The Great French Revolution, 1789–1793
Peter Kropotkin (N. F. Dryhurst, trans.) (1909)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Peter Kropotkin's 'La Grande Révolution 1789–1793' in N. F. Dryhurst's English translation, from the 1909 William Heinemann edition (London). Scan via Internet Archive (University of Toronto). Library matter and scan artifacts trimmed; the full work — 68 chapters through the 9th Thermidor plus Conclusion and index — is complete per the edition's table of contents. This 1909 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THE  GREAT  FRENCH
REVOLUTION

1789-1793


BY THE  SAME  AUTHOR

MUTUAL AID

A  FACTOR  OF  EVOLUTION

In  One  Volume. Demy  8vo. Price  35.  6d.

Some  Press  Opinions:

The  Athenaum.—"  Prince  Kropotkin  has  written  a
most  suggestive  and  stimulating  study,  showing  not  only
immense  range  of  reading  and  observation,  and  the
power  of  marshalling  facts  in  an  orderly  manner,  but
also  a  most  attractive  and  generous  personality,  demon-
strating unconquerable  faith  in  the  innate  goodness  of
humanity  and  its  golden  future."

The  Clarion. — • '  If  I  described  this  new  work  of  Prince
Kropotkin's  as  the  most  important  English  work  pub-
lished for  several  years,  Ish  uld  not  be  guilty  of  excess.
If  any  book  of  like  value  has  appeared  within  the  last  ten
years,  I  do  not  remember  it.  Read  it !  Read  it !  "

The  Review  of  Reviews. — ' '  There  are  few  more  de-
lightful books  to  read  than  '  Mutual  Aid  as  a  Factor  in
Evolution.'  It  is  a  good,  healthy,  cheerful,  delightful
book,  which  does  one  good  to  read."

Nature, — "The book  is  undeniably  readable  through-
out. The  author  has  a  creed  which  he  preaches  with  all
the  fervours  of  genuine  conviction.  He  is  anxious  to
make  converts,  but  his  zeal  never  leads  him  to  forget
fairness  and  courtesy.  Those  who  disagree  with  him
may  learn  much  by  studying  the  book."

The  Nation. — "  Prince  Kropotkin  has  done  an  impor-
tant service  to  sound  thinking  on  questions  of  sociology."

The  British  Weekly.—1 '  The  array  of  facts  from  all
departments  of  life  which  he  here  collects  is  over-
whelming. To  most  readers  the  facts  adduced  from
mediaeval  history  and  from  modern  conditions  will  be
new.  It  will  be  for  scientific  readers  to  adjust  the  burden
borne  by  each  of  the  factors  in  evolution,  but  that  mutual
aid  is  an  essential  and  important  factor  no  one  can  doubt
who  reads  this  book.  Though  so  full  of  facts,  it  is  never
tedious  and  never  dry,  but  carries  the  reader  with  it."

LONDON  :  WILLIAM  HEINKMANN,  31  BEDFORD  STREET,  W.C.


THE  GREAT  FRENCH

REVOLUTION

1789-1793

~  ^

-XsT  BY

Pc.  A.  KROPOTKIN

AUTHOR  OF  "  MUTUAL  AID  "  ETC.


TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY

N.  F.  DRYHURST


LONDON  :  WILLIAM  HEINEMANN
NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS

1909


Copyright.  London,  1909,  by  William  Heinemtnn


'


PRT '


PREFACE

THE  more  one  studies  the  French  Revolution  the  clearer  it
is  to  see  how  incomplete  is  the  history  of  that  great  epoch,
how  many  gaps  in  it  remain  to  be  filled,  how  many  points
demand  elucidation.

How  could  it  be  otherwise  ?  The  Great  Revolution,  that
set  all  Europe  astir,  that  overthrew  everything,  and  began  the
task  of  universal  reconstruction  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,
was  like  the  working  of  cosmic  forces  dissolving  and  re-creating
a  world.  And  if  in  the  writings  of  the  historians  who  deal
with  that  period,  and  especially  of  Michelet,  we  admire  the
immense  work  they  have  accomplished  in  disentangling  and
co-ordinating  the  innumerable  facts  of  the  various  parallel
movements  that  made  up  the  Revolution,  we  realise  at  the
same  time  the  vastness  of  the  work  which  still  remains  to  be
done.

The  investigations  made  during  the  past  thirty  years  by
the  school  of  historical  research  represented  by  M.  Aulard  and
the  Societe  de  la  Revolution  fran£aise,  have  certainly
furnished  most  valuable  material.  They  have  shed  a  flood  of
light  upon  the  acts  of  the  Revolution,  on  its  political  aspects,
and  on  the  struggles  for  supremacy  that  took  place  between
the  various  parties.  But  the  study  of  the  economic  side  of
the  Revolution  is  still  before  us,  and  this  study,  as  M.  Aulard
rightly  says,  demands  an  entire  lifetime.  Yet  without  this
study  the  history  of  the  period  remains  incomplete  and  in


vi  PREFACE

many  points  wholly  incomprehensible.  In  fact,  a  long  series
of  totally  new  problems  presents  itself  to  the  historian  as  soon
as  he  turns  his  attention  to  the  economic  side  of  the  revolu-
tionary upheaval.

It  was  with  the  intention  of  throwing  some  light  upon
these  economic  problems  that  I  began  in  1886  to  make  separate
studies  of  the  earliest  revolutionary  stirrings  among  the  peasants ;
the  peasant  risings  in  1789;  the  struggles  for  and  against  the
feudal  laws  ;  the  real  causes  of  the  movement  of  May  31,  and
so  on.  Unfortunately  I  was  not  able  to  make  any  researches
in  the  National  Archives  of  France,  and  my  studies  have,
therefore,  been  confined  to  the  collections  of  printed  matter
in  the  British  Museum,  which  are,  however,  in  themselves
exceedingly  rich.

Believing  that  it  would  not  be  easy  for  the  reader  to  ap-
preciate the  bearing  of  separate  studies  of  this  kind  without
a  general  view  of  the  whole  development  of  the  Revolution
understood  in  the  light  of  these  studies,  I  soon  found  it  necessary
to  write  a  more  or  less  consecutive  account  of  the  chief  events
of  the  Revolution.  In  this  account  I  have  not  dwelt  upon  the
dramatic  side  of  the  episodes  of  these  disturbed  years,  which
have  been  so  often  described,  but  I  have  made  it  my  chief
object  to  utilise  modern  research  so  as  to  reveal  the  intimate
connection  and  interdependence  of  the  various  events  which
combined  to  produce  the  climax  of  the  eighteenth  century's
epic.

This  method  of  studying  separately  the  various  parts  of  the
work  accomplished  by  the  Revolution  has  necessarily  its  own
drawbacks :  it  sometimes  entails  repetition.  I  have  preferred,
however,  to  take  the  risk  of  reproach  for  this  fault  in  the  hope
of  impressing  more  clearly  upon  the  reader's  mind  the  mighty
currents  of  thought  and  action  that  came  into  conflict  during
the  French  Revolution — currents  so  intimately  blended  with


PREFACE  vii

the  very  essence  of  human  nature  that  they  must  inevitably
reappear  in  the  historic  events  of  the  future.

All  who  know  the  history  of  the  Revolution  will  understand
how  difficult  it  is  to  avoid  errors  in  facts  when  one  tries  to
trace  the  development  of  its  impassioned  struggles.  I  shall,
therefore,  be  extremely  grateful  to  those  who  will  be  good
enough  to  point  out  any  mistakes  I  may  have  made.  And  I
wish  to  express  here  my  sincerest  gratitude  to  my  friends,
James  Guillaume  and  Ernest  Nys,  who  have  had  the  kindness
to  read  my  manuscript  and  to  help  me  in  this  work  with  their
knowledge  and  their  criticisms.

PETER  KROPOTKIN


CONTENTS

CHAP. .  PA6B

/I.  THE  Two  GREAT  CURRENTS  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  i

'  II.  THE  IDEA  . 5

III.  ACTION ii

' IV.  THE  PEOPLE  BEFORE  THE  REVOLUTION . .  16

V.  THE  SPIRIT  OF  REVOLT: THE  RIOTS  19

VI.  THE CONVOCATION OF THE STATES-GENERAL

BECOMES  NECESSARY . . . ...  30

/  VII.  THE  RISING  OF  THE  COUNTRY  DISTRICTS  DURING

THE  OPENING  MONTHS  OF  1789  ....  35

VIII.  RIOTS  IN  PARIS  AND  ITS  ENVIRONS ...  46

IX.  THE  STATES-GENERAL . . . . .  50

X.  PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  COUP  D'ETAT ...  57

XI.  PARIS  ON  THE  EVE  OF  THE  FOURTEENTH . .  67

XII. THE TAKING OF THE BASTILLE . . .  78

XIII.  THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  JULY  14  AT  VERSAILLES  .  88

'  XIV.  THE  POPULAR  RISINGS 94

'  XV.  THE  TOWNS 98

1  XVI.  THE  PEASANT  RISING ...*..  109

XVII.  AUGUST  4  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES . . .118

XVIII.  THE  FEUDAL  RIGHTS  REMAIN ....  129

XIX.  DECLARATION  OF  THE  RIGHTS  OF  MAN  . . .141

XX.  THE  FIFTH  AND  SIXTH  OF  OCTOBER  1789 . .  146

XXI.  FEARS OF THE MIDDLE CLASSES— THE NEW

MUNICIPAL  ORGANISATION  ."  *  v*  ''•': . .  158

XXII.  FINANCIAL DIFFICULTIES— SALE OF CHURCH

PROPERTY .*  y^*  ^  Wuif^<j5in->ji  'iu^* IV  l68
ix


x  CONTENTS

CHAP.  PAOK

XXIII.  THE  FfcxE  OF  THE  FEDERATION . . . .174

XXIV.  THE  "  DISTRICTS"  AND  THE  " SECTIONS "  OF  PARIS 180

XXV.  THE SECTIONS OF PARIS UNDER THE NEW

MUNICIPAL  LAW 189

XXVI.; DELAYS IN THE ABOLITION OF THE FEUDAL

RIGHTS. .  ' /»-'  v *  . . .195

XXVII.  FEUDAL  LEGISLATION  IN  1790 . . .  205

XXVIII.  ARREST  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  IN  1790 . . . 213

XXIX.  THE  FLIGHT  OF  THE KING—  REACTION— END  OF

THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY .... 226

XXX.  THE  LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY — REACTION  IN  1791-

1792 . . . 337

XXXI.  THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION IN THE SOUTH OF

FRANCE 247

XXXII.  THE  TWENTIETH  OF  JUNE  1792 . . . .255

XXXIII.  THE  TENTH  OF  AUGUST: ITS  IMMEDIATE  CONSE-
QUENCES 268

XXXIV.  THE  INTERREGNUM— THE  BETRAYALS * . . 282

XXXV.  THE  SEPTEMBER  DAYS 297

XXXVI.  THE  CONVENTION — THE  COMMUNE — THE  JACOBINS 309

XXXVII.  THE GOVERNMENT— CONFLICTS  WITH THE CON-
VENTION—THE WAR 318

XXXVIII.  THE  TRIAL  OF  THE  KING 33°

XXXIX.  THE  "MOUNTAIN"  AND  THE  GIRONDE . . . 340

XL.  ATTEMPTS OF THE GIRONDINS TO STOP THE

REVOLUTION 348

XLI.  THE  "ANARCHISTS" . . . . . L. 353

XLII.  CAUSES  OF  THE  RISING  ON  MAY  31' ; ,: v  . 361
V  vi'

^ XLIII.  SOCIAL  DEMANDS—STATE  OF  FEELING  IN  PARIS

— LYONS .,.  « ?-, *x ,» *r ^ ,  .-••, . 370

XLIV.  THE WAR  —  THE RISING IN LA VBHDBE  —

TREACHERY  OF  DUMOURIEZ .i.w»i: '••««-.'• • 379

XLV.  A  NEW  RISING  RENDERED-  INEVITABLE . • 391
XLVI.  THE  INSURRECTION  OF  MAY  31  AND  JUNE  2. . 399


CONTENTS  xi

CHAP.  PACK

XLVII.  THE  POPULAR  REVOLUTION— ARBITRARY  TAXATION  407
XLVIII.  THE  LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY  AND  THE  COMMUNAL

LANDS 413

XLIX.  THE  LANDS  RESTORED  TO  THE  COMMUNES . .  421

L.  FINAL  ABOLITION  OF  THE  FEUDAL  RIGHTS . .  437

LI.  THE  NATIONAL  ESTATES 433

LII.  THE  STRUGGLE  AGAINST  FAMINE — THE  MAXIMUM

—PAPER-MONEY 437

LJII.  COUNTER-REVOLUTION IN BRITTANY — ASSASSINA-
TION OF  MARAT 445

LIV.  THE  VENDEE — LYONS — THE  RISINGS  IN  SOUTHERN

FRANCE 453

LV.  THE  WAR — THE  INVASION  BEATEN  BACK . .  462

LVI.  THE  CONSTITUTION — THE  REVOLUTIONARY  MOVE-
MENT . 470

LVII.  THE  EXHAUSTION  OF  THE  REVOLUTIONARY  SPIRIT  478

LVIII.  THE  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT 484

LIX.  SCHEMES FOR THE SOCIALISATION OF LAND,
INDUSTRIES, MEANS OF SUBSISTENCE AND

EXCHANGE 493

LX.  THE  END  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT . .  500

LXI.  THE CONSTITUTION OF  THE  CENTRAL  GOVERN-
MENT— REPRISALS 508

LXI  I.  EDUCATION — THE METRIC SYSTEM — THE NEW

CALENDAR — ANTI-RELIGIOUS  MOVEMENT . .  518

LXIII.  THE  SUPPRESSION  OF  THE  SECTIONS , . .  528

LXIV.  STRUGGLE  AGAINST  THE  HEBERTISTS « . .  533

LXV.  FALL  OF  THE  HEBERTISTS — DANTON  EXECUTED  .  542

LXVL  ROBESPIERRE  AND  HIS  GROUP ....  550

LXVII.  THE  TERROR . 555

LXVIII.  THE  QTH  THERMIDOR— TRIUMPH  OF  REACTION .  562

CONCLUSION 573


CHAPTER  I

THE  TWO  GREAT  CURRENTS  OF  THE ^
REVOLUTION

Main  causes  of  Great  Revolution — Previous  risings — Union  of
middle  classes  and  people  necessary — Importance  of  part
played  by  people

Two  great  currents  prepared  and  made  the  Great  French
Revolution.  One  of  them,  the  current  of  ideas,  concerning^
the  political  reorganisation  of  States,  came  from  the  middle
classes  ;  the  other,  the  current  of  action,  came  from  the  people,
both  peasants  and  workers  in  towns,  who  wanted  to  obtain
immediate  and  definite  improvements  in  their  economic  con-
dition. And  when  these  two  currents  met  and  joined  in  the
endeavour  to  realise  an  aim  which  for  some  time  was  common
to  both,  when  they  had  helped  each  other  for  a  certain  time,
the  result  was  the  Revolution.

The  eighteenth-century  philosophers  had  long  been  sapping
the  foundations  of  the  law-and-order  societies  of  that  period,
wherein  political  power,  as  well  as  an  immense  share  of  the
wealth,  belonged  to  the  aristocracy  and  the  clergy,  whilst  the
mass  of  the  people  were  nothing  but  beasts  of  burden  to  the
ruling  classes.  By  proclaiming  the  sovereignty  of  reason  ;  by
preaching  trust  in  human  nature — corrupted,  they  declared,  by
the  institutions  that  had  reduced  man  to  servitude,  but,
nevertheless,  certain  to  regain  all  its  qualities  when  it  had
reconquered  liberty — they  had  opened  up  new  vistas  to  man-
kind. By  proclaiming  equality  among  men,  without  dis-
tinction of  birth ;  by  demanding  from  every  citizen,  whether
king  or  peasant,  obedience  to  the  law,  supposed  to  express  the
will  of  the  nation  when  it  has  been  made  by  the  representatives

I  A


2 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

of  the  people ;  finally,  by  demanding  freedom  of  contract
between  free  men,  and  the  abolition  of  feudal  taxes  and  ser-
vices— by  putting  forward  all  these  claims,  linked  together
with  the  system  and  method  characteristic  of  French  thought,
the  philosophers  had  undoubtedly  prepared,  at  least  in  men's
minds,  the  downfall  of  the  old  regime.

This  alone,  however,  would  not  have  sufficed  to  cause  the
outbreak  of  the  Revolution.  There  was  still  the  stage  of  pass-
ing from  theory  to  action,  from  the  conception  of  an  ideal  to
putting  it  into  practice.  And  the  most  important  point  in  the
study  of  the  history  of  that  period  is  to  bring  into  relief  the
circumstances  that  made  it  possible  for  the  French  nation  at  a
given  moment  to  enter  on  the  realisation  of  the  ideal — to
attempt  this  passage  from  theory  to  action.

On  the  other  hand,  long  before  1789,  France  had  already
entered  upon  an  insurrectionary  period.  The  accession  of
Louis  XVI.  to  the  throne  in  1774  was  the  signal  for  a  whole
series  of  hunger  riots.  These  lasted  up  to  1783  ;  and  then
came  a  period  of  comparative  quiet.  But  after  1786,  and  still
more  after  1788,  the  peasant  insurrections  broke  out  again  with
renewed  vigour.  Famine  had  been  the  chief  source  of  the
earlier  disturbances,  and  the  lack  of  bread  always  remained  one
of  the  principal  causes  of  the  risings.  But  it  was  chiefly
disinclination  on  the  part  of  the  peasants  to  pay  the  feudal^
taxes  which  now  spurred  them  to  revolt.  The  outbreaks
went  on  increasing  in  number  up  to  1789,  and  in  that  year
they  became  general  in  the  east,  north-eas*  and  south-east  of
France.

In  this  way  the  dis aggregation  of  the  body  social  came  about.
A  jacquerie  is  not,  however,  a  revolution,  even  when  it  takes
such  terrible  forms  as  did  the  rising  of  the  Russian  peasants  in
1773  under  the  banner  of  Pougatchoff.  A  revolution  is
infinitely  more  than  a  series  of  insurrections  in  town  and
country.  It  is  more  than  a  simple  struggle  between  parties,
however  sanguinary ;  more  than  mere  street-fighting,  and
much  more  than  a  mere  change  of  government,  such  as  was
made  in  France  in  1830  and  1848.  A  revolution  is  a  swift
overthrow,  in  a  few  years,  of  institutions  which  have  taken


THE  TWO  GREAT  CURRENTS  3

centuries  to  root  in  the  soil,  and  seem  so  fixed  and  immovable
that  even  the  most  ardent  reformers  hardly  dare  to  attack  them
in  their  writings.  It  is  the  fall,  the  crumbling  away  in  a  brief
period,  of  all  that  up  to  that  time  composed  the  essence  of
social,  religious,  political  and  economic  life  in  a  nation.  It
means  the  subversion  of  acquired  ideas  and  of  accepted  notions
concerning  each  of  the  complex  institutions  and  relations  of
the  human  herd.

In  short,  it  is  the  birth  of  completely  new  ideas  concerning
the  manifold  links  in  citizenship — conceptions  which  soon
become  realities,  and  then  begin  to  spread  among  the  neigh-
bouring nations,  convulsing  the  world  and  giving  to  the
succeeding  age  its  watchword,  its  problems,  its  science,  its
lines  of  economic,  political  and  moral  development.

To  arrive  at  a  result  of  this  importance,  and  for  a  movement
to  assume  the  proportions  of  a  revolution,  as  happened  in
England  between  1648  and  1688,  and  in  France  between  1789
and  1793,  it  is  not  enough  that  a  movement  of  ideas,  no  matter
how  profound  it  may  be,  should  manifest  itself  among  the
educated  classes ;  it  is  not  enough  that  disturbances,  however
many  or  great,  should  take  place  in  the  very  heart  of  the
people.  The  revolutionary  action  coming  from  the  people
must  coincide  with  a  movement  of  revolutionary  thought
coming  from  the  educated  classes.  There  must  be  a  union
of  the  two.

That  is  why  the  French  Revolution,  like  the  English  Revo-
lution of  the  preceding  century,  happened  at  the  moment
when  the  middle  classes,  having  drunk  deep  at  the  sources  of
current  philosophy,  became  conscious  of  their  rights,  and
conceived  a  new  scheme  of  political  organisation.  Strong  in
their  knowledge  and  eager  for  the  task,  they  felt  themselves
quite  capable  of  seizing  the  government  by  snatching  it  from  a
palace  aristocracy  which,  by  its  incapacity,  frivolity  and
debauchery,  was  bringing  the  kingdom  to  utter  ruin.  But  the :
middle  and  educated  classes  could  not  have  done  anything
alone,  if,  consequent  on  a  complete  chain  of  circumstances,
the  mass  of  the  peasants  had  not  also  been  stirred,  and,  by  a
series  of  constant  insurrections  lasting  for  four  years,  given  to


4 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  dissatisfied  among  the  middle  classes  the  possibility  of
combating  both  King  and  Court,  of  upsetting  old  institutions
_and  changing  the  political  constitution  of  the  kingdom.

The  history  of  this  double  movement  remains  still  to  be
written.  The  history  of  the  great  French  Revolution  has  been
told  and  re-told  many  times,  from  the  point  of  view  of  as  many
different  parties ;  but  up  to  the  present  the  historians  have
confined  themselves  to  the  political  history,  the  history  of  the
triumph  of  the  middle  classes  over  the  Court  party  and  the
defenders  of  the  institutions  of  the  old  monarchy.

Thus  we  know  very  well  the  principles  which  dominated  the
Revolution  and  were  translated  into  its  legislative  work.  We
have  been  enraptured  by  the  great  thoughts  it  flung  to  the
world,  thoughts  which  civilised  countries  tried  to  put  into
practice  during  the  nineteenth  century.  The  Parliamentary
history  of  the  Revolution,  its  wars,  its  policy  and  its  diplomacy,
has  been  studied  and  set  forth  in  all  its  details.  But  the
popular  history  of  the  Revolution  remains  still  to  be  told.  The
part  played  by  the  people  of  the  country  places  and  towns  in  the
Revolution  has  never  been  studied  and  narrated  in  its  entirety.
Of  the  two  currents  which  made  the  Revolution,  the  current  of  /
thought  is  known  ;  but  the  other,  the  current  of  popular  action,  '••
has  not  even  been  sketched.

It  is  for  us,  the  descendants  of  those  called  by  their  con-
temporaries the  "  anarchists,"  to  study  the  popular  current,
and  to  try  to  reconstruct  at  least  its  main  features.


CHAPTER  IT
THE  IDEA

Modern  States — Influence  of  English  and  American  Revolu-
tions on  French  Revolution — Condition  and  aims  of  middle
classes — Centralisation  of  authority — Attitude  towards
peasants — Influence  of  eighteenth-century  philosophy

To  understand  fully  the  idea  which  inspired  the  middle
classes  in  1789  we  must  consider  it  in  the  light  of  its  results —
the  modern  States.

The  structure  of  the  law-and-order  States  which  we  see
in  Europe  at  present  was  only  outlined  at  the  end  of  the
eighteenth  century.  The  system  of  the  centralised  authority,
now  in  full  working  order,  had  not  then  attained  either  the
perfection  or  uniformity  it  possesses  to-day.  That  formidable
mechanism,  by  which  an  order  sent  from  a  certain  capital  puts
in  motion  all  the  men  of  a  nation,  ready  for  war,  and  sends
them  out  to  carry  devastation  through  countries,  and  mourn-
ing into  families  ;  those  territories,  overspread  with  a  network
of  officials  whose  personality  is  completely  effaced  by  their
bureaucratic  apprenticeship,  and  who  obey  mechanically  the
orders  emanating  from  a  central  will ;  that  passive  obedience
of  citizens  to  the  law ;  that  worship  of  law,  of  Parliament,  of
judges  and  their  assistants,  which  we  see  about  us  to-day ;  that
mass  of  hierarchically  organised  and  disciplined  functionaries  ;
that  system  of  schools,  maintained  or  directed  by  the  State,
where  worship  of  power  and  passive  obedience  are  taught ;
that  industrial  system,  which  crushes  under  its  wheels  the
worker  whom  the  State  delivers  over  to  its  tender  mercies ;
that  commerce,  which  accumulates  incredible  riches  in  the
hands  of  those  who  monopolise  the  land,  the  mines,  the  ways
of  communication  and  the  riches  of  Nature,  upon  which

5


6 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  State  is  nourished ;  and  finally,  that  science,  which  libe-
rates thought  and  immensely  increases  the  productive  powers
of  men,  but  which  at  the  same  time  aims  at  subjecting  them
to  the  authority  of  the  strongest  and  to  the  State — all  this
was  non-existent  before  the  Revolution.

However,  long  before  the  Revolution  had  by  its  mutterings
given  warning  of  its  approach,  the  French  middle  classes — the
Third  Estate — had  already  developed  a  conception  of  the
political  edifice  which  should  be  erected  on  the  ruins  of  feudal
royalty.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the  English  Revolution  had
helped  the  French  middle  class  towards  a  comprehension  of  the
part  they  would  be  called  on  to  play  in  the  government  of
society.  And  it  is  certain  that  the  revolution  in  America
stimulated  the  energies  of  the  middle-class  revolutionaries.
Thanks  to  Hobbes,  Hume,  Montesquieu,  Rousseau,  Voltaire,
Mably,  d'Argenson  and  others,  ever  since  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century  the  study  of  Politics  and  the  constitution
of  organised  societies  based  on  elective  representation  had
become  popular,  and  to  this  Turgot  and  Adam  Smith  had  just
added  the  study  of  economic  questions  and  the  place  of  property
in  the  political  constitution  of  a  State.

That  is  why,  long  before  the  Revolution  broke  out,  the  idea
of  a  State,  centralised  and  well-ordered,  governed  by  the  classes
holding  property  in  lands  or  in  factories,  or  by  members  of  the
learned  professions,  was  already  forecast  and  described  in  a
great  number  of  books  and  pamphlets  from  which  the  men  of
action  during  the  Revolution  afterwards  drew  their  inspiration
and  their  logical  force.

^Trius  it  came  to  pass  that  the  French  middle  classes  in  1789,
at  the  moment  of  entering  upon  the  revolutionary  period,  knew
quite  well  what  they  wanted.  They  were  certainly  not  re-
publicans— are  they  republicans  even  to-day  ?  But  they  no
longer  wanted  the  King  to  have  arbitrary  powers,  they  refused
to  be  ruled  by  the  princes  or  by  the  Court,  and  they  did  not
recognise  the  right  of  the  nobility  to  seize  on  all  the  best  places
in  the  Government,  though  they  were  only  capable  of  plunder-
ingthe  State  as  they  had  plundered  their  vast  properties  with-
oufcadding  anything  to  their  value.  The  middle  classes  were


THE  IDEA  7

perhaps  republican  in  sentiment,  and  desired  republican
simplicity  of  manners,  as  in  the  growing  republic  of  America  ;
but  they  desired,  above  all  things,  government  by  the  propertied
classes.

They  inclined  to  free  thought  without  being  Atheists,  but
they  by  no  means  disliked  the  Catholic  form  of  religion.  What
they  detested  most  was  the  Church,  with  its  hierarchy  and  its
bishops,  who  made  common  cause  with  the  princes,  and  its
priests  who  had  become  the  obedient  tools  of  the  nobility.

The  middle  classes  of  1789  understood  that  the  moment  had
arrived  in  France,  as  it  had  arrived  one  hundred  and  forty  years
before  in  England,  when  the  Third  Estate  was  to  seize  the
power  falling  from  the  hands  of  royalty,  and  they  knew  what
they  meant  to  do  with  it.

Their  ideal  was  to  give  France  a  constitution  modelled  upon
the  English  constitution,  and  to  reduce  the  King  to  the  part  of
a  mere  enregistering  scribe,  with  sometimes  the  power  of  a
casting-vote,  but  chiefly  to  act  as  the  symbol  of  national  unity.
As  to  the  real  authority,  that  was  to  be  vested  in  a  Parliament,
in  which  an  educated  middle  class,  which  would  represent  the
active  and  thinking  part  of  the  nation,  should  predominate.

At  the  same  time,  their  ideal  was  to  abolish  all  the  local
powers  which  at  that  time  constituted  so  many  autonomous
units  in  the  State.  They  meant  to  concentrate  all  govern-
mental power  in  the  hands  of  a  central  executive  authority,
strictly  controlled  by  the  Parliament,  but  also  strictly  obeyed
in  the  State,  and  combining  every  department — taxes,  law
courts,  police,  army,  schools,  civic  control,  general  direction
of  commerce  and  industry — everything.  By  the  side  of  this
political  concentration,  they  intended  to  proclaim  complete
freedom  in  commercial  transactions,  and  at  the  same  time  to
give  free  rein  to  industrial  enterprise  for  the  exploitation  of  all
sorts  of  natural  wealth,  as  well  as  of  the  workers,  who  henceforth
would  be  delivered  up  defenceless  to  any  one  who  might  employ
them.

All  this  was  to  be  kept  under  the  strict  control  of  the  State,
which  would  favour  the  enrichment  of  the  individual  and  the
accumulation  of  large  fortunes — two  conditions  to  which  great


8  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

importance  was  necessarily  attached  by  the  middle  classes,
seeing  that  the  States  General  itself  had  been  convoked  to
ward  off  the  financial  ruin  of  the  State.

On  economic  matters,  the  men  of  action  belonging  to  the
Third  Estate  held  ideas  no  less  precise.  The  French  middle
classes  had  studied  Turgot  and  Adam  Smith,  the  creators  of
political  economy.  They  knew  that  the  theories  of  those
writers  had  already  been  applied  in  England,  and  they  envied
their  middle-class  neighbours  across  the  Channel  their  powerful
economic  organisation,  just  as  they  envied  them  their  political
power.  They  dreamed  of  an  appropriation  of  the  land  by  the
middle  classes,  both  upper  and  lower,  and  of  the  revenue  they
would  draw  from  the  soil,  which  had  hitherto  lain  unpro-
ductive in  the  hands  of  the  nobility  and  the  clergy.  In  this
they  were  supported  by  the  lower  middle  class  settled  in  the
country,  who  had  become  a  power  in  the  villages,  even  before
the  Revolution  increased  their  number.  They  foresaw  the
rapid  development  of  trade  and  the  production  of  merchandise
on  a  large  scale  by  the  help  of  machinery  ;  they  looked  forward
to  a  foreign  trade  with  distant  lands,  and  the  exportation  of
manufactured  goods  across  the  seas  to  markets  that  would  be
opened  in  the  East,  to  huge  enterprises  and  colossal  fortunes.

But  before  all  this  could  be  realised  they  knew  the  ties  that
bound  the  peasant  to  his  village  must  be  broken.  It  was
necessary  that  he  should  be  free  to  leave  his  hut,  and  even
that  he  should  be  forced  to  leave  it,  so  that  he  might  be  impelled
towards  the  towns  in  search  of  work.  Then,  in  changing
masters,  he  would  bring  gold  to  trade,  instead  of  paying  to  the
landlords  all  sorts  of  rents,  tithes  and  taxes,  which  certainly
pressed  very  heavily  upon  him,  but  which  after  all  were  not  very
profitable  for  the  masters.  And  finally,  the  finances  of  the
State  had  to  be  put  in  order ;  taxation  would  be  simplified,
and,  at  the  same  time,  a  bigger  revenue  obtained.

In  short,  what  they  wanted  was  what  economists  have  called
freedom  of  industry  and  commerce,  but  which  really  meant  the
relieving  of  industry  from  the  harassing  and  repressive  super-
vision of  the  State,  and  the  giving  to  it  full  liberty  to  exploit
the  worker,  who  was  still  to  be  deprived  of  his  freedom.  There


THE  IDEA  9

were  to  be  no  guilds,  no  trade  societies ;  neither  trade  wardens
nor  master  craftsmen ;  nothing  which  might  in  any  way  check
the  exploitation  of  the  wage-earner.  There  was  no  longer  to
be  any  State  supervision  which  might  hamper  the  manufac-
turer. There  were  to  be  no  duties  on  home  industries,  no
prohibitive  laws.  For  all  the  transactions  of  the  employers,
there  was  to  be  complete  freedom,  and  for  the  workers  a  strict
prohibition  against  combinations  of  any  sort.  Laisser  fair*  for
the  one  ;  complete  denial  of  the  right  to  combine  for  the  others.

Such  was  the  two-fold  scheme  devised  by  the  middle  classes.
Therefore  when  the  time  came  for  its  realisation,  the  middle
classes,  strengthened  by  their  knowledge,  the  clearness  of  their
views  and  their  business  habits,  without  hesitating  over  their
scheme  as  a  whole  or  at  any  detail  of  it,  set  to  work  to  make
it  become  law.  And  this  they  did  with  a  consistent  and  in-
telligent energy  quite  impossible  to  the  masses  of  the  people,
because  by  them  no  ideal  had  been  planned  and  elaborated
which  could  have  been  opposed  to  the  scheme  of  the  gentlemen
of  the  Third  Estate.

It  would  certainly  be  unjust  to  say  that  the  middle  classes
were  actuated  only  by  purely  selfish  motives.  If  that  had  been
the  case  they  would  never  have  succeeded  in  their  task.  In
great  changes  a  certain  amount  of  idealism  is  always  necessary
to  success.

The  best  representatives  of  the  Third  Estate  had,  indeed,
drunk  from  that  sublime  fount,  the  eighteenth-century  philo-
sophy, which  was  the  source  of  all  the  great  ideas  that  have
arisen  since.  The  eminently  scientific  spirit  of  this  philosophy  ;
its  profoundly  moral  character,  moral  even  when  it  mocked  at
conventional  morality ;  its  trust  in  the  intelligence,  strength  and
greatness  of  the  free  man  when  he  lives  among  his  equals ;  its
hatred  of  despotic  institutions — were  all  accepted  by  the  revo-
lutionists of  that  time.  Whence  would  they  have  drawn  other-
wise the  powers  of  conviction  and  the  devotion  of  which  they
gave  such  proofs  in  the  struggle  ?  It  must  also  be  owned  that
even  among  those  who  worked  hardest  to  realise  the  programme
of  enriching  the  middle  classes,  there  were  some  who  seriously
believed  that  the  enrichment  of  the  individual  would  be  the


io  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

best  means  of  enriching  the  nation  as  a  whole.  Had  not  the
best  economists,  with  Adam  Smith  at  their  head,  persuasively-
preached  this  view  ?

But  however  lofty  were  the  abstract  ideas  of  liberty,  equality
and  free  progress  that  inspired  the  sincere  men  among  the
middle  classes  of  1789-1793,  it  is  by  their  practical  programme,
by  the  application  of  their  theories,  that  we  must  judge  them.
Into  what  deeds  shall  the  abstract  idea  be  translated  in  actual
life  ?  By  that  alone  can  we  find  its  true  measure.

If,  then,  it  is  only  fair  to  admit  that  the  middle  classes  of
1789  were  inspired  by  ideas  of  liberty,  equality  (before  the
law),  and  political  and  religious  freedom,  we  must  also  admit
that  these  ideas,  as  soon  as  they  took  shape,  began  to  develop
exactly  on  the  two  lines  we  have  just  sketched  ;  liberty  to
utilise  the  riches  of  Nature  for  personal  aggrandisement,  as
well  as  liberty  to  exploit  human  labour  without  any  safeguard
for  the  victims  of  such  exploitation,  and  political  power  organised
so  as  to  assure  freedom  of  exploitation  to  the  middle  classes.
And  we  shall  see  presently  what  terrible  struggles  were  evolved
in  1793  when  one  of  the  revolutionary  parties  wished  to  go
further  than  this  programme.


CHAPTER  III
ACTION

The  people — Revolution  and  Socialism — Equal  rights  of  all
to  land — "  Communism  " — Situation  not  clearly  understood
by  people — Hatred  of  poor  towards  aristocracy  and  clergy —
Hatred  of  feudalism — People's  readiness  to  take  up  arms

BUT  what  of  the  people  ? What  was  their  idea  ?

The  people,  too,  had  felt  to  a  certain  extent  the  influence
of  the  current  philosophy.  By  a  thousand  indirect  channels
the  great  principles  of  liberty  and  enfranchisement  had  filtered
down  to  the  villages  and  the  suburbs  of  the  large  towns.
Respect  for  royalty  and  aristocracy  was  passing  away.  Ideas  of
equality  were  penetrating  to  the  very  lowest  ranks.  Gleams
of  revolt  flashed  through  many  minds.  The  hope  of  an
approaching  change  throbbed  in  the  hearts  of  the  humblest.
"  Something  was  to  be  done  by  some  great  folk  for  such  poor
ones  "  ;  she  did  not  know  who,  nor  how ;  "  but  God  send  us
better,"  said  an  old  woman,  in  1789,  to  Arthur  Young,*  who
travelled  through  France  on  the  eve  of  the  Revolution.  That
"  something  "  was  bound  to  bring  an  alleviation  of  the  people's
misery.

The  question  whether  the  movement  which  preceded  the
Revolution,  and  the  Revolution  itself,  contained  any  element  of
Socialism  has  been  recently  discussed.  The  word  "  Socialism  "
was  certainly  not  in  either,  because  it  dates  only  from  the
middle  of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  idea  of  the  State  as
Capitalist,  to  which  the  Social-Democratic  fraction  of  the  great
Socialist  party  is  now  trying  to  reduce  Socialism,  was  certainly
not  so  much  in  evidence  as  it  is  to-day,  because  the  founders  of
Social-Democratic  "  Collectivism,"  Vidal  and  Pecqueur,  did  not

*  Arthur  Young,  Travels  in  France,  p.  167  (London,  1892).
n


12 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

write  until  the  period  between  1840  and  1849.  But  it  is  im-
possible to  read  the  works  of  the  pre-Revolutionary  writers
without  being  struck  by  the  fact  that  they  are  imbued  with
ideas  which  are  the  very  essence  of  modern  Socialism.

Two  fundamental  ideas — the  equal  rights  of  all  citizens  to
the  land,  and  what  we  know  to-day  under  the  name  of  com-
munism— found  devoted  adherents  among  the  more  popular
writers  of  that  time,  Mably,  d'Argenson,  and  others  of  less
importance.  Manufacturing  production  on  a  large  scale  was
in  its  infancy,  so  that  land  was  at  that  time  the  main  form  of
capital  and  the  chief  instrument  for  exploiting  human  labour,
while  the  factory  was  hardly  developed  at  all.  It  was  natural,
therefore,  that  the  thoughts  of  the  philosophers,  and  later  on
the  thoughts  of  the  revolutionists,  should  turn  towards  communal
possession  of  the  land.  Did  not  Mably,  who  much  more  than
Rousseau  inspired  the  men  of  the  Revolution,  declare  about
1768,  in  his  Doutes  sur  Vordre  naturel  et  essentiel  des  societes,  that
there  should  be  equal  rights  to  the  land  for  all,  and  communist
possession  of  it  ?  The  rights  of  the  nation  to  all  landed  property,
and  to  all  natural  wealth — forests,  rivers,  waterfalls,  &c. — was
not  this  the  dominant  idea  of  the  pre-Revolutionary  writers,  as
well  as  of  the  left  wing  of  the  revolutionary  masses  during  the
period  of  upheaval  ?

Unfortunately,  these  communistic  aspirations  were  not
formulated  clearly  and  concretely  in  the  minds  of  those  who
desired  the  people's  happiness.  While  among  the  educated
middle  classes  the  ideas  of  emancipation  had  taken  the  form  of  a
complete  programme  for  political  and  economic  organisation,
these  ideas  were  presented  to  the  people  only  in  the  form  of
vague  aspirations.  Often  they  were  mere  negations.  Those
who  addressed  the  people  did  not  try  to  embody  the  concrete
form  in  which  their  desiderata  could  be  realised.  It  is  even
probable  that  they  avoided  being  precise.  Consciously  or  not,
they  seemed  to  say :  "  What  good  is  there  in  speaking  to  the
people  of  the  way  in  which  they  will  be  organised  later  on  ?  It
would  only  chill  their  revolutionary  ardour.  All  they  want  is
the  strength  to  attack  and  to  march  to  the  assault  of  the  old
institutions.  Later  on  we  shall  see  what  can  be  done  for  them."


ACTION  13

Are  there  not  many  Socialists  and  Anarchists  who  act  still
in  the  same  way  ?  In  their  hurry  to  push  on  to  the  day
of  revolt  they  treat  as  soporific  theorising  every  attempt  to
throw  some  light  on  what  ought  to  be  the  aim  of  the  Revolu-
tion.

It  must  be  said,  also,  that  the  ignorance  of  the  writers — city
men  and  bookmen  for  the  most  part — counted  for  much  in  this.
Thus,  in  the  whole  of  that  gathering  of  learned  or  experienced
business  men  who  composed  the  National  Assembly — lawyers,
journalists,  tradesmen,  and  so  forth — there  were  only  two  or
three  legal  members  who  had  studied  the  feudal  laws,  and  we
know  there  were  among  them  but  very  few  representatives  of
the  peasants  who  were  familiar  by  personal  experience  with  the
needs  of  village  life.

For  these  reasons  the  ideas  of  the  masses  were  expressed
chiefly  by  simple  negations.  "  Let  us  burn  the  registers  in
which  the  feudal  dues  are  recorded  !  Down  with  the  tithes  !
Down  with  *  Madame  Veto ' !  Hang  the  aristocrats !  "  But  to
whom  was  the  freed  land  to  go  ?  Who  were  to  be  the  heirs  of
the  guillotined  nobles  ?  Who  was  to  grasp  the  political  power
when  it  should  fall  from  the  hands  of  "  Monsieur  Veto,"  the
power  which  became  in  the  hands  of  the  middle  classes  a  much
more  formidable  weapon  than  it  had  been  under  the  old
regime  ?

This  want  of  clearness  in  the  mind  of  the  people  as  to  what
they  should  hope  from  the  Revolution  left  its  imprint  on  the
whole  movement.  While  the  middle  classes  were  marching
with  firm  and  decided  steps  towards  the  establishment  of  their
political  power  in  a  State  which  they  were  trying  to  mould,
according  to  their  preconceived  ideas,  the  people  were  hesitat-
ing. In  the  towns,  especially,  they  did  not  seem  to  know  how  to
turn  to  their  own  advantage  the  power  they  had  conquered.
And  later,  when  ideas  concerning  agrarian  laws  and  the  equalis-
ing of  incomes  began  to  take  definite  form,  they  ran  foul  of  a
mass  of  property  prejudices,  with  which  even  those  sincerely
devoted  to  the  cause  of  the  people  were  imbued.

A  similar  conflict  was  evoked  by  the  conceptions  of  the
political  organisation  of  the  State.  We  see  it  chiefly  in  the


H THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

antagonism  which  arose  between  the  governmental  prejudices
of  the  democrats  of  that  time  and  the  ideas  that  dawned  in  the
hearts  of  the  people  as  to  political  decentralisation,  and  the
prominent  place  which  the  people  wished  their  municipalities
to  take  both  in  the  division  of  the  large  towns  and  in  the  village
assemblies.  This  was  the  starting-point  of  the  whole  series  of
fierce  contests  which  broke  out  in  the  Convention.  Thence,
too,  arose  the  indefiniteness  of  the  results  obtained  by  the
Revolution  for  the  great  mass  of  the  people  in  all  directions,
except  in  the  recovery  of  part  of  the  land  from  the  lords,  lay
and  clerical,  and  the  freeing  of  all  land  from  the  feudal  taxes  it
formerly  had  to  pay.

But  if  the  people's  ideas  were  confused  on  constructive  lines,
they  were,  on  the  other  hand,  extremely  clear  on  certain  points
^ in  their  negations.

First  of  all,  the  hatred  felt  by  the  poor  for  the  whole  of  the
idle,  lazy,  perverted  aristocracy  who  ruled  them,  while  black
misery  reigned  in  the  villages  and  in  the  dark  lanes  of  the  great
towns.  Next,  hatred  towards  the  clergy,  who  by  sympathy
belonged  more  to  the  aristocracy  than  to  the  people  who  fed
them.  Then,  hatred  of  all  the  institutions  under  the  old
regime,  which  made  poverty  still  harder  to  bear  because  they
denied  the  rights  of  humanity  to  the  poor.  Hatred  for  the
feudal  system  and  its  exactions,  which  kept  the  labourer  in  a
state  of  servitude  to  the  landowners  long  after  personal  serfdom
had  ceased  to  exist.  Lastly,  the  despair  of  the  peasant  who  in
those  years  of  scarcity  saw  land  lying  uncultivated  in  the  hands
of  the  lord,  or  serving  merely  as  a  pleasure-ground  for  the
nobility  while  famine  pressed  hard  on  the  villages.

It  was  all  this  hatred,  coming  to  a  head  after  long  years  as  the
selfishness  of  the  rich  became  more  and  more  apparent  in  the
course  of  the  eighteenth  century.  And  it  was  this  need  of  land
|  • — this  land  hunger,  the  cry  of  the  starving  in  revolt  against  the
lord  who  refused  them  access  to  it — that  awoke  the  spirit  of
revolt  ever  since  1788.  And  it  was  the  same  hatred,  and  the
same  need,  mingled  with  the  hope  of  success,  which  stimulated
the  incessant  revolts  of  the  peasants  in  the  years  1789-1793,
revolts  which  enabled  the  middle  classes  to  overthrow  the  old


•


ACTION  15

regime  and  to  organise  its  own  power  under  the  new  one,  that
of  representative  government.

Without  those  risings,  without  that  disorganisation  of  autho-
rity in  the  provinces  which  resulted  in  never-ceasing  jacqueries,
without  that  promptitude  of  the  people  of  Paris  and  other  towns
I  in  taking  up  arms,  and  in  marching  against  the  strongholds  of
\  royalty  whenever  an  appeal  to  the  people  was  made  by  the
I  revolutionaries,  the  middle  classes  would  certainly  not  have
}  accomplished  anything. But  it  is  to  this  true  fount  and  origin
of  the  Revolution — the  people's  readiness  to  take  up  arms —
that  the  historians  of  the  Revolution  have  not  yet  done  justice
— the  justice  owed  to  it  by  the  history  of  civilisation.


CHAPTER  IV
THE  PEOPLE  BEFORE  THE  REVOLUTION

Condition  of  people  previous  to  1789 — Wanton  luxury  of
aristocrats — Poverty  of  majority  of  peasants — Rise  and
importance  of  well-to-do  peasant  class

IT  would  be  waste  of  time  to  describe  here  at  any  length  the
condition  of  the  peasants  in  the  country  and  of  the  poorer
classes  in  the  towns  on  the  eve  of  1789.

All  the  historians  who  have  written  about  the  great  French
Revolution  have  devoted  eloquent  pages  to  this  subject.  The
people  groaned  under  the  burden  of  taxes  levied  by  the  State,
rents  and  contributions  paid  to  the  lord,  tithes  collected  by
the  clergy,  as  well  as  under  the  forced  labour  exacted  by  all
three.  Entire  populations  were  reduced  to  beggary  and  wan-
dered on  the  roads  to  the  number  of  five,  ten  or  twenty
thousand  men,  women  and  children  in  every  province ;  in
1777,  one  million  one  hundred  thousand  persons  were  officially
declared  to  be  beggars.  In  the  villages  famine  had  become
chronic  ;  its  intervals  were  short,  and  it  decimated  entire
provinces.  Peasants  were  flocking  in  hundreds  and  thousands
from  their  own  neighbourhood,  in  the  hope,  soon  undeceived,
of  finding  better  conditions  elsewhere.  At  the  same  time,  the
number  of  the  poor  in  the  towns  increased  every  year,  and
it  was  quite  usual  for  food  to  run  short.  As  the  municipalities
could  not  replenish  the  markets,  bread  riots,  always  followed
by  massacres,  became  a  persistent  feature  in  the  everyday  life
of  the  kingdom.

On  the  other  hand  might  be  seen  the  superfine  aristocrat
of  the  eighteenth  century  squandering  immense  fortunes —
hundreds  of  thousands  and  millions  of  francs  a  year — in  un-
bridled and  absur^  luxury.  To-day  a  Taine  can  go  into

16


THE  PEOPLE  BEFORE  THE  REVOLUTION 17

raptures  over  the  life  they  led  because  he  knows  it  only  from  a
distance,  a  hundred  years  away,  and  through  books ;  but,  in
reality,  they  hid  under  their  dancing-master  manners  roisterous
dissipations  and  the  crudest  sensuality ;  they  were  without
interest,  without  thought,  without  even  the  simplest  human
feeling.  Consequently,  boredom  was  always  tapping  at  the
doors  of  the  rich,  boredom  at  the  Court  of  Versailles,  boredom
in  their  chateaux ;  and  they  tried  in  vain  to  evade  it  by  the  most
futile  and  the  most  childish  means.  We  also  know  what  they
were  worth,  these  aristocrats,  when  the  Revolution  broke  out ;
how  they  left  "  their  "  King,  and  "  their  "  Queen  to  defend
themselves,  and  hastened  to  emigrate,  calling  for  a  foreign
invasion  to  protect  their  estates  and  privileges  against  the
revolted  people.  Their  worth  and  their  "  nobility "  of
character  can  be  estimated  by  the  colonies  of  emigres,  which  they
established  at  Coblentz,  Brussels  and  Mitau.

Those  extremes  of  luxury  and  misery  with  which  life  abounded
in  the  eighteenth  century  have  been  admirably  depicted  by
every  historian  of  the  Great  Revolution.  But  one  feature
remains  to  be  added,  the  importance  of  which  stands  out
especially  when  we  study  the  condition  of  the  peasants  at  this
moment  in  Russia  on  the  eve  of  the  great  Russian  Revolution.

The  misery  of  the  great  mass  of  French  peasants  was  un-
doubtedly frightful.  It  had  increased  by  leaps  and  bounds,
ever  since  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  as  the  expenditure  of  the
State  increased  and  the  luxury  of  the  great  lords  became  more
exquisite  in  the  extravagancies  revealed  for  us  in  certain
memoirs  of  that  time.  What  helped  to  make  the  exactions  of
the  nobility  unendurable  was  that  a  great  number  of  them,
when  ruined,  hiding  their  poverty  under  a  show  of  luxury,
resorted  in  desperation  to  the  extortion  of  even  the  least  of
those  rents  and  payments  in  kind,  which  only  custom  had
established.  They  treated  the  peasants,  through  the  inter-
mediary of  their  stewards,  with  the  rigour  of  mere  brokers.
Impoverishment  turned  the  nobility,  in  their  relations  with
their  ex-serfs,  into  middle-class  money-grubbers,  incapable,
however,  of  finding  any  other  source  of  revenue  than  the
exploitation  of  ancient  privileges,  relics  of  the  feudal  age.


1 8 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

This  is  why  we  find  in  certain  documents,  during  the  fifteen
years  of  Louis  XVI. 's  reign  which  preceded  the  Revolution,
indisputable  traces  of  a  recrudescence  of  seigneurial  exactions.

But  though  the  historians  are  right  in  depicting  the  con-
dition of  the  peasants  in  very  dark  colours,  it  would  be  a  mis-
take to  impeach  the  veracity  of  those  who,  like  Tocqueville,
mention  some  amelioration  in  the  conditions  of  the  country
during  those  very  years  preceding  the  Revolution.  The  fact
is,  that  a  double  phenomenon  became  apparent  in  the  villages
at  that  time  :  the  impoverishment  of  the  great  mass  of  the
peasants  and  the  bettering  of  the  condition  of  a  few  among  them.
This  may  be  seen  to-day  in  Russia  since  the  abolition  of  serfdom.

The  great  mass  of  the  peasants  grew  poorer.  Year  after
year  their  livelihood  became  more  and  more  precarious :  the
least  drought  resulted  in  scarcity  and  famine.  But  a  new  class
of  peasant,  a  little  better  off  and  with  ambitions,  was  forming
at  the  same  time,  especially  in  districts  where  aristocratic
estates  were  disintegrating  rapidly.  The  village  middle
classes,  the  well-to-do  peasants,  came  into  being,  and  as  the
Revolution  drew  near  these  furnished  the  first  speakers  against
feudal  rights,  and  demanded  their  abolition.  It  was  this  class
which,  during  the  four  or  five  years  the  Revolution  lasted,
most  firmly  insisted  that  these  feudal  rights  should  be  abolished
without  compensation,  and  that  the  estates  of  the  royalist
nobles  should  be  confiscated  and  sold  in  small  parcels.  It  was
this  class,  too,  which  was  most  bitter,  in  1793,  against  les  ci-
devantSy  the  dispossessed  nobles,  the  ex-landlords.

For  the  time  being,  at  the  approach  of  the  Revolution,  it  was
through  the  peasant  who  had  become  of  some  importance  in  his
village  that  hope  filled  men's  hearts  and  inspired  the  spirit
of  revolt.

Traces  of  this  awakening  are  evident,  for  since  the  accession
of  Louis  XVI.,  in  1774,  revolts  were  continually  on  the  increase.
It  may  be  said,  therefore,  that  if  despair  and  misery  impelled
the  people  to  riot,  it  was  the  hope  of  obtaining  some  relief  that
incited  them  to  revolt.

Like  every  other  revolution,  that  of  1789  was  inspired  by  the
hope  of  attaining  certain  important  results.


CHAPTER  V
THE  SPIRIT  OF  REVOLT:  THE  RIOTS

Reforms  at  beginning  of  reign  of  Louis  XVI. — Turgot —
Question  of  National  Representation — Character  of  Louis
XVI. — Revolution  in  America — Riots  on  accession  of  Louis
— Their  consequences — Large  towns  revolt  in  turn — "  Par-
liaments "  and  "  Plenary  Courts  " — Paris  parliament  refuses
to  grant  money  to  Court — Action  of  King — Insurrections  in
Brittany — Grenoble — Queen's  letter  to  Count  de  Mercy —
Gradual  awakening  of  revolutionary  spirit — Louis  compelled
to  convoke  Assembly  of  Notables  and  States-General

As  is  usual  in  every  new  reign,  that  of  Louis  XVI.  began  with
some  reforms.  Two  months  after  his  accession  Louis  XVI.
summoned  Turgot  to  the  ministry,  and  a  month  later  he
appointed  him  Controller-General  of  Finance.  He  even
supported  him  at  first  against  the  violent  opposition  that
Turgot,  as  an  economist,  a  parsimonious  middle-class  man
and  an  enemy  of  the  effete  aristocracy,  was  bound  to  meet
with  from  the  Court  party.

Free  trade  in  corn  was  proclaimed  in  September  1774,*
and  statute  labour  was  abolished  in  1776,  as  well  as  the  old
corporations  and  guilds  in  the  towns,  which  were  no  longer  of
any  use  except  to  keep  up  a  kind  of  industrial  aristocracy,  and
by  these  measures  hopes  of  reform  were  awakened  among  the
people.  The  poor  rejoiced  to  see  the  breaking  down  of  the
toll-gates,  which  had  been  put  up  all  over  France,  and  pre-
vented the  free  circulation  of  corn,  salt  and  other  objects  of
prime  necessity.  For  them  it  meant  the  first  breach  in  the
odious  privileges  of  the  landowners ;  while  the  peasants  who

*  Before  that  the  farmer  could  not  sell  his  corn  for  three  months
after  the  harvest,  the  lord  of  the  manor  alone  being  entitled  to  do  that.
It  was  one  of  the  feudal  privileges,  which  enabled  the  lord  to  sell  it  at
a  high  price.

19


20 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

were  better  off  rejoiced  to  see  the  joint  liability  of  the  tax-
payers abolished.*  Finally,  in  the  August  of  1779,  mortmain
and  personal  servitude  were  suppressed  upon  the  King's
private  estates,  and  the  following  year  it  was  decided  to
abolish  torture,  which  was  used  in  the  most  atrocious  forms
established  by  the  Ordinance  of  1670.!  "  Representative
Government,"  such  as  was  established  by  the  English  after
their  revolution,  and  was  advocated  in  the  writings  of  the
contemporary  philosophers,  also  began  to  be  spoken  of.  With
this  end  in  view,  Turgot  had  even  prepared  a  scheme  of  pro-
vincial assemblies,  to  be  followed  later  on  by  representative
government  for  all  France  in  which  the  propertied  classes
would  have  been  called  upon  to  constitute  a  parliament.
Louis  XVI.  shrank  from  this  proposal,  and  dismissed  Turgot ;
but  from  that  moment  all  educated  France  began  to  talk  of  a
Constitution  and  national  representation.^  However,  it  was
no  longer  possible  to  elude  the  question  of  national  representa-
tion, and  when  Necker  became  minister  in  July  1777,  it  came
tip  again  for  discussion.  Necker,  who  understood  very  well
the  wishes  of  his  master,  and  tried  to  bring  his  autocratic  ideas

*  This  has  been  abolished  in  Russia  also.

f  Statute  of  August  24,  1780.  Breaking  on  the  wheel  existed  still
in  1785.  The  parliaments,  in  spite  of  the  Voltaireanism  of  the  period,
and  the  general  refinement  in  the  conception  of  life,  enthusiastically
defended  the  use  of  torture,  which  was  abolished  definitely  only  by
the  National  Assembly.  It  is  interesting  to  find  (E.  Seligman,  La
justice  en  France  pendant  la  Revolution,  p.  97)  that  Brissot,  Marat
and  Robespierre  by  their  writings  contributed  to  the  agitation  for  the
reform  of  the  penal  code.

J  The  arguments  upon  which  Louis  XVI.  took  his  stand  are  of  the
highest  interest.  I  sum  them  up  here  according  to  E.  Samichon's  Les
reformes  sous  Louis  XVI.  :  assemblies  provinciales  et  parlements.  The
King  found  Turgot's  schemes  dangerous,  and  wrote  :  "  Though  coming
from  a  man  who  has  good  ideas,  his  constitution  would  overthrow  the
existing  State."  And  again,  further  on:  "The  system  of  a  rent-
paying  electorate  would  tend  to  make  malcontents  of  the  non-propertied
classes,  and  if  these  were  allowed  to  assemble  they  would  form  a  hot-
bed of  disorder.  .  .  .  The  transition  from  the  abolished  system  to
the  system  M.  Turgot  now  proposes  ought  to  be  considered  :  we  see
well  enough  what  is,  but  only  in  our  thoughts  do  we  see  what  does  not
yet  exist,  and  we  must  not  make  dangerous  experiments  if  we  do  not  see
wnere  they  will  end."  Vide  also,  in  Samichon's  Appendix  A,  the  very
interesting  list  of  the  chief  laws  under  Louis  XVI.  between  1774  and
1789.


THE  SPIRIT  OF  REVOLT  21

into  some  accord  with  the  requirements  of  finance,  attempted
to  manoeuvre  by  proposing  the  introduction  of  provincial
affliSiF^blieft  flflly  anc^  relegating  the  possibility  of  a  national
representation  to  the  distant  future.  But  he,  too,  was  met
by  a  formal  refusal  on  the  part  of  the  King.  "  Would  it  not
be  a  happy  contingency,"  wrote  the  crafty  financier,  "  that
your  Majesty,  having  become  an  intermediary  between  your
estates  and  your  people,  your  authority  should  only  appear  to
mark  the  limits  between  severity  and  justice  ?  "  To  which
Louis  replied  :  "  It  is  of  the  essence  of  my  authority  not  to  be  an
intermediary,  but  to  be  at  the  bead"  It  is  well  to  remember
these  words  in  view  of  the  sentimentalities  concerning  Louis
XVI.  which  have  been  propagated  by  historians  belonging  to
the  party  of  reaction.  Far  from  being  the  careless,  inoffensive,
good-natured  person,  interested  only  in  hunting,  that  they
wished  to  represent  him,  Louis  XVI.  for  fifteen  years,  until
1789,  managed  to  resist  the  necessity,  felt  and  declared,  for
new  political  forms  to  take  the  place  of  royal  despotism  and
the  abominations  of  the  old  regime.

The  weapon  used  by  Louis  XVI.,  in  preference  to  all  others
was  <|eceit.  Only  fear  made  him  yield,  and,  using  always  the
same  weapons,  deceit  and  hypocrisy,  he  resisted  not  only  up
to  1789,  but  even  up  to  the'Iast  moment,  to  the  very  foot  of
the  scaffold.  At  any  rate,  in  1778,  at  a  time  when  it  was
already  evident  to  all  minds  of  more  or  less  perspicacity,  as
it  was  to  Turgot  and  Necker,  that  the  absolute  power  of  the
King  had  had  its  day,  and  that  the  hour  had  come  for  replacing
it  by  some  kind  of  national  representation,  Louis  XVI.  could
never  be  brought  to  make  any  but  the  feeblest  concessions.
He  convened  the  provincial  assemblies  of  the  provinces  of
Berri  and  Haute-Guienne  (1778  and  1779).  But  in  face  of  the
opposition  shown  by  the  privileged  classes,  the  plan  of  extending
these  assemblies  to  the  other  provinces  was  abandoned,  and
Necker  was  dismissed  in "178 1.

The  revolution  in  America  had,  meanwhile,  helped  also  to
awaken  minds,  and  to  inspire  them  with  a  breath  of  liberty
and  republican  democracy.  On  July  4,  1776,  the  English
colonies  in  North  America  had  proclaimed  their  independence,


22 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

and  the  new  United  States  were  recognised  by  France  in  1778,
which  led  to  a  war  with  England  that  lasted  until  1783.  All
historians  mention  the  effect  which  this  war  had  on  men's
minds.  There  is,  in  fact,  no  doubt  that  the  revolt  of  the
English  colonies  and  the  constitution  of  the  United  States
exercised  a  far-reaching  influence  in  France,  and  helped
powerfully  in  arousing  the  revolutionary  spirit.  We  know,
too,  that  the  Declaration  of  Rights,  drawn  up  by  the  young
American  States  influenced  the  French  Revolutionists  pro-
foundly, and  was  taken  by  them  as  a  model  for  their  declaration.
It  might  be  said  also  that  the  war  in  America,  during  which
France  had  to  build  an  entire  fleet  to  oppose  England's,
completed  the  financial  ruin  of  the  old  regime  and  hastened
its  downfall.  But  it  is  nevertheless  certain  that  this  war  was
also  the  beginning  of  those  terrible  wars  which  England  soon
waged  against  France,  and  the  coalitions  which  she  organised
•'*££  against  the  Republic.  As  soon  as  England  recovered  from  her

defeats  and  felt  that  France  was  weakened  by  internal  struggles,
she  used  every  means,  open  and  secret,  to  bring  about  the
-y,  wars  which  we  shall  see  waged  relentlessly  from  1793  till  1815.

All  these  causes  of  the  Great  Revolution  must  be  clearly
indicated,  for  like  every  event  of  primordial  importance,  it
was  the  result  of  many  causes,  converging  at  a  given  moment,
and  creating  the  men  who  in  their  turn  contributed  to
strengthen  the  effect  of  those  causes.  But  it  must  be  under-
stood that  in  spite  of  the  events  which  prepared  the  Revolu-
tion, and  in  spite  of  all  the  intelligence  and  ambitions  of  the
middle  classes,  those  ever-prudent  people  would  have  gone  on
a  long  time  waiting  for  a  change  if  the  people  had  not  hastened
matters.  The  popular  revolts,  growing  and  increasing  in
number  and  assuming  proportions  quite  unforeseen,  were  the
new  elements  which  gave  the  middle  class  the  power  of  attack
they  themselves  did  not  possess.

The  people  had  patiently  endured  misery  and  oppression
under  Louis  XV.,  but  as  soon  as  that  King  died,  in  1774,  they
began  to  revolt,  knowing  well  that,  with  a  change  of  masters
at  the  palace,  there  comes  an  inevitable  slackening  of  authority.
A  continuous  series  of  riots  broke  out  between  1775  an£^  1777'


THE  SPIRIT  OF  REVOLT  23

These  were  the  riots  of  hunger  that  had  been  repressed
until  then  only  by  force. The  harvest  of  1774  had  been  bad,
and  bread  was  scarce. Accordingly  noting  broke  out  in  April
1775. At  Dijon  the  people  took  possession  of  the  houses  of
the  ffloflflflftfets..  destroyed  their  furniture  and  smashed  up
their  flour-mills. It  was  on  this  occasion  that  the  governor  of
the  town — one  of  the  superfine  gentlemen  of  whom  Taine  has
written  with  so  much  complacence — said  to  the  people  those
fatal  words  which  were  to  be  so  often  repeated during  the
Revolution  : "  The  grass  has  sprouted,  go  to  the  fields  and
browse  on  it." Auxerre,  Amiens,  Lille,  followed  Dijon. A
few  days  later  the  "  robbers,"  for  so  the  majority  of  historians
designate  the  famished  rioters,  having  assembled  at  Pontoise,
Passy  and  Saint-Germain  with  the  intention  of  pillaging  the
granaries,  turned  their  steps  towards  Versailles. Louis  XVI.
wanted  to  go  out  on  the  balcony  of  the  palace  to  speak  to
them,  to  tell  them  that  he  would  reduce  the  price  of  bread  ;
but  Turgot,  like  a  true  economist,  opposed  this.  The  reduction
in  the  price  of  bread  was  not  made. The  "  robbers,"  in  the
meantime,  entered  Paris  and  plundered  the  bakeries,  distributing
whatever  food  they  could  seize  among  the  crowd  ;  but  they  were
dispersed  by  the  troops,  and  two  of  the  rioters  were  hanged
at  the  Place  de  la  Greve,  and  as  they  were  being  hanged  they
cried  out  that  they  were  dying  for  the  people. Since  that
time  the  legend  began  to  circulate  in  France  about  "  robbers  "
overrunning  the  country — a  legend  which  had  such  an  im-
portant effect  in  1789,  as  it  furnished  the  middle  classes  in  the
towns  with  a  pretext  for  arming  themselves. And  from  that
time  also  began  the  placards  insulting  the  King  and  his  ministers
which  were  pasted  up  at  Versailles, containing  threats  to
execute  the  King  the  day  after  his  coronation,  and  even  to
exterminate  the  whole  of  the  royal  family  if  bread  remained
at  the  same  price. Forged  governmental  edicts,  too,  began  to
be  circulated  through  the  country. One  of  them  asserted
that  the  State  Council  had  reduced  the  price  of  wheat  to
twelve  livres (francs)  the  measure.

These  riots  were  of  course  suppressed,  but  they  had  far-
reaching  consequences. Strife  was  let  loose  among  the  various


24 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

parties.  It  rained  pamphlets.  Some  of  these  accused  the
minister,  while  others  spoke  of  a  plot  of  the  princes  against
the  King,  or  made  fun  of  the  royal  authority.  In  short,  with
men's  minds  already  in  a  state  of  ferment,  the  popular  out-
breaks were  the  sparks  which  ignited  the  powder.  Concessions
to  the  people,  never  dreamed  of  before,  were  openly  discussed  ;
public  works  were  set  on  foot ;  taxes  on  milling  were  abolished,
and  this  measure  led  the  people  of  Rouen  to  declare  that  all
manorial  dues  had  been  abolished,  so  that  they  rose  in  July  to
protest  against  ever  paying  them  again.  The  malcontents
evidently  lost  no  time  and  profited  by  the  occasion  to  extend
the  popular  risings.

We  have  not  the  necessary  documents  for  giving  a  full
account  of  the  popular  insurrections  during  the  reign  of  Louis
XVI. — the  historians  did  not  trouble  about  them  ;  the  archives
have  not  been  examined,  and  it  is  only  by  accident  that  we
learn  that  in  such-and-such  a  place  there  were  "  disorders."
Thus,  there  were  riots  of  a  somewhat  serious  nature  in  Paris,
after  the  abolition  of  the  trade-guilds  in  1776 — and  all  over
France,  in  the  course  of  the  same  year — as  a  result  of  the  false
reports  respecting  the  abolition  of  all  obligations  in  the  matter
of  statute  labour  and  dues  claimed  by  the  landowners.  But,
according  to  the  printed  documents,  it  would  appear  also
that  there  was  a  decrease  in  the  rioting  in  the  years  1777  to
1783,  the  American  war  having  perhaps  something  to  do
with  this.

However,  in  1782  and  1783,  the  riots  recommenced,  and  from
that  time  went  on  increasing  until  the  Revolution.  Poitiers
revolted  in  1782  ;  in  1786  it  was  Vizille's  turn  ;  from  1783  to
1789  rioting  broke  out  in  the  Cevennes,  the  Vivarais  and  the
Gevaudan.  The  malcontents,  who  were  nicknamed  mascarats,
wanting  to  punish  the  "  practitioners  "  who  sowed  dissension
among  the  peasants  to  incite  them  to  go  to  law,  broke  into  the
law  courts  and  into  the  houses  of  the  notaries  and  attorneys
and  burned  all  the  deeds  and  contracts.  Three  of  the  leaders
were  hanged,  others  were  sent  to  penal  servitude,  but  the
disorders  broke  out  afresh,  as  soon  as  the  closing  of  the  farle-
ments  (Courts  of  Justice)  furnished  them  with  a  new  pre-


THE  SPIRIT  OF  REVOLT  25

text.*  In  1786  it  was  Lyons  that  revolt  ed.f  The  silk- weavers
went  on  strike  ;  they  were  promised  an  increase  of  wages,  but
troops  were  called  out,  whereupon  there  was  a  fight  and  three
of  the  leaders  were  hanged.  From  that  moment,  up  to  the
Revolution,  ^vyofls  became  a  hotbed  of  revolt,  and  in  1789  it
was  the  rioters  of  1786  who  were  chosen  as  electors.

Sometimes  these  risings  had  a  religious  character ;  some-
times they  were  to  resist  military  enlistment — every  levy  of
soldiers  led  to  a  riot,  says  Turgot ;  or  it  might  be  the  salt
tax  against  which  the  people  rebelled,  or  the  exactions  of  the
tithes.  But  revolts  went  on  without  intermission,  and  it  was
in  the  east,  south-east  and  north-east — future  hotbeds  of
the  Revolution — that  these  revolts  broke  out  in  the  greatest
number.  They  went  on  steadily  growing  in  importance,  and
at  last,  in  1788,  after  the  dissolution  of  the  Courts  of  Justice,
which  were  called  farlements  and  were  replaced  by  "  Plenary
Courts,"  insurrections  broke  out  in  every  part  of  France

It  is  evident  that  for  the  mass  of  the  people  there  was  not
much  to  choose  between  a  farlement  and  a  "  Plenary  Court."
If  the  'parlements  had  refused  sometimes  to  register  edicts  made
by  the  King  and  his  minister,  they  had  on  the  other  hand
displayed  no  solicitude  for  the  people.  But  the  parlements
had  shown  opposition  to  the  Court,  that  was  enough ;  and
when  emissaries  of  the  middle  classes  sought  popular  support
for  rioting,  they  were  given  it  willingly,  because  it  was  a  way
of  demonstrating  against  the  Court  and  the  rich.

In  the  June  of  1787  the  Paris  -parlement  had  made  itself
very  popular  by  refusing  a  grant  of  money  to  the  Court.  The
law  of  the  country  was  that  the  edicts  of  the  King  should  be
registered  by  the  ^arlement,  and  the  Paris  farlement  unhesi-
tatingly registered  certain  edicts  concerning  the  corn  trade,
the  convocation  of  provincial  assemblies  and  statute  labour.
But  it  refused  to  register  the  edict  which  was  to  establish  fresh
taxes — a  new  "  territorial  subvention,"  and  a  new  stamp  duty.
Upon  this  the  King  convoked  what  was  called  a  "  Bed  of

*  C.  de  Vic  and  J.  de  Vaissete,  Histoire  gSnfrale  du  Languedoc,  con-
tinued by  du  M6ge,  10  vols.,  1840-1846.
t  Chassin,  Genie  de  la  Revolution.


26  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Justice,"  and  compelled  his  edicts  to  be  registered.  The
farlement  protested,  and  so  won  the  sympathy  of  the  middle
classes  and  the  people.  There  were  crowds  round  the  Courts
at  every  sitting ;  clerks,  curious  idlers  and  common  men
collected  there  to  applaud  the  members.  To  stop  this,  the
King  banished  the  farlement  to  Troyes,  and  then  riotous
demonstrations  began  in  Paris.  The  popular  hatred  was  then
being  directed  against  the  princes  chiefly,  especially  against
the  Duke  d'Artois  and  the  Queen,  who  was  nicknamed
"Madame  Deficit."

The  Exchequer  Court  of  Paris  (Cour  des  Aides),  supported
by  the  popular  outburst,  as  well  as  by  the  provincial  parlements
and  the  Court  of  Justice,  protested  against  this  act  of  royal
power,  and,  as  the  agitation  was  growing,  the  King  was  com-
pelled to  recall  the  exiled  farlement.  This  was  done  on
September  9,  and  evoked  fresh  demonstrations  in  Paris,  during
which  the  minister  Calonne  was  burnt  in  effigy.

These  disturbances  were  chiefly  confined  to  the  lower
middle  classes.  But  in  other  localities  they  assumed  a  more
popular  character.

In  1788  insurrections  broke  out  in  Brittany.  When  the
military  Commander  of  Rennes  and  the  Governor  of  the
province  went  to  the  Breton  ^arlement  to  announce  the  edict
by  which  that  body  was  abolished,  the  whole  town  turned  out
immediately.  The  crowd  insulted  and  hustled  the  two
functionaries.  The  people  in  their  hearts  hated  the  Governor,
Bertrand  de  Moleville,  and  the  middle  classes  profited  by  this
to  spread  a  rumour  that  the  edict  was  all  owing  to  the  Governor.
"  He  is  a  monster  that  deserves  to  be  strangled,"  said  one  of
the  leaflets  distributed  among  the  crowd.  When  he  came  out
of  the  palace,  therefore,  they  pelted  him  with  stones,  and  after
several  attempts  some  one  threw  a  cord  with  a  slip-knot  over
him.  Fighting  was  about  to  begin — the  young  men  in  the
crowd  breaking  through  the  ranks  of  the  soldiers — when  an
officer  threw  down  his  sword  and  fraternised  with  the  people.
By  degrees  troubles  of  the  same  kind  broke  out  in  several
other  towns  in  Brittany,  and  the  peasants  rose  in  their  turn
when  grain  was  being  shipped  at  Quimper,  Saint-Brieuc,


THE  SPIRIT  OF  REVOLT  27

Morlaix,  Pont-PAbbe',  Lamballe  and  other  places.  It  is
interesting  to  note  the  active  part  taken  in  these  disorders  by
the  students  at  Rennes,  who  from  that  time  fraternised  with
the  rioters.*  In  Dauphine,  especially  at  Grenoble,  the  insur-
rection assumed  a  still  more  serious  character.  As  soon  as
the  military  commander,  Clermont-Tonnerre,  had  promulgated
the  edict  which  dissolved  the  'parlement  the  people  of  Grenoble
rose.  The  tocsin  was  rung,  and  the  alarm  spreading  quickly
to  the  neighbouring  villages,  the  peasants  hastened  in  crowds
to  the  town.  There  was  a  sanguinary  affray  and  many  were
killed.  The  commander's  guard  was  helpless  and  his  palace
was  sacked.  Clermont-Tonnerre,  with  an  axe  held  over  his
head,  had  to  revoke  the  royal  edict.

It  was  the  people,  and  chiefly  the  women,  who  acted  on  this
occasion.  As  to  the  members  of  the  -parlement,  the  people  had  a
good  deal  of  trouble  to  find  them.  They  hid  themselves,  and
wrote  to  Paris  that  the  people  had  risen  against  their  will,
and  when  the  people  laid  hands  on  them  they  were  kept
prisoners — their  presence  giving  an  air  of  legality  to  the
insurrection.  The  women  mounted  guard  over  these  arrested
members,  unwilling  to  trust  them  even  to  the  men,  lest  they
should  be  allowed  to  escape.

The  middle  classes  of  Grenoble  were  in  a  state  of  terror.
During  the  night  they  organised  a  militia  of  citizens  that  took
possession  of  the  town  gates  as  well  as  of  some  military  posts,
which  they  yielded  to  the  troops  soon  after.  Cannon  were
trained  on  the  rebels,  while  the  'parlement  took  advantage
of  the  darkness  to  disappear.  From  June  9  to  14  reaction
triumphed,  but  on  the  i^th  news  came  that  there  had  been  a
rising  at  Besangon  and  that  the  Swiss  soldiers  had  refused  to
fire  on  the  people.  Upon  this  the  people's  spirit  revived,  and
it  was  proposed  to  convoke  the  Estates  of  the  province.  But
fresh  reinforcements  of  troops  having  been  sent  from  Paris  the
disturbance  subsided  by  degrees.  The  agitation,  however,
kept  up  chiefly  by  the  women,  lasted  some  time  longer.f

*  Du  Chatellier,  Histoire  de  la  Revolution  dans  les  d&partements  de
Vancienne  Bretagne,  6  vols.,  1836  ;  vol.  ii.  pp.  60-70,  161,  &c.
f  Vic  and  Vaissete,  vol.  x.  p.  637.


28  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Besides  these  two  risings  mentioned  by  the  majority  of  the
historians,  many  others  broke  out  at  the  same  time  in  Provence,
Languedoc,  Rousillon,  Beam,  Flanders,  Franche-Comte  and
Burgundy.  Even  where  no  serious  riots  occurred  advantage
was  taken  of  the  prevailing  excitement  to  keep  up  the  dis-
content and  to  make  demonstrations.

At  Paris,  after  the  dismissal  of  the  Archbishop  of  Sens,
there  were  numerous  demonstrations.  The  Pont  Neuf  was
guarded  by  troops,  and  several  conflicts  occurred  between  them
and  the  people,  of  whom  the  leaders  were,  as  Bertrand  de
Moleville  remarks,*  "  those  who  later  on  took  part  in  all  the
popular  movements  of  the  Revolution."  Marie-Antoinette's
letter  to  the  Count  de  Mercy  should  also  be  read  in  this
connection.  It  is  dated  August  24,  1788,  and  in  it  she  tells
him  of  her  fears,  and  announces  the  retirement  of  the  Arch-
bishop of  Sens  and  the  steps  she  had  taken  to  recall  Necker  ;
the  effect  produced  on  the  Court  by  those  riotous  crowds  can
therefore  be  understood.  The  Queen  foresaw  that  this  recall
of  Necker  would  lessen  the  King's  authority  ;  she  feared  "  that
they  may  be  compelled  to  nominate  a  prime  minister,"  but
"  the  moment  is  pressing.  It  is  very  essential  that  Necker
should  accept."  t

Three  weeks  later,  September  14,  1788,  when  the  retirement
of  Lamoignon  became  known,  the  riotings  were  renewed.
The  mob  rushed  to  set  fire  to  the  houses  of  the  two  ministers,
Lamoignon  and  Brienne,  as  well  as  to  that  of  Dubois.  The
troops  were  called  out,  and  in  the  Rue  Melee  and  the  Rue  de
Grenelle  there  was  a  horrible  slaughter  of  poor  folk  who  could
not  defend  themselves.  Dubois  fled  from  Paris.  "  The  people
themselves  would  execute  justice,"  said  Les  deux  amis  de  la
liberte.  Later  still,  in  October  1788,  when  the  farlement

*  Vic  and  Vaissete,  p.  1 36.

f  J.  Feuillet  de  Conches,  Lettres  de  Louis  XVI.,  Marie -Antoinette  el
Madame  Elisabeth  (Paris,  1864),  vol.  i.  pp.  214-216  ;  "  The  Abbe  has
written  to  you  this  evening,  sir,  and  has  notified  my  wish  to  you,"
wrote  the  Queen.  "  I  think  more  than  ever  that  the  moment  is
pressing,  and  that  it  is  very  essential  that  he  (Necker)  should  accept.
The  King  fully  agrees  with  me,  and  has  just  brought  me  a  paper  with
his  own  hand  containing  his  ideas,  of  which  I  send  you  a  copy."  The
next  day  she  wrote  again  ;  "  We  must  no  longer  hesitate.  If  he  can
get  to  work  to-morrow  all  the  better.  It  is  most  urgent.  I  fear  that
we  may  be  compelled  to  nominate  a  prime  minister."


THE  SPIRIT  OF  REVOLT  29

that  had  been  banished  to  Troyes  was  recalled,  "  the  clerks
and  the  populace  "  illuminated  the  Place  Dauphine  for  several
evenings  in  succession.  They  demanded  money  from  the
passers-by  to  expend  on  fireworks,  and  forced  gentlemen  to
alight  from  their  carriages  to  salute  the  statue  of  Henri  Quatre.
Figures  representing  Calonne,  Breteuil  and  the  Duchess  de
Polignac  were  burned.  It  was  also  proposed  to  burn  the
Queen  in  effigy.  These  riotous  assemblies  gradually  spread
to  other  quarters,  and  troops  were  sent  to  disperse  them.
Blood  was  shed  and  many  were  killed  and  wounded  in  the  Place
de  la  Greve.  Those  who  were  arrested,  however,  were  tried  jj
by  the  'parlement  judges,  who  let  them  off  with  light  penalties.

In  this  way  the  revolutionary  spirit  awoke  and  developed
in  the  van  of  the  Great  Revolution.* XJ^illitiative ..,£ame
from the middle classes certainly — chiefly from the lower
middle  classes — but,  generally  speaking,  the  middle  classes  took
care  not  to  compromise  themselves,  and  the  number  of  them
who  opposed  the  Court,  more  or  less  openly,  before  the  con- •' }  (
voking  of  the  States-General  was  very  limited. If  there  had  '•
been  only  their  few  attempts  at  resistance  France  might  have
waited many  years  for  the  overthrow  of  royal  despotism.  (
Fortunately  a  thousand  circumstances  impelled  the  masses  to
revolt. And  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  after  every  outbreak
there were summary  hangings, wholesale arrests and even
torture  for  those  arrested,  the  people  did  revolt,  pressed  on  J>  J/  '
one  side  by  their  desperate  misery,  and  spurred  on  the  other
by  those  vague  hopes  of  which  the  old  woman  spoke  to  Arthur
Young. They  rose in numbers against the governors of
provinces,  tax-collectors,  salt-tax  agents  and  even  against  the
troops,  and  by  so  doing  completely  disorganised  the  govern-
mental machine.

From  1788  the  peasant  risings  became  so  general  that  it
was  impossible  to  provide  for  the  expenses  of  the  State,  and
Louis  XVI.,  after  having  refused  for  fourteen  years  to  convoke
the  representatives  of  the  nation,  lest  his  kingly  authority
should  suffer,  at  last  found  himself  compelled  to  convoke,  first
the  two  Assemblies  of  Notables,  and  finally  the  States-General.

*  For  fuller  information,  see  Felix  Roquain,  L'esprit  r&olutionnaire
want  la  Revolution.


CHAPTER  VI

THE  CONVOCATION  OF  THE  STATES-
GENERAL  BECOMES  NECESSARY

Irresponsibility  of  old  rSgime — Miserable  condition  of  peasants
— Discontent  of  middle  classes — They  encourage  riots  among
the  people — Change  in  political  system  of  France — Necker
— Financial  crisis — Assembly  of  Notables  convoked — Louis
convokes  States-General — Increased  representation  granted  to
Third  Estate

To  any  one  who  knew  the  condition  of  France  it  was  clear
that  the  irresponsible  regime  of  the  Court  could  not  last.
The  misery  in  the  country  districts  went  on  increasing  year
by  year,  and  it  became  more  and  more  difficult  to  levy  the
taxes  and  at  the  same  time  compel  the  peasants  to  pay  rent
to  the  landlords  and  perform  the  innumerable  statute  labours
exacted  by  the  provincial  government.  The  taxes  alone
devoured  half  and  often  two-thirds  of  what  the  peasants  could
earn  in  the  course  of  the  year.  Beggary  and  rioting  were
becoming  normal  conditions  of  country  life.  Moreover,  it
was  not  only  the  peasants  who  protested  and  revolted.  The
middle  classes,  too,  were  loudly  expressing  their  discontent.
They  profited  certainly  by  the  impoverishment  of  the  peasants
to  enrol  them  in  their  factories,  and  they  took  advantage  of
the  administrative  demoralisation  and  the  financial  disorders
of  the  moment  to  seize  on  all  kinds  of  monopolies,  and  to
enrich  themselves  by  loans  to  the  State.

But  this  did  not  satisfy  the  middle  classes.  For  a  while
they  managed  to  adapt  themselves  to  royal  despotism  and  Court
government.  A  moment  came,  however,  when  they  began  to
fear  for  their  monopolies,  for  the  money  they  had  invested  in
loans  to  the  State,  for  the  landed  property  they  had  acquired,

30


CONVOCATION  OF  STATES-GENERAL 31

for  the  factories  they  had  established,  and  afterwards  to
encourage  the  people  in  their  riots  in  order  that  they  might
break  down  the  government  of  the  Court  and  establish  their
own  political  power.  This  evolution  can  be  plainly  traced
during  the  first  thirteen  or  fourteen  years  of  Louis  XVI. 's
reign,  from  1774  to  1788.

An  important  change  in  the  entire  political  system  of  France
was  visibly  taking  place.  But  Louis  XVI.  and  his  Court
resisted  that  change,  and  they  opposed  it  so  long  that  when
the  King  at  last  decided  to  yield,  it  was  just  when  those  modest
reforms  that  would  have  been  so  welcome  at  the  beginning  of
his  reign  had  already  been  found  insufficient  by  the  nation.
Whereas,  in  1775,  a  regime  of  autocracy  mingled  with  national
representation  would  have  satisfied  the  middle  classes,  twelve
or  thirteen  years  later,  in  1787  and  1788,  the  King  was  con-
fronted by  a  public  opinion  which  would  no  longer  hearken
to  compromise,  but  demanded  representative  government
with  all  the  limitation  of  royal  power  which  it  involved.

We  have  seen  how  Louis  XVI.  rejected  Turgot's  very  modest
proposals.  The  mere  thought  of  limiting  the  royal  power  was
repugnant  to  him.  Therefore  Turgot's  reforms — abolition  of
statute  labour,  abolition  of  trade-wardens  and  a  timid  attempt
to  make  the  two  privileged  classes — the  nobility  and  clergy —
pay  some  of  the  taxes,  had  no  substantial  results.  Everything
is  interdependent  in  a  State,  and  everything  under  the  old
regime  fell  in  ruins  together.

Necker,  who  followed  closely  on  Turgot,  was  more  a  financier
than  a  statesman.  He  had  the  financier's  narrow  mind  which
sees  things  only  in  their  petty  aspects.  His  proper  element
was  financial  transactions — raising  loans.  To  read  his  Pouvoir
executif  is  to  understand  how  his  mind,  accustomed  only  to
reason  about  theories  of  government,  instead  of  clearing  itself
in  the  shock  of  human  passions  and  desiderata  that  find  ex-
pression in  a  society  at  a  given  moment,  was  incapable  of
comprehending  the  vast  problem,  political,  economic,  religious
and  social,  that  was  thrust  upon  France  in  1789.*

*  Du  pouvoir  ex&cutif  dans  les  grands  itats,  2  vols.,  1792.  The
idea  of  this  book  is,  that  if  France  was  passing  through  a  revolutionary


32 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Necker,  moreover,  never  dared  to  use  to  Louis  XVI.  the
clear,  exact,  severe  and  bold  language  which  the  occasion
required.  He  spoke  to  him  very  timidly  about  representative
government,  and  he  limited  his  reforms  to  what  could  neither
solve  the  difficulties  nor  satisfy  any  one,  while  they  made
every  one  feel  the  necessity  of  a  fundamental  change.

The  provincial  assemblies,  eighteen  of  which  Necker  added
to  those  already  instituted  by  Turgot,  leading  in  turn  to  the
establishment  of  district  and  parish  councils,  were  evidently
brought  to  discuss  the  most  difficult  questions  and  to  lay  bare
the  hideous  corruption  of  the  unlimited  power  of  royalty.  And
these  discussions,  which  could  not  but  spread  all  over  the
country  down  to  the  villages,  no  doubt  helped  powerfully  in
the  fall  of  the  old  regime.  In  this  way  the  provincial  assemblies,
which  in  1776  might  have  acted  as  lightning  conductors  and
lessened  the  force  of  the  storm,  were  helping  towards  the
insurrection  of  1788.  Likewise  the  famous  Compte  rendu,  the
report  upon  the  state  of  the  provinces,  that  Necker  published
in  1781,  a  few  months  before  quitting  office,  was  a  heavy  blow
to  royal  autocracy.  As  always  happens  on  such  occasions,  he
helped  to  shake  down  the  system  which  was  already  tottering
to  its  fall,  but  he  was  powerless  to  prevent  the  fall  from  be-
coming a  revolution  :  probably  he  did  not  even  perceive  that
it  was  impending.

The  financial  crash  came  after  Necker's  first  dismissal,  in
the  years  1781  to  1787.  The  finances  were  in  such  a  miserable
condition  that  the  debts  of  the  State,  the  provinces,  the  State

crisis  in  1792,  it  was  the  fault  of  her  National  Assembly  for  having
neglected  to  arm  the  King  with  a  strong  executive  power.  "  Every-
thing would  have  gone  its  course  more  or  less  perfectly  if  only  care
had  been  taken  to  establish  in  our  midst  a  tutelary  authority,"  says
Necker,  in  the  preface  to  this  work ;  and  he  enlarges  in  these  two
volumes  on  the  boundless  rights  with  which  the  royal  power  should
be  invested.  It  is  true  that  in  his  book,  Sur  la  legislation  et  le  commerce
des  grains,  published  in  1776,  he  had  developed,  by  way  of  protesting
against  a  system  of  free  trade  in  corn,  supported  by  Turgot,  some
ideas  showing  sympathy  with  the  poor,  in  advocating  that  the  State
should  intervene  to  fix  the  price  of  wheat  for  their  benefit,  but  that
was  the  limit  of  his  "  State-Socialism."  The  essential  thing,  in  his
opinion,  was  a  strong  Government,  a  throne  respected  and  surrounded
with  that  object  by  high  functionaries  and  a  powerful  executive.


CONVOCATION  OF  STATES-GENERAL 33

departments  and  even  of  the  King's  household  were  accumu-
lating in  an  alarming  fashion.  At  any  moment  the  bankruptcy
of  the  State  might  have  been  declared,  a  bankruptcy  which
the  middle  classes,  now  interested  in  the  State  finances  as
creditors,  did  not  want  at  any  price.  With  all  this,  the  mass
of  the  people  were  already  so  impoverished  that  they  could
no  longer  pay  the  taxes — they  did  not  pay,  and  revolted  ;  while
the  clergy  and  the  nobility  refused  to  make  any  sacrifice  in
the  interests  of  the  State.  Under  such  conditions  the  risings
in  the  villages  necessarily  brought  the  country  nearer  to  the
Revolution.  And  it  was  in  the  midst  of  these  difficulties
that  the  minister  Calonne  convoked  an  Assembly  of  the
Notables  at  Versailles  for  February  22,  1787.

To  convoke  this  Assembly  of  Notables  was  to  do  exactly
what  ought  not  to  have  been  done  at  that  moment :  it  was
exactly  the  half -measure  which  on  one  side  made  the  National
Assembly  inevitable,  and  on  the  other  hand  inspired  distrust
of  the  Court  and  hatred  of  the  two  privileged  orders,  the
nobility  and  the  clergy.  Through  that  Assembly  it  was  learned
that  the  national  debt  had  mounted  up  to  sixteen  hundred
and  forty-six  millions — an  appalling  sum  at  that  time — and
that  the  annual  deficit  was  increasing  by  one  hundred  and
forty  millions  annually.  And  this  in  a  country  ruined  as
France  was  !  It  came  to  be  known — every  one  talked  of  it ;
and  after  every  one  had  talked  about  it,  the  Notables,  drawn
from  the  upper  classes  and  practically  a  ministerial  assembly,
separated  on  May  25  without  having  done  or  decided  anything.
During  their  deliberations  Calonne  was  replaced  by  Lom6nie
de  Brienne,  Archbishop  of  Sens.  But  the  new  minister,  by
his  intrigues  and  his  attempted  severity,  only  succeeded  in
stirring  up  the  parlements,  in  provoking  widely  spread  riots
when  he  wished  to  disband  them,  and  in  exciting  public  opinion
still  more  against  the  Court.  When  he  was  dismissed  on
August  25,  1788,  there  was  general  rejoicing  all  over  France.
But  as  he  had  proved  clearly  the  impossibility  of  despotic
government  there  was  nothing  for  the  Court  but  to  submit.
On  August  8,  1788,  Louis  XVI.  was  at  last  obliged  to  convoke
the  States-General,  and  to  fix  the  opening  for  May  I,  1789.

c


34  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Even  in  this  the  Court  and  Necker,  who  was  recalled  to  the
ministry  in  1788,  managed  so  as  to  displease  every  one.  It
was  the  general  opinion  in  France  that  in  the  States-General,
in  which  the  three  classes  would  be  separately  represented,
the  Third  Estate  ought  to  have  twice  as  many  members  as
the  two  others,  and  that  the  voting  should  be  by  individuals.
But  Louis  XVI.  and  Necker  were  opposed  to  this,  and  even
convoked  a  second  Assembly  of  Notables  on  November  6,  1788,
which  would,  they  were  sure,  reject  the  doubling  of  numbers
in  the  Third  Estate  and  the  individual  vote.  This  was  exactly
what  happened  ;  but  in  spite  of  that,  public  opinion  had  been
so  predisposed  in  favour  of  the  Third  Estate  by  the  provincial
Assemblies  that  Necker  and  the  Court  were  obliged  to  give  in.
The  Third  Estate  was  granted  a  double  representation — that
is  to  say,  out  of  a  thousand  deputies  the  Third  would  have
as  many  as  the  clergy  and  nobility  combined.  In  short,  the
Court  and  Necker  did  everything  they  possibly  could  to  turn
public  opinion  against  them,  without  gaining  any  advantage
for  themselves.  The  Court's  opposition  to  the  convocation
of  a  national  representative  Assembly  was  in  vain.  The
States-General  met  at  Versailles  on  May  5,  1789.


CHAPTER  VII

THE  RISING  OF  THE  COUNTRY  DISTRICTS
DURING  THE  OPENING  MONTHS  OF  1789

Heroism  of  middle  classes  at  beginning  of  Revolution  over-
rated— Abolition  of  serfdom — Statute  labour  and  other  im-
positions upon  peasants — Failure  of  crops  in  1789 — Riots
follow— Nature  of  riots—"  Vive  la  Liberte  !  "—Riots  at  Agde
— Concessions  granted  to  people — Effect  of  riots  on  elections
— Agitation  in  rural  districts — Importance  of  peasant  insur-
rection

NOTHING  could  be  more  erroneous  than  to  imagine  or  describe
France  as  a  nation  of  heroes  on  the  eve  of  1789,  and  Quinet
was  perfectly  right  in  destroying  this  legend,  which  some
historians  had  tried  to  propagate.  It  is  evident  that  if  we
were  to  collect  into  a  few  pages  the  occasional  instances,  very
rare  after  all,  of  open  resistance  to  the  old  regime  on  the  part  of
the  middle  classes — such  as  d'EspremeniPs  opposition — we
could  compose  a  tolerably  impressive  picture.  But  what  is
particularly  apparent  in  making  a  survey  of  the  conditions  of
the  time  is  the  absence  of  serious  protests,  of  assertions  of  the
individual,  the  servility  of  the  middle  classes.  "  Nobody  makes
himself  known,"  says  Quinet,  very  justly.  There  is  no  oppor-
tunity even  to  know  oneself.*  And  he  asks  :  "  What  were  they
doing — Barnave,  Thouret,  Sieyes,  Vergniaud,  Guadet,  Roland,
Danton,  Robespierre,  and  all  the  others,  who  were  so  soon  to
become  the  heroes  of  the  Revolution  ? "

Dumbness,  silence,  prevailed  in  the  provinces  and  in  the

towns. The  central  power  had  to  summon  men  to  vote,  and

invite  them  to  say  aloud  what  they  had  been  saying  in  whispers,

before  the  Third  Estate  issued  their  famous  cabiers. And

*  Quinet,  La  Revolution,  ed.  1869,  vol.  i.  p.  15.

35


36 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

even  then  !  If  in  some  of  the  cahiers  we  find  daring  words  of
revolt,  what  submissiveness  and  timidity  appear  in  most  of
them,  what  moderation  in  their  demands  !  For,  after  the
right  to  carry  arms,  and  some  legal  guarantees  against  arbitrary
arrests,  it  was  chiefly  a  little  more  liberty  in  municipal  affairs
that  was  asked  for  in  the  cahiers  of  the  Third  Estate.*  It  was
later  on,  when  the  deputies  of  the  Third  saw  themselves
supported  by  the  people  of  Paris,  and  when  the  mutterings  of
the  peasant  insurrection  began  to  be  heard,  that  they  grew
bolder  in  their  attitude  towards  the  Court.

Fortunately,  the  people  began  to  revolt  everywhere,  after  the
disturbances  provoked  by  the  farlements  during  the  summer
and  autumn  of  1788,  and  the  tide  of  revolt,  gathering  force,
swept  onward  to  the  rising  of  the  villages  in  July  and  August
of  1789.

It  has  already  been  said  that  the  condition  of  the  peasants
and  workers  in  the  towns  was  such  that  a  single  bad  harvest
sufficed  to  bring  about  an  alarming  increase  in  the  price  of
bread  in  the  towns  and  sheer  famine  in  the  villages.  The
peasants  were  no  longer  serfs,  serfdom  having  long  been
abolished  in  France,  at  least  on  private  estates.  After  Louis
XVI.  had  abolished  it  within  the  royal  domains  in  1779,  there
remained  in  1788  only  about  80,000  persons  held  by  mortmain
in  the  Jura,  at  most  about  1,500,000  in  the  whole  of  France,
perhaps  even  less  than  a  million  ;  even  those  subject  to  mort-
main were  not  serfs  in  the  strict  meaning  of  the  term.  As  to
the  majority  of  the  French  peasants,  they  had  long  ceased  to
be  serfs.  But  they  went  on  paying  in  money,  and  in  working
for  their  personal  liberty  with  statute  labour  as  well  as  with

*  With  regard  to  the  demands  which  afterwards  excited  the  fury
of  the  landowners,  it  is  well  to  note  these  :  The  tax  on  bread  and  meat
to  be  fixed  according  to  the  average  prices,  demanded  by  Lyons,  Troyes,
Paris  and  Chalons  ;  that  "  wages  should  be  regulated  periodically
according  to  the  daily  needs,"  demanded  by  Rennes ;  that  work
should  be  guaranteed  to  all  able-bodied  poor,  demanded  by  several
towns.  As  to  the  Royalist-Constitutionalists,  who  were  numerous,  it
can  be  seen  by  the  proposals  of  the  "  Cahier  gtnfral,"  analysed  by
Chassin  (Les  Elections  et  les  cahiers  de  Paris  en  1789,  vol.  iii.,  1889,
p.  185),  that  they  wished  to  limit  the  deliberations  of  the  States-
General  to  questions  of  finance  and  of  retrenchments  in  the  household
'expenditures  of  the  King  and  the  princes.


THE  RISINGS  OF  1789  37

work  of  other  kinds.  These  dues  were  extremely  heavy  and
variable,  but  they  were  not  arbitrary,  and  they  were  considered
as  representing  payments  for  the  right  of  holding  land,  whether
collectively  by  the  community  or  privately  as  farm-land.  And
each  parcel  of  land  or  farm  had  its  dues,  as  varied  as  they  were
numerous,  carefully  recorded  in  the  feudal  registers,  the
terriers.

Besides,  the  right  of  manorial  justice  had  been  retained,  and
over  large  districts  the  lord  was  still  judge,  or  else  he  nominated
the  judges ;  and  in  virtue  of  this  ancient  prerogative  he  re-
tained all  kinds  of  personal  rights  over  his  ex-serfs.*  When
an  old  woman  bequeathed  to  her  daughter  one  or  two  trees
and  a  few  old  clothes — for  example,  "  my  black  quilted  petti-
coat," a  bequest  such  as  I  have  seen — "  the  noble  and  generous
lord  or  the  noble  and  generous  lady  of  the  castle  levied  so
much  on  the  bequest.  The  peasant  paid  also  for  the  right  of
marriage,  of  baptism,  of  burial ;  he  paid  likewise  on  everything
he  bought  or  sold,  and  the  very  right  of  selling  his  crops  or  his
wine  was  restricted.  He  could  not  sell  before  the  lord  had
sold  his  own.  Lastly,  there  were  all  manner  of  tolls  (banalites)
— for  the  use  of  the  mill,  of  the  wine-press,  the  public  bakehouse,
the  washing-places,  on  certain  roads  or  particular  fords — all
maintained  since  the  days  of  serfdom,  as  well  as  contributions
of  nuts,  mushrooms,  linen,  thread,  formerly  considered  as  gifts
for  festive  occasions."

As  to  statute  labour,  it  took  an  infinite  variety  of  forms  :
work  in  the  fields  of  the  lord,  work  in  his  parks  and  h,is  gardens,
work  to  satisfy  all  sorts  of  whims. In  some  villages  .there  was  '
even  an  obligation  to  beat  the  pond  during  the  night  in  order
that  the  frogs  should  not  prevent  his  lordship  from  sleeping.

*  In  an  excellent  pamphlet,  Les  fl&aux  de  V  agriculture,  ouvrage  pour
servir  d  Vappui  des  cahiers  des  doUances  des  campagnes,  by  D.  ...
(April  10, 1789),  we  find  this  statement  of  causes  preventing  the  develop-
ment of  agriculture  :  The  enormous  taxes,  the  tithes,  joint  and  indi-
vidual, "  solites "  and  "  insolites,"  and  these  always  increasing ;
the  large  quantities  of  game  preserved  through  abuse  of  privileges  and
sport ;  and  the  vexation  and  abuse  of  the  seigneurial  law  courts.  It
is  here  shown  that  "  it  was  by  means  of  the  attachment  of  manorial
law  courts  to  the  fief  that  the  landlords  had  made  themselves  despots
and  held  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  districts  in  the  chains  of
slavery  "  (p.  95).


38  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Personally  the  man  was  free,  but  all  this  network  of  dues  and
exactions,  which  had  been  woven  bit  by  bit  through  the  craft
of  the  lords  and  their  stewards  in  the  centuries  of  serfdom —
all  this  network  still  clung  round  the  peasant.

More  than  that,  the  State  was  there  with  its  taxes,  its  fines,
its  twentieths,  its  statute  labours  ever  increasing,  too,  and  the
State,  as  well  as  the  steward  of  my  lord,  was  always  ready  to  exer-
cise ingenuity  in  devising  some  new  pretext  for  introducing
some  new  form  of  taxation.

It  is  true  that,  since  Turgot's  reforms,  the  peasants  had  ceased
paying  certain  feudal  taxes,  and  some  provincial  governors
had  even  refused  to  resort  to  force  to  levy  certain  dues,  which
they  considered  to  be  injurious  exactions.  But  the  principal
feudal  dues  attaching  to  the  land  were  exacted  in  full,  and
they  became  all  the  heavier  as  the  State  and  provincial  taxes,
to  which  they  were  added,  continually  increased.  There  is,
therefore,  not  a  word  of  exaggeration  in  the  gloomy  pictures
of  life  in  the  villages  drawn  by  every  historian  of  the  Revolution.
But  neither  is  there  any  exaggeration  in  saying  that  in  each
village  there  were  some  peasants  who  had  created  for  themselves
a  certain  amount  of  prosperity,  and  that  these  were  the  men
who  especially  wished  to  shake  off  all  feudal  obligations,  and  to
win  individual  liberty.  The  two  types  depicted  by  Erckmann
and  Chatrian  in  their  Histoire  d'un  paysan—'ihe  middle-class
man  of  the  village,  and  the  peasant  crushed  beneath  the  burden
of  his  poverty — are  true  to  life.  Both  of  them  existed.  The
former  gave  political  strength  to  the  Third  Estate  ;  while  the
bands  of  insurgents  that,  since  the  winter  of  1788-1789  had
begun  to  force  the  nobles  to  relinquish  the  feudal  dues  in-
scribed in  the  terriers,  were  recruited  from  among  the  starving
poor  in  the  villages,  who  had  only  mud  cabins  to  live  in,  and
a  few  chestnuts  or  the  gleanings  of  the  fields  for  food.

The  same  remark  applies  also  to  the  towns,  to  which  the
feudal  rights  extended,  as  well  as  to  the  villages.  The  poorer
classes  in  the  towns  were  just  as  much  crushed  beneath  feudal
taxes  as  the  peasants.  The  right  of  seigneurial  justice  remained
to  its  full  extent  in  many  a  growing  city,  and  the  hovels  of  the
artisans  and  mechanics  paid  the  same  dues,  in  cases  of  sales  or


THE  RISINGS  OF  1789  39

inheritance,  as  the  huts  of  the  peasants.  Several  towns  had
even  to  pay  a  perpetual  tribute  as  redemption  from  their
former  feudal  subjection.  Besides  this,  the  majority  of  the
towns  paid  the  don  gratuit — the  voluntary  gift — to  the  King,
just  to  maintain  a  shadow  of  municipal  independence,  and  the
burden  of  these  taxes  pressed  hardest  on  the  poor.  If  we  add
to  all  this  the  heavy  royal  taxes,  the  provincial  contributions,
the  fines,  the  salt  tax  and  the  rest,  as  well  as  the  caprices  of  the
functionaries,  the  heavy  expenses  incurred  in  the  law  courts,
and  the  impossibility  of  a  mere  commoner's  obtaining  justice
against  a  noble,  even  if  he  were  a  rich  member  of  the  middle
classes,  and  if  we  take  into  consideration  the  many  forms  of
oppression,  insult  and  humiliation  to  which  the  lower  classes
were  subject,  we  shall  be  able  to  form  some  idea  of  the  con-
dition of  the  poor  on  the  eve  of  1789.

It  was,  however,  these  poorer  classes  who,  by  revoking  in  the
towns  and  villages,  gave  the  representatives  of  the  Third  Estate
in  the  States-General  courage  to  oppose  the  King  and  to  declare
the  Assembly  a  constituent  body.

Drought  had  caused  a  failure  of  the  crops  in  1788,  and  the
winter  was  very  severe.  Before  that  there  had  certainly  been
winters  as  severe,  and  crops  quite  as  bad,  and  even  riots  among
the  people.  Every  year  there  was  scarcity  in  some  part  of
France,  and  often  it  affected  a  fourth  or  a  third  part  of  the
kingdom.  But  this  time  hopes  had  been  awakened  by  preceding
events — the  provincial  assemblies,  the  Convocation  of  Notables,
the  disturbances  connected  with  the  ^arlements  in  the  towns,
which  spread,  as  we  have  seen,  at  least  in  Brittany,  to  the  villages
also.  And  these  insurrections  in  1789  soon  became  alarming
both  in  extent  and  character.

I  learn  through  Professor  Kareeff,  who  has  studied  the  effect
of  the  Great  Revolution  upon  the  French  peasants,  that  in  the
National  Archives  there  is  a  huge  bundle  of  documents  bearing
on  the  risings  of  the  peasants  which  preceded  the  taking  of  the
Bastille.*  For  my  own  part,  never  having  been  able  to  study

*  It  is  now  known  that  Taine,  who  pretended  that  he  had  studied
the  reports  of  the  Governors  of  the  provinces  concerning  these  insur-
rections, had  only  glanced  through  twenty-six  referring  to  1770,  as  M.
Aulard  has  shown  (Taine ;  historian  de  la -  Revolution  fr an  faise,  Paris,  1907).


40  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  archives  in  France,  but  having  consulted  many  provincial
histories  of  that  period,*  I  had  already,  in  former  works,  arrived
at  the  conclusion  f  that  a  great  number  of  riots  had  broken  out
in  the  villages  after  January  1789,  and  even  after  December
1788.  In  certain  provinces  the  situation  was  terrible  on
account  of  the  scarcity,  and  everywhere  a  spirit  of  revolt,  until
then  but  little  known,  was  taking  possession  of  the  people.  In
the  spring,  the  insurrection  became  more  and  more  frequent
in  Poitou,  Brittany,  Touraine,  Orl6anais,  Normandy,  He  de
France,  Picardy,  Champagne,  Alsace,  Burgundy,  Nivernais,
Auvergne,  Languedoc  and  Provence.

Nearly  all  these  riots  were  of  the  same  character.  The
peasants,  armed  with  knives,  scythes,  cudgels,  flocked  in  a  body
to  the  town,  and  compelled  the  labourers  and  farmers  who  had
brought  the  corn  to  the  market  to  sell  it  at  a  certain  "  honest  "
price,  such  as  three  livres  the  bushel ;  or  else  they  went  to  the
corn  merchants,  took.,out  the  wheat  and  "  divided  it  among
themselves  at  a  reduced  price,"  promising  to  pay  for  it  after  the
next  harvest.  In  other  places  they  forced  the  landowner  to
forego  his  dues  upon  flour  for  a  couple  of  months,  or  they  com-
pelled the  municipality  to  tax  bread,  and  sometimes  "  to
increase  by  four  sous  the  daily  wage."  Where  famine  was
severest,  as  at  Thiers,  the  town  workers  went  to  collect  wheat
in  the  country  districts.  Often  they  broke  open  the  granaries
belonging  to  religious  communities  and  merchant  monopolists,
or  even  those  belonging  to  private  persons,  and  provided  the
bakers  with  flour.  Moreover,  from  this  time,  too,  dated  the
formation  of  bands  composed  of  peasants,  wood-cutters,  some-
times even  of  contrabandists,  who  went  from  village  to  village
seizing  the  corn.  By  degrees  they  began  also  to  burn  the  land
registers  and  to  force  the  landlords  to  abdicate  their  feudal
rights — these  were  the  same  bands  which  gave  the  middle
classes  the  pretext  for  arming  their  militias  in  1789.

*  La  Jura,  by  Sommier;  Le  Languedoc,  by  Vic  and  Vaissete ;  Castres,
by  Combes ;  LaBretagne,  by  du  Chatellier;  LaFranche-Comte,  by  Clerc  ;
L' Auvergne,  by  Dulaure;  Le  Berry,  by  Regnal  ;Le  Limousin,  by  Leymarie  ;
L' Alsace,  by  Strobel ;  &c.

f  La  Grande  Revolution  (pamphlet),  Paris,  1893  ;  "  The  Great  French
Revolution  and  its  Lesson,"  anniversary  article  in  The  Nineteenth
Century,  June  1889  ;  articles  on  the  Revolution  in  La  Revolte.


THE  RISINGS  OF  1789  41

Ever  since  January  there  was  heard,  too,  in  these  riots  the
cry  of  "  Vive  la  Liberte  !  "  and  from  that  time,  and  still  more
markedly  after  the  month  of  March,  we  find  the  peasants  here
and  there  refusing  to  pay  the  tithes  and  feudal  dues,  or,  indeed,
even  the  taxes.  Outside  the  three  provinces,  Brittany,  Alsace
and  Dauphine,  which  are  cited  by  Taine,  traces  are  to  be  found
of  similar  movements  nearly  all  over  the  eastern  part  of  France.

In  the  south,  at  Agde,  after  the  riots  of  April  19,  20  and  21,
"the  people  foolishly  persuaded  themselves  that  they  were
everything,"  wrote  the  mayor  and  the  consuls,  "  and  they  may
do  everything  according  to  the  pretended  will  of  the  King
concerning  the  equality  of  rank."  The  people  threatened  to
sack  the  town  if  the  price  of  all  provisions  was  not  lowered,  and
the  provincial  dues  on  wine,  fish  and  meat  suppressed  ;  further-
more— and  here  we  see  already  the  communalist  good  sense  of
the  masses  of  the  people  in  France — "  they  wished  to  nominate
consuls,  some  of  whom  would  be  drawn  from  their  own  class,"
and  these  demands  were  acceded  to  the  insurgents.  Three  days
after  the  people  demanded  that  the  duty  on  milling  should  be
reduced  by  one-half,  and  this  also  was  granted.*

This  insurrection  was  the  counterpart  of  a  hundred  others.
To  obtain  bread  was  the  prime  cause  of  the  movement,
but  soon  there  were  also  demands  in  the  direction  where
economic  conditions  and  political  organisation  meet,  the
direction  in  which  popular  agitation  always  goes  forward
with  the  greatest  confidence  and  obtains  some  immediate
results.

In  Provence,  at  least  in  March  and  April  of  1789,  more  than
forty  large  villages  and  towns,  among  them  Aix,  Marseilles
and  Toulon,  abolished  the  tax  on  flour,  and  here  and  there  the
mob  pillaged  the  houses  of  officials  whose  duty  was  to  levy  the
taxes  on  flour,  hides,  butcher's  meat,  &c.  The  prices  of  pro-
visions were  reduced  and  a  maximum  established  for  all  provisions,
and  when  the  gentlemen  of  the  upper  middle  classes  protested,
the  mob  replied  by  stoning  them,  or  else  a  trench  was  dug  before
their  eyes  which  might  serve  for  their  grave.  Sometimes  even
a  coffin  was  brought  out  the  better  to  impress  the  refractory
*  Taine,  vol.  ii.  22,  23.  ,  ,


42  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

who  apparently  hastened  to  comply.  All  this  took  place  in
April  1789,  without  the  shedding  of  a  drop  of  blood.  It  is  "  a
kind  of  war  declared  on  proprietors  and  property,"  say  the
reports  from  the  governors  and  municipalities.  "  The  people
still  declare  that  they  will  pay  nothing,  neither  taxes,  nor  dues,
nor  debts."*

Before  that,  since  April,  the  peasants  began  to  plunder  the
great  country  houses  and  to  compel  the  nobility  to  renounce
their  rights.  At  Peinier,  they  forced  the  lord  "  to  sign  a
document  by  which  he  renounced  his  seigneurial  rights  of  every
kind."  f  At  Riez  they  wanted  the  bishop  to  burn  the  records.
At  Hyeres  and  elsewhere  they  burned  the  old  papers  concerning
the  feudal  rents  and  taxes.  In  short,  in  Provence,  from  the
month  of  April,  we  can  already  see  the  beginning  of  the  great
rising  of  the  peasants  which  forced  the  nobility  and  clergy  to
make  their  first  concessions  on  August  4,  1789.

It  is  easy  to  discern  the  influence  that  these  riots  and  this
excitement  exercised  upon  the  elections  for  the  National
Assembly.  Chassin,  in  his  Genie  de  la  Revolution,  says  that
in  some  localities  the  nobility  exercised  a  great  influence  on
the  elections,  and  that  in  these  localities  the  peasant  electors
dared  not  make  any  complaints.  Elsewhere,  especially  at
Rennes,  the  nobles  took  advantage  even  of  the  sitting  of  the
States-General  of  Brittany  at  the  end  of  December  1788,  and  in
January  1789,  to  try  to  stir  up  the  starving  people  against  the
middle  classes.  But  what  could  these  last  convulsive  efforts
of  the  nobles  do  against  the  pouplar  tide,  which  rose  steadily  ?
The  people  saw  more  than  half  the  land  lying  idle  in  the  hands
of  the  nobility  and  clergy,  and  they  understood  better  than  if
statisticians  had  demonstrated  it  to  them,  that  so  long  as  the
peasants  did  not  take  possession  of  the  land  to  cultivate  it
famine  would  be  always  present  among  them.

The  very  need  to  live  made  the  peasant  rise  against  the
monopolisers  of  the  soil.  During  the  winter  of  1788-1789,  says
Chassin,  no  day  passed  in  the  Jura  without  convoys  of  wheat
being  plundered.!  The  military  authorities  could  think  of

*  Letters  in  the  National  Archive3,  1453,  cited  by  Taine,  vol.  ii.
p.  24.  f  Letter  in  the  Archives.  J  Chassin,  p.  162.


THE  RISINGS  OF  1789  43

nothing  but  "  Suppression  of  the  riots  "  ;  but  the  tribunals
refused  to  sentence  or  even  to  judge  the  famished  rioters.
Similar  riots  broke  out  everywhere,  north,  south,  east  and  west,
says  Chassin.*

The  elections  brought  with  them  a  renewal  of  life  and  of
hope  in  the  villages.  The  lordly  influence  was  great  everywhere,
but  now  in  every  village  there  was  to  be  found  some  middle-class
man,  a  doctor  or  lawyer,  who  had  read  his  Voltaire,  or  Sieves,
or  the  famous  pamphlet — Qu'est-ce  que  le  tiers  etat  ?  Every-
thing was  changing  wherever  there  was  a  weaver  or  a  mason
who  could  read  and  write,  were  it  only  the  printed  letters.
The  peasants  were  eager  to  put  "  their  grievances  "  on  paper.
It  is  true  that  these  grievances  were  confined  for  the  greater
part  to  things  of  secondary  importance ;  but  throughout  we
see  cropping  up,  as  in  the  insurrection  of  the  German  peasantry
in  1523,  the  demand  that  the  lords  should  prove  their  right  to
the  feudal  exactions.f  When  the  peasants  sent  in  their
cabiers,  they  waited  patiently  for  the  result.  But  the  tardiness
of  the  States-General  and  the  National  Assembly  exasperated
them,  and  as  soon  as  that  terrible  winter  of  1788-1789  came
to  an  end,  as  soon  as  the  sun  shone  again,  and  brought  with  it
hope  of  a  coming  harvest,  the  riots  broke  out  afresh,  especially
after  the  spring  work  in  the  fields  was  over.

The  intellectual  middle  classes  evidently  took  advantage  of
the  elections  to  propagate  revolutionary  ideas.  "  A  Constitu-
tional Club  "  was  formed,  and  its  numerous  branches  spread
themselves  even  into  the  smallest  towns.  The  apathy  which
had  struck  Arthur  Young  in  the  eastern  towns  no  doubt
existed  ;  but  in  some  of  the  other  provinces  the  middle  classes
extracted  all  the  profit  they  desired  from  the  electoral  agita-
tion. We  can  even  see  how  the  events  which  took  place  in
June  at  Versailles  in  the  National  Assembly  were  prepared
severla  months  before  in  the  provinces.  Thus  the  union  of
the  Three  Estates  and  the  vote  by  head  had  been  agreed  to  in
Dauphine  since  the  month  of  August  1788  by  the  States  of
the  province,  under  pressure  of  the  local  insurrections,  .nj-v.-

*  Chassin,  p.  163.

f  Doniol,  La  Revolution  franfaiss  et  (a


44 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

It  must  not  be  thought,  however,  that  the  middle-class
people  who  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  elections  were  in  the
least  degree  revolutionary.  They  were  moderates,  "  peaceful
rebels,"  as  Chassin  says.  As  regards  revolutionary  measures,
it  was  usually  the  people  who  spoke  of  them,  since  secret  societies
were  found  among  the  peasants,  and  unknown  persons  began
to  go  about  appealing  to  the  people  to  pay  taxes  no  longer,  but
to  make  the  nobles  pay  them.  Or  else  emissaries  went  about
declaring  that  the  nobles  had  already  agreed  to  pay  the  taxes,
but  that  this  was  only  a  cunning  trick  on  their  part.  "  The
people  of  Geneva  were  emancipated  in  a  day.  .  .  .  Tremble,
ye  nobles  !  "  There  were  also  pamphlets  addressed  to  the
peasants  and  secretly  distributed,  such  as  UAvis  aux  habitants
des  campagneSy  distributed  at  Chartres.  In  short,  as  Chassin
says,  and  no  one  has  more  carefully  studied  this  aspect  of  the
Revolution  :  "  Such  was  the  agitation  in  the  rural  districts
that  even  if  the  people  of  Paris  had  been  vanquished  on  July  4,
it  was  no  longer  possible  to  restore  the  condition  in  which  the
country  had  been  previous  to  January  1789."  To  do  that,  it
would  have  been  necessary  to  conquer  each  village  separately.
After  the  month  of  March  the  feudal  taxes  were  no  longer
paid  by  any  one.*

The  importance  of  this  profound  agitation  in  the  country

r  districts  can be  easily  understood. Although  the  educated

middle  classes  did  undoubtedly  profit  by  the  conflicts  with  the

Court  and  the 'parlements  to  arouse  political  ferment,  and

although  they  worked  hard  to  disseminate  discontent,  it  is

nevertheless  certain  that  the  peasant  insurrection,  winning  over

the  towns  also,  made  the  real  basis  of  the  Revolution,  and  gave

,  the  deputies  of  the  Third  Estate  the  determination,  presently

/  to  be  expressed  by  them  at  Versailles,  to  reform  the  entire

system  of  the  government  in  France,  and  to  initiate  a  complete

/ revolution  in  the  distribution  of  wealth.

Without  the  peasant  insurrection,  which  began  in  winter

/  and  went  on,  ever  growing,  until  1793,  the  overthrow  of  royal

; despotism  would  never  have  been  effected  so  completely,  nor

) would  it  have  been  accompanied  by  so  enormous  a  change,

/ ,  >  *  Chassin,  p.  167  et  seq+


THE  RISINGS  OF  1789  45

political,  economic  and  social.  France  might,  indeed,  have  had
a  sham  parliament,  even  as  Prussia  had  in  1848  ;  but  this  inno-
vation would  not  have  assumed  the  character  of  a  revolution  :
it  would  have  remained  superficial,  as  it  did  in  the  German
States  after  1


tr.r


CHAPTER  VIII
RIOTS  IN  PARIS  AND  ITS  ENVIRONS

Activity  in  Paris — "  Reveillon  Affair  "—First  conflict  between
people  of  Paris  and  rich—"  English  gold  "—Paris  becomes
centre  of  Revolution

UNDER  such  conditions  it  is  easy  to  imagine  that  Paris  could
not  remain  quiet.  Famine  had  set  its  grip  upon  the  rural
districts  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  great  city,  as  elsewhere.
Provisions  were  as  scarce  in  Paris  as  in  the  other  large  towns,
and  those  who  came  in  search  of  work  could  do  nothing  more
than  simply  increase  the  multitude  of  the  poor,  especially  in
prospect  of  the  great  events  which  every  one  felt  were  on  the
way.

Towards  the  end  of  winter — in  March  and  April — some
hunger-riots  and  pillagings  of  corn  are  mentioned  in  the
reports  of  the  Governors  of  the  provinces  at  Orleans,  Cosnes,
Rambouillet,  Jouy,  Pont- Saint e-Maxence,  Bray-sur-Seine,  Sens,
Nangis,  Viroflay,  Montlhery,  &c.  In  other  places  within  the
region,  in  the  forests  around  Paris,  the  peasants,  as  early  as
March,  were  exterminating  all  the  rabbits  and  hares  ;  even  the
woods  belonging  to  the  Abbey  of  Saint-Denis  were  cut  down
and  carried  away  in  the  full  view  and  knowledge  of  every  one.

Paris  was  devouring  revolutionary  pamphlets,  of  which  ten,
twelve,  or  twenty  were  published  every  day,  and  passed  rapidly
from  the  hands  of  those  who  could  afford  to  buy  them  into
those  of  the  poorest.  People  were  excitedly  discussing  the
pamphlet  by  Sieye"s,  Qu'est-ce  que  le  tiers?  Rabaud  de  Saint-
Etienne's  Considerations  sur  les  interhs  du  tiers  etat>  which  was
tinctured  with  Socialism,  Les  droits  des  etats-generaux,  by
d'Entraigues,  and  a  hundred  other  less  famous,  but  often  more

46


RIOTS  IN  PARIS  AND  ITS  ENVIRONS 47

mordant.  All  Paris  was  becoming  excited  against  the  Court
and  the  nobles,  and  soon  the  middle-class  revolutionaries  went
to  the  poorest  suburbs  and  into  the  taverns  on  the  outskirts
to  recruit  the  hands  and  the  pikes  that  they  needed  to  strike
at  royalty.  Meanwhile,  on  April  28,  the  insurrection,  known
later  as  "  The  Reveillon  Affair  "  broke  out,  an  affair  which
seemed  like  one  of  the  forerunners  of  the  great  days  of  the
Revolution.

On  April  27,  the  Electoral  Assemblies  met  in  Paris,  and  it
seems  that  during  the  preparation  of  the  cahiers  in  the  Fau-
bourg Saint-Antoine  there  was  a  disagreement  between  the
middle  classes  and  the  working-men.  The  workers  stated
their  grievances  and  the  middle-class  men  replied  with  insults.
Reveillon,  a  paper-manufacturer  and  stainer,  formerly  a  work-
man himself,  now  by  skilful  exploitation  come  to  be  the  em-
ployer of  three  hundred  operatives,  made  himself  especially
prominent  by  the  brutality  of  his  remarks.  They  have  been
repeated  many  times  since.  "  The  working  man  can  live  on
black  bread  and  lentils  :  wheat  is  not  for  the  likes  of  him,"  &c.

Is  there  any  truth  in  the  connection  which  was  made  later
on  by  the  rich  people,  after  the  inquiry  into  "  The  Reveillon
Affair,"  between  the  insurrection  itself,  and  this  fact  mentioned
by  the  toll-keepers,  who  declared  that  an  immense  multitude
of  suspicious-looking  poor  people  clothed  in  rags  had  entered
Paris  just  at  that  time  ?  On  this  point  there  can  only  be
conjectures,  vain  conjectures  after  all.  Given  the  prevalent
state  of  mind,  with  revolt  simmering  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Paris,  was  not  Reveillon's  attitude  towards  the  workers  quite
enough  in  itself  to  explain  what  happened  the  following  day  ?

On  April  27,  the  people,  infuriated  by  the  opposition  of  the
rich  manufacturer  and  his  brutal  speeches,  carried  his  effigy  to
the  Place  de  la  Greve  for  sentence  and  execution.  At  the
Place  Royale  a  rumour  spread  that  the  Third  Estate  had  just
condemned  Reveillon  to  death.  But  evening  came,  and  the
crowds  dispersed,  spreading  terror  among  the  rich  by  their  cries,
which  resounded  in  the  streets  all  through  the  night.  Finally,
on  the  morning  of  the  28th,  the  crowds  went  to  Reveillon's
factory  and  compelled  the  workers,  to  stop  work ;  they  then


48  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

attacked  the  warehouse  and  plundered  it.  The  troops  arrived,
and  the  people  forthwith  defied  them  by  throwing  stones,
slates  and  furniture  from  the  windows  and  the  roof.  On  this
the  troops  opened  fire  and  for  several  hours  the  people  defended
themselves  with  great  fury.  The  result  was  that  twelve  soldiers
were  killed  and  eighty  wounded ;  and  on  the  people's  side
there  were  two  hundred  killed  and  three  hundred  wounded.
The  workers  took  possession  of  their  comrades'  dead  bodies
and  carried  them  through  the  streets  of  the  suburbs.  Several
days  after  a  riotous  mob  of  five  or  six  hundred  men  gathered
at  Villejuif,  and  tried  to  break  open  the  doors  of  the  Bicetre
prison.

Here,  then,  was  the  first  conflict  between  the  people  of  Paris
and  the  rich,  a  conflict  which  produced  a  deep  impression.
It  was  the  first  sight  of  the  people  driven  to  desperation,  a
sight  which  exercised  a  powerful  influence  on  the  elections
by  keeping  away  the  reactionaries.

Needless  to  say  that  the  gentlemen  of  the  middle  classes  tried
to  prove  that  this  outbreak  was  arranged  beforehand  by  the
enemies  of  France.  Why  should  the  good  people  of  Paris
have  risen  against  a  manufacturer  ?  "  It  was  English  money
that  incited  them  to  revolt,"  said  some  ;  "  the  gold  of  the  aris-
tocrats," said  the  middle-class  revolutionaries.  No  one  was
willing  to  admit  that  the  people  revolted  simply  because  they
suffered,  and  had  endured  enough  of  the  arrogance  of  the  rich,
who  added  insults  to  their  sufferings !  *  From  that  time  we
see  the  growth  of  the  legend  which  later  on  was  to  be  used  to
reduce  the  Revolution  to  its  parliamentary  work,  and  to
represent  all  the  popular  insurrections  during  the  four  years
(of  the  Revolution  as  accidents — the  work  of  brigands  or  of
agents  paid  either  by  Pitt  or  by  the  party  of  reaction.  Still
later  the  historians  revived  the  legend  :  "  Since  the  Court  was
able  to  use  this  riot  as  a  pretext  for  rejecting  the  overtures  of
the  States-General,  therefore  it  must  have  been  only  the  work
of  reactionaries."  How  often  have  we  not  heard  the  same
methods  of  reasoning  used  in  our  own  time  !

*  Droz  (Histoire  du  rtgne  de  Louis  XVI.),  a  reactionary  historian,
has  remarked  aptly  that  the  money  found  on  some  of  the  slain  men
may  well  have  $een  the  proceeds  of  plunder,


RIOTS  IN  PARIS  AND  ITS  ENVIRONS 49

In  reality  the  days  from  April  24  to  28  were  merely  fore-
runners of  the  days  of  July  II  to  July  14.  A  revolutionary
spirit  began  to  manifest  itself  among  the  people  of  Paris  from
that  time  onwards.  Close  by  the  Palais  Royal,  the  revolu-
tionary focus  of  the  middle  classes,  were  the  faubourgs,  the
centres  of  the  popular  risings.  Henceforth  Paris  became  the
focus  of  the  Revolution,  and  the  States-General,  which  were
about  to  assemble  at  Versailles,  came  to  rely  upon  Paris  for  the
support  they  needed  in  pressing  their  demands  and  in  their
struggles  against  the  Court.


CHAPTER  IX
THE  STATES-GENERAL

Opening  of  States-General — King's  distrust — People  not
represented—"  Third  Estate  " — Establishment  of  National
Assembly— Oath  in  Tennis  Court— King  annuls  resolutions
of  Assembly— Speech  of  Mirabeau— People  threaten  force

ON  May  4,  1789,  the  twelve  hundred  deputies  of  the  States-
General  assembled  at  Versailles,  repaired  to  the  church  of  Saint
Louis  to  hear  Mass  in  connection  with  the  opening  ceremony,
and  the  next  day  the  King  opened  the  session  in  the  presence  of
a  crowd  of  spectators.  And  already  from  this  opening  meeting
the  tragic  inevitability  of  the  Revolution  began  to  unfold  itself.

The  King  felt  nothing  but  distrust  towards  the  representa-
tives of  the  nation  whom  he  had  convoked.  He  had  at  last
resigned  himself  to  convoking  them,  but  he  complained  before
the  deputies  themselves  of  "  the  restlessness  of  spirit,"  the
general  ferment  throughout  the  country,  as  if  such  restlessness
was  in  itself  factitious,  and  not  caused  by  the  actual  condition
of  France  ;  as  if  that  assemblage  had  been  a  useless  and  capri-
cious violation  of  kingly  rights.

France,  too  long  held  back  from  reform,  had  at  last  come  to
feel  the  necessity  of  a  complete  revision  of  all  her  institutions —
and  the  King  only  mentioned  a  few  trifling  reforms  in  finance,
for  which  a  little  economy  in  expenditure  would  have  sufficed.
He  demanded  "  the  agreement  of  the  Orders  "  at  a  time  when
the  provincial  assemblies  had  already  proved  to  men's  minds
that  the  existence  of  separate  Orders  was  superannuated — a  dead
weight,  a  survival  of  the  past.  At  a  time,  too,  when  everything,
as  in  Russia  to-day,  needed  reconstruction,  the  King  expressed
his  fear  above  all  things  of  "  innovation  "  !  Thus,  in  the

50


THE  STATES-GENERAL  51

King's  speech,  the  life-and-death  struggle  about  to  begin  be-
tween royal  autocracy  and  representative  power  was  already
foreshadowed.

As  to  the  nation's  representatives,  they  themselves  in  their
divisions  were  already  displaying  signs  of  the  deep  cleavage
which  was  to  manifest  itself  throughout  the  Revolution  be-
tween those  who  would  cling  to  their  privileges  and  those  who
would  strive  to  demolish  them.

The  national  representation,  in  fact,  even  then  showed  its
chief  defect.  The  people  were  not  represented  at  all,  the  peasants
were  absent.  It  was  the  middle  classes  who  took  it  upon  them-
selves to  speak  for  the  people  in  general ;  and  with  regard  to
the  peasantry,  in  the  whole  of  this  assembly,  made  up  of  lawyers,
notaries,  attorneys,  there  were  perhaps  five  or  six  who  knew
anything  about  the  real  position,  much  less  the  legal  position
of  the  immense  mass  of  the  peasants.  All  of  them,  being
townsmen,  were  well  able  to  defend  the  townsman  ;  but  as  to
the  peasant,  they  did  not  even  know  what  he  required,  or  what
would  be  injurious  to  him.

Civil  war  already  exists  within  these  precincts,  where  the  King,
surrounded  by  nobles,  speaks  as  master  to  the  Third  Estate,
and  reminds  them  of  his  "  benefits."  The  Keeper  of  the  Seals,
Barentain,  disclosing  the  real  intention  of  the  King,  dwells  upon
the  part  to  which  the  States-General  should  confine  themselves.
They  are  to  consider  the  taxes  which  they  will  be  asked  to
vote,  they  are  to  discuss  the  reform  of  civil  and  criminal  law,
they  are  to  vote  on  a  law  concerning  the  Press,  to  check  the
liberties  which  it  had  recently  arrogated  to  itself,  and  that  will
be  all.  There  were  to  be  no  dangerous  reforms  :  "  All  just  »
demands  have  been  granted ;  the  King  has  not  been  stopped  by
indiscreet  murmurs ;  he  has  indulgently  deigned  to  ignore  them ;
be  has  pardoned  even  the  expression  of  those  false  and  extravagant
matters  under  cover  of  which  it  was  intended  to  substitute  harmful
chimeras  for  the  unalterable  principles  of  the  monarchy.  Gentle-
men, you  will  reject  with  indignation  these  dangerous  innova-
tions."

All  the  struggles  of  the  four  succeeding  years  lay  in  these
words,  and  Necker,  who  followed  the  King  and  the  Keeper  of


52  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  Seals,  in  his  speech  lasting  three  hours,  added  nothing  to
advance  either  the  great  question  of  representative  govern-
ment, which  absorbed  the  middle  classes,  or  that  of  the  land
and  the  feudal  exactions,  which  interested  the  peasants.  The
adroit  Comptroller  of  Finance  knew  how  to  make  a  three-hours'
speech  without  compromising  himself  either  with  the  Court  or
the  people.  The  King,  faithful  to  the  views  he  had  already
expressed  to  Turgot,  did  not  understand  the  seriousness  of
the  moment,  and  left  to  the  Queen  and  princes  the  task  of
intriguing  to  prevent  the  concessions  which  were  demanded
of  him.

But  neither  did  Necker  comprehend  that  it  was  a  question  of
surmounting  not  merely  a  financial  crisis,  but  a  political  and
social  crisis  of  the  utmost  seriousness,  and  that  under  these
circumstances  a  policy  of  manoeuvring  between  the  Court  and
the  Third  Estate  was  bound  to  be  fatal.  For  if  it  was  not
already  too  late  to  prevent  a  Revolution,  it  was  at  least  necessary
to  make  some  attempt  at  an  honest,  straightforward  policy  of
concessions  in  the  ma^eT^Tgorernmeiit;  the  time  had  come
to  bring  forward,  in  their  most  important^aspects,  the  great
land  problems  on  which  the  misery  or  well-being^oi^a  whole
nation  depended.

And  as  to  the  representatives  themselves,  neither  the  twb
privileged  orders,  nor  yet  "  the  Third,"  grasped  the  full  extent
of  the  problem  which  was  confronting  France.  The  nobilit
dreamed  of  regaining  their  ascendency  over  the  Crown ;  the
clergy  thought  only  of  maintaining  their  privileges ;  and  the
Third  Estate,  although  it  knew  quite  well  what  steps  to  take
for  the  conquest  of  power  in  favour  of  the  middle  classes,  did
not  perceive  that  there  was  yet  another  problem,  infinitely
more  important  to  solve — that  of  giving  back  the  land  to  the
peasant,  in  order  that,  possessing  a  land  freed  from  heavy  feudal
exactions,  he  might  double  and  treble  the  production  of  the
soil,  and  so  put  an  end  to  the  incessant  periods  of  scarcity  which
were  undermining  the  strength  of  the  French  nation.

Could  there  be  any  way  out  of  these  conditions  but  by  corf-
flict  and  struggle  ?  The  revolt  of  the  people  :  the  rising  of  the
peasants,  the  Jacquerie,  the  insurrection  of  the  workers  in  the


THE  STATES-GENERAL  53

towns,  and  of  the  poor  in  general — in  a  word,  the  Revolution,
with  all  its  struggles,  its  hatreds,  its  terrible  conflicts  and  its
revenges,  were  they  not  all  inevitable  ?

For  five  weeks  the  "deputies  of  *the  Third'"  tried  by
parleying  to  induce  the  deputies  of  the  other  two  Orders  to  sit
together,  while  the  Royalist  committees  on  their  side  worked
to  maintain  the  separation.  The  negotiations  led  to  nothing.
But  as  the  days  went  by  the  people  of  Paris  assumed  a  more  and
more  menacing  attitude.  In  Paris,  the  Palais  Royal,  turned  into
an  open-air  club  to  which  every  one  was  admitted,  voiced  the
general  exasperation.  It  rained  pamphlets  for  which  the
people  scrambled.  "  Every  hour  produces  something  new,"
says  Arthur  Young.  "  Thirteen  came  out  to-day,  sixteen
yesterday  and  ninety-two  last  week.  .  .  .  Nineteen-twentieths
of  these  productions  are  in  favour  of  liberty.  .  .  .  The  ferment
at  Paris  is  beyond  conception."  *  The  orators  who  harangued
openly  in  the  streets,  standing  on  a  chair  in  front  of  a  cafe,
already  spoke  of  seizing  upon  the  palaces  and  chateaux  of  the
noble  landlords.  One  heard  already,  like  the  rumbling  of  a
coming  storm,  threatenings  of  the  coming  Terror,  while
at  Versailles  the  people  collected  at  the  doors  of  the  Assembly
to  insult  the  aristocrats.

The  deputies  of  the  "  Third  "  felt  that  they  were  being
supported.  By  degrees  they  grew  bolder,  and  on  June  17,
upon  a  motion  of  Sieyes,  they  declared  themselves  at  last  a
"  National  Assembly."  In  this  way  the  first  step  towards
the  abolition  of  the  privileged  classes  was  taken,  and  the  people
of  Paris  greeted  this  first  step  with  thunderous  acclamations.
Thus  encouraged,  the  Assembly  voted  that  the  established
taxes,  being  illegal,  should  be  levied  only  provisionally,  and
only  for  as  long  as  the  Assembly  sat.  The  people  should  not  be
any  longer  bound  to  pay  them  when  once  the  Assembly  should
be  dissolved.  A  "  Committee  of  Subsistence  "  was  appointed
to  combat  the  famine,  and  capitalists  were  reassured  by  the
Assembly's  consolidation  of  the  National  Debt — an  act  of  the
greatest  prudence  at  that  moment,  since  the  National  repre-
sentation had  to  maintain  itself  at  any  cost,  and  to  disarm  a

*  Arthur  Young,  Travels  in  France,  pp.  153,  176  (London,  1892).


54 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

power,  the  power  of  the  money-lender,  who  would  be  dangerous
if  he  took  sides  with  the  Court.

But  this  meant  revolt  against  the  Royal  authority.  Accord-
ingly the  princes,  d'Artois,  Conde"  and  Conti,  together  with
the  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  began  to  plan  a  coup  tfetat.  On  a  given
day  the  King  was  to  go  in  great  state  to  the  Assembly.  There
he  would  annul  all  the  resolutions  of  the  Assembly,  he  would
decree  the  separation  of  the  Orders,  and  would  himself  fix  the
few  reforms,  which  should  be  passed  by  the  Three  Orders  sitting
separately.  And  what  did  Necker,  that  perfect  representative
of  the  middle  classes  of  the  period,  oppose  to  this  stroke  of
authority,  to  the  coup  tfetat  prepared  by  the  Court  ?  Com-
promise !  He,  too,  wanted  a  display  of  authority,  a  Royal
Session,  and  in  this  session  the  King  was  to  grant  the  capitative
vote  without  distinction  between  the  Three  Orders  in  the
matter  of  taxes ;  but  for  everything  concerning  the  privileges
of  the  nobility  and  clergy  separate  sittings  of  the  Orders
were  to  be  maintained.  Now,  it  is  evident  that  this  measure
was  still  less  possible  to  realise  than  that  of  the  princes.  A
coup  d'etat  is  not  risked  for  a  half-measure,  which,  moreover,
could  not  be  maintained  for  more  than  a  fortnight.  How
could  taxation  have  been  reformed  without  impinging  on  the
privileges  of  the  two  superior  Orders  ?

It  was  on  June  20,  therefore,  that  the  deputies  of  "  the
Third,"  emboldened  by  the  more  and  more  threatening
attitude  of  the  people  in  Paris,  and  even  at  Versailles,  decided
to  resist  the  plans  for  dismissing  the  Assembly,  and  for  that
purpose  to  bind  themselves  together  by  solemn  oath.  Seeing
their  Assembly  Hall  closed  on  account  of  the  preparations  that
were  being  made  for  the  Royal  Session,  they  went  in  procession
to  a  kind  of  private  hall,  the  hall  of  the  Tennis  Court  in  the
Rue  Saint-Fran  c.ois.  A  crowd  Imarched  with  the  procession
through  the  streets  of  Versailes,  headed  by  Bailly.  Some
volunteer  soldiers  offered  their  services  to  mount  guard  for
them.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  crowds  which  surrounded  them
on  all  sides  upheld  the  deputies.

Arrived  at  the  hall  of  the  Tennis  Court,  excited  and  touched
by  a  fine  emotion,  they  all  but  one  took  a  solemn  oath  not  to
separate  before  they  had  given  France  a  Constitution.


THE  STATES-GENERAL  X 55

;  No  doubt  these  were  but  words  ;  there  was  even  something
theatrical  in  this  oath;  but  that  matters  little.  There' are
moments  when  words  are  required  to  make  hearts  vibrate.  And
the  oath  taken  in  the  hall  of  the  Tennis  Court  made  the  hearts
of  revolutionary  youth  vibrate  throughout  the  length  and
breadth  of  France.  Woe  to  the  Assemblies  that  are  incapable
of  such  an  attitude  and  such  words.

Besides,  this  act  of  courage  on  the  part  of  the  Assembly  bore
immediate  fruit.  Two  days  later  the  Third  Estate,  being
obliged  to  sit  in  the  church  of  Saint  Louis,  found  the  clergy
coming  to  take  part  in  their  deliberations.

The  great  blow  of  the  Royal  Session  was  struck  the  following
day,  June  23,  but  its  effect  was  already  weakened  by  the  oath
in  the  Tennis  Court  and  the  sitting  in  the  church  of  Saint
Louis.  The  King  appeared  before  the  deputies.  He  annulled
all  the  resolutions  of  the  Assembly,  or  rather  of  the  Third
Estate  ;  he  decreed  the  maintenance  of  the  Orders,  determined
the  limits  of  the  reforms  to  be  accomplished,  threatened  the
States-General  with  dissolution  if  they  did  not  obey,  and
ordered  all  the  deputies  to  separate  for  the  time  being.  Upon
this  the  nobility  and  clergy  obediently  left  the  hall,  but  the
deputies  of  "  the  Third  "  kept  their  places.  Then  it  was  that
Mirabeau  uttered  his  beautiful  and  famous  speech,  in  which
he  said  that  the  King  was  only  their  mandatory,  that  they  held
their  authority  of  the  people,  and  having  taken  the  oath  they
could  not  separate  without  having  framed  a  Constitution.
Being  here  by  the  will  of  the  people  they  would  leave  only  by
the  force  of  the  bayonet.

Now,  it  was  exactly  this  force  which  the  Court  no  longer
possessed.  Necker  had  already  told  them,  in  February,  and
very  truly,  that  obedience  was  nowhere  to  be  found,  and  that
they  could  not  be  sure  even  of  the  troops.

As  to  the  people  of  Paris,  we  have  seen  in  what  kind  of
humour  they  were  on  April  27.  Every  moment  a  general
rising  of  the  people  against  the  rich  was  feared  in  Paris,  and  a
few  ardent  revolutionaries  had  not  hesitated  to  go  into  the
gloomy  faubourgs  in  search  of  reinforcements  against  the
Court.  Even  at  Versailles,  on  the  eve  of  the  Royal  Session,
the  people  had  almost  killed  a  clerical  deputy,  the  Abbe*  Maury,


56 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

as  well  as  d'Espre*m6nil,  a  deputy  of  "  the  Third,"  who  had
come  over  from  the  nobility.  On  the  day  of  the  Royal  Session
the  Keeper  of  the  Seals  and  the  Archbishop  of  Paris  were  so
"  hooted,  abused  and  scoffed  at,  so  overwhelmed  with  shame
and  rage,"  that  the  King's  secretary,  Passeret,  who  accom-
panied the  minister,  "  died  of  the  shock  the  same  day."  -On
the  24th,  the  Bishop  of  Beauvais  was  nearly  killed  by  a  blow  on
the  head  from  a  stone.  On  June  25,  the  crowd  hissed  the  depu-
ties of  the  nobility  and  clergy.  All  the  windows  were  broken
in  the  palace  of  the  Archbishop  of  Paris.  "  The  troops  refused
to  fire  on  the  people,"  says  Arthur  Young  bluntly.  The  King's
threat  was  therefore  meaningless.  The  people's  attitude  was  too
menacing  for  the  Court  to  resort  to  bayonets,  and  this  is  why
Louis  XVI.  uttered  this  exclamation,  "After  all  ...  let
them  stay ! "

As  to  the  Assembly  of  the  Third  Estate  itself,  was  it  not
deliberating  under  the  watchful  eyes  and  menaces  of  the  people
who  filled  the  galleries  ?  As  early  as  June  17,  when  the  Third
Estate  declared  itself  a  National  Assembly,  that  memorable
decision  was  arrived  at  amidst  the  acclamations  of  the  galleries
and  of  the  two  or  three  thousand  persons  who  surrounded  the
Hall  of  Assembly.  The  list  of  the  three  hundred  deputies  of
"  the  Third  "  who  were  opposed  to  it  went  the  round  of  Paris,
and  there  was  even  some  talk  of  burning  their  houses.  And
when  the  oath  was  being  taken  in  the  Tennis  Court,  and  Martin
Dauch  opposed  it,  Bailly,  the  president  of  the  Assembly,
prudently  made  him  escape  by  a  back  door  to  avoid  facing  the
people  gathered  at  the  front  of  the  hall,  and  for  several  days
he  had  to  remain  in  hiding.

Without  this  pressure  put  upon  the  Assembly  by  the  people,
it  is  quite  possible  that  the  brave  deputies  of  "  the  Third,"
whose  names  are  remembered  in  history,  might  never  have
succeeded  in  overcoming  the  resistance  of  the  timorous  who
had  ranged  themselves  with  Malouet.

As  to  the  people  of  Paris,  they  made  open  preparations  for
the  revolt,  which  was  their  reply  to  the  military  coup  d'etat
prepared  by  the  Court  against  Paris  for  July  16.


CHAPTER  X
PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  COUP  D'ETAT

The  1 4th  of  July — Middle  classes  distrust  people — Royalists
prepare  coup  d'Stat — Middle  classes  urge  people  to  arm —
People  seize  Bastille — Middle  classes  restore  order — King
and  feudal  rights — Effect  of  Royal  Session — Atmosphere  of
conspiracy  at  Court — Foundation  of  Breton  Club— Mirabeau
and  people — Necker  tries  to  avert  famine — Incompetence  of
National  Assembly — Royalist  plotting  continues — Petition  of
Assembly

THE  accepted  account  of  July  14  runs  as  follows :  The  National
Assembly  was  sitting.  At  the  end  of  June,  after  two  months
of  parleying  and  hesitations,  the  Three  Orders  were  at  last
united.  The  power  was  slipping  from  the  grasp  of  the  Court,
which  began,  therefore,  to  prepare  a  coup  d'etat.  Troops
were  summoned  and  massed  round  Versailles ;  they  were  to
disperse  the  Assembly  and  bring  Paris  to  its  senses.

On  July  n,  the  accepted  version  goes  on  to  say,  the  Court
decided  to  act.  Necker  was  dismissed  and  exiled,  Paris  heard
of  this  on  the  I2th,  and  the  citizens  formed  a  procession,  which
passed  through  the  streets  carrying  a  statue  of  the  dismissed
minister.  At  the  Palais  Royal,  Camille  Desmoulins  made  his
famous  speech  ending  with  an  appeal  to  arms.  The  faubourgs
rose  and  50,000  pikes  were  forged  in  thirty-six  hours  ;  on  the
1 4th  the  people  marched  upon  the  Bastille,  which  presently
lowered  its  drawbridge  and  surrendered.  The  Revolution
had  gained  its  first  victory.

Such  is  the  usual  account,  which  is  repeated  at  the  Republic's
festivals.  It  is,  however,  only  a  half-truth.  It  is  true  so  far
as  the  dry  statement  of  facts  is  concerned ;  but  it  does  not
tell  what  should  be  told  about  the  part  played  by  the  people

57


58  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

in  the  rising ;  nor  yet  about  the  true  connection  between
the  two  elements  of  the  movement,  the  people  and  the  middle
classes.  (For  in  the  Paris  insurrection  leading  to  July  14,  as
all  through  the  Revolution,  there  were  two  separate  currents
of  different  origin  :  the  political  movement  of  the  middle
classes  and  the  popular  movement  of  the  masses.  At  certain
moments  during  the  great  days  of  the  Revolution,  the  two
movements  joined  hands  in  a  temporary  alliance,  and  then
they  gained  their  great  victories  over  the  old  regime.  But
the  middle  classes  always  distrusted  their  temporary  ally,  the
people,  and  gave  clear  proof  of  this  in  July  1789.  The  alliance
was  concluded  unwillingly  by  the  middle  classes  ;  and  on  the
morrow  of  the  I4th,  and  even  during  the  insurrection  itself,
they  made  haste  to  organise  themselves,  in  order  that  they
.  might  be  able  to  bridle  the  revolted  people.  ^J

Ever  since  the  ReVeillon  affair,  the  people  of  Paris,  suffering
from  scarcity,  seeing  bread  grow  dearer  day  by  day,  and
deceived  by  empty  promises,  had  been  trying  to  revolt.  But
not  feeling  themselves  supported,  even  by  those  of  the  middle
classes  who  had  become  prominent  in  the  struggle  with  royal
authority,  they  could  only  chafe  the  bit.  In  the  meantime,
the  Court  party,  led  by  the  Queen  and  the  princes,  decided
to  strike  a  great  blow,  which  would  put  an  end  to  the  Assembly
and  to  the  popular  agitation  in  Paris.  They  concentrated
troops  whose  attachment  to  the  King  and  Queen  they  stimu-
lated by  every  means,  and  openly  prepared  a  coup  d'etat  against
the  Assembly  and  against  Paris.  Then  the  Assembly,  feeling
themselves  threatened,  gave  free  rein  to  those  of  their  members
and  friends  in  Paris  who  wanted  "  the  appeal  to  the  people  "  *
that  is  to  say,  the  appeal  for  a  popular  rising.  And  the  people
of  the  faubourgs,  desiring  nothing  better,  responded  to  the
appeal.  ^They  did  not  wait  for  the  dismissal  of  Necker,  but
began  to  rise  as  early  as  July  8,  and  even  on  June  27.  Taking
advantage  of  this  the  middle  classes  urged  the  people  to  open
insurrection,  and  allowed  them  to  arm  themselves.  At  the
same  time  they  took  care  to  be  armed,  too,  so  that  they  could
control  the  popular  outbreak  and  prevent  its  going  "  too  far.'!
But  as  the  insurrection  gathered  force,  the  people,  contrary


PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  COUP  D'ETAT 59

to  the  will  of  the  middle  classes,  seized  the  Bastille,  the  emblem
and  support  of  the  royal  power  ;  whereupon  the  middle  classes,
having  meanwhile  organised  their  militia,  lost  no  time  in
suppressing  the  men  with  pikes  and  re-establishing  order.

That  is  the  twofold  movement  which  has  to  be  described.

We  have  seen  that  the  purpose  for  holding  the  Royal  Session
of  June  23  was  to  declare  to  the  States-General  that  they
were  not  the  power  they  wished  to  be  ;  that  the  absolute  power
of  the  King  remained  unimpaired  ;  that  there  was  nothing
for  the  States-General  to  change  in  it ;  *  and  that  the  two
privileged  orders,  the  nobility  and  the  clergy,  would  of  them-
selves enact  whatever  concessions  they  should  deem  useful
for  a  more  just  distribution  of  the  taxes.  The  benefits  which
were  to  be  granted  to  the  people  would  come  therefore  from  the
King  in  person,  and  those  benefits  would  be  the  abolition  of
statute  labour,  in  great  part  already  accomplished,  of  mort-
main and  of  franc-fief,  restriction  of  the  game  laws,  the  sub-
stitution of  a  regular  enlistment  instead  of  drawing  lots  for
the  militia,  the  suppression  of  the  word  tattle  and  the  organisa-
tion of  the  provincial  authorities.  All  this,  however,  belonged
to  the  realm  of  empty  promises,  or  indeed  was  but  the  mere
naming  of  reform,  for  all  that  these  reforms  implied,  all  the
substance  for  making  these  changes,  had  still  to  be  provided ;
and  how  could  it  be  provided  without  laying  the  axe  to  the
privileges  of  the  two  superior  orders  ?  But  the  most  important
point  in  the  royal  speech,  since  the  whole  revolution  was  soon
to  turn  upon  the  matter,  was  the  King's  declaration  concerning
the  inviolability  of  the  feudal  rights.  He  declared  that  the
tithes,  redemptions,  rents  of  all  kinds  and  seigneurial  and  feudal
rights  were  property  rights  absolutely  and  for  ever  inviolable.

By  such  a  pronouncement  the  King  was  evidently  placing
the  nobility  on  his  side  against  the  Third  Estate.  But  to
make  a  promise  qf  this  extent  was  to  circumscribe  the  Revo-
lution in  advance,  in  such  a  way  as  to  render  it  powerless  to

*  Necker's  original  project  allowed  the  Assembly  a  right  to  push
the  Revolution  as  far  as  the  establishment  of  a  charter,  in  imitation
of  the  English,  says  Louis  Blanc ;  they  took  care  to  exclude  from  all
joint  deliberations  the  form  of  constitution  to  be  given  by  the  next
States-General  (Histoire  dc  la  Revolution  franpaise,  4vo,  vol.  i.  p.  120).


60  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

accomplish  any  substantial  reform  in  the  finances  of  the
State  and  in  the  entire  internal  organisation  of  France.  It
meant  maintaining  intact  the  old  France,  the  old  regime,  and
we  shall  see  later  how,  in  the  course  of  the  Revolution,  royalty
and  the  maintenance  of  feudal  rights — the  old  political  form
and  the  old  economic  form — came  to  be  associated  in  the
mind  of  the  nation.

It  must  be  admitted  that  this  manoeuvre  of  the  Court
succeeded  up  to  a  certain  point.  After  the  Royal  Session  the
nobility  accorded  the  King,  and  especially  the  Queen,  an
ovation  at  the  palace,  and  the  next  day  there  remained  only
forty-seven  nobles  who  adhered  to  the  two  other  Orders.  Only
a  few  days  later,  when  the  rumour  spread  that  a  hundred
thousand  Parisians  were  marching  on  Versailles,  the  people
at  the  palace  were  in  a  state  of  general  consternation  at  hearing
this  news,  and  on  an  order  from  the  King,  confirmed  by  the
weeping  Queen — for  the  nobility  no  longer  relied  upon  the
King — most  of  the  nobles  rejoined  the  representatives  of  the
clergy  and  the  Third  Estate.  But  even  then  they  scarcely
concealed  their  hope  of  soon  seeing  those  rebels  dispersed  by
force.

Meanwhile,  all  manosuvrings  of  the  Court,  all  its  conspiracies,
and  even  all  conversations  of  such-and-such  a  prince  or  noble,
were  quickly  made  known  to  the  revolutionaries.  Everything
reached  Paris  by  a  thousand  secret  ways  of  communication
carefully  established,  and  the  rumours  coming  from  Versailles
helped  to  increase  the  ferment  in  the  capital.  The  moment
always  arrives  when  those  in  power  can  no  longer  depend  even
upon  their  servants,  and  such  a  moment  had  come  at  Versailles.
Thus,  while  the  nobility  were  rejoicing  over  the  little  success
gained  by  the  Royal  Session,  some  middle-class  revolutionaries
were  founding  at  Versailles  itself  a  club,  the  Breton  Club,
which  soon  became  a  great  rallying  centre  and  was  later  on
the  famous  club  of  the  Jacobins.  To  this  club  the  servants,
even  those  of  the  King  and  Queen,  went  to  report  what  was
said  behind  closed  doors  at  the  Court.  Some  Breton  depu-
ties, among  them  Le  Chapelier,  Glezen  and  Lanjuinais,  were
the  founders  of  this  Breton  Club,  and  Mirabeau,  the  Duke


PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  COUP  D'ETAT 61

d'Aiguillon,  Sieye's,  Barnave,  Potion,  the  Abbe*  Gre"goire  and
Robespierre  were  members  of  it.

Since  the  States-General  had  been  sitting  at  Versailles  the
greatest  excitement  prevailed  in  Paris.  The  Palais  Royal,
with  its  gardens  and  c afh,  had  become  an  open-air  club,  whither
ten  thousand  persons  of  all  classes  went  every  day  to  exchange
news,  to  discuss  the  pamphlets  of  the  hour,  to  renew  among
the  crowd  their  ardour  for  future  action,  to  know  and  to
understand  one  another.  Here  flocked  together  the  lower
middle  classes  and  the  intellectuals.  All  the  rumours,  all  the
news  collected  at  Versailles  by  the  Breton  Club,  were  imme-
diately communicated  to  this  open-air  club  of  the  Parisians.
Thence  the  rumours  and  news  spread  to  the  faubourgs,  and
if  sometimes  on  the  way  fiction  was  added  to  fact,  it  was,  as
is  often  the  case  with  popular  legends,  truer  than  the  truth
itself,  since  it  was  only  forestalling,  and  revealing  under  the
guise  of  legend,  the  secret  springs  of  action,  and  intuitively
judging  men  and  things  often  more  correctly  than  do  the  wise.
Who  better  than  the  obscure  masses  of  the  faubourgs  knew
Marie-Antoinette,  the  Duchess  de  Polignac,  the  perfidious
King  and  the  treacherous  princes  ?  Who  has  understood  them
better  than  the  people  did  ?

Ever  since  the  day  following  the  Royal  Session,  the  great
city  was  simmering  with  revolt.  The  Hotel  de  Ville  had
sent  congratulations  to  the  Assembly.  The  Palais  Royal  had
forwarded  an  address  couched  in  militant  language.  For  the
famished  people,  despised  and  rejected  until  then,  the  popular
triumph  was  a  gleam  of  hope,  and  insurrection  represented
in  their  eyes  the  means  of  procuring  the  bread  they  needed.
At  the  time  when  the  famine  was  growing  more  and  more
severe,  and  even  the  supply  of  bad  flour,  yellow  and  burnt,
reserved  for  the  poor,  continually  failed,  the  people  knew
that  in  Paris  and  the  vicinity  there  was  enough  food  to  feed
everybody,  and  the  poor  said  to  one  another  that  without  an
insurrection  the  monopolists  would  never  leave  off  starving
the  people.

But,  as  the  murmurs  of  the  people  in  their  dark  quarters
grew  louder,  the  Paris  middle  classes  and  the  representatives


62  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

of  the  people  at  Versailles  became  more  and  more  alarmed
^  i  about  a  possible  rising  in  the  provinces/ Better  the  King  and

•  Court  than  the  people  in  revolt.*^  The  very  day  the  three
Orders  were  united,  June  27,  after  the  first  victory  of  the  Third
Estate,  Mirabeau,  who  until  then  was  appealing  to  the  people,
separated  himself  completely  from  them,  and  advocated  the
separation  of  the  representatives  from  them.  He  even  warned
the  members  to  be  on  their  guard  against  "  seditious  auxiliaries."
In  this  we  can  already  see  the  future  programme  of  "  the
Gironde  "  evolving  in  the  Assembly.  Mirabeau  wished  the
Assembly  to  contribute  "  to  the  maintenance  of  order,  to  the
public  tranquillity,  to  the  authority  of  the  laws  and  their
ministers."  He  went  even  further.  He  wanted  the  deputies
to  rally  round  the  King,  saying  that  the  King  meant  well ;
if  it  happened  that  he  did  any  wrong,  it  was  only  because  he
was  deceived  and  badly  advised  !

i  (  The  Assembly  loudly  applauded  this  speech.  "  The  truth
is,"  says  Louis  Blanc  very  aptly,  "  that  far  from  wishing  to
overturn  the  throne,  the  middle  classes  were  already  trying
to  shelter  themselves  behind  it.  Deserted  by  the  nobility,  it

j  was  in  the  ranks  of  his  commons,  at  one  time  so  obstinate,
that  Louis  XVI.  would  have  found  his  most  faithful  and  most
alarmed  servitors.  He  was  ceasing  to  be  the  King  of  gentle-
men, he  was  becoming  the  King  of  the  property-owners.";-
This  primordial  defect  in  the  Revolution  weighed  it  down,
all  the  time,  as  we  shall  see,  up  to  the  moment  when  reaction
got  the  upper  hand.

The  distress  in  the  city,  however,  increased  from  day  to
.day.  It  is  true  that  Necker  had  taken  measures  to  avert  the
dangers  of  a  famine.  On  September  7,  1788,  he  had  suspended

*  Those  who  make  speeches  on  the  anniversaries  of  the  Revolution
prefer  to  keep  silent  on  this  delicate  subject,  and  speak  of  the  touching
unanimity  which  they  pretend  to  have  existed  between  the  people  and
their  representatives.  But  Louis  Blanc  has  already  pointed  out  the
fears  of  the  middle  classes  as  the  i4th  of  July  drew  near,  and  modern
research  only  confirms  this  point  of  view.  The  additional  facts  which
I  give  here,  concerning  the  days  from  the  2nd  to  the  I2th  of  July,
show  also  that  the  insurrection  of  the  people  of  Paris  followed  up  to
the  1 2th  its  own  line  of  conduct,  independent  of  the  middle-class
members  of  the  Third  Estate.


PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  COUP  D'ETAT 63

the  exportation  of  corn,  and  he  was  protecting  the  importation
by  bounties ;  seventy  million  livres  were  expended  in  the
purchase  of  foreign  wheat.  At  the  same  time  he  gave  wide-
spread publicity  to  the  decree  of  the  King's  Council  of  April
23,  1789,  which  empowered  judges  and  officers  of  the  police
to  visit  private  granaries  to  make  an  inventory  of  the  grain,
and  in  case  of  necessity  to  send  the  grain  to  market.  But  the
carrying  out  of  these  orders  was  confided  to  the  old  authorities
and — no  more  need  be  said  !

Now  in  July  the  Government  was  giving  bounties  to  those
who  brought  wheat  to  Paris;  but  the  imported  wheat  was
secretly  re-exported,  so  that  it  could  be  brought  in  again  and
so  obtain  the  bounty  a  second  time.  In  the  provinces,  mono-
polists were  buying  up  the  corn  with  a  view  to  these  specula-
tions; they  bought  up  even  the  standing  crops.
. '  .It  was  then  that  the  true  character  of  the  National  Assembly
was  revealed.  It  had  been  worthy  of  admiration,  no  doubt,
when  it  took  the  oath  in  the  Tennis  Court,  but  above  all
things  it  still  maintained  towards  the  people  a  middle-class
attitude.  On  July  4,  when  the  report  of  the  "  Committee
of  Subsistence  "  was  presented,  the  Assembly  discussed  the
measures  to  be  taken  for  guaranteeing  food  and  work  to  the
people.  They  talked  for  hours  and  made  proposition  after
proposition.  Petion  proposed  a  loan,  others  proposed  authoris-
ing the  provincial  assemblies  to  take  the  necessary  measures,
.but  nothing  was  decided,  nothing  undertaken.  And,  when
one  of  the  members  raised  the  question  of  the  speculators  and
denounced  some  of  them,  he  had  the  entire  Assembly  against
him.  Two  days  later,  July  6,  Bouche  announced  that  the
culprits  were  known,  and  that  a  formal  accusation  would  be
made  the  next  day.  "  A  general  panic  took  possession  of  the
Assembly,"  says  Gorsas,  in  the  Courrier  de  Versailles  et  de  Paris,
which  he  had  just  started.  But  the  next  day  came  and  not  a
word  more  was  uttered  on  this  subject.  The  affair  was
suppressed  in  the  interim.  Why  ?  For  fear — as  subsequent
events  go  to  prove — of  compromising  revelations.

In  any  case,  so  much  did  the  Assembly  fear  the  popular
outbreak,  that  on  the  occasion  of  a  riot  in  Paris,  on  June  30,


64 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

after  the  arrest  of  the  eleven  French  Guards  who  had  refused
to  load  their  muskets  to  fire  on  the  people,  the  Assembly  voted
an  address  to  the  King,  conceived  in  the  most  servile  terms  and
protesting  its  "  profound  attachment  to  the  royal  authority."  *

However  grudgingly  the  King  might  have  consented  to
give  the  middle  classes  the  smallest  share  in  the  Government,
they  would  have  rallied  to  him  and  helped  with  all  their  power
of  organisation  to  keep  the  people  down.  But — and  let  this
serve  as  a  warning  in  future  revolutions — in  the  life  of  the
individual,  of  parties,  and  even  of  institutions,  there  is  a  logic
which  is  beyond  any  one's  power  to  change.  The  royal
despotism  could  not  come  to  terms  with  the  middle  classes,
who  demanded  from  it  their  share  in  the  Government.  It
was  logically  destined  to  fight  them,  and  once  the  battle  began
it  had  to  succumb  and  yield  its  place  to  representative  govern-
ment— the  form  which  was  best  suited  to  the  rule  of  the
middle  classes.  On  the  other  hand,  without  betraying  its
natural  supporters,  the  nobility,  it  could  not  make  terms  with
democracy,  the  people's  party,  and  it  did  its  best  to  defend
the  nobles  and  their  privileges,  to  see  itself  later  on  betrayed
in  return  by  those  self-same  persons,  privileged  from  their
birth.

Meanwhile  information  concerning  the  plots  of  the  Court
was  coming  from  all  quarters,  both  to  the  partisans  of  the
Duke  of  Orleans,  who  used  to  meet  at  Montrouge,  as  well  as
to  the  revolutionaries,  who  frequented  the  Breton  Club.
Troops  were  concentrating  at  Versailles,  and  on  the  road  from
Versailles  to  Paris.  In  Paris  itself  they  took  possession  of  the
most  important  points  in  the  direction  of  Versailles.  Thirty-
five  thousand  men  were  said  to  be  distributed  within  this
compass,  and  twenty  thousand  more  were  to  be  added  to  them
in  a  few  days.  The  princes  and  the  Queen,  it  was  rumoured,
were  planning  to  dissolve  the  Assembly,  to  crush  Paris  in  case
of  a  rising,  to  arrest  and  kill,  not  only  the  principal  leaders

I  *  *f  The  National  Assembly  deplores  the  troubles  which  are  now
agitating  Paris.  ...  It  will  send  a  deputation  to  the  King  to  beg
him  of  his  grace  to  employ  for  the  re-establishment  of  order  the  infallible
means  of  the  clemency  and  kindness  that  are  so  native  to  his  heart,
with  the  confidence  which  his  good  people  will  always  deserve.'"  '»


PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  COUP  D'ETAT 65

and  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  but  also  those  members  of  the
Assembly,  such  as  Mirabeau,  Mounier  and  Lally-Tollendal,  who
wished  to  transform  Louis  XVI.  into  a  constitutional  monarch.
Twelve  members,-  said  La  Fayette  later  on,  were  to  be  immolated.
The  Baron  de  Breteuil  and  Marshal  de  Broglie  had  been
summoned  to  put  this  project  into  execution — both  of  them
quite  ready  to  do  it.  "  If  it  is  necessary  to  burn  Paris,  Paris
will  be  burnt,"  said  the  former.  As  to  Marshal  de  Broglie,
he  had  written  to  the  Prince  de  Conde  that  a  whiff  of  grape-
shot  would  soon  "  disperse  these  argufiers  and  restore  the
absolute  power  which  is  going  out,  in  place  of  the  republican
spirit  which  is  coming  in."  *

It  must  not  be  believed  that  those  rumours  were  only  idle
tales,  as  some  reactionary  historians  have  asserted.  The  letter
of  the  Duchess  de  Polignac,  addressed  on  July  12  to  Flesselles,
the  Provost  of  the  Merchants,  which  was  found  later  on,  and
in  which  all  the  persons  implicated  were  mentioned  under
assumed  names,  is  sufficient  proof  of  the  plot  hatched  by  the
Court  for  July  16.  If  there  could  still  be  any  doubt  on  this
matter,  the  words  addressed  to  Dumouriez  at  Caen  on  July  10
by  the  Duchess  de  Beuvron,  in  the  presence  of  sixty  exulting
nobles,  should  suffice  to  prove  it  :

"  Well,  Dumouriez,"  said  the  Duchess,  "  do  you  not  know
the  great  news  ?  Your  friend  Necker  is  turned  out,  and  the
result  is  that  the  King  reascends  the  throne  and  the  Assembly
is  dispersed.  Your  friends,  '  the  forty-seven,'  are  at  this  very
moment  in  the  Bastille,  perhaps,  with  Mirabeau,  Turgot,  and
a  hundred  or  so  of  those  insolent  fellows  of  the  Third  Estate,
and  for  certain  Marshal  de  Broglie  is  in  Paris  with  thirty
thousand  men."f

The  Duchess  was  mistaken.  Necker  was  not  dismissed  until
the  nth,  and  Broglie  took  care  not  to  enter  Paris.

But  what  was  the  Assembly  doing  then  ?  It  was  doing
what  Assemblies  have  always  done,  and  always  will  do.  It
decided  on  nothing.  What  could  it  decide  ?

The  very  day  that  the  people  of  Paris  began  to  rise,  that

*  Louis  Blanc,  Histoire  de  la  Revolution  franpaise.
f  Dumouriez,  M&moires,  vol.  ii.  p.  35.

E


66  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

is,  on  July  8,  the  Assembly  charged  no  other  than  Mirabeau,
the  people's  tribune,  with  the  drawing  up  of  a  humble  petition
to  the  King,  and  while  praying  the  King  to  withdraw  the
troops  the  Assembly  filled  their  petition  with  the  grossest
adulation.  It  spoke  of  a  people  who  dearly  loved  their  King,

Jand  thanked  Heaven  for  the  gift  bestowed  upon  them  in  his
-» /love.  ('How  many  times  similar  words  and  flatteries  will  be
addressed  to  the  King  by  the  representatives  of  the  people
i  during  the  progress  of  the  Revolution  ? The  fact  is  that  the
Revolution cannot be understood at all if these repeated
efforts  on  the  part  of  the  propertied  classes  to  win  over  Royalty
,to  their  side  as  a  buckler  against  the  people  are  passed  by
unnoticed. All  the  dramas  which  will  be  enacted  later  on,
in 1793,  within  the  Convention,  were  already  contained  in
germ in  this  petition  from  the  National  Assembly,  signed
but  a  few  days  before  July  14.  \


CHAPTER  XI
PARIS  ON  THE  EVE  OF  THE  FOURTEENTH

Revolution  centred  in  Paris,  not  in  Assembly — Paris  ready
to  rise — Districts  organise  people — Arrest  of  soldiers  of  Gardes
franpaises — Scarcity  of  bread — Fury  of  people  increases —
Dismissal  of  Necker — Camille  Desmoulins  appeals  to  arms —
Struggle  begins — Tocsin  rung — People  procure  food  and
arms  —  Permanent  Committee  instituted  —  Formation  of
National  Guard — Middle  classes  try  to  disarm  people

THE  attention  of  the  historians  is  generally  absorbed  by  the
National  Assembly.  The  representatives  of  the  people
assembled  at  Versailles  seem  to  personify  the  Revolution,  and
their  last  words  or  acts  are  chronicled  with  pious  devotion.
Nevertheless,  it  was  not  there  that  the  passionate  heart  of  the
Revolution  was  throbbing  during  those  July  days  :  it  was
throbbing  in  Paris.

Without  Paris,  without  her  people,  the  Assembly  was  naught.
If  the  fear  of  Paris  in  revolt  had  not  restrained  the  Court,  the
Assembly  would  have  been  most  certainly  dispersed,  as  has  been
seen  so  many  times  since — on  the  iSthBrumaire  and  December  2
in  France,  and  also  recently  in  Hungary  and  in  Russia.  No
doubt  the  deputies  would  have  protested  ;  no  doubt  they  would
have  uttered  some  fine  speeches,  and  some  of  them  perhaps
might  have  tried  to  raise  the  provinces  ;  but  without  a  people
ready  to  rise,  without  a  preliminary  revolutionary  work  accom-
plished among  the  masses,  without  an  appeal  to  the  people
for  revolt  made  direct  from  man  to  man  and  not  by  manifestoes,
a  representative  Assembly  can  do  little  when  it  has  to  face  an
established  government  backed  by  its  legions  of  functionaries
and  its  army.

Fortunately  Paris  was  awake. Whilst  the  National  Assembly

67


68  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

slumbered  in  fancied  security,  and  on  July  10  tranquilly
resumed  the  discussion  on  the  scheme  for  a  Constitution,  the
people  of  Paris,  to  whom  the  boldest  and  most  clear-sighted
of  the  middle  classes  had  at  last  appealed,  prepared  for  in-
surrection. Details  of  the  military  trap  which  the  Court
was  preparing  for  the  i6th  were  repeated  in  the  faubourgs.
Everything  was  known,  even  the  King's  threat  to  retire  to
Soissons  and  deliver  up  Paris  to  the  army ;  and  Paris,  la  grande
fournaise,  organised  itself  in  its  various  sections  to  answer  force
by  force.  The  "  seditious  auxiliaries  "  with  which  Mirabeau
had  threatened  the  Court  had  been  appealed  to  indeed,  and
in  the  gloomy  wineshops  of  the  suburbs  the  Paris  proletarians
discussed  the  means  of  "  saving  the  country."  They  armed
themselves  as  best  they  could.

Hundreds  of  patriotic  agitators,  "  unknown  persons,"  of
course,  did  everything  to  keep  up  the  ferment  and  to  draw
the  people  into  the  streets.  Squibs  and  fireworks  were,
according  to  Arthur  Young,  one  of  the  means  used  ;  they
were  sold  at  half-price,  and  whenever  a  crowd  collected  to  see
the  fireworks  let  off  at  a  street  corner,  some  one  would  begin
to  harangue  the  people — tell  them  news  of  the  Court  plots.
"  Lately  a  company  of  Swiss  would  have  crushed  all  this  ;  a
regiment  would  do  it  now  if  led  with  firmness ;  but  let  it  last
a  fortnight,  and  an  army  will  be  wanting,"  *  said  Arthur  Young
on  the  eve  of  July  14.

In  fact,  by  the  end  of  June  the  people  of  Paris  were  in  full
ferment  and  preparing  for  insurrection.  At  the  beginning  of
the  month  there  had  already  been  riots  on  account  of  the
dearness  of  corn,  writes  Hardy,  the  English  bookseller  ;  and  if
Paris  remained  calm  until  the  25th,  it  was  only  because,  until
the  Royal  Session,  the  people  were  always  hoping  that  the
Assembly  would  do  something.  But  since  the  25th,  Paris
understood  already  that  no  other  hope  remained  but
insurrection.

One  party  of  Parisians  marched  that  day  towards  Versailles,
ready  to  fight  the  troops.  In  Paris  itself,  bands  were  formed
"  prepared  to  proceed  to  the  direst  extremities,"  as  we  read
*  Young,  Travels  in  France,  p.  184  (London,  1892).


PARIS  ON  THE  EVE  OF  THE  FOURTEENTH 69

in  the  secret  Notes  addressed  to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,
which  were  published  by  Chassin.*  "  The  people  have  been
in  commotion  all  night,  they  have  made  bonfires  and  let  off  a
prodigious  number  of  rockets  in  front  of  the  Palais  Royal  and
the  General  Comptroller's  Office.  They  were  shouting,  *  Long
live  the  Duke  of  Orleans  !  '  "

The  same  day,  the  25th,  soldiers  of  the  French  Guards
deserted  their  barracks,  fraternising  and  drinking  with  the
people,  who  carried  them  off  to  various  quarters,  shouting
through  the  streets  as  they  passed  :  "  A  las  la  calotte  !  "
^  Meanwhile  the  "  districts "  of  Paris,  that  is,  the  primary
bodies  of  electors,  especially  those  of  the  workmen's  quarters,
assembled  regularly  and  took  measures  for  organising  resistance
in  Paris.  The  "  districts  "  were  kept  in  touch  with  each
other,  and  their  representatives  made  repeated  efforts  to
constitute  an  independent  municipal  body.  Even  on  the  25th
Bonneville  appealed  to  arms  at  an  Assembly  of  the  electors,  and
proposed  that  they  should  form  themselves  into  a  Commune,
quoting  historical  precedent  to  give  weight  to  his  proposal.
The  next  day,  after  having  met  first  in  the  Museum,  Rue
Dauphine,  the  representatives  of  the  "  districts "  at  last
transferred  themselves  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  and  on  July  I
they  were  already  in  their  second  session,  a  verbatim  report  of
which  is  given  by  Chassin.f  Thus  they  constituted  the
"  Permanent  Committee,"  which  we  shall  see  acting  on  the
day  of  July  14. )

On  June  30,  a  simple  incident,  the  arrest  of  eleven  soldiers
of  the  Gardes  jrangaises,  who  had  been  sent  to  the  Abbaye
prison  for  refusing  to  load  their  muskets,  sufficed  to  cause  a
serious  riot  in  Paris.  When  Loustalot,  editor  of  the  'Revolutions
de  Paris ,  mounted  a  chair  in  front  of  the  Cafe  Foy  in  the  Palais
Royal,  and  harangued  the  crowd  on  this  matter,  four  thousand
men  went  immediately  to  the  Abbaye  and  set  the  arrested
soldiers  at  liberty.  The  jailers,  seeing  the  crowd  arrive,  realised
that  resistance  was  useless,  and  handed  over  the  prisoners ;
and  the  dragoons,  riding  full  gallop  to  cut  down  the  people,

*  Chassin,  Les  flections  et  les  cahiers  de  Pans  (Paris,  1889),  vol.  iii.
p.  453-  t  Chassin,  vol.  iii.  pp.  439-444,  458,  460.


70  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

halted,  thrust  back  their  sabres  into  their  sheaths,  and  frater-
nised with  the  crowd.  A  shudder  ran  through  the  Assembly
when  they  learned  next  day  of  this  fraternisation  of  the  troops
and  the  rioters.  "  Are  we  to  be  the  tribunes  of  a  people  in
revolt  ?  "  these  gentlemen  asked  one  another.

But  revolt  was  already  growing  in  the  outskirts  of  Paris.
At  Nangis  the  people  had  refused  to  pay  the  taxes,  so  long  as
they  were  not  fixed  by  the  Assembly,  and  as  there  was  a
scarcity  of  bread  (only  two  bushels  of  wheat  were  sold  to  each
buyer)  and  the  people  were  in  an  uproar,  the  market  was
surrounded  by  dragoons.  But  notwithstanding  the  presence
of  the  troops  there  were  several  riots  at  Nangis  and  in  other
little  towns  on  the  outskirts.  "  The  people  quarrel  with  the
bakers,"  says  Young,  "  and  then  run  away  with  the  bread  and
wheat  for  nothing."  *

The  Mercure  de  France  (July  27)  even  mentions  some
attempts  made  in  several  places,  especially  at  Saint-Quentin,
to  cut  the  green  crops,  so  great  was  the  scarcity.

In  Paris,  on  June  30,  the  patriots  were  already  enrolling
themselves  at  the  Cafe  du  Caveau  for  insurrection,  and  when
they  heard  the  next  day  that  Broglie  had  taken  command  of
the  army,  the  people,  say  the  secret  reports,  openly  declared
and  posted  up  everywhere  that  "  should  the  troops  fire  a  single
shot  they  would  put  everything  to  fire  and  sword."  "  Many
other  things  much  stronger  than  that  were  said,"  adds  the
official.  "  Wise  men  dare  not  show  themselves."

On  July  2  the  fury  of  the  populace  broke  out  against  the
Count  d'Artois  and  the  Polignacs.  There  was  talk  of  killing
them  and  sacking  their  palaces.  There  was  talk  also  of  seizing
upon  all  the  cannon  distributed  through  Paris.  The  crowds
in  the  streets  were  larger  and  the  fury  of  the  people  incon-
ceivable, say  the  same  reports.  "  This  very  day,"  said  Hardy,
the  bookseller,  in  his  journal,  "  a  raging  multitude  was  on  the
point  of  setting  out  from  the  Palais  Royal  to  rescue  the  deputies
of  the  Third  Estate,  who  it  was  said  were  exposed  to  the  danger
of  being  assassinated  by  the  nobles."  The  people  now  began
to  talk  of  seizing  on  the  arms  at  the  Hotel  des  Invalides.
*  Arthur  Young,  p.  189.


PARIS  ON  THE  EVE  OF  THE  FOURTEENTH 71

The  fury  inspired  by  hunger  kept  pace  with  the  fury  against
the  Court.  Consequently,  on  July  4  and  6,  fearing  an  attack
on  the  bakers,  parties  of  Gardes  fran^aises  had  to  be  sent  out
to  patrol  the  streets  and  superintend  the  distribution  of  bread.

On  July  8,  a  prelude  to  the  insurrection  broke  out  in  Paris
itself,  at  the  camp  of  twenty  thousand  unemployed  workmen
engaged  by  the  Government  in  road-making  at  Montmartre.
Two  days  after,  on  the  loth,  blood  was  already  flowing,  and
on  the  same  day  they  began  to  set  fire  to  the  toll-gates.  The
one  in  the  Chaussee  d'Antin  was  burnt,  and  the  people  took
advantage  of  this  by  letting  in  provisions  and  wine  free  of  duty.

Would  Camille  Desmoulins  ever  have  made  his  appeal  to
arms  on  the  I2th  if  he  had  not  been  sure  that  the  people  would
listen  to  him,  if  he  had  not  known  that  Paris  was  already  in
revolt,  that  only  twelve  days  before  Loustalot  had  stirred  up
the  crowd  over  a  matter  of  less  importance,  and  that  Paris
and  the  faubourgs  were  even  then  merely  waiting  for  the
signal  for  some  one  to  begin  and  it  would  flame  into  in-
surrection ?

The  impetuosity  of  the  princes,  who  were  certain  of  success,
precipitated  the  coup  d'etat  planned  for  the  i6th,  and  the
King  was  compelled  to  act  before  reinforcements  for  the
troops  had  arrived  at  Versailles.*

Necker  was  dismissed  on  the  nth,  the  Count  d'Artois
shaking  his  fist  in  the  minister's  face  as  he  passed  into  the
council  chamber  of  the  ministers,  and  the  King,  with  his
usual  duplicity,  pretending  to  know  nothing  about  it,  although
he  had  already  signed  the  dismissal.  Necker  submitted  to
his  master's  orders  without  a  word.  He  even  fell  in  with  his
plans,  and  arranged  for  his  departure  for  Brussels  in  such  a
way  that  it  passed  unnoticed  at  Versailles.

Paris  only  learned  about  it  towards  noon  the  next  day,
Sunday,  the  I2th.  Every  one  had  been  expecting  this  dismissal,
which  was  to  be  the  beginning  of  the  coup  d'etat.  The  people
were  already  repeating  the  saying  of  the  Duke  de  Broglie,

*  Vide  the  Letters  of  Salmour,  the  Envoy  from  Saxony,  to  Stutter-
helm,  on  July  19  and  August  20  (Archives  of  Dresden),  cited  by  Flammer-
mont ;  La  iourn&e  du  14  Juillet  1789,  by  Pitra  (Publications  de  la  Societe
de  1'Histoire  de  la  Revolution  francaise,  1892).


72 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

who,  with  his  thirty  thousand  soldiers  massed  between  Paris
and  Versailles,  was  "  answerable  for  Paris,"  and  as  sinister
rumours  were  circulating  all  the  morning  concerning  the
massacres  prepared  by  the  Court,  "  all  revolutionary  Paris  "
rushed  in  a  body  to  the  Palais  Royal.  Just  then  the  courier
had  arrived  bringing  news  of  Necker's  exile.  The  Court  had
decided  to  open  hostilities.  .  .  .  Whereupon  Camille  Des-
moulins,  coming  out  of  one  of  the  cafes  in  the  Palais  Royal,  the
Cafe  Foy,  with  a  sword  in  one  hand  and  a  pistol  in  the  other,
mounted  upon  a  chair  and  made  his  appeal  to  arms.  Breaking
a  branch  from  a  tree,  he  took,  as  is  known,  a  green  leaf  as  a
badge,  a  rallying-sign.  And  his  cry,  "  There  is  not  a  moment
to  lose,  haste  to  arms !  "  spread  through  the  faubourgs.

In  the  afternoon  an  immense  procession,  carrying  the  busts
of  the  Duke  of  Orleans  and  Necker,  veiled  in  crape  (it  was
said  that  the  Duke  of  Orleans  also  had  been  banished),  passed
through  the  Palais  Royal,  along  the  Rue  Richelieu,  and  turned
towards  the  Place  Louis  XV.  (now  Place  de  la  Concorde),  which
was  occupied  by  troops — Swiss,  French  Infantry,  Hussars  and
Dragoons — under  the  command  of  the  Marquis  de  Besenval.
The  troops  soon  found  themselves  surrounded  by  the  people.
They  tried  to  keep  them  back  with  sabre-thrusts  ;  they  even
fired  upon  them,  but  before  an  innumerable  crowd  that  pushed
and  jostled,  pressing  in  and  breaking  through  their  ranks  on
every  side,  the  soldiers  were  forced  to  retire.  From  other
sources  we  learn  that  the  French  Guards  fired  a  few  shots  at
the  "  Royal  German  "  regiment,  which  adhered  to  the  King,
and  that  the  Swiss  refused  to  fire  on  the  people.  Besenval,
who  seems  not  to  have  had  much  confidence  in  the  Court,
withdrew,  therefore,  before  an  overwhelming  torrent  of  the
people  and  went  to  camp  on  the  Champ-de-Mars.*

Thus  the  struggle  began. But what  would  be  the  final

*  "  The  French  Guards,  having  sided  with  the  populace,  fired  upon
a  detachment  of  the  Royal  German  regiment,  posted  on  the  boulevard,
under  my  windows.  Two  men  and  two  horses  were  killed,"  wrote
Simolin,  Plenipotentiary  of  Catherine  II.  in  Paris,  to  the  Chancellor
Osterman,  on  July  13.  And  he  added  :  "  Yesterday  and  the  day
before  they  burned  the  barritre  blanche  and  that  of  the  Faubourg
Poissonniere  "  (Conches,  Lettres  de  Louis  XVI.,  &c.,  p.  223).


PARIS  ON  THE  EVE  OF  THE  FOURTEENTH 73

outcome  of  it  if  the  troops,  still  faithful  to  the  King,  received
orders  to  march  on  Paris  ?  In  this  eventuality,  the  middle
classes  decided  to  accept,  with  reluctance,  the  supreme  measure,
the  appeal  to  the  people.  The  tocsin  was  rung  throughout
Paris,  and  the  faubourgs  began  to  forge  pikes.*

By  degrees  armed  men  began  to  appear  in  the  streets.  All
night  long  men  of  the  people  compelled  the  passers-by  to
give  them  money  to  buy  powder.  The  toll-gates  were  in
flames.  All  the  gates  on  the  right  bank,  from  the  Faubourg
Saint- Antoine  to  that  of  Saint-Honore,  as  well  as  those  at
Saint-Marcel  et  Saint- Jacques,  were  burnt,  and  provisions  and
wine  entered  Paris  freely.  All  night  the  tocsin  rang  and  the
middle  classes  trembled  for  their  possessions,  because  men
armed  with  pikes  and  cudgels  spread  themselves  through
every  quarter  and  plundered  the  houses  of  some  monopolists,
known  to  be  enemies  of  the  people,  and  knocking  at  the  doors
of  the  rich  they  demanded  money  and  arms.

The  next  day,  the  I3th,  the  people  went  first  of  all  to  the
places  where  there  was  food.  They  attacked  the  monastery
of  Saint-Lazare,  with  cries  of  "  Bread,  bread  !  "  Fifty-two
carts  were  laden  with  flour,  which,  instead  of  being  emptied
then  and  there,  were  dragged  to  the  Halles,  so  that  the  food
might  be  used  by  every  one.  It  was  to  the  Halles  that  the
people  also  sent  the  provisions  let  into  Paris  without  paying
duty.f

At  the  same  time  the  people  seized  the  prison  of  La  Force,
where  debtors  were  imprisoned,  and  the  liberated  prisoners
went  about  the  city  thanking  the  people ;  but  an  outbreak  of
prisoners  in  the  Chatelet  was  quelled,  apparently  by  some  of
the  middle  classes  who  had  armed  in  hot  haste  and  were  already

*  Of  these  50,000  were  made,  as  well  as  "  all  kinds  of  small  arms,
at  the  expense  of  the  town,"  saysDusaulx  ("L'oeuvre  de  sept  jours,"
p.  203).

t  "  From  all  parts  there  came  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville  an  infinite
number  of  carriages,  chariots  and  carts,  stopped  at  the  gates  of  the  town,
and  loaded  with  all  sorts  of  supplies,  plates  and  dishes,  furniture,
food-stuffs,  &c.  The  people,  who  only  clamoured  for  arms  and  ammu-
nition, .  .  .  came  to  us  in  crowds  and  became  more  insistent  every
minute."  It  was  July  1 3  (Dusaulx, "  L'oeuvre  de  sept  jours,"  in  M6moires
sur  la  Bastille,  published  by  H.  Monin,  Paris,  1889,  p.  397).


'


74 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

patrolling  the  streets.  By  six  o'clock  the  middle-class  militia
were  already  formed  and  marching  towards  the  Hotel  de
Ville,  and  at  ten  o'clock  that  evening,  says  Chassin,  they
were  on  duty.

Taine  and  his  followers,  faithful  echoes  of  the  fears  of  the
middle  class,  try  to  make  us  believe  that,  on  the  I3th,  Paris
was  in  the  hands  of  thieves.  But  this  allegation  is  contra-
dicted by  all  contemporary  evidence.  There  were,  no  doubt,
wayfarers  stopped  by  men  with  pikes,  who  demanded  money
to  procure  arms ;  and  there  were  also,  on  the  nights  between
the  1 2th  and  I4th,  armed  men  who  knocked  at  the  doors  of
the  well-to-do  to  ask  for  food  and  drink,  or  for  arms  and  money.

It  is  also  averred  that  there  were  attempts  at  pillage,  since
two  credible  witnesses  mention  persons  executed  at  night,
between  the  I3th  and  I5th,  for  attempts  of  that  kind.*  But
here,  as  elsewhere,  Taine  exaggerates.

Whether  the  modern  middle-class  Republicans  like  it  or  not,
it  is  certain  that  the  revolutionaries  of  1789  did  appeal  to  the
"  compromising  auxiliaries  "  of  whom  Mirabeau  spoke.  They
went  to  the  hovels  on  the  outskirts  to  find  them.  And  they

*  The  citations  given  by  M.  Jules  Flammermont,  in  a  note  in  his  work
on  the  Fourteenth  (Lajournte  du  i^Juillet  1789),  are  conclusive  on  this
subject — more  conclusive  than  his  text,  which  seems  to  us  up  to  a

»  certain  point  to  contradict  itself  on  pages  clxxxi.  and  clxxxii./" "  In
the  afternoon,"  says  the  Count  de  Salmour,  "  the  guard  of  the  middle
classes,  already  formed,  began  to  disarm  all  the  vagabonds.  It  is
they  and  the  armed  middle-class  men  who,  by  their  vigilance,  saved
Paris  again  this  night.  .  .  .  The  night  passed  quietly  and  with

.  much  order  :  thieves  and  vagabonds  were  arrested,  and  for  the  more
serious  offences  they  were  hanged  on  the  spot  "  (Letter  of  the  Count
de  Salmour,  dated  July  10,  1789,  in  the  Archives  of  Dresden).!  The
following  passage  from  a  letter  of  Dr.  Rigby,  which  M.  FlammCTmont
gives  as  a  note,  p.  clxxxiii.,  says  the  same  thing :  "As  night  came
on  very  few  of  the  persons  who  had  armed  themselves  the  preceding
evening  were  to  be  seen.  Some,  however,  had  refused  to  give  up
their  arms,  and  proved  in  the  course  of  the  night  how  just  were  the
suspicions  of  the  inhabitants  concerning  them,  for  they  began  to
plunder  ;  but  it  was  too  late  to  do  it  then  with  impunity.  They  were
soon  discovered  and  apprehended,  and  we  were  told  the  following
morning  that  several  of  these  unhappy  wretches,  who  had  been  taken
in  the  act,  had  been  executed  "  (Dr.  Rigby's  Letters,  pp.  56-57).  On
reading  these  pages  we  admit  there  is  some  truth  in  the  testimony  of
Morellet,  according  to  which,  "on  the  night  between  the  I3th  and
i4th  some  excesses  were  committed  against  persons  and  property."


PARIS  ON  THE  EVE  OF  THE  FOURTEENTH 75

were  quite  right  to  do  so,  because  even  if  there  were  a  few
cases  of  pillaging,  most  of  these  "  auxilliaries,"  understanding
the  seriousness  of  the  situation,  put  their  arms  at  the  service
of  the  general  cause,  much  more  than  they  used  them  to
gratify  their  personal  hatreds  or  to  alleviate  their  own  misery.

It  is  at  any  rate  certain  that  cases  of  pillage  were  extremely
rare.  On  the  contrary,  the  spirit  of  the  armed  crowds  became
very  serious  when  they  learned  about  the  engagement  that
.had  been  entered  into  by  the  troops  and  the  middle  classes.
f  The  men  with  the  pikes  evidently  looked  upon  themselves  as
the  defenders  of  the  town,  upon  whom  a  heavy  responsibility
rested.  Marmontel,  a  declared  enemy  of  the  Revolution,
nevertheless  notices  this  interesting  feature.  "  The  thieves
themselves,  seized  with  the  general  terror  [?],  committed  no
depredations.  The  armourers'  shops  were  the  only  ones  broken
open,  and  only  arms  were  stolen,"  he  says  in  his  Memoires.
And  when  the  people  brought  the  carriage  of  the  Prince  de
Lambesc  to  the  Place  de  la  Greve  to  burn  it,  they  sent  back
the  trunk  and  all  the  effects  found  in  the  carriage  to  the  Hotel
de  Ville.  At  the  Lazarite  Monastery  the  people  refused  money
and  took  only  the  flour,  arms  and  wine,  which  were  all  con-
veyed to  the  Place  de  la  Greve.  "  Nothing  was  touched  that
day,  either  at  the  Treasury  or  at  the  Bank,"  remarks  the  English
Ambassador  in  his  account. )

What  is  quite  true  is  the  fear  felt  by  the  middle  classes  at
the  sight  of  these  men  and  women,  ragged,  pinched  with  hunger
and  armed  with  clubs  and  pikes  "  of  all  shapes."  The  terror
inspired  by  these  spectres  of  famine  thronging  the  streets  was
such  that  the  middle  classes  could  not  get  over  it.  Later  on,
in  1791  and  1792,  even  those  among  them  who  wanted  to
put  an  end  to  Royalty  preferred  reaction  rather  than  make  a
fresh  appeal  to  the  popular  revolution.  The  memory  of  the
famished  people  swarming  in  the  streets  of  whom  they  had
caught  a  glimpse  on  July  12,  13  and  14  haunted  them.

"  Arms  !  "  was  the  cry  of  the  people  after  they  had  found
a  little  bread.  They  sought  everywhere  for  them,  without
finding  any,  while  night  and  day  in  the  faubourgs  pikes  of  every
kind  were  being  forged  from  any  iron  that  came  to  hand.


76  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  middle  classes,  meanwhile,  without  losing  a  moment,
were  constituting  their  executive  power  in  the  municipality
at  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  and  their  militia.

We  know  that  the  elections  for  the  National  Assembly  took
place  in  two  degrees  ;  but  the  elections  over,  the  electors  of
the  Third  Estate,  to  whom  were  added  some  of  the  electors
of  the  clergy  and  of  the  nobility,  had  continued  to  meet  at  the
Hotel  de  Ville,  since  June  27,  with  the  authorisation  of  the
Town  Council  and  the  "  Ministers  for  Paris."  Now  these
electors  took  the  lead  in  organising  the  middle-class  militia.
We  have  already  seen  them  holding  their  second  sitting  on
July  I.

f /^On  July  12  they  instituted  a  Permanent  Committee,  presided
N  AT  fever  by  Flesselles,  the  Provost  of  the  Merchants,  and  they
decided  that  each  of  the  sixty  districts  should  choose  two
;  hundred  well-known  citizens,  capable  of  bearing  arms,  which
i  should  form  a  body  of  jmilitig  numbering 1 2,000  men,  to
;  watch  over  the  public  safety. This  militia  was  to  be  increased
in  four  days  to  a  total  of  48,000  men ;  meanwhile  the  same
Committee  was  trying  to  disarm  the  people.

In  this  way,  Louis  Blanc  says  very  truly,  the  middle  classes
obtained  for  themselves  a  Pretorian  Guard  of  12,000  men
and  at  the  risk  of  supporting  the  Court  they  wanted  to  disarm
the  mass  of  the  people.

Instead  of  the  green  badge  of  the  earlier  days,  this  militia
had  now  to  wear  the  red  and  blue  cockade,  and  the  Permanent
Committee  took  measures  to  prevent  the  people,  who  were
arming  themselves,  from  invading  the  ranks  of  this  militia.
It  was  decreed  that  any  one  with  arms  and  wearing  the  red
and  blue  cockade,  without  having  been  registered  in  one  of
the  districts,  should  be  brought  for  judgment  before  the
Committee.  The  general  commandant  of  this  National  Guard
had  been  nominated  by  the  Permanent  Committee  on  the  night
of  July  13  and  14  ;  he  was  a  noble,  the  Duke  d'Aumont.  He
would  not  accept  the  post,  and  another  nobleman,  the  Marquis
de  la  Salle,  who  had  been  nominated  second  in  command,
took  his  place.

In  short,  while  the  people  were  forging  pikes  and  arming


PARIS  ON  THE  EVE  OF  THE  FOURTEENTH 77

themselves,  while  they  were  taking  measures  to  prevent  the
ammunition  from  being  sent  out  of  Paris,  while  they  were
seizing  the  bread-stuffs  and  sending  them  to  the  Halles  or  to
the  Place  de  la  Greve,  while  on  the  I4th  they  were  constructing
barricades  to  prevent  the  troops  entering  Paris,  and  had  seized
the  arms  at  the  Hotel  des  Invalides  and  were  marching  in  a
body  towards  the  Bastille  to  compel  it  to  capitulate,  the
middle  classes  were  mainly  preoccupied  in  taking  measures
for  keeping  the  newly  acquired  power  entirely  in  their  own
hands.  They  constituted  the  middle-class  Commune  of  Paris,
which  tried  to  restrain  the  popular  movement,  and  at  the
head  of  this  Commune  they  placed  Flesselles,  the  Provost  of
the  Merchants,  who  was  corresponding  with  the  Duchess  de
Polignac  about  checking  the  insurrection  in  Paris,  We  know,
indeed,  that  on  the  I3th,  when  the  people  went  to  ask  Flesselles
for  arms,  he  sent  them  boxes  containing  old  linen  instead  of
muskets,  and  the  next  day  he  used  all  his  influence  to  prevent
the  people  from  taking  the  Bastille.

Thus  began  on  the  side  of  the  adroit  middle-class  leaders ( ^ '
the  system  ^fbetrayingjdifi^R^ohition,  -which,  as  we  shall "
see,  developed  so  much  during  the  next  few  years.  ^  l


CHAPTER  XII
THE  TAKING  OF  THE  BASTILLE

"  A  la  Bastille  !  "—Importance  of  Bastille — Popular  hatred
of  prisons — Guns  taken  from  Hotel  des  Invalides — Deputa-
tions sent  to  de  Launey — Attack  on  Bastille  begins — De-
fenders fire  on  people — Another  deputation  sent — Firing
continues — Cannon  arrives  for  people — Garrison  capitulates —
Deaths  of  de  Launey  and  Flesselles — First  victory  of  people

FROM  the  dawn  of  July  14,  the  attention  of  the  Paris  insurrec-
tion was  directed  upon  the  Bastille,  that  gloomy  fortress  with  its
solid  towers  of  formidable  height  which  reared  itself  among  the
houses  of  a  populous  quarter  at  the  entrance  of  the  Faubourg
Saint- Antoine.  Historians  are  still  inquiring  how  the  thoughts
of  the  people  came  to  be  turned  in  this  direction,  and  some  of
them  suggest  that  it  was  the  Permanent  Committee  at  the
Hotel  de  Ville,  who  wanted  to  furnish  an  objective  for  the
insurrection  in  directing  it  against  this  emblem  of  royalty.
There  is  nothing,  however,  to  confirm  this  supposition,  whilst
several  important  facts  contradict  it.  It  is  more  probable  that
the  popular  instinct,  which,  ever  since  the  I2th  or  I3th,  under-
stood that  in  the  plans  of  the  Court  to  crush  the  people  of
Paris  the  Bastille  would  play  an  important  part,  decided  in
consequence  to  get  possession  of  it.

We  know,  indeed,  that  in  the  west  the  Court  had  Besenval
camped  with  his  thirty  thousand  men  in  the  Champ-de-Mars,
and  that  in  the  east  it  relied  for  support  upon  the  towers  of  the
Bastille,  with  their  cannon  trained  on  the  revolutionary  Fau-
bourg Saint- Antoine  and  its  principal  thoroughfare,  as  well  as
on  that  other  great  artery,  the  Rue  Saint- Antoine,  which  leads
to  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  the  Palais  Royal  and  the  Tuileries.  The
importance  of  the  Bastille  was,  therefore,  only  too  evident,

7*


THE  TAKING  OF  THE  BASTILLE


79


and  from  the  morning  of  the  I4th,  according  to  the  Deux  amis
de  la  liberte^  the  words  "  A  la  Bastille  !  "  flew  from  mouth  to
mouth  from  one  end  of  the  town  to  the  other.*

It  is  true  that  the  garrison  of  the  Bastille  numbered  only
one  hundred  and  fourteen  men,  of  whom  eighty-four  were
pensioners  and  thirty  Swiss,  and  that  the  Governor  had  done
nothing  towards  victualling  the  place ;  but  this  proves  only
that  the  possibility  of  a  serious  attack  on  the  fortress  had
been  regarded  as  absurd.  The  people,  however,  knew  that
the  Royalist  plotters  counted  on  the  fortress,  and  they  learned
from  inhabitants  of  the  quarter  that  ammunition  had  been
transferred  from  the  arsenal  to  the  Bastille  on  the  night  be-
tween the  1 2th  and  I3th.  They  perceived,  also,  that  the
Governor,  the  Marquis  de  Launey,  had  already  placed  his
cannon  in  position  on  the  morning  of  the  I4th,  so  that  the
people  could  be  fired  on  if  they  massed  themselves  in  the
direction  of  the  Hotel  de  Ville.

It  must  also  be  said  that  the  people  had  always  detested
prisons,  such  as  the  Bicetre,  the  donjon  of  Vincennes  and  the
Bastille.  During  the  riots  of  1783,  when  the  nobility  pro-
tested against  arbitrary  imprisonments,  the  minister  Breteuil
decided  to  abolish  incarceration  at  Vincennes.  This  famous
donjon  was  then  transformed  into  a  granary,  and  to  conciliate
public  opinion  Breteuil  permitted  visitors  to  inspect  the  terrible
oubliettes.  There  was  much  talk,  says  Droz,  about  the  horrors
that  were  to  be  seen  there,  and  of  course  it  was  also  said  that
in  the  Bastille  there  were  even  worse  things  to  be  seen.f

In  any  case,  it  is  certain  that  on  the  evening  of  the  I3th  some
musket  shots  were  being  exchanged  between  the  detachments
of  armed  Parisians,  who  passed  close  to  the  fortress  and  its

/  *  In  several  of  the  cahiers  the  electors  had  already  demanded  "  that
the  Bastille  be  pulled  down  and  destroyed  " — Cahiers  des  Halles  ;
also  those  of  Les  Mathurins,  Cordeliers,  Sepulcre,  &c.,  cited  by  Chassin
(Les  elections  et  les  cahiers  de  Paris,  vol.  ii.  p.  449  et  seq.).  The  electors
had  cause  for  their  demand,  as,  after  the  Reveillon  affair,  the  order
had  been  given  to  fortify  the  Bastille.  Therefore,  already  on  the
night  of  June  30  there  was  some  talk  of  seizing  this  fortress  (Recit  de
I'elargissement  .  .  .  des  gardes  franchises,  cited  by  Chassin.  p.  452
note).  >

\  Droz,  Histoire  de  Lewis  XVI..  vol.  i.  p.  41?.


80  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

defenders,  and  that  on  the  I4th,  from  the  earliest  hours  of  the
morning,  the  crowds,  more  or  less  armed,  who  had  been  moving
about  the  streets  all  through  the  preceding  night,  began  to
assemble  in  the  thoroughfares  which  led  to  the  Bastille.  Al-
ready during  the  night  the  rumour  ran  that  the  King's  troops
were  advancing  from  the  side  of  the  Barriere  du  Trone,  in  the
Faubourg  Saint- Antoine,  and  the  crowds  moved  off  eastwards
and  barricaded  the  streets  north-east  of  the  Hotel  de  Ville.

A  successful  attack  on  the  Hotel  des  Invalides  gave  the
people  an  opportunity  of  arming  themselves  and  provided
them  with  some  cannon.  Since  the  previous  day  middle-class
men,  delegated  by  their  districts,  had  been  calling  at  the  Hotel
des  Invalides  to  ask  for  arms,  saying  that  their  houses  were  in
danger  of  being  plundered  by  the  thieves,  and  Baron  de  Besen-
val,  who  commanded  the  royal  troops  in  Paris,  happening  to  be
at  the  Invalides,  promised  to  obtain  authorisation  for  this  from
Marshal  de  Broglie.  The  authorisation  had  not  yet  arrived
when,  on  the  I4th,  by  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning — the
pensioners,  commanded  by  Sombreuil,  being  at  their  guns  with
match  in  hand  ready  to  fire — a  mob  of  seven  or  eight  thousand
men  suddenly  poured  cut  of  the  three  neighbouring  streets  at  a
quick  pace.  Helping  one  another,  "  in  less  than  no  time  "  they
crossed  the  fosse,  eight  feet  in  depth  and  twelve  feet  wide,  which
surrounded  the  esplanade  of  the  Hotel  des  Invalides,  swarmed
over  the  esplanade  and  took  possession  of  twelve  pieces  of
cannon,  24.-,  18-  and  lo-pounders,  and  one  mortar.  The
garrison,  already  infected  with  a  "  seditious  spirit,"  made  no
defence,  and  the  mob,  spreading  everywhere,  soon  found  their
way  into  the  cellars  and  the  church,  where  they  discovered
32,000  muskets  concealed,  as  well  as  a  certain  quantity  of
powder.*  These  muskets  and  cannon  were  used  the  same  day
in  the  taking  of  the  Bastille.  As  to  the  powder,  on  the  previous
day  the  people  had  already  stopped  thirty-six  barrels  which
were  being  sent  to  Rouen  ;  these  had  been  carried  off  to  the
Hotel  de  Ville,  and  all  night  long  powder  had  been  distributed
to  the  people,  who  were  arming  themselves.

*  I  here  follow  the  letter  of  the  Count  de  Salmour,  as  well  as
Malhieu  Dumas,  both  quoted  by  M.  Flammermont.


THE  TAKING  OF  THE  BASTILLE  81

The  removal  of  the  guns  by  the  mob  from  the  Hotel  des
Invalides  was  done  very  slowly.  At  two  o'clock  in  the  after-
noon it  was  not  yet  completed.  There  would  therefore  have
been  quite  enough  time  to  bring  up  troops  and  disperse  the
people,  especially  as  infantry,  cavalry,  and  even  artillery  were
stationed  close  by  at  the  Military  School  and  in  the  Champ-de-
Mars.  But  the  officers  of  these  troops  did  not  trust  their
soldiers  ;  and  besides,  they  must  themselves  have  hesitated  when
they  were  confronted  with  this  innumerable  multitude,  com-
posed of  persons  of  every  age  and  every  condition,  of  which
more  than  200,000  had  flooded  the  streets  for  the  last  two  days.
The  people  of  the  faubourgs,  armed  with  a  few  muskets,  pikes,
hammers,  axes,  or  even  with  simple  cudgels,  were  moving
about  in  the  streets,  thronging  in  crowds  to  the  Place  Louis
XV.  (now  the  Place  de  la  Concorde)  surrounding  the  Hotel  de
Ville  and  the  Bastille,  and  filling  the  thoroughfares  between.
The  middle  classes  of  Paris  were  themselves  seized  with  terror
on  seeing  these  masses  of  armed  men  in  the  street.

Hearing  that  the  approaches  to  the  Bastille  were  invaded  by
the  people,  the  Permanent  Committee  at  the  Hotel  de  Ville,
of  which  mention  has  been  made,  sent  on  the  morning  of  the
1 4th  some  persons  to  parley  with  de  Launey,  the  Governor  of
the  fortress,  to  beg  him  to  withdraw  the  cannon  levelled  on
the  streets,  and  not  to  commit  any  act  hostile  to  the  people  ;  in
return,  the  Committee,  usurping  powers  they  did  not  possess,
promised  that  the  people  "  would  not  set  on  foot  any  vexatious
proceedings  against  the  place."  The  delegates  were  received
very  affably  by  the  Governor,  and  even  stayed  to  breakfast
with  him  until  nearly  midday.  De  Launey  was  probably
trying  to  gain  time  while  waiting  for  definite  orders  from  Ver-
sailles, which  did  not  come,  as  they  had  been  intercepted  in
the  morning  by  the  people.  Like  all  the  other  military  chiefs,
de  Launey  must  have  realised  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  him
to  stand  against  the  whole  people  of  Paris  assembled  in  the
streets,  and  so  he  temporised.  For  the  time  being  he  ordered
the  cannon  to  be  drawn  back  four  feet  and  closed  the  embrasures
with  wooden  planks,  so  that  the  people  should  not  see  through
them.


82  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

About  midday  the  district  of  Saint-Louis-la-Culture  on  its
own  account  sent  two  delegates  to  speak  in  its  name  to  the
Governor ;  one  of  them,  the  advocate  Thuriot  de  la  Rosiere,
obtained  from  the  Marquis  de  Launey  the  promise  that  he
would  not  give  the  order  to  fire  if  he  was  not  attacked.  Two
more  deputations  were  sent  to  the  Governor  by  the  Per-
manent Committee  at  one  and  three  o'clock ;  but  they  were
not  received.  Both  of  them  demanded  of  the  Governor  the
surrender  of  the  fortress  to  a  body  of  the  middle-class  militia,
which  would  guard  it  jointly  with  the  soldiers  and  the  Swiss.

Luckily,  all  these  compromises  were  baffled  by  the  people,
who  understood  that  the  Bastille  must  be  captured,  cost  what  it
might.  Being  in  possession  of  the  muskets  and  the  cannon  from
the  Hotel  des  Invalides,  their  enthusiasm  was  steadily  increasing.

The  mob  thronged  the  streets  adjacent  to  the  Bastille,  as  well
as  the  different  courtyards  which  surrounded  the  fortress  itself.
Presently  a  fusillade  began  between  the  people  and  the  soldiers
posted  on  the  ramparts.  Whilst  the  Permanent  Committee
were  striving  to  allay  the  ardour  of  the  assailants  and  making
arrangements  for  proclaiming  at  the  Place  de  la  Greve  that
de  Launey  had  promised  not  to  fire  if  they  refrained  from
attacking  him,  the  crowds,  shouting  "  We  want  the  Bastille !
Down  with  the  bridges !  "  rushed  towards  the  fortress.  It  is  said
that  on  seeing  from  the  top  of  the  walls  the  whole  Faubourg
Saint-Antoine  and  the  street  leading  to  it  quite  black  with
people  marching  against  the  Bastille,  the  Governor,  who  had
ascended  thither  with  Thuriot,  almost  swooned.  It  appears
even  that  he  was  on  the  point  of  surrendering  the  fortress
immediately  to  the  Committee  of  Militia,  but  that  the  Swiss
opposed  it.*

The  first  drawbridges  of  that  exterior  part  of  the  Bastille
which  was  called  the  Forecourt  (fAvancee)  were  soon  battered
down,  thanks  to  one  of  those  audacious  deeds  of  some  few
persons  who  are  always  forthcoming  at  such  moments.  Eight
or  ten  men,  with  the  help  of  a  tall,  strong  fellow,  Pannetier,  a
grocer,  took  advantage  of  a  house  that  was  built  against  the

*  Letter  of  De  Hue  to  his  brothers,  German  text,  quoted  by  Flammer-
mont,  p.  cxcviii.  note,


THE  TAKING  OF  THE  BASTILLE  83

exterior  wall  of  the  Forecourt  to  climb  this  wall,  astride  of  which
they  moved  along  as  far  as  a  guard-house  standing  close  to  the
little  drawbridge  of  the  Forecourt,  and  thence  they  leaped
into  the  first  court  of  the  Bastille  proper,  the  Government
Court  in  which  was  the  Governor's  house.  This  court  was
unoccupied,  the  soldiers  having  retreated  with  de  Launey
into  the  fortress  itself,  after  the  departure  of  Thuriot.

The  eight  or  ten  men,  having  dropped  into  this  courtyard,
with  a  few  blows  of  an  axe  lowered  first  the  little  draw-
bridge of  the  Forecourt  and  opened  its  gate,  and  after-
wards the  larger  one.  More  than  three  hundred  men  then
rushed  into  the  Government  Court,  and  ran  to  the  other  two
drawbridges,  the  greater  and  the  lesser,  which,  when  lowered,
served  to  cross  the  wide  fosse  of  the  actual  fortress.  These
two  bridges,  of  course,  had  been  raised.

Here  took  place  the  incident  which  wrought  the  fury  of  the
people  of  Paris  to  its  full  pitch,  and  afterwards  cost  de  Launey
his  life.  When  the  crowd  thronged  into  the  Government
Court,  the  defenders  of  the  Bastille  began  to  fire  upon  them,
and  there  was  even  an  attempt  to  raise  the  great  drawbridge
of  the  Forecourt,  so  as  to  prevent  the  crowd  from  leaving
the  Government  Court  and  obviously  with  the  intention  of
either  imprisoning  or  massacring  them.*  Thus,  at  the  very
moment  when  Thuriot  and  Corny  were  announcing  to  the
people  in  the  Place  de  la  Greve  that  the  Governor  had  promised
not  to  fire,  the  Government  Court  was  being  swept  by  the
musketry  of  the  soldiers  posted  upon  the  ramparts,  and  the
guns  of  the  Bastille  began  to  hurl  cannon-balls  into  the  adjoin-
ing streets.  After  all  the  parleying  which  had  taken  place  that
morning,  this  opening  fire  upon  the  people  was  evidently  inter-
preted as  an  act  of  treason  on  the  part  of  De  Launay,  whom
the  people  accused  of  having  lowered  the  two  first  drawbridges

*  This  attempt  was  made,  it  is  now  said,  not  by  order  of  de  Launey,
but  spontaneously  by  some  soldiers,  who  had  gone  out  to  buy  pro-
visions and  were  returning.  A  highly  improbable  thing,  it  seems  to
me,  for  three  or  four  soldiers  to  attempt,  isolated  as  they  were,  in
the  midst  of  that  crowd.  Besides,  what  would  have  been  the  good  of
imprisoning  the  crowd  if  it  was  not  intended  to  use  the  prisoners  as
hostages  against  the  people  ?


84  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

of  the  Forecourt,  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  the  mob  under
the  fire  from  the  ramparts.*

It  was  then  about  one  o'clock.  The  news  that  the  cannon
of  the  Bastille  were  firing  on  the  people  spread  through  Paris
and  produced  a  two-fold  effect.  The  Permanent  Committee
of  the  Paris  militia  hastened  to  send  another  deputation  to  the
Commandant,  to  ask  him  if  he  would  receive  there  a  detachment
of  militia  who  would  guard  the  Bastille  jointly  with  the  troops.
But  this  deputation  never  reached  the  Commandant,  for  a
close  fusillade  was  going  on  all  the  time  between  the  soldiers
and  their  assailants,  who,  crouched  along  some  of  the  walls,
were  firing  at  the  soldiers  serving  the  guns.  Besides,  the
people  knew  that  the  deputations  from  the  Committee  would
only  throw  cold  water  on  the  attack.  "  It  is  no  longer  a  depu-
tation they  want ;  it  is  the  siege  of  the  Bastille  ;  it  is  the
destruction  of  this  horrible  prison  ;  it  is  the  death  of  the
Governor  for  which  they  are  loudly  clamouring  " — reported
the  deputies  when  they  returned.

This  did  not  prevent  the  Committee  at  the  Hotel  de  Ville
from  sending  a  third  deputation.  M.  Ethis  de  Corny,  Pro-
cureur  of  the  King  and  of  the  town,  and  several  citizens  were
charged  once  more  to  allay  the  people's  ardour,  to  check  the
assault,  and  to  parley  with  de  Launey,  for  the  purpose  of
persuading  him  to  receive  a  guard  from  the  Committee  into  the
fortress.  The  intention  of  preventing  the  people  taking
possession  of  the  Bastille  was  evident ,f

*  Various  explanations  have  been  given  of  this  sudden  opening  of
hostilities.  As  the  people  who  had  thronged  into  the  Court  de  1'Orme
and  the  Government  Court  began  to  plunder  the  Commandant's  house
and  those  of  the  soldiers'  quarters,  it  was  said  that  this  had  decided
the  defenders  of  the  Bastille  to  open  fire.  For  the  military,  however,
the  taking  of  the  Forecourt  by  assault,  which  gave  the  people  access
to  the  drawbridges  of  the  fortress  and  even  to  the  gates,  was  quite
sufficient  reason.  But  it  is  also  possible  that  the  order  to  defend  the
Bastille  to  the  last  was  at  that  moment  transmitted  to  de  Launey.
We  know  that  one  order  was  intercepted,  which  does  not  prove  that
no  other  was  delivered.  It  is,  in  fact,  supposed  that  de  Launey  had
received  this  order.

f  "  They  were  charged  to  induce  all  persons  found  near  the  Bastille
to  withdraw  to  their  respective  districts  in  order  that  they  might  there  be
at  once  admitted  into  the  Paris  militia  ;  to  remind  de  Launey  of  the
promises  he  had  made  to  M.  Thuriot  de  la  Roziere  and  to  M.  Bellon  .  .  ."


THE  TAKING  OF  THE  BASTILLE  85

As  to  the  people,  as  soon  as  the  news  of  the  firing  spread
through  the  town,  they  acted  without  any  one's  orders,  guided
by  their  revolutionary  instinct.  They  dragged  the  cannon
which  they  had  taken  from  the  Hotel  des  Invalides  to  the
Hotel  de  Ville,  and  about  three  o'clock,  when  Corny's  depu-
tation was  returning  to  report  their  failure,  they  met  about
three  hundred  French  Guards,  and  a  number  of  armed  men
belonging  to  the  middle  class  under  the  command  of  an  old
soldier  named  Hulin,  marching  to  the  Bastille,  followed  by
five  pieces  of  artillery.  The  firing  by  this  time  had  been  going
on  for  more  than  three  hours.  The  people,  not  in  the  least
dismayed  by  the  great  number  killed  and  wounded,*  were
maintaining  the  siege  by  resorting  to  various  expedients.  One
of  these  was  the  bringing  up  of  two  cartloads  of  straw,  to  which
they  set  fire,  using  the  smoke  as  a  screen  to  facilitate  their
attack  on  the  two  entrances,  the  greater  and  lesser  drawbridges.
The  buildings  of  the  Government  Court  were  already  in  flames.

The  cannon  arrived  just  at  the  moment  they  were  wanted.
They  were  drawn  into  the  Government  Court  and  planted  in
front  of  the  drawbridges  and  gates  at  a  distance  of  only  90  feet.

It  is  easy  to  imagine  the  effect  that  these  cannon  in  the  hands
of  the  people  must  have  produced  on  the  besieged.  It  was
evident  that  the  drawbridges  must  soon  go  down,  and  that  the
gates  would  be  burst  open.  The  mob  became  still  more
threatening  and  was  continually  increasing  in  numbers.

The  moment  soon  came  when  the  defenders  realised  that  to
resist  any  longer  was  to  doom  themselves  to  certain  destruction,
de  Launey  decided  to  capitulate.  The  soldiers,  seeing  that

(Flammermont,  loc.  cit.,  p.  clviii.).  Having  entered  the  Forecouit,
which  was  full  of  people  armed  with  muskets,  axes,  &c.,  the  deputation
spoke  to  the  soldiers  on  the  walls.  These  latter  demanded  that  the
people  should  »first  withdraw  from  the  Government  Court,  whereupon
the  deputation  tried  to  induce  the  people  to  do  so  (cf.  Boucheron,  cited
by  Flammermont,  p.  ccxiv.  note).  Fortunately  the  people  were  wise
enough  not  to  comply  with  their  wishes.  They  continued  the  assault.
They  understood  so  well  that  it  was  no  longer  any  time  for  parleying,
that  they  treated  the  gentlemen  of  the  deputation  rather  badly,  and
even  talked  of  killing  them  as  traitors  (loc.  cit.t  p.  ccxvi.  note,  and
Proems-verbal  des  electeurs).

*  Eighty-three  killed  on  the  spot,  fifteen  dead  of  their  wounds,
thirteen  disabled  and  sixty  injured.


86 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

they  would  never  get  the  better  of  the  whole  of  Paris  which  was
coming  to  besiege  them,  had  some  time  before  advised  capitu-
lation, and  so  about  four  o'clock,  or  between  four  and  five,  the
Governor  ordered  the  white  flag  to  be  hoisted  and  the  drums
to  beat  the  chamade  (the  order  to  cease  fire),  and  descend  from
the  battlements.

The  garrison  capitulated  and  demanded  the  right  of  march-
ing out  with  their  arms.  It  may  be  that  Hulin  and  Elie,  stand-
ing close  to  the  great  drawbridge,  would  have  agreed  to  these
terms  in  the  name  of  the  people  ;  but  the  people  would  have
none  of  them.  A  furious  cry  of  "  Down  with  the  bridges !  "
was  raised.  At  five  o'clock,  therefore,  the  Commandant  passed
out  through  one  of  the  loopholes  near  the  lesser  drawbridge  a
note  in  which  it  was  said,  "  We  have  twenty-thousand-weight
of  gunpowder  ;  we  shall  blow  up  the  whole  quarter,  with  the
garrison,  if  you  do  not  accept  the  terms  of  capitulation."
However,  even  if  de  Launey  thought  of  so  doing,  the  garrison
would  never  have  permitted  him  to  put  this  threat  into  effect.
At  any  rate,  the  fact  is  that  de  Launey  himself  gave  up  the  key
that  opened  the  entrance  of  the  lesser  drawbridge.

Immediately,  the  mass  of  the  besiegers  took  possession  of  the
fortress.  They  disarmed  the  Swiss  and  the  Invalides,  and
seized  de  Launey,  who  was  dragged  towards  the  Hotel  de  Ville.
On  the  way  the  mob,  furious  at  his  treachery,  heaped  every
kind  of  insult  on  him  ;  twenty  times  he  was  nearly  killed,  despite
the  heroic  efforts  of  Cholat  and  another.*  These  two  men
protected  him  with  their  own  bodies,  but,  when  only  a  hundred
steps  from  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  he  was  dragged  out  of  their  hands
and  decapitated.  De  Hue,  the  Commandant  of  the  Swiss,
saved  his  life  by  declaring  that  he  was  devoted  to  the  Town  and
the  Nation,  and  by  drinking  to  them,  but  three  officers  of  the
Bastille  staff  and  three  soldiers  were  slain.  As  to  Flesselles,
the  Provost  of  the  Merchants,  who  was  in  correspondence  with
Besenval  and  the  Duchess  de  Polignac,  and  who  had,  as
appears  by  a  passage  in  one  of  his  letters,  many  other  secrets  to
hide  that  were  very  compromising  for  the  Queen,  the  people

*  Was  not  this  other  Maillard  ?  We  know  that  it  was  he  who
arrested  de  Launey.


THE  TAKING  OF  THE  BASTILLE  87

were  about  to  execute  him  when  an  unknown  man  shot  him
dead.  Did  this  unknown  man  think  that  dead  men  tell  no
tales  ?

As  soon  as  the  bridges  of  the  Bastille  had  been  lowered  the
crowd  rushed  into  the  courtyards  and  began  to  search  the
fortress  and  free  the  prisoners  entombed  in  the  oubliettes.
There  was  great  emotion,  and  tears  were  shed  at  the  sight  of
the  phantoms  who  issued  from  their  cells,  bewildered  by  the
light  of  the  sun  and  by  the  sound  of  the  many  voices  that
welcomed  them.  These  poor  martyrs  of  royal  despotism  were
carried  in  triumph  by  the  people  through  the  streets  of  Paris.
The  whole  town  was  soon  delirious  with  joy  on  hearing  that  the
Bastille  was  in  the  hands  of  the  people,  and  their  determination
to  keep  their  conquest  was  redoubled.  The  coup  d  9etat  of  the
Court  had  failed.

In  this  way  the  Revolution  began.  The  people  had  won
their  first  victory.  A  material  victory  of  this  kind  was  essential.
It  was  necessary  that  the  Revolution  should  endure  a  struggle
and  come  out  from  it  triumphant.  Some  proof  of  the  strength
of  the  people  had  to  be  given,  so  as  to  impress  their  enemies,
to  arouse  courage  throughout  France,  and  to  push  forward
everywhere  towards  revolt,  towards  the  conquest  of  liberty.


CHAPTER  XIII

THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  JULY  14  AT
VERSAILLES

Ftte  at  Versailles— State  of  Court— Conduct  of  people —
Middle  classes — King  visits  Paris — His  plans  of  armed  resist-
ance come  to  nothing — Insurrection  in  Paris  spreads — Emi-
gration of  nobles — Foulon  and  others  put  to  death

WHEN  a  revolution  has  once  begun,  each  event  in  it  not  merely
sums  up  the  events  hitherto  accomplished  ;  it  also  contains
the  chief  elements  of  what  is  to  come  ;  so  that  the  contem-
poraries of  the  French  Revolution,  if  they  could  only  have
freed  themselves  from  the  momentary  impressions,  and  separated
the  essential  from  the  accidental,  might  have  been  able,  on  the
morrow  of  July  14,  to  foresee  whither  events  as  a  whole  were
thenceforth  trending.

But  even  on  the  evening  of  the  I3th,  the  Court  attached  no
importance  to  the  movement  in  Paris.

That  evening  there  was  a  fete  at  Versailles.  There  was
dancing  in  the  Orangery,  and  glasses  were  filled  to  drink  to  the
coming  victory  over  the  rebellious  capital ;  and  the  Queen,
her  friend  the  Duchess  de  Polignac  and  the  rest  of  the  Court
beauties,  with  the  princes  and  princesses,  were  lavishing
favours  on  the  foreign  soldiers  in  their  barracks  to  stimulate
them  for  the  coming  fight.*  In  their  madness  and  terrible
frivolity,  no  one  in  that  world  of  shams  and  conventional  lies,
which  constitute  every  Court,  perceived  that  it  was  too  late  to
attack  Paris,  that  the  opportunity  for  doing  so  was  lost.  And

*  Mirabeau,  in  his  speech  before  the  Assembly,  which  resumed  its
sitting  on  the  i$th  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  spoke  as  if  this
f&te  had  taken  place  the  day  before.  He  was  alluding,  however,  to
the  ftte  of  the  I3th.

88


THE  CONSEQUENCES  AT  VERSAILLES 89

Louis  XVI.  was  no  better  informed  on  the  matter  than  the
Queen  and  the  princes.  When  the  Assembly,  alarmed  by  the
people's  rising,  hurried  to  him  on  the  evening  of  the  I4th,  to  beg
him  in  servile  language  to  recall  the  ministers  and  send  away  the
troops,  he  replied  to  them  in  the  language  of  a  master  certain
of  victory.  He  believed  in  the  plan  that  had  been  suggested
to  him  of  putting  some  reliable  officers  at  the  head  of  the
middle-class  militia  and  crushing  the  people  with  their  help,
after  which  he  would  content  himself  with  sending  some
equivocal  orders  about  the  retirement  of  the  troops.  Such  was
that  world  of  shams,  of  dreams  more  than  of  reality,  in  which
both  King  and  Court  lived,  and  in  which,  in  spite  of  brief
intervals  of  awakening,  they  continued  to  live  up  to  the
moment  of  ascending  the  steps  of  the  scaffold.

How  clearly  they  were  revealing  their  characters  even  then  !
The  King  hypnotised  by  his  absolute  power,  and  always  ready
on  account  of  it  to  take  exactly  the  step  which  was  to  lead  him
to  the  catastrophe.  Then  he  would  oppose  to  events  inertia —
nothing  but  inertia,  and  finally  yield,  for  form's  sake,  just  at  the
moment  when  he  was  expected  to  resist  obstinately.  The
Queen,  too,  corrupt,  depraved  to  the  very  heart  as  absolute
sovereign,  hastening  the  catastrophe  by  her  petulant  resistance,
and  then  suddenly  yielding  the  next  moment,  only  to  resume,
an  instant  after,  the  childish  tricks  of  a  courtesan.  And  the
princes  ?  Instigators  of  all  the  most  fatal  resolutions  taken
by  the  King,  and  cowards  at  the  very  first  failures  of  them,
they  left  the  country,  flying  immediately  after  the  taking  of  the
Bastille  to  resume  their  plottings  in  Germany  or  Italy.  How
clearly  all  these  traits  of  character  were  revealed  in  those  few
days  between  July  8  and  15.

On  the  opposite  side  we  see  the  people,  filled  with  ardour,
enthusiasm  and  generosity,  ready  to  let  themselves  be  massacred
that  Liberty  might  triumph,  but  at  the  same  time  asking  to
be  led  ;  ready  to  allow  themselves  to  be  governed  by  the  new
masters,  who  had  just  installed  themselves  in  the  Hotel  de  Ville.
Understanding  so  well  the  Court  schemes,  and  seeing  with  the
utmost  clearness  through  the  plot  which  had  been  growing  into
shape  ever  since  the  end  of  June,  they  allowed  themselves  to  be


90  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

entangled  in  the  new  plot — the  plot  of  the  propertied  classes,
who  were  soon  to  thrust  back  into  their  slums  the  hungry
people,  "  the  men  with  the  pikes  "  to  whom  they  had  appealed
for  a  few  hours,  when  it  was  necessary  to  set  the  force  of  popular
insurrection  against  that  of  the  army.

And  finally,  when  we  consider  the  conduct  of  the  middle
classes  during  these  early  days,  we  see  already  foreshadowed
the  great  dramas  of  the  Revolution  which  were  to  come.  On
the  I4th,  in  proportion  as  Royalty  gradually  lost  its  menacing
character,  it  was  the  people  who,  in  a  corresponding  degree,
inspired  terror  in  the  representatives  of  the  Third  Estate
assembled  at  Versailles.  In  spite  of  the  vehement  words
uttered  by  Mirabeau  concerning  the  jete  at  the  Orangery,
the  King  had  only  to  present  himself  before  the  Assembly,
recognise  the  authority  of  the  delegates,  and  promise  them
inviolability,  for  the  whole  of  the  representatives  to  burst  into
applause  and  transports  of  joy.  They  even  ran  out  to  form  a
guard  of  honour  round  him  in  the  streets,  and  made  the  streets
of  Versailles  resound  with  cries  of  "  Vive  le  Roi  I  "  And  this  at
the  very  moment  when  the  people  were  being  massacred  in
Paris  in  the  name  of  this  same  King,  and  while  at  Versailles
the  crowd  was  insulting  the  Queen  and  the  Duchess  de  Polignac,
and  the  people  were  asking  themselves  if  the  King  was  not  at
one  of  his  old  tricks.

In  Paris  the  people  were  not  deceived  by  the  promise  to
withdraw  the  troops.  They  did  not  believe  a  word  of  it.
They  preferred  to  organise  themselves  in  a  huge  insurgent  com-
mune, and  this  commune,  like  a  commune  of  the  Middle  Ages,
took  all  the  necessary  measures  of  defence  against  the  King.
The  streets  were  torn  up  in  trenches  and  barricades,  and  the
people's  patrols  marched  through  the  town,  ready  to  sound  the
tocsin  at  the  first  alarm.

Nor  did  the  King's  visit  to  Paris  greatly  reassure  the  people.
Seeing  himself  defeated  and  abandoned,  he  decided  to  go  to
Paris,  and  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  to  be  reconciled  with  his  capital,
and  the  middle  classes  tried  to  turn  this  visit  into  a  striking  act
of  reconciliation  between  themselves  and  the  King.  The
middle-class  revolutionaries,  of  whom  very  many  belonged  to


THE  CONSEQUENCES  AT  VERSAILLES 91

the  Freemasons,  made  an  "  arch  of  steel  "  with  their  swords  for
the  King  on  his  arrival  at  the  Hotel  de  Ville  ;  and  Bailly,
elected  Mayor  of  Paris,  fastened  in  the  King's  hat  the  tricolour
cockade.  There  was  talk  even  of  erecting  a  statue  to  Louis  XVI.
on  the  site  of  the  demolished  Bastille,  but  the  mass  of  the  people
preserved  an  attitude  of  reserve  and  mistrust,  which  were  not
dispelled  even  after  the  visit  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville.  King  of
the  middle  classes  as  much  as  they  liked,  but  not  a  King  of  the
people.

The  Court,  for  its  part,  knew  very  well  that  after  the  in-
surrection of  July  14  there  would  never  be  peace  between
royalty  and  the  people.  They  induced  the  Duchess  de  Polignac
to  leave  for  Switzerland,  despite  the  tears  of  Marie-Antoinette,
and  the  following  day  the  princes  began  to  emigrate.  Those
who  had  been  the  life  and  soul  of  the  defeated  coup  d'etat
made  haste  to  leave  France.  The  Count  d'Artois  escaped  in
the  night,  and  so  much  was  he  in  fear  for  his  life  that,  after
stealing  secretly  through  the  town,  he  took  a  regiment  and  two
cannon  for  escort  the  rest  of  the  way.  The  King  promised  to
rejoin  his  dear  emigrants  at  the  first  opportunity,  and  began  to
make  plans  of  escaping  abroad,  in  order  to  re-enter  France  at
the  head  of  an  army.

In  fact,  on  July  16,  all  was  ready  for  his  departure.  He  was
to  go  to  Metz,  place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  troops,  and
march  on  Paris.  The  horses  were  already  put  to  the  carriage
which  were  to  convey  Louis  XVI.  to  the  army,  then  concentrated
between  Versailles  and  the  frontier.  But  de  Broglie  refused  to
escort  the  King  to  Metz,  and  the  princes  were  in  too  great  a
hurry  to  be  off,  so  that  the  King,  as  he  said  himself  afterwards,
seeing  himself  abandoned  by  the  princes  and  the  nobles,
relinquished  his  project  of  an  armed  resistance,  which  the
history  of  Charles  I.  had  suggested  to  him,  and  went  to  Paris
to  make  his  submission  instead.

Some  Royalist  historians  have  tried  to  cast  a  doubt  on  the
preparation  by  the  Court  of  a  coup  d'etat  against  the  Assembly
and  Paris.  But  there  are  plenty  of  documents  to  prove  the
reality  of  the  plot.  Mignet,  whose  moderation  is  well  known,
and  who  had  the  advantage  of  writing  soon  after  the  events,  had


92  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

not  the  slightest  doubt  on  this  point,  and  later  researches  have
confirmed  his  position.  On  July  13,  the  King  was  to  have  re-
vived the  declaration  of  June  23,  and  the  Assembly  was  to  have
been  dissolved.  Forty  thousand  copies  of  this  declaration
were  already  printed  for  sending  throughout  France.  The
commander  of  the  army  massed  between  Versailles  and  Paris
had  been  given  unlimited  powers  for  the  massacre  of  the  people
of  Paris  and  for  extreme  measures  against  the  Assembly  in  case
of  resistance.

A  hundred  million  of  State  notes  had  been  manufactured  to
provide  for  the  needs  of  the  Court.  Everything  was  ready,
and  when  they  heard  that  Paris  had  risen,  the  Court  considered
this  rising  as  an  outbreak  which  aided  their  plans.  A  little
later  on,  when  it  was  known  that  the  insurrection  was  spread-
ing, the  King  was  still  on  the  point  of  setting  out  and  leaving
to  his  ministers  the  task  of  dispersing  the  Assembly  with  the
help  of  foreign  troops.  It  was  the  ministers  who  dared  not  put
this  plan  into  execution  when  they  saw  the  tide  rising.  This
is  why  so  great  a  panic  seized  the  Court  after  July  14,  when
they  heard  of  the  taking  of  the  Bastille  and  the  execution  of
de  Launey,  and  why  the  Duchess  de  Polignac,  the  princes,
and  so  many  other  nobles,  who  had  been  the  leading  spirits
of  the  plot,  afraid  of  being  denounced,  had  to  emigrate  in  a
hurry.

But  the  people  were  on  the  alert.  They  vaguely  under-
stood what  the  emigrants  were  going  to  seek  on  the  other  side
of  the  frontier,  and  the  peasants  arrested  the  fugitives,  among
whom  were  Foulon  and  Berthier.

We  have  already  made  mention  of  the  misery  which  reigned
in  Paris  and  the  environs,  and  of  the  monopolists,  into  whose
crimes  the  Assembly  refused  to  inquire  too  closely.  The  chief
of  these  speculators  in  the  people's  misery  was  said  to  be  Foulon,
who  had  made  an  immense  fortune  as  financier  and  in  his  posi-
tion as  contractor  for  the  army  and  navy.  His  detestation  of
the  people  and  the  revolution  was  also  well  known.  Broglie
wanted  him  to  be  minister  when  he  was  preparing  the  coup
d'etat  for  July  1 6,  and  if  the  crafty  financier  refused  this  post,
he  had  not  been  sparing  of  his  counsel.  His  advice  was  to  get


THE  CONSEQUENCES  AT  VERSAILLES 93

rid,  at  one  blow,  of  all  those  who  had  acquired  influence  in  the
revolutionary  camp.

After  the  taking  of  the  Bastille,  when  he  learned  how  de
Launey's  head  had  been  carried  through  the  streets,  he  knew
that  it  was  best  for  him  to  follow  the  princes  and  emigrate ;
but  as  this  was  not  an  easy  thing  to  do,  owing  to  the  watchfulness
of  the  District  Commune,  he  took  advantage  of  the  death  of  one
of  his  servants  to  pretend  that  he  was  dead  and  buried,  while  he
quitted  Paris  and  took  refuge  in  a  friend's  house  at  Fontaine-
bleau.

There  he  was  discovered  and  arrested  by  the  peasants,  who
avenged  their  long  endurance  of  misery  upon  him.  With  a
bundle  of  grass  tied  on  his  shoulders,  in  allusion  to  the  grass  he
had  promised  to  make  the  people  of  Paris  eat,  the  wretched
monopolist  was  dragged  to  Paris  by  an  infuriated  crowd.  At
the  Hotel  de  Ville  Lafayette  tried  to  save  him,  but  the  angry
people  hanged  him  on  a  lamp-iron.

His  son-in-law,  Berthier,  equally  guilty  in  the  coup  d'etat,
and  contractor  for  the  Duke  de  Broglie's  army,  was  arrested  at
Compiegne  and  also  dragged  to  Paris,  where  they  were  going  to
hang  him  likewise,  but,  struggling  to  save  himself,  he  was  over-
powered and  trampled  to  death.

Other  guilty  individuals  who  were  on  the  way  to  foreign
lands  were  arrested  in  the  north  and  north-east  and  brought
back  to  Paris.

The  terror  excited  in  the  breasts  of  the  Court's  familiar
friends  by  these  executions  on  the  people's  side  can  easily  be
imagined.  Their  pride  and  their  resistance  to  the  Revolution
were  shattered  ;  they  wished  only  to  be  forgotten.


.


CHAPTER  XIV
THE  POPULAR  RISINGS

Necessity  of  popular  risings  outside  Paris — Effect  of  taking
of  Bastille  over-estimated — Difference  between  French  and
English  peasant  risings — Importance  of  peasant  insurrection

PARIS,  by  frustrating  the  plans  of  the  Court,  had  struck  a
mortal  blow  at  royal  authority.  Besides  this,  the  appearance
in  the  streets  of  people  in  rags,  as  an  active  force  in  the  Revo-
lution, was  giving  a  new  character,  a  new  tendency  of  equality
to  the  whole  movement.  The  rich  and  powerful  understood
perfectly  the  meaning  of  what  had  been  going  on  in  Paris
during  those  days,  and  the  emigration,  first  of  the  princes,
then  of  the  favourites  and  the  monopolists,  accentuated  the
victory.  The  Court  was  already  seeking  the  aid  of  the  foreigner
against  revolutionary  France.  /

If,  however,  the  insurrection  had  been  confined  to  the
capital,  the  Revolution  could  never  have  developed  to  the
extent  of  resulting  in  the  demolition  of  ancient  privileges.
The  insurrection  at  the  centre  had  been  necessary  to  strike
at  the  central  Government,  to  shake  it  down,  to  demoralise
its  defenders.  But  to  destroy  the  power  of  the  Government
in  the  provinces,  to  strike  at  the  old  regime  through  its  govern-
mental prerogatives  and  its  economic  privileges,  a  widespread
rising  of  the  people  was  necessary  in  cities,  towns  and  villages.
This  is  exactly  what  came  about  in  the  course  of  July  throughout
the  length  and  breadth  of  France.

The  historians,  who  all,  whether  consciously  or  not,  have
followed  very  closely  the  Deux  amis  de  la  liberte,  have  generally
represented  this  movement  of  the  towns  and  rural  districts  as  a
result  of  the  taking  of  the  Bastille.  The  news  of  this  success

94


THE  POPULAR  RISINGS  95

is  supposed  to  have  roused  the  country  parts.  The  chateaux
were  burned,  and  this  rising  of  the  peasants  diffused  so  much
terror  that  the  nobles  and  clergy  abdicated  their  feudal  rights
on  August  4.

This  version  is,  however,  only  half  true.  As  far  as  the  towns
are  concerned,  it  is  correct  that  a  great  number  of  urban  risings
took  place  under  the  influence  of  the  taking  of  the  Bastille.
Some  of  them,  as  at  Troyes  on  July  18,  at  Strasbourg  on  the
I9th,  at  Cherbourg  on  the  2ist,  at  Rouen  on  the  24th,  and  at
Maubeuge  on  the  27th,  followed  close  upon  the  Paris  in-
surrection, whilst  the  others  went  on  during  the  next  three  or
four  months,  until  the  National  Assembly  had  voted  the
municipal  law  of  December  14,  1789,  which  legalised  the
constitution  of  a  democratic  middle-class  municipal  govern-
ment to  a  considerable  extent  independent  of  the  Central
Government.

With  regard  to  the  peasants,  it  is  clear  that  with  the  then
existing  slowness  of  communications,  the  space  of  twenty
days  which  passed  between  July  14  and  August  4  are  absolutely
insufficient  to  account  for  the  effect  of  the  taking  of  the
Bastille  on  the  rural  districts  and  the  subsequent  effect  of
the  peasants'  insurrection  on  the  decisions  of  the  National
Assembly.  In  fact,  to  picture  events  in  such  a  fashion  is  to
belittle  the  profound  importance  of  the  movement  in  the
country.

^The  insurrection  of  the  peasants  for  the  abolition  of  the
feudal  rights  and  the  recovery  of  the  communal  lands  which
had  been  taken  away  from  the  village  communes,  since  the
seventeenth  century,  by  the  lords,  lay  and  ecclesiastical,  is  the
very  essence,  the  foundation  of  the  great  Revolution.  Upon
it  the  struggle  of  the  middle  classes  for  their  political  rights
was  developed.  Without  it  the  Revolution  would  never  have
been  so  thorough  as  it  was  in  France.  The  great  rising  of  the
rural  districts  which  began  after  the  January  of  1789,  even  in
1788,  and  lasted  five  years,  was  what  enabled  the  Revolution  to
accomplish  the  immense  work  of  demolition  which  we  owe  to  it.
It  was  this  that  impelled  the  Revolution  to  set  up  the  first
landmarks  of  a  system  of  equality,  to  develop  in  France  the


96 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

republican  spirit,  which  since  then  nothing  has  been  able  to
suppress,  to  proclaim  the  great  principles  of  agrarian  com-
munism, that  we  shall  see  emerging  in  1793.  This  rising,  in  fact,
is  what  gives  the  true  character  to  the  French  Revolution,
and  distinguishes  it  radically  from  the  Revolution  of  1648-
1657  in  England.)

There,  too,  in  the  course  of  those  nine  years,  the  middle
classes  broke  down  the  absolute  power  of  royalty  and  the
political  privileges  of  the  Court  party.  But  beyond  that,
the  distinctive  features  of  the  English  revolution  was  the
struggle  for  the  right  of  each  individual  to  profess  whatever
religion  he  pleased,  to  interpret  the  Bible  according  to  his
personal  conception  of  it,  to  choose  his  own  pastors — in  a  word,
the  right  of  the  individual  to  the  intellectual  and  religious
development  best  suited  to  him.  Further,  it  claimed  the
right  of  each  parish,  and,  as  a  consequence,  of  the  townships,
to  autonomy.  But  the  peasant  risings  in  England  did  not
aim  so  generally,  as  in  France,  at  the  abolishing  of  feudal
dues  and  tithes,  or  the  recovery  of  the  communal  lands.  And
if  Cromwell's  hosts  demolished  a  certain  number  of  castles
which  represented  true  strongholds  of  feudalism,  these  hosts
unfortunately  did  not  attack  either  the  feudal  pretensions
of  the  lords  over  the  land,  or  even  the  right  of  feudal  justice,
which  the  lords  exercised  over  their  tenants.  What  the
English  revolution  did  was  to  conquer  some  precious  rights
for  the  individual,  but  it  did  not  destroy  the  feudal  power  of
the  lord,  it  merely  modified  it  whilst  preserving  his  rights
over  the  land,  rights  which  persist  to  this  day.

The  English  revolution  undoubtedly  established  the
political  power  of  the  middle  classes,  but  this  power  was  only
obtained  by  sharing  it  with  the  landed  aristocracy.  And  if
the  revolution  gave  the  English  middle  classes  a  prosperous
era  for  their  trade  and  commerce,  this  prosperity  was  obtained
on  the  condition  that  the  middle  classes  should  not  profit  by
it  to  attack  the  landed  privileges  of  the  nobility.  On  the
contrary,  the  middle  classes  helped  to  increase  these  privileges,
at  least  in  value.  They  helped  the  nobility  to  take  legal
possession  of  the  communal  lands  by  means  of  the  Enclosure


THE  POPULAR  RISINGS  97

Acts,  which  reduced  the  agricultural  population  to  misery,
placed  them  at  the  mercy  of  the  landowners,  and  forced  a
great  number  of  them  to  migrate  to  the  towns,  where,  as
proletarians,  they  were  delivered  over  to  the  mercy  of  the
middle-class  manufacturers.  The  English  middle  classes  also
helped  the  nobility  to  make  of  their  immense  landed  estates
sources,  not  only  of  revenue  often  fabulous,  but  also  of  political
and  local  juridical  power,  by  re-establishing  under  new  forms
the  right  of  manorial  justice.  They  helped  also  to  increase
their  revenues  tenfold  by  allowing  them  through  the  land
laws,  which  hamper  the  sale  of  estates,  to  monopolise  the  land,
the  need  of  which  was  making  itself  felt  more  and  more
among  a  population  whose  trade  and  commerce  were  steadily
increasing.

/  We  now  know  that  the  French  middle  classes,  especially  the
upper  middle  classes  engaged  in  manufactures  and  commerce,
wished  to  imitate  the  English  middle  classes  in  their  revolution.
They,  too,  would  have  willingly  entered  into  a  compact  with
both  royalty  and  nobility  in  order  to  attain  to  power.  But
they  did  not  succeed  in  this,  because  the  basis  of  the  French
Revolution  was  fortunately  much  broader  than  that  of  the
revolution  in  England.  In  France  the  movement  was  not
merely  an  insurrection  to  win  religious  liberty,  or  even  com-
mercial and  industrial  liberty  for  the  individual,  or  yet  to
constitute  municipal  authority  in  the  hands  of  a  few  middle-
class  men.  It  was  above  all  a  peasant  insurrection,  a  move-
ment of  the  people  to  regain  possession  of  the  land  and  to
free  it  from  the  feudal  obligations  which  burdened  it,  and
while  there  was  all  through  it  a  powerful  individualist  element
— the  desire  to  possess  land  individually — there  was  also  the
communist  element,  the  right  of  the  whole  nation  to  the
land — a  right  which  we  shall  see  proclaimed  loudly  by  the
poorer  classes  in  1793.)

This  is  why  it  would  be  a  strange  reduction  of  the  importance
of  the  agrarian  insurrection  in  the  summer  of  1789  to  represent
it  as  an  episode  of  brief  duration  brought  about  by  enthusiasm
over  the  taking  of  the  Bastille.


CHAPTER  XV
THE  TOWNS

Condition  of  municipal  institutions — Feudal  rights  still  exist
— Need  of  municipal  reform — Townspeople  revolt — New  muni-
cipality voted — Importance  of  communalist  movement —
Paris  Commune — Other  cities  follow — Troubles  at  Strasbourg
— New  corporation  constituted — Middle  classes  freed  from
feudalism — Riots  in  Troyes,  Amiens  and  other  cities — Sig-
nificance of  popular  action  during  Revolution

IN  the  eighteenth  century  the  municipal  institutions  had
fallen  to  utter  decay,  owing  to  the  numerous  measures  taken
by  royal  authority  against  them  for  two  hundred  years.

Since  the  abolition  of  the  plenary  assembly  of  the  towns-
people, which  formerly  had  the  control  of  urban  justice  and
administration,  the  affairs  of  the  large  cities  were  going  from
bad  to  worse.  The  posts  of  "  town  councillors  "  introduced
in  the  eighteenth  century  had  to  be  bought  from  the  commune,
and,  often  enough,  the  patent  so  purchased  was  for  life.*
The  councils  met  seldom,  in  some  towns  about  once  in  six
months,  and  even  then  the  attendance  was  not  regular.  The
registrar  managed  the  whole  business,  and  as  a  rule  did  not
fail  to  make  those  interested  in  it  pay  him  handsomely.  The
attorneys  and  advocates,  and  still  more  the  governor  of  the
province,  continually  interfered  to  obstruct  all  municipal
autonomy.

Under  these  conditions  the  affairs  of  the  city  fell  more  and
more  into  the  hands  of  five  or  six  families,  who  shared  a  good
deal  of  the  revenues  among  themselves.  The  patrimonial
revenues  which  some  towns  had  retained,  the  proceeds  of  the
octrois,  the  city's  trade  and  the  taxes  all  went  to  enrich  them.

*  Babeau,  La  ville  sous  I'ancien  regime,  p.  153  el  seq.
98


THE  TOWNS  99

Besides  this,  mayors  and  officials  began  to  trade  in  corn  and
meat,  and  soon  became  monopolists.  As  a  rule,  the  working
population  hated  them.  The  servility  of  the  officials,  coun-
cillors and  aldermen  towards  "  Monsieur  Plntendant "  (the
Governor)  was  such  that  his  whim  became  law.  And  the
contributions  from  the  town  towards  the  governor's  lodging,
towards  increasing  his  salary,  to  make  him  presents,  for  the
honour  of  holding  his  children  at  the  baptismal  font,  and  so
forth,  went  on  growing  larger — not  to  mention  the  presents
which  had  to  be  sent  every  year  to  various  personages  in  Paris.

In  the  towns,  as  in  the  country,  the  feudal  rights  still  existed.
They  were  attached  to  property.  The  bishop  was  still  a
feudal  lord,  and  the  lords,  both  lay  and  ecclesiastical — such,
for  instance,  as  the  fifty  canons  of  Brioude — maintained  not
only  honorary  rights,  or  even  the  right  of  intervening  in  the
nomination  of  aldermen,  but  also,  in  some  towns,  the  right  of
administering  justice.  At  Angers  there  were  sixteen  manorial
tribunals.  Dijon  had  preserved,  besides  the  municipal
tribunals,  six  ecclesiastical  courts—"  the  bishopric,  the  chapter,
the  monks  of  Saint-Benigne,  La  Sainte-Chapelle,  La  Chartreuse
and  the  commandery  of  La  Madeleine."  All  of  these  were
waxing  fat  in  the  midst  of  the  half-starved  people.  Troyes
had  nine  of  these  tribunals,  beside  "  two  royal  mayoral  courts."
So  that  the  police  did  not  always  belong  to  the  towns,  but  to
those  who  administered  "  justice."  In  short,  it  was  the
feudal  system  in  full  swing.*

But  what  chiefly  excited  the  anger  of  the  citizens  was  that
all  kinds  of  feudal  taxes,  the  poll  tax,  the  twentieths,  often  the
taille  and  the  "voluntary  gifts"  (imposed  in  1758  and  abolished
only  in  1789),  as  well  as  the  lods  et  ventes  (which  were  the  dues
levied  by  the  lord  on  all  sales  and  purchases  made  by  his
vassals),  weighed  heavily  upon  the  homes  of  the  citizens,  and
especially  on  those  of  the  working  classes.  Not  so  heavily,
perhaps,  as  in  the  country,  but  still  very  eavily  when  added
to  all  the  other  urban  taxes.

*  Vide  Babeau,  La  Ville,  pp.  323,  331,  &c.  Rodolphel  Reuss,
L' 'Alsace  pendant  la  Revolution,  vol.  i.,  gives  the  cahier  of  the  Strasbourg
Third  Estate,  very  interesting  in  this  connection.


ioo THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

^What  made  these  dues  more  detestable  was  that  when  the
town  was  making  the  assessment  hundreds  of  privileged
persons  claimed  exemption.  The  clergy,  the  nobles  and
officers  in  the  army  were  exempt  by  law,  as  well  as  the  "  officers
of  the  King's  household,"  "  honorary  equerries,"  and  others
who  paid  for  those  offices  without  service,  to  flatter  their  own
vanity  and  to  escape  from  the  taxes.  An  indication  of  their
titles  inscribed  over  the  door  was  enough  to  excuse  their  paying
anything  to  the  town.  One  can  readily  imagine  the  hatred
that  these  privileged  persons  inspired  in  the  people^

The  entire  municipal  system  had,  therefore,  to  be  reformed.
But  who  can  tell  how  many  years  it  would  have  lasted  yet,  if
the  task  of  reforming  it  had  been  left  to  the  Constituent
Assembly.  Happily  enough,  the  people  undertook  to  do  it
themselves,  the  more  so  that  during  the  summer  of  1789  a
fresh  cause  of  discontent  was  added  to  all  those  which  have
just  been  enumerated.  (  This  cause  was  the  famine — the
exorbitant  price  of  bread,  for  lack  of  which  bread  the
poorer  classes  were  suffering  in  most  of  the  towns.  Even  in
those  places  where  the  municipality  did  its  best  to  lower  the
price  of  it  by  purchasing  corn,  or  by  proclaiming  a  fixed  price,
bread  was  always  scarce,  and  the  hungry  people  formed  in
long  queues  outside  the  bakers'  doors.^

But  in  many  of  the  towns  the  mayor  and  the  aldermen
followed  the  example  of  the  Court  and  the  princes,  and
speculated  themselves  in  the  dearth.  This  is  why,  after  the
news  of  the  taking  of  the  Bastille,  as  well  as  of  the  executions
of  Foulon  and  Berthier,  had  spread  into  the  provinces,  the
townspeople  began  to  revolt  more  or  less  everywhere.  First,
they  exacted  a  fixed  price  on  bread  and  meat ;  they  destroyed
the  houses  of  the  principal  monopolists,  often  of  the  municipal
officials ;  they  took  possession  of  the  Town  Hall  and  nominated
by  election  on  the  popular  vote  a  new  municipality,  without
heeding  the  limitations  fixed  by  law  or  the  legal  rights  of  the
old  municipal  body,  or  yet  the  offices  purchased  by  the  "  coun-
cillors." A  movement  of  the  highest  revolutionary  importance
was  thus  set  on  foot,  for  the  town  affirmed,  not  only  its
autonomy,  but  also  its  determination  to  take  an  active  part  in


THE  TOWNS  101

the  general  government  of  the  nation.  It  was,  as  Aulard  has
aptly  remarked,  a  communalist  movement  of  the  very  greatest
importance,*  in  which  the  province  imitated  Paris,  where,  as
we  have  seen,  the  Commune  had  been  established  on  July  13.
It  is  evident  that  this  movement  was  far  from  being  general.
It  displayed  itself  clearly  only  in  a  certain  number  of  cities
and  small  towns,  chiefly  in  the  east  of  France.  But  everywhere
the  old  municipality  of  the  ancient  regime  had  to  submit  to  the
will  of  the  people,  or,  at  least,  to  the  will  of  the  electorate
in  the  local  assemblies.

\  Thus  was  accomplished,  at  the  outset,  in  July  and  August,
the  great  Communalist  Revolution,  which  the  Constituent
Assembly  legalised  later  on  by  the  municipal  laws  of  December
14,  1789,  and  June  21,  1790.  Obviously  this  movement  gave
the  Revolution  a  powerful  access  of  life  and  vigour.  The
whole  strength  of  the  Revolution  concentrated,  as  we  shall
see,  in  1792  and  1793,  in  the  municipalities  of  the  towns  and
villages,  of  which  the  revolutionary  Commune  of  Paris  was  the
prototype.

The  signal  for  this  reconstruction  came  from  Paris.  Without
waiting  for  the  municipal  law,  which  some  day  would  be  voted
by  the  Assembly,  Paris  gave  herself  a  Commune.  Her  Muni-
cipal Council,  her  Mayor  (Bailly),  and  the  Commander  of  her
National  Guard  (Lafayette)  were  elected.  Better  still,  her
sixty  districts  were  organised — "  sixty  republics,"  as  Montjoie
happily  terms  them  :  for  if  these  districts  did  delegate  authority
to  the  assembled  representatives  of  the  Commune  and  to  the
Mayor,  they  at  the  same  time  retained  some  of  it.  "  Authority
is  everything,"  said  Bailly,  "  and  there  is  none  at  the  centre."
"  Each  district  is  an  independent  power,"  declare  with  regret
the  friends  of  the  rule  and  compass,  without  understanding
that  this  is  how  revolutions  are  made.

While  the  National  Assembly  had  to  struggle  against  its
own  dissolution,  and  had  its  hands  full  of  so  many  things,  when
could  it  have  been  able  to  enter  on  the  discussion  of  a  law
concerning  the  reorganisation  of  the  Courts  of  Justice  I  It
hardly  got  as  far  as  that  at  the  end  of  ten  months  of  its  existence.

*  Aulard,  Histoire  politique  de  la  Revolution  franeaise,  2  nd  edition,  1 903 .


loz THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

But  "  the  district  of  the  Petits- August  ins  decided  on  its  own
account,"  says  Bailly,  in  his  Memoires,  "  that  justices  of  the
peace  should  be  established."  And  the  district  proceeded  then
and  there  to  elect  them.  Other  districts  and  other  cities,
Strasbourg  especially,  did  the  same,  and  when  the  night  of
August  4  arrived  and  the  nobility  had  to  abdicate  their  rights
of  seigneurial  justice,  they  had  lost  it  already  in  several  towns,
where  new  judges  had  been  appointed  by  the  people.  The
Constituent  Assembly  had  thus  nothing  else  to  do  but  in-
corporate the  accomplished  fact  in  the  Constitution  of  1791.

Taine  and  all  the  admirers  of  the  administrative  order  of
the  somnolent  ministers  are  shocked  no  doubt  at  the  thought  of
these  districts  forestalling  the  Assembly  by  their  votes  and
pointing  out  to  it  the  will  of  the  people  by  their  decisions ;
but  it  is  in  this  way  human  institutions  develop  when  they  are
not  the  product  of  bureaucracy.  In  this  way  all  the  great
cities  were  built  up ;  we  can  see  them  still  being  thus  built.
Here  a  group  of  houses  and  a  few  shops  beside  them  ;  this  will
be  an  important  point  in  the  future  city  ;  there  a  track,  as
yet  scarcely  discernible,  and  that  one  day  will  be  one  of  its
great  streets.  This  is  the  "  anarchic  "  evolution,  the  only
way  pertaining  to  free  Nature.  It  is  the  same  even  with  in-
stitutions when  they  are  the  organic  product  of  life,  and  this
is  why  revolutions  have  such  immense  importance  in  the  life
of  societies.  They  allow  men  to  start  with  the  organic  re-
constructive work  without  being  hampered  by  an  authority
which,  perforce,  always  represents  the  past  ages.

Let  us  therefore  glance  at  some  of  these  communal  revolu-
tions.

In  1789  news  spread  with  what  would  seem  to  us  almost
inconceivable  slowness.  Thus  at  Chateau-Thierry  on  July  12,
and  at  Besanc.on  on  the  27th,  Arthur  Young  did  not  find  a
single  cafe  or  a  single  newspaper.  The  news  that  was  being
talked  about  was  a  fortnight  old.  At  Dijon,  nine  days  after
the  great  rising  in  Strasbourg  and  the  taking  of  the  Town  Hall
by  the  insurgents,  no  one  knew  anything  about  it.  Still  the
news  that  was  coming  from  Paris,  even  when  it  came  in  the
form  of  legend,  could  not  but  stimulate  the  people  to  rise.


THE  TOWNS  103

All  the  deputies,  it  was  said,  had  been  put  in  the  Bastille  ;
and  as  to  the  "  atrocities  "  committed  by  Marie- Antoinette,
every  one  was  discussing  them  with  perfect  assurance.

At  Strasbourg  the  troubles  began  on  July  19,  as  soon  as  the
news  of  the  taking  of  the  Bastille  and  the  execution  of  de
Launey  spread  through  the  town.  The  people  had  already
a  grudge  against  the  municipal  council  for  their  slowness  in
communicating  to  the  people's  "  representatives  " — that  is,
to  the  electors — the  results  of  their  deliberations  over  the
cahier  de  doleances,  the  "  writ  of  grievances,"  drawn  up  by
the  poorer  classes.  The  people,  therefore,  attacked  the  house
of  "Lemp,  the  Mayor  (or  Ammeister),  and  destroyed  it.

Through  the  organ  of  its  "  Assembly  of  Burgesses  "  the
people  demanded  measures — I  quote  from  the  text — "  fpr
assuring  the  political  equality  of  the  citizens,  and  their  influence
in  the  elections  of  the  administrators  of  the  public  property
and  of  the  freely  elected  judges  freely  eligible."  *

They  insisted  upon  no  notice  being  taken  of  the  existing  law,
and  upon  electing  by  universal  suffrage  a  new  town  council,
as  well  as  all  the  judges.  The  Magistracy,  or  Municipal
Government,  on  its  side  had  no  great  wish  to  do  this,  "  and
opposed  the  obse/vance  of  several  centuries  to  the  proposed
change."  Whereupon  the  people  gathered  to  besiege  the
Town  Hall,  and  a  storm  of  stones  began  to  fall  in  the  apartment
where  negotiations  were  taking  place  between  the  Magistracy
and  the  revolutionary  representatives,  and  to  this  argument  the
Magistracy  at  once  yielded.

Meanwhile,  seeing  poor  and  starving  persons  assembling
in  the  streets,  the  well-to-do  middle  classes  armed  themselves
against  the  people,  and  going  to  the  house  of  Count  Rocham-
beau,  the  governor  of  the  province,  they  asked  his  permission
for  the  respectable  citizens  to  carry  arms,  and  to  form  themselves
into  a  police,  jointly  with  the  troops,  a  request  which  the
officer  in  command,  "  imbued  with  aristocratic  ideas,"  un-
hesitatingly refused,  as  de  Launey  had  done  at  the  Bastille.

*  Lettre  des  representants  de  la  bourgeoisie  aux  deputes  de  Stras-
bourg a  Versailles,  July  28,  1789  (R.  Reuss,  L'Alsace  pendant  la
Revolution  franeaise,  Paris,  1881,  "Documents,"  xxvi).


104 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  next  day,  a  rumour  having  spread  in  the  town  that  the
Magistracy  had  revoked  their  concessions,  the  people  went
again  to  attack  the  Town  Hall,  demanding  the  abolition  of  the
town-dues  and  subsidies  (octrois  and  bureaux  des  aides).  Since
this  had  been  done  in  Paris,  it  could  very  well  be  done  in
Strasbourg.  About  six  o'clock  masses  of  "  workmen,  armed  with
axes  and  hammers,"  advanced  from  three  streets  towards  the
Town  Hall.  They  smashed  open  the  doors  with  their  hatchets,
broke  into  the  vaults,  and  in  their  fury  destroyed  all  the  old
papers  accumulated  in  the  offices.  "  They  have  wreaked  a
blind  rage  upon  the  papers :  they  have  been  all  thrown  out  of
the  windows  and  destroyed,"  wrote  the  new  Magistracy.  The
double  doors  of  all  the  archives  were  forced  open  in  order  to
burn  the  old  documents,  and  in  their  hatred  of  the  Magistracy
the  people  even  broke  the  furniture  of  the  Town  Hall  and
threw  it  out  into  the  streets.  The  Record  Office,  "  the  depot
of  estates  in  litigation,"  met  with  the  same  fate.  At  the
tax-collector's  office  the  doors  were  broken  open  and  the
receipts  carried  off.  The  troops  stationed  in  front  of  the
Town  Hall  could  do  nothing ;  the  people  did  as  they  liked.

The  Magistracy,  seized  with  terror,  hurriedly  lowered  the
prices  of  meat  and  bread  :  they  fixed  the  six-pound  loaf  at
twelve  sous.*  Then  they  opened  amicable  negotiations  with
the  twenty  tribus  (or  guilds)  of  the  city  for  the  elaboration  of
a  new  municipal  constitution.  They  had  to  hurry,  as  rioting
still  went  on  in  Strasbourg  and  in  the  neighbouring  districts,
where  the  people  were  turning  out  the  "  established  "  provosts
of  the  communes,  and  were  nominating  others  at  will,  while
formulating  claims  to  the  forests  and  claiming  other  rights
directly  opposed  to  legally  established  property.  "  It  is  a
moment  when  every  one  believed  himself  in  a  fair  way  to
obtain  the  restoration  of  pretended  rights,"  said  the  Magis-
tracy in  the  letter  dated  August  5.

On  top  of  this  the  news  of  the  night  of  August  4  in  the
Assembly  arrived  at  Strasbourg  on  the  nth,  and  the  disturbance

*  Wheat  was  then  19  livres  the  sack.  The  prices  rose  at  the  end  of
August  to  28  and  30  livres,  so  that  the  bakers  were  forbidden  to  bake
cakes  or  fancy  bread.


THE  TOWNS  105

became  still  more  threatening,  all  the  more  as  the  army  made
common  cause  with  the  rebels.  Whereupon  the  old  Corpora-
tion resolved  to  resign.*  The  next  day,  August  12,  the  three
hundred  aldermen  in  their  turn  resigned  their  "  offices,"  or
rather  their  privileges.  New  aldermen  were  elected,  and
they  appointed  the  judges.

>  Thus,  on  August  14,  a  new  Corporation  was  constituted,
a  provisional  Senate,  which  was  to  direct  the  affairs  of  the
city  until  the  Assembly  at  Versailles  should  establish  a  new
municipal  constitution.  Without  waiting  for  this  constitution
Strasbourg  had  in  this  way  given  herself  a  Commune  and
judges  to  her  liking.

The  old  regime  was  thus  breaking  up  at  Strasbourg,  and  on
August  17  M.  Dietrich  congratulated  the  new  aldermen  in
these  terms  :

"  Gentlemen,  the  revolution  which  has  just  taken  place  in
our  town  will  mark  the  epoch  of  the  return  of  the  confidence
that  should  unite  the  citizens  of  the  same  commune.  This
august  assembly  has  just  been  freely  elected  by  their  fellow
citizens  to  be  their  representatives.  .  .  .  The  first  use  that
you  have  made  of  your  powers  has  been  to  appoint  your
judges.  .  .  .  What  strength  may  grow  from  this  union  !  "
Dietrich,  moreover,  proposed  to  decree  that  August  14,  the
day  of  the  revolution  in  Strasbourg,  should  be  an  annual  civic

1*.

{  An  important  fact  stands  out  in  this  revolution.  The
middle  classes  of  Strasbourg  were  freed  from  the  feudal  system.
They  had  given  themselves  a  democratic  municipal  government.
But  they  had  no  intention  of  giving  up  the  feudal  (patrimonial)
rights  which  belonged  to  them  over  certain  surrounding  lands.
When  the  two  deputies  from  Strasbourg  in  the  National
Assembly  were  pressed  by  their  fellows  to  abdicate  their  rights,
during  the  night  of  August  4,  they  refused  to  do  so.  And  when
later  on  one  of  these  two  deputies,  Schwendt,  urged  the
matter  before  the  Strasbourg  middle  classes,  begging  them  not
to  oppose  the  current  of  the  Revolution,  his  constituents
persisted  nevertheless  in  claiming  their  feudal  rights.  Thus
*  Reuss,  V Alsace,  p.  147.


io6 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

we  see  forming  in  this  city,  since  1789,  a  party  which  will  rally
round  the  King,  "  the  best  of  kings,"  "  the  most  conciliatory
of  monarrhs,"  with  the  purpose  of  preserving  their  rights  over
"  the  rich  seignories,"  which  belonged  to  the  city  under  feudal
law.  The  letter  *  in  which  the  other  Strasbourg  deputy,
Turckheim,  sent  in  his  resignation  after  escaping  from  Versailles
on  October  5,  is  a  document  of  the  highest  interest  in  this
connection  ;  one  sees  there  already  how  and  why  the  Gironde
will  rally  under  its  middle-class  flag  the  "  defenders  of
property  "  as  well  as  the  Royalists/,

What  happened  at  Strasbourg  give's  us  a  clear  enough  idea
of  what  was  going  on  in  the  other  large  towns.  For  instance,
at  Troyes,  a  town  about  which  we  have  also  sufficiently
complete  documents,  we  see  the  movement  made  up  of  the
same  elements.  The  people,  with  the  help  of  the  neighbouring
peasants,  rebelled  since  July  18,  after  they  had  heard  about
the  burning  of  the  toll-gates  at  Paris.  On  July  20,  some  peasants,
armed  with  pitchforks,  scythes  and  flails,  entered  the  town,
probably  to  seize  the  wheat  they  needed  for  food  and  seed,
which  they  expected  to  find  there  in  the  warehouses  of  the
monopolists.  But  the  middle  classes  formed  themselves  into
a  National  Guard  and  repulsed  the  peasants,  whom  they
already  called  "  the  brigands."  During  the  ten  or  fifteen
days  following,  taking  advantage  of  the  panic  which  was
spreading,  five  hundred  "  brigands "  were  talked  of  as  coming
from  Paris  to  ravage  everything ;  the  middle  classes  organised
their  National  Guard,  and  all  the  small  towns  armed  themselves
likewise.  But  the  people  were  ill-pleased  at  this.  On  August
8,  probably  on  hearing  news  of  the  night  of  August  4,  the
people  demanded  arms  for  all  volunteers,  and  a  maximum
price  for  bread.  The  municipality  hesitated.  Whereupon
the  people  deposed  the  members  on  August  19,  and,  as  had
been  done  at  Strasbourg,  a  new  municipality  was  elected.

The  people  overran  the  Town  Hall,  seized  the  arms  and

distributed  them  among  themselves. They  broke  into  the

Government  salt-stores  ;  but  here,  too,  they  did  not  plunder,

"  they  only  caused  the  salt  to  be  served  out  at  six  sous."

*  Published  by  Reuss.


THE  TOWNS  107

Finally,  on  September  9,  the  disturbance,  which  had  never
ceased  since  August  19,  reached  its  culminating- point.  The
people  seized  upon  the  Mayor  (Huez),  whom  they  accused  of
having  tried  to  defend  the  trading  monopolists,  and  killed  him.
They  sacked  his  house,  and  also  a  notary's,  and  the  house  of  the
old  Commandant  Saint- Georges,  who  a  fortnight  before  had
given  the  order  to  fire  on  the  people,  as  well  as  that  of  the
lieutenant  of  the  mounted  police,  who  had  caused  a  man  to
be  hanged  during  the  preceding  riot ;  and  they  threatened,
as  they  had  done  in  Paris  after  July  14,  to  sack  many  others.
After  thiSj  for  about  a  fortnight,  terror  reigned  among  the
upper  middle  classes.  But  they  managed  during  that  time  to
reorganise  their  own  National  Guard,  and  on  September  26
they  ended  by  getting  the  upper  hand  of  the  unarmed  people.
f  As  a  rule  the  anger  of  the  people  was  directed  much  more
against  the  representatives  of  the  middle  classes  who  monopolised
the  food-stuffs  than  against  the  nobility  who  monopolised
the  land.  Thus  at  Amiens,  as  at  Troyes,  the  insurgent  people
almost  killed  three  merchants ;  whereupon  the  middle  classes
hastened  to  arm  their  militia.  We  may  even  say  that  this
formation  of  militias  in  the  towns,  which  was  carried  out
everywhere  in  August  and  September,  would  probably  have
never  taken  place  if  the  popular  rising  had  been  confined  to  the
country  parts,  and  had  been  directed  solely  against  the  nobility.
At  Cherbourg  on  July  21,  at  Rouen  on  the  24th,  and  in
many  other  towns  of  less  importance,  almost  the  same  thing
happened.  The  hungry  people  rose  with  cries  of  "  Bread !
Death  to  the  monopolists !  Down  with  the  toll-gates  1  "
which  meant  free  entrance  of  all  supplies  coming  in  from
the  country.  They  compelled  the  municipality  to  reduce
the  price  of  bread,  or  else  they  took  possession  of  the  mono-
polists' storehouses  and  carried  off  the  grain ;  they  sacked  the
houses  of  those  who  were  known  to  have  trafficked  in  the
price  of  bread-stuffs.  The  middle  classes  took  advantage  of
this  movement  to  turn  out  the  old  municipal  government
imbued  with  feudalism,  and  to  set  up  a  new  municipality
elected  on  a  democratic  basis.  At  the  same  time,  taking
advantage  of  the  panic  produced  by  the  rising  of  the  "  lower


io8 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

classes  "  in  the  towns,  and  of  the  "  brigands  "  in  the  country,
they  armed  themselves  and  organised  their  Municipal  Guard.
After  that  they  "restored  order,"  executed  the  popular  leaders,
and  very  often  went  into  the  country  to  restore  order  there,
where  they  fought  with  the  peasants  and  hanged  the  "  leaders  "
of  the  revolted  peasantry.

After  the  night  of  August  4,  these  urban  insurrections  spread
still  more.  Indications  of  them  are  seen  everywhere.  The
taxes,  the  town-dues,  the  levies  and  excise  were  no  longer  paid.
"The  collectors  of  the  taille  are  at  their  last  shift,"  said
Necker,  in  his  report  of  August  7.  *'  The  price  of  salt  has  been
compulsorily  reduced  one-half  in  two  of  the  revolted  localities,"
the  collection  of  taxes  "  is  no  longer  made,"  and  so  forth.
"  An  infinity  of  places  "  was  in  revolt  against  the  treasury
clerks.  The  people  would  no  longer  pay  the  indirect  tax ;
as  to  the  direct  taxes,  they  are  not  refused,  but  conditions  were
laid  down  for  their  payment.  In  Alsace,  for  instance,  "  the
people  generally  refused  to  pay  anything  until  the  exempts
and  privileged  persons  had  been  added  to  the  lists  of  tax-
payers."

In  this  way  the  people,  long  before  the  Assembly,  were  making
the  Revolution  on  the  spot ;  they  gave  themselves,  by  revo-
lutionary means,  a  new  municipal  administration,  they  made
a  distinction  between  the  taxes  that  they  accepted  and  those
which  they  refused  to  pay,  and  they  prescribed  the  mode  of
equal  division  of  the  taxes  that  they  agreed  to  pay  to  the
State  or  to  the  Commune.

It  is  chiefly  by  studying  this  method  of  action  among  the
people,  and  not  by  devoting  oneself  to  the  study  of  the  Assembly's
legislative^ work,  that  one  grasps  the  genius  of  the  Great
Revolution — the  Genius,  in  the  main,  of  all  revolutions,  past
and  to  come.


CHAPTER  XVI
THE  PEASANT  RISING

Peasants  begin  to  rise — Causes  of  risings — Chateaux  destroyed
— Rising  in  Alsace — Franche-Comte — Castres — Auvergne —
Characteristics  of  rising — Middle  classes  and  their  fears —
Picardy  revolts  —  Terror  throughout  France  —  National
Assembly  meets

EVER  since  the  winter  of  1788,  and  especially  since  March  1789,
the  people,  as  we  have  said,  no  longer  paid  rent  to  the  lords.
That  in  this  they  were  encouraged  by  the  revolutionaries  of
the  middle  classes  is  undoubtedly  true  ;  there  were  many
persons  among  the  middle  classes  of  1789  who  understood
that  without  a  popular  rising  they  would  never  have  the  upper
hand  over  the  absolute  power  of  the  King.  It  is  clear,  also,
that  the  discussions  in  the  Assembly  of  the  Notables,  wherein
the  abolition  of  the  feudal  rights  was  already  spoken  about,
encouraged  the  rising,  and  that  the  drawing  up  in  the  parishes
of  the  cakiers,  which  were  to  serve  as  guides  for  the  assemblies
of  electors,  tended  in  the  same  direction.  Revolutions  are
never  the  result  of  despair,  as  is  often  believed  by  young
revolutionists,  who  think  that  good  can  come  out  of  an  excess  of
evil.  On  the  contrary,  the  people  in  1789  had  caught  a  glimpse
of  the  light  of  approaching  freedom,  and  for  that  reason  they
rose  with  good  heart.  But  to  hope  was  not  enough,  to  act  was
also  necessary ;  the  first  rebels  who  prepare  a  revolution  must
be  ready  to  give  their  lives,  and  this  the  people  did.

Whilst  rioting  was  being  punished  by  pillory,  torture  and
hanging,  the  peasants  were  already  in  revolt.  From  November,
1788,  the  Governors  of  the  provinces  were  writing  to  the
ministers  that  if  they  wished  to  put  down  all  the  riotings  it

was  no  longer  possible  to  do  so. Taken  separately,  none  was  of

109


i  io THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

great  importance  ;  together,  they  were  undermining  the  very
foundations  of  State.

In  January  1789,  writs  of  plaints  and  grievances  (the
c abier s  de  doleances)  were  drawn  up,  the  electors  were  elected,
and  from  that  time  the  peasants  began  to  refuse  to  furnish
statute  labour  to  the  lords  and  the  State.  Secret  associations
were  formed  among  them,  and  here  and  there  a  lord  was  exe-
cuted by  the  "  Jacques  Bonhommes."  In  some  places  the
tax-collectors  were  received  with  cudgels ;  in  others,  the  lands
belonging  to  the  nobles  were  seized  and  tilled.

From  month  to  month  these  risings  multiplied.  By  March
the  whole  of  the  east  of  France  was  in  revolt.  The  movement,
to  be  sure,  was  neither  continuous  nor  general.  An  agrarian
rising  is  never  that.  It  is  even  very  probable,  as  is  always  the
case  in  the  peasant  insurrections,  that  there  was  a  slackening
n  the  outbreaks  at  the  time  of  field  work  in  April,  and  after-
wards at  the  beginning  of  the  harvest  time.  But  as  soon  as  the
first  harvests  were  gathered  in,  during  the  second  half  of
July  1789,  and  in  August,  the  risings  broke  out  with  fresh
force,  especially  in  the  east,  north-east  and  south-east  of
France.

Documents  bearing  with  exactitude  on  this  rising  are  want-
ing. Those  that  have  been  published  are  very  incomplete,
and  the  greater  part  bear  traces  of  a  partisan  spirit.  If  we  take
the  Moniteur,  which,  we  know,  only  began  to  appear  on  Novem-
ber 24,  1789,  and  of  which  the  ninety-three  numbers,  from
May  8  to  November  23,  1789,  were  compiled  later  on  in  the
Year  IV.,*  we  find  in  them  a  tendency  to  show  that  the  whole
movement  was  the  work  of  the  enemies  of  the  Revolution — of
heartless  persons  who  took  advantage  of  rustic  ignorance.
Others  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  it  was  the  nobles,  the  lords,  or,
indeed,  even  that  it  was  the  English,  who  had  incited  the
peasants  to  rise.  As  for  the  documents  published  by  the
Committee  for  Investigations  in  January  1790,  they  tend  rather
to  represent  the  whole  affair  as  the  result  of  an  unfortunate
chance — the  work  of  "  brigands,"  who  had  devastated  the

*  Moreover,  the  numbers  from  November  24,  1789,  to  February  3,
1790,  were  also  retouched  in  the  Year  IV.


THE  PEASANT  RISING  m

country  parts,  and  against  whom  the  middle  classes  had  taken
up  arms,  and  whom  they  had  exterminated.

We  know  to-day  how  false  this  representation  is,  and  it  is
certain  that  if  a  historian  took  the  trouble  to  study  carefully
the  documents  in  the  archives,  a  work  of  the  highest  value
would  result  from  it,  a  work  the  more  necessary  as  the  risings
of  the  peasants  continued  until  the  Convention  abolished
feudal  rights,  in  August  1793,  and  until  the  village  communes
were  granted  the  right  of  resuming  the  communal  land  which
had  been  taken  from  them  during  the  two  preceding  centuries.
For  the  time  being,  this  work  among  the  archives  not  being
done,  we  must  confine  ourselves  to  what  can  be  gleaned  from
some  local  histories  from  certain  memoirs,  and  from  a  few
authors,  always  explaining  the  rising  of  1789  by  the  light  which
•the  better-known  movements  of  the  following  year  sheds  on
this  first  outbreak.

That  the  dearth  of  food  counted  for  much  in  these  risings  is
certain.  But  their  chief  motive  was  the  desire  to  get  possession
of  the  land  and  the  desire  to  get  rid  of  the  feudal  dues  and  the
tithes.

C  There  is,  besides,  one  characteristic  trait  in  these  risings.
They  appear  only  sporadically  in  the  centre  of  France  and  in
the  south  and  west,  except  in  Brittany.  But  they  are  very
general  in  the  east,  north-east  and  south-east.  The  Dauphine,
the  Franche-Comte  and  the  Maconnais  are  especially  affected
by  them.  In  the  Franche-Comte  nearly  all  the  chateaux  were
burned,  says  Doniol ;  *  three  out  of  every  five  were  plundered  in
Dauphine.  Next  in  proportion  comes  Alsace,  the  Nivernais,
the  Beaujolais,  Burgundy  and  the  Auvergne.  As  I  have
remarked  elsewhere,  if  we  trace  on  a  map  the  localities  where
these  risings  took  place,  this  map  will  in  a  general  way  present  a
striking  resemblance  to  the  map  "  of  the  three  hundred  and
sixty-three,"  published  in  1877,  after  the  elections  which  gave
to  France  the  Third  Republic.  It  was  chiefly  the  eastern  part
of  France  which  espoused  the  cause  of  the  Revolution,  and
this  same  part  is  still  the  most  advanced  in  our  own  day.

Doniol  has  remarked  very  truly  that  the  source  of  the  risings
*  La  Revolution  franfaise,  p.  48.


ii2 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

was  already  set  forth  in  the  cahiers,  which  were  written  for  the
elections  of  1789.  Since  the  peasants  had  been  asked  to  state
their  grievances,  they  were  sure  that  something  would  be  done
for  them.  Their  firm  belief  that  the  King  to  whom  they  ad-
dressed their  complaints,  or  the  Assembly,  or  some  other  power,
would  come  to  their  aid  and  redress  their  wrongs,  or  at  least
let  them  take  it  upon  themselves  to  redress  these  wrongs —
this  was  what  urged  them  to  revolt  as  soon  as  the  elections  had
taken  place,  and  before  even  the  Assembly  had  met.  When
the  States-General  began  to  sit,  the  rumours  which  came  from
Paris,  vague  though  they  were,  necessarily  made  the  peasants
believe  that  the  moment  had  come  for  obtaining  the  abolition
of  feudal  rights  and  for  taking  back  the  land.

The  slightest  encouragement  given  to  them,  whether  on  the
part  of  the  revolutionaries  or  from  the  side  of  the  Orleanists,
by  no  matter  what  kind  of  agitators,  coupled  with  the  disquiet-
ing news  which  was  coming  from  Paris  and  from  the  towns  in
revolt,  sufficed  to  make  the  villages  rise.  There  is  no  longer
the  slightest  doubt  that  use  was  made  more  than  once  of  the
King's  name,  and  of  the  Assembly's,  in  the  provinces.  Many
documents,  indeed,  allude  to  the  circulation  among  the  villages
of  false  decrees  of  the  King  and  of  the  Assembly.  In  all  their
risings,  in  France,  in  Russia  and  in  Germany,  the  peasants  have
always  tried  to  decide  the  hesitating  ones — I  shall  even  say
to  persuade  themselves  by  maintaining  that  there  was  some
force  ready  to  back  them  up.  This  gave  them  cohesion,  and
afterwards,  in  case  of  defeat  and  of  proceedings  being  taken
against  them,  there  was  always  a  safe  excuse.  They  had  thought,
and  the  majority  thought  so  sincerely,  that  they  were  obeying
the  wishes,  if  not  the  orders,  of  the  King  or  of  the  Assembly.
Therefore,  as  soon  as  the  first  harvests  were  reaped  in  the  summer
of  1789,  as  soon  as  people  in  the  villages  began  to  eat  again
after  the  long  months  of  scarcity,  and  the  rumours  arriving
from  Versailles  began  to  inspire  hope,  the  peasants  rose.  They
turned  upon  the  chateaux  in  order  to  destroy  the  charter-
rooms,  the  lists  and  the  title-deeds ;  and  houses  were  burned
down  if  the  masters  did  not  relinquish  with  a  good  grace  the
feudal  rights  recorded  in  the  charters,  the  rolls  and  the  rest.


THE  PEASANT  RISING  113

In  the  neighbourhood  of  Vesoul  and  Belfort  the  war  on  the
country  houses  began  on  July  16,  the  date  when  the  chateau
of  Sancy,  and  then  those  of  Luce,  Bithaine  and  Molans,  were
plundered.  Soon  all  Loraine  had  risen.  "  The  peasants,
believing  that  the  Revolution  was  going  to  bring  in  equality  of
wealth  and  rank,  were  especially  excited  against  the  lords,"  says
the  Courrier  franfais.*  At  Saarlouis,  Forbach,  Sarreguemines,
Phalsbourg  and  Thionville  the  excise  officers  were  driven  away
and  their  offices  pillaged  and  burnt.  Salt  was  selling  at  three
sous  the  pound.  The  neighbouring  villages  followed  the
example  of  the  towns.

^  In  Alsace  the  peasant  rising  was  almost  general.  It  is  stated
that  in  eight  days,  towards  the  end  of  July,  three  abbeys  were
destroyed,  eleven  chateaux  sacked,  others  plundered,  and  that
the  peasants  had  carried  off  and  destroyed  all  the  land  records.
The  registers  of  feudal  taxes,  statute-labours  and  dues  of  all
sorts  were  also  taken  away  and  burnt.  In  certain  localities
flying  columns  were  formed,  several  hundred  and  sometimes
several  thousand  strong,  of  peasants  gathered  from  the  villages
round  about ;  they  marched  against  the  strongest  chateaux,
besieged  them,  seized  all  the  old  papers  and  made  bonfires  of
them.  The  abbeys  were  sacked  and  plundered  for  the  same
reason,  as  well  as  houses  of  rich  merchants  in  the  towns.  Every-
thing was  destroyed  at  the  Abbey  of  Miirbach,  which  probably
offered  resistance.!

In  the  Franche-Comte  the  first  riots  took  place  at  Lons-le-
Saulnier  as  early  as  July  19,  when  the  news  of  the  preparations
for  the  coup  d'etat  and  Necker's  dismissal  reached  that  place,
but  the  taking  of  the  Bastille  was  still  unknown,  says  Sommier.J
Rioting  soon  began,  and  at  the  same  time  the  middle  classes
armed  its  militia  (all  wearing  the  tricolour  cockade)  to  resist

*  P,  242  et  seq.

f  According  to  Strobel  (Vaterlandische  Geschichte  des  Elsass),  the
rising  took  place  generally  in  this  way  :  a  village  rose,  and  straightway
a  band  was  formed  composed  of  the  inhabitants  of  various  villages,
which  went  in  a  body  to  attack  the  chateaux.  Sometimes  these  bands
concealed  themselves  in  the  woods.

%  Histoire  de  la  Revolution  dans  le  Jura  (Paris,  1846),  p.  22.  The
bent  of  men's  minds  in  the  Jura  is  revealed  in  a  song  given  in  the
Cahier  d'Aval.

H


ii4 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

"the  incursions  of  the  brigands  who  infest  the  kingdom."*
The  rising  soon  spread  to  the  villages.  The  peasants  divided
among  themselves  the  meadows  and  woods  of  the  lords.  Be-
sides this,  they  compelled  the  lords  to  renounce  their  right  over
land  which  had  belonged  formerly  to  the  communes.  Or  else,
without  any  formalities,  they  retook  possession  of  the  forests
which  had  once  been  communal.  All  the  title-deeds  held  by
the  Abbey  of  the  Bernardins  in  the  neighbouring  communes
were  carried  off  .f  At  Castres  the  risings  began  after  August  4.
A  tax  of  coupe  was  levied  in  kind  (so  much  per  setter)  in  this  town
on  all  wheats  imported  into  the  province.  It  was  a  feudal  tax,
granted  by  the  King  to  private  individuals.  As  soon,  therefore,
as  they  heard  in  Castres  the  news  of  the  night  of  August  4,  the
people  rose,  demanding  the  abolition  of  this  tax ;  and  imme-
diately the  middle  classes,  who  had  formed  the  National  Guard,
six  hundred  strong,  began  to  restore  "  order."  But  in  the
rural  districts  the  insurrection  spread  from  village  to  village,
and  the  chateaux  of  Gaix  and  Montl£dier,  the  Carthusian
Convent  of  Faix,  the  Abbey  of  Vielmur  and  other  places  were
plundered  and  the  records  destroyed. t

In  the  Auvergne  the  peasants  took  many  precautions  to  put
the  law  on  their  side,  and  when  they  went  to  the  chateaux  to
burn  the  records,  they  did  not  hesitate  to  say  to  the  lords  that
they  were  acting  by  order  of  the  King.§  But  in  the  eastern
provinces  they  did  not  refrain  from  declaring  openly  that  the

*  Sommier,  pp.  24-25.

t  Edouard  Clerc,  Essai  sur  I'histoire  de  la  Franche-Comte,  2nd  edition
(Besan9on,  1870).

J  Anacnarsis  Combes,  Histoire  de  la  ville  de  Castres  et  de  ses  environs
pendant  la  Revolution  francaise  (Castres,  1875).

§  M.  Xavier  Roux,  who  published  in  1891,  under  the  title  Memoire
sur  la  marche  des  brigandages  dans  le  Dauphine  en  1789,  the  complete
depositions  of  an  inquiry  made  in  1879  on  this  subject,  attributes  the
whole  movement  to  a  few  leaders :  "To  call  upon  the  people  to  rise
against  the  King  would  have  had  no  results,"  says  this  writer  ;  "  they
attained  their  end  in  a  roundabout  way.  A  singularly  bold  plan  was
adopted  and  carried  out  over  the  whole  province.  It  is  summed  up
in  these  words  :  to  stir  up  the  people  against  the  lords  in  the  name  of
the  King  ;  the  lords  once  crushed,  the  throne  was  to  be  attacked,
which,  then  being  defenceless,  could  be  destroyed"  (p.  iv.  of  the  intro-
duction). Well,  we  take  from  M.  Roux 'himself  this  'admission,  that  all
the  inquiries  made  have  never  led"  to  the  disclosure  of  a  single  leader's
name  "  (p.  v.).  The  whole  people  were  included  in  this  conspiracy.


THE  PEASANT  RISING  115

time  had  come  when  the  Third  Estate  would  no  longer  permit
the  nobles  and  priesthood  to  rule  over  them.  The  power  of
these  two  classes  had  lasted  too  long,  and  the  moment  had  come
for  them  to  abdicate.  For  a  large  number  of  the  poorer
nobles,  residing  in  the  country  and  perhaps  loved  by  those  round
them,  the  revolted  peasantry  showed  much  personal  regard.
They  did  them  no  harm  ;  but  the  registers  and  title-deeds  of
feudal  landlordism  they  never  spared.  They  burned  them,  after
compelling  the  lord  to  swear  that  he  would  relinquish  his  rights.
'Like  the  middle  classes  of  the  towns,  who  knew  well  what
they  wanted  and  what  they  expected  from  the  Revolution,  the
peasants  also  knew  very  well  what  they  wanted ;  the  lands
stolen  from  the  communes  should  be  given  back  to  them,  and
all  the  dues  begotten  by  feudalism  should  be  wiped  out.  The
idea  that  the  rich  people  as  a  whole  should  be  wiped  out,  too,
may  have  filtered  through  from  that  time  ;  but  at  the  moment
the  jacquerie  confined  its  attention  to  things,  and  if  there  were
cases  where  the  persons  of  some  lords  were  ill-treated,  they  were
isolated  cases,  and  may  generally  be  explained  by  the  fact  that
they  were  speculators,  men  who  had  made  money  out  of  the
scarcity.  If  the  land-registers  were  given  up  and  the  oath  of
renunciation  taken,  all  went  ofE  quietly  :  the  peasants  burned
the  registers,  planted  a  May-tree  in  the  village,  hung  on  its
boughs  the  feudal  emblems,  and  then  danced  round  the  tree.*

Otherwise,  if  there  had  been  resistance,  or  if  the  lord  or  his
steward  had  called  in  the  police,  if  there  had  been  any  shooting
— then  the  chateau  was  completely  pillaged,  and  often  it  was
set  on  fire.  Thus,  it  is  reckoned  that  thirty  chateaux  were
plundered  or  burnt  in  the  Dauphine,  nearly  forty  in  the  Franche-
Comte,  sixty-two  in  the  Maconnais  and  the  Beaujolais,  nine
only  in  the  Auvergne,  and  twelve  monasteries  and  five  chateaux
in  the  Viennois.  We  may  note,  by  the  way,  that  the  peasants
made  no  distinctions  for  political  opinions.  They  attacked,
therefore,  the  houses  of  "  patriots  "  as  well  as  those  of  "  aristo-
crats."

*  Sometimes  in  the  south  they  hung  up  also  this  inscription :  "  By
order  of  the  King  and  of  the  National  Assembly,  a  final  quittance  of
rents  "  (Mary  Lafon,  Histoire  politique  du  Midi  de  la  France,  1842-
1845,  vol.  iv.  p.  377).


ii6 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

What  were  the  middle  classes  doing  while  these  riots  were
going  on  ?

There  must  have  been  in  the  Assembly  a  certain  number  of
men  who  understood  that  the  rising  of  the  peasants  at  that
moment  represented  a  revolutionary  force ;  but  the  mass  of
the  middle  classes  in  the  provinces  saw  only  a  danger  against
which  it  was  necessary  to  arm  themselves.  What  was  called  at
the  time  la  grande  -peur  ("  the  great  fear  ")  seized,  in  fact,  on  a
good  many  of  tKe" towns  in  the  region  of  the  risings.  At
Troyes,  for  example,  some  countrymen  armed  with  scythes
and  flails  had  entered  the  town,  and  would  probably  have
pillaged  the  houses  of  the  speculators,  when  the  middle  classes,
"  all  who  were  honest  among  the  middle  classes,"  *  armed
themselves  against  "  the  brigands "  and  drove  them  away.
The  same  thing  happened  in  many  other  towns.  The
middle  classes  were  seized  with  panic.  They  were  expecting
"  the  brigands."  Some  one  had  seen  "  six  thousand  "  on  the
march  to  plunder  everything,  and  the  middle  classes  took
possession  of  the  arms  which  they  found  at  the  Town  Hall  or
at  the  armourers',  and  organised  their  National  Guard,  for
fear  lest  the  poor  folk  of  the  town,  making  common  cause  with
"  the  brigands,"  might  attack  the  rich.

At  Peronne,  the  capital  of  Picardy,  the  inhabitants  had
revolted  in  the  second  half  of  July.  They  burnt  the  toll-gates,
threw  the  Custom  House  officers  into  the  water,  carried  off  the
receipts  from  the  Government  offices  and  set  free  all  the
prisoners.  All  this  was  done  before  July  28.  "  After  receiving
the  news  from  Paris  on  the  night  of  the  28th,"  wrote  the  Mayor
of  Peronne,  "  Hainault,  Flanders  and  all  Picardy  have  taken
up  arms ;  the  tocsin  is  ringing  in  all  the  towns  and  villages."
Three  hundred  thousand  middle-class  men  were  formed  into
permanent  patrols — and  all  this  to  be  ready  for  two  thousand
"  brigands,"  that,  they  said,  were  overrunning  the  villages  and
burning  the  crops.  In  reality,  as  some  one  aptly  remarked  to
Arthur  Young,  all  these  "  brigands "  were  nothing  more  than
peasants,!  who  were,  indeed,  rising,  and,  armed  with  pitchforks,
cudgels  and  scythes,  were  compelling  the  lords  to  abdicate  their

*  Moniteur,  i.  378.  f  Travels  in  France,  p.  225.


THE  PEASANT  RISING  117

feudal  rights,  and  were  stopping  passers-by  to  ask  them  if  they
were  "  for  the  nation."  The  Mayor  of  Peronne  has  also
aptly  said  :  "  We  are  willing  to  be  in  the  Terror.  Thanks  to
the  sinister  rumours,  we  can  keep  on  foot  an  army  of  three
millions  of  middle-class  men  and  peasants  all  over  France."
f'Adrien  Duport,  a  well-known  member  of  the  Assembly  and
of  the  Breton  Club,  even  boasted  of  having  armed  in  this  way
the  middle  classes  in  a  great  many  towns.  He  had  two  or  three
agents,  "  resolute  but  not  well-known  men,"  who  avoided  the
towns,  but  on  arriving  at  a  village  would  announce  that  "  the
brigands  were  coming."  "  There  are  five  hundred,  a  thousand,
three  thousand  of  them,"  said  these  emissaries,  "  they  are
burning  all  the  crops  round  about,  so  that  the  people  may
starve."  Thereupon  the  tocsin  would  be  rung  and  the
villages  would  arm  themselves.  And  by  the  time  that  the
sinister  rumour  reached  the  towns,  the  numbers  would  have
grown  to  six  thousand  brigands.  They  had  been  seen  about  a
league  off  in  such  a  forest ;  then  the  townspeople,  especially
the  middle  classes,  would  arm  themselves  and  send  patrols
into  the  forest — to  find  nothing  there.  But  the  important
point  was  that  the  peasants  were  thus  being  armed.  Let  the
King  take  care  !  When  he  tries  to  escape,  in  1791,  he  will
find  the  armed  peasants  in  his  way.%,

We  can  imagine  the  terror  which  these  risings  inspired  all
through  France  :  we  can  imagine  the  impression  that  they
made  at  Versailles,  and  it  was  under  the  domination  of  this
terror  that  the  National  Assembly  met  on  the  evening  of
August  4  to  discuss  what  measures  should  be  taken  to  suppress
the  jacquerie.


CHAPTER  XVII
AUGUST  4  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES

Night  of  August  4 — Aristocracy  pretends  to  relinquish  feudal
rights — Assembly  begs  King  to  take  action — D'Aiguillon  and
de  Noailles  take  up  cause  of  peasants — Their  great  speeches
— Le  Guen  de  K6rangall — Scene  in  Assembly — Extent  of
actual  concessions — Effect  of  news  in  provinces — Middle
classes  take  up  arms  against  peasants.

THE  night  of  August  4  is  one  of  the  great  dates  of  the  Revolu-
tion. Like  July  14  and  October  15,  1789,  June  21,  1791,
August  10,  1792,  and  May  31,  1793,  it  marked  one  of  the  great
stages  in  the  revolutionary  movement,  and  it  determined  the
character  of  the  period  which  follows  it.

The  historic  legend  is  lovingly  used  to  embellish  this  night,
and  the  majority  of  historians,  copying  the  story  as  it  has  been
given  by  a  few  contemporaries,  represent  it  as  a  night  full  of
enthusiasm  and  saintly  abnegation.

With  the  taking  of  the  Bastille,  the  historians  tell  us,  the
Revolution  had  gained  its  first  victory.  The  news  spread  to
the  provinces,  and  provoked  everywhere  somewhat  similar
insurrections.  It  penetrated  to  the  villages,  and,  at  the  in-
stigation of  all  kinds  of  vagabonds,  the  peasants  attacked  their
lords  and  burnt  the  chateaux.  Whereupon  the  clergy  and
nobility,  filled  with  a  patriotic  impulse,  seeing  that  they  had
as  yet  done  nothing  for  the  peasant,  began  to  relinquish  their
feudal  rights  during  this  memorable  night.  The  nobles,  the
clergy,  the  poorest  parish  priest  and  the  richest  of  the
feudal  lords,  all  renounced  upon  the  altar  of  their  country
their  secular  prerogatives.  A  wave  of  enthusiasm  passed
through  the  Assembly ;  all  were  eager  to  make  their  sacrifice.
"  The  sitting  was  a  holy  feast,  the  tribune  an  altar,  the  Assembly

zi8


AUGUST  4  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES 119

Hall  a  temple,"  says  one  of  the  historians,  who  are  usually  calm
enough.  "  It  was  a  Saint  Bartholomew  of  property,"  say  the
others.  And  when  the  first  beams  of  day  broke  over  France  on
the  morrow  the  old  feudal  system  no  longer  existed.  "  France
was  a  country  born  anew,  having  made  an  auto-da-fe  of  all  the
abuses  of  its  privileged  classes."

That  is  the  legend.  It  is  true  that  a  profound  enthusiasm
thrilled  the  Assembly  when  two  nobles,  the  Viscount  de  Noailles
and  the  Duke  d'Aiguillon,  put  the  demand  for  the  abolition  of
feudal  rights,  as  well  as  of  the  various  privileges  of  the
nobility,  and  when  two  bishops — those  of  Nancy  and  of  Chartres
— spoke  demanding  the  abolition  of  the  tithes.  It  is  true  that
the  enthusiasm  went  on  ever  increasing,  and  that  during  this
all-night  sitting  nobles  and  clergy  followed  one  another  to  the
tribune  and  disputed  who  should  first  give  up  their  seignorial
courts  of  justice.  Pleas  were  to  be  heard,  made  by  the  privileged
persons,  for  justice — free,  unbought,  and  equal  for  all.  Lords,
lay  and  ecclesiastic,  were  seen  relinquishing  their  game  laws.
(The  Assembly  was  carried  f  away  by  its  enthusiasm,  and  ^X
in  this  enthusiasm  nobody  remarked  the  clause  for  redeeming
the  feudal  rights  and  tithes,  which  the  two  nobles  and  the  two
bishops  had  introduced  into  their  speeches — a  clause  terrible
even  in  its  vagueness,  since  it  might  mean  all  or  nothing,  and
did,  in  fact,  postpone,  as  we  shall  see,  the  abolition  of  feudal
rights  for  four  years — until  August  1793.  But  which  of  us  in
reading  the  beautiful  story  of  that  night,  written  by  its  con-
temporaries, has  not  been  carried  away  by  enthusiasm  in  his
turn  ?  And  who  has  not  passed  over  those  traitorous  words,
"rachat  au  denier  30"  (redemption  at  a  thirty-years'  purchase),
without  understanding  their  terrible  import  ?  This  is  also
what  happened  in  France  in  1789.  J

The  evening  sitting  of  August  4  had  at  first  begun  with  panic,
not  with  enthusiasm.  We  have  just  seen  that  a  number  of
chateaux  had  been  burnt  or  plundered  during  the  previous
fortnight.  Beginning  in  the  east,  the  peasant  insurrection
spread  towards  the  south,  the  north  and  the  centre ;  it
threatened  to  become  general.  In  a  few  places  the  peasants
had  acted  savagely  towards  their  masters,  and  the  news  which


120 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

came  in  from  the  provinces  exaggerated  what  had  happened.
The  nobles  ascertained  with  alarm  that  there  was  not  any  force
on  the  spot  capable  of  checking  the  riots.

The  sitting  opened,  therefore,  with  the  reading  of  a  scheme
for  issuing  a  proclamation  against  the  risings.  The  Assembly
was  invited  to  pronounce  an  energetic  condemnation  of  the
rioters  and  to  command  most  emphatically  respect  for  property,
whether  feudal  or  not,  while  waiting  for  the  Assembly  to
legislate  on  the  matter.

"  It  appears  that  property,  of  no  matter  what  nature,  is  the
prey  of  the  most  culpable  brigandage,"  said  the  Committee  of
Inquiry.  "  On  all  sides  chateaux  are  burnt,  convents  destroyed
and  farms  given  over  to  pillage.  The  taxes  and  seignorial  dues
all  are  done  away  with.  The  laws  are  powerless,  the  magistrates
are  without  authority.  ,  .  ."  And  the  report  demanded  that
the  Assembly  should  censure  severely  the  disturbances  and
declare  "  that  the  old  laws  (the  feudal  laws)  were  in  existence
until  the  authority  of  the  nation  had  abrogated  or  modified
them,  that  all  the  customary  dues  and  payments  should  be  paid
as  in  the  past,  until  it  should  have  been  ordained  otherwise  by
the  Assembly."

"  They  are  not  brigands  who  do  that !  "  exclaimed  the  Duke
d'Aiguillon  ;  "  in  several  provinces  the  whole  of  the  people
have  entered  into  a  league  to  destroy  the  chateaux  to  ravage
the  lands,  and  above  all  to  get  possession  of  the  record-rooms
where  the  title-deeds  of  the  feudal  properties  are  deposited."
It  is  certainly  not  enthusiasm  that  speaks  here  :  it  is  more  like
fear.*

The  Assembly  proceeded  in  consequence  to  beg  the  King  to
take  stringent  measures  against  the  rebellious  peasants.  This
had  already  been  spoken  of  the  day  before,  August  3.  But
for  some  days  past  a  certain  number  of  the  nobility — a  few  more
advanced  in  their  ideas  than  the  rest  of  their  class,  and  who
saw  more  clearly  all  that  was  happening  :  the  Viscount  de

*  "  To  ravage  the  lands  "  would  probably  mean  that  in  certain
places  the  peasants  reaped  the  harvests  belonging  to  the  lords  while
they  were  yet  green.  Besides,  it  was  the  end  of  July,  the  corn  was
nearly  ripe,  and  the  people,  who  had  nothing  to  eat,  cut  the  corn
belonging  to  the  lords.


AUGUST  4  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES 121

Noailles,  the  Duke  d'Aiguillon,  the  Duke  de  La  Rochefoucauld,
Alexandre  de  Lamotte  and  some  others — were  secretly  consult-
ing together  as  to  the  attitude  to  be  taken  towards  the  jacquerie.
They  had  understood  that  the  only  means  of  saving  the  feudal
rights  was  to  sacrifice  the  honorary  rights  and  prerogatives  of
little  value,  and  to  demand  the  redemption  by  the  peasants  of
the  feudal  dues  attached  to  the  land  and  having  a  real  value.
They  commissioned  the  Duke  d'Aiguillon  with  the  develop-
ment of  these  ideas,  and  this  is  how  it  was  done  by  the  Viscount
de  Noailles  and  the  Duke  d'Aiguillon.

f  Ever  since  the  Revolution  began  the  country  folk  had  de-
manded the  abolition  of  the  feudal  rights.*  At  the  present
time,  said  the  two  spokesmen  of  the  liberal  nobility,  the  rural
districts,  dissatisfied  that  nothing  has  been  done  for  them  during
these  three  months,  are  in  a  state  of  revolt ;  they  are  no  longer
under  control,  and  the  choice  now  lies  "  between  the  destruc-
tion of  society  and  certain  concessions."  These  concessions
were  formulated  by  the  Viscount  de  Noailles  thus :  Equality  of
all  persons  under  taxation,  which  should  be  paid  in  proportion
to  the  income  ;  all  public  expenses  to  be  contributed  to  by  all ;
"  all  the  feudal  rights  to  be  redeemed  by  the  (village)  communes
by  means  of  a  yearly  rent "  ;  and  lastly,  "  the  abolition  without
redemption  of  the  seignorial  statute-labours,  of  mortmain  and
other  kinds  of  personal  servitude."  t  )  It  must  also  be  said  that

*  "  The  marks  of  transport  and  effusion  of  generous  sentiment  which
made  the  picture  presented  by  the  Assembly  more  lively  and  spirited
from  hour  to  hour,  scarcely  left  time  for  coming  to  some  agreement
over  the  prudential  measures  thought  advisable  for  carrying  into
effect  those  beneficent  projects,  which  had  been  voted  in  so  many
memorials  of  both  provincial  and  parochial  assemblies — wherever  the
citizens  had  been  able  to  meet  for  the  last  eighteen  months — amid
touching  expressions  of  opinion  and  ardent  protestations."

f  "  All  the  feudal  rights  were  to  be  redeemable  by  the  communes,
either  by  money  or  exchange,"  said  the  Viscount  de  Noailles.  "  Every
one  will  be  subject  to  all  the  public  charges,  all  the  State  charges
(subsides),  without  any  distinction,"  said  d'Aiguillon.  "  I  demand
the  redemption  for  the  ecclesiastical  funds,"  said  Lafare,  Bishop  of
Nancy,  "  and  I  demand  that  the  redemption  be  not  turned  to  the
profit  of  the  ecclesiastical  lord,  but  that  it  may  be  invested  usefully
for  the  poor."  The  Bishop  of  Chartres  demanded  the  abolition  of
the  game  laws,  and  renounced  those  rights  for  his  own  part.  Where-
upon both  nobles  and  clergy  rise  at  the  same  time  to  follow  his  example.
De  Richer  demanded  not  only  the  abolition  of  the  manorial  courts  of


122 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

for  some  time  past  the  personal  services  had  been  no  longer
paid  by  the  peasants.  We  have  very  clear  evidence  on  that
head  from  the  governors  of  the  provinces.  After  the  revolt
of  July  it  was  plain  that  they  would  never  be  paid  again,  whether
the  lord  renounced  them  or  not.

These  concessions,  proposed  by  the  Viscount  de  Noailles,
were,  however,  cut  down,  both  by  the  nobles  and  by  the  middle-
class  deputies,  of  whom  a  great  number  possessed  landed
property  comprising  feudal  rights.  The  Duke  d'Aiguillon,
who  followed  de  Noailles  in  the  tribune,  and  whom  the  above-
mentioned  nobles  had  chosen  as  their  spokesman,  spoke  of  the
peasants  with  sympathy ;  he  excused  their  insurrection,  but
his  conclusion  was  that  "  the  barbarous  remnants  of  the  feudal
laws  which  still  exist  in  France  are — there  is  no  need  for
dissimulation — a  species  of  property,  and  all  property  is  sacred"
"  Equity"  said  he,  "  forbids  us  to  exact  the  renunciation  of  any
property  without  granting  a  just  indemnity  to  the  owner."  He
also  softened  down  the  Viscount  de  Noailles'  phrase  about  the
taxes,  by  saying  that  all  citizens  should  contribute  "  in  propor-
tion to  their  means."  And  as  to  the  feudal  rights,  he  demanded
that  all  these  rights — the  personal  rights  as  well  as  the  others —
might  be  redeemed  by  the  vassals  "  if  they  so  desired,"  the  com-
pensation being  "  au  denier  30" — that  is,  thirty  times  the  annual
payment.  This  was  to  make  redemption  a  sham,  because  for
land  rents  it  was  heavy  enough  at  twenty-five  years,  and  in
business  transactions  rent  is  generally  reckoned  at  twenty,  or
even  seventeen.

These  two  speeches  were  received  by  the  gentlemen  of  the
Third  Estate  with  enthusiasm,  and  they  have  come  down  to
posterity  as  sublime  acts  of  abnegation  on  the  part  of  the
nobility,  while  in  reality  the  National  Assembly,  which  followed
the  programme  laid  down  by  the  Duke  d'Aiguillon,  created
thereby  the  very  conditions  of  the  terrible  struggles  which
later  on  steeped  the  Revolution  in  blood.  The  few  peasants
who  were  in  this  Assembly  did  not  speak,  and  nobody  called

justice,  but  also  that  justice  should  be  dispensed  gratuitously.  Several
priests  asked  that  they  might  be  allowed  to  sacrifice  their  perquisites
(casuel),  but  that  a  tax  in  money  should  take  the  place  of  the  tithe.


AUGUST  4  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES 123

attention  to  the  small  value  of  the  "  renunciations  "  of  the • ...
nobles. As  to  the  mass  of  the  deputies  of  the  Third  Estate,
who  were  city  men  for  the  most  part,  and  therefore  probably  had
only  a  very  vague  idea  about  the  feudal  rights  as  a  whole,  as
well  as  about  the  significance  of  the  peasant  rising,  in  their A
, eyes,  to  renounce  the  feudal  rights,  even  on  terms  of  redemp- I
tion,  was  to  make  a  sublime  sacrifice  to  the  Revolution.

Le  Guen  de  Kerangall,  a  Breton  deputy,  "  dressed  as  a
peasant,"  then  uttered  some  beautiful  and  moving  words.
These  words,  when  he  spoke  of  the  "  infamous  parchments  "
which  registered  the  obligations  of  personal  servitude,  survivals
of  serfdom,  made,  and  still  make,  hearts  throb.  But  he,  too,
did  not  speak  against  a  redemption  of  all  the  feudal  rights,
including  those  same  "  infamous  "  services,  imposed  "  in  times
of  darkness  and  ignorance,"  the  injustice  of  which  he  so
eloquently  denounced.

It  is  certain  that  the  spectacle  presented  by  the  Assembly
during  that  night  must  have  been  fine — representatives  of  the
nobility  and  clergy  coming  forward  to  relinquish  the  privileges
they  had  exercised  without  question  for  centuries.  The  action
and  the  word  were  magnificent  when  the  nobles  rose  to  renounce
their  privileges  in  the  matter  of  taxes,  and  the  priests  to  re-
nounce their  tithes,  the  poorest  curates  among  them  giving  up
the  casuely  the  greatest  lords  giving  up  their  courts  of  manorial
justice,  and  all  of  them  relinquishing  the  hunting  rights,  asking
for  the  suppression  of  the  pigeon-houses,  which  had  been  such  a
plague  to  the  peasants.  /*  It  was  fine  to  see,  also,  whole  provinces
renouncing  privileges  winch  had  created  for  them  an  exceptional
position  in  the  kingdom.  The  category  of  pays  d'etats  endowed
with  special  rights  was  thus  suppressed,  and  the  privileges  of
the  towns,  several  of  which  held  feudal  rights  over  the  neigh-
bouring country,  were  abolished.  The  representatives  of  the
Dauphine  (where,  as  we  have  seen,  the  rising  had  been  strong
and  widespread)  having  led  the  way  for  the  abolition  of  pro-
vincial distinctions,  the  others  followed  them.}

All  the  eye-witnesses  of  this  memorable  sitting  have  given
glowing  descriptions  of  it.  When  the  nobility  accepted  in
principle  the  redemption  of  the  feudal  rights,  the  clergy  were


i24 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

called  upon  to  declare  themselves.  They  accepted  fully  the
redemption  of  the  ecclesiastical  feudalities  on  the  condition
that  the  price  of  redemption  should  not  create  personal  fortunes
amongst  the  clergy,  but  that  the  whole  should  be  employed  in
works  of  general  utility.  A  bishop  then  spoke  about  the  injuries
done  in  the  peasants'  fields  by  the  packs  of  hounds  kept  by  the
lords,  and  demanded  the  abolition  of  the  hunting  privileges,  and
immediately  the  nobility  gave  their  assent  by  a  loud  and  im-
passioned shout.  The  enthusiasm  reached  a  very  high  pitch
during  the  sitting,  and  when  the  Assembly  separated  at  two
o'clock  in  the  morning,  every  one  felt  that  the  foundations  of
a  new  society  had  been  laid.

It  would  not  be  fair  to  try  to  diminish  the  importance  of
that  night.  Enthusiasm  of  this  kind  is  needed  to  push  on  events.
It  will  be  needed  again  when  a  Social  Revolution  comes.  In  a
revolution  enthusiasm  must  be  provoked,  and  words  which
make  hearts  vibrate  must  be  pronounced.  The  fact  that  the
nobility,  the  clergy  and  the  privileged  persons  of  every  kind
had  recognised  during  that  night's  sitting  the  progress  of  the
Revolution,  that  they  decided  to  submit  to  it  instead  of  taking
up  arms  against  it — this  fact  by  itself  was  already  a  conquest
of  the  human  mind.  It  was  all  the  greater  as  the  renunciation
was  made  with  enthusiasm.  It  is  true  that  it  was  done  in  the
light  of  the  burning  chateaux,  but  how  many  times  had  that
same  light  merely  provoked  in  the  privileged  classes  an  obstinate
resistance,  and  led  to  hatred  and  massacre !  That  night  in
August  those  distant  flames  inspired  other  words — words  of
sympathy  for  the  rebels ;  and  other  acts — acts  of  conciliation.

Ever  since  July  14,  the  spirit  of  the  Revolution,  born  of  the
ferment  which  was  working  through  the  whole  of  France,  was
hovering  over  everything  that  lived  and  felt,  and  this  spirit,
created  by  millions  of  wills,  gave  the  inspiration  that  we  lack  in
ordinary  times.

But  having  pointed  out  the  effects  of  the  enthusiasm  which
only  a  revolution  could  inspire,  the  historian  must  also  consider
calmly  how  far  all  this  enthusiasm  did  actually  go,  and  what
was  the  limit  it  dared  not  pass  ;  he  must  point  out  what  it  gave
the  people  and  what  it  refused  to  grant  them.


AUGUST  4  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES 125

Well,  that  limit  can  be  indicated  in  very  few  words.  The
Assembly  only  sanctioned  in  principle  and  extended  to  France
altogether  what  the  people  had  accomplished  themselves  in
certain  localities.  It  went  no  further.  \

We  have  seen  what  the  people  had  already  done  in  Strasbourg
and  in  so  many  other  towns.  They  had  compelled  all  the
citizens,  noble  and  middle-class,  to  share  the  taxation,  and  had
proclaimed  the  necessity  of  an  income  tax — and  the  National
Assembly  accepted  that.  The  people  had  abolished  all  honorary
offices,  and  the  nobility  agreed  to  renounce  those  offices  on
August  4  ;  by  so  doing,  they  again  accepted  a  revolutionary
act.  The  people  had  also  abolished  the  manorial  courts  of
justice  and  appointed  judges  by  election ;  the  Assembly
accepted  this  in  its  turn.  Finally,  the  people  had  abolished  the
privileges  of  the  towns  and  the  provincial  toll-gates — it  was
actually  done  in  the  eastern  provinces — and  now  the  Assembly
made  a  general  principle  of  a  fact  already  accomplished  in  a
part  of  the  kingdom.

For  the  rural  districts  the  clergy  admitted  in  principle  that
the  tithes  should  be  redeemable ;  but  in  how  many  places
were  the  people  paying  them  !  And  when  the  Assembly
tried  afterwards  to  exact  payment  up  to  1791,  it  had  to
resort  to  threats  of  execution  to  compel  the  peasants  to
obey.  Let  us  rejoice,  certainly,  that  the  clergy  yielded  to  the
abolition  of  the  tithes — under  the  condition  that  they  should
be  redeemed — but  let  us  also  say  that  the  clergy  would  have
done  infinitely  better  had  they  not  insisted  on  redemption.
What  struggles,  what  hatreds,  what  bloodshed  had  been  spared
if  they  had  given  up  the  tithes  and  had  left  the  payment  of  their
salaries  to  the  nation  or  their  parishioners.  As  to  the  feudal
rights,  how  much  strife  would  have  been  avoided  if  the  Assembly,
instead  of  accepting  the  motion  of  the  Duke  d'Aiguillon,  had
simply  adopted  on  August  4,  1789,  that  of  the  Viscount
de  Noailles,  which  after  all  was  a  very  modest  proposal :  the
abolition  without  indemnity  of  the  personal  dues,  and  redemp-
tion for  the  rents  attaching  to  land.  But,  to  arrive  at  this
latter  measure,  in  1792,  how  much  blood  had  to  flow  during
three  years,  not  to  mention  the  savage  struggles  which  had  to  /


126 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

be  gone  through  to  attain  in  1793  the  total  abolition  of  feudal
rights  without  redemption  ?

But  let  us  for  the  moment  do  as  the  men  of  1789  did.  Every
one  was  filled  with  joy  after  that  sitting.  Every  one  congratu-
lated themselves  upon  that  Saint  Bartholomew  of  feudal  abuses,
which  proves  how  important  it  is  during  a  revolution  to  recog-
nise, or  at  least  to  proclaim,  a  new  principle.  Couriers  were
despatched  from  Paris,  carrying  the  great  news  to  every  corner
of  France  :  "  All  the  feudal  rights  are  abolished  !  "  For  it
was  so  that  the  decisions  of  the  Assembly  were  understood  by
the  people,  and  it  was  so  stated  in  the  first  article  of  the  reso-
lution of  August  5.  All  the  feudal  rights  are  abolished  !
No  more  tithes !  No  more  quit-rents !  No  more  dues  on  the
sales  of  inheritance,  no  more  payments  in  kind,  nor  statute-
labours,  nor  subsidies  !  The  game  laws  are  gone  !  Done  with
the  pigeon-houses  :  all  game  is  henceforth  free  to  everybody  !
There  were  to  be  no  more  nobles,  no  privileged  persons  of  any
sort :  every  one  was  equal  before  the  judge  elected  by  all !

At  least  this  was  how  the  night  of  August  4  was  understood
in  the  provinces.  And  before  the  resolutions  of  August  5  and
1 1  had  been  published,  before  the  line  of  demarcation  between
what  should  be  redeemed  and  what  should  disappear  since  that
day  had  been  marked  out — long  before  those  acts  and  renuncia-
tions had  been  formulated  into  paragraphs  of  law,  messengers
had  already  brought  the  good  news  to  the  peasant.  Hence-
forth, whether  he  was  shot  down  or  not,  he  would  no  longer  pay
anything.

(  The  peasant  insurrection  took,  therefore,  a  new  force.  It
spread  through  the  provinces,  such  as  Brittany,  which  until
then  had  remained  quiet.  And  if  the  landowners  demanded
payment  of  any  kind  of  dues,  the  peasants  went  to  their  chateaux
and  burnt  all  the  records  and  land-registers.  They  did  not
care  to  submit  to  the  decrees  of  August  and  distinguish  between
redeemable  rights  and  abolished  rights,  says  Du  ChateUier.*J
Everywhere,  all  over  France,  the  pigeon-houses  and  game  were
destroyed.  In  the  villages  the  peasants  ate  their  fill  therefore,

*  Histoire  de  la  Revolution  dans  les  dSpartements  de  I'ancienne  Bre-
tagne,  8  vols.,  vol.  i.  p.  422.


AUGUST  4  AND  ITS  CONSEQUENCES 127

and  they  also  took  possession  of  those  lands  which,  though
formerly  belonging  to  the  village  communities,  had  been
seized  by  the  lords.

(It  was  then  that  in  the  east  of  France  one  could  see  what  has
happened  later  on  more  or  less  all  over  France — namely,  the
middle  classes  interposing  against  the  peasants  in  favour  of  the
landlords.)  Liberal  historians  have  passed  this  by  in  silence,  but
it  is  a  fact  of  the  highest  importance  for  the  comprehension  of
the  history  of  the  next  few  years.

We  have  seen  that  the  peasant  rising  attained  its  greatest
vigour  in  the  Dauphine  and  in  eastern  France  generally.  The
rich  people  and  the  lords  fled,  Necker  complaining  that  he  had
to  furnish*sixr  thousand  passportslto  the  richest  inhabitants
in  a  fortnight.  Switzerland  was  inundated  with  them.  But
the  middle-class  people  who  remained  armed  themselves  and
organised  their  militia,  and  the  National  Assembly  soon  voted  a  £^
draconian  measure  against  the  peasants  (August  10).*  Under
the  pretext  that  the  insurrection  was  the  work  of  brigands,  it
authorised  the  municipalities  to  call  out  the  troops,  to  disarm
all  men  without  profession  and  without  domicile,  to  disperse  the
bands  and  to  deal  with  them  summarily.  The  middle  classes
of  the  Dauphine*  profited  largely  by  these  laws.  When  bands
of  peasants  in  revolt  passed  through  Burgundy,  burning  the
chateaux,  the  middle-class  men  in  the  towns  and  villages  leagued
themselves  against  them.  One  of  these  bands,  says  the  Deux
amis  de  la  liberte^  was  defeated  at  Cormatin  on  July  27,  when
twenty  were  killed  and  sixty  taken  prisoners.  At  Cluny  there
were  a  hundred  killed  and  one  hundred  and  sixty  prisoners.
The  municipality  of  Macon  made  war  in  due  form  upon  the
peasants,  who  refused  to  pay  the  tithe,  and  they  hanged  twenty
of  them.  Twelve  peasants  were  hanged  at  Douai ;  at  Lyons  the
middle  classes,  while  fighting  the  peasants,  killed  eighty  of
them  and  took  sixty  prisoners.  In  the  Dauphin6  the  Provost-
Marshal  went  all  over  the  country  hanging  the  rebellious
peasants.!  In  the  Rouergue,  the  town  of  Milhaud  appealed

**Buchez  and^Roux,  Histoire  parlementaire,  vol.  ii.  p.  254.

t  After  the  defeat  of  two  large  bands  of  peasants,  one  of  which
threatened  to  attack  the  chateaux  of  Cormatin,  the  other  the  town  of
Cluny,  and  after  punishments  of  a  frightful  severity  had  been  inflicted,


128 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

to  the  neighbouring  towns,  inviting  them  to  arm  themselves
against  the  brigands  and  those  who  refused  to  pay  the  taxes.*

In  short,  we  see  by  these  several  acts,  of  which  it  would  be
easy  to  increase  the  list,  that  wherever  the  rising  of  the  peasants
was  the  most  violent,  there  the  middle  classes  undertook  to
crush  it ;  and  they  would  have  undoubtedly  helped  considerably
to  do  it  if  the  news  which  came  from  Paris  after  the  night  of
August  4  had  not  given  a  new  impetus  to  the  insurrection.

The  peasant  rising  apparently  slackened  only  in  September
or  October,  perhaps  on  account  of  the  ploughing  ;  but  in
January  1790  we  learn,  from  the  account  of  the  Feudalism
Committee,  that  the  peasant  insurrection  had  begun  again  with
renewed  vigour,  probably  because  of  the  claims  for  payment.
The  peasants  were  unwilling  to  submit  to  the  distinction  made
by  the  Assembly  between  the  dues  attached  to  the  land  and  the
personal  services,  and  they  rose  in  order  that  they  should  pay
nothing  at  all.

We  shall  return  to  this  very  important  subject  in  one  of  the
succeeding  chapters.

the  war  went  on,  but  in  a  scattered  way,  say  Buchez  and  Roux.  "  How-
ever the  Permanent  Committee  of  Macon  illegally  constituted  itself
into  a  tribunal,  by  order  of  which  twenty  of  these  unhappy  peasants
were  executed  for  the  crime  of  hunger  and  for  having  rebelled  against
the  tithe  and  feudal  laws "  (p.  244).  Everywhere  the  rising  was
clearly  provoked  by  acts  of  minor  importance,  by  disputes  with  the
lord  or  the  chapter  about  a  meadow  or  a  fountain,  and  in  one  chateau,
to  which  the  rights  of  plenary  jurisdiction  belonged,  several  vassals
were  hanged  for  marauding  offences,  &c.  The  pamphlets  of  the  time,
which  Buchez  and  Roux  consulted,  say  that  the  parlement  (the  Court)
of  Douai  ordered  twelve  leaders  of  bands  to  be  executed  ;  the  Committee
of  Electors  (middle-class  men)  at  Lyons  sent  out  a  flying  column  of
volunteer  National  Guards.  One  contemporary  pamphlet  states  that
this  little  army  in  a  single  engagement  killed  eighty  of  the  so-called
brigands,  and  took  sixty  prisoners.  The  Provost-Marshal  of  the
Dauphine,  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  middle-class  militia,  marched  through
the  country  and  executed  as  he  went  (Buchez  and  Roux,  vol.  ii.  p.  245).
*  Courrier  parisien,  sitting  of  August  19,  1789,  p.  1729.


CHAPTER  XVIII
THE  FEUDAL  RIGHTS  REMAIN

Assembly  and  feudal  privileges — Survivals  of  serfdom — Obli-
gations to  feudal  lord — Lords  try  to  back  out  of  their  promises
— Church  tithes  abolished  in  theory  but  not  in  practice —
Disappointment  of  peasants — Game  laws — Feudal  rights —
Personal  servitude  alone  abolished — Other  dues  remain —
Redemption  of  land  rendered  impossible — Effect  of  vagueness
of  Assembly — Article  of  August  4,  1789,  not  to  be  taken
literally — Peasants  refuse  to  pay — King  the  rallying-point  of
feudalism — Tactics  of  Assembly — Its  resolutions  finally  pub-
lished by  the  King

WHEN  the  Assembly  met  again  on  August  5  to  draw  up,  under
the  form  of  resolutions,  the  list  of  renunciations  which  had
been  made  during  the  historic  night  of  the  ^th,  one  could  see
up  to  what  point  the  Assembly  was  on  the  side  of  property,
and  how  it  was  going  to  defend  every  one  of  the  pecuniary
advantages  attached  to  those  same  feudal  privileges,  which
it  had  made  a  show  of  abandoning  a  few  hours  before.

There  were  still  in  France,  under  the  name  of  mainmortes,
banalites*  &c.,  a  few  survivals  of  the  ancient  serfdom.  There
were  still  peasants  subject  to  mortmain  in  the  Franche-Comte,
the  Nivernais  and  the  Bourbonnais.  They  were  serfs  in  the
true  sense  of  the  word  ;  they  could  not  sell  their  goods,  nor
transmit  them  by  inheritance,  except  to  those  of  their  children
who  lived  with  them.  They  remained  therefore  attached  to
the  soil.f  How  many  they  were  we  do  not  exactly  know,  but

*  The  common  oven,  mill,  press,  &c.,  belonging  to  the  lord,  for  the
use  of  which  the  peasants  had  to  pay,  besides  suffering  much  loss  of
food,  grain  and  wine.

f  The  fact  of  being  attached  to  the  land  is  what  constitutes  the
essence  of  serfdom.  Wherever  serfdom  has  existed  for  several  cen-
turies, the  lords  have  also  obtained  from  the  State  rights  over  the
person  of  the  serf,  which  made  serfdom  (in  Russia,  for  example,  at  the

129  I


130 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

it  is  thought  that  the  number  given  by  Boncerf  as  three  hundred
thousand  mainmortables  is  the  most  probable.*

Besides  these  mainmortables  there  were  a  very  large  number
of  peasants  and  also  of  free  townsmen,  who  were,  nevertheless,
still  held  under  personal  obligations  either  to  their  former
lords  or  else  to  the  lords  of  the  lands  they  had  bought  or
held  on  lease.

It  is  estimated  that  as  a  rule  the  privileged  classes — the
nobility  and  clergy — held  half  the  lands  of  every  village,  but
that  besides  these  lands,  which  were  their  property,  they  still
retained  various  feudal  rights  over  the  lands  owned  by  the
\  peasants.  ^  Small  proprietors  were  even  then  very  numerous

in  France,  but  there  were  very  few  of  them,  adds  M.  Sagnac,
who  "  held  by  right  of  freehold,  who  did  not  owe  at  least  a
quit-rent,  or  some  other  due,  in  recognition  of  the  seigniory."
Nearly  all  lands  paid  something,  either  in  money  or  in  a  portion
of  the  crops,  to  some  or  other  lord.}

(These  obligations  varied  very  much,  but  they  may  be
divided  into  five  classes  :  (i)  The  personal  obligations,  often
humiliating — relics  of  serfdom  ;  t  (2)  payments  of  all  sorts  in
money,  in  kind  or  in  work,  which  were  due  for  a  real  or  supposed
concession  of  land  ;  these  were  the  mortmain  and  the  real
statute-labours,!  the  quit-rent,  the  field-rent,  the  land-tax,
the  fines  on  sales  and  on  inheritance  ;  (3)  various  payments
resulting  from  the  lords'  monopolies  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  lords
levied  certain  customs-revenues,  certain  town-dues,  or  certain
rents  from  those  who  used  their  markets  or  their  measures,

beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century)  a  state  closely  akin  to  slavery,
and  in  the  current  language  of  the  day  allowed  serfdom  to  be  con-
founded with  slavery.

*  Sagnac,  La  legislation  civile  de  la  Revolution  francaise,  pp.  59,  60.

f  Arthur  Young,  writing  of  these  vexatious  and  ruinous  dues,  says  :
"  What  are  these  tortures  of  the  peasantry  in  Bretagne,  which  they
call  chevanehes,  quintaines,  soule,  saut  de  poisson,  baiser  de  mariees,
chansons  ;  transporte  d'ceuf  sur  un  charette  ;  silence  des  grenouilles,  corvee
a  misericorde  ;  milode  ;  leide  ;  couponage  ;  cartilage  ;  barrage  ;  forage  ;
marechausse;  bauvin;  ban  d'aout;  trousses;  gelinage;  civerage;  taillabilite  ;
vingtain  ;  sterlage  ;  bordelage  ;  minage  ;  ban  de  vendanges  ;  droit  d'accapt
.  .  .  ?  The  very  terms  .  .  .  are  unknown  in  England,  and  consequently
untranslatable  "  (Travels  in  France,  p.  319;  London,  1892).

J  "  Real  "  opposed  to  "  personal  "  means  here  an  obligation  attached
to  things,  that  is  to  say.  to  the  possession  of  the  land.-


THE  FEUDAL  RIGHTS  REMAIN  131

mills,  wine-presses,  common  ovens  and  the  rest ;  (4)  the  fees
of  justice  levied  by  the  lord  wherever  the  court  belonged  to
him,  the  taxes,  fines  and  so  on  ;  and  (5)  the  lord  possessed
the  exclusive  right  of  hunting  over  his  land  and  those  of  the
neighbouring  peasantry,  as  well  as  the  right  of  keeping  pigeon-
houses  and  rabbit-warrens,  which  conferred  a  much-coveted
honour  with  the  privilege.  /

All  these  rights  were  vexatious  to  the  last  degree,  and  they
cost  the  peasant  dear,  even  when  they  mattered  little  or  nothing
to  the  lord.  (And  it  is  a  fact,  upon  which  Boncerf  lays  stress
in  his  remarkable  work,  Les  inconvenient;  des  droits  feodaux  *
that  ever  since  1776  the  impoverished  lords,  and  especially  their
stewards,  began  to  squeeze  the  farmers,  the  tenants  and  the
peasants  generally,  in  order  to  get  out  of  them  as  much  as
possible.  In  1786  there  was  even  a  pretty  wide  revision  of
the  land-registers  for  the  purpose  of  augmenting  the  feudal
dues.  *J

The  Assembly,  therefore,  after  pronouncing  the  abolition
of  all  the  survivals  of  the  feudal  system,  halted  when  it  became
a  question  of  wording  these  renunciations  and  putting  them
into  the  written  law.

Thus  it  seemed  as  if  the  lords  having  sacrificed  their  main-
mortis,  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  said  about  it ;  they  had
only  to  put  their  renunciation  into  the  form  of  a  decree.  But
even  on  this  question  they  raised  discussions.  They  tried  to
establish  a  distinction  between  the  personal  mortmainable
serfdom,  a  condition  which  should  be  abolished  without
indemnity,  and  the  real  mortmainable  serfdom  attached  to
the  land  and  transmitted  with  the  leasing  or  purchase  of  it  :
serfs  of  the  latter  class  might  redeem  themselves.  And  if  the
Assembly  decided  in  the  end  to  abolish  without  indemnity
all  the  rights  and  dues,  feudal  as  well  as  manorial,  "which
pertained  to  mortmain,  real  or  personal,  and  to  personal
services,"  they  managed  so  as  to  cast  a  doubt  even  on  this —
especially  in  every  case  where  it  was  difficult  to  separate  the
rights  of  mortmain  from  feudal  rights  in  general.

There  was  the  same  shuffling  over  the  question  of  the
*  P.  52.


132 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Church  tithes.  It  is  known  that  the  tithes  very  often  amounted
to  a  fifth  or  even  a  quarter  of  all  harvests,  and  that  the  clergy
claimed  a  share  of  the  very  grasses  and  nuts  which  the  peasants
gathered.  These  tithes  weighed  very  heavily  upon  the  peasants,
especially  upon  the  poorer  ones.  But  then,  on  August  4,  the
clergy  had  declared  their  renunciation  of  all  tithes  in  kind,  on
condition  that  these  tithes  should  be  redeemed  by  those  who
paid  them.  But  as  they  did  not  indicate  the  conditions  of
redemption,  nor  the  rules  of  procedure  under  which  the
redemption  should  be  made,  the  renunciation  in  reality  was
reduced  to  a  simple  declaration  of  principle.  The  clergy
accepted  the  redemption  ;  they  permitted  the  peasants  to
redeem  the  tithes  if  they  wished  to  do  so,  and  to  debate  the
price  with  the  holders  of  the  tithes.  But,  on  August  6,  when
it  was  proposed  to  draw  up  the  resolutions  concerning  the
tithes,  a  difficulty  presented  itself.

There  were  tithes  which  the  clergy  had  sold  in  the  course
of  the  centuries  to  private  individuals,  and  these  tithes  were
called  lay  or  enfeoffed.  For  such  as  these  redemption  was
considered  absolutely  necessary,  in  order  to  maintain  the
right  of  property  for  the  last  purchaser.  Worse  than  that :
the  tithes  paid  by  the  peasants  to  the  clergy  themselves  were
represented  to  the  Assembly  by  certain  speakers,  as  a  tax
which  the  nation  paid  in  support  of  its  clergy  ;  and  by  degrees,
during  the  discussion,  the  opinion  prevailed  that  there  might
be  a  question  of  redeeming  the  tithes  if  the  nation  undertook
to  give  a  regular  salary  to  the  clergy.  This  discussion  lasted
five  days,  until  the  nth,  and  then  several  priests,  backed  by
the  archbishops,  declared  that  they  relinquished  the  tithes
to  the  country,  and  left  themselves  to  the  justice  and  generosity
of  the  nation.

£.  It  was  decided,  therefore,  that  the  tithes  paid  to  the  clergy
should  be  abolished  ;  but  while  means  were  being  found  for
providing  from  some  other  source  the  expenses  for  religion,
the  tithes  should  be  paid  as  formerly.  As  to  the  enfeoffed  tithes,
they  were  to  be  paid  until  they  were  redeemed.\

It  can  be  imagined  what  a  terrible  disappointment  this  was
for  the  rural  populations,  and  what  a  cause  of  disturbance.


THE  FEUDAL  RIGHTS  REMAIN  133

In  theory  the  tithes  were  suppressed,  but  in  reality  they  were
to  be  collected  as  usual.  "  "Until  when  ?  "  asked  the  peasants  ;
and  the  answer  was,  "  Until  we  find  some  other  means  of
paying  the  clergy !  "  And  as  the  finances  of  the  kingdom
were  going  from  bad  to  worse,  the  peasant  was  justified  in
asking  if  the  tithes  would  ever  be  abolished.  The  stoppage
of  work  and  the  revolutionary  agitation  manifestly  prevented
the  collection  of  the  taxes,  whilst  the  cost  of  the  new  law  and
the  new  administration  tended  necessarily  to  increase  the
difficulty.  Democratic  reforms  are  expensive  and  it  is  only
with  time  that  a  nation  in  revolution  is  able  to  pay  the  cost
of  its  reforms.  /Meanwhile  the  peasant  had  to  pay  the  tithes,  •
and  up  to  179!  they  were  exacted  from  him  in  a  very  harsh  ;
way,  and  as  he  did  not  want  to  pay,  law  upon  law  and  penalty
upon  penalty  were  decreed  by  the  Assembly  against  the
defaulters.  J

The  same  remark  applies  to  the  game  laws.  On  the  night
of  August  4  the  nobles  had  renounced  their  hunting  rights.
But  when  it  came  to  the  formulation  of  what  had  been  said,
it  was  perceived  that  this  would  give  the  right  of  hunting  to
every  one.  Whereupon  the  Assembly  retracted,  and  only
extended  the  right  of  hunting  to  all  proprietors,  or  rather  to
the  owners  of  real  estate  upon  their  own  lands.  But  here
again  they  left  rather  vague  the  formula  at  which  they  finally
stopped.  The  Assembly  abolished  the  exclusive  right  of
hunting  and  that  of  the  unenclosed  warrens,  but  they  said
that  every  proprietor  had  the  right  to  destroy  and  to  cause  to
be  destroyed,  only  upon  his  inherited  land,  all  kinds  of  game.
Did  this  authorisation  apply  to  the  farmers  ?  It  is  doubt-
ful. The  peasants,  however,  did  not  wait  for,  nor  require,
the  permission  of  tricky  lawyers.  Immediately  after  August
4  they  began  everywhere  to  destroy  the  game  belonging  to
the  lords.  After  having  seen  for  many  years  their  crops
devoured  by  the  game,  they  themselves  destroyed  the  depre-
dators without  waiting  for  any  authorisation.

Finally  as  to  what  concerned  the  essential  thing,  the  great
question  which  so  deeply  interested  more  than  twenty  millions
of  Frenchmen — the  feudal  rights — the  Assembly,  when  it  was


134 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

formulating  in  resolutions  the  renunciations  of  the  night  of
August  4,  confined  itself  simply  to  the  enunciation  of  a  principle.
^"  The  National  Assembly  destroys  entirely  the  feudal
system,"  said  the  first  article  of  the  resolutions  of  August  5.
But  the  following  articles  of  August  5  to  1 1  explain  that  only
the  personal  servitude  degrading  to  honour  should  disappear
entirely.  All  the  other  dues,  whatsoever  their  origin  or  nature,
remained.*)  They  might  be  redeemed  one  day,  but  there  was
nothing  in  the  resolutions  of  August  to  indicate  either  when
or  under  what  conditions  that  could  be  done.  No  limit  was
imposed.  Not  the  slightest  suggestion  was  made  as  to  the
legal  procedure  by  means  of  which  the  redemption  would
be  made.  Nothing — nothing  but  the  principle,  the  desideratum.
And,  meanwhile,  the  peasant  had  to  pay  everything,  as  before.

There  was  something  worse  in  these  resolutions  of  August
1789.  They  opened  the  door  to  a  measure  by  which  redemp-
tion would  be  made  impossible,  and  this  was  passed  by  the
Assembly  seven  months  later,  f  In  February  1790  they  made
redemption  absolutely  impossible  for  the  peasant  to  accept,
by  imposing  the  joint  redemption  of  all  land  rents,  personal
and  realv  M.  Sagnac  has  remarked,  on  page  90  of  his  excellent
work,  that  Demeunier  had  already  proposed  on  August  6  or  7
a  measure  of  this  kind.  And  the  Assembly,  as  we  shall  see,
made  a  law  in  February  1790,  after  which  it  became  impossible
to  redeem  the  dues  upon  the  land  without  redeeming  at  the
same  time,  in  the  same  lot,  the  personal  services,  abolished
though  they  were  since  August  5,  1789.

Carried  away  by  the  enthusiasm  with  which  Paris  and
France  received  the  news  of  that  all-night  sitting  of  August  4,
the  historians  have  not  given  sufficient  prominence  to  the
extent  of  the  restrictions  which  the  Assembly  put  against  the
first  clause  of  its  decree  by  means  of  clauses  voted  in  the  sittings
from  August  5  to  II.  Even  Louis  Blanc,  who  furnishes,
however,  in  his  chapter  La  frofriete  devant  la  Revolution,*
the  ideas  necessary  for  the  appreciation  of  the  tenor  of  the
resolutions  passed  in  August,  seems  to  hesitate  at  destroying
the  beautiful  legend,  and  he  glosses  over  the  restrictions,  or
*  Book  II.  chap.  i.


THE  FEUDAL  RIGHTS  REMAIN  135

else  tries  even  to  excuse  them  in  saying  that  "  the  logical
sequence  of  facts  in  history  is  not  so  rapid,  indeed  far  from  it,
as  that  of  the  ideas  in  the  head  of  a  thinker."  (  But  the  fact
remains  that  this  vagueness,  these  doubts,  these  hesitations,
which  the  Assembly  flung  to  the  peasants  when  they  asked
for  measures,  clear  and  precise,  to  abolish  the  old  abuses,
became  the  cause  of  the  terrible  .struggles  which  were  evolved
during  the  four  following  years.)  It  was  not  until  after  the
expulsion  of  the  Girondins  that  the  question  of  the  feudal
rights  came  up  again  boldly  and  in  its  entirety,  in  the  sense
of  Article  i  of  the  resolution  of  August  4.*

°  T  lKMft.1  •

It  is  no  use  now,  and  at  a  distance  of  a  hundred  years,  to
declaim  against  the  National  Assembly.  Indeed,  the  Assembly
did  all  that  could  have  been  hoped  for  from  an  assembly  of
property  owners  and  well-to-do  middle-class  men  ;  perhaps
it  did  even  more.  It  gave  forth  a  principle,  and  by  so  doing
it  invited,  so  to  say,  a  further  step.  But  it  is  very  important
to  take  into  account  these  restrictions,  for  if  the  article  which
declared  the  total  destruction  of  the  feudal  system  is  taken
literally,  we  cannot  fail  to  understand  completely  the  four
years  of  the  Revolution  which  follow,  and  still  more  the
struggles  which  broke  out  in  the  very  midst  of  the  Convention
in  1793.

The  resistance  to  these  resolutions  was  immense.  If  they
could  not  satisfy  the  peasants  and  if  they  became  the  signal
for  a  powerful  recrudescence  of  the  peasant  risings,  to  the  nobles,

*  Buchez  and  Roux  (Histoire  parlementaire  de  la  Revolution  francaise,
vol.  ii.  p.  243)  see  in  the  abdications  of  August  4  only  concessions  ren-
dered necessary  by  the  debates  on  the  "  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of
Man."  The  majority  being  in  favour  of  this  declaration,  their  vote
would  have  infallibly  carried  with  it  the  abolition  of  privileges.  It  is
also  interesting  to  note  how  Madame  Elisabeth  announced  the  night
of  August  4  to  her  friend,  Madame  de  Mombelles  :  "  The  nobility,"
she  writes,  "  with  an  enthusiasm  worthy  of  the  French  heart,  have
renounced  everything,  the  feudal  rights  and  their  hunting  rights.
Fishing  will  also  be  comprised,  I  believe.  The  clergy  have  likewise
renounced  the  tithes  and  perquisites  and  the  possibility  of  holding
several  benefices.  This  decree  has  been  sent  into  all  the  provinces.
/  hope  this  will  put  an  end  to  the  burning  of  the  chateaux.  They  have
burned  seventy."  (Conches,  loc.  cit.  p.  238.)


136 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  higher  clergy  and  the  King  these  resolutions  signified  the
spoliation  of  .Church  and  nobility.  From  that  day  began
the  hidden  agitation,  which  was  fomented  unceasingly  and
with  an  ever-growing  ardour  against  the  Revolution.  The
Assembly  believed  it  could  safeguard  the  rights  of  landed
property,  and  in  ordinary  times  a  law  of  that  kind  might  have
attained  this  end.  But  in  the  villages  people  understood
that  the  night  of  August  4  had  dealt  a  tremendous  blow  at
all  feudal  rights,  and  that  the  resolutions  of  August  5  to  II
had  stripped  the  landlords  of  them,  even  though  redemption  of
these  rights  was  imposed  upon  the  peasants.  The  general
spirit  of  these  resolutions,  which  included  the  abolition  of  the
tithes,  the  rights  of  hunting  and  other  privileges,  clearly  indi-
cated to  the  people  that  the  interests  of  the  people  are  superior
to  the  rights  which  property-owners  may  have  acquired  in  the
course  of  history.  They  contained  the  condemnation,  in  the
name  of  justice,  of  all  the  hereditary  privileges  of  feudalism.
And  henceforth  nothing  could  rehabilitate  those  rights  in  the
mind  of  the  peasant.

The  peasants  understood  that  those  rights  were  condemned
and  they  rightly  declined  to  buy  them  out.  They  just  simply
ceased  to  pay.  But  the  Assembly,  having  neither  the  courage
to  abolish  the  feudal  rights  altogether,  nor  the  inclination  to
work  out  a  method  of  redemption  that  would  be  acceptable  to
the  peasants,  created  in  that  way  the  equivocal  conditions
which  were  to  bring  forth  civil  war  throughout  France.  On
the  one  hand,  the  peasants  understood  that  they  need  not
buy  anything,  nor  pay  anything  ;  that  the  Revolution  had  only
to  go  on  in  order  to  abolish  the  feudal  rights  without  redemption.
On  the  other  hand,  the  rich  people  understood  that  the
resolutions  of  August  had  as  yet  abolished  nothing  except
the  mortmain  and  the  sacrificed  hunting  rights ;  so  that,  by
rallying  themselves  to  the  counter-revolution,  and  to  the  King
as  its  representative,  they  would  perhaps  succeed  in  maintain-
ing their  feudal  rights  and  in  keeping  the  land  that  they  and
their  ancestors  had,  under  various  pretexts,  robbed  from  the
village  communes.

King,  probably  by  the  advice  of^his  counsellors,  had


THE  FEUDAL  RIGHTS  REMAIN  137

thoroughly  understood  the  part  assigned  to  him  in  the  counter-
revolution as  a  rallying-point  for  the  defence  of  feudal  privileges,
and  he  hastened  to  write  to  the  Archbishop  of  Aries  to  tell
him  that  he  would  never  give,  except  under  compulsion,  his
sanction  to  the  resolutions  of  August.  "  The  sacrifice  of  the
two  first  orders  of  the  State  is  fine,"  he  said  ;  "  but  I  can
only  admire  it ;  I  will  never  consent  to  the  spoliation  of  my
clergy  and  my  nobility.  I  will  not  give  my  sanction  to  decrees
which  would  despoil  them."

And  he  continued  to  refuse  his  assent  until  he  was  led  a
prisoner  to  Paris  by  the  people.  And  even  when  he  gave  it,
he  did  everything,  in  conjunction  with  the  property-owning
clergy,  nobles  and  middle  classes,  to  couch  his  sanction  in  such
a  form  as  to  render  the  resolutions  of  the  Assembly  dead  letters.

My  friend,  James  Guillaume,  who  has  been  so  kind  as  to
read  my  manuscript,  has  made  a  note  on  the  question  of  the
sanction  of  the  resolutions  (arrttes)  of  August  4,  which  I  here
reproduce  in  entirety :

The  Assembly  at  the  time  exercised  both  constituent  and  legislative
power :  and  it  had  several  times  declared  that  its  enactments,  as  a
constituent  power,  were  independent  of  the  royal  authority ;  only  the
laws  had  need  of  the  King's  sanction  (they  were  called  decree  before
the  sanction,  law  after  it).

The  acts  of  August  4  were  of  a  constituent  nature :  the  Assembly  had
worded  them  as  resolutions  (arretes),  but  it  did  not  think  for  a  moment
that  it  was  necessary  to  obtain  a  permission  from  the  King  to  state  that
the  privileged  persons  had  renounced  their  privileges.  The  character
of  these  resolutions — or  of  this  resolution,  for  sometimes  they  speak  of
it  in  the  plural  and  sometimes  in  the  singular — is  indicated  in  the  I9th
and  last  Article,  which  says :  "  The  National  Assembly  will  occupy
itself,  immediately  ajter  the  constitution,  with  drawing  up  the  laws
necessary  for  the  development  of  the  principles  which  it  has  determined
by  the  present  resolution,  which  will  be  forthwith  sent  by  Messieurs
the  Deputies  into  all  the  provinces,"  &c.  It  was  on  August  II  that
the  publication  of  the  resolutions  was  definitely  adopted ;  at  the  same
time  the  Assembly  accorded  to  the  King  the  title  of  "  Restorer  of  French
Liberty,"  and  ordered  that  a  Te  Deum  should  be  sung  in  the  chapel
of  the  palace.


138 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

On  the  1 2th  the  president  (Le  Chapelier)  went  to  ask  the  King  when
he  would  receive  the  Assembly  for  the  1e  Deum;  the  King  replied
that  it  would  be  on  the  I3th  at  noon.  On  the  I3th  the  whole  of  the
Assembly  went  to  the  palace ;  the  president  made  a  speech ;  he  did
not  in  the  least  ask  for  sanction ;  he  explained  to  the  King  what  the
Assembly  had  done,  and  announced  to  him  the  title  that  had  been
accorded  to  him :  Louis  XVI.  replied  that  he  accepted  the  title  with
gratitude  ;  he  congratulated  the  Assembly  and  expressed  his  confidence
in  it.  Then  the  ^e  Deum  was  sung  in  the  chapel.

It  mattered  little  that  the  King  had  written  secretly  to  the  arch-
bishop to  express  a  different  sentiment:  just  then  only  public  actions
mattered.

Therefore  there  was  not  the  least  public  opposition  from  the  King,
during  the  early  days,  against  the  resolutions  of  August  4.

But  on  Saturday,  September  12,  concerned  at  the  disturbances  which
were  agitating  all  France,  the  party  of  the  "  patriots  "  judged  that,  to
put  an  end  to  them,  it  was  necessary  to  make  a  solemn  proclamation
of  the  resolutions  of  August  4,  and  to  this  end  the  majority  decided
that  the  resolutions  should  be  presented  for  the  King's  sanction^  in  spite  of
the  opposition  made  to  this  decision  by  the  counter-revolutionists,  who
would  have  preferred  not  to  mention  them  further.

However,  on  Monday  the  I4th  the  patriots  perceived  that  there
might  be  some  misunderstanding  over  this  word  "  sanction"  Just  at
that  point  the  Assembly  discussed  the  "  suspensive  veto  "  of  the  King,
and  Barnave  remarked  that  the  veto  could  not  be  applied  to  the  reso-
lutions of  August  4.  Mirabeau  spoke  to  the  same  effect.  "  The
resolutions  of  August  4,"  he  said,  "  were  enacted  by  the  constituent
power,  since  when  they  cannot  be  subjected  to  sanction.  The  resolutions
of  August  4  are  not  laws,  but  principles  and  constitutional  bases.  Con-
sequently, when  you  sent  for  sanction  the  acts  of  August  4,  it  was  for
promulgation  only  that  you  should  have  forwarded  them."  Le  Chapelier,
indeed,  proposed  to  replace  the  word  "  sanction  "  in  all  concerning  these
resolutions  by  the  word  "  promulgation,"  and  added :  "  I  maintain
that  it  is  useless  to  receive  royal  sanction  for  what  his  Majesty  has
already  given  authentic  approbation  to,  as  much  by  the  letter,  which
he  sent  me  when  I  had  the  honour  to  be  the  spokesman  of  the  Assembly,
(when  president),  as  by  the  solemn  acts  of  grace  and  the  Te  Deum
sung  in  the  King's  Chapel."

It  was  proposed,  therefore,  to  decree  that  the  Assembly  should
suspend  its  order  of  the  day  (the  question  of  the  veto)  until  the  promul-
gation of  the  resolutions  of  August  4  had  been  made  by  the  King.


THE  FEUDAL  RIGHTS  REMAIN  139

(Great  noise  and  disorder.)  The  sitting  was  ended  without  arriving  at
any  decision.

On  the  1 5th  there  was  a  fresh  discussion,  without  results.  On  the
1 6th  and  i/th  other  things  were  discussed,  the  succession  to  the  Throne
occupying  attention.

At  last,  on  the  i8th,  the  King's  reply  arrived.  He  approved  the
general  spirit  of  the  articles  of  August  4,  but  there  were  some  of  them
to  which  he  could  only  give  a  conditional  assent ;  and  he  concluded  in
these  terms  :  "  Therefore,  I  approve  the  greater  number  of  these  articles,
and  I  will  sanction  them  when  they  shall  be  worded  as  laws"  This
dilatory  reply  produced  great  discontent ;  it  was  repeated  that  the
King  had  been  asked  only  to  -promulgate,  which  he  could  not  refuse  to  do.
It  was  decided  that  the  president  should  go  to  the  King  to  beg  him  to
order  the  promulgation  at  once.  Confronted  by  the  threatening
language  of  the  speakers  in  the  Assembly,  Louis  XVI.  knew  that  he
must  yield ;  but  while  yielding  he  cavilled  over  the  words :  he  sent
back  to  the  president  (Clermont  Tonnerre)  on  the  evening  of  September
20  a  reply  saying :  "  You  have  asked  me  to  invest  with  my  sanction
the  resolutions  of  August  4  ...  I  have  communicated  to  you  the
criticisms  to  which  they  seem  to  me  to  be  susceptible  .  .  .  You  ask  me
now  to  promulgate  these  same  decrees ;  -promulgation  belongs  to  laws.
.  .  .  But  I  have  already  said  that  I  approved  of  the  general  spirit  of
these  resolutions.  ...  I  am  going  to  order  their  'publication  throughout
the  kingdom.  ...  I  do  not  doubt  but  that  I  shall  be  able  to  invest
with  my  sanction  all  the  laws  which  you  will  decree  upon  the  various
matters  contained  in  these  resolutions."

^  If  the  resolutions  of  August  4  contained  only  principles,  or  theories,
if  we  seek  in  them  vainly  for  practicable  measures,  &c.,  it  is  so,  because  such
must  be  the  character  of  these  resolutions,  so  clearly  marked  by  the
Assembly  in  Article  19.  On  August  4  the  Assembly  had  proclaimed,
in  principle,  the  destruction  of  the  feudal  system ;  and  it  was  added
that  the  Assembly  would  make  the  laws,  for  the  application  of  the
principle,  and  that  they  would  make  these  laws  when  the  Constitution
should  be  completed.  We  may  reproach  the  Assembly  for  this  method
if  we  wish ;  but  we  must  acknowledge  that  it  deceived  no  one,  and  in  no
way  broke  its  word  by  not  making  the  laws  immediately,  since  it  had
promised  to  make  them  after  the  Constitution.  But,  once  the  Constitution
was  completed,  the  Assembly  had  to  dissolve  and  bequeath  its  work  to
the  Legislative  Assembly*

f
This  note  by  James  Guillaume  throws  a  new  light  upon  the


140 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

tactics  of  the  Constituent  Assembly.  When  the  war  against
the  chateaux  had  raised  the  question  of  feudal  rights  the
Assembly  had  two  courses  before  it.  Either  it  could  elaborate
some  scheme  of  laws  upon  feudal  rights,  schemes  which  would
have  taken  months,  or  rather  years,  to  discuss,  and,  seeing  the
diversity  of  opinions  held  by  the  representatives  on  this  subject,
would  have  ended  only  in  dividing  the  Assembly.  Or  else
the  Assembly  might  have  confined  itself  to  proposing  only
some  principles,  which  should  serve  as  bases  for  the  enactment
of  future  laws.

It  was  this  second  alternative  which  was  ordained  by  the
Assembly.  It  hastened  to  compile  in  several  sittings  the
resolutions  which  the  King  was  finally  obliged  to  publish.
And  in  the  provinces  these  declarations  of  the  Assembly  had
the  effect  of  so  shaking  the  feudal  system  that,  four  years  after,
the  Convention  was  able  to  vote  for  the  complete  aboliton
of  the  feudal  rights  without  redemption.  Whether  this  was
foreseen  or  not  we  do  not  know,  but  this  alternative  was,  after
all,  preferable  to  the  first.


CHAPTER  XIX
DECLARATION  OF  THE  RIGHTS  OF  MAN

Meaning  and  significance  of  Declaration — Modelled  on  De-
claration of  Independence — Its  defects — Its  influence —
"  Preamble  to  the  Constitution  " — Defiance  of  feudalism

A  FEW  days  after  the  taking  of  the  Bastille  the  Constitution
Committee  of  the  National  Assembly  met  to  discuss  the
"  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man  and  of  the  Citizen."
The  idea  of  issuing  such  a  declaration,  suggested  by  the  famous
Declaration  of  Independence  of  the  United  States,  was  perfectly
right.  Since  a  revolution  was  in  course  of  accomplishment,
and  a  complete  change  in  the  relations  between  the  various
ranks  of  society  would  result  from  it,  it  was  well  to  state  its
general  principles  before  this  change  was  expressed  in  the  form
of  a  Constitution.  By  this  means  the  mass  of  the  people
would  be  shown  how  the  revolutionary  minorities  conceived
the  revolution,  and  for  what  new  principles  they  were  calling
on  the  people  to  struggle.

It  would  not  be  fine  phrases  merely  ;  it  would  be  a  brief
summary  of  the  future  that  it  was  proposed  to  conquer  ;  and
under  the  solemn  form  of  a  declaration  of  rights,  made  by  an
entire  people,  this  summary  would  be  invested  with  the
significance  of  a  national  oath.  Proclaimed  in  a  few  words,
the  principles  that  they  were  going  to  put  into  practice  would
kindle  the  people's  courage.  It  is  always  ideas  that  govern
the  world,  and  great  ideas  presented  in  a  virile  form  have
always  taken  hold  of  the  minds  of  men.  In  fact  the  young
North  American  republicans,  at  the  time  when  they  were
intending  to  conquer  their  independence,  had  issued  just  such
declarations,  and  ever  since,  the  Declaration  of  Independence


i42 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

of  the  United  States  had  become  the  charter,  one  might  almost
say  the  Decalogue,  of  the  young  North  American  nation.*

Consequently,  as  soon  as  the  Assembly  nominated  (on  July  9)
a  committee  for  the  preparatory  work  of  the  Constitution,
it  was  found  necessary  to  draw  up  a  Declaration  of  the  Rights
of  Man,  and  the  work  was  begun  after  July  14.  The  committee
took  for  their  model  the  Declaration  of  Independence  of  the
United  States,  which  had  already  become  famous,  since  1776,
as  a  statement  of  democratic  belief .f  jT  Unfortunately  the
defects  in  it  were  also  copied  ;  that  is  to  say,  like  the  American
Constitutionalists  assembled  in  the  Congress  of  Philadelphia,
the  National  Assembly  kept  out  of  its  declaration  all  allusions
to  the  economic  relations  between  citizens ;  it  confined  itself
to  affirming  the  equality  of  all  before  the  law,  the  right  of  the
nation  to  give  itself  whatever  government  it  wisheci,  and  the
constitutional  liberties  of  the  individual.  As  to  property,  the
French  Declaration  took  care  to  affirm  its  "inviolable  and
sacred  "  character  and  it  added  that  "  nobody  could  be  deprived

*  "  When  in  the  course  of  human  events,"  said  the  Declaration  of
Independence  of  the  United  States,  "  it  becomes  necessary  for  one
people  to  dissolve  the  political  bands  which  have  connected  them  with
another,  and  to  assume  among  the  Powers  of  the  Earth  the  separate
and  equal  station  to  which  the  Laws  of  Nature  and  of  Nature's  God
entitle  them,  a  decent  respect  to  the  opinions  of  mankind  requires
that  they  should  declare  the  causes  which  impel  them  to  the  separation.

"  We  hold  these  Truths  to  be  self-evident,  that  all  men  are  created
equal,  that  they  are  endowed  by  their  Creator  with  certain  unalienable
Rights,  that  among  these  are  Life,  Liberty  and  the  Pursuit  of  Happi-
ness— that  to  secure  these  rights,  Governments  are  instituted  among
men,  deriving  their  just  powers  from  the  consent  of  the  governed,  that
whenever  any  form  of  government  becomes  destructive  of  these  ends  it  is
the  right  of  the  people  to  alter  or  to  abolish  it,  and  to  institute  new  govern-
ment, laying  its  foundation  on  such  principles,  and  organising  its
powers  in  such  form,  as  to  them  shall  seem  most  likely  to  effect  their
safety  and  happiness"  (Declaration  made  in  Philadelphia,  July  4,
1776).  This  declaration  certainly  does  not  correspond  to  the  com-
munist aspirations  proclaimed  by  numerous  groups  of  citizens.  But
it  expresses  and  indicates  exactly  their  ideas  concerning  the  political
form  which  they  wished  to  obtain,  and  it  inspired  the  Americans  with
a  proud  spirit  of  independence.

f  James  Guillaume  has  recalled  this  fact  in  his  work,  La  declaration
desdroitsde  I'homme  et  du  citoyen,  Paris,  1900,  p.  9.  The  Reporter  of
the  Constitutional  Committee  had  indeed  mentioned  this  fact.  To  be
assured  of  this  one  has  only  to  compare  the  texts  of  the  French  drafts
with  those  of  the  American  declaration  given  in  J.  Guillaume's  book.


DECLARATION  OF  THE  RIGHTS  OF  MAN 143

of  his  property  if  it  were  not  that  public  necessity,  legally
established,  clearly  exacted  it,  and  under  the  condition  of  a
just  and  previous  indemnity."  This  was  to  repudiate  the
right  of  the  peasants  to  the  land  and  to  the  abolition  of  the
exactions  of  feudal  origin,  j

(  The  middle  classes  put  forth  in  this  way  their  liberal  pro-
gramme of  equality  before  the  law  in  judicial  matters  and  of
government  controlled  by  the  nation  and  existing  only  by  its
will.  And,  as  in  all  minimum  programmes,  this  signified
implicitly  that  the  nation  must  not  go  further  ;  it  must  not
touch  upon  the  rights  of  property  established  by  feudalism
and  despotic  royalty./

It  is  probable  that  during  the  discussions  raised  by  the
drawing-up  of  the  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man,  some
ideas  of  a  social  and  equalising  character  were  brought  forward.
But  they  must  have  been  set  aside.  In  any  case  we  find  no
trace  of  them  in  the  Declaration  of  1789.*  Sieyes*  proposal
that  "  if  men  are  not  equal  in  means,  that  is  in  riches,  intellect,
and  strength,  &c.,  it  does  not  follow  that  they  may  not  be
equal  in  rights  "  f — even  this  idea,  so  modest  in  its  claim,  is
not  to  be  found  in  the  Declaration  of  the  Assembly.  Instead
of  the  foregoing  words  of  Sieyes,  the  first  article  of  the  Declara-
tion was  conceived  in  these  terms  :  "  Men  are  born  and  live
free  and  equal  under  the  laws.  Social  distinctions  may  be
established  only  on  grounds  of  common  utility "  ;  which
allows  that  social  distinctions  might  be  established  by  law
in  the  interest  of  the  community,  and,  by  means  of  that  fiction,
opens  the  door  to  all  inequalities.

Altogether,  when  reading  to-day  the  "  Declaration  of  the
Rights  of  Man  and  of  the  Citizen,"  we  are  tempted  to  ask  if
this  declaration  had  really  the  influence  over  the  minds  of  the
period  which  historians  attribute  to  it.  It  is  evident  that
Article  I,  which  affirms  the  equality  of  rights  for  all  men;  Article

*  In  America  the  people  of  certain  States  demanded  the  proclama-
tion of  the  common  right  of  the  whole  nation  to  the  whole  of  the
land;  but' this  idea,  detestable  from  the  middle-class  point  of  view,
was  excluded  from  the  Declaration  of  Indepndence.

f  Article  16  of  Sieyes'  ^proposal  (La  declaration  des  droits  de  I'homme
et  du  citoyen,  by  James  Guillaume,  pi  30).


144 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

6,  which  says  that  the  law  should  be  "  the  same  for  all,"  and
that  "  all  the  citizens  have  a  right  to  co-operate,  either  person-
ally or  through  their  representatives,  in  its  formation  "  ;  Article
10,  by  virtue  of  which  "  no  one  should  be  molested  for  his
opinions,  provided  that  their  manifestation  does  not  disturb
the  public  order  established  by  law  "  ;  and  finally,  Article  12,
which  declares  that  the  public  force  was  "instituted  for  the
advantage  of  all — not  for  the  special  use  of  those  to  whom
it  is  entrusted  " — these  affirmations,  made  in  the  midst  of  a
society  wherein  feudal  subjection  still  existed,  and  while  the
Royal  family  still  considered  itself  the  owner  of  France,  worked
a  complete  revolution  in  the  minds  of  men.

But  it  is  also  certain  that  the  Declaration  of  1789  would
have  never  had  the  influence  it  exercised  later  on  in  the  course
of  the  nineteenth  century  if  the  Revolution  had  stopped  short  at
the  limits  of  this  profession  of  middle-class  liberalism.  Luckily
the  Revolution  went  much  further.  And  when,  two  years
later,  in  September  1791,  the  National  Assembly  drew  up
the  Constitution,  it  added  to  the  Declaration  of  the  Rights
of  Man  a  "  Preamble  to  the  Constitution,"  which  contained
already  these  words  :  "  The  National  Assembly  .  .  .  abolishes
irrevocably  the  institutions  that  are  hurtful  to  liberty  and
the  equality  of  rights."  And  further,  "  There  no  longer
exists  either  nobility,  or  peerage,  or  hereditary  distinctions,
or  distinctions  of  orders,  or  feudal  system,  or  'patrimonial  courts
of  justice,  nor  are  there  any  titles,  denominations  and  pre-
rogatives which  were  derived  from  them,  nor  any  order  of
chivalry,  nor  any  such  corporations  which  required  proofs  of
nobility  for  entering  them,  or  decorations  which  supposed
distinctions  of  birth,  nor  any  other  superiority  except  that  of
the  public  functionaries  in  the  exercise  of  their  functions.  There
are  no  longer  any  guilds,  nor  corporations  of  professions,  arts
and  crafts  [the  middle-class  ideal  of  the  State  Omnipotent
appears  in  these  two  paragraphs].  The  law  does  not  recognise
any  longer  either  religious  vows  or  any  other  pledge  which  would
be  contrary  to  natural  laws  and  to  the  Constitution"

When  we  think  that  this  defiance  was  flung  to  a  Europe
still  plunged  in  the  gloom  of  all-powerful  royalty  and  feudal


DECLARATION  OF  THE  RIGHTS  OF  MAN 145

subjection,  we  understand  why  the  French  Declaration  of
the  Rights  of  Man,  often  confounded  with  the  Preamble  of
the  Constitution  which  followed  it,  inspired  the  people  during
the  wars  of  the  Republic  and  became  later  on  the  watchword
of  progress  for  every  nation  in  Europe  during  the  nineteenth
century.  But  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  it  was  not  the
Assembly,  nor  even  the  middle  classes  of  1789  who  expressed
their  desires  in  this  Preamble.  It  was  the  popular  revolution
which  was  forcing  them  bit  by  bit  to  recognise  the  rights  of
the  people  and  to  break  with  feudalism — at  the  cost  of  what
sacrifices  we  shall  see  presently.


CHAPTER  XX
THE  FIFTH  AND  SIXTH  OF  OCTOBER  1789

King  refuses  to  sanction  Declaration — Middle  classes  and
people  in  opposition  to  royalty — Influence  of  people  on  upper
classes — Power  of  King's  veto  during  Revolution — Assembly
refuse  King  the  veto,  but  grant  him  the  suspensive  veto — Weak-
ness of  Assembly — Scarcity  of  food  in  Paris — Accusations
against  royal  family  and  people  at  Court — Danger  of  national
bankruptcy — Plans  for  King's  escape — Influence  of  history
of  Charles  I.  on  Louis  XVI. — His  terror  of  Revolution — Plot-
ting continues — Preparations  for  march  on  Versailles — Pre-
cautions of  King — Outbreak  of  insurrection — March  on  Ver-
sailles— Queen  chief  object  of  people's  animosity — Entry  of
women  into  Versailles — King  sanctions  Declaration  of  Rights
of  Man — Lafayette  sets  out  for  Versailles — Terror  at  Court —
End  of  Monarchy  of  Versailles

EVIDENTLY  to  the  King  and  the  Court  the  "  Declaration  of
the  Rights  of  Man  and  of  the  Citizen  "  must  have  seemed  a
criminal  attempt  upon  all  the  laws,  human  and  divine.  The
King,  therefore,  bluntly  refused  to  give  it  his  sanction.  It  is
true  that,  like  the  "  resolutions  "  passed  between  August  4  and
II,  the  Declaration  of  Rights  represented  only  an  affirmation
of  principles ;  it  had,  therefore,  as  they  said  then,  a  "  con-
stituent character  "  (un  caractere  constituant),  and  as  such  it
did  not  need  the  royal  sanction.  The  King  had  but  to
promulgate  it.

Now  this  is  what  he  refused  to  do  under  various  pretexts.
On  October  5  he  wrote  again  to  the  Assembly  to  say  that  he
wished  to  see  how  the  maxims  of  the  Declaration  would  be
applied  before  giving  it  his  sanction.*

*  "  I  do  not  quite  understand  the  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man :
it  contains  very  good  maxims,  suitable  for  guiding  your  labours.  But
it  contains  some  principles  that  require  explanations,  and  are  even

!46


OCTOBER  5  AND  6,  1789

He  had  opposed,  as  we  have  seen,  by  a  similar  refusal,  the
resolutions  of  August  4  to  n,  concerning  the  abolition  of  the
feudal  rights,  and  it  can  be  imagined  what  a  weapon  the
Assembly  made  of  these  two  refusals.  What !  the  Assembly
was  abolishing  the  feudal  system,  personal  subjection  and  the
pernicious  prerogatives  of  the  lords,  it  was  proclaiming  the
equality  of  all  before  the  law — and  see  how  the  King,  but
especially  the  princes,  the  Queen,  the  Court,  the  Polignacs,
the  Lamballes  and  all  the  rest  of  them,  are  opposing  it !  If
it  were  only  a  matter  of  speeches  in  favour  of  equality,  the
circulation  of  which  had  been  prevented  !  But  no,  the  whole
Assembly,  including  the  nobles  and  the  bishops,  were  all  agreed
to  make  a  law  favourable  to  the  people  and  to  do  away  with
all  privileges  (for  the  people  who  do  not  pay  much  heed  to
legal  terms,  the  "  resolutions  "  were  as  good  as  "  laws  "),  and
now  the  Court  party  are  going  to  prevent  these  laws  coming
into  force  !  The  King  would  have  accepted  them  ;  he  came
to  fraternise  with  the  people  of  Paris  after  July  14 ;  but  it
is  the  Court,  the  princes,  the  Queen,  who  are  opposed  to  the
attempt  of  the  Assembly  to  secure  the  happiness  of  the  people.

In  the  great  duel  between  royalty  and  the  middle  classes,
the  latter  thus  had  got  the  people  on  their  side.  At  this
moment  public  opinion  was  really  inflamed  against  the  princes,
the  Queen,  and  the  upper  classes  on  account  of  the  Assembly,
whose  labours  they  began  to  follow  with  interest.

At  the  same  time  the  people  themselves  were  influencing
those  labours  in  a  democratic  sense.  Thus  the  Assembly
might  perhaps  have  accepted  the  scheme  of  two  Chambers
"  in  the  English  fashion."  But  the  people  would  not  have  it.
They  understood  instinctively  what  learned  jurists  have  since
so  well  explained — that  in  revolution  a  second  Chamber  was
impossible  :  it  could  only  act  when  the  revolution  was  exhausted
and  a  period  of  reaction  had  begun.

Similarly,  it  was  also  the  people  of  Paris  who  were  more
vehemently  opposed  to  the  royal  veto  than  those  who  sat  in

liable  to  different  interpretations,  which  cannot  be  fully  appreciated
until  the  time  when  their  true  meaning  will  be  fixed  by  the  laws  to
which  the  Declaration  will  serve  as  the  basis.  Signed  :  Louis."


148 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  Assembly.  Here,  too,  the  masses  understood  the  situation
quite  clearly  ;  for  if,  in  the  normal  course  of  affairs,  the  power
of  the  King  to  check  a  decision  of  the  parliament  loses  much
of  its  importance,  it  is  quite  another  thing  in  a  revolutionary
period.  Not  that  the  royal  power  becomes  less  dangerous
in  the  long  run  ;  but  in  ordinary  times  a  parliament  being
the  organ  of  privileged  persons  will  seldom  pass  anything
that  the  King  would  have  to  veto  in  the  interest  of  the  privileged
classes ;  while  during  a  revolutionary  period  the  decisions  of
a  parliament,  influenced  as  they  are  by  the  popular  spirit  of
the  moment,  may  often  tend  towards  the  destruction  of
ancient  privileges,  and,  consequently,  they  will  encounter
opposition  from  the  King.  He  will  use  his  veto,  if  he  has  the
right  and  the  strength  to  use  it.  This  is,  in  fact,  what  happened
with  the  Assembly's  "  resolutions  "  of  August,  and  even  with
the  Declaration  of  Rights.

In  spite  of  this,  there  was  in  the  Assembly  a  numerous
party  who  desired  the  absolute  veto — that  is  to  say,  they  wished
to  give  the  King  the  possibility  of  legally  preventing  any
measure  he  might  choose  to  prevent ;  and  it  took  lengthy
debates  to  arrive  at  a  compromise.  The  Assembly  refused
the  absolute  veto,  but  they  accepted,  against  the  will  of
the  people,  the  suspensive  veto,  which  permitted  the  King
to  suspend  a  decree  for  a  certain  time,  without  altogether
annulling  it.

At  a  distance  of  a  hundred  years  the  historian  is  naturally
inclined  to  idealise  the  Assembly  and  to  represent  it  as  a  body
that  was  ready  to  fight  for  the  Revolution.  In  reality  it  was
not.  The  fact  is  that  even  in  its  most  advanced  representatives
the  National  Assembly  remained  far  below  the  requirements
of  the  moment.  It  must  have  been  conscious  of  its  own
impotence.  Far  from  being  homogeneous,  it  contained,  on
the  contrary,  more  than  three  hundred  deputies — four  hundred
according  to  other  estimates ;  that  is  to  say,  more  than  one-
third,  ready  to  come  to  terms  with  royalty.  Therefore,
without  speaking  of  those  members  who  were  pledged  to  the
Court,  and  there  were  several  of  them,  how  many  feared  the
revolution  much  more  than  the  royal  power !  But  the


OCTOBER  5  AND  6,  1789  149

revolution  had  begun,  and  there  was  the  direct  pressure  of
the  people  and  the  fear  of  their  rage  ;  there  was  also  that
intellectual  atmosphere  which  dominates  the  timorous  and
forces  the  prudent  to  follow  the  more  advanced  ones.  More-
over the  people  maintained  their  menacing  attitude,  and  the
memory  of  de  Launey,  Foulon  and  Bertier  was  still  fresh  in
their  minds.  In  the  faubourgs  of  Paris  there  was  even  talk  of
massacring  those  members  of  the  Assembly  whom  the  people
suspected  of  having  connections  with  the  Court.

Meanwhile  the  scarcity  of  food  in  Paris  was  always  terrible.
It  was  September,  the  harvest  had  been  gathered  in,  but  still
there  was  a  lack  of  bread.  Long  files  of  men  and  women
stood  every  night  at  the  bakers'  doors,  and  after  long  hours  of
waiting  the  poor  often  went  away  without  any  bread.  In
spite  of  the  purchase  of  grain  that  the  Government  had  made
abroad,  and  the  premium  paid  to  those  who  imported  wheat
to  Paris,  bread  was  scarce  in  the  capital,  as  well  as  in  all  the
large  towns,  and  in  the  small  towns  near  Paris.  The  measures
taken  for  revictualling  were  insufficient,  and  what  was  done
was  paralysed  by  fraud.  ^All  the  vices  of  the  ancien  regime,
of  the  centralised  State  which  was  growing  up  since  the
sixteenth  century,  became  apparent  in  this  question  of  bread.
In  the  upper  circles  the  refinement  of  luxury  had  attained  its
limits ;  but  the  mass  of  the  people,  flayed  without  mercy,
had  come  to  the  point  of  not  being  able  to  produce  its  own
food  on  the  rich  soil  and  in  the  productive  climate  of  France  F^

Besides,  the  most  terrible  accusations  were  being  circulated
against  the  princes  of  the  royal  family  and  personages  in  the
highest  positions  at  Court.  They  had  re-established,  it  was  said,
the  "  famine  compact,"  and  were  speculating  on  the  rise  of
prices  of  the  bread-stuffs.  And  these  rumours,  as  it  appeared
later  on,  were  not  quite  unfounded.

To  complete  all,  the  danger  of  national  bankruptcy  was
imminent.  Interest  on  State  debts  had  to  be  paid  imme-
diately, but  the  expenses  were  increasing,  and  the  Treasury
was  empty.  No  one  dared  now  to  resort  to  the  abominable
means  which  were  habitual  under  the  old  regime  for  levying  the
taxes,  when  everything  in  the  peasant's  home  was  seized  by


ISO THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  tax  collector ;  whilst  the  peasants,  on  their  side,  in  the
expectation  of  a  more  just  assessment  of  the  taxes,  preferred
not  to  pay,  and  the  rich,  who  hated  the  Revolution,  with
secret  joy  refrained  from  paying  anything  whatever.  Necker,
again  in  the  Ministry  since  July  17,  1789,  had  tried  various
ingenious  expedients  for  avoiding  bankruptcy — but  without
success.  In  fact,  one  cannot  well  see  how  bankruptcy  could
be  prevented  without  either  resorting  to  a  forced  loan  from
the  rich,  or  seizing  the  wealth  of  the  clergy.  The  middle
classes  understood  it,  and  became  resigned  to  such  drastic
measures,  since  they  had  lent  their  money  to  the  State  and
did  not  wish  to  lose  it.  But  the  King,  the  Court  and  the
higher  ecclesiastics,  would  they  ever  agree  to  this  seizure  of
their  properties  by  the  State  ?

A  strange  feeling  must  have  taken  possession  of  men's  minds
during  the  months  of  August  and  September  1789.  At  last
the  desire  of  so  many  years  was  realised.  Here  was  a  National
Assembly  which  held  in  its  hands  the  legislative  power.  An
Assembly  which  had  already  proved  itself  not  quite  hostile
to  a  democratic,  reforming  spirit ;  and  now  it  was  reduced  to
impotence,  and  to  the  ridicule  attendant  on  impotency.  It
could  make  decrees  to  avoid  bankruptcy,  but  the  King,  the
Court,  the  princes  would  refuse  to  sanction  them.  Like  so
many  ghosts  of  the  past,  they  had  the  power  to  strangle  the
representation  of  the  French  people,  to  paralyse  its  will,  to
prolong  to  infinity  the  provisional  unsettled  state  of
affairs.

More  than  that :  these  ghosts  were  preparing  a  great  coup.
In  the  King's  household  they  were  making  plans  for  his  escape
from  Versailles.  The  King  would  shortly  be  carried  off  to
Rambouillet,  or  to  Orleans,  where  he  would  put  himself  at
the  head  of  the  armies,  and  thence  he  would  threaten  Versailles
and  Paris.  Or  else  he  might  fly  towards  the  eastern  frontier
and  there  await  the  arrival  of  the  German  and  Austrian  armies
which  the  emigres  had  promised  him.  All  sorts  of  influences
were  thus  intermingling  at  the  palace  :  that  of  the  Duke  of
Orleans,  who  dreamed  of  seizing  the  throne  after  the  departure
of  Louis ;  that  of  "  Monsieur,"  the  brother  of  Louis  XVI.,


OCTOBER  5  AND  6,  1789  151

who  would  have  been  delighted  if  his  brother,  as  well  as  Marie-
Antoinette,  whom  he  hated  personally,  had  disappeared.

Since  the  month  of  September  the  Court  meditated  the
escape  of  the  King ;  but  if  they  discussed  many  plans,  they
dared  not  carry  out  any  one  of  them.  It  is  very  likely  that
Louis  XVI.  and  his  wife  dreamed  of  repeating  the  history  of
Charles  I.,  and  of  waging^  a  regular  war  against  the  parliament
only  with  better  success.  The  history  of  the  English  King
obsessed  them :  it  fascinated  them ;  but  they  read  it,  as  prisoners
awaiting  trial  read  police  stories.  They  drew  from  it  no
instruction  as  to  the  necessity  of  yielding  in  time  :  they  only
said  to  themselves  :  "  Here  they  ought  to  have  resisted  ;  there
it  was  necessary  to  plot ;  there  again  daring  was  required ! "
And  so  they  made  plans,  which  neither  they  nor  their  courtiers
had  the  courage  to  put  into  execution.

The  Revolution  held  them  spell-bound ;  they  saw  the
monster  that  was  going  to  devour  them,  and  they  dared  neither
submit  nor  resist.  Paris,  which  was  already  preparing  to
march  upon  Versailles,  filled  them  with  terror  and  paralysed
their  efforts.  "  What  if  the  army  falters  at  the  supreme
moment,  when  the  battle  has  begun  ?  What  if  the  com-
manders betray  the  King,  as  so  many  of  them  have  done
already  ?  What  would  be  left  to  do  then  if  not  to  share  the
fate  of  Charles  I.  ?  "

And  yet  they  plotted.  Neither  the  King  nor  his  courtiers,
nor  the  privileged  classes  as  a  whole  could  understand  that
the  time  for  compromise  was  far  away ;  that  now  the  only
way  was  frankly  to  submit  to  the  new  force  and  to  place  the
royal  power  under  its  protection — for  the  Assembly  asked
nothing  better  than  to  grant  its  protection  to  the  King.
Instead  of  that,  they  plotted,  and  by  so  doing  they  impelled
those  members  of  the  Assembly  who  were,  after  all,  very
moderate,  into  counter-plots :  they  drove  them  towards
revolutionary  action.  This  is  why  Mirabeau  and  others,  who
would  have  willingly  worked  at  the  establishing  of  a  moderately
constitutional  monarchy,  had  to  throw  in  their  lot  with  the
advanced  sections.  And  this  is  why  moderates,  like  Duport,
constituted  "  the  confederation  of  the  clubs,"  which  allowed


152 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

them  to  keep  the  people  in  a  state  of  ferment,  for  they  felt
they  would  soon  have  need  of  the  masses.

The  march  upon  Versailles  on  October  5,  1789,  was  not  as
spontaneous  as  it  was  supposed  to  be.  Even  in  a  Revolution
every  popular  movement  requires  to  be  prepared  by  men  of
the  people,  and  this  one  had  its  forerunners.  Already  on
August  30  the  Marquis  of  Saint-Huruge,  one  of  the  popular
orators  of  the  Palais  Royal,  had  wanted  to  march  on  Versailles
with  fifteen  hundred  men  to  demand  the  dismissal  of  the
"  ignorant,  corrupt  and  suspected "  deputies,  who  were
defending  the  suspensive  veto  of  the  King.  Meanwhile  they
threatened  to  set  fire  to  the  chateaux  of  those  deputies,  and
warned  them  that  two  thousand  letters  had  been  sent  into
the  provinces  to  that  effect.  The  gathering  was  dispersed,
but  the  idea  of  a  march  upon  Versailles  was  thrown  out,  and
it  continued  to  be  discussed.

On  August  31  the  Palais  Royal  sent  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville
five  deputations,  one  oi  which  was  headed  by  Loustalot,  the
most  sympathetic  of  republican  writers,  asking  the  municipality
of  Paris  to  exercise  pressure  upon  the  Assembly  to  prevent  its
acceptance  of  the  royal  veto.  Some  of  those  who  took  part
in  these  deputations  went  to  threaten  the  deputies,  others  to
implore  them.  At  Versailles  the  crowd,  in  tears,  begged
Mirabeau  to  abandon  the  defence  of  the  absolute  veto,  justly
remarking  that  if  the  King  had  this  right  he  would  no  longer
have  need  of  the  Assembly.*

From  this  time,  the  idea  began  to  grow  that  it  would  be
well  to  have  the  Assembly  and  the  King  at  hand  in  Paris.
In  fact,  since  the  first  days  of  September,  there  was  open
speaking  already  at  the  Palais  Royal  about  bringing  the  King
and  "  M.  le  Dauphin  "  to  Paris,  and  for  this  purpose  all  good
citizens  were  exhorted  to  march  on  Versailles.  The  Mercure
de  France  made  mention  of  it  on  September  5  (page  84),  and
Mirabeau  spoke  of  women  who  would  march  on  Versailles  a
fortnight  before  the  event.
t^The  banquet  given  to  the  Guards  on  October  3,  and  the

* Buchez  and  Roux,  p.  368  et  seq. Bailly,  Mtmoires,  ii.  326,  341.


OCTOBER  5  AND  6,  1789  153

plots  of  the  Court,  hastened  events.  Every  one  had  a  fore-
boding of  the  blow  which  the  party  of  reaction  was  preparing
to  strike.  Reaction  was  raising  its  head ;  the  Municipal
Council  of  Paris,  essentially  middle  class,  became  bold  in
reactionary  ways.  J  The  royalists  were  organising  their  forces
without  troubling  much  to  conceal  the  fact.  The  road  from
Paris  to  Metz  having  been  lined  with  troops,  the  carrying  off
of  the  King  and  his  going  to  Metz  were  discussed  openly.
The  Marquis  de  Bouille,  who  commanded  the  troops  in  the
East,  as  well  as  de  Breteuil  and  de  Mercy  were  in  the  plot,  of
which  de  Breteuil  had  taken  the  direction.  For  this  end
the  Court  collected  as  much  money  as  possible,  and  October  5
was  spoken  of  as  the  possible  date  of  the  flight.  The  King
would  set  out  that  day  for  Metz,  where  he  would  place  himself
in  the  midst  of  the  army  commanded  by  the  Marquis  de  Bouille.
There  he  would  summon  to  him  the  nobility  and  the  troops
which  still  held  faithful,  and  would  declare  the  Assembly
rebellious.

With  this  movement  in  view  they  had  doubled  at  the  palace
the  number  of  the  body-guards  (young  members  of  the  aris-
tocracy charged  with  the  guarding  of  the  palace),  and  the
regiment  of  Flanders  had  been  summoned  to  Versailles,  as
well  as  the  dragoons.  The  regiment  came,  and  on  October  I
a  great  banquet  was  given  by  the  body-guard  to  the  regi-
ment of  Flanders,  and  the  officers  of  the  dragoons  and  of
the  Swiss  in  garrison  at  Versailles  were  invited  to  this  ban-
quet.

During  the  dinner  Marie-Antoinette  and  the  Court  ladies,
as  well  as  the  King,  did  all  they  could  to  bring  the  royalist
enthusiasm  of  the  officers  to  a  white  heat.  The  ladies  themselves
distributed  white  cockades,  and  the  National  cockade  was
trodden  underfoot.  Two  days  later,  on  October  3,  another
banquet  of  the  same  kind  took  place.

(  These  banquets  precipitated  events.  The  news  of  them
soon  reached  Paris — exaggerated  perhaps  on  the  way — and  the
people  of  the  capital  understood  that  if  they  did  not  march
immediately  upon  Versailles,  Versailles  would  march  upon
Paris. }


154 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  Court  was  evidently  preparing  a  great  blow.  Once
the  King,  having  left  Versailles,  was  safe  somewhere  in  the
midst  of  his  troops,  nothing  would  be  easier  than  to  dissolve
the  Assembly,  or  else  compel  it  to  return  to  the  Three  Orders
— that  is  to  say,  to  the  position  before  the  Royal  Session  of
June  23.  In  the  Assembly  itself  there  was  a  strong  party
of  some  four  hundred  members,  the  leaders  of  whom  had
already  held  confabulations  with  Malouet  for  the  transference
of  the  Assembly  to  Tours,  far  from  the  revolutionary  people
of  Paris.  If  this  plot  of  the  Court  succeeded,  then  all  the
hitherto  obtained  results  would  be  upset.  The  fruits  of
July  14  would  be  lost ;  lost,  too,  the  results  of  the  rising  of
the  peasants  and  of  the  panic  of  August  4.

What  was  to  be  done  to  prevent  such  a  disaster  ?  The
'people  had  to  be  roused — nothing  less  than  that  would  do  !  And
therein  lies  the  glory  of  the  prominent  revolutionists  of  that
moment ;  they  understood  the  necessity  of  a  popular  rising
and  accepted  it,  though  usually  the  middle  classes  recoil  before
such  a  measure.  To  rouse  the  people — the  gloomy,  miserable
masses  of  the  people  of  Paris — this  is  what  the  revolutionists
undertook  to  do  on  October  4  ;  Danton,  Marat  and  Loustalot,
whose  names  we  have  already  mentioned,  being  the  most
ardent  in  the  task.  A  handful  of  conspirators  cannot  fight
an  army ;  reaction  cannot  be  vanquished  by  a  band  of  men,
howsoever  determined  they  may  be.  To  an  army  must  be
opposed  an  army,  and,  failing  an  army — the  people,  the  whole
people,  the  hundreds  of  thousands  of  men,  women  and  children
of  a  city.  They  alone  can  be  victorious,  they  alone  have
conquered  armies  by  demoralising  them,  by  paralysing  their
brute  force.

On  October  5  the  insurrection  broke  out  in  Paris  to  the  cry
of  "  Bread  !  Bread  !  "  The  sound  of  the  drum  beaten  by
a  young  girl  served  to  rally  the  women.  Soon  a  troop  of
women  was  formed  ;  it  marched  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  forced
the  doors  of  the  Communal  Hall,  demanding  bread  and  arms,
and,  as  a  march  upon  Versailles  had  already  been  talked  of
for  several  days,  the  cry  "  To  Versailles  !  "  attracted  crowds
of  women.  Maillard,  known  in  Paris  since  July  14  for  the


OCTOBER  5  AND  6,  1789  155

part  he  had  taken  in  the  siege  of  the  Bastille,  was  declared
leader  of  the  column,  and  the  women  set  out.

A  thousand  diverse  ideas  no  doubt  crossed  their  minds,  but
that  of  bread  must  have  dominated  all  others.  It  was  at
Versailles  that  the  conspiracies  against  the  happiness  of  the
people  were  hatched  ;  it  was  there  that  the  famine  compact
had  been  made,  there  that  the  abolition  of  the  feudal  rights
was  being  prevented — so  the  women  marched  on  Versailles.
It  is  more  than  probable  that  among  the  mass  of  the  people
the  King,  like  all  Kings,  was  regarded  as  a  good  enough  creature,
who  wished  the  welfare  of  his  people.  The  royal  prestige
was  then  still  deeply  rooted  in  the  minds  of  men.  But  even
in  1789  they  hated  the  Queen.  The  words  uttered  about  her
were  terrible.  "  Where  is  that  rip  ?  Look  at  her,  the  dirty
whore ;  we  must  catch  hold  of  that  bitch  and  cut  her  throat,"
said  the  women,  and  one  is  struck  by  the  ardour,  the  pleasure,
I  might  say,  with  which  these  remarks  were  written  down  in
the  inquiry  at  the  Chatelet.  Here  again  the  people  judged
soundly.  If  the  King  had  said,  on  learning  about  the  fiasco
of  the  Royal  Session  on  June  23,  "  After  all,  let  these  wretches
stay  !  " — Marie-Antoinette  was  wounded  to  the  heart  by  it.
She  received  with  supreme  disdain  the  "  plebeian "  King
when  he  came  on  his  return  from  his  visit  to  Paris  on  July  17,
wearing  the  tricolour  cockade,  and  since  then  she  had  become
the  centre  of  all  the  intrigues.  The  correspondence  which
later  she  carried  on  with  Count  Fersen  about  bringing  the
foreign  armies  to  Paris  originated  from  that  moment.  Even
this  night  of  October  5,  when  the  women  invaded  the  palace
— this  very  night,  says  the  extremely  reactionary  Madame
Campan,  the  Queen  received  Fersen  in  her  bedchamber.

The  people  knew  all  this,  partly  through  the  palace  servants  ;
and  the  crowd,  the  collective  mind  of  the  people  of  Paris,
understood  what  individuals  were  slow  to  comprehend — that
Marie-Antoinette  would  go  far  in  her  hatred  of  the  Revolution,
and  that,  in  order  to  prevent  all  the  plottings  of  the  Court,
it  was  necessary  that  the  King  and  his  family,  and  the  Assembly
as  well,  should  be  kept  in  Paris  under  the  eye  of  the  people.

At first, on entering  Versailles, the women, crushed by


156 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

fatigue  and  hunger,  soaked  through  with  the  downpour  of
rain,  contented  themselves  with  demanding  bread.  When
they  invaded  the  Assembly  they  sank  exhausted  on  the  benches
of  the  deputies ;  but  nevertheless,  by  their  presence  alone
these  women  had  already  gained  a  first  victory.  The  Assembly
profited  by  this  march  upon  Versailles  to  obtain  from  the  King
his  sanction  for  the  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man.

After  the  women  had  started  from  Paris,  men  had  also
begun  to  march,  and  then,  about  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,
to  prevent  any  mishap  at  the  palace,  Lafayette  set  out  for
Versailles  at  the  head  of  the  National  Guards.

Terror  seized  upon  the  Court.  "  It  is  all  Paris,  then,  that
is  marching  against  the  palace  ?  "  The  Court  held  a  council,
but  without  arriving  at  any  decision.  Carriages  had  already
been  ordered  out  to  send  off  the  King  and  his  family,  but  they
were  discovered  by  a  picket  of  National  Guards,  who  sent
them  back  to  the  stables.

The  arrival  of  the  middle-class  National  Guards,  the  efforts
of  Lafayette,  and  above  all,  perhaps,  a  heavy  rain,  caused  the
crowd  which  choked  the  streets  of  Versailles,  the  Assembly  and
the  purlieus  of  the  palace,  to  diminish  by  degrees.  But  about
five  or  six  in  the  morning  some  men  and  women  found  at  last
a  little  gate  open  which  enabled  them  to  enter  the  palace.
In  a  few  moments  they  had  found  out  the  bedchamber  of  the
Queen,  who  had  barely  time  to  escape  to  the  King's  apartment ;
otherwise  she  might  have  been  hacked  to  pieces.  The  body-
guard were  in  similar  danger  when  Lafayette  rode  up,  just
in  time  to  save  them.

(The  invasion  of  the  palace  by  the  crowd  was  one  of  those
defeats  of  royalty  from  which  it  never  recovered.  Lafayette
obtained  from  the  crowds  some  cheering  for  the  King  when
he  appeared  upon  a  balcony.  He  even  extracted  from  the
crowd  some  cheers  for  the  Queen  by  making  her  appear  on  the
balcony  with  her  son,  and  by  kissing  respectfully  the  hand  of
her  whom  the  people  called  "  the  Medicis  "...  but  all  that
was  only  a  bit  of  theatricality.  The  people  had  realised  their
strength,  and  they  used  it  to  compel  the  King  to  set  out  for
Paris.  The  middle  classes  then  tried  to  make  all  sorts  of


OCTOBER  5  AND  6,  1789  157

royalist  demonstrations  on  the  occasion  of  the  entrance  of  the
King  into  his  capital,  but  the  people  understood  that  henceforth
the  King  would  be  their  prisoner,  and  Louis  XVI.  on  entering
the  Tuileries,  abandoned  since  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  had
no  illusions  about  it.  }  "  Let  every  one  put  himself  where  he
pleases  !  "  was  his  reply  when  he  was  asked  to  give  orders,  and
he  asked  for  the  history  of  Charles  I.  to  be  brought  to  him
from  his  library.

The  great  monarchy  of  Versailles  had  come  to  an  end.
For  the  future  there  would  be  "  Citizen  Kings  "  or  emperors
who  attained  the  throne  by  fraud  ;  but  the  reign  of  the
"  Kings  by  the  Grace  of  God  "  was  gone.

Once  more,  as  on  July  14,  the  'people,  by  solidarity  and  by
their  action,  had  paralysed  the  plots  of  the  Court  and  dealt  a
heavy  blow  at  the  old  regime.  The  Revolution  was  making
a  leap  forward.


CHAPTER  XXI

FEARS  OF  THE  MIDDLE  CLASSES— THE  NEW
MUNICIPAL  ORGANISATION

Unexpected  reaction  sets  in — Exultation  of  revolutionists —
Their  misconception  of  the  situation — Reaction  versus  Revo-
lution— Aims  of  middle  classes — Assembly,  afraid  of  people,
strengthens  its  position — Council  of  Three  Hundred  establishes
its  authority — Importance  of  Bailly  and  Lafayette — Martial
law  voted — Marat,  Robespierre  and  Buzot  alone  protest —
Intrigues  of  Duke  of  Orl6ans  and  Count  de  Provence — Mira-
beau — Aims  of  educated  middle  class — Duport,  Charles  de
Lameth  and  Barnavo — Bailly  and  Lafayette — Alarm  of
middle  classes  at  insurrection — Proposal  of  Sieyes  accepted
— Ancient  feudal  divisions  abolished — France  divided  into
departments — Electoral  Assemblies — Difference  between  pas-
sive and  active  citizens — General  assemblies  of  village  com-
munes forbidden — Importance  to  Revolution  of  municipal
centres — Parliaments  abolished — Formidable  opposition  to
new  organisation

ONCE  more  one  might  have  thought  that  the  Revolution  would
now  freely  develop  of  itself.  Royal  reaction  was  vanquished  ;
"  Monsieur  and  Madame  Veto  "  had  given  in,  and  were  held
as  prisoners  in  Paris ;  and  the  National  Assembly  would  surely
use  now  the  axe  in  the  forest  of  abuses,  hew  down  feudalism,
and  apply  the  great  principles  it  had  proclaimed  in  the  Declara-
tion of  the  Rights  of  Man,  the  mere  reading  of  which  had
made  all  hearts  throb.

I*  ^There  was,  however,  nothing  of  the  sort.  Against  all
I  expectations,  it  was  reaction  that  began  after  October  5.  It
I  organised  its  powers,  and  went  on,  growing  in  strength  until
I  the  month  of  June  1792.^

^  After  having  accomplished  its  task,  the  people  of  Paris
retreated  to  their  hovels ;  the  middle  classes  disbanded  them

and  made  them  leave  the  streets. And  had  it  not  been  for

158


FEARS  OF  THE  MIDDLE  CLASSES  159

the  peasant  insurrection,  which  followed  its  course  until  the
feudal  rights  were  actually  abolished  in  July  1793,  had  it  not
been  for  the  numerous  insurrections  in  the  provincial  towns
which  prevented  the  government  of  the  middle  classes  from
firmly  establishing  itself,  the  final  reaction,  which  triumphed
in  1794,  might  have  been  already  triumphant  in  1791  or  even
in  1790.)

"  The  King  is  at  the  Louvre,  the  National  Assembly  at  the
Tuileries,  the  channels  of  circulation  are  cleared,  the  market-
place is  full  of  sacks  of  corn,  the  National  exchequer  is  being
replenished,  the  mills  are  turning,  the  traitors  are  flying,  the
shavelings  are  down,  the  aristocracy  is  expiring,"  thus  Camille
Desmoulins  wrote  in  the  first  number  of  his  journal  (November
28).  But  in  reality  reaction  was  everywhere  raising  its  head.
While  the  revolutionaries  exulted,  believing  that  the  Revolution
was  almost  accomplished,  the  reactionaries  knew  that  the  great
struggle,  the  real  one,  between  the  past  and  the  future,  was
only  to  begin  in  every  provincial  town,  great  and  small,  in
every  little  village ;  that  now  was  the  time  for  them  to  act
in  order  to  get  the  upper  hand  in  the  revolution.

The  reactionaries  understood  something  more.  They
saw  that  the  middle  classes,  who  until  then  had  sought  the
support  of  the  people,  in  order  to  obtain  constitutional  laws
and  to  dominate  the  higher  nobility,  were  going,  now  that
they  had  seen  and  felt  the  strength  of  the  people,  to  do  all
they  could  to  dominate  the  people,  to  disarm  them  and  to
drive  them  back  into  subjection.

This  fear  of  the  people  made  itself  felt  in  the  Assembly,
immediately  after  October  5.  More  than  two  hundred
deputies  refused  to  go  to  Paris,  and  demanded  passports  for
returning  to  their  homes.  They  met  with  a  refusal,  and
were  treated  as  traitors,  but  a  certain  number  of  them  sent
in  their  resignations  all  the  same  :  they  were  not  thinking  of
going  so  far !  There  was  now  a  new  series  of  emigrations,
as  there  had  been  after  July  14.  But  this  time  it  was  not  the
Court  which  gave  the  signal,  it  was  the  Assembly.

However,  there  was  in  the  Assembly  a  strong  nucleus  of
middk-class  representatives  who  knew  how  to  profit  by  the


160 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

first  moments  of  success-^to  establish  the  power  of  their  own
class  upon  a  solid  foundation.  Consequently,  even  before
moving  to  Paris,  the  Assembly  voted,  on  October  19,  the
responsibility  of  the  ministers,  as  well  as  of  administrative
officials  before  the  National  representation,  and  the  assessment
of  all  taxes  by  the  Assembly.  These  two  first  conditions  of
a  Constitutional  Government  were  thus  established.  The
title  of  the  "  King  of  France  "  was  also  changed  into  "  King
of  the  French.'5)

Whilst  the  Assembly^  was  thus  profiting  by  the  movement
of  October  5  to  establish  itself  as  the  sovereign  power,  the
/  middle-class  municipality  of  Paris,  i.e.9  the  Council  of  the
Three  Hundred,  which  had  set  itself  up  after  July  14,  also
took  advantage  of  events  to  establish  its  authority.  Sixty
directors,  chosen  from  among  the  Three  Hundred,  and  divided
between  eight  departments — food,  police,  public  works,
hospitals,  education,  land  and  revenues,  taxes  and  the  National
Guard — were  going  to  take  over  all  these  important  branches
of  administration,  and  thus  to  become  a  respectable  power,
especially  as  the  municipality  had  under  its  orders  a  National
Guard  of  60,000  men,  drawn  solely  from  well-to-do  citizens?

Bailly,  the  Mayor  of  Paris,  and  Lafayette,  the  chief  com-
mander of  the  National  Guard,  were  becoming  important
personages.  As  to  the  municipal  police  functions,  the  middle
classes  assumed  the  right  of  supervision  in  everything :  meetings,
newspapers,  the  selling  of  literature  in  the  streets,  the  ad-
vertisement posters,  and  so  on ;  so  as  to  be  able  to  suppress
all  that  might  be  hostile  to  their  interests.

And  finally,  the  Council  of  the  Three  Hundred,  taking
advantage  of  the  murder  of  a  baker  on  October  21,  went  to
the  Assembly  to  beg  for  martial  law,  which  was  voted  at  once.
Henceforth  it  was  sufficient  for  a  municipal  official  to  unfurl
the  red  flag  for  martial  law  to  be  proclaimed  ;  after  that  e/ery
crowd  had  to  disperse,  and  the  troops,  when  required  by  the
municipal  official,  could  fire  upon  the  people  if  they  did  not
disperse  after  three  summonses  had  been  made.  If  the  people
dispersed  peaceably  without  resistance,  before  the  last  summons,
only  the  ringleaders  of  the  disturbance  were  arrested  and  sent


FEARS  OF  THE  MIDDLE  CLASSES  161

to  prison  for  three  years — if  the  crowd  was  unarmed  ;  otherwise
the  sentence  was  death.  But  in  case  of  any  violence  committed
by  the  people,  it  was  death  for  all  concerned  in  the  riot.  It
was  death,  too,  for  any  soldier  or  officer  of  the  National  Guard
who  should  stir  up  any  rioting.

A  murder  committed  in  the  street  was  thus  sufficient  excuse
for  this  law  to  be  passed,  and,  as  Louis  Blanc  has  aptly  remarked,
in  the  whole  press  of  Paris  there  was  but  one  voice,  that  of
Marat,  to  protest  against  this  atrocious  law,  and  to  say  that
in  a  time  of  revolution,  when  a  nation  had  still  to  break  its
chains  and  to  fight  to  the  bitter  end  against  its  enemies,  martial
law  had  no  right  to  exist.  In  the  Assembly,  Robespierre  and
Buzot  were  the  only  ones  to  protest,  and  these  not  on  a  point
of  principle.  It  was  not  advisable,  they  said,  to  proclaim
martial  law  before  having  established  a  court  which  could  try
the  criminals  for  felony  against  the  nation.

Profiting  by  the  slackening  of  the  people's  ardour,  which
necessarily  followed  after  the  movement  of  October  5  and  6,
the  middle  classes  began,  also  in  the  Assembly,  as  in  the
municipality,  to  organise  their  new  power — not,  it  is  true,
without  some  collisions  between  the  personal  ambitions  which
clashed  and  conspired  against  each  other.

The  Court  on  its  side  saw  no  reason  for  abdicating ;  it
conspired  and  struggled  also,  and  made  profit  out  of  the
necessitous  and  ambitious,  such  as  Mirabeau,  by  enrolling
them  in  its  service.

The  Duke  of  Orleans,  having  been  compromised  in  the
movement  of  October  5,  which  he  had  secretly  supported,
was  sent  in  disgrace,  by  the  Court,  as  ambassador  to  England.
But  then  it  was  "  Monsieur,"  the  Count  of  Provence,  the
King's  brother,  who  began  intriguing  to  send  away  the  King —
"  the  log  "  (soliveau),  as  he  wrote  to  a  friend.  Once  the  King
had  gone,  Orleans  could  pose  as  a  candidate  for  the  throne
of  France.  Mirabeau,  always  in  want,  and  who,  ever  since
June  23,  had  acquired  a  formidable  power  over  the  Assembly,
was  intriguing  on  his  side  to  get  into  the  Ministry.  When
his  plots  were  thwarted  by  the  Assembly,  which  voted  that
none  of  its  members  should  accept  a  place  in  the  Ministry,

t


162 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

he  threw  himself  into  the  arms  of  the  Count  of  Provence,  in
the  hope  of  getting  into  power  by  his  intervention.  Finally,
he  sold  himself  to  the  King  and  accepted  from  him  a  pension
of  fifty  thousand  francs  a  month  for  four  months,  and  the
promise  of  an  embassy ;  in  return  for  which  M.  de  Mirabeau
pledged  himself  "  to  aid  the  King  with  his  knowledge,  bis
power  and  his  eloquence,  in  whatever  Monsieur  will  judge
useful  to  the  State  and  in  the  interest  of  the  King."  All  this,
however,  only  became  known  later  on,  in  1792,  after  the  taking
of  the  Tuileries,  and,  meanwhile,  Mirabeau  kept,  until  his
death  on  April  2,  1791,  his  reputation  as  a  champion  of  the
people.

Historians  will  never  unravel  the  tissue  of  intrigues  which
was  then  being  woven  round  the  Louvre  and  in  the  palaces
of  the  princes,  as  well  as  round  the  Courts  of  London,  Vienna
and  Madrid,  and  in  the  various  German  principalities.  Quite
a  world  fermented  round  the  royalty  which  was  perishing.
And  even  in  the  midst  of  the  Assembly,  how  many  ambitions
were  struggling  to  grasp  the  power  !  But  after  all,  these
are  but  incidents  of  small  value.  They  help  to  explain  certain
facts,  but  they  could  change  nothing  in  the  progress  of  events,
marked  out  by  the  very  logic  of  the  situation  and  the  forces
in  the  conflict.

The  Assembly  represented  the  educated  middle  classes  on
their  way  to  conquer  and  organise  the  power  which  was  falling
from  the  hands  of  the  Court,  the  higher  clergy,  and  the  great
nobles.  And  it  contained  in  its  midst  a  number  of  men
marching  straight  towards  this  end  with  intelligence  and  a
certain  audacity,  which  increased  every  time  that  the  people
gained  a  fresh  victory  over  the  old  regime,  /  There  was  in  the
Assembly  a  "  triumvirate  "  composed  of  Duport,  Charles  de
Lameth,  and  Barnave,  and  at  Paris  there  were  the  Mayor
Bailly  and  the  commander  of  the  National  Guard,  Lafayette,
upon  whom  all  eyes  were  turned.  But  the  real  power  of  the
mement  was  represented  by  the  compact  forces  of  the  Assembly
which  were  elaborating  the  laws  to  constitute  the  government
of  the  middle  classes.]

This  was  the  work  which  the  Assembly  resumed  with  ardour,


FEARS  OF  THE  MIDDLE  CLASSES  163

as  soon  as  it  was  installed  in  Paris  and  could  go  on  with  its
work  with  a  certain  amount  of  tranquillity.

This  work  was  begun,  as  we  have  seen,  the  very  day  after
the  taking  of  the  Bastille.  The  middle  classes  were  seized
with  alarm  when  they  saw  the  people  arming  themselves  with
pikes  in  a  few  days,  burning  the  toll-gates,  seizing  the  bread-
stuffs  wherever  they  found  them,  and  all  the  while  showing
as  much  hostility  to  the  rich  middle  classes  as  towards  the
"  red  heels  "  (talons  rouges).  They  made  haste  to  arm  them-
selves and  to  organise  their  National  Guard — to  array  the
**  beaver  hats  "  against  the  "  woollen  caps "  and  the  pikes,
so  that  the  popular  insurrections  could  be  kept  in  hand.  And
after  the  insurrection  on  October  5,  they  passed  without  delay
the  law  about  rioting,  of  which  we  have  just  spoken.
I  At  the  same  time  they  made  haste  to  legislate  in  such  a  way
that  the  political  power  which  was  slipping  out  of  the  hand
of  the  Court  should  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  people.
Thus,  eight  days  after  July  14,  Sieve's,  the  famous  advocate  of
the  Third  Estate,  had  already  proposed  to  the  Assembly  to
divide  the  French  into  two  classes,  of  which  one  only,  the
active  citizens,  should  take  part  in  the  government,  whilst
trie  other,  comprising  the  great  mass  of  the  people  under  the
name  of  the  passive  citizens,  should  be  deprived  of  all  political
rights.  Five  weeks  later  the  Assembly  accepted  this  division
as  the  basis  for  the  Constitution.  The  Declaration  of  Rights,
of  which  the  first  principle  was  Equality  of  Rights  for  all
citizens,  was  thus  flagrantly  violated  as  soon  as  proclaimed.  >

Now,  on  resuming  the  work  of  political  organisation  for
France,  the  Assembly  abolished  the  ancient  feudal  division
into  provinces,  of  which  each  one  preserved  certain  privi-
leges for  the  nobility  and  the  parlements.  It  divided  France
into  departments,  and  suspended  the  ancient  <parlements,  i.e.,
the  ancient  tribunals,  which  also  possessed  certain  judicial
privileges — and  it  went  on  to  the  organisation  of  an  entirely
new  and  uniform  administration,  always  maintaining  the
principle  of  excluding  the  poorer  classes  from  theXjOvernment.

The  National  Assembly,  which]  had  been  elected  under
the  old  regime  under  a  system  of  elections  in  two  degrees,


164 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

was  nevertheless  the  outcome  of  an  almost  universal  suffrage.
That  is  to  say,  that  the  primary  assemblies,  which  had  been
convoked  in  every  electoral  division,  were  composed  of  nearly
all  the  citizens  of  the  locality. These  primary  assemblies  had
nominated  the  electors,  who  made  up  in  each division one
electoral  assembly,  and  this,  in  its  turn,  chose  its  representative
, '  in  the  National  Assembly,  fit  is  well  to  note  that after  the
elections  the  electoral  assemblies  continued  to  meet,  receiving
letters  from  their  deputies  and  keeping  watch  over  their  votes^f
(  Having  now  attained  power,  the  middle  classes  did  two
things. They extended the prerogatives of the electoral
assemblies, by  confiding  to  them  the  election  of  the  local
councils  (the  directoires  of  each  department),  the  judges  and
certain  other  functionaries. They  gave  them  thus  a  great
power. But, at the same time, they excluded from the
primary  assemblies  the  mass  of  the  people,  whom  by  this
means  they  deprived  of  all  political  rights. They  admitted
into  them  only  the  active  citizens,  that  is,  those  who  paid
in  direct  contributions  at  least  three  days'  work.* The  rest
became  passive  citizens,  who  could  no  longer  take  part  in  the
primary  assemblies,  and  accordingly  had  no  right  to  nominate
the  electors,  or  the  municipality,  or  any  of  the  local  authorities.
Besides,  they  could  no  longer  form  part  of  the  National  Guard.t
Furthermore,  to  be  eligible  as  an  elector,  it  was  necessary
to  pay,  in  direct  taxes,  the  value  of  ten  days'  work,  which
made  these  assemblies  entirely  middle  class. Later  on,  in  1791,
when  reaction  was  emboldened  by  the  massacre  on  the  Champ-
de-Mars,  the  Assembly  made  an  additional  restriction  :  electors
must possess landed property. And to be nominated a
representative  of  the  people  in  the  National  Assembly,  it  was
necessary  to  pay  in  direct  taxation  the  value  of  a  marc  of  silver
(eight  ounces),  that  is  to  say,  fifty  livres.J  ^

*  Each  municipality  fixed  the  value,  in  money,  of  the  day,  and  it
was  agreed  to  take  for  a  basis  the  day  of  a  journeyman.

f  The  municipal  law  of  December  14,  1789,  not  only  excluded  the
passive  citizens  from  all  the  elections  of  municipal  officers  (paragraphs
5,  6,  8,  &c.),  but  it  also  forbade  the  electoral  assemblies  to  meet  "  by
trades,  professions  or  guilds."  They  could  only  meet  by  quarters,  or
districts.

J  The  livre  had  the  value  of  about  one  franc.


FEARS  OF  THE  MIDDLE  CLASSES  165

And  finally,  the  permanence  of  the  electoral  assemblies  was
interdicted.  Once  the  elections  were  over,  these  assemblies
were  not  to  meet  again.  Once  the  middle-class  governors
were  appointed,  they  must  not  be  controlled  too  strictly.
Soon  the  right  even  of  petitioning  and  of  passing  resolutions
was  taken  away — "  Vote  and  hold  your  tongue  !  "

As  to  the  villages,  they  had  preserved,  as  we  have  seen,  under
the  old  regime,  in  nearly  the  whole  of  France,  up  to  the  Revo-
lution, the  general  assembly  of  the  inhabitants,  like  the  mir
in  Russia.  To  this  general  assembly  belonged  the  administra-
tion of  the  affairs  of  the  commune,  such  as  the  re-division
and  the  use  of  the  communal  lands — cultivated  fields,  meadows
and  forests,  and  also  the  waste  lands.  But  now  these  general
assemblies  of  the  village  communes  were  forbidden  by  the
municipal  law  of  December  22  to  24,  1/89.  Henceforth  only
the  well-to-do  peasants,  the  active  citizens,  had  the  right  to
meet,  once  a  year,  to  nominate  the  mayor  and  the  munici-
pality, composed  of  three  or  four  middle-class  men  of  the
village.

A  similar  municipal  organisation  was  given  to  the  towns,
where  the  active  citizens  met  to  nominate  the  general  council
of  the  town  and  the  municipality,  that  is  to  say,  the  legislative
power  in  municipal  matters  and  the  executive  power  to  whom
was  entrusted  the  administration  of  the  commune's  police
and  the  command  of  the  National  Guard.

Thus  the  movement  described  as  taking  place  in  the  towns
in  July  1789,  and  which  consisted  in  obtaining  by  revolutionary
means  an  elective  municipal  administration  at  a  time  when
the  laws  of  the  old  regime,  still  in  full  force,  authorised  nothing
of  the  kind — this  movement  was  sanctioned  by  the  municipal
and  administrative  law  of  December  22  to  24,  1789.  (And,
as  we  shall  see,  an  immense  power  was  conferred  on  the  Revo-
lution by  the  creation,  at  its  very  outset,  of  these  thirty  thousand
municipal  centres,  independent  in  a  thousand  matters  of  the
central  government,  and  capable  of  revolutionary  action,
when  the  revolutionaries  succeeded  in  seizing  upon  them.\

It  is  true  that  the  middle  classes  surrounded  themselves  with
every  precaution  in  order  to  keep  the  municipal  power  in  the


i66 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

hands  of  the  well-to-do  members  of  the  community,  and  the
municipalities  themselves  were  placed  under  the  supervision
of  the  councils  of  the  department,  which,  being  chosen  by
electors  in  the  second  degree,  thus  represented  the  wealthier
section  of  the  middle  classes  and  were  the  support  and  the
right  hand  of  the  counter-revolutionists  during  the  Revolution.
On  the  other  hand,  the  municipality  itself,  which  was  elected
by  the  active  citizens  only,  also  represented  the  middle  classes
more  than  the  masses  of  the  people,  and  in  towns  like  Lyons
and  so  many  others  it  became  a  centre  of  reaction./  But  with
all  that,  the  municipalities  were  not  dependent  upon  the  royal
power,  and  it  must  be  recognised  that  the  municipal  law  of
December  1789  contributed  to  the  success  of  the  Revolution
more  than  any  other  law.'J  During  the  insurrection  against
the  feudal  lords,  in  August  1789,  many  municipalities  were
hostile  to  the  revolted  peasants,  and  we  saw  how  the  munici-
palities of  the  Dauphine  took  the  field  against  the  peasants
and  hanged  the  rebels  without  mercy.  But  in  proportion
as  the  Revolution  developed,  the  people  came  to  get  hold  of
the  municipalities,  and  in  1793  and  1794  the  municipalities
in  several  parts  of  France  became  the  real  centres  of  action
for  the  popular  revolutionaries.

Another  very  important  step  was  made  by  the  National
Assembly  when  it  abolished  the  old  courts  of  justice — the
parlements — and  introduced  judges  elected  by  the  people.
In  the  rural  districts,  each  canton,  composed  of  five  or  six
parishes,  appointed,  through  its  active  citizens,  its  own  magis-
trates ;  and  in  the  large  towns  this  right  was  given  to  the
electoral  assemblies.  The  old  'parlements  naturally  strove  to
maintain  their  prerogatives.  In  the  south,  for  instance  at
Toulouse,  eighty  members  of  the  'parlements,  supported  by
eighty-nine  gentlemen,  even  started  a  movement  to  restore
to  the  monarch  his  legitimate  authority  and  "  liberty,"  and
to  religion  "  its  useful  influence.'^  At  Paris,  Rouen  and  Metz,
and  in  Brittany  the  farlements  would  not  submit  to  the
levelling  power  of  the  Assembly,  and  they  headed  conspiracies
in  favour  of  the  old  regime^

But  they  found  no  support  among  the  people,  and  they


FEARS  OF  THE  MIDDLE  CLASSES  167

were  compelled  to  yield  to  the  decree  of  November  3,  1789,
by  which  they  were  sent  on  vacation  until  a  new  order  was
given.  The  attempts  to  resist  led  only  to  a  new  decree,  on
January  n,  1790,  by  which  it  was  declared  that  the  resistance
to  the  law  by  the  magistrates  of  Rennes  "  disqualified  them
from  fulfilling  any  functions  of  the  active  citizen,  until,  having
sent  in  their  request  to  the  legislative  body,  they  had  been
admitted  to  take  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  the  Constitution,
as  decreed  by  the  National  Assembly  and  accepted  by  the
King."

The  National  Assembly,  it  can  be  seen,  meant  to  make  its
decisions  concerning  the  new  administrative  organisation  for
France  respected.  But  this  new  organisation  encountered
a  formidable  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  higher  clergy,  the
nobility  and  the  upper  middle  classes,  and  it  took  years  of  a
revolution,  much  more  far-reaching  than  the  middle  classes
had  intended,  to  break  down  the  old  organisation  for  the
admission  of  the  new.


CHAPTER  XXII

FINANCIAL  DIFFICULTIES— SALE  OF
CHURCH  PROPERTY

Necessity  of  avoiding  bankruptcy — Assembly  determine  to
seize  Church  property — Value  of  Church  revenue — Its  un-
equal distribution — Proposals  of  Bishop  of  Autun — Alarm  of
wealthy  clergy — Delight  of  middle  classes — Expropriation
voted — Suppression  of  monastic  orders — Paper  currency —
Administration  of  Church  property  transferred  to  munici-
palities— Clergy  henceforward  deadly  enemies  of  Revolution
— Organisation  of  French  Church — Effects  of  new  organisation
— Constituent  Assembly  works  essentially  for  middle  class —
Need  of  "  wind  from  the  street "

THE  greatest  difficulty  for  the  Revolution  was  that  it  had  to
make  its  way  in  the  midst  of  frightful  economic  circumstances.
State  bankruptcy  was  still  hanging  threateningly  over  the
heads  of  those  who  had  undertaken  to  govern  France,  and
if  this  bankruptcy  came  indeed,  it  would  bring  with  it  the
revolt  of  the  whole  of  the  upper  middle  classes  against  the
Revolution.  If  the  deficit  had  been  one  of  the  causes  which
forced  royalty  to  make  the  first  constitutional  concessions,
and  gave  the  middle  classes  courage  to  demand  seriously  their
share  in  the  Government,  this  same  deficit  weighed,  like  a
nightmare,  all  through  the  Revolution  upon  those  who  were
successively  pushed  into  power.

It  is  true  that,  as  the  State  loans  were  not  international
in  those  times,  France  had  not  the  fear  of  foreign  nations
coming  down  upon  her  in  the  guise  of  creditors,  to  seize  upon
her  provinces,  as  would  be  done  to-day  if  a  European  State
in  revolution  was  declared  bankrupt.  But  there  were  the  home
money-lenders  to  be  considered,  and(if  France  had  suspended
payment,  it  would  have  been  the  ruin  of  so  many  middle-class

1 68


FINANCIAL  DIFFICULTIES  169

fortunes  that  the  Revolution  would  have  had  against  it  all
the  middle  class,  both  upper  and  lower — in  fact  every  one
except  the  workers  and  the  poorest  of  the  peasantry.  So  it
was  that  the  Constituent  Assembly,  the  Legislative  Assembly,
the  Convention,  and,  later  on,  the  Directory,  had  to  make
unheard-of  efforts  during  a  succession  of  years  to  avoid  bank-
ruptcy.

The  solution  arrived  at  by  the  Assembly  at  the  close  of  1789
was  that  of  seizing  the  property  of  the  Church,  putting  it  up
for  sale,  and  in  return  paying  the  clergy  by  fixed  salaries.
The  Church  revenues  were  valued  in  1789  at  a  hundred  and
twenty  million  livres  for  the  tithes,  eighty  millions  in  other
revenues  brought  in  by  various  properties  (houses  and  landed
property,  of  which  the  value  was  estimated  at  a  little  more
than  two  thousand  millions),  and  thirty  millions  or  thereabout
from  the  subsidy  that  was  added  every  year  by  the  State  ;  a
total,  let  us  say,  of  about  two  hundred  and  thirty  millions
a  year.  These  revenues  were  evidently  shared  in  a  most
unjust  way  among  the  different  members  of  the  clergy.  The
bishops  lived  in  the  most  refined  luxury,  and  rivalled  in  their
expenditure  the  richest  lords  and  princes,  whilst  the  priests
in  the  towns  and  "villages  "  reduced  to  a  suitable  portion,"
lived  in  poverty.  It  was  proposed,  therefore,  by  Talleyrand,
Bishop  of  Autun,  after  October  10,  to  take  possession  of  all
Church  property  in  the  name  of  the  State,  to  sell  it,  to  endow
the  clergy  adequately,  by  giving  1200  livres  a  year  to  each
priest,  plus  his  lodging,  and  with  the  rest  to  cover  part  of
the  public  debt,  which  had  mounted  to  fifty  millions  in  life-
interests,  and  to  sixty  millions  in  rents  for  ever.  This  measure
enabled  the  deficit  to  be  filled  in,  the  remainder  of  the  salt
tax  (gabelle)  to  be  abolished,  and  a  stop  put  to  the  selling  of
the  charges  or  posts  of  officials  and  functionaries,  which  used
to  be  sold  to  contractors  by  the  State.

This  scheme,  of  course,  did  not  fail  to  evoke  great  alarm
on  the  part  of  those  who  were  landed  proprietors.  "  You
are  leading  us  on  to  an  agrarian  law  !  "  they  told  the  Assembly.
"  Every  time  you  go  back  to  the  origin  of  property,  the  nation
will  go  back  with  you  !  " — which  meant  recognising  that  the


170 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

foundation  of  all  landed  property  lay  in  injustice,  usury,  fraud
^-"or  theft.

CjBut  the  middle  classes  who  did  not  own  land  were  delighted
!  with  this  scheme.  Bankruptcy  was  avoided  by  it,  and  the
bourgeois  would  be  enabled  to  buy  property.  )  But  as  the
word  "  expropriation  "  frightened  the  pious  souls  of  the  land-
owners, means  were  found  to  avoid  it.  It  was  said  that  the
Church  property  was  "  put  at  the  disposal  of  the  nation,"  and
it  was  decided  to  put  it  up  for  public  sale  to  the  value  of  four
hundred  millions.  November  2,  1789,  was  the  memorable
date  when  this  immense  expropriation  was  voted  in  the
Assembly  by  five  hundred  and  sixty-eight  voices .  against  three
hundred  and  forty-six.  Three  hundred  and  forty-six  were
against  it.  And  these  opposers  became,  henceforth,  the  bitter
enemies  of  the  Revolution,  always  agitating  to  do  the  greatest
possible  and  imaginable  harm  to  the  constitutional  regime
and  later  on  to  the  Republic.

But  the  middle  classes,  taught  by  the  Encyclopedists  on
the  one  hand,  and  haunted  on  the  other  hand  by  the  in-
eluctability of  the  bankruptcy,  did  not  allow  themselves  to
be  daunted.  When  the  enormous  majority  of  the  clergy
and  especially  of  the  monastic  orders  began  to  intrigue  against
the  expropriation  of  the  Church  property,  the  Assembly  voted,
on  February  12,  1790,  for  the  suppression  of  perpetual  vows
and  of  the  monastic  orders  of  both  sexesJ>  Only  it  did  not
dare  to  touch  for  the  time  being  the  religious  bodies  entrusted
with  public  education  and  the  care  of  the  sick.  These  were
not  abolished  until  August  18,  1792,  after  the  taking  of  the
Tuileries.

We  can  understand  the  hatred  these  decrees  excited  in  the
breasts  of  the  clergy,  as  well  as  of  those — and  in  the  provinces
they  were  very  numerous — upon  whom  the  clergy  had  a  hold.
So  much,  however,  did  the  clergy  and  the  religious  orders
hope  to  retain  the  administration  of  their  enormous  properties,
which  would  be  considered  in  such  case  merely  as  guarantees
for  the  State  loans,  that  they  did  not  at  first  display  all  their
hostility.  But  this  state  of  affairs  could  not  last.  The
Treasury  was  empty,  the  taxes  were  not  coming  in.  A  loan


FINANCIAL  DIFFICULTIES  171

of  thirty  millions,  voted  on  August  9,  1789,  was  not  successful ;
another,  of  eighty  millions,  voted  on  the  27th  of  the  same
month,  had  brought  in  even  much  less.  Finally,  an  extra-
ordinary tax  of  a  fourth  of  the  revenue  had  been  voted  on
September  26  after  one  of  Mirabeau's  famous  speeches.  But
this  tax  was  immediately  swallowed  up  in  the  gulf  of  interests
on  old  loans,  and  then  followed  the  idea  of  a  forced  paper
currency,  of  which  the  value  would  be  guaranteed  by  the
national  property  confiscated  from  the  clergy,  and  which
should  be  redeemed  according  as  the  sale  of  the  lands  brought
in  money.

One  can  imagine  the  colossal  speculations  to  which  these
measures  for  the  sale  of  the  national  property  upon  a  large
scale  gave  rise.  One  can  easily  guess  the  element  which  they
introduced  into  the  Revolution.  Nevertheless,  even  now
the  economists  and  the  historians  ask  whether  there  was  any
other  method  for  meeting  the  pressing  demands  of  the  State.
i  The  crimes,  the  extravagance,  the  thefts  and  the  wars  of  the
>  old  regime  weighed  heavily  upon  the  Revolution  ;  and  starting
with  this  enormous  burden  of  debt,  bequeathed  to  it  by  the
old  regime,  it  had  to  bear  the  consequences.  Under  menace
of  a  civil  war,  still  more  terrible  than  that  which  was  already
breaking  out,  under  the  threat  of  the  middle  classes  turning
their  backs  upon  it — the  classes  which,  although  pursuing
their  own  ends,  were  nevertheless  allowing  the  people  to  free
themselves  from  their  lords,  but  would  have  turned  against
all  attempts  at  enfranchisement  if  the  capital  they  had  invested
in  the  loans  was  endangered,  set  between  these  two  dangers,
the  Revolution  adopted  the  scheme  for  a  paper  currency
(les  assignats),  guaranteed  by  the  national  property.
\On  December  21,  1789,  on  the  proposition  of  the  districts
of  Paris,*  the  administration  of  the  Church  property  was
transferred  to  the  municipalities,  which  were  commissioned
to  put  up  for  sale  four  hundred  millions'  worth  of  this  property.
The  great  blow  was  struck,  j  And  henceforth  the  clergy,  with
the  exception  of  some  village  priests  who  were  real  friends
of  the  people,  vowed  a  deadly  hatred  to  the  Revolution — a
*  Vide  chap.  xxiv.


172 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

clerical  hatred,  which  -the  abolition  of  monastic  vows  helped
further  to  envenom,  f  Henceforward  all  over  France  we  see
the  clergy  becoming  "the  centres  of  conspiracies  made  to
restore  the  old  regime  and  feudalism.  They  were  the  heart
and  soul  of  the  reaction,  which  we  shall  see  bursting  forth  in
1790  and  in  1791,  threatening  to  put  an  end  to  the  Revolution
before  it  had  realised  anything  substantial.,

But  the  middle  classes  resisted  it,  and  did  not  allow  them-
selves to  be  disarmed.  In  June  and  July  1790  the  Assembly
opened  the  discussion  upon  a  great  question — the  internal
organisation  of  the  Church  of  France.^ The  clergy  being  now
paid  by  the  State,  the  legislators  conceived  the  idea  of  freeing
them  from  Rome,  and  putting  them  altogether  under  the
Constitution,  The  bishoprics  were  identified  with  the  new
departments  :  their  number  was  thus  reduced,  and  the  two
boundaries,  that  of  the  diocese  and  that  of  the  department,
became  identical.  This  might  have  been  allowed  to  pass  ;
but  the  election  of  the  bishops  was  by  the  new  law  entrusted
to  the  Assemblies  of  electors — to  those  same  Assemblies  which
were  electing  the  deputies,  the  judges  and  the  officers  of  the
State.)

This  was  to  despoil  the  bishop  of  his  sacerdotal  character
and  to  make  a  State  functionary  of  him.  It  is  true  that  in
the  Early  Churches  the  bishops  and  priests  were  nominated
by  the  people  ;  but  the  electoral  Assemblies  which  met  for
the  elections  of  political  representatives  and  officials  were  not
the  ancient  assemblies  of  the  people — of  the  believers.  Con-
sequently the  believers  saw  in  it  an  attempt  made  upon  the
ancient  dogmas  of  the  Church,  and  the  priests  took  every
possible  advantage  of  this  discontent.  The  clergy  divided  into
two  great  parties :  the  constitutional  clergy  who  submitted,  at
least  for  form's  sake,  to  the  new  laws  and  took  the  oath  to
the  Constitution,  and  the  unsworn  clergy  who  refused  the
oath  and  openly  placed  themselves  at  the  head  of  a  counter-
revolutionary movement.  So  it  came  about  that  in  every
province,  in  each  town,  village  and  hamlet,  the  question  put
to  the  inhabitants  was — whether  they  were  for  the  Revolution
or  against  it  ?  The  most  terrible  struggles  sprang,  therefore,


SALE  OF  CHURCH  PROPERTY  173

into  existence  in  every  locality,  to  decide  which  of  the  two
parties  should  get  the  upper  hand.  fThe  Revolution  was
transported  from  Paris  into  every  village  :  from  being  par-
liamentary it  became  popular.)

The  work  done  by  the  Constituent  Assembly  was  undoubtedly
middle-class  work.  But  to  introduce  into  the  customs  of
the  nation  the  principle  of  political  equality,  to  abolish  the
relics  of  the  rights  of  one  man  over  the  person  of  another,  to
awaken  the  sentiment  of  equality  and  the  spirit  of  revolt
against  inequalities,  was  nevertheless  an  immense  work.  Only
it  must  be  remembered,  as  Louis  Blanc  has  remarked,,  that  to
maintain  and  to  kindle  that  fiery  spirit  in  the  Assembly,  "  the
wind  that  was  blowing  from  the  street  was  necessaryy"  "  Even
rioting,"  he  adds,  "  in  those  unparalleled  days,  produced
from  its  tumult  many  wise  inspirations !  Every  rising  was
so  full  of  thoughts  !  "  In  other  words,  it  was  the  street,  the
man  in  the  street,  that  each  time  forced  the  Assembly  to  go
forward  with  its  work  of  reconstruction.  Even  a  revolutionary
Assembly,  or  one  at  least  that  forced  itself  upon  monarchy
in  a  revolutionary  way,  as  the  Constituent  Assembly  did,
would  have  done  nothing  if  the  masses  of  the  people  had  not
impelled  it  to  march  forward,  and  if  they  had  not  crushed,
by  their  insurrections,  the  anti -revolutionary  resistance.


CHAPTER  XXIII
THE  FETE  OF  THE  FEDERATION

End  of  first  period  of  Revolution — Duel  between  King  and
Assembly — King  bribes  Mirabeau — He  finds  tools  among
middle  class — Enemies  of  Revolution  among  all  classes —
Period  of  plots  and  counter-plots — The  Ftte  of  the  Federation
— Meaning  of  the  f&te — Joy  of  the  people

( /  WITH  the  removal  of  the  King  and  the  Assembly  from  Versailles
to  Paris  the  first  period — the  heroic  period,  so  to  speak,  of  the
Great  Revolution — ended.  The  meeting  of  the  States-General,
the  Royal  Session  of  June  23,  the  Oath  of  the  Tennis  Court,
the  taking  of  the  Bastille,  the  revolt  of  the  cities  and  villages
in  July  and  August,  the  night  of  August  4,  and  finally  the
march  of  the  women  on  Versailles  and  their  triumphal  return
with  the  King  as  prisoner ;  these  were  the  chief  stages  of
the  period. J

Now,  when  both  the  "  legislative  "  and  the  "  executive  "
power — the  Assembly  and  the  King — settled  at  Paris,  a  period
x\  of  hidden,  continuous  struggle  began  between  moribund
royalty  and  the  new  Constitutional  power  which  was  being
slowly  consolidated  by  the  legislative  labours  of  the  Assembly
and  by  the  constructive  work  done  on  the  spot,  in  every  town
and  village.

France  had  now,  in  the  National  Assembly,  a  constitutional
power  which  the  King  had  been  forced  to  recognise.  But,
if  he  recognised  it  officially,  he  saw  in  it  only  a  usurpation,
an  insult  to  his  royal  authority,  of  which  he  did  not  wish
to  admit  any  diminution.  So  he  was  always  on  the  alert  to
find  a  thousand  petty  means  of  belittling  the  Assembly,  and
for  disputing  with  it  the  smallest  fragment  of  authority.
Even  to  the  last  moment  he  never  abandoned  the  hope  of


174


THE  FETE  OF  THE  FEDERATION  175

one  day  reducing  to  obedience  this  new  power,  which  he
reproached  himself  for  having  allowed  to  grow  by  the  side
of  his  own.

In  this  struggle  every  means  seemed  good  to  the  King.
He  knew,  by  experience,  that  the  men  of  his  own  surroundings
easily  sold  themselves — some  for  a  trifle,  others  demanding
a  high  price — and  he  exerted  himself  to  obtain  money,  plenty
of  money,  borrowing  it  in  London,  so  as  to  be  able  to  buy  the
leaders  of  the  parties  in  the  Assembly  and  elsewhere.  He
succeeded  only  too  well  with  one  of  those  who  stood  in  the
forefront,  with  Mirabeau,  who  in  return  for  heavy  sums  of
money  became  the  counsellor  of  the  Court  and  the  defender
of  the  King,  and  spent  his  last  days  in  an  absurd  luxury.  But
it  was  not  only  in  the  Assembly  that  royalty  found  its  tools  ;
the  great  number  were  outside  it.  They  were  found  among
those  whom  the  Revolution  had  deprived  of  their  privileges,
of  the  handsome  pensions  which  had  been  allotted  to  them
in  former  days,  and  of  their  colossal  incomes ;  among  the
clergy  who  saw  their  influence  perishing  ;  among  the  nobles
who  were  losing,  with  their  feudal  rights,  their  privileged
position  ;  among  the  middle  classes  who  were  alarmed  for
the  capital  they  had  invested  in  manufactures,  commerce
and  State  loans — among  those  self-same  middle  classes  who
were  now  enriching  themselves  during  and  by  means  of  the
Revolution.

/They  were  numerous,  indeed,  the  enemies  of  the  Revolution*
They  included  all  those  who  formerly  had  lived  on  the  higher
ecclesiastics,  the  nobles  and  the  privileged  members  of  the
upper  middle  class.  More  than  one-half  of  that  active  and
thinking  portion  of  the  nation  which  contains  the  makers  oij
its  historic  life  stood  in  the  ranks  of  these  enemies.  And  if
among  the  people  of  Paris,  Strasbourg,  Rouen  and  many  other
towns,  both  large  and  small,  the  Revolution  found  ardent
champions — how  many  towns  there  were,  like  Lyons,  where
the  centuries-old  influence  of  the  clergy  and  the  economic
servitude  of  the  workers  were  such  that  the  poor  themselves
supported  the  priests  against  the  Revolutiony  How  many
towns,  like  the  great  seaports,  Nantes,  Bordeaux,  Saint-Malo,


176 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

where  the  great  merchants  and  all  the  folk  depending  on  them
were  already  bound  up  with  reaction.

Even  among  the  peasants,  whose  interests  should  have  lain
with  the  Revolution — how  many  lower  middle-class  men  there
were  in  the  villages  who  dreaded  it,  not  to  mention  those
peasants  whom  the  mistakes  of  the  revolutionists  themselves
,  were  to  alienate  from  the  great  cause.  (  There  were  too  many
theorists  amongst  the  leaders  of  the  Revolution,  too  many
worshippers  of  uniformity  and  regularity,  incapable,  therefore,
of  understanding  the  multiple  forms  of  landed  property
recognised  by  the  customary  law ;  too  many  Voltaireans,
on  the  other  hand,  who  showed  no  toleration  towards  the
prejudices  of  the  masses  steeped  in  poverty ;  and  above
all,  too  many  politicians  to  comprehend  the  importance
which  the  peasants  attached  to  the  land  question.  And
the  result  was  that  in  the  Vendee,  in  Brittany  and  in
the  south-east,  the  peasants  themselves  turned  against  the
Revolution.)

The  counter-revolutionists  knew  how  to  attract  partisans
from  each  and  all  of  these  elements.  A  Fourteenth  of  July  or  a
Fifth  of  October  could  certainly  displace  the  centre  of  gravity
of  the  ruling  power  ;  but  it  was  in  the  thirty-six  thousand
communes  of  France  that  the  Revolution  had  to  be  accom-
plished, and  that  required  some  time.  (And  the  counter-
revolutionists  took  advantage  of  that  time  to  win  over  to  their
cause  all  the  discontented  among  the  well-to-do  classes,  whose
name  was  legion.  For,  if  the  radical  middle  classes  put  into
the  Revolution  a  prodigious  amount  of  extraordinary  in-
telligence, developed  by  the  Revolution  itself — intelligence,
subtleness  and  experience  in  business  were  not  wanting  either
among  the  provincial  nobility  or  the  wealthy  merchants  and
clergy,  who  all  joined  hands  for  lending  to  royalty  a  formidable
power  of  resistance.^

This  relentless  struggle  of  plots  and  counter-plots,  of  partial

risings  in  the  provinces  and  parliamentary  contests  in  the

Constituent  Assembly,  and  later  on  in  the  Legislative — this

\ concealed  struggle  lasted  nearly  three  years,  from  the  month

of  October  1789  to  the  month  of  June  1792,  when  the  Revo-


THE  FETE  OF  THE  FEDERATION  177

lution  at  last  took  a  fresh  start,  v  It  was  a  period  poor  in  events
of  historic  import — the  only  ones  deserving  mention  in  that
interval  being  the  recrudescence  of  the  peasants'  rising  in
January  and  February  1790,  the  Fete  of  the  Federation,  on
July  14,  1790,  the  massacre  at  Nancy  on  August  31,  1790,  the
flight  of  the  King  on  June  20,  1791,  and  the  massacre  of  the
people  of  Paris  on  the  Champ-de-Mars  on  July  17,  1791^

Of  the  peasants'  insurrections  we  shall  speak  in  a  later
chapter,  but  it  is  necessary  to  say  something  here  about  the
Fete  of  the  Federation.  It  sums  up  the  first  part  of  the
Revolution.  Its  overflowing  enthusiasm  and  the  harmony
displayed  in  it  show  what  the  Revolution  might  have  been
if  the  privileged  classes  and  royalty,  comprehending  how
irresistible  was  the  change,  had  yielded  with  a  good  grace  to
what  they  were  powerless  to  prevent.

Taine  disparages  the  festivals  of  the  Revolution,  and  it  is
true  that  those  of  1793  and  1794  were  often  too  theatrical.
They  were  got  up  for  the  people,  not  by  the  people.  But
that  of  July  14,  1790,  was  one  of  the  most  beautiful  popular
festivals  ever  recorded  in  history.

Previous  to  1789  France  was  not  unified.  It  was  an  historic
entity,  but  its  various  parts  knew  little  of  each  other  and
cared  for  each  other  even  less.  But  after  the  events  of  1789,
and  after  the  axe  had  been  laid  at  the  roots  of  the  survivals
of  feudalism,  after  several  glorious  moments  had  been  lived
together  by  the  representatives  of  all  parts  of  France,  there
was  born  a  sentiment  of  union  and  solidarity  between  the
provinces  that  had  been  linked  together  by  history.  (  All  Europe  j
was  moved  to  enthusiasm  over  the  words  and  deeds  of  the
Revolution — how  could  the  provinces  resist  this  unification
in  the  forward  march  towards  a  better  future  ?  This  is  what
the  Fete  of  the  Federation  symbolised.X

It  had  also  another  striking  feature.  As  a  certain  amount
of  work  was  necessary  for  this  festival,  the  levelling  of  the  soil,
the  making  of  terraces,  the  building  of  a  triumphal  arch,  and
as  it  became  evident,  eight  days  before  the  jtte,  that  the
fifteen  thousand  workmen  engaged  in  this  work  could  never
finish  it  in  time — what  did  Paris  do  ?  Some  unknown  person


i/8 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

suggested  that  every  one  should  go  to  work  in  the  Champ-
de-Mars ;  and  all  Paris,  rich  and  poor,  artists  and  labourers,
monks  and  soldiers,  went  to  work  there  with  a  light  heart.
France,  represented  by  the  thousands  of  delegates  arrived
from  the  provinces,  found  her  national  unity  in  digging  the
earth — a  symbol  of  what  equality  and  fraternity  among  men
should  one  day  lead  to.

The  oath  that  the  scores  of  thousands  of  persons  present
took  "  to  the  Constitution,  as  decreed  by  the  National  Assembly
and  accepted  by  the  King,"  the  oath  taken  by  the  King  and
spontaneously  confirmed  by  the  Queen  for  her  son,  are  of
little  importance.  Every  one  took  his  oath  with  some  "  mental
reservations  "  ;  every  one  attached  to  it  certain  conditions.
The  King  took  his  oath  in  these  words :  "  I,  King  of  the
French,  swear  to  use  all  the  power  reserved  to  me  by  the
constitutional  Act  of  the  State  to  maintain  the  Constitution
decreed  by  the  National  Assembly  and  accepted  by  me."
Which  meant  that  he  would  indeed  maintain  the  Constitution,
but  that  it  would  be  violated,  and  that  he  would  not  be  able
to  prevent  it.  In  reality,  at  the  very  moment  the  King  was
taking  the  oath  he  was  thinking  only  of  how  he  was  to  get  out
of  Paris — under  the  pretence  of  going  to  review  the  army.
He  was  calculating  the  means  of  buying  the  influential  members
of  the  Assembly,  and  discounting  the  help  that  should  come
from  the  foreigners  to  check  the  Revolution  which  he  himself
had  let  loose  through  his  opposition  to  the  necessary  changes
and  the  trickery  in  his  dealings  with  the  National  Assembly.

The  oaths  were  worth  little,  but  the  important  thing  to
note  in  this  jete — beyond  the  proclamation  of  a  new  nation
having  a  common  ideal — is  the  remarkable  good  humour  of
the  Revolution.  One  year  after  the  taking  of  the  Bastille,
Marat  had  every  reason  for  writing  :  "  Why  this  unbridled
joy  ?  Why  these  evidences  of  foolish  liveliness  ?  The
Revolution,  as  yet,  has  been  merely  a  sorrowful  dream  for  the
people  !  "  But  although  nothing  had  yet  been  done  to  satisfy
the  wants  of  the  working  people,  and  everything  had  been
done,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  to  prevent  the  real  abolition
of  the  feudal  abuses,  although  the  people  had  everywhere  paid


THE  FETE  OF  THE  FEDERATION  179

with  their  lives  and  by  terrible  sufferings  every  progress  made
in  the  political  Revolution — in  spite  of  all  that,  the  people
burst  into  transports  of  joy  at  the  spectacle  of  the  new  demo-
cratic regime  confirmed  at  this  fete.  Just  as  fifty-eight  years
later,  in  February  1848,  the  people  of  Paris  were  to  place
"  three  years  of  suffering  at  the  service  of  the  Republic,"  so
now  the  people  showed  themselves  ready  to  endure  anything,
provided  that  the  new  Constitution  promised  to  bring  them
some  alleviation,  provided  that  it  held  in  it  for  them  a  little
goodwill.

If  then,  three  years  later,  the  same  people,  so  ready  at  first
to  be  content  with  little,  so  ready  to  wait,  became  savage  and
began  the  extermination  of  the  enemies  of  the  Revolution,
it  was  because  they  hoped  to  save,  at  least,  some  part  of  the
Revolution  by  resorting  to  extreme  means.  It  was  because
they  saw  the  Revolution  foundering  before  any  substantial
economic  change  had  been  accomplished  for  the  benefit  of
the  mass  of  the  people.  In  July  1790  there  was  nothing  to
forecast  this  dark  and  savage  character.  "  The  Revolution,  as
yet,  has  been  only  a  sorrowful  dream  for  the  people,"  "  It
has  not  fulfilled  its  promises.  No  matter.  It  is  moving.
And  that  is  enough"  And  everywhere  the  people's  hearts
were  filled  with  life.

But  reaction,  all  armed,  was  watchful,  and  in  a  month  or
two  it  was  to  show  itself  in  full  force.  After  the  next  anniversary
of  July  14,  on  July  17,  1791,  it  was  already  strong  enough  to
shoot  down  the  people  of  Paris  on  this  same  Champ-de-
Mars.


CHAPTER  XXIV

THE  "  DISTRICTS  "  AND  THE  "  SECTIONS  "  OF
PARIS

Creation  of  Communes — Their  power — Village  Communes —
Municipal  Communes — Commune  of  Paris — Soul  of  Revolu-
tion— Erroneous  conceptions  of  Communes — Electoral  divi-
sions of  Paris — Districts  useful  for  organisation  of  Revolution
— Varied  constitution  of  districts — Germ  of  Commune —
Lacroix  on  districts — Independence  of  districts — Link  between
Paris  and  provincial  towns — Sections  become  instruments  of
federation

WE  have  seen  how  the  Revolution  began  with  popular  risings
ever  since  the  first  months  of  1789.  To  make  a  revolution
it  is  not,  however,  enough  that  there  should  be  such  risings
— more  or  less  successful.  It  is  necessary  that  after  the  risings
there  should  be  left  something  new  in  the  institutions,  which
would  permit  new  forms  of  life  to  be  elaborated  and  established.
The  French  people  seem  to  have  understood  this  need
wonderfully  well,  and  the  something  new,  which  was  introduced
into  the  life  of  France,  since  the  first  risings,  was  the  popular
Commune,  f  Governmental  centralisation  came  later,  but  the
Revolution  began  by  creating  the  Commune — autonomous  to
a  very  great  degree — and  through  this  institution  it  gained,
as  we  shall  see,  immense  power.  \

{  In  the  villages  it  was,  in  fact,  tile  peasants'  Commune  which
insisted  upon  the  abolition  of  feudal  dues,  and  legalised  the
refusal  to  pay  them ;  it  was  the  Commune  which  took  back
from  the  lords  the  lands  that  were  formerly  communal,
resisted  the  nobles,  struggled  against  the  priests,  protected
the  patriots  and  later  on  the  sans-c ulottes,  arrested  the  returning
emigres,  and  stopped  the  runaway  king/1

180  J


"  DISTRICTS  "  AND  "  SECTIONS  "  OF  PARIS 181

(.In  the  towns  it  was  the  municipal  Commune  which  re-
constructed  the  entire  aspect  of  life,  arrogated  to  itself  the
right  of  appointing  the  judges,  changed  on  its  own  initiative
the  apportioning  of  the  taxes,  and  further  on,  according  as
the  Revolution  developed,  became  the  weapon  of  sans-culottism
in  its  struggle  against  royalty  and  against  the  royalist  conspirators
and  the  German  invaders.  Later  still,  in  the  Year  II.  of  the
Republic,  it  was  the  Communes  that  undertook  to  work  out
the  equalisation  of  wealth.^?

And  it  was  the  Commune  of  Paris,  as  we  know,  that  de-
throned the  King,  and  after  August  10  became  the  real  centre
and  the  real  power  of  the  Revolution,  which  maintained  its
vigour  so  long  only  as  that  Commune  existed.1*

The  soul  of  the  Revolution  was  therefore  in  the  Communes,
and  without  these  centres,  scattered  all  over  the  land,  the  Revolu-
tion never  would  have  had  the  power  to  overthrow  the  old
regime,  to  repel  the  German  invasion,  and  to  regenerate  France^

It  would,  however,  be  erroneous  to  represent  the  Communes
of  that  time  as  modern  municipal  bodies,  to  which  the  citizens,
after  a  few  days  of  excitement  during  the  elections,  innocently
confide  the  administration  of  all  their  business,  without  taking
themselves  any  further  part  in  it.  The  foolish  confidence  in
representative  government,  which  characterises  our  own
epoch,  did  not  exist  during  the  Great  Revolution.  The
Commune  which  sprang  from  the  popular  movement  was
not  separated  from  the  people.  By  the  intervention  of  its
"  districts,"  "  sections  "  or  "  tribes,"  constituted  as  so  many
mediums  of  popular  administration,  it  remained  of  the  people,
and  this  is  what  made  the  revolutionary  power  of  these  organi-
sations.

Since  the  organisation  and  the  life  of  the  "  districts  "  and
the  "sections"  is  best  known  for  Paris,*  it  is  of  the  City  of
Paris  that  we  shall  speak,  the  more  so  as  in  studying  the  life
of  the  Paris  "  sections  "  we  learn  to  know  pretty  well  the  life
of  the  thousands  of  provincial  Communes.

From  the  very  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  and  especially

*  The  "  districts  "  were  described  as  "  sections  "  after  the  municipal
law  of  June  1790  was  passed,


1 82 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

since  events  had  roused  Paris  to  take  the  initiative  of  rebellion
in  the  first  days  of  July  1789,  the  people,  with  their  marvellous
gift  for  revolutionary  organisation,  were  already  organising
in  view  of  the  struggle  which  they  would  have  to  maintain,
and  of  which  they  at  once  felt  the  import.

The  City  of  Paris  had  been  divided  for  electoral  purposes
into  sixty  districts,  which  were  to  nominate  the  electors  of
the  second  degree.  Once  these  were  nominated,  the  districts
ought  to  have  disappeared ;  but  they  remained  and  organised
themselves,  on  their  own  initiative,  as  permanent  organs  of
the  municipal  administration,  by  appropriating  various
functions  and  attributes  which  formerly  belonged  to  the  police,
or  to  the  law  courts,  or  even  to  different  government  depart-
ments under  the  old  regime.

Thus  they  rendered  themselves  necessary,  and  at  a  time
when  all  Paris  was  effervescing  at  the  approach  of  July  14
they  began  to  arm  the  people  and  to  act  as  independent
authorities;  so  much  so  that  the  Permanent  Committee,
which  was  formed  at  the  Hotel  de  Ville  by  the  influential
middle  classes,*  had  to  convoke  the  districts  to  come  to  an
understanding  with  them.  The  districts  proved  their  useful-
ness and  displayed  a  great  activity  in  arming  the  people,  in
organising  the  National  Guard,  and  especially  in  enabling
the  capital  to  repulse  an  attack  upon  it.

After  the  taking  of  the  Bastille,  we  see  the  districts  already
acting  as  accepted  organs  of  the  municipal  administration.
Each  district  was  appointing  its  Civil  Committee,  of  from
sixteen  to  twenty-four  members,  for  the  carrying  out  of  its
affairs.  However,  as  Sigismond  Lacroix  has  said  in  the  first
volume  of  his  Actes  de  la  Commune  de  Paris  pendant  la  Revo-
lution^ each  district  constituted  itself  "  how  it  liked."  There
was  even  a  great  variety  in  their  organisation.  One  district,
"  anticipating  the  resolutions  of  the  National  Assembly
concerning  judicial  organisation,  appointed  its  justices  of
peace  and  arbitration."  (JBut  to  create  a  common  understanding
between  them,  "  they  formed  a  central  corresponding  bureau
where  special  delegates  met  and  exchanged  communications.''!
*  $&  chap.  xii.  f  Vo1-  *•»  Paris«  l894,  p-  vii.


\


«  DISTRICTS  "  AND  "  SECTIONS  "  OF  PARIS 183

The  first  attempt  at  constituting  a  Commune  was  thus  made
from  below  upward,  by  the  federation  of  the  district  organisms  ;
it  sprang  up  in  a  revolutionary  way,  from  popular  initiative.
The  Commune  of  August  10  was  thus  appearing  in  germ
from  this  time,  and  especially  since  December  1789,  when  the
delegates  of  the  districts  tried  to  form  a  Central  Committee
at  the  Bishop's  palace.*

It  was  by  means  of  the  "  districts  "  that  henceforth  Danton,
Marat  and  so  many  others  were  able  to  inspire  the  masses  of
the  people  in  Paris  with  the  breath  of  revolt,  and  the  masses,
accustoming  themselves  to  act  without  receiving  orders  from
the  national  representatives,  were  practising  what  was  described
later  on  as  Direct  Self-Government.t

Immediately  after  the  taking  of  the  Bastille,  the  districts
had  ordered  their  delegates  to  prepare,  in  consultation  with
the  Mayor  of  Paris,  Bailly,  a  plan  of  municipal  organisation,
which  should  be  afterwards  submitted  to  the  districts  them-
selves. But  while  waiting  for  this  scheme,  the  districts  went  on
widening  the  sphere  of  their  functions  as  it  became  necessary.

When  the  National  Assembly  began  to  discuss  municipal
law,  they  did  so  with  painful  slowness.  "  At  the  end  of  two
months,"  says  Lacroix,  "  the  first  article  of  the  new  Munici-
pality scheme  had  still  to  be  written."  t  /vThese  delays  natu-
rally seemed  suspicious  to  the  districts,  and  from  this  time
began  to  develop  a  certain  hostility,  which  became  more  and
more  apparent,  on  behalf  of  part  of  the  population  of  Paris
and  the  official  Council  of  its  Commune.  It  is  also  important
to  note  that  while  trying  to  give  a  legal  form  to  the  Muni-
cipal Government,  the  districts  strove  to  maintain  their  own
independence.  They  sought  for  unity  of  action,  not  in  sub-
jection to  a  Central  Committee,  but  in  a  federative  union.  \

Lacroix  says : "  The  state  of  mind  of  the  districts  .  .  .

*  Most  of  the  "  sections  "  held  their  general  assemblies  in  churches,
and  their  committees  and  schools  were  often  lodged  in  buildings  which
formerly  belonged  to  the  clergy  or  to  monastic  orders.  The  Bishopric
became  a  central  place  for  the  meetings  of  delegates  from  the  sections.

I  Sigismond  Lacroix,  Actes  de  la  Commune,  vol.  iii.  p.  625.  Ernest
Mellie,  Les  Sections  de  Paris  pendant  la  Revolution,  Paris,  1898,  p.  9.

J  Lacroix,  Actes,  vol.  ii.  p.  xiv.


1 84 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

displays  itself  both  by  a  very  strong  sentiment  of  communal
unity  and  by  a  no  less  strong  tendency  towards  direct  self-
government.  Paris  did  not  want  to  be  a  federation  of  sixty
republics  cut  off  haphazard  each  in  its  territory ;  the  Commune
is  a  unity  composed  of  its  united  districts.  .  .  .  Nowhere  is
there  found  a  single  example  of  a  district  setting  itself  up  to
live  apart  from  the  others  .  .  .  But  side  by  side  with  this
undisputed  principle,  another  principle  is  disclosed  .  .  .  which
is,  that  the  Commune  must  legislate  and  administer  for  itself,
,.  directly,  as  much  as  possible.  Government  by  representation
'  must  be  reduced  to  a  minimum  ;  everything  that  the  Commune
can  do  directly  must  be  done  by  it,  without  any  intermediary,
without  any  delegation,  or  else  it  may  be  done  by  delegates
r  reduced  to  the  role  of  special  commissioners,  acting  under
the  uninterrupted  control  of  those  who  have  commissioned
them  .  .  .  the  final  right  of  legislating  and  administrating
for  the  Commune  belongs  to  the  districts — to  the  citizens,
who  come  together  in  the  general  assemblies  of  the  districts."
We  thus  see  that  the  principles  of  anarchism,  expressed
some  years  later  in  England  by  W.  Godwin,  already  dated
from  1789,  and  that  they  had  their  origin,  not  in  theoretic
speculations,  but  in  the  deeds  of  the  Great  French  Revolution.
There  is  still  another  striking  fact  pointed  out  by  Lacroix,
which  shows  up  to  what  point  the  districts  knew  how  to
distinguish  themselves  from  the  Municipality  and  how  to
prevent  it  from  encroaching  upon  their  rights.  When  Brissot
came  forward  on  November  30, 1789,  with  a  scheme  of  municipal
constitution  for  Paris,  concocted  between  the  National  Assembly
and  a  committee  elected  by  the  Assembly  of  Representatives
(the  Permanent  Committee  of  the  Paris  Commune,  founded
on  July  12,  1789),  the  districts  at  once  opposed  it.  Nothing
was  to  be  done  without  the  direct  sanction  of  the  districts
themselves,*  and  Brissot's  scheme  had  to  be  abandoned.
Later  on,  in  April  1790,  when  the  National  Assembly  began
to  discuss  the  municipal  law,  it  had  to  choose  between  two
proposals :  that  of  an  assembly — free  and  illegal,  after  all —
of  delegates  from  the  districts,  who  met  at  the  Bishop's  palace,
*  Lacroix,  Actes,  vol.  iii.  p.  iv.


«  DISTRICTS  "  AND  "  SECTIONS  "  OF  PARIS 185

a  proposal  which  was  adopted  by  the  majority  of  the  districts
and  signed  by  Bailly,  and  that  of  the  legal  Council  of  the
Commune,  which  was  supported  by  some  of  the  districts  only.
The  National  Assembly  decided  in  favour  of  the  first.
Needless  to  say  that  the  districts  did  not  limit  themselves
to  municipal  affairs.  They  always  took  part  in  the  great
political  questions  of  the  day.  The  royal  veto,  the  imperative
mandate,  poor-relief,  the  Jewish  question,  that  of  the  "  marc
of  silver  "  * — all  of  these  were  discussed  by  the  districts.  As
for  the  "  marc  of  silver,"  they  themselves  took  the  initiative
in  the  matter,  by  convoking  each  other  for  discussion  and
appointing  committees.  "  They  vote  their  own  resolutions,"
says  Lacroix,  "  and  ignoring  the  official  representatives  of  the
Commune,  they  are  going  themselves  on  February  8  (1790)
to  present  to  the  National  Assembly  the  first  Address  of  the
Paris  Commune  in  its  sections.  It  is  a  personal  deonstration
of  the  districts,  made  independently  of  any  official  representa-
tion, to  support  Robespierre's  motion  in  the  National  Assembly
against  the  "  marc  of  silver."  t

/What  is  still  more  interesting  is  that  from  this  time  the
provincial  towns  began  to  put  themselves  in  communication
with  the  Commune  of  Paris  concerning  all  things.  From  I
this  there  developed  a  tendency  to  establish  a  direct  link
between  the  towns  and  villages  of  France,  outside  the  National
Parliament,  and  this  direct  and  spontaneous  action,  which
later  became  even  more  manifest,  gave  irresistible  force  to
the  Revolution.  ]

It  was  especially  in  an  affair  of  capital  importance — the
liquidation  of  the  Church  property — that  the  districts  made
their  influence  felt,  and  proved  their  capacity  for  organisation.
The  National  Assembly  had  ordained  on  paper  the  seizing
of  the  Church  property  and  the  putting  it  up  for  sale,  for  the
benefit  of  the  nation ;  but  it  had  not  indicated  any  practical
means  for  carrying  this  law  into  effect.  At  this  juncture  it
was  the  Paris  districts  that  proposed  to  serve  as  intermediaries
for  the  purchase  of  the  property,  and  invited  all  the  munici-


*  Vide  chap.  ind.

|  Lacroix,  Actes,  vol.  iii.  pp.  xii.  and  xiii.


1 86 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

polities  of  France  to  do  the  same.  They  thus  found  a  practical
method  of  applying  the  law.

The  editor  of  the  Actes  de  la  Commune  has  fully  described
how  the  districts  managed  to  induce  the  Assembly  to  entrust
them  with  this  important  business :  "  Who  speaks  and  acts  in
the  name  of  that  great  personality,  the  Commune  of  Paris  ?  "
demands  Lacroix.  And  he  replies :  "  The  Bureau  de  Ville
(Town  Council)  in  the  first  place,  from  whom  this  idea  ema-
nated; and  afterwards  the  districts,  who  have  approved  it,
and  who,  having  approved  it,  have  got  hold  of  the  matter
in  lieu  of  the  Town  Council,  for  carrying  it  out,  have  negotiated
and  treated  directly  with  the  State,  that  is  to  say,  with  the
National  Assembly,  and  at  last  effected  the  proposed  purchase
directly,  all  contrarily  to  a  formal  decree,  but  with  the  consent
of  the  Sovereign  Assembly."

What  is  even  more  interesting  is  that  the  districts,  having
once  taken  over  this  business,  also  took  no  heed  of  the  old
Assembly  of  Representatives  of  the  Commune,  which  was
already  too  old  for  serious  action,  and  also  they  twice  dismissed
the  Town  Council  that  wanted  to  interfere,  f "  The  districts,"
Lacroix  says,  "  prefer  to  constitute,  with  a  view  to  this  special
object,  a  special  deliberate  assembly,  composed  of  sixty  dele-
gates, and  a  small  executive  council  of  twelve  members  chosen
by  these  sixty  representatives."*^

By  acting  in  this  way — and  the  libertarians  would  no  doubt
do  the  same  to-day — the  districts  of  Paris  laid  the  foundations
of  a  new,  free,  social  organisation.f

*  Lacroix,  Actes,  iv.  p.  xix.

f  S.  Lacroix,  in  his  Introduction  to  the  fourth  volume  of  the  Actes
de  la  Commune,  gives  a  full  account  of  this  affair.  But  I  cannot  resist
reproducing  here  the  following  lines  of  the  "  Address  to  the  National
Assembly  by  the  deputies  of  the  sixty  sections  of  Paris,  relative  to  the
acquisition  to  be  made,  in  the  name  of  the  Commune,  of  national
domains."  When  the  members  of  the  Town  Council  wanted  to  act  in
this  affair  of  the  purchases,  instead  of  the  sections,  the  sections  pro-
tested and  they  expressed  the  following  very  just  idea  concerning  the
representatives  of  a  people  :  "  How  would  it  be  possible  for  the  acquisi-
tion consummated  by  the  Commune  itself,  through  the  medium  of  its
commissioners,  specially  appointed  '  ad  hoc,'  to  be  less  legal  than  if  it
were  made  by  the  general  representatives.  ...  Are  you  no  longer  recog-
nisingl  the  principle  that  tkt functions  of  the  deputy  cease  in  the  presence

.IUv


"  DISTRICTS  "  AND  "  SECTIONS  "  OF  PARIS 187

We  thus  see  that  while  reaction  was  gaining  more  and  more
ground  in  1790,  on  the  other  side  the  districts  of  Paris  were
acquiring  more  and  more  influence  upon  the  progress  of  the
Revolution.  While  the  Assembly  was  sapping  by  degrees  the
royal  power,  the  districts  and  afterwards  the  "sections"  of
Paris  were  widening  by  degrees  the  sphere  of  their  functions
in  the  midst  of  the  people.  They  thus  prepared  the  ground
for  the  revolutionary  Commune  of  August  10,  and  they
soldered  at  the  same  time  the  link  between  Paris  and  the
provinces.

"  Municipal  history,"  says  Lacroix,  "  is  made  outside
official  assemblies.  It  is  by  means  of  the  districts  that  the
most  important  acts  in  the  communal  life,  both  political  and
administrative,  are  accomplished  :  the  acquisition  and  selling
of  the  national  estates  (biens  nationaux)  goes  on,  as  the  districts
had  wished,  through  the  intermediary  of  their  special  com-
missioners ;  the  national  federation  is  prepared  by  a  meeting
of  delegates  to  whom  the  districts  have  given  a  special  mandate.
.  .  .  The  federation  of  July  14  is  also  the  exclusive  and  direct
work  of  the  districts,"  their  intermediary  in  this  case  being
an  assembly  of  delegates  from  the  sections  for  concluding  a
federative  compact.*

It  has  often  been  said  that  the  National  Assembly  repre-
sented the  national  unity  of  France.  When,  however,  the
question  of  the  Fete  of  the  Federation  came  up,  the  politicians,
as  Michelet  has  observed,  were  terrified  as  they  saw  men
surging  from  all  parts  of  France  towards  Paris  for  the  festival,
and  the  Commune  of  Paris  had  to  burst  in  the  door  of  the
National  Assembly  to  obtain  its  consent  to  the  fete.  "  Whether
it  liked  or  not,  the  Assembly  had  to  consent,"  Michelet  adds.  j

^Besides,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  movement  was
born  first  (as  Buchez  and  Roux  had  already  remarked)  from
the  need  of  assuring  the  food-supply  to  Paris,  and  to  take
measures  against  the  fears  of  a  foreign  invasion  ; that  is to I
say,  this  movement  was  partly  the  outcome  of  an  act  of  local J


ojjhe  defuter  $" Proud  and  true  words,  unfortunately  buried  nowa-
days under  governmental  fictions.
*  Lacroix,  vol.  i.  pp.  ii,  iv.  and  729,  note,


1 88 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

administration,  and  yet  it  took,  in  the  sections  of  Paris,*
the  character  of  a  national  confederation,  wherein  all  the  cantons
of  the  departments  of  France  and  all  the  regiments  of  the
army  were  represented.  The  sections,  which  were  created
for  the  individualisation  of  the  various  quarters  of  Paris,
became  thus  the  instrument  for  the  federate  union  of  the
whole  nation.  \

*  S.  Lacroix,  Les  Actes  de  la  Commune,  ist  edition,  vol.  vi.,  1897,
pp.  273  et  seq.


CHAPTER  XXV

THE  SECTIONS  OF  PARIS  UNDER  THE  NEW
MUNICIPAL  LAW

Commune  of  Paris — Permanence  of  sectional  assemblies —
Distrust  of  executive  power — Local  power  necessary  to  carry
out  Revolution — National  Assembly  tries  to  lessen  power  of
districts — Municipal  law  of  May- June  1790 — Impotence  of
attacks  of  Assembly — Municipal  law  ignored — Sections  the
centre  of  revolutionary  initiative — Civic  committees — In-
creasing power  of  sections — Charity-bureaux  and  charity-
workshops  administered  by  sections — Cultivation  of  waste
land

OUR  contemporaries  have  allowed  themselves  to  be  so  won
over  to  ideas  of  subjection  to  the  centralised  State  that  the
very  idea  of  communal  independence — to  call  it  "  autonomy  "
would  not  be  enough — which  was  current  in  1789,  seems
strange  nowadays.  M.  L.  Foubert,*  when  speaking  of  the
scheme  of  municipal  organisation  decreed  by  the  National
Assembly  on  May  21,  1790,  was  quite  right  in  saying  that
"  the  application  of  this  scheme  would  seem  to-day  a  revoke
tionary  act,  even  anarchic — so  much  the  ideas  have  changed  "  ;
and  he  adds  that  at  the  time  this  municipal  law  was  considered
insufficient  by  the  Parisians  who  were  accustomed,  since  July
14,  1789,  to  a  very  great  independence  of  their  "  districts."

The  exact  delimitation  of  powers  in  the  State,  to  which
so  much  importance  is  attached  to-day,  seemed  at  that  time
to  the  Parisians,  and  even  to  the  legislators  in  the  National
Assembly,  a  question  not  worth  discussing  and  an  encroachment
on  liberty.  Like  Proudhon,  who  said  "The  Commune  will

*  L'idee  autonovniste  dans  les  districts  de  Paris  en  1789  et  en  1790,  in
the  review  La  Revolution  fran^aise,"  Year  XIV.,  No.  8,  February  14,
1895,  p.  141  et  seq.

189


J


190 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

be  all  or  nothing,"  the  districts  of  Paris  did  not  understand
that  the  Commune  was  not  all.  ("  A  Commune,"  they  said,
"  is  a  society  of  joint-owners  and  fellow  inhabitants  enclosed
by  a  circumscribed  and  limited  boundary,  and  it  has  collectively
the  same  rights  as  a  citizen."  And,  starting  from  this  definition,
they  maintained  that  the  Commune  of  Paris,  like  every  other
citizen,  "  having  liberty,  property,  security  and  the  right  to
resist  oppression,  has  consequently  every  power  to  dispose  of
its  property,  as  well  as  that  of  guaranteeing  the  administration
of  this  property,  the  security  of  the  individuals,  the  police,
the  military  force  —  all."  The  Commune,  in  fact,  must  be
sovereign  within  its  own  territory  :  the  only  condition,  I
may  add,  of  real  liberty  for  a  Commune,  j

The  third  part  of  the  preamble  to  the  municipal  law  of
May  1790  established,  moreover,  a  principle  which  is  scarcely
understood  to-day,  but  was  much  appreciated  at  that  time.
It  deals  with  the  direct  exercise  of  powers,  without  inter-
mediaries\  "  The  Commune  of  Paris  "  —  so  says  this  preamble  —
"  in  consequence  of  its  freedom,  being  possessed  of  all  its  rights
and  powers,  exercises  them  always  itself  —  directly  as  much  as
possible,  and  as  little  as  possible  by  delegation"^

In  other  words,  the  Commune  of  Paris  was  not  to  be  a
governed  State,  but  a  people  governing  itself  directly  —  when
possible  —  without  intermediaries,  without  masters.
£lt  was  the  General  Assembly  of  the  section,  and  not  the
elected  Communal  Council,  which  was  to  be  the  supreme
authority  for  all  that  concerned  the  inhabitants  of  Paris,
And  if  the  sections  decided  to  submit  to  the  decision  of  '
majority  amongst  themselves  in  general  questions,  they  did
not  for  all  that  abdicate  either  their  right  to  federate  by
means  of  freely  contracted  alliances,  or  that  of  passing  from
one  section  to  another  for  the  purpose  of  influencing  their
neighbours'  decisions,  and  thus  trying  by  every  means  to
arrive  at  unanimity.

The  "  permanence  "  of  the  general  assemblies  of  the  sections
—  that  is,  the  possibility  of  calling  the  general  assembly  whenever
it  was  wanted  by  the  members  of  the  section  and  of  discussing
everything  in  the  general  assembly  —  this,  they  said,  will


PARIS  UNDER  THE  NEW  MUNICIPAL  LAW 191

educate  every  citizen  politically,  and  allow  him,  when  it  is
necessary,  "  to  elect,  with  full  knowledge,  those  whose  zeal
he  will  have  remarked,  and  whose  intelligence  he  will  have
appreciated."  *

The  section  in  permanence — the  forum always  open — is
the  only  way,  they  maintained,  to  assure  an  honest  and  in-
telligent administration.  >^
r  Finally,  as  Foubert  also  says,  distrust  inspired  the  sections :  '
distrust  of  all  executive  'power. "  He  who  has  the  executive
power,  being  the  depository  of  force,  must  necessarily  abuse
it." "  This  is  the  opinion  of  Montesquieu  and  Rousseau,"
adds  Foubert — it  is  also  mine !  \

The  strength  which  this  point  of  view  gave  to  the  Revolution
can  be  easily  understood,  the  more  so  as  it  was  combined
with  another  one,  also  pointed  out  by  Foubert.  "The
revolutionary  movement,"  he  writes,  "  is  just  as  much  against
centralisation  as  against  despotism."  The  French  people
thus  seem  to  have  comprehended  from  the  outset  of  the
Revolution  that  the  immense  work  of  transformation  laid
upon  them  could  not  be  accomplished  either  constitutionally
or  by  a  central  power;  it  had  to  be  done  by  the  local  powers,
and  to  carry  it  out  they  must  be  free.

Perhaps  they  also  thought  that  enfranchisement,  the
conquest  of  liberty,  must  begin  in  each  village  and  each  town.
The  limitation  of  the  royal  power  would  thus  be  rendered
only  the  more  easy.

The  National  Assembly  evidently  tried  all  it  could  to  lessen
the  power  of  the  districts,  and  to  put  them  under  the  tutelage
of  a  communal  government,  which  the  national  representatives
might  be  able  to  control.  Thus  the  municipal  law  of  May
27  to  June  27,  1790,  suppressed  the  districts.  It  was  intended
to  put  an  end  to  those  hotbeds  of  Revolution,  and  for  that
purpose  the  new  law  introduced  a  new  subdivision  of  Paris
into  forty-eight  sections — active  citizens  only  being  allowed
to  take  part  in  the  electoral  and  administrative  assemblies  of
the  new  "  sections."

The  law  had,  moreover,  taken  good  care  to  limit  the  duties
*  Section  des  Mathurins,  quoted  by  Foubert,  p.  155.


192 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

of  the  sections  by  declaring  that  in  their  assemblies  they  should
occupy  themselves  "  with  no  other  business  than  that  of  the
elections  and  the  administration  of  the  civic  oath."  *  But
this  was  not  obeyed.  The  furrow  had  been  ploughed  more
than  a  year  before,  and  the  "  sections  "  went  on  to  act  as
the  "  districts  "  had  acted.  (*  After  all,  the  municipal  law  was
itself  obliged  to  grant  to  the  sections  the  administrative
attributes  that  the  districts  had  already  arrogated  to  them-
selves. We  find,  therefore,  under  the  new  law  the  same
sixteen  commissioners  whom  we  saw  in  the  districts  —  elected
and  charged  not  only  with  police  and  even  judicial  functions,
but  also  trusted  by  the  administration  of  the  department
"  with  the  reassessment  of  the  taxes  in  their  respective
sections."  f  Furthermore,  if  the  Constituent  Assembly
abolished  the  "  permanence  "  —  that  is  to  say,  the  permanent
right  of  the  sections  to  meet  without  a  special  convocation  —
it  was  compelled  nevertheless  to  recognise  their  right  of
holding  general  assemblies,  at  the  demand  of  fifty  active
citizens.!  ^

That  was  sufficient,  and  the  citizens  did  not  fail  to  take
advantage  of  it.  For  instance,  scarcely  a  month  after  the
installation  of  the  new  municipality,  Danton  and  Bailly  went
to  the  National  Assembly,  on  behalf  of  forty-three  out  of  the
forty-eight  sections,  to  demand  the  instant  dismissal  of  the
ministers  and  their  arraignment  before  a  national  tribunal.

The  sections  parted  with  none  of  their  sovereign  power.
Although  they  had  been  deprived  of  it  by  law,  they  retained
it,  and  proudly  displayed  it.  Their  petition  had,  in  fact,


*  Division  I.,  Article  2.  f  Division  IV.,  Article  12.


I  Danton  understood  thoroughly  the  necessity  of  guarding  for  the
]  sections  all  the  rights  which  they  had  attributed  to  themselves  during
\  the  first  year  of  the  Revolution,  and  this  is  why  the  General  Ruling  for
\  the  Commune  of  Pans,  which  was  elaborated  by  the  deputies  of  the
sections  at  the  Bishopric,  partly  under  the  influence  of  Danton,  and
adopted  on  April  7, 1790,  by  forty  districts,  abolished  the  General
Council  of  the  Commune. It  left  all  decisions  to  the  citizens  assembled
in  their  sections,  and  the  sections  retained  the  right  of  permanence.
On  the  contrary,  Condorcet,  in  his  "municipality  scheme,"  remaining
true  to  the  idea  of  representative  government,  personified  the  Commune
in  its  elected  General  Council,  to  which  he  gave  all  the  rights  (Lacroix,
Actes,  2nd  series,  vol.  i.  p.  xii.).


PARIS  UNDER  THE  NEW  MUNICIPAL  LAW 193

nothing  municipal  about  it,  but  they  took  action,  and  that
was  all.  Besides,  the  sections,  on  account  of  the  various
functions  they  had  assumed,  became  of  such  importance  that
the  National  Assembly  listened  to  them  and  replied  graciously.
(it  was  the  same  with  the  clause  of  the  municipal  law  of  t
1790,  which  entirely  subjected  the  municipalities  "to  the
administration  of  the  department  and  the  district  for  all  j
that  concerned  the  functions  they  should  have  to  exercise
by  delegation  from  the  general  administration."  * )  Neither
the  sections  nor  the  Commune  of  Paris  nor  the  provincial
Communes  would  accept  this  clause.  They  simply  ignored
it  and  maintained  their  independence.

Generally  speaking,  the  sections  gradually  took  upon  them-
selves the  part  of  being  centres  of  revolutionary  initiative,
which  had  belonged  to  the  "  districts  "  ; and  if  their  activity
relaxed during the reactionary  period  which France  lived
through  in  1790  and  1791,  it  was  still,  as  we  shall  see  by  the
sequel,  the  sections  which  roused  Paris  in  1792  and  prepared
the  revolutionary  Commune  of  August  10.
£By  virtue  of  the  law  of  May  21,  1790,  each  section  had  to  ,
appoint  sixteen  commissioners  to  constitute  their  civic  com-  j
mittees,  and  these  committees  entrusted  at  first  with  police  ;
functions  only,  never  ceased,  during  the  whole  time  of  the  j
Revolution,  extending  their  functions  in  every  direction^  Thus,
in  September  1790,  the  Assembly  was  forced  to  grant  to  the
sections  the  right  which  the  Strasbourg  sections  had  assumed
in  August  1789,  namely,  the  right  to  appoint the justices
of  the  peace  and  their  assistants,  as  well  as  the  prud'bommes
(conciliation  judges). And  this right was  retained  by  the
sections  until  it was  abolished  by  the  revolutionary  Jacobin
government,  which  was  instituted  on  December  4,  1793.

On  the  other  hand,  these  same  civic  committees  of  the
sections  succeeded,  towards  the  end  of  1790,  after  a  severe
struggle,  in  obtaining  the  power  of  administering  the  affairs
of  the  charity-bureaux,  as  well  as  the  very  important  right
of  inspecting  and  organising  the  distribution  of  relief,  which
enabled  them  to  replace  the  charity  workshops  of  the  old

*  Article  55.

N


194 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

regime  by  relief-works,  under  the  direction  of  the  sections
themselves.  In  this  way  they  obtained  a  great  deal.  They
undertook  by  degrees  to  supply  clothes  and  boots  to  the  army.
(They  organised  milling  and  other  industries  so  well  that  in
'  I793  anX  citizen,  domiciled  in  a  section,  had  only  to  present
j  him-  or  her-self  at  the  sectional  workshop  to  be  given  work.*
A  vast  powerful  organisation  sprang  up  later  on  from  these
first  attempts,  so  that  in  the  Year  II.  (1793-1794)  the  sections
tried  to  take  over  completely  the  manufacture  as  well  as
the  supply  of  clothing  for  the  army.^

The  "  Right  to  Work,"  which  the  people  of  the  large  towns
demanded  in  1848,  was  therefore  only  a  reminiscence  of  what
had  existed  during  the  Great  Revolution  in  Paris.  But  then
in  1792-93,  it  was  organised  from  below,  not  from  above,  as
Louis  Blanc,  Vidal  and  other  authoritarians  who  sat  in  the
Luxembourg  from  March  till  June  1848  intended  it  to  be.f

There  was  something  even  better  than  this.  Not  only
did  the  sections  throughout  the  Revolution  supervise  the
supply  and  the  sale  of  bread,  the  price  of  objects  of  prime
necessity,  and  the  application  of  the  maximum  when  fixed
by  law,  but  they  also  set  on  foot  the  cultivation  of  the  waste
lands  of  Paris,  so  as  to  increase  agricultural  produce  by  market
gardening.

This  may  seem  paltry  to  those  who  think  only  of  bullets
and  barricades  in  time  of  revolution ;  but  it  was  precisely  by
entering  into  the  petty  details  of  the  toilers'  daily  life  that
the  sections  of  Paris  developed  their  political  power  and  their
revolutionary  initiative.

But  we  must  not  anticipate.  Let  us  resume  the  current
of  events.  We  shall  return  again  to  the  sections  of  Paris
when  we  speak  of  the  Commune  of  August  10.

*  Meille,  p  289.

t  We  must  say  "  intended,"  because  in  1848  nothing  was  done
besides  talk  and  discussion.


CHAPTER  XXVI

DELAYS IN  THE  ABOLITION  OF  THE
FEUDAL  RIGHTS

The  people  desire  to  abolish  feudal  system — Aims  of  middle
classes — Gradual  estrangement  of  middle  classes  and  people —
"  Anarchists  " — "  Girondins  " — Importance  of  feudal  question
in  Revolution — August  4,  1789 — -Reactionary  party  gains
ground — Honorary  rights  and  profitable  rights — Decrees  of
February  27,  1790 — Feudalism  still  oppresses  peasants —
Difficulties  of  peasants

ACCORDING  as  the  Revolution  progressed,  the  two  currents
of  which  we  have  spoken  in  the  beginning  of  this  book,  the
popular  current  and  the  middle-class  current,  became  more
clearly  defined — especially  in  economic  affairs.

The  people  strove  to  put  an  end  to  the  feudal  system,  and
they  ardently  desired  equality  as  well  as  liberty.  Seeing
delays,  therefore,  even  in  their  struggle  against  the  King  and  the
priests,  they  lost  patience  and  tried  to  bring  the  Revolution  to
its  logical  development.  They  foresaw  that  the  revolutionary
enthusiasm  would  be  exhausted  at  no  far  distant  day,  and  they
strove  to  make  the  return  of  the  landlords,  the  royal  despotism,
and  the  reign  of  the  rich  and  the  priests  impossible  for  all  time.
And  for  that  reason  they  wished — at  least  in  very  many  parts
of  France — to  regain  possession  of  the  lands  that  had  been
filched  from  the  village  communities  and  demanded  agrarian
laws  which  would  allow  every  one  to  work  on  the  land  if  he
wanted,  and  laws  which  would  place  the  rich  and  the  poor
on  equal  terms  as  regarded  their  rights  as  citizens.
(  They  revolted  when  they  were  compelled  to  pay  the  tithes,
and  they  made  themselves  masters  of  the  municipalities,  so
that  they  could  strike  at  the  priests  and  the  landlords.  \  In

195


196 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

short,  they  maintained  revolutionary  conditions  in  the  greater
part  of  France,  whilst  in  Paris  they  kept  close  watch  over  the
law-makers  from  the  vantage-points  of  the  galleries  in  the
Assembly,  and  in  their  clubs  and  meetings  of  the  "  sections."
Finally,  when  it  became  necessary  to  strike  a  heavy  blow  at
royalty,  the  people  organised  the  insurrection  and  fought  arms
in  hand,  on  July  14,  1789,  and  on  August  10,  1792.

The  middle  classes,  on  their  side,  worked  with  all  their
might  to  complete  "  the  conquest  of  power  " — the  phrase,
as  is  seen,  dates  from  that  time.  According  as  the  power  of
the  King  and  the  Court  crumbled  and  fell  into  contempt,  the
middle  classes  developed  their  own.  They  took  up  a  firm
position  in  the  provinces,  and  at  the  same  time  hastened  to
establish  their  present  and  future  wealth.

If  in  certain  regions  the  greater  portion  of  the  property
confiscated  from  the  emigres  and  the  priests  passed  in  small
lots  into  the  hands  of  the  poor  (at  least  this  is  what  may  be
gathered  from  the  researches  of  Lout  chit  zky,*) — in  other
regions  an  immense  portion  of  these  properties  served  to
enrich  the  middle  classes,  whilst  all  sorts  of  financial  specu-
lations were  laying  the  foundations  of  many  a  large  fortune
among  the  Third  Estate.

(  But  what  the  educated  middle  classes  had  especially  borne
in  mind — the  Revolution  of  1648  in  England  serving  them
as  a  model — was  that  now  was  the  time  for  them  to  seize  the
government  of  France,  and  that  the  class  which  would  govern
would  have  the  wealth — the  more  so  as  the  sphere  of  action
of  the  State  was  about  to  increase  enormously  through  the
formation  of  a  large  standing  army,  and  the  reorganisation
of  public  instruction,  justice,  the  levying  of  taxes,  and  all
the  rest.  This  had  been  clearly  seen  to  follow  the  revolution
in  England.  \

(It  can  be  understood,  therefore,  that  an  abyss  Was  ever
widening  between  the  middle  classes  and  the  people  in  France ;
the  middle  classes,  who  had  wanted  the  revolution  and  urged
the  people  into  it,  so  long  as  they  had  not  felt  that  "  the

*  Izvestia  (Bulletin)  of  the  University  of  Kieff,  Year  XXXVII.,  Nos.
3  and  8  (Russian),


DELAYS  IN  ABOLITION  OF  FEUDAL  RIGHTS 197

conquest  of  power"  was  already  accomplished  to  their  ad-
vantage; and  the  people,  who  had  seen  in  the  Revolution
the  means  of  freeing  themselves  from  the  double  yoke  of
poverty  and  political  disability.^

(  Those  who  were  described  at  that  time  by  the  "  men  of
order "  and  the  "  statesmen "  as  "  the  anarchists,"  helped
by  a  certain  number  of  the  middle  class — some  members  of
the  Club  of  the  Cordeliers  and  a  few  from  the  Club  of  the
Jacobins — found  themselves  on  one  side.  As  for  the  "  states-
men," the  "  defenders  of  property,"  as  they  were  then  called,
they  found  their  full  expression  in  the  political  party  of  those
who  became  known  later  on  as  "  the  Girondins  "  :  that  is  to
say,  in  the  politicians  who,  in  1792,  gathered  round  Brissot
and  the  minister  Roland.)

We  have  told  in  chap.  xv.  to  what  the  pretended  abolition
of  the  feudal  rights  during  the  night  of  August  4  was  reduced  by
the  decrees  voted  by  the  Assembly  from  August  5  to  1 1,  and
we  now  see  what  further  developments  were  given  to  this
legislation  in  the  years  1790  and  1791.

But  as  this  question  of  feudal  rights  dominates  the  whole
of  the  Revolution,  and  as  it  remained  unsolved  until  1793,  y
after  the  Girondin  chiefs  had  been  expelled  from  the  Convention,
I  shall,  at  the  risk  of  a  little  repetition,  sum  up  once  more  the
legislation  of  the  month  of  August  1789,  before  touching
upon  what  was  done  in  the  two  following  years.  This  is
the  more  necessary  as  a  most  regrettable  confusion  continues
to  prevail  about  this  subject,  although  the  abolition  of  the
feudal  rights  was  the  principal  work  of  the  Great  Revolution.
Over  this  question  the  main  contests  were  fought,  both  in
rural  France  and  in  the  Assembly,  and  out  of  all  the  work
of  the  Revolution,  it  was  the  abolition  of  these  rights  which
best  survived,  in  spite  of  the  political  vicissitudes  through
which  France  passed  during  the  nineteenth  century.

The  abolition  of  the  feudal  rights  certainly  did  not  enter
the  thoughts  of  those  who  called  for  social  renovation  before
1789.  All  they  intended  to  do  was  to  amend  the  abuses  of
these  rights.  It  was  even  asked  by  certain  reformers  whether
it  would  be  possible  "  to  diminish  the  seigniorial  prerogative,"


198 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

as  Necker  said.  It  was  the  Revolution  that  put  the  question
of  abolition  pure  and  simple  of  these  rights.

"  All  property,  without  any  exception,  shall  be  always
respected" — they  made  the  King  say  at  the  opening  of  the
States-General.  And  it  was  added  that  "  his  Majesty  expressly
understands  by  the  word  property  the  feudal  and  seigniorial
tithes,  levies,  rents,  rights  and  dues  and,  generally  speaking,
all  rights  and  prerogatives  profitable  or  honorary,  attached  to
the  estates  and  to  the  fiefs  belonging  to  any  person."

None  of  the  future  revolutionists  protested  then  against
this  interpretation  of  the  rights  of  the  lords  and  the  landed
proprietors  altogether.

"  But,"  says  Dalloz — the  well-known  author  of  the  Repertoire
de  jurisprudence,  whom  certainly  no  one  will  tax  with  revo-
lutionary exaggeration — "  the  agricultural  populations  did
not  thus  interpret  the  liberties  promised  to  them  ;  everywhere
the  villages  rose  up;  the  chateaux  were  burned,  and  the
archives  and  the  places  where  the  records  of  feudal  dues  were
kept  were  destroyed ;  and  in  a  great  many  localities  the
landlords  gave  their  signatures  to  documents  renouncing  their
rights."  *

Then,  in  the  dismal  blaze  of  the  burning  chateaux  and
the  peasant  insurrection  which  threatened  to  assume  still
greater  proportions,  took  place  the  sitting  of  August  4,  1789.

As  we  have  seen,  the  National  Assembly  voted  during  that
memorable  night  a  decree,  or  rather  a  declaration  of  principles,
of  which  the  first  article  was  "  The  National  Assembly  destroys
completely  the  feudal  system."

The  impression  produced  by  those  words  was  immense.
They  shook  all  France  and  Europe.  The  sitting  of  that  night
was  described  as  a  "  Saint  Bartholomew  of  property."  But
the  very  next  day,  as  we  saw  already,  the  Assembly  changed
its  mind.  By  a  series  of  decrees,  or  rather  of  resolutions
passed  on  August  5,  6,  8,  10  and  n,  they  re-established  and
placed  under  the  protection  of  the  Constitution  all  that  was
essential  in  the  feudal  rights.  Renouncing,  with  certain
exceptions,  the  personal  services  that  were  due  to  them,  the
*  Dalloz,  article  Fiodalisme.


DELAYS  IN  ABOLITION  OF  FEUDAL  RIGHTS 199

lords  guarded  with  all  the  more  care  those  of  their  rights,
often  quite  as  monstrous,  which  could  in  the  slightest  way
be  made  to  represent  rents  due  for  the  possession  or  the  use
of  the  land — the  real  rights,  as  the  law-makers  said  (rights  over
things — res  in  Latin  signifying  things).  These  were  not  only
the  rents  for  landed  property,  but  also  a  great  number  of
payments  and  dues,  in  money  and  in  kind,  varying  with  the
province,  established  at  the  time  of  the  abolition  of  serfdom
and  attached  thenceforth  to  the  possession  of  the  land.  All
these  exactions  had  been  entered  in  the  terriers  or  landed-
estate  records,  and  since  then  these  rights  had  often  been  sold
or  conceded  to  third  parties.

The  champarts,  the  terriers,  the  agriers  comptants  and  so
on  *  and  the  tithes  too — everything,  in  short,  that  had  a
pecuniary  value — were  maintained,  in  full.  The  peasants
obtained  only  the  right  to  redeem  these  dues,  if  some  day  they
would  come  to  an  agreement  with  the  landlord  about  the
price  of  the  redemption.  But  the  Assembly  took  good  care
neither  to  fix  a  term  for  the  redemption  nor  to  determine
its  rate.

In  reality,  except  that  the  idea  of  feudal  property  was
shaken  by  Article  i  of  the  resolutions  of  August  5  to  n,
everything  which  concerned  dues  reputed  to  be  attached
to  the  use  of  the  land  remained  just  as  it  was,  and  the  muni-
cipalities were  ordered  to  bring  the  peasants  to  reason  if  they
did  not  pay.  We  have  seen  how  ferociously  certain  of  them
carried  out  these  instructions.!

*  Shares  of  the  produce  of  the  land,  taxes  on  it,  court  rolls,  &c.

f  These  facts,  which  are  in  complete  contradiction  to  the  unmeasured
praise  lavished  on  the  National  Assembly  by  many  historians,  I  first
published  in  an  article  on  the  anniversary  of  the  Great  Revolution  in
the  Nineteenth  Century,  June  1889,  and  afterwards  in  a  series  of  articles
in  La  Revolte  for  1892  and  1893,  and  republished  in  pamphlet  form
under  the  title  La  Grande  Revolution,  Paris,  1893.  The  elaborate  work
of  M.  Ph.  Sagnac  (La  legislation  civile  de  la  Revolution  francaise,  1789-
1804 :  Essai  d'histoire  sociale,  Paris,  1898)  has  since  confirmed  this
point  of  view.  After  all,  it  was  not  a  question  of  a  more  correct  inter-
pretation of  facts,  it  was  a  question  of  the  facts  themselves.  And  to  be
convinced  of  this,  one  has  only  to  consult  any  collection  of  the  laws  of
the  French  State — such  as  is  contained,  for  instance,  in  the  well-
known  Repertoire  de  jurisprudence,  by  Dalloz.  There  we  have,  either
in  full  or  in  a  faithful  summary,  all  the  laws  concerning  landed  property,


200 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

We  have  seen,  furthermore,  in  the  note  written  by  my
friend  James  Guillaume  *  that  the  Assembly,  by  specifying
in  one  of  its  acts  of  August  1789  that  these  were  only  "  reso-
lutions," gave  themselves,  by  this,  the  advantage  of  not  having
to  require  the  King's  sanction.  But  at  the  same  time,  the
acts  were  thus  deprived  of  the  character  of  law,  so  long  as
their  provisions  had  not  been  put  into  the  shape  of  consti-
tutional decrees.  No  obligatory  character  was  attached  to
them :  legally,  nothing  had  been  done.

However,  even  these  "  resolutions "  seemed  too  advanced
to  the  landlords  and  to  the  King.  The  latter  tried  to  gain  time,
so  as  not  to  have  them  promulgated,  and  on  September  18
he  was  still  addressing  remonstrances  to  the  National  Assembly
asking  them  to  reconsider  their  resolutions.  He  only  decided
on  their  promulgation  on  October  6,  after  the  women  had
brought  him  back  to  Paris  and  placed  him  under  the  super-
vision of  the  people.  But  then  it  was  the  Assembly  that  turned
a  deaf  ear.  They  made  up  their  minds  to  promulgate  the
resolutions  only  on  November  3,  1789,  when  they  sent  them
out  for  promulgation  to  the  provincial  parlements  (courts  of
justice)  ;  so  that  in  reality  the  resolutions  of  August  5  to  II
were  never  actually  promulgated.

In  such  conditions  the  peasants'  revolt  had  necessarily  to
go  on,  and  that  is  what  happened.  The  report  of  the  Feudal
Committee,  made  by  Abbe  Gregoire  in  February  1790,  stated,
in  fact,  that  the  peasant  insurrection  was  still  going  on  and
that  it  had  gained  in  strength  since  the  month  of  January.
It  was  spreading  from  the  East  to  the  West.

But  in  Paris  the  party  of  reaction  had  already  gained  much
ground  since  October  6.  Therefore,  when  the  National
Assembly  undertook  the  discussion  of  the  feudal  rights  after
Gregoire's  report,  they  legislated  in  a  reactionary  spirit.  In
reality  the  decrees  which  they  passed  from  February  28  to
March  5  and  on  June  18,  1790,  had  as  consequence  the  re-

both  private  and  communal,  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  histories
of  the  Revolution. From  this  source  I  have  drawn,  and  it  was  by
studying  the  texts  of  these  laws  that  I  have  come  to  understand  the
real  meaning  of  the  Great  French  Revolution  and  its  inner  struggles.
*  Set  above,  chap,  xviii.


DELAYS  IN  ABOLITION  OF  FEUDAL  RIGHTS 201

establishing  of  the  feudal  system  in  all  that  was  of  im-
portance.

That,  as  can  be  seen  by  the  documents  of  the  period,  was
the  opinion  of  those  who  wished  for  the  abolition  of  feudalism.
They  described  the  decrees  of  1790  as  re-establishing  feudalism.

To  begin  with,  the  distinction  between  the  honorary  rights,
abolished  without  redemption,  and  the  'profitable  rights  which
the  peasants  had  to  redeem,  was  maintained  completely,  and
confirmed ;  and,  what  was  worse,  several  personal  feudal  rights,
having  been  classed  as  'profitable  rights,  were  now  "  completely
assimilated  with  the  simple  rents  and  charges  on  the  land."  *
Some  rights,  therefore,  that  were  mere  usurpations,  mere
vestiges  of  personal  servitude  and  should  have  been  condemned
on  account  of  their  origin,  were  now  put  upon  the  same
footing  as  obligations  resulting  from  the  location  of  the
land.

For  non-payment  of  these  dues,  the  lord,  even  though
he  had  lost  the  right  of  "  feudal  seizure "  t  could  exercise
constraint  of  all  kinds,  according  to  the  common  law.  The
following  article  confirms  this :  "  The  feudal  dues  and  taxes
(droits  feodaux  ft  censuels),  together  with  all  sales,  rents  and
rights  that  are  redeemable  by  their  nature,  shall  be  subject,
until  their  redemption,  to  the  rules  that  the  various  laws  and
customs  of  the  kingdom  have  established."

The  Constituent  Assembly  went  still  further.  In  their
sitting  of  February  27,  following  the  opinion  of  Merlin,  they
confirmed,  in  a  great  number  of  cases,  the  right  of  serfdom  in
mortmain.  They  decreed  that  "  the  landed  rights  of  which
the  tenure  in  mortmain  had  been  converted  into  tenure  by-
annual  rent,  not  being  representative  of  the  mortmain,  should
be  preserved."

So  much  did  the  middle  classes  hold  to  this  heritage  of
serfdom  that  Article  4  of  chap.  iii.  of  the  new  law  declared,
that  "if  the  mortmain,  real  or  mixed,  has  been  converted

*  "  All  honorary  distinctions,  superiority  and  power  resulting  from
the  feudal  system  are  abolished.  As  for  those  profitable  rights  which
will  continue  to  exist  until  they  are  redeemed,  they  are  completely  assimi-
lated to  the  simple  rents  and  charges  on  the  land  "  (Law  of  February
24,  Article  I  of  chap.  i.).  j  Article  6.


202 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

since  the  enfranchisement  into  dues  on  the  land,  or  into
rights  of  mutation,  these  dues  shall  continue  to  be  owed."

Altogether,  the  reading  of  the  discussion  in  the  Assembly
on  the  feudal  rights  suggests  the  question — whether  it  was
really  in  March  1790,  after  the  taking  of  the  Bastille,  and  on
August  4  that  these  discussions  took  place,  or  were  they  still
at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XVI.  in  the  year  1775.

Thus,  on  March  I,  1790,  certain  rights  "  of  fire,  .  .  .
chiennage  (kennels),  moneage  (coining),  of  watch  and  ward,"
as  well  as  certain  rights  o\er  the  sales  and  purchases  by  the
vassals  were  abolished.  One  would  have  thought,  however,
that  these  rights  had  been  abolished,  without  redemption,
during  the  night  of  August  4.  But  it  was  nothing  of  the  kind.
Legally,  in  1790,  the  peasants,  in  many  parts  of  France,  still
dared  not  buy  a  cow,  nor  even  sell  their  wheat,  without  paying
dues  to  the  lord.  They  could  not  even  sell  their  corn  before
the  lord  had  sold  his  and  had  profited  by  the  high  prices  that
prevailed  before  much  of  the  corn  had  been  threshed.

However,  one  might  think  that  at  last  these  rights  were
abolished  on  March  I,  as  well  as  all  the  dues  levied  by  the
lords  on  the  common  oven,  the  mill,  or  the  wine-press.  But
we  must  not  jump  to  conclusions.  They  were  abolished,  true
enough,  but  with  the  exception  of  those  cases  where  they  had
formerly  been  the  subject  of  a  written  agreement  between
the  lord  and  the  peasant  commune,  or  were  considered  as
payable  in  exchange  for  some  concession  or  other.

Pay,  peasant !  always  pay !  and  do  not  try  to  gain  time,
for  there  would  be  an  immediate  distraint,  and  then  you  could
only  save  yourself  by  winning  your  case  before  a  law-court.

This  seems  hard  to  believe,  but  so  it  was.  Here  is  the
text  of  Article  2,  chap,  iii.,  of  the  new  feudal  laws.  It  is
rather  long,  but  it  deserves  to  be  reproduced,  because  it  lets
us  see  what  slavery  the  feudal  law  of  February  24  to  March  15,
1790,  left  still  crushing  down  the  peasant.

"  Article  2. — And  are  presumed  redeemable,  except  there
is  proof  to  the  contrary  (which  means  'shall  be  paid  by  the
peasant  until  he  has  redeemed  them ' ) :

"  (i)  All the seigniorial annual dues, in money, grain,


DELAYS  IN  ABOLITION  OF  FEUDAL  RIGHTS 203

poultry,  food-stuffs  of  all  kinds,  and  fruits  of  the  earth,  paid  y
under  the  denomination  of  quit-rents,  over-rents,  feudal
rents,  manorial  or  emphyteutic,  champerty,  tasque,  terrage,
agrier  (rights  on  the  produce  of  lands  and  fields,  or  on  the
tenant's  labour),  soete,  actual  forced  labour,  or  any  other
denomination  whatsoever,  which  are  payable  or  due  only  by
the  proprietor  or  holder  of  a  piece  of  land,  so  long  as  he  is
proprietor  or  holder,  and  has  the  right  of  continuing  in
possession.

"  (2)  All  the  occasional  fees  (casuels)  which,  under  the  name
of  quint  (fifth),  requint  (twenty-fifth),  treizains  (thirteenth),
lods  (dues  on  sales  of  inheritance),  lods  et  ventes,  mi-lods,
redemptionsv  venterolles,  reliefs,  relevoisons,  pleas,  and  any
other  denominations  whatsoever,  are  due  on  account  of  super-
vening mutations  in  the  property  or  the  possession  of  a  piece
of  land.

"  (3)  The  rights  of  acapts  (rights  on  succession),  acapts  in
arrears  (arriere- acapts)  and  other  similar  rights  due  on  the
mutation  of  the  former  lords."

On  the  other  hand,  the  Assembly,  on  March  9,  suppressed
various  rights  of  toll  on  the  high  roads,  canals,  &c.,  which  were
levied  by  the  lords.  But  immediately  afterwards  they  took
care  to  add  the  following  clause :

"  It  is  not  to  be  understood,  however,  that  the  National
Assembly  includes,  as  regards  the  present,  in  the  suppression
declared  by  the  preceding  article,  the  authorised  toll-gates  .  .  .
&c.,  and  the  duties  mentioned  in  the  article  aforesaid  which
may  have  been  acquired  as  compensation."  This  meant  that  many
of  the  lords  had  sold  or  mortgaged  certain  of  their  rights ;
or  else,  in  cases  of  inheritance,  the  eldest  son  having  succeeded
to  the  estate  or  the  chateaux,  the  others,  more  especially  the
daughters,  received  as  compensation  certain  rights  of  toll  over
the  highways,  the  canals,  or  the  bridges.  In  these  cases,
therefore,  all  the  rights  remained,  although  recognised  as  being
unjust,  because,  otherwise,  it  would  have  meant  a  loss  to
some  members  of  noble  or  middle-class  families.

Cases  like  these  recurred  all  through  the  new  feudal  law.
After  each  suppression  of  feudal  right  some  subterfuge  was


204 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

inserted  to  evade  it.  So  that  the  result  would  have  been
lawsuits  without  end.

There  was  only  one  single  point  where  the  breath  of  the
Revolution  really  made  itself  felt,  and  this  was  on  the  question
of  the  tithes.  It  was  decided  that  all  tithes,  ecclesiastical
and  enfeoffed  (which  means  sold  to  the  laity),  should  cease
from  January  1791.  But  here  again  the  Assembly  decreed
that  for  the  year  1790  they  were  to  be  paid  to  whom  they
were  due,  "  and  in  full."

This  is  not  all.  They  did  not  forget  to  impose  penalties  on
those  who  might  disobey  this  decree,  and  on  opening  the
discussion  of  chap.  iii.  of  the  feudal  law,  the  Assembly
enacted :  "  No  municipality  or  administration  of  district  or
department  shall  be  able,  on  pain  of  nullity  and  of  being
prosecuted  as  a  guilty  'party  and  having  to  'pay  the  damages,  as
such,  to  prohibit  the  collection  of  any  of  the  seigniorial  dues,  of
which  payment  shall  be  asked  under  the  pretext  that  they  have
been  implicitly  or  explicitly  suppressed  without  compensation."

There  was  nothing  to  fear  from  the  officials  of  either  the  dis-
tricts or  the  departments ;  they  were,Jespecially  the  latter,  body
and  soul  with  the  lords  and  the  middle-class  landowners.  But
there  were  municipalities,  especially  in  the  East  of  France,  of
which  the  revolutionists  had  taken  possession,  and  these  would
tell  the  peasants  that  such  and  such  feudal  dues  had  been  sup-
pressed, and  that,  if  the  lords  claimed  them,  they  need  not
be  paid.

Now,  under  penalty  of  being  themselves  prosecuted  or
distrained  upon,  the  municipal  councillors  of  a  village  will
not  dare  to  say  anything,  and  the  peasant  will  have  to  pay,  and
they  must  distrain  upon  him.  He  will  only  be  at  liberty,  if  the
payment  was  not  due,  to  claim  reimbursement  later  on  from
the  lord,  who,  by  that  time,  may  have  emigrated  to  Coblentz.

This  was  introducing — as  M.  Sagnac  has  well  said — a  terrible
clause.  The  'proof  that  the  peasant  no  longer  owed  certain
feudal  dues,  that  they  were  personal,  and  not  attached  to
the  land — this  proof,  so  difficult  to  make,  rested  with  the
peasant.  If  he  did  not  make  it,  if  he  could  not  make  it — as
was  nearly  always  the  case — he  had  to  pay!


CHAPTER  XXVII

FEUDAL  LEGISLATION  IN  1790

New  laws  support  feudal  system — Sagnac's  opinion  of  them —
Attempts  to  collect  feudal  dues  resisted — Insurrection  spreads
— Spurious  decrees  excite  further  risings — Peasants  demand
"  Maximum  "  and  restoration  of  communal  lands — Revolution
fixes  price  of  bread — Middle-class  suppressions — Draconian
laws  against  peasants  (June  1790) — Tithes  to  be  paid  one
year  longer — Summary  of  laws  to  protect  property — Articles
of  peasants'  demands

THUS  it  was  that  the  National  Assembly,  profiting  by  the
temporary  lull  in  the  peasant  insurrections  during  the  winter,
passed,  in  1790,  laws  which  in  reality  gave  a  new  legal  basis
to  the  feudal  system.

Lest  it  should  be  believed  that  this  is  our  own  interpretation
of  the  legislation  of  the  Assembly,  it  should  be  enough  to  refer
the  reader  to  the  laws  themselves,  or  to  what  Dalloz  says
about  them.  But  here  is  what  is  said  about  them  by  a  modern
writer,  M.  Ph.  Sagnac,  whom  it  is  impossible  to  accuse  of
sans-culottism,  since  he  considers  the  abolition  without  re-
demption of  the  feudal  rights,  accomplished  later  on  by  the
Convention,  as  an  "iniquitous  and  useless  spoliation."  Let
us  see,  then,  how  M.  Sagnac  estimates  the  laws  of  March  1790.

"  The  ancient  law,"  he  writes,  "  weighs,  with  all  its  force,
in  the  work  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  upon  the  new  law
that  is  being  worked  out.  It  is  for  the  peasant — if  he  does
not  wish  to  pay  a  tribute  of  forced  labour,  or  to  carry  part
of  his  harvest  to  the  landlord's  barn,  or  to  leave  his  field  in
order  to  go  and  work  in  his  lord's — it  is  for  the  peasant  to
bring  proof  that  his  lord's  demand  is  illegal.  But  if  the  lord
has  possessed  some  right  for  forty  years — no  matter  what  was
its  origin  under  the  old  system — this  right  becomes  legal  under

ao5


206 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  law  of  March  15.  Possession  is  enough.  It  matters
little  what  precisely  is  this  possession,  the  legality  of  which
the  tenant  denies :  he  will  have  to  pay  all  the  same.  And
if  the  peasants,  by  their  revolt  in  August  1789,  have  compelled
the  lord  to  renounce  certain  of  his  rights,  or  if  they  have
burned  his  title-deeds,  it  will  suffice  for  him  now  to  produce
proof  of  possession  during  thirty  years  for  these  rights  to  be
re-established."  *

It  is  true  that  the  new  laws  allowed  the  cultivator  to  purchase
the  lease  of  the  land.  But "  all  these  arrangements,  undoubtedly
favourable  to  one  who  owed  the  payment  of  real  dues  (droits
reels\  were  turned  now  against  him,"  says  M.  Sagnac  ;  "  because
the  important  thing  for  him  was,  first  of  all,  to  pay  only  the
legal  dues,  while  now,  if  he  could  not  show  proof  to  the  contrary,
he  had  to  acquit  and  redeem  even  the  usurped  rights."  f

In  other  words,  nothing  could  be  redeemed  unless  all  the
dues  were  redeemed :  the  dues  for  the  possession  of  the  land,
retained  by  the  law,  and  the  personal  dues  which  the  law
had  abolished.

Furthermore,  we  read  what  follows  in  the  same  author,
otherwise  so  moderate  in  his  estimations :

"  The  framework  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  does  not
hold  together.  This  Assembly  of  landlords  and  lawyers,  by
no  means  eager,  despite  their  promises,  to  destroy  completely
the  seigniorial  and  domanial  system,  after  having  taken  care
to  preserve  the  more  considerable  rights  [all  those  which  had
any  real  value],  pushed  their  generosity  so  far  as  to  permit
redemption ;  but  immediately  it  decrees,  in  fact,  the  im-
possibility of  that  redemption.  .  .  .  The  tiller  of  the  soil  had
begged  lor  reforms  and  insisted  upon  having  them,  or  rather
upon  the  registration  in  law  of  a  revolution  already  made
in  his  mind  and  inscribed — so  at  least  he  thought — in  deeds ;
but  the  men  of  law  gave  him  only  words.  He  felt  that  once
more  the  lords  had  got  the  upper  hand."  \

"  Never did legislation unchain a greater indignation,"

*  Ph.  Sagnac,  La  legislation  civile  de  la  Revolution  franfaise  (Paris,
1898),  pp.  105-106.
f  Sagnac,  p.  120.  £  Sagnac,  p.  120.


FEUDAL  LEGISLATION  IN  1790  207

continues  M.  Sagnac.  "  On  both  sides  people  apparently
decided  to  have  no  respect  for  it."  *

The  lords,  feeling  themselves  supported  by  the  National
Asssembly,  began,  therefore,  angrily  to  exact  all  the  feudal
dues  which  the  peasants  had  believed  to  be  dead  and  buried.
They  claimed  the  payment  of  all  arrears ;  writs  and  summonses
rained  in  thousands  on  the  villages.

The  peasants,  on  their  side,  seeing  that  nothing  was  to
be  got  from  the  Assembly,  continued  in  certain  districts  to
carry  on  the  war  against  the  lords.  Many  chateaux  were
sacked  or  burned,  while  elsewhere  the  title-deeds  were  destroyed
and  the  offices  of  the  fiscal  officials,  the  bailiffs  and  the  recorders
were  pillaged  or  burnt.  The  insurrection  spread  also  west-
ward, and  in  Brittany  thirty-seven  chateaux  were  burnt  in  the
course  of  February  1790.

But  when  the  decrees  of  February  to  March  1790  became
known  in  the  country  districts,  the  war  against  the  lords
became  still  more  bitter,  and  it  spread  to  regions  which  had
not  dared  to  rise  the  preceding  summer.  Thus,  at  the  sitting
of  the  Assembly  on  June  5,  mention  was  made  of  risings  in
Bourbon-Lancy  and  the  Charolais,  where  false  decrees  of  the
Assembly  had  been  spread,  and  an  agrarian  law  was  demanded.
At  the  session  of  June  2,  reports  were  read  about  the  in-
surrections in  the  Bourbonnais,  the  Nivernais  and  the  province
of  Berry.  Several  municipalities  had  proclaimed  martial  law ;
there  had  been  some  killed  and  wounded.  The  "  brigands  "
had  spread  over  the  Campine,  and  at  that  very  time  they  were
investing  the  town  of  Decize.  Great  "  excesses "  were  also
reported  from  the  Limousin,  where  the  peasants  were  asking
to  have  the  maximum  price  of  grain  fixed.  "  The  project  for
recovering  the  lands  granted  to  the  lords  for  the  last  hundred  and
twenty  years  is  one  of  the  articles  of  their  demand"  says  the
report.  The  peasants  evidently  wanted  to  recover  the
communal  lands  of  which  the  village  communes  had  been
robbed  by  the  lords.

Spurious  decrees  of  the  National  Assembly  were  seen
everywhere.  In  March  and  April  1790,  several  were  circulated
*  Sagnac,  p.  121.


208 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

in  the  provinces,  ordering  the  people  not  to  pay  more  than
one  sou  for  a  pound  of  bread.  The  Revolution  was  thus
getting  ahead  of  the  Convention,  which  did  not  pass  the  law
of  the  "  Maximum  "  until  1793.

In  August,  the  popular  risings  were  still  going  on.  For
instance,  in  the  town  of  Saint-Etienne-en-Forez,  the  people
killed  one  of  the  monopolists,  and  appointed  a  new  munici-
pality which  was  compelled  to  lower  the  price  of  bread ;  but
thereupon  the  middle  classes  armed  themselves,  and  arrested
twenty-two  rebels.  This  is  a  picture  of  what  was  happening
more  or  less  everywhere — not  to  mention  the  greater  struggles
at  Lyons  and  in  the  South  of  France.

But  what  did  the  Assembly  do  ?  Did  they  do  justice  to
the  peasants'  demands  ?  Did  they  hasten  to  abolish  without
redemption  those  feudal  rights,  so  hateful  to  those  who
cultivated  the  land,  that  they  no  longer  paid  them  except
under  constraint  ?

Certainly  not !  The  Assembly  only  voted  new  Draconian
laws  against  the  peasants.  On  June  2,  1790,  "  the  Assembly,
informed  and  greatly  concerned  about  the  excesses  which
have  been  committed  by  troops  of  brigands  and  robbers"
[for  which  read  "  peasants  "]  in  the  departments  of  the  Cher,
the  Nievre  and  the  Allier,  and  are  spreading  almost  into  the
Correze,  enact  measures  against  these  "  promoters  of  disorder,"
and  render  the  communes  jointly  responsible  for  the  violences
committed.

"  All  those,"  says  Article  i  of  this  law,  "  who  stir  up  the
people  of  the  towns  and  the  country  to  accomplish  acts  of
violence  and  outrages  against  the  properties,  possessions  and
enclosures,  or  the  life  and  safety  of  the  citizens,  the  collection
of  the  taxes,  the  free  sale  and  circulation  of  food-stuffs,  are
declared  enemies  of  the  Constitution,  of  the  work  of  the
National  Assembly,  of  Nature,  and  of  the  King.  Martial
law  will  be  proclaimed  against  them."  *

A  fortnight  later,  on  June  18,  the  Assembly  adopted  a
decree  even  still  harsher.  It  deserves  quotation.

Its  first  article  declares  that  all  tithes,  whether  ecclesiastical
*  Moniteur,  Juije  6,


FEUDAL  LEGISLATION  IN  1790  209

or  lay,  hold  good  "  for  payment  during  the  present  year  only
to  those  to  whom  the  right  belongs  and  in  the  usual  manner.  .  .  ."
Whereupon  the  peasants,  no  doubt,  asked  if  a  new  decree  was
not  going  to  be  passed  by-and-by  for  yet  another  year  or  two
— and  so  they  did  not  pay.

According  to  Article  2,  "  those  who  owe  payments  in  field-
and  land-produce  (champart,  terriers),  in  cash,  and  in  other
dues  payable  in  kind,  which  have  not  been  suppressed  without
indemnity,  will  be  held  to  pay  them  during  the  present  year
and  the  years  following  in  the  usual  way  ...  in  conformity
with  the  decrees  passed  on  March  3  and  on  May  4  last."

Article  3  declares  that  no  one  can,  under  pretext  of  litiga-
tion, refuse  to  pay  either  the  tithes  or  the  dues  on  field-
produce,  &c.

Above  all,  it  was  forbidden  "  to  give  any  trouble  during
the  collecting  "  of  the  tithes  and  dues.  In  the  case  of  disorderly
assemblies  being  formed,  the  municipality,  by  virtue  of  the
decree  of  February  20-23,  must  proceed  to  take  severe  measures.
^  This  decree  of  February  20-23,  I79°>  was  Vei7  characteristic.
It  ordained  that  the  municipality  should  intervene  and  pro-
claim martial  law  whenever  a  disorderly  assembly  takes  place.
If  they  neglect  to  do  this,  the  municipal  officials  were  to  be
held  responsible  for  all  injury  suffered  by  the  owners  of  the
property.  And  not  only  the  officials,  but  "  all  the  citizens
being  able  to  take  part  in  the  re-establishment  of  public  order,
the  whole  community  shall  be  responsible  for  two-thirds  of
the  damage  done."  Each  citizen  shall  be  empowered  to
demand  the  application  of  martial  law,  and  then  only  shall  he
be  relieved  of  his  responsibility.)

This  decree  would  have  been  still  worse  if  its  supporters
had  not  made  a  tactical  error.  Copying  an  English  law,  they
wanted  to  introduce  a  clause  which  empowered  the  calling
out  of  the  soldiers  or  militia,  and  in  such  case  "  royal  dicta-
ture "  had  to  be  proclaimed  in  the  locality.  The  middle
classes  took  umbrage  at  this  clause,  and  after  long  discussions
the  task  of  proclaiming  martial  law,  in  support  of  one  another,
was  left  to  the  municipalities,  without  any  declaration  in  the
King's  name.  Furthermore,  the  village  communes  were  to

o


210 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

be  held  responsible  for  any  damages  which  might  accrue  to
the  lord,  if  they  had  not  shot  or  hanged  in  good  time  the
peasants  who  refused  to  pay  the  feudal  dues.

The  law  of  June  18,  1790,  confirmed  all  this.  All  that  had
any  real  value  in  the  feudal  rights,  ail  that  could  be  represented
by  any  kind  of  legal  chicanery  as  attached  to  the  possession
of  the  land,  was  to  be  paid  as  before.  And  every  one  who
refused  was  compelled  by  the  musket  or  the  gallows  to  accept
these  obligations.  To  speak  against  the  payment  of  the  feudal
dues  was  held  to  be  a  crime,  which  called  forth  the  death
penalty,  if  martial  law  was  proclaimed.*

Such  was  the  bequest  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  of
which  we  have  been  told  so  many  fine  things  ;  for  everything
remained  in  that  state  until  1/92.  The  feudal  laws  were
only  touched  to  make  clear  certain  rules  for  the  redemption
of  the  feudal  dues,  or  to  complain  that  the  peasants  were  not
willing  to  redeem  anything,f  or  else  to  reiterate  the  threats
against  the  peasants  who  were  not  paying.t

The  decrees  of  February  1790  were  all  that  the  Constituent
Assembly  did  for  the  abolition  of  the  odious  feudal  system,
and  it  was  not  until  June  1793,  after  the  insurrection  of  May
31,  that  the  people  of  Paris  compelled  the  Convention,  in  its
"purified"  form,  to  pronounce  the  actual  abolition  of  the
feudal  rights.

Let  us,  therefore,  bear  these  dates  well  in  mind.

On  August  4,  1789. — Abolition  in  principle  of  the  feudal
system ;  abolition  of  personal  mortmain,  the  game  laws,  and
patrimonial  justice.

From  August  5  to  II. — Partial  reconstruction  of  this  system
by  acts  which  imposed  redemption  for  all  the  feudal  dues
of  any  value  whatsoever.

End  of  1789  and  1790. — Expeditions  of  the  urban  munici-

*  During  this  discussion  Robespierre  uttered  a  very  just  saying
which  the  revolutionists  of  all  countries  should  remember  :  "As  for
me,  I  bear  witness,"  he  cried,  "  that  no  revolution  has  ever  cost  so
little  blood  and  cruelty."  The  bloodshed,  indeed,  came  later,  through
the  counter-revolution.

f  Law  of  May  3  to  9,  1790.

j  Law  of  June  15  to  19,  1790.


FEUDAL  LEGISLATION  IN  1790  an

polities  against  the  insurgent  peasantry,  and  hangings  of  the ^
same.

February  1790. — Report  of  the  Feudal  Committee,  stating
that  the  peasant  revolt  was  spreading.

March  and  June  1790. — Draconian  laws  against  the  peasants
who  were  not  paying  their  feudal  dues,  or  were  preaching
their  abolition.  The  insurrections  still  spreading.

June  1791. — These  laws  were  confirmed  once  more.  Re-
action all  along  the  line.  The  peasant  insurrections  continuing.

Only  in  July  1792,  as  we  shall  see,  on  the  very  eve  of  the
invasion  of  the  Tuileries  by  the  people,  and  in  August  1792,
after  the  downfall  of  royalty,  did  the  Assembly  take  the  first
decisive  steps  against  the  feudal  rights.

Lastly,  it  was  only  in  August  1793,  after  the  expulsion  of
the  Girondins,  that  the  definite  abolition,  without  redemption,
of  the  feudal  rights  was  enacted.

This  is  the  true  picture  of  the  Revolution.  ,

One  other  question,  of  immense  importance  for  the  peasants,
was  clearly  that  of  the  communal  lands.

Everywhere,  in  the  east,  north-east  and  south-east  of  France,
wherever  the  peasants  felt  themselves  strong  enough  to  do
it,  they  tried  to  regain  possession  of  the  communal  lands,
of  which  the  greater  part  had  been  taken  away  from  them
by  fraud,  or  under  the  pretext  of  debt,  with  the  help  of  the
State,  chiefly  since  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.*  Lords,  clergy,
monks  and  the  middle-class  men  of  both  towns  and  villages —
ajl  had  had  their  share  of  them.

\There  remained,  however,  a  good  deal  of  these  lands  still
in  communal  possession,  and  the  middle  classes  looked  on
them  with  greedy  eyes.  So  the  Legislative  Assembly  hastened
to  make  a  law,  on  August  I,  1791,  which  authorised  the  sale
of  communal  lands  to  private  persons.  This  was  to  give  a
free  hand  for  pilfering  these  lands'..

The  Assemblies  of  the  village  communes  were  at  that  time,
in  virtue  of  the  municipal  law  passed  by  the  National  Assembly
in  December  1789,  composed  exclusively  of  the  middle-class

Decree  of  1669.


212 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

men  of  the  village — of  active  citizens — that  is,  of  the  wealthier
peasants,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  poor  householders.  And
these  village  assemblies  were  evidently  eager  to  put  up  the
communal  lands  for  sale,  of  which  a  large  part  could  be
acquired  at  a  low  price  by  the  better-off  peasants  and  farmers.
/As  to  the  mass  of  the  poor  peasants,  they  opposed  with  all
tneir  might  the  destruction  of  the  collective  possession  of
the  land,  as  they  are  to-day  opposing  it  in  Russia.

On  the  other  hand,  the  peasants,  both  the  rich  and  the
poor,  did  all  they  could  to  regain  possession  of  the  communal
lands  for  the  villages  ;  the  wealthier  ones  in  the  hope  of  securing
some  part  for  themselves,  and  the  poor  in  the  hope  of  keeping
these  lands  for  the  commune.  All  this,  let  it  be  well  under-
stood, offering  an  infinite  variety  of  detail  in  different  parts
of  France.)

It  was,  nowever,  this  re-taking  by  the  communes  of  the
communal  lands  of  which  they  had  been  robbed  in  the  course
of  two  centuries,  that  the  Constituent  and  the  Legislative
Assemblies,  and  even  the  National  Convention,  opposed  up
to  June  1793.  The  King  had  to  be  imprisoned  and  executed,
and  the  Girondin  leaders  had  to  be  driven  out  of  the  Con-
vention before  it  could  be  accomplished.


CHAPTER  XXVIII
ARREST  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  IN  1790

Insurrections  necessary — Extent  of  reaction — Work  of  Con-
stituent and  Legislative  Assemblies — New  Constitution — Local
government  opposed  to  centralisation — Difficulties  in  apply-
ing new  laws — Directoires  on  side  of  reaction — "Disorder
wanted  " — Active  and  passive  citizens — The  gains  of  insurrec-
tion— Equality  and  agrarian  law — Disappearance  of  manorial
courts — Workers'  demands  answered  by  bullets — Middle
classes'  love  of  order  and  prosperity — "  Intellectuals  "  turn
against  people — Success  of  counter-revolution — Plutocracy —
Opposition  to  republican  form  of  government — Danton  and
Marat  persecuted  and  exiled — Discontent  and  dishonesty  in
army — Massacres  at  Nancy — Bouille's  "  splendid  behaviour  "

WE  have  seen  what  the  economic  conditions  in  the  villages
were  during  the  year  1790.  They  were  such  that  if  the
peasant  insurrections  had  not  gone  on,  in  spite  of  all,  the
peasants,  freed  in  their  persons,  would  have  remained  econo-
mically under  the  yoke  of  the  feudal  system — as  happened  in
Russia,  where  feudalism  was  abolished,  in  1861,  by  law,  and
not  by  a  revolution.

Besides,  all  the  political  work  of  the  Revolution  not  only
remained  unfinished  in  1790,  but  it  actually  suffered  a  complete
set-back.  As  soon  as  the  first  panic,  produced  by  the  un-
expected breaking-out  of  the  people,  had  passed,  the  Court,
the  nobles,  the  rich  men  and  the  clergy  promptly  joined
together  for  the  reorganisation  of  the  forces  of  reaction.  And
soon  they  felt  themselves  so  well  supported  and  so  powerful
that  they  began  to  see  whether  it  would  not  be  possible  to
crush  the  Revolution,  and  to  re-establish  the  Court  and  the
nobility  in  their  rights.

All  the  historians  undoubtedly  mention  this  reaction ; but

still  they  do  not  show  all  its  depth  and  all  its  extent. The

213


214 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

reality  was  that  for  two  years,  from  the  summer  of  1790  to
the  summer  of  1792,  the  whole  work  of  the  Revolution  was
suspended.  People  were  asking  if  it  was  the  Revolution
which  was  going  to  get  the  upper  hand  or  the  counter-revo-
lution. The  beam  of  the  balance  wavered  between  the  two.
And  it  was  in  utter  despair  that  the  revolutionist  "leaders
of  opinion  "  decided  at  last,  in  June  1792,  once  more  to  appeal
to  popular  insurrection.

Of  course  it  must  be  recognised  that  while  the  Constituent
Assembly,  and  after  it  the  Legislative,  opposed  the  revolutionary
abolition  of  the  feudal  rights  and  popular  revolution  altogether,
they  nevertheless  accomplished  an  immense  work  for  the
destruction  of  the  powers  of  the  King  and  the  Court,  and
for  the  creation  of  the  political  power  of  the  middle  classes.
And  when  the  legislators  in  both  these  Assemblies  undertook
to  express,  in  the  form  of  laws,  the  new  Constitution  of  the
Third  Estate,  it  must  be  confessed  that  they  went  to  work
with  a  certain  energy  and  sagacity.

\  They  knew  how  to  undermine  the  power  of  the  nobility
and  how  to  express  the  rights  of  the  citizen  in  a  middle-class
Constitution.  They  worked  out  a  local  self-government
which  was  capable  of  checking  the  governmental  centralisation,
and  they  modified  the  laws  of  inheritance  so  as  to  democratise
property  and  to  divide  it  up  among  a  greater  number  of
persons.

They  destroyed  for  ever  the  political  distinctions  between
the  various  "  orders " — clergy,  nobility,  Third  Estate,  which
for  that  time  was  a  very  great  thing ;  we  have  only  to  remember
how  slowly  this  is  being  done  in  Germany  and  Russia.  They
abolished  all  the  titles  of  the  nobility  and  the  countless  privileges
which  then  existed,  and  they  laid  the  foundations  of  a  more
equal  basis  for  taxation.  They  avoided  also  the  formation  of
an  Upper  Chamber,  which  would  have  been  a  stronghold  for
the  aristocracy.  And  by  the  departmental  law  of  December
1789,  they  did  something  which  helped  on  the  Revolution
enormously :  they  abolished  every  representative  of  the  central
authority  in  the  provinces.

Lastly,  they  took  away  from  the  Church  her  rich  possessions,


ARREST  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  IN  1790 215

and  they  made  the  members  of  the  clergy  simple  functionaries
of  the  State.  The  army  was  reorganised  ;  so  were  the  -courts  of
justice.  The  election  of  judges  was  left  to  the  people.  And
in  all  these  reforms  the  middle-class  legislators  avoided  too
much  centralisation.  In  short,  judged  from  ihe  legislative
point  of  view,  they  appear  to  have  been  clever,  energetic  men,
and  we  find  in  their  work  certain  elements  of  republican
democratism,  and  a  tendency  towards  local  autonomy,  which
the  advanced  parties  of  the  present  day  do  not  sufficiently
appreciate.

However,  in  spite  of  all  these  laws,  nothing  was  yet  done.
The  reality  was  not  on  the  same  level  as  the  theory,  for  the
simple  reason  that  there  lies  always  an  abyss  between  a  law
which  has  just  been  'promulgated  and  its  practical  carrying  out
in  life — a  reason  which  is  usually  overlooked  by  those  who
do  not  thoroughly  understand  from  their  own  experience  the
working  of  the  machinery  of  State. }

It  is  easy  to  say :  "  The  property  of  the  religious  bodies
shall  pass  into  the  hands  of  the  State."  But  how  is  that  to  be
put  into  effect  ?  Who  will  go,  for  example,  to  the  Abbey  of
Saint  Bernard  at  Clairvaux,  and  tell  the  abbot  and  the  monks
that  they  have  to  go  ?  Who  is  to  drive  them  out  if  they  do
not  go  ?  Who  is  to  prevent  them  from  coming  back  to-morrow,
helped  by  all  the  pious  folk  in  the  neighbouring  villages,  and
from  chanting  the  mass  in  the  abbey  ?  Who  is  to  organise
an  effective  sale  of  their  vast  estates  ?  And  finally,  who  will
turn  the  fine  abbey  buildings  into  a  hospital  for  old  men,  as
was  actually  done  later  on  by  the  revolutionary  govern-
ment ?  We  know,  indeed,  that  if  the  "  sections  "  of  Paris  had
not  taken  the  sale  of  the  Church  lands  into  their  hands,
the  law  concerning  these  sales  would  never  have  begun  to
take  effect.

In  1790,  1791,  1792,  the  old  regime  was  still  there,  intact,  ^
and  ready  to  be  reconstituted  in  its  entirety — with  but  sligKt
modifications — just  as  the  Second  Empire  of  Napoleon  III.
was  ready  to  come  back  to  life  at  any  moment  in  the  days  of
Thiers  and  MacMahon.  The  clergyj  the  nobility,  the  old
officialism,  and  above  all  the  old  spirit,  were  all  ready  to  lift


2i6 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

up  their  heads  again,  and  to  clap  into  gaol  those  who  had  dared
to  put  on  the  tri-colour  sash.  They  were  watching  for  the
opportunity  j  they  were  preparing  for  it.  ^Moreover  the  new
Vj  \  Directories  (directoires)  of  the  departments,  established  by
the  Revolution,  but  drawn  from  the  wealthy  class,  were  the
framework,  always  ready  for  the  re-establishment  of  the  old

J:  regime.  They  were  the  citadels  of  the  counter-revolution.)
CJBoth  the  Constituent  and  the  Legislative  Assembly  had
certainly  drawn  up  a  number  of  laws,  of  which  people  admire
the  lucidity  and  style  to  this  day;  but  nevertheless,  the
greater  majority  of  these  laws  remained  a  dead  letter.  It
must  not  be  forgotten  that  for  more  than  two-thirds  of  the
Fundamental  laws  made  between  1789  and  1793  no  attempt
was  even  made  to  put  them  into  execution.  J

The  fact  is,  that  it  is  not  enough  to  make  a  new  law.  It
is  necessary  also,  nearly  always,  to  create  the  mechanism  for
its  application ;  and  as  soon  as  the  new  law  strikes  at  any
vested  interest,  some  sort  of  revolutionary  organisation  is
usually  required  in  order  to  apply  this  law  to  life,  with  all  its
consequences.  We  have  only  to  think  of  the  small  results
produced  by  the  laws  of  the  Convention  concerning  education,
which  all  remained  a  dead  letter.

To-day  even,  in  spite  of  the  present  bureaucratic  con-
centration and  the  armies  of  officials  who  converge  towards
their  centre  at  Paris,  we  see  that  every  new  law,  however
trifling  it  may  be,  takes  years  before  it  passes  into  life.  And
again,  how  often  it  becomes  completely  mutilated  in  its
application !  But  at  the  time  of  the  Great  Revolution  this
bureaucratic  mechanism  did  not  exist ;  it  took  more  than
fifty  years  for  its  actual  development.

£  How  then  could  the  laws  of  the  Assembly  enter  into  everyday
life  without  a  revolution  by  deed  being  accomplished  in  every
town,  in  every  village,  in  each  of  the  thirty-six  thousand
communes  all  over  France^

Yet  such  was  the  blindness  of  the  middle-class  revolutionists
that,  on  the  one  hand,  they  took  every  precaution  to  prevent
the  people — the  poor  people,  who  alone  were  throwing  them-
selves with  all  their  heart  into  the  Revolution — from  having


ARREST  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  IN  1790 217

too  much  share  in  the  direction  of  communal  affairs,  and  on
the  other  hand,  they  opposed  with  all  their  might  the  breaking-
out  and  the  successful  carrying-through  of  the  Revolution  in
every  town  and  village.

Before  any  vital  work  could  result  from  the  decrees  of  the
Assembly,  disorder  was  wanted.  It  was  necessary  that  in  every
little  hamlet,  men  of  action,  the  patriots  who  hated  the  old
regime,  should  seize  upon  the  municipality ;  that  a  revolution
should  be  made  in  that  hamlet ;  that  the  whole  order  of  life
should  be  turned  upside  down;  that  all  authority  should  be
ignored ;  that  the  revolution  should  be  a  social  one,  if  they
wished  to  bring  about  the  -political  revolution.

It  was  necessary  for  the  peasant  to  take  the  land  and  begin
to  plough  it  without  waiting  for  the  orders  of  some  authority,
which  orders  evidently  would  never  have  been  given.  It
was  necessary  for  an  entirely  new  life  to  begin  in  the  village.
But  without  disorder,  without  a  great  deal  of  social  disorder,
this  could  not  be  done.

£  Now  it  was  precisely  this  disorder  the  legislators  wanted
prevent.

Not  only  had  they  eliminated  the  people  from  the  ad-  <
ministration,  by  means  of  the  municipal  law  of  December
1789,  which  placed  the  administrative  power  in  the  hands  of
the  active  citizens  only,  and  under  the  name  of  -passive  citizens
excluded  from  it  all  the  poor  peasants  and  nearly  all  the
workers  in  towns.  And  not  only  did  they  hand  over  all  the
provincial  authority  to  the  middle  classes  :  they  also  armed
these  middle  classes  with  the  most  terrifying  powers  to  prevent
the  poor  folk  from  continuing  their  insurrections.  "\

And  yet  it  was  only  these  insurrections  of  the  poor  people
which  later  on  permitted  them  to  deal  mortal  blows  at  the
old  regime  in  1792  and  1793.*

*  It  is  interesting  to  read  in  M.  Aulard's  Histoire  politique  de  la
Revolution  franpaise  (2nd  edition,  Paris,  1903)  the  pages  55  to  60,  in
which  he  shows  how  the  Assembly  laboured  to  prevent  the  power
falling  into  the  hands  of  the  people.  The  remarks  of  this  writer,
concerning  the  law  of  October  14,  1790,  prohibiting  the  assembling
of  the  citizens  of  the  communes  to  discuss  their  affairs  more  than  once
a  year  for  the  elections,  are  very  true.


218 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Altogether  the  Revolution  appeared  at  this  period  under
the  following  aspect :  The  peasants  realised  that  nothing  was
yet  done.  The  abolition  of  the  personal  services  had  only
awakened  their  hopes,  and  they  claimed  now  the  abolition  of
their  economic  servitude,  for  good,  and  without  redemption.
Besides,  they  wanted  to  regain  possession  of  their  communal
lands.

What  they  had  already  gained,  here  and  there,  in  1789,  by
means  of  their  insurrections,  they  wanted  to  keep,  and  to  have
their  gains  sanctioned  by  the  National  Assembly.  And  what
they  had  not  yet  succeeded  to  obtain,  they  wanted  to  have
without  falling  under  the  thunders  of  the  martial  law.

But  these  two  wants  of  the  people  the  middle  classes  opposed
with  all  their  might.  They  had  taken  advantage  of  the  revolts
against  feudalism  to  begin  their  first  attack  on  the  power
of  the  King,  the  nobles  and  the  clergy.  But  as  soon  as  a
first  outline  of  a  middle-class  Constitution  had  been  worked
out  and  accepted  by  the  King — with  every  scope  for  the
violation  of  it — the  middle  classes  halted,  terrified  at  the
rapid  conquests  made  by  the  spirit  of  revolution  in  the  hearts
of  the  people.

They  knew,  moreover,  that  the  landed  property  of  the
nobility  was  going  to  pass  into  their  hands ;  and  they  wanted
to  have  that  property  intact,  with  all  the  additional  revenues
that  stood  for  the  ancient  feudal  services  transformed  into
payments  in  money.  Some  day,  later  on,  they  would  see  if
it  would  not  be  advantageous  to  abolish  the  rest  of  these  dues,
and  then  it  would  be  done  legally,  "  methodically,"  and  "  in
order."  Because  if  disorder  be  tolerated,  who  knows  where
the  people  would  stop  ?  Were  they  not  already  talking  of
"  equality,"  of  "  agrarian  law,"  of  "  equalisation  of  fortunes,"
of  "  farms  not  exceeding  a  hundred  and  twenty  acres  "  ?

As  to  the  towns  and  the  artisans,  and  the  entire  working
population  of  the  cities,  the  same  thing  was  going  on  as  in
the  villages.  The  guilds  and  corporations  of  which  royalty
had  contrived  to  make  so  many  instruments  of  oppression
had  been  abolished.  The  survivals  of  the  feudal  system  which
still  existed,  in  the  towns  as  in  the  country,  had  been  sup-


ARREST  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  IN  1790 219

pressed  since  the  popular  insurrections  of  the  summer  of
1789.  The  manorial  courts  had  disappeared  and  the  judges
were  elected  by  the  people  and  taken  from  the  propertied
middle  class.

But  after  all  this  did  not  really  mean  much.  Work  was
slack  and  bread  was  selling  at  famine  prices.  The  great  mass
of  the  workers  would  indeed  have  waited  patiently  if  only
there  was  a  chance  of  the  reign  of  Liberty,  Equality  and
Fraternity  being  established.  But  as  that  was  not  being  done,
they  lost  patience.  The  workers  began  to  demand  that
the  Commune  of  Paris,  like  the  municipalities  of  Rouen,
Nancy  and  Lyons,  and  elsewhere,  should  take  charge  of  the
victualling  so  as  to  sell  the  wheat  and  the  rye  at  cost  price.
They  demanded  that  maximum  prices  for  the  sale  of  the
bread-stuffs  should  be  established,  and  that  sumptuary  laws
should  be  made,  so  that  the  rich  might  be  taxed  by  a  forced  and
progressive  tax.  But  then  the  middle  classes,  who  had  armed
themselves  since  1789,  while  the  passive  citizens  had  been
disarmed,  came  forth,  unfurled  the  red  flag,  and  bidding  the
people  disperse,  they  shot  those  who  did  not  obey  at  once.
This  was  done  in  Paris,  as  it  was  very  nearly  everywhere  else
throughout  France.

The  progress  of  the  Revolution  was  thus  stopped.  Royalty
began  to  revive.  The  emigrant  nobles  at  Coblentz,  Turin
and  Mitau  rubbed  their  hands.  They  plucked  up  courage
and  indulged  in  wild  speculation.  From  the  summer  of  1790
until  June  1792,  the  counter-revolution  had  every  reason  to
believe  that  it  would  soon  be  victorious.

It  was  quite  natural,  after  all,  that  such  an  important
revolution  as  that  which  had  been  accomplished  between
1789  and  1793  should  have  its  periods  of  check  and  even  of
recoil.  The  forces  at  the  disposal  of  the  old  regime  were
immense,  and  having  experienced  a  first  defeat,  they  could
not  but  try  to  reconstitute  themselves,  in  order  to  set  up  a
barrier  in  opposition  to  the  new  spirit.  There  was  therefore
nothing  unforeseen  in  the  wave  of  reaction  which  appeared
in  1790.  But  if  this  reaction  was  so  strong  that  it  could  last
until  June  1792,  and  if,  in  spite  of  all  the  crimes  of  the  Court,


220 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

it  became  so  powerful  that  in  1791  the  whole  Revolution  was
set  back,  this  was  because  the  middle  classes  had  joined  hands
with  the  nobility  and  the  clergy  who  had  rallied  round  the
banner  of  royalty.f  The  new  force  constituted  by  the  Revo-
lution itself — the  middle  classes — brought  their  business
ability,  their  love  of  "  order "  and  of  property,  and  their
hatred  of  popular  tumult  to  lend  support  to  the  forces  of  the
old  regime.  Moreover,  the  majority  of  the  "intellectuals,"
in  whom  the  people  had  put  their  trust,  as  soon  as  they  per-
ceived the  first  glimmer  of  a  rising,  turned  their  backs  on  the
masses,  and  hurried  into  the  ranks  of  the  defenders  of  "  order  "
to  join  them  in  keeping  down  the  people  and  in  opposing
the  popular  tendencies  towards  equality. }

Reinforced  in  this  fashion,  the  counter-revolutionists
succeeded  so  well,  that  if  the  peasants  had  not  continued
their  risings  in  the  provinces,  and  if  the  people  in  the  towns,
on  seeing  the  foreigners  invading  France,  had  not  risen  again
during  the  summer  of  1792,  the  progress  of  the  Revolution
would  have  been  stopped,  without  anything  lasting  having
been  effected.

Altogether,  the  situation  was  very  gloomy  in  1790.  "A
plutocracy  is  already  established  shamelessly,"  wrote  Loustallot
on  November  28,  1789,  in  the  Revolution  de  Paris.  Who
knows  if  it  is  not  already  a  treasonable  crime  to  say,
"  The  nation  is  the  sovereign."  *  But  since  then  reaction
had  gained  a  good  deal  of  ground,  and  it  was  still  visibly
progressing.

In  his  great  work  upon  the  political  history  of  the  Great
Revolution,  M.  Aulard  has  described  at  some  length  the
opposition  that  the  idea  of  a  republican  form  of  government
encountered  among  the  middle  classes  and  the  "  intellectuals  "
of  the  period — even  when  the  abolition  of  monarchy  was
Tendered  unavoidable  by  the  treacheries  of  the  Court  and  the
monarchists.  In  fact,  while  in  1789  the  revolutionists  had
acted  as  if  they  wished  to  get  rid  of  royalty  altogether,  a

*  Aulard,  Histoire  politique  de  la  Revolution  franpaise,  p.  72.  A
detailed  analysis  of  what  had  been  done  by  the  Assembly  against  the
spirit  of  democracy  will  be  found  in  Aulard.


ARREST  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  IN  1790 221

decidedly  monarchical  movement  began  now,  among  these
very  revolutionists,  in  proportion  as  the  constitutional  power
of  the  Assembly  was  asserted.*  Even  more  may  be  said.
After  October  5  and  6,  1789,  especially  after  the  flight  of  the
King  in  June  1791,  every  time  that  the  people  displayed
themselves  as  a  revolutionary  force,  the  middle  classes  and
the  "  leaders  of  opinion "  of  the  Revolution  became  more
and  more  monarchical.

That  is  a  very  important  fact ;  but  neither  must  it  be  for-
gotten that  the  essential  thing  for  both  middle  class  and
intellectuals  was  the  "preservation  of  ^property,"  as  they  used
to  say  in  those  days.  /We  see,  in  reality,  this  question  of  the  <
maintenance  of  'property  running  like  a  black  thread  all  through
the  Revolution  up  to  the  fall  of  the  Girondins.f  It  is  also
certain  that  if  the  idea  of  a  Republic  so  greatly  frightened
the  middle  classes,  and  even  the  ardent  Jacobins  (while  the
Cordeliers  accepted  it  willingly),  it  was  because  the  popular
masses  linked  it  with  that  of  equality,  and  this  meant  for
them  equality  of  fortune  and  the  agrarian  law — that  is,  the
ideal  of  the  Levellers,  the  Communists,  the  Expropriators,
the  "  Anarchists  "  of  the  period.^

It  was  therefore  chiefly  to  prevent  the  people  from  attacking
the  sacrosanct  principle  of  property  that  the  middle  classes
were  anxious  to  put  a  check  on  the  Revolution.  After  October
1789,  the  Assembly  had  passed  the  famous  martial  law  which
permitted  the  shooting  of  the  peasants  in  revolt,  and  later
on,  in  July  1791,  the  massacre  of  the  people  of  Paris.  They
put  obstacles  also  in  the  way  of  the  men  of  the  people  coming

*  Among  others,  a  very  interesting  instance  of  this  may  be  found  in
the  letters  of  Madame  Jullien  (de  la  Drome) :  "I  am  cured,  therefore,
of  my  Roman  fever,  which  did  not,  however,  go  as  far  as  republicanism
for  fear  of  civil  war.  I  am  shut  up  with  animals  of  all  sorts  in  the
sacred  Ark  of  the  Constitution.  .  .  .  One  is  somewhat  of  a  Huron
squaw  (North  American  Indian)  when  playing  the  Spartan  or  Roman
woman  in  Paris."  Elsewhere  she  asks  her  son  :  "  Tell  me  if  the
Jacobins  have  become  Feuillants  "  (the  Club  of  the  Feuillants  was
the  monarchist  club).  Journal  d'une  bourgeoise  pendant  la  Revolution,
published  by  Edouard  Lockroy,  Paris,  1881,  2nd  edition,  pp.  31,  32,  35.

t  Marat  alone  had  dared  to  put  in  his  newspaper  the  following
epigraph  :  "  Ut  redeat  miser-is  abeat  fortuna  superbis."  (May  fortune
desert  the  rich  and  come  back  to  the  poor.)


j


222 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

to  Paris  for  the  Fete  of  the  Federation,  on  July  14,  179x5.  And
they  took  a  series  of  measures  against  the  local  revolutionary
societies  which  gave  strength  to  the  popular  revolution,  even
at  the  risk  of  killing,  in  so  doing,  what  had  been  the  germ
of  their  own  power.

Vfiince  the  first  outbreaks  of  the  Revolution  some  thousands
of  political  associations  had  sprung  into  being  throughout
France.  It  was  not  only  the  primary  or  electoral  assemblies
continuing  to  meet ;  it  was  not  only  the  numerous  Jacobin
societies,  branches  of  the  parent  society  at  Paris — it  was
the  sections  chiefly,  the  Popular  Societies  and  the  Fraternal
Societies,  which  came  into  existence  spontaneously  and  often
without  the  least  formality ;  it  was  the  thousands  of
committees  and  local  powers — almost  independent — substitu-
ting themselves  for  the  royal  authority,  which  all  helped  to
spread  among  the  people  the  idea  of  social  equality  by
means  of  a  revolution.j

Therefore  the  middle  classes  eagerly  applied  themselves
to  the  task  of  crushing,  paralysing,  or  at  least  demoralising
these  thousands  of  local  centres,  and  they  succeeded  so  well
that  the  monarchists,  the  clergy,  and  the  nobles  began  once
more  to  get  the  upper  hand  in  the  towns  and  boroughs  of
more  than  half  of  France.

Presently  they  resorted  to  judicial  prosecutions,  and  m
January  1790,  Necker  obtained  an  order  of  arrest  against  Marat,
who  had  openly  espoused  the  cause  of  the  people,  the  poorest
classes.  Fearing  a  popular  outbreak,  they  despatched  both
infantry  and  cavalry  to  arrest  the  people's  tribune  ;  his  printing
press  was  smashed,  and  Marat,  at  the  high-tide  of  the  Revo-
lution, was  forced  to  take  refuge  in  England.  When  he
returned,  four  months  after,  he  had  to  remain  hidden  all  the
time,  and  in  December  1791  he  had  to  cross  the  Channel
once  more.

In  short,  the  middle  classes  and  the  "intellectuals,"  both
defenders  of  property,  did  so  much  to  crush  the  popular  move-
ment that  they  stopped  the  Revolution  itself.  According
as  middle-class  authority  constituted  itself,  the  authority  of
the  King  was  seen  to  recover  its  youthful  vigour.


ARREST  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  IN  1790 223

"  The  true  Revolution,  an  enemy  to  licence,  grows  stronger
every  day,"  wrote  the  monarchist,  Mallet  du  Pan,  in  June
1790.  And  so  it  was.  Three  months  later,  the  counter-
revolution felt  itself  already  so  powerful  that  it  strewed  the
streets  of  Nancy  with  corpses.

At  first,  the  revolutionary  spirit  had  touched  the  army
but  little,  composed,  as  it  then  was,  of  mercenaries,  partly
foreign — either  Germans  or  Swiss.  But  it  penetrated  by
degrees.  The  Fete  of  the  Federation,  to  which  delegates
from  the  soldiers  had  been  invited  to  take  part  as  citizens,
helped  in  this,  and  in  the  course  of  the  month  of  August,  a
spirit  of  discontent  began  to  show  itself  a  little  everywhere,
but  especially  in  the  eastern  garrisons,  in  a  series  of  movements
among  the  soldiers.  They  wanted  to  compel  their  officers  to
give  an  account  of  the  sums  which  had  passed  through  their
hands,  and  to  make  restitution  of  what  had  been  withheld
from  the  soldiers.  These  sums  were  enormous.  In  the  regi-
ment of  Beauce  they  amounted  to  more  than  240,000  livres,
and  from  100,000  even  to  two  millions  in  other  garrisons.
The  ferment  went  on  growing;  but,  as  might  be  expected
of  men  brutalised  by  long  service,  part  of  them  remained
faithful  to  the  officers,  and  the  counter-revolutionists  took
advantage  of  this  to  provoke  conflicts  and  sanguinary  quarrels
between  the  soldiers  themselves.  Thus,  at  Lille,  four  regi-
ments fought  among  themselves — royalists  against  patriots —
and  left  fifty  dead  and  wounded  on  the  spot.

It  is  highly  probable  that,  the  royalist  plots  having  redoubled
in  activity  since  the  end  of  1789,  especially  among  the  officers
of  the  Army  of  the  East,  commanded  by  Bouille,  it  fell  in
with  the  plans  of  the  conspirators  to  take  advantage  of  the
first  outbreak  of  the  soldiers  by  drowning  it  in  blood,  thus
helping  the  royalist  regiments  to  remain  faithful  to  their
commanders.

The  occasion  was  soon  found  at  Nancy.
\yhe  National  Assembly,  on  hearing  of  the  agitation  among
the  soldiers,  passed,  on  August  6,  1790,  a  law,  which  diminished
the  effectives  in  the  army  and  forbade  the  "  deliberate  asso-
ciations "  of  the  soldiers  in  the  service,  but  at  the  same  time


224 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

• ordered  also  the  money  accounts  to  be  rendered  without  delay
/  by  the  officers  to  their  respective  regiments?)

As  soon  as  this  decree  became  known  at  Nancy  on  the  9th,
the  soldiers,  chiefly  the  Swiss  of  the  Chateauvieux  regiment,
made  up  mainly  of  men  from  the  cantons  of  Vaud  and  Geneva,
demanded  the  accounts  from  their  officers.  They  carried
off  the  pay-chest  of  their  regiment  and  placed  it  in  the  safe
keeping  of  their  own  sentinels ;  they  threatened  their  officers
with  violence,  and  sent  eight  delegates  to  Paris  to  plead  their
cause  before  the  National  Assembly.  The  massing  of  Austrian
troops  on  the  frontier  helped  to  increase  the  disturbance.

The  Assembly,  meanwhile,  acting  on  false  reports  sent  up
from  Nancy,  and  incited  by  the  Commandant  of  the  National
Guard,  Lafayette,  in  whom  the  middle  class  had  full  confidence,
voted  on  the  i6th  a  decree  condemning  the  soldiers  for  their
breach  of  discipline,  and  ordering  the  garrisons  of  the  National
Guard  of  the  Meurthe  department  to  "  repress  the  authors
of  the  rebellion."  Their  delegates  were  arrested,  and  Lafayette,
on  his  part,  ssued  a  circular  summoning  the  National  Guards
from  the  towns  nearest  Nancy  to  take  arms  against  the  revolted
garrison  in  that  town.

At  Nancy  itself,  however,  everything  seemed  as  if  it  were
going  to  pass  off  peaceably,  the  majority  of  the  men  who
had  rebelled  having  even  signed  "  a  deed  of  repentance."
But  apparently  that  was  not  what  the  royalists  wanted.*

Bouille  set  out  from  Metz  on  the  28th,  at  the  head  of  three
thousand  faithful  soldiers,  with  the  firm  intention  of  dealing
the  rebels  the  crushing  blow  desired  by  the  Court.

The  double-dealing  of  the  Directory  of  the  department
helped  Bouille,  and  while  everything  could  yet  be  arranged
peacefully,  Bouille  offered  the  garrison  quite  impossible
conditions,  and  immediately  attacked  it.  His  soldiers  com-

*  Vide  Grands  details  par  pieces  authentiques  de  I'affaire  de  Nancy
(Paris,  1790) ;  Detail  tr&s  exact  des  ravages  commis  .  .  .  a  Nancy
(Paris,  1790)  ;  Relation  exacte  de  ce  qui  s'est  passt  a  Nancy  le  31  ao&t
1790  ;  Le  sens  commun  du  bonhomme  Richard  sur  I'affaire  de  Nancy
(Philadelphia  (?)),  Van  second  de  la  liberti  francaise,  and  other  pamphlets
in  the  rich  collection  at  the  British  Museum,  vol.  vii.  pp.  326,  327,  328,
962.


ARREST  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  IN  1790 225

mitted  the  most  frightful  carnage,  they  killed  the  citizens  as
well  as  the  rebellious  soldiers,  and  plundered  the  houses.

Three  thousand  corpses  strewed  the  streets  of  Nancy  as
the  outcome  of  the  fight,  and  after  that  came  the  "  legal "
reprisals.  Thirty-two  rebels  were  executed  by  being  broken
on  the  wheel,  and  forty-one  were  sent  to  penal  servitude.

The  King  at  once  expressed  his  approval  by  letter  of  "  the
splendid  behaviour  of  M.  Bouille  " ;  the  National  Assembly
thanked  the  assassins ;  and  the  municipality  of  Paris  held  a
funeral  service  in  honour  of  the  conquerors  who  had  fallen
in  the  battle.  No  one  dared  to  protest,  Robespierre  no
more  than  the  others.  Thus  ended  the  year  1790.  Armed
reaction  was  uppermost.


CHAPTER  XXIX

THE  FLIGHT  OF  THE  KING— REACTION— END  OF
THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY

June  21,  1791 — Royalist  plot — Flight  to  Varennes — Drouet
pursues  King — Decision  of  people — Effect  of  this  decision —
France  without  a  King — Middle  classes  recant — Causes  of  their
reaction — King  declared  re-established — Massacre  of  repub-
licans— Danton  escapes  to  England — Robert,  Marat  and  Feron
go  into  hiding — Electoral  rights  of  people  further  restricted
— King  takes  oath  to  Constitution — Constituent  Assembly  dis-
solved— Legislative  Assembly  obtains  power — Views  of  Marat
and  Desmoulins — Reaction  continues — Treason  in  the  air

THE  Great  Revolution  is  full  of  events,  tragic  in  the  highest
degree.  The  taking  of  the  Bastille,  the  march  of  the  women
on  Versailles,  the  attack  on  the  Tuileries,  the  execution  of  the
King,  have  resounded  all  over  the  world — we  were  taught
the  dates  of  them  in  our  childhood.  However,  there  are  also
other  dates,  which  are  often  forgotten,  but  have  an  equally
great  significance,  as  they  sum  up  the  meaning  of  the  Revolution
,  aj  a  given  moment,  and  its  further  progress.

Thus,  as  regards  the  downfall  of  monarchy,  the  most  sig-
nificant moment  of  the  Revolution — the  moment  that  most
clearly  sums  up  its  first  part  and  gives,  moreover,  to  all  its
further  progress  a  certain  popular  character — is  June  21,  1791 :
that  memorable  night  when  some  obscure  men  of  the  people
arrested  the  fugitive  King  and  his  family  at  Varennes,  just
as  they  were  about  to  cross  the  frontier  and  to  throw  themselves
into  the  arms  of  the  foreigner.  On  that  night  royalty  was
wrecked  in  France.  And  from  that  night  the  people  entered
upon  the  scene,  thrusting  the  politicians  into  the  background)

The  episode  is  well  known. A  plot  had  been  formed  in

Paris  to  enable  the  King  to  escape,  and  to  get  him  across  the

226


THE  FLIGHT  OF  THE  KING  227

frontier,  where  he  was  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  emigres
and  the  German  armies.  The  Court  had  been  concocting
this  plot  since  September  1789,  and  it  appears  that  Lafayette
was  aware  of  it.*

That  the  royalists  should  have  seen  in  this  escape  the  means
of  placing  the  King  in  safety,  and  of  crushing  the  Revolution
at  the  same  time,  was  but  natural.  But  many  of  the  revo-
lutionists among  the  middle  classes  also  favoured  the  plan  :
once  the  Bourbons  were  out  of  France,  they  thought,  Philippe,
Duke  of  Orleans,  would  be  put  on  the  throne  and  he  could
be  made  to  grant  a  middle-class  Constitution,  without  having
any  need  of  assistance  from  the  always  dangerous  popular
risings.

The  people  frustrated  this  plot.

An  unknown  man,  Drouet,  ex-postmaster,  recognised  the
King  as  he  passed  through  a  village.  But  the  royal  carriage
was  already  off  at  full  speed.  Losing  no  time,  Drouet  and
one  of  his  friends,  Guillaume,  set  off  at  once,  in  the  dark,  in
hot  pursuit  after  the  carriage.  The  forests  along  the  road
were,  they  knew,  scoured  by  hussars  who  had  come  to  meet
the  royal  fugitives  at  Pont-de-Somme-Vesle,  but  not  seeing  the
carriage  and  fearing  the  hostility  of  the  people  had  retreated
into  the  woods.  Drouet  and  Guillaume  managed,  however,
to  avoid  these  patrols  by  following  paths  known  to  themselves,
but  did  not  overtake  the  royal  carriage  until  Varennes,  where
an  unexpected  delay  had  detained  it — the  relay  of  horses  and
the  hussars  not  having  been  met  at  the  exact  place  which
had  been  appointed.  There,  Drouet,  getting  a  little  ahead,
had  just  time  to  run  to  the  house  of  a  friendly  innkeeper.
"  You  are  a  good  patriot,  are  you  ?  "  "I  should  think  so  !  "
"  Very  well  then,  let  us  arrest  the  King."

Then,  without  making  any  noise,  they  blocked,  first  of  all,
the  road  for  the  heavy  royal  carriage,  by  placing  across  the
bridge  over  the  Aire  a  cart  laden  with  furniture,  which  they
found  there  by  chance.  After  that,  followed  by  four  or  five

*  In  the  letter  of  the  Count  d'Estaing  to  the  Queen,  of  which  the
rough  draft,  found  afterwards,  was  published  in  the  Histoire  de  la
Revolution,  by  the  Deux  amis  de  la  liberte,  1792,  vol.  iii.  pp.  101-104.  Also
is  Blanc,  1832,  vol.  iii.  pp.  I75-1?6*


228 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

citizens  armed  with  muskets,  they  stopped  the  fugitives,  just
as  their  carriage,  coming  down  from  the  upper  town  towards
the  bridge,  was  passing  under  the  archway  of  the  church  of
Saint  Gencoult.*

Drouet  and  his  friends  made  the  travellers  alight  despite
their  protestations  and,  while  waiting  for  the  municipality
to  verify  their  passports,  made  them  go  into  the  back-parlour
of  Sauce,  the  grocer.  There,  the  King,  being  openly  recognised
by  a  judge  residing  at  Varennes,  was  compelled  to  abandon
his  character  of  servant  to  "  Madame  Korif "  (the  passport
obtained  for  the  Queen  from  the  Russian  ambassador  bore
that  name)  and  with  his  usual  duplicity  began  to  plead  the
dangers  to  which  his  family  was  exposed  in  Paris  from  the
Duke  of  Orleans,  to  excuse  his  flight.

But  the  people  of  Varennes  were  in  no  wise  deceived.
They  understood  at  once  the  King's  stratagems.  The  tocsin
was  rung,  and  the  alarm  rapidly  spread  in  the  night  from
Varennes,  all  round  to  the  country  villages,  whence  there
came  flocking  on  every  side  peasants  armed  with  hay-forks
and  sticks.  They  guarded  the  King  until  day  broke,  two
peasants,  hay-fork  in  hand,  acting  as  sentinels.

Thousands  upon  thousands  of  peasants  from  the  neighbour-
ing villages  flocked  now  on  the  road  leading  from  Varennes
to  Paris,  and  these  crowds  entirely  paralysed  the  hussars  and

*  It  seems  most  probable,  according  to  authentic  documents  collected
and  analysed  by  M.  G.  Lenotre  (Le  Drame  de  Varennes,  Juin  1791,
Paris,  1905,  pp.  151  et  seq.),  and  a  pamphlet,  Rapport  sommaire  et
exact  de  I'arrestation  du  roi  b  Varennes,  pres  Clermont,  by  Bayon  (Collec-
tion of  the  British  Museum,  F.  893,  13),  that  Drouet  had  at  first  only
suspicions  concerning  the  travellers,  that  he  had  hesitated  and  only
dashed  through  the  woods  in  pursuit  after  his  suspicions  had  been
confirmed  by  Jean  de  Lagny.  This  boy  of  thirteen,  who  was  the  son
of  the  postmaster  at  Chantrix,  J.  B.  Lagny,  arrived  at  Sainte-Mene-
hould,  having  ridden  full  speed,  bringing  the  order  for  the  arrest  of
the  royal  carriage,  signed  by  Bayon,  one  of  the  volunteers  who  were
sent  from  Paris  in  pursuit  of  the  King.  Bayon  having  covered  thirty-
five  leagues  in  six  hours,  by  changing  horses  ten  times,  was  probably
quite  exhausted,  and  halting  for  a  moment  at  Chantrix,  he  hurried
off  a  courier  before  him.  It  is  also  highly  probable  that  Louis  XVI.
had  been  already  recognised  at  Chantrix  by  Gabriel  Vallet,  who  had
just  married  one  of  J.  B.  Lagny's  daughters,  and  who  had  been  in
Paris  during  the  Fete  of  the  Federation.  This  Vallet  drove  the  royal
carriage  as  far  as  Chalons,  where  he  certainly  did  not  keep  the  secret.


THE  FLIGHT  OF  THE  KING  229

dragoons  of  Bouille,  in  whom  the  King  had  put  his  trust  for
escape.  At  Sainte-Menehould  the  tocsin  was  rung  immediately-
after  the  departure  of  the  royal  carriage  ;  and  it  was  the  same
at  Clermont-en-Argonne.  At  Sainte-Menehould  the  people
even  disarmed  the  dragoons,  who  had  come  to  form  an  escort
for  the  King,  and  then  fraternised  with  them.  At  Varennes
the  sixty  German  hussars,  under  the  command  of  sub-lieutenant
Rohrig,  who  had  come  to  escort  the  King  until  he  would  be
met  by  Bouille,  and  who  had  posted  themselves  in  the  lower
town  on  the  other  side  of  the  Aire,  scarcely  showed  themselves.
Their  officer  disappeared  without  any  one  ever  knowing
what  had  become  of  him,  and  the  men,  after  drinking  all  day
with  the  inhabitants,  who  did  not  abuse  them,  but  won  them
over  to  their  cause  in  a  brotherly  way,  took  no  further  interest
in  the  King.  They  were  soon  shouting  "  Vive  la  Nation  !  "
as  they  drank,  while  the  whole  town,  roused  by  the  tocsin,
was  crowding  into  the  neighbourhood  of  Sauce's  shop.

The  approaches  to  Varennes  were  barricaded  to  prevent
Bouille's  uhlans  from  entering  the  town.  And  as  soon  as  day
dawned,  the  cry  of  the  crowd  was  "  To  Paris  !  To  Paris  !  "

These  cries  became  even  more  menacing,  when,  about  ten
o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  two  commissioners — despatched
on  the  morning  of  the  2ist,  one  by  Lafayette  and  the  other
by  the  Assembly,  to  stop  the  King  and  his  family — arrived
at  Varennes.  "  Let  them  set  out.  They  must  set  out.  We
shall  drag  them  into  the  carriage  by  force  !  "  shouted  the
peasants,  growing  furious  when  they  saw  Louis  XVI.  trying
to  gain  time  in  expectation  of  the  arrival  of  Bouille  and  his
uhlans.  The  King  and  his  family  had  to  obey,  and  after
having  destroyed  the  compromising  papers  which  they  carried
with  them  in  the  carriage,  they  saw  that  there  was  nothing
left  to  do  but  begin  their  return  to  Paris.

The  people  took  them  back  to  Paris  as  prisoners.  All  was
O¥«r  with  royalty.  It  was  covered  with  opprobrium.
C-On  July  14,  1789,  royalty  had  lost  its  fortress,  but  it  had
retained  its  moral  force,  its  prestige.  Three  months  later,  on
October  6,  the  King  became  the  hostage  of  the  Revolution,
but  the  monarchical  principle  was  still  firm.  Louis  XVI.,.


1


230 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

I  around whom the propertied classes had rallied, was still
powerful. The  Jacobins  themselves  dared  not  attack  him.^

But  on  that  night,  when  the  King,  disguised  as  a  servant,
passed  the  night  in  the  back-parlour  of  a  village  grocer,  elbowed
by  "  patriots  "  and  lighted  by  a  candle  stuck  in  a  lantern —
that  night  when  the  tocsin  was  rung  to  prevent  the  King
from  betraying  the  nation,  and  the  peasant  crowds  brought
him  back  as  prisoner  to  the  people  of  Paris — that  night  royalty
was  wrecked  for  ever.  ^  The  King,  who  had  been  in  olden  times
the  symbol  of  national  unity,  lost  now  his  right  to  be  so  regarded
by  becoming  the  symbol  of  an  international  union  of  tyrants
against  the  peoples.  All  the  thrones  of  Europe  felt  the  shock^l

Moreover,  on  that  same  night,  the  people  entered  the  political
arena,  to  force  the  hand  of  the  political  leaders.  The  ex-
postmaster  Drouet,  who,  on  his  own  initiative,  stopped  the
King  and  thus  frustrated  the  deep-laid  plots  of  politicians ;
this  villager,  who,  obeying  his  own  impulse  at  dead  of  night,
urged  his  horse  and  made  him  gallop  over  hills  and  dales  in
pursuit  of  the  secular  traitor — the  King — is  a  symbol  of  the
people  who  from  that  day,  at  every  critical  juncture  of  the
Revolution,  took  the  lead  and  dominated  the  politician.
(The  invasion  of  the  Tuileries  by  the  people  on  June  20,  1792,
the  march  of  the  faubourgs  of  Paris  against  the  Tuileries  on
August  10,  1792,  the  dethronement  of  Louis  XVI.  with  all
its  consequences — all  these  great  events  were  to  follow  each
other  now,  as  a  historic  necessity./

The  King's  intention,  when  he  tried  to  escape,  was  to  put
himself  at  the  head  of  the  army  commanded  by  Bouille,  and
supported  by  a  German  army,  to  march  on  Paris.  Once  the
capital  should  be  reconquered,  we  know  exactly  what  the
royalists  intended  to  do.  They  were  going  to  arrest  all  the
"  patriots "  :  the  proscription  lists  were  already  drawn  up.
Some  of  them  would  have  been  executed,  and  the  others
deported  or  imprisoned.  All  the  decrees  voted  by  the  Assembly
for  the  establishment  of  the  Constitution  or  against  the
clergy  were  going  to  be  abolished ;  the  ancient  regime,  with  its
orders  and  its  classes,  was  to  be  re-established ;  the  mailed
fist  would  have  been  re-introduced,  and,  by  means  of  summary


REACTION  231

executions,  the  tithes,  the  feudal  laws,  the  game  laws,  and
all  the  feudal  rights  of  the  old  regime  jvould  have  been
reinstituted.

Such  was  the  plan  of  the  royalists ;  they  did  not  trouble
to  conceal  it.  "  Just  wait,  you  gentlemen  patriots,"  said  they,
to  whoever  would  listen  to  them,  "soon  you  will  pay  for
your  crimes."

The  people,  as  we  have  said,  frustrated  this  plan.  The
King,  arrested  at  Varennes,  was  brought  back  to  Paris  and
placed  under  the  guardianship  of  the  patriots  of  the  faubourgs.

One  might  think  that  now  was  the  time  for  the  Revolution
to  pursue  its  logical  development  with  giant  strides.  The
King's  treachery  having  been  proved,  were  they  not  going
to  proclaim  his  dethronement,  overthrow  the  old  feudal
institutions  and  inaugurate  the  democratic  republic  ?

But  nothing  of  the  sort  happened.  On  the  contrary,  it
was  reaction  that  triumphed  definitely  a  few  weeks  after  the
King's  flight  to  Varennes,  and  the  middle  classes  handed  over
to  royalty  a  new  patent  of  immunity.

The  people  had  grasped  at  once  the  situation.  It  was
evident  that  the  King  could  not  be  left  on  the  throne.  Re-
instated in  his  palace,  would  he  not  resume  all  the  more
actively  the  web  of  his  conspiracies  and  plots  with  Austria
and  Prussia  ?  Since  he  had  been  prevented  from  leaving
France,  he  would  doubtless  the  more  zealously  hasten  the
foreign  invasion.  This  was  obvious,  the  more  so  as  he  had
learned  nothing  by  his  Varennes  adventure.  He  continued
to  refuse  his  signature  to  the  decrees  directed  against  the
clergy,  and  the  prerogatives  of  the  nobles.  Evidently  the
only  possible  solution  was  to  declare  his  dethronement  without
further  delay.

/This  is  how  the  people  of  Paris  and  a  large  part  of  the*
provinces  understood  the  situation.  At  Paris  they  began,
the  day  after  June  21,  to  demolish  the  busts  of  Louis  XVI.
and  to  efface  the  royal  inscriptions.  The  crowd  rushed  into
the  Tuileries,  openly  inveighing  against  royalty  and  demanding
the  dethronement/)  When  the  Duke  of  Orleans  took  his  drive
through  the  streets  of  Paris,  with  a  smile  on  his  lips,  believing


232 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

as  he  did  that  he  would  pick  up  a  crown  there,  people  turned
their  backs  on  him :  they  did  not  want  any  King.  /The
\J  \  Cordeliers  openly  demanded  the  republic  and  signed  an  acMress
\  in  which  they  declared  themselves  to  be  all  against  the  King
— all  "  tyrannicides."  The  municipal  body  of  Paris  issued  a
similar  declaration.  The  sections  of  Paris  proclaimed  their
permanence ;  the  woollen  caps  and  the  men  with  pikes  re-
appeared in  the  streets ;  every  one  felt  that  it  was  the  eve
of  another  July  14.  The  people  of  Paris  were,  in  fact,  ready
to  rise  for  the  definite  overthrow  of  royalty.)

The  National  Assembly,  under  the  pressure  of  the  popular
movement,  went  ahead  :  they  acted  as  if  there  was  no  longer
a  King.  Had  he  not,  in  effect,  abdicated  by  his  flight  ?
They  seized  the  executive  power,  gave  orders  to  the  ministers
and  took  over  the  diplomatic  correspondence.  For  about  a
fortnight  France  existed  without  any  King,

But  then  the  middle  classes  suddenly  changed  their  mind ;
they  recanted,  and  set  themselves  in  open  opposition  to  the
republican  movement.  The  attitude  of  the  Assembly  changed
in  the  same  way.  While  all  the  popular  and  fraternal  societies
declared  themselves  in  favour  of  dethronement,  the  Jacobin
'*  Club,  composed  of  the  middle-class  statists,  repudiated  the
4  idea  of  a  republic,  and  declared  for  the  maintenance  of  a
constitutional  monarchy.  "  The  word  republic  frightened
the  haughty  Jacobins,"  said  Real  from  the  platform  of  their
club.  The  most  advanced  among  them,  including  Robespierre,
were  afraid  of  compromising  themselves :  they  did  not  dare  to
declare  for  dethronement,  they  said  it  was  calumny  when
they  were  called  republicans.

The  Assembly  which  were  so  decidedly  anti-royalist  on
June  22,  now  suddenly  reversed  their  decisions,  and  on  July
15  they  published  in  great  haste  a  decree  which  declared  the
King  to  be  blameless  and  pronounced  against  his  dethronement  ;
and  therefore  against  the  republic.  Thenceforth,  to  demand
a  republic  became  a  crime.

What  had  happened  during  those  twenty  days  that  the
leaders  should  have  tacked  so  suddenly  and  formed  the  reso-
lution of  keeping  Louis  XVI.  on  the  throne  ?  Had  he  shown


REACTION  233

any  signs  of  repentance  ?  Had  he  given  any  pledges  of  sub-
mission to  the  Constitution  ?  No,  nothing  of  the  kind  !
f The  explanation  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  middle-class  leaders
had  again  seen  the  spectre  which  had  haunted  them  since
July  14  and  October  6,  1789  :  the  rising  of  the  'people .')  The
men  with  the  pikes  were  out  in  the  streets  and  the  provinces
seemed  ready  to  rise,  as  in  the  month  of  August  1789.
Thousands  of  peasants  were  hastening  from  their  villages,  at
the  sound  of  the  tocsin,  on  the  road  to  Paris,  and  bringing
the  King  back  to  the  capital ;  the  mere  sight  of  this  had  given
them  a  shock.  And  now  they  saw  the  people  of  Paris  ready
to  rise,  arming  themselves  and  demanding  that  the  Revolution
should  go  on :  asking  for  the  republic,  for  the  abolition  of
the  feudal  laws,  for  equality  pure  and  simple.  The  agrarian
law,  the  bread  tax,  the  tax  upon  the  rich,  were  they  not  going
to  become  realities  ?

No,  rather  the  traitor  King,  the  invasion  of  the  foreigner,
than  the  success  of  the  popular  Revolution  !

This  is  why  the  Assembly  hastened  to  make  an  end  of  all
republican  agitation,  in  hurrying  through,  on  July  15,  the
decree  which  exculpated  the  King,  re-established  him  on  the
throne,  and  declared  all  those  who  wished  to  push  forward
ttye  Revolution  to  be  criminals.

([Whereupon  the  Jacobins,  those  pretended  leaders  of  the
Revolution,  after  one  day  of  hesitation,  abandoned  the  re-
publicans, who  were  proposing  to  get  up  a  huge  popular
demonstration  against  royalty,  on  July  17,  in  the  Champ-de-
Mars.  And  then,  the  middle-class  counter-revolutionists,  sure
of  their  position,  assembled  their  National  Guard  commanded
by  Lafayette,  and  brought  them  up  against  the  masses  as  they
assembled,  unarmed,  in  the  Champ-de-Mars,  round  the  "  altar
of  the  fatherland,"  to  sign  a  republican  petition.  The  red
flag  was  unfurled,  martial  law  proclaimed,  and  the  people,
the  republicans,  were  massacred^

From  that  time  began  a  period  of  open  reaction,  which
went  on  increasing  until,  the  spring  of  1792.

The  republicans,  authors  of  the  Champ-de-Mars  petition
which  demanded  the  dethronement  of  the  King,  were  fiercely


234 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

persecuted.  Danton  had  to  cross  over  to  England  (August
1791),  Robert,  a  declared  republican  and  editor  of  the  Revolu-
tions de  Paris,  Freron,  and  above  all  Marat,  had  to  go  into
hiding.

,  (^Profiting  by  this  period  of  terror,  the  middle  classes  took
care  to  limit  further  the  electoral  rights  of  the  people.  Hence-
forth, to  be  an  elector,  besides  paying  in  direct  contributions
ten  days'  labour,  a  man  had  to  possess,  either  as  owner,  or  in
usufruct,  property  valued  at  150  to  200  days'  work,  or  to  hold
as  a  farmer  property  valued  at  400  days'  labour.  The  peasants,
as  we  see,  were  deprived  absolutely  of  all  political  rights,])

After  July  17,  1791,  it  became  dangerous  to  call  oneself  or
to  be  called  a  republican,  and  soon  some  of  the  revolutionists,
who  had  "  nothing  to  lose  and  everything  to  gain  from
disorder  and  anarchy,"  themselves  began  to  treat  as  "  depraved
men  "  those  who  asked  for  a  republic  instead  of  a  king.

By  degrees  the  middle  classes  became  still  bolder,  and  it
was  in  the  middle  of  a  pronounced  royalist  movement,  to  the
accompaniment  of  enthusiastic  cheers  for  the  King  and  Queen
from  the  Paris  middle  classes,  that  the  King  came  on  September
14,  1791,  before  the  Assembly  to  accept  and  solemnly  swear
fealty  to  the  Constitution  which  he  betrayed  the  same  day.

\v  Fifteen  days  later,  the  Constituent  Assembly  dissolved,  and
this  was  made  another  occasion  for  the  constitutionalists  to
renew  their  manifestations  of  loyalty  in  honour  of  Louis  XVI.
The  Government  then  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Legislative
Assembly,  elected  on  a  restricted  suffrage,  and  clearly  even
more  middle  class  than  the  Constituent  Assembly  had  been^
And  still  the  reaction  grew.  Towards  the  end  of  1791  the
best  revolutionists  completely  despaired  of  the  Revolution.
Marat  believed  all  was  lost.  "  The  Revolution,"  he  wrote
in  his  Ami  du  feu-pie,  "  has  failed.  .  .  ."  He  demanded  that
an  appeal  should  be  made  to  the  people,  but  the  politicians
did  not  listen  to  him.  "  It  was  a  handful  of  poor  folk,"  he
said  in  his  journal,  on  July  21,  "  who  knocked  down  the
walls  of  the  Bastille.  Only  set  them  to  work,  and  they  will
prove  themselves  as  they  did  that  first  day ;  they  ask  nothing


END  OF  ASSEMBLY  235

better  than  to  fight  against  their  tyrants  ;  but  then  they  were
jree  to  act,  now  they  are  chained"  Chained  by  the  leaders,
be  it  understood.  "  The  patriots  dare  not  show  themselves,"
says  Marat  again  on  October  15,  1791,  "  and  the  enemies
of  liberty  fill  the  galleries  of  the  Senate-house,  and  are  seen
everywhere."

Similar  words  of  despair  were  uttered  by  Camille  Desmoulins
at  the  Jacobin  Club,  on  October  24,  1791.  The  "  reactionaries
have  turned,"  he  said,  "  the  popular  movement  of  July  and
August  1789,  to  their  advantage.  The  Court  favourites  talk
to-day  about  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  and  the  rights
of  man,  of  equality  among  the  citizens,  to  deceive  the  people,
and  they  parade  in  the  uniform  of  the  National  Guard  to  seize
or  even  buy  the  posts  of  leaders.  Around  them  gather  the
tools  of  the  throne.  The  aristocratic  devils  have  displayed
an  infernal  cleverness."

Prudhomme  said  openly  that  the  nation  was  betrayed  by
its  representatives  ;  the  army  by  its  chiefs.

But  Prudhomme  and  Desmoulins  could  at  least  show  them-
selves, while  a  popular  revolutionist,  such  as  Marat,  had  to
hide  himself  for  several  months,  not  knowing  sometimes  where
to  find  a  shelter  for  the  night.  It  has  been  well  said  of  him
that  he  pleaded  the  cause  of  the  people  with  his  head  upon  the
block.  Danton,  on  the  point  of  being  arrested,  had  gone
to  London.

The  Queen  herself,  in  her  correspondence  with  Fersen,  by
whose  intermediary  she  arranged  for  invasion  and  prepared
for  the  entry  of  the  German  armies  into  the  capital,  bore
witness  to  "  a  marked  change  in  Paris."  "  The  people,"  she
said,  "  no  longer  read  the  papers."  "  They  are  only  interested
in  the  dearness  of  bread  and  the  decrees,"  she  wrote  on
October  31,  1791.

The  dearness  of  bread — and  the  decrees  !  Bread,  so  that
they  might  live  and  carry  on  the  Revolution,  for  bread  was
scarce  already  in  October !  And  the  decrees  against  the
priests  and  the  emigres,  which  the  King  refused  to
sanction  !

Treason  was  everywhere,  and  we  know  now  that  at  that


236 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

'  very  time-^-at  the  close  of  1791,  Dumouriez,  the  Girondist
General  who  commanded  the  armies  in  the  East  of  France,
was  already  plotting  with  the  King.  He  was  drawing  up  for
Louis  a  secret  memorandum  on  the  means  for  checking  the
Revolution.  This  memorandum  was  found  after  the  taking
of  the  Tuileries  in  the  iron  safe  of  Louis  XVI.


CHAPTER  XXX

THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY-
REACTION  IN  1791-1792

King  and  Assembly — Fear  of  foreign  invasion — Feuillants
and  Girondins — Count  d'Artois  and  Count  de  Provence —
Emigration  of  nobles — Assembly  summon  Count  de  Provence
and  6migr&s  to  return — Declaration  of  war  against  Austria —
Fall  of  royalist  Ministry — Girondins  in  power — Was  war  neces-
sary ? — Equalisation  of  wealth — Socialistic  ideas  of  people —
Mayor  of  Etampes  killed  by  peasants — Robespierre  and  agra-
rian law — Middle  classes  rally  round  royalty — Royalist  coup
d'etat  imminent — Lafayette's  letter  to  Assembly

THE  new  National  Assembly,  elected  by  active  citizens  only,
which  took  the  name  of  National  Legislative  Assembly,  met
on  October  I,  1791,  and  from  the  first  moment,  the  King,
encouraged  by  the  manifestations  of  the  temper  of  the  middle
classes  who  thronged  round  him,  assumed  an  arrogant  attitude
towards  it.  Now  began,  just  as  in  the  early  days  of  the  States-
General,  a  series  of  malicious  petty  annoyances  on  the  side
of  the  Court,  with  feeble  attempts  at  resistance  on  the  part
of  the  representatives.  In  spite  of  this,  as  soon  as  the  King
entered  the  Assembly,  he  was  received  with  the  most  servile
marks  of  respect  and  the  liveliest  marks  of  enthusiasm.  On
such  occasions  Louis  XVI.  spoke  of  an  enduring  harmony  and
an  inalienable  confidence  between  the  legislative  body  and
the  King.  "  May  the  love  of  country  unite  us,  and  public
interest  render  us  inseparable,"  he  would  say — and  at  that
very  time  he  would  be  arranging  the  foreign  invasion  which
was  to  overawe  the  constitutionalists  and  re-establish  repre-
sentation by  Three  Orders  and  the  privileges  of  the  nobility

and  .clergy.

237


238 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Generally  speaking,  since  October  1791 — in  reality,  since
wie  flight  of  the  King  and  his  arrest  at  Varennes  in  June,  the
fear  of  a  foreign  invasion  obsessed  all  minds  and  had  become
the  chief  object  of  consideration.  There  were,  it  is  true,
in  the  Legislative  Assembly  two  parties :  the  royalist  Right,
represented  by  the  Feuillants,  and  the  Left,  represented  by  the
Girondins,  serving  as  a  half-way  house  between  those  of  the
middle  classes  who  were  partly  constitutional  and  those  who
were  partly  republican.  But  neither  one  nor  the  other  of
them  took  any  interest  in  the  great  problems  bequeathed  to
them  by  the  Constituent  Assembly.  Neither  the  establishing
of  a  republic  nor  the  abolition  of  the  feudal  privileges
excited  the  Legislative  Assembly.  The  Jacobins  themselves
and  even  the  Cordeliers  seemed  to  have  agreed  not  to
mention  the  republic,  and  it  was  about  questions  of  secondary
importance,  such  as  who  should  be  mayor  of  Paris,  that  the
passions  of  the  revolutionists  and  anti-revolutionists  came  into
Collision.  ^

'  VThe  two  great  questions  of  the  moment  concerned  the
priests  and  the  emigrated  nobles.  They  dominated  everything
else  on  account  of  the  attempts  at  anti-revolutionary  risings
organised  by  the  priests  and  the  emigres,  and  because  they
were  intimately  connected  with  the  foreign  war,  which,  every
one  felt,  was  close  at  hand. ./

The  youngest  brother  of  the  King,  the  Count  d'Artois,
had  emigrated,  as  we  know,  immediately  after  July  14,  1789.
The  other  brother,  the  Count  de  Provence,  had  escaped  at
the  same  time  as  Louis  XVI.,  in  June  1791,  and  had  suc-
ceeded in  getting  to  Brussels.  Both  of  them  had  protested
against  the  King's  acceptance  of  the  Constitution.  They
declared  that  the  King  could  not  alienate  the  rights  of  the
ancient  monarchy,  and  that,  consequently,  his  act  was  null.
Their  protestation  was  published  by  the  royalist  agents  all
over  France  and  produced  a  great  effect.

The  nobles  left  their  regiments  or  their  chateaux  and
emigrated  en  masse,  and  the  royalists  threatened  those  who

Jdid  not  do  the  same  that  they  would  be  relegated  to  the  middle
class when the nobility returned victorious. The


THE  LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY  239

assembled  at  Coblentz,  Worms  and  Brussels  were  openly
preparing  a  counter-revolution  which  was  to  be  supported  by
the  foreign  invasion  •  and  it  became  more  and  more  evident
that  the  King  was  playing  a  double  game,  for  it  was  impossible
not  to  see  that  everything  done  by  the  emigrant  nobles  had
his  assent.

On  October  30,  1791,  the  Legislative  Assembly  decided  to
proceed  against  the  King's  younger  brother,  Louis-Stanislas-
Xavier,  who  had  received  from  Louis  XVI.,  at  the  time  of
his  flight,  a  decree  conferring  upon  him  the  title  of  regent,
in  case  the  King  should  be  arrested.  The  Assembly,  therefore,
summoned  the  Count  de  Provence  to  return  to  France  within
two  months  ;  if  not,  he  was  to  lose  his  right  of  regency.
A  few  days  later,  on  November  9,  the  Assembly  ordered
also  all  emigres  to  return  before  the  end  of  the  year ;  if
not,  they  should  be  treated  as  conspirators,  condemned,
sentenced  in  default,  and  their  revenues  should  be  seized !
for  the  profit  of  the  nation — "  without  prejudice,  however,
to  the  rights  of  their  wives,  their  children  and  their  lawful
creditors.",)

The  King  sanctioned  the  decree  concerning  his  brother,
but  opposed  his  "  veto  "  to  the  second,  concerning  the  emigres.
He  vetoed  also  a  decree  which  ordered  the  priests  to  take  the
oath  to  the  Constitution,  under  pain  of  arrest  as  suspects,
in  case  of  religious  disturbances  in  the  communes  to  which
they  ministered.

The  most  important  act  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  was
the  declaration  of  war  against  Austria,  which  was  openly
preparing  for  an  invasion,  in  order  to  re-establish  Louis  XVI.
in  those  rights  he  had  held  before  1789.  The  King  and  Marie-
Antoinette  urged  it  upon  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  and  their
entreaties  became  still  more  urgent  after  their  flight  had  been
stopped.  But  it  is  extremely  probable  that  the  warlike  pre-
parations of  Austria  would  have  been  prolonged,  perhaps
until  the  following  spring,  if  the  Girondins  had  not  pressed
for  war.

Lack  of  cohesion  in  the  royalist  Ministry,  one  of  its  members,


240 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Bertrand  de  Moleville,  being  strongly  opposed  to  the  con-
stitutional regime,  whilst  Narbonne  wanted  to  make  it  one  of
the  props  to  the  throne,  had  led  to  its  fall ;  whereupon,  in
March  1792,  Louis  XVI.  called  into  power  a  Girondist  Ministry,
with  Dumouriez  for  foreign  affairs,  Roland,  that  is  to  say,
Madame  Roland,  for  the  Interior,  Grave,  soon  to  be  replaced
by  Servan,  at  the  War  Office,  Claviere  for  Finance,  Duranthon
for  Justice,  and  Lacoste  for  the  Marine.

It  need  not  be  said,  as  Robespierre  quickly  made  it  appear,
that  far  from  hastening  the  Revolution,  the  coming  of  the
Girondins  into  power  was  on  the  contrary  a  weight  in  the
scales  for  reaction.  Henceforth  all  was  for  moderation,  since
the  King  had  accepted  what  the  Court  called  the  "  Minister e
sans-culotu."  It  was  only  in  the  affair  of  the  war  that  this
Ministry  showed  any  ardour,  against  the  advice  of  Marat  and
Robespierre,  and  on  April  20,  1792,  the  Girondins  triumphed.
War  was  declared  against  Austria,  or  as  they  said  then,  "  against
the  King  of  Bohemia  and  Hungary."

Was  the  war  necessary  ?  Jaure's  *  has  put  the  question,
and  in  the  answering  of  it  has  placed  before  the  reader's  eyes
many  documents  of  that  time.  And  the  conclusion  that
must  be  drawn  from  these  documents,  and  is  deduced  from
them  by  Jaures  himself,  is  the  same  as  that  which  was  defended
by  Marat  and  Robespierre.  The  war  was  not  necessary.  The
foreign  sovereigns  no  doubt  feared  the  development  of  re-
publican ideas  in  France  ;  but  from  that  to  their  rushing  to
the  help  of  Louis  XVI.  was  far  enough  ;  they  were  very  far  from
eager  about  entering  upon  a  war  of  that  kind.  It  was  the
Girondins  who  wanted  the  war,  because  they  saw  in  it  the
means  of  combating  the  royal  power.

Marat  told  the  plain  truth  concerning  the  matter.  "  You
want  the  war,"  he  said,  "  because  you  do  not  want  to  appeal
to  the  people  for  the  giving  of  a  decisive  blow  to  royalty."
The  Girondins  and  a  mass  of  the  Jacobins  preferred  indeed
a  foreign  invasion,  which,  by  arousing  patriotism  and  laying
bare  the  treachery  of  the  King,  would  lead  to  the  downfall  of
*  Histoire  socialiste,  La  Legislative,  p.  815  et  seq.


THE  LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY  241

royalty  without  any  popular  rising.  "  We  want  some  great
treachery,"  said  Brissot,  who  hated  the  people,  their  disorderly
risings,  and  their  attacks  upon  property.

Thus  the  Court  on  one  side,  and  the  Girondists  on  the  other,
found  themselves  in  agreement  in  encouraging  the  invasion
of  France.  Under  such  conditions  war  was  inevitable.  It
blazed  out,  and  it  raged  for  twenty-three  years  with  all  its
fatal  consequences,  fatal  to  the  Revolution  and  to  European
progress.  "  You  do  not  want  to  appeal  to  the  people  ;  you
do  not  want  the  popular  revolution — very  well,  you  shall  have
war,  and  perhaps  the  general  break-up  !  "  How  many  times
has  this  truth  been  verified  since.

The  spectre  of  the  people,  armed  and  insurgent,  demanding
from  the  middle  classes  their  share  of  the  national  wealth,
never  ceased  to  haunt  those  members  of  the  Third  Estate  who
had  attained  power,  or  who  had,  through  the  clubs  and  news-
papers, acquired  an  influence  upon  the  course  of  events.  It
must  be  said  also  that,  by  degrees,  the  revolutionary  education
of  the  people  was  being  accomplished  by  the  Revolution  itself,
and  that  the  masses  were  by  degrees  emboldened  to  demand
measures  imbued  with  a  communist  spirit,  which  to  some
extent  would  have  contributed  to  efface  the  economic  in-
equalities.

"  Equalisation  of  wealth  "  was  very  much  spoken  of  among
the  people.  The  peasants  who  possessed  only  miserable  little
plots,  and  the  town-workers,  thrown  out  of  work,  began  to
affirm  their  right  to  the  land.  In  the  villages,  the  peasants
demanded  that  no  one  should  possess  a  farm  of  more  than  a
hundred  and  twenty  acres,  and  in  the  towns  it  was  said  that
any  one  who  wished  to  cultivate  the  land  should  have  a  right
to  a  certain  quantity.*

A  tax  upon  food-stuffs,  to  prevent  speculation  in  objects  of
prime  necessity,  laws  against  monopolists,  municipal  purchasing

*  After  the  decrees  of  March  15,  the  objections  raised  against  these
decrees  had  been  numerous.  They  have  been  pointed  out  by  Doniol
(La  Revolution,  &c.,  pp,  104  et  seq.},  and  by  Professor  N.  Kareiev  (Les
paysans  et  la  question  paysanne  en  France  dans  le  dernier  quart  du
XV IIP  Siecle  (Paris:  Giard,  1899),  pp.  489  et  seq.,  and  Appendix
No.  33,

Q


242 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

of  food-stuffs  which  should  be  delivered  to  the  inhabitants  at
cost  price,  a  progressive  tax  on  the  rich,  a  forced  loan  and  heavy
taxes  on  all  inheritances,  these  ideas  were  discussed  by  the
people  and  found  their  way  into  the  press.  The  very  in-
stantaneousness  with  which  they  manifested  themselves  each
time  the  people  gained  a  victory,  either  in  Paris  or  in  the
provinces,  proved  that  these  ideas  were  widely  circulating
among  the  disinherited,  even  though  the  revolutionary  writers
]  did  not  dare  to  express  them  too  openly. /"  You  do  not  then
perceive,"  said  Robert  in  his  Revolutions  deFaris,  in  May  1791,
"  that  the  French  Revolution,  for  which  you  are  fighting,  as
you  say,  as  a  citizen,  is  a  veritable  agrarian  law  put  in  execution
by  the  people.  They  are  re-entering  on  their  rights.  One
step  more,  and  they  will  re-enter  upon  their  possessions  ..."*)

It  is  easy  to  guess  the  horror  with  which  these  ideas  inspirea
the  middle  classes,  who  were  eager  to  enjoy  now,  and  at  their
ease,  their  acquired  wealth,  as  well  as  their  new,  privileged
position  in  the  State.  We  can  imagine  the  fury  which  was
kindled  among  them  in  March  1792,  when  the  news  came  to
Paris  that  the  Mayor  of  Etampes,  Simonneau,  had  just  been
killed  by  the  peasants.  He,  as  well  as  so  many  other  middle-
class  mayors,  had  shot  down  the  peasants  who  had  revolted
without  any  legal  formalities  and  no  one  had  said  a  word.
But  when  the  hungry  peasants,  who  asked  only  that  the  price
of  bread  should  be  fixed,  killed  this  mayor  with  their  pikes,
a  chorus  of  indignation  was  raised  among  the  Parisian  middle
classes.

"  The  day  has  come  when  the  landowners  of  all  classes  must
feel  at  length  that  they  are  falling  under  the  scythe  of  anarchy,"
groaned  Mallet  du  Pan  in  his  Mercure  de  France  ;  and  he
demanded  a  "  coalition  of  the  landowners  "  against  the  people,
against  the  "  brigands,"  the  preachers  of  agrarian  law.  Every
one  began  to  perorate  against  the  people,  Robespierre  as  well
as  the  others.  The  priest  Dolivier  was  alone  in  raising  his
voice  in  favour  of  the  masses  and  to  declare  that  "  the  nation
is  really  the  owner  of  its  land."  "  There  is  no  law,"  he  said,
"  which  could  justly  prevent  the  peasant  from  eating  when
*  Quoted  by  Aulard,  p.  91*


THE  LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY  243

he  is  hungry,  so  long  as  the  servants  and  even  the  beasts  of  the
rich  have  all  they  need."

As  for  Robespierre,  he  declared  that  "  the  agrarian  law  was
only  an  absurd  bogey  displayed  to  stupid  men  by  wicked  ones."
And  he  rejected  beforehand  every  attempt  that  was  made  in
the  direction  of  the  "  equalisation  of  wealth."  Always  careful
never  to  go  beyond  the  opinion  of  those  who  represented  the
dominant  power  at  a  given  moment,  he  took  care  not  to  side
with  those  who  marched  with  the  people  but  knew  that  it
was  the  ideas  of  equalisation  and  communism  which  alone
could  give  the  Revolution  the  force  that  was  necessary  for  the
final  demolition  of  the  feudal  system.

This  fear  of  popular  risings  and  of  their  economic  conse-
quences impelled  the  middle  classes  also  to  rally  closer  and
closer  round  royalty  and  to  accept  whatever  kind  of  Constitution
came  from  the  hands  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  with  all
its  defects  and  its  compliance  with  the  King's  wishes.  Instead
of  progressing  in  the  way  of  republican  ideas,  the  middle
classes  and  the  "  intellectuals "  developed  in  a  contrary
direction.  If  in  1789,  in  all  the  actions  of  the  Third  Estate,
a  decidedly  republican  and  democratic  spirit  was  to  be  seen,
now,  according  as  the  people  manifested  communistic  and
equalising  tendencies,  these  same  men  became  the  defenders
of  royalty ;  while  the  sincere  republicans,  such  as  Thomas
Paine  and  Condorcet,  represented  an  infinitesimal  minority
among  the  educated  members  of  the  middle  classes.  As  the
people  became  republican,  the  "  intellectuals  "  retrograded
towards  constitutional  royalty.

On  June  13,  1792,  scarcely  eight  days  before  the  invasion
of  the  Tuileries  by  the  people,  Robespierre  was  still  inveighing
against  the  republic.  "  It  is  in  vain,"  he  cried  on  that  date,
"  for  any  one  to  wish  to  seduce  ardent  and  uninstructed  minds
by  the  lure  of  a  freer  government  under  the  name  of  a  republic  :
the  overthrow  of  the  Constitution  at  this  moment  can  only
kindle  civil  war,  which  will  lead  to  anarchy  and  to  despotism."

Did  he  fear  the  establishing  of  a  sort  of  aristocratic  republic,
as  in  the  Netherlands  ?  Such  is,  at  least,  the  supposition  of
Louis  Blanc,  and  it  is  possible,  after  all ;  but  to  us  it  seems


244 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

more  probable  that  having  remained  up  till  then  a  fierce
defender  of  property,  Robespierre  feared  at  that  moment,  as
nearly  all  the  Jacobins  did,  the  fury  of  the  people,  their
attempts  at  levelling  down  fortunes,  "  expropriation,"  as  we
say  to-day.  He  feared  to  see  the  Revolution  wrecked  in  its
attempts  at  Communism.  The  fact  is,  that  even  up  to  the
eve  of  August  10,  at  a  time  when  the  whole  Revolution,
unfinished  as  it  was,  checked  iji  its  onrush,  and  assailed  by  a
thousand  conspiracies,  was  almost  on  the  point  of  being
defeated,  and  nothing  could  save  it  except  the  overthrow  of
royalty  by  a  popular  rising,  Robespierre,  like  all  the  Jacobins,
preferred  to  maintain  the  King  and  his  Court  rather  than
risk  a  fresh  appeal  to  the  revolutionary  fire  of  the  people.
Just  as  the  Italian  and  Spanish  republicans  of  our  own  times
prefer  to  retain  monarchy  rather  than  risk  a  popular  revolution
which  they  foresee  would  surely  be  inspired  with  communistic
tendencies.

History  thus  repeats  itself,  and  how  many  times  it  may  again
repeat  itself,  when  Russia,  Germany  and  Austria  begin  their
great  revolution !

The  most  striking  thing  in  the  condition  of  mind  of  the
politicians  of  the  period  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  exactly  at
this  moment,  July  1792,  the  Revolution  found  itself  menaced
by  a  formidable  royalist  coup  d'etat,  long  preparing,  which
was  to  be  supported  by  widespread  insurrections  in  the  south
and  west,  and  also  by  a  German,  English,  Sardinian  and  Spanish
invasion.

Thus  in  June  1792,  after  the  King  had  dismissed  l^pland,
Claviere  and  Servan,  the  three  Girondist  ministers,  Lafayette,
chief  of  the  Feuillants  and  royalist  at  heart,  at  once  wrote
his  famous  letter  to  the  Legislative  Assembly,  dated  June  i$
in  which  he  offered  to  make  a  coup  d'etat  against  the  revo-
lutionists. He  openly  demanded  that  France  should  be
purged  of  the  "  Jacobins,"  and  he  added  that  in  the  army
"  the  principles  of  liberty  and  equality  are  cherished,  the
laws  respected,  and  property  sacred  " — not  as  in  Paris,  for


THE  LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY  245

example, where  attacks were  openly  made  upon  it  in  the
Commune  and  at  the  Club  of  the  Cordeliers.

Lafayette  demanded — and  this  already  gives  the  measure
of  the  progress  of  reaction — that  the  royal  power  should
remain  "  intact  and  independent."  He  desired  "  a  revered
King  " — and  this  after  the  flight  to  Varennes  ;  this,  at  the
very  moment  when  the  King  was  keeping  up  an  active  corre-
spondence with  Austria  and  Prussia,  expecting  from  them  his
u  liberation,"  and  treating  the  Assembly  with  more  or  less
contempt,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the  news  he  received
concerning  the  progress  of  the  German  invasion.

And  to  think  that  the  Assembly  was  upon  the  point  of
sending  out  this  letter  of  Lafayette's  to  the  eighty-three
departments,  and  that  only  a  stratagem  of  the  Girondins
prevented  it — Gaudet  pretending  that  the  letter  was  a  forgery,
that  it  could  not  have  come  from  Lafayette  !  All  this  within
two  months  of  August  10.

Paris  was  inundated  at  this  time  by  royalist  conspirators.
The  emigres  came  and  went  freely  between  Coblentz  and  the
Tuileries,  whence  they  returned  after  receiving  the  caresses
of  the  Court  and  plenty  of  money.  "  A  thousand  houses  of
ill-fame  were  open  to  the  conspirators,"  wrote  Chaumette,
then  Public  Prosecutor  of  the  Commune  of  Paris,  in  his  Notes.*
The  departmental  administration  of  Paris  which  had  Talley-
rand and  La  Rochefoucauld  in  its  midst,  belonged  entirely  to
the  Court.  The  municipality,  a  great  many  of  the  Justices
of  the  Peace,  "  the  majority  of  the  National  Guard,  and  all
its  General  Staff,  were  for  the  Court,  serving  it  as  an  escort
and  as  watch-dogs  in  the  frequent  excursions  that  royalty
were  making  in  the  streets  and  in  the  theatres."  June  21
was  then  apparently  forgotten.

"  The  semi-military  household  of  the  King,  composed  very
largely  of  old  body-guards,  returned  emigres,  and  some  of

*  Mtmoires  sur  la  Revolution  du  10  aodt,  1792,  with  preface  by
F.  A.  Aulard  (Paris,  1893).  Chaumette  accused  even  the  Directory
of  the  department  of  having  gathered  together  sixty  thousand  counter-
revolutionists  and  lodged  them.  If  there  seems  to  be  any  exaggeration
in  the  number  of  sixty  thousand,  the  fact  that  a  great  number  of  counter-
revolutionists  were  assembled  in  Paris  is  certain.


246 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

those  heroes  of  February  28,  1791,  known  under  the  name  of
"  knights  of  the  dagger "  (chevaliers  du  poignard),  irritated
the  people  by  their  insolence,  insulted  the  National  Repre-
sentatives and  loudly  declared  their  liberticide  intentions,"
continues  Chaumette.

The  monks,  the  nuns  and  an  immense  majority  of  the
priests  stood  on  the  counter-revolutionary  side.*

As  to  the  Assembly,  this  is  how  Chaumette  characterised
it :  "A  National  Assembly,  without  force,  without  respect,
divided  against  itself,  lowering  itself  in  the  eyes  of  Europe
by  petty  and  vexatious  debates,  humiliated  by  an  insolent
Court,  and  replying  to  insult  only  by  redoubling  its  servility ;
without  power,  without  any  stability  of  purpose."  In  fact,
this  Assembly,  which  used  to  discuss  for  hours  in  succession
how  many  members  should  compose  such  and  such  a  deputation
to  the  King,  and  whether  one  or  two  wings  of  the  folding-
doors  should  be  open  for  them — which  really  spent  its  time,
as  Chaumette  wrote,  "in  listening  to  declamatory  speeches,
all  ending  in  ...  addressing  some  new  message  to  the  King  " —
such  an  Assembly  could  inspire  nothing  but  contempt  in  the
Court  itself.

Meanwhile,  all  through  the  west  and  the  south-east  of
France,  up  to  the  very  gates  of  the  revolutionary  towns,  such
as  Marseilles,  secret  royalist  committees  were  at  work,  collecting
arms  in  the  chateaux,  enrolling  officers  and  men,  and  pre-
paring for  the  levy  of  a  powerful  army,  which  was  to  march
upon  Paris,  under  the  command  of  chiefs  who  would  be  sent
from  Coblentz.

These  movements  in  the  south  are  so  characteristic  that  it
is  necessary  to  give  at  least  a  general  view  of  them.

*  Here  is  a  piece  of  news  of  which  all  Paris  was  talking  at  the  time,
as  related  by  Madame  Jullien  :  "  The  Superior  of  the  Grey  Sisters
of  Rueil  lost  her  portfolio,  which  was  found  and  opened  by  the  munici-
pality of  the  place.  It  is  estimated  that  they  have  sent  48,000  livres
to  the  tmigrts  since  January  I."  (Journal  d'une  bourgeoise,  p.  203.)


CHAPTER  XXXI

THE  COUNTER-REVOLUTION  IN  THE
SOUTH  OF  FRANCE

Condition  of  provinces — Coblentz  centre  of  royalist  plots
—  Counter  -  revolutionary  federation  —  Loyalist  activity —
Royalists  receive  money  from  Pitt,  and  help  from  other
Powers — Risings  and  counter-risings  in  provinces

WHEN  studying  the  Great  Revolution,  one  is  so  much  attracted
by  the  magnitude  of  the  struggles  which  unfolded  themselves
in  Paris,  that  one  is  tempted  to  neglect  the  condition  of  the
provinces,  and  to  overlook  the  power  which  the  counter-
revolution possessed  there  all  the  time.  This  power,  however,
was  enormous.  The  counter-revolution  had  for  it  the  support
of  the  past  centuries,  and  the  interests  of  the  present ;  and
it  is  necessary  to  study  it  in  order  to  understand  how  small
is  the  power  of  a  representative  assembly  during  a  revolution
— even  if  its  members  could  all  be  inspired  with  the  very
best  intentions  only.  When  it  comes  to  a  struggle,  in  every
town  and  in  every  little  village,  against  the  forces  of  the  old
regime,  which,  after  a  moment  of  stupor,  reorganise  themselves
to  stop  the  revolution — it  is  only  the  impulse  of  the  revolu-
tionists on  the  spot  which  can  overcome  that  powerful  resistance.

It  would  take  years  and  years  of  study  in  the  local  archives
to  trace  out  all  the  doings  of  the  royalists  during  the  Great
Revolution.  A  few  episodes  will,  however,  allow  us  to  gain
some  idea  of  them.

The  insurrection  in  the  Vendee  is  more  or  less  known.  But
we  are  only  too  much  inclined  to  believe  that  there,  in  the
midst  of  a  half-savage  population,  inspired  by  religious  fanati-
cism, is  to  be  found  the  only  real  hotbed  of  the  counter-

247


248 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

revolution.  Southern  France  represented  a  similar  hotbed,
all  the  more  dangerous  as  there  the  country  districts  and  cities
had  furnished  some  of  the  best  contingents  to  the  Revolution.

The  direction  of  these  various  movements  emanated  from
Coblentz,  the  little  German  town  situated  in  the  Electorate
of  Treves,  which  had  become  the  chief  centre  of  the  royalist
emigration.  Since  the  summer  of  1791,  when  the  Count
d'Artois,  followed  by  the  ex-minister  Calonne,  and,  later,  by
his  brother,  the  Count  de  Provence,  had  settled  in  this  town,
it  had  become  the  head  centre  of  the  royalist  plots.  Thence
came  the  emissaries  who  were  organising  throughout  the
whole  of  France  anti-revolutionary  risings.  Everywhere
soldiers  were  being  recruited  for  Coblentz,  even  in  Paris,
where  the  Editor  of  the  Gazette  de  Paris  publicly  offered
sixty  livres  for  each  recruit.  For  some  time  these  men  were
almost  openly  sent  to  Metz  and  afterwards  to  Coblentz.

"  Society  followed  them,"  says  Ernest  Daudet,  in  his  mono-
graph, Les  Conspirations  royalistes  dans  le  Midi  ;  "  the  nobility
imitated  the  princes,  and  many  of  the  middle  class  and  common
people  imitated  the  nobility.  They  emigrated  for  fashion,
for  poverty  or  for  fear.  A  young  woman  who  was  met  in  a
diligence  by  a  secret  agent  of  the  Government,  and  questioned
by  him,  replied  :  "  I  am  a  dressmaker  ;  my  customers  are  all
gone  off  to  Germany ;  so  I  have  turned  emigre tte  in  order
to  go  and  find  them."

A  complete  Court,  with  its  ministers,  its  chamberlains  and
its  official  receptions,  and  also  its  intrigues  and  its  infamies,
was  evolved  round  the  King's  brothers,  and  the  European
sovereigns  recognised  this  Court,  and  treated  and  plotted  with
it.  Meanwhile,  they  were  expecting  to  see  Louis  XVI.  arrive
and  set  himself  at  the  head  of  the  troops  formed  by  the  emigres.
He  was  expected  in  June  1791,  when  he  fled  to  Varennes,  and
later,  in  November  1791,  and  in  January  1792.  Finally  it
was  decided  to  prepare  for  a  great  stroke  in  July  1792,  when
the  royalist  armies  of  western  and  southern  France,  supported
by  English,  German,  Sardinian  and  Spanish  invasions,  were
to  march  on  Paris,  rousing  Lyons  and  other  large  towns  on
the  way,  whilst  the  royalists  of  Paris  would  strike  their  great


THE  COUNTER-REVOLUTION  249

blow, disperse the Assembly and punish the hot-headed
Jacobins.

"  To  replace  the  King  on  the  throne,"  which  really  meant
making  him  again  an  absolute  monarch,  and  reintroducing  the
old  regime  as  it  had  existed  at  the  time  of  the  Convocation
of  the  States-General — that  was  their  intention.  And  when
the  King  of  Prussia,  more  intelligent  than  those  phantoms
of  Versailles,  asked  them  :  "  Would  it  not  be  justice,  as  well
as  prudence,  to  make  the  nation  the  sacrifice  of  certain  abuses
of  the  old  government  ?  "  "  Sire,"  they  replied,  "  not  a
single  change,  not  a  single  favour  !  "  *

It  is  needless  to  add  that  all  the  cabals,  all  the  tale-bearings,
all  the  jealousies,  which  characterised  Versailles  were  repro-
duced at  Coblentz.  The  two  brothers  had  each  his  Court,
his  acknowledged  mistress,  his  receptions,  his  circle,  while  the
nobles  indulged  in  Court  gossip  which  grew  more  and  more
malicious  according  as  they  grew  poorer  and  poorer.

Around  this  centre  gravitated,  quite  openly  now,  those
fanatical  priests  who  preferred  civil  war  to  the  constitutional
submission  proposed  by  the  new  decrees,  as  well  as  those  noble
adventurers  who  chose  to  risk  a  conspiracy  rather  than  resign
themselves  to  the  loss  of  their  privileged  position.  They
went  to  Coblentz,  obtained  the  prince's  sanction  for  their
plots,  and  returned  to  the  mountainous  regions  of  the  Cevennes
or  to  the  shores  of  the  Vendde,  to  kindle  the  religious  fanaticism
of  the  peasants  and  to  organise  royalist  risings.

The  historians  who  sympathise  with  the  Revolution  pass,
as  a  rule,  too  rapidly  over  these  counter-revolutionary  resist-
ances, so  that  many  readers  may  consider  them  as  unimportant
events,  or  as  the  work  of  but  a  few  fanatics  who  could  have
been  easily  subdued  by  the  Revolution.  But  in  reality,  the
royalist  plots  extended  over  whole  regions,  and  as  they  found
support  among  the  big  men  of  the  middle  classes,  in  the  great
commercial  cities — and,  in  certain  regions,  in  the  religious
hatred  between  Protestants  and  Catholics  as  in  the  south —
the  revolutionists  had  to  carry  on  a  terrible  struggle  for  life

*  Document  in  the  Archives  des  affaires  ttt angires,  quoted  by  E.

DaucUt.


250 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

in  every  town  and  in  every  little  commune  to  save  the  Revo-
lution from  defeat.

Thus,  while  the  people  of  Paris  were  preparing  for  July  14,
1790,  the  great  Fete  of  the  Federation,  in  which  all  France
took  part,  and  which  was  to  give  to  the  Revolution  a  firm
communal  basis — the  royalists  were  preparing  the  federation
of  the  counter-revolutionists  in  the  south-east.  On  August
1 8  of  the  same  year,  nearly  20,000  representatives  of  185
communes  of  the  Vivarais  assembled  on  the  plain  of  Jales,  all
wearing  the  white  cross  on  their  hats.  Led  by  the  nobles,
they  formed  that  day  the  nucleus  of  the  royalist  federation
of  the  south,  which  was  solemnly  constituted  in  the  month  of
February  following.

This  federation  prepared,  first,  a  series  of  insurrections  for
the  summer  of  1791,  and  afterwards  the  great  insurrection
which  was  to  break  out  in  July  1792,  simultaneously  with  the
foreign  invasion,  and  which  was  expected  to  give  the  finishing
blow  to  the  Revolution.  The  Jales  confederation  existed  in
this  way  for  two  years,  keeping  up  regular  correspondence
with  both  the  Tuileries  and  Coblentz.  Its  oath  was  "  to  re-
instate the  King  in  all  his  glory,  the  clergy  in  their  possessions,
and  the  nobility  in  their  honours."  And  when  their  first
attempts  failed,  they  organised,  with  the  help  of  Claude  Allier,
the  prior  of  Chambonnaz,  a  widely  spread  conspiracy,  which
was  to  bring  out  more  than  fifty  thousand  men.  Led  by  a
large  number  of  priests,  marching  under  the  folds  of  the  white
flag,  and  supported  by  Sardinia,  Spain  and  Austria,  this  army
would  have  gone  to  Paris  "  to  free  "  the  King,  to  dissolve
the  Assembly,  and  to  chastise  the  patriots.

In  the  Lozere,  Charrier,  notary  and  ex-deputy  to  the
National  Assembly,  whose  wife  belonged  to  the  nobility,  was
invested  with  the  supreme  command  by  the  Count  d'Artoi*.
He  openly  organised  a  counter-revolutionary  militia,  and  even
got  together  some  artillery.

Chambery,  at  that  time  a  town  in  the  kingdom  of  Sardinia,
was  another  centre  of  the  emigres.  Bussy  had  even  formed
there  a  royalist  legion  which  exercised  in  open  day.  In  this
way  the  counter-revolution  was  being  organised  in  the  south,


THE  COUNTER-REVOLUTION  251

while  in  the  west  the  priests  and  nobles  were  preparing  for
the  rising  of  the  Vendee,  with  the  help  of  England.

It  may  perhaps  be  said  that,  even  all  taken  together,  the
conspirators  and  the  confederations  of  south-eastern  France
were  not  very  numerous.  But  the  revolutionists,  too,  those
at  least  who  were  determined  to  act,  were  not  numerous
either.  Everywhere  and  in  all  times,  the  men  of  action  have
been  an  insignificant  minority.  But  thanks  to  inertia,  to
prejudice,  to  acquired  interests,  to  money  and  to  religion,
the  counter-revolution  held  entire  provinces  ;  and  it  was  this
terrible  power  of  reaction  which  explains  the  fury  of  the
Revolution  in  1793  and  1794,  when  it  had  to  make  a  supreme
effort  to  escape  from  the  clutches  that  were  strangling  it.

Whether  the  adherents  of  Claude  Allier,  ready  to  take  arms,
really  amounted  to  sixty  thousand  men,  as  he  stated  when  he
visited  Coblentz  in  January  1792,  may  be  doubted.  But  this
much  is  certain,  that  in  every  town  in  the  south,  the  struggle
between  the  revolutionists  and  the  counter-revolutionists
continued  without  intermission,  making  the  balance  sway
sometimes  to  one  side  and  sometimes  to  the  other.

At  Perpignan,  the  military  royalists  were  ready  to  open
the  frontier  to  the  Spanish  army.  At  Aries,  in  the  local
struggle  between  the  monnetiers  and  the  chiffonistes,  that  is,
between  the  patriots  and  the  counter- revolutionists,  the
latter  were  victorious.  "  Warned,"  says  one  writer,  "  that
the  Marseillais  were  organising  an  expedition  against  them,
that  they  had  even  pillaged  the  arsenal  of  Marseilles  the
better  to  be  able  to  make  the  campaign,  they  prepared  for
resistance.  They  fortified  themselves,  built  up  the  gates  of
their  town,  deepened  the  fosses  along  the  enclosure,  made
safe  their  communications  with  the  sea,  and  reorganised  the
National  Guard  in  such  a  way  as  to  reduce  the  patriots  to
impotence."

These  few  lines  borrowed  from  Ernest  Daudet  *  are
characteristic.  They  give  a  picture  of  what  was  taking  place

*  Histoire  des  Conspirations  royalistes  du  Midi  sous  la  Revolution
(Paris,  1881).  Daudet  is  a  moderate,  or  rather  a  reactionary,  but  bis
history  is  documentary,  and  he  has  consulted  the  local  archives.


252 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

more  or  less  all  through  France.  Four  years  of  revolution,
that  is,  the  absence  of  a  strong  government  for  four  years,
and  incessant  fighting  on  the  part  of  the  revolutionists  were
necessary  to  paralyse  to  some  extent  the  reaction.

At  Montpellier,  the  patriots  had  founded  a  league  of  defence
against  the  royalists,  in  order  to  protect  the  priests  who  had
taken  the  oath  to  the  Constitution,  as  well  as  those  parishioners
who  attended  mass  when  the  constitutional  priests  officiated.
There  was  frequent  fighting  in  the  streets.  At  Lunel  in
the  Herault,  at  Yssingeaux  in  the  Haute-Loire,  at  Mende
in  the  Lozere,  it  was  the  same.  People  remained  in  arms.
It  might  be  truly  said  that  in  every  town  in  that  region  similar
struggles  took  place  between  the  royalists,  or  the  "  Feuillants  "
of  the  place,  and  the  "  patriots,"  and  later  on  between  the
Girondins  and  the  "  anarchists."  We  may  even  add  that
in  the  vast  majority  of  the  towns  of  the  centre  and  of  the  west,
the  reactionaries  got  the  upper  hand,  and  that  the  Revolution
was  seriously  supported  only  in  thirty  out  of  the  eighty-three
departments.  More  than  that ;  the  revolutionists  themselves,
for  the  most  part,  began  to  defy  the  royalists  only  by  degrees
and  in  proportion  as  their  own  revolutionary  education  was
effected  by  events.

In  all  these  towns  the  anti-revolutionists  joined  hands.
The  rich  people  had  a  thousand  means,  which  the  generality
of  the  patriots  did  not  possess,  of  moving  about,  of  corre-
sponding by  means  of  special  messengers,  of  hiding  in  their
chateaux,  and  of  accumulating  arms  in  them.  The  patriots
corresponded  undoubtedly  with  the  Popular  Societies  and
the  Paris  Fraternities,  with  the  Society  of  the  Indigent,  as
well  as  with  the  mother  society  of  the  Jacobins ;  but  they
were  very  poor !  Arms  and  means  of  moving  about  both
failed  them.

Besides,  those  who  were  against  the  Revolution  were  sup-
ported from  without.  England  has  always  followed  the  policy
she  pursues  to  this  day :  that  of  weakening  her  rivals  and
creating  partisans  among  them.  "  Pitt's  money "  was  no
phantom.  Very  far  from  that.  With  the  help  of  this  money
the  royalists  passed  quite  freely  from  their  centre  and  depot


THE  COUNTER-REVOLUTION  253

of  arms,  Jersey,  to  St.  Malo  and  Nantes,  and  in  all  the  great
seaports  of  France,  especially  those  of  St.  Malo,  Nantes,
Bordeaux,  the  English  money  gained  adherents  and  supported
the  "  commercialists "  (Us  commergantistes)  who  took  sides
against  the  Revolution.  Catherine  II.  of  Russia  did  as  Pitt
did.  In  reality,  all  the  European  monarchs  took  part  in  this.
If  in  Brittany,  in  the  Vendee,  at  Bordeaux,  and  at  Toulon
the  royalists  counted  upon  England,  in  Alsace  and  Lorraine
they  counted  on  Germany,  and  in  the  south  upon  the  armed
help  promised  by  Sardinia,  as  well  as  on  the  Spanish  army
which  was  to  land  at  Aigues-Mortes.  Even  the  Knights  of
Malta  were  going  to  help  with  two  frigates  in  this  expedition.

In  the  beginning  of  1792,  the  department  of  the  Loze"re
and  that  of  the  Ardeche,  both  rendezvous  of  the  refractory
priests,  were  covered  with  a  network  of  royalist  conspiracies,
of  which  the  centre  was  Mende,  a  little  town  hidden  away
in  the  mountains  of  the  Vivarais,  where  the  population  was
very  backward,  and  where  the  rich  and  the  nobles  held  the
municipality  in  their  hands.  Their  emissaries  went  through
the  villages  of  the  province,  enjoining  on  the  peasants  to  arm
themselves  with  guns,  scythes  and  pitch-forks,  and  to  be
ready  to  turn  out  at  the  first  call.  In  this  way  they  were
preparing  for  the  insurrection  which,  they  hoped,  would  raise
the  Gevaudan  and  the  Velay,  and  compel  the  Vivarais  to
follow  suit.

It  is  true  that  none  of  the  royalist  insurrections  which  took
place  in  1791  and  1792,  at  Perpignan,  Aries,  Mende,  Yssingeaux
and  in  the  Vivarais,  were  successful.  It  was  not  enough  to
shout  "  Down  with  the  patriots  !  "  to  rally  a  sufficient  number
of  insurgents,  and  the  patriots  promptly  dispersed  the  royalist
bands.  But  during  those  two  years  the  struggle  was  incessant.
There  were  moments  when  the  whole  country  was  a  prey  to
civil  war,  and  the  tocsin  rang  without  intermission  in  the
villages.

There  was  even  a  moment  when  it  was  necessary  that  armed
bands  of  the  Marseillais  should  come  to  hunt  out  the  counter-
revolutionists  in  that  region,  to  take  possession  of  Aries  and
Aigues-Mortes,  and  to  inaugurate  the  reign  of  terror  which,


254 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

later  on,  attained  such  vast  proportions  in  the  South  of  Lyons,
and  in  the  Ardeche.  As  to  the  rising  organised  by  the  Count
de  Saillans,  which  broke  out  in  July  1792,  at  the  same  time
as  that  of  the  Vendee,  and  at  the  moment  when  the  German
armies  were  marching  on  Paris,  it  would  certainly  have  had
a  fatal  influence  on  the  progress  of  the  Revolution  if  the  people
had  not  promptly  suppressed  it.  Fortunately,  the  people
took  this  upon  themselves,  while  Paris,  on  her  side,  made
preparations  to  seize,  at  last,  the  centre  of  all  royalist  conspiracies
— the  Tuileries.


CHAPTER  XXXII
THE  TWENTIETH  OF  JUNE  1792

State  of  Revolution  at  beginning  of  1792  —  Constitution
lacks  power — Legislative  Assembly — Preparations  of  counter-
revolutionists — People  recognise  dangers  of  Revolution —
Jacobin  fears — Great  republican  demonstration — Effect  of
demonstration  —  Republican  leaders  imprisoned  —  Assembly
and  Revolution — "  The  Lamourette  kiss  " — People  decide  to
do  away  with  royalty — Critical  point  of  Revolution — Girondins
warn  King — Their  fears  of  popular  revolution — Despair  of
Marat  and  patriots — Royalist  hopes — Petty  disputes  of
revolutionists

WE  see,  by  what  has  just  been  said,  in  what  a  deplorable
condition  the  Revolution  was  in  the  early  months  of  1792.
If  the  middle-class  revolutionists  could  feel  satisfied  with
having  .conquered  a  share  in  the  government  and  laid  the
foundations  of  the  fortunes  they  were  going  soon  to  acquire
with  the  help  of  the  State,  the  people  saw  that  nothing  had
yet  been  done  for  them.  Feudalism  still  stood  erect,  and
in  the  towns  the  great  mass  of  the  proletarians  had  gained
nothing  to  speak  of.  The  merchants  and  monopolists  were
making  huge  fortunes  as  Government  contractors  and  stock-
jobbers, and  by  means  of  speculating  in  the  bonds  upon  the
sale  of  the  Church  property  and  buying  up  the  communal
lands,  but  the  price  of  bread  and  of  all  things  of  prime  necessity
went  up  steadily,  and  hunger  became  permanent  in  the  poorer
quarters  of  the  great  cities.

The  aristocracy  meanwhile  became  bolder  and  bolder.
The  nobility,  the  rich,  lifted  up  their  heads  and  boasted  that
they  would  soon  bring  the  sans-culottes  to  reason.  Every
day  they  expected  the  news  of  a  German  invasion,  advancing
triumphantly  on  Paris  to  restore  the  old  regime  in  all  iti

*55


256 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

splendour.  In  the  provinces,  as  we  have  seen,  reaction  was
openly  organising  its  partisans  for  a  general  rising.

As  to  the  Constitution,  which  the  middle  classes  and  even
the  intellectual  revolutionaries  spoke  of  preserving  at  every
cost,  it  existed  only  for  passing  measures  of  minor  importance,
while  all  serious  reforms  remained  suspended.  The  King's
authority  had  been  limited,  but  in  a  very  modest  way.  With
the  powers  left  him  by  the  Constitution — the  civil  list,  the
military  command,  the  choice  of  ministers  and  the  rest —
but  above  all  the  interior  organisation  of  the  local  government,
which  placed  everything  in  the  hands  of  the  rich,  the  people
could  do  nothing.

No  one  certainly  would  suspect  the  Legislative  Assembly
of  radicalism,  and  it  is  evident  that  its  decrees  concerning  the
feudal  dues  and  the  priests  were  sufficiently  imbued  with
middle-class  moderation  ;  and  yet  even  these  decrees  the
King  refused  to  sign.  Every  one  felt  that  the  nation  was
living  simply  from  day  to  day,  under  a  system  which  offered
no  stability  and  could  be  overthrown  at  any  moment  in  favour
of  the  old  regime.

Meanwhile  the  plot  which  was  concocting  in  the  Tuileries
spread  further  into  France  itself,  and  drew  in  the  Courts  of
Berlin,  Vienna,  Stockholm,  Turin,  Madrid  and  Petersburg.
The  hour  was  near  when  the  counter-revolutionists  were  to
strike  the  great  blow  they  had  prepared  for  the  summer  of
1792.  The  King  and  Queen  urged  the  German  armies  to
march  upon  Paris  ;  they  even  named  the  day  when  they
should  enter  the  capital,  and  when  the  royalists,  armed  and
organised,  would  receive  them  with  open  arms.

The  people,  and  those  of  the  revolutionists  who,  like  Marat
and  the  Cordeliers,  held  by  the  people — those  who  brought
the  Commune  of  August  10  into  existence — understood
perfectly  well  the  dangers  by  which  the  Revolution  was
surrounded.  The  people  had  always  had  a  true  inkling  of
the  situation,  even  though  they  could  not  express  it  exactly,
nor  support  their  premonitions  by  learned  arguments ;  and
the  mass  of  the  French  people  guessed,  infinitely  better  than
the  politicians,  the  plots  which  were  being  hatched  in  the


JUNE  20,  1792  257

Tuileries  and  in  the  chateaux  of  the  nobility.  But  they  were
disarmed,  while  the  middle  classes  had  organised  their  National
Guard  battalions ;  and  what  was  worse,  those  of  the  "  in-
tellectuals "  whom  the  Revolution  had  pushed  to  the  front,
those  who  were  held  as  the  spokesmen  of  the  Revolution —
among  them  honest  men  like  Robespierre — had  not  the
necessary  confidence  in  the  Revolution,  and  still  less  in  the
people.  Just  like  the  parliamentary  Radicals  of  our  own  times,
who  dread  to  see  the  people  come  out  into  the  streets,  lest
they  should  become  masters  of  the  situation,  they  did  not
dare  to  avow  their  dread  of  revolutionary  equality.  They
explained  their  attitude  as  one  of  care  to  preserve,  at  least,
the  few  liberties  acquired  by  the  Constitution.  To  the  in-
determinate chances  of  a  new  insurrection,  they  preferred,
they  said,  a  constitutional  monarchy.

^Events  of  such  an  importance  as  the  declaration  of  war
(on  April  21,  1792)  and  the  German  invasion  were  necessary
to  change  the  situation.  Then  only,  seeing  themselves  betrayed
on  all  sides,  even  by  the  leaders  in  whom  they  had  put  their  trust,
the  people  began  to  act  for  themselves,  and  to  exercise  pressure
on  the  "  leaders  of  opinion."  Paris  began  to  prepare  for  a  great
insurrection,  which  was  to  allow  the  people  to  dethrone  the
King.  The  sections,  the  Popular  Societies,  and  the  Fraternal
Societies — that  is,  the  "  unknown  ones,"  the  crowd,  seconded
by  the  Club  of  the  Cordeliers,  set  themselves  this  task.  The
keenest  and  most  enlightened  patriots,  says  Chaumette,*
assembled  at  the  Club  of  the  Cordeliers  and  there  they  used
to  pass  the  night,  preparing  the  popular  insurrection.^There
was,  among  others,  one  committee  which  got  up  a  red  flag,
bearing  the  inscription  :  "  Martial  Law  of  the  People  against
the  Rebellion  of  the  Court."  Under  this  flag  were  to  rally
all  free  men — the  true  republicans,  those  who  had  to  avenge
a  friend,  a  son  or  some  relative  assassinated  in  the  Champ-de-
Mars  on  July  17,  1791.

Most  historians,  paying  a  tribute  to  their  authoritarian
training,  represent  the  Jacobin  Club  as  the  initiator  and  the
head  of  all  the  revolutionary  movements  in  Paris  and  the

*  Mtmoires,  p.  13.

R


258 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

provinces,  and  for  two  generations  every  one  believed  this.
But  now  we  know  that  such  was  not  the  case.  The  initiative
of  June  20  and  August  10  did  not  come  from  the  Jacobins.
On  the  contrary,  for  a  whole  year  they  were  opposed,  even
the  most  revolutionary  of  them,  to  appealing  again  to  the
people.  Only  when  they  saw  themselves  outflanked  by  the
popular  movement,  they  decided,  and  again  only  a  section
of  them,  to  follow  it.

But  with  what  timidity  1  They  wished  to  see  the  people
out  in  the  street,  combating  the  royalists ;  but  they  dared
not  wish  for  the  consequences.  What  if  the  people  were  not
satisfied  with  overthrowing  the  royal  power  ?  If  popular
wrath  should  turn  against  the  rich,  the  powerful,  the  cunning
ones,  who  saw  in  the  Revolution  nothing  but  a  means  of
enriching  themselves  ?  If  the  people  should  sweep  away  the
Legislative  Assembly,  after  the  Tuileries  ?  If  the  Commune
of  Paris,  the  extremists,  the  "  anarchists " — those  whom
Robespierre  himself  freely  loaded  with  his  invectives — those
republicans  who  preached  "  the  equality  of  conditions  " —
what  if  they  should  get  the  upper  hand  ?

This  is  why,  in  all  the  conferences  which  took  place  before
June  20,  we  see  so  much  hesitation  on  the  part  of  the  prominent
revolutionists.  This  is  why  the  Jacobins  were  so  reluctant
to  approve  the  necessity  of  another  popular  rising.  It  was
only  in  July,  when  the  people,  setting  aside  the  constitutional
laws,  proclaimed  the  "  permanence  "  of  the  sections,  ordered
the  general  armament,  and  forced  the  Assembly  to  declare
"  the  country  in  danger  " — it  was  only  then  that  the  Robes-
pierres,  the  Dantons  and,  at  the  very  last  moment,  the  Girondins
decided  to  follow  the  people's  lead  and  declare  themselves
more  or  less  at  one  with  the  insurrection.

It  was  quite  natural  that  under  these  circumstances  the
movement  of  June  20  could  not  have  either  the  spirit  or  the
unity  that  was  necessary  to  make  of  it  a  successful  insurrection
against  the  Tuileries.  The  people  came  out  into  the  streets,
but,  uncertain  as  to  the  attitude  of  the  middle  classes,  the
masses  did  not  dare  to  compromise  themselves  too  much.
They  acted  as  if  they  wanted  to  find  out  first  how  far  they


JUNE  20,  1792  259

could  go  in  their  attack  of  the  palace — leaving  the  rest  to  the
chances  of  all  great  popular  demonstrations.  If  anything
comes  of  this  one — all  the  better  ;  if  not,  they  will  at  least
have  seen  the  Tuileries  at  close  quarters  and  estimated  its
strength.

(This  is,  in  fact,  what  happened.  The  demonstration  was
perfectly  peaceful.  Under  the  pretence  of  petitioning  the
Assembly  to  celebrate  the  anniversary  of  the  Oath  in  the
Tennis  Court,  and  to  plant  a  tree  of  Liberty  at  the  door  of
the  National  Assembly,  an  immense  multitude  of  people  came
out  on  this  day.j  It  soon  filled  all  the  streets  leading  from  the
Bastille  to  the  Assembly,  while  the  Court  filled  with  its  ad-
herents the  Place  du  Carrousel,  the  great  courtyard  of  the
Tuileries  and  the  outskirts  of  the  palace.  All  the  gates  of  the
Tuileries  were  closed,  cannon  were  trained  on  the  people  ;
cartridges  were  distributed  to  the  soldiers,  and  a  conflict
between  the  two  bodies  seemed  inevitable.

However,  the  sight  of  the  ever-increasing  multitudes
paralysed  the  defenders  of  the  Court.  The  outer  gates  were
soon  either  opened  or  forced,  and  the  Place  du  Carrousel  as  also
the  courtyards  were  inundated  with  people.  Many  were  armed
with  pikes  and  sabres,  or  with  sticks  at  the  end  of  which  a
knife,  a  hatchet,  or  a  saw  was  fixed,  but  the  section  had  carefully
selected  the  men  who  were  to  take  part  in  the  demonstration.

The  crowd  were  beginning  to  break  in  one  of  the  doors  of
the  palace  with  the  blows  of  an  axe,  when  Louis  XVI.  himself
ordered  it  to  be  opened.  Immediately  thousands  of  men
burst  into  the  inner  courtyards  and  the  palace  itself.  The
Queen,  with  her  son,  had  been  hurried  away  by  her  friends
into  a  hall,  part  of  which  was  barricaded  with  a  large  table.
The  King  being  discovered  in  another  room,  it  was  filled  in
a  few  minutes  by  the  crowd.  QThey  demanded  that  he  should  *
sanction  the  decrees  which  he  had  vetoed  ;  that  the  "  patriot
ministers  " — that  is,  the  Girondist  Ministry — whom  he  had
dismissed  on  June  13,  should  be  recalled  ;  that  the  rebel
priests  should  be  driven  out  of  France  ;  and  his  choice  be
made  between  Coblentz  and  Paris.  The  King  took  off  his
hat,  and  allowed  a  woollen  cap  to  be  put  on  his  head ;  the


260 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

crowd  also  made  him  drink  a  glass  of  wine  to  the  health  of
the  nation.  But  for  two  hours  he  withstood  the  crowd,
repeating  that  he  should  abide  by  the  Constitution.}

As  an  attack  on  royalty,  the  movement  had  failed.  Nothing
came  of  it.

But  the  rage  of  the  well-to-do  classes  against  the  people
was  only  the  greater  on  that  account.  Since  the  masses  had
not  dared  to  attack  the  palace,  and  had,  by  that,  shown  their
weakness,  they  fell  upon  them  with  all  the  hatred  that  can  be
inspired  only  by  fear.

>^|  ^  VfcVhen  a  letter  from  Louis  XVI.,  complaining  of  the  invasion
of  his  palace,  was  read  at  the  sitting  of  the  Assembly,  the
members  broke  out  into  applause,  as  servile  as  the  plaudits  of
the  courtiers  before  1789.  Jacobins  and  Girondins  were
unanimous  in  thus  disowning  any  share  in  the  demonstration^

Encouraged  undoubtedly  by  this  manifestation  of  support,
the  Court  had  a  tribunal  set  up  in  the  palace  of  the  Tuileries
itself,  for  the  punishing  of  those  guilty  of  the  movement.
They  were  thus  resuscitating,  says  Chaumette  in  his  Memoir es,
the  odious  methods  of  procedure  which  had  been  resorted  to
after  October  5  and  6,  1789,  and  after  July  17,  1791.  This
tribunal  was  composed  of  justices  of  the  peace  in  the  pay  of
royalty.  The  Court  sent  them  their  food,  and  the  Wardrobe-
Keeper  of  the  Crown  had  orders  to  provide  for  all  their  wants.*
The  most  vigorous  of  the  writers  were  prosecuted  and  sent
to  prison.  Several  presidents  and  secretaries  of  the  sections
shared  the  same  fate.  Again  it  became  dangerous  to  call
oneself  a  republican.

The  Directories  of  the  departments  and  a  large  number  of
municipalities  joined  in  the  servile  protestations  of  the  Assembly
and  sent  letters  of  indignation  against  the  "  faction."  In
reality,  thirty-three  out  of  the  eighty-three  Directories  of
departments — that  is,  the  whole  west  of  France — were
openly  royalist  and  counter-revolutionary.

Revolutions,  we  must  remember,  are  always  made  by
minorities,  and  even  when  a  revolution  has  begun,  and  a  part

*  Journal  de  Perlet  of  June  27,  quoted  by  Aulard  in  a  note  added  to
the  M&moires  of  Chaumette.


JUNE  20,  1792  261

of  the  nation  accepts  its  consequences,  there  is  always  only  a
very  small  minority  who  understands  what  still  remains  to  be
done  to  assure  the  triumph  of  what  has  been  obtained,  and
who  have  the  courage  of  action.  This  is  why  an  Assembly,
always  representing  the  average  of  the  country,  or  rather
something  below  the  average,  has  always  been,  and  will  always
be,  a  check  upon  revolution  ;  it  can  never  be  an  instrument  of
revolution.

The  Legislative  Assembly  gives  us  a  striking  case  in  point.
On  July  7 — that  is,  four  days  before  the  country  had  to  be
declared  in  danger  in  consequence  of  the  German  invasion,
and  one  month  only  before  the  downfall  of  royalty — the
following  occurrence  took  place  in  the  Assembly.  They  had
been  discussing  for  several  days  what  measures  should  be  taken
for  the  general  safety,  when,  at  the  instigation  of  the  Court,
Lamourette,  Bishop  of  Lyons,  proposed,  on  a  motion  of  order,
a  general  reconciliation  of  the  parties,  and  to  bring  it  about,
he  suggested  a  very  simple  means  :  "  One  party  in  the  Assembly
attributes  to  the  other  the  seditious  design  of  wishing  to  de-
stroy the  monarchy.  The  others  attribute  to  their  colleagues
the  design  of  wishing  the  destruction  of  constitutional  equality
and  the  aristocratic  government  known  under  the  name  of
the  Two  Chambers.  Well,  gentlemen,  let  us  annihilate  by  a
common  execration,  and  by  an  irrevocable  oath,  let  us  annihilate
both  the  Republic  and  the  Two  Chambers."  Hats  were
thrown  into  the  air,  members  embraced  each  other,  the  Right
fraternised  with  the  Left,  and  a  deputation  was  sent  at  once
to  the  King,  who  came  to  join  in  the  general  gaiety.  This
scene  is  known  in  history  as  "  the  Lamourette  kiss."  For-
tunately public  opinion  was  not  captured  by  such  scenes.
\The  same  evening  Billaud-Varennes  protested  at  the  Jacobin  !
Club  against  this  hypocritical  attempt  at  reconciliation,  and  )
it  was  decided  to  send  his  speech  out  to  the  affiliated  societies/*
The  Court  on  its  side  had  no  intention  of  disarming.  Petion,
Mayor  of  Paris,  had  been  suspended  from  his  office  that  very
day  by  the  royalist  Directory  of  the  Seine  department,  for  his
negligence  on  June  20.  But  then,  the  people  of  Paris  took
up  the  cause  of  their  mayor  passionately,  so  that  six  days  later,


262 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

on  July  13,  the  Assembly  thought  fit  to  rescind  the
suspension.

The  people  had  made  up  their  minds.  They  understood
that  the  moment  had  come  when  they  must  get  rid  of  royalty,
and  that,  if  June  20  were  not  quickly  followed  by  a  popular
rising,  all  would  be  over  with  the  Revolution.  But  the
politicians  in  the  Assembly  judged  otherwise.  "  Who  could
tell  what  would  be  the  result  of  a  rising  ?  "  they  asked  them-
selves, and  the  result  was  that  with  but  a  few  exceptions  the
legislators  of  the  Assembly  were  already  arranging  for  a  way
out,  in  case  the  counter-revolution  should  be  victorious.

The  fears  of  those  who  intend  to  become  "  statesmen,"  and
their  desire  of  securing  for  themselves  pardon  in  case  of  defeat
— there  lies  the  danger  for  every  revolution.

For  all  those  who  seek  instruction  from  history,  the  seven
weeks  which  elapsed  between  the  demonstration  of  June  20
and  the  taking  of  the  Tuileries  on  August  10,  1792,  are  of  the
highest  importance.

^  Although  the  demonstration  on  June  20  had  had  no  imme-
diate result,  it  produced  nevertheless  a  great  awakening  all
over  France.  "  The  revolt  ran  from  town  to  town,"  as  Louis
Blanc  says.  The  foreigner  was  at  the  gates  of  Paris,  and  on
July  ii  the  country  was  proclaimed  in  danger.  On  the  I4th,
the  Federation  was  celebrated,  and  on  this  occasion  the  people
made  a  formidable  demonstration  against  royalty.*^  From
every  side  the  revolutionary  municipalities  sent  addresses  to
the  Assembly  calling  on  it  to  take  action.  Since  the  King
had  betrayed  his  country  they  demanded  his  dethronement
or,  at  least,  his  suspension.  The  word  Republic,  however,
was  not  yet  mentioned ;  there  was  rather  an  inclination
towards  a  regency.  Marseilles  was  an  exception,  as  it  had
demanded  the  abolition  of  royalty  since  June  27,  and  had
sent  five  hundred  volunteers  who  arrived  in  Paris  singing  the
"  Marseillaise  Hymn."  Brest  and  other  towns  also  sent  some
volunteers,  and  the  sections  of  Paris,  sitting  in  permanence,
armed  themselves  and  organised  their  popular  battalions.

It  was  felt  on  all  sides  that  the  Revolution  was  approaching
a  decisive  moment.


JUNE  20,  1792  263

What,  then,  did  the  Assembly  do  ?  And  what  those  middle-
class  republicans — the  Girondins  ?

When  the  strongly  worded  address  from  Marseilles  was
read  in  the  Assembly,  demanding  that  measures  in  consonance
with  the  seriousness  of  events  should  be  taken,  nearly  the
whole  of  the  Assembly  protested.  And  when  Duhem,  on
July  27,  demanded  that  the  dethronement  should  be  discussed,
his  proposition  was  received  with  howls.

Marie-Antoinette  certainly  was  not  mistaken  when  she
wrote,  on  July  7,  to  her  intimate  correspondents  abroad,  that
the  patriots  were  frightened  and  wanted  to  negotiate — which
is  what  really  came  to  pass  a  few  days  later.
,  Those  who  were  with  the  people,  in  the  sections,  no  doubt;  /
felt  that  they  were  on  the  eve  of  some  great  event.  The
sections  of  Paris  had  declared  themselves  permanent,  as  well
as  several  of  the  municipalities.  Taking  no  notice  of  the  law
concerning  the  passive  citizens,  they  admitted  them  to  their*
deliberations,  and  armed  them  with  pikes.  It  was  evident1
that  a  great  insurrection  was  on  the  way.
I  But  the  Girondins,  the  party  of  "  the  statesmen,"  were
just  then  sending  to  the  King,  through  his  valet  de  cbambre,
Thierry,  a  letter  telling  him  that  a  formidable  insurrection
was  preparing,  that  the  dethronement  and  something  yet  more
terrible  might  result  from  it,  and  that  only  one  way  remained
to  prevent  this  catastrophe,  and  that  was  to  recall  the
Ministryvof  Roland,  Servan  and  Claviere  within  eight  days
at  latest. J

Certainly  it  was  not  "  the  twelve  millions  promised  to
Brissot "  which  impelled  the  Girondins  to  take  this  step.
Neither  was  it,  as  Louis  Blanc  wrote,  their  ambition  to  re-
grasp  the  power.  The  cause  was  much  deeper  than  that,
and  Brissot's  pamphlet  A  ses  commettants  discloses  clearly
what  the  Girondins  thought  at  this  moment.  It  was  their
fear  of  a  popular  revolution — a  revolution  which  would  touch
upon  property — their  fear  and  their  contempt  for  the  people
— the  mob  of  ragged  wretches,  who  guided  them  :  their  fear
of  a  system  in  which  property  and  more  than  that,  authoritarian
training  and  the  "  managing  capacity,"  would  lose  the  privileges


264 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

they  had  conferred  until  then — the  fear  of  seeing  themselves
reduced  to  the  level  of  "  the  Great  Unwashed."

This  fear  paralysed  the  Girondins  as  to-day  it  paralyses
all  the  parties  who  occupy  in  Parliaments  the  same  position,
more  or  less  Governmental,  which  the  Girondins  occupied
at  that  timeo

We  can  comprehend,  therefore,  the  despair  which  seized
upon  the  true  patriots  and  expressed  by  Marat  in  these  words  :

"  For  three  years,"  he  wrote,  "  we  have  striven  to  regain
our  liberty,  and  we  are  now  as  far  off  from  it  as  ever.  The
Revolution  has  turned  against  the  people.  For  the  Court
and  its  supporters  it  is  an  eternal  motive  for  intrigue  and
corruption  ;  for  the  legislators,  an  occasion  for  prevarication
and  trickery.  .  .  .  Already  it  is  for  the  rich  and  the  avaricious
nothing  but  an  opportunity  for  illicit  gains,  monopolies,
frauds  and  spoliations,  while  the  people  are  ruined,  and  the
numberless  poor  are  placed  between  the  fear  of  perishing
from  hunger  and  the  necessity  of  selling  themselves.  .  .  .  Let
us  not  be  afraid  to  repeat :  we  are  further  from  liberty  than
ever ;  for,  not  only  are  we  slaves,  but  we  are  so  legally."

"  On  the  stage  of  the  State,  the  scenery  only  has  been
changed,"  he  writes  further  on.  "  The  same  actors,  the
same  intrigues,  the  same  motives  have  remained."  "  It
was  fatal,"  continues  Marat,  "  for  the  lower  classes  of  the
nation  to  be  left  alone  to  struggle  against  the  highest  class.
At  the  moment  of  an  insurrection  the  people  will  break  down
all  before  them  by  their  weight ;  but  whatever  advantage
they  may  gain  at  first,  they  will  end  by  succumbing  to  the
machinations  of  the  superior  classes,  who  are  full  of  cunning,
craft  and  artifice.  Educated  men,  those  who  are  well  off,
and  the  crafty  ones  of  the  superior  classes,  had  at  first  taken
sides  against  the  despot ;  but  that  was  only  to  turn  against
the  people,  after  they  had  wormed  themselves  into  the  people's
confidence  and  had  made  use  of  the  people's  forces  to  set
themselves  up  in  the  place  of  the  privileged  orders  whom
they  have  proscribed."

"  Thus,"  continues  Marat — and  his  words  are  of  gold,
since  one  might  say  they  were  written  to-day,  in  the  twentieth


JUNE  20,  1792  265

century — "  thus  it  is  that  the  revolution  has  been  made  and
maintained  only  by  the  lowest  classes  of  society — by  the
workers,  the  artisans,  the  little  tradesmen,  the  agriculturists,
by  the  plebs,  by  those  luckless  ones  whom  the  shameless  rich
call  canaille,  and  whom  Roman  insolence  called  proletarians.
But  who  would  ever  have  imagined  that  it  would  be  made
only  in  favour  of  the  small  landowners,  the  men  of  law,  the
supporters  of  fraud."

The  day  after  the  taking  of  the  Bastille,  it  would  have  been
easy  for  the  representatives  of  the  people  "  to  have  suspended
from  their  offices  the  despot  and  his  agents,"  wrote  Marat
further  on.  "  But  for  doing  that,  they  ought  to  have  had
perspicacity  and  virtue."  As  to  the  'people,  instead  of  arming
themselves  universally,  they  permitted  one  part  only  of  the
citizens  to  arm  (meaning  the  National  Guard  composed  of  active
citizens).  And  instead  of  attacking  the  enemies  of  the  Revolu-
tion without  further  delay,  the  people  gave  up  the  advantages
of  their  victory  by  remaining  merely  in  a  state  of  defence.

"  To-day,"  says  Marat,  "  after  three  years  of  everlasting
speeches  from  patriotic  societies  and  a  deluge  of  writings  .  .  .
the  people  are  further  from  feeling  what  they  ought  to  do
in  order  to  be  able  to  resist  their  oppressors,  than  they  were
on  the  very  first  day  of 'the  Revolution.  At  that  time  they
followed  their  natural  instincts,  their  simple  good  sense  which
made  them  find  the  true  way  for  subduing  their  implacable  foes.
.  .  .  Now,  behold  them — chained  in  the  name  of  the  law,
tyrannised  over  in  the  name  of  justice  ;  they  are  constitutional
slaves  !  "

This  might  have  been  written  yesterday,  yet  it  is  taken
from  No.  657  of  the  Ami  du  peuple.

A  profound  discouragement  took  hold  of  Marat,  and  he
could  see  only  one  exit :  "  some  fit  of  civic  fury  "  on  the
part  of  the  people,  as  on  July  13  and  14  and  on  October  5
and  6,  1789.  Despair  was  devouring  him,  until  the  federates
came  from  the  departments  to  Paris.  This  filled  him  with
new  hope.

The  chances  of  the  counter-revolution  were  so  great  at
the  end  of  July  1792,  that  Louis  XVI.  curtly  refused  the


266 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

proposition  of  the  Girondins.  Were  not  the  Prussians  already
marching  upon  Paris  ?  And  Lafayette  and  Luckner  too,  were
they  not  ready  to  turn  their  armies  against  the  Jacobins,  against
Paris?  Lafayette,  who  enjoyed  great  power  in  the  North,  and
was  the  idol  of  the  middle-class  National  Guards  in  Paris !

In  fact,  the  King  had  many  reasons  to  expect  a  victory.
The  Jacobins  dared  not  act.  And  when  Marat,  on  July  18,
after  the  treachery  of  Lafayette  and  Luckner  became  known
— they  had  wanted  to  carry  off  the  King  on  July  16,  and  to
set  him  in  the  midst  of  their  armies — when  Marat  proposed
to  take  the  King  as  a  hostage  for  the  nation  against  the  foreign
invasion,  every  one  turned  his  back  on  him,  and  treated  him
as  a  madman  :  he  had  none  but  the  sans-culottes  in  the  hovels
to  approve  him.  Because  he  had  dared  to  say  at  that  moment
what  to-day  we  know  to  be  the  truth,  because  he  had  dared
to  denounce  the  plottings  of  the  King  with  the  foreigner,
Marat  was  abandoned  by  every  one,  even  by  those  few  patriotic
Jacobins  upon  whom  he,  who  is  represented  as  so  suspicious,
had,  however,  depended.  They  refused  even  to  give  him  an
asylum  when  he  was  hunted  down  for  arrest  and  knocked
for  shelter  at  their  doors.

As  to  the  Girondins,  after  the  King  had  refused  their
proposal,  they  again  parleyed  with  him,  through  the  inter-
mediary of  the  painter,  Boze.  They  sent  him  another  message
on  July  25,

Fifteen  days  only  separated  Paris  from  August  10.  Revo-
lutionary France  was  chafing  the  bit.  It  knew  that  the
supreme  moment  had  come.  Either  the  finishing  blow  must
be  struck  at  royalty,  or  else  the  Revolution  would  remain
unaccomplished.  How  could  they  allow  royalty  to  surround
itself  with  troops,  and  to  organise  the  great  plot  which  was
to  deliver  Paris  to  the  Germans  ?  Who  knows  how  many
years  longer  royalty,  slightly  rejuvenated,  but  still  very  nearly
absolute,  would  have  continued  to  rule  France  ?

And  yet,  at  this  supreme  moment,  the  whole  care  of  the
politicians  was  to  dispute  among  themselves  as  to  whose  hands
the  power  should  fall  into  if  it  should  drop  from  the  hands
of  the  King  !


JUNE  20,  1792  267

The  Girondins  wanted  it  to  go  to  their  Committee  of
Twelve,  which  should  then  become  the  Executive  Power.
Robespierre,  for  his  part,  demanded  fresh  elections — a  renovated
Assembly — a  Convention,  which  should  give  France  a  new
Republican  Constitution.

As  to  acting,  as  to  preparing  the  dethronement,  nobody
thought  of  that  except  the  people  :  the  Jacobins  thought  of
it  as  little  as  all  other  politicians.  It  was  once  more  "  the
unknown  men,"  the  favourites  of  the  people — Santerre,
Founder,  the  American,  the  Pole,  Lazowski,  Carra,  Simon,*
Westermann,  at  that  time  a  simple  law-clerk — who  came
together  at  the  Soleil  d'Or  to  plan  the  siege  of  the  palace
and  the  general  rising,  with  the  red  flag  at  its  head.  It  was
the  sections — the  majority  of  the  Paris  sections,  and  a  few
here  and  there  in  the  north  of  France — in  the  department
of  Maine-et-Loire,  and  in  Marseilles  ;  and  finally,  the  volunteers
from  Marseilles  and  Brest,  whom  the  people  of  Paris  had
enlisted  in  the  cause  of  the  insurrection.

The  people : always the people  !

"  There  (in  the  National  Assembly)  they  were  like  lawyers
crazily  disputing,  without  cessation,  over  trifling  matters,
under  the  whip  of  their  masters.  .  .  ."

"  Here  (in  the  Assembly  of  the  Sections)  the  very  foundations
of  the  Republic  were  being  laid,"  as  Chaumette  expressed  it
in  his  notes  on  August  10.

*  J.  F.  Simon  was  a  German  tutor,  an  old  collaborator  of  Basedow
in  the  Philantropium  at  Dessau.


CHAPTER  XXXIII

THE  TENTH  OF  AUGUST  :  ITS  IMMEDIATE
CONSEQUENCES

Peasants  ignore  feudal  system — Change  in  state  of  France —
Royalist  plans — Administration — Army — Lafayette — Feudal
laws — King  and  Germans — Revolutionists  fear  popular  risings
— Robespierre — Revolutionary  leaders  at  length  join  hands —
People  prepare  to  strike — New  "  Commune  "  springs  up —
August  10 — Royalists  anticipate  victory — Indecision  of
Assembly — Abolition  of  royalty — Triumph  of  popular  revolu-
tion— Decrees  passed  under  compulsion  by  Assembly — Feudal
laws — Lands  of  6migr6s — Proposal  of  Mailhe — Legislative  \
Assembly  dissolves — Commune  of  Paris

WE  have  seen  what  was  the  condition  of  France  during  the
summer  of  1792.  For  three  years  the  country  had  been  in
open  revolution  and  a  return  to  the  old  state  of  affairs  had
been  made  absolutely  impossible.  For,  if  the  feudal  system
still  existed  according  to  law,  in  actuality  it  was  no  longer
acknowledged  by  the  peasants.  They  paid  the  feudal  dues
no  more ;  they  got  hold  of  the  lands  of  the  clergy  and  the
emigrant  nobles ;  and  in  certain  places  they,  themselves,
retook  from  the  landlord  the  lands  which  formerly  belonged
to  the  village  communities.  In  their  village  municipalities,
they  considered  themselves  the  masters  of  their  own
affairs.

The  State  institutions  were  equally  upset.  The  whole  of
the  administrative  structure,  which  seemed  so  formidable
under  the  old  regime,  was  crumbling  away  under  the  breath
of  the  popular  revolution.  Who  had  any  respect  now  for  the
ex-governor  of  the  province,  or  for  the  Marshals'  Courts
and  the  judges  of  the  old  farlement  ?  The  new  municipality,

closely  watched  over  by  the  local  sans -culottes,  the  Popular

268


AUGUST  10  : ITS  CONSEQUENCES  269

Society  of  the  place,  the  Primary  Assembly,  the  men  with
the  pikes  —  these  represented  the  new  powers  of  France.

The  whole  aspect  of  the  country,  the  whole  spirit  of  the
people,  its  language,  its  manners,  its  ideas,  had  been  changed
by  the  Revolution.  A  new  nation  was  born,  and  in  its  political
and  social  conceptions  it  completely  differed  from  what
had  been  scarce  twelve  months  before.

But  still  the  old  regime  was  left  standing.  Royalty  continued
to  exist  and  represented  an  enormous  force,  round  which
the  counter-revolutionists  were  ready  to  rally.  The  nation
was  living  under  provisional  conditions.  To  give  back  to
royalty  its  former  power  was  clearly  a  dream  in  which  no  one
but  some  Court  fanatics  believed  any  longer.  But  the  powers
of  royalty  for  evil  were  still  immense.  If  it  could  not  restore
the  feudal  system,  what  evil  might  it  not  do,  all  the  same,  to
the  liberated  peasants,  if,  after  having  got  the  upper  hand,
its  supporters  should  dispute  in  every  village  the  land  and  the
liberties  the  peasants  had  won.  This  was,  in  fact,  what  the
King  and  a  good  many  of  the  Constitutional  Monarchists,
the  "  Feuillants,"  proposed  to  do  as  soon  as  the  Court  party
should  have  crushed  those  whom  they  called  the  "  Jacobins."
As  to  the  Administration  in  two-thirds  of  the  departments,
and  even  in  Paris,  the  departmental  administration  and  that
of  the  districts  were  against  the  people,  against  the  Revolution,
they  were  ready  to  adapt  themselves  to  any  simulacrum  of  a
constitution  that  would  have  permitted  the  middle  classes  to
share  the  power  of  governing  with  the  King  and  the  Court.


army,  commanded  by  men  like  Lafayette  and  Luckner,
could  be  used  at  any  moment  against  the  nation.  In  fact,
we  have  seen  how,  after  June  20,  Lafayette  left  his  camp  and
came  to  Paris  to  offer  the  King  the  support  of  "  his  "  army
against  the  people,  to  break  up  the  patriotic  societies  and  to
make  a  coup  ffetat  in  favour  of  the  Court.^

And  to  crown  all,  the  feudal  laws  still  remained  in  force.
If  the  peasants  had  ceased  to  pay  the  feudal  dues  this  was
a  breach  of  the  law  ;  and  the  moment  the  King  recovered
his  authority  the  peasants  would  have  been  compelled  to  pay
everything,  so  long  as  they  had  not  freed  themselves  from


2;o THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  clutches  of  the  feudal  past  by  redeeming  their  servitude
— they  would  have  had  to  restore  all  the  land  they  had  taken
from  the  landlord  and  even  what  they  had  bought  from  the
State.

It  was  clear  that  this  provisional  state  of  things  could  not
last  long.  A  nation  cannot  go  on  living  with  a  sword  suspended
over  its  head.  And,  moreover,  the  people,  guided  by  their
unfailing  instincts,  knew  perfectly  well  that  the  King  was
conniving  with  the  Germans,  and  inviting  them  to  march  on
Paris.  At  that  time,  it  is  true,  no  written  proof  of  his  treachery
was  yet  known.  The  correspondence  of  the  King  and  Marie-
Antoinette  had  not  been  discovered,  and  it  was  not  known
how  these  two  traitors  were  urging  the  Austrians  and  the
Prussians  to  hasten  their  march  on  Paris ;  that  they  were
keeping  them  informed  as  to  all  the  movements  of  the  French
troops ;  transmitting  to  them  all  the  military  secrets,  thus
delivering  up  France  to  the  invaders.  All  this  was  only  learned
later,  and  even  then,  rather  vaguely,  after  the  taking  of  the
Tuileries,  when  certain  papers  of  the  King's  were  seized  in  a
secret  cupboard  made  for  him  by  locksmith  Gamain.  But
treason  is  not  easily  hidden,  and  by  a  thousand  indications,
upon  which  the  men  and  women  of  the  people  were  quick  to
seize,  they  were  convinced  that  the  Court  had  made  an  agree-
ment with  the  Germans  and  that  France  was  going  to  be
delivered  up  to  them.

The  idea  gradually  spread  then,  through  Paris  and  the
provinces,  that  it  was  necessary  to  strike  a  great  blow  against
the  Tuileries  :  that  the  old  regime  would  remain  a  perpetual
menace  to  France  so  long  as  Louis  XVI.  remained  on  the
throne.

And  in  order  to  strike  that  blow,  an  appeal  had  to  be  made
for  a  rising  of  the  people  of  Paris — to  the  men  with  the  pikes
— as  had  been  done  in  1789  before  July  14.  And  this  was
what  the  middle  classes  refused  to  do — what  they  dreaded
most.  We  find,  indeed,  in  the  writings  of  the  period  a  kind
of  terror  of  "  the  men  with  the  pikes."  Were  they  going
to  reappear,  these  men  so  terrible  to  the  rich  ?

The  worst  was  that  this  fear  was  felt  not  only  by  the  pro-


AUGUST  10  : ITS  CONSEQUENCES  271

pertied  classes,  but  also  by  the  advanced  politicians./  Robes-
pierre  up  to  June  1792  also  opposed  the  appeal  for  a  "popular
rising.  "  The  overthrow  of  the  Constitution  at  this  moment,"
he  said,  "  can  only  kindle  civil  war,  which  will  lead  to  anarchy
and  despotism."  He  did  not  believe  in  the  possibility  of  a
republic.  "  What,"  he  exclaimed,  "  is  it  in  the  midst  of  so
many  fatal  dissensions  that  they  want  to  leave  us  suddenly
without  a  Constitution !  "  The  republic,  in  his  opinion,
would  be  "  the  arbitrary  will  of  the  few."  He  meant  of  the
Girondins.  "  This  is  the  aim  of  all  the  intrigues  which  have
agitated  us  this  long  while."  And  to  baffle  these  intrigues
he  preferred  to  retain  the  King  and  the  intrigues  of  the  Court !
This  was  how  he  spoke  as  late  as  June,  two  months  before
August  io.\

To  convince  the  revolutionary  "  leaders  of  opinion  "  of  the
necessity  of  striking  a  blow  at  the  Tuileries  and  of  making
an  appeal,  therefore,  for  a  popular  rising,  nothing  less  was
required  than  that  they  should  have  visible  testimony  of  the
reaction  which  began  after  June  20 — the  coming  of  Lafayette
to  Paris  to  offer  "  his  "  army  for  a  royalist  coup  d?etaty  the
Germans  making  ready  to  march  on  Paris  "  to  deliver  the
King  "  and  "  to  punish  the  Jacobins,"  and  finally,  the  active
military  preparations  made  by  the  Court  for  attacking  Paris.
Only  then  did  they  make  up  their  minds,  and  understand
the  necessity  of  the  rising.  But  once  this  was  decided  upon,
the  people  undertook  to  do  the  rest.

(  It  is  certain  that  Danton,  Robespierre,  Marat,  Robert  and
a  few  others  came  to  a  preliminary  understanding.  Robespierre
detested  everything  about  Marat ;  his  military  fervour,  which
he  called  exaggeration,  his  hatred  of  the  rich,  his  absolute
distrust  of  politicians — everything  even  to  the  poor  and  dirty
clothing  of  the  man,  who  since  the  Revolution  had  broken  out
had  eaten  nothing  but  the  food  of  the  people,  bread  and
water,  and  had  entirely  devoted  himself  to  the  people's  cause.
And  yet  the  elegant  and  punctilious  Robespierre,  as  well  as
Danton,  approached  Marat  and  his  followers,  approached
the  men  of  the  Paris  sections  of  the  Commune,  to  come  to
an  understanding  with  them  as  to  the  means  of  rousing  the


272 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

people  again,  as  on  July  14.  They  at  last  understood  that  if
the  provisional  state  of  things  lasted  much  longer  the  Revo-
lution would  die  out  without  having  accomplished  anything
durable.  ]

Either  an  appeal  should  be  made  to  the  people,  and  then
full  liberty  would  have  to  be  left  to  the  poor  to  strike  their
enemies  as  it  seemed  best  to  them,  and  to  levy  what  they
could  upon  the  property  of  the  rich,  or  else  the  royal  power
would  win  in  the  struggle  and  this  would  mean  the  triumph
of  the  counter-revolution,  the  destruction  of  the  little  that
had  been  obtained  in  the  direction  of  equality — the  White
Terror  of  1794  would  have  begun  in  1792.

An  understanding  was,  therefore,  arrived  at  between  a
small  number  of  the  more  advanced  Jacobins,  and  those  of
the  people  who  wanted  to  strike  a  decisive  blow  at  the  Tuileries.
But  the  moment  they  had  come  to  this  understanding,  from
the  moment  when  "  the  leaders  of  opinion  " — the  Robespierres,
the  Dantons,  and  their  followers — promised  to  oppose  no  longer
a  popular  insurrection,  and  declared  their  readiness  to  support
it,  the  rest  was  left  to  the  people,  who  understood,  much
better  than  the  leaders  of  the  parties,  the  necessity  for  common
action  when  the  Revolution  was  on  the  point  of  striking  such
a  decisive  blow.

The  people,  the  Great  Unknown,  now  began  to  prepare
for  the  rising  and  they  created,  spontaneously,  for  the  needs
of  the  moment,  the  kind  of  sectional  organisation  which  was
judged  the  fittest  to  give  the  necessary  cohesion  to  the  move-
ment. As  to  the  details,  they  were  left  to  the  organising  spirit
of  the  people  of  the  faubourgs,  and  when  the  sun  rose  over
Paris  no  one  could  have  predicted  how  that  great  day  would
end.  The  two  battalions  of  federals  from  Marseilles  and
Brest,  well  organised  and  armed,  numbered  only  about  a
thousand  men,  no  one  except  those  who  had  been  working
the  preceding  days  and  nights  in  the  red-hot  furnace  of  the
faubourgs  could  say  whether  the  faubourgs  would  rise  in  a
body  or  not.

"  And  the  ordinary  leaders,  where  were  they  and  what
were  they  doing  ?  "  asks  Louis  Blanc.  "  There  is  nothing  to


AUGUST  10  : ITS  CONSEQUENCES  273

indicate,"  he  replies,  "  what  action  Robespierre  took  on  this
supreme  night,  or  whether  he  did  anything  at  all."  Nor
does  Danton  seem  to  have  taken  any  active  part  in  the  pre-
parations for  the  rising  or  in  the  fight  itself  on  August  10.

It  is  quite  clear  that,  from  the  moment  that  the  movement
was  decided,  the  people  had  no  need  of  the  politicians.  What
was  necessary  was  to  arm  the  people,  to  distribute  weapons
among  those  who  knew  how  to  use  them,  to  organise  the
nucleus  of  each  battalion,  to  form  a  column  in  each  street
of  the  faubourgs.  For  this  work,  the  politicians  would  only
have  been  in  the  way,  and  the  men  of  the  people  told  them
to  go  to  bed  while  the  movement  was  being  definitely  organised
on  the  night  of  August  9  and  10.  That  is  what  Danton  did,
and  he  slept  peacefully,  as  we  know  from  Lucile  Desmoulin'a
journal.

New  men,  "unknown  ones,"  came  to  the  front  in  those
days,  when  a  new  General  Council,  the  Revolutionary  Com-
mune of  August  10,  was  appointed  by  the  sections.  Taking
the  law  into  their  own  hands,  each  section  nominated  three
commissioners,  "  to  save  the  country,"  and  the  people's  choice
fell,  so  the  historians  tell  us,  upon  obscure  men.  The
"  extremist,"  Hebert,  was  one  of  them,  that  was  a  matter  of
course ;  but  we  find  neither  Marat  nor  Danton  among  them,
at  first.*  /

Thus  it  was  that  a  new  "  Commune  " — the  insurrectionary
Commune— sprang  up  in  the  midst  of  the  people  and  took
upon  itself  the  direction  of  the  rising.  And  we  srjall  see  this
Commune  exercising  a  powerful  influence  over  the  progress
of  subsequent  events ;  dominating  the  Convention  and  urging
"  the  Mountain  "  to  revolutionary  action  so  as  to  secure,  at
least,  the  conquests  already  won  by  the  Revolution.

It  would  be  useless  to  narrate  here  the  whole  day's  doings
on  August  10.  The  dramatic  side  of  the  Revolution  is  what

*  "  How  great  that  Assembly  was  !  "  says  Chaumette  in  his  M&moires,
p.  44.  "  What  sublime  outbursts  I  witnessed  during  the  discussion
on  the  King's  dethronement !  What  was  the  National  Assembly,
with  its  paltry  passions,  its  petty  measures,  its  decrees  stifled  at  birth,
then  crushed  by  the  veto,  what  was  that  Assembly,  I  say,  in  comparison
with  the  Assembly  of  the  Commissioners  from  the  Paris  sections  ?  "

S


274 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

has  been  told  best  by  the  historians,  and  excellent  descriptions
of  its  events  will  be  found  in  Michelet  and  Louis  Blanc.  We
shall,  therefore,  confine  ourselves  to  recalling  the  chief  features
of  that  day.

Ever  since  Marseilles  had  declared  for  the  dethronement
of  the  King,  petitions  and  addresses  for  the  dethronement
'had  come  in  great  numbers  to  the  Assembly.  In  Paris  forty-
two  sections  had  pronounced  in  favour  of  it.  P6tion  had
even  gone  on  August  4  to  bring  forward  this  resolution  of
the  sections  at  the  bar  of  the  Assembly.

As  to  the  politicians  they  did  not  realise  in  the  least  the
gravity  of  the  situation  ;  and  though  we  find  in  letters  written
from  Paris  by  Madame  Jullien  on  August  7  and  8,  such  passages
as  these  :  "  A  terrible  storm  is  coming  up  on  the  horizon.  .  .  .
At  this  moment  the  horizon  is  heavy  with  vapours  which  must
produce  a  terrible  explosion  " — the  Assembly  in  its  sitting  of
the  8th  calmly  voted  the  absolution  of  Lafayette  for  his  letter
as  if  no  such  thing  as  a  movement  of  hatred  against  royalty
existed.

All  the  while  the  people  of  Paris  were  preparing  for  a  decisive
battle.  The  insurrectionary  committee  had,  however,  the
good  sense  not  to  fix  any  date  for  the  rising  beforehand.
They  merely  sounded  the  varying  moods  of  the  population
of  Paris,  did  their  best  to  brace  up  their  minds,  and  kept
watch  for  the  moment  when  the  appeal  to  arms  could  be  made.
Thus,  they  tried,  apparently,  to  provoke  a  rising  on  June  26,
after  a  popular  banquet  among  the  ruins  of  the  Bastille,
in  which  the  whole  faubourg  had  taken  part — people
bringing  to  it  their  tables  and  provisions.*  And  they  tried
another  rising  on  July  30,  but  again  the  attempt  did  not
succeed.

Altogether  the  preparations  for  the  rising,  badly  seconded
by  "  the  leaders  of  opinion,"  would,  perhaps,  have  dragged
out  to  some  length,  if  the  plots  of  the  Court  had  not  helped
to  precipitate  matters.  With  the  aid  of  the  courtiers,  who
had  sworn  to  die  for  the  King,  along  with  some  battalions
of  the  National  Guard  that  had  remained  faithful  to  the  Court
*  Mortimer  Ternaux,  La  Ttrreur,  vol.  ii.  p.  1 30.


AUGUST  10  : ITS  CONSEQUENCES  275

and  the  Swiss,  the  royalists  felt  sure  of  victory.  They  had
fixed  August  10  for  their  coup  d'etat.  "  That  was  the  day
fixed  for  the  counter-revolution,"  we  read  in  one  of  the  letters
of  the  period ;  "  the  following  day  was  to  see  all  the  Jacobins
of  the  kingdom  drowned  in  their  own  blood."

The  insurrection,  therefore,  could  not  be  postponed  any
longer.  On  the  night  of  the  9th  and  loth,  just  about
midnight,  the  tocsin  rang  in  Paris.  At  first,  however,  its  call
seemed  not  to  be  well  attended,  and  it  was  asked  at  the  Com-
mune whether  the  rising  should  not  be  countermanded.  At
seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  certain  quarters  were  still  tranquil.
In  reality,  however,  it  appears  that  the  people  of  Paris,  with
their  admirable  instinct  for  revolution,  did  not  want  to  enter
into  conflict  with  the  royal  troops  in  the  dark,  because  such
»  fight  might  easily  have  ended  in  their  being  routed.
,  .In  the  meantime  the  Insurrectionary  Commune  had  taken
possession  of  the  H6tel  de  Ville  during  the  night,  and  the
legal  council  of  the  Commune  had  abdicated  in  the  presence
of  this  new  revolutionary  power,  which  immediately  gave  an
impetus  to  the  insurrection^

About  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  only  some  men  with
pikes,  led  by  the  Federates  from  Marseilles,  debouched  upon
the  Place  du  Carrousel ;  but  an  hour  later  large  masses  of  the
people  began  to  move,  and  the  King  was  informed  that  "  all
Paris  "  was  marching  on  the  Tuileries.

It  was  indeed  all  Paris,  that  is,  all  the  Paris  of  the  poor,
supported  by  the  National  Guards  from  the  workers'  and
artisans'  quarters.

About  half -past  eight,  as  these  masses  were  already  approach-
ing the  palace,  the  King,  haunted  by  the  recent  memory  of
what  had  happened  on  June  20,  and  fearing  to  be  killed  this
time  by  the  people,  quitted  the  Tuileries,  and  went  to  take
refuge  with  the  Assembly,  leaving  his  faithful  servitors  to
defend  the  palace  and  to  massacre  its  assailants.  But  as  soon
as  the  King  had  gone,  entire  battalions  of  National  Guards
from  the  rich  middle-class  quarters  dispersed,  so  as  not  to
have  to  face  the  people  in  revolt.

Compact masses of the people then thronged into the


276 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

approaches  to  the  Tuileries,  and  their  vanguard,  encouraged
by  the  Swiss  Guards,  who  flung  their  cartridges  out  of  the
palace  windows,  penetrated  into  one  of  the  courtyards  of  the
Tuileries.  But  here,  others  of  the  Swiss,  commanded  by  the
officers  of  the  Court  and  posted  on  the  great  staircase  of  the
chief  entrance,  fired  upon  the  crowd,  and  in  a  few  minutes
four  hundred  of  the  assailants  lay  dead  in  heaps  at  the  foot
of  the  stairs.

This  shooting  decided  the  issue  of  the  day.  The  cries  of
"  Treachery  !  Death  to  the  King  !  Death  to  the  Austrian
woman  !  "  rapidly  spread  all  over  the  town,  and  the  people
of  Paris  ran  towards  the  Tuileries  from  all  sides — the  Faubourgs
Saint-Antoine  and  Saint-Marceau  rushed  there  in  a  body —
and  soon  the  Swiss,  under  the  furious  assault  of  the  people,
were  either  disarmed  or  massacred.

.  Need  we  recall  the  fact  that  even  at  the  supreme  moment
the  Assembly  remained  undecided,  not  knowing  what  to  do  ?
They  acted  only  when  the  armed  people  burst  into  the  hall
where  they  were  sitting  threatening  to  kill  the  King  and  his
family,  as  well  as  the  deputies  who  did  not  dare  to  pronounce
the  dethronement.  Even  after  the  Tuileries  had  been  taken
and  when  royalty  no  longer  existed  in  fact,  the  Girondins,
who  formerly  had  loved  to  orate  about  the  Republic,  still
hesitated  to  face  any  decisive  action.  All  that  Vergniaud
dared  demand  was  "  a  provisional  suspension  of  the  head  of
the  executive  power  " — who,  henceforth,  should  be  installed
int  he  Palace  of  the  Luxembourg.  \

It  was  only  two  or  three  days  later  that  the  Revolutionary
Commune  transferred  Louis  XVI.  and  his  family  from  the
Luxembourg,  whence  they  might  easily  have  escaped,  to  the
tower  of  the  Temple,  and  undertook  to  hold  them  there  as
the  people's  prisoners.

Royalty  was  thus  abolished  de  facto.  Henceforth  the
Revolution  was  able  to  develop  for  awhile  without  fear  of
being  suddenly  checked  in  its  progress  by  a  royalist  coup
tfetat  or  by  a  massacre  of  the  revolutionists  by  the  "  White
Terror."

For  the  politicians  the  chief  interests  of  the  revolution  of


AUGUST  10  : ITS  CONSEQUENCES  277

August  10  lay  in  the  blow  it  had  struck  at  royalty.  For  the
people  it  lay  especially  in  the  abolition  of  that  force,  which
was  opposing  the  carrying  out  of  the  decrees  against  the
feudal  rights,  against  the  emigrant  nobles  and  against  the
priests,  and  which  at  the  same  time  had  appealed  to  a  German
invasion  to  re-establish  the  feudal  monarchy.  It  lay  in  the
triumph  of  a  popular  revolution,  in  a  triumph  of  the  masses,
who  could  now  push  on  the  Revolution  towards  Equality —
that  dream  and  aim  of  the  poor.  Consequently,  on  the  very
day  after  August  10,  the  Legislative  Assembly,  reactionary
as  it  was,  had  to  pass,  under  pressure  from  without,  some
decrees  which  were  to  send  the  Revolution  a  step  forward.

Every  priest  who  had  not  yet  taken  the  oath  (so  ran  these
decrees),  and  who,  within  the  next  fortnight,  did  not  swear
to  obey  the  Constitution,  and  yet  was  found  after  that  time
upon  French  territory,  should  be  transported  to  Cayenne.

All  the  lands  of  the  emigrant  nobles,  in  France  and  in  the
colonies,  were  to  be  sequestrated,  and  put  up  for  sale  in
small  lots.

All  distinctions  between  passive  citizens  (the  poor)  and
active  citizens  (the  propertied  classes)  were  abolished.  Every
one  became  an  elector  on  attaining  his  twenty-first  year,  and
was  eligible  for  election  at  twenty-five.

As  to  the  feudal  laws,  we  have  seen  how  the  Constituent
Assembly,  on  March  15,  1790,  had  made  a  decree,  according
to  which  the  feudal  dues  were  supposed  to  represent  the  price
of  a  certain  concession  of  land,  made  once  upon  a  time  by
the  landowner  to  the  tenant — which  was,  of  course,  false —
and,  as  such,  all  the  feudal  dues  had  to  be  paid  so  long  as  they
were  not  redeemed  by  the  tenant.  This  decree,  by  thus
confounding  the  'personal  dues,  the  outcome  of  rent,  wiped
out,  de  jactQy  the  decree  of  August  4,  1789,  which  had  declared
the  former  to  be  abolished.  By  the  decree  of  March  15,
1790,  these  decrees  came  up  again  under  the  fiction  which
represented  them  as  payment  for  the  possession  of  the  land.
This  is  what  Couthon  had  made  quite  evident  in  his  report,
read  before  the  Assembly  on  February  29,  1792.

But  on  June 14, 1792,  that  is  to  say,  when  June  20  was


278 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

close  at  hand,  and  it  was  necessary  to  conciliate  the  people,
the  Left,  taking  advantage  of  the  accidental  absence  of  certain
members  of  the  Right,  abolished  without  indemnity  some  of
the  personal  feudal  dues,  the  most  noteworthy  being  the
tasufl,  that  is,  the  right  of  the  lord  to  levy  dues  in  cases  of
legacies  left  by  his  tenants,  on  marriages,  on  sales  and  on  the
wine-press,  the  mill  and  other  communal  necessaries.

After  three  years  of  revolution  a  parliamentary  trick  was
thus  necessary  to  obtain  from  the  Assembly  the  abolition  of
these  odious  dues.  In  reality  even  this  decree  did  not  finally
abolish  them  :  in  certain  cases  they  still  had  to  be  redeemed  ;
but  let  us  pass  over  that.

As  to  the  annual  feudal  levies,  such  as  the  quit-rents,  the
field-tax  and  so  on,  which  were  paid  in  addition  to  the  rent
and  represented  relics  of  the  ancient  servitude,  they  remained
in  full  force.

But  now  came  August  10. The  people  had  taken  possession

i of  the  Tuileries,  and  the  King  was  dethroned  and  imprisoned.

And  as  soon  as  this  news  spread  to  the  villages,  petitions  from

the peasants flooded the Assembly, demanding the total

abolition  of  the  feudal  rights.

These  were  the  days  before  September  2,  when  the  attitude
of  the  people  of  Paris  was  not  altogether  reassuring  for  the
Legislative  Assembly,  which  was  accused  of  plotting  with
royalty,  and  the  Assembly,  seeing  itself  compelled  to  take
some  steps  forward,  issued  the  decrees  of  August  16  to  25,
1792.

In  virtue  of  these  decrees  all  prosecution  for  non-payment
of  feudal  dues  was  suspended.  The  feudal  and  seigniorial
rights  of  all  kinds,  which  were  not  the  price  of  an  original
concession  of  land,  were  suppressed  without  indemnity.

And  by  the  decree  of  August  20,  it  was  permitted  to  redeem
separately,  either  the  casuel  rights,  or  the  annual  rights,  the
legitimacy  of  which  could  be  proved  by  presenting  the  original
title  of  the  concession  of  land.  All  this,  however,  only  in  case
of  a  new  purchase  by  a  new  owner.

The  abolition  of  the  prosecutions  represented,  undoubtedly,
a  great  step  in  advance.  But  the  feudal  rights  still  remained.


AUGUST  10  : ITS  CONSEQUENCES  279

They  had  still  to  be  redeemed.  The  new  law  only  added
to  the  confusion — the  result  being  that,  henceforth,  the
peasants  could  pay  nothing  and  redeem  nothing.  And  this
was  what  the  peasants  did  while  waiting  for  some  new  victory
for  the  people  and  some  new  concession  on  the  part  of  the
ruling  classes.

At  the  same  time  all  tithes  and  prestations,  or  obligatory
unpaid  labour  for  the  clergy,  which  had  been  retained  from
the  days  of  serfdom  or  mortmain,  were  suppressed  without
indemnity.  This  was  a  substantial  gain.  If  the  Assembly
protected  the  lands  and  the  middle-class  monopolists,  they,
at  least,  delivered  up  the  priests,  since  the  King  was  no  longer
there  to  defend  them.

But  at  the  same  time  the  Assembly  took  a  measure  which,
if  it  had  been  applied,  would  have  stirred  up  the  whole  of
the  French  peasantry  against  the  Republic.  It  abolished  the
joint  responsibility  for  payments  which  existed  in  the  peasant
communes,*  and  accepting  the  motion  of  Francois  de  Neuf-
chateau,  the  Assembly  ordered  the  communal  lands  to  be
divided  among  the  citizens.  It  appears,  however,  that  this
decree,  expressed  in  a  few  lines  and  in  very  vague  terms,  was
never  taken  seriously.  Its  application,  besides,  would  have
involved  such  difficulties  that  it  remained  a  dead  letter ;  and
when  the  question  came  up  again,  the  Legislative  Assembly,
having  finished  its  term  of  office,  dissolved  without  coming
to  any  decision.

Concerning  the  lands  of  the  emigrant  nobles  it  was  decided
to  put  them  up  for  sale  in  small  lots  of  two,  three,  or  not
more  than  four  acres.  And  this  sale  was  to  be  made,  "  on
lease,  at  a  money  rent,"  always  redeemable.  That  is  to  say,
he  who  had  not  the  money  could  purchase  all  the  same,  on
condition  of  paying  a  perpetual  rent,  which  he  might,  some
day,  be  able  to  redeem.  This  was,  of  course,  to  the  advantage
of  the  poor  peasant,  but  all  sorts  of  difficulties  were  evidently
put  in  the  way  of  small  purchasers.  Well-to-do  middle-class
people  preferred  to  buy  the  estates  of  the  emigrant  nobles

*  It  was  the  same  thing  evidently  as  that  which  exists  in  Russia
under  the  name  of  krougovai*  porouha,  "  responsibility  all  round.'*


280 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

in  bulk  and  to  speculate  in  the  sale  of  them  broken  up  into
lots  later  on.

Finally — and  this,  too,  was  typical — one  of  the  members,
Mailhe,  took  advantage  of  the  condition  of  men's  minds  at
this  moment  to  propose  a  measure  which  was  really  revolutionary
and  was  accepted  later  on,  in  1793,  after  the  fall  of  the  Giron-
dins.  He  demanded  that  the  effects  of  the  royal  ordinance
of  1669  might  be  broken,  and  that  the  lords  should  be  com-
pelled to  restore  to  the  village  communes  the  land  which  they
had  taken  away  from  them  in  virtue  of  that  ordinance.  His
proposal,  however,  was  not  accepted ;  a  new  revolution  was
required  for  that.  ^

These  then  were  the  results  of  August  10 :  Royalty  was
overthrown,  and  now  it  was  possible  for  the  Revolution  to
turn  over  a  new  page  in  the  direction  of  equality,  provided
the  Assembly  and  the  governing  classes  in  general  did  not
oppose  it.

The  King  and  his  family  were  in  prison.  A  new  Assembly,
a  National  Convention,  was  convoked.  The  elections  were
to  be  made  by  universal  suffrage,  but  still  in  two
degrees.

Some  measures  were  taken  against  the  priests  who  refused
to  recognise  the  Constitution,  and  against  the  emigrant  nobles.
Orders  were  given  to  put  up  for  sale  the  lands  of  the  emigres
which  had  been  sequestrated  in  accordance  with  the  decree
of  March  30,  1792.

The  war  against  the  invaders  was  to  be  pushed  on  vigorously
by  the  sans-culotte  volunteers.

^  But  the  great  question — "what  was  to  be  done  with  the
traitor  King  " — and  that  other  great  question,  which  was  so
vital  for  fifteen  million  peasants — the  question  of  the  feudal
rights — remained  in  suspense.  It  was  still  necessary  to  redeem
those  rights  in  order  to  do  away  with  them.  And  the  new
law  concerning  the  partition  of  the  communal  lands  threw
the  villages  into  alarm7\

It  was  over  this  that  the  Legislative  Assembly  dissolved,
after  doing  all  they  could  to  prevent  the  Revolution  from
developing  normally,  and  from  putting  an  end  to  those  two


AUGUST  10  : ITS  CONSEQUENCES  281

heritages  of  the  past : the  absolute  authority  of  the  King
and  the  feudal  laws.

But  by  the  side  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  there  had  grown
up,  since  August  10,  a  new  power,  the  Commune  of  Paris,
which  took  into  its  hands  the  revolutionary  initiative  and,  as
we  shall  see  presently,  managed  to  retain  it  for  nearly  two
years.


CHAPTER  XXXIV
THE  INTERREGNUM— THE  BETRAYALS

People  demand  justice — Suspension  of  King — Danger  of
German  invasion — Heroism  of  people — Royalists  and  Germans
— Despair  of  people — Popularity  of  Lafayette — Position  of
middle-class  landowners — Royalist  plots  for  King's  escape —
Activity  of  Commune — Revolutionary  army  organised —
Character  of  Revolution  changes — Struggle  between  Assembly
and  Commune — Surrender  of  Longwy — Exultation  of  Royalists
— Royalist  conspirators  acquitted — Royalist  houses  searched
— Nearly  two  thousand  arrests — Assembly  orders  Great
Council  of  Commune  to  dissolve — Commune  refuses  to  obey
— Royalist  plan  disclosed — Siege  of  Verdun — Indignation  of
revolutionists

THE  people  of  Paris  wept  for  their  dead  ;  and  loudly  demanded
justice  and  punishment  on  those  who  had  provoked  the  mas-
sacre round  the  Tuileries.

Eleven  hundred  men,  says  Michelet,  three  thousand  accord-
ing to  public  rumour,  had  been  slain  by  the  defenders  of  the
Palace.  It  was  chiefly  the  men  with  the  pikes,  the  extremely
poor  folk  of  the  faubourgs  who  had  suffered.  They  had  rushed
in  crowds  on  the  Tuileries,  and  had  fallen  under  the  bullets  of
the  Swiss  and  the  nobles  protected  by  the  strong  walls  of  the
Palace.

Tumbrils  laden  with  corpses  wended  their  way  to  the
faubourgs,  says  Michelet,  and  there  they  laid  out  the  dead,
so  that  they  might  be  identified.  The  crowd  gathered  round
them,  and  the  men's  cries  for  vengeance  mingled  with  the
sobs  of  the  women.

On  the  evening  of  August  10  and  the  following  day  the
popular  fury  was  turned  chiefly  on  the  Swiss.  Had  not  some
of  the  Swiss  thrown  their  cartridges  out  of  the  windows,
thereby  inviting  the  crowd  to  enter  the  Palace  ?  Were  not

a8a


THE  INTERREGNUM—THE  BETRAYALS 283

the  people  trying  to  fraternise  with  the  Swiss,  who  were
posted  on  the  great  staircase  at  the  entrance,  when  at  close
quarters  they  opened  a  steady  and  murderous  fire  on  the  crowd  ?

But  the  people  soon  came  to  know,  however,  that  it  was
necessary  to  strike  higher,  if  they  wanted  to  reach  the  insti-
gators of  the  massacre ;  at  the  King,  the  Queen,  and  "  the
Austrian  Committee  "  in  the  Tuileries.

Now,  it  was  just  the  King,  the  Queen,  and  their  faithful
adherents  whom  the  Assembly  protected  with  their  authority,
It  is  true  that  the  King,  the  Queen,  their  children  and  the
familiar  friends  of  Marie-Antoinette  were  shut  up  in  the
tower  of  the  Temple.  The  Commune  had  obtained  their
transference  to  this  Tower  from  the  Assembly,  by  declining
all  responsibility  if  they  remained  in  the  Luxembourg.  But
in  reality  there  was  nothing  done.  Nothing  was  done  until
September  4.

On  August  10  the  Assembly  had  refused  even  to  proclaim
the  dethronement  of  Louis  XVI.  Under  the  inspiration  of
the  Girondins  they  had  only  declared  the  suspension  of  the
King,  and  they  were  careful  to  nominate  a  governor  for  the
Dauphin.  And  now  the  Germans,  who  had  entered  France
on  the  1 9th,  were  marching  upon  Paris  to  abolish  the  Consti-
tution, to  restore  the  King  and  his  absolute  power,  to  annul
all  the  decrees  of  the  two  Assemblies,  and  to  put  the  "  Jaco-
bins "  to  death,  which  meant  all  the  revolutionists.

It  is  easy  to  understand  the  state  of  mind  which  must  have
prevailed  in  Paris  under  these  conditions ;  beneath  a  calm
exterior,  an  uneasy  gloom  held  the  faubourgs,  which  after
their  victory  over  the  Tuileries,  so  dearly  bought,  felt  them-
selves betrayed  by  the  Assembly,  and  by  the  revolutionary
"leaders  of  opinion,"  who  hesitated,  they  also,  to  declare
against  the  King  and  the  royal  power.

Every  day  new  proofs  were  brought  into  the  tribune  of  the
Assembly,  to  the  meetings  of  the  Commune  and  to  the  press,
of  the  plot,  which  had  been  hatched  at  the  Tuileries  before
August  10  and  was  still  going  on  in  Paris  and  in  the  provinces.
But  nothing  was  done  to  punish  the  guilty,  or  to  prevent  them
from  resuming  the  weaving  of  their  plots.


284 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Every  day  the  news  from  the  frontier  became  more  and
more  disquieting.  The  fortresses  were  not  prepared  for
defence  ;  nothing  had  been  done  to  prevent  the  advance  of
the  enemy.  It  was  evident  that  the  weak  French  contingents,
commanded  by  untrustworthy  officers,  could  never  stop  the
German  armies,  twice  as  strong  in  numbers,  accustomed  to
warfare,  and  under  generals  who  were  trusted  by  their  soldiers.
The  royalists  calculated  the  day,  the  hour,  when  the  invading
armies  would  knock  at  the  gates  of  Paris.

The  mass  of  the  people  comprehended  the  danger.  All
who  were  young,  strong,  enthusiastic  in  republican  Paris,
hastened  to  enrol  themselves  for  frontier  service.  The  enthu-
siasm became  heroic.  Money,  jewellery,  and  all  sorts  of  gifts
of  the  patriots  flowed  into  the  enrolment  offices.

But  what  was  the  good  of  all  this  devotion,  when  every  day
brought  news  of  some  fresh  treachery,  and  when  all  these
treacheries  were  to  be  traced  to  the  King  and  Queen,  who,
shut  up  in  the  Temple,  still  continued  to  direct  the  plots  ?
In  spite  of  the  close  watch  kept  by  the  Commune,  did  not
Marie-Antoinette  know  exactly  all  that  went  on  outside  ?
She  was  informed  of  every  movement  of  the  German  armies  ;
and  when  workmen  went  to  put  bars  on  the  windows  of  the
Temple,  she  said  :  "  What  is  the  use  ?  In  a  week  we  shall
not  be  here."  In  fact,  it  was  between  September  5  and  6
that  the  royalists  expected  the  entrance  of  eighty  thousand
Prussians  into  Paris.

What  is  the  use  of  arming  and  hastening  to  the  frontier,
when  the  Legislative  Assembly  and  the  party  that  is  in  power
are  the  declared  enemies  of  the  Republic  ?  They  are  doing
everything  to  maintain  royalty.  A  fortnight  before  August
10,  on  July  24,  had  not  Brissot  actually  spoken  against  the
Cordeliers  who  wanted  the  Republic  ?  Had  he  not  demanded
that  they  should  be  punished  by  the  arm  of  the  law  ?  *  And
now,  after  August  10,  did  not  the  Jacobin  Club,  which  was
the  meeting-place  for  the  well-to-do  middle  classes,  keep  silent,

*  "  If  there  exist,"  he  said,  "  men  who  are  working  now  to  establish
the  Republic  upon  the  ruins  of  the  Constitution,  the  arm  of  the  law
should  punish  them,  as  well  as  the  active  partisans  of  the  two  Chambers
and  the  counter-revolutionists  at  Coblentz."


THE  INTERREGNUM— THE  BETRAYALS 285

until  August  27,  on  the  question  which  was  agitating  the
people :  "  Shall  royalty,  which  depends  for  support  upon
German  bayonets,  be  maintained — yes  or  no  ?  "

The  powerlessness  of  the  governing  classes,  the  cowardice  of
the  "  leaders  of  thought  "  in  this  hour  of  danger,  could  not
but  bring  the  people  to  despair.  And  the  depth  of  this
despair  can  only  be  gauged  if  one  reads  the  newspapers  of
those  days,  the  memoirs,  and  the  private  letters,  and  tries  to
live  through  the  various  emotions  that  Paris  lived  through
after  the  declaration  of  war.  This  is  why  I  shall  briefly  recapi-
tulate the  chief  events.

At  the  moment  when  war  was  declared,  Lafayette  was  still
being  lauded  to  the  skies,  especially  in  middle-class  circles.
They  rejoiced  to  see  him  at  the  head  of  an  army.  It  is  true
that  since  the  massacre  in  the  Champ-de-Mars  (July  1791)
some  doubts  about  him  had  been  expressed,  and  that  Chabot
spoke  of  them  in  the  Assembly  at  the  beginning  of  June  1792.
But  the  Assembly  treated  Chabot  as  an  agitator,  as  a  traitor,
and  silenced  him.

Then,  on  June  18,  the  Assembly  received  from  Lafayette
his  famous  letter,  in  which  he  denounced  the  Jacobins  and
demanded  the  suppression  of  all  the  clubs.  This  letter  arriving
a  few  days  after  the  King  had  dismissed  the  Girondist  Ministry
— the  Jacobin  Ministry,  as  it  was  then  called— the  coincidence
caused  people  to  reflect.  Nevertheless,  the  Assembly  con-
doned it  by  casting  a  doubt  on  the  authenticity  of  the  letter,
whereupon  people  naturally  wondered  if  the  Assembly  were
not  in  league  with  Lafayette.

In  spite  of  all  this,  the  agitation  went  on  increasing,  and
on  June  20  the  people  rose.  Admirably  organised  by  the
"  sections,"  it  invaded  the  Tuileries.  No  excesses,  as  we  have
seen,  took  place ;  but  the  middle  classes  were  seized  with
terror,  and  the  Assembly  flung  themselves  into  the  arms  of
reaction  by  passing  a  riot  act  against  public  gatherings  in  the
streets.  Thereupon  Lafayette  arrived,  on  the  23rd  ;  he  went
to  the  Assembly,  where  he  acknowledged  and  stood  by  his  letter
of  June  1 8.  He  disapproved  of  the  doings  of  June  20  in
violent  terms,  and  denounced  the  "  Jacobins  "  with  still  more


286 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

acrimony.  Luckner,  who  commanded  the  other  army,  joined
with  Lafayette  in  disapproving  of  June  20  and  in  testifying
his  fidelity  to  the  King.  After  this,  Lafayette  drove  through
Paris  "  with  six  or  eight  hundred  officers  of  the  Parisian  garri-
son surrounding  his  carriage."  *  We  know  now  why  he  had
come  to  Paris.  It  was  to  persuade  the  King  to  allow  himself
to  be  carried  off,  and  be  placed  under  the  protection  of  the
army.  It  is  only  now  that  we  know  this  with  certainty,  but
Lafayette's  conduct  was  at  the  time  already  becoming  sus-
picious. A  communication  was  even  then  laid  before  the
Assembly,  asking  that  he  should  be  prosecuted ;  but  the
majority  voted  for  his  exculpation.  What  must  the  people
have  thought  of  this  matter  ?  f

*  Madame  Jullien  to  her  son  (Journal  d'une  bourgeois* ,  p.  170).
If  the  letters  of  Madame  Jullien  may  be  incorrect  in  some  small  details,
they  are  still  most  valuable  for  this  period,  because  they  tell  exactly
what  revolutionary  Paris  was  saying  and  thinking  on  such  and  such
days.

f  Lally-Tollendal,  in  a  letter  which  he  addressed  to  the  King  of
Prussia  in  1793,  claiming  the  liberation  of  Lafayette,  enumerated  th«
services  that  the  cunning  general  had  rendered  to  the  Court.  After
the  King  had  been  brought  back  to  Paris  from  Varennes  in  June  1791,
the  principal  leaders  in  the  Constituent  Assembly  met  to  decide  whether
the  King  should  not  be  tried  and  the  Republic  established.  Lafayette
said  to  them  :  "If  you  kill  the  King,  I  warn  you  that  the  next  day  I
and  the  National  Guard  will  proclaim  the  Prince  Royal."  "  He
belongs  to  us,  we  must  forget  everything,"  said  Madame  Elisabeth
(the  sister  of  Louis  XVIi)  in  June  1792,  to  Madame  de  Tonnerre,  when
speaking  of  Lafayette ;  and  in  the  beginning  of  July  1792,  Lafayett*
wrote  to  the  King,  who  replied  to  him.  In  this  letter,  dated  July  8,
he  proposed  to  organise  the  King's  escape.  He  was  to  come  on  the
1 5th,  with  fifteen  squadrons  and  eight  pieces  of  horse  artillery,  to
receive  the  King  at  Compiegne.  Lally-Tollendal,  a  royalist  in  virtue
of  a  sort  of  religion  that  was  hereditary  in  his  family,  as  he  said  himself,
confirmed  what  follows,  on  his  conscience  :  "  His  [Lafayette's]  procla-
mations to  the  army,  his  famous  letter  to  the  Legislative  body,  his
unexpected  appearance  at  the  bar  after  the  terrible  day  of  June  20  ;
nothing  of  this  was  unknown  to  me,  nothing  was  done  without  my  participa-
tion. .  .  .  The  day  after  his  arrival  in  Paris,  I  spent  part  of  the  night
with  him  ;  we  were  discussing  whether  war  should  be  declared  against
the  Jacobins  in  Paris  itself — war,  in  the  full  meaning  of  the  word."  Their
plan  was  to  unite  "  all  the  landowners  who  were  dissatisfied,  and  all  the
oppressed  who  were  numerous,"  and  to  proclaim  :  No  Jacobins,  and
no  Coblentz  :  to  lead  the  people  to  the  Jacobin  Club,  "  to  arrest  their
leaders,  seize  their  papers,  and  pull  down  their  house."  M.  de  Lafayette
strongly  desired  this  ;  he  had  said  to  the  King,  "  We  must  destroy  the
Jacobins  physically  and  morally.  His  timid  friends  were  opposed  to


THE  INTERREGNUM— THE  BETRAYALS 287

"  Mon  Dieu,  my  friend,  how  badly  everything  is  going,"
wrote  Madame  Jullien  to  her  husband  on  June  30,  1793.
"  For  mark  how  the  conduct  of  the  Assembly  irritates  the
people  ;  so  much  so  that  when  it  will  please  Louis  XVI.  to
take  up  the  whip  of  Louis  XIV.  to  turn  out  this  flabby  parlia-
ment, there  will  be  hurrahs  on  all  sides,  with  very  different
meanings,  it  is  true  ;  but  what  does  it  matter  to  tyrants,
provided  they  fall  in  with  their  plans !  The  aristocratic
middle  class  are  wild  with  joy,  and  the  people  in  the  depths
of  despair ;  consequently  the  storm  brews.*

Let  us  compare  these  words  with  those  of  Chaumette  quoted
above,  and  we  shall  be  able  to  understand  that  to  the  revolu-
tionary element  of  the  population  of  Paris,  the  Assembly  must
have  seemed  like  a  cannon-ball  attached  to  the  feet  of  the
Revolution.!

August  10,  however,  came,  and  the  people  of  Paris  in  their
sections  took  over  the  movement.  Proceeding  revolutionary-
wise,  they  had  elected  their  own  Council  of  the  Commune
to  give  unity  to  the  rising.  They  drove  out  the  King  from
the  Tuileries,  made  themselves  masters  of  the  Palace  after  a

this,  t  I  .  He  swore  to  me  that  he  would,  at  least,  on  returning  to  his
army,  immediately  set  to  work  to  find  means  for  the  King's  deliver-
ance." This  letter  of  Lally-Tollendal's  is  given  in  full  by  Buchez  and
Roux,  vol.  xvii.  p.  227  et  seq.

And  yet  in  spite  of  all,  "  the  commissioners  sent  to  Lafayette  after
August  10  by  the  leaders  of  the  Assembly  had  instructions  to  offer
him  the  first  place  in  the  new  order  of  things."  The  treachery  in  the
Assembly  among  the  Girondins  was  thus  much  deeper  than  one  would
have  thought.

*  Journal  d'une  bourgeoise,  p.  164.

f  "  At  this  moment  the  horizon  is  charged  with  vapours  which  must
produce  an  explosion,"  wrote  Madame  Jullien  on  August  8.  "  The
Assembly  appears  to  me  too  weak  to  back  up  the  will  of  the  people,
and  the  people  appear  to  me  too  strong  to  allow  itself  to  be  overmastered
by  them.  Out  of  this  conflict,  this  struggle,  something  must  come  :
either  liberty  or  slavery  for  twenty-five  millions  of  men"  (p.  211).
And  further  on  :  "  The  dethronement  of  the  King  demanded  by  the
majority,  and  rejected  by  the  minority  who  dominate  the  Assembly,
will  bring  about  the  frightful  conflict  which  is  preparing.  The  Senate
will  not  have  the  audacity  to  pronounce  it,  and  the  people  will  not  have
the  baseness  to  endure  the  contempt  which  is  shown  to  public  opinion."
And  when  the  Assembly  acquitted  Lafayette,  Madame  Jullien  made
this  prophecy :  "  But  all  that  is  leading  us  towards  a  catastrophe
which  will  cause  the  friends  of  humanity  to  shudder  ;  for,  it  will  rain
blood.  I  do  not  exaggerate  "  (p.  213).


288 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

sharp  fight,  and  their  Commune  imprisoned  the  King  in  the
tower  of  the  Temple.  But  the  Legislative  Assembly  still
existed,  and  soon  it  became  the  rallying-point  for  the  royalist
elements.

The  middle-class  landowners  saw  at  once  the  new  popular
and  equalising  turn  taken  by  the  insurrection — they  clung  on
all  the  more  to  royalty.  A  thousand  plans  were  set  on  foot
for  the  transference  of  the  Crown,  either  to  the  Dauphin —
which  would  have  been  done  if  the  regency  of  Marie-An-
toinette had  not  been  generally  regarded  with  so  much  disgust
— or  to  some  other  candidate,  either  French  or  foreign.  There
was,  as  after  the  flight  to  Varennes,  a  recrudescence  of  senti-
ment in  favour  of  royalty  ;  and  when  the  people  loudly  de-
manded that  they  should  pronounce  plainly  against  royalty,
the  Assembly,  like  all  assemblies  of  parliamentarian  politicians,
being  uncertain  which  side  should  get  the  upper  hand,  took
good  care  not  to  compromise  itself.  It  inclined  rather  towards
royalty  and  tried  to  condone  the  past  crimes  of  Louis  XVI.
It  was  opposed  to  their  being  brought  to  light  by  any  serious
prosecutions  of  his  accomplices.

The  Commune  had  to  threaten  to  ring  the  tocsin,  and  the
sections  had  to  talk  of  a  massacre  of  all  the  royalists  *  before
the  Assembly  decided  to  give  in.  At  last  it  ordered,  on
August  17,  the  formation  of  a  criminal  tribunal,  composed  of
eight  judges  and  eight  jurors,  who  were  to  be  elected  by  the
representatives  of  the  section.  But  still,  they  tried  to  limit
the  powers  of  the  tribunal.  It  was  not  to  try  and  fathom  the
conspiracy  which  had  been  planned  in  the  Tuileries  before
August  10 ;  it  was  to  confine  itself  to  inquiring  who  was
responsible  for  what  took  place  on  the  roth.

Proofs  of  the  conspiracy,  however,  were  forthcoming ;
every  day  they  became  more  definite.  Among  the  papers
found  after  the  taking  of  the  Tuileries  in  the  desk  belonging
to  Montmorin,  Keeper  of  the  Civil  List,  were  many  compro-
mising documents.  There  was,  among  others,  a  letter  from

*  "  You  appear  to  be  in  the  dark  as  to  what  is  happening  in  Paris,"
said  the  spokesman  of  one  of  the  deputations  of  the  Commune  to  the
Assembly.


THE  INTERREGNUM— THE  BETRAYALS 289

the  princes,  proving  they  were  acting  in  agreement  with  Louis
XVI.  when  they  sent  out  the  Austrian  and  Prussian  armies
against  France  and  organised  a  corps  of  cavalry  from  among
the  emigres,  who  were  marching  with  those  armies  on  Paris.
There  was  also  found  a  long  list  of  pamphlets  and  libels  directed
against  the  National  Assembly  and  the  Jacobins ;  libels  paid
for  out  of  the  Civil  List,  including  those  which  were  meant  to
provoke  a  riot  on  the  arrival  of  the  Marseillais  federates,  and
inciting  the  National  Guard  to  slaughter  them.*

And  finally,  there  was  proof  that  the  "  constitutional  "
minority  of  the  Assembly  had  promised  to  follow  the  King
in  the  case  of  his  leaving  Paris,  without,  however,  exceeding
the  distance  prescribed  by  the  Constitution.  There  were
very  many  other  things  besides,  but  they  were  concealed,  lest
the  popular  fury  might  be  directed  on  the  prisoners  in  the
Temple.  Probably  also  on  the  Assembly,  we  may  add.

At  length  the  betrayals,  so  long  foreseen,  broke  out  in  the
army.  On  August  22  the  treason  of  Lafayette  became
known.  He  had  tried  to  force  his  army  to  follow  him  and  to
march  on  Paris.  In  reality,  his  plan  had  been  arranged  two
months  before  when  he  had  come  to  see  how  the  land  lay  in
Paris  after  June  20.  Now  he  threw  off  the  mask.  He  ordered
the  arrest  of  three  commissioners  who  were  sent  to  him  by  the
Assembly  to  announce  the  revolution  of  August  10,  and  the
old  fox  Luckner  approved  of  his  action.  Fortunately,  La-
fayette's army  did  not  follow  its  general,  and  on  the  1 9th,
accompanied  by  his  staff,  he  had  to  cross  the  frontier,  hoping
to  make  his  way  to  Holland.  But  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  the
Austrians  and  was  clapped  into  prison  by  them  and  treated
very  rigorously,  which  shows  how  the  Austrians  intended  to
treat  every  revolutionist  who  should  have  had  the  misfortune
to  fall  into  their  power.  They  executed  on  the  spot  those

*  In  one  letter  from  Switzerland,  the  punishing  the  Jacobins  was
discussed.  "  We  shall  execute  justice  on  them  ;  they  shall  be  a  terrible
example.  «  »  .  War  upon  the  paper  money  ;  that  is  where  bankruptcy
will  begin.  The  clergy  and  the  parlements  will  be  reinstated.  .  .  .
So  much  the  worse  for  those  who  have  bought  the  property  of  the
clergy.  .  *  ."  In  another  letter  we  read  :  "  There  is  not  a  moment
to  lose.  We  must  make  the  middle  classes  feel  that  the  King  alone
can  save  them."

T


29o THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

municipal  officers  who  were  "  patriots,"  and  whom  they  suc-
ceeded in  capturing ;  and  some  of  them  had  their  ears  cut
off  and  nailed  to  their  foreheads  by  the  Uhlans.

The  next  day  after  Lafayette's  treason,  the  news  came  to
Paris  that  Longwy,  which  had  been  invested  on  the  2Oth,
had  yielded  at  once,  and  among  th  epapers  of  the  commandant,
Lavergne,  a  letter  was  found  containing  offers  of  betrayal  on
behalf  of  Louis  XVI.  and  the  Duke  of  Brunswick.

"  Unless  a  miracle  happen,  no  further  dependence  can  be
placed  on  the  army,"  was  now  the  general  opinion.

As  to  Paris,  it  was  full  of  Noirs.*  A  crowd  of  emigres  had
returned,  and  the  military  man  was  often  recognised  disguised
in  a  priest's  soutane.  All  kinds  of  plots,  the  indications  of
which  the  people,  who  anxiously  watched  the  royal  prison,
were  quick  to  seize  upon,  were  woven  round  the  Temple.
The  royalists  intended  to  free  the  King  and  Queen,  either  by
an  escape  or  by  a  sudden  attack  on  the  prison,  and  they  were
getting  up  a  general  rising  for  the  day,  either  September  5
or  6,  when  the  Prussians  would  be  on  the  outskirts  of  Paris.
They  made  no  attempt  to  conceal  it.  The  seven  hundred
Swiss  remaining  in  Paris  were  to  serve  as  the  military  frame-
work for  the  rising.  They  were  to  march  upon  the  Temple,
set  the  King  at  liberty,  and  place  him  at  the  head  of  the  move-
ment. All  the  prisons  were  to  be  opened,  and  the  prisoners
were  to  be  sent  out  to  plunder  the  city,  and  so  add  to  the
confusion,  during  which  Paris  was  to  be  set  on  fire.t

So,  at  least,  ran  public  rumour,  spread  by  the  royalists
themselves.  And  when  Kersaint  read  the  report  upon  August
10,  that  report  confirmed  the  rumour.  In  the  words  of  a
contemporary,  "it  made  one  tremble  ...  so  well  and  so
thickly  were  the  nets  spread  "  round  the  revolutionists.  And
yet  the  whole  truth  was  not  told.

In  the  midst  of  all  these  difficulties,  there  was  only  the  activity
of  the  Commune  and  its  sections  that  responded  to  the  gravity
of  the  situation.  They  alone,  seconded  by  the  Cordeliers'

*  So  they  then  called  those  who  later  were  termed  the  Blancs.

t  The  prisoners  shut  up  in  La  Force  prison  had  already  tried  to
set  it  on  fire,  says  Michelet,  according  to  the  inquiry  that  was  made
concerning  the  September  days.


THE  INTERREGNUM— THE  BETRAYALS 291

Club,  acted  with  a  view  to  rousing  the  people,  and  obtaining
from  them  a  supreme  effort  to  save  the  Revolution  and  the
country,  the  cause  of  both  being  at  that  moment  identical.

The  General  Council  of  the  Commune,  revolutionarily
elected  by  the  sections  on  August  9,  acting  in  harmony  with
the  sections  themselves,  worked  with  enthusiastic  ardour  to
arm  and  equip,  first  30,000,  then  60,000  volunteers,  who  were
to  set  out  for  the  frontiers.  Supported  by  Danton,  they
found  for  their  vigorous  appeals  the  words  which  electrified
France.  For,  casting  its  municipal  attributes  behind  it,  the
Commune  of  Paris  spoke  then  to  all  France,  and,  through  its
volunteers,  to  the  army  also.  The  sections  organised  the
immense  work  of  equipping  the  volunteers,  and  the  Commune
ordered  the  leaden  coffins  to  be  dug  up  and  melted  down  to
make  bullets,  and  the  holy  vessels  from  the  churches  to  be
made  into  bronze  for  cannon.  The  sections  became  the  burn-
ing furnace  whereat  they  furbished  up  the  weapons  by  which
the  Revolution  was  about  to  vanquish  its  enemies  and  make
another  step  forward — a  step  towards  Equality.

For,  in  fact,  a  new  revolution — a  revolution  aiming  at
Equality — taken  by  the  people  into  their  own  hands,  was
already  evolving.  And  it  was  the  glory  of  the  people  of  Paris
to  understand  that  in  preparing  to  repel  the  invasion  they
were  not  acting  merely  under  an  impulse  of  national  pride  ;
neither  was  it  a  simple  question  of  preventing  the  restoration
of  royal  despotism.  It  was  a  question  of  consolidating  the
Revolution,  of  bringing  it  to  some  practical  conclusion  for  the
benefit  of  the  mass  of  the  people,  by  inaugurating  a  revolution
as  social  as  it  was  political  in  character ;  and  that  meant
opening,  by  a  supreme  effort  on  the  part  of  the  masses,  a  new
page  in  the  history  of  civilisation.

But  the  middle  classes,  they  also  had  perfectly  divined  this
new  character  which  was  appearing  in  the  Revolution  and  of
which  the  Commune  of  Paris  was  making  itself  the  organ.
Accordingly  the  Assembly,  which  represented  chiefly  the
middle  classes,  worked  with  ardour  to  counteract  the  influence
of  the  Commune.

Already  on  August  1 1,  while  the  smoke  of  its  burning  still


292 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

hung  over  the  Tuileries,  and  the  corpses  still  lay  in  the  court"
yards  of  the  Palace,  the  Assembly  had  commanded  the  election
of  a  new  Directory  of  the  department  which  they  wished  to
oppose  to  the  Commune.  The  Commune  refused  this,  and
the  Assembly  had  to  capitulate ;  but  the  struggle  went  on —
an  inexorable  struggle,  in  which  the  Girondins  of  the  Assembly
tried  at  times  to  detach  the  sections  from  the  Commune,  and
at  times  to  obtain  the  dissolution  of  the  General  Council
elected  revolutionarily  on  August  9.  Contemptible  intrigues
in  the  face  of  an  enemy  that  drew  nearer  to  Paris  each  day,
plundering  shamelessly  as  it  went.

On  the  24th,  the  news  that  Longwy  had  surrendered  without
a  fight  reached  Paris,  and  the  insolence  of  the  royalists  grew
accordingly.  They  chanted  "  Victory."  The  other  towns
would  do  as  Longwy  did,  and  they  were  already  announcing
that  their  German  allies  would  arrive  within  a  week  ;  they
even  prepared  lodging  for  them.  Crowds  of  royalists  gathered
round  the  Temple  and  the  royal  family  joined  them  in  wishing
success  to  the  Germans.  But  the  most  terrible  thing  was,
that  those  who  were  charged  with  the  government  oi  France
had  not  the  courage  to  take  any  measure  to  prevent  Paris
from  being  forced  to  capitulate  like  Longwy.  The  Com-
mission of  Twelve,  which  represented  the  pivot  of  action  in
the  Assembly,  fell  into  consternation.  And  the  Girondin
Ministry — Roland,  Claviere,  Servan  and  the  others — were  of
the  opinion  that  it  was  necessary  to  fly  and  withdraw  to  Blois,
or  else  to  Southern  France,  and  leave  the  revolutionary  people  of
Paris  to  the  fury  of  the  Austrians,  of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,
and  the  emigres.  "  The  deputies  were  already  flying  one  by
one,"  *  and  the  Commune  openly  came  to  complain  of  it  to
the  Assembly.  This  was  adding  baseness  to  treachery,  and  of
all  the  ministers,  Danton  alone  was  opposed  to  it  absolutely.

It  was  only  the  revolutionary  sections  and  the  Commune
who  understood  that  victory  must  be  won  at  all  costs,  and  that
to  win  it,  the  enemy  must  be  struck  on  the  frontiers,  and  the
counter-revolutionists  in  Paris — both  at  the  same  time.

*  Anlard,  Etudes  et  lepons  sur  la  Revolution  frtnfaise,  and  series,
1898,  p.  49.


THE  INTERREGNUM— THE  BETRAYALS 293

This  was  just  what  the  governing  classes  did  not  want  to
admit.  After  the  criminal  court,  appointed  to  try  those  who
were  guilty  of  the  measures  on  August  10,  had  been  installed
with  much  solemnity,  it  soon  became  apparent  that  this
tribunal  did  not  care  to  punish  the  guilty  any  more  than  the
High  Court  of  Orleans,  which  had  become — to  use  Brissot's
expression — "  the  safeguard  of  the  conspirators."  It  sacri-
ficed at  first  two  or  three  scapegoats  for  Louis  XVI.,  but
immediately  after  it  acquitted  one  of  the  most  important  of
the  conspirators,  the  ex-minister  Montmorin,  as  well  as  Desson-
ville,  who  was  implicated  in  d'Angremont's  conspiracy,  and
it  hesitated  about  punishing  Bachmann,  the  general  in  com-
mand of  the  Swiss.  After  that,  there  was  nothing  further  to
be  expected  from  it.

An  attempt  has  been  made  by  some  writers  to  represent
the  population  of  Paris  as  composed  of  cannibals,  greedy  for
blood,  who  became  furious  when  they  saw  a  victim  escaping
from  them.  This  is  absolutely  false.  What  the  people  under-
stood by  these  acquittals  was,  that  the  governing  class  did  not
wish  to  bring  to  light  the  conspiracies  that  had  been  hatched
in  the  Tuileries,  because  they  knew  how  many  of  themselves,
would  be  implicated,  and  because  these  conspiracies  were  still
going  on.  Marat,  who  was  well  informed,  was  right  in  saying
that  the  Assembly  was  afraid  of  the  people,  and  that  it  would
not  have  been  displeased  if  Lafayette  had  come  with  his  army
to  restore  royalty.

The  discoveries  made  three  months  later,  when  Gamain
informed  about  the  existence  of  the  iron  cupboard  containing
the  secret  papers  of  Louis  XVI.,  have  in  fact  proved  this.
Royalty's  strength  lay  in  the  Assembly.

Thereupon  the  people,  seeing  that  it  was  absolutely  impos-
sible to  establish  the  responsibilities  of  each  one  of  the  mon-
archist conspirators,  and  realising  the  danger  whicL,these  con-
spirators presented  in  view  of  the  German  invasion,  decided
to  strike  indiscriminately  at  all  those  who  had  occupied  posts
of  trust  at  the  Court,  and  who  were  considered  dangerous  by
the  sections,  as  well  as  those  at  whose  houses  arms  might  be
found  concealed.  To  do  this,  the  sections  compelled  the


294 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Commune  and  the  Commune  compelled  Danton,  who  had
filled  the  post  of  Minister  of  Justice  since  August  10,  to  order
a  general  search  to  be  made  throughout  Paris,  in  order  to  seize
the  arms  concealed  in  the  houses  of  the  royalists  and  priests,
and  to  arrest  those  who  were  most  suspected  of  connivance
with  the  invading  enemy.  The  Assembly  had  to  submit  and
issue  the  search-warrants.

The  search  for  arms  took  place  on  the  night  of  the  29th
and  3Oth,  and  the  Commune  displayed  in  it  a  vigour  which
struck  terror  into  the  conspirators.  On  the  afternoon  of
August  29,  Paris  seemed  dead,  a  prey  to  gloomy  terror.  It
having  been  forbidden  for  any  one  to  go  out  after  six  o'clock
in  the  evening,  all  the  streets,  by  nightfall,  were  in  the  posses-
sion of  the  patrols,  sixty  strong,  each  man  armed  with  a  sabre
or  an  improvised  pike.  Towards  one  o'clock,  in  the  night,  the
searchings  began  throughout  Paris.  The  patrols  entered  every
apartment,  looking  for  arms  and  taking  away  those  which  they
found  in  the  houses  of  royalists.

Nearly  three  thousand  men  were  arrested,  nearly  two  thou-
sand muskets  were  seized.  Sometimes  the  search  lasted  for
hours,  but  no  one  could  complain  about  the  disappearance
of  any  article  of  value,  whilst  at  the  Eudistes' — priests  who
had  refused  to  take  the  Oath  of  the  Constitution — all  the  silver
vessels  which  had  disappeared  from  the  Sainte-Chapelle  were
found  hidden  in  the  fountains.

The  next  day  the  greater  number  of  the  persons  arrested
were  released  by  order  of  the  Commune  or  on  the  demand  of
the  sections.  As  to  those  who  were  kept  in  prison,  it  is  highly
probable  that  a  sorting  of  these  would  have  been  made  and
that  summary  courts  would  have  been  formed  to  try  them —
if  events  had  not  been  precipitated  at  the  seat  of  war  and  in
Paris  itself.

While  all  Paris  was  arming  itself  at  the  vigorous  appeal  of
the  Commune ;  while  on  every  public  place  "  altars  to  the
country  "  were  erected,  before  which  the  youth  of  Paris  was
enrolled,  and  upon  which  citizens,  rich  and  poor,  laid  their
offerings  to  the  country  ;  while  the  Commune  and  the  sections
were  displaying  an  energy  truly  astounding  in  the  equipment


THE  INTERREGNUM—THE  BETRAYALS 295

and  arming  of  60,000  volunteers  for  the  frontier,  and  although
everything  and  all  things  were  lacking  for  this  purpose,  never-
theless they  had  succeeded  in  despatching  two  thousand  every
day — the  Assembly  chose  this  very  moment  to  attack  the
Commune.  Upon  the  report  of  the  Girondin,  Guadet,  it
issued  on  August  30  a  decree  ordering  the  instant  dissolution
of  the  General  Council  of  the  Commune  and  new  elections.

If  the  Commune  had  obeyed,  it  would  have  meant  disorga-
nising at  a  blow,  to  the  advantage  of  both  the  royalists  and
the  Austrians,  the  organisation  and  the  despatch  of  the  volun-
teers—the only  chance  there  was  for  repelling  the  invasion  and
for  vanquishing  royalty.  It  is  evident  that  the  only  reply  which
could  be  given  to  this  by  the  Revolution  was  to  refuse  to  obey,
and  to  declare  the  instigators  of  this  measure  to  be  traitors.
This  is  what  the  Commune  did  a  few  days  later  by  ordering
a  search  to  be  made  at  the  houses  of  Roland  and  Brissot.  As
to  Marat,  he  frankly  demanded  the  extermination  of  those
traitorous  legislators.

The  same  day  the  Criminal  Court  acquitted  Montmorin —
and  this,  having  learned  a  few  days  before,  by  the  trial  of
d'Angremont,  that  the  royalist  conspirators,  well  paid,  en-
rolled, divided  into  brigades  and  subject  to  a  central  com-
mittee, were  only  awaiting  the  signal  to  appear  in  the
streets  and  attack  the  patriots  in  Paris  and  in  every  town  of
the  provinces.

Two  days  later,  on  September  I,  there  came  a  new  revela-
tion. The  official  paper  of  the  Girondist  Ministry,  the  Moni-
Uury  published  a  "  Plan  of  the  forces  joined  against  France  " —
received,  so  they  said,  from  a  trustworthy  source  in  Germany  ;
and  in  this  plan  it  was  stated  that,  while  the  Duke  of  Brunswick
was  righting  the  patriot  armies,  the  King  of  Prussia  was  to
march  straight  upon  Paris ;  that  after  he  had  made  himself
master  of  the  city,  the  inhabitants  would  be  divided  into  two
sections — the  revolutionists  and  the  royalists,  and  all  the  revo-
lutionists would  be  put  to  death ;  that  in  case  a  town  could
not  be  taken,  it  would  be  set  on  fire — "  Deserts  are  preferable
to  people  in  revolt,"  the  leagued  kings  had  already  said  in  their
manifesto.  And,  as  if  to  confirm  this  plan,  Guadet  discoursed


296 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

to  the  Assembly  about  the  great  conspiracy  discovered  in  the
town  of  Grenoble  and  its  environs.  In  the  house  of  a  certain
Monnier,  an  agent  of  the  emigres,  a  list  of  more  than  a  hundred
local  leaders  of  the  conspiracy  had  been  seized,  and  these
leaders  reckoned  on  the  support  of  twenty-five  to  thirty
thousand  men.  The  country  districts  of  the  Deux-Sevres
and  those  of  the  Morbihan  had  begun  an  insurrection  as  soon
as  they  had  heard  of  the  surrender  of  Longwy  :  that  was
actually  included  in  the  plan  of  the  royalists  and  of  Rome.

The  same  day,  in  the  afternoon,  news  came  that  Verdun
was  besieged,  and  every  one  understood  that  this  town  was
going  to  surrender,  like  Longwy ;  that  then  nothing  more
would  remain  to  check  a  rapid  march  of  the  Prussians  on
Paris  ;  and  that  the  Assembly  would  indeed  either  quit  Paris,
leaving  it  to  the  enemy,  or  would  treat  for  the  restoration  of
the  King  to  the  throne  and  give  him  full  powers  to  satisfy  his
vengeance  by  the  extermination  of  the  patriots.

Finally,  on  this  very  day,  September  I,  the  minister  Roland
issued  an  address  to  the  administrative  bodies,  which  was  stuck
up  on  the  walls  of  Paris,  and  in  which  he  spoke  of  a  vast  con-
spiracy of  the  royalists  to  prevent  the  free  circulation  of  food-
stuffs. Nevers  and  Lyons  were  already  suffering  from  it.*

Thereupon  the  Commune  closed  the  barriers,  and  ordered
the  tocsin  to  be  rung  and  the  alarm-gun  to  be  fired.  In  4
strongly  worded  proclamation,  it  requested  all  the  volunteers
who  were  prepared  to  start  to  sleep  that  night  upon  the  Champ-
de-Mars,  so  as  to  be  ready  to  march  early  the  next  day.

And  at  the  same  time  a  furious  cry  of  "  Let  us  rush  the
prisons !  "  rang  throughout  Paris.  There  lay  the  conspirators
who  were  only  waiting  for  the  coming  of  the  Germans  to  put
Paris  to  fire  and  sword.  Some  of  the  sections,  Poissonni£re,
Postes,  Luxembourg,  voted  that  these  conspirators  should  be
put  to  death.  "  We  must  finish  with  them  to-day !  " — and
push  on  the  Revolution  in  a  new  path.

*  Granier  de  Cassagnac,  Histoire  des  Girondins  tt  des  massacres  de
Septembre  (Paris,  1860).


CHAPTER  XXXV
THE  SEPTEMBER  DAYS

People  roused  to  fury — Massacres  at  Abbaye  prison — Com-
mune tries  to  put  an  end  to  massacres — Massacres  continue —
Attitude  of  Girondins — Explanation  of  massacres — Address
of  Assembly  to  people — End  of  massacres

THE  tocsin  sounding  all  over  Paris,  the  drums  beating  in
the  streets,  the  alarum-gun,  the  reports  of  which  rang  out
every  quarter  of  an  hour,  the  songs  of  the  volunteers  setting
out  for  the  frontier,  all  contributed  that  Sunday,  September
2,  to  rouse  the  anger  of  the  people  to  fury.

Soon  after  midday,  crowds  began  to  gather  around  the
prisons.  Some  priests  who  were  being  transferred  from  the
Town  Hall  to  the  Abbaye  prison,  to  the  number  of  twenty-
five,*  in  closed  carriages,  were  assailed  in  the  streets  by  the
Federates  from  Marseilles  or  Avignon.  Four  priests  were
killed  before  they  reached  the  prison.  Two  were  massacred
on  arriving  there,  at  the  gate.  The  others  were  admitted  ;
but  just  as  they  were  being  put  through  some  simple  form  of
interrogation,  a  multitude,  armed  with  pikes,  swords  and
sabres,  forced  the  door  of  the  prison  and  killed  all  the  priests
with  the  exception  of  Abbe*  Picard,  head  of  the  Deaf  and
Dumb  Institution,  and  his  assistant.

This  was  how  the  massacres  began  at  the  Abbaye — a  prison
which  had  a  specially  bad  reputation  in  the  quarter  where  it
Stood.  The  crowd,  which  had  formed  around  this  prison,

*  Sixteen,  says  Meh6e  fiis  (Felhemesi,  La  viriti  toute  entiere.  sur  les
truis  acteurs  de  la  journtc  du  2  septembre,  et  sur  plusieurs  journtes  et
nuits  secretes  des  tnciens  comiUs  de  gouvernement,  Paris,  1794).  I
maintain  the  exact  orthography  of  the  printed  title. .  "  Felhemesi  "
is  the  anagram  of  Mehee  fils.

397


298 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

composed  chiefly  of  small  tradespeople  living  in  that  part  of
the  town,  demanded  that  all  the  royalists  arrested  since  August
10  should  be  put  to  death.  It  was  known  in  the  quarter  that
gold  was  plentiful  among  them,  that  they  feasted  and  received
their  wives  and  friends  quite  freely.  The  prisoners  had  made
illuminations  after  the  defeat  of  the  French  army  at  Mons,
and  sang  songs  of  victory  after  the  taking  of  Longwy.  They
insulted  the  passers-by  from  behind  the  bars  and  promised
the  immediate  arrival  of  the  Prussians  and  the  slaughter  of  the
revolutionists.  The  whole  of  Paris  was  talking  of  the  plots
concocted  in  the  prisons,  of  arms  introduced,  and  it  was
widely  known  that  the  prisons  had  become  actual  manufac-
tories of  false  paper-money  and  false  drafts  on  the  "  Maison
de  Secours,"  by  which  they  were  trying  to  ruin  the  public
credit.

All  this  was  said  and  repeated  among  the  crowds  that
gathered  round  the  Abbaye,  La  Force,  and  the  Conciergerie.
Soon  these  crowds  forced  the  doors  and  began  killing  the
officers  of  the  Swiss  regiments,  the  King's  guards,  the  priests
who  were  to  have  been  deported  because  of  their  refusal  to
take  the  Oath  to  the  Constitution,  and  the  royalist  conspirators,
arrested  after  August  10.

The  spontaneity  of  this  attack  seems  to  have  struck  every
one  by  its  unexpectedness.  Far  from  having  been  arranged
by  the  Commune  and  Danton,  as  the  royalist  historians  are
pleased  to  declare,*  the  massacres  were  so  little  foreseen  that
the  Commune  had  to  take  measures  in  the  greatest  haste  to
protect  the  Temple,  and  to  save  those  who  were  imprisoned
for  debt  or  for  arrears  of  payments,  as  well  as  the  ladies  attend-
ing on  Marie-Antoinette.  These  ladies  could  only  be  saved
under  cover  of  the  night  by  the  commissioners  of  the  Com-

*  They  quote,  to  prove  this,  that  persons  were  liberated,  between
August  30  and  September  2,  thanks  to  the  intervention  of  Danton
and  other  revolutionary  personages,  and  say :  "  You  see  very  well
how  they  saved  their  friends !  "  They  forget,  however,  to  say  that
out  of  the  three  thousand  persons  arrested  on  the  3Oth,  more  than  two
thousand  were  released.  It  was  sufficient  that  any  patriot  of  the
prisoners'  section  should  claim  his  release.  For  the  part  played  by
Danton  in  the  September  days,  see  the  careful  study  of  A.  Aulard,
in  his  Etudes  et  lefons  sur  la  Revolution  franpaise,  1893-1897,  jwl  series.


THE  SEPTEMBER  DAYS  299

mune,  who  carried  out  their  tasks  with  much  difficulty  and
at  the  risk  of  perishing  themselves  by  the  hands  of  the  crowds
that  surrounded  the  prisons,  or  were  stationed  in  the  neigh-
bouring streets.*

As  soon  as  the  massacres  began  at  the  Abbaye,  and  it  is
known  that  they  began  at  about  half -past  two  A.M.,f  the
Commune  immediately  took  measures  to  prevent  them.  It
immediately  notified  them  to  the  Assembly,  which  appointed
Commissioners  to  speak  to  the  people  ;  J  and  at  the  sitting  of  the
General  Council  of  the  Commune,  which  opened  in  the  after-
noon, Manuel,  the  attorney,  was  already,  by  six  o'clock,  giving  an
account  of  his  fruitless  efforts  to  stop  the  massacres.  "  He
stated  that  the  efforts  of  the  National  Assembly's  twelve
commissioners,  his  own,  and  those  of  his  colleagues  from  the

*  Madame  de  Tourzel,  the  Dauphin's  governess,  and  her  young
daughter  Pauline,  three  of  the  Queen's  waiting- women,  Madame  de
Lamballe  and  her  waiting- woman,  had  been  transferred  from  the
Temple  to  La  Force,  and  from  this  prison  they  were  all  saved,  except
Madame  de  Lamballe,  by  the  Commissioners  of  the  Commune.  At
half- past  two  in  the  night  of  September  2  and  3,  these  Commissioners,
Truchot,  Tallien  and  Guiraud,  came  to  render  an  account  of  their
efforts  to  the  Assembly.  At  the  prison  of  La  Force  and  that  of  Sainte-
Pelagie,  they  had  taken  out  all  the  persons  detained  for  debt.  After
reporting  to  the  Commune,  about  midnight,  Truchot  returned  to  La
Force,  to  take  out  all  the  women.  "  I  was  able  to  take  out  twenty-
four,"  he  said.  "  We  have  placed  especially  under  our  protection
Mademoiselle  de  Tourzel  and  Madame  Sainte-Brice.  .  .  .  For  our
own  safety  we  withdrew,  for  they  were  threatening  us  too.  We  have
conducted  those  ladies  to  the  section  of  the  '  Rights  of  Man,'  to  stay
there  until  they  are  tried  "  (Buchez  and  Roux,  xvii.  p.  353).  These
words  of  Truchot  are  absolutely  trustworthy,  because  as  we  know,
by  the  narrative  of  Pauline  de  Tourzel,  with  what  difficulty  the  com-
missioner of  the  Commune  (she  did  not  know  who  he  was,  and  spoke
of  him  as  a  stranger)  succeeded  in  getting  her  through  the  streets  near
the  prison,  full  of  people  watching  to  see  that  none  of  the  prisoners
were  removed.  Madame  de  Lamballe,  too,  was  about  to  be  saved  by
Petion,  the  mayor,  but  some  forces  unknown  opposed  it.  Emissaries
of  the  Duke  of  Orl6ans  are  mentioned,  who  desired  her  death,  and  names
even  are  given.  However,  one  thing  only  is  certain  ;  there  were  so
many  influential  persons  who,  since  the  Diamond  Necklace  affair,  were
interested  in  the  silence  of  this  confidante  of  the  Queen's,  that  the
impossibility  of  saving  her  need  not  surprise  us.

I  Mon  agonie  de  trente-huit  heures,  by  Jourgniac  de  Saint-Meard.

I  Bazire,  Dussaulx,  Francois  de  Neufchateau,  the  famous  Girondin
Isnard,  and  Laquinio  were  among  the  number.  Bazire  invited  Chabot,
who  was  beloved  in  the  faubourgs,  to  join  them  (Louis  Blanc,  quarto
edition,  ii.  p.  19).


300 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

municipality,  had  been  ineffectual  to  save  the  criminals  from
death."  At  the  evening  sitting  the  Commune  received  the
report  of  its  commissioners  sent  to  La  Force  ;  and  decided  that
they  should  be  sent  there  again  to  calm  the  minds  of  the  people.*
During  the  night  of  the  2nd  and  3rd,  the  Commune  had
even  ordered  Santerre,  commandant  of  the  National  Guard,
to  send  detachments  to  stop  the  massacres.  But  the  National
Guard  did  not  wish  to  interfere  ;  otherwise,  it  is  clear  that  the
battalions  of  the  moderate  sections  would  have  gone.  An
opinion  was  evidently  forming  in  Paris  that  for  the  National
Guard  to  march  upon  the  crowds  would  have  been  to  kindle
civil  war,  at  the  very  moment  when  the  enemy  was  but  a  few
days  distant,  and  when  union  was  most  necessary.  "  They
divide  you  ;  they  disseminate  hatred ;  they  want  to  kindle
civil  war,"  said  the  Assembly  in  its  proclamation  of  September
3,  in  which  it  called  on  the  people  to  stand  united.  Under
the  circumstances  there  was  no  other  weapon  but  persuasion.
But  to  the  exhortations  of  the  Commune's  envoys,  who  were
trying  to  stop  the  massacres,  a  man  of  the  people  aptly  replied
at  the  Abbaye  by  asking  Manuel,  "  If  those  rascals  of  Prussians
and  Austrians  entered  Paris,  would  they  try  to  distinguish
between  the  innocent  and  guilty."  f  And  another,  or

*  See  the  minutes  of  the  Commune,  quoted  by  Buchez  and  Roux,
xvii.  p.  368.  Tallien,  in  his  report  to  the  Assembly,  which  was  given
in  ^later  during  the  night,  confirms  the  words  of  Manuel :  "  The  pro-
curator of  the  Commune,"  said  he,  "  went  first  to  the  Abbaye  and
used  every  means  suggested  to  him  by  his  zeal  and  humanity.  He
could  not  make  any  impression,  and  saw  several  victims  killed  at  his
feet.  He  himself  was  in  danger  of  his  life,  and  they  were  obliged  to
force  him  away  for  fear  that  he  should  fall  a  victim  to  his  zeal."  At
midnight,  when  the  people  went  over  to  La  Force,  "  our  commissioners,"
says  Tallien,  "  followed  them  there,  but  could  not  gain  anything.  Som«
deputations  came  after  them,  and  when  we  left  to  come  here,  another
deputation  was  then  going  thither."

f  "  Tell  me,  Mr.  Citizen,  if  those  rascals  of  Prussians  and  Austrians
came  to  Paris,  would  they  too  seek  out  the  guilty  ?  Would  they  not
strike  right  and  left,  as  the  Swiss  did  on  August  10  ?  As  for  me,  I  am
no  orator,  I  put  no  one  to  sleep,  and  I  tell  you  I  am  a  father  of  a  family  ;
I  have  a  wife  and  five  children  whom  I  want  to  leave  here  in  the  keeping
of  the  section,  so  that  I  can  go  and  fight  the  enemy,  but  I  don't  intend
that  these  scoundrels  who  are  in  prison,  for  whom  the  other  scoundrels
are  coming  to  open  the  doors,  shall  be  able  to  go  and  slaughter  my
wife  and  children."  I  quote  from  Felhemesi  (Mehee  fils),  La  veriti  toute
entiere,  &c.


THE  SEPTEMBER  DAYS  301

perhaps  the  same,  added  :  "  This  is  Montmorin's  blood  and
his  companions !  We  are  at  our  post,  go  back  to  yours ;  if
all  those  whom  we  set  up  to  do  justice  had  done  their  duty,  we
should  not  be  here."  *  This  is  what  the  people  of  Paris  and
all  the  revolutionists  understood  thoroughly  that  day.

In.  any  case  the  Watch  Committee  of  the  Commune,t  as
soon  as  they  learned  the  result  of  Manuel's  mission  on  the
afternoon  of  September  2,  published  the  following  appeal  :
"  In  the  Name  of  the  People.  Comrades,— It  is  enjoined  upon
you  to  try  all  the  prisoners  in  the  Abbaye,  without  distinction,
with  the  exception  of  the  Abbe  Lenfant,  whom  you  shall  put  in
a  secure  place.  At  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  September  2.  (Signed  :
Panis,  Sergent,  Administrators.)  "

A  provisional  tribunal,  composed  of  twelve  jurors  chosen
by  the  people,  was  at  once  set  up,  and  Usher  Maillard,  so  well
known  in  Paris  since  July  14  and  October  5,  1789,  was  ap-
pointed president  of  it.  A  similar  tribunal  was  improvised  at
La  Force  by  two  or  three  members  of  the  Commune,  and
these  two  tribunals  set  themselves  to  save  as  many  of  the
prisoners  as  was  possible.  Thus  Maillard  succeeded  in  saving
Cazotte,  who  was  gravely  compromised, £  and  Sombreuil,
known  to  be  a  declared  enemy  of  the  Revolution.  Taking
advantage  of  the  presence  of  their  daughters,  Mademoiselle

*  Pnidhomme,  in  his  journal,  gives  in  these  words  the  reply  made
by  a  man  of  the  people,  on  the  first  visit  to  the  Abbaye  by  a  deputation
from  the  Legislative  Assembly  and  from  the  municipality.

f  The  Watch  Committee  of  the  Commune,  which  had  taken  the
place  of  the  preceding  administration,  and  was  composed  at  first  of
fifteen  members  of  the  municipal  police,  had  been  reorganised  by  a
decree  of  the  General  Council  of  the  Commune  on  August  30  :  it  was
then  formed  of  four  members,  Panis,  Sergent,  Duplain  and  Sourdeuil,
who,  with  the  authorisation  of  the  Council,  and  "  seeing  the  critical
state  of  circumstances  and  the  divers  and  important  works  to  which
it  was  necessary  to  devote  themselves,"  added  on  September  2  seven
other  members :  Marat,  Deforgues,  Lenfant,  Leclerc,  Durfort,  Cailly
and  Guermeur  (Buchez  and  Roux,  vol.  xvii.  pp.  405,  433  ;  vol.  xviii.
pp.  1 86, 187).  Michelet,  who  saw  the  original  document,  speaks  only  of
six ;  he  does  not  mention  Durfort ;  Robespierre  was  sitting  on  the
General  Council,  Marat  took  part  in  it  "  as  journalist  " — the  Commune
having  decreed  that  a  gallery  should  be  erected  in  the  Council  Chamber
for  a  journalist  (Michelet,  vol.  vii.  ch.  iv.).  Danton  tried  to  reconcile
the  Commune  with  the  executive  of  the  Assembly ;  that  is  to  say,
with  the  Ministry  of  which  he  was  a  member,
i  J  Michelet,  vol.  vii.  ch.  v.


302 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Cazotte  and  Mademoiselle  Sombreuil,  who  had  obtained  leave
to  share  their  fathers'  imprisonment,  and  also  the  advanced
age  of  Sombreuil,  he  succeeded  in  having  them  acquitted.
Later  on,  in  a  document  which  Granier  de  Cassagnac  *  has
reproduced  in  facsimile,  Maillard  could  say  with  pride  that
in  this  way  he  saved  the  lives  of  forty-three  persons.  Needless
to  say  that  "  the  glass  of  blood,"  said  to  have  been  drunk  by
Mademoiselle  Sombreuil  to  save  her  father,  is  one  of  the
infamous  inventions  of  the  royalist  writers.!

At  La  Force  prison  there  were  also  many  acquittals,  and,
according  to  Tallien,  there  was  only  one  woman  who  perished,
Madame  de  Lamballe.  Every  acquittal  was  hailed  with  cries
of  "  Vive  la  Nation  /  "  and  the  acquitted  person  was  escorted
to  his  residence  by  men  of  the  crowd  with  every  mark  of
sympathy ;  but  his  escort  refused  absolutely  to  accept  money
from  either  the  man  set  at  liberty  or  his  family.  Thus  they
acquitted  the  royalists  against  whom  there  were  no  established
facts,  as,  for  example,  the  brother  of  the  minister  Bertrand
de  Molleville;  and  even  a  bitter  enemy  of  the  Revolution,
Weber,  the  Austrian,  who  was  foster-brother  to  the  queen  ;
and  they  conducted  them  back  in  triumph,  with  transports  of
joy,  to  the  houses  of  their  relations  or  friends.

At  the  Carmelite  Convent,  priests  began  to  be  imprisoned
from  August  II — among  them  being  the  famous  Archbishop
of  Aries,  who  was  accused  of  having  been  the  cause  of  the
massacre  of  the  patriots  in  that  town.  All  of  them  would
have  been  deported  but  for  what  happened  on  September  2.
A  certain  number  of  men  armed  with  sabres  broke  into  the
convent  that  day  and,  after  a  summary  trial,  killed  the  arch-
bishop, as  well  as  a  great  many  of  the  priests  who  refused  to
take  the  civic  oath.  Several,  however,  saved  themselves  by
climbing  over  a  wall ;  others  were  saved,  as  is  shown  in  the
narrative  of  the  Abbe  Berthelet  de  Barbot,  by  members  of
the  Luxembourg  section,  and  by  some  pikemen  who  were
on  duty  in  the  prison.

*  Histoire  des  Girondins  et  des  massacres  de  Septembre,  2  vols.,  1860.
| Vide  Louis  Blanc,  Book  viii.  ch.  ii. ;  L.  Combes, Episodes et
euriosites  rtvolutionnaires,  1872.


THE  SEPTEMBER  DAYS  303

The  massacres  continued  also  on  the  3rd,  and  in  the  evening
the  Watch  Committee  of  the  Commune  sent  out  to  the
departments,  in  envelopes  of  the  Ministry  of  Justice,  a  circular,
drawn  up  by  Marat,  in  which  the  Assembly  was  attacked,  the
events  recounted,  and  the  departments  recommended  to
imitate  Paris.

The  tumult  among  the  people,  however,  subsided,  Saint-
Meard  says,  and  on  the  3rd,  about  eight  o'clock,  he  heard
several  voices  calling  out :  "  Mercy,  mercy  for  those  who
remain  !  "  Moreover,  only  a  few  political  prisoners  were  left
in  the  prisons.  But  then  there  happened  what  must  needs
happen.  With  those  who  had  attacked  the  prison  on  principle,
there  began  to  mingle  other  elements — the  dubious  elements.
And  finally  there  appeared  what  Michelet  has  aptly  called
**  the  fury  of  purification  " — the  desire  to  purge  Paris,  not
only  of  royalist  conspirators,  but  also  of  coiners,  the  forgers  of
bills  of  exchange,  swindlers,  and  even  the  prostitutes,  who
were,  they  said,  all  royalists.  On  the  3rd  the  thieves  in  the
Grand  Chatelet  and  the  convicts  at  the  Bernardins  had
already  been  massacred,  and  on  the  4th  a  band  of  men  went
out  to  kill  at  the  Salpetriere,  and  at  Bicetre,  even  at  the  "  House
of  Correction  "  at  Bicetre,  which  the  people  ought  to  have
respected  as  a  place  of  suffering  for  the  poor,  like  themselves,
especially  the  children.  At  last  the  Commune  succeeded  in
putting  an  end  to  these  massacres,  on  the  4th,  according  to
Maton  de  la  Varenne.*

More  than  a  thousand  persons  in  all  perished,  of  whom
two  hundred  and  two  were  priests,  twenty-six  of  the  Royal
Guards,  about  thirty  of  the  Swiss  belonging  to  the  Staff,  and
more  than  three  hundred  prisoners  under  the  common  law,
some  of  whom,  imprisoned  in  the  Conciergerie,  were  fabri-
cating during  their  detention  false  paper-money.  Maton  de  la
Varenne,  who  has  given  t  an  alphabetical  list  of  persons  killed
during  those  September  days,  makes  a  total  of  1086,  plus

*  M  .  i  .  de  la  Varenne,  Histoire  particuliere  des  evenements  qui
ont  eu  lieu  en  France  pendant  les  moi  de  j  uin,  de  juillet,  d'aotit  et  de
septembre,  et  qui  ont  opere  let  chute  du  trdne  royal  (Paris,  1806).  There
were  a  few  more  isolated  massacres  on  the  5th,

t  Histoire  particuliere  t  pp.  419-460.


304 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

three  unknown  persons  who  perished  accidentally.  Upon
which  the  royalist  historians  embroidered  their  romances,  and
wrote  about  8000  and  even  12,852  killed.*

All  the  historians  of  the  Great  Revolution,  beginning  with
Buchez  and  Roux,  have  given  the  opinions  of  various  well-
known  revolutionists  concerning  these  massacres,  and  one
striking  trait  stands  out  in  the  numerous  quotations  which
they  have  published.  This  is,  that  the  Girondins,  who  later
on  made  use  of  the  September  days  to  attack  violently  and
persistently  the  "  Mountain,"  in  no  wise  departed  during
those  days  from  this  very  attitude  of  laisser  faire  with  which
later  on  they  reproached  Danton,  Robespierre  and  the  Com-
mune. The  Commune  alone,  in  its  General  Council  and  in
its  Watch  Committee,  took  measures,  more  or  less  efficacious,
to  stop  the  massacres,  or,  at  least,  to  circumscribe  and  legalise
them,  when  they  saw  that  it  was  impossible  to  prevent  them.
The  others  acted  feebly,  or  thought  that  they  ought  not  to
interfere,  and  the  majority  approved  after  the  thing  was  done.
This  proves  up  to  what  point,  in  spite  of  the  cry  of  outraged
humanity  necessarily  raised  by  these  massacres,  it  was  generally
understood  that  they  were  the  inevitable  consequence  of
August  10,  and  of  the  political  equivocations  of  the  governing
classes  themselves  during  the  twenty  days  which  followed
the  taking  of  the  Tuileries.

Roland,  in  his  letter  of  September  3,  so  often  quoted,  spoke
of  the  massacres  in  terms  which  recognised  their  necessity.!

*  Peltier,  arch-royalist  writer  and  liar,  giving  every  detail,  put  the
figure  at  1005,  but  he  added  that  there  had  been  some  killed  at  the
Bicetre  and  in  the  streets,  which  permitted  him  to  bring  the  total  up  to
8000  !  (Dernier  tableau  de  Paris,  ou  recit  historique  de  la  Revolution  du
10  aout,  2  vols.,  London,  1792-1793).  On  this  Buchez  and  Roux  havo
justly  remarked  that  "  Peltier  is  the  only  one  to  say  that  people  wer«
killed  in  other  places  besides  the  prisons,"  in  contradiction  to  all  his
contemporaries.

f  "  I  know  that  revolutions  are  not  to  be  judged  by  ordinary  rules  ;
but  I  know,  also,  that  the  power  which  makes  them  must  soon  take
its  place  under  the  aegis  of  the  law,  if  total  annihilation  is  not  desired.
The  anger  of  the  people  and  the  beginning  of  the  insurrection  are  com-
parable to  the  action  of  a  torrent  that  overthrows  the  obstacles  that  no
other  power  could  have  annihilated,  and  the  ravage  and  devastation
which  the  flood  will  carry  far  onward  if  it  does  not  soon  return  to  its
channel.  .  .  .  Yesterday  was  a  day  of  events  over  which  perhaps  we


THE  SEPTEMBER  DAYS  305

The  essential  thing  for  him  was  to  develop  the  theory  which
was  to  become  the  favourite  theory  of  the  Girondins — namely,
that  if  disorder  was  necessary  before  August  10,  all  must  now
return  again  to  order.  In  general,  the  Girondins,  as  Buchez
and  Roux  *  have  well  said,  "  were  chiefly  preoccupied  with
themselves.  .  .  .  They  saw  with  regret  the  power  passing
out  of  their  hands  into  those  of  their  adversaries  .  .  .  but
they  found  no  motive  for  condemning  the  movement  that
had  been  made  .  .  .  they  did  not  deny  that  it  alone  could
save  the  national  independence,  and  guard  themselves  from
the  vengeance  of  the  army  directed  by  the  emigres"

The  chief  newspapers,  such  as  the  Moniteur  and  Prud-
homme's  Revolutions  de  Paris,  approved,  whilst  the  others,
such  as  the  Annales  patriotiques  and  the  Chronique  de  Paris,
and  even  Brissot  in  the  Patriots  ]ran$aisy  limited  themselves
to  a  few  cold  and  indifferent  words  concerning  those  days.
As  to  the  royalist  press,  it  is  evident  that  they  seized  upon
these  facts  to  put  in  circulation  for  a  whole  century  the  most
fantastic  tales.  We  shall  not  take  upon  ourselves  to  contradict
them.  But  there  is  an  error  of  appreciation  deserving  of
reference,  which  is  to  be  found  among  the  republican  historians.

It  is  true  that  the  number  of  those  who  did  the  killing  in
the  prisons  did  not  exceed  more  than  three  hundred  men,
wherefore  all  the  republicans  have  been  accused  by  some
writers  of  cowardice  for  not  having  put  a  stop  to  it.  Nothing

ought  to  draw  a  veil ;  I  know  that  the  people,  terrible  in  their  ven-
geance, had  in  it  some  kind  of  justice  ;  they  did  not  take  as  their
victims  every  one  who  came  in  the  way  of  their  fury,  they  directed
it  upon  those  whom  they  believed  to  have  been  too  long  spared  by  the
sword  of  justice,  and  who,  the  peril  of  circumstances  persuaded  them,
must  be  immolated  without  delay.  But  the  safety  of  Paris  demands
that  all  the  powers  shall  return  at  once  to  their  respective  limits."

*  P.  397.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Girondist  ministers  knew
very  well  what  was  going  on  in  the  prisons.  We  know  that  Servan,
the  Minister  of  War,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  2nd,  went  to  the  Commune,
where  he  had  made  an  appointment  for  eight  o'clock  with  Santerre,
P6tion,  Hebert,  Billaud-Varenne  andothers,  to  discuss  military  measures^
It  is  obvious  that  the  massacres  must  have  been  mentioned  at  the
Commune,  and  that  Roland  was  informed  about  them,  but  that  Servan,
as  well  as  the  others,  thought  that  they  should  attend  to  the  most
pressing  business — the  -war  on  the  frontiers — and  on  no  account  provoke
civil  war  in  Paris,

t;


3o6 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

is,  however,  more  erroneous  than  this  reckoning.  The  number
of  three  or  four  hundred  is  correct.  But  it  is  enough  to  read
the  narratives  of  Weber,  Mademoiselle  de  Tourzel,  Maton
de  la  Varenne  and  others,  to  see  that  if  the  murders  were  the
work  of  a  limited  number  of  men,  there  were  around  each
person  and  in  the  neighbouring  streets  crowds  of  people  who
approved  of  the  massacres,  and  who  would  have  taken  arms
against  any  one  who  might  have  tried  to  prevent  them.  Be-
sides, the  bulletins  of  the  sections,  the  attitude  of  the  National
Guard,  and  the  attitude  even  of  the  best-known  revolutionists,
proved  that  every  one  understood  that  military  intervention
would  have  been  the  signal  for  a  civil  war,  and,  no  matter  to
which  side  the  victory  went,  this  would  have  led  to  massacres
still  more  widespread  and  still  more  terrible  than  those  in  the
prisons.

On  the  other  hand,  Michelet  has  said,  and  his  words  have
been  repeated  since,  that  it  was  fear,  groundless  fear,  always
ferocious,  which  had  inspired  these  massacres.  A  few  hundreds
of  royalists  more  or  less  in  Paris  did  not  mean  danger  for  the
Revolution.  But  to  reason  so  is  to  underrate,  it  seems  to  me,
the  strength  of  the  reaction.  These  few  hundred  royalists  had
on  their  side  the  majority,  the  immense  majority  of  the  well-
to-do  middle  classes,  all  the  aristocracy,  the  Legislative  As-
sembly, the  Directory  of  the  department,  the  greater  number
of  the  justices  of  peace,  and  the  enormous  majority  of  the
officials.  It  was  this  compact  mass  of  elements  opposed  to  the
Revolution  which  was  merely  awaiting  the  approach  of  the
Germans  to  receive  them  with  open  arms,  and  to  inaugurate
with  their  aid  the  counter-revolutionary  Terror,  the  Black
Massacre.  We  have  only  to  remember  the  White  Terror  under
the  Bourbons,  when  they  returned  in  1814  under  the  powerful
protection  of  armed  foreigners.

Besides,  there  is  one  fact  which  is  not  sufficiently  appreciated
by  the  historians,  but  which  sums  up  the  whole  situation,  and
gives  the  true  reason  for  the  movement  of  September  2.

It  was  on  the  morning  of  September  4,  while  the  massacres
were  still  going  on,  that  the  Assembly  decided  at  last,  on  the
motion  of  Chabot,  to  utter  the  word  so  long  awaited  from  the


THE  SEPTEMBER  DAYS  307

legislators  by  the  people.  In  an  address  to  the  French  people,
it  declared  that  respect  for  the  decisions  of  the  future  Con-
vention prevented  its  members  "  from  forestalling  by  their
resolution  what  they  must  expect  from  the  French  nation  " ;
but  that  they  took  now,  as  individuals,  the  oath  which  they
could  not  take  as  representatives  of  the  people  :  "  to  combat
with  all  their  might  both  kings  and  royalty  ! — No  king  ;  capitu-
lation, never  ;  a  foreign  king,  never  /  "  shouted  the  members.
And  as  soon  as  this  address  was  voted,  despite  the  restriction
just  mentioned,  certain  commissioners  of  the  Assembly  went
immediately  with  it  to  the  Sections,  where  these  Commis-
sioners were  promptly  welcomed,  and  the  sections  took  upon
themselves  to  put  an  end  at  once  to  the  massacres.

But  this  address  was  not  voted  in  the  Assembly  before  Marat
had  advised  the  people  to  massacre  the  royalist  knaves  of  the
Legislative  Assembly ;  nor  before  Robespierre  had  denounced
Carra  and  the  Girondins  in  general  as  ready  to  accept  a  foreign
king,  and  the  Commune  had  ordered  the  searching  of  Roland's
and  Brissot's  dwellings.  It  was  on  September  4 — only  on  the
4th — that  the  Girondin  Guadet  invited  the  representatives
to  swear  their  readiness  to  combat  with  all  their  might  both
kings  and  royalties.  If  a  frank  declaration  of  this  kind  had
been  voted  immediately  after  August  10,  and  if  Louis  XVI.
had  been  brought  to  trial  there  and  then,  the  massacres  would
certainly  not  have  taken  place.  The  people  would  have
realised  the  powerlessness  of  the  royalist  conspiracy  from  the
moment  the  Assembly  and  the  Government  declared  their
readiness  to  combat  the  supporters  of  the  throne.

Furthermore,  Robespierre's  suspicions  were  not  pure  fancy.
Condorcet,  the  old  republican,  the  only  representative  in  the
Legislative  Assembly  who  since  1791  had  openly  pronounced
for  the  Republic  while  repudiating  on  his  own  account — but
only  on  his  own  account — all  idea  of  desiring  the  Duke  of
Brunswick  on  the  throne  of  France,  admitted,  however,  in  the
Chronique  de  Paris  that  the  Duke  had  been  mentioned  to  him
sometimes.*  The  fact  is  that  during  those  days  of  interregnum

*  Carra,  the  editor  of  the  Annales  patriotiques,  one  of  the  chief  organs
ol  the  Girondist  party,  mentioned  Brunswick  in  these  terms,  in  the


308 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

several  candidates  for  the  throne  of  France — the  Duke  of
York,  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  the  Duke  of  Chartres  (who  was
the  candidate  of  Dumouriez)  and  the  Duke  of  Brunswick —
Were  undoubtedly  discussed,  not  only  by  those  politicians  who,
like  the  Feuillants,  did  not  want  to  have  a  republic,  but  also
by  those  who,  like  the  Girondins,  did  not  believe  in  the  chances
of  victory  for  France.

In  these  hesitations,  in  this  pusillanimity,  this  want  of
honesty  among  the  statesmen  in  power,  lies  the  true  cause
of  the  despair  which  seized  upon  the  people  of  Paris  on  Sep-
tember 2.

number  dated  July  19,  1792  :  "  He  is  the  greatest  warrior  and  the
cleverest  statesman  in  Europe,  this  Duke  of  Brunswick ;  he  is  very
learned,  very  enlightened,  very  amiable ;  he  wants  but  one  thing,
perhaps — a  crown — to  be,  I  do  not  say  the  greatest  king  on  earth,  but
to  be  the  true  restorer  of  the  liberty  of  Europe.  If  he  comes  to  Paris,
I  wager  that  his  first  step  will  be  to  come  to  the  Jacobins  and  put  on
the  bonnet  rouge."


CHAPTER  XXXVI

THE  CONVENTION—THE  COMMUNE— THE
JACOBINS

Convention  formed — Its  composition — Girondins — "  Moun-
tain " — "  Plain  "  or  "  Marsh  " — Activity  of  sections  since
their  formation — Revolutionary  Commune — Jacobin  Club
and  "  Mountain  " — Jacobins  support  "  Mountain,"  but  oppose
Girondins

ON  September  21,  1792,  the  Convention,  that  Assembly  which
has  been  so  often  represented  as  the  true  type,  the  ideal  of  a
revolutionary  Assembly,  was  at  last  opened.  The  elections
had  been  made  by  all  the  citizens,  both  active  and  passive,  but
still  in  two  degrees,  which  means  that  all  the  citizens  had  first
elected  the  electoral  assemblies,  and  these  had  nominated  the
deputies  to  the  Convention.  Such  a  mode  of  election  was
clearly  in  favour  of  the  wealthy ;  but  as  the  elections  took
place  in  September,  in  the  midst  of  the  general  agitation
resulting  from  the  triumph  of  the  people  on  August  10,  and
many  who  Were  opposed  to  the  Revolution,  being  terrorised  by
the  events  on  September  2,  preferred  not  to  show  themselves
at  all  during  the  elections,  things  were  not  so  bad  as  might
have  been  feared.  In  Paris,  Marat's  list,  containing  all  the
revolutionaries  known  at  the  Cordeliers'  and  Jacobin  Clubs,
was  accepted  in  its  entirety.  The  five  hundred  and  twenty-
five  electors  of  Paris,  who  met  together  on  September  2,  in  the
Club  of  the  Jacobins,  elected  Collot  d'Herbois  and  Robespierre
as  president  and  vice-president,  excluded  from  the  lists  all
those  who  had  signed  the  two  royalist  petitions  known  as  the
Petitions  of  the  Eight  Thousand  and  the  Twenty  Thousand,
and  Toted  for  Marat's  list.

too


310 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  "  moderantist "  element  dominated,  however,  all
the  same  in  the  new  Assembly,  and  Marat  wrote,  after  the
first  sitting,  that,  seeing  the  character  of  the  majority  of  the
delegates,  he  despaired  of  the  salvation  of  France.  He  foresaw
that  their  opposition  to  the  revolutionary  spirit  was  going  to
plunge  the  country  into  endless  struggles  :  "  They  will  end  by
bringing  everything  to  destruction,"  he  said,  "if  the  small
number  of  the  defenders  of  the  people,  who  will  have  to
contend  with  them,  do  not  get  the  upper  hand  and  crush
them."  We  shall  see  presently  how  right  were  his  forebodings.

But  the  events  were  impelling  France  towards  the  Republic,
and  the  inclinations  of  the  people  were  such  that  the  moderant-
ists  of  the  Convention  did  not  dare  to  resist  the  current  which
was  sweeping  away  royalty.  At  its  very  first  sitting  the  Con-
vention declared  unanimously  that  royalty  was  abolished  in
France.  Marseilles,  as  we  have  seen,  and  several  other  pro-
vincial towns  were  already  before  August  10  demanding  a
Republic ;  and  Paris  had  done  so  with  all  solemnity  since  the
first  day  of  the  elections.  The  Jacobin  Club  had  also  decided
at  last,  in  its  sitting  of  August  27,  to  declare  itself  republican,
after  the  publication  of  the  papers  found  in  the  Tuileries.
The  Convention  followed  the  lead  of  Paris.  It  abolished
royalty  at  its  first  sitting  on  September  21,  1792.  The  next
day,  by  a  second  decree,  it  ordained  that  from  this  day  all
public  acts  should  be  dated  from  the  first  year  of  the  Republic.

Three  very  distinct  parties  met  in  the  Convention  :  the
Mountain,  the  Gironde  and  the  Plain,  or  rather  the  Marsh.
The  Girondins,  although  less  than  two  hundred,  dominated.
They  had  already,  in  the  Legislative  Assembly,  furnished  the
King  with  the  Roland  Ministry,  and  they  liked  to  pose  as
"statesmen."  Composed  of  well-educated,  refined  and  keen
politicians,  the  Girondist  party  represented  the  interests  of
the  commercial,  mercantile,  and  propertied  middle  classes,
who  were  coming  to  the  front  very  rapidly  under  the  new
regime.  With  the  support  of  the  Moderates  of  the  Marsh,
the  Girondins  were  at  first  the  strongest,  and  it  was  from
among  them  the  first  republican  Ministry  was  chosen.  Danton
alone,  of  the  Ministry  that  had  come  into  power  on  August  10,


THE  CONVENTION  311

had  represented  the  popular  revolution  :  but  he  sent  in  his
resignation  on  September  21,  when  the  Convention  met,  and
the  power  rested  in  the  hands  of  the  Girondins.

The  "  Mountain,"  composed  of  Jacobins,  such  as  Robes-
pierre, Saint-Just  and  Couthon,  of  Cordeliers,  such  as  Danton
and  Marat,  and  supported  by  popular  revolutionists  like
Chaumette  and  Hebert,  was  not  yet  constituted  into  a  political
party :  that  was  done  later  through  the  course  of  events.
For  the  time  being,  there  rallied  round  them  those  who  wanted
to  press  on  ahead  and  make  the  Revolution  end  in  some  tangible
results — that  is  to  say,  to  destroy  royalty  and  royalism,  to
crush  the  power  of  the  aristocracy  and  the  clergy,  to  abolish
feudalism  to  establish  the  Republic.

Lastly,  the  "  Plain  "  or  "  Marsh  "  consisted  of  those  who
were  undecided — men  without  settled  convictions,  always
remaining  "  property-owners  "  and  conservatives  by  instinct —
those  who  form  the  majority  in  all  representative  assemblies.
They  numbered  about  five  hundred  in  the  Convention.  At
first  they  supported  the  Girondins,  but  then  deserted  them
in  the  moment  of  danger.  Fear  made  them  support  for  a
certain  time  the  Red  Terror,  with  Saint-Just  and  Robespierre,
but  afterwards  they  became  partisans  of  the  White  Terror,
when  the  coup  d'etat  of  Thermidor  had  sent  Robespierre
and  his  friends  to  the  scaffold.

One  might  have  thought  that  now  the  Revolution  was
going  to  develop  without  further  hindrances  and  follow  the
natural  path  dictated  by  the  logic  of  events.  The  trial  and
condemnation  of  the  King,  a  Republican  Constitution  in  place
of  that  of  1791,  war  to  the  death  against  the  invaders  ;  and  at
the  same  time  the  abolition  of  all  that  constituted  the  power
of  the  old  regime — the  feudal  laws,  the  authority  of  the  clergy,
the  royalist  organisation  of  provincial  administrations — all
these  ought  to  have  been  considered  as  the  necessary  outcome
of  the  situation.

But  the  middle  classes  which  had  come  into  power  and
were  represented  in  the  Convention  by  the  "  Statesmen  "
of  the  Gironde,  did  not  hold  this  opinion.

The  people  had  dethroned  Louis  XVI. But  as  to  getting


3i2 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

rid  of  the  traitor  who  had  brought  the  Germans  almost  to  the
gates  of  Paris,  as  to  executing  Louis  XVI.,  the  Gironde  was
very  strongly  in  opposition.  Rather  civil  war  than  this  deci-
sive step  !  Not  from  fear  of  the  vengeance  of  the  foreigner —
gince  it  was  the  Girondins  themselves  who  had  undertaken
to  wage  war  against  all  Europe  ;  but  from  fear  of  the  Revolu-
tion, of  the  French  people,  and  especially  of  the  Paris  revolu-
tionists who  saw  in  the  execution  of  the  King  the  beginning
of  the  real  revolution.

However,  the  people  of  Paris,  in  their  sections  and  their
Commune,  had  been  able  to  form,  side  by  side  with  the  National
Assembly,  a  veritable  power,  which  gave  body  to  the  revolu-
tionary tendencies  of  the  Parisian  population,  and  in  the  end
even  dominated  the  Convention.  Let  us,  therefore,  pause
a  moment  before  touching  upon  the  struggles  which  rent  the
National  Representation,  to  cast  a  retrospective  glance,  on  the
methods  by  which  this  authority,  the  Commune  of  Paris,  had
been  constituted.

We  have  seen  in  chaps,  xxiv.  and  xxv.  how  the  sections
of  Paris  had  assumed  importance,  as  organs  of  the  municipal
life,  by  taking  upon  themselves,  in  addition  to  the  police
functions  and  the  election  of  the  judges  which  belonged  to
them  by  law,  various  economic  functions  of  the  highest  import-
ance— such  as  the  distribution  of  food-stuffs,  public  aid,  the
sale  of  national  lands,  and  so  on,  and  we  saw  how  these  very
functions  enabled  them  to  exercise  a  serious  influence  in  the
discussion  of  the  great  political  questions  of  a  general  character.

Having  become  important  organs  of  the  public  life,  the
sections  necessarily  tried  to  establish  a  federal  link  between
themselves,  and  several  times  already,  in  1790  and  1791,  they
appointed  special  commissioners  with  the  object  of  coming
to  an  understanding  with  each  other  for  common  action,
outside  the  regular  Municipal  Council.  However,  nothing
permanent  resulted  from  these  attempts.

In  April  1792,  when  war  was  declared,  the  labours  of  the
lections  Were  suddenly  augmented  by  a  great  many  new
functions.  They  had  to  take  upon  themselves  the  enrolment
and  the  choice  of  the  volunteers,  the  collecting  of  patriotic


THE  CONVENTION  313

donations,  the  equipment  and  provisioning  of  the  battalions
sent  to  the  frontiers,  the  administrative  and  political  corre-
spondence with  these  battalions,  the  looking  after  the  needs
of  the  volunteers'  families,  &c.,  not  to  mention  the  perpetual
strife  which  they  had  to  maintain  from  day  to  day  against
the  royalist  conspirators  who  tried  to  hamper  their  work.
With  these  new  functions,  the  necessity  for  a  direct  union
between  the  sections  made  itself  felt  more  than  ever.

Nowadays,  looking  over  the  correspondence  of  the  sections
and  their  vast  accounts,  one  cannot  but  admire  the  spirit  of
spontaneous  organisation  shown  by  the  people  of  Paris,  and
the  devotion  of  the  men  who  willingly  carried  out  the  whole
of  this  task — usually  after  finishing  their  daily  labour.  Here
is  where  we  may  appreciate  the  devotion,  more  than  religious,
which  was  created  in  the  French  people  by  the  Revolution.
For  we  must  not  forget  that  if  each  section  appointed  its
military  committee  and  its  civil  committee,  it  was  to  the
General  Assemblies,  held  in  the  evening,  that  all  important
questions  were  generally  referred.

We  can  understand,  too,  how  these  men,  who  were  looking
on  the  horrors  of  war  not  theoretically,  but  in  reality,  and  were
in  daily  touch  with  the  sufferings  imposed  upon  the  people
by  the  invasion,  must  have  hated  the  instigators  of  the  invasion
— the  King,  the  Queen,  the  Court,  the  ex-nobles  and  the  rich,
all  the  rich,  who  made  common  cause  with  the  Court.  The
people  of  Paris  thus  joined  with  the  peasants  of  the  frontier
departments  in  their  hatred  of  the  supporters  of  the  throne
who  had  called  the  foreigners  into  France.  When,  therefore,
the  idea  of  a  pacific  demonstration  for  June  20  was  suggested,
it  was  the  sections  that  took  upon  themselves  the  organisation
of  this  demonstration — it  was  they  who  afterwards  arranged
the  attack  on  the  Tuileries  on  August  10,  taking  the  oppor-
tunity, meanwhile,  to  form  at  last  the  much  desired  direct
union  for  revolutionary  action  among  the  sections.

When  it  became  evident  that  the  demonstration  on  June  20
had  resulted  in  nothing — that  the  Court  had  not  learned
anything,  and  did  not  wish  to  learn  anything — the  sections
themselves  took  the  initiative  in  demanding  from  the  Assembly


THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  dethronement  of  Louis  XVI.  On  July  23  the  section  of
Mauconseil  passed  a  resolution  to  this  effect,  of  which  they
gave  notice  to  the  Assembly ;  and  then  they  set  to  work  to
prepare  for  a  rising  on  August  5.  Other  sections  hastened  to
pass  a  similar  resolution,  and  when  the  Assembly,  in  its  sitting
of  August  5,  denounced  the  resolution  of  the  citizens  of  Mau-
conseil as  illegal,  it  had  already  received  the  approbation  of
fourteen  sections.  The  same  day  some  members  of  the  Gravil-
liers  section  went  to  the  Assembly  to  declare  that  they  were
still  leaving  to  the  legislators  "  the  honour  of  saving  the
country,"  but  they  added  :  "If  you  refuse,  however,  to  do
it,  we  shall  have  to  take  it  upon  ourselves."  The  Quinze-
Vingts  section,  on  its  part,  announced  "  the  morning  of  August
10  as  the  extreme  limit  of  the  people's  patience,"  and  that
of  Mauconseil  declared  that  "it  would  wait  peaceably  and
keeping  watch  until  eleven  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  the  follow-
ing Thursday  (August  9)  in  expectation  of  the  decision  of  the
National  Assembly  ;  but  that,  if  justice  and  right  was  not  done
to  the  people  by  the  legislative  body,  one  hour  after,  at  mid-
night, the  fire-drum  would  be  beaten,  and  every  one  would
rise."  *

Finally,  on  August  7,  the  same  section  requested  all  the
others  to  appoint  in  each  of  them  "six  commissioners,  less
orators  than  good  citizens,  who  by  their  meeting  together  would
form  a  central  point  at  the  H6tel  de  Ville,"  which  was  done
on  the  9th.f  When  twenty-eight  or  thirty  out  of  the  forty-
six  sections  had  joined  the  movement,  their  commissioners
met  at  the  H6tel  de  Ville,  in  a  hall  adjoining  the  one  where
the  Municipal  Council  met  regularly — it  was  small  in  numbers
that  night — and  they  took  action  in  a  revolutionary  manner,
as  a  new  Commune.  They  provisionally  suspended  the
Municipal  Council,  shut  up  in  a  hall  the  mayor,  Petion,  dis-
missed the  staff  of  the  National  Guards'  battalions,  and  took

*  Mortimer  Ternaux,  La  Terreur,  vol.  ii.  pp.  178,  216,  393  ;  Buchez
and  Roux,  vol.  xvi.  p.  247  ;  Ernest  Mellie,  Les  Sections  de  Paris,
p.  144  et  seq.

t  A  "  corresponding  committee  "  had  already  been  established  for
communicating  with  the  different  sections,  and  a  meeting  of  the  com-
missioners of  several  sections  had  taken  place  on  July  23.


THE  COMMUNE  315

over  all  the  authority  of  the  Commune,  as  well  as  of  the  general
direction  of  the  insurrection.*

Thus  the  new  authority,  the  Revolutionary  Commune,
was  constituted,  and  installed  in  the  H6tel  de  Ville,

The  Tuileries  Palace  was  taken,  the  King  dethroned,  and
immediately  the  new  Commune  made  it  felt  that  August  10
was  not  the  culmination  of  the  Revolution  inaugurated  on
July  14,  1789,  but  the  beginning  of  a  new  popular  revolution,
marching  in  the  sense  of  Equality.  Henceforth  it  dated  it3
documents  from  "  the  Year  IV.  of  Liberty  and  the  Year  I.
of  Equality."  A  whole  mass  of  new  duties  began  to  devolve
upon  the  new  Commune.

During  the  last  twenty  days  of  August,  while  the  Legisla-
tive Assembly  was  hesitating  between  the  various  currents,
royalist,  constitutionalist,  and  republican,  which  drew  its
members  hither  and  thither,  and  was  proving  itself  absolutely
incapable  of  rising  to  the  height  of  events,  the  sections  of
Paris  and  the  Commune  became  the  true  heart  of  the  French
nation  for  the  awakening  of  Republican  France,  for  flinging
her  against  the  coalition  of  kings,  and  for  organising  in  co-
operation with  the  other  Communes  the  great  movement
of  the  volunteers  in  1792.  And  when  the  hesitations  of  the
Assembly,  the  hankering  of  the  majority  of  the  members
after  royalty,  and  their  hatred  of  the  insurrectional  Commune
had  brought  the  people  of  Paris  to  a  pitch  of  mad  fury  in  those
September  days,  it  was  still  the  sections  and  the  Commune
that  tried  to  appease  them.  As  soon  as  the  Legislative  Assembly
decided  at  last  to  declare,  on  September  4,  against  royalty  and

*  Ernest  Melli6  has  found  the  minute-book  of  the  PoissonniSre  section*
It  met  on  August  9,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening,  in  permanent
committee  in  the  church  of  Saint-Lazare ;  there  it  dismissed  all  the
officers  of  the  Saint-Lazare  battalion,  not  appointed  by  the  National
Guards  themselves,  and  appointed  "  on  the  spot  other  officers  under
whose  orders  the  section  intended  to  march."  It  entered  into  agree-
ment with  the  other  sections  as  to  the  order  of  marching,  and  at  four
o'clock  in  the  morning,  having  appointed  its  permanent  committee
"  to  keep  watch  over  the  preparations  for  arming  and  to  give  the  orders
for  security  that  they  should  judge  to  be  necessary,"  the  section  joined
"  the  brethren  of  the  Saint- Antoine  faubourg,"  and  began  to  march
upon  the  Tuileries/  By  means  of  this  minute  we  get  a  lively  impression
of  the  way  in  which  the  people  of  Paris  acted  on  that  memorable
night.


316 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  various  pretenders  to  the  throne  of  France,  and  as  soon
as  it  signified  its  decision  to  the  sections,  these  joined  together
at  once,  to  put  an  end  to  the  massacres  which  threatened  to
extend  from  the  prisons  to  the  streets,  and  to  guarantee  the
safety  of  all  the  inhabitants.

Likewise,  when  the  Convention  met,  and  though  it  had
decreed  the  abolition  of  royalty  in  France  on  the  morning
of  September  21,  "it  did  not  dare  to  pronounce  the  decisive
word  '  Republic,' "  and  "  seemed  to  be  waiting  for  some  en-
couragement from  without" ;  *  this  encouragement  came
from  the  people  of  Paris.  They  acclaimed  the  decree  in  the
street  with  cries  of  "  Vive  la  Republique  !  "  and  the  citizens
of  the  Quatre-Nations  section  went  to  the  Convention,  to
compel  it  to  take  a  step  further,  saying  that  they  would  be
only  too  happy  to  pay  with  their  blood  for  the  "  Republic  "
which  was  not  yet  proclaimed,  and  which  was  only  on  the  next
day  officially  recognised  by  the  Convention.

The  Commune  of  Paris  thus  became  a  power  which  took
upon  itself  to  be  the  inspirer,  if  not  the  rival,  of  the  Convention,
and  the  ally  of  the  party  called  the  "  Mountain."

The  "  Mountain  "  had,  besides,  another  power  on  its  side
which  had  been  formed  in  the  current  of  the  Revolution —
the  Jacobin  Club,  in  Paris,  with  the  numerous  societies  in  the
provinces  which  were  affiliated  to  it.  It  is  true  that  this  club
had  none  of  the  power  and  revolutionary  initiative  with  which
modern  political  writers  endow  it.  The  very  persons  compos-
ing the  mother-society  in  Paris  were  chiefly  well-to-do  middle-
class  men.  How  could  they  guide  the  Revolution  ?

At  every  epoch,  Michelet  says,  they  had  flattered  themselves
with  being  the  wiseacres  and  political  lights  of  the  Revolution,
who  held  the  balance  of  it  all.  They  did  not  lead  the  Revolu-
tion ;  they  followed  it.  The  tone  of  the  club  changed  with
every  fresh  crisis.  But  the  club  made  itself  immediately  the
expression  of  the  tendency  which  had  come  to  the  front  at  a
certain  moment  among  the  educated,  moderately  democratic
middle  classes ;  it  supported  this  tendency  by  cultivating

*  Aulard,  Histoire  politique  de  la  Revolution,  2nd  edition,  p.  272

et  seq.


THE  JACOBINS  317

opinion  in  Paris  in  the  directions  desired,  and  it  furnished
the  most  important  officials  under  each  new  regime.  Robes-
pierre, who,  to  use  Michelet's  happy  phrase,  was  "  the  golden
mean  of  the  Mountain,"  wanted  the  Jacobins  "to  serve  at
an  intermediary  between  the  Assembly  and  the  Street,  to
frighten  and  reassure  the  Convention  alternately."  But  he
understood  that  the  initiative  should  come  from  the  Street,
from  the 'People.

We  have  already  said  that  the  influence  of  the  Jacobins  on
the  events  of  August  10  was  nil,  and  it  so  remained  until
September  1792,  the  club  being  nearly  deserted  at  that  time.
But  by  degrees,  in  the  course  of  the  autumn,  the  mother-
society  of  Paris  was  reinforced  by  many  Cordeliers,  and  then
the  club  revived  and  became  the  rallying-point  for  the  whole
of  the  moderate  party  among  the  republican  democrats.
Marat  became  very  popular  there,  but  not  so  "  the  extrem-
ists " — which  in  modern  parlance  would  mean  "  the  Com-
munists." These  the  club  opposed  and,  later  on,  fought
against  them.

When,  in  the  spring  of  1793,  the  struggle  entered  on  by  the
Girondins  against  the  Commune  of  Paris  reached  its  critical
point,  the  Jacobins  supported  the  Commune  and  the  Mountain,
in  the  Convention,  and  helped  them  to  gain  the  victory  over
the  Girondins,  and  to  consolidate  it.  By  their  correspondence
with  the  affiliated  clubs  in  the  provinces,  the  Jacobins  supported
the  advanced  revolutionists  there,  and  helped  them  to  check-
mate the  influence  not  only  of  the  Girondins,  but  also  of  the
royalists  concealed  behind  them.  This  left  the  Jacobins  free
to  turn  later  on  against  the  popular  revolutionists  of  the
Commune,  and  so  make  way  for  middle-class  reaction  to  accom-
plish the  coup  d'etat  of  the  9th  Thermidor.


CHAPTER  XXXVII

THE  GOVERNMENT— CONFLICTS  WITH  THE
CONVENTION— THE WAR

New  Ministerial  Council— Danton,  at  first  its  leader,  later
forced  to  resign — Roland  succeeds  him — Council  inactive —
Real  power  in  hands  of  Danton,  Commune,  Sections  and
Jacobins — Council  attacks  Danton,  Marat,  and  Robespierre —
Conflict  between  Convention  and  Commune — Provinces  become
hostile  to  Commune  and  people  of  Paris — Girondins  attack
Paris  sections — Revolution  and  war — Girondins  desire  war —
Peasants  of  frontier  enthusiastic — Western  France  not  eager —
Country  unprepared — Plan  of  Dumouriez  and  Lafayette —
Germans  advance — Battle  of  Valmy — Danton  negotiates  with
Duke  of  Brunswick — Further  republican  successes — Battle
of  Jemmapes — England — Consequences  of  war — The  Vend6e

THE  first  care  of  the  Convention  was  not  to  decide  what  should
be  done  with  the  dethroned  King,  but  to  determine  which
party  should  profit  by  the  people's  victory  over  the  Tuileries —
who  should  rule  the  Revolution.  Whereupon  there  broke  out
those  conflicts  which  for  eight  months  hindered  the  regular
development  of  the  Revolution  and,  until  June  1793,  held  in
suspense  the  great  questions,  such  as  that  of  the  land,  the
feudal  dues,  and  so  on,  and  led  to  the  exhaustion  of  the  people's
energy,  to  indifference,  to  that  lassitude  which  made  the  hearts
of  those  who  witnessed  it  to  bleed,  as  Michelet  has  so  well
expressed  it.

On  August  10,  after  pronouncing  the  "  suspension  "  of  the
King,  the  Legislative  Assembly  had  handed  over  all  the  func-
tions of  central  executive  power  to  a  council  composed  of  six
ministers — chosen  from  without  the  Assembly,  the  majority
being  Girondins — Roland,  Servan,  Claviere,  Monge,  and  Le
Brun — with  the  addition  of  Danton,  whom  the  Revolution  had

placed  in  the  position  of Minister  of  Justice. This  council

318


THE  GOVERNMENT  319

had  no  president ;  each  minister  presiding  for  a  week  in
turn.

The  Convention  confirmed  this  arrangement ;  but  Danton,
who  had  become  the  soul  of  the  national  defence  and  diplo-
macy, and  who  exercised  a  preponderating  influence  on  the
council,  was  forced  to  resign  by  the  attacks  of  the  Girondins.
He  quitted  the  Ministry  on  October  9, 1792,  and  his  place  was
filled  by  the  insignificant  Garat.  After  this,  Roland,  the
Minister  of  the  Interior,  became  the  most  influential  man  of  the
Ministerial  Council,  and  kept  his  post  until  January  1793,
when  he  resigned  after  the  execution  of  the  King.  In  this
position  he  exercised  all  his  influence,  and  permitted  the
Girondins  grouped  round  him  and  his  wife  to  employ  all  their
energy  to  prevent  the  Revolution  from  developing  along  the
broad  lines  which  had  been  marked  out  for  it  since  1789  :  the
establishment  of  a  democracy,  the  definite  abolition  of  the  feu-
dal system,  and  some  steps  towards  an  equalisation  of  conditions.
Danton,  however,  was  still  the  inspirer  of  diplomacy,  and  when
the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  was  instituted,  in  April  1793,
he  became  the  real  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  on  this  com-
mittee.*

Although  in  power  and  dominating  the  Convention,  the
Gironde  did  not  know  actually  what  to  do.  As  Michelet
truly  says,  "it  perorated,"  but  it  did  nothing.  Not  having
courage  for  revolutionary  measures,  neither  had  it  enough  for
open  reaction.  Consequently,  the  real  authority,  both  for
initiative  and  for  action,  rested  in  Danton's  hands  in  the  war
and  diplomacy,  and  in  the  hands  of  the  Commune  of  Paris,
the  sections,  the  popular  societies,  and  partly  with  the  Jacobin
Club  with  regard  to  revolutionary  measures  in  the  interior.
Powerless  to  act  itself,  the  Gironde  directed  furious  attacks
upon  those  who  did  act,  chiefly  against  "  the  triumvirate  "  of
Danton,  Marat,  and  Robespierre,  whom  they  violently  accused
of  dictatorial  tendencies.  There  were  times  when  it  was  asked
whether  these  attacks  should  come  to  a  head — whether  Danton
was  to  be  ostracised  and  Marat  sent  to  the  guillotine.

*  Aulard  gives  in  his  Histoire  politique,  2nd  edition,  pp,  315-317,
an  excellent  rtsumt  of  these  various  changes,


320 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

However,  as  the  Revolution  had  not  yet  exhausted  its  vitality,
all  these  attacks  failed.  They  only  made  the  people  more
ardently  in  favour  of  Marat,  especially  in  the  faubourgs  of
Saint-Antoine  and  Saint-Marceau  ;  they  augmented  the  in-
fluence of  Robespierre  in  the  eyes  of  the  Jacobins  and  of  the
democratic  middle  class,  and  they  raised  Danton  still  higher  in
the  eyes  of  all  those  who  loved  to  see  Republican  France  defying
the  Bangs.  To  them  Danton  was  the  man  of  action  capable  of
heading  off  the  invasion,  of  frustrating  the  royalist  plots  at
home,  and  of  establishing  the  Republic  securely,  even  at  the
risk  of  his  life  and  his  political  reputation.

Ever  since  the  first  sittings  of  the  Convention,  its  Right,
formed  by  the  Girondins,  had  renewed  the  shameful  conflict
with  the  Commune  of  Paris,  which  they  had  been  leading  in
the  Legislative  Assembly  since  August  n.  They  owed  their
power  to  the  insurrection,  organised  by  the  Commune,  and
yet  they  attacked  it  with  a  hatred  which  they  had  never  dis-
played for  the  Court  conspirators.

It  would  be  wearisome  to  narrate  here  in  full  all  these  attacks
of  the  Gironde  upon  the  Commune.  It  will  be  enough  to
mention  some  of  them.

The  first  was  over  the  auditing  of  the  accounts  ;  it  was
aimed  at  the  Commune  and  its  Watch  Committee,  as  well  at
Danton.  It  is  evident  that  during  those  disturbed  months  of
August  and  September  1792,  under  the  extraordinary  circum-
stances created  by  the  movement  of  August  10  and  the  foreign
invasion,  money  had  to  be  expended  by  Danton,  the  only  active
man  in  the  Ministry,  without  too  much  exactitude  of  accounts,
whether  for  the  diplomatic  negotiations  which  led  to  the  retreat
of  the  Prussians,  or  for  getting  hold  of  the  threads  of  the  plot  of
the  Marquis  de  la[  Rouerie  in  Brittany,  and  that  of  the  princes
in  England  and  elsewhere.  It  is  also  very  plain  that  it  was  not
easy  for  the  Watch  Committee  of  the  Commune,  which
equipped  and  sent  off  every  day,  in  haste,  several  thousand
volunteers  for  the  frontier,  to  keep  very  exact  accounts.  But  it
was  just  upon  this  weak  point  that  the  Girondins  directed  their
first  attack  and  their  insinuations,  demanding  that  a  complete
account  from  September  30  should  be  rendered.  The  Execu-


THE  GOVERNMENT  321

tive  of  the  Commune,  that  is,  its  Watch  Committee,  sent  in
an  extremely  clear  statement  of  its  accounts,*  and  justified  its
political  action.

But  in  the  provinces,  doubts  as  to  their  honesty  remained
hanging  over  Danton  and  the  Commune ;  and  the  Girondins
in  their  letters  to  their  friends  and  agents  made  as  much  as
possible  out  of  these  doubts.

At  the  same  time  the  Girondins  tried  to  give  the  Convention
an  anti-revolutionary  guard.  They  wanted  the  Directory  of
each  department — the  Directories  were,  as  we  know,  reactionary
— to  send  to  Paris  four  foot -soldiers  and  two  mounted  men,
making  in  all  4470  men,  to  guard  the  Convention  against  the
possible  attacks  of  the  people  of  Paris  and  the  Commune  !  And
a  powerful  agitation  was  necessary  among  the  sections,  which
appointed  special  commissioners  to  resist  the  passing  of  this
vote,  and  to  prevent  the  formation  in  Paris  of  a  reactionary  guard.

But  it  was  chiefly  the  September  massacres  that  the  Girondins
never  ceased  exploiting  in  order  to  attack  Danton,  who  in
those  days  acted  hand  in  hand  with  the  Commune  and  the
sections.  After  "  drawing  the  veil,"  and  almost  justifying
those  days  by  the  mouth  of  Roland  f  as  they  had  justified
previously  the  massacres  of  La  Glaciere  at  Lyons  by  the  mouth
of  Barbaroux,J  they  now  manoeuvred  so  well  in  the  Convention
that  on  January  20,  1793,  they  obtained  from  it  an  order  of
prosecution  against  the  authors  of  the  September  massacres,  in
the  hope  that  the  reputation  of  Danton,  Robespierre,  and  Marat
would  be  blackened  by  this  inquiry.

By  degrees,  taking  advantage  of  the constitutionalist  and

*  Out  of  713,885  livres  received  it  had  expended  only  85,529  livres,
of  which  there  was  a  clear  account  rendered  (Louis  Blanc,  ii.  62 ]<
Giraut,  on  the  accusation  of  the  Terror,  proved  later  on  that  in  four
months  the  committee  had  arrested  only  320  persons.  If  only  the
Girondins  had  been  as  modest  after  Thermidor  !

f Vide  ch.  xxxv,

j  After  long  struggles  between  the  revolutionary  population  of
Lyons  andithe  adherents  of  the  priests,  and  after  the  murder  in  a  church
of  the  patriot  Lescuyer,  for  having  wanted  to  put  up  the  church's
property  for  sale,  in  accordance  with  law,  there  was  an  insurrection
of  the  revolutionary  working  population,  which  ended  in  the  murder
of  sixty  royalists,  whose  corpses  were  thrown  into  the  depths  of  the
Tour  de  la  Glaciere.  Barbaroux,  a  Girondist  deputy,  justified  these
massacres,

X


322 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

royalist  current,  which  asserted  itself  among  the  middle  classes
after  August  10,  the  Girondins  succeeded  in  creating  in  the
provinces  a  feeling  of  hostility  towards  Paris  and  its  Commune,
as  well  as  towards  the  party  of  the  "  Mountain."

Several  departments  even  sent  detachments  of  federates  to
defend  the  Convention  against  "  the  agitators  who  wanted  to
become  tribunes  and  dictators  " — Danton,  Marat,  and  Robes-
pierre— and  against  the  people  of  Paris.  At  the  appeal  of
Barbaroux,  Marseilles — this  time  "  commercialist  "  Marseilles
— sent  up  to  Paris,  in  October  1792,  a  battalion  of  federates,
composed  of  rich  young  men  from  the  merchant  city,  who
marched  through  the  streets  of  Paris,  demanding  the  heads  of
Robespierre  and  Marat.  They  were  the  precursors  of  the
Thermidor  reaction ;  but,  fortunately,  the  people  of  Paris
defeated  the  plot  by  winning  over  these  federates  to  the  cause  of
the  Revolution.

Meanwhile  the  Girondins  did  not  fail  to  make  a  direct  attack
on  the  federal  organisation  of  the  Paris  sections.  They  wanted
at  any  cost  to  destroy  the  insurrectional  Commune  of  August  10,
and  they  succeeded  in  getting  new  elections  for  the  General
Council  of  the  Paris  municipality.  Potion,  the  Girondist
mayor,  resigned  at  the  same  time.  Here  again,  however,  the
sections  frustrated  these  manoeuvres.  Not  only  had  the  party
of  the  Mountain  the  majority  in  the  elections,  but  a  revo-
lutionary as  advanced  and  as  popular  as  Chaumette  was  ap-
pointed procurator  of  the  Commune,  and  the  editor  of  the
Pere  Duchesne,  Hebert,  became  his  deputy  (December  2,  1792).
Potion,  who  was  no  longer  in  sympathy  with  the  revolutionary
sentiments  of  the  people  of  Paris,  was  not  re-elected,  and
Chambon,  a  moderate,  took  his  place  ;  but  he  remained  there
only  two  months,  and  on  February  14,  1793,  he  was  replaced  by
Pache,  formerly  Minister  of  War.

This  was  how  the  revolutionary  Commune  of  1793  was
constituted — the  Commune  of  Pache,  Chaumette,  and  Hebert,
which  was  the  rival  of  the  Convention  and  played  so  powerful  a
part  in  the  movement  of  May  3i-June  2,  1793,  which  ended  in
the  expulsion  of  the  Girondin  leaders  from  the  Convention,
and  pushed  forward  with  ardour  the  popular  revolution  of  the


THE  WAR  323

Year  II.  of  the  Republic  which  stood  up  for  Equality  and,
finally,  for  Communism.

The  great  question  of  the  moment  was  the  war.  On  the
successes  of  the  armies  depended  the  future  development  of
the  Revolution.

We  have  seen  that  the  advanced  revolutionaries,  like  Marat
and  Robespierre,  had  not  wanted  the  war.  But  the  Court
called  in  the  German  invaders  to  save  royal  despotism  :  the
priests  and  nobles  furiously  wanted  the  war,  hoping  to  regain
through  it  their  ancient  privileges ;  and  the  neighbouring
governments  saw  in  a  war  upon  France  the  means  of  combating
the  spirit  of  revolution  which  was  beginning  to  show  itself  in
their  own  dominions,  as  well  as  a  good  opportunity  for  wresting
from  France  some  provinces  and  colonies.  The  Girondins,  on
the  other  hand,  desired  the  war,  because  they  saw  in  it  the  only
way  to  succeed  in  limiting  the  authority  of  the  King  without
appealing  to  a  popular  rising.  "  It  is  because  you  do  not  wish
to  appeal  to  the  people  that  you  wish  for  war,"  said  Marat,  and
he  was  right.

As  to  the  people,  the  peasants  of  the  frontier  departments,
when  they  saw  the  German  armies  headed  by  the  emigrant
nobles  massing  themselves  on  the  Rhine  and  in  the  Low  Countries,
they  understood  that  it  was  a  question  for  them  of  taking  up
arms  to  defend  their  rights  over  the  lands  they  had  retaken  from
the  nobles  and  clergy.  Therefore,  when  the  war  with  Austria
was  declared  on  April  20,  1792,  an  astounding  enthusiasm  was
displayed  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  departments  close  to  the
Eastern  frontier.  The  levies  for  the  volunteers,  for  one  year,
were  made  with  enthusiasm,  to  the  singing  of  Ca  ira  !  and  the
patriotic  gifts  flowed  in  from  all  sides.  But  this  was  not  the
case  in  the  regions  of  western  and  south-western  France  :
there  the  people  did  not  want  the  war  at  all.

Nothing,  moreover,  was  ready  for  the  war.  The  forces  of
France,  not  numbering  more  than  1 30,000  men,  spread  out  from
the  North  Sea  to  Switzerland,  badly  equipped  and  commanded
by  royalist  officers  and  staffs,  were  not  in  a  condition  to  resist
an  invasion.


324 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Dumouriez  and  Lafayette  at  first  conceived  the  bold  plan  of
rapidly  invading  Belgium,  which  had  already  in  1790  tried  to
detach  herself  from  Austria,  but  had  been  vanquished.  The
Belgian  Liberals  had  appealed  to  the  French,  but  the  attempt
failed,  and  thenceforth  the  French  generals  kept  on  the  defen-
sive, the  more  so  because  Prussia  had  joined  with  Austria  and
the  German  princes  to  invade  France,  and  moreover,  this
coalition  was  strongly  and  openly  supported  by  the  Court  of
Turin,  and  secretly  by  the  Courts  of  St.  Petersburg  and  London.

On  July  26,  1792,  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  who  commanded
one  of  the  invading  armies,  composed  of  70,000  Prussians  and
68,000  Austrians,  Hessians  and  emigres,  began  to  march  upon
Coblentz,  publishing  as  he  went  a  manifesto  which  roused  the
indignation  of  all  France.  He  threatened  to  set  fire  to  the
towns  that  dared  to  defend  themselves,  and  to  exterminate
their  inhabitants  as  rebels.  If  Paris  dared  to  break  into  the
palace  of  Louis  XVI.,  the  city  would  be  subjected  to  an  exem-
plary dragooning  that  would  never  be  forgotten.

Three  German  armies  were  to  enter  France  and  march  upon
Paris,  and  on  April  19,  the  Prussian  army  crossed  the  frontier
and  took  Longwy  and  Verdun  without  a  struggle.

We  have  seen  the  enthusiasm  that  the  Commune  succeeded
in  rousing  in  Paris  when  this  news  arrived,  and  how  it  replied  by
causing  the  leaden  coffins  of  the  rich  to  be  melted  down  for
balls,  and  the  bells,  as  well  as  the  other  church  furniture  in
bronze,  to  be  turned  into  cannon,  whilst  the  churches  were
used  as  vast  worksheds,  where  thousands  of  people  worked
making  the  volunteers'  outfits,  singing,  as  they  sewed,  the  Ca
ira  and  the  Marseillaise^  the  stirring  hymn  of  Rouget  de  1'Isle.

The  emigres  had  made  the  allied  kings  believe  that  they  would
find  France  ready  to  receive  them  with  open  arms.  But  the
openly  hostile  attitude  of  the  peasants  and  the  September
days  in  Paris  made  the  invaders  pause.  The  inhabitants  of  the
towns  and  the  peasants  of  the  Eastern  departments  understood
very  well  that  the  enemy  had  come  to  take  away  the  fruits  of  all
their  conquests,  and  it  had  been  chiefly  in  the  regions  to  the
East  that  the  risings  of  the  town  and  country  parts,  in  1789  and
1790,  had  best  succeeded  in  destroying  feudalism.


THE  WAR  325

But  enthusiasm  was  not  sufficient  to  conquer.  The  Prussian
army  was  advancing,  and  now  with  the  Austrian  army,  it  had
already  entered  the  forest  of  the  Argonne,  which  extended
over  a  length  of  eleven  leagues,  separating  the  valley  of  the  Meuse
from  the  barren  Champagne.  Dumouriez'  army  tried  vainly
by  forced  marches  to  stop  the  invasion.  It  succeeded  only  in
occupying  just  in  time  an  advantageous  position  at  Valmy,
at  the  exit  from  the  great  forest,  and  here  the  Prussians,  on
September  20,  met  with  their  first  check,  while  trying  to  gain
possession  of  the  hills  occupied  by  the  soldiers  of  Dumouriez.
Under  the  circumstances,  the  battle  of  Valmy  was  an  important
victory — the  first  victory  of  the  peoples  over  the  kings — and
as  such  it  was  hailed  by  Goethe  who  accompanied  the  army  of
the  Duke  of  Brunswick.

The  Prussian  army  was  compelled  to  make  a  halt  under  torren-
tial rains  in  the  forest  of  the  Argonne,  and  as  everything  was
lacking  in  the  arid  plains  stretching  in  front,  it  became  a  prey
to  dysentery,  which  made  frightful  ravages  among  the  men.
The  roads  were  liquid  mud,  the  peasants  on  the  watch — every-
thing foreboded  a  disastrous  campaign.

It  was  then  that  Danton  negotiated  with  the  Duke  of  Bruns-
wick for  the  retreat  of  the  Prussians.  What  the  conditions
were  is  not  known  to  this  day.  Did  Danton  promise  him,  as  it
has  been  later  maintained,  to  save  the  life  of  Louis  XVI.  ?  It
is  possible.  But  if  this  promise  was  made,  it  must  have  been
conditional,  and  we  do  not  know  what  engagements  were  under-
taken in  return  by  the  invaders,  beyond  the  immediate  retreat
of  the  Prussians.  Was  the  simultaneous  retreat  of  the  Austrians
promised  ?  Was  a  formal  renunciation  of  the  throne  by  Louis
XVI.  spoken  of  ?  We  are  only  able  to  make  conjectures.

All  we  really  know  is  that,  on  October  I,  the  Duke  of  Bruns-
wick began  his  retreat  by  Grand-Pre  and  Verdun.  Towards
the  end  of  the  month  he  recrossed  the  Rhine  at  Coblentz,
accompanied  by  the  curses  of  the  emigres.

Dumouriez  thereupon,  after  giving  Westermann  orders  to
"  escort  the  Prussians  back  politely,"  without  hurrying  them  too
much,  went  to  Paris,  on  October  II,  evidently  to  see  how  the
parties  were  divided  and  to  determine  his  own  line  of  conduct.


326 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

He  so  arranged  it  that,  although  he  did  not  take  the  oath  to  the
Republic,  he  was  nevertheless  very  well  received  by  the  Jaco-
bins, and  from  that  time  he  undoubtedly  began  to  press  keenly
the  candidature  of  the  Duke  de  Chartres  for  the  throne  of
France.

The  insurrection,  which  had  been  arranged  in  Brittany  by
the  Marquis  de  la  Rouerie  to  break  out  at  the  time  when  the
Germans  would  be  marching  on  Paris,  also  came  to  nothing.
Information  about  it  was  given  to  Danton,  who  was  able  to
grasp  the  threads  of  it,  in  Brittany  as  well  as  in  London.  But
London  remained  the  centre  of  the  conspiracies  of  the  princes,
and  the  island  of  Jersey  was  made  the  centre  for  royalist  stores
of  arms.  The  intention  was  to  land  a  small  army  somewhere
on  the  coast  of  Brittany,  to  seize  Saint-Malo  with  the  aid  of  the
local  royalists,  and  to  hand  over  this  port  of  great  military  and
commercial  importance  to  the  English.

At  the  same  time,  the  French  army  of  the  South,  commanded
by  Montesquiou,  entered  Savoy  the  very  day  the  Convention
opened.  It  took  ChambeVy  four  days  later  and  introduced  into
Savoy  the  peasant  revolution  against  feudal  landlords.
.  At  the  end  of  the  same  month  of  September,  one  of  the  armies
of  the  Republic,  commanded  by  Lauzun  and  Custine,  passed
the  Rhine  and  took  Spires  by  assault  on  the  3Oth.  Worms
yielded  four  days  later,  and  on  October  23,  Mayence  and  Frank-
fort-on-the-Maine  were  occupied  by  the  armies  of  the  sans-
culottes.

In  the  North,  there  was  another  series  of  successes.  Towards
the  end  of  October,  the  army  under  Dumouriez  entered  Bel-
gium, and  on  November  6,  it  gained  a  great  victory  over  the
Austrians  at  Jemmapes,  in  the  environs  of  Mons — a  victory
which  Dumouriez  had  arranged  in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  glory
to  the  son  of  the  Duke  de  Chartres — and  to  sacrifice  two  batta-
lions of  Parisian  volunteers.

This  victory  opened  up  Belgium  to  the  French.  Mons  was
occupied  on  the  8th,  and  on  the  I4th  Dumouriez  made  his
entry  into  Brussels.  The  people  received  the  soldiers  of  the
Republic  with  open  arms.  They  were  expecting  them  to
initiate  a  series  of  revolutionary  measures,  chiefly  concerning


THE  WAR  327

property.  Snch  was  also  the  idea  of  the  "  Mountain  " — at
least  of  Cambon — the  man  who  had  organised  the  immense
business  of  selling  the  lands  of  the  clergy  as  a  guarantee  for  the
asstgnats,  who  was  at  that  moment  organising  the  sale  of  the
estates  of  the  emigrant  royalists,  and  who  asked  nothing  better
than  to  introduce  the  same  system  into  Belgium.  But  whether
it  Was  that  the  "  Mountain  "  lacked  courage,  attacked  as  it  was
by  the  Girondins  for  its  want  of  respect  for  property,  or  that
the  aims  of  the  Revolution  had  not  found  the  necessary  support
in  Belgium,  where  only  the  proletarians  were  on  the  side  of  the
Revolution,  while  all  the  well-to-do  middle  classes  and  the
formidable  power  of  the  priests  were  opposed  to  it.  At  any
rate,  it  remains  a  fact  that  the  Revolution — which  might  have
combined  the  Belgians  with  the  French,  was  not  accomplished.

With  all  these  successes  and  victories  there  was  enough  to
intoxicate  the  lovers  of  the  war,  and  the  Girondins  triumphed.
On  December  15,  the  Convention  issued  a  decree  in  which  it
defied  all  the  monarchies  and  declared  that  peace  should  not
be  concluded  with  any  of  the  Powers  until  their  armies  had  been
expelled  from  the  territory  of  the  Republic.  In  reality,  how-
ever, the  situation  within  looked  rather  gloomy,  and  the  very
victories  of  the  Republic  only  set  the  seal  upon  the  union
between  all  the  monarchies.

The  invasion  of  Belgium  decided  England  as  to  her  role.
The  dawn  of  republican  and  communist  ideas  -among  the
English,  which  was  manifested  by  the  foundation  of  republican
societies,  and  found  its  literary  expression  in  1793  through  the
remarkable  work  on  free  communism,  by  Godwin,  "  On  Political
Justice,"  had  inspired  the  French  republicans,  especially  Dan-
ton,  with  the  hope  of  finding  support  in  an  English  revolu-
tionary movement.*

But  industrial  and  mercantile  interests  carried  the  day  in  the
British  Isles.  And  when  republican  France  invaded  Belgium

*  The  tenor  of  the  negotiations  of  Brissot  in  England  during
January  1793,  before  the  King's  execution,  is  still  unknown.  Concern-
ing those  of  Danton,  see  Georges  Avenel's  article,  Danton  et  les
positivistes  rettgieux,  in  his  Lundis  revolutionnaires,  1875,  PP-  248
et  seq.,  and  the  work  of  Albert  Sorel,  V 'Europe  et  la  Revolution  franfaise
(Paris).


328 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

and  fortified  herself  in  the  valley  of  the  Scheldt  and  Rhine,
threatening  to  take  possession  of  Holland,  England's  policy  was
decided.

To  take  away  France's  colonies,  to  destroy  her  power  on  the
sea,  to  check  her  industrial  development  and  her  colonial
expansion — this  was  the  policy  to  which  the  greatest  number
adhered  in  England.  The  party  of  Fox  was  crushed  and  Pitt's
was  in  the  ascendant.  Thenceforth  England,  strong  in  her
fleet  and  still  stronger  in  her  money  with  which  she  subsidised
the  continental  powers — Russia,  Prussia,  and  Austria  among
them — became  and  remained,  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,  the
head  of  a  European  coalition.  It  was  a  war  of  complete  ex-
haustion between  the  two  nations.  And  this  war  forcibly
brought  France  to  a  military  dictatorship.

Besides,  if  Paris,  threatened  by  the  invasion,  was  transported
by  a  sublime  enthusiasm  and  its  best  elements  hastened  to  join
the  volunteers  from  the  departments  of  Eastern  France,  it  was
also  the  war  which  gave  the  first  impulse  to  the  rising  in  the
Vendee.  It  furnished  the  priests  with  a  pretext  for  exploiting
the  reluctance  of  the  population  to  leave  their  shady  groves  and
go  fighting,  they  knew  not  where,  upon  the  frontier  :  it  helped
to  arouse  the  fanaticism  of  the  Vend6ans  and  to  make  them  re-
volt, at  the  very  time  when  the  Germans  were  entering  France.
We  shall  see  later  how  much  evil  was  wrought  for  the  Revolution
by  this  rising.

But  if  it  had  been  only  the  Vende*e !  All  through  France
the  war  created  such  a  terrible  condition  of  things  for  the  great
mass  of  the  poor  folk  that  one  cannot  but  ask,  how  did  the
Republic  succeed  in  passing  safely  through  such  a  formidable
crisis  ?

The  harvest  of  1792  was  a  good  one  for  wheat ;  but  on
account  of  the  rains  it  was  only  fairly  good  for  the  oats  and
barley.  The  exportation  of  cereals  was  forbidden,  and  yet
for  all  that  there  was  a  famine.  In  the  towns,  for  a  long  time
nothing  so  terrible  had  been  seen.  Long  files  of  men  and
women  besieged  the  bakers  and  the  butchers,  spending  the
whole  night  in  the  snow  and  rain,  without  the  certainty  of
getting  one  scrap  of  bread  in  the  morning  even  at  an  exorbitant


THE  WAR  329

price.  And  this,  at  a  time  when  quite  a  number  of  industries
had  been  stopped  almost  completely,  which  meant  no
work.

The  fact  is  that  one  cannot  with  impunity  take  away  from  a
nation  of  twenty-five  millions  nearly  a  million  men  in  the  flower
of  their  manhood,  and  perhaps  half  a  million  of  beasts  of  burden,
without  its  being  felt  in  agricultural  labour.  Neither  can  the
food-stuffs  of  a  nation  be  subjected  to  the  inevitable  wastage
of  war  without  making  still  blacker  the  misery  of  the  poor — at
the  same  time  that  a  horde  of  exploiters  enrich  themselves  at
the  expense  of  the  public  treasury.*

Questions  concerning  all  these  vital  facts  were  being  launched
like  thunderbolts  into  the  very  midst  of  each  popular  society
in  the  provinces  and  into  each  section  of  the  great  towns,  to
find  their  way  thence  to  the  Convention.  And  above  every-
thing rose  the  greatest  question  of  all  upon  which  all  the  others
depended  :  "  What  was  to  be  done  with  the  King  ?  "

*  The  robberies  committed  by  a  certain  number  of  officers  in  the
commissariat  of  the  armies  of  the  Republic  were  scandalous.  Some
examples  will  be  found  in  JaureV  Histoire  socialists,  La  Convention*
The  speculations  in  which  they  indulged  can  also  be  imagined  from  the
fact  that  the  commissariat  officers  purchased  immense  quantities  of
wheat  precisely  in  those  departments  where  the  harvest  had  been  bad,
and  the  prices  were  very  high,  Speculations  in  the  rise  of  wheat
formerly  made  by  Septeuil  for  the  profit  of  Louis  XVI.,  "  the  good
King,"  who  never  neglected  this  means  of  filling  his  privy  purse,  were
now  being  made  by  the  middle  classes^


CHAPTER  XXXVIII
THE  TRIAL  OF  THE  KING

Fate  of  King  undecided — Reason  of  delay — Trial  determined
on — Gamain  betrays  the  King — Obstacles  in  way  of  trial —
Justification  of  trial — Marie- Antoinette  and  Fersen — Girondins
try  to  prevent  trial  by  attacking  "  Mountain  " — King  appears
before  Convention — Death  sentence  pronounced — Execution
of  King

THE  two  months  which  elapsed  between  the  opening  of  the
Convention  and  the  trial  of  the  King  remain  up  till  now  an
enigma  for  history.

The  first  question  which  confronted  the  Convention  after
it  had  met  was  naturally  that  of  deciding  what  was  to  be  done
with  the  King  and  his  family,  imprisoned  in  the  Temple.  To
keep  them  there  for  an  indefinite  time,  until  the  invasion
should  be  repelled  and  a  republican  constitution  voted  and
accepted  by  the  people,  was  impossible.  How  could  the
Republic  be  established,  so  long  as  it  held  the  King  and  his
legitimate  heir  in  prison,  without  daring  to  do  anything  with
them  ?

Besides,  having  become  simple  individuals,  who,  taken  from
the  palace,  were  dwelling  en  famille  in  prison,  Louis  XVI.,
Marie-Antoinette  and  their  children  became  interesting
martyrs,  to  whom  the  royalists  were  devoted,  and  whom  the
middle  classes  and  even  the  sans-culottes  pitied  as  they  mounted
guard  over  them  at  the  Temple.

Such  a  situation  could  not  continue.  And  yet,  nearly  two
months  passed,  during  which  the  Convention  was  very  much
interested  in  all  manner  of  things  without  ever  broaching  the
first  consequence  of  August  10 — the  fate  of  the  King.  This

delay,  in  our  opinion,  must  have  been  intentional,  and  we  can

330


THE  TRIAL  OF  THE  KING  331

only  explain  it  by  supposing  that  during  this  time  they  were
carrying  on  secret  conferences  with  the  European  Courts —
conferences  which  have  not  yet  been  divulged,  and  which
were  certainly  connected  with  the  invasion  and  the  issue  of
which  depended  on  the  turn  that  would  be  taken  by  the  war.

We  know  already  that  Danton  and  Dumouriez  had  had
parleyings  with  the  chief  commander  of  the  Prussian  army,
which  in  the  end  decided  him  to  separate  from  the  Austrian
and  effect  his  retreat.  And  we  know,  too,  that  one  of  the
conditions  imposed  by  the  Duke  of  Brunswick — although
very  probably  it  was  not  accepted — was  that  Louis  XVI.
should  not  be  harmed.  But  there  must  have  been  more  than
that.  Similar  negotiations  were  very  likely  being  carried  on
with  England.  And  how  can  the  silence  of  the  Convention
and  the  patience  of  the  sections  be  explained,  without  suppos-
ing that  there  was  an  understanding  between  the  "  Mountain  "
and  the  Gironde  ?

To-day,  however,  it  is  clear  to  us  that  parleyings  of  this
kind  could  come  to  nothing,  and  for  two  reasons.  The  fate
of  Louis  XVI.  and  his  family  was  not  of  sufficient  interest  to
the  King  of  Prussia,  nor  to  the  King  of  England,  nor  to  the
brother  of  Marie-Antoinette,  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  for  them
to  sacrifice  national  political  interests  to  the  personal  interests
of  the  prisoners  in  the  Temple.  That  was  plainly  seen  through
the  negotiations,  which  took  place  later,  concerning  the  setting
at  liberty  of  Marie-Antoinette  and  Madame  Elisabeth.  And,
on  the  other  hand,  the  allied  Kings  did  not  find  in  France
among  the  educated  class,  the  unity  of  republican  sentiment
which  should  have  made  their  hope  of  re-establishing  royalty
vanish.  On  the  contrary,  they  found  the  "  intellectuals "
of  the  middle  classes  very  much  inclined  to  accept  either  the
Duke  of  Orleans  (Grand  Master  of  the  Brotherhood  of  Free-
masons, to  which  all  the  revolutionaries  of  renown  belonged)
or  his  son,  the  Duke  de  Chartres— the  future  Louis-Philippe —
or  even  the  Dauphin.

But  the  people  became  impatient.  The  popular  societies
throughout  France  demanded  that  the  trial  of  the  King
should  be  deferred  no  longer,  and  on  October  19,  the  Commune


332 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

attended  at  the  bar  of  the  Convention  to  signify  that  this
was  the  wish  of  Paris  also.  At  last,  on  November  3,  the  first
step  was  taken.  A  communication  was  read  demanding  that
Louis  XVI.  should  be  put  upon  his  trial,  and  the  principal
heads  of  accusation  were  formulated  the  next  day.  The  dis-
cussion on  this  subject  was  opened  on  the  1 3th.  The  affair,
however,  would  have  still  dragged  out  to  a  great  length  if,
on  November  20,  the  locksmith  Gamain,  who  had  formerly
taught  Louis  lock-making,  had  not  revealed  to  Roland  the
existence  in  the  Tuileries  of  a  secret  cupboard,  which  Gamain
had  helped  the  King  to  put  in  one  of  the  walls,  for  keeping
his  papers.

This  bit  of  history  is  well  known.  One  day,  in  August  1792,
Louis  XVI.  sent  for  Gamain  from  Versailles  in  order  that  he
might  help  him  to  fix  in  a  wall,  under  a  panel,  an  iron  door
which  he  had  constructed  himself,  to  serve  to  shut  in  a  kind
of  secret  cupboard.  When  the  work  was  finished,  Gamain
set  out  again  in  the  night  for  Versailles,  after  drinking  a  glass
of  wine  and  eating  a  biscuit  given  to  him  by  the  Queen.  He
fell  on  the  road,  seized  with  violent  colic,  and  had  been  ill
ever  since.  Believing  himself  to  have  been  poisoned,  or  worked
upon,  may  be,  by  the  fear  of  being  prosecuted  some  day  by
the  republicans,  he  gave  information  concerning  the  cupboard
to  Roland,  who,  without  letting  any  one  know,  immediately
took  possession  of  the  papers  in  it,  carried  them  off  to  his  house
and  examined  them  together  with  his  wife,  and  having  affixed
his  seal  to  each  of  them  he  brought  them  to  the  Convention.

The  profound  sensation  produced  by  this  discovery  can  be
understood,  especially  when  it  became  known  through  these
papers  that  the  King  had  bought  the  services  of  Mirabeau,
that  his  agents  had  proposed  to  him  to  buy  eleven  influential
members  of  the  Legislative  Assembly  (it  was  already  known
that  Barnave  and  Lameth  had  been  won  over  to  his  cause),
and  that  Louis  XVI.  still  had  in  his  pay  those  disbanded
members  of  his  guards  who  had  placed  themselves  at  the
service  of  his  brothers  at  Coblentz,  and  who  were  then  march-
ing with  the  Austrians  upon  France.

It  is  only  now,  when  we  have  in  our  hands  so  ma'ny  documents


THE  TRIAL  OF  THE  KING  333

that  confirm  the  treacheries  of  Louis  XVI.,  and  can  see  the
forces  which  were,  nevertheless,  opposed  to  his  condemnation,
that  we  comprehend  how  very  difficult  it  was  for  the  Revolu-
tion to  bring  a  King  to  judgment  and  to  execute  him.

All  the  prejudice,  the  open  and  latent  servility  in  society,
the  fear  for  the  property  of  the  rich,  and  the  distrust  of  the
people,  were  joined  together  to  hinder  the  trial.  The  Gironde,
faithfully  reflecting  all  these  fears,  did  all  that  was  possible  to
prevent  the  trial  from  taking  place,  and  afterwards  to  prevent
its  ending  in  a  condemnation,  or,  failing  this,  to  see  that  the
condemnation  should  not  be  to  death,  and  finally,  that  the
sentence  should  not  be  carried  out.*  Paris  had  to  threaten
the  Convention  with  an  insurrection  to  force  it  to  pronounce
its  judgment  when  the  trial  opened,  and  not  to  defer  the
execution.  And  yet  up  to  the  present  day  what  maudlin
speeches  are  uttered,  what  tears  are  shed  by  the  historians
when  they  mention  this  trial !

And  what  about  ?  If  any  general,  no  matter  which,  had
been  convicted  of  having  done  what  Louis  XVI.  had  done —
that  is,  of  calling  in  the  foreign  invaders  and  of  supporting
them — who,  among  the  modern  historians,  all  of  them  defenders
of  "  State  reasons,"  would  have  hesitated  a  single  moment  to
demand  the  death  of  that  general  ?  Why  then  so  much  lamen-
tation when  high  treason  was  committed  by  the  commander
of  all  the  armies  of  France  ?

According  to  all  traditions  and  all  fictions  to  which  our
historians  and  jurists  resort  for  establishing  the  rights  of
"  the  head  of  the  State,"  the  Convention  was  the  sovereign
at  that  moment.  To  it,  and  to  it  alone  belonged  the  right  of
judging  the  sovereign  whom  the  people  had  dethroned,  as
to  it  alone  belonged  the  right  of  legislation  which  had  fallen
from  his  hands.  Tried  by  the  members  of  the  Convention,
Louis  XVI.  was — to  use  their  own  language — tried  by  his
peers.  And  they,  having  ascertained  the  moral  certitude  of
his  treason — had  no  choice.  They  had  to  pronounce  the

*.  During  the  trial,  some  Girondist  deputies,  those  of  Calvados  in
particular,  wrote  to  their  constituents  that  the  "  Mountain  "  wanted  the
Kinglto  be  put  to  death  only  to  set  the  Duke  of  Orleans  upon  the
throne.  -


334 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

sentence  of  death.  Clemency  even  was  outside  the  question,
at  a  time  when  blood  was  flowing  on  the  frontiers.  The
allied  Kings  knew  this  themselves  ;  they  comprehended  it
perfectly.

As  to  the  theory  developed  by  Robespierre  and  Saint- Just,
according  to  which  the  Republic  had  the  right  to  kill  Louis  XVI.
as  its  enemy,  Marat  was  quite  right  to  protest  against  it.  That
might  have  been  done  during  or  immediately  after  the  conflict
of  August  10,  but  not  three  months  after  the  fight.  Now,
there  was  nothing  left  to  do  but  to  try  Louis  with  all  the
publicity  possible,  so  that  the  peoples  and  posterity  might
themselves  judge  as  to  his  knavery  and  his  deceit.

In  the  matter  of  the  act  of  high  treason  on  the  part  of
Louis  XVI.  and  his  wife,  we,  who  have  in  our  hands  the  corre-
spondence of  Marie-Antoinette  with  Fersen  and  the  letters
of  Fersen  to  various  personages,  must  admit  that  the  Con-
vention judged  rightly,  even  though  it  had  not  the  over-
whelming proofs  that  we  possess  to-day.  But  so  many  facts
had  accumulated  in  the  course  of  the  last  three  years,  so  many
avowals  had  been  let  drop  by  royalists  and  by  the  Queen,  so
many  acts  of  the  King  since  his  flight  to  Varennes,  which,
although  amnestied  by  the  Constitution  of  1791,  served  none
the  less  to  explain  his  ulterior  acts — that  every  one  was  morally
certain  of  his  treason.  Neither  had  the  people  of  Paris  any
doubts  on  the  subject.

In  fact,  this  treason  began  by  the  letter  which  Louis  XVI.
wrote  to  the  Emperor  of  Austria  the  very  day  on  which  he
took  the  oath  to  the  Constitution  in  September  1791,  amid
the  enthusiastic  acclamations  of  the  Parisian  middle  classes.
Then  came  the  correspondence  of  Marie-Antoinette  with
Fersen,  written  with  the  King's  knowledge.  Nothing  is  more
odious  than  this  correspondence.  Ensconced  in  the  Tuileries,
the  two  traitors,  the  Queen  and  the  King,  asked  for  the  in-
vasion, planned  it,  pointed  out  the  road  for  it,  sent  information
concerning  the  forces  and  the  military  plans.  The  triumphal
entry  of  the  German  allies  into  Paris  and  the  wholesale  massacre
of  all  the  revolutionists  were  planned  out  by  the  fair  and  skilful
hand  of  Marie-Antoinette.  The  people  had  estimated  truly


THE  TRIAL  OF  THE  KING  335

the  woman  they  called  the  "  Medicis,"  she  whom  the  historians
wish  to  represent  to  us  now  as  a  poor  madcap.*

From  the  legal  point  of  view,  there  is  consequently  nothing
wherewith  to  reproach  the  Convention.  As  to  the  often-
debated  question  whether  the  execution  of  the  King  did  not
do  more  harm  than  would  have  been  caused  by  his  presence
in  the  midst  of  the  German  or  English  armies,  there  is  only
one  remark  to  make.  So  long  as  the  royal  power  was  considered
by  the  propertied  class  as  the  best  means  of  holding  in  check
those  who  wish  to  dispossess  the  rich  and  diminish  the  power
of  the  priests — so  long  the  King,  dead  or  alive,  in  prison  or
free,  beheaded  and  canonised,  going  about  as  a  knight -errant
among  his  fellow  Kings,  would  have  always  been  the  hero  of  a
pathetic  legend  invented  by  the  clergy  and  all  interested  persons.
"  On  the  contrary,  by  sending  Louis  to  the  scaffold,  the
Revolution  succeeded  in  killing  a  principle,  which  the  peasants
had  begun  to  kill  at  Varennes.  On  January  21,  1793,  the
revolutionary  portion  of  the  French  people  knew  well  that
the  pivot  of  all  the  power,  which  for  centuries  had  oppressed
and  exploited  the  masses,  was  broken  at  last.  The  demolition
of  that  powerful  organisation  which  was  crushing  the  people
was  begun  ;  its  centre  was  broken,  and  the  popular  revolution
took  a  fresh  start.

*  Fersen,  the  friend  of  Marie- Antoinette,  has  entered  in  his  private
diary  what  these  conspirators  were  preparing  for  the  French  patriots.
The  Minister  of  Prussia,  Baron  de  Beck — Fersen  wrote — disapproved
loudly  of  their  not  exterminating  the  Jacobins  in  the  towns  through
which  they  passed,  and  of  their  having  shown  too  much  clemency*
As  to  the  Count  de  Mercy,  he  said  to  Fersen  that  great  severity  was
needful,  and  that  Paris  ought  to  be  set  on  fire  at  the  four  corner st

On  September  n,  Fersen  wrote  to  the  Baron  de  Breteuil  that,  as
the  territory  conquered  by  the  German  armies  yields  only  to  force,
"  mercy  in  such  case  appears  to  me  extremely  pernicious.  This  is  the
moment  to  destroy  the  Jacobins."  To  exterminate  the  leaders  in  every
place  through  which  the  allies  should  pass,  seems  to  him  to  be  the  best
means  :  "  We  must  not  hope  to  win  them  over  by  kindness ;  thtey
must  be  exterminated,  and  this  is  the  moment."  And  Breteuil  replies
to  him  that  he  has  spoken  of  it  to  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  But  the
duke  is  too  mild.  The  King  of  Prussia  appears  to  be  better  :  "  Varennes,
for  example,  will  be  chastised  one  of  these  days."  Vide  Le  Comte  de
Fersen  et  la  Cour  de  France.  Extrait  de  papiers  ;  «  s  publie  par  son
petit-neveu,  le  Baron  R.  M.  de  Klinckowstrom  (Paris,  1877),  vol.  ii.  pp.
360  et  seq.


336 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Since  then  the  right  divine  of  Kings  has  never  been  able  to
re-establish  itself  in  France,  even  with  the  support  of  Europe
in  coalition,  even  with  the  aid  of  the  frightful  "  White  Terror  "
of  the  Restoration.  And  royalties  issuing  from  the  barricades
or  from  a  coup  d?etat,  like  Napoleon  III.,  have  not  succeeded
either,  as  we  have  seen  in  1848  and  1870.  The  very  principle
of  royalty  was  slain  in  France.

Everything  was  done,  however,  by  the  Girondins  to  prevent
the  condemnation  of  Louis  XVI.  They  invoked  every  judicial
argument,  they  had  recourse  to  every  parliamentary  wile.
There  were  even  moments  when  the  King's  trial  was  nearly
changed  into  a  trial  of  the  "  Mountain."  But  nothing  availed.
The  logic  of  the  situation  carried  the  day  over  the  quibbles
of  parliamentary  tactics.

At  first,  the  Girondins  put  forward  the  pretext  of  the  King's
inviolability,  established  by  the  Constitution,  to  which  it  was
triumphantly  replied  that  this  inviolability  no  longer  existed
— since  the  King  had  betrayed  the  Constitution  and  his
country.

A  special  tribunal,  formed  of  representatives  of  the  eighty-
three  departments,  was  next  demanded  ;  and  when  it  became
evident  that  this  proposal  would  be  set  aside,  the  Girondins
wanted  to  have  the  sentence  submitted  to  the  ratification  of
the  thirty-six  thousand  communes  and  all  the  primary  assemblies
by  a  roll-call  of  each  citizen.  This  was  to  call  in  question
again  the  results  of  August  10  and  the  Republic.

When  the  impossibility  of  thus  laying  the  trial  upon  the
shoulders  of  the  primary  Assemblies  was  demonstrated,  the
Girondins,  who  had  themselves  most  eagerly  clamoured  for
the  war  and  advocated  war  to  the  bitter  end  and  against  all
Europe,  began  now  to  plead  the  effect  which  would  be  produced
on  Europe  by  the  King's  execution.  As  if  England,  Prussia,
Austria  and  Sardinia  had  waited  for  the  death  of  Louis  XVI.
to  make  their  coalition.  As  if  the  democratic  Republic  was
not  sufficiently  odious  to  them,  as  if  the  allurement  of  the
great  commercial  ports  of  France,  and  her  colonies  and  provinces
in  the  East,  were  not  enough  to  bring  the  Kings  in  coalition
against  France,  so  that  they  might  profit  by  the  moment  when


THE  TRIAL  OF  THE  KING  337

the  birth  of  a  new  society  had  weakened  his  powers  of  military-
resistance  outside  his  own  territory.

Repulsed  again  on  this  point  by  the  "Mountain,"  the
Girondins  then  made  a  diversion  by  attacking  the  "  Mountain  "
itself,  demanding  that  several  members  of  this  party  should
be  brought  to  trial  as  "  the  aiders  and  abettors  of  the  September
massacres,"  by  whom  were  meant  Danton,  Marat  and  Robes-
pierre, the  "  dictators,"  the  "  triumvirate."

In  the  midst  of  all  these  discussions  the  Convention  decided
on  December  3  that  it  would  itself  try  Louis  XVI. ;  but
scarcely  was  this  declared  than  everything  was  again  called
in  question  by  one  of  the  Girondins,  Ducos,  and  the  attention
of  the  Convention  was  turned  in  another  direction.  By
demanding  the  penalty  of  death  for  "  any  person  who  shall
propose  to  restore  Kings  or  royalty  in  France,  no  matter  under
what  denomination,"  the  Girondins  flung  at  the  "  Mountain  "
an  insinuation  that  the  "  Mountain  "  was  trying  to  bring  the
Duke  of  Orleans  to  the  throne.  They  sought  to  substitute
a  trial  of  the  "  Mountain  "  for  the  trial  of  the  King.

At  last,  on  December  II,  Louis  XVI.  appeared  before  the
Convention.  He  was  subjected  to  an  interrogation,  and  his
replies  must  have  killed  any  lingering  sympathy  which  may
have  existed  in  his  favour.  Michelet  asks  how  was  it  possible
for  a  man  to  lie  as  Louis  lied  ?  And  he  can  only  explain  his
deceit  by  the  fact  that  every  kingly  tradition  and  all  the  in-
fluence of  the  Jesuits  to  which  Louis  XVI.  had  been  subjected,
had  inspired  him  with  the  idea  that  State  reasons  permitted
a  King  to  do  anything.

The  impression  produced  by  this  interrogation  was  so  dis-
advantageous to  Louis  that  the  Girondins,  comprehending
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  save  the  King,  made  a  fresh
diversion  demanding  the  expulsion  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans.
The  Convention  allowed  a  vote  to  be  taken  on  it,  and  decreed
the  expulsion,  but  the  next  day  the  decision  was  revoked  after
it  had  been  disapproved  by  the  Jacobin  Club.

The  trial,  however,  followed  its  due  course,  Louis  XVI.
appeared  a  second  time  before  the  Convention  on  December  26,
with  his  advocates  and  his  counsellors,  Malesherbes,  Tronchet

y


338 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

and  Deseze  ;  his  defence  was  heard,  and  it  was  evident  that
he  would  be  condemned.  There  was  no  longer  any  possibility
of  interpreting  his  acts  as  an  error  of  judgment,  or  as  an  act
of  foolishness.  It  was  treason,  deliberate  and  crafty,  as  Saint-
Just  the  next  day  showed  it  to  be.

If,  however,  the  Convention  and  the  people  of  Paris  could
thus  form  a  clear  opinion  concerning  Louis  XVI. — both  as
man  and  king — it  is  to  be  understood  that  such  was  not  the
case  with  the  provincial  towns  and  villages.  And  we  can
imagine  the  unloosing  of  passions  which  would  have  resulted,
had  the  pronouncing  of  the  penalty  been  referred  to  the
Primary  Assemblies.  The  majority  of  the  revolutionists  having
gone  to  the  frontiers,  it  would,  as  Robespierre  said,  have  left
the  decision  "  to  the  rich,  the  natural  friend  of  monarchy,
to  the  selfish,  to  the  feeble  and  the  cowardly,  to  all  the  haughty
and  aristocratic  upper  middle  class,  all  of  them  men  born  to
thrive  and  to  oppress  under  a  King."

We  shall  never  disentangle  all  the  intrigues  which  were  set
on  foot  at  that  time  in  Paris  between  the  "  statesmen."  It
is  enough  to  say  that  on  January  I,  1793,  Dumouriez  hastened
to  Paris  and  stayed  there  until  the  2oth,  occupied  in  clandes-
tine conference  with  the  various  parties,  while  Danton  remained
until  January  14.  with  the  army  of  Dumouriez.*

At  last,  on  the  I4th,  after  an  extremely  stormy  discussion,
the  Convention  decided  to  vote,  by  name,  upon  three  ques-
tions, namely,  to  know  whether  Louis  XVI.  was  guilty  of
"  conspiring  against  the  liberty  of  the  nation,  and  of  criminal
attempts  against  the  general  safety  of  the  State  "  ;  whether
the  sentence  should  be  submitted  to  the  sanction  of  the  people  ;
and  what  should  be  the  penalty.

The  roll-call  began  the  next  day,  the 1 5th. Out  of  749

*  Jaurds  has  pointed  out  here  an  important  error  in  Michelet.  It
was  Daunou  who,  on  January  14,  pronounced  the  speech  in  favour
of  the  King  that  Michelet  has  attributed  by  mistake  to  Danton.  Return-
ing to  Paris  on  January  15,  Danton,  on  the  contrary,  made  a  powerful
jpeech  demanding  the  condemnation  of  Louis  XVI.  It  would  be
important  to  verify  the  accusation  against  Brissot,  Gensonne,  Guadet,
and  Petion,  formulated  by  Billaud-Varennes  in  his  speech  on  January
15..  J793  (Pamphlet  of  32  pages,  published  by  order  of  the  Convention.
British  Museum  Collection,  vol.  F,  1097).


THE  TRIAL  OF  THE  KING  339

members  of  the  Convention,  716  declared  Louis  XVI.  guilty.
Twelve  members  were  absent  through  illness  or  official  business,
and  five  abstained  from  voting.  No  one  said  "  not  guilty."
The  appeal  to  the  people  was  rejected  by  423  votes  out  of  the
709  who  voted.  Paris,  during  all  this  time,  was  in  a  state  of
profound  agitation,  especially  in  the  faubourgs.

The  voting  by  name  on  the  third  question — the  penalty —
lasted  twenty-five  consecutive  hours.  Here  again,  apparently
through  the  influence  of  the  Spanish  ambassador,  and  perhaps
with  the  help  of  his  piastres,  one  deputy,  Mailhe,  tried  to  stir
up  confusion  by  voting  for  a  reprieve,  and  his  example  was
followed  by  twenty-six  members.  Sentence  of  death,  without
any  proviso,  was  pronounced  by  387  out  of  72.1  voters,  there
being  five  who  abstained  from  voting  and  twelve  absent.  The
sentence  was  therefore  pronounced  only  by  a  majority  of
fifty-three  voices — by  twenty-six  only,  if  we  exclude  the  votes
containing  conditions  of  reprieve.  And  this  was  at  a  moment
when  all  the  evidence  went  to  prove  that  the  King  had  plotted
treason  ;  and  that  to  let  him  live  was  to  arm  one-half  of  France
against  the  other,  to  deliver  up  a  large  part  of  France  to  the
foreigners,  and,  finally,  to  stop  the  Revolution  at  the  time
when,  after  three  years  of  hesitation,  during  which  nothing
durable  had  been  effected,  an  opportunity  at  last  presented
itself  of  broaching  the  great  questions  which  were  of  such
intense  interest  to  the  country.

But  the  fears  of  the  middle  classes  went  so  far  that  on  the
day  of  the  King's  execution  they  expected  a  general  massacre.

On  January  21,  Louis  XVI.  died  upon  the  scaffold.  One
of  the  chief  obstacles  to  all  social  regeneration  within  the
Republic  existed  no  longer.  There  is  evidence  that  up  to
the  last  moment  Louis  hoped  to  be  liberated  by  a  rising,  and
an  attempt  to  carry  him  off,  when  on  the  way  to  execution,
had  in  fact  been  arranged.  The  vigilance  of  the  Commune
caused  this  to  fail.


CHAPTER  XXXIX
THE  «  MOUNTAIN  "  AND  THE  GIRONDE

Policy  of  "  Mountain  " — Royalist  tendencies  of  Girondins —
They  reject  agrarian  law,  and  swear  to  respect  property
— Continuous  conflict  between  Gironde  and  "  Mountain  "
— Socialistic  aims  of  Montagnards — Brissot  and  Robespierre
— Order  versus  Revolution

SINCE  August  10  the  Commune  of  Paris  had  dated  its  docu-
ments from  "  the  Fourth  Year  of  Liberty  and  the  First  of
Equality."  The  Convention  dated  its  acts  from  "  the  Fourth
Year  of  Liberty  and  the  First  Year  of  the  French  Republic."
And  in  this  little  deta  1  already  appeared  two  ideas  confronting
one  another.

Was  there  to  be  a  new  revolution  grafted  upon  the  preced-
ing one  ?  Or  would  France  confine  herself  to  establishing
and  legalising  the  political  liberties  won  since  1789  ?  Would
she  be  content  with  consolidating  the  middle-class  government,
slightly  democratised,  without  calling  upon  the  mass  of  the
people  to  take  advantage  of  the  immense  readjustment  of
wealth  accomplished  by  the  Revolution  ?

Two  totally  different  ideas,  and  these  two  ideas  were  repre-
sented in  the  Convention,  one  by  the  "  Mountain,"  and  the
other  by  the  Gironde.

On  the  one  side  were  those  who  understood  that  for  the
destruction  of  the  ancient  feudal  system,  it  was  not  enough
to  register  a  beginning  of  its  abolition  in  the  laws  ;  and  that,
to  bring  the  reign  of  absolutism  to  an  end,  it  was  not  enough
to  dethrone  a  King,  set  up  the  emblem  of  the  Republic  on  the
public  buildings,  and  print  its  name  upon  the  headings  of
official  papers ;  that  this  was  only  a  beginning,  nothing  but
the  creation  of  certain  conditions  which  would  perhaps  permit

340


THE  «  MOUNTAIN  "  AND  THE  GIRONDE 341

the  remodelling  of  the  institutions.  And  those  who  thus
understood  the  Revolution  were  supported  by  all  who  wished
the  great  mass  of  the  people  to  come  forth  at  last  from  the
hideous  poverty,  so  degrading  and  brutalising,  into  which  the
old  regime  had  plunged  them — all  who  sought,  who  strove  to
discover  in  the  lessons  of  the  Revolution  the  true  means  of
elevating  these  masses,  both  physically  and  morally.  With
them  were  great  numbers  of  the  poor,  whom  the  Revolution
had  taught  to  think.

And  opposed  to  them  were  the  Girondins — a  party  formid-
able in  its  numbers  :  for  the  Girondins  were  not  only  the  two
hundred  members  grouped  around  Vergniaud,  Brissot  and
Roland.  They  were  an  immense  portion  of  the  French  nation  ;
almost  all  the  well-to-do  middle  class  ;  all  the  constitutionalists
whom  the  force  of  circumstances  had  made  republicans,  but
who  feared  the  Republic  because  they  feared  the  domination  of
the  masses.  And  behind  them,  ready  to  support  them,  while
waiting  for  the  moment  to  crush  them  too,  for  re-establish-
ing royalty,  were  all  those  who  trembled  for  their  wealth,  as
well  as  for  their  educational  privileges — all  those  whom  the
Revolution  had  deprived  of  their  old  privileges,  and  who  were
sighing  for  the  return  of  the  old  regime.

In  fact,  we  see  quite  clearly  that  not  only  the  "Plain,"
but  also  three-fourths  of  the  Girondins  were  royalists  as  much
as  the  Feuillants.  For,  if  some  of  their  leaders  dreamed  of
a  kind  of  antique  republic,  without  a  king,  but  with  a  people
obedient  to  the  laws  made  by  the  rich  and  the  learned,  the
greater  number  would  have  very  willingly  accepted  a  king.
They  gave  ample  proof  of  this  by  their  good  fellowship  with  the
royalists  after  the  coup  d'etat  of  Thermidor.  And,  all  things
considered,  this  attitude  of  mind  of  the  Girondins  is  quite
comprehensible,  because  the  essential  thing  for  them  was  the
establishment  of  government  by  the  middle  classes,  who  were
then  rapidly  growing  in  trade  and  commerce,  on  the  ruins
of  feudalism,  and,  as  Brissot  used  to  say,"  the  preservation  of
property  "  was  for  them  the  main  point.

Hence  their  hatred  of  the  people  and  their  love  of
«  order."


342 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

/ To  prevent  a  rising  of  the  people,  to  constitute  a  strong

;  government, and to protect property, this was  what was

essential  for  the  Girondins  at  this  moment ; and  it  is  because

/  most  historians  failed  to  comprehend  this  fundamental  cha-

/ racter  of  Girondism,  that  they  have  sought  for  so  many  other

j secondary circumstances  to explain  the  conflict that broke

f out  between  the  "  Mountain  "  and  the  Gironde.

When  we  see  the  Girondins  "  repudiating  the  agrarian
law,"  "  refusing  to  recognise  equality  as  a  principle  of  republican
legislation,"  and  "  swearing  to  respect  property,"  we  may
perhaps  think  all  that  a  little  too  abstract  in  a  hundred  years'
time.  Those  formulas  had,  however,  in  the  time  of  the  Revolu-
tion, a  very  exact  meaning.

To  reject  the  agrarian  law  meant  at  that  time  to  reject  the
attempts  to  place  the  land  in  the  hands  of  those  who  cultivated
it.  It  meant  rejecting  the  idea,  so  popular  among  the  revolu-
tionists sprung  from  the  people,  that  no  landed  property — no
farm — should  be  of  more  than  120  argents  (about  180  acres)  ;
that  every  citizen  had  a  right  to  the  land  ;  and  that  it  was
necessary  to  seize  the  property  of  the  emigres  and  the  clergy,
as  well  as  the  large  estates  of  the  rich,  and  to  divide  them  •
between  the  poor  labourers  who  possessed  nothing.

"  To  take  the  oath  to  respect  property  "  was  to  deny  to  the
rural  communities  the  right  of  resuming  possession  of  the  lands
which  had  been  taken  from  them  for  two  centuries,  by  virtue
of  the  royal  ordinance  of  1669 ;  it  was  to  oppose,  in  favour  of
the  lords  and  of  the  recent  middle-class  buyers  of  land,  the
abolition  of  the  feudal  rights  without  redemption.

Finally,  it  was  to  combat  any  attempt  at  levying  upon  the •
rich  commercial  class  and  the  stock-jobbers  a  progressive  tax ;
it  was  to  keep  the  heavy  charges  of  the  war  and  the  Revolution
upon  the  poor  only.

The  abstract  formula  had  thus,  as  we  see,  a  very  tangible
meaning.

In  fact,  over  each  of  these  questions  the  "  Mountain  "  had
to  carry  on  a  bitter  struggle  against  the  Girondins  ;  so  much  so,
that  it  was  forced  to  appeal  to  the  people,  to  approve  of  insur-
rection, and  to  expel  the  Girondins  from  the  Convention,  in


THE  «  MOUNTAIN  "  AND  THE  GIRONDE 343

order  to  be  able  to  make  even  a  few  steps  in  the  direction  just
mentioned.

For  the  time  being,  this  "  respect  for  property  "  was  asserted
by  the  Girondins  in  the  smallest  things,  even  in  the  inscribing
of  the  words  Liberty,  Equality,  Property,  on  the  base  of  the
statues  which  they  carried  at  a  festival ;  in  the  embracing  of
Danton,  when  he  said  at  the  first  sitting  of  the  Convention  :
"  Let  us  declare  that  all  properties,  territorial,  individual  and
industrial,  shall  be  for  ever  respected."  At  these  words  the
Girondin  Kersaint  fell  upon  his  neck,  saying  :  "  I  repent  of
having  called  you  a  sedition-monger  this  morning,"  which
was  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Since  you  promise  to  respect  middle-
class  property,  let  us  pass  over  your  responsibility  for  the
September  massacres  !  "

While  the  Girondins  were  thus  endeavouring  to  organise
the  middle-class  republic,  and  to  lay  the  foundations  for  the
enrichment  of  the  middle  classes  on  the  model  set  by  England
after  her  revolution  of  1646,  the  members  of  the  "  Mountain  "
— or  rather,  the  advanced  group  among  them,  which  for  a  short
time  took  the  lead  over  the  moderate  section,  represented
by  Robespierre — sketched  the  broad  outlines  of  what  would
have  been  the  basis  for  a  socialist  society — meaning  no  offence
to  those  of  our  contemporaries  who  wrongfully  claim  to  be
the  first  to  have  done  so.  The  Montagnards  wanted,  first,
to  abolish  the  last  vestiges  of  feudalism,  and  then  to  equalise
property,  to  destroy  the  great  landed  estates,  and  give  the
land  to  all,  even  to  the  poorest  labourers.  They  intended  at
the  same  time  to  organise  the  national  distribution  of  the
products  of  prime  necessity,  estimated  at  their  just  value,  and,
by  means  of  a  properly  handled  taxation,  to  fight  "  com-
mercialism " — that  is,  the  whole  tribe  of  rich  stock-jobbers,
bankers,  merchants  and  captains  of  industry,  who  were  rapidly
multiplying  and  accumulating  large  fortunes.

At  the  same  time,  they  had  proclaimed,  since  1793,  "the
universal  right  of  well-being — well-being  for  all,"  which  the
socialists  later  on  turned  into  "  the  right  to  work."  This
right  had  been  already  mentioned  in  1789  (on  August  27),
and  again  in  the  Constitution  of  1791.  But  even  the  most


344 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

advanced  of  the  Girondins  were  too  fettered  by  their  middle-
class  education  to  comprehend  this  right  of  universal  well-
being,  which  implied  the  right  of  all  to  the  land  and  a  complete
reorganisation,  freed  from  speculation  in  the  distribution  of
the  products  necessary  for  existence.

The  Girondins  were  generally  described  by  their  contem-
poraries as  "  a  party  of  refined,  subtle,  intriguing  and,  above
all,  ambitious  people,"  fickle,  talkative,  combative,  but  in  the
manner  of  barristers.  "  They  want  the  Republic,"  said  •
Couthon,  "  but  they  want  also  the  aristocracy."  "  They
displayed  much  tenderness,"  said  Robespierre,  "  but  a  tender-
ness which  sighed  almost  exclusively  for  the  enemies  of  liberty."

They  felt  a  kind  of  aversion  towards  the  masses  ; they  were  j
afraid  of  them.*

At  the  time  when  the  Convention  assembled,  the  gulf  that
separated  the  Girondins  from  the  Montagnards  was  not  yet
understood.  Many  saw  only  a  personal  rivalry  between
Brissot  and  Robespierre.  Madame  Jullien,  for  instance,  a  true
friend  of  the  "  Mountain  "  and  a  true  democrat  in  sentiment,
in  her  letters,  called  upon  the  two  rivals  to  cease  their  fratricidal
struggle.  But  it  had  already  become  a  struggle  between  two
opposite  principles  :  the  party  of  order  and  the  party  of  the
Revolution.

The  people,  in  a  period  of  strife,  and,  later  on,  the  historians,
always  like  to  personify  every  conflict  in  two  rivals.  It  is
briefer,  more  convenient  for  conversation,  and  it  is  also  more
"  romantic,"  more  "  dramatic."  This  is  why  the  struggle
between  these  two  parties  was  so  often  represented  as  the  clash-
ing of  two  ambitions,  Brissot's  and  Robespierre's.  As  is  always
the  case,  the  two  heroes  in  whom  the  people  personified  the

*  It  is  necessary  to  read  the  Memoires  of  Buzot  to  understand  the
hatred  and  contempt  of  the  Girondins  for  the  people.  We  constantly
meet  phrases  of  this  kind :  "  Paris  is  made  up  of  September
murderers  "  ;  "  here  one  wallows  in  the  filth  of  this  corrupt  city  "  ;
' '  one  must  have  the  vice  of  the  people  of  Paris  to  please  them,"  &c.
Vide  Buzot,  Memoires  sur  la  Revolution  franpaise,  precedes  d'un  precis
de  sa  vie,  by  M.  Gaudet  (Paris,  1828},  pp.  32,  45,  141,  &c.  See  also
Petion's  letter  to  Buzot  of  February  6,  1792,  published  in  the  Revolt
tions  de  Paris,  vol.  xi.  p.  263,  from  which  Aulard  has  given  extracts.


THE  «  MOUNTAIN  "  AND  THE  GIRONDE 345

conflict  were  well  chosen.  They  were  typical.  But,  in  reality,
Robespierre  did  not  accept  the  principle  of  equality  to  the
extent  it  was  accepted  by  the  Montagnards  after  the  fall  of
the  Girondins.  He  belonged  to  the  group  of  moderates.  In
March  and  May  1793,  he  understood  that,  if  he  wanted  the
Revolution  to  triumph,  he  must  not  separate  himself  from
those  who  demanded  expropriatory  measures,  and  he  acted
accordingly — leaving  himself  free  to  guillotine  later  the
Left  wing,  the  Hebertists,  and  to  crush  the  "  extremists."
Brissot,  on  the  other  hand,  was  not  always  a  supporter  of
order  ;  he  admitted  "  disorder  "  up  to  the  moment  when  his
party  had  come  to  power.  But,  all  things  considered,  the  two
men  represented  the  two  parties  very  well.

A  struggle  to  the  bitter  end  was,  therefore,  inevitable
between  the  middle-class  party  of  order  and  that  of  the  popular
revolution.

The  Girondist  party,  having  come  into  power,  wanted  that
everything  should  now  be  restored  to  order  ;  that  the  Revolu-
tion with  its  revolutionary  proceedings  should  cease,  as  soon
as  they  took  the  helm. No  more  disturbance  in  the  street  ;  i
everything  was henceforth  to be under  the orders of  the  \
ministers,  appointed  by  a  docile  parliament.

As  to  the  party  of  the  "  Mountain,"  they  wanted  the  Revolu-
tion to  accomplish  such  changes  as  would  really  modify  the
whole  of  the  conditions  prevailing  in  France  :  especially  for
the  peasants,  who  represented  more  than  two-thirds  of  the
population,  and  the  poverty-stricken  folk  in  the  towns ;
changes  which  would  make  it  impossible  ever  to  go  back  to
the  royal  and  feudal  past.

Some  day,  a  year  or  two  later,  the  Revolution  would  calm
itself ;  the  people,  being  exhausted,  would  have  gone  back
into  their  cabins  and  hovels  ;  the  emigres  would  return  ;  the
priests  and  the  nobles  would  again  get  the  upper  hand.  There-
fore it  was  all  the  more  urgent  that  they  should  find  everything
changed  in  France  ;  the  land  in  other  hands,  already  watered
with  the  sweat  of  its  new  owners  ;  and  these  owners  regarding
themselves  not  as  intruders,  but  as  having  the  right  to  plough


346 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

this  land  and  to  reap  it.  They  must  find  the  whole  of  France
transformed  in  its  manners,  its  habits,  its  language — a  land
where  every  man  would  consider  himself  the  equal  of  his
fellow  men  from  the  moment  he  handled  the  plough,  the
spade,  or  the  tool.  But  for  this  it  was  of  absolute  necessity
that  the  Revolution  should  continue  even  though  it  had  to
sacrifice  a  number  of  those  whom  the  people  had  appointed
to  be  their  representatives,  by  sending  them  to  the  Convention.

Of  course  such  a  struggle  would  be  a  struggle  to  the  death.
For  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  these  men  of  order  and
government,  the  Girondins,  nevertheless  considered  the  revo-
lutionary tribunal  and  the  guillotine  as  the  most  efficacious
wheels  of  government.  But  it  could  not  be  avoided.

Already  on  October  24,  1792,  when  Brissot  published  his
first  pamphlet,  in  which  he  demanded  a  coup  d'etat  against
the  disorganisers,  the  "  anarchists  "  and  the  "  Tarpeian  Rock  "
for  Robespierre  ;*  already  from  October  29,  when  Louvet
made  in  the  Convention  his  speech  of  accusation  in  which  he
demanded  the  head  of  Robespierre,  the  Girondins  were  holding
the  knife  of  the  guillotine  suspended  over  the  heads  of  the
"  levellers,  the  abettors  of  disorder,  the  anarchists,"  who  had
had  the  audacity  to  take  sides  with  the  people  of  Paris  and  their
revolutionary  Commune.f

Ever  since  that  day  the  Girondins  had  not  ceased  in  their
efforts  to  despatch  the  "  Mountain  "  party  to  the  guillotine.
Thus,  on  March  21,  1793,  when  the  defeat  of  Dumouriez  at
Neerwinden  became  known  at  Paris,  and  Marat  rose  to  accuse

*  "  Three  Revolutions,"  he  wrote,  "  were  necessary  to  save  France  :
the  first  to  overthrow  despotism  ;  the  second  to  destroy  royalty  ;  the
third  to  beat  down  anarchy  !  And  to  this  last  Revolution  I  have
consecrated  my  pen  and  all  my  efforts  since  August  n  "  (J.  P.  Brissot,
depute  a  la  Convention  Nationale,  A  tons  les  republicains  de  France,
sur  la  Societe  des  Jacobins  de  Paris.  Pamphlet  dated  October  24,  1792).
Both  Brissot' s  pamphlets  were  reprinted  in  London.

|  Louvet  made  no  concealment  of  the  true  meaning  of  his  "  Robes-
pierride."  When  he  saw  that  the  shot  directed  by  him  and  his  friends
had  missed  fire,  and  that  the  Convention  had  not  put  Robespierre  on
his  trial,  on  going  home  he  said  to  his  wife,  Lodo'iska  :  "  We  must  be
prepared  for  the  scaffold  or  exile."  He  tells  this  in  his  Memoires,
p.  74.  He  felt  that  the  weapon  he  had  aimed  at  the  "  Mountain  "  was
turning  against  himself.


THE  "MOUNTAIN"  AND  THE  GIRONDE 347

him  of  treason,  the  Girondins  nearly  killed  him  in  the  Conven-
tion ;  he  was  saved  merely  by  his  cool  audacity  ;  and  three  weeks
later,  on  April  12,  returning  to  the  charge,  they  ended  by
getting  the  Convention  to  send  Marat  before  the  revolutionary
tribunal.  Six  weeks  later,  on  May  24,  it  was  the  turn  of
Hebert,  the  vice-procureur  of  the  Commune  ;  of  Varlet,  the
working-man  preacher  of  socialism,  and  other  "  anarchists  "
whom  they  caused  to  be  arrested  in  the  hope  of  sending  them
to  the  scaffold.  In  short,  it  was  a  regular  campaign  for  turning
the  members  of  the  "  Mountain  "  out  of  the  Convention,  for
throwing  them  down  the  "  Tarpeian  Rock."

At  the  same  time  the  Girondins  were  organising  counter-
revolutionary committees  everywhere  ;  and  they  kept  up  an
uninterrupted  stream  of  petitions,  directed  against  the  Mon-
tagnards  coming  to  the  Convention  from  persons  who  styled
themselves  "  friends  of  law  and  liberty  " — we  know  to-day
what  that  means — while  those  of  them  who  were  in  the  Con-
vention wrote  letters,  full  of  calumnies,  to  their  friends  in  the
provinces,  exciting  them  against  the  "Mountain,"  and  especially
against  the  revolutionary  population  of  Paris.  And  while  the
commissioners  of  the  Convention  made  superhuman  efforts
to  repel  the  invasion,  and  tried  to  stimulate  the  ardour  of  the
people  by  applying  measures  of  equality,  the  Girondins  opposed
them  at  every  point,  in  all  directions,  by  means  of  the  despatches
they  sent  to  their  electors.  They  endeavoured  even  to  prevent
the  collection  of  necessary  information  concerning  the  estates
of  the  emigres  which  had  to  be  confiscated  and  put  up  for  sale.

In  his  Patriote  jran$aise,  Brissot  conducted  a  bitter  campaign
against  the  revolutionists,  and  altogether  the  Girondins
demanded — nay,  they  insisted  on — the  dissolution  of  the
revolutionary  Commune  of  Paris  ;  and  they  went  even  so
far  as  to  demand  the  dissolution  of  the  Convention  and  the
election  of  a  new  Assembly  in  which  none  of  the  present
members  of  the  Convention  could  be  re-elected.  And  finally,
a  "  Commission  of  the  Twelve,"  which  lay  in  wait  for  the
moment  when  a  coup  d'etat  should  enable  them  to  send  the
chief  members  of  the  "  Mountain  "  to  the  scaffold


CHAPTER  XL

ATTEMPTS  OF  THE  GIRONDINS  TO  STOP
THE  REVOLUTION

Girondins  represent  middle  classes — They  support  Liberty,
but  oppose  Equality — Views  of  Brissot — Girondins  and
"  anarchists  "

So  long  as  it  was  a  question  of  overthrowing  the  old  regime
of  absolute  monarchy,  the  Girondins  were  in  the  front  rank.
High-spirited,  fearless  poets  imbued  with  admiration  for
the  republics  of  antiquity,  and  desirous  of  power  at  the  same
time — how  could  they  adapt  themselves  to  the  old  regime?

Therefore,  while  the  peasants  were  burning  the  chateaux
of  the  landlords  and  their  tax-registers,  while  the  people  were
demolishing  the  relics  of  feudal  servitude,  the  Girondins  were
busy  chiefly  with  establishing  the  new  political  forms  of
government.  They  saw  themselves  already  in  power,  masters
of  the  destiny  of  France,  sending  forth  armies  to  carry  Liberty
into  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth.

As  to  bread  for  the  people,  did  they  ever  think  about  that  ?
Certain  it  is  that  they  never  realised  the  force  of  resistance
possessed  by  the  old  regime,  and  that  they  never  thought  that
to  conquer  this  force  they  would  have  to  appeal  to  the  people.
The  people  must  pay  the  taxes,  vote  at  elections,  furnish
soldiers  to  the  State  ;  but  as  to  making  or  unmaking  political
forms  of  government,  that  must  be  the  work  of  the  thinkers,
of  the  governing  class,  of  the  statesmen.

Therefore,  when  the  King  had  summoned  the  Germans
to  his  aid,  and  they  were  on  their  way  to  Paris,  the  Girondins,
who  had  wished  for  the  war  to  rid  them  of  the  Court,  refused

to  appeal  to  the  people  in  revolt  to  repel  the  invasion  and

348


ATTEMPTS  TO  STOP  THE  REVOLUTION 349

drive  out  the  traitors  from  the  Tuileries.  Even  after  August
10,  the  idea  of  repelling  the  foreigner  by  the  Revolution
seemed  so  hateful  to  them,  that  Roland  convoked  the  leading
men,  including  Danton  and  his  friends,  to  speak  to  them  about
his  plan.  This  was  to  flee,  to  transport  the  Assembly  and  the
prisoner  King  to  Blois  first,  and  thence  to  the  South,  thus
delivering  up  the  North  of  France  to  the  invaders,  and  con-
stituting a  little  republic  somewhere  in  the  Gironde.

The  people,  the  revolutionary  enthusiasm  of  the  people
which  saved  France,  did  not  exist  for  them.  They  were
merely  bureaucrats.

Altogether  the  Girondins  were  the  faithful  representatives
of  the  middle  classes.  According  as  the  people  grew  bolder,
and  claimed  that  the  rich  should  be  taxed,  and  equal  chances
of  wealth  be  given  to  all ;  as  soon  as  they  demanded  equality
as  the  necessary  condition  of  liberty — the  middle  classes  began
to  say  it  was  time  to  draw  the  line  between  themselves  and  the
people  and  to  reduce  the  popular  masses  to  "  order."

The  Girondins  followed  this  current.  When  they  came
into  power,  these  middle-class  revolutionaries,  who  until  then
had  given  themselves  heart  and  soul  to  the  Revolution,  sepa-
rated themselves  from  the  people.  The  efforts  of  the  people,
in  striving  to  set  up  its  own  political  organisation  within  the
sections  of  the  large  cities,  and  the  popular  societies  through-
out France,  their  desire  to  march  forward  on  the  road  of
Equality  were  in  their  eyes  a  danger  for  the  whole  of  the
propertied  classes,  and  constituted  a  crime.

And  henceforth  the  Girondins  resolved  to  stop  the  Revolu-
tion :  to  establish  a  strong  government  and  to  reduce  the
people  to  submission — by  means  of  the  guillotine  if  need  be.
In  order  to  comprehend  the  great  drama  of  the  Revolution
which  ended  in  the  insurrection  of  Paris  on  May  31,  and  the
"  purification  "  of  the  Convention,  one  must  read  what  the
Girondins  said  themselves ;  and  in  this  respect  the  two
pamphlets  of  Brissot  are  especially  instructive.*

"  I  thought,  on  entering  the Convention,"  says Brissot

*  Brissot  d  ses  commettants  (May  23,  1793],  and  A  tous  Us  rtyubli*
wins  de  France  (October  24,  1792).


350 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

"  that  since  royalty  was  annihilated,  and  since  nearly  all  power
was  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  the  people  or  of  their  repre-
sentatives, the  patriots  must  change  their  way  of  proceeding
since  their  position  had  changed."

"  I  thought  that  the  insurrectionary  movement  must  cease,
because,  when  there  was  no  longer  a  tyranny  to  be  struck  down,
there  ought  to  be  no  longer  any  force  in  insurrection."*

"  I  thought,"  Brissot  says  further  on,  "  that  order  alone
could  produce  tranquillity  ;  that  order  consisted  of  a  religious
respect  for  the  laws,  the  magistrates  and  the  safety  of  the
individual.  ...  I  thought,  consequently,  that  order,  also,
was  a  truly  revolutionary  measure.  ...  I  thought  therefore
that  the  real  enemies  of  the  people  and  of  the  Republic  were
the  anarchists,  the  preachers  of  agrarian  law,  the  exciters  of
sedition. "f

"  Twenty  anarchists,"  Brissot  goes  on  to  say,  "  have  usurped
an  influence  in  the  Convention  which  should  belong  to  reason
alone."  Follow  the  debates  and  you  shall  see  on  one  side  men
constantly  occupied  with  the  care  of  causing  the  laws,  the
constituted  authorities  and  property  to  be  respected  ;  and
on  the  other  hand  are  men  constantly  occupied  in  keeping
the  people  agitated,  in  discrediting  by  calumny  the  constituted
authorities,  in  protecting  the  impunity  of  crime,  and  in  loosen-
ing all  the  bonds  of  society."!  kj

It  is  true  that  those  whom  Brissot  called  "  anarchists  "
comprised  very  diverse  elements.  But  they  all  had  this  one
trait  in  common  :  they  did  not  believe  the  Revolution  had
ended,  and  they  acted  accordingly.

They  knew  that  the  Convention  would  do  nothing  without
being  forced  by  the  people.  And  for  that  reason  they  organised
the  popular  rising.  In  Paris  they  proclaimed  the  sovereign
power  of  the  Commune,  and  they  tried  to  establish  national
unity,  not  by  means  of  a  central  government,  but  by  direct
relations  established  between  the  municipality  and  the  sections
of  Paris,  and  the  thirty-six  thousand  communes  of  France.

Now  this  is  precisely  what  the  Girondins  would  not  allow.

*  /.  P.  Brissot  a  ses  commettants,  p.  7.
|  Supra,  pp.  8,  9.  %  Supra,  p.  13.


ATTEMPTS  TO  STOP  THE  REVOLUTION 351

"  I  have  declared,"  says  Brissot,  "  since  the  beginning  of
the  Convention  that  there  was  in  France  a  party  of  dis-
organisers,  which  was  tending  towards  the  dissolution  of  the
Republic,  even  while  it  was  in  its  cradle.  ...  I  can  prove
to-day  :  first,  that  this  party  of  anarchists  has  dominated  and
still  dominates  nearly  all  the  deliberations  of  the  Convention
and  the  workings  of  the  Executive  Council ;  secondly,  that
this  party  has  been  and  still  is  the  sole  cause  of  all  the  evils,
internal  as  well  as  the  external,  which  afflict  France  ;  and
thirdly,  that  the  Republic  can  only  be  saved  by  taking  rigorous
measures  to  wrest  the  representatives  of  the  nation  from  the
despotism  of  this  faction."

For  any  one  who  knows  the  character  of  the  epoch,  this
language  is  quite  plain.  Brissot  was  simply  demanding  the
guillotine  for  those  whom  he  called  anarchists  and  who,  by
wanting  to  go  on  with  the  Revolution  and  to  finish  the  abolition
of  the  feudal  system,  were  preventing  the  middle  classes,  and
the  Girondins  in  particular,  from  manipulating  the  Convention
to  their  own  advantage.

"  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  define  this  anarchy,"  says
the  representative  Girondin,  and  here  is  his  definition  :

"  Laws  that  are  not  carried  into  effect,  authorities  without
force  and  despised,  crime  unpunished,  property  attacked,  the
safety  of  the  individual  violated,  the  morality  of  the  people
corrupted,  no  constitution,  no  government,  no  justice,  these
are  the  features  of  anarchy  !  "

But,  is  not  this  precisely  the  way  by  which  all  revolutions
are  made  ?  As  if  Brissot  himself  did  not  know  it,  and  had  not
practised  it  before  attaining  power  !  For  three  years,  from  May
1789  to  August  10,  1792,  it  had  been  necessary  to  despise
the  authority  of  the  King — and  to  have  an  "  authority  without
force,"  in  order  to  be  able  to  overthrow  it  on  August  10.

Only  what  Brissot  wanted  was,  that  once  that  point  had  been
reached,  and  the  authority  of  the  King  was  overthrown,  the
Revolution  might  cease  the  same  day.

Since  royalty  was  overthrown  and  the  Convention  had
become  the  supreme  power,  "  all  insurrectionary  movement,"
he  tells  us,  "  ought  to  have  stopped."


352 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

What  was  most  distasteful  to  the  Girondins  was  the  tendency
of  the  Revolution  towards  Equality — the  most  dominant
tendency  in  the  Revolution  at  this  moment,  as  M.  Faguet
has  clearly  demonstrated.*  Thus,  Brissot  could  not  forgive
the  Jacobin  Club  for  having  taken  the  name — not  "  Friends
of  the  Republic,"  but  "  Friends  of  Liberty  and  Equality  " —
especially  of  Equality  !  And  he  could  not  pardon  the  "  anar-
chists "  for  having  inspired  the  petitions  "  of  those  workers
in  the  camp  at  Paris  who  styled  themselves  the  nation,  and
who  wished  to  fix  their  salary  by  that  of  the  deputies !  "f

"  The  disorganisers,"  he  says  elsewhere,  "  are  those  who
want  to  level  everything — property,  comforts,  the  price  of
commodities,  the  various  services  rendered  to  the  State,  &c.,
who  want  the  workmen  in  the  camp  to  receive  the  salary  of
the  legislator ;  who  want  to  level  even  talents,  knowledge,  the
virtues,  because  they  have  none  of  these  things."J

*  L'ceuvrc  sociale  de  la  Revolution  franpaise,  edited,  with  introduc-
tion, by  Emile  Faguet. Paris,  undated,  ?  1900.
f  Brissot,  supra,  p.  29.
j  Brissot,  Pamphlet  dated  October  24,  1792.


CHAPTER  XLI
THE  "  ANARCHISTS  "

Anarchists  not  a  party — Their  aims  and  policy — Brissot
quoted — He  attacks  anarchists — Gironde  and  anarchists —
Girondist  programme

BUT  who  were  those  anarchists  of  whom  Brissot  spoke  so
much,  and  whose  extermination  he  demanded  with  so  much
rancour  ?

First  of  all,  the  anarchists  did  not  form  a  -party.  In  the
Convention  there  were  the  parties  of  the  "  Mountain,"  the
Gironde,  the  "  Plain,"  or  rather  the  "  Marsh  "  (sometimes  called
le  Ventre\  but  there  were  no  "  anarchists."  Danton,  Marat,
and  even  Robespierre,  or  some  other  Jacobin  of  the  same
stamp,  could  work  at  times  with  the  anarchists ;  but  they
always  remained  outside  the  Convention.  They  were,  one
might  almost  say,  above  it :  they  dominated  it.

The  "  anarchists "  were  the  revolutionists  scattered  all
over  France.  They  had  given  themselves  to  the  Revolution
body  and  soul ;  they  understood  the  necessity  for  it ;  they
loved  it,  and  they  worked  for  it.

Many  of  them  gathered  round  the  Paris  Commune,  because
it  was  still  revolutionary ;  a  certain  number  of  them  were
members  of  the  Cordeliers'  Club ;  some  of  them  belonged  to
the  Jacobin  Club.  But  their  true  domain  was  the  Section,
and,  still  more  so,  the  Street.  In  the  Convention,  they  were
to  be  seen  in  the  galleries,  where  they  guided  the  debates  by
their  approbation  or  disapproval.  Their  effective  means  of
action  was  the  opinion  of  the  people,  not  "  the  public  opinion  "
of  the  middle  classes.  Their  real  weapon  was  the  insurrection,

353


354 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

and  with  this  weapon  they  influenced  the  deputies  and  the
executive  power.

When  it  became  necessary  to  make  a  fresh  attempt  to  in-
flame the  people  and  to  march  with  them  against  the  Tuileries,
it  was  they  who  prepared  the  attack  and  fought  in  the  ranks.
And  when  the  revolutionary  enthusiasm  of  the  people  had
cooled — they  returned  to  the  obscurity  from  whence  they  had
sprung,  leaving  us  only  the  rancorous  pamphlets  of  their  ad-
versaries by  which  we  are  enabled  to  discover  the  immense
revolutionary  work  they  have  accomplished.

As  to  their  ideas,  they  were  clear  and  decided.  The  Repub-
lic— of  course  !  They  believed  in  it.  Equality  before  the
law  was  another  of  their  canons.  But  that  was  not  all :  far
from  it.

To  use  political  liberty  as  the  means  for  gaining  economic
liberty,  as  had  been  recommended  to  them  by  the  middle
classes  !  They  knew  that  this  could  not  be  done.  Therefore,
they  wanted  the  thing  itself.  The  Land  for  All — which  was
what  they  called  "  the  agrarian  law  " — and  Economic  Equality,
or  to  use  the  language  of  that  period,  "  the  levelling  of  wealth."

But  let  us  hear  what  Brissot  has  to  say  about  them  :  "  They
are  the  men,"  he  says,  "  who  have  divided  society  into  two
classes,  those  who  have  and  those  who  have  not — the  unbreeched
ones  (sans- culottes),  and  the  property-owners — and  who  have
stirred  up  the  one  against  the  other.

"  They  are  the  men,"  Brissot  goes  on  to  say,  "  who,  under
the  name  of  sections,  have  never  ceased  from  wearying  the
Convention  with  petitions,  demanding  a  maximum  for  corn."

They  are  the  men  who  have  incited  "  the  petition  of  those
ten  thousand  men,  who  declared  themselves  in  a  state  of
insurrection  if  the  price  of  wheat  was  not  fixed,"  and  who  are
stirring  up  revolts  all  over  France.

These,  then,  were  the  crimes  of  those  who  were  described
by  Brissot  as  the  "  anarchists  "  :  to  have  divided  the  nation
into  two  classes ;  the  Haves  and  the  Have-Nots ;  to  have  stirred
up  the  one  against  the  other  ;  to  have  demanded  bread — and
above  all,  bread  for  those  who  worked.

They  were  unquestionably  great  criminals. But  who  of  the


THE  "ANARCHISTS"  355

learned  socialists  of  the  nineteenth  century  has  been  able  to
invent  anything  better  than  this  demand  of  our  ancestors
in  1793  :  "  Bread  for  all  "  ?  Many  more  words  there  are
to-day,  but  less  action  !

As  for  their  methods  of  putting  their  ideas  into  execution,
here  they  are  :  "  The  multiplicity  of  crimes,"  Brissot  tells  us,
"  is  produced  by  impunity  ;  impunity  by  the  paralysis  of  the
law  courts  ;  and  the  anarchists  stand  up  for  this  impunity,  and
help  to  paralyse  the  courts,  either  by  terrorism  or  by  denouncing
and  accusing  the  aristocracy."

"  Of  repeated  outrages  on  property  and  individual  safety
the  anarchists  of  Paris  give  examples  every  day ;  and  their
private  emissaries,  as  well  as  those  whom  they  distinguish  by
the  title  of  commissioners  of  the  Convention,  are  preaching
this  violation  of  the  rights  of  man  everywhere."

Brissot  then  mentions  "  the  anarchists'  eternal  denunciations
of  property-owners  and  merchants,  whom  they  designate  by
the  name  of  '  monopolists  '  "  ;  he  speaks  of  "  property-owners
who  are  unceasingly  branded  as  robbers,"  of  the  hatred  the
anarchists  feel  towards  every  State  official.  "  From  the  mo-
ment," he  says,  "  when  a  man  takes  office,  he  becomes  odious
to  the  anarchists,  he  becomes  guilty."  And  with  cause,  say
we.

But  Brissot  is  superb  when  he  is  enumerating  the  benefits  of
"  order."  It  is  a  passage  that  must  be  read  if  one  wishes  to
comprehend  what  the  Girondist  middle  class  would  have  given
the  French  people,  if  the  "  anarchists  "  had  not  given  a  further
impulse  to  the  Revolution.  "  Consider,"  he  says,  "  the  de-
partments where  the  fury  of  these  men  has  been  restrained  ;
take  for  example,  the  department  of  the  Gironde.  Order  has
constantly  reigned  there  ;  the  people  there  submit  to  the  law,
although  they  are  paying  ten  sols  a  pound  for  bread.  .  .  .  The
reason  is  that  from  this  department  the  citizens  have  expelled
the  preachers  of  the  agrarian  law,  that  they  have  nailed  up  the
doors  of  that  club  *  where  they  teach  .  .  ."  &c.

And  this  was  written  two  months  after  August  10,  when  the
blindest  person  could  not  fail  to  understand  that  if  the  people
*  The  Jacobin  Club.


356 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

all  over  France  had  "  submitted  to  the  law,  although  they  were
paying  ten  sols  a  pound  for  bread  "  there  would  have  been  no
Revolution  at  all,  and  royalty,  which  Brissot  feigned  to  be
fighting,  as  well  as  feudalism,  might  perhaps  have  reigned  for
still  another  century,  as  in  Russia.*

We  must  read  Brissot  to  understand  what  the  middle  classes
were  then  preparing  for  France,  and  what  the  "  Brissotins  "
of  the  twentieth  century  are  still  preparing  wherever  a  revo-
lution is  going  to  break  out.

"  The  troubles  in  the  Eure  ;  the  Orne  and  elsewhere,"  says
Brissot,  "  have  been  caused  by  preachings  against  the  rich,
against  the  monopolists,  by  seditious  sermons  on  the  necessity
of  fixing  by  force  a  maximum  price  for  grains  and  all  food-
stuffs."

And  of  Orleans,  he  says  :  "  This  town  enjoyed  since  the  be-
ginning of  the  Revolution  a  tranquillity  that  has  not  even  been
touched  by  the  disturbances  arising  elsewhere  through  the
scarcity  of  grain,  although  grain  was  one  of  the  staple  commo-
dities of  the  town.  .  .  .  However,  this  harmony  between  the
poor  and  the  rich  was  not  according  to  the  principles  of  anarchy  ;
and  so  one  of  these  men  to  whom  order  brings  despair,  for  whom
disturbance  is  the  only  aim,  rushed  in  to  break  this  happy  har-
mony by  exciting  the  sans-culotUs  against  the  property-
owners."

"Again  it  is  this  anarchy,"  exclaims  Brissot,  "which  has
created  a  revolutionary  influence  in  the  army  "  :  "  Who  now
can  doubt  the  terrible  evil  which  has  been  caused  in  our  armies
by  this  anarchist  doctrine  that  would  establish  under  cover  of
equality  in  law  equality  both  universal  and  in  fact — the  scourge
of  society,  just  as  the  other  is  its  support  ?  Anarchic  doctrine

*  Louis  Blanc  has  defined  Brissot  extremely  well  in  saying  that  he
was  one  of  those  men  who  are  "  republicans  in  advance  of  the  time
to-day,  and  revolutionaries  behind  the  time  to-morrow "  ;  people
who  have  not  the  strength  to  follow  the  century,  after  having  had  the
audacity  to  outstrip  it.  After  having  written  in  his  youth  that
"  property  was  theft,"  his  respect  for  property  became  so  great  that
on  the  morrow  of  August  4,  he  blamed  the  Assembly  for  the  precipita-
tion with  which  it  had  published  its  decrees  against  feudalism  ;  and
that  at  a  moment  when  citizens  were  embracing  each  other  in  the
street  in  congratulation  of  these  decrees.


THE  «  ANARCHISTS  "  357

which  would  bring  down  to  one  level  learning  and  ignorance,
virtue  and  vice,  offices,  salaries,  services."

This  is  what  the  Brissotins  will  never  pardon  in  the  anar-
chists :  equality  in  law  may  be  forgiven,  but  it  must  never
become  equality  in  fact.  Had  not  Brissot,  moreover,  been
sufficiently  angered  already  by  the  navvies  engaged  in  the
camp  at  Paris,  who  one  day  asked  that  their  wages  might  be
made  equal  to  the  salary  of  the  deputies  ?  The  idea  of  such  a
thing  !  Brissot  and  a  navvy  put  upon  the  same  level — not  in
law,  but  "  in  fact  "  !  Miserable  wretches  !

But  how  did  it  happen  that  the  anarchists  exercised  such  a
great  power  even  to  the  dominating  of  the  terrible  Convention
and  the  dictating  of  its  decisions  ?

Brissot  tells  us  how  in  his  pamphlets.  "  It  is,"  he  says,  "  the
galleries  of  the  Convention,  the  people  of  Paris,  and  the  Commune
who  dominate  the  position  and  force  the  hand  of  the  Conven-
tion every  time  some  revolutionary  measure  is  taken."

At  the  outset,  Brissot  tells  us,  the  Convention  was  very  wise.
"  You  would  see,"  said  he,  "  the  majority  of  the  Convention,
sincere,  sane,  the  friends  of  principles,  with  their  eyes  always
fixed  upon  the  law."  They  welcomed  "  almost  unanimously  "
every  proposal  which  tended  to  humble  and  crush  "  the  abettors
of  disorder."

One  can  guess  the  revolutionary  results  which  were  to  be
expected  from  these  representatives  who  always  kept  their  eyes
fixed  on  the  law — the  royal  and  feudal  law  ;  fortunately,  the
"  anarchists  "  had  something  to  say  in  the  matter.  But  these
"  anarchists  "  knew  that  their  place  was  not  in  the  Convention,
among  the  representatives — their  place  was  in  the  street ;  they
understood  that  if  they  ever  set  foot  inside  the  Convention,  it
must  not  be  to  debate  with  the  "  members  of  the  Right,"  or
the  "  Frogs  of  the  Marsh  "  ;  it  must  be  to  exact  something,
either  from  the  top  of  the  galleries  where  the  public  sat,  or
through  an  invasion  of  the  Convention,  with  the  people  at
their  back.

"  In  this  fashion,  little  by  little  the  brigands  "  (Brissot  is
speaking  of  the  "  anarchists  ")  "  have  audaciously  lifted  up
their  heads.  From  being  the  accused,  they  have  transformed


358 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

themselves  into  the  accusers  ;  instead  of  being  silent  spectators
at  our  debates,  they  have  become  the  arbiters." — "  We  are  in
the  midst  of  a  revolution,"  was  their  reply.

In  fact,  those  whom  Brissot  called  "  anarchists  "  saw  further
and  were  giving  proofs  of  a  political  wisdom  far  exceeding  that
shown  by  those  who  were  pretending  to  govern  France.  If  the
Revolution  had  ended  in  the  triumph  of  the  Brissotins,  without
having  abolished  the  feudal  system,  and  without  having  given
back  the  land  to  the  Communes — where  should  we  be  to-day  ?

But  perhaps  Brissot  has  formulated  somewhere  a  programme
in  which  he  explains  how  the  Girondins  proposed  to  put  an  end
to  the  feudal  system  and  the  struggles  it  provoked  ?  At  the
supreme  moment,  when  the  people  of  Paris  were  demanding  the
expulsion  of  the  Girondins  from  the  Convention,  he  may
perhaps  have  said  how  the  Girondins  proposed  to  satisfy,  were
it  only  in  part,  the  most  pressing  of  the  popular  needs  ?

He  never  says  anything,  absolutely  not  a  word  of  the  sort.
The  party  of  the  Gironde  cut  short  the  whole  of  this  question
by  repeating  that  to  touch  property,  whether  it  be  feudal  or
middle  class,  is  to  do  the  work  of  the  "  leveller,"  of  the  "  aider
and  abettor  of  disorder,"  of  the  "  anarchist."  People  of  that
sort  should  be  simply  exterminated.

"  Before  August  10,  the  disorganisers  were  real  revolutionists,"
writes  Brissot,  "  because  a  republican  had  to  be  a  disorganiser.
But  the  disorganisers  of  to-day  are  the  real  counter-revolu-
tionists ;  they  are  enemies  of  the  people,  because  the  '  people  '
are  master  now.  What  is  left  for  them  to  desire  ?  Interior  tran-
quillity, since  this  tranquillity  alone  assures  to  the  owner  his
property,  to  the  worker  his  work,  to  the  poor  their  daily  bread,
and  to  all  the  enjoyment  of  liberty."  *

Brissot  did  not  even  understand  that  at  that  time  of  scarcity,
when  the  price  of  bread  had  gone  up  to  six  or  seven  sous  the
pound,  the  people  might  well  demand  an  edict  to  fix  the  price
of  bread.  Only  "  anarchists  "  could  make  such  a  demand  !  t

For  him  and  for  the  whole  of  the  Gironde,  the  Revolution
was  terminated  since  the  movement  of  August  10  had  placed

*  Pamphlet  dated  October  24,  1792.
f  Ibid.  p.  19.


THE  "ANARCHISTS"  359

their  party  in  power.  There  was  nothing  more  to  be  done  but
to  accept  the  situation  and  obey  whatever  political  laws  the
Convention  should  make.  They  did  not  even  understand  the
man  of  the  people,  who  said  that,  since  the  feudal  laws  remained,
since  the  land  had  not  been  given  back  to  the  Communes,  since
in  all  things  concerning  the  land  question  there  was  merely  a
provisional  arrangement,  since  the  poor  had  still  to  bear  the
whole  burden  of  the  war — the  Revolution  was  not  ended,  and  only
revolutionary  action  could  bring  it  to  an  end,  seeing  the  immense
resistance  offered  by  the  old  regime  to  every  attempt  at  decisive
measures.

The  party  of  the  Gironde  could  not  even  comprehend  this.
They  admitted  only  one  class  of  discontented — that  of  the
citizens  who  feared  "  either  for  their  riches,  their  comforts,
or  their  lives."  *  Any  other  kind  of  discontented  had  no  right
to  exist.  And  when  we  know  in  what  a  state  of  uncertainty
the  Legislative  Assembly  had  left  all  questions  pertaining  to
the  land,  we  can  but  ask  how  such  an  attitude  of  mind  could
be  possible  ?  In  what  sort  of  unreal  world  of  political  intrigue
did  these  men  live  ?  We  should  not  be  able  to  understand
them  at  all,  were  it  not  that  we  know  too  many  like  them  among
our  own  contemporaries.

Brissot's  conclusion,  accepted  by  all  the  Girondins,  was  as
follows  :  "  We  must  make  a  coup  d'etat,  a  third  revolution,
which  must  c  beat  down  anarchy.'  Dissolve  the  Commune
of  Paris,  and  destroy  its  sections  !  Dissolve  the  clubs  which
preach  disorder  and  equality  !  Close  the  Jacobin  Club,  and
seal  up  its  papers  !  The  '  Tarpeian  Rock,'  that  is,  the
guillotine,  for  '  the  triumvirate '  of  Robespierre,  Danton,
and  Marat,  as  well  as  for  all  the  f  levellers ' — all  the  *  anar-
chists.' Then,  a  new  Convention  will  be  elected,  but  not  one
of  the  present  members  shall  sit  again  "  (which  meant,  of  course,
a  certainty  of  triumph  for  the  counter-revolution).  A  strong
Government,  and  Order — restored  !  Such  was  the  Girondins'
programme  ever  since  the  fall  of  the  King  had  carried  them  into
power  and  made  "  the  disorganisers  useless."

WTiat  was  left,  then,  for  the  revolutionists  to  do  if  not  to  take
*  Pamphlet  dated  October  24,  1792,  p,  12/4


360 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

up  the  fight,  and  fight  for  life  or  death  ?  Either  the  Revolution
must  have  stopped  short — unfinished  as  it  was — and  then  the
counter-revolution  of  Thermidor  would  have  begun  fifteen
months  sooner,  in  the  spring  of  1793,  before  the  abolition  of  the
feudal  rights  had  been  accomplished  ;  or  else  the  Girondins
had  to  be  expelled  from  the  Convention,  notwithstanding  all  the
services  they  had  rendered  to  the  Revolution,  so  long  as  royalty
had  to  be  fought.  It  was  impossible  to  ignore  these  services.
"  No  doubt,"  exclaimed  Robespierre,  in  the  famous  sitting  of
April  10 — "  they  have  struck  at  the  Court,  at  the  emigres,  at
the  priests,  and  that  with  a  heavy  hand  ;  but  at  what  time  ?
When  they  had  still  to  gain  power.  Once  they  had  gained  it,
their  ardour  soon  abated.  How  quickly  they  changed  the
objects  of  their  hatred  !  "

The  Revolution  could  not  be  left  unfinished.  It  had  to  go  on
— over  their  bodies,  if  necessary.  And,  therefore,  Paris  and  the
revolutionary  departments,  ever  since  February  1793,  were  in
the  throes  of  an  agitation  which  culminated  in  the  movement
of  May  31.


»


CHAPTER  XLII
CAUSES  OF  THE  RISING  ON  MAY  31

Struggle  between  "Mountain"  and  "  Gironde  " — Momentous
questions — Inactivity  of  Convention  — Montagnards — Robes-
pierre— Counter-revolution  gains  ground — Directories  of  de-
partments and  districts — New  Commune — Growth  of  Popular
Societies,  Fraternal  Societies  and  Revolutionary  Committees —
Federalism — Centralisation — Gironde  and  "Mountain"

DURING  the  early  part  of  1793,  the  struggle  between  the
"  Mountain  "  and  the  "  Gironde  "  grew  daily  more  envenomed
according  as  these  three  great  questions  presented  themselves
to  France.

First :  Were  all  the  feudal  dues  to  be  abolished  without
redemption,  or  were  these  survivals  of  feudalism  to  continue
to  starve  the  farmer  and  paralyse  agriculture  ?  This  was  the
burning  question  which  meant  so  much  to  an  agricultural
population  of  nearly  twenty  millions,  including  those  who  had
bought  the  greater  part  of  the  national  lands  taken  from  the
clergy  and  the  emigrant  nobles.

Secondly  :  Were  the  villages  to  retain  possession  of  the  com-
munal lands  which  they  had  retaken  from  the  lords  ?  Would
the  right  of  resuming  possession  be  recognised  for  those  Com-
munes that  had  not  already  done  so  ?  Would  the  right  of
every  citizen  to  the  land  be  admitted  ?

And  thirdly :  Was  the  maximum  going  to  be  introduced,  which
meant  the  fixing  of  the  price  of  bread  and  other  commodities
of  prime  necessity  ?

These  three  great  questions  were  exciting  the  whole  of
France  and  had  divided  it  into  two  hostile  camps.  On  one
side  were  those  who  possessed  property ;  on  the  other,  those
who  possessed  nothing — the  rich  and  the  poor  ;  those  who  were


362 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

enriching  themselves  in  spite  of  misery,  scarcity  and  war,  and
those  who  were  supporting  the  whole  burden  of  the  war  and  yet
had  to  stand  for  hours,  and  sometimes  for  entire  nights  at  the
baker's  door,  without  being  able  in  the  end  to  carry  home  a
morsel  of  food.

And  yet  months — five  to  eight  months — passed  without  the
Convention  having  done  anything  to  change  the  situation  or  to
solve  the  great  social  problems  evolved  by  the  development  of
the  Revolution  itself.  Time  was  spent  in  endless  discussions
in  the  Convention  and  hatred  was  increasing  between  the  two
parties,  of  which  one  stood  for  the  rich,  and  the  other  defended
the  poor,  while  no  agreement,  no  compromise  was  possible
between  those  who  defended  property  and  those  who  wished
to  attack  it.

It  is  true  that  the  "  Montagnards  "  themselves  had  no  very
clear  ideas  about  economic  questions,  and  were  divided  into
two  groups — the  one  known  as  the  "  Enrages  "  being  the  much
more  advanced  of  the  two.  The  other  group,  to  which
Robespierre  belonged,  was  inclined  to  take  views  almost  as  much
in  defence  of  property  as  were  those  of  the  Girondins  concern-
ing the  three  great  questions  just  mentioned.  But  little  as  we
may  sympathise  with  Robespierre,  it  must  be  admitted  that  he
developed  with  the  Revolution  and  he  always  felt  deeply  for  the
sufferings  of  the  people.  In  the  National  Assembly,  ever  since
1791,  he  had  spoken  in  favour  of  restoring  the  communal  lands
to  the  Communes.  The  more  he  saw  of  the  property-owning
and  commercial  selfishness  of  the  middle  classes  the  more
openly  he  sided  with  the  people  and  the  revolutionary  Com-
mune of  Paris — with  those  who  were  then  called  the  "  anar-
chists."

"  The  food  necessary  for  the  people,"  he  declared  in  the
Convention,  "  is  as  sacred  as  life  itself.  All  that  is  necessary
to  preserve  life  is  property  common  to  the  whole  of  society.
It  is  only  what  is  in  excess  of  this  that  may  become  private
property,  and  may  be  given  up  to  the  industrial  activities  of
the  traders."

What  a  pity  that  this  frankly  communistic  idea  did  not  pre-
vail among  the  nineteenth-century  socialists  instead  of  the


CAUSES  OF  THE  RISING  ON  MAY  31 363

"  collectivism  "  of  Pecqueur  and  Vidal,  which  was  preached
in  1848  and  is  now  being  dished  up  again  under  the  name  of
"  scientific  socialism."  What  might  not  the  trend  of  the
Communist  movement  in  1871  have  been,  had  it  recognised  as
its  principle  that  "  all  things  necessary  for  life  are  as  sacred  as
life  itself  and  represent  the  common  property  of  the  whole
nation  " — if  it  had  taken  as  its  watchword  :  "  The  Commune
organising  consumption  and  guaranteeing  well-being  for  all."

Everywhere  and  always  a  revolution  is  made  by  minorities.
Even  among  those  deeply  interested  in  the  Revolution  it  is
only  a  minority  that  devotes  itself  entirely  to  it.  This  was
also  the  case  in  France  in  1793.

As  soon  as  royalty  was  overthrown  a  gigantic  movement  was
set  on  foot  throughout  the  provinces  against  the  revolutionists
who  had  dared  to  fling  down  the  head  of  a  King  as  a  defiance
to  all  the  reactionaries  of  Europe.  In  the  manor-house,  the
drawing-room,  the  confessional,  the  cry  was  :  "  What  scoun-
drels to  have  dared  to  do  that  !  Now  they  will  stop  at  nothing  :
they  are  going  to  rob  us  of  our  wealth,  or  else  guillotine  us  !  "
And  so  the  plots  of  the  counter-revolutionists  redoubled  in
vigour.

The  Church,  every  Court  of  Europe,  the  English  middle
classes,  all  took  part  in  the  work  of  intrigue,  propaganda  and
corruption  for  organising  the  counter-revolution.

The  maritime  towns,  especially  such  as  Nantes,  Bordeaux
and  Marseilles,  where  there  were  many  rich  merchants,  Lyons,
the  manufacturer  of  luxury,  Rouen,  the  centre  of  trade  and
industry,  became  powerful  centres  of  reaction.  Whole  regions
were  influenced  by  priests  and  emigres  who  had  returned  under
false  names,  and  also  by  English  and  Orleanist  gold,  as  well  as  by
emissaries  from  Italy,  Spain,  and  Russia.

The  party  of  the  "  Gironde  "  served  as  the  rallying-point  for
this  mass  of  reaction,  for  the  royalists  knew  perfectly  well  that
the  Girondins,  in  spite  of  their  apparent  republicansim,  were
really  their  allies,  and  that  they  were  compelled  to  be  so  by  the
logic  of  their  party,  which  is  always  much  more  powerful  than
the  party  label.  And  the  people,  on  its  side,  understood  the
situation  perfectly.  It  knew  that  so  long  as  the  Girondins


364 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

remained  in  the  Convention  no  real  revolutionary  measure
would  be  possible,  and  that  the  war  carried  on  so  feebly  by
these  sybarites  of  the  Revolution  would  be  prolonged  indefinitely
to  the  utter  exhaustion  of  France.  Accordingly,  therefore,  as
the  necessity  for  "  purifying  the  Convention  "  by  the  elimina-
tion of  the  Girondins  became  more  and  more  evident,  the  people
on  its  side  tried  to  organise  itself  for  the  local  struggles  which
were  imminent  in  every  large  city  and  every  small  town  and
village.

We  have  already  remarked  that  the  Directories  of  the
departments  were  mostly  counter-revolutionary.  The  Direc-
tories of  the  districts  were  equally  so.  But  the  municipalities,
established  by  the  law  of  1789,  were  much  more  democratic.
It  is  true  that  when  they  were  first  constituted  in  the  summer
of  1789,  they  mercilessly  repressed  the  peasant  revolts.  But,  as
the  Revolution  developed,  the  municipalities,  elected  by  the
people  often  in  the  midst  of  insurrectionary  disturbances  and
under  the  supervision  of  the  Popular  Societies,  gradually  became
more  revolutionary.

In  Paris,  previous  to  August  10,  the  council  of  the  Commune
had  been  composed  of  middle-class  democrats.  But  during
the  night  of  August  10,  a  new  revolutionary  Commune  was
elected  by  the  forty-eight  sections,  and  although  the  Conven-
tion, at  the  instance  of  the  Girondins,  had  dissolved  this
Commune,  the  new  Commune  elected  on  December  2,  1792,
with  its  procurator,  Chaumette,  its  deputy-procurator,  Hebert,
and  its  mayor,  Pache  (who  was  appointed  somewhat  later),  was  a
frankly  revolutionary  body.

An  elected  body  of  officials  invested  with  powers  so  extensive
and  so  diverse  as  those  entrusted  to  the  council  of  the  Paris
Commune  would  have  certainly  inclined  by  degrees  towards  a
moderate  policy.  But  the  people  of  Paris  had,  in  the  sections,
centres  for  revolutionary  action.  These  sections,  however,
according  as  they  arrogated  to  themselves  various  political
powers,  such  as  the  right  of  distributing  cards  of  citizenship  to
show  that  the  recipient  was  not  a  royalist  conspirator,  the
appointing  of  volunteers  to  fight  in  La  Vendee,  and  so  on —
these  very  sections,  whose  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  and


CAUSES  OF  THE  RISING  ON  MAY  31 365

the  Committee  of  General  Safety  were  working  to  make  them
political  organs,  in  their  turn  soon  inclined  to  officialism  and
conservatism.  In  1795,  they  became,  in  fact,  the  rallying-
points  for  the  middle-class  reaction.

This  is  why  a  network  of  Popular  Societies  and  Fraternal
Societies,  as  well  as  Revolutionary  Committees,  was  constituted
side  by  side  with  the  Commune  and  the  sections  to  become,
after  the  expulsion  of  the  Girondins  in  the  Year  II.  of  the
Republic,  a  real  power  for  action.  All  these  groups  federated
with  each  other,  either  for  momentary  purposes  or  for  con-
tinuous action,  and  they  endeavoured  to  put  themselves  in
touch  with  the  thirty-six  thousand  communes  of  France.
For  this  purpose  they  organised  a  special  correspondence-
bureau.

A  new,  freely  constituted  organisation  thus  came  into  exist-
ence. And  when  we  study  these  groupings — these  "  free
understandings,"  we  should  say  now — we  see  before  us  the
realisation  of  what  the  modern  anarchist  groups  in  France  are
advocating  without  even  knowing  that  their  grandfathers  had
already  put  it  into  practice  during  so  tragic  a  moment  of  the
Revolution  as  was  the  early  part  of  1/93.*

The  majority  of  historians  in  sympathy  with  the  Revolution,
when  they  come  to  the  tragic  struggle  which  was  fought  out
between  the  "  Mountain  "  and  the  "  Gironde  "  in  1793,  dwell
too  much,  it  seems  to  me,  on  the  secondary  aspects  of  this
struggle.  They  attach  too  much  importance  to  the  so-called
federalism  of  the  Girondins.

It  is  true  that  after  May  31,  when  the  Girondist  and  royalist
insurrections  broke  out  in  several  departments,  the  word
"  federalism  "  embodied  in  contemporary  documents  the  chief
article  of  accusation  used  by  the  "  Mountain  "  party  against  the
Girondins.  But  this  word  had  become  a  mere  catch-word,  a
party  badge,  and  was  in  reality  only  a  battle-cry  good  enough

*  Mortimer-Ternaux,  a  rabid  reactionary,  has  pointed  out  this
double  organisation  in  his  Histoire  de  la  Terreur,  vol.  vii.  Jaures  (La
Convention,  vol.  ii.  p.  1254)  has  also  a  very  well  written  page  on  this
subject ;  and  Aulard  refers  to  it  at  some  length  in  his  Histoire  politique
de  la  Revolution,  part  ii.  ch.  v.


366 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

to  use  against  one's  adversaries,  and  as  such  it  served  its  purpose
well.  In  reality,  as  Louis  Blanc  has  remarked,  the  "  federalism
of  the  Girondins  consisted  chiefly  in  their  hatred  of  Paris  and
their  desire  to  oppose  the  reactionary  provinces  to  the  revo-
tionary  capital.  They  were  afraid  of  Paris,  and  this  was  all
their  federalism  meant."  *

They  detested  and  feared  the  ascendency  gained  in  the
Revolution  by  the  Commune  of  Paris,  the  Paris  revolutionary
committees  and  the  people  of  Paris.  When  they  talked  of
transferring  the  seat  of  the  Legislative  Assembly,  and  later  of  the
Convention  itself,  to  some  provincial  town,  it  was  not  for  love  of
provincial  autonomy.  It  was  merely  to  place  the  legislative
body  and  the  executive  authority  in  the  midst  of  a  less  revo-
lutionary population  than  that  of  Paris — among  people  less
active  in  the  public  cause.  This  was  how  royalty  acted  in  the
Middle  Ages  when  it  preferred  a  growing  town,  a  "  royal  town,"
to  the  older  cities  accustomed  to  the  forum.  Thiers  wanted
to  do  the  same  in  iS/l.t

Instead  of  federalising,  everything  done  by  the  Girondins
showed  them  to  be  as  centralising  and  authoritarian  as  the
Montagnards,  perhaps  more  so  ;  for  the  latter  relied  at  least
upon  the  Popular  Societies  when  they  went  on  commission
into  the  provinces  and  not  upon  organs  of  bureaucracy — the
councils  of  the  departments  and  the  districts.  When  the
Girondins  appealed  to  the  provinces  against  Paris,  it  was  to
incite  the  counter-revolutionary  forces  of  the  middle  classes
in  the  manufacturing  towns  and  the  fanaticism  of  the  peasants
in  Normandy  and  Brittany  against  the  revolutionists  of  Paris.
When  the  reactionaries  were  victorious  and  the  Girondins
returned  to  power  after  the  9th  Thermidor,  they  proved,  as
befits  a  party  of  order,  that  they  were  centralisers  much  more
than  the  Montagnards.

M.  Aulard,  who  wrote  at  some  length  about  the  federalism
of  the  Girondins,  aptly  remarks  that  before  the  establishment

*  Louis  Blanc,  4to,  vol.  ii.  p.  42.

f  When  the  Girondins  talked  of  assembling  the  commissioners  of
the  departments  at  Bourges  "  they  would  not  have  stopped  at  this
transference,"  says  Thibaudeau  in  his  M&moires  :  "It  was  their  inten-
tion to  form  a  second  Convention."


CAUSES  OF  THE  RISING  ON  MAY  31 367

of  the  Republic  none  of  the  Girondins  expressed  federalist
tendencies.  Barbaroux,  for  example,  was  an  unmistakable  cen-
traliser,  and  declared  before  the  Bouches-du-Rhone  Assembly
that  a  Federative  Government  is  not  suitable  for  a  great  people,
because  of  the  slowness  of  its  working  and  the  multiplicity  and
complexity  of  its  machinery.*  We  do  not,  in  fact,  find  any
serious  attempt  at  federative  organisation  in  the  scheme  for  a
Constitution  that  the  Girondins  brought  forward  in  1793.
They  show  themselves  by  it  to  have  been  thorough  centralists.

On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  to  me  that  Louis  Blanc  lays  too
much  stress  on  the  "  fiery  impetuosity  "  of  the  Girondins,
Brissot's  ambition  clashing  with  Robespierre's,  and  the  wound-
ing of  Robespierre's  self-esteem  by  the  reckless  Girondins —
for  which  Robespierre  never  pardoned  them.  Jaures  expresses
similar  ideas,  at  least  in  the  first  part  of  his  volume  on  the
Convention, f  which,  however,  does  not  prevent  him,  later  on,
from  indicating  other  causes — when  he  begins  to  explain  the
struggle  between  the  people  of  Paris  and  the  bourgeoisie — causes
much  more  serious  than  wounded  self-esteem,  and  "  the  egoism
of  power."

Of  course  the  "  fiery  impetuosity  "  of  the  Girondins,  so  well
described  by  Louis  Blanc,  and  the  conflict  of  ambition  were
present,  and  they  certainly  helped  to  envenom  the  strife,  but  in
the  struggle  between  the  "  Gironde  "  and  the  "  Mountain,"
there  was,  as  we  have  already  said,  one  general  cause  of  strife
infinitely  more  serious  than  all  the  personal  conflicts  put  to-
gether. This  cause  Louis  Blanc  had  already  clearly  indicated
by  quoting  from  Garat  the  language  used  by  the  "  Gironde  "
to  the  "  Mountain  "  and  the  reply  of  the  "  Mountain  "  to  the
"  Gironde  "  :

"  It  is  not  for  you,"  said  the  Gironde,  "  to  govern  France,

*  Aulard,  Histoire  politique,  p.  264.  "  I  do  not  know  that  any  one
should  have  claimed  the  honour  of  it,"  Thibaudeau  wrote,  when  speak-
ing of  the  federalism  of  the  Girondins,  in  his  M&moires  sur  la  Convention
et  la  Directoire,  vol.  i.  p.  38  (Paris,  1824).  As  to  Marat,  he  was  very
explicit  on  this  point  in  his  paper,  under  the  date  of  May  24,  1793.
"  They  have  for  a  long  time  been  accusing  the  leaders  of  this  infernal
faction  with  federalism  ;  I  confess  that  I  have  never  held  this  opinion
of  them,  although  I  also  have  sometimes  reiterated  the  charge."

|  La  Convention,  pp.  388,  394,  396,  and  1458.


368 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

you,  who  are  covered  with  the  blood  of  September.  The  legis-
lators of  a  rich  and  industrial  empire  must  regard  property  as  one
of  the  most  sacred  bases  of  social  order -,  and  the  mission  of  legis-
lating for  France  cannot  be  fulfilled  by  you  who  preach  anarchy,
protect  plunder  and  terrify  the  owners  of  property.  .  .  .  You
summon  against  us  all  the  hired  assassins  of  Paris  ;  we  summon
against  you  all  the  honest  folk  of  Paris."

It  is  the  language  of  the  propertied  party — le  parti  des
bonnetes  gens — those  who  massacred  the  people  of  Paris  in  June
1848  and  in  1871,  supported  the  coup  d'etat  of  Napoleon  III.,
and  who  are  now  ready  to  do  it  all  over  again.
^  To  it  the  "  Mountain  "  replied  :  "  We  accuse  you  of  want-
ing to  use  your  talents  for  your  own  advancement  only,  and  not
in  the  interests  of  Equality.  So  long  as  the  King  permitted
you  to  govern  through  the  ministers  you  gave  him,  so  long  did
he  seem  honest  enough  for  you.  .  .  .  Your  secret  desire  has
never  been  to  raise  France  to  the  glorious  destiny  of  a  Republic,
but  to  keep  her  under  a  King  whose  Mayors  of  the  Palace  you
v  would  yourselves  have  been."

We  shall  see  how  just  this  accusation  was  when  we  find
Barbaroux  in  the  South  and  Louvet  in  Brittany  both  of  them
hand  in  glove  with  the  royalists,  and  when  so  many  of  the
Girondins  entered  into  an  agreement  with  les  blancs,  after
they  came  back  to  power  through  the  reaction  of  Thermidor.
But  let  as  continue  the  quotation.

"  You  want  liberty  without  equality,"  said  the  "  Mountain,"
'*  and  we  desire  equality  because  we  cannot  conceive  liberty
without  it.  You  who  call  yourselves  statesmen,  you  want  to
organise  the  Republic  for  the  rich  ;  but  we,  not  pretending  to  be
statesmen,  are  striving  for  laws  which  will  lift  the  poor  out  of
their  misery  and  turn  all  men,  under  a  state  of  universal  well-
being,  into  happy  citizens  and  ardent  defenders  of  a  universally
adored  republic."

Here  we  see  two  absolutely  different  conceptions  of  society  ;
and  it  was  so  that  the  struggle  was  understood  by  its  contem-
poraries.*

*  Numerous  quotations  could  be  given  to  prove  this.  The  two
following  may  serve  as  examples  :  "  The  Girondins  wanted  the  Revolu-


CAUSES  OF  THE  RISING  ON  MAY  31 369

The  Revolution  had  hitherto  confined  itself  to  overthrowing
the  King,  without  even  trying  to  secure  its  work  by  a  complete
change  of  the  ideas  of  the  nation  in  a  republican  direction  ;
it  had  to  stop  after  its  first  victory,  and  leave  France  to  struggle,
as  best  she  could,  against  German,  English,  Spanish,  Italian,
and  Savoyard  invaders,  supported  from  within  by  the  partisans
of  royalty.  Or  else,  the  Revolution,  after  getting  rid  of  the
King,  had  to  make  at  once,  without  delay,  an  effort  towards
"  Equality,"  as  they  then  called  it — towards  "  Communism,"
as  we  should  say  now.  It  must  complete  the  work  of  abolishing
the  feudal  rights,  the  work  of  restoring  the  land  to  the  com-
munes, the  work  of  nationalising  the  soil,  while  it  would  recog-
nise the  right  of  all  to  the  land.  It  must  consolidate  the  work
already  so  far  carried  out  by  the  revolted  peasantry  during
those  four  years,  and  it  would  try,  with  the  people's  help,  "  to
raise  the  poor  out  of  their  wretchedness."  It  must  try  to
create,  if  possible,  not  absolute  equality  of  riches,  but  a  con-
dition of  well-being  for  all, — "  universal  welfare."  And  it
would  do  this  by  forcibly  taking  the  power  of  Government  from
the  rich,  and  transferring  it  to  the  Communes  and  the  Popular
Societies.

These  alternatives  suffice  to  explain  the  sanguinary  struggle
which  rent  asunder  the  Convention,  and  with  it  the  whole  of
France  after  the  downfall  of  royalty.  Everything  else  is  of
secondary  importance.

tion  to  stop  short  of  the  middle  classes,"  says  Baudot.  They  wanted
"  quietly  to  establish  a  middle-class  aristocracy,  which  should  take
the  place  of  the  nobility  and  clergy,"  said  Bourdon  de  1'Oise  at  the
Jacobin  Club,  on  May  31.  (La  Socttti  des  Jacobins,  Aulard  edition,
vol.  v.  p.  220.)


CHAPTER  XLIII

SOCIAL  DEMANDS—STATE  OF  FEELING  IN  PARIS-
LYONS

Effect  of  execution  of  King — Changed  aspect  of  Revolution —
Rise  of  counter-revolution — Paris  Commune  tries  to  keep
down  price  of  bread — Varlet — Jacques  Roux — Movement
against  owners  of  large  fortunes — Petition  to  Convention —
Marat  tries  to  stop  agitation— Effect  of  riot— Necessity  of
crushing  "Gironde"  becomes  evident

NOTWITHSTANDING  the  violence  that  the  Parliamentary
struggle  between  the  "  Mountain "  and  the  "  Gironde "
displayed  at  times,  it  would  have  dragged  on  had  it  been
strictly  confined  to  the  Convention.  But  since  the  execution
of  Louis  XVI.  events  were  moving  faster,  and  the  gulf  between
the  revolutionists  and  the  counter-revolutionists  was  becoming
so  wide  that  there  was  no  longer  any  possibility  of  a  vague,  in-
determined  party,  half-way  between  the  two  others.  Opposed
as  they  were  to  the  natural  course  of  development  which  the
Revolution  was  following,  the  Girondins  soon  found  them-
selves, together  with  the  Feuillants  and  Royalists,  in  the  ranks
of  the  counter-revolutionists,  and  as  such  they  had  to  succumb.
The  Revolution  was  still  in  its  ascendant  phase.

The  execution  of  the  King  had  produced  a  profound  impres-
sion in  France.  If  the  middle  classes  were  stricken  with  terror
at  the  daring  of  the  Montagnards,  and  trembled  for  their
property  and  their  lives,  the  intelligent  portion  of  the  popula-
tion saw  on  the  contrary  the  dawn  of  a  new  era — the  nearing
of  that  "  well-being  for  all "  which  the  revolutionists  had
promised  to  the  poor.

The  greater  was  their  deception  ! The  King  had  perished,

37o


SOCIAL  DEMANDS  371

royalty  had  disappeared ;  but  the  insolence  of  the  rich  was
growing.  Their  insolence  sunned  itself  in  the  wealthy  quarters,
it  even  announced  itself  impudently  in  the  public  galleries
of  the  Convention,  while  in  the  poor  districts  misery  grew
blacker  and  blacker,  as  the  sad  winter  of  1793  crept  on,  bringing
a  lack  of  bread,  unemployment,  a  rise  in  prices,  and  the  deprecia-
tion of  paper-money.  And,  in  the  meantime,  bad  news  came
in  from  everywhere  :  from  the  frontier,  where  the  troops  had
melted  like  snow  ;  from  Brittany,  where  a  general  rising  with
the  help  of  the  English  was  being  prepared  ;  from  La  Vendee,
where  a  hundred  thousand  revolted  peasants  were  murdering
the  patriots  with  the  benediction  of  the  clergy ;  from  Lyons,
which  had  become  the  stronghold  of  the  counter-revolution-
ists ;  from  the  Treasury,  that  now  existed  only  by  fresh  issues
of  paper-money  (les  assignats) ;  and,  finally,  from  the  Conven-
tion, which  had  come  to  a  standstill,  and  was  exhausting  its
forces  in  stormy  internal  struggles.

All  this  was  helping  to  paralyse  the  revolutionary  spirit.
In  Paris,  the  poor  workers,  the  sans- culottes,  no  longer  came
to  the  sections  in  sufficient  numbers,  and  the  middle-class
counter-revolutionists  took  advantage  of  it.  In  February
1793,  the  culottes  dbrees  invaded  the  sections.  They  came
in  great  numbers  to  the  evening  meetings,  passed  reactionary
votes — by  using  their  sticks  in  case  of  need — displaced  the
sans-culotte  functionaries,  and  had  themselves  nominated  in
their  stead.  The  revolutionists  were  even  forced  to  reorganise
their  forces,  so  as  to  be  able  to  come  to  the  rescue  from  the
neighbouring  sections,  when  one  section  was  invaded  by  the
counter-revolutionists.

In  Paris  and  in  the  provinces  some  sections  were  even
compelled  to  ask  the  municipal  council  to  guarantee  to  the
poor  men  of  the  people  who  assisted  at  the  sittings,  and  accepted
duties  on  the  committees,  a  payment  of  two  livres  per  day.
Whereupon  the  Girondins  did  not  fail,  of  course,  to  ask  the
Convention  to  dissolve  all  these  organisations  of  Sections,
Popular  Societies  and  Federations  of  Departments.  They
did  not  understand  what  power  of  resistance  was  yet  in  the
old  regime,  and  they  did  not  see  that  such  a  step,  taken  at  this


372 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

moment,  would  have  secured  the  immediate  triumph  of  the
counter-revolution  and  the  "  Tarpeian  Rock  "  for  themselves.

However,  the  mass  of  the  people  was  not  yet  discouraged.
The  fact  is,  that  new  ideas  were  ripening  in  many  minds,  new
currents  were  coming  to  the  surface,  and  seeking  the  form
which  would  best  express  them.

The  Paris  Commune,  having  obtained  large  grants  from
the  Convention  for  the  purchase  of  flour,  succeeded  more
or  less  in  keeping  the  price  of  bread  to  three-halfpence  a  pound.
But  to  obtain  bread  at  this  price,  the  people  had  to  spend
the  night  at  the  bakers'  doors,  waiting  in  a  queue  on  the  pave-
ment. And  then  the  people  understood  that  the  Commune
in  buying  wheat  at  the  price  the  monopolists  extorted  only
enriched  the  speculators  at  the  expense  of  the  State.  It
meant  moving  for  ever  in  a  circle,  for  the  profit  of  the  stock-
jobbers. Stock-jobbing  had  already  grown  alarmingly.  The
newly  formed  bourgeoisie  rapidly  became  rich  by  this  means.
Not  only  did  the  caterers  for  the  armies — the  "  rice-bread-
and-salt  "  (les  riz-pain-sel) — make  ill-gotten  fortunes,  but,  as
everything — wheat,  flour,  copper,  oil,  soap,  candles,  zinc,  ftc. —
induced  speculation,  to  say  nothing  of  the  enormous  specula-
tions on  the  sale  of  national  estates,  fortunes  grew  from  nothing
with  an  extraordinary  rapidity  in  the  sight  and  hearing  of  all.

The  question  :  "  What  is  to  be  done  ?  "  was  then  asked  with
all  the  tragic  meaning  which  it  acquires  in  times  of  crisis.

Those  to  whom  the  supreme  remedy  for  all  social  evils  is
always  "the  punishment  of  the  guilty,"  could  only  propose
the  death  penalty  for  the  stock-jobbers,  the  reorganisation
of  the  police  system  of  "  public  safety,"  and  a  revolutionary
tribunal — which  was  in  reality  merely  a  return  to  Maillard's
tribunal,  without  its  openness,  but  certainly  not  a  solution
of  the  problem.

In  the  faubourgs,  however,  a  deeper  current  of  opinion  was
also  forming,  one  which  sought  constructive  solutions,  and  this
current  found  expression  in  the  predictions  of  a  workman
of  the  faubourgs,  Varlet,  and  of  a  former  priest,  Jacques  Roux,
supported  by  all  the  "  nameless  ones,"  who  in  history  go  by
the  name  of  Les  Enrages  (the  extremists).  These  men  under-


SOCIAL  DEMANDS  373

stood  that  the  theories  on  freedom  of  commerce,  defended
in  the  Convention  by  men  like  Condorcet  and  Sieves,  were
not  true :  that  those  commodities  which  are  scarce  in  the
market  are  easily  to  be  seized  upon  by  speculators,  especially
during  a  period  such  as  the  Revolution  was  now  traversing.
And  they  set  themselves  to  spread  ideas  on  the  necessity  of
communalising  and  nationalising  commerce,  and  organising  the
exchange  of  goods  at  cost  -price — those  ideas  which  later  on  inspired
Fourier,  Godwin,  Robert  Owen,  Proudhon,  and  their  subse-
quent socialist  followers.

The  Enrages  had  understood — and  we  will  see  later  how  a
beginning  of  practical  application  was  given  to  their  ideas —
that  it  was  not  enough  to  guarantee  to  each  man  the  right  to
work,  or  even  a  right  to  the  land ;  they  saw  that  so  long  as
commercial  exploitation  existed,  nothing  could  be  done ;
they  maintained  that  to  prevent  this,  commerce  would  have
to  be  communalised.

At  the  same  time,  a  pronounced  movement  was  growing
among  the  masses  against  the  owners  of  great  fortunes — a
movement  similar  to  that  of  to-day  in  the  United  States  against
the  rapidly  amassed  fortune  of  the  "  trusts."  The  best  minds
of  the  time  were  struck  by  the  impossibility  of  establishing
a  democratic  Republic,  so  long  as  there  was  no  protection
against  the  monstrous  inequality  of  incomes,  which  was  already
asserting  itself,  and  threatened  to  grow  even  worse.*

This  movement  against  the  monopolists  and  the  stock-
jobbers was  bound  to  produce  also  a  movement  against  specula-
tion in  paper-money  y  and  on  February  3,  1792,  delegates  from
the  Commune,  from  the  forty-eight  sections  and  from  the
"  United  Defenders  of  the  eighty-four  departments  "  came
before  the  Convention,  demanding  that  a  limit  should  be  put
to  the  depreciation  of  paper-money,  due  to  stock-jobbery.
They  demanded  the  repeal  of  the  decree  of  the  Constituent

*  Micheletjs  genius  has  led  him  to  see  very  clearly  the  importance
of  this  communist  movement  of  the  masses,  and  he  had  already  drawn
attention  to  its  essential  points.  Jaures  (Histoire  socialiste,  vol.  iv.
pp.  1003  et  seqj  has  now  given  more  ample  and  very  interesting  informa-
tion on  this  movement  in  Paris  and  Lyons,  where  L'Ange  was  a  pre
cursor  of  Fourier.


374 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Assembly  which  had  recognised  that  money  is  merchandise,
and  the  death  penalty  for  stock-jobbers.*

This  was,  as  we  may  see,  a  revolt  of  the  poor  against  the
wealthy  classes,  who  having  got  all  possible  advantages  out
of  the  Revolution,  were  now  opposed  to  its  benefiting  the  poor.
And  this  is  why,  when  the  petitioners  learned  that  the  Jacobins,
Saint-Just  included,  were  opposed  to  their  petition,  for  fear
of  alarming  the  middle  classes,  they  spoke  of  them  as  of  "  those
who  do  not  understand  the  poor,  because  they  themselves
dine  well  every  night. "t

Marat,  too,  tried  to  calm  the  agitation.  He  disapproved
of  the  petition  and  defended  the  Montagnards  and  the  Paris
deputies  whom  the  petitioners  attacked  ;  but  he  knew  misery
well,  and  when  he  heard  the  pleadings  of  the  working  women
who  came  to  the  Convention  on  February  24,  begging  the
protection  of  the  legislators  against  the  speculators,  )ie  at  once
took  up  the  cause  of  the  poor.  In  a  very  violent '  article,  in
the  issue  of  his  paper  of  the  25th,  "  despairing  of  seeing  the
legislators  take  any  effectual  measures,"  he  preached  "  the
complete  destruction  of  this  accursed  brood  " — "  capitalists,
stock-jobbers,  monopolists,  whom  these  wretched  representa-
tives of  the  nation  encouraged,  by  not  attacking  them."

The  fury  of  an  enraged  mob  is  felt  in  this  article,  in  which

*  Could  stock-jobbing  influence  the  fluctuations  in  the  value  of
paper-money  ?  Several  historians  have  put  to  themselves  this  ques-
tion, only  to  reply  in  the  negative.  The  depreciation,  they  said,  was
due  to  the  too  great  quantity  of  tokens  of  exchange  which  were  put
into  circulation.  This  is  true ;  but  those  who  have  followed  closely
the  fluctuations  in  the  price,  let  us  say,  of  wheat  on  the  international
markets,  of  cotton  on  the  Liverpool  Exchange,  or  of  Russian  notes  on
the  Berlin  Exchange,  some  thirty  years  ago,  will  not  hesitate  to  recog-
nise that  our  grandfathers  were  right  in  holding  stock-jobbers  largely
responsible  for  the  depreciation  of  the  paper-money.  Even  to-day,
when  financial  operations  cover  an  infinitely  wider  area  than  they  did
in  1793,  stock- jobbing  has  always  the  effect  of  exaggerating  out  of  all
proportion  the  effects  of  supply  and  demand  at  a  given  moment.  If,  with
the  present  facilities  of  transport  and  exchanges,  stock-jobbing  cannot
create  a  permanent  rise  in  the  price  of  a  commodity,  or  in  the  value  of
given  shares,  it  always  exaggerates  nevertheless  the  natural  rise,  and
swells  quite  out  of  proportion  the  temporary  fluctuations  in  price
which  are  due  either  to  the  varying  productivity  of  labour  (for  instance,
in  the  harvests),  or  to  fluctuations  in  supply  and  demand.

f  Taurus,  iv.  p.  1023.


STATE  OF  FEELING  IN  PARIS  375

Marat  demands,  first,  that  the  principal  monopolists  be
handed  over  to  a  State  tribunal,  and  then  advocates  revolu-
tionary acts,  saving  that  "the  looting  of  a  few  shops,  at  the
doors  of  which  the  monopolists  should  be  hanged,  would  soon
put  an  end  to  these  malpractices,  which  reduce  twenty-five
million  people  to  despair,  and  cause  thousands  to  perish  of
want."

On  the  same  day,  in  the  morning,  the  people  did  indeed
pillage  some  shops,  taking  sugar,  soap,  &c.,  and  there  was  talk
in  the  faubourgs  of  recommencing  the  September  massacres
among  the  monopolists  and  jobbers  of  the  Stock  Exchange,
and  the  rich  altogether.

One  can  imagine  what  was  made  of  this  movement,  which
after  all  was  nothing  but  a  small  riot,  by  the  Girondins  who
wished  to  convince  the  provinces  that  Paris  was  a  raging  furnace
of  terror,  in  which  no  one  was  safe  any  longer.  Happy  at
having  found  in  Marat's  article  the  sentence  about  pillage
which  we  have  just  quoted,  they  made  enough  out  of  it  to
accuse  the  "  Mountain  "  and  the  people  of  Paris  en  masse  of
intending  to  murder  the  rich.  The  Commune  did  not  dare
to  approve  the  riot,  and  even  Marat  had  to  contradict  himself
by  saying  that  it  was  fomented  by  royalists.  As  to  Robespierre,
he  did  not  lose  the  opportunity  of  attributing  the  whole  move-
ment to  the  influence  of  foreign  money.

The  riot  produced  nevertheless  the  desired  effect.  The
Convention  raised,  from  four  to  seven  millions,  the  advance
it  was  making  to  the  Commune  to  enable  it  to  keep  bread
at  three-halfpence  the  pound,  and  Chaumette,  the  procureur
of  the  Commune,  developed  before  the  Convention  the  idea
which  was  later  introduced  into  the  "  law  of  maximum  " —
that  the  question  was  not  solely  to  obtain  bread  at  a  reasonable
price.  It  was  also  necessary,  said  he,  "  that  commodities  of
secondary  necessity  "  should  be  accessible  to  the  people.  There
no  longer  exists  "  any  just  ratio  between  the  pay  of  a  day's
manual  labour  and  these  commodities  of  secondary  necessity."
"  The  poor  have  done  as  much  as  the  rich,  even  more,  for  the
Revolution.  The  whole  life  of  the  rich  has  changed,  he  alone
(the  poor  man)  has  remained  in  the  same  position,  and  all  he


376 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

has  gained  through  the  Revolution  is  the  right  of  complaining
of  his  poverty."*

This  movement  in  Paris  at  the  end  of  February  contributed
to  a  great  extent  to  the  fall  of  the  Girondins.  While  Robes-
pierre was  still  hoping  by  legal  means  to  paralyse  the  party
of  the  "  Gironde  "  in  the  Convention,  the  Enrages  understood
that  so  long  as  this  party  ruled  in  the  Assembly,  no  progress
of  any  sort  would  be  made  in  matters  of  economics.  They
had  the  courage  to  say  aloud  that  the  aristocracy  of  money,  of
the  great  merchants  and  financiers,  was  rising  from  the  ruins
of  the  old  aristocracy,  and  that  this  new  aristocracy  was  so
strong  in  the  Convention  that  if  the  coalition  of  the  Kings
had  not  counted  on  its  support,  they  would  neWr  have  dared
to  attack  France.  It  is  even  very  probable  that  from  that
time  on  Robespierre  and  his  faithful  Jacobins  told  themselves
that  they  ought  to  make  sure  of  the  Enrages  to  crush  the
Girondins,  leaving  till  later,  according  to  the  turn  events
might  take,  the  question  whether  to  follow  the  Enrages  or  to
fight  them.

It  is  certain  that  ideas  such  as  those  advocated  by  Chaumette
were  bound  to  simmer  in  the  people's  minds  in  all  large  towns.
The  poor  man  had  indeed  done  all  for  the  Revolution,  and
while  the  bourgeoisie  got  rich,  the  poor  man  alone  got  nothing.
Even  in  those  cities  where  no  popular  movements  similar  to
those  of  Paris  and  Lyons  had  taken  place,  the  poor  must  have
made  similar  reflections  among  themselves.  And  everywhere

*  A  much  keener  economist  than  many  professional  economists,
this  most  sympathetic  man  pointed  to  the  root  of  the  question,  show-
ing how  monopolists  exaggerated  the  results  of  conditions  created
by  the  war  and  the  repeated  issues  of  paper-money.  "  War  at  sea,"
said  he,  "  the  disasters  in  our  colonies,  the  losses  on  the  market  value
of  the  paper  currency,  and  above  all,  the  fact  that  the  quantities
of  notes  issued  no  longer  correspond  with  the  needs  of  the  commercial
transactions — these  are  a  few  of  the  causes  of  this  considerable  rise
which  we  lament.  But  how  great  is  their  influence,  how  terrible  and
disastrous  is  their  result,  when  among  us  there  exist  evilly  disposed
men,  monopolists,  when  the  national  distress  is  used  as  a  base  for  the
selfish  speculations  of  a  crowd  of  capitalists  who  do  not  know  what  to
do  with  the  immense  sums  of  money  they  have  gained  in  the  recent
transactions."


STATE  OF  FEELING  IN  LYONS  377

they  must  have  noticed  that  the  Girondins  were  a  centre,
round  which  could  rally  those  who  wished  to  prevent  at  all  |
costs  the  Revolution  from  benefiting  the  poor.

At  Lyons,  the  struggle  took  just  the  same  course.  It  is
clear  that  in  this  great  manufacturing  town,  where  the  work-
men lived  by  an  industry  of  luxury,  which  unavoidably  had
suffered  from  the  Revolution,  the  destitution  was  terrible.
There  was  no  work,  and  bread  was  at  a  famine  price,  three-
pence a  pound.

There  were  in  Lyons,  as  everywhere,  two  parties :  the
popular  party,  represented  by  Laussel,  and  still  more  by
Chalier,  and  the  party  of  the  merchant  middle  class,  which
rallied  round  the  Girondins,  as  an  intermediate  step  before
going  over  to  the  Feuillants.  The  mayor,  Niviere-Chol,  a
Girondist  merchant,  was  the  man  of  the  middle-class  party.

Many  priests  who  had  refused  to  take  the  oath  of  obedience
to  the  Constitution  were  in  hiding  in  this  town,  where  the
population  had  always  had  a  leaning  towards  mysticism,  and
agents  of  the  emigres  also  were  there  in  great  numbers.  Alto-
gether Lyons  was  a  centre  for  conspirators  coming  from  Jales,*
Avignon,  Chambery  and  Turin.

Against  all  these,  the  people  had  but  the  Commune,  in
which  the  two  most  popular  men  were  Chalier — an  ex-priest
and  mystic  communist,  and  Laussel,  another  ex-priest.  The
poor  worshipped  Chalier,  who  never  ceased  to  preach  against
the  rich.

It  is  difficult  to  disentangle  the  events  which  took  place  in
Lyons  during  the  first  days  of  March.  We  only  know  that
the  unemployment  and  want  were  terrible,  and  that  there
was  great  unrest  among  the  workmen.  They  demanded  the
maximum  for  grain,  and  also  for  those  commodities  which
Chaumette  called  "  commodities  of  secondary  necessity "
(wine,  wood,  oil,  soap,  coffee,  sugar,  &c.).  They  also  called
for  the  prohibition  of  the  traffic  in  tokens  of  exchange,  whether
notes,  gold  or  silver,  and  wished  for  the  establishment  of  a
tariff  of  wages.  The  poor  discussed  the  expediency  of  mas-
sacring or  guillotining  the  monopolists,  and  the  Commune  of

*  Ch.  xxxi.


378 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Lyons,  going  no  doubt  by  the  decree  of  the  Legislative  Assembly
of  August  29,  1792,  ordered  searches  to  be  made  all  over  Lyons,
similar  to  those  which  took  place  on  August  29,  1792,  in  Paris,
in  order  to  lay  hands  on  the  numerous  royalist  conspirators
sojourning  in  the  city.  But  the  royalists  and  the  Girondins,
rallying  round  the  mayor,  Niviere-Chol,  succeeded  in  seizing
the  municipality,  and  proposed  to  deal  severely  with  the
people.  The  Convention,  however,  interfered  to  prevent
the  slaughter  of  the  "  patriots,"  and  for  this  purpose  sent  three
commissioners  to  Lyons.  Supported  by  these  commissioners,
the  revolutionists  again  took  possession  of  the  sections  which
had  been  invaded  by  reactionaries.  The  Girondin  mayor
was  forced  to  resign,  and  on  March  9,  a  friend  of  Chalier  was
elected  in  the  place  of  Niviere-Chol.

But  the  struggle  did  not  end  with  that,  and  we  shall  see
later  on  how,  the  Girondins  again  gaining  the  upper  hand  at
the  end  of  May,  the  people,  the  "  patriots,"  were  massacred.
For  the  present  let  us  only  note  that  in  Lyons,  as  in  Paris,
the  Girondins  served  as  a  rallying-point,  not  only  for  those
who  were  opposed  to  the  people's  Revolution,  but  also  for  all
those  absolute  Royalists  and  constitutional  Feuillants  who  did
not  want  a  Republic.*

The  necessity  of  crushing  the  political  power  of  the  "  Gi-
ronde  "  became,  however,  still  more  evident  when  the  betrayal
of  Dumouriez  revealed  whither  their  policy  was  leading.

*  On  April  15,  the  bourgeoisie  of  Lyons  sent  to  the  Convention  a
delegation  of  those  sections  where  they  held  the  upper  hand,  to  report
that  their  city  groaned  beneath  the  tyranny  of  a  Jacobin  municipal
council,  which  was  laying  hands  on  the  property  of  rich  merchants.
They  also  asked  the  bourgeoisie  of  Paris  to  get  hold  of  the  sections.
At  the  end  of  February  the  Mayor  of  Paris,  Petion,  published  his
"  Letter  to  the  Parisians,"  in  which  he  called  the  bourgeoisie  to  arms
against  the  people,  saying :  "  Your  property  is  threatened,  and  you
close  your  eyes  to  the  danger.  .  »  .  You  are  subjected  to  all  manner
of  requisitions  and  yet  you  suffer  patiently."  This  was  a  direct  appeal
to  the  middle  classes  against  the  people.


CHAPTER  XLIV

THE  WAR—THE  RISING  IN  LA  VENDEE—
TREACHERY  OF  DUMOURIEZ

Need  of  volunteers — Forces  ordered — Money  required —
Lack  of  trustworthy  generals — Dumouriez — His  connection
with  Girondins  and  Montagnards — France  and  England —
War  declared — Treachery  of  Dumouriez — Counter-revolu-
tionary movement  in  Brittany — Rising  in  La  Vendee — Danton
recalled  from  Belgium — Volunteers  enlist — Terrible  situation
— "Mountain"  tries  to  allay  panic — Revolutionary  tribune —
Peasants  urge  clergy  to  rise — Savage  hunt  for  republicans —
Dumouriez  in  Belgium — Danton  tries  to  check  Dumouriez —
Dumouriez  outlawed — Committee  of  Public  Welfare  created —
Danton  becomes  leading  spirit — Fall  of  Girondins  inevitable

IN  the  early  part  of  1793,  the  war  began  under  very  unfavour-
able circumstances,  and  the  advantages  obtained  during  the
previous  autumn  were  not  maintained.  Great  reinforcements
were  necessary  in  order  to  enable  the  army  to  take  the  offensive
and  the  free  enlistments  were  far  from  giving  the  necessary
numbers.*

It  was  estimated  in  February  1793,  that  it  would  take  at
least  300,000  men  to  fill  up  the  gaps  in  the  army  and  to  bring
up  its  effective  force  to  half  a  million,  but  volunteers  were  no
longer  to  be  counted  on.  Certain  departments  (the  Var  and
the  Gironde)  willingly  sent  their  battalions — nearly  whole
armies — but  other  departments  did  nothing  of  the  sort.

Then,  on  February  24,  the  Convention  was  compelled  to

*  The  people  knew,  of  course,  how  the  volunteers  of  1792  had  been
received  in  the  army  by  the  staff  of  officers  and  the  generals — all
royalists.  "  None  of  them  wanted  to  have  them,"  says  Avenel,  who
has  consulted  the  archives  of  the  War  Office.  The  volunteers  were
treated  as  "  disorganisers "  and  cowards ;  they  were  shot  on  the
slightest  provocation,  and  the  troops  were  incited  against  them  (Lundis
rtvolutionnaires,  p.  8).

379


38o THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

order  a  forced  levy  of  300,000  men,  to  be  raised  among  all  the
departments,  and  in  each  department  by  the  districts  and
communes  between  them.  These  latter  had  first  to  call  upon
volunteers  ;  but  if  this  appeal  was  not  answered  by  the  required
number  of  men,  the  communes  had  to  recruit  the  remainder,
in  whichever  way  they  considered  best — that  is  to  say,  either
by  lot  or  by  personal  nomination,  with  the  r^»ht,  however,  of
finding  a  substitute  in  both  cases.  To  induce  men  to  enlist,
the  Convention  not  only  promised  them  pensions,  but  it  also
undertook  to  enable  the  pensioners  to  buy  portions  of  the
national  estates,  by  paying  for  them  in  instalments  with  their
pensions,  a  tenth  part  of  the  total  cost  of  the  land  or  estate
purchased  to  be  paid  every  year.  Government  lands  to  the
value  of  400  million  francs  were  assigned  for  this  purpose.*

Meanwhile  money  was  badly  wanted,  and  Cambon,  an
absolutely  honest  man,  who  held  an  almost  absolute  power
over  the  finances,  was  forced  to  make  a  new  issue  of  800  millions
in  paper-money.  But  the  best  estates  of  the  clergy  (which
were  the  guarantee  for  these  notes)  had  already  been  sold,
and  the  estates  of  the  emigres  did  not  sell  so  easily.  People
hesitated  to  buy  them,  fearing  that  the  purchased  estates
might  be  confiscated  when  the  emigres  would  return  to  France.
Therefore  the  Treasury,  under  Cambon,  found  it  increasingly
difficult  to  meet  the  ever-growing  needs  of  the  armies.t

However,  the  greatest  difficulty  of  the  war  was  not  this.
It  lay  in  the  fact  that  nearly  all  the  generals  belonged  to  the
counter-revolution,  and  the  system  of  the  election  of  officers
by  the  soldiers  themselves,  which  the  Convention  had  just
introduced,  could  furnish  superior  officers  only  after  the  lapse
of  a  certain  time.  For  the  present,  the  generals  did  not
inspire  confidence,  and  in  fact  the  treachery  of  Lafayette  was
soon  followed  by  that  of  Dumouriez.

Michelet  was  perfectly  justified  in  saying  that  when  Du-

*  Everything  remained,  however,  so  far  as  it  can  be  ascertained,
as  promises  (Avenel,  Biens  nationaux,  in  Lundis  rtvolutionnaires).

|  A  few  revolutionary  sections  of  Paris  offered  thereupon  to  mort-
gage all  their  properties  to  serve  as  a  guarantee  for  the  notes.  This
offer  was  refused,  but  there  was  a  profound  idea  in  it.  When  a  nation
makes  war,  property  owners  must  bear  the  weight  of  it,  as  much  and
even  more  than  those  whose  only  incomes  are  their  wages.


THE  WAR  381

mouriez  left  Paris  to  rejoin  his  army  a  few  days  after  the
execution  of  Louis  XVI.,  he  was  already  meditating  his  treachery.
He  had  seen  the  triumph  of  the  "  Mountain,"  and  he  probably
understood  that  the  execution  of  the  King  was  the  beginning
of  a  new  phase  in  the  Revolution.  For  the  revolutionists
he  felt  nothing  but  hatred,  and  he  no  doubt  foresaw  that  his
dream  of  re-establishing  the  Constitution  of  1791  in  France,
with  a  Duke  of  Orleans  on  the  throne,  could  only  be  realised
w  th  the  help  of  Austria.  From  that  day  he  must  have  decided
on  his  treachery.

At  this  moment  Dumouriez  was  closely  connected  with  the
Girondins,  and  even  on  intimate  terms  with  Gensonne,  with
whom  he  remained  in  communication  till  April.  However,
he  did  not  break  with  the  "  Montagnards  "  either,  who  already
mistrusted  him — Marat  treated  him  frankly  as  a  traitor,  but
did  not  feel  strong  enough  to  attack  him.  The  victories  of
Valmy  and  Jemmapes  had  been  so  much  glorified,  and  the  real
facts  concerning  the  retreat  of  the  Prussians  were  so  little
known,  that  the  soldiers,  especially  the  rank  and  file,  adored
their  general.  To  attack  him  in  these  circumstances  would
have  been  to  risk  rousing  the  army,  which  Dumouriez  could
have  led  against  Paris  and  the  Revolution.  Consequently
there  remained  nothing  for  the  "  Mountain  "  to  do  but  to
wait  and  watch.

In  the  meantime  France  was  entering  into  a  war  with
England.  As  soon  as  the  news  of  the  execution  of  Louis  XVI.
had  reached  London,  the  English  Government  returned  his
passport  and  papers  to  the  French  Ambassador,  ordering  him
to  quit  the  United  Kingdom.  But  it  goes  without  saying
that  the  execution  of  the  King  was  only  a  pretext  to  break
off  relations  with  France.  It  is  in  fact  now  known,  through
the  Count  de  Mercy,  that  the  English  Government  felt  no
affection  for  the  French  royalists,  and  that  it  was  not  in  the
least  anxious  to  strengthen  them  by  its  support.  England
simply  considered  this  the  right  time  to  get  rid  of  a  maritime
rival  that  had  helped  the  Americans  to  obtain  their  indepen-
dence, to  take  from  France  her  colonies,  and  perhaps  even
some  great  mil  tary  port — at  any  rate,  to  weaken  her  sea  power.


382 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  English  Government  simply  made  the  most  of  the  impres-
sion produced  by  the  execution  of  the  King  to  press  the
war.

Unfortunately,  the  French  politicians  did  not  see  how
inevitable  from  the  English  point  of  view  was  this  war.  Not
only  the  Girondins — especially  Brissot,  who  plumed  himself
on  knowing  England — but  Danton  also,  still  hoped  that  the
Whigs,  of  whom  a  party  were  enthusiastic  supporters  of  the
ideas  of  liberty,  would  overthrow  Pitt  and  prevent  the  war.
In  reality,  the  greater  part  of  the  British  nation  was  soon  united
on  the  question  of  war  when  its  mercantile  advantages  were
understood.  It.  must  also  be  said  that  the  English  diplomatists
managed  to  make  very  clever  use  of  the  ambitions  of  the  French
statesmen.  They  made  Dumouriez  believe  that  he  was  the
man  for  them — the  only  one  with  whom  they  could  treat ;
and  they  promised  to  support  him,  to  re-establish  a  con-
stitutional monarchy.  Danton  they  persuaded  that  the
Whigs  might,  very  possibly,  return  to  power,  and  they  would
then  make  peace  with  Republican  France.*

On  the  whole  they  managed  to  put  the  onus  on  France
when  the  Convention  declared  war  with  Great  Britain  on
February  I.

This  declaration  changed  the  whole  of  the  military  situation.
To  take  possession  of  Holland,  to  prevent  the  English  from
landing  there,  became  an  absolute  necessity.  But  this  was
precisely  what  Dumouriez,  either  because  he  did  not  consider
himself  strong  enough,  or  because  he  had  no  mind  to,  had  not
done  during  the  autumn,  although  he  had  been  urged  by
Danton  to  do  it.  He  had  taken  up,  in  December,  his  winter
quarters  in  Belgium,  and  this  of  course  did  not  dispose  the
Belgians  in  favour  of  the  French  invaders.  Liege  was  his  chief
military  depot.

Up  to  the  present  we  do  not  yet  know  all  about  Dumouriez'
treachery.  Very  probably,  as  Michelet  said,  he  had  already
made  up  his  mind  to  betray,  when  he  returned  to  his  army
on  January  26,  1793.  His  march  at  the  end  of  February,

*  Albert  Sorel,  L' Europe  et  la  Revolution  franfaise  (Paris,  1891),
Book  I.,  ch.  ii.,  pp.  373  et  seq.  Avenel,  he.  cit.


THE  WAR  383

against  Holland,  when  he  took  Breda  and  Gertruydenberge,
seems  to  have  been  already  a  manoeuvre  agreed  upon  with  the
Austrians.  At  any  rate,  this  march  served  the  Austrians
admirably.  They  took  advantage  of  it  to  enter  Belgium,  on
March  r,  and  took  Liege,  where  the  inhabitants  had  in  vain
begged  Dumouriez  for  arms.  The  patriots  of  Liege  were
forced  to  fly,  the  French  army  was  completely  routed  and  dis-
banded ;  the  generals  refused  to  help  each  other,  and  Du-
mouriez was  far  off  in  Holland.  It  was  impossible  to  do  the
Austrians  a  better  turn.

This  news  produced  a  tremendous  effect  in  Paris,  especially
as  it  was  followed  by  other  news,  equally  grave.  On  March  3
it  became  known  that  a  counter-revolutionary  movement
was  about  to  begin  immediately  in  Brittany.  At  the  same
time,  at  Lyons,  the  reactionary  battalions  of  the  fils  de  famille
(wealthy  young  men)  made  a  move  against  the  revolutionary
Commune — just  at  the  time  when  the  emigres,  who  had
gathered  in  numbers  at  Turin,  were  crossing  the  frontier
and  entering  France  in  battle  array,  backed  up  by  the  King
of  Sardinia.  To  crown  all,  the  department  of  La  Vendee
rose  on  March  10.  It  was  quite  evident  that  these  various
movements  were,  as  in  1792,  parts  of  one  great  counter-
revolutionary scheme.  And  every  one  in  Paris  suspected  that
Dumouriez  was  won  over  by  the  counter-revolutionists,  and
was  working  for  their  advantage.

Danton,  who  was  at  that  time  in  Belgium,  was  recalled  in
all  haste.  He  arrived  in  Paris  on  March  8  and  pronounced
one  of  his  powerful  calls  to  unity  and  patriotism — an  appeal
which  made  hearts  thrill  all  over  France.  The  Commune
hoisted  once  more  the  black  flag.  Again  the  fatherland  was
declared  in  danger.

Volunteers  enlisted  hurriedly,  and  on  the  evening  of  the
9th  a  civic  feast,  at  which  masses  of  people  assisted,  was  organised
in  the  streets,  on  the  eve  of  their  departure.  But  it  was  no
longer  the  youthful  enthusiasm  of  1792.  A  sinister  energy
goaded  them  on.  A  lowering  anger  gnawed  at  the  hearts  of
the  poor  of  the  faubourgs  at  the  sight  of  the  political  struggles
tearing  France  asunder.  "  A  rising  in  Paris  is  what  is  needed,"


384 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Danton  is  reported  to  have  said,  and  ind  >ed  one  was  needed
to  rouse  the  people  and  the  sections  from  the  torpor  into
which  they  were  sinking.

To  ward  off  the  difficulties,  truly  terrible,  which  beset  the
Revolution,  to  provide  for  the  immense  expenditure  imposed
on  France  by  the  counter-revolutionary  leagues  without  and
within,  the  Revolution  had  to  find  resources  by  levying  taxes
upon  the  fortunes  which  were  then  being  amassed  by  the  middle
classes,  owing  to  the  Revolution  itself.  But  this  was  exactly
what  the  governing  class  refused  to  admit,  partly  on  principle,
the  accumulation  of  large  private  fortunes  being  considered
the  way  to  enrich  the  nation,  and  partly  from  the  fear  with
which  a  more  or  less  general  rising  in  the  big  towns,  of  poor
against  rich,  inspired  them.

The  horror  of  the  September  days — especially  the  4th  and
5th  at  the  Chatelet  and  the  Salpetridre — was  yet  fresh  in  their
memories.  What  would  happen  then  if  a  whole  class  rose
against  another — the  poor  against  the  rich,  against  all  the
wealthy  ?  It  meant  civil  war  in  every  town.  And  this,  with
La  Vendee  and  Brittany  rising  in  the  West,  supported  by
England,  by  the  emigres  in  Jersey,  by  the  Pope,  and  all  the
clergy — with  the  Austrians  in  the  North,  and  the  army  of
Dumouriez  ready  to  follow  its  general  and  march  against  the
people  of  Paris !

Therefore  the  leaders  of  opinion  of  the  "  Mountain  "  and
the  Commune  did  their  utmost  first  of  all  to  allay  the  panic,
pretending  that  they  considered  Dumouriez  a  trustworthy
republican.  Robespierre,  Danton  and  Marat,  constituting
a  sort  of  triumvirate  of  opinion,  backed  up  by  the  Commune,
made  speeches  to  this  effect,  and  they  all  worked  at  the  same
time  to  rouse  courage  in  the  people's  hearts,  so  as  to  be  in  a
position  to  repel  the  invasion,  which  wore  a  far  more  serious
aspect  than  it  had  in  1792.  All  worked  to  this  end,  save  the
Girondins,  who  saw  but  one  thing — "  the  anarchists,"  who
were  to  be  crushed  and  exterminated  !

On  March  10,  a  renewal  of  the  September  days  was  feared
in  Paris.  But  the  public  anger  was  turned  upon  the  journalist
friends  of  Dumouriez,  and  a  band  betook  themselves  to  the


THE  WAR  385

chief  Girondin  printing  offices  of  Gorzas  and  Fieve,  and  smashed
their  presses.

What  the  people,  inspired  by  Varlet,  Jacques  Roux,  the
American,  Fournier,  and  other  Enrages  really  desired  was  a
purification  of  the  Convention.  But  the  more  common
demand  for  a  revolutionary  tribunal  had  been  substituted
for  this  in  all  the  sections.  Pache  and  Chaumette  came  to
the  Convention  on  the  9th,  to  demand  such  a  tribunal.  Where-
upon Cambace*res,  the  future  "  arch-counsellor "  of  the
Napoleonic  Empire,  proposed  that  the  Convention  should
renounce  the  current  ideas  on  the  division  of  legislative  and
judicial  power  and  seize  the  latter  as  well,  so  as  to  be  able  to
establish  a  special  tribunal  for  the  trial  of  traitors.

Robert  Lindet,  a  lawyer  of  the  old  monarchist  school,  pro-
posed later  on  to  institute  a  tribunal  consisting  of  judges
nominated  by  the  Convention,  and  bound  to  judge  those  whom
the  Convention  would  send  before  them.  He  insisted  upon
having  no  jury  in  this  new  tribunal,  and  it  was  only  after  long
debates  that  it  was  decided  to  reinforce  the  five  judges,  nomi-
nated by  the  Convention,  by  twelve  jurymen  and  six  assistants,
taken  from  Paris  and  the  adjoining  departments,  and  nominated
every  month  by  the  Convention.

And  so,  instead  of  measures  calculated  to  reduce  stock-
jobbing and  place  the  necessaries  of  life  within  reach  of  the
people,  instead  of  a  purification  of  the  Convention,  which
would  have  eliminated  the  members  always  opposed  to  revolu-
tionary measures,  instead  of  taking  military  steps  rendered
imperative  by  the  already  almost  confirmed  treachery  of
Dumouriez,  the  insurrection  of  March  10  obtained  nothing
beyond  a  revolutionary  tribunal.  The  creative,  constructive
spirit  of  a  popular  revolution,  which  was  feeling  its  way,
was  now  confronted  by  the  spirit  of  police  management,  which
was  soon  to  crush  it.

After  appointing  this  tribunal  the  Convention  was  going  to
adjourn,  when  Danton  rushed  to  the  tribune,  and  stopped  the
members  as  they  were  leaving  the  hall,  to  remind  them  that
the  enemy  was  on  the  frontiers  of  France,  and  that  nothing
had  yet  been  done.


386 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  same  day  the  peasants  in  La  Vendee,  urged  on  by  the
clergy,  rose  in  insurrection  and  began  to  massacre  the  Republi-
cans. The  rising  had  long  been  prepared,  chiefly  by  the
priests,  at  the  instigation  of  Rome,  and  there  had  already
been  an  attempt  at  starting  it,  in  August  1792,  when  the
Prussians  had  entered  France.  Since  then,  Angers  had  become
the  political  centre  of  the  malcontent  priests,  the  Sisters  of
the  Sagesse  Order  and  others  serving  as  emissaries  to  distribute
the  appeals  to  revolt,  and  to  awaken  fanaticism  by  spreading
stories  about  supposed  miracles.*  The  levy  of  men  for  the
war,  promulgated  on  March  10,  became  the  signal  for  a  general
rising.  The  head  council  of  the  insurrection,  dominated
by  the  priests,  and  having  at  its  head  the  priest  Bernier,  was
established  at  the  demand  of  Cathelinau,  a  mason  and  sacristan
of  his  parish,  who  had  become  one  of  the  most  audacious  chiefs
of  the  bands.

On  the  loth  the  tocsin  rang  in  several  hundred  parishes,
and  about  100,000  men  left  their  work  to  begin  the  hunting
down  of  the  republicans  and  those  priests  who  had  sworn
allegiance  to  the  Constitution.  It  was  an  actual  hunt,  with
a  ringer  who  sounded  the  "  view  halloo,"  says  Michelet,  a  hunt
of  extermination,  during  which  the  captives  were  subjected
to  the  most  terrible  tortures :  they  were  killed  slowly,  or  else
were  left  to  be  tortured  by  the  women's  scissors  and  the  weak
hands  of  the  children  who  prolonged  their  martyrdom.  All
this,  under  the  leadership  of  the  priests,  with  tales  of  miracles
to  incite  the  peasants  to  kill  the  wives  also  of  the  republicans.
The  nobles,  with  their  royalist  amazons,  only  came  after.
And  when  these  "  honest  folk  "  decided  at  last  to  appoint  a
tribunal  to  try  the  republican  prisoners,  this  tribunal,  in  six
weeks,  sent  542  patriots  to  be  executed.f

*  Michelet,  Book  X.  ch.  v.

f  "  Each  day,"  wrote  a  royalist  priest,  Francois  Chevalier  (quoted
by  Chassin),  "  each  day  was  marked  by  bloody  expeditions  which  cannot
but  horrify  every  decent  soul,  and  seem  justifiable  only  in  the  light
of  philosophy."  (They  were  commanded  by  priests  in  the  name  of
religion.)  "  Matters  had  come  to  a  pass,  when  it  was  said  openly  that
it  was  unavoidable  and  essential  for  peace,  not  to  leave  a  single  republi-
can alive  in  France.  Such  was  the  popular  fury  that  it  was  sufficient
to  have  attended  at  a  mass  said  by  one  of  the  constitutional  clergy,


THE  RISING  IN  LA  VENDEE  387

To  resist  this  savage  rising,  the  Republic  had  nothing  but
2000  men  scattered  all  over  the  lower  part  of  La  Vendee,
from  Nantes  to  La  Rochelle.  It  was  not  till  the  end  of  May
that  the  first  organised  forces  of  the  Republic  arrived.  Up
to  then  the  Convention  had  only  been  able  to  oppose  decrees  :
death  penalty  and  confiscation  of  property  for  the  nobles  and
priests  who  had  not  left  La  Vendee  at  the  end  of  a  week !
But  who  was  there  with  the  necessary  force  to  carry  out  these
decrees  ?

Matters  were  no  better  in  Eastern  France,  where  the  army
of  Custine  was  retreating ;  while  in  Belgium,  Dumouriez
was  in  open  rebellion  against  the  Convention  since  March  12.
He  sent  them  from  Louvain  a  letter,  which  he  at  once  made
public,  and  in  which  he  reproached  France  with  the  crime  of
having  annexed  Belgium,  of  wishing  to  ruin  that  country  by
introducing  paper-money  and  the  sale  of  national  properties.
Six  days  later  he  attacked  the  superior  forces  of  the  Austrians
at  Neerwinden,  allowed  himself  to  be  beaten  by  them,  and  on
March  22,  supported  by  the  Duke  de  Chartres  and  some
Orleanist  generals,  he  entered  into  direct  negotiations  with  the
Austrian,  Colonel  Mack.  These  two  traitors  promised  to
evacuate  Belgium  without  resistance,  and  to  march  against
Paris  to  re-establish  there  the  constitutional  monarchy.  In
case  of  need,  they  would  call  on  the  Austrians  to  support  them,
and  in  the  meantime  the  Austrians  occupied  Conde,  one  of
the  French  fortresses  near  the  frontier,  as  a  guarantee.

Danton,  staking  his  head  on  it,  rushed  to  Dumouriez'  camp,
to  prevent  this  treason  and  to  attempt  to  bring  back  Dumouriez
to  the  Republic.  Having  failed  in  persuading  two  Girondins,
Gensonne,  a  friend  of  Dumouriez,  and  Gaudet,  to  go  with
him,  he  left  alone,  on  the  i6th,  for  Belgium,  running  the  risk
of  being  accused  himself  of  treason.  He  found  Dumouriez
in  full  retreat  after  the  Battle  of  Neerwinden,  and  understood
that  the  traitor  had  already  made  up  his  mind.  He  had  indeed

to  be  imprisoned  and  then  murdered,  or  shot,  under  the  pretext  that
the  prisons  were  too  full,  as  they  were  on  September  2."  At  Mache-
coul,  524  republican  citizens  had  been  shot,  and  there  was  talk  of
massacring  the  women,  Charette  was  urging  on  his  fanatical  peasants
to  do  this.


388 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

already  given  his  word  to  Colonel  Mack  to  evacuate  Holland
without  fighting.

Paris  was  seized  with  fury  when,  Danton  having  returned
on  the  29th,  Dumouriez'  treason  was  established  as  a  certainty.
The  republican  army,  which  alone  might  have  repulsed  the
invasion,  was  perhaps  already  marching  against  Paris  to  re-
establish royalty !  Under  such  conditions,  the  Committee
of  Insurrection,  which  had  then  been  meeting  for  some  days
at  the  Bishop's  palace,  under  the  leadership  of  the  Enrages,
won  over  the  Commune.  The  sections  began  to  arm  and
seized  the  artillery  ;  they  probably  would  have  marched  against
the  Convention,  had  not  other  counsels  prevailed  to  prevent
a  panic.  On  April  3,  confirmatory  news  of  Dumouriez'
treachery  was  received.  He  had  arrested  the  commissioners
sent  to  him  by  the  Convention.  Happily,  his  army  did  not
follow  him.  The  decree  of  the  Convention,  outlawing  Du-
mouriez  and  ordering  the  arrest  of  the  Duke  de  Chartres,
had  reached  the  regiments,  and  neither  Dumouriez  nor  the
Duke  de  Chartres  succeeded  in  winning  over  the  soldiers.
Dumouriez  was  forced  to  cross  the  frontier,  as  Lafayette  had
done,  and  to  seek  refuge  among  the  Austrians.

On  the  following  day  he  and  the  Imperial  generals  issued  a
proclamation,  in  which  the  Duke  of  Coburg  made  known  to
the  French  that  he  was  coming  to  restore  to  France  her  con-
stitutional King.

At  the  height  of  this  crisis,  when  the  uncertainty  about  the
attitude  of  Dumouriez'  army  jeopardised  the  security  of  the
Republic  itself,  the  three  most  influential  men  of  the  "  Moun-
tain " — Danton,  Robespierre  and  Marat — in  agreement  with
the  Commune  led  by  Pache,  Hebert  and  Chaumette,  acted
with  complete  unanimity,  to  prevent  the  panic  and  the  sad
consequences  it  might  have  entailed.

At  the  same  time  the  Convention,  in  order  to  avoid  the  lack
of  unity  which  had  hitherto  hampered  the  general  management
of  the  war,  resolved  to  take  the  executive  power  into  their
hands,  as  well  as  the  legislative  and  judicial  powers.  They
created  a  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  (Comite  de  Salut  public),
with  very  extensive  powers,  almost  dictatorial — a  measure


THE  TREACHERY  OF  DUMOURIEZ 389

which  was  evidently  of  an  immense  importance  for  the  subse-
quent development  of  the  Revolution.

We  have  seen  that  after  August  10  the  Legislative  Assembly
had  founded,  under  the  name  of  "  Provisory  Executive  Council,"
a  body  of  ministers  invested  with  all  the  functions  of  the  execu-
tive power.  Besides,  in  January  1793,  the  Convention  had
created  a  "Committee  of  General  Defence,"  and,  war  being
at  that  moment  the  most  important  matter,  this  committee
obtained  control  over  the  Provisory  Executive  Council,  and
thus  became  the  chief  machinery  of  the  administration.  Now,
to  give  the  Government  more  unity,  the  Convention  created
a  "  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  "  (Comite  de  Salut  public),
elected  by  it  and  renewable  every  twelve  months.  This
committee  was  to  supplant  both  the  Defence  Committee
and  the  Executive  Council.

In  reality  it  was  the  Convention  itself  supplanting  the
Ministry,  but  little  by  little,  as  was  to  be  expected,  the  Com-
mittee of  Public  Welfare  overruled  the  Convention  and
acquired  in  all  the  branches  of  administration  a  power  which
it  shared  only  with  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  (Comite
de  Surete  generale),  entrusted  with  the  control  of  the  State
police.

In  the  middle  of  the  crisis  which  was  developing  in  April
1793,  Danton,  who  had  until  then  taken  a  most  active  part
in  the  war,  became  the  leading  spirit  of  the  Committee  of
Public  Welfare,  and  he  retained  this  influence  until  July  10,
1793,  when  he  retired.

Finally,  the  Convention,  which  had  sent,  since  September
1792,  several  of  its  members  to  the  provinces  and  to  the  armies,
with  the  title  of  Commissioned  Deputies  (Representants  en
mission),  armed  with  very  extensive  powers,  decided  to  send
eighty  more  deputies  to  rouse  enthusiasm  in  the  provinces
and  to  supervise  the  war.  And,  as  the  Girondins  generally
refused  to  accept  this  function,  they  willingly  agreed  to  appoint
members  of  the  "  Mountain "  on  these  difficult  missions,
perhaps  with  the  idea  of  having  a  freer  hand  in  the  Convention
after  their  departure.

It  was  certainly  not  these  measures  of  reorganisation  of  the


390 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Government  which  prevented  the  treachery  of  Dumouriez
having  the  disastrous  effect  it  might  have  had,  if  the  army
had  followed  its  general.  There  was  a  higher  force  in  action.
For  the  French  nation  the  Revolution  possessed  a  charm,
and  gave  it  a  vigour,  which  it  was  not  possible  for  a  general
to  destroy  at  his  will  and  pleasure.  On  the  contrary,  this
betrayal  had  the  effect  of  giving  a  new  character  to  the  war —
that  of  a  popular,  democratic  war.  But  every  one  under-
stood that  Dumouriez  alone  would  never  have  dared  what
he  did.  He  obviously  had  strong  support  in  Paris.  It  was
there  that  the  root  of  the  treachery  lay.  "  The  Convention
betrays,"  said  the  address  of  the  Jacobin  Club,  signed  by
Marat,  who  presided  that  night.

Henceforth  the  fall  of  the  Girondins  and  the  removal  of
their  leaders  from  the  Convention  became  inevitable.  The
treachery  of  Dumouriez  gave  the  final  impetus  to  the  insurrec-
tion which  broke  out  on  May  31.


CHAPTER  XLV
A  NEW  RISING  RENDERED  INEVITABLE

Rising  of  May  31 — Significance  of  rising — Summary  of  situa-
tion— Convention  and  Dumouriez — Girondins  vote  arrest  of
Marat — People  take  his  part — Character  of  Marat — He  is
acquitted — Famine  in  large  towns — Extraordinary  tax  levied
— Indigination  of  Girondins — Commission  of  Twelve  appointed
— Hebert  and  Varlet  arrested  —  Isnard's  threat  —  Sections
demand  expulsion  of  Girondins  from  Convention

MAY  31  is  one  of  the  great  dates  of  the  Revolution,  and  quite
as  full  of  significance  as  July  14  and  October  5,  1789,  June  21,
1791,  and  August  10,  1792 — but,  perhaps,  the  most  tragic  of
them  all.  On  this  day  the  people  of  Paris  rose  for  the  third
time,  making  its  last  effort  to  impress  upon  the  Revolution
a  really  popular  character  ;  and,  to  bring  this  about,  it  had  to
stand  up — not  against  the  King  and  the  Court,  but  against
the  child  of  the  Revolution  itself — the  National  Convention —
in  order  to  eliminate  from  it  the  leaders  of  the  Girondin  party.

June  21,  1791,  the  day  of  the  King's  arrest  at  Varennes,  had
brought  one  epoch  to  a  close ;  the  fall  of  the  Girondins  on
May  31,  1793,  was  the  close  of  another  epoch.  At  the  same
time  it  became  a  symbol  for  all  revolutions  to  come.  Hence-
forth, for  a  long  time  to  come,  no  revolution  will  be  possible
unless  it  culminates  in  its  May  31.  Either  there  will  be  in
the  revolution  a  day  when  the  proletarians  will  separate  them-
selves from  the  middle-class  revolutionists,  and  will  advance
then  to  a  point  where  the  others  will  not  be  able  to  follow
them  without  ceasing  to  be  middle  class ;  or  this  separation
will  not  take  place,  and  then  there  will  be  no  revolution.  < '»'

Even  to  this  day  we  feel  the  tragedy  of  the  situation  which
presented  itself  to  the  Republicans  of  that  time.  On  the

391


392 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

eve  of  May  31,  it  was  no  longer  a  question  of  a  perjured,
treacherous  king  to  be  set  aside  :  it  was  against  their  comrades
in  the  fight  that  the  revolutionists  had  to  proceed,  because  it
had  become  evident  that  unless  this  was  done,  the  reaction
would  have  got  the  upper  hand  already  in  June  1793,  while
the  chief  work  of  the  Revolution— the  destruction  of  the
feudal  system  and  of  "  the  right  divine  of  royalty  " — had  not
yet  been  accomplished.  The  dilemma  was  this :  either  to
proscribe  the  Girondin  republicans,  who  had  up  till  then
fought  so  bravely  against  despotism,  but  were  now  saying
to  the  people  :  "  Thus  far,  but  no  farther !  "  ;  or  else  to
rouse  the  people  for  the  purpose  of  eliminating  them,  and
passing  over  their  dead  bodies  to  try  and  accomplish  the  great
work  which  the  Revolution  had  begun.

This  tragic  situation  is  very  clearly  revealed  in  Brissot's
pamphlet  "To  his  Constituents,"  dated  May  26,  which  we
have  already  mentioned.  We  cannot,  in  fact,  read  these
pages  without  feeling  that  it  is  a  question  of  life  or  death
that  is  debated.  Brissot  was  evidently  hazarding  his  head
in  publishing  this  pamphlet,  in  which  he  implacably  demanded
that  those  whom  he  called  the  "  anarchists  "  should  be  sent
to  the  scaffold.  After  its  appearance  there  remained  but  two
issues :  either  the  "  anarchists "  should  let  themselves  be
guillotined  by  the  Girondins,  which  would  open  the  door  to
the  royalists ;  or  else  the  Girondins  should  be  expelled  from
the  Convention,  and  in  that  case  it  was  they  who  must
perish.

It  is  evident  that  the  members  of  the  "  Mountain  "  did  not
decide  with  a  light  heart  to  appeal  to  an  insurrection  in  order
to  compel  the  Convention  to  thrust  out  from  its  midst  the
chief  leaders  of  the  Right.  For  more  than  six  months  they
had  been  trying  to  come  to  some  agreement.  Danton  especially
laboured  to  negotiate  a  compromise.  Robespierre,  for  his
part,  worked  to  render  the  Girondins  powerless  "  parliamen-
tarily,"  without  resorting  to  force.  Marat  himself  stifled
his  anger  in  order  to  avoid  civil  war.  In  this  way  they  managed
to  delay  the  separation  for  several  months.  But  at  what  a
price  !  The  Revolution  was  entirely  stopped  ;  nothing  was


A  NEW  RISING  RENDERED  INEVITABLE 393

being  done  to  secure  what  had  been  already  gained.  It  was
living  from  hand  to  mouth.

In  the  provinces,  the  old  regime  had  maintained  much  of
its  strength.  The  privileged  classes  were  lying  in  wait  for  the
moment  to  recapture  their  wealth  and  position,  to  restore
royalty  and  the  feudal  rights  that  the  law  had  not  yet  abolished.
The  first  serious  check  of  the  armies  would  have  brought
about  the  victorious  return  of  the  old  regime.  In  the  South,
the  South- West  and  the  West  of  France,  the  mass  of  the  people
were  with  the  priests,  with  the  Pope,  and  through  them  with
royalty.  It  is  true  that  a  great  deal  of  the  land  taken  from  the
clergy  and  the  dispossessed  nobles  had  already  passed
into  the  hands  of  the  upper  and  lower  middle  classes,  as  well
as  to  some  extent  to  the  peasants.  The  feudal  dues  were
neither  redeemed  nor  paid.  But  all  that  was  merely  pro-
visional. And  what  if  to-morrow  the  people,  exhausted  by
poverty  and  famine,  weary  of  the  war,  should  retreat  to  their
novels  and  leave  a  free  hand  to  the  old  regime?  Would  it
not  be  triumphant  everywhere  in  a  few  months  ?

After  Dumouriez'  treachery  the  situation  in  the  Convention
became  quite  untenable.  Feeling  how  deeply  they  were
implicated  by  this  treason  of  their  favourite  general,  the
Girondins  redoubled  the  bitterness  of  their  attacks  against
the  "  Mountain."  Accused  of  conniving  with  the  traitor,
they  could  only  reply  by  flinging  down  a  demand  for  the
prosecution  of  Marat  for  the  address  the  Jacobins  had  pub-
lished on  April  3,  on  hearing  the  news  of  Dumouriez'  treachery,
which  Marat  had  signed  as  the  president  of  the  club  for  that
week.

Taking  advantage  of  the  absence  of  a  great  many  members
of  the  Convention — mostly  members  of  the  "  Mountain  " —
who  were  acting  as  commissioners  to  the  armies  and  in  the
departments  at  that  time,  the  Girondins  demanded  of  the
Convention,  on  April  12,  an  order  of  prosecution  against
Marat,  and  then  a  warrant  for  his  arrest,  in  order  to  send  him
for  trial  before  the  criminal  tribunal,  for  having  advocated
murder  and  pillage.  The  decree  for  his  arrest  was  voted  on
April  13,  by  220  voices  against  92,  out  of  367  voters — seven


394 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

being  for  an  adjournment,  and  forty-eight  abstaining  from
voting.

The  blow  however  failed.  The  people  of  the  faubourgs
loved  Marat  too  much  to  allow  him  to  be  condemned.  The
poor  felt  that  Marat  was  one  of  the  people  and  never  would
betray  them.  And  the  more  one  studies  the  Revolution  the
more  one  knows  what  Marat  did  and  what  he  said,  the  more
one  discovers  how  unmerited  was  his  reputation  as  a  sinister
exterminator  which  the  historians,  admirers  of  the  middle-class
Girondins,  have  created  for  him.  Nearly  always,  since  the
very  first  weeks  of  the  Convocation  of  the  States-General,
and  especially  in  critical  moments,  Marat  saw  more  clearly
and  more  justly  than  the  others,  clearer  and  better  even  than
the  two  other  great  leaders  of  revolutionary  opinion — Danton
and  Robespierre.

From  the  day  that  Marat  threw  himself  into  the  Revolution,
he  gave  himself  entirely  to  it,  and  lived  in  absolute  poverty,
driven  continually  into  hiding  while  the  others  entered  into
power.  Up  to  his  death,  in  spite  of  the  fever  which  racked
him,  Marat  never  changed  his  way  of  living.  His  door  was
always  open  to  the  men  of  the  people.  He  thought  that  a
dictatorship  would  help  the  Revolution  through  its  difficulties,
but  he  never  thought  of  dictatorial  powers  for  himself.

Bloodthirsty  as  his  language  was  with  regard  to  the  creatures
of  the  Court — especially  at  the  outset  of  the  Revolution,  when
he  said  that  if  they  did  not  strike  off  thousands  of  heads  there
would  be  nothing  done  and  the  Court  would  crush  the  Revolu-
tion— he  always  respected  those  who  were  devoted  to  the
Revolution,  even  when  they  in  their  turn  began  to  be  an
obstacle  to  the  development  of  the  movement.  He  saw  from
the  outset  that  the  Convention,  having  a  strong  Girondin
party  in  its  midst,  would  never  be  capable  of  accomplishing
its  mission,  but  he  tried  at  first  to  avoid  the  elimination  of  the
Girondin  leaders  by  violence,  and  he  only  became  its  advocate
and  organiser  when  he  saw  that  it  was  necessary  to  choose
between  the  "  Gironde  "  and  the  Revolution.  If  he  had  lived,
it  is  probable  that  the  Terror  would  not  have  assumed  the
ferocity  imprinted  on  it  by  the  members  of  the  Committee


A  NEW  RISING  RENDERED  INEVITABLE 395

of  Public  Safety.  They  would  not  have  been  allowed  to  use
it  to  strike,  on  the  one  side,  the  advanced  party — the  Hebertists
— and,  on  the  other,  the  conciliators,  such  as  Danton.*

The  more  the  people  loved  Marat,  the  more  the  middle-class
members  of  the  Convention  detested  him.  This  is  why  the
Girondins,  who  wished  to  break  down  the  "  Mountain,"
decided  to  begin  with  him  :  he  would  be  defended  less  than
any  other  Montagnard.

But  as  soon  as  Paris  learned  that  a  writ  was  out  for  Marat's
arrest,  the  excitement  was  immense.  The  insurrection  would
have  broken  out  on  April  14  if  the  "  Mountain,"  including
Robespierre  and  Marat  himself,  had  not  preached  calmness.
Marat,  who  did  not  let  himself  be  arrested  at  once,  appeared
before  the  tribunal  on  April  24,  and  was  acquitted  off-hand
by  the  jury.  He  was  then  carried  in  triumph  to  the  Conven-
tion, and  from  thence  into  the  streets  on  the  shoulders  of  the
sans- culottes,  under  a  cascade  of  flowers.

The  attempt  of  the  Girondins  had  thus  failed,  and  they
understood  at  once  that  they  never  would  recover  from  that
blow.  It  was  "  a  day  of  mourning  "  for  them,  as  one  of  their
newspapers  said,  and  Brissot  began  to  write  his  last  pamphlet,
"To  his  Constituents,"  in  which  he  did  his  best  to  arouse
the  passions  of  the  well-to-do  middle  classes  against  the
"  anarchists."

Under these conditions, the Convention, whose sittings
were  becoming  furious  battles  between  the  two  parties,  lost
the  people's  respect :  and  the  Commune  of  Paris  took  naturally  I U\
the  lead  in  the  initiation  of  revolutionary  measures.

As  the  winter  of  1793  advanced,  famine  in  the  large  towns
grew  worse  and  worse.  The  municipalities  found  the  greatest
difficulty  in  the  world  in  procuring  bread,  were  it  only  a  pound,

*  Marat  was  right  in  saying  that  the  works  he  had  published  at  the
beginning  of  the  Revolution,  Offrande  a  la  Patrie,  Plan  de  Constitution,
Legislation  criminelle,  and  the  first  hundred  numbers  of  the  Ami  du
peuple,  were  full  of  tenderness,  prudence,  moderation,  love  of  man-
kind, liberty,  justice  (Chevremont,  Marat,  vol.  ii.  p.  215).  JaurSs,
who  has  read  Marat  carefully,  has  done  much  towards  showing  him
in  a  true  light,  especially  in  the  fourth  volume  of  his  Histoire  de  fa
Revolution.


396 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

or  a  quarter  of  a  pound — four  ounces — a  day,  for  each  in-
habitant. To  do  that  even,  the  municipalities,  and  especially
that  of  Paris,  had  to  run  into  the  most  frightful  debt.

The  Commune  of  Paris  then  ordered  a  progressive  income
tax  of  twelve  million  livres  to  be  levied  on  the  rich,  for  the
expenses  of  the  war.  An  income  of  fifteen  hundred  livres  for
the  head  of  each  family,  and  a  thousand  livres  for  every  other
member,  were  considered  as  "  necessary  "  and  therefore  freed
from  this  taxation.  But  everything  above  this  amount  was
treated  as  "  superfluity,"  and  had  to  pay  a  progressive  tax  :
thirty  livres  for  a  superfluity  of  two  thousand  livres ;  fifty
livres  on  a  superfluity  of  from  two  to  three  thousand  livres ;
and  so  on,  up  to  twenty  thousand  livres  on  a  superfluity  of
fifty  thousand  livres.

For  sustaining  the  war  in  which  France  was  engaged,  in  the
midst  of  a  Revolution  and  a  famine,  such  an  extraordinary
tax,  to  be  levied  this  special  year  only,  was  very  modest,  after
all.  It  was  only  the  large  incomes  which  were  touched  by
it,  whereas  a  family  of  six  persons  who  had  an  income  of  ten
thousand  livres  would  have  paid  less  than  one  hundred  livres.
But  the  rich  protested  loudly,  while  Chaumette,  the  promoter
of  this  tax,  whom  the  Girondins  wanted  to  attack  after  Marat,
said  justly :  "  Nothing  will  make  me  change  my  principles.
Even  with  the  knife  at  my  neck  I  shall  still  declare,  up  to  this
day,  the  poor  have  done  everything  ;  it  is  time  for  the  rich  to  take
their  turn.  I  shall  declare  that  the  selfish  people,  the  young
idlers,  must  be  made  useful,  whether  they  like  it  or  not,  and
some  respite  be  procured  for  the  useful  and  respectable  worker."

The  Gironde  redoubled  its  hatred  for  the  Commune  that
had  suggested  the  idea  of  such  a  taxation.  But  one  can  imagine
the  general  explosion  of  hatred  that  broke  forth  among  the
middle  classes,  when  Cambon,  supported  by  the  public  in  the
galleries,  proposed  in  the  Convention,  and  put  to  the  vote
a  forced  loan  of  a  thousand  millions  to  be  levied  throughout
France  on  the  rich  people,  and  assessed  on  nearly  the  same
principles  as  the  tax  of  the  Commune — a  loan  to  be  reimbursed
later  on  by  the  money  raised  on  the  emigres'  lands,  according
as  they  were  sold.  In  the  difficult  circumstances  through


A  NEW  RISING  RENDERED  INEVITABLE 397

which  the  Republic  was  passing,  it  had  no  other  possible  way /
out  except  a  tax  of  this  kind. But  in  the  Convention  the
defenders  of  property  were  ready  to  slay  the  Montagnards
when  the  latter  supported  the  project  of  a  forced  loan  ; they
almost  came  to  blows.

If  proofs  were  still  necessary  to  show  the  impossibility  of
anything  being  done  to  save  the  Revolution,  so  long  as  the
Girondins  remained  in  the  Convention,  and  the  two  parties
continued  to  neutralise  each  other,  these  debates  upon  the
loan  would  have  given  a  striking  demonstration  of  it.

But  what  exasperated  the  people  of  Paris  most  of  all  was
that  to  stop  the  Revolution,  of  which  Paris  had  up  to  that
time  been  the  chief  forcing-bed,  the  Girondins  did  all  they
could  to  incite  the  departments  against  the  capital,  not  even
hesitating  before  the  necessity  this  involved  of  marching  hand
in  hand  with  the  royalists.  They  preferred  royalty  rather
than  that  any  step  should  be  made  towards  the  Social  Republic.
Better  to  inundate  Paris  with  blood  and  to  rase  the  accursed
town  to  the  ground,  than  to  allow  the  people  of  Paris  and  their
Commune  to  initiate  a  movement  which  would  threaten  the
middle-class  property-owners.  Thiers  and  the  Bordeaux
Assembly  of  1871  had,  we  see,  their  ancestors  in  1793.

On  May  19,  the  Girondins,  at  the  suggestion  of  Bar  ere,
decreed  the  formation  of  a  Commission  of  Twelve  to  examine
into  the  decisions  passed  by  the  Commune,  and  this  commission,
appointed  on  the  2ist,  became  the  driving-wheel  of  the
Government.  Two  days  later,  on  the  23rd,  it  caused  Hebert
to  be  arrested,  the  deputy-procurator  of  the  Commune,  beloved
by  the  people  for  the  frank  republicanism  of  his  Pere  Duckesne,
and  Varlet,  the  favourite  of  the  Paris  poor,  for  whom  the
Convention  was  but  a  "  law-shop,"  and  who  preached  the
social  revolution  in  the  streets.  But  the  arrests  were  not
meant  to  stop  there.  The  Commission  of  Twelve  proposed
also  to  prosecute  the  sections ;  it  demanded  that  the  register
of  the  sections  should  be  given  up,  and  it  procured  the  arrest
of  the  president  and  secretary  of  the  City  section  for  having
refused  to  give  up  their  registers.

The  Girondin,  Isnard,  who  presided  over  the  Convention


398 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

during  these  days,  an  authoritarian  in  whom  Thiers  was  fore-
shadowed— on  his  part  added  to  the  ferment  by  his  threats.
He  threatened  the  Parisians,  if  they  made  any  attack  on  the
National  representation,  that  Paris  would  be  destroyed.
"  People  would  be  searching  soon  on  the  banks  of  the  Seine,
to  see  if  Paris  had  ever  existed."  These  stupid  threats,  which
recalled  only  too  well  those  of  the  Court  in  1791,  brought  the
popular  indignation  to  its  full  height.  On  the  26th  there
was  fighting  in  nearly  every  section.  The  insurrection  became
inevitable,  and  Robespierre,  who  until  then  had  discouraged
the  rising,  went  to  the  Jacobins  on  the  26th  to  say  that  if  need
be  he  was  ready  to  rise  alone  against  the  conspirators  and
traitors  who  sat  in  the  Convention.

Thirty-five  sections  of  Paris  out  of  thirty-eight  had  already
asked  the  Convention  to  expel  from  its  midst  twenty-two
Girondin  representatives,  whose  names  were  given.  The
sections  were  now  rising  to  compel  the  Convention  to  obey
the  will  of  the  people  of  Paris.


CHAPTER  XL VI
THE  INSURRECTION  OF  MAY  31  AND  JUNE  z

Preparations  for  rising — Activity  of  sections — Commission  of
Twelve — Want  of  union  among  revolutionists — Les  Enrages —
New  class  of  middle-class  property-owners — May  31 — Failure
of  insurrection — Preparations  for  fresh  revolt — June  2 — News
of  rising  at  Lyons — Fury  against  Gironde — Letter  to  Conven-
tion— Speech  of  Marat  to  Jacobin  Club — Girondins  join
counter-revolutionists — Convention  outlaws  Girondins

ONCE  more  the  people,  in  their  sections,  got  ready  for  insurrec-
tion as  on  August  10.  Danton,  Robespierre  and  Marat  held
frequent  consultations  with  each  other  during  those  days ;
but  still  they  hesitated,  and  again  action  came  from  the  "  un-
known ones,"  who  constituted  an  insurrectionary  club  at  the
Bishop's  Palace,  and  appointed  a  Commission  of  "  Six  "  for
that  purpose.

The  sections  took  an  active  part  in  the  preparations.  The
section  of  the  Quatre  Nations  had  already,  in  March,  declared
itself  in  a  state  of  insurrection,  and  had  authorised  its  Watch
Committee  to  issue  mandates  of  arrest  against  citizens  suspected
of  anti-revolutionary  opinions,  whilst  other  sections,  those  of
Mauconseil  and  Poissonniere,  openly  demanded  the  arrest  of  the
"  Brissotin  "  deputies.  The  following  month,  that  is  to  say,
on  April  8  and  9,  after  the  treachery  of  Dumouriez,  the
sections  of  Bonconseil  and  the  Halle-aux-Bles  insisted  on
the  general's  accomplices  being  prosecuted,  and  on  the  I5th,
thirty-five  sections  published  a  list  of  the  twenty-two  members
of  the  Gironde,  whose  expulsion  from  the  Convention  they
demanded.

From  the  beginning  of  April,  the  sections  had  also  been
trying  to  constitute  their  Own  federation,  for  action,  outside


400 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  Council  of  the  Commune,  and  on  April  2  the  Gravilliers
section,  always  in  the  vanguard,  took  the  lead  in  the  creation
of  a  "  General  Committee."  This  committee  acted  only
in  an  intermittent  way,  but  it  was  reconstituted  on  the  approach
of  danger,  on  May  5,  and  on  the  2Qth  it  undertook  the  direction
of  the  movement.  As  to  the  influence  of  the  Jacobin  Club,
it  was  never  very  great,  and  its  members  themselves  admitted
that  the  centre  of  action  lay  in  the  sections.*

On  May  26,  numerous  gatherings  of  the  people  besieged

/'the  Convention,  into  which  they  speedily  forced  their  way,

and  those  who  entered  the  hall  demanded,  with  the  support

f  of  the  galleries,  that  the  Commission  of  Twelve  should  be

\  suppressed. But  the  Convention  resisted  this  demand,  and

Hi  was  not  until  after  midnight  that,  wearied  out,  it  at  last

yielded,  and  the  Commission  was  broken  up.

This  concession  was,  however,  only  for  the  moment.  The
very  next  day,  on  the  27th,  profiting  by  the  majority  they
had  in  the  Convention  owing  to  the  absence  of  a  great  many
of  the  "  Montagnards,"  who  were  on  commissions  in  the
provinces,  the  "  Gironde,"  supported  by  the  "  Plain,"  re-
established the  Commission  of  Twelve.  The  insurrection
had  thus  had  no  effect.

What  had  rendered  the  insurrection  powerless  was  that
there  was  no  agreement  among  the  revolutionists  themselves.
One  party  of  the  sections,  inspired  by  those  known  as  the
"  Extremists  "  (les  Enrages),  wanted  a  measure  that  would  strike
terror  into  the  counter-revolutionists.  They  wanted,  after
rousing  the  people,  to  kill  the  principal  Girondins :  they
even  spoke  of  slaying  the  aristocrats  in  Paris.

But  this  scheme  met  with  strong  opposition.  The  National
Representation  was  a  trust  confided  to  the  people  of  Paris ;
how  could  they  betray  the  trust  of  all  France  ?  Danton,
Robespierre  and  Marat  opposed  it  strenuously.  The  council
of  the  Commune  with  Pache,  the  mayor,  also  refused  to  agree
to  this  scheme ;  and  the  Popular  Societies  would  not  support
it  either.

There  was  another  thing  to  be  taken  into  account. It  was

*  Vide  Aulard,  Jacobins,  vol.  v.  p.  209,


THE  INSURRECTION  OF  MAY  31  AND  JUNE  2 401

necessary  to  consider  the  middle  classes  who  were  at  that  time
already  very  numerous  in  Paris,  and  whose  battalions  of  National
Guards  would  have  put  down  the  insurrection  if  it  became
a  question  of  defending  their  property.  Guarantees  had  thus
to  be  given  that  property  should  not  be  touched.  This  is
why  Hassenfratz,  one  of  the  Jacobins,  who  declared  that  there
was  nothing  in  theory  against  the  pillage  of  the  scoundrels —
for  so  he  called  the  rich— nevertheless  tried  to  prevent  the
insurrection  from  being  accompanied  by  pillage.  "  There  are
a  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  men  having  their  homes  in
Paris,  who  are  armed  and  ready  to  repress  pillage.  It  is  clear
that  it  is  an  absolute  impossibility  to  make  an  attack  on  property,"
said  Hassenfratz  to  the  Jacobins ;  and  he  therefore  called  on
all  the  members  of  the  club  to  "  pledge  themselves  to  perish,
rather  than  allow  attacks  to  be  made  on  property."

A  similar  oath  was  taken  on  the  night  of  the  3ist,  in  the
Commune,  and  even  at  the  Bishop's  Palace,  by  the  "  extrem-
ists," the  sections  doing  likewise.

The  fact  is,  that  a  new  class  of  middle-class  property-owners
had  already  sprung  up  at  this  time — a  class  which  has  increased
so  enormously  during  the  nineteenth  century — and  the  revolu-
tionists were  compelled  to  take  them  into  consideration,  so
as  not  to  be  opposed  by  them.

On  the  eve  of  an  insurrection  one  can  never  tell  whether
the  people  will  rise  or  not.  This  time  there  was  also  the  fear
that  the  Enrages  would  try  to  kill  the  Girondins  in  the  Con-
vention, and  so  compromise  Paris  in  the  eyes  of  the  depart-
ments. Three  days,  therefore,  were  spent  in  conferences,
until  it  was  agreed  that  the  insurrection  should  be  directed
by  a  union  of  the  different  revolutionary  elements — the
Council  of  the  Commune,  the  Council  of  the  Departments,
and  the  General  Revolutionary  Council  at  the  Bishop's  Palace  ;
that  no  personal  violence  should  be  committed,  and  that
property  should  be  respected.  They  were  to  confine  them-
selves to  a  moral  insurrection,  to  putting  pressure  on  the  Con-
vention, so  as  to  force  it  to  hand  over  the  guilty  deputies  to
the  revolutionary  tribunal.

Marat,  on  leaving  the  Convention  on  the  evening  of  the  3Oth,

2  C


402 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

explained  this  decision  at  the  Bishop's  Palace,  and  afterwards
at  the  Commune.  And  apparently  it  was  he  who,  braving
the  law  which  punished  with  death  any  one  who  rang  the
tocsin,  rang  the  first  peal  at  midnight  from  the  belfry  of  the
Hotel  de  Ville.  The  insurrection  thus  began.

The  delegates  who  sat  at  the  Bishop's  Palace,  and  who  were
representing  the  centre  of  the  movement,  first  deposed,  as
had  been  done  on  August  10,  the  mayor  and  the  council  of
the  Commune ;  but  instead  of  dismissing  the  mayor  and
appointing  another  council,  they  reinstated  both,  after  first
making  them  take  an  oath  to  join  the  insurrection.  They
did  the  same  with  the  council  of  the  department,  and  that
night  the  revolutionists  from  the  Bishop's  Palace,  the  Depart-
ment, and  the  Commune  met  together,  constituting  a  "  General
Revolutionary  Council "  which  undertook  the  direction  of
the  movement.

This  council  appointed  Hanriot,  the  commander  of  one
of  the  battalions,  that  of  the  sans-culottes  section,  to  be  General
Commander  of  the  National  Guard.  The  tocsin  was  rung
and  drums  were  beating  the  "  alarm "  throughout  Paris.
But  still  indecision  was  the  most  noticeable  thing  in  this  rising.
Even  after  the  alarm-gun  on  the  Pont-Neuf  had  begun  to
fire,  about  one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  the  armed  sectionaries,
pouring  into  the  streets,  did  not  seem  to  have  any  fixed  plan.
Two  battalions,  faithful  to  the  Girondins,  had  been  the  first
to  hasten  to  the  Convention,  and  they  took  up  a  position  in
front  of  the  Tuileries.  Hanriot,  with  forty-eight  cannon  from
the  sections,  surrounded  the  Tuileries  and  the  Assembly
Hall.

Hours  passed  by  without  anything  being  done.  All  Paris
was  on  foot,  but  the  majority  of  the  people  only  wanted  to
put  some  pressure  on  the  Convention,  so  that  the  Girondin
Vergniaud,  seeing  that  they  went  no  further,  put  a  resolution
to  the  effect  that  the  sections  had  merited  well  of  the  country.
He  no  doubt  hoped  by  this  to  mitigate  their  hostility  towards
the  "  Gironde."  It  looked  almost  as  if  the  day  were  lost,
when  new  crowds  of  people  came  up  in  the  evening  and  invaded
the  Hall  of  the  Convention.  Then,  the  Montagnards  feeling


THE  INSURRECTION  OF  MAY  31  AND  JUNE  2 403

themselves  reinforced,  Robespierre  demanded  not  only  the
suppression  of  the  Commission  of  Twelve  and  the  trial  of  its
members,  but  also  the  trial  of  the  principal  members  of  the
"  Gironde,"  whom  they  called  "  the  Twenty-Two  "  and  who
did  not  include  the  Twelve.

This  proposition  was  not  discussed.  All  that  the  Convention
decided  to  do  was  to  break  up  the  Commission  of  Twelve
once  more,  and  to  have  all  its  papers  settled  and  sent  to  the
Committee  of  Public  Welfare,  for  a  report  to  be  made  on  them
within  three  days.  For  the  rest,  the  Convention  approved
of  a  resolution  of  the  Commune  which  directed  that  the  work-
men who  remained  under  arms,  until  public  tranquillity  was
restored,  should  be  paid  forty  sous  a  day.  Upon  this  the
Commune  levied  a  tax  on  the  rich,  so  as  to  be  able  to  pay  the
workmen  for  the  first  three  days  of  the  insurrection.  It  was
decided,  also,  that  the  galleries  of  the  Convention  should  be
thrown  open  to  the  people,  without  tickets  being  required  for
admission.

All  this  meant,  however,  very  little.  The  "  Gironde "
was  still  there,  and  continued  to  have  a  majority  in  the  Con-
vention. The  insurrection  had  failed.  But  then  the  people
of  Paris,  comprehending  that  nothing  had  been  done,  set  to
work  to  prepare  for  a  fresh  rising  for  the  next  day  but  one,
June  2.

The  revolutionary  committee  formed  within  the  General
Council  of  the  Commune  gave  the  order  for  the  arrest  of
Roland  and  his  wife.  He  had  gone  away,  and  she  was  arrested
alone.  It  furthermore  demanded  very  plainly  that  the  Con-
vention should  have  twenty-seven  of  its  Girondist  members
arrested.  That  evening  the  tocsin  was  rung,  and  the  measured
reports  of  the  alarm-gun  began  again  to  resound.

On  June  2  all  Paris  had  risen,  this  time  to  finish  matters.
More  than  a  hundred  thousand  armed  men  assembled  round
the  Convention.  They  had  with  them  one  hundred  and
sixty-three  pieces  of  artillery,  and  they  asked  that  the  Girondist
leaders  should  hand  in  their  resignations,  or,  failing  this,  that
twenty-two  of  them,  the  number  being  afterwards  raised  to
twenty-seven,  should  be  expelled  from  the  Convention.


404 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  horrible  news  that  arrived  that  day  from  Lyons  rein-
forced the  popular  insurrection.  It  became  known  that  on
May  29  the  famished  people  of  Lyons  had  risen,  but  that  the
counter-revolutionists — that  is,  the  Royalists  supported  by  the
Girondins — had  gained  the  upper  hand  and  had  restored
order  by  murdering  eight  hundred  patriots  !

This  was  unfortunately  only  too  true,  and  the  share  taken
by  the  Girondins  in  the  counter-revolution  was  only  too
evident.  The  news  roused  the  people  to  fury ;  it  was  the
doom  of  the  "  Gironde."  The  people  who  were  besieging
the  Convention  declared  that  they  would  let  no  one  pass  out
so  long  as  the  expulsion  of  the  principal  Girondins,  in  some
fashion  or  other,  was  not  pronounced.

It  is  known  that  the  Convention,  or  at  least  the  Right,
the  "  Plain  "  and  part  of  the  "  Mountain,"  declaring  that  their
deliberations  were  no  longer  free,  tried  to  get  out,  hoping  to
overawe  the  people,  and  so  make  their  way  through  the  crowd.
Whereupon  Hanriot,  drawing  his  sword,  gave  the  famous  order  :
"  Gunners,  to  your  guns  !  "

After  a  three  days'  resistance,  the  Convention  was  thus
obliged  to  do  as  it  was  bidden.  It  voted  the  exclusion  of
thirty-one  of  the  Girondist  members  ;  whereupon  a  deputation
of  the  people  brought  to  it  the  following  letter  :

"  The  whole  of  the  people  of  the  departments  of  Paris  have
deputed  us  to  tell  you,  citizen  legislators,  that  the  decree
which  you  have  just  made  is  the  salvation  of  the  Republic  ;
we  come  to  offer  hostages  from  among  us,  in  numbers  equalling
those  of  whom  the  Assembly  has  ordered  the  arrest,  so  as  to
answer  their  departments  for  their  safety."

On  the  other  hand,  Marat  gave  an  address  to  the  Jacobins
on  June  3,  in  which  he  summed  up  as  follows  the  meaning  of
the  movement  that  had  just  been  carried  out,  and  proclaimed
the  right  of  well-being  for  all.

"  We  have  given  a  great  impetus  to  the  Revolution,"  he
said,  speaking  of  the  expulsion  of  the  thirty-one  Girondin
deputies,  "  it  is  for  the  Convention  now  to  confirm  the  bases
of  the  public  happiness.  Nothing  is  easier ;  you  only  must
make  up  your  minds  definitively.  We  wish  that  all  the  citizens


THE  INSURRECTION  OF  MAY  31  AND  JUNE  2 405

spoken  of  as  sans-culottes  may  enjoy  happiness  and  comfort,
We  wish  that  this  useful  class  should  be  helped  by  the  rich
in  proportion  to  their  capacities.  We  do  not  wish  to  attack
property.  But  what  is  the  most  sacred  property  ?  It  is  that
of  existence.  We  wish  this  property  to  be  respected.  .  .  .

"  We  wish  that  all  men  who  have  not  a  hundred  thousand
livres'  worth  of  property  should  have  an  interest  in  the  mainten-
ance of  our  work.  As  to  those  who  have  more  than  a  hundred
thousand,  let  them  cry  out  as  much  as  they  like.  .  .  .  We
shall  tell  these  men  :  '  Acknowledge  that  we  are  the  great
number,  and  if  you  do  not  help  us  to  turn  the  wheel,  we  shall
drive  you  out  of  the  Republic,  we  shall  take  possession  of  your
property,  and  divide  it  among  the  sans- culottes.'  "

And  to  this  he  added  another  idea  which  was  soon  to  be  put
into  execution  :

"  Jacobins,"  he  went  on  to  say,  "  I  have  a  truth  to  tell  you.
You  do  not  know  your  most  deadly  enemies ;  they  are  the
constitutional  priests.  It  is  they  who  declaim  most  in  the
provinces  against  anarchists,  disorganisers,  Dantonism,  Robes-
pierrism,  Jacobinism.  .  .  .  Do  not  cherish  any  longer  the
popular  errors ;  cut  at  the  roots  of  superstition  !  Declare
openly  that  the  priests  are  your  enemies."*

At  that  moment  Paris  did  not  in  the  least  desire  the  death
of  the  Girondist  deputies.  All  that  the  people  wanted  was
that  the  revolutionary  members  of  the  Convention  should  have
a  liberty  of  action  for  carrying  the  Revolution  further  on.
The  arrested  deputies  were  not  sent  to  the  Abbaye  prison  ;
they  were  guarded  in  their  own  homes.  Their  pay  even,  of
eighteen  francs  a  day,  allotted  to  each  member  of  the  Con-
vention, was  continued,  and  every  one  of  them  could  move
about  Paris,  accompanied  by  a  gendarme,  whom  he  had  to
feed.

If  these  deputies,  acting  in  accordance  with  the  principles
of  antique  citizenship,  which  they  so  much  liked  to  vaunt,
had  withdrawn  into  private  life,  it  is  certain  that  they  would
have  been  let  alone.  But  instead  of  that,  they  hurried  off  to
their  departments  to  stir  them  up  against  the  Convention,

*  Aulard,  Jacobins,  vol.  v.  p.  227.


406 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

and  when  they  saw  that  in  order  to  excite  the  counter-revolu-
tion and  to  rouse  the  departments  against  Paris,  they  would
have  to  march  hand  in  hand  with  the  royalists,  they  allied
themselves  with  the  royalist  traitors,  rather  than  give  up  their
plans.  They  marched  with  these  traitors  against  the  Revolu-
tion.

Then,  and  only  then — in  July  1793 — the  Convention  out-
lawed them  as  rebels.


CHAPTER  XL VII

THE  POPULAR  REVOLUTION— ARBITRARY
TAXATION

Immediate  result  of  expulsion  of  Girondins — Importance  of
period,  May  1793  to  July  1794 — Famine  continues — War
against  coalition — Difficulties  of  sans-culottes — Forced  loan
necessary — Superfluous  and  necessary  incomes — Impossibility
of  levying  loan

IF  any  one  doubts  the  necessity  under  which  the  Revolution
lay,  of  expelling  the  chief  men  of  the  "  Gironde  "  from  the
Convention,  he  should  cast  a  glance  at  the  legislative  work
which  the  Convention  set  itself  to  accomplish,  as  soon  as  the
opposition  of  the  Right  was  broken.

The  taxation  of  the  rich  to  help  towards  the  enormous
expenses  of  the  war  ;  the  establishment  of  a  maximum  price  for
all  commodities  ;  the  restoration  to  the  communes  of  the  lands
which  the  nobility  had  taken  from  them  since  1669  ;  the  definite
abolition,  without  redemption,  of  the  feudal  rights  ;  the  laws
concerning  inheritance,  intended  to  spread  and  equalise
wealth ;  the  democratic  Constitution  of  1793 — all  these
measures  came  in  rapid  succession  after  the  Right  had  been
weakened  by  the  expulsion  of  the  Girondist  leaders.

This  period,  which  lasted  from  May  31,  1793,  to  July  27,
1794  (9th  Thermidor  of  the  Year  II.  of  the  Republic),  repre-
sents the  most  important  period  of  the  whole  Revolution.
The  great  changes  in  the  relations  between  citizens,  the  pro-
gramme which  the  Assembly  had  sketched  during  the  night
of  August  4,  1789,  were,  after  four  years  of  resistance,  at  last
carried  out  by  the  purified  Convention,  under  the  pressure  of

the  popular revolution. And  it  was the people — the  sans-

407


408 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

culottes — who  not  only  forced  the  Convention  to  legislate
in  this  way,  after  they  had  given  it  the  power  of  doing  so  by  the
insurrection  of  May  31  ;  but  it  was  also  they  who  put  these
measures  into  execution  locally,  by  means  of  the  popular  societies
to  whom  the  commissioned  members  of  the  Convention  applied,
when  they  had  to  create  local  executive  power.

Famine  still  reigned  during  this  period,  and  the  war,  main-
tained by  the  Republic  against  the  coalition  of  the  King  of
Prussia,  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  the  King  of  Sardinia  and  the
King  of  Spain,  urged  on  and  financed  by  England,  assumed
terrible  proportions.  The  requirements  of  this  war  were
enormous,  and  one  can  have  no  idea  of  them  without  noting
the  minute  details  that  are  to  be  found  in  the  documents  of
the  time,  so  as  to  conceive  the  actual  penury  and  ruin  to  which
France  was  brought  by  the  invasion.  Under  these  truly  tragic
circumstances,  when  all  things  were  lacking — bread,  shoes,
beasts  of  burden,  iron,  lead,  saltpetre — when  nothing  could
enter  by  land  through  the  armies  of  four  hundred  thousand
men  hurled  against  France  by  the  allied  Kings,  and  nothing  by
sea,  through  the  blockade  maintained  by  English  ships — under
these  circumstances  the  sans-culottes  were  striving  to  save  the
Revolution  which  was  on  the  point  of  collapsing.

At  the  same  time,  all  who  held  by  the  old  state  of  things,
all  who  had  formerly  occupied  privileged  positions  and  all  who
hoped  either  to  regain  those  positions,  or  else  create  new  ones
for  themselves  as  soon  as  the  monarchic  regime  was  re-estab-
lished— the  clergy,  the  nobility,  the  middle  classes  enriched
by  the  Revolution — all  conspired  against  it.  Those  who
remained  faithful  to  it  had  to  struggle  between  the  circle  of
foreign  cannon  and  bayonets  that  was  closing  round  them,
and  the  conspirators  in  their  midst  who  were  trying  to  stab
them  in  the  back.

Seeing  this,  the  sans-culottes  made  haste  to  act  so  that  when
the  reaction  gained  the  upper  hand,  it  should  find  a  new  and
regenerate  France  :  the  peasants  in  possession  of  the  land,  the
town-worker  familiarised  with  equality  and  democracy,  the
aristocracy  and  the  clergy  despoiled  of  their  riches  which  had
been  their  true  strength,  and  these  riches  already  passed  into


ARBITRARY  TAXATION  409

thousands  of  other  hands,  divided  into  shares,  changed  entirely
in  appearance,  unrecognisable — impossible  to  reconstruct.

The  true  history  of  those  thirteen  months — June  1793  to
July  1794 — has  not  7et  keen  written.  The  documents  which
one  day  will  be  used  for  writing  it  exist  in  the  provincial
archives,  in  the  reports  and  letters  of  the  Convention's  com-
missioners, in  the  minutes  of  the  municipalities  and  of  the
popular  societies.  But  they  have  not  yet  been  collected  with
the  care  that  has  been  bestowed  upon  the  documents  concern-
ing the  legislation  of  the  Revolution,  and  they  ought  to  be
sought  for  soon  as  they  are  rapidly  disappearing.  This  would,
no  doubt,  be  the  work  of  a  life-time  :  but  without  this  work
the  history  of  the  Revolution  will  remain  incomplete.*

What  the  historians  have  chiefly  studied  of  this  period  is  the
War — and  the  Terror.  And  yet  these  are  not  the  essentials.
The  essential  factor  was  the  immense  work  of  distributing  the
landed  property,  the  work  of  democratising  and  dechristianising
France,  which  was  accomplished  during  these  thirteen  months.
To  relate  this  immense  work  with  all  the  struggles  to  which  it
gave  birth  in  the  different  places,  in  each  town  and  hamlet  of
France,  will  be  the  work  of  some  future  historian.  All  that  we
can  do  to-day  is  to  recall  some  of  the  chief  features  of  it.

The  first  really  revolutionary  measure  taken  after  May  31
was  the  forced  loan  from  the  rich  to  subvent  the  expenses  of  the
war.  The  condition  of  the  Treasury  was,  as  we  have  seen,  de-
plorable. The  war  was  devouring  huge  sums  of  money.  The
paper-money,  issued  in  too  great  quantities,  had  already  de-
preciated. New  taxes  on  the  poor  could  not  produce  any-
thing. What  else  was  left  to  do,  if  not  to  tax  the  rich  ?  And
the  idea  of  a  forced  loan,  of  a  milliard  levied  on  the  rich — an
idea  which  had  already  been  mooted  under  the  Ministry  of
Necker  at  the  outset  of  the  Revolution — germinated  in  the
nation.

When  we  read  to-day  what  contemporaries,  both  reactionaries

*  Papers  of  the  highest  value  have  been  destroyed  recently  at  Clair-
vaux.  We  have  found  the  traces  of  them  and  we  have  recovered  some
fragments  of  the  library  of  "  Pelarin,"  which  had  been  sold  to  a  grocer
and  a  tobacconist  in  the  village.


410 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

and  revolutionists,  said  of  the  condition  of  France,  it  is  im-
possible not  to  think  that  every  republican,  whatever  his  ideas
might  be  concerning  property,  must  have  sided  with  the  idea  of
a  forced  loan.  There  was  no  other  possible  way  out  of  the
difficulty.  When  this  question  was  brought  forward,  on  May
20,  the  tax  was  proposed  by  Cambon,  a  moderate  ;  but  the
Girondins  fell  upon  the  proposers  of  the  loan  with  unexpected
violence,  stirring  up  a  shameful  scene  in  the  Convention.

This  is  why  all  that  could  be  done  on  May  20  was  to  accept
the  idea  of  a  forced  loan  in  principle.  As  to  the  manner  of
carrying  it  into  effect  that  was  to  be  discussed  later  on — or
perhaps  never,  if  the  Girondins  succeeded  in  sending  the
"  Montagnards  "  to  the  "  Tarpeian  Rock."

On  the  very  night  following  the  expulsion  of  the  principal
Girondins,  the  Commune  of  Paris  resolved  that  the  decree
fixing  the  maximum  for  the  price  of  commodities  should  be
carried  into  effect  without  further  delay,  that  the  arming  of
the  citizens  should  be  proceeded  with  at  once  ;  that  the  forced
loan  should  be  levied  ;  and  that  the  revolutionary  army  should
be  organised  and  should  comprise  all  good  citizens,  but  exclude
the  ci-devants,  that  is,  the  ex-nobles,  the  "  aristocrats."

The  Convention  lost  no  time  in  taking  similar  action,  and
on  June  22,  1793,  it  discussed  the  report  of  Real,  who  proposed
the  following  principles  for  the  forced  loan.  The  necessary
income,  three  thousand  livres  for  a  father  of  a  family  and  fifteen
hundred  livres  for  a  bachelor,  was  to  be  free  from  taxation.
The  excessive  incomes  were  to  contribute  by  progression,  up
to  the  incomes  of  ten  thousand  livres  for  bachelors,  and  twenty
thousand  for  fathers  of  families.  If  the  income  were  above
this  figure,  it  was  to  be  considered  as  superfluous,  and  requisi-
tioned in  its  entirety  for  the  loan.  This  principle  was  adopted  ;
only  the  Convention  by  its  decree  of  the  same  day  fixed  the
necessary  income  at  six  thousand  livres  for  bachelors  and  ten
thousand  for  the  fathers  of  families.*

*  I  here  follow  the  work  of  Rene  Stourm,  Les  finances  de  I'ancien
regime  et  la  Revolution,  1885,  vol.  ii.  pp.  369  et  seq.  The  discussions  in
the  Convention  were  very  interesting.  Cambon,  on  introducing  the
question  on  May  20,  1793,  said  :  "I  should  like  the  Convention  to
open  a  civic  loan  of  a  milliard  livres,  which  should  be  made  up  by  the


ARBITRARY  TAXATION  411

They  perceived,  however,  in  August,  that  with  these  sums
the  loan  would  produce  less  than  two  hundred  millions,*  and
on  September  3,  the  Convention  had  to  fall  back  on  its  decree  of
June  22.  It  fixed  the  necessary  income  at  a  thousand  livres
for  bachelors  and  fifteen  hundred  for  married  men,  plus  a
thousand  livres  for  each  member  of  their  family.  The  excessive
incomes  were  taxed  on  an  ascending  scale  which  went  from  ten
to  fifty  per  cent,  of  the  income.  And  as  to  the  incomes  above
nine  thousand  livres,  they  were  taxed  so  as  never  to  leave  more
than  four  thousand  five  hundred  livres  of  income,  plus  the
necessary  which  we  have  just  mentioned,  no  matter  what  the
amount  of  the  rich  man's  revenue  was.  This,  however,  was
applied  not  as  a  permanent  tax,  but  as  a  forced  loan,  only  made
for  a  time  and  under  extraordinary  circumstances.

A  striking  fact,  which  proves  in  a  remarkable  way  the  impo-
tence of  parliaments,  is  that  although  there  was  certainly  never
any  government  that  inspired  more  terror  than  that  of  the
Convention  in  the  Year  II.  of  the  Republic,  yet  this  law  con-
cerning the  forced  loan  was  never  obeyed.  The  rich  people
did  not  pay  it.  The  levying  of  the  loan  entailed  enormous
expense ;  but  how  was  it  to  be  levied  upon  rich  people  who
would  not  pay.  By  seizure,  by  sale  ?  For  this  a  complicated
political  mechanism  was  required,  and  there  was  already  so  very
much  of  the  national  property  for  sale  ?  Materially,  the  loan
was  not  a  success  ;  but  as  the  advanced  Montagnards  meant
it  to  prepare  men's  minds  for  the  idea  of  equalising  all  wealth,
and  so  to  make  it  another  step  forward,  in  this  respect  they
attained  their  end.

Later  on — even  after  the  reaction  of  Thermidor,  the  Direc-
tory also  had  recourse  to  two  attempts  in  the  same  direction —
in  1795  and  in  1799.  The  idea  of  superfluous  and  necessary

rich  and  the  indifferent.  You  are  rich,  you  have  an  opinion,  which
causes  us  expense  ;  I  want  to  bind  you  to  the  Revolution  whether  you
like  or  not ;  I  want  you  to  lend  your  wealth  to  the  Republic."  Marat,
Thuriot,  and  Mathieu  supported  this  proposal ;  but  there  was  a  very
strong  opposition.  It  should  be  noted  that  it  was  a  department,  that
of  Herault,  that  had  taken  the  initiative,  and  set  the  example  of  a  loan
of  this  kind.  Cambon  mentioned  it  in  his  speech.^  Jacques  Roux,
at  the  Gravilliers,  had  already  advised  it  on  March  9.
*  Stourm,  p.  372,  note.


412 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

incomes  was  making  its  way — and  we  know  that  progressive
taxation  became  part  of  the  democratic  programme  during  the
century  after  the  Revolution.  It  was  even  applied  in  several
countries,  but  in  much  more  moderate  proportions ;  so  mode-
rate, indeed,  that  there  was  nothing  left  but  the  name.


CHAPTER  XL VIII

THE  LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY  AND  THE
COMMUNAL  LANDS

History  of  communal  lands — Rise  of  middle-class  peasants —
Opposition  to  poorer  peasants — Active  and  passive  citizens —
Appropriation  of  communal  land  by  well-to-do  peasants —
Inaction  of  Assembly — Proposal  of  Mailhe  rejected — Decree
of  Assembly — Indignation  produced  by  decree — Difficulty  of
carrying  decree  into  effect — Assembly  frames  new  law  to
advantage  of  "  grabbers  "

THE  restoration  of  the  communal  lands  to  the  village  communes
and  the  definite  abolition  of  the  feudal  laws  were,  as  we  have
seen,  the  questions  that  dominated  all  others  in  rural  France  ;
quest  ons  of  immense  importance  in  which  two-thirds  of  France
was  intensely  interested,  and  yet  so  long  as  the  Girondins,  the
"  defenders  of  property  "  ruled  the  Convention,  they  remained
in  suspense.

Since  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  or  rather  since  1788,
when  a  ray  of  hope  had  penetrated  into  the  villages,  the  peasants
had  expected  to  regain  possession  of  the  communal  lands,  and
had  even  tried  to  take  back  what  the  nobility,  the  clergy  and
the  upper  middle  classes  had  appropriated  under  the  edict  of
166*9.  Wherever  they  could,  the  peasants  took  back  these  lands
in  spite  of  the  tenible  repression  which  very  often  followed
their  attempts  at  expropriation.

Formerly,  the  whole  of  the  land — meadows,  woods,  waste
lands,  and  clearings — had  belonged  to  the  village  communities.
The  feudal  lords  held  the  right  of  administering  justice  over  the
inhabitants,  and  most  of  them  had  also  the  right  of  levying
various  taxes,  generally  consisting  of  three  days'  work  and
various  payments,  or  gifts,  in  kind,  in  exchange  for  which  the

413


4H THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

lords  were  pledged  to  maintain  armed  bands  for  the  defence  of
the  territory  against  invasions  and  incursions,  whether  of  other
lords  or  of  foreigners  or  of  local  brigands.

Gradually,  however,  with  the  help  of  the  military  power  they
possessed,  and  of  the  clergy,  who  sided  with  them,  as  well  as  of
the  lawyers  versed  in  Roman  law,  whom  they  maintained  in  their
courts,  the  lords  appropriated  considerable  tracts  of  land  as  their
private  property.  This  appropriation  was  gradual ;  it  took
centuries — the  whole  of  the  Middle  Ages — to  accomplish  it,
but  towards  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century  it  was  accom-
plished. The  lords  were,  by  that  time,  in  possession  of  large
tracts  of  arable  land  and  pastures.  But  still  they  were  not
satisfied.

As  the  population  of  Western  Europe  increased,  and  the
land  acquired  a  greater  value,  the  lords,  having  become  the
King's  peers,  being  under  the  protection  of  both  King  and
Church,  began  to  covet  the  lands  still  in  the  possession  of  the
village  communities.  To  take  these  lands  by  a  thousand  ways
and  under  a  thousand  pretexts,  either  by  force  or  by  legal
fraud,  was  the  customary  thing  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth
centuries.  Then  came  the  ordinance  of  Louis  XIV.,  le  Roi
Soleil,  in  1669,  to  furnish  the  lords  with  a  new  legal  weapon
for  the  appropriation  of  the  communal  lands.

This  weapon  was  the  triage,  which  permitted  the  lord  to
appropriate  a  third  of  the  lands  belonging  to  the  village  com-
munities that  had  formerly  been  under  his  jurisdiction,  and
the  lords  eagerly  took  advantage  of  the  edict  to  seize  upon  the
best  land,  chiefly  the  meadows.

Under  Louis  XIV.  and  Louis  XV.  the  nobility  and  the
Church  continued  to  seize  the  communal  lands  under  various
pretexts.  A  monastery  would  be  founded  in  the  midst  of
virgin  forests,  and  the  peasants  of  their  own  accord  would  give
the  monks  vast  tracts  of  the  forest,  and  this  possession  soon
became  property.  Or  else  the  lord,  for  a  mere  nothing,  would
obtain  the  right  of  building  a  farm  on  land  belonging  to  the
commune  in  the  centre  of  uncultivated  lands,  with  the  result
that  he  soon  claimed  the  right  of  property  over  all,  and,  if  need
were,  did  not  hesitate  to  fabricate  title-deeds.  In  other
•places  they  took  advantage  of  the  law  of  enclosures  (bornage),


THE  ASSEMBLY  AND  COMMUNAL  LANDS 415

and  in  several  provinces  the  lord  who  had  put  a  fence  round
part  of  the  communal  lands  declared  himself  the  owner  of  it
and  received  the  royal  sanction  or  the  sanction  of  the  parliaments
to  his  rights  of  property  over  these  enclosures.  As  the  resis-
tance of  the  communes  to  these  appropriations  was  treated  as
rebellion,  while  the  lords  had  protectors  at  Court,  the  theft
of  the  communal  lands,  on  a  large  and  small  scale,  continued
throughout  the  whole  kingdom.*

However,  as  soon  as  the  peasants  became  conscious  of  the
approaching  Revolution,  they  began  to  insist  that  all  the
appropriations  made  since  1669,  whether  under  the  law  of
triage  or  otherwise,  should  be  declared  illegal,  and  that  the
lands,  which  the  village  communes  themselves  had  been
induced  by  a  thousand  fraudulent  means  to  give  up  to  indivi-
duals, should  be  restored.  In  certain  places,  during  the  risings
of  1789-1792,  the  peasants  had  already  taken  back  these  lands,
but  reaction  might  set  in  any  day,  and  if  successful  the  ci-
devants — the  dispossessed  nobles — would  again  seize  upon
them.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  make  the  restoration  of
the  lands  general  and  to  legalise  it,  a  measure  which  was
strenuously  opposed,  not  only  by  the  two  Assemblies,  the  Con-
stituent and  the  Legislative,  but  also  by  the  Convention,  so
long  as  it  was  under  the  domination  of  the  Girondins.

It  must  be  noted  that  the  idea  of  dividing  the  communal
lands  between  the  inhabitants  of  each  commune,  which  was
often  brought  forward  by  the  village  bourgeoisie,  was  not  at  all
favoured  by  the  great  mass  of  the  peasants,  no  more  than  it  is
favoured  in  our  own  day  by  Russians,  Bulgarians,  Servians,
Arabs,  Kabyles,  Hindus,  or  any  other  peasantry  among  whom
the  village  community  still  persists.  We  know,  in  fact,  that
whenever  a  voice  is  raised  in  a  country  where  communal  pro-
perty exists,  demanding  the  division  of  lands  belonging  to  the
village  community,  it  is  raised  in  behalf  of  the  village  middle-
class  people,  who  have  grown  rich  by  some  small  business,  and

*  Several  provincial  assemblies  had,  prior  to  1789,  tried  to  compel
the  village  communes  to  divide  their  lands,  either  in  equal  parts  per
head,  or  in  proportion  to  the  personal  tax  (la  taille)  paid  by  each  house-
holder. Several  cahiers  of  1789  made  a  similar  demand.  Others,  on
the  contrary,  complained  of  the  enclosures  (bornage]  which  the  King
had  authorised  in  certain  provinces  in  1769  and  1777.


4i6 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

hope  to  appropriate  the  poor  man's  acre,  as  soon  as  the  land  is
divided.  The  bulk  of  the  peasantry  is  nearly  always  opposed
to  such  a  division.

This  was  also  what  happened  in  France  during  the  Revolu-
tion. In  the  midst  of  the  great  mass  always  sinking  deeper  and
deeper  in  their  hideous  poverty,  a  peasant  middle  class  was
being  evolved,  which  was  growing  rich,  in  one  way  or  another,
and  whose  demands  were  the  more  readily  heard  by  a  revolu-
tionary administration,  middle  class  in  its  origin,  its  tastes  and
its  point  of  view.  These  fowrgmV-peasants  Were  quite  in
agreement  with  the  mass  of  the  poor  peasants  in  demanding  the
restoration  of  the  communal  lands  taken  by  the  lords  since  1669,
but  they  were  against  this  mass  when  they  demanded  the
peremptory  division  of  these  lands.  The  opposition  of  the
poorer  peasants  was  the  stronger,  because  of  the  distinction
which  had  been  established  during  the  course  of  the  centuries
between  two  classes  of  inhabitants,  in  both  rural  and  urban
communes.  There  were  families,  more  or  less  well-to-do,  who
were,  or  said  they  were,  descended  from  the  first  founders  of
each  commune.  These  styled  themselves  the  bourgeois,  in
Alsace  die  Burger,  the  "  citizens,"  or  even  simply  "  the  families  " ;
but  there  were  also  those  who  had  entered  the  commune  later
on,  and  who  were  called  "  the  inhabitants,"  les  menants  ;  die
Ansdssigen  in  Alsace  and  Switzerland.

Only  the  former  had  rights  over  the  communal  arable  lands,
and  they  alone  in  many  cases  shared  the  right  of  pasturage  and
the  right  over  the  woods,  the  waste  lands,  the  forests,  &c. ;
while  the  inhabitants,  the  manants,  the  Ansdssigen,  were  often
debarred  all  rights,  and  were  scarcely  allowed  to  pasture  a  goat
on  the  waste  land,  or  to  pick  up  the  fallen  wood  and  chestnuts.

Their  situation  became  still  worse  after  the  National  Assembly
had  established  the  fatal  distinction  between  active  and  passive
citizens,  not  only  for  political  rights  but  also  for  the  election  of
the  communal  councils,  the  officials,  and  the  judges.  By  the
municipal  law  of  December  1789,  the  Constituent  Assembly  had
indeed  abolished  the  popular  village  assembly,  which  was  com-
posed, as  in  the  Russian  mir,  of  all  the  heads  of  families  in  the
commune,  which  till  then  had  continued  to  meet  under  an  elm


THE  ASSEMBLY  AND  COMMUNAL  LANDS 417

or  in  the  shadow  of  the  belfry ;  and  instead  of  the  folk-mote,
it  had  introduced  an  elected  municipality  which  could  be
elected  by  the  active  citizens  alone.

From  that  time  the  appropriation  of  communal  lands  by
well-to-do  peasants  and  all  sorts  of  middle-class  people  must
have  proceeded  rapidly.  It  was  easy,  indeed,  for  the  "  active  "
citizens  to  come  to  an  understanding  among  themselves  about
purchases  of  the  best  pieces  of  ground,  and  thus  to  deprive  the
poor  commoners  of  the  use  of  the  common  lands  which  were
perhaps  the  sole  guarantee  of  their  existence.  This  must  have
been  the  case  in  the  Vendee,  and  undoubtedly  all  through
Brittany  also,  where  the  peasants,  as  may  be  seen  from  the
laws  of  1793,  enjoyed  till  then  extensive  rights  over  wide
stretches  of  waste  lands,  heaths  and  pastures — rights  which
the  village  bourgeoisie  began  to  dispute  when  the  ancient
custom  of  communal  assembly  was  abolished  by  the  law  of
December  1789.

Under  the  influence  of  the  laws  made  by  the  Constituent
Assembly,  the  little  village  bourgeoisie  began  to  insist  more  and
more  that  the  lands  appropriated  under  the  law  of  triage
should  be  given  back  to  the  villages,  and  that  the  division  of
the  communal  lands  should  be  decreed  at  the  same  time.  They
were,  no  doubt,  quite  sure  that  if  the  division  were  decreed  by
the  National  Assembly,  it  would  be  accomplished  to  the  advan-
tage of  the  well-to-do  peasants.  The  poor,  the  "  passive  "
commoners,  would  be  excluded.  But  neither  the  Constituent
nor  the  Legislative  Assembly  did  anything  until  1792.  They
were  both  opposed  to  any  solution  of  the  land  question  that
might  be  unfavourable  to  the  nobility,  and  for  that  reason  they
took  no  action.*

*  Robespierre  had  already  demanded  in  the  Constituent  Assembly
the  abolition  of  the  ordinance  of  1669,  and  the  restitution  of  the  com-
munal lands  which  "  the  towns,  boroughs  and  villages  of  Artois  pos-
sessed since  time  immemorial,"  and  to  the  preservation  of  which  had
mainly  been  due  the  abundance  of  cattle  and  the  prosperity  of  agri-
culture and  the  flax  industry.  These  lands  had  been  taken  away  by
the  States-General  of  Artois  for  the  enrichment  of  the  administrative
officials  and  to  place  them  in  the  hands  of  the  nobility.  He  demanded,
therefore,  the  abolition  of  the  ordinance  of  1669.  (Motion  de  Robespierre
CM  nom  de  la  province  d'4rtois  et  &$  provinces  de  Flandre,  d'Hainaut

2  D


418 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

After  August  10,  1792,  however,  the  Legislative  Asssmbly,
on  the  eve  of  dissolution,  felt  itself  obliged  to  do  something,
and  what  it  did  was  for  the  benefit  of  the  village  bourgeoisie.
When  Mailhe  bi ought  forward,  on  August  25,  1792,  a  well-
thought-out  proposal  for  a  decree  to  annual  the  effects  of  the
ordinance  of  1669,  and  compel  the  lords  to  restore  the  com-
munal lands  which  had  been  taken  from  the  village  communes
within  the  last  two  hundred  years,  his  decree  was  not  accepted.
Instead,  eleven  days  previously,  on  August  14,  the  Legislative
Assembly,  on  the  motion  of  Francois  (of  Neuf chateau),  had
already  decreed  as  follows  :  "  First,  this  year,  immediately
after  the  harvest,  all  the  communal  lands  and  usages  other  than
woods  [which  meant  even  the  grazing  lands  still  held  by  the
communes,  over  which  rights  of  pasturage  generally  belonged
to  all  the  inhabitants]  shall  be  divided  among  the  citizens  of
each  commune.  Secondly,  these  citizens  shall  enjoy  complete
ownership  of  their  respective  portions.  Thirdly,  the  com-
munal property  known  as  nobody's  and  vacant  shall  be  equally
divided  between  the  inhabitants.  And  fourthly,  to  fix  the
method  of  division  the  Committee  of  Agriculture  shall  in  three
days  propose  a  plan  to  be  decreed."  By  this  same  decree  the
Legislative  Assembly  abolished  also  the  joint  liability  of  the
commoners  for  the  payment  of  dues  and  taxes.

It  was  indeed  a  treacherous  blow  dealt  to  communal  owner-
ship. Hurriedly  drawn  up,  with  incredible  vagueness  and
carelessness,  this  decree  seemed  to  me  so  extravagant  that  for
some  time  I  could  not  believe  that  the  text,  as  given  by  Dalloz,
was  anything  but  an  imperfect  summary,  and  I  searched  for  the
complete  decree.  But  I  found  Dalloz  had  given  the  exact
and  full  text  of  this  amazing  law,  which,  with  the  stroke  of  a
pen,  abolished  communal  property  in  France  and  deprived
those  who  were  called  inhabitants,  or  Ansdssigen,  of  all  rights
over  communal  lands.

We  can  quite  understand  the  fury  provoked  by  this  decree
throughout  France  among  the  poorer  of  the  rural  population.
It  was  understood  to  be  an  order  to  divide  the  communal  lands

et  de  Cambists  pour  la  restitution  des  biens  nationaux  envahis  par  les
seigneurs. Imprimerie  Nationale,  1791. British  Museum  Pamphlets.) ,


THE  ASSEMBLY  AND  COMMUNAL  LANDS 419

among  the  active  citizens,  and  those  "  citizens  "  only,  to  the
exclusion  of  the  "inhabitants  "  and  the  poor.  It  was  a  spolia-
tion for  the  benefit  of  the  village  bourgeoisie,*  and  this  decree,
with  its  third  paragraph,  would  in  itself  have  sufficed  to  rouse
the  whole  of  the  Breton  peasantry  against  the  Republic.

Already  on  September  8,  1793,  a  report  was  read  before  the
Assembly  to  state  that  the  carrying  out  of  this  decree  was  so
vigorously  opposed  by  the  people  that  it  would  be  impossible
to  apply  it.  However,  nothing  was  done.  The  Legislative
Assembly  separated  without  having  abrogated  it,  and  it  was  not
rescinded  until  October  by  the  Convention.

Seeing  the  difficulty  of  carrying  the  decree  into  effect,  the
Convention  decided  first,  by  the  decrees  of  October  11-13,
1792,  that  "  the  communal  lands  under  cultivation  shall,  until
the  time  of  partition,  continue  to  be  ploughed  and  sown  as
before  in  accordance  with  local  customs,  and  the  citizens  who
shall  have  done  the  aforesaid  ploughing  and  sowing  shall  enjoy
the  crops  resulting  from  their  labours. "f

So  long  as  the  Girondins  dominated  the  Convention  nothing
better  could  be  done.  But  it  is  very  probable  that  the  peasants
— those  of  them,  at  least,  to  whom  the  purport  of  these  counter-
decrees  was  explained — realised  that  the  attempt  to  divide  the
communal  lands  had  failed  for  the  time  being.  But  who  shall
measure  the  harm  that  this  threat  of  expropriation,  still  sus-
pended over  the  communes,  did  to  the  Revolution  ?  Who
shall  tell  the  amount  of  hatred  stirred  up  by  it  in  agricultural
districts  against  the  revolutionists  of  the  towns  ?

Nor  was  this  all.  Between  August  28  and  September  14,
on  the  eve  of  its  dissolution,  the  Legislative  Assembly  had
published  another  decree  concerning  the  communal  lands,
which,  if  it  had  been  upheld,  would  have  been  turned  com-
pletely to  the  advantage  of  the  lords.  It  declared,  true  enough,
that  "  the  unoccupied  and  waste  lands  shall  be  considered  as
belonging  to  the  village  communes,  and  shall  be  adjudged  as
theirs  by  the  tribunals  "  ;  but  if  the  lord  had  appropriated  these
lands  or  part  of  them  earlier  than  within  the  last  forty  years,

*  The  decree  was  so  interpreted  indeed  by  the  law-courts  (vide
Dalloz,  x.  p.  265,  No,  2261,  note).  f  Ibid.  ix.  186.


420 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

and  had  held  them  since,  they  remained  his  property.*  This
law,  as  was  shown  later  by  Fabre  (deputy  for  the  Herault),  in  a
report  by  him  to  the  Convention,  was  of  a  very  great  advantage
to  the  lords,  for  "  nearly  all  the  former  lords  were  able  to  prove
the  necessary  forty  years'  possession,"  and  so  to  nullify  the  clauses
"of  this  decree  which  were  favourable  to  the  communes. "f
Fabre  also  pointed  out  in  this  decree  the  injustice  of  Article  3,
according  to  which  the  village  commune  could  never  regain
possession  of  its  lands  once  the  lord  had  sold  his  acquired  or
supposed  rights  over  them  to  a  third  person.  Dalloz  has,
furthermore,  shown  clearly  how  difficult  it  was  for  the  village
communes  to  produce  the  positive  and  certain  proofs  which  were
demanded  of  them  by  the  law-courts  for  reinstating  them  in
possession  of  their  lands.

Such  as  it  was,  the  law  of  August  1792  was,  therefore,
always  turned  to  the  advantage  of  the  "  grabbers  "  of  com-
munal property.  It  was  only  in  the  Convention,  and  then  only
after  the  insurrection  of  May  31  and  June  2,  which  ended  in
the  expulsion  of  the  Girondist  leaders,  that  the  question  of  the
communal  lands  could  again  be  considered  in  a  light  favourable
to  the  mass  of  the  peasants.

*  "  These  lauds  shall  be  restored  to  the  communes  unless  the  former
lords  (ci-devant  seigneurs}  can  prove  by  title-deeds  or  by  exclusive  and
undisturbed  possession  for  forty  years  that  they  have  proprietary  rights."

f  Rapport  de  Fabre,  p.  36.  British  Museum  Pamphlets  on  the  French
Revolution,  R.  F.,  vol.  247.


CHAPTER  XLIX
THE  LANDS  RESTORED  TO  THE  COMMUNES

Law  of  June  n,  1793 — Lands  to  be  restored — Difficulty  of
partition — Details  of  decree — Diverse  opinions  of  peasants —
Majority  of  communes  quickly  take  possession  of  lands —
Subsequent  history  of  communal  lands

So  long  as  the  Girondins  were  the  masters,  the  question  of  the
communal  lands  remained  as  it  was.  The  Convention  did
nothing  to  minimise  the  harmful  effects  of  the  decrees  of
August  1792,  still  less  did  it  accept  Mailhe's  proposal  concern-
ing the  lands  of  which  the  communes  had  been  robbed.

But  immediately  after  June  2,  the  Convention  took  up  the
question  again,  and  on  June  n,  1793,  it  passed  a  law  which
has  marked  an  epoch  in  the  village  life  of  France,  and  has  been
full  of  consequences — more,  perhaps,  than  any  other  law  in
French  legislation.

By  this  law  all  the  lands  taken  from  the  communes  within
the  last  two  centuries,  by  virtue  of  the  triage  ordinance  of
1669,  had  to  be  restored,  as  well  as  all  those  unoccupied,  and
waste  lands,  grass,  marsh,  heath,  &c.,  that  had  been  taken
from  the  village  communes  in  one  way  or  another  by  individuals,
including  also  those  that  came  under  the  "  forty  years'  posses-
sion "  Act,  decreed  by  the  Legislative  Assembly.*

*  "All  the  communal  lands  in  general,"  said  the  law  of  June  10-11,
1793,  "  known  throughout  the  Republic  under  the  various  names
of  idle  and  waste  lands,  &c.  (gastes,  garrigues,  landes,  pacages,  pdtis,
ajoncs,  bruyeres,  bois  communs,  hermes,  vacants,  palus,  marais,  marecage,
montagne],  and  under  any  other  denomination  whatsoever,  are  the
property  of,  and  by  their  nature  belong  to,  the  generality  of  the  inhabi-
tants, or  members  of  the  communes,  or  sections  of  the  communes.  The
communes  shall  be  authorised  to  demand  their  restitution."  Clause  4
of  Article  25  of  the  ordinance  concerning  the  "waters  and  forests  of
1669,  as  well  as  all  the  edicts,  declarations,  decrees  of  the  council  and

421


422 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

However,  in  passing  this  just  and  necessary  measure,  which
was  to  efface  the  effects  of  the  spoliations  committed  under
the  old  regime,  the  Convention  made  a  false  step  concerning
the  partition  of  these  lands.  On  this  point  there  were  two
conflicting  currents  of  ideas  in  the  Convention  as  in  every
other  place  in  France.  The  well-to-do  peasants,  who  had
long  coveted  the  communal  lands,  of  which  they  in  many
cases  held  portions  in  pledge,  wanted  the  partition.  They
knew  that  if  the  lands  were  divided,  it  would  be  easy  for  them
before  long  to  buy  up  from  the  poorer  peasants  the  plots  of
land  which  would  be  allotted  to  them.  They  wanted  also,  as
we  have  said,  the  division  to  be  made  between  the  "  citizens  "
alone,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  "inhabitants,"  or  even  of  the
poorer  citizens — the  'passive  citizens  of  1789.  These  bourgeois
peasants  found  in  the  Convention  energetic  advocates,  who
always  pleaded  in  the  name  of  property,  justice  and  equality
when  they  pointed  out  the  inequality  in  the  properties  held
by  the  different  communes — which  did  not  prevent  them
from  defending  the  inequalities  within  the  commune.  These
were  the  men  who  demanded  compulsory  division,*  there
being  only  a  few,  like  Julian  Souhait,  who  demanded  that
communal  property  should  be  maintained.

The  Girondist  leaders,  however,  were  no  longer  there  to
support  the  advocates  of  division,  and  the  purified  Convention,
dominated  by  the  Montagnards,  would  not  agree  to  divide
the  communal  lands  among  one  part  only  of  the  inhabitants ;
but  it  believed  at  the  same  time  that  it  was  doing  a  good  thing,
and  acting  in  the  interests  of  agriculture,  by  authorising  the
lands  to  be  divided  among  the  inhabitants  individually.  The
idea  which  led  the  Convention  astray  was  that  no  one  in  France

letters  patent,  which  since  that  time  have  authorised  the  triage,  division,
partial  distribution  or  concession  of  woods  and  forests,  manorial  and
seigniorial,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  communal  rights  and  usages  .  .  .
and  all  the  judgments  given,  and  acts  done  as  resulting  therefrom,  are
revoked  and  remain  in  this  respect  as  null  and  void."  "  The  forty
years'  possession,  declared  by  the  decree  of  August  28,  1792,  as  suffi-
cient to  establish  the  ownership  of  an  individual,  shall  not  in  any  case
be  allowed  to  take  the  place  of  the  legitimate  title,  and  the  legitimate
title  shall  not  be  that  which  emanates  from  feudal  authority."

*  Vide  the  speech  of  P.  Lozeaji  concerning  the  communal  properties,
printed  by  order  of  the  Convention.


LANDS  RESTORED  TO  THE  COMMUNES 423

should  be  refused  a  share  of  the  Republic's  land,  and  under
the  influence  of  this  idea  the  Convention  favoured,  rather
than  permitted,  the  division  of  the  communal  lands.

The  division,  says  the  law  of  June  n,  1793,  shall  be  made
between  all,  "  so  much  per  head  of  the  domiciled  inhabitants,
regardless  of  age  or  sex,  absent  or  present."*  "  Every  citizen,
including  the  labourers  and  the  domestics  on  the  farms,
domiciled  for  a  year  in  the  commune,  shall  have  an  equal
share  in  this  division,  and  for  ten  years  the  communal  portion
assigned  to  each  citizen  shall  not  be  seized  for  debt."f

The  partition,  however,  had  to  be  optional.  An  assembly
of  the  inhabitants,  composed  of  all  individuals  having  an
interest  in  the  division,  of  either  sex  and  over  the  age  of  twenty-
one,  was  to  be  convened  on  a  certain  Sunday,  and  this  assembly
was  to  decide  whether  the  communal  property  should  be
divided,  either  the  whole  of  it,  or  only  in  part.  If  a  third  of
the  assembly  voted  for  the  division,  the  division  should  be
decided  upon  and  could  not  be  revoked.!

It  is  easy  to  conceive  the  immense  change  brought  about
by  this  decree  in  the  economic  life  of  the  villages.  All  the
lands  taken  from  the  communes  for  the  past  two  centuries,
by  means  of  triage,  pretended  debts,  and  frauds,  could  now
be  taken  back  by  the  peasants.  The  forty  years'  possession
was  no  longer  a  title  to  property,  the  communes  could  go  as
far  back  as  1669  to  claim  their  former  possessions  from  the
powerful  and  the  crafty.  And  all  the  communal  lands,  includ-
ing the  lands  restored  to  the  peasants  by  the  law  of  June  1 1,
now  belonged  to  all  those  who  had  lived  in  the  commune
for  a  year  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  persons  in  each
family,  including  the  children  of  both  sexes  and  aged  rela-
tives. The  distinction  between  citizen  and  inhabitant  was
wiped  out.  Every  one  had  a  right  to  the  land.  It  was  a  com-
plete revolution.

Concerning  the  other  part  of  the  law  that  decreed  the
division,  and  its  being  carried  into  effect  by  the  will  of  one-
third  over  two-thirds  of  the  inhabitants,  it  was  applied  only

*  Section  ii.,  Article  i.
f  Section  iii.,  Article  I.
Ibid.  Article  2.


424 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

in  certain  parts  of  France,  and  then  not  generally.  In  the
North,  where  there  was  not  much  pasture,  the  peasants  willingly-
divided  the  communal  lands.  But  in  La  Vendee  and  in
Brittany  they  violently  opposed  the  division  being  made  by
the  will  of  a  third  of  the  inhabitants.  They  meant  to  hold,
all  of  them,  their  right  of  grazing,  &c.,  over  the  uncultivated
lands  intact.  In  some  parts  of  France  there  were  numerous
divisions.  Thus,  in  the  Moselle,  which  is  a  wine-growing
country,  686  communes  divided  the  communal  property,  107
of  them  per  head  and  579  per  family,  only  119  communes
remaining  undivided  ;  but  in  other  departments,  in  Central
and  Western  France,  the  majority  of  the  communes  kept  their
lands  intact.

As  a  rule  the  peasants,  who  knew  very  well  that  if  the  com-
munal lands  were  divided,  the  poorer  families  would  soon
become  proletarians  and  poorer  than  ever,  were  in  no  hurry
to  vote  for  the  partition.

It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  Convention,  whose  middle-
class  members  loved  so  much  to  talk  of  the  inequalities  that
would  result  if  the  communes  simply  retook  possession  of  their
lands,  made  no  attempt  to  equalise  the  benefits  conferred  on
the  communes  by  the  law  of  June  1 1 .  Making  speeches  about
the  poor  communes  that  got  nothing  served  as  an  excellent
pretext  for  doing  nothing  and  for  leaving  the  dishonestly
appropriated  lands  with  those  who  had  got  them,  but  when
the  opportunity  came  for  proposing  something  to  prevent
this  "injustice,"  nothing  was  proposed.*

*  An  exception  should  be  made  in  favour  of  Pierre  Bridet  (Observa
tion  sur  le  decret  du  28  aout  1792.  Paris,  1793).  He  proposed  some-
thing like  what  is  to-day  described  as  "  land  nationalisation."  "  The
communal  lands,"  said  Bridet,  "  are  national  property,  and  consequently
it  is  unfair  to  allow  certain  communes  to  possess  a  great  deal  of  land
while  others  have  only  a  little."  He  proposed  therefore  that  the  State
should  take  possession  of  all  the  communal  lands,  and  lease  them  in
small  lots,  if  leaseholders  weie  to  be  found  ;  if  not — in  large  lots,
thrown  open  to  the  enterprise  of  inhabitants  from  other  districts  in  the
neighbourhood.  All  this  was  to  be  done  by  the  Directories  of  the  depart-
ments, which  were,  as  we  know,  highly  reactionary  bodies  representing
the  interests  of  the  rich.  Of  course  this  scheme  was  not  adopted.
Since  the  lands  belonging  to  each  commune  would  have  been  leased
(as  they  already  were)  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  local  peasants,  rich
and  poor,  by  the  communes  themselves,  and  would  only  in  exceptional


LANDS  RESTORED  TO  THE  COMMUNES 425

What  the  communes,  up  till  then,  had  been  doing  them-
selves was  going  to  be  handed  over  now  to  paid  officials,  who,
most  probably,  would  have  favoured  the  better-off  men  in
the  province,  by  enabling  them  to  enrich  themselves  at  the
expense  of  the  village  communes.

The  communes  that  made  no  delay  in  retaking  possession
of  their  ancient  lands  secured  them  then  and  there,  so  that
when  reaction  triumphed  and  the  lords  came  back  into  power,
they  could  do  nothing  to  regain  what  the  law  had  taken  away
from  them  and  the  peasants  were  holding  in  actual  possession.
But  the  communes  that  hesitated  got  nothing  at  all.  For,
as  soon  as  reaction  got  the  better  of  the  revolutionists,  as  soon
as  the  insurrection  of  the  last  of  the  Montagnards  had  been
crushed  on  the  1st  Prairial,  Year  III.  (May  20,  1795),  the  first
care  of  the  reactionary  Convention  was  to  annul  the  revolu-
tionary decrees  of  the  Montagnard  Convention.  On  the  2ist
Prairial,  Year  IV.  (June  19,  1796),  a  decree  was  issued  prohibit-
ing the  restitution  of  the  communal  lands  to  the  communes.*

A  year  later,  on  May  21,  1797,  a  new  law  forbade  the  village
communes  to  transfer  or  exchange  their  property  by  virtue
of  the  laws  of  June  n  and  August  24,  1793.  Henceforth
special  legislation  was  required  for  each  particular  act  of
transference.  This  law  was  clearly  meant  to  check  the  too

cases  be  rented  by  inhabitants  from  neighbouring  districts,  the  scheme
practically  amounted  to  this :  In  order  to  permit  a  few  exceptional
middle-class  men  to  lease  lands  situated  in  other  districts  and  com-
munes than  their  own,  the  State  was  going  to  step  in  and  take  the
place  of  the  communes  in  the  administration  of  their  lands.  This
is  what  the  scheme  meant.  Of  course,  its  preamble  contained
lofty  language  about  justice  which  might  appeal  to  socialistically
inclined  town-people,  ignorant  of  the  land  question,  and  unable  to
examine  that  language  more  closely.  But  in  reality  the  scheme
tended  only  to  create  many  new  injustices,  even  worse  than  the  old
ones,  and  to  establish  numerous  sinecures — all  in  the  name  of  State
regulation.

*  "  Inasmuch  as  the  effect  of  the  law  of  June  10,  1793,  has  given
rise  to  numberless  actions  for  claims  ..."  since  the  examination  of
these  matters  under  dispute  would  take  a  long  time,  "  and  since  it  is,
moreover,  urgent  that  the  unfortunate  results  of  the  too  literal  inter-
pretation of  the  law  of  June  10,  1793,  should  be  checked,  serious  in-
conveniences from  them  having  already  been  felt  .  .  .  all  actions  and
proceedings  resulting  from  this  law  are,  for  the  time  being,  to  be
suspended,  and  all  the  present  holders  of  the  said  lands  are,  for  the
time  being,  to  be  maintained  in  their  possession  "  (Dalloz,  ix.  195).


426 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

scandalous  plundering  of  the  communal  property  which,  went
on  after  the  Revolution.

Later  still,  under  the  Empire,  there  were  several  attempts
made  to  abolish  the  legislation  of  the  Convention.  But,  as
M.  Sagnac  remarks,  "  the  successive  attempts  against  the  laws
of  the  Convention  failed  miserably."  There  were  too  many
interests  established  on  the  part  of  the  peasants  for  these  attacks
to  have  any  effect.

On  the  whole,  it  may  be  said  that  the  majority  of  the
communes  that  had  retaken  possession  of  the  lands  filched
from  them  since  1669  retained  possession  of  them,  while  those
that  failed  to  do  so  before  June  1796  got  nothing.  In  revolu-
tion it  is  only  the  accomplished  facts  which  count.


CHAPTER  L
FINAL  ABOLITION  OF  THE  FEUDAL  RIGHTS

Girondins  oppose  abolition  of  feudal  rights — Decree  of  July  17
— Feudal  laws  abolished  en  masse — Reaction  unable  to  prevent
effect  of  decree — Triumph  of  Revolution

As  soon  as  royalty  was  abolished,  the  Convention  had  to  discuss
in  its  first  sittings  the  question  of  the  feudal  rights.  However,
as  the  Girondins  were  opposed  to  the  abolition  of  these  rights
without  indemnity,  and  yet  proposed  no  scheme  of  redemption
which  would  be  binding  on  the  lords,  the  whole  matter  re-
mained in  suspense.  But  this  was  the  main,  the  all-absorbing
question  for  much  more  than  one-half  of  the  population  of
France,  who  asked  themselves  with  anxiety :  "  Is  it  possible
that  the  peasant  shall  have  to  set  his  neck  again  under  the
feudal  yoke,  and  again  endure  the  horrors  of  famine — as  soon
as  the  revolutionary  period  is  over  ?  "

We  have  just  seen  that  immediately  after  the  Girondist
leaders  had  been  expelled  from  the  Convention,  the  decree
which  restored  the  communal  lands  to  the  communes  was
passed;  but  the  Convention  still  hesitated  to  legislate  about
the  feudal  rights.  It  was  only  on  July  17,  1793,  that  at  last
it  decided  to  strike  the  great  blow  which  was  to  set  a  seal  upon
the  Revolution  by  legalising  the  attainment  of  one  of  its  two
chief  objectives — the  complete  abolition  of  the  feudal  rights.

Royalty  ceased  to  exist  on  January  24,  1793,  and  now,  on
July  17,  1793,  the  law  of  France  ceased  to  recognise  the  rights
of  the  feudal  lords — the  servitude  of  one  man  to  another.

The  decree  of  July  17  was  quite  explicit.  The  distinctions
established  by  the  two  preceding  Assemblies  between  the

different  feudal  rights,  in  the  hope  of  maintaining  part  of  them,

4*7


428 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

were  annulled.  Every  right  based  upon  the  feudal  law  simply
ceased  to  exist.

"  All  dues  formerly  seigniorial,  feudal  rights,  both  fixed  and
casual,  even  those  reserved  by  the  decree  of  August  25  last,
are  suppressed  without  indemnity,"  so  ran  the  decree.*  There
was  no  exception  ;  there  remained  only  those  rents  and  labour
dues  that  were  paid  purely  for  the  land,  and  were  not  of  feudal
origin.f

Thus  the  assimilation  of  feudal  rents  to  ground  rents,  which
had  been  established  in  1789  and  1790,  was  completely  blotted
out.  If  any  rent  or  obligation  had  a  feudal  origin,  it  was
abolished  irrevocably  and  without  indemnity.  The  law  of
1790  had  declared  that  if  any  one  leased  a  piece  of  land,  he  could
purchase  it  by  paying  a  sum  equivalent  to  twenty  or  twenty-
five  times  the  annual  rent ;  and  this  condition  was  accepted
by  the  peasants.  But,  added  the  law,  if  besides  the  ground
rent  the  owner  had  imposed  any  due  of  a  feudal  character —
a  fine,  for  instance,  on  all  sales  and  inheritances,  any  kind  of
pledge  or  tax  which  represented  a  personal  obligation  on  the
farmer  to  the  landlord,  such  as  the  obligation  to  use  the  mill
or  wine-press  belonging  to  the  lord,  or  a  limitation  on  the  right
of  sale  of  produce,  or  a  tribute  out  of  the  crops,  or  even  a  pay-
ment to  be  made  at  the  time  of  breaking  the  lease,  or  when  the
land  changed  owners — all  dues,  such  as  these,  had  to  be  redeemed
at  the  same  time  as  the  ground  rent.

But  this  time  the  Convention  struck  a  really  revolutionary
blow.  It  would  have  none  of  these  subtleties.  Does  your
farmer  hold  his  land  under  an  obligation  of  a  feudal  character  ?
If  so,  whatever  you  call  this  obligation,  it  is  suppressed  without
indemnity.  Or  it  may  be  the  farmer  pays  a  ground  rent
which  has  nothing  feudal  about  it,  but  beside  this  rent  you
have  imposed  on  him  a  pledge  or  a  tax  or  some  kind  of  feudal
due.  In  that  case,  be  becomes  the  owner  of  the  land  without
owing  you  anything  whatsoever.

But  the  owner  might  reply,  the  obligation  was  merely  nominal.
So  much  the  worse.  You  intended  to  make  a  vassal  of  your
farmer  ;  he  is  therefore  free  and  in  full  possession  of  the  land

*  Article  I  of  the  decree  of  July  17,  1793.  |  Article  2.


FINAL  ABOLITION  OF  FEUDAL  RIGHTS 429

to  which  the  feudal  obligation  was  attached,  without  owing
you  anything.  Ordinary  individuals,  M.  Sagnac  says,  "  either
through  vanity  or  by  force  of  custom  employed  this  proscribed
form,  and  in  the  leases  they  granted  stipulated  for  some  trifling
fine  or  small  tax  on  sales  and  purchases  "* — they  wanted  merely
to  play  the  lord.

So  much  the  worse  for  them.  The  Convention  did  not
inquire  whether  they  wanted  to  play  the  lord  or  to  become
one.  It  knew  that  all  the  feudal  dues  had  been  trifling  and
customary  at  first,  only  to  grow  very  oppressive  in  the  course
of  time.  Such  a  contract  was  as  much  tinged  with  feudalism
as  those  that  had  served  in  centuries  past  to  enslave  the
peasants  ;  the  Convention  saw  in  it  the  mark  of  feudalism,
and  therefore  it  gave  the  land  to  the  peasant  who  rented  it,
without  asking  any  indemnity  for  it.

More  than  this :  it  ordered  that  "  all  the  title-deeds  which
acknowledged  the  now  abolished  dues  should  be  destroyed."f
Lords,  notaries,  land-commissioners,  had  all,  within  three
months,  to  bring  those  title-deeds  and  charters  which  gave
one  class  power  over  another  to  the  record  office  of  their
municipality,  there  to  be  thrown  in  a  heap  and  burned.  What
the  peasants  had  done  during  their  revolt  in  1789,  at  the  risk
of  being  hanged,  was  now  to  be  done  by  law.  "  Five  years
in  irons  for  every  depository  convicted  of  having  concealed,
subtracted  or  kept  back  the  originals  or  copies  of  such  deeds."
Many  deeds  of  that  sort  proved  the  right  of  feudal  State-
ownership  over  certain  lands,  for  the  State,  too,  had  formerly
its  serfs,  and  later  its  vassals.  But  that  did  not  matter.  The
feudal  rights  must  and  shall  disappear.  What  the  Constituent
Assembly  had  done  with '  the  feudal  titles — prince,  count,
marquis — the  Convention  was  now  doing  with  the  pecuniary
rights  of  feudalism.

Six  months  later,  on  the  8th  Pluviose,  Year  II.  (January  27,
1 794)j'  in  response  to  numerous  protests,  chiefly  on  the  part
of  the  notaries  who  had  recorded  in  the  same  books,  and  often
on  the  same  page,  the  dues  attaching  merely  to  the  land
and  the  feudal  dues,  the  Convention  consented  to  suspend
*  Ph.  Sagnac,  loa  ciU  p<  147^  f  Article  4.


430 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  working  of  Article  6,  and  the  municipalities  were  permitted
to  keep  the  mixed  title-deeds  in  their  archives.  But  the  law
of  July  17  remained  intact,  and  once  more,  on  the  29th
Floreal,  Year  II.  (May  18,  1794),  the  Convention  confirmed
the  decree  that  all  rents  "tinged  with  the  slightest  trace  of
feudalism  "  were  to  be  suppressed  without  indemnity.

It  is  most  remarkable  that  the  reaction  which  took  the  upper
hand  since  1794  was  quite  unable  to  abolish  the  effect  of  this
revolutionary  measure.  It  is  a  long  way,  as  we  have  already
said,  from  the  written  law  to  its  carrying  into  actual  effect.
Consequently,  wherever  the  peasants  had  not  risen  against
their  lords,  wherever  they  had  turned  against  the  sans-culottes,
as  in  La  Vende*e,  under  the  leadership  of  the  lords  and  the
priests,  wherever  their  village  municipalities  remained  in  the
hands  of  the  priests  and  the  rich — there  the  decrees  of  June  1 1
and  July  17  were  not  applied.  In  these  regions  the  peasants
did  not  regain  possession  of  their  communal  lands.  They  did
not  become  the  owners  of  the  lands  they  held  on  feudal  lease
from  their  ex-feudal  lords.  They  did  not  burn  the  feudal
title-deeds ;  and  they  <|id  not  even  buy  the  nationalised  lands
for  fear  of  the  Church's  curse.

But  in  many  places — in  a  good  half  of  the  departments —
the  peasants  did  buy  the  national  lands  ;  here  and  there  they
even  compelled  the  administration  to  sell  them  in  small  lots.
They  took  possession  of  the  lands  they  leased  from  their  former
lords,  and,  after  planting  a  May-tree,  they  danced  round  it
and  burned  all  the  feudal  documents.  They  retook,  in  fact,
their  communal  lands  from  the  monks,  the  local  bourgeoisie
and  the  lords — and  where  this  was  done,  the  returning  tide
of  reaction  had  no  power  over  the  economic  revolution  that
was  accomplished  in  deeds.

Reaction  set  in  on  the  9th  Thermidor,  and  with  it  began
the  "  blue  "  terror  of  the  enriched  middle  classes.  Later  on
came  the  Directory,  the  Consulat,  the  Empire,  the  Restoration,
which  swept  away  the  greater  part  of  the  democratic  institu-
tions of  the  Revolution.  But  this  part  of  the  work  accom-
plished by  the  Revolution  remained  :  it  resisted  all  attacks.
The  reaction  was  able  to  destroy,  up  to  a  certain  point,  the,


FINAL  ABOLITION  OF  FEUDAL  RIGHTS 431

political  work  of  the  Revolution ;  but  its  economic  work
survived.  And  the  new,  transfigured  nation,  which  had  been
formed  during  the  revolutionary  turmoil,  also  remained  and
set  itself  hard  to  work.

Another  thing.  When  we  study  the  economic  results  of
the  Great  Revolution,  as  it  was  accomplished  in  France,  we
comprehend  the  vast  difference  there  is  between  the  abolition
of  feudalism  accomplished  bureaucratically  by  the  feudal
State  itself,  as  was  done  in  Prussia  in  1848,  or  in  Russia  in
1861,  and  the  abolition  accomplished  by  a  popular  revolution.
In  Prussia  and  Russia  the  peasants  were  freed  from  feudal
dues  and  compulsory  labour  only  by  losing  a  considerable  part
of  the  lands  they  possessed  and  by  consenting  to  pay  a  heavy
indemnity  which  ruined  them.  To  become  free  property-
owners,  they  impoverished  themselves ;  while  the  lords,  who
at  first  resisted  the  reform,  drew  from  it,  at  least  in  the  fertile
regions,  unhoped-for  advantages.  Nearly  everywhere  in
Europe  the  reform  that  abolished  the  feudal  servitude  increased
the  power  of  the  lords.

In  France  alone,  where  the  abolition  of  the  feudal  system
was  carried  out  by  a  revolution,  the  change  has  acted  against
the  lords,  as  an  economic  and  political  caste,  to  the  advantage
of  the  great  mass  of  the  peasants.


CHAPTER  LI
THE  NATIONAL  ESTATES

National  estates — Previously  benefited  only  middle  classes —
Discontent  among  peasants — Convention  orders  land  to  be
subdivided — Decree  concerning  heirs — Effect  of  redistribution
of  land — Changed  aspect  of  France

THE  movement  of  May  31  had  the  same  salutary  effect  upon
the  sale  of  the  national  estates.  Until  then  these  sales  had
been  profitable  mainly  to  the  middle  classes.  Now  the
Montagnards  took  measures  for  rendering  the  purchase  of
national  estates  accessible  to  the  poor  who  wished  to  cultivate
the  land  themselves.

When  the  estates  of  the  clergy,  and  later  on  those  of  the
emigres,  had  been  confiscated  by  the  Revolution  and  put  up
for  sale,  a  certain  part  of  these  estates  was  divided  at  the  outset
into  small  lots,  and  the  buyers  were  allowed  twelve  years  to
pay  the  purchase-money  by  instalments.  But  in  proportion
as  reaction  grew  stronger  and  stronger  in  1790  and  1791,  and
the  middle  classes  consolidated  their  power,  less  and  less
facilities  were  offered  to  the  poorer  classes  for  buying  the
confiscated  lands.  Moreover,  the  State,  being  short  of  funds,
was  in  need  of  ready  money.  Consequently,  it  was  found
preferable  not  to  break  up  the  large  estates  and  farms,  but  to
sell  them  as  they  were  to  those  who  bought  them  for  speculation.
True,  in  certain  regions  the  peasants  combined  into  syndicates
for  buying  the  larger  estates,  but  the  legislators  did  not  favour
such  combinations,  and  an  immense  quantity  of  land  went  into
the  hands  of  speculators.  The  small  farmers,  the  farm  labourers,
the  artisans  who  lived  in  the  villages,  and  the  poor  in  general

43*


THE  NATIONAL  ESTATES  433

complained,  of  course,  but  the  Legislative  Assembly  paid  no
attention  to  their  complaints.*

Already,  in  1789,  the  wish  was  expressed  in  several  cabiers
that  the  Crown  lands  and  the  mortmain  estates  should  be
divided  into  small  farms  of  from  four  to  five  acres  each.  The
people  of  Artois  would  even  have  no  farms  larger  than  "  three
hundred  measures  of  land."t  But,  as  Avenel  had  already
pointed  out,  "  neither  in  the  speeches  pronounced  on  this
subject,  nor  in  the  decrees  that  were  passed,  do  we  find  one
single  word  in  favour  of  those  poorer  peasants  who  owned  no
land.  .  .  .  Nobody  advocated  in  the  Assembly  the  organisa-
tion of  popular  credit  for  enabling  these  famishing  peasants
to  buy  on  easy  terms  small  lots  of  land.  .  .  .  Nor  was  any
attention  paid  to  the  desire  expressed  by  certain  papers,  such
as  the  Moniteur,  which  asked  that  one-half  of  the  lands  offered
for  sale  should  be  divided  into  lots,  worth  about  5000  francs
each,  so  as  to  create  a  number  of  small  peasant  proprietors. "t

The  result  was  that  the  lands  that  were  put  up  for  sale  by
the  nation  were  chiefly  bought  by  such  peasants  who  had
already  some  property,  or  else  by  middle-class  town-people —
the  last  circumstance  producing  a  great  deal  of  discontent  in
the  villages  of  Brittany  and  La  Vendee.

Thereupon  came  August  10.  Under  the  menaces  of  the
revolted  poor,  the  Legislative  Assembly  tried  to  appease  dis-
content by  ordering  that  the  lands  confiscated  from  the  emigres
should  be  sold  in  small  lots  of  from  two  to  four  acres,  to  be
paid  for  by  a  perpetual  rent  in  money.  However,  those  buyers
who  could  pay  ready  money  had  still  the  preference.

On  June  3,  1793,  immediately  after  the  expulsion  of  the
Girondist  leaders  from  the  Convention,  the  promise  was  made
by  the  National  Representation,  now  under  Montagnard
influence,  to  give  one  acre  of  freehold  land  to  each  proletarian
family  in  the  villages  ;  and  some  commissioners  of  the  Con-
vention actually  did  that,  distributing  small  allotments  to  the
poorest  peasants.  But  it  was  only  on  the  2nd  Frimaire,

*  Ph.  Sagnac,  La  legislation  civile  de  la  Revolution  franchise,  p.  177.

t  Ibid.  p.  80.

j  G.  Avenel,  Lundis rtvolutionnaires,  pp.  30-40 ; Prof.  Kar6iev,

P*  519'

9  E


434 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Year  II.  (November  22,  1793),  that  the  Convention  issued
orders  to  subdivide  as  much  as  possible  the  national  estates
that  were  put  up  for  sale.  Besides,  especially  favourable
conditions  of  payment  were  introduced  for  the  buyers  of  the
estates  of  the  emigres,  and  these  conditions  were  maintained
until  1796,  when  the  reactionaries,  returning  to  power,  abolished
them.

It  must,  however,  be  remembered  that  the  finances  of  the
Republic  remained  all  the  time  in  a  deplorable  state.  The
taxes  were  coming  in  very  irregularly,  and  the  war  absorbed
thousands  and  thousands  of  million  francs.  The  paper  currency
lost  in  value,  and  in  such  conditions  the  essential  thing  was
to  get  ready  money  as  quickly  as  possible,  through  the  sale
of  the  national  estates,  so  as  to  be  able  to  destroy  a  corresponding
amount  of  paper-money  from  the  previous  issues.  This  is
why  the  Montagnards  as  well  as  the  Girondins  cared  less  for
the  small  agriculturist  than  for  the  means  of  realising  as
rapidly  as  possible  the  largest  amounts  of  ready  money.  Who-
ever paid  in  cash  continued  to  have  preference.

And  yet,  notwithstanding  all  that,  and  notwithstanding
all  prevarications  and  speculations,  considerable  quantities
of  land  were  sold  in  small  lots.  While  there  were  many  middle-
class  people  who  suddenly  made  scandalous  fortunes  by  the
accumulation  of  national  property,  considerable  quantities
of  land,  in  certain  portions  of  France,  and  especially  in  the
East  (as  has  been  shown  by  Professor  Luchitzky  of  Kieff),
passed  in  small  lots  into  the  hands  of  the  poorer  peasants.  In
this  region,  a  real  revolution  was  accomplished  in  the  distribu-
tion of  landed  property.

At  the  same  time,  the  idea  of  the  Revolution  was  to  strike
a  blow  at  the  whole  class  of  great  landed  proprietors,  and
completely  to  break  up  all  large  fortunes.  For  this  purpose
the  right  of  primogeniture  in  inheritance  was  abolished  by
the  revolutionary  legislature.  Already,  on  March  15,  1790,
the  Legislative  Assembly  had  abolished  the  feudal  form  of
inheritance,  according  to  which  the  landlord  transmitted  his
estates  to  one  single  heir — generally  his  eldest  son.  Next
year  (law  of  April  8  to  15,  1791)  all  legal  inequalities  among


THE  NATIONAL  ESTATES  435

the  different  heirs  were  done  away  with.  "  All  the  inheri-
tants  of  equal  degree  shall  inherit,  in  equal  parts,  the  properties
which  are  assigned  to  them  by  law,"  said  this  decree.  Next,
the  number  of  heirs  was  increased — collateral  heirs  and  illegiti-
mate children  being  put  on  the  same  footing  as  the  direct
heirs  ;  and  finally,  on  March  7,  1793,  the  Convention  abolished
all  rights  "  of  disposing  of  one's  property,  whether  in  case  of
death,  or  whilst  still  alive,  by  means  of  agreed  donation  in  a
direct  line."  "  All  descendants  will  have  an  equal  part  of  the
properties  of  their  deceased  relatives  (ascendants).99

The  parcelling  out  of  the  estates  was  thus  rendered  obligatory
in  all  inheritances.

What  was  the  effect  of  these  three  great  measures — the
abolition  of  the  feudal  rights  without  compensation,  the
return  of  the  communal  lands  to  the  communes,  and  the  sale
of  the  estates  sequestrated  from  the  clergy  and  the  emigres?
How  did  they  affect  the  distribution  of  landed  property  ?
This  question  continues  to  be  discussed  till  now,  and  the
opinions  still  remain  contradictory.  It  may  even  be  said
that  they  vary  according  to  the  portions  of  France  which  have
been  the  main  object  of  study  by  this  or  that  investigator.*

With  all  that,  one  fact  dominates  the  others.  Landed
property  was  subdivided.  In  all  those  parts  of  France  where
the  peasants  joined  the  Revolution,  considerable  amounts  of
land  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  peasants.  And  every-
where black  misery — the  gloomy  misery  of  the  old  regime —
began  to  disappear.  Chronic  famine  which  formerly  used  to
brood  over  nearly  one-third  of  France  every  year,  was  known
no  more  in  the  nineteenth  century.

Previous  to  the  Revolution  some  parts  of  France  suffered
every  year  from  famine.  The  agricultural  conditions  were

*  In  the  Cote-d'Or,  the  estates  of  the  clergy  were  bought  more  by
the  middle  classes  than  by  the  peasants.  But  it  was  the  reverse  with
the  estates  of  the  imigris,  which  were  bought  in  the  same  region  mainly
by  the  peasants.  In  the  Laonnais,  the  peasants  have  bought  more
estates  of  the  clergy  than  the  middle  classes  did,  while  the  estates
of  the  emigrants  were  equally  distributed  between  these  two  classes.
In  the  North,  considerable  areas  of  land  were  bought  by  small  associa-
tions of  peasants  (Sagnac,  he.  cit.  p.  188),


436 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

exactly  what  they  are  now  in  Russia.  The  peasant  might
work  himself  to  death,  but  he  could  never  have  enough  even
of  bread  from  one  crop  to  the  next.  His  ploughing  was  bad,
his  seeds  were  bad,  and  his  meagre  cattle  could  not  give  him
the  necessary  manure.  From  one  year  to  another  the  crops
grew  worse  and  worse.  "  Just  as  it  is  now  in  Russia  !  "  one
is  bound  to  exclaim  continually,  while  studying  the  documents
and  the  works  that  deal  with  the  conditions  of  the  French
peasants  under  the  old  regime.

»•  But  then  comes  the  Revolution.  The  storm  is  terrible.
The  sufferings  inflicted  by  the  Revolution  and  especially  by
the  war  are  unparalleled  ;  they  are  truly  tragical.  At  certain
moments  one  sees  the  abyss  opening  that  will  swallow  France.
After  that  comes  the  Directory,  followed  by  the  wars  of  the
Napoleonic  Empire.  And  finally  comes  the  reaction  of  the
Bourbons,  who  are  replaced  upon  the  throne  of  France  in  1814,
by  the  coalition  of  Kings  and  Emperors  ;  and  with  them  comes
the  White  Terror,  even  more  terrible  than  the  Red  Terror
of  the  Revolution.  Whereupon  superficial  people  triumphantly
say  :  "  You  see,  revolutions  are  of  no  use  !  "
(*:  There  are,  however,  two  legacies  of  the  Great  Revolution
which  no  reaction  could  wipe  out.  France  was  democratised
by  the  Revolution  to  such  an  extent  that  those  who  know
France  cannot  stay  for  a  while  in  any  other  country  of  Europe
without  saying  to  themselves  :  "  One  sees  here  at  every  step
that  the  Great  Revolution  has  not  passed  over  this  country.
The  peasant,  in  France,  has  become  a  man.  He  is  no  longer
"  the  wild  animal  "  of  whom  La  Bruy£re  spoke  in  his  Caracteres.
He  is  a  thinking  being.  And  the  very  aspect  of  France  has
been  changed  by  the  Revolution.  France  has  become  a
country  of  relatively  wealthy  peasants.  Even  the  White
Terror  itself  was  not  capable  of  thrusting  back  the  French
peasant  under  the  old  yoke  of  misery.  Of  course  there  still
remains  too  much  poverty  in  the  villages,  in  France  as  else-
where. But  this  poverty  is  wealth  in  comparison  with  what
France  was  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,  and  with  what  we
still  see  wherever  the  Revolution  has  not  yet  carried  its  torch.


CHAPTER  LII

THE  STRUGGLE  AGAINST  FAMINE—THE
MAXIMUM— PAPER-MONEY

Difficulty  of  feeding  large  towns — Activity  of  speculators —
Situation  at  Lyons — Demand  for  maximum — Convention
fixes  price  of  wheat  and  food-stuffs — Danger  of  fixing  retail
prices — Maximum  abolished  by  reactionaries — Fall  in  value
of  paper  currency — Bankruptcy  threatens  State — Necker
tries  to  raise  money — Manufacture  of  false  assignats

ONE  of  the  great  difficulties  in  every  Revolution  is  the  feeding
of  the  large  towns.  The  large  towns  of  modern  times  are
centres  of  various  industries  that  are  developed  chiefly  for  the
sake  of  the  rich  or  for  export  trade ;  these  two  branches  fail
whenever  any  crisis  occurs,  and  the  question  then  arises  of  how
these  great  urban  agglomerations  are  to  be  fed.

France  had  entered  upon  this  phase.  Emigration  and  war,
especially  the  war  with  England  which  prevented  exportation
and  all  the  foreign  trade  by  which  such  towns  as  Marseilles,
Lyons,  Nantes  and  Bordeaux  lived,  and  the  tendency  felt  by
rich  people  to  avoid  making  any  display  of  their  wealth  in  time
of  revolution,  combined  to  put  a  stop  to  the  manufacture  of
luxuries  and  to  commerce  on  a  large  scale.

The  peasants,  especially  those  who  had  obtained  possession
of  their  lands,  worked  hard.  Never  was  labour  so  energetic  as
in  that  autumn  of  1791,  Michelet  tells  us  ;  and  the  harvests  of
1791,  1792,  and  1793  had  been  abundant,  so  that  there  should
have  been  no  lack  of  bread.  But  since  1788,  all  Europe,  and
France  in  particular,  had  been  passing  through  a  series  of  bad
years — very  cold  winters  and  sunless  summers.  In  reality
there  had  been  only  one  good  harvest,  that  of  1793,  and  then
only  in  half  the  departments.  In  those  there  had  been  even  a

437


438 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

surplus  of  wheat ;  but  when  this  surplus,  as  well  as  the  means
of  transport,  had  been  requisitioned  for  the  war,  there  was  a
dearth  in  more  than  half  France.  A  sack  of  wheat  which
before  that  had  been  valued  at  only  50  livres  in  Paris,  went  up  to
60  livres  in  February  1793  and  to  100  and  150  livres  in  the
month  of  May.

Bread,  which  formerly  cost  three  sous  a  pound,  now  rose  to
six  sous,  and  even  to  eight  sous  in  the  small  towns  round  Paris.
In  the  south  it  was  famine  price — ten  and  twelve  sous  a  pound.
At  Clermont  in  the  Puy-de-D6me  in  June  1793,  a  pound  of
bread  cost  sixteen  to  eighteen  sous.  "  Our  mountain  districts
are  in  the  utmost  misery.  The  government  is  distributing  the
eighth  of  a  setier  per  individual,  and  every  one  is  obliged  to  wait
two  days  for  his  turn,"  we  read  in  the  MoniUur  of  June  15,  1793.

As  the  Convention  did  nothing  there  were  disorderly  gather-
ings and  riots  in  eight  of  the  departments,  and  the  Commis-
sioners of  the  Convention  were  forced  to  fix  the  price  of  bread-
stuffs  as  the  people  wished.  The  trade  of  bladier  (speculation
in  wheat)  became  at  this  time  one  of  the  most  dangerous.

In  Paris  the  question  of  feeding  600,000  persons  had  come
to  be  one  of  life  or  death  ;  for  if  the  price  of  bread  remained
at  six  sous  a  pound,  as  it  then  was,  an  insurrection  was  in-
evitable and  in  that  case  grape-shot  alone  could  prevent  the
pillaging  of  the  rich  men's  houses.  The  Commune,  therefore,
plunged  deeper  into  debt  to  the  State,  and  expended  from
12,000  to  75,000  livres  a  day  to  furnish  the  bakers  with  flour,
and  to  keep  the  price  of  bread  at  twelve  sous  for  the  four-pound
loaf.  The  Government,  for  its  part,  fixed  the  quantity  of
grain  that  each  department  and  each  canton  should  send  to
Paris.  But  the  roads  were  in  bad  repair  and  all  the  beasts  of
burden  had  been  requisitioned  for  the  war.  The  prices  of
everything  had  gone  up  in  proportion.  A  pound  of  meat  which
had  formerly  cost  five  or  six  sous  now  sold  at  twenty  sous ;
sugar  was  ninety  sous  a  pound,  and  a  candle  cost  seven  sous.

Speculators  had  been  treated  with  much  severity ;  but  that
did  not  help  matters.  After  the  expulsion  of  the  Girondins,
the  Commune  had  succeeded  in  getting  the  Convention  to
close  the  Stock  Exchange  in  Paris  on  June  27,  1793,  but  specu-


THE  STRUGGLE  AGAINST  FAMINE 439

lation  still  went  on,  and  speculators  were  seen  assembling  at  the
Palais  Royal  wearing  a  special  badge  and  marching  in  processions
with  girls  to  mock  the  misery  of  the  people.

On  September  8,  1793,  the  Paris  Commune  in  desperation
set  seals  on  the  houses  of  the  bankers  and  "  money-merchants."
Saint-Just  and  Lebas,  sent  by  the  Convention  on  commission
to  the  Lower  Rhine,  made  an  order  in  the  Criminal  Court
for  the  house  of  any  one  convicted  of  jobbery  to  be  razed  to
the  ground.  But  speculation  was  only  driven  into  other
channels.

In  Lyons  the  situation  was  worse  than  in  Paris,  for  the
municipality  being  partly  Girondist,  took  no  measures  to  relieve
the  wants  of  the  people.  "  The  population  of  Lyons  at  present
is  130,000  souls  at  least ;  there  are  not  provisions  enough  for  three
days"  wrote  Collot  d'Herbois  to  the  Convention  on  November
7,  1793.  "  Our  situation  as  regards  food  is  desperate.  We  are
on  the  brink  of  famine.  .  .  ."  And  it  was  the  same  in  all
the  large  towns.

During  this  period  of  scarcity  there  were  touching  instances
of  devotion.  We  read,  for  instance,  how  that  the  sections  of
Montmartre  and  L'Homme  Arme  decreed  a  civic  fast  of  six
weeks  ;*  and  Meille  has  found  in  the  Bibliothe"que  Nationale  the
decree  of  the  Observatoire  section  dated  February  i,  1792,  by
which  all  well-to-do  citizens  in  this  section  were  pledged  not  to
use  sugar  and  coffee  until  their  more  moderate  price  would  allow
the  enjoyment  of  them  to  their  less  fortunate  brethren.f
Later  on  in  the  Year  II.  (February  and  March  1794),  when
bread  went  up  to  a  very  high  price,  all  the  patriots  of  Paris
decided  not  to  eat  any  more  of  it.

But  such  things  could  only  have  a  moral  effect  in  the  midst
of  dearth.  A  general  measure  became  necessary.  On  April
1 6,  1793,  the  administration  of  the  Paris  department  had
addressed  a  petition  to  the  Convention  demanding  that  the
maximum  price  at  which  corn  could  be  sold  should  be  fixed  ;
and  after  a  serious  discussion,  in  spite  of  strong  opposition,  the
Convention  on  May  3,  1793,  decided  to  fix  a  maximum  price
for  all  grains.

*  Btichez  and  Roux,  xxxvii.  12*  f  Meill6,  p.  302,  note.


440 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  general  intention  of  this  decree  was  to  place,  as  far  as
possible,  the  consumer  in  direct  touch  with  the  farmer  in  the
markets,  so  that  they  could  dispense  with  the  middle-men.
For  this  purpose  every  merchant  or  owner  of  corn  and  flour  was
bound  to  send  from  his  place  of  residence  to  the  municipality  a
declaration  as  to  the  quantity  and  nature  of  the  grain  in  his
possession.  Corn  and  flour  were  no  longer  to  be  sold  except  in
public  markets  established  for  the  purpose,  but  the  consumer
might  lay  in  provisions  by  the  month  directly  from  the  mer-
chants or  landowners  of  his  canton  if  furnished  with  a  certificate
from  the  municipality.  The  lowest  prices  at  which  the  different
kinds  of  grain  had  stood  between  January  I  and  May  I,  1793,
became  the  maximum  price,  above  which  the  grain  could  not
be  sold.  These  prices  were  to  be  slightly  decreased  by  degrees
until  September  I.  Those  who  sold  or  bought  at  prices  above
the  maximum  were  to  be  fined.  Those  who  were  convicted
of  maliciously  or  designedly  spoiling  or  concealing  the  grain  or
flour,  which  was  done  even  during  the  scarcity,  were  to  be  put
to  death.

Four  months  later  it  was  found  advisable  to  equalise  the  price
of  wheat  all  over  France,  and  on  September  4,  1793,  the  Con-
vention fixed  for  the  month  of  September  the  price  of  the  best
quality  wheat  at  14  livres  the  quintal  (50  kilos,  in  weight,  100
by  measure).  This  was  the  maximum  so  much  cried  down,*
a  necessity  of  the  moment  of  which  the  royalists  and  Girondins
made  a  crime  to  lay  upon  the  Montagnards.  The  crime  was  all
the  more  unpardonable  because  those  who  sympathised  with  the
people  demanded  that  not  only  should  the  price  of  wheat  be
fixed,  but  also  that  of  the  baked  bread,  as  well  as  various  objects  of
prime  and  secondary  necessity.  If  society  had  undertaken  to
protect  the  life  of  the  citizen,  should  it  not  also,  they  said  with
justice,  protect  it  against  those  who  made  attempts  on  that  life  by
forming  coalitions  to  deprive  it  of  what  was  absolutely  necessary.

*  It  is  often  thought  that  it  would  be  easy  for  a  revolution  to
economise  in  the  administration  by  reducing  the  number  of  officialsj
This  was  certainly  not  the  case  during  the  Revolution  of  1789-1793,
which  with  each  year  extended  the  functions  of  the  State,  over  instruc-
tion, judges  paid  by  the  State,  the  administration  paid  out  of  the  taxes,
an  immense  army,  and  so  forth.


THE  MAXIMUM  441

The  contest  over  this  subject  was,  however,  very  keen —
many  of  the  Montagnards  as  well  as  the  Girondins  being  abso-
lutely opposed  to  the  idea  of  fixing  the  price  of  food-stuffs,
which  they  said  was  "  impolitic,  unpractical  and  dangerous."
But  public  opinion  prevailed,  and  on  September  29,  1793,  the
Convention  decided  to  fix  a  maximum  price  for  things  of  first
and  second  necessity — meat,  cattle  for  the  market,  lard,  butter,
sweet  oil,  fish,  vinegar,  brandy,  and  beer.

This  solution  was  so  natural  that  the  question  of  forbidding
the  exportation  of  grain,  and  of  building  granaries  with  this
view  and  of  fixing  a  maximum  price  for  cereals  and  meat  had
already  been  discussed  by  both  politicians  and  revolutionists
since  1789.  Certain  towns,  such,  as  Grenoble,  had  decided
since  September  1789,  to  purchase  grain  for  itself  and  to  deal
severely  with  monopolists.  Many  pamphlets  to  this  effect
were  published.f  When  the  Convention  assembled,  the
demands  for  the  fixing  of  a  maximum  price  became  pressing,
and  the  council  of  the  department  of  Paris  met  the  magistrates
of  the  department  to  discuss  this  question.  The  result  was  a
petition  which,  in  the  name  of  all  the  people  in  the  department
of  Paris,  demanded  that  the  Convention  should  fix  a  maximum
price  for  grain.  The  prices  of  articles  of  secondary  necessity
were  fixed  for  a  year.  Combustibles,  candles,  lamp  oil,  salt,
soap,  sugar,  honey,  white  paper,  metals,  hemp,  flax,  woollen
and  cotton  stuffs,  sabots,  shoes,  tobacco,  and  the  raw  materials
used  in  factories  were  comprised  in  this  category.  The  maxi-
mum price  at  which  it  was  permitted  to  sell  these  wares  was  the
price  each  had  fetched  in  1790,  which  had  been  fixed  by  the
Assemblies  plus  one-third,  deduction  being  made  of  the  fiscal
and  other  duties  to  which  they  were  then  subject.  This  was
the  decree  of  September  29,  1793.

But  at  the  same  time  the  Convention  legislated  against  the
salaried  classes  and  the  poor  in  general.  It  decreed  that  "  the

*  Vide  the  collection  in  the  British  Museum,  Bibliotheque  historique
de  la  Revolution,  which  contains  the  pamphlets  on  the  Food  Question,
vols.  473,  474,  475.

f  Momoro  has  published  a  very  interesting  pamphlet  on  this  subject,
in  which  he  explains  the  communist  principles  (Opinion  de  Momoro
«  .  .  sur  la  fixation  de  maximum  du  prix  des  grains  dans  I' universality
de  la  Republique  franfaise)*


442 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

maximum  or  highest  figure  respectively  of  salaries,  wages,  piece
work  or  by  the  day,  shall  be  fixed  up  to  the  September  follow-
ing, by  the  General  Councils  of  the  commune  at  the  same  rate
as  in  1790,  with  half  that  sum  in  addition.  .  .  ."

It  is  clear  that  this  system  could  not  be  limited.  Once  France
had  shown  that  she  did  not  wish  to  remain  under  a  system  of
freedom  in  commerce — and  consequently  in  stock-jobbing  and
speculation  which  naturally  followed — she  could  not  stop  at
these  timid  experiments.  She  had  to  go  further  along  the
road  to  the  communalism  of  commerce,  despite  the  resistance
which  such  ideas  must  necessarily  encounter.  The  result  of
this  was  that,  on  the  nth  Brumaire  (November  I,  1593),  the
Convention  discovered  through  the  report  of  Barere  that  to
fix  the  price  at  which  goods  should  be  sold  by  retailers  was  "  to
injure  the  small  trades  to  the  profit  of  the  greater  ones,  and  the
factory-hand  to  the  profit  of  the  factory-owner."  Then  the
idea  was  conceived  that  to  establish  the  price  of  merchandise
included  in  the  preceding  decree,  it  was  necessary  to  know
"  the  value  of  each  on  production."  Adding  to  this  five  per
cent,  profit  for  the  wholesale  merchant,  and  five  per  cent,  for
the  retailer,  so  much  more  for  expenses  of  transport,  the  fair
price  was  fixed  at  which  each  kind  of  goods  should  be  sold.

A  gigantic  inquiry  was  begun,  therefore,  to  establish  one  of
the  factors  of  value,  the  cost  of  production.  Unfortunately,
it  was  never  completed,  owing  to  the  triumph  of  reaction,  on
the  9th  Thermidor,  when  everything  of  that  kind  was  aban-
doned. On  the  3rd  Nivose,  Year  III.  (December  23,  1794),
after  a  stormy  discussion,  opened  by  the  Thermidorians,  on
the  1 8th  Brumaire  (November  8),  the  decrees  concerning  the
maximum  were  repealed.  This  resulted  in  an  alarming  fall
in  the  value  of  the  paper  currency  :  only  nineteen  francs  were
given  in  exchange  for  a  hundred  francs  in  paper,  six  months
later  the  exchange  was  two  francs  for  a  hundred,  and  in
November  1725  the  value  had  sunk  to  fifteen  sous.  Meanwhile
a  pair  of  shoes  cost  a  hundred  livres  and  a  drive  in  a  carriage
six  thousand  livres.*

*  Vide  Avenel,  Lundis  rtvolutionnaires,  ch.  iii.,  concerning  the  true
causes  of  this  unavoidable  clearness.


PAPER-MONEY  443

It  has  been  already  mentioned  how  Necker,  to  procure  the
means  of  existence  for  the  State,  had  had  recourse  at  first  to  two
loans,  one  for  thirty,  the  other  for  eighty  millions.  These
loans,  however,  not  being  successful,  he  had  obtained  from  the
Constituent  Assembly  an  extraordinary  grant  of  a  quarter
of  every  person's  income  payable  once.  Bankruptcy  was
threatening  the  State,  and  the  Assembly,  led  by  Mirabeau,
voted  the  grant  demanded  by  Necker.  But  this  also  produced
very  little.*  Then,  as  we  have  seen,  the  idea  was  evolved  of
putting  up  the  Church  lands  for  sale  and  issuing  assignats  (paper-
money),  which  were  to  be  cancelled  according  as  the  sales
brought  iq  th<»  ffl<myr  tkus  forming  a  source  of  national  revenue.
The  quantity  of  paper-money  issued  was  to  be  limited  to  the
value  of  the  lands  each  time  put  up  for  sale.  Tbese^g'flflgfo
bore  interest. and  had  an  inflated  value.

Jobbery  and  money-lending  no  doubt  tended  continually
to  depreciate  the  value  of  the  assignats  :  it  could,  however,  be
maintained  more  or  less,  so  long  as  the  maximum  prices  of  the
principal  commodities  and  objects  of  prime  necessity  were  fixed
by  the  municipalities.  But  as  soon  as  the  maximum  was
abolished  by  the  Thermidorian  reaction  the  depreciation  of  the
assignats  was  rapid.  The  misery  caused  by  this  among  those
who  lived  from  hand  to  mouth  can  be  imagined.

Reactionary  historians  are  always  ready  to  involve  this  sub-
ject, like  so  many  others,  in  vagueness  and  confusion.  But  the
truth  is  that  the  great  depreciation  of  the  assignats  was  only  felt
after  the  decree  of  the  3rd  Nivose,  Year  III.,  which  abolished
the  maximum.

At  the  same  time,  the  Convention  under  the  Thermidorians
began  to  issue  vast  quantities  of  assignats,  so  that  from  six
thousand  four  hundred  and  twenty  millions,  which  were  in
circulation  on  the  3rd  Brumaire,  Year  III.  (November  3,  1794),
the  sum  had  mounted  nine  months  later,  that  is,  by  the  25th
Messidor,  Year  III.  (July  13,  1795),  to  twelve  milliards.

*  As  a  rule,  during  the  whole  Revolution  no  taxes  were  paid  in.  In
February  1793,  the  Treasury  had  not  received  anything  from  the  tax
on  landed  and  personal  property  levied  in  1792,  and  of  that  levied  in
1791  only  half  had  been  received — about  150  millions.  The  remainder
was  still  to  come.


444 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Furthermore,  the  princes,  and  above  all,  the  Count  d'Artois,
had  set  up  in  England,  by  an  ordinance  of  September  20,
1794,  countersigned  by  Count  Joseph  de  Puisaye  and  the
Chevalier  de  Tinteniac,  "  a  manufactory  of  assignats,  resembling
in  all  respects  those  which  had  been  issued,  or  were  to  be  issued,
by  the  so-called  National  Convention."  There  were  soon
seventy  workmen  employed  in  this  manufacture,  and  the
Count  de  Puisaye  wrote  to  the  committee  of  the  Breton  in-
surrection :  "  Before  long  you  will  have  a  million  a  day,  and
afterwards  two,  and  more  later."

Finally,  on  March  21,  1794,  there  was  a  discussion  in  the
English  House  of  Commons,  in  which  the  famous  Sheridan
denounced  the  manufacture  of  the  false  assignats,  which  Pitt
had  allowed  to  be  established  in  England,  and  Taylor  declared
that  he  had  seen  with  his  own  eyes  the  false  paper-money  being
made.  Considerable  quantities  of  these  assignats  were  offered
in  all  the  large  towns  of  Europe  in  payment  of  bills  of  exchange.*
If  only  reaction  had  confined  itself  to  these  infamous  secret
doings,  but  it  was  even  still  more  active  in  the  systematic
monopolisation  of  food-stuffs  by  means  of  purchasing  the  crops
in  advance,  and  in  speculating  in  assignats.^

In  addition,  the  abolition  of  the  maximum  was  the  signal  for
an  increase  in  the  price  of  everything,  and  this  in  the  midst  of
terrible  scarcity.  One  can  but  ask  how  France  managed  to  pass
through  such  a  frightful  crisis  without  completely  going  under.
Even  the  most  revolutionary  authors  ask  themselves  this.

*  Vide  Louis  Blanc,  Book  XIII.,  ch.  iv.,  which  gives  an  excellent
Histoire  du  maximum  ;  also  Avenel,  Lundis  revolutionnaires.

|  Some  letters  from  England,  addressed  by  royalists  to  their  agents
in  France,  reveal  the  methods  by  which  the  stock-jobbers  worked.
Thus  we  read  in  one  of  these  letters  :  "  Run  up  the  exchange  to  200
livres  for  one  pound  sterling.  We  must  discredit  the  assignats  as  much
as  possible,  and  refuse  all  those  without  the  royal  effigy.  Run  up  the
prices  of  all  kinds  of  commodities.  Give  orders  to  your  merchants  to  buy
in  all  objects  of  prime  necessity.  If  you  can,  persuade  Cott  .  .  .  ti
to  buy  up  the  tallow  and  candles  at  any  price,  make  the  public  pay  as
much  as  five  francs  a  pound.  My  lord  is  well  satisfied  with  the  way
in  which  B.t.z.  (Batz)  has  acted.  We  hope  that  the  assassinats  (sic)
will  be  pushed  carefully.  Disguised  priests  and  women  are  the  best
for  this  work."  (S.  Thiers,  Histoire  de  la  Revolution  francaise,  vol.  iii.
pp.  I44-I4S.  1834*


CHAPTER  LIII

COUNTER-REVOLUTION  IN  BRITTANY-
ASSASSINATION  OF  MARAT

Girondins  stir  up  civil  war — Royalist  plot  discovered — English
prepare  insurrection  in  Normandy  and  Brittany — Insurrection
falls  through — Weakness  of  republican  forces — Commissioners
of  Convention  succeed  in  rousing  towns — Charlotte  Corday —
Implication  of  Girondins  in  plot — Assassination  of  Marat —
Execution  of  Chalier — Character  and  work  of  Marat

ASSAILED  from  all  sides  by  the  coalition  of  European  monarchies,
in  the  midst  of  the  tremendous  work  of  reconstruction  which  she
had  undertaken,  France  found  herself  in  the  throes  of  a  terrible
crisis.  And  it  is  in  studying  this  crisis  in  its  details,  in  realising
the  sufferings  which  the  people  had  to  endure  from  day  to  day,
that  we  realise  the  enormity  of  the  crime  committed  by  the
leisured  classes,  when,  in  order  to  retain  their  privileges,  they
did  not  hesitate  to  plunge  France  into  the  horrors  of  a  civil  war
and  a  foreign  invasion.

Nevertheless,  the  Girondist  leaders  did  not  shrink  after  their
exclusion  from  the  Convention  on  June  2,  1793,  from  going  to
the  provinces,  to  fan  there,  with  the  support  of  royalists  and
even  of  foreigners,  the  flame  of  civil  war.  fy  £  ^  j^j

It  may  be  remembered  that  after  excluding  thirty-one  Giron-
dist members  from  its  midst,  the  Convention  placed  them  under
home-arrest,  leaving  them  the  right  of  going  about  in  Paris,
under  the  condition  of  being  accompanied  by  a  gendarme.
Vergniaud,  Gensonne,  Fonfrede,  remained  in  Paris,  and  from
time  to  time  Vergniaud  addressed  letters,  full  of  venom,  to  the
Convention.  As  to  the  others,  they  escaped  and  went  to  rouse
the  provinces.  The  royalists  could  not  desire  anything  better.

443


446 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Anti-revolutionary  risings  broke  out  in  sixty  departments —
the  most  extreme  Girondins  and  the  royalists  working  hand  in
hand.

Since  1791  a  royalist  plot  was  already  hatching  in  Brittany —
its  aim  being  to  re-establish  the  old  States-General  of  this
province,  and  the  old  administration  by  the  three  orders.
Tufin,  Marquis  de  la  Rou^rie-Reziere,  had  been  placed  by  the
emigrant  princes  at  the  head  of  this  conspiracy.  The  plot,  how-
ever, was  denounced  to  Danton,  who  had  it  watched  by  one  of
his  secret  agents.  The  Marquis  de  la  Rouerie-Reziere  was
forced  to  go  into  hiding,  and  in  January  1793,  he  died  in  La
Guyaumarais,  the  chateaux  of  one  of  his  friends,  where  he
was  buried  secretly.  The  insurrection  broke  out,  however,
with  the  support  of  the  English.

With  the  aid  of  smugglers  and  the  emigres  who  lived  in
Jersey  and  in  London,  the  English  Government  prepared  a
tremendous  insurrection  which  was  to  place  in  its  hands  the
fortified  towns  of  Saint-Malo,  Brest,  Cherbourg,  and  perhaps
also  Nantes  and  Bordeaux.  After  the  Convention  had  decreed
the  arrest  of  the  most  important  Girondist  members,  Petion,
Gaudet,  Brissot,  Barbaroux,  Louvet,  Buzot,  and  Lanjuinais
went  to  Normandy  and  Brittany,  to  take  the  leadership  of  the
insurrection  there.  On  reaching  Caen,  they  at  once  organised  a
League  of  the  United  Counties,  with  the  intention  of  marching
against  Paris.  They  had  the  delegates  of  the  Convention
arrested,  and  they  excited  popular  feeling  against  the  Monta-
gnards.  General  Wimpffen,  who  was  in  command  of  the
Republican  troops  in  Normandy,  and  who  took  up  the  cause  of
the  insurgents,  did  not  hide  from  them  his  royalist  opinions
and  his  intention  to  seek  support  in  England  ;  but,  notwith-
standing this,  the  Girondist  leaders  did  not  break  with  him.

Happily  the  people  in  Normandy  and  Brittany  did  not  follow
the  lead  of  the  royalists  and  the  clergy.  The  towns  ranged
themselves  on  the  side  of  the  Revolution,  and  the  insurrection,
having  been  crushed  at  Vernon,  fell  through.*

The  march  of  the  Girondist  leaders  through  Brittany,  along
the  dark,  walled  country  lanes,  not  daring  to  show  themselves

*  "  The  civic  hymn  of  the  Bretons  marching  against  Anarchy,"


COUNTER-REVOLUTION  IN  BRITTANY 447

even  in  the  smallest  towns,  where  the  republicans  would  have
arrested  them,  shows  how  little  sympathy  they  found,  even  in
this  Breton  country,  where  the  Convention  had  not  won  the
favour  of  the  peasants,  and  where  the  levying  of  recruits  for  the
war  on  the  Rhine  was,  of  course,  fiercely  resented.  When
Wimpffen  intended  to  march  against  Paris,  Caen  only  furnished
him  with  a  few  dozen  volunteers.*  In  the  whole  of  Normandy
and  Brittany  only  five  to  six  hundred  men  were  enlisted,  and
they  did  not  even  fight  when  they  found  themselves  face  to
face  with  a  small  army  arrived  from  Paris.

In  some  towns,  however,  especially  in  the  seaports  of  Saint-
Malo  and  Brest,  the  royalists  found  staunch  supporters  amongst
the  merchant  class,  and  a  tremendous  effort  was  necessary  for
the  republicans  to  prevent  Saint-Malo  from  giving  itself  up,
as  Toulon  had  done,  to  the  English.

One  must,  indeed,  read  the  letters  of  the  young  Jullien,
commissioner  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare,  and  of
Jeanbon  Saint-Andre",  commissioner  of  the  National  Conven-
tion, to  understand  how  weak  were  the  material  forces  of  the
Republic,  and  how  willing  the  well-to-do  classes  were  to  up-
hold the  foreign  invaders.

Everything  had  been  prepared  to  give  up  the  fortress  of  Saint-
Malo  to  the  English  fleet,  armed  as  it  was  with  123  cannon,  25
mortars,  and  well  stocked  with  cannon-ball,  bombs  and  powder.

such  was  the  title  of  the  song  of  the  Girondins,  which  Gaudet  gives  in
the  Mtmoires  of  Buzot,  pp.  68-69.  Here  is  one  of  the  stanzas  :

From  a  throne  propped  by  his  crimes,
Robespierre,  all  drunk  with  blood.
Points  out  his  victims  with  his  finger
To  the  roaring  Anarchist.

This  Marseillaise  of  the  Girondins  demanded  the  death  of  Danton,  of
Pache,  and  of  Marat.  Its  refrain  was  :

War  and  death  to  the  tyrants,
Death  to  the  apostles  of  carnage  1

Of  course,  at  the  same  time  they  themselves  were  demanding  and
preparing  the  slaughter  of  the  revolutionists.

*  The  review  of  which  Charlotte  Corday  spoke  before  her  judges
and  which  was  to  have  gathered  thousands  of  men,  was  a  fiction,  with
which  she  expected  no  doubt  to  frighten  the  sans-culottes  of  Paris.


448 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

It  was  only  the  arrival  of  the  commissioners  of  the  Convention
which  rekindled  the  zeal  of  the  republicans  and  prevented
this  treachery.

These  commissioners  did  not  rely  upon  the  local  adminis-
trative bodies  ;  they  knew  them  to  be  worm-eaten  with  royalism
and  "  commercialism."  They  went  straight  to  the  Popular
Society  of  each  town,  whether  small  or  large.  They  proposed
to  this  society  to  "  purify  "  itself.  Each  member  had  to  state
openly  before  the  whole  society  what  he  had  been  before  1789  ;
what  he  had  done  since  then  ;  whether  he  had  signed  the
royalist  petitions  of  the  8000  or  20,000  ;  what  had  been  his
fortune  before  1789,  and  what  it  was  at  the  present  moment.
Those  who  could  not  give  satisfactory  answers  to  these  questions
were  excluded  from  the  Republican  Society.

After  this  the  society  became  the  recognised  organ  of  the
Convention.  With  its  aid  the  commissioner  proceeded  to  a
similar  purification  in  the  municipality  and  had  the  royalist
members  and  profit-mongers  (profiteurs)  excluded.  Then,
supported  by  the  society,  they  roused  the  enthusiasm  of  the
population,  especially  of  the  sans- culottes.  They  directed  the
enlisting  of  volunteers  and  induced  the  patriots  to  make  efforts,
often  heroic,  for  the  defence  of  the  coasts.  They  organised
republican  fetes  and  introduced  the  republican  calendar.
And  when  they  left,  to  accomplish  the  same  work  elsewhere,
they  handed  over  to  the  new  municipality  the  work  of  taking
all  necessary  measures  for  the  transport  of  ammunition,  pro-
visions, troops,  when  asked  to  do  so  by  the  commissioners
of  the  Convention — always  under  the  supervision  of  the
local  Popular  Society  with  which  they  maintained  a  regular
correspondence.

Very  often  the  war  demanded  extraordinary  sacrifices.  But  in
each  town,  in  Quimper,  in  Saint-Malo  itself,  the  commissioners
of  the  Convention  found  men  devoted  to  the  Revolution  ;  with
their  aid  they  organised  the  defence.  The  emigres  and  the
British  ships  did  not  even  dare  to  approach  Saint-Malo  or
Brest.

Thus  the  royalist  insurrection  failed  both  in  Normandy  and  in


ASSASSINATION  OF  MARAT  449

Brittany.  Yet  it  was  from  Caen  that  Charlotte  Corday  came
to  assassinate  Marat.  Influenced,  no  doubt,  by  all  that  she
heard  said  against  the  Republic  of  the  sans-culotte  Montagnards,
dazzled  perhaps  by  the  refined  republican  airs  which  the  Giron-
dins  who  had  come  to  Caen  gave  themselves,  and  where  she
met  Barbaroux,  Charlotte  Corday  arrived  on  July  1 1  in  Paris,
determined  to  murder  some  one  of  the  eminent  revolutionists.

The  Girondist  chroniclers,  who  all  hated  Marat,  the  chief
organiser  of  May  31,  have  made  out  that  Charlotte  Corday
was  a  republican.  This  is  absolutely  untrue.  Mademoiselle
Marie  Charlotte  Corday  d'Armont  belonged  to  an  arch-royalist
family,  and  her  two  brothers  had  emigrated.  She  herself,
brought  up  in  the  convent  of  PAbbaye-aux-Dames  at  Caen,
now  lived  with  a  relation,  Madame  de  Breteville,  who  was
only  prevented  by  fear  from  openly  calling  herself  a  royalist.
All  the  so-called  "  republicanism  "  of  Mademoiselle  Corday
d'Armont  lay  in  the  fact  that  she  refused  once  to  drink  the
king's  health,  and  explained  her  refusal  by  saying  that  she
would  be  a  republican  "  if  the  French  were  worthy  of  a
Republic."  That  is  to  say,  she  was  a  constitutionalist,  probably
a  "  Feuillante."  General  Wimpffen  even  described  her  simply
as  a  royalist.

Everything  leads  us  to  believe  that  Charlotte  Corday  d'Ar-
mont  did  not  stand  alone.  Caen,  as  we  have  just  seen,  was  the
centre  of  the  Federation  of  the  United  Departments,  organised
against  the  Montagnard  Convention,  and  it  is  very  probable
that  a  plot  had  been  prepared  for  July  14  or  15,  to  kill  on  that
day  "  Danton,  Robespierre,  Marat  and  Company,"  and  that
Charlotte  Corday  knew  of  this.  Her  visit  to  the  Girondin
Duperret,  to  whom  she  handed  over  some  leaflets  and  a  letter
from  Barbaroux — then  at  Caen — and  whom  she  advised  to
retire  to  Caen  without  delay,  tend  rather  to  represent  Charlotte
Corday  as  the  tool  of  a  plot  hatched  at  Caen  by  the  Girondins
and  the  royalists.*

The  original  plan  of  Charlotte  Corday  had  been,  she  said,

*  That  a  plot  existed,  and  that  the  Girondins  were  cognisant  of  it,
seems  clear  enough.  Thus,  on  July  10,  a  letter  was  read  at  the  General
Council  of  the  Commune  of  Paris,  received  at  Strasbourg,  and  forwarded
to JParis  by  the  mayor  of  that  city,  in  which  were  the  following  lines :

2F


450 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

to  kill  Marat  on  the  Champ-de-Mars,  on  July  14,  during  the
anniversary  jete  of  the  Revolution,  or  should  he  not  be  there,
at  the  sitting  of  the  Convention.  But  the  fete  had  been  put
off,  and  Marat,  who  was  ill,  did  not  attend  the  Convention.

Then  she  wrote  to  him,  begging  to  be  received,  and  on
obtaining  no  answer,  she  wrote  again,  playing  this  time  jesuiti-
cally  on  his  kindness,  of  which  she  knew,  or  of  which  her  friends
had  spoken  to  her.  In  this  letter  she  said  she  was  unhappy,
persecuted,  knowing  for  certain  that  with  such  a  recom-
mendation she  would  be  received.

With  this  note,  and  a  dagger  hidden  in  her  scarf,  she  went,
on  July  13,  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  to  Marat.  His
wife,  Catherine  Evrard,  after  hesitating  a  little,  finally
allowed  the  young  lady  to  enter  the  modest  room  of  the
people's  friend.

Marat,  wasted  by  fever  for  the  past  two  or  three  months,
af^er  the  life  of  a  tracked  wild  beast  which  he  had  led  since  1789,
was  seated  in  a  closed  bath,  correcting  the  proofs  of  his  paper  on
a  board  placed  across  the  bath.  It  was  here  that  Charlotte
Corday  d'Armont  struck  the  Friend  of  the  People  in  the  breast.
His  death  was  instantaneous.

Three  days  later,  on  the  i6th,  another  friend  of  the  people,
Chalier,  was  executed  by  the  Girondins  at  Lyons.

In  Marat,  the  people  lost  their  most  devoted  friend.  The
partisans  of  the  Girondins  have  represented  him  as  a  blood-
thirsty madman,  who  did  not  even  know  what  he  wanted.
But  we  know  to-day  how  such  reputations  are  made.  The
fact  is,  that  in  the  dark  years  of  1790  and  1791,  when  he  saw
that  all  the  heroism  of  the  people  had  not  been  able  to  break
the  royal  power,  Marat  began  to  despair,  and  he  wrote  that  a
few  thousand  aristocratic  heads  ought  to  be  sacrificed  to  make
the  Revolution  succeed.  However,  in  the  depth  of  his  heart,
he  was  not  at  all  bloodthirsty.  He  only  loved  the  people,  both

"  The  '  Mountain,'  the  Commune,  the  Jacobin  Club  and  the  whole
rascally  crew  are  a  hair's-breadth  from  the  grave.  .  .  .  Between  now
and  July  15  we  will  dance  1  I  hope  that  no  other  blood  than  that  of
Dan  ton,  Robespierre,  Marat  and  Company  will  be  shed  "  (I  quote  from
Louis  Blanc).  On  July  1 1  and  1 2,  in  the  Girondist  paper,  the  Chvonique
de  Paris,  there  were  already  allusions  to  the  death  of  Marat.


ASSASSINATION  OF  MARAT  451

he  and  his  heroic  mate,  Catherine  Evrard,*  with  a  love  far
deeper  than  that  of  any  other  prominent  revolutionist,  and  to
this  love  he  remained  true.

From  the  day  the  Revolution  began,  Marat  took  to  bread  and
water,  not  figuratively  speaking,  but  in  reality.  And  when  he
was  murdered,  the  entire  fortune  of  the  Friend  of  the  People
was  a  note  for  25  livres  (francs).

With  this  love  of  the  people  to  guide  him,  Marat,  who  also
was  older  than  most  of  his  revolutionist  comrades,  and  had  more
experience,  understood  the  various  phases  of  the  Revolution,
and  foresaw  what  was  to  come,  far  better  than  did  any  of  his
contemporaries.  He  was  the  only  one,  we  may  say,  of  the  revo-
lutionary leaders  who  had  a  real  understanding  of  events  and
power  of  grasping  them  as  a  whole,  in  their  intricate  bearings
on  one  another .f

That  he  had  a  certain  amount  of  vanity  is  to  be  explained  to
some  extent  by  the  fact  that  he  was  always  pursued,  always
tracked,  even  in  the  greatest  days  of  the  Revolution,  while  each
new  phase  of  the  Revolution  only  confirmed  the  accuracy  of  his
predictions.  But  these  are  mere  details.  The  distinctive  fea-
ture of  his  mind  was  that  at  each  given  moment  he  understood
what  had  to  be  done  for  the  triumph  of  the  people's  cause —
the  triumph  of  the  people's  revolution,  not  of  an  abstract
theoretical  revolution.

However,  it  must  be  owned  that  when  the  Revolution,  after
the  abolition  of  feudal  rights,  had  to  make  one  more  step  to
solidify  its  work — when  it  had  to  take  such  measures  as  would
benefit  the  lowest  classes  by  giving  to  every  one  the  certainty
of  work  and  life — Marat  did  not  fully  grasp  the  truth  in  the
ideas  held  by  Jacques  Roux,  Varlet,  Chalier,  L'Ange,  and  many
others.  Having  been  himself  unable  to  formulate  the  leading
ideas  of  the  deep  communist  change,  of  which  these  precursors
sought  the  practical  forms,  and  fearing,  on  the  other  hand,  that

*  "A  divine  woman,  who,  touched  by  his  position  when  he  fled  from
cellar  to  cellar,  took  in  and  hid  the  Friend  of  the  People.  To  him  she
devoted  her  fortune  and  sacrificed  her  peace."  Thus  Michelet  quotes
the  words  of  Albertine,  Marat's  sister,  about  Catherine  Evrard.

•j-  It  is  a  pleasure  to  note  that  a  study  of  Marat's  work,  neglected
till  this  day,  led  Jaures  to  speak  with  respect  of  this  quality  of  the
popular  tribunei


452 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

France  might  lose  the  liberties  she  had  already  won,  he  did  not
give  these  communists  the  necessary  support  of  his  energy  and
his  immense  influence.  He  did  not  make  himself  the  mouth-
piece of  the  new  movement.

"  Had  my  brother  lived,"  said  the  sister  of  Marat,  "  neither
Danton,  nor  Camille  Desmoulins  " — nor  the  Hebertists  either,
we  may  add — "  would  have  been  guillotined."

On  the  whole,  although  Marat  understood  the  sudden
accesses  of  fury  in  the  people,  and  even  considered  them  neces-
sary, at  times,  yet  he  certainly  was  not  an  upholder  of  terrorism
as  it  was  practised  after  September  1793.


CHAPTER  LIV

THE  VENDEE— LYONS— THE  RISINGS  IN  SOUTHERN

FRANCE

Royalist  conspiracies  in  South — Risings  against  Convention —
Toulon  surrenders  to  English  and  Spanish  fleet — Causes  of
rising  in  La  Vendee — Disaffection  of  peasants — Ill-feeling  of
villages  against  towns — Girondins  help  insurrection — Plan  of
Vendeans — They  take  Saumur  and  Angers,  but  are  forced  to
retire  at  Nantes — Vendeans  exterminated — Risings  in  Pro-
vence and  at  Lyons — Chalier — Marseilles  and  other  southern
towns  join  movement — Royalists  defeated — Siege  and  capture
of  Lyons — Action  of  republicans  in  Lyons — Bordeaux  sur-
renders to  Convention

IF  the  royalist  rising  failed  in  Normandy  and  Brittany,  the
reactionaries  met  with  more  success  in  the  province  of  Poitou,
in  the  departments  of  Deux-Sevres,  Vienne,  and  Vendee,
at  Bordeaux,  Limoges,  and  partly  in  Eastern  France,  where
risings  against  the  Convention  began  at  Besancon,  Dijon  and
Macon.  In  these  parts  of  France  the  middle  classes,  as  we
have  seen,  had  acted  with  ferocity  against  the  revolted  peasants
in  1789.

In  the  South,  where  royalist  conspiracies  had  been  going  on
for  a  long  time,  revolts  broke  out  in  several  places.  Marseilles
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  counter-revolutionists — Girondins
and  royalists — who  elected  a  provisory  government,  and
intended  to  march  against  Paris.  Toulouse,  Ntmes  and
Grenoble  rose  also  against  the  Convention.

Toulon  surrendered  to  an  English  and  Spanish  fleet,  which
took  possession  of  this  fortress  in  the  name  of  Louis  XVII.
Bordeaux,  a  trading  town  of  great  importance,  seemed  also
to  be  ready  to  rise  at  the  call  of  the  Girondins ;  and  Lyons,
where  the  industrial  and  merchant  bourgeoisie  was  supreme

453


454 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

since  May  29,  revolted  openly  against  the  Convention,  and
withstood  a  long  siege  ;  whilst  the  Piedmontese,  profiting
by  the  disorder  in  the  army,  which  had  Lyons  as  its  base  of
operations,  crossed  the  frontier  of  France.  j

Up  to  the  present  day,  the  true  causes  of  the  rising  in  La
Vendee  have  not  been  made  quite  clear.  Of  course  the  devo-
tion of  the  peasants  to  their  clergy,  cleverly  made  use  of  by
Rome,  did  much  to  foster  their  hatred  against  the  Revolution.
Certainly  there  was  also  in  the  villages  of  La  Vendee  a  vague
attachment  to  the  King,  and  it  was  easy  for  the  royalists  to
rouse  the  pity  of  the  peasants  for  "  the  poor  King  who  had
desired  only  the  good  of  the  people,  and  had  been  executed
by  the  people  of  Paris  "  ;  many  tears  also  were  then  shed  by
the  women  over  the  fate  of  the  poor  child,  the  Dauphin,
shut  up  in  a  prison.  The  emissaries  who  came  from  Rome,
Coblentz  and  England,  bringing  with  them  papal  bulls,
royal  decrees  and  gold,  had  a  clear  field  under  such  condi-
tions, above  all  when  they  were  protected  by  the  middle
classes,  the  ex-slave-traders  of  Nantes,  and  the  merchants  on
whom  England  showered  promises  of  aid  against  the  sans-
culottes.

And  finally,  there  was  this  reason,  in  itself  sufficient  to  bring
whole  provinces  to  arms — the  levy  of  three  hundred  thousand
men  ordered  by  the  Convention.  This  levy  was  regarded
in  La  Vendee  as  a  violation  of  the  most  sacred  right  of  every
human  being — that  of  remaining  in  his  native  land.

It  is  nevertheless  permissible  to  believe  that  there  were  yet
other  causes  to  rouse  the  peasants  of  La  Vendee  against  the
Revolution.  Continually,  whilst  studying  various  documents
of  the  period,  one  comes  across  such  causes  as  must  certainly
have  produced  a  feeling  of  resentment  among  the  peasants
against  the  Constituent  and  the  Legislative  Assemblies.  The
fact  alone  that  the  former  had  abolished  with  a  stroke  of  the
pen  the  folk-motes  of  the  villages,  which  had  existed  for
centuries  until  December  1789,  as  also  the  fact  that  the  peasants
were  divided  into  two  classes — active  and  passive — and  that
the  administration  of  communal  affairs  was  given  to  those
elected  by  the  rich  only— these  facts  alone  were  sufficient  to


THE  VENDEE  455

awake  discontent  in  the  villages  against  the  Revolution,  and
against  the  towns  in  general  and  their  middle  classes.

It  is  true  that  on  August  4  the  Revolution  had  proclaimed
in  principle  the  abolition  of  feudal  rights  and  mortmain,  but
the  latter,  it  appears,  no  longer  existed  in  the  West,  and  feudal
rights  were  only  abolished  on  paper ;  and  as  the  risings  of  the
villages  were  not  widespread  in  the  western  provinces,  the
peasants  of  these  provinces  saw  that  they  would  have  to  continue
paying  feudal  dues  as  before.

On  the  other  hand — and  this  was  of  great  importance  to  the
villages — the  sale  of  the  State  lands,  of  which  the  greater  part,
all  the  Church  lands,  should  have  reverted  to  the  poor,  were
now  being  bought  by  wealthy  people  in  the  towns,  and  this
tended  to  strengthen  the  general  ill-feeling  of  the  villages
against  the  towns.  To  this  must  also  be  added  the  pilfering
of  the  communal  lands  for  the  benefit  of  the  middle  class,
which  was  increased  by  the  decrees  of  the  Legislative  Assembly.*

It  thus  happened  that  the  Revolution,  while  imposing  new
burdens  on  the  peasants — fresh  taxes,  recruiting,  and  requisi-
tions— had  given  nothing  to  the  villages  up  to  August  1793,
except  when  the  peasants  themselves  had  taken  the  lands  of
the  nobles  or  the  estates  of  the  clergy.  In  consequence,  a
deeply  seated  hatred  was  growing  in  the  villages  against  the
towns,  and  we  see  indeed  that  the  rising  in  La  Vendee  was
a  war  declared  by  the  villages  against  the  towns,  especially
against  the  middle  classes  of  the  towns. f

With  the  help  of  Rome,  the  insurrection  broke  out,  wild
and  bloody,  under  the  guidance  of  the  clergy.  And  the  Con-
vention could  only  send  out  against  it  some  insignificant  troops,
commanded  by  generals  either  incapable  or  else  interested  in
making  the  war  drag  on  ;  while  the  Girondist  deputies  did
their  best  to  help  the  insurrection  by  the  letters  they  addressed

*  See  ch.  xxvi.

f  Certain  indications  of  a  social  character  in  the  Vendean  rising  are
to  be  found,  says  Avenel,  in  the  work  of  Antonin  Proust  (La  Justice
revolutionnaire  d  Niort).  It  was  a  war  of  the  peasants  against  the
bourgeois — the  peasants  sending  their  delegates  to  the  bourgeois  creditors
"  to  get  the  title-deeds  and  burn  them  "  (Lundis  revolutionnaires ,
p.  284).


456 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

to  Nantes  and  the  other  towns.  All  these  forces,  acting  in
the  same  direction,  made  it  possible  for  the  rising  to  spread
and  finally  to  become  so  menacing  that  the  "  Mountain,"  in
order  to  crush  it,  had  recourse  to  the  most  abominable  measures.

The  plan  of  the  Vendeans  was  to  take  all  the  towns,  to
exterminate  the  republican  "  patriots,"  to  carry  the  insurrec-
tion into  the  neighbouring  provinces,  and  then  to  march
against  Paris.

At  the  beginning  of  June  1793,  the  Vendean  leaders,  Cathe-
lineau,  Lescure,  Stoflet,  and  La  Roche-Jacquelein,  at  the
head  of  40,000  men,  took  the  town  of  Saumur,  which  gave
them  command  over  the  Loire.  Then,  crossing  the  Loire,
they  took  Angers  (June  17),  and  dexterously  disguising  their
movements,  they  immediately  marched  on  Nantes,  the  sea-
port of  the  Loire,  the  possession  of  which  would  have  put
them  into  direct  communication  with  the  English  fleet.  On
June  29  and  30,  their  armies,  rapidly  massed,  attacked  Nantes.
But  in  this  enterprise  they  were  routed  by  the  republicans.
They  lost  Cathelineau,  the  real  and  democratic  leader  of  the
rising,  and  they  were  forced  to  abandon  Saumur  and  retire
to  the  left  bank  of  the  Loire.

A  supreme  effort  was  made  now  by  the  Republic  to  attack
the  Vendeans  in  their  own  country.  The  war  became  a  war  of
extermination,  and  finally  twenty  to  thirty  thousand  Vendeans,
followed  by  their  families,  decided  to  emigrate  to  England
after  crossing  Brittany.  They  consequently  crossed  the  Loire
from  south  to  north,  and  went  northwards.  But  England
had  no  desire  to  receive  such  immigrants,  and  the  Bretons,
for  their  part,  received  them  coldly,  the  more  so  as  the  Breton
patriots  were  gaining  the  upper  hand  in  the  towns  and  villages ;
therefore  all  these  starving  and  ragged  people,  with  their
women  and  children,  were  driven  back  towards  the  Loire.

We  have  mentioned  already  the  savage  ardour  with  which
the  Vendeans,  encouraged  by  their  clergy,  were  animated  at
the  outset  of  their  revolt.  Now,  the  war  was  becoming  one
of  mutual  extermination.  In  October  1793 — it  is  Madame
de  la  Roche-Jacquelein  who  writes  thus — their  watchword
was  "  No  quarter."  On  September  20,  1793,  the  Vendeans


LYONS  457

filled  the  wells  at  Montaigne  with  the  bodies  of  republican
soldiers,  many  of  them  still  alive  and  only  stunned  or  disabled
by  blows.  Charette,  on  taking  Noirmoutiers,  on  October  15,
had  all  those  who  surrendered  shot.  Living  men  were  buried
up  to  the  neck,  and  their  captors  amused  themselves  by  inflict-
ing all  kinds  of  tortures  on  the  unburied  heads.*

On  the  other  hand,  when  all  this  mass  of  men,  women  and
children,  driven  back  to  the  Loire,  poured  into  Nantes,  the
prisons  of  this  town  began  to  be  dangerously  overcrowded.
In  these  dens,  swarming  with  human  beings,  typhoid  fever
and  various  other  infectious  diseases  raged,  and  soon  spread
into  the  town  which  was  already  exhausted  by  the  siege.
Besides,  just  as  in  Paris,  after  August  10,  the  imprisoned
royalists  threatened  to  set  fire  to  the  city  and  to  murder  all
the  Jacobins,  so  the  Vendeans  imprisoned  at  Nantes  likewise
threatened  to  exterminate  all  the  republicans  as  soon  as  the
J"  Royal  Army "  of  Vendeans  should  approach  Nantes.  It
must  be  noted  that  the  patriots  numbered  but  a  few  hundreds
in  this  town,  which  had  gained  its  wealth  in  the  slave  trade
and  slave  labour  in  Saint  Domingo,  and  was  losing  it  now  that
slavery  had  been  abolished.  Consequently,  the  patriots  had
to  display  an  extraordinary  vigilance  and  energy  to  prevent
Nantes  from  being  taken  by  a  sudden  attack  of  the  "  Royal
Army,"  and  the  republicans  from  being  massacred.  Their
efforts  had  been  so  great  that  the  men  of  the  republican
patrols  were  quite  worn  out.

Then  the  cry  of  "  Drown  them  all,"  which  had  already  been
heard  in  1792,  became  more  and  more  menacing.  A  panic,

*  See  Michelet,  who  studied  the  Vendean  war  from  local  documents
on  the  spot.  "  The  sad  question,"  he  says,  "  has  often  been  discussed
as  to  who  had  taken  the  initiative  in  these  barbarous  acts,  and  which
of  the  two  sides  went  furthest  in  such  crimes.  The  wholesale  drowning
of  the  Vendeans  in  the  Loire  by  Carrier  is  spoken  of  endlessly,  but
why  should  the  massacres  of  Charette  be  passed  over  in  silence  ?  Old
Vendean  veterans  have  told  their  doctor,  who  retold  it  to  me,  that  never
had  they  taken  a  soldier  (especially  one  of  the  army  that  came  from
Mayencej  without  killing  him  under  torture,  provided  they  had  time
for  that;  and  when  the  men  from  Nantes  arrived,  in  April  1793,  at
Challans,  they  saw  nailed  to  a  door  something  which  resembled  a  great
bat ;  this  was  a  republican  soldier  who  for  several  hours  had  been
nailed  there,  suffering  terrible  agonies  and  unable  to  die  "  (Michelet's
History  of  the  Revolution,  Book  XI.  ch.  v.j.


458 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

which  Michelet  compares  to  the  panic  which  takes  hold  of
men  in  a  plague-stricken  town,  seized  on  the  poorest  among
the  population  of  Nantes,  and  the  commissioner  of  the  Con-
vention, Carrier,  whose  temperament  made  him  only  too
susceptible  to  such  a  panic,  let  them  have  their  own  way.

The  people  began  by  drowning  the  arrested  priests,  and
ended  by  exterminating  over  2000  men,  women  and  children,
incarcerated  in  the  prisons  of  Nantes.

As  to  La  Vend6e,  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  (Comite
de  Salut  public),  without  going  deeper  into  the  scrutiny  of
the  causes  which  might  have  brought  a  whole  province  to
revolt,  and  contenting  themselves  wth  a  hackneyed  explanation
of  the  "  fanaticism  of  these  peasant  brutes,"  without  endeavour-
ing to  understand  the  peasants  or  to  rouse  their  interest  in  the
Republic,  conceived  the  abominable  idea  of  exterminating
the  Vendeans  and  depopulating  the  department.

Sixteen  entrenched  camps  were  made,  and  twelve  "  infernal
columns  "  were  sent  into  the  country  to  ravage  it,  to  burn
the  peasants'  huts,  and  to  exterminate  the  inhabitants.  It  is
easy  to  conceive  what  a  harvest  such  a  system  gavel  La
Vendee  became  a  bleeding  wound  of  the  Republic,  and  one
which  bled  for  two  years.  An  immense  region  was  lost  entirely
to  the  Republic,  and  La  Vendee  was  the  cause  of  the  most
painful  divisions  between  the  Montagnards  themselves.

The  risings  in  Provence  and  at  Lyons  had  an  equally  fatal
influence  on  the  progress  of  the  Revolution.  Lyons  was  at
that  time  a  city  of  industries  for  the  wealthy.  Great  numbers
of  artist- workmen  worked  in  their  homes  at  weaving  fine  silks
and  also  at  making  gold  and  silver  embroideries.

Now,  the  whole  of  this  industry  came  to  a  standstill  during  the
Revolution,  and  the  population  of  Lyons  became  divided
into  two  hostile  camps.  The  master-workers,  the  small
employers,  and  the  leisured  classes,  higher  and  middle,  were
against  the  Revolution ;  whereas  the  ordinary  workmen,
those  who  worked  for  the  small  employers,  or  who  found  work
in  the  industries  connected  with  weaving,  were  whole-
heartedly for  the  Revolution,  \nd  were  already  kindling  the


THE  RISINGS  IN  SOUTHERN  FRANCE 459

beacons  of  socialism,  which  were  to  flare  up  during  the  nine-
teenth century.  They  willingly  followed  Chalier,  a  mystical
communist  and  a  friend  of  Marat,  a  man  of  much  influence
in  the  municipal  council,  the  democratic  aspirations  of  which
resembled  those  of  the  Paris  Commune.  An  active  communist
propaganda  was  also  being  carried  on  by  L'Ange — a  precursor
of  Fourier  and  his  friends.

The  middle  classes,  for  their  part,  listened  willingly  to  the
nobles,  and  above  all  to  the  priests.  The  local  clergy  had
always  had  a  strong  influence  at  Lyons,  and  they  were  rein-
forced now  by  a  number  of  priests  who  had  returned  from  their
emigration  to  Savoy.

Taking  advantage  of  all  this,  the  middle-class  Girondins
behind  whom  were  the  royalists,  had  invaded  the  greater,
part  of  the  sections  of  Lyons,  and  were  preparing  a  rising
against  the  Jacobins.

The  conflict  broke  out  on  May  29,  1793.  There  was  fighting
in  the  streets,  and  the  middle  classes  got  the  upper  hand.
Chalier  was  arrested,  and  after  being  tamely  defended  at  Paris
by  Robespierre  and  Marat,  he  was  executed  on  July  16,  after
which  the  repression  on  the  part  of  the  middle  classes  and  the
royalists  became  terrible.  The  wealthy  people  of  Lyons
who  had  been  Girondins  up  till  then,  encouraged  by  the  revolts
in  the  West,  now  openly  made  common  cause  with  the  royalist
emigres.  They  armed  20,000  men  and  fortified  the  town
against  the  Convention.

At  Marseilles  the  Girondins  had  intended  to  support  Lyons.
Here  they  had  risen  after  May  31.  Inspired  by  the  Girondin
Rebecqui,  who  had  come  here  from  Paris,  the  sections  of
Marseilles,  the  greater  part  of  which  were  also  in  the  hands  of
the  Girondins,  had  raised  an  army  of  10,000  men,  which  was
going  to  march  towards  Lyons,  and  thence  to  Paris,  to  combat
the  Montagnards  there.  Other  southern  towns,  Toulon,
Nimes,  Montauban,  joined  the  movement,  which  soon  acquired,
as  might  have  been  expected,  an  openly  royalist  character.
However,  the  Marseilles  army  was  soon  routed  by  the  troops
of  the  Republic,  commanded  by  Carteaux,  who  entered
Marseilles  on  August  25.


460 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Rebec qui  drowned  himself ;  but  a  party  of  the  defeated
royalists  took  refuge  at  Toulon,  and  this  big  military  port
was  given  up  to  the  English.  The  English  admiral  took
possession  of  the  town,  proclaimed  Louis  XVII.  King  of
France,  and  had  an  army  of  8000  Spaniards  brought  over  by
sea,  to  hold  Toulon  and  its  forts.

Meanwhile  an  army  of  20,000  Piedmontese  had  entered
France  to  rescue  the  royalists  at  Lyons,  and  they  were  now
coming  down  towards  Lyons,  by  way  of  the  valleys  of  the
Sallenche,  the  Tarentaise,  and  the  Maurienne.

The  attempts  of  Dubois-Crance,  a  member  of  the  Conven-
tion, to  treat  with  Lyons,  failed,  because  the  movement  had
fallen  by  now  into  the  hands  of  the  royalists,  and  they  would
not  listen  to  any  offers.  The  commandant  Pre"cy,  who  had
fought  among  the  Swiss  on  August  10,  was  one  of  the  faithful
adherents  of  Louis  XVI.  Many  of  the  emigres  had  also  come
to  Lyons  to  fight  against  the  Republic,  and  the  leaders  of  the
royalist  party  were  contriving  with  an  agent  of  the  royal
house,  Imbert-Colomi&s,  as  to  the  means  of  connecting  the
Lyons  insurrection  with  the  operations  of  the  Piedmontese
army.  Finally,  the  Council  of  Public  Welfare  for  Lyons  had
for  secretary  General  Reubies,  one  of  the  "  P£res  de  POratoire,"
while  the  commandant  Precy  was  in  touch  with  the  agents
of  the  royal  house,  and  was  asking  them  for  reinforcements
of  Piedmontese  and  Austrian  soldiers.

In  these  circumstances  nothing  remained  to  do  but  to  besiege
Lyons  in  due  torm  ;  and  the  siege  was  begun  on  August  8
by  seasoned  troops,  detached  for  this  purpose  from  the  army
of  the  Alps,  and  with  cannon  brought  from  Besanc.on  and
Grenoble.  The  workmen  of  Lyons  had  no  desire  for  this
counter-revolutionary  war,  but  they  did  not  feel  themselves
strong  enough  to  revolt.  They  escaped  from  the  besieged
town,  and  came  to  join  the  army  of  the  sans- culottes,  who,
although  they  lacked  bread  themselves,  still  shared  it  with
20,000  of  these  fugitives.

In  the  meantime,  Kellerman  had  succeeded,  in  September,

in  driving  back  the  Piedmontese,  and  Couthon  and Maignet,

•  two  commissioners  of  the  Convention,  who  had  raised  an  army


THE  RISINGS  IN  SOUTHERN  FRANCE 461

of  peasants  in  the  Auvergne,  armed  with  scythes,  pickaxes
and  pitchforks,  arrived  on  October  2  to  reinforce  Kellerman.
Seven  days  later  the  armies  of  the  Convention  at  last  took
possession  of  Lyons.

It  is  sad  to  record  that  the  repression  by  the  Republicans
was  terrible.  Couthon  apparently  favoured  a  policy  of  pacifica-
tion, but  the  terrorists  got  the  upper  hand  in  the  Convention.
It  was  proposed  to  apply  to  Lyons  the  method  which  the
Girondin  Isnard  had  proposed  to  apply  to  Paris — that  is  to
say,  to  destroy  Lyons,  so  that  nothing  but  ruins  should  remain,
which  would  bear  the  following  inscription  :  "  Lyons  made
war  against  liberty — Lyons  exists  no  more."  But  this  absurd
plan  was  not  accepted,  and  the  Convention  decided  that  the
houses  of  the  wealthy  were  to  be  destroyed,  and  that  those
of  the  poor  should  be  left  intact.  The  execution  of
this  plan  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  Collot  d'Herbois,  and  if
he  did  not  carry  it  out,  this  was  because  its  realisation  was
practically  impossible ;  a  city  is  not  so  easily  destroyed  as
that.  But  by  the  tremendous  number  of  executions  and  the
prisoners  being  shot  "  in  a  heap,"  Collot  managed  to  surpass
even  the  Marseilles  counter-revolutionists,  and  did,  of  course,
immense  harm  to  the  Revolution.

The  Girondins  had  counted  greatly  on  the  rising  in  Bordeaux,
and  this  merchant  town  rose  indeed,  but  the  insurrection  did
not  last.  The  people  were  not  to  be  carried  away ;  they  did
not  believe  in  the  accusations  of  "  royalism  and  Orleanism  "
hurled  against  the  "  Mountain,"  and  when  the  Girondist
members  who  had  escaped  from  Paris  arrived  at  Bordeaux,
they  were  forced  to  go  into  hiding  in  this  city,  which  in  their
dreams  was  to  have  been  the  centre  of  their  rising.  Bordeaux
soon  gave  itself  up  to  the  commissioners  of  the  Convention.

As  to  Toulon,  which  had  been  long  since  worked  upon  by
English  agents,  and  where  the  naval  officers  were  all  royalists,
it  surrendered  completely  to  an  English  squadron.  The
few  republicans  of  this  city  were  imprisoned,  and  as  the  English,
without  losing  time,  had  armed  the  forts  and  built  new  ones,
a  regular  siege  was  necessary  to  retake  the  town.  This  was
only  done  in  the  December  following.


CHAPTER  LV
THE  WAR— THE  INVASION  BEATEN  BACK

Reorganisation  of  republican  army— Horrors  of  war —
Girondist  generals  replaced — The  war — Difficulties  of  republi-
cans— Condition  of  France — Hopes  of  allies — Their  successes
and  delays  —  Republicans  gain  courage  —  Victory  over
Austrians  —  Surrender  of  Lyons  —  Toulon  recaptured  —
Vengeance  of  republicans

AFTER  the  betrayal  of  Dumouriez  and  the  arrest  of  the  Girondist
leaders,  the  Republic  had  to  accomplish  anew  the  entire  work
of  reorganising  its  army  on  a  democratic  basis,  and  it  was
necessary  to  re-elect  all  the  superior  officers,  in  order  to  replace
the  Girondist  and  royalist  generals  by  Jacobin  republicans.

The  conditions  under  which  this  great  change  was  accom-
plished, were  so  hard  that  only  the  grim  energy  of  a  nation  in
revolution  was  capable  of  bringing  it  to  the  desired  end  in  face
of  the  invasion,  the  internal  disorders,  and  the  underground
work  of  conspiracies  which  was  being  carried  on  all  over  France
by  the  rich,  for  the  purpose  of  starving  the  sans-culotte  armies,
and  handing  them  over  to  the  enemy.  For  nearly  everywhere
the  administration  of  the  departments  and  the  districts  had
remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Feuillants  and  the  Girondins,
and  they  did  their  best  to  prevent  ammunition  and  provisions
from  reaching  the  armies.

It  needed  all  the  genius  of  the  Revolution  and  all  the  youth-
ful audacity  of  a  people  awakened  from  its  long  sleep,  all  the
faith  of  the  revolutionists  in  a  future  of  equality,  to  persist
in  the  Titanic  struggle  which  the  sans-culottes  had  to  carry
on  against  the  invaders  and  the  traitors.  But  how  many
times  the  exhausted  nation  was  on  the  point  of  giving  in  !

Jf  to-day  war  can  ruin  and  devastate  whole  provinces,  we


THE  WAR— THE  INVASION  BEATEN  BACK 463

can  guess  what  were  the  ravages  of  war  a  hundred  and  twenty
years  ago,  amongst  a  population  much  poorer  then.  In  the
departments  adjoining  the  seat  of  the  war,  the  harvests  were
cut,  mostly  unripe,  as  forage.  Most  of  the  horses  and  other
beasts  of  burden  were  pressed  into  service,  either  on  the  spot
or  for  one  of  the  fourteen  armies  of  the  Republic.  The
soldiers,  in  common  with  the  peasants  and  the  poor  of  the
towns,  lacked  bread.  But  they  lacked  everything  else  as  well.
In  Brittany  and  in  Alsace,  the  commissioners  of  the  Convention
were  driven  to  ask  the  citizens  of  certain  towns,  such  as  Brest
or  Strasbourg,  to  take  off  their  boots  and  shoes  and  to  send
them  to  the  soldiers.  All  the  leather  that  could  be  obtained
was  requisitioned,  as  also  were  all  the  cobblers,  to  make  foot-
wear, but  this  was  still  insufficient,  and  wooden  shoes  had  to
be  distributed  to  the  soldiers.  Worse  than  this,  it  became
imperative  to  form  committees  to  requisition  from  private
houses  "  kitchen  utensils,  cauldrons,  frying-pans,  saucepans,
buckets,  and  other  articles  of  brass  and  pewter,  and  also  any
pieces  of  broken  brass  or  lead."  This  was  done  in  the  districts
of  Strasbourg.

At  Strasbourg,  the  commissioners  of  the  Convention  and
the  municipal  council  were  obliged  to  ask  the  inhabitants
for  clothes,  stockings,  boots,  shirts,  bed-clothes,  and  old  linen,
with  which  to  clothe  the  ragged  volunteers.  They  had  also
to  beg  for  beds  in  private  houses,  where  the  wounded  might
be  nursed.

But  all  this  was  insufficient,  and  from  time  to  time  the
commissioners  of  the  Convention  found  it  necessary  to  raise
heavy  revolutionary  impositions,  which  they  levied  chiefly
from  the  rich.  This  was  especially  the  case  in  Alsace,  where
the  great  landowners  would  not  give  up  their  feudal  rights,
in  defence  of  which  Austria  had  taken  up  arms.  In  the  South,
at  Narbonne,  one  of  the  members  of  the  Convention  was  driven
to  demand  the  services  of  all  the  men  and  women  of  the  town
to  unload  the  barges  and  load  the  carts  which  were  to  transport
provisions  for  the  army.*

*  It  is  important  to  note  that  in  spite  of  all  that  reactionary  histo-
rians may  say  about  the  Terror,  we  see  by  the  archives  in  this  case


464 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Little  by  little,  however,  the  army  was  reorganised.  The
Girondist  generals  were  eliminated ;  younger  men  replaced
them.  Everywhere  appeared  new  men,  for  whom  war  had
never  been  a  trade,  and  who  came  into  the  army  with  all  the
ardour  of  the  citizens  of  a  nation  deeply  stirred  by  revolution.
They  soon  created,  too,  new  tactics,  which  were  later  attributed
to  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  the  tactics  of  rapid  marches,  and  of
great  masses  crushing  the  enemy  in  its  separate  armies,  before
they  had  time  to  effect  a  junction.

Miserably  clothed,  often  in  rags  and  barefoot,  very  often
hungry,  but  inspired  with  the  holy  flame  of  the  Revolution
of  Equality,  the  volunteers  of  1793  were  victorious  where  defeat
had  seemed  certain.

At  the  same  time  the  commissioners  of  the  Convention
displayed  fierce  energy  in  finding  the  means  to  feed,  clothe
and  move  the  armies.  For  the  greater  part,  equality  was
their  principle.  No  doubt  there  were  amongst  these  com-
missioners some  black  sheep,  like  Cambaceres,  a  future  dignitary
under  Napoleon.  There  were  a  few  fools  who  surrounded
themselves  with  display,  such  as  became  later  the  undoing  of
Bonaparte,  and  there  were  also  a  few  not  above  bribes.  But
all  these  were  very  rare  exceptions.  Nearly  all  the  two  hundred
commissioners  honestly  shared  the  hardships  and  the  dangers
with  the  soldiers.

These  efforts  brought  success,  and  after  a  very  dark  period
of  reverses  in  August  and  September,  the  republican  armies
gained  the  upper  hand.  The  tide  of  the  invasion  was  stemmed
in  the  beginning  of  the  autumn.

In  June,  after  the  treachery  of  Dumouriez,  the  army  of
the  North  was  completely  disorganised — its  generals  being  ready
to  fight  each  other — and  it  had  against  it  four  armies  represent-
ing a  total  of  118,000  men,  English,  Austrians,  Hanoverians
and  Dutch.  Forced  also  to  abandon  its  entrenched  camp,
and  to  take  refuge  behind  the  Sarpe,  leaving  the  fortresses  of

that  the  sans-culottes  and  a  few^  young  citizens  were  the  only  ones  who
answered  this  call  on  their  patriotism,  and  that  "  not  one  silk-stocking,
whether  man  or  woman,"  turned  up  on  the  quay  of  the  canal.  After
which  the  commissioner  limited  himself  to  imposing  on  the  rich  "  a
patriotic  gift  "  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor.


THE  WAR— THE  INVASION  BEATEN  BACK 465

Valenciennes  and  Conde  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  this  army
had  left  open  the  road  to  Paris.

The  two  armies  which  defended  the  Moselle  and  the  Rhine
barely  numbered  60,000  fighting  men,  and  they  had  against
them  83,000  Prussians  and  Austrians,  together  with  a  cavalry
corps  of  about  6000  emigres.  Custine,  whose  devotion  to  the
Republic  was  very  doubtful,  abandoned  the  positions  taken
in  1792,  and  allowed  the  Germans  to  occupy  the  fortress  of
Mayence,  on  the  Rhine.

In  Savoy  and  near  Nice,  where  40,000  Piedmontese,  supported
by  8000  Austrians,  had  to  be  headed  off,  there  was  only  the
Alpine  Army  and  the  Army  of  the  Maritime  Alps,  both  com-
pletely deprived  of  all  means  of  transport,  in  consequence  of
the  royalist  risings  in  the  Forez,  at  Lyons,  and  in  Provence.

In  the  Pyrenees,  23,000  Spaniards  entered  France,  and  were
opposed  by  only  10,000  men,  who  had  no  cannon  and  no
provisions.  With  the  help  of  the  emigres,  this  Spanish  army
took  several  forts,  and  threatened  the  whole  of  the  Roussillon
region.

As  to  England,  she  inaugurated  in  1793  the  policy  which
was  followed  later  on  during  the  Napoleonic  wars.  Without
coming  forward  too  much  herself,  she  preferred  to  subsidise
the  allied  Powers  and  to  profit  by  the  weakness  of  France
in  taking  her  colonies  and  ruining  her  maritime  commerce.
In  June  1793,  the  English  Government  declared  the  blockade
of  all  the  French  ports,  and  English  vessels,  contrary  to  the
custom  of  international  law  of  those  days,  began  to  seize  all
neutral  vessels  bringing  provisions  to  France.  At  the  same
time  England  helped  the  emigres,  smuggled  in  arms  and  bundles
of  proclamations  to  stir  up  Brittany  and  La  Vendee,  and  pre-
pared to  seize  the  ports  of  Saint-Malo,  Brest,  Nantes,  Bordeaux
and  Toulon.

The  interior  affairs  of  France  were  no  better.  Brittany
was  in  a  ferment  through  the  intrigues  of  the  emigres  and  the
agents  of  England.  In  La  Vendee,  a  hundred  thousand
peasants,  influenced  to  fanaticism,  were  in  open  revolt.  In
the  great  commercial  cities,  such  as  Nantes,  Bordeaux  and
Marseilles,  the  middle  classes  were  infuriated  because  their

2  G


466 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

business  affairs  had  been  brought  to  a  standstill.  Lyons  and
Provence  were  in  the  full  swing  of  an  insurrection.  In  the
Fore*z  the  clergy  and  the  emigres  were  busy  sowing  discord  ;
and  in  Paris  itself  all  who  had  grown  rich  since  1789,  impatient
to  see  the  end  of  the  Revolution,  were  preparing  a  fierce  attack
upon  it.

Under  these  conditions,  the  allies  felt  so  certain  of  being
able  soon  to  re-establish  royalty,  and  of  placing  Louis  XVII.
on  the  throne,  that  they  considered  it  a  question  of  but  a  few
weeks.  Fersen,  the  confidant  of  Marie- Antoinette,  was  already
discussing  with  his  friends  of  whom  should  the  Council  of
Regency  be  composed,  whilst  the  scheme  for  placing  the  Count
d'Artois  at  the  head  of  the  malcontents  in  Brittany  was  agreed
upon  between  England,  Spain  and  Russia.*

If  the  allies  had  only  marched  straight  against  Paris,  they
would  certainly  have  reduced  the  Revolution  to  serious  straits.
But  either  from  the  fear  of  a  new  September  2,  or  because
they  preferred  the  possession  of  the  fortresses  won  from  France
to  a  siege  of  Paris,  they  chose  to  stop  in  their  advance  to  take
Valenciennes  and  Mayence.

However,  Mayence  fought,  and  surrendered  only  on  July  22.
The  fortress  of  Conde  had  surrendered  a  few  days  earlier,  after
holding  out  for  four  months ;  and  on  July  26  Valenciennes,
after  an  assault  of  the  allies,  capitulated  in  its  turn  amidst  the
applause  of  the  bourgeoisie  who,  during  the  siege,  had  been  in
close  communication  with  the  Duke  of  York.  Austria  took
possession  of  these  two  fortified  towns.

In  the  North,  the  road  to  Paris  was  open  since  August  10,
1793,  and  the  allies  had  more  than  300,000  men  in  all  between
Ostend  and  Bale.  What  was  it  then  that  once  again  held
back  the  allies  and  prevented  them  from  marching  against
Paris,  to  deliver  Marie- Antoinette  and  the  Dauphin  ?  Was
it  really  the  desire  only  to  take  first  those  fortresses  which
would  remain  theirs,  whatever  might  happen  in  France  ?
Was  it  the  fear  of  the  fierce  resistance  which  Republican  France
might  offer  ?  Or  was  it — and  this  seems  to  us  the  most

*  Letter  to  Baron  de  Stedinck,  written  on  April  26,  from  St.  Peters-
burg.


THE  WAR-THE  INVASION  BEATEN  BACK 467

probable — considerations  of  a  diplomatic  nature  ?  As  the
documents  which  might  throw  light  on  the  French  diplomacy
of  this  period  are  not  yet  published,  we  are  reduced  to  con-
jectures. We  know,  however,  that  during  the  summer  and
autumn  of  1793,  the  Committee  for  Public  Welfare  was  treat-
ing with  Austria  about  the  liberation  of  Marie-Antoinette,
the  Dauphin  and  his  sister,  and  their  aunt,  Madame  Elisabeth.
And  we  know  also  that  Danton  carried  on  secret  negotiations
with  the  English  Whigs  till  1794, to  st°P  t^ie  war  w*tn  England.
From  day  to  day  people  were  expecting  in  England  to  see
Fox,  the  leader  of  the  Whigs,  overthrow  Pitt,  the  Tory  leader,
and  step  into  power ;  and  twice — at  the  end  of  January  1794,
during  the  discussion  of  the  answer  to  the  speech  from  the
throne,  and  on  March  16,  1794 — **  was  hoped  that  the  English
Parliament  would  declare  itself  against  a  war  with  France.*

At  any  rate,  the  fact  remains,  that  after  their  first  successes,
the  allies  did  not  march  against  Paris,  but  began  to  besiege
the  fortresses.  The  Duke  of  York  began  the  siege  of  Dunkirk
and  the  Duke  of  Coburg  besieged  Le  Quesnoy.

This  gave  a  moment  of  respite  to  the  Republic,  and  allowed
Bouchotte,  the  Minister  of  War  who  had  succeeded  Pache,
time  to  reorganise  the  army  which  had  been  reinforced  by  a
levy  of  600,000  men,  and  to  find  republican  officers  for  it.
Carnot,  at  the  same  time,  in  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare,
tried  to  make  the  generals  act  together  with  more  accord,
while  the  commissioners  of  the  Convention  carried  the  flame
of  the  Revolution  to  the  armies.

Thus  passed  the  month  of  August,  during  which  the  reverses
on  the  frontier  and  in  La  Vendee  revived  the  hopes  of  the
royalists  and  filled  with  despair  a  good  many  of  the  republicans.
However,  from  the  first  days  of  September  1793,  the  armies
of  the  Republic,  spurred  by  public  opinion,  took  the  offensive
in  the  North,  on  the  Rhine,  and  in  the  Pyrenees.  This  new
move  was  crowned  with  success  in  the  North,  where  the  Duke
of  York,  furiously  attacked  by  the  French  at  Hondschoote,

*  G.  Avenel,  Lundis  rivolutionnaires,  p.  245.  Avenel  even  attri-
butes the  fall  of  Danton  to  the  failure  of  this  diplomacy,  which  had
always  been  opposed  by  Robespierre  and  Bardre.


468 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

was  forced  to  abandon  the  siege  of  Dunkirk; but  elsewhere
the  results  were  for  the  time  indecisive.

The  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  at  once  took  advantage
of  the  first  military  successes  to  demand  and  obtain  from  the
Convention  almost  dictatorial  powers — to  be  retained  "  as
long  as  peace  is  not  concluded."  But  what  helped  most  in
arresting  the  advance  of  the  invasion  was  that,  seeing  every-
where new  leaders,  openly  republican,  rise  from  the  ranks
and  reach  the  highest  positions  in  a  few  days,  and  seeing  also
the  commissioners  of  the  Convention  marching  themselves
sword  in  hand  at  the  heads  of  attacking  columns,  the  soldiers
were  inspired  with  fresh  courage  and  achieved  wonders  of
valour.

On  October  15  and  16,  in  spite  of  very  heavy  losses,  they
gained  at  Wattignies  the  first  great  victory  over  the  Austrians.
This  victory  was  won,  we  may  say  literally,  by  the  bayonet,
for  the  village  of  Wattignies  changed  hands  as  often  as  eight
times  during  the  battle.  As  a  result  of  this  defeat,  the  Austrians
raised  the  siege  of  Maubeuge,  and  the  victory  won  at  Watti-
gnies had  the  same  influence  on  the  course  of  events  as  the
victory  of  Valmy  had  had  in  1792.

Lyons,  as  we  saw,  was  forced  to  surrender  in  October,  and
in  December  Toulon  was  retaken  from  the  English,  after  an
assault  which  was  begun  on  the  8th  Frimaire  of  the  Year  II.
(November  28,  1793),  and  lasted  till  the  26th  Frimaire
(December  16),  when  the  "  English  redoubt  "  and  the  forts
of  Eguillette  and  of  Balagnier  were  taken  by  assault.  The
English  squadron  set  fire  to  the  French  vessels  harboured  in
the  port,  as  well  as  to  the  arsenals,  the  docks  and  the  powder
magazines  and,  leaving  the  roadstead,  abandoned  the  royalists,
who  had  delivered  Toulon  to  them,  to  the  vengeance  of  the
republicans.

Unhappily  this  vengeance  was  terrible,  and  left  deep  traces
of  hatred  in  many  hearts.  One  hundred  and  fifty  persons,
mostly  naval  officers,  were  shot  in  batches,  after  which  came
the  detailed  vengeance  of  the  revolutionary  courts.

In  Alsace  and  on  the  Rhine,  where  the  armies  of  the  Republic
.  had  to  fight  the  Prussians  and  the  Austrians,  they  were  forced


THE  WAR— THE  INVASION  BEATEN  BACK  469

from  the  beginning  of  the  year's  campaign  to  abandon  their
line  of  defence  round  Wissemburg.  This  opened  the  road  to
Strasbourg,  where  the  bourgeoisie  was  calling  on  the  Austrians
and  pressing  them  to  come  and  take  possession  of  the  town
in  the  name  of  Louis  XVII.  But  the  Austrians  had  no  desire
to  strengthen  royalty  in  France,  and  this  gave  time  to  Hoche
and  Pichegrue,  aided  by  Saint- Just  and  Le  Bas,  who  represented
the  Convention,  to  reorganise  the  army  and  take  the  offensive
themselves.

However,  winter  was  already  approaching,  and  the  campaign
of  1793  ended,  without  there  being  any  new  successes  to
record  on  either  side.  The  Austrian,  Prussian,  Hessian,
Dutch,  Piedmontese  and  Spanish  armies  remained  on  the
French  frontiers,  but  the  energy  of  the  allies  was  spent.  Prussia
even  wished  to  retire  from  the  alliance ;  and  England  had  to
bind  herself  at  The  Hague  (April  28,  1/94)  to  pay  the  Prussian
King  a  sum  of  7,500,000  francs,  and  to  send  in  a  yearly
contribution  of  1,250,000  francs,  before  Prussia  would  agree
to  maintain  an  army  of  62,400  men  to  fight  France.

The  following  spring,  therefore,  the  war  was  to  recommence  ;
but  the  Republic  could  now  struggle  under  far  more  favourable
conditions  than  in  1792  and  1793.  Thanks  to  the  enthusiasm
with  which  it  had  inspired  the  poorest  classes,  the  Revolution
was  freeing  itself  little  by  little  from  those  external  enemies
who  had  sought  to  crush  it.  But  at  what  a  price  when  we
consider  the  sacrifices  this  entailed — the  internal  convulsions,
the  alienation  of  liberty,  which  in  the  end  killed  this  very
same  Revolution  and  delivered  France  up  to  the  despotism
of  a  military  "  saviour."


CHAPTER  LVI

THE  CONSTITUTION— THE  REVOLUTIONARY
MOVEMENT

Committee  formed  to  frame  new  Constitution — Plans  of
Girondins — Struggle  between  Girondins  and  Montagnards —
Girondins  try  to  strengthen  power  of  Directoires — Girondist
scheme  rejected — Constitution  of  Montagnards — It  is  accepted
by  Convention — Dictatorship  of  Committees  of  Public  Welfare
and  Public  Safety

IT  has  been  necessary  to  narrate  at  some  length  the  counter-
revolutionary risings  in  France  and  the  varied  events  of  the
frontier  wars  before  returning  to  the  legislative  activity  of  the
Convention  and  the  events  which  subsequently  unfolded  them-
selves in  Paris.  Without  some  knowledge  of  the  former,  the
latter  would  be  incomprehensible.  The  truth  is,  the  war
dominated  everything  ;  it  was  absorbing  the  best  forces  of  the
nation,  and  was  paralysing  every  effort  to  render  the  Revolution
more  advantageous  to  the  masses  of  the  people.

The  chief  aim  with  which  the  Convention  had  been  convoked
was  the  elaboration  of  a  new  republican  Constitution.  The
monarchist  Constitution  of  1791,  that  had  divided  the  country
into  two  classes,  one  of  which  was  deprived  of  all  political
rights,  could  not  be  maintained  any  longer  :  in  fact,  it  had
ceased  to  exist.  Consequently,  as  soon  as  the  Convention
assembled  (September  21,  1792),  it  set  to  work  on  a  new
Constitution,  and  on  October  n  a  special  committee  was
elected  for  this  purpose.  It  was  composed,  as  might  have  been
expected,  chiefly  of  Girondins  (Sieyes,  the  Englishman,  Thomas
Paine,  Brissot,  Petion,  Vergniaud,  Gensonne,  Condorcet,
Barere,  and  Danton).  The  Girondin  Condorect,  a  celebrated
mathematician  and  philosopher,  who  as  far  back  as  1774  had

470


THE  CONSTITUTION  471

been  working  with  Turgot  at  political  and  social  reforms,  and
who  was  one  of  the  first,  after  the  flight  of  Varennes,  to  declare
himself  a  republican,  was  the  chief  author  of  the  constitutional
scheme  placed  by  the  committee  before  the  Convention,  and  of
a  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man  and  Citizen  which  accom-
panied this  scheme.

It  is  obvious  that  in  a  legislative  body  of  deputies,  the  first
question  to  arise,  as  soon  as  there  was  any  mention  of  a  new
Constitution,  was  the  question  as  to  which  of  the  two  parties
struggling  for  power  would  profit  by  this  new  law.  The
Girondins  wished  to  turn  it  into  a  tool  which  would  enable
them  to  put  a  brake  on  the  Revolution,  so  that  it  should  not  go
further  than  it  went  on  August  10  ;  to  shatter  the  power  of  the
revolutionary  Commune  of  Paris,  and  of  the  revolutionary
communes  in  the  country,  and  to  crush  the  Montagnards.
And  the  Montagnards,  who  did  not  consider  the  work  of  the
Revolution  accomplished,  naturally  had  to  prevent  the  Girondins
from  turning  the  Constitution  into  an  instrument  for  opposing
the  further  development  of  the  Revolution.

Even  before  the  condemnation  of  Louis  XVI.  the  Girondins
had  pressed  the  Convention  to  accept  their  Constitution,  in  the
hope  of  saving  the  King.  And  later  on,  in  March  and  in  April
1793,  when  they  saw  communistic  efforts  budding  amongst  the
people  and  directed  against  the  rich,  they  pressed  the  Conven-
tion all  the  more  to  accept  Condorcet's  scheme  ;  whilst  the
Montagnards  did  all  they  could  to  postpone  the  final  discussion,
until  they  had  succeeded  in  paralysing  the  Girondins  and  the
royalists.  It  must  also  be  said  that  the  Constitution,  which
had  roused  so  much  enthusiasm  in  1789,  had  already  lost  much
of  its  interest  for  the  revolutionists,  especially  since  the  decrees
of  August  10  and  n  had  abolished  the  distinction  between
passive  and  active  citizens.  If  the  Girondins  did  attach  any
importance  to  it,  it  was  "  to  restore  order,"  to  diminish  the
influence  that  the  revolutionists  exercised  in  the  provinces
through  the  medium  of  the  municipal  councils,  and,  in  Paris,
through  the  Commune.

The  municipal  law  of  December  1789  had  given  the  munici-
palities considerable  power — the  greater  because  the  provincial


472 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

representatives  of  the  central  power  had  been  abolished.  And
we  have  seen  how  the  sections  of  Paris,  which  acted  as  inde-
pendent municipalities,  succeeded  in  conquering  extensive
administrative  rights,  when  it  became  necessary  to  repel  invasion,
to  enlist  volunteers,  to  provision  the  armies,  and  to  keep  a  watch
on  the  royalist  plots.

In  the  municipalities  and  the  sections,  the  Revolution  of
1793  had  found  its  best  support,  and  it  is  easy  to  understand
that  the  Montagnards  did  their  utmost  to  retain  this  powerful
instrument  of  their  influence.*

But  this  is  also  why  the  Girondins,  in  their  scheme  for  a
Constitution,  which  the  rising  of  May  31  alone  prevented
them  from  imposing  on  France,  had  taken  care  to  destroy  the
communes,  to  abolish  their  independence,  and  to  strengthen
the  power  of  the  Directoires  of  the  departments  and  the
districts,  which  were  the  organs  of  the  landlord  and  the  middle
classes.  To  achieve  this,  the  Girondins  demanded  the  abolition
of  the  large  communes  and  the  communal  municipalities,  and
the  creation  of  a  third  and  new  series  of  bureaucratic  bodies —
the  directoires  du  canton,  which  they  described  as  "  cantonal
municipalities."

If  this  scheme  had  been  adopted,  the  communes,  which
represented  not  mere  wheels  of  the  administration,  but  bodies
possessing  lands,  buildings,  schools,  &c.,  in  common,  would  have
disappeared.  Their  place  would  have  been  taken  by  purely
administrative  bodies.  As  the  village  municipalities  very  often
took  the  side  of  the  peasants,  and  the  municipalities  of  the  large
towns,  as  also  their  sections,  often  stood  for  the  interests  of  the
poor  citizen,  the  Girondins  intended  to  hand  over  the  local
government  to  the  middle  classes,  and  they  hoped  to  achieve
their  end  by  creating  the  cantonal  municipalities,  which  would
depend  much  more  upon  the  eminently  bureaucratic  and

*  When,  on  March  7,  1793,  the  Defence  Committee,  alarmed  at  the
desperate  situation  of  France  in  face  of  the  invasion,  called  the  ministers
and  the  Commune  of  Paris  to  consult  together,  Marat,  in  summing  up
what  was  already  being  done,  told  them  "  that  in  such  a  crisis,  the
sovereignty  of  the  people  was  not  indivisible  :  that  each  commune  was
sovereign  in  its  own  territory,  and  that  the  people  had  the  right  to  take
such  steps  as  were  necessary  for  their  welfare"  (Memoir es  de  Thi-
baudeau;  Michelet,  Book  X.  ch.  i.).


THE  CONSTITUTION  473

reactionary  Directories  of  the  departments  than  upon  the
poorer  classes  of  the  people.

On  this  extremely  important  point  the  Girondist  and  the
Montagnard  schemes  of  Constitution  were  thus  entirely  opposed
to  each  other.

Another  alteration,  and  a  very  important  one,  which  the
Girondins  endeavoured  to  introduce  and  the  Constitutional
Committee  rejected,  was  the  introduction  of  two  houses  of
parliament,  or,  in  default  of  this,  the  division  of  the  legislative
body  into  two  sections,  as  was  done  later  in  the  Constitution  of
the  Year  III.  (1795),  after  the  reaction  of  Thermidor  had  set
in  and  the  Girondins  had  returned  to  power.

It  is  true  that  the  Girondist  scheme  for  a  Constitution  seemed
in  some  ways  very  democratic,  in  the  sense  that  it  left  to  the
primary  assemblies  of  electors,  not  only  the  choice  of  their
representatives,  but  also  the  choice  of  functionaries  of  the
Treasury,  of  the  Courts  of  Justice,  including  the  High  Court,
and  also  the  ministers,*  and  that  it  introduced  the  referendum,
or  direct  legislation.  But  the  nomination  of  ministers  by  the
electoral  bodies  (admitting  that  it  would  be  possible  in  practice)
would  only  have  succeeded  in  creating  two  rival  authorities,
the  Chamber  and  the  Ministry,  both  nominees  of  the  universal
suffrage,  whilst  the  referendum  was  hemmed  in  by  most  com-
plicated rules  that  made  it  illusory.f

And  finally  this  scheme  of  a  constitution,  and  the  Declaration
of  Rights  which  had  to  precede  it,  established,  in  a  more  concrete
way  than  the  Constitution  of  1791,  the  rights  of  the  citizens —
i.e.,  his  liberty  of  religious  belief  and  worship,  freedom  of  the

*  Each  Primary  Assembly  had  to  nominate  seven  ministers,  and  the
administration  of  the  department  would  form  with  these  names  a  list
of  thirteen  candidates  for  each  Ministry*  Then,  the  Primary  Assemblies,
convoked  for  a  second  time,  would  elect  the  ministers  from  these  lists.

|  An  excellent  summary  of  the  two  Constitutions,  the  Girondin
and  the  Montagnard,  and  of  all  concerning  them,  will  be  found  in
Aulard's  Histoire  Politique,  2nd  part,  ch.  iv.  I  follow  this  summary
for  the  facts,  but  the  responsibility  for  the  appreciation  is  mine.  Thus
I  disagree,  as  may  be  seen,  with  M.  Aulard  in  his  appreciation  of  the
Girondin  project  regarding  the  "cantonal  municipalities."  Far  from
tending  to  "  seriously  organise  the  commune,"  this  project  tended,  in
my  opinion,  to  destroy  it,  so  as  to  replace  it  by  a  body  bureaucratic
rather  than  popular.


474 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

press,  and  all  other  ways  of  spreading  his  thoughts.  As  to  the
communist  tendencies  which  were  coming  to  the  front  among
the  masses,  the  Declaration  of  Rights  limited  itself  to  acknow-
ledging that  "  aid  to  the  poor  is  a  sacred  debt  owed  to  them  by
society,  and  that  society  owes  education  to  all  its  members
equally."

One  can  well  understand  the  apprehension  that  this  project
raised  when  it  was  laid  before  the  Convention  on  February  15,
1793.  The  Convention,  influenced  by  the  Montagnards,
sought  to  withhold  its  decision  as  long  as  possible,  and  asked
that  other  projects  should  be  sent  in.  It  also  nominated  a  new
commission — the  Commission  of  the  Six — to  analyse  the  various
projects  which  might  be  submitted,  and  on  April  17,  the
report  having  been  made  by  the  new  commission,  the  discussion
began  in  the  Convention.  Robespierre  pronounced  a  long
discourse  which  was,  as  has  been  remarked  by  M.  Aulard,*
certainly  slightly  tinged  with  what  we  call  "  socialism."  "  We
should,"  said  Robespierre,  "  declare  that  the  right  of  property
is  limited,  as  all  others,  by  the  obligation  of  respecting  the  rights
of  the  others ;  that  the  right  of  property  must  not  be  injurious
either  to  the  security  or  to  the  liberty,  or  to  the  existence,  or
to  the  property  of  other  men  ;  and  that  every  trade  which
violates  this  principle  is  essentially  illicit  and  immoral."  He
demanded  also  that  the  right  to  work  be  proclaimed,  though
in  a  very  modest  form.  "Society,"  he  said,  "is  bound  to
provide  for  the  subsistence  of  all  its  members,  either  in  procuring
work  for  them,  or  in  guaranteeing  the  means  of  existence  to
those  who  are  unable  to  work."

But  where  the  ideas  of  the  Montagnards  differed  entirely
from  those  of  the  Girondins  was  when  it  came  to  discussing,  on
May  22,  the  abolition  of  communal  municipalities,  and  the
creation  of  cantonal  councils  of  administration.  The  Monta-
gnards were  decidedly  against  this  abolition,  the  more  so  as  the
Girondins  wished  to  destroy  also  the  unity  of  Paris  and  of  its
Commune,  and  demanded  that  each  town  of  more  than  50,000
inhabitants  should  be  divided  into  several  municipalities.  On
this  point  the  Convention  took  up  the  opinions  of  the  Monta-
*  Histoire  Politique,  p.  291.


THE  CONSTITUTION  475

gnards  and  rejected  the  Girondist  project  of  cantonal  munici-
palities.

The  Constitution  of  the  Montagnards — and  herein  lies  its
distinctive  feature — maintained  the  municipalities  intact.
"  Could  we,"  said  Herault  de  Sechelles,  "  give  up  the  munici-
palities, however  great  their  number  ?  To  abolish  them  would
have  been  an  ingratitude  towards  the  Revolution  and  a  crime
against  liberty.  Nay,  it  would  be  to  annihilate  completely
popular  government"  "  No,"  he  added,  after  having  uttered
some  sentimental  phrases,  "  no,  the  idea  of  suppressing
municipalities  can  only  have  been  born  in  the  heads  of  the
aristocrats,  whence  it  transferred  itself  into  those  of  the
Moderates."  *

For  the  nomination  of  representatives  the  Montagnard  Con-
stitution introduced  direct  manhood  suffrage  by  ballot  in
each  district  (50,000  inhabitants).  For  the  nomination  of  the
administrators  of  the  departments  and  those  of  the  districts,
the  suffrage  was  to  be  in  two  degrees,  and  in  three  degrees  for  the
nomination  of  the  twenty-four  members  of  the  Executive
Council  (the  Ministry)  which  was  to  be  renewed  each  year.
The  Legislative  Assembly  was  to  be  elected  for  one  year  only,
and  its  acts  were  to  be  divided  into  two  categories  :  the  de-
crees, to  be  carried  into  effect  at  once  ;  and  the  laws,  for  which
the  people  could  demand  the  referendum.

However,  in  the  Montagnard  Constitution,  as  well  as  in  the
Girondin  scheme,  the  right  of  referendum  was  illusory.  To
begin  with,  nearly  everything  could  be  done  by  decrees,  and
this  excluded  the  referendum.  Then,  to  obtain  the  referendum
it  was  necessary  that  "  in  half  of  the  departments,  plus  one-
tenth  of  the  Primary  Assemblies  of  each  department,  regularly
constituted,"  an  objection  should  be  formulated  against  a  new
law,  during  the  forty  days  after  the  promulgation  of  the  pro-
posed law.

Finally,  the  Constitution  guaranteed  to  all  Frenchmen
"  equality,  liberty,  safety,  inviolability  of  property,  the  security

*  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  in  Russia  also,  the  enemies  of  the
commune  are  at  the  present  day  partisans  of  the  canton  ( Vsessoslov-
naya  volost),  and  that  they  oppose  it  to  the  village  communes,  whose
lands  they  covet.


476 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

of  the  national  debt,  free  worship,  common  education,  public
relief,  unrestricted  liberty  of  the  press,  the  right  of  petitioning,
the  right  of  forming  popular  societies,  and  enjoyment  of  all  the
rights  of  man."

As  to  the  social  laws  which  the  people  awaited  from  the
Constitution,  H6rault  de  Se"chelles  promised  these  later.  Order
first :  they  would  see  later  on  what  they  could  do  for  the  people ;
upon  this  the  majority  of  the  Girondins  and  Montagnards
were  in  perfect  agreement.

On  June  24,  1793,  this  Constitution  was  accepted  by  the
Convention,  and  was  immediately  submitted  to  the  Primary
Assemblies,  which  pronounced  themselves  with  great  unanimity
and  even  enthusiasm  in  favour  of  it.  The  Republic  was  then
composed  of  4944  cantons,  and  when  the  votes  of  4420  cantons
were  known,  it  appeared  that  the  Constitution  had  been  accepted
by  1,801,918  voices  against  11,610.

On  August  10,  the  Constitution  was  proclaimed  in  Paris  with
much  pomp,  and  in  the  departments  it  became  an  effective
means  of  paralysing  Girondist  risings.  These  no  longer  had  a
pretext,  since  the  calumnies  which  the  Girondins  spread  every-
where about  the  Montagnards  wishing  to  re-establish  royalty,
with  a  Duke  of  Orleans  on  the  throne,  had  fallen  through.  On
the  other  hand,  the  Constitution  of  June  24,  1793,  was  so  well
received  by  the  majority  of  the  democrats  that  it  subsequently
became  the  creed  of  democracy  for  nearly  a  century.

The  Convention  which  had  been  convoked  for  the  special
purpose  of  giving  a  republican  Constitution  to  France  had  now
only  to  lay  down  its  powers.  But  it  was  obvious  that  under  the
circumstances,  invaders  holding  part  of  the  country,  and  the
war  having  to  be  carried  on  with  an  energy  far  surpassing  the
means  at  the  disposal  of  the  Republic,  and  in  the  face  of  risings
in  La  Vended,  at  Lyons,  in  Provence,  and  elsewhere,  the
Constitution  could  not  be  applied.  It  was  impossible  for  the
Convention  to  disperse,  and  to  leave  the  Republic  to  run  the
risks  of  new  elections.

Robespierre  developed  this  idea  before  the  Jacobin  Club  on
the  very  morrow  of  the  promulgation  of  the  Constitution,  and
.the  numerous  delegates  who  had  come  to  Paris  to  assist  at  this


THE  REVOLUTIONARY  MOVEMENT 477

promulgation  held  the  same  opinion.  On  August  28,  the  Com-
mittee of  Public  Welfare  expressed  the  same  opinion  before  the
Convention,  which,  after  hesitating  for  six  weeks,  finally  decreed,
when  the  Republican  Government  had  obtained  its  first  suc-
cesses at  Lyons — that  is  to  say,  on  October  10,  1793 — that
the  government  of  France  should  remain  "  revolutionary  "  till  the
conclusion  of  peace.

This  meant  to  maintain,  in  fact,  if  not  by  right,  the  dictator-
ship of  the  Committees  of  Public  Welfare  and  General  Safety,
which  had  just  been  strengthened  in  September  by  the  law  of
suspects  and  the  law  dealing  with  revolutionary  committees.


CHAPTER  LVII

THE  EXHAUSTION  OF  THE  REVOLUTIONARY
SPIRIT

Revolutionary  leaders  afraid  to  move — Commune  of  Paris —
Montagnards — Inactivity  of  Convention — Commissioners  of
Convention  work  only  to  strengthen  Montagnard  regime

THE  movement  of  May  31,  1793,  had  made  it  possible  for  the
Revolution  to  complete  the  work  which  proved  to  be  its
principal  achievement  :  the  final  abolition,  without  redemp-
tion, of  feudal  rights,  and  the  abolition  of  royal  despotism.
But,  this  done,  the  Revolution  was  coming  to  a  standstill.
The  mass  of  the  people  were  willing  to  go  further  ;  but  those
whom  the  tide  of  Revolution  had  carried  to  the  head  of  the
movement  dared  not  advance.  They  did  not  wish  the  Revolu-
tion to  lay  hands  on  the  wealth  of  the  middle  classes,  as  it  had  on
that  of  the  nobility  and  clergy,  and  they  strained  all  their  power
to  moderate,  to  arrest,  and  eventually  to  crush  the  movement
that  was  beginning  in  this  direction.  Even  the  more  advanced
and  the  more  sincere  among  them,  as  they  gradually  neared
power,  developed  the  greatest  consideration  for  the  middle
classes,  although  they  hated  them.  They  stifled  their  own
aspirations  towards  equality,  they  even  considered  what  the
English  middle  classes  might  say  of  them.  In  their  turn  they
became  "  statesmen,"  and  laboured  to  build  up  a  strong
centralised  government,  whose  component  parts  should  obey
them  blindly.  They  succeeded  in  erecting  this  power  over  the
corpses  of  those  whom  they  had  found  too  advanced,  but  they
realised,  when  they  themselves  mounted  the  scaffold,  that  in
destroying  the  advanced  party,  they  had  killed  the  Revolution.
After  having  sanctioned  by  law  what  the  peasants  had  de-

478


THE  EXHAUSTION  OF  THE  SPIRIT 479

manded  during  the  last  four  years,  and  had  already  achieved  here
and  there,  the  Convention  was  incapable  of  undertaking  anything
more  of  importance.  Except  in  matters  of  national  defence
and  education,  its  work  henceforth  was  sterile.  The  legislators
sanctioned,  it  is  true,  the  formation  of  revolutionary  committees
and  decided  to  pay  those  of  the  poor  sans-culottes  who  gave  their
time  to  serve  on  the  sections  and  the  committees ;  but  these
measures,  apparently  so  democratic,  were  not  measures  of
revolutionary  demolition  or  creation.  They  were  but  means  for
organising  the  power  of  the  State.

It  was  outside  the  Convention  and  the  Jacobin  Club — in  the
Commune  of  Paris,  in  certain  sections  of  the  capital  and  of  the
provinces,  and  in  the  Cordeliers'  Club,  that  a  few  men  were  to
be  found  who  understood  that  to  secure  the  victories  already
gained,  it  was  necessary  to  march  further  still,  and  they  en-
deavoured therefore  to  formulate  the  aspirations  of  a  social
character  which  were  beginning  to  appear  among  the  masses.

They  made  a  bold  attempt  at  organising  France  as  an  aggre-
gate of  forty  thousand  communes,  regularly  corresponding
amongst  themselves,  and  representing  so  many  centres  of
extreme  democracy,*  which  should  work  to  establish  the  real
equality — Vegalite  de  fait,  as  used  then  to  be  said,  the  "  equalisa-
tion of  incomes."  They  sought  to  develop  the  germs  of
municipal  communism  which  the  law  of  maximum  had  recog-
nised ;  they  advocated  the  nationalisation  of  the  trade  in  prime
commodities  as  the  best  means  for  combating  the  monopolists
and  the  speculators.  And  they  attempted,  finally,  to  prevent  the
formation  of  large  fortunes,  and  to  distribute  those  already
amassed.  But,  once  they  had  reached  power,  the  revolutionists
from  the  middle  classes  took  advantage  of  the  force  that  had

*  The  municipal  function  was  "  the  last  term  of  the  Revolution,"
as  Mignet  has  so  well  said  (Histoire  de  la  Revolution  francaise,  I9th
edition,  vol.  ii.  p.  31).  "  Opposed  in  its  aims  to  the  Committee  of
Public  Welfare,  it  desired,  in  lieu  of  the  ordinary  dictatorship,  the  most
extreme  local  democracy,  and  in  the  place  of  creeds  the  consecration
of  the  grossest  disbelief.  Anarchy  in  politics  and  atheism  in  religious
affairs,  such  were  the  distinctive  features  of  this  party  and  the  means
by  which  they  counted  on  establishing  its  power."  It  must,  however,
be  remarked  that  only  a  part  of  the  "  anarchists  "  followed  Hebert
in  his  anti-religious  campaign,  while  many  left  him  on  realising  the
force  of  religious  spirit  in  the  villages.


480 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

been  constituted  in  the  hands  of  the  two  Committees  of  Public
Welfare  and  General  Safety,  whose  authority  grew  with  the
dangers  of  the  war,  and  they  crushed  those  whom  they  named
the  Enrages— only  to  succumb  in  their  turn,  in  the  month  of
Thermidor,  to  the  attach  of  the  counter-revolutionary  middle
classes.

So  long  as  the  Montagnards  had  to  struggle  against  the
Girondins,  they  sought  the  support  of  the  popular  revolu-
tionists. In  March  and  in  April  1793,  they  appeared  ready  to
go  far  in  company  with  the  proletarians.  But  having  entered
into  power,  most  of  them  thought  only  of  establishing  a  "  mid-
way "  party,  taking  a  stand  between  the  Enrages  and  the  counter-
revolutionists,  and  they  treated  as  enemies  those  who  stood  for
the  aspirations  of  the  people  towards  equality.  They  crushed
them  by  frustrating  all  their  attempts  at  organising  themselves
in  the  sections  and  the  communes.

The  fact  is  that  the  Montagnards,  with  one  or  two  exceptions,
had  not  even  the  comprehension  of  popular  needs  indispensable
in  constituting  a  party  of  democratic  revolution.  They  did
not  understand  the  proletarian,  with  his  troubles,  his  often
starving  family,  and  his  still  vague  and  formulated  aspirations
after  equality.  It  was  rather  the  individual  in  the  abstract,
the  unity  of  a  democratic  society  that  interested  them.

With  the  exception  of  a  few  advanced  Montagnards,  when  a
commissioner  of  the  Convention  arrived  in  a  provincial  town,
the  questions  of  employment  and  prosperity  within  the  Repub-
lic and  the  equal  enjoyment  of  available  commodities  by  all
interested  him  but  little.  Having  been  sent  to  organise  resist-
ance to  the  invasion  and  to  rouse  the  patriotic  feeling,  he  acted
as  a  democratic  official  for  whom  the  people  were  but  the  tools
which  were  to  help  him  to  carry  out  the  plans  of  the  Govern-
ment.

If  he  presented  himself  at  the  local  Popular  Society,  it  was
because,  the  municipality  being  "  worm-eaten  with  aristo-
cracy," the  Popular  Society  would  help  him  to  "purify  the
municipality,'*  with  a  view  to  organising  the  national  defence
and  arresting  the  traitors

If  he  imposed  taxes  on  the  rich,  often  very  heavy  ones,  it  was


THE  EXHAUSTION  OF  THE  SPIRIT 481

because  the  rich,  "worm-eaten  with  commercialism,"  were  in
sympathy  with  the  Feuillants  or  the  Federalists  and  were  help-
ing the  enemy.  It  was  also  because  by  taxing  them,  means  were
provided  to  feed  and  clothe  the  armies.

If  he  proclaimed  equality  in  some  town,  if  he  forbade  the
baking  of  white  bread  and  recommended  the  inhabitants  to  use
black  or  bean-bread  only,  he  did  so  in  order  that  the  soldiers
might  be  fed.  And  when  some  agent  of  the  Committee  of
Public  Welfare  organised  a  popular  fete,  and  wrote  afterwards
to  Robespierre  that  he  had  united  a  certain  number  of  young
women  and  young  patriots  in  wedlock,  it  was  yet  another  stroke
of  military  patriotism.  It  is  remarkable,  therefore,  when  we
now  read  the  letters  of  the  deputy  commissioners  of  the  Con-
vention, addressed  to  the  Convention  or  the  Committee  of
Public  Welfare,  that  we  find  nothing  in  them  about  the  great
questions  which  were  then  so  interesting  to  the  peasants  and
the  working  men.*  That  military  matters  and  those  of  pro-
visioning the  armies  should  predominate  in  this  correspon-
dence is  quite  natural.  But  the  time  was  one  of  revolution,
and  the  commissioners  must  have  continually  come  across
subjects  of  vital  importance  to  the  Revolution — the  more  so  as
they  spoke  in  their  letters  of  public  feeling,  of  the  reception
given  to  the  Montagnard  Convention  and  its  Constitution,  of
the  difficulties  of  finding  provisions  for  the  armies,  and  of  the
scarcity  of  available  means  of  subsistence.  And  yet  the  great
economic  questions,  which  were  of  such  immense  importance
for  the  poor,  seem  to  have  interested  only  three  or  four  of  the
commissioners.

The  Convention  had  at  last  abolished  the  feudal  rights,  and
had  ordered  the  burning  of  the  title-deeds — an  operation  which
was  carried  out  with  much  ill-will ;  and  it  had  authorised  the
village  communities  to  recover  possession  of  those  lands  which
had  been  taken  from  them,  under  various  pretexts,  during  the
past  two  hundred  years.  It  is  evident  that  to  carry  out  these
measures,  and  to  carry  them  out  at  once,  would  have  been  the

*  These  letters  may  be  found  in  the  Recueil  des  Actes  du  Comit6  de
Salut  Public,  published  by  T.  Aulard.  Paris,  1889  and  following  years  ;
also  in  Legros,  La  Revolution  telle  qu'elle  est  :  Correspondence  du  Comite
de  Salut  Public  avec  ses  generaux,  2  vols.,  Paris,  1837.

2H


482  THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION
way  to  rouse  the  enthusiasm  of  the  masses  for  the  Revolution.
But  in  the  letters  of  the  commissioners  scarcely  anything  can
be  found  on  this  subject.*  The  younger  Jullien,  in  his  most
interesting  letters,  addressed  to  the  Committee  of  Public
Welfare  and  to  his  friend  and  patron,  Robespierre,  only  once
mentions  that  he  has  had  the  feudal  title-deeds  burnt.t  In  the
same  way  only  a  passing  mention  of  this  subject  is  made  once  by
Collot  d'Herbois.t

Even  when  the  commissioners  speak  of  the  supplies  of  food
— and  they  have  often  to  do  so — they  do  not  go  to  the  root  of
the  question.  There  is  but  one  letter  of  Jeanbon  Saint- Andre,
dated  March  26,  1793,  which  is  an  exception  ;  but  even  that
letter  is  anterior  to  the  movement  of  May  31  :  later  on,  he  too
turned  against  the  advanced  revolutionists^

Writing  from  the  Lot-et-Garonne,  one  of  the  departments
most  in  sympathy  with  the  Revolution,  Jeanbon  begged  his
colleagues  in  the  committee  not  to  blind  themselves  to  the
dangers  of  the  situation  :  "  It  is  such,"  said  he,  "  that  if  our
courage  does  not  bring  forth  one  of  those  extraordinary  events
which  rouse  public  opinion  in  France  and  give  it  new  strength,
there  is  no  more  hope.  The  disturbances  in  La  Vended  and  in
the  neighbouring  departments  are  iio  doubt  such  as  to  cause
anxiety,  but  they  are  really  dangerous  only  because  the  sacred
enthusiasm  for  liberty  is  being  stifled  in  every  heart.  Every-
where men  are  weary  of  the  Revolution.  The  rich  hate  it,  the
poor  lack  bread  .  .  ."  and  "  all  those  who  were  until  now
termed  '  moderates,'  who  made  some  sort  of  common  cause

*  The  letters  published  in  the  collection  of  Aulard,  or  in  that  of
Legros,  are  palpitating  with  interest  in  every  way  ;  but  I  have  sought
in  vain  for  traces  of  activity  of  the  commissioners  in  this  direction.
Only  Jeanbon  Saint-Andre,  Collot  d'Herbois,  Fouch6,  and  Dubois
Crance  sometimes  touch  on  the  great  questions  which  so  interested  the
peasants  and  the  proletarians  in  the  towns.  It  may  be  that  there  are
other  letters  of  commissioners  which  I  do  not  know  ;  but  what  seems
to  me  certain  is  that  the  greater  part  of  the  Commissioners  took  but
little  interest  in  these  matters.

t Une  Mission  en  Vendte.

I  Aulard,  Recueil  des  Actes  du  Comite  de  Salut  Public,  vol.  v.  p.  505.

(  This  letter  is  signed  by  the  two  commissioners,  Jeanbon  and
Lacoste,  who  had  been  sent  to  this  department ;  but  it  is  in  the  writing
of  the  former.


THE  EXHAUSTION  OF  THE  SPIRIT 483

with  the  republicans,  and  who  at  least  desired  somej  kind  of
revolution,  no  longer  wish  for  it  now.  .  .  .  Let  us  say  it
openly,  they  desire  a  counter-revolution.  Should  a  new
Convention  be  summoned,  the  French  people  would  either
refuse  to  elect  it,  or  they  would  elect  one  entirely  opposed  to
the  principles  of  liberty.  Even  the  municipal  councils  are
weak  or  corrupted."  Such,  at  least,  they  were  found  to  be  in
all  the  districts  that  these  two  representatives  had  visited.

Jeanbon  thus  demanded  broad  and  rigorous  measures.  And
at  the  end  of  his  letter  he  again  referred  to  this  subject  in  a
postscript.  "  The  poor  man,"  said  he,  "  has  no  bread.  Al-
though grain  is  not  lacking,  it  has  been  hoarded.  It  is  impera-
tive to  help  the  poor  to  live,  if  you  want  them  to  help  you  to
uphold  the  Revolution.  .  .  .  We  think  that  a  decree  ordering
a  general  levy  of  all  kinds  of  grain  would  be  very  good,  especially
if  a  clause  be  added  establishing  public  granaries,  formed  with
the  superfluous  stock  of  private  persons."  Jeanbon  Saint-
Andre"  implored  Barere  to  take  the  lead  in  these  matters.*
But  how  was  it  possible  to  arouse  interest  in  the  Convention
for  such  things  ?

The  strengthening  of  the  Montagnard  regime  was  what
most  of  all  interested  the  commissioners.  However,  like  all
statesmen  who  preceded,  like  all  who  will  succeed  them,  it  was
not  in  the  general  well-being  and  happiness  for  the  great  mass
of  the  people  that  they  sought  a  foundation.  It  was  in  the
weakening  and,  at  need,  in  the  extermination  of  the  enemies  of
this  regime.  They  soon  welcomed  the  Terror,  as  a  means  of
crushing  the  enemies  of  the  democratic  Republic  ;  but  never
do  we  see  them  welcoming  broad  measures  of  great  economic
change,  not  even  those  for  which  they  had  themselves  voted
under  the  pressure  of  circumstances.

*  Actes  du  Comitt  de  Salut  Public,  published  by  Aulard,  vol.  iii.  pp.
533-534-


CHAPTER  LVIII
THE  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT

Egalite  de  fait — Socialistic  problems — Proposition  of  Billaud-
Varenne — Communalist  movement — Means  of  subsistence  and
land  question — Leading  apostles  of  communism — Jacques
Roux — Leclerc — Varlet — Boissel — Babeuf

IN  the  cahiers  of  1789,  ideas  were  already  to  be  found  which,
as  Chassin  has  pointed  out,  would  to-day  be  classed  as  socialistic.
Rousseau,  Helvetius,  Mably,  Diderot  and  others  had  already
dealt  with  the  inequalities  of  fortunes  and  the  accumulation
of  superfluous  wealth  in  the  hands  of  the  few,  as  the  great
obstacle  to  the  establishment  of  democratic  liberty.  These
ideas  came  once  more  to  the  front  during  the  first  hours  of
the  Revolution.

Turgot,  Sieyes  and  Condorcet  asserted  that  the  equality
of  political  rights  meant  nothing  without  real  equality  in  fact
(egalite  de  fait)  !  This,  said  Condorcet,  was  the  "  final  aim
of  social  art,  since  inequality  in  riches,  inequality  of  state,
and  inequality  of  education  are  the  main  cause  of  all  evils."*
And  the  same  ideas  found  an  echo  in  several  cahiers  of  the
electors  in  1789,  who  demanded  the  right  of  all  to  the  possession
of  the  land,  or  "  the  equalisation  of  wealth."

It  may  even  be  said  that  the  Parisian  proletariat  had  already
formed  a  conception  of  its  class  interests  and  had  found  men
to  express  them  well.  The  idea  of  separate  classes,  having
opposing  interests,  is  clearly  stated  in  the  cahiers  des  $auvres
of  the  district  of  Saint-Etienne-du-Mont,  by  a  certain  Lambert,

*  Already  Cabet,  in  his  Appendix  to  Voyage  en  Icarie,  edition  of
1842,  had  pointed  out,  with  quotations  in  support,  this  characteristic
of  the  eighteenth-century  thinkers  ;  of  recent  works  see  Andre  Lichten-
berger,  Le  Socialisme  et  la  Revolution  franfaise,  Paris,  1899.

484


THE  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT  485

"  a  friend  of  those  who  have  nothing."  Productive  work,
adequate  salaries  (the  living  wage  of  the  modern  English
Socialists),  the  struggle  against  the  laisser  jaire  of  the  middle-
class  economists,  and  a  plain  distinction  traced  between  the
social  question  and  the  political  one — all  these  are  to  be  found
in  this  cahier  des  pauvres*

But  it  was  chiefly  after  the  taking  of  the  Tuileries,  and  still
more  after  the  execution  of  the  King — in  February  and  in
March  1793 — that  these  ideas  began  to  be  openly  propagated.
It  would  even  seem — so  at  least  it  is  said  by  Baudot — that  if
the  Girondins  appeared  as  such  passionate  defenders  of  property,
it  was  because  they  feared  the  influence  which  the  propaganda
of  equality  and  communism  was  acquiring  in  Paris.t

A  few  Girondins,  especially  Rabaut  de  Saint-Etienne  and
Condorcet,  fell  under  the  influence  of  this  movement.  Con-
dorcet,  on  his  death-bed,  was  working  out  the  scheme  of  a
"  mutuality  "  (mutualite),  i.e.,  of  a  mutual  insurance  league
amongst  all  citizens,  against  eventualities  which  might  throw
the  relatively  well-off  worker  into  conditions  under  which  he
would  be  forced  to  sell  his  work  at  no  matter  what  price.
As  to  Rabaut,  he  demanded  that  the  great  fortunes  be  taken
from  the  rich,  either  by  means  of  a  progressive  tax  or  by  a
law  which  would  cause  the  natural  flow  of  the  rich  man's
superfluous  wealth  "into  establishments  of  public  utility."

*  "  There  has  never  been  and  there  will  never  be  any  but  two  really
distinct  classes  of  citizens,  the  property-owners  and  those  who  have
no  property — of  whom  the  former  have  everything  and  the  latter
nothing,"  so  it  was  said  in  the  cahier  des  pauvres.  "  Of  what  use  will
a  wise  constitution  be  to  a  nation  reduced  by  hunger  to  the  state  of
skeletons  ?  "  queried  the  author  of  the  Quatre  cris  d'un  patriote.  (Chassin,
Le  Genie  de  la  Revolution,  Paris,  1863,  vol.  i.  pp.  287,  289.)

f  We  find  in  the  Notes  historiques  sur  la  Convention  nationale,  le
Directoire,  I'Empire  et  I'exil  des  votants,  by  M.  A.  Baudot,  edited  by
Mme.  Edgar  Quinet  (Paris,  1893),  a  very  interesting  note  where  it  is
said  that  Ingrand's  opinion  that  the  system  "  of  common  property  "
(communism),  developed  by  Buonarroti,  "  was  brought  forward  some
time  before  the  events  of  June  20  ;  and  that  these  events  owed  their
origin  to  this  spirit  of  association"  (pp.  10-11).  Petion  is  said  to  have
warned  a  great  number  of  deputies  about  it.  "It  seems,"  continues
Baudot,  "  that  the  Girondins  put  so  much  acrimony  and  bitterness
into  their  policy  from  fear  of  seeing  the  doctrine  of  the  communists
predominate."  Later  on  certain  members  of  the  Convention  took
up  these  ideas,  as  is  known,  and  joined  the  conspiracy  of  Babeuf.


486 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

"  Great  riches  are  a  drawback  to  liberty,"  he  wrote,  repeating
a  saying  very  much  in  vogue  at  that  time.  Even  Brissot  at
one  time  tried  to  come  to  some  sort  of  agreement  with  this
popular  theory— which  soon  after  he  attacked  with  ferocity.*

A  few  Montagnards  went  further.  Thus  Billaud-Varenne,
in  a  tract  published  in  1793,  spoke  openly  against  great  wealth.
He  protested  against  Voltaire's  idea  that  the  worker  should  be
spurred  to  work  by  hunger,  and  he  demanded  that  it  be  declared
that  no  citizen  should  henceforth  be  permitted  to  possess
more  than  a  fixed  amount  of  land,  and  that  no  one  be  allowed
to  inherit  more  than  from  20,000  to  25,000  livres.t  He  under-
stood that  the  primal  cause  of  social  ills  lay  in  the  fact  that
there  were  men  who  existed  "in  a  direct  but  not  mutual
dependency  upon  some  other  human  being.  For  this  is  the
first  link  in  the  chain  of  slavery."  He  derided  small  peasant
proprietorship  which  some  wished  to  introduce  for  the  poor,
"  whose  existence  in  such  conditions  would  never  be  anything
but  precarious  and  miserable."  A  cry  was  making  itself  heard,
he  said  later  on  (p.  129)  :  "  War  to  the  chateaux,  'peace  to  the
huts  !  Let  us  add  to  this  the  consecration  of  this  fundamental
rule  :  Let  there  be  no  citizen  who  can  dispense  with  employ-
ment, and  let  there  be  no  citizen  unable  to  learn  a  trade  and
practise  it."

Billaud-Varenne's  proposition  concerning  inheritances  was
taken  up,  as  is  known,  by  the  International  Working  Men's

*  The  better  to  fight  "  the  division  of  lands  proposed  by  anarchists
or  the  Coblentzians  "  (Robespierre  afterwards  took  up  this  insinuation
of  Brissot's  against  the  communists  and  made  it  his  own),  Brissot
declared,  in  December  1792,  that  the  equality  of  the  rights  of  citizens
would  be  a  fiction  if  the  laws  did  not  abolish  and  prevent  the  too  great
real  inequalities  among  the  citizens.  But  such  institutions,  favourable
to  "  equality,"  added  Brissot,  "  must  be  introduced  without  commo-
tion, without  violence,  without  showing  disrespect  to  the  first  of  all
social  rights,  the  right  of  property."

t  Speaking  of  property,  he  represented  it  in  this  interesting  guise.
"  Property,"  said  he,  "  is  the  pivot  of  civil  associations.  It  is  well
known  that,  especially  in  a  great  empire,  the  balance  of  fortunes  cannot
be  quite  exact  and  immovable,  and  that  the  impulse  of  an  immense
commerce,  aided  by  a  vast  industry  and  by  riches  produced  by  agri-
culture necessarily  keep  it  continually  oscillating  ;  but  the  balance
should  never  fall  on  either  side  too  decidedly."  (Les  elements  de  republi-
canism, Paris,  1793,  p.  57.  Pamphlets  of  the  British  Museum,  vol.
F.  1097.)


THE  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT  487

Association  at  its  Congress  at  Bale  in  1869.  But  it  must  be
said  that  Billaud-Varenne  was  one  of  the  most  advanced  among
the  Montagnards.  Some,  as  for  instance,  Lepelletier,  limited
themselves  to  asking  what  the  International  asked  under  the
name  of  "  integral  education  " — that  is  to  say,  the  teaching
of  a  handicraft  to  each  young  man  ;  whilst  others  limited
themselves  to  asking  for  "  the  revolutionary  restitution  of  pro-
perties," or  the  limitation  of  the  right  of  property.

It  is,  however,  chiefly  outside  the  Convention — amongst
the  people,  in  some  sections,  such  as  that  of  Gravilliers,  and
in  the  Cordeliers'  Club — certainly  not  among  the  Jacobins —
that  one  must  look  for  the  champions  of  the  communalist  and
communist  movements  of  1793  and  1794.  There  was  even
an  attempt  at  free  organisation  among  those  who  were  known
at  that  time  as  the  Enrages — that  is  to  say,  the  extremists —
those  who  aimed  at  a  revolution  that  would  tend  towards
equality.  After  August  10,  1792,  there  was  founded — appa-
rently at  the  suggestion  of  the  federates  who  had  come  to
Paris — a  sort  of  league  between  the  delegates  of  the  forty-
eight  sections  of  Paris,  the  General  Council  of  the  Commune
and  the  "  United  Defenders  of  the  eighty-four  departments."
And  when  in  February  1793  the  movements  against  stock-
jobbers began,  of  which  we  have  already  spoken,*  the  delegates
of  this  league  demanded  from  the  Convention,  on  February
3,  energetic  measures  against  stock-jobbing.  In  their  address
can  already  be  seen  a  germ  of  the  idea  which  later  on  was  the
base  of  Proudhon's  Mutualism  and  his  Bank  of  the  People  :
the  idea  that  all  profit  resulting  from  exchange  in  the  banks,
if  there  be  any  profit,  should  return  to  the  whole  nation —
not  to  separate  individuals — since  they  are  produced  by  public
confidence  of  all  in  all.

Our  knowledge  about  the  different  movements  which  were
going  on  among  the  people  of  Paris  and  of  the  large  towns
in  1793  and  1794  still  remains  imperfect.  It  is  only  now  that
they  are  being  studied.  But  what  is  indisputable  is,  that  the
communist  movement  represented  in  Jacques  Roux,  Varlet,
Dolivier,  Chalier,  Leclerc,  L'Ange  (or  Lange),  Rose  Lacombe,
*  Chap,  xliii.


488 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Boissel,  and  some  others,  was  of  a  depth  which  passed  unper-
ceived  at  first,  but  which  Michelet  had  already  surmised.*

It  is  obvious  that  communism  in  1793  did  not  appear  with
that  completeness  of  doctrine  which  is  found  with  the  French
followers  of  Fourier  and  Saint-Simon,  and  especially  with
Considerant,  or  even  Vidal.  In  1793,  communist  ideas  were
not  worked  out  in  the  quiet  of  a  private  study;  they  were
born  from  the  needs  of  the  moment.  This  is  why  the  social
problem  showed  itself  during  the  Great  Revolution  especially
in  the  form  of  a  question  about  the  means  of  subsistence,  and  of
a  land  question.  But  in  this  also  lies  what  makes  the  communism
of  the  Great  Revolution  superior  to  the  socialism  of  1848  and
of  its  later  forms.  It  went  straight  to  the  root  in  attacking
the  distribution  of  produce.

This  communism  certainly  appears  fragmentary  to  us,
especially  as  stress  was  laid  by  its  exponents  upon  its  different
separate  aspects ;  and  there  always  remained  in  it  what  we
might  call  partial  communism.  It  admitted  individual
possession  side  by  side  with  common  property,  and  while  proclaim-
ing the  right  of  all  to  the  entire  sum  of  the  fruits  of  production,
it  yet  recognised  an  individual  right  to  the  "  superfluous,"
by  the  side  of  the  right  of  all  to  the  products  of  "  first  and
second  necessity."  Nevertheless  the  three  principal  aspects
of  communism  are  already  to  be  found  in  the  teachings  of  1793  :
Land  communism,  industrial  communism,  and  communism
in  commerce  and  in  credit.  And  in  this,  the  conception  of
1793  was  broader  than  the  one  of  1848.  For,  if  each  one  of
the  agitators  of  1793  usually  laid  more  stress  on  one  of  these
aspects  than  on  the  others,  these  three  aspects  do  not  exclude
one  another.  On  the  contrary,  being  born  from  the  same
conception  of  equality,  they  complete  each  other.  At  the
same  time  the  agitators  of  the  Great  Revolution  endeavoured
to  attain  the  practical  carrying  out  of  their  idea  by  the  action

*  It  is  probable  that  besides  the  advocating  of  communism  in  the
sections  and  Popular  Societies,  there  were  also,  from  August  10,  1792,
attempts  to  constitute  secret  communist  societies,  which  were  extended
afterwards,  in  1795,  by  Buonarroti  and  Babeuf,  and  which,  after  the
revolution  of  July  1830,  gave  birth  to  the  secret  societies  of  the
Blanquists.


THE  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT  489

of  local  forces,  by  immediate  practical  realisation,  while  at
the  same  time  they  tried  to  start  some  sort  of  a  direct  union
of  the  40,000  communes.  In  Sylvain  Marechal  one  finds
even  a  vague  aspiration  towards  what  we  describe  now  as
anarchist  communism — expressed,  of  course,  with  much  caution,
for  one  risked  paying  with  one's  head  for  the  use  of  too  frank
language.

The  idea  of  reaching  communism  by  means  of  a  conspiracy
through  a  secret  society  which  should  grasp  the  reins  of  govern-
ment— the  idea  of  which  Babeuf  became  the  apostle — was
formulated  later  on,  in  1794  and  1795,  when  the  Thermidor
reaction  had  crushed  the  ascending  movement  of  the  Great
Revolution.  This  was  the  result  of  a  loss  of  force — not  an
effect  of  the  growing  power  of  the  years  from  1789  to  1793.

Of  course  there  was  plenty  of  declamatory  effect  in  the
preachings  of  the  popular  communists.  It  was  a  fashion  of
the  times — one  to  which  our  modern  orators  also  pay  a  tribute.
But  everything  that  is  known  about  the  communists  of  the
Great  Revolution  tends  to  show  them  as  men  profoundly
devoted  to  their  ideas.

Jacques  Roux  had  been  a  priest.  He  was  extremely  poor
and  lived  with  his  sole  companion,  a  dog,  almost  entirely  on  his
income  of  two  hundred  livres  (francs)  in  a  gloomy  house  in
the  centre  of  Paris,*  and  preached  communism  in  the  working-
men's  quarters.  He  was  very  popular  in  the  Gravilliers
section  to  which  he  belonged,  and  had  great  influence  on  the
Cordeliers'  Club — until  the  end  of  June  1793,  when  his  in-
fluence was  destroyed  by  the  intervention  of  Robespierre.
As  to  Chalier,  we  have  already  seen  the  power  which  he  had
in  Lyons,  and  we  know  through  Michelet  that  this  mystic-
communist  was  a  remarkable  man — even  more  a  "  friend  of
the  people  "  than  Marat.  He  was  simply  adored  by  his  pupils.
After  his  death,  his  friend  Leclerc  came  to  Paris  and  continued
the  propaganda  of  communism  with  Roux,  Varlet,  a  young
Parisian  working  man,  and  Rose  Lacombe,  a  leader  of  the
women  revolutionists.  About  Varlet  practically  nothing  is
known,  except  that  he  was  popular  among  the  poor  of  Paris.
*  Jaures,  La  Convention,  p.  1069  (notes  of  Bernard  Lazare).


490 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

His  pamphlet,  Declaration  solennelle  des  droits  de  Vhomme  dans
Vetat  social,  published  in  1793,  was  very  moderate  in  tone.*
But  it  must  be  remembered  that  with  the  decree  of  March  10,
1793,  hanging  over  their  heads,  the  revolutionists  did  not
dare  to  say  in  print  everything  they  thought.

The  communists  also  had  their  theorists,  such  as  Boissel,
who  published  his  Catechisme  du  genre  humain  in  the  early
days  of  the  Revolution,  and  a  second  edition  of  the  same  work
in  1791  ;  the  anonymous  author  of  a  work  published  also  in
1791  and  entitled  De  la  'propriety  ou  la  cause  du  $auvre  plaidee
au  tribunal  de  la  Raison,  de  la  Justice  et  de  la  Verite  ;  and  Pierre
Dolivier,  cure*  of  Mauchamp,  whose  remarkable  work,  Essai
sur  la  justice  -primitive  'pour  servir  de  frincife  generateur  au
seul  ordre  social  qui  peut  assurer  d  Vhomme  tons  ses  droits  et  tous
ses  moyens  de  bonheur,  was  published  at  the  end  of  July  1793  by
the  citizens  of  the  Commune  of  Anvers,  a  district  of  Etampes.t

There  was  also  L'Ange  (or  Lange),  who  was,  as  Michelet  had
already  pointed  out,  a  real  precursor  of  Fourier.  Babeuf  was
also  in  Paris  in  1793.  He  was  employed  under  the  protection
of  Sylvain  Mare*chal  in  the  administration  of  the  means  of
subsistence,  and  made  a  secret  communist  propaganda.  Forced
to  stay  in  hiding,  since  he  had  been  prosecuted  for  a  supposed

*  He  limited  himself  to  asking  in  this  declaration  that  the  right  of
possession  of  land  be  limited  ;  that  the  enormous  inequality  of  fortunes
be  abolished  "  by  fair  means,"  so  that  the  poor  could  protect  themselves
from  oppression  by  the  rich,  and  that  "  the  possessions  amassed  at  the
cost  of  the  public,  by  theft,  stock- jobbing,  monopoly,  &c.,  should  become
national  property,  the  instant  society  obtained  conclusive  and  reliable
proofs  of  peculation."  (Pamphlets  in  the  British  Museum,  F.  499.)
In  another  pamphlet,  Votux  formts  par  des  franfais  fibres,  &c.,  he  also
asked  for  severe  laws  against  monopolists  (same  collection,  F.  65.)

f  In  his  Discours  sur  les  moyens  de  sauver  la  France  et  la  liberte,
delivered  at  the  time  of  the  elections  for  the  Convention  (this  pamphlet
may  be  found  at  the  Bibliotheque  Nationale),  Jacques  Roux  main-
tained that  a  prolonged  dictatorship  means  the  death  of  liberty,  and
he  wished  (pp.  42  and  43)  that  it  should  be  made  obligatory  for  the  great
landowners  to  be  allowed  to  sell  their  harvest  only  in  those  markets
indicated  to  them  in  their  respective  districts  ;  "  establish,"  he  said,
"  in  all  the  cities  and  large  market  towns  public  stores  where  the  price
of  goods  will  be  established  by  public  auction  (au  concours)."  Michelet,
who  had  already  mentioned  this  Discours  (Book  XV.  ch.  vi.),  added  that
this  doctrine  of  Roux  was  very  popular  in  the  Gravilliers,  Arcis,  and
other  sections  of  the  Centre  de  Paris.


THE  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT  491

forgery — wrongly  prosecuted  by  the  middle  classes,  as  has
been  proved  by  Deville,  who  has  found  the  original  minutes
of  the  trial* — he  was  compelled  to  be  very  discreet.f

Later  on  communism  was  connected  with  Babeuf  's  conspiracy.
But  Babeuf,  so  far  as  one  may  judge  from  his  writings  and
letters,  was  only  an  opportunist  of  the  communism  of  1793.
His  conceptions,  as  well  as  the  means  of  action  which  he
advocated,  belittled  the  idea.  While  it  was  well  understood
by  many  that  a  movement  having  a  communist  tendency
would  be  the  only  means  to  assure  the  victories  of  the  democ-
racy, Babeuf,  as  one  of  his  recent  apologists — quite  correctly —
put  it,  sought  to  shuffle  communism  into  democracy  (glisser
le  communisms  dans  le  democratie).  While  it  had  become
evident  that  democracy  would  lose  its  victories  if  the  people
did  not  enter  the  arena  with  its  demands  and  ideals,  Babeuf
wanted  democracy  first,  and  then  to  introduce  communism
into  it,  little  by  little.  J

Altogether  Babeuf's  conception  of  communism  was  so  narrow,
so  unreal,  that  he  thought  it  possible  to  reach  communism
by  the  action  of  a  few  individuals  who  were  to  get  the  Govern-

*  Thermidor  et  Directoire,  1794-1799  (Histoire  socialists,  vol.  v.
pp.  14  and  following).

f  In  his  Catechisme,  Boissel  already  expounded  the  ideas  which
became  current  among  socialists  towards  1848.  Thus,  to  the  question
"  Which  are  the  principal  institutions  of  this  mercenary,  homicidal,
anti-social  State  ?  "  he  answers,  "  Property,  marriage,  and  religions
are  what  men  have  invented,  established,  and  consecrated  to  legitimate
their  impostures."  In  specifying  the  things  over  which  men  have
extended  their  property  rights,  he  said  :  "  It  is  those  things  of  which
they  have  thought  it  necessary  to  become  possessed,  or  to  make  others
believe  that  they  were  possessed,  such  as  lands,  women,  even  men,
the  sea,  the  rivers,  and  mountains,  the  sky,  the  nether  regions,  the
gods  themselves,  out  of  whom  they  have  always  made  and  still  make
capital."  He  was  not  tender  either  to  the  laws,  of  which  he  said  :
"  They  are  the  obligations  which  the  strong,  the  more  shrewd,  the  more
cunning  have  imposed  on  the  weaker,  in  order  to  maintain  their
disastrous  institutions,  or  even  to  prevent  the  bad  effects  of  these
institutions,  so  far  as  it  was  possible."  His  definitions  of  authority
and  justice  might  be  accepted  by  modern  anarchists.  See  Le  Cate-
chisme  du  genre  humain  pour  I'etablissement  essentiel  et  indispensable
du  veritable  ordre  moral  et  de  I' Education  sociale  des  hommes.  (Paris  1789),
p.  132.  Pamphlets  of  the  British  Museum,  F.  513  (3).)

J  Thus,  for  instance,  the  people,  armed  with  a  democratic  Constitu-
tion, would  veto  all  the  laws,  until  the  maintenance  of  all  citizens
should  be  assured  by  law  I


492 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

ment  into  their  hands  by  means  of  the  conspiracy  of  a  secret
society.  He  went  so  far  as  to  be  ready  to  put  his  faith  in  one
single  person,  provided  this  person  had  a  will  strong  enough
to  introduce  communism,  and  thus  save  the  world  /  A  sad  illusion,
which  paved  the  way  for  Bonaparte  and,  continuing  to  be
cherished  by  a  great  number  of  socialists  during  the  whole
of  the  nineteenth  century,  gave  us  Caesarism — the  faith  in  a
Napoleon  or  a  Disraeli — the  faith  in  a  saviour  which  still
persists  even  to  this  day.


CHAPTER  LIX

SCHEMES FOR THE SOCIALISATION OF LAND,

INDUSTRIES, MEANS OF SUBSISTENCE

AND  EXCHANGE

Communist  movement  and  land — Economic  importance  of
land — Agrarian  proposals — View  of  Dolivier — Industrial
demands — Proposals  of  L'Ange — Problem  of  means  of  sub-
sistence— Question  of  exchange  of  produce — Summary  of
situation — Evils  of  repression

THE  dominating  idea  of  the  communist  movement  of  1793
was,  that  the  land  should  be  considered  as  the  common  in-
heritance of  the  whole  nation,  that  every  citizen  should  have
a  right  to  the  land,  and  that  the  means  of  existence  should  be
guaranteed  to  each,  so  that  no  one  could  be  forced  to  sell  his
or  her  work  under  the  threat  of  starvation.  "  Actual  equality  "
(fegalite  de  fait),  which  had  been  much  spoken  of  during  the
eighteenth  century,  was  now  interpreted  as  the  affirmation
of  an  equal  right  of  all  to  the  land  ;  and  the  great  transfer  of
lands  which  was  going  on  through  the  sale  of  the  national
estates  awakened  a  hope  of  a  practical  realisation  of  this  idea.

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  at  this  time,  when  the  great
industries  were  only  just  beginning  to  grow,  the  land  was  the
chief  instrument  of  exploitation.  By  the  land  the  landowner
held  the  peasants  in  his  hands,  and  the  impossibility  of  owning
a  scrap  of  land  compelled  the  peasants  to  emigrate  to  the  towns,
where  they  became  the  defenceless  prey  of  the  factory-owners
and  the  stock-jobbers.

Under  such  circumstances  the  minds  of  the  communists
necessarily  turned  to  what  was  described  then  as  the  "  agrarian
law  " — that  is  to  say,  to  the  limitation  of  property  in  land

493


494 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

to  a  certain  maximum  of  area,  and  towards  the  recognition
of  the  right  of  every  inhabitant  to  the  land.  The  land-grabbing
that  was  then  practised  by  speculators  during  the  sales  of  the
national  estates  could  but  strengthen  this  idea  ;  and  while
some  demanded  that  each  citizen  desiring  to  cultivate  land
should  have  the  right  to  receive  his  share  of  the  national
property,  or  at  least  to  buy  a  part  of  it  under  easy  conditions
of  payment — others,  who  saw  further  ahead,  demanded  that
all  the  land  should  again  be  made  communal  property  and
that  every  holder  of  land  should  get  only  the  right  of  temporary
possession  of  that  land  which  he  himself  cultivated,  and  only
for  so  long  as  he  cultivated  it.

Thus  Babeuf,  fearing  perhaps  to  compromise  himself  too
much,  demanded  the  equal  division  of  communal  lands.  But
he  also  wanted  the  "  inalienability  "  of  the  land,  which  meant
the  retention  of  the  rights  of  the  commune,  or  of  the  nation,
over  the  land,  i.e.,  'possession  by  the  individuals,  not  ownership.

On  the  other  hand,  at  the  Convention,  during  the  debate
on  the  law  on  the  partition  of  communal  lands,  Julien  Souhait
opposed  the  final  partition  proposed  by  the  Agricultural
Committee,  and  he  certainly  had  on  his  side  the  millions  of
poor  peasants.  He  demanded  that  the  division  of  communal
lands,  in  equal  portions,  among  all,  should  be  only  temporary,
and  that  they  might  be  redivided  after  certain  periods  of  time.
The  use  only  would  be  conceded  in  this  case  to  separate  in-
dividuals, as  it  is  in  the  Russian  Mir.

Dolivier,  a  cur6  of  Mauchamp,  following  a  similar  line  of
thought,  expressed,  in  his  Essai  sur  la  justice  primitive,  "  two
immutable  principles :  the  first,  that  the  land  belongs  to  all
in  general  and  to  no  one  in  particular ;  and  the  second,  that
each  has  the  exclusive  right  to  the  produce  of  his  labour."
But  as  the  land  question  dominated  all  others  at  this  time,
he  preferred  to  dwell  especially  on  the  first  of  these  two  pro-
positions.

'*  The  land,"  he  said,  "  taken  as  a  whole,  must  be  considered
as  the  great  common-land  of  nature  "—the  common  property
of  all ;  "  each  individual  must  have  the  right  of  sharing  in
the  great  common-land  (au  grand  communal).  One  generation


SCHEMES  FOR  SOCIALISATION  495

has  no  right  to  make  laws  for  the  next,  or  to  dispose  of  its
sovereign  rights ;  how  much  stronger,  then,  the  reason  for
not  disposing  of  its  patrimony  !  "  And  further  :  "  Nations
alone,  and  by  sub-division  the  communes,  are  the  real  owners
of  their  land."*

In  fact,  Dolivier  recognised  a  right  of  property,  transmissible
by  inheritance,  in  the  case  of  movable  property  only. As  to
the  land,  no  one  should  be  allowed  to  possess  any  part  of  the
common property, except what he with his family could
cultivate — and  then  only  as  a  temporary  possession. This,
of  course,  would  not  prevent  common  cultivation  being  done
by  the  commune,  side  by  side  with  farms  cultivated  individually.
But  Dolivier,  who  knew  village  life  well,  disliked  the  farmers
as  much  as  the  big  landowners. He  demanded  "  the  complete
subdivision  of  the  big  farms  "  ; "  the  utmost  division  of  land
among  all  those  citizens  who  have  none,  or  who  have  not
enough  of  it. This  is  the  only  adequate  measure  which  can
put  life  into  our  villages,  and  bring  comfort  to  all  the  families
now  groaning  in  misery,  through  a  lack  of  means  for  rendering
their  work  remunerative.  .  .  .  The  land,"  he  added, "  will
be  better  cultivated,  domestic  resources  will  be  more  numerous,
and the markets consequently more abundantly supplied ;
we  shall  get  rid  of  the  most  abominable  aristocracy,  that  of
the farmers." He foresaw that greater agricultural well-
being  would  be  attained  in  this  way,  and  that  there  would
never  again  be  any  need  of  regulating  the  prices  of  the  means
of  subsistence  by  laws,  which  "  is  necessary  under  the  present
circumstances,  but  nevertheless  is  always  inconvenient."

The  socialisation  of  industries  also  found  champions,  especially
in  the  Lyons  region.  The  Lyons  workers  demanded  that
wages  should  be  regulated  by  the  commune,  and  that  the  wages
should  be  such  as  to  guarantee  subsistence.  It  was  the  "  living
wage  "  of  modern  English  socialists.  Besides,  they  demanded
the  nationalisation  of  certain  industries,  such  as  mining.  The

*  As  this  work  of  Dolivier  is  not  in  the  British  Museum  I  quote
from  Jaurds.  His  other  work,  Le  vceu  national,  on  systems  politique
propre  a  organiser  la  nation  dans  toutes  ses  parties  (Paris,  1790),  is  only
interesting  because  of  the  idea  of  organising  the  nation  from  the  bottom
upwards. — Pamphlets  of  the  British  Museum,  F.  514  (4)^


496 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

proposition  was  also  put  forward  that  the  communes  should
seize  upon  the  industrial  enterprises  abandoned  by  the  counter-
revolutionists,  and  work  them  on  their  own  account.  On  the
whole  the  idea  of  the  commune  becoming  a  producer  of  all
sorts  of  commodities  was  very  popular  in  1793-  The  utilisation
of  the  large  tracts  of  uncultivated  land  in  the  parks  of  the  rich,
for  communal  market  gardening,  was  a  widespread  idea  in
Paris,  and  Chaumette  advocated  it.

It  is  evident  that  much  less  interest  was  taken  then  in
industry  than  in  agriculture.  Nevertheless,  Cusset,  a  merchant
whom  Lyons  had  elected  member  of  the  Convention,  already
spoke  of  the  nationalisation  of  industries,  and  L'Ange  elabo-
rated a  project  of  a  sort  of  "  phalanstery,"  where  industry
would  be  combined  with  agriculture.  Since  1790  L'Ange
had  carried  on  an  earnest  communist  propaganda  at  Lyons.
Thus,  in  a  pamphlet,  dated  1790,  he  put  forward  the  following
ideas :  "  The  Revolution,"  he  wrote,  "  was  going  to  be  a
salutary  change  ;  but  then  it  was  spoiled  by  a  change  of  ideas,
by  means  of  the  most  abominable  abuse  of  riches.  The  sovereign
(that  is,  the  people)  has  been  transformed."  "  Gold,"  he
wrote  further,  "is  useful  and  beneficial  in  laborious  hands,
but  it  becomes  dangerous  when  it  accumulates  in  the  coffers
of  capitalists.  Everywhere,  sire,  wherever  your  Majesty
may  look,  you  will  see  the  land  cultivated,  but  by  us ;  it  is
we  who  till  it,  we  who  have  been  the  first  owners  of  the  land,
the  first  and  the  last  effective  possessors  of  it.  The  idle  who
call  themselves  landowners  can  but  collect  the  surplus  of  our
subsistence.  This  proves,  at  least,  our  rights  to  co-proprietor-
ship. But  if,  then,  we  are  co-proprietors,  and  the  sole  cause
of  any  income,  the  right  of  limiting  our  consumption,  and  of
depriving  us  of  the  surplus,  is  the  right  of  a  plunderer"  which  is,
to  my  mind,  a  very  concrete  conception  of  the  "surplus
value."*

*  Plaintes  et  representations  d'un  citoyen  decrete  passif,  aux  citoyens
decretes  actifs,  by  M.  L'Ange  (Lyons),  1790,  p.  15  (Bibliothdque  Nationale
of  Paris).  For  the  more  or  less  socialistic  ideas  of  the  Cercle  Social
founded  by  the  Abbe  Fauchet,  and  whose  organ  was  La  Bouche  de  fer
sec,  vide  A.  Lichtenberger,  Le  Socialisms  et  la  Revolution  francaise,  ch.
-iii.  p.  69.


SCHEMES  FOR  SOCIALISATION  497

Reasoning  always  from  facts — *>.,  from  the  crisis  in  the  means
of  livelihood  through  which  France  was  passing — he  proposed
a  system  of  subscription  of  all  the  would-be  consumers,  en-
titling them  to  buy  at  fixed  prices  the  whole  of  the  crop —
all  this  to  be  reached  by  means  of  free  association,  gradually
becoming  universal.  He  also  wanted  to  see  common  stores,
whereto  all  the  cultivators  could  carry  their  produce  for  sale.
This  was,  as  we  see,  a  system  which  avoided  in  the  commerce
of  commodities  both  the  individualist  monopoly  and  the
obligatory  State  system  of  the  Revolution.  It  was  the  pre-
cursor of  the  present  system  of  co-operative  creameries  united
to  sell  the  produce  of  a  whole  province,  as  may  be  seen  in
Canada,  or  of  a  whole  nation,  as  is  the  case  in  Denmark.

On  the  whole,  it  was  the  problem  of  the  means  of  subsistence
that  was  the  preoccupation  of  the  communists  of  1793,  and
led  them  to  compel  the  Convention  to  pass  the  law  of  maximum,
and  also  to  formulate  the  great  principle  of  the  socialisation
of  the  exchange  of  produce — the  municipalisation  of  trade.

In  fact,  the  question  of  the  trade  in  cereals  was  foremost
all  over  France.  "  Full  freedom  in  the  grain  trade  is  in-
compatible with  the  existence  of  our  Republic,"  said  the
electors  of  Seine-et-Oise  before  the  Convention  in  November
1792.  "  This  trade  is  carried  on  by  a  minority  with  a  view  to
its  own  enrichment,  and  this  minority  is  always  interested  in
bringing  about  artificial  rises  in  price,  which  invariably  make
the  consumer  suffer.  All  partial  measures  against  this  specula-
tion are  dangerous  and  impotent,"  these  electors  said ;  "  it
is  half-way  measures  that  will  ruin  us."  All  the  trade  in  grain,
the  entire  provisioning  must  be  carried  on  by  the  Republic,  which
will  establish  "  a  fair  proportion  between  the  price  of  bread
and  the  price  of  a  day's  labour."  The  sale  of  the  national
estates  having  given  rise'  to  abominable  speculations  on  the
part  of  those  who  bought  these  lands,  the  electors  of  Seine-
et-Oise  demanded  the  limitation  of  the  size  of  the  farms  and
the  nationalisation  of  trade.

"  Ordain,"  they  said,  "  that  no  one  shall  be  allowed  to  under-
take to  farm  more  than  120  arpents  of  22  feet  to  the  perch  ;*

*  About  120  acres,

21


498 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

that  no  landowner  be  allowed  to  cultivate  more  than
one  such  farm,  and  that  he  will  be  obliged  to  lease  out
any  others  he  may  possess."  And  they  added !  "  Place,
moreover,  the  duty  of  providing  the  necessary  food-stuffs
for  each  part  of  the  Republic  in  the  hands  of  a  central
administration  chosen  by  the  people,  and  you  will  see  that
the  abundance  of  grain  and  the  fair  proportion  between  its
price  and  the  day's  wage  will  restore  peace,  happiness  and
life  to  all  citizens."

It  is  evident  that  these  were  not  ideas  from  the  brain  of  a
Turgot  or  a  Necker  ;  they  were  born  of  life  itself.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  these  ideas  were  accepted  both
by  the  Committee  of  Agriculture  and  that  of  Commerce,
and  were  developed  in  their  report  on  the  means  of  subsistence
laid  before  the  Convention.*  In  fact,  they  were  applied,
at  the  instance  of  the  people,  in  several  departments  of  the
Berry  and  the  Orleanais.  In  the  department  of  Eure-et-Loir,
on  December  3,  1792,  the  commissioners  of  the  Convention
were  nearly  killed  by  the  people,  who  said  :  "  The  middle  classes
have  had  enough,  it  is  now  the  turn  of  the  poor  workers."

Later  on,  similar  laws  were  violently  advocated  by  Beffroy
(Aisne),  and  the  Convention,  as  we  saw  already  when  re-
ferring to  the  law  of  "  maximum,"!  attempted  to  socialise
on  an  immense  scale  all  trade  in  objects  of  prime  and  secondary
necessity,  for  the  whole  of  France,  by  means  of  national  stores,
and  by  establishing  in  every  department  what  would  be  found
to  be  "  fair  "  prices  for  all  commodities.

We  thus  see,  budding  during  the  Revolution,  the  idea  that
commerce  is  a  social  junction;  that  it  must  be  socialised,  as
well  as  the  land  and  the  industries— an  idea  which  was  to  be
elaborated  later  on  by  Fourier,  Robert  Owen,  Proudhon,  and
the  communists  of  the  'forties.

We  perceive  even  more.  It  is  clear  to  us  that  Jacques  Roux,
Varlet,  Dolivier,  L'Ange,  and  thousands  of  town  and  country
folk,  agriculturists  and  artisans,  understood,  from  a  practical

»,  *  "Report  and  Pr°Ject  of  a  decree  on  subsistences,"  presented  by
M.  Fabre,  deputy  of  the  department  of  the  H6rault.
- f  Chap.  lii.


SCHEMES  FOR  SOCIALISATION  499

point  of  view,  the  problem  of  the  means  of  subsistence  infinitely
better  than  the  Convention.  They  understood  that  taxation
alone,  without  the  socialisation  of  the  land,  the  industries  and
the  commerce  of  the  nation  would  remain  a  dead  letter,  even
if  it  were  backed  up  by  a  legion  of  repressive  laws  and  by  the
revolutionary  tribunal.

It  was  the  system  of  selling  the  national  estates  adopted  by
the  Constituent  Assembly,  the  Legislative  Assembly  and  the
Convention,  that  had  created  those  rich  farmers  whom  Dolivier
considered,  and  quite  rightly,  as  the  worst  form  of  aristocracy.
The  Convention  did  not  begin  to  notice  this  until  1794.  But
then,  the  only  thing  they  were  able  to  do  was  to  arrest  the
farmers  in  hundreds  and  to  send  them  to  the  guillotine  as
monopolists  (accapareurs).  However,  all  these  Draconian  laws
against  monopoly  (such  as  the  law  of  July  26,  1793,  which
prescribed  the  searching  of  all  lofts,  cellars,  and  barns  belonging
to  farmers)  resulted  only  in  spreading  in  the  villages  hatred
against  the  towns,  and  against  Paris  in  particular.

The  revolutionary  tribunal  and  the  guillotine  could  not
make  up  for  the  lack  of  a  constructive  communist  theory.


CHAPTER  LX
THE  END  OF  THE  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT

Montagnards  and  communists — Attitude  of  Hubert — Of
Billaud-Varenne — Obstacles  to  communism — Assemblies  and
land — Communal  land  given  to  well-to-do  peasants — Jacques
Roux  and  Robespierre — Roux  prosecuted — Reply  to  com-
munism of  Committee  of  Public  Welfare — Resolutions  passed
by  communists — Convention  defends  middle  class  and  sup-
presses communism

PREVIOUS  to  May  31,  when  the  Montagnards  saw  the  Revolu-
tion brought  to  a  standstill  by  the  opposition  of  the  Girondins,
they  sought  the  support  of  the  communists,  and  of  the  Enrages
in  general.  In  those  days,  Robespierre,  in  the  proposed
Declaration  of  Rights  which  he  read  before  the  Convention  on
April  21,  1793,  expressed  himself  in  favour  of  a  limitation  of
the  rights  of  property,  and  Jeanbon  Saint-Andre,  Collot
d'Herbois,  Billaud-Varenne,  and  several  others  tried  to  make
terms  with  the  communists.  If  Brissot,  in  his  savage  attacks
on  the  Montagnards,  described  all  of  them  as  "  anarchists  "  and
"  destroyers  of  property,"  it  was  only  because  at  that  time  the
Montagnards  had  not  yet  tried  to  separate  themselves  definitely
from  the  Enrages  and  the  communists.

However,  immediately  after  the  disturbances  in  February
1793,  the  Convention  assumed  a  threatening  attitude  towards
the  communists.  Acting  on  a  report  by  Barere,  in  which  he
already  represented  the  communist  agitation  as  the  work  of  the
clergy  and  the  emigres,  the  Convention,  notwithstanding  the
opposition  of  Marat,  enthusiastically  voted,  on  March  1 8,
I793>  "  trie  penalty  of  death  for  whomsoever  should  propose
an  agrarian  law,  or  any  subversion  whatsoever  of  landed

property,  whether  communal  or  individual."

500


END  OF  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT 501

Still,  they  were  forced  to  conciliate  the  Enrages,  since  they
needed  the  support  of  the  people  of  Paris  against  the  Girondins,
and  in  the  most  active  sections  of  Paris  the  Enrages  were  very
popular.  But  once  the  Girondins  had  been  overthrown,  the
Montagnards  turned  against  those  who  wished  for  "  the
Revolution  in  deeds,  after  it  had  been  accomplished  in  thought,"
and  crushed  them  in  their  turn.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  there  was  no  one  among  the
educated  men  of  the  time  who  could  formulate  the  communist
ideas  in  a  complete  and  comprehensive  form,  and  make  himself
heard.  Marat  might  have  done  so,  had  he  been  allowed  to
live  ;  but  he  had  been  assassinated  on  July  13.  As  to  Hebert,
he  was  too  easy-going  a  man  to  take  upon  himself  a  task  of  this
nature  :  he  belonged  too  much  to  the  society  of  the  gay
middle  classes  of  Holbach's  school  ever  to  become  a  champion
of  the  anarchist  communism  which  was  springing  up  among
the  masses.  He  could  adopt  the  language  of  the  sans- culottes,
as  the  Girondins  had  adopted  the  red  woollen  cap  of  the  poor,
and  their  familiar  "  thee  "  and  "  thou  "  in  speech,  but,  like
them,  Hebert  was  too  little  in  sympathy  with  the  people  to
understand  and  to  express  the  popular  aspirations.  In  fact,
he  allied  himself  with  the  "  Mountain  "  to  crush  Jacques  Roux
and  the  Enrages  together.

Billaud-Varenne  seemed  to  understand,  better  than  the
other  Montagnards,  the  need  of  profound  changes  in  a  com-
munistic direction.  He  understood  at  one  time  that  a  social
revolution  ought  to  have  been  going  abreast  with  the  political
revolution.  But  he,  too,  had  not  the  courage  to  enter  the  ranks
for  this  cause.  He  took  a  place  in  the  Government  and  ended  by
doing  as  all  the  other  Montagnards  did,  when  they  said  :  "  The
Republic  first,  social  measures  will  come  later"  But  there  they
got  stranded,  and  there  the  Republic  was  stranded  as  well.

The  fact  is,  that  the  Revolution,  by  its  first  measures,  had
roused  too  many  interests  and  too  much  cupidity  to  make  it
possible  for  communism  to  develop. The  communist  ideas
about  landed  property  were  running  counter  to  all  the  wideV Y
spread  interests  of  the  middle  classes,  who  had  bought  national
estates,  or  were  wildly  speculating  in  them.


502 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  legislators  of  the  Constituent  and  the  Legislative
Assemblies,  as  we  have  already  mentioned,  had  seen  in  these
sales  a  means  of  enriching  the  middle  classes  at  the  cost  of  the
clergy  and  the  nobility.  As  to  the  masses  of  the  people,  they
did  not  think  much  about  them.  Ready  money  being  badly
needed  in  the  Exchequer,  the  national  estates  were  sold  reck-
lessly, avec  fureur,  as  Avenel  says,  in  1790  and  1791,  to  the
middle  class,  or  to  the  rich  peasants — even  to  English  and
Dutch  companies,  which  bought  with  an  eye  to  speculation.
And  when  the  purchasers,  who  paid  only  20  or  even  only
12  per  cent,  of  the  whole  price  at  the  moment  of  the
purchase,  had  to  pay  the  next  instalment,  they  did  all  they
could  to  avoid  paying  anything  more,  and  very  often  they
succeeded.

However,  as  the  peasants  who  had  been  unable  to  obtain
any  of  these  lands  were  complaining  bitterly,  the  Legislative
Assembly,  in  August  1790,  and  later  on,  by  the  decree  of  June
II,  1793,*  the  communal  lands — the  only  hope  for  the  poorer
peasant  — were  flung  by  the  Convention  to  the  better-off
peasants  as  their  prey.f  The  Convention  promised  also  that
the  confiscated  land  of  the  emigres  should  be  divided  into  lots
of  one  to  four  acres,  to  be  sold  to  the  poor  for  a  perpetual  rent
which  was  to  be  paid  in  money,  and  could  be  redeemed  at  any
time.  It  was  even  decreed,  towards  the  end  of  1792,  that
national  lands  to  the  amount  of  a  thousand  million  livres  worth,
should  be  reserved  for  the  sans-culotte  volunteers  who  had
enlisted  in  the  armies,  and  be  sold  to  them  under  favourable
conditions.  But  nothing  of  the  kind  was  done.  This  decree
remained  a  dead  lettet,  just  as  hundreds  of  other  decrees  of
those  times.

And  when  Jacques  Roux  spoke  before  the  Convention,  on
June  25, 1793 — less  than  four  weeks  after  the  rising  of  May  31
— denouncing  stock-jobbing  and  demanding  laws  against  the
speculators,  his  speech  was  received  with  angry  howls>  and

*  See  chap,  xlviii.

f  Most  historians  have  described  this  measure  as  a  favourable  one
to  the  peasants.  In  reality,  it  meant  depriving  the  poorest  of  the  sole
inheritance  which  was  left  them.  This  is  why  the  measure  met  with
so  much  opposition  when  it  came  to  its  application.


END  OF  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT 503

Roux  himself  was  hooted  out  of  the  Convention.*  Besides,
as  he  attacked  the  "  Mountain  "  in  his  speeches,  and  enjoyed  a
great  influence  in  his  own  section,  Les  Gravilliers,  as  well  as  in
the  Cordeliers'  Club,  Robespierre,  who  never  went  near  this
Club,  visited  it  on  the  night  of  June  30,  after  the  riots  of  the  25th
and  27th  directed  against  the  soap  merchants,  in  company  with
Hebert,  Collot  d'Herbois,  and  several  others,  as  a  delegation
from  the  Jacobin  Club,  and  they  got  Roux  and  his  friend  Varlet
struck  off  the  list  of  the  Cordeliers.

From  that  day  Robespierre  never  ceased  slandering  Jacques
Roux.  As  this  Cordelier-communist  severely  criticised  the
Revolution  for  having  done  nothing  so  far  for  the  people,  and
would  say  occasionally  in  his  criticisms — just  as  the  socialists
of  our  own  day  often  do — that  the  people  suffered  more  under
the  Republic  than  under  monarchy,  Robespierre,  whenever  he
spoke  of  Roux,  never  failed  to  describe  him  as  a  "  base  priest  "
who  had  sold  himself  to  the  foreigners,  a  "  scoundrel  "  who
"  endeavoured  to  excite  baneful  disturbances  to  injure  the
Republic."  fcl

From  June  1793,  Jacques  Roux  might  have  considered  him-
self doomed.  He  was  first  accused  of  being  the  instigator  of

*  "  It  is  the  rich,"  said  Jacques  Roux,  "  who  have  reaped  for  the
last  four  years  the  advantages  of  the  Revolutions  ;  it  is  the  merchant
aristocracy,  more  terrible  than  the  noble  aristocracy,  which  oppresses
us,  and  we  do  not  see  any  limit  to  their  extortions,  for  the  price  of
goods  is  growing  to  an  alarming  extent.  It  is  time  that  the  death-
struggle  between  the  selfish  and  the  hard-working  classes  should  come
to  an  end.  .  .  .  Are  the  possessions  of  knaves  to  be  held  more  sacred
than  human  life  ?  The  necessities  of  life  must  be  at  the  disposition  of
administrative  bodies,  just  as  the  armed  forces  are  at  their  disposition.'*
Roux  reproached  the  Convention  with  not  having  confiscated  the
fortunes  acquired  since  the  Revolution  by  the  bankers  and  monopo-
lists, and  he  said  that  the  Convention  having  decreed  "  a  forced  loan
of  a  thousand  million  livres  to  be  levied  upon  the  rich,  the  capitalist
and  the  merchant  will  the  next  day  raise  this  sum  from  the  sans-culottes,
thanks  to  the  monopolies  and  the  powers  of  extortion  they  will  retain  if
the  monopolies  of  commerce  and  forestalling  are  not  destroyed."  He
very  clearly  saw  the  danger  of  such  conditions  for  the  Revolution,
when  he  said  :  "  The  stock-jobbers  get  possession  of  the  factories,
of  the  seaports,  of  every  branch  of  commerce,  of  all  produce  of  the
land,  and  they  cause  the  friends  of  justice  to  die  of  hunger,  thirst  and
exposure,  or  else  force  them  into  the  arms  of  despotism."  (I  quote
from  the  text  of  Roux'  speech,  found  by  Bernard  Lazare,  and  com-
municated to  JaurSs.)


504 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  riots  against  the  soap  merchants.  Later  on,  in  August,
when  he  was  publishing  with  Leclerc  a  paper,  L' Ombre  de
Marat,  Marat's  widow  was  persuaded  to  prosecute  him  for
using  this  title  ;  and  finally  he  was  accused  of  having  embezzled  a
small  cheque  which  he  had  received  for  the  Cordeliers'  Club,
while  it  is  quite  certain,  as  Michelet  has  said,  that  "  disinte-
restedness was  the  special  characteristic  of  these  fanatics,"  and
that  among  all  the  well-known  revolutionists,  "  Roux,  Varlet,
and  Leclerc  were  distinguished  as  models  of  probity."  Roux'
section  of  the  Gravilliers  vainly  demanded  from  the  Commune
the  abandonment  of  these  prosecutions,  offering  that  its  mem-
bers should  give  securities  for  him.  The  women  revolutionists
did  likewise — and  their  club  was  suppressed  by  the  Commune.
Finally,  he  was  released,  but  the  prosecution  was  not  stopped.

Full  of  indignation  at  the  persistent  persecutions,  Roux  and
his  friends  went  on  the  evening  of  August  19  to  the  Gravilliers
section  to  which  they  belonged,  and  deprived  the  president  and
the  secretaries  of  their  offices.  Roux  was  nominated  president.
Upon  this,  Hebert  denounced  Roux  before  the  Jacobin  Club,
on  the  2  ist,  and  when  the  matter  was  brought  before  the
Council  of  the  Commune,  Chaumette  accused  him  of  "  an
attempt  against  the  sovereignty  of  the  people,"  and  spoke  of
capital  punishment.  Roux  was  prosecuted,  but  his  section
obtained  from  the  Commune  his  release  on  August  25.  The
inquiry,  however,  was  continued,  and  the  charge  of  theft  was
brought  forward ;  so  that  on  January  14,  1794  (23r<*  Nivose),
Roux  was  sent  before  a  common  police  court.
<  This  court  declared  itself  incompetent  to  pronounce  upon
such  serious  indictments  as  those  brought  against  Roux —
meaning  the  affair  of  the  Gravilliers  section — and  ordered  him
to  be  sent  before  the  revolutionary  tribunal.  Knowing  what
that  meant,  Roux  stabbed  himself  in  court  thrice  with  a
knife.  The  president  of  the  court  hastened  to  his  assistance
and  displayed  much  friendliness  towards  him,  even  giving  him
the  kiss  of  civic  brotherhood,  before  he  was  removed  to  the
Bicetre  prison.  In  the  prison  infirmary  Roux  "  tried  to  exhaust
his  strength,"  as  it  was  reported  to  the  procurator  of  the
-Revolutionary  Tribunal,  Fouquier-Tinville,  by  opening  his


END  OF  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT 505

wounds ;  and  finally  he  succeeded  in  stabbing  himself  once
more,  this  time  mortally,  through  the  lung.  The  record  of
the  post-mortem  is  dated  "  ist  Ventose,"  i.e.9  February  19,
1794.*

The  people  of  Paris,  especially  in  the  sections  of  the  centre
of  the  city,  understood  now  that  their  hopes  of  "  practical
equality  "  were  over.  Gaillard,  a  friend  of  Chalier,  who  had
been  kept  by  the  Girondins  in  prison,  at  Lyons,  during  the
siege,  and  who  had  come  to  Paris  after  Lyons  had  been  taken
by  the  Montagnards,  also  killed  himself  three  weeks  later,  when
he  learned  that  Leclerc  had  been  arrested  together  with  Chau-
mette  and  the  Hebertists.  ft :

In  reply  to  all  these  demands  of  communism,  and  seeing  that
the  masses  were  abandoning  the  Revolution,  as  they  found  that
little  attention  was  paid  to  their  demands,  the  Committee  of
Public  Welfare  issued  on  the  2ist  Ventose  (March  u,  1794),  a
circular,  written  in  a  pompous  style  and  addressed  to  the  com-
missioners of  the  Convention  in  the  provinces.  But  the  con-
clusions of  both  this  high-flown  circular  and  the  famous  speech
pronounced  two  days  later  (23rd  Ventose)  by  Saint- Just,  were
very  poor.  The  Convention  offered  nothing  but  charity —
scanty  charity — to  be  provided  for  the  destitute  by  the
State.

"  A  great  blow  was  necessary  to  overthrow  the  aristocracy,"
so  the  circular  ran.  "  The  Convention  has  struck  it.  Virtuous
poverty  must  recover  the  property  which  criminals  had  taken
away  from  it.  ...  It  is  necessary  that  terror  and  justice
should  strike  in  all  directions  at  the  same  time.  The  Revolution
is  the  work  of  the  people.  It  is  time  the  people  should  enjoy
its  fruits  "...  and  so  on.  But  in  reality  the  Convention  did
nothing  in  this  direction.  The  decree  of  the  I3th  Ventose
Year  II.  (February  3,  1794),  of  which  Saint-Just  spoke  in  high-
flown  terms,  amounted  to  this  :  Each  commune  was  to  make
a  list  of  its  destitute  "  patriots  " — and  later  on  the  Committee
of  Public  Welfare  would  make  a  report  to  the  Convention  about
the  means  of  giving  them  certain  compensation  out  of  the
estates  of  the  enemies  of  the  Revolution.  They  would  be  given
*  JaurSs,  Histoir*  sociaUst$t  La  Convention,  pp.  1698  and  1699.


506 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

full  ownership  of  about  one  acre  each.*  As  to  the  old  people
and  the  infirm,  the  Convention  decided  on  the  22nd  Floreal
(May  u),  to  open  for  them  a  Book  of  National  Charity,  in
which  both  the  old  and  the  infirm  peasants  were  to  be  registered
for  a  yearly  allowance  of  1 60  livres  (francs),  the  old  or  infirm
artisans  for  120  livres,  and  the  old  mothers  and  widows  for
80  and  60  livres  respectively.

It  is  hardly  needful  to  say  that  this  promised  acre  of  land
looked  like  mockery  to  the  peasants.  Moreover,  apart  from  a
few  localities,  the  decree  was  never  applied.  Those  who  had
seized  nothing  for  themselves  got  nothing.

It  must  be  added,  however,  that  some  of  the  Commissioners
of  the  Convention,  namely,  Albitte,  Collot  d'Herbois,  and  Fouche
at  Lyons,  Jeanbon  Saint-Andr6  at  Brest  and  Toulon,  Romme
in  the  Charente,  had  shown  in  1793  a  certain  tendency  towards
socialising  various  commodities.  And  when  the  Convention
decreed,  on  the  i6th  Nivose,  Year  II.  (January  5,  1794),  ^nt  m
towns  besieged,  blockaded  or  surrounded  by  the  enemy,  all
materials,  goods,  and  means  of  subsistence  of  all  sorts,  must  be
shared  in  common" — "  there  was  a  tendency,"  as  M.  Aulard
says,  "  to  apply  this  law  to  towns  which  were  neither
besieged  nor  blockaded,  nor  surrounded."  f

The  Convention,  or,  to  be  more  correct,  its  Committees  of
Public  Welfare  and  Public  Safety,  certainly  succeeded  in  sup-
pressing in  1794  the  communist  manifestations.  But  the
spirit  of  the  revolution  impelled  the  French  nation  towards
such  measures,  and  under  the  pressure  of  events  a  great  work
of  levelling  and  an  unmistakable  display  of  the  communist
spirit  took  place,  more  or  less,  all  over  France,  during  the
Year  II.  of  the  Republic.!
Thus,  on  the  24th  Brumaire,  Year  II.  (November  14, 1793),

*  One  arpent — a  measure  the  size  of  which  varied  in  different  parts
of  France  from  one  acre  to  one  acre  and  a  quarter.

t  Hisloire  politique,  chap.  viii.  ii.

"This  is  why,"  Aulard  wrote,  "  one  looks  vainly  for  the  appearance
of  socialist  theories  at  this  moment  of  severe  repression.  But  the  sum
total  of  partial  and  empiric  measures  which  are  taken,  of  laws  which
are  passed  under  the  pressure  of  the  moment,  and  of  provisory  institu-
tions introduced,  by  the  revolutionary  government,  is  bringing  about
"a  state  of  things  which  prepares  men's  minds,  even  though  the  voice


END  OF  COMMUNIST  MOVEMENT 507

the  representatives  of  the  Convention  at  Lyons,  Albitte,  Collot
d'Herbois  and  Fouche,  passed  a  resolution,  which  even  began  to
take  effect,  whereby  all  the  infirm,  the  old,  the  orphans,  and  the
destitute  citizens  had  to  be  "lodged,  clothed,  and  fed  at  the
cost  of  the  rich  in  their  respective  cantons."  Moreover,
"  labour,  as  well  as  the  implements  needful  in  their  trades,  had
to  be  provided  for  the  citizens  capable  of  work."  The  commo-
dities placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  various  citizens — wrote
these  commissioners  in  their  circulars — must  be  in  proportion
to  their  labour,  their  diligence  and  the  ardour  they  display  in
the  service  of  the  mother  country.  Many  commissioners  of
the  Convention  passed  similar  resolutions.  Thus  Fouche*
levied  heavy  taxes  on  the  rich  to  feed  the  poor.  It  is  also
certain — as  M.  Aulard  says — that  many  commissioners  had
begun  to  practise  collectivism,  or,  we  should  say,  municipal
communism.*

The  idea  that  the  State  ought  to  take  over  the  factories
abandoned  by  their  owners,  and  work  them,  was  expressed
more  than  once.  Chaumette  developed  it  in  October  1793,
•  when  he  demonstrated  the  bad  effects  of  the  law  of  the  "  maxi-
mum "  upon  certain  industries  ;  and  Jeanbon  Saint-Andre
had  taken  into  the  hands  of  the  Government  a  certain  mine  of
Carhaix,  in  Brittany,  in  order  to  secure  a  living  for  the  workers.

However,  if  certain  of  the  representatives  of  the  Convention
in  the  provinces  really  took,  in  1793  and  1794,  equalitarian
measures,  and  were  inspired  with  the  idea  of  "limitation  of
incomes,"  the  Convention  itself  remained  a  defender  of  the
interests  of  the  middle  classes,  and  there  must  be  some  truth
in  the  remark  of  Buonarotti,  who  wrote  in  1842,  that  the  fear
of  the  Convention,  lest  Robespierre  and  his  group  should  begin
taking  measures  that  would  favour  the  equalitarian  instincts  of
the  people,  contributed  to  the  downfall  of  this  group  on  the
9th  Thermidor.*

of  the  socialists  is  not  heard,  for  a  social  revolution,  and  begins  a  partial
accomplishment  of  it."

*  Observations  sur  Maximilien  Robespierre,  in  La  Fraternite,  journal
mensuel  exposant  la  doctrine  dt  la  communaute,  No,  17,  September  1842.


CHAPTER  LXI

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  CENTRAL
GOVERNMENT— REPRISALS

Committees  of  Public  Welfare  and  Public  Safety — Condition
of  Paris — Power  of  old  regime — Middle  classes  in  opposition
to  Revolution — Paper-money  forbidden  by  Convention —
Weakening  of  Commune — Convention  and  sections — "  Law
of  suspects  " — Jacobins  obtain  power — Robespierre  and
expelled  Girondins — Report  of  Saint- Just — Central  Govern-
ment established — Military  situation — Republican  reverses —
Massacres  of  Republicans — Attempts  to  rescue  Marie-An-
toinette— Her  trial  ordered,  but  postponed — Her  execution —
Condemnation  of  arrested  Girondins — Others  follow — Begin-
ning of  Terror

SINCE  May*3i  and  the  arrest  of  the  principal  Girondin  members,
the  "  Mountain  "  had  patiently  worked  during  the  summer  of
1793  at  the  constitution  of  a  strong  Government,  concentrated
in  Paris  and  capable  of  grappling  with  the  foreign  invasion,
the  revolts  in  the  provinces,  and  any  popular  risings  that  might
occur  in  Paris  itself  under  the  guidance  of  the  Enrages  and  the
communists.

We  have  seen  that  in  April  the  Convention  had  entrusted
the  central  power  to  a  Committee  of  Public  Welfare,  and  after
May  31  it  continued  to  strengthen  this  committee  with  new
Montagnard  elements.*  And  when  the  application  of  the

*  The  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  which  at  first  had  been  Danton-
ist,  became  after  May  31  more  and  more  Robespierrist.  Saint- Just
and  Couthon  had  already  become  members  on  May  30  ;  and  Jeanbon
Saint-Andre  joined  on  June  12  ;  Robespierre  entered  it  on  July  27,
Carnot  and  Prieur  (of  the  C6te-d' Or J  were  admitted  on  August  14,  and
Collot  d'Herbois  and  Billaud-Varenne  on  September  6,  after  the  rising
of  the  4th  and  sth  of  that  month.  Three  parties  could  be  distinguished
in  this  committee :  the  terrorists,  Collot  d'Herbois  and  Billaud-Varenne  ;
the  workers,  Carnot  for  the  war,  Prieur  for  military  engineering  and
armament,  and  Lindet  for  the  provisioning  of  the  army;  and  "the

508


CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT 509

new  Constitution  was  put  off  till  the  termination  of  the  war,  the
two  committees — of  Public  Welfare  and  of  General  Safety —
continued  to  concentrate  power  in  their  hands,  while  pursuing
a  moderate  policy — that  of  standing  midway  between  the
advanced  parties,  represented  by  the  Enrages  and  the  Commune
of  Paris,  and  the  followers  of  Danton,  behind  whom  stood  the
Girondins.

In  this  work  of  concentration  of  power  the  two  committees
were  strongly  seconded  by  the  Jacobins,  who  were  extending
their  sphere  of  action  into  the  provinces  and  were  closing  up
their  ranks.  From  eight  hundred  in  1791,  the  number  of
societies  affiliated  to  the  Jacobin  Club  of  Paris  rose  to  eight
thousand  in  1793,  and  each  one  of  these  societies  became  a
support  of  the  republican  middle  classes ;  they  were  also  nur-
series whence  the  numerous  officials  of  the  new  bureaucracy
were  drawn,  and  police  centres  which  the  Government  used  for
discovering  its  enemies  and  for  getting  rid  of  them.

Besides,  forty  thousand  revolutionary  committees  were
formed  in  the  towns  and  the  village  communes,  as  well  as  in  the
sections,  and  all  these  communities,  which  mostly  stood,  as
Michelet  had  already  noticed,  under  the  leadership  of  educated
middle-class  men — very  often  officials  of  the  old  regime — were
soon  subordinated  by  the  Convention  to  the  Committee  of
General  Safety,  while  the  sections  themselves,  as  also  the
Popular  Societies,  were  as  rapidly  transformed  into  organs
of  the  central  government,  so  as  to  become  mere  branches  of
the  republican  hierarchy.

Meanwhile  the  state  of  Paris  was  far  from  reassuring.  The
energetic  men,  the  best  revolutionists,  had  enlisted  in  1792  and
1793  in  the  army,  and  had  gone  to  the  frontiers  or  to  La
Vendee,  while  the  royalists  were  beginning  to  lift  their  heads.
Taking  advantage  of  the  slackened  supervision  of  the  sections,
they  returned  in  great  numbers  to  Paris.  In  August,  the

men  of  action,"  Robespierre,  Saint- Just  and  Couthon.  The  Committee
of  Public  Safety,  which  represented  the  State  police,  consisted  chiefly
of  functionaries  of  the  old  rtgime.  One  is  even  tempted  to  ask  oneself
whether  many  of  these  men  had  not  retained  their  former  sympathies.
The  Public  Prosecutor  of  the  revolutionary  tribunal,  Fouquier-Tinville,
was  entirely  subservient  to  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  whose
orders  he  came  to  receive  every  evening.


5io THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

extravagant  luxury  of  the  old  regime  suddenly  made  its  re-
appearance. The  public  gardens  and  the  theatres  were
crowded  with  "  muscadins  ".*  In  the  theatres  royalist  plays
were  cheered  vociferously,  while  republican  plays  were  hissed.
In  one  of  the  former,  the  Temple  prison  and  the  rescue  of  the
Queen  were  represented,  and  it  needed  but  little  for  the  escape
of  Marie-Antoinette  to  become  an  accomplished  fact.

The  sections  were  overrun  by  Girondist  and  royalist
counter-revolutionists.  And  when  the  young  workmen  and
artisans,  weary  after  their  long  day's  work,  assembled  in  the
general  meetings  of  the  sections,  the  young  men  of  the  middle
classes,  armed  with  cudgels,  came  to  these  meetings,  and
carried  the  voting  at  their  will.

Of  course  the  sections  would  have  withstood  these  incur-
sions, as  they  had  already  done  once  before,  by  each  helping  the
neighbouring  sections,  but  the  Jacobins  regarded  the  power  of
the  sections  with  jealousy,  and  made  use  of  the  first  opportunity
to  paralyse  them.  That  opportunity  was  not  long  in  coming.

Bread  still  continued  scarce  and  dear  in  Paris,  and  on  Septem-
ber 4  crowds  began  to  assemble  round  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  with
cries  of  "  We  want  bread  !  "  f  These  cries  were  becoming
threatening,  and  it  needed  all  the  popularity  and  good-humour
of  Chaumette,  the  orator  most  loved  by  the  poor  of  Paris,  to
soothe  the  crowd.  Chaumette  promised  to  provide  bread,  and
to  have  the  administrators  charged  with  provisioning  Paris
arrested.  By  these  promises  he  staved  off  a  rising,  and  the
next  day  the  people  only  sent  deputations  to  the  Convention.

The  Convention,  however,  neither  knew  nor  wished  to  deal
with  the  true  causes  of  this  movement.  All  it  did  was  to
threaten  the  counter-revolutionists  with  drastic  measures,
and  to  strengthen  the  central  government.  In  fact,  neither
the  Convention,  nor  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare,  nor

•  A  nickname  given  to  extravagantly  dressed  dandies  of  the  wealthier
classes.

t  It  is  possible,  even  probable,  that  royalists,  too  (like  Lepltre),
worked  in  the  sections  to  foment  this  movement.  It  was  an  old  ruse
of  the  reactionists.  But  to  say  that  this  movement  was  the  work
of  reactionaries  was  as  absurd  and  as  Jesuitical  as  to  say,  for  instance,
that  the  movements  of  1789  were  the  work  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans.


CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT 511

even  the  Commnne — the  existence  of  which,  it  must  be  said,
was  already  threatened  by  the  committee — showed  any  capacity
for  facing  the  situation.  There  was  no  one  to  express  the
communist  ideas  which  were  growing  among  the  people,  with
the  same  vigour,  the  same  daring  and  precision  that  Danton,
Robespierre,  Barere,  and  so  many  others  had  used  in  expressing
the  aspirations  of  the  early  days  of  the  Revolution.  The
advocates  of  "  strong  government  " — middle-class  mediocrities,
more  or  less  democratic  in  their  views — were  steadily  gaining
the  upper  hand.

The  truth  is,  that  the  old  regime  st  11  retained  an  immense
power,  and  this  power  had  been  augmented  lately  by  the
support  it  had  found  among  precisely  those  on  whom  the
Revolution  had  poured  its  gifts.  To  shatter  this  power,  a  new,
popular  and  equalitarian  revolution  was  necessary ;  but  the
greater  number  of  the  revolutionists  of  1789-1792  wanted  no
such  thing.  The  majority  of  the  middle  classes,  who  had  held
revolutionary  views  in  1789-1792,  now  considered  that  the
Revolution  was  going  too  far.  Would  this  Revolution  be  able
to  prevent  the  "  anarchists "  from  "  levelling  wealth "  ?
Would  it  not  make  the  peasants  too  comfortable  ?  so  com-
fortable that  they  would  refuse  to  work  for  the  purchasers  of  the
national  lands  ?  Where,  then,  should  they  find  the  labourers
to  get  profits  from  their  estates  ?  For  if  the  buyers  had  put
millions  into  the  Treasury  to  buy  national  lands,  it  was  certainly
with  the  intent  of  getting  profits  out  of  them,  and  what  was
to  be  done  if  there  were  no  more  unemployed  proletarians  in
the  villages  ?

The  Court  party  and  the  aristocracy,  threfore,  had  now  as
allies  a  whole  class  of  men  who  had  bought  national  lands,
troops  of  the  so-called  "  black  gangs  "  (les  bandes  noires)  who
were  speculating  in  the  purchase  and  sale  of  the  national
estates,  crowds  of  contractors  speculating  in  the  supplies  for
the  army,  and  multitudes  of  stock-jobbers  speculating  in  the
paper-currency  and  in  all  the  necessaries  of  life.  All  of  them
had  made  their  fortunes,  and  they  were  in  a  hurry  now  to  enjoy
them  unhindered — to  put  an  end  to  the  Revolution,  on  one
Condition  only,  that  the  properties  they  had  bought  and  the


5i2 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

fortunes  they  had  amassed  should  not  be  taken  from  them.
A  newly  created  crowd  of  lower  middle-class  people  backed
them  up  in  the  villages.  And  all  of  them  cared  but  little  as  to
the  kind  of  Government  they  were  to  have,  provided  it  was
strong,  provided  it  could  keep  the  sans- culottes  in  order  and
withstand  England,  Austria  and  Prussia,  which  otherwise,  if
victorious,  might  try  to  restore  to  their  previous  owners  the
properties  taken  by  the  Revolution  from  the  clergy  and  the
emigrant  royalists.

Consequently,  the  Convention  and  the  Committee  of  Public
Welfare,  seeing  that  their  authority  was  endangered  by  the
Commune  and  the  sections,  had  every  facility  for  taking
advantage  of  the  lack  of  cohesion  in  the  movement  of  the  first
days  of  September,  and  for  giving  new  powers  to  the  central
government.

The  Convention  decided,  it  is  true,  to  stop  the  trade  in
paper-money,  by  forbidding  it  on  pain  of  death,  and  a  "  revo-
lutionary army  "  of  6000  men  was  organised,  under  the  com-
mand of  the  Hebertist  Ronsin,  for  the  purpose  of  checking  the
counter-revolutionists  and  requisitioning  in  the  villages  victuals
wherewith  to  feed  Paris.  But  as  this  measure  was  not  followed
by  any  vital  act  which  would  have  given  the  land  to  those  who
wished  to  cultivate  it  themselves,  or  would  have  helped  them  to
cultivate  it,  the  requisitions  of  the  revolutionary  army  became
another  cause  of  hatred  in  the  villages  against  Paris,  and
resulted  only  in  increasing  the  difficulties  of  providing  food-stuffs
for  the  capital.

For  the  rest,  the  Convention  did  not  go  beyond  uttering
threats  of  a  "  Terror,"  and  endowing  the  Government  with
fresh  powers.  Danton  spoke  of  an  "armed  nation"  and
menaced  the  royalists.  "  Every  day,"  he  said,  "  some  aristo-
crat, some  scoundrel  ought  to  pay  with  his  head  for  his  crimes."
The  Jacobin  Club  demanded  the  arraignment  of  the  arrested
Girondins.  Hebert  spoke  of  an  "itinerant  guillotine."  The
revolutionary  tribunal  was  going  to  be  rendered  more  effi-
cacious, and  searches  in  private  houses  were  allowed  to  be  made,
even  at  night.

At  the  same  time,  while  threatening  the  nation  with  a  reign


CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT 513

of  terror,  measures  were  taken  to  weaken  the  Commune.  As
the  revolutionary  committees  of  the  sections,  which  held  powers
of  judicial  police,  including  that  of  arrest,  had  been  accused  of
various  abuses  of  these  powers,  Chaumette  succeeded  in  placing
them  under  the  surveillance  of  the  Commune  and  in  making
them  eliminate  their  less  reliable  members ;  but  twelve  days
later,  on  September  17,  1793,  the  Convention,  becoming  jealous
of  the  thus  increased  power  of  the  Commune,  took  away  this
right  from  its  rival,  and  the  revolutionary  committees  were
now  placed  under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  Committee  of
Public  Safety — that  sinister  force  of  secret  police  which  grew
by  the  side  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare,  threatening
soon  to  absorb  it.

As  to  the  sections,  under  the  pretext  that  they  were  being
invaded  by  counter-revolutionists,  the  Convention  decided,  on
September  9,  that  the  number  of  their  general  meetings  should
be  reduced  to  two  a  week  ;  and  to  gild  the  pill,  two  francs  a
meeting  were  allotted  to  those  of  the  sans-culottes  who  attended
these  assemblies,  and  who  lived  only  by  the  work  of  their
hands — a  measure  which  has  often  been  put  forward  as  very
revolutionary,  but  which  the  sections  seem  to  have  judged
differently.  A  few  of  these  (the  Contract  social,  the  Halle-
aux-bles,  the  Droits  de  Phomme,  under  the  influence  of  Varlet)
refused  the  indemnity  and  condemned  the  principle  ;  whilst
others,  as  Ernest  Mellie  has  shown,  only  made  very  moderate
use  of  this  allowance.

On  September  19,  the  Convention  increased  the  arsenal  of
repressive~laws  by  the  terrible  "law  of  iutpects."  This  law
made  possible  the  arrest  as  suspects  of  "Jt"ci~dfvants — dis-
possessed nobles — of  all  those  who  might  show  themselves
"  partisans  of  tyranny  or  federalism,"  of  all  who  "  do  not
fulfil  their  civil  duties  " — whosoever,  in  fact,  had  not  continually
shown  devotion  to  the  Revolution.  Louis  Blanc  and  all  the
admirers  of  the  State  describe  this  law  as  a  measure  of  "  tremen-
dous policy  "  (formidable  politique),  whereas  in  reality  it  simply
revealed  the  incapacity  of  the  Convention  to  continue  in  the
direction  that  has  been  opened  and  traced  by  the  Revolution.
It  also  prepared  the  way  for  the  terrible  overcrowding  of  the

2  K


THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

prisons,  which  led  later  on  to  the  drowning  (noyades)  of  prisoners
by  Carrier  in  Nantes,  to  the  wholesale  shooting  by  Collot
in  Lyons,  to  the  fourntes  (batches)  of  June  and  July  1794  in
Paris,  and  more  than  anything  else  prepared  the  downfall  of
the  Montagnard  regime.

As  a  formidable  government  thus  grew  up  in  Paris,  terrible
struggles  inevitably  arose  between  the  various  political  factions,
to  decide  in  whose  hands  this  powerful  weapon  should  be.  On
September  25,  a  free  fight  took  place  at  the  Convention  between
all  the  parties,  the  victory  remaining  with  those  who  repre-
sented the  party  of  the  golden  mean  among  the  revolutionists
— with  the  Jacobins  and  Robespierre  their  faithful  representa-
tive. Under  their  influence,  the  revolutionary  tribunal  was
constituted  from  their  nominees.

Eight  days  later,  on  October  3,  the  new  power  asserted  itself.
On  that  day,  Amar,  member  of  the  Committee  of  Public
Safety,  was  forced  to  make,  after  much  hesitation,  his  report
about  the  Girondins  who  had  been  expelled  on  June  2  from  the
Convention,  in  which  he  demanded  that  they  should  be  sent
before  the  revolutionary  tribunal ;  and  either  from  fear  or  from
some  other  consideration,  he  now  went  a  good  deal  further  the
other  way,  and  demanded,  besides  the  thirty-one  men  whom
he  accused,  the  prosecution  also  of  seventy-three  Girondist
deputies  who  had  protested  in  June  against  the  violation  of  the
national  representation  in  the  Convention,  but  had  continued
to  sit.  To  every  one's  great  astonishment  Robespierre  violently
opposed  this  proposition.  It  was  not  the  rank  and  file,  said  he,
who  should  be  punished  ;  it  sufficed  to  punish  their  leaders.
Supported  as  he  was  by  both  the  Right  and  by  the  Jacobins,
he  carried  his  point  with  the  Convention,  and  thus  gained  the
aureole  of  a  conciliator,  capable  of  dominating  both  the  Con-
vention and  the  two  committees.

A  few  days  more  and  his  friend  Saint- Just  read  before  the
Convention  a  report,  in  which,  after  complaining  of  corruption,
and  of  the  tyranny  of  the  new  bureaucracy,  he  made  allusions
to  the  Commune  of  Paris — Chaumette  and  his  party — and
concluded  with  a  demand  that  "  the  revolutionary  govern-
ment be  maintained  till  peace  be  concluded."


CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT 515

The  Convention  accepted  his  conclusions.  The  central
government  was  thus  definitively  constituted.

Whilst  these  struggles  were  taking  place  in  Paris,  the  military-
situation  offered  a  most  gloomy  prospect.  In  August,  an  order
for  a  levy  had  been  issued,  and  Danton  having  again  recovered
his  energy  and  his  penetration  of  the  people's  mind,  had  the
splendid  inspiration  of  putting  the  entire  work  of  enlistment
into  the  hands,  not  of  the  revolutionary  bureaucracy,  but  of  the
eight  hundred  confederates  who  had  been  sent  to  Paris  by  the
primary  electoral  assemblies  to  signify  their  acceptance  of  the
Constitution.  This  plan  was  adopted  on  August  25.

However,  as  one-half  of  France  had  no  desire  for  war,  the
levy  progressed  but  slowly ;  both  arms  and  ammunition  were
lacking.

There  was  a  series  of  reverses  at  first,  in  August  and  September.
Toulon  was  in  the  hands  of  the  English,  Marseilles  and  Provence
were  in  revolt  against  the  Convention  ;  the  siege  of  Lyons  was
still  going  on — it  continued  till  October  8 — and  in  La  Vendee
the  situation  was  not  improving.  It  was  only  on  October  16
that  the  armies  of  the  Republic  gained  their  first  victory,  at
Wattignies,  and  on  the  1 8th  that  the  Vendeans,  beaten  at
Chollet,  crossed  the  Loire  to  march  northwards.  But  still  the
massacres  of  the  republicans  did  not  cease,  and  at  Noirmoutiers,
Charette  shot  all  who  surrendered  to  him.

It  is  easy  to  understand  that  at  the  sight  of  all  this  bloodshed,
of  the  superhuman  efforts  made  by  France  to  liberate  its  terri-
tory from  the  invaders,  and  the  incredible  sufferings  of  the
great  mass  of  the  French  people,  the  cry  of  "  Strike  the  enemies
of  the  Revolution,  high  or  low  !  "  came  from  the  hearts  of  the
revolutionists.  A  nation  cannot  be  oppressed  beyond  endur-
ance without  awakening  revolt.

On  October  3  the  order  was  given  to  the  revolutionary
tribunal  for  the  trial  of  Marie- Antoinette.  Since  February
there  had  been  continual  talk  of  attempted  rescues  of  the  Queen.
Several  of  these,  as  we  know  to-day,  very  nearly  succeeded.
The  municipal  officers  whom  the  Commune  put  in  charge  of
the  Temple  were  continually  being  won  over  by  partisans  of  the


516 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

royal  family.  Foulon,  Brunot,  Moelle,  Vincent,  and  Michonis
were  amongst  them.  Lepitre,  an  ardent  royalist,  was  in  the
service  of  the  Commune  and  attracted  attention  in  the  sections
by  his  advanced  opinions.  Another  royalist,  Bault,  had  ob-
tained the  post  of  warder  in  the  Conciergerie  prison,  where  the
Queen  was  now  kept.  An  attempted  escape  had  fallen  through
in  February  ;  but  another  attempt,  organised  by  Michonis  and
the  Baron  de  Batz,  came  very  near  succeeding.  After  the
discovery  of  this  attempt  (July  il)  Marie-Antoinette  was  first
separated  from  her  son,  who  was  placed  in  the  keeping  of  the
cobbler  Simon.  The  Queen  was  then  transferred  (August  8)
to  the  Conciergerie.  But  the  attempts  to  rescue  her  con-
tinued, and  a  Knight  of  Saint-Louis,  Rougeville,  even  succeeded
in  penetrating  to  her,  whilst  Bault,  as  warder,  kept  up  relations
with  the  outer  world.  Every  plan  for  her  liberation  produced
great  excitement  among  the  royalists,  who  threatened  a  coup
d'etat  and  the  immediate  massacre  of  the  conventionals  and
all  patriots  in  general.

It  is  very  likely  that  the  Convention  would  not  have  post-
poned the  trial  of  Marie-Antoinette  till  October  had  it  not
hoped  to  stop  the  invasion  of  the  allied  monarchs  as  a  condition
of  the  Queen's  liberation.  It  is  known,  indeed,  that  the  Com-
mittee of  Public  Welfare  had  given  (in  July)  instructions  in
this  sense  to  its  commissioners,  Semonville  and  Maret,  who  were
arrested  in  Italy  by  the  governor  of  Milan  ;  and  it  is  also  known
that  the  negotiations  for  the  liberation  of  the  Crown  Princess
were  carried  on  still  later.

The  efforts  of  Marie- Antoinette  to  call  into  France  a  German
invasion,  and  her  betrayals  to  facilitate  the  victory  of  the  enemy,
are  too  well  known — now  that  her  correspondence  with  Fersen
has  been  published — for  it  to  be  worth  while  to  refute  the  fables
of  her  modern  defenders  who  wish  to  prove  that  she  was  almost
a  saint.  Public  opinion  was  not  mistaken  in  1793,  when  it
accused  the  daughter  of  Marie-Therese  of  being  even  more
guilty  than  Louis  XVI.  She  died  on  the  scaffold  on  October  16.

The  Girondins  soon  followed  her.  It  will  be  remembered
that  when  thirty-one  of  them  were  arrested  on  June  2,  they  had
been  allowed  the  liberty  of  moving  about  in  Paris,  under  the


CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT 517

condition  of  being  escorted  by  a  gendarme.  There  was  so  little
idea  of  taking  their  lives  that  several  well-known  Montagnards
had  offered  to  go  to  the  departments  of  the  arrested  Girondins,
to  be  kept  there  as  hostages.  But  most  of  the  arrested  Giron-
dins had  escaped  from  Paris  and  had  gone  to  preach  civil  war
in  the  provinces.  Some  roused  Normandy  and  Brittany,  others
urged  Bordeaux,  Marseilles,  and  Provence  to  revolt,  and  every-
where they  became  the  allies  of  royalists.

At  this  time,  of  the  thirty-one  arrested  on  June  2,  only  twelve
remained  in  Paris.  Ten  more  Girondins  were  added  to  these,
and  the  case  was  brought  into  Court  on  the  3rd  Brumaire
(October  22).  The  Girondins  defended  themselves  with
courage,  and  as  their  speeches  seemed  likely  to  influence  even
the  picked  jury  of  the  revolutionary  tribunal,  the  Committee
of  Public  Welfare  hurriedly  obtained  from  the  Convention  a  law
on  the  "  acceleration  of  the  pleadings  "  in  Court.  On  the  9th
Brumaire  (October  29),  Fouquier-Tinville  had  this  new  law
read  before  the  Court,  the  case  was  closed,  and  the  twenty-two
Girondins  were  condemned.  Valaze  stabbed  himself,  the  others
were  executed  on  the  morrow.

Madame  Roland,  the  real  inspirer  of  the  Girondist  party,  was
executed  on  the  1 8th  Brumaire  (November  8)  ;  the  ex-mayor
of  Paris,,  Bailly,  of  whose  connivance  with  Lafayette  in  the
massacre  of  July  17,  1791,  there  was  no  doubt,  Girey-Dupre
from  Lyons,  the  Feuillant  Barnave,  won  over  by  the  Queen  while
he  accompanied  her  from  Varennes  to  Paris,  soon  followed  them,
and  in  December  the  Girondin  Kersaint  and  Rabaut  Saint-
Etienne  mounted  the  scaffold,  as  also  did  Madame  Dubarry
of  royal  fame.  Roland  and  Condorcet  committed  suicide.

Thus  began  the  Terror,  and  once  begun,  it  had  to  follow  its
inevitable  course  of  development.


CHAPTER  LXII

EDUCATION— THE METRIC SYSTEM— THE NEW
CALENDAR— ANTI-RELIGIOUS  MOVEMENT

Education — Three-grade  system — Metric  system — Its  im-
portance— The  Republican  calendar — Its  connection  with
Church— Severe  laws  against  priests — First  attempts  at
"  dechristianisation  "—Encouraged  by  Convention— Bishop
Gobel's  renunciation — Enthusiasm  of  Assembly — Movement
spreads — Fete  of  Liberty  and  Reason — Opposition  of  Robes-
pierre— Conduct  of  Danton — Robespierre  and  Danton —
Triumph  of  Catholicism— Fete  of  the  Supreme  Being— Prelude
to  9th  Thermidor

AMIDST  all  these  struggles,  the  revolutionists  did  not  lose  sight
of  the  great  question  of  national  education.  They  tried  to
lay  its  foundations  on  principles  of  equality.  An  enormous
amount  of  work  was  actually  done  in  this  direction,  as  may
be  seen  by  the  documents  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Instruc-
tion, recently  published.*  The  admirable  report  of  Michel
Lepelletier  on  education,  found  after  his  death,  was  read  before
the  Convention,  and  a  series  of  measures  for  a  three-grade
system  of  education — primary  schools,  central  schools  and
special  schools — was  adopted.

But  the  greatest  intellectual  monument  of  this  period  of
the  Revolution  was  the  metric  system.  This  system  did  much
more  than  simply  introduce  into  the  subdivisions  of  linear,
surface,  volume,  and  weight  measures,  the  decimal  system
which  is  the  basis  of  our  numeration — which  of  itself  would
have  gone  a  good  way  towards  the  simplification  of  mathe-

*  Proces-verbaux  du  Comite  d' instruction  publique  de  I' Assemble
legislative  zndfiProces-verbaux  du  Comitt  d' instruction  publique  de  la
Convention  nationale,  published,  with  notes  and  prefaces,  by  James
"Guillaume  (Paris,  1889-1907),  7  vols.

518


THE  NEW  CALENDAR  519

matical  instruction,  and  helped  to  develop  the  mathematical
turn  of  mind.  It  also  gave  to  the  fundamental  measure,  the
metre,  a  length  (one  forty-millionth  part  of  the  earth's  meridian)
which  could  always  be  re-established  with  a  very  fair  degree
of  accuracy,  in  case  our  measures  should  be  lost  in  future  ages,
as  those  of  the  old  civilisations  have  been  lost — and  this  very
fact  opened  up  new  vistas  for  thought.  Besides,  by  establish-
ing a  simple  ratio  between  the  units  of  length,  surface,  volume
and  weight,  the  metric  system  prepared  the  mind  of  the  next
generation  for  the  great  victory  of  science  in  the  nineteenth
century — its  certainty  as  to  the  unity  of  physical  forces  and
the  unity  of  Nature.

The  new  Republican  calendar  was  a  logical  outcome  of  the
metric  system.  It  was  adopted  by  the  Convention,  after
two  reports  by  Romme,  read  on  September  20  and  October
5,  and  another  report  of  Fabre  d'Eglantine,  read  on  November
24,  1793.*  The  new  calendar  inaugurated  also  a  new  era
in  the  reckoning  of  years,  which  was  to  begin  with  the  procla-
mation of  the  Republic  in  France,  on  September  22,  1792,
which  was  also  the  autumn  equinox.  The  Christian  week
was  abandoned.  Sunday  disappeared — the  day  of  rest  being
each  tenth  day,  the  decadi.^

This decision of  the Convention, which  struck  out  the

*  The  Republican  year  was  divided  into  twelve  months,  each  of
thirty  days,  the  names  for  which  were  found  by  Fabre  d' Eglantine  :
Vendemiaire,  Brumaire  and  Frimaire  for  the  autumn,  from  September
22  till  December  20  ;  Nivose,  Pluviose  and  Ventose  for  the  winter,  from
December  21  till  March  20  ;  Germinal,  Floreal  and  Prairial  for  the
spring,  from  March  21  till  June  18  ;  and  Messidor,  Thcrmidor  and
Fructidor  for  the  summer,  from  June  19  till  September  16.  Five  extra
days,  called  the  sans -culottides,  September  17,  18,  19,  20  and  21,  com-
pleted the  year.  Each  month  was  divided  into  three  decades,  and  the
days  were  called  primidi,  duodi,  tridi,  &c.,  the  day  of  rest  being  the
tenth  day,  the  decadi.

f  The  idea  of  establishing  the  new  calendar  on  an  astronomical
conception  was  certainly  excellent  (the  idea  of  placing  the  five  surplus
days  all  at  the  end  of  the  year  was  not  so  good)  and  the  names  of  the
months  were  very  well  chosen  ;  but  besides  all  the  objections  which
were  bound  to  be  made  against  this  calendar,  because  it  glorified  the
Revolution,  it  is  very  probable  also  that  the  idea  of  replacing  the  week
of  seven  days  (the  quarter  of  a  lunar  month)  by  one  of  ten  days,  too
long  for  our  customs,  was  and  will  be  an  obstacle  to  its  general  accept-
ance.


520 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Christian  calendar  from  our  daily  life,  necessarily  emboldened
those  who  saw  in  the  Christian  Church  and  its  servants  the
chief  support  of  servitude.  The  experience  they  had  had
with  the  clergy  who  had  taken  the  Oath  to  the  Constitution
had  proved  the  impossibility  of  winning  over  the  Church  to
the  cause  of  progress.  Consequently  the  question  of  abolish-
ing the  payment  of  the  clergy  by  the  State,  and  of  leaving  the
expense  of  supporting  the  ministers  of  their  various  cults  to
the  members  of  these  cults  themselves,  necessarily  arose.
Cambon  had  already  brought  it  before  the  Convention  in
November  1792.  But  on  three  different  occasions  the  Con-
vention decided  to  retain  a  National  Church,  subject  to  the
State  and  paid  by  it — while  it  treated  the  refractory  priests
(who  had  not  taken  the  oath)  with  great  severity.

Against  these  priests  very  severe  laws  were  passed  :  deporta-
tion for  those  unsworn,  and,  from  March  18,  1793,  death  for
those  who  should  take  part  in  disturbances  in  connection  with
the  recruiting,  and  those  who  should  be  found  on  the  Republic's
territory  after  having  been  condemned  to  deportation.  On
October  21,  1793,  even  more  expeditious  laws  were  decreed,
and  deportation  became  applicable  also  to  the  constitutional,
sworn  priests,  if  they  were  accused  of  "  incivism  "  by  six  citizens
of  their  canton.  This  proved  the  growth  of  a  conviction  in
France  that  the  jurcurs  (the  priests  who  had  taken  the  oath)
were  often  quite  as  dangerous  as  the  non-jureurs  or  papisUs.

The  first  attempts  of  "  dechristianisation  "  were  made  at
Abbeville  and  at  Nevers.*  The  commissioner  of  the  Con-
vention, Fouche,  who  was  at  Nevers  and  who  acted  no  doubt
in  agreement  and  perhaps  under  the  influence  of  Chaumette,
whom  he  met  in  this  town,  declared,  on  September,  26,  1793,
war  "against  all  superstitious  and  hypocritical  worship,"  as
also  the  desirr  to  substitute  for  them  "  a  worship  of  the  Republic
and  of  natural  morality."!  A  few  days  after  the  introduction

*  In  this  account  I  follow  closely  the  excellent  monograph  of  Professor
Aulard,  Lt  Culte  de  la  Raison  et  le  Culte  de  I'Etre  supreme,  2nd  edition
(Paris,  1904).  An  abridgment  of  this  work  is  to  be  found  also  in  his
Histoire  politique,  2nd  edition,  p.  469  and  following.

f  He  also  issued  an  order  by  the  force  of  which  "  any  minister  of
any  cult,  or  priest  pensioned  by  the  nation,  is  bound  to  marry,  or  to


ANTI-RELIGIOUS  MOVEMENT  521

of  the  new  calendar  he  issued,  on  October  10,  a  new  order,
according  to  which  the  ceremonies  of  various  cults  might
only  be  practised  inside  their  respective  temples.  All  "  religious
emblems  on  the  high  roads,"  &c.,  were  to  be  destroyed,  the
priests  were  no  longer  to  appear  in  their  vestments  anywhere
except  in  their  churches,  and,  finally,  burials  were  to  be  con-
ducted without  any  religious  ceremony,  in  fields  planted  with
trees,  "  beneath  the  shadow  of  which  shall  be  erected  a  statue
representing  Sleep. '  All  other  emblems  shall  be  destroyed,"
and  "  the  gates  to  this  field,  consecrated  with  religious  respect
to  the  shades  of  the  dead,  shall  bear  this  inscription  :  *  Death
is  eternal  sleep  '."  He  also  explained  the  meaning  of  these
decrees  to  the  people,  by  means  of  materialist  lectures.

At  the  same  time,  Laignelot,  another  commissioner  of  the
Convention,  transformed  the  parish  church  in  Rochefort  into
a  Temple  of  Truth,  where  eight  Catholic  priests  and  one
Protestant  minister  came  to  "  renounce "  their  orders  on
October  31,  1793.  At  Paris,  on  October  14,  at  the  instigation
of  Chaumette,  external  religious  practices  were  forbidden,
and  on  the  i6th  the  order  issued  by  Fouche  on  burials  was
adopted  in  principle  by  the  Commune.

That  this  movement  was  in  no  way  a  surprise,  and  that
men's  minds  had  been  prepared  for  it  by  the  Revolution  itself
and  its  forerunners,  is  self-evident.  Encouraged  now  by  the
acts  of  the  Convention,  the  provinces  threw  themselves  enthu-
siastically into  the  movement  of  dechristianisation.  Follow-
ing the  lead  of  the  borough  of  Ris-Orangis,  the  whole  district
of  Corbeil  renounced  Christianity,  and  this  step  received  the
approbation  of  the  Convention,  when  deputies  from  Corbeil
arrived  on  October  30  to  report  what  had  been  done.

Six  days  later,  deputies  from  the  commune  of  Mennecy
presented  themselves  at  the  Convention,  attired  in  copes.
They,  too,  were  well  received,  and  the  Convention  recognised
the  "  right  that  all  citizens  have  to  adopt  whatsoever  worship
suits  them  best,  and  to  suppress  those  ceremonies  which
displease  them."  A  deputation  from  Seine-et-Oise  asking

adopt  a  child,  or  to  keep  an  incapable  old  person,  on  pain  of  being
divested  of  his  offices  and  pensions  "  (Aulard,  Culte  de  la  Raison,  p.  27).


522 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

that  the  Bishop  of  Versailles,  who  had  recently  died,  should
not  be  replaced,  was  also  received  with  due  honours.

The  Convention  encouraged  the  movement  against  Christi-
anity not  only  by  its  attitude  towards  dechristianisation,
but  also  by  the  use  to  which  it  put  the  Church  treasures,
brought  to  it  by  the  inhabitants — including  the  shrine  of  the
Church  of  Sainte-Genevieve,  which  was  transferred,  by  order,
to  the  Mint.*

Encouraged  undoubtedly  by  this  attitude  of  the  govern-
ment, Anacharsis  Cloots  and  Chaumette  then  took  another
step  forward.  Cloots,  a  Prussian  baron,  who  had  whole-
heartedly espoused  the  cause  of  the  Revolution,  and  who
advocated  with  courage  and  sincerity  an  International  Federa-
tion of  all  peoples,  and  the  procurtur  of  the  Commune,  Chau-
mette, who  was  a  true  representative  of  the  Paris  working
man,  persuaded  Gobel,  the  Bishop  of  Paris,  to  lay  down  his
ecclesiastical  duties.  Having  received  the  consent  of  the
Episcopal  Council,  and  having  announced  his  decision  to  the
department  and  to  the  Commune,  Gobel  came  in  state  on
the  I7th  Brumaire  (November  7,  1793),  accompanied  by
eleven  of  his  vicars,  and  followed  by  the  mayor  Pache,  the
procureur  Chaumette,  and  by  two  members  of  the  department,
Momoro  and  Lullier,  to  the  Convention,  to  divest  himself
openly  of  his  prerogatives  and  titles.

His  speech  on  this  occasion  was  full  of  dignity.  Revering
as  he  did  "  the  eternal  principles  of  equality  and  morality,  the
necessary  foundations  of  every  truly  republican  government,"
he  now  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  people  and  renounced  the
practice  of  "  the  functions  of  a  minister  of  the  Catholic  faith."
Depositing  his  cross  and  his  ring,  he  accepted  and  put  on  the
red  cap  which  one  of  the  members  handed  him.

The  Assembly  was  seized  thereupon  with  an  enthusiasm
which  could  only  be  compared  to  that  of  the  night  of  August
4.  Two  other  bishops,  Thomas  Lindet  and  Gay-Vernon,
and  some  other  ecclesiastical  members  of  the  Convention,
rushed  to  the  tribune  to  follow  the  example  of  Bishop  Gobel.

*  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Constituent  Assembly  had  already
made  similar  decisions.


ANTI-RELIGIOUS  MOVEMENT  523

Abbe  Gregoire,  however,  refused  to  join  them.  As  to  Sieves,
he  declared  that  for  many  years  already  he  had  abandoned
all  ecclesiastical  forms,  that  he  had  no  other  faith  than  that
of  liberty  and  equality,  and  that  his  prayers  had  long  since
called  for  the  triumph  of  reason  over  superstition  and  fanaticism.

The  result  of  this  scene  in  the  Convention  was  tremendous.
The  whole  of  France  and  all  the  neighbouring  nations  heard
of  it.  And  everywhere,  among  the  governing  classes,  there
rose  a  flood  of  hatred  against  the  Republic.

In  France,  the  movement  spread  rapidly  to  the  provinces.
Within  a  few  days  several  bishops  and  a  great  number  of  clergy
had  divested  themselves  of  their  titles,  and  their  abdications
were  at  times  the  occasion  of  striking  scenes.  It  is  touching,
indeed,  to  read,  for  instance,  the  following  description  of  the
abdication  of  the  clergy  at  Bourges,  which  I  found  in  a  local
pamphlet  of  the  period.*

Having  mentioned  a  priest,,}.  Baptiste  Patin,  and  Julien-
de-Dieu,  a  member  of  the  Benedictine  Order,  who  came  to  lay
down  their  ecclesiastical  prerogatives,  the  author  of  the
pamphlet  continues  :  "  Privat,  Brisson,  Patrou,  Rouen  and
Champion,  all  metropolitan  ex-cures,  were  not  the  last  to
step  into  the  arena  ;  Epsic  and  Calende,  Dumantier,  Veyre-
ton,  ex-Benedictines,  Rauchon  and  Collardot  came  after
them  ;  the  ex-canon  Desormaux,  and  Dubois,  his  companion,
bent  beneath  the  burden  of  years,  followed  them  with  slow
steps,  when  Lefranc  exclaimed :  '  Burn,  burn  the  credentials
of  our  priesthood,  and  may  the  very  memory  of  our  past  state
disappear  in  the  flames  which  consume  them.  I  lay  upon  the
altar  of  our  fatherland  this  silver  medal ;  it  bears  the  image
of  the  last  of  those  tyrants  who,  by  reason  of  the  scheming
ambition  of  the  clergy,  was  called  "  most  Christian  ".'  All
the  documents  of  priesthood  were  then  burnt  in  a  pile  ;  and
a  thousand  cries  arose  :  '  Perish  for  ever  the  memory  of  the
priests  !  Perish  for  ever  Christian  superstition  !  Long  live
the  sublime  religion  of  Nature  ! '  "  After  which  the  pamphlet

*  Extraits  du  registre  de  la  Societe  populaire  de  Bourges.  Stance
du  quintidi  25  brumaire  ]de  Van  deuxieme  de  la  Republique  franfaise,
une  et  indivisible  (November  15,  1793).  Pamphlets  of  the  British
Museum,  F.  16  (7).


524 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

enumerates  the  patriotic  gifts.  This  list  is  really  touching.
Presents  in  linen  and  silver  shoe-buckles  are  very  numerous.
The  patriots  and  the  "brothers"  were  poor.  They  gave
what  they  could.

On  the  whole  the  anti-Catholic  feeling,  in  which  a  "  religion
of  Nature  "  was  blended  with  patriotic  sentiments,  seems  to
have  been  far  deeper  than  one  was  led  to  think  before  consulting
the  documents  of  the  period.  The  Revolution  made  men  think,
and  gave  courage  to  their  thoughts.

In  the  meantime,  the  Department  and  the  Commune  of
Paris  decided  to  celebrate  the  following  decadi,  the  2Oth
Brumaire  (November  10),  in  Notre  Dame  itself,  and  to  organise
a  Fete  of  Liberty  and  Reason,  during  which  patriotic  hymns
were  to  be  sung  before  the  statue  of  Liberty.  Cloots,  Momoro,
Hubert  and  Chaumette  carried  on  an  active  propaganda  among
the  popular  societies,  and  the  fete  was  entirely  successful.
This  fete  has  been  so  often  described  that  we  need  not  dwell
on  the  details.  It  must  be  mentioned,  however,  that  in
representing  "  Liberty "  a  living  creature  was  preferred  to
a  statue,  because,  said  Chaumette,  "  A  statue  would  also  have
been  a  step  towards  idolatry."  As  Michelet  had  already
remarked,  the  founders  of  the  new  faith  recommended  "  the
choice,  for  the  fulfilment  of  so  august  a  part,  of  persons  whose
character  makes  them  chastely  beautiful,  and  whose  strictness
of  habits  and  views  repudiates  any  base  idea."  Far  from  being
a  gay  mockery,  the  fete  was  rather  a  "  chaste  ceremony,  cheer-
less, dull  and  tedious,"  says  Michelet,*  who  was,  it  is  known,
very  favourably  inclined  towards  the  dechristianisation  move-
ment of  1793.  But  the  Revolution,  he  said,  was  already  "  old
and  weary,  too  old  to  engender  anything  new."  The  attempt
of  1793  was  not  born  of  the  fiery  enthusiasm  of  Revolution,
"  but  of  the  dialectical  schools  of  the  Encyclopedic  times."
Indeed,  it  closely  resembled  the  modern  Ethical  Societies'
movement,  which  also  remains  out  of  touch  with  the  masses.

What  chiefly  strikes  us  to-day  is  that  the  Convention,
notwithstanding  the  requests  which  came  from  all  quarters,
refused  to  broach  the  great  question,  the  abolition  of  salaries

*  Book  XIV.,  chap.  iii.


ANTI-RELIGIOUS  MOVEMENT  525

for  priests  paid  by  the  State.  On  the  contrary,  the  Commune
of  Paris  and  its  sections  openly  put  into  practice  dechristianisa-
tion.  In  every  section  one  church  was  dedicated  to  the  cult
of  Reason.  The  General  Council  of  the  Commune  even  risked
hastening  events.  In  reply  to  a  religious  speech  by  Robes-
pierre, delivered  on  the  1st  Frimaire,*  the  Council  issued
on  the  3rd  Frimaire  (November  23),  under  the  influence  of
Chaumette,  an  order  by  which  all  churches  or  temples  of  all
religions  in  Paris  were  to  be  immediately  closed  ;  the  clergy
were  made  individually  responsible  for  religious  disturbances ;
the  Revolutionary  Committees  were  invited  to  keep  a  watch
on  the  clergy  ;  and  a  resolution  was  made  to  demand  that
the  Convention  exclude  the  clergy  from  any  form  of  public
service.  At  the  same  time  a  course  of  "  morality  "  lectures
was  established,  to  prepare  the  preachers  of  the  new  cult.
It  was  also  decided  to  destroy  the  bell  towers,  while  in  various
sections  fetes  of  Reason  were  organised,  during  which  the
Catholic  faith  was  ridiculed.  One  section  burnt  some  missals,
and  Hebert  burnt  some  relics  at  the  Commune.

In  the  provinces,  says  Aulard,  nearly  all  the  towns,  especially
in  the  south-west,  seemed  to  rally  round  the  new  rationalist
faith.

Yet  the  government,  that  is  to  say,  the  Committee  of
Public  Welfare,  from  the  very  beginning  showed  a  decided
opposition  to  this  movement.  Robespierre  combated  it  openly,
and  when  Cloots  came  to  tell  him  with  enthusiasm  of  the
abdication  of  Gobel,  he  showed  his  displeasure  roughly,  asking
what  the  Belgians,  whose  union  with  France  was  desired  by
Cloots,  would  say  to  it.

For  a  few  days,  however,  he  kept  quiet.  But  on  November
20  Danton  returned  to  Paris,  after  a  prolonged  stay  at  Arcis-
sur-Aube,  where  he  had  retired  with  his  young  wife,  whom
he  had  married  in  church  immediately  after  the  death  of  his
first  wife.  The  next  day,  the  1st  Frimaire  (November  21),
Robespierre  pronounced  at  the  Jacobin  Club  his  first  speech,
and  a  very  violent  one,  against  the  worship  of  Reason.  The
Convention,  he  said,  would  never  take  the  rash  step  of  forbidding

*  See  further.


526 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  practice  of  the  Catholic  faith.  The  liberty  of  religion
would  be  maintained,  and  the  persecution  of  the  peaceful
priests  would  not  be  permitted.  He  then  pointed  out  that
the  belief  in  a  "  great  Being  watching  over  oppressed  innocence
and  punishing  crime  "  was  entirely  popular,  and  he  treated
the  dechristianisers  as  traitors,  as  agents  of  the  enemies  of
France,  who  wished  to  repel  those  foreigners  whom  the  cause
of  humanity  and  common  interests  attracted  towards  the
Republic.

Five  days  later  Danton  spoke  almost  to  the  same  effect
in  the  Convention,  and  attacked  the  anti-religious  pro-
cessions. He  demanded  that  a  limit  be  fixed  to  such
manifestations.

j  What  had  occurred  during  these  few  days  to  draw  Robes-
pierre and  Danton  together  ?  What  new  combinations,
diplomatic  or  otherwise,  presented  themselves  at  this  moment,
to  call  Danton  to  Paris  and  to  induce  him  to  oppose  himself  to
the  dechristianising  movement,  while  he  was  a  true  disciple
of  Diderot,  and  did  not  cease  to  affirm  his  materialistic  atheism
even  on  the  scaffold  ?  This  move  of  Danton's  is  the  more
striking  because  during  the  first  half  of  the  month  of  Frimaire
the  Convention  continued  to  view  the  dechristianisers  favour-
ably.* On  the  I4th  Frimaire  (December  4)  the  "  Robes-
pierrist  "  Couthon  had  displayed  some  more  relics  from  the
tribune  of  the  Convention  and  mocked  at  them.

The  question  therefore  arises,  Was  not  Robespierre  making
use  of  some  new  turn  in  the  negotiations  with  England  to
influence  Danton  and  to  freely  express  his  views  on  religion
which  had  always  remained  dear  to  this  deistic  disciple  of
Rousseau  ?

T Towards  the  middle  of  the  month,  Robespierre,  reinforced

'  by  the  support  of  Danton,  decided  to  act,  and  on  the  i6th

Frimaire  (December  6)  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  came

before  the  Convention  to  demand  a  decree  concerning  religious

liberty,  the  first  article  of  which  forbade  "  all  violence  and

measures  against  the  liberty  of  religions." Was  this  measure

dictated  by  the  fear  of  revolt  in  the  villages,  where  the  closing

*  Aulard,  Histoirt  politique,  p.  475.


ANTI-RELIGIOUS  MOVEMENT  527

of  the  churches  was  usually  very  badly  received,*  or  were
there  other  reasons,  unknown  to  us — the  fact  remains,  at  any
rate,  that  from  that  day  Catholicism  triumphed.  The  Robes-
pierrist  Government  took  it  under  its  protection,  and  once
again  Catholicism  became  the  State  religion  .f

Later  in  the  spring,  Robespierre  and  his  followers  went  still
further  :  they  made  an  attempt  to  oppose  to  the  worship  of
Reason  a  new  worship,  that  of  the  Supreme  Being,  conceived
after  the  fashion  of  the  Vicaire  Savoyard,  of  Rousseau.  This
worship,  however,  in  spite  of  governmental  support  and  the
prospect  of  the  guillotine  for  its  adversaries,  became  confused
with  the  cult  of  Reason,  even  though  it  was  called  the  cult  of
the  Supreme  Being,  and  under  this  name — Aulard  says — a
half-deistic  and  half-rationalistic  cult  continued  to  spread  up  to
the  time  when  the  reaction  of  Thermidor  got  the  upper  hand.

As  to  the  fete  of  the  Supreme  Being  which  was  celebrated
with  great  pomp  in  Paris  on  the  2Oth  Prairial  (June  8,  1794),
and  to  which  Robespierre,  posing  as  the  founder  of  a  new
State  religion,  which  was  to  combat  atheism,  attached  much
importance — this  fete  was  as  beautiful,  it  appears,  as  a  popular
theatrical  performance  can  be,  but  it  called  forth  no  echo  in
the  feelings  of  the  people.  Celebrated  as  it  was  by  the  wish
of  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare — soon  after  Chaumette
and  Gobel,  who  had  all  the  sympathies  of  the  masses  with
them,  had  been  executed  for  their  irreligious  opinions  by  this
committee — the  fete  wore  too  much  the  character  of  a  bloody
triumph  of  the  Jacobin  government  over  the  advanced  spirits
among  the  people  and  the  Commune,  to  be  agreeable  to  the
people.  And  by  the  openly  hostile  attitude  of  several  members
of  the  Convention  towards  Robespierre,  during  the  fete  itself,
it  became  the  prelude  of  the  9th  Thermidor — the  prelude  of
the  grand  finale.

*  Several  letters  of  commissioners  mention  this.  Most  of  them,  a3
those  of  Dartygoeyte,  Lefiot,  Pflieger  and  Gamier,  are,  however,
posterior  to  the  decree.  (Actes  du  ComiU  de  Salut  Public,  published  by
Aulard,  vol.  ix.,  pp.  385,  759,  780.)

f  As  several  commissioners  of  the  Convention  had  taken  very
stringent  measures  against  the  Catholic  religion,  the  Convention  added,
however,  a  paragraph  to  this  decree  to  say  that  it  did  not  intend  to
censure  what  had  been  done  up  to  that  day  by  its  representatives.


CHAPTER  LXIII
THE  SUPPRESSION  OF  THE  SECTIONS

Position  of  sections — "  Popular  societies  " — Opposition  of
Jacobins— Attitude  of  Robespierre— Sections  gradually  de-
prived of  their  powers — Control  of  police — Revolutionary
committees  subordinated  to  Committee  of  Public  Safety —
State  absorbs  sections — Revolution  doomed

TOWARDS  the  end  of  1793,  two  rival  powers  stood  facing
one  another  :  the  two  committees — of  Public  Welfare  and
of  Public  Safety — which  governed  the  Convention,  and  the
Commune  of  Paris.  Yet  the  real  strength  of  the  Commune
lay  neither  in  its  extremely  popular  mayor  Pache,  nor  in  its
equally  popular  frocureur  Chaumette,  nor  yet  in  his  deputy
Hubert,  nor  in  its  General  Council.  It  was  to  be  found
in  the  sections.  And  therefore  the  central  government
was  steadily  endeavouring  to  subject  the  sections  to  its
authority.  ,  .,  ,-

After  the  Convention  had  withdrawn  the  "  permanence  "
of  the  sections  of  Paris ;  that  is  to  say,  their  right  of  calling
their  general  meetings  as  frequently  as  they  chose,  the  sections
began  to  found  "  popular  societies  "  or  "  sectional  societies."
But  these  societies  were  viewed  very  unfavourably  by  the
Jacobins,  who  in  their  turn  were  becoming  "  government
men."  Therefore,  at  the  end  of  1793,  and  in  January  1794,
there  was  much  talk  in  the  Jacobin  Club  against  these  societies
— the  more  so  as  the  royalists  were  making  a  united  effort
to  invade  and  to  capture  them.  "  Out  of  the  corpse  of
monarchy,"  said  Simond,  one  of  the  Jacobins,  "  came  an
infinite  number  of  poisonous  insects,  who  are  not  sufficiently

stupid  to  attempt  its  resurrection,  but  who  try  nevertheless

528


THE  SUPPRESSION  OF  THE  SECTIONS 529

to  prolong  the  convulsions  of  the  political  body."*  In  the
provinces  especially,  these  "  insects "  were  successful.  An
enormous  number  of  emigres,  continued  Simond,  "lawyers,
financiers,  agents  of  the  ancien  regime"  overran  the  country,
invaded  the  popular  societies  and  became  their  presidents
and  secretaries.

It  is  evident  that  the  popular  societies,  which  in  Paris  were
merely  the  same  sections  under  another  name,t  would  have
easily  "  purified  "  themselves  by  excluding  from  their  midst
the  disguised  royalists,  and  then  have  continued  the  work
of  the  sections.  But  their  entire  activity  displeased  the
Jacobins,  who  viewed  with  jealousy  the  influence  of  these
"  new-comers  "  who  "  vied  with  them  in  patriotism."  "  If
one  believed  them,"  said  the  same  Simond,  "  the  patriots  of
1789  ...  are  nothing  but  overtaxed  or  worn-out  beasts  of
burden  who  ought  to  be  slaughtered  because  they  can  no  longer
keep  pace  with  the  novelties  in  the  political  life  of  the  Revolu-
tion." And  he  betrayed  the  fears  of  the  middle-class  Jacobins
when  he  spoke  of  the  "fourth  legislative  body"  which  these
new-comers  would  have  liked  to  convoke,  in  order  to  go  further
than  the  Convention.  "  Our  greatest  enemies,"  added
Jeanbon  Saint-Andre,  "  are  not  without ;  we  see  them  :  they
are  amongst  us ;  they  wish  to  carry  revolutionary  measures
•further  than  we  do"\  Thereupon  Dufourney  spoke  against
all  the  sectional  societies,  and  Deschamps  called  them  the
-petites  Vendees.

As  to  Robespierre,  he  hastened  to  bring  forward  his  favourite
argument — foreign  intrigues.  "  My  suspicions,"  said  he,
"  were  only  too  true.  You  see  that  the  hypocritical  counter-
revolutionists  are  dominant  in  them.  Prussian,  English  and
Austrian  agents  want,  by  these  means,  to  annihilate  the  authority
of  the  Convention  and  the  'patriotic  ascendency  of  the  Jacohin
Society"^

*  Jacobins,  vol.  v.,  p.  623.

f  See,  for  instance,  in  Ernest  Melli6's  work,  the  statutes  of  the
popular  society  organised  by  the  PoissonniSre  section.-

J  Jacobins,  vol.  v.,  pp.  624,  625.

§  Jacobins,  sitting  of  December  26,  1793,  vol.  v.f  p.  578.  Momoro,
a  member  of  the  Cordeliers'  Club,  having  hazarded  the  remark  that  the

2  L


530 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  hostility  of  the  Jacobins  against  the  popular  societies
was  evidently  nothing  but  hostility  against  the  sections  in
Paris  and  against  all  similar  organisations  in  the  provinces,
and  this  hostility  was  but  an  expression  of  similar  feeling  in  the
Central  Government.  Consequently,  as  soon  as  the  Revolu-
tionary Government  was  established  by  the  decree  of  the
I4th  Frimaire  (December  4,  1793),  the  right  to  elect  justices
of  the  peace  and  their  secretaries — a  privilege  which  the  sections
had  enjoyed  since  1789 — was  taken  from  them.  The  magis-
trates and  their  secretaries  were  henceforth  to  be  nominated
by  the  General  Council  of  the  department.*  Even  the  right
of  the  sections  to  nominate  their  relief  committees,  and
of  themselves  to  organise  relief  work,  which  they  had  turned,
as  we  saw,  to  such  good  account,  was  taken  from  them  in
December  1793,  and  given  to  the  Committees  of  Public
Welfare  and  Public  Safety.  The  popular  organisation  of  the
Revolution  was  thus  struck  at  its  very  root.

But  it  is  especially  in  the  concentration  of  police  functions
that  the  leading  idea  of  the  Jacobin  government  appears  in
full.  We  have  seen  the  importance  of  the  sections  as  parts
of  the  life  of  Paris,  both  municipal  and  revolutionary  ;t  we
know  what  they  were  doing  for  the  provisioning  of  the  capital,
the  enlisting  of  volunteers,  the  raising,  arming  and  despatching
of  volunteer  regiments,  the  manufacture  of  saltpetre,  the
organisation  of  labour,  the  care  of  the  poor,  &c.  But  besides
these  functions  the  sections  of  Paris  and  the  provincial  popular
societies  also  performed  police  duties.  This  had  dated,  in
Paris,  from  July  14,  1879,  wnen  tne  citizens  had  themselves
formed  their  district  committees,  in  order  to  take  charge
of  the  duties  of  the  police.  Later  on,  the  law  of  September  6,
1789,  confirmed  them  in  the  discharge  of  these  duties,  and  in
the  following  October  the  municipality  of  Paris,  still  a  pro-
visional body  at  this  period,  founded  its  secret  police  under

members  of  the  Cordeliers'  Club  had  often  questioned  their  right  tp
prevent  the  formation  of  popular  societies,  since  "  the  right  to  assemble
in  popular  societies  is  sacred,"  Robespierre  answered  curtly  :  "Every-
thing demanded  by  the  public  welfare  is  certainly  right."

*  Decrees  of  the  8th  Nivose  (December  28, 1793),  and  of  the  23rd
•Floreal  (May  12,  1794).  f  Chap.  xxiv.


THE  SUPPRESSION  OF  THE  SECTIONS 531

the  name  of  "The  Search  Committee."  The  municipal
government,  sprung  from  the  Revolution,  thus  revived  one
of  the  worst  traditions  of  the  ancien  regime.

After  August  10  the  Legislative  Assembly  decreed  that  all
the  police  duties  of  "  public  safety  "  should  pass  to  the  councils
of  the  departments,  the  districts  and  the  municipalities,  and
a  Committee  of  Supervision  was  established,  with  its  subordinate
committees  in  every  section  ;  but  as,  by  degrees,  the  struggle
between  the  revolutionists  and  their  enemies  became  keener,
these  committees  were  overwhelmed  with  work,  and  on  March
21,  1793,  new  revolutionary  committees,  each  made  up  of
twelve  members,  were  established  in  every  commune  and  in
every  section  of  the  communes  of  the  large  towns,  which,  like
Paris,  were  divided  into  sections.*

In  this  way,  the  sections,  through  the  medium  of  their
revolutionary  committees,  became  police  bureaux.  The
duties  of  these  revolutionary  committees  were  limited,  it
is  true,  to  the  supervision  of  strangers  ;  but  they  soon  acquired
rights  as  extensive  as  those  of  the  secret  police  in  monarchical
States.  At  the  same  time  one  can  see  how  the  sections,  which,
to  begin  with,  had  been  organs  of  the  democratic  revolution,
became  gradually  absorbed  by  the  police  functions  of  their
committees,  and  how  these  latter,  becoming  less  and  less
municipal  bodies,  changed  into  mere  police  officials,  subordinate
to  the  central  police,  which  was  in  its  turn  subject  to  the
Committee  of  Public  Safety .f

The  two  committees — of  Public  Welfare  and  of  Public
Safety—- separated  the  revolutionary  committees  more  and
more  from  their  rival,  the  Commune,  which  in  this  way  they
weakened,  and  by  disciplining  them  to  obedience  they
transformed  them  into  machinery  of  the  State.  Finally,
under  the  pretext  of  suppressing  abuses,  the  Convention  trans-
formed them  into  salaried  officials ;  and  at  the  same  time  it
subordinated  the  40,000  revolutionary  committees  to  the

*  See  the  rights  given  by  the  section  of  the  Pantheon  to  its  com-
mittee, quoted  by  Ernest  Mellie,  loc.  cit.,  p.  185.

f  See  the  work  of  Ernest  Mellie,  p.  189  et  seq.  for  very  interesting
details  on  the  "Committee  of  Public  Welfare  of  the  Department  of
Paris" — an  organ  of  the  secret  police — and  other  similar  information.


532 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Committee  of  Public  Safety,  to  which  it  gave  also  the  right  of
"  purifying  them,"  and  even  of  nominating  their  members.

The  State's  seeking  to  centralise  everything  in  its  own  hands,
as  the  monarchy  had  done  in  the  seventeenth  century,  and  its
depriving  the  popular  organisations  of  such  rights  as  the  nomina-
tion of  the  judges  and  the  administration  of  relief  work,  as  well
as  of  all  other  administrative  functions,  and  its  subjecting  them
to  its  bureaucracy  in  police  matters,  meant  the  death  of  the
sections  and  of  the  revolutionary  councils.

After  these  changes  had  been  made,  the  sections of  Paris

and  the  popular  societies  in  the  provinces  were  really  dead.

The State  had  swallowed them. And  their  death  was  the

death  of  the  Revolution. Since  January 1794,  public  life  in

Paris had been destroyed, says Michelet. "  The general

assemblies  of  the  sections  were  dead,  and  all  their  power  had

passed  to  their  revolutionary  committees,  which,  themselves

being  no  longer  elected  bodies,  but  simply  groups  of  officials

j  nominated  by  the  authorities,  had  not  much  life  in  them

J  either."

Now,  whenever  it  might  please  the  Government  to  crush
the  Commune  of  Paris,  it  could  do  so  without  fear  of  being
itself  overthrown.  And  this  it  really  did  in  March  1794
(Ventose  of  the  Year  II.).


CHAPTER  LXIV
STRUGGLE  AGAINST  THE  HEBERTISTS

Robespierre  foretells  end  of  Revolution — Causes  of  its  termi-
nation —  Hebert  —  Chaumette  and  Hebertists  —  Increased
power  of  Committees  of  Public  Welfare  and  Public  Safety—-
The struggle  for  power — Robespierre  and  Danton — Camille
Desmoulins — Robespierre  attacks  Cloots — State  of  insurrec-
tion in  Southern  France — Fabre  d' Eglantine  and  Bourdon —
Attempt  to  rouse  Convention  against  Committee  of  Public
Welfare — Fabre  d' Eglantine  demands  arrest  of  three  Heber-
tists— Cordeliers  side  with  Hebertists — Toulon  recaptured —
Series  of  republican  successes — Authority  of  Committee  of
Public  Welfare  restored — Arrest  of  Fabre  d' Eglantine — False
accusations  against  him — He  is  executed — Struggle  between
revolutionary  factions  continues — Influence  of  masonic  lodges
on  Revolution)

As  early  as  December  1793,  Robespierre  spoke  of  the  coming
end  of  the  revolutionary  Republic — "  Let  us  be  careful,"  he
said,  "for  the  death  of  the  fatherland  is  not  far  off."  *  Nor
was  he  alone  in  foreseeing  it ;  the  same  idea  recurred  frequently
in  the  speeches  and  letters  of  the  revolutionists.

The  fact  is,  that  a  revolution  that  stops  half-way  is  sure  to  be
soon  defeated,  and  at  the  end  of  1793  the  situation  in  France
was,  that  the  Revolution,  having  been  arrested  in  its  develop-
ment, was  now  wearing  itself  out  in  internal  struggles  and  in
an  effort,  as  fruitless  as  it  was  impolitic,  to  exterminate  its
enemies  while  it  was  mounting  guard  over  their  property .f

*  Stances  du  club  des  Jacobins,  edited  by  Professor  Aulard  ;  sitting
of  December  12,  1793,  vol.  v.,  p.  557.

f  Michelet  understood  this  very  well,  when  he  wrote  a  few  lines,  full
of  sadness  (Book  XIV.,  chap,  i.),  in  which  he  recalled  the  words  of
Duport,  "Plough  deeply,"  and  said  that  the  Revolution  was  bound
to  fail  because  both  the  Girondins  and  the  Jacobins  were  political  revo-
lutionists who  marked  only  "two  different  degrees  on  the  same  line."
The  most  advanced  of  them^  Saint- Just,  he  added,  never  ventured  to

533


534 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

By  the  very  force  of  events,  France  was  drifting  towards  a
new  movement  imbued  with  a  communist  spirit.  But  the
Revolution  had  allowed  a  "  strong  government  "  to  be  con-
stituted, and  this  government  had  crushed  the  Enrages  and
gagged  those  who  dared  to  hold  similar  opinions.

As  to  the  Hebertists  who  predominated  in  the  Cordeliers'
Club  and  in  the  Commune,  and  had  succeeded  in  invading,
through  Bouchotte,  the  Minister  of  War,  the  offices  of  his
department,  their  ideas  on  government  led  them  in  paths
remote  from  an  economic  revolution.  It  is  true  that  Hebert
had  at  times  expressed  communist  sentiments  in  his  paper,*
but  to  terrorise  the  enemies  of  the  Revolution  and  to  have
the  government  seized  by  his  party  seemed  to  him  far  more
important  than  to  solve  the  questions  of  food,  the  land  and
organised  labour.  The  Commune  of  1871  also  produced  this
type  of  revolutionist.

So  far  as  Chaumette  was  concerned,  by  his  popular  sym-
pathies and  his  manner  of  life  he  might  almost  have  been  ranked
with  the  Communists.  At  one  time  he  was  indeed  under
their  influence.  But  he  was  closely  connected  with  the  party
of  Hebertists,  and  this  party  was  not  in  the  least  enthusiastic
about  Communism.  They  never  tried  to  arouse  a  powerful
manifestation  of  the  people's  social  will.  Their  idea  was  to
attain  power  by  means  of  a  new  "  weeding  out  "  of  the  Con-
vention :  to  get  rid  of  the  "  worn  out,  the  broken  limbs  of  the
Revolution,"  as  Momoro  used  to  say,  and  to  compel  the  Con-
vention to  submit  to  the  Commune  of  Paris,  by  means  of  a
new  May  31,  supported  this  time  by  the  military  force  of  the
"  revolutionary  army."  Later  on  they  would  see  what  was  to  be
done.

In  this,  however,  the  Hebertists  had  miscalculated.  They
did  not  realise  that  they  had  to  deal  now  with  two  serious
powers  :  a  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  which  during  the
attack  religion  or  education  or  to  go  to  the  root  of  social  questions ;
one  can  hardly  make  out  what  were  his  views  on  property.  "  Th«
Revolution,"  said  Michelet,  "thus  failed  to  take  the  character  of  a
religious  or  a  social  revolution,  which  would  have  consolidated  it  by
giving  it  support,  vigour  and  depth."

*  Tridon  has  given  some  such  extracts  in  his  sketch  Les  H4ber-
'  tistes  ((Euvres  divtrses  de  G.  Tridon,  Paris,  1891,  pp.  86-90).


STRUGGLE  AGAINST  THE  HEBERTISTS 535

past  six  months  had  become  a^ force  in  the  Government  and
had  won  general  approval  for  the  intelligent  way  in  which  it
had  directed  the  war  ;  and  a  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  which
had  grown  very  powerful,  since  it  had  concentrated  in  its  hands
a  wide  system  of  police,  and  thus  had  the  power  to  send  whom-
soever it  wished  to  the  guillotine.  Besides,  the  Hebertists
began  to  fight  on  ground  where  they  were  bound  to  be  defeated
— the  ground  of  Terrorism.  Here  they  had  to  meet  the  rivalry
of  a  whole  world  of  Government  officials,  even  those  who,  like
Cambon,  considered  Terrorism  necessary  for  conducting  the
war.  Terrorism  is  always  a  weapon  of  government  and  the
government  of  the  day  turned  it  against  them.

It  would  be  tiresome  to  recount  here  all  the  intrigues  of  the
different  parties  that  struggled  for  power  during  the  month  of
December  1793,  and  the  first  months  of  1794.  Suffice  it  to
say  that  four  groups  or  parties  were  then  in  the  field :  the
Robespierrist  group,  consisting  of  Robespierre,  Saint-Just,
Couthon,  and  their  friends,  the  party  of  the  "  worn  out " ;
politicians  who  grouped  themselves  round  Danton  (Fabre
d'Eglantine,  Phelippeaux,  Bourdon,  Camille  Desmoulins,  and
others) ;  the  Commune,  which  was  in  agreement  with  the  Heber-
tists ;  and  finally,  those  members  of  the  Committee  of  Public
Welfare  (Billaud-Varenne  and  Collot  d'Herbois)  who  were
known  as  terrorists,  around  whom  were  grouped  men  who  did
not  wish  to  see  the  Revolution  lay  down  its  arms,  but  did  not
want  either  that  Robespierre,  whom  they  secretly  opposed,  or
the  Commune  and  the  Hebertists  should  gain  the  upper  hand.

Danton  was,  in  the  eyes  of  the  revolutionists,  a  man  com-
pletely used  up,  but  they  saw  in  him  a  real  danger,  since  the
Girondins  stood  behind  him,  pushing  themselves  forward
under  cover  of  his  great  popularity.  At  the  end  of  November,
however,  we  saw  Robespierre  and  Danton  marching  hand  in
hand  against  the  anti-religious  movement ;  and  when  it  was
Danton's  turn  to  submit  to  a  public  examination  of  his  life
before  the  Jacobin  Club,  which  was  then  "  weeding  itself  out,"
Robespierre  again  held  out  his  hand  to  him.  He  did  even
more  :  he  identified  himself  with  Danton.

On  the  other  hand,  when  Camille  Desmoulins,  who  as  a


536 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

journalist  excelled  in  calumny,  issued,  on  the  1 5th  and  zoth  of
Frimaire  (December  5  and  10),  the  two  first  numbers  of  his
Vieux  Cordelier,  in  which  he  attacked  Hubert  and  Chaumette
in  the  vilest  manner,  and  started  a  campaign  in  favour  of  an
abatement  in  the  prosecution  of  the  enemies  of  the  Revolution,
Robespierre  read  both  these  numbers  before  publication  and
approved  them.  During  the  examination  of  Desmoulins'  life
at  the  Jacobin  Club,  he  also  defended  him.  This  meant  that
for  the  moment  he  was  ready  to  make  certain  concessions  to
the  Dantonists,  provided  they  helped  him  to  attack  the  party  of
the  Left — the  Hebertists.

This  they  did  quite  willingly  and  with  much  violence,  by  the
pen  of  Desmoulins  in  his  Vieux  Cordelier,  and  through  the
organ  of  Phelippeaux  and  at  the  Jacobin  Club,  where  the  latter
bitterly  attacked  the  conduct  of  the  H6bertist  generals  in  the
Vendee.  Robespierre  worked  in  the  same  direction  against
Anacharsis  Cloots,  an  influential  Hebertist,  whom  the  Jacobins
had  even  elected  president  at  that  moment,  attacking  him  with
quite  religious  fanaticism.  When  it  was  Cloots'  turn  to  under-
go the  civic  examination  of  his  life,  Robespierre  pronounced  a
speech  against  him,  full  of  venom,  in  which  he  represented  this
pure  idealist  and  worshipper  of  the  Revolution,  this  inspired
propagandist  of  the  International  union  of  all  the  sans- culottes,
as  a  traitor,  and  that  because  he  had  had  business  relations  with
the  bankers  Vandenyver,  and  had  taken  some  interest  in  them
when  they  were  arrested  as  suspects.  Cloots  was  expelled
from  the  Jacobin  Club  on  the  22nd  of  Frimaire  (December  12)
and  so  became  a  victim  marked  for  the  scaffold.  He  was,  in
fact,  arrested  a  fortnight  later.

The  insurrection  in  Southern  France  dragged  on  in  the  mean-
time, and  Toulon  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  English ;  so
that  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  was  accused  of  incapacity
and  it  was  even  rumoured  that  it  intended  to  give  up  Southern
France  to  the  counter-revolution.  There  were  days  when  the
Committee  was  but  a  hair's-breadth  from  being  overthrown,
"  sent  to  the  Tarpeian  Rock  "—which  would  have  been  a
victory  for  both  the  Girondins  and  the  "  moderates,"  that  is
to  say,  for  the  counter-revolutionists.


STRUGGLE  AGAINST  THE  HEBERTISTS 537

The  soul  of  the  campaign  carried  on  in  political  circles  against
the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  was  Fabre  d'Eglantine,  one
of  the  "moderates,"  seconded  by  Bourdon  (of  the  Oise)  a
Dantonist,  and  between  the  22nd  and  the  2yth  Frimaire
(December  12-17)  a  serious  attempt  was  made  to  rouse  the
Convention  against  its  Committee  of  Public  Welfare,  and  to
impeach  it.

However,  though  the  Dantonists  plotted  against  the  Robes-
pierrists,  both  parties  joined  hands  to  attack  the  Hebertists.
On  the  27th  Frimaire  (December  17)  Fabre  d'Eglantine  made
a  report  at  the  Convention  demanding  the  arrest  of  three
Hebertists :  Ronsin,  the  general  of  the  "  revolutionary  army  "
in  Paris ;  Vincent,  secretary  general  of  the  War  Office,  and
Maillard,  who  had  led  the  women  to  Versailles  on  October  5,
1789.  This  was  the  first  attempt  of  the  "  party  of  clemency  "
to  make  a  coup  d'etat  in  favour  of  the  Girondins  and  a  more
moderate  government.  All  those  who  had  made  fortunes  by
the  Revolution  were  now  in  a  hurry,  as  we  have  already  said,
to  return  to  a  state  of  "  order,"  and  to  reach  this  goal  they  were
prepared  to  sacrifice  the  Republic,  if  need  be,  and  to  establish  a
constitutional  monarchy.  Many,  like  Danton,  were  weary  of
mankind,  and  said  to  themselves :  "  It  is  time  to  put  an  end
to  all  this,"  while  others — and  these  are  the  most  dangerous
to  all  revolutions — losing  faith  in  the  Revolution,  prepared  to
meet  half-way  the  reaction  which  they  already  saw  coming.

The  arrest  of  the  three  Hebertists  would  have  been  granted
without  difficulty  by  the  Convention,  but  for  the  fear  of
recalling  the  arrest  of  Hebert  in  1793.*  It  would  have  become
obvious  that  a  coup  tfetat  was  preparing  in  favour  of  the
Girondins  who  would  serve  in  their  turn  as  a  stepping-stone  to
reaction.  The  publication  of  the  third  number  of  the  Vieux
Cordelier,  in  which  Desmoulins,  under  names  borrowed  from
Roman  history,  denounced  the  whole  revolutionary  govern-
ment, helped  to  unmask  the  intrigue,  for  all  the  counter-
revolutionists  in  Paris  suddenly  lifted  their  heads  after  reading
this  number,  and  openly  predicted  the  speedy  end  of  the
Revolution.

* * Vide  chap,  xxxix.


53$ THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  Cordeliers  immediately  took  up  the  cause  of  the  Heber-
tists,  but  found  no  other  basis  for  their  appeal  to  the  people
than  the  necessity  for  acting  more  severely  against  the  enemies
of  the  Revolution.  They  too  identified  the  Revolution  with
Terrorism.  They  carried  the  head  of  Chalier  about  Paris  and
began  to  prepare  the  people  for  a  fresh  May  31  rising,  with  the
intention  of  bringing  about  a  new  "  purification  "  of  the  Con-
vention, and  the  removal  of  its  "  worn-out  and  its  broken
limbs."  But  as  to  what  they  intended  to  do  on  attaining
power — what  direction  they  would  try  to  give  to  the  Revolu-
tion— nothing  was  said  about  that.

Once  the  fight  was  begun  in  such  conditions,  it  was  easy  for
the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  to  parry  the  blow.  They  by
no  means  rejected  Terror  as  an  arm  of  Government.  In  fact,
on  the  5th  Nivose  (December  25),  Robespierre  had  made  his
report  on  the  revolutionary  government,  and  if  the  substance
of  this  report  was  the  necessity  of  maintaining  the  balance
between  the  too  advanced  parties  and  the  too  moderate  ones,
its  conclusion  was  death  to  the  enemies  of  the  feofle  !  Next  day
he  demanded,  moreover,  a  greater  rapidity  in  the  pronouncement
of  sentences  by  the  revolutionary  tribunal.

About  the  same  time  it  became  known  in  Paris  (on  the  4th
Nivose — December  24)  that  Toulon  had  been  retaken  from  the
English  ;  on  the  5th  and  6th  of  the  same  month  (December  25
and  26)  that  La  Vende*e  was  crushed  at  Savenay ;  on  the  loth
that  the  army  of  the  Rhine,  having  taken  the  offensive,  had
retaken  the  lines  of  Wissembourg  from  the  enemy  ;  and  on  the
1 2th  Nivose  (January  I,  1794)  that  the  blockade  of  Landau  was
raised  and  that  the  German  army  had  recrossed  the  Rhine.

A  whole  series  of  decisive  victories  had  thus  been  won,
and  they  strengthened  the  Republic.  They  also  restored  the
authority  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare.  Camille
Desmoulins  in  his  fifth  number  hastened  to  make  amends  for
his  recent  articles,  but  still  continued  to  attack  Hubert  violently,
a  proceeding  which  turned  the  meetings  of  the  Jacobin  Club  in
the  second  decade  of  Nivose  (from  December  31  to  January  10,
1794)  into  personal  attacks  ending  in  free  fights.  On  January
10,  the  Jacobins  passed  a  resolution  excluding  Desmoulins  from


STRUGGLE  AGAINST  THE  HEBERTISTS 539

their  club,  and  only  Robespierre's  great  popularity  enabled
him  to  induce  the  society  not  to  carry  it  into  effect.

On  the  24th  Nivose  (January  13)  the  committees  decided  to
strike  a  blow  and  to  terrify  the  camp  of  their  detractors  by  order-
ing Fabre  d'Eglantine  to  be  arrested.  The  pretext  was  an
accusation  of  forgery,  and  it  was  announced  loudly  that  the
committees  had  succeeded  in  discovering  a  great  plot,  the  aim
of  which  was  to  discredit  the  nation's  representatives.

It  is  now  known  that  the  accusation  which  served  as  a  pretext
for  the  arrest  of  Fabre — that  of  having  falsified  a  decree  of  the
Convention  to  the  advantage  of  the  powerful  Indian  Company
— was  false.  The  decree  dealing  with  the  Indian  Company
had  indeed  been  falsified,  but  by  Delaunay,  another  member
of  the  Convention.  The  document  still  exists  in  the  archives,
and  since  its  discovery  by  Michelet,  it  has  been  proved  that  the
falsification  was  in  Delaunay's  handwriting.  But  at  the  time
of  Fabre's  arrest,  Fouquier-Tinville,  the  public  prosecutor  of
the  revolutionary  tribunal,  and  of  the  Committee  of  Public
Safety,  did  not  allow  the  document  to  be  produced  either
before  or  during  the  trial  in  court,  and  Fabre  perished  as  a
forger,  because  the  Government  simply  wanted  to  get  rid  of  a
dangerous  foe.  Robespierre  took  good  care  not  to  interfere.*

*  The  affair  was  a  complicated  one.  The  royalists  had  in  their
service  a  very  clever  man,  the  Baron  de  Batz,  who  by  his  courage  and
skill  in  escaping  from  pursuit  had  acquired  an  almost  legendary  repu-
tation. This  Baron  de  Batz,  after  having  worked  a  long  time  for  the
escape  of  Marie-Antoinette,  undertook  to  incite  certain  members  of
the  Convention  to  make  large  fortunes  by  going  into  stock- jobbing —
money  having  to  be  provided  for  these  operations  by  the  Abbe  Es-
pagnac.  For  this  purpose  Baron  de  Batz  assembled  in  his  house  on  a
certain  day  Julien  (of  Toulouse),  Delaunay  and  Bazire  (a  Dantonist).
The  banker  Benoit,  the  poet  Laharpe,  the  Comtesse  de  Beaufort
(Julien's  mistress),  and  Chabot  (the  unfrocked  priest  who  at  one  time
had  been  a  favourite  of  the  people,  but  who  had  since  married  an
Austrian  lady,  a  sister  of  the  banker  Frey)  were  also  of  the  party.
Besides,  an  attempt  was  made  by  the  same  man  to  win  over  Fabre,
and  Delaunay  was  actually  won  over  in  favour  of  the  Indian  Company.
This  company  was  attacked  in  the  Convention,  which  ordered  the
liquidation  of  the  company  to  be  proceeded  with  at  once  by  special
commissioners.  The  wording  of  this  decree  had  to  be  written  by
Delaunay,  who  wrote  indeed  a  draft  of  the  decree,  and  this  draft  was
signed  by  Fabre,  who  made  a  iew  alterations  in  it  in  pencil.  But
other  alterations  to  the  advantage  of  the  company  were  subsequently
made,  in  ink,  by  Delaunay,  on  the  same  draft,  and  this,  draft,  which  was


540 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Three  months  later,  Fabre  d'Eglantine  was  executed,  as  were
also  Chabot,  Delaunay,  the  Abb6  d'Espagnac,  and  the  two
brothers  Frey,  the  Austrian  bankers.

Thus  the  mortal  struggle  between  the  different  factions  of  the
revolutionary  party  went  on,  and  one  easily  understands  how
the  foreign  invasion  and  all  the  horrors  of  civil  war  in  the  pro-
vinces were  bound  to  render  this  struggle  more  and  more  vio-
lent and  sanguinary.  A  question,  however,  necessarily  arises  :
What  prevented  the  struggle  between  the  parties  from  taking
the  same  sanguinary  character  at  the  very  beginning  of  the
Revolution  ?  How  was  it  that  men,  whose  political  views  were
so  widely  different  as  those  of  the  Girondins,  of  Danton,  Robes-
pierre and  Marat,  had  been  able  to  act  in  concert  against  royal
despotism  ?

It  appears  very  probable  that  the  intimate  and  fraternal
relations  which  had  been  established  at  the  approach  of  the
Revolution  in  the  masonic  lodges  of  Paris  and  the  provinces,
between  the  leading  men  of  the  time,  must  have  contributed
to  bring  about  such  an  understanding.  It  is  known,  indeed,
from  Louis  Blanc,  Henri  Martin,  and  the  excellent  monograph
of  Professor  Ernest  Nys,*  that  nearly  all  revolutionists  of  renown
were  freemasons— Mirabeau,  Bailly,  Danton,  Robespierre,
Marat,  Condorcet,  Brissot,  Lalande,  and  many  others  were
masonic  brothers,  and  the  Duke  of  Orleans  (Philippe-Egalite)
remained  its  national  Grand  Master  down  to  May  13,  1793.
On  the  other  side,  it  is  also  known  that  Robespierre,  Mirabeau,
Lavoisier,  and  probably  many  more  belonged  to  the  lodges
of  the  Illuminates,  founded  by  Weishaupt,  whose  aim  was  "  to
free  the  nations  from  the  tyranny  of  princes  and  priests,  and  as
a  first  step,  to  free  the  peasants  and  the  working  men  from
serfdom,  forced  labour  and  guilds."

It  is  quite  certain,  to  quote  M.  Nys,  that  "  by  its  humani-
tarian tendencies,  its  firm  belief  in  the  dignity  of  man,  and  by  its
principles  of  liberty,  equality  and  fraternity,"  freemasonry

never  submitted  to  the  Convention,  was  made  to  pass  for  the  decree
itself.

*  Ernest  Nys,  Idies  modernes  :  Droit  International  et  Franc-mafon-
nene.  Bruxelles,  1908.


STRUGGLE  AGAINST  THE  HEBERTISTS 541

had  helped  immensely  to  educate  public  opinion  in  the  new
ideas — the  more  so  that,  thanks  to  it,  in  every  part  of  France
meetings  were  held,  at  which  progressive  ideas  were  expounded
and  applauded,  and,  what  was  much  more  important  than  is
usually  thought,  men  learned  to  discuss  and  to  vote.  "The
union  of  the  Three  Estates  in  June  1789,  and  the  movement  on
the  night  of  August  4,  were  most  probably  prepared  within  the
masonic  lodges."  *

This  preliminary  work  must  also  have  established  personal
relations  and  habits  of  mutual  respect  between  the  men  of  action,
apart  from  the  always  too  narrow  party  interests,  and  thus
enabled  the  revolutionaries  of  different  opinions  to  act  with  a
certain  unity,  for  four  years,  in  the  abolition  of  royal  despotism.
It  was  only  later,  towards  the  end  of  the  Revolution,  when
their  personal  relations  were  subjected  to  the  severest  trials —
especially  after  the  freemasons  themselves  were  divided  upon
the  question  of  royalty — that  these  links  were  broken.  And
then  the  struggles  began  to  be  of  the  ferocious  character  they
assumed  before  the  fall  of  the  Montagnards.

*  E.  Nys,  loc  cit*  pp.  82,  831


CHAPTER  LXV
FALL  OF  THE  HEBERTISTS-D ANTON  EXECUTED

Struggle  between  revolutionists  and  counter-revolutionists
continues— Robespierre  and  commissioners  of  Convention-
Triumph  of  Hebertists — Great  speech  of  Saint- Just — He  advo-
cates Terrorism — His  attack  on  Dantonists — Action  of  Cor-
deliers—Arrest of  Hebertist  leaders— Further  arrests  of  Chau-
mette,  Pache,  Clootz  and  Leclerc — Success  of  the  Government
—Execution  of  Hebertists  and  others — Royalist  rejoicing-
End  of  struggle  between  committees  and  Commune — Com-
mittees arrest  Danton,  Desmoulins,  Ph61ippeaux  and  Lacroix
— They  are  executed — Effect  of  executions  on  Paris — End  of
Revolution  in  sight

THE  winter  thus  passed  in  veiled  struggles  between  the  revolu-
tionists and  the  counter-revolutionists,  who  every  day  lifted
their  heads  higher  and  more  boldly.

In  the  beginning  of  February,  Robespierre  made  himself  the
mouthpiece  of  a  movement  against  certain  commissioners  of
the  Convention  who  had  acted,  as  Carrier  did  at  Nantes  and
Fouche  at  Lyons,  with  appalling  fury  against  the  revolted  towns,
and  who  had  not  discriminated  between  the  instigators  of  the
revolts  and  the  men  of  the  people  who  had  been  dragged  into
them.*  He  demanded  that  these  commissioners  should  be
recalled,  and  he  threatened  them  with  prosecution,  but  this
movement  came  to  nothing.  On  the  5th  Ventose  (February
23)  Carrier  was  amnestied  by  the  Convention — and  Carrier
being  the  greatest  sinner,  this  meant,  of  course,  that  the  faults
of  all  the  other  commissioners,  whatever  they  might  have  been,
were  pardoned.  The  Hebertists  triumphed.  Robespierre  and
Couthon  were  both  ill,  and  did  not  appear  for  a  few  weeks.

*  It  is  known  that  the  young  Julien  had  written  to  him  quite  frankly
about  the  excesses  of  certain  commissioners,  and  especially  of  those  of
Carrier  (vide  Une  mission  en  Vendee).

54*


FALL  OF  THE  HEBERTISTS  543

In  the  meantime  Saint-Just,  returned  from  visiting  the
armies,  delivered  before  the  Convention,  on  the  8th  Ventose
(February  26),  a  great  speech  which  produced  a  strong  impres-
sion and  still  more  embroiled  matters.  Far  from  advocating
clemency,  Saint- Just  adopted  the  Terrorist  programme  of  the
H£bertists.  He,  too,  menaced  the  foes  of  the  Republic — even
more  vigorously  than  the  Hebertists  had  ever  done.  He  pro-
mised to  direct  the  attack  on  the  "  worn-out  party,"  and  singled
out,  as  the  next  victims  of  the  guillotine,  the  Dantonists — "  the
political  party  which  always  speaks  of  moving  with  slow  steps,
deceives  all  parties,  and  prepares  the  return  of  reaction ;  the
party  which  speaks  of  clemency  because  its  members  know  that
they  are  not  virtuous  enough  to  be  terrible,"  Once  he  stood
on  this  ground  of  republican  probity  Saint- Just  could  speak  of
course  with  authority,  while  the  Hebertists  who — in  their  words
at  least — scoffed  at  probity,  gave  their  enemies  the  possibility
of  confounding  them  with  the  crowd  of  "  profitmongers  "
(profiteurs)  who  only  saw  in  the  Revolution  their  personal  en-
richment. As  to  the  economic  questions,  the  tactics  adopted
by  Saint- Just  in  his  report  of  the  8th  Ventose  was  to  accept,
though  very  vaguely,  some  of  the  ideas  of  the  Enrages.  He
confessed  that  until  then  he  had  not  thought  of  these  questions.
"  The  force  of  circumstances,"  he  said,  "  leads  us  perhaps  to
conclusions  of  which  we  had  not  thought."  But  now  that  he
thinks  of  them,  he  still  does  not  wish  to  injure  great  fortunes  :
he  objects  to  them  only  because  they  are  in  the  hands  of  the
enemies  of  the  Revolution.  "  The  estates  of  the  patriots  are
sacred,"  he  says,  "  but  the  lands  of  the  conspirators  are  there  for
the  poor."  Still  he  expresses  some  ideas  upon  landed  property.
His  intention  is  that  the  land  should  belong  to  those  who  culti-
vate it :  let  the  land  be  taken  away  from  those  who  for  twenty  or
fifty  years  have  not  cultivated  it.  He  would  like  to  see  a
democracy  of  virtuous  small  landowners  living  in  modest  ease  ;
and  he  asks  that  the  landed  estates  of  the  conspirators  be  seized
and  given  to  the  poor.  There  can  be  no  liberty  so  long  as  there
are  beggars  and  paupers,  and  so  long  as  the  civil  (he  means  the
economic)  relations  in  society  produce  desires  that  are  contrary
to  the  established  form  of  government,  "  /  defy  you,"  he  says,


544 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

"  to  establish  liberty ,  so  long  as  the  -poor  can  be  roused,  against  the
new  order  of  things,  and  I  defy  you  to  do  away  with  poverty,
so  long  as  we  have  not  made  it  possible  for  every  one  to  be  able
to  own  land.  .  .  .  Mendicity  must  be  abolished  by  distribut-
ing the  national  estates  to  the  poor."  He  spoke  also  of  a  sort
of  national  insurance  :  of  a  "  national  public  domain  established
for  repairing  the  misfortunes  that  may  happen  to  the  social
body."  This  domain  would  be  used  to  reward  virtue,  to  repair
individual  misfortunes,  and  for  education.

And  with  all  this  was  mingled  a  great  deal  of  Terrorism.  It
was  H6bertist  Terrorism,  slightly  tinged  with  socialism.  But
his  socialism  had  no  backbone  in  it.  It  consisted  rather  of
maxims  than  of  legislative  schemes.  It  is  obvious,  moreover,
that  Saint- Just's  aim  was  chiefly  to  prove,  as  he  himself  said,
"  that  the  *  Mountain '  still  remains  the  summit  of  the
Revolution."  It  will  not  allow  others  to  surpass  it.  It  will
execute  the  Enrages  and  the  Hebertists,  but  it  may  borrow
something  from  them.

Through  this  report,  Saint-Just  obtained  two  decrees  from
the  Convention.  One  was  in  reply  to  those  who  called  for
clemency  :  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  was  invested  with
the  power  of  liberating  "  the  detained  patriots."  The  other
decree  was  meant  apparently  to  go  even  further  than  the
Hebertists  ever  intended  to  go,  and  at  the  same  time  to  tran-
quillise  the  purchasers  of  national  estates.  The  estates  of  the
patriots  were  to  be  sacred ;  but  those  of  the  enemies  of  the
Revolution  were  to  be  confiscated  for  the  benefit  of  the  Repub-
lic. As  to  the  enemies  themselves,  they  were  to  be  detained
until  peace  was  concluded,  and  then  they  would  be  banished.
Those  who  wished  the  Revolution  to  advance  further  in  a  social
direction  were  thus  befooled.  Nothing  came  of  this  discourse
but  the  words.

Thereupon  the  Cordeliers  decided  to  act.  On  the  I4th
Ventose  (March  4)  they  covered  with  a  black  veil  the  board
inscribed  with  the  Rights  of  Man  which  was  hung  up  in  their
club.  Vincent  spoke  of  the  guillotine,  and  Hebert  spoke
against  Amar,  one  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  who  was
-hesitating  to  send  sixty-one  Girondins  before  the  revolutionary


FALL  OF  THE  HEBERTISTS  545

tribunal.  In  ambiguous  phrases  he  even  alluded  to  Robespierre
— not  as  an  obstacle  to  serious  change,  but  as  a  defender  of
Desmoulins.  It  thus  meant  applying  to  all  evils  no  remedy  but
Terrorism.  Carrier  let  slip  the  word  "  insurrection."

But  the  people  of  Paris  did  not  move  and  the  Commune
refused  to  listen  to  the  appeal  of  the  Hebertist  Cordeliers.
Then  during  the  night  of  the  23rd  Ventose  (March  13)  the  He-
bertist leaders — Hebert,  Momoro,  Vincent,  Ronsin,  Ducroquet
and  Laumur — were  arrested,  and  the  Committee  of  Public
Welfare  spread  by  the  agency  of  Billaud-Varenne  all  kinds  of
fables  and  calumnies  about  them.  They  had  meant,  said
Billaud,  to  massacre  all  the  royalists  in  the  prisons ;  they  were
going  to  plunder  the  Mint ;  they  had  buried  food-supplies  in
the  ground  in  order  to  starve  Paris  !

On  the  28th  Ventose  (March  18)  Chaumette,  the  procurator
of  the  Commune,  whom  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  had
dismissed  on  the  previous  day  and  replaced  by  Cellier,  was  also
arrested.  The  mayor  Pache  was  deprived  of  office  by  the  same
committee.  Anacharsis  Cloots  had  already  been  arrested  on
the  8th  Nivose  (December  28) — the  accusation  being  that  he  had
sought  information  as  to  whether  a  certain  lady  was  on  the  list  of
suspects.  Leclerc,  a  friend  of  Chalier,  who  had  come  from
Lyons  and  had  worked  with  Jacques  Roux,  was  implicated  in
the  same  charge.

The  Government  triumphed.

The  true  reasons  of  these  arrests  among  the  advanced  party
we  do  not  yet.  know.  Had  they  made  a  plot  with  the  intention
of  seizing  the  power  by  the  help  of  the  "  revolutionary  army  "  of
Ronsin  ?  It  was  possible,  but  up  to  now  we  know  nothing
definite  of  this  affair.

The  Hebertists  were  sent  before  the  revolutionary  tribunal,
and  the  committees  had  the  baseness  to  make  up  what  was
known  then  as  an  "  amalgam."  In  the  same  batch  were  in-
cluded bankers  and  German  agents,  together  with  Momoro,
who  since  1790  had  become  known  for  his  Communist  ideas,
and  who  had  given  absolutely  everything  he  possessed  to  the
Revolution  ;  with  Leclerc,  the  friend  of  Chalier,  and  Anachar-
sis Cloots,  "  the  orator  of  mankind  "  (orateur  du  genre  humain),

2  M


546 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

who  in  1793  had  already  foreseen  the  Republic  of  Mankind
and  had  dared  to  speak  of  it.

On  the  4th  Germinal  (March  24)  after  a  purely  formal  trial
which  lasted  three  days,  they  were  all  executed.

It  is  easy  to  imagine  what  rejoicings  took  place  on  that  day
among  the  royalists,  with  whom  Paris  was  crowded.  The
streets  were  overflowing  with  "  muscadins  "  attired  in  the  most
impayable  fashion ;  who  insulted  the  condemned  victims
while  they  were  being  dragged  in  dust-carts  to  the  Place  de  la
Revolution.  The  rich  paid  absurd  prices  to  have  seats  close  to
the  guillotine,  so  that  they  might  enjoy  fully  the  death  of  the
editor  of  the  Pere  Duchesne.  "  The  square  was  turned  into  a
theatre,"  says  Michelet,  "  and  round  about  there  was  a  kind
of  fair,  in  the  Champs-Elyse'es,  where  gaily  dressed  crowds
circulated  among  the  improvised  shops  and  tents."  The  people
did  not  appear  on  that  day ;  gloomy  and  heavy-hearted,  the
poor  remained  in  their  slums.  They  knew  that  it  was  their
triends  who  were  being  murdered.

Chaumette  was  guillotined  a  few  days  later,  on  the  24th
Germinal  (April  1 3)  with  Gobel,  the  bishop  of  Paris,  who  had
resigned  his  bishopric.  They  had  both  been  accused  of  impiety.
The  widow  of  Desmoulins  and  the  widow  of  Hebert  were
included  in  the  same  batch.  Pache  was  spared,  but  he  was
replaced  as  mayor  by  Fleuriot-Lescaut,  an  insignificant  man,  and
the  procureur  Chaumette,  first  by  Cellier,  and  then  by  Claude
Payan,  a  man  devoted  to  Robespierre  and  more  interested  in
the  Supreme  Being  than  in  the  people  of  Paris.*

The  two  committees — of  Public  Safety  and  of  Public  Wel-
fare— had  thus  got  the  better  of  their  rival,  the  Commune  of
Paris.  The  long  struggle  which  this  centre  of  revolutionary

*  The  law  of  the  i4th  Frimaire  (December  4),  which  had  established
the"  Revolutionary  Government  "  had  replaced  the  elected  procurers
of  the  communes  by  agents  nationaux,  nominated  by  the  Committee
of  Public  Welfare.  Chaumette,  having  been  confirmed  in  his  functions
by  the  committee,  became  thus  a  "  national  agent."  Then,  on  the
day  when  the  Hebertists  were  arrested,  i.e.,  on  the  23rd  Ventose  (March
13),  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  obtained  from  the  Convention
a  new  law  which  allowed  them  to  replace  provisionally  those  func-
tionaries, elected  by  the  Communes,  of  whom  they  wanted  to  get  rid.
In  virtue  of  this  law  the  committee,  having  removed  Pache,  the  mayor
of  Paris,  nominated  Fleuriot-Lescaut  in  his  place.


FALL  OF  THE  HEBERTISTS  547

initiative  had  sustained  since  August  9,  1792,  against  the
official  representatives  of  the  Revolution,  had  come  to  an  end.
The  Commune,  which  for  nineteen  months  had  been  as  a
beacon  to  revolutionary  France,  was  about  to  become  a  mere
particle  of  the  State  machinery.  After  this,  the  end  was
already  in  sight.*

However,  the  royalists  were  so  triumphant  after  these  execu-
tions that  the  committee  felt  themselves  outdone  by  the  coun-
ter-revolutionists. Now,  it  was  they  who  were  asked  to  ascend
the  "  Tarpeian  Rock  " — so  dear  to  Brissot.  Desmoulins,  whose
behaviour  on  the  day  of  Hebert's  execution  was  abominable
(he  himself  has  told  all  about  it),  issued  a  seventh  number  of  his
Vieux  Cordelier,  directed  entirely  against  the  revolutionary
regime.  The  royalists  indulged  in  foolish  manifestations  of
joy,  and  urged  Danton  to  attack  the  committees.  The  crowd
of  Girondins  who  had  covered  themselves  with  the  mantle  of
Danton  were  going  to  take  advantage  of  the  absence  of  the
H6bertists  to  make  a  coup  d'etat — and  this  would  have  meant  the
guillotine  for  Robespierre,  Couthon,  Saint-Just,  Billaud-
Varenne,  Collot  d'Herbois  and  all  the  leading  Montagnards.
The  counter-revolution  might  have  been  already  victorious
by  the  spring  of  1794,  but  the  committees  decided  to  deal  a
blow  to  the  Right,  and  to  sacrifice  Danton.

During  the  night  of  March  30  (the  9th  Germinal)  Paris  was
stupefied  to  learn  that  Danton,  Desmoulins,  Phelippeaux  and
Lacroix  were  arrested.  Acting  on  a  report  laid  before  the
Convention  by  Saint-Just  (drawn  up  after  a  rough  draft  given
him  by  Robespierre  which  has  been  preserved  till  now),  the
Assembly  immediately  gave  the  order  for  the  prosecution  of

*  With  Pache  and  Chaumette  disappeared  the  two  men  who  in  the
minds  of  the  people  best  symbolised  the  popular  revolution.  When  the
delegates  who  had  been  sent  from  the  departments  came  to  Paris  to
signify  the  acceptance  of  the  Constitution,  they  were  surprised  to  find
Paris  quite  democratic,  says  Avenel  (Anacharsis  Cloots,  vol.  ii.  pp.
168-169).  The  mayor, "  Papa  Pache,"  came  from  the  country  with  a
loaf  of  bread  in  his  pocket ;  Chaumette,  the  procureur  of  the  Commune,
"  lives  in  one  room  with  his  wife,  who  mends  old  clothes.  '  Come  in/
they  reply  to  whoever  knocks  at  their  door— just  as  it  was  at  Marat's."
The  "  Pdre  Duchesne,"  the  "  orator  of  mankind  "—all  these  men  were
equally  accessible.  These  were  the  men  who  were  now  taken  from
the  people.  .  .  .


548 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

Danton  and  his  arrest.  The  "  Marsh  "  obediently  voted  as  it
was  told  to  vote.

The  Committees  again  made  an  "  amalgam  " — or  "  batch  "
— in  order  to  bewilder  public  opinion,  and  sent  before  the
revolutionary  tribunal,  Danton,  together  with  Desmoulins,
Bazire  (whose  name  we  saw  as  a  visitor  of  the  Baron  de  Batz),
Fabre,  accused  of  forgery,  Lacroix,  accused  of  robbery,  Chabot,
who  acknowledged  that  he  had  received  (without  having  spent
them)  a  hundred  thousand  francs  from  the  royalists  for  some
unknown  affair,  the  forger  Delaunay,  and  the  go-between  of
de  Batz's  conspiracy,  Julien  (of  Toulouse).

The  pleadings  before  the  tribunal  were  suppressed.  When
the  vigorous  defence  of  Danton  threatened  to  provoke  a  popular
rising,  the  judges  would  not  permit  him  or  the  others  to  speak,
and  pronounced  the  death  sentences.

On  the  1 6th  Germinal  (April  5)  they  were  all  executed.

One  can  well  understand  the  effect  produced  on  the  popu-
lation of  Paris  and  the  revolutionists  in  general  by  the  fall  of  the
revolutionary  Commune  of  Paris,  and  the  execution  of  men  such
as  Leclerc,  Momoro,  Hebert,  and  Cloots,  followed  by  that  of
Danton  and  Camille  Desmoulins,  and  finally  that  of  Chaumette.
These  executions  were  considered  in  Paris  and  in  the  provinces
as  the  end  of  the  Revolution.  In  political  circles  it  was  known
that  Danton  was  the  rallying-point  of  the  counter-revolutionists.
But  for  France  in  general  he  remained  the  revolutionist  who
had  always  been  in  the  vanguard  of  all  popular  movements.
"  If  these  men  are  traitors,  whom  then  shall  we  trust  ?  "  the
people  asked  themselves.  "  But  are  they  traitors  ?  "  others
questioned.  "  Is  this  not  a  sure  sign  that  the  Revolution  is
nearing  its  end  ?  "

Certainly  it  was  such  a  sign.  Once  the  upward  movement
of  the  Revolution  was  arrested ;  once  a  force  could  be  found
that  was  able  to  say  :  "  Further  thou  shalt  not  go,'*  and  that  at  a
moment  when  the  most  essential  demands  of  the  people  were
seeking  expression — once  this  force  had  succeeded  in  crushing
those  who  tried  to  formulate  the  claims  of  the  masses,  the  true
revolutionists  knew  well  that  this  was  indeed  the  death-agony
of  the  Revolution.  They  were  not  deceived  by  Saint-Just,


FALL  OF  THE  HEBERTlSTS  549

who  told  them  that  he,  too,  was  coming  to  think  like  those
whom  he  sent  to  the  scaffold.  They  understood  that  it  was  the
beginning  of  the  end.

In  fact,  the  triumph  of  the  committees  over  the  Commune
of  Paris  was  the  triumph  of  order,  and  during  a  revolution  the
triumph  of  order  is  the  termination  of  the  revolutionary  period.
There  might  still  be  a  few  more  convulsions,  but  the  Revolu-
tion was  at  an  end.

And  the  people  who  had  made  the  Revolution  finally  lost
all  interest  in  it.  They  stood  aside  to  make  way  for  the
"  muscadins."


CHAPTER  LXVI
ROBESPIERRE  AND  HIS  GROUP

Position  and  influence  of  Robespierre — Causes  of  his  power —
His  incorruptibility — His  fanaticism — His  accusation  against
Fabre — His  character  and  policy ,

ROBESPIERRE  has  been  often  mentioned  as  a  dictator ;  his
enemies  in  the  Convention  called  him  "  the  tyrant,"  and  it  is
true  that  as  the  Revolution  drew  to  a  close  Robespierre  acquired
so  much  influence  that  he  came  to  be  regarded  both  in  France
and  abroad  as  the  most  important  person  in  the  Republic.

It  would,  however,  be  incorrect  to  represent  Robespierre  as  a
dictator y  though  certainly  many  of  his  admirers  desired  a  dictator-
ship for  him.*  We  know,  indeed,  that  Cambon  exercised  con-
siderable authority  within  his  special  domain,  the  Committee
of  Finance,  and  that  Carnot  wielded  extensive  powers  in  matters
concerning  the  war,  despite  the  ill-will  borne  him  by  Robespierre
and  Saint-Just.  But  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  was  too
jealous  of  its  controlling  power  not  to  have  opposed  a  dictator-
ship, and,  besides,  some  of  its  members  detested  Robespierre.
Moreover,  even  if  there  were  in  the  Convention  a  certain
number  who  were  not  actually  averse  to  Robespierre's  prepon-
derating influence,  these  would  have  been  none  the  less  un-
willing to  submit  to  the  dictatorship  of  a  Montagnard  so
rigorous  as  he  in  his  principles.  Nevertheless,  Robespierre's
power  was  really  immense.  Nearly  every  one  of  his  enemies  as
well  as  his  admirers  felt  that  the  disappearance  of  his  party  from

*  The  Notes  historiques  sur  la  Convention  nationale,  by  Marc  Antoine
Baudot  (Paris,  1893),  may  be  of  little  value,  but  Saint- Just's  proposal
to  appoint  Robespierre  dictator  to  save  the  Republic,  which  Baudot
mentions  (p.  13),  is  by  no  means  improbable.  Buonarotti  speaks  of  it
as  of  a  well-known  fact.

550


ROBESPIERRE  AND  HIS  GROUP  551

the  political  arena  would  mean,  as  indeed  it  proved,  the
triumph  of  reaction.

How  then  is  the  power  of  Robespierre  and  his  group  to  be
explained  ?  First  of  all,  Robespierre  had  been  incorruptible
in  the  midst  of  a  host  of  men  who  readily  yielded  to  the  seduc-
tions of  riches  and  power,  and  this  is  a  very  important  trait  in
time  of  revolution.  While  the  majority  of  the  middle-class
men  about  him  shared  in  the  spoils  of  the  national  estates  when
they  were  put  up  for  sale  by  the  Revolution,  and  took  part  in
the  stock-jobbery ;  while  thousands  of  Jacobins  secured  posts
under  Government  for  themselves,  Robespierre  remained  an
upright  judge,  steadfastly  reminding  them  of  trie  higher
principles  of  republicanism  and  threatening  those  keenest  after
spoil  with  the  guillotine.

In  all  he  said  and  did  during  those  five  troubled  years  of
revolution,  we  feel  even  now,  and  his  contemporaries  must
have  felt  it  still  more,  that  he  was  one  of  the  very  few  politicians
of  that  time  who  never  wavered  in  their  revolutionary  faith,
nor  in  their  love  for  the  democratic  republic.  In  this  respect
Robespierre  was  a  real  force,  and  if  the  communists  had  been
able  to  oppose  him  with  another  force  equal  to  his  own  in
strength  of  will  and  intelligence,  they  would  undoubtedly
have  succeeded  in  leaving  a  far  deeper  impress  of  their  ideas  on
the  Great  Revolution.

These  qualities,  however,  which  even  his  enemies  acknow-
ledge in  Robespierre,  would  not  suffice  alone  to  explain  the
immense  power  he  possessed  towards  the  end  of  the  Revolution.
The  fact  is,  his  fanaticism,  which  sprang  from  the  purity  of  his
intentions,  kept  him  incorruptible  in  the  midst  of  a  widespread
corruption.  At  the  same  time,  he  was  striving  to  establish
his  authority  over  men's  minds,  and  to  accomplish  this  he  was
ready,  if  necessary,  to  pass  over  the  dead  bodies  of  his  opponents.
In  the  work  of  establishing  his  authority  he  was  powerfully
seconded  by  the  growing  middle  classes  as  soon  as  they  recog-
nised in  him  the  "  happy  mean  " — equally  removed  from  the
extremists  and  the  moderates — the  man  who  offered  them  the
best  guarantee  against  the  "  excesses  "  of  the  people.

The  bourgeoisie  felt  that  here  was  a  man  who  by  the  respect


552 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

he  inspired  in  the  people,  the  moderate  scope  of  his  aims  and
his  itch  for  power,  was  just  the  right  man  to  establish  a  strong
government,  and  thus  put  an  end  to  the  revolutionary  period.
So  long,  therefore,  as  the  middle  classes  had  anything  to  fear
from  the  advanced  parties,  so  long  did  they  refrain  from
interfering  with  Robespierre's  work  of  establishing  the  authority
of  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  and  of  his  group  in  the
Convention.  But  when  Robespierre  had  helped  them  to  crush
those  parties,  they  crushed  him  in  his  turn,  in  order  that  middle-
class  Girondins  should  be  restored  to  power  in  the  Convention,
after  which  the  Thermidorean  reaction  was  developed  to  its
fullest  extent.

Robespierre's  mind  was  admirably  suited  for  the  role  he  was
required  to  play.  To  be  convinced  of  this,  one  has  only  to  read
the  rough  draft  of  the  deed  of  accusation  against  the  Fabre
d'Eglantine  and  Chabot  group,  which  is  written  in  Robespierre's
own  hand,  and  was  found  among  his  papers  after  the  9th
Thermidor.  This  document  characterises  the  man  better
than  any  amount  of  arguments.*

"  Two  rival  coalitions  have  been  quarrelling,  to  the  public
scandal,  for  some  time  past,"  it  begins.  "  One  of  them  is
inclined  to  moderation  and  the  other  to  excesses  which  are
practically  working  against  the  Revolution.  One  declares  war
against  all  energetic^  patriots  and  preaches  indulgence  for
conspirators,  the  other  artfully  slanders  the  defenders  of  liberty,
and  would  crush,  one  by  one,  every  patriot  who  has  ever  erred,
while  remaining  at  the  same  time  wilfully  blind  to  the  criminal
plottings  of  our  most  dangerous  enemies.  .  .  .  One  tries  to
abuse  its  credit  with  or  its  presence  in  the  National  Convention
[Danton's  party],  the  other  misuses  its  influence  with  the  popu-
lar societies  [the  Commune  and  the  Enrages].  One  wants  to
obtain  from  the  Convention  dangerous  decrees  and  measures
of  oppression  against  its  adversaries ;  the  other  makes  use  of
dangerous  language  in  public  assemblies.  .  .  .  The  triumph

*  It  was  Robespierre  who  prepared  the  rough  draft  of  the  accusation
against  this  group,  but  he  made  Saint-Just  his  mouthpiece.  Vide
Papiers  inedits  trouves  chez  Robespierre,  Saint- Just,  Pay  an,  &c.t  sup-
primes  ou  omis  par  Courtois,  precede  du  rapport  de  ce  dernier  a  la  Con-
vention nationale,  vol.  i.,  p.  21  et  seq.  Paris,  1828;


ROBESPIERRE  AND  HIS  GROUP  553

of  either  party  would  be  equally  fatal  to  liberty  and  national
authority.  .  .  ."  And  Robespierre  goes  on  to  say  how  the  two
parties  had  attacked  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  ever  since
its  formation.

After  charging  Fabre  with  preaching  clemency,  in  order
to  conceal  his  own  crimes,  he  adds  :  "  The  moment  no  doubt
was  favourable  for  preaching  a  base  and  cowardly  doctrine,
even  to  well-disposed  men,  when  all  the  enemies  of  liberty
were  doing  their  utmost  on  the  other  side ;  when  a  venal
philosophy,  prostituted  to  tyranny,  neglected  thrones  for  altars,
opposed  religion  to  patriotism,*  made  morality  contradict
itself,  confounded  the  cause  of  religion  with  that  of  des-
potism, the  Catholics  with  the  conspirators,  and  tried  to  force
the  people  to  see  in  the  revolution  not  the  triumph  of  virtue  but
the  triumph  of  atheism — not  the  source  of  happiness,  but  the
destruction  of  moral  and  religious  ideas."

We  can  see  plainly  from  these  extracts  that  if  Robespierre
had  not  the  breadth  of  view  and  boldness  of  thought  necessary
for  the  leader  of  a  party  during  a  revolution,  he  possessed  in
perfection  the  art  of  inciting  an  assembly  against  this  or  that
person.  Every  phrase  in  his  deed  of  accusation  is  a  poisoned
arrow  that  hits  the  mark.

The  most  striking  point  in  all  this  is  the  fact  that  Robespierre
and  his  friends  did  not  realise  the  part  the  "  Moderates  "  were
making  them  play  until  the  time  had  come  for  their  own  over-
throw. "  There  is  a  scheme  to  incite  the  people  to  level  every-
thing," his  brother  writes  to  him  from  Lyons.  "  If  care  is  not
taken,  everything  will  be  disorganised."  And  Maximilien
Robespierre  could  see  no  further  than  his  brother.  In  the  efforts
of  the  advanced  party  he  saw  only  attacks  on  the  Government
of  which  he  was  a  member.  Like  Brissot,  he  accused  them  of
being  the  tools  of  the  London  and  Viennese  Cabinets.  The
attempts  of  the  Communists  were  for  him  only  "  disorganisa-
tion." It  was  necessary  to  "  take  care  "  of  them — to  crush
them  by  the  Terror.

*  We  see  in  Aulard's  Le  Culte  de  la  Raison  el  le  Culte  de  I'Etre  supreme
how,  on  the  contrary,  the  movement  against  Christianity  was  linked
with  patriotism.


554 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

"  What  are  the  means  of  ending  the  civil  war  ?  "  he  asks  in  a
note.  And  he  replies  :

"  To  punish  the  traitors  and  conspirators,  especially  the
guilty  deputies  and  administrators.

"  To  send  patriotic  troops  under  patriot  leaders  to  subdue
the  aristocrats  of  Lyons,  Marseilles,  Toulon,  the  Vendee,  the
Jura,  and  every  other  region  where  the  standard  of  revolt  and
royalism  has  been  set  up.

"And  to  make  terrible  examples  of  all  the  scoundrels  who
have  outraged  liberty  and  shed  the  blood  of  patriots."  *

It  is  not  a  revolutionist  who  speaks  but  a  member  of  a  Govern-
ment using  the  language  of  all  Governments.  This  is  why
Robespierre's  whole  policy,  after  the  fall  of  the  Commune
until  the  Qth  Thermidor,  remained  absolutely  sterile.  It  did
nothing  to  prevent  the  impending  catastrophe,  it  did  much  to
accelerate  it.  It  did  nothing  to  turn  aside  the  daggers  which
were  being  secretly  whetted  to  strike  the  Revolution  ;  it  did
everything  to  make  their  blows  mortal.

*  Paf>ttrs  inidits,  vol.  ii.,  p.  14.


CHAPTER  LXVII
THE  TERROR

Steps  taken  by  committees  to  increase  their  power — War  with
England — Condition  of  provinces — Burning  of  Bedouin —
Special  commission  formed  to.  deal  with  arrested  citizens —
Robespierre's  law  of  22nd  Prairial — Effect  of  law — Aim  of
Robespierre — Attempts  on  his  life— Arrests  and  executions —
Terror — Hatred  of  Jacobin  government

AFTER  the  downfall  of  their  enemies  of  the  Left  and  of  the
Right,  the  committees  continued  to  concentrate  more  and
more  power  in  their  own  hands.  Up  to  that  time  there  had
been  six  Government  departments,  which  were  indirectly
subordinate  to  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare  through  the
intermediary  of  the  Executive  Committee  composed  of  six
ministers.  On  the  1 2th  Germinal  (April  i)  the  State  depart-
ments were  suppressed  and  their  place  taken  by  twelve  Execu-
tive Commissions,  each  of  them  under  the  supervision  of  a
section  of  the  committee.*  Furthermore,  the  Committee  of
Public  Welfare  obtained  the  right  of  recalling  by  its  own
authority  the  commissioners  of  the  Convention.  And  finally,
it  was  decided  that  the  supreme  revolutionary  tribunal  should
sit  in  Paris  under  the  eye  of  the  committees.  Those  who  were
accused  of  conspiracy,  in  any  part  of  France,  were  to  be  brought
to  Paris  for  trial.  At  the  same  time  measures  were  taken  for
purging  Paris  of  all  dangerous  elements.  All  ci-devants
(dispossessed  nobles)  and  all  the  foreigners  belonging  to  the
nations  at  war  with  France,  with  a  few  indispensable  exceptions,
were  to  be  expelled  from  Paris.f

*  As  James  Guillaume  has  shown,  the  majority  of  these  Commissions
had  already  been  formed  successively  since  October  1793.  Proc&s-
verbaux  du  comitt  d' instruction  publiqu»  d»  la  Convention,  vol.  iv.,
Introduction,  pp.  n,  12.

t  Decrees  of  th«  a6tb  and  37th  Germinal.


556 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  other  great  pre-occupation  of  the  Government  was  the
war.  In  January  1794,  there  had  still  been  hope  that  the
opposition  party  in  the  English  parliament  supported  by  a
considerable  number  of  people  in  London  and  several  in-
fluential members  of  the  House  of  Lords,  would  prevent  the
Prime  Minister,  Pitt,  from  continuing  the  war.  Danton  must
have  shared  this  illusion — which  was  one  of  the  crimes  imputed
to  him.  But  Pitt  carried  the  parliamentary  majority  with  him
against  "  the  impious  nation,"  and  since  the  beginning  of  spring
England,  and  Prussia  whom  she  subsidised,  pushed  on  the  war
vigorously.  There  were  soon  four  armies,  315,000  strong,
massed  on  the  frontiers  of  France,  confronting  the  four  armies
of  the  Republic,  which  numbered  only  294,000.  But  by  this
time  the  armies  of  France  were  Republican  armies,  democratised,
with  tactics  of  their  own  elaborated,  and  they  were  not  long  in
gaining  the  upper  hand  over  the  allied  Powers.

The  darkest  spot,  however,  was  in  the  condition  of  things  in
the  provinces,  especially  in  the  South.  The  indiscriminate
extermination  of  all  the  counter-revolutionists — both  the
leaders  and  their  irresponsible  followers — to  which  the  local
Jacobins  and  the  commissioners  of  the  Convention  had  resorted
when  their  party  triumphed,  aroused  such  bitter  hatred  that  it
was  war  to  the  knife  everywhere.  To  make  matters  still  more
difficult,  there  was  no  one  either  on  the  spot  or  in  Paris  who
could  have  suggested  any  remedy  but  extreme  measures  of
repression.  Here  is  an  instance  in  point.

The  department  of  the  Vaucluse  had  always  been  full  of
royalists  and  priests  ;  and  it  happened  that  in  Bedouin,  one  of
these  remote  villages  at  the  foot  of  Mont  Ventoux  which  had
never  forsaken  the  old  regime  nor  concealed  the  fact,  "  the  law
had  been  scandalously  outraged."  On  May  I,  the  "Tree
of  Liberty "  had  been  cut  down  and  "  the  decrees  of  the
Convention  dragged  through  the  mud."  Suchet,  the  local
military  chief,  who  was  presently  to  become  an  imperialist,
wished  to  make  a  terrible  example  of  the  village  and  demanded
its  destruction.  Maignet,  the  commissioner  of  the  Convention,
hesitated  and  applied  for  instructions  to  Paris,  whence  came  the
order  "Punish  severely,"  whereupon  Suchet  set  fire  to  the


THE  TERROR  557

village  and  433  houses  were  rendered  uninhabitable.  With
such  a  system  one  can  easily  imagine  that  there  would  be  no
choice  but  to  "  punish  severely."

So  it  was  in  reality.  A  few  days  later,  it  being  found  im-
possible to  transfer  to  Paris  all  the  arrested  citizens,  for,  as
Maignet  said,  it  would  have  required  an  army  and  a  com-
missariat to  do  it,  Couthon  proposed  a  special  commission  to
deal  with  them.  This  commission  was  to  be  formed  of  five
members  to  sit  at  Orange  and  try  the  enemies  of  the  Revolution
in  the  departments  of  the  Vaucluse  and  the  Bouches-du-Rhone.
The  two  committees  agreed  to  the  proposal.*  Robespierre
with  his  own  hand  drew  up  the  instructions  for  this  com-
mission, and  these  instructions  presently  served  as  a  model  for
his  law  of  Terror  issued  on  the  22nd  Prairial.t

A  few  days  later,  Robespierre  enlarged  upon  these  principles
before  the  Convention,  saying  that  hitherto  they  had  shown
too  much  consideration  for  the  enemies  of  liberty  and  that  they
must  now  go  beyond  the  judicial  forms  and  simplify  them.J
And  two  days  after  the  Fete  of  the  Supreme  Being  he  proposed,
with  the  consent  of  his  colleagues  on  the  Committee  of  Public
Welfare,  the  famous  law  of  the  22nd  Prairial  (June  10) — con-
cerning the  reorganisation  of  the  revolutionary  tribunal.
By  virtue  of  this  law,  the  tribunal  was  to  be  divided  into

*  I  here  follow  the  account  given  by  Louis  Blanc  (Book  XII.,  chap,
xiii.),  whom  no  one  can  accuse  of  being  hostile  to  the  Robespierre
group.

f  "  The  enemies  of  the  Revolution,"  said  this  instruction,  "  are
those  who  by  any  means  whatever  and  under  no  matter  what  pretext
have  tried  to  hamper  the  progress  of  the  Revolution  and  prevent  the
establishment  of  the  Republic.  The  due  penalty  for  this  crime  is
death  ;  the  proofs  requisite  for  condemnation  are  all  information,  of  no
matter  what  kind,  which  may  convince  a  reasonable  man  and  a  friend
of  liberty.  The  guide  for  passing  sentences  lies  in  the  conscience  of
the  judge,  enlightened  by  love  of  justice  and  of  his  country,  their  aim
being  the  public  welfare  and  the  destruction  of  these  enemies  of  the
fatherland."

I  "  They  wish  to  govern  revolutions  by  lawyers'  subtleties  ;  con-
spiracies against  the  Republic  were  being  treated  as  if  they  were
actions  between  private  individuals.  Tyranny  slays  and  liberty
pleads  !  And  the  Code  made  by  the  conspirators  is  the  law  by  which
they  are  judged!  ..."  "The  only  delay  in  punishing  the  enemies
of  the  fatherland  should  be  until  such  time  as  they  are  found  out :  it
is  not  so  much  a  question  of  punishing  as  of  destroying  them."


558 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

sections,  each  composed  of  three  judges  and  nine  jurors.  Seven
of  their  combined  number  were  to  be  sufficient  for  making
decisions.  The  rules  for  passing  sentence  were  to  be  those
which  have  just  been  described  as  contained  in  the  instructions
to  the  commission  at  Orange,  except  that  among  the  crimes
deserving  of  death  they  included  also  the  spreading  of  false
news  to  divide  or  stir  up  the  people,  the  undermining  of
morality  and  the  corrupting  of  the  public  conscience.

It  is  evident  that  to  decree  such  a  law  was  to  sign  the  bank-
ruptcy of  the  revolutionary  Government.  It  meant  doing
under  a  pretext  of  legality  what  the  people  of  Paris  had  done  in
an  insurrection  and  in  a  moment  of  panic  and  desperation  during
the  September  days.  And  the  effect  of  the  law  of  the  22nd
Prairial  was  to  bring  the  counter-revolution  to  a  head  in  six
weeks.

Was  Robespierre's  purpose  in  drawing  up  this  law  only  to
strike  at  those  members  of  the  Convention  whom  he  believed
to  be  most  harmful  to  the  Revolution,  as  some  historians  have
tried  to  prove  ?  His  withdrawal  from  the  business  of  govern-
ment after  the  discussions  in  the  Convention  had  proved  that
the  Assembly  would  not  allow  itself  to  be  bled  by  the  committee
without  defending  its  members,  gives  an  air  of  probability  to
this  supposition.  But  the  well-established  fact  that  the  in-
structions to  the  commission  at  Orange  had  also  emanated
from  Robespierre  upsets  this  theory.  It  is  more  probable  that
Robespierre  simply  followed  the  current  of  the  moment,  and
that  he,  Couthon  and  Saint- Just,  in  agreement  with  many  others,
including  Cambon,  wanted  to  use  the  Terror  as  a  general
weapon  of  warfare  as  well  as  a  menace  to  some  members  of  the
Convention.  In  reality,  without  mentioning  Hebert,  they
had  been  steadily  approaching  this  law  since  the  decrees  of  the
I9th  Flor6al  (May  8)  and  9th  Prairial  (May  28)  which  dealt
with  the  concentration  of  authority.  It  is  also  very  probable
that  the  attempt  of  Ladmiral  to  kill  Collot  d'Herbois  and  the
strange  affair  of  Cecile  Renault  helped  to  secure  the  acceptation
of  the  law  of  the  22nd  Prairial.

Towards  the  end  of  April  there  had  been  a  series  of  executions
in  Paris  which  must  have  stimulated  to  a  high  degree  the  hatred


THE  TERROR  559

on  the  royalists'  side.  After  the  "  batch  "  guillotined  on  the  24th
Germinal  (April  13),  which  included  Chaumette,  Gobel,  Lucile
Desmoulins,  the  widow  of  Hebert,  and  fifteen  others,  they  had
executed  d'Epremesnil,  le  Chapelier,  Thouret,  old  Malesherbes,
the  defender  of  Louis  XVI.  at  his  trial,  Lavoisier,  the  great
chemist  and  good  republican,  and  the  sister  of  Louis  XVI.,
Madame  Elisabeth,  whom  they  might  have  set  at  liberty  at  the
same  time  as  her  niece,  without  in  the  least  endangering  the
Republic.

The  royalists  were  much  infuriated  by  this,  and  on  the  yth
Prairial  (May  25)  a  certain  Ladmiral— an  office-keeper  aged  fifty
— went  to  the  Convention  intending  to  kill  Robespierre.  Lad-
miral,  however,  fell  asleep  during  a  speech  by  Barere  and  missed
the  "  tyrant."  He  therefore  fired  instead  at  Collot  d'Herbois
as  he  was  mounting  the  stairs  to  his  lodging.  A  struggle  ensued
between  the  two  men  in  which  Collot  disarmed  Ladmiral.

The  same  day,  Cecile  Renault,  a  girl  of  twenty,  the  daughter
of  a  royalist  stationer,  entered  the  courtyard  of  the  house  where
Robespierre  lodged  with  the  Duplays,  and  insisted  on  seeing
him.  Her  intentions  were  suspected  and  she  was  arrested.
Two  small  knives  were  found  in  her  pocket  and  her  incoherent
answers  were  interpreted  as  meaning  that  she  had  intended  to
make  an  attempt  on  Robespierre's  life.  If  it  was  so,  the  whole
affair  was  very  childish  ;  but  these  two  attempts  probably
served  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  Terrorist  Law.

At  any  rate  the  committees  took  advantage  of  both  incidents
to  make  a  huge  "  amalgam."  They  had  the  father  and  brother
of  the  young  girl  arrested,  and  several  persons  whose  sole  crime
was  that  they  had  known  Ladmiral  more  or  less  intimately.
In  the  same  "  batch  "  they  included  Madame  Saint-Amaranthe,
who  kept  a  gambling-house  to  which  many  people  were  at-
tracted by  the  beauty  of  her  daughter,  Madame  de  Sartine.
As  the  establishment  had  been  frequented  by  all  sorts  of  people,
among  others  by  Chabot,  Desfieux,  Herault  de  Sechelles,  and
visited,  it  seems,  by  Danton  and  apparently  by  a  younger
brother  of  Robespierre,  the  affair  was  made  out  to  be  a  royalist
conspiracy,  in  which  it  was  attempted  to  implicate  Robespierre
himself.  They  also  dragged  in  old  Sombreuil,  whom  Maillard


560 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

had  saved  during  the  September  massacres,  the  actress  Grand'-
Maison,  a  mistress  of  Baron  de  Batz,  Sartino,  "  a  knight  of  the
dagger,"  and  along  with  these  notables  a  poor  innocent  little
dressmaker,  seventeen  years  old,  named  Nicolle.

Under  the  new  law  of  the  22nd  Prairial,  the  trial  was  soon
over.  This  time  the  "  batch  "  numbered  fifty-four  persons,
who  all  went  to  the  scaffold  in  red  smocks  of  parricides,  their
execution  lasting  two  hours.  This  was  the  first  outcome  of
the  new  law,  which  every  one  called  Robespierre's  law,  and  at
one  stroke  it  made  the  rule  of  the  Terrorists  detested  by  all
Paris.

One  can  imagine  the  state  of  mind  of  those  who  had  been
arrested  as  "  suspects "  and  flung  into  prisons  in  the  capital,
when  they  heard  the  terms  of  the  new  law  and  its  application
in  the  case  of  the  fifty-four  red-smocks  (Les  chemises  rouges).  A
general  massacre  to  clear  out  the  prisons  was  expected,  as  at
Nantes  and  Lyons,  and  preparations  were  being  made  by  the
prisoners  to  resist.  It  is  even  probable  that  a  rising  was
planned.*  The  number  of  accused  persons  tried  at  one  time
rose  to  one  hundred  and  fifty,  who  were  executed  in  three
"  batches  " — convicts  and  royalists  going  to  the  scaffold
together.

It  is  useless  to  dwell  upon  these  executions.  Suffice  it  to  say
that  from  April  17,  1793,  the  day  when  the  Revolutionary
Tribunal  was  established,  until  the  22nd  Prairial  in  the  Year  II.
(June  10,  1794),  that  ig>  within  fourteen  months,  the  tribunal
had  sent  2607  persons  to  the  guillotine  in  Paris  ;  but  after  the
passing  of  the  new  law,  within  forty-six  days  from  the  22nd
Prairial  to  the  9th  Thermidor  (July  27,  1794)  t^ie  same  tribunal
caused  1351  to  perish.

The  people  of  Paris  soon  sickened  with  the  horror  of  seeing
the  procession  of  tumbrils  carrying  the  condemned  to  the  foot
of  the  guillotine,  where  it  was  as  much  as  five  executioners  could
do  to  empty  them  every  day.  There  was  no  longer  room  in  the
cemeteries  to  bury  the  victims,  and  vigorous  protests  were  raised

*  A  search  made  in  the  prisons  led  to  the  seizure  of  sums  of  money
amounting  to  864,000  livres,  exclusive  of  jewels,  which  brought  the
total  value  up  to  something  like  1,200,000  livres  possessed  by  the
suspects  in  prison.


THE  TERROR  561

each,  time  a  new  cemetery  was  opened  in  any  of  the  faubourgs.
The  sympathies  of  the  working  people  were  now  turned  to  the
victims  of  the  guillotine  all  the  more  because  those  struck  down
belonged  chiefly  to  the  poorer  classes — the  rich  having  emi-
grated or  concealed  themselves.  As  a  fact,  among  the  2750
guillotined  persons  of  whose  social  status  Louis  Blanc  found
record  only  650  belonged  to  the  well-to-do  classes.  It  was  even
whispered  that  on  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety  there  was  a
royalist,  an  agent  of  Baron  de  Batz,  who  urged  on  the  executions
so  as  to  render  the  Republic  detested.

One  thing  is  certain  ;  each  new  "  batch  "  of  this  kind  hastened
the  fall  of  the  Jacobin  Government.  The  Terror  had  ceased  to
terrorise,  a  thing  which  statesmen  cannot  understand.


2  N


CHAPTER  LXVIII

THE  9TH  THERMIDOR— TRIUMPH  OF
REACTION

Causes  of  overthrow  of  Robespierre — Evils  of  transfer  of  land
— Republican  successes  abroad — Terror  continues — Danton-
ists,  Girondins  and  "  Marsh  "  unite  to  overthrow  Robespierre
— Unpopularity  of  Committee  of  Public  Welfare — Robespierre
attacks  Bardre  and  Fouch6 — His  speech  in  Convention — Effect
of  speech — 9th  Thermidor — Arrest  of  Robespierre  and  his
associates — Efforts  of  Commune — Capture  of  Hotel  de  Ville —
Execution  of  Robespierre  and  Terrorists — End  of  Revolution
— Reactionaries  continue  executions — Attempted  rising  of
workers — Execution  of  last  of  Montagnards — Triumph  of
middle  classes — Royalist  manifestations — Massacres  of  revo-
lutionists— Reaction  succeeded  by  Directory — Final  effort  of
revolutionists— Napoleon  proclaims  himself  Emperor

IF  Robespierre  had  many  admirers,  who  adored  him,  he  had  also
quite  as  many  enemies,  who  utterly  detested  him  and  lost  no
opportunity  of  making  him  odious  by  attributing  to  him  all  the
horrors  of  the  Terror.  Nor  did  they  neglect  to  render  him
ridiculous  by  connecting  him  with  the  doings  of  an  old  mad
mystic,  Catherine  Theot,  who  called  herself  "the  Mother  of
God."

But  still  it  is  evident  that  it  was  not  personal  enmities  which
overthrew  Robespierre.  His  fall  was  inevitable,  because  he
represented  a  regime  that  was  on  the  point  of  foundering.  After
the  Revolution  had  passed  through  its  ascendant  phase,  which
lasted  until  August  or  September  1793,  it  entered  upon  its
descendant  phase.  It  was  now  passing  through  the  Jacobin
regime  of  which  Robespierre  was  the  supreme  expression,  and
in  its  turn  this  regime  had  to  give  place  to  the  men  of  "  law  and
order,"  who  were  longing  to  put  an  end  to  the  unrest  of  revolu-
tion, and  were  only  waiting  for  the  moment  when  they  could

S6a


THE  9TH  THERMIDOR  563

overthrow  the  Terrorists  of  the  "  Mountain  "  without  provoking
an  insurrection  in  Paris.

We  cannot  overestimate  all  the  evil  resulting  from  the  fact
that  in  economic  matters  the  Revolution  was  based  on  personal
gain.  A  revolution  should  include  the  welfare  of  all,  otherwise
it  is  certain  to  be  crushed  by  those  very  persons  whom  it  hai
enriched  at  the  expense  of  the  nation.  Whenever  a  shifting  of
wealth  is  caused  by  a  revolution,  it  ought  never  to  be  for  the
benefit  of  individuals,  but  always  for  the  benefit  of  communities.
Yet  it  was  on  this  point  precisely  that  the  Great  Revolution
fatally  erred.

The  estates,  which  were  confiscated  from  the  church  and  the
nobility,  were  given  to  private  persons,  whereas  they  should  have
been  restored  to  the  villages  and  the  towns,  because  they  had
formerly  belonged  to  the  people — being,  as  they  were,  the  lands
which  individuals  had  fastened  upon  under  the  protection  of
the  feudal  system.  There  have  never  been  any  cultivated  lands
of  seigniorial  or  ecclesiastic  origin.  Apart  from  a  few  monastic
communities,  neither  lords  nor  priests  had  ever  with  their  own
hands  cleared  a  single  acre.  The  people,  those  called  vilains
or  manants,  had  cleared  every  square  yard  of  cultivated
soil.  It  was  they  who  had  made  it  accessible,  habitable,
and  given  value  to  it,  and  it  was  to  them  it  should  have  been
restored.

But,  acting  in  the  interests  of  a  middle-class  State,  the  Con-
stituent and  Legislative  Assemblies,  and  even  the  Convention
too,  acknowledged  the  legal  claims  of  lord,  convent,  cathedral,
and  church  to  lands  which  in  former  times  had  been  appro-
priated by  those  props  of  the  then  growing  State,  and  they  took
possession  of  these  lands  and  sold  them  chiefly  to  the  middle
classes.

It  can  be  imagined  what  a  scramble  for  a  share  in  this  booty
took  place  when  estates,  of  which  the  total  value  amounted  to
from  ten  to  fifteen  thousand  millions  of  francs,  were  on  sale  for
several  years  under  conditions  extremely  favourable  to  the
purchasers — conditions  which  could  be  rendered  still  more
advantageous  by  currying  favour  with  the  new  local  authorities.
In  this  way  the  famous  "  black  bands  "  were  formed  in  the


564 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

provinces,  against  which  all  the  efforts  of  the  Convention's
commissioners  were  powerless.

The  pernicious  influence  of  these  pilferers,  reinforced  by  the
Paris  stock-jobbers  and  the  army  contractors,  spread  by  degrees
to  the  Convention  itself,  where  the  honest  men  among  the
Montagnards  found  themselves  confronted  by  "  profitmongers  "
and  helpless  against  them.  What  was  there  to  oppose  to  them  ?
Once  the  Enrages  were  crushed  and  the  sections  of  Paris  para-
lysed— what  remained  in  the  Convention  beside  the  "  Marsh  "  ?

The  victory  of  Fleurus,  won  on  June  26  (8th  Messidor)  over
the  combined  forces  of  Austria  and  England — a  victory  which
ended  the  campaign  in  the  North  for  that  year — and  the  suc-
cesses gained  by  the  Republic's  armies  in  the  Pyrenees,  the  Alps,
and  on  the  Rhine,  as  well  as  the  arrival  of  a  transport  laden  with
wheat  from  America — at  the  cost,  be  it  said,  of  several  battle-
ships— these  successes  served  in  themselves  as  powerful  argu-
ments with  the  "  moderates,"  who  were  anxious  to  restore
order.  "  What,"  said  they,  "  is  the  good  of  a  revolutionary
government,  now  that  the  war  is  almost  over  ?  It  is  time  to
go  back  to  legal  conditions,  and  to  put  an  end  to  government
by  revolutionary  committees  and  patriotic  societies  in  the  pro-
vinces. It  is  time  to  restore  order  and  to  close  the  period  of
revolution  !  "

But  the  Terror,  so  generally  attributed  to  Robespierre,  far
from  relaxing,  was  still  fully  maintained.  On  the  3rd  Messidor
(June  21),  Herman,  a  government  official,  "  commissaire  des
administrations  civiles^  police  et  tribunaux"  a  man  much  attached
to  Robespierre,  sent  in  a  statement  to  the  Committee  of  Public
Welfare,  asking  permission  to  inquire  into  the  plottings  among
the  prisoners  and  hinting  that  "  it  might  be  necessary  presently
to  purge  the  prisons."  He  was  authorised  by  the  committee
to  hold  the  inquiry,  and  forthwith  began  the  sending  of  those
horrible  "  batches,"  those  cartloads  of  men  and  women  to  the
guillotine,  a  sight  more  abominable  to  the  Parisians  than  the
September  massacres.  These  executions  were  all  the  more
odious  because  no  one  knew  where  they  would  end,  and  because
they  went  on  in  the  midst  of  balls,  concerts,  and  other  festivities
given  by  the  class  that  had  so  recently  grown  rich,  and  amid  the


THE  9TH  THERMIDOR  565

derision  of  the  royalist  jeunesse  doree,  who  grew  daily  more
aggressive.

Every  one  must  have  felt  that  this  state  of  things  could  not
last,  and  the  Moderates  in  the  Convention  took  advantage  of  it.
Dantonists,  Girondins,  and  the  members  of  the  "  Marsh,"
joined  ranks,  and  concentrated  their  forces  on  Robespierre's
overthrow,  as  the  first  point  to  be  gained.  The  condition  of
Paris  favoured  their  designs,  as  the  Committee  of  Public
Welfare  had  succeeded  in  crippling  the  sections — the  true
centres  of  the  popular  movements.

On  the  5th  Thermidor  (July  23)  the  general  council  of  the
Commune,  in  which  Payan,  an  intimate  friend  of  Robespierre,
was  now  all  powerful,  did  much  to  injure  its  popularity  by
issuing  a  decree  that  was  absolutely  unjust  to  the  workers.
The  council  ordered  in  all  the  forty-eight  sections  the  procla-
mation of  the  maximum,  which  was  to  fix  the  limit  of  the
workers'  wages.  As  we  have  seen,  the  Committee  of  Public
Welfare  had  already  made  itself  unpopular  with  the  sections
by  destroying  their  autonomy,  and  appointing  the  members  of
several  of  their  committee.

The  moment,  therefore,  was  ripe  for  attempting  a  coup
d'etat.

On  the  2 1st  Messidor  (July  9)  Robespierre  had  at  length
decided  to  begin  the  attack  upon  his  enemies.  Eight  days
previously  he  had  been  complaining  at  the  Jacobin  Club  of  the
war  that  was  being  waged  against  him  personally.  He  now
went  into  particulars,  and  made  some  allusions  to  Barere —
that  very  Barere  who  until  then  had  been  the  pliant  instrument
of  his  faction,  whenever  a  bold  stroke  had  been  needed  in  the
Convention.  Two  days  later,  again  at  the  Jacobin  Club,  he
made  a  direct  attack  on  Fouche*  for  his  terrible  doings  in  Lyons,
and  succeeded  in  having  him  summoned  to  answer  for  them
before  the  club.

By  the  26th  Messidor  (July  14)  war  was  declared,  as  Fouche
had  refused  to  appear  before  the  Jacobins.  As  to  the  attack  on
BareTe,  it  meant  also  an  attack  on  Collot  d'Herbois  and  Billaud-
Varenne,  as  well  as  on  two  powerful  members  of  the  Committee
of  Public  Safety,  Vadier  and  Voulland,  who  often  conferred


566 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

with  Bar£re  and  had  collaborated  with  him  in  the  business  of
the  prison  plots.

All  those  of  the  Left,  therefore,  who  felt  themselves  threatened
— Tallien,  BareTe,  Vadier,  Voulland,  Billaud-Varenne,  Collot
d'Herbois,  Fouch£ — banded  themselves  together  against  the
"  triumvirs  " — Robespierre,  Saint-Just  and  Couthon.  Mode-
rates, such  as  Barras,  Rov&re,  Thirion,  Courtois,  Bourdon,  and
the  rest,  who,  for  their  part,  would  have  liked  to  see  the
downfall  of  the  whole  "  Mountain,"  including  Collot  d'Herbois,
Billaud-Varenne,  Barege,  Vadier  and  the  others,  no  doubt  said  to
themselves  that  it  was  best  to  begin  by  attacking  the  Robes-
pierre group,  as,  once  that  was  overthrown,  the  rest  could  be
easily  managed.

The  storm  burst  in  the  Convention  on  the  8th  Thermidor
(July  26,  1794).  It  must  have  been  expected,  for  the  hall  was
thronged.  Robespierre  attacked  the  Committee  of  General
Safety  in  a  carefully  prepared  speech  and  charged  it  with  con-
spiring against  the  Convention.  He  was  there,  he  said,  to
defend  the  Convention  and  himself  against  slanders.  He  also
defended  himself  against  the  charge  of  dictatorial  tendencies,
and  he  did  not  try  to  be  conciliatory  towards  his  adversaries —
even  towards  Cambon,  of  whom  he  spoke,  as  well  as  of  Mallarme'
and  Ramel,  in  terms  borrowed  from  the  Enrages,  calling  them
"  Feuillants,  aristocrats,  rascals."

He  was  permitted  to  finish,  because  people  were  anxious  to
know  his  conclusions,  and  when  he  had  expressed  them  it  was
perceived  that  in  reality  he  was  asking  for  an  increase  in  his  own
authority  and  that  of  his  group.  There  was  no  new  outlook,
no  new  programme  in  his  speech.  It  was  only  the  demand  of
a  Government  member  for  more  power — still  more  power,  to
be  used  for  purposes  of  repression.

"  What  is  the  remedy  for  the  evil  ?  "  he  said  in  conclusion.
"  The  punishment  of  the  traitors,  a  complete  reconstruction
of  the  Committee  of  General  Safety,  the  purification  of  that
committee  and  its  subordination  to  the  Committee  of  Public
Welfare  ;  the  purification  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare
itself ;  and  unity  of  Government  under  the  authority  of  the
National  Convention  which  was  the  centre  and  the  judge."


THE  9TH  THERMIDOR  567

It  was  understood  then  that  he  confined  himself  to  asking
for  more  authority  to  be  vested  in  his  triumvirate,  to  be  used
against  Collot  and  Billot,  Tallien  and  Barere,  Cambon  and
Carnot,  Vadier  and  Voulland.  The  conspirators  of  the  Right
must  have  rubbed  their  hands.  They  had  only  to  let  Tallien,
Billot- Varenne  and  the  other  Montagnards  act.

The  evening  of  the  same  day  the  Jacobin  Club  rapturously
applauded  Robespierre's  speech  and  made  a  furious  demonstra-
tion against  Collot  d'Herbois  and  Billaud- Varenne.  It  was  even
proposed  to  march  against  the  two  committees.  But  nothing
went  beyond  mere  talk.  The  Jacobin  Club  had  never  been  a
centre  of  action. .

During  the  night  Bourdon  and  Tallien  secured  the  support
of  the  Conventionals  of  the  Right,  and  apparently  the  plan
agreed  upon  was  to  prevent  Robespierre  and  Saint- Just  from
speaking.

The  next  day,  the  9th  Thermidor,  as  soon  as  Saint- Just  rose
to  read  his  statement — which,  by  the  way,  was  very  moderate,
for  it  only  asked  for  a  revision  of  Government  procedure —
Billaud- Varenne  and  Tallien  would  not  allow  him  to  read  it.
They  demanded  the  arrest  of  the  "  tyrant,"  meaning  Robes-
pierre, and  shouts  of  "  Down  with  the  tyrant !  "  were  re-echoed
by  the  whole  of  the  "  Marsh."  Robespierre  attempted  to
speak,  but  he,  too,  was  prevented.  An  order  was  given  for  his
prosecution,  including  his  brother,  Saint- Just,  Couthon  and
Lebas,  and  they  were  immediately  arrested  and  taken  off  to
different  prisons.

Meanwhile  Hanriot,  the  chief  of  the  National  Guard,  followed
by  two  aides-de-camp  and  some  gendarmes,  was  galloping
through  the  streets  in  the  direction  of  the  Convention,  when
two  of  the  members  of  the  Convention,  seeing  him  pass  in
the  Rue  Saint-Honor^,  had  him  arrested  by  six  of  the  very
gendarmes  under  his  command.

The  General  Council  of  the  Commune  did  not  meet  until
six  o'clock  in  the  evening.  It  then  issued  an  appeal  to  the
people,  calling  on  them  to  rise  against  Barere,  Collot,  Bourdon
and  Amar.  and  Coffinhal  was  despatched  to  deliver  Robespierre
and  his  friends  who,  it  was  thought,  were  kept  under  arrest  in


568 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

the  building  occupied  by  the  Committee  of  General  Safety,
but  Coffinhal  found  there  only  Hanriot,  whom  he  released.  As
to  Robespierre,  he  had  been  taken  first  to  the  Luxembourg,
but  the  officials  there  refused  to  receive  him  ;  and,  instead  of
going  straight  to  the  Commune,  and  casting  in  his  lot  with  the
party  of  insurrection,  he  went  to  the  Police  Office  on  the
Quai  des  Orfevres,  and  remained  doing  nothing.  Saint-Just
and  Lebas  went  as  soon  as  they  were  free  to  the  Commune,  and
Coffinhal,  again  sent  by  the  Council  to  seek  Robespierre,  had  to
force  his  hand  to  compel  him  to  go  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville,
which  he  reached  about  eight  o'clock.

The  Council  of  the  Commune  began  to  arrange  for  a  rising,
but  it  became  clear  that  the  sections  had  no  mind  to  rise  against
the  Convention  in  favour  of  those  whom  they  charged  with
having  guillotined  Chaumette  and  Hebert,  killed  Jacques
Roux,  ejected  Pache  from  office,  and  destroyed  the  autonomy
of  the  sections.  Paris,  moreover,  must  have  felt  that  the
Revolution  was  dying  out,  and  that  the  men  for  whom  the
Council  of  the  Commune  appealed  to  the  people  to  rise  were  in
no  way  representative  of  the  popular  cause.

By  midnight  the  sections  had  made  no  sign  of  stirring.
Louis  Blanc  says  that  they  were  in  a  state  of  division,  their
civil  committees  being  unable  to  come  to  agreement  with  the
revolutionary  committees  and  the  General  Assemblies.  The
fourteen  sections  that  obeyed  the  Commune  in  the  first  in-
stance did  nothing,  while  eighteen  were  hostile,  and  of  these,
six  were  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  Hotel  de  Ville.
The  men  of  Jacques  Roux'  section,  the  Gravilliers,  even  formed
the  first  nucleus  of  one  of  the  two  columns  that  marched  upon
the  Hotel  de  Ville  at  the  order  of  the  Convention.*

*  The  sections,  M.  Ernest  Mellie  says,  took  no  initiative,  but  tamely
followed  their  committees,  the  members  of  which  were  dependent  on
the  Committees  of  Public  Welfare  and  General  Safety.  They  were
left  no  part  in  politics.  .  .  .  They  had  even  been  forbidden  to  call
themselves  primary  assemblies  ;  on  the  2Oth  Floreal,  Year  II.  (May  9,
1794),  Payan,  the  national  agent  of  the  Commune,  who  had  taken  the
place  of  Chaumette,  warned  them  by  letter  that,  under  a  revolutionary
government,  there  were  no  primary  assemblies.  .  .  .  This  was  to
remind  them  that  their  abdication  was  complete  (pp.  151,  152).  After
recounting  the  successive  purifications  to  which  the  sections  had
submitted  to  make  themselves  acceptable  to  the  Jacobins  (p.  153),  M.


THE  9TH  THERMIDOR  569

In  the  meantime,  the  Convention  was  declaring  the  insur-
gents and  the  Commune  outlaws,  and  when  this  declaration
was  read  in  the  Place  de  la  Greve,  Hanriot's  artillerymen,  who
hadjbeen  posted  there  with  nothing  to  do,  slipped  away  one
by  one>  The  Place  was  quite  deserted  when  shortly  afterwards
the  Hotel  de  Ville  was  invaded  by  the  columns  from  the
Gravilliers  and  the  Arcis.  A  young  gendarme,  who  was  the
first  to  enter  the  room  in  which  were  Robespierre  and  his
friends,  fired  a  pistol-shot  which  broke  Robespierre's  jaw.  The
Hotel  de  Ville,  the  very  centre  of  the  resistance,  was  thus  taken
without  a  blow  being  struck  in  its  defence.  Thereupon  Lebas
killed  himself,  the  younger  Robespierre  tried  to  kill  himself  by
leaping  through  a  window  from  the  third  story ;  Coffinhal
caught  hold  of  Hanriot,  whom  he  accused  of  having  lost  their
cause,  and  hurled  him  out  of  window  ;  Saint-Just  and  Couthon
allowed  themselves  to  be  arrested  quietly.

The  next  morning,  after  a  mere  form  of  identification,  they
were  all  executed,  to  the  number  of  twenty-one.  They  went
to  their  death  in  the  Place  de  la  Revolution  by  a  long  route
amid  the  insults  of  counter-revolutionary  crowds.  The  fashion-
able people  who  hastened  to  enjoy  the  spectacle  were  even  more
festive  than  on  the  day  of  the  execution  of  the  Hebertists.
Windows  were  let  at  fabulous  prices,  and  the  ladies  who  sat  in
them  wore  full  dress.  Reaction  was  triumphing.  The  Revo-
lution had  come  to  an  end.

Here  we,  too,  shall  pause,  without  narrating  the  details  of
the  orgies  under  the  White  Terror,  which  began  after  Ther-
midor,  or  the  two  attempts  at  insurrection  against  the  new
regime  :  the  movement  of  Prairial  in  the  Year  III.  and  the
conspiracy  of  Babeuf  in  the  Year  IV.

Mellie  concludes  with  these  words  :  "  Michelet  was  right,  therefore,  in
saying  that  by  this  time  the  assemblies  of  the  sections  were  dead  and
that  all  power  had  passed  over  to  the  revolutionary  committees,  which,
being  themselves  nominated  by  the  Government,  had  no  longer  any
vitality  either  "  (pp.  154,  155].  On  the  pth  Thermidor  (and  of  this
M.  Mellie  has  found  the  proofs  in  the  Archives},  in  nearly  all  the  sections
the  revolutionary  committees  were  assembled  to  await  the  orders  of  the
Government  (p.  169).  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the  sections
did  not  take  action  against  the  Thermidoreans*


570 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

The  opponents  of  the  Terror,  who  were  always  talking  of
clemency,  wanted  it  only  for  themselves  and  their  friends.
The  first  thing  they  did  when  they  came  into  power  was  to
execute  all  the  partisans  of  the  Montagnards  whom  they  had
overthrown.  In  the  three  days,  the  loth,  nth,  and  I2th
Thermidor  (July  28,  29,  and  30)  there  were  a  hundred  and  three
executions.  Denunciations  poured  in  from  the  middle  classes
and  the  guillotine  was  working  hard — this  time  on  the  side  of
reaction.  From  the  pth  Thermidor  to  the  1st  Prairial,  in  less
than  ten  months,  seventy-three  Montagnard  representative*
were  condemned  to  death  or  imprisoned,  while  seventy-three
Girondins  re-entered  the  Convention.

It  was  now  the  turn  of  the  real  "  Statesmen."  The  "  maxi-
mum "  on  commodities  was  speedily  abolished,  which  produced
a  violent  crisis,  during  which  stock-jobbing  and  speculation
attained  gigantic  proportions.  The  middle  classes  held  high
holiday,  as  they  did  again  later  on  after  June  1848  and  May
1871.  The  jeunesse  doree  organised  by  Fre"on  ruled  Paris,
while  the  workers,  seeing  that  the  Revolution  was  vanquished,
crept  back  to  their  hovels  to  meditate  on  the  chances  of  the  next
upheaval.

They  attempted  to  rise  on  the  1 2th  Germinal,  Year  III.
(April  I,  1795),  and  again  on  the  1st  Prairial  (May  20)  demanding
bread  and  the  Constitution  of  1793.  On  this  occasion  the  fau-
bourgs showed  much  spirit,  but  the  middle  classes  had  had  time
to  organise  their  forces.  The  revolutionary  tribunal  had  been
abolished,  so  the  last  of  the  Montagnards — Romme,  Bourbotte,
Duroy,  Soubrancy,  Goujon  and  Duquesnoy — were  condemned
to  death  by  a  military  commission  and  executed.

Thenceforth  the  middle  classes  remained  masters  of  the
Revolution  and  the  descendant  phase  continued.  The  reaction
soon  became  frankly  royalist.  The  troupe  doree  no  longer
remained  concealed,  but  openly  wore  the  grey  coat  with  the
green  or  blue  colour  of  the  Chouans  *  and  ill-treated  all  those
known  as  "  terrorists  " — that  is  to  say,  all  republicans.  There
were  persecutions  both  wholesale  and  retail.  Whoever  had
assisted  in  any  way  in  the  execution  of  the  King — or  in  his
*  The  Breton  royalists.


THE  9TH  THERMIDOR  571

arrest  after  the  flight  to  Varennes,  whoever  had  taken  any  part
whatever  in  the  assault  on  the  Tuileries,  was  pointed  out  to
the  royalists  and  life  made  insupportable  for  him.

In  the  departments,  especially  in  the  South,  the  "  Compa-
gnies  du  Jesus,"  the  "  Compagnies  du  Soleil  "  and  other  royalist
organisations  practised  wholesale  reprisals.  In  the  prisons  at
Lyons,  Aix  and  Marseilles  they  killed  all  those  who  had  taken
part  in  the  former  government,  Mignet  says :  "  Nearly
every  place  in  the  South  had  its  second  of  September,"  and  that,
of  course,  means  its  royalist  second  of  September.  Besides
these  wholesale  massacres,  the  members  of  the  above-named
Societies  of  Jesus  and  the  Sun  held  individual  man-hunts.
In  Lyons,  whenever  they  found  a  revolutionist  who  had  escaped
their  massacres,  they  killed  him  and  threw  the  body  into  the
Rhone  without  any  pretence  at  a  trial.  Similar  deeds  were
enacted  in  Tarascon.

The  reaction  increased  until  at  last  the  Convention  broke  up
on  the  4th  Brumaire,  Year  IV.  (October  26, 1795).  The  Direc-
tory succeeded  it  and  prepared  the  way  for  the  Consulate  first
and  the  Empire  afterwards.  The  Directory  was  a  terrible
orgy  of  the  middle  classes,  in  which  the  fortunes  acquired  during
the  Revolution,  especially  during  the  Thermidorean  reaction,
were  squandered  in  unbridled  luxury.  For,  if  the  Revolution
had  put  in  circulation  eight  milliards  of  paper-money,  the
Thermidorean  reaction  went  ten  times  as  fast  in  that  direction,
for  it  issued  the  amazing  sum  of  thirty  milliards  in  paper
within  fifteen  months.  By  this  we  can  calculate  the  amount  of
the  fortunes  which  had  been  accumulated  by  the  "  profit-
mongers,"  thanks  to  these  tremendous  issues  of  paper-
money.

Once  again,  in  May  1 796,  the  revolutionary  Communists  under
the  leadership  of  Babeuf  tried  to  get  up  an  insurrection  through
their  secret  society,  but  they  were  arrested  before  it  was  ripe.
An  attempt  to  raise  the  camp  at  Crenelle  on  the  night  of  the
23rd  Fructidor,  Year  IV.  (September  9, 1796),  also  failed.  Babeuf
and  Darthe*  were  condemned  to  death,  and  killed  themselves
with  a  dagger  on  the  7th  Prairial,  Year  V.  But  the  royalists  had
their  failure  too,  on  the  i8th  Fructidor,  Year  V.  (September  4,


572 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

1797),  and  the  Directory  lasted  until  the  1 8th  Brumaire,
Year  VIII.  (November  9,  1799).

On  that  day  Napoleon  Bonaparte  carried  out  his  coup  d'etat,
and  national  representation  was  completely  suppressed  by  the
ex-sans-culotte,  who  had  the  army  on  his  side.

The  war,  which  had  lasted  seven  years,  had  thus  come  to  its
logical  conclusion.  On  the  28th  Flore*al,  Year  XII.  (May  18,
1804),  Napoleon  proclaimed  himself  Emperor,  and  then  war
broke  out  again,  to  last  with  brief  intervals  until  1815.


CONCLUSION

WHEN  one  sees  that  terrible  and  powerful  Convention  wrecking
itself  in  1794—1795,  that  proud  and  strong  Republic  disappear-
ing, and  France,  after  the  demoralising  regime  of  the  Directory,
falling  under  the  military  yoke  of  a  Bonaparte,  one  is  impelled
to  ask :  "  What  was  the  good  of  the  Revolution  if  the  nation
had  to  fall  back  again  under  despotism  ?  "  In  the  course  of  the
nineteenth  century,  this  question  has  been  constantly  put,  and
the  timid  and  conservative  have  worn  it  threadbare  as  an  argu-
ment against  revolutions  in  general.

The  preceding  pages  supply  the  answer.  Those  who  have
seen  in  the  Revolution  only  a  change  in  the  Government,
those  who  are  ignorant  of  its  economic  as  well  as  its  educational
work,  those  alone  could  put  such  a  question.

The  France  we  see  during  the  last  days  of  the  eighteenth
century,  at  the  moment  of  the  coup  d'etat  on  the  i8th  Brumaire,
is  not  the  France  that  existed  before  1789.  Would  it  have  been
possible  for  the  old  France,  wretchedly  poor  and  with  a  third
of  her  population  suffering  yearly  from  dearth,  to  have  main-
tained the  Napoleonic  Wars,  coming  so  soon  after  the  terrible
wars  of  the  Republic  between  1792  and  1799,  when  all  Europe
was  attacking  her  ?

The  fact  is,  that  a  new  France  had  been  constituted  since
1792—1793.  Scarcity  still  prevailed  in  many  of  the  depart-
ments, and  its  full  horrors  were  felt  especially  after  the  coup
d'etat  of  Tliermidor,  when  the  maximum  price  for  all  food-
stuffs was  abolished.  There  were  still  some  departments  which
did  not  produce  enough  wheat  to  feed  themselves,  and  as  the
war  went  on,  and  all  means  of  transport  were  requisitioned  for
its  supplies,  there  was  scarcity  in  those  departments.  But  every-
thing tends  to  prove  that  France  was  even  then  producing

173


574 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

much  more  of  the  necessaries  of  life  of  every  kind  than  in
1789.

Never  was  there  in  France  such  energetic  ploughing,  Miche-
let  tells  us,  as  in  1792,  when  the  peasant  was  ploughing  the  lands
he  had  taken  back  from  the  lords,  the  convents,  the  churches,
and  was  goading  his  oxen  to  the  cry  of  "  Allons  Prusse  I  Allons
Autriche  !  "  Never  had  there  been  so  much  clearing  of  lands
— even  royalist  writers  admit  this — as  during  those  years  of
revolution.  The  first  good  harvest,  in  1794,  brought  relief  to
two-thirds  of  France — at  least  in  the  villages,  for  all  this  time
the  towns  were  threatened  with  scarcity  of  food.  Not  that  it
was  scarce  in  France  as  a  whole,  or  that  the  sans-culottt  muni-
cipalities neglected  to  take  measures  to  feed  those  who  could
not  find  employment,  but  from  the  fact  that  all  beasts  of  burden
not  actually  used  in  tillage  were  requisitioned  to  carry  food  and
ammunition  to  the  fourteen  armies  of  the  Republic.  In  those
days  there  were  no  railways,  and  all  but  the  main  roads  were
in  the  state  they  are  to  this  day  in  Russia — well-nigh  impassable.

A  new  France  was  born  during  those  four  years  of  revolution.
For  the  first  time  in  centuries  the  peasant  ate  his  fill,  straight-
ened his  back  and  dared  to  speak  out.  Read  the  detailed
reports  concerning  the  return  of  Louis  XVI.  to  Paris,  when  he
was  brought  back  a  prisoner  from  Varennes,  in  June  1791,  by
the  peasants,  and  say  :  "  Could  such  a  thing,  such  an  interest
in  the  public  welfare,  such  a  devotion  to  it,  and  such  an  in-
dependence of  judgment  and  action  have  been  possible  before
1789  ?  "  A  new  nation  had  been  born  in  the  meantime,  just
as  we  see  to-day  a  new  nation  coming  into  life  in  Russia  and
in  Turkey.

It  was  owing  to  this  new  birth  that  France  was  able  to  main-
tain her  wars  under  the  Republic  and  Napoleon,  and  to  carry
the  principles  of  the  Great  Revolution  into  Switzerland,  Italy,
Spain,  Belgium,  Holland,  Germany,  and  even  to  the  borders
of  Russia.  And  when,  after  all  those  wars,  after  having  mentally
followed  the  French  armies  as  far  as  Egypt  and  Moscow,
we  expect  to  find  France  in  1815  reduced  to  an  appalling
misery  and  her  lands  laid  waste,  we  find,  instead,  that  even  in
its  eastern  portions  and  in  the  Jura,  the  country  is  much  more


CONCLUSION  575

prosperous  than  it  was  at  the  time  when  Petion,  pointing  out
to  Louis  XVI.  the  luxuriant  banks  of  the  Maine,  asked  him  if
there  was  anywhere  in  the  world  a  kingdom  more  beautiful
than  the  one  the  King  had  not  wished  to  keep.

The  self-contained  energy  was  such  in  villages  regenerated
by  the  Revolution,  that  in  a  few  years  France  became  a  country
of  well-to-do  peasants,  and  her  enemies  soon  discovered  that  in
spite  of  all  the  blood  she  had  shed  and  the  losses  she  had  sus-
tained, France,  in  respect  of  her  productivity,  was  the  richest
country  in  Europe.  Her  wealth,  indeed,  is  not  drawn  from  the
Indies  or  from  her  foreign  commerce  :  it  comes  from  her  own
soil,  from  her  love  of  the  soil,  from  her  own  skill  and  industry.
She  is  the  richest  country,  because  of  the  subdivision  of  her
wealth,  and  she  is  still  richer  because  of  the  possibilities  she
offers  for  the  future.

Such  was  the  effect  of  the  Revolution.  And  if  the  casual
observer  sees  in  Napoleonic  France  only  a  love  of  glory,  the
historian  realises  that  even  the  wars  France  waged  at  that  period
were  undertaken  to  secure  the  fruits  of  the  Revolution — to  keep
the  lands  that  had  been  retaken  from  the  lords,  the  priests  and
the  rich,  and  the  liberties  that  had  been  won  from  despotism
and  the  Court.  If  France  was  willing  in  those  years  to  bleed
herself  to  death,  merely  to  prevent  the  Germans,  the  English,
and  the  Russians  from  forcing  a  Louis  XVIII.  upon  her,  it  was
because  she  did  not  Want  the  return  of  the  emigrant  nobles  to
mean  that  the  ci-devants  would  take  back  the  lands  which  had
been  watered  already  with  the  peasant's  sweat,  and  the  liberties
which  had  been  sanctified  with  the  patriots'  blood.  And  France
fought  so  well  for  twenty-three  years,  that  when  she  was  com-
pelled at  last  to  admit  the  Bourbons,  it  was  she  who  imposed
conditions  on  them.  The  Bourbons  might  reign,  but  the
lands  were  to  be  kept  by  those  who  had  taken  them  from  the
feudal  lords,  so  that  even  during  the  White  Terror  of  the
Bourbons  they  dared  not  touch  those  lands.  The  old  regime
could  not  be  re-established.

This  is  what  is  gained  by  making  a  Revolution.

There  are  other  things  to  be  pointed  out. In  the  history  of


576 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

all  nations  a  time  comes  when  fundamental  changes  are  bound
to  take  place  in  the  whole  of  the  national  life.  Royal  despotism
and  feudalism  were  dying  in  1789 ;  it  was  impossible  to  keep
them  alive  ;  they  had  to  go.

But  then,  two  ways  were  opened  out  before  France  :  reform
or  revolution.

At  such  times  there  is  always  a  moment  when  reform  is  still
possible  ;  but  if  advantage  has  not  been  taken  of  that  moment,
if  an  obstinate  resistance  has  been  opposed  to  the  requirements
of  the  new  life,  up  to  the  point  when  blood  has  flowed  in  the
streets,  as  it  flowed  on  July  14,  1789,  then  there  must  be  a
Revolution.  And  once  the  Revolution  has  begun,  it  must
necessarily  develop  to  its  last  conclusions — that  is  to  say,  to  the
highest  point  it  is  capable  of  attaining — were  it  only  temporarily,
being  given  a  certain  condition  of  the  public  mind  at  this  par-
ticular moment.

If  we  represent  the  slow  progress  of  a  period  of  evolution  by  a
line  drawn  on  paper,  we  shall  see  this  line  gradually  though
slowly  rising.  Then  there  comes  a  Revolution,  and  the  line
makes  a  sudden  leap  upwards.  In  England  the  line  would  be
represented  as  rising  to  the  Puritan  Republic  of  Cromwell ;
in  France  it  rises  to  the  Sans-culotte  Republic  of  1793.  How-
ever, at  this  height  progress  cannot  be  maintained  ;  all  the
hostile  forces  league  together  against  it,  and  the  Republic  goes
down.  Our  line,  after  having  reached  that  height,  drops.
Reaction  follows.  For  the  political  life  of  France  the  line
drops  very  low  indeed,  but  by  degrees  it  rises  again,  and  when
peace  is  restored  in  1815  in  France,  and  in  1 688  in  England —
both  countries  are  found  to  have  attained  a  level  much  higher
than  they  were  on  prior  to  their  Revolutions.

After  that,  evolution  is  resumed  :  our  line  again  begins  to
rise  slowly :  but,  besides  taking  place  on  a  very  much  higher
level,  the  rising  of  the  line  will  in  nearly  every  case  be  also
much  more  rapid  than  before  the  period  of  disturbance.

This  is  a  law  of  human  progress,  and  also  a  law  of  individual
progress.  The  more  recent  history  of  France  confirms  this
very  law  by  showing  how  it  was  necessary  to  pass  through  the
Commune  to  arrive  at  the  Third  Republic.


CONCLUSION  577

The  work  of  the  French  Revolution  is  not  confined  merely
to  what  it  obtained  and  what  was  retained  of  it  in  France.  It
is  to  be  f6und  also  in  the  principles  bequeathed  by  it  to  the
succeeding  century — in  the  line  of  direction  it  marked  out  for
the  future.

A  reform  is  always  a  compromise  with  the  past,  but  the
progress  accomplished  by  revolution  is  always  a  promise  of
future  progress.  If  the  Great  French  Revolution  was  the
summing  up  of  a  century's  evolution,  it  also  marked  out  in  its
turn  the  programme  of  evolution  to  be  accomplished  in  the
course  of  the  nineteenth  century.

It  is  a  law  in  the  world's  history  that  the  period  of  a
hundred  or  a  hundred  and  thirty  years,  more  or  less,  which
passes  between  two  great  revolutions,  receives  its  character
from  the  revolution  in  which  this  period  began.  The
nations  endeavour  to  realise  in  their  institutions  the  in-
heritance bequeathed  to  them  by  the  last  revolution.
All  that  this  last  could  not  yet  put  into  practice,  all  the
great  thoughts  which  were  thrown  into  circulation  during
the  turmoil,  and  which  the  revolution  either  could  not  or  did
not  know  how  to  apply,  all  the  attempts  at  sociological  recon-
struction, which  were  born  during  the  revolution,  will  go  to
make  up  the  substance  of  evolution  during  the  epoch  that
follows  the  revolution,  with  the  addition  of  those  new  ideas
to  which  this  evolution  will  give  birth,  when  trying  to  put  into
practice  the  programme  marked  out  by  the  last  upheaval.
Then,  a  new  revolution  will  be  brought  about  in  some  other
nation,  and  this  nation  in  its  turn  will  set  the  problems  for  the
following  century.  Such  has  hitherto  been  the  trend  of  history.

Two  great  conquests,  in  fact,  characterise  the  century  which
has  passed  since  1789-1793.  Both  owe  their  origin  to  the
French  Revolution,  which  had  carried  on  the  work  of  the
English  Revolution  while  enlarging  and  invigorating  it  with  all
the  progress  that  had  been  made  since  the  English  middle
classes  beheaded  their  King  and  transferred  his  power  to  the
Parliament.  These  two  great  triumphs  are  :  the  abolition  of
serfdom  and  the  abolition  of  absolutism,  by  which  personal
liberties  have  been  conferred  upon  the  individual,  undreamt

2O


578 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

of  by  the  serf  of  the  lord  and  the  subject  of  the  absolute  king,
while  at  the  same  time  they  have  brought  about  the  develop-
ment of  the  middle  classes  and  the  capitalist  regime.

These  two  achievements  represent  the  principal  work  of  the
nineteenth  century,  begun  in  France  in  1789  and  slowly  spread
over  Europe  in  the  course  of  that  century.

The  work  of  enfranchisement,  begun  by  the  French  peasants
in  1789,  was  continued  in  Spain,  Italy,  Switzerland,  Germany,
and  Austria  by  the  armies  of  the  sans- culottes.  Unfortunately,
this  work  hardly  penetrated  into  Poland  and  did  not  reach  Russia
at  all.

The  abolition  of  serfdom  in  Europe  would  have  been  already
completed  in  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  if  the
French  bourgeoisie,  coming  into  power  in  1794  over  the  dead
bodies  of  Anarchists,  Cordeliers,  and  Jacobins,  had  not  checked
the  revolutionary  impulse,  restored  monarchy,  and  handed  over
France  to  the  imperial  juggler,  the  first  Napoleon.  This  ex-
sans-culotte,  now  a  general  of  the  sans- culottes,  speedily  began  to
prop  up  aristocracy  ;  but  the  impulsion  had  been  given,  the
institution  of  serfdom  had  already  received  a  mortal  blow.  It
was  abolished  in  Spain  and  Italy  in  spite  of  the  temporary
triumph  of  reaction.  It  was  closely  pressed  in  Germany  after
1811,  and  disappeared  in  that  country  definitively  in  1848.
In  1 86 1,  Russia  was  compelled  to  emancipate  her  serfs,  and  the
war  of  1878  put  an  end  to  serfdom  in  the  Balkan  peninsula.

The  cycle  is  now  complete.  The  right  of  the  lord  over  the
person  of  the  peasant  no  longer  exists  in  Europe,  even  in  those
countries  where  the  feudal  dues  have  still  to  be  redeemed.

This  fact  is  not  sufficiently  appreciated  by  historians.  Ab-
sorbed as  they  are  in  political  questions,  they  do  not  perceive
the  importance  of  the  abolition  of  serfdom,  which  is,  however,
the  essential  feature  of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  rivalries
between  nations  and  the  wars  resulting  from  them,  the  policies
of  the  Great  Powers  which  occupy  so  much  of  the  historian's
attention,  have  all  sprung  from  that  one  great  fact — the
abolition  of  serfdom  and  the  development  of  the  wage-system
which  has  taken  its  place.

The  French  peasant,  in  revolting  a  hundred  and  twenty  years


CONCLUSION  579

ago  against  the  lord  who  made  him  beat  the  ponds  lest  croaking
frogs  should  disturb  his  master's  sleep,  has  thus  freed  the  peasants
of  all  Europe.  In  four  years,  by  burning  the  documents  which
registered  his  subjection,  by  setting  fire  to  the  chateaux,  and  by
executing  the  owners  of  them  who  refused  to  recognise  his
rights  as  a  human  being,  the  French  peasant  so  stirred  up  all
Europe  that  it  is  to-day  altogether  free  from  the  degradation  of
serfdom.

On  the  other  hand,  the  abolition  of  absolute  power  has  also
taken  a  little  over  a  hundred  years  to  make  the  tour  of  Europe.
Attacked  in  England  in  1648,  and  vanquished  in  France  in  1789,
royal  authority  based  on  divine  right  is  no  longer  exercised  save
in  Russia,  but  there,  too,  it  is  at  its  last  gasp.  Even  the  little
Balkan  States  and  Turkey  have  now  their  representative
assemblies,  and  Russia  is  entering  the  same  cycle.

In  this  respect  the  Revolution  of  1789-1793  has  also  accom-
plished its  work.  Equality  before  the  law  and  representative
government  have  now  their  place  in  almost  all  the  codes  of
Europe.  In  theory,  at  least,  the  law  makes  no  distinctions
between  men,  and  every  one  has  the  right  to  participate,
more  or  less,  in  the  government.

The  absolute  monarch — master  of  his  subjects — and  the  lord
— master  of  the  soil  and  the  peasants,  by  right  of  birth — have
both  disappeared.  The  middle  classes  now  govern  Europe.

But  at  the  same  time  the  Great  Revolution  has  bequeathed
to  us  some  other  principles  of  an  infinitely  higher  import ;
the  principles  of  communism.  We  have  seen  how  all  through
the  Great  Revolution  the  communist  idea  kept  coming  to
the  front,  and  how  after  the  fall  of  the  Girondins  numerous
attempts  and  sometimes  great  attempts  were  made  in  this
direction.  Fourierism  descends  in  a  direct  line  from  L'Ange
on  one  side  and  from  Chalier  on  the  other.  Babeuf  is  the  direct
descendant  of  ideas  which  stirred  the  masses  to  enthusiasm  in
1793  ;  he,  Buonarotti,  and  Sylvain  Marechal  have  only  syste-
matised  them  a  little  or  even  merely  put  them  into  literary
form.  But  the  secret  societies  organised  by  Babeuf  and
Buonarotti  were  the  origin  of  the  communistes  materialises


5So THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

secret  societies  through  which  Blanqui  and  Barbes  conspired
under  the  bourgeois  monarchy  of  Louis-Philippe.  Later  on,  in
1866,  the  International  Working  Men's  Association  appeared
in  the  direct  line  of  descent  from  these  societies.  As  to
"  socialism  "  we  know  now  that  this  term  came  into  vogue  to
avoid  the  term  "communism,"  which  at  one  time  was  dangerous
because  the  secret  communist  societies  became  societies  for
action,  and  were  rigorously  suppressed  by  the  bourgeoisie  then
in  power.

There  is,  therefore,  a  direct  filiation  from  the  Enrages  of
1793  and  the  Babeuf  conspiracy  of  1795  to  the  International
Working  Men's  Association  of  1866-1878.

There  is  also  a  direct  descent  of  ideas.  Up  till  now,  modern
socialism  has  added  absolutely  nothing  to  the  ideas  which  were
circulating  among  the  French  people  between  1789  and  1794,
and  which  it  was  tried  to  put  into  practice  in  the  Year  II.  of
the  Republic.  Modern  socialism  has  only  systematised  those
ideas  and  found  arguments  in  their  favour,  either  by  turning
against  the  middle-class  economists  certain  of  their  own  defini-
tions, or  by  generalising  certain  facts  noticed  in  the  develop-
ment of  industrial  capitalism,  in  the  course  of  the  nineteenth
century.

But  I  permit  myself  to  maintain  also  that,  however  vague  it
may  have  been,  however  little  support  it  endeavoured  to  draw
from  arguments  dressed  in  a  scientific  garb,  and  however  little
use  it  made  of  the  pseudo-scientific  slang  of  the  middle-class
economists,  the  popular  communism  of  the  first  two  years  of
the  Republic  saw  clearer,  and  went  much  deeper  in  its  analyses,
than  modern  socialism.

First  of  all,  it  was  communism  in  the  consumption  of  the
necessaries  of  life — not  in  production  only ;  it  was  the  com-
munalisation  and  the  nationalisation  of  what  economists  know
as  consumption — to  which  the  stern  republicans  of  1793  turned,
above  all,  their  attention,  when  they  tried  to  establish  their
stores  of  grain  and  provisions  in  every  commune,  when  they
set  on  foot  a  gigantic  inquiry  to  find  and  fix  the  true  value  of
the  objects  of  prime  and  secondary  necessity,  and  when  they
'inspired  Robespierre  to  declare  that  only  the  superfluity  of  food-


CONCLUSION  581

stuffs  should  become  articles  of  commerce,  and  that  what  was
necessary  belonged  to  all.

Born  out  of  the  pressing  necessities  of  those  troublous  years,
the  communism  of  1793,  with  its  affirmation  of  the  right  of  all
to  sustenance  and  to  the  land  for  its  production,  its  denial  of
the  right  of  any  one  to  hold  more  land  than  he  and  his  family
could  cultivate — that  is,  more  than  a  farm  of  120  acres — and
its  attempt  to  communalise  all  trade  and  industry — this  com-
munism went  straighter  to  the  heart  of  things  than  all  the  mini-
mum programmes  of  our  own  time,  or  even  all  the  maximum
preambles  of  such  programmes.

In  any  case,  what  we  learn  to-day  from  the  study  of  the
Great  Revolution  is,  that  it  was  the  source  and  origin  of  all  the
present  communist,  anarchist,  and  socialist  conceptions.  We
have  but  badly  understood  our  common  mother,  but  now  we
have  found  her  again  in  the  midst  of  the  sans- culottes,  and  we  see
what  we  have  to  learn  from  her.

Humanity  advances  by  stages  and  these  stages  have  been
marked  for  several  hundred  years  by  great  revolutions.  After
the  Netherlands  came  England  with  her  revolution  in  1648-
1657,  and  then  it  was  the  turn  of  France.  Each  great  revolu-
tion has  in  it,  besides,  something  special  and  original.  England
and  France  both  abolished  royal  absolutism.  But  in  doing  so
England  was  chiefly  interested  in  the  personal  rights  of  the
individual,  particularly  in  matters  of  religion,  as  well  as  the  local
rights  of  every  parish  and  every  community.  As  to  France,  she
turned  her  chief  attention  to  the  land  question,  and  in  striking
a  mortal  blow  at  the  feudal  system  she  struck  also  at  the  great
fortunes,  and  sent  forth  into  the  world  the  idea  of  nationalising
the  soil,  and  of  socialising  commerce  and  the  chief  industries.

Which  of  the  nations  will  take  upon  herself  the  terrible  but
glorious  task  of  the  next  great  revolution  ?  One  may  have
thought  for  a  time  that  it  would  be  Russia.  But  if  she  should
push  her  revolution  further  than  the  mere  limitation  of  the
imperial  power  ;  if  she  touches  the  land  question  in  a  revolu-
tionary spirit — how  far  will  she  go  ?  Will  she  know  how  to
avoid  the  mistake  made  by  the  French  Assemblies,  and  will
she  socialise  the  land  and  give  it  only  to  those  who  want  to


582 THE  GREAT  FRENCH  REVOLUTION

cultivate  it  with  their  own  hands  ? We  know  not  :  any  answer
to  this  question  would  belong  to  the  domain  of  prophecy.

The  one  thing  certain  is,  that  whatsoever  nation  enters  on
the  path  of  revolution  in  our  own  day,  it  will  be  heir  to  all  our
forefathers  have  done  in  France.  The  blood  they  shed  was
shed  for  humanity — the  sufferings  they  endured  were  borne  for
the  entire  human  race  ;  their  struggles,  the  ideas  they  gave  to
the  world,  the  shock  of  those  ideas,  are  all  included  in  the
heritage  of  mankind.  All  have  borne  fruit  and  will  bear  more,
still  finer,  as  we  advance  towards  those  wide  horizons  opening
out  before  us,  where,  like  some  great  beacon  to  point  the  way,
flame  the  words — LIBERTY,  EQUALITY,  FRATERNITY.


INDEX


ABB  AYE  (prison),  soldiers  released
from,  69  ;  attacked  by  Fede-
rals, 297  ;  massacres  at,  299

Absolutism,  abolition  of,  577-79

Acapts,  203

Agrarian  Law,  fear  of,  169  ;  pro-
gress of,  242  ;  repudiated  by
"  Gironde,"  342  ;  meaning  of,
403-4  ;  supporters  penalised,
500

Agrier,  203

Aiguillon,  Due  d',  against  feudalism,
121

Albitte,  socialism  of,  506,  507

Allier,  Claude,  organises  conspiracy,
250,  251

Allies,  mistake  of,  466

"  Amalgams,"  545,  548,  549

Amar,  reports  on  Girondins,  514;
attacked,  544

America,  North,  inspires  liberty,
21  et  seq.  ;  young  Republic  of,
141

"  Ami  du  Peuple,"  395

Anarchism,  principles  of,  184 ;
beliefs  of,  354-55  ;  modern,

365
Anarchists,  4,  13  ;  side  with  people,

346  ; persecution of, 347  ;

denounced by Brissot, 350,

392  ; influence  of, 353, 357  ;

attacked by  Girondins, 359 ;

called  Coblentzians,  486  ;  called

Levellers,  511
Anarchy  defined  by  Brissot,  351  ;

in  politics,  479

"  Ancien  regime,"  vices  of,  149
Angremont  d',  conspiracy  of,  293
"  Annales patriotiques," quoted,

305.  307-8
"  Ansassigen," 416  ; deprived of

rights,  418


Archbishop of Aries, tried and

executed,  302
Archives, National, records of

peasant  risings  in,  39
Archives  of  France,  vi.,  provincial,

importance  of,  409
Argenson,  d',  cited,  12
Argonne,  Forest  of,  Prussians  halt

in,  325

Aristocracy,  worst  form  of,  499
Aries,  Archbishop,  accused  of  mas-
sacre, 302

Armies,  Four,  of  France,  556
Arms,  search  for,  294
Army,  French,  weakness  of,  284  ;
unreliability  of,  290  ;  corrup-
tion in,  223,  329
German,  enters  France,  on  fron-
tier, 323,  324-25  ;  retreat  of,
325  ; recrosses  Rhine,  538
of Republic (Fr.), condition
of,  462-63  ; disorganisation
and  tactics  of,  464 ;  retreat
of,  465  ; reorganisation  of,
410,  515

Artois,  Count  d',  plans  coup  d'ttat,
hated, 70  ; escape  of,  91  ;
protests  against  Constitution,
238  ; in  exile,  248  ; manu-
factures assignats,  /m ;  heads
Breton  rising,  466
land  system  in,  417,  433
Assemblies,  electoral,  in  Paris,  47  ;
of  Notables,  29,  33, 109  ; of
Representatives,  1 86  ;  of  Com-
missioners, 273;  Village,  416;
Communal,  417

Assembly,  Constituent,  character  of,
172  ;  maintains  mortmain,
20 1  ;  reaction  in,  202  ;  pro-
tects property,  203,  204  ;
imposes  redemption,  210 ;


583


INDEX


Assembly,  Constituent — continued
opposes  popular  revolution,
214;  reinstates  King,  233;
dissolves,  234 ;  decrees  on
land,  277  ;  recognises  money
as  merchandise,  374 ;  opposes
land  solution,  417  ;  abo-
lishes titles,  429 ;  mistakes  of,

499

Legislative,  sells  communal
lands,  21  ;  opposes  people,
214,217  ',  formation  of,  234  ;
servility  of,  237  ;  proceeds
against  Count  de  Provence,
239  ;  moderation  of,  256  ;
King  takes  refuge  in,  275  ;
threatened,  278,  307  ;  bad
policy  of,  279 ;  dissolution
of,  280 ;  declares  against
monarchy,  306-7 ;  dissen-
sions in,  315  ;  members
bought,  332 ;  disappoints
peasants  about  land,  417;
laws  of,  418-20;  sells  emi-
gres' lands,  435  ;  mistake  of,
499  ;  sells  communal  lands,
502

National,  inevitability  of,  33  ;
enthusiasm  in,  118  et  seq.  ;
condemns  riots,  1 20  ;  tempo-
rises over  feudal  rights,  131;
work  of,  135,  173;  resolu-
tions of ,  1 3  5  ;  effect  on  peas-
ants, 1 36  ;  composition  of,
148,  162  ;  threatened,  152  ;
fears  people,  1 59  ;  method  of
electing,  163-64 ;  opposition
to,  167  ;  King's  intentions
towards,  175;  concocts  muni-
cipal constitution,  184-85  ;
lessens  power  of  Districts,
191;  destroys  feudalism,  198;
resolutions  of  200  legalises
feudalism,  205;  ignores  King,
232  ;  reaction  in,  232-33  ;
suppresses  Lafayette's  letter,
245;  absolves  Lafayette,  285;
yields  to  threats,  288  ;  libels
on,  289.  Vide  National
Assignats,  vide  Paper  -  currency,
issue  of,  44,  171,  371  ;  deprecia-
tion of,  434,  442-3  ;  forging  of,

"444
Atheism,  479


Avenel, cited, 327  ; quoted, 433,

455,  502,  547
August  4,  renunciations  of,  118  e

seq.
Aulard,  research  by,  v.,  quoted,  39,

101,  217,  220,  245,  298,  316,

319.  365.  366, 367,  473, 506,

507,  521,  525  ; cited,  481,  482,

483,  526,  527
Aumont,  Duke  d',  refuses  command

of  National  Guards,  76
Austria, army, on frontier, 224  ;

urged to invade, 239 ; war

declared  against,  240
"  Austrian  Committee,"  283
Author,  cited,  40
Autonomy  of  towns,  too


BABEAU,  quoted,  98,  99

Babeuf,  apostle  of  communism,
489,  490,  491,  492,  494,  579;
conspiracy  of,  485,  569,  571  ;
suicide  of,  571

Bachmann  (Commander  of  Swiss),
escapes  punishment,  293

Bailly  (Mayor  of  Paris),  Presi-
dent of  Assembly,  56 ;  pins
tricolour  in  King's  hat,  91  ;
on  Municipal  Council,  101  ;
quoted,  152  ;  importance  of,
1 60;  plans  organisation,  183  ;
agrees  to  free  assembly,
184-85  ;  demands  dismissal
of  ministers,  192  ;  execu-
tion of,  517;  a  freemason,
540

Balkan  States,  cited,  579

Banalites,  37,  129,  131,  202

Bankruptcy  of  State,  33,  149,  168

Banquets,  October  i  and  October  3 ,
1789,  152,  153

Barbaroux,  justifies  massacres,  321;
favours  centralisation,  367  ;
stirs  up  revolt,  368,  446

BarbSs,  secret  society  of,  580

Barbot,  Berthelet  de  (Abb6),  narra-
tive of,  302

Barentain  (Keeper  of  Seals),  ad-
dresses States  General,  51-52,
54  ;  hooted  by  people,  56

Bar6re,  suggests  Commission  of
Twelve,  397  ;•'  report  of,  441,
500  ;  takes  lead,  483  ;  daring


INDEX


585


Bar£re — continued

of,  511;  attachment  to  Robes-
pierre, 565,  567

Barnave,  silence  of,  35  ;  member  of
Breton  Club,  61  ;  in  middle-
class  triumvirate,  162  ;  won
over  by  King,  332  ;  executed,

517

Bastille,  taking  of  (July  14,  1789),
official  account,  57 ;  true
version,  58  ;  78  et  seq.,  87

Batz,  Baron  de,  conspires  with
Count  d'Artois,  444  ;  organises
Queen's  escape,  516;  clever-
ness of,  539 ;  agent  of,  on  Com-
mittee of  Public  Safety,  561

Baudot,  quoted,  369  ;  explains
Girondins'  defence  of  property,
485  ;  cited,  550

Bault,  warder  of  Queen,  516

Bayon,  pursues  King,  228

Bazire,  tries  to  stop  massacres,
299  ;  in  royalist  plot,  539 ;
tried  and  executed,  548

Beauvais,  Bishop  of,  stoned,  56

Beck,  Baron  de,  Prussian  Minister,
objects  to  clemency,  335

"  Bed  of  Justice,"  25-26

Bedoin,  burning  of,  556

Beffroy,  communism  of,  498

Beggary,  increase  of,  30

Benoit  (banker)  in  Royalist  plot,  539

Bernardins,  the  massacre  of  con-
victs at,  303

Bernier,  heads  Council  of  Insurrec-
tion, 386

Berthier,  arrested,  92  ;  trampled  to
death,  93  ;  effect  of  death,
100  ;  memory  of,  149

Besan9on,  rising  at,  27

Besenval,  Marquis  de,  commands
troops  in  Paris,  72,  78,  80

Betrayals,  282  et  seq.

Beuvron,  Duchess  de,  boasts  of,  65

Bicetre  (prison),  loathed  by  people,
79  ;  massacres  at,  303

Billaud-Varennes,  in  war-council,
305  ;  against  wealth,  486 ;
makes  terms  with  Commun-
ists, 500 ;  insight  of,  501  ;
on  Committee  of  Public  Wel-
fare, 535  ;  slanders  Hebertists,
545  ;  attacked  by  Robespierre,
565-67


"  Blackgangs "  (Bandes  noires},
speculations  of,  511

Blanc,  Louis,  quoted  and  cited,  59,
62,  134,  161,  172,  227,  299,
321,  366,  367,  444,  450,  557,
568  ;  as  authoritarian,  194  ;
criticises  Robespierre,  243-44  ;
on  leaders,  272  ;  excellent  at
description,  274 ;  criticises
Brissot,  356  ;  cites  law  of
suspects,  513  ;  on  freemasons,
540 ;  guillotine  statistics  of,
561

"  Blancs,"  origin  of,  290

Blanqui,  secret  society  of,  580

"  Blue  Terror,"  430

Boissel,  communism  of,  488  ;  Catt-
chisme  of,  490  ;  note,  491

Bonaparte,  Napoleon,  vanity  of,
464  ;  way  paved  for,  492  ;
coup  d'etat  of,  572

Boncerf,  quoted,  130-31

"  Bonnet  rouge  "  (cap  of  liberty),
308

Bonneville,  appeals  to  arms,  69

Book  of  National  Charity,  506

"  Bornage,"  414-15

"  Bouche  de  fer  sec,"  85

Boucheron,  quoted,  85

Bouchotte, Minister  of  War, 467,

534

Bouille,  Marquis  de,  in  royalist  plot,
153  ;  commands  army  of  east,
223  ;  massacres  at  Metz,  224-

25

Bourbotte,  executed,  570

Bourdon  (of  the  Oise),  quoted,  369  ;
as  Dantonist,  535  ;  attacks
Commission  of  Public  Welfare,

537
Bourgeoisie, prosperity of, 376 ;

peasant,  416  ; power  of,  578  ;

vide  middle  classes
Bourges,  priests  abdicate  at,  523
"  Bread  for  all  "  (1793).  355
Bread,  scarcity  of,  235  ; prices  of,

438  et  seq.

Breda,  taken  by  Dumouriez,  383
Brest,  federals  from,  272
Breteuil,  Baron  de,  effigy  of,  burned

29  ; plots  with  Court,  65,  153  ;

changes prison into granary,

79  ; corresponds  with  Fersen,

335


586


INDEX


Bretons,  civic  hymn  of,  446

Bridet,  Pierre,  proposes  land
nationalisation,  424

Brienne,  Lomenie  de  (Archbishop
of  Sens),  Minister,  28,  33

"  Brigands,"  legend  of  the,  1 14,  1 16,
207

Brisson,  ex-curt,  resigns,  523

Brissot,  municipal  constitution  of,
184  ;  politics  of,  197  ;  against
people,  241  ;  against  Republic,
284  ;  quoted,  293  ;  house  of,
searched,  295,  307  ;  cited,  305  ;
negotiates  with  England,  327  ;
accused  by  Billaud-Varenne,
338  ;  leads  "  Gironde,"  341  ;
defends  property,  341  ;  rival
of  Robespierre,  344,  367  ;
pamphlets  of,  346,  349  et
seq.  ;  attacks  Revolutionists,
347  ;  on  crimes  of  Anarchists,
354  et  seq.  ;  knows  England,
382  ;  "  To  his  Constituents,"
392  ;  stirs  up  revolt,  446  ;  on
Commission  of  Constitution,
470  ;  attacks  communism,  486;
attacks  Montagnards,  500  ;  a
freemason,  540

"  Brissotins,"  399

British  Museum,  Pamphlets  in,  vi.,
224,  338,  420,  441,  490,  491,

523

Brittany,  risings  in,  26  et  seq.  ;
disturbances  in,  39  ;  counter-
revolution in,  383,  445  ;  dis-
content in,  433

Broglie,  Marshal  de,  plots  with
Court,  65  ;  defied  by  people,
70  ;  threatens  Paris,  71,  80  ;
fails  King,  91  ;  plans  coup
d'etat,  92

Bninot,  won  over  by  Royalists,
516

Brunswick,  D.  of,  intrigues  of,  290  ;
fear  of,  292  ;  aspires  to  throne
307-8  ;  marches  on  Coblentz,
324  ;  defeat  of,  325  ;  negotia-
tions with,  331  ;  mildness  of,
335

Brussels,  emigres  at,  17

Bruydre,  La,  quoted,  436

Buchez  and  Roux,  quoted  and  cited,
127,  128,  135,  152,  187,  299,
360,304-5,314,439


Buonarotti,  explains  9th  Ther-
midor,  507  ;  cited,  550  ;  com-
mission of,  579

"  Bureau  de  Ville,"  186

Buzot,  protests  against  martial  law,
161  ;  cited,  344  ;  stirs  up  revolt,
446  ;  Memoires  of,  quoted,  447


CAFE  du  Caveau,  patriots  enrol  at,
70

Cahier  General,  36 ;  d'Aval,  Song
in,  113

Cahier s  de  doleanc.es,  35  ;  modera-
tion of,  36  ;  pamphlet  on,  37  ;
demand  destruction  of  Bastille
79 ;  delayed,  103;  on  elec-
tions, 112  ;  socialism  in,  484-

85
"  £a  ira  "  sung  by  volunteers,  323,

324

Calendar,  Republican,  519

Calende,  ex-cure,  resigns,  523

Calonne,  effigy  burned,  26,  29 ;
convokes  Assembly  of  Notables
(I787),  33  ;  dismissed,  33

Cambaceres,  advises  Convention,
385;  disloyalty  of,  464

Cambon,  ideas  on  landed  property,
327;  issues  new  paper-cur-
rency, 380 ;  proposes  forced
loan,  396,  410,  and  disestab-
lishment of  church,  520  ;  as
Terrorist,  535  ;  authority  in
finance,  550 ;  abused  by  Robes-
pierre, 566-67

Campan,  Mme.,  disclosures  of,  155

Canton  (system),  partisans  of,
enemies  of  Commune,  475

Carmelite  Convent,  massacre  at,
302

Carnot,  authority  in  war,  550  ;
attacked  by  Robespierre,  550

Carra,  quoted,  307  ;  denounced  by
Robespierre,  307-8

Carrier,  drowns  prisoners  at  Nantes,
457  ;  amnestied,  542  ;  advo-
cates insurrection,  545

Carteaux  commands  Rep. troops,

459
Cathelineau,  Vendean  leader,  386,

456
Catherine  II.  (Russia)  helps

c ou nter-re volution ,  253


INDEX


587


Catholicism,  triumph  of,  527
Cassagnac,  Granier  de,  cited,  296,

302

Casuels,  203
Cazotte, saved by  Maillard, 301  ;

daughter  of,  302
Cellier arrested, 545  ; succeeds

Chaumette,  546
Centralisation,  evils  of,  149
Chabot,  silenced,  285  ; tries  to  stop
massacres, 299  ; motion of,
306  ; tried  and  executed,  540,
548

Chalier,  represents  people  at  Lyons,
377  ; leads workers and
arrested, 459  ; head carried
through streets, 538  ; fore-
father of  Fourierism,  579
Chambery,  taken,  326
Chambon  succeeds  Petion,  322
Champerty  (champart),  203,  209
Champion  (ex-cure),  resignation  of,

523
Champs -de -Mars,  Fete  in,  178  ;

massacre  in,  179,  233,  257
Chapelier,  Le,  guillotined,  559
Charette,  urges  peasants  to  kill

Republicans, 387  ; brutality

of,  457  ; massacres  prisoners,

515

Charles  I.  (England),  influence  of
history  on  Louis  XVI.,  91,  151

Charrier,  chief  of  counter-revolu-
tion, 250

Chartres,  Duke  de,  candidate  for
throne,  308,  326,  331  ;  intrigues
with  Dumouriez,  326,  387 ;
fails  with  soldiers,  388

Chassin,  quoted  and  cited,  36,  42,
43,  44,  69,  73,  79,  386,  484,
485

Chateaux  burned,  42,  95,  113,  115,
135,  207,  252

Chatelet  (prison),  revolt  in,  73

Chatellier,  du,  cited,  40 ;  quoted,
126

Chaumette,  quoted,  245,  246,  273,
396  ;  Procurator  of  Commune,
322,  364  ;  law  of  maximum  of,
375  ;  demands  revolutionary
tribunal,  385  ;  promotes  in-
come tax,  396 ;  advocates
market-gardening,  496 ;  ac-
cuses Roux,  504;  arrested,


Chaumette — con  tinned

505;  promises  bread,  510;
purifies  revolutionary  com-
mittees, 513  ;  new  cult
preached,  520,  522 ;  organises
f&te,  524 ;  guillotined,  527,
546  ;  communism  of,  534  ;  at-
tacked by  Desmoulins,  536 ;
arrested,  545  ;  character,  547

"  Chemises  Rouges,"  560

Chevalier,  Fran£ois,  describes  mas-
sacre in  Vendee,  386

ChSvremont,  cited,  395

Chiennage,  202

Chiffonistes,  251

Chollet, Vendeans defeated at

515

Chouans,  costume  of,  570

"  Chronicle  de  Paris,"  cited,  305,
307  ;  foretells  Manat's  death,
450

Church,  tithes  relinquished,  132;
property,  value  of,  169  ;  ex-
propriation of — lands  voted,
170,  and  speculation  in,  171  ;
liquidation  of  property,  185  ;
treasures  sent  to  Mint,  522

Ci-devants, expelled from Paris,

555

"  Citizen  Kings,"  157
Citizens, "active and passive,"

163 et  seq.,  191,  212; respon-

of,  209

Civic  Fasts,  439
Civil  War,  avoided,  306  ; fear  of,

384

Clairvaux,  papers  found  at,  409
Claude  Payan,  Mayor  of  Paris,  546
Clavidre (Girondist Minister of
Finance),  240,  318  ; dismissed,
244

Clermont-Tonnerre dissolves Gre-
noble parlement,  27
Clive,  Ed.  Le,  cited,  40  ;  quoted,  1 14
Cloots,  Anacharsis,  advocates  inter-
nationalism, 522  ; organises
Fete  of  Liberty, 524  ; enthu-
siasm  of, 525  ; attacked by
Robespierre, 536 ; charge
against,  545,  guillotined,  546
Club,  Breton,  revolutionary  centre,

60,  61,  64  (vide  Jacobins)
Constitutional,  formed,  43
Cordeliers'  (vide  Cordeliers)


588  INDEX

"  Coalition  of  Kings,"  336
Coblentz,  Emigres  at,  17,  248,  249,

332
Coburg,  Duke  of,  proclamation,

388  ; besieges Le Quesnoy,

467
Cofnnhal,  tries  to  save  Robespierre,

567

Collardot  resigns,  253
"Collectivism," founders of, n,

253

Colonies,  English,  revolt  of,  22
Combes, Anacharsis, cited, 40 ;

quoted,  1 14

"  Commercantistes,"  253
Commerce,  a  social  function,  498
Commission  of  Twelve,  347  ; con-
sternation of,  292  ; prosecu-
tion of  sections, 397  ; sup-
pressed, 400,  403
of  Six,  399,  474

Commissioners  of  Convention,
supervise  war,  389  ;  levy  toll
from  rich,  463  ;  march
sword  in  hand,  468  ;  func-
tions of,  480-81  ;  defects  of,
482  ;  attacked  by  people,
498  ;  treat  with  foreign
Courts,  516;  stringent
measures  of,  527
of  Departments,  366
of  Sections,  314

Committee,  Agricultural,  494,  498  ;
Civil  (of  Districts),  182
of  Commerce,  498
of  Defence,  472
District  assumes  police  duties,

530

Feudal,  report  of,  200

to  frame  Constitution,  470

of  General  Safety,  vide  Public
Safety

Insurrectionary,  good  sense  of,
274  ;  wins  Commune,  388

of  Militia,  82

Permanent,  69  ;  illegality  of,
128

of  Public  Instruction,  5 1 8

of  Public  Safety  (April  1793),
319  ;  deterioration  of,  365  ;
ferocity  of,  394-95,  458  ;
dictatorship  of,  471  ;
authority  of,  480 ;  sup-
presses Communism,  506  ;


Committee  of  Public  Safety— con-
tinued

power  of,  508  ;  policy  of,
509  ;  constitution  of,  509  ;
incapacity  of,  511  ;  jealous
of  Commune,  512,  550;
sinister  force  of,  513  ;  orga-
nises relief  works,  530  ;  con-
trols police,  531  ;  new  power
given  to,  544  ;  triumph  of,
546 ;  used  by  Robespierre,
550;  unpopularity  of ,  565
of  Public  Welfare,  deterio-
rates, 365  ;  formed,  388-89  ;
treats  with  Austria,  467  ;
dictatorship  of,  468,  477,
480  ;  pompous  circular  of,

505  ;  suppresses  communism,

506  ;  constitution  of,  508-9  ;
power of, 508, 534-35  ;
policy  of,  509  ; opposes  cult
of Reason, 525  ; demands
decree  on  religious  liberty,
526  ; accused  of  incapacity
and treachery, 536  -  37  ;
authority restored, 538  ;
parries  attack,  538  ;  slanders
Hebertists, 545  ; attacked
by  Robespierre,  566

Revolutionary, orders arrest

of  Girondins,  403
Search,  531
of  "  Subsistence,"  53  ; report

of,  63

Watch,  of  Commune,  301
Committees, Civic, functions of,

193-94

Revolutionary,  477
Commune, definition of, 189-90;
Actes  de  la,  186

of  Paris,  77,  183  ;  popular
work  of,  1 80  et  seq.  ;  divi-
sions of,  182  ;  coerces
National  Assembly,  187  ;
functions  of,  219  ;  attacks
property,  245  ;  Revolution-
ary, 273  ;  Insurrectionary,
275  ;  power  of,  281,  357  ;
holds  King  prisoner,  283  ;
threatens  massacre,  288  ;
foresight  of,  292  ;  opposes
Directory,  292  ;  releases
prisoners,  294  ;  attacked  by
Assembly,  295  ;  rings


INDEX


589


Commune  of  Paris — continued

tocsin,  296 ;  protects
prisoners,  298  et  seq.  ;  stops
massacres,  303  ;  how  con-
stituted, 312  ;  at  Hotel  de
Ville,  315  ;  authority  of,

319  ; attacked  by  Gironde,
317  ; honesty questioned,

320  ; success  of  attack  on,
322  ; constitution  of  (1793),
322  ; demands  trial  of  King,
332  ; differs  from Conven-
tion, 340 ; dissolution de-
manded, 347  ; anarchists
rally round, 353  ; dissolu-
tion of, 364 ; hoists black
flag, 383  ; backs Jacobin
Triumvirate, 384  ; collabo-
rates with  "  Mountain,"  388  ;
decrees progressive income
tax, 396 ; opposes Terror,
400 ; levies tax on rich,
403  ; fixes maximum and
reorganises army, 410 ;
power of, destroyed, 472,
532  ; real  strength  of,  528  ;
separated  from  Sections,  531;
agrees  with  Hebertists  and
downfall  of,  547

of  France,  176
of  Strasbourg,  105
Communes, administration and
creation  of,  165  ; federation

of,  315

Peasant, joint responsibility
of,  210,  279

Village,  composition  of  (1789),

211

Communism,  signs  of,  41  ;  im-
portance of,  101  ;  Godwin's,
327  ;  supporters  of,  451  ;  of
Republic,  362  -  63,  580  ;
efforts  towards,  369  ;  ten-
dencies towards,  474  ;  warn-
ings against,  485  ;  in  Revolu-
tion, 488-89,  579  ;  at  Lyons,
496

Constructive,  need  of,  499
Communist  Movement  (1891),  363  ;

484  et  seq., 500  et  seq.  ; repre

sentatives  of,  487

Communists, threatened by Con-
vention, 500 ;  of  the  "  Forties,"

498


"  Compagnies  de  Jesus,"  massacres

by,  571

du  Soleil,"  massacres  by,  571
"  Compromising  auxiliaries,"  74-75
Conches,  J.  Feuillet  de,  quoted,  28,

135
Conciergerie  (prison),  attacked,  298

Queen  in,  516
Conde,  Prince  de,  plans  coup  d'etat

54,  65

occupied  by  Austrians,  387
Condorcet,  municipal  scheme  of,
192  ;  sincerity  of,  243  ;  sup-
ports Republic,  307  ;  defends
free  trade,  373  ;  and  equality,
484  ;  author  of  Constitution,
470  ;  communism  of,  485  ;
suicide  of ,  5 1 7  ;  a  freemason,
540

"  Confederation  of  Clubs,"  151
Confederation,  National,  188
"  Conquest  of  Power,"  196-97
Considerant,  communism  of,  488
Conspiracies, at Grenoble, 248  ;

in  South,  248

"  Conspiracy  of  the  Right,"  567
Constitution,  discussed,  20,  68  ;  of
1791,  102,  343  ;  oath  to,  178  ;
quoted,  192  ;  function  of,  256  ;
framing  of,  470  et  seq.  ;  demo-
cratic character  of  and  sum-
mary of,  473  ;  Montagnards',
475  ;  proclaimed,  476
Constitutional  Government,  first
conditions  of,  160  ;  guarantees
of,  475

Constitutionalists,  royalist,  limita-
tions of,  36
Conti,  Prince  de,  plans  coup  d'etat,

54

Convention,  National,  contests  in,
14  ;  abolishes  feudal  system
210 ;  convoked,  280 ;  how
elected,  309  ;  three  parties  in ;
abolishes  royalty,  310;  Con-
servatives in,  311  ;  cowardice
of,  316  ;  conflicts  with,  318  et
seq.  ;  orders  prosecution  for
massacres,  321  ;  defies  mon-
archies, 327  ;  sovereign  rights
°*»  333  ;  decrees  King's  trial,
337  ;  publishes  pamphlets,  338;
votes  on  King's  sentence,  339  ;
differs  from  Commune,  340 ;


590


INDEX


Convention,  National — continued
inactivity  of,  362,  424  ;  purifi-
cation of,  364,  385  ;  struggle
in,  369  ;  raises  bread  fund,  375  ;
middle-class  power  in,  376 ;
levies  men,  380 ;  tries  to
grasp  judicial  power,  385  ;
helplessness  of,  386 ;  grasps
executive  power,  388;  treachery
in,  390  ;  child  of  Revolution,
391  ;  battles  in,  395-97  ;  De~
sieged  by  people,  400,  402  ;
galleries  opened  to  public,  403  ;
tries  to  overawe  people,  404  ;
legislative  work  of,  407  ;  false
step  of,  422  ;  legislative  sta-
bility of,  426  ;  abolishes  pecu-
niary rights,  429  ;  breaks  up
large  estates,  434  ;  fixes  maxi-
mum, 439-441 ;  Commissioners,
zeal  of,  448  ;  work  finished,
476-79,  481  ;  attempts  sociali-
sation, 498  ;  mistakes  of,  499  ;
threatens  Communists,  500  ;
defends  middle  classes,  507  ;
checks  speculation,  512;
jealous  of  Commune,  513  ;
free  fight  in,  514;  accepts
Revolutionary  Government,
515  ;  receives  resignation  of
bishops,  522-23  ;  refuses  to
broach  question  of  priests'  pay
524-25  •,  storm  in,  566  ;  dis-
solves, 571  ;  wrecking  of,  573

Co-proprietorship,  496

Corday,  Charlotte  d'Armont,  447,
449-50

Cordeliers,  demand  Republic,  232  ;
reaction  among,  238  ;  attack
property,  245  ;  aid  Fra-
ternal Societies,  257  ;  favour
Republic,  284 ;  support
rising,  291  ;  reinforce  Jaco-
bin Club,  317  ;  champion
communism,  487  ;  action  of,
538,  544

Club  of,  197  ;  anarchists  in,
353;  Robespierre  visits,  503;
Hebertists  in,  534

Corney,  Ethis  de,  parleys  with  de
Launey,  83,  84,  85

Corporations  of  Guilds,  abolished,
19

Correspondence  bureaux,  182


Cost  of  production, inquiry  into

442

Council,  General,  of  Paris  Com-
mune, suppressed,  190  ;
elected  by  people,  287  ;
attacked,  295  ;  change  in,
364  ;  hastens  events,  525  ;
appeals  to  people,  567
General  of  Departments,  con-
stitution of,  1 66  ;  functions
of,  530-31

General  Revolutionary,  402
Ministerial,  318-19
Municipal,  pays  members,  371
Provisory  Executive,  389
of  the  Three  Hundred,  160
Councils, of Departments, 166 ;
functions  of,  530  ;  take  police
duties,  531
local,  election  of,  164
take  pledge  against  violence,

401

Counter-revolution,  176, 220,  221,
223, 245, 247, 251, 363-64,
404,445  537,  556
Coup  d'etat,  of  August  10,  275
of  Counter-revolution,  256
of  Court,  54,  56,  57  et  seg.,  68,
71  ; fails,  87  ; doubted,  91,
154  ; supported  by  foreign
Courts,  244
of  Girondins,  359,  537
of  Napoleon  III.,  336
of  Thermidor  311,  317,  341
Coupe,  abolished,  114
"  Courrier  Fran9ais,"  quoted,  113
Parisien,"  quoted,  128
de Versailles et de Paris,"

quoted,  63

Court,  rejects  overtures,  48  ;  middle
class supports, 76  -  77  ;
stupidity  of, 89  ; intrigues
with  foreigners,  162
Party,  58
Plots,  64,  65  et  seq.,  150,  274  ;

evidence  of,  283
Courtois,  cited,  552
Couthon,  report  on  land  laws,  277  ;
criticises "  Gironde," 344 ;
raises  army  of  peasants,  460-
6 1  ;  favours  pacification,  461  ;
mocks relics, 526 ; Robes-
pierrist,  535  ;  arrested,  567
Crown  Lands,  division  of,  433


INDEX


"  Culottes  dorees  "  invade  Sections,

371

"  Cult  of  Supreme  Being,"  527
Currents,  Two,  of  Revolution,  i  et
seq.

popular,  195
Cusset, advocates nationalisation

of  industries,  496
Custine, commands Republican

army, 326 ; retreats, 387,

465


DALLOZ,  cited,  199,  205  ;  quoted,
198,  418-19

Danton,  silence  of,  35  ;  rouses
people,  154;  inspires  masses,
183  ;  policy  of,  192  ;  demands
dismissal  of  ministers,  192  ;
persecution  of,  234  ;  in  Lon-
don, 235  ;  inactivity  of,  273  ;
supports  Sections,  291  ;  courage
of,  292  ;  orders  search  for
arms,  294 ;  saves  prisoners,
298  et  seq.  ;  Minister  of  Justice,

318  ; forced  to  resign, made
Minister of Foreign Affairs,

319  ; libelled,  negotiates  with
D. of  Brunswick, 325  ; frus-
trates plots  in  Brittany,  326  ;
treats with England, 327  ;
parleys with  Prussians, 331  ;
demands King's condemna-
tion,  338  ; stays  with  army,
338  ; respects  property,  343  ;
believes  in  English  Whigs,  382  ;
appeals  for  unity  and  patriot-
ism, 383  ; incites  rising,  384  ;
insists  on  action, 385  ; tries
to  win  back  Dumouriez,  387  ;
activity of, 389 ; tries com-
promise, 392  ; opposes  Terror,
400 ; secret negotiations of,
467  ; daring  of, 511  ; speaks
of "armed nation," 512;
renews  energy,  515;  returns  to
Paris, 525  ; attacks  atheism,
526  ; group  of,  535  ;  weary  of
mankind, 537  ; a freemason,
540; arrested, tried  and  exe-
cuted, 548  ;  illusion  of,  556

Dauch, Martin, refuses oath in

Tennis  Court,  56
Daudet,  Ernest,  quoted,  248,  251


Daunon,  speaks  in  favour  of  King,

338

Dauphine,  insurrections  in,  27  ;
executions  in,  128,  166

Debt,  National,  171

Declaration  of  Rights,  22,  163,  473,
500

Decrees  (1790),  re-establish  feudal-
ism, 201  ;  spurious,  207

"  Defenders  of  property,"  197

Delaunay,  forgery  of,  539  ;  trial  of,
548

Demeunier  proposes  joint  redemp-
tion, 134

Democracy,  influence  of,  147

Departments,  Government,  160

Deputies,  flight  of,  292

Deschamps  against  Sections,  529

Deseze  defends  King,  338

Desmoulins,  Camille,  speech  of,  57
appeals  to  arms,  72  ;  exults,
159  ;  despairs,  235  ;  a  Dan-
tonist,  535  ;  calumnies  of,
536-37,  538,  excluded  from
Jacobin  Club,  539  ;  rejoices
at  Hebertists  fall,  547  ;
arrested,  tried,  executed,  548
Lucile,  journal,  cited,  273  ;
guillotined,  546

Desormaux,  ex-canon,  resigns,  523

Dessonville  conspires,  293

"  Deux  Amis  de  la  Liberte,"  quoted,
79,  94,  127  ;  cited,  227

Deville,  proves  injustice  to  Babeuf,
491

Dictatorship,  military,  forced  on
France,  328

Diderot,  socialistic  ideas  of,  484

Dietrich  congratulates  new  regime
at  Strasbourg,  105

Dijon,  riots  at,  23

"  Direct  action,"  190

"  Direct  Self-Government,"  183

Directories,  revolutionary,  216 ;
favours  counter«revolution,364;
strengthened,  472

Directory,  attempts  progressive
taxation,  411;  succeeds  Con-
vention, 571

Disorder,  the  use  of,  345

"  Distribution  of  Produce,"  488

Districts  of  Paris  organise  resist-
ance, 69,  1 80  et  seq.  ;  autonomy
of,  182


592


INDEX


Dolivier,  Pierre,  sympathises  with
people,  242  ;  favours  agrarian
law,  243  ;  on  land  question,
494-95  ;  insight  of,  49^-99

"  Don  gratuit,"  39

Doniol,  quoted,  in

Dragoons  fraternise  with  people,  70

Drouet  pursues  and  captures  King,
227  et  seq.

Droz,  quoted,  48,  79

Dubarry,  Madame,  guillotined,  517

Dubois  (Minister),  house  of,  burned,
28

Dubois  (cure),  resigns,  523

Dubois-Crance  treats  with  Lyons,
460

Ducos  accuses  "  Mountain,"  337

Ducroquet  arrested,  545

Dufourney  against  sectional  so-
cieties, 529

Dulaure,  cited,  40

Dumantier  resigns,  253

Dumas,  letter  of,  80

Dumouriez  at  Caen,  65  ;  treachery
of,  236,  380,  381,  383,  387,  388  ;
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  240  ;
supports  Duke  de  Chartres,
308,  326,  387  ;  plans  invasion
of  Belgium,  324  ;  victory  of,
at  Valmy,  325  ;  intrigues  with
Jacobins,  326  ;  enters  Belgium,
326  ;  hastens  to  Paris,  338  ;
defeat  of,  at  Neerwinden,  346 ;
beguiled  by  Pitt,  382  ;  sus-
pected, 383  ;  makes  pact  with
Austrians,  383  ;  retreats,  387  ;
treachery  of,  confirmed,  388  ;
frustrated,  390

Duperret  receives  Ch.  Corday,  449

Duport,  Adrien,  arms  middle  classes,
117  ;  forms  "  Confederation  of
Clubs,"  151  ;  in  Moderate
Triumvirate,  162  ;  quoted  by
Michelet,  533

Duquesnoy  executed,  570

Duranthon,  Minister  for  Justice,
240

Duroy  executed,  570
Dusaulx, quoted,  73  ; tries  to  stop
September  massacres,  299

EDICTS  forged,  23
Education,  scheme  of,  517
Egalite  de  fait,  403,  479, 493


Eglantine,  Fabre  d',  points  out
injustice  of  land  laws,  420 ;
names  months  for  Republican
Calendar,  519;  a  Dantonist,
535  ;  attacks  Committee  of
Public  Welfare,  537  ;  arrested,
539  ;  guillotined,  540
Elections,  qualifications  for,  164 ;

new  law  for,  277

Elisabeth,  Mme.,  letter  on  feudal
rights,  135  ;  negotiations  con-
cerning, 331  ;  guillotined,  559
Emigration  of  nobility,  238-39
Emigres  (emigrant  nobles)  abandon
King,  17  ;  arrest  of,  92  ;
speculate,  219  ;  decrees  against
235  ;  intrigues  of,  238  ;  ordered
to  return,  239  ;  activity  of,
245  ;  obstinacy  of,  249  ;  at
Chambery,  250 ;  return  to
Paris,  290 ;  falsehoods  of,
324  ;  flock  to  Turin,  383  ;  in
Jersey,  384  ;  fight  at  Lyons,
460

Enclosure  Acts,  effect  of,  97
Encyclopedists,  influence  of,  1 70
England,  example  of,  8  ; war  with,
22,  381  ; helps  counter-revolu-
tion, 251-52; attacks west
of  France,  253  ;  rcle  of,  327  ;
policy  of,  328,  465  ; as  model
for Girondins, 343  ; aims  at
French  sea-power,  381  et  seq.  ;
effect of  war  with,  437  ; false
assignats  made  in,  444  ; sub-
sidises Prussia,  469
English  Ambassador,  testimony  of,

75
Government helps Royalists,

446
Revolution taken as model,

196

Enrages  (Extremists),  character  of,
362  ;  support  Varlet  and  Roux,
372  ; insight of, 373  ; used
against "  Gironde," 376  ;
inspire people, 385  ; lead  in
Paris,  388  ;  demand  "  Terror,"
400 ;  defend  property,  401  ;  de-
sire equality,  487 ;  conciliated,
500  ;  suppressed,  345,  534
Entraigues,  d',  Les  Droits  des  Etats-

Generaux,  by,  46
Epsic  (Benedictine)  resigns,  523


INDEX


593


"  Equalisation  of  Wealth,"  241,
243,  484

Equality,  doctrine  of,  143  ;  op-
posed, 147  ;  aim  of  poor,  277  ;
era  of,  315  ;  danger  to  property
of,  349  ;  effort  towards,  369

Erckmann  and  Chatrian,  cited,  38

Espagnac,  Abbe  d',  executed,  540

Espreminil,  d',  opposes  old  regime,
35  ;  injured  by  crowd,  55  ;
guillotined,  559

Estaing,  Count  d',  letter  of,  to
Queen,  227

Eudistes  refuse  oath  to  Constitu-
tion, 294

Europe  indebted  to  French  peas-
ants, 578-79

Everard,  Catherine,  eulogy  of,  450

Evolution,  102,  576

Exchequer  Court,  protest  by,  26

Existence,  sacredness  of,  405

"  Expropriation,"  fear  of,  170

Extremists,  vide  Enrages


"  FAMILIES,"  the,  416

Famine  extent  of,  46  et  seq. ;
"  Compact,"  149 ;  in  1792,
328  ;  all  over  France,  362  ;
increase  of,  395  ;  disappear-
ance of,  435-36 ;  struggle
against,  437  et  seq.

Farms,  limitation  of,  497-98

Faubourgs,  St.  Antoine  and  St.
Marceau,  attack  Tuileries,  276

Fauchet,  Abbe,  founds  "  Cercle
Social,"  496

Federalism  of  Girondins,  365,  366

Federals  from  Brest  and  Marseilles,
272,  275

Federation  of  counter-revolution,
250  ;  of  districts,  183-84,  187

Fersen,  Count,  correspondence  of,
155.  335.  5i6;  discusses  Coun-
cil of  Regency,  466

Festivals,  popular,  177

Fete  of  Federation,  174  et  seq.,  187,
223  ; gives firm basis to
Revolution,  250
of  Liberty  and  Reason,  524
of  Supreme  Being,  527

Feudal Law, Sagnac quoted on,

205-6  ;  renewed,  202  et  seq.
Dues, 37 et seq., 99 et  seq.  ;


Feudal  Dues — continued

redemption  of,  201  ;  exacted
207 ;  enumerated,  202  et
seq.  ;  sacredness  of,  210  ;
abolished,  278  ;  question  of,
361
Legislation  (1790],  205  et  seqt-t

209  et  seqt

Rights, linked with royalty,
60  ; in  towns,  99  ;  effect  of,
in  ; upheld, 129 et seq.  ;
abolition  pronounced, 1 34  ;
but delayed, 195 et seq.  ;
retention of, 278  ; final
abolition  of,  427  et  seq.
11  Feudal  Seizure  "  abolished,  210
Feudal  System,  hatred  of,  14,  414 ;
broken  at  Strasbourg,  105  ;
decrees  against,  210 ; land
under,  413  et  seq.
Taxes  refused,  44

Feudalism,  survivals  of,  36,  255  ;  re-
established, 20 1

Feuillants,  Club  of,  221  ; position
of,  238  ; fight  patriots,  252  ;
oppose Republic, 308  ;
treachery  of,  462
Fils  de  famille,  battalions  of,  383
Finances, condition  of, 32  ; diffi-
culties of,  1 68  et  seq.
Flammermont,  quoted,  71,  74,  80,

84,85

Flanders,  regiment  of,  153
Flesselles (Provost of  Merchants)
corresponds with Court, 65  ;
disarms  people,  76-77  ; shot,
86-87
Fleuriot-Lescaut succeeds Pache,

546

Fleurus,  victory  of,  564
Fonfrede  arrested,  445
Force, La  (prison],  attacked, 73,

298
"  Forced  loans,"  242,  409-10  ; in

Herault,  411
"Forty Years' Possession Act,"

421,  423
Foubert,  M.  L.,  quoted,  189,  cited,

191

Fouche, socialism  of, 506-7 ; on
*•  burial, 521  ; attacked by
$•*  Robespierre,  565  t >'
Foulon,  arrested,  92  ; hanged,  93  ;
effect  of  death  of,  100,  149

2P


594


INDEX


Fouquier-Tinville,  Public  Prosecu-
tor, 509  ; "  accelerates  plead-
ings," 517
Fourier,  ideas  of,  373  ;  followers  of,

488  ;  teaching  of,  498
Fourierism,  descent  of,  579
Fournees  ("  batches  "j,  514  ;  horror

of,  561,  564

Fournier  inspires  people,  385
"  Fourth  Legislative  Body,"  529
Fox,  Charles  James,  hopes  in,  467
France, financial ruin of, 22 ;
unification  of,  177-78  ; trans-
formation of, 346 ; divided
into hostile camps, 361-62  ;
regenerated, 408-9, 574 ; de-
mocratised, 436  ;  interior  con-
dition of, 465-66 ; organised
in  communes,  476  ;  communist
spirit  in,  506  ; dechristianising
of, 519-21  ; productivity  of,

575

Franc- fief,  59

Francois  (of  Neufchateau],  motion
of,  279  ;  tries  to  stop  massacres
299 .'  proposes  division  of
communal  lands,  418

Frankfort-on-the-Maine,  occupied
by  sans-culottes,  326

Fraternal  societies,  task  of,  257

"  Fraternit6,  La,"  quoted,  509

Freedom  of  opinion,  143

Freemasons,  Brotherhood  of,  revo-
lutionaries in,  331

Free  trade,  in  grain,  19  ; opposed,

497

Fr6on  organises  jeunesse  doree,  570
Freron  persecuted,  234
Freys  (Austrian  Bankers),  in  plot,

539  ;  executed,  540
"  Fury  of  purification,"  303


GABELLE  (salt  tax)  abolished,  169
Gaillard,  suicide  of,  505
Gamain  reveals  secret  safe,  293,  332
Game  laws,  59  ;  abolished,  121,  126,

133

Garat  succeeds  Dan  ton,  319
Gardes  francaises,  vide  Guards
Gamier,  letters  of,  527
Gay-Vernon,  Bishop,  resigns,  522
Gazette  de  Paris,  editor  of,  recruits

Royalists,  248


Geneva,  emancipation  of,  44

Gensonne  accused,  338  ;  fails  Dan-
ton,  387  ;  under  home-arrest,
445  ;  on  Constitution  Com-
mittee, 470

German  armies,  expected  in  Paris,
256  ;  influence  of,  257

Germany,  comparison  with,  214  ;
attacks  Alsace  and  Lorraine,

253

Gertruydenberge  taken,  383

Girant,  evidence  of,  321

Girey-Dupre  executed,  517

"  Gironde,"  the,  programme  of,  62  ;
defends  property,  106,  358  ;
composition  of,  310,  311  ;
protects  King,  312  ;  impotence
°f»  3*9  »  opposes  King's  trial,
333  ;  versus  "  Mountain,"  340  et
seq.  ;  tries  to  end  Revolution,
359 ;  rallies  reaction,  363  ;
necessary  to  crush,  378  ;  sends
volunteers,  379  ;  hostility  to,
402

Girondins,  party  of,  197,  310 ;
position  of,  238 ;  agree  with
Court,  241 ;  ministry  of,  240,
244,  292,  318 ;  fight  Anar-
chists, 252,  384  ;  indecision  of,
276 ;  attitude  towards  mas-
sacres, 304-5  ;  ready  to  admit
foreign  troops,  307  ;  power  of,
311  ;  work  against  Revolu-
tion, 319  et  seq.,  348  et  seq.  ;
try  to  form  reactionary  guard,
321  ;  expelled,  322,  398,  404  ;
favour  war,  323 ;  attack  Con-
vention, 327  ;  accuse  "  Moun-
tain," 333  ;  try  to  save  King,
336-37  ;  policy  and  aims  of,
341-42,  389  ;  characteristics
of,  and  hatred  for  people,  344,
348  ;  methods  of,  346 ;  in-
trigues of,  347 ;  dreams  of,
348  ;  object  to  equality,  352  ;
programme  of,  359 ;  Robes-
pierre's opinion  of,  360  ;  ambi-
tion of,  369  ;  attack  sections,
371  ;  accuse  "  Mountain,"  375;
printing-presses  of,  smashed,
385  ;  fall  inevitable,  390  ;
persecute  Marat,  393  ;  failure
of.  395  ;  incite  departments
against  jtParis,V397,  406  ;  out-


INDEX


595


Glrondms— continued

lawed,  406  j  resnlt  of  expul-
sion, 407  ;  opposed  to  "  maxi-
mum," 441  ;  stir  up  revolt,
445.  455-56$  work  with
Royalists,  446  •  discouraged
by  Bretons,  447  j  Marseillaise
of,  447  ;  defeat  of,  459  j  in
hiding,  461  j  treachery  of,  462  j
in  framing  Constitution,  470
et  seq,  ;  use  Constitution,  471  ;
divide  legislative  body,  473  ;
ideas  of,  474 ;  spread  calum-
nies, 476 ;  prosecution  of,
demanded,  514;  execution  of,
22,  517  ;  similarity  with  Jaco-
bins. 533

Glezen,  60

Gobel (Bishop of Paris] resigns,
522  ;  guillotined,  527,  546

Godwin,  W.,  cited,  184,  327,  373

Goethe  at  Battle  of  Valmy,  325

Gorsas,  quoted,  63

Goujon  executed,  570

Government centralised, 318  j

federative,  367
Revolutionary,  384,  508  etseq*.

545.  555
Grand Chatelet (prison), thieves

massacred  at,  303

Grand'  -  Maison (actressj guillo-
tined, 560

Grave,  War  Minister,  24
"  Great  Unknown,"  272-73
Gr6goire,  Abb6,  61  ;  report  of,  200  j

refuses  to  resign,  523
Crenelle,  attempt  to  raise  camp  at,

57i

Grenoble  insurrection,  27
Guadet,  silence  of,  35  ; stratagem

of, 245  ; report of, 295  ;

speech  of, 296 ; motions  of,

307 ; accused, 338  ; fails

Danton,  387  ; stirs  up  revolt

446

Guards,  French,  refuse  to  fire,  64 ;
distribute  bread,  71  ;  fire
on  German  regiment,  72

Municipal,  "  restore  order,"
108

National  (faithful  to  King),
formation  of,  160  ;  passive
citizens  excluded  from,  160 ;
disperse,  274-75  ;  supports


Guards,  National— continued

people,  275  ;  refuse  to  stop
massacres,  300  ;  officers  of,
dismissed,  314 ;  controlled
by  middle  classes,  401

Guillaume, helps capture King,

227

James,  thanks  to,  vii  j  on
Resolutions  of  National  As-
sembly, 137  et  seq.  ;  on
democratic  beliefs,  142  ;
quoted,  143;  cited,  199,  518,
555


HANRIOT, General of National
Guard, 402 ; terrorises Con-
vention, 404  ; arrested, 567  ;
released,  568
Hardy  (English  bookseller],  quoted,

68,  70

Harvests,  effect  of,  1 10,  328
Hassenfratz  excuses  pillage,  401
"  Haves  and  Have-Nots,"  354
H6bert,  305  ;  commissioner  of  Con-
vention, 273 ; Procurator of
Paris  Committee,  364 ;  arrested,
397  j anti-religious campaign
of, 479 ; character of, 501  ;
denounces  Roux,  504; recom-
mends itinerant guillotine,
512  ;  organises  fete,  524 ;  burns
relics, 525  ; communism of,
534  ;  attacked  by  Desmoulins,
536  ; attacks  Amar,  544 ;  ar-
rested,  347, 544 1 guillotined,

545

Hebertists,  struggle  against,  533  et
seq.  ; miscalculation  of, 534  ;
arrest  of,  537  ;  fall  of,  542  et  seq.
Helvetius,  socialism  of,  484
Henri  Quatre,  statue  saluted,  29
Herbois, Collot d', President of
National Convention, 309 ;
quoted,  439  ;  ordered  to  destroy
Lyons,  479  ; alludes  to  title-
deeds,  482  ; makes  terms  with
communists, 500 ; socialism
of, 506-7  ; on  Committee  of
Public  Welfare,  535  ; attempt
to  kill, 558-59  ; attacked  by
Robespierre,  565-67
Herman  proposes  to  purge  prisons,
564


596


INDEX


High  Court  (Orleans),  safeguards
conspirators,  293

Historians,  omissions,  24,  134 ;
shortcoming  of,  94-95  ;  ignore
counter-revolution,  249  ;  em-
broideries of,  304 ;  limitations
of,  306,  409

Hobbes,  cited,  6

Hoche  takes  the  offensive,  469

Holbach,  school  of,  501

Holland  threatened,  328,  382

Hondschoote,  Duke  of  York  at-
tacked at,  467

H6tel  des  Invalides,  attack  on,
proposed,  70  ;  arms  seized
at,  77  ;  attacked,  80
de  Ville,  congratulates  As-
sembly, 6 1  ;  becomes  centre
of  Revolution,  69-74

Hue,  de,  Commander  of  Swiss
Guards,  letter  of,  82  j  saved,
86

Huez,  de  (Mayor  of  Troyes],  killed
by  peasants,  107

Hulin  attacks  Bastille,  85,  86

Hume,  cited,  6


"  ILLUMINATES,"  vow  of,  540
Imbert-Colomies, royalist agent,

460

"  Imperative  Mandate,"  185
Income  tax,  details  of,  410-11
Indian  Company,  power  of,  5  39
Industries,  socialisation  of,  493  et

seq.  ; nationalisation  of,  495-

96
Insurrection,  vide  Risings ; cause

of,  41  ;  uncertainty  of,  401
"  Intellectuals," retrogression of,

243  ;  disbelieve  in  Revolution,

256  ;  compared  with  Radicals,

256 ; inclined to monarchy,

331

International  Working  Men's  Asso-
ciation, 580  ;  Congress  (Bdle,
1869),  487

Interregnum,  282  et  seq.

Invasion,  foreign,  181,  238  ;  sup-
ported by  foreign  Courts,  324

Isnard,  President  of  Convention,
397  ;  threatens  to  obliterate
Paris,  398,  461


JACOBINS,  reaction  of,  221,  238  ;
repudiate  Republic,  232 ;
support  war,  240  ;  attacked
by  Lafayette,  244  ;  poverty
of,  252 ;  mistaken  idea
about,  257  ;  advanced  party
of,  272  ;  threatened,  275,  283  ;
punishment  of,  planned,
289 ;  support  advanced
revolutionists,  317  ;  intrigue
with  Dumouriez,  326  ;  exter-
mination planned  by  Fersen,
335  ;  "do  not  understand
poor,  "3  74  ;  pledged  to  defend
property,  401 ;  support  Com-
mittees of  Public  Welfare  and
General  Safety,  508  ;  jealous
of  sections,  510

Club  (Paris},  silence  of,  284  ;
electors  meet  at,  309 ;
declares  itself  Republican,
310  ;  weapon  of  "  Moun-
tain," 316-17 ;  reinforced
by  Cordeliers,  317  ;  revokes
decrees  against  Duke  of
Orleans,  337  ;  influence  of,
400  ;  affiliation  with,  508  ;
demands  trial  of  Girondins,
512  ;  against  Popular  So-
cieties, 528  ;  "purification"
of,  535 ;  Robespierre  com-
plains to,  565
Government  concentrate  police

functions,  530

Republicans,  officer  army,  462
Jacqueries, 15; necessity  of, 52;

character  of,  115
"  Jacques  Bonhomme,"  no
Jales,  confederation  of,  corresponds

with  King  and  emigres,  250
Jaures, cited, 24, 365, 374, 505  ;
shows  error  of  Michelet,  338  ;
quoted  on  communist  move-
ment, 373  ;  on  Marat,  395
Jeanbon,  vide  Saint- Andre
Jemmapes,  victory  at,  326
Jewish  question,  185
Julien-de-Dieu (Benedictine) re-
signs, 523

Jullien (Commissioner), letter of
447  ; burns  title-deed,  482
in  Royalist  company, 539
trial of, 548  ; describes
noyades  at  Nantes,  542


INDEX


597


Jullien — continued

Madame, letters quoted, 221,

274,  286-87  ;  cited,  344
July 14 (1790), consequences of,

88  et  seq. ; importance  of,  177
June  2  (1793},  rising  of,  403
Jura,  wheat  convoys  plundered  in,  43
Jure  urs  and  non  -jure  urs ,  vide  Priests,

520
"  Justices  of  Peace,"  102

KAR£EFF,  Professor,  quoted,  39
Kellerman repulses Piedmontese,

460  ; reinforced by  Commis-
sioners, 461
Kerengall,  Le  Guen  de,  denounces

feudalism,  123
Kersaint,  report  of,  290  ;  embraces

Danton,  343  ;  executed,  517
King,  power  of,  limited,  335
Kings,  right  divine  of,  destroyed,  336
King's  Council,  decree  of  (April  3,

1789),  63
Klinckovstrom, Baron  R. M.  de,

cited,  335

Knights of Malta, help counter-
revolution, 253

of  the  Poignard,  246

LACOMBE,  Rose,  communist,  487  ;
leader  of  revolutionary  women,
489

Lacoste,  Minister  for  Marine,  240;
letter  of,  482

Lacroix,  Sigismund,  quoted,  182,
183,  184,  186,  187,  188,  193  ;
arrested,  547  ;  tried,  548

Ladmiral  tries  to  kill  d'Herbois,
558-59  ;  guillotined,  559

Lafayette  (Commander  of  National
Guard),  plots  with  Court,  65  ;
on  Municipal  Council,  101  ;
at  Versailles,  156;  importance
of,  160  ;  intrigues,  227  ;  chief
of  Feuillants,  244 ;  supports
royalty  in  letter,  245  ;  ab-
solved, 274 ;  suspected,  285-86 ;
denounces  Jacobins,  286  ;  sides
with  Royalty,  286  ;  treachery
discovered,  289  ;  fate  of,  289  ;
plans  invasion  of  Belgium,  324  ;
treachery  of,  380-81

LagnyJ.de,  helps  capture  King,  228


Laignelot  turns  church  into  Temple

of  Truth,  521

Lalande,  a  freemason,  540
Lally-Tollendal, letter  to  King  c

Prussia,  286
Lamballe,  Princess  de,  killed,  299  ;

only  woman  massacred,  302
Lambesc, Prince de, carriage

burned,  75
Lambert,  "  friend  of  those  who  have

nothing,"  484-85

Lameth,  in  Triumvirate  of  Moder-
ates, 162  ; won  over  by  King,
332
Lamoignon (Minister), house

burned,  28

Land,  registers,  destruction  of,  40,
429 ;  question,  52,  488  ;  in
America,  143 ;  confiscation
of,  196  ;  importance  of,  493  ;
socialisation  of,  493  et  seq. ;
speculation  in,  493  ;  inalien-
ability of,  494 ;  theories
on,  495,  543  ;  sales  of,  bad
results,  502 ;  mistakes  in.
563  et  seq.

Communal,  robbery  of,  195  ;
question  of.  211,  212,  361  ;
seizure  of,  414  et  seq. ;  restora*
tion  of,  opposed,  415  ;  divi-
sion of,  418  ;  division  of,
rescinded,  419  ;  "  grabbed,"
420  ;  restoration  of,  421  ;
partition  of,  422-23  et  seq*. ;
transferred,  425
of  emigres,  sale  of,  277,  279.

280,  396
'?  Hunger,"  14
Laws,  199,  277-78
Ownership,  345,  346
Pensioners',  not  reserved,  380
System  (in  ArtoisJ,  417
Taxes,  199

Landau,  blockade  raised,  538
Landed  property,  subdivision  of,  43  5
Lange,  precursor  of  Fourierism,  373,

459,  490,  496,  497.  498,  579
Lanjuinais, founds Breton Club,

60  ;  stirs  up  revolt,  446
Laumur  arrested,  545
Launey,  Marquis  de  (Governor  of
Bastille),  79  ;  defends  Bastill«,
8 1 et  seq.  ; capitulates, 85  |
killed,  86  ;  memory  of,  149


598


INDEX


Laussel, leads people at Lyons,

377
Lauzun, commands Republican

army,  326
Lavergne,  Commandant,  letter  to,

290

Lavoisier  guillotined,  559
"  Law  of  Suspects,"  477,  513
Law,  municipal  and  administrative,

165  ;  ignored,  193
Laws,  social,  476
"  Leaders  of  Thought,"  cowardice

of,  285

"  League  of  United  Counties,"  446
Le Bas (Commissioner), sent to

Lower  Rhine,  439  ;  in  fighting

line,  469

Lebrun,  in  Girondist  Ministry,  318
Lechapelier,  founds Breton Club,

60
Leclerc,  disciple  of  J.  Roux,  489  ;

arrested,  505,  545
Leflot,  letters  of,  527
Lefranc,  priest,  resigns,  523
Legacy  duties,  242
Legends,  use  of,  103  ;  historic,  118-

19  ;  revolutionary,  302
Legislation,  difficulties  of,  215,  216
Legros,  cited,  481
Lemp,  Mayor  of  Strasbourg,  house

burned,  103

Lenfant,  Abb6,  saved,  301
Lenotre,  M.  G.,  cited,  228
Lepelletier  demands  "  integral  edu-
cation,"  487  { report  of, on

education,  518
Lescure,  Vendean  leader,  456
Lescuyer,  murder  of,  321
Levellers,  vide  Anarchists
Leymarie,  cited,  40
Liberty,  drawback  to,  486  ;  religious

526

Lichtenberger,  A,,  cited,  496
Liege,  military  depot,  382  j taken

by  Austrians,  383
Lille,  military  riots  at,  223
Lindet,  Robert,  385

Thomas,  522
"  Living  Wage,"  495
Lods  et  ventes,  203
Longwy  invested,  290  ; surrender

of,  292,  296,  298,  324
Louis'  XIV.  ordinance  of,  414
Louis  XV* ,  misery  under,  22


Louis  XVI.,  accession  of ,  2  ;  reforms
under,  19-20  ;  opposes  repre-
sentative Government  and  dis-
misses Turgot,  20,  21  ;  real
character  of,  21  j  good  inten-
tion of,  23  j  yields,  31  j  con
vokes  States  -  General,  33  »
opposes  reform.  50  et  seq.  ;
policy  of,  59 ;  served  by
Commons,  62  j  intentions
towards,  65  ;  duplicity  of.
71  ;  visits  Paris,  90 ;  plots
escape,  91  •  "  best  of  Kings,"
1 06  ;  heads  counter-revolution.
137;  refuses  sanction  to
Declaration  of  Rights  of  Man,
146;  flight  of,  planned,  150
et  seq*  ;  feeling  towards,  155  j
made  prisoner,  sanctions
Declaration  of  Rights  of  Man,
1571  in  Paris,  173;  takes
oath,  178  j  explains  property,
198 ;  remonstrates  with
National  Assembly,  200  j
thanks  Bouill6  for  massacre,
225  ;  flees  to  Varrenne,  226
et  seq.  j  brought  back,  229
et  seq.  •  Intentions  of,  230-31  ;
treachery  of,  234,  239  ;  refuses
to  sanction  decrees,  235  {  secret
safe  of,  236,  293  ;  tries  to  re-
establish Three  Orders,  237  ;
calls  Girondist  Ministry,  240  \
foreign  correspondence  of,  245  j
plots  of,  248-49 ;  authority
limited  of,  256 ;  takes  refuge
In  Assembly,  275  j  imprisoned
with  family  in  Temple,  276,
280,  283,  284 ;  position  of,
280 ;  intrigues  of,  290  •  pro-
tected by  Girondins,  312  j
suspended,  318  ;  negotiations
in  favour  of,  325  •  fate  of,  328-
30  et  seq*  ;  speculations  of,  328;
trial  of,  330  et  seq.  ;  pitied  by
people,  330 ;  indifference  to,
of  foreign  Courts,  331  »  dis-
banded guards  in  pay  of,  332  ;
treason  of,  333 ;  letter  to
Emperor  of  Austria,  334 ;
death  of,  a  necessity,  335  j
crime  of,  336  j  interrogation  of,
337  {  defence  of,  338  ;  found
gui  ty  and  executed,  539  j


INDEX


599


Louis  XVI. — continued

Girondist  plot  in  favour  of,
349  ;  effect  of  execution,  370;
in  England,  381,  382  ;  beloved
in  La  Vendee,  454
Loustalot,  harangues  crowd,  69,
71;  heads  deputation,  152;
rouses  people,  1 54 ;  quoted,
220

Lou  vet,  "  Robespierride  "  of,  346  ;
in  Brittany,  368  ;  stirs  up
revolt,  446

Lozeau,  P.,  speech  of,  422
Luckner,  joins  Lafayette,  286
Lyons,  revolt  at,  25  ;  massacre  at,
321,  404;  a  Royalist  centre,
377  ;  struggle  at,  378  ;  counter-
revolution in,  383  ;  reaction
in,  458-59  ;  siege  of,  460 ;
taken  by  Republicans,  461,
468  ;  champions  socialistic  in-
dustry, 495  ;  communism  at,
496


MABLY,  cited,  6,  12  ; socialism  of,

484
Mack  (Colonel  in  Austrian  Army],

promise  of  Dumouriez  to,  388
Maignet,  raises  army  of  peasants,

460-61  ; "  punishes  severely,"

556-57

Mailhe,  revolutionary  measure  of,
280 ;  demands  reprieve  of
King.  339  ;  proposes  restora-
tion of  communal  lands,  418,
421

Maillard,  leads  women  to  Ver-
sailles, 154;  saves  Cazotte,

301  ; and  forty- three  others,

302  ;  tribunal  of,  372
Mainmortes,  129  et  seq*
Malesherbes, defends King, 337  ;

guillotined,  559
Mallarm6  abused  by  Robespierre,

566
Malouet,  leads  reaction,  56  ;  plots

against  people,  1 54
Manants,  416

Manifesto  of  Leagued  Kings,  295
Manorial  Justice,  37

Courts,  abolition  of ,  121
Manuel,  report of,  299 ; tries to

stop  massacres,  300


Marat,  rouses  people,  154;  protests
against  martial  law,  161  ;
queries  people's  joy,  178  ;
inspires  revolt,  183  ;  order  to
arrest,  222  ;  persecuted,  234  ;
despair  of,  234-35  ;  insight  of,
256,  293  ;  denounces  traitors,
295  ;  circular  by,  303  ;  advises
people,  307  ;  list  of,  309  ;
despairs  of  France's  salvation,
310;  loved  by  people,  320;
against  war,  323  ;  protests
against  Republic's  right  to  kill
King,  334 ;  accused,  347  ;
quoted,  367  ;  takes  up  cause
of  poor,  374-75  ;  policy  of,
392  et  seq.  ;  Girondins  order
arrest  of,  393  ;  people's  defence
of,  394 ;  character  of,  394 ;
acquittal  of,  395  ;  writing,
quoted,  395  ;  opposes  Terror,
400 ;  rings  tocsin,  401-2  ;
addresses  Jacobins,  404  ;  sup-
ports forced  loan,  411;  murder
of,  450  ;  disinterestedness  and
nobility  of,  450-51  ;  no  terror-
ist, 452 ;  on  sovereignty  of
people,  472 ;  opposes  death
penalty  for  communists,  500  ;
loss  to  Revolution,  501  ;
arrested  in  Italy,  516  ;  a  free-
mason, 540

"  Marc  of  Silver,"  164,  185

Marechal  Sylvain,  communism  of,
489»  579 ;  employs  Babeuf,
490

Marie- Antoinette  (Queen),  letter  to
Count  de  Mercy,  28  ;  leads
Court,  58  ;  understood  by
people,  6 1 ;  feasts  foreign  troops,
88  ;  character  of,  89,  335  ;  in-
sulted, 90 ;  hated,  151;  fetes
soldiers,  153  ;  disdains  King,
155  ;  corresponds  with  Fer-
sen,  155,  334 ;  in  personal
danger,  156;  takes  oath,  178;
letter  of,  235  j  pitied  by
people,  330 ;  negotiations
about,  331  ;  plots  with  Austria,
334;  tried,  515;  executed,
516

Marmontel,  quoted,  75

Marseillaise  hymn  by  Rouget  de
1'Isle,  324


6oo


INDEX


Marseilles  resists  Revolution,  251  ;
federals  from,  272  ;  votes  for
dethronement,  274 ;  demands
Republic,  310

"Marsh"  or  "Plain,"  310;  com-
position of ,  311  ;  obeys  Robes-
pierrists,  547

Martial  Law,  160,  209,  221,  257

Martin,  Henri,  on  freemasons,  540

Mascarats,  revolt  of,  24

Masonic  lodges,  540

Massacres,  at  Lyons,  321,404,  514;
in  Champ-de-Mars  (July  17,
1791),  179,  257  ;  September,
297  et  seq.  ;  numbers  slain  in,
303  ;  of  1848  and  1871,  368  ;
at  Machecoul,  387

Mathieu,  supports  forced  loan,  41 1

Maubeuge,  Austrians  raise  siege  of,
468

Maury,  Abbe,  almost  slain,  5  5

"  Maximum,"  36,  207,  208,  241,
361,  372  ;  Chaumette's  law  of,
375-76  ;  fixed  by  Convention,
439  ;  law  of,  497-98 ;  abolished,
570

Mayence  occupied  by  sans-culottes,
326

"  Means of Subsistence," 493 et

seq.  ;  problem  of,  497
Exchange,  493  et  seq.

Mehee  fils  (Fehlemesi),  quoted,  297,
300

Mellie,  Ernest,  quoted  and  cited,
183,314,315,439,513,529.568

Mercure  de  France,  quoted,  70,  152,
242

Mercy,  Count  de,  plots,  153  ;
reveals  English  policy,  381  ;
severity  of,  335

Metric  system,  importance  of,  518-

19

Michelet,  v.  ;  excellent  descrip-
tion by,  274 ;  quoted,  282,
303,  306 ;  criticises  Jaco-
bins, 316-17;  criticises
Gironde,  319  ;  errors  of,  338  ;
on  King's  mendacity,  337  ;
on  communist  movement,  373  •
on  Dumouriez,  381-82 ;  on
hunting  Republicans,  386 ;
quoted,  437,  451,  452 ;  on
Vendean  War,  457-58  ;  cited,
488  ;  defends  Cordeliers,  504  ;


Michelet — contin  ued

on  middle  -  class  leadership,
508  ;  on  Fete  of  Liberty  and
Reason,  524 ;  on  death  of
Revolution,  532  ;  on  Jacobins
and  Girondins,  533  ;  on  execu-
tions, 546  ;  on  Sections,  569  ;
on  peasants  during  Revolution,

574

Michonis,  plans  Queen's  escape,  516

Middle  classes,  Third  Estate  or
bourgeoisie,  idea  of,  5  et  seq. ;
practical  programme  of,  10 ;
schemes  of,  30  et  seq.  ;  modera-
tion of,  44  ;  in  revolution,  47  ;
fear  of  masses,  58,  75,  81,  106,
158  ;  form  militia,  76  ;  betray
people,  77 ;  work  of,  96 ;
arming  of,  128  ;  brutality  of,
128  ;  Liberalism  of,  144 ;
disband  people,  158  et  seq.;
organise  government,  162, 163  ;
great  fortunes  of,  169  ;  specu-
lations of,  171  ;  current  of,
195  ;  position  of,  196 ;  take
arms,  208  ;  legislation  of,  214,
215,  218;  reaction  of,  222;
intrigues  of,  227 ;  against
Republic,  243  ;  joy  of,  287  ;
work  with  counter-revolution,
291  ;  intention  of,  356  ;  terror
of,  370  ;  hatred  of  people,  397  ;
power  of,  401  ;  plots  of,  488

Mignet,  quoted,  91-92,  479,  571

Militia,  armed  (1789},  27,  40,  76

Mi-lods,  203

"  Minist£re  sans-culotte,"  240

"  Ministers  for  Paris,"  76

Mir,  Russian,  comparison  with,
416  ;  land  under,  494

Mirabeau,  speech  of,  55,  88  ;  mem-
ber of  Breton  Club,  60  ;  deserts
people,  62 ;  petitions  King,
66  ;  as  Constitutionalist,  151;
bought,  161,162,175;  treachery
of,  332  ;  a  freemason,  540

Moderates  wish  municipalities  sup-
pressed, 475

"  Moderation,"  310

Moelle,  won  over  by  Royalists,  516

Moleville, Bertrand de, 26, 28  ;
opposes constitution, 240  ;
tried  and  acquitted,  302

Mombelles,  Mme.,  letter  to,  135


INDEX


601


Momoro,  pamphlet  on  "  maxi-
mum," 44 ;  organises  fete,
524;  speaks  for  sections,  529;
crime  of,  545  ;  arrested,  545

Monarchy,  revival  of,  222

Monastic  Orders  suppressed,  170

Montage,  202

Monge,  Gironde  minister,  318

Moniteur,  Royalist  plans  in,  295  ;
approved  September  mas-
sacres, 305  ;  advocates  peasant
proprietorship,  433

Monopolists,  rise  of,  30  ;  buy  up
wheat,  63  ;  killed,  208

Monopoly,  laws  against,  499

Mons,  defeat  at,  298

"  Montagnards,"  division  of,  362  ;
prepare  to  equalise  wealth,
411  ;  break  up  large  estates,
432  ;  give  acre  to  proletarians,
434~35  ;  oppose  "  maximum,"
441  ;  carry  on  Revolution,
471  ;  ideas  of,  474  ;  policy  of,
480  ;  regime  of,  483  ;  volte
face  of,  500  ;  mistake  of,  501

Montesquieu,  cited,  6,  191

Montesquieu,  commands  army  in
south,  326

Montmorin  (Keeper  of  Civil  List),
compromising  papers  of,  288  ;
acquitted,  295  ;  "blood "  of,  301

"  Moral  Insurrection,"  401

Mortimer-Ternaux,  cited,  314,  365

Mortmain  abolished,  20

Mounier,  agent  of  emigres,  296

"  Mountain,"  The,  influenced  by
Commune,  273  ;  conspires,
293  ;  composition  of,  310-11  ;
power  of,  316 ;  success  of
attack  on,  322  ;  tries  to  intro-
duce land  reform  in  Belgium,
327  ;  resolved  on  King's  con-
demnation, 336 ;  versus
Gironde,  340  et  seq.  ;  pro-
gramme of,  345  ;  attacked  by
Gironde,  346 ;  reproaches
Gironde,  358  ;  allays  panic,
384  ;  collaborates  with  Com-
mune, 388  ;  appeals  to  people,
392  ;  policy  of,  508

Municipal  function,  479
institutions,  98  et  seq.
law  of  December  1789,  471
organisation,  158,  189


Municipalisation  of  trade,  497
Municipalities,  centres of Revolu-
tion, 1 66  ; cantonal,  creation
of,  472-73

Municipality  elected,  417
"  Muscadins,"  510,  546,  549
Mutual  Insurance  scheme,  485


NANGIS,  people  refuse  taxes  at,  70
Nantes,  slave  trade  of,  457;  Carrier's

noyades  at,  514
Napoleon  I.,  vide  Bonaparte
Napoleon  III.,  coup  d'etat  of,  336
Narbonne supports Constitution,

240
Nation, French, unification of

(1790),  177

National  Assembly,  composition  of,
1 3  ;  tardiness  of,  43  ;  Third
Estate  declares  itself  to  be,
56 ;  congratulations  and
militant  addresses  to,  61  ;
loyal  to  King,  62 ;  true
character  of,  63  ;  fears
people,  63  ;  servility  of,  64,
66 ;  inactivity  of,  65  ;
marked  members  of,  65  ;
impotence  of,  67  et  seq.  ;
alarms  in,  70,  89  ;  struggle
of,  101  et  seq.  ;  members  of,
threatened,  149  ;  suppresses
soldiers'  agitation,  223-25  ;
soldiers  send  delegates  to,
224 ;  Chaumette's  estimate
of,  246

Debt, amount of, 33 ; con-
solidation of,  53

Estates,  432  et  seq.

Guard organised, 76 ; vide
Guards

Lands, speculations in, 511  ;
vide  Lands

Life,  changes  in,  576

Representation,  20  ; defect  of,
51  ;  sacredness  of,  400

Unity, scheme of Anarchists

for,  350
Necker, Minister, 20 ; policy  of,

21  ; dismissed,  21  ; recalled,

28,  34  ;  as  financier,  31  et  seq* ;

his "  Compte rendu," 32  ;

three hours' speech of, to

States-General, 51 et seq. ;


602


INDEX


Necker — continued

compromise  of,  54 ;  insight
of,  55  ;  dismissed  again,  57,
65  ;  tries  to  avert  famine,  62-
63  ;  insulted  by  Court,  71  ;
bust  carried  in  procession,  72  ;
proposes  to  diminish  seig-
niorial prerogative,  197-98  j
orders  Marat's  arrest,  222

Neerwinden,  defeat  at,  346,  387

Newspapers,  scarcity  of,  102

Nineteenth Century, cited, 40;
quoted,  199

Niviere-Chol leads middle  -  class
revolt  in  Lyons,  377

Noailles, Viscount de, speaks
against  feudalism,  119  et  seq.

Nobility,  luxury  of,  17  ; property
rights  of,  122  et  seq.

Noirmoutiers, prisoners shot at,

515

"  Noirs,"  gathering  of  the,  290
Notables, Assembly of, 39 ; vide

Assembly

Noyades  of  Nantes,  457,  458,  514
Nys,  Ernest,  thanks  to,  vii.,  mono-
graph of,  on  freemasons,  quoted,
540-41


OCTOBER  5  and  6  (1789],  Paris
Insurrection,  146  et  seq.

Old  age  pensions,  506

•  '  Ombre  de  Marat,  L',"  504

Orange,  Commission  at,  557-58

Order,  triumph  of,  549

Ordinance  of  1670,  20

Orleans,  Duke  of,  plot  against,  64,
65  ;  popularity  of,  69  ;  bust
carried  in  procession,  72  ;
dreams  of,  1 50  ;  disgrace  of,
161  ;  intrigues  of,  227-28  ;
expects  crown,  231  ;  candidate
for  throne,  331  ;  Grand  Master
of  freemasons,  540

Owen,  Robert,  teaching  of,  498


PACHE  (Mayor  of  Paris),  succeeds
Chambon,  322,  364  ;  demands
revolutionary  tribunal,  385  ;
opposed  to  Terror,  400  •
deprived  of  office,  545  ;  spared,
546  ;  character  of,  547


Paine,  Thomas,  sincerity  of,  243  ;
on  Constitution  Committee,
470

Palais  Royal,  revolutionary  focus,
49,  61,  70,  72;  deputation
from,  152

Pamphlets,  revolutionary,  24,  46,
53  ;  vide  British  Museum

Pan,  Mallet  du,  quoted,  223,  242

Panis,  signs  appeal  of  Commune,  301

Pannetier,  leads  attack  on  Bastille.
82,  83

Paper-currency  (vide  Assignats)  j
under  Directory,  571

Paris,  hunger  riots  in,  23,  28,46  (vide
Riots) ;  clerks  and  populace
of,  29  ;  centre  of  Revolution,
67 ;  thieves  hanged  in,  77 ;
ammunition  kept  in,  77 ;
misery  in,  92 ;  scarcity  in,
149  ;  feared,  151;  insurrection
breaks  out  in,  154;  districts
of,  171  ;  reaction  in,  200 ;
sections  of,  215  ;  municipality
demands  Republic,  232,  310  ;
reaction  in,  233,  509  ;  full  of
conspiracies,  245  ;  rises  August
9  and  10,  275  ;  laments  her
dead,  282  ;  to  be  burned,  290  ;
searched  for  arms,  294  •  puri-
fied, 303 ;  revolutionary  energy
of,  324  ;  threatens  Convention,
333  I  panic  in,  383,  384 ;
rising  needed  in,  383  ;  fury  of,
388,  403,  404;  hated  by
farmers,  499 ;  executions  in,
514;  inactive,  545;  "purifi-
cation "of,  555

Parlement of Paris banished to

Troyes,  26  ;  recalled,  29
of  Rennes,  26

Ptrlements  (Courts  of  Justice),
closing  of,  24,  25  et  seq.  ;
disturbances  about,  39 ;  sus-
pension of,  163  ;  support  re-
action, 1 66

Parliament, English, friends of

French  Republic  in,  556
Prussian,  uselessness  of,  45

Passeret  (King's  secretary)  hooted,
56

Patin,  J.  Baptiste,  resigns,  523

f?Patriote  fran9aise,"  cited,  305
347


INDEX


603


Patriots,  beaten  at  Aries,  251  ;
mutilated  by  Uhlans,  251;  form
league  of  defence,  252

Patrou,  resigns,  523

Payan,  exasperates  workers,  565

Peasant  Risings  (vide  Jacqueries],
2,  28,  29,  40,  44,  46,  52,  112
etseq.,  159,  177,  198,  207,  208

Peasants,  misery  of,  17  j  oppose
export  of  grain,  26  •  not  repre-
sented in  Assembly,  51  j
slaughter  of,  127;  illegal  execu-
tions of,  128  ;  disappointment
of,  132  et  seq.  ;  refuse  to  pay
taxes,  149, 150;  Draconian  laws
for,  199,  208,  209  ;  hardships  of,
202  ;  difficulties  of,  204  ;  re-
pression of,  211  ;  courage  of,
228  ;  deprived  of  political
rights,  234  j  refuse  to  pay
feudal  dues,  279 »  oppose
foreign  invasion,  324  j  condi-
tion of  (in  1793},  393  i  regain
communal  lands,  413  j  oppose
division  of  lands,  415  ;  rights
of  disputed,  417  ;|1  admitted,
418;  anger  of,  418-19  ;  advan-
tages gained  by,  431  ;  industry
of,  437  ;  discontented  in  La
Vendee,  454  ;  energy  of  (1792),

574
Pecqueur, collectivism of, 11-12,

363

P61arin  Library,  fragment  found  of,
409

Peltier,  lies  of,  304

People,  first  J  conflict  with  rich,
48;  feared,  55  j  in  revolt,  56,
61,  63-64;  take  arms,  68;
slaughtered,  85  •  character  of,
89  ;  change  in,  179  ;  vigilance
of,  196  ;  needs  of,  218  ;  intelli-
gence of,  256  5  despair  of,
287  5  victory  of,  287-88  j
belied,  293  ;  power  of,  312,
357  j  devotion  of,  3135  offer
hostages  to  Convention,  404  ;
sovereignty  of,  472  j  social  will
of,  534

I.'  Pere  Duchesne,"  edited  by  Chau-
mette,  322

"  Pares  de  1'Oratoir*,"  460

Permanent  Committee,  76,  81,  84,
182,  190-91


Personal  servitude  suppressed,  20
Rights  over  peasants,  37

Petion  (Mayor  of  Paris),  member
of  Breton  Club,  61  ;  proposes
loan,  63  ;  tries  to  save  Princess
de  Lamballe,  299 ;  during
September  massacres,  305  ;
Imprisoned,  314  ;  resigns,  322  ;
accused,  338  ;  "  Letter  to
Parisians  "  by,  378  ;  stirs  up
revolt,  446  j  on  Council  of
Commune,  470

"  Petitions  of  Eight  Thousand  and
Twenty  Thousand,"  309

Pflieger,  letters  of,  527

Phelippeaux,  a  Dantonist,  535  ;
attacks  Hebertist  generals,  5  36 ;
arrested,  547

Philosophers,  influence  of,  I,  2

Philosophy,  scientific,  9

Picard,  Abbe,  escape  of,  297

Pichegrue,  attacks  invaders,  469

Piedmontese,  enter  France,  460

Pikemen,  save  prisoners,  302

Pikes,  forging  of,  73,  77

Pillaging,  rareness  of,  75

Pitt,  policy  of,  48  •  money  of,
252 ;  overthrow  hoped  for,
467 ;  against "  impious  nation,"
556

''Plain"  or  "Marsh,"  right  wing
of  Convention,  315

"  Pleas,"  203

"  Plenary  Court,"  25

Polignac,  Duchess  de,  effigy  burned
29  ; people's  opinion  of,  61
letter  of,  65  j hatred  for,  70
intrigues  of,  86,  88  ; insulted,
90  ;  exiled,  91

Politics,  study  of,  6

Poor,  relief  of,  185,  193-94  j  neg-
lected by  Convention,  505

Pope,  aids  counter-revolution,  384

Popular  Societies,  252.  257,  365,
400,  448,  480

Pougatchofl,  leads  Russian  peas-
ants (1773).  2

Power,  demoralisation  of,  478

Precy,  commandant  at  Lyons,
460

Press,  attitude  of,  towards  Septem-
ber massacres,  305

Priests,  intrigues  of,  238  j deer
against,  239,  280 ;  join  counter-


6o4


INDEX


Priests — continued

revolution,  250  ;  protected  by
"  patriots,"  252  ;  massacre  of,
297  ;  incite  Vendean  rising,
336 ;  enemies  of  Jacobins,
405  ;  refuse  oath  to  Constitu-
tion, 520  ;  lay  down  preroga-
tives, 522-23

Primogeniture,  abolished,  434-35

Princes,  intrigues  of,  58

Prisons,  conspiracies  in,  56,  298  ;
vide  Massacres,  September

Privat  (curt)  resigns,  523

Profiteurs,  543

Proletarians,  part  played  by,  391,
484

Property,  protection  of,  74  ;  sacred-
ness  of,  122  et  seq.,  143,  198,
342,  343,  368  ;  rights  of,  136  ;
substituted  for  Fraternity  by
Girondins,  343  ;  movement
against,  373  ;  guaranteed,  401  ;
superfluous,  405  ;  defended,
500  ;  of  "  patriots  "  respected,

544

Proudhon,  quoted, 1 89  ; ideas  of,
373  ; his  Bank  of  People,  487  ;
teaching  of,  498
Proust,  Antonin,  explains  Vendean

revolt,  455
Provence,  large  towns  in,  abolish

flour  tax,  41

Count de, "  Monsieur," in-
trigues of, 161, 162 ; pro-
tests against Constitution,
238  ;  in  exile,  248
Provinces,  importance  of,  247
Provincial  histories,  importance  of,

40

Assemblies,  discussions  in,  33
Prndhomme, plain speaking of,
235  ; "  Revolutions  de  Paris,"
paper  of,  cited,  305
Prussia, King  of, advises  conces-
sions, 249

Public  force,  basis  of,  144
Puisage, Count J. de, counter-
signs false  as  si  gnats,  444


U  QUATRE  cris  d'un  patriote,"  485
Quinet,  Edgar,  quoted,  35
Quint,  203


RAMEL,  abused  by  Robespierre,  566

Rauchon,  priest,  resigns,  523

Reaction,  revival  of,  153  ;  ram-
pant, 158  et  seq.;  organised,
213  ;  in  Paris,  233,  235  '
progress  of,  255  ;  forces  or,
408

Reason,  Cult  of,  521-25

Rebecqui  (Girondin)  stirs  up  Mar-
seilles, 459  ;  drowns  himself,
460

Redemption,  39 ;  "  rachat  au
denier  30,"  119,  122  ;  difficulties
of,  199  ;  of  feudal  dues,  277-78

"  Red  Terror,"  311,  436

Referendum,  473

Reforms,  under  Turgot,  19

Regnal,  cited,  40

Relevoisons,  203

Reliefs,  203

Religion  democratised,  7

Religious  hatred,  249

Renault,  Cecile, strange  affair  of,

558-59

Rennes,  parlement  of,  26  ;  magis-
trates disqualified  at,  167

Renunciation,  legend  of,  134  et
seq.

Republic,  enemies  of,  170  ;  people's
service  to,  179  ;  France  im-
pelled towards,  310  ;  of  middle
classes,  343  ;  Breton  peasants
against,  419 ;  strengthened,

538

Republican  soldiers,  torture  of,  457
Republicans, massacre of, 386 ;

persecution  of,  571
Requint,  203

Reubies,  General,  Secretary  of  Lyons
Committee  of  Public  Welfare,
460

Reuss,  Rodolphe,  cited,  99
"  Reveillon  Affair,"  47  et  seq*
"  R6 volte,  La,"  cited,  40,  199
Revolution, definition of, 2, 3  ;
need  of  enthusiasm  in,  1 24  ;
meaning  of,  242  ; made  by
minorities,  363 ;  alternatives
offered  to,  369  ; makes  men
think, 524  ; evils  of, 563  ;
benefits  of,  573  et  seq.
Great  French,  history  of,  In-
complete, v. ;  heroes  of,  35
map  of ,  1 1 1  ;  great  dates  of


INDEX


605


Revolution,  Great  French— continued
1 1 8,  391  ; good  humour  of,
178  ; true  picture  of,  210-
ii  ; logical sequence of,
311; aims of, 323; not
supported  in  Belgium,  327  ;
chief  work  of,  392  ;  complete
on land question, 423 ;
economic results of, 431  ;
legacies  of, 436, 577  ; ex-
penses of,  440  ;  devotion  to,
448  ; social problem in,
488-89  ;  interests  roused  by,
501  ; work  of  people,  505  ;
middle  classes  enriched  by,
Sll>  537  ; source  of  modern
social ideas, 581  ; various
phases  of,  vide  Chapter  index
American,  influence  of,  21
English, contrasted, 3;  96 et
seq., 581  ; part played by
people  in,  4  ;  lesson  of,  6
popular  power  of,  145
Russian,  17
in  Savoy,  326

Revolutions  of  1848  and  1870,  336
"Revolutions  de  Paris,"  220,  242,

305

Revolutionists,  type  of  (1871),  534
Rigby,  Dr.,  letter  of,  74
Right  of  poor,  376

of  property,  limitation  of,  487
"  Right  to  Work,"  194,  343
"  Rights  of  Man,"  vide  Declaration  ;

veiled  in  black,  544
Riots,  hunger,  19  et  seq.  ;  at  Dijon,
Auxerre,  Amiens,  Lille,  Pon-
toise,  Passy,  St. -Germain,  23  ;
at  Poitiers,  Vizille,  Cevennes,
Vivarais,  Gevaudan,  24 ;  at
Lyons,  25  ;  in  Paris,  26,  27,
29  ;  spread  of,  41  et  seq.  ;
bloodless  character  of,  42  ;
influence  elections,  42 ;  at
Villejuif,  48
Rising,  of  May  31- June  2  (1793),

361  etseq.,  391,  399
Risings, in Besancon, Provence,
Languedoc,  B6arn,  Flanders,
Franche-Comte, Burgundy,
27 et seq.  ; in  country  dis-
tricts, 35 etseq.;  in Stras-
bourg, &c.,  103  et  seq.
Agrarian,  97


Risings — continued

character  of ,  1 1 1  et  seq* ;  spread

of,  116

Peasant,  109  et  seq,
popular  influence  of,  94-96
of  Royalists,  unsuccessful,  253  ;

in La Vend6e, 384 ; in

Provence  and  Lyons,  effects

of,  458
Urban,  95
Robert, quoted, 242  ; persecuted,

234

Robespierre,  silence  of,  35  ;  member
of  Breton  Club,  61  ;  protests
against  martial  law,  161  ;  in-
sight of,  240,  307  ;  opposes
Agrarian  law  and  Republic,
243  ;  fears  people,  244 ;  in-
activity of,  273  ;  denounces
Carra,  307  ;  Vice-president  of
Convention,  309 ;  supported
by  "  Marsh  "  or  "  Plain,"  311  ;
"golden  mean  of  the  Moun-
tain," 317;  against  war,  323  ;
opinion  on  regicide,  334  ;  rival
of  Brissot,  344 ;  satirises  Giron-
dins,  344 ;  moderation  of,
345  ;  speech,  on  April  10,  360  ;
development  of,  362  ;  belief
in  "  foreign  money,"  375  ;
attacks  "  Gironde,"  376 ;  policy
of,  392  ;  declares  for  insurrec-
tion, 398  ;  opposes  "  Terror,"
400  ;  demands  suppression  of
"  Twelve "  and  trial  of
"  Twenty-Two,"  403  ;  advo-
cates restoration  of  communal
lands,  417  ;  socialistic  speech
of,  474  ;  reads  Declaration  of
Rights,  500 ;  attacks  Roux
and  Varlet,  503  ;  "  La  Fra-
ternite's "  observations  on,
507  ;  daring  of,  511;  opposes
prosecution  of  obscure  Giron-
dins,  514  ;  represents  Jacobins,
514  ;  religious  speech  of,  525  ;
opposes  Cult  of  Reason,  525-
26  ;  accuses  sections  of  foreign
intrigues,  529 ;  on  public
welfare,  529  ;  foresees  end  of
Republic,  533  ;  group  of,  535  ;
reports  on  Revolutionary
Government,  538  ;  popularity
of.  539 ;  a  freemason,  540 ;


6o6


INDEX


Robespierre — continued

attacks  commissioners,  542 ;
position  and  power  of,  550  et
seq*  j  incorruptibility  of,  551  ;
bourgeoisie's  respect  for,  552  ;
letter  from  his  brother,  553  ;
drafts  accusation  of  F.  d' Eg-
lantine, 547,  552  j  suspicions
of.  553  J  aotes  on  "  Terrorism"
of,  554  J  enemies  of,  562  ;
cabal  against,  565  et  seq*  ;
attacks  "  Left,"  566 ;  arrest  of,
567  ;  stupor  of,  568  ;  identifi-
cation and  execution  of,  569
Rochambeau,  Count  de,  refuses

arms  to  middle  classes,  103
Roche-Jacquelein, La, Vendcan

leader,  456

Mme.  de,  letter  quoted,  456
Rochefoucauld,  supports  Court,  245
Roland,  silence  of,  35  ;  politics  of,
197  ;  Minister  for  Interior,
240  ;  dismissed,  244  ;  house
of,  searched,  295,  307 ;
address  of,  296 ;  justifies
massacres,  304,  321  ;  again
Minister,  318  j  resigns  after
execution  of  King,  319 ;
influence  of,  319  ;  examines
King's  secret  papers,  332  ;
leader  of  "  Gironde,"  341  ;
absurd  plan  of,  349  ;  arrest
of,  ordered,  403  j  suicide  of,

517

Mme.,  influence  of,  240  ; guil-
lotined, 517
Rome  helps  revolt  in  La  Vendee,

455

Romme,  execution  of,  570

Ronsin, organises "  revolutionary
army,"  512  ;  arrested,  545

Rosiere, Thuriot de la, District
delegate,  82,  83,  84

Rouen,  insurrection  at,  24
(priest)  resigns,  523

Rouerie,  Marquis  de,  plots  in  Brit-

i tany, 320, 326 ; heads con-
spiracy, 446

Rousseau,  J.  J.,  influence  of,  6,  12  ;
cited.  191  ;  socialism  of,  484

Roux,  Jacques,  ex-priest  and
popular  leader,  372  ;  in-
spires people,  385  ;  advises
forced  loan,  41 1 ;  communism


Roux,  Jacques — continued

of,  489  ; insight  of,  498-99  ;
denounces stock  -  jobbing,
502-3  ;  struck  off  Cordeliers'
list, 503 1 false charge
against, 504 ; trial and
suicide  of,  504-5
Xavier,  quoted,  114
"  Royal  dictature,"  209
Royal family, negotiations con-
cerning, 331
Session,  55,  59

Royalists,  plot  of,  290  ;  letters  to
agents,  444  ;  where  successful,
453  ;  rejoicings  of,  547  ;  fury

of,  559

Royalty,  as  shield  of  property,  66  j
tools  of,  175  ;  downfall  of,
229-30,  285  i  abolished  de
facto,  276

Russia,  peasants  in,  17.  18  •  com-
parison with,  165,  212,  213,
214,  356,  436,  475,  574  ;  joint
responsibility  in,  279  ;  abso-
lutism dying  in,  579  ;  future  of,
581

SAGESSE,  Sceurs  de  la,  Royalist
emissaries,  336

Sagnac,  M.,  quoted,  134,  199,  204,
205,206,207,426,435

Saint- Amaranthe,  guillotined,  559

Saint- Andr6,  Jeanbon,  letters  of,
447  ;  warning  of,  482  ;  demands
bread  and  "  Terror,"  483  ;
makes  terms  with  communists,
$00 ;  socialism  of,  506-7  ;
opposes  sections,  529-30

"  Saint  Bartholomew  of  property,"
119,  126,  198

Saint- Etienne,  Rabaud  de,  46 ;  com-
munism of,  485  ;  executed,

517

Saint-Georges,  Commandant,  house
of,  burned,  107

Saint-Huruge,  Marquis  of,  pro-
poses march  on  Versailles,  152

Saint- Just,  theory  of,  about  King,
334  ;  proves  King's  treachery,
338  ;  opposes  petition  against
stock  -  jobbing,  374  ;  with
army,  439  ;  pleads  for  "  desti-
tute patriots,"  505  ;  demands
Revolutionary  Government ,


INDEX


607


Saint-Just— continued

514;  a  Robespierrist,  535-
adopts  Terrorism,  543-44 ;
mouthpiece  of  Robespierre,
552  ;  shouted  down,  567  ;
arrested  and  executed,  569

Saint-Lazare,  monastery  attacked,

73,  75

Saint-Malo,  attempt  to  surrender,
to  English,  447

Saint-M6ard,  J.  de,  cited,  299  j
quoted,  303

Saint-Simon,  followers  of,  488

Salle,  Marquis  de  la,  commands
National  Guard,  76

Salmour,  Count  de,  quoted,  74,  80

Salpetriere  (prison),  massacre  at,3O3

Samichon,  E.,  quoted,  20

Sans-culottes,  volunteer  for  war,
280 ;  outnumbered  in  sec-
tions, 371  ;  "  happiness  and
comfort  "  for,  405  ;  patriotism
of,  463-64 ;  enfranchisement
of  Europe  by,  578

Santerre,  ordered  to  stop  massacres,
300  ;  at  war,  305

Sardinia,  invades  France,  253,  383

Sartino  (Knight  of  Poignardj,  guillo-
tined, 560

Sauce,  grocer,  King  in  shop  of,  228-
29

Schwendt,  supportsjRevolution,  105

"  Scientific  socialism,"  363

Sechelles  (of  Herault),  municipal
integrity  of,  475-76

Second  Empire,  comparison  with,

215

Secret  police,  revival  of,  531
Sections (of Paris], 180 et seq.  ;
creation  of,  188  ;  under  new  law,
189  et  seq.  ;  General  Assembly
of,  position  of,  190;  centres  of
Revolution,  193  ;  new  function
of, 312-13  ; federation of,
312 demand dethronement,
314 attacked by Gironde
322 prepare  rising,  399-400
pledged to defend property
401  ; conquer rights, 472
overrun  with  Royalists, 510
attacked  by  Convention,  513
suppression of, 528 et seq.
perform police duties, 530 ,
divisions  among,  568


Seigniorial  exactions,  18

justice  in  cities,  38
Seligman,  E.,  cited,  20
Sens, Archbishop  of  Minister, 28

(vide  BrienneJ
September Days, horror of, 384

(vide  Massacres]
Serfdom, abolished on King's

estates, 36 ; essence  of, 129

et  seq.  ; general  abolition  of,

577-79
Sergent,  signs  appeal  to  Commune,

301
Servan, War Minister, 240, 244,

305.  3i8

Sheridan,  R.  B.,  denounces  forging
of  assi gnats,  444

Si  eyes,  silence  of,  35  ;  famous
pamphlet  of  (Qu'est-ce  que  le
tiers-etat  ?],  43,  46 ;  motion
of,  53  ;  member  of  Breton
Club,  6 1  ;  proposals  of,  143,
163  ;  defends  free  trade,  373  ;
on  special  committee,  470 ;
defends  equality,  484  ;  adopts
new  cult,  523

Simmoneau  (Mayor  of  Etampes]
killed,  242

Simon  (cobbler),  Dauphin  put  in
charge  of,  516

Simond,  quoted,  528,  529

*'  Sixteen Commissioners," 192,

193

Smith,  Adam,  influence  of,  8

Social  demands,  370  et  seq.

distinctions, danger of, 143  ;
abolished,  144

"  Socialisation  of  Exchange  and
Produce,"  497

"Socialism,"  origin  of,  11-12,  13,
459  ;  modern,  580

Societies,  Fraternal,  222,  365
Popular,  222,  448,  528

Society  of  the  Indigent,  252

Soete,  203

Soldiers,  distrusted,  81  ;  as  citizens,
223  ;  meeting  of,  224  ;  frater-
nise with  peasants,  229

Sombreuil,  commands  Invalides,
80  ;  saved,  301  ;  legend  about
daughter,  302  ;  guillotined,

559

Somnier,  cited,  40  ;  quoted,  114
Soubrancy,  executed,  570


6o8


INDEX


Souhait,  Julian,  demands  mainten-
ance of  communal  property,
422  ;  opposes  portioning  land,

494

Soul,  Albert,  cited,  382
Spaniards,  attack  South,  253  ;  8000

in Toulon, 460 ; 23,000 in

France,  465
Speculations,  in Church  property,

255; in  land, 279,  404; in

wheat,  329  ;  in  necessities,  372  ;

in  assignats,  373
Speculators,  protected,  63
Spires,  taken  by  Republican  army,

326

Stamp  duty,  25
State,  sphere  of  action  of,  196
States,  modern,  structure  of,  5  et

seq.  ;  centralisation  of,  7
States-General,  29,  30,  33-34,  39,

43,  48  ;  Third  Estate  in, 39 ;

of  Brittany,  42 ;  rely  on  Paris,

49  ;  opening  of,  50  et  seq.
"  Statesmen,"  311,  338,  570
Statute  labour  abolished,  19,  37
Stedinck,  Baron  de,  letter  to,  466
Stock  Exchange  closed,  438
Stock-jobbers,  pernicious  influence
> of,  584
Stock- jobbing, essence of, 372 ;

effect of, 374 ; prohibited,

439,  487

Stourm,  Rene,  cited,  410-11
Strasbourg, cahier of, 99 ; rising

in, 103  et  seq.  ; in  danger  of

invasion,  469

Strobel,  cited,  40  ;  quoted,  113
Students  fraternise  with  people,  27
Suchet,  severity  of,  566
Suffrage  restricted,  234
"  Surplus  value,"  Lange's  explana-
tion of,  496
Swiss,  soldiers, refuse  to  fire,  27  ;

regiment  defends  Bastille,  82  ;

Guards  faithful  to  King,  274;

treachery  of,  to  people,  276  ;

in  Paris,  290  ;  massacre  of,  298


Taille  (entail),  59;  (personal  tax),  41 5
Taine,  complacency  of,  23  ; super-
ficiality of, 39  ; quoted, 41  ;
exaggeration  of, 74;  "  shocked,"
102  ;  disparagement  of,  177


Talleyrand  (Bishop  of  Autunj,
proposition  of,  169  ;  supports
Court,  245

Tallien,  report  to  Assembly,  300  ;
report  of,  300,  302  ; attacked
by  Robespierre,  567
"  Tarpeian  Rock,"  346,  347,  359  ;

for  Girondins,  372
Tasque,  203

Tax,  on  bread  and  meat,  36
Taxation,  progressive,  396,  485
Taxes,  limitation  of,  37  (note),  53
Taxpayers,  joint  liability  of,  20
Taylor,  sees  false  assignats  made,  444
Tennis  Court,  oath  in,  54  et  seq.
Terr  age,  203

Terriers  (land  registers),  199
"  Territorial  subvention,"  25
"  Terror,"  use  made  of,  117  ; need
of, 253-54 ; counter-revolu-
tionary, 306  ; welcomed,  483  ;
begun,  517,  555  et  seq.  ; Law
of  (22nd  Prairial)  557  ; main-
tenance of,  564

Terrorism,  used  politically,  535
Theatres,  political  plays  in,  510
Theot,  Catherine,  mad  mystic,  562
Thermidor, reaction of  9th, 430 ;

reaction  triumphs,  562
Thibaudeau,  quoted,  367
Thiers,  famine  at,  40
Thiers,  M.,  quoted,  444
Third  Estate,  opportunity  of,  7-8  ;
composition of, 34  ; issues
cahier s,  35  ;  and  middle  classes,
38  ; and poorer classes, 39  ;
determination  of,  44  ; position
of, 52, 115  ; demand union,
53  ; Constitution, 54  et  seq.  ;
resistance  of,  54  et  seq.  ; King
opposed  to, 59  ; sagacity  of,
214  ;  reaction  of,  243
Third  Republic,  progress  to,  576
Thouret,  silence  of,  35  ;  guillotined,

559

Three  Estates,  union  of,  43,  62  ;
separation  of,  54

Thuriot,  supports  forced  loan,  41 1

Tinteniac,  Chevalier  de,  counter-
signs false  assignats,  444

Tithes  "  solites  and  insolites,"
37  ( note)  ;  destruction  of
deeds,  114;  abolition  of,  119
et  seq.  ;  iniquity  of,  132


Tocqueville,  veracity  of,  18
Toll-gates, removed, 19  ; burned,

7i

Tolls,  suppressed,  203
Torture,  abolished,  20
Toulon,  surrendered  to  English,  447 ;

surrender  of,  453,  460  ;  retaken

from  English,  468,  538
Tour  de  la  Glaciere,  tragedy  of,  321
Touzel,  Mme.,  saved  by  Commune,

299  ;  cited,  306
Town  Council  of  Paris,  76
Treizains,  203  |

Triage,  414,  421
Tribunal,  Revolutionary,  301,  372  ;

demanded, 385  ; rapidity  of,

538  ;  abolished,  570
Tridon,  cited,  534

Triumvirate, of Duport, Lameth
and  Barnave,  162

of  Danton,  Marat,  and  Robes-
pierre, 319,  321, 322  ; at-
tacked by Gironde, 320  ;
effect of attacks, 320 ;
threatened  by  Girondins,  359
Tronchet,  defends  King,  337
Troops,  refuse  to  fire,  56
Tuileries,  invasion  of,  210  ; taking

of,  278  ;  numbers  slain  in,  282
Turckheim,  resigns,  106
Turgot,  creator  of  political  economy,

8  ; as economist, 19, 23  ;

representative government,

20 ; foresight  of,  21  ; explains

riots, 25  ; reforms rejected,

31  ; reforms of, 38  ; as

Minister, 52 ; on equality,

484
Turkey,  representative  Government

in,  579

"  UNITED defenders " appeal to

Convention,  373
United  States,  recognised  by  France,

22


VADIER,  attacked by Right, 565,

567

Valaze,  suicide  of,  517
Vallet,  Gabrielle, recognises  King,

228  •-•.&£

Valmy,  battle  of,  325  "*•

Varenne,  Maton  de  la,  cited,  303,  306


INDEX  609

Varennes,  flight  to,  226  et  seq.  ;
threatened,  335

Varlet,  arrest  of,  347  ;  leader  of
people,  372  ;  inspires  people,
385  ;  arrested,  397  ;  com-
munism of,  489  ;  pamphlet  of,
490 ;  insight  of,  498-99  ;
struck  off  Cordeliers,  503  ;
condemns  payment  of  mem-
bers, 513

Vaucluse,  Royalist  centre,  556

Vendean  leaders,  defeat  of,  456  ;
brutalities  of ,  457

Vendee,  against  Revolution,  176  ;
insurrection  in,  247  ;  rising  in,
328,  334,  383  ;  massacre  of
Republicans  in,  386  ;  reaction
in,  430  ;  rising  in,  453  et  seq.  ;
result  of  suppression  in,  458  ;
crushed  at  Savenay,  538

Venterolles,  203

Verdun,  siege  of,  296  ;  surrender
of,  324

Vergniaud,  35  ;  demands  suspen-
sion of  King,  276  ;  leader  in
"  Gironde,"  341  ;  tries  to
pacify  people,  402  ;  under
home- arrest,  445  ;  on  Conven-
tion Committee,  470

Vernon,  insurrection  crushed  at,
446

Versailles,  King  and  Ministers  in-
sulted at,  23  ;  plots  at,  43  ;
intrigues  in,  64 ;  f&te  at,  88
et  seq.  ;  march  on,  planned,
1 52  ;  march  on,  1 54  et  seq.

Veto,  opposition  to,  147  et  seq.  ;
suspensive,  148  ;  royal,  j88

Veyreton,  resigns,  253

Vic  and  Vaissete,  quoted,  28  ;  cited,
40

Vidal,  as  authoritarian,  194  ;  col-
lectivism of,  363  ;  communism
of,  488

Vieux Cordelier, 536-38  ; exults,

547

Village  Communes,  suppressed,  165
Village,  economic  life  of,  423
Vincennes, donjon transformed,

79
Vincent,  won  over,  516;  advocates

guillotine,  544  ; arrested,  545
Vivarais,  adheres  to  royalty,  253
"  Vive  la  Liberte,"  cry  of,  41


6io


INDEX


Voltaire,  6  ;  idea,  486

Volunteers  (sans-eulottesi,  280 ;
equipment  of,  291,  320  ;  enthu-
siasm of,  323 ;  two  battalions  of,
sacrificed,  326  ;  for  La  Vend6e,
364  ;  evil  treatment  of,  379  ;
civic  feast  for,  383  ;  ragged
but  victorious,  463-64;  lands
not  reserved  for,  502

Vote,  capitative,  granted,  54

Voulland  attacked,  565


WAR,  reason  for,  24 ;  fatal  to
Revolution,  241;  opposition  to
and  unreadiness  for,  323  ;  ter-
rible effects  of,  328  ;  prepara-
tions for,  379  ;  onus  of,  laid  on
Republic,  382  ;  requirements
of,  408  ;  difficulties  of  the,
462  et  seq.  ;  end  of,  564

Watch  Committee,  circular  of,  303  ;
attacked  by  Gironde,  320 ;
justifies  expenditure,  321

Wattignies,  victory  of,  468  ;  first
victory  of  Republic,  515


Weber, the Austrian, acquitted,

302  ;  cited,  306
Weishaupt,  founder  of  Illuminates,

540
Westermann,  escorts  Prussians  on

retreat,  325
Wheat,  prices  of,  104
"White  Terror"  (1794),  272,  276;

under  Bourbons  (1814), 306;

partisans  of,  311,  336,  436,  569'
Wimpffen,  General,  Commander  in

Normandy,  446-47
Wissemburg,  abandoned,  469  ; re-
taken, 538
Women,  in  revolution,  27  ;  club  of,

suppressed,  504
Workers,  under  arms,  payment  of,

403


YORK,  Duke  of,  candidate  for
throne,  308;  besieges  Dun-
kirk, 467  ;  abandons  siege,  468

Young,  Arthur,  "Travels  in
France,"  quoted,  u,  43,  53,
[:*'  56,  68,  70;  116  ;  cited,  102


