Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


v


k^ c) 1 1 r


/ His ^


/rARJ.E_H


KRILOF AND HIS FABLES


KRILOF AND HIS
FABLES


By W. R. S. RALSTON, M.A.


STK.AHAN AND CO. PUBLISHERS

56 LUDGATE HILL, LONDON


Ttxi pyccKMX^, KOTopbiMi nonaACTCfl stotl nepcBO^'b
YBa»(aeMaro 6acHonHciia, nepeBO^HHKi noKopHtume npo-
cHTb npiiHflTb FL coo6paH(eHie, hto H^jiocTpHpoBaHie KnerH
HHCKOJbKO on nero He 3aBHc&io.


PREFACE.


THE poems of which a literal prose translation is now
offered to the English reader enjoy a popularity in
their native land which they can scarcely expect to obtain in
a foreign country. At home they live on the lips and in the
memories of old and young, of rich and poor, and have be-
come a sort of national heirloom ; abroad they run the risk
of being regarded as little more than quaint curiosities.
Much of their special excellence depends upon the choice
felicity of their language and the artistic structure of their
verse ; it is, therefore, scarcely possible for any one torfcrm
a fair idea of their original merits who makes their acquaint-
ance only after they have been interpreted into alien prose.
But, even in a foreign dress, I think that they cannot fail to
interest and to please such readers as will make fair allow-
ance for the disadvantages under ^hich they labour. Their
brilliance has naturally been dimmed, and their music has


viii PREFACE,


been altogether stilled; but their shrewd insight into the
thoughts and motives of the human heart, their ingenious
interpretation of the inarticulate sentiments which prevail in
the world of brutes, and their faculty of relating a story
clearly and concisely, all these remain ; and all these can be
appreciated by the foreign reader. The pictures of Russian
life, also, which their words offer are perfectly intelligible to
all who take the trouble to study them, and will convey to
a stranger's mind a far more correct idea of Russian manners
and customs than he can gain from the cleverest illustrations
which fancy can suggest to an artist whose knowledge of the
subject is imperfect. In the stories, for instance, of " The Tv/o
Peasants," '*The Peasant in Trouble," " The Three Moujiks,"
" The Peasant and the Labourer," and several others of
the same class, a store of information will be found respect-
ing the sayings and doings of the common people of Russia,
those many millions of fellow-Europeans of whom we know
much less than we do of the Chinese or the American Indians.
Still more interesting should be the protests which some of
them offer against the oppression and corruption which so
long prevailed in Russia ; against the manner in which the
strong trod down the weak, and the rich ground the faces of
the poor. It is pleasant to mark the generous sympathy
with wronged weakness, the hardy indignation against guilty
strength, which prompted Krilof to pen such apologues as
those of " The Peasants and the River," ** The Bear among
the Bees," and " The Dancing Fish." Such stories as these
can never be entirely divested of their attraction, even when


PREFACE, ix


they have been stripped of their ornaments and clothed in
an unaccustomed and prosaic garb.

Most of the translators of these fables have tried to turn
them into verse.* I have not ventured to attempt a similar
task, but have confined my efforts to the production of what
I hope is a faithful prose rendering of Krilof 's poetry. The
version may be disfigured by the ungainliness of a photo-
graphic portrait, but it aims at possessing something of a
photograph's fidelity. The only liberty I have allowed my-
self with the fables I have selected for translation has been
sometimes to omit the " moral " when it did not seem indis-
pensable. Krilof is never tedious as a moralist, but all
" morals " and " applications," and such-hke tags and com-
mentaries, are apt to become tiresome. I should not be
surprised if the notes which I have myself added bore witness
to the truth of this assertion.

I have translated about half of the entire collection of
Krilof 's fables. Of those I have omitted, a considerable part
is composed of the imitations with which Krilof commenced
his career as a fabulist, and of which I have thought it suffi-
cient to give a couple of specimens. The rest are chiefly
pieces which seem less original and characteristic than those
I have selected, or which appear comparatively pointless
now, though they had a special interest at the time they were
written, and for the readers for whom they were intended.


• One of the exceptions is Mr. Sutherland Edwards, who has given prose renderings
of most of the &bles he has inserted in his excellent article on Krilof. It is to be found
in his " Russians kt Home" — by far the best English book about Russia.


PREFACE,


It should be borne in mind that Krilof's fables were
seldom mere literary bubbles, blown to create an instant*s
amusement or admiration, but not intended to serve any
useful end, or to suggest any serious idea. Each of them,
as a general rule, conveyed either a valuable warning or a
wholesome reprimand.

Before bringing this preface to a close-, I wish to acknow-
ledge my obligations to the several writers from whom I have
borrowed. For some reason which I cannot clearly explain,
English translators from the Russian have shown a singular
unwillingness to refer to the predecessors who have made their
task comparatively easy. It has been a common practice to
make copious, if not exclusive, use df a French or German
translation of a Russian work, and then utterly to ignore
the obligation. This course of behaviour appears to me
injudicious, being apt to expose those who follow it to un-
pleasant comments. I .think that, in translating from so
unfamiliar a language as the Russian, one should by all
means make use of such assistance as preceding translators,
have to offer; but let that assistance be frankly acknowledged.

In my own case, although my translations have been
made from the original Russian, yet I have to express my
thanks to M. Charles Parfait* for his spirited translation of
the fables into French verse, and to M. Ferdinand Torneyt


• " Fables de Krilof, traduites en vers franfiais par Charles Parfait." Paris (H. Plon),

1867. 8vo.

t ** Iwan Krylow's Fabeln. Aus dem Russischen von Ferdinand Tomey." Mitau

und Leipzig, 1842. Svo.


PREFACE. xi


and an anonymous German lady* for their versions into
German verse — versions which are singularly faithful, con-
sidering the difficulties with which they have had to contend.
For the sketch of Krilof 's life I am almost entirely indebted
to the memoirs written (in Russian) by M. Pletnef, by M.
Lobanof, and by M. Grot, of the Academy of Sciences of St.
Petersburg.

I gladly seize this opportunity of expressing my thanks
to M. Grot for many kindnesses, and, among others, for his
gift of the excellent and thoroughly exhaustive critique by
M. Kenevich,t from which I have drawn most of the notes
which I have inserted (between brackets) at the end of some
of the fables.

Lastly, I have to thank another Russian friend, M. Alex-
ander Onegine, for the trouble he has taken in revising my
translation, thereby securing me against that dread of pos-
sible blunders innocently committed, which so often hangs
like a dreary shadow about a translator's seldom over-
enviable path.

W. R. S. R.

Inner Temple^
Dec, 14, 1868.


* " Fabeln von Krylow, treii ubersetzt aus dem Russischen ins Deutsche, von einer

Deutschen." St. Petersburg, 1863. 8vo.

t ' ' Bibliograficheskiya i istoricheskiya primyechania k basnyam Kruilova. Sostavil

v. Kenevich." Sanktpeterburg, 1868. 4to,


CONTENTS.


Page

THE TWO PEASANTS I

THE EDUCATION OF THE LION 3

THE BROOK 7

THE MILLER 9

THE GRANDEE 12

THE WOLF IN THE KENNEL 14

THE THREE MOUJIKS . . . . . . . 17

THE DIVISION 19

THE CROW AND THE HEN 21

THE PEBBLE AND THE DIAMOND . . . . .23

THE MISER 24

THE PIKE AND THE CAT 2^

THE ASS AND THE NIGHTINGALE 30

THE HOP-PLANT 32

trishka's caftan 33

THE ELEPHANT AS GOVERNOR 35

THE POOR MAN ENRICHED 37

THE QUARTETTE 40

THE INQUISITIVE MAN 43

THE COOK AND THE CAT 45


XIV


CONTENTS.


THE MUSICIANS ....
THE PEASANT AND THE LABOURER
THE BEAR AMONG THE BEES
THE HORSE AND THE DOG
DEMIAN'S FISH SOUP.
THE WOLVES AND THE SHEEP
THE MAN AND HIS SHADOW
THE WOLF AND ITS CUB .
THE DANCING FISH .
THE PIKE ....
THE GEESE ....
THE LION AND THE PANTHER
THE COMB ....
THE AUTHOR AND THE ROBBER
THE HIND AND THE DERVISH
CANINE FRIENDSHIP .
THE CUCKOO AND THE COCK
THE PEASANTS AND THE RIVER
THE BAG ....
FORTUNE AND THE BEGGAR
THE CUCKOO AND THE EAGLE
THE ASS ....
THE LANDLORD AND THE MICE
THE PEASANT AND THE SHEEP
THE RAZORS ....

THE MONKEY AND THE MIRROR
THE ELEPHANT IN FAVOUR
THE WOLF AND THE MOUSE
THE PEASANT IN TROUBLE
THE SWORD-BLADE .


Page

A7

49

51

54

55

57

59
61

63
66

67
69

71

73
76

77
80

81

83
8

88
89
91
93
95
97
98

99

lOI

103


CONTENTS. XV


Page

THE RAIN-CLOUD I05

THE WHISK 106

THE EAGLE AND THE SPIDER I07

THE MERCHANT . 109

THE PIG Ill

THE FOX IN THE ICE II3

MIRON . 115

THE WOLF AND THE FOX II7

THE OWL AND THE ASS . ' II9

THE MONKEY AND THE SPECTACLES . . . .121

THE ELEPHANT AND THE PUG-DOG 1 23

THE INDUSTRIOUS BEAR 1 24

THE FOX AS ARCHITECT 1 25

FORTUNE'S VISIT 1 27

THE LION, THE CHAMOIS, AND THE FOX . . . I29

THE ORACLE 13I

THE ASS AND THE PEASANT 1 33

THE SHEEP AND THE DOGS 1 34

THE STRING OF CARTS 1 35

THE DIVERS 137

THE TRIGAMIST 139

THE CUCKOO AND THE TURTLE-DOVE . . . . 141

THE LEAVES AND THE ROOTS 1 43

THE WOLF AND THE CUCKOO 1 45

THE IMPIOUS 147

THE FOX AND THE MARMOT 1 49

THE PEASANT AND THE ROBBER I51

THE ANT 153

THE SLANDERER AND THE SNAKE 1 55

THE TWO DOGS . 1 57


xvi CONTENTS,


Page

THE STONE AND THE WORM . . . . . • 1 59

THE KITE l6o

THE SQUIRREL IN SERVICE l6l

THE PEASANT AND THE AXE 1 63

THE SQUIRREL AND THE THRUSH 1 64

THE ASS 'and JUPITER 1 65

THE CAT AND THE NIGHTINGALE . . • . . . 167

THE PEASANT AND THE HORSE 1 69

THE GNAT AND THE SHEPHERD 170

THE WOLF AND THE CAT 171

THE CANNON AND THE SAILS 1 73

THE EAGLE AND THE BEE 1 75

THE LION 177


«^-^


MEMOIR.


-o-


l X) ATHER more than a hundred years ago,* a boy was
/ JLV bom at Moscow, on whom Fortune seemed at first
by no means disposed to smile, but who was destined to
enjoy in after-life a singular amount of honour and success.
His father, a captain in the infantry of the line, found his
income scarcely sufficient for the support of even a small
family, and had no reason for hoping that the future would
bring him better times.

Soon after the birth of the little Ivan Andreevich, the
captain's family followed his regiment into the east of Russia ;
and, after a time, found themselves at Orenburg, in the midst
of the troubles caused by the insurrection of Pugachef, the
insurgent leader, who produced so great a disturbance by giv-
ing himself out to be the Emperor Peter III. That unfortunate
monarch had in reality been assassinated several years before ;
but a story had got abroad that he had managed to escape
from death, and was living somewhere in concealment ; so


• On February — , 1768, according to general report ; but some writers think he was

bom a few years earlier.


xviii MEMOIR.


the minds of many men were prepared to accept Pugachef *s
daring statement. Accordingly, the impostor soon raised a
numerous army, and for some time set the imperial troops
at defiance.

During the period of his success, he attacked the fortress
in which the elder Krilof was stationed, and was so enraged
at the obstinacy with which it was defended, that he declared
he would hang that officer and all the members of his family.
They all ultimately contrived to escape ; but tradition states
that they were often in great danger, and that on one occasion,
when they were halting in a village post-house, the little Ivan
was hidden out of harm's way in a large piece of earthen-
ware which stood in the cottage.

From Orenburg, they went to Tver ; and there the captain,
finding that his expenses were becoming greater than his
income, retired from the army, and obtained a post in the
civil service. A few years later, he died, leaving very little
to his son, now a lad of fourteen, beyond a large box of
books, which had followed him in all his wanderings.

After a time, the boy obtained employment in the public
service, but of so unremunerative a nature that his mother
determined to go with him to St. Petersburg, in hopes of
obtaining a pension there as an officer's widow. All that
she did obtain was a post for her son, with the salary of two
roubles (about six shilHngs) a month.* He remained in


* Money went further then, of course, than it will now. For instance, the wages
paid to the servant kept by Madame Krilof were two roubles a year only. Still the
little household must have been often reduced to great straits.


MEMOIR, XIX


the public service till the year 1788, when he -lost his
mother.

She has been described as " a simple-minded woman, who
had received scarcely any education," but one of great worth
and of considerable strength of character. She had done
her best to obtain a good education for her boy, reading
Russian with him herself, and making him, when he was^
studying French, read all his translations aloud to her —
although she did not understand a word of the language
from which they were rendered. By means of little presents
and rewards, she induced him to study hard, and he soon
took very kindly to books. The old volumes which had
formed his father's travelling library he read over and over
again with delight, and, from the perusal of the histories
which were among them, his mind became full of ideas about
classic Greece and ancient Russia. Vague ideas concerning
the stage next began to float through his head, and, after
a time, they shaped themselves into a drama, called the
" Cofeinitsa,"* which he wrote (if the date of his birth may
be trusted) before he was sixteen years old. This he offered to
a bookseller, who gave him sixty paper roubles for it (about
as many francs), or rather, at Krilofs express desire, books
to that amount. The works he chose were those of Racine,
Boileau, and Moliere, preferring them to those of Voltaire
and Cr^illon. Ydars afterwards, when he had become
famous, the bookseller gave him back the MS., which he


• A " Cofeinitsa" is a fortune-teller who looks for auguries in coffee-grounds.

b—i


XX MEMOIR,


had never published, and the poet re-read it with a pleasure
not altogether free from regret.

The lad next turned his attention to tragedy, and produced
a piece called " Cleopatra," which he showed to his friend, the
celebrated actor, Dmitrievsky. The actor went carefully
over it with him, and pointed out so many faults that Krilof
gave it up in despair, and began another, under the title of
" Philomela." This also, which was finished in 1 786, and was
printed nine years later in the collection of Russian dramas
published by the Academy of Sciences, failed to meet with
the actor's approval. So the young author gave up the
drama for a time.

After the death of his mother, which took place when he
was twenty years old, Krilof found himself entirely alone in
the world, and free to occupy himself as he pleased. So he
soon gave up his employment in the public service, and
determined to devote himself to literature.

In partnership with a retired officer of literary tastes, who
had a printing establishment of his own, he founded a journal,
or rather a monthly satirical magazine, called the " Spirit-
Post ;"* but, clefverly as it was written, it was not a commercial
success, and, after a year, it stopped. By this time, Krilof
had become the sole proprietor of the printing-press, which
occupied a room in the house which then stood where the
Oldenburg Palace stands now, close to the Summer Garden.
Then he began to print a new journal, called the " Spectator,"t


• Pochta Dukhof. f ZriteL


MEMOIR, xxi


which lasted eleven months. Those were bad days for jour-
nalists in Russia, and the circulation of the " Spectator " did
not exceed 170 copies.* As soon as it had run its brief
course, Krilof started a third journal, under the title of the
" St Petersburg Mercury;" but, after a year's existence, this
also came to a close, never having secured more than 150
subscribers. After its demise, Krilof discontinued his own
publications, but he continued to print for others.

By this time, he had become well known in the world of
letters, and, as he was also a good musician and an agreeable
companion, he was much sought after in society. Most of
his biographers relate that he led a jovial and careless life
until 1801, when the Empress Maria Fedorovna obtained a
post for him at Riga, under Prince Sergius Galitsin.t But
M. Grot, of the Academy of Sciences, points out that this is
a mistake. Krilof had, long before that time, become
intimate with the Prince, in whose house he lived for a
while at Moscow, and whom he accompanied first into
Lithuania, and then to his country house in the province of
Saratof, in South-east Russia. There he remained till the
year 1801.

This was an important period in his life, for it enabled him
to study the country well, and the ways of the country people.


* At that time, Karamzin's " Moscow Journal," the periodical which then had the
largest circulation, could boast of only 300 subscribers.

t There are many princes of this name in Russia ; so many, that tradition relates
how a nobleman who, one day, attempted to pass over a river in a ferry-boat without
payment, claiming exemption on the ground that he was a Prince Galitsin, was in-
dignantly addressed by the ferryman with the words, "Am not I a Prince Galitsin
too?" And so he really was.


xxii MEMOIR,


When at Tver, in his boyish days, he was always fond of
associating with the common folk, the "black people," as
they are called in Russia ; and he would spend whole hours
in wandering about the bazaars or the places where the
moujiks were amusing themselves, or in sitting on the banks
of the Volga, listening to the conversation of the washer-
women who congregated there, and gossiped over their work.
While at Prince Galitsin's he had again an opportunity of
mixing among the peasantry, and of making himself tho-
roughly acquainted with the joys and sorrows of village life.
There he could see for himself how hard was too often the
peasant's lot, how heavy was the pressure under which he had
to groan. It was there, in all probability, that he stored up
those impressions of the country to which he afterwards so
often gave form and colour in his fables. There, too, he was
able to study the curious scene presented by a rich noble's
country house; for Prince Galitsin lived in great state, keep-
ing up a band of forty musicians to play to him, and em-
ploying altogether as many as six hundred retainers in his
household. The Prince and all his family were very kind to
the young poet, who used to teach the children of the house,
and get up little musical and theatrical entertainments for the
amusement of his hosts. The only things he had to complain
of were the gnats and flies, which are certainly very trying in
Russia, and particularly in the neighbourhood of the Volga,
and which he used to try to avoid by mounting to the top of
the village belfry, where he was one day found, fast asleep
among the bells.


MEMOIR. xxiii


When the Emperor Alexander I. mounted the throne, in
1 80 1, he recalled Prince Galitsin from his retirement in the
country, and made him military governor of Livonia. Krilof
went with him as a secretary, but did not long act in that
capacity ; for it soon turned out that he had no great talent
for business, and, besides that, he began to devote himself to
gambling with what seemed likely to be a fatal passion. But
he stayed with the Prince, as a friend and companion, till
1804, when his patron gave up his appointment, and then he
returned to St. Petersburg. According to the usual accounts,
it was then that he went to the Prince's estates in the pro-
vince of Saratof ; but it seems more likely that he took to
leading a wandering life at that time, and continued it for
some years, going from one Russian city to another, as fancy
led him. He is said to have won a very large sum of money
at cards during his residence in Riga, so that he could well
afford to be idle and extravagant for a time.

What is certain is, that towards the end of the year 1805
lie spent some time in Moscow, and became intimate with
the literary celebrities of that capital. To one of these, the
celebrated poet and fabulist Dmitrief, Krilof one day showed
some fables which he had adapted from La Fontaine. Struck
by their spirit and animation, Dmitrief inserted them in the
" Moscow Spectator," where they obtained a decided success,
and strongly recommended their author to cultivate this style
of writing. Krilof 's fame may be said to date from that
epoch. He was nearly forty years old before he found out
in what his strength lay.


xxi\r MEMOIR,


In 1806 he returned to St Petersburg, and soon afterwards
obtained a Government appointment, which he held for some
years. In 1807 he produced two comedies, which obtained
considerable success on the stage. The one was called " The
Fashions-Shop,"* and the other " A Lesson for Daughters,"t
and both of them were levelled against that taste for every-
thing French, which was always so excessively distasteful to
Krilof With their appearance his dramatic career came to
a close, and thenceforward he was content to base his repu-
tation on his fables, of which the first collection, twenty-
three in number, was published in the year 1809; and the
second, containing twenty-one more, in 181 1. In 181 2 he
was appointed to a very congenial post in the Imperial Public
Library, which had just been reorganized and placed under the
direction of his intimate friend, Olenine. The officers to whom
the various departments were entrusted were all men of
learning and literary tastes, and the section of Russian Liter-
ature was confided to Sopikof, a very learned authority on
Slavonic bibliography. Krilof entered the Library as his
assistant, and, six years later, succeeded him in his post and
in his official quarters. That position he continued to hold
till the year 1841, when he definitively retired from the
public service. Long before that time his fables had made
him the most popular writer in Russia.

The years he spent in the Public Library, almost thirty in
number, glided peacefully away. He was a man of but few


■I


• Modnaya Lavka. f Urok Dochkam.


MEMOIR. XXV


wants, and such as he had he could easily satisfy. Besides
his salary, he had a pension of at first about sixty pounds a
year, and afterwards of twice that amount ; so he was suffi-
ciently well off. His position in the Hterary and scientific
world was a very pleasant one. His fame as a popular author
was continually increasing, his presence was gieatly prized
and sought after in society, and he was treated with almost
affectionate kindness by the imperial family. He might, if
he had liked, have revolved in the most distinguished circles ;
but his tastes werp very simple, and he had little sympathy
with gilded magnificence. His quarters in the Public Library
suited him admirably, and so did his post, in which he had
little to disturb him. The rooms which he had inherited from
his predecessor, Sopikof, were on the second floor of the
building, their windows looking out on the Gostinnoi-Dvor,
the principal bazaar of St. Petersburg — a huge collection of
shops, the arcades surrounding which are enlivened all day
by the presence of crowds of loungers or intending pur-
chasers. From his rooms Krilof could look down at his ease
on the busy scene below, and could listen contentedly to the
conversations which were constantly going on there between
the merchants and their customers, or among the peasants
and the droshky-drivers, who are accustomed to loiter in pic-
turesque groups about the street which divides the Library
from the bazaar. After his official labours were over for the
day, he used to go to the English Club, so called because it
was originally founded by an Englishman, and there he would
dine heartily, and then enjoy a doze. For some time after


xxvi MEMOIR.


his death, a certain stain, due to the pressure of his head
during the nap which was his " usual custom of an afternoon,"
was carefully preserved upon the walls of tlie club. When
his doze was over, he would sometimes go to the theatre ; but
more frequently he stayed where he was, playing cards till it
was time to go home. As he grew older and more unwieldy,
he went out more rarely into society ; but there were a few
houses which he always loved to frequent, especially that of
the Olenines, by whom he was treated as if he had been a
member of the family. In the literary, artistic, and scientific
circles of St. Petersburg it has always been possible to enjoy
the pleasures of society without encountering its drawbacks.
The idea of giving parties " out of revenge " has never been
able to naturalize itself there ; and men of narrow means
have not thought it necessary to hamper their mutual inter-
course by restrictions borrowed from the code of opulent
festivity. Consequently, Krilof was able to spend a sociable
evening with his friends, whenever the idea occurred to him,
without being compelled to submit to such changes of dress
as would have sorely vexed him. For he was careless to a
fault in his costume. At home, he generally wore an old
and tattered dressing-gown, and he had a strong objection
to renewing his wardrobe. When his old clothes were worn
out, his friends used sometimes to get him invested in new
ones by dint of stratagem ;• but it was impossible to instil
into him the reverence with which such objects are generally
regarded by well-regulated minds. Gloves he never would
condescend to wear, even in the depth of winter. " I always


MEMOIR. xxvii


lose them," he used to plead, "and my hands never get
cold." And, indeed, his circulation was singularly vigorous.
When he lived near the Summer Garden, he used to bathe
every day in the adjacent canal, and he continued this
practice even when the water was covered by a thin coat of
ice. So great was his contempt for clothes that, in hot
weather, he would sometimes dispense with all but his shirt;
and on one occasion, when, thus simply clad, he was playing
the violin, he was so carried away by the tide of musical
feeling, that he spent some time tranquilly performing at his
open window — quite unaware that he was presenting a
singular spectacle to the world of fashion then promenading
in the Summer Garden. He had an eccentric habit of
appropriating any stray napkin or towel, or the like, that
might be lying about a room, and of afterwards producing
it from his pocket, under the impression that it was his hand-
kerchief, and waving it before the eyes of the astonished
company. Perhaps the strangest story told on good authority
of his absence of mind in things sartorial is that of his
going to court on one occasion in a new uniform. His friend
Olenine, just before entering the presence-chamber, thought
it as well to scrutinize Krilof s costume, and discovered that
he had got on so new a coat, that its buttons were still
enveloped in the silver paper which the tailor had carefully
wrapped round them.

The state of his apartments was in keeping with that of
his dress. Neither order nor cleanliness had charms for his
eyes. Nothing was ever cleaned or put to rights in his


xxviii MEMOIR.


rooms: his books lay about anywhere; undisturbed dust
accumulated upon everything. He was very fond of birds ;
and, twice a day, he used to strew his floor with oats, on
which the pigeons, which haunted the adjacent bazaar —
sacred birds to Russian eyes — ^would descend in flocks,
finding easy access through the open window.

During one brief period, the rooms wore a totally different
appearance ; but the change did not last long. Krilof had
sold a new edition of his fables for a large sum of money,
and did not know what to do with it. At first, he thought
of spending it in travelling abroad ; but he soon gave up
that idea. Then he determined to expend it upon the
embellishment of his apartments. Upholsterers were called
in ; sumptuous furniture was freely bought. The floors were
covered with costly carpets; silken hangings adorned the
walls and windows. Choice pictures were hung up on all
sides, flanked by mirrors in gleaming frames ; and, wherever
an inch of standing-room could be found, there was placed
a crystal vase, or a delicate statuette, or some fragile form of
beauty in glass. The whole abode seemed transformed as
by the wave of a fairy's wand, and the owner might well be
excused if he felt proud of the change he had produced,
when the newly decorated rooms were lighted up on the
occasion of the feast to which he invited his bosom friends
in honour of his apartments' metamorphosis.

But he soon grew tired of all this unwonted splendour.
A few days after the inaugural banquet, one of his friends
happened to call upon him, and found that he had returned


MEMOIR. xxix


to his old ways. The rich carpets were strewn with oats, on
which a greedy flock of pigeons was feeding. Every time
the door opened, away flew the birds in a hurry, upsetting
the crystals, overthrowing the statuettes, shivering the glass
into fragments. A very short time sufficed to reduce the
room to its normal state of dirt and disorder, from which
it never recovered as long as Krilof occupied it. Only,
before the ruin took place, a sketch of this sumptuous study
was taken for the Grand Duchess Maria Nikolaevna, which
still preserves the memory of the fabulist's short-lived magni-
ficence.

As may well be supposed, his servants were none of the
best. An old woman, assisted by her daughter, waited upon
him, and took care not to trouble him by any excess of
housewifely zeal. Nothing was ever cleaned ; not a book
was ever known to be dusted. If a visitor arrived, he did
not know where to deposit his hat in safety, nor where to
find a seat from which he could rise un soiled. Krilof never
troubled himself about such superfluities as a writing-desk
or a cabinet. Even such necessaries as pens and ink and
paper were seldom to be discovered without painful research.

One of his friends, in describing a visit which he paid the
poet, states that he found him smoking a cigar, which kept
going out. Each time it went out, he called the servant-girl
in to give him a light; so at last she brought a candle with-
out a candlestick, dropped a little melted tallow on the table,
and stuck the candle in it for her master's convenience. He
was greatly addicted to tobacco, we may take this oppor-


XXX MEMOIR,


tunity of observing, and would often smoke, says Lobanof,
" from thirty-five to fifty cigars a day." It is to be hoped
that they were cigarettes or papirosses.

It was dangerous, as might be imagined, to lend Krilof a
book of any value. On one ocpasion, he was sitting at
breakfast, reading a large and valuable volume he had bor-
rowed from his friend and patron, Olenine, when suddenly
he overbalanced himself, and, in trying to avoid a fall, he
upset the coffee-pot over the book. Rushing wildly into
the kitchen, he carried off a bucket of water, and began to
pour its contents over the book as it lay on the ground.
Seeing this, his scared servant-maid burst into the rooms of
his colleague, Gnedich, and horrified him by the news that
her master had gone out of his mind.

This, by the way, was not the only occasion on which his
eccentric demeanour savoured of madness to vulgar under-
standings. Once, it is said, when he was very young, he
was stopping in the country with Count Tatischef, when his
host was suddenly called away to town. The Count, whose
whole family was to go with him, allowed Krilof, at his own
recjuest, to remain where he was. As soon as the young
poet found himself alone, he began to carry out an idea he
had long cherished, and to lead a life as similar as was
possible to that led by man in unsophisticated times. With
that view, he gave up devoting any time to his toilette, dis-
continued shaving, and allowed his hair and nails to grow
as they liked. Books, however, he did not discard; but,
instead of reading them at home, he spent the entire day


MEMOIR. xxxi


over them in the garden. One day, as he was strolling
there, presenting a strange and hermit-like appearance, the
sound of wheels was suddenly heard, and, before he could
escape into the house, the Count and all his family, returning
unexpectedly, drove past the very spot where he was. Their
surprise may be well conceived. His confusion was pro-
bably as great then as it was on the occasion of another
misadventure which happened to him in early youth. When
he was first at St. Petersburg, he used to spend a good deal
of time at the house of his friend, the actor Dmitrievsky.
It happened that at one time his visits were discontinued for
a while, and during that interval Dmitrievsky changed his
quarters. One day, Dmitrievsky met his young friend, and
invited him to dinner. At the appointed hour Krilof, who
knew nothing about the change of address, appeared at the
wonted door. It was opened by a servant, who told him
that her master was out " I *11 come in and wait for him,"
said Krilof, making his way into what had been his friend's
bed-room, and there unceremoniously going to sleep on the
bed. Now it happened that the rooms were then occupied
by a Chinovnik and his wife. Presently they returned
home, and the lady went straight to her room without
having learned that a visitor had arrived during her absence.
Her astonishment may be imagined when she discovered an
utterly unknown young man tranquilly slumbering on the
bed. The shriek which she naturally uttered on seeing the
sleeping stranger called her husband to her side, and awoke
the involuntary trespasser, who at first had some difficulty in


xxxii MEMOIR.


accounting for his totally unexpected appearance there. It
was certainly an awkward positipn to retire from gracefully.
To his next-door neighbour, Gnedich, he was greatly
attached, heartily enjoying his society. Gnedich had trans-
lated the " Iliad," and was fond of holding forth on the
subjects of Homer's merits and those of Greek writers in
general. One day, Krilof, who was then fifty years old,
talked about learning Greek. Gnedich told him he was too
old, that no one could learn a new language after such and
such an age, and added various, other similar remarks of
equal value. Krilof made no reply; but, the next day, he
began to study Greek, making use of a New Testament in
which the original was accompanied by a Slavonic translation,
and being thus saved the trouble of consulting a dictionary.
For two years he continued his studies in secret. At the
end of that time,- he happened to be present one day when
Gnedich was complaining that he could not understand a
certain passage in Homer. " I should read it this way,"
said Krilof, favouring him with an impromptu translation.
At first, Gnedich thought he was being cheated; but when
his companion had proved that he now knew Greek, trans-
lating several passages taken from Homer at random, he did
not know how to express his wonder and admiration in
sufficiently strong terms. Afterwards, he induced Krilof to
commence a translation of the " Odyssey," but it never went
very far. Krilof soon began to neglect his classical studies,
and the large collection of Greek works he had bought was
shoved under his bed. Sometimes he would stretch out an


MEMOIR. xxxiii


arm in search of an ^sop, but all the others were forgotten ;
and, at last, his housekeeper, seeing no use in such musty
volumes, used them up, one after another, to heat the stove.
A somewhat similar fate once befell a fable of his own. He
had read it aloud at a party, and forgotten to take away
the manuscript with him. The next day he sent for it,
but learned that the servants, having found a very shabby
roll of paper, had used it to wrap up candles in.

As he grew older and more corpulent, his natural laziness
increased, and it became difficult to induce him to exert him-
self. He used to lie in bed late, and, when he got up, he would
invest himself in a dressing-gown and a pair of slippers, and
often sit in his rooms till evening, dressed in little more than
that simple garb. When he was on duty in the Library, and
therefore confined within its walls for twenty-four hours, he
never grumbled at his lot, as Gnedich used to do, but would
lie on a sofa and read novels all day. He read all sorts of
trash, merely to kill time, and sometimes thought so little
about what he was reading that, when he had got to the end
of a story, he would begin it over again without recognising
it. The only occurrence which could rouse him to active
exertion was that of a fire. I'he moment he heard of one,
he would jump out of bed, and set off for the scene of the
disaster, willing to remain intently gazing at it as long as it
lasted. He seldom grew so excited in conversation about
any other subject as he was when he described the various
great fires which he had seen, especially that which took

place on the north side of the Neva, when the " camels "

c


xxxiv MEMOIR.


for the ships were destroyed. Conflagrations are numerous
and extensive in Russia, and in winter, when everything is
white with snow, the eflfects produced by a large mass of
flame at night are very fine, and the more lasting inasmuch
as it is difficult to obtain water in any other shape than that
of rock ice.

Towards the end of Krilof^s stay in the Library, he was
recommended by the doctors to take more exercise ; so, in
fine weather, he used to go for long walks, and when it
rained he paced the galleries round the upper floor of the
Gostinnoi-Dvor. At first, the shopkeepers used, according
to their wont, to pester him with invitations to purchase ;
and, one day, the occupants of a certain stall made a rush at
him, and led him in triumph to their counter. Feigning
acquiescence, he turned over all they showed him; but
always demanded still more costly goods, until he had
made them fairly turn all their stock upside down. Then,
with many thanks for the interesting exhibition they had
offered him, he made his escape. A little farther on, the
same scene was repeated. Then the shopkeepers grew
wiser : those who had been victimized indulged in that little
laugh at their own expense, for which a Russian's sense of
humour makes him almost always ready ; and the rest still
more fully appreciated the joke.

Some of Krilofs biographers have spoken as if his per-
sonal appearance had been well known to all his fellow-
citizens ; but this is evidently a mere figure of speech. One
of them tells a story of how the fabulist was lunching off"


MEMOIR. XXXV


oysters one day — ^he was very fond of them, and it is said
that he could dispose of eight dozen, "washed down with
English porter" — ^when he discovered that he had left his
purse behind. So he had to ask the proprietor of the
establishment, whom he did not know, to give him credit.
"Certainly, Ivan Andreevich," answered the landlord.
" What, you know me, then ? " asked Krilof. " Of course,"
was the flattering reply; "every one in the city knows you,
Ivan Andreevich."

So far, so well ; but another narrator adds that, as Krilof
was on his way home, he stopped to buy some paper at a
shop in the Gostinnoi-Dvor, just opposite his own rooms.
When the parcel was handed to him, he said to the shop-
keeper, "I am Krilof; I live up there. Please send up
for the money." But the tradesman, with the unseemly
materialism of his class, merely remarked, " How can one
know all the people in the world? There *s lots of them
hereabouts;" and refused to part with the paper until it
was paid for.

But, in spite of this tradesman-like ignorance, it is certain
that Krilof was well known by sight as well as by reputation ;
and people used to point him out to each other, and espe-
cially to their children, as he walked along the streets. His
fables were eagerly sought after by the editors of journals
and magazines, and the collected editions of them which he
published from time to time met with a large and steadily
increasing sale. Between the years 1830 and 1840, the

publisher Smirdine printed 40,000 copies of them in various

c — 2


xxxvi MEMOIR,


forms, which found their way into all parts of the empire,
and made Krilof by far the most popular author of the day.
There was scarcely a child belonging to the educated
classes who was not familiar with his stories; and they were
written in so simple a style, and in such idiomatic language,
that they were, for the most part, perfectly intelligible even
to the totally uneducated peasant. His sketches of village
life, for instance, and his shrewd little illustrations of popular
thought and feeling would be as thoroughly appreciated by
the rude inhabitants of a hamlet in the interior, supposing
that they had an opportunity of hearing them read or recited,
as by the literary men whom Krilof used to meet at Jukov-
sky's pleasant Saturday-evening gatherings, or by his learned
colleagues of the Academy of Sciences or the " Society of
the Lovers of Russian Literature."

Nor was it merely in his own country that Krilofs name
was known. Various translators had given specimens of his
writings to their respective countrymen; and, in the year
1824, a sumptuous edition of his fables was edited in Paris
by Count Gregory Orlof. A number of distinguished French
and Italian poets co-operated in this work, rendering into
their best verse the literal prose translations which were laid
before them. Many a version which pretends to be "from the
Russian" has been really produced after a similar fashion,
and the result has generally been as disappointing as that of
Count Orlof s enterprise, "whose book," says M. Charles
Parfait, "was one in which Russia could not recognise a
single characteristic of her national poet." Still it served to


MEMOIR. xxxvii


gain Krilof a reputation in France of which many of his con-
temporaries would have been very proud. He does not seem
to have cared much about it himself; and on one occasion,
when the proofs of a memoir of his life, which was about to
be inserted in a French biographical dictionary, were sent to
him for correction, he at first refused to trouble himself about
them at all, saying, " Let them write what they like," and ulti-
mately consented only to make a few slight alterations in
them. For he was singularly free from that eager thirst after
fame which so many really distinguished writers have felt. He
always spoke most modestly about what he had done. " I am
like a sailor," he said, on one occasion, " who has not met with
any disasters, simply because he has never ventured far from
shore." His early works he called the follies of his youth;
and even of his fables, after they had gained the general
applause of the public, he was wont to say very little. Many
of them alluded to persons and to events about which many
people must have been curious to know ; but he scarcely
ever told even his most intimate friends what were the
particular objects of his satire ; and, in most cases, the
secret went with him into the grave. Of his manuscripts
he was utterly careless. Before a fable was printed, he took
the greatest pains with it, going, perhaps, as many as ten
times over it, and never ceasing to revise it as long as there
was a word in it he could improve or correct. But, after the
printers had finished with his copy, he took no more interest
in it. Of the collection of his manuscripts now in the Public
Library at St. Petersburg, a great part consists of a number


xxxviii MEMOIR,


of rough drafts found by his friend Lobanof among the litter
of a garret.

In February, 1838, Krilof's seventieth birthday was cele-
brated by his friends in a manner which could not fail to
touch him deeply. A grand banquet was organized in the
Nobles' Hall, at which three hundred of the most distinguished
members of the cultivated society of St. Petersburg assisted.
In front of his seat was placed his bust, crowned with flowers,
and, at the end of the feast, flowers were showered down
upon him by the ladies who occupied the galleries, and who
were eager to do honour to their own and their children's
friend. A laurel crown had* been presented to him, and, as
he was going away, a number of the students of the Univer-
sity crowded round him, asking for a leaf as a relic.

From that time forward, he may almost be said to have
written no more. About a couple of years after the festival,
he resigned his office, and moved from the Public Library
to the other side of the river. There he lived for some time
in the Vassily Ostrof, leading a very retired life, and gradu-
ally dropping more and more out of society. It was while
he was there that a fire broke out, one night, next door.
Every one else was naturally much alarmed ; but Krilof took
everything so quietly, that he would not even dress and go
out until he had finished his tea and a cigar, nor would he
give any orders about saving his books and memoranda.

After some time, he again changed his abode, and went to
the extremity of the city, where he fitted up some rooms,
from the windows of which a splendid view might be enjoyed.


MEMOIR, xxxix


There he proposed to lead a still more retired life than
before. It would, perhaps, have been more lonely than he
would have liked ; for he had outlived most of the friends of
his younger days, and he does not seem to have had a single
relation with whom he was acquainted. At one period of
his life, when he was young and poor, and, cbmparatively
speaking, unknown, he had formed a strong attachment for
a young girl, whom he hoped to be allowed to mairy. But
her parents objected to his poverty, and his hopes remained
unfulfilled. Among his poems are to be found a number of
lyrics addressed to Annette. They form the only trace that
is left of the fruitless passion of his youth. In his old age
he adopted the children of his servant's daughter, Saveleva ;
but it is very likely that, in his declining years, he missed
those little attentions by which a loved hand can do so much
to make smooth the end of the journey of life.

His last illness was one of but short duration. He retained
the full use of his faculties to the end ; and his last words
were, " Lord, forgive me my trespasses ! '* With them ended
a life which was very dear to his countrymen. He died on
November ^®y, 1844, at the age of 76.

His funeral was celebrated at the public expense, and was
attended by such crowds that the great church of St. Isaac
could not hold those who wished to assist at the service of
the dead. The whole of the Nevsky Prospect was thronged
by masses of sympathizing lookers-on, thousands of whom
followed the coffin, which, surrounded by the students of the
University, passed slowly up the long street, and under the


xl MEMOIR,


windows of the rooms in which Krilof had spent so many
peaceful years, till it reached the cemetery attached to the
Convent of St. Alexander Nevsky. There the remains of
Krilof were deposited, by the side of the tomb of his friend
Gnedich, and within sight of that of Karamzine. Beside
him in the coffin his friends had placed the laurel crown
which had been conferred upon him at the time of his jubilee
banquet, and, in accordance with an urgent request which
he expressed before his death, a bouquet which liad many
years previously been presented to him by the Empress
Alexandra Fedorovna. Soon afterwards a public subscrip-
tion was opened for the purpose of erecting a monument to
his memory, and the children of Russia, of all ages and
classes, united in contributing to it. With its proceeds an
excellent statue of the poet was set up in the Summer Garden,
within sight of the windows of the palace which now occupies
the place of the house in which his printing-press used to
work. There he sits in bronze, just as he used to sit in the
flesh, clad in his well-loved dressing-gown, an open book in
his hand. The pedestal of the monument is adorned with
bronze figures representing the various animals about which
he wrote ; ^nd a couple of bas-reliefs illustrate two of his most
popular fables — " Demian's Fish Soup " and " Fortune and
the Beggar." Around the monument, which stands in a
circular open space, a number of children are always at play,
dressed in the picturesque garb which juvenile Russia affects,
and on them the poet seems to smile benignly as he looks
down from his easy chair above. It is a thoroughly national


MEMOIR, xli


monument — z. somewhat rare object in Russia, where previous
statues have for the most part greatly puzzled the natives,
who call them holvani — idols. That of Loiiionossof, for
instance, which stands at Archangel bareheaded and classically
undressed, is a subject of great wonder to the peasants, who
find it of a chilly and depressing appearance, as seen among
the snows of an Arctic winter. But Krilof 's statue is of an
altogether different kind, having the merits of being charac-
teristic and intelligible. It is a worthy memorial to a man
who had, to a singular degree, gained the affection of his
contemporaries, and who will probably retain that of their
descendants. For many a score of years to come his
memory is likely to be kept green in the minds of the chil-
dren and the children's children of those little people who
now play around his statue, in what is one of the most
picturesque spots of St. Petersburg, when the sun is bright
and the sky is blue overhead, and the trees of the Summer
Garden are clothed in foliage that offers a pleasant shelter
from the heat. At such a time it is very pleasant for any
one who has read Krilof 's fables, and who is not unduly de-
pressed by the thought that the tide of aristocratic life has
ebbed from the summer-smitten city, to sit in the grateful
shade, and, as he lazily watches the gleam of palace walls
through the openings in the hanging curtain of green leaves,
to call up before his mental vision the varied scenes which
the poet has depicted, and the quaint animal life with which
he has peopled them. If it be a Russian who is thus in-
dulging in day-dreams, the chances are that they will be


crossed by some shadow of regret for old days gone by, and
perhaps haunted by what seem to be echoes of a voice that
is still.


KRILOF AND HIS FABLES


d


THE TWO PEASANTS.


" /"^ OOD day, gossip Thaddeus ! "
VJ " Good day, gossip Egor ! "

"Well, friend, how are you getting on?"

" Oh, gossip, I see you don't know about my misfortune.
God ha.s afflicted me : I have burnt myself out of house and
home, and have been obliged to go about begging ever since."

" How ever did you manage that ? That was a poor joke,
my friend."


KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


" Just so. On Christmas Day we had a feast. I went out
to give the horses their food, candle in hand. I must confess
there was a buzzing in my head. Well, I don't know how it
was, but I must have let a spark fall. I just managed to save
myself; but my homestead was burnt, and all I had in it.
Now for your story."

" Ah, Thaddeus, a sad piece of work ! With me, also, it
seems, God has been angry. You see, I have no feet left. I
think it 's a perfect miracle that I escaped with my life. I
went to the cellar for beer. It was Christmas Day 'in my
case too, and I, too, must confess that I had swallowed a
little too much brandy along with my friends. Well, that 1
mightn't set the house on fire in my drunkenness, I blew the
candle right out. But the devil gave me such a fall down-
stairs 'vs\ the dark, that he made me a mere wreck of a man ;
and here I've been a cripple ever since."

"Blame yourselves, friends," said their kinsman Stefan.
" To tell the truth, I don't think it a miracle that one of you
has burnt his house down, and the other is on crutches.
Things go ill with a drunken man, when he has a candle in
his hand ; but he is even worse off when he is in the dark."


THE EDUCATION OF THE LION.


TO the Lion, the king of the forests, Heaven gave a son.
You know how different from ours is the nature of
beasts. Among us, a child a year old, if it belong to a royal
family, is small and weak and stupid. But, by the time it
has lived a twelvemonth, a lion-cub has long ago left off its
baby-linen. So, at the end of a year, the Lion began seriously
to consider that he must not allow his son to remain ignorant,
not wishing that the royal dignity should be degraded in
him, or that, when the son's turn should come to govern
the kingdom, the nation should reproach the fether on his
accoimt But whom should he entreat, or compel, or induce
by rewards to instruct the Czarevich how to become a Czar?


KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


Should he hand him over to the Fox ? The Fox is clever,
but it is terribly addicted to telling lies ; and a liar is per-
petually getting into trouble. " No," thought the Lion ; " the
science of falsehood is not one which princes ought to study."
Should he trust him to the Mole ? Every one who speaks of
that animal says that it is an extreme admirer of regularity in
everything, and that it never takes a step without examining
the ground before it, and that it cleans and shells with its
own paws every grain of corn that comes to its table. In fact,
the Mole has the reputation of being very great in small
affairs. Unfortunately, however, though the Mole's eyes are
keen for whatever is just under its nose, it cannot see any-
thing at a distance. The Mole's love of order is an excellent
thing for animals of its own kind; but the Lion's kingdom is
considerably more extensive than a mole-run. Should he
choose the Panther? The Panther is brave and strong, and,
besides that, it is a great master of military tactics. But the
Panther knows nothing about politics, and is absolutely
ignorant of everything else that concerns civil affairs. Pretty
lessons indeed it would give in ruling ! A king must be a
judge and a minister, as well as a warrior ; but the Panther
is good for nothing but fighting, so it, too, is unfit to educate
royal children. To be brief, not a single beast, not even
the Elephant himself, who was as much respected in the
forest as Plato used to be in Greece, seemed wise enough
or sufficiently well informed to satisfy the Lion.

By good fortune, or the opposite — we shall find out which
before long, — another king, the king of birds, the Eagle, an


THE EDUCATION OF THE LION, 5

old acquaintance and friend of the Lion, heard of that
monarch's difficulty, and, wishing to do his friend a great
kindness, offered to educate the young Lion himself. The
Lion felt as if a weight were taken off his shoulders ; and no
wonder. What could be better, as it seemed, than to find a
king as a prince's tutor ? So the Lion-cub was got ready, and
sent off to the Eagle's court, there to learn how to govern.

Two or three years go by ; in the meantime, ask whom
you will, you hear nothing but unanimous praise of the
young Lion, and all the birds scatter through the forests
wonderful stories about his merits. At last the appointed
time comes, and the Lion sends for his son. The prince
arrives, and the king gathers all his people together, sum-
moning great and small alike. He embraces his son before
them all, kisses him, and addresses him in these words : " My
beloved son, you are my only heir. I am now looking forward
to the grave ; but you are only just entering upon life, so I
intend to make over my sceptre to you. Only tell me
first, in the presence of this assembly, what you have been
taught, how much you know, and in what manner you pro-
pose to make your people happy."

" Papa," answered the prince, " I know what no one else
here knows. I can tell where each bird, from the Eagle to
the Quail, can most readily find water, on what each of them
lives, and how many eggs it lays ; and I can count up all the
wants of every bird, without missing one. Here is the certi-
ficate my tutor gave me. It was not for nothing that the
birds used to say that I could pick the stars out of the sky.


KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


And when you have made up your mind to transfer your
power to me, I will immediately begin to teach the beasts
how to make nests."

On this the king and all his beasts howled aloud. The
members of the council hung their heads, and the old Lion
perceived, too late, that the young Lion had not learned what
was wanted — that he was acquainted with birds only, not
knowing the nature of beasts, although he was destined by
birth to rule over beasts, and that he was utterly ignorant ot
the knowledge which is most requisite in kings — the know-
ledge of what are the wants of their own people, and what
are the interests of their own country.

[This fable refers to the education of the Emperor Alex-
ander I. Catherine entrusted it to the Genevese La Harpe
— a man of excellent intentions, but one who knew very little
about Russia, and who set up his own little republic before
the eyes of the future despot as the type of the most perfect
commonwealth in the world. He filled the boy*s head with
ideas which would certainly appear to Krilof to be beyond
a boy*s comprehension; and when his pupil came to the
throne, he wrote him a pressing letter from Geneva, urging
him to give Russia a constitution, without waiting to make
any preparations for its reception.

One of Florian*s fables bears the title of "The Lion*s
Education ;" and as it was translated by Dmitrief, it is very
probable that Krilof may have read it. But there is very
little resemblance between the two fables.]


THE BROOK.

A SHEPHERD by the side of a Brook complainingly
sang, in his grief, of his sad and irreparable loss. His
pet lamb had lately been drowned in the neighbouring river.
Having heard the Shepherd, the Brook thus began to


" Insatiable river ! how would it be if thy depths, like
mine, were clearly visible to all eyes, and every one could
sec, in thy most secret recesses, all the victims which thou
hast so greedily swallowed up 7 I think that thou wouldst
dive into the earth for shame, and hide thyself in its dark
abysses. Methinks that, if Fate gave me such copious waters,


S KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


I should become an ornament to Nature, and would never
hurt even so much as a chicken. How cautiously should
my waves roll past every bush, every cottage ! My shores
would only bless me, and I should bring fresh life to the
adjacent valleys and meadows, without robbing them of so
much as even a single leaflet Then, in a word, I should
perform my journey in a kindly spirit, nowhere causing mis-
fortune or sorrow, and my waters should flow right down to
the sea as pure as silver."

So spake the Brook, and so it really meant. But what
happened ? A week had not gone by before a heavy rain-
cloud burst upon a neighbouring hill. In its affluence of
waters the Brook suddenly rivalled the river. But, alas!
what has become of the Brook's tranquillity ? The Brook
overflows its banks with turbid waters. It seethes ; it roars ;
it flings about masses of soiled foam. It overthrows ancestral
oaks : their crashing may be heard afar. And, at last, that
very shepherd, on whose account it lately upbraided the
river with such a flow of eloquence, perished in it with all
his flock, and of his cottage not even a trace was left behind.

How many brooks are there which flow along so smoothly,
so peacefully, and murmur so sweetly to the heart, only
because they have but very little water in them !


THE MILLER.


THE water began to dribble away through a Miller's
dam. At first there would have been no great harm
done, if he had taken the matter in hand. But why should
he? Our Miller does not think of troubling himself The
leak becomes wors^ eveiy day, and the water pours out as
if from a tap.

'" Hallo, Miller ! don't stand gaping there ! It 's time you
should set your wils to work."

But the Miller says,

"Harm's a long way off. I don't require an ocean of
water, and my mill is rich enough in it for all my time."


THE GRANDEE.

ONCE, in the days of old, a certain Grandee passed
from his richly dight bed into the realm which
Pluto sways. To speak more simply, he died. And so, as
was anciently the custom, he appeared before the justice-
seat of Hades. Straightway he was asked, "Where were
you bom ? What have you been ? "

" I was born in Persia, and my rank was that of a Satrap.
But, as my health was feeble during my lifetime, I never
exercised any personal control in my province, but left
everything to be done by my secretary."

" But you — what did you do ? "

" I ate, drank, and slept ; and I signed everything he set
before me."

" In with him, then, at once into Paradise ! "

" How now I Where is the justice of this ? " thereupon
exclaimed Mercury, forgetting all politeness.

"Ah, brother," answered Eacus, "you know nothing
about it. But don't you see this ? The dead man was a
fool. What would have happened if he, who had such
power in his hands, had unfortunately interfered in business ?
Why, he would have ruined the whole province. The tears
which would have flowed then would have been beyond all


THE GRANDEE. 13


calculation. Therefore it is that he has gone into Paradise,
because he did not interfere with business."

I was in court yesterday, and I saw a judge there. There
can be no doubt that he will go into Paradise.

[When this fable was submitted to the censors, they sent
it on to the Minister of Public Instruction, who kept it by
him for a whole year, instead of giving any decision about
it Meanwhile, copies of it were circulated in MS., and it
became well known in society ; but still the minister with-
held permission to print it. At last, at one of the court-
masquerades, Krilof found an opportunity of reading it to
the Emperor Nicholas, who was so delighted with it that he
took him in his arms, kissed him, and said, " Write away,
old man, write away." On the strength of this, Krilof ap-
plied anew to the authorities, and obtained leave to print
the fable. With its appearance, his literary career may l^e
said to have come to a close.]


THE WOLF IN THE KENNEI.


A WOLF, one night, thinking to climb into a sheepfold,
fell into a kennel. Immediately the whole kennel was
up in anns. The dogs, scenting the grisly disturber so near
at hand, began to bark in their quarters, and to tear out to
the fight.

" Hallo, lads, a thief!" cried the keepers; and immediately
the gates were shut In a moment the kennel became a hell.
Men come running, one armed with a club, another with a
gun. "Lights!" they cry; "bring lights I" The lights being
brought, our Wolf is seen sitting squeezed up in the furthest
comer, gnashing its teeth, its hide bristling, and its eyes look-


-^


THE WOLF IN THE KENNEL, 15


ing as if it would fain eat up the whole party. Seeing, how-
ever, that it is not now in the presence of the flock, and that
it is now called upon to pay the penalty for the sheep it has
killed, my trickster resorts to negotiation, beginning thus :

" Friends, what is all this fuss about ? I am your ancient
gossip and comrade; and I have come here to contract an
alliance with you — not with the slightest intention of quar-
relling. Let us forget the past, and declare in favour of mu-
tual harmony. Not only will I for the future avoid touching
the flocks belonging to this spot, but I will gladly fight in
their behalf against others ; and I swear on the word of a
Wolf that I "

" Listen, neighbour," here interrupted the huntsman. " You
are grey-coated ; but I, friend, am grey-headed, and I have
long known what your wolfish natures are like, and therefore
it is my custom never to make peace with wolves until I have
torn their skin from ofl" their backs."

With that he let go the pack of hounds on the Wolf

[This fable, which was printed in October, 181 2, represents
Napoleon in Russia. The words put into the mouth of the
Wolf are almost exactly those of which he himself made use.
It is said that, after the battle of Krasnoe, Kutuzof read this
fable aloud to the officers who stood round him, and that,
when he came to the words, " You are grey-coated ; but I,
friend, am grey-headed," in which an allusion is made to Na-
poleon's grey overcoat and his own white hair, he took off" his
white forage-cap, and shook his bent head. Buistrof says


i6 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,

that he once read to Klrilof a statement to the effect that,
"after Borodino, Kutuzofs young soldiers abused him for
not instantly attacking Napoleon ; but Krilof, understanding
his intentions, sent him this fable, which he read to his
younger officers, and so appeased them." On hearing this,
however, Krilof frowned, and said, *' That's all nonsense.
Is it likely that I, a private individual, neither a diplomatist
nor a soldier, should have known beforehand what Kutuzof
was going to do ? It *s absurd ! Say, in some paper or other,
my friend, that it is not true."]


THE THREE MOUJIKS.

THREE Moujiks * stopped at a village to pass the niglit.
They had done their business at Petersburg as drivers ;
had sometimes worked, and sometimes amused theinselv«-;
and were now going back to their native place. As a Moujik
does not like to go to bed empty, our visitors asked for
supper. But villagers have no variety of dishes. They set
on the table before the hungry travellers a basin of cabbage
soup, some bread, and the remains of a bowl of porridge.
It wasn't hke Petersburg fare, but there was no use in talk-


i8 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


ing about that ; at all events, it was better than going to bed
hungry. So the Moujiks crossed themselves, and sat down to
table. Then the one who was the sharpest of them, seeing
that there was altogether but little for three, perceived how
the business might be mended. When force can't win the
day, a little cunning must be tried.

"Comrades," he cries, "you know Thomas; well, he's
likely to have his hair cropped * during this levy."

" What levy ? "

" Why, there 's news of a war with China. Our father t has
ordered the Chinese to pay a tribute of tea."

On that the two others took to weighing the matter, and
deliberating upon it (unfortunately they could read, and had
studied newspapers and reports), as to how the war would be
carried on, and who should have the command. Our friends
began a regular discussion, surmised, explained, wrangled.
That was just what our trickster wanted. While they were
giving their advice, and settling affairs, and arranging the
forces, he didn't say a word, but ate up the whole of the
souj) and the porridge.


*To be taken as a soldier. f I'he Emperor.


THE DIVISION.


CERTAIN honest merchants, who had their dwelling
and their counting-house in common, made a heap
of money. Having wound up their business, they wish to
divide their gains. But how can a division take place with-
out squabbling? They have begun to quarrel about the
money and the stock, when suddenly there is a cry that the
house is on fire.

" Quick, quick, save the goods and the house ! " shouts
one of them. "Come along; we will settle our accounts
afterwards ! "


20 ' KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


" Give me another thousand first I " screams a second,
*' or I will not stir from the spot."

" You have given me two thousand too little ! " exclaims a
third ; "but here are my accounts, all perfectly straight."

" No, no ; we protest against such an idea. How, for
what, and why, do you claim that ? "

Forgetting that the house was on fire, these strange
fellows went on squabbling where they were, till they were
suffocated by the smoke, and they and their goods were all
burnt up together.

[This fable is said to refer to the squabbles which took
place among the Russian generals at the time of the French
invasion. Count Rostopchin, for instance, withdrew from
the Moscow Volunteer Committee simply because it was
made dependent on the Volunteer Committee of St. Peters-
burg. In many cases what was much worse than squabbling
took place, some of the officials being charged with having,
even at that critical period, " stolen all that could be stolen,
the very clothes, the very food of the recruits, of the volun-
teers, of the prisoners.'']


THE CROW AND THE HEN.


WHEN the Prince of Smolensk,* using skill as a wea-
pon against insolence, laid a snare for the modem
Vandals, and left them Moscow for their ruin, then all its
inhabitants, old and young, assembled together without loss
of time, and departed from the city, like a swarm of bees
leaving their hive. On all the disquiet which then took
place a Crow looked down tranquilly from a housetop,
whetting its beak the while.

"What ! are not you ready to start, gossip?" cried a Hen
to it from a passing cart. " Why, they say the enemy is at
our very gates."


• KutuoC He Rceived the i


t of SulDleiuky aCtcc the ballle of KraE


22 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


" What is that to me ?" replied the bird ol omen. " I shall
remain here quietly. You and your sisters can do as you
please. But people don't boil crows, or roast them either ;
so I shall have no difficulty in living on good terms with the
new-comers. It may even happen, perhaps, that I may get
some cheese from them, or a stray bone, or something or
other. Farewell, my fowl ! a happy journey to you."

The Crow really did stay ; but, instead of its gaining any-
thing by doing so, when the time came in which the Prince
of Smolensk began to starve his guests, it was itself seized
by them, and turned into soup.

[This fable was printed in the magazine called " The Son of
the Fatherland," in November, 1812. Towards the end of Sep-
tember in that year, news began to reach St. Petersburg of the
miserable state of Napoleon's army. " Eye-witnesses assert,"
said the preceding number of the magazine, "that the French
go out to shoot crows every day, and cannot sufficiently praise
their soupe aux corbeaux^ In the same number appeared a
caricature, styled "French crow-soup," representing four
grenadiers, wounded, ragged, and emaciated, one of whom
is plucking a crow, while the others are getting ready a carv-
ing-knife and a saucepan. When Murat's travelling kitchen
fell into the hands of the Russians, the saucepans were full
of horse and cat flesh. Later on in the retreat, a time came
when some of the starving soldiers actually preyed on the
dead bodies of their comrades.]


THE PEBBLE AND THE DIAMOND.

A DIAMOND, which some one had lost, lay for some
time on the high road. At last it happened that a
merchant picked it up. By him it was offered to the king,
who bought it, had it set in gold, and made it one of the
ornaments of the royal crown. Having heard of this, a
Pebble began to make a fuss. The brilliant fate of the
Diamond fascinated it; and, one day, seeing a Moujik
passing, it besought him thus :

" Do me a kindness, fellow-countryman, and take me
with you to the capital. Why should I go on suffering here
in rain and mud, while our Diamond is, men say, in honour
there? I don't understand why it has been treated with
such respect Side by side with me here it lay so many
years ; it is just such a stone as I' am — my close companion.
Do take me ! How can one tell ? If I am seen there, I
too, perhaps, may be found worthy of being turned to

account."

The Moujik took the stone into his lumbering cart, and

conveyed it to the city. Our stone tumbled into the cart,
thinking that it would soon be sitting by the side of the Dia-
mond. But a quite different fate befell it. It really was
turned to account, but only to mend a hole "in the road.


THE MISER.


A CERTAIN Goblin used to keep watch over a rich
treasure buried underground. Suddenly, he was
ordered by the ruler of the demons to fly away for many
years to the other side of the world. His service was of
such a nature, that he was obliged lo do as he was bid,
whether he liked it or not. Our Goblin fell into a terrible
perplexity, wondering how he should preserve his treasure in
his absence — who there was to take charge of it. To build
a treasure-house, and hire a guardian-^ that would cost much
money. To leave it to itself— that way it might be lost.
Impossible to answer for it for a day. Some one might dig
it up, and steal it ; people are quick at scenting out money.


THE MISER, 25


He worried himself; he pondered over it ; and at last an
idea came into his head. The master of the house to which
he was attached was a terrible Miser. The Goblin, having
dug up the treasure, appeared to the Miser, and said,

" Dear master, they have ordered me to go away from
your house to a distant land. But I have always been well
disposed towards you, so don't refuse to accept this treasure
of mine, as a parting token of affection. Eat, drink, and be
merry, and spend it without fear ; only, when you die, I am
to be your sole heir. That is my single stipulation. As for
the rest, may destiny grant you health and long life."

He spoke, and was off.

Ten — twenty years went by. Having completed his ser-
vice, the Goblin flies home to his native land. What does
he see ? O rapturous sight ! The Miser, dead from star-
vation, lies stretched on the strong box, its key in his hand ;
and the ducats are all there intact. So the Goblin gets his
treasure back again, and rejoices greatly to think that it has
had a guardian who did not cost him a single farthing.

[Krilof s remark at the end of this fable is-^

" When a miser has money, and yet grudges to pay for

food and drink, is he not treasuring up his ducats for a

goblin ? "

M. Farfait, the author of an excellent French translation

of the fables, observes that the same idea has been expressed

by a popular French poet, Pierre Dupont, who is not very

likely to have read Krilof:


26 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

•'Tire* profit dc ccttc fable,
Vous touH qui rognez Hur tin liard :
VouH thdbaurigez pour le diable."

The goblin of the fable is the domovoiy or domestic spirit,
in whom the Russian peasant has great faith. It is, probably,
a near relation of the lubber-fiend which, in Milton's country
house,

" HatikH at the fire its hairy Ntrcnt^th,"

and of the well-known Scotch bogle, which, when its weary
landlord \ids flitting in order to get rid of it, exclaimed, from

the centre of the furniture-laden cart, " And I 'm flittin', too."]


THE PIKE AND THE CAT.


A CONCEITED Pike took it into its head to exercise
the functions of a cat, I do not know whether the
Evil One had plagued it with envy, or whether, perhaps, it
had grown tired of fishy fare ; but, at all events, it thought fit
to ask the Cat to take it out to the chase, with the intention
of catching a few mice in the warehouse. " But, my dear
fiiend," Vaska says to the Pike, " do you understand that
kind of work ? Take care, gossip, that you don't incur dis-
grace. It is n't without reason that they say, ' Tlie work
ought to be in the master's power.' "

" Why really, gossip, what a tremendous affair it is !


28 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,

Mice, indeed ! Why, I have been in the habit of catching
perches ! "

" Oh, very well. Come along ! "

They went ; they lay each in ambush. The Cat thoroughly
enjoyed itself; made a hearty meal ; then went to look after
its comrade. Alas ! the Pike, almost destitute of life, lay
there gasping, its tail nibbled away by the mice. So the
Cat, seeing that its comrade had undertaken a task quite
beyond its strength, dragged it back, half dead, to its pond.

[The Pike, in this fable, represents Admiral Tchichakof,
who, although a naval officer, was entrusted with the com-
mand of the troops intended to prevent Napoleon from
crossing the Berezina during the retreat from Moscow.
With this view he was stationed at Borisof ; but the French
surprised him there, and drove him out of the place, thereby
securing the passage of the river. Sir Robert Wilson says
the admiral was at dinner when the enemy broke in upon
his rear-guard, captured the whole of his correspondence,
and inflicted great loss on his troops.

In the Public Library at St. Petersburg is a collection of
caricatures relating to the French invasion of Russia, one of
which represents Kutuzof holding one end of a long net ;
Napoleon, in the form of a hare, is slipping out at the other
end, which is held by Tchichakof, who is exclaiming, ^*Je
le sauve.^^

Tchichakof is said to have been "an Englishman in charac-
ter;" he had learnt navigation in England, and had married


THE PIKE AND THE CAT.


29


an English woman. "To a sailor's bluntness he added the
English reserve;" and this made his countrymen dislike him
from the first. After the affair of the Berezina, they despised
him also.]


THE ASS AND THE NIGHTINGALE.

AN Ass happened to see a Nightingale, one day, and said
to it,

" Listen, my dear. They say you have a great mastery
over song. I have long wished very much to hear you sing,
and to judge as to whether your talent is really so great."

On this the Nightingale began to make manifest its art —
whistled in countless ways, sobbed, sustained notes, passed
from one song to another; at one time let her voice die away,
and echoed the distant murmur of the languishing reed ; at
another, poured through the wood a shower of tiny notes.
Then all listened to the favourite singer of Aurora. The
breezes died away; the feathered choir was hushed; the cattle
lay down on the grass. Scarcely breathing, the shepherd
revelled in it, and only now and then, as he listened to it,
smiled on the shepherdess.

At length the singer ended. Then the Ass, bending its
head towards the ground, observed,

" It 's tolerable. To speak the truth, one can listen to you
without being bored. But it 's a pity you don't know our
Cock. You would sing a great deal better if you were to
take a few lessons from him."

Having heard such a judgment, our poor Nightingale took
to its wings and flew far away.


THE ASS AND THE NIGHTINGALE, 31

« ~

[It is said that Krilof wrote this fable after an interview
with some great man (Count Razumofsky or Prince A. N.
(jalitzin, perhaps), who had asked him to read him some of
his fables. After hearing them, the noble patron of letters
said, " That is very good ; but why don't you translate, as
Dmitrief does?" "I cannot," modestly answered the poet,
who returned home, and straightway wrote down the grandee
an ass.

M. Fleury ranks this piece among the imitations ; and it is
true that the same subject has been admirably treated by
Diderot. But the idea may easily have occurred to Krilof
without his having read Diderot's excellent fable.]


THE HOP-PLANT.

A HOP-PLANT had made its way to the edge of a gar-
den, and had begun to wind itself around a dry stake
in the fence. Now, in the open field beyond stood an oak-
sapling.

"What use is there in that stunted creature, or, indeed, in any
of its kind?" Thus about the oak the Hop used to whisper
to the stake. " How can it even be compared with you ?
You, simply by your erect carriage, look like a perfect lady in
its presence. It is true that it is clothed with foliage ; but
how rough it is I what a colour it has 1 Why ever does the
earth nourish it ? "

Meanwhile, a week had scarcely passed, before the owner
broke up that stake for firewood, and transplanted the young
oak into his garden. His care resulted in full success, and
the oak flourished, extending vigorous shoots. Remarking
this, our Hop-plant wound itself about it, and now its voice
is entirely devoted to the oak's glory and honour.


TRISHKA'S CAFTAN.


TRISHKA'S caftan was out at elbows. Why should he
ponder long over it? He took to his needle, cut a
quarter off each sleeve ; so mended the elbows. The caftan
was all right again, only his arms were bare for a quarter of
their length. That is no great matter; but every one is always
laughing at Trishka. So Trishka says,

"As I'm no fool, I '11 set this afiair straight also. I '11
make the sleeves longer than they were before. Oh ! Trishka
is no common-place fellow."

So he cut off the skirts of his caftan, and used them to
lei^then his sleeves. Then Trishka was happy, though he


34 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

had a caftan which was as short as a waistcoat. In a similar
way have I sometimes seen other embarrassed people set
their affairs straight Take a look at them as they dash away.
They have all got on Trishka's caftan.

[An allusion to the ruinous shifts to which the Russian
proprietors used to have recourse when their affairs became
at all embarrassed. They are beginning to be less improvi-
dent now; but, at the time when Krilof wrote the fable, they
used to be notorious for their readiness to adopt any means
which would afford them a temporary relief. It may easily
be imagined how the unfortunate peasants must have suffered
whenever their masters were seized by one of these reckless
fits.]


THE ELEPHANT AS GOVERNOR.


AN Elephant was once appointed ruler of a forest. Now,
it is well known that the race of elephants is endowed
with great intelligence; but every family has its unworthy
scion. Our Governor was as stout as the rest of his race
are, but as foolish as the rest of his race are not. As to his
character, he would not intentionally hurt a fly. Well, the
worthy Governor becomes aware of a petition laid before
him by the Sheep, stating that their skins are entirely torn
off their backs by the Wolves.

" Oh, rogues ! " cries the Elephant, " what a crime ! Who
gave you leave to plunder ? "

a — 2


36 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


But the Wolves say,

" Allow us to explain, O father. Did not you give us
leave to take from the Sheep a trifling contribution* for our
pelisses in winter ? It is only because they are stupid sheep
that they cry out. They have only a single fleece taken
from each of them, but they grumble about giving even
that ! "

" Well, well," says the Elephant, " take care what you
do. I will not permit any one to commit injustice. As it
must be so, take a fleece from each of them. But do not
take from them a single hair besides."

He who has rank and power, but wants sense, however
good his heart may be, is sure to do harm.


• (^^0*- the lax levied on the peasant by hw master.


I


THE POOR MAN ENRICHED.

S IT worth while being rich, if one is never to eat
or drink delicately, and to do nothing but heap up
money? And to what end? We die, and then leave all
behind. We only torment ourselves, and get a bad name.
No ; if riches had fallen to my share, not only roubles, but
even thousands of them wouldn't have been grudged by
me, so long as I could live sumptuously and luxuriously;
and my feasts should have been talked about far and wide.
Besides, I should have done good to others. To rich misers,
their life is a kind of torment."

So reasoned a Poor Man with himself, lying on the bare
boards in a wretched hovel. Suddenly, gliding to his side
through a chink, there appeared — some say a wizard, others
say the Evil One (most likely the latter, as the end of the
story will show), and began to speak thus :

" You wish to be rich ; I have heard you say why. I am
glad to help a friend, so here is a purse for you ; there is a
ducat in it — no more. But, as soon as you have taken one coin
out of it, you will find another in it all ready for you. So
now, my friend, your growing rich depends entirely upon your
own wishes. Take the purse, and freely supply yourself
from it until your craving is satisfied. Only bear this in


38 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


mind, — until you shall have flung the purse into the river,
you are forbidden to spend a single ducat"

He spoke, and left the purse with the Poor Man. The
Poor Man was almost beside himself for joy. But, as soon
as he returned to his senses, he began to handle the purse ;
and with what result ? Scarcely could he believe it was not
a dream. He had hardly taken one ducat out, before an-
other was already stirring in the purse. Our needy friend
says to himself,

" I will shake out a heap of ducats. Then, to-morrow I
shall be rich, and I will begin to live like a Sybarite."

But the next morning he had changed his mind.

" It *s true," he says, " I am rich now. But who isn't glad
to get hold of a good thing ? and why shouldn't I become
twice as rich ? It surely wouldn't be laziness in me to spend
another day over the purse. Here I have money for a
mansion, an equipage, a country house. But if I might buy
estates too, wouldn't it be stupid in me to lose such an
opportunity ? Yes, I will keep the wonderful purse. So be
it : I will fast one day more. As to that, I shall always have
time enough for luxurious living."

But what happens ? A day goes by, and then a week, a
month, a year. Our Poor Man has long ago lost all count
of the ducats. Meanwhile, he eats scantily, and drinks
scantily. Scarcely has the day begun to break before he is
back at the old work. The day comes to an end; but, ac-
cording to his calculations, something or other is still sure
to be wanting. Sometimes he makes up his mind to throw


away the purse. But then his lieart grows faint within him.
He reaches the bank of the river, and — then lums back
again.

"How can I possibly part with the purse," he says,
" while it yields a stream of gold of its own accord?"

By this time our poor friend has grown grey, and thin,
and as yellow as his own gold. He no more so much as
thinks about luxury now. He has become faint and feeble ;
health and rest have utterly deserted him. But still with
trembling hand he goes on taking ducats out of the purse.
He takes, and takes; and how does it all end? On the
bench on which he used to sit gloating over his wealth — on
that very bench he dies, in the act of counting the last coins
of his ninth naillion.


THE QUARTETTE.


THE tricksy Monkey, the Goat, the Ass, and bandy-
legged Mishka the Bear, detennine to play a quartette.
They provide themselves with the necessary pieces of music —
with two fiddles, and with an alto and a counter-bass. Then
they sit down on a meadow under a lime-tree, prepared to
enchant the world by their skill. They work away at their
fiddlesticks with a will; and they make a noise, but there is
no music in it.

" Stop, brothers, stop I " cries the Monkey, " wait a little !
How can we get our music right? It's plain, you mustn't
sit as you are. You, Mishka, with your counter-bass, face


THE QUARTETTE, 41


the alto. I will sit opposite the second fiddle. Then a
different sort of music will begin : we shall set the very hills
and forests dancing.''

So they change places, and recommence ; but the music
is just as discordant as before.

" Stop a little," exclaims the Ass; " I have found out the
secret. We shall be sure to play in tune if we sit in a row."

They follow its advice, and form in an orderly line. But
the quartette is as unmusical as ever. Louder than before
there arose among them squabbling and wrangling as to how
they ought to be seated. It happened that a Nightingale
came flying that way, attracted by their noise. At once they
all intreat it to solve their difficulty.

" Be so kind," they say, " as to bear with us a little, in
order that our quartette may come off properly. Music we
have; instruments we have: tell us only how we ought to
place ourselves."

But the Nightingale replies,

" To be a musician, one must have a quicker intelligence
and a finer ear than you possess. You, my friends, may
place yourselves just as you like, but you will never become
musicians."

[Some writers say this fable alludes to the foundation, in
March, i8ii, of the "Society of Lovers of Russian Litera-
ture," which had four departments, and seemed more like a
public office than a literary institution, and the members of
which had places allotted to them according to their rank


i


42 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


rather than to their talents. But Baron Korf says it refers
to the disputes about places which arose among the firs
Presidents of the four departments of the Imperial Council,
at the time of its reconstruction, in the year i8io.]


THE INQUISITIVE MAN.

"/^^ OOD day, dear friend ; where do you come from?'*
VJ "From the Museum, where I have spent three
hours. I saw everything they have there, and examined it
carefully. So much have I seen to astonish me, that, if you
will believe me, I am neither strong enough nor clever
enough to give you a full description of it. Upon my word
it is a palace of wonders. How rich Nature is in invention !
What birds and beasts haven't I seen there ! What flies,
butterflies, cockroaches, little bits of beetles! — some like
emeralds, others like coral. And what tiny cochineal in-
sects ! Why, really, some of them are smaller than a pin's
head."

" But did you see the elephant ? What did you think it
looked like ? I '11 be bound you felt as if you were looking
at a mountain."

" Are you quite sure it 's there ? "

" Quite sure."

" Well, brother, you mustn't be too hard upon me ; but,
to tell the truth, I didn't remark the elephant."

[Bulgarine states that Krilof wrote this fable in allusion
to the remark of some one, perhaps Prince Viazemsky, that


44 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

each of the three great fabulists, La Fontaine, Khemnitser,
and Dmitrief, bore the name of Ivan, — thus omitting all
notice of Ivan Krilof. But the story does not seem to rest
on any substantial authority, and it is entirely out of keeping
with all the other anecdotes about Krilof, who was remarkably
modest and unpretentious.]


THE COOK AND THE CAT.

A CERTAIN Cook, rather more educated than his fellows,
went from his kitchen one day to a neighbouring tavern
— he was of a serious turn of mind, and on that day he cele-
brated the anniversary of a friend's death — leaving a Cat at
home, to guard his viands from the mice. On his return, what
does he see ? The floor strewed with fragments of a pie, and
Vaska the Cat crouching in a comer behind a vinegar-barrel,
purring with satisfaction, and busily engaged in disposing of
a chicken.

" Ah, glutton ! ah, evil-doer ! " exclaims the reproachful
Cook. " Are you not ashamed of being seen by these walls,


46 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

let alone living witnesses ? What ! be an honourable Cat
up to this time — one who might be pointed out as a model
of discretion ! And now, ah me ! how great a disgrace !
Now all the neighbours will say, * The cat Vaska is a rogue ;
the cat Vaska is a thief. Vaska must not be admitted into
the kitchen, not even into the courtyard, any more than a
ravenous wolf into the sheepfold. He is utterly corrupt ; he
is a pest, the plague of the neighbourhood.' "

Thus did our orator, letting loose the current of his words,
lecture away without stopping. But what was the result ?
While he was delivering his discourse, Vaska the Cat ate up
the whole of the chicken.

I would advise some cooks to inscribe these words on their
walls : " Don't waste time in useless speech, when it is action
that is needed."


THE MUSICIANS.

A CERTAIN man invited a neighbour to dinner, not
without an ulterior purpose. He was fond of music,
and he entrapped his neighbour into his house to listen to
his choir. The honest fellows began to sing, each on his
own account, and each with all his might. The guest's ears
began to split, and his head to turn.

" Have pity on me ! " he exclaimed, in amazement.
"What can any one like in all this ? Why, your choristers
bawl like madmen."

" It 's quite true," replied the host, with feeling. " They
&o flay one's ears just a trifle. But, on the other hand.


4« KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


they are all of irreproachable behaviour, and they never
touch a drop of intoxicating liquor."

But, I say, in my opinion you had better drink a little,
if needs be : only take care to understand your business
thoroughly.


w»nw


froWi


i


"li


-^


If -^


t


4


n


'1i


i^


Y


■.' 1


It


1


■ l ' :'P


' I


' V'


-,*


1


ID..-


^y^"


<^,


*:


■■«, 1


THE PEASANT AND THE LABOURER.


AN old Peasant and a Labourer were going home through
the forest to the village one evening, in the time of
the hay-harvest, when they suddenly found themselves face
to face with a bear. Scarcely had the Peasant time to utter
a cry when the bear was upon him ; it threw him down,
rolled him over, made his bones crack again, and began
looking about for a soft spot at which to commence its
meal. Death draws near to the old man.

" Stefan, my kinsman, my dear friend, do not desert me ! "
he cries, from under the bear, to the Labourer.

Then Stefan, putting forth all his strength like a new


50 KRTLOF AND HIS FABLES.

Hercules, splits the bear*s head in two with his axe,' and
drives his pitchfork into its bowels. The bear howls, and
falls dying. Our bear expires.

The danger having vanished, the Peasant gets up, and
soundly scolds the Labourer. Our poor Stefan is astounded.

" Pardon me, what have I done ? "

** What have yo.u done, you blockhead ? I *d like to know
what you are so absurdly pleased about ; why, you 've gone
and stuck the 'bear in such a manner that youVe utterly
ruined his fur ! "


I


i>^.


THE BEAR AMONG THE BEES.


THE beasts elected the Bear, one spring, Inspector of
the Beehives. They might, it is true, have chosen a
more trustworthy animal, seeing that the Bear is passionately
fond of honey. The matter was one to be regretted ; but
who can expect wisdom from beasts ? Every other solicitor
for the post of Hive Inspector they sent away with a refusal,
and finally, as if by way of pleasantry, the Bear made his
appearance in that capacity. But harm soon came of the
appointment for our Bear carried off all the honey into his
den. The theft was found out, an alarm was sounded, and
legal proceedings were taken in due form. Eventually, the


52 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,

Bear was dismissed from his office, and the old rogue was
sentenced to lie in his den all the winter.

The Court decided, ratified, and countersigned ; but, in
spite of all this, it did not return the honey. As for Mishka,
he didn't pay the slightest attention to the affair. Bidding
the world farewell for a season, he betook himself to his
warm den. There he sucks his honeyed paw, and waits till
fair weather invites him to a fresh cruise.

[At the time when Krilof wrote, extortion and corruption
were scandalously rife in Russia. The Government strove
hard to put down the extortioners, and the Press did all that
it could, in its fettered condition, to aid in so good a cause.
But, in spite of all that could be done, the evil went on
flourishing. As soon as Alexander I. came to the throne,
he issued an edict against exactions of every kind ; and in
1809, when the great abuses in the Commissariat Depart-
ment had been brought to light, he renewed the old ukases
of Peter the Great and Catherine II. The first, published
in 17 14, orders that all persons convicted of extorting money
and taking bribes shall undergo severe corporal punishment,
shall forfeit all their property, and shall be ^ treated as rascals,
and turned out of the list of honest people." The second,
of the date of 1763, ordains that they shall be "not only
turned out of the ranks of honest people, but eliminated
from the entire human race." But, notwithstanding all these
energetic declarations, the forbidden practices remained un-
checked ; and, to the end of Alexander's reign, each year


THE BEAR AMONG THE BEES, 53

saw a new edict issued on the subject. In 18 16, especially,
a vigorous attempt was made to produce a reform, and a re-
script was addressed to the Minister of Justice, bidding him
see that the law courts should be rendered the means of
maintaining right, not of confirming wrong ; and that assist-
ance should be given to the weak and needy in their appeals
against oppression. But it too often occurred that, when
some great man had been detected in robbing the poor, the
only punishment he underwent was a nominal banishment to
his estates, where he enjoyed, like the Bear, the fruits of his
villany, and waited till the temporary ill wind should have
blown over.]


THE HORSE AND THE DOG.

A DOG and a Horse, which served the same peasant,
began to discuss each other's merits, one day.

" How grand we are, to be sure ! " says Barbos. " I
shouldn't be sorry if they were to turn you out of the farm-
yard. A noble service, indeed, to plough or to draw a cart !
And I Ve never heard of any other proof of your merit.
How can you possibly compare yourself with me? I rest
neither by day nor by night. In the daytime I watch the
cattle in the meadows ; by night I guard the house."

"Quite true," replied the Horse. "What you say. is per-
fectly correct. Only remember that, if it weren't for my
ploughing, you wouldn't have anything at all to guard here."


DEMIAN'S FISH SOUP.


"XTEIGHBOUR, lightof my eyes! do eat a little more."
J. 'I " Dear neighbour, I am full to the throat.'
" No matter ; just a Uttle plateful. Believe me, the soup

is cooked gloriously."

"But I've had three platefuls already."

"Well, what does that matter? If you like it and it does

you good, why not eat it all up ? What a soup it is ! How

rich ! It looks as if it had been sprinkled over with amber.

Here is bream ; there is a lump of sterlet Take a little more,

dear, kind friend. Just another spoonful ! Wife, come and

intreat him."

Thus does Demian feast his neighbour Phocas, not giving


56 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


him a moment's breathing-time. Phocas feels the moisture
trickling down his forehead ; still he takes one more plateful,
attacks it with all the strength he has left, and somehow
manages to swallow the whole of it.

" That 's the sort of friend I like !" cries Demian. " I can't
bear people who require pressing. But now, dear friend,
take just one little plateful more !"

But, on hearing this, our poor Phocas, much as he liked
fish soup, catching hold of his cap and sash, runs away home
witliout looking behind him. Nor from that day to this has
he crossed Demian's threshold.

[There was a meeting one day, at the house of the poet
Derjavine, of the members of the " Society of the Lovers of
Russian Literature." Krilof had promised to attend, and to
read one of his new and, as yet, unpublished fables ; but he
. did not appear till very late. When he arrived, some one was
reading an exceedingly long poem, which went on and on
until the audience was utterly worn out. At last, however,
it came to an end. Then Krilof was asked to read his poem ;
so he put his hand in his pocket, produced a piece of paper,
and read ** J^emian's Fish Soup." It is easy to imagine how
thoroughly it was appreciated by an audience which had just
been suffering tortures at the hands of a literary Demian —
one of those authors who, when they have once secured a
hearing, never know when it is time to leave off.]


THE WOLVES AND THE SHEEP.

THE Sheep could not live in peace on account of the
Wolves, and the evil increased to such a pitch, that at
last the rulers of the beasts had to take vigorous steps towards
interfering and saving the victims. With that intent a council
was summoned. The majority of its members, it is true,
were Wolves ; but then all Wolves are not badly spoken of
There have been Wolves known, and that often (such
instances are never forgotten), to have walked past a flock
quite peacefully — when completely gorged. So why should
not Wolves have seats in the council? Although it was
necessary to protect the Sheep, yet there was no reason for
utterly suppressing the Wolves.

Well, the meeting took place in the thick wood. They
pondered, considered, harangued, and at last framed a decree.
Here you have it, word for word : — " As soon as a Wolf
shall have disturbed a flock, and shall have begun to worry
a Sheep, then the Sheep shall be allowed, without respect
to persons, to seize it by the scruf of the neck, to carry it
into the nearest thicket or wood, and there to bring it before
the court"

This law is ever3rthing that can be desired. Only, I have
remarked, up to the present day, that although the Wolves


58 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


are not to be allowed to worry with impunity, yet in all
cases, whether the Sheep be plaintiff or defendant, the Wolf
is always sure, in spite of all opposition, to carry off the
Sheep into the forest.


THE MAN AND HIS SHADOW.


THERE was a certain original who must needs desire to
catch his own Shadow. He makes a step or two to-
wards it, but it moves away before him. He quickens his
pace; it does the same. At last he takes to running; but
the quicker he goes, the quicker runs the Shadow also,
utterly refusing to give itself up, just as if it had been a
treasure. But see ! our eccentric friend suddenly turns
round, and walks away from it. And presently he looks
behind him ; the Shadow runs after him now.

Ladies fair, I have often observed what do you sup-
pose ?— no, no ; I assure you I am not going to speak about


6o KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


you that Fortune treats us in a similar way. One man

tries with all his might to seize the goddess, and only loses
his time and his trouble. Another seems, to all appearance,
to be running out of her sight ; but, no : she herself takes a
pleasure in pursuing him. •


THE WOLF AND ITS CUB.

A WOLF, which had begun to accustom its Cub to
support itself by its father's profession, sent it one
day to prowl about the skirts of the wood. At the same
time it ordered it to give all its attention to seeing whether
it would not be possible, even at the cost of sinning a little,
for them both to make their breakfast or dinner at the
expense of some shepherd or other. The pupil returns
home, and says —

" Come along, quick ! Our dinner awaits us : nothing
could possibly be safer. There are sheep feeding at the
foot of yon hill, each one fatter than the other. We have
only to choose which to carry off and eat ; and the flock is
so large that it would be difficult to count it over again "

" Wait a minute," says the Wolf. " First of all I must know
what sort of a man the shepherd of this flock is."

" It is said that he is a good one — painstaking and
inteUigent. But I went round the flock on all sides, and
examined the dogs : they are not at all fat, and seem to be
spiritless and indolent."

" This description," says the old Wolf, " does not greatly
attract me to the flock. For, decidedly, if the shepherd is


62 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

good, he will not keep bad dogs about him. One might very
soon get into trouble there. But come with me : I will take
you to a flock where we shall be in less danger of losing our
skins. Over that flock it is true that a great many dogs
watch ; but the shepherd is himself a fool. And where the
shepherd is a fool, there the dogs too are of little worth."


THE DANCING FISH.


HAVING waters as well as woods in his dominions,
the Lion called the beasts together to a council, to
consider who should be appointed governor of the Fish.
They gave their votes in the usual manner, and the Fox was
chosen. Well, the Fox sat in the governor's seat, and visibly
waxed fat. He had a Moujik as friend, kinsman, and gossip,
and the two used to lay their heads together. The Fox
conducted business and pronounced legal decisions on the
shore ; and meantime his gossip angled after the Fish, and,
like a trusty comrade, shared what he caught with his friend.
But rogues do not always succeed. The Lion somehow


64 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


grew suspicious, from rumours it heard, that the scales had
been falsified in its law courts ; so, having found a leisure
time, it determined to investigate the state of its dominions.

Having gone to the shore, it found that the good gossip
had caught some fish, and had kindled a fire by the river-
side, intending to feast on them with his comrade. The
poor fish were bounding into the air to get away from the
heat, each one to the best of its power : each one, seeing its
end close at hand, flung itself about, gaping at the Moujik.

" Who are you, and what are you doing ? " angrily asked
the Lion.

" Great king ! " answers the chief rogue — the Fox always
has a trick in reserve — " great king | this is my chief secre-
tary here, who is esteemed for his probity by all the nation ;
and these are carp, all inhabitants of the waters. We have
all come here to congratulate you, our good king, on your
arrival."

"Well, how is justice dispensed here? Is your district
content ? "

" Great king ! here they do not merely live ; they are in
Paradise. If only your royal life may be prolonged !" (All
this time the fish were leaping about in the pan.)

" But tell me," said the Lion, "why do they fling them-
selves about topsy-turvy in this manner ? "

" O wise Lion," replied the Fox, " they are dancing for
joy at seeing you."

Not being able to stand such a manifest fiction as this,
the Lion, in order that there should be some music for its


THE DANCING FISH. 65

subjects to dance to, made the secretaiy and the governor
both sing out under its claws.

[This fable, as originally written by Krilof, ended as
follows :

'* O wise Lion," replied the Fox, " they are dancing for
joy at seeing you." Then the Lion, tapping the Starost
kindly on the breast, proceeded on his journey.

But the censor objected that this seemed like a reflection
on the Emperor Alexander, who was then — it was in the
year 1824 — making what was destined to be his last journey
through Russia. Krilof at first refused to make any altera-
tion ; but eventually he modified the fable, and added the
lines with which it now concludes.

There is a tradition that, during one of his travels in the
interior, the Emperor Alexander I. spent a night, in some
city or other, in the governor's house. The next morning,
just as he was on the point of continuing his journey, he
happened tfi 'look out of window, and saw a great crowd
collected in front of the house. The governor, being asked
what was the cause of it, replied that it was a deputation of
the inhabitants, who wished to thank the Emperor for the
happy lives they led. As the Emperor was in a hurry to get
away, he 'declined to receive the deputation, and drove off.

Afterwards it turned out that the people had come to
complain of their governor, who oppressed them terribly.]


THK IMKK.

AN appeal to justice was made against the Pike, on the
ground that it had rendered the pond uninhabitable.
A whole ('art-load of proofs were tendered as evidence; and
the rulprit, as was beseeming, was brought into court in a
large tub. The judges were assembled not far off, having
been set to graze in a neighbouring field. Their names are
still preserved in the archive.s. 1'here were two Donkeys,
a couple of old Horses, and two or three (loats. 'i'he Fox
also was added to their number, as asses.sor, in order that the
business might be carried on under competent supervision.

Now, popular report said that the Pike used to su|)ply the
table of the Fox with fi.sh. However this might be, therr
was no partiality among the judges ; and it must also be
•tated that it was impossible to conceal the Pike's roguery
in the affair in question. So there was no help for it. Sentence
was passed, condemning the Pike to an ignominious punish-
ment. In order to frighten others, it was to be hung from a
tret*.

** Respected judges," thus did the Fox begin to speak,
" hanging is a trifle. I should have liked to have sentenced
the culprit to such a punishment as has never been seen here
among us. In order that rogues may in future live in fear,
and run a terrible risk, 1 would drown it in the river."

" Fxcellent 1 " (Ty the judges, ami unanimously accept
the proposition.

.So the Pike was flung -into the river.


THE GEESE.


A PEASANT, with a long rod in his hand, was driving
some Geese to a town where they were to be sold ;
and, to tell the truth, he did not treat them over-politcly. In
hopes of tnaking a good bai^ain, he was hastening on so as
not to lose the market-day (and when gain is concerned,
geese and men alike are apt to suffer), I do not blame the
peasant ; but the Geese talked about him in a different
spirit, and, whenever they met any passers-by, abused him
to them in such terms as these :

" Is it possible to find any Geese more unfortmiate than
we are? This Moujik harasses us so terribly, and chases us
6 — s


68 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

about just as if we were common Geese. The ignoramus
does not know that he ought to pay us reverence, seeing
that we are the noble descendants of those geese to whom
Rome was once indebted for her salvation, and in whose
honour even feast-days were specially appointed there."

"And do you want to have honour paid you on that
account ? " a passer-by asked them.

" Why, our ancestors "

" I know that — I have read all about it ; but I want to
know this — of what use have you been yourselves ? "

" Why, our ancestors saved Rome ! "

" Quite so ; but what have you done ? "

"We? Nothing."

" Then what merit is there in you ? Let your ancestors
rest in peace — they justly received honourable reward ; but
you, my friends, are only fit to be roasted ! "

It would be easy to make this fable still more intelligil)le ;
but I am afraid of irritating the Geese.


THE LION AND THE PANTHER.

ONCE on a time, in ancient days, the Lion maintained
a very long contest with the Panther about certain
disputed forests, valleys, and caves. To go to law about
their rights — this was not in accordance with their charac-
ters; for, in matters relating to law, the strong are often
blind. For such affairs they have their own rule, — **Who
conquers is right." But at last, that they might not eternally
squabble, with claws ever becoming more blunt, our heroes
determined to submit their dispute to law. Their intention
was to put an end to their fighting, to settle all hostilities,
and then, as is customary, to conclude a peace which should
last uninterrupted — until the next quarrel.

" Let us each choose a secretary at once," proposes the
Panther to the Lion, " and decide according as the two secre-
taries shall advise. I, for instance, will choose the Cat. It
is not a very good-looking little animal ; but, then, its con-
science is clear. But do you, for your part, nominate the
Ass, for it belongs to a distinguished order in the state ;
and, to tell the truth, you will have in it a very enviable
beast. Trust me as a friend in this. All your court and
council together are scarcely worth its hoof. Let us accept
whatever arrangements it and my Cat may make."


70 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

And the Lion sanctioned the first part of the Panther's
scheme without opposition ; only he chose the Fox, instead
of the Ass, to represent him in the discussion, saying to
himself, after so doing,

"Truly, there is but little good to be gained from him
whom an enemy recommends."


A LOVING mother bought a good strong Comb to keep
her boy's hair in order. The child never let his new
present go out of his hands. Whether playing or learning
his alphabet, he was always lovingly passing his Comb through
the twining curls of his waving golden hair, soft as fine fiax.
And what a Comb it was ! Not only did it not pull out his
hair, but it never even got caught in it ; so smoothly and
easily did it glide through his locks. It was a priceless Comb
in the eyes of the child. But at last it happened, one day,
that the Comb was mislaid. Our boy went playing and


*:'■■■■
72 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

romping about, until he got his hair into a regular tangle.
Scarcely had the nurse touched it, when he began to howl,

" Where is my Comb ? "

At last it was founa ; but when they tried to pass it through
his locks, it could not be moved either backwards or forwards :
all it did was to pull his hair out by the roots, so as to bring
the tears into his eyes.

" How wicked you are, you bad Comb ! " cries the boy.

But the Comb replies,

** My dear, I am what I always was ; only your hair has
become tangled."

Whereupon our young friend, giving way to rage and vexa-
tion, flings his Comb into the river. And now the Naiads
comb their hair with it.

In my time I have often seen men behave in a like man-
ner towards the truth. As long as we have a clear conscience,
truth is agreeable to us, we hold it sacred, we listen to it and
obey it ; but as soon as a man has begun to do violence to
his conscience, the truth becomes alien to his ears. Then
every one resembles the boy who did not like to have his
hair combed after it had got into a tangle.


* v.. :


THE AUTHOR AND THE ROBBER.

IN the gloomy realm of shadows, two sinners appeared
before the judges for sentence at the very same time.
The one was a Robber, who used to extract tribute on the
highway, and who had at last come to the gallows ; the other
an Author, covered with glory, who had infused a subtle poison
into his works, had promoted atheism, and had preached
immorality, being, like the Siren, sweet-voiced, and, like the
Siren, dangerous. In Hades judical ceremonies are brief;
there are no useless delays. Sentence was pronounced im-
mediately. Two huge iron cauldrons were suspended in the
air by two tremendous iron chains ; in each of these one of
the sinners was placed. Under the Robber a great pile of
wood was heaped up, and then one of the Furies herself set
it on fire, kindling such a terrible flame, that the very stone in
the roof of the infernal halls began to crack. The Author's
sentence did not seem to be a severe one. Under him, at first,
a little fire scarcely glowed; but, the longer it burned, the
larger it became.

Centuries have now gone by, but the fire has not gone
out. Beneath the Robber the flame has long ago been ex-
tinguished ; beneath the Author it grows hourly worse and
worse. Seeing that there is no mitigation of his torments,


74 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

the writer at last cries out amidst them that there is no justice
among the gods; that he had filled the world with his renown ;
and that, if he had written a little too freely, he had been
punished too much for it ; and that he did not think he had
sinned more than the Robber. Then before him, in all her
ornaments, with snakes hissing amid her hair, and with
bloody scourges in her hands, appeared one of the three In-
fernal Sisters.

"Wretch !" she exclaims, " dost thou upbraid Providence?
Dost thou compare thyself with this robber? His crime is
as nothing compared with thine. Only as long as he lived
did his cruelty and lawlessness render him hurtful. But thou
— long ago have thy bones turned to dust, yet the sun never
rises without bringing to light fresh evils of which thou art
the cause. The poison of thy writings not only does not
weaken, but, spreading abroad, it becomes more malignant as
years roll by. Look there I" and for a moment she enables
him to look upon the world ; " behold the crimes, the misery,
of which thou art the cause. Look at those children who
have brought shame upon their families, who have reduced
their parents to despair. By whom were their heads and
hearts corrupted? By thee. Who strove to rend asunder
the bonds of society, ridiculing as childish follies all ideas of
the sanctity of marriage and the right of authority and law,
and rendering them responsible for all human misfortunes ?
Thou art the man ! Didst thou not dignify unbelief with the
name of enlightenment? Didst thou not place vice and
passion in the most charming and alluring of lights ? And


THE AUTHOR AND THE ROBBER. 75

now look ! — a whole country, perverted by thy teaching, is full
of murder and robbery, of strife and rebellion, and is being
led onwards by thee to ruin. For every drop of that country's
tears and blood thou art to blame. And now dost thou dare
to hurl thy blasphemies against the gods ? How much evil
have thy books yet to bring upon the world ? Continue, then,
to suffer ; for here the measure of thy punishment shall be
according to thy deserts." Thus spoke the angry Fury, and
slammed down the cover on the cauldron.

[There seems to be little doubt that Krilof was thinking
of Voltaire when he wrote this somewhat violent diatribe.
" We prefer to believe," says the French translator of Krilof,
in a note on this passage, " that, in spite of his errors, the
apostle of universal toleration, the ardent promoter of so
many useful and humane reforms, the zealous defender of so
many innocent persons, will find less severity in his real
Judge than he finds here in the Minos of the fable."]


THE HIND AND THE DERVISH.

A YOUNG Hind, bereft of her much-loved fawns, and
still having her udders full of milk, found two young
wolves deserted in a forest, and immediately began to fulfil
the sacred duty of a mother towards them, feeding them with
her milk. A Dervish, who inhabited the same forest, as-
tonished at this proceeding of hers, cried out —

" Imprudent creature that thou art ! On what kind of
animal art thou conferring thy milk? on what art thou
wasting thy affections ? Is it possible that thou canst expect
gratitude from such as they are ? Or is it that thou dost not
know their evil nature ? Some day, perhaps, it will be thy
blood that they will drink."

" It may be so, indeed," replied the Hind ; " but I did not
think, nor do I wish to think, of that. It is only as a mother
that I care to feel just now ; and my milk would have been a
burden to me if I had not given suck to these little ones.''

Thus genuine charity does good without thinking of re-
compense. To the really benevolent, their abundance would
be burdensome if they could not share it with those wlio
are in want.


i


CANINE FRIENDSHIP.


UNDER a kitchen window lay Barbos and Polkan, bask-
ing in the sunshine. It would have been more fitting
in them to have been guarding the house at the gate in front
of the courtyard. But they had eaten till they were satiated,
and, besides, polite dogs do not bark at any one in the day-
time. So they indulged in a discussion about all sorts of
things — about their doggish service, about good and evil,
and finally about friendship.

" What," says Polkan, " can be pleasanter than to live heart
to heart with a friend ? — in everything to offer mutual service ;
not to sleep or eat without one's friend, and to defend his


78 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


body with all one's force ; finally, for friends to look into one
another's eyes, and each to think that only a fortunate hour
in which he could please or amuse his friend, and to place
all his own happiness in his friend's good fortune ! Suppose,
for instance, you and I were to contract such a friendship.
I venture to say, we should not be able to tell how quickly
time was flying."

" That is true. So be it," replies Barbos. " Long has it
been grievous to me, my dear Polkan, that we, who are dogs
of the same yard, cannot spend a single day without (juar-
railing : and why is it ? Thanks to our master, we are
neither closely pent nor scantily fed. Besides, it really is
scandalous. From the earliest times the dog has been the
type of friendship ; yet you scarcely ever see any more friend-
ship among dogs than among men."

" Let us make manifest an instance of it to our own times,"
says Polkan.

*' Your paw!"

" There it is."

Straightway the new friends begin to caress and fondle
each other. They know not, in their raptures, to what to liken
themselves.

"My Orestes!"

"My Pylades!"

"Away with all quarrels, all envy, all malice !"

Unluckily, at this moment the cook tosses a bone out of the
kitchen. Our new friends fling themselves upon it furiously.
What has become of their harmonious alliance ? Orestes and


CANINE FRIENDSHIP, 79


Pylades seize each other by the throat, so that their hair goes
flying to the winds, and even torrents of water will scarcely
separate them.

The world is full of such friendships. One would not be
far wrong if one said of friends, as they are now-a-days, that
they are almost all alike in respect to their friendship.
To listen to them, you would imagine they were perfectly
unanimous. But just throw them a bone; they will behave
exactly like our dogs.*


Kenevich says that this fable, which appeared in May, 1815, was sugtcested by the

proceedings of the Congress of Vienna.


r


^;^


THE CUCKOO AND THE COCK.


i(


H


OW proudly and sonorfiisly you sing, my dear
Cock i "

"But you, dear Cuckoo, my light, how smoothly flows
your long-drawn-out note ! There is no wich singer in all
the rest of our forest."

" To you, my dear gossip, I could listen for ever."

" And as for you, my beauty, I swear that, when yon arc
silent, I scarcely know how to wait till you begin again.
Where do you get such a voice from ? — so clear, so soft, and
so high 1 But no doubt you were always like that ; not
very large in stature, but in song — a regular nightingale."

" Thanks, gossip. As for you, I declare, on my conscience,
you sing better than the birds in the garden of Eden. I*or
a proof of this, I appeal to public opinion."

At this moment a Sparrow, which had overheard their
conversation, said to them,

" You may go on praising one another till you are hoarse,
my friends ; but your music is utterly worthless."

Why was it that, not being afraid to sin, the Cuckoo
praised the Cock ? Simply because the Cock praised the
Cuckoo.*

* Thiii in said to allude to the perpetual interchange of compliinentK which u^cll
to take place between the oditorM of the " Northern Bee "-Grech and liulgurinc.


THE PEASANTS AND THE RIVER.


SOME Peasants, who had been driven out of all patience
by the ruin which the brooks and rivulets had brought
upon them by their overflowing, set out to seek redress from
the River into which those streams fell. And, indeed, there
was much reason for denouncing them. They had torn
away the seed from the newly-sown fields, they had over-
thrown and washed away mills, and it was impossible to
count the cattle they had drowned. But the River flows so
gently, though indeed proudly : on its banks great cities
stand, and no one ever hears such tricks laid to its chaige.
So, doubtless, it will put a check upon these streams.


82 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

Thus did the Peasants reason among themselves. But
what happened ? When they had drawn near to the banks
of the River, and looked out upon its surface, they saw that
its stream was bearing along half of their missing property.
The Peasants, without beginning a fruitless complaint, only
gazed on the waters for awhile. Then, after looking in each
other's faces, and shaking their heads, they returned home ;
and as they went, they said,

" Why should we waste our time ? You '11 never get any
redress for what the children have stolen, so long as their
parents go halves with them in the spoil."

[The best comment upon this fable is that supplied by
Trutofsky's illustration of it. A number of peasants have
come to lay before the district Ispravnik, or officer of rural
police, a complaint against some of their petty oppressors.
But, on arriving near the Ispravnik's house, they see that
worthy standing in his verandah, banignantly smiling on the
two men they have come to complain of, who are offering
him a variety of presents, all of which the peasants recog-
nise as having formerly belonged to themselves. Horrified
at the sight, they are evidently about to retire without laying
their case before such a judge.]


THE BAG.

AN empty Bag long lay neglected on the ground, in the cor-
ner of an antechamber, the lowest menials of the house
often using it as a mat to rub their shoes upon. But suddenly
our Bag was turned to honourable account, and filled full of
ducats. In an iron-bound coffer it now lies in security. Its
master caresses it with his own hand, and takes such care
of it that not a breath of wind is able to ruffle it ; no fly dares
to light upon it. Besides this, the whole town becomes well
acquainted with the Bag. If a friend comes to visit its master,
he willingly begins to say pleasant things about the Bag.
Whenever it is opened, every one smiles sweetly upon it ; and
whoever sits down by its side is sure to pat it or stroke it
affectionately, , seeing that it is universally respected. The
Bag begins to be puffed up, to make much of itself, to air its
cleverness. It begins to chatter and to give utterance to non-
sense, discussing and criticising everything : " This is not so,"
and " That man is a fool," or " That affair will turn out badly."
Every one gives it his entire attention, listening with open
mouth, although it talks nonsense enough to make their ears
tingle. But, unfortunately, men have this weakness, that they
are sure to admire whatever a Bag says, so long as it is full
of ducats.

6—2


84 KRTLOF AND HIS FABLES.


But did the Bag long enjoy honour? — did its reputation
for cleverness last, and was it long the object of endearment ?
Only until its last ducat had been taken out of it : then it was
flung out of doors, and nothing more was ever heard of it.

[To this Bag Krilof compares many of the wealthy brandy-
tax farmers.* Some of them, he says, were once mere waiters
in petty taverns, but have now grown rich, and assumed airs
of importance. ** A million is a great fact. Only, friends,
don't be too proud. Shall I whisper the truth to you ? Ood
grant you may not get ruined ! For, if you do, the same fate
will befall you that befell the Bag."]


• CoiUraCtoM who farmed the tax on spirits, and made cnlosjtal fortunc.4, supplying
the peaiianti with the worst of liquors, and getting as much us they could out of them.
The whole system has now been altered, and this class of contractors no longer exists.


FORTUNE AND THE BEGGAR.


A WRETCHED Beggar, carrying a ragged old wallet,
was creeping along from house to house ; and, as he
grumbled at his lot, he kept wondering that folks who lived
in rich apartments, and were up to their throats in money and
in the sweets of indulgence, should be always unsatisfied,
however full their pockets might be, and that they should go
so far as often to lose all they have, while unreasonably
craving for, and laying their hands on, new riches. " Here,
for instance," he says, " the former master of this house suc-
ceeded in trading prosperously, and made himself enormously
rich by commerce. But then, instead of stopping, and hand-


86 KRILOF AND HIS FAIU.KS.

ing over his business to another, and spending the rest of his
years in peace, he took to e(|iiipping ships for the sea in the
spring. He exi)ected to get mountains of gold ; but the
ships were smashed, and his treasures were swallowed up by
the waves. Now they all lie at the bottom of the sea, and
he has found his riches melt away like those in dreams.
Another man became one of the farmers of the spirit-tax,
and so gained a million. That was a trifle : he wanted to
double it. So he plunged up to his ears in speculations, and
was utterly ruined. In short, instances of this are countless.
And quite right too : a man should use discretion."

At this moment Fortune suddenly appeared to the Beggar,
and said, " Listen ! I have long wished to help you. Here
is a lot of ducats I have found. Hold out your wallet, and
I will fill it with them ; but only on this condition :--All shall
be gold that falls into the wallet ; but if any of it falls out
of the wallet to the ground, it .shall all become dust. Con-
sider this well. I have warned you beforehand. I shall keep
strictly to my compact. Your wallet is old ; don't overload
it beyond its powers."

Our Beggar is almost too overjoyed to breathe. He scarcely
feels the ground beneath his feet. He opens his wallet, and
with generous hand a golden stream of ducats is poured into
it. The wallet soon becomes rather heavy.

" Is that enough?"

*' Not yet."

** Isn't it cracking?"

" Never fear."


FORTUNE AND THE BEGGAR, 87

" Consider, you 're quite a Croesus."

"Just a little more \ just add a handful."

" There, it 's full. Take care : the wallet is going to burst."

"Just a little bit more."

But at that moment the wallet split; the treasure fell
through, and turned to dust; and Fortune disappeared. The
Beggar had nothing but his empty wallet, and remained as
poor as before.


J


THE CUCKOO AND THE EAGLE.

THE Eagle promoted a Cuckoo to the rank of a
Nightingale. The Cuckoo, proud of its new position,
seated itself proudly on an aspen, and began to exhibit its
musical talents. After a time, it looks round. All the birds
are flying away, some laughing at it, others abusing it. Our
Cuckoo grows angry, and hastens to .the Eagle with a com-
plaint against the birds.

'* Have pity on me I ** it says. " According to your com-
mand, I have been appointed Nightingale to these woods,
and yet the birds dare to laugh at my singing."

" My friend," answers the Eagle, " I am a king, but I am
not God. It is impossible for me to remedy the cause of
your complaint. I can order a Cuckoo to be styled a
Nightingale ; but to make a Nightingale out of a Cuckoo- -
that I cannot do."


— ♦ —


THE ASS.


A PEASANT had an Ass which seemed to behave itself
so discreetly that he could not praise it too highly.
But, in order that it might not get lost in the forest, our
peasant tied a bell round its neck. On this our Ass, who
had evidently heard a great deal of talk about decorations,
became puffed up, began to grow proud and conceited, and
looked upon itself as a veiy important gentleman. But its
new rank proved ruinous to the Ass, poor thing ! — a fact
which may serve as a lesson for others besides asses. I ought
to tell you beforehand that Ihe Ass was never over-honest ;


90 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

but until it got its bell everything went smoothly with it. If
it made its way into a field of rye or oats, or into a garden,
it ate what it wanted, and then got out again quietly. But
now it is a very different story with him. Whenever our
illustrious gentleman trespasses, the bell which now adoms
his neck goes with him, and rings an incessant peal. Every-
one looks out to see what it is. Here, one man, seizing a
bludgeon, drives our poor beast out of his rye-field or his
garden ; and there, another, who owns a field of oats, no
sooner hears the sound of the bell, than he catches up a
stake, and begins thrashing the unfortunate animal's flanks.
So that by the autumn our poor grandee is half dead : the
Ass has nothing left but skin and bone.*

In the same way among men, also, rank proves injurious
to rogues. As long as a rogue's position is humble, he is not
remarked. But a lofty rank is, to a rogue, as it were a bell
round his neck. Its noise is loud, and may be heard afar
off.


* 'I'here is a good deal of resemblance between this Ass and the Dog in one nf

/Esop's fables.


THE LANDLORD AND THE MICE.

A CERTAIN Merchant built a magazine, in which he
stored away his stock of edibles ; and, in order that
the mice should not damage them, he instituted a police of
cats. And now the Merchant lives in peace. His stores are
patrolled day and night, and all goes well. Unfortunately,
an unexpected contingency occurs. One of the guardians
proves himself a thief. Among cats, as with us (who knows
it not?), the police are not faultless. But then, instead of
detecting and punishing the thief, and sparing the honest
servant, our landlord orders all his cats to be whipped. As
soon as they hear this ingenious sentence, honest and guilty
alike, they all run out of the house as quickly as possible :
our landlord remains catless. This is just what the mice
have been hoping and longing for. They enter the stores as
soon as the cats have left, and in two or three weeks they
contrive to eat up the whole of their contents.

[This fable, printed in 1811, probably alludes to the con-
sequences of the wholesale punishment inflicted on the
officials of the Commissariat and Victualling Departments
during the war with France. They were disgraced in a


92 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


body, and their uniforms were taken from them. The result
was, that numbers of them retired from the service, rather
than put up with such a slight. Krilof was interested in
the matter; for the sister of one of his best friends was
married to the General-Provision-Master.]


THE PEASANT AND THE SHEEP.

A PEASANT summoned a Sheep into court, charging
the poor thing with a criminal offence. The judge
was — the Fox. The case got into full swing immediately.
Plaintiff and defendant were equally adjured to state, point
by point, and without both speaking at once, how the affair
took place, and in what their proofs consisted.

Says the Peasant : " On such and such a day, I missed
two of my fowls early in the morning. Nothing was left of
them but bones and feathers. And no one had been in the
yard but the Sheep." Then the Sheep depones that it was
fast asleep all the night in question; and it calls all its
neighbours to testify that they had never known it guilty
either of theft or of any roguery ; andj besides this, it states
that it never touches flesh-meat. /

Here is the Fox's decision, word ^ot word :
" The explanation of the Shee^^annot under any circum-
stances be accepted. For all rogj/es are notoriously clever
at concealing their real designs ; and it appears manifest, on
due inquiry, that on the aforesaid night the Sheep was not
separated from the fowls; and fowls are exceedingly savoury,
and opportunity favoured it. Therefore I decide, according


t
f


94 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,

to my conscience, that it is impossible that the Sheep could
have forborne to eat the fowls ; and accordingly the Sheep
shall be put to death, and its carcase shall be given to the
court, and its fleece shall be taken by the plaintiff."


X


THE RAZORS.

AS I was travelling, one day, I fell in with an acquaintance,
and we spent the night in the same bed-room. As
soon as I awake next morning, what do I hear? My friend
is evidently in trouble. The night before, we had both gone to
bed meny and free from care-; but now my friend is entirely
changed: he groans, he sighs, he mutters words of com-
plaining.

"What is the matter, iny friend?" I cry. "You're not
ill, I hope."

" Oh, no," he rephes ; " but 1 'm shaving,"

" What ! is that all ? " I exclaim ; and thereupon I get up


96 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

and look at him. The strange fellow is making faces at
himself in the looking-glass, with tears in his eyes, and looking
as agonized all the time as if he were expecting to be flayed
alive. When I had at last discovered the cause of such suf-
ferings, I say to him, " It *s no wonder, and it 's entirely your
own fault that you are so much hurt. Just look at those
things of yours. They are more like carving-knives than
razors : as to shaving with them, that is impossible. All you
can do is to scrape yourself painfully with them."

" I must allow, brother," he replies, " that the razors are
excessively blunt ; how can I help kntwing that ? I 'm not
such a fool as all that. But I never use sharp ones, for fear
of cutting myself."

" But I venture to assure you, my friend, that you will cut
yourself much sooner with a blunt razor. With a sharp one
y<wi will shave yourself twice as safely ; only you must know
how to use it properly."

Are there not many, though they would be ashamed to
own it, who are afraid of clever people, and are more ready
to have fools about them ?


•»•


THE MONKEY AND THE MIRROR.

A MONKEY, which saw its image one day in a mirror,
gave a Bear a slight push with its foot, and said,
" Only look, my dear gossip, what a hideous* creature that
is 1 What grimaces it makes ! How it skips about ! I
should hang myself from vexation if I were at all like that.
But, if we must tell the truth, are there not in the number
of our friends five or six such grimacers ? "

" Why take the trouble to count up your friends ? Would
it not be better to take a look at yourself? " answered the
Bear.

But Mishka's advice was only thrown away uselessly.

There are plenty of examples of this in the world. No
one is ready to recognise himself in a satire. I remarked
that only yesterday. We ^,11 know that Clement's hands are
not clean. Every one charges Clement with taking bribes ;

but he shakes his head with secret horror when he thinks of

f.

Peter's unjust proceedings.* ;


t.


. #»


THE ELEPHANT IN FAVOUR.

ONCE upon a time, the Elephant stood high in the
good graces of the Lion. The forest immediately
began to talk about the matter, and, as usual, many guesses
were made as to the means by which the Elephant had
gained such favour.

" It is no beauty," say the beasts to each other, " and it
is not amusing. And what habits it has ! what manners ! "

Says the Fox, whisking about his brush, " If it had pos-
sessed such a bushy tail as mine, I should not have wondered."

" Or, sister," says the Bear, " if it had got into favour on
account of claws, no one would have found the matter at all
extraordinary; but it has no claws at all, as we all know well."

" Isn't it its tusks that have got it into favour?" thus the
Ox broke in upon their conversation. " Haven't they, per-
haps, been mistaken for horns?"

" Is it possible," said the Ass, shaking its ears, " that you
don't know how it has succeeded in making itself liked, and
in becoming distinguished ? Why, I have guessed the reason.
If it hadn't been distinguished for its long ears, it never would
have got into favour."


THE WOLF AND THE MOUSE.


A GRISLY Woif carried off a sheep from the fold into
■^*- a retired nook in the forest — not from hospitality,
one may well suppose. The glutton tore the skin off the
poor sheep, and began devouring it so greedily that the
bones cracked under its teeth. But, in spite of its rapacity,
it could not eat it all up; so it set aside what remained over
for supper, and then, lying down close by it, cuddled itself
together at its ease, after the succulent repast.

But, see, the smell of the banquet has attracted its near
neighbour, a young Mouse. Between the mossy tufts and hil-
locks it has crept, has seized a morsel of meat, and has run


loo KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


off quickly to its home in a hollow tree. Perceiving the
theft, our Wolf begins to howl through the forest, crying,
" Police ! Robbery ! Stop thief ! I *m ruined ! I 've been
robbed of everything I possessed !"

Just such an occurrence did I witness in the town. A thief
stole a watch from Clement, the judge, and the judge shouted
after the thief, " Police, police !"


THE PEASANT IN TROUBLE.


A THIEF crept into a Peasant's house one autumn
night, and, betaking himself to the store-room,* rum-
maged the walls, the shelves, and the ceiling, and stole,
without remorse, all he could lay his hands on. So that our
Moujik, poor fellow, who had Iain down a rich man, woke up
so bereft of everything, that a beggar's sack seemed the only
resource left him in the world. Heaven grant that none of
us may ever know a similar wakii^ ! The Peasant weeps


I02 KRILOF AND HIS FAHLES.


and wiiilH, and calls together his friendH and rclativeH, his
gossips, and all his neighbours.

** Can*t you help me in my trouble ? " he asks.

Then each begins to address the Peasant, and favours him
with sage advice.

Says his gossip Karpich, " Ah, my light I you shotildn'i
have gone boasting to all the world that you were so rich."

Says his gossip Klimich, " In future, my dear gossip, yoti
nuist take care to have the store-room close to the room you
sleep in."

*'Ah, brothers, you're all in the wrong," exclaims his
neighbour Phocas. "The fault wasn't in the store-room
being at a distance. What you must do is to keej) some
fierce dogs in your yard. Take whichever you please of my
Jouchka's puppies. I would far rather cordially make a
present of them to a good neighbour than drown them."

And thus, as far as words went, his loving friends and
relatives gave him a thousand excellent pieces of advice,
each according to his power ; but when it came to deeds,
not one of them would helj) the poor fellow.


THE SWORD-BLADE.


THE keen blade of a Sword, made of Damascus steel,
which had been thrown aside on a heap of old iron,
was sent to market with the other pieces of metal, and sold
for a trifle to a Moujik. Now, a Moujik's ideas move in a
narrow circle. He immediately set to work to tuni the blade
to account. Our Moujik fitted a handle to the blade, and
began to strip with it lime trees, in the forest, of the bark he
wanted for shoes, while at home he unceremoniously splin-
tered fir chips with it. Sometimes, also, he would lop off
twigs with it, or small branches for mending his wattled
fences, or would shape stakes with it for his garden paling.


I04 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


And the result was that, before the year was out, our blade
was notched and rusted from one end to the other, and the
children used to ride astride of it. So one day a Hedgehog,
which was lying under a bench in the cottage, close by the
spot where the blade had been flung, said to it,

" Tell me, what do you think of this life of yours ? If there
is any truth in all the fine things that are said about Da-
mascus steel, you surely must be ashamed of having to
splinter fir chips, and square stakes, and of being turned, at
last, into a plaything for children."

But the Sword-blade replied,

" In the hands of a warrior, I should have been a terror to
the foe ; but here my special faculties are of no avail. So
in this house I am turned to base uses only. But am I free
to choose my employment ? No ! Not I, but he, ought to
be ashamed, who could not see for what 1 was fit to be
employed."


THE RAIN-CLOUD.

A GREAT Cloud passed rapidly over a country which
was parched by heat, but did not let fall a single drop
to refresh it. Presently it poured a copious stream of rain
into the sea, and then began boasting of its generosity in
the hearing of a neighbouring Mountain. But the Mountain
replied,

"What good have you done by such generosity? and how
can one help being pained at seeing it ? If you had poured
your showers over the land, you would have saved a whole
district from famine. But as to the sea, my friend, it has
plenty of water already, without you adding to it."

[This fable is said to have been written on the occasion of
certain grants of land made to the Governor of the Province
of Pskof, during the prevalence of a terrible famine in that
part of the country.]


THE WHISK.

GREAT honours were suddenly conferred upon a dirty
Whisk.* It will not now any longer sweep the floors
of kitchens ; for the master*s caftans are handed over to it,
the servants having, probably, got drunk. Well, our Whisk
set to work vigorously. It was never tired of belabouring
the master's clothes, and it thrashed the caftans like so much
rye. Undoubtedly its industry was great ; only the mi.sfor-
tune was, that it was itself so dirty. Of what use, then, was
all its toil ? The more it tried to clean anything, the dirtier
did it make it.

Just as much harm is done when a fool interferes in what
is out of his own line, and undertakes to correct the work of
a man of learning.


• In KtiMuin, a Goiik. 'I'hin in n provinciAl W(;rrl, a native of the Province of .Simi
lcn>»k. The Go/ik is a hunch of Imrc twig* goiy nicaninK bare Ki'CHtly rencmblinK <nir
Hcholantic birch. The KiiMianii make ^rcat \\%c of it in their bnthfi(nce Dal'ii " V.x
pUnatory l/cxiu>n of the livinjf (/rcut KitHhian l^nKtiaxc/' a work of the KrcatcMt
v;ihje to every one who wikhcn to liecome really well acquainted with KtioHian liieratiirrj


THE EAGLE AND THE SPIDER.


AN EAGLE had soared above the clouds to the loftiest
peak of the Caucasus. There, on an ancient cedar
it settled, and admired the landscape visible at its feet. It
seemed as if the borders of the world could be seen from
thence. Here flowed rivers, winding across the plains ; there
stood woods and meadows, adorned with the full garb of
spring ; and, beyond, frowned the angry Caspian Sea, black
as a raven's wing.

" Praise be to thee, O Jove, that, as ruler of the worid,
thou hast bestowed on me such powers of flight that I know
of no heights to me inaccessible ! " — thus the Eagle addressed


io8 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


Jupiter — "insomuch that I now look upon the beauties of
the world from a point whither no other being has ever
flown."

" What a boaster you are ! " replies a Spider to it from a
twig. " As I sit here, am I lower than you, comrade ? "

The Eagle looks up. Truly enough, the Spider is busy
spinning its web about a twig overhead, just as if it wanted
to shut out the sunlight from the Eagle.

" How did you get up to this height ? " asks the Eagle.
**Even among the strongest of wing there are some who
would not dare to trust themselves here. But you, weak and
wingless, is it possible you can have crawled here ? " '

" No ; I didn't use that means of rising aloft."

" Well, then, how did you get here ? "

" Why, I just fastened myself on to you, and you brought
me yourself from down below on your tail-feathers. But I
know how to maintain my position here without your help,
so I beg you will not assume such airs in my presence ; for
know that I "

At this moment a gust of wind comes suddenly flying by,
and whirls away the Spider again into the lowest depths.


THE MERCHANT.


"/ 'OME here, Andrew, my brother! Where have you
^— ' got to ? Come here, quickly, and admire your uncle's
doings. Deal as I do, and you '11 never suffer loss." Thus
in his shop spoke a Merchant to his nephew. " You know
that remnant of Polish cloth — the one we have had on our
hands so long, because it was old, and damp, and rotten? Well,
I 've just passed it off for English. Here is a hundred-rouble
note I have just this instant got for it. Heaven must have
sent a fool this way."

" Just so, uncle, just so," replied the nephew ; " only I 'm


no KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


not quite sure as to which was the fool. Just look here;
you 11 see you Ve taken a forged note."

To cheat ! — the Merchant cheated : there 's nothing won-
derful in that. But if one looks around in the world a little
higher than where the shops arc, one sees that even there
people go on in the self-same manner. Almost all of them
are occupied in everything by the .same calculation ; and that
is, '* How can one man hest succeed in cheating another?"


THE PIG.

A PIG once made its way into the courtyard of a lordly
mansion, sauntered at its will around the stables and
the kitchen, wallowed in filth, bathed in slops, and then
returned home from its visit a thorough pig.

" Well, Kavronya, what have you seen f " says the Swine-
herd to the Pig. " They do say that there is nothing but
pearls and diamonds* in rich people's houses, and that there
each thing is richer than the rest."


• On< or KrIU>r> Rus:


uatucked thii £kble »a beuij[ "tovf,"t


112 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


" I assure you they talk nonsense," grunted Kavronya. " I
saw no riches at all — nothing but dirt and offal ; and yet
you may suppose I didn*t spare my snout, for I dug up the
whole of the back yard."

God forbid I should hurt any one by my comparison ; but
how can one help calling those critics Kavronyas who, in
whatever they have to discuss, have the faculty of seeing
only that which is bad ?


fault with the two words biscr and Jt'ttn/ing, used licrc by the Swineherd to describe
something precious, saying that they botli mean ])carls. His remark holds good for
the old Slavonic ; but in modern Russian biscr means glass beads of various colour's
used for stringing, and jenichug;, the real i)earl.


THE FOX IN THE ICE.

VERY early one winter morning, during a hard frost, a
Fox was drinking at an ice-hole, not far from the haunts
of men. Meanwhile, whether by pure accident or from negli-
gence doesn't much matter, the end of its tail got wet, and
froze to the ice. No great harm was done ; the Fox could
easily remedy it. It had only to give a tolerably hard pull,
and leave about a score of its hairs behind ; then it could
run away home quickly, before any one came. -But how could
it make up its mind to spoil its tail ? Such a bushy tail as it
was, so ample and golden ! No ; better wait a little. Surely,
men are sleeping still. It 's even possible that a thaw may,
meanwhile, set in. In that case, it will be able to withdraw
its tail easily from the ice-hole. So it waits : it goes on
waiting, but its tail only freezes all the more. It looks round;
the day is already beginning to dawn. People are stirring ;
voices are to be heard. Our poor Fox begins to rush about
wildly — now this way, now that. But still it cannot free itself
from the hole. Luckily, a Wolf comes running that way.

" Dear friend, gossip, father !" cries the Fox, " do save me
I am all but lost !"

8


1 14 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


So the Wolf stopped, and set to work to rescue the Fox.
Its method was a very simple one : it bit the tail of the Fox
clean off. So our foolish friend went home tailless, but re-
joicing that its skin was still on its back.


MIRON.


' I 'HERE lived in a certain city a rich man, named Miron.
A Against this rich man arose complaints from his
neighbours on all sides. And the neighbours were so far
right that, although he had millions in his strong box, he
never gave a copeck to the poor.

But who is there who does not like to gain a good reputa-
tion? In order to give a different turn to the conversation
about him, our Miron made it publicly known among the
people, that in future he meant to give away foOd to the
needy every Saturday. And, indeed, any one who passed


ii6 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


his house, at the end of the week, could see that his gates
were not closed.

"Poor fellow!" they think, "he will be utterly ruined."
But of that there was no fear; for, every Saturday, he un-
chained a number of ferocious dogs, so that it was not a
question with the poor who visited him of eating or oi
drinking, but simply of escaping, if Heaven willed it, with a
whole skin.

In the meantime, Miron was looked upon as almost a
saint. Every one said, "One can't sufficiently admire Miron;
only it 's a pity that he keeps such savage dogs, and that it \s
so difficult to get at him : otherwise, he is ready to give away
all he has, even to the uttermost copeck."

It has often occurred to me to see how hard of access are
the palaces of great people. But, of course, the fault is not
due to the Mirons. It is always the dogs who are to blame.


THE WOLF AND THE FOX.


A FOX, which had feasted on fowls to satiety, and had
set aside a good store of spare food, lay down under a
haycock, one evening, to sleep. Suddenly it looks up, and
sees a hungry Wolf dragging itself along to pay it a visit.

" This is terrible, gossip !" says the WolE '■ I cannot any-
where find even the smallest of bones to pick, and I am ac-
tually dying of hunger. The d(^s are malicious, the shepherd
won't sleep, and I have nothing left but to hang myself,"

"Really?"

" Really and truly."

" My poor old gossip ! But won't you take a litde hay ?


ii8 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

There is a whole haycock. I am delighted to oblige my
friend."

But what its friend wanted was meat, not hay; and about
its stock of provisions the Fox said never a word. So my
grey-coated hero, though greatly caressed as to its ears by its
gossip, had to go to bed supperless.


THE OWL AND THE ASS.

A BLIND Ass, which had undertaken a long journey,
wandered from the road into a forest. As the night
came on, our foolish fellow went so far into the thicket that
it couldn't move either backwards or forwards; and even one
who had eyes would have been unable to get out of that
difficulty. But an Owl, by good luck, happened to be in the
neighbourhood, and offered to act as a guide to the Ass.
We all know how well Owls see at night. Hills, hillocks,
ditches, precipices — all these our Owl distinguished as if it
had been daylight, and, by daybreak, it had made its way with
the Ass to the level road. Now, how could any one part with
such a guide ? So the Ass entreated the Owl not to desert it,
and determined to visit the whole world in the OwPs company.
Our Owl seated itself like a lord on the back of the Ass,
and the two friends began to continue their journey. But
did it prosper? No. The sun had scarcely begun to glow
in the morning sky, when a greater than nocturnal darkness
hid everything from the OwPs eyes. But our Owl is obsti-
nate : it directs the Ass at random.

" Take care ! " it cries. " We shall tumble into a pool, if
we go to the right."


1 20 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

There was really no pool on the right ; but on the left there
was even worse.

" Keep more to the left — another pace to the left ! "
And — the Owl and the Ass fell into the ravine together.


THE MONKEY AND THE SPECTACLES.


A MONKEY became weak-sighted in old age. Now it
had heard men say that this misfortune was one of no
great importance ; only one must provide oneself with glasses.
So it gets half-a-dozen pairs of spectacles, turns them now
this way and now that, puts them on the top of its head,
applies them to its tail, smells them, licks them ; still the
spectacles have no effect at all on its sight.

" Good lack ! " it cries, " what fools they be who listen to
all the nonsense men utter I They've told me nothing but
lies about the spectacles. There isn't an atom of good in
them."


122 KRILOF AAD HIS FABLES.

Here the Monkey, in its vexation and annoyance, flung
them down on a stone so violently that they were utterly
broken to bits.

Unfortunately, men behave in the same way. However
useful a thing may be, an ignorant man, who knows nothing
about its value, is sure to speak ill of it, and, if he possesses
any influence, he persecutes it too.


THE ELEPHANT AND THE PUG-DOG.

AN Elephant was being taken through the streets, pro-
bably as a sight. It is well known that Elephants are
a wonder among us; so crowds of gaping idlers followed the
Elephant. From some comer or other, a Pug-dog comes to
meet him. It looks at the Elephant, and then begins to run
at it, to bark, to squeal, to try to get at it, just as if it
wanted to fight it.

"Neighbour, cease to bring shame on yourself," says
Shafka * to it. " Are you capable of fighting an Elephant ?
Just see now, you are already hoarse; but it keeps straight on,
and does not pay you the slightest attention."

" Aye, aye ! " replies the Pug-dog, " that *s just what gives
me courage. In this way, you see, without fighting at all,
I may get reckoned among the greatest bullies. Just let the
dogs say, ^ Ah, look at Puggy ! He must be strong, indeed,
that's clear, or he would never bark at an Elephant' "


* Name given to a long-haired dog.


THE INDUSTRIOUS BEAR.

SEEING that a Peasant, who employed himself in mak-
ing dugas,* disposed of them advantageously, a Bear
determined to gain its living by the same business. The
forest resounded with knocking and cracking, and the noise
of the Bear*s pranks could be heard a verst off. It destroyed
a prodigious number of elms, birches, and hazels; but its
labours did not lead to a good result. (For dugas are bent
by dint of patience, and not in a moment.) So our Bear goes
to the Peasant, and asks his advice, saying,

" Neighbour, what is the reason of this? I can break
trees ; but I haven't been able to bend one into a duga.
Tell me, in what does the real secret of success consist ? "

" In that," answered the Peasant, " of which, my friend,
you haven't a bit — in patience."


* The duga is the wooden arch which, in a Russian cart or carriage, rises from the
shafts above the horse's neck. When gaily painted and provided with bells, it is
supposed to appeal to the animal's aesthetic tastes, and to encourage it to go on its
way rejoicing. There are factories now in which dugas arc made wholesale by steam-
power.


THE FOX AS ARCHITECT.

A CERTAIN Lion was exceedingly fond of fowls, but
they never throve with him. And that was no
wonder. They lived utterly free from all restrictions; and
so some of them were stolen, others disappeared of their own
accord.

To remedy this unpleasantness and loss, the Lion deter-
mined to build a large poultry-yard, and so cunningly to
design and arrange it, as entirely to keep out thieves, but to
provide the fowls with plenty of space and all things needful,

Well, they inform the Lion that the Fox is a great hand
at building, so the affair is entrusted to him. The building
is begun and ended successfully, the Fox working at it with
all conceivable industry and talent. The building is looked
at and examined in detail. Truly, it is a work which can-
not be too much admired. Everything is there which any
one can possibly desire — food close at hand, perches
inserted everywhere, refuges from cold and heat, and retired
little places for the sitting hens. All honour and glory to
our good Fox ! A liberal reward is bestowed on him, and
an order is given to transfer the fowls, without loss of time, to
their new abode.

But is the change of any use ? Not at all. It is true that


J


126 KRILOF AND If IS FABLES.

the building seems firm and massive, and the walls enclosing
it lofty. But yet the fowls daily become fewer and fewer.
No one can imagine whence this evil springs. But the Lion
orders a watch to be set ; and whom do they catch ? Why
that villain, the Fox. It is true that he had constructed the
building so that no one else could break in and steal ; but he
had taken care to leave a little hole by which he could gel
into it himself.


FORTU^fE'S VISIT.


AT the extremity of a town stood a wretched old house.
In it lived three brothers, who could not get richl
Somehow, there was not a single thing that succeeded with
them. Whatever any one of them took in hand was sure to
prove unsuccessful : on all sides they met with hindrance
and loss; and, according to them, it was all the fault of
Fortune.

It happened that Fortune paid them a visit as she was
passing by, and, touched by their great poverty, determined
to do all she could to help them in everything they under-
took, and to spend a whole summer with them. A whole


128 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


summer ! — a long time indeed. Well, the poor fellows soon
find their affairs assuming a different aspect. One of them,
although he was a poor hand at trading, gets a great profit
now on everything he either buys or sells, utterly forgets that
such a thing as loss exists, and rapidly becomes as rich as
Croesus. The second enters the public service. At another
time he would have stuck fast among the copyists ; but now
he reaps successes on all sides. Every time he gives a
dinner, or pays a visit of ceremony, he gets either rank con-
ferred upon him or a place given him. See, he has an
estate, a mansion in town, and a box in the country.

And now you will ask, what advantage did the third
brother obtain ? I suppose that Fortune really helped him
also ? Certainly ; from his side she scarcely ever absented
herself. The third brother chased flies all the summer, and
that with the most wonderful success. I don't know whether
he used to be clever at that sort of thing in former days, but
during that summer his labour was never thrown away. In
whatever manner he moved his hand (thanks to Fortune), he
never once missed his shot.

But see ! their guest, meanwhile, has brought her stay
with the brothers to an end, and has set out on a long
journey. Two of the brothers have gained greatly. One
of them is rich ; the other has got riches and rank besides.
But the third brother curses his fate, inasmuch as malignant
Fortune has left him nothing but a beggar's wallet.


THE UON, THE CHAMOIS, AND THE FOX.


A LION was chasing a Chamois along a valley. He
had all but caught it, and with longing eyes was
anticipating a certain and a satisfying repast It seemed as
if it were utterly impossible for the victim to escape ; lor a
deep ravine appeared to bar the way for both the hunter and
tlie hunted. But the nimble Chamois, gathering together all
its strength, shot hke an arrow from a bow across the
chasm, and stood still on the rocky cliff on the other side.
Our Lion pulled up short. But .at that moment a friend of
his happened to be near at hand. That friend was the Fox.
"What I" said he, "with your strength and agility, is it


130 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,

possible that you will yield to a feeble Chamois ? You have
only to will, and you will be able to work wonders. Though
the abyss be deep, yet, if you are only in earnest, I am certain
you will clear it Surely you can confide in my disinterested
friendship. I would not expose your life to danger if I were
not so well aware of your strength and dexterity."

The Lion's blood waxed hot, and began to boil in his
veins. He flung himself with all his might into space. But
he could not clear the chasm ; so down he tumbled headlong,
and was killed by the fall. Then what did his dear friend
do? He cautiously made his way down to the bottom of
the ravine, and there, out in the open space and the free air,
seeing that the Lion wanted neither flattery nor obedience
now, he set to work to pay the last sad rites to his dead
friend, and in a month picked his bones clean.


THE ORACLE.


IN a certain temple there was a wooden idol which began
to utter prophetic answers, and to give wise counsels.
Accordingly, it rejoiced in a very rich attire, being covered
from top to toe with gold and silver ; and was gorged with
sacrifices, deafened by prayers, and choked with incense.
Every one believed blindly in the Oracle.

All of a sudden — wonderful to relate ! — the Oracle began
to talk nonsense — took to answering incoherently and ab-
surdly, so that, if any one consulted it about anything,
whatever our Oracle said was a lie j so that every one


132 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,

wondered what had become of its prophetic faculty. The
fact was, that the idol was hollow, and the priests used to sit
in it in order to reply to the laity ; and so, as long as the
priest was discreet, the idol did not talk nonsense; but
when a fool took to sitting in it, the idol became a mere
dummy.*

I have heard — can it be true ? — that in days gone by there
used to be judges who were renowned for ability — so long as
they kept an able secretary.


* The word used is holvan—\\i^ term irreverently applied by the common folk in

Russia to most of their outdoor statues.


THE ASS AND THE PEASANT.

A PEASANT, who had hired an Ass for his garden
during the summer, set it to drive away the impudent
race of crows and of sparrows. The Ass was one of a most
honest character, utterly unacquainted with either rapacity
or theft. It never profited by a single leaf belonging to its
master, and it would indeed be a sin to say that it connived
at the proceedings of the birds. Still the Peasant got but
little good out of his garden. The Ass, as it chased the
birds with all its might, galloped across all the beds, backwards
and forwards, in such a manner that it trod underfoot and
trampled in pieces everything that grew in the garden.

Seeing then that all his pains were thrown away, the
Peasant took a cudgel and revenged himself for his loss on
the back of the Ass. " No wonder ! " says every one ; " serve
the beast right ! Was it for a creature of its parts to under-
take such a business ? "

But I say — though not with the intention of defending
the Ass ; it was certainly in fault, and it has already paid
the penalty — surely he also was to blame who set the Ass to
guard his garden.


i


THE SHEEP AND THE DOGS.

IN a certain flock of Sheep, it was resolved that the
number of dogs should be increased, in order that the
wolves might worry no more. What was the result ? Why,
the number increased so greatly that at last, truly enough,
the Sheep were no longer annoyed by the wolves. But dogs,
too, must Hve. So, first, they deprived the Sheep of their
fleeces, and then they tore their skins off" them, choosing them
by lot. At last, only five or six of the Sheep remained, and
those also the dogs ate up.

[In former days, whenever there was a difficulty about
setting straight anything that had gone wrong in Russia, the
only idea which suggested itself to the minds of the autho-
rities was to increase the number of those officials who had
to deal with the matter. But as these officials were miserably
paid, they had to make a livelihood out of the people who
were confided to their charge, and who, accordingly, fared
no better than the sheep in the fable. Latterly, a different
system has been introduced, and fewer but better paid
officials are now employed.]


THE STRING OF CARTS.


A NUMBER of Carts, laden with pottery, were going
along in a string, and had to descend a steep hill.
Having left the others to wait a little on the top of the hill,
the owner began very cautiously to lead down the first cart
The good horse which drew it almost supported the weight
on its croup, not allowing it to roll down too fast But a
young Horse up on top took to blaming the poor animal for
every step it made :

" Ah, praiseworthy animal ! how wonderful ! Just see, it
crawls like a crab.- See there, it has almost stumbled over a
stone ! Look how awry, how askew, are its movements !


136 KRILOF AND HIS FABLE6.


Ah ! it 's bolder now. There 's a jostle again ! Only here
you ought to have gone a little more to the left. Oh, what
a donkey ! It would be all very well if this were night, or if
it were going uphill. But now it is going downhill, and by
daylight. One loses all patience while watching it. ReaJly
it 's a water-carrier you ought to be, if you have no sense in
you. But just look at us ! — see how we will dash along.
Never fear for us ; we wont lose a moment : we shall not so
much carry our loads as whirl them down."

With these words, straining its back and inflating its chest,
the young Horse sets its load in motion. But no sooner does
it commence the descent than the weight begins to press
upon it heavily, the Cart to roll rapidly. The Horse, urged
on from behind, and thrust from side to side, dashes on
splendidly at a gallop. Over stones, across gullies, went the
Cart amid shocks and boundings. More to the left — still to
the left, till at last the Cart and its load goes headlong into
the ditch with a crash ! Farewell to the master's crockery.

[This fable alludes to the criticisms evoked by Kutuzof *s
unwillingness to precipitate matters in dealing with Napoleon.
When he refused to fight under the walls of Moscow, the
l)eople began to clamour against him, as they had done
against Barclay de Tolly ; and the younger oflicers under his
command were especially indignant with him. But Krilof
took his part throughout.]


THE DIVERS.

A CERTAIN King, says Krilof,* could not make up his
mind as to whether knowledge and science produce
more good or harm. He consulted divers learned men on
the subject, but they could not solve the problem to his satis-
faction. At last, one day, he met a venerable and remark-
ably intelligent hermit, to whom he confided his doubts, and
who favoured him with the following apologue :

" There was once a fisherman, in India, who lived on the
sea-coast. After a long life of poverty and privation, he died,
leaving three sons. They, seeing that their nets brought them
in but a scanty livelihood, and detesting their father's avoca-
tion, determined to make the sea yield them a richer recom-
pense — not fish, but pearls. So, as they knew how to swim
and to dive, they gave themselves up to collecting that form
of tribute from it. But the three brothers met with very diffe-
rent kinds of success.

" The first, the laziest of the family, spent his time in saun-
tering along the shore. He had an objection to wetting even
so much as his feet, so he confined his expectations to picking


* I have thought it best to abridge the introduction, which is of inordinate length in

the original.


i


138 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

up such pearls as the waves might wash ashore at his feet.
But the result of this laziness of his was that he scarcely made
enough to keep him alive. As to the second, he used to
dive, and find rich pearls at the bottom of the sea, never
sparing any pains, and knowing how to choose those depths
only which it lay within his power to sound.

" But the third brother, troubled by a craving after vast
treasures, reasoned with himself as follows : * It is true that
there are pearls which one can find near the shore ; but what
treasures, apparently, might I not expect if I could only suc-
ceed in reaching the lowest depths of the open sea ! There,
no doubt, lie heaps of countless riches — corals, pearls, and
precious stones — all of which one might pick up and carry
away at will.* Captivated by this .idea, the foolish fellow
straightway sought the open sea, chose the spot where the
depths seemed blackest, and plunged into the abyss. But
his recklessness cost him his life ; for the deep swallowed him
down, and he never returned to the light of day.

" O King," continued the hermit, "no doubt we recognise
in knowledge the source of many benefits. But those who
seek it in an irreverent spirit may find in it an abyss in
which they may perish, like the diver, but with this differ-
ence, that they may too often involve others in their own
ruin."


THE TRIGAMIST.


A CERTAIN sinner, while his wife was still alive, married
two other women. As soon as the news of this reached
the King, who was a severe king, and disinclined to permit
such scandals, he immediately ordered the polygamist to be
tried for the offence, and ordained that such a punishment
should be discovered for him as would terrify the whole
people, so that no one should in future be capable of at-
tempting so great a crime. " But if I see that his punish-
ment is a light one," he added, " then I will hang all the
judges around the judgment-seat"

This pleasantry is disagreeable to the judges. Fear bathes


t


I40


KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


them in a cold sweat. For three whole days they deliberate
as to what punishment can be contrived for the culprit Pun-
ishments are plentiful ; but experience has proved that none
of them will deter people from sinning. However, at last
Heaven inspired them. The criminal was brought into court
for the announcement of the judicial decision, by which they
unanimously decreed —

That he should live with all his three wives at once !

At such a decision the people were lost in astonishment,
and expected that the King would hang all the judges. But,
before the fifth day arrived, the Trigamist had hanged him-
self And the sentence produced such alarm that since that
time no man has committed trigamy in that country.


[This fable is not altogether original, being founded on a
misogenical pleasantry of great antiquity; but it is given as
a specimen of Krilof *s terse style of story-telling.]


THE CUCKOO AND THE TURTLE-DOVE.

A CUCKOO sat on a bough, bitterly complaining.
" Why art thou so sad, dear friend ? " sympathisingly
cooed the Turtle-dove to her, from a neighbouring twig. " Is
it because spring has passed away from us, and love with it ;
that the sun has sunk lower, and that we are nearer to the
winter ? "

" How can I help grieving, unhappy one that I am?" re-
plies the Cuckoo : " thou shalt thyself be the judge. This
spring my love was a happy one, and, after a while, I became
a mother. But my offspring utterly refuse even to recognise
me. Was it such a return that I expected from them ? And
how can I help being envious when I see how ducklings
crowd around their mother — how chickens hasten to the
hen when she calls to them. Just like an orphan I sit here,
utterly alone, and know not what filial affection means."

" Poor thing!" says the Dove, " I pity you from my heart.
As for me, though I know such things often occur, I should
die outright if my dovelets did not love me. But tell me,
have you already brought up your little ones ? When did
you find time to build a nest ? I never saw you doing any-
thing of the kind : you were always flying and fluttering
about."


144 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


Is it possible that you do not recognise us ? We are the roots
of the tree on which you flourish. Go on rejoicing in your
beauty : only remember there is this difference between us,
that with the new spring a new foliage is bom ; but, if the
roots perish, neither you nor the tree can survive."

[In the large illustrated edition of the fables, published four
years ago, at St. Petersburg, this story is accompanied by one
of Trutofsky's spirited drawings, which renders its meaning
very clear. A couple of gentlemen and a lady, evidently
belonging to the proprietor class, are sitting at their ease in
a balcony; and down below, regarded by them with con;
temptuous wonder, stand half-a-dozen peasants, their clothes
tattered, their figures emaciated, their faces worn with care.
The fable was written in i8i i, at a time when the question of
the emancipation of the serfs was occupying considerable
attention.]


THE WOLF AND THE CUCKOO.


" "pAREWELL, neighbour ! " said a Wolf to a Cuckoo.

A " In vain have I deluded myself with tlie idea of
finding peace in this spot. Your people sdA dogs are alt
alike here — one worse than the other : even if you were an
angel, you couldn't help quarrelling with them."

"And is my neighbour going far? and where is that people
so pious that you think you will be able to live in haraiony
with them?"

" Oh ! I am going right away to the forest of the happy
Arcadia. There, it is said, they don't know what war is.
The men are as mild as lambs, and the rivers flow with no-
lo


146


KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


thing but milk. There, in a word, the Age of Gold is to be
found. Every one treats his neighbour like a brother ; and. it
is even said that the dogs never bark there, much less bite.
Tell me, dear friend, would it not be charming to find one-
self, even in a dream, in so peaceful a land as that ? Fare-
well ! Don't retain an unpleasant remembrance of me. There
I shall really be able to live in harmony, in plenty, and in
indulgence, and not, as here, have to be always on guard
by day, and be deprived of one's quiet repose at night."

"A happy journey to you, dear neighbour," says the
Cuckoo. " But, tell me, do you leave your teeth and your
habits behind you, or do you take them with you ? "

" How could I possibly leave them behind me ? What
nonsense are you talking ?"

** Then, mark my words ! your skin won't remain long on
your back there."


THE IMPIOUS.

IN the days of old there was a people, to the shame, be it
said, of the nations of the earth, which became so hard-
ened in heart, that it took up arms against the gods. Noisily,
with countless banners displayed, the insurgent crowds over-
run the plains, some armed with bows, others with slings. In
order to kindle more fury among the people, the ringleaders,
in the insolence of their hearts, declare that the tribunal of
Heaven is harsh and foolish — that the gods either sleep or
judge unreasonably — that the time has come to read them an
unceremonious lesson — and that, as to the rest, it will not be
difficult to hurl stones at the gods from the nearest hills, and
to fill all Olympus with arrows.

Disquieted by the insolent blasphemies these fools uttered,
all Olympus applied to Jupiter with the prayer that he would
avert this evil. And even all the heavenly council was of
opinion that, in order to confute the rebels, it would not be
amiss to make manifest, at all events, a little miracle — a
deluge or an earthquake, with thunder and lightning, or,
perhaps, to crush them under a shower of stones.

" Let us wait a little," replied Jupiter ; " for if they do not
become quiet, but go on with their foolish violence, not fear-
ing the immortals, they will be punished by their own deeds."

10 — 2


148


KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.


Then, with a roar, the banded rebels against the gods shot
into the air a mass of arrows, a cloud of stones. But, laden
with innumerable deaths, inevitable and terrible, their wea-
l)ons fell back again upon their own heads.


THE FOX AND THE MARMOT.

" T T ^HERE are you running so fast, gossip, without
^ ^ ever looking back ? " a Marmot asked a Fox.

" Oh, my friend, my dear gossip, I have had a calumnious
accusation brought against me, and I have been dismissed
as an extortioner. You know, I was the judge of the poultry-
yard. In that position I lost my health and my peace of mind.
From the press of business, I never had time to get a com-
fortable meal, and at nights I could not sleep soundly. And
now, in return for this, I have incurred the wrath of my em-
ployers, and all on account of a calumny. Only just think !
Who in the world shall be without reproach, if calumnies are
listened to ? I an extortioner ! Do they suppose I 've gone
out of my mind? Now, I appeal to you, have you ever
seen that I took part in that wickedness ? Think the matter
over; reflect on it well."

** No, gossip, no ; but I have often remarked that there
was some down on your muzzle."

Many an official complains that he is forced to spend
every rouble he has ; and all the town knows that, originally,
he had nothing, and that he got nothing with his wife. But


ISO KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

see ! little by little he builds a house ; he buys an estate.
Now, in what manner can you reconcile his salary with his
expenditure ? Although you can prove nothing against him
legally, yet you will not be committing a sin if you say,
" That fellow has down on his muzzle."


THE PEASANT AND THE ROBBER.

A PEASANT, who was beginning to stock his little farm,
had bought a cow and a milk-pail at a lair, and was
going quietly homewards by a lonely path through the forest,
when he suddenly fell into the hands of a Robber. The
Robber stripped him as bare as a hme tree.*

" Have mercy !" cried the Peasant. " I am utterly mined.
You have reduced me to beggary. For a whole year I have


i


152 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,

worked to buy this dear little cow. I could scarcely bear to
wait for this day to arrive."

" Very good," replied the Robber, touched by compassion;
" don't cry out against me. After all, I shall not want to milk
your cow, so I '11 give you back your milk-pail."


THE ANT.

A CERTAIN Ant had extraordinary strength, such as
had never been heard of even in the days of old.
It could even, as its trustworthy historian states, lift up two
large grains of barley at once ! Besides this, it was also re-
markable for wonderful courage. Whenever it saw a worm,
it immediately stuck its claws into it, and it would even go
alone against a spider. And so it acquired such a reputation
on its ant-hill, that it became the sole subject of conversation.

Extravagant praise I consider poison ; but our ant was not
of the same opinion : it delighted in it, measured it by its
own conceit, and believed the whole of it. At length its
head became so turned that it determined to exhibit itself to
the neighbouring city, that it might acquire fame by showing
off its strength there.

Perched on the top of a lofty cart-load of hay, having
proudly made its way to the side of the moujik in charge, it
enters the city in great state. But, alas ! what a blow to its
pride ! It had imagined that the whole bazaar would run
together to see it, as to a fire. But not a word is said about
it, every one being absorbed in his own business. Our Ant
seizes a leaf, and jerks it about, tumbles down, leaps up


I


154 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES.

again. Still not a soul pays it any attention. At last, wearied
with exerting itself, and holding itself proudly erect, it says,
with vexation, to Barbos, the mastiff, lying beside its master's
cart, " It must be confessed, mustn't it, that the people of
your city have neither eyes nor brains ? Can it really be true
that no one remarks me, although I have been straining my-
self here for a whole hour? And yet I 'm sure that at home
I am well known to the whole of the ant-hill."
And so it went back again, utterly crestfallen.


THE SLANDERER AND THE SNAKE.

ON the occasion of some triumphal procession in the
realms below, the Snake and the Slanderer refused to
yield each other precedence, and began a noisy quarrel as
to which of the two had the best right to go first.

Now, in the infernal regions, as is well known, he takes
precedence who has done most harm to his fellow-creatures.
So in this hot and serious dispute, the Slanderer showed his
tongue to the Snake ; and the Snake boastingly talked to the
Slanderer about its sting, hissed but that it was unable to
put up with an affront, and strove hard to crawl past him.
The Slanderer actually found himself being left behind.
But Beelzebub could not allow this : he himself took the
Slanderer's part, and drove the Snake back, saying,

"Although I recognise your merit, yet I justly assign
precedence to him. You are excessively venomous, and
dangerous in the extreme to everything which is near you ;
your sting is fatal, and you sting — ^which is no small merit —
without provocation. But can you wound from afar, like the
deadly tongue of the Slanderer, from whom there is no
escape, even though mountains or oceans intervene ? It is
clear, then, that he is more deadly than you ; so give place
to him, and in future behave more quietly."


156 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


Since that time, Slanderers have been honoured more than
Snakes in hell.

[In the first edition of this fable, which appeared in May,
1814, the triumphal procession was represented as taking
place " on the birthday of Attila or Nero, or perhaps of
Napoleon : I am afraid of stating which, for fear of making
a mistake. But, after all; it 's no matter. In Satan's realms,
such names are inscribed on a tablet, and great solemnities
are appointed in their honour."

Krilof was "a good hater;" and he certainly did not like
Napoleon.]


THE TWO DOGS.


BARBOS, the faithful yard-dog, who serves his master
zealously, happens to see his old acquaintance Joujou,
the curly lap-dog, seated at the window on a soft down
cushion. Sidling fondly up to her, like a child to a parent,
he all but weeps with emotion ; and there, under the window,
he whines, wags his tail, and bounds about.

" What sort of a life do you lead now, Joujoutka, ever
since the master took you into his mansion ? You remember,
no doubt, we used often to suffer hunger out in the yard.
What is your present service like?"

" It would be a sin in me to murmur against my good for-


158 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,

tune," answers Joujoutka. " My master cannot make enough
of me. I live amidst riches and plenty, and I eat and drink
oflf silver. I frolic with the master, and, if I get tired, I take
my ease on carpets or on a soft, couch. And how do you get
on?"

" I ?" replied Barbos, letting his tail dangle like a whip,
and hanging his head. " I live as I used to do. I suffer from
cold and hunger; and here, while guarding my master's
house, I have to sleep at the foot of the wall, and I get
drenched in the rain. And if I bark at the wrong time, I am
whipped. But how did you, Joujou, who were so small and
weak, get taken into favour, while I jump out of my skin to
no purpose ? What is it you do ?"

" * What is it you do ?' A pretty question to ask !" replied
Joujou, mockingly. " I walk upon my hind legs."

[This fable is suspiciously like that by Izmailof, called
"The Two Cats," which, in its turn, was adapted from
Florian.]


THE STONE AND THE WORM.

'* T T THAT a fuss every one is making ! How wanting in
V » manners ! " observed, with respect to a shower,
a Stone which lay in a field. " Have the kindness to look.
Every one is delighted with it. They have longed for it as if
it were the best of guests ; but what is it that it has done ?
It has come for a couple of hours or so — no more. But they
should make a few inquiries about me. Why I have lain here
for .centuries. Modest and unassuming, I lie quietly where
I am thrown. And yet I have never heard from a single
person so much as a * Thank you 1' It is not without reason
that the world gets reviled. I cannot see a grain of justice
anywhere in it."

" Hold your tongue ! " exclaimed a Worm. " This shower,
brief as it has been, has abundantly watered the fields, which
were being rendered sterile by the drought, and has revived
the hopes of the farmer. But you contribute nothing to the
ground but a useless weight."

Thus many a man will boast of having served the state
for forty years ; but as for being Useful, he has never been a
bit more so than the Stone.


.1


.•I


THE KITE.

A KITE, which had been allowed to soar to the clouds,
called out from on high to a Butterfly down below in
the valley,

" I can assure you that I can scarcely make you out
Confess now that you feel envious when you watch my so
lofty flight."

" Envious ? No, indeed ! You have no business to think
so much of yourself. You fly high, it is true ; but you are
always tied by a string. Such a life, my friend, is very far
removed from happiness. But I, though in truth but little
exalted, fly wherever I wish. I should not like all my life
long to have to conduce to some one else's foolish amuse-
ment."


THE SQUIRREL IN SERVICE.


A SQUIRREL once served a Lion : I know not liow, or
in what capacity. But this much is certain, that the
Squirrel's service found favour in the Lion's eyes ; and to
satisfy the Lion is, certainly, no light affair. In return for
this, it was promised a whole waggon-load of nuts. Promised
— yes ; but, meanwhile, time continues to fly by. Our Squirrel
often suffers hunger, and has tears in its eyes while grinning
in the Lion's presence. When it looks round in the forest,
its former comrades show themselves here and there high up
among the trees. It looks at them till its eyes begin to
blink J but they keep on always cracking nuts. Our Squirrel


1 62 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


takes a step towards the nut-bushes, looks at them — it can
do no more. At one time it is called away, at another it is
even dragged off, on the Lion's service.

But see ! At last the Squirrel has grown old, and become
tedious to the Lion. It is time for it to retire. They have
granted the Squirrel its discharge, and they have actually
given it the full load of nuts. Excellent nuts — such as the
world has never seen before. All picked fruit — one as
good as another ; a perfect marvel : only one thing is unlucky
— the Scjuirrel has long ago lost all its teeth.


THE PEASANT AND THE AXE.

AMOUJIK, who was building a hut, got vexed with
his Axe. The Axe became disagreeable to him ; the
Moujik waxed wroth. The fact was, he himself hewed
abominably; but he lay all the blame on the Axe. What-
ever happened, the Moujik found an excuse for scolding it.

" Good-for-nothing creature ! " he cries, one day, " from
this time forward I will never use you for anything but
squaring stakes. Know that, with my cleverness and industry,
and my dexterity to boot, I shall get on very well without
you, and will cut with a common knife what another wouldn't
be able to hew with an axe."

" It is my lot to work at whatever you lay before me,"
quietly replied the Axe to the angry rebuke, " and so your
will, master, is sacred for me. I am ready to serve you in
whatever way you please. Only reflect now, that you may not
have to repent by-and-bye. You may blunt me on useless
labour, if you will ; but you will certainly never be able to
build huts with a knife."


11 — %


THK SQUIRREL AND THK THRUSH.

A(;)R()W1) collected in a village, one holiday, under the
windows of the seignorial mansion, looking, with open-
mouthed wonder, at a Squirrel in a revolving cage. A Thrush
also was wondering at it, perched on a neighbouring birch tree.
The Sciuirrel ran so fast that his feet seemed to twinkle, and
its bushy tail spread itself straight out.

" Dear old compatriot," asked the Thrush, **can you tell
me what you are doing there ? "

" Oh, dear friend, I have to work hard all day. I am, in
fact, the courier of a great noble. So that I can never stop
to eat, nor to drink, nor even to take breath ; " and the
Squirrel betook itself anew to running round in its wheel.

" Yes," said the Thrush, as it flew away, " I can see i)lainly
enough that yon are running ; but, for all that, you are always
there at the same window."

Look at some busybody or other. He worries himself; he
rushes to and fro; every one wonders at him. It seems as if
he were going to jump out of his skin ; only, in spite of all
that, lie does not make any more progress than the Scjuirrel
in the wheel.


THE ASS AND JUPITER.

WHEN Jupiter stocked the universe with the various
tribes of animals, the Ass, among others, came into
the world. But, either purposely or from an accident owing
to the press of work at such a busy time, the Cloud-compeller
made a sad mistake, and the Ass came out of its mould no
larger than a squirrel. Scarcely any one ever took any notice
of the Ass, although the Ass yielded to no one in pride.
The Ass was much inclined towards boasting. But what
was it to boast of? With such a puny stature, it was
ashamed to show itself in the world. So our conceited Ass
went to Jupiter, and began to pray for a larger stature.

" Have pity on me ! " it cried : " how can I bear this
misery ? Lions, panthers, elephants, all obtain honour every-
where, and, from the highest to the lowest, every one goes on
talking about them only. Why have you treated Asses so
unkindly that they never obtain any honour, and not a word
is ever spoken about them by any one ? But, if I were only
as big as a calf, I would lower the pride of the lions and
panthers, and all the world would be talking about me."

Every day our Ass continued to sing this same song to
Jupiter, and bothered him so that at last he granted its
request, and the Ass became a big beast. But, besides this.


lUy KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


it ac(iuircd such a savage voice that our long-eared Hercules
dismayed the whole forest. " Whatever is that brute ? What
family does it belong to? It has very long teeth, anyhow,
hasn't it ? and no end of horns ! " At last, nothing else was
talked about besides the Ass.

Hut how did it all end ? Hefore the year was out, every-
one had discovered what the Ass really was. Our Ass
became proverbial for stupidity, and, ever since that time,
Asses have been beasts of burden.

Noble birth and high office are excellent things ; but how
can they ])r()fit a man whose soul is ignoble ?


THK CAT AND THE NIGHTIN(;ALE.


A CAT, which had caught a Nightingale, stuck its claws
into the poor bird, and, pressing it lovingly, said,
" Dear Nightingale, my soul ! I hear that you are every-
where renowned for song, and that you are considered equal
to the finest singers. My gossip, the Fox, tells me that your
voici; is so sonorous and wonderful that, at the sound of your
entrancing songs, all the shepherds and shepherdesses go out
of their wits. I have greatly desired to hear you — don't
tremble so, and don't be obstinate, my dear : never fear; I
haven't the least wish to eat you. Only sing me something ;
then I will give you your liberty, and release you to wander


i68 KRILOF AND HIS FABLES,


through the woods and forests. I don't yield to you in love
for music, and I often purr myself to sleep."

Meanwhile our poor Nightingale scarcely breathed under
the Cat's claws.

" Well, why don't you begin ? " continued the Cat. " Sing
away, dear, however little it may be."

But our songster didn't sing ; only uttered a shrill cry.

" What ! is it with that you have entranced the forest? "
mockingly asked the Cat. "Where is the clearness, the
strength, of which every one talks incessantly? Such a
squeaking I 'm tired of hearing from my kittens. No ; I see
that you haven't the least skill in song. Let 's see how you
will taste between my teeth."

And it ate up the poor singer, bones and all.

[This fable, which was published in the year 1824, is said
to be intended to depict the painful position which Russian
literature occupied at the time, with respect to the Censor-
ship. During that period of reaction, the press was terribly
weighted; and it seemed that, at last, there would be no
subjects left of which it was not forbidden to take notice.
The censors acted just as they thought fit — altered manu-
scripts, prohibited books, and stopped the publication of
newspapers " till the editors should have knowledge enough
to conduct them properly." It is a pleasure to compare the
position which the Russian press holds now, with that which
it occupied then.]


THE PEASANT AND THE HORSE.

A PEASANT was sowing oats one day. Seeing that, a
young Horse began to reason about it, grumbling to
itself.

" A pretty piece of work this, for which he brings such a
lot of, oats here ! And yet they say men are wiser than we
are. Can anything possibly be more foolish or ridiculous
than to plough up a whole field like this, in order to scatter
one's oats over it afterwards to no purpose ? Had he given
them to me, or to the bay here, or had he even thought fit
to fling them to the fowls, it would have all been more like
business. Or even if he had hoarded them up, I should
have recognised avarice in that. But to fling them uselessly
away ! No ; that is sheer stupidity."

Meanwhile time passed ; and in the autumn the oats were
garnered, and the Peasant fed this very Horse on them.

Reader, there can be no doubt that you do not approve
of the Horse's opinions. But, from the oldest times to our
own days, has not man been equally audacious in criticising
the designs of Providence, although, in his blind folly, he
sees nothing of its means or ends ?


r


THK (INAT AND THK SHKPHKRl).

HAVIN(i confidocl liis sliocp to the care of his dogs, a
Slicphcrd went to sleep in the sliade. Remarking
tliat, a snake glided towards him from vmder the bushes,
brandishing its forked tongue. The Shepherd would have
passed away from the world, had not a Cinat taken pity on
him, and stung him with all its might. Rou.scd from his
slumber, the Shepherd killed the .snake. Ikit first, while
half awake and half asleep, he hit the Clnat such a slap
that the poor thing was utterly done for.

There is no lack of examples of this. If the weak, even
with the best intentions, try io o\Kn\ the eyes of the strong,
you may expect that they will meet with the same fate as
the (Inat.


THE WOLF AND THE CAT.

A WOLF ran out of the forest into a village — ^not for a
visit, but to save its life ; for it trembled for its skin.
The huntsmen and a pack of hounds were after it. It would
fain have rushed in through the first gateway ; but there was
this unfortunate circumstance in its way, that all the gateways
were closed. Our Wolf sees a Cat on a partition fence, and
says, pleadingly,

** Vaska, my friend, tell me quickly which of the moujiks
here is the kindest, so that I may hide myself from my evil
foes ? Listen to the cry of the dogs and the terrible sound
of the horns ! All that noise is actually made in chase of
me!"

" Go quickly, and ask Stefan," says Vaska the Cat ; " he is
a very kind moujik."

" Quite true ; only I have torn the skin off one of his
sheep."

"Well, then, you can try Demian.".

" I 'm afraid he 's angry with me, too. I carried off one of
his kids."

" Run over there, then. Trofim lives there."

" Trofim ! I should be afraid of even meeting him. Ever
since the spring, he has been threatening me about a lamb."


172 KRILOF AND HIS rABJL£S.


" Dear me, that 's bad I But perhaps Klim will protect
you."

" Oh, Vaska, I have killed one of his calves."
" What do I hear, gossip ? You Ve quarrelled with all the
village," said Vaska to the Wolf. "What sort of protection
can you hope for here ? No ; our moujiks are not so destitute
of sense as to be willing to save you to their own hurt And,
really, you have only yourself to blame. What you have
sown, that you must now reap."


THE CANNON AND THE SAILS.

A FIERCE quarrel arose on board a ship between its
Cannon and its Sails. Poking their muzzles out of
the port-holes, the Cannon thus murmured heavenward :

'* ye gods ! was ever such a thing seen, as that a set
of trumpery linen fabrics should have the insolence to set
up for being as useful as we are ? In the whole course of our
laborious voyage, what have they done? The moment a
breeze begins to blow, they proudly swell out their breasts,
carrying themselves above the waves as pompously as if they
were really of great importance, but yet do nothing more than
show off their airs. But, as for us, we thunder in battles.
Is it not due to us that our ship rules the waves ? Do not
we carry with us everywhere terror and death ? No ; we do
not wish to live any longer with the Sails. We can do every-
thing for ourselves without them. Fly, then, to our aid,
mighty Boreas, and quickly tear them into rags."

Boreas heard, and, flying thither, breathed on the sea.
Immediately the waters were overcast and turned black, a
heavy cloud covered the sky, and the waves ran mountains
high. Thunder deafened the ear ; lightning blinded the eye.
Boreas roared, and tore the sails into shreds. When nothing
was left of them, the tempest ceased. But what followed ?


174 KRILOF AND HIS'' FABLES,


Deprived of its sails, the ship became a sport to the winds
and waves, and drifted about at sea like a log. And in the
first encounter with a hostile vessel, which thundered terrible
broadsides along its whole length, our ship, now unable to
move, was soon riddled like a sieve, and went down to the
bottom like a stone — Cannon and all.

Every state is strong when its elements are wisely balanced.
By its Cannon it is terrible to its foes ; but its civil powers
I)lay the part of the Sails.


THE EAGLE AND THE BEE.

SEEING how a Bee was busying itself about a flower, an
Eagle said to it, with disdain,

" How I pity thee, poor thing, with all thy toil and skill !
All through the summer, thousands of thy fellows are mould-
ing honeycomb in the hive. But who will afterwards separate
and distinguish the results of thy labour ? I must confess, I
do not understand what pleasure thou canst take in it To
labour all one's life, and to have in view — what ? Why, to
die without having achieved distinction, exactly like all the
rest. What a difference there is between us ! When I spread
my sounding pinions, and am borne along near the clouds,
I am everywhere a cause of alarm. The birds do not dare
to rise from the ground ; the shepherds fear to repose beside
their well-fed flocks ; and the swift does, having seen me, will
not venture out into the plains." .

But the Bee replies,

" To thee be glory and honour ! May Jupiter continue to
pour on thee his bounteous gifts ! I, however, bom to work
for the common good, do not seek to make my labour dis-
tinguished. But, when I look at our honeycombs, I am
consoled by the thought that there are in them a few drops
of my own honey."


t


176 KRILOF AXD HIS FABLES.


Fortunate is he, the field of whose labour is conspicuous
He gains added strength from the knowledge that the whol
world witnesses his exploits. But how deser\nng of respec
is he who, in humble obscurity, hopes for neither fame no
honour in return for all his labour, for all his loss of res
— who is animated by this thought only, that he works fo
the common good I


THE LION.

WHEN the Lion became old and weak, his hard bed
began to annoy him. It made his very bones ache ;
besides, it did not warm him. So he summons his nobles to
his side, long-haired and shaggy wolves and bears, and says,

" Friends, to old bones like mine, my bed has now become
intolerably hard. So find out some way, without oppressing
either the poor or the rich, to collect fleeces for me, that I
may not have to sleep on the bare stones."

" Most illustrious Lion !" answer the grandees, " who would
think of grudging you his skin, not to speak of his fleece ?
And are there but few shaggy beasts among us here ? As to
stags, hinds, chamois, and goats, they scarcely pay any tri-
bute at all. We will take their fleeces from them at once.
They will not be any the worse for that ; on the contrary,
indeed, they will be all the lighter for it."

This very wise advice was immediately carried out The
Lion could not sufficiently praise the zeal of his friends.
But in what had they shown themselves zealous ? Only in
this, that they caught the poor creatures, and sent them away
completely shorn. But they themselves, though they were
twice as hirsute, did not contribute so much as a single hair
of their own ; on the contrary, each of them who happened
to be on the spot turned that tribute to good account, and
provided himself ^vith a mattress for the winter.

12


INDEX TO THE FABLES.


Ant ....
Ass ....
Ass and Jupiter
Ass and Nightingale
Ass and Peasant
Author and Robber


Bag

Bear and Bees

Brook


Canine Friendship .
Cannon and Sails .
Cat and Nightingale
Comb

Cook and Cat .
Crow and Hen
Cuckoo and Cock .
Cuckoo and Eagle .
Cuckoo and Turtledove


Dancing Fish .
Demian's Fish Soup
Divers
Division .


Page
153

89
165

30
133

73


83

51

7


77

173
167

71

45
21

80

88

141


63

55

137

19


Eagle and Bee
Eagle and Spider .
Education of Lion .
Elephant and Pug-dog
Elephant as Governor
Elephant in Favour


Fortune and Beggar
Fortune's Visit
Fox and Marmot
Fox as Architect
Fox in Ice


Geese

Gnat and Shepherd

Grandee .


H


Hind and Dervish
Hop-plant
Horse and Dog


Page

107

3
123

35
98


85
127

149

125

"3


67

170

12


Impious .
Industrious Bear
Inquisitive Man


76
32
54


147
124

43


12 — 2


i8o


INDEX TO THE FABLES.


K


Q


Pnge


kite 160


Quartette . . . .


40


L

Landlord and Mice ... 91


K


Leaves and Roots .


143


Rain-cloud . . . ^


105


Lion .....


177


Razors ....


95


Lion and Panther .


69


Lion, Chamois, and Fox


129


.s


M


Sheep and Dogs


>34


Man and Shadow .


59


Slanderer and Snake


'55


Merchant


109


Squirrel and Thru.sh


. 164


Miller


9


Squirrel in Service .


. x6i


Miron


"5


Stone and Worm


• *S9


Miser


24


String of Carts


• <35


Monkey and Mirror


97


Sword-blade .


. un


Monkey and Spectacles


121


•#


Musicians


• 47


T


Oracle . ... . . .131


Three Moujiks


«7


Owl and A.SS iig


Trigamist


• »39


y


Tri.shka's Caftan


• • 33


Two Dogs


. 158


I'


Two Pca.sants , . . .


I


Peasant and Axe . . .163


Peasant and Horse


169


Peasant and Labourer


49


vv


Peasant and Robber


151


Peasant and Sheep .


93


Whisk


. io6


Peasant in Trouble .


lOI


Wolf and Cat . . . .


• 171


Peasants and River


81


Wolf and Cub.


61


Pebble and Diamond


23


Wolf and Cuckoo .


145


Pig .


IIT


Wolf and Fox.


117


Pike


A


66


Wolf and Mouse


99


Pike and Cat .


27


Wolf in Kennel


M


Poor Man Enriched


37


Wolves and Sheep .


57


Pnlziel Brothers^ Camden Press, N. It


STRAHAN AND COMPANY,

56, LUBGATE HILL, LONDON.


THE BOOK LIST OF


WORKS BY G. J. VAUGHAN, D.D.

Vicar op Doncastbr.


Small 8yo. 28. 6d.


Voices of the Prophets

Or Faith, Prayer, and Holy Living.


Small 8yo. 2«. 6d.

Plain Words on Christian Living.


1. Sleep and Waking.

2. The Seat and Exit of Evil.
8. Temptation.
4. Conscience.

6. The Christian Use of Food.

6. The Christian Use of Society.

7. Domestic Service ; (I) Masteis


OONTEMTS.
10.

11.


8.
9.


and Servants.
Domestic Service;

and Masters.
A Good Old Age.


(2) Servants


12.

13.
14.
15.
16.


Repentance and Fozgiyeness Once
Needed.

Repentance and Foi^yeness Oc-
casionally Needed

Repentance and Foi^yeness Daily
Needed.

Address for a Harvest Home.

The Decisive Question.

The Marks of the Lord Jesus.

The Revelation of the Unseen.


Small 8yo. 25. 6d.


Christ the Light of the World,


1.

2.
8.
4.
6.

e.


Why He Came.

The Lamp and the Light.

Nunc Diraittis.

Uses of Light.

A Man of Sorrows.

The Oospel of the FaU.


COMTKNTH.

7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.


The Oospel of the Flood.
Christ the Lord of Nature.
Christ the Conqueror of Satan.
Christ the Destroyer of Death.
Christ the Sinner's Friend.
Cast Out and Found.


Small Svo. 28, ed.


Characteristics of Christ's Teaching,

Drawn from the Sennon on the Mount.


CONTENTS.


1. Who are Happy? First, Second,

and Third Answers.

2. Who are Happy? Fourth Answer.
8. Who are Happy? Fifth Answer.

4. Who are Happy? Sixth Answer.

5. Who are Happy ? Seventh Answer.

6. Who are Happy ? Eighth and Last

Answer.
What are Christians? Two'An-


7.
8.


9.


swers.
Christ interprets the Law: Five

Examples.
Christ warns us against Three

Counterfeits.


10. Christ teaches us the Hanner of

Prayer.

11. Of the Candle of the SonI, which

is a Single Intention.

12. Christ teaches us what we on^t

to Seek : Two Things. ^'^

13. Christ warns us against Jndging.

14. Christ counsels Discrimination. *

15. The Charter of Prayer.

16. Christ points out to ns the QtAM

of Life.

17. Concluding Cautions.


BTRABXS AND OOHPANT.


WORKS BY HENBT ALFOBD, D.D.

Dean op Canterbury.


Crown 8vo. and Small 8vo.

The New Testament.

A Revision of the Anthori zed Version. [In the Press.
Demy 8vo. Is. 6d.

Essays and Addresses,

Chiefl y on Chnrch Su bjects.
Crown 8vo. Ss. 6d. ; 12mo. Is. 6d.

The Year of Prayer ;

Being Family P rayers for the Christian Year.
Neat clothy 9d.

The Week of Prayer;

An abridgment of ** The Year of Prayer, " intended for use

in Schools.


The Year of Praise ;

Being Hymns with Tunes, for the Sundays and Holidays

of the Year.
TTiere are Four Editions of this Book, viz. : —
I. Large Type, Imperial 16mo. price 35. 6d. with Music. II. Small Type,
Crown 8vo. price Is. 6d. with Music. III. Large Type, Small 8vo.
price Is. without Music. IV. Small Type, Demy 32mo. price 6d.

without Music.

Small 8vo. Zs. 6d. each.

How to Study the New Testament.

Part I.— The Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles. Fart II.— The Epistles
(Section I.) Part IIL— The Epistles (Section II.), and the Apocalypse.

Small 8yo. Zs. 6d.

Eastertide Sermons.

Preached before the Universit y of Cambridge.
Small 8yo. 55.

The Q ueen*s E nglish.

Small 8yo. Ss. 6d.

Meditations :

In Advent, o n Creation, o n Providence.
Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Letters from Abroad.

New and enlarged Edition, Crown 8vo. 5s.

Poetical Works.


THB BOOK LIST OF


WORKS BY DOHA GBEENWELL.


Crown 8vo. 68.


Essays.

Contents : —

1. Our Single "Women— 2. Hardened in Good— 3. Prayer —

4. Popular Religious Literature— 5. Christianos ad Leones.

" Misa Greenwell'g Essays are very
moetuL and are written with a reu
knowleoge of their subjects. The


book is reaUv a good one.'* — Spectator.

" We highly value all the Essays for

their good sense, fine feeling, and

hearty religiousness, and for the ft'esh-


ness and piquancy of their style.
Together they form one of the most
admirable pleas for, and defences of,
Christian philanthropy which have
lately issued from the press.'*— Abn-
con/ormUt.


Enlarged Edition, crown 8yo. 6«.

Poems.


"Here is a poet as true as George
Herbert or Henry Vaughan or our
•wn Cowper. We advise our readers to

Sossess the book, and get the Joy and
le surprise of so much real thought
and feeling. It is a cardiphonia
set to music." — North British Review.
"Miss Greenwell is specially en-
dowed as a writer of sacred poetry ;
and it is the rarest realm of all, vrith
the fewest competitors for its crown.
She seems to us to be peculiarly fitted


with natural gifts for entering into the
chambers of the human heart, and to
be spiritually endowed to walk there,
with a brightening influence, cheering,
soothing, exalting, with words of com-
fort and looks of love, as a kind of
Florence Nightingale walking the
hospital of ailing B0ulB."—Ath€7icBum.
''^Amongst volumes of verse lately
given to the world, none has tnier and
richer poetic qualities than this.**—
Nonoonjormdat.


Small Svo. 28. dd.


The Patience of Hope.


"This is the most thoughtful and
suggestive book of our day."— Wit-
ness.

"A work of singular philosophic
power, as well as poetic beauty."—
Family Treaswry.

" Our admiration of the searching.


fearless speculation, the wonderftU
power of speaking clearly upon dark
and all but unspeakable subjects, the
rich outcome of ' thoughts that wan-
der through eternity, 'increases every
time we take up this wonderftil little
\iOok.."-~NorthBrUish Review.


Small Svo. 85. 6d,


The Covenant of Life and Peace.


<(i


'The production of a thoughtful,
cultivated Christian mind, setting
forth, in great fulness and beauty, the


present privileges of the believer.'
—Baptist MagaziM,


Small Svo. 35^ 6d.

Two Friends.

" We cannot read these pages with- I of a thoughtAil and earnest mind ".
oat teeing that they are the production | lAmd^ Revitiw,


STRAHAN AKD 0OHPA.NY.


WOBKS BT WILLIAM GILBEBT.


2 vols, post 8vo. 2l5.


The Wizard of the Mountain,


"Mr. Gilbert has here strack a new
vein in which we hope he will con-
tinue to work. Many of the tales are


perfectly Mry']ike."— Westminster Re-
view.


Crown 8vo. 68.


Doctor Austin's Guests.


"More than any other writer of
fiction that we could name, Mr.
Gilbert possesses the power of in-
vesting an imaginary narrative with
the character of a plain, unvarnished
statement of facts. In reading his
pages one seems to be listening to a
person who is not broaching theories
or communicating impressions, but
simply registering, in a sober and


straightforward manner, matters that
have fallen under his observation or
within his actual experience. His
realism is the realism of Balzac and
Defoe. We congratulate Mr. Gilbert
on having made a decided advance in
his art. This work is better, we think,
than any of his previous ones." —
Saturday Review.


Crown 8vo. Illustrated, 8*. 6d,

The Magic Mirror.


A Round of Tales for Old and Young.

"The stories are well told in the
best style for children, and the little
woodcuts to illustrate them have the
merit of showing an unhackneyed
mode of treatment"— T7i« Times.


" This is such a book as Nathaniel
Hawthorne alone could have written."
^New York Round Table.


Crown 8vo. 6s.

De Profundis :

A Tale of the Social Deposits.


"Mr. Gilbert's novels do more to
enlarge the field of actual experience
than those of any other writer of the
day. . . . Defoe and Mr. Gilbert
alone of English novelists seem to
give the ore of English life, while
other novelists of equal power give
only the extracted metaL . . . We
think ' De Pro ftmdis ' the most power-


ful of Mr. Gilbert's powerful stories."
— Spectator.

"Mr. Gilbert has a dramatic faculty
which many professed dramatists
might well envy, and a purity of style
which, in his department of literature,
has only been surpassed by Defoe."
— Nonconformist


Square 16ino. Illustrated, 2s. 6d,

The Washerwoman's Foundling.


" A prettier tale for the Christmas
season has not come under our notice
nmongst recently published stories.


It is the most humorous prose poem
we have read for many a day.' —
Athenamm.


A


THB BOOK LIST OV


WOBES BT EDWABD IBVINO.


k


5 vols, demy 8vo. £8.

The Collected Writings of Edward Irving.

Edited by his Nephew, the Rey. G. OARLYLE, M. A.

•^* More than one-half of iheee WrUingt are now printed far the

Jlrst time.


** Edward Irving hart tho power of
teaching the true nubllme, and the
BngUah language can show no more
magnlfloent speclmena of roligious
•loquenee than thoae that are con-
tained In these Collected Wrltlnga."—
TifMt,

'* Irving, almoet alone among recent
men. Uvea hla aermona and preached
klfl life. Ilia wordH, more than thoae
of any other modern ttpoaker. wore
* life pasacd through the lire of
thought.' lie Maid out hta InmoNt
heart, and thla It la that makes hla


wrltlnga read like a prolonged and
Ideal biography."— r^e 8at%i/rday J2e-

"The greatest preacher the world
has ever aeen aince apoatollc timet/'—
BUiokwood*» MagoMi/M.

* * Irving waa the freest, brotherlieaty
braveat human aoul mine ever oama
in contact with. I call him, on the
whole, the best man I have ever, after
trial enough, found In this world or
now hope to fin^" —Thomas CartyU
in ** Frastr's Magatine."


Post Svo. 65.


Miscellanies from the Collected Writings

of Edward Irving.


" In preparing thla fiortion of my
lecture (that wliich had reference to
Irving), I hod oucaaion to consult the
edition of hla worka published by
Mr. Btrahan of London, and also the
selection which has been made of a
volume of extracts from the larger
work. I have no hesitation In giving
the highest testimony in my power to
the abnity and tact shown in the latter
piece of work. The volume of extracts
will, I am confident, have the effect of
me^ng his countrymen appreciate the
rare qualities of Irving aa a preacher,
in a manner the most pleaaing and
eflbctlve,"— Dean Ramscm, in Mi Leo-
tures on *' Preachers and PreaoMng,"
before the Phitosophioal Institution 0/
IMAnburgh.


" It la by such a volume as this, wo
are Inclined to think, that Irving will
come to be widely known to genentl
readers. Tliere are pasaages of a
purely theological character which,
we think, display nrofound wisdom,
and are models of clear, strong, living
utterance. There are practical and
ethical 'savings,' that are aa gold and
rubies and diamonda. We entirely
approve the principle of ita comnlla-
tlon, and welcome it as fitted, in a
very remarkable manner, to ouicken
genuine and deep religious reeling,
and to impart earnestness and force
to the religious life. "—J\ronooVorm{«(.


8 vols, demy Svo. 15«. each.

Prophetical Writings of Edward Irving.

VoL I. now ready.


8TRAHAN AND OOHFANT.


WOBES BY THOMAS GUTHRIE, D.D.

Editor of "The Sunday Magazine."


Crown 8vo. 3«. ^d.

Studies of Character from the Old

Testament.


Crown 8vo. ^s. 6d.

Our Father's Business.


Crown 8vo. %s, ^d.

Out of Harness,


Crown 8vo. 35. ^d,

Man and the Gospel


"In point of striking thought, as
well as apposite and beautiful illus-
tration, this work will stand com-
parison with any which bears its
author's name, ^e subjects of which


it treats are as varied as the are
interesting, and belong to that class
which, as Lord Bacon says, *come
home to men's business and liosoms.' "
^Ed'vnhwrqh. Cov/runt.


Crown 8vo. Zs, 6d,

The Parables


Bead in the Light of the Present Day.

** No one can so fittingly explain the
Parables of the New Testament as Dr.
Guthrie. He is a master of imagery,
who scarcely writes a sentence without


a comparison, and who has, moreover,
the no less essential qualities of clear
spiritual insight and strong, shrewd
sense." — Fi'eeman.


Crown 8vo. 35. 6d.

Speaking to the Heart.


" Dr. Guthrie never speaks without
speaking to the heart ; but these dis-
courses bear with unwonted vividness
the impress of his great emotional


nature. They glow, they sparkle, they
bum with intense feeliug. We have
seldom looked into a more fkscinatiiif
book." — English Chwrchman,


82mo. l8, 6d.

The Angels' Song.

82mo. l5. 6d.

Early Piety.


8


THE BOOK LIST OF


WORKS BY ROBERT BUCHANAN.


Small Syo. 53,

London Poems.


*'A Rories of life-like character-
pictures. If Bfr. Buchanan writes no
more, he will have permanently en-
riched English literature by what he
has alrea(^ accomplished." — BrUish
Qttarterly Review.

''There is somethins very graceful
in every one of these dozen 'London
Idyls,' and it is the grace of thorough
completeness and proportion— the
HOund mind in the soundbody— so far
superior to any mere polish or trick of
style. Several are exquisitely touch-
ing." — Church and State Review.

*• We hardly know of any narrative
poetry greater than is found in some
of these sad and mourning lines. . . .
These verses have been lived before
they were written doym."—Athen(Bum.


tt


No volume has appeared for many
years in London which so certainly
announces a poetic fiiime." — Spectator,


<<


As a poet combining simplicity
with pathos and a wonderful talent
for giving to bis sul^jects the forms of
reality and life Mr. Buchsoian is un-
surpassed. Among contemporaries
and recent writers he is unequalled."
— Court Circular.


f(t


'They are in their subject so pa-
thetic—so repelling, one might almost
say; in their realism so pre-Ri^>haelite;
and yet in their poetic treatment so
delicately and tenderly artistic ; that
one cannot choose but wonder and
admire, and be sad over them."—
Morning Star,


Small Svo. 5s,


Idyls and Legends of Inverburn.


" Mr. Buchanan is a man of original

Senius ; such faculty as he has is in-
ependent, individual. And if we look
closely into his poems we shall be
struck with the fact that, although
quite tree from mannerism or eccen-
tricity, which would call attention to
any marked peculiarity isolating him
from contemporaries, his thought and
style are distinctively his own. He
has none of the showy graces which
make inconsiderate readers exclaim,
' How clever, how poetical 1 ' While
reading the poems you never think of
the poet. It is only in the afterglow
of emotion you think of him, and then


you know what rare power was needed
to produce so genuine an effect." —
Art. " Robert Buchanan," by G. H.
Lewes, in the Fortnightly Review.

" One of the most charming volume,
of poetic narrative that we know."—
Pall Mall Gazette.

" We do not call to mind any volume
of modem poetry so rich in tenderly
told story, beautifully painted pictuxv,
and abundant, spontaneous music."—
Illuatrated Times.

"One who can write thus has a
claim to be considered a true poet and
master otheaxtB."—Eoleotio jfevieu;.


Small Svo. 55.

Undertones.


"The offspring of a true poet's
heart and brain, they are full of
imagination, fancy, thought, and feel-
ing ; of subtle perception of beauty,
and harmonious expression."— Daily
News.

" Poetry, and of a noble kind."—
Athenceum.

*' Great intelligence, fine workman-


ship, and dramatic power almost
unexampled in this half century."—
lllv^trated Times.

" It is Ufe from within that in these
pages invests the ancient myths with
fresh meaning and beauty. Tet luxu-
riance of descriptive power tiiere is
too."— Scotsman,


8TRAHAN AND OOMPANT.


WORKS B7 ALEXANDEB SMITH.


Crown 8vo. 6s. with Coloured Frontispiece.

A Summer in Skye.


" Mr. Smith has great command of
language. Eveiy page displays in-
gemous expressions, highly wrought
comparisons, minute descriptions. *A
Summer in Skye' is to us very in-
teresting indeed." — Saturday Review.

** With the exception of Mr. Ruskin
and Mr. Eingsley, we should he
puzzled where to go amongst living
authors for better word-painting." —
Reader.

** There are passages in the present
volume which show the author's mar-
vellous power of reproducing at will
the magnificent effects of mountain


scenery — ^passages in which a play of
fancy and a true poetic insight strongly
reinforce an illustration already pre-
sented with great facility of expres-
sion and rich colouring." — Noncon-
Jormist.

''Mr. Alexander Smith speaks of
Boswell's Journal as * delicious read-
ing : ' his own work, though after a
very different fashion, affords delicious
reading also. His egotism is never
offensive ; it is very often charming.
If the traveller is sometimes lost in
the essayist, who will not prefer an
Elia to a Pennant?"— DaiZ]/ News.


Crown 8vo. 3». 6d.

Dreamthorp :

A Book of Essays written in the Country.


<c


. A book to be read in the
spirit of lazy leisure, to the sound
of bubbling brooks and whispering


woods. It is exquisitely printed,
handy, handsome, and cheap."— .^tAc-

nCBVM.


Crown 8vo. Qs,


Alfred Hagart's Household.


" The author i>aints with the most
ordinary colours, but he has Opie's
receipt for mixing them * with brains. '
It is his skill not only in selecting the
most attractive and suggestive traits
of character, but in expressing them
in the most graceful and suggestive
language, that gives unusual interest
to * Alfired Hagart's Household.' The
author has the poet's power of trans-
lating tersely what he interprets from
nature, of condensing vague feeBngs
into taiigible and graceftil shape, and
of mirroring by a simile what descrip-
tion would render inadequately. . . .
Mr. Smith invests the simplest every-


day characters and incidents with a
freshness and grace which charm us."
—Pall Mail Gagette.

'*It is a sort of prose idyl, as dra-
matic in its details as 'Hermann and
Dorotheas.' " — Athencevm.

"We want novelists with a touch
of poetry in them. We want novelists
whose love of the poetic will preserve
them from sensational absurdities.
Such a novelist we find in Mr. Smitih."
— Press.

''No one can read ' Alfired Hagart's
Household ' without a sense of keen
ei^oyment "—Gvordian*


10


THB DOCK LIST OF


WORKS BT E. H. FLUMFTBE, VI.A.

PuoFBiiHOR or Divinity, Ring's CoLLEas, LovDoir.

2 VoU. poHt 8vo. 12*.

The Tragedies of iEschylus.

A N«w TraiJHlation, with a DioKrapliical Ewsay, and an Appendix

of Rliyined Chonuos,

Popular Edition, crown 8vo. 7». 6J.

The Tragedies of Sophocles :

A Now TranRlation, with a IMograiiliical EvHay, and an Appendix

of Khy»n«d ClioniH<5».

iiiftrft, not law ranutrkBhU for Ito


*' Lot UN Nay at one/) UiAt Prof«NNor
Plutnpiro luiN not only HuriHuiN6d tho
nreviouN tranNliitorN ur HopnocltfN, but
him proUucod n work of Nfutfukr


fullcity tluin it« ttdiiUty : a n»aUv r«ad'
ttblii and onjoytthlo veraion of tli« old
lilayn."— Pall Mall OaxetU.


Crown 8vo, 59,

Lazarus, and other Poems.


" ProfuNNor Pluniptrft'N freNhnftNN
and oriKfnnlfiy of ihouKht in IreatinK
faiullitir NulJiJiictNKiv'') aK^'atchann to
wlini wo limy ttinn hiN Biblical IdylN."
— (Jhurchiiuin.


"Tho voluina cannot fail to e«ta-
blUdi Mr. Pluinptro'N reputation a« a
<l«votlonttl j»oet of a hlgU order of
m^rM." —Mirrning Pout.


Crown 8vo. 0«.

Master and Scholar, and other Poems.


"The pr«Nent volume will certainly
a<ld to Prof«NHor Pluniptro's rcpu-
ttttlou. It U worthy to be put on


the Name Nhelf with Helper and bU
own favourite KahU.'* —fVetlininitUr

Review.


Small 8vo. Gs.

Theology and Life.


"There In a d^jjjrce of fr«Hhn'<HN and
of orlKlnality alwiut Mr. i'lumptre'N
msrnuniH wliicli In wantinu in a larue
nuijority of diM<;ourNeN. They contain


tlie riuK of true metal, and ar« of
intrinMlc value, independently of thcsir
NuitubleneMN to the Immediate i)iirpotfu
of their delivery,"— Pttm*.


Demy 8vo, 12*.

Christ and Christendom ;

Being the Boylo Lectures for 1866,


IC


'Tlie Hoyle IvectureN for 18«J<J will
Ntand not unworthily l^y the Nide of
thoNt! produ»!ed by Pron?NHor IMump-
tre'N moHt eniirieut predeccHMora. in


them he diNphiyH, with rare force and
c4)nMtartt reodineNN, all the reiwmru«N
(if tt ripe Niiholar. a ke4;n critic, aii4 nu
elo<iuent writer, —/((/t«7UBtM».


8vo. Hewed, Qd,

Sunday.

"A learned, comprclieiiNivi', and Ningularly candid and valuable treatUfi."—

Hnotunc'iti.


8TRAHAN AND COMPANY.


11


WORKS BY HORACE BUSHNELL, D.D.

Crown 8vo. 7«. 6d.

The Vicarious Sacrifice,

Grounded on Principles of Universal Obligation.

one can rise from its stndy without
having his mind enlarged by its pro-
found speculation, his devotion stirred
by its piety, and his faith established
on a broader basis of thought and
knowledge." — Chtardian,


"This work is an important con-
tribution to theological literature,
whether we regard the amount of
thought which it contains, the syste-
matic nature of the treatise, or the
practical effect of its teaching. No


Crown 8vo. 3*. 6d,


Nature and the Supernatural,

As Together constituting the One System of God.

"It is a work of great ability, and | and mgexdouB."— Edinburgh Review.
full of thought whidi is at once true


Crown 8vo. 6s.

Christ and His Salvation,

In Sennons variously related thereto.


"These sermons are distinguished
from the ordinary discourses of the
pulpit by being the product not


merely of religious faith and feeling,
but of religious genius." — AUantie
Monthly.


Crown 8vo. 3*. 6d.

The New Life.


" We have here a Christian preacher
dealing with some of the profoundest
'ttiemes of Christian experience, witii
an insist into the working of the


human soul, a grasp and breadth of
thought^ and a depth of experience,
such as we have never seen equalled."
—PcUriot.


Crown 8vo. 35. 6d.

Christian Nurture,

Or the Godly Upbringing of Children.


" The thinking is original, vigorous,
and suggestive. The book is one that
cannot oe read without profit and


pleasure of no transient character.
Montrose Standard.


Crown 8vo. 3*. 6d,

Work and Play.


" This book is a collection of pai>er8
on general subjects, treated in a re-
ligious spirit. To say that they are


worthy of the writer i^ sufficient
recommendation." — Baptist Magatime.


Limp cloth, 6d.

The Character of Jesus.


12


THE BOOK LIST OF


WORKS BY JOHN DE LIEFDE.


2 Volames, post Svo. IlloBtrated, 228,

Six Months among the Charities of

Europe.


♦ ♦


^ This Work deBcribes, among other representative Charities on
the Continent, the large establisnments devoted to the care of the
Indigent, the Blind, the Fatherless, the Aged Poor, the Neglected
Women and Children, and the Discharged Prisoners.


" The many thougands of English
readers who are ready at home to take
part in such works, and who would
know, byCaithftiland pleasant report,
what has been achieved elsewhere by
the beneficent energies of earnest men
and women, will And in this book a
fall body of the most pertinent infor-
mation, full of encouragement and
good suggestions." — Examiner,

"Mr. ae Liefde's book is readable,
interesting, stimulating. It shows how
monl energy will overcome obstacles


that seem enormous, how faith and
enthusiasm move mountains."— J^ort-
nightly Review.

" This book is excellent. It will be
eagerly read by persons of practical
benevolence. It shows how much can
be done by determination and single-
ness of purpose to diminish the sum of
human sunering, and to promote the
happiness of mankind. 8uch a work
cannot foil to be extensively appre-
ciated."— Daily Newi.


Crown Svo. Illustrated, 85. 6d.

The Postman's Bag.


A Story-Book for

"This little volume is simple, art-
less, and Christian. We know several
little children who are never weary of
these stories, and we are sure that
they can learn f^om them nothing but
what is good."^London Review.

" Commend us to Mr. de Liofde for a
pleasant story, whether in the parlour
or on the printed page. He is himself


Boys and Girls.

a story-book, full of infections hnmoor.
racy anecdote, youthful freshness, and
warm-hearted religion. In this pret^
little volume we do not get anv of hu
more elaborate tales ; it is profeHsedly
a book 'for boys and girls,' and ia
made up of short stories and Cables,
the very things to win children's
hearts.*'— Patrtof.


Crown Svo. 5*.


The Romance of Charity.

Being an Account of some Remarkable Institutions on the

Continent.


** Mr. de Liefde may well call his
volume * The Romance of Charity,'
for his collection of facts overpass
fiction in strangeness. It is not very
creditable that such vast works of
Christian love should be absolutely
unknown to, or unappreciated by, the


approved leaders and principal advo-
cates of our Church system in Eng-
land. Some of the accounts Kfven by
Mr. de Liefde are most affecting and
truly wonderful"— r/i«Deau of Can-
terbv/ryin the ** Contemporary Beview.**


Crown Svo.

Truth in Tales.


[In the Prtu,


STRAHAN AND COMPANY.


13


WORKS BY GEORGE MAG DONALD LL.D.


Crown 8vo. 68,

The Disciple, and other Poems.


" Year by year Mr. Mac Donald is
winning his way to a high place among
contemporary poets. Each new
volume reveals fresh powers. The
present volume contains, we think, the
finest pieces he has written. It is


both broader and manlier in tone and
sentiment, and from an artistic point
of view it sho\i s an increased mastery
of language and clearness of thought."
— Westminster Review,


Popular Edition, crown 8vo. Zs, 6d,

Unspoken Sermons.


" True and beautiful thought, musi-
cally and eloquently expressed." —
PaXl Mall Gazette.

* * Readers will rejoice over these ser-
mons as tiiose who have gotten great
spoil." — Nonconformist.

** In Gheorge Mac Donald's company
the very air seems impregnated with
love, purity, and tenderness. We
seem to be under an Italian sky ; and


the harshness, whether of individual
or national temperament, is wonder-
fully checked. A loving heart reveals
to us the heart which is the fountain
of love, and sends us away ashamed
of our harsh and bitter feelings, and
praying to be able to love more both
Him who is Love and those who ought
ever to be dear to us for His sake.'*—
Dr. Guthrie's ** Sunday Magazine.*'


Square 16mo. 2s. 6d., Illustrated by Arthur Hughes.

Dealings with the Fairies.


" Mr. Mac Donald writes as though
he had lived a long time in Fairy Land,
and not from vague reports, but from
notes taken on tibe spot."— Spectator.

" Mr. Hughes has illustrated these
Fairy Tales with much skill ; and the
charming little volume, if it did not
make us wish to be young again, did


more, for while we were reading, so
great was the magic of the Enchanter's
Wand, we became young once more,
and clapped our venerable hands over
the tears of the Light Princess, and
the groans of Mr. Thunderthump."—
British Quarterly Review.


Popular Edition, crown 8vo. Qs.

Annals of a Quiet Neighbourhood.


" It is as full of music as was Pros-
pero's island ; ridi in strains that take
the ear captive and linger long upon
it." — Saturday- Review.

** A true and noble work."— Daily
Neivs.

"Whoever reads this story once


will read it many times. It shows an
almost supernatural insight into the
workings of the human heart."— PaH
Mall Gazette.

" This story is one that only a man
of genius could have written."— ^»-
aminer.


u


TUB BOOK LIST OF


WORKS BT THE AUTHOR OF " STXTDIES

FOR STORIES."


Crown 8vo. illuMtrut^dy 69,

A Sister's Bye-Hours.


"W« put thiM liook down with
rAKrttt. Wu Imvn HSiUi cnoiiKh to
Nbuw that It In brliiifiil ut truts warm


nt^MiiUm, fiiul that It In an fitultlANM in
kiiKUiitf" <iN ft In Nltn[)lu In Mtylo."—
London ItevUw.


Crown 8vo. illuNtratod, 69.

Studies for Stories from Girls' Lives.


"HInipla in Ntyln, wnnn with liunitin
aflhction, find wrlttnn in faultloNN
IBngllNh, ihrna (ivo NtorluN nro NtudhiN
for iho nrtlNt, MirtnonN for thu thotiKlit'
ful, and A rar» Nounut of dnllKht for nil
who (tan Mnd pliioNuri) In vmWy good
workN of iiroNu fiction. . . . Ttioy ari)
yroNw \HHimn." - Athrmf-um,

" Ka<th of thiiNd NtudliiN In a drrtnui
In ItNulf lUuNtratlvu of tho oi»itnition


of Nonin jiarilcular tiaNNlon— Mitch m
(invy, inlNpIacitd amoltlon, Nontimitn'
titlUni, indolimcro, JimlouNy. In all of
tliont th(i w.Uivn aru yountf tfirU, and
W(i cannot IritoMlix' ^ bettor l>ook for
yoiutK \m[\m."—l'all Mall (laxttU.

•• Ttinni (tould not tw ft t)ett«r book
to iittt into tiM) liitndN of young IoUIdn."
• -^SptcUitor.


B({uaro ICnio. illiiHtratud, <)m. C(/.

Stories Told to a Child.


''Thorn In morn rmil fiunilty in Nomo
of tluiNd brinf taloN than could liu
foun<l by aniilyNiN in half the nuciuinn*
fill novciN now publiNhod. One nioNt
tdnaNant thing about tliu tniok In, that
though it In written for cldldrcn liy a
brain caiiabloof InNtrui'.ting tho nilndN
and (innobling the tlioughtN of grown
poopin, thnrn In no tmiUnu lUmn Ui
nurNiiry IntidlnctN. Thuauthor'NiifrortN
tru Nint|dy wido nnough to nmbruco
Uiom, and (juthuliu mioiigh to bu to


thoni liko th(t whtdiiNoinu NUiuihitie
anri wind. Morn than thlN It In not
niiNV to Niiy. but that may l>n Nahl with
nntlrn conlidttncd, DuNidoN, thitrn Im a
(/ufWncMN atiout MInn lugnlow'NNtoriuM,
a vigour wItJiout rudcnnNN, a tdtity
without cunt, a wluiltiNoniu inotnnrll-
ncHN, which idaccN thcni amonuNt tho
NafcNt aN well aN the nwrnt Intnlliuont
tlilngH of the Hoi't that wu know oV*^~
Vail Mall (JasetU,


'J* Kach of tho Mix ntoHcm in tlilH book \h mmd wpaiutoly, in

nout cloth, pricu iiU,


STRAHAN AND COMPANY.


15


WORKS B Y SARAH TYTLER.

Crown 8vo. 5s,

Days of Yore.

' "^ — disappoints us : each has * the virtue

of a full draught in a few drops ; ' and
in each there is the quintessence of
such a novel as Thackeray might have
written. " — Pall Mall Gazette.


** The concentrated power which we
admire in ' Citoyenne Jacqueline ' is


precisely the kind of power to ensure
an equal success to the author in
• Days of Yore. ' No story in the book


Crown 8vo. 6a

Citoyenne Jacqueline :

A Woman's Lot in the Great French Revolution.

•• * Citoyenne Jacqueline ' is one of
those rare books of which every sen-
tence deserves to be read leisurely,
and will repay the attention with
pleasure."— Gttardian.

•' There is real genius in the book.'*
— Speetator.


•* The author charms us immediately
into keen interest in the scenes, and
sympathy with the characters of her
story, which shows a power of catch-
ing and reproducing to the life French
piquancy and levity." — Pall Mall
Gajsette.


Crown 8vo. Illustrated, 5s*

Papers for Thoughtful Girls.


♦• One of the most fascinating books
wo have ever seen for the rising youth
of the fair sex. The whole volume is
lively and yet so serious, that we


so


would disclaim all liking for the young
ladv who should not fall in love with
\t.—Ecledic Review.


Crown 8vo. 5s. '

The Diamond Rose :

A Life of Love and Duty.


" Story sweetly told. It is so ftdl of
character, it has such a depth of true
human pathos about it, and — what in
these days is no small merit — it is


wiitten in such an exquisitely perfect
style, that we hope all our readers
will procure it for themselves." —
Literary Churchman.


Crown 8vo. 58.

Girlhood and Womanhood :

The Story of some Fortunes and Misfortunes.


*• Every quality of merit which was
conspicuous in * Citoyenne Jacqueline '
is apparent here also. The first tales
in this volume give us some of the
llnest descriptions of scenery we have
ever read, while the meditative mood


into which MisaTytler frequently falls
in these eighteenth century reminis-
cences is very like the delightful chit-
chat with which Tliackeray indulged
his readers so often.*'— Spectator.


Popular Edition, crown 8vo. Illustrated, 6s,

The Huguenot Family in the English

Village.


* * • TheHugucnotFamily ' ought to be
called by a nobler name than ' a novel '
It claims analysis as an historical study
of great value and beauty ; and as a
story— as an example of character-
painting, of the close and delicate re-
presentation of the gifts and graces.


the struggles and triumphs of the
human heart — ^it has few, if any, su-

Seriors. Grand'm^ Diipuy is the
nest creation of English fiction since
Romola. The Parson's daughters
would do no discredit to Oliver Qold-
smith."— Morning Post.


16 THB BOOK LIST 07


WORKS BY NOBMAN MACLEOD, DJ>.

Onb of Her Majesty's Chaplains.


Two Vols, crown 8vo. 16*.

The Starling.

A Scotch Story.


Popular Edition, Illustrated, crown 8vo. 69.

Eastward :

Travels in Eg3rpt, Palestine, and Syria.

[In the Press.

Sixteenth Thousand, crown Svo. 85. 6d,

The Earnest Student:

Being Memorials of John Mackintosh.
New Edition, Illustrated, crown 8yo. 85. 6d,

The Old Lieutenant and His Son.


Ninth Thousand, crown Svo. 85. 6d,

Parish Papers.

Eleventh Thousand, Illustrated, square Svo. 28. 6d,

The Gold Thread:

A Story for the Young.
Thirty-fifth Thousand, sewed, 6rf.

Wee Davie.


Second and Cheaper Edition, crown Svo. 65.

Reminiscences of a Highland Parish

Small Svo. 2s. 6d.

Simple Truth spoken to Working People.

New Edition, in preparation.

The Home School.


STRAHAN AND COMPANY,


17


WORKS OF FICTION,


3 vols, post 8vo. 31s. M.

The Man of Birth and the Woman of

the People.

By Maria Schwartz.


"The story is undoubtedly clever,
and is entirely free from the vulgar
sensationalism which characterises too
many of our modem works of fiction.


It is irresistibly enthralling and unex-
ceptionally healthy in ite tone."—
Noruxynformist.


3 vols, post 8vo. 31s. 6d.

Grace's Fortune.


"A thoroughly interesting novel.
It avoids every approach to the sen-
sational, and is written with very re-


markable ease and vigour."— London
Review, __


Post 8vo. 105. 6d,

Lotta Schmidt,

And other Stories.
By Anthony Trollope.

Post Svo. 105. 6d,

Arne :

A Sketch of Norwegian Peasant Life.

By Bjornstjerne Bjornson.

Translated by Augitsta Plesner and Susan Rugeley-Powers.

"The most charming love-story of
the year." — Illustrated Times.

"Such firesh little bits of nature
come to us rarely. They are green


spots in the arid waste of fiction. —
AthencBum.

" It is, in fact, a fairy-book for men
and women." — Westminster Review


Crown Svo. 65.

Wealth and Welfare.

By Jeremiah Gotthelf.


" For a long time we have not read
a book in which the style was at once
so firesh and individual without being


forced. This volume is a perfect little
mine of shrewd observation." —
London Review.


Crown Svo. Illustrated, 6«.

A French Country Family.

By Madame de "Witt, nSe GtrizoT.
Translated by the Author of "John Halifax, Gentleman."


"Madame de Witt is a charming
painter of the natures and ways of
well-nurtured children, and the
Author of ' John Halifiax, Gentleman/


has done good service in giving us this
English version of a book which will
delight the inmates of our nurseries."
—A^iMtm^.


18 THB BOOK LIST OF


WORKS IN GENERAL LITERATURE.


Second Edition, crown 8vo. 58,

On "Ecce Homo."

By the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone.

" A curlonBly delicate eggay on the
method pursued in ' Ecce Homo/ the
fine and cumplicated texture of which


ia in Btrange contrast with the l>old
doubts and bold dogmatisuM of
modem thought."— (Spectator.


Crown 8vo. 6s,

Scripture Portraits, & other Miscellanies,

From the Published Writings of
A. P. Stanley, D.D., Dean ofWestminster.


Crown 8vo. 68.

}9


Essays from ^' Good Words.

By Henry Rogers, Author of ** The Eclipse of Faith. "
•• Worthy of the ability of the author of ' The Eclipse of Faith.' "^Spectator.


Square 8vo. Illustrated, 12«.

La Belle France.

By Bessie Parkes-Belloo, Author of ** Essays on Woman's

Work," &c.

Small 8vo. is.

Essays on Woman's Work.

By Bessie Rayner Parkes.
"Every woman ought to read Miss Parkes' little volume on Woman'p
Work."— rime*.


Small 8vo. Zs. 6d.

The Higher Education of Women.

By Emily Davies,


"There is so much temperance,
good sense, and originality in Miss
Davies' treatment of uie question, that


it would be a most regrotable tliinfi;
if she failed to ensure a wide circle of
readers." — Westminster Review.


Small 8vo. 6s.

Woman's Work in the Church.

Being Historical Notes on Deaconesses and Sisterhoods.
By John Malcolm Ludlow.

"Of the importance of the suUoot
of this book there can be no question,
and Mr. Ludlow has brought to its
dlsousBion an intense sympathy, a


large amount of information, and a
calm, Judicial b^ItH."— British Quar^
terly Review.


STRAHAN AND COHFANT. 19


WORKS IN GENERAL LITERATURE.


Crown 8vo. 6s.

Practical Essays on Education.

By Thomas Markby, M. A.


Crown 8vo. 65.

Views and Opinions

By Matthew Browne.


"The work of a highly sensitive
and cultivated mind. There is a rare
and original vein of sportive humour
running throughout its pages. . . .


These are rare qualities ; and the book
in which they are displayed ^as few if
any recent cqusHs."— Westminster Re-
view.


Post 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Tangled Talk.

An Essayist's Holiday.


"'Tangled Talk' is the work of a
true essayist. . . . It is a mosaic of
suggestive bits ; or, since mosaic is a
false image, let us say it is a skein of
bright and broken threads, every one


of which may readily be woven into
the reader's own thoughts, adding
colour and strength to them for the
tu.t\jxe.**—Illtistrated Times,


Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d,

Beginning Life.

By the Rev. Principal Tullooh.
" An excellent book for young meiL**— Edinburgh Review,

Small 8vo. Illustrated, Qs, People's Edition, crown 8vo. Fancy

Covers, Is.

The Autocrat of the Breakfast-table.

By Oliver Wendell Holmes.
Crown 8vo. 3«. 6d,

The Near and the Heavenly Horizons.

By the Countess de Gasparin.

" This is a charming book. The of speaking to everyone * in their own
Countess de Gasparin has the touch toji%iie."'—AtlienanitA,
of genius which nas the strange gift


Small 8vo. 5«.

Human Sadness.

By the Countess de Gasparin.

'* There are times when the soul
craves an utterance for its deeper
longings. The Countess de.Oasparin


has given expression to these desires,
and has done so in beautiful and af-


fecting language.*'— London Review.


20 THE BOOK LIST OF


WOBES IN GENERAL LITERATURE.


Small Svo. 89. 6d.

Lights Through a Lattice.

By J. E. A. Brown.
Square Svo. 68, *

Gerhardt's Spiritual Songs.

Translated by John Kelly.
Cloth extra, small Svo. 4«. 6d.

The Hymns of Denmark.

Rendered into English by Gilbert Tait .
Small Svo. Ss,

Duchess Agnes, etc.

By Ira Craio.
" A book of verse which will certainly give MIbs Craig a plaee among ilie
sisterhood of living singers."— ^t^mBum.

Demy Svo. 78. Qd,

The Resources and Prospects of America.

Ascertained during a Visit to the States in the Autumn of 1865.

By Sir S. Morton Peto, Bart. M.P.

too sanguine a view, the book Is likely
to be equally acceptable on both sldeM
of the Atlantic."— 2'i7»«, April 12,
1866.


" It deals entirely with the material
and commercial capabilities of the
country, and, as these are points on
which It is almost impossible to take


Small Svo. Illustrated by Whymper, 8«. 6d,

The Regular Swi«s Round.

In Three Trips.
By the Rev. Harry Jones, M. A.

2 vols, demy Svo. Illustrated, 21*.

Cosas de Espana:

Illustrative of Spain and the Spaniards as they are.
By Mrs. Wm. Pitt Byrne, Author of " Flemish Interiors," &c.
"The best book wo have yet seen on Spain."— Daiiy Newt.

Crown Svo. Zs. Qd,

My Ministerial Experiences.

By the Rev. Dr. Buchsel, Berlin.


" This is an interesting volume. It
contains very interesting accounts of
the German Pietists, amongst whom
Dr. Buchsel was constantly known,


and who maintained the pure gonpel
in the midst of abounding Rational-
ism."— iiecort/.


STRAHAN AND OOUPANT. 21

PHILOSOPHICA L & SCIENT IFIC WORKS.

Fifth and cheaper Edition, with Additions, Crown 8vo. 6«,

The Reign of Law.

By the Duke of Argyll.
" This is a masterly book . . . strong, soaud, mature, able thonght from its
first page to its last.**— (Spectator^

Post 8vo. 65.

The Philosophy of the Conditioned :

Sir William Hamilton and John Stuart Mill.
By the Rev. H. L. Mansel, D. D. Oxford.


" This volume is distinguished by
the same clearness of style, cogency of
argument, accuracy of information,
and mastery of the subjects, which
characterise all the other valuable


productions of the author, and is on
the points criticised a most successful
as well as a most unsparing exposure
of Mill's manifold bttotb/' — British
Quarterly Review.


Second Edition, with Additions, 2 vols. 14^.

Henry Holbeach :

Student in Life and Philosophy.
A Narrative and a Discussion. With Letters to Mr. M. Arnold,
Mr. Alexander Bain, Mr. T. Carlyle, Mr. A. Helps, Mr. G. H. Lewes,
Rev. H. L. Mansel, Rev. F. D. Maurice, Mr. J. S. Mill, and Rev.

Dr. J. H. Newman.

hands of one who has read extensively
and thought profoundly on all tiie
terrible questions of the day." —
British QtMrterly Review.


" The brave manner in which mere
utilitarianism, materialism, positiv-
ism, and authority are grappled with,
convinces the reader that he is in the


Crown 8vo. 6».

Familiar Lectures on Scientific Subjects.

By Sir John F. W. Herschel, Bart.
** A book of most profound and romantic sci entific charm.**— Spectotor.

Crown 8vo. Illustrated, 4^. 6(2.

God's Glory in the Heavens.

By W. Leitoh, D.D. la te Principal of Queen's College, Canada.
With Thirty-six Illustrations, printed in Colours, Crown 8vo. 9«.

A Year at the Shore.

By Philip Henry Gosse, F.R.S.
"A delicious book deliciou sly illustrated.**— JHtfgfrafed lA)ndon News*

Square 8vo. With Photographs and Plates, 128,

Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid.

By Professor C. PiAzzi Smyth, F.R.S.S.L. and E.
" We commend this work to all lovers of genuine goodness, of stubborn
mathematics, and of adventur ous theorizing." — Lond^m Quarterly Review,

Post 8vo. 8a.

Outlines of Philosphy.

By Alexander Vinet.
" This volume abounds in passages remarkable for deep thought and eloquent
expressioxL**— Giuuidian


22 THE BOOK LIST OF


BIOOBAFHIGAL WORKS.


Popular Edition, 8 Vols, crown 8vo. 6*. each.

Lives of Indian Ofl&cers,

1 llustrative of the History of tho Civil and Military Sorvicos of India.

By John William Katb,

Author of " The History of the War in Afghanistan," fto. 4io.

" We say at once that more admira- Officers * will take a high place among

bly-writton and intcrosting narratives the standard books of £!ngland." —

are scarcely to bo found in any litera- Athenceum.
turo. . . . Mr. Kaye's * Lives of Indian


Crown 8vo. 6«.

Vignettes :

Twelve Biographical Sketches.
By Be88ie Rayner Parkes.


(I


This Is a very charming volume.
It will make many aciiuainted with
persons worthy of being known, who


have hitherto been names and nothing
more,'*— British Quarterly Review.


Crown 8vo. Zs. 6d, Pocket Edition, small 8vo. 2*.

Praying and Working.

By the Rev. W. Fleming Stevenson.


" The story of the lives of noble and
devoted men. . . . This record of men's
faith in God's help will be road with


interest and sympathy, for it touolies
the electric cliain with which we are
darkly hound,"— Athenceum.


Third and Cheaper Edition, Illustrated, crown 8vo. 6«.

Memoirs of the Life and Philanthropic
Labours of Andrew Reed, D.D.

Prepared from Autobiographic Sources by his Sons, Andrew
Reed, B.A. and Charles Rekd, F.S.A.

"The sons of Andrew Reed have *' A profoundly Interesting piece of


done a good work in publishing this
memorinloftheirfather." — Athetueum.


biography."— W^eefciy Messenger.


Crown 8vo. 8«. 6d.

Story of the Lives of Carey, Marshman,

and Ward.

By John C. Marshman.


8TSAHAN AMD OOHFANY. 23

THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS WORKS.

The Critical English Testament,

Being an Adaptation of Bengel's Gnomon, with numerous Notes,

showing the Precise Results of Modem Criticism and Exegesis.

Edited by Rev. W. L. Blaokley, M.A. and Rev. James

Hawes, M.A.

Complete in three volumes, averaging 750 pages, price 6s. each.
' ' A more valuable handbook for the nave put before the Ehiglish reader the


Bible student could not have been sup
plied" — British Qtuirterly Review.
"The Editors of this valuable work


results of the labours of more than
twenty eminent commentators." —
Evangelical Magazine.


Crown 8vo. 5s.

The Bible Student's Life of our Lord.

By Rev. Samuel J. Andrews.
*' For most readers this book will be far more interesting than any other
work on our Lord's earthly lif e. ' ' — Contem/pnrar y Review.

Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d,

The Foundations of our Faith.

By Professors Auberlen, Gess, and others.
"We know nothing that can compare with this work for completeness,
wisdom, and power."— JToncoV ormisf.

Small 8vo. 6s.

Personal Names in the Bible.

By the Rev. W. F. Wilkinson, M.A. Joint Editor of ** Webster
and Wilkinson's Greek Testament. "
'' This is a book for all who would wisely, justly, and carefully study the
sacred volume.*'— ffowwiw*.

Post 8vo. Ss.

Outlines of Theology.

By Alexander Vinet.


"This volume is of oreat iperit and
extreme interest. . . . Our readers will
find in it a rich vein of vigorous
thought, extremely su^estive, and


always pervaded by a devout and
reverent spWt" — British Qitarterly
Review.


New and Enlarged Edition. Crown 8vo. 55.

The Christ of History.

By John Young, LL.D.


" The republication of Dr. Young's
'Christ of History,' with an appendix
on Kenan's *Vie de J68us,*is well
timed. Theargument is irresistible and
unanswerable. We trust that this re-
appearance of a work of such great ex-
cellence, eloquence, and logical com-


pactness will give fi*esh impetus to its
study, and lead those who persist in
approaching Christ on the strictly
human side to cry, with the Apostle,
*My Lord and my Qod.* "- British
Quarterly Review.


Post 8vo. 7s. 6<i

The Life and Light of Men.

By John Young, LL.D.


"The author's idea is beautifully
worked out in this volume, which^
like all Dr. Young's writings, is cha-


racterised by deep thought and the
keenest appreciation of spiritual
thhigs.**— 5j)ecfator.


i


24 THE BOOK LIST OF


THEOLOGICAL AND BEL IGIOUS WOBKS.

Crown 8vo. 68.

Week-Day Sermons.

By R. W. Dale, M .A.
Crown 8vo. 8«. 6rf.

Wind-wafted Seed.

Reprinted from " Oood Words " and " The Sunday Magazine,"
Edited by Norman Maclkod, P.P. and Thomas Guthbis, D.D.

Crown 8vo. 8«. Qd,

TheTreasnre-book of Devotional Reading.

Edited by Benjamin Orme, M.A.

contentg arc even better thui their


" The nolectionR have 1i>een made
with care, and will bo prized not
merely as Romothing to lie rend In an
idle hour, but to be pondered over."
—Literary Churchman.

"This ip A beautiful book, but its


accompaniment. Such a book, we
feel, is not to be critlciaed save by one
who bhould misa many of his favoariie ,

authors. But thiH is not likely to be !

Jhecase.**— fiipectotor.


Crown 8vo. 8«. 6d,

The Words of the Angels ;

Or, their Visits to the Earth, and the Messages they delivered.

By R udolph Stier, D .D.

Crown 8vo. Qs.

The Prophet Jonah :

His Mission and Character Illustrated and Applied.
By the Rev. Hugh Martin, M.A.
"The work is both practical and I It is aa well suited for general reading
expository, and will prove a valuable as for reference."— lonoow Review.
contribution to theological Hterntu re. |

PoHt 8vo. 78. 6d.

Sermons and Expositions.

By the late John Robertson, D.D. Glasgow Cathedral.

equal. Let it be added that a more


" Dr. Robertson had not a superior
among the Scottish clergy ; for manly
grasp of mind, for pith and point in
treating his subject, he had hardly an


gonial, kindly, liberal-minded and
(most man never walked this earth."
— Fraseft MagoMine.


Demy 8vo. 7«. 6d,

Ecclesia Dei :

The Place and Functions of the Church in the Divine Order of the
Universe, and its Relations with the World.
"Tliis Is a very remarkable work. lence will soon force a way into pnblio
the execution of a grandly conceived
theory. . . We ftilly expect to find
that its intrinsic and literary excel-


notoriety, and secure a due apprecia-
tion."— irofctt Bull


Crown 8vo. 2«. 6rf.

Church Life :

Its Grounds and Obligations.
By the Author of <* Ecclesia Dei."


I


STBAHAN AND OOHPANT. 2d

THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS WOBES.


Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d,

On the Written Word.

By the R ev. J. Oswald Dykes.
Crown 8vo. 3«. Qd,

Prayers in the Congregation.

By Henr y Ward Beech er, D.D.
Crown 8vo. 25. 6d.

Life Thoughts.

By Henry "Ward Beec her, D.D.
Crown Svo. 35. 6d.

Royal Truths.

By Henr y Ward Beech kr, D.D.
Crown Svo. Zs. 6d.

Christian BeUeving and Living.

By F. D. HlTNTINGDO N, D.D.
Small Svo. Ss,

The Restoration of the Jews :

The History, Principles, and Bearings of the Question.
By David Brown, D. D. Author of " The Second Advent."

Cloth antique. Is, 6d.

The Pathway of Promise.

Small Svo. 28. 6d.

Able to Save ;

Or, Encouragement to Patient Waiting.
By the Author o f "The Pathw ay of Promise."

Small Svo. 28. 6d.

The Throne of Grace.

By the Author of "The Pathw ay of Promise. '
Limp cloth, 8d,

Loving Counsel :

An Address to his Parishioners
By the Author o f "The Pathw ay of Promise.

Crown Svo. sewed, 1*.

Romanism and Rationalism as opposed

to Pure Christianity.

By John Caibns, D.D.


26 TBI BOOK LIST OT


THEOLOGICAL AND RELI GIOUS WORKS.

Cloth antique, la. Qd.

Personal Piety :

A Help to Christians to Walk worthy of their Calling.

Cloth antique, la. 6d,

The Sunday Evening Book for Family

Reading.

Cloth antique, Is. 6d,

Aids to Prayer.

Small 8vo. cloth antique, Zs, 6d,

Christian Companionship for Eetired

Hours.

Small 8vo. Zs. Qd.

Conversion.

By the Kev. Adolph Saphir.
Small 8vo. la, 6d

The Higher Christian Life.

By the Rev. W. E. Boardman.
Small 8vo. la. 6d,

The Way Home.

By the Kev. Charles Bullock.
Small 8vo. la.

Blind Bartimeus, and his Great Physician.

By the Rev. W. G. Hoge.
Limp cloth, la.

The Still Hour.

By Austin Phelps.
Small 8vo. 2a. 6d,

Man's Renewal.

By Austin Phelps, Author of ** The Still Hour.


It


Small 8vo. la. 6d,

Prevailing Prayer.

With Introduction by Norman Maoleod, D.D.


STRAHAN AND COMPANY. 27


BOOKS FOR WORKING PEOPLE.


Seventy-second Thousand, crown 8vo. boards, la, 6d.

Better Days for Working People.

By William G. Blaikib, D.D. F.R.S.E.


Fifth Thousand, crown 8vo. cloth, Zs. 6d,

Heads and Hands in the World of Labour,

By William G. Blaikie, D.D. F.R.S.E.


Crown 8vo. boards, 1*. 6d.

Counsel and Cheer for the Battle of Life.

By William G. Blaikib, D.D. F.R.S.E.


Crown 8vo. boards, la, 6d,

The Representation and Education of

the People.

Lectures delivered at the Working Men's College.
By Frederick Denison Maurice, M.A.


Small 8vo. cloth, 2s. Qd.

Simple Truth spoken to Working People.

By Norman Macleod, D.D. One of Her Majesty's Chaplains.

Small 8vo. sewed, 6d,

Plain Words on Health.

Lay Sermons to Working People.
By John Brown, M.D.

Small crown 8vo. 28, 6d.

Progress of the Working Classes from

1832 to 1867.

By J. M. Ludlow and Lloyd Jonep,


28 TBB BOOK LIST OF


BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG.


Square 16mo. Illustrated, la, 6d,

The Will-o'-the-Wisps are in Town ;

And other New Tales.
By Hans Christian Andersen.

Square 16mo. Illustrated, 2«. 6d,

Edwin's Fairing.

By Edward Monro, M.A.
Square 16mo. Illustrate, 2a. 6d,

iEsop's Fables.

Square 16mo. Illustrated, 28, 6d,

Liliiput Levee :

Poems of Childhood, Child- fancy, and Child-like Moods.


Square 8vo. Illustrated, Be. 6d,

Wordfiworth's Poems for the Young.

Square 16mo. Illustrated, Zs. Qd,

Stories told to a Child,

By the Author of *' Studies for Stories."


Square 16mo. Illustrated, Zs, Qd,

Poems Written for a Child.

By Two Friends.


Square 16mo. Is. Qd.

Daily Devotions for Childrfift.

Square 16mo. Is. 6d,

Daily Meditations for Chil^lren.


STRAHAN AND COMPANY.


29


FINE ABT BOOKS.


Imperial 4to. cloth gilt, 21s.

Touches of Nature.

By Eminent Artists and Authors.

This Volume contains One Hundred Drawings on Wood, set in

gold borders, and produced in the highest style of art, under the

superintendence of Messrs. Dalziel Bbothebs.


" This collection is one of the best
that has ever appeared. It comprises
drawibigs by Mlllais, Holman Hunt,
Frederick Walker, Sandys, Wolf, Law-
less, DvL Manner, Tenniel, Marcus
Stone, Leitch, and half a dozen other
men, more or less distinguished. 0ome
of them are as good as can be found
anywhere : Holman Hunt's drawing
on p. 6 is an instance— a figure of a
Jewish Reaper, which is beautiful be-
yond praise, a thing which demands
and deserves contemplation as a mas-
terly work of art. Besides Mr. Hunt,
Mr. Millais and Mr. Walker are seen
in this volume at their best, and so is
Mr. Du Manner."— PaW Mall Gazette.

"Millais's drawings here are all in
his best style, and Mr. Holman Hunt's
is perhaps the most remarkable in the
coUection. Mr. Sandys furnishes some
very striking illustrations ; Mr. Wolf


presents us with a collection of birds | minster Review.


such as he alone can draw ; Mr. Lin-
ton a landscape, with one of those
skies which he so much loves. We
would gladly go on to specify others,
but must content ourselves with
briefiy commending Mr. Small, Mr.
Houghton, Mr. Walker, and especially
Mr. Barnes ; and adding a word of
deep regret for the loss of Mr. Paul
Gray, whose pictures here show how
true a lover of nature he was. But
the chief value of the work is the
testimony, which most certainly it
bears, to the soundness and healtlu-
ness of English art in the present day.
And it must be remembered that the
illustrations were originally designed
for 'Good Words,' the price of which
is only 64. ; but which fully deserves
both its hij^ reputation and wide cir-
culation, by the spirit and good taste
with which it is conducted." — We»t-


Demy 4to. cloth gilt, 165.

Millais's Illustrations^

A Collection of Drawings on "Wood.


By John Everett

"Foremost among the Illustrated
Books deserves to be named Mr. Mil-
lais's * Collected Illustrations.' Mr.
Millais has qualities as an artist with
which few authors can dare a com-
parison. What these qualities are
may be inferred firom the fact that
here are his best iUustrations col-
lected together, separate fh)m the text
to which they belonged. They are
works of art that need no letterpress
— ^no comment : they speak for uiem-
selves, and have an interest by them-
selves. They nearly aU display extra-
ordinary powA, and some of them
are in their way quite perfect." —
Timu.

"A collection of Ae choicest draw-
ings that have appeared in 'Good
Words' and other flnily Ulustrated


Millais, R.A.

periodicals, has been collected into
one handsome volume. By the phrase
' choicest drawings' we mean — ^nor do
we think that the fitness of ikat
phrase, so applied, will be for a mo-
ment questioned— the drawings of Mr.
John Everett Millais. If anybody
wishes to see how a great artist wiu
condescend to learn the mechanism
of any subordinate branch of urt in
which he is called upon to work, there
is no better source of information on
the point than this book i^ords. The
wood-cutter has been mei^ and all hla
modes of effect have been considered
by the i)ainter, so that a perfect union
of their forces has been gahied, to
the incalculable advantage of popular
art.**— Daily TeiUgraiph,


%'i


30


STRAHAN AND OOMPANT.


" Chod words a/re worth muck cmd cost lUUe.** — He&bebt


Sixpence Monthly, Illnstrated.

Good Words.

Edited by Norman Maclkod, D.D.,
AndHhutratedioith Wood Engravings from desigiu by MiUais, Holman Bunt,
Keene^ Walker^ Wolf^ WaUon. and others.

The experiment has now been tried of establishing a Magazine
which should reflect the every-day life of a good man — ^with its
times of reli^ous thought and devotional feeling, naturally passing
into other times of healthy recreation, busy work, intellectau
study, poetic joy, or sunny laughter ; — and its success has exceeded
the most sanguine hopes of its projectors. '* Grood Words" was
commenced ten years ago, and now enjoys a larger circulation
than any other Mionthly Magazine.— The following are among the
Contributors to the Parts already published : —


Bishop Alexander.
Dean Alford.
Duke of AigylL
W. Lindsay Alexander, D.D.
A. K. H. B. Author of ** The Recrea-
tions of a Country Parson."
Professor Ansted.
Bev. William Amot
Rev. William Arthur, A.M.
Author of "John Halifax."
Rev. Thomas Binney.
Professor J. S. Blackie.
Sir David Brewster, D.C.L.
John Brown, M.D.
Robert Buchanan.
John Caird, D.D.
Isa Craig.
Rev. J. LI. Davies.
J. H. Merle D'Aubign6, D.D.
Principal Forbes.
The Countess De Chusparin.
Mrs. Gatty.
Archd. Geikie, F.G.S.
WiUiam Gilbert.

The Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone.
James Glaisher, F.R.S.
Mrs. Margaret Maria Gordon.
P. H. Gosse, F.R.S.
Dora Greenwell.
Thomas Gutlirie, D.D.
James Hamilton, D.D.
Sir John F. W. Herschel, Bart.
Jean Ingelow.
J. W. Kaye.
Rev. Charles Eingsley.
Henry Kingsley.
Rev. Professor Lee.


J. M. Lndlow.

Miss Marsh.

Gerald Massey.

Professor McCosh.

Geoi^ge MacDonald, LL.D.

J. R. Macduff, D.D.

Norman Macleod, D.D.

Florence Nightingale.

Mrs. Oiiphant.

Laurence 01iphantr.<«i*

P. Turner Palgrave.'.

Rev. J. J. Stewart Pilewne, BJ).

Professor Lyon Playfiilr.

Professor J. L Porter.

Adelaide A. Procter.

Rev. Charles Pritchard, F.R.S.

Rev. W. Morley Punshon.

Rev. Professor Plumptre.

Henry Rogers.

Samuel Smiles.

Alexander Smith.

Professor C. Piazzi Smyth.

Dean Stanley.

W. Fleming Stevenson.

Bishop Tait.

Isaac Taylor.

Alfred Tennyson.

Sir W. Thomson.

Rev. A. W. Thorold.

Anthony Trollope.

Rev. Principal T^och.

Sarah Tytler.

C. J. VaughMJ, D.D.

Archbishop Wnately.

Bishop Wilberforce.

Catherine Winkworth.


The Volumes of "Good "Words" are Elegantly Bound in Mauve
Cloth extra, and Full Gilt, price 7it. 6d. each.
%* Each Year*8 Isstie forms a Complete Book.

All the Yolumes and Parts are in print, and may be had bj

order of any Bookseller.


BTIUHA.N AND COMPANT.


31


Sevenpence Monthly, Illustrated.

The Sunday Magazine.

Edited hy Thomas Guthrie, D.D,

And illustrated uoith Wood Engravings from Dtsigns "by Watson, Houghton,
Du MavHer, E. Hughes, Small, Pi/n/uosll, and others.

{From Note by the Editor.)

While aimioR to bring the Bible into relation to common life, the "Sonday
Magazine" seeks to express the devoutest thoughts of worship. Theology and
the story of the Church; missions and missionaries; illustrations of God's
glory in His works, and God's care in His providence ; homilies on daily duties;
and tales and sketches of character, all find a place. Human life has many
relations, Christian experience many shades, th& truth many sides : this Maga-
zine addresses itself to each.

The Four Volumes oj tht *' Sunday MagoMine*' alreadu published contain the
following Serial Works, cmong many otkeres —


ANNALS OP A QUIET NEIGH-
BOURHOOD. By George Mac-
Donald, LJ'.D.

OLD TESTAMENT CHARACTERS.
By Thomas Guthrie, D.D.

PICTURES FROM CHURCH HIS-
TORY. By Islay Bums, D.D.

THE SEABOARD PARISH. Bvthe
Author of * ''Annals of a Quiet
Neighbourhood."

HEROES AND MARTYRS OF THE
REFORMATION IN ITALY. By
W. L. Alexander, D.D.

IN THE LIFE OF OUR LORD.
By William Hanna, D.D.


HOW TO STUDY THE NEW TES-
TAMENT. By Henry Alford, D.D.
Dean of Canterbury.

OCCUPATIONS OF A RETIRED
LIFE. By Bdward Garrett.

THE CHRISTIAN LIFE IN VERSE.

THE METAPHORS OF ST. PAUL.
By J. S. Howson, D.D.

THE HUGUENOT FAMILY IN
THE ENGLISH VILLAGE. By
Sarah Tytler.

THE SEVEN CONSCIENCES. By
John De Liefde.

LUTHER THE SINGER By George
MacDonald, LL.D.


And numerous contributions by the Duke of Argyll; Dean Ramsay: Caoon
Girdlestone; C. J. Vaughan, D.D. ; Norman Macleod, D.D. ; J. C. Ryle, D.D. ;
Alexander Raleigh, D.D.; A Thomson, D.D.; J. R. Macduff, D.D.: J. 0.
Miller, D.D.; Professor Plumptre; Professor A H. Charteris; H. B. Tris-
tram. LL.D.: Revs. W. F. Stevenson, AW. Thorold, W. Amot, Newman Hall,
R. W. Dale, Huirh Macmillan, Henry Allon, Samuel Cox, J. Oswald Dykes, tho
late Professor Miller, James Hamilton, D.D., and Rev. Andrew Grichton,
AK.H.B.; Misses Isa Craig, Jean Ingelow, Dora Green well, Isabella Fyvie,
and Sarah Tytler ; Mrs. Sewell ; and others.

The Yearly Volumes of the ** Sunday Magazine " are Handflomely
Bound in cloth extra, and FuU Gut, Ba. 6d, each.

*«* Bach Tear*8 Issue forma a Complete Booh.

All I3ie Volumes and Parts are iu print, and may be had by order

of any Bookseller.


32 THE BOOK LIST OF STRAHAN AND COMPANY.


On the 1st of each Month) price 28. Qd.

The Contemporary Keview,


The "Contemporary Review" numbers among its Contributors
those wko, holding loyally to belief in the Articles of the Christian
Faith, are not afraid of Modem Thought in its varied aspects and
demands, and scorn to defend their faith by mere reticence, or by
the artifices too commonly acquiesced in.


The following are among the Contributors to the Numbers already

published : —


Alexander, William, D.D., Bisbop of
Derry.

Alford, Henry, D.D., Dean of Canter-
bury.

Bayne, Peter.

Blakesley, tbe Rev. Canon.

Brady, W. Maziere, D.D.

Browne, Mattbew.

Bunbury, E. H., M.A.

Cbeetbajn, Professor.

Colquboun, J. C, M.A.

Conington, Professor.

Cracroft, Bernard, M.A.

Dale, R. W., M.A.

Davies, tbe Rev. J. LI., M.A.

Domer, Dr. J. A., Berlin.

Dowden, Edward.

Farrar, tbe Rev. P. W, M.A.

Premantle, tbe Rev. W. H., M.A.

Goodwin, Harvey, D.D., Dean of Ely.

Hannab, tbe Rev Jobn, D.C.L

Hayman, tbe Rev. Henry, B.D.

Howson, J. 8., D.D.

Humpbry, tbe Rev. W. G., B.D.

Hnnt, tbe Rev. Jobn, M.A.

Kinnear, J. Boyd.

Lake, tbe Rev. W. C, M.A.


Ludlow, J M.

Ligbtfoot, Profealnr. ,

Ljrttelton, Lord.

Magee, W. C, D.D., Bisbop of Pfttar-
boron^

ManseU H. L., D.D., Deanof St. PtraTs.

Maurice, Professor. .

Merivale, the Rev. Charles, D.C.L.

MacDonnell, Jobn, D.D., Dean of
CasbeL

Mozley, tbe Rev. J. B , B.D.

Perowne, Rev. J. J. Stewart, B.D.

Poole, B. Stuart

Plumptre, Professor.

Reicbel, C. P., D.D.

Rawlinson, Professor.

Robertson, tbe Rev. Canon, M.A.

Sbaw, Benjamin, M.A.

Stanley, A. P., D.D., Dean of West-
minster.

Stevenson, tbe Rev. W. Fleming.

Tristram, tbe Rev. H. B.,M.A.LL.D.

Tullocb, PrincipaL

Tyrwbitt, tbe Rev. R. St. John, M.A.

Vaugban, tbe Rev. Edward T., M.A.

Westoott, the Rev. Brooke F., RD.


Seven Volumes of the " Contemporary Review ** are now i^ady, y^j

bound in cloth, royal 8vo. price 10s, 6d. each. They can be had J^
from any Jbokseller, or direct from the Publisher ; and the Kj^lthly
Numbers can also be had from the beginnings price 2% 6ldpmdli.
