The Birth of the War-God (Kumarasambhava) (Kalidasa (trans. Ralph T. H. Griffith), 1879)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1879 Trubner's Oriental Series edition (https://archive.org/details/birthofwargodpoe00kaliuoft). Griffith's translation of Kalidasa's epic of the birth of Kartikeya.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

'i^


.*  V  ■;  •  ff"^.


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2007  with  funding  from

Microsoft  Corporation


TRUBNER'8  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


"  A  knowledge  of  the  commonplace,  at  least,  of  Oriental  literature,  philo-
sophy, and  religion  is  as  necessary  to  the  general  reader  of  the  present  day
as  an  acquaintance  with  the  Latin  and  Greek  classics  was  a  generation  or  so
ago.  Immense  strides  have  been  made  within  the  present  century  in  these
branches  of  learning ;  Sanskrit  has  been  brought  within  the  range  of  accurate
philology,  and  its  invaluable  ancient  literature  thoroughly  investigated  ;  the
language  and  sacred  books  of  the  Zoroastrians  have  been  laid  bare ;  Egyptian,
Assyrian,  and  other  records  of  the  remote  past  have  been  deciphered,  and  a
group  of  scholars  speak  of  still  more  recondite  Accadian  and  Hittite  monu-
ments ;  but  the  results  of  all  the  scholarship  that  has  been  devoted  to  these
subjects  have  been  almost  inaccessible  to  the  public  because  they  were  con-
tained for  the  most  part  in  learned  or  expensive  works,  or  scattered  through-
out the  numbers  of  scientific  periodicals.  Messrs.  Trubner  &  Co.,  in  a  spirit
of  enterprise  which  does  them  infinite  credit,  have  determined  to  supply  the
constantly-increasing  want,  and  to  give  in  a  popular,  or,  at  least,  a  compre-
hensive form,  all  this  mass  of  knowledge  to  the  world." — Times.


Second  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.— 748,  with  Map,  cloth,  price  21s.

THE  INDIAN  EMPIRE  :
ITS  PEOPLE,  HISTORY,  AND  PRODUCTS.

By  the  Hon.  Sir  W.  W.  HUNTER,  K.C.S.L,  C.S.I.,  CLE.,  LL.D.

Member  of  the  Viceroy's  Legislative  Council,
Director-General  of  Statistics  to  the  Government  of  India.

Being  a  Revised  Edition,  brought  up  to  date,  and  incorporating  the  general
results  of  the  Census  of  1881.

"It  forms  a  volume  of  more  than  700  pages,  and  is  a  marvellous  combination  of
literary  condensation  and  research.  It  gives  a  complete  account  of  the  Indian
Empire,  its  history,  peoples,  and  products,  and  forms  the  woi-thy  outcome  of
seventeen  years  of  labour  with  exceptional  opportunities  for  rendering  that  labour
fruitful.  Nothing  could  be  more  lucid  than  tSir  William  Hunter's  expositions  of  the
economic  and  political  condition  of  India  at  the  present  time,  or  more  interesting
tlian  his  scholarly  history  of  the  India  of  the  past,"— T/te  Times.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


THE  FOLLOWING WORKS  HAVE  ALREADY  APPEARED:—
Third  Edition,  post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xvi. — 428,  price  i6s.

ESSAYS  ON  THE  SACRED  LANGUAGE,  WRITINGS,

AND  RELIGION  OF  THE  PARSIS.

By  MAKTIN  HAUG,  Ph.D.,

Lnte  of  the  Universities  of  Tiibingen,  Gottingen,  and  Bonn  ;  Superintendent

of  Sanskrit  Studies,  and  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  Ppona  College. ,

Edited  and  Enlarged  by  Dr.  E.  W.  WEST.

To  which  is  added  a  Biographical  Memoir  of  the  late  Dr.  Haug

by  Prof.  E.  P.  Evans.

I.  History  of  the  Researches  into  the  Sacred  Writings  and  Keligion  of  the
Parsis,  from  the  Earliest  Times  down  to  the  Present.

IT.  Languages  of  the  Parsi  Scriptures.
ill.  The  Zend-Avesta,  or  the  Scripture  of  the  Parsis.
IV.  The  Zoroastrian  Keligion,  as  to  its  Origin  and  Development.

"  '  Essays  on  the  Sacred  Tjaiiguage,  Writings,  and  Religion  of  the  Parsis,'  by  the
late  Dr.  Martin  Haug,  edited  by  Dr.  E.  W.  West.  The  author  intended,  on  his  return
from  India,  to  expand  the  materials  contained  in  this  work  into  a  comprehensive
acconnt  of  the  Zoroastrian  religion,  but  the  design  was  frustrated  by  his  nntimely
death.  We  have,  however,  in  a  concise  and  readable  form,  a  history  of  the  researches
into  the  sacred  writings  and  religion  of  the  Parsis  from  the  earliest  times  down  to
the  present — a  dissertation  on  the  lan^iuages  of  tlie  Parsi  Scriptures,  a  translation
of  the  Zend-Avesta,  or  the  Scripture  of  the  Parsis,  and  a  dissertation  on  the  Zoroas-
trian religion,  with  especial  reference  to  its  origin  and  development." — Times.


Post  Bvo,  cloth,  pp.  viii. — 176,  price  7s.  6d.

TEXTS  FROM  THE  BUDDHIST  CANON

COMMONLY  KNOWN  AS  "  DHAMMAPADA."

With  Accompanying  Narratives.

Translated  from  the  Chinese  by  S.  BEAL,  B.A.,  Professor  of  Chinese,

University  College,  London.

The  Dhammapada,  as  hitherto  known  by  the  Pali  Text  Edition,  as  edited
by  Fausboll,  by  Max  Miiller's  English,  and  Albrecht  Weber's  German
tmnslations,  consists  only  of  twenty-six  chapters  or  sections,  whilst  the
Chinese  version,  or  rather  recension,  as  now  translated  by  Mr.  Beal,  con-
sists of  thirty-nine  sections.  Tlie  students  of  Pali  who  possess  Fausboll's
text,  or  either  of  tlie  above  named  translations,  will  therefore  needs  want
Mr.  Beal's  English  rendering  of  the  Chinese  version  ;  the  thirteen  above-
named  additional  sections  not  being  accessible  to  them  in  any  other  form  ;
for,  even  if  they  understand  Chinese,  the  Chinese  original  would  be  un-
obtainable by  them.

'•  Mr.  Beal's  rendering  of  the  Chinese  translation  is  a  most  valuable  aid  to  the
critical  study  of  the  work.  It  contains  autlicntic  texts  gathered  from  ancient
canonical  books,  and  generally  connected  witli  some  incident  in  tlie  liistory  of
Buddha.  Their  great  interest,  however,  consists  iji  the  light  wliich  they  throw  upon
everyday  life  in  India  at  the  remote  period  at  which  tliey  were  written,  and  upon
the  method  of  teaching  adopted  by  the  founder  of  Ihe  religion.  The  method
cmployod  was  principally  panible,  and  the  simplicity  of  tlie  tales  and  tlie  excellence
of  the  monils  inculcated,  as  well  as  the  strange  lioM  which  they  have  retained  upon
the  mindH  of  millions  of  people,  make  them  a  very  remarkable  sttidy." — Times.

"  Mr,  Beal,  by  makinjf  it  accessible  in  an  English  dress,  luxs  added  to  the  great  ser-
ricea  he  ha«  already  rendered  to  the  comparative  study  of  religious  history." — Academy.

"  Valuable  as  exliibiting  the  doctrine  of  the  Buddhists  in  its  purest,  least  adul-
terated form,  it  brings  the  modern  reader  face  to  face  with  that  simple  creed  and  rule
of  conduct  which  won  Its  way  over  the  minds  of  myriads,  and  which  is  now  nominally
profoiied  by  145  nnllions,  who  have  overlaid  its  austere  simplicity  with  innumerable
ceremonieft,  forgotten  its  maxims,  perverted  its  teaching,  and  so  inverted  its  leading
principle  that  a  teliaion  whcse  founder  denied  a  God,  now  worships  that  founder  as
tt  g»>d  u\mBvU.''—Scottman.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Second  Edition,  post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xxiv. — 360,  price  los.  6d.

THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIAN  LITERATURE.

By  ALBUECHT  WEBER.

Translated  from  the  Second  German  Edition  by  John  Mann,  M.A.,  and
Theouor  Zachariae,  Ph.D.,  with  the  sanction  of  the  Author.

Dr.  BuHLER,  Inspector  of  Schools  in  India,  writes: — "When  I  was  Pro-
fessor of  Oriental  Languages  in  Elphinstone  College,  I  frequently  felt  the
want  of  such  a  work  to  which  I  could  refer  the  students."

Professor  CowELL,  of  Cambridge,  writes  :— "It  will  be  especially  useful
to  the  students  in  our  Indian  colleges  and  universities.  I  used  to  long  for
such  a  book  when  I  was  teaching  in  Calcutta.  Hindu  students  are  intensely
interested  in  the  history  of  Sanskrit  literature,  and  this  volume  will  supply
them  with  all  they  want  on  the  subject."

Professor  Whitney,  Yale  College,  Newhaven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.,  writes  :—
"  I  was  one  of  the  class  to  whom  the  work  was  originally  given  in  the  form
of  academic  lectures.  At  their  first  appearance  they  were  by  far  the  most
learned  and  able  treatment  of  their  subject ;  and  with  their  recent  additions
they  still  maintain  decidedly  the  same  rank."

"  Is  perhaps  the  most  comprehensive  and  lucid  survey  of  Sanskrit  literature
extant.  The  essays  contained  in  the  volume  were  originally  delivered  as  academic
lectures,  and  at  the  time  of  their  first  publication  were  acknowledged  to  be  by  far
the  most  learned  and  able  treatment  of  the  subject.  They  have  now  been  brougiit
up  to  date  by  the  addition  of  all  the  most  important  results  of  recent  research." —
Times,

Post  8vo,  cloth,  pp.  xii. — 198,  accompanied  by  Two  Language
Maps,  price  12s.

A  SKETCH  OF
THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF  THE  EAST  INDIES.

By  ROBERT  N.  GUST.

The  Author  has  attempted  to  fill  up  a  vacuum,  the  inconvenience  of
which  pressed  itself  on  his  notice.  Much  had  been  written  about  the
lauguages  of  the  East  Indies,  but  the  extent  of  our  present  knowledge  had
not  even  been  brought  to  a  focus.  It  occurred  to  him  that  it  might  be  of
use  to  others  to  publish  in  an  arranged  form  the  notes  which  he  had  collected
for  his  own  edification.

"  Supplies  a  deficiency  which  has  long  been  felt."— T?mes.

"  The  book  before  us  is  then  a  valuable  contribution  to  philological  science.  It
passes  under  review  a  vast  number  of  languages,  and  it  gives,  or  professes  to  give,  in
every  case  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  opinions  and  judgments  of  the  best-informed
writers." — Saturday  Review,

Second  Corrected  Edition,  post  8to,  pp.  xii. — 116,  cloth,  price

THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

A  Poem. By  KALIDASA.

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit  into  English  Verse  by
Ralph  T.  H.  Geiffith,  M.A.

"  A  very  spirited  rendering  of  the  Kumdrasambhava,  which  was  first  published
twenty -six  years  ago,  and  which  we  are  glad  to  see  made  once  more  accessible." —
2'^mes.

"  Mr.  Griflath's  very  spirited  rendering  is  well  known  to  most  who  are  at  all
interested  in  Indian  literature,  or  enjoy  the  tenderness  of  feeling  and  rich  creative
imagination  of  its  author." — Indian  Antiquary.

"  We  are  very  glad  to  welcome  a  second  edition  of  Professor  Griffith's  admirable
translation. Few  translations  deserve  a  second  edition  better." — Athenceum.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  4^2,  cloth,  price  i6s.

A  CLASSICAL DICTIONARY  OF  HINDU  MYTHOLOGY

AND  RELIGION,  GEOGRAPHY,  HISTORY,  AND

LITERATURE.

By  JOHN  DOWSON,  M.R.A.S.,
Late  Professor  of  Hindustani,  Staff  College.

"  This  not  only  forms  an  indispensjible  book  of  reference  to  students  of  Indian
liteniture,  but  is  also  of  great  general  interest,  as  it  gives  in  a  concise  and  easily
accessible  foi-ra  all  that  need  be  known  about  the  personages  of  Hindu  mythology
whose  names  are  so  familiar,  but  of  whom  so  little  is  known  outside  the  limited
circle  of  tavants." — Times.

*•  It  is  no  slight  gain  when  such  subjects  are  treated  fairly  and  fully  in  a  moderate
space ;  and  we  need  only  add  that  the  few  wants  which  we  may  hope  to  see  supplied
in  new  editions  detract  but  little  from  the  general  excellence  of  Mr.  Dowsou's  work."
—Satut'daif  Review.

Post  8vo,  with  View  of  Mecca,  pp.  cxii.— 172,  cloth,  price  9s.

SELECTIONS  FROM  THE  KORAN.

By  EDWARD  WILLIAM  LANE,

Translator  of  ''  The  Thousand  and  One  Nights ; "  &c.,  &c.

A  New  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarged,  with  an  Introduction  by

Stanley  Lane  Poolk.

"...  Has  been  lonsr  esteemed  in  this  country  as  the  compilation  of  one  of  the

greatest  Arabic  scholars  of  the  time,  the  late  Mr.  Lane,  the  well-known  translator  of

the '  Arabian Nights. "... The present  editor  has enhanced the  value  of  his

relative's  work  by  divesting  the  text  of  a  great  deal  of  extraneous  matter  introduced

by  way  of  comment,  and  prefixing  an  introduction." — Times.

"  Mr.  Poole  is  both  a  generous  and  a  learned  biographer.  .  .  .  Mr.  Poole  tells  us
the  facts  ...  so  far  as  it  is  possible  for  industry  and  criticism  to  ascertain  them,
and  for  literary  skill  to  present  them  in  a  condensed  and  readable  iorm."—EngLisk'
man,  Calcutta.  _________

Post  8vo,  pp.  vi. — 368,  cloth,  price  148.

MODERN  INDIA  AND  THE  INDIANS,
BEING  A  SERIES  OF  IMPRESSIONS,  NOTES,  AND  ESSAYS.

By  MONIER  WILLIAMS,  D.C.L.,
Hon.  liL.D,  of  the  University  of  Calcutta,  Hon.  Member  of  the  Bombay  Asiatic
Society,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  Oxford.
Third  Edition,  revised  and  augmented  by  considerable  Additions,
with  Illustrations  and  a  Map.
"  In  tliis  volume  we  have  the  thoiightful  impressions  of  a  thoughtful  man  on  some
of  the  most  important  questions  connected  witli  our  Indian  Empire,  .  .  .  An  en-
lightened obsorvanc  man  travelling  among  an  enlightened  ol>servant  people,  Professor
Monier  Williams  hjvs  brought  )>efore  the  public  in  a  pleaauit  form  more  of  the  manners
and  customs  of  the  Queen's  Indian  subjects  than  we  ever  remember  to  have  seen  in
nny  one  work. He  not  only  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  Englishman  for  this  able
contribution  to  the  study  of  Modem  India— a  subject  with  which  we  should  be
specially  familiar— but  he  deserves  the  thanks  of  every  Indian,  Parseo  or  Hindu,
Buddhist  and  Moslem,  for  his  clear  exposition  of  their  manners,  their  creeds,  and
their  necesaitjes."— rijn**,

Post  Bvo,  pp.  xliv. — 376.  cloth,  price  14s.

METRICAL  TRANSLATIONS  FROM  SANSKRIT
WRITERS.

With  an  Introduction,  many  Prose  Versions,  and  Parallel  Passages  from
Gliissical  Authors.
Bt  J.  MUIR,  CLE.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Ph.D.
"...  An  agreeable  Introduction  to  Hindu  poetrv."— 7'/ni<'«.

"...  A  vohimc  which  may  be  t^kcn  :is  a  fair  illustration  alike  of  the  religious
and  roonl  Rentiraentu  and  of  the  legendary  lore  of  the  best  Sanskrit  w liters. "—
Kditibarpk  Vatig  Her  int.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Second  Edition,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxvi. — 244,  cloth,  price  10s.  6d.

THE GULISTAN;

Or,  rose  garden  OF  SHEKH  MUSHLIU'D-DIN  SADI  OF  SHIRAZ.

Translated  for  the  First  Time  into  Prose  and  Verse,  with  an  Introductory
Preface,  and  a  Life  of  the  Author,  from  the  Atish  Kadah,

By  EDWARD  B.  EASTWICK,  C.B.,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  M.R.A.S.

"  It  is  a  very  fair  rendering  of  the  original." — Times.

"  The  new  edition  has  long  been  desired,  and  will  be  welcomed  by  all  who  take
any  interest  in  Oriental  poetry.  The  Gulistan  is  a  typical  Persian  verse-book  of  the
highest  order.  Mr.  Eastwick's  rhymed  translation  ,  .  .  has  long  established  itself  in
a  secure  position  as  the  best  version  of  Sadi's  finest  work." — Academy.

"  It  is  both  faithfully  and  gracefully  executed."— Ja6ief.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 408  and  viii. — 348,  cloth,  price  28s.

MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS RELATING TO INDIAN
SUBJECTS.

By  BRIAN  HOUGHTON  HODGSON,  Esq.,  F.K.S.,

Late  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service  ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the  Institute;  Chevalier
of  the  Legion  of  Honour  ;  lato  British  Minister  at  tlie  Court  of  Nepal,  &c.,  «fcc.

CONTENTS  O'' VOL.  I.

Section  I. — On  the  Kocch,  Bodo,  and  Dh-mal  Tribes.— Part  I.  Vocabulary. —
Part  II.  Grammar. — Part  III.  Their  Origin,  Location,  Numbers,  Creed,  Customs,
Cliaracter,  and  Condition,  with  a  General  Description  of  the  Climate  tliey  dwell  in.
— Appendix.

Section  II.— On  Himalayan  Ethnology— I.  Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the  Lan-
guages of  the  Broken  Tribes  of  Ndpal.— II.  Vocabuhiry  of  the  Dialects  of  the  Kiranti
Language. — III.  Grammatical  Analysis  of  the  Vayu  Language.  The  Vayii  Grammar.
— IV.  Analy.sis  of  the  Balling  Dialect  of  the  Kiranti  Language.  The  Bdhing  Gram-
mar.—V.  On  the  Vayu  or  Hayu  Tribe  of  the  Central  Himalaya. — VI.  On  tne  Kiraiui
Tribe  of  the  Central  Himaliiya.

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  //.

Section  III. — On  the  Aboiigines  of  Noi  th-Eaatern  India.  Comparative  Vocabulary
of  the  Tibetan,  Bodo,  and  Garo  Tongues.

Section  IV. — Aborigines  of  the  North-Eastem  Frontier.

Section  V. — Aborigines  of  the  Eastern  Frontier.

Section  VI —The  Indo-Chinese  Borderers,  and  their  connection  with  the  Hima-
layans  and  Tibetans.  Comparative  Vocabulai  y  of  Indo-Chinese  Borderers  in  Arakan.
Comparative  Vocabulary  of  Indo-Chinese  Boiderers  in  Tenasserim.

Section  VII.— The  Mongolian  Affinities  of  the  Caucasians. — Comparison  and  Ana-
lysis of  Caucasian  and  Moiitrolian  Words.

Section  VIII.— Physical  Type  of  Tibetans.

Skction  IX.— The  Aborigines  of  Central  India. — Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the
Aboriginal  Languages  of  Cential  India.— Aboii<;ines  of  the  Eastern  Ghats.— Vocabu-
lary of  some  of  the  Dialects  of  the  Hill  and  Wandering  Tribes  in  the  Northern  Sircars.
— Aborigines  of  the  Nilgiris,  with  Remarks  on  their  Affinities. — Supplement  to  the
Nilgirian  Vocabtilaries.— The  Aborigines  of  Southern  India  and  Ceylon.

Section  X.— Route  of  Nepale>e  Mission  to  Pekin,  with  Remarks  on  the  Water-
Shed  and  Plate  m  of  Tibet.

Section  XL— Route  from  Kathmandii,  the  Capital  of  Nepal,  to  Darjeeling  in
Sikim. — Memoi-andum  relative  to  the  Seven  Cosis  of  Nepal.

Section  XII. — Some  Accounts  of  the  Systems  of  Law  and  Police  as  recognised  in
the  State  of  Nepal.

Section  XIII.— The  Native  Method  of  making  the  Paper  denominated  Hindustan,
Nepalese.

Section  XIV.— Pre-eminence  of  the  Vernactilars ;  or,  the  Anglicists  Answered  ;
Being  Letters  on  the  Education  of  the  People  of  India.

"  For  the  study  of  the  less-known  races  of  India  Mr.  Briiin  Hodgson's  'Miscellane-
ous Essays'  will  be  found  very  valuable  both  to  the  philologist  and  the  ethnologist."

— Times.


TRUBNER-S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Third  Edition,  Two  Vols.,  post  8vo,  pp.  viiL— 268  and  viii.— 326,  cloth,
price  2 IS.

THE  LIFE  OR  LEGEND  OF  GAUDAMA,

THE  BUDDHA  OF  THE  BURMESE. With  Annotations.

The  Ways  to  Neibban,  and  Notice  on  the  Phongyies  or  Burmese  Monks.

By  the  Right  Rev.  P.  BIGANDET,

Bishop  of  Ramatha,  Vicar-Apostolic  of  Ava  and  Pegu.

"The  work  is  furnished  with  copious  notes,  which  not  only  iUnstrate  the  subject-
matter,  but  form  a  perfect  encyclopajdia  of  Buddhist  lore." — Times.

".\  work  which  will  furnish  Kuropean  students  of  Buddhism  with  a  most  valuable
help  in  the  prosecution  of  their  investigations." — Edioburgh  Daily  Review.

"  Bishop  Bigandet's  invaluable  work." — Indian  Antiquary.

"  Viewed  in  this  light,  its  importjinco  is  sufficient  to  place  students  of  the  subject
under  a  deep  obligation  to  its  author."— C«fcit«a  Review.

"This  work  is  one  of  the  greatest  authorities  upon  Buddhism."— DuftZin  Review.


Post  Svo,  pp.  xxiv. — 420,  cloth,  price  iBs.

CHINESE BUDDHISM.

A  VOLUME  OF  SKETCHES,  HISTORICAL  AND  CRITICAL.

By  J.  EDKINS,  D.D.

Author  of  "  China's  Place  in  Philology,"  "  Religion  in  China,"  &c.,  &c.

"It  contiins  a  vast  deal  of  importjint  information  on  the  subject,  such  as  is  only
to  be  gjiined  by  long-continued  study  on  the  spot." — Athenceum.

"  Upon  the  whole,  we  know  of  no  work  comparable  to  it  for  the  extent  of  its
original  research,  and  the  simplicity  with  which  this  complicated  system  of  philo-
sophy, religion,  literature,  and  ritual  is  set  forth." — British  Quarterly  Review.

"  The  whole  volume  is  replete  with  learning.  ...  It  deserves  most  careful  study
from  all  interested  in  the  history  of  the  religions  of  the  world,  and  expressly  of  those
who  are  concerned  in  the  propagation  of  Christianity.  Dr.  Edkins  notices  in  terms
of  just  condemnation  the  exaggerated  praise  bestowed  upon  Buddliism  by  recent
English  writers." — Record.


Post  Svo,  pp.  496,  cloth,  price  18s.

LINGUISTIC  AND ORIENTAL ESSAYS.

Written  from  the  Year  1846  to  1878.
By  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  CUST,

Late  Member  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service ;  Hon.  Secretary  to

the  Royal  Asiatic  Society;

and  Author  of  "The  Modern  Languages  of  the  East  Indies."

"  We  know  none  who  has  described  Indian  life,  e-xpecially  the  life  of  the  natives,
with  so  much  learning,  sympathy,  and  literary  ii\\er\t."— Academy.

"  Tliey  seem  to  us  to  be  full  of  suggestive  and  original  remarks."— 5<.  Janui's  Gazette.

"  His  book  contains  a  vast  amount  of  information.  The  result  of  thirty-five  years
of  inquiry,  reflection,  and  speculation,  and  that  on  subjects  as  full  of  fascination  as
of  fo*Ki  for  thought." — Tablet.

"  Exiiibit  such  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  history  and  antiquities  of  India
as  to  entitle  him  to  speak  as  one  having  authority. "—J?(/i»i6nr</A  Daily  Review.

"  The  author  speaks  with  the  atithority  of  personal  experience It  is  this

constant  n««fH;iiition  with  the  country  and  the  pcoplo  which  gives  such  a  vividness
to  many  of  the  pages."-  Athenceum.  ""


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  civ. — 348,  cloth,  price  iSs.

BUDDHIST  BIRTH  STORIES; or,  Jataka  Tales.

The  Oldest  Collection  of  Folk-lore  Extaut :

BEING THE JATAKATTHAVANNANA,

For  the  first  time  Edited  in  the  original  Pali.

By  V.  FAUSBOLL  ;

And  Translated  by  T.  W.  Khys  Davids.

Translation. Volume  I.

"These  are  tales  supposed  to  have  been  told  by  the  Buddha  of  what  he  Iiad  seen
and  heard  in  his  previous  births.  They  are  probably  the  nearest  representatives
of  the  original  Aryan  stories  from  which  sprang  the  folk-lore  of  Europe  as  well  as
India.  Tne  introduction  contains  a  most  interesting  disquisition  on  the  migrations
of  tliese  fables,  tracing  their  reappearance  in  the  various  groups  of  folk-lore  legends.
Among  other  old  friends,  we  meet  with  a  version  of  the  Judgment  of  Solomon." — Times.

"  It  is  now  some  years  since  Mr.  Rhys  Davids  asserted  his  right  to  be  heard  on
this  siibject  by  his  able  article  on  Buddhism  in  the  new  edition  of  the  '  Encyclopaedia
Britannica. ' " — Leeds  Mercui-y.

"  All  who  are  interested  in  Buddhist  literature  ought  to  feel  deeply  indebted  to
Wr.  Rhys  Davids.  His  well-established  reputation  as  a  Pali  scholar  is  a  sufficient
guarantee  for  the  fidelity  of  his  version,  and  the  style  of  his  translations  is  deserving
of  high  praise." — Academy.

"  No  more  competent  expositor  of  Buddhism  could  be  found  than  Mr.  Rhys  Davids.
In  the  Jutaka  book  we  have,  then,  a  priceless  record  of  the  earliest  imaginative
litei-ature  of  our  race ;  and  ...  it  presents  to  us  a  nearly  complete  picture  of  the
social  life  and  customs  and  popular  beliefs  of  the  common  people  of  Aryan  tribes,
closely  related  to  oin-selves,  just  as  they  were  passing  through  the  first  stages  of
civilisation." — St.  James's  Gazette.


Post  Svo,  pp.  xxviii. — 362,  cloth,  price  14s.

A TALMUDIC MISCELLANY;

Or,  a  THOUSAND  AND  ONE  EXTRACTS  FROM  THE  TALMUD,

THE  MIDRASHIM,  AND  THE  KABBALAH.

Compiled  and  Translated  by  PAUL  ISAAC  HERSHON,

Author  of  "  Genesis  According  to  the  Talmud,",  &c.

With  Notes  and  Copious  Indexes.

"  To  obtain  in  so  concise  and  handy  a  form  as  this  volume  a  general  idea  of  the
TalmTid  is  a  boon  to  Christians  at  least." — Times.

"  Its  peculiar  and  popular  character  will  make  it  attractive  to  general  readers.
Mr.  Hershon  is  a  very  competent  scholar.  ,  .  .  Contains  samples  of  the  good,  bad,
and  indifferent,  and  especially  extracts  that  throw  light  upon  the  fcicriptures." —
British  Quarterly  Review.

"  Will  convey  to  English  readers  a  more  complete  and  truthful  notion  of  the
Talmud  tlian  any  other  work  that  has  yet  appeared." — Daily  News.

"  Without  overlooking  in  the  slightest  the  several  attractions  of  the  previous
volumes  of  the  '  Oriental  Series.'  we  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  this  surpasses
them  all  in  interest." — Edinburgh  Daily  Review.

"  Mr.  Hershon  has  .  .  ,  thus  given  English  readers  what  Is,  we  believe,  a  fair  set
of  specimens  which  they  can  test  for  themselves." — The  Record

"  This  book  is  by  far  the  best  fitted  in  the  present  state  of  knowledge  to  enable  the
general  reader  to  gain  a  fair  and  unbiassed  conception  of  tlie  multifarious  contents
of  the  wonderful  miscellany  which  can  only  be  truly  understood — so  Jewish  pride
asserts — by  the  life-long  devotion  of  scholars  of  the  Chosen  People." — Inquirer.

"  The  value  and  importance  of  this  volume  consist  in  the  fact  that  scarcely  a  single
extract  is  given  in  its  pages  but  throws  some  light,  direct  or  refracted,  upon  thoso
Scriptures  which  are  the  common  heritage  of  Jew  and  Christian  alike." — John  Bull.

"  It  is  a  capital  specimen  of  Hebrew  scholarship  ;  a  monument  of  learned,  loving,
light-giving  labour."— /ewis^  Herald.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  i)p.  xii. — 228,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

THE  CLASSICAL  POETRY  OF  THE  JAPANESE.

By basil hall CHAMBERLAIN,
Author  of  "Yeigo  Heukaku  Shiraii."

"  A  very  curious  volume.  The  author  has  manifestly  devoted  much  labour  to  the"
task  of  studying  the  poetical  literature  of  the  Japanese,  and  rendering  characteristic
bjiccimens  into  Enu'liah  verse." — Daily  News.

*'  Mr.  Chamberlain's  volume  is,  so  far  as  we  are  aware,  the  first  attempt  which  has
been  made  to  iuterj»ret  the  literature  of  the  Japanese  to  the  Western  world.  It  is  to
the  cliissical  poetry  of  Old  Jap;ui  that  we  must  turn  for  indigenous  Japanese  thought,
and  in  the  volume  before  us  we  have  a  selection  from  that  poetry  rendered  into
graceful  English  verse." — I'aOlet.

"It  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  best  tr.mslations  of  lyric  literature  which  has
ap))eared  during  the  close  of  the  last  year." — Celestial  Empire.

"  Mr.  Chjunbeilain  set  himself  a  difficult  task  when  he  undertook  to  reproduce
Japanese  poetry  in  an  English  form.  But  lie  has  evidently  laboured  con  amore,  and
bis  efforts  are  successful  to  a  degree." — London  and  China  Express.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 164,  cloth,  price  los.  6d.

THE  HISTORY  OF  ESARHADDON  (Son  of  Sennacherib),
KING  OF  ASSYRIA,  b.c.  681-668.

Translated  from  tlie  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  upon  Cylinders  and  Tablets  in
the  British  Museum  Collection;  together  with  a  Grammatical  Analysis
of  each  Word,  Explanations  of  the  Ideographs  by  Extracts  from  the
Bi-Liogual  Syllabaries,  and  List  of  Eponyms,  kc.

By  ERNEST  A.  BUDGE,  B.A.,  M.R.A.S.,

Assyrian  Exhibitioner,  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.

•'  Students  of  scriptural  archaeology  will  also  appreciate  the  '  History  of  Esar-
hadflon.' " — Times.

"  There  is  much  to  attract  the  scholar  in  this  volume. It  does  not  pretend  to

Eopuhirise  studies  which  are  yet  in  their  infancy.  Its  primary  object  is  to  translate,
ut  it  does  not  assume  to  be  more  than  tentative,  and  it  offers  both  to  the  professed
Assyriologist  and  to  the  ordinary  nou-Assyriological  Semitic  scholar  the  means  of
controlling  its  results.'' — Academy.

"Mr.  Budge's  book  is,  of  course,  mainly  addressed  to  Assyrian  scholars  and
students.  They  are  not,  it  is  to  be  feared,  a  very  numerous  chiss.  But  the  more
thanks  are  due  to  him  on  that  account  for  the  way  in  which  he  has  acquitted  himself
in  his  laborious  task."— Toilet.


Post  8vo,  pp.  448,  cloth,  price  21s.

THE MESNEVI

(Usually  known  as  The  Mesneviti  Sherip,  or  Holy  Mesnevi)

OF

MEVLANA  (OUR  LORD)  JELALU  'D-DIN  MUHAMMED  ER-RUML

Book  the  First.

Together  with  gome  Account  of  the  Life  and  Acts  of  the  Author,

of  his  Ancestor's,  and  of  his  Descendants.

Illustrated  by  a  Selection  of  Characteristic  Anecdotes,  as  Collected

by  their  Historian,

Mevlana  Shemsu-'D-Din  Ahmed,  el  Eflaki,  el  'Aripi.

Translated,  and  the  Poetry  Versified,  in  English,

By  JAMES  W. REDHOUSE, M.R.A.S.,  &c.

"  A  complete  treasury  of  occult  Oriental  lore."— Saturday  Eevieic.

"This  bfX)k  will  Ije  a  very  valuable  help  to  the  reader  ignorant  of  Persia,  wlio  is
dcnirnuH  of  oVttaining  nn  inHi^ht  into  a  very  imiwrtaut  deiKirtment  of  the  literature
extant  in  that  language."- 2'a6it<.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi.—  280,  cloth,  price  6s.

EASTERN  PROVERBS  AND  EMBLEMS

Illustrating  Old  Truths.

By  Rev.  J.  LONG,

Member  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society,  F.R.G.S.

"  We  regard  the  book  as  valuable,  and  wish  for  it  a  wide  circulation  and  attentive
reading.  "—Record.

"  Altogether,  it  is  quite  a  feast  of  good  ihiags."— Globe.
"  It  is  full  of  interesting  matter." — Antiquary.

Post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 270,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

INDIAN POETRY;

Containing  a  New  Edition  of  the  "  Indian  Song  of  Songs,"  from  the  Sanscrit
of  the  "Gita  Goviuda"  of  Jayadeva ;  Two  Books  from  "The  Iliad  of
India"  (Mahabharata),  "Proverbial  Wisdom  "  from  the  Shlokas  of  the
Hitopadesa,  and  other  Oriental  Poems.
By  EDWIN  ARNOLD,  C.S.L,  Author  of  "The  Light  of  Asia."

"  In  this  new  volume  of  Messrs.  Trlibner's  Oriental  Series,  Mr.  Edwin  Arnold  does
good  service  by  illustrating,  tlirough  the  medium  of  his  musical  English  melodies,
the  power  of  Indian  poetry  to  stir  European  emotions.  The  '  Indian  Song  of  Songs  '
is  not  unknown  to  scholars.  Mr.  Arnold  will  have  introduced  it  among  popular
English  poems.  Nothing  could  be  more  graceful  and  delicate  than  the  shades  by
which  Krishna  is  portrayed  in  the  gradual  process  of  being  weaned  by  the  love  of

'  Beautiful  Radha,  jasmine-bosomed  Radha,'
from  the  allurements  of  the  forest  nymphs,  in  whom  the  five  senses  are  typified." —
T'lDies.

"  No  other  English  poet  has  ever  thrown  his  genius  and  his  art  so  thoroughly  into
the  work  of  translating  Eastern  ideas  as  Mr.  Arnold  has  done  in  his  splendid  para-
phrases of  language  contained  in  these  mighty  eyics."  —Daily  Teleffi-ax>h.

"  Tlie  poem  abounds  with  imagery  of  Eastern  luxuriousness  and  sensuousm  ss ;  the
air  seems  laden  with  the  spicy  odours  of  the  tropics,  and  the  verse  has  a  richness  and
a  melody  suflScient  to  captivate  the  senses  of  the  dullest." — Standard.

"  The  translator,  while  producing  a  very  enjoyable  poem,  has  adliered  with  toler-
able fidelity  to  the  original  te:s.t."— Overland  Mail.

"  We  certainly  wish  Mr.  Arnold  success  in  his  attempt  '  to  popularise  Indian
classics,'  that  being,  as  his  preface  tells  us,  the  goal  towards  which  he  bends  his
eSorta."— Allen's  Indian  Hail.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi. — 296,  cloth,  price  los.  6d.

THE  MIND  OF  MENCIUS ;

Or,  POLITICAL  ECONOMY  FOUNDED  UPON  MORAL

PHILOSOPHY.

A  Systematic  Digest  of  the  Doctrines  of  the  Chinese  Philosopher

Mencius.

Translated  from  the  Original  Text  and  Classified,  with
Comments  and  Explanations,

By  the  Rev.  ERNST  FABER,  Rhenish  Mission  Society.

Translated  from  the  German,  with  Additional  Notes,

By  the  Rev.  A.  B.  HUTCHINSON,  C.M.S.,  Church  Mission,  Hong  Kong.

•  "  Mr.  Faber  is  already  well  known  in  the  field  of  Chinese  stuciies  by  his  digest  of
the  doctrines  of  Confucius.  The  value  of  this  work  will  be  perceived  when  it  is
remembered  that  at  no  time  since  relations  commenced  between  China  and  the
West  has  the  former  been  so  powerful — we  had  almost  said  aggressive — as  now.
For  those  who  will  give  it  careful  study,  Mr.  Faber's  work  is  one  of  the  most
valuable  of  the  excellent  series  to  which  it  belongs." — Nature.

A 2


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  336,  clotb,  price  i6s.

THE RELIGIONS  OF INDIA.

By  a.  BARTH.

Trannlated  from  the  French  with  the  authority  and  assistance  of  the  Author.

The  author  has,  at  the  request  of  the  publishers,  considerably  enlarged
the  work  for  the  translator,  and  has  added  the  literature  of  the  subject  to
date  ;  the  translation  may,  therefore,  be  looked  upon  as  an  equivalent  of  a
iitrw  and  improved  edition  of  the  original.

"  Is  not  only  a  valjinblc  manual  of  the  religions  of  India,  which  marks  a  distinct
step  in  the  treatment  of  the  subject,  but  also  a  useful  work  of  reference."— Academy.

"This  volume  is  a  reproduction,  with  corrections  and  additions,  of  an  article
contributed  by  the  learned  author  two  years  ago  to  the  '  Encyclopedie  des  Sciences
Relif^euses.'  It  attracted  much  notice  when  it  first  appeared,  and  is  generally
admitted  to  present  the  best  summary  extant  of  the  vast  subject  with  which  it
defi\s."— Tablet.

"This  is  not  only  on  the  whole  the  best  but  the  only  manual  of  the  religions  of
India,  apart  from  Buddhism,  which  we  have  in  English.  The  present  work  .  .  .
shows  not  only  great  knowledge  of  the  facts  and  power  of  clear  exposition,  hnt  also
great  insight  into  the  inner  history  and  the  deeper  meaning  of  the  great  religion
for  it  is  in  rejility  only  one,  which  it  proposes  to  describe."— il/od«m  Heviao.

"  The  merit  of  the  work  has  been  emphatically  recognised  by  the  most  authoritative
Orientalists,  both  in  this  country  and  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  But  probably
there  are  few  Indianists  (if  we  may  use  the  word)  who  would  not  derive  a  good  deal
of  information  from  it,  and  especially  from  the  extensive  bibliography  provided  in
the  notes." — Dublin  Revieic.

"  Such  a  sketch  M.  Barth  has  drawn  with  a  master-hand."— Critic  {New  York).


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.— 152,  cloth,  price  68.

HINDU PHILOSOPHY.

The  SANKHYA  KAKIKA  op  IS'WARA  KKISHNA.

An  Exposition  of  the  System  of  Kapila,  with  an  Appendix  on  the
Nyaya  and  Vais'eshika  Systems.

By  JOHN  DAVIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.),  M.R.A.S.

The  system  of  Kapila  contains  nearly  all  that  India  has  produced  in  the
department  of  pure  philosophy.

"The  non- Orientalist  .  .  .  finds  in  Mr.  Davies  a  patient  and  learned  guide  who
leads  him  into  the  intricacies  of  the  philosophy  of  India,  and  supplies  him  with  a  clue
that  lie  may  not  be  lost  in  them.  In  the  preface  he  states  that  the  system  of
Kapila  is  the  'earliest  attempt  on  record  to  give  an  answer,  from  reason  alone,
to  the  njysterious  questions  which  arise  in  every  thotightful  mind  about  the  origin  of
the  world,  the  nature  and  relations  ot  man  and  his  future  destiny,'  and  in  his  learned
and  able  notes  lie  exhibits  '  the  ctmnection  of  the  San khya  system  with  the  philo-
*jphy  of  Spinoza,*  and  '  the  connection  of  the  system  of  Kapila  with  that  of  Schopen-
hauer and  Von  Hartnianu.' "—/''oreif/n  Church  Chronicle.

"  Mr.  Davies's  volume  on  Hindu  Philosophy  is  an  undoubted  gain  to  all  students
of  the  develoi)tiient  of  thought.  The  system  of  Kapila,  which  is  here  given  in  a  trans-
lation from  the  Srmkhya  Kadka.  is  the  only  contrilmtion  of  India  to  pure  philosophy.
.  .  .  Prcsontw  many  points  of  deep  interest  to  the  student  of  comparative  philo*
•opliy,  and  without  Mr.  Davies's  lucid  interpretation  it  wotild  be  diflicult  to  appre-
ciate these  points  In  any  adequate  manner."— Saturday  Revieto.

"  We  welcome  Mr.  Davies's  book  as  a  valuable  addition  to  our  philosophical
Ubnry."^jrota  and  Querit$.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  X. — 130,  cloth,  price  6s.

A  MANUAL  OF  HINDU  PANTHEISM. VEDANTASARA.

Translated,  with  copious  Annotations,

By  Major  G.  A.  JACOB,

Bombay  Staff  Corps  ;  Inspector  of  Army  Schools.

The  design  of  this  little  work  is  to  provide  for  missionaries,  and  for
others  who,  like  them,  have  little  leisure  for  original  research,  an  accurate
summary  of  the  doctrines  of  the  VedS,nta.

"  The  modest  title  of  Major  Jacob's  work  conveys  but  an  inadequate  idea  of  the
vast  amount  of  research  embodied  in  liis  notes  to  the  text  of  the  Vedantasara.  So
copious,  indeed,  are  these,  and  so  much  collateral  matter  do  they  bring  to  bear  on
the  subject,  that  the  diligent  student  will  rise  from  their  perusal  with  a  fairly
adequate  view  of  Hindvi  philosophy  generally.  His  work  ...  is  one  of  the  best  of
its  kind  that  we  have  seen." — Calcutta  Review.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 154,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

TSUNI— I  I  GOAM  :

The  Supreme  Being  of  the  Khoi-Khoi.

By  THEOPHILUS  HAHN,  Ph.D.,

Custodian  of  the  Grey  Collection,  Cape  Town  ;  Corresponding  Member

of  the  Geegr.  Society,  Dresden  ;  Corresponding  Member  of  the

Anthropological  Society,  Vienna,  &c.,  &c.

•'The  first  instalment  of  Dr.  Hahn's  labours  will  be  of  interest,  not  at  the  Cape
only,  but  in  every  University  of  Europe.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  most  valuable  contribution
to  the  comparative  study  of  religion  and  mythology.  Accounts  of  their  religion  and
mythology  were  scattered  abovxt  in  various  books  ;  these  have  been  carefully  col-
lected by  Dr.  Hahn  and  printed  in  his  second  chapter,  enriched  and  improved  by
what  he  has  been  able  to  collect  himself." — Prof.  Max  Muller  in  the  Nineteenth
Century.

"  It  is  full  of  good  tilings."— iSi.  James's  Gazette.


In  Four  Volumes. Post  8vo,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  xii.— 392,  cloth,  price  123.  6d.,

Vol.  II.,  pp.  vi.— 408,  cloth,  price  12s.  6d.,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  viii.— 414,

cloth,  price  12s.  6d.,  Vol.  IV.,  pp.  viii.— 340,  cloth,  price  los.  6d.

A  COMPREHENSIVE  COMMENTARY  TO  THE  QURAN.

To  which  is  prefixed  Sale's  Preliminary  Discourse,  with
Additional  Notes  and  Emendations.

Together  with  a  Complete  Index  to  the  Text,  Preliminary
Discourse,  and  Notes.

By  Rev.  E.  M.  WHERRY,  M.A.,  Lodiana.

"  As  Mr.  Wherry's  book  is  intended  for  missionaries  in  India,  it  is  no  doubt  well
that  they  should  be  prepared  to  meet,  if  they  can,  the  ordinary  arguments  and  inter-
pretations, and  for  this  purpose  Mr.  Wherry's  additions  will  prove  useful."— Safttrday
Review.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  vi. — 208,  cloth,  price  Ss.  6d.

THE  BHAGAVAD-GITA.

Translated,  with  Introduction  and  Notes.

By  JOHN  DA  VIES,  M.A.  (Cantab.)

••  Let  U8  add  that  his  translation  of  the  Bhagavad  Git&  is,  as  we  judge,  the  best
that  has  a«  yet  appeared  in  Enghsh,  and  that  his  Philological  Notes  are  of  quite
peouliar  value."— Dutiin  Review.


Post  8vo,  pp.  96,  cloth,  price  53.
THE  QUATRAINS  OF  OMAR  KHAYYAM.

Translated  by  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  M.A.,
Barrister-at-Law,  late  H.M.  Bengal  Civil  Service.


Post  Svo,  pp.  xxxii.— 336,  cloth,  price  los.  6d.

THE QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM.

The  Persian  Text,  with  an  English  Verse  Translation.
By  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  late  of  the  Bengal  Civil  Service.

"  Mr.  Whinfield  has  executed  a  difficult  task  with  considerable  success,  and  his
Tersion  contains  much  that  will  be  new  to  thode  who  only  know  Mr.  Fitzgerald's
delightful  selection."— .(4ca(Z€my.

"The  most  prominent  features  in  the  Quatrains  are  their  profoiind  agnosticism,
combined  with  a  fatalism  based  more  on  philosophic  than  religious  grounds,  their
Epicureanism  and  the  spirit  of  universal  tolerance  and  charity  which  animates  them."
— Calcutta  Review.

Post  Svo,  pp.  xxiv. — 268,  cloth,  price  98.

THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE  UPANISHADS  AND

ANCIENT  INDIAN  METAPHYSICS.

As  exhibited  in  a  series  of  Articles  contributed  to  the  Calcutta  Review.

By  ARCHIBALD  EDWARD  GOUGH,  M.A.,  Lincoln  College,  Oxford  ;
Principal  of  the  Calcutta  Madrasa.

"  For  practical  imrposes  this  is  perliaF>8  the  most  important  of  the  works  that  have
thus  far  appeared  in  '  TrUbner's  Oriental  Series.'  .  .  .  We  CiUinot  doubt  that  for  all
who  may  take  it  up  the  work  musr  be  one  of  profound  interest.' — Saturday  Review.


In  Two  Volumes. Vol.  I.,  post  Svo,  pp.  xxiv.— 230,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

A  COMPARATIVE  HISTORY  OF  THE  EGYPTIAN  AND

MESOPOTAMIAN  RELIGIONS.

By  Dr.  C.  P.  TIELE.

Vol.  I.— History  of  the  Egyptian  Religion.

Translated  from  the  Dutch  with  the  Assistance  of  the  Autlior.

By  JAMES  BALLINGAL.

"  It  places  In  the  hands  of  the  English  readers  a  history  of  Egyptian  Religion
which  la  very  complete,  which  is  based  on  the  best  materials,  and  which  has  been
ilhwtrated  by  the  latest  results  of  research.  In  this  volume  there  is  a  great  deal  of
infurraation,  as  well  as  independent  investigation,  for  the  trustwortliiness  of  which
Dr.  Tiele's  name  is  in  itself  a  guarantee ;  and  the  description  of  the  successive
religions  under  the  Old  Kingdom,  the  Middle  Kingdom,  and  the  Now  Kingdom,  is
given  in  a  muuuer  which  is  scholarly  and  minute. " — Scotsman.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 302,  cloth,  price  8s.  6d.

YUSUF  AND  ZULAIKHA.

A  Poem  by  JAMI.

Translated  from  the  Persian  into  English  Verse.

By  RALPH  T.  H.  GRIFFITH.

"  Mr.  Griffith,  who  has  done  already  good  service  as  translator  into  verse  from  the
Sanskrit,  has  done  further  good  work  in  this  translation  from  the  Persian,  and  he
has  evidently  shown  not  a  little  skill  in  his  rendering  the  quaint  and  very  oriental
style  of  his  author  into  our  more  prosaic,  less  figurative,  language.  .  .  .  The  work,
besides  its  intrinsic  merits,  is  of  importance  as  being  one  of  the  most  popular  and
famous  poems  of  Persia,  and  that  which  is  read  in  all  the  independent  native  schools
of  India  where  Persian  is  tdMgh.t."— Scotsman.


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii. — 266,  cloth,  price  9s.

LINGUISTIC  ESSAYS.
By  carl  ABEL.

•'  An  entirely  novel  method  of  dealing  with  philosophical  questions  and  impart
real  human  interest  to  the  otherwise  dry  technicalities  of  the  science." — Standard,

"  IJr.  Abel  is  an  opponent  from  whom  it  is  pleasant  to  differ,  for  he  writes  witn
enthusiasm  and  temper,  and  his  mastery  over  the  English  language  fits  him  to  be  a
champion  of  unpopular  doctrines."— .(4 (^en«;Mm.


Post  8vo,  pp.  ix. — 281,  cloth,  price  los.  6d.

THE SARVA  -  DARSANA  -  SAMGRAHA  ;

Or,  review  of  THE  DIFFERENT  SYSTEMS  OF  HINDU
PHILOSOPHY.

By  MADHAVA  ACHARYA.

Translated  by  E.  B COWELL,  M.  A.,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University

of  Cambridge,  and  A.  E.  GOUGH,  M.A.,  Professor  of  PhUosophy

in  the  Presidency  College,  Calcutta.

This  work is  an  intei-esting  specimen of Hindu critical  ability. The

author successively passes in  review the sixteen philosophical systems

current  in  the  fourteenth  century  in  the  South  of  India ;  and  he  gives  what

appears  to  him  to  be  their  most  important  tenets.

"  The  translation  is  trustworthy  throughout.  A  protracted  sojourn  in  India,
where  there  is  a  living  traiiitiou,  has  familiarised  t.ie  translators  with  Indian
thought." — A  thcnosum.


Post  8vo,  pp.  Ixv. — 368,  cloth,  price  148.
TIBETAN  TALES  DERIVED  FROM  INDIAN  SOURCES.

Tran.slated  from  the  Tibetan  of  the  Kah-Gyur.

By  F.  ANTON  VON  SCHIEFNER.

Done  into  English  from  the  German,  with  an  Introduction,

By  W.  R.  S.  RALSTON,  M.A.

"Mr.  Ralston,  whose  name  is  so  familiar  to  all  lovers  of  Russian  folk-lore,  has
supplied  some  interesting  Western  analogies  and  parallels,  drawn,  for  the  most  part,
from  Slav(»nic  sources,  to  the  Eastern  folk-tales,  culled  from  the  Kahgyur,  one  of  the
divisions  of  the  Tibetan  sacred  hQo\i9,."— Academy.

"The  translation  .  .  .  could  scarcely  liave  fallen  into  better  hands.  An  Introduc-
tion .  .  .  gives  the  leading  facts  in  the  lives  of  those  scholars  who  have  given  their
attention  to  gaining  a  knowledge  of  the  Tibetan  literature  and  language." — Calcutta
Jieview.

"  Ought  to  interest  all  who  care  for  the  East,  for  amusing  stories,  or  for  comparative
folk-lore."— Paii  Mall  Gazette,


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xvi. — 224,  cloth,  price  9s.

UDANAVARGA.

A  Collection  of  Verses  from  the  Buddhist  Canon.

Compiled  by  DHARMATRATA.

Bbino  the  northern  BUDDHIST  VERSION  of  DHAMMAPADA.

Translated  from  the  Tibetan  of  Bkah-hgyur,  with  Notes,  and
Extracts  from  the  Commentary  of  Pradjnavarman,

By  W.  WOODVILLE  ROCKHILL.

"  Mr.  Rockhill's  pnsent  work  is  the  first  fiom  which  assistance  will  be  gained
for  a  uioie  accnnite  understanding  of  tlie  I'ali  text;  it  is,  in  fact,  as  yet  tlie  only
term  of  comparison  available  to  us.  The  '  Udanavarga,'  the  Thibetan  version,  was
originally  discovered  by  the  late  M.  Schiefner,  who  published  the  Tibetan  text,  and
had  intended  adding  a  translation,  an  intention  frustrated  by  his  death,  but  which
has  been  carried  out  by  Mr.  Rockhill.  .  .  .  Mr.  Ruckhill  in;iy  be  congratulated  for
having  well  accomplished  a  diflScuit  task." — Saturday  Review.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  xxiv. — 566,  cloth,  accompanied  by  a
Language  Map,  price  25s.

A  SKETCH  OF  THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF  AFRICA.

By  ROBERT  NEEDHAM  CUST,
Banister-at-Law,  and  late  of  Her  Majesty's  Indian  Civil  Service.

"Any  one  at  all  interested  in  African  languages  cannot  do  better  than  get  Mr.
Gust's  book.  It  is  encyclopaedic  in  its  scope,  and  the  reader  gets  a  start  clear  away
in  any  paitictilar  languaji^e,  and  is  left  free  to  add  to  the  initial  sum  of  knowledge
tliere  collected." — liatal  Mercury.

"  Mr.  fust  baa  contrived  to  produce  a  work  of  value  to  linguistic  students."—
Nature.


Third  Edition. Post  8vo,  pp.  XV.-250,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  RELIGION  TO  THE

SPREAD  OF  THE  UNIVERSAL  RELIGIONS.

By  C.  r.  TIELE.

Doctor  of  Theology,  Professor  of  the  History  of  Religions  in  the
University  of  Leyden.

Translated  from  the  Dutch  by  J.  Estlin  Carpenter,  M.A.

"  Few  books  of  its  size  contain  the  result  of  so  much  wide  thinking,  able  and  labo-
rl'rtw  study,  or  enable  the  reader  to  gain  a  better  bird's-eye  view  of  the  latest  restilts
of  Investigations  into  the  religions  history  of  nations.  As  Professor  Tiele  modestly
•ays,  '  In  this  little  book  are  outlines— pencil  sketches,  I  might  say— nothing  moie.'
hut  there  arc  sonio  men  whose  sketches  from  a  thumb-nail  are  of  far  more  worth
than  an  enormous  canvas  covered  with  the  crude  painting  of  others,  and  it  is  easy  to
■ec  that  these  pages,  full  of  information,  these  sentences,  cut  and  perhaps  also  dry,
•Lort  and  clear,  condense  the  fruits  of  long  and  thorough  research."— -Sco(*»«aji.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii. — 312,  with  Maps  and  Plan,  cloth,  price  148.

A  HISTORY  OF  BURMA.

Including  Burma  Proper,  Pegu,  Taungu,  Tenasserim,  and  Arakan. From
the  Earliest  Time  to  the  End  of  the  First  War  with  British  India.

By  Lieut.-Gen.  Sir  ARTHUR  P.  PHAYRE,  G.C.M.G.,  K.C.S.I.,  and  C.B.,

Membre  Correspondant  de  la  Societe  Academique  Indo-Chinoise

de  France.

"Sir  Arthur  Phayre's  contribution  to  Triibner's  Oriental  Series  supplies  a  recog-
nised want,  and  its  appearance  has  been  looked  forward  to  for  many  years

General  Phayre  deserves  great  credlL  for  the  patience  and  industry  which  has  resulted
in  this  History  of  Burma." — Sa,t%irday  Kevitw.


Third  Edition. Post  8vo,  pp.  276,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.  ^

RELIGION IN CHINA.

By  JOSEPH  EDKINS,  D.D.,  Peking.
Containing  a  Brief  Account  of  the  Three  Religions  of  the  Chinese,  with
Observations  on  the  Prospects  of  Christian  Conversion  amongst  that
People.
"  Dr.  Edkins  has  been  most  careful  in  noting  the  varied  and  often  complex  phases
of  opinion,  so  as  to  give  an  account  of  considerable  value  of  the  subject." — Scotsman.
"  As  a  missionary,  it  has  been  part  of  Dr.  Edkins'  duty  to  study  the  existing
religions  in  China,  and  his  long  residence  in  the  country  has  enabled  him  to  acquire
an  intimate  knowledge  of  them  as  they  at  present  exist." — /Saturday  Review.

"  Dr.  Edkins'  valuable  work,  of  which  this  is  a  second  and  revised  edition,  has,
from  tlie  time  that  it  was  published,  been  the  standard  authority  upon  the  subject
of  which  it  treats." — Nonconformist.

"  Dr.  Edkins  .  .  .  may  now  be  fairly  regarded  as  among  the  first  authorities  on,
Chinese  religion  and  language."— .Briiis/i  Quarterly  Revietc.


Post  8vo,  pp.  X.-274,  cloth,  price  9s.

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  BUDDHA  AND  THE  EARLY
HISTORY  OF  HIS  ORDER.

Derived  from  Tibetan  Works  in  the  Bkah-hgyur  and  Bstan-hgyur.

Followed  by  notices  on  the  Early  History  of  Tibet  and  Khoten.

Translated  by  W.  W.  ROCKHILL,  Second  Secretary  U.  S.  Legation  in  China.

"The  volume  bears  testimony  to  the  diligence  and  fuhiess  with  which  the  author
has  consulted  and  tested  the  ancient  documents  bearing  vipon  his  remarkable  sub-
ject."—  Times.

"  Will  be  appreciated  by  those  who  devote  themselves  to  those  Buddhist  studies
which  have  of  late  years  taken  in  these  Western  regions  so  remarkable  a  develop-
ment. Its  matter  possesses  a  special  interest  as  being  derived  from  ancient  Tibetan
works,  some  portions  of  which,  here  analysed  and  translated,  have  not  yet  attracted
the  attention  of  scholars.  The  volume  is  rich  in  ancient  stories  bearing  upon  the
world's  renovation  and  the  origin  of  castes,  as  recorded  in  these  venerable  autho-
rities."— Daily  News.

Third  Edition. Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.-464,  cloth,  price  i6s.

THE  SANKHYA  APHORISMS  OF  KAPILA,

With  Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  Commentaries.

Translated  by  J.  R.  BALL  ANT  YNE,  LL.D.,  late  Principal  of  the  Benares

College.

Edited  by  FITZEDWARD  HALL.

"The  work  displays  a  vast  expenditure  of  labour  and  scholarship,  for  which
students  of  Hindoo  pliilosophy  have  every  reason  to  be  gratefulto  Dr.  Hall  and  the
publishers." — Calcutta  Review.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  cviii.-242,  and  viii.-370,  cloth,  price  248.
Dedicated  by  permission  to  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales.

BUDDHIST  RECORDS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD,

Translated  from  the  Chinese  of  Hiuen  Tsiang  (a.D.  629).

By  SAMUEL  BEAL,  B.A.,

(Trin.  Coll.,  Camb.) ;  R.N.  (Retired  Chaplain  and  N.I.) ;  Professor  of  Chinese,
University  College,  London  ;  Rector  of  Wark,  Northumberland,  &c.

An  eminent  Indian  authority  writes  respecting  this  work :—"  Nothing
more  can  be  done  in  elucidating  the  History  of  India  until  Mr.  Real's  trans-
latiou  of  the  'Si-yu-ki'  appears."

"  It  is  a  strange  freak  of  liistorical  preservation  that  the  best  account  of  the  con-
dition (if  India  at  that  ancient  period  has  come  down  to  us  in  the  books  of  travel
written  by  the  Chinese  pilgrims,  of  whom  Hwen  Thsang  is  the  best  known." — Times.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xlviii.-398,  cloth,  price  12s.

THE ORDINANCES OP MANU.

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit,  with  an  Introduction,

By  the  late  A.  C.  BURNELL,  Ph.D.,  CLE.

Completed  and  Edited  by  E.  W.  HOPKINS,  Ph.D.,
of  Columbia  College,  N.Y.

"This  work  is  full  of  interest ;  while  for  tlie  student  of  sociology  and  tlie  science
of  religion  it  is  full  of  importance,  Ir  is  a  great  boon  to  get  so  notable  a  work  in  so
accessible  a  form,  admirably  edited,  and  competently  translated."— Scofsmaw.

'« Few  men  were  more  competent  than  Burnell  to  give  us  a  really  good  translation
of  this  well-known  law  book,  first  rLndered  into  English  by  Sir  William  Jones.
IJuniell  was  not  only  an  indepeniient  Sanskrit  scholar,  but  an  experienced  lawyer,
and  he  joined  to  these  two  important  qualifications  the  rai-e  faculty  of  being  able  to
express  his  thoughts  in  clear  and  trenchant  English.  .  .  .  We  ought  to  feel  very
trrateful  to  Dr.  Hopkins  for  having  given  us  all  that  could  bo  published  of  the  trans-
lation left  by  Burnell."— F.  Max  MCllek  in  the  Academy.


Post  Bvo,  pp.  xii.-234,  cloth,  price  9s.

THE  LIFE  AND  WORKS  OF  ALEXANDER
CSOMA  DE  KOROS,

Between  1819  and  1842.  With  a  Short  Notice  of  all  his  Published  and  Un-
published Works  and  Essays.  From  Original  and  for  most  part  Un-
published Documents.

By  THEODORE  DUKA,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.  (Eng.),  Surgeon-Major
H.M.'s  Bengal  Medical  Service,  Retired,  &c.

"  Not  too  soon  have  Messrs.  Trlibner  added  to  their  valuable  Oriental  Series  a
hiMtory  of  the  life  and  works  of  one  of  the  most  gifted  and  devoted  of  Oriental
RtudcntK,  Alexander  Csoraa  de  Koros.  It  is  forty-thi-ce  years  since  his  death,  and
though  an  account  of  Ids  career  was  demanded  soon  after  iiis  decease,  it  has  only
i*ow  appeared  in  the  imix»rtant  memoir  of  his  compatriot.  Dr.  D\\kii."—Bool:sellti:


TR  UBNER  'S  ORIENT  A  L SERIES.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-3i8  and  vi.-3i2,  cloth,  price  2rs.

MISCELLANEOUS  PAPERS  RELATING  TO
INDOCHINA.

Reprinted  from  "Dalrymple's  Oriental  Repertory,"  ''Asiatic  Researches,"
and  the  "Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal."

CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  I.

I.— Some  Accounts  of  Quedah. By  Michael  Topping.

II —Report  made  to  tlie  Chief  and  Council  of  Balambangan,  by  Lieut.  James
Barton,  of  his  several  Surveys.

III.  — Substancti  of  a  Letter  to  the  Court  of  Directors  from  Mr.  John  Jesse,  dated
July  20,  1775,  at  Borneo  Proper.

IV. — Formation  of  the  Establishment  of  Poolo  Peenang.

v.— The  Gold  of  Limong. By  John  Macdonald.

VI.— On  Three  Natural  Productions  or  Sumatra. By  John  Macdonald.

VII. — On  the  Traces  of  the  Hindu  Language  and  Literature  extant  amongst  the
Malays. By  William  Marsden.

VIII. — Somii  Account  of  the  Elastic  Gum  Vine  of  Prince-Wales  Island.  By  James
Howison.

IX.-- A  Botanical  Description  of  Urceola  Elastica,  or  Caoutcliouc  Vine  of  Sumatra
and  Pulo-Piuang. By  William  Roxburgh,  M.D.

X.— An  Account  of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Poggy,  or  Nassau  Islands,  lying  off
Sumatra. By  John  Crisp.

XI.— Remarks  on  the  Species  of  Pepper  which  are  found  on  Prince- Wales  Island,
By  William  Hunter,  M.D.

XII.— On  the  Languages  and  Literature  of  the  Indo-Chinese  Nations.  By  J.
Le\den,  M.D.

XIII.— Some  Account  of  an  Or  uig-Outang  of  remarkable  height  found  on  the  Island
of  Sumatra. By  Clarke  Abel,  M.D.

XIV.  — Ob.se rvations  on  the  Geological  Appearances  and  General  Features  of  Por-
tions of  the  Malaym  Peninsula. By  Captain  James  Low.

XV.— Short  Sketch  of  the  Geology  of  Pulo-Pinang  and  the  Neighbouring  Islands.
By  T.  Ware.

XVI.— Climate  of  Singapore.

XVII.  —Inscription  on  the  Jetty  at  Singapore.

XVIII.— Extract  of  a  Letter  from  Colonel  J.  Low.

XIX. — Inscription  at  Singapore.

XX.— An  Account  of  Several  Inscriptions  found  in  Province  Wellesley.  By  Lieut.-
Col.  James  Low.

XXI. — Note  on  the  Inscriptions  from  Singapore  and  Province  Wellesley.  By  J.  W.
Laid  lay.

XXli.— On  an  Inscription  from  Keddah. By  Lieut.-Col.  Low.

XXIII.— A  Notice  of  the  Alphabets  of  the  Philippine  Islands.

XXI  v.— Succinct  Review  of  the  Observations  of  the  Tides  in  the  Indian  Archipelago.

XXV.— Report  on  the  Tin  of  the  Province  of  Mergui. By  Capt.  G.  B  Tremenheere.

XXVI.— Report  on  the  Manganese  of  Mergui  Province. By  Capt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere.

XXVIL— Paragraphs  to  be  added  to  Capt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere's  Report.

XXVIII.- -Second  Report  on  the  Tin  of  Mergui. By  Capt.  G.  R  Tremenheere.

XXIX.— Analysis  of  Iron  Ores  from  Tavoy  and  Mergui,  and  of  Limestone  from
Mergui. By  Dr.  A.  Ure.

XXX. — Report  of  a  Visit  to  the  Pakchan  River,  and  of  s^me  Tin  Localities  in  the
Southern  Portion  of  the  Tenasserim  Provinces. By  Capt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere.

XXXI.— Report  on  a  Route  from  the  Mouth  of  the  Pakchan  to  Krau,  and  thence
across  the  Isthmus  of  Krau  to  the  Gulf  of  Slum.  By  Capt.  Al.  Fraser  and  Capt.  J.  G.
Forlong.

XXXI I.— Report,  &c. ,  from  Capt.  G.  B.  Tremenheere  on  the  Price  of  Mergui  Tin  Ore.

XXXIII.— Remarks  on  the  Different  Species  of  Orang-utan. By  E.  Blyth.

XXXIV.— Further  Remarks. By  E.  Blyth.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


MISCELLANEOUS  PAPERS  RELATING  TO  INDO-CHINA—
continued.


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II.


XXXV.— Citalcx^ie  of  Mammalia  inhabiting  tho  Malayan  PeninsuLi  and  Islands.
By  Theodore  Cantor,  M.D.

XXXVI. —On  the  Local  and  Relative  Geology  of  Singapore. By  J.  R.  Logan.

XXXVII.— Catalogue  of  Reptiles  inhabiting  .the  Malayan  Peninsula  and  Islands.
By  Theodore  Cantor,  M.D.

XXXVIII.— Some  Account  of  the  Botanical  Collection  brought  from  the  Eastward,
in  1841,  by  Dr.  Cantor. By  the  late  W.  Griffith.

XXX IX. —On  the  Flat-Horned  Taurine  Cattle  of  S.E.  Asia. By  E.  Blyth,

XIa— Note,  by  Major-General  G.  B.  Tremenheere.

General  Index.

Index  of  Vernacular  Terms.

Index  of  Zoological  Genera  and  Sub-Genera  occurring  in  Vol.  II.

"The  papers  treat  of  almost  every  aspect  of  Indo-China— its  philology,  economy,
geography,  geology — and  constitute  a  very  material  and  important  contribution  to
our  accessible  information  regarding  that  country  and  its  people." — Contemporari/
Review.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-72,  cloth,  price  5s.

THE SATAKAS OF BHARTRIHARI.

Translated  from  the  Sanskrit

By  the  Rev.  B.  HALE  WORTH  AM,  M.R.A.S.,

Rector  of  Eggesford,  North  Devon.

"  A  very  interesting  addition  to  Trttbner's  Oriental  Series."—Saturday  Review.
"  Many  of  the  Maxims  in  the  book  have  a  Biblical  ring  and  beauty  of  expression.
-St.  James'  Gazette.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xii.-i8o,  cloth,  price  6s.

ANCIENT  PROVERBS  AND  MAXIMS  FROM  BURMESE
SOURCES ;

Or,  the  NITI  LITERATURE  OF  BURMA.

By  JAMES  GRAY,

Author  of  "Elements  of  Pali  Grammar,"  "Translation  of  the
Dhammapada,"  &c.

The  Sanscrit-Pfi,li  word  Nlti  is  equivalent  to  "conduct"  in  its  abstract,
and  "guide"  in  its  concrete  signification.  As  a])plied  to  books,  it  is  a
general  term  for  a  treatise  which  includes  maxims,  pithy  sayings,  and
didactic  stories,  intended  as  a  guide  to  such  matters  of  every-day  life  as
form  the  character  of  an  individual  and  influence  hun  in  his  relations  to  his
fellow-men.  Treatises  of  this  kind  have  been  popular  in  all  ages,  and  have
served  as  a  most  effective  medium  of  instruction.


TRUBNER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


Post  8vo,  pp.  xxxii.  and  330,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

MASNAVI I MA' NAVI:

THE  SPIRITUAL  COUPLETS  OF  MAULANA  JALALU-'D-DIN
MUHAMMAD  I  RUMI.

Translated  and  Abridged  by  E.  H.  WHINFIELD,  M.A.,
Late  of  H.M.  Bengal  Civil  Service.


Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  346,  cloth,  price  los.  6d.

MANAVA-DHARMA-CASTRA:
THE  CODE  OF  MANU.

Original  Sanskrit  Text,  with  Critical  Notes.

By  J.  JOLLY,  Ph.D.,

Professor  of  Sanskrit  in  the  University  of  "VVurzhurg  ;  late  Tagore  Professor
of  Law  in  the  University  of  Calcutta.

The  date  assigned  by  Sir  "William  Jones  to  this  Code — the  well-known
Great  Law  Book  of  the  Hindus — is  1250-500  B.C.,  although  the  rules  and
precepts  contained  in  it  had  probably  existed  as  tradition  for  countless  ages
before.  There  has  been  no  reliable  edition  of  the  Text  for  Students  for
many  years  past,  and  it  is  believed,  therefore,  that  Prof.  Jolly's  work  will
supply  a  want  long  felt.


Post  8vo,  pp.  215,  cloth,  price  7s.  6d.

LEAVES  FROM  MY  CHINESE  SCRAP-BOOK.

By  FREDERIC  HENRY  BALFOUR.

Author  of  "Waifs  and  Strays  from  the  Far  East,"  " Taoist  Texts,'
"Idiomatic  Phrases  in  the  Peking  Colloquial,"  &c.  &c.


THE  FOLLOWING WORKS  ARE  IN  PREPARATION:—

In  Two  Vols.,  post  8vo.

ALBERUNI'S INDIA:

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  ITS  RELIGION,  PHILOSOPHY,  LITERATURE,
GEOGRAPHY,  CHRONOLOGY,  ASTRONOMY,  CUSTOMS,  LAW,
AND  ASTROLOGY  (about  a.d.  1031).

Translated  into  English.

With  Notes  and  Indices  by  Prof.  EDWARD  SACHAU,
University  of  Berlin.

*^*  The  Arabic  Original,  with  an  Index  of  the  Sanskrit  Words,  Edited  by
Professor  SACHAU,  is  in  the  press.


TRUB.VER'S  ORIENTAL  SERIES.


In  Two  Volumes,  post  8vo.

MISCELLANEOUS  PAPERS  RELATING  TO
INDOCHINA.

Edited  by  R.  ROST,  Ph.D.,  &c.  &c.,

Librarian  to  the  India  Office.

Second  Series.

Reprinted  for  the  Straits  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  from  the
Malayan  "Miscellanies,"  the  "Transactions  and  Journal  "of  the  Batavian
Society,"  and  the  "Journals"  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  and  the
Royal  Geographical  and  Royal  Asiatic  Societies.


Post  8vo.

THE  LIFE OF HIUEN TSIANG.

By  the  shamans  HWUI  LI  and  YEN-TSUNG.

"With  a  Preface  containing  an  account  of  the  Works  of  I-TsiNG.

By  SAMUEL  BEAL,  B.A.

(Trin.  Coll.,  Camb.) ;  Professor  of  Chinese,  University  College,  London ;

Rector  of  Wark,  Northumberland,  &c.

Author  of  "  Buddhist  Records  of  the  Western  World,"  "  The  Romantic
Legend  of  Sakya  Budda,"  &c.

When  the  Pilgrim  Hiuen  Tsiang  returned  from  his  travels  in  India,  he
took  up  his  abode  in  the  Temple  of  "Great  Beuevoleuce  ;  "this  convent  had
been  constructed  by  the  Emperor  in  honour  of  the  Empress,  AVen-te-hau.
After  Hiuen  Tsiang's  death,  his  disciple,  Hwui  Li,  composed  a  work  which
gave  an  account  of  his  illustrious  Master's  travels  ;  this  work  when  he  com-
pleted he  buried,  and  refused  to  discover  its  place  of  concealment.  But
previous  to  his  death  he  revealed  its  whereabouts  to  Yen-tsung,  by  whom  it
Wiia  finally  revised  and  published.  This  is  "  The  Life  of  Hiuen  Tsiang."  It
is  a  valuable  sequel  to  the  Si-yu-ki,  correcting  and  illustrating  it  in  many
particulars.

Post  8vo.

A  SKETCH  OF  THE  MODERN  LANGUAGES  OF
OCEANIA.

By  R.  N.  CUST,  LL.D.

Author  of  ••  Modem  Languages  of  the  East,"  "  Modern  Languages  of
Africa,"  &c.


Post  8vo.

ESSAYS  ON  THE  INTERCOURSE  OF  THE  CHINESE

WITH  WESTERN  COUNTRIES  IN  THE  MIDDLE

AGES  AND  ON  KINDRED  SUBJECTS.

By  E.  BRETSCHNEIDER,  M.D.,
Formerly  Physician  of  the  Russian  Legation  at  Pekin.


LONDON :  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  57  and  59  LUDGATE  HILL.

250—16/7/87.


TRUBNER'S

ORIENTAL SERIES,


V.


BAl.I.ANTYNE, HANSON AND  CO
EDINBURGH AND LONDON


THE


BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.


A  POEM  BY  kA LID  Asa.


CranslatetJ  from  tje  Sanskrit  into  engli'gj  Fcrge


BY


KALPH  T.  H.  GEIFFITH,  M.A.

PRINCIPAL  OF  BENARES  COLLEGE.


^econti  ^tiition.


LONDON:
TRUBNER & CO., LUDGATE HILL.

1879.

X^All  rights  reserved.}


PHEFACE.


Of  the  history  of  Kalidasa,  to  whom  by  general  assent
the  Kumar  A  Sambhava,  or  Birth  of  the  War- God,
is  attributed,  we  know  but  little  with  any  certainty;
we  can  only  gather  from  a  memorial  -  verse  which
enumerates  their  names,  that  he  was  one  of  the  '  Nine
Precious  Stones '  that  shone  at  the  Court  of  Vikra-
MADITYA,  King  of  OUJEIN,  in  the  half  century  immedi-
ately preceding  the  Christian  era/'^  As  the  examination
of  arguments  for  and  aojainst  the  correctness  of  this  date
is  not  likely  to  interest  general  readers,  I  must  request
them  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  belief  that  about  the
time  when  Virgil  and  Horace  were  shedding  an  undying
lustre  upon  the  reign  of  Augustus,  our  poet  Kalidasa
lived,  loved,  and  sang,  giving  and  taking  honour,  at  the
polished  court  of  the  no  less  munificent  patron  of
Sanskrit  literature,  at  the  period  of  its  highest  perfection.

*  [This  date  is  much  too  early.  It  has  been  shown  by  H.  Jacobi  from
the  astrological  data  contained  in  the  poem  that  the  date  of  its  composition
cannot  be  placed  earlier  than  about  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  a.d.]


viii  PREFACE.

Little  as  we  know  of  Indian  poetry,  here  and  there
an  English  reader  may  be  found,  who  is  not  entirely
unacquainted  with  the  name  or  works  of  the  author  of
the  beautiful  dramas  of  SakontalI  and  The  Hero  and
THE  Nymph,  the  former  of  which  has  long  enjoyed  an
European  celebrity  in  the  translation  of  Sir  William
Jones,  and  the  latter  is  one  of  the  most  charming  of
Professor  Wilson's  specimens  of  the  Hindii  Theatre ;
here  and  there  even  in  England  may  be  found  a  lover
of  the  graceful,  tender,  picturesque,  and  fanciful,  who
knows  something,  and  would  gladly  know  more,  of  the
sweet  poet  of  the  Cloud  Messenger,  and  The  Seasons  ;
whilst  in  Germany  he  has  been  deeply  studied  in  the
original,  and  enthusiastically  admired  in  translation, —
not  the  Orientalist  merely,  but  the  poet,  the  critic,  the
natural  philosopher, — a  Goethe,  a  Schlegel,  a  Humboldt,
having  agreed,  on  account  of  his  tenderness  of  feeling
and  his  rich  creative  imagination,  to  set  KIlidasa  very
high  among  the  glorious  company  of  the  Sons  of  Song."^

That  the  poem  which  is  now  for  the  first  time  offered

*  Goethe  says  :

Willst  du  die  Bliithe  des  friihen,  die  Friichte  des  spateren  Jahres,
Willst  du  was  reizt  und  entzuckt,  willst  du  was  siittigt  und  nahrt,

Willst  du  den  Himmel,  die  Erde,  mit  einem  Namen  begreifen ;
Nenn'  ich  Sakontald,  Dich,  und  so  ist  Alles  gesagt.

See  also  Scblegel's  Dramatic  Literature,  Lect.  II.,  and  Humboldt's
Kosmos,  "Vol.  II.  p.  40,  and  note.


PREFACE.  ix

to  the  general  reader,  in  an  English  dress,  will  not
diminish  this  reputation  is  the  translator's  earnest  hope,
yet  my  admiration  of  the  grace  and  beauty  that  pervade
so  much  of  the  work  must  not  allow  me  to  deny  that
occasionally,  even  in  the  noble  Sanskrit,  if  we  judge  him
by  an  European  standard,  KIlidIsa  is  bald  and  prosaic.
Nor  is  this  a  defence  of  the  translator  at  the  expense  of
the  poet.  Eully  am  I  conscious  how  far  I  am  from
being  able  adequately  to  reproduce  the  fanciful  creation
of  the  sweet  singer  of  Oujein  ;  that  numerous  beauties  of
thought  and  expression  I  may  have  passed  by,  mistaken,
marred ;  that  in  many  of  the  more  elaborate  descriptions
my  own  versification  is  '  harsh  as  the  jarring  of  a  tune-
less chord'  compared  with  the  melody  of  Kalidasa's
rhythm,  to  rival  whose  sweetness  and  purity  of  language,
so  admirably  adapted  to  the  soft  repose  and  celestial
rosy  hue  of  his  pictures,  would  have  tried  all  the  fertility
of  resource,  the  artistic  skill,  and  the  exquisite  ear  of
the  author  of  Lalla  Kookh  himself.  I  do  not  think
this  poem  deserves,  and  I  am  sure  it  will  not  obtain,
that  admiration  which  the  author's  masterpieces  abeady
made  known  at  once  commanded ;  at  all  events,  if  the
work  itself  is  not  inferior,  it  has  not  enjoyed  the  good
fortune  of  haviug  a  Jones  or  a  Wilson  for  translator.

It  may  be  as well to  inform  the  reader,  before  he
wonder  at  the  misnomer,  that  the  Birth  of  the  War-


X  PREFACE.

God  was  either  left  unfinished  by  its  author,  or  time
has  robbed  us  of  the  conclusion ;  the  latter  is  the  more
probable  supposition,  tradition  informing  us  that  the
poem  originally  consisted  of  twenty-two  cantos,  of  which
only  seven  now  remain.*

I  have  derived  great  assistance  in  the  work  of  transla-
tion from  the  Calcutta  printed  edition  of  the  poem  in
the  Library  of  the  East- India  House ;  but  although  the
Sanskrit  commentaries  accompanying  the  text  are  some-
times of  the  greatest  use  in  unravelling  the  author's
meaning,  they  can  scarcely  claim  infallibility ;  and,  not
unfrequently,  are  so  matter-of-fact  and  prosaic,  that  I
have  not  scrupled  to  think,  or  rather  to  feel,  for  myself.
It  is,  however,  Professor  Stenzler's  edition,  f  published
under  the  auspices  of  the  Oriental  Translation  Fund  (a
society  that  has  liberally  encouraged  my  own  undertak-
ing), that  I  have  chiefly  used.  Valuable  as  this  work
is  (and  I  will  not  disown  my  great  obligations  to  it),  it
is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  extracts  from  the  native
commentators  are  so  scanty,  and  the  annotations  so  few
and  brief.

And  now  one  word  as  to  the  manner  in  which  I  have
endeavoured  to  perform  my  task. Though  there  is  much,


[*  Ten  more  cantos,  of  very  inferior  merit,  have  been  published  since
this  was  written.]

t  [With  a  Latin  translation.]


PREFACE.  xi

I  think,  that  might  be  struck  out,  to  the  advantage  of
the  poem,  this  I  have  in  no  instance  ventured  to  do,
my  aim  having  been  to  give  the  English  reader  as  faith-
ful a  cast  of  the  original  as  my  own  power  and  the
nature  of  things  would  permit,  and,  without  attempting
to  give  word  for  word  or  line  for  line,  to  produce  upon
the  imagination  impressions  similar  to  those  which  one
who  studies  the  work  in  Sanskrit  would  experience.

I  will  not  seek  to  anticipate  the  critics,  nor  to  deprecate
their  animadversions,  by  pointing  out  the  beauties  of  the
poet,  or  particularising  the  defects  of  him  and  his  trans-
lator. That  the  former  will  be  appreciated,  and  the
latter  kindly  dealt  with,  late  experience  makes  me  con-
fident ;  so  that  now,  in  the  words  of  the  Manager  in  the
Prelude  to  the  Hero  and  the  Nymph,  "  I  have  only  to
request  the  audience  that  they  will  listen  to  this  work  of
Kalidasa  with  attention  and  kindness,  in  consideration
of  its  subject  and  respect  for  the  Author."

Adderley  Library,  Marlborough  College,
Ajpril,  1853.


PRELIMINARY  NOTE.

PRONUNCIATION.

As  a  general  rule,  the  Sanskrit  vowels  are  to  be  sounded
like  those  of  the  Italian  alphabet,  except  the  short  or  unac-
cented a,  which  has  the  sound  of  that  letter  in  the  word
America:  ^^ pandit  "  a  learned  man,  being  pronounced ^%w6Zi7.

a,  long  or  accented  . . .  like  a  in  father.

e  like  e  in  they.

i,  short  or  unaccented,  like  i  in  pick.
/,  long  or  accented  ...  like  i  in  pique.

0  like  0  in  ^0.

u,  short  or  unaccented,  like  u  in  full.
Uj  long  or  accented  . . .  like  u  in  rule.

The  diphthongs  ai  and  au  are  pronounced  severally  like  i  in
rise  and  01^  in  our.

The  consonants  are  sounded  as  in  English.  In  the  aspirates,
however,  the  sound  of  h  is  kept  distinct;  dh,  th^  ph,  hh,  &c.,
being  pronounced  as  in  red-hot^  pent-house,  up-hill,  abhor,  <fec.
G  is  always  hard,  whatever  vowel  follows.

In  Himalaya  the  accent  is  on  the  second  syllable.


THE

BIRTH OF THE WAR-GOD


Canto  jTirst


UMA'S NATIVITY.

Far  in  the  north  Himalaya,  lifting  high
His  towery  summits  till  they  cleave  the  sky,
Spans  the  wide  land  from  east  to  western  sea,
Lord  of  the  hills,  instinct  with  deity.
For  him,  when  Prithu  ruled  in  days  of  old
The  rich  earth,  teeming  with  her  gems  and  gold.
The  vassal  hills  and  Merit  drained  her  breast.
To  deck  Himalaya,  for  they  loved  him  best ;
And  earth,  the  mother,  gave  her  store  to  fill
With  herbs  and  sparkling  ores  the  royal  hill.
Proud  mountain-king  !  his  diadem  of  snow
Dims  not  the  beauty  of  his  gems  below.
For  who  can  gaze  upon  the  moon,  and  dare
To  mark  one  spot  less  brightly  glorious  there  ?


2  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Wlio,  'mid  a  thousand  virtues,  dares  to  blame
One  shade  of  weakness  in  a  hero's  fame  ?
Oft,  when  the  gleamings  of  his  mountain  brass
Flash  through  the  clouds  and  tint  them  as  they  pass,
Those  glories  mock  the  hues  of  closing  day,
And  heaven's  bright  wantons  hail  their  hour  of  play ;
Try,  ere  the  time,  the  magic  of  their  glance.
And  deck  their  beauty  for  the  twilight  dance.
Dear  to  the  sylphs  are  the  cool  shadows  thrown
By  dark  clouds  wandering  round  the  mountain's  zone,
Till  frightened  by  the  storm  and  rain  they  seek
Eternal  sunshine  on  each  loftier  peak.

Far  spread  the  wilds  where  eager  hunters  roam,
Tracking  the  lion  to  his  dreary  home.
For  though  the  melting  snow  has  washed  away
The  crimson  blood-drops  of  the  wounded  prey.
Still  the  fair  pearls  that  graced  his  forehead  tell
Where  the  strong  elephant,  o'ermastered,  fell.
And  clinging  to  the  lion's  claws,  betray.
Falling  at  every  step,  the  mighty  conqueror's  way.
There  birch-trees  wave,  that  lend  their  friendly  aid
To  tell  the  passion  of  the  love-lorn  maid.
So  quick  to  learn  in  metal  tints  to  mark
Her  hopes  and  fears  upon  the  tender  bark.

List !  breathing  from  each  cave,  Himalaya  leads
The  glorious  hymn  with  all  his  whispering  reeds.


umA  'S  NA  TIVITY.  3

Till  heavenly  minstrels  raise  their  voice  in  song,

And  swell  his  music  as  it  floats  along.

There  the  fierce  elephant  wounds  the  scented  bough

To  ease  the  torment  of  his  burning  brow  ;

And  bleeding  pines  their  odorous  gum  distil

To  breathe  rare  fragrance  o'er  the  sacred  hill.

There  magic  herbs  pour  forth  their  streaming  light
From  mossy  caverns  through  the  darksome  night,
And  lend  a  torch  to  guide  the  trembling  maid
Where  waits  her  lover  in  the  leafy  shade.
Yet  hath  he  caves  within  whose  inmost  cells
In  tranquil  rest  the  murky  darkness  dwells,
And,  like  the  night-bird,  spreads  the  brooding  wing
Safe  in  the  shelter  of  the  mountain-king,
Unscorned,  uninjured ;  for  the  good  and  great
Spurn  not  the  suppliant  for  his  lowly  state.

Why  Kngers  yet  the  heavenly  minstrel's  bride
On  the  wild  path  that  skirts  HimIlaya's  side  ?
Cold  to  her  tender  feet — oh,  cold — the  snow,
Why should her steps  —  her homeward steps  —  be

slow  ?
'Tis  that  her  slender  ankles  scarce  can  bear
The  weight  of  beauty  that  impedes  her  there  ;
Each  rounded  limb,  and  all  her  peerless  charms.
That  broad  full  bosom,  those  voluptuous  arms.


4  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

E'en  the  wild  kine  that  roam  his  forests  bring
The  royal  symbols  to  the  mountain-king.
With  tails  outspread,  their  bushy  streaming  hair
Flashes  like  moonlight  through  the  parted  air.
What  monarch's  fan  more  glorious  might  there  be,
More  meet  to  grace  a  king  as  proud  as  he  ?

There,  when  the  nymphs,  within  the  cave's  recess.
In  modest  fear  their  gentle  limbs  undress.
Thick  clouds  descending  yield  a  friendly  screen,
And  blushing  beauty  bares  her  breast  unseen.

With  pearly  dewdrops  Ganga  loads  the  gale
That  waves  the  dark  pines  towering  o'er  the  vale,
And  breathes  in  welcome  freshness  o'er  the  face
Of  wearied  hunters  when  they  quit  the  chase.

So  far  aloft,  amid  Himalayan  steeps.
Couched  on  the  tranquil  pool  the  lotus  sleeps,
That the bright Seven who star the northern

sky
Cull  the  fair  blossoms  from  their  seats  on  high ;
And  when  the  sun  pours  forth  his  morning  glow
In  streams  of  glory  from  his  path  below.
They  gain  new  beauty  as  his  kisses  break
His  darlings*  slumber  on  the  mountain  lake.

Well  might  that  ancient  hill  by  merit  claim
The  power  and  glory  of  a  monarch's  name  ;


umA's  nativity.

Nurse  of  pure  herbs  that  grace  each  holy  rite,
Earth's  meetest  bearer  of  unyielding  might.
The  Lord  of  Life  for  this  ordained  him  king,
And  bade  him  share  the  sacred  offering.

Gladly  obedient  to  the  law  divine.
He  chose  a  consort  to  prolong  his  line.
N"o  child  of  earth,  born  of  the  Sages'  will,
The  fair  nymph  Mena  pleased  the  sovran  hill.
To  her  he  sued,  nor  was  his  prayer  denied.
The  Saints'  beloved  was  the  mountain's  bride.
Crowned  with  all  bliss  and  beauty  were  the  pair,
He  passing  glorious,  she  was  heavenly  fair.
Swiftly  the  seasons,  winged  with  love,  flew  on.
And  made  her  mother  of  a  noble  son.
The  great  MainIka,  who  in  triumph  led
His  Serpent  beauties  to  the  bridal  bed  ;
And  once  when  Indra's  might  those  pinions  rent
That  bare  the  swift  hills  through  the  firmament,
(So  fierce  his  rage,  no  mountain  could  withstand
The  wild  bolt  flashing  from  his  red  right  hand,)
He  fled  to  Ocean,  powerful  to  save.
And  hid  his  glory  'neath  the  friendly  wave.

A  gentle  daughter  came  at  length  to  bless
The  royal  mother  with  her  loveliness ;
Born  once  again,  for  in  an  earlier  life
High  fame  was  hers,  as  Siva's  faithful  wife.


6  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

But  her  proud  sire  had  dared  the  God  to  scorn ;
Then  was  her  tender  soul  with  anguish  torn,
And  jealous  for  the  lord  she  loved  so  well,
Her  angered  spirit  left  its  mortal  cell.
Now  deigned  the  maid,  a  lovely  boon,  to  spring
From  that  pure  lady  and  the  mountain-king.
When  Industry  and  Virtue  meet  and  kiss.
Holy  their  union,  and  the  fruit  is  bliss.

Blest  was  that  hour,  and  all  the  world  was  gay,
When  MenX's  daughter  saw  the  light  of  day.
A  rosy  glow  suffused  the  brightening  sky;
An  odorous  breeze  came  sweeping  softly  by.
Breathed  round  the  hill  a  sweet  unearthly  strain,
And  the  glad  heavens  poured  down  their  flowery  rain.

That  fair  young  maiden  diademmed  with  light
Made  her  dear  mother's  fame  more  sparkling  bright,
As  the  blue  offspring  of  the  Turquois  Hills
The  parent  mount  with  richer  glory  fills,
When  the  cloud's  voice  has  caused  the  gem  to  spring,
Responsive  to  its  gentle  thundering.

Then  was  it  sweet,  as  days  flew  by,  to  trace
The  dawning  charm  of  every  infant  grace,
Even  as  the  crescent  moons  their  glory  pour
More  full,  more  lovely  than  the  eve  before.

As  yet  the  maiden  was  unknown  to  fame ;
Child  of  the  Mountain  was  her  only  name.


umJ's  nativity.

But  when  her  mother,  filled  with  anxious  care
At  her  stern  penance,  cried  Forbear  !  Forbear  !
To  a  new  title  was  the  warning  turned,
And  Uma  was  the  name  the  maiden  earned.

Loveliest  was  she  of  all  his  lovely  race,
And  dearest  to  her  father. On  her  face
Looking  with  love  he  ne'er  could  satisfy
The  thirsty  glances  of  a  parent's  eye.
When  sprmg-tide  bids  a  thousand  flowerets  bloom
Loading  the  breezes  with  their  rich  perfume,
Though  here  and  there  the  wandering  bee  may  rest,
He  loves  his  own — his  darling  mango — best.
The  Gods'  bright  river  bathes  with  gold  the  skies,
And  pure  sweet  eloquence  adorns  the  wise.
The  flambeau's  glory  is  the  shining  fire ;
She  was  the  pride,  the  glory  of  her  sire.
Shedding  new  lustre  on  his  old  descent.
His  loveliest  child,  his  richest  ornament.

The  sparkling  Ganga  laved  her  heavenly  home.
And  o'er  her  islets  would  the  maiden  roam
Amid  the  dear  companions  of  her  play
With  ball  and  doll  to  while  the  hours  away.

As  swans  in  autumn  in  assembling  bands
Fly  back  to  Ganga's  well-remembered  sands :
As  herbs  beneath  the  darksome  shades  of  night
Collect  again  their  scattered  rays  of  light :


8  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.  \

i

So  dawned  upon  the  maiden's  waking  mind  j

The  far-ofif  memory  of  her  life  resigned,  !

And  all  her  former  learning  in  its  train,
Feelings,  and  thoughts,  and  knowledge  came  again.

Kow  beauty's  prime,  that  craves  no  artful  aid,
Itipened  the  loveliness  of  that  yoimg  maid :  ■

That  needs  no  wine  to  fire  the  captive  heart, —  \

The  how  of  Love  without  his  flowery  dart.  '

There  was  a  glory  beaming  from  her  face.
With  love's  own  light,  and  every  youthful  grace :
Ne'er  had  the  painter's  skilful  hand  portrayed  *

A  lovelier  picture  than  that  gentle  maid  ;
Ne'er  sun-kissed  lily  more  divinely  fair
Unclosed  her  beauty  to  the  morning  air.

Bright  as  a  lotus,  springing  where  she  trod.
Her  glowing  feet  shed  radiance  o'er  the  sod.
That  arching  neck,  the  step,  the  glance  aside,  '

The  proud  swans  taught  her  as  they  stemmed  the  tide,  '

Whilst  of  the  maiden  they  would  fondly  learn  -^

Her  anklets'  pleasant  music  in  return.  \

When  the  Almighty  Maker  first  began
The  marvellous  beauty  of  that  child  to  plan.
In  full  fair  symmetry  each  rounded  limb

Grew  neatly  fashioned  and  approved  by  Him :  j

The  rest  was  faultless,  for  the  Artist's  care  j

Formed  each  young  charm  most  excellently  fair,  i


umA's  nativity.

As  if  his  moulding  hand  would  fain  express
The  visible  type  of  perfect  loveliness.

What  thing  of  beauty  may  the  poet  dare
With  the  smooth  wonder  of  those  limbs  compare  ?
The  young  tree  springing  by  the  brooklet's  side  ?
The  rounded  trunk,  the  forest-monarch's  pride  ?
Too  rough  that  trunk,  too  cold  that  young  tree's  stem ;
A  softer,  warmer  thing  must  vie  with  them.

Her  hidden  beauties  though  no  tongue  may  tell,
Yet  Siva's  love  will  aid  the  fancy  well :
No  other  maid  could  deem  her  boasted  charms
Worthy  the  clasp  of  such  a  husband's  arms.
Between  the  partings  of  fair  Uma's  vest
Came  hasty  glimpses  of  a  lovely  breast :
So  closely  there  the  sweet  twin  hillocks  rose,
Scarce  could  the  lotus  in  the  vale  repose.
And  if  her  loosened  zone  e'er  slipped  below.
All  was  so  bright  beneath  the  mantle's  flow,
So  dazzling  bright,  as  if  the  maid  had  braced
A  band  of  gems  to  sparkle  round  her  waist ;
And  the  dear  dimples  of  her  downy  skin
Seemed  fitting  couch  for  Love  to  revel  in.
Her  arms  were  softer  than  the  flowery  dart,
Young  Kama's  arrow,  that  subdues  the  heart ;
For  vain  his  strife  with  Siva,  till  at  last
He  chose  those  chains  to  bind  his  conqueror  fast.


lo  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

E'en  the  new  moon  poured  down  a  paler  beam
When  her  long  fingers  flashed  their  rosy  gleam,
And  brighter  than  Anoka's  blossom  threw
A  glory  round,  like  summer's  evening  hue.
The  strings  of  pearl  across  her  bosom  thrown
Increased  its  beauty,  and  enhanced  their  own, —
Her  breast,  her  jewels  seeming  to  agree,
The  adorner  now,  and  now  the  adorned  to  be.
When  Beauty  gazes  on  the  fair  full  moon,
No  lotus  charms  her,  for  it  blooms  at  noon :
If  on  that  flower  she  feed  her  raptured  eye,
No  moon  is  shining  from  the  mid-day  sky  ;
She  looked  on  Uma's  face,  more  heavenly  fair.
And  found  their  glories  both  united  there.
The  loveliest  flower  that  ever  opened  yet
Laid  in  the  fairest  branch  :  a  fair  pearl  set
In  richest  coral,  with  her  smile  might  vie
Flashing  through  lips  bright  with  their  rosy  dye.
And  when  she  spoke,  upon  the  maiden's  tongue,
Distilling  nectar,  such  rare  accents  hung.
The  sweetest  note  that  e'er  the  Koil  poured
Seemed  harsh  and  tuneless  as  a  jarring  chord.
The  melting  glance  of  that  soft  liquid  eye.
Tremulous  like  lilies  when  the  breezes  sigh.
Which  learnt  it  first — so  winning  and  so  mild —
The  gentle  fawn,  or  MenA's  gentler  child  ?


UMA  'S  NA  TIVITY.  1 1

And  oh,  the  arching  of  her  brow  !  so  fine

Was  the  rare  beauty  of  its  pencilled  line,

Love  gazed  upon  her  forehead  in  despair

And  spurned  the  bow  he  once  esteemed  so  fair  :

Her  long  bright  tresses  too  might  shame  the  pride

Of  envious  yaks  who  roamed  the  mountain-side.

Surely  the  Maker's  care  had  been  to  bring

From  Nature's  store  each  sweetest,  loveliest  thing,

As  if  the  world's  Creator  would  behold

All  beauty  centred  in  a  single  mould.

When  holy  Narad — Saint  who  roams  at  will —
First  saw  the  daughter  of  the  royal  hill,
He hailed the bride whom Siva's love should

own
Half  of  himself,  and  partner  of  his  throne.
Himalaya  listened,  and  the  father's  pride
Would  yield  the  maiden  for  no  other's  bride  :
To  Fire  alone  of  all  bright  things  we  raise
The  holy  hymn,  the  sacrifice  of  praise.
But  still  the  monarch  durst  not,  could  not  bring
His  child,  unsought,  to  Heaven's  supremest  King ;
But  as  a  good  man  fears  his  earnest  prayer
Should  rise  unheeded,  and  with  thoughtful  care
Seeks  for  some  friend  his  eager  suit  to  aid.
Thus  great  Himalaya  in  his  awe  delayed.


12  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Since  the  sad  moment  when  his  gentle  bride
In  the  full  glory  of  her  beauty  died,
The  mournful  Siva  in  the  holy  grove
Had  dwelt  in  solitude,  and  known  not  love.
High  on  that  hill  where  musky  breezes  throw
Their  balmy  odours  o'er  eternal  snow ;
Where  heavenly  minstrels  pour  their  notes  divine,
And  rippling  Ganga  laves  the  mountain  pine,
Clad  in  a  coat  of  skin  all  rudely  wrought
He  lived  for  prayer  and  solitary  thought.
The  faithful  band  that  served  the  hermit's  will
Lay  in  the  hollows  of  the  rocky  hill.
Where  from  the  clefts  the  dark  bitumen  flowed.
Tinted  with  mineral  dyes  their  bodies  glowed ;
Clad  in  rude  mantles  of  the  birch-tree's  rind.
With  bright  red  garlands  was  their  hair  entwined.
Tlie  holy  bull  before  his  master's  feet
Sliook  the  hard-frozen  earth  with  echoing  feet.
And  as  he  heard  the  lion's  roaring  swell
In  distant  thunder  from  the  rocky  dell,
In  angry  pride  he  raised  his  voice  of  fear
And  from  the  mountain  drove  the  startled  deer.

Bright  fire — a  shape  the  God  would  sometimes  wear
Who  takes  eight  various  forms — was  glowing  there.
Then  the  great  deity  who  gives  the  prize
Of  penance,  prayer,  and  holy  exercise.


umA  'S  NA  TIVITY.  1 3

As  though  to  earn  the  meed  he  grants  to  man,
Himself  the  penance  and  the  pain  began.

Now  to  that  holy  lord,  to  whom  is  given
Honour  and  glory  by  the  Gods  in  heaven,
The  worship  of  a  gift  HimIlaya  paid,
And  towards  his  dwelling  sent  the  lovely  maid  ;
Her  task,  attended  by  her  youthful  train.
To  woo  his  widowed  heart  to  love  again.

The  hermit  welcomed  with  a  courteous  brow
That  gentle  enemy  of  hermit  vow.
The  still  pure  breast  where  Contemplation  dwells
Defies  the  charmer  and  the  charmer's  spells.
Calm  and  unmoved  he  viewed  the  wondrous  maid,
And  bade  her  all  his  pious  duties  aid.
She  culled  fresh  blossoms  at  the  God's  command,
Sweeping  the  altar  with  a  careful  hand ;
The  holy  grass  for  sacred  rites  she  sought.
And  day  by  day  the  fairest  water  brought.
And  if  the  unwonted  labour  caused  a  sigh,
The  fair-haired  lady  turned  her  languid  eye
Where  the  pale  moon  on  Siva's  forehead  gleamed.
And  swift  through  all  her  frame  returning  vigour  streamed.


CANTO SECOND.


Canto  ©econD^


THE  ADDRESS  TO  BRAHMA.

While  impious  TIrak  in  resistless  might

Was  troubling  heaven  and  earth  with  wild  affright,

To  Brahma's  high  abode,  by  Indra  led,

The  mournful  deities  for  refuge  fled.

As  when  the  Day- God's  loving  beams  awake

The  lotus  slumbering  on  the  silver  lake,

So  Brahma  deigned  his  glorious  face  to  show,

And  poured  sweet  comfort  on  their  looks  of  woe.

Then  nearer  came  the  suppliant  Gods  to  pay
Honour  to  him  whose  face  turns  every  way.
They  bowed  them  low  before  the  Lord  of  Speech,
And  sought  with  truthful  words  his  heart  to  reach :
"  Glory  to  Thee  !  before  the  world  was  made,
One  single  form  thy  Majesty  displayed.
Next  Thou,  to  body  forth  the  mystic  Three,
Didst  fill  three  Persons  :  Glory,  Lord,  to  Thee  !
Unborn  and  unbegotten  !  from  thy  hand
The  fruitful  seed  rained  down ;  at  thy  command


i8  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

From  that  small  germ  o'er  quickening  waters  thrown

All  things  that  move  not,  all  that  move  have  grown.

Before  thy  triple  form  in  awe  they  bow  :

Maker,  preserver,  and  destroyer,  Thou  !

Thou,  when  a  longing  urged  thee  to  create,

Thy  single  form  in  twain  didst  separate.

The  Sire,  the  Mother  that  made  all  things  be

By  their  first  union  were  but  parts  of  Thee.

From  them  the  life  that  fills  this  earthly  frame.

And  fruitful  Nature,  self-renewing,  came.

Thou  countest  not  thy  time  by  mortals'  light ;

With  Thee  there  is  but  one  vast  day  and  night.

When  Brahma  slumbers  fainting  Nature  dies,

When  Brahm^  wakens  all  again  arise.

Creator  of  the  world,  and  uncreate  !

Endless  !  all  things  from  Thee  their  end  await.

Before  the  world  wast  Thou !  each  Lord  shall  fall

Before  Thee,  mightiest,  highest.  Lord  of  all.

Thy  self-taught  soul  thine  own  deep  spirit  knows ;

Made  by  thyself  thy  mighty  form  arose  ;

Into  the  same,  when  all  things  have  their  end,

Shall  thy  great  self,  absorbed  in  Thee,  descend.

Lord,  who  may  hope  thy  essence  to  declare  ?

Firm,  yet  as  subtile  as  the  yielding  air :

Fixt,  all-pervading ;  ponderous,  yet  light.

Patent  to  all,  yet  hidden  from  the  sight.


THE  ADDRESS  TO  BRAHMA.  19

Thine  are  the  sacred  hymns  which  mortals  raise,
Commencing  ever  with  the  word  of  praise,
With  three-toned  chant  the  sacrifice  to  grace,
And  win  at  last  in  heaven  a  blissful  place.
They  hail  Thee  Nature  labouring  to  free
The  Immortal  Soul  from  low  humanity;
Hail  Thee  the  stranger  Spirit,  unimpressed,
Grazing  on  Nature  from  thy  lofty  rest.
Father  of  fathers,  God  of  gods  art  thou.
Creator,  highest,  hearer  of  the  vow  !
Thou  art  the  sacrifice,  and  Thou  the  priest.
Thou,  he  that  eateth ;  Thou,  the  holy  feast.
Thou  art  the  knowledge  which  by  Thee  is  taught,
The  mighty  thinker,  and  the  highest  thought ! "

Pleased with their truthful praise, his favouring
eye
He  turned  upon  the  dwellers  in  the  sky.
While  from  four  mouths  his  words  in  gentle  flow
Come  welling  softly  to  assuage  their  woe  :
"  Welcome  !  glad  welcome.  Princes  !  ye  who  hold
Your  lofty  sovereignties  ordained  of  old.
But  why  so  mournful  ?  what  has  dimmed  your  light  ?
Why  shine  your  faces  less  divinely  bright  ?
Like  stars  that  pour  forth  weaker,  paler  gleams,
When  the  fair  moon  with  brighter  radiance  beams.


20  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

0  say,  in  vain  doth  mighty  Indra  bear
The  thunderbolt  of  heaven,  unused  to  spare  ?
Vritra,  the  furious  fiend,  'twas  strong  to  slay  :
Why  dull  and  blunted  is  that  might  to-day  ?
See,  Varun's  noose  hangs  idly  on  his  arm,
Like  some  fell  serpent  quelled  by  magic  charm.
Weak  is  Kuvera's  hand,  his  arm  no  more
Wields  the  dread  mace  it  once  so  proudly  bore  ;
But  like  a  tree  whose  boughs  are  lopped  away.
It  tells  of  piercing  woe,  and  dire  dismay.
In  days  of  yore  how  Yama's  sceptre  shone !
Pled  are  its  glories,  all  its  terrors  gone ;
Despised  and  useless  as  a  quenched  brand,
All  idly  now  it  marks  the  yielding  sand.
Fallen  are  the  Lords  of  Light,  ere  now  the  gaze
Shrank  from  the  coming  of  their  fearful  blaze  ;
So  changed  are  they,  the  undazzled  eye  may  see
Like  pictured  forms,  each  rayless  deity.
Some  baffling  power  has  curbed  the  breezes'  swell  :
Vainly  they  chafe  against  the  secret  spell.
We  know  some  barrier  checks  their  wonted  course.
When  refluent  waters  seek  again  their  source.
The  RuDRAS  too — fierce  demigods  who  bear
The  curved  moon  hanging  from  their  twisted  hair—
Tell  by  their  looks  of  fear,  and  shame,  and  woe.
Of  threats  now  silenced,  of  a  mightier  foe.


THE  ADDRESS  TO  BRAHMA.  21

Glory  and  power,  ye  Gods,  were  yours  of  right  :
Have  ye  now  yielded  to  some  stronger  might,
Even  as  on  earth  a  general  law  may  be
Made  powerless  by  a  special  text's  decree  ?
Then  say,  my  sons,  why  seek  ye  Brahma's  throne  ?
'Tis  mine  to  frame  the  worlds,  and  yours  to  guard  your
own."

Then  Indra  turned  his  thousand  glorious  eyes,
Glancing  like  lilies  when  the  soft  wind  sighs,
And  in  the  Gods'  behalf,  their  mighty  chief
Urged  the  Most  Eloquent  to  tell  their  grief.
Then  rose  the  heavenly  Teacher,  by  whose  side
Dim  seemed  the  glories  of  the  Thousand-eyed,
And  with  his  hands  outspread,  to  Brahma  spake.
Couched  on  his  own  dear  flower,  the  daughter  of  the  lake:

"  0  mighty  Being !  surely  thou  dost  know
The  unceasing  fury  of  our  ruthless  foe  ;
For  thou  canst  see  the  secret  thoughts  that  lie
Deep  in  the  heart,  yet  open  to  thine  eye.
The  vengeful  Tarak,  in  resistless  might,
Like  some  dire  Comet,  gleaming  wild  affright.
O'er  all  the  worlds  an  evil  influence  sheds.
And,  in  thy  favour  strong,  destruction  spreads.
All  bow  before  him :  on  his  palace  wall
The  sun's  first  ray  and  parting  splendour  fall;


22  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Ne'er  could  he  waken  with  a  lovelier  glance

His  own  dear  lotus  from  her  nightly  trance.

For  him,  proud  fiend,  the  moon  no  waning  knows,

But  with  unminished  full-orhed  lustre  glows.

Too  faint  for  him  the  crescent  glory  set

Amid  the  blaze  of  Diva's  coronet.

How  fair  his  garden,  where  the  obedient  breeze

Dares  steal  no  blossom  from  the  slumbering  trees !

The  wild  wind  checks  his  blustering  pinions  there,

And  gently  whispering  fans  the  balmy  air ;

While  through  the  inverted  year  the  seasons  pour.

To  win  the  demon's  grace,  their  flowery  store.

For  him,  the  Eiver-god  beneath  the  stream,

Marks  the  young  pearl  increase  its  silver  gleam,

Until,  its  beauty  and  its  growth  complete,

He  bears  the  offering  to  his  master's  feet.

The  Serpents,  led  by  VXsuKi,  their  king.

Across  his  nightly  path  their  lustre  fling ;

Bright  as  a  torch  their  flashing  jewels  blaze,

Nor  wind,  nor  rain,  can  dim  their  dazzling  rays.

E'en  Indra,  sovereign  of  the  blissful  skies,

To  gain  his  love  by  flattering  homage  tries.

And  sends  him  oft  those  flowers  of  wondrous  hue

That  on  the  heavenly  tree  in  beauty  grew.

Yet  all  these  offerings  brought  from  day  to  day,

This  flattery,  fail  his  ruthless  hand  to  stay.


THE  ADDRESS  TO  BRAHMA,

Earth,  hell,  and  heaven,  beneath  his  rage  must  groan,

Till  force  can  hurl  him  from  his  evil  throne.

Alas  !  where  glowed  the  bright  celestial  bowers.

And  gentle  fair  ones  nursed  the  opening  flowers,

Where  heavenly  trees  a  heavenly  odour  shed.

O'er  a  sad  desert  ruin  reigns  instead.

He  roots  up  Meru's  sacred  peaks,  where  stray

The  fiery  coursers  of  the  God  of  Day,

To  form  bright  slopes,  and  glittering  mounds  of  ease,

In  the  broad  gardens  of  his  palaces.

There,  on  his  couch,  the  mighty  lord  is  fanned

To  sweetest  slumber  by  a  heavenly  band ;

Poor  captive  nymphs,  who  stand  in  anguish  by,

Drop  the  big  tear,  and  heave  the  ceaseless  sigh.

And  now  have  Indra's  elephants  defiled

The  sparkling  stream  where  heavenly  GangI  smiled,

And  her  gold  lotuses  the  fiend  has  taken.

To  deck  his  pools,  and  left  her  all  forsaken.

The  Gods  of  heaven  no  more  delight  to  roam

O'er  all  the  world,  far  from  their  glorious  home.

They  dread  the  demon's  impious  might,  nor  dare

Speed  their  bright  chariots  through  the  fields  of  air.

And  when  our  worshippers  in  duty  bring

The  appointed  victims  for  the  offering.

He  tears  them  from  the  flame  with  magic  art,

While  we  all  powerless  watch  with  drooping  heart.


24  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

He  too  has  stolen  from  his  master's  side

The  steed  of  heavenly  race,  great  Indra's  pride.

No  more  our  hosts,  so  glorious  once,  withstand

The  fierce  dominion  of  the  demon's  hand,

As  herbs  of  healing  virtue  fail  to  tame

The  sickness  raging  through  the  infected  frame.

Idly  the  discus  hangs  on  Vishnu's  neck,

And  our  last  hope  is  vain,  that  it  would  check

The  haughty  TXrak's  might,  and  flash  afar

Euin  and  death — the  thunderbolt  of  war.

E'en  Indra's  elephant  has  felt  the  might

Of  his  fierce  monsters  in  the  deadly  fight,

Which  spurn  the  dust  in  fury,  and  defy

The  threatening  clouds  that  sail  along  the  sky.

Therefore,  0  Lord,  we  seek  a  chief,  that  he

May  lead  the  hosts  of  heaven  to  victory,

Even  as  holy  men  who  long  to  sever

The  immortal  spirit  from  its  shell  for  ever,

Seek  lovely  Virtue's  aid  to  free  the  soul

From  earthly  ties  and  action's  base  control.

Thus  shall  he  save  us :  proudly  will  we  go

Under  his  escort  'gainst  the  furious  foe ;

And  Indra,  conqueror  in  turn,  shall  bring

Fortune,  dear  captive,  home  with  joy  and  triumphing."

Sweet  as  the  rains — the  fresh'ning  rains — that  pour
On  the  parched  earth  when  thunders  cease  to  roar.


THE  ADDRESS  TO  BRAHMA.  2\

Were  Bkahma's  words :  "Gods,  I  have  heard  your  grief;

Wait  ye  in  patience :  time  will  bring  relief.

'Tis  not  for  me,  my  children,  to  create

A  chief  to  save  you  from  your  mournful  fate.

Not  by  my  hand  the  fiend  must  be  destroyed,

For  my  kind  favour  has  he  once  enjoyed ;

And  well  ye  know  that  e'en  a  poisonous  tree

By  him  who  planted  it  unharmed  should  be.

He  sought  it  eagerly,  and  long  ago

I  gave  my  favour  to  your  demon-foe,

And  stayed  his  awful  penance,  that  had  hurled

Flames,  death,  and  ruin  o'er  the  subject  world.

When  that  great  warrior  battles  for  his  life,

0,  who  may  conquer  in  the  deadly  strife,

Save  one  of  Siva's  seed  ? He  is  the  Kght,

Eeigning  supreme  beyond  the  depths  of  night.

Nor  I,  nor  YiSH^u,  his  full  power  may  share,

Lo,  where  he  dwells  in  solitude  and  prayer !

Go,  seek  the  Hermit  in  the  grove  alone,

And  to  the  God  be  Uma's  beauty  shown.

Perchance,  the  Mountain-child,  with  magnet's  force.

May  turn  the  iron  from  its  steadfast  course,

Bride  of  the  mighty  God  ;  for  only  she

Can  bear  to  Him  as  water  bears  to  me.

Then  from  their  love  a  mighty  Child  shall  rise,

And  lead  to  war  the  armies  of  the  skies.


26  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Freed  by  his  hand,  no  more  the  heavenly  maids
Shall  twine  their  glittering  hair  in  mournful  braids."

He  spake,  and  vanished  from  their  wondering  sight ;
And  they  sped  homeward  to  their  world  of  light.
But  Indra,  still  on  Brahma's  words  intent,
To  Kama*s  dwelling-place  his  footsteps  bent.
Swiftly  he  came :  the  yearning  of  his  will
Made  Indra's  lightning  course  more  speedy  still.
The  Love-God,  armed  with  flowers  divinely  sweet.
In  lowly  homage  bowed  before  his  feet.
Around  his  neck,  where  bright  love-tokens  clung,
Arched  like  a  maiden's  brow,  his  bow  was  hung,
And  blooming  Spring,  his  constant  follower,  bore
The  mango  twig,  his  weapon  famed  of  yore.


CANTO THIRD,


Canto  Cf)irti.


THE  DEATH  OF  LOVE,

In  eager  gaze  the  sovereign  of  the  skies
Looked  full  on  Kama  with  his  thousand  eyes  :
E'en  such  a  gaze  as  trembling  suppliants  bend,
When  danger  threatens,  on  a  mighty  friend.

Close  by  his  side,  where  Indra  bade  him  rest,
The  Love-God  sate,  and  thus  his  lord  addressed :
"  All-knowing  Indra,  deign,  my  Prince,  to  tell
Thy  heart's  desire  in  earth,  or  heaven,  or  hell :
Double  the  favour,  mighty  sovereign,  thou
Hast  thought  on  Kama,  0,  command  him  now !
Who  angers  thee  by  toiling  for  the  prize.
By  penance,  prayer,  or  holy  sacrifice  ?
What  mortal  being  dost  thou  count  thy  foe  ?
Speak,  I  will  tame  him  with  my  darts  and  bow.
Has  some  one  feared  the  endless  change  of  birth.
And  sought  the  path  that  leads  the  soul  from  earth  ?
Slave  to  a  glancing  eye  thy  foe  shall  bow.
And  own  the  witchery  of  a  woman's  brow ;


30  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

E'en  though  the  object  of  thine  envious  rage
Were  taught  high  wisdom  by  the  immortal  sage,
With  billowy  passions  will  I  whelm  his  soul,
Like  rushing  waves  that  spurn  the  bank's  control.
Or  has  the  ripe  full  beauty  of  a  spouse,
Too  fondly  faithful  to  her  bridal  vows,
Ravished  thy  spirit  from  thee  ? Thine,  all  thine
Around  thy  neck  her  loving  arms  shall  twine.
Has  thy  love,  jealous  of  another's  charms,
Spurned  thee  in  wrath  when  flying  to  her  arms  ?
I'll  rack  her  yielding  bosom  with  such  pain.
Soon  shall  she  be  all  love  and  warmth  again,
And  wildly  fly  in  fevered  haste  to  rest
Her  aching  heart  close,  close  to  thy  dear  breast.
Lay,  Indra,  lay  thy  threatening  bolt  aside  :
My  gentle  darts  shall  tame  the  haughtiest  pride.
And  all  that  war  with  heaven  and  thee  shall  know
The  magic  influence  of  thy  Kama's  bow ;
For  woman's  curling  lip  shall  bow  them  down,
Fainting  in  terror  at  her  threatening  frown.
Flowers  are  my  arms,  mine  only  warrior  Spring,
Yet  in  thy  favour  am  I  strong,  great  King.
What  can  their  strength  who  draw  the  bow  avail
Against  my  matchless  power  when  I  assail  ?
Strong  is  the  Trident-bearing  God,  yet  he.
The  mighty  Siva,  e'en,  must  yield  to  me."


THE  DEATH  OF  LOVE.  31

Then  Indra  answered  with  a  dawning  smile,
Resting  his  foot  upon  a  stool  the  while :
•"Dear  God  of  Love,  thou  truly  hast  displayed
The  power  unrivalled  of  thy  promised  aid.
My  hope  is  all  in  thee :  my  weapons  are
The  thunderbolt  and  thou,  more  mighty  far.
But  vain,  all  vain  the  bolt  of  heaven  to  fright
Those  holy  Saints  whom  penance  arms  aright.
Thy  power  exceeds  all  bound :  thou,  only  thou.
All-conquering  Deity,  canst  help  me  now !
Full  well  I  know  thy  nature,  and  assign
This  toil  to  thee,  which  needs  a  strength  like  thine  :
As  on  that  snake  alone  will  Krishna  rest.
That  bears  the  earth  upon  his  haughty  crest.
Our  task  is  well-nigh  done :  thy  boasted  dart
Has  power  to  conquer  even  Siva's  heart.
Hear  what  the  Gods,  oppressed  with  woe,  would  fain
From  mighty  Siva  through  thine  aid  obtain.
He  may  beget — and  none  in  heaven  but  he —
A  chief  to  lead  our  hosts  to  victory.
But  all  his  mind  with  holiest  lore  is  fraught,
Bent  on  the  Godhead  is  his  every  thought.
Thy  darts,  0  Love,  alone  can  reach  him  now,
And  lure  his  spirit  from  the  hermit  vow.
Go,  seek  Himalaya's  Mountain-child,  and  aid
With  all  thy  loveliest  charms  the  lovely  maid,


32  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

So  may  she  please  his  fancy :  only  she

May  wed  with  Siva  :  such  the  fixt  decree.

E'en  now  my  bands  of  heavenly  maids  have  spied

Fair  UmA  dwelling  by  the  Hermit's  side.

There  by  her  father's  bidding  rests  she  still,

Sweet  minister,  upon  the  cold  bleak  hill.

Go,  Ki-MA,  go  !  perform  this  great  emprise.

And  free  from  fear  the  Eulers  of  the  Skies  ;

We  need  thy  favour,  as  the  new-sown  grain

Calls  for  the  influence  of  the  gentle  rain.

Go,  KXma,  go  !  thy  flowery  darts  shall  be

Crowned  with  success  o'er  this  great  deity.

Yea,  and  thy  task  is  e'en  already  done.

For  praise  and  glory  are  that  instant  won

When  a  bold  heart  dares  manfully  essay

The  deed  which  others  shrink  from  in  dismay.

Gods  are  thy  suppliants,  KAma,  and  on  thee

Depends  the  triple  world's  security.

No  cruel  deed  will  stain  thy  flo\^  ery  bow :

With  all  thy  gentlest,  mightiest  valour,  go !

And  now.  Disturber  of  the  spirit,  see

Spring,  thy  beloved,  will  thy  comrade  be,

And  gladly  aid  thee  Siva's  heart  to  tame  :

None  bids  the  whispering  Wind,  and  yet  he  fans  the  flame."

He  spake,  and  Kama  bowed  his  bright  head  down.
And  took  his  bidding  like  a  flowery  crown.


THE  DEATH  OF  LOVE.  33

Above  his  wavy  curls  great  Indra  bent,
And  fondly  touched  his  soldier  ere  he  went,
With  that  hard  hand — but,  0,  how  gentle  now  ! —
That  fell  so  heavy  on  his  elephant's  brow.

Then  for  that  snow-crowned  hill  he  turned  away,
Where  all  alone  the  heavenly  Hermit  lay.
His  fearful  Rati  and  his  comrade  Spring
Followed  the  guidance  of  Love's  mighty  king.
There  will  he  battle  in  unwonted  strife,
Return  a  conqueror  or  be  reft  of  life.

How  fair  was  Spring  ! To  fill  the  heart  with
love,
And  lure  the  Hermit  from  his  thoughts  above.
In  that  pure  grove  he  grew  so  heavenly  bright
That  Kama's  envy  wakened  at  the  sight.

Now  the  bright  Day- God  turned  his  burning  ray
To  where  Kuvera  holds  his  royal  sway,
While  the  sad  South  in  whispering  breezes  sighed
And  mourned  his  absence  like  a  tearful  bride.
Then  from  its  stem  the  red  Asoka  threw
Full  buds  and  flowerets  of  celestial  hue,
Nor  waited  for  the  maiden's  touch,  the  sweet
Beloved  pressure  of  her  tinkling  feet.
There  grew  Love's  arrow,  his  dear  mango  spray,
Winged  with  young  leaves  to  speed  its  airy  way,


34  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

And  at  the  call  of  Spring  the  wild  bees  came,
Grouping  the  syllables  of  Ki.MA*s  name.
How  sighed  the  spirit  o'er  that  loveliest  flower
That  boasts  no  fragrance  to  enrich  its  dower  !
For  Nature,  wisest  mother,  oft  prefers
To  part  more  fairly  those  good  gifts  of  hers.
There  from  the  tree  Palasa  blossoms  spread,
CHirved  like  the  crescent  moon,  their  rosiest  red,
With  opening  buds  that  looked  as  if  young  Spring
Had  pressed  his  nails  there  in  his  dallying :
Sweet  wanton  Spring,  to  whose  enchanting  face
His  flowery  Tilaka  gave  fairer  grace  :
Who  loves  to  tint  his  lip,  the  mango  spray.
With  the  fresh  colours  of  the  early  day.
And  powder  its  fine  red  with  many  a  bee
That  sips  the  oozing  nectar  rapturously.
The  cool  gale  speeding  o*er  the  shady  lawns
Shook  down  the  sounding  leaves,  while  startled  fawns
Ean  wildly  at  the  viewless  foe,  all  blind
With  pollen  wafted  by  the  fragrant  wind.
.  Sweet  was  the  Koil's  voice,  his  neck  still  red
With  .mango  buds  on  which  he  late  had  fed  :
'Twas  as  the  voice  of  Love  to  bid  the  dame
Spurn  her  cold  pride,  nor  quench  the  gentle  flame.
What  though  the  heat  has  stained  the  tints  that  dyed
With  marvellous  bloom  the  heavenly  minstrel's  bride  ?


THE  DEA  TH  OF  LO  VE.  3 5

Neither  her  smile  nor  sunny  glances  fail :
Bright  is  her  lip,  although  her  cheek  be  pale.
E'en  the  pure  hermits  owned  the  secret  power
Of  warm  Spking  coming  in  unwonted  hour,
While  Love's  delightful  witchery  gently  stole
With  strong  sweet  influence  o'er  the  saintly  soul.

On  came  the  Archer-God,  and  at  his  side
The  timid  Eati,  his  own  darling  bride.
While  breathing  nature  showed  how  deep  it  felt,
At  passion's  glowing  touch,  the  senses  melt.
For  there  in  eager  love  the  wild  bee  dipp'd
In  the  dark  flower-cup  where  his  partner  sipp'd.
Here  in  the  shade  the  hart  his  horn  declined.
And,  while  joy  closed  her  eyes,  caressed  the  hind.
There  from  her  trunk  the  elephant  had  poured
A  lily-scented  stream  to  cool  her  lord,
While  the  fond  love-bird  by  the  silver  flood
Gave  to  his  mate  the  tasted  lotus  bud.
FuU  in  his  song  the  minstrel  stayed  to  sip
The  heavenlier  nectar  of  his  darling's  lip.
Pure  pearls  of  heat  had  late  distained  the  dye.
But  flowery  wine  was  sparkling  in  her  eye.
How the young creeper's beauty  charmed  the

view.
Fair  as  the  fairest  maid,  as  playful  too  !


36  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Here  some  bright  blossoms,  lovelier  than  the  rest,

In  full  round  beauty  matched  her  swelling  breast.

Here  in  a  thin  bright  line,  some  delicate  spray,

Red  as  her  lip,  ravished  the  soul  away.

And  then  how  loving,  and  how  close  they  clung

To  the  tall  trees  that  fondly  o'er  them  hung !

Bright,  heavenly  wantons  poured  the  witching  strain,

Quiring  for  Siva's  ear,  but  all  in  vain.

No  charmer's  spell  may  check  the  firm  control

Won  by  the  holy  o'er  the  impassioned  soul.

The  Hermit's  servant  hasted  to  the  door :
In  his  left  hand  a  branch  of  gold  he  bore.
He  touched  his  lip  for  silence :  "  Peace  !  be  still !
Nor  mar  the  quiet  of  this  holy  hill."
He  spake  :  no  dweller  of  the  forest  stirred,
No  wild  bee  murmured,  hushed  was  every  bird.
Still  and  unmoved,  as  in  a  picture  stood
All  life  that  breathed  within  the  waving  wood.

As  some  great  monarch  when  he  goes  to  war
Shuns  the  fierce  aspect  of  a  baleful  star,
So  Kama  hid  him  from  the  Hermit's  eye,
And  sought  a  path  that  led  unnoticed  by.
Where  tangled  flowers  and  clustering  trailers  spread
Their  grateful  canopy  o'er  Siva's  head.
Bent  on  his  hardy  enterprise,  with  awe
The  Three-eyed  Lord — great  Penitent — he  saw.


THE  DEATH  OF  LOVE.  37

There  sate  the  God  beneath  a  pine-tree's  shade,

Where  on  a  mound  a  tiger's  skin  was  laid.

Absorbed  in  holiest  thought,  erect  and  still.

The  Hermit  rested  on  the  gentle  hill.

His  shoulders  drooping  down,  each  foot  was  bent

Beneath  the  body  of  the  Penitent.

With  open  palms  the  hands  were  firmly  pressed,

As  though  a  lotus  lay  upon  his  breast.

A  double  rosary  in  each  ear,  behind

With  wreathing  serpents  were  his  locks  entwined.

His  coat  of  hide  shone  blacker  to  the  view

Against  his  neck  of  brightly  beaming  blue.

How  wild  the  look,  how  terrible  the  frown

Of  his  dark  eyebrows  bending  sternly  down !

How  fiercely  glared  his  eyes'  unmoving  blaze

Fixed  in  devotion's  meditating  gaze  !

Calm  as  a  full  cloud  resting  on  a  hill,

A  waveless  lake  when  every  breeze  is  still,

Like  a  torch  burning  in  a  sheltered  spot.

So  still  was  He,  unmoving,  breathing  not.

So  full  the  stream  of  marvellous  glory  poured
From  the  bright  forehead  of  that  mighty  Lord,
Pale  seemed  the  crescent  moon  upon  his  head.
And  slenderer  than  a  slender  lotus  thread.
At  all  the  body's  nine-fold  gates  of  sense
He  had  barred  in  the  pure  Intelligence,


38  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

To  ponder  on  the  Soul  which  sages  call
Eternal  Spirit,  highest,  over  all.

How  sad  was  KAma  at  the  awful  sight,
How  failed  his  courage  in  a  swoon  of  fright !
As  near  and  nearer  to  the  God  he  came
Whom  wildest  thought  could  never  hope  to  tame,
Unconsciously  his  hands,  in  fear  and  woe,
Dropped  the  sweet  arrows  and  his  flowery  bow.

But  UmI  came  with  all  her  maiden  throng.
And  KIma's  fainting  heart  again  was  strong  ;
Bright  flowers  of  spring,  in  every  lovely  hue.
Around  the  lady's  form  rare  beauty  threw.
Some  clasped  her  neck  like  strings  of  purest  pearls.
Some  shot  their  glory  through  her  wavy  curls.
Bending  her  graceful  head  as  half-oppressed
With  swelling  charms  even  too  richly  blest,
Fancy  might  deem  that  beautiful  young  maiden
Some  slender  tree  with  its  sweet  flowers  o'erladen.
From  time  to  time  her  gentle  hand  replaced
The  flowery  girdle  slipping  from  her  waist :
It  seemed  that  Love  could  find  no  place  more  fair,
So  hung  his  newest,  dearest  bowstring  there.
A  greedy  bee  kept  hovering  round  to  sip
The  fragrant  nectar  of  her  blooming  Up.
She  closed  her  eyes  in  terror  of  the  thief.
And  beat  him  from  her  with  a  lotus  leaf.


THE  DEATH  OF  LOVE.  39

The  angry  curl  of  Eati's  lip  confessed
The  shade  of  envy  that  stole  o'er  her  breast.
Through  Kama's  soul  fresh  hope  and  courage  flew,
As  that  sweet  vision  blessed  his  eager  view.
So  bright,  so  fair,  so  winning  soft  was  she,
Who  could  not  conquer  in  such  company .?

Now  Uma  came,  fair  maid,  his  destined  bride,
With  timid  steps  approaching  Siva's  side.
In  contemplation  will  he  brood  no  more.
He  sees  the  Godhead,  and  his  task  is  o'er.
He  breathes,  he  moves,  the  earth  begins  to  rock,
The  Snake,  her  bearer,  trembling  at  the  shock.

Due  homage  then  his  own  dear  servant  paid,
And  told  him  of  the  coming  of  the  maid.
He  learnt  his  Master's  pleasure  by  the  nod,
And  led  Himalaya's  daughter  to  the  God.
Before  his  feet  her  young  companions  spread
Fresh  leaves  and  blossoms  as  they  bowed  the  head.
While  Uma  stooped  so  low,  that  from  her  hair
Dropped  the  bright  flower  that  starred  the  midnight

there.
To  him  whose  ensign  bears  the  bull  she  bent.
Till  each  spray  fell,  her  ear's  rich  ornament.
"  Sweet  maid,"  cried  Siva,  "  surely  thou  shalt  be
Blessed  with  a  husband  who  loves  none  but  thee ! "


40  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE WAR-GOD.

Her  fear  was  banished,  and  her  hope  was  high  :
A  God  had  spoken,  and  Gods  cannot  lie.

Kash  as  some  giddy  moth  that  wooes  the  flame,
Love  seized  the  moment,  and  prepared  to  aim.
Close  by  the  daughter  of  the  Mountain- King,
He  looked  on  Siva,  and  he  eyed  his  string.

While  with  her  radiant  hand  fair  UmX  gave
A  rosary,  of  the  lotuses  that  lave
Their  beauties  in  the  heavenly  Ganga's  wave,
And  the  great  Three-Eyed  God  was  fain  to  take
The  offering  for  the  well-loved  suppliant's  sake,
On  his  bright  bow  Love  placed  the  unerring  dart,
.The  soft  beguiler  of  the  stricken  heart.

Like  the  Moon's  influence  on  the  sea  at  rest.
Came  passion  stealing  o'er  the  Hermit's  breast.
While  on  the  maiden's  lip  that  mocked  the  dye
Of  ripe  red  fruit,  he  bent  his  melting  eye.
And  oh  !  how  showed  the  lady's  love  for  him,
The  heaving  bosom,  and  each  quivering  limb !
Like  young  Kadambas,  when  the  leaf-buds  swell,
At  the  warm  touch  of  Spring  they  love  so  well.
But  still,  with  downcast  eyes,  she  sought  the  ground.
And  durst  not  turn  their  burning  glances  round.

Then  with  strong  effort,  Siva  lulled  to  rest.
The  storm  of  passion  in  his  troubled  breast.


THE  DEATH  OF  LOVE.  41

And  seeks,  with  angry  eyes  that  round  him  roll,
Whence  came  the  tempest  o'er  his  tranquil  soul.
He  looked,  and  saw  the  bold  young  archer  stand,
His  bow  bent  ready  in  his  skilful  hand.
Drawn  towards  the  eye ;  his  shoulder  well  depressed,
And  the  left  foot  thrown  forward  as  a  rest.

Then  was  the  Hermit-God  to  madness  lashed.
Then  from  his  eye  red  flames  of  fury  flashed.
So  changed  the  beauty  of  that  glorious  brow.
Scarce  could  the  gaze  support  its  terror  now..

Hark  !  heavenly  voices  sighing  through  the  air  :
"  Be  calm,  great  Siva,  0  be  calm  and  spare  !  "
Alas  !  that  angry  eye's  resistless  flashes
Have  scorched  the  gentle  King  of  Love  to  ashes  !

But  Eati  saw  not,  for  she  swooned  away  ;
Senseless  and  breathless  on  the  earth  she  lay ;
Sleep  while  thou  mayst,  unconscious  lady,  sleep  !
Soon  wilt  thou  rise  to  sigh  and  wake  to  weep.

E'en  as  the  red  bolt  rives  the  leafy  bough.
So  Siva  smote  the  hinderer  of  his  vow ;
Then  fled  with  all  his  train  to  some  lone  place
Far  from  the  witchery  of  a  female  face.

Sad  was  Himalaya's  daughter :  grief  and  shame
O'er  the  young  spirit  of  the  maiden  came  :


42  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Grief — for  she  loved,  and  all  her  love  was  vain  ;
Shame — she  was  spurned  before  her  youthful  tram.
She  turned  away,  with  fear  and  woe  oppressed,
To  hide  her  sorrow  on  her  father's  breast ;
Then,  in  the  fond  arms  of  her  pitying  sire,
Closed  her  sad  eyes  for  fear  of  Siva's  ire.
Still  in  his  grasp  the  weary  maiden  lay.
While  he  sped  swiftly  on  his  homeward  way.

Thus  have  I  seen  the  elephant  stoop  to  drink,
And  lift  a  lily  from  the  fountain's  brink.
Thus,  when  he  rears  his  mighty  head  on  high,
Across  his  tusks  I've  seen  chat  lily  lie.


CANTO FOURTH,


Canto  jTourtI)*


RA  TI'S LAMENT.

Sad,  solitary,  helpless,  faint,  forlorn.

Woke  Kama's  darling  from  her  swoon  to  mourn.

Too  soon  her  gentle  soul  returned  to  know

The  pangs  of  widowhood^that  word  of  woe.

Scarce  could  she  raise  her,  trembling,  from  the  ground,

Scarce  dared  to  bend  her  anxious  gaze  around,

Unconscious  yet  those  greedy  eyes  should  never

Feed  on  his  beauty  more — gone,  gone  for  ever.

"  Speak  to  me,  Kama  !  why  so  silent  ?  give
One  word  in  answer — doth  my  Kama  live  ?  "
There  on  the  turf  his  dumb  cold  ashes  lay,
Whose  soul  that  fiery  flash  had  scorched  away.
She  clasped  the  dank  earth  in  her  wild  despair,
Her  bosom  stained,  and  rent  her  long  bright  hair.
Till  hill  and  valley  caught  the  mourner's  cry.
And  pitying  breezes  echoed  sigh  for  sigh.


46  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

"  Oh  thou  wast  beautiful :  fond  lovers  sware

Their  own  bright  darlings  were  like  Kama,  fair.

Sure  woman's  heart  is  stony  :  can  it  be

That  I  still  live  while  this  is  all  of  thee  ?

Where  art  thou,  KIma  ? Could  my  dearest  leave

His  own  fond  Eati  here  alone  to  grieve  ?

So  must  the  sad  forsaken  lotus  die

When  her  bright  river  leaves  his  channel  dry.

KIma,  dear  Kama,  call  again  to  mind

How  thou  wast  ever  gentle,  I  was  kind.

Let  not  my  prayer,  thy  Kati's  prayer,  be  vain  ;

Come  as  of  old,  and  bless  these  eyes  again  !

Wilt  thou  not  hear  me  ?  Think  of  those  sweet  hours

When  I  would  bind  thee  with  my  zone  of  flowers,

Those  soft  gay  fetters  o'er  thee  fondly  wreathing,

Thine  only  punishment  when  gently  breathing

In  tones  of  love  thy  heedless  sigh  betrayed

The  name,  dear  traitor !  of  some  rival  maid.

Then  would  I  pluck  a  floweret  from  my  tress

And  beat  thee  till  I  forced  thee  to  confess,

While  in  my  play  the  falling  leaves  would  cover

The  eyes — the  bright  eyes — of  my  captive  lover.

And  then  those  words  that  made  me,  oh,  so  blest —

"  Dear  love,  thy  home  is  in  my  faithful  breast !  "

Alas,  sweet  words,  too  blissful  to  be  true,

Or  how  couldst  thou  have  died,  nor  Eati  perish  too  ?


RATI'S  LAMENT.  47

Yes,  I  will  fly  to  thee,  of  thee  bereft,
And  leave  this  world  which  thou,  my  life,  hast  left.
Cold,  gloomy,  now  this  wretched  world  must  be,
Eor  all  its  pleasures  came  from  only  thee.
When  night  has  veiled  the  city  in  its  shade,
Thou,  only  thou,  canst  soothe  the  wandering  maid,
And  guide  her  trembling  at  the  thunder's  roar
Safe  through  the  darkness  to  her  lover's  door.
In  vain  the  wine-cup,  as  it  circles  by.
Lisps  in  her  tongue  and  sparkles  in  her  eye.
Long  locks  are  streaming,  and  the  cheek  glows  red :
But  all  is  mockery.  Love — dear  Love — is  dead.
The  Moon,  sweet  spirit,  shall  lament  for  thee,
Late,  dim,  and  joyless  shall  his  rising  be.
Days  shall  fly  on,  and  he  forget  to  take
His  full  bright  glory,  mourning  for  thy  sake.
Say,  Kaj^ia,  say,  whose  arrow  now  shall  be
The  soft  green  shoot  of  thy  dear  mango  tree.
The  favourite  spray  which  Koils  love  so  well,
And  praise  in  sweetest  strain  its  wondrous  spell  ?
This  line  of  bees  which  strings  thy  useless  bow
Hums  mournful  echo  to  my  cries  of  woe.
Come  in  thy  lovely  shape  and  teach  again
The  Koil's  mate,  that  knows  the  tender  strain,
Her  gentle  task  to  waft  to  longing  ears
The  lover's  hope,  the  distant  lover's  fears.


48  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE WAR-GOD.

Come,  bring  once  more  that  ecstasy  of  bliss,
The  fond  dear  look,  the  smile,  and  ah !  that  kiss !
Fainting  with  woe,  my  soul  refuses  rest
When  memory  pictures  how  I  have  been  blest.
See,  thou  didst  weave  a  garland,  love,  to  deck
With  all  spring  s  fairest  buds  thy  Eati's  neck.
Sweet  are  those  flowers  as  they  were  culled  to-day,
And  is  my  KIma's  form  more  frail  than  they  ?
His  pleasant  task  my  lover  had  begun.
But  stern  Gods  took  him  ere  the  work  was  done ;
Return,  my  KAma,  at  thy  Eati's  cry.
And  stain  this  foot  which  waits  the  rosy  dye.

Now  will  I  hie  me  to  the  fatal  pile,
And  ere  heaven's  maids  have  hailed  thee  with  a  smile,
Or  on  my  love  their  winning  glances  thrown,
I  will  be  there,  and  claim  thee  for  mine  own.
Yet  though  I  come,  my  lasting  shame  will  be
That  I  have  lived  one  moment  after  thee.
Ah,  how  shall  I  thy  funeral  rites  prepare.
Gone  soul  and  body  to  the  viewless  air  ?
With  thy  dear  Spring  I've  seen  thee  talk  and  smile,
Shaping  an  arrow  for  thy  bow  the  while.
Where  is  he  now,  thy  darling  friend,  the  giver
Of  many  a  bright  sweet  arrow  for  thy  quiver  ?
Is  he  too  sent  upon  death's  dreary  path,
Scorched  by  the  cruel  God's  inexorable  wrath  ? "


R ATI'S  LAMENT.  49  . . '

Stricken  in  spirit  by  her  cries  of  woe,  i

Like  venomed  arrows  from  a  mighty  bow,
A  moment  fled,  and  gentle  Spring  was  there,
To  ask  her  grief,  to  soothe  her  wild  despair.

She  beat  her  breast  more  wildly  than  before,  ,

With  greater  floods  her  weeping  eyes  ran  o'er.  '

When  friends  are  nigh  the  spirit  finds  relief  "  \

In  the  full  gushing  torrent  of  its  grief.  1

"  Turn,  gentle  friend,  thy  weeping  eyes,  and  see
That  dear  companion  who  was  all  to  nie.

His  crumbling  dust  with  which  the  breezes  play,  j

Bearing  it  idly  in  their  course  away,  ;

White  as  the  silver  feathers  of  a  dove,
Is  all  that's  left  me  of  my  murdered  love.  j

Now come, my Kama. Spring, who was so  j

dear,
Longs  to  behold  thee. Oh,  appear,  appear  !  '-\

Fickle  to  women  Love  perchance  may  bend  j

His  ear  to  listen  to  a  faithful  friend.  ;

Kemember,  he  walked  ever  at  thy  side  'I

O'er  bloomy  meadows  in  the  warm  spring-tide, *  '

That  Gods  above,  and  men,  and  fiends  below  I

Should  own  the  empire  of  thy  mighty  bow,
That  ruthless  bow,  which  pierces  to  the  heart,
Strunix  with  a  lotus-thread,  a  flower  its  dart.  i


50  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

As  dies  a  torch  \ylieii  winds  sweep  roughly  by,

So  is  my  light  for  ever  fled,  and  I,

The  lamp  his  cheering  rays  no  more  illume,

Am  wrapt  in  darkness,  misery  and  gloom.

Fate  took  my  love,  and  spared  the  widow's  breath,

Yet  fate  is  guilty  of  a  double  death.

When  the  wild  monster  tramples  on  the  ground

The  tree  some  creeper  garlands  closely  round,

lieft  of  the  guardian  which  it  thought  so  true,

Forlorn  and  withered,  it  must  perish  too.

Then  come,  dear  friend,  the  true  one's  pile  prepare,

And  send  me  quickly  to  my  husband  there.

Call  it  not  vain  :  the  mourning  lotus  dies

When  the  bright  Moon,  her  lover,  quits  the  skies.

When  sinks  the  red  cloud  in  the  purple  west.

Still  clings  his  bride,  the  lightning,  to  his  breast.

All  nature  keeps  the  eternal  high  decree :

Shall  woman  fail  ? I  come,  my  love,  to  thee  !

Now  on  the  pile  my  faint  limbs  will  I  throw.
Clasping  his  ashes,  lovely  even  so, —
As  if  beneath  my  weary  frame  were  spread
Soft  leaves  and  blossoms  for  a  flowery  bed.
And  oh,  dear  comrade  (for  in  happier  hours
Oft  have  I  heaped  a  pleasant  bed  of  flowers
For  thee  and  him  beneath  the  spreading  tree),
Now  quickly  raise  the  pile  for  Love  and  me.


R ATI'S  LAMENT.

Aud  ill  thy  mercy  gentle  breezes  send

To  fan  the  flame  that  wafts  away  thy  friend,

And  shorten  the  sad  moments  that  divide

Impatient  KIma  from  his  Rati's  side ;

Set  water  near  us  in  a  single  urn,

We'll  sip  in  heaven  from  the  same  in  turn ;

And  let  tliine  offering  to  his  spirit  be

Sprays  fresh  and  lovely  from  the  mango  tree,

Culled when the round young buds begin to

swell.
For  Kama  loved  those  fragrant  blossoms  well."

As  Eati  thus  complained  in  faithful  love,
A  heavenly  voice  breathed  round  her  from  above.
Falling  in  pity  like  the  gentle  rain
That  brings  the  dying  herbs  to  life  again :
"  Bride  of  the  flower-armed  God,  thy  lord  shall  be
Not  ever  distant,  ever  deaf  to  thee.
Give  me  thine  ear,  sad  lady,  I  will  tell
Why  perished  Kama,  whom  thou  lovedst  well.
The  Lord  of  Life  in  every  troubled  sense
Too  warmly  felt  his  fair  child's  influence.
He  quenched  the  fire,  but  mighty  vengeance  came
On  Kama,  fanner  of  the  unholy  flame.
When  Siva  by  her  penance  won  has  led
Himalaya's  daughter  to  her  bridal  bed.


51


52  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

His  bliss  to  KAma  shall  the  God  repay,
And  give  again  the  form  he  snatched  away.
Thus  did  the  gracious  God,  at  Justice*  prayer,
The  term  of  Love's  sad  punishment  declare.
The  Gods,  like  clouds,  are  fierce  and  gentle  too,
Now  hurl  the  bolt,  now  drop  sweet  heavenly  dew.
Live,  widowed  lady,  for  thy  lover's  arms
Shall  clasp  again — oh,  fondly  clasp — thy  charms.
In  summer-heat  the  streamlet  dies  away
Beneath  the  fury  of  the  God  of  Day :
Then,  in  due  season,  comes  the  pleasant  rain.
And  all  is  fresh,  and  fair,  and  full  again."

Thus  breathed  the  spirit  from  the  viewless  air,
And  stilled  the  raging  of  her  wild  despair ;
While  Spring  consoled  with  every  soothing  art,
Cheered  by  that  voice  from  heaven,  the  mourner's  heart.
Who  watched  away  the  hours,  so  sad  and  slow,
That  brought  the  limit  of  her  weary  woe.
As  the  pale  moon,  quenched  by  the  conquering  light
Of  garish  day,  longs  for  its  own  dear  night.


CANTO FIFTH.


Canto  JTiftf).


(/MA'S REWARD,

Now  woe  to  Uma,  for  young  Love  is  slain,
Her  Lord  hath  left  her,  and  her  hope  is  vain.
Woe,  woe  to  Uma!  how  the  Mountain-Maid
Cursed  her  bright  beauty  for  its  feeble  aid  !
'Tis  Beauty's  guerdon  which  she  loves  the  best.
To  bless  her  lover,  and  in  turn  be  blest.

Penance  must  aid  her  now — or  how  can  she
Win  the  cold  heart,  of  that  stern  deity  ?
Penance,  long  penance :  for  that  power  alone
Can  make  such  love,  so  high  a  Lord,  her  own.

But,  ah !  how  troubled  was  her  mother's  brow
At  the  sad  tidings  of  the  mourner's  vow !
She  threw  her  arms  around  her  own  dear  maid.
Kissed,  fondly  kissed  her,  sighed,  and  wept,  and  prayed

"  Are  there  no  Gods,  my  child,  to  lov^e  thee  here  ?
Prail  is  thy  body,  yet  thy  vow  severe.


56  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

The  lily,  by  the  wild  bee  scarcely  stirred,
Bends,  breaks,  and  dies  beneath  the  weary  bird."

Fast fell her tears, her prayer was strong, but
still
Tliat  prayer  was  weaker  than  her  daughter's  will.
Who  can  recall  the  torrent's  headlong  force,
Or  the  bold  spirit  in  its  destined  course  ?

She  sent  a  maiden  to  her  sire,  and  prayed
He  for  her  sake  would  grant  some  bosky  shade,
That  she  might  dwell  in  solitude,  and  there
Give  all  her  soul  to  penance  and  to  prayer.
In  gracious  love  the  great  Himalaya  smiled.
And  did  the  bidding  of  his  darling  child.
Then  to  that  hill  which  peacocks  love  she  came.
Known  to  all  ages  by  the  lady's  name.

Still  to  her  purpose  resolutely  true,
Her  string  of  noble  pearls  aside  she  threw.
Which,  slipping  here  and  there,  had  rubbed  away
The  sandal  dust  that  on  her  bosom  lay.
And  clad  her  in  a  hermit  coat  of  bark,
Kough  to  her  gentle  limbs,  and  gloomy  dark,
Pressing  too  tightly,  till  her  swelling  breast
Broke  into  freedom  through  the  unwonted  vest.
Her  matted  hair  was  full  as  lovely  now
As  when  'twas  braided  o'er  her  polished  brow.


UMA 'S  REWA RD.  57

Thus  the  sweet  beauties  of  the  lotus  shine
When  bees  festoon  it  in  a  graceful  line  ;
And,  though  the  tangled  weeds  that  crown  the  rill
Cling  o'er  it  closely,  it  is  lovely  still.
With  zone  of  grass  the  votaress  was  bound,
Which  reddened  the  fair  form  it  girdled  round :
Never  before  the  lady's  waist  had  felt
The  ceaseless  torment  of  so  rough  a  belt.

Alas  !  her  weary  vow  has  caused  to  fade
The  lovely  colours  that  adorned  the  maid.
Pale  is  her  hand,  and  her  long  finger-tips
Steal  no  more  splendour  from  her  paler  lips.
Or,  from  the  ball  which  in  her  play  would  rest,
Made  bright  and  fragrant,  on  her  perfumed  breast.
Eough  with  the  sacred  grass  those  hands  must  be,
And  worn  with  resting  on  her  rosary.
Cold  earth  her  couch,  her  canopy  the  skies,
Pillowed  upon  her  arm  the  lady  lies :
She  who  before  was  wont  to  rest  her  head
In  the  soft  luxury  of  a  sumptuous  bed,
Vext  by  no  troubles  as  she  slumbered  there.
But  sweet  flowers  slipping  from  her  loosened  hair.
The  maid  put  off,  but  only  for  awhile.
Her  passioned  glances  and  her  witching  smile.
She  lent  the  fawn  her  moving,  melting  gaze.
And  the  fond  creeper  all  her  winning  ways.


58  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

The  trees  that  blossomed  on  that  lonely  mount
She  watered  daily  from  the  neighbouring  fount :
If  she  had  been  their  nursing  mother,  she
Could  not  have  tended  them  more  carefully.
Not  e'en  her  boy — her  own  bright  boy — shall  stay
Her  love  for  them :  her  first  dear  children  they.
Her  gentleness  had  made  the  fawns  so  tame,
To  her  kind  hand  for  fresh  sweet  grain  they  came,
And  let  the  maid  before  her  friends  compare
Her  own  with  eyes  that  shone  as  softly  there.

Then  came  the  hermits  of  the  holy  wood
To  see  the  votaress  in  her  solitude  ;
Grey  elders  came ;  though  young  the  maid  might  seem,
Her  perfect  virtue  must  command  esteem.
They  found  her  resting  in  that  lonely  spot,
The  fire  was  kindled,  and  no  rite  forgot.
In  hermit's  mantle  was  she  clad  ;  her  look
Fixt  in  deep  thought  upon  the  Holy  Book.
So  pure  that  grove  :  all  war  was  made  to  cease.
And  savage  monsters  lived  in  love  and  peace.
Pure  was  that  grove  :  each  newly  built  abode
Had  leafy  shrines  where  fires  of  worship  glowed.

P>ut  far  too  mild  her  penance,  UmI  thought.
To  win  from  heaven  the  lordly  meed  she  sought.


UMA'S  REWARD.  59

She  would  not  spare  her  form,  so  fair  and  frail,
If  sterner  penance  could  perchance  prevail.
Oft  had  sweet  pastime  wearied  her,  and  yet
Tain  would  she  match  in  toil  the  anchoret.
Sure  the  soft  lotus  at  her  birth  had  lent
Dear  Uma's  form  its  gentle  element ;
But  gold,  commingled  with  her  being,  gave
That  will  so  strong,  so  beautifully  brave.

Full  in  the  centre  of  four  blazing  piles
Sate  the  fair  lady  of  the  winning  smiles,
While  on  her  head  the  mighty  God  of  Day
Shot  all  the  fury  of  his  summer  ray ;
Yet  her  iixt  gaze  she  turned  upon  the  skies.
And  quenched  his  splendour  with  her  brighter  eyes.
To  that  sweet  face,  though  scorched  by  rays  from  heaven,
Still  was  the  beauty  of  the  lotus  given,
Yet,  worn  by  watching,  round  those  orbs  of  light
A  blackness  gathered  like  the  shades  of  night.
She  cooled  her  dry  lips  in  the  bubbling  stream,
And  lived  on  Amrit  from  the  pale  moon-beam,
Sometimes  in  hunger  culling  from  the  tree
The  rich  ripe  fruit  that  hung  so  temptingly.

Scorched  by  the  fury  of  the  noon-tide  rays.
And  fires  that  round  her  burned  with  ceaseless  .blaze,
Summer  passed  o'er  her  :  rains  of  Autumn  came
And  throughly  drenched  the  lady's  tender  frame.


6o  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

So  steams  the  earth,  when  mighty  torrents  pour
On  thirsty  fields  all  dry  and  parched  before.
The  first  clear  rain-drops  falling  on  her  brow,
Gem  it  one  moment  with  their  light,  and  now
Kissing  her  sweet  lip  find  a  welcome  rest
In  the  deep  valley  of  the  lady's  breast ;
Then  wander  broken  by  the  fall  within
The  mazy  channels  of  her  dimpled  skin.
There  as  she  lay  upon  her  rocky  bed,
No  sumptuous  roof  above  her  gentle  head,
Dark  Night,  her  only  witness,  turned  her  eyes,
Ked  lightnings  flashing  from  the  angry  skies,
And  gazed  upon  her  voluntary  pain,
In  wind,  in  sleet,  in  thunder,  and  in  rain.
Still  lay  the  maiden  on  the  cold  damp  ground.
Though  blasts  of  winter  hurled  their  snows  around,
Still  pitying  in  her  heart  the  mournful  fate
Of  those  poor  birds,  so  fond,  so  desolate, —
Doomed,  hapless  pair,  to  list  each  other's  moan
Through  the  long  hours  of  night,  sad  and  alone.

Chilled  by  the  rain,  the  tender  lotus  sank  :
She  filled  its  place  upon  the  streamlet's  bank.
Sweet  was  her  breath  as  when  that  lovely  flower
Sheds  its  best  odour  in  still  evening's  hour.
Red  as  its  leaves  her  lips  of  coral  hue  :
Red  as  those  quivering  leaves  they  quivered  too.


umA's  reward.  6i

Of  all  stern  penance  it  is  called  the  chief
To  nourish  life  upon  the  fallen  leaf.
But  even  this  the  ascetic  maiden  spurned,
And  for  all  time  a  glorious  title  earned.
Apakna — Lady  of  the  unbroken  fast —
Have  sages  called  her,  saints  who  knew  the  past.
Fair  as  the  lotus  fibres,  soft  as  they,
In  these  stern  vows  she  passed  her  night  and  day.
]N"o  mighty  anchoret  had  e'er  essayed
The  ceaseless  penance  of  this  gentle  maid.

There  came  a  hermit :  reverend  was  he
As  Brahmanhood's  embodied  sanctity.
With  coat  of  skin,  with  staff  and  matted  hair,
His  face  was  radiant,  and  he  spake  her  fair.
Up  rose  the  maid  the  holy  man  to  greet.
Arid  humbly  bowed  before  the  hermit's  feet.
Though  meditation  fill  the  pious  breast.
It  finds  a  welcome  for  a  glorious  guest :

The  sage  received  the  honour  duly  paid.
And  fixed  his  earnest  gaze  upon  the  maid.
While  through  her  frame  unwonted  vigour  ran.
Thus,  in  his  silver  speech,  the  blameless  saint  began :
"  How  can  thy  tender  frame,  sweet  lady,  bear
In  thy  firm  spirit's  task  its  fearful  share  ?
Canst  thou  the  grass  and  fuel  duly  bring,
And  still  unwearied  seek  the  freshening  spring  ?


62  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Say,  do  tlie  creeper's  slender  shoots  expand,
Seeking  each  day  fresh  water  from  thy  hand,
Till  like  thy  lip  each  ruddy  tendril  glows,
That  lip  which,  faded,  still  outreds  the  rose  ?
With  loving  glance  the  timid  fawns  draw  nigh  :
Say  dost  thou  stiU  with  joy  their  wants  supply  ?
For  thee,  0  lotus-eyed,  their  glances  shine,
Mocking  the  brightness  of  each  look  of  thine.
0  Mountain-Lady,  it  is  truly  said
That  heavenly  charms  to  sin  have  never  led.
For  even  penitents  may  learn  of  thee
How  pure,  how  gentle  Beauty's  self  may  be.
Bright  Ganga  falling  with  her  heavenly  waves,
Himalaya's  head  with  sacred  water  laves.
Bearing  the  flowers  the  seven  great  Sages  fling
To  crown  the  forehead  of  the  Mountain-King.
Yet  do  thy  deeds,  0  bright-haired  maiden,  shed
A  richer  glory  round  his  awful  head.
Purest  of  motives,  Duty  leads  thy  heart :
Pleasure  and  gain  therein  may  claim  no  part.
0  noble  maid,  the  wise  have  truly  said
That  friendship  soon  in  gentle  heart  is  bred.
Seven  steps  together  bind  the  lasting  tie :
Then  bend  on  me,  dear  Saint,  a  gracious  eye.
Fain,  lovely  UmA,  would  a  Brahman  learn
What  noble  guerdon  would  thy  penance  earn.


UMA  'S  re  WA  RD.  63

Say,  ^rt  thou  toiling  for  a  second  birth,
Where  dwells  the  great  Creator  ? O'er  the  earth
Eesistless  sway  ? Or  fair  as  Beauty's  Queen,
Peerless,  immortal,  shall  thy  form  be  seen  ?

The  lonely  soul  bowed  down  by  grief  and  pain,
By  penance'  aid  some  gracious  boon  may  gain.
But  what,  0  faultless  one,  can  move  thy  heart
To  dwell  in  solitude  and  prayer  apart  ?
Why  should  the  cloud  of  grief  obscure  thy  brow,
'Mid  all  thy  kindred,  who  so  loved  as  thou  ?
Foes  hast  thou  none  :  for  what  rash  hand  would  dare
From  serpent's  head  the  magic  gem  to  tear  ?
Why  dost  thou  seek  the  hermit's  garb  to  try.
Thy  silken  raiment  and  thy  gems  thrown  by  ?
As  though  the  sun  his  glorious  state  should  leave,
Eayless  to  harbour  'mid  the  shades  of  eve.
Wouldst  thou  win  heaven  by  thy  holy  spells  ?
Already  with  the  Gods  thy  father  dwells.
A  husband,  lady  ? 0  forbear  the  thought,
A  priceless  jewel  seeks  not,  but  is  sought.
Maiden,  thy  deep  sighs  tell  me  it  is  so  ;
Yet,  doubtful  still,  my  spirit  seeks  to  know
Couldst  thou  e'er  love  in  vain  ? What  heart  so  cold
That  hath  not  eagerly  its  worship  told  ?
Ah !  could  the  cruel  loved  one,  thou  fair  maid,
Look  with  cold  glances  on  that  bright  hair's  braid  ?


64  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Thy  locks  are  hanging  loosely  o'er  thy  brow,
Thine  ear  is  shaded  by  no  lotus  now.
See,  where  the  sun  hath  scorched  that  tender  neck
Which  precious  jewels  once  were  proud  to  deck.
Still gleams the line where they were wont to

cling,
As  faintly  shows  the  moon's  o'ershadowed  ring.
Now  sure  thy  loved  one,  vain  in  beauty's  pride.
Dreamed  of  himself  when  wandering  at  thy  side,
Or  he  would  count  him  blest  to  be  the  mark
Of  that  dear  eye,  so  soft,  so  lustrous  dark.
But,  gentle  IJMi.,  let  thy  labour  cease  ;
Turn  to  thy  home,  fair  Saint,  and  rest  in  peace.
By  many  a  year  of  penance  duly  done
Eich  store  of  merit  has  my  labour  won.
Take  then  the  half,  thy  secret  purpose  name ;
Nor  in  stern  hardships  wear  thy  tender  frame."

The  holy  Brahman  ceased  :  but  UmA's  breast
In  silence  heaved,  by  love  and  fear  opprest.
In  mute  appeal  she  turned  her  languid  eye,
Darkened  with  weeping,  not  with  softening  dye.
To  bid  her  maiden's  friendly  tongue  declare
The  cherished  secret  of  her  deep  despair :
"  Hear,  holy  Father,  if  thou  still  wouldst  know.
Why  her  frail  form  endures  this  pain  and  woe.


umA's  reward.  65

As  the  soft  lotus  makes  a  screen  to  stay
The  noontide  fury  of  the  God  of  Day.
Proudly  disdaining  all  the  blest  above,
With  heart  and  soul  she  seeks  for  Siva's  love.
For  him  alone,  the  Trident- wielding  God,
The  thorny  paths  of  penance  hath  she  trod.
But  since  that  mighty  one  hath  Kama  slain,
Vain  every  hope,  and  every  effort  vain.
E'en  as  life  fled,  a  keen  but  flowery  dart
Young  Love,  the  Archer,  aimed  at  Siva's  heart.
The  God  in  anger  hurled  the  shaft  away.
But  deep  in  Uma's  tender  soul  it  lay ;
Alas,  poor  maid !  she  knows  no  comfort  now,
Her  soul's  on  fire,  her  wild  locks  hide  her  brow.
She  quits  her  father's  halls,  and  frenzied  roves
The  icy  mountain  and  the  lonely  groves.
Oft  as  the  maidens  of  the  minstrel  throng
To  hymn  great  Siva's  praises  raised  the  song,
The  lovelorn  lady's  sobs  and  deep-drawn  sighs
Drew  tears  of  pity  from  their  gentle  eyes.
Wakeful  and  fevered  in  the  dreary  night
Scarce  closed  her  eyes,  and  then  in  wild  affright
Eang  through  the  halls  her  very  bitter  cry,
"  God  of  the  azure  neck,  why  dost  thou  fly  ? "
While  their  soft  bands  her  loving  arms  would  cast
Eound  the  dear  vision  fading  all  too  fast.


66  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Her  skilful  hand,  with  true  love-guided  art,
Had  traced  the  image  graven  on  her  heart.
"  Art  thou  all  present  ? Dost  thou  fail  to  see
Poor  UmA's  anguish  and  her  love  for  thee  ?  "
Thus  oft  in  frenzied  grief  her  voice  was  heard,
Chiding  the  portrait  with  reproachful  word.
Long  thus  in  vain  for  Diva's  love  she  strove,
Then  turned  in  sorrow  to  this  holy  grove.
Since  the  sad  maid  hath  sought  these  forest  glades
To  hide  her  grief  amid  the  dreary  shades,
The  fruit  hath  ripened  on  the  spreading  bough ;
But  ah  !  no  fruit  hath  crowned  her  holy  vow.
Her  faithful  friends  alone  must  ever  mourn
To  see  that  beauteous  form  by  penance  worn,
But  oh  !  that  ^rvA  would  some  favour  deign,
As  Indra  pitieth  the  parching  plain  !  "

The  maiden  ceased :  his  secret  joy  dissembling,
The  Brahman  turned  to  UmA  pale  and  trembling :
"  And  is  it  thus,  or  doth  the  maiden  jest  ?
Is  this  the  darling  secret  of  thy  breast  ?  "

Scarce  could  the  maid  her  choking  voice  command.
Or  clasp  her  rosary  with  quivering  hand :
"  0  holy  Sage,  learned  in  the  Vedas'  lore,
'Tis  even  thus. Great  ^iva  I  adore.
Thus  would  my  steadfast  heart  his  love  obtain.
For  this  I  gladly  bear  the  toil  and  pain.


UMA'S  reward.  6y

Surely  the  strong  desire,  the  earnest  will,
May  win  some  favour  from  his  mercy  still."

"  Lady,"  cried  he,  "  that  mighty  Lord  I  know  ;
Ever  his  presence  bringeth  care  and  woe.
And  wouldst  thou  stiU  a  second  time  prepare
The  sorrows  of  his  fearful  life  to  share  ?
Deluded  maid,  how  shall  thy  tender  hand,
Decked  with  the  nuptial  bracelet's  jewelled  band,
Be  clasped  in  his,  when  fearful  serpents  twine
In  scaly  horror  round  that  arm  divine  ?
How  shall  thy  robe,  with  gay  flamingoes  gleaming,
Suit  with  his  coat  of  hide  with  blood-drops  streaming  ?
Of  old  thy  pathway  led  where  flowerets  sweet
Made  pleasant  carpets  for  thy  gentle  feet.
And  e'en  thy  foes  would  turn  in  grief  away
To  see  these  vermeil-tinted  limbs  essay,
Where  scattered  tresses  strew  the  mournful  place,
Their  gloomy  path  amid  the  tombs  to  trace.
On  Siva's  heart  the  funeral  ashes  rest.
Say,  gentle  lady,  shall  they  stain  thy  breast,
"Where  the  rich  tribute  of  the  Sandal  trees
Sheds  a  pure  odour  on  the  amorous  breeze  ?
A  royal  bride  returning  in  thy  state.
The  king  of  elephants  should  bear  thy  weight.
How  wilt  thou  brook  the  mockery  and  the  scorn
When  thou  on  Siva's  bull  art  meanly  borne  ?


68  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Sad  that  the  crescent  moon  his  crest  should  be :
And  shall  that  mournful  fate  be  shared  by  thee  ?
His  crest,  the  glory  of  the  evening  skies,
His  bride,  the  moonlight  of  our  wondering  eyes  !
Deformed  is  he,  his  ancestry  unknown  ;
By  vilest  garb  his  poverty  is  shown.
O  fawn-eyed  lady,  how  should  Siva  gain
That  heart  for  which  the  glorious  strive  in  vain
No  charms  hath  he  to  win  a  maiden's  eye :
Cease  from  thy  penance,  hush  the  fruitless  sigh  !
Unmeet  is  he  thy  faithful  heart  to  share.
Child  of  the  Mountain,  maid  of  beauty  rare  !
Not  'mid  the  gloomy  tombs  do  sages  raise
The  holy  altar  of  their  prayer  and  praise."

Impatient  Uma  listened :  the  quick  blood
Eushed  to  her  temples  in  an  angry  flood.
Her  quivering  lip,  her  darkly-flashing  eye
Told  that  the  tempest  of  her  wrath  was  nigh.
Proudly she spoke  : "  How couldst thou tell

aright
Of  one  like  Siva,  perfect,  infinite  ?
Tis  ever  thus,  the  mighty  and  the  just
Are  scorned  by  souls  that  grovel  in  the  dust.
Their  lofty  goodness  and  their  motives  wise
Shine  all  in  vain  before  such  blinded  eyes.


umA's  reward.

Say  who  is  greater,  he  who  strives  for  power,
Or  he  who  succours  in  misfortune's  hour  ?
Eefuge  of  worlds,  0  how  should  Siva  deign
To  look  on  men  enslaved  to  paltry  gain  ?
The  spring  of  wealth  himself,  he  careth  naught
For  the  vile  treasures  that  mankind  have  sought.
His  dwelling-place  amid  the  tombs  may  be,
Yet  Monarch  of  the  three  great  worlds  is  he.
What  though  no  love  his  outward  form  may  claim,
The  stout  heart  trembles  at  his  awful  name.
Who  can  declare  the  wonders  of  his  might  ?
The  Trident- wielding  God,  who  knows  aright  ?
Whether  around  him  deadly  serpents  twine.
Or  if  his  jewelled  wreaths  more  brightly  shine  ;
Whether  in  rough  and  wrinkled  hide  arrayed.
Or  silken  robe,  in  glittering  folds  displayed  ;
If  on  his  brow  the  crescent  moon  he  bear,
Or  if  a  shrunken  skull  be  withering  there ;
The  funeral  ashes  touched  by  him  acquire
The  glowing  lustre  of  eternal  fire ;
Falling  in  golden  showers,  the  heavenly  maids
Delight  to  pour  them  on  their  shining  braids.
What  though  no  treasures  fill  his  storehouse  full,
What  though  he  ride  upon  his  horned  bull,
Not  e'en  may  Indra  in  his  pride  withhold
The  lowly  homage  that  is  his  of  old,


70  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

But  turns  liis  raging  elephant  to  meet

His  mighty  Lord,  and  bows  before  his  feet,

Right  proud  to  colour  them  rich  rosy  red

With  the  bright  flowers  that  deck  his  prostrate  head.

Thy  slanderous  tongue  proclaims  thy  evil  mind,

Yet  in  thy  speech  one  word  of  truth  we  find.

Unknown  thou  call'st  him  :  how  should  mortal  man

Count  when  the  days  of  Brahma's  Lord  began  ?

But  cease  these  idle  words  :  though  all  be  true,

His  failings  many  and  his  virtues  few,

Still  clings  my  heart  to  him,  its  chosen  lord.

Nor  fails  nor  falters  at  thy  treacherous  word.

Dear  maiden,  bid  yon  eager  boy  depart :

Why  should  the  slanderous  tale  defile  his  heart  ?

Most  guilty  who  the  faithless  speech  begins,

But  he  who  stays  to  listen  also  sins."

She  turned  away  :  with  wrath  her  bosom  swelling,
Its  vest  of  bark  in  angry  pride  repelling :
But  sudden,  lo,  before  her  wondering  eyes
In  altered  form  she  sees  the  sage  arise ;
'Tis  ^iVA*s  self  before  the  astonished  maid.
In  all  his  gentlest  majesty  displayed.
She  saw,  she  trembled,  like  a  river's  course,
Checked  for  a  moment  in  its  onward  force.
By  some  huge  rock  amid  the  torrent  hurled
Where  erst  the  foaming  waters  madly  curled.


umA's  reward.

One  foot  uplifted,  shall  she  turn  away  ?
Unmoved  the  other,  shall  the  maiden  stay  ?
The  silver  moon  on  Siva's  forehead  shone,
While  softly  spake  the  God  in  gracious  tone
"  O  gentle  maiden,  wise  and  true  of  soul,
Lo,  now  I  bend  beneath  thy  sweet  control.
Won  by  thy  penance,  and  thy  holy  vows.
Thy  willing  slave  Siva  before  thee  bows."


71


He  spake,  and  rushing  through  her  languid  frame,
At  his  dear  words  returning  vigour  came.
She  knew  but  this,  that  all  her  cares  were  o'er.
Her  sorrows  ended,  she  should  weep  no  more  !


CANTO SIXTH.


\


Canto  ©irtl),


UMA'S  ESPOUSALS.

NoAV  gentle  Uma  bade  a  damsel  bear

To  Siva,  Soul  of  All,  her  maiden  prayer :

"  Wait  the  high  sanction  of  Himalaya's  will,

And  ask  his  daughter  from  the  royal  hill."

Then  ere  the  God,  her  own  dear  Lord,  replied,

In  blushing  loveliness  she  sought  his  side.

Thus  the  young  mango  hails  the  approaching  spring

By  its  own  tuneful  bird's  sweet  welcoming.

In  Uma's  ear  he  softly  whispered,  yea,
Then  scarce  could  tear  him  from  her  arms  away.
Swift  with  a  thought  he  summoned  from  above
The  Seven  bright  Saints  to  bear  his  tale  of  love.
They  came,  and  She,  the  Heavenly  Dame,  was  there,
Lighting  with  glories  all  the  radiant  air ;
Just  freshly  bathed  in  sacred  Ganga's  tide.
Gemmed  with  the  dancing  flowers  that  deck  her  side,


76  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD,

And  richly  scented  with  the  nectarous  rill
That  heavenly  elephants  from  their  brows  distil.
Fair  strings  of  pearl  their  radiant  fingers  hold,
Clothed  are  their  limbs  in  hermit-coats  of  gold  ;
Their  rosaries,  large  gems  of  countless  price.
Shone  like  the  fruit  that  glows  in  Paradise,
As  though  the  glorious  trees  that  blossom  there
Had  sought  the  forest  for  a  life  of  prayer.
With  all  his  thousand  beams  the  God  of  Day,
Urging  his  coursers  down  the  sloping  way,
His  banner  furled  at  the  approach  of  night,
Looks  up  in  reverence  on  those  lords  of  light.
Ancient  creators :  thus  the  wise,  who  know.
Gave  them  a  name  in  ages  long  ago :
With  Brahma  joining  in  creation's  plan,
And  perfecting  the  work  His  will  began  ;
Still  firm  in  penance,  though  the  hermit- vow
Bears  a  ripe  harvest  for  the  sages  now.
Brightest  in  glory  'mid  that  glorious  band
See  the  fair  Queen,  the  Heavenly  Lady,  stand.
Fixing  her  loving  eyes  upon  her  spouse,
She  seemed  sent  forth  to  crown  the  sage's  vows
With  sweet  immortal  joy,  the  dearest  prize
Strong  prayer  could  merit  from  the  envious  skies.
With  equal  honour  on  the  Queen  and  all
Did  the  kind  "lance  of  Siva's  welcome  fall.


UMA'S  espousals.  77

No  partial  favour  by  the  good  is  shown :
They  count  not  station,  but  the  deed  alone.
So  fair  she  shone  upon  his  raptured  view,
He  longed  for  wedlock's  heavenly  pleasures  too.
What  hath  such  power  to  lead  the  soul  above
By  virtue's  pleasant  path  as  wedded  love !
Scarce  had  the  holy  motive  lent  its  aid
To  knit  great  Siva  to  the  Mountain-Maid,
When  Kama's  spirit  that  had  swooned  in  fear
Breathed  once  again  and  deemed  forgiveness  near.

The  ancient  Sages  reverently  adored
The  world's  great  Father  and  its  Sovran  Lord,
And  while  a  soft  ecstatic  thrilling  ran
O'er  their  celestial  frames,  they  thus  began  :

"  Glorious  the  fruit  our  holy  studies  bear,
Our  constant  penance,  sacrifice  and  prayer.
For  that  high  place  within  thy  thoughts  we  gain
Which  fancy  strives  to  reach,  but  longs  in  vain.
How  blest  is  he,  the  glory  of  the  wise,
Deep  in  whose  thoughtful  breast  thy  Godhead  lies !
But  who  may  tell  his  joy  who  rests  enshrined,
0  BrahmI's  great  Creator,  in  thy  mind  !
We  dwell  on  high  above  the  cold  moon's  ray ;
Beneath  our  mansion  glows  the  God  of  Day,
But  now  thy  favour  lends  us  brighter  beams,
Blest  with  thy  love  our  star  unchanging  gleams.


78  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

How  should  we  tell  what  soul-entrancing  bliss
Enthrals  our  spirit  at  an  hour  like  this  ?
Great  Lord  of  All,  thou  Soul  of  Life  indwelling,
We  crave  one  word  thy  wondrous  nature  telling.
Though  to  our  eyes  thy  outward  form  be  shown,
How  can  we  know  thee  as  thou  shouldst  be  known  ?
In  this  thy  present  shape,  we  pray  thee,  say
Dost  thou  create  ?  dost  thou  preserve  or  slay  ?
But  speak  thy  wish ;  called  from  our  starry  rest
We  wait,  0  Siva,  for  our  Lord's  behest."

Then  answered  thus  the  Lord  of  glory,  while
Flashed  from  his  dazzling  teeth  so  white  a  smile,
The  moon  that  crowned  him  poured  a  larger  stream
Of  living  splendour  from  that  pearly  gleam  :

"  Ye  know,  great  Sages  of  a  race  divine,
No  selfish  want  e'er  prompts  a  deed  of  mine.
Do  not  the  forms — eight  varied  forms — I  wear,
The  truth  of  this  to  all  the  world  declare  ?
Now,  as  that  thirsty  bird  that  drinks  the  rain
Prays the kind clouds of heaven to soothe its

pain.
So  the  Gods  pray  me,  trembling  'neath  their  foe,
To  send  a  child  of  mine  and  end  their  woe.
I  seek  the  Mountain-Maiden  as  my  bride:
Our  hero  son  shall  tame  the  demon's  pride.


UMA'S  espousals.  79

Thus  the  priest  bids  the  holy  fire  arise,
Struck  from  the  wood  to  aid  the  sacrifice.
Go,  ask  Himalaya  for  the  lovely  maid :
Blest  are  those  bridals  which  the  holy  aid.
So  shall  more  glorious  honours  gild  my  name,
And  win  the  father  yet  a  prouder  fame.
Nor,  0  ye  heavenly  Sages,  need  I  teach
What  for  the  maiden's  hand  shall  be  your  speech,
For  still  the  wise  in  worthiest  honour  hold
The  rules  and  precepts  ye  ordained  of  old.
This  Lady  too  shall  aid  your  mission  there  :
Best  for  such  task  a  skilful  matron's  care.
And  now,  my  heralds,  to  your  task  away.
Where  proud  Himalaya  holds  his  royal  sway ;
Then  meet  me  where  this  mighty  torrent  raves
Down  the  steep  channel  with  its  headlong  waves."

Thus  while  that  holiest  One  his  love  confessed,
The  hermits  listened :  from  each  saintly  breast
Fled  the  false  shame  that  yet  had  lingered  there.
And  love  and  wedlock  showed  divinely  fair.

On  through  the  heaven,  o'er  tracts  of  swordlike  blue,
Towards  the  gay  city,  swift  as  thought,  they  flew.
Bright  with  high  domes  and  palaces  most  fair,
\  As  if  proud  Alaka  were  planted  there.


I


8o  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Or  Paradise  poured  forth,  in  showers  that  bless,

The  rich  overflowings  of  its  loveliness.

Round  lofty  towers  adorned  with  gems  and  gold

Her  guardian  stream  the  holy  Ganga  rolled.

On  every  side,  the  rampart's  glowing  crown,

Bright  wreaths  of  fragrant  flowers  hung  waving  down, —

Flowers  that  might  tempt  the  maids  of  heavenly  birth

To  linger  fondly  o'er  that  pride  of  earth.

Its  noble  elephants,  unmoved  by  fear,

The  distant  roaring  of  the  lions  hear.

In  beauty  peerless,  and  unmatched  in  speed.

Its  thousand  coursers  of  celestial  breed.

Through  the  broad  streets  bright  sylphs  and  minstrels  rove :

Its  dames  are  Goddesses  of  stream  and  grove.

Hark  !  the  drum  echoes  louder  and  more  loud
From  glittering  halls  whose  spires  are  wrapt  in  cloud.
It  were  the  thunder,  but  that  voice  of  fear
Falls  not  in  measured  time  upon  the  ear.
Tis  balmy  cool,  for  many  a  hea-^'-enly  tree.
With  quivering  leaves  and  branches  waving  free.
Sheds  a  delightful  freshness  through  the  air, —
Fans  which  no  toil  of  man  has  stationed  there.
The  crystal  chambers  where  they  feast  at  night
Flash  back  the  beamings  of  the  starry  light.
So  brightly  pure  that  silver  gleam  is  shed,
Playing  so  fondly  round  each  beauteous  head,


y


UMA  'S  ESPO  USA  LS.  8 1

That  all  seem  gifted  from  those  lights  above

With  richest  tokens  of  superior  love.

How  blest  its  maidens  !  cloudless  is  their  day,

And  radiant  herbs  illume  their  nightly  way.

No  term  of  days,  but  endless  youth  they  know ;

No  Death  save  him  who  bears  the  Flowery  Bow  :

Their  direst  swoon,  their  only  frenzy  this —

The  trance  of  love,  the  ecstasy  of  bliss  !

Ne'er  can  their  lovers  for  one  hour  withstand

The  frown,  the  quivering  lip,  the  scornful  hand ;

But  seek  forgiveness  of  the  angry  fair,

And  woo  her  smile  with  many  an  earnest  prayer.

Around,  wide  gardens  spread  their  pleasant  bowers.

Where the bright Champac opes her fragrant

flowers :
Dear  shades,  beloved  by  the  sylphs  that  roam
In  dewy  evening  from  their  mountain  home.

Ah  !  why  should  mortals  fondly  strive  to  gain
Heaven  and  its  joys  by  ceaseless  toil  and  pain  ?
E'en  the  Saints  envied  as  their  steps  drew  near.
And  owned  a  brighter  heaven  was  opened  here.
They  lighted  down  ;  braided  was  each  long  tress,
Bright  as  the  pictured  flame,  as  motionless.
Himalaya's  palace-warders  in  amaze
On  the  Seven  Sages  turned  their  eager  gaze, —


82  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

A  noble  company  of  celestial  race
Where  each  in  order  of  his  years  had  place, —
Glorious,  as  when  the  sun,  his  head  inclining.
Sees  his  own  image  'mid  the  waters  shining.
To  greet  them  with  a  gift  Himalaya  sped.
Earth  to  her  centre  shaking  at  his  tread.
By  his  dark  lips  with  mountain  metals  dyed,
His  arms  like  pines  that  clothe  his  lofty  side :
By  his  proud  stature,  by  his  stony  breast.
Lord  of  the  Snowy  Hills  he  stood  confest.
On  to  his  Council- hall  he  led  the  way,
Nor  failed  due  honour  to  the  Saints  to  pay.
On  couch  of  reed  the  Monarch  bade  them  rest.
And thus with uplift hands those Heavenly Lords

addressed :
"  Like  soft  rain  falling  from  a  cloudless  sky,
Or  fruit,  when  bloom  has  failed  to  glad  the  eye,
So  are  ye  welcome,  Sages ;  thus  I  feel
Ecstatic  thrilling  o'er  my  spirit  steal.
Changed,  like  dull  senseless  iron  to  burning  gold,
Or  some  rapt  creature,  when  the  heavens  unfold
To  eyes  yet  dim  with  tears  of  earthly  care.
The  rest,  the  pleasures,  and  the  glory  there.
Long  pilgrim  bands  from  this  auspicious  day
To  my  pure  hill  shall  bend  their  constant  way.
Famed  shall  it  be  o'er  all  the  lands  around.
For  where  the  good  have  been  is  holy  ground.


UMA'S  ESPOUSALS.  83

Now  am  I  doubly  pure,  for  Ganga's  tide
Falls  on  my  head  from  heaven  and  laves  my  side.
Henceforth  I  boast  a  second  stream  as  sweet,
The  water.  Sages,  that  has  touched  your  feet.
Twice  by  your  favour  is  Himalaya  blest, —
This  towery  mountain  that  your  feet  have  prest,
And  this  my  moving  form  is  happier  still
To  wait  your  bidding,  to  perform  your  will.
These  mighty  limbs  that  fill  the  heaven's  expanse
Sink  down,  o'erpowered,  in  a  blissful  trance.
So  bright  your  presence,  at  the  glorious  sight
My  brooding  shades  of  darkness  turn  to  light.
The  gloom  that  haunts  my  mountain  caverns  flies,
And  cloudy  passion  in  the  spirit  dies.
O  say,  if  here  your  arrowy  course  ye  sped
To  throw  fresh  glory  round  my  towering  head.
Surely  your  wish,  ye  Mighty  Ones,  can  crave
No  aid,  no  service  from  your  willing  slave.
Yet  deem  me  worthy  of  some  high  behest :
The  lord  commandeth,  and  the  slave  is  blest.
Declare  your  pleasure,  then,  bright  heavenly  band :
We  crave  no  guerdon  but  your  sole  command.
Yours  are  we  all,  Himalaya  and  his  bride.
And  this  dear  maiden  child  our  hope  and  pride."

Not  once  he  spake :  his  cavern  mouths  around
In  hollow  echoinfTS  erave  again  the  sound.


84  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Of  all  who  speak  beyond  compare  the  best,
Angiras  answered  at  the  Saints'  request :

"  This  power  hast  thou,  great  King,  and  mightier  far,
Thy  mind  is  lofty  as  thy  summits  are.
Sages  say  truly,  Vishnu  is  thy  name  :
His  spirit  breatheth  in  thy  mountain  frame!
Within  the  caverns  of  thy  boundless  breast
All  things  that  move  and  all  that  move  not  rest.
How  on  his  head  so  soft,  so  delicate.
Could  the  great  Snake  uphold  the  huge  earth's  weight,
Did  not  thy  roots,  far-reaching  down  to  hell,
Bear  up  the  burden  and  assist  him  well  ?
Thy  streams  of  praise,  thy  pure  rills'  ceaseless  flow
Make  glad  the  nations  wheresoe'er  they  go.
Till,  shedding  purity  on  every  side,
They  sink  at  length  in  boundless  Ocean's  tide.
Blest  is  fair  GangA,  for  her  heavenly  stream
Flows  from  the  feet  of  him  that  sits  supreme ;
And  blest  once  more,  0  mighty  Hill,  is  she
That  her  bright  waters  spring  anew  from  thee.
Vast  grew  his  body  when  the  avenging  God
In  three  huge  strides  o'er  all  creation  trod.
Above,  below,  his  form  increased,  but  thou
Wast  ever  glorious  and  as  vast  as  now.
By  thee  is  famed  Sumeru  forced  to  hide
His  flashing  rays  and  pinnacles  of  pride,


umA  'S  ESPO USALS.  85

For  thou  hast  won  thy  station  in  the  skies

*Mid  the  great  Gods  who  claim  the  sacrifice.

Firm  and  unmoved  remains  thy  lofty  hill,

Yet  thou  canst  bow  before  the  holy  still.

Now — for  the  glorious  work  will  fall  on  thee, —

Hear  thou  the  cause  of  this  our  embassy.

We  also.  Mountain  Monarch,  since  we  bear

To  thee  the  message,  in  the  labour  share.

The  Highest,  Mightiest,  Noblest  One,  adored

By  the  proud  title  of  our  Sovran  Lord :

The  crescent  moon  upon  his  brow  bears  he.

And  wields  the  wondrous  powers  of  Deity.

He  in  this  earth  and  varied  forms  displayed,

Bound  each  to  other  by  exchange  of  aid,

Guides  the  great  world  and  all  the  things  that  are.

As  flying  coursers  whirl  the  glittering  car.

Him  good  men  seek  with  holy  thought  and  prayer.

Who  fiUs  their  breast  and  makes  his  dwelling  there.

When  saints,  we  read,  his  lofty  sphere  attain,

They  ne'er  may  fall  to  this  base  earth  again  :

His  messengers,  great  King,  we  crave  the  hand

Of  thy  fair  daughter-  at  the  God's  command.

At  such  blest  union,  as  of  Truth  and  Voice,

A  father's  heart  should  grieve  not,  but  rejoice.

Her  Lord  is  Father  of  the  world,  and  she

Of  all  that  liveth  shall  the  mother  be.


86  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Gods  that  adore  him  with  the  Neck  of  Blue

In  homage  bent  shall  hail  the  Lady  too,

And  give  a  glory  to  her  feet  with  gems

That  sparkle  in  their  priceless  diadems.

Hear  what  a  roll  shall  blazon  forth  thy  line, —

]\faid,  Father,  Suitor,  Messengers  divine !

Give  him  the  chosen  lady,  and  aspire

To  call  thy  son  the  Universe's  Sire,

Who  laudeth  none,  but  all  mankind  shall  raise

To  Him  through  endless  time  the  songs  of  praise."

Thus  while  he  spake  the  lady  bent  her  head
To  hide  her  cheek,  now  blushing  rosy  red,
And  numbered  o'er  with  seeming  care  the  while
Her  lotus'  petals  in  sweet  maiden  guile.
With  pride  and  joy  Himalaya's  heart  beat  high.
Yet  ere  he  spake  he  looked  to  MenA's  eye  :
Full  well  he  knew  a  mother's  gentle  care
Learns her child's  heart  and  love's deep  secret

there,
And  this  the  hour,  he  felt,  when  fathers  seek
Her  eye  for  answer  or  her  changing  cheek.
His  eager  look  Himalaya  scarce  had  bent
When  Mena's  eye  beamed  back  her  glad  assent.
O  gentle  wives  !  your  fondest  wish  is  still
To  have  with  him  you  love  one  heart,  one  will.


UMA  'S  ESPO  USALS.  87

He  threw  his  arms  around  the  blushing  maid
In  queenly  garment  and  in  gems  arrayed,
Awhile  was  silent,  then  in  rapture  cried,
"  Come,  0  my  daughter  !  Come,  thou  destined  bride
Of  Siva,  Lord  of  All :  this  glorious  band
Of  Saints  have  sought  thee  at  the  God's  command ;
And  I  thy  sire  this  happy  day  obtain
The  best  reward  a  father's  wish  would  gain."

Then  to  the  Saints  he  cried  :  "  Pure  Hermits,  see
The  spouse  of  Siva  greets  your  company."
They  looked  in  rapture  on  the  maid,  and  poured
Their  fullest  blessing  on  her  heavenly  lord.
So  low  she  bowed,  the  gems  that  decked  her  hair
And  sparkled  in  her  ear  fell  loosened  there ;
Then  with  sweet  modesty  and  joy  opprest
She  hid  her  blushes  on  the  Lady's  breast,
Who  cheered  the  mother  weeping  for  her  child.
Her  own  dear  Uma,  till  again  she  smiled  :
Such  bliss  and  glory  should  be  hers  above.
Yea,  mighty  Siva's  undivided  love.

They  named  the  fourth  for  Uma's  nuptial  day ;
Then  sped  the  Sages  on  their  homeward  way ;
And  thanked  by  Siva  with  a  gracious  eye
Sought  their  bright  rest  amid  the  stars  on  high.


88  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Through  all  those  weary  days  the  lover  sighed
To  wind  his  fond  arms  round  his  gentle  bride.
Oh,  if  the  Lord  of  Heaven  could  find  no  rest,
Tliink,  think  how  Love,  strong  Love,  can  tear  a  mortal's
breast !


CANTO SEVENTH,


Canto  ©etientl)*


UMA'S BRIDAL.

In  light  and  glory  dawned  the  expected  day
Blest  with  a  kindly  star's  auspicious  ray,
When  gaily  gathered  at  Himalaya's  call
His  kinsmen  to  the  solemn  festival.
Through  the  broad  city  every  dame's  awake
To  grace  the  bridal  for  her  monarch's  sake  ;
So  great  their  love  for  him,  this  single  care
Makes  one  vast  household  of  the  thousands  there.
Heaven  is  not  brighter  than  the  royal  street
Where  flowers  lie  scattered  'neath  the  nobles'  feet,
And  banners  waving  to  the  breeze  unfold
Their  silken  broidery  over  gates  of  gold.
And  she,  their  child,  upon  her  bridal  day
Bears  her  dear  parents'  every  thought  away-
So,  when  from  distant  shores  a  friend  returns,
With  deeper  love  each  inmost  spirit  burns.


92  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

So,  when  grim  Death  restores  his  prey  again
Joy  brighter  shines  from  memory  of  pain.
Each  noble  matron  of  HimXlaya's  race
Folds  his  dear  Uma  in  a  long  embrace,
Pours  blessings  on  her  head,  and  prays  her  take
Some  priceless  jewel  for  her  friendship's  sake.
With  sweetest  influence  a  star  of  power
Had  joined  the  spotted  moon  :  at  that  blest  hour
To  deck  fair  TJMi.  many  a  noble  dame
And  many  a  gentle  maid  assiduous  came.
And  well  she  graced  their  toil,  more  brightly  fair
With  feathery  grass  and  wild  flowers  in  her  hair.
A  silken  robe  flowed  free  below  her  waist ;
Her  sumptuous  head  a  glittering  arrow  graced.
So  shines  the  young  unclouded  moon  at  last,
Greeting  the  sun,  its  darksome  season  past.
Sweet-scented  Lodhra  dust  and  Sandal  dyed
The  delicate  beauties  of  the  fair  young  bride.
Veiled  with  a  soft  light  robe. Her  tiring-girls
Then  led  her  to  a  chamber  decked  with  pearls
And  paved  with  sapphires,  where  the  lulling  sound
Of  choicest  music  breathed  divinely  round.
There  o'er  the  lady's  limbs  they  poured  by  turns
Streams  of  pure  water  from  their  golden  urns.
Fresh  from  the  cooling  bath  the  lovely  maid
In  fairest  white  her  tender  form  arrayed.


UMA'S  bridal.  93

So  opes  the  Kasa  all  her  shining  flowers
Lured  from  their  buds  by  softly  falling  showers.
Then  to  a  court  with  canopies  overhead
A  crowd  of  noble  dames  the  maiden  led —
A  court  for  solemn  rites,  where  gems  and  gold
Adorn  the  pillars  that  the  roof  uphold.
There  on  a  couch  they  set  her  with  her  face
Turned  toward  the  east. So  lovely  then  the  grace
Of  that  dear  maid,  so  ravishing  her  smile,
E'en  her  attendants  turned  to  gaze  awhile  ;
For  though  the  brightest  gems  around  her  lay,
Her  brighter  beauty  stole  their  eyes  away.
Through  her  long  tresses  one  a  chaplet  wound.
And  one  with  fragrant  grass  her  temples  crowned,
While  o'er  her  head  sweet  clouds  of  incense  rolled
To  try  and  perfume  every  shining  fold.
Bright  dyes  of  saffron  and  the  scented  wood
Adorned  her  beauty,  till  the  maiden  stood
Fairer  than  Ganga  when  the  Love-birds  play
O'er  sandy  islets  in  her  silvery  bay.
To  what  rare  beauty  shall  her  maids  compare
Her  clear  brow  shaded  by  her  glossy  hair  ?
Less  dazzling  pure  the  lovely  lotus  shines
Flecked  by  the  thronging  bees  in  dusky  lines.
Less  bright  the  moon,  when  a  dark  band  of  cloud
Enhances  beauties  which  it  cannot  shroud.


94  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Behind  her  ear  a  head  of  barley  drew

The  eye  to  gaze  upon  its  golden  hue.

But  then  her  cheek,  with  glowing  saffron  dyed,

To  richer  beauty  called  the  glance  aside.

Though  from  those  lips,  where  Beauty's  guerdon

lay,
The  vermeil  tints  were  newly  washed  away.
Yet  o'er  them,  as  she  smiled,  a  ray  was  thrown
Of  quivering  brightness  that  was  all  their  own.

"  Lay  this  dear  foot  upon  thy  lover's  head
Crowned  with  the  moon,"  the  laughing  maiden  said,
Who  dyed  her  lady's  feet — no  word  spake  she.
But  beat  her  with  her  wreath  in  playful  glee.

Then  tiring- women  took  the  jetty  dye
To  guard,  not  deck,  the  beauty  of  her  eye,
Whose  languid  half-shut  glances  might  compare
With  lotus  leaves  just  opening  to  the  air ;
And  as  fresh  gems  adorned  her  neck  and  arms.
So  quickly  changing  grew  the  maiden's  charms,
Like  some  fair  plant  where  bud  succeeding  bud
Unfolds  new  beauty ;  or  a  silver  flood
Where  gay  birds  follow  quickly  ;  or  like  night.
When  crowding  stars  come  forth  in  all  their  light.
Oft  as  the  mirror  would  her  glance  beguile
She  longed  to  meet  her  Lord's  approving  smile.


UMA'S  BRIDAL.  95

Her  tasteful  skill  the  timid  maid  essays

To  win  one  smile  of  love,  one  word  of  praise.

The  happy  mother  took  the  golden  dye
And  raised  to  hers  young  UmA's  beaming  eye.
Then  swelled  her  bosom  with  maternal  pride
As  thus  she  decked  her  darling  for  a  bride.
Oh,  she  had  longed  to  trace  on  that  fair  brow
The  nuptial  line,  yet  scarce  could  mark  it  now.

On  Uma's  rounded  arm  the  woollen  band
Was  fixt  securely  by  the  nurse's  hand.
Blind  with  the  tears  that  filled  her  swimming  eye,
In  vain  the  mother  strove  that  band  to  tie.
Spotless  as  curling  foam-flakes  stood  she  there,
As  yielding  soft,  as  graceful  and  as  fair :
Or  like  the  glory  of  an  autumn  night
Eobed  by  the  full  moon  in  a  veil  of  light.

Then  at  her  mother's  best,  the  maid  adored
The  spirit  of  each  high  ancestral  lord,
Nor  failed  she  next  the  noble  dames  to  greet,
And  give  due  honour  to  their  reverend  feet.
They  raised  the  maiden  as  she  bowed  her  head :
"  Thine  be  the  fulness  of  his  love  !  "  they  said.
Half  of  his  being,  blessing  high  as  this
Can  add  no  rapture  to  her  perfect  bliss.
Well-pleased  Himalaya  viewed  the  pomp  and  pride
]\Ieet  for  his  daughter,  meet  for  Siva's  bride ;


96  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Then  sought  the  hall  with  all  his  friends  to  wait
The  bridegroom's  coming  with  a  monarch's  state.

Meanwhile  by  heavenly  matrons'  care  displayed
Upon  Kuvera's  lofty  mount  were  laid
The  ornaments  of  Siva,  which  of  yore
At  his  first  nuptials  the  bridegroom  wore.
He  laid  his  hand  upon  the  dress,  but  how
Shall  robes  so  sad,  so  holy,  grace  him  now  ?
His  own  dire  vesture  took  a  shape  as  fair
As  gentle  bridegroom's  heart  could  wish  to  wear.
The  withering  skull  that  glazed  the  eye  with

dread.
Shone  a  bright  coronal  to  grace  his  head.
That  elephant's  hide  the  God  had  worn  of  old
Was  now  a  silken  robe  inwrought  with  gold.
Ere  this  his  body  was  with  dust  besprent :
With  unguent  now  it  shed  delightful  scent ;
And  that  mid-eye  which  glittering  like  a  star
Shot  the  wild  terror  of  its  glance  afar —
So  softly  now  its  golden  radiance  beamed —
A  mark  of  glory  on  his  forehead  seemed.
His  twining  serpents,  destined  still  to  be
The  pride  and  honour  of  the  deity,
Changed  but  their  bodies :  in  each  sparkling  crest
The  blazing  gems  stiU  shone  their  loveliest.


UMA'S  bridal.  97

What  need  of  jewels  on  the  brow  of  Him

Who  wears  the  crescent  moon  ? No  spot  may  dim

Its  youthful  beauty,  e'en  in  light  of  day

Shedding  the  glory  of  its  quenchless  ray.

Well-pleased  the  God  in  all  his  pride  arrayed

Saw  his  bright  image  mirrored  in  the  blade

Of the huge sword they brought; then calmly

leant
On  !N"andi's  arm,  and  toward  his  bull  he  went,
Whose  broad  back  covered  with  a  tiger's  hide
Was  steep  to  climb  as  Mount  KailIsa's  side.
Yet  the  dread  monster  humbly  shrank  for  fear,
And  bowed  in  reverence  as  his  Lord  drew  near.
The  matrons  followed  him,  a  saintly  throng.
Their  ear-rings  waving  as  they  dashed  along :
Sweet  faces,  with  such  glories  round  them  shed
As  made  the  air  one  lovely  lotus  bed.
On  flew  those  bright  ones  :  Kali  came  behind,
The  skulls  that  decked  her  rattling  in  the  wind :
Like  the  dark  rack  that  scuds  across  the  sky.
With  herald  lightning  and  the  crane's  shrill  cry.

Hark  !  from  the  glorious  bands  that  lead  the  way.
Harp,  drum,  and  pipe,  and  shrilling  trumpet's  bray.
Burst  through  the  sky  upon  the  startled  ear
And  tell  the  Gods  the  hour  of  worship  's  near.


98  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

They  came ;  the  Sun  presents  a  silken  shade
Which  heaven's  own  artist  for  the  God  had  made,
Gilding  his  brows,  as  though  bright  GangA  rolled
Adown  his  holy  head  her  waves  of  gold.
She  in  her  Goddess-shape  divinely  fair.
And  YamunA,  sweet  Eiver-Nymph,  were  there,
Fanning  their  Lord,  that  fancy  still  might  deem
Swans  waved  their  pinions  round  each  Lady  of  the  Stream.  j

E'en  BRAHMi.  came,  Creator,  Lord  of  Might,
And  Vishnu  glowing  from  the  realms  of  light.  4

"  Eide  on,"  they  cried,  "  thine,  thine  for  ever  be  \

The  strength,  the  glory,  and  the  victory."  j

To  swell  his  triumph  that  high  blessing  came  1

Like  holy  oil  upon  the  rising  flame.  j

In  those  Three  Persons  the  one  God  was  shown,  :

Each  first  in  place,  each  last, — not  one  alone  ;  '.

Of  Siva,  Vishnu,  BrahmA,  each  may  be  1

First,  second,  third,  among  the  Blessed  Three.  \

By  Indra  led,  each  world-upholding  Lord
With  folded  hands  the  mighty  God  adored.
In  humble  robes  arrayed,  the  pomp  and  pride
Of  glorious  deity  they  laid  aside.  \

They  signed  to  Nandi,  and  the  favourite's  hand  \

Guided  his  eye  upon  the  suppliant  band.
He  spake  to  Vishnu,  and  on  Indra  smiled,  |

To  BrahmA  bowed — the  lotus'  mystic  child.  j


UMA'S  bridal.  99

On  all  the  hosts  of  heaven  his  friendly  eye

Beamed  duly  welcome  as  they  crowded  nigh.

The  Seven  Great  Saints  their  blessings  o'er  him  shed,

And  thus  in  answer,  with  a  smile,  he  said  :

"  Hail,  mighty  Sages  !  hail,  ye  Sons  of  Light !

My  chosen  priests  to  celebrate  this  rite."

Now  in  sweet  tones  the  heavenly  minstrels  tell
His  praise,  beneath  whose  might  Tripura  fell.
He  moves  to  go :  from  his  moon-crest  a  ray
Sheds  quenchless  light  on  his  triumphant  way.
On  through  the  air  his  swift  bull  bore  him  well,
Decked  with  the  gold  of  many  a  tinkling  bell ;
Tossing  from  time  to  time  his  head  on  high,
Enwreathed  with  clouds  as  he  flew  racing  by.
As  though  in  furious  charge  he  had  up  torn
A  bank  of  clay  upon  his  mighty  horn.

Swiftly  they  came  where  in  its  beauty  lay
The  city  subject  to  Himalaya's  sway.
No  foeman's  foot  had  ever  trod  those  halls,
No  foreign  bands  encamped  around  the  walls.
Then  Siva's  glances  fixed  their  eager  hold
On  that  fair  city  as  with  threads  of  gold.
The  God  whose  neck  still  gleams  with  cloudy  blue
Burst  on  the  wondering  people's  upturned  view,
And  on  the  earth  descended,  from  the  path
His  shafts  once  dinted  in  avenging  wrath.


lOo  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Forth  from  the  gates  a  noble  army  poured
To  do  meet  honour  to  the  mighty  Lord.
With  all  his  friends  on  elephants  of  state
The  King  of  Mountains  passed  the  city  gate,
So  gaily  decked,  the  princes  all  were  seen
Like  moving  hills  inwrapt  in  bowery  green.
As  the  full  rushing  of  two  streams  that  pour
Beneath  one  bridge  with  loud  tumultuous  roar,
So  through  the  city's  open  gate  streamed  in
Mountains  and  Gods  with  tumult  and  with  din.
So  glorious  was  the  sight,  wonder  and  shame,
When  Siva  bowed  him,  o'er  the  Monarch  came ;
He  knew  not  he  had  bent  his  lofty  crest
In  reverent  greeting  to  his  heavenly  guest.
Himalaya,  joying  in  the  festive  day.
Before  the  immortal  bridegroom  led  the  way
Where  heaps  of  gay  flowers  burying  half  the  feet
Lay  breathing  odours  through  the  crowded  street.

Careless  of  all  beside,  each  lady's  eye
Must  gaze  on  ^iva  as  the  troop  sweeps  by.
One  dark-eyed  beauty  will  not  stay  to  bind
Her  long  black  tresses,  floating  unconfined
Save  by  her  little  hand  ;  her  flowery  crown
Hanging  neglected  and  unfastened  down.
One  from  her  maiden  tore  her  foot  away
On  which  the  dye,  all  wet  and  streaming,  lay.


umA's  bridal.

And  o'er  the  chamber  rushing  in  her  haste,
Where'er  she  stepped,  a  crimson  footprint  traced.
Another  at  the  window  takes  her  stand ;
One  eye  is  dyed, — the  pencil  in  her  hand.
Here  runs  an  eager  maid,  and  running,  holds
Loose  and  ungirt  her  flowing  mantle's  folds.
Whilst,  as  she  strives  to  close  the  parting  vest,
Its  brightness  gives  new  beauty  to  her  breast.
Oh  !  what  a  sight !  the  crowded  windows  there
With  eager  faces  excellently  fair.
Like  sweetest  lilies,  for  their  dark  eyes  fling
Quick  glances  quivering  like  the  wild  bee's  wing.

Onward  in  peerless  glory  Siva  passed ;
Gay  banners  o'er  his  way  their  shadows  cast.
Each  palace  dome,  each  pinnacle  and  height
Catching  new  lustre  from  his  crest  of  light.
On  swept  the  pageant :  on  the  God  alone
The  eager  glances  of  the  dames  were  thrown ;
On  his  bright  form  they  fed  the  rapturous  gaze,
And  only  turned  to  marvel  and  to  praise :
"  Oh,  well  and  wisely,  such  a  lord  to  gain
The  Mountain-Maid  endured  the  toil  and  pain.
To  be  his  slave  were  joy ;  but  Oh,  how  blest
The  wife — the  loved  one — lying  on  his  breast !
Surely  in  vain,  had  not  the  Lord  of  Life
Matched  this  fond  bridegroom  and  this  loving  wife.


I02  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Had  been  his  wish  to  give  the  worlds  a  mould
Of  perfect  beauty  ! Falsely  have  they  told
How  the  young  flower- armed  God  was  burnt  by  fire
At  the  red  flash  of  Siva's  vengeful  ire.
No :  jealous  Love  a  fairer  form  confessed,
And  cast  away  his  own,  no  more  the  loveliest.
How  glorious  is  the  Mountain  King,  how  proud
Earth's  stately  pillar,  girt  about  with  cloud !
Now  will  he  lift  his  lofty  head  more  high.
Knit  close  to  Siva  by  this  holy  tie."

Such  words  of  praise  from  many  a  bright-eyed
dame
On  Siva's  ear  with  soothing  witchery  came.
Through  the  broad  streets  'mid  loud  acclaim  he  rode.
And  reached  the  palace  where  the  King  abode.
There  he  descended  from  his  monster's  side.
As  the  sun  leaves  a  cloud  at  eventide.

Leaning  on  Vishnu's  arm  he  passed  the  door
Where  mighty  BrahmA  entered  in  before.
Next  Indra  came,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven.
The  noble  Saints  and  those  great  Sages  seven.
Then  led  they  Siva  to  a  royal  seat ;
Fair  gifts  they  brought,  for  such  a  bridegroom  meet :
With  all  due  rites,  the  honey  and  the  milk,
Kich  gems  were  offered  and  two  robes  of  silk.


UMA'S  BRIDAL.  103

At  length  by  skilful  chamberlains  arrayed
They  led  the  lover  to  the  royal  maid.
Thus  the  fond  Moon  disturbs  the  tranquil  rest
Of  Ocean  glittering  with  his  foamy  crest,
And  leads  him  on,  his  proud  waves  swelling  o'er,
To  leap  with  kisses  on  the  clasping  shore.
He  gazed  on  Uma. From  his  lotus  eyes
Flashed  out  the  rapture  of  his  proud  surprise.
Then  calm  the  current  of  his  spirit  lay
Like  the  world  basking  in  an  autumn  day.

They  met ;  and  true  love's  momentary  shame
O'er  the  blest  bridegroom  and  his  darling  came.
Eye  looked  to  eye,  but,  quivering  as  they  met,
Scarce  dared  to  trust  the  rapturous  gazing  yet.

In  the  God's  hand  the  priest  has  duly  laid
The  radiant  fingers  of  the  Mountain-Maid,
Bright,  as  if  Love  with  his  dear  sprays  of  red
Had  sought  that  refuge  in  his  hour  of  dread.
From  hand  to  hand  the  soft  infection  stole,
Till  each  confessed  it  in  the  inmost  soul.
Fire  filled  his  veins,  with  joy  she  trembled  ;  such
The  magic  influence  of  that  thrilling  touch.

How  grows  their  beauty,  when  two  lovers  stand
Eye  fixt  on  eye,  hand  fondly  linkt  in  hand  !


I04  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Then  how,  unblamed,  may  mortal  minstrel  dare
To  paint  in  words  the  beauty  of  that  pair  !
Around  the  fire  in  solemn  rite  they  trod,
The  lovely  lady  and  the  glorious  God  ;
Like  day  and  starry  midnight  when  they  meet
In  the  broad  plains  at  lofty  Meru's  feet.
Thrice  at  the  bidding  of  the  priest  they  came
With  swimming  eyes  around  the  holy  flame.
Then  at  his  word  the  bride  in  order  due
Into  the  blazing  fire  the  parched  grain  threw,
And  toward  her  face  the  scented  smoke  she  drew,
Which  softly  wreathing  o'er  her  fair  cheek  hung.
And  round  her  ears  in  flower-like  beauty  clung.
As  o'er  the  incense  tbe  sweet  lady  stooped.
The  ear  of  barley  from  her  tresses  drooped,
And  rested  on  her  cheek,  beneath  the  eye
Still  brightly  beaming  with  the  jetty  dye.

"  This  flame  be  witness  of  your  wedded  life  :
Be  just,  thou  husband,  and  be  true,  thou  wife  !  "
Such  was  the  priestly  blessing  on  the  bride.
Eager  she  listened,  as  the  earth  when  dried
By  parching  summer  suns  drinks  deeply  in
The  first  soft  droppings  when  the  rains  begin.

"  Look,  gentle  UmI,"  cried  her  Lord,  "  afar
Seest  thou  the  brightness  of  yon  polar  star  ?


UMA'S  bridal.  105

Like  that  -unchanging  ray  thy  faith  must  shine."
Sobbing,  she  whispered,  "  Yes,  for  ever  thine."


The  rite  is  o'er. Her  joyful  parents  now
At  Brahma's  feet  in  duteous  reverence  bow.
Then  to  fair  Uma  spake  the  gracious  Power
Who  sits  enthroned  upon  the  lotus  flower :
"  0  beautiful  lady,  happy  shalt  thou  be,
And  hero  children  shall  be  born  of  thee ;  "
Then  looked  in  silence :  vain  the  hope  to  bless
The  bridegroom,  Siva,  with  more  happiness.

Then  from  the  altar,  as  prescribed  of  old,
They  turned,  and  rested  upon  seats  of  gold ;
And,  as  the  holy  books  for  men  ordain.
Were  sprinkled  duly  with  the  moistened  grain.
High  o'er  their  heads  sweet  Beauty's  Queen  displayed
Upon  a  stem  of  reed  a  cool  green  shade,
While  the  young  lotus-leaves  of  which  'twas  made
Seemed,  as  they  glistened  to  the  wondering  view,
All  richly  pearled  with  drops  of  beady  dew.
In  twofold  language  on  each  glorious  head
The  Queen  of  Speech  her  richest  blessings  shed ;
In  strong,  pure,  godlike  utterance  for  his  ear,
To  her  in  liquid  tones,  soft,  beautifully  clear.


io6  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Now  for  awhile  they  gaze  where  maids  divine
In  graceful  play  the  expressive  dance  entwine ;
Whose  eloquent  motions,  with  an  actor's  art,
Show  to  the  life  the  passions  of  the  heart.

The  rite  was  ended ;  then  the  heavenly  band
Prayed  Siva,  raising  high  the  suppliant  hand :
"  Now,  for  the  dear  sake  of  thy  lovely  bride,
Have  pity  on  the  gentle  God,"  they  cried,
"  Whose  tender  body  thy  fierce  wrath  has  slain :
Give  all  his  honour,  all  his  mifi^ht  agjain."
Well  pleased,  he  smiled,  and  gracious  answer  gave :
Siva  himself  now  yields  him  Kama's  slave.
When  duly  given,  the  great  will  ne'er  despise
The  gentle  pleading  of  the  good  and  wise.

Now  have  they  left  the  wedded  pair  alone ;
And  ^IVA  takes  her  hand  within  his  own
To  lead  his  darling  to  the  bridal  bower.
Decked  with  bright  gold  and  all  her  sumptuous  dower.
She  blushes  sweetly  as  her  maidens  there
Look  with  arch  smiles  and  glances  on  the  pair ;
And  for  one  moment,  while  the  damsels  stay.
From  him  she  loves  turns  her  dear  face  away.


I^OTES.


CANTO  FIRST.

The  Hindu  Deity  of  War,  the  leader  of  the  celestial  armies,
is  known  by  the  names  Kdrtikeya  and  Skanda.  He  is  repre-
sented with  six  faces  and  corresponding  arms,  and  is  mounted
upon  a  peacock,

Himalaya.']  Mansion  of  Snow;  from  hima,  snow,  and  dlaya,
mansion. The  accent  is  on  the  second  syllable.

Prithu.]  It  is  said  that  in  the  reign  of  this  fabulous  monarch,
gods,  saints,  demons,  and  other  supernatural  beings,  drained
or  milked  from  the  earth  various  treasures,  appointing  sever-
ally one  of  their  own  class  as  the  recipient,  or  Calf,  to  use
the  word  of  the  legend.  Himalaya  was  thus  highly  favoured
by  the  sacred  Mount  Meru,  and  the  other  hills.  The  story  is
found  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  the  Harivansa,  which  forms  a
supplement  to  the  Mahahhdrat.

Still  the  fair  pearls,  &c.]  It  was  the  belief  of  the  Hindus
that  elephants  wore  these  precious  jewels  in  their  heads.

Till  heavenly  minstrels,  &c.]  A  class  of  demi-gods,  the
songsters  of  the  Hindu  Paradise,  or  Indra's  heaven.

There  magic  herbs,  &c.]  Frequent  allusion  is  made  by  Kdlidds
and  other  Sanskrit  poets  to  a  phosphoric  light  emitted  by
plants  at  night.

E'en  the  wild  Icine,  &c,]  The  Chouri,  or  long  brush,  used  to
whisk  ojBf  insects  and  flies,  was  with  the  Hindus  what  the
sceptre  is  with  us.  It  was  usually  made  of  the  tail-hairs  of
the  Yak,  or  Bos  Grunniens.  Thus  the  poet  represents  these
animals  as  doing  honour  to  the  Monarch  of  Mountains  with
these  emblems  of  sovereignty.


io8  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

That  the  bright  Seven.']  The  Hindiis  call  the  constellation
Ursa  Major  the  seven  Rishis,  or  Saints.  They  will  appear
as  actors  in  the  course  of  the  poem.

Aiid  once  when  Indra's  might.]  We  learn  from  the  Bdmdyana
that  the  mountains  were  originally  furnished  with  wings,  and
that  they  flew  through  the  air  with  the  speed  of  the  wind.
For  fear  lest  they  should  suddenly  fall  in  tlieir  flight,  Indra,
King  of  the  Gods,  struck  ofi"  their  pinions  with  his  thunder-
bolt ;  but  Maindka  was  preserved  from  a  similar  fate  by  the
friendship  of  Ocean,  to  whom  he  fled  for  refuge.

Born  once  again^  &c.]  The  reader  will  remember  the  Hindii
belief  in  the  Transmigration  of  Souls.  The  story  alluded  to
by  the  poet  is  this  : — "  Daksha  was  the  son  of  Brahma  and
father  of  Sati,  whom,  at  the  recommendation  of  the  Bishis,
or  Sages,  he  espoused  to  6%va,  but  he  was  never  wholly  recon-
ciled to  the  uncouth  figure  and  practices  of  his  son-in-law.
Having  undertaken  to  celebrate  a  solemn  sacrifice,  he  invited
all  the  Gods  except  ^iva,  which  so  incensed  Sati,  that  she
threw  herself  into  the  sacrificial  fire." — (Wilson,  Specimens
of  Hindii  Theatre,  Vol.  II.  p.  263.)  The  name  of  Sati,  mean-
ing good,  true,  chaste  woman,  is  the  modern  Suttee,  as  it  is
corruptly  written.

As  the  blue  offspring  of  the  Turqaois  Hills.]  These  hills  are
placed  in  Ceylon.  The  precious  stone  grows,  it  is  said,  at
the  sound  of  thunder  in  the  rainy  season.

At  her  stern  penance.]  This  is  described  in  the  fifth  canto.
The  meaning  of  the  name  Umd  is  "Oh,  do  not."

The  Gods'  bright  river.]  The  celestial  Ganges,  which  falls
from  heaven  upon  Himalaya's  head,  and  continues  its  course
on  earth.

Young  Kdma's  arrow.]  K4ma,  the  Hindii  Cupid,  is  armed
with  a  bow,  the  arrows  of  which  are  made  of  flowers.

And  brighter  than  Akica's  rich  leaves.]  Nothing,  we  are
told,  can  exceed  the  beauty  of  this  tree  when  in  full  bloom.
It  is,  of  course,  a  general  favourite  with  the  poets  of  India.


NOTES.


109


The  strings  of  pearl.']

"  Then,  too,  the  pearl  from  out  its  shell
Unsightly,  in  the  sunless  sea
(As  'twere  a  spirit,  forced  to  dwell
In  form  unloveU')  v)as  set  free.,
And  round  the  neck  of  woman  threw
A  light  it  lent  and  borrowed  too."

Moore — Loves  of  the  Angels.
Moore  is  frequently  the  best  interpreter,  unconsciously,  of
an  Indian  poet's  thought.  It  is  worth  remarking,  that  the
Sanskrit  word  muktd,  pearl  (literally /re^^i),  signifies  also  the
spirit  released  from  mundane  existence,  and  re-integrated
with  its  divine  original.

The  sweetest  note  thaf  e'er  the  Koil  poured.]  The  KoJcila,  or
Koil,  the  black  or  Indian  cuckoo,  is  the  bulbul  or  nightingale
of  Hindustan.  It  is  also  the  herald  of  spring,  like  its  Euro-
pean namesake,  and  the  female  bird  is  the  especial  messenger
of  Love.

WTien  holy  Narad.] A  divine  sage,  son  of  Brahmd.

The  holy  hdl]  The  animal  on  which  the  God  Siva  rides,
as  Indra  on  the  elephant.

Wlio  takes  eight  various  forms.]  Siva  is  called  Wearer  of
the  Eight  Forms,  as  being  identical  with  the  Five  Elements,
Mind,  Individuality,  and  Crude  Matter.

Where  the  pah  moon  on  Siva's  forehead.]  Siva's  crest  is  the
new  moon,  which  is  sometimes  described  as  forming  a  third
eye  in  his  forehead.  We  shall  find  frequent  allusions  to  this
in  the  course  of  the  poem.


CANTO  SECOND.

While  impious  TdraJc]  A  demon  who,  by  a  long  course  of
austerities,  had  acquired  power  even  over  the  Gods.  This
Hindii  notion  is  familiar  to  most  of  us  from  Southey's  "  Curse
of  Kehdma."


no  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD,

Whose  face  turns  every  ivay.  ]  Brahmd  is  represented  with
four  faces,  one  towards  each  point  of  the  compass.

The  mystic  Three.]  "  The  triad  of  quahties,"  a  philosophical
term  familiar  to  all  the  systems  of  Hindii  speculation.  They
are  thus  explained  in  the  Tattwa  Samdsa,  a  text-book  of  the
Sinkhya  school : — "  Now  it  is  asked,  What  is  the  '  triad  of
qualities '  ?  It  is  replied,  The  triad  of  qualities  consists  of
'Goodness,'  'Foulness,'  and  'Darkness.'  By  tlie  'triad  of
qualities '  is  meant  the  '  three  qualities.'  Goodness  is  end-
lessly diversified,  accordingly  as  it  is  exemplified  in  calmness,
lightness,  complacency,  attainment  of  wishes,  kindliness,  con-
tentment, patience,  joy,  and  the  like ;  summarily,  it  consists
of  happiness.  '  Foulness  '  is  endlessly  diversified,  accordingly
as  it  is  exemplified  in  grief,  distress,  separation,  excitement,
anxiety,  fault-finding,  and  the  like  ;  summarily,  it  consists  of
pain.  '  Darkness '  is  endlessly  diversified,  accordingly  as  it
is  exemplified  in  envelopment,  ignorance,  disgust,  abjectness,
heaviness,  sloth,  drowsiness,  intoxication,  and  the  like ;
summarily,  it  consists  of  delusion."

Thou,  when  a  longing,  &c.]  "Having  divided  his  own
substance,  the  mighty  power  became  half  male,  half  female,
or  nature  active  and  passive." — Manu,  Ch.  I.

So  also  in  the  old  Orphic  hymn  it  is  said,

"  Zeus  was  a  male  ;  Zeus  was  a  deathless  damsel."

Ilie  sacred  hymns.]  Contained  in  the  Vedas,  or  Holy
Scriptures  of  the  Hindus.

The  word  of  praise.]  The  mystic  syllable  OM,  prefacing  all
the  prayers  and  most  of  the  writings  of  the  Hindiis.  It
implies  the  Indian  triad,  and  expresses  the  Three  in  One.

They  hail  thee,  Nature.]  The  object  of  Nature's  activity,
according  to  the  SAnkhya  system,  is  "  the  final  liberation  of
individual  soul."  "  The  incompetency  of  nature,  an  irrational
principle,  to  institute  a  course  of  action  for  a  definite  purpose,
and  the  unfitness  of  rational  soul  to  regulate  the  acts  of  an


NOTES.  Ill

agent  whose  character  it  imperfectly  apprehends,  constitute  a
principal  argument  with  the  theistical  Sdnkhyas  for  the  neces-
sity  of  a Providence, to  whom  the  ends  of  existence  are

known,  and  by  whom  Nature  is  guided The  atheistical

Sdnkhyas,  on  the  other  hand,  contend  that  there  is  no  oc-
casion for  a  guiding  Providence,  but  that  the  activity  of
nature,  for  the  purpose  of  accomplishing  soul's  object,  is  an
intuitive  necessity,  as  illustrated  in  the  following  passage  : —
As  it  is  a  function  of  milk,  an  unintelligent  (substance),  to
nourish  the  calf,  so  it  is  the  office  of  the  chief  principle
(nature)  to  liberate  the  soul." — Prof  Wilson's  Sdnkhya  Kdrikd.

Hail  Thee  the  stranger  Spirit,  &c.]  "  Sonl  is  witness,  solitary,
bystander,  spectator,  passive." — Sdnkh.  Kdr.  verse  xix.

See,  Varunh  noose.'] The  God  of  Water.

Weak  is  Kuvera's  hand.] The  God  of  Wealth.

Tama's  sceptre.] The  God  and  Judge  of  the  Dead.

The  Lords  of  Light.]  The  Xdityas,  twelve  in  number,  are
forms  of  the  sun,  and  appear  to  represent  him  as  distinct  in
each  month  of  the  year.

The  Rudras.]  A  class  of  demi-gods,  eleven  in  number,  said
to  be  inferior  manifestations  of  ^iva,  who  also  bears  this
name.

E'en  as  on  earth,  &c.]  Thus  the  commandment, — Thou
shalt  not  kill,  is  abrogated  by  the  injunction  to  kill  animals
for  sacrifice.

The  heavenly  Teacher.] Vrihaspati,  the  son  of  Angiras.

His  own  dear  flower.]  The  lotus,  on  which  Brahmd  is  repre-
sented reclining.

Their  flashing  jewels.]  According  to  the  Hindu  belief,
serpents  wear  precious  jewels  in  their  heads.

Chakra.] A  discus,  or  quoit,  the  weapon  of  Vishnu.

As  water  bears  to  me.]  "  HE,  having  willed  to  produce
various  beings  from  his  own  divine  substance,  first  with  a
thought  created  the  waters,  and  placed  in  them  a  productive
seed"— Manu,  Ch.  I.


112  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Mournful  braids.']  As  a  sign  of  mourning,  especially  for
the  loss  of  their  husbands,  the  Hindustani  women  collect
their  long  hair  into  a  braid,  called  in  Sanskrit  veni.

The  mango  tivig.']  We  shall  meet  with  several  allusions  to
this  tree  as  the  favourite  of  Love  and  the  darling  of  the  bees.


CANTO  THIRD.

Wlio  angers  thee^  &c.]  To  understand  properly  this  speech
of  Kdma,  it  is  necessary  to  be  acquainted  with  some  of  the
Hindii  notions  regarding  a  future  state.  "  The  highest  kind
of  happiness  is  absorption  into  the  divine  essence,  or  the
return  of  that  portion  of  spirit  which  is  combined  with  the
attributes  of  humanity  to  its  original  source.  This  happiness,
according  to  the  philosopher,  is  to  be  obtained  only  by  the
most  perfect  abstraction  from  the  world  and  freedom  from

passion, even  while  in  a state  of  terrestrial  existence

Besides  this  ultimate  felicity,  the  Hindus  have  several  minor
degrees  of  happiness,  amongst  which  is  the  enjoyment  of
Indra's  Swarga,  or,  in  fact,  of  a  Muhammadan  Paradise.  The
degree  and  duration  of  the  pleasures  of  this  paradise  are  pro-
portioned to  the  merits  of  those  admitted  to  it ;  and  they  who
have  enjoyed  this  lofty  region  of  Swarga,  but  whose  virtue  is
exhausted,  revisit  the  habitation  of  mortals." — Prof.  Wilson's
Megha  Duta.  Compare  also  "  The  Lord's  Song." — Specimens
of  Old  Indian  Poetry^  pp.  67,  68.

Indra,  therefore,  may  be  supposed  to  feel  jealous  whenever
a  human  being  aspires  to  something  higher  than  that  heaven
of  which  he  is  the  Lord.

The  "  chain  of  birth  "  alluded  to  is  of  course  the  metem-
psychosis, or  transmigration  of  souls,  a  belief  which  is  not  to
be  looked  upon  (says  Prof.  Wilson  in  the  preface  to  his
edition  of  the  Sdnkhya  Kdrikd)  as  a  mere  popular  superstition.
It  is  the  main  principle  of  all  Hindd  metaphysics  ;  it  is  the
foundation  of  all Hindu philosophy. The  great  object  of


NOTES.  113

their  philosophical  research  in  every  system,  Brahminical  or
Buddhist,  is  the  discovery  of  the  means  of  putting  a  stop  to
further  transmigration ;  the  discontinuance  of  corporeal  being  ;
the  liberation  of  soul  from  body.

As  on  that  Snake.']  Sesha,  the  Serpent  King,  is  in  the
Hindu  mythology  the  supporter  of  the  earth,  as,  in  one  of
the  fictions  of  the  Edda, —

**  That  sea-snake,  tremendous  curled,
Whose  monstrous  circle  girds  the  world."

He  is  also  the  couch  and  canopy  of  the  God  Vishnu,  or,  as  he
is  here  called,  Krishna, — that  hero  being  one  of  his  incarna-
tions, and  considered  identical  with  the  deity  himself.
The  threefold  world.'] Earth,  heaven,  and  hell.
His  fearful  liati] The  wife  of  Kdma,  or  Love.
To  tvhere  Kuvera,  «fec.] The  demi-god  Kuvera  was  regent
of  the  north.

Nor  ivaited  for  the  maiden's  touch.]  Referring  to  the  Hindu
notion  that  the  Asoka  blossoms  at  the  touch  of  a  woman's
foot. So  Shelley  says,

"  I  doubt  not,  the  flowers  of  that  garden  sweet
Rejoiced  in  the  sound  of  her  gentle  feet."

Sensitive  Plant.

Groujjing  the  syllables.]  This  comparison  seems  forced
rather  too  far  to  suit  a  European  taste.  Kdlidds  is  not  satis-
fied with  calling  the  mango-spray  the  Arrow  of  Love  ;  he  must
tell  us  that  its  leaves  are  the  feathers,  and  that  the  bees  have
marked  it  with  the  owner's  name.

I'hat  loveliest  ^flower.] The  Karnikdra.

His  flowery  Tilaka.]  The  name  of  a  tree ;  it  also  means  a
mark  made  with  coloured  earths  or  unguents  upon  the  forehead
and  between  the  eyebrows,  either  as  an  ornament  or  a  sectarial
distinction  ;  the  poet  intends  the  word  to  convey  both  ideas
at  once  here.  In  this  passage  is  another  comparison  of  the
mango-spray:  it  is  called  the  lip  of  Love;  its  rouge  is  the
blush  of  morning,  and  its  darker  beautifying  powder  the
clustering  bees. From  the  universal  custom  of  dying  the  lips,


114 THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.  \

the  Sanskrit  poets  are  constantly  speaking  of  their  *'  vermeil  :

tints,"  &c.,  as  will  be  sufficiently  evident  in  the  course  of  this  ;

work.  i

The,  Hermifs  servant.] By  name  Nandi.  j

His  neck  of  hrightly-heaming  blue.] An  ancient  legend  tells ]

us  that  after  the  deluge  the  ocean  was  churned  by  Gods  and '

demons,  in  order  to  recover  the  Anirit  and  other  treasures  :

that  had  been  lost  in  it : —  <

"  Then  loud  and  long  a  joyous  sound

Rang  through  the  startled  sky  :

*  Hail  to  the  Amrit,  lost  and  found  ! '  '

A  thousand  voices  cry.

But  from  the  wondrous  churning  streamed  <

A  poison  fierce  and  dread,
Burning  like  fire  ;  where'er  it  streamed

Thick  noisome  mists  were  spread.  1

The  wasting  venom  onwards  went,  i

And  filled  the  Worlds  with  fear,
Till  Brahmd  to  their  misery  bent

His  gracious  pitying  ear  ;  \

And  Siva  those  destroying  streams  \

Drank  up  at  BrahmjC's  beck.  j
Still  in  thy  throat  the  dark  flood  gleams,

God  of  the  azure  neck  !  "  <

Specimens  of  Old  Indian  Poetry — Churning  of  the  Ocean.  I

Gates  of  sense.] The  eyes,  ears,  &c.  .


CANTO  FOURTH.

Late  J  dim,  and  joyless  shall  his  rising  be.]  The  Moon,  in
Hindii  mythology,  is  a  male  deity.

This  line  of  bees.]  Kdma's  bow  is  sometimes  represented  as
strung  in  this  extraordinary  manner.

And  stain  this  foot.]  "Staining  the  soles  of  the  feet  with
a  red  colour,  derived  from  the  Mehndee,  the  Lac,  (fee,  is  a
favourite  practice  of  the  Hindii  toilet." — Wilson.


NOTES.  115


CANTO  FIFTH.

And  worn  ivith  resting  on  her  rosaiy.]  The  Hindus  use  their
rosaries  much  as  we  do,  carrying  them  in  their  hands  or  on
their  wrists.  As  they  turn  them  over,  they  repeat  an  inaudible
prayer,  or  the  name  of  the  particular  deity  they  worship,
as  Vishnu  or  S'iva.  The  Budrdkshd  maid  (which  we  may  sup-
pose Um4  to  have  used)  is  a  string  of  the  seeds  or  berries  of
the  Eleocarpus,  and  especially  dedicated  to  S'iva.  It  should
conXain  108  berries  or  beads,  each  of  which  is  fingered  with
the  mental  repetition  of  one  of  Siva's  108  appellations.

Not  e^en  her  boy.  ] Kdrtikeya,  the  God  of  War.

Of  those  poor  birds.']  The  Chakravdki.  These  birds  are
always  observed  to  fly  in  pairs  during  the  day,  but  are  sup-
posed to  remain  separate  during  the  night.

That  friendship  soon  in  gentle  heart  is  bred.]

"  Amor  in  cor  gentil  ratto  s'apprende."

Dante.


CANTO  SIXTH.

The  Heavenly  Dame.] Arundhati,  wife  of  one  of  the  Seven
Saints.

The  Boar.] An  Avatdr,  or  incarnation  of  Vishnu. In  this
form  he  preserved  the  world  at  the  deluge.

That  thirsty  bii'd.] The  Chdtaka,  supposed  to  drink  nothing
but  rain-water.

Froud  Alakd.] The  capital  of  Kuvera,  the  God  of  Wealth.

The  bright  Champac]

"  The  maid  of  India  blest  again  to  hold
In  her  broad  lap  the  Champac's  leaves  of  gold."

Lalla  Roohh.

Angiras.] One  of  the  Seven  Saints  ;  the  father  of  Vrihaspati,
the  teacher  of  the  gods.


ii6  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  WAR-GOD.

Vast  grew  his  body.]  Alluding  to  the  VAmana,  or  Dwarf
Avatdr  of  Vishnu,  wrought  to  restrain  the  pride  of  the  giant
Bali,  who  had  expelled  the  Gods  from  heaven.  In  that  form
he  presented  himself  before  the  giant,  and  asked  him  for  three
paces  of  land  to  build  a  hut.  Bali  ridiculed  and  granted  the
request.  The  dwarf  immediately  grew  to  a  prodigious  size,
so  that  he  measured  the  earth  with  one  pace,  and  the  heavens
with  another.

Sumeru.]  Another  name  of  the  sacred  Mount  Meru ;  or
ratiier  the  same  word,  with  su,  good,  prefixed.


CANTO  SEVENTH,

Kaildsa's  side.]  A  mountain,  the  fabulous  residence  of
Kuvera,  and  favourite  haunt  of  S'iva,  placed  by  the  Hindiis
among  the  Himalayas.

Kdli  came  behind.]  The  name  of  one  of  the  divine  matrons.
The  word  also  signifies  in  Sanskrit  a  row  or  succession  of
clouds,  suggesting  the  comparison  which  follows.

In  twofold  language.]  In  Sanskrit  and  Prakrit.  The  latter
is  a  softened  modification  of  the  former,  to  which  it  bears  the
same  relation  as  Italian  to  Latin ;  it  is  spoken  by  the  female
characters  of  the  Hindu  drama.


THE END.


I'RINTKD  BY  HALLANTYNE,  HANSON  AND  CO.
EDINBURGH  AND  LONDON


^m

^■^^^>:-

^

1

ss

i

:'^>U:-:y :"■

--;^%\:i':r;':::'.:'..

•■,j^'-";m^'^,  ■

■■■/•  > - -■:'.


■I


i^;„v


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO
LIBRARY


Acme Library Card Pocket

Under  Pat.  *'  Ref.  Index  File."
Made  by  LIBRARY  BITREAU
