Dangerous Acquaintances (Les Liaisons dangereuses) (Choderlos de Laclos, 1782)
==========================================================
The great French epistolary novel of seduction and ruin — Valmont and Merteuil's cold war, in Aldington's 1924 translation. Translated by Richard Aldington (1924). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dli.ministry.01293).

BROADWAY 
TRANSLATIONS 

‘“ Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale 
Her infinite variety.” 

Broadway Translations 

CHODERLOS 
DE LACLOS 

DANGEROUS ACQUAINTANCES 
(LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES) 

Translated by 
RICHARD ALDINGTON 

With an Introduction 

wv 
ie 

CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION 
I Life of Choderlos de Laclos, 1741-89 
II ¥ P ‘ 1789-1803 
III Character of Choderlos de Laclos 
IV Minor Works of Choderlos de Laclos 

V_ The Liaisons Dangereuses 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 
Publisher's Note 
Editor’s Preface 
Part I 
» Al 
» Il 
» IV 

Appendix 

Page 

II 
21 
25 

27 

59 
61 

65 
157 
249 

» 335 

. 430 

INTRODUCTION 

I 
LIFE OF CHODERLOS DE LACLOS 
First Period: 1741-1789 

Until 1905, when two biographies of Laclos and his family 
correspondence were published, his life was only known in 
outline ; the natural tendency to identify him with the Vicomte 
de Valmont caused misapprehensions of his real character. 
Unfortunately for us, the bulk of the information collected 
by Mm, Dard, Caussy and de Chauvigny relates to the last 
fifteen years of Laclos’s life; so that we know more than 
enough about Laclos the Reyolutionary conspirator and general 
of artillery and comparatively little about Laclos the author 
of the ‘‘ Liaisons Dangereuses,” His character is something 
of an enigma, made rather more mysterious by his voluble 
biographers, His correspondence is almost valueless as a 
key to this enigma, because it was written at the end of his 
life (when he had become precociously senile), was addressed 
to his children or to his wife (who was not an intelligent woman), 
was composed either under the constraint of a thirteen months 
imprisonment or in the bustle of active service ; finally this 
correspondence is infected with 18th century self-consciousness 
and the pose of “ virtuous sensibility.” For these and other 

- \The best short account of Laclos is the preface written by 
M. A. Van Bever for his excellent edition of the Liaisons Dangereuses 

(1920). | 

hl gy 
. 
cL eres 
nh t 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

reasons the man’s letters, generally so useful in determining 
character, are not of much assistance. How trust the corres- 
pondence of a man of such deep reserve and dissimulation 
as Laclos ? And even in prison might he not have played the 
epistolary part of a “good papa”? Who knows? The 
writer of the Liaisons Dangereuses, the calculating Orléanist 
conspirator, might have feigned anything. 

Our knowledge of Laclos’s family and early life is sight. He 
belonged to the petite noblesse, the minor “ gentry” of France, 
who were exploited by the ancien régime because they were 
poor, proud and patriotic and who received their reward under 
the Revolution too often in the shape of imprisonment and the 
guillotine. The family of Laclos is supposed to have been 
Spanish in origin; the earliest notice of the name occurs in 
1683. The father of the author, Jean Ambroise Choderlos 
de Laclos, was ‘‘ sécretaire de l’Intendence de Picardie et 
Artois’’; he married Marie Catherine Gallois, Their son, 
Pierre Ambroise Francois Choderlos de Laclos, was baptised 
at Amiens, rgth of October, 1741. The first definite knowledge 
we have of him is that in 1759 he began to work at mathematics 
with a view to entering the Artillery. He was received in 
January, 1760; and made sous-lieutenant in March 1761; 
lieutenant en deuxieme in 1762. He was not made captain until 
1771. He saw no active service until after the Revolution 
and, after spending all his life in the army, received his baptism 
of fire at sixty. He was in garrison at Toul, Strasbourg, 
Grenoble and other places. Thé period at Grenoble, 1769- 
1775, 1s important. Grenoble was then “a charming town, 
sparkling with intelligence, where the women did not allow 
themselves to be forgotten,” says Stendhal, who many years 
later met Laclos at Milan. Laclos went out into the best 
society and admitted ‘to Count Tilly in London that he had 
“ quelques adventures assez piquantes” ; though the reports 
of his senior officers praise his devotion to duty and military 
knowledge. At Grenoble he is supposed to have known the 
originals of the principal characters in the ‘‘ Liaisons Danger- 
euses.”’ Stendhal boasted that as a child he had known 
the original of Madame de Merteuil, a mysterious Mme. 
L.T.D.P.M., interpreted as Mme. de la Tour de Pin Monmort. 
_ Cécile Volanges is supposed to be derived from a Demoiselle 
2 

LIFE OF LACLOS 

de Blacons. But these identifications are shadowy and remote ; 
all that we can say definitely is that Laclos found some of the 
material for his book in the society of Grenoble. , 

He is described at this time as tall, thin, narrqw-shouldered, 
with fine, pale features and blue eyes ; “‘ under a cold exterior 
he hid an ardent mind.” At twenty he wept over Rousseau ; 
indeed the influence of Rousseau upon him was capital. It is 
obvious in his work. Possibly, his efforts to force his temper- 
ament into a Rousseau-made mould accounted for some of 
the incoherence and mystery of his personality. He also ad- 
mired Clarissa and was struck with the character of Lovelace, 
who certainly has a distant affinity with Valmont. At Grenoble 
he wrote his first poems, some of which were published in the 
Almanac des Muses. In 1777 he wrote the libretto of an 
unsuccessful opera Ernestine, which was laughed off the stage. 
In 1779 he was detached from his regiment and went to assist 
the Marquis de Montalembert in the building of a fort on the 
island of Aix, near La Rochelle, a task upon which he was 
engaged for some years, 

In a few sentences all our essential knowledge of Laclos 
up to his fortieth year has been related. The reader will see 
how very meagre are the data upon which we may form a con- 
ception of the man who wrote the Liatsons Dangereuses, 
for it was at Aix in the months between July 1780 and Septem- 
ber 1781 that Laclos wrote his famous novel. What sort of 
a man was Laclos when heewrote the Liaisons Dangereuses ? 
What were his motives and his object >? If his character had 
any consistency, if he did not change completely after his 
marriage and with the Revolution, he cannot have been the 
mere voluptuary he is often held to be. He cannot have been 
the original of Valmont. An unscrupulous voluptuary of the 
Valmont kind would not have been an irreproachable artillery 
officer and the trusted subordinate of Montalembert. When 
we come to the period of Laclos’s life about which we have 
ample information we do not find him a dissolute or “immoral ” 
man at all, On the contrary, we find a clever political agent 
and a sentimental family man. We may perhaps grant that 
he followed the current of the times which coincided with his 
own development ; that he was gay and “‘ licentious ’’ under 
Louis XV, ardently reforming under Louis XVI, sentimental 

3 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

and republican during the Revolution; but the key to his 
character and life, as well as to a correct understanding of 
the Liaisons Dangereuses lies in the fact that he was a disciple 
of Rousseau and a man of disappointed ambition. The 
sentimental Rousseauite in him was the expansive family 
man and perhaps explains the ardent passages in the Liaisons 
Dangereuses which procured him the reputation of 
‘immorality’; the disappointed ambition gave him his 
cold exterior, made him a political intriguer, landed him in a 
revolutionary gaol, and supplied the motive force of his novel. 
Laclos intended that work as an attack on the upper classes 
of the ancien régime ; it was one of the innumerable straws 
which showed which way the gathering storm of revolution 
was blowing. 

Tilly, in the interesting account of his conversation with 
Laclos in London after the outbreak of the Revolution,confirms 
this reading of Laclos. He says Laclos told him he was tired 
of rhyming without success, ‘‘ of studying a profession which 
could lead him neither to great advancement nor to great 
consideration,” that he resolved ‘‘ to write a book which should 
be out of the common way, which would make a stir and be 
heard of in the world after he had left it.” Whether Laclos 
did or did not make this confession cannot be known certainly ; 
but it is the most plausible explanation of the genesis of the 
Liaisons Dangereuses, That book was the revenge of a dis- 
appointed man of genius, fretting against a system which 
condemned him to obscurity and monotonous routine in a 
subaltern position. 

Let us try to imagine the life and prospects of a man like 
Laclos under the ancien régime. They were not so brilliant 
as might be supposed. We hear so much of the luxury and 
license of 18th century France and forget that, as in all times, 
these were the privileges of a small minority. Because the 
Maréchal Duc de Richelieu was an unconscionable libertine 
and was imitated by the gilded youth of the time, it does 
not follow that every officer was a petit mattre. Laclos never 
had the means of being a petit maitre. He had not 
enough money to marry until he was over forty. Until his 
father died in 1784, he had only his pay. Even in 1784 his | 
income was only 2,700 livres pay and 1,800 livres private 

mes 

LIFE OF LACLOS 

income, A petit matire usually had an income of about 100,000 
livres and died several millions in debt. There is an absurd 
story that Laclos, in order to seduce the girl he afterwards 
married, hired the next door house and had a: sliding panel 
cut through into her boudoir; it has been ‘proved that the 
unfurnished rental alone of the house was two-thirds of his 
whole income ! Laclos-Valmont is a myth. 

This does not mean that Laclos was any more austere 
than young officers and young Frenchmen usually are. No 
doubt he had adventures with women and possibly prided 
himself upon possessing an uncommon “‘ strategy of seduction.” 
Even Montaigne had this weakness.1 But no doubt these 
affairs were commonplace enough; to indulge in adultery 
on the scale vaunted by erotic novelists would demand a 
lavish expenditure far beyond the means of a humble captain 
of artillery. Those writers then, who, mistaking the purpose 
of the Liaisons Dangereuses, have seen merely a libertine in 
its author, are guilty of an error. The canker in Laclos’s 
character is disappointed ambition. Under the ancien régime 
there was little hope for a poor officer without ‘‘ protectors,’* 
Exceptional merit on active service might indeed lead a 
brilliant soldier to the rank of general or even marshal of 
France; but Laclos never had an opportunity for active 
service. His promotions came with discouraging slowness, 
the mere result of seniority ; moreover, the artillery was a 
despised branch of the service and in the decade before the 
Revolution the French War Office reserved the higher 
commands of the army entirely for noblemen of rank. Laclos 
saw that a complete reform of government was the only chance 
of his gratifying his ambition; as a disciple of Rousseau he 
was angered by the behaviour of the ruling classes ; the 
Liaisons Dangereuses was his declaration of war on the ancien 
régime, | 
The book had a prodigious success, Grimm begins his 
literary letter for April 1782 with a long review which opens 
with the words: “‘ For several years no novel has appeared 
whose success has been so brilliant as that of the ‘ Liaisons 

+“ Qui me demanderoit la premiére partie en l’amour, je repondrais 
que c’est sgavoir prendre le temps ; la seconde la mesme ; et encores 
la tierce ; c’est un poinct qui peult tout.” Sur des Vers de Virgile. 

3 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

‘Dangereuses,’ ’’ Grimm, who did not understand the book, 
also remarks that Rétif de la Bretonne had been called the 
Rousseau of the gutter ; ‘‘ M. Choderlos de Laclos is the Rétif 
de la Bretonne of good company.” Mme. Riccoboni who 
engaged in a semi-moral, semi-literary and wholly polite 
argument with Laclos about the novel, wrote him : 

‘All Paris is eager to read you, all Paris is talking about 
you, If there is any happiness in occupying the attention 
of the people in that immense metropolis, enjoy it. No one 
has ever been in a better position to enjoy it than you.”’ 

Tilly, then page to Marie Antoinette, wrote that it ‘‘ made 
a prodigious sensation among the public.” After the Revolu- 
tign a copy of one of the earliest editions was found among 
the Queen’s books; it was richly bound, but, as a sacrifice 
to modesty, bore no title on the outside. The first edition 
(April, 1782) of 2,000 copies was followed a month later by 
another of the same number; the book was frequently 
reprinted ; indeed there were no less than fifty pirated editions.? 
Had the copyright laws of to-day then existed Laclos would 
have made a considerable income from these sales; as it was 
he received 1,600 livres for the first edition and authorised 
a second on the same terms, But the pirates must have robbed 
him of most of his possible gains. 

This brilliant success was, however, largely a succés de 
scandale, All the women were angry with the creator of 
Mme. de Merteuil ; that character made the pseudo-virtuous 
Mme. Riccoboni feel ‘‘ outraged if her dignity as a woman 
and a French-woman.” Mme, de Genlis (mistress of the 
dissipated Duc d’ Orléans) “‘ nearly died of despair’’ at the 
thought that someone had mistaken for hers ‘‘ that infamous 
work of M. de Laclos.” The Marquise de Coigny (the mistress 
of Lauzun) closed her doors to the author of the Liaisons 
Dangereuses. Strangely enough the objections mostly came 
from such ladies ; no doubt they had reason to fear the sharp 
eyes of this officer-novelist, who observed character ds coolly 
‘and accurately as he worked out his mathematics and tactics. 

1M. Van Bever has catalogued nearly thirty editions of the Liaisons 
Dangereuses, only a few of which are possessed by the British Museum. 
There is a unique copy of an edition of 1788 in the possession of Mr. 
Arthur Symons, The “ fifty pirated editions ’’ are mentioned on the — 
authority of Biographers only ; they produce no definite evidence. 
—_ 6 

LIFE OF LACLOS 

On the other hand the old Bishop of Pavia (apparently a ° 
saintly man and obviously an intelligent one) told Laclos in 
1801 that he considered the book a moral one, ‘‘ very fit to 
be put into the hands of young ladies.”’” The book was never 
officially condemned by Louis XVI, any of, the Revolutionary 
governments or Napoleon. It was forbidden in 1825 by the 
reactionary government of Charles X ; at the same time were 
also forbidden the works of Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau, 
Beaumarchais, Ia Rochefoucauld, Vauvenargues, and the 
Télémaque of Fénelon; so the Ltiassons Dangereuses was 
not in bad company. The real cause of the scandal in 1782 
was the freedom with which “keys” to the novel were 
circulated in conversation, involving many contradictions, 
of course, but providing admirable opportunities for malicious 
gossip. 

Laclos did not wholly escape persecution for his book. 
The sale was not interfered with and no direct censure could be 
made on him ; in 1782 officers had the right to publish works 
not dealing with military affairs, without submitting them for 
the approval of the Minister of War. But there are many 
indirect ways of persecuting an officer and Laclos soon began 
to feel them ; moreover, the Ministry were sharp enough to 
see the political motives behind the book. Laclos had now 
no chance of rapid promotion (he was even made to wait a 
year longer than other officers of his seniority for the Croix de 
Saint Louis) and when later he published a pamphlet on a 
military topic, without obtaining formal permission, retribu- 
tion was swift. 

Laclos had received leave of absence from Montalembert 
to superintend the publication of his novel, and, with his super- 
ior’s connivance, had outstayed his leave six weeks, presumably 
to enjoy the pleasures of his sudden fame. The Minister of 
War could not take notice of this—Montalembert alone was 
responsible—but he sent a peremptory order for Laclos to 
rejoin his regiment. The object of this was plain; while 
Laclos was on detachment he would have few or no regimental 
duties and hence plenty of leisure for writing, but once back 
with the regiment he would soon find that duties rained on 
him, But Montalembert was his friend and Laclos was an old 
soldier. He rejoined his regiment indeed but immediately 

7 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

‘‘ went sick ’’ and remained sick for some months, and even had 
the skill to exact a gratuity of 800 livres for expenses. Mean- 
while Montalembert used his influence and when Laclos ceased 
to be ‘‘sick’’ he returned to La Rochelle. He had won the 
first round with the Ministry. 

Probably, his chief concern was to follow up his success 
effectually. In 1785 the Academy of Chalons-sur-Marne 
offered a prize for an essay on ‘‘ the best means of perfecting 
the education of women.” Laclos began to write an essay and 
afterwards turned it into a discourse De L’ Education des 
Femmes, a sort of pendant to Emile and the famous Discourse 
on the Inequality of Men.’’ It was not published until 1903 
and adds nothing to Laclos’s literary reputation. One sentence 
in it deserves quotation, because it shows where his thoughts 
were tending ; after he had argued that no improvement was 
possible in the education of women because society made them 
‘‘ slaves’ he adds: ‘‘ Know that people can only escape from 
slavery through a great revolution.’’ Perhaps it was lucky 
for Laclos that his treatise—which by the way is an example 
of thoroughly false reasoning from the ‘“‘ noble savage ”’ fallacy 
——was not published in 1785. 

Meanwhile Laclos had been putting into practice some of 
these educational theories. At La Rochelle there lived a 
family named Duperré, where there was a pretty daughter 
named Marie-Soulange. Laclos and she fell in love and on 
the 1st of May, 1784, the lady gave birth to a male child, 
baptised Etienne. Naturally, in a small Huguenot town like 
La Rochelle the scandal was considerable. It does not appear 
to have harmed Laclos, however ; he was still received in the 
best society, made rhymed compliments for Madame de Mont-. 
alembert and met “le Président Alquier’’ who was sub- 
sequently very useful to him in Revolutionary days.‘ He was 
also received into the literary society of La Rochelle, which 
had had the honour to rank Voltaire among its members. 

This incorrect proceeding on the part of Laclos was 
happily repaired by a marriage in May, 1786. The lady was - 
so delighted that she commemorated the event by a lapidary 
inscription upon a public building. The marriage was indeed 
a happy one—how could it fail to be after such auspicious 
preliminaries ? QOne explanation for Laclos’s action lies in 

8 

LIFE OF LACLOS 

his poverty. His wife had a dot of 5,000 dures a year. In 
1784 he had only his pay. A seduction was perhaps his only 
means of outwitting wealthier rivals and deciding the family. 
At any rate when he married, the death of his father had made 
him possessor of a small private income; which with his pay 
amounted to 4,500 lures. 

A day or two after the marriage, Laclos obtained a month’s 
leave and went to Paris with his wife. But the honeymoon 
was destined to interruption. There had been a war of military 
pamphlets over Vauban, in which certain topics of fortifi- 
cation were debated. Laclos published his views in a pamphlet 
disparaging Vauban’s defensive works ; this was highly dis- 
pleasing to the Minister of War who was a fanatical disciple 
of Vauban. Laclos also committed the imprudence of a breach 
of discipline by not submitting his pamphlet for official approval 
before publication. The Minister at once wrote a severely 
worded order to Laclos to rejoin his regiment at Metz, although 
he was on leave. Laclos got wind of this and lay perdu for 
nearly a fortnight with Mme. de Laclos in the Hotel des Milords 
where the emissary of the War Office finally unearthed him and 
delivered the order. Laclos had no choice but to obey. Even 
the charms of Mme. de Laclos, directed upon the Minister of 
War, failed to melt that functionary’s resentment and he 
refused to countermand the order, only too enchanted to have 
an opportunity of legally quelling this turbulent and far too 
clever subordinate. | 

Laclos’s effort to calf public attention to himself in his 
military capacity by this Vauban pamphlet was then a miser- 
able failure. From a military point of view he was no doubt 
right—at least Napoleon (himself an artillery officer) thought 
well enough of Laclos to make him a general; but woe to the 
officer who attempts to pierce through the pedantry of army 
councils with no weapons but sensible ideas, close reasoning 
and light sarcasm ! The officers who answered Laclos had two 
irrefutable arguments ; first of all, Vauban was a great French- 
man and had discovered everything there was to know about 
the science of fortification ; it was therefore impious to attack 
his principles and futile to attempt any other means of fortifi- 
cation. The other (of course) was that Laclos had written 
the ‘‘ Liaisons Dangereuses.’’ Fortunately, the merits of the 

9 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

dispute do not concern us. All we need note is that Laclos 
gained nothing by his pamphlet and lost a great deal; he 
received a severe reprimand from the War Office, was sent 
back from leave to his regiment at Metz, and some pretext 
was made to delay his Croix de Saint Louis for a year. 

This misadventure was decisive in Laclos’s life. He realised 
that the Government and the Ministry were prejudiced against. 
him, and with reason. He saw that he could hope for nothing 
from the Army but slow promotion by seniority; and this 
was insufficient for his ambition. He determined to leave 
the service and to try his fortune elsewhere. Since the public- _ 
ation of his book he had made friends with several’; 
distinguished people who had not only admired the author | 
of the ‘‘ Liaisons Dangereuses’ but felt the charm of his 
personality. Among these were the Vicomte de Noailles, 
the Duc de Lévis and the Vicomte de Ségur ; the last named, 
son of his persecutor, the Minister for War. Through their 
influence he tried to obtain a military post with the Turkish 
_ army in the summer of 1787, but this, as usual, was blocked 
by the Ministry who were determined to allow Laclos no 
opportunity of distinguishing himself on active service. Laclos 
consoled himself by writing a project for renumbering the 
streets and houses of Paris, on the soulless and mechanical 
system of modern American towns. 

It was now 1788, The meanest intelligences could perceive 
that some great change or at least reform was about to take 
place in the Government of the nation. Voltaire had laughed 
and reasoned the French into contempt for their political . 
institutions and revolt against Catholicism; Rousseau had 
filled their heads with ‘‘ noble savage ’’ chimaeras, sophistries 
of equality and vague expansive sentimentality ; the Encyclo- 
pedists and the example of the English had given them an 
itch for commerce and the useful arts so little honoured 
by the monarchy. The monarchy itself was in a condition 
of desolating decrepitude. The wave of sentimental loyalty 
_to Louis XVI at his accession soon spent itself and rolled back 
into contempt and hatred when it was found that an apathetic 
youé had given place to an apathetic imbecile, the nadir of 
whose intelligence may be judged by the following entry in 
his private diary: “14 Juillet, 1789, Rien.” The only ability 

| 0 

LIFE OF LACLOS 

in the royal family was that of Marie Antoinette ; hence the 
disgusting calumnies of the “ patriots’’. The best of the 
nobility were in favour of a change and deplored the abuses 
of the out-worn machine of government; the interest and 
insolence of the others were but too plain., Every Frenchman 
had become a social reformer, a friend of man‘and an inheritor 
of the mantle of Rousseau. Pamphlets and projects fell -like 
hail, especially after the taking of the Bastille ; the most insane 
‘reforms ’’ were propounded in the language of sages, the 
most impossible ideals were evoked in the name of reason, 
sensible ameliorations were demanded in the tones of raving 
sentimentality. It was clear to all that the millenium was at 
hand. . 

These troubled waters were exactly the element for a cool 
fish like Laclos. In 1788 he had taken his observations and 
had made up his mind. He easily persuaded the Vicomte 
de Ségur to introduce him to the Duc d’ Orléans. The duke 
was soon fascinated and dominated by Laclos’s superior 
intelligence. It was easy for the King’s brother to obtain 
a kind of permanent leave of absence for Laclos, who, without 
resigning his commision, entered the duke’s household about 
the end of 1788 with the post of supernunaerary “‘ secrétaire des 
commandements ”’ a salary of 6,000 livres and a lodging on 
the second floor of 27, Cour des Fontaines. 

II 
Second Period: 1789-1803 

Jules Janin, writing with all the accuracy of a literary 
journalist, says; ‘‘ The life of Choderlos de Laclos ends with 
the Liaisons Dangereuses.” On the contrary, it only then 
began. Laclos’s later life as Orléanist conspirator, Jacobin, 
prisoner in Revolutionary gaols, general under the Consulate, 
husband and father, is full of interest and quaint ironies. 
But is not the intention of the present writer to follow Laclos’s 
former biographers who in their zeal have re-written the secret 
political history of the Revolution, with many discussions 

II 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

upon military affairs, including a description of Kellerman’s 
dispositions at Valmy and a map of the battle. 

The part played by Laclos in the Revolution was tortuous 
and obscure, but not unimportant; the evidence is often 
indecisive, sometimes untrustworthy—remarks in memoirs, 
anonymous pamphlets, accusations of enemies. True to his 
character he himself reveals little or nothing. We catch 
glimpses of him through the smoke and din of Revolution, 
we perceive that his name was connected with important events, 
we observe that he obtained the reward of great abilities— 
many enemies. His part in the Revolution was not dramatic, 
like that of his friends Mirabeau and Danton. Like other 
politicians in other circumstances, he backed the wrong horse 
in the Duc d’ Orléans; when he, rightly, staked all he had 
left on Napoleon, he was too old and incapable to derive any 
real benefit for himself or his children. 

The reader may be surprised to find an ardent disciple 
of Rousseau and a “ friend of man,” at the centre of Orléanist 
intrigues. Was Laclos duped by Egalité’s pose? Did he 
believe this fat, debauched cousin of Louis XVI to be a true 
friend of liberty and the people ? The answer is decisively, 
No. Laclos joined the Orléanists from motives of self-interest, 
after a careful estimation of political possibilities. 

In 1789 hardly anyone in France wanted a Republic, no 
one believed the monarchy could be overthrown. Sincere 
believers in reform wanted at the outside a constitutional 
monarchy founded upon that of 18th century England. Laclos 
was playing a deeper and more far-sighted game, but like so 
many of the ci-devanis he entirely underestimated the forces 
of the Revolution. Apart from that enormous factor, which 
completely wrecked his calculations, his reading of the situa- 
tion was subtle and accurate, so accurate that the result he 
played for was that actually attained in the Revolution of 
1830 ; a Bourbon dynasty gave way to an Orléanist King. 

The Dukes of Orléans were always a nuisance to the 
French government. As the King’s brother, the Duc d’ 
- Orléans was naturally an enemy of the Court and at the head 
of any Fronde or important conspiracy or opposition to govern- 
ment which came along. It was therefore the tradition, 
rigidly observed, so to order the education and training of 

12 

LIFE OF LACLOS 

the Duc d’ Orléans that he became contemptible, debauched 
in habits, irresolute in character, incapable of public business. 
Still it was sometimes possible to galvanise an Orléans into 
activity. Retz succeeded fairly well with Gaston. Laclos 
determined to play Retz to Egalité and th avoid Retz’s mis- 
takes. Egalité hated Marie Antionette, was ready to do any- 
thing to embarrass her, was “ not without ambition ”’ but had 
a strong feeling of “‘I dare not.’’ Until Laclos came along, 
Mme. de Genlis had been his virtuous Lady Macbeth. 

The plot was a simple one. Orléanist agents were to create 
as much disturbance and political agitation as possible ; 
Orléans, by lavish charities and bribes (nearly ail the early 
Revolutionaries except Lafayette were inhis pay) and by 
posing as a friend of the people, an advocate of extreme 
reforms, was to gain popularity. Then, at the decisive moment, 
some pretext was to be taken to secure the abdication or 
forcible exile of Louis XVI, and Orléans was to be proclaimed 
a constitutional King, or, failing that, Regent to the Dauphin, 
who would be proclaimed Louis XVII. Laclos would of 
course have obtained a high, perhaps a dominant, post in 
the new government. In any case his fortune would have 
been made. To further this end Laclos, (it is said), drew up 
the democratic ‘‘ Instructions données aux baillages par 
le Duc d’ Orléans’ ; wrote pamphlets and got himself elected 
Commissaire on the ‘‘ assemblée electorale des citoyens nobles 
de Paris.”” He is also accused of fomenting riots. 

After the fall of the Bastille, Orléanist intrigues increased. 
Versailles was alarmed by the progress of the conspiracy. 
Unfortunately for him, Egalité himself became alarmed by 
the turn of events and allowed Versailles to parry his schemes 
by sending him on a trumped-up special mission to London, 
in October, 1789. Laclos went with him and continued his 
laborious direction of the conspiracy. Meanwhile the Duc 
d’ Orléans distinguished himself in London by offending King 
George, disgusting the émigrés and shocking society by his 
open affair with Mme. de Boufflers. The Duke, with Laclos, 
returned to Paris in July, 1790. 

Once back in Paris, Laclos plunged directly into political 
action. He was a prominent member of the early Jacobin 
club and edited their paper, the ‘‘ Journal des Amis de la 

13 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Constitution.” Although the Duc d’ Orléans had by this 
time exhausted nearly all his vast wealth, Laclos remained 
faithful to him, led the debates of the Jacobins in the direction _ 
favourable to the Duke, and tenaciously held to his scheme. 
Danton throughout was the friend of Laclos and was deeply 
involved in the Orléanist plot. In general, the ideas defended 
by Laclos were democratic ; he attacked the émigrés violently, 
advocated the plebiscite, liberty of the press, eligibility of all 
citizens to the position of deputy, election of Ministers by 
universal suffrage, and the sharing of inherited property equally 
among a man’s children. On the recovery of Louis XVI from 
a short illness, he protested against money being used to pay 
for special Te Deums “ as in the days of despotism ” and urged 
that the money should be given as dowries to “ destitute 
daughters of the conquerors of the Bastille.’ On the other 
hand, he naturally always advocated the continuance of the 
monarchy, with strong hints on the advisability of a change of 
dynasty. Less comprehensibly, he opposed the freeing of 
negro slaves in the French colonies. But his position among 
the early Jacobins must have been important, if we may 
judge by two facts. The first is that he was picked out for 
violent attacks by other clubs opposed to the Jacobins; the 
second that he persuaded the Jacobins to enroll Egalité among 
their members. 

The Orléanist plot finally came to a head in June and 
July, 1791, and failed, chiefly through the incapacity and 
timidity of the Duc d’ Orléans himself. On the morning of 
the 21st of June, 1791, Paris was in a turmoil at the news of 
the flight of the King ; his arrest at Varennes and ignominious 
_ return to Paris completed the confusion. By all except the 
ardent Royalists this was considered to be an act of war upon 
the nation and many held that it was equivalent to abdication. 
Republicanism made great advances. But Republicanism was 
not what Laclos wanted then. He argued that the King had 
virtually abdicated, that the throne was vacant and proposed 
that the Dauphin should be proclaimed as Louis XVII, with 
the Duc d’ Orléans as Regent. This proposal was diligently 
circulated by the Orléanists, but either from fear or policy, 
the Duke publically announced that he would not accept the 
Regency if it were offered him. But Laclos still persisted. 

14 

LIFE OF LACLOS 

On the 25th of June, the Assembly passed a decree sus- 
pending the King from his royal functions until the new con- 
stitution was presented. In July, they passed another decree 
proclaiming the “ inviolability ” of the King, which was really 
equivalent to pardoning the flight to Varennes and asserting 
his position as monarch in the new constitution. Laclos now 
played his last card. To understand his action, it must -be 
premised that any citizen might present a petition which other 
citizens would sign if they were in agreement, but the drawing 
up of petitions by groups, like political clubs, was not allowed. 
Laclos was addressing a very stormy meeting of the Jacobins. 
on the subject of a petition against this decree, when a mob 
(probably organised by Laclos’s agents), burst into the club 
and demanded that a petition should be drawn up there and 
then and carried the next day to the Champ de Mars for 
signature by the public. Laclos feebly opposed the project 
as illegal but appeared to yield to force ; in fact the document 
was drawn up by another hand, though Laclos subsequently 
added an important sentence toit. This led to serious results, 
including the riot, known as the Massacre of the Champ de 
Mars. The National Assembly parried Laclos’s petition by 
' prolonging the decree of the 25th of June. The Jacobins 
split up ; all but six of the members who were also deputies 
of the National Assembly withdrew and went over to the 
Feuillants, From this moment the Jacobins became the 
violent Republican force we know them as, and were im- 
placably hostile to Laclos. He had to leave the club ; his last 
visit was on the roth of August, 1791. He lost all favour with 
the Duc d’ Orléans, though he continued to draw a reduced 
salary until October, 1792. 

It is easy to see Laclos’s error in the Revolution. Though 
he was theoretically and perhaps sincerely a Revolutionary, 
he remained at heart a man of the ancien régime. Like so many 
theoretically wise men he lacked a certain suppleness; he 
had observed so closely, calculated so logically, planned with 
such foresight, that he could not believe any unsuspected. 
event, any unforeseen force, could overthrow his calculations. 
As Lord Chesterfield, in an earlier generation, persisted in 
trying to govern George II through his mistresses, according 
to the long-established rules of Court life, and failed ; so Laclos 

I5 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

attempted to thrust into power an impotent prince he despised, 
not realising that the French nation was thoroughly weary 
of such intrigues, and would have no more incompetent 
despots. 

In other respects Laclos was supple enough. Immediately 
after the affair of the Champ de Mars, he abandoned the 
Orléanists and proclaimed himself a Republican, He procured 
his election as Commissaire on the mumicipalité provisoire of the 
Section de la Butte des Moulins ; the next day he was appointed 
vice-president of the permanent Assembly of the section. 

The Jacobins remained suspicious and resentful; they refused . 

to admit him into the Commune, and thus narrowly the author 
of the Liaisons Dangereuses avoided complicity in the crimes 
of Robespierre and Marat, and the inevitable guillotine. 
Nevertheless the year 1792 was the summit of his career. 
His friend Danton included Laclos in the list of thirty com- 
missioners of the executive power, (29th of August, 1792). 
On the same day, another friend, Servan, then Minister of 
War, made Laclos Commissioner to the army of Luckner, 
with the rank and pay of maréchale de camp. 

Thereafter events followed rapidly. Laclos left Paris 
a day or two after the September massacres; prepared a 
plan for the defence of Paris, in the very probable event of 
a defeat of the Republican armies ; worked day and night to 
send troops and munitions to Kellerman and Dumouriez 
and was to that extent responsible for the wholly unexpected 
victory of Valmy. On the 22nd of September, 1792, the 
“ Republic, one and indivisible ’’ was proclaimed. In October, 
Laclos was appointed an infantry general in the non-existant 
Army of the Pyrenees. In December he returned to Paris 
from the south. He had been appointed Governor-General 
of the French établissments in India, and he prepared a plan 
for driving out the English with 15,000 men and 15 ships 
of the line. The governments changed and events occurred 
too rapidly once more for the satisfaction of Laclos’s am- 
bitions ; he was never Governor-General of India outside the 
walls of Paris, His enemies were now in power and profoundly 
mistrustful of him as a dangerous, cool conspirator and the 
heart of the old Orléanist conspiracy. Laclos vegetated for 
some months in Paris. On the 31st of March, 1793, Laclos 

16 

LIFE OF LACLOS 

was arrested, together with his old opponent, Mme. de Genlis, 
and the children of the Duc d’ Orléans. On the 4th of April 
Egalité was himself arrested. 

Laclos was released under surveillance on the roth of May ; 
in September he resigned his rank of general and his Governor- 
Generalship. But nothing could placate his ehemies and on 
the 4th of November he was re-arrested (when engaged in 
some experiments with “hollow cannon balls’’ on behalf 
of the Ministry of War) taken to La Force and subsequently 
transferred to Picpus. Egalité was guillotined on the 7th of 
November. 

Laclos was in great danger, especially just after the execu. 
tion of the Duc d’ Orléans, until after the fall of Robespierre. 
Why he was not guillotined remains a mystery. There is 
nothing intrinsically impossible in the story that while in prison 
he wrote some of Robespierre’s speeches for him, except the 
one fact that Robespierre was far too vain of his oratory to 
think of asking outside assistance. 

Laclos was kept in prison for thirteen months. Many of 
the letters he wrote to his wife are in existence but they are 
not of much interest. They breathe the monotony of prison 
life, are severely limited in scope by prison censorship; they 
show a certain stoicism and a warm family affection. The 
following two letters to his wife will serve as an example ot 
all the others and at the same time will give a sketch of Laclos’s 
life in prison. 

‘“‘7 prairial An II de la’ Rep. une et indiv. 

“This letter will indeed be short, my dear, for I have 
absolutely nothing to tell you. It is pouring with rain and I 
am well—that is all the news I can give you. I was wise enough 
to exercise this morning in spite of the horrible black cold ; 
but I made a little fire for my dinner, I am thoroughly warm 
at the moment of writing to you (4 o’clock in the afternoon) 
and I shall spend my evening in killing time with a few com- 
panions in misfortune. I shall not recognise any duration of 
time until I can employ it for you and near you. That indeed 
will be a happy period since it will be a time of both justice 
and happiness. God grant, first that it comes and then that 
it comes soon, Then, however much it rains, all our days will 
be fine ; until then I have no day at noon and I shiver in the 

17 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

sun. It is simply to relieve you of anxiety that I write this 
completely empty letter ; but you will see from it, as from the 
fullest, that I am well, that I think of you, and that I love you 
with all my heart ; is not that the main thing ? ”’ 

‘15 prairial An II de la Rep. une et indiv. 
“You are concerned that I have nothing to read! I can 
no longer read for pleasure. I read the papers as much as I 
can, because I have not ceased to be interested in our victories. 
For the rest, I only read to learn; I have made reading a 
labour, not arecreation. I have gone through Bezoult’s arith- 
metic again, to be sure that I can instruct my daughter in it; 
I have learned the new method of calculating, according to 
the new weights and measures, and I am now busy with book- 
keeping by double-entry, for eventual necessities. I am also 
looking for notes on rural economy. I think that is enough ; 
perhaps there are superfluous things init ; but that time alone 
can show.” 
Gradually Laclos’s situation grew better. His brother 
was released from the Luxembourg on the 30th of September, 
1794; Laclos came out on the 3rd of December, 1794. Soon 
after his release he obtained 10,000 /ivves from the government, 
being his pay as general and compensation from his imprison- 
ment, But the Directoire kept him in disgrace. For four 
years and upwards he was engaged in no public affairs, but 
only held the undistinguished post of trustee of mortgages. 
Thus, all Laclos’s ambitions were disappointed and his 
dreams of wealth and power shrank into the dull reality of an 
unimportant office appointment. For five years he played a 
daring often a shrewd, always a self-interested game ; time after 
time he seemed about to reach his objective and time after time 
he was disappointed or received nothing but an empty title 
of power without either its functions or its control of wealth. 
The irresolution of the Duc d’ Orléans wrecked his earlier 
efforts ; the enmity of the Jacobins and the Directoire kept 
him from important employment under the Republic. Except 
. for his brief and laborious part in Valmy, his ‘functions 
as general under the Republic were purely decorative. The 
truth is, he was regarded almost universally with suspicion, 
sand not a small part of that suspicion was aroused by his 
18 

LIFE OF LACLOS 

reputation as author of the Liaisons Dangereuses. The book's 
moral and veiled political purpose were overlooked or ignored 
and Laclos himself was regarded as a kind of political Valmont. 
When he tried to find out the charges upon which he was 
imprisoned, he could only discover that he was accused of 
being a dangerous person, a man of genius,‘ author of the 
Liaisons Dangereuses. No doubt genius is a sort of crime 
in an egalitarian state, but it was the reputation of his novel 
which caused Laclos to be regarded as a dangerous genius. 
His prison experience was disastrous tohim; the interminable 
months of apprehension and privation were too much for a 
man of his age. He left the revolutionary prison with all 
his fire and energy gone, prematurely senile, wrapped up 
entirely in his family and in a state of mind when he seriously 
thought of writing a sequel to the Liaisons Dangereuses to 
prove that “ there is no happiness except in a family.” 

The 18th Brumaire and the rise of Napoleon to power 
rekindled in Laclos some sparks of energy, and all his old 
ambitions, It is thought that he served the rising fortunes 
of General Buonaparte by anonymous pamphlets. At all 
events Buonaparte became his hero, ‘a prodigy in the art 
of ruling men,” an “ immortal general ’’ alone “‘ worth 30,000 
men in the field’’; Laclos was “full of confidence in the 
fortune and genius of Buonaparte.’’ In January, 1800, Buon- 
aparte made him a general of artillery and next month sent 
him to the army of the Rhine. Still Laclos’s evil genuis 
attended him ; he did nothing except pursue the advancing 
army in a post-chaise and was intrigued into the army of 
Italy. In May he was at Grenoble; in September at Turin 
and Milan where he met Stendhal and made a considerable 
impression on that writer’s mind. Later in the year he was 
in action in Italy—after serving all his life in the army, he 
received his baptism of fire at sixty !—but the great seige 
train he had prepared and the chance of using his “ hollow 
cannon-balls ” in real action were rendered abortive by the 
unexpected victory of Marengo, Once again fate thwarted 
him. 

During 1802 he was in Paris engaged in some artillery 
staff work. In May, 1803, he received orders to join the army 
of Italy and to take command of the artillery at Tarentum 

19 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

a greatly dreaded place owing to its unhealthiness. After 
a long and wearisome journey in great heat the old man 
reached his post, only to fall ill of dysentery. He died on the 
5th of September, 1803. His last letters were to his wife, 
General Marmont and Buonaparte. That to Marmont is 
pathetic and expresses keenly the misery, the anxiety and 
bitterness of his end: 

‘“‘ General, 

‘‘T am so near to absolute despair and my situa- 
tion is indeed so terrible that I think I have a sort of right to 
importune you, not as First Inspector, but as General Marmont, 
kind and sensitive, a friend to me and mine. 

‘You know already that the command you procured me, 
and in which you may remember my one desire was active 
service, you know, I say, that it has dwindled—without any 
hope of glory or other advantage—to keeping garrison 550 
leagues from my family and my friends, in the most unhealthy 
climate of Italy only to be considered afterwards as not being 
active service in the present war. 

‘Among the numerous victims to the unhealthiness of 
the district, I am one, with an illness such that the doctors 
only hope to bring me to a state where I can go and breathe 
the air of France, without which they assert I cannot be entirely 
cured, and in which I foresee I shall need long and costly 
attention. 

‘“The doctors have already reported to General Saint-Cyr 
and he is ready to authorise my departure when I have the 
strength, but this is my position : 

“ After having spent in this journey 6000 /tvres of my own 
money, in posting charges and in the buying and selling of 
horses, household establishment, etc, I find myself here with 
thirty /ouis of my running salary, with the expenses of a sick- 
ness which will come to three or four thousand francs at the 
least; moreover I have to travel more than 250 posts, in 
which the doctors say I cannot go more than ten or twelve 
leagues a day, which makes an expense of sixty or seventy 
days at inns, so that I must die at Tarentum if I do not receive 
the assistance of at least 12,000 livres. 

“Who but the First Consul can do me this service ? 

20 

CHARACTER OF LACLOS 

Who but you can ask him for it on my behalf? I have left 
my wife in Paris, encumbered with three children and with 
no pecuniary resources ; if she sold all her furniture she could 
not raise enough to get me away from here . . . when I left 
Paris I did not think the issue of my journey: “would be to come 
to Tarentum to ask for charity. 

“JT am very miserable; tears overcome me. Farewell, 
General, I rely on your friendship for mc.” 

IIl 
The Character of Laclos 

Errors in appraising Laclos’s character have two sources ; 
there is a persistent effort to describe him in terms of Valmont 
and a disregard of his peculiarly 18th century characteristics. 
To make the dominant trait in his character a sort of Machia- 
vellian volupté is merely substituting a literary fancy for such 
real evidence as we have. Doubtless Laclos pursued volupté 
in his youth—otherwise he could hardly have written the 
Liaisons Dangereuses—and there is a trace of Machia- 
vellianism in his make-up, But that is far from explaining 
what appears enigmatic and is complex in the man. 

That ambition was his. dominant passion through the 
latter part of his life can hardly be doubted by an impartial 
observer of his actions, Frustrated ambition was the force 
behind his writings, his conspiracies, his political theorisings : 
as, on a larger scale, the frustrated ambition of the minor 
gentry and bourgeoisie created part of the initial force of the 
Revolution. Love of money was not stronger in Laclos than 
in other men, but love of power, of considération, was very 
powerful. But merely to say he was ambitious does not explain 
him. 

The singular union of voluptuousness, false sentiment 
and arid utilitarianism was not uncommon among the makers 
of the Revolution. The French Revolution was not a puritan 
movement, like the English revolutions of the 17th century ; 
on the contrary it was avid of pleasure. ‘La Revolution a 
été fait par des voluptueux '’—the Revolution was made by 

21 

* 
ts 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

pleasure-lovers—says Baudelaire somewhere ; and it is true. 
That is one side of Laclos, But the pursuit of pleasure for its 
own sake takes the sweetness and the freshness out of life, 
brings ennui and distaste and a regret for lost innocence. 
These 18th century voluptueux—so given to reasoning—reasoned 
themselves into an admiration for sentiment, for wholesome 
family affection, for benevolence and justice ; an admiration, 
stimulated by Rousseau. This admiration was a matter of 
abstract conviction rather than spontaneous feeling ; 
consequently the sentiment of these people nearly always 
appears false, affected and theatrical. It is like Marie 
Antoinette playing shepherdess because she is weary of the 
Court ; it may be charming, but it is not genuine. When 
Laclos writes to his wife urging her to “‘ avroser ’’—to sprinkle 
—their daughter with “‘ her expansive sensibility ”’ he strikes 
the false note I am trying to define. It is like the flood of tears 
M. Diderot felt it necessary to shed at first seeing the aged 
Fontenelle, which (quite rightly) made the old gentleman 
very annoyed and sarcastic indeed. That gives us another side 
of Laclos. 

What I have called “ utilitarianism ’’ was partly a result 
of Laclos’s training, partly a result of the cynicism of the age, 
partly the creation of Encyclopedist propaganda. Under 
the ancien régime, money and the arts of making money, were 
not the sole and absolute test of merit as they are with us. 
Military capacity and success, learning and holiness, the 
dignity of the law, were all at least theoretically recognised 
as superior to mere wealth in the aristocracies of noblesse 
a’ épée, noblesse d’ église and noblesse de robe. Even literature, 
the arts and science were recognised as superior to mere 
wealth, a fact which is due, be it said, to the enlightened des- 
potism of Cardinal Richelieu and Louis XIV. But the result 
was that France was not a rich country like England and 
Holland and the useful arts were despised, often foolishly 
enough. The Encyclopedists (and Voltaire) argued that a 
rich country is a happy country and that sound political 
economy is the mother of the Muses. Across this again came 
the idealism of Rousseau, vaunting the charms of the small- 
holders’s life. Thus, we have the grotesque spectacle of an 
elderly artillery officer attempting to learn the science of 

22 

CHARACTER OF LACLOS 

agriculture by reading in prison a book on rural economy 
written by an abbé, of all people! Even their most ardent 
advocates will admit that there is no soaring on the viewless 
wings of poesy with five acres and a cow. 

To pursue the matter further; the social life of the 18th 
century, in which Laclos was readily accepted, with all its 
charm and ease, was cynical. That statement requires. no 
proof. But cynicism is very apt to consider ‘“‘ commodity ”’ 
as the one thing needful. Laclos did not escape the contagion. 
In his case this utilitarianism, this aridity of spirit, were fos- 
tered by the military life, by the study of mathematics, and 
a passion for rigidly logical argument upon false premises 
accepted as axioms. It is Stendhal’s ‘‘ Lo-gique,” the French- 
man’s delight to “‘ avoir raison’’; a wordy and arid virtue. 
To this, in Laclos’s case (as in Stendhals’) must be added a 
profound dissimulation, a desire to cover up. tracks, to leave 
no trace of activities, a love of subtle back-stairs manoeuvering. 
Laclos did notindulgein the childish concealments of Stendhal 
(pseudonymous signatures, letters in bad English, etc.) but 
he very effectually succeeded in hiding a large portion of his 
life. He had the egotist’s joy in wearing a mask. 

Laclos’s life was certainly a failure and the reasons for it 
are plain enough. He did none of the great things he wanted 
to do, made no mark on history, achieved no worldly success. 
But for his novel he would be completely forgotten. His 
methodical, calculating, tortuous, yet sentimental mind lacked 
the ‘‘something’”’ that gave men like Mirabeau, Danton 
and Napoleon their influence over others. He was more like 
Robespierre, fish-like and pedantic, without the reputation 
of being “‘incorruptible’’—a reputation Laclos certainly did not 
deserve. He had none of those sudden flashes of intuition, 
those lightening appeals to men’s hearts, that profound know- 
ledge of crowd psychology, which the great Revolutionaries 
had. That is why he would never have been a great general. 
No doubt he could solve military problems, as he worked out 
political problems, theoretically and at leisure. But he had 
eminent wea, but merely to point out that with practicalls equal op pee 
tunities in the Revolution, he failed to achieve anything fapoctont, 

His commanding position among the early Jacobins certainly appeared 
to promise a great future. Perhaps he was a little too old. 

23 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

not the gift of action. Perhaps he had worked out too many 
formulae of velocity and resistance, solved too many tactical 
problems on paper. At all events, he had a certain mental 
rigidity which made him a failure as a man of action. Only 
once did he combine his gifts successfully, his sentiment, his 
laborious observations, his tactical knowledge, his mathe- 
matical precision of construction, his sense of intrigue ; and 
that of course was in the Liaisons Dangereuses. 

Laclos’s religious beliefs were vague and unobstrusive. 
Like most educated Frenchmen of his generation, he found 
the pleasantries of Voltaire unanswerable objections to 
Christianity. But since he could not possibly be acquainted 
with the far more effective criticism of modern times, his 
attitude was perhaps the most intelligent which could be 
adopted. It would be absurd to expect a man with so little 
imagination and sense of mystery, a man so rigid and pedantic 
between the parallel lines of his logic, to perceive even, far less 
enjoy, the poetry of religion. He had no real sense of beauty, 
no ardent passion for 7é «4d, not a spark of Platonism ; 
elegance, convénance, the formal or delicately polissons beauties 
of 18th century art sufficed him. 

He appears to have taken his paternal duties solemnly. 
He was a doting husband in his old age, which is perhaps an 
argument for his having been a roué in his youth—when he 
had no longer the energy and presence to capture other men’s 
wives, his own became doubly precious. There is some reason 
to believe that he was a mari complaisant, that the creator 
of Valmont was himself Valmontised. Mme. de Laclos’s third 
child was born (5th June, 1795) only six months after Laclos 
left prison (3rd December, 1794) ; a letter from Laclos in prison 
to his wife, dated 4 sans-culottides An II (i.e. zoth September, 
1794) contains this curious and suggestive passage : 

“No, assurely, my dear, your silence of five days (not 
three days) created in me no doubt as to your feelings, but 
keen anxiety as to your health. It would be easier for me 
to think you dead than to think you had done wrong; but 
as both would forever annihilate all hope of happiness for me, 
the expressions might have been the same.” 

But this is only a conjecture ; and perhaps it is unkindly in 
a biographer to scrutinize such matters too closely. 

24 

MINOR WORKS OF LACLOS 

The final judgment on Laclos’s character is, I think, that 
he followed the spirit of his age almost slavishly ; he did not 
lead it and he does not personally incarnate it in a complete 
and striking manner. He was a great novelist but not a great 
man. i 

4 

IV 
Laclos’s Minor Works 

Laclos’s minor writings deserve but the briefest notice. 
It is sufficient to state that he wrote a pamphlet on Vauban, 
an unfinished tract on the education of women, and divers 
political pamphlets. His speeches, his journalism and his 
letters have only a biographical interest. The ‘‘ Education 
des Femmes ”’ has been published by M. Edouard Champion ; 
M. Caussy printed the Pamphlet, La Guerre et La Paix as an 
appendix to his biography. 

The poems of Laclos perhaps call for more notice; a 
collection of them was published in 1908 by Mr. Arthur Symons 
and M. Louis Thomas. These poems range from the four-line 
epigram to the conte in the manner of the innumerable 18th 
century imitations of La Fontaine; they contain songs, 
epistles and a rondeau. They are no better and no worse than 
the occasional pieces of scores of French writers of the age. 
Voltaire and Gentil-Bernard appear to have been his models. 
One Conte, Le Bon Chotx has a biographical interest, since 
it relates an anecdote of an amorous undertaking in which 
a ‘“ Bel Esprit ’’, who talks charmingly and goes for his books 
to lend the lady is worsted by a ‘‘ sot’ who merely makes love 
to her. The lady informs the “ Bel Esprit’ (who surprises 
her with the ‘‘ sot’”’) that she is not afraid of his writing a 
satire : 

‘‘ Car entre nous, ce que vous pourrez dire 
Ne vaudra pas ce que Cléon a fait.’’? 

1“ For, between ourselves, what you may say will not be worth 
what Cléon has done.”’ | 

25 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

And Laclos reflects in a characteristic vein : 

‘“ Soit a la Ville, a la Cour, al’ Armée, | 
Les gens d’esprit n’ont jamais les bons lots : 
Les sots ont tout, méme la renommée.? 

The other contes are stories of light love told in nimble, humour- 
ous verse, very much like that of Prior in English and Voltaire 
in French, though of course without the easy mastery of those 
great poets. There is a mediocre poem on Death which avoids 
none of the commonplaces and strikes out no new thought. 
There is a would-be crushing epigram on Madame de Genlis 
which has not much point and one of those carefully composed 
“impromptu” quatrains habitual with occasional poets— 
the explanatory title contains exactly as many words as the 
poem itself. The songs have been praised but are mediocre. 
The Rondeau is perhaps as good as any and will suffice to show 
the quality ot Laclos’s verse : 

‘“ Elle est a moi; cette aimable Rosine, 
Son coeur sensible a couronné mes feux ; 
Elle est Amoi... . puis-je etre plus heureux ? 
O volupté! J’éprouve ton délire, 
Et mon bonheur a surpassé mes voeux. 

Sein palpitant, voluptueux sourire, 

Lévres de rose et regards langoureux, 

Rosine a tout: cette aimable Rosine 
Elle est 4 moi. 

‘‘ En vers naifs dans mes chants amoureux, 
Ainsi, d’Amour je célébrois l’empire. 
Las ! Peignez-vous, mes transports douloureux. 
Lysis arrive: il accorde sa lyre, 
Puis chante aussi: ‘cette aimable Rosine, 
Elle est 4 moi ’,’’? 

i“ In town, at court, in the army, the men of wit never have the 
best shares ; the fools have everything, even fame.”’ | 

® The reader will already have noticed that the word ‘‘ Rosine” 
which ought to rhyme with “ délire, sourire " etc. spoils the correct 
thyme-scheme. We must suppose that it was written about a lady 

26 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

It is neat, charming, conventional verse, but other French 
poets of the 18th century—Dorat, Lebrun, Desmahis, Bernis, 
Gentil-Bernard, have done the same kind of thing much better. 
Those who have directed attention to these minor works 
of Laclos have not increased his literary reputation, may even 
have harmed it. He is aman of one book. * < 

V 
The Liatsons Dangereuses 

The 18th century in France produced at least four great 
novels, all love stories. They are Marivaux’s Marianne, 
Rousseau’s La Nouvelle Héloise, Prevost’s Manon Lescaut, 
Choderlos de Laclos’s Liaisons Dangereuses. A timid and 
prudish criticism has long witheld from Laclos the praise he 
deserves and, in spite of enthusiasts like Mr. Arthur Symons, 
M. Van Bever, M. Suarés (not to mention Stendhal), the novel 
is not yet correctly esteemed by the general reader. Behind 
the Liaisons Dangereuses there is a keen if limited intelligence 
and wonderful observation. The novel is constructed with 
almost faultless precision, the precision of a mathematician ; 
the intrigue and situation are developed with the forethought 
and care of a man skilled in tactics, a man accustomed to neglect 
no possibility. The characters are observed so nicely and 
rendered so vividly that they become real persons to us— 
indeed they are ‘‘ drawn from the life.” The story itself is 
so ingeniously unfolded, the interest so well kept up, that once 
a reader is caught by it, he is compelled to read on almost 
feverishly to see what will happen next. Finally, the style, 

with a name like ‘“‘ Elvire ”, which was changed for purposes of publi- 
cation. The following is a rough translation : 

“She is mine ! that charmingRosine, her tender heart has crowned 
my flame: she is mine . . . could I be happier? O voluptuousness | 
I feel your ecstacy, and my happiness transcends my hopes. 

‘ Palpitating breasts, voluptuous smile, lips of rose and languid 
glances, Rosine has them all: that charming Rosine, she is mine ! 

In artless verses in my amorous songs thus I proclaimed Love's 
power. Alas! Imagine my extreme pain. Lysis comes, tunes his lyre 
and then sings too: ‘ That charming Rosine, she is mine.’ ”’ 

Compare Bertin, Elégie iv. of Les 4mours. 

27 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

artificially varied for each character, is subtle, expressive 
and exactly adapted to its purpose; its very negligencies, 
which are intentional, reveal some trait of character, some 
psychological detail. Its faults are slight. A little too com- 
plaisant a dwelling upon erotic incidents; an occasional 
lengthiness and over-development of detail, the one insepar- 
able from a novel in letter-form, the other inevitable in psycho- 
logical novels, It is the most “modern” of 18th century 
novels, less remote from us than La Nouvelle Héloise or even 
than Manon. There is a possibility that the reader who picks 
up this book will have some feeling of prejudice against it ; 
I beg him not to be misled by the timidities and prejudices 
of ‘‘ official ”’ criticism—so often made without direct contact 
with the book criticised'—but to read it and to judge it for 
himself with an open mind. I am confident Laclos’s book 
can endure triumphantly any reasonable test. 

The Liaisons Dangereuses is an “‘erotic’’ novel; but 
that is not saying much, seeing that nine-tenths of the world’s 
novels circle round the same perennial topic. It is also a 
“ psychological ’”’ novel, if by that rather loose term we mean 
a novel in which the main interest is directed towards the 
analysis of character, rather than the narrative of events. 
This type of psychological love-novel, so common in this 
century, was very largely the creation of 18th century France ; 
perhaps it goes back as far as Mme. de La Fayette’s Princesse 
de Cléves. The Greek novel, the mediaeval romance, the 
Renaissance pastoral all treated of love indeed, but in a 
conventional, superficial, more or less romantic way. The 
hero and heroine were in love, got into all sorts of difficulties 
and adventures in consequence, were eventually united and 
left to be happy ever after. There was very little 
“ psychology ’’, or at least only of a very primitive sort ; 
nothing resembling the complicated,not to say tedious, subtlety 
of the love-poetry of Dante, Guido Cavalcanti and their 
numerous satellites. The 18th century novelists made a com- 
plete change of venue ; instead of taking the ‘‘ love interest ” 

11 need scarcely say that this does not refer to Mr, Saintsbury, 
whose antipathy to Stendhal and Laclos is well-known and is perhaps 
only one more of his delightful ‘‘ préventions.’’ I am thinking of the 

numerous manuals of literature published for the misguidance of the 
young. 
28 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

as a necessary but conventional theme or embroidery, they 
concentrated upon the actual relations of livingmen and women 
with ever increasing precision of observation and minuteness 
of analysis. This was a most important departure, It not 
only attracted a more mature and intelligent set of readers ; 
it made novel-writers a more considerable part of the world 
of literature ; it attracted writers who might otherwise have 
been moral essayists or dramatists. And it had the further 
consequence of a greater openness, a more frank discovery 
of the ordinary (or extraordinary) habits of lovers ; the female 
busts of the older type of novelist became full-length statues. 

There was and is no rational objection to this, so long 
as the writer is really an artist. No one has ever yet succeeded 
in drawing an exact line between what is permissable and what 
is not permissable in these matters; certainly if we excised 
from literature everything which appears improper to the rabid 
puritan we should castrate more than half the masterpieces 
of literature. But in dealing with 18th century French novels 
we have to use our judgment and to discriminate between 
those works which have literary importance and those which 
were written merely to tickle the appetite of ‘‘ amateurs of 
rare and curious facetiac.’’ I think that I should certainly 
rank among the last named the Jmirce of the Abbé Dulaurens, 
the Fecilité ou Mes Fredaines of Andrea de Nerciat and the 
Dialogues ou Tableaux des Moeurs du Temps attributed 
(but most doubtfully in my opinion) to Crébillon fils. The 
hasty judgment which consigned so many 18th century 
novels to this undesirable category has been revised time 
and again. Voltaire and Marivaux scarcely needed justi- 
fication; but the works of Casanova, Louvet de Couvray, 
Rétif de la Bretonne, Crébillon, Diderot, Prévost, and Florian 
even, have been one by one rescued from the “ Enfer”’ of 
improper books, examined impartially, and found to contain 
talents and sometimes even genuis. The Liaisons Dangereuses 
emerged as triumphantly as any. No doubt, the novels dis- 
cussed here are not to be handed to the Podsnappian Young 

} This is not the place to discuss the problem of authorship, but 
i will only add that Apollinaire’s evidence for attributing these dialogues 
to Crébillon seems to me no evidence at all ; ag es different in style 

from Crébillon’s other works and they lack the “ al purpose ”’ 
evident in his other work. j pert ie | 
29 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Person along with her morning tract, but they will be found 
interesting and serious enough by intelligent men and women. 

The sea of 18th century novels is large enough, but it 
is now moderately well charted. The writers hitherto men- 
tioned are about the most important (one might add Duclos 
and Marmontel) and are those principally relevant to a dis- 
cussion of the “‘ Liaisons Dangereuses.” Three writers may 
be picked out as the principal influences on Laclos : Rousseau, 
Marivaux and Crébillon fils. I do not say there are not others, 
but either they are not obvious influences or they are the same 
type of writer as one of these three. 

Marivaux’s Marianne is not only a delightful book by a 
delightful author, but had a decisive influence on many later 
18th century novels; Richardson was deeply indebted to it, 
and one cannot but regret that Marianne is not now accessible 
to English readers and that so little justice is done to it. The 
book is tremendously long and by its adventure side is related 
to the older type of novel; by its form of fictitious memoirs 
it decidedly influenced successors—Duclos, Louvet, even 
Casanova who perpetually hovers between fiction and memoirs. 
But its real departure was in bringing the novel away from 
princely and noble characters and giving the main part toa 
simple ‘‘ Marianne,” an enfante trouvée,1 and above all in its 
treatment of psychology. Marivaux was so far ahead of his 
contempories in delicacy of observation and character-study 
that they simply did not understand him. Almost the only 
other 18th century novelists who is so shrewd and profound 
is Laclos himself. Marivaux is one of the few authors Laclos 
quotes * and though what he says is not wholly approving one 
sees the influence of Marivaux in almost every letter of the 
Liaisons Dangereuses. Here is a page taken almost at hazard 
from ‘ Marianne” which will show how deeply Laclos had 
meditated that novel : 

“ Valville® doubtless knew where I was living ; yet I heard 
nothing said about him and my heart could not understand it. 

1 Who, of course, eventually turns out to be a missing heiress. 

* In his letters. 

* Notice the similarity of the names ‘‘ Valville ’ and ‘‘ Valmont ”: 
like Valmont, Valville was an “‘infidéle ’ but infinitely more tender. 
The Don Juan of Crébillon’s Egavements is named “‘ Varsac.” Laclos 
uses the name ‘‘ Vressac.”’ 

30 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Even if Valville had found a way to send me news of him, 
he would have gained nothing by it ; I had renounced him but 
I did not want him to renounce me; what fantasticality of 
sentiment ! 

“One day when I was thinking of this and in spite of my 
doing so (it was in the afternoon) I was to!d that a lackey 
wished to speak to me; I thought he came from my benefac- 
tress and I went down to the parlour, I scarcely looked at this 
pretended servant, who only showed himself sideways and 
handed me a letter with a trembling hand. ‘ From whom ?’ 
said I. ‘Look, Mademoiselle,’ he replied in an agitated 
voice, which my heart recognised before I did, since I became 
agitated myself. 

‘T looked at him when I took the letter and found his. 
eyes upon me ; what eyes, Madame ! Mine were fixed on him ; 
we remained a short time without speaking ; only our hearts 
had spoken when the convent door-keeper came in and told 
me that my benefactress was coming up, that her carriage 
had just entered the courtyard. Notice that she did not men- 
tion her name ; ‘ It is your good Mamma,’ she said, and then 
left. 

‘“*« Ah! Monsieur, leave me,’ I cried in distress to Valville 
(for you see it is he), who only replied by a sigh as he went out. 

“T hid my letter as I waited for my _ benefactress, 
who appeared a moment afterwards .. .”’ 

Might not that be a quotation from the Liazsons Danger- 
euses, from one of Cécile’s or Madam de Tourvel’s letters ? 
Its tone is much more the tone of the Liaisons than that of 
La Nouvelle Héloise. I am tempted to think that it was. 
Marivaux who taught Laclos to avoid all those extraneous. 
digressions (about English travellers, Alpine scenery, Italian 
music and what not) which so charmed the first readers of 
La Nouvelle Héloise and which we find an impediment to our 
pleasure in the book, Nevertheless Rousseau’s mind had 
probably more action upon Laclos than that of any other 
writer; but we see this in the general Rousseauism of his 
outlook and philosophy, not so much in any definite quality 
of his novel. The device of a novel in letter-form was very 
common in 1780; Laclos may have adopted it from fondness 

31 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

for La Nouvelle Héloise, but there were dozens of other models 
athand, The Liaisons Dangereuses is an attack upon civilised 
woman and the social customs which control her life. The 
characters all become unfortunate and unhappy. Why ? 
Because all more or less have erred. And how have they erred ? 
By a greater or less departure from the Rousseauesque “ laws 
of nature,”’ 

Laclos as a disciple of Rousseau would have us consider 
his characters somewhat in this way. Valmont makes 
seduction his aim in life because the sentiment of nature has 
been perverted by society to a cold and unnatural vanity which 
prefers to triumph rather than to enjoy. The malice 
of Madame de Merteuil is equally the result of a perversion 
of natural sentiment through a wrong education and the 
marriage de convenance, These two types of “ civilised ” 
wickedness prey upon the others—Cécile, Danceny, Madame 
de Tourvel—who, though naturally inclined to “ virtue ”’, 
are rendered vulnerable to their attacks through defects in 
the social system. Danceny has been condemned to an un- 
natural celibacy ; Cécile comes ignorant from a convent and 
is to be compelled to marry a man she has never seen ; Madame | 
de Tourvel is left alone by her husband and is childless, hence 
for all her “ virtue’’ she falls a victim to Valmont. And 
this after all has common sense it in; and it was not feigned ; 
these characters and these incidents existed in real life. Laclos, 
then, was justified in the contention which emerges from his 
book,—that the social customs of the upper classes in the 
18th century were such that they condemned many women 
almost inevitably to one or another form of unhappiness and 
often to ‘ vice.”’ 

It is from Crébillon fils that we can learn something of 
these conditions. He is a much maligned man who so far 
from being a monster of Don Juanism, loved his ugly little 
English wife dearly and was faithful to her all his life. His 
novels are a long pleading against cynicism in love and on 
behalf of sentiment. They are unrestrained in certain details, 
it is true, but far less so than is generally supposed and they 
are really so moral they are a little on the dull side. So far 
‘from its being true that “‘ there is nothing moral about ‘ The 
Sofa, A Moral Tale’ except its title,’ the whole book 

32 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

is ‘‘moral”’ in both senses of the word: moral because it 
is filled with observations and reflections on human life: and 
moral because the author’s intention is to urge his readers 
to choose the better part. But before touching any further 
on Crébillon it will be advantageous to give a brief sketch of 
the 18th century idea and practice of love and ‘marriage. 

The outward, established and lawful form in all classes 
was, of course, the indissoluable Catholic marriage. With 
the aristocracy it had certain peculiarities ; a girl was educated. 
in a convent, away from men and any knowledge of the world ; 
at fifteen or sixteen she was suddenly informed by her mother 
that ‘‘a marriage had been arranged” and a month later, 
with her complete ignorance of life, of herself, of marriage, 
of men, she would find herself wedded for life to a man she had 
not seen three times. The following account of an 18th 
century wedding gives the situation perfectly : 

‘‘M. de Rinville had proposed to M. de Bellegarde a husband 
for his daughter Mimi in the person of one of his half-cousins. 
who was said to be a very worthy young man. As M. de 
Bellegarde was an excellent father and above all things desired 
that the young man should “ please his daughter ’’—that was 
the usual phrase—a day was fixed; and, Mimi having been 
well instructed because she had a habit of never paying atten- 
tion to anyone, they went to dine with Mme. de Rinville where 
they found all the Rinvilles and all the d’Houdetots in the 
world. First of all the Marquise d’Houdetot kissed the whole 
Bellegarde family. They sat down to table, Mimi beside 
young d’Houdetot; M. de Rinville and the Marquise d’ 
Houdetot took possession of M. de Bellegarde; at desert 
they talked openly about marriage. After the coffee was 
served and the servants had gone: ‘‘ Come !”’ said old M. de 
Rinville, ‘‘ Here we are in the family circle, don’t let us be 
so mysterious. It’s a matter of Yes or No. Does my son suit 
you? Yes or No; and your daughter the same, Yes or No ; 
that’s the main point. Our young Comte is already in love ; 
your daughter has only to see whether he does not displease 
her, let her say so . . . Make-your decision, my goddaughter.’” 
Thereupon Mime blushed. And Mme. .d’Esclavelles trying 
to halt matters, asking for time to breathe, M. de Rinville 

33 

rs 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

‘went on; ‘ Yes, we had better deal with the settlement first, 
and meanwhile the young people can talk to each other.’ 
‘Well said, well said.’ And at that, they went to a corner of 
the drawing-room, And here was M. de Rinville announcing 
that the Marquis d’Houdetot gave his son an income of 18,000 
livres in Normandy, and the company of cavalry he bought 
him the year before; here was the Marquise d’Houdetot 
giving her diamonds, which are fine ones, and all of them. 
M. de Bellegarde retaliated by promising 300,000 lures 
as a dowry and a share in the inheritance. And they rose 
saying: ‘ Agreed,’ let us sign the contract this evening. We 
will publish the banns on Sunday; we will get the rest dispensed 

es | 

‘with and the marriage shall be on Monday’. 

Marriages so obviously made in Heaven could not be 
‘very successful on earth. The young people so brusquely 
bundled into matrimony were at the mercy of the first amour- 
ette which came along. The mariage de convenance has 
produced some singular freaks of morals. In Italy it brought 
with it the custom known as ‘‘ cicisbeism,’’ which was carried 
so far that the name of the lover was actually inserted in the 
marriage-contract.2 In mediaeval Provence the elaborate 
amatory code of “ /’amour courtois’’ was created, an essential 
article of which was the assertion that the lovers must not 
be married to each other, though the lady might be and 
generally was, married to someone else; one Court of Love 
distinctly laid it down that a husband could not be a lover. 
It is a perfectly understandable result of these arbitrary mat- 
ings. A delicate-minded woman could not possibly satisfy 
all her natural coquetry and sentiment with a mere “‘ lord 
and master,’’ who looked on her as a part of his property, a 
means of continuing his family. The ingenuity of women 
invented this kind of ‘‘ Platonic” love to gratify their finer 
sensibilities, while remaining faithful to their husbands in 
the flesh; the lover might sigh and serenade, protest his 
devotion, wear his lady’s colours, defend her in word and deed, 
sing her praises, converse with her and be smiled upon, but 

- he might not aspire to more substantial favours. 

1 Memoives et Correspondence de Mme, d’ Epinay, Quoted by the 
Goncourts in La Femme au XVIII Siécle. 
_ 8 So Stendhal says. | 
34 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

It was plainly a false position and a perilous one for matri- 
monial honour. In Italy, the problem of the erring wife was 
first settled by poison or dagger, later by the more amiable 
toleration of the “ cicisbeo’’ after a year of marriage. In 
France, where “‘ galanterie’’’ has always existed, matters were 
rather different and even more illogical. Husbands might do 
as they pleased, but wives must be virtuous ; a detected wife 
might be clapped into a Convent for the rest of her life on the 
mere complaint of her husband to the King. Plainly, then, 
the virtue of women consisted in that invaluable quality of 
not being found out. By the 18th century the delicacy and 
fine sentiment of ‘‘ ?’amour couvtots ’’ had disappeared and gave 
way to a refined but sensual promiscuity, in which the Kings 
of France from Henri IV to Louis XV had led the van.' But 
that imperious and sometimes absurd vanity of the French 
stepped in and made matters even worse. They were not 
content with a real and lasting passion, (which, however 
illegal or reprehensible, had a real excuse and cannot be 
refused human sympathy) ; they abandoned all true sentiment, 
though they continued to use its language ; and their “‘ affairs ”’ 
degenerated from sentiment to sensuality, from sensuality 
to the gratification of a vanity which had in it elements of 
base selfishness, cruelty and perfidy. Don Juan became the 
Duc de Richelieu, became Valmont, became the insufferable 
petit maitre. The object was to win as many women as 
possible, simply to boast of it; to ‘“‘ gaina reputation” as 
“irresistible? ; to attack ‘‘ our most fashionable women ” 
of the moment; and, when once the attack was successful, 
the triumph was to break away as quickly as possible, 
(especially if the woman were really in love) in as public and 
humiliating a manner as the amiable lover could contrive. 

That is what Stendhal was denouncing when he declared 
again and again that only the Italians understood love and that 
the French ruined everything by their vanity, as the English 
did by their ‘‘ phlegm.” And, indeed, could there be a more 
paltry and inexcusable perversion of the most delicious of 
human sentiments, a worse crime against that “ charme de 
la vie ’—the charm of life—so praised by 18th century poets ? 
Perhaps no more startling example of self-centred vanity ever 

} Louis XVI was incapable of leading anything. 
35 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

existed than the 18th century petit maitre. But as all things 
in life, even malicious vanity, have some compensation, 
the petits mattres were at least a considerable cause of the 
remarkable intelligence noticed in 18th century Frenchwomen. 
It is true they were often ‘‘ cruel, courteous, smooth, inhuman ” 
—Mme. de Merteuils, in fact—but the necessity for a constant 
defence against enterprising Don Juans, possessed of a whole 
strategy of seduction, sharpened their wits. All the odds were 
against them in this unequal battle. Sentiment and senses, 
frustrated by forced matches, warred against them; if they 
yielded, and were found out, an inconsistant and malicious 
‘‘ world ’ congratulated the man on a “‘ triumph ”’ and treated 
the unhappy woman as “ dishonoured ”’; if they yielded and 
were not found out, they had to suffer the arrogance, infideli- 
ties and exactions of lovers who held their reputation, freedom 
and happiness in their hands ; if they did not yield they were 
looked upon as hypocrites, or “‘ fausses prudes,’’ or were 

credited with lovers they had not, or were openly claimed ' 

by men they had refused. The 18th century woman needed 
all her charm and intelligence, all her perfidy and dissimulation, 
all the arsenal of feminine weapons to hold her own ; and in 
a society infested with Valmonts, a Mme. de Merteuil is a 
necessary consequence, almost a deserved revenge. 

Of course all the upper classes were not Valmonts and 
Merteuils.1_ There were plenty of “ honnétes gens’’ among 
the aristocracy ; and the bourgeoisie were then almost inexor- 
ably strict in morals, But the tone of society was both cynical 
and libertine; wonderfully refined indeed and glozed over 
with all the charm of the arts, but essentially false and worldly. 
Nothing was so ridiculous as for a husband and wife to be in 
love ;; it was “ du dernier bourgeois.” The husband went his 
way, the wife hers; they lived in separate apartments, met 
only at meals and always on terms of ceremonious politeness.* 
It is hardly a matter of surprise that the women followed the 
men in libertinage, that they in turn went from lover to lover, 
amusing themselves by ‘‘ taking away” a husband from a 

1 Witness that charming and benevolent Duc de Penthiévre whose 
innumerable charities and amiable character made him so universally 
beloved. 

*See the Memoires et Correspondences de Mme. d’ Epi 
the Goncourts’ book already referred to. ee tere 

36 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

young wife, a lover from the woman who really loved him. 
Among this 18th century fast set there was fierce competition 
for the ‘‘ man of the hour,’’ whether he were Field-Marshall, 
or petit mative; the gratification was almost wholly one of 
vanity. The women even had their secret “ petites matsons '’— 
small houses kept secretly for amorous rendezvous. The man 
in power was surrounded by women and if one of them could 
attract him, dominate him and keep him (as sometimes 
happened) she avenged herself and her sex by a tyranny of 
caprice ; during the 18th century France was governed, and 
not unskilfully, by women who who were the real force behind 
their powerful lovers. ? 

This was the society and these the situations studied by 
Crébillon fis in his novels, which were carefully read by Laclos., 
It is true that something must be deducted on account of the 
imagination of the novelist, it is true that he darkened the 
shades, but when we find his scenes so abundantly confirmed 
by memoirs and other evidence, they can be accepted as 
accurate enough. There is no reason to suppose that Crébillon 
was especially depraved in choosing these subjects; he was 
simply pursuing the study of morals rather further and with 
more freedom than his predecessors. The following page from 
‘ The Sofa ’”’ will give an idea of his verve in satire and at the 
same time complete this long digression on 18th century morals, 
The scene is between Nassés and Zulica, Zulica had a rendez- 
vous with a petit maitre who, with all the insolence of his race, 
sends a friend, Nassés (whom she had never seen before), 
to take his place. Zulica is first indignant, then tearful and 
pathetical, always insincere; Nassés flatters her, condoles 
with her, makes love to her and is successful. The following 
conversation takes place later in the same interview : 

““ Tam afraid,’ said Zulica, ‘ that you are not very delicate. 
‘ You wrong me,’ he replied tranquilly, ‘I am naturally very 
susceptible to love. But I admit I have possessed more women 
than I have loved!’ ‘ But that is infamous!’ she retorted, 
‘I cannot conceive how you can boast of that!’ ‘I do not 
1 u ° 
ila aiegeds 10 i tat ee oe aici aes ae 

tolerant and mistake petty reforms for love of liberty. The usual 
arguments of intellectual incapacity, &c, are absurd. ‘ 

37 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

boast of it,’ he answered, ‘ I simply say that itis so.’ ‘ I think,’ 
said she, ‘ that you have deceived many women.’ ‘I have 
abandoned some but not deceived them,’ he answered. ‘ They 
did not ask me to be constant, consequently I did not promise 
to be, and you will see that when there are no conditions, 
neither side can complain that any have been broken !’ 

““T should be very interested to know everything you 
have done,’ said Zulica. ‘ Must I give you a detailed history ? ' 
replied Nassés, ‘It would be long and I fear it would weary 
you. But I can obey you without risk by suppressing details. 
I have been ten years in society ; Iam twenty-five ; and you 
are the thirty-third beauty I have conquered in a regular affair!’ 

‘ Thirty-three !’ she cried. ‘It is true I have had no 
more than that,’ he replied, ‘ but do not be surprised ; I have 
never been fashionable.’ | 

““ Ah! Nassés!’ she said, ‘how I am to be pitied for 
loving you, and how hard it will be for me to depend on your 
constancy!’ ‘I fail to see why,’ he said; ‘do you think 
because I have had thirty-three women I love you any 
the less?’ ‘ Yes,’ she answered, ‘ the less you had loved the 
more I could believe that you would have resources left to 
love again and that your sentiment would not be entirely 
destroyed.’ ‘IJ think,’ he replied, ‘I have proved to you that 
my heart is not exhausted ; besides, to speak frankly, there 
are very few affairs in which sentiment enters, Opportunity, 
convenience, idleness, create almost all of them. People 
tell each other (without feeling it) that they are amiable ; 
they become intimate, without believing in each other; they 
see 1t is vain to expect love and they separate for fear of being 
bored. Sometimes they are deceived in what they feel; they 
thought it was passion, it was only inclination ; a movement, 
consequently not durable, which disappears in pleasures, 
while love seems to be re-born from them... .’’’! 

The last few pages are merely a sketch to indicate the 
literary and social background of the Liaisons Dangereuses ; 
they do not pretend to any extensive examination of the 

1 Le Sofa, pp. 295, 6, 7. Oeuvres de M. Crébillon le fils, ondres, 1772. 

I am confident that the unprejudiced reader will feel that Crébillon 

is attacking heartlessness and excess, not defending them or inculcating 
them, 
38 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

novel or of the life of the time. If I have dwelt rather upon 
the defects and shortcomings of 18th century society,the reason 
is not that I am blind to its charm, but lies in my theme ; 
if we are to understand Laclos’s book we must perpetually 
keep in mind that it is an attack upon abuses !nherent in the 
18th century marriage system, code of morals and education 
of women. It was necessary to indicate these abuses. I 
know that they are not the whole of 18th century life, but 
they are the conditions under which his characters live, through 
which they dominate and torture others or by which they 
suffer. Again, it would be easy to find other literary influences 
in Laclos—Voltaire, the comedy writers, Montesquicu --but 
these are sufficient to show his principal literary affinities and 
the genre of novel which he adopted and developed. If he 
has less delicacy of feeling and less subtlety of analysis than 
Marivaux, he has more unity of action and a nearer approach 
to tragic power. He has not Rousseau’s eloquence and passion 
but he is less verbose and his characters are truer to real 
life. And though the form Laclos selected shows he had little 
reliance on his powers as a writer of dialogue, (the hardest 
part of novel-writing to a novice); and though Crébillon 
fils is a skilful, if verbose, writer of dialogue, and a sharp 
observer ; nevertheless Laclos as a novelist is superior to 
Crébillon in almost every respect. 

One test of a novelist’s power is the creation of characters 
so vivid that they seem to us not inventions but real persons, 
It is an inherent gift which may indeed be developed by 
practice but cannot be attained by any amount of labour 
ifit is not already in the man ; either he has it or he has not. 
The characters of the ‘“‘ Liaisons Dangereuses’ possess this 
quality of vividness, this life of their own, which make them 
as real to us as the personages we meet in the brilliant memoirs 
of the age. They have a fidelity to what one might call tradi- 
tional human characteristics which allows us to recognize 
similar characters under the changed exterior of modern 
life; but their fidelity to 18th century characters is the source 
of their striking vitality. Laclos lays bare layer after layer 
of their souls until we know them as an anatomist knows the 
Structure of a body. There is practically no one who now 
dares to make the suggestion that the characters of the 

39 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

“Liaisons Dangereuses ”’ are not true to the life of the time. 
A learned French writer, while compelled by the evidence 
to admit this, makes the quibble: ‘‘ They existed, but not 
in the same circles.’ How does he know? There were 
feuds and cliques enough in this society, but any ‘‘ gentleman ” 
could, if he so desired, be introduced into almost any circle, 
even the most aristocratic, even the most literary, which last 
was the most jealously guarded. 

Valmont is the most striking character in the book, perhaps 
because he is the most familiar. He is one of the innumerable 
avatars of the protean Don Juan. As someone recently 
suggested (I think it was Mr. Arnold Bennet) there is still a 
great deal to be done with Don Juan ; he is capable of infinite 
developement, infinite explanation, Sometimes, when reflect- 
ing on the character, one is tempted to think of him as one 
of those unkillable survivals from a primitive and remote 
civilisation ; a survival of a once victorious type from an age 
of rapine and perpetual war when it was expedient that the 
nimblest male should capture as many females as possible, 
a relic of primitive instincts which have long become obsolete, 
hike those of gamblers, or of the gentlemen who shoot tame 
pheasants in the fields. But Don Juan is never a fool, on the 
contrary ; and for brute force he substitutes an infinite cunning, 
an abysmal perfidy. The type is strikingly vigorous in France ; 
in England it occurs, but not so openly and with less feline 
grace. France has but rarely been afflicted with such gentry 
as the Restoration ‘“‘ cullies ’’ who, at sight of a woman, uttered 
a sort of amorous ‘‘ View Halloo! Hark forrard !’’, like the 
fox-hunters they were. An excellent sketch of the 17th 
century Don Juan occurs in the Memoirs of the Comte de 
Grammont. Hamilton represents Saint-Evremond (who was 
a sage and an Epicurean) rebuking Grammont in these words ; 

“Ts it not true that as soon as a woman pleases you, your 
first step is to find out if someone else loves her; and the 
second to exasperate her, for the last thing you trouble about 
is to make her love you? As a rule, you only enter the lists 
to disturb someone else’s peace. A mistress who had no 
lovers would have no charms for you, and be without value 
for herself, though she possessed them,’”? 

1 Mémoires du Comte de Grammont. 1760. Tome I, p. 87. 

40 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

But the Comte de Grammont was a gentleman and a wit ; 
there was no cruelty in his vanity, no perversity in his infidel- 
ities. He was fickle but not cold-blooded. It was reserved 
for the 18th century to rob “ gallantry” of all its charm 
by importing into it a lawless arrogance, a kind of misdirected 
ambition, seeking to triumph over and crush women, losing 
all respect, all poetry, almost all pleasure even, and retaining 
nothing but a cynical gaiety and a morose sense of superiority. 
Vauvenargues has intimated a character of the Valmont sort 
in his ‘‘ Phalante ”’: 

‘He knows neither love nor fear, neither faith nor pity. 
He scorns honour as much as pity; he hates the Gods and 
the laws. Crime in itself is a pleasure to him... Dissimulat- 
ing and implacable in his hatred, fierce and barbarous in his 
vengeance, eloquent only to persuade to crime and to pervert 
innocence, his ferocious and indomitable nature loves to trample 
under foot humanity, prudence and religion ; he lives sullied 
with infamy ; he walks with his head up; he threatens the 
wise and virtuous with his glances; his insolent temerity 
triumphs over the laws.’’! 

Is not that the mental physiognomy of Valmont? The 
same defects can be recognised in Valmont’s cynicism, in his 
admission that he 1s always most roused to action by opposi- 
tion, in his diabolical perversion of Cécile’s ignorance, in his 
extraordinary temerity, in his delight at the agonies of Mme. 
de Tourvel, in his perfidy, and his contempt for religion, 
notably in feigning contrition and piety in order to get in 
touch with his mistress again. Contemporary opinion, indeed, 
identified Valmont with several French noblemen, The 
Goncourts say: 

“ The only difficulty was that too many models were 
found. Did not Valmont bring to peoples’ lips the name of 
a famous man? Did not M. de Choiseul begin his great career 
by this gle of a man of amorous successes, of a pitiless méchant, 
of a consumate roué, achieving his aim with an air of careless- 
ness, never making a step or uttering a word without a project 
against some woman, dominating women by sarcasm, threat- 
ening them with his wit, triumphing over them through their 

? Vauvenargues. Caractéres. 1747. 

41 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

fear ? But why speak of Choiseul ? Had not Laclos the proto 
type of his creation under his eyes in the terrifying figure of 
the Marquis de Louvois, in the figure of that Comte de Frize 
amusing himself by torturing Mme. de Blot ? ”? 

Some writers on Laclos, strong in their own innocence, 
have protested that Valmont is an exaggeration, that such 
a man did not, could not, have existed. Even in the 18th 
century Grimm asserted that the ‘‘ motives” of Valmont 
and the Merteuil woman were inadequate ; but Grimm was 
a German baron and not a Frenchman and he did not know 
everything about the life of his time. Here is a desolating 
little tragedy from real life, quoted by the Goncourts, a miser- 
able little tragedy, recalling the ‘‘ projects’’ of Valmont on 
Mme. de Tourvel, where the protagonist and villain is no less 
a personage than the Duc de Richelieu. 

“So lived, so died, the wife of a mirror-maker in the 
rue Saint Antoine, Mme. Michelin, the eighteen year old 
fair-haired girl seduced by Richelieu. At first it was only 
the habit of seeing every morning at mass at Saint Paul’s 
a good-looking unknown man. Then, as soon as she had 
blushed at some ordinary compliment, Richelleu was at her 
shop, buying mirrors from the husband. And almost immedi- 
ately, deceived by a letter purporting to come from a Duchess 
which brought her to Richelieu’s petite maison, she was face 
to face with the man she loved, but loved innocently, and, 
as she said, ‘‘ without wanting to do wrong.”’ From that day, 
how many tears were dried only by the vanity of saying 
‘“ Monsieur le Duc’”’ to the lover who played so cruelly and 
with such effrontery with her scruples, her tortures, her last 
innocences! The poor little bougeoise began to pine away. 
Richelicu himself noticed she was changing. She tried to 
forget herself; but, even in pleasure, this wail escaped her, 
“Ah! it is all over. I am miserable!” And kissing her 
lover’s hand, she left him forever, left him to die . . . Some 
time later, Richelieu’s carriage over-took a man in deep mourn- 
ing; it was Michelin, who two days before had buried his 
wife. Richelieu took him into the carriage to watch 
him weeping.’ 

?Goncourts. Op. Cit. Vol I, p. 204. 
_ 2 Vie privée du maréchal de Richelieu, contenant ses amours et ses 
intyvigues. Paris. Buisson. 1791. Vol. III. Quoted by Goncourts. 

42 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Is it necessary to quote more evidence, like the extra- 
ordinary account of the lover who bribes servants, conveys 
letters, even breaks into a woman’s bedroom at night, given 
by Clélie in Le Hasard du Coin du Feu? Such perversity, 
such wantonness of cruelty to the most charming of living 
things ; such a monstrous injustice in repaying the tendcrest 
and most disinterested of affections with contempt, humilia- 
tion, death ; such tampering with innocence, and such abuse 
of power (the grand seigneur remaining tranquilly aloof in 
the privileges and immunities of his rank) ; such a crime makes 
one shudder. Who can fail to feel indignant at such a story, 
who can wonder that the streets of Paris were red with blood 
of ‘ aristos’’ and the walls echoed with shouts of ‘‘A la 
Lanterne ’’ when such abuses of power occurred ? Who will 
not feel that the very grave-stones of such victims cried for 
vengeance ? And who, after such evidence from real life, 
can assert that Valmont is a fiction, that he is false to human 
nature, that such cruel arrogance never existed ? But many 
who admit the verity of the ‘‘ Liaisons Dangereuses ’”’ ask 
us to believe that Laclos was himself a Valmont, that his 
book is a kind of manual of seduction based upon the practice 
of these pirates of love. It is an absurd argument, though it 
is the current interpretation of the book. Lax as sexual 
customs were, the most eminent and powerful of the race of 
Valmont would scarcely have dared to issue a written con- 
fession of his own infamy in his lifetime ; how could a poor 
artillery captain have ventured to do so >? His book was an 
attack on, not a defence of, the Valmonts. Whatever obtuse 
people like Grimm and Mme Riccoboni might say, the govern- 
ment of the day was sharp enough to see the satirical and 
reforming purpose hidden under the book’s cold effrontery ; 
had Laclos been really a Valmont he would have been dis- 
graced from the army. Besides, how is it that we find him 
immediately afterwards beginning a serious treatise on the 
education of women, denouncing abuses; how is it that a 
few years later he is an amiable husband and expansively 
sentimental father ; if he were a Valmont ? Can one conceive 
of a Valmont or a Richelieu loving his wife and children ? 

1 Le Hasard du Coin du Feu. Crébillon fils. Oeuvres. Londres 1772. 
Tome III. pp. 435. 

43 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Admit that reformed rakes make good husbands—-but has 
not the cynicism of a Valmont or a Richelicu gone beyond 
reformation ? 

And what of Mme. de Merteuil, Valmont’s female counter- 
part, whom necessity has quickened to a yet more subtle 
cunning, in whom there is an even more diabolical ingenuity 
in “‘ruining’’ her enemies? Is she an invention, offensive 
to the virtue and French blood of Mme. Riccoboni? By no 
means. She is the female 77poste to Valmont’s attack on her 
sex. It is less easy to trace through the century the Merteuils 
than the Valmonts; complete secrecy was essential to them 
‘as the noise of scandal was to the men. Their dominant passion 
was not so much vanity—though of that they had plenty— 
as malice (méchanceté) that frightfully efhcient and unscrupu- 
lous female malice which ‘‘ makes a goblin of the sun.”’ Sen- 
suality they had, indeed, but not the indulgent good nature 
which so often goes with it ; theirs was a hard sensuality, hard 
and bitter as their rouged mouths, whose gratification could 
hardly exist except at the expense of a man’s bitterness and 
humiliation or a woman’s tears.!_ How cynically Mme. de 
Merteuil dismisses Belleroche, entraps Prévan, takes Danceny 
from Cécile! Where she would be almost incredible, were 
it not for her youth and subtlety, is in her ability to keep her 
actions secret. But look at this portrait of a Mme. de Merteuil 
a Vage de retour, when self-indulgence has marked itself on 
her face and long immunity has rendered her careless of 
constraint. 

‘“ Madame de Sénanges had been pretty, but her features 
were worn ; her languid and weary-looking eyes had neither 
fire nor brilliance. The paint which completed the decay of 
the poor remnants of her beauty, her outrageous clothes, 
her immodest bearing, only rendered her more insupportable. 
She was a woman who retained none of her former graces 
except that immodesty which youth and charm may render 
pardonable, although it dishonours both ; but a woman who, at 
a more advanced age, offered to the eyes nothing but a picture 
of corruption, which cannot be looked at without horror. 

‘She had some wit, I mean that sort so commonly found 
in society ; what she said was nothing, but she spared nothing, 

1See etter CXXXITI. 
44 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

always was malicious; and, never thinking good, was not 
afraid to say what she thought. She had the Court turns 
of phrase, bizarre, negligent, new or renewed; she helped 
them on by a nonchalant, drawling tone, an affected laziness 
which is sometimes thought natural and, in my opinion, 
is merely a method of boring more slowly a spite of her 
rare talents for frivolousness, she sometimes abandoned it 
and discoursed in a self-opinionated way , without judgement 
and without knowledge, she did not fail to judge ; battening, 
moreover, on sentiment and probity and always amazed at 
the excessive “ déréglements de son siécle,’’! over which she 
frequently lamented.’”? 

The young man who thus describes Mme. de Sénanges 
is a kind of Danceny, still mnocent, and in love with a girl, 
who is a better and more intelligent Cécile. The harpy decides 
to ‘‘ take the young man away”’ from his Cécile (and from 
another older woman who 1s also after him) and the wretched 
youth is paralysed by her attack, yields weakly, (as Danceny 
does to Merteuil), loses the girl he really loves and is reduced 
tomisery. Those who think Crébillon’s novels are not evidence 
should consult the secret mémoirs and other documents 
referred to by the Goncourts. In their rather hysterical style, 
they sum up the Merteuil type of woman in a couple of pages, 
from which the following phrases may be taken : 

“Woman equalled man, if she did not surpass him, in 
this hbertinage of amorous wickeness . . .4 In certain rare 
and abominable women® deceit rose to an almost satanic 
degree. A natural insincerity, an acquired dissimulation, 
a controlled gaze, regulated features, an effortless lie in the 
whole being, a profound observation, a penetrating glance, 
a domination of the senses, a curiosity and a desire for 
knowledge, which allowed them to see in love nothing but 
facts to collect and meditate; to such faculties and such 

1“ Dissoluteness of the age,’’ almost the very words used by 
Mme. de Merteuil in one of her letters. 
_ “Les Egarements du Coeur et de l’Esprit. Crébillon fils. Oeuvres 
eas pp. 157. 
oncourts. Op. cit. Vol. 1. pp. 202, : 
at MeMeacee : si oT 
_* The abominable Mme. de Brinvilliers was a kind of Merteuil among 
poisoners, in the 17th century. 

45 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

dangerous qualities these women owed, from their youth, 
the talents and policy which might have made the reputation 
of a Minister.’”? 

These two, Mme. de Merteuil and Valmont, are the active 
characters whose strong malignant force controls to a greater 
or less extent the other passive characters, delivered into their 
hands either through their own weaknesses or through the 
imperfections of social customs. Danceny, Cécile, Madame 
de Tourvel, Madame de Volanges, and Madame de Rosemonde 
are, therefore, less striking characters but are none the less 
sketches from 18th century life. Danceny is rather a con- 
ventional character—the poor young man of good family 
who has little or no experience of life. He is, perhaps, the 
most literary of Laclos’s characters ; I suspect he was taken 
directly from Crébillon. In any case his situation between 
Cécile and Mme. de Merteuil is practically equivalent to the 
situation of young Meilcour between Mme. de Sénanges and 
Mademoiselle de Théville in ‘‘ Les Egarements,’ though 
Mlle de Thevitle 1s a much more estimable character than 
Cécile. Danceny is “still at the age of sentiment,” as people 
then put it; he really loves Cécile, but he is too young to 
feel the full strength of passion,too inexperienced to resist 
the wiles of Mme. de Merteuil. As Florian puts it in his 
\Mémotres dun Jeune Espagnol, (which are his own mémoires) 
‘“T did not much regret Henriette ; in paying her attentions 
it was not she I loved, it was the pleasure of loving a woman 
I had sought ; as soon as my mind was occupied by something 
else, I ceased to think of love.”’ Florian was sixteen at that 
time ; Danceny is several years older and hence not quite 
so casual in deceiving Cécile. 

As for Cécile herself, she is a masterly study of the 
‘‘ Caillette’’ in process of formation. She is one of those 
pretty girls so often represented in contemporary engravings, 
with their delicate oval faces, facile smiles and coquettish 
brainlessness. The same mixture of childishness and pre- 
cosity may be seen in some of Greuze’s heads_ She is a creation 
of the 18th century treatment of women. As very young 
children they caught a glimpse of fashionable life in their 
parents’ house ; then they were suddenly taken away, shut 

1 See also Mémoirs of Tilly, Richelieu, Mme. d’Epinay and others. 

46 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

up for years in a convent, and kept in ignorance of life and 
particularly of sexual matters, while they acquired the 
‘““accomplishments,’’ Meanwhile, the occasional glimpses of 
the outside world during brief outings, the visits of well- 
dressed, rouged, perfumed, patched Mammas accompanied 
by fashionable friends, whisperings of marriage and the de- 
lights of the “‘ monde,”’ filled their silly little heads with a 
fever of curiosity and longing for freedom, amusement, 
les agréments, les dissipations, Once free from the convent 
restrictions they often enough became “ cazllettes.” Here is 
Duclos’s description of the cazllette - 

‘“A woman of this character, or rather of this species, 
has neither principles, passions nor ideas. She does not think, 
she believes she feels ; her mind and her heart are equally 
cold and sterile. She is occupied by little things only, talks 
only in commonplaces which she takes for new expressions. 
She brings everything back to herself, or to a detail which 
has struck her. She likes to appear well-informed and thinks 
herself necessary to people. Vain bustle is her element ; 
clothes, decisions on fashions, and ornaments are her occupa- 
tion. She will cut short the most important conversation 
to say that this year’s taffetas are dreadful and in a taste 
which shames the nation. She takes a lover as she does a 
dress, because it is the fashion. She is troublesome in affairs, 
and boring in her pleasures. The caillette of quality is only 
distinguished from the bourgeotse caillette by certain words 
of a better usage and different objects; the first tells you 
about a visit to Marly and the other bores you with details 
of a supper at the Marais.’’? 

That is what Cécile would have become a year or so after 
her marriage with Gercourt, had it taken place. As to Mme. 
de Volanges, she is the French ‘‘ ma mére,” out of touch with 
her daughter whose sympathy she had never gained, yet 
sincerly anxious for the child’s happiness. She is rather stupid, 
and her “ virtue’ is not particularly clear-sighted ; the man 
against whom she warns Mme. de Tourvel so unctiously 
seduces her own daughter, under her very nose, as it were. 
Her sudden gush of feeling towards Cécile and her design of 

+“ Confessions du Comte * * * .’ Oeuvres Complétes de Duclos 
Paris, 1806. Tome VIII. pp. 124-5. 

47 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

marrying her to Danceny are easily thwarted by the astute 
Mme, de Merteuil, in whose hands she is as wax. Mme. de 
Merteuil plays on her weaknesses and prejudices with con- 
summate skill. And here we can only stand back and admire 
the subtlety of Laclos’s psychology; in every case where 
Valmont and Mme. de Merteuil ‘“ triumph,” it is through 
their acute perception of the weaknesses in others and their 
own self-command. The weakness in Cécile is ignorance, 
sensual curiosity, lack of character ; in her mother worldly 
prudence, conventional virtue and limited intelligence ; in 
Danceny inexperience and credulity; in Mme. de Tourvel 
a number of very minor faults all arising from a kind of vanity ; 
it is through flattery of a very subtle sort that Valmont 
makes her love him, and that love once created he has 
a cardinal weakness to play on. Mme. de Volanges is a very 
ordinary sort of woman; her ideas move in a narrow 
circle, she is the slave of convention. She is in no respect 
remarkable, but merely an 18th century embodiment of that 
perpetual type, the well-intentioned mother with no particular 
intelligence. 

Mme. de Rosemonde is, as it were, a kind of chorus to 
the tragedy, aloof in the detachment of her great age, but 
with that keen mind and sympathetic indulgence for human 
weakness so noticeable in many old ladies of the time. She 
is not a Mme. du Deffand or a Mme. de Tencin, but she is of 
their class and type; she has not aged stupidly, but with 
wisdom. 

Mme. de Tourvel is a little apart from Laclos’s other char- 
acters because in her he essayed to create an ideal type, the 
Rousseau-like ‘‘ virtuous woman,” all sentiment, compassion, 
benevolence,! trust. To some extent, then, she is an artificial 
creation and although her character is worked out with 
minute care it is not wholly convincing. She does not carry 

64 

1 It has been rather acutely remarked that a clue to Mme. de 
Tourvel’s character may be found in her confusion of ‘‘ virtue ’’ with 
benevolence ; a common 18th century fallacy. When Valmont gives 
money to a poor cottager, she cannot believe that he can be as wicked 
as people say; for if the wicked are benevolent what is left to the 
virtuous ? But a man may smile and smile and be a villain: lTaclos 
is perhaps the first 18th century writer to point out that mere benevo- 
lence and charity are not synonomous with virtue; that even in the 
worst men there may be some benevolence, as there may be malevolence 
in the best women. 

48 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

that startling conviction of reality such as we feel with Valmont 
and Mme. de Merteuil. Yet many of her traits are perfectly 
in harmony with what we know of 18th century women. 
Among the Merteuils and Sénanges, the fausses #rudes and the 
coguettes and the carllettes were many women of character and 
intelligence, some capable of an almost sublime devotion 
in love. 

In that century are to be found some touching examples 
of women’s passion. There is Mlle Aissé with her whole-hearted 
love of the Chevalier Aydie, of whom she wrote : 

‘There are many people who never knew the satisfaction 
of loving with sufficient delicacy to prefer the happiness of 
what we love to our own.” 

There is Mile de Lespinasse with her passion for Guibert 
and the famous love-letter : 

‘“ From every moment of my life, 1774. 
‘‘ My dear, I suffer, I love you and I am waiting for you.” 

There is Mme. de la Popeliniére whose love-letter to the 
faithless Richelieu is an unconscious masterpiece of pathos, 
with its rush of unpunctuated sentences, its humility, its 
ardour, its repetition, ‘‘ Mon amant mon coeur ”’ like a des- 
pairing litany of love.! There is that Princesse de Condé 
stooping from her great rank to love passionately, disinterest- 
edly, purely, a young officer. Even the cynicism of relatives 
is touched by this unselfish, ardent love; Condé himself 
relents ; there is talk of a marriage ; but suddenly the Princess 
is attacked by religious scruples, tears herself from her lover 
in a heart-rending letter and hides her life and tears for ever 
in the solitude of the Nuns of the Perpetual Adoration. Mine. 
de Tourvel is not the only woman of her age who rose above 
its easy cynicism, its facile pleasures and coldness of heart, 
to the grandeur of a great passion. For, in spite of the Phari- 
sees, there is something very touching, something noble in 
these profound passions which hesitate at no sacrifice, suffer 
all things, forgive all things. The depravity of the object 
of Mme. de Tourvel’s passion only makes it the more tragic ; 
until that cruel Ietter dictated by the malignant Marquise 

1 The letter is quoted in full by the Goncourts ; I do not envy those 
who can read it unmoved. 

49 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

opens her eyes, she believes Valmont to be worthy. Her 
death is perhaps a violation of probability ; yet people have 
died of a broken heart. 

Such are Laclos’s characters, taken either from perpetual 
human types or from the rarer types created by the life of 
the 18th century. The catastrophe in which he involves them 
is tragic enough to justify his freedom of speech. It is objected 
by some critics that the more or less conventional ‘‘ judgment ” 
on Valmont and especially on Mme. de Merteuil is an artificial 
ending and a weakness. It is artificial, so artificial that Laclos 
must have intended it to be thought so. If we remember that 
man’s character and bitterness, we shall see that this clumsy 
sounding ending is a last consummate finesse. What it says 
in effect is: ‘‘ People of France, these are your rulers, see how 
they behave, see their cynicism, their depravity, the cold 
effrontery of their sensuality, their baseness. This is what 
they are; this is what they do; and they do it unpunished,” 
That is one reason why Tilly said the book was a ‘‘ wave on 
the ocean of Revolution.” 

But the ‘“ Liaisons Dangereuses’”’ contains two other 
inter-dependent moral themes—perhaps two _ political-social 
problems would be more accurate—which Laclos leaves his 
reader to ponder upon, with a shrewd guess as to what the 
solution will be. Several times I have insisted on the fact 
that the “ Liaisons Dangereuses ’’ is the revenge of a man 
with disappointed ambitions and the polemic of a disciple 
of Rousseau. I repeat it, because it is essential if we are to 
understand the real object of this pitiless, ironic tragedy and 
not to be misled into thinking it a mere aimless and wanton 
harrowing of our feelings, an almost devilish display of 
cynicism, 

The first of these problems, and the most important in 
Laclos’s view as a moralist, was the education of women. 
We can see that his Rousseau ‘ back-to-nature ”’ remedy 
was mere claptrap; but his diagnosis was masterly. What 
he points out in effect is this. ‘‘ You educate your girls in 
cloistered ignorance. You fit them for nothing but to be 
delicious playthings. You abruptly take them from a convent 
and throw them in their trembling ignorance and against 
their will into the arms of a man they have barely seen. You 

50 

’ 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

thwart their profoundest sentiments ; you outrage their most 
elementary delicacy; you mock at their “little tears’ and 
‘childish sentiments ”’; you violate a moral law, because 
marriage without love is a hideous thing ; you vi»late a natural 
law, for the meanest of females has a right to a choice of the 
father of her children. What is the result ? The ignorance of 
some makes them an easy prey to an unscrupulous seducer, 
with an inevitable corruption of character and misery. The 
stronger character of others turns to malignancy ; the natural 
desires of a woman become a shameless sensuality, their natural 
vanity becomes a preposterous egotism, their natural jealousy 
of other women a devilish hate, their intelligence creates a 
whole system of hypocrisy to guard against your anomalous 
standards, and their cunning becomes an almost superhuman 
perfidy in their battles with you and you, gentlemen, worthy 
emulators of that ‘ tres haut et trés puissant seigneur,’ Monsieur 
le Vicomte de Valmont. And, supremest wrong of all, the most 
virtuous and tender of women, capable of a profound and 
unselfish passion which can never be satisfied by your mariages 
de convenance, is surprised, tortured, victimised, driven to 
her grave, by this same scoundrel.” 

Laclos’s remedies for this really do not concern us, they 
have the ngidity and pedantry of the military philosophe 
in them, the illusions of the “‘ friend of man,’’ But his denunci- 
ation was not an unjust one. And sometimes, when we are 
tempted to smile at the sentiment of the early Igth century, 
to feel irritated at its absurd prudery, we might remember 
that it was a natural reaction from the rule of the Valmonts 
and Merteuils. That bath of sentiment had its value. It 
is possible our own reaction against it has gone too far. There 
is something revolting in the “ gouwjaterie’’ of a certain type 
of wealthy young man, which reminds one of a vulgar 
Valmont. 

The other theme has already been touched upon; it is 
almost entirely political and might be defined as the problem 
of the petite nodblesse, to which Laclos belonged. The members 
of this class were in some respects the most victimised sufferers 

Ga 

1See M. Paul Morand’s brilliant Lewis et Ivéne. (Paris, 1924). 
Mr. Wyndham Lewis has also published one or two studies of a rather 
Similar type of “ hero.”’ 

5I 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

under the ancien régime.! Many of them were rigidly virtuous, 
most were poor; their poverty and principles prevented their 
taking much share in the excesses of the grande noblesse and 
financiers ;?_ they were all profoundly loyal to the Monarchy. 
This loyalty and principle were quite shamelessly abused by 
the government. The Petite noblesse filled most of the minor 
parts of the services and upon them fell all the hard and un- 
pleasant work and very little of the rewards, The sale of 
regiments and Court influence made it almost impossible for 
one of the petite noblesse to rise to high rank in the army or 
navy, unless he was lucky enough to attract the fancy of some 
Court favourite. Officers who had twenty years service, the 
Croix de Saint Louis, the scars of half a dozen campaignes, 
had the profound humiliation of serving under a colonel of 
sixteen or seventeen, an embryo petit maitre, whose one merit 
was (in Voltaire’s words) the fact that ‘‘ he had given himself 
the trouble of being born.”’ 

As we have seen, Laclos was an able artillery officer, 
especially in fortification; and, as the years passed and he 
reached the ‘‘ dangerous ”’ age of forty, his disappointed ambi- 
tion hardened into bitterness. The ‘“ Liaisons Dangereuses, ’ 
then, in effect, addresses the petite noblesse thus: ‘‘ We are 
the effective officers of the Services, the men upon whom the 
real defence of the country falls; yet we live in poverty, 
have no hope of high rank, while others no better born than 
ourselves step over our heads through wealth and influence. 
While we are with our regiments, these our superiors 
(worthy descendants of the Crusaders!) are doing what ? 
Indulging in heartless debauchery, seducing our sisters and 
cousins, perverting the women of France in their petites maisons. 
These are the fine flower of civilisation, these the Paladins 
of France ! What leaders ! Godfrey de Bouillon took Palestine 
from the Saracens—Danceny is left to idleness in the boudoirs 
of Paris, Du Guesclin, Montluc, Condé, Turenne, captured 
cities and provinces at the sword’s point; M. de Valmont 

1 See M. Henri Carré’s La Noblesse de France et l’Opinion Publique 
au XVIIIe Siécle. (Paris, 1920). 

2 Probably the very worst offenders in the 18th century, were the 
newly rich ‘ fermiers généraux."”’ The private life of de la Popeliniere 
for example, is an edifying spectacle. 

as 

52 

THE LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

beleaguers a helpless child and triumphs over a modest 
woman.! See, gentlemen, the heroes who command you !’”? 

I have one more point to make before brinzing this long 
examination to a close; and that is Laclos’s penetration as 
a ‘‘moralist,’’ by which I mean a detached and unbiassed 
observer of human manners. There is, indeed, a certain cold- 
ness and cynicism in his observations which remind one 
distantly of the ‘‘ Maximes”’ of La Rochefoucauld ; but even 
when they are a little warped by prejudice they have enough 
point and truth at least to set one thinking. Many of these 
observations are of course brought out indirectly as traits of 
character, but quite often Laclos allows himself to analyse 
through the remarks of his letter-writers. Perhaps some of 
them are the merest boutades, but they have a sting. Turn 
over the pages of the “ Liaisons’; you find things like 
these : 

“Have you forgotten that love, like medicine, is simply 
the art of aiding nature ? ”’ 

‘A propos negligence, you are like the people who send 
regularly for news of their sick friends, and never ask what 
the reply was.”’ 

‘But I did not think I ought to lose an opportunity of 
allowing myself to be given an order ; being convinced on the 
one hand, that she who commands, commits herself, and, on 
the other hand, that the illusory authority we appear to let 
women take is one of the snares they avoid with the most 
difficulty.” 

‘Old women must not be angered—they make young 
women’s reputations.”’ 

‘“ When a woman’s heart has been exercised for some time 
it needs rest; and I have noticed flattery is the softest pillow 
one can offer any of them.”’ 

1 See Letter CX XV, particularly the paragraph beginning, “‘ Hither- 
to, my fair friend.”’ 

2Is there not a last stab of contempt in making Valmont fall in a 
duel over a woman by the hand of a boy ? Of course, it would be a 
grave error to suppose that even the“ petits maitres ’’ were cowards ; 
any history of the 18th century will show that they were extremely 
brave and excellent soldiers. But in times of peace there was nothing 
for them to do, except seduce women. 

53 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Perhaps one of the best is Mme de Merteuil’s little essay 
on the two main classes of women who have outlived their 
beauty (Letter CXIII). It is rather too long to quote, but 
the reader should not overlook it. If all the observations 
of this kind were extracted from the Liaisons Dangereuses, 
they would make quite a little sheaf of Maximes and Pensées— 
to stand on that side of La Rochefoucauld which is more remote 
from Pascal. 

Such is my view of one of the greatest of 18th century 
French novelists and of his single masterpiece. It is not a 
view hastily adopted and perversely defended. I am aware 
that it is not the general view of Laclos and the Lzazsons 
Dangereuses, but I trust the reader will consider my argu- 
ments and the evidence IJ bring before rejecting it. This view 
was gradually formed from a close study of the book and its 
author, made with all the evidence I could collect and what- 
ever knowledge of French history, manners and literature 
I happened to possess. I cannot, of course, hope that I have 
avoided all errors of fact and interpretation in so long a 
study; but J have been as scrupulous as I knew how. 
Certainly, had the evidence led me to other conclusions 
I should have recorded them; and had I not thought the 
book a good one I should not have translated it. I believe 
it will surprise many who have not read the novel and know 
it only by the common defamation. Those who expect to 
find a light, amorous tale will be disappointed, those of 
more robust mental calibre and acuter taste will find a tragic 
story well told and a subtlety of psychological analysis not 
unworthy a countryman of Stendhal, Flaubert and Balzac. 

RICHARD ALDINGTON 

There are several other translations of the Liaisons 
Dangereuses ,; one made as early as 1784, and one about 
twenty years ago by that accomplished poet, Ernest Dowson. 
The present translator has not consulted any of his 
predecessors. 

A list of “ Books Consulted ”’ for this Introduction will 
be found on page 55. 

All notes not signed ‘‘C, de L.”’ are the translator’s. 

54 

¥ 

LIST OF BOOKS CONSULTED 

Choderlos de Laclos: Liaisons Dangereuses. Notice par 
Ad. van Bever, (see above) 2 vols, Paris, 1920. 

Choderlos de Laclos: Poésies, Pubhées par Arthur Symons 
et Louis Thomas. Paris, 1908. 

Choderlos de Laclos: Lettres Inédites, Publiées par M. Louis 
de Chavigny. Paris, 1go4. 

Emile Dard: Le General Choderlos de Laclos. Paris, 1905. 

Fernand Caussy: JLaclos 1741-1803. Paris, 1905, 

Edmond et Jules de Goncourt: La Femme au Dix-Huitiéme 
Siécle. Paris. (Edition définitive, 1924). 

Henri Carré: La Noblesse de France et Vopinion Publique au 
NVIITIe Srecle, Paris, 1920. 

Servais Etienne: Le Genre Romanesque en France depuis 
l Apparition de la ‘‘ Nouvelle Héloise”’ jusqw aux Approches 
dela Révolution, Paris, 1922. 

Crébillon fils: Qzuvres. Londres. 7 vols., 1772. 

Anthony Hamilton: .Wémoires du Comte de Grammont, 2 vols. 
(No place given). 1760, 

J. J. Rousseau: Julie ou la Nouvelle Héloise. Paris. 2 vols. 
(Flammarion). 

Marivaux: .Warianine, Paris (Garnier). 

Casanova: Mémvoires. Paris. 6 vols. (Flammarion). 

Florian: Alémotres d’Un Jeune Espagnol, Introduction de 
André Bouis. Paris, 1923. 

Louvet de Couvray: Les Adventures du Chevalier de Faublas, 
Paris. (Garnier). 

kétif de la Bretonne: Les Plus Belles Pages. Paris, 1906. 

Diderot: Les Bijoux Indiscrets. Au Monomatapa, (No 
date, but 18th century). 

La Réligieuse. Le Neveu de Rameau, (Flammarion). 

Abbé Dulaurens : Imirce ou la Fille dela Nature. Paris, 1922. 

Andrea de Nerciat: Félicité. Paris, 1gto. 

Duclos: Confessions du Comte de * * *, CEéuvres, Tome 
VIII, 1806. 

(Other books used are mentioned in the footnotes). 

7 a7} 

DANGEROUS ACQUAINTANCES 
(LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES) 

PUBLISHER’S NOTE? 

The Public 1s notified that despite the title of this work and 
what 1s said by the editor in his preface, we do not guarantee 
the authenticity of the collection and we have good reason to 
belicve ut 1s only a Novel. ) 

Moreover we think that the author, 11 seeking verisimilitude, 
has himself destroyed it 1n a very clumsy way, by the period 
im which he has placed the events he makes public. Indeed, 
several of the characters he describes have such abominable 
morals that 1t 1s ampossible to suppose they could have lived in 
our own century—that century of philosophy in which enlighten- 
ment, spreading on all sides, has rendered (as everyone knouw's) 
all men so worthy and all women so modest and reserved. 

Our opinion therefore 1s that 1f the events recorded in this 
work have a basis of truth they can only have happened in other 
countries or in other times, and we greatly blame the author 
who, apparently seduced by the hope of being more interesting 
by coming nearer his age and country, has dared to display, in 
our dress and vith our customs, morals which are so foreign 
to us, 

To preserve as far as we can the too credulous reader from 
any mistake in the matter, we support our opinion by a line of 
reasoning which we put forward with confidence, because 1% 
appears to us triumphant and unanswerable ; it 1s that the 
same causes could not fail to produce the same effects, and that 
to-day we never see a young Lady, with an income of sixty 
thousand livres, become a nun, nor the wife of a Président? die 
of grief while she is still young and preity. 

11782. Anironic comment by Taclos himself. 

1“ Présidente.”” A Président was an important magistrate ; his 
wife had the title of ‘‘ Présidente.’’ Throughout this translation ‘ La 
Présidente de Tourvel ”’ will appear as ‘‘ Madame de Tourvel,’’ since 
there is no English equivalent to the title of ‘‘ Présidente.” 

59 

EDITOR’S PREFACE 

This work, or rather this collection, which the public may 
perhaps think too voluminous, only contains a very small 
number of the letters composing the whole correspondence 
from which it is taken. When I was requested to put in order 
this correspondence by those into whose hands it had fallen 
and whose purpose I knew was to make it public, I asked no 
compensation for my pains beyond the permission to cut out 
everything which might appear to me unnecessary, and I have 
tried to preserve only those letters which seemed to me needed 
for the understanding of events or to reveal character. If to 
this slight task is added that of rearranging the letters I have 
preserved in an order which is almost always that of their 
dates, and a few short notes whose purpose as a rule is merely 
to point out the origin of quotations or to explain some of 
the omissions ;_ the whole of my share in this work will be 
known. My task went no further.? 

I had proposed more considerable changes, almost all 
relating to the purity of diction or style, which will be found 
very faulty. I had also desired authority to cut down certain 
letters which are too long, several of which treat separately, 
and with practically no continuity, of matters that have no 
connection with each other. This labour, which was not 
accepted, would certainly have been insufficient to make the 
work valuable but would at least have freed it from some of 
its defects. 

It was pointed out to me that the intention was to publish 
the letters and not a work founded upon the letters; that 
it would be as contrary to probability as to truth for the 

1] must also give notice that I have suppressed or changed all the 
names of persons mentioned in these letters ; and that if among those 
which I have substituted there should be a name belonging to some- 

body this will be no more than an error on my part from which no 
conclusion should be drawn. (C. de I..) 

OI 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

eight or ten people who took part in the correspondence to 
have written with the same purity. And when I pointed out 
that far from this being the case, there was none among them 
guiltless of serious mistakes which could not fail to be censured, 
I was told that every reasonable reader would naturally 
expect to find mistakes in a collection of letters by a few 
private persons since in all those hitherto published by 
different authors of eminence (and even by certain Academi- 
clans), there was not one wholly free from this reproach. 
These reasons did not convince me and I thought them, as 
I still think, easier to give than to accept; but I had no 
authority and was forced to give way. But I reserved the 
right to protest against the decision and to state that I was 
of a different opinion ; which I now do. 

As to any merit which this work may have, perhaps it 
is not for me to give an opinion, since it ought not and cannot 
influence anyone’s. However, those who like to know what 
they are to expect before they begin to read a book, may 
continue to read this preface ; others will do better to turn 
straight to the work itself; they know enough about it. 

What I have to say at first is, that although my advice 
was, as I have admitted, to publish these letters, I am far 
from hoping they will be successful. But do not take this 
sincerity on my part for the affected modesty of an author ; 
for I declare with the same frankness that if this collection 
had not seemed to me worth offering to the public I should 
not have troubled with it. Let us try to reconcile this 
apparent contradiction. 

The merit of a work consists in its utility or the pleasure 
it gives, and sometimes in both when that is possible; but 
success (which is not always a proof of merit) often arises 
rather from the choice of a subject than from its execution, 
from the aggregate of objects presented rather than from the 
manner in which they are treated. Now this collection 
includes, as its title indicates, the letters of a whole group, 
and this causes a diversity of interest which weakens that of 
the reader. Moreover, since almost all the sentiments here 
expressed are feigned or dissimulated they can only arouse 
the interest of curiosity which is always far below the interest 
of sentiment, which excites less indulgence and allows faults 

62 

EDITOR’S PREFACE 

of detail to be more easily perceived, because these details 
are continually opposed to the one desire for which satis- 
faction is wished. 

These defects are perhaps partly atoned for by a quality 
which lies in the very nature of the work; that is, variety of 
styles, a merit which an author attains with difficulty but 
which here arises spontaneously, and at least preserves from 
the boredom of uniformity. Some persons may count as 
a merit the considerable number of observations, either new 
or little known, which are scattered through these letters. 
That, I think, is all the pleasure that can be hoped for from 
them, even when they are judged with the greatest indulgence. 

The utility of the work will perhaps be more contested 
but seems to me easier to establish. To me at least, it appears 
a service rendered to good morals to unmask the methods 
employed by those whose morals are bad, in corrupting others 
who are good, and I think that these letters effectively con- 
tribute to that end. There will also be found the proof and 
example of two important truths which might be thought 
unknown, seeing how little they are regarded; one is that 
every woman who consents to receive into her society an 
immoral man ends by becoming his victim; the other is that 
every mother who allows someone else to possess her daughter's 
confidence is at least imprudent. Young people of either sex 
may also learn here that the friendship which seems to be 
granted them with such facility by persons of bad morals 
is never anything but a dangerous snare, as fatal to their 
happiness as to their virtue. Yet abuse, which 1s always 
so near to what is good, seems to me particularly to be dreaded 
here; and, far from advising this book to youth, I think 
it very important to deprive the young of all books of this 
kind. The period when it may cease to be dangerous and 
become useful appears to me to have been grasped-—for 
persons of her own sex-—-by a good mother who not only 
possesses intelligence but a good intelligence. ‘‘I think,” 
she said to me, after she had read the manuscript of this 
correspondence, ‘‘ I should be rendering a real service to my 
daughter by giving her this book on her wedding-day.”’ 
If all mothers of families are of a similar opinion IJ shall always 
congratulate myself upon the publication of this work. 

63 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

But even arguing from this favourable supposition it 
still seems to me that this collection can please but a few. 
Depraved men and women will find it to their interest to 
decry a work which may harm them ; and since they are not 
lacking in skill, they may be clever enough to attach the 
rigourists to their party through their alarm at the picture 
of evil morals here presented. 

Those who pretend to irreligion will take no interest in 
a female devotee because that very fact will make them look 
upon her as a foolish little woman, and at the same time the 
devotees will be angry that virtue succumbs and will complain 
that religion is represented as having too little power. 

On the other hand, persons of a delicate taste will be 
disgusted by the over-simple and faulty style of several of 
these letters, while the bulk of readers who are convinced 
that everything they see printed is the fruit of long labour 
will think they see in other letters the laboured manner of 
an author showing himself beneath the personage through 
whose mouth he speaks. 

Finally, the general opimion will perhaps be that each 
thing is of use only in its place and that if, as a rule, the 
over-careful style of authors deprives familiar letters of the 
effects of grace, the negligences 1n real familiar letters become 
serious faults and make them unendurable when they are 
printed. 

I frankly admit that all these objections seem to me to be 
founded ; I also think I could reply to them, and that without 
exceeding the length of a preface. But it will be felt that 
the necessity of replying to everything would mean that the 
book responded to nothing ; and that, if I had thought this, 
] should have suppressed both preface and book. 

04 

PART I 

LETTER I 

Cécile Volanges to Sophie Carnay at the Ursuline Convent 

of , 

You will see, my dear, that I have kept my word and that 
bonnets and pom-poms do not take up all my time—there 
will always be some left over for you. Yet I have seen more 
clothes in this single day than in the four years we spent 
together; and I think the haughty Tanville’ will be more 
angered by my first visit (when I intend to ask for her), than 
she thought we were when she came to see us in ftoccht.? 
Mamma asks my opinion in everything and treats me much 
less like a school-girl than she used to do. I have my own 
maid; I have a room and a study at my disposal and I am 
writing this to you at a very pretty writing-table whose key 
was given to me so that I can shut up anything I want in it. 
Mamma says [ am to see her every day when she gets up; 
that I need not arrange my hair® until dinner time because 
we shall always be alone, and that she will tell me every day 
when I am to join her in the afternoon. The rest of my time 
is at my disposal and I have my harp, my drawing and my 
books just as in the convent, except that Mother Perpetue is 
not here to scold me and that I need do nothing unless I wish ; 
but since my Sophie is not here to talk and Jaugh with me, 
I may just as well occupy myself. * 

It is not yet five o’clock ; I do not see Mamma until seven ; 
plenty of time, if I had anything to say to you! but so far 
nothing has been said and except for the preparations I see 
being made and the numbers of sewing-women who all come 

1 Pupil in the same convent, (C. de L.). * In her best clothes. 
3This refers to the elaborate head-dress of the 18th century lady. 

05 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

for me I should think there is no intention of marrying me 
and that it was one more delusion on the part of the good 
Josephine. Yet Mamma has told me so often that a young 
Jady should remain at the convent until she is married that 
Josephine must be right, since Mamma has taken me away. 

A carriage has just stopped at the door and Mamma sends 
me a message to come to her at once. Suppose it were he ? 
I am not dressed; my hand trembles and my heart beats. 
I asked my maid if she knew who was with my mother. 
“Why,” said she, “itis M.C. . .” And she laughed. Oh! 
I think it zs he! I shall surely return to tell you what has 
happened. This, at all events, is his name. I must not keep 
them waiting. Adieu, for a moment... 

How you will laugh at your poor Cécile! Oh! I was 
very much ashamed, but you would have been as helpless as 
I was, When I entered Mamma’s room I saw a gentleman in 
black standing beside her. I saluted him as well as I could 
and remained rooted to the spot. You can imagine how [| 
looked at him! ‘‘ Madame,” said he to my mother, as he 
bowed to me, ‘‘ This is a charming young lady and I feel more 
than ever the value of your favour.’’ At this plain remark 
I began to tremble, to such an extent that I could not stand 
up; I found an arm-chair and sat down in it, blushing deeply 
and very disconcerted, I had scarcely sat down when this 
man was at my knees! Your poor Cécile then lost her head ; 
as Mamma said, I was thoroughly scared. I sprang up with 
a piercing cry ... just like the day of the thunder-storm. 
Mamma burst out laughing and said: ‘‘ Why! What is the 
matter with you? Sit down and give Monsieur your foot.” 
My dear, ‘“ Monsieur ’’ was a shoemaker! I cannot tell you 
how ashamed I was; fortunately no one was there but 
Mamma. I think that when I am married I shall never employ 
this shoemaker. 

You must admit we are well informed ! Good-bye. It is 
nearly six o’clock and my maid says I must dress. Good-bye, 
dear Sophie ; I love you as if I were still at the convent. 

P.S. Ido not know by whom to send this letter, so I shall 
wait until Josephine comes. 

Paris, 3rd August, 17—. 

1 Attendant at the convent turning-box. (C. de L.). 
66 

LETTER II 

LETTER II 

The Marquise de Merteuil to the Vicomie de Valmont at 
the Chateau de . 

Come back, my dear Vicomte, come back ; what are you 
doing, what can you be doing with an old aunt whose property 
is entailed on you? Come at once; I need you. I have a 
wonderful 1dea and you must carry it out. These few words 
should be enough for you and, but too honoured by my choice, 
you should come eagerly to take my orders on your knees : 
but you abuse my favours even since you have ceased to make 
use of them; and in the alternative of an eternal hatred or 
an excessive indulgence your good luck decides that my 
kindness should win the day. I shall therefore tell you my 
plan; but swear to me like a faithful knight that you will 
engage yourself in no other adventure until you have accom- 
plished this. She is worthy of a hero; you will serve both 
Jove and vengeance ; and it will be a rouerze? the more to put 
in your mémoires ; yes, in your mémotres, for I wish them to 
be printed one day and I undertake to write them. But let 
us leave this and return to what concerns us. 

Madame de Volanges is marrying her daughter; it is 
still a secret, but she told me about it yesterday. And whom 
do you think she has chosen for her son-in-law ? The Comte 
de Gercourt. Who would have thought that I should become 
Gercourt’s cousin? J am in a rage... Have you not 
guessed why ? Dullard ! Have you forgiven him the adventure 
with the Intendante? And have J not even more reason 
to complain of him, monster that you are 2? But 1 calm 
myself and the hope of vengeance soothes my mind. 

You have been a hundred times annoyed, as I have myself, 
by the consequence Gercourt attaches to the wife he is to have 

1The words rvoué and rouerie, which are happily falling out of 
use in good company, were very fashionable at the time these letters 
were written. (C. de L.). 

2 To understand this passage, the reader must know that the Comte 
de Gercourt had left the Marquise de Merteuil for the Intendante de ——, 
who had sacrificed to him the Vicomte de Valmont and that it was then 
the Marquise and the Vicomte became attached to one another. Since 
this adventure is much earlier than the events dealt with in these letters 
the whole correspondence about it has been suppressed. (C. de L.). 

67 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

and by the silly presumption which makes him think he will 
avoid the inevitable fate. You know his ridiculous prejudices 
in favour of a cloistered education and his still more ridiculous 
preconception of the modesty of fair-haired women. Indeed 
I would wager that, in spite of the income of sixty thousand 
livres which goes with the Volanges girl, he would never have 
consented to the marriage if she had been dark or if she had 
not been to a convent. Let us prove to him that he is a mere 
fool ; no doubt he will be one day—that is not what troubles 
me—but it would be amusing to have him begin by being 
one. How it will delight us to hear him boasting on the 
morning after (for he will boast); and then, if you once 
mould this girl, it would be very unlucky if Gercourt, like 
anybody else, does not become the talk of Paris. 

Moreover, the heroine of this new adventure is worthy of 
all your attention ; she is really pretty, she is only fifteen ; 
a rosebud ; ignorant to a degree and entirely unaffected, but 
you men are not afraid of that ; in addition, a certain languid 
gaze seems to promise a great deal. Add to this that I 
recommend her to you; you have no more to do than to 
thank and obey me. 

You will receive this letter to-morrow morning. I insist 
on your being with me to-morrow evening at seven o’clock. 
I shall receive nobody until eight, not even the reigning 
Chevalier ; his mind is not equal to so important an affair . 
You see that love does not blind me. At eight o’clock I will 
grant you your liberty and you will return at ten to sup with 
the fair creature ; for she and her mother are taking supper 
with me. Good-bye, it is after midday; very soon I shall 
cease to take an interest in you. 

Paris, 4th August, 17—. 

LETTER III 
Cécile Volanges to Sophie Carnay 

I am still kept in ignorance, my dear. Yesterday Mamma 
invited a number of people to supper. In spite of the fact 
that it was to my interest to observe them, especially the 
men, I was very bored. Men and women, everybody, looked 

68 

LETTER IV 

closely at me and then whispered in each others’ ears. I saw 
they were talking about me; this made me blush; I could 
not prevent it. I wish I could have, for I noticed that when 
people looked at the other women they did not blush; or 
else the rouge they put on prevents one seeing the colour 
caused them by embarrassment ; for it must be very difficult 
not to blush when a man looks steadily at you. 

What made me most uneasy was that I did not know what 
they thought about me.’ I think I heard two or three times 
the word “‘ Pretty ’ ; but I very distinctly heard ‘“* Awkward” : 
and the latter must be true because the woman who said it 
is my mother’s relative and friend ; she even seemed to have 
a sudden friendship for me. She is the only person who 
talked to me at all during the evening. To-morrow we go to 
supper at her house. 

After supper I heard a man who, I am sure, was speaking 
of me, say to another: ‘‘ We must let her ripen; we shall 
see, this winter.’’ Perhaps it is he who is to marry me; but 
then it will not be for four months! I wish I knew what 
is to be. 

Here is Josephine, who tells me she is in a hurry. Yet 
] must tell you another awkwardness of mine. Oh! I am 
afraid the lady was right ! 

After supper gambling began. I was beside Mamma ; 
I do not know how it happened, but I went to sleep almost 
at once. I was awakened by a loud burst of laughter. I do 
not know if they were laughing at me, but I think they were. 
Mamma gave me permission to go, which gave me great 
pleasure. Imagine! It was after eleven o’clock ! Good-bye, 
my dear Sophie ; always love vour Cécile. I assure you the 
world is not as amusing as we imagined. 

Paris, 4th August, 17—. 

LETTER IV 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteusl at Paris 

Your orders are charming; your manner of giving them 
is still more amiable ; you would make despotism attractive. 
As you know, this is not the first time that I regret I am 
no longer your slave; and however much of a monster you 

69 

K 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

say I am IJ never think but with pleasure of the time you 
honoured me with softer names. Quite often I even hope to 
deserve them again and to end up with you by giving the world 
an example of constancy. But more important interests must 
occupy us; to conquer is our fate, and fate must be obeyed ; 
perhaps we shall mect again at the end of our career ; for be 
it said without offence, most fair Marquise, you follow me 
step by step; and since, after separating for the happiness 
of the world, we preach the faith separately, it seems to me 
that you make as many proselytes as J, in this mission of 
love. I know your zeal, your ardent fervour; and if this 
God estimated us by our works, you would one day be the 
patroness of some large town, while your friend at best would 
be a village saint. This form of expression surprises you, 
does it not? But for the last eight days I have heard and 
spoken none other; and in order to grow perfect in it I am 
forced to disobey you, 

Do not be angry; and listen to me. You have shared 
all the secrets of my heart and I am about to confide to you 
the greatest project I have ever formed. What was it you pro- 
posed to me? To seduce a girl who has seen and knows 
nothing, who (so to speak) would be handed over to me 
defenceless, who could not fail to be intoxicated by a first 
attention and whom curiosity would probably lead more 
rapidly than love. There are twenty others who could succeed 
as wellas I, But this is not the case with the enterprise which 
now occupies me; its success assures me as much fame as 
pleasure. The Love who is preparing my crown himself 
hesitates between myrtle and laurel, or rather he will unite 
them to honour my triumph. You yourself, my fair friend, 
will be seized by a holy respect and you will say en- 
thusiastically: ‘‘ Here is a man after my own heart.” 

You know Madame de Tourvel, her religious devotion, her 
conjugal love, her austere principles, That is what I am 
attacking ; that is the enemy worthy of me; that is the end 
I mean to reach ; 

‘And if I do not carry off the prize of obtaining her, 

At least I shall have the honour of having attempted it.” 
Bad verses may be quoted when they are by a great poet.! 

1¥,a Fontaine, 

fal’ 

LETTER IV 

You must know that her husband is in Burgundy on 
account of some big Jaw-suit (I hope to make him lose a still 
more important one). Hus inconsolable spouse is compelled 
to spend here the whole time of her distressing widowhood. 
A mass every day, a few visits to the poor in the district, 
morning and evening prayers, solitary walks, pious con- 
versations with my old aunt, and sometimes a dismal rubber 
of whist, are her only distractions. I am preparing more 
effectual ones for her. My good angel led me here for her 
happiness and for my own. Madman that I was! I regretted 
the twenty-four hours I sacrificed to the demands of conven- 
tion. How I should be punished were I forced to return to 
Paris! Luckily, four people are needed for a hand of whist, 
and since there is no one here but the local cuvé my eternal 
aunt pressed me to sacrifice a few days to her. You may 
guess that I consented. You cannot imagine how much she 
has flattered me since then and above all how edified she is 
to see me regularly at prayer and at mass. She does not 
realise who is the divinity I adore. 

For the last four days I have given myself up to this 
powerful passion. You know I always desire keenly and 
sweep away obstacles; but what you cannot know is how 
much solitude adds to the ardour of desire. I have but one 
idea ; I think of it by day and dream of it by night. J must 
have this woman, to save myself from the ridiculous position 
of being in love with her—for how far may not one be led by 
a thwarted desire ? O delicious possession! I need you for 
my happiness and still more for my peace of mind. It is 
fortunate for us that women are so weak in their own defence ! 
Otherwise we should be nothing but their timid slaves. At 
this very moment I have a feeling of gratitude for facile 
women which quite naturally brings me to your feet. I cast 
myself before them to obtain forgiveness and I conclude this 
long letter. Good-bye, fair lady—all in good part. 

From the Chateau de... , 5th of August 17—. 

71 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER V 
The Marquise de Merteuil to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Do you realise, Vicomte, that your letter is extremely 
insolent and that I ought to be angry with you? But it 
shows me you have lost your head and that fact alone saves 
you from my indignation. I am a generous and compassionate 
friend and forget my own injury to concern myself with your 
danger ; and, however tiresome it may be to arguc, I must 
yield to your present need of it. 

You possess Madame de Tourvel! What a ridiculous 
caprice ! I see it is your usual obstinacy which never wants 
except what seems impossible to obtain. What sort of a 
woman is she ? Regular features, if you like, but a complete 
lack of expression; fairly well-made but entirely without 
grace; always ridiculously dressed with her bunches of 
neckerchief on her breast and her bodice up to her chin ! 
I warn you as a friend, two women like her will ruin your 
reputation for you. Think of that day when she made the 
collection in Saint Roch, when you thanked me so often for 
having procured you such a spectacle! I can still see her, 
giving her hand to that hop-pole of a man with long hair, 
ready to sink down at every step, with her four yards of hoop- 
skirt continually on someone’s head, and blushing at every 
bow. Who would have said then that you would desire such 
a woman? Come Vicomte, blush, and recover your senses. 
I promise you secrecy. 

And then, think of the annoyances awaiting you. Who is 
the rival you must combat ? A husband! Do you not feel 
humiliated by the mere word ? What a disgrace if you fail ! 
And how little glory if you succeed !_ I will go further—you 
must not expect any pleasure. Can there be any with prudes ? 
I mean with those who are really so. They are reserved in 
the very midst of pleasure and can offer you nothing more 
than a half-enjoyment. That complete abandonment of self, 
that delirium of delight wherein pleasure is purified by its 
excess, those treasures of love are unknown to them. I warn 
you—supposing the best, your Madame de Tourvel will think 

72 

LETTER V 

she has done everything for you if she treats you like a husband, 
and in the tenderest conjugal interview the parties always 
remain two. Here it is still worse; your prude is religious 
with the sort of religion which condemns a woman to per- 
petual childishness. Perhaps you will surmount this obstacle, 
but do not flatter yourself with the idea that you can destroy 
it; you may conquer the love of God, but not the fear of the 
devil ; when you hold your mistress in your arms and feel her 
heart beating, it will be from terror, not from love. Perhaps 
if you had known this woman sooner you might have madc 
something of her ; but she is twenty-two and has been married 
nearly two years. Believe, me, Vicomte, when a woman 1- 
encrusted to that extent she must be left to her fate ; she will 
never be anything but a poor creature. 

Yet it is for this fair object that you refuse to obey me, 
that you bury yourself in your aunt’s tomb, that you give up 
a most delicious adventure which would do you the utmost 
honour ! How does it happen that Gercourt always has the 
‘advantage over you? Come, I am talking to you good- 
humouredly; but at the moment I really am tempted to 
think you do not deserve your reputation, I am tempted to 
withdraw my confidence from you. I could never grow 
accustomed to confiding my secrets to Madame de Tourvel’s 
lover. 

You are to know that the Volanges girl has already turned 
one head. Young Danceny is madly in love with her. He has 
sung with her; and indeed she sings better than a girl just 
from a convent should. They are to go through a number of 
duets and I feel sure she will gladly be in unison ; but Danceny 
is a mere child who will lose his time in making love and will 
never complete anything. The girl herself is quite shy and, 
in any event, it will be much less amusing than you could 
have made it ; it puts me out of humour and I shall certainly 
quarrel with the Chevalier when he arrives. I advise him to 
be gentle ; for, at the moment, I could break with him without 
reluctance. I am sure that if I had the good sense to leave 
him now he would be in despair ; and nothing amuses me like 
a lover in despair. He would call me false, and the word 
“false ’’ always gives me pleasure; after “‘ cruel”’ it is the 
Sweetest in a woman’s ear and the least difficult to deserve. 

73 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Seriously I must think about breaking off this affair. See 
what you are the cause of! I lay it on your conscience. 
Good-bye. Recommend me to Madame de Tourvel’s prayers. 

Paris, the 7th of August, 17—. 

LETTER VI 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

So there is no woman in the world who does not abuse 
her power ! Even you, whom I so often called “an indulgent 
friend,”’ cease to be so; you do not shrink from attacking me 
through the object of my affection ! With what strokes you 
dared to paint Madame de Tourvel ! A man would have paid 
for such insolence with his life and any woman but you would 
have been repaid at least by some revenge. J] beg you will 
not subject me to such harsh tests ; I cannot promise to endure 
them. In the name of friendship, wait until I have had the 
woman if you want to disparage her. Do you not know that 
pleasure alone has the right of loosening the bandage from 
Love’s eyes ? 

But what am I saying? Does Madame de Tourvel need 
illusion ? No, she needs but to be herself and she is adorable. 
You censure her for dressing badly and J agree with you; all 
clothes do her injustice, whatever hides her disfigures her. 
In the unconstraint of her morning-dress she is indeed delight- 
ful. Thanks to the extremely hot weather we are having, 
a morning-dress of simple linen allows me to see her round 
supple figure. Her breasts are hidden by a single fold of 
muslin and my furtive but keen glances have already spied 
out their enchanting shape. Her face, you say, lacks ex- 
pression. And what should it express at a time when nothing 
speaks to her heart ? No doubt, unlike our coquettes, she 
has not that delusive gaze which sometimes seduces and always 
deceives. She cannot cover the emptiness of a phrase by a 
false smile, and although she has the finest teeth imaginable 
she only laughs at what amuses her. But you should see her 
in her playful moments—what an image of frank, natural 
zaiety ! What pure joy and pitying kindness are in her gaze 

74 

LETTER VI 

when she hastens to help the unfortunate! Above all you 
should see her when at the least word of praise or flattery her 
divine face is coloured by the touching embarrassment of an 
unfeigned modesty ! She is chaste and r>ligious and therefore 
vou think her cold and lifeless? I’ tkink very differently. 
What an amazing sensibility she must possess to be able to 
shed it even on her husband and to love continually a person 
who is continually absent! What stronger proof could you 
desire ? Yet I have been able to obtain another, 

I arranged a walk so that we came upon a ditch which had 
to be crossed ; and although she is very active, she is even 
more timid ; you may imagine that a prude is afraid to take 
a leap.t She was compelled to accept my help. I have 
clasped this modest woman in my arms! Our preparations 
and the crossing of my old aunt sent our gay devotee into 
peals of laughter; but as soon as I took hold of her, by an 
intentional awkwardness on my part our arms became mutually 
entwined. I held her breast against my own and, in that 
brief moment, I felt her heart beat faster. Her face was 
suffused by a charming blush and her modest embarrassment 
showed me that her heart had beaten with love and not with fear. 
And yet my aunt was as mistaken as you and said: ‘‘ The 
child was afraid’’; but the child’s charming candour does 
not permit her a lie and she answered naively: ‘‘O no, 
but...” That single word enlightened me. From that 
moment my cruel uneasiness gave way to a pleasing hope. 
I shall have this woman; I shall carry her away from the 
husband who profanes her; I shall even dare to ravish her 
from the God she adores. What a delicious pleasure to be 
alternately the cause and the conqueror of her remorse ! 
Far be it from me to wish to destroy the prejudices which 
torture her! They will add to my happiness and my fame. 
Let her believe in virtue, but let her sacrifice it to me; let 
her slips terrify her without restraining her; let her be 
agitated by a thousand terrors and not be able to forget and 
to crush them save in my arms. Then J agree, she may say: 
“I adore you’’—and she alone among all women will be 
worthy to say so. I shall indeed be the God she has preferred. 

1 The reader will perceive here that bad taste for puns which was 
beginning then and is now so popular. (C. de L.) ‘‘ Sauter le fossé ’ 
means “ to jump aditch ’’ and “ to take a leap,’’ ‘‘ to cross the Rubicon,” 

75 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Let us be frank ; in our arrangements, as frigid as they are 
facile, that which we call happiness is scarcely a pleasure. 
Shall I confess it to you? I thought my heart withered up 
and, finding I had nothing left but my senses, I pitied myself 
for a premature old age. Madame de Tourvel has given me 
back the charming illusions of youth. Near her I do not 
need to enjoy her to be happy. The only thing which terrifies 
me is the time this adventure will take ; for I can leave nothing 
to chance. However much I remind myself of my lucky 
audacities I cannot resolve to put them into practice. For 
me to be really happy she must give herself-—that is no small 
matter. I am sure you will admire my prudence. The word 
“love”? I have not yet spoken; but already we have 
got to ‘‘confidence’’ and “ interest.””. To deceive her as 
little as possible and especially to forestall any gossip which 
might reach her I have myself told her, as if accusing myself, 
some of my best known exploits. You would laugh to see the 
candour with which she reproves me. She says she wishes 
to convert me. She does not guess the price she would have 
to pay for attempting it. She is far from thinking that “ by 
pleading ”’ (as she puts it) ‘* for the unfortunate women I have 
ruined,” that she is pleading beforehand on her own behalf. 
The idea came to me yesterday in the middle of one of her 
sermons and I could not refuse myself the pleasure of in- 
terrupting her, in order to tell her she spoke like a prophet. 
(sood-bye, fairest lady ! You see I am not irrecoverably lost. 

P.S. By the way, has the poor Chevalier committed 
suicide in despair ? Really, you are a hundred times worse 
than I am and you would humiliate me, were I conceited. 

Irom the Chateau of ... , oth of August, 17—-. 

LETTER VII 

Cécile Volanges to Sophie Carnay? 

If I have told you nothing about my marriage, the reason 
is that I know no more about it than I did the first day. I am 

‘In order not to weary the reader’s patience, a large number of 
letters from this daily correspondence have been suppressed ; those 
only have been given which appeared necessary to a complete under- 
standing of the events in this group. For the same reason all Sophie 
Carnay’s letters have been supressed as well as several others from the 
actors in these events. (C. de I..). 

76 

LETTER VIII 

growing used to not thinking about it and I find this kind of 
life quite suits me. I spend a good deal of time working at 
my singing and my harp; I seem to like them more now that 
I have no master, or rather now that I hive a better one. The 
Chevalier Danceny, the gentleman of wiom I spoke, and with 
whom I sang at Madame de Merteuil’s house, is kind enough 
to come here every day and to sing with me for hours on end. 
He is extremely agreeable. He sings like an angel and com- 
poses most elegant airs to which he writes the words. What 
a pity he is a Knight of Malta! It seems to me that if he 
married, his wife would be very happy. .. His gentleness 
is charming. He never seems to be paying one a compliment 
and yet everything he says is flattering. He corrects me 
continually, as much in music as in anything else; but he 
mingles such interest and such gaiety with his criticism that 
it is impossible not to feel grateful to him. Only, when he 
looks at you, he seems to be saying something agreeable. 
And in addition, he is very unselfish. For example, yesterday, 
he was invited to an important concert—and he preferred to 
stay the whole evening here. It gave me a great deal of 
pleasure ; for when he is not here, nobody speaks to me and 
I grow languid ; but when he is here, we sing and converse 
together. He has always something new to tell me. He and 
Madame de Merteuil are the only two people I think agreeable. 
But good-bye, my dear, I have promised to learn for to-day 
an arietta with a very difficult accompaniment and | do not 
want to break my word ; I shall practise it until he comes. 

From... , 7th of August, 17—. 

LETTER VIII 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Volanges 

No one could be more touched than I am, Madame, by 
the confidence you show me, nor take more interest than 
I in the future of Mademoiselle de Volanges. With all my 
heart I wish her the happiness of which I am sure she is worthy 
and I rely upon your prudence to obtain it. I do not know 
the Comte de Gercourt ; but, since he is honoured by your 

77 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

choice, I cannot but esteem him highly. I limit myself, 
Madame, to the wish that this marriage may be as happy as 
my own, which was likewise your work, and for which I am 
every day more grateful. May your daughter’s happiness be 
your reward for the happiness you procured me ; and may the 
best of friends be also the happiest of mothers ! 

I am indeed distressed that I cannot convey to you these 
sincere wishes in person and make the acquaintance of 
Mademoiselle de Volanges as soon as I should desire. Since 
I have received from you marks of kindness that were indeed 
maternal, I have the right to hope from her the tender friend- 
ship of a sister. I beg, Madame, you will be good enough to 
ask it of her on my behalf until I am in a position to merit it. 

I have arranged to stay in the country for the whole time 
of Monsieur de Tourvel’s absence. I have made use of this 
time to enjoy and profit by the society of the respectable 
Madame de Rosemonde. She is a woman who has remained 
charming; her great age has robbed her of nothing; she 
keeps her memory and her gaiety intact. Her body alone is 
eighty-eight ; her spirit is only twenty. 

Our solitude is enlivened by her nephew, the Vicomte de 
Valmont, who has been kind enough to spare us a few days. 
I only knew him by hearsay and what I heard made me little 
desirous to know more of him: but I think him better than 
rumour pretends. Here, where he is not spoiled by the whirl 
of society, he talks of Reason with astonishing facility and 
confesses his faults with rare candour, He speaks to me with 
great confidence and I lecture him with great severity. You, 
who know him, will admit that his conversion would be a 
great achievement; but in spite of his promises I have no 
doubt that a week of Paris will make him forget all my sermons. 
His stay here will at least be that much time taken from his 
ordinary conduct ; and I really think after the way he has 
lived that the best thing he can do is to do nothing at all. 
He knows [I am writing to you and asks me to convey to you 
his respectful regards. Accept mine also with your usual 
kindness and never doubt the sincere feelings with which 
I have the honour to be, etc. 

From the Chateau of... , oth of August, 17—. 

78 

LETTER IX 

LETTER IX 
Madame de Volanges to Madame de Tourvel 

I have never doubted, my fair young friend, either your 
friendship for me or your sincere interest in my affairs. It is 
not for the purpose of clearing up this point—which I hope is 
forever settled between us—that I reply to your reply; but 
I cannot avoid discussing with you the subject of the Vicomte 
de Valmont. 

I must admit I never expected to find that name in your 
Ietters. What can there be in common between you and 
him ? You do not know this man; where could you have 
acquired the notion of a libertine’s soul ? You speak of his 
rave candour ; ah yes! Valmont’s candour must indeed be 
very rare. The more false and dangerous in that he is amiable 
and seductive, he has never from his earliest youth taken one 
step or said one word without a purpose, and he has never 
had a purpose but was wicked or criminal. My dear, you know 
me ; you know that among the virtues I have tried to acquire, 
forbearance is the one I most prize. And so, if Valmont were 
carried away by impetuous passions; if, like a thousand 
others, he were seduced by the errors of his age ; while I blamed 
his conduct, I should pity his person and should await in 
silence the time when some fortunate change would acquire 
him the esteem of virtuous pcople. But Valmont is not that 
kind of man ; his conduct is the result of his principles. He 
calculated all that a man may permit himself in wickedness 
without compromising himself; and, in order to be cruel 
and wicked without danger, he chose women for his victims. 
I will not stop to count those he has seduced ; but how many 
has he not ruined ? 

In the quiet, retired life which you lead, such scandalous 
adventures do not reach you. I could tell you some which 
would make you shudder; but your gaze, as pure as your 
soul, would be sullied by such pictures; with the certainty 
that Valmont will never be dangerous to you, you do not 
need such weapons for your defence. The only thing I have 
to tell you is that among all the women to whom he has 

79 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

paid attentions, whether successful or no, there is not one 
but has had reason to complain of him. The Marquise de 
Merteuil is the single exception to this general rule; she 
alone was able to resist him and to restrain his wickedness. 
I must confess that this episode in her life is that which 
sets her highest in my estimation ; and it suffices in the world’s 
eyes as a full justification for certain imprudences she was 
reproached with when she was first a widow.? 

At all events, my dear, I am authorised by my age, my 
experience and above all by my friendship, to point out to 
you that people in society are beginning to notice Valmont’s 
absence ; if it is known that he has spent some time alone 
with you and his aunt your reputation will be in his hands— 
the greatest misfortune which can happen to a woman. 
I advise you to persuade his aunt not to detain him any longer ; 
and if he persists in remaining I think you ought not to 
hesitate to leave. Why should he remain ? What is he doing 
in that part of the country ? If you watch his movements 
I am sure you will find out that he has simply chosen a con- 
venient place for some evil purpose he is meditating in the 
neighbourhood, But, since it is impossible to remedy the 
evil, let us rest satisfied with preserving ourselves from it. 

Good-bye, my dear ; my daughter’s marriage 1s postponed 
for a little while. The Comte de Gercourt, whom we were 
expecting every day, writes me that his regiment is ordered 
for Corsica; and since the war still drags on, it will be im- 
possible for him to get away before the winter. It is vexatious ; 
but still it lets me hope that we shall have the pleasure of 
seeing you at the wedding, and I was sorry it should take 
place without you. Good-bye; without compliment and 
without reserve I am entirely yours. 

P.S. Mention me to Madame de Rosemonde, whom I love 
as much as she deserves. 

From... , 11th of August, 17—. 

1 Madame de Volanges’s error allows us to see that Valmont like 
other scoundrels did not reveal his accomplices. (C. de L.). 

80 

LETTER X 

LETTER X | 
The Marquise de Merteuil to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Are you sulking with me, Vicomte ? Or are you dead ? 
Or, which would be much the same thing, do you live only for 
your Madame de Tourvel ? That woman, who has given you 
back the illusions of youth, will soon give you back its ridiculous 
prejudices. You are already timid and slavish; you might 
as well be in love. You have given up your fortunate audacities. 
You are acting without principles, leaving everything to chance, 
or rather to caprice. Have you forgotten that love, like 
medicine, is semply the art of aiding nature ? You see I am 
beating you with your own weapons; but I feel no pride in 
it; itis beating a fallen man, She must give herself, you say ; 
doubtless she must ! And she will give herself like the others, 
with this difference: It will be with a bad grace. But in 
order that she may end up by giving herself, the best means 
is to begin by taking her. This ridiculous distinction is the 
metrest raving in love! I say ‘‘ love’ because you are in love. 
To speak to you otherwise would be deceiving you; it would 
be hiding your disease from yourself. But tell me, O languish- 
ing lover, do you suppose you raped the other women you have 
had ? But, however much a woman wants to give herself, 
however much of a hurry she may be in, some sort of pretext 
is necessary ; and what could be more convenient for us than 
a pretext which makes us appear to yield to force ? For my 
own part, I must confess that one of the things which most 
flatters me is a sharp and well conducted attack, where 
everything is carried out with order but with rapidity ; which 
never puts us to the painful embarrassment of having our- 
selves to repair an awkwardness by which we ought to have 
profited ; which preserves an air of violence even in those 
things we grant, and cunningly flatters our two favourite 
passions—the glory of defence and the pleasure of defeat. 
I confess that this talent, which is much rarer than is generally 
believed, has always given me pleasure even when it has not 
attracted me; sometimes I have yielded myself simply as 

81 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

a recompense. As in our ancicnt tournaments, Beauty 
awarded the prize of valour and skill. 

But as to you, you are no longer yourself, and you act as 
if you were afraid of succeeding. How long is it since you 
‘began to travel by short stages and side-tracks ? My friend, 
when you want to get somewhere—post-horses and the main- 
road ! But let us leave this subject, which gives me the more 
annoyance since it deprives me of the pleasure of seeing you. 
At least you might write to me more often than you do and 
give me news of your progress. Do you know that for more 
than a fortnight you have been occupied by this ridiculous 
adventure and have neglected everyone ? 

A propos negligence ; you are like those people who send 
regularly for news of their sick friends and never ask what 
the reply was. You ended your last letter by asking me if 
the Chevalier is dead. I did not reply and you troubled no 
more about it. Have you forgotten that my lover is your 
sworn friend ? Don’t be uneasy, he is not dead; or if he 
were, it would be from excess of joy. Poor Chevalier, how 
tender he is! What alover heis! How keenly he is affected ! 
My head is in a whirl. Seriously, the perfect happiness he 
enjoys in being loved by me really attaches me to him. 

The very day I wrote you that I was preparing to break 
with him, how happy I made him! I was actually thinking 
of the means to reduce him to despair when he was announced. 
Either from caprice or good sense, he never had appeared 
so well. However, I received him in a bad humour. He 
hoped to pass two hours with me before my door opened for 
the rest of the company. I told him that I was going out ; 
he asked where I was going; I refused to tell him. He 
insisted. “‘ Where you will not be,” I replied tartly. Happily 
for him he was petrified by this reply; for if he had said a 
word there would have inevitably followed a scene which 
would have brought about the rupture J had planned. 
Astonished by his silence, I turned my eyes on him with no 
other purpose, I swear, than to see what countenance he was 
keeping. I perceived on his charming face that profound and 
tender sadness which you yourself admit is so difficult to 
resist. The same cause produced the same effect; I was 
conquered a second time, From that moment I only thought 

82 

LETTER X 

of how to avoid his thinking I had been disagreeable. ‘ I am 
going out on business,” said I, with a slightly more gentle 
air, ‘‘ and this business partly concerns you; but don’t ask 
me any questions. I shall dine at home ; come back and you 
shall know all about it.”” He then regained the use of speech ; 
but I did not allow him to use it. ‘* | am in a great hurry,” 
I continued, ‘‘ Go away until this evening.” He kissed my 
hand and left. 

Immediately, to compensate him, perhaps to compensate 
myself, I decided to show him my httle house? about which 
he knew nothing. I called my faithful Victoire, I had my 
usual headache; the servants were told I was in bed; and, 
at last when I was alone with ‘‘ the faithful servant,’ I dressed 
myself as a waiting-woman while she disguised herself as a 
lackey. She then brought a cab to my garden gate and off 
we went. When we reached the Temple of Love, 1 chose the 
most seductive dishabille. It was really delicious ; it is my 
own invention ; it lets nothing be seen and yet allows every- 
thing to be guessed at. I promise you, a pattern for your 
Madame de Tourvel—when you have rendered her worthy 
of wearing it. 

After these preparations, while Victoire was occupied with 
the other details I read a chapter of the ‘ Sopha,”’ a letter of 
‘“ Héloise ’’ and two tales of La Fontaine, to rehearse the 
different tones I desired to take. Meanwhile my Chevalier 
comes to my door with his usual eagerness. My door-keeper 
stops him and tells him I am ill—the first incident. At the 
same time he gives him a letter from me, but not in my 
handwriting, according to my prudent rule. He opens it and 
finds in Victoire’s handwriting: ‘‘ At nine o’clock precisely, 
on the Boulevard in front of the cafés.’”’ He goes there; 
and a young lackey whom he does not know (at least whom he 
thinks he does not know, for it was Victoire) comes and tells 
him to send away his carriage and follow him. This whole 
romantic walk over-excites his brain and that never does any 
harm. He arrives at last; and surprise and love positively 

‘“ Petite-maison,”’ a house kept secretly for lovers’ rendezvous, 
equivalent to the modern ‘“‘ gaygonniére.”” I am informed that such 
refuges are not unknown in England, but my informant could not tell 
me by what name they are distinguished. 

83 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

a recompense. As in our ancicnt tournaments, Beauty 
awarded the prize of valour and skill. 

But as to you, you are no longer yourself, and you act as 
2 if you were afraid of succeeding. How long is it since you 
began to travel by short stages and side-tracks ? My friend, 
when you want to get somewhere—post-horses and the main- 
road! But let us leave this subject, which gives me the more 
annoyance since it deprives me of the pleasure of seeing you. 
At least you might write to me more often than you do and 
give me news of your progress. Do you know that for more 
than a fortnight you have been occupied by this ridiculous 
adventure and have neglected everyone ? 

A propos negligence ; you are like those people who send 
tegularly for news of their sick friends and never ask what 
the reply was. You ended your last letter by asking me if 
the Chevalier is dead. 1 did not reply and you troubled no 
more about it. Have you forgotten that my lover is your 
sworn friend ? Don’t be uneasy, he is not dead; or if he 
were, it would be from excess of joy. Poor Chevalier, how 
tender he is! What alover he is! How keenly he 1s affected ! 
My head is in a whirl. Seriously, the perfect happiness he 
enjoys in being loved by me really attaches me to him, 

The very day I wrote you that I was preparing to break 
with him, how happy I made him! I was actually thinking 
of the means to reduce him to despair when he was announced. 
Either from caprice or good sense, he never had appeared 
so well. However, I received him in a bad humour. He 
hoped to pass two hours with me before my door opened for 
the rest of the company. I told him that I was going out ; 
he asked where I was going; I refused to tell him. He 
insisted. ‘‘ Where you will not be,” I replied tartly. Happily 
for him he was petrified by this reply; for if he had said a 
word there would have inevitably followed a scene which 
would have brought about the rupture I had planned. 
Astonished by his silence, I turned my eyes on him with no 
other purpose, I swear, than to see what countenance he was 
keeping. I perceived on his charming face that profound and 
tender sadness which you yourself admit is so difficult to 
resist. The same cause produced the same effect; I was 
conquered a second time. From that moment I only thought 

82 

LETTER X 

of how to avoid his thinking I had been disagreeable. ‘‘ ] am 
going out on business,” said I, with a slightly more gentle 
air, ‘‘ and this business partly concerns you; but don’t ask 
me any questions. I shall dine at home ; come back and you 
shall know all about it.’’ He then regained the use of speech ; 
but I did not allow him to use it. ‘‘ I am in a great hurry,”’ 
I continued, ‘‘ Go away until this evening.’”’ He kissed my 
hand and left. 

Immediately, to compensate him, perhaps to compensate 
myself, I decided to show him my little house? about which 
he knew nothing. I called my faithful Victoire, I had my 
usual headache; the servants were told I was in bed: and, 
at last when I was alone with “ the faithful servant,’’ I dressed 
myself as a waiting-woman while she disguised herself as a 
lackey. She then brought a cab to my garden gate and off 
we went. When we reached the Temple of Love, J chose the 
most seductive dishabille. It was really delicious; it is my 
own invention ; it lets nothing be seen and yet allows every- 
thing to be guessed at. I promise you a pattern for your 
Madame de Tourvel—when you have rendered her worthy 
of wearing it. 

After these preparations, while Victoire was occupied with 
the other details I read a chapter of the ‘‘ Sopha,’’ a letter of 
‘“ Heloise ’’ and two tales of La Fontaine, to rehearse the 
different tones I desired to take. Meanwhile my Chevalier 
comes to my door with his usual eagerness. My door-keeper 
stops him and tells him I am il]—the first incident. At the 
same time he gives him a letter from me, but not in my 
handwriting, according to my prudent rule. He opens it and 
finds in Victoire’s handwriting: ‘‘ At nine o’clock precisely, 
on the Boulevard in front of the cafés.’’ He goes there ; 
and a young lackey whom he does not know (at least whom he 
thinks he does not know, for it was Victoire) comes and tells 
him to send away his carriage and follow him. This whole 
romantic walk over-excites his brain and that never does any 
harm, He arrives at last; and surprise and love positively 

‘“ Petite-matson,’’ a house kept secretly for lovers’ rendezvous, 
equivalent to the modern ‘‘ gargonniére.’’ I am informed that such 
refuges are not unknown in England, but my informant could not tell 
me by what name they are distinguished. 

83 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

enchant him, To give him time to recover we take a turn in 
the shrubbery ; then I bring him back to the house. He sees 
a table laid for two and a bed made up; we then go into the 
boudoir, which has all its decorations displayed. There, half 
out of premeditation, half from sentiment, I threw my arms 
around him and fell at his knees. ‘‘ To prepare you the sur- 
prise of this moment,” I said, ‘‘ I reproach myself for having 
troubled you with an appearance of ill-humour, with having 
veiled for an instant my heart from your gaze. Forgive 
these faults, I will expiate them by my love.’’ You may 
imagine the effect of that sentimental discourse. The happy 
Chevalier raised me and my pardon was sealed on the same 
ottoman upon which you and I so gaily and in the same way 
sealed our eternal separation. 

Since we had six hours to spend together and I had 
determined that the whole time should be equally delicious 
to him, I moderated his transports, and my tenderness was 
replaced by amiable coquetry. I do not think I ever took so 
much trouble to please or that I was ever so satisfied with 
myself. After supper I was successively youthful and rational, 
playful and emotional, sometimes even wanton, and I pleased 
myself by considering him as a sultan in the midst of a harem 
in which I was successively the different favourites. Indeed, 
although his reiterated regards were always received by the 
same woman, it was always by a new mistress. 

At last at daybreak we had to separate ; and in spite of 
what he said and did even to prove to me the contrary, he 
needed it as much as he desired it little. At the moment when 
we left and as a last farewell, I took the key of this happy 
dwelling and put it into his hands. ‘I only acquired it for 
you,” said I, “it is but right that you should be its master - 
the sacrificing priest should have the disposal of the temple.,”’ 
By this manoeuvre I forestalled any reflections which might 
have occurred to him from my ownership of this little house 
—which is always a suspicious thing. I know him well enough 
to be sure that he will only use it for me ; and if I take a fancy 
to go there without him, I still have another key. At all 
costs he wished to fix another day there ; but I still like him 
too much to want to use him up so quickly. One should 
only permit excess with those one intends to leave soon. 

84 

LETTER Xl 

He does not know that; but, for his happiness, I know it 
for two. 

JT see that it is three o’clock in the morring and that I have 
written a volume when I[ meant only to write a line. Such is 
the charm of confiding friendship ; it is that which makes you 
still the person I like best, but to tell you the truth the 
Chevalier gives me more pleasure. 

From... , rath of August, 17 -. 

LETTER XI 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Volanges 

Your severe letter would have terrified me, Madame, if 
I had not fortunately more grounds for confidence than you 
find for fear. This dangerous Monsieur de Valmont, who 
must be the terror of all women, appears to have laid down 
his murderous arms before entering this Chdteau. Tar from 
forming plans here he has not even brought any affectations ; 
and the quality of charm which even his enemies allow him 
has almost disappeared here, leaving him only good nature. 
Apparently, the country air has caused this miracle. I can 
assure you that, although he is constantly with me and even 
appears to take pleasure in it, he has never let slip a word 
resembling love, not one of those phrases which all men 
indulge in, without having—as he has—something to justify 
it. He never forces one into that reserve which everv respect- 
able woman nowadays is compelled to adopt towards the 
men by whom she is surrounded. He knows how to refrain 
from misusing the gaiety he creates. Perhaps he over- 
praises a little; but it is done with such delicacy that he 
would accustom modesty itself to panegyric. Indeed, if I had 
a brother, I should wish him to be such as Monsieur de 
Valmont shows himself here. Many women perhaps would 
wish him to pay them more marked attentions; I must 
confess I am infinitely grateful to him for having realised 
that I am not to be confounded with them. 

Certainly this portrait is very different from the one you 
made me ; and yet both may be likenesses at different periods 

85 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

He himself admits he has had many faults and that he has 
been credited with more. But I have met few men who 
speak of virtuous women with so much respect, I might 
almost say, enthusiasm. What you tell me shows that at 
least in this matter he is not deceitful. His conduct with 
regard to Madame de Merteuil proves it. He often speaks of 
her, and always with so much praise and the appearance of 
so genuine an attachment that, until I received your letter, 
I thought that what he called the friendship between them 
was really love. I plead guilty to a hasty judgment here, 
and I was the more to blame since he himself has often taken 
the trouble to justify her. 1 confess that I thought this 
artifice when it was really honest sincerity on his part. I don't 
know; but it seems to me that a man who Is capable of so 
constant a friendship for so estimable a woman cannot be an 
abandoned libertine. I cannot say if we owe his good conduct 
here to certain intrigues in the neighbourhood, as you suppose. 
There are indeed several charming women round about ; but 
he seldom goes out, except in the morning, and then he says 
he goes shooting. It is true he rarely brings back any game ; 
but he assures me he is unskilful in that exercise. In any 
casc, what he does out of doors does not concern me much ; 
and if I did wish to know, 1t would only be to have one more 
reason for sharing your view or bringing you to mine. 

As to your proposal that I should take measures to shorten 
Monsieur de Valmont’s stay here, it appears to me very 
difficult to presume to ask his aunt not to have her nephew 
in her house, the more so since she is very attached to him. 
Yet I promise you, merely from deference and not from 
necessity, to take the first opportunity of making this request 
either to her or to him. As to myself, Monsieur de Tourvel 
knows | have arranged to stay here until he returns and he 
will rightly enough be surprised at my inconsistancy if 
I change my plans, 

This is a very long explanation, Madame, but I thought 
I owed it to truth to give a favourable account of Monsieur 
de Valmont, which he appears to stand in great need of with 
you. I am none the less sensible of the friendship which 
dictated your advice. I owe to it also the obliging things you 
say to me about the postponement of your daughter’s marriage. 

86 

LETTER XII 

I thank you sincerely ; but, however great my pleasure would 
be in passing that time with you, I would gladly sacrifice it 
to my desire to see Mademoiselle de Volanges sooner happy, 
if she can ever be happier than at the side of a mother so 
worthy of all her tenderness and respect. I share with her 
these two sentiments which attach me to you and I beg you 
to receive kindly this assurance of them. 
I have the honour to be, etc. 

From... , 13th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XII 
Cécile Volanges to the Marquise de Merteuil 

Mamma is indisposed, Madame ; she will not go out and 
I must keep her company ; so [I shall not have the honour of 
going to the Opera with you. I assure you that I far more 
regret not being with you than missing the performance. 
I beg you will believe me. I like you so much! Would you 
be so kind as to tell Monsieur le Chevalier Danceny that 
I do not possess the album of which he spoke and that it would 
give me great pleasure if he would bring it to me to-morrow ? 
If he comes to-day he will be told we are not at home; but 
that is because Mamma does not wish to receive anybody. 
I hope she will be better to-morrow. 

I have the honour to be, etc. 

From ..., 13th of August, 17--. 

LETTER XIII 
The Marquise de Merteuil to Cécile Volanges 

I am very sorry, my dear, to be deprived of the pleasure 
of seeing you, and for the cause of this deprivation. I hope 
the opportunity will occur again. I will deliver your message 
to the Chevalier Danceny, who will certainly be very sorry 
to know that your Mamma is unwell. If she will receive me 
to-morrow, I will come and keep her company. She and 

87 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

I will attack the Chevalier de Belleroche? at piquet; and 
while we win his money we shall have as an extra pleasure 
that of hearing you sing with your charming master, to whom 
I shall propose it. If this suits your Mamma and you, I will 
answer for myself and my two Chevaliers. Good-bye, my 
dear; my regards to dear Madame de Volanges. I kiss 
you tenderly. 

From... , r3th of August, 17 —. 

LETTER XIV 
Cécile Volanges to Sophie Carnay 

I did not write to you yesterday, my dear Sophie, but it 
was not on account of my pleasures; I assure you. Mamma 
was ill and I did not leave her all day. At night when I left 
her I had no heart for enything ; and I went to bed as quickly 
as I could, to be certain the day was over ; I have never spent 
such a long one. It is not that 1 don’t love Mamma—~I don’t 
know what it was. I was to go to the Opera with Madame 
de Merteuil ; the Chevalier Danceny was to have been there. 
You know they are the two persons I like best. When the 
time came that I should have been there too, my heart shrank 
in spite of myself. I felt disgusted with everything and 
I cried and cried without being able to stop myself. 
Fortunately, Mamma was in bed and could not see me. J am 
sure the Chevalier Danceny was sorry too; but he had the 
distraction of the performance and everybody who was 
there—it was a very different thing. 

Happily Mamma is better to-day, and Madame de Merteuil 
is coming with someone else and the Chevalier Danceny ; 
but Madame de Merteuil always comes very late ; and it is very 
tiresome to be all alone so long. It is only eleven o’clock. 
It is true that I must play on my harp; and then it will take 
me a little time to dress, for I want to have my hair well done 
to-day. I think Mere Perpetue was right and that we become 
coquetish as soon as we are in the world. I have never wanted 

? The Chevalier mentioned in Madame de Merteuil’s letters. (C. de L.). 
88 

LETTER XIV 

so much to be pretty as in the last few days and it seems to 
me I] am not so pretty as | thought ; and then one is at a dis- 
advantage beside women who are rouged. Madame de Merteuill, 
for example--I can see that all the men think she is prettier 
than lam; that does not annoy me very much because she 
likes me and then she assures me that the Chevalier Danceny 
thinks 1 am prettier than she is. It was very kind of her 
to have told me! She even seemed to be pleased by it. I 
can’t understand how she could be. It is because she really 
lovesme! Andhe!... Oh! Howit pleased me! It seems 
to me that just to look at him would be enough to make one 
handsome. I could look at him forever if I were not airaid 
of meeting his eyes; for every time that happens it puts me 
out of countenance and hurts me, as it were; but it doesn’t 
matter. 

Good-bye, my dear; I must begin to dress. I love you 
as ever, 

Paris, the ryth of August, 17 —~—. 

LETTER XV 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Mertewl 

It is very kind of you not to abandon me to my sad fate. 
The life I lead here is truly fatiguing, with the excess of its 
repose and its insipid uniformity. When I read you letter and 
the details of your charming day, I was twenty times «mpted 
to invent an excuse, fly to your feet and ask of you in my 
favour an infidelity to your Chevalier, who after all does not 
deserve his happiness. Do you know you have made me 
jealous of him? What do you mean by speaking of our 
‘eternal separation ?’’ I deny the oath, spoken in delirium ; 
we should not have been worthy to make it if we were to keep 
it. Ah! May I one day avenge myself in your arms for the 
_ involuntary vexation caused me by the Chevalier’s happiness ! 
_ I confess I am indignant when I think that this man, without 
| thought, without giving himself the least trouble, by stupidly 
_ following the instinct of his heart, should find a felicity to 
_ which I cannot attain. Oh! Ishalldisturbit .... Promise 

89 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

me I shall disturb it. Are you not humiliated yourself ? You 
take the trouble to deceive him and he is happier than you 
are. You think he is in your chains! It is you who are in 
his. He sleeps calmly while you are awake for his pleasures. 
What more could his slave do? 

Come, my fair friend, as long as you share yourself between 
several, I am not in the least jealous ; I simply see your lovers 
as the successors of Alexander, incapable of holding among 
them all that Empire where I reigned alone. But that you 
should give yourself entirely to one of them! That there 
should exist another man as happy as I! I will not endure 
it; do not think that I will endure it. Either take me back 
or at least take someone else as well ; and do not let an exclu- 
sive caprice betray the inviolable friendship we have sworn 
each other, 

No doubt it is quite enough that I should have to complain 
of love. You see that I agree with your ideas and admit my 
faults. Indeed, if to be in love is not to be able to live without 
possessing that person one desires, to sacrifice to her one’s 
time, one’s pleasures, one’s life; then I am really in love. 
Jam no nearer success ; I should not have anything at all to 
tell you about the matter, but for an occurrence which makes 
me reflect a good deal and from which I do not know yet 
whether J should fear or hope. 

You know my man, a treasure for intrigue and a real 
comedy-valet ; as you may suppose, my instructions included 
his falling in love with the waiting-woman and making the 
serving men drunk. The rascal is luckier than Jam; he has 
succeeded already. He has just discovered that Madame de 
Tourvel has ordered one of her serving-men to obtain in- 
formation about my conduct and even to follow my morning 
walks as much as he can without being perceived. What 
does the woman mean ? And so the most modest of them all 
yet dares to risk things we should scarcely dare allow our- 
selves! Iswear. .. But, before I think of avenging myself 
for this feminine ruse, let me think how to turn it to my own 
advantage. Hitherto these suspected walks have had no pur- 
pose ; I must give them one. It deserves all my attention, and I 
must leave you and reflect on it. Good-bye, my dear friend 

Still from the Chateau de... , 15th of August, 17-—. 
go 

LETTER XVI 

LETTER XVI 
Cécile Volanges to Sopie Carnay ; 

Ah! my Sophie, here is news! Perhaps I ought not to 
tell you; but I must speak to someone ; it is stronger than 
I am. The Chevalier Danceny... I am so upset that I 
cannot write; I don’t know where to begin. After I had 
told you about the pleasant evening! I spent here with him 
and Madame de Merteuil, I did not speak of him to you again ; 
it was because I did not wish to speak of him to anyone ; 
but I kept thinking about him. After that evening he became 
sad, so sad, so very sad, that it hurt me; and when I asked 
him why he said he was not sad, but I could see he was. 
Yesterday he was worse than ever. It did not prevent his 
having the kindness to sing with me as usual; but every 
time he looked at me, my heart was wrung. After we had 
finished singing he went to put my harp in its case ; and when 
he brought me back the key he begged me play on it again 
this evening as soon as I was alone. I did not suspect any- 
thing ; I did not even want to play but he begged me so hard 
that I said yes. He had his reason. When I went to my 
own room and my maid had left me I went and got my harp. 
In the strings I found a letter, folded only and not sealed, 
from him, Ah ! if you knew all that he wrote to me! Since 
I have read his letter I have been so delighted that I could 
not think of anything else. I read it over again four times 
in succession and then locked it in my writing-desk. I knew 
it by heart ; and when I was in bed I said it over so often 
that I did not think of going to sleep. As soon as I closed 
my eyes, I saw him there saying to me himself everything 
I had just read. I did not go to sleep until very late and as 
soon as I woke up (it was still very early) I went and got his 
letter to read it over again. I took it into bed and kissed it 

as if... Perhaps it is wrong to kiss a letter like that but 
I could not help it. 

1 The letter which speaks of this evening cannot be found. It 
may be surmised that it was the evening mentioned in Madame de 

Merteuil’s note and is also spoken of in the preceding letter from Cécile 
Volanges. (C. de L,). 

gI 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

And now, my dear, although I am very glad, I am also in 
a great difficulty ; for surely I ought not to reply to this letter. 
I know I ought not and yet he asks me to; and if I don't 
answer I am sure he will go on being sad. It is very unlucky 
for him! What do you advise me to do? But you know no 
more than I do. I am very much tempted to speak about it 
to Madame de Merteuil who is very fond of me. I should like 
to console him but I do not want to do anything wrong. We 
are always being told to be kind-hearted ! And then we are 
forbidden to carry out what a kind heart inspires in us when 
it is fora man! It1s unjust. Is not a man our neighbour 
as much as a woman, and even more? For, after all, have 
we not a father as well as a mother, a brother as well as a 
sister > And then there is always the husband, in addition. 
And yet if I did something which was not right perhaps 
Monsieur Danceny himself would not think well of me! Oh! 
I would rather he were still sad; and then, after all, I have 
plenty of time. Because he wrote yesterday, I am not obliged 
to write to-day; and then I shall see Madame de Merteuil 
this evening and if I can pluck up courage I shall tell her all 
about it. If I do what she tells me I shall have nothing to 
reproach myself with. And then perhaps she will tell me that 
I may reply to him just a little, so that he will not be so sad ! 
Oh! I am very unhappy. 

Good-bye, my dear. Tell me what you think. 

From ..., 19th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XVII 
The Chevaher Danceny to Cécile Volanges 

Mademoiselle, before I yield to the pleasure (shall I say ?) 
or to the necessity of writing to you, I begin by begging you 
‘to listen to me, I feel I need your indulgence to dare the 
declaration of my sentiments ; if I wished merely to justify 
them, indulgence would not be necessary. For, after all, 
what am I about to do but to show you your own work ? 
And what have I to say to you which has not been said before 
by my looks, my embarrassment, my behaviour and even my 

g2 

LETTER XVIII 

silence ? And why should you be angry at a sentiment you 
alone caused to exist ? It arose from you and doubtless is 
worthy of being offered to you; though it be burning as my 
soul, it is aS pure as yours, Can #t be a crime to have 
appreciated your charming features, your seductive talents, 
your enchanting graces and that touching candour which adds 
an inestimable value to qualities of themselves so precious ? 
No, without doubt ; but one may be unhappy without being 
guilty, and unhappiness will be my fate if you refuse to accept 
my regard, It is the first my heart has offered. But for you 
I should still be—not happy—but at peace. I saw you; 
repose fled far from me and my happiness is uncertain. Yet 
you are surprised by my sadness; you ask me the reason ; 
sometimes I have even thought that it grieved you. Ah! 
Say but one word and my felicity will be your handiwork ! 
But, before you speak, remember that a word can also over- 
whelm me with misery. Be the arbitress of my destiny. 
Because of you I shall be eternally happy or unhappy. To 
what dearer hands could I confide a greater trust ? 

I shall end, as I began, by imploring your indulgence. 
I asked you to listen to me; I will dare more, I will beg you 
to answer me. To refuse, would be to let me think that you 
feel yourself offended and my heart reassures me that my 
‘respect 1s equal to my love. 

P.S. To answer, you can use the same means by which 
I conveyed this letter to you; it seems to me both certain 
and convenient. 

From ..., 19th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XVIII 
Cécile Volanges to Sophie Carnay 

What, Sophie! You condemn beforehand what I am 
going to do! I had already enough anxieties, and now you 
add to them. It is clear, you say, that I ought not to reply. 
It is very easy for you to talk ; and besides, you don’t under- 
stand the whole situation; you are not here to see. J am 
sure if you were in my place, you would do what I am doing. 

93 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Of course, as a general rule, one ought not to reply; and you 
must have seen from my yesterday’s letter that I did not want 
to; but I think nobody was ever in the position I am in now. 

And then to be forced to decide all by myself ! Madame 
de Merteuil, whom I counted on seeing yesterday evening, 
did not come. Everything combines against me; it was she 
who was the cause of my knowing him. It is almost always 
with her that I have seen and spoken to him. Not that 
I bear her any malice for it; but she leaves me at the very 
moment of difficulty. Oh! Iam very much to be pitied ! 

You must know that he came yesterday as usual. | was 
so upset that I dared not look at him. He could not speak 
to me because Mamma was there. I was very much afraid 
he would be distressed when he saw I had not written to 
him. I did not know which way to look. A moment after- 
wards he asked me if I wanted him to get my harp. My heart 
beat so hard that it was all I could do to answer yes. When 
he returned, it was much worse. I only glanced at him for a 
moment. And he did not look at me; but he really appeared 
as if he were ill. It really hurt me to see him. He began to 
tune my harp and then, when he brought it to me, he said: 
“Ah! Mademoiselle! .. .’’ He only said those two words, 
but it was in a tone which completely distracted me. I played 
a prelude on my harp without knowing what I was doing. 
Mamma asked if we were not going to sing. He made an 
excuse and said he was a little unwell; and I, who had no 
excuse, was forced to sing. I wished I had never had a voice. 
I expressly chose an air I did not know ; for I was quite sure 
I could not sing any one and I should have aroused suspicion. 
Fortunately, there came a visitor; and, as soon as | heard 
the carriage arrive, I stopped and asked him to take back my 
harp. I was very much afraid he would leave then and 
there; but he came back. 

While Mamma and the lady who had just come were talking 
together, I wanted to glance at him again only for a moment. 
A second later I saw his tears falling, and he was obliged to 
turn aside in order not to be seen. This time I could endure 
it no longer; I felt I was going to cry too. 1 went out and 
immediately wrote in pencil on a scrap of paper: ‘“‘ Do not 
be so sad, I beg you; I promise to reply.” Surely, you cannot 

94 

LETTER XIX 

say there was anything wrong in that; and then it was 
stronger than I am. I put the piece of paper in my harp- 
strings, as his letter was, and returned to the drawing-room. 
I felt calmer. 1] was very anxious for the lady to go away. 
Fortunately, she was only making a call’ and left soon after- 
wards. As soon as she had gone, | said I wanted my harp 
again and I asked him to go and get it. I could see, from 
his expression, that he suspected nothing. But when he 
came back, oh! how happy he was! As he put my harp 
in front of me, he placed himself in such a way that Mamma 
could not see, and he took my hand and pressed it . . . but 
in such a way! .. . it was only a moment, but I cannot tell 
you what pleasure it gave me. However, I withdrew it; 
so I have nothing to reproach myself with. 

And so, my dear, you see I cannot help writing to him, 
since [ promised him; and then, I can’t bear to make him 
unhappy again; for I suffer from it more than he does, If 
it were for something wrong, of course I should not do it. 
But what wrong can there be in writing, especially if it is to 
prevent someone from being unhappy ? What troubles me 
is that I cannot turn my letter well; but he will feel that it 
it not my fault ; and then I am sure that the mere fact it is 
from me will please him. 

Good-bye, my dear. If you think I am wrong, tell me ; 
but I do not believe Iam. As the moment approaches when 
I am to write to him, my heart beats inconceivably. And yet 
I must do it, since I promised. Good-bye. 

From ..., 20th of August, 17-—. 

LETTER XIX 
Cécile Volanges to the Chevalier Danceny 

You were so sad yesterday, Monsieur, and I was so grieved 
by it, that I allowed myself to promise you I would reply to 
the letter you wrote me. To-day I feel just as much that 
I ought not to; but, since I promised, I do not want to break 
my word, and that ought to prove to you the friendship I 
have for you. Now that you know it, I hope you will not ask 

95 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

me to write to you again. I also hope you will not tell anyone 
I have written to you; because I should certainly be blamed 
for it and it might cause me much distress. Above all, I hope 
you will not think badly of me for doing it; for that would 
distress me more than anything. I can assure you that 
I should not have done this favour for anyone but you. 
I wish you would do me the favour of not being sad as you 
have been; it takes away all the pleasure I have in seeing 
you. You see, Monsieur, I speak to you sincerely. I ask 
nothing better than that our friendship should last forever ; 
but, I beg you, do not write to me again. 
I have the honour to be, 
Cécile Volanges. 

From... , 20th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XX 
The Marquise de Mertewuil to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Ah! You rogue, so you are coaxing me for fear I shall 
mock you? Come, I must pardon you; you write me so 
many follies that 1 am forced to forgive you the sobriety in 
which you are kept by your Madame de Tourvel. I do not 
think my Chevalier would be as indulgent as I am; _ he is 
the kind of man who might not approve the renewal of our 
lease and who would find nothing amusing in your wild 
idea. Yet I laughed at it and was really sorry I was forced 
to laugh at it alone. If you had been there I do not know 
how far this gaiety might have led me; but I have had 
time to reflect and I have armed myself with severity. I do 
not refuse for always; but I delay, and rightly. Perhaps 
I should bring vanity into it and, once I became interested 
in the game, there is no knowing where it might stop. I might 
enchain you again and make you forget your Madame de 
Tourvel ; and suppose I, the unworthy, should disgust you 
with virtue—what a scandal! To avoid this danger, these 
are my conditions. 

As soon as you have had your fair devotee, and can furnish 

g6 

LETTER XX 

me with a proof, come, and I am yours, But you know that 
in important matters only written proofs are accepted. By 
this arrangement, on the one hand I shall become a recompense 
instead of being a consolation—an jdea which pleases me 
better—and on the other hand, your success will be the 
more piquant by becoming itself a means of infidelity. Come, 
come as soon as you can and bring me the proof of your 
triumph—like our noble knights of old who laid at their 
ladies’ feet the brilliant fruits of their victory. Seriously, 
IT am curious to know what a prude would write after such a 
moment and what veil she will throw over her words after 
having left none upon her person. It is for you to see whether 
I rate myself at too high a price; but I warn you it will not 
be reduced. Until then, my dear Vicomte, you must allow 
me to remain faithful to my Chevalier and to amuse myself 
by making him happy, in spite of the little distress it causes 
you, 

And yet, if I were less moral, I believe he would have at 
this moment a dangerous rival—little Cécile Volanges. I am 
passionately fond of the child; it is a real passion. If [ am 
not deceived she will become one of our most fashionable 
women. I can see her little heart developing, and it is a 
delightful sight. She is already madly in love with her 
Danceny, but does not yet know it herself. He himself, though 
very much in love, still has the timidity of his age and dares 
not declare himself too plainly. Both adore me. The little 
girl especially is very anxious to tell me her secret ; particularly 
in the last few days I have noticed she is really oppressed by 
it and I should have done her a great service by helping her 
a little; but I do not forget that she is only a child and I do 
not want to compromise myself. Danceny has spoken to 
me a little more plainly ; but I have made up my mind not 
to listen to him. As for the girl, I am often tempted to make 
' her my pupil; it is a service I should like to render Gercourt. 
He leaves me plenty of time since he is in Corsica until October. 
It occurs to me that I might make use of this time and that 
we will give him a fully formed woman instead of his innocent 
convent-girl. What insolent confidence on the part of this 
man, to dare to sleep tranquilly while a woman who has 
reason to complain of him has not yet avenged herself ! 

97 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Ah ! if the girl were here now I do not know what I might 
not say to her. 

Good-bye, Vicomte; good-night and good luck; but, 
for Heaven’s sake, make some progress. Remember, if you 
do not have this woman, that others will blush at having 
had you. 

From ..., 21st of August, 17—-. 4 o’clock in the morning. 

LETTER XXI 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

At last, my fair friend, I have made a step forward, a 
large step, which, although it has not led me to the goal, 
has allowed me to see that I am on the road and has banished 
my fear that I had missed the way. I have at last declared 
my love; and although she kept the most obstinate silence 
I obtained perhaps the least equivocal and most flattering 
reply possible; let us not anticipate, but go back to the 
beginning. 

You remember that my walks were being watched. Well! 
I wanted to turn this scandalous circumstance to public 
edification, and this is what I did. I ordered my man to find 
in the neighbourhood some unfortunate person in need of 
help. It was not a difficult task to accomplish. Yesterday 
afternoon he informed me that this morning there would be 
a destraint on the furniture of a whole family which could 
not pay its taxes. I made certain that the family contained 
no girl or woman whose age or features might render my 
action suspicious ; and, when I was certain of this, I announced 
at dinner my intention of going shooting the next day. Here 
I must render justice to my Madame de Tourvel ; no doubt 
she regretted the order she had given and, not having the 
strength to conquer her curiosity, she had at least enough to 
oppose my desire. It would be excessively hot; I ran the 
tisk of getting ill; I should kill nothing and tire myself in 
vain; and during this dialogue, her eyes, which perhaps 
spoke more than she wished, showed me that she desired 
I should take her bad reasons as good ones. I was careful not 

98 

LETTER XXI 

to yield to them, as you may suppose, and in the same way 
I resisted a little diatribe against shooting and sportsmen 
and also a small cloud of ill-humour which darkened that 
heavenly face the whole evening. For a moment I feared 
she might countermand her orders and that her delicacy might 
harm me. [reckoned without the curiosity of a woman---and 
so I was wrong. My man reassured me the same evening 
and I went to bed satisfied. 

At dawn I rose and set out. I was scarcely fifty yards 
from the Chateau when I saw my spy following me. I set 
out across the field as though I were shooting, in the direction 
of the village I wished to reach; my only pleasure on the 
way was to set the pace to the fellow who was following me 
and since he dared not leave the roads he often had to cover 
at top speed triple the distance I went. I exercised him so 
much that I became very hot myself and sat down at the foot 
of a tree. And did he not have the insolence to slip behind 
a bush about twenty yards from me and sit down too? For 
a moment I was tempted to take a shot at him, for although 
my gun was only loaded with pellets it would have given him 
enough of a lesson on the dangers of curiosity ; 1 luckily for 
him I recollected that he was useful to me and positively 
necessary to my plans and this reflection saved him. 

When I reached the village I saw there was a disturbance ; 
I went forward; 1 asked questions; I was told what was 
happening; I called the Tax-Collector ; and, yielding to my 
generous compassion, I nobly paid fifty-six livres, for which 
five persons were to be reduced to straw and despair. After 
so simple an action you cannot imagine what a chorus of 
benedictions echoed round me from the spectators! What 
tears of gratitude flowed from the eyes of the aged head of 
the family and embellished this patriarchal face which a 
moment before was rendered truly hideous by the wild 
imprint of despair! I was watching this spectacle when 
another younger peasant, leading a woman and two children 

1In 1723, the Comte de Charolais, passing through the village of 
Anet, saw a “ bourgeois,’ in a night-cap, standing at his door; the 
Comte shot the bourgeois as an amusement. The next day he went to 
the Regent for a formal pardon and received it, with the remark that 

the pardon was due to his rank, but would more willingly be granted 
to anyone who did the same to the Comte. See Carré Noblesse de France, 

P. 293. 
99 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

by the hand, rushed towards me, saying to them: ‘“‘ Let us 
all fall at the feet of this Image of God’”’; and at the same 
moment I was surrounded by the family prostrate at my 
knees. I must admit my weakness; my eyes filled with 
tears and I felt an involuntary but delicious emotion. I was 
astonished at the pleasure there is in doing good; and 
I should be tempted to believe that those whom we call 
virtuous people are not so virtuous as they are pleased to 
tell us. However that may be, I thought it only just to pay 
these poor people for the pleasure they had just given me. 
I had brought ten lows with me; which I gave to them. 
Their thanks recommenced but without the same degree of 
pathos; necessity had produced the great, the true effect ; 
the rest was only a simple expression of gratitude and 
astonishment for superfluous gifts. 

However, in the midst of the wordy benedictions of this 
family I was not unlike the hero of a play in the last scene, 
You are to know that my faithful spy was in the forefront of 
the crowd. My object was fulfilled ; I got free from them and 
returned to the Chateau. Taking it all round, I congratulate 
myself on my invention. This woman is certainly worth all 
the trouble I have taken ; one day it will form my claim upon 
her; and having, as it were, thus paid for her beforehand 
I shall have the right to dispose of her as I fancy, without 
reproaching myself. 

I forgot to tell you that, to turn everything to my profit, 
I asked these good people to pray to God for the success of my 
plans, You will see that their prayers have already been 
partly recompensed. .. But I am told that dinner is served 
and it will be too late for this letter to go if I finish it after 
dinner. And so—the rest by the next post. I am sorry, 
for the rest is the finest part. Good-bye, my fair friend. 
You steal from me a moment of the pleasure of seeing her. 

From ..., 20th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXII 
- Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Volanges 

No doubt you will be glad, Madame, to hear of an act of 
Monsieur de Valmont which, it seems to me, is in strong 
100 

LETTER XXII 

contrast to all the traits by which he has been represented to 
you. It is so painful to think disadvantageously of anyone, 
so grieving to find nothing but vices in those who should have 
all the qualities needed to make virtue beloved! And then 
you are so glad to be indulgent, that it is doing you a favour 
to furnish you with motives for reversing too harsh a judg- 
ment. It seems to me that Monsieur de Valmont has a right 
to hope for this favour. I might almost say this justice ; 
and this is why I think so. 

This morning he went on one of those walks which might 
lead one to suspect some intrigue on his part in the neighbour- 
hood, as you thought; a thought which I blame myself for 
having accepted too quickly. Fortunately for him, and above 
all fortunately for us, since it preserves us from being unjust, 
one of my men-servants had to go the same way as he did! ; 
and in this way my reprehensible but fortunate curiosity was 
satisfied. He related to us that Monsieur de Valmont found 
in the village of . . . an unhappy family whose goods were 
being sold because they could not pay their taxes ; Monsieur 
de Valmont not only hastened to discharge the debt of these 
poor people but even gave them a considerable sum of money. 
My servant was a witness of this virtuous action ; and more- 
over he tells me that the peasants, talking among themselves 
and with him, said that a servant, whom they described, and 
whom my servant thinks is Monsieur de Valmont’s, yesterday 
made inquiries about such inhabitants of the village as might 
be in need of help. If this is true, it is not merely a passing 
compassion provoked by accident; it is a pre-conceived 
plan of doing good ; it is the solicitude of charity ; it is the 
fairest virtue of the fairest souls; but whether it was chance 
or method, it is still a good and praiseworthy action, the 
mere relation of which moved me to tears, In addition I must 
say, still from a sense of justice, that when I spoke to him 
about this action, of which he had not say a word, he began 
by denying it, and, when he did admit it, seemed to set so 
little value upon it that his modesty doubled its merit. 

And now, my respectable friend, tell me if Monsieur de 
Valmont is indeed an abandoned libertine? If this is all 

«c ea Madame de Tourvel not dare to say it was by her orders ? 
. de L.). 

Ior 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

he is and if he acts in this way, what is there left for the 
virtuous ? What! Should the wicked share with the good 
the sacred pleasure of charity ?? Would God permit a virtuous 
family to receive from a wicked man’s hand that aid for which 
it returned thanks to His divine providence ? And could 
He be pleased to hear pure mouths shed their benedictions 
upon a reprobate? No. I prefer to believe that his faults, 
though long continued, are not eternal; and I cannot think 
that he who does good is the enemy of virtue. Monsieur de 
Valmont is perhaps only one more example of the danger of 
acquaintances. I dwell on this idea, which pleases me. If, 
on the one hand, it may serve to justify him in your mind, on 
the other, it renders more and more precious to me that 
tender friendship which unites me to you for life. 

I have the honour to be, etc. 

P.S. Madame de Rosemonde and I are just going to 
see this honest and unfortunate family and to add our tardy 
succour to that of Monsieur de Valmont. We are taking 
him with us. At least we shall give these good people the 
pleasure of seeing their benefactor again; I am afraid it is 
all he has left us to do. 

From... , 21st of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXIII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Mertewil 

We broke off at my return to the Chateau ; I continue 
my story. 

I had only time for a brief toilet ; I went into the drawing- 
room where my fair one was embroidering, while the local 
Curé was reading the Gazette to my old aunt. I went and 
sat down beside the frame. Glances, softer than usual, and 
almost caressing, soon allowed me to guess that the servant 
had already given an account of his mission. Indeed my 

1The 18th century, the age of privilege and sensibility, considered 
charity the greatest and most amiable of virtues. The 2oth century, 
the age of democracy and commerce, considers charity an insult or at 

best the poor man’s “ claim ’’ to the rich man’s money: The emotions 
of compassion and gratitude are scarcely involved. 

102 

LETTER XXIiIl. 

amiable Inquisitive was unable to keep for long the secret 
she had stolen from me; and she was not afraid to interrupt 
a venerable pastor whose utterance closely resembled that of 
a sermon, by saying: ‘“‘ And I too, have news to tell you” ; 
and she immediately related my adventure with a precision 
which did honour to the intelligence of her historian. You 
may imagine how I displayed all my modesty ; but who could 
stop a woman when she is praising what she loves, although 
she does not yet know it? I decided to let her proceed. It 
was as if she were preaching the panegyric of a saint. During 
this time I observed, not without hope, all that was promised 
to love by her animated looks, her freer. gestures, and above 
all by the tone of her voice which by its perceptible alteration 
betrayed the emotion of her soul. She had scarcely finished 
speaking when Madame de Rosemonde said : ‘‘ Come, nephew 
come, let me embrace you.” I felt immediately that the 
pretty preacher could not prevent herself from being embraced 
in turn. However, she tried to escape; but she was soon in 
my arms ; and far from having the strength to resist she had 
scarcely enough to stand upright. The more I observe this 
woman the more desirable she seems to me. She hastened 
back to her frame and seemed to the others to recommence 
her embroidery ; but I could easily perceive that her trembling 
hand would not permit her to continue her work. 

After dinner the ladies desired to visit the unfortunate 
persons I had so piously succoured, I accompanied them. 
I spare you the boredom of this second scene of gratitude 
and praise. My heart, urged by a delicious memory, 
hastens the moment of the return to the Chdteau. On the 
way, my fair lady, more preoccupied than usual, did 
not say a word. I was busy trying to find means to profit 
from the effect produced by the event of the day and kept 
equally silent. Madame de Rosemonde alone spoke and re- 
ceived only short and rare answers from us. We must have 
bored her; that was my plan and it succeeded. So, when 
we got out of the carriage, she went to her room and left my 
fair lady and me alone together in a dimly lighted drawing- 
room ; soft obscurity, which emboldens timid love ! 

I did not have the trouble of turning the conversation 
in the direction I wished it to go. The amiable lady’s fervour 

103 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

served me better than my skill could have done. ‘‘ When 
a person is so worthy of doing good,’’ said she, fixing her 
gentle gaze on me, ‘“‘ how can he pass his life in doing ill ?”’ 
'“T do not deserve either this praise or this censure,” I replied, 
‘and I cannot understand that with your intelligence you 
have not understood me. Even though my confidence 
should do me harm with you, you are too worthy of it for me 
to be able to refuse it to you. You will find the key to my 
conduct in a character which is unfortunately too compliant. 
Surrounded by the immoral, I have imitated their vices ; 
I may even have gratified my vanity by surpassing them. 
Seduced in the same way here by the example of virtues, 
without hoping to attain to your level, I have at least tried 
to follow you. Ah! Perhaps the action for which you 
praise me to-day would lose all its value in your eyes, if you 
knew its real motive !’’ (You see, my fair friend, how near 
the truth I was). “It is not to me,” I continued, “‘ that these 
unfortunates owe my succour. Where you think you see 
praiseworthy action, I only sought a means of pleasing. 
I was only, (since I must say it), the weak agent of the divinity 
I adore.” (Here she tried to interrupt me; but I did not 
give her time). ‘‘ At this very moment,” I added, “ my 
secret only escaped me through my weakness. I had promised 
myself to withhold it from you; I held it a happiness to 
render to your virtues as to your charms a pure regard of 
which you would forever remain ignorant; but, incapable 
of deceiving, when I have the example of candour beneath 
my eyes, I shall not have to reproach myself with culpable 
dissimulation towards you. Do not suppose that I insult you 
by a criminal hope. I shall be unhappy, I knowit; but my 
sufferings will be dear to me ; they will prove to me the excess 
of my love ; it is at your feet, and in your bosom that I shall 
lay my troubles. There I shall gather strength to suffer 
anew ; there I shall find compassionate kindness, and I shall 
think myself consoled because you have pitied me. O you 
whom I adore, hear me, pity me, help me!” I was now at 
her knees and clasped her hands in mine; but she suddenly 
snatched them away and pressed them over her eyes with an 
expression of despair. ‘Ah! unhappy woman!’ she 
exclaimed and then burst into tears, Fortunately I had 
104 

LETTER XXIII 

worked myself up to such an extent that I was weeping too ; 
and taking her hands again, I bathed them in tears. This 
was a very necessary precaution; for she was so occupied 
’ by her own grief that she would not have perceived mine, 
had I not thought of this method of advertising her. In 
addition I had the advantage of gazing at leisure upon that 
charming face, still more embellished by the powerful attrac- 
tion of tears. I grew warm, and was so little master of myself 
that I was tempted to profit by this moment. 

How great is our weakness; how great is the Power of 
circumstances, if I myself, forgetting my plans, risked losing 
by a premature triumph the charm of long struggles and the 
details of a painful defeat; if, seduced by desires worthy 
only of a young man, I almost exposed the conqueror of 
Madame de Tourvel to the fate of gathering as the fruit of 
his labours nothing but the insipid advantage of having had 
one woman more! Ah! Let her yield herself, but let her 
struggle ! Let her have the strength to resist without having 
enough to conquer; let her fully taste the feeling of her 
weakness and be forced to admit her defeat. Let the obscure 
poacher kill the deer he has surprised from a hiding place ; 
the real sportsman must hunt it down. A sublime plan, is 
it not ? But perhaps I should now be regretting I had not 
followed it, if chance had not come to the aid of my prudence. 

We heard a noise. Somebody was coming into the drawing- 
room. Madame de Tourvel rose precipitately in terror, seized 
one of the candlesticks and left the room. I had to let her 
go. It was only a servant. As soon as I was certain of this, 
I followed her. Scarcely had I taken a few steps when either 
because she recognised me or from a vague fecling of fear, 
I heard her increase her pace and throw herself rather than 
enter into her apartment whose dvor she closed behind her. 
I went up to it; but the key was in the inside. I was careful 
not to knock ; for that would have given her the opportunity 
for too facile a resistance. I had the happy and simple idea 
of attempting to look through the key-hole and I saw this 
adorable woman on her knees, bathed in tears and praying 
fervently. What God did she dare to invoke ? Is there any 
sufficiently powerful against love? In vain does she now 
seek outside aid ; it is I who control her fate. 

105 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Thinking I had done enough for one day, I also retired 
into my apartment and began to write to you. I hoped to 
see her again at supper ; but she sent a message that she felt 
unwell and had gone to bed. Madame de Rosemonde wished 
to go up to her bed-room ; but the cunning invalid pretended 
a headache which did not allow her to see anybody. You 
may imagine that I did not sit up late after supper and that | 
too had my headache. Having retired to my room, I wrote 
a long letter to complain of this harshness and I went to bed 
with the idea of delivering it this morning. I slept badly, 
as you may perceive by the date of this letter. I got up and 
re-read my epistle. I saw that I had not watched myself 
enough ; that I showed more ardour than love in it and more 
ill-humour than sadness. I ought to re-write it; but then, 
I should have to be calmer to do so. 

I see it is dawn, and I hope its accompanying freshness 
will bring me sleep. 1 am going back to bed; and, whatever 
may be this woman’s domination, I promise you not to be 
so absorbed with her that I have not plenty of time left to 
think of you. Good-bye, my fair friend. 

From ..., 21st of August, 17—. 4 0’clock in the morning. 

LETTER XXIV 
The Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Tourvel 

Ah! For pity’s sake, Madame, deign to calm the distemper 
of my soul; deign to inform me what I am to hope or fear. 
Placed between an excess of happiness or of misfortune, 
uncertainty is a cruel torture. Why did I speak to you? 
Why could I not resist the dominating charm which delivered 
up my thoughts to you? Content to adore you in silence, 
I at least enjoyed my love; that pure sentiment, which was 
not then troubled by the image of your grief, sufficed for my 
felicity ; but that source of happiness has become a source of 
despair since I saw your tears fow, since I heard that cruel 
“Ah! unhappy woman!" Those words will long continue 
to re-echo in my heart. Through what fatality is it that the 
softest of sentiments is only able to inspire you with fear >? 

106 

LETTER XXIV 

But what is this apprehension ? Ah! not that of sharing it ; 
I have misunderstood your heart, it is not made for love ; 
mine, which you constantly depreciate, is alone sensitive, 
yours does not even feel pity. If it were not so, you would 
not have refused a word of consolation to'a wretch who con- 
fessed to you his sufferings ; you would not have avoided his 
gaze when he has no pleasure but to look at you; you would 
not have played cruelly with his uneasiness by announcing 
that you were ill, without allowing him to enquire after your 
state of health; you would have felt that this very night, 
which for you was merely twelve hours of repose, would be 
a century of pain for him. 

Tell me, how have I deserved this cruel harshness ? I am 
not afraid to refer to you as judge; what have I done, but 
yield to an involuntary sentiment, inspired by beauty and 
justified by virtue, always restrained by respect, the innocent 
admission of which was the result of confidence and not of 
hepe; will you betray the confidence which you yourself 
seem to allow me and to which I yielded myself unreservedly ? 
No, I cannot believe it; that would be imputing a fault to 
you, and my heart revolts at the mere idea of finding one in 
you; I disavow my complaints; I may have written, but 
would not have thought them. Ah! let me think you perfect 
—it is the sole pleasure left me. Prove to me that you are so 
by granting me your generous aid. What wretch have you 
succoured who needed it as much as I ? Do not abandon me in 
the delirium into which you have plunged me; lend me 
your good sense since you have stolen my own; when you 
have corrected me, enlighten me in order to finish your work. 

I do not wish to deceive you, you will not succeed in 
extinguishing my love; but you will teach me to control it ; 
by guiding my steps, by dictating my speech, you will at least 
save me from the terrible misfortune of displeasing you. 
I beg you to dissipate this despairing thought; tell me that 
you forgive me, that you pity me; assure me of your indul- 
gence, You will never grant me all I desire’ but I ask for 
what I need—will you refuse it ? 

Farewell, Madame: receive graciously the homage of my 
feelings ; it does not diminish my respect. 

From ..., 20th of August, 17—. 

107 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER XXV 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

Here is today’s bulletin. | 

At eleven o’clock I went to Madame de Rosemonde’s 
apartment; and, under her protection, I was taken to see 
the feigned invalid, who was still in bed. Her eyes were 
very tired; I hope she slept as badly as I did. I seized a 
moment, when Madame de Rosemonde had turned away 
to deliver my letter ; she refused to take it; but I left it on 
the bed and very virtuously went over to my old aunt’s arm- 
chair for she wanted to be near her dear child—the letter had 
to be concealed to avoid a scandal. The invalid said awk- 
wardly that she thought she was a little feverish, Madame 
de Rosemonde called on me to feel her pulse and boasted of my 
medical knowledge. My fair one therefore had the double 
disappointment of being obliged to give me her arm, and of 
feeling that her little lie would be discovered. I took her 
hand and clasped it in one of mine, while with the other I 
wandered over her cool dimpled arm ;_ the malicious creature 
made no response whatever which made me say as I let her go: 
“ There is not even the least excitement.” I guessed her looks 
must be severe and, to punish her, I did not seek them; a 
moment after, she said she wished to rise and we left her 
alone. She appeared at ‘dinner, which was a gloomy meal ; 
she announced she would not go walking, which was to tell 
me I should not have a chance of speaking to her. I felt that 
was the moment for a sigh and a pained glance ; no doubt 
she expected it, for it was the only moment in the day when 
I succeeded in catching her eye. Modest as she is, she has her 
little wiles like the rest. I found an opportunity to ask her 
if she would have the goodness to tell me what was my fate, 
and I was a little astonished to hear her reply : ‘‘ Yes, Monsieur 
I have written to you.” I was very anxious to have this 
letter; but either from wiles again, or from clumsiness or 
from timidity, she only handed it to me this evening just before 
she went to bed. I send you her letter as well as the rough 
draft of my own; read them and judge: notice with what 

108 

LETTER XXVI 

obvious falsity she asserts she is not in love, when I am sure 
of the contrary ; and then she will complain if I am unfaith- 
ful to her afterwards, when she is not afraid to be faithless to 
me beforehand! My fair friend, the most skilful man can do 
no more than keep himself on a level with the most sincere 
woman ; and yet I must feign to believe all this nonsense, 
and weary myself out with despairing, because it pleases the 
lady to play at cruelty! How can one avoid being avenged 
on such baseness! Ah! patience... . but good-bye, I 
have still a lot to write. 

Apropos, you will send me back the cruel one’s letter; 
it may be that later she will want to set a value on these trifles, 
and I must be prepared. 

I have not said anything about the Volanges girl; we will 
talk about her at the first opportunity. 

From the Chdteau, 22nd of August, 17. 

LETTER XXVI 
Madame de Tourvel to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Indeed, Monsieur, you would have had no letter from me 
if my foolish conduct of yesterday evening did not compel 
me to enter into explanations with you. Yes, I wept, I admit 
it; and perhaps those two words which you are so careful 
to quote to me did escape me. Tears and words, you noticed 
them all; and therefore all must be explained to you. 

I am accustomed to inspire none but virtuous sentiments, 
to hear no speech save that which can be listened to without 
blushing ; consequently to enjoy a feeling of confidence which 
I dare to say I deserve and therefore I do not know how to 
dissimulate or to combat the impressions I feel. The astonish- 
ment and embarrassment into which I was thrown by your 
behaviour, a certain fear inspired by a situation which ought 
never to have occured to me, perhaps the revolting idea of 
seeing myself confounded with women you depised and treated 
as lightly as they—all these causes prevoked my tears and 
may have made me say (rightly, I think) that I was unhappy. 
This expression, which you thought so strong, would be far 
too weak if my tears and words had had another motive ; 

109g 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

if instead of disapproving sentiments which must offend me 
I could have feared I might share them. 

No, Monsieur, I do not have this fear; if I had, I should 
fly a hundred miles from you; I should bewail in a desert 
the misfortune of having known you. Perhaps, in spite of 
my certainty that I do not love you, that I shall never love 
you, perhaps I should have done better to follow the advice 
of my friends and not allow you to come near me. 

I thought—and this is my one error—I thought you 
would respect a virtuous woman who asked no more than to 
find you so and to do you justice ; who was defending you 
while you outraged her by your criminal desires. You do 
not know me; no, Monsieur, you do not know me. If you 
did, you would not have supposed you could make your 
errors into a right; because you said to me words I ought 
not to have heard, you would not have thought yourself 
authorised to write me a letter I] ought not to have read—and 
you ask me to “‘ guide your steps, to dictate your speech !”’ 
Monsieur, silence and oblivion, that is the advice I must give 
you, which you must follow; then indeed you will have a 
right to my indulgence and it will depend upon you to obtain 
even my gratitude. .. And yet, no, I will ask nothing of 
him who has not respected me; I will not give a mark of 
confidence to one who has abused my frankness. 

You compel me to fear you, perhaps to hate you; I did 
not wish to; I wished to see in you only the nephew of my 
most respectable friend ; I opposed the voice of friendship 
to the accusations of public fame. You have destroyed every- 
thing ; and, I foresee, you will not wish to repair anything. 

I must tell you, Monsieur, that your feelings are an offence 
to me, that the admission of them is an outrage, and above 
all that, far from my coming one day to share them, you 
would force me never to see you again, if you did not keep 
a silence in this matter such as I feel I have a right to expect 
and even to demand from you. I enclose with this letter 
the one you wrote me and I hope you will be good enough to 
return me this one ; I should indeed be pained if there existed 
any trace of an event which ought never to have taken place. 

I have the honour to be, etc. 

From ..., 21st of August, 17—. 

IIo 

LETTER XXVII 

LETTER XXVII 
Cécile Volanges to the Marquise de Merteuil 

Ah! How kind you are, Madame! How well you realised 
that it would be easier for me to write than to speak to you ! 
And then, what I have to say to you is very difficult; but 
you are my friend, are you not? Oh! yes, my most kind 
friend ! [ will try not to be afraid ; and then I need so much 
both you and your advice! I am in great trouble, it seems 
to me that every one guesses what I am thinking; and 
especially when he is there, I blush as soon as I am looked 
at. Yesterday, when you saw me crying, I wanted to speak 
to you, and then something or other prevented me; and 
when you asked me what was the matter, the tears came in 
spite of me. 1 could not have said a word. But for you 
Mamma would have noticed it and then what would have 
happened to me ? And this is how I spend my life, especially 
the last four days ! 

That was the day, Madame, yes, I am going to tell you 
about it, that was the day the Chevalier Danceny wrote to 
me. Oh! I assure you that when I found his letter I did 
not know at all what it could be; but, to tell you the truth, 
I cannot say that I had no pleasure in reading it; 1 would 
rather be unhappy all my life than that he should not have 
written to me. But I knew very well that I ought not to 
write to him and I can assure you that I told him I was very 
angry about it; but he said it was stronger than he was, and 
I can believe him; for I had made up my mind not to answer 
him and yet I could not prevent myself. Oh! I only wrote 
to him once and even then it was partly to tell him not to 
write to me again; but in spite of that he keeps on writing ; 
and as I do not answer, I can see he is sad, and that grieves 
me still more: and so I don’t know what to do or what will 
become of me and I am very much to be pitied. 

Tell me, Madame, I beg you, would it be very wrong to 
answer him from time to time ? Only until he can manage 
not to write to me any more himself and to be as we were 
before; because for my part if this goes on I do not know 

III 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

what will happen to me. Why, when I read his last letter, 
I cried as if I would never stop; and I am quite sure if I do 
not answer him again, it will be very sad for us both. 

I send you his letter too, or rather a copy, and you can 
judge; you will see he does not ask for anything wrong. 
However, if you think it ought not to be, I promise you not 
to do it; but I believe you will think as I do, that there is 
nothing wrong in it. 

And while I am about it, Madame, allow me to ask you 
another question ; I have been told that it is wrong to love 
anybody—but why is that? What makes me ask you 1s 
that the Chevalier Danceny says that it is not wrong at all 
and that almost everybody loves; if that is true, I do not 
see why I should be the only one not to; or is it only wrong 
for girls ? Because I heard Mamma herself say that Madame 
D.... loved M.... and she did not speak of it as a thing 
which was so very bad ; and yet I am sure she would be angry 
with me if she even suspected my friendship for Monsieur 
Danceny. Mamma still treats me like a child; and she 
tells me nothing. When she took me out of the convent, 
I thought it was to marry me; but now I don’t think so; 
not that I care, I assure you; but you, who are so much her 
friend, perhaps know about it and if you know, I hope you 
will tell me. 

This is a very long letter, Madame, but since you have 
allowed me to write to you I have taken advantage of it to 
tell you everything and I rely on your friendship. 

I have the honour to be, etc. 

Paris, 23rd of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXVIII 
The Chevalier Danceny to Cécile Volanges 

And so, Mademoiselle, you still refuse to answer me! 
Nothing can bend you; and each day carries away with it 
the hopes it brought ! What is the friendship you consented 
should exist between us if it is not even powerful enough to 
make you sensible of my suffering ; if it leaves you calm and 

IT2 

LETTER XXVIII 

cold while I endure the torments of a fire I cannot extinguish ; 
if, so far from inspiring you with confidence, it does not even 
suffice to awaken your pity? What! your friend suffers, 
and you do nothing to help him! He asks only a word from 
you and you refuse it to him! And you want him to be 
contented with a sentiment so weak that you are afraid to 
repeat your assurance of it! 

Yesterday you said you wished not to be ungrateful; 
ah! believe me, Mademoiselle, to wish to repay love with 
friendship is not to fear ingratitude, it is only fearing to 
seem ungrateful. But I dare no longer occupy you with feelings 
which can only be toublesome to you if they do not affect 
you; I must shut them up in my own heart until I learn to 
overcome them. I know how painful this task will be; I do 
not conceal from myself the fact that I shall need all my 
strength; I shall try every means—there is one which will 
wound my heart deepest, and that will be to remind myself 
frequently that yours is insensible. I shall even try to see 
you less often and I am already considering how to find a 
plausible excuse. 

What! Must I abandon the sweet custom of seeing you 
each day! Ah! at least I shall never cease to regret it. 
An endless misery will be the reward of a most tender love ; 
and you will have willed it so, it will be your work |! Never— 
I see it—shall I recapture the happiness I lose to-day; you 
only were made for my heart; with what pleasure would 
I swear to live only for you! But you do not desire to accept 
that oath; your silence shows me plainly that your heart 
makes no plea for me ; it is at once the clearest proof of your 
indifference and the cruellest manner of telling me. Farewell, 
Mademoiselle. 

I dare not flatter myself with hopes of an answer; love 
would have written eagerly, friendship with pleasure, even 
pity with indulgence ; but pity, friendship and love are alike 
strangers to your heart. 

Paris... , 23rd of August, 17—. 

113 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER XXIX 
Cécile Volanges to Sophie Carnay 

I told you, Sophie, that there are cases when one can 
write; and I assure you I greatly regret having followed 
your advice, because it gave so much pain to the Chevalier 
Danceny and to me. The proof that I was right is that 
Madame de Merteuil, a woman who must surely know, ended 
by agreeing with me. I told her everything. At first she 
said what you did; but when I explained everything to her 
she admitted it was quite a different matter; she only 
demands that I show her all my letters and all those from 
the Chevalier Danceny, to be certain I only say what is 
proper ; and so for the present Iam content. Ah! how much 
I love Madame de Merteuil! She is so kind! And such a 
Tespectable woman. So nothing can be said. 

How I shall write to Monsieur Danceny and how pleased 
he will be! He will be more pleased than he imagines; for 
up to now I have only spoken to him of my “ friendship ”’ and 
he always wanted me to say my “ love.” I think it came to 
the same thing; but still I was afraid to, and he wanted it. 
I spoke of it to Madame de Merteuil; she said I was right 
and that one should never admit loving someone until it 
was impossible to prevent it any longer. I am sure I shall 
not be able to prevent myself much longer; after all it is 
the same thing, and will please him more. 

Madame de Merteuil said too that she would lend me 
books which speak about all this and will teach me how to 
conduct myself and how to write better than I do; for, you 
see, she tells me all my faults, which is a proof of how much 
she loves me; she only advised me not to say anything to 
Mamma about these books because it would look as if she had 
neglected my education and that might make her angry. 
Oh! I shall say nothing to her about them. 

But it is very extraordinary that a woman who is scarcely 
related to me should take more care of me than my mother ! 
It is very fortunate for me that I know her ! 

114 

LETTER XXX 

She also asked Mamma to allow her to take me to-morrow 
to her box at the Opera ; she says we shall be all alone there, 
and we will talk the whole time without any fear of being 
overheard; I shall lke that much more than the Opera, 
We shall also talk about my marriage; for she tells me 
that it was quite true 1 was to be married; but we 
have not been able to say any more about it. Now, is it 
not really very surprising that Mamma says nothing at all 
about it ? 

Good-bye, dear Sophie, I am going to write to the Chevalier 
Danceny. Oh! I am so glad ! 

From... , 24th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXX 
Cécile Volanges to the Chevalier Danceny 

At last I agree to write to you, Monsieur, to assure you of 
my friendship, of my dove, since otherwise you would be 
unhappy. You say I am not kind-hearted; I assure you 
that you are wrong and I hope you will not think so any more. 
If you were hurt because I did not write to you, do you think 
I was not pained too? But the reason was that nothing in 
the world could make me do something I thought was wrong ; 
and I would not even have admitted my love, if I could have 
prevented myself; but your sadness hurt me too much. 
I hope now you will not be sad any more and that we shall 
be very happy. 

I expect to have the pleasure of seeing you this evening 
and that you will come early; it will never be as early as 
I desire. Mamma dines at home and I think she will invite 
you to stay; I hope you will not be engaged as you were the 
day before yesterday. Was it very pleasant, the dinner you 
went to? For you left very early. But we will not speak of 
that any more; now you know I love you, I hope you will 
stay with me as much as you can ; for 1 am only happy when 
I am with you and I should like you to be the same. 

I am very sorry you are still sad, but it is not my fault. 

115 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

I shall ask for my harp as soon as you arrive so that you get 
my letter at once. I cannot do any more. 

Good-bye, Monsieur. I love you with all my heart; the 
oftener I tell you so, the happier I am; I hope you will 
be so too, 

From... , 24th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXXI 
The Chevalier Danceny to Cécile Volanges 

Yes, we shall indeed be happy. My happiness is certain, 
since I am loved by you; your happiness will never end if 
it lasts as long as the 'ove you have inspired in me. Ah! 
you love me, you are no longer afraid to assure me of your 
love! ‘‘ the oftener you tell me so, the happier you are!” 
After I had read that charming “I love you,” written by 
your hand, I heard the same admission from your lovely 
mouth. I saw those charming eyes gaze upon me, embellished 
by an expression of tenderness. I received your vow to live 
only for me. Ah! accept my vow to devote my whole life 
to your happiness ; accept it and be sure I shall never betray 
it. 

What a happy day we spent yesterday! Ah! Why is 
it that Madame de Merteuil has not secrets to tell your Mamma 
every day? Why must the idea of the constraint which 
awaits us mingle with the delicious memory which possesses 
me? Why can I not forever hold that pretty hand which 
wrote to me “I love you!” cover it with kisses, and thus 
avenge myself for the refusal of a greater favour ! 

Tell me, my Cécile, when your Mamma came back; when 
we were forced by her presence to exchange only indifferent 
looks ; when you could no longer console me by the assurance 
of your love for your refusal to give me proofs of it; did you 
feel no regret ? Did you not say to yourself: ‘‘ A kiss would 
have made him happier and I have denied him this happiness?” 
Promise me, my dearest, that you will be less severe next 
time. With the aid of this promise I shall find courage to 
endure the difficulties which circumstances are preparing for 

116 

LETTER XXXII 

us; and cruel privations will at least be softened by the 
certainty that you share my affliction. 

Good-bye, my charming Cécile; the hour has come when 
I am to visit you. It would be impossible for me to leave 
you if it were not to go and see you again. Good-bye, you 
whom I love so much! You whom I shall ever love more ! 

From ..., 24th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXXII 
Madame de Volanges to Madame de Tourvel 

You wish me, Madame, to believe in the virtues of Monsieur 
de Valmont ? [I confess I cannot bring myself to do so, and 
it would be as difficult for me to consider him virtuous from 
the one fact which you tell me, as it would be to consider 
as vicious a man of recognised virtue about whom I learned 
one lapse. Humanity is not perfect in any type, no more in 
evil than in good. The wicked man has his virtues, as the 
good man has his weaknesses. It seems to me the more 
necessary to believe this truth since from it arises the necessity 
of indulgence for the wicked as well as for the good; since 
it saves the latter from pride and the former from discourage- 
ment. No doubt you will think I am now practising very 
ill the indulgence I preached ; but I see in indulgence only a 
dangerous weakness when it leads us to treat the good and 
the wicked man in the same way. 

I will not allow myself to scrutinise the motives for 
Monsieur de Valmont’s action; I like to think they were as 
praiseworthy as it; but has he any the less spent his life in 
bringing into families confusion, disorder and scandal ? 
Hearken, if you will, to the voice of the wretch he has suc- 
coured ; but do not let it prevent you from hearing the cries 
of a hundred victims he has sacrificed. Even if he were, as 
you say, merely an example of the danger of acquaintance, 
would he himself be any the less a dangerous acquaintance ? 
You suppose him capable of reformation ? Let us go further ; 
let us suppose this miracle had happened. Would not public 
opinion against him still remain, and does not that suffice 

117 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

to govern your conduct ? God alone can absolve at the 
moment of repentance ; He reads our hearts: but men can 
only judge of thoughts by actions, and no one who has lost 
the esteem of others has a right to complain of necessary 
suspicion, which renders this loss so difficult to repair. Above 
all, remember, my young friend, that sometimes, to lose this 
esteem, one need only appear to attach too little value to it ; 
and do not call this severity injustice ; for, beside the fact that 
we have a right to think people do not renounce this valuable 
advantage when they have a right to it, those who are no 
longer withheld by this powerful curb are indeed the nearer 
to acting ill. Such, however, would be the aspect in which 
you would appear through an intimate acquaintance with 
Monsieur de Valmont, however innocent it might be. 

Alarmed by the warmth with which you defend him, 
I hasten to forestall the objections I foresee. You will adduce 
Madame de Merteuil, to whom this acquaintance has been 
pardoned ; you will ask me why I receive him in my house ; 
you will tell me that far from being rejected by virtuous 
people, he is admitted into, even sought by, what is called 
good company. I think I can answer everything. 

First of all) Madame de Merteuil, who is indeed most 
estimable, has perhaps no fault but too great a confidence 
in her own strength ; she is a skilful driver who enjoys guiding 
her chariot among rocks and precipices, and only her success 
is her justification; it is right to praise her, it would be 
imprudent to follow her ; she herself admits it and reproaches 
herself. The more she has seen, the more severe her principles 
have become; and I am bold to assure you that she would 
think as I do. 

As to what concerns me, I will not justify myself any more 
than others. No doubt I receive Monsieur de Valmont and he 
is received everywhere ; it 1s One more inconsistency to add 
to the thousand others which govern society. You know as 
well as I do that we spend our lives in noticing them, in 
complaining of them and submitting to them. Monsieur de 
Valmont, with his ancient name, his wealth, and many 
amiable qualities, early recognised that to dominate society 
all he needed was to wield praise and ridicule with equal 
skill. No one possesses this double talent to the extent he 

118 

LETTER XXXIII 

does; with the one he seduces, with the other he makes 
himself feared. He is not esteemed; but he is flattered. 
Such is his existence in the midst of a world which, with 
more prudence than courage, prefers té treat him with 
deference rather than to combat him. 

But neither Madame de Merteuil nor any other woman 
‘ would dare to shut herself up in the country almost alone 
with such a man. It was reserved for the most prudent and 
most modest of women to set the example of this inconsistency 
—forgive the word, it slipped out from friendship. My dear 
friend, your very virtue betrays you, through the confidence 
it Inspires in you. Remember that your judges on the one 
hand will be frivolous people who will not believe in a virtue 
whose model they do not find in themselves, and, on the other, 
malignant people who will feign not to believe in it to punish 
you for having had it. Consider that at this moment you are 
doing what several men would not dare to risk. Indeed, 
I see that among the young men (of whom Monsieur de 
Valmont is but too much the oracle) the most prudent are 
afraid to appear too intimate with him; and you are not 
affaid ! Ah! recover yourself, I beg you. . . If my reasons 
do not suffice to persuade you, yield to my friendship ; it is 
that which causes me to renew my entreaties, which justifies 
them. You will think it severe, and I hope it may be un- 
necessary ; but I prefer that you should have to complain 
rather of its solicitude than of its negligence. 

From ..., 24th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXXIII 
The Marquise de Merteuil to the Vicomte de Valmont 

As soon as you are afraid of succeeding, my dear Vicomte, 
as soon as your object is to furnish arms against yourself, 
and you are less anxious to triumph than to combat, I have 
nothing more to say. Your conduct is a masterpiece of 
prudence. It would be a masterpiece of folly on the contrary 
assumption ; and to tell you the truth, I am afraid you are 
deluding yourself. 

11g 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

I do not reproach you for not having profited by the 
moment. On the one hand, I do not quite see that it had 
arrived; and on the other I know too well—whatever they 
may say—that an occasion lost may be found again, while 
there is no recovery from too hasty a step. 

But your real blunder is to have allowed yourself to 
start writing. I defy you now to foresee where that may 
lead you. Do you hope perhaps to prove to this woman 
that she ought to yield herself ? It seems to me that could 
only be a truth of sentiment, not of demonstration ; and to 
make her accept it you must move her and not reason with 
her; but how can it help you to move her by letter, since 
you will not be at hand to profit by it ? Suppose your fine 
phrases should produce the intoxication of love, do you 
flatter yourself it will Jast so long that reflection will not have 
time to prevent her from admitting it ? Remember what is 
needed for writing a letter, what takes place before it is 
delivered ; and then see if a woman with principles like your 
devotee can desire for so long what she tries never to desire 
at all. This course may succeed with children who, when 
they write “I love you,’ do not know they are saying 
‘““T yield myself.’ But the rationalising virtue of Madame 
de Tourvel seems to me to understand perfectly the value 
of phrases, So, in spite of the advantage you obtained over 
her in conversation, she beats you in her letter. And then, 
do you realise what is happening ? The mere fact of debating 
makes her unwilling to yield. By dint of looking for good 
reasons she finds them; she expresses them; and then 
she will hold to them not so much because they are good as 
not to contradict herself. 

And then, I am surprised you have not noticed that 
there is nothing so difficult in love as to write what one does 
not feel. I mean, to write it in a credible way. It 1s not that 
the same words are not employed ; but they are not arranged 
in the same way, or rather they are arranged—and that is 
enough. Re-read your letter; there is an order in it which 
betrays you at every phrase. I am ready to believe that 
your Madame de Tourvel is sufficiently inexperienced not to 
notice it; but what does that matter? The effect fails 
none the less. That is the defect of novels; the author lashes 

I20 

LETTER XXXIV 

his sides to warm himself up, and the reader remains cold. 
Héloise is the one exception; and in spite of the author’s 
talents this observation has always made me think that its 
subject was true. It is not the same in speaking. Practice 
in exerting one’s speech gives it feeling; facility of tears 
adds to it; the expression of desire in the eyes may be mis- 
taken for that of tenderness ; and then a less coherent language 
more easily introduces that air of uncertainty and disorder 
which is the real eloquence of love; above all the presence 
of the loved person prevents reflection and makes us women 
wish to be overcome. 

Take my advice, Vicomte; you are asked not to write 
again; take advantage of it to repair your mistake and wait 
for an opportunity to speak. Do you know, this woman has 
more strength than J] thought ? Her defence holds out well ; 
and but for the length of her letter and the pretext she gives 
you to resume by her phrase of gratitude, she would not have 
betrayed herself at all. | 

What seems to me still to promise you success is that she 
uses too many influences at once; I foresee she will exhaust 
them all in defending the word and will have none left to defend 
the thing. 

I send you back your two letters; if you are wise they 
will be the last until after the happy moment, If it were 
not so late, I should speak to you of the Volanges girl who is 
advancing rapidly; I am very pleased with her. I think 
I shall have finished before you, and you ought to be very 
glad of it. Good-bye for to-day. 

From ..., 24th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXXIV 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

You speak admirably, my fair friend; but why take so 
much trouble to prove what every one knows ? To advance 
rapidly in love it is better to speak than to write ; that, I think, 
is the whole of your letter. Why! These are the simplest 
elements in the art of seduction. I will only point out that 

IZ1I 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

you make but one exception to this principle, and there are 
two. To children who follow this course from timidity and 
yield from ignorance, must be added the blue-stockings who 
start on it from conceit and who are led into the snare by 
vanity. For instance, I am quite sure that the Comtesse 
de B.... who readily answered my first letter was no more 
in love with me then than I was with her; she only saw an: 
opportunity of writing on a subject which would show her 
wit to good advantage. 

However that may be, a lawyer would tell you that in 
this case the principle does not apply. You suppose I have 
a choice between writing and speaking, and I have not. 
Since the occurrence of the nineteenth my cruel one, who 
is on the defensive, has avoided any meeting with a skill 
which outwits my own. It has reached a point where if it 
continues she will force me to think seriously of means to 
regain this advantage ; for assuredly I do not mean to be 
beaten by her in any way. Even my letters are the subject 
of a little war; not content with leaving them unanswered, 
she refuses to take them. Each one needs a new ruse which 
is not always successful. 

You remember in what a simple way I delivered the first 
one ; the second was just as easy. She had asked me to return 
her letter; I gave her mine instead, without her having the 
least suspicion of it. But either from annoyance at having 
been caught, or from caprice, or perhaps even from virtue 
——for she will at last force me to believe in it—she obstinately 
refused the third. However I hope that the embarrassment 
which nearly involved her as a result of this refusal will 
correct her for the future, 

I was not very surprised when she refused to take this 
letter, which I merely offered her; that would have been 
granting something and I expect a longer defence. After 
this attempt, which was simply an experiment made by the 
way, I put my letter in an envelope and, choosing the moment 
of her toilet, when Madame de Rosemonde and the waiting- 
woman were present, I sent it to her by my man-servant 
with orders to say to her that this. was the paper she had 
asked for. I had foreseen that she would shrink from the 
scandal of explanation which would be necessitated by a 

IZ2 

LETTER XXXIV 

refusal; she took the letter, and my ambassador, who had 
been told to watch her face and is no bad observer, only 
noticed a slight blush and more embarrassment than anger. 

I was congratulating myself, you may be sure, on the 
idea that she would either keep my letter or that if she wishet 
to return it she would be compelled to be alone with me: 
which would give me an opportunity to speak to her. About 
an hour afterwards one of her servants came to my room and 
delivered to me, from his mistress, a packet shaped differently 
from mine, on whose envelope I recognised the much-desired 
handwriting. I opened it hastily... It was my own letter 
unopened and merely folded in two. I suspect that her fear 
lest I should be not so scrupulous as she in the matter of 
scandal made her employ this diabolical ruse. 

You know me; there is no need for me to describe my 
rage. However, it was necessary to be calm and to think of 
some new method. This is the only one I could devise. 

Every morning someone goes from here to get the letters 
at the post office which is about three quarters of a mile 
away ; aclosed box rather like a trunk is used for this purpose, 
and the post master has one key and Madame de Rosemonde 
the other. Every one puts his letters in at any time during 
the day; in the evening they are taken to the post office 
and the next morning someone goes for the letters which have 
come in. All the servants, visitors’ or others, discharge this 
task. It was not my man’s turn; but he undertook to go 
on the pretext that he had something to do in the 
neighbourhood. 

Meanwhile I wrote my letter. I disguised my handwriting 
for the address and imitated fairly well on the envelope the 
postmark of Dijon. I chose this town because, since I was 
asking for the same rights as the husband, I thought it more 
amusing to write from the same place, and also because my 
fair one had talked all day of her desire to receive letters from 
Dijon. I thought it only just to procure her that pleasure. 

These precautions once taken, it was easy to add my 
letter to the others. By this expedient I had the advantage 
of being able to watch its reception; for the custom here is 
to meet for breakfast and to await the arrival of the letters 
before separating. At last they arrived. 

123 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Madame de Rosemonde opened the box. ‘‘ From Dijon,” 
said she, giving the letter to Madame de Tourvel. ‘It is not 
my husband’s handwriting,”’ said she in an anxious voice, 
as she broke the seal quickly; the first glance showed her 
what it was; she changed countenance to such an extent 
that Madame de Rosemonde noticed it and said to her: 
‘What is the matter ?’’ I went up to her too, saying: “‘Is 
this letter so very terrible then ?’’ The timid devotee dared 
not raise her eyes, said not a word, and to hide her embarrass- 
ment, pretended to run over the letter, although she was in 
no state toread, I was enjoying her distress and, not being 
sorry to tease her a little, I added: ‘‘ Your calmer looks 
make me hope that this letter gives you more astonishment 
than pain.”’ Her anger then inspired her better than her 

prudence had done. ‘It contains,’’ she replied, ‘ things 
which offend me and which I am astounded anyone should 
have dared to write to me.”’ ‘‘ And who is it ?”’ interrupted 

Madame de Rosemonde. “It is not signed,’”’ replied the 
enraged fair one, ‘‘ but both the letter and its writer inspire 
me with the same contempt. I shall be obliged if you will 
not mention it to me again.’”’ So saying, she tore up the 
audacious letter, put the pieces in her pocket, rose, and left 
the room. 

In spite of her anger, she has none the less had my letter ; 
and I rely on her curiosity at least to read it in full. 

The details of the day would take me too far. I add to 
this the rough draft of my two letters; you will know as 
much as I do, If you wish to keep informed of this corres- 
pondence you must get used to deciphering my notes ; nothing 
in the world would induce me to endure the boredom of 
re-copying them. Good-bye, my fair friend. 

From... , 25th of August, 17—-. 

LETTER XXXV | 
Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Tourvel 

I must obey you, Madame, I must prove to you that 
in spite of all the faults you are pleased to credit me with 
I still retain sufficient delicacy not to permit myself a com- 

124 

LETTER XXXV 

plaint and sufficient courage to burden myself with the most 
painful of sacrifices. You impose upon me silence and 
oblivion! Well! I will force my love to be silent and I will 
forget, if it is possible, the cruel manner .in which you re- 
ceived it. Of course my wish to please you did not give me 
the right to do so and I admit that my need for your indulgence 
constituted no claim to obtaining it; but you consider my. 
love an outrage and you forget that if it were a fault you 
are at once its cause and its excuse. You forget also that 
I was accustomed to show you my soul even when such 
confidence might harm me and that it was no longer possible 
to hide from you the emotions which move me; and so that 
which was the result of my good faith you consider the fruit 
of presumption. As a reward for the most tender, the most 
respectful, the most sincere love, you cast me far from you. 
You even speak of your hatred. .. Who else would not 
complain of such treatment ? I alone am submissive ; I endure 
everything without a murmur; you strike and I adore. 
The inconceivable power you have over me makes you the 
absolute mistress of my feelings ; and if my love alone resists 
you, if you cannot destroy it, that is because it is your work 
and not mine. 

I do not ask a return which I never flattered myself | 
should obtain. I do not expect even that pity which I might 
have hoped from the interest you have sometimes shown 
inme. But I confess I think I may appeal to your justice. 

You inform me, Madame, that an attempt has been 
made to harm me in your estimation. If you had followed 
the advice of your friends you would not even have allowed 
me to approach you—those are your words. And who are 
these officious friends ? No doubt such severe people, of so 
tigid a virtue, will consent to be named ; no doubt they would 
not hide themselves in an obscurity which would make 
them resemble vile caluminators; and I shall learn both 
their names and their censures. Remember, Madame, I have 
a right to know both since by them you have judged me. 
A criminal is not condemned without being told his crimes 
and the names of his accusers. I ask no other favour and 
I undertake beforehand to justify myself, to force them to 
withdraw their statements. 

125 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

If I have been perhaps too contemptuous of the vain 
clamour of a public for which I care little, it is different with 
your esteem; and when I am consecrating my life to the 
task of meriting it, I shall not allow myself to be deprived 
of it with impunity. It becomes the more precious to me 
since I must owe to it the request you are afraid to ask of me, 
which would give me, you say, “a right to your gratitude.”’ 
Ah! far from claiming your gratitude I should think I owed 
it to youif you would grant me an opportunity to be agreeable 
to you. Begin by doing me greater justice, and do not leave 
me ignorant of what you desire from me. If I could guess 
it, I would spare you the trouble of sayingit. To the pleasure 
of seeing you, add the happiness of serving you and I shall 
congratulate myself upon your indulgence. What then can 
restrain you? Not, I hope, the fear of a refusal? I feel 
I could not pardon you that. There was no refusal in my 
not returning your letter. More than you, I desire that it 
should not be necessary to me; but I was accustomed to 
believe your spirit was so gentle and it is only in that letter 
that I can find you suchas you would wish to appear. While 
I form the hope that you will be moved, I see you would fly 
a hundred miles from me rather than consent; when every- 
thing in you increases and justifies my love, it is your letter 
which repeats to me that my love outrages you ; when I look 
at you and that love seems to me the supreme good, I need 
to read you to feel it is only a dreadful torment. You can 
now perceive that my greatest happiness would be to be 
able to return you that fatal letter; to ask me for it again 
would be authorising me to cease to believe what it contains ; 
I hope you do not doubt my eagerness to return it to you. 

From... , 21st of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXXVI 
The Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Tourvel 
(Postmark of Dijon), 

Your severity increases every day, Madame, and if I may 
be bold to say so, you seem to be more afraid of being in- 
dulgent than of being unjust. After having condemned me 

126 

LETTER XXXVI 

without hearing me, you must have felt indeed that it would 
be easier for you not to read my arguments than to reply to. 
them. You refuse my letters with obstizacy; you send 
them back to me with contempt. And you. finally force me 
to a trick at the very moment when my sole object is to: 
convince you of my good faith. The necessity of defending 
myself which you have forced upon me no doubt will suffice 
to excuse the means. Convinced moreover by the sincerity 
of my feelings that it would suffice to explain to you in order 
to justify them in your eyes, I felt I might allow myself 
this slight subterfuge. I even dare to think that you will 
forgive me for 1t and that you will not be very surprised that 
love is More ingenious in putting itself forward than indifference- 
is in putting it aside. 

Madame, allow my heart to reveal itself completely to 
you. It belongs to you and you have a right to know it. 

When I came to Madame de Rosemonde’s house I was. 
very far from foreseeing the fate which awaited me there. 
I did not know you were there ; and I will add, with my 
accustomed sincerity, that if I had known it my self-con- 
fidence would not have been disturbed—not that I do not 
render your beauty the justice it cannot be refused, but as. 
I was accustomed to experience nothing but desires and to: 
yield only to those encouraged by hope, I was ignorant of 
the tortures of love. 

You yourself witnessed the entreaties of Madame de 
Rosemonde to retain me here for some time. I had already 
passed a day with you; yet I only yielded—or at least I only 
thought I yielded—to the natural and legitimate pleasure of 
showing my regard for a respectable relative. The kind of 
life led here was certainly very different from that to which 
I was accustomed. It was easy for me to conform to it; 
and, without seeking to discover the cause of the change 
which was taking place in me, I still attributed it solely to 
that facility of character of which I think I have already 
spoken to you. 

Unfortunately (and why must it be a misfortune ?) as 
I came to know you better I soon recognised that the en- 
chanting face, which alone had struck me, was the least of 
your advantages; your heavenly soul surprised, seduced 

127 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

mine. I admired beauty, I adored virtue. Without hoping 
that I might possess you I pondered on the means to deserve 
you. By asking your indulgence for the past, I aspired to 
your approbation in the future; I sought for it in your 
speech, I watched for it in your looks; in those looks which 
darted a poison all the more dangerous in that it was cast 
out undesignedly, and received without suspicion. 

And then I knew love. But how far I was from com- 
plaining ! Resolved to bury it in eternal silence I gave myself 
up without fear, as without reserve, to that delicious emotion. 
Each day increased its power. Soon the pleasure of seeing 
you became a necessity. Were you absent for a moment? 
My heart shrank with sadness ; at the sound which announced 
your return, it palpitated with joy. I existed only through 
you and for you. And yet, I call you to witness, never in 
the gaiety of playful games or in the interest of a serious 
conversation did there escape from me a word which might 
betray the secret of my heart. 

At last there came a day from which my misfortune was 
to begin ; and through some inscrutable destiny a good action 
was the beginning. Yes, Madame, it was in the midst of the 
wretches I had succoured that, yielding yourself to that 
precious sensibility which embellishes beauty itself and adds 
a value to virtue, you completely unsettled a heart which 
was already intoxicated by an excess of love. You remember 
perhaps how preoccupied I was during our return! Alas ! 
I was trying to overcome an inclination which I felt was 
becoming stronger than I. | 

It was when I had exhausted my strength in this unequal 
‘struggle that a chance I could not have foreseen left us alone 
together. There I succumbed, I admit it. My overwrought 
heart could not restrain its words or its tears. But is that 
a crime? And if it is one, is it not sufficiently punished by 
the frightful torments to which I am abandoned ? 

Devoured by a hopeless love, I implore your pity and 
find nothing but your hatred; with no other happiness than 
that of seeing you my eyes seek you out in spite of myself 
and I tremble to meet your looks. In the cruel condition to 
‘which you have reduced me, I spend the days in hiding my 
‘pain and the nights in abandoning myself to it; while you 

128 

LETTER XXXVII 

in your peace and tranquillity know nothing of these torments 
except that you caused them and congratulate yourself on 
doing so. Yet it is you who complain and I who make 
eXCuses., 

Here, Madame, is a faithful account of what you call my 
faults, which might more justly perhaps be called my mis- 
fortunes. A pure and sincere lave, a respect which has 
never failed, a perfect submission, such are the feelings you 
have inspired in me. I should not have been afraid to 
offer them to the divinity itself. O you, you who are its 
fairest work, imitate it in its indulgence! Think of my 
cruel distress; think above all that since you have placed 
me between despair and supreme happiness, the first word 
you pronounce will decide my fate forever. 

From... , 23rd of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXXVII 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Volanges 

I submit myself, Madame, to the advice your friendship 
gives me. Accustomed to defer to your opinion in every- 
thing I have come to think it 1s always founded upon reason. 
I will even admit that Monsieur de Valmont must indeed be 
infinitely dangerous if he can at the same time feign to be 
what he appears here and remain as you describe him. How- 
ever this may be, since you demand it, I will send him away 
from me; at least I will do my best; for often those things 
which in essence should be the most simple, become difficult 
in form. 

It still seems to me impractical to make this request of 
his aunt; it would be equally impolite to her and to him. 
On the other hand I should feel some repugnance if I took the 
decision to go away myself; for in addition to the reasons 
I have already mentioned relative to Monsieur de Tourvel. 
if my departure provoked Monsieur de Valmont (as is possible), 
would it not be easy for him to follow me to Paris? And his 
return, of which I should be, or at least appear to be, the 
cause, might seem stranger than a meeting in the country 

129 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

at the house of a person who is known to be his relative and 
my friend. 

My only resource then is to persuade him to leave of his 
-own accord. I feel this is a difficult proposition to make ; 
but since he seems to desire to prove to me that he is more 
virtuous than is supposed, I do not despair of success. I shall 
not even be sorry to attempt it and to have an opportunity 
-of judging whether, as he says so often, really virtuous women 
never have and never will have reason to complain of his 
actions. If he goes, as I desire, it will indeed be out of regard 
‘for me; for I cannot doubt but that he intends to pass a 
large part of the autumn here. If he refuses my request and 
persists in remaining, I shall still have time to go myself 
and I promise you I will. 

That, I think, Madame, is all your friendship exacted of 
‘me; J hasten to satisfy it, and to prove to you that in spite 
‘of the warmth I may have showed in defending Monsieur 
‘de Valmont, I am none the less disposed, not only to listen 
‘to, but to follow, the advice of my friends. 

I have the honour to be, etc. 

From ,.., 25th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXXVIII 
The Marquise de Merteuil to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Your enormous packet has just arrived, my dear Vicomte. 
If its date is correct, 1 ought to have received it twenty-four 
‘hours sooner; however that may be, if I took the time to 
read it I should have none left in which to answer it. So 
I prefer to acknowledge receipt of it—and to talk of something 
else. It is not that I have anything to tell you on my own 
account ; the autumn hardly leaves in Paris one man with a 
human visage; and so for the last month I have been 
desperately sober and anyone but my Chevalier would be 
wearied by the proofs of my constancy, Having nothing to 
do, I amuse myself with the Volanges girl: and it is about 
-her that I wish to speak to you. 

Do you know you have lost more than you thought by not 

130 

LETTER XXXVIII 

undertaking this child? She is really delicious! She has 
neither character nor principles; so you may judge how 
charming and facile her company would be. I do not think 
that she would ever shine by sentiment but everything about 
her presages the keenest sensations. Without wit and without 
finesse, she has yet a certain natural duplicity (if I may say 
so) which sometimes surprises even me and which will be all 
the more successful since her face is the image of candour 
and ingenuousness. She is naturally very caressing, and 
I sometimes amuse myself with her ; she grows excited with 
incredible facility ; and she is all the more amusing because 
she knows nothing, absolutely, nothing, of what she so much 
wishes to know. She has the most diverting fits of im- 
patience ; she laughs, is piqued, weeps, and then begs me to 
tell her with a truly seductive good faith. Really, I am 
almost jealous of the man for whom this pleasure is reserved. 

I do not know if I told you that for four or five days 
I have had the honour to be her confident. You can guess 
that at first I pretended to be severe; but as soon as I saw 
that she thought she had convinced me with her bad reasons, 
I pretended to accept them as good, and she is intimately 
persuaded that she owes this success to her eloquence ;_ this 
precaution was necessary to avoid compromising myself. 
I have allowed her to write and say ‘‘ I love’’; and the same 
day, without her guessing it, I arranged her an interview 
alone with Danceny. But imagine, he is still such a fool 
that he did not even get a kiss from her. Yet the lad writes 
very pretty verses! Heavens! How silly these wits are ! 
He is silly to an extent which embrasses me; for after all 
I cannot be his guide. 

You would be very useful to me at this juncture. You 
' know Danceny sufficiently well to obtain his confidence, and 
if he once gave it to you, we should progress rapidly. Hurry 
on with your Madame de Tourvel, for I do not want Gercourt 
to escape; I spoke of him yesterday to the little girl and 
painted him in such colours that she could not hate him more 
if she had been married to him for ten years. I gave her 
a long lecture on conjugal fidelity ; nothing could equal my 
severity on this point. Thus, on the one hand, I re-established 
in her eyes my reputation for virtue which might be destroyed 

131 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

by too much condescension; and on the other hand I in- 
creased in her the hatred with which I desire to gratify her 
husband, And finally I hope that by making her think that 
it is not permitted to yield to love except in the little time 
‘she has left before marriage, she will decide the quicker not 
to lose any of it. Good-bye, Vicomte; I must go to my 
toilet and will read your volume. 
From... , 27th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XXXIX 
Cécile Volanges to Sophie Carnay 

I am sad and uneasy, my dear Sophie, I cried almost 
all night. It is not that I am not very happy at the moment, 
but I foresee that it will not last. 

Yesterday I went to the Opera with Madame de Merteuil ; 
we talked a lot about my marriage and what I found out 
about it was not at all nice. It is M. le Comte de Gercourt 
I am to marry and it is to be in October. He is rich, he is 
a man of quality, he is colonel of the ...... Regiment, So 
far so good. But first of all he is old; consider, he is at least 
thirty-six ! And then Madame de Merteuil says he is melan- 
choly and severe and that she is afraid I shall not be happy 
with him. I could see quite well she was sure I should not 
be, and that she did not wish to say so, 1n order not to distress 
me. She talked to me almost all the evening about the 
duties of wives to husbands; she admits that M. de Gercourt 
is not in the least agreeable, and yet she says I must love 
him. Did she not tell me also that once I am married I must 
no longer love the Chevalier Danceny? As if that were 
possible ! Oh! I assure you I shall always love him. Let 
M. de Gercourt look after himself, he was none of my seeking. 
At present he is in Corsica, far away from here; I wish he 
would stay there ten years. If I were not afraid of going 
back to the convent I should tell Mamma this is not the 
husband I want; but that would be even worse. I am very 
perplexed. I feel I have never loved M. Danceny so much 
as I do now; and when I think that I have only one month 

132 

LETTER XL 

left to be as I am, the tears come into my eyes at once; my 
only consolation is the friendship of Madame de Merteuil— 
she is so kind-hearted ! She shares all my griefs with me 
and then she is so agreeable that when I am with her I hardly 
think about them. Besides she is very useful to me; for the 
little I know I have learnt from her; and she is so kind that 
I tell her everything I think without being at all bashful. 
When she thinks it is not right, she scolds me sometimes ; 
but it is very gently, and then I kiss her with all my heart 
until she is no longer vexed. At least I can love her as much 
as I like without there being anything wrong in it, and it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure. However, we have agreed 
that I am to appear not to love her so much in front of other 
people, especially in front of Mamma, so that she will not 
suspect anything about the Chevalier Danceny. I assure 
you thatif I could always live as I do now, I think I should be 
very happy. There is only that horrid M. de Gercourt .. . 
But I will not speak of him again ; for it would make me sad 
once more. Instead of that I shall write to the Chevalier 
Danceny ; I shall only speak to him about my love but not 
about my griefs, for I do not wish to distress him. 

Good-bye, my dear. You see it would be wrong for you 
to complain and that although I am so busy, as you put it, 
I still have time to love you and to write to you.! 

From... , 17th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XL 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuuil 

It is not enough for my cruel one that she does not answer 
my letters, that she refuses to receive them; she wants to 
deprive me of the sight of her, she insists that I go away. 
What will surprise you more is that I am submitting to such 
harshness. You will find fault with me. But I did not 
think I ought to lose an opportunity of allowing myself to 
be given an order; being convinced on the one hand that 

* The letters from Cécile Volanges and the Chevalier Danceny are 
omitted since they are not interesting and relate no event. (C. de L,). 

133 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

she who commands commits herself, and on the other hand 
that the illusory authority we appear to let women take is 
one of the snares they avoid with the most difficulty. More- 
over the skill she has shown in avoiding being alone with me 
placed .me in a dangerous situation, which I felt I ought to 
get out of at any cost; for as I was continually near her 
without being able to occupy her with my love I had reason 
to fear that at last she would grow used to seeing me without 
disquiet—-a state of mind which you know is difficult to 
alter. 

For the rest you can guess | did not yield without con- 
ditions. I was even careful enough to make one it was 1m- 
possible to grant; so that I can cither keep my word or 
break it, and at the same time begin a discussion either by 
word of mouth or by letter at a time when my fair one is 
better pleased with me and when she needs me to be so with 
her—without reckoning that I should be very clumsy if I 
found no means of obtaining some satisfaction for desisting 
from this claim, however indefensible it may be. 

After having explained my reasons in this long preamble, 
I begin the history of the last two days. As corroborating 
documents I shall add my fair one’s letter and my reply. #You 
will admit that few historians are so precise as I am. 

You will remember the effect produced by my letter 
from Dijon the day before yesterday; the rest of the day 
was very stormy. The pretty prude only appeared at dinner 
time and announced a bad headache—a pretext by which 
she tried to conceal one of the most violent fits of ill humour 
a woman could have. Her face was positively changed by 
it; the expression of gentleness you are familiar with in her 
was changed into a rebellious look which gave it a new beauty. 
I have promised myself to make use of this discovery later 
and sometimes to replace the tender mistress by the rebellious 
mistress, 

I foresaw that the time after dinner would be dull and, 
to avoid the boredom of it, I pretended I had letters to 
write and went to my room. I returned to the drawing- 
room about six o’clock; Madame de Rosemonde proposed 
that we should go out, which was agreed upon. But at the 
moment when she was getting into the carriage, the pre- 

134 

LETTER XLI 

tended invalid by an infernal piece of malice pretended in 
her turn (and perhaps to avenge herself for my absence) 
that she had an increase of pain, and without any pity forced 
me to endure a #éte a téte with my old aunt. I do not know 
if my imprecations against this female demon were heard, 
but when we got back we found she had gone to bed. 

Next morning at breakfast she was a different woman. 
Her natural gentleness had returned and I had good reason 
to think I was forgiven. Breakfast was scarcely over when 
the gentle creature rose with an indolent air and went out 
into the park; I followed her, as you may suppose. ‘‘ What 
has caused this desire for walking ?”’ said I as I met her. 
““T have done a lot of writing this morning,” she rephied, 
“and my head is a little weary.”’ ‘“ I am not so fortunate,” 
I replied, ‘‘ as to have to reproach myself with this fatigue ? ” 
““T have indeed written to you,’’ she answered again, “ but 
I hesitate to give you my letter. It contains a request and 
you have not accustomed me to hope for its success,”’ ‘* Ah! 
I swear that if it is possible. . .’’ ‘‘ Nothing is easier,’ she 
interrupted, ‘‘and although you ought perhaps to grant it 
as a matter of justice, I consent to take it as a grace,.”” Saying 
these words, she handed me her letter; as I took it I took 
her hand too, which she withdrew but without anger and 
with more embarrassment than vivacity. ‘It is hotter than 
{ thought,” she said, ‘‘ I must go back.’’ And she took the 
path to the Chateau. 1 made vain efforts to persuade her 
to continue her walk and I was forced to remind myself that 
we might be seen in order to use nothing more than eloquence. 
She returned without speaking a word and I saw plainly that 
this pretended walk had no other purpose than that of giving 
me her letter. She went to her room as soon as we got back 
and I went to mine to read the epistle, which you will do 
well to read also, as well as my reply before going any 
further. . . 

LETTER XLI 
Madame de Tourvel to the Vicomte de Valmont 

It seems from your conduct towards me,Monsieur, that 
you are every day seeking to increase the reasons I have to 

135 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

complain of you. Your obstinacy in wishing to occupy me 
ceaslessly with a sentiment which I ought not and do not 
wish to listen to; the way in which you have dared to abuse 
my good faith or my timidity in order to send me your letters ; 
above all the method, which I dare to say was indelicate, 
you made use of to send me the last, without even fearing the 
effect of a surprise which might have compromised me ; all 
these ought to have given rise on my part to reproaches as 
sharp as they are justly deserved. However, instead of 
dwelling upon these injuries, I merely make a request as 
simple as it is just ; and if ] obtain it from you, ] agree that 
all shall be forgiven. 

You have said yourself, Monsieur, that I need not fear 
a refusal ; and although, by an inconsistancy which is peculiar 
to you, this very phrase was followed by the only refusal 
you could give me,' I am ready to believe that to-day you 
will none the less keep the word formally given so short 
a time ago. 

It is my desire than that you will be good enough to go 
away from me; to leave this (hdteau, where a longer stay 
on your part could only expose me further to the judgment 
of a public always quick to think ill of others, a public whom 
you have but too much accustomed to fix their eyes on the 
women who admit you into their society. 

Although I had long been warned of this danger by my 
friends, I neglected, I even opposed their advice as long as 
your conduct towards me led me to believe that you did not 
wish to confound me with that crowd of women who all 
have reason to complain of you. Now that you treat me 
like them, that I can no longer remain ignorant of it, I owe 
to the public, to my friends, to myself to follow this imperative 
course. I might add here that you will gain nothing by 
refusing my request, for I am determined to leave myself 
if you persist in remaining ; but I do not wish to lessen my 
obligation to you for this complaisance and I wish you to 
know that by forcing me to leave here you would disorganise 
my plans. Prove to me, as you have so often told me, 
Monsieur, that virtuous women will never have reason to 

1See LETTER XXXV. (C. de I.). 
136 

LETTER XLII 

complain of you; prove to me at least that when you have 
done them an injury you can repair it. 

If I thought there was any need to justify my request to 
you, it would be enough to say to you that you have passed 
your hfe in making it necessary and that nevertheless it is 
not my fault if I have to make it. But do not let us recall 
events I wish to forget, which force me to judge you sternly 
at a moment when I give you an opportunity to deserve my 
gratitude. Good-bye, Monsieur. Your conduct will show 
me with what sentiments I should be, for life, your most 
humble, etc. 

From... , 25th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XLII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Tourvel 

However harsh the conditions you impose upon me, 
Madame, I do not refuse to carry them out. 1 feel it would 
be impossible for me to thwart any of your desires. Once 
agreed on this point, I dare to flatter myself that in my 
turn you will allow me to make a few requests, much more 
easy to grant than yours, which I only desire to obtain by 
my perfect submission to your will. 

One, which I hope will be pleaded for by your justice, 
is to be good enough to tell me the names of those who have 
accused me to you ; it seems to me they have done me enough 
wrong for me to have a right to know them ; the other, which 
I expect from your indulgence, is to be good enough to allow 
me sometimes to renew the homage of a love which more 
than ever now will deserve your pity. 

Remember, Madame, that I hasten to obey you even 
when I can only do so at the expense of my own happiness ; 
I will say more, in spite of my persuasion that you only 
desire my departure to save yourself from the sight (which 
is always painful), of the object of your injustice. 

Acknowledge, Madame, that you do not so much fear a 
public which is too much accustomed to respect you to dare 
to form a disadvantageous judgment of you, as you are 

137 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

inconvenienced by the presence of a man whom it is easier 
to punish than to blame. You send me away from you as 
people avert their gaze from an unfortunate they do not 
wish to aid. 

But when absence is about to increase my anguish, to 
whom but to you can I address my complaints? From 
whom else can I expect the consolations which will be so 
necessary to me? Will you refuse them to me, when you 
alone are the cause of my sufferings ? 

No doubt you will not be surprised that before I go I should 
desire to justify to you the sentiments you have inspired 
in me; and also that I lack the courage to go away if I do 
not receive the order from your mouth, 

This double reason makes me ask you for a brief interview. 
It is useless for us to try to replace it by letters; we write 
volumes and explain badly what could be perfectly under- 
stood in a quarter of an hour’s conversation. You will easily 
find time to grant it to me; for, however anxious I am to 
obey you, you know that Madame de Rosemonde is aware 
of my plan to spend part of the autumn with her and I must 
at least wait for a letter to be able to form a pretext for 
leaving. 

Good-bye, Madame ; never has it been so difficult for me 
to write this word as now when it calls to my mind the idea 
of our separation. If you could imagine how it makes me 
suffer I] dare to think that you would feel some gratitude 
to me for my docility. At least accept, with more indulgence, 
the assurance and homage of the tenderest and most 
respectful love. 

From ..., 26th of August, 17—. 

CONTINUATION OF LETTER XL 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

And now let us discuss matters, my fair friend. You will 
agree with me that the scrupulous, the honest Madame de 
Tourvel, cannot grant me the first of my requests and betray 
the confidence of her friends, by telling me the names of my 

138 

CONTINUATION OF LETTER XL 

accusers; so by promising everything on this condition, 
I commit myself to nothing. But you will agree also that 
her refusal of this will become a claim to obtaining all the 
rest; and that, by going away, I then sain the advantage 
of starting a regular correspondence with her by her own 
permission ; I make little account of the meeting I have asked 
from her which has practically no other object but to 
accustom her beforehand not to refuse me others when they 
will be really necessary to me. 

The only thing remaining for me to do before I leave is 
to find out who are the people who have busied themselves 
in harming me in her opinion, I presume it is her pedant of 
a husband; I wish it were; in addition to the fact that a 
conjugal interdiction is a spur to desire, I should be certain 
that from the moment my fair one consents to write to me 
I shall have nothing more to fear from her husband, since 
she will already be compelled to deceive him. 

But if she has a woman friend sufficiently intimate to 
possess her confidence, and if this friend 1s against me, it 
seems to me necessary to set them at variance, and I expect 
to succeed in this; but first of all 1 must know who it is. 

I thought yesterday I should find it out ; but this woman 
does nothing like other women. We were in her room at the 
moment when she was informed that dinner was served. 
She was just finishing her toilet and as she hurried and made 
apologies, I noticed she had left the key in her writing-table ; 
and I knew it was her habit not to remove the key of her 
apartment, I was thinking uf it during dinner when I heard 
her maid come down ; I decided what to do at once; I pre- 
tended my nose was bleeding and left the room. I rushed 
to the writing-table ; but I found all the drawers open and 
not a piece of written paper. Yet there is no need to burn 
them at this time of the year. What does she do with the 
letters she receives ? For she often receives them. I neglected 
nothing; everything was open and I looked everywhere ; 
but I found nothing except that I convinced myself that 
this precious hoard remains in her pocket. 

How am I to get them out ? Ever since yesterday I have 
been trying in vain to find the way; yet I cannot overcome 
my desire for them. I regret I do not possess the talents of 

139 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

a pickpocket. Ought it not indeed to make part of the 
education of a man who dabbles in intrigues ?? Would it 
not be amusing to steal a rival’s letter or portrait, or to 
take from a prude’s pocket the evidence to unmask her ? 
But our parents never foresee anything ; and though I foresee 
everything I only perceive that I am clumsy, without being 
able to remedy it. 

In any case I came back to table very much out of humour. 
However, my fair one calmed my ill humour a little by the 
air of interest which my feigned indisposition gave her; and 
I did not fail to assure her that for some time I had under- 
gone violent agitations which had harmed my health. Per- 
suaded as she is that she is the cause of them, ought she not 
in conscience to labour to calm them ? But, although she 1s 
pious, she is not very charitable; she refuses all amorous 
alms and it seems to me that this refusal suthces to justify 
my stealing them. But good-bye ; the whole time I am talking 
to you I am thinking of nothing but those accursed letters. 

From... , 27th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XLIII 

Madame de Tourvel to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Why do you attempt, Monsieur, to lessen my gratitude ? 
Why do you wish to obey me only by half and as it were to 
haggle over a right proceeding ? It is not sufficient for you, 
then, that I should feel its cost 2 You not only ask a great 
deal ; you ask impossible things. If indeed my friends have 
spoken to me of you, they can only have done so out of 
interest in me; even if they were wrong, their intention was 
none the less good and you propose to me to acknowledge 
this mark of attachment on their part by giving you their 
secret ! I was wrong to speak to you of it and you make me 
feel so at this moment. What would have been merely candour 
with any one else becomes thoughtlessness with you, and 
would lead me to a base action if I yielded to-your request 
I appeal to you, to your honour ; did you believe me capable 

1 After this insult to the petit-maitres, it hardly seems possible that 
anyone can deny the political-moral motives of Laclos ; still less possible 
that he could be supposed to identify himself with Valmont. 

140 

LETTER XLIV 

of this action? Ought you to have suggested it to me ? 
Certainly not; and I am sure that when you have thought 
it over you will not repeat this request. 

The request you make me that you shall write to me is 
no easier to grant; and if you have any wish to be just you 
will not blame me. I do not wish to offend you; but with 
the reputation you have acquired (which, by your own ad- 
mission, you deserve at least in part), what woman could 
admit she was in correspondence with you! And what 
virtuous woman can make up her mind to do what she feels 
she will be compelled to hide ? 

Still, if I were assured that your letters would be such 
that J should never have to complain of them, that I could 
always justify myself in my own eyes for having received 
them, perhaps then the desire of proving to you that I am 
guided by reason and not by hatred would make me pass 
over these powerful considerations and do far more than 
I ought to do, by allowing you to write to me sometimes. 
If indeed you desire it as much as you tell me, you will 
willingly submit to the one condition which could make me 
consent to it; and if you have any gratitude for what I am 
doing for you now you will delay your departure no further. 

Allow me to point out to you in this connection that you 
received a letter this morning and did not make use of it to 
announce your departure to Madame de Rosemonde, as you 
had promised me. I hope that now nothing will prevent 
you from keeping your word. Above all I desire you will 
not expect from me, in exchange, the mecting you ask for, 
to which I absolutely will not lend myself; and that, instead 
of the order which you pretend is necessary to you, you 
will content yourself with the entreaty I make you again. 

Farewell, Monsieur. 

From ..., 27th August, 17—. 

LETTER XLIV 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteul 

Share my joy, my fair friend; I am loved; I have 
triumphed over this rebellious heart. It is in vain for it to 
141 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

dissimulate longer ; my fortunate skill has surprised its secret. 
Thanks to my active exertions, I know everything I want to 
know ; since night, the happy night of yesterday, I am back 
in my element ; I have resumed my whole existence; I have 
unveiled a double mystery of love and iniquity; I shall 
enjoy the one, I shall avenge myself upon the other; I shall 
fly from pleasures to pleasures. The mere idea of it so 
transports me that I have some difficulty in recalling my 
prudence, that I find it dificult perhaps to put any order into 
the account I have to give you. However, let me try. 

Yesterday, after I had written you my letter, I received 
one from the charming devotee. I send it to you; you will 
see that she gives me, as adroitly as she can, the permission 
to write to her; but she urges me to leave and I felt 
I could not put off going much longer without doing myself 
harm. 

Tormented, however, with the desire to know who could 
have written against me, I was still uncertain what course 
to take. I tried to win over the waiting-maid and I desired 
her to let me have her mistress’s pockets, which she could 
easily get hold of at night and replace in the morning, without 
creating the least suspicion. I offered ten louis for this sight 
service ; but I found only a scrupulous or timid prude, who 
was moved neither by my money nor my eloquence. I was 
still lecturing her when the supper bell rang. I had to leave 
her, only too happy that she consented to promise secrecy, 
upon which as you may suppose I did not rely. 

I was never more out of humour. I felt I had com- 
promised myself; and the whole evening I reproached 
myself for this imprudent step. 

I went to my apartment, not without uneasiness, and 
spoke to my man who, in his character of the successful 
lover, ought to have some influence. I wished him either to 
get this girl to do what I had asked of her or at least to make 
certain of her discretion; but he who is usually uncertain 
of nothing seemed uncertain of the success of this negotiation, 
and made me an observation on this subject which astonished 
me by its profoundity. 

‘You know better than I, Monsieur,’ said he, ‘‘ that to 
lie with a girl is only to make her do what pleases her ; there 

142 

LETTER XLIV 

is often a great distance Letween that and making her do 
what we want.” 

The rascal’s good sense sometimes terrifies me.! 

‘“T can rely on her the less,” he acded, ‘‘ since I have 
reason to believe that she has a lover and that I only owe 
her to the inactivity of the country. So, were it not for my 
zeal in your service, Monsieur, I should only have had her 
once.”” (This fellow is a real treasure!) ‘‘ As to secrecy,” 
he went on, ‘‘ of what use will it be to make her promise since 
she will risk nothing by betraying us? To speak of it to her 
again would only better show her that it is important and 
so make her more anxious to please her mistress.”’ 

The more true these remarks were, the more my em- 
barrassment was increased. Luckily the fellow was in a 
mood to chatter; and since I needed him I let him talk. 
As he related his affair with this girl, he informed me that 
since the room she occupies is only separated from her 
mistress’s by a thin partition, which might allow a suspicious 
noise to be heard, they came together each night in his room. 
Immediately I formed my plan, communicated it to him, 
and we carried it out with success. 

I waited until two o’clock in the morning; then, as we 
had agreed, I went to the room where their meeting took 
place, carrying a light with me under the pretext that I had 
rung several times without getting an answer. My confident, 
who plays his parts perfectly, gave a little scene of surprise, 
despair and excuses which I closed by sending him to heat 
me some water I feigned to need; while the scrupulous 
chamber-maid was the more shamefaced because the rascal, 
who had wanted to improve upon my plan, had persuaded 
her to a lack of costume which the season admitted of but 
did not excuse. 

Since I felt that the more this girl was humiliated the 
more easily I could make use of her, I did not allow her to 
alter either her posture or her dress; and after I had bade 
my valet wait for me in my room, I sat down beside her on 
the bed which was in great disorder and began my conversa- 
tion. I needed to preserve all the domination over her which 
the occasion gave me; I therefore maintained a calm which 

1 Piron, Métromanie. (C. de L.). 

143 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

would have done honour to the continence of Scipio; and 
without taking the slightest liberty with her, which her 
freshness and the opportunity appeared to give her a right 
to hope for, I talked to her about business as calmly as I could 
have done with a solicitor. - 

My conditions were that I would faithfully keep her 
secret provided that the next day at about the same hour 
she would submit to me her mistress’s pockets. ‘‘ Moreover,’ 
I added, ‘‘I offered you ten louis yesterday ; I promise them 
to you again to-day. I do not wish to abuse your situation.”’ 
Everything was granted, as you may believe ; then I retired 
and permitted the happy couple to make up for lost time. 

I spent my own time in sleeping ; and on awaking, since 
I wished to have an excuse for not replying to my fair one’s 
letter before I had gone through her papers (which 1 could 
not do until the following night), I decided to go shooting, 
where I remained almost all day. 

At my return I was received rather coldly. I have reason 
to think that she was a little piqued by my lack of anxiety 
to make use of the time which remained; especially after 
the kinder letter she had written me. I suppose this, because 
when Madame de Rosemonde reproached me a little for this 
long absence, my fair one replied rather tartly: ‘‘ Ah! Do 
not let us reproach Monsieur de Valmont for giving himself 
up to the sole pleasure he can find here.’’ I complained of 
this injustice, and I made use of it to assert that I enjoyed 
the company of these ladies so much I sacrificed to it a very 
interesting letter I had to write. I added that, not having 
been able to sleep for several nights, I had wished to try 
whether weariness would give it me; and my looks ex- 
plained sufficiently both the subject of my letter and the 
cause of my insomnia. I was careful to be gently melancholy 
all evening which seemed to me to succeed quite well; and 
under this I hid the impatience I was in for the arrival of 
the hour which would yield me the secret she persisted in 
hiding from me. At last we separated and some time after 
the faithful waiting-woman came to bring me the price 
agreed upon for my discretion. 

Once master of this treasure, I proceeded to go through 
it with my accustomed prudence; for it was important to 

144 

LETTER XLIV 

put everything in its place. I came first of all upon two 
letters from the husband, a confused mixture of law-suit 
details and tirades of conjugal love, which I had the patience 
to read right through without finding a word referring to 
myself, [I put them back with annoyance; but this was 
mollified by my finding under my hand the pieces of my 
famous letter from Dijon carefully put together. Fortunately 
I took it into my head to run over it. Imagine my joy at 
perceiving very distinct traces of my adorable devotee’s 
tears! I confess it, I yielded to the sentiment of a young 
man, and kissed this letter with a rapture of which I thought 
myself incapable. I continued my happy search; I found 
all my letters arranged in the order of their date ; and what 
surprised me still more agreeably, was to find the first of all, 
which I thought had been returned to me by an ingrate, 
faithfully copied by her hand and in a changed trembling 
handwriting which sufficiently showed the soft agitation of 
her heart during this occupation, 

Up till then I was entirely given over to love ; but soon 
it gave place to fury. Who do you think it is tries to ruin 
me with the woman I adore ? What fury do you suppose 
is SO malicious as to contrive such a perfidy 2? You know her ; 
she is your friend, your relative; it is Madame de Volanges. 
You cannot imagine what a tissue of horrors that infernal 
shrew has written her about me. It is she and she alone who 
has disturbed the confidence of this angelic woman; it is 
by her designs, her pernicious warnings, that I am forced 
to go away; it is to her I am sacrificed. Ah! Her daughter 
must certainly be seduced, but that is not enough, I must 
ruin her; and since the age of this accursed woman protects 
her from my attacks, I must strike her through the object 
of her affection. 

She wishes me to return to Paris! She forces me to do 
so. So be it, I will return, but she shall groan for my return. 
I am sorry Danceny is the hero of this adventure; he has a 
foundation of virtue which will impede us; however he is 
in love and I often see him; perhaps some use can be made 
of this. But I am forgetting myself in my anger and that 
I owe you an account of what happened to-day. Let us 
go back to it. 

145 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

This morning I saw my delicate prude. Never had I 
thought her so beautiful. That was inevitable: a woman’s 
fairest moment, the only one in which she can produce that 
intoxication of the soul, which is always talked of and so 
rarely experienced, is the moment when we are certain of 
her love but not of her favours; and that is precisely the 
position in which I am. Perhaps also the idea that I was 
about to be deprived of the pleasure of seeing her served to 
embellish her. At length, when the post arrived I was handed 
your letter of the twenty-seventh ; and while I read it I still 
hesitated as to whether I should keep my word; but I met 
my fair one’s eyes and it would have been impossible for 
me to refuse her anything. 

I therefore announced my departure. A minute later 
Madame de Rosemonde left us alone; but I was still four 
paces from the timid person when she rose with an air of 
terror, saying: ‘‘ Leave me, leave me, Monsieur, in the name 
of God, leave me.” This fervent prayer which revealed her 
emotion could not but animate me the more, Already I was 
beside her, I held her hand which she clasped in a most 
touching way; I was beginning a series of tender complaints 
when some hostile demon brought back Madame de Rose- 
monde. The timid devotee, who indeed had some reason to 
be fearful, took advantage of it and retired. 

Nevertheless, I offered her my hand and she accepted 
it; and auguring well from this mildness, which she had not 
showed me for a long time, I attempted to press her hand 
as | recommenced my complaints. First of all she tried to 
withdraw it; but at my warmer entreaty she yielded with 
a comparatively good grace, but without replying either to 
this gesture or to my speeches. When we reached the door 
of her apartment I tried to kiss her hand before leaving her. 
The defence was at first thorough; but a ‘‘ remember I am 
going’ spoken very tenderly made it awkward and in- 
adequate. Scarcely was the kiss given when the hand re- 
covered enough strength to escape and the fair one entered 
her apartment, where her waiting-woman was, Here ends 
my story. 

Since I presume you will be at the house of the Maréchale 
de . . . to-morrow, where assuredly I shall not go to find 

146 

LETTER XLV 

you; since I suppose also that at our first interview we 
shall have more than one matter to discuss, notably that of 
the Volanges girl which I have not lost sight of ; I am sending 
this letter on ahead of me, and long as it 1s, I shall only close 
it at the moment it goes to post ; but in my present condition 
everything may depend upon an opportunity; and I leave 
you, to go and watch for it. 

P.S. Eight o’clock in the evening. 

Nothing new; not the smallest moment of freedom ; 
care even to avoid it. However, as much sadness as decency 
permitted, at least. Another event which cannot be un- 
important, is that I am entrusted with an invitation from 
Madame de Rosemonde to Madame de Volanges to come 
and spend some time with her in the country. 

Good-bye, my fair friend; to-morrow or the day after 
at latest. 

From ..., 28th of August, 17—. 

LETTER XLV 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Volanges 

Monsieur de Valmont left this morning, Madame; you 
seemed to desire this departure so much that I felt I ought 
to inform you. Madame de Rosemonde misses her nephew 
very much and it must be admitted that his society is agree- 
able ; she passed the whole morning talking to me with her 
accustomed sensibility ; she never ceased praising him. I felt 
I owed her the gratification of listening without contradicting 
her, the more so since it must be admitted she is right in 
many respects. I felt moreover that I had to reproach 
myself with being the cause of the separation and I do not 
hope to be able to make up to her for the pleasure of which 
I have deprived her. You know I am not naturally gay and 
the kind of life we shall lead here will not increase my gaiety. 

If I had not been led by your advice, I should fear I had 
acted somewhat inconsiderately ; for I was really hurt by the 
grief of my respectable friend; it touched me so much that 
I would gladly have mingled my tears with hers 

147 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

We now live in the hope that you will accept the invitation 
which Monsieur de Valmont brings you from Madame de 
Rosemonde, to come and spend some time with her. I hope 
you have no doubt of the pleasure I shall have in seeing 
you again ; and indeed you owe us this compensation. I shall 
be very happy to have this opportunity of making an earlier 
acquaintance with Mademoiselle de Volanges and of being 
in a position to convince you more and more of my respectful 
sentiments, etc. 

From..., 2gth of August, 17—-. 

LETTER XLVI 
The Chevalier Danceny to Cécile Volanges 

What has happened to you, my adorable Cécile ? What 
can have caused so sudden and so cruel a change in you? 
What has become of your vows that you would never change ? 
But yesterday, you repeated them with so much pleasure ! 
What can have made you forget them to-day ? However 
much I scrutinize myself [ cannot find the cause in me and 
it is dreadful to me to have to look for it in you. Ah! You 
cannot be either fickle or deceitful ; and even in this moment 
of despair my soul shall not be withered by an insulting 
suspicion, And yet by what fatality is it that you are no 
longer the same 2? No, cruel one, you are no longer the same ! 
The tender Cécile, the Cécile I adore, whose vows I have 
received, would not have avoided my glances, would not 
have thwarted the lucky chance which placed me beside her ; 
or if some reason which I cannot conceive had forced her 
to treat me so harshly she would at least not have disdained 
to tell me of it. 

Ah! You do not know, you will never know, my Cécile, 
how much you have made me suffer to-day, how much I suffer 
at this moment. Do you think I can live if I am not loved 
by you? And yet, when I begged a word from you, one 
word, to dissipate my fears, instead of replying you pre- 
tended a fear that we should be overheard ; and you created 
that obstacle, which up till then did not exist, by the place 

148 

LETTER XLVII 

you chose in the company. When forced to leave you I asked 
you at what hour I might see you to-morrow, and you feigned 
not to know, so that Madame de Volanges had to tell me. 
And so the moment I always desire so much, the moment 
which brings me back to you, to-morrow will create nothing 
but uneasiness for me; and the pleasure of seeing you, 
hitherto so dear to my heart, will be replaced by the fear of 
being wearisome to you. 

Already this fear checks me, I feel it, and I dare not 
speak to youof my love. That ‘‘ [ love you” which I delighted 
to repeat when I could hear it in my turn, that sweet phrase 
which sufficed for my felicity, now offers me, 1f you are changed, 
nothing but the image of an eternal despair. Yet I cannot 
believe that this talisman of love has lost all its power and 
I still attempt to use it.1. Yes, my Cécile, love you. Repeat 
with me that expression of my happiness, remember that 
you have accustomed me to hear it and that by depriving 
me of it you condemn me to a torment which, like my love, 
will end only with my life. 

From .. 

29th of August, 17--. 

ae 4 

LETTER XLVII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteual 

I shall not be able to see you to-day, my fair friend, for 
the following reasons which I beg you to accept with 
indulgence. 

Instead of returning directly yesterday I stopped with 
the Comtesse de . . ., whose Chdteau was almost on my 
road, and from whom I asked a dinner. I did not reach Paris 
until seven o’clock and I went to the Opera where I hoped 
I might find you. 

After the Opera I went to see my ladies of the green-room ; 
there I found my former love, Emilie, surrounded by a retinue 
of admirers, women as well as men, whom she had invited 

fe: 
1 Those who have never had occasion to feel sometimes the value 

of a word, of an expression, consecrated by love, will find no sense in 
this phrase (C. de 1..). 

149 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

to supper that evening at P ... I had no sooner entered 
the circle than I was invited to the supper by general acclama- 
tion. I was also invited by a short, fat, little creature who 
jabbered an invitation in Dutch French, whom I perceived 
to be the true hero of the feast. I accepted. 

I learned on the way that the house to which we were 
going was the price agreed upon for Emilie’s favours to this 
grotesque creature and that the supper was a positive wedding- 
feast. The little man could not contain himself with joy 
in expectation of the happiness he was about to receive ; he 
seemed to me to feel so much satisfaction that he made me 
wish to disturb it ; which I did accordingly. 

The only difficulty I met with was in persuading Emilie 
who was made a little scrupulous by the Burgermaster’s 
wealth. However, after some demurring, she consented to 
my plan, which was to fill up this little beer-tub with wine 
and thus put him out of action for the whole night. 

The sublime conception we had of a Dutch drinker caused 
us to employ all the known methods. We succeeded so well 
that at dessert he had not even the strength to hold his 
glass; but the charitable Emilie and I vied with each other 
in filling him up. At last he fell under the table in such a 
state of intoxication that it will last at least a week. We then 
decided to send him back to Paris: and since he had not 
kept his carriage I had him put into mine and remained in 
his place. I then received the congratulations of the company 
who retired soon after, leaving me master of the battle- 
field. This freak, and possibly my long retirement, made 
me think Emilie so desirable that I have promised to remain 
with her until the Dutchman’s resurrection. 

This complaisance on my part is the reward for one she 
has just granted me, that of acting as a desk for me to write 
to my fair devotee; I thought it amusing to send her a 
letter written from the bed and almost in the arms of a girl, 
interrupted even for a complete infidelity, in which letter 
I give her an exact description of my situation and my conduct. 
Emilie, to whom I read the epistle, laughed extravagantly, 
and I hope you too will laugh. 

since my letter must have the Paris postmark I am 
sending it to you; I have left it open. Be good enough to 

150 

LETTER XLVIII 

read it, to seal it, and to send it to the post. Be careful not 
to use your own seal nor any amorous emblem, simply a 
head. Good-bye, my fair friend. 

P.S. I re-open my letter; I have persuaded Emilie to 
go to the Italiens, . . I shall make use of this time to come 
to see you. I shall be with you at six o’clock at the latest ; 
and if it suits you, we will go together to Madame de Volanges 
at seven. It will be decent not to delay the invitation I have 
to give her from Madame de Rosemonde ; moreover I shall 
be very glad to see the Volanges girl. Good-bye, most fair 
lady. I hope to have so much pleasure in embracing you 
that the Chevalier may be jealous of it ! 

From P ..., 30th August, 17—. 

LETTER XLVIII 

The Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Tourvel 
(Postmark of Paris) 

After a restless mght, during which I have not closed my 
eyes ; after having been ceaselessly either in the agitation of 
a devouring ardour or inthe complete annihilation of all the 
faculties of my soul; I seek from you, Madame, the calm 
I need but do not hope to enjoy yet. Indced the position 
I am in as I write to you makes me understand more than 
ever the irresistible power of love; I can scarcely preserve 
sufficient control over myself to put my ideas into some 
order; and already I perceive that I shall not finish this 
letter without being forced to interrupt it. Ah! May I not 
hope that some day you will share the perturbation I feel 
at this moment? Yet I dare to think that if you really 
knew it you would not be entirely insensible to it. Believe 
me, Madame, cold tranquillity, the soul’s sleep, the image 
of death, do not lead to happiness ; only the active passions 
can lead to it; and, in spite of the torments you make me 
endure, I think I may boldly assure you that at this moment 
I am happier than you. In vain do you overwhelm me with 
your discouraging severities; they do nat prevent me from 
abandoning myself wholly to love and from forgetting in the 

I51 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

delirium it causes me the despair to which you surrender me, 
It is thus I mean to avenge myself for the exile to which 
you condemn me. Never did I have so much pleasure in 
writing to you; never in that occupation did I feel so soft 
and yet so keen an emotion. Everything seems to increase 
my raptures ; the air I breathe is filled with voluptuousness ; 
the very table upon which I write to you, which for the 
first time is devoted to that use, becomes for me the sacred 
altar of love ; how much it will be embellished in my eyes ! 
I shall have traced upon it the vow to love you forever ! 
I beg you to pardon the disorder of my senses. Perhaps 
I ought to abandon myself less to raptures you do not share ; 
I must leave you a moment to dispel an ecstasy which 
increases every instant, which becomes stronger than I am. 

J return to you, Madame, and without doubt I shall 
always return with the same eagerness. Yet the feeling 
of happiness has fled far from me; it has given place to 
that of cruel privations. Of what use is it for me to speak 
to you of my sentiments if I seek vainly the means to con- 
vince youre After so many repeated efforts, confidence and 
strength abandon me together. If I recall once more the 
pleasures of love it is but to feel more keenly the regret at 
being deprived of them. I see no resource save in your 
indulgence and at this moment I feel but too well how much 
I need that indulgence to hope to obtain it. However, never 
was my love more respectful, never ought it to offend you 
less ; it is such, I dare to say, that the most austere virtue 
need not fear it; but I fear myself that I am occupying you 
too long with the distress I feel. Although I know that the 
object which causes it does not share that distress, I must 
not abuse its favours; and it would be doing so to employ 
more time in recalling this painful image to you. I shall only 
beg you to reply to me and never to doubt the truth of my 
sentiments, 

Written from P ..., dated from Paris, 30th of August, 17—. 
LETTER XLIX 
Cécile Volanges to the Chevalier Danceny 

Without being either fickle or deceitful, Monsieur, it is 
sufficient for me to be enlightened as to my conduct, to feel 
152 

LETTER L 

the necessity of altering it; I have promised this sacrifice 
to God, until I can offer Him also that of my sentiments 
to you which your religious condition renders _ still 
more criminal. I feel indeed that this will give me great 
pain and I will not hide from you the fact that since the day 
before yestreday I have cried every time I have thought of 
you. But I hope that God will grant me the grace of sufficient 
strength to forget you, as I pray Him morning and evening. 
I expect from your friendship and from your honour that 
you will not seek to disturb me in the good resolution which 
has been inspired in me and in which I am trying to remain. 
Consequently I beg you will be kind enough to write to me no 
more, especially as I warn you that I shall not answer you 
again and that you would force me to inform Mamma of all 
that has happened ; which would entirely deprive me of the 
pleasure of seeing you. 

None the less I still have all the attachment for you that 
may be without there being anything wrong in it; and it 1s 
indeed with all my soul that I wish you every kind of happi- 
ness. I feel that you will not love me so much now and that 
perhaps you will soon love another more than me. But that 
will be one penance the more for the fault I have committed 
by giving you my heart, which I ought to give only to God 
and to my husband, when I have one. I hope that the divine 
mercy will have pity on my weakness and send me no grief 
that I cannot endure. 

Farewell, Monsieur ; I can assure you that if I were per- 
mitted to love anyone I should never love anybody but you. 
But that is all I can say to you and perhaps even that is more 
than I should say. 

From ..., 31st of August, 17—. 

LETTER L 
Madame de Tourvel to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Is it thus, Monsieur, that you carry out the conditions 
under which I have consented sometimes to receive your 
letters ? And can I “have no reason to complain ’”’ when 

53 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

you speak to me of nothing but a sentiment to which I should 
fear to yield myself even if I could do so without failing in 
all my duties ? 

Moreover, did I need fresh reasons for retaining this 
salutary fear, it seems to me that I could find them in your 
last letter. Indeed, at the very moment when you seem to 
make love’s apology, what do you do but show its dreadful 
storms ? Who can wish for happiness that is bought at the 
price of reason, whose fleeting pleasures are at least followed 
by regret, if not remorse ? 

And you, upon whom the effect of this dangerous delirium 
must be lessened by habit, are yet obliged to admit that it 
often becomes stronger than you; and are you not the first 
to complain of the involuntary distress it causes you ? What 
fearful ravages would it not make upon a fresh and sensitive 
heart, which would yet increase its power by the extent of the 
sacrifices such a heart would be compelled to make it ? 

You believe, Monsieur, or you feign to believe, that love 
leads to happiness ; and I am so convinced it would render me 
unhappy that I wish never to hear its name mentioned. 
It seems to me that one’s tranquillity is disturbed merely by 
speaking of it ; and it is as much from choice as from a sense 
of duty that I beg you to keep silent upon this point. 

After all, this request must now be very easy for you to 
grant me. Now you are back in Paris you will find plenty of 
opportunities to forget a sentiment whose origin was perhaps 
only due to your habit of occupying yourself with such objects, 
and whose strength was merely due to the inactivity of the 
country. Are you not in the very place where you formerly 
saw me with so much indifference ? Can you make a step 
without meeting an instance of your facility in changing ? 
And are you not surrounded by women who are all more 
amiable than I and have more rights to your homage ?_ I do 
not possess the vanity of which my sex 1s accused ; still less 
have I that false modesty which is only a refinement of 
pride ; and it is in good faith that I tell you I know I have 
very few means of pleasing ; did I possess them all, I should 
not think them sufficient to secure your constancy. To 
request you to concern yourself with me no more is therefore 
only to beg you to do to-day what you have already done and 

154 

LETTER L 

what you will surely do again in a little time, even if I should 
beg you to do the contrary. 

This truth, which I do not lose sight of, would of itself 
be a sufficiently strong reason for my not wishing to listen 
to you. I have a thousand others ; but without entering upon 
a long discussion I limit myself to asking you (as I have done 
already) to occupy me no longer with a sentiment I ought 
not to listen to and to which I ought still less to respond. 

From ..., 1st of September, 17—. 

END OF PART ONE 

155 

PART II 

LETTER LI 
The Marquise de Merteuil to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Really, Vicomte, you are insupportable. You treat me as 
carelessly as if I were your mistress. Do you know, I shall 
grow angry, and that I am nowin a frightful temper ? What ! 
You are to see Danceny to-morrow morning ; you know how 
important it is that I should speak to you before this inter- 
view ; and without troubling yourself any further, you let 
me wait for you all day long and run off I know not where. 
Owing to you I was indecently late in reaching Madame 
de Volanges’s and all the old women said I was wonderful. 
Y had to flatter them the whole evening to appease them ; 
for old women must not be angered—they make young 
women’s reputations. 

It is now one o'clock in the morning and instead of going 
to bed, as I am dying to do, I must write you a long letter 
which will increase my drowsiness by the boredom it will 
cause me, It is very lucky for you that I have no time to 
scold you more. And do not let that make you believe I have 
forgiven you; I am simply in a hurry. Now listen to me ; 
I must hurry. 

If you are at all skilful, you ought to secure Danceny’s 
confidence to-morrow. This is a favourable moment for 
confidence ; he is unhappy. The little girl has been to con- 
fession ;: she told everything, like a child ; and since then she 
has been so tormented by fear of the devil that she wishes to 
break off altogether. She told me all her little scruples with 
a vehemence which showed me how excited she was. She let 
me see the letter breaking things off, and it is a positive sermon. 

157 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

She prattled a whole hour to me without speaking one word of 
common sense. None the less she embarrassed me; for as 
you may suppose I could not risk confiding myself to such a 
reckless creature. 

Nevertheless, I saw through all her chatter that she does 
not love Danceny any the less; I even noticed one of those 
expedients (which never fail in love), by which the little girl 
rather amusingly deceives herself. Tormented by the desire 
to think about her lover and by the fear of damning herself 
by thinking about him, she has devised the plan of praying 
God to make her forget him ; and since she renews this prayer 
at every moment of the day she finds a way of constantly 
thinking about him. 

With someone more accustomed than Danceny this little 
event might perhaps be more favourable than hurtful; but 
the young man is such a Céladon that, if we do not help him, 
he will take so much time in overcoming the slightest obstacles 
that he will not leave us enough to carry out our plan. 

You are quite right; it is a pity, and I am as annoyed 
about it ‘as you, that he should be the hero of this adventure. 
But what would you have ? What is done is done; and it is 
your fault. I asked to see his reply’; it was pitiful. He 
argued with her interminably to prove that an involuntary 
sentiment cannot be a crime; as if it did not cease to be 
involuntary, the moment one ceases to oppose it! It is 
such a simple idea that it even occurred to the little girl. , 
He complains of his unhappiness in a rather touching way ; 
but his grief is so gentle and seems so great and so sincere 
that I think it is impossible that a woman who has the 
opportunity to distress a man to this extent, with so little 
danger, should not be tempted to gratify the whim. Finally 
he explains he is not a monk as the little girl believed and 
undoubtedly this is what he does the best; for, if one went 
so far as to yield to monastic love, the Knights of Malta 
would certainly not deserve the preference. 

In any case, instead of wasting my time in arguments 
which would have compromised me and perhaps not have 
persuaded her, I approved the plan of breaking things off ; 
but I said that in such a case it was more polite to explain 

1 This letter could not be found, (C. de L,). 
158 

LETTER LII 

one’s reasons than to write them, that it was also the custom 
to return the letters and any other trifles one might have 
received ; and thus appearing to agree with the little creature’s 
ideas I decided her to grant Danceny an interview. We 
made the arrangements there and then and’ I undertook to 
persuade the mother to go out without her daughter;  to- 
morrow afternoon will be the decisive instant. Danceny is 
already informed; but, for God’s sake, if you find an 
opportunity, persuade this fair shepherd to be a little less 
languishing ; and inform him, since he must be told every- 
thing, that the real way of vanquishing scruples is to leave 
those who have them nothing to lose. 

In addition, to prevent a repetition of this ridiculous 
scene, I did not omit to raise some doubts in the little girl’s 
mind concerning the discretion of confessors; and I can 
assure you she is now atoning for the fright she gave me by 
her own fright lest her confessor should tell her mother every- 
thing. I hope that when I have talked with her once or twice 
she will cease telling all her follies to the first person who 
comes along.! 

Farewell, Vicomte; gain possession of Danceny and 
direct him, It would be shameful if we could not do what 
we chose with two children. If we find it more difficult than 
we had thought at first, you must stimulate your zeal by 
remembering that she is Madame de Volanges’s daughter ; 
and I, that she is to become Gercourt’s wife. Good-bye. 

From ..., 2nd of September, 17~-. 

LETTER LII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Tourvel 

You forbid me, Madame, to speak to you of my love ; 
but where shall I find the courage requisite to obey you? 
Occupied solely by a sentiment which should be so soft and 
which you render so cruel; languishing in the exile to which 

1 The reader must long have guessed from Mme. de Merteuil’s morals, 
how little she respected religion. This whole paragraph would have 
been suppressed, but it was felt that in showing effects one should not 
fail to make known the causes. (C. de 1..). 

159 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

you have condemned me; living only upon privations and 
regrets; a prey to torments, the more painful in that they 
continually remind me of your indifference ; must I be com- 
pelled to lose the one consolation that is left me, and can I 
have any other than sometimes to open to you a soul which 
you fill with distress and bitterness ? Will you avert your 
gaze, in order not to see the tears which are shed owing to 
you? Will you refuse even the homage of the sacrifices you 
exact ? Would it not be more worthy of you, more worthy 
of your virtuous and gentle soul, to pity a wretch who is only 
such because of you, than to wish to aggravate his sufferings 
still more by a prohibition which is both unjust and harsh ? 

You pretend to fear love and you will not see that you 
alone cause the evils of which you accuse it. Ah! No doubt, 
this is a painful sentiment when the person who inspires it 
does not share it; but where shall happiness be found if a 
reciprocal love does not procure it? Tender friendship, a 
soft confidence, the only confidence which is without reserve, 
softened griefs, augmented pleasures, enchanted hope, 
delicious memories-—where shall they be found save in love ? 
You caluminate love, you who need but to cease to with- 
stand it in order to enjoy all the good it offers you; and 
I forget the grief I feel, to undertake its defence. 

You force me to defend myself as well; for while I con- 
secrate my life to adoring you, you spend yours in finding 
fault with me; you already suppose me fickle and deceitful ; 
and by a misuse of certain of my faults—which I myself 
confessed to you—you take pleasure in confounding what 
I once was with what I now am. Not content with having 
abandoned me to the torment of living far from you, you 
add to it a cruel persiflage about pleasures to which you 
know how completely you have rendered me insensible. 
You believe neither my promises nor my vows; well, I have 
one guarantee to offer you which you at least will not suspect ; 
it is yourself. I only ask you to question yourself in good 
faith ; if you do not believe in my love, if you doubt one 
moment that you alone reign over my soul, if you are not 
certain that you have attached this heart, which indeed has 
hitherto been but too fickle, I consent to bear the pain of this 
error ; I shall groan for it, but I shall not appeal; but if on 

160 

LETTER LII 

the contrary, doing justice to us both, you are forced to admit 
to yourself that you have not, that you will never, have a 
rival, do not force me, I beg you, to struggle with idle fancies, 
and at least leave me the consolation of seeing you no longer 
doubt a sentiment which will, which can orly, end with my 
hfe. Allow me, Madame, to beg you to reply positively to 
this part of my letter. 

Yet if I] abandon that period of my life which seems to 
harm me so cruelly in your eyes, it is not because I lack 
reasons to defend it, if needed. 

After all, what have I done except not to resist the whirl- 
pool into which I was thrown? Entering the world young 
and without experience ; passed, as it were, from hand to 
hand by a crowd of women who all hastened to anticipate 
by their facility a reflection which they felt must be un- 
favourable to them; was it for me to show the example of a 
resistance which was not opposed to me ? Or should I have 
punished myself for a momentary error which was often pro- 
voked, by a useless constancy which would have only appeared 
ridiculous? Ah! What save a quick breaking off can 
justify a shameful choice ! 

But, I can assert, that intoxication of the senses, perhaps 
even that delirium of vanity, never reached my heart. Born 
for love, it might be distracted by intrigue but could not be 
occupied by intrigue; surrounded with seductive but con- 
temptible objects, my soul was reached by none of them ; 
pleasures were offered me, I sought virtues; and at last I 
myself believed I was inconstant only because I was delicate 
and sensitive. 

When I saw you I was enlightened; I soon recognised 
that the charm of love was derived from the qualities of the 
soul; that they alone could cause its excess and justify it. 
I felt that it was equally impossible for me not to love you © 
and to love any other but you. 

Such, Madame, is the heart to which you fear to confide 
yourself, upon whose fate you have to pass sentence ; but 
whatever may be the destiny you reserve for it, you will 
change nothing in the sentiments which attach it to you; 
‘ they are as unalterable as the virtues which gave birth to them. 
From .:., 3rd of September, 17—. 

161 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER LIII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

I have seen Danceny, but I have only obtained a half- 
confidence ; he was especially obstinate in concealing the 
name of the Volanges girl, whom he only spoke of as a very 
modest woman who was rather pious ; except for that he told 
me his story and especially the last episode fairly accurately. 
I inflamed him as much as I could and bantered him on his 
delicacy and scruples; but he appears to set a value upon 
them and I cannot answer for him; but I shall be able to tell . 
you more after to-morrow. To-morrow I am taking him to 
Versailles and on the way I shall occupy myself by 
investigating him. 

The meeting which was to take place to-day also gave me 
some hope ; it may be that everything went off as we should 
desire ; and perhaps all we have to do now is to wrench an 
admission of it and to assemble proofs. This will be an easier 
task for you than for me; for the little girl is more confiding 
or, which comes to the same thing, more of a chatterer, 
than her discreet lover. However, I will do my best. 

Good-bye, my fair friend, I am in a great hurry; I shall 
not see you to-night nor to-morrow; if you learn anything 
on your part write me a note for my return. I intend to 
sleep in Paris. 

From ..., 3td of September, 17—-. in the evening. 

LETTER LIV 
The Marquise de Mertewl to the Vicomte de Valmont 

O yes! Indeed it is from Danceny that something is to 
be learned ! If he told you anything, he was boasting. I never 
knew such a fool in matters of love and more and more I regret 
our kindness to him. Do you know I was afraid I should be 
compromised on account of him! And that it was in pure 
waste! Oh! I shall be revenged, I promise him. 

162 

LETTER LIV 

When I arrived yesterday for Madame de Volanges she 
did not want to go out; she felt unwell; it needed all my 
eloquence to persuade her and I saw Danceny arriving before 
we could get away, which would have been the more awkward 
because Madame de Volanges had told him‘ the night before 
she would not be at home. Her daughter and I were on 
thorns. At last we went; and the little girl pressed my hand 
so affectionately as we said good-bye that, in spite of her de- 
termination to break off—which she really believed she 
meant to do—I augured wonders from the evening. 

I was not at the end of my apprehensions. We had 
scarcely been half an hour with Madame . . . when Madame 
de Volanges felt ill, seriously ill; and reasonably enough 
she wanted to go home, which I quite as much did not want, 
because I was afraid if we surprised the young people (as 
you might have wagered we should) that my entreaties to 
the mother to come out might appear suspicious. I adopted 
the plan of frightening her about her health, which fortunately 
is not difficult; and I kept her an hour and a half -without 
consenting to take her home, from the fear I pretended to 
have that the motion of the carriage would be dangerous. 
We did not get back finally until the time agreed upon. From 
the shamefaced air I observed on arriving, I must admit 
I hoped that at least my trouble had not been wasted. 

My desire to learn what had happened made me remain 
with Madame de Volanges, who went to bed immediately ; 
and after having taken supper at her bedside, we Icft her 
very soon, under the pretext that she needed rest; and we 
went into her daughter’s room. She on her part had done 
everything I expected of her; banished scruples, new vows 
to love forever, etc., etc., in short she carried things out well ; 
but the fool Danceny did not pass one inch beyond the point 
he was at before. Oh! He is a person one can quarrel with ; 
reconciliations are not dangerous with him ! 

However, the little girl asserts that he wanted more, 
but that she was able to defend herself. I would wager that 
she is boasting or making an excuse; I practically made 
sure of it. In fact, the fancy came to me to find out what kind 
of a defence she was capable of. And I, a mere woman, from 
one remark to another, excited her to a degree. In short, 

163 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

you may believe me, never was a person so liable to an attack 
on the senses. She is really delightful, dear little thing! 
She deserves another lover! At least she will have a good 
woman friend, for I am sincerely attached to her. I have 
promised her I will train her, and I believe I shall keep my 
word. I have often felt the need of having a woman in my 
confidence, and I should prefer her to any other; but I can 
do nothing with her until she is . . . what she must be ; and 
that is one more reason for being angry with Danceny. 

Good-bye, Vicomte; do not call on me to-rnorrow, unless 
in the morning. I have yielded to the entreaties of the 
Chevalier for an evening in my little house. 

From ..., 4th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LV 
Cécile Volanges to Sophie Carnay 

You are right, my dear Sophie, your prophecies are more 
successful than your advice. As you predicted, Danceny 
has been stronger than the confessor, than you, than myself ; 
we are now exactly as we were. Ah! I do not regret it; 
and if you scold me, it will be because you do not know the 
pleasure there is in loving Danceny. It is very easy for you to 
say what I ought to do, there is nothing to prevent you; but 
if you had felt how much it hurts to see the grief of a person 
one loves, how his joy becomes yours, and how difficult it is 
to say No when you want to say Yes, you would not be 
surprised at anything; I felt it myself, I felt it very keenly, 
I do not yet understand it. Do you suppose I can see Danceny 
cry without crying myself? I assure you it is impossible 
for me ; and when he is pleased, Iam as happy as he is. You 
may talk as you like ; what we say does not change what is, 
and I am quite sure that this is how it is. 

I should like to see you in my place. .. No, that is not 
what I mean, for I certainly would not yield my place to any- 
one, but I should like you to love someone as well; it is not 
only because you would understand me better and would 
scold me less, but because you would be happier or, to speak 

1“ Petite maison.” 

164 

LETTER LVI 

more accurately, you would only then begin to be happy. 

Our amusements, our laughter, all of it, you see were 
only child’s-play ; when they are gone they leave nothing 
behind. But love, ah! love... A word, a look, only to 
know that he is there, that is happiness. When I see Danceny 
I want nothing else ; when I do not see him I want nothing 
but him. I do not know how it happens; but it is as if 
everything that pleases me is like him. When he is not with 
me I think about him ; and when I can think about him com- 
pletely, without being distracted, when I am quite alone for 
instance, I am still happy; I close my eyes and immediately 
I think I see him; I remember what he said; and I think 
I hear him; that makes me sigh; and then I feel a fire, 
an agitation. .. I cannot keep still. It is like torture and 
the torture is an inexpressible pleasure. 

I even think that when one is in love once it extends to 
friendship as well. Yet my friendship for you is not changed ; 
it 1s Just as it was at the convent; but the friendship I am 
speaking about I feel for Madame de Merteuil. It seems to 
me that I love her more like Danceny than like you, and some- 
times I wish she were he. Perhaps the reason for it is that 
this 1s not a childish friendship like ours ; or perhaps because 
I see them so often together, which makes me mistake one for 
the other. In any case, the truth is that between them they 
make me very happy; and after all I do not think there 
is anything very wrong in what I am doing. So I ask nothing 
more than to go on as I am; and the only thing that troubles 
me is the idea of my marriage ; for if Monsieur de Gercourt 
is like what I am told he is—and I have no doubt of it—I do 
not know what will become of me. Good-bye, dear Sophie ; 
I still love you very tenderly. 

From ..., 4th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LVI 
Madame de Tourvel to the Vicomte de Valmont 

How could the reply you ask from me, Monsieur, be of 
service to you? If I believed in your sentiments would that 
not be still another reason to fear them? And without 

165 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

attacking or defending their sincerity, does it not suffice me, 
and should it not suffice you, to know that I neither wish nor 
ought to reply to them ? 

Suppose you really loved me (and it is only to have done 
with the matter, that I entertain the supposition) would the 
obstacles which separate us be any the more surmountable ? 
And should I have anything to do save to wish that you might 
speedily conquer this love, and above all to aid you to do so 
to the best of my power by hastening to deprive you of all 
hope ? You admit yourself that ‘‘ this is a painful sentiment 
when the person who inspires it does not share it.”” Well, 
you are quite aware that it is impossible for me to share it ; 
and even if this misfortune happened to me I should be the 
more to be pitied without your being the happier. I hope you 
respect me enough not to doubt it for an instant. Desist 
then, I beg you, desist from attempting to trouble a heart to 
which tranquillity is so necessary; do not compel me to 
regret having known you. 

Chertshed and respected by a husband whom I love and 
respect, my duty and my pleasure meet in the same person ; 
I am happy, I ought to be so. If keener pleasures exist, 
I do not desire them ; I do not wish to experience them. Is 
there anything better than to be at peace with oneself, to 
spend none but tranquil days, to fall asleep without un- 
easiness and to wake without remorse ? What you call happi- 
ness is a mere tumult of the senses, a storm of passion, the 
sight of which is terrifying even looked at from the shore. 
Ah! How can one dare these tempests? How dare to 
embark upon a sea covered with the remains of thousands ° 
and thousands of shipwrecks? And with whom? No, 
Monsieur, I shall remain on land; I cherish the bonds which 
attach me to it. Even if I could break them, I should not 
wish to do so; if I did not possess them, I should hasten to 
acquire them. 

Why do you attach yourself to my steps? Why do you 
persist in following me? Your letters, which should be 
occassional, follow each other with rapidity. They ought to 
be sober, and you speak to me of nothing but your mad love. 
You surround me with the idea of you, more than you did 
in person. Separated from me in one shape, you reappear in 

166 

LETTER LVII 

another way. You enjoy embarrassing me by specious reason- 
ing ; you elude my own. I do not wish to reply to you again, 
I shall not reply again. . . How you treat the women you 
have seduced! With what contempt you speak of them ! 
I am willing to believe that some deserve it; but are all so 
contemptible ? Ah! Doubtless they are, since they betrayed 
their duty to yield to a criminal love. And that moment they 
lost everything, even to the respect of him for whom they 
sacrificed everything. It is a just punishment, but the very 
idea makes me shudder. But after all what does it matter to 
me? Why should I concern myself with them or with you ? 
By what right do you trouble my tranquillity ? Leave me, 
do not see me again ; write to me no more, I beg you; I insist 
on it. This letter is the last you will receive from me. 
From... , 5th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LVII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteutl 

I found your letter yesterday on my arrival. Your anger 
altogether delighted me. You could not have felt Danceny’s 
mistakes more keenly if they had been directed towards 
yourself. No doubt it is from vengeance that you are accustom- 
ing his mistress to make little infidelities ; indeed you are 
incorrigible ! Yes, you are charming and I am not surprised 
she could resist you less easily than Danceny. 

At last I know that fine novel-hero by heart! He has 
no more secrets! I have told him so often that virtuous 
love was the supreme good, that one sentiment was worth 
ten intrigues, that I am myself at the moment both in love 
and timid—in short he found my way of thinking so conform- 
able to his own that in his enchantment at my candour he 
told me everything and vowed to me an unreserved friend- 
ship. This does not help us on with our plan. First of all, 
it appeared to me his idea was that an unmarried girl de- 
serves much more deference than a woman, since she has more 
to lose. He thinks especially that a man cannot be justified 
in placing a girl in the necessity of marrying him or living 
dishonoured, when the girl is infinitely richer than the man, 

167 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

as she is in his case. The mother’s confidence, the girl’s 
candour, everything intimidates and restrains him. The 
difficulty would not be to combat his reasonings, however 
true they may be. With a little skill and the help of passion, 
they could soon be destroyed ; the more so, since they lend 
themselves to ridicule and the authority of custom is on our 
side, But what prevents my having any influence over him, 
is that he is happy as he is. Indeed, if first loves appear in 
general more virtuous and, as they say, more chaste; if 
they are at least slower in their progress ; it is not, as people 
think, from delicacy or timidity, but because the heart, sur- 
prised by an unknown sentiment, hesitates as it were at every 
step to enjoy the charm it feels, and because this charm is 
so powerful upon a fresh heart that it forgets every other 
pleasure, This is so true, that a libertine in love—if a libertine 
can be in love—becomes at that very moment less eager to 
enjoy. In short there is only the difference of more and less 
between Danceny’s conduct with the Volanges girl and mine 
with the chaste Madame de Tourvel. 

To inflame our young man he needs more obstacles than 
he has met with. Above all he needs more mystery, for 
mystery leads to boldness. Iam not far from thinking that 
you have harmed us by serving him so well; your conduct 
would have been excellent with an accustomed man who 
would merely have had desires; but you might have fore 
seen that to a young man, virtuous and in love, the great 
value of favours is that they are the proof of love; and 
consequently that the more certain he was of being loved the 
less enterprising he would be. What is to be done now? 
I do not know ; but I have ceased to hope that the little girl 
will be taken before her marriage; we shall have had our 
trouble for nothing ; I am sorry, but I see no help for it. 

While I am discoursing here, you are doing something 
better with your Chevalier. This reminds me that you have 
promised an infidelity in my favour; I have your promise 
in writing and I do not mean to make it a la Chdtre.1. I admit 

1] have not been able to identify this la Chatre satisfactorily. 
There was an abbé de la Chatre mentioned bv Saint Simon ; ala Chatre 
who received 100,000 crowns in ‘ notes ’’ in Taw’s Missisippi scheme ; 
and a la Charte was a friend of the Duchesse d’Aguillon. The sense 
of the passage is plain enough—a ‘‘ la Chatre note ’’ obviously means a 
worthless one. It is a common phrase in 18th century French. 

168 

LETTER LVIII 

that it has not yet fallen due; but it would be generous on 
your part not to wait until then; and for my part I will 
account to you for the interest. What do you say to this, 
my fair friend? Are you not wearied by .your constancy ? 
Is this Chevalier so very wonderful ? Oh! Let me do what 
{ want; I hope to compel you to admit that if you have 
found some merit in him, it is because you have forgetten me. 
Good-bye, my fair friend ; I embrace you as I desire you ; 
I defy all the Chevalier’s kisses to have as much ardour. 
From... , 5th of September, 17-——. 

LETTER LVIII 
The Vicomte de Valmonte to Madame de Tourvel 

How have I deserved, Madame, the reproaches you make 
me and the anger you display towards me? The liveliest but 
yet the most respectful attachment, the most complete sub- 
mission to your slightest wishes ; there in two phrases is the 
history of my sentiments and of my conduct. Overwhelmed 
by the distress of an unhappy love, I had no consolation but 
that of seeing you; you ordered me to deny myself that ; 
I obeyed without a murmur. As a reward for this sacrifice 
you gave me permission to write to you, and now you wish 
to deprive me of this one pleasure. Shall I let it be taken 
from me without attempting to defend it? No, certainly 
not. Ah! how could it fail to be dear to my heart ? It is 
the one thing which is left me, and I hold it from you. 

My letters, you say, are too frequent ! Remember, I beg 
you, that during the ten days my exile has lasted I have not 
passed a moment without thinking of you, and yet you have 
only received two letters from me. ‘I speak to you of 
nothing but my love!’’ Ah! What am I to say, if not what 
I think? All I could do was to weaken the expression of 
it; and you can believe me, I only allowed you to see what 
it has been impossible for me to hide. You end up by 
threatening not to answer me again. And so you are not 
content with treating harshly a man who prefers you to all 
else and who respects you even more than he loves you, 
you wish to add scorn to it! And why these threats and this 

169 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

anger ? Why should you need them? Are you not certain 
to be obeyed, even when your orders are unjust? Is it 
possible for me to thwart any of your desires—have I not 
already given you a proof? Will you abuse the power you 
have over me? After you have rendered me unhappy, after 
you have become unjust, will it be so easy for you to enjoy 
that tranquillity which you assert is so necessary to you ? 
Will you never say to yourself: ‘‘ He made me the mistress of 
his fate and I made him miserable ; he implored my aid and 
I watched him without pity.’’ Do you know how far my 
despair may go? No. : 

To calculate my misery, you would have to know how 
much I love you and you do not know my heart. 

You are sacrificing me to what? To imaginary fears. 
And who creates them in you? A man who adores you, a 
trustworthy man over whom you will never cease to have 
complete power. What do you fear, what can you fear, from 
a sentiment which you will always be able to control as you 
please, but your imagination creates monsters for itself and 
you attribute the terror they cause you to love, A little con- 
fidence and these phantoms will disappear. 

A wise man has said that fears can almost always be dis- 
sipated by discovering their cause.!. This truth is especially 
applicable to love. Love, and your fears will vanish. Instead 
of the objects which terrify you, you will find a delicious 
sentiment, a tender and submissive lover ; and all your days, 
impressed by happiness, will leave you no regret except that 
you have wasted some in indifference. Since I have re- 
cognised my errors, and exist only for love, I myself regret 
a time which I thought was passed in pleasures; and I feel 
that it is for you alone to make me happy. But, I beg you, 
do not let the pleasure I have in writing to you be disturbed 
by the fear of displeasing you. I do not wish to disobey you ; 
but I am at your knees, I implore the happiness you would 
deprive me of, the only happiness you have left me ; I cry to 
you, hear my prayers and see my tears; ah! Madame, will 

you refuse me ? 

From ..., 7th of September, 17—. 

1It is thought that this is Rousseau in Emile, but the quotation iS 
not exact and Valmont’s application is a false one; and then, had 
Madame de Tourvel read Emile? (C. de L.). 

170 

LETTER LIX 

LETTER LIX, 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

Tell me, if you know, what is meant by this raving of 
Danceny’s ? What has happened and what has he lost ? 
Perhaps his fair one is annoyed by his eternal respect ? One 
must be just; anybody would be annoyed by less. What 
shall I say to him this evening, at the meeting he asks of me, 
which I have given him at hazard? Assuredly I shall not 
waste my time in listening to his lamentations, if this is not 
to lead us anywhere. Amorous complaints are not good to 
listen to except in recitatives or in ariettas. Tell me what has 
happened and what I am to do; otherwise I shall desert, to 
avoid the boredom I foresee. Can I have a talk with you this 
morning ? If you are engaged, at least write me a word and 
give me the cues for my part. 

Where were you yesterday ? I never succeed in seeing 
you now. Really, it was not worth keeping me in Paris in 
September. Make up your mind, for I have just received a 
very pressing invitation from the Comtesse de B. .. to go 
and see her in the country ; and, as she writes me amusingly 
enough, ‘‘ her husband has a splendid wood which he care- 
fully preserves for the pleasures of his friends.’’ Well, you 
know I ha've some rights over that wood; and I shall go and 
re-visit it if I am not useful to you. Good-bye, remember 
Danceny will be with me at four o’clock. 

From ..., 8th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LX 

The Chevalier Danceny to the Vicomte de Valmont 
(Enclosed with the preceding) 

Ah! Monsieur, I am in despair, I have lost everything. 

I dare not confide to paper the secret of my distress ; but 

I need to pour it out into the bosom of a faithful and trust- 

worthy friend. At what hour can I see you and ask con- 
17I 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

solation and advice? I was so happy the day I opened my 
soul to you! And now what a difference! Everything has 
changed for me. What I suffer on my own account is the least 
part of my torture; my anxiety on behalf of a far dearer 
object is what I cannot endure. More fortunate than I, you 
can see her, and I expect of your friendship that you will not 
refuse me this step ; but I must see you, I must tell you about 
it. You will pity me, you will help me; I have no hope but 
in you. You are sensitive, you know what love is, and you 
are the only person in whom I can confide; do not refuse 
me your assistance. 

Farewell, Monsieur, the only consolation I feel in my grief 
is to remember I have a friend like you. Let me know, I beg 
you, at what hour IJ shall find you in. If it is not this morning, 
J should wish it to be early in the afternoon. 

From ..., 7th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXI 
Cécile Volanges to Sophie Carnay 

My dear Sophie, pity your Cécile, your poor Cécile; she 
is very miserable. Mamma knows everything; I cannot 
conceive how she can have suspected anything and yet she 
has discovered everything. Yesterday evening, Mamma 
indeed seemed to me a little out of humour but I did not pay 
much attention to it ; and while we waited for the end of her 
game, I even chatted very gaily with Madame de Merteuil 
who had supped here, and we talked much of Danceny. Yet 
I do not think we could have been overheard. She went 
away and I retired to my apartment. 

I was undressing, when Mamma came in and sent my 
waiting-woman away; she asked me for the key of my 
writing-table, and the tone in which she made this demand 
caused me to shake so much that I could scarcely stand up. 
I pretended not to be able to find it ; but at last I had to obey. 
The first drawer she opened was precisely that which con- 
tained the Chevalier Danceny’s letters. I was so upset that 
when she asked me what they were, I could make no answer 

172 

LETTER LXI 

except that they were nothing ; but when I saw her begin to 
read the first letter which came to hand I had only time to 
reach an armchair before I felt so ill that I lost consciousness. 
As soon as I came to myself, my mother, who had called my 
waiting-woman, told me to go to bed and left the room. She 
took a]] Danceny’s letters with her. I shudder every time I 
think that I must appear before her again. I have done nothing 
but cry all night. 

I am writing to you at dawn, in the hope that Josephine 
‘will come. If I can speak to her alone, I shall beg her to 
deliver a little note which I am going to write to Madame de 
Merteuil. If not, I shall put it into your letter and you will 
be kind enough to send it as if it were from you. She 1s the 
only person from whom I can receive any consolation. At 
least we will speak of him for I do not hope ever to see him 
again. [am very unhappy! Perhaps she will be kind enough 
to take charge of a letter for Danceny. I dare not confide 
in Josephine for this purpose, and still less in my waiting- 
woman ; for perhaps it was she who told my mother I had 
letters in my writing-desk. 

» I shall not write to you at more length, because I want to 
have time to write to Madame de Merteuil, and also to Danceny 
in order to have my letter quite ready if she will take charge 
of it. After that I shall go to bed again so that they will find 
me there when they come to my room. [I shall say I am ill 
to avoid going to see Mamma. It will not be much of a lie ; 
indeed I suffer more than if I were feverish. My eyes burn 
from having cried so long, and I have a weight on my stomach 
which prevents me from breathing. When I think that I shall 
never see Danceny again, I wish I were dead. (Good-bye, my 
dear Sophie. I cannot talk to you any further; [ am 
suffocated by tears. 

From ..., 9th of September, 17—. 

(Note ; Cécile Volange’s lettter to the Marquise has been suppressed, 
because it only contained the same facts as the preceding letter and 
with less details. The Chevalier Danceny’s letter could not be found. 
The reason for this will be seen in Letter LX III, from Madame to the 
Vicomte. C. de L.} 

173 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER LXII 
Madame de Volanges to the Chevalier Danceny 

Monsieur, after having abused a mother’s confidence and 
the innocence of a child, you will doubtless not be surprised 
if you are received no longer in a house where you have repaid 
the proofs of a most sincere friendship by a complete forgetful- 
ness of all good behaviour, I prefer to ask you not to come to 
my house again, instead of giving orders at my door, which 
would compromise us all through the remarks the footman 
could not fail to make. I have a right to hope that you will 
not force me to make use of this method. I warn you also 
that if in the future you make the slightest attempt to con- 
tinue my daughter in the abberration you have plunged her, 
an austere and eternal retirement will remove her from your 
solicitation. It is for you to see, Monsieur, whether you 
will have as little scruple in causing her misfortune as you 
have had in attempting her dishonour. For my part, I have 
made my choice and she knows it. 

You will find enclosed a packet of your letters. I expect 
you to send me in exchange all my daughter’s letters; and 
_ that you will assist in leaving no trace of an event whose 
memory cannot be recalled by me without indignation, by her 
without shame, and by you without remorse. I have the 
honour to be, etc. 

Fron ..., 7th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LAIll 
The Marquise de Mertewil to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Yes, indeed, I will explain Danceny’s note to you. The 
event which made him write it, is my work and 1s, I think, 
my masterpiece. I have not wasted my time since your last 
letter and I said like the Athenian architect: ‘‘ What he has 
said I will do.” 

This fine novel-hero needs obstacles, he is drowsing in 
his felicity! Oh! Let him apply to me, I will find work for 

174 

LETTER LXIII 

him ; and if Iam not mistaken his sleep will not be so tranquil. 
He had to be taught the value of time and I flatter myself 
that he now regrets the time he has wasted. He needed 
more mystery, you said too; well, -he will not lack that 
necessity. I have one good point; I need only to be showed 
my mistakes and I never rest until I have retrieved them. 
Learn then what I have done. 

When I returned home two mornings ago, I read your 
letter and thought it enlightening. Convinced that you had 
very plainly pointed out the cause of the trouble, I em- 
ployed myself entirely in thinking how to remove it. How- 
ever, I began by going to bed ; for the indefatigable Chevaher 
had not allowed me a moment’s sleep and I thought I was 
drowsy ; but not at all ; I was entirely occupied with Danceny, 
and my desire to drag him out of his indolence or to punish 
him for it prevented me from shutting my eyes, and it was 
not until I had thoroughly worked out my plans that I obtained 
a couple of hours’ rest. 

The same evening, I called on Madame de Volanges and, 
in accordance with my plan, | told her in confidence that 
I was sure there existed a dangerous acquaintance between 
her daughter and Danceny. This woman, so clear-sighted 
against you, was so blinded that she replied to me at first 
that I must be wrong; that her daughter was a child, etc., 
etc. I could not tell her all I knew; but mentioned glances, 
remarks, ‘‘ which had alarmed my virtue and my friendship.”’ 
Finally I talked almost as well as a devotee would have done ; 
and, to strike the decisive blow, I went so far as to say that 
I thought I had seen a letter given and received. That 
reminds me, I added, that one day she opened a drawer of her 
writing-table in my presence, and I saw in it a lot of papers, 
which no doubt she is keeping. Do you know whether she 
has any frequent correspondence? Here Madame de 
Volanges’s face changed and I saw a few tears swim in her 
eyes. ‘I thank you, my real friend,” she said, pressing my 
hand, ‘I shall look into this.” 

After this conversation, which was too short to be sus- 
picious, I went up to the young person. I left her soon after, 
to ask the mother not to compromise me with her daughter ; 
which she promised the more willingly, since I pointed out to 

75 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

her how convenient it would be if the child should attain 
enough confidence in me to open her heart to me and put me 
in a position to give her ‘‘ my careful advice.’’ What con- 
vinces me that she will keep her promise, is that I have no 
doubt but that she wishes to impress her daughter with her 
own acuteness, In this way I shall be able to keep up my 
tone of friendship with the girl, without appearing deceitful 
in Madame de Volanges’s eyes; which I desired to avoid. 
Moreover, in the future I shall have the advantage of remain- 
ing as long and as secretly with the girl as I wish, without 
the mother ever taking offence. 

I profited by it that very evening ; and when my card- 
game was over I took the child aside into a corner and started 
her on the subject of Danceny, about whom she is inexhaustible. 
I amused myself by exciting her with the pleasure she would 
have in seeing him the next day; there was no kind of folly 
I did not make her express. I had to give her back in hope 
what I took from her in reality ; and then all this will make 
her feel the blow more acutely and I am convinced that the 
more she suffers the more eager she will be to console herself 
for it on the first occasion. Moreover it is good to accustom 
to such events someone whom one destines to great adventures. 

After all, can she not pay with a few tears for the pleasure 
of having her Danceny? She is wild about him! Well, 
I promise her she shall have him and that but for this storm 
she would never have had him. It isa bad dream, the awaken- 
ing from which will be delicious ; and, looking at it all round, 
it seems to me she ought to be grateful to me; and if I have 
mixed a little malice with it, one must be amused : 

‘“‘ Fools are here below for our minor pleasures.”’ ? 

I left at last, very pleased with myself. Either Danceny, 
I said to myself, animated by obstacles, will redouble his 
love, and then I shall have served him to the best of my 
power; or if he is a mere fool, as I have sometimes been 
tempted to think, he will be in despair and will consider 
himself beaten ; in this case, at least I shall be avenged on 
him, as far as it was in my power, and so doing I shall have 

1 Gresset, Le Méchant. (C. del). 

176 

LETTER LXIIlI 

increased the mother’s esteem, the daughter's friendship, 
and the confidence of both. As to Gercourt, who is the 
primary object of my attention, I shall be very unlucky if, 
mistress of his wife’s mind as I am aad shall be even more, 
I do not find a thousand ways of making iim what I wish him 
to be. I went to bed with these pleasant ideas; I therefore 
slept well and woke up very late. 

At my waking, I found two notes, one from the mother 
and one from the daughter; I could not keep from laughing 
when I found literally the same phrase in both: ‘it is from 
you alone I expect any consolation.’’ Is it not indeed amusing 
to console for and against, and to be the only agent of two 
directly opposite interests ? Here I am like the Divinity, 
receiving the contrary prayers of blind mortals and changing 
nothing in my immutable decrees. However I quitted this 
august role to take on that of the consoling angel; and in 
accordance with the precept, I have visited my friends in 
their affliction. 

I began by the mother; I found her in a state of grief 
which already partly avenges me for the annoyances she made 
you undergo with your fair prude. Everything has succeeded 
perfectly ; my one fear was lest Madame de Volanges might 
profit by the moment to gain her daughter’s confidence, 
which would have been very easy if the language of gentle- 
ness and kindness had been employed towards her, and if 
the advice of reason had been given with the air and tone of 
indulgent tenderness. Fortunately, she armed herself with 
severity; she arranged it all so badly indeed that I had 
nothing to do but to applaud. It is true she nearly spoiled 
all our plans by her determination to send her daughter back 
to the convent, but I parried this thrust; and | have per- 
suaded her merely to threaten it in case Danceny should 
continue his attentions; this was to force them both to a 
circumspection I think necessary for success. 

I then went to the daughter. You will not believe how 
grief has improved her! If she becomes even a little 
coquettish I warrant you she will often cry; but this time 
she was crying without malice aforethought. Struck by this 
new charm which I had not observed in her before and which 
I was very glad to notice, I gave her only clumsy consolations 

177 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

at first which increased rather than allayed her grief; and in 
this way I brought her to a state where she was really choking. 
She ceased crying and for a moment I was afraid of con- 
vulsions, I advised her to go to bed which she agreed to ; 
I acted as her waiting-woman ; she had not made her toilet 
and soon her scattered hair fell on her shoulders and breasts 
which were entirely uncovered. I kissed her; she let me take 
her in my arms and her tears began to flow again without 
effort. Heavens! How beautiful she was! Ah ! if Magdalene 
was like this she must have been far more dangerous as a 
penitent than as a sinner. 

When the disconsolate fair onc was in bed I began to 
console her in earnest. First of all I reassured her about her 
fear of the convent. I awoke the hope in her of seeing Danceny 
secretly ; and sitting on the bed I said to her: ‘‘ If he were 
here ’’; and then embroidering on that theme I led her from 
one diversion to another until she forgot she was afflicted. 
We should have separated perfectly pleased with each other 
if she had not wished to entrust me with a letter for Danceny, 
which I consistently refused. Here are my reasons, which 
no doubt you will approve. 

First of all it was compromising me with Danceny; and 
though this was the only reason I could give the little girl, 
there are nevertheless many other reasons between ourselves, 
Would it not be risking the fruit of my labours if I gave our 
young people so soon such an easy way of soothing their 
distress ? And then, I should not be sorry to compel them 
to entangle a few servants in this adventure ; for if it turns 
out well, as I hope it will, it must be known immediately after 
the marriage; and there are few more certain methods of 
spreading it about ; or, if by some miracle they did not talk, 
we would talk, and it will be more convenient to lay the 
indiscretion upon them. 

You must put this idea into Danceny’s head to-day ; 
and since I am not certain of the Volanges’s waiting-woman 
{whom she seems not to trust) tell him of mine, my faithful 
Victoire. I shall take care that the application succeeds. 
This idea pleases me all the more because the confidence 
will only be useful to us and not to them; for I have not 
reached the end of my story. 

178 

LETTER LXIII 

While I was refusing to take charge of the little girl’s 
letter, I feared every moment that she would ask me to put 
it in the post-box ; which I could not have refused. Happily, 
either from agitation, or from ignorance, or because she 
thinks less of the letter than of the reply (which she could 
not receive in this way) she did not speak of it ; but to prevent 
this idea coming to her or at least to prevent her making use 
of it, I made up my mind immediately ; and returning to her 
mother I persuaded her to take her daughter away for some 
time, to take her to the country. . . and where? Does not 
your heart beat with joy? ... To your aunt, to the old Rose- 
monde woman. She is to let her know about it to-day; and 
thus you have a pretext to return to your devotee who will 
not be able to reproach you with the scandal of a téte @ téte : 
and thanks to my care, Madame de Volanges herself will 
repair the harm she has done you. 

But listen to me, and do not busy yourself so eagerly with 
your own affairs that you lose sight of this; remember I am 
interested in it. 

I want you to become the correspondent and adviser of 
the two young people. Inform Danceny of this journey and 
offer him your services. Do not allow any difficulty except 
that of delivering your letter of credit to the fair one’s hands; 
and immediately overcome the obstacle by telling him that 
my waiting-woman is the way. There can be no doubt that 
he will accept; and as a reward for your trouble you will 
have the confidence of an unspoiled heart, which is always an 
interesting thing. Poor little girl! How she will blush when 
she hands you her first letter! Really, the part of confident, 
against which prejudices exist, seems to me a very pleasant 
relaxation when one is occupied elsewhere ; which will be the 
case with you. 

The result of this intrigue will depend upon your care. 
You must decide on the time when the actors must be brought 
together. The country offers a thousand means; and 
Danceny will assuredly be ready to go there at your first 
signal. A night, a disguise, a window. .. anything. But if 
the little gir] returns here in the same state she goes away 
I shall blame you. If you think she needs any encouragement 
from me, let me know. I think I have given her a good enough 

179 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

lesson on the danger of keeping letters to dare to write to her 
now ; and I] still mean to make her my pupil. 

I think I have forgotten to tell you that her suspicions 
about the betrayal of her correspondence fell first of all upon 
her waiting-woman, and that I directed them against the 
confessor. It is killing two birds with one stone. 

Good-bye, Vicomte; I have been writing to you a long 
time and it has delayed my dinner ; but my letter was dictated 
by self-esteem and friendship ; both are chatterers. However, 
it will reach you at three o’clock and that is all you need. 

Complain of me now if you dare ; and if you are tempted, 
yo and have another look at the Comte de B...’s wood. 
You say he keeps it for his friends’ pleasure! And is the 
man everybody’s friend ? But good-bye, I am hungry. 

From —-—, 9th, of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXIV 

The Chevalier Danceny to Madame de Volanges 
(Sent with Letter LX VI from the Vicomte to the Marquise) 

Without seeking to justify my conduct, Madame, and 
without complaining of yours, I cannot but be afflicted by an 
event which makes three persons miserable, all three of whom 
are worthy of a happier fate. I am more grieved that | am 
its cause than that I am its victim, and ever since yesterday 
I have been trying to reply to you without finding strength 
to do so. Yet I have so many things to tell you that I must 
make an effort ; and if this letter lacks order and continuity 
you will be sufficiently conscious of the painfulness of my 
situation to grant me some indulgence. 

Permit me first to protest against the first phrase in your 
letter. I dare to assert that I abused neither the confidence 
nor the innocence of Mademoiselle de Volanges ;_ I respected 
both in my actions. My actions alone were within my con- 
trol ; and if you should make me responsible for an involuntary 
sentiment I am not afraid to add that the feelings inspired 
in me by your daughter were such as might displease you but 

180 

LETTER LXIV 

could not offend you. On this matter, which moves me more 
than I can say I ask none but yourself as judge and my 
letters as witnesses. 

You forbid me to enter your house in the future and I shall 
certainly submit to everything you are pleased to order in 
this matter; but will not this sudden and total absence give 
as much occasion to the observations you wish to avoid as 
the order which, for that very reason, you did not wish to 
give at your door ? [ insist the more on this point, since it 
is far more important for Mademoiselle de Volanges than 
for me. I beg you then to weigh everything carefully and not 
to allow your severity to warp your prudence. I am con- 
vinced that nothing but your daughter’s interests will 
determine your resolve and shall await new orders on your 
part. 

But in case you should permit me to call upon you some- 
times, I promise you, Madame (and you can count upon my 
promise), not tu abuse these occasions by attempting to speak 
privately to Mademoiselle de Volanges or to convey any letter 
to her. The fear of what might compromise her reputation 
binds me to this sacrifice; and the happiness of seeing her 
sometimes will console me. This part of my letter 1s also the 
sole reply I can make to what you say about the fate to which 
you destine Mademoiselle de Volanges, a fate which you wish 
to make dependent upon my conduct. To promise you more 
would be to deceive you. A vile seductor can suit his plans 
to circumstances and calculate according to events; but 
the love which animates me permits me only two sentiments— 
courage and constancy. 

What! Shall I consent to be forgotten by Mademoiselle 
de Volanges, to forget her myself ? No, no, never. I shall 
be faithful to her; she has received my oath and I renew it 
to-day. Pardon me, Madame, I digress ; I must return. 

There remains one other matter for me to discuss with 
you ; that of the letters you ask from me. I am truly pained 
to add a refusal to the harm you think I have committed ; 
but I beg you will listen to my reasons and will deign to 
remember, in order to appreciate them, that the sole consola- 
tion for the misfortune of having lost your friendship is the 
hope of retaining your esteem. 

181 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Mademoiselle de Volanges’s letters which were alwavs 
so precious have become much more so at this moment. They 
are the one treasure left to me; they alone still recall to me 
a sentiment which creates the whole charm of my life; yet, 
you may believe me, I should not hesitate a moment to sacrifice 
them, and my regret at being deprived of them would yield 
to the desire to prove my respectful deference to you; but 
powerful considerations restrain me and I am sure that you 
yourself will not be able to condemn them. 

It is true you have Mademoiselle de Volanges’s secret. 
But allow me to tell you I have every reason to believe that 
this was the result of a surprisal and not of confidence. I do 
not presume to blame a proceeding which was authorised, 
perhaps, by maternal solicitude. I respect your rights but 
they do not go so far as to relieve me of my duties. The most 
sacred of all is never to betray the confidence placed in us. 
I should be failing in my duty if I exposed to the eyes of 
another the secrets of a heart which desired only to unveil 
them to mine. If your daughter consents to confide them to 
you, let her speak ; her letters are useless to you. If on the 
contrary she wishes to keep her secret to herself, doubtless 
you will not expect that I should make them known to you. 

As to the silence in which you desire this event to remain 
buried, be at rest, Madame ; in all that concerns Mademoiselle 
de ‘Volanges, I can defy even the heart of a mother. To 
relieve you completely of all uneasiness, I have foreseen 
everything. The precious packet which hitherto has been 
inscribed ‘‘ Papers to be burned ”’ ; is now inscribed : ‘‘ Papers 
belonging to Madame de Volanges.’’ The course I am taking 
will also prove to you that my refusal is not based on the 
fear that you would find in these letters a single sentiment 
of which you personally might have reason to complain. 

This is a very long letter, Madame. Yet it will not be 
sufficiently long if it leaves you the least doubt of the honesty 
of my sentiments, of my very sincere regret at having dis- 
pleased you and of the profound respect with which I have the 
honour to be, etc. . 

From... .. yth, of September. 17—. 

182 

LETTER LXV 

LETTER LXV 

The Chevalier Danceny to Cécile Volasges 

(Sent open to the Marquise de Merteuil in Letter LXVI 
from the Vicomte) 

O, my Cécile, what will become of us? What god will 
save us from the misfortunes which threaten us? May love 
at least give us courage to endure them! How can IJ describe 
to you my astonishment, my despair, at the sight of my 
letters, at reading Madame de Volanges’s note ? Who can 
have betrayed us? Whom do your suspicions fall upon ? 
Did you do something imprudent ? What are you doing now ? 
What has been said to you? I want to know all about it and 
I know nothing. But perhaps you yourself know nothing 
more than I do. 

I send you your Mamma’s note and a copy of my reply. 
I hope that you will approve of what I say to her. I want 
you to approve also the steps I have taken since this fatal 
event; the purpose of them all is to have news from you 
and to give you news of me; and, who knows ? perhaps to 
see you again, more freely than before. 

Can you imagine, my Cécile, what pleasure it would be 
to be together again, to be able to swear once more an eternal 
love, and to see in our eyes, to feel in our souls, that this vow 
will never be broken ? What griefs would not be forgotten 
in so,sweet a moment ? Well, I hope to see it come, and I owe 
it to the very steps I beg you to approve. What do I say? 
I owe it to the consoling solicitude of the tenderest friend 
and my one request is that you will permit this friend to be 
yours also. 

Perhaps I ought not to have given your confidence without 
your permission ? But I have unhappiness and necessity for 
my excuse. Love it was that guided me; it is love which 
claims your indulgence, which begs you to forgive a necessary 
confidence without which we should remain perhaps separated 
forever.1_ You know the friend of whom I speak; he is the 

1 Monsieur Danceny does not state the matter accurately. He had 

given his confidence to Monsieur de Valmont before this event. See 
Lettey LVII, (C. de L,). 

183 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

friend of the woman you love most. It is the Vicomte de 
Valmont. 

My design, in going to him, was first of all to ask him 
to persuade Madame de Merteuil to take charge of a letter 
to you. He did not think this method would succeed ; but 
in default of the mistress he answers for the waiting-woman, 
who has obligations to him. She will hand you this letter 
and you can give her your reply. 

This assistance will be of no use to us if, as Monsieur 
de Valmont believes, you are going to the country immediately. 
But in that case he himself will help us. The woman to 
whose house you are going is his relative. He will take ad- 
vantage of this pretext to go there at the same time as you 
do; and our correspondence will pass through his hands. 
He even promises that if you will allow yourself to be guided 
he will arrange for us to see each other without any risk of 
compromising you at all. 

And now, my Cécile, if you love me, if you pity my mis- 
fortune, if, as I hope, you share my regrets, will you refuse 
your confidence to a man who will be our guardian angel ? 
But for him I should be reduced to the despair of being unable 
even to soften the sorrows I cause you. They will end, I hope ; 
but, my dear one, promise me not to abandon yoursclf to. 
sorrow too much, do not let yourself be prostrated. The 
idea of your pain is unendurable torture to me. I would give 
my life to make you happy! You know it. May the 
certainty that you are adored bring some consolation to your 
soul! Mine needs your assurance that you forgive Love 
the ills he makes you suffer. 

Good-bye, my Cécile ; good-bye, my dear one. 

From ..., 9th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXVI 
Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteurl 

You will see, my fair friend, when you read the two 
enclosed letters that I have carried out your plan well. 
Although they are both dated to-day, they were written 

184 

LETTER LXVI 

yesterday in my house and under my eyes; that to the 
little girl says everything we could wish. I can only bow 
before the profundity of your insight, if I may judge of it 
by the success of your proceedings. Danceny is all on fire ; 
and assuredly at the first occasion you will have nothing more 
to reproach him with. If his fair ingénue is docile all will be 
over soon after his arrival in the country; I have a hundred 
methods ready. Thanks to your care I am now positively 
Danceny's friend; the only thing he needs now is to be 
a Prince.) 

Danceny is still very young! Would you believe I could 
not persuade him to promise the mother that he would give 
up his love; as if it were very difficult to make a promise 
when you have decided not to keep it! It would be deceitful, 
he kept repeating ; an edifying scruple, is it not, especially 
as he wants to seduce the daughter; but that is what men 
are! They are all equally base in their designs and their 
weakness in carrying them out they call probity. 

It will be your business to prevent Madame de Volanges’s 
being scared at the little pranks our young man has allowed 
himself in his letter ; preserve us from the convent ; and try 
to make her give up her request for the little girl’s letters. 
First of all he will not give them up, he does not want to, 
and I agree with him ; here love and reason tally. I have read 
these letters, I have devoured their boredom. They may 
become useful. I will explain. 

In spite of all our prudence, there might be a scandal ; 
it would prevent the marriage, would it not, and destroy 
all our plans for Gercourt. But since I want to avenge myself 
on the mother, in this case I intend to dishonour the girl. 
By choosing carefully from this correspondence and only 
producing part of it, the little Volanges girl could be made 
to appear as if she had taken all the first steps and absolutely 
thrown herself at his head. Some of the letters might even 
compromise her mother, and would at least staim her with an 
unpardonable negligence. I quite realise that the scrupulous 
Danceny would refuse at first but since he would be personally 
attacked, I think he could be persuaded. It is a thousand 

1 An expression referring to a passage in a poem by M. de Voltaire. 
(C. de L,). 

185 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

to one against the luck turning this way; but we must 
foresee everything. 

Farewell, my fair friend ; it would be very agreeable of you 
to come and sup to-morrow with the Maréchale de ...... : 
I was unable to refuse. I suppose there is no need to re- 
commend secrecy towards Madame de Volanges about my 
country projects; she would soon decide to stay in town ; 
while, once she arrives there, she will not leave the next day ; 
and if she gives us only a week I will answer for everything. 

From ..., 9th September, 17—. 

LETTER LXVII 
Madame de Tourvel to the Vicomte de Valmont 

I did not desire to answer you again, Monsieur, and 
perhaps the embarrassment I feel at this moment is itself 
a proof that indeed I ought not to do so. However I do not 
wish to leave you any subject for complaint against me ; 
I wish to convince you that I have done everything for you 
I could do. , 

I gave you permission to write to me, you say? I admit 
it; but when you remind me of this permission do you think 
I forget on what conditions it was given to you? If I had 
kept to them as much as you have departed from them, would 
you have received a single reply from me? Yet this is the 
third ; while you are doing everything that must force me 
to break off this correspondence, it is I who am employed in 
trying to continue it. There is one way of doing so, but only 
one; and if you refuse to take it, it will be, whatever you 
may say, a proof to me of how little value you set upon it. 

Abandon a language which I cannot and will not listen 
to; renounce a sentiment which offends and frightens me, 
to which perhaps you ought to be less attached by remember- 
ing that it is the object which separates us. Is this sentiment 
the only one you are able to feel, and shall love have one 
fault the more in my eyes by excluding friendship ? And will 
you yourself commit the fault of not desiring to have as a 
friend her in whom you have wished for more tender senti- 

186 

LETTER LXVIII 

ments ? I am unwilling to think so; this humiliating idea 
would revolt me, would estrange me from you forever. 

In offering you my friendship, Monsieur, I give you all 
I have, all that I can bestow. What more can you desire ? 
To yield to this gentle sentiment, so well suited to my heart, 
I await only your consent and the promise I exact from you 
that this friendship shall suffice for your happiness. I shall 
forget everything which may have been said to me; I shall 
rely on you to justify my choice. 

You see my frankness; it should prove to you my con- 
fidence ; it depends entirely on you to increase it further ; 
but I warn you that the first word of love destroys it forever 
and brings back all my fears, above all that it will become for 
me the signal for an eternal silence towards you. 

If, as you say, you have abandoned your errors, would 
you not prefer to be the object of a virtuous woman’s friend- 
ship than of a guilty woman’s remorse ? Good-bye, Monsieur ; 
you will realise that after having spoken thus I can say 
nothing more until you have replied to me. 

From... , 9th September, 17—. 

LETTER LXVIII 
Thr Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Tourvel 

How can I reply to your last letter, Madame ? How can 
I dare to be outspoken, when my sincerity may ruin me with 
you? No matter, it must be so; I shall have the courage to 
do it. I tell myself, I repeat to myself, that it is better to 
deserve you than to obtain you; and though you should 
refuse me forever a happiness I shall ceaselessly desire, I must 
at least prove to you that my heart is worthy of it. 

What a pity it is that, as you put it, I have abandoned 
my errors. With what transports of joy I should then have 
read this very letter to which I fear to reply to-day! In it 
you speak to me “ frankly,’’ you express your ‘‘ confidence ”’ 
in me, you finally offer me your “ friendship.”’ What 
treasures, Madame, and how I regret I cannot profit by them 
why am I no longer what I was? 

187 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

If I were so; if I felt only an ordinary inclination for 
you, that light desire, the child of seduction and pleasure, 
which is called love nowadays, I should hasten to take 
advantage of all I could obtain. With little delicacy con- 
cerning means so long as they procured the success, 
I should encourage your frankness in order to discover your 
thoughts ; I should want your confidence with the purpose of 
betraying it; I should accept your friendship in the hope 
of deluding it... What! This picture fnghtens you, 
Madame? ... Well! It would be my portrait if I told 
you that I consent to be nothing but your friend. . . 

Shall I consent to share with anyone else a sentiment 
that comes from your soul? If ever I should say so, do not 
believe me. From that moment I should be seeking to 
deceive you; I might still desire you, but I should certainly 
have ceased to love you. 

It is not that amiable frankness, soft confidence, tender 
friendship are valueless in my eyes. . . But love, true love, 
the love you inspire, uniting all these feelings, giving them 
more energy, could not lend itself like them to that tran- 
quillity, to that coldness of soul which allows comparisons, 
which even endures preferences. No, Madame, I shall not be 
your friend; I shall love you with the tenderest, the most 
ardent and yet the most respectful love; you may bring 
it to despair, but you cannot destroy it. 

By what mght do you presume to dispose of a heart 
whose homage you refuse ? From what refinement of cruelty 
is it that you envy me even the happiness of loving you ? 
That is mine, it is independent of you. I shall take care to 
defend it. Though it is the source of my woes, it is also their 
remedy. 

No, once again, no. Persist in your cruel denials, but 
leave me my love. You delight in rendering me unhappy ! 
Well, so be it; try to weary my courage; I shall at least 
be able to compel you to decide my fate and perhaps some 
day you will do me more justice. It is not that I hope ever 
to make you feel this emotionally: but without being per- 
suaded, you will be convinced, you will say to yourself: 
] misjudged him. 

Tet us put it more plainly, you do yourself an injustice, 

188 

LETTER LXX 

To know you without loving you, to love you without being 
constant to you, are both equally impossible ; and in spite 
of the modesty which embellishes you, it must be easier for 
you to complain of, than to be surprised by, the feelings you 
create. As for me, whose sole merit is that of having 
appreciated you, I desire not to lose you ; and far from -agree- 
ing to your insidious offers, I renew at your feet my oath to 
love you forever. 

From... , roth of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXIX 

Cécile Volanges to the Chevalier Danceny 
(Note written in pencil and copied out by Danceny) 

You ask me what I am doing; I love you, and I weep. 
My mother does not speak to me; she has taken away my 
paper, pens and ink; [I am using a pencil which luckily was 
left me and I write to you on a piece of your letter. I must 
approve all you have done; I love you too much not to take 
any means of getting news of you and giving you my news. 
Although I did not lke Monsieur de Valmont and did not 
believe him to be your friend, I shall try to accustom myself 
to him and I shall love him for your sake. I do not know 
who betrayed us; it can only have been my waiting-woman 
or my confessor. I am very miserable; to-morrow we are 
going to the country; I do not know for how long. Great 
Heaven ! Never to see you again! I have no more space. 
Good-bye; try to read this. These pencilled words will 
perhaps be effaced, but never the sentiment engraved in 
my heart. 

From ..., roth of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXX 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

I have something important to tell you, my dear friend 
Yesterday, as you know, I supped with the Maréchale de ...... ; 
you were mentioned and I expressed, not all the good I think 

189 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

of you, but all the good I do not think. Everybody appeared 
to be of my opinion and the conversation was languishing as 
always happens, when we say nothing, but good of our neigh- 
bour, when a contradictor arose ; it was Prévan. 

‘““ Heaven forbid,’ said he as he got up, “ that I should 
doubt Madame de Merteuil’s virtue; but I dare to think she 
owes more to her levity than to her principles. It is perhaps 
more difficult to pursue her than to please her; since in 
running after a woman one never fails to meet others on the 
way, since, all things considered, these other women may be 
as good or better than she is, some men are distracted by a 
new inclination, others desist from lassitude; and perhaps 
she has had to defend herself less than any woman in Paris. 
For my part,” he added, (encouraged by the smiles of several 
women), ‘“‘I shall only believe in Madame de Merteuil’s 
virtue after I have killed six horses in paying court to her.”’ 

This mockery succeeded like all those which arise from 
malice ; and during the laughter it excited, Prévan sat down 
and the general conversation changed. But the two Comtesses 
de B...... , who were beside our unbeliever, continued the 
subject with him in their private conversation, which happily 
I was in a position to over-hear. 

The challenge to move your tenderness was accepted. 
The promise to tell everything was given; and of all the 
promises which might be given in this adventure that would 
assuredly be the most religiously kept. But you are fore- 
warned, and you know the proverb. . . 

It remains for me to tell you this Prévan, whom you do 
not know, is infinitely agreeable and still more dextrous. If 
you have sometimes heard me say the contrary, it is only 
because I do not like him, that I enjoy thwarting his successes 
and that I knuw what power my opinion has with some thirty 
of our most fashionable women. 

Indeed, by this means I prevented him for a long time 
from appearing on what we call the theatre of fashion ; 
and he performed prodigies without acquiring any reputation. 
But the noise of his triple adventure, by turning all eyes 
upon him, has given him the confidence he lacked hitherto 
and has made him really formidable. In short he is perhaps 
the only man I should now be afraid of meeting on my path ; 

190 

LETTER LXX 

and apart from your own interests, you would do me a real 
service by making him a little ridiculous on the way. I leave. 
him in good hands and I hope that when I return he will 
be a lost man. 

In return I promise you to conduct ‘successfully your 
pupil’s adventure and to pay as much attention to her as to. 
my fair prude. 

The latter has just sent me a plan of capitulation. Her 
whole letter shows her desire to be deluded. It is impossible 
to offer a more convenient and more usual method. She 
wants me to be her friend. But I, who like new and diff- 
cult methods, do not intend to let her off so easily; and 
I shall certainly not have taken so much trouble with her in 
order to end up with an ordinary seduction. 

On the contrary, my plan is that she shall feel, and fee? 
thoroughly, the value and extent of each sacrifice she makes. 
me; not to lead her so fast that remorse cannot follow her ; 
to make her virtue expire in a slow agony ; to hold her attention 
continually upon this painful spectacle ; and not to grant her 
the happiness of having me in her arms until I have forced 
her to admit her desire for it. After all, I am not worth much 
if I am not worth the trouble of being asked for. And can 
I take a less vengeance on a lofty woman who appears to: 
blush to admit that she adores ? 

I have therefore refused this precious friendship and have 
held to my title of lover. Since I am aware that this title, 
which at first appears merely a dispute about words, 1s really 
an important thing to obtain, I took great care with my letter 
and tried to put into it that disorder which alone can render 
sentiment. In short I talked as much nonsense as I could; 
for without talking nonsense, there is no tenderness; and 
I think that is the reason why women are so much our 
superiors in love-letters. 

I ended up mine with a piece of flattery and that is another 
result of my profound observation. When a woman’s heart 
has been exercised for some time, it needs rest; and I have 
noticed that flattery is the softest pillow one can offer any 
of them. Good-bye, my fair friend; I leave to-morrow. If 
you have any orders to give me for the Comtesse de ...... ’ 
I shall stay at her house at least for dinner. I am sorry to 

IgI 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

go without seeing you. Send me your sublime instructions 
and help me with your wise counsels at this decisive moment 
Above all things resist Prévan; and may I one day 
compensate you for this sacrifice! Good-bye. 
From ..., 11th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXI 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

My rattle-headed servant has left my portfolio in Paris ! 
My fair one’s letters, those of Danceny to the Volanges girl, 
were all left behind, and I need them all. He is just leaving 
to make amends for his stupidity ; and while he is saddling 
his horse, I will give you an account of last night; for I beg 
you to believe I do not waste my time. 

The adventure of itself is a very small thing; it was 
only a revival with the Vicomtesse de M...... But it interested 
me in its details. Moreover I am glad to let you see that if 
I have a talent for misleading women I have none the less, 
when I wish, that of excusing them. I always take the most 
difficult or the most amusing course; and I do not blame 
myself for a good action, so long as it gives me exertion or 
amusement, 

I found the Vicomtesse here, and when she added her 
requests to the entreaties of the others that I should spend 
the night in the Chateau: ‘“‘ Well! I consent,’ I said to her, 
“on condition that I spend it with you.’ ‘ Impossible,” 
she replied, ‘‘ Vressac is here.”’ Till that moment I had 
merely meant to say something polite; but that word “ im- 
possible ’’ roused me, as it always does. I felt humiliated at 
being sacrificed to Vressac and I resolved not to endure it; 
so I insisted. 

The circumstances were not favourable. Vressac has 
been clumsy enough to arouse the Vicomte’s suspicions; so 
that the Vicomtesse cannot receive him in her own house; 
and this visit to the good Comtesse had been arranged between 
them with the purpose of snatching a few nights. At first 
the Vicomte even showed his annoyance at meeting Vressac 

192 

LETTER LXXI 

there ; but since he is even more a sportsman than a jealous 
husband he stayed none the less; and the Comtesse, who is 
still the same as she was when you knew her, after putting the 
wife in the main corridor, lodged the husvand on one side 
and the lover on the other and left them to arrange it between 
them. The evil genius of both of them caused me to be 
lodged opposite. 

That very day (that is to say yesterday), Vressac who, 
as you may suppose, is flattering the Vicomte, went shooting 
with him in spite of his dislike for sport, and intended to 
console himself at night in the wife’s arms for the boredom 
the husband caused him all day; but I considered he would 
need a rest and devoted my attention to the means of per- 
suading his mistress to give him time for it. 

I succeeded and made her agree to quarrel with him over 
this day’s shooting, to which obviously he had only consented 
for her sake. A worse pretext could not have been found ; 
but no woman possesses to a higher degree than the Vicomtesse 
that talent common to them all of putting caprice in the 
place of common sense and of being never so difficult to 
sooth as when she is in the wrong. Moreover it was not a 
convenient time for explanation ; and, as I only wanted one 
night I agreed that they should patch matters up the next 
day. 

Vressac then was sulked with when he came back. He 
tried to ask the reason; she started a quarrel with him. He 
attempted to justify himself ; the husband, who was present, 
served as a pretext for breaking off the conversation ; finally 
he tried to profit by a moment when the husband was out 
of the room to request that he might be given a hearing at 
night. It was then that the Vicomtesse was sublime. She 
grew indignant with the audacity of men who, because they 
have received favours from a woman, think they have the 
right to abuse her even when she has reason to complain of 
them ; and having changed the topic thus skilfully, she talked 
delicacy and sentiment so well that Vressac was rendered mute 
and confused and I myself was tempted to think she was 
right; for you must know that as a friend of them both 
I was present at the conversation. 

She finally declared positively that she would not add 

193 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

the fatigues of love to those of shooting and that she would 
blame herself for disturbing such soft pleasures. The husband 
‘came back; the wretched Vressac, who thereby lost the 
‘opportunity of replying, addressed himself to me; and 
after he had told me his grievances at great length (which 
I knew as well as he did) he begged me to speak to the 
Vicomtesse and I promised him to do so. I did indeed speak 
to her; but it was to thank her and to arrange with her the 
hour and means of our meeting. 

She told me that since she was lodged between her husband 
and her lover, she had thought it more prudent to go to 
Vressac than to receive him in her apartment; and that since 
I was opposite her she thought it safer also to come to me; 
that she would arrive as soon as her waiting-woman had left 
her alone ; and that I had only to leave my door ajar and to 
wait for her. 

Everything was carried out as we had agreed; she came 
to my room about one o'clock in the morning. 

. in the simple attire 
Of : a beauty just snatched from sleep. 

Since I am without vanity, I will not dwell upon the details 
of the night; but you know me, and I was satisfied with 
myself. 

At dawn we had to separate. And here the interest begins. 
The scatter-brain thought she had left her door ajar; we 
found it closed with the key inside; you can have no idea 
‘of the expression of despair with which the Vicomtesse said 
to me at once: ‘Ah! I am ruined.” It must be admitted 
that it would have been amusing to leave her in this situation, 
but could I allow a woman to be ruined for without being 
ruined by me ? And ought I, like the majority of men, to let 
myself be dominated by events ? A way out had to be found. 
What would you have done, my fair friend? This is what 
I did, and it succeeded. 

I soon found out that the door in question could be broken 
in by making a great deal of noise. I therefore persuaded 

1 Racine, Tragedy of Britannicus. (C. de L..). 
194 

LETTER LXX]l 

the Vicomtesse, not without difficulty, to give piercing cries 
of terror, such as ‘‘ Thieves!’ “‘Murder!”’ etc., etc. And we 
agreed that at the first cry I should break down the door 
while she rushed into bed. You cannot think how much time 
was needed to bring her to the point even after she had agreed 
to do it. However it was the only thing to do and at the 
first kick the door gave way. 

It was fortunate for the Vicomtesse that she did not 
waste any time. For at the same moment the Vicomte 
and Vressac were in the corridor and the waiting-woman rushed 
to her mistress’s room. 

I alone kept my head and I made use of it to extinguish 
a night-light which was still burning and to throw it on the 
ground; for you will realise how ridiculous it would have 
been to feign this panic terror with a light in the room. I then 
abused the husband and the lover for their heavy sleeping, 
assuring them that the cries, at which I had run out and my 
efforts to break down the door had lasted at least five 
minutes. 

The Vicomtesse, who had recovered her courage in her 
bed, seconded me well enough and vowed by all the gods 
that there was a thief in her apartment. She protested with 
more sincerity that she had never been so afraid in her life. 
We looked everywhere and found nothing, when I pointed 
out the overturned night-light and concluded that no doubt 
a rat had caused the damage and the terror; my opinion 
was accepted unanimously and after a few hackneyed 
pleasantries about rats the Vicomte was the first to return to 
his room and his bed, begging his wife to have quieter rats 
in future. 

Vressac remained alone with us and went up to the 
Vicomtesse to tell her that this was a vengeance of Love; 
upon which she looked at me and replied: ‘‘ He must have 
been angry for he has avenged himself amply; but,” she 
added, ‘‘ J am quite exhausted, I must go to sleep.” 

I was in an expansive mood; consequently, before we 
separated I pleaded Vressac’s cause ~and brought about a 
reconciliation. The two lovers embraced and I in my turn 
was embraced by them both. I had no more interest in the 
Vicomtess’s kisses: but I admit that Vressac’s gave me 

195 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

pleasure. We went out together, and after I had received 
his lengthy thanks we each went back to bed. 

If you think this story amusing, I do not ask you to keep 
it secret. Now that I have had my amusement it is just that 
the public should have its turn. At the moment I am only 
speaking of the story ; perhaps we shall very soon say as much 
of the heroine. 

Good-bye ; my servant has been waiting an hour ; I delay 
only long enough to embrace you and to warn you above 
everything to beware of Prévan. 

From the Chateau of ..., 13th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXII 

The Chevalier Danceny to Cécile Volanges 
(Not delivered till the fourteenth) 

O my Cécile! How I envy Valmont’s lot! To-morrow 
he will see you. He will deliver this letter to you and I, 
languishing far from you, shall drag out my weary existence 
between regrets and misery. My love, my tender love, pity 
me for my misfortune ; above all pity me for yours; it 1s 
against them that courage abandons me, 

How dreadful it is for me to be the cause of your misery ! 
But for me, you would be happy and tranquil. Can you 
forgive me? Tell me, ah! tell me that you forgive me; 
tell me also that you love me, that you will love me forever. 
I must have you repeat it tome, It is not that I doubt it ; 
but it seems to me that the more certain I am of it the sweeter 
it is to hear it said. You love me, do you not? Yes, you 
love me with all your soul. I do not forget that this was the 
last word I heard you speak! How I gathered it to my 
heart ! How profoundly it is engraved there ! And with what 
delight mine responded to it! 

Alas! In that moment of happiness I was far from 
foreseeing the dreadful fate which awaited us. Let us think, 
my Cécile, of how to mitigate it. If I am to believe my 
friend, you have only to give him the confidence he deserves 
and we shall achieve it. 

196 

LETTER LXXIII 

I admit I was pained by the unfavourable idea you 
seem to have of him. In that I recognised your mother’s 
prejudices ; it was from deference to them that for some time 
I neglected this truly amiable man who to-day is doing 
everything for me, who,in short, is working to re-unite us when 
your Mamma has separated us. I beg you, my dear, to 
look upon him with a more favourable eye. Remember he 
is my friend, that he wishes to be yours, that he can procure 
me the happiness of seeing you. If these reasons do not con- 
vince you, my Cécile, you do not love me as much as I love 
you, you do not love me as much as you did love me. Ah! 
If ever you should love me less. . . But no, my Cécile’s heart 
is mine; it is mine for life; and if I have to dread the grief 
of an unhappy love, her constancy at least will save me from 
the tortures of a betrayed love. 

Good-bye, my charming love; do not forget that I am 
suffering and that it only depends upon you to render me 
happy, perfectly happy. Listen to my heart’s prayer, and 
receive the tenderest kisses of love. 

Paris, 11th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXAXIII 

The Vicomte de Valmont to Cécile Volanges 
(Enclosed with the preceding letter) 

The friend who assists you has learned that you have 
no means of writing and has already provided for it. In the 
ante-chamber of the apartment you occupy, under the large 
wardrobe on the left, you will find a stock of paper, pens 
and ink, which he will renew when wished, and which he 
thinks you can leave in the same place if you do not find a 
safer one. 

He asks you not to be offended if he seems to pay no 
attention to you in company and only to look upon you as 
a child. This behaviour seems to him necessary in order to 
create the confidence he needs to be able to work more 
efficaciously for his friend’s happiness and your own. He will 
try to create opportunities of speaking to you when he has 

197 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

something to tell you or to hand to you; and he hopes to 
succeed if you are zealous in assisting him, 

He also advises you to return to him one by one the 
letters you receive, so that there may be less risk of com- 
promising you. 

He ends by assuring you that if you will give him your 
confidence he will use all his energy to soften the persecution 
inflicted by a too cruel mother upon two persons, one of 
whom ‘is already his best friend while the other appears to 
him to deserve the tenderest interest. 

From the Chateau de... , 14th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LAXIV 
The Marquise de Mertewtl to the Vicomte de Valmont 

How long is it, my friend, that you have been so easily 
terrificd ? Is this Prévan so very formidable ? See how simple 
and modest 1am! _ I have often met this proud conqueror ; 
and I have scarcely looked at him! It needed no less an event 
than your letter to make me pay attention to him. Yesterday 
I repaired my injustice. He was at the Opera, almost opposite 
me, and I took note of him. He is certainly handsome, very 
handsome; fine and delicate features! He must improve 
when seen at close quarters! And you say that he wants 
to have me! Assuredly, he will do me both honour and 
pleasure ! Seriously, I have a caprice for him, and IJ here 
confide to you that I have taken the first steps. 

As we left the Opera, he was two steps from me, and in 
a loud voice I arranged with the Marquise de ...... to sup on 
Thursday with the Maréchale. I think this is the only house 
where I can meet him. I have no doubt he heard me. . . 
Suppose the ungrateful wretch does not come ? Tell me, do 
you think he will come ? Do you know that if he does not come 
I shall be out of humour all the evening? You see, he will 
not find so much difficulty in following me, and, which will 
surprise you more, he will find still less in pleasing me. He 
says he wishes to kill six horses in paying court tome! Oh! 
I will save the lives of those horses. I shall never have the 

198 

LETTER LXXIV 

patience to wait so long as that. You know it is not one of 
my principles to make a man languish when once I have made 
up my mind, and I have made it up for hiz. 

Admit now that it is a pleasure to.talk reason to me. 
Has not your important advice had a great success? But 
what do you expect; I have been vegetating so long; it is 
more than six weeks since I allowed myself a frolic. This 
one comes along; can I deny myself this ? Is not the motive 
of it worth the trouble? Is there anyone more acceptable, 
in whatever sense you take the word ? 

You yourself are compelled to do him justice ; you do more 
than praise him, you are jealous of him. Well! I make 
myself: judge between you; but first of all I must have in- 
formation and that is what I want to obtain. I shall be a 
just judge and you shall both be weighed in the same balance. 
I have your records, and your affair is completely investigated. 
Is it not just that I should now busy myself with your 
adversary ? Come, submit yourself with a good grace, and 
to begin with, tell me, I beg you, what is the triple adventure 
of which he is the hero? You speak of it as if I had never 
known anything else and this is the first I have heard of it. 
Apparently it happened while I was away at Geneva and your 
jealousy must have prevented you from writing it to me. 
Atone for this fault at once; remember that nothing which 
concerns him is indifferent to me. It seems to me that when 
I returned people were still talking about it ; but I was busy 
with other matters and I rarely listen to anything of this 
kind which is not a topic of the day. 

Even if what I ask of you should annoy you a little, is it 
not the least return you can make for the trouble I have 
taken on your behalf? Was it not I who brought you in 
touch with your Madame de Tourvel again, when your 
stupidities had separated you from her ? Was it not I again 
who put into your hands the means of avenging yourself on 
the intense zeal of Madame de Volanges? You have com- 
plained so often of the time you wasted in seeking your 
adventures! Now you have them under your hand. Love, 
hatred, you have only to choose; they all sleep under the 
same roof; you can double your existence, caress with one 
hand and strike with the other. 

199 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Again it is to me that you owe the adventure of the 
Vicomtesse. JI am very pleased with it; but, as you say, it 
must be talked about ; for if the occasion led you, as I can 
well understand, to prefer mystery to scandal for the moment, 
it must yet be admitted that the woman did not deserve such 
good treatment. 

Moreover, I have reason to complain of her. The Chevalier 
de Belleroche thinks her prettier than I like; and for many 
reasons I should be glad to have a pretext for breaking with 
her ; well, there is no more convenient pretext than to be able 
to say ‘‘ It is impossible to meet that woman.”’ 

Good-bye, Vicomte; remember that in your position, 
time is precious; I shall spend mine in procuring Prévan’s 
happiness. 

Paris, 15th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXV 
Cécile Volanges to Sophte Carnay 

(Note: In this letter Cecile Volanges relates in the fullest 
detail everything relative to her in the events which the 
reader has seen at the end of the first part, Letter XJ.1, 
and those following. This repetition has been suppressed. 
She speaks at last of the Vicomte de Valmont and ex- 
presses herself as follows.) C. de L. 

. . . Tassure you he is a very extraordinary man. Mamma 
speaks very ill of him; but the Chevalier Danceny speaks 
very well of him and I think he is in the right. I have never 
seen such an able man. When he gave me Danceny’s letter, 
it was before everybody, and nobody saw anything; it is 
true I was very frightened because I had not been warned 
of anything ; but after this I shall be in readiness. I already 
understand what he wants me to do to convey him my reply. 
It is very easy to arrange with him, for his looks say anything 
he wants. I do not know how he does it: he told me in the 
note I mentioned to you that he would appear not to pay 
any attention to me in Mamma’s presence ; and indeed you 
would say he never thinks of me; and yet every time I seek 
his eyes, I am certain to meet them at once. 

200 

LETTER LXXVI 

There is a close friend of Mamma’s here whom I did not 
know, who also seems not to like Monsieur de Valmont at 
all, although he is very attentive to:her. I am afraid he 
will soon grow weary of the life we lead here and that he will 
return to Paris; it would be a great pity. He must have 
a good heart to have come here on purpose to help his friend 
and me! I should like to show him my gratitude, but I do 
not know what to do to get an opportunity to speak to him ; 
and if I did find one, I should be so bashful that perhaps 
I should not know what to say to him. 

I can only speak freely to Madame de Merteuil, when 
I speak of my love; perhaps I should be embarrassed even 
with you, whom I tell everything, if it was in conversation. 
I have often felt with Danceny himself, as if in spite of myself, 
a certain fear which prevented me from saying everything 
I was thinking. Now I blame myself for it, and I would 
give everything in the world to find a moment to tell him 
once, only once, how much I love him. Monsieur de Valmont 
has promised him that if I allow myself to be guided, he will 
procure us an opportunity of seeing each other. I shall do 
whatever he wishes; but 1 cannot imagine that it is 
possible. 

Good-bye, my dear, I have no more space. 

From the Chiteau de... , 14th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXVI 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

Either your letter is a joke which I have not understood ; 
or when you wrote to me you were in a very dangerous 
delirum. If I knew you less, my fair friend, I should really 
be very frightened ; and whatever you may say, I am not 
easily frightened. 

However much I read and re-read you I get no further ; 

+ Mile. de Volanges changed her confident shortly after this, as will 
be seen, in the following letters; this collection will not contain any 
of those she continued to write to her convent friend ; they would tell 
the reader nothing. (C. de L,). 

201 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

for your letter cannot be taken in the obvious sense it presents. 
What did you mean ? 

Was it only that it is unnecessary to take such precautions 
against an enemy so little dangerous ? But in this case you 
may be wrong. Prévan is really amiable ; he is more so than 
you think ; above all he has the very useful talent of interest- 
ing a woman in his love by his skill of speaking of it in com- 
pany and before everyone, by making use of the first con- 
versation he finds. There are few women who avoid the snare 
of replying to him because they all have pretentions to subtlety 
and none of them likes to miss an opportunity of showing it. 
Now, you know well enough that a woman who consents to 
speak of love very soon ends by accepting it, or at least by 
acting as if she had done so, By this method, which he has 
really perfected, he has the further advantage of often calling 
women themselves as witness to their own defeat; and 
what I tell you I have seen myself. 

I was only in the affair at second hand; I have never 
been intimate with Prévan; but there were six of us; and 
the Comtesse de P...., while she thought herself very sly, 
and indeed appeared, to everybody who was not in the secret, 
to be carrying on a general conversation, told us everything 
in the greatest detail, both how she had yielded to Prévan 
and all that had passed between them. She related this so 
confidently that she was not even disturbed by a smile which 
came to all six of us at the same time; and I shall alWays 
remember that when one of us tried to excuse himself by 
feigning to doubt what she was saying, or rather what she 
appeared to be saying, she replied gravely that assuredly none 
of us knew so much about it as she; and she was not afraid 
even to address Prévan and to ask him if she had been 
mistaken in a single word. 

I had reason to believe then that this man was dangerous 
for everybody ; but is it not enough for you, Marquise, that 
he is handsome, very handsome, as you say yourself? Or 
that he should make upon you “ One of those attacks which 
you are pleased sometimes to reward for no reason except 
that you think them well made ?”’ Or that you should have 
thought it amusing to yield for any other reason? Or... . 
How can I tell? How can I divine the thousands and thou- 

202 

LETTER LXXVI 

sands of caprices which govern a woman’s mind, by which 
alone you are still related to your sex? Now that you are 
warned of the danger I have no doubt you will easily escape 
it; but still you had to be warned of it; I return then to 
my text—what did you mean ? _—_ 

If it is only a joke about Prévan, in addition to its being 
a very long one, it was not of any use with me ; it is in society 
that you must fasten some ridicule upon him, and I repeat 
my request to you in this matter. 

Ah! I think I have the key to the enigma! Your 
letter is a prophecy, not of what you will do, but of what he 
will believe you ready to do at the moment of the fall you are 
preparing for him. I quite approve of this plan, but it de- 
mands very great caution. You know as well as I that for 
public effect, to have a man or to receive his attentions is 
absolutely the same thing, unless the man is a fool; and 
Prévan is far from being that. If he obtains nothing but an 
appearance, he will boast of it and that will be enough. The 
fools will believe in it, the malicious will appear to believe 
in it; what resource will you have ? I am really afraid. It 
is not that I doubt your skill; but it is the best swimmers 
who get drowned. 

I do not think I am more stupid than others. I have 
found a hundred, I have found a thousand ways of dis- 
honouring a woman ; but when I have tried to find a way to 
save her from dishonour, I have never found the possibility 
ofit. Even with you, my fair friend, whose conduct is a master- 
piece, I have thought a hundred times that you had more 
luck than skill. 

But after all perhaps I am seeking a reason where there 
is none. I wonder that for an hour I have been seriously 
considering what is assuredly only a jest on your part. You 
will banter me! Well! So be it; but hurry up and let us 
speak of something else. Of something else! I am wrong, 
it is always the same thing; always wumen to have or to 
ruin, and often both together. 

Here, as you have very well pointed out, I have the 
means of exercising myself in both sorts, but not with the same 
facility. I foresee that vengeance will be swifter than love. 
The Volanges girl has surrendered, I will answer for it: she 

203 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

is dependent simply on the opportunity, and I shall take 
care to provide one. But it is not the same with Madame 
de Tourvel ; she is an annoying woman, I do not understand 
her; J have a hundred proofs of her love, but a thousand 
of her resistance ; and indeed I am afraid she will escape me. 

The first effect produced by my return made me hope for 
something better. You may suppose that I wanted to judge 
of it for myself ; and to be sure of seeing her first impulses, 
I sent no one on ahead of me and calculated my journey 
to arrive while they were at table. In fact, I dropped from 
the sky like a Divinity at the Opera, who comes to wind up 
the plot. 

Having made enough noise on entering to turn their 
looks upon me, I could see at one glance the joy of my old 
aunt, the annoyance of Madame de Volanges and the dis- 
concerted pleasure of her daughter. My fair one was in a 
seat where her back was turned to the door; at that moment 
she was engaged in cutting something and did not even turn 
her head ; I spoke to Madame de Rosemonde and at the first 
word, the tender devotee recognised my voice and gave a 
cry in which I thought I noticed more love than surprise and 
fear. By this time I was far cnough into the room to see her 
face; the tumult of her soul, the combat of her thoughts 
and sentiments, were painted on it in twenty different ways. 
I sat down at table beside her ; she did not know what she was 
doing or what she was saying. She tried to continue eating ; 
and could not; at last, less than a quarter of an hour after- 
wards, her embarrassment and her pleasure became stronger 
than she, and she could think of nothing better than to ask 
permission to leave the table; she escaped into the park, 
under the pretext that she needed the air. Madame de 
Volanges wished to go with her; the tender prude would not 
allow it ; no doubt she was but too happy to find a pretext 
for being alone and yielding without constraint to the soft 
emotions of her heart ! 

I cut the dinner as short as I could. Desert had scarcely 
been served when that infernal Volanges woman, urged 
apparently by the necessity of injuring me, rose from her place 
to go and find my charming invalid ; but I had foreseen this 
plan and I thwarted it. I feigned to take this one rising for 

204 

LETTER LXXVI 

the general rising. And as I stood up at the same time the 
Volanges girl and the local curé allowed themselves to be 
led by this double example ; so that Madame de Rosemonde 
found herself sitting alone at table w:th the old Knight- 
Commander T... and they both decided to leave too. We 
all went then to rejoin my fair onc whom we found in a grove 
near the Chateau; and since she wanted solitude and not 
a walk she was just as glad to return with us as to make us 
stay with her. 

As soon as I was certain that Madame de Volanges would 
have no opportunity of speaking to her alone, I thought of 
carrying out your orders, and busied myself with your pupil’s 
interests. Immediately after the coffee, I went up to my 
room and entered the others’, to reconnoitre the ground; 
I made my dispositions to provide for the little girl’s corres- 
pondence ; and after this first kindness, I wrote a note to in- 
form her of it and to ask for her confidence ; I put my note 
in with Danceny’s letter. I returned to the drawing-room. 
There I found my fair one stretched out on a sofa in a delicious 
lassitude. 

This spectacle by awakening my desires animated my 
glances ; I felt they must be tender and pressing, and I placed 
myself in such a way that I could make use of them. Their 
first effect was to make my heavenly prude lower her large, 
modest eyes. For some time I looked at this angelic face ; 
then wandering over all her person I amused myself by 
guessing at the curves and forms through a light but always 
troublesome garment. After I had descended from the head 
to her feet, I returned from the feet to her head. My fair 
friend, that soft gaze was fixed upon me; immediately it 
was lowered again; but, desirous of favouring its return, 
I turned away my eyes. Then there was established between 
us that tacit convention, the first treaty of timid love, which 
to satisfy the mutual need for looking at each other allows 
glances to follow each other until it is time for them to mingle. 

I was so sure that my fair one was completely absorbed 
in this new pleasure that I took it upon myself to watch over 
our common safety; but after I had assured myself that a 
fairly brisk conversation prevented our being noticed by the 
company, I tried to persuade her eyes to speak their language 

205 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

frankly. With that purpose I first of all surprised a few glances, 
but with so much reserve that her modesty could not be 
alarmed by it; and to put the timid creature more at her 
ease I appeared myself as embarrassed as she. Little by 
little our eyes grew accustomed to meeting each other and 
remained steady for a longer time; finally they ceased to 
relinquish each other and I perceived in hers that soft langour 
which is the happy signal of love and desire ; but it was only 
for a moment; she soon recovered herself and, not 
without some shamefacedness, changed her attitude and 
her gaze. 

Not wishing to leave her any doubt that I had noticed 
her different movements, I got up quickly and asked her with 
an air of anxiety if she felt ill. Immediately everyone sur- 
rounded her. I let them all pass in front of me; and as 
the little Volanges girl who was working at her embroidery 
near the window, needed a little time to leave her frame, 
I seized this opportunity to give her Danceny’s letter. 

I was a little way from her; I threw the epistle on her 
knee. She did not at all know what to do with it. You would 
have laughed at her look of surprise and embarrassment ; 
however I did not laugh, for I was afraid so much clumsiness 
would betray us. But a strongly marked glance and gesture 
at length made her understand that she had to put the letter 
in her pocket. 

The rest of the day brought nothing interesting. What 
has happened since may perhaps lead to events which will 
please you, at least in the matter of your pupil ; but it is better 
to spend one’s time in carrying out plans than in relating 
them. Besides this is the eighth page I have written and 
I am tired; so, good-bye. 

You will realise without my telling you that the little girl 
has replied to Danceny.' I have also had a reply from my fair 
one, to whom I wrote the day after my arrival. I send you 
the two letters. You will read them or you will not read 
them ; for this perpetual repetition, which already is ceasing 
to amuse me, must be very insipid for any one not directly 
concerned. 

1 This letter could not be found. (C. de L.) 
206 

LETTER LXXVII 

Once more, good-bye. [I still love you very much; but 
I beg you, if you speak to me of Prévan again, do it in such 
a way that I understand you. 

From the Chateau de ..., 17th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXVII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Tourvel 

What can be the reason, Madame, for your cruel pertinacity 
in avoiding me ? How can it be that the most tender eager- 
ness on my part should only obtain from you a behaviour 
which would scarcely be legitimate towards a man of whom 
you had the greatest reason to complain? What! I am 
brought back to your feet by love; and when a fortunate 
chance places me beside you, you prefer to feign an indisposi- 
tion and to alarm your friends rather than consent to remain 
near me! How often yesterday did you not turn away your 
eyes to deprive me of the favour of a look ? And if for one 
instant I was able to see less severity in it, the moment was 
so short that it seemed as if you desired less to let me enjoy 
it than to make me feel what I lost by being deprived of it. 

That, I dare to say, is not the treatment love deserves 
nor the treatment friendship would tolerate; and yet you 
know I am animated by one of these sentiments and I think 
I have reason to believe that you did not decline the other. 
What have I done to lose that precious friendship, of which 
no doubt you thought me worthy since you offered it to me ? 
Have I harmed myself by confiding in you, and will you punish 
me for my frankness? Are you not afraid at least of abusing 
them both? Indeed was it not in your bosom, my friend, 
that I laid the secret of my heart ? Was it not with you alone 
that I felt obliged to refuse conditions which I had only to 
to accept to procure myself the means of not keeping and 
perhaps of exploiting to my advantage ? Would you, by so 
undeserved a harshness, force me to believe that I had only 
to deceive you in order to obtain more indulgence ? 

I do not regret a line of conduct which I owed you, which 
I owed myself; but by what fatality is it that each praise- 

207 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

worthy action becomes the signal of a new misfortune for 
me! It was after I had given rise to the only praise you have 
yet deigned to give my conduct, that for the first time I had 
to deplore the misfortune of having displeased you. It was 
after I had proved to you my complete submission by de- 
priving myself of the happiness of seeing you, solely to re- 
assure your delicacy, that you wished to break off all corres- 
pondence with me, to take from me that poor compensation 
for the sacrifice you had exacted and to deprive me even of 
the love which alone could have given you a right to it. 
Finally it is after I spoke to you with a sincerity which even 
the interests of my love could not weaken that you now fly 
me as if I were a dangerous seducer whose perfidy you had 
detected. 

Will you never grow weary of being unjust? At least 
tell me what new faults can have brought you to such severity 
and do not refuse to give me the orders you wish me to follow ; 
when I promise to carry them out is it claiming too much to 
ask to know what they are ? 

rom... , 15th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXVIII 
From Madame de Tourvel to the Vicomte de Valmont 

You appear surprised by my conduct, Monsieur, and you 
are not far from demanding an explanation of it, as if you had 
the right to blame it. I confess I should have thought I had 
more reason than you to be surprised and to complain; but 
since the refusal contained in your last reply I have adopted 
the course of enclosing myself in an indifference which leaves 
no occasion for observations or for reproaches. However, 
since you ask for explanations, and since, thanks be to Heaven, 
I fee] nothing in myself which can prevent me from giving 
them, I am willing once more to come to an explanation with 
you. 

Anyone who read your letters would think me unjust or 
capricious. I think I deserve that no one should think that 
of me; it seems to me that you especially are least of all in 

208 

LETTER LXXVIII 

a position to think so. No doubt you felt that by compelling 
my justification you would force me to recall all that has 
passed between us. Apparently you thought you had only 
to gain by this examination; since, for my part, I do not 
think I have anything to lose by it, at least in your eyes, 
I am not afraid to undertake it. Indeed it is perhaps the 
only means of knowing which of us two has the right to 
complain of the other. 

From the first day of your arrival at this Chateau, Monsieur, 
I think you will admit that at least your reputation gave me 
the right to be reserved with you; and without being taxed 
with an excess of prudery [ think I might have limited my- 
self merely to expressions of the coldest politeness. You 
yourself would have treated me with indulgence and would 
have thought it quite simple for so inexperienced a woman 
to have not even the merit necessary to appreciate your own. 
Assuredly that would have been the prudent course; and 
it would have been the less difficult for me to follow because 
(I will not conceal it from you) when Madame de Rosemonde 
came to inform me of your arrival I was compelled to re- 
collect my friendship for her, and her friendship for you, in 
order not to let her see how much I was annoyed by this 
news. 

I willingly admit that you showed yourself at first under 
a more favourable aspect than I had imagined; but you 
will admit in your turn that it did not last long and that you 
soon grew weary of a constraint for which you apparently 
did not think yourself sufficiently recompensed by the 
favourable opinion it gave me of you. 

It was then that you took an unfair advantage of my 
good faith and confidence ; you did not shrink from speaking 
to me about a sentiment which you must have known would 
offend me; and, while you did nothing save aggravate your 
faults by multiplying them, I was seeking an opportunity 
to forget them by offering you a chance to atone for them, 
at least in part. My request was so just that you yourself 
did not feel you could refuse it; but you made a right out 
of my indulgence and profited by it to ask me for a per- 
mission which, no doubt, I ought not to have granted, yet 
which you obtained. Certain conditions were attached to it, 

209 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

none of which you have observed; and your correspondence 
has been such that every one of your letters made it a duty 
for me not to reply. It was at the moment when your 
obstinacy compelled me to send you away from me that, 
perhaps from a blameworthy condescension, I tried the one 
means which could permit me to bring you back; but of 
what value is a virtuous sentiment in your eyes ? You scorn 
friendship ; and in your mad intoxication you count miseries 
and shame as nothing, you seek only pleasures and victims. 

You are as inconsiderate in your proceedings as you are 
inconsequental in your reproaches ; you forget your promises, 
or rather you make it an amusement to break them; after 
having consented to go away from me, you return here 
without being recalled ; without any regard for my requests 
and reasons, without having even the politeness to inform me 
beforehand, vou did not shrink from exposing me to a surprise 
whose effect (although it was assuredly a very simple matter) 
might have been interpreted in a sense unfavourable to me 
by the other persons present. You did not try to distract 
attention from, or to dissipate, the embarrassment you had 
caused ; you appeared to devote all your attention to in- 
creasing it still more. At table you chose a place exactly beside 
mine; a slight indisposition forced me to leave before the 
others and instead of respecting my solitude you persuaded 
everyone to come and disturb it. Returned to the drawing- 
room, I found you beside me if I took a step; if I said a word 
it was always you who replied. The most insignificant word 
served you as a pretext for returning to a conversation I did 
not wish to hear, which might even have compromised me ; 
for indeed, Monsieur, however skilful you may be, I think others 
are able to understand what I understand. 

Thus I am forced by you into immobility and silence, 
and none the less you continue to pursue me; I cannot 
raise my eyes without meeting yours. I am continually 
obliged to look away; and from a most incomprehensible 
thoughtlessness you fixed the eyes of the company upon me at 
a moment when I should have liked to be able even to avoid 
my own. 

And you complain of my conduct! And you are sur- 
prised at my eagerness to avoid you! Ah! Rather blame 

210 

LETTER LXXIX 

my indulgence, rather be surprised that I did not leave at 
the moment you arrived. I ought perhaps to have done so; 
and you will compel me to this violent but necessary course 
if you do not cease your offensive pursuit. No, I do not 
forget, I shall never forget what I owe to myself, what I owe 
to the bonds I have formed, bonds I respect and cherish ; 
and I beg you to believe that if ever I found myself reduced 
to the unhappy dilemma of having to sacrifice them or sacrifice 
myself, I should not hesitate for an instant. Good-bye, 
Monsieur, 

From ..., 16th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXIX 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

I meant to go shooting this morning; but the weather is 
detestable. J have nothing to read but a new novel, which 
would bore even a school-girl. It will be at least two hours 
until luncheon ; so in spite of my long letter yesterday I shall 
chat to you again. I am quite sure not to weary you, for 
I shall talk to you about the ‘“ very handsome Prévan.” 
How is it you have not heard of his famous adventure which 
separated ‘‘ the inseparables ?’’ I wager the first word will 
bring it back to your mind. However, here it is, since you 
want it. 

You remember that all Paris was surprised that three women, 
all three of them pretty, all three of them with the same 
talents, and able to advance the same claims, should remain 
in intimate friendship from the moment of their entry into 
society. At first the reason was thought to be their extreme 
timidity ; but soon they were surrounded by a numerous 
group whose attentions they shared, and were made aware 
of their worth by the eagerness and regards of which they 
were the objects ; yet their union became all the closer ; and 
you would have said that the triumph of one was always the 
triumph of the two others. It was hoped that the moment 
of love at least would create some rivalry. Our charming 
ladies vied with each other for the honour of being the apple 

211 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

of discord; I should myself have entered the ranks if the 
great vogue of the Comtesse de .... at that time had 
allowed me to be unfaithful to her before I obtained the 
favour I sought. 

However our three beauties made their choice at the same 
carnival, as if in concert; and far from exciting the storms 
which had been expected it only rendered their friendship 
more interesting through the charm of mutual confidences, 

The crowd of rejected suitors then joined the crowd of 
jealous women and this scandalous constancy was submitted 
to public censure. Some asserted that in this society of 
‘““inseparables ” (so they were called then) the fundamental 
law was community of property and that it applied even to 
love ; others maintained that if the three lovers were exempt 
from male rivals, they had female rivals; some went so far 

as to say that the lovers had only been received from decency 
and had merely obtained a title with no functions. 

These rumours, true or false, did not have the expected 
effect. On the contrary the three couples felt they would 
be lost if they separated at this moment; they adopted the 
course of weathering out the storm ; the public, which wearies 
of everything, soon wearied of a fruitless satire. Carried 
away by its natural frivolity, it turned to other things; and 
then, coming back to this with its usual inconsistency, it 
changed censure into praise. Since everything here is a 
matter of fashion, the enthusiasm gained ground ; it was be- 
coming a positive delirum when Prévan undertook to verify 
these prodigies and to settle public opinion and his own 
about them. 

He therefore sought out these models of perfection. 
He was easily admitted into their society and considered 
this a favourable omen. He knew very well that happy 
people are not so easily accessible. He very soon saw, in fact, 
that this boasted happiness was like the happiness of kings— 
more envied than desirable. He noticed that these supposed 
inseparables began to look for outside pleasures and even 
to seek distractions; and from this he concluded that the 
bonds of love or friendship were already slackened or broken 
and that only the ties of vanity and habit retained some 
strength. 

212 

LETTER LXXIX 

However, the women, united by the emergency, preserved 
among themselves the appearance of the same intimacy ; 
but the men, who were freer in their proceedings, discovered 
they had duties to fulfil or other affaigs 10 follow; they still 
complained of them but had ceased to avoid them and their 
evenings were rarely complete. 

This behaviour on their part was useful to the assiduous 
Prévan who, naturally placed beside the neglected lady of 
the day, took occasion to offer alternately, as circumstance 
permitted, the same attentions to each of the three friends, 
He easily perceived that to make a choice among them would 
be his ruin; that the false shame of finding herself the first 
to be unfaithful would frighten whichever woman he pre- 
ferred; that the wounded vanity of the two others would 
make them enemies of the new lover and that they would 
not fail to oppose him with all the severity of high principles ; 
and finally that jealousy would certainly revive the attentions 
of a rival who might still be formidable. Everything would 
have become an obstacle ; but in his triple project everything 
became easy; each woman was indulgent because she was 
concerned in it and each man because he thought he was not. 

Prévan, who at that time had only one woman to victimise, 
was so fortunate as to have her become conspicuous. Her 
position as a foreigner and her adroit refusal of a great prince’s 
attentions had fixed upon her the observation of the court 
and the town; her lover shared the honour of it and made 
use of it with his new mistresses. The one difficulty was to 
carry on the three intrigues at the same time, for their pro- 
gress was necessarily regulated by the slowest ; indeed I had 
it from one of his confidents that his greatest difficulty was 
to delay one of them who was ready to begin nearly a fort- 
night before the others. 

At last the great day arrived. Prévan, who had obtained 
the consent of all three, was now master of the proceedings 
and arranged them as you will see. One of the three husbands 
was away, the other was going at dawn the next day, the 
third was in Paris. The inseparable women were to sup with 
the future widow; but the new Master had not allowed 
the old Servants to be invited. The morning of the same 
day he made three packets from the letters of his mistress ; 

213 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

he accompanied one with a portrait he had received from 
her, the second with a true lover’s knot she had painted her- 
self, the third with a lock of her hair; each one took this 
third of a sacrifice as a complete sacrifice and consented in 
exchange to send a letter, breaking off relations, to the 
disgraced lover. 

That was a good deal; but it was not enough. She 
whose husband was in Paris had only the daytime at her 
. disposal; it was agreed that a feigned indisposition should 
excuse her from supping with her friend and that the whole 
evening should be Prévan’s; she whose husband was away 
granted the night; and dawn, the moment of the third 
husband’s departure, was marked down by the last for the 
rendezvous, 

Prévan, who neglected nothing, then ran to the fair 
foreigner, carried and created there the ill-humour he needed 
and only left after having made a quarrel which assured him 
twenty-four hours of liberty. Having thus made his dis- 
positions, he went home with the purpose of taking some 
rest; but other affairs were waiting for him. 

The letters breaking off relations had been a flash of 
light to the disgraced lovers; each one of them could have 
no doubt but that he was sacrificed to Prévan; and their 
annoyance at being trifled with was added to the ill-humour 
which is almost always created by the little humiliation of 
being left ; all three, without communicating with each other, 
but as if in concert, resolved to have satisfaction and took 
the course of demanding it from their favoured rival. 

He therefore found three challenges waiting for him ; 
he accepted them honourably ; but not wishing to lose either 
the pleasures or the fame of this adventure he fixed the 
meetings for the morning of the next day and assigned them 
all three to the same place and the same hour. This was at 
one of the gates of the Bois de Boulogne. 

When evening came he ran his triple career with equal 
success, at least he afterwards boasted that each of his new 
mistresses thrice received the gage and oath of his love. 
Here, as you may suppose, the story lacks proof; all the 

1“ T/heure du berger ” literally “ the shepherd’s hour,” the common 
phrase for a lover’s rendezvous. 

214 

LETTER LXXIX 

impartial historian can do is to point out to the incredulous 
reader that excited vanity and imagination can achieve 
prodigies, and moreover that the morning that was to follow 
so brilliant a night might be held to excuse him from con- 
sideration of the future. In any case the following facts are 
more certain. 

Prévan arrived punctually at his rendezvous; there he 
found his three rivals, a little surprised at meeting each 
other ; and perhaps each of them already partly consoled by 
finding he had companions in misfortune. He addressed 
them in an affable and sprightly way and made them the 
following speech which has been faithfully reported to me: 

‘“Gentlemen,” said he, ‘‘ by finding yourselves met 
together here you have doubtless guessed that all three of 
you have the same reason for complaint against me. I am 
ready to give you satisfaction. Decide by lot among your- 
selves which of the three shall first attempt a vengeance to 
which you have all an equal right. I have brought no second 
and no witnesses. I had none for the offence; I ask none for 
the reparation.”” Then, giving way to his gambling pro- 
pensities, he added: ‘I know one rarely wins ‘seven and 
the go’!; but whatever be the fate which is in store for me, 
a man has always lived long enough when he has had time to 
acquire the love of women and the esteem of men !”’ 

While his astonished adversaries gazed at each other in 
silence and their delicacy was perhaps calculating that this 
triple combat was not an equal match, Prévan went on: 
‘I will not conceal from you that the night I have just passed 
has fatigued me cruelly. It would be generous on your part 
to allow.me to recruit my strength. I have given orders 
for a breakfast to be prepared near here. Do me the honour 
of accepting it. Let us breakfast together and above all let 
us breakfast gaily. We may fight for such trifles but I think 
they should not be allowed to spoil our temper.” 

The breakfast was accepted. Prévan, they say, had never 
been so amiable. He had the skill to humiliate none of his 
rivals ; to persuade them that they would all easily have had 
the same successes, and above all to make them admit they 
would not have missed the opportunity any more than he 

1‘* Sept et le va,” a gambling term. 
215 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

had. Once these facts were admitted the rest arranged itself. 
And so before the breakfast was over they had already re- 
peated ten times that such women did not deserve that 
honest men should fight for them. This idea brought cordiality 
with it, wine fortified the cordiality ; so that a few moments 
afterwards, it was not sufficient to bear no ill will, and they 
swore an unreserved friendship. | 

Prévan no doubt was as glad of this result as of the other, 
but he was unwilling to lose any of his celebrity. Con- 
sequently he adroitly altered his plans to fit the circumstances. 
‘“ After all,” said he to the three offended lovers, “‘ you 
should avenge yourselves not upon me but upon your faith- 
less mistresses. I offer you the opportunity. Like yourselves, 
I feel already an injury which I shall soon share ; for if each 
of you has been unable to hold one of them, can I hope to hold 
all three of them ? Your quarrel becomes mine. Come and 
sup this evening in my house, and I hope to delay your 
vengeance no longer.”’ They wanted him to explain, but he 
replied in the tone of superiority which the circumstances 
authorised him to take: ‘‘ Gentlemen, I think I have proved 
to you that I have some ability in managing; rely on me.” 
They all consented ; and after having embraced their new 
friend, separated until the evening to await the result of his 
promises. 

Without wasting any time Prévan returned to Paris, and, 
in accordance with custom, visited his new conquests. He 
persuaded all three of them to come that evening and sup 
privately with him at his house. Two of them indeed made 
some difficulties, but what is there left to refuse on the morning 
after ? He arranged the meetings with an hour between each, 
the time needed for his plan. After these preparations, he 
went away, informed the three other conspirators and all 
four went off gaily to wait for their victims. 

They heard the first one arrive. Prévan appeared alone, 
received her with an air of alacrity, and led her to the sanctuary 
of which she thought herself the divinity ; then, disappearing 
on some slight pretext, he immediately sent the outraged 
lover in his stead. 

As you may suppose, the confusion of a woman who is 
not yet accustomed to adventures rendered the triumph 

216 

LETTER LXXIX 

very easy, at this moment; every reproach which was not 
made was counted as a grace; and the fugitive slave, de- 
livered up again to her former master, was only too glad to 
hope for pardon by returning to her first chains. The treaty 
of peace was ratified in a more solitary place, and the empty 
stage was filled in turn by the other actors practically in the 
same way, and assuredly with the same ending. 

However, each of the women still thought herself the only 
one concerned, Their astonishment and embarrassment 
increased when the three couples met for supper; but their 
confusion was at its height when Prévan reappeared among 
them and had the cruelty to make excuses to the three faith- 
less ladies—excuses which gave away their secret and showed 
them plainly to what extent they had been duped. 

However they sat down to table and soon regained 
countenance; the men accepted the situation, the women 
submitted to it. All had hatred in their hearts; but their 
words were none the less tender; gaiety awakened desire 
which in turn lent new charms to their merriment. This 
astounding orgy lasted until morning; and when they 
separated the women had every reason to think themselves 
forgiven but the men had kept their resentment and the 
next day broke matters off without the possibility of a re- 
conciliation ; and not content with leaving their light mis- 
tresses they completed their vengeance by making the 
adventure public. Since that time one of the women is in a 
convent and the other two are languishing in exile in their 
country estates.} 

This is the story of Prévan ; it is for you to see whether 
you wish to add to his fame and harness yourself to his 
triumphal chariot. Your letter really made me uneasy and 
{ am impatiently waiting a wiser and clearer answer to the 
last letter I wrote you. 

Good-bye, my fair friend; beware of the amusing or 
capricious ideas which always seduce you too easily. Remem- 
ber that in the career you are following, intelligence is not 

1 This end to this edifying adventure was occasionally a fact in 18th 
century life, in spite of the general tolerance. It will be noticed that the 
women pay the price. Here again we find Laclos’s ‘‘ feminist thesis ” 
and incidently a justification for the perfidy of the Madame de Merteuils. 

217 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 
enough and that a single imprudence may become an irrepar- 
able misfortune. And finally sometimes allow prudent 
friendship to guide your pleasures. 
Good-bye, I still love you as much as if you were reasonable. 
From ..., 18th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXX 
The Chevalier Danceny to Cécile Volanges 

Cécile, my dearest Cécile, when will the day come for us 
to meet again ? Who will teach me to live so far from you P 
What will give me the needful strength and courage ? Never, 
no, never, can I endure this fatal absence. Every day adds 
to my misery and I see no end toit ! Valmont who promised 
me help and consolation, Valmont neglects and perhaps has 
forgotten me. He is near her whom I love; he knows not 
what one suffers when far from her. He did not write to me 
when sending me your last letter. Yet it is he who should 
inform me when and how I am to see you. Has he then noth- 
ing to tell me ? You yourself do not speak to me of it; can 
it be that you have ceased to share my longing for it? Ah! 
Cécile, Cécile, I am very unhappy. I love you more than 
ever ; but this love which is the charm of my life is becoming 
its torment. 

No, I cannot continue to live thus, I must see you, I must, 
if only fora moment. When I get up I say to myself: I shall 
not see her. I go to bed saying: I have not seen her. These 
long, long days bring not a moment of happiness. All is 
privation, all is regret, all is despair; and all these mis- 
fortunes come to me from her whence I expected all my 
pleasures ! Add to these killing griefs my uneasiness about 
yours and you will have an idea of my situation. I think of 
you continually, yet never think of you without uneasiness. 
If I see you grieved and unhappy, I suffer for all your griefs ; 
if I see you tranquil and consoled, my own griefs are re- 
doubled. Everywhere I find unhappiness. 

Ah! It was not thus when you dwelt in the same place 
as I! Then all was pleasure. The certainty of seeing you 
embellished even the moments of absence; the time I was 

218 

LETTER LXXX 

compelled to pass far from you brought me nearer to you as 
it glided away. The use I made of it was always concerned 
with you. If I carried out my duties, they rendered me more 
worthy of you; if I cultivated some talent, I hoped I should 
please you more. Even when the distractions of society took 
me away from you I was not separated from you. At the 
theatre I tried to guess what would have pleased you; a 
concert reminded me of your talents and our sweet occupation. 
In company and on walks I seized upon the slightest re- 
semblance to you. I compared you with everyone; you had 
the advantage everywhere. Each moment of the day was 
marked by a new homage and each evening I brought them 
as a tribute to your feet. 

And now, what have I left? Painful regrets, eternal 
privations, and a faint hope which is diminished by Valmont’s 
silence and changed into uneasiness by yours! We are 
separated only by ten leagues and this distance, so easily 
traversed, becomes an insurmountable obstacle ! And when 
I implore my friend and my mistress to help me overcome it, 
both remain cold and calm! Far from helping me, they do 
not even answer me. 

What has happened to Valmont’s active friendship ? 
Above all what has happened to those tender feelings of yours 
which rendered you so ingenious in discovering means for us 
to see each other every day ? I remember that sometimes, 
though I still desired it, I was forced to sacrifice it to prudence 
or to duties; what did you not say to me then? By how 
many pretexts did you combat my reasons! And recollect, 
my Cécile, my reasons always yielded to your wishcs. I do 
not make that a merit ; I had not even the merit of sacrifice. 
What you desired to obtain, 1 burned to grant. But now 
I ask in my turn; and what is my request ? To see you for 
a moment, to give and receive once more the vow of an 
eternal love. Is it no longer your happiness as it is mine ? 
I repel this disheartening idea which would put the finishing 
touch to my misfortunes. You love me, you will always 
love me ; I believe it, I am sure of it, I will never doubt it ; 
but my situation is terrible and I cannot endure it much 
longer. Good-bye, Cécile. 

Paris, 18th of September, 17—. 

219 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER LXXXI 
The Marquise de Merteutl to the Vicomte de Valmont 

How much I pity you for your fears ! How they prove my 
superiority over you! And you think to teach me, to lead 
me? Ah! My poor Valmont, what a distance there still is 
from you tome! No, not all the pride of your sex will suffice 
to fill up the interval which separates us. Because you 
could not carry out my plans, you think them impossible ! 
Proud, weak creature! It well befits you to try to gauge my 
methods and to judge of my resources! Really, Vicomte, 
your advice put me out of humour and I cannot conceal it 
from you. That you should mask your incredible clumsiness 
towards your Madame de Tourvel by displaying to me as a 
triumph the fact that for a moment you disconcerted this 
timid woman—that I allow. When you boast of obtaining 
a look, a single look, I smile and grant it you. And when, 
feeling in spite of yourself the unimportance of your action, 
you try to hide it from my notice by flattering me with your 
sublime effort in bringing together two children, who are both 
of them burning to see each other, and who, let me observe 
in parenthesis, owe the ardour of that desire to me alone— 
that too I will admit. And when finally you make use of 
these briliant actions to tell me in a doctoral tone that “it 
is better to spend one’s time in carrying out plans than in 
talking about them ’’—well, such vanity does not harm me 
and I forgive it. But that you should think I need your 
prudence, that I should go astray if I did not defer to your 
opinion, that I ought to sacrifice to it a pleasure, a fantasy— 
really, Vicomte, you are becoming too proud of the confidence 
I have in you! 

And what then have you done that I have not surpassed 
a thousand times ? You have seduced, ruined even, a number 
of women ; but what difficulties did you have to overcome ? 
What obstacles to surmount ?? Where is there in that any 
merit which is really yours? A handsome face, the result 
of mere chance; grace, which is almost always given by 
experience ; wit indeed, but mere chatter would take its 

220 

LETTER LXXXI 

place if needed; a quite praiseworthy inpudence, but pro- 
bably due solely to the facility of your first successes ; if I am 
not wrong, those are all your methods ; for, as for the celebrity 
you have been able to acquire, I think vou will not expect 
me to rank very high the art of creating or seizing the 
opportunity of a scandal. 

As to prudence and shrewdness, I do not mention myself— 
but where is the woman who would not possess more than 
you P Why! Your Madame de Tourvel leads you like a child. 

Believe me, Vicomte, people rarely acquire the qualities 
they can dispense with. You fought without risk and 
necessarily acted without wariness. For you men defeats are 
simply so many victories the less. In this unequal struggle 
our fortune is not to lose and your misfortune not to win. 
If I granted you as many talents as we have, still how much 
we should surpass you from the continual necessity we have 
of using them ! 

Let us suppose, if you like, that you display as much 
skill in conquering us as we do in defending ourselves or in 
yielding ; yet you will admit this skill becomes useless to you 
after success, You are wholly occupied with your new inclina- 
tion and you give yourselves up to it without fear and with- 
out reserve; its duration does not matter to you. 

Indeed, these ties reciprocally given and received (I speak 
the jargon of love) can be drawn tighter or broken by you 
alone as you choose; we are but too happy if in your in- 
consistencies you prefer mystery to publicity and content 
yourselves with a humiliating abandonment without making 
the idol of one day a victim of the next ! 

But if an unfortunate woman is the first to feel the weight 
of her chain, what risks she runs if she tries to escape it, if 
she even dares to raise it. It is with trembling that she 
attempts to send away the man whom her heart repels with 
an effort. If he persists in staying, she has to yield from 
fear what she granted to love: 

Her arms still open though her heart is closed. 
She must unloose with prudent skill the very ties you 

would have broken. She is at the mercy of her enemy and is 
221 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

without resource if he is without generosity ; and how can 
she hope it of him, when, though he is sometimes praised for 
having it, he is never blamed for lacking it ? 

Doubtless you will not deny these truths which are so 
obvious they are commonplaces. But if you have seen me 
directing events and opinions and making these formidable 
men the toy of my caprices or my fantasies ; depriving some 
of will, others of the power of harming me; if in accordance 
with my changing tastes I have turn by turn attached to my 
train or cast far from me 

Those unthroned tyrants now become my slaves! ; 

if through these frequent revolutions I have kept my reputa- 
tion intact; ought you not to have concluded that, since 
I was born to avenge my sex and to dominate yours, I must 
have created methods unknown to anybody but myself ? 

Ah! Keep your advice and your fears for those 
unbalanced women who rave of their ‘‘ sentiment,’ whose 
excited imagination would make one think nature had placed 
their senses in their heads; who, having never reflected, 
always confuse love with the lover; who, in their foolish 
illusion, think that the one man with whom they have sought 
pleasure is the sole depository of it; who, being truly super- 
stitious, give the priest the respect and faith which is due only 
to the divinity. 

Fear also for those who are more vain than prudent and 
who will not allow themselves to be abandoned when 
necessary. 

Tremble above all for those women, active in their idle- 
ness, whom you call “‘ tender,’’ of whom love takes possession 
so easily and with such power; women who feel the need 
to occupy themselves with it even when they do not enjoy 
it and who, abandoning themselves unreservedly to the 

1It is not known whether this verse and the one before it, ‘‘ Her 
arms still open though her heart is closed ’’ are quotations from little 
known works or whether they are part of Mme. de Merteuil’s prose. 
What makes it probable is the multitude of faults of this kind in all 
the letters of this correspondence. Only those of the Chevalier Danceny 
are free from them, perhaps because he sometimes occupied himself 

with poetry and therefore his more practised ear enabled him to avoid 
this defect more easily. (C. de L.). 

222 

LETTER LXXXI 

ebullition of their ideas, give birth through them to those 
sweet letters which are so dangerous to write; women who 
are not afraid to confide these proofs of their weakness to 
the person who causes them , imprudent women, who cannot 
see their future enemy in their present lover. 

But what have I in common with these incautious women ? 
When have you seen me depart from the rules I have _ pre- 
scribed for myself or lose my principles ? I say my principles 
and I say it advisedly ; for they are not, like other women’s 
principles, given at hazard, accepted without reflection and 
followed from habit; they are the result of my profound 
meditations; I created them and I can say that I am my 
own work. 

I entered society, an unmarried girl, at a time when my 
condition compelled me to silence and inaction; I made use 
of it to observe and to reflect. While I was thought light- 
headed or inattentive because I paid little attention to the 
conversations they were careful to hold with me, I carefully 
gathered those they tried to hide from me. 

That useful curiosity which served to instruct me, also 
taught me to dissimulate; I was often forced to conceal the 
objects of my attention from the eyes of those about me and 
I tried to direct my own eyes at will; from this I gained that 
ability to simulate when I chose that preoccupied gaze you 
have praised so often. Encouraged by this first success, I tried 
to govern the different expressions of my face in the same 
way. Did I experience some grief, I studied to show an air 
of serenity, even one of joy; I carried my zeal so far as to 
cause myself voluntary pain and to seek for an expression 
of pleasure at the same time. I worked over myself with 
the same care and more trouble to repress the symptoms of 
an unexpected joy. In this way I acquired that power over 
my features by which I have sometimes seen you astonished. 

I was still very young and practically without any interest ; 
but I only possessed my thoughts and I felt indignant that 
they might be snatched from me or surprised in me against 
my will. Furnished with these first arms, I made trial of 
them. I was not content with not allowing people to see 
through me, I amused myself by showing myself under various 
aspects; certain of my movements, I now watched over 

223 

‘ 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

what I said; I regulated both according to circumstances or 
even only according to my fancy. From that moment on, my 
way of thinking was for myself alone and I only showed what 
it was useful for me to render visible. 

This labour upon myself fixed my attention on the ex- 
pression and character of faces; from that I obtained a 
penetrating glance which experience however, has taught me 
~ not to rely upon entirely, but which in general has rarely 
deceived me. | 

I was not yet fifteen and already I possessed the talents 
to which the greater part of our politicians owe their reputa- 
tion; and I considered myself still in the first elements of 
the science I wished to acquire. 

As you may suppose, I was like all young girls and tried 
to guess at love and its pleasures. But I had never been to 
a convent, I had no intimate friend, and I was watched by a 
vigilant mother; I had only vague ideas which I could not 
settle ; even nature which I have subsequently had every 
Treason to be grateful to, had not given me any indication, 
It was as if she was silently working to perfect her labour. 
My head alone was in a ferment; I did not desire to enjoy, 
I wanted to know; my desire to learn suggested the means 
to me. 

[ realised that the only man with whom I could discuss 
this topic without compromising myself was my confessor. 
I made up my mind at once; I overcame my little bashful- 
ness ; and boasting of a fault I had not committed, I accused 
myself of having done ‘“‘ everything that women do.” That 
was my expression; but when I spoke in this way I did 
not know at all what idea I was expressing. My hope was 
not entirely disappointed or entirely fulfilled; the fear of 
betraying myself prevented me from obtaining informa- 
tion; but the good father made it out to be so wicked that 
I concluded the pleasure must be extreme; and the desire 
to enjoy it succeeded the desire to know what it was. 

I do not know where this desire might have led me 
and as I was then quite without experience a single occasion 
might perhaps have ruined me ; fortunately for me my mother 
informed me a few days later that I was to be married and 
immediately the certainty of knowing extinguished my 

224 

LETTER LXXXI 

curiosity and I reached Monsieur de Merteuil’s arms a virgin. 

I awaited with confidence the moment which would 
enlighten me and I needed premeditation to show embarrass- 
ment and fear. This first night, which is generally thought to 
be so cruel or so sweet, was for me simply an opportunity for 
experience ; I noticed very carefully both pain and pleasure 
and in these different sensations I saw nothing but facts to. 
collect and to meditate upon. 

This kind of study very soon began to please me; but 
faithful to my principles, and feeling perhaps instinctively 
that no one should be further from my confidence than my 
husband, I resolved from the mere fact that I was moved 
by it to appear unmoved to my husband. This apparent 
coldness was afterwards the unshakable foundation of his 
blind confidence ; on further reflection I added to this the 
air of heedlessness which my years sanctioned ; and he never 
thought me so childish as in the moments when I praised 
him with most boldness. However, I must confess I allowed 
myself at first to be carried away in the whirlpool of society 
and I gave myself up entirely to its futile distractions, But 
when after some months Monsieur de Merteuil took me to his. 
gloomy country estate, the fear of boredom brought back the 
taste for study ; and finding myself surrounded by people whose 
difference of rank placed me above all suspicion, I made use 
of this to give my experiments a wider field. It was there 
that I made certain that love which they tell us is the cause 
of our pleasures, is at most only the pretext for them. 

Monsieur de Merteuil’s illness interrupted these soft occupa- 
tions; I had to follow him to town whither he went for 
medical aid. He died, as you know, shortly afterwards ; 
and although, taking it all round, I had no reason to complain 
of him, I felt none the less keenly the value of the liberty my 
widowhood would give me and I promised myself to make 
good use of it. 

My mother expected I should go into a convent or return 
to live with her. I refused both courses; all I granted to 
decency was to return to the country again, where I still had 
a few observations to make, 

I supported them with the assistance of reading ; but do. 
not think that it was all of the kind you suppose. I studied 

225 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

our manners in novels, our opinions in philosophers ; I even 
sought in the severest moralists what it was they exacted of 
us and in this way I learned what one could do, what one 
ought to think and what one ought to appear. Once I was 
certain on these three points, the last alone presented some 
difficulties in practice; I hoped to conquer them and 
I meditated the means, 

I began to grow weary of my rustic pleasures which were 
too monotonous for my active head ; I felt a need for coquetry 
to reconcile me with love, not to feel it veritably but to 
inspire and to feign it. In vain I had been told and had read 
that this sentiment could not be feigned; I saw that to do 
so successfully one had only to join the talent of a comedian 
to the mind of an author. I practised myself in both arts 
and perhaps with some success; but instead of seeking the 
vain applause of the theatre, I resolved to employ for my 
happiness what others sacrifice to vanity. 

A year passed away in these different occupations. My 
period of mourning allowed me to reappear and I returned 
to town with my plans; I had not foreseen the first obstacle 
I met with. 

My long solitude, my austere retirement had given me a 
veneer of prudery which frightened all our most charming 
men; they kept away and left me at the mercy of a crowd 
of wearisome creatures who all wanted to marry me. The 
difficulty was not in refusing them; but several of these 
refusals displeased my family and I wasted on these private 
annoyances a time which [ had promised myself to employ 
so charmingly. I was therefore obliged, in order to recall 
the one party and to get rid of the other, to display a few 
imprudences and to employ the care I’-had meant to use for 
the preservation of my reputation in harming it. I succeeded 
easily, as you may believe. But not being carried away by 
any passion, I only did what I considered necessary and 
measured the doses of my heedlessness with prudence. 

As soon as I obtained the objective I wished to reach, 
I returned on my steps and gave the honour of my amend- 
ment to those women who claim merit and virtue since they 
can have no pretention to charm. This was a master stroke 
which was of more value to me than I had hoped. These 

226 

LETTER LXXXI 

grateful Duennas constituted themselves my defenders ; and 
their blind zeal for what they called their work was carried 
to such an extent that at the slightest remark any one dared 
to make about me, the whole band of prides exclaimed that 
it was a scandal and an insult. The same method secured 
me also the support of our women with pretentions, who, 
persuaded that I had given up the idea of following the same 
course as themselves, chose me as the object of their praises 
every time they wished to prove that they did not talk scandal 
about everybody. 

However my preceding conduct had brought back the 
lovers ; and to steer cautiously between them and my faith- 
less female protectors I gave myself out to be a tender-hearted 
but fastidious woman, whose excessive delicacy supplied her 
with weapons against love. 

Then I began to display on the great stage the talents 
I had procured myself. My first care was to acquire the re- 
putation of being invincible. To attain this I always pre- 
tended to accept the attentions of those men only who did 
not please me. I employed them usefully in gaining me the 
honours of resistance, while I yielded myself fearlessly to the 
accepted lover. But my feigned timidity never allowed him 
to accompany me into society; and thus the gaze of the 
company was always fixed upon the rejected lover. 

You know how quickly I make up my mind; that is 
because IJ have observed a woman’s secret is almost always 
betrayed by the preliminary attentions. Whatever one may 
do the tone is never the same after as before the success, This 
difference does not escape an attentive observer ; and I have 
found it less dangerous to be mistaken in my choice than to 
allow myself to be fathomed. In this way I have the further 
advantage of removing the appearances by which alone we 
are judged. 

These precautions and the further ones of never writing 
and never giving up any proof of my defeat may appear exces- 
sive, but have never seemed to me sufficient. I had descended 
into my own heart and I studied in it the heart of others. 
There I saw that everybody keeps a secret in it which he must 
not allow to be revealed—a truth which antiquity appears 
to have known better than we and of which the story of Samson 

227 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

may be only an ingenious parable. Like a new Delilah I always 
used my power as she did to surprise this important secret. 
Ah! How many of our modern Samsons are there whose 
hair I keep under my scissors! I have ceased to be afraid of 
them; they are the only men I have sometimes let myself 
humiliate. With the others I was more pliant; the art of 
making them unfaithful to avoid appearing fickle, a feigned 
friendship, an apparent confidence, a few generous actions, 
the flattering idea each of them had that he was my only 
lover, these procured me their discretion. Finally, when these 
methods failed me F have foreseen the time of breaking things 
off and I have smothered with ridicule or calumny any credence 
these dangerous men might have obtained. 

You see me constantly practise what I tell you here ; 
and you doubt my prudence ! Well! Think of the time when 
you paid your first attentions to me ; none ever flattered me 
so much ; I desired you before I had seen you. Seduced by 
your reputation, I felt you were lacking to my glory ; I burned 
to wrestle with you hand to hand. This was the only one of my 
inclinations which ever had a moment’s power over me. And 
yet if you had wished to ruin me, what means could you have 
found ? Vain talk which leaves no trace behind it, which your 
very reputation would have helped to make suspicious, and 
a train of improbable facts, the accurate relation of which 
would have sounded like a badly written novel. 

Since then I have indeed given up to you all my secrets ; 
but you know the interests which unite us and whether, of 
us two, it is I who should be charged with imprudence.! 

Since I am in the way of giving you information, I will 
do so exactly. I can hear you telling me that at least I am 
at the mercy of my waiting-woman ; indeed, although she has 
not the secret of my feelings, she has the secret of my actions. 
When you spoke to me of her before, I simply answered that 
I was sure of her; and the proof that this reply was sufficient 
for your tranquility is that you have since on your own account 
confided dangerous secrets to her. But now that you are 

1Tt will be seen later, in Lettey CLII, not what M. de Valmont’s 
secret was, but practically of what kind it was; and the reader will 
understand that further enlightenment on this subject could not be 
given. (C. de L.). 

228 

LETTER LXXXI 

offended about Prévan and have lost your head I suppose 
you will not believe me any more on my bare word. You 
must therefore be instructed. 

First of all, this girl is my foster-sister, and that tie which 
to us does not appear to be one is not without strength for 
people of her class; moreover I have her secret and better 
still; she was the victim of a love-folly which would have 
ruined her if 1 had not saved her. Her parents, bristling up 
with honour, wanted nothing less than to have her shut up. 
They applied to me. I saw at a glance how useful their anger 
might be to me. I supported them and asked for the order, 
which I obtained. Then, suddenly going over to the side of 
clemency to which I brought her parents also, and making 
use of my credit with the old Minister, I made them all consent 
to leave the order in my hands, and to give me the power of 
witholding 1t or demanding its execution according as I should 
determine from the girl’s future conduct. She knows therefore 
that her fate is in my hands; and if, which is impossible, 
these powerful methods should not stop her, is it not obvious 
that her conduct made public and her authentic punishment 
would soon deprive her words of all credence? To these 
precautions which I call fundamental, are added a thousand 
others, either local or casual, which are suggested to me by 
reflection and habit ; to give them in detail would be circum- 
stantial but the use of them is important and you must take 
the trouble to collect them from my whole conduct if you wish 
to understand them. 

But to suppose that I have taken so much trouble and shall 
not enjoy the fruits of it; that after I have raised myself 
above other women by painful labour, I should consent to 
crawl like them between impudence and timidity ; that above 
all I should fear a man to the extent of seeing my safety no- 
where but in flight—no, Vicomte, never. I must conquer 
or perish. As to Prévan, I want to have him and I will have 
him ; he wants to tell it and he shall not tell it; that is our 
romance in a phrase. Good-bye. 

From ,.., 20th of September, 17—. 

229 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER LXXXII 
Cécile Volanges to the Chevalier Danceny 

Heavens. how your letter distressed me! I did well to 
be so impatient to receive it! I hoped to find consolation 
in it and now I am more upset than before I received it. 
I cried a lot in reading it; I do not blame you for that ; 
I have already cried many times on account of you without 
that distressing-me. But this time it is not the same thing. 

What do you mean when you say your love becomes a 
torment to you, that you cannot live any longer in this way, 
nor endure your situation any more ? Are you going to stop 
loving me because it is not so agreeable as it was before? It 
seems to me that I am no happier than you are, on the con- 
trary; and yet I only love you the more. If Monsieur de 
Valmont has not written to you, it is not my fault ; I could 
not ask him to do so, because I have not been alone with him 
and we have arranged never to speak to each other in other 
peoples’ presence ; and that is on your account too, so that 
he ean sooner do what you desire. I do not say that I do not 
desire it also, and you ought to be certain of this; but what 
do you expect me to do? If you, think it is so easy, find the 
way, I ask nothing better. 

Do you think it is very pleasant for me to be scolded every 
day by Mamma, who never said anything harsh to me before ; 
but on the contrary ? It 1s worse now than if I were at the 
convent. 

But I consoled myself by remembering that it was for your 
sake ; there were even moments when I felt I was glad of it ; 
but when I see that you are angry as well and that without 
it being my fault at all, I am more upset than by anything 
that has happened to me up to now. 

It is difficult even to receive your letters and if Monsieur 
de Valmont were not so kind and so clever I should not know 
what to do; and it is still more difficult to write to you. All 
the morning I dare not, because Mamma is close at hand and 
keeps coming into my room. Sometimes I can in the after- 
noon, under the pretext of singing or playing on my harp; 

230 

LETTER LXXXII 

and even then I must break off at every line so that they can | 
hear I am working. Luckily my waiting-woman sometimes 
_ goes to sleep in the evening and I tell her I can easily go 
to bed myself, to make her go away and leave me the light. 
And then I must get under my bed-curtains so that no light 
can be seen, and then I must listen for the slightest noise 
so that I can hide everything in my bed if anyone comes. 
I wish you were here to see! You would see that one has 
to be very much in love to do all this. Indeed it is true I do 
all I can and I wish I could do more. 

Certainly I do not refuse to tell you that I love you and 
and that I shall always love you; I never said it with a 
better heart; and you are angry! Yet you assured me 
before I had said it to you that it was enough to make you 
happy. You cannot deny it; it isin your letters. Although 
I have them no longer, I remember it as well as when I read 
them every day. And because we are absent from each other, 
you do not think in the same way! But this absence will 
not last forever, perhaps ? Heavens! How unhappy I am! 
And you are the cause of it ! 

About your letters—I hope you have kept those that 
Mamma took from me and sent back to you; there must 
come a time when I shall not be so oppressed as I am now, 
and you will give them all back to me. How happy I shall 
be when I can keep them all without anybody being able to 
object ! Now I give them all back to Monsieur de Valmont, 
because it would be too risky; in spite of that I never give 
them back to him without feeling very distressed. 

Good-bye, my dear. I love you with all my heart. I shall 
love you all my life. I hope you are not grieved any more 
now ; if I were sure of it I should cease to be grieved myself. 

Write me as soon as you can, for I feel I shall be sad until then. 
From the Chateau de , 23rd of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXXIII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Tourvel 

Pray, Madame, let us continue the intercourse so un- 
happily interrupted! How can I finally prove to you how 
231 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREDUSES 

much I differ from the odious portrait of me which has been 
made to you; above all how can I enjoy again that charming 
confidence you began to show me! What charms you lent 
to virtue! How you embellished all virtuous sentiments 
and forced one to cherish them! Ah! That is where you 
seduce ; that is the most powerful seduction ; it is the only 
one which is both powerful and respectable. 

Doubtless it is enough to see you, to have the desire of 
pleasing you ; to listen to you in company, to have this desire 
increased ; but he who has the happiness to know you better, 
who can sometimes read in your soul, soon yields to a more 
noble enthusiasm and, touched by veneration as well as by 
love, adores in you the image of all virtues. I was perhaps 
created to love them and follow them more than others, and, 
after being carried away from them by a few errors, I was 
brought back to them by you; through you I felt all their 
charm again. Will you make this new love a crime in me ? 
Will you condemn your own work? Would you reproach 
yourself even for the interest you might take in it? What 
evil can you fear from so pure a sentiment, what sweetness 
might you not taste in it ? 

My love frightens you, you think it violent, extreme ? 
Temper it by a gentler love ; do not refuse the power I offer 
you, which I swear never to escape from, which I dare to think 
would not be entirely a loss for virtue. What sacrifice could 
appear difficult to me were I sure your heart would reward 
me for it! What man is so unhappy as to be unable to 
enjoy the privations he imposes on himself; as not to prefer 
a word or a look that is granted to all the enjoyments he 
might ravish or surprise ! And you thought I was that man ! 
And you feared me! Ah! Why does your happiness not 
depend upon me! How I would avenge myself upon you, 
by making you happy! But that soft power is not produced 
by sterile friendship ; it is granted only to love. 

That word intimidates you! And why? A more tender 
attachment, a closer union, a single thought, the same 
happiness and the same griefs—what in these is foreign to 
your soul? Yet such is love! Such at least is the love 
you inspire and I feel! Above all it is that love which 
calculates without interest and can appreciate actions on their 

232 

LETTER LXXXIII 

merits, not from their value; the inexhaustible treasure of 
tender minds, everything becomes precious when it is done 
by love or for love. 

What is there frightening in these truths which are so 
easy to grasp, so sweet to practise? ‘What fears can be 
caused you by a tender man whom love allows no happiness 
but yours? That is to-day the only wish I have; I would 
sacrifice everything to carry it out except the sentiment which 
inspires it; and, if you but consent to share that sentiment 
itself, you shall govern it yourself. But do not let us allow 
it to divide us any longer when it ought to unite us. If the 
friendship you have offered me is not a vain word, if, as you 
said to me yesterday, it is the softest feeling known to your 
soul; I do not refuse to allow friendship to bargain between 
us; but if friendship becomes the judge of love she must 
consent to listen to it, refusal to hear it would become an 
injustice and friendship is not unjust. A second interview 
will have no more disadvantages then the first ; chance may 
again furnish the opportunity; you yourself can appoint 
the time. I am willing to believe that I am wrong; would 
you not rather amend me than combat me, and have you 
any doubts of my docility >? If that annoying third person 
had not interrupted us, perhaps I should already be entirely 
of your opinion; who knows how far your power might 
Z0 ? 

Shall I confess it? Sometimes I am afraid of this in- 
vincible power to which I yield myself without daring to 
calculate, of that irresistible charm which renders you the 
sovereign of my thoughts as of my actions. Alas! Perhaps 
it is I who should dread this interview I ask for! When it 
is over perhaps I shall find myself changed by my promises 
and doomed to burn with a love which I feel can never be 
extinguished, without daring even to implore your aid! Ah! 
Madame, for pity’s sake, do not abuse your power! Ah! But 
if they would make you happier, if by them I should appear 
more worthy of you—-what pains would not be softened by 
these consoling ideas! Yes, I feel it; to speak to you again 
is to give you more powerful weapons against me, is to yield 
myself more completely to your will. It is easier to defend 
oneself against your letters; they are indeed your very 

233 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

words, but you are not there to lend them strength. Never- 
theless, the pleasure of listening to you makes me brave the 
danger; at least I shall have the happiness of having done 
everything for you even against myself; and my sacrifices 
will become a homage. I am but too happy to prove to you — 
in a thousand ways, as I feel it in a thousand shapes, that, 
not even excepting myself, you are, you always will be the 
dearest object of my heart. 
From the Chiteau de... , 23rd September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXXIV 
The Vicomte de Valmont to Céctle Volanges 

You saw how we were thwarted yesterday. All day long 
I was unable to hand you the letter I had for you; I do not 
know if I shall find more opportunity to-day. I am afraid of 
compromising you by showing more zeal than skill; and 
I should not forgive myself an imprudence which would 
be so fatal to you and would cause my friend’s despair by 
making you eternally unhappy. However I know love's 
impatiences. I feel how irksome it must be for you in your 
position to experience any delay in the only consolation you 
can enjoy at this time. I have been considering means of 
putting aside these obstacles and [ have discovered one 
which will be easy to carry out, if you take some trouble. 

I think I have noticed that the key to your bedroom door 
which opens on to the corridor, is always on your Mamma’s 
mantlepiece. With that key everything would be easy, as 
you will realise; but in default of it I will procure you one 
like it, which will do instead. To carry this out it will be 
enough if I have it for one or two hours. You ought easily 
to find an opportunity to take it, and in order that it shall 
not be missed I enclose one of my own, which is rather like 
it, so that the difference cannot be seen unless it is tried ; 
which they will not do. You must merely be careful to put 
a faded blue ribbon on it like the ribbon on yours. 

You must try to have this key at breakfast-time to-morrow 
or the day after ; because it will be easier to give it me then 

234 

LETTER LXXXIV 

and can be returned to its place for evening, when your 
Mamma is more likely to look closely at it. I could return 
it to you at dinner time 1f we have a proper understanding. 

You know that when we go from tne drawing-room to 
the dining-room, Madame de Rosemonde always comes 
last. I will give her my arm. You have only to leave your 
tapestry frame slowly or to let something drop, so that you 
stay behind; you will then be able to take the key which 
I shall be careful to hold behind me. Immediately after 
you have taken it you must not neglect to rejoin my old aunt 
and to caress her. If by chance you let the key drop, do not 
be disconcerted; I will pretend I did it and I answer for 
everything. 

Your Mamma’s lack of confidence in you and her harsh 
treatment of you justify this little deceit. Moreover it is the 
only way for you to continue to receive Danceny’s letters 
and to transmit yours to him ; any other is really too danger- 
ous and might completely ruin you both; my prudent 
friendship would blame me if I continued to employ that 
method. 

Once master of the key we shall still have to take 
some precautions against the noise of the door and the lock ; 
but they are very easy. Under the same wardrobe where 
I hid your paper you will find oil and a feather. You some- 
times go to your room when you are alone; you must make 
use of this time to oil the lock and the hinges. The only 
thing to beware of is to take care of oil-stains which would 
be evidence against you. You must also wait until it is night- 
time because if this is done with the intelligence of which you 
are capable, no trace of it will remain the next morning. 

However, if it is noticed do not hesitate to say that it was 
the floor-polisher of the Chateau. In this case you must 
specify the time and even what he said to you ; as, for example, 
that he takes this precaution against rust for all locks which 
are not used. For you will realise it is not probable that 
you should be a witness of this without asking the reason. 
It is the small details which give probability, and probability 
renders lies without consequence by taking away the desire 
to verify it. 

After you have read this letter, I beg you to re-read it 

' 235 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

and to pay attention to it; first, because you must know 
well anything you wish to do well; and then in order to 
assure yourself that I have omitted nothing. I am un- 
accustomed to employ artifice on my own account and have 
no great practice in it; nothing less than my keen friend- 
ship for Danceny and the interest I have in you could have 
persuaded me to make use of these methods, however innocent 
they may be. I hate anything which looks like deceit ; that 
is my character. But I am so moved by your misfortunes 
that I would attempt anything to soften them. 

You will realise that when this communication is once 
established between us it will be much easier for me to procure 
you the interview with Danceny which he desires. However 
do not speak to him yet about all this; you would only 
increase his impatience, and the moment to satisfy it has not 
yet come. I think you ought to calm his impatience rather 
than to irritate it. I rely on your delicacy in this. Good-bye, 
my fair pupil ; for you are my pupil. Love your tutor a little 
and above all be docile with him; you will find it to your 
advantage. I am busying myself with your happiness and 
you may rest assured I shall find my own in it. 

From... , 24th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXXV 
The Marquise de Merteuil to the Vicomte de Valmont 

At last you will be tranquillised, and above all you will 
do me justice. Listen, and never again confound me with 
other women. My adventure with Prévan is ended; ended ! 
Do you understand what that means? You shall now judge 
whether he or I should boast. The relation will not be so 
amusing as the action; but it would not be just that you 
who have done nothing but argue well or ill about this affair 
should receive as much pleasure from it as I, who gave my time 
and my trouble. 

However, if you have some grand stroke to make, if you 
have some enterprise to attempt in which this dangerous 
rival seems to you to be feared, come here. He leaves the 

236 

LETTER LXXXV 

field free to you, at least for some time ; perhaps he will never 
rise again after the blow I have dealt him. 

How fortunate you are to have me as your friend! I am 
your good fairy. You languish far from the beauty who 
attracts you; I say a word and you find yourself near her. 
You wish to avenge yourself on a woman who does you 
harm; I show you the place where you can strike her and 
hand her over to your discretion. Finally it is I whom you 
invoke to remove a dangerous competitor from the lists, 
and I grant your prayer. Indeed if you do not pass your 
life in thanking me you are an ingrate. I return to my 
adventure and go back to the beginning. 

The rendezvous made in such a loud voice as I left the 
Opera was overheard as I had hoped. Prévan was there ; 
and when the Maréchale told him politely that she was happy 
to see him twice in succession at her days, he was careful to 
reply that since Monday evening he had altered a thousand 
arrangements to be able to come that evening. ‘‘ A word to 
to the wise!’’ However as I wished to know with more 
certainty whether or not I was the real object of this flattering 
eagerness, I wanted to compel the new wooer to chose between 
me and his ruling passion. I declared I should not ‘gamble ; 
and he on his part discovered a thousand pretexts for not 
gambling ; so my first triumph was over lansquenet. 

I took possession of the Bishop of. . . . for my conversation ; 
I chose him because of his acquaintance with the hero of the 
day, to whom I wished to give every opportunity of address- 
ing me. I was also very glad to have a respectable witness 
who, if needed, could depose to my conduct and to my speech. 
This arrangement succeeded. 

After the usual vague remarks, Prévan soon made himself 
master of the conversation and assumed different tones in 
turn to try which would please me. I refused that of senti- 
ment, as not believing in it; by being serious I stopped his 
gaiety which seemed to me too airy for a beginning ; he fell 
back on delicate friendship and it was under that common- 
place flag that we began our mutual attack. 

The Bishop did not go down to supper ; Prévan therefore 
gave me his arm and was naturally placed beside me at 
table. I must be just and admit he showed great skill in 

237 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

keeping up our private conversation while appearing only 
to concern himself with the general conversation, the whole 
weight of which seemed to fall on him. As dessert he spoke 
of a new play to be given on Monday next at the Frangais. 
I expressed some regret at not having my box; he offered 
me his which I first refused, as is customary; to which he 
replied wittily enough that I did not understand him, that he 
would certainly not sacrifice his box to someone he did not 
know, but that he simply informed me the Maréchale had the 
use of it. She lent herself to the jest and I accepted. 

When we had returned to the drawing-room, he asked for 
a place in the box, as you may suppose, and when the Maré- 
chale, who treats him very kindly, promised it to him “ if 
he were good,’’ he made it the occasion for one of those 
conversations with a double meaning, in which you boasted 
his talents. He knelt down like an obedient child (as he said) 
under the pretext of asking her advice and imploring her 
judgment, and said many flattering and quite tender things 
which it was easy for me to apply to myself. After supper 
several people gave up gambling and the conversation was more 
general and less interesting, but our eyes were very eloquent. 
I say our eyes; I ought to have said his eyes, for mine had 
only one expression, that of surprise. He must have thought 
I was astonished and excessively preoccupied by the pro- 
digious effect he was making on me. I think I left him very 
well satisfied ; I was just as pleased. 

The following Monday I went to the Francais as we had 
agreed. In spite of your literary curiosity I can tell you 
nothing of the play except that Prévan has a marvellous 
talent for flattery and that the play was a failure; that is 
all I learnt. It was with regret I saw the evening ending, 
for really it gave me great pleasure; and to prolong it I in- 
vited the Maréchale to come and sup with me; this gave me 
a pretext to invite the amiable Flatterer who only asked for 
time to run and postpone an engagement with the Comtesses 
de P....? This name brought back all my anger; I saw 
clearly that he was going to begin his confidences ; I recollected 
your wise advice and promised myself ... to pursue the 

1See Letter LXX. (C. de L,). 
238 

LETTER LXXXV 

adventure, feeling sure I should cure him of this dangerous 
indiscretion. | 

As he was a stranger among my guests, who were not 
numerous that evening, he owed me tha customary attentions ; 
and so when we went to supper he offered ‘me his hand. When 
I took it I was malicious enough to make mine tremble 
slightly and to walk with lowered eyes and more rapid 
breathing. I appeared to foresee my defeat and to fear my 
conquerer. He noticed it perfectly; and the traitor im- 
mediately changed his tone and behaviour. He had been 
gallant, he became tender. Circumstances compelled him 
to much the same remarks, but his gaze became less sprightly 
and more caressing, the inflection of his voice softer and his 
smile was no longer that of artifice but of contentment. 
In his talk he gradually subdued the fire of his sallies, and 
delicacy replaced wit. I ask you, would you have done 
better ? 

On my part I became absent-minded, to such an extent 
that the company was forced to notice it; and when I was 
reproached with it, I was skilful enough to defend myself 
awkwardly and to cast at Prévan a quick but timid and 
disconcerted glance, such as would make him think that my 
one fear was lest he should guess the cause of my confusion. 

After supper I took advantage of the time when the good 
Maréchale was telling one of those stories she always tells, to 
place myself on my ottoman in the languid attitude caused 
by a tender reverie. I was not sorry that Prévan should see 
me thus, and indeed he honoured me with a very particular 
attention. As you may suppose, my timid glances did not 
dare to seek my conquerer’s eyes ; but when directed towards 
him in a more humble way they soon informed me that I had 
obtained the effect I wished to produce. It was then 
necessary to convince him that I shared it ; and so, when the 
Maréchale announced that she was leaving, I exclaimed in 
a soft and tender voice: ‘‘ Ah! I was so comfortable there ! ”’ 
However, I got up; but before taking leave of her, I asked 
her plans, to have a pretext to tell mine and to let it be known 
I should be at home on the day after the morrow. After 
which everyone left. 

I then began to reflect. I had no doubt that Prévan would 

239 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

make use of the sort of rendezvous I had given him ; that he 
would come early enough to find me alone and that the attack 
would be sharp; but I was also very sure that with my 
reputation he would not treat me with that brusqueness which 
men of any experience only employ with women who have 
had intrigues or with those who have had no experience ; 
and I saw my success was certain if he uttered the word 

““love’’; above all if he tried to obtain it from me. 
How convenient it is to have to deal with you “ men of 
principles !’’ Sometimes a bungling lover disconcerts one 

by his timidity or embarrasses one by his passionate raptures ; 
it is a fever which, like others, has its cold shiverings and its 
burning, and sometimes varies in its symptoms. But it is 
so easy to guess your prearranged advance! The arrival, 
the bearing, the tone, the remarks—-I knew what they would 
all be the evening before. I shall therefore not tell you our 
conversation which you will easily supply. You will only 
observe that in my feigned defence I gave him all the help 
in my power; embarrassment, to give him time to speak ; 
poor arguments, for him to combat; fear and suspicion, to 
encourage his protestations ; and the perpetual refrain on his 
part, ‘‘ | only ask one word of you”’; and the silence on my 
part, which only seemed to let him wait in order to make 
him desire it more; and through all this, a hand taken a 
hundred times, always withdrawn and never quite refused. 
One could spend all day in this way; we spent a mortal 
hour ; we should perhaps be there still if we had not heard 
a Carriage come into my court-yard. This fortunate occur- 
rence naturally made his entreaties more pressing; and 
I, seeing that the moment had come when I was safe from any 
sudden attack on his part, prepared myself by a long sigh and 
granted the precious word. Someone was announced and 
soon after there was a numerous company. 

Prévan asked if he might come the next morning and 
I consented ; but, careful of my defence, I ordered my waiting 
woman to remain in my bedroom during the whole of this 
visit, and you know that from there you can see everything 
that is going on in my dressing-room, which was where 
I received him. Free in our conversation, and both having 
the same desire, we were soon in agreement; but it was 

7 240 

LETTER LXXXV 

necessary to get rid of this importunate spectator, which 
was what I expected. 

Then, I gave him my own version of my private life and 
easily convinced him that we should never find a moment of 
liberty ; that he must consider as a miracle the opportunity 
we had enjoyed the day before and that even this was far 
too dangerous for me to risk, since at any moment someone 
might come into my drawing-room. I did not fail to add 
that all these customs had grown up because hitherto they 
had never been an impediment to me; and at the samc 
time I insisted upon the impossibility of altering them with- 
out compromising myself in the eyes of my servants. He 
tried to look sad, to be out of humour, to tell me my love was 
shght ; and you can guess how much that touched me! But 
to strike the decisive blow, I called in tears to my help. It 
was precisely the situation of ‘‘ Zaire, you are weeping.’”! The 
power he thought he had over me, and the hope it gave him 
that he could take me as he wished, stood him in stead of 
all the love of Orosmane. 

After this theatrical incident, we returned to our arrange- 
ments. As the daytime was impossible, we considered the 
night; but my porter became an insurmountable obstacle 
-and I would not allow Prévan to try to bribe him. He then 
proposed the small door into my garden ; but | had foreseen 
that and I invented a dog which was tranquil and silent by 
day but a real demon at night. The facility with which 
I entered into all these details naturally emboldened him ; 
and so at last he proposed the most ridiculous expedient, 
which was the one I accepted. 

First of all, his servant was as trustworthy as he was ; 
in this he did not deceive me, for one was as little trustworthy 
as the other. I was to give a big supper in my house; he 
would be there and would arrange to leave alone. The 
skilful confident would call the carriage, open the door, and 
Prévan, instead of getting in, would nimbly slip away. His. 
coachman would not be able to perceive it ; and so everyone 
would think he had gone and yet he would be in my house ; 
it remained to be seen if he could get to my room, I admit 

1 Reference to Voltaire’s tragedy Zaire. 

241 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

that at first my difficulty was to allege against this project 
Teasons sufficiently weak for him to be able to destroy them ; 
he replied by instances. According to him, nothing was 
more usual than this way ; he had often made use of it him- 
self; it was even the method he usually adopted, as being 
the least dangerous. 

Subjugated by this irrefutable authority, I candidly 
admitted that there was a concealed stairway which led up 
to my boudoir ; that I could leave the key in it and he could 
lock himself in and wait without much risk until my women 
had left; and then, to make my consent more probable, 
a moment afterwards I would not allow it, I was only brought 
to consent on condition of his perfect submission, his re- 
straint... Ah! What restraint! In short I was willing 
to prove my love to him, but not to satisfy his. 

I forgot to tell you that he was to leave by the small 
garden door ; he had only to wait until dawn ; the Cerberus 
would then say not a word. Not a soul passes at that hour 
and the servants are in their deepest sleep. If you are sur- 
prised at this heap of silly arguments, it is because you have 
forgotten our mutual situation. Where was the necessity for 
‘better ones ? He asked nothing better than that everything 
Should be known and I was quite sure 1t would not be known. 
The appointment was fixed for two days afterwards. 

Notice that the affair had been arranged and that nobody 
had: yet seen Prévan alone with me. I meet him at supper 
at a friend’s house ; he offers her his box for a new play and 
I accept a seat in it. I invite this woman to supper during 
the play and in Prévan’s presence. It is almost impossible 
for me not to ask him too, He accepts and two days after- 
wards pays me the visit demanded by custom. It is true 
The comes to see me the next morning; but, apart from the 
fact that morning visits no longer count, 1t was in my power 
to consider this improper ; and in fat I put him in the class 
of my less intimate friends by a written invitation to a formal 
supper. I can say like Anette: “ But that is all, after all!” 

When the fatal day came, the day on which I was to lose 
my virtue and my reputation, I gave my instructions to my 
faithful Victoire and she carried them out as you will soon 
see. 

242 

LETTER LXXXV 

The evening came. There were already a number of 
people with me when Prévan was announced. I received him 
with a marked politeness, which showed how little intimate 
I was with him; and I put him in the,Maréchale’s party, as 
being that through which I had made his acquaintance. The 
evening produced nothing but a very short note, which the 
discreet lover found a way to hand me and which I burned 
in accordance with my custom. He announced in it that 
I could count upon him; and this essential word was sur- 
rounded by all the parasitic words about love, happiness, 
etc., which are never ‘found missing on such an occasion. 

At midnight when the card parties were finished, I pro- 
posed a short macédoine.1 I had the double intention of 
giving Prévan his opportunity to leave and at the same time 
rendering it noticeable ; which could not fail to happen from 
his reputation as a gambler. I was also glad that, if necessary, 
people could remember I had not been in a hurry to remain 
alone. 

The play lasted longer than I had thought. The devil 
tempted me and I yielded to the desire to go and tempt the 
impatient prisoner. I was proceeding towards my ruin when 
I reflected that once J had surrendered to him it would no 
longer be in my power to keep him in the costume of decency 
necessary to my plans. I had the strength to resist. I turned 
back and, not without ill humour, returned to my place at 
the eternal game. At last it ended and everyone went away. 
J rang for my women, undressed very quickly and sent them 
away at once. 

Can you see me, Vicomte, in my light toilette, walking 
timidly and carefully, and opening the door to my conquercr 
with a trembling hand ? He saw me—a flash is not quicker. 
How shall I tell you? I was overcome, completely overcome, 
before I could say a word to stop him or to defend myself. 
He then wished to put himself into a more comfortable situa- 
tion, more suitable to the circumstances. He cursed his 
clothes which, he said, kept him at a distance from me; he 
wished to combat me with equal weapons, but my extreme 

‘Some persons may not know perhaps that a ‘“‘ macédoine ”’ is a 
mixture of several games of chance among which each dealer has, the 
right to chose when it is his turn. This is one of the inventions of the 
age. (C, de L,). 

243 

I.ES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

timidity opposed this plan and my tender caresses did not 
leave him time for it. He busied himself with other matters. 
His privileges were doubled and his pretentions returned ; 

and then: ‘ Listen to me,’ I said, ‘“‘ Up till now you will 
have a very agreeable story to tell the two Comtesses de 
P....anda thousand others ; but I am curious to know how 

you will relate the end of the adventure.” So saying, I rang 
the bell with all my strength. This time it was my turn, 
and my action was quicker than his speech. He had only 
begun to stammer when I heard Victoire running and calling 
the men-servants whom she had kept in her room as I had 
ordered. Then taking a lofty tone and raising my voice, 
I continued: ‘‘ Go, Monsieur, and never appear before me 
again.” Thereupon a crowd of my servants rushed in, 

Poor Prévan lost his head and thought he saw an ambush 
in what at bottom was only a pleasantry, and rushed for his 
sword. It turned out badly for him; for my footman who is 
brave and strong, seized him round the body and threw 
him on the ground. I admit I was in mortal terror. I called 
to them to stop and ordered them to let him go free, merely 
making sure that he left my house. My servants obeyed 
me; but there was a great clamour among them and they 
were indignant that anyone should have dared to insult 
‘their virtuous mistress.” They all went out with the 
unhappy Chevalier, with noise and scandal as I had wished. 
Victoire alone remained and during this time we occupied our- 
selves in repairing the disorder of my bed. 

My servants came back still in a tumult; and I, “ still 
thoroughly upset,” asked them by what good fortune it was 
that they were still up; and Victoire told me that she had 
given a supper to two of her friends, that they had sat up in 
her room ; in short, everything we had agreed on together. 
I thanked them all and sent them away, but ordered one of 
them to go for my doctor. It appeared to me that I had a 
right to fear the effects of ‘‘ my profound shock”; and this 
was a certain means of giving circulation and celebrity to 
the news. 

The doctor came, pitied me very much and only ordered 
me rest. I ordered Victoire to go out early in the morning 
and gossip about it in the neighbourhood. 

244 

LETTER LXXXVI 

Everything succeeded so well that before midday and 
as soon as it was daylight with me, my devout neighbour was 
at my bedside to know the truth and the details of this 
horrible adventure. For an hour I was forced to lament with 
her over the corruption of the age, Shortly afterwards, 
1 received the enclosed note from the ‘Maréchale. Finally 
just before five to my great astonishment M... } arrived. 
He said he came to apologise to me for the fact that an officer 
in his corps could have insulted me to such an extent. He had 
only learned it when dining with the Maréchale and had 
immediately sent orders to Prévan to consider himself under 
arrest. J asked pardon for him and it was refused. I then 
thought that as an accomplice I ought to comply with the 
order myself and at least keep myself under close arrest. 
I ordered my door to be closed and said I was unwell. 

You owe this long letter to my solitude. I shall write 
one to Madame de Volanges, who will surely read it in public, 
and you will see how the story ought to be told. 

I forgot to tell you that Belleroche is in a rage and is 
determined to call Prévan out. Poor boy! Fortunately 
I shall have time to calm him down. Meanwhile I shall rest 
myself for my head is weary with writing. Good-bye, 
Vicomte. 

From the Chateau de... , 25th of September, 17—. 
(In the evening.) , 

LETTER LXXXVI1 

The Maréchale de ... to the Marquise de Merteuil 
(Note enclosed in the preceding letter) 

Heavens! What is this I hear, my dear Madame? Is 
it possible that little Prévan should attempt such abomina- 
tions? And upon you too! What one is liable to! And so 
we shall not be safe in our‘own houses! Really, such happen- 
ings are a consolation for being old. But what I shall never 
feel consoled for, is that 1 was partly the cause of your having 
received such a monster in your house. I promise you that 
if what I am told is true, he shall never set foot in my house 

1 The Commander of the corps in which M. de Prévan was serving 
(C. de L,). 

245 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

again; all decent people will adopt the same course with 
him, if they act as they ought. 

I am told that it made you ill, and I am anxious about 
your health. Pray, give me news of your dear self ; or let me 
hear by one of your women, if you cannot do it yourself. 
I should have hastened to you this morning, but for the 
baths which the doctor will not allow me to interrupt ; and 
this afternoon I must go to Versailles about that affair of 
my nephew’s. 

Farewell, dear Madame; count upon my sincere and life- 
Jong friendship. 

Paris, 25th of September, 17—-. 

LETTER LXAAAVII 

The Marquise de Merteuil to Madame de Volanges 

I am writing to you from my bed, my good, dear friend 
A most disagreable event, the most impossible to foresee has 
made me ill with shock and grief. Assuredly I have nothing 
to reproach myself with; but for a virtuous woman who 
preserves the modesty befitting her sex, it is always so pain- 
ful to have public attention directed upon her, and I would 
give anything in the world to have been able to avoid this 
unfortunate adventure ; I am not yet certain whether I shall 
not go to the country to wait for it to be forgotten. This 
is what happened. 

At the Maréchale de .. .’s'house I met a Monsieur de 
Prévan whom you will certainly know by name and whom I 
did not know otherwise. But as I met him in this house I 
think I had every reason to believe him an honourable man. 
In his person he is quite handsome, and he seemed to me not 
to be lacking in intelligence. Chance and the tedium of gambl- 
ing left me the only woman between him and the Bishop of 

.. while every one else was occupied with lansquenet. 
We all three conversed until supper time. At table a new 
play was spoken of, which gave him the opportunity to offer 
his box to the Maréchale, who accepted it ; and it was agreed 

246 

LETTER LXXXVII 

that I should have a place in it. It was for last Monday, 
at the Francais. As the Maréchale was coming to sup with 
me after the play, I invited this gentleman to accompany 
her, and he came. Two days later he paid me a call which was 
spent with the usual talk and without anything noticeable 
occurring. The next day he came to see me in the morning, 
which appeared to me a little improper; but I thought that 
instead of letting him feel it by my manner of receiving him, 
it would be better to warn him by some act of politeness that 
we were not as intimately known to each other as he seemed 
to think. For that reason I sent him the same day a very 
dry and very ceremonious invitation for a supper I gave the 
day before yesterday. I did not speak four times to him the 
whole evening ; and he, on his part, left as soon as he had 
finished his game of cards. You will admit that hitherto 
nothing could appear less likely to lead to an adventure ; 
after the card parties there was a ‘‘ macédoine’”’ which kept us 
up until nearly two o’clock ; and then I went to bed. 

At least a mortal half hour after my women had gone, 
I heard a noise in my room. I opened my curtains in great 
' terror and saw a man come in by the door which leads to my 
boudoir. I gave a piercing cry; and by the glimmer of my 
night-light I recognised this Monsieur de Prévan who, with 
incredible effrontery, told me not to be alarmed, that he 
would enlighten me upon the mystery of his behaviour and 
that he begged me to make no noise. So saying, he lighted 
a candle ; I was so startled I could not speak. His tranquil 
and easy air petrified me I think even more. But he had not 
spoken two words when I saw what this pretended mystery 
was ; and, as you may suppose, my only answer was to ring 
as hard as I could. 

By an incredible good fortune all the servants on duty 
had remained up with one of my women and had not yet 
gone to bed. As my waiting-woman was coming up to me 
she heard me speaking with great warmth, was frightened, 
and called them all up. You may imagine what a scene it 
was! My servants were furious; at one moment I thought 
my footman would kill Prévan. I confess that at that time 
I was very glad to be in force ; but when reflecting on it to- 
day I should have preferred that only my waiting-woman 

247 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

had come. She would have sufficed and perhaps I should 
have avoided the scandal which so distresses me. 

Instead of that, the noisé awoke the neighbours, the 
servants gossiped about it, and ever since yesterday all Paris 
is talking about it. Monsieur de Prévan is under arrest by 
the orders of his commanding officer who had the politeness 
to call upon me; to apologise, he said. This imprisonment 
will increase the talk; but I was unable to get it changed. 
The Town and the Court have inquired at my door which 
I have closed to everybody. The few persons I have seen 
tell me that people do me justice, and that the public indigna- 
tion against Monsieur de Prévan is intense; certainly he 
deserves it, but that does not remove the unpleasantness of 
this adventure. 

Moreover this man must surely have some friends and his 
friends must be evil; who knows, who can know what they 
will invent to harm me ? Heavens, how unfortunate a young 
woman is! She has done nothing when she has preserved 
herself from scandal, she must overcome even calumny. 

Pray tell me what you would have done and what you 
would do in my place ; in brief, all you think. I have always 
received from you the kindest consolation and' the wisest 
advice ; and it is from you I most like to receive them. 

Farewell, my dear and good friend ; you know the senti- 
ments which will forever attach me to you. I kiss your 
amiable daughter. 

Paris, 26th of September, 17—. 

END OF PART TWO 

248 

PART III 

LETTER LXXXVIII 
Cé&ule Volanges to the Vicomte de Valmont 

In spite of all my pleasure, Monsieur, in receiving letters 
from M. le Chevalier Danceny, and although I desire no 
less than he does that we should see each other again without 
our being prevented, yet I dare not do what you propose. 
First of all, it is too dangerous ; the key you wish me to put 
in place of the other does indeed resemble it ; but still there 
is a difference between them, and Mamma looks at everything 
and notices everything. Moreover, although it has not 
been used since we have been here, by some misfortune it 
might be; and if it were noticed, I should be ruined for 
ever. And then it seems to me it would be very wrong; to 
make a double key in that way—it is too much! It is true 
that you would be the person who would be kind enough to 
take charge of it; but in spite of that, if it were known, the 
blame and the fault would none the less be laid on me, because 
you would have donevit for me. Lastly, I twice tried to take 
it and certainly it would be very easy if it were anything 
else; but I do not know why, I always began to tremble 
and had not the courage to do it. I think it is better to 
remain as we are. 

If you still have the kindness to be as complaisant as you 
have been, you will always find means of giving me a letter. 
Even with the last one, but for the accident which made you 
turn round quickly at the wrong moment, we should have 
done it easily. I know that you cannot always be thinking 
about this, as I do; but I prefer to have more patience and 
not to take such risks. I am sure Monsieur Danceny would 

249 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

say as I do; for every time he wanted something which was 
too hard for me to do, he always agreed that it should not be 
done. I shall hand you at the same time as this letter, 
Monsieur, your own letter, Monsieur Danceny’s and your 
key. I am none the less grateful to you for all your kind- 
nesses and I beg you will continue them. It is true I am very 
unhappy, and but for you I should be much more so; but 
after all, it is my mother; we must be patient. And so 
long as Monsieur Danceny loves me and you do not abandon 
me, perhaps there will come a happier time. 

I have the honour to te, Monsieur, with much gratitude, 
your most humble and most obedient servant. 

From , 26th of September, 17—. 

LETTER LXXXIX 
The Vicomte de Valmcnt to the Chevalier Danceny 

If your affairs do not always progress as fast as you would 
like, my friend, you must not blame me alone. I have more 
than one obstacle to overcome here. Madame de Volanges’s 
vigilance and severity are not the only ones; your young 
friend herself hinders me with some. Either from coldness 
or timidity, she does not always do what I advise her and 
yet I think I know what ought to be done better than she. 

I had found a simple, convenient and certain way of 
delivering your letters to her and even of facilitating later 
the interviews you desire; but I cannot persuade her to 
make use of it. I am the more distressed by this since I see 
no other way to bring you together; and even with your 
correspondence I am continually in fear of compromising all 
three of us. Well, you will realise that I desire neither to 
run that risk myself nor to expose either of you to it. 

Yet I should be really pained if your little friend’s lack 
of confidence should prevent me from being useful to you; 
perhaps you would do well to write to her about it. Consider 
what you wish to do, it is for you alone to decide ; for it is 
not enough to serve one’s friends, they must be served in the 
manner they wish. This might also be a further means of 

250 

LETTER XC 

making sure of her feelings for you; for the woman who 
keeps a will of her own does not love as much as she says. 

It is not that I suspect your mistress of inconstancy ; but 
she is very young; she is very much afraid of her Mamma 
who, as you know, seeks only to harm you; and perhaps 
it would be dangerous to remain too long without occupying 
her with you. But do not grow too uneasy about what I tell 
you. I have really no reason for suspicion ; it is merely the 
solicitude of friendship. I do not write you at more length 
because I too have some affairs on my own account. I am not 
so far forward as you; but I love as much and that is con- 
soling ; and even if I do not succeed on my own account, 
I shall think I have employed my time well if I can be useful 
to you. Good-bye, my friend. 

From the Chateau de... , 26th of September, 17—. 

LETTER XC 
Madame de Tourvel to the Vicomte de Valmont 

I very much hope, Monsieur, that this letter will give 
you no pain ; or, if it must give you pain, that at least it may 
be softened by that I feel in writing to you. You ought to 
know me enough now to be quite sure I would not willingly 
distress you; but doubtless you yourself would be just as 
unwilling to plunge me into an eternal despair. I call upon 
you then, in the name of the tender friendship I promised you, 
in the name even of those sentiments, perhaps keener but 
certainly not more sincere, which you have for me, not to 
let us see each other again; leave me; and, until then, let 
us especially avoid those private and too dangerous interviews 
in which through some inconceivable power I pass my time 
in listening to what I ought not to hear, without being able 
to tell you what I wish to say. 

Even yesterday, when you came and joined me in the 
park, my sole object was to tell you what I am writing to you 
to-day; and yet what did I do except occupy myself with 
your love. . . with your love, to which I ought never to 
reply! Ah! I beseech you, leave me. 

251 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Do not fear that my absence should ever alter my feelings 
for you; how should I succeed in conquering them, when 
I have no longer the courage to combat them ? You can see 
it, I confess everything; I am less afraid of admitting my 
weakness than of yielding to it; but the power I have lost 
over my feelings, I have kept over my actions; yes, I shall 
keep it, I am resolved upon it, were it at the cost of my life. 

Alas! It was not long ago that I felt certain I should 
never have to engage in such struggles. I felt glad of it and 
perhaps glorified myself on it too much. Heaven has punished, 
cruelly punished my pride; but full of pity at the moment 
even when it strikes us, it warns me again before I fall; and 
I should be doubly guilty if I continued to be lacking in 
prudence when I am already made aware that I have no 
more strength. 

You have said a hundred times that you would not want 
a happiness bought by my tears. Ah! Let us talk no more 
of happiness, but allow me to regain some tranquillity. 

By granting my request, what new rights will you not 
acquire over my heart ? And as they will be founded upon 
virtue, I shall not need to defend myself from them. What 
delight I shall take in my gratitude! I shall owe to you the 
pleasure of enjoying a delicious sentiment without remorse. 
But now on the contrary, I am frightened by my feelings, by 
my thoughts, and dread equally to occupy myself with you 
or with myself ; the very idea of you even terrifies me ; when 
I cannot fly from it, I combat it; I do not drive it away, 
but repel it. 

Is it not better for us both to end this state of uneasiness 
and anxiety ? O you, whose ever tender soul remained the 
friend of virtue even in the midst of its errors, you will respect 
my painful situation, you will not reject my prayer! A softer 
but not less tender interest will take the place of these violent 
agitations ; then, breathing by your favours, I shall cherish 
my existence, and I shall say in the joy of my heart: ‘‘ The 
joy I feel is owing to my friend.” 

In submitting to a few slight privations, which I do not 
impose upon you but which I ask of you, shall you think you 
are buying too dearly the cessation of my torments? Ah} 
If I could make you happy by only consenting to be unhappy 

» 252 

LETTER XC] 

myself, believe me, I should not hesitate a moment . . . but 
to become guilty! ... No, my friend, no, rather death a 
thousand times. 

Already I am assailed by shame, I aim on the eve of remorse, 
and I shrink from others and myself ; I blush in company and 
shiver in solitude ; I have nothing but a life of grief; I shall 
have no tranquillity unless you consent. My most praise- 
worthy resolutions are insufficient to reassure me; I made 
this resolution yesterday and yet I passed the night in tears. 

Behold your friend, she whom you love, confused and 
supplicating, begging you for rest and innocence. Ah God ! 
But for you would she ever have been reduced to this 
humiliating request ? I do not blame you at all; I feel too 
much myself how difficult it is to resist an imperious senti- 
ment. A wail is not a murmur. Do from generosity what 
I am doing from duty, and >to all the sentiments you have 
’ inspired in me I shall add that of an eternal gratitude. Good- 
bye, good-bye, Monsieur. 

From ..., 27th of September, 17—. 

LETTER XCI 
The Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Tourvel 

I am in consternation at your letter, Madame, and still 
do not know how to reply to it. Doubtless if there must be 
a choice between your unhappiness and mine, it is for me 
to sacrifice myself, and I do not hesitate ; but it seems to me 
that things of this importance ought above all to be discussed 
and made clear; and how can that be done, if we are never 
to speak to each other nor see each other again ? 

What ! When we are united by the softest feelings, shall 
a vain terror suffice to separate us, perhaps for ever ! In vain 
will tender friendship and ardent love claim their rights; 
their voices will not be heard. And why? What is this 
pressing danger which threatens you? Ah! Believe me; 
such fears, so lightly conceived, are already, it seems to me 
sufficiently powerful reasons for confidence. 

Permit me to tell you that I find in this a trace of the 

253 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

unfavourable impressions you have been given about me. 
A woman does not tremble in the presence of the man she 
esteems ; above al] she does not send away the man she has 
thought worthy of a certain friendship; it is the dangerous 
man who is feared and shunned. 

And yet who was ever more respectful and more sub- 
missive than I] ? Already, as you see, I am watching what 
I say; I no longer allow myself those names which are so 
soft, so dear to my heart, and which my heart does not cease 
to give youin secret. I am no longer the faithful and unhappy 
lover receiving advice and consolations from a tender and 
sensitive friend ; I am the prisoner before his judge, the slave 
before his master. No doubt these new titles imply new duties; 
I promise to carry them all out. Hear me and if you condemn 
me, I will accept the sentence and go. I promise more; do 
you prefer the despotism which judges without hearing ? 
Do you feel in yourself the courage to be unjust ? Command 
and I will still obey. 

But let me hear this judgment or this order from your 
mouth. And why ? you will say in your turn. Ah! If you 
put that question, you little know love and my heart! Is it 
then nothing to see you once more ? Ah! Even if you carry 
despair into my soul perhaps a consoling look will prevent 
me from succumbing to it. And then if I must renounce 
love, renounce friendship, for which alone I exist, at least 
you will see your work and your pity will be left me; even 
if I did not deserve that slight favour I think I am ready to 
pay dearly enough for it to hope to obtain it. 

What! You are about to send me away from you! 
You agree that we shall become strangers to each other ! 
What do I say? You desire it; and while you assure me 
that my absence will not alter your sentiments, you only 
hasten my departure to labour more easily at _ their 
destruction. 

You already speak to me of replacing them by gratitude. 
And so you offer me the sentiment which a stranger would 
obtain from you for the slightest service, which even your 
enemy would obtain by ceasing to do you harm! And you 
wish my heart to be content with that ! Question your own ; 
if your lover, if your friend, should one day speak to you 

254 

LETTER XCII 

of their gratitude, would you not say to them indignantly : 
‘“ Leave me, you are ungrateful.” 

I pause here and call upon your indulgence. Forgive the 
expression of a grief which you have created ; it will do no 
harm to my complete submission. But in my turn | call upon 
you, in the name of those soft sentiments, which you call 
upon yourself, not to refuse to hear me; and at least from 
pity for the utter distress into which you have plunged me, 
do not put off the moment. Good-bye, Madame. 

From... , 27th of September, 17—, in the evening. 

LETTER XCII 
The Chevaher Danceny to the Vicomte de Valmont 

O my friend! Your letter froze me with terror. Cécile 
Oh God! Is it possible? Cécile no longer loves me. 

Yes, I see that dreadful truth through the veil your friend- 
ship throws over it. You wish to prepare me to receive a 
mortal blow; I thank you for your pains, but can Love be 
imposed upon ? It anticipates what concerns it; it does 
not hear its fate, but divines it. I have no longer any doubt 
of mine; speak to me plainly, you can do so, and I beg you 
to. Tell me everything ; what gave birth to your suspicions, 
what confirmed them? The slightest details are precious. 
Above all try to recollect her words. One word for another 
may change a whole phrase ; the same word has sometimes 
two meanings ... you may have been deceived. Alas! 
I am still trying to flatter myself. What did she say to you ? 
Does she blame me for anything? Does she not at least 
excuse herself for her faults? I ought to have foreseen this 
change from the difficulties which for some time she has 
found in everything. Love does not admit so many obstacles. 
What ought I to do? What do you advise me ? Should 

I try to see her? Is that impossible ? Absence is so cruel, 
so disastrous . . . and she has refused a way to see me! 
You do not tell me what it was! If it was indeed too danger- 
ous, she well knows I should not wish her to risk too much. 

255 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

But then I know your prudence; and, to my misfortune, 
cannot but believe it. 

What am I to do now? How shall I write to her? If 
I let her see my suspicions they may perhaps grieve her ; 
and if they are unjust, should I ever forgive myself for having 
distressed her ? If I hide them from her, it is deceiving her, 
and I cannot use dissimulation with her. 

Oh! If she could know what I suffer, my pain would 
touch her. I know she is tender, her heart is excellent and I 
have a thousand proofs of her love. Too much timidity, some 
embarrassment, she is so young! And her mother treats her 
with such severity! I shall write to her; I shall restrain 
myself; I shall only ask her to rely implicitly upon me. 
Even if she refuses again, at least she cannot be angry at your 
request ; and perhaps she will consent. 

I send you a thousand apologies, both for her and for 
myself. I assure you that she feels the value of the pains 
you are taking and that she is grateful for them. This is 
not suspicion on her part, it is timidity. Be indulgent; it 
is the fairest trait of friendship. Yours is very precious to 
me and I do not know how to acknowledge all you are doing 
for me. Good-bye, I am going to write to her at once. 

I feel all my fears return; who could have believed it 
would ever be difficult for me to write to her! Alas! But 
yesterday it was my dearest pleasure. 

Good-bye, my friend; continue your exertions and pity 
me, 

Paris, 27th of September, 17—. 

LETTER XCIII 

The Chevalier Danceny to Cécile Volanges 
(Enclosed with the preceding) 

I cannot conceal from you how distressed I was to learn 
from Valmont of the small confidence you continue to have 
in him. You know he is my friend, that he is the only person 
who can bring us together again ; I thought these claims would 
have been sufficient for you; I see with pain that I was 

256 

LETTER XCIII 

wrong. Can I hope at least that you will tell me your reasons ? 
Will you still find certain difficulties to prevent your doing 
so? Yet without your aid I cannot guess the mystery of this 
conduct. I dare not suspect your love, and doubtless you 
would not dare to betray mine. Ah! Cécile! ... 

Is it then true that you have refused a way of seeing me ? 
A way which is “ simple, convenient and certain ?’’! And this 
is how you love me! So short an absence has greatly altered 
your sentiments. But why deceive me? Why tell me that 
you still love me, that you love me more than ever? Has 
your Mamma destroyed your candour as well as your love ? 
If at least she has left you some pity you will not hear without 
pain of the dreadful torments you cause me. Ah! I should 
suffer less in dying. 

Tell me, is your heart closed to me for ever? Have you 
entirely forgotten me? Thanks to your refusal, I do not 
know when you will hear my complaints nor when you will 
reply to them. Valmont’s friendship had made our corres- 
pondence certain ; but you did not want it; you thought it 
dificult, you preferred that it should be seldom. No, I no 
longer believe in love, in good faith. Ah! Who is to be 
believed if Cécile has deceived me ? 

Answer me. Is it true you love me no more? No, that 
is impossible ; you delude yourself; you calumniate your 
own heart. A passing fear, a moment of discouragement, 
which love has soon banished ; is it not so, my Cécile ? Ah! 
Doubtless it is, and I am wrong to accuse you. How happy 
I should be to be wrong! How glad I should be to make you 
tender apologies, to repair this moment of injustice by an 
eternity of love ! 

Cécile, Cécile, have pity on me! Consent to see me, 
take any way of doing it ! See what is the result of absence ! 
Fears, suspicions, perhaps coldness! One look, one word, 
and we shall be happy, But what! Can I still speak of 
happiness ? Perhaps it is lost for me, lost forever. Tormented 
by fear, urged cruelly between unjust suspicions and more 
eruel truth, I cannot fix upon any thought; I retain only 
sufficient existence to suffer and to love you. Ah! Cécile! 

1Danceny does not know what this way is; he simply repeats 
Valmont’s expression. (C. de 1..). 

257 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

You alone have the right to render existence dear to me; 
and I expect from the first word you pronounce the return 
of happiness or the certainty of an eternal despair. 

Paris, 27th of September, 17-—. 

LETTER XCIV 
Cécile Volanges to the Chevaher Danceny 

I understand nothing of your letter, except the pain it 
causes me. What has Monsieur de Valmont told you, what 
can have made you believe I do not love you? Perhaps it 
would be very fortunate for me, for assuredly I should be 
less tortured ; and it is very hard, when I love you as I do, 
to see that you always think I am wrong, and that instead 
of consoling me, it is you who always cause me the pains 
which grieve me most. You think that I am deceiving you 
and that I tell you things which do not exist! You have a 
pretty idea of me! But even if I were as untruthful as you 
reproach me with being, what interest should I have in 
being so? Assuredly, if I did not love you any more I should 
only have to say so and everyone would praise me for it ; 
but unluckily it is stronger than I am; and then it must 
needs be for someone who has no gratitude at all to me for 
it ! 

What have I done to make you so angry? I did not 
dare take the key because I was afraid Mamma would notice 
it and that it would cause me more trouble and you too on 
my account ; and then too, because it seemed wrong to me. 
But only Monsieur de Valmont had spoken to me about 
it; I could not know whether you wanted it or not since 
you knew nothing about it. Now I know that you want it, 
do I refuse to take the key ? I shall take it tomorrow; and 
then we shall see what you will have to say. Monsieur de 
Valmont may well be your friend; I think I love you quite 
as much as he can like you, at least; and yet he is always 
right and I am always wrong. I assure you I am very angry. 
That is all the same to you, because you know I am pacified 
at once ; but when I have the key I can see you when I want ; 

258 

LETTER XCV 

and I assure you I shall not want to, if you act like this. 
I would rather suffer the grief which comes from myself than 
from you ; consider what you wish to do. 

If you would allow it, we should love each other so much ! 
And at least we should have no troubles except those inflicted 
on us by other people! I assure you that if it were in my 
control you would never have to complain of me; but if you 
do not believe me, we shall always be very unhappy and 
it will not be my fault. I hope we shall soon be able to see 
each other, and that then we shall have no more reasons to 
hurt each other as we do now. 

If I could have foreseen this, I should have taken the key 
at once; but, truly, I thought I was doing right. Do not 
be angry with me, I beg you. Do not be sad any more, and 
always love me as much as I love you; then I shall be quite 
content. Good-bye, my dear. 

From the Chateau de... , 28th of September, 17—. 

LETTER XCV 
Cécile Volanges to the Vicomte de Valmont 

I beg you, Monsieur, to be good enough to return me the 
key you gave me to put in place of the other ;_ since everybody 
desires it, I too must agrce to it. 

I do not know why you told Monsieur Danceny I did not 
love him any more ; I do not think I have ever given you any 
reason to think so ; and it has pained him very much and me 
too. I know you are his friend ; but that is not a reason for 
grieving him, nor me either. You would do me a great pleasure 
to tell him the contrary the next time you write to him and 
that you are sure of it; for he has more confidence in you ; 
and when I have said a thing and I am not believed, I do not 
know what else to do. You can be at rest about the key ; 
I remember perfectly everything you told me in your letter. 
However, if you still have it and would give it to me at the 
same time as the key, I promise you to pay great attention 
to it. If it could be tomorrow when we are going in to 
dinner, I could give you the other key at breakfast the next 

259 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

day and you would return it to me in the same way as the 
first. I should prefer it not to be a long time, because there 
would be less risk of Mamma noticing it. 

And then, once you have this key, will you have the 
kindness to make use of it to get my letters; in this way 
Monsieur Danceny will have news of me more often. It is 
true that this will be more convenient than it is now; but at 
first it frightened me too much ; I beg you to excuse me and 
I hope you will continue to be as complaisant as in the past. 
I shall always be very grateful for it. 

I have the honour to be, Monsieur, your most humble 
and most obedient servant. 

From ..., 28th of September, 17—. 

LETTER XCVI 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

I wager that ever since your adventure you have every 
day been expecting my compliments and praise; I have no 
doubt but that my long silence has put you a little out of 
temper; but what do you expect ? I have always thought 
that when one had nothing but praise to give a woman one 
can be at rest about her and occupy oneself with something 
else. However, I thank you on my own account and con- 
gratulate you on yours. To make you perfectly happy, I am 
even willing to admit that this time you have surpassed my 
expectations. After that, let us see if on my side I have at 
least partly fulfilled yours. 

I do not want to talk to you about Madame de Tourvel ; 
her slow advance displeases you. You only like completed 
affairs. Drawn-out scenes weary you; but I have never 
tasted the pleasure I now enjoy in this supposed tardiness. 

Yes, I like to see, to watch this prudent woman impelled, 
without her perceiving it, upon a path which allows no return, 
and whose steep and dangerous incline carries her on in spite 
of herself, and forces her to follow me. There, terrified by 
the peril she runs, she would like to halt and cannot check 
herself. Her exertions and her skill may render her steps 

260 

LETTER XCVI 

shorter ; but they must follow one upon the other. Sometimes, 
not daring to look the danger in the face, she shuts her eyes, 
lets herself go, and abandons herself to my charge. More 
often her efforts are revived by a new fear; in her mortal 
terror she would like to try to turn back once again; she 
exhausts her strength in painfully climbing back a short 
distance and very soon a magic power replaces her nearer the 
danger from which she had vainly tried to fly. Then having 
no one but me for guide and for support, without thinking 
of reproaching me for the inevitable fall, she implores me to 
retard it. Fervent prayers, humble supplications, all that 
mortals in their fear offer to the divinity, I receive from 
her ; and you expect me to be deaf to her prayers, to destroy 
myself the worship she gives me, and to use in casting her 
down that power she invokes for her support! Ah! At least 
leave me the time to watch these touching struggles between 
love and virtue. 

What! Do you think that very spectacle which makes 
you rush eagerly to the theatre, which you applaud there 
wildly, is less interesting in reality ? You listen with en- 
thusiasm to the sentiments of a pure and tender soul, which 
dreads the happiness it desires and does not cease to defend 
itself even when it ceases to resist ; should they only be value- 
less for him who gives birth to them ? But these, these are 
the delicious enjoyments this heavenly woman offers me 
every day; and you reproach me for lingering over their 
sweetness! Ah! The time will come only too soon when, 
degraded by her fall, she will be nothing but an ordinary 
woman to me. 

But in speaking to you of her I forget that I did not wish 
to speak of her. I do not know what power attaches me to 
her, ceaselessly brings me back to her, even when I insult 
it. Let me put aside the dangerous thought of her; let me 
become myself again to deal with a more amusing subject. 
It concerns your pupil, now become mine, and I hope you 
will recognise me here. 

For some days I had been better treated by my tender 
devotee and in consequence, being less preoccupied with her, 
I noticed that the Volanges girl is indeed very pretty; and 
that if it was silly to be in love with her like Danceny, perhaps 

261 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

it was none the less silly on my part not to seek with her a 
distraction rendered necessary by my solitude. I also thought 
it just to pay myself for the trouble I am giving myself for 
her ; I remembered too that you had offered it to me before 
Danceny had any claims to it; and I thought myself author- 
ised to claim some rights in a property he only possessed 
through my refusal and rejection. The little person’s pretty 
look, her fresh mouth, her childish air, even her awkwardness 
fortified these sage reflections ; I resolved to act upon them 
and the enterprise was crowned by success. 

You are wondering already by what means I have so 
soon supplanted the cherished lover; what seduction is 
suitable to this age, this inexperience ? Spare yourself the 
trouble, I used none. While you skilfully handled the arms 
of your sex and triumphed by subtlety; I returned to man 
his imprescriptible rights and overcame by authority. I was 
sure of seizing my prey if I could come at it; I needed no 
ruse except to approach her and that I made use of hardly 
deserves the name. 

I profited by the first letter I received from Danceny 
for his fair one, and after having notified her of it by the 
signal agreed upon between us, instead of using my skill to 
give it her I used it to find means not to give it; I feigned 
to share the impatience I had created, and after having 
caused the difficulty I pointed out the remedy for it. 

The young person’s room has a door opening on the 
corridor ; but naturally the mother had taken the key. It 
was only a question of getting possession of it. Nothing could 
have been easier to carry out ; I only asked to have it at my 
disposition for a couple of hours and I guaranteed to have 
one like it. Then correspondence, interviews, nocturnal 
rendez-vous, all became convenient and certain. However, 
would you believe it ? the timid child was afraid and refused. 
Another would have been nonplussed by this; but I only 
saw in it an opportunity for a more piquant pleasure. I wrote 
to Danceny to complain of this refusal and I acted so well 
that our scatter-brain had no rest until he had obtained, 
exacted even, from his timorous mistress her consent to grant 
my request and to yield wholly to my discretion. 

I confess I was very pleased to have changed parts in this 

262 

LETTER XCVI 

way and to have the young man do for me what he thought 
I should do for him. This idea doubled the value of the 
adventure in my eyes ; therefore as soon as I had the precious 
key, I hastened to make use of it ; this was last night. 

After making sure that everything was quiet in the 
Chateau, | armed myself with a dark lantern, made the toilet 
which suited the hour and was demanded by the situation, 
and paid my first visit to your pupil. I had caused everything 
to be prepared (and by herself) to be able to enter noiselessly. 
She was in her first sleep and in the sleep of her age; so that 
I came up to her bedside without awakening her. At first 
I was tempted to go further and to try to pass as a dream ; 
but fearing the effect of surprise and the noise it brings with it, 
I preferred to arouse the pretty sleeper cautiously, and in 
fact I succeeded in preventing the cry I feared. 

After having calmed her first fears, I risked a few liberties 
since I had not come there to talk. Doubtless she had not 
been well informed at her convent as to how many different 
perils timid innocence is exposed, and all it has to guard to 
avoid a surprisal; for giving all her attention and all her 
strength to defending herself from a kiss, which was only a 
false attack, she left all the rest without defence. How could 
I not profit by it! I therefore changed my movement and 
immediately took post. Here we were both very nearly lost ; 
the little girl was terrified and tried to scream in good faith ; 
fortunately her voice was quenched in tears, She also threw 
herself towards her bell-rope, but my skill restrained her arm 
in time. 

‘What are you doing,’ I then said to her, ‘‘ You will 
ruin yourself forever. Suppose someone comes; what does 
it matter tome ? Whom will you convince that I am not here 
by your wish ? Who but you could have given me the means 
of coming in ? And will you be able to explain the use of this 
key I hold from you, which I could only have had 
through you ?” 

This short harangue calmed neither her grief nor her anger : 
but it brought about submission. I do not know if I achieved 
the tone of eloquence ; it is at least true that I did not have 
its gestures. With one hand occupied by force and the other 
by love what orator could pretend to grace in such a situation ? 

263 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

If you imagine it correctly, you will at least admit it was 
favourable to attack; but I do not understand anything 
and, as you say, the simplest woman, a mere school-girl, leads 
me like a child. 

For all her distress she felt she had to adopt some course 
and come to terms. Since prayers found me inexorable she 
-had to come to offers. You will suppose that I sold this impor- 
tant post very dearly ; no, I promised everything for a kiss. It 
is true that, having taken the kiss, I did not keep my promise ; 
but I had good reasons. Had we agreed that it should be taken 
or given? After much bargaining, we agreed on a second ; 
and it was said that this should be received. Then I guided 
the timid arms around my body, I held her more amorously 
in one of mine, and the soft kiss was indeed received, well 
received, perfectly received, in short, love himself could not 
have done better. 

Such good faith deserved a reward ; and so I immediately 
granted the request. The hand was withdrawn; but I do 
not know by what chance I found myself in its place. You 
suppose that there I was very eager, very active, do you not ? 
Not at all. I have begun to like slow methods, I tell you. 
Once certain of arriving, why hurry on the journey so fast ? 

Seriously, I was very glad to observe for once the power 
of opportunity, and here I found it divested of all other aid. 
Yet she had to combat love, and love supported by modesty or 
shame, fortified above all by the annoyance I had given, which 
was considerable. Opportunity was alone ; but it was there, 
all was offered, all was present, and love was absent. 

To make certain of my observations I was cunning enough 
to use no more force than she could combat. Only if my 
charming enemy abused my facility, and was ready to escape 
me, I restrained her by the same fear whose happy effects I 
had already made proof of. Well, without my taking any 
other exertion, the tender mistress, forgetting her oaths, 
yielded at first and ended up by consenting; not but that 
after the first moment reproaches and tears returned in 
concert ; I do not know whether they were true or feigned ; 
but, as always happens, they ceased as soon as I busied myself 
with giving reason for others. In short, from frailty to 
reproaches and from reproaches to frailty, we did not separate 

264 

LETTER XCVII 

until we were satisfied with each other and had both agreed 
on the rendez-vous for this evening. 

I did not go back to my room until dawn. And I was worn 
out with fatigue and lack of sleep ; however I sacrificed both 
to the desire of being at breakfast in the morning; I have a 
passion for observing behaviours the morning after. You 
can have no idea of what this was. There was embarrassment 
in her countenance ! Difficulty in walking ! Eyes continually 
lowered, and so large and so tired ! That round face had grown 
so much longer! Nothing could be more amusing. And for 
‘the first time, her mother, (alarmed by this extreme change) 
showed quite a tender interest in her! And Madame de 
Tourvel too was very attentive about her ! Oh! Her attentions 
are only lent ; a day will come when they can be returned to 
her and that day is not far off. Good-bye, my fair friend. 

From the Chateau, 1st of October, 17—. 

LETTER XCVII 
Cécile Volanges to the Marquise de Merteuil 

Ah Heaven! Madame, how distressed I am! How 
miserable I am! Who will console me in my grief? Who 
will advise me in my present state of embarrassment ? This 
Monsieur de Valmont ... and Danceny! No, the idea of 
Danceny fills me with despair. . . Howcan I relate it to you ? 
How can I tell you? ... Ido not know what to do. Yet 
my heart is full. .. I must speak to someone and you are 
the only person in whom I can, in whom I dare confide. You 
are so kind tome! But do not be sonow; I am not worthy 
of it; how shall I put it? I do not desire your kindness. 
Everyone here has showed an interest in me to-day ; they all 
increased my pain. I felt so much that I did not deserve 
it! Scold me, rather; scold me well, for I deserve it; but 
afterwards save me; if you do not have the kindness to 
advise me I shall die of grief. 

You must know then. . . my hand trembles, as you see, 
I can hardly write, my face feels on fire. .. Ah! itis indeed 

205 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

the red of shame. Well, I will endure it ; it will be the first 
punishment for my fault. Yes, I will tell you everything. 

You must know then that Monsieur de Valmont, who 
hitherto had been handing me Monsieur Danceny’s letters, 
suddenly found that it was too difficult and wanted to have 
the key of my room I can assure you I did not want to do 
it; but he went to the extent of writing to Danceny and 
Danceny wanted it too; and it hurts me so much when I 
refuse him anything, especially since my absence which 
makes him so unhappy, that I ended by consenting to it. 
I did not foresee the misfortune which would occur from it. 

Yesterday Monsieur de Valmont made use of this key to 
come into my room when I was asleep; I expected it so little 
that he frightened me very much when he woke me up; but 
as he spoke to me at once, I recognised him and did not scream ; 
and then my first idea was that he had perhaps come to bring 
me a letter from Danceny. It was far from that. A moment 
afterwards he wanted to kiss me ; and while I defended myself, 
as was natural, he did what I would not have him do for any- 
thing in the world . . . but, he wanted a kiss first. I had to, 
for what could I do? I had tried to call, but I could not and 
then he told me that if somebody came he could throw all the 
blame on me; and indeed that was very easy on account of 
the key. After it he did not withdraw at all. He wanted 
a second; and I don’t know what there was about this one 
but it completely disturbed me; and after, it was still worse 
than before. Oh! Thisis very wrong. Afterwards... you 
will exempt me from telling you the rest ; but Iam as unhappy 
as one can be. 

What I blame myself the most for, and yet must speak to 
you about, is that I am afraid I did not defend myself as 
much as I could have; I do not know how this could have 
happened : assuredly I do not love Monsieur de Valmont, on 
the contrary ; and there were moments when I was as if 
T loved him. .. You may well suppose that did not prevent 
me from continuing to say no to him ; but I felt I was not doing 
what I said; and it was as if in spite of myself; and then 
T was very much upset! If it is always as difficult as that to 
defend oneself, one must need a lot of practice! It is true 
that Monsieur de Valmont has a way of talking that one 

266 

LETTER XCVII 

does not know how to answer ; and will you believe it ? when 
he went away it was as if I was sorry, and I was weak enough 
to consent that he should come again this evening; that 
troubles me even more than all the fest. 

Oh! In spite of this, I promise you'I shall prevent him 
from coming. He had scarcely gone when I felt how wrong 
I had been to promise it him. And I cried all the rest of the 
time. Above all Danceny grieved me! Every time I thought 
of him my tears increased until they stifled me, and still I 

thought of him... and even now you see what happens ; my 
paper is all wet. No, I shall never be consoled were it only 
for his sake. . . At last I could cry no more, and yet I could 

not sleep a minute. This morning when I got up and looked 
at myself in the mirror, it frightened me to see how changed 
I was. 

Mamma noticed it as soon as she saw me and asked me 
what was the matter. I began to cry at once. I thought 
she was going to scold me, and perhaps that would have 
hurt me less; but, no, she spoke gently to me! I did not 
deserve it. She told me not to grieve like that ! She did not 
know the reason for my grief. That I should make myself 
ill. There are moments when I wish I were dead. I could not 
endure it. I threw myself sobbing into her arms, saying: 
‘Ah Mamma! your little girl is very unhappy !’’. Mamma 
could not prevent herself from crying a little and that only 
increased my grief; fortunately she did not ask me why 
I was so unhappy, for I should not have known what to 
say to her. 

I beg you Madame, to write to me as soon as you can and 
tell me what I ought to do, for I have not the courage to 
think of anything and can do nothing but grieve. Please send 
me your letter by Monsieur de Valmont; but pray, if you 
write to him at the same time, do not mention to him what 
I have told you. 

I’ have the honour to be, Madame, always with great 
friendship, your most humble and most obedient servant. . . 

I dare not sign this letter. 

From the Chateau de. . tst of October, 17—. 

° 9 

267 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER XCVIII 
Madame de Volanges to the Marquise de Merteuil 

A few days ago, my charming friend, you asked me for 
consolation and advice; to-day it is my turn; and ] make 
the same request on my own behalf which you made on yours. 
I am really very distressed, and I fear I have not taken the 
best way to avoid the grief I feel. . 

My daughter is the cause of my uneasiness. Since my 
departure. I had indeed seen that she remained sad and 
wretched ; but I expected it and had armed my heart with 
the severity I considered necessary. I hoped that absence 
and distractions would soon destroy a love which I looked 
upon rather as a childish error, than as a real passion. Yet 
far from having improved since my sojourn here, I notice 
the child is more and more giving way to a dangerous melan- 
choly; and I seriously fear her health will be affected. 
Particularly in the last few days she has changed visibly. 
Yesterday above all I was struck by her appearance and 
every one here was truly alarmed by it. 

What proves to me still further the extent to which she 
is affected, is that I see her at the point of overcoming the 
timidity she has always showed me. Yesterday morning 
when I simply asked her if she was ill, she threw herself into 
my arms, telling me she was very unhappy; and she cried 
until she sobbed. I cannot tell you how much it pained me ; 
the tears came into my eyes at once and I had only time to 
turn away to prevent her from seeing them. Fortunately I had 
the prudence not to ask her any questions and she did not 
dare to say anything else to mc. But it is none the less clear 
that she is tormented by this unfortunate passion. 

What course am IJ to take if this continues ? Shall I create 
my daughter’s unhappiness ? Shall I turn against her the 
most precious qualities of the soul—sensibility and constancy ? 
Is it for this I am her mother? And even if I stifled the 
natural sentiment which makes us desire the happiness of 
our children ; even if I considered as a weakness what I think, 
on the contrary, to be the first, the most sacred of our duties ; 

268 

LETTER XCVIII 

yet should I force her choice, shall I not have to answer for 
the disastrous results which might follow? What a use 
for maternal authority, to place one’s daughter between crime 
and misery ! f 

My friend, I shall not imitate what I have so often con- 
demned. Doubtless I might attempt to choose a husband for 
my daughter: in that all I did was to help her by my ex- 
perience ; I was not exercising a right, I was fulfilling a duty. 
I should betray a duty on the contrary, if I bestowed her in 
defiance of an inclination I could not prevent from existing, 
the extent and duration of which neither she nor I can know, 
No, I will not allow her to marry one man and love another 
and I prefer to forfeit my authority rather than her virtue. 

I think then that the wisest thing I can do is to withdraw 
from the arrangement I have made with Monsieur de Gercourt. 
You see the reasons for it; they seem to me more important 
than my promises. I go further ; in the state things are now, 
to fulfil my engagement would be really to break it. For if 
I owe it to my daughter not to reveal her secret to Monsieur 
de Gercourt, at least I owe it to him not to abuse the ignorance 
in which I leave him and to do for him everything I think he 
would do himself, if he were informed of the situation. Shall 
I, on the contrary, betray him unworthily when he relies 
upon my faith and while he honours me by choosing me as 
his second mother, shall I deceive him in the choice he makes 
of the mother of his children ? These undeniable reflections 
which I cannot escape, alarm me more than IJ can tell you. 

With the misfortunes they make me dread I compare my 
daughter, happy with a husband her heart has chosen, only 
knowing her duties by the pleasure she finds in carrying them 
out; my son-in-law equally satisfied and congratulating 
himself every day upon his choice; each of them finding 
happiness in the other’s happiness, and that of both uniting 
to increase mine. Should the hope of so delightful a future 
be sacrificed to vain considerations of prudence ? And what 
are those which restrain me? Solely the views of interest. 
What advantage would it be for my daughter to have been 
born rich if she must none the less be the slave of wealth ? 

I admit that Monsieur de Gercourt is perhaps a more 
distinguished husband than I could have hoped for my 

269 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

daughter; I will even admit that I was extremely flattered 
by his choosing her. But after all, Danceny is as well born as 
he is; in personal qualities he yields to him in nothing; he 
has the advantage over Monsieur de Gercourt of loving and of 
being loved; he is not rich, it is true,but is not my daughter 
rich enough for them both? Ah why should I deprive her of 
the delightful satisfaction of enriching the man she loves ! 

These marriages which are calculated instead of being 
matched, which are called ‘‘ marriages of convenience ’’, 
where everything indeed is convenient except their tastes 
and characters, are the most fertile source of those scandalous 
discords which become more frequent every day.’ I prefer 
to delay ; at least I shall have the time to observe my daughter 
whom I do not know. I have the courage to cause her a 
transitory grief if she will acquire through it a more solid 
happiness; but it is not in my heart to risk giving her up 
to an eternal despair. 

Those are the ideas, my dear friend, which torment me, and 
on which I require your advice. These severe matters con- 
trast greatly with your amiable gaiety and do not at all appear 
suitable to your age ; but your reason is so far in advance of 
it! Moreover your friendship will aid your prudence; and 
I do not fear that either will be refused to the maternal 
solicitude which implores them. 

Good-bye, my charming friend ; never doubt the sincerity 
of my sentiments, 

From the Chateau de... , 2nd of October, 17—. 

LETTER XCIX 
Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

More little events, my fair friend; but only scenes, no 
actions, so arm yourself with patience; take a lot of it; for 
while my Madame de Tourvel advances with such slow steps, 
your pupil retreats, and that is much worse. Well, I have 
the wit to amuse myself with these trifles. I am positively 

1 This states in a sentence one of the principal themes of this novel. 

270 

LETTER XCIX 

growing accustomed to my stay here; and I can say that 
I have not passed a boring moment in my old aunt’s dull 
Chateau. Indeed, have I not enjoyment, deprivation, hope, 
uncertainty ? What more can one have on a wider stage ? 
Spectators ? Eh! Let things go, spectators will not be lack- 
ing. Though they do not see me at work, I will show them 
my completed task ; they will have nothing to do but admire 
and applaud ; Yes, they will applaud ; for I can at last predict 
with certainty the moment when my austere devotee will fall. 
This evening I was present at the death-agony of her virtue. 
Soft frailty will reign in its place. I fix the time no later than 
our next interview. But I hear you already crying out upon 
pride. Toannounce a victory, to boast of it beforehand! Ah 
well, calm yourself ! To prove my modesty to you, I will begin 
with the story of my defeat. 

Your pupil is indeed a very ridiculous little person ! 
She is indeed a child who should be treated as such, and one 
would do her a favour by only giving her a child’s punishment ! 
Would you believe that after what passed between her and me 
the day before yesterday, after the friendly way we parted 
yesterday morning, when I went to her again in the evening, 
as she had agreed, I found the door closed from the inside > 
What do you say to that ? We endure such puerilities some- 
times on the eve, but on the day after! Is it not amusing ? 

Yet [ did not laugh at it at first ; I had never felt so much 
the ascendency of my character. Assuredly I went to this 
rendez-vous without pleasure and solely as a matter of pro- 
cedure. My own bed, which I greatly needed, seemed to me 
at the moment preferable to anyone else’s and I only left it 
with regret. Yet I had no sooner found an obstacle, than 
I burned to overcome it; I was especially humiliated to be 
outwitted by a child. J retired therefore in a very ill humour ; 
and with the idea of concerning myself no further with this 
silly child and her affairs, I wrote her at once a note, which 
I meant to give to her to-day, in which I rated her at her true 
value. But, as people say, night brings wisdom ; this morning 
I realised that, having no choice of distractions here, I should 
have to keep this one ; so I suppressed the severe note. Since 
I have reflected upon it, I cannot get over my having had the 
idea of ending an adventure before having in my hands the 

271 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

evidence to ruin its heroine. How far we are led astray by 
first thoughts! Happy is he, my fair friend, who, like you, 
has grown accustomed never to yield to them! In short, 
I put off my vengeance ; I made this sacrifice to your designs 
on Gercourt. 

Now that I am no longer angry, I only see the ridiculous 
side of your pupil’s conduct. Indeed, I should lke to know 
what she hopes to gain by it! For my part, I have no idea ; 
if it were only to defend herself, you must admit that she was 
a little late. One day she must tell me the answer to this 
enigma! I very much want to knowit. Perhaps it was only 
because she was tired ? Frankly, it might be so; for doubt- 
less she is still ignorant: that the shafts of love, like the lance 
of Achilles, carry with them the remedy to the wounds they 
make. But no, from her little grimace all that day, I 
would wager there entered into it repentance ... there... 
something . . . like virtue. .. Virtue! ... Doesit beseem 
her to have it? Ah! Let her leave virtue to the woman 
truly born for it, the only one who knows how to embellish it, 
who would make it beloved! .. Pardon, my fair friend, 
but this very evening there took place between Madame 
de Tourvel and me the scene I am to relate to you, from 
which I still feel some emotion. I need to make an effort over 
myself to distract myself from the impression it made on 
me; it was as an assistance to this that I began to write to 
you. You must pardon something to this first moment. 

For some days Madame de Tourvel and I have been in 
agreement upon our sentiments; we were only disputing 
about words. It was indeed always her friendship which 
responded to my love ; but this conventional language did 
not alter the root of things; and even if we had remained 
there, I should perhaps have advanced less quickly, but none 
the less surely. Already there was no longer any question 
of sending me away, as she wished at first; and as to our 
daily interviews, if I give my attention to offering her the 
opportunity, she gives hers to seizing it. 

As our little rendez-vous usually take place out of doors, 
to-day’s horrible weather left me no hope; I was even 
positively annoyed; I did not foresee how much I should 
profit by this mishap. 

272 

LETTER XCIX 

As they were unable to go out, they began to play cards 
after leaving the table ; and as I play very little and am no 
longer necessary, | went up to my room with no other project 
but to wait there until about the end of the game. 

I was returning to join the company when I met the 
charming woman going into her room and she, either from 
imprudence or frailty, said to me in her soft voice: ‘‘ Where 
are you going? There is no one in the drawing-room.” 
I needed nothing more, as you may believe, to make an 
attempt to enter her room; and I found less resistance than 
I expected. It is true that I took the precaution to begin 
the conversation at the door and to start it on indifferent 
topics ; but we were scarcely settled when I brought in the 
real topic and spoke of my love to my friend. Although her 
first reply was simple, it seemed to me expressive: ‘‘ Oh!” 
she said, “‘ Do not let us speak of that here’’; and she 
trembled. Poor woman! She saw herself dying. 

However she was wrong to be in fear. For some time 
I have been certain of success one day or another, and, as 
I watched her use so much strength in useless combats, 
I resolved to spare my own and to await without effort the 
time when she would yield herself from very weariness. You 
will realise that I want a complete triumph with her and that 
I wish to owe nothing to opportunity. It was in accordance 
with this plan, and with the purpose of being pressing without 
engaging myself too far, that I returned to this word “ love’, 
which was so obstinately refused ; ‘since I was certain she 
believed me to be sufficiently ardent, I tried a more tender 
tone. This refusal had ceased to annoy me, it distressed me ; 
did not my tender friend owe me some consolation ? 

While she was consoling me, a hand remained in mine ; 
the pretty body leant upon my arm, and we were extremely 
close together. You have surely noticed in this situation 
how, as the defence weakens, demands and refusals take 
place at closer quarter; how the head turns away and the 
looks are lowered, while the sentences, all enunciated in a 
weak voice, become infrequent and broken. These valuable 
symptoms announce the consent of the mind in an unmistak- 
able manner; but it has barely touched the senses at that 
time ; I even think that it is always dangerous to attempt 

273 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

any too conspicuous enterprise then, because this state of 
abandonment never exists without a very delightful pleasure 
and a woman cannot be forced out of it without an ill humour 
on her part which infallibly turns to the profit of the defence. 

But in the present case prudence was all the more necessary 
since J] had especially to apprehend the terror which this 
forgetfulness of herself would not fail to cause my tender 
dreamer. And so J] did not even exact that the admission 
I asked for should be put into words; a look would suffice 
me, a single look, and I was happy. 

My fair friend, those beautiful eyes were indeed lifted to 
mine, that heavenly mouth even said: ‘‘ Yes, 1...” But 
suddenly the gaze was obscured, the voice failed, and this 
adorable woman fell into my arms. Scarcely had I the time 
to receive her when, tearing herself away with convulsive 
force, her eyes wandering and her hands lifted to Heaven. . . 
“God. . . Oh! my God, save me,” she cried ; and suddenly 
swifter than lightning, she was on her knees ten paces from 
me. I could hear that she was almost suffocating. I went 
to help her; but she, taking my hand which she bathed in 
tears, sometimes even embracing my knees, exclaimed : 
“Yes, it will be you, it will be you, who will save me! You 
do not wish my death, leave me ; save me; leave me; in the 
name of God, leave me!” And these broken sentences 
were barely audible through her redoubled sobs. However, 
she held me with such strength, that I could not have gone 
away; then, collecting my own strength, I lifted her in my 
arms, At the same instant the tears ceased ; she spoke no 
more ; all her limbs stiffened and violent convulsions succeeded 
to this storm. 

I must admit I was deeply moved and I think I should 
have consented to her request, even if the circumstances had 
not compelled me. The truth is, after I had given her some 
assistance, I left her as she begged me and I congratulate 
myself upon having done so, Already I have almost received 
the reward for it. 

I expected that, as on the day of my first declaration, 
she would not show herself during the evening. But about 
eight o'clock she came down to the drawing-room and simply 
announced to the company that she had been very indisposed. 

274 

LETTER CXIX 

Her face was dejected, her voice weak, and her behaviour 
composed; but her gaze was. gentle and often fixed itself 
upon me. Her refusal to play cards having obliged me to take 
her place, she sat down at my side. * During supper, she 
remained alone in the drawing-room. When we returned, 
I thought I noticed that she had been crying; to find out, 
I said to her it seemed to me she was still suffering from 
her indisposition ; to which she obligingly replied: ‘‘ This 
illness does not go as quickly as it comes!” Finally, when 
we retired, I gave her my hand; and at the door of her 
apartment she pressed my hand hard. It is true that this 
movement seemed to be almost involuntary ; but so much 
the better, it 1s one more proof of my domination. 

I would wager that now she is enchanted to be where she 
is; all the price is paid ; nothing remains but to enjoy. Per- 
haps while I am writing to you she is already occupied with 
that soft idea ! And even if she is occupied, on the contrary, 
with a new plan of defence, do we not know what becomes 
of all such plans ? I ask you, can it be later than our next 
interview ? I quite expect she will make some difficulties in 
granting it; but there ! When the first step is made, do these 
austere prudes know how to stop? Their love is a positive 
explosion ; their resistance gives it more strength. My shy 
devotee would run after me if I ceased to run after her, 

In short, my fair friend, I shall very soon be with you 
to demand the execution of your word. Doubtless you have 
not forgotten what you promised me after this success—an 
infidelity to your Chevalier ? Are you ready ? For my part, 
I desire it as if we had never known each other; for the 
rest, to have known you is perhaps a reason for desiring it 
the more : 

“IT am just, I am not being gallant.’ 

So this shall be the first infidelity I shall make my demure 
conquest ; and I promise you to make use of the first pretext 
to absent myself from her for twenty-four hours. That 
shall be her punishment for having kept me so long away 
from you. Do you know that this adventure has occupied 

1 Voltaire, comedy of Nanine. (C. de L.). 
275 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

me for more than two months? Yes, two months and three 
days; it is true that I am including to-morrow, since it 
will only be really consummated then. This reminds me that 
Mademoiselle de B.... resisted for three whole months. 
I am very glad to see that frank coquetry has more defences 
than austere virtue. 

Good-bye, my fair friend; I must leave you, for it is very 
late: this letter has led me further than I reckoned: but 
as I am sending to Paris to-morrow, I wanted to profit by it 
to allow you to share your friend’s joy a day sooner. 

From the Chateau de. .. , 2nd of October, 17—. 
(In the evening.) 

LETTER C 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

My friend, I am outwitted, betrayed, lost ; Iam in despair : 
Madame de Tourvel has gone. She has gone, and I did not 
know it! And I was not there to oppose her departure, to 
reproach her with her unworthy betrayal. Ah! Do not 
think I should have let her go; she would have remained ; 
yes, she would have remained, even if I had been compelled 
to employ violence. But in my credulous confidence, I was 
sleeping calmly ; I was sleeping and the thunder-bolt fell on 
me. No, I simply cannot understand this departure ; I must 
give up trying to understand women. 

When I recollect yesterday afternoon ! What am I saying? 
The very evening! That gentle look, that tender voice ! 
And that pressure of the hand! And during this time she was 
planning to run away from me ! Owomen, women ! Complain 
after this, if you are deceived! Yes, every perfidy we employ 
is a theft from you. 

What pleasure I shall have in avenging myself! I shall 
find this perfidious woman again, I shall reassert my power 
over her. If love sufficed me to find means for it, what will 
it not be, aided by vengeance ? I shall see her again at my 
knees, trembling and bathed in tears, crying to me for mercy 
in her deceitful voice ; and I shall be without pity. 

276 

LETTER C 

What is she doing now ? What is she thinking ? Perhaps 
she congratulates herself on having deceived me; and, faith- 
ful to the tastes of her sex, finds this the most agreeable 
pleasure. What this boasted virtue could not achieve, the 
spirit of deceit obtained without effort. Fool that I was! 
I dreaded her modesty; I ought to have feared her bad 
faith. 

And to be obliged to swallow down my resentment ! Only 
to dare to show a tender pain, when my heart is filled with 
rage ! Tosee myself reduced to imploring a rebellious woman, 
who has escaped my domination! Ought I to be humiliated 
to this point.2 And by whom? By a timid woman, who has 
never had any practice in defending herself. Of what use is 
it to me to have established myself in her heart, to have 
inflamed her with all the fires of love, to have brought the 
disturbance of her senses to the point of delirium if she is 
tranquil in her retirement and can take more pride in her 
flight to-day than Tin my victories ? And shall I endure this ? 
My friend, you will not think so ; you have not this humiliating 
idea of me. 

But what fate attaches me to this woman ? Are there not 
a hundred others who desire my attentions ? Will they not 
be eager to reply to them ? Even if none of them was worth 
her, do not the attractions of variety, the charm of new 
conquests, the splendour of their number, offer delightful 
enough pleasures ? Why run after her who flies from us and 
neglect those who offer themselves? Ah! why?... Ido 
not know, but I feel it strongly. 

For me there is no happiness, no rest, until I possess this 
woman whom I hate and whom I love with equal fury. I shall 
only endure my fate from the moment I am master of hers. 
Then I shall be calm and satisfied and I, in my turn, shall see 
her given up to the storms I feel at this moment; I shall 
create in her a thousand others as well. Hope and fear, 
suspicion and confidence, all the ills invented by hatred, all 
the good allowed by love—I want them to fill her heart, to 
succeed each other at my will. This time will come. .. But 
what work still remains! How near I was to it yesterday, 
and how far I am from it to-day! How am I to draw near 
it once more ? I dare not attempt any measures ; I feel that 

277 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

I must be calmer to adopt any course, and my blood boils 
in my veins. 

What redoubles my torture is the calm with which every- 
body here replies to my questions about this event, about 
its cause, about allits extraordinary side. . . Nobody knows, 
nobody desires to know; they would scarcely have spoken 
of it, if I had allowed them to speak of anything else. Madame 
de Rosemonde, to whom I rushed this morning when I learned 
the news, replied with the coldness of her age that it was the 
natural result of the indisposition Madame de Tourvel felt 
yesterday ; that she had feared an illness and had preferred 
to be in her own home. She thinks it quite simple; she would 
have done the same, she told me; as if there could be any- 
thing in common between them! Between her, who has 
nothing left but to die and the other, who is the charm and 
torment of my life! 

Madame de Volanges, whom I suspected at first of being 
an accomplice, only appeared moved by the fact that she 
had not been consulted upon this step. I confess I am very 
glad that she has not had the pleasure of doing me harm. 
This proves to me that she does not possess the woman’s 
confidence as much as I feared; it is one enemy the less. 
How glad she would be, if she knew that it was from me 
Madame de Tourvel fled! How puffed up with pride she 
would have been if it had been by her advice! How her 
self-importance would have redoubled! Heavens! How 
J hate her! Oh! I shall renew the affair with her daughter ; 
I want to work upon her as I fancy ; so I think I shall stay here 
some time; at least, the few reflections I have made lead me 
to that course. 

Do you not think that after so obvious a step, my un- 
grateful lady must dread my presence? If the idea has 
occurred to her that I might follow her, she will not have 
failed to close her doors to me ; and I no more wish to accustom 
her to this method than to suffer the humiliation of it myself. 
On the contrary, I prefer to announce to her that I am staying 
here ; and I shall even beg her to return here ; and when she 
is fully persuaded of my absence I shall arrive at her house ; 
we shall see how she will sustain that adventure. But to 
increase its effect, it must be postponed, and I do not know 

278 

LETTER Cl 

yet if I shall have the patience ; twenty times to-day I have 
had my mouth open to call for my horses. However I will 
control myself ; I promise to wait for your reply here ; I only 
ask you, my fair friend, not to keep me waiting. 

What would annoy me most would be not to know what is 
happening ; but my servant, who is in Paris, has the right 
to some access to the waiting-woman ; he will be able to help 
me. I am sending him instructions and money. I beg you 
will allow me to enclose both in this letter and that you will 
send them to him by one of your servants, with orders to 
give them to him in person. I take this precaution because 
the rascal has a habit of never receiving the letters I write 
him when they order him to do something which gives him 
trouble, and because he does not appear to me at present to 
be as interested in his conquest as I should like him to be. 

Good-bye, my fair friend ; if you have some happy idea, 
some way of hastening my advance, let me know. More 
than once I have proved how useful your friendship can be ; 
I feel it again now; for since I have written to you I feel 
calmer ; at least | am speaking to someone who understands 
me and not to the automata near whom I have vegetated since 
this morning. Really, the further I go the more I am tempted 
to believe that you and I are the only people in the world who 
are. worth anything. 

From the Chateau de , 3rd of October, 17—. 

LETTER Cl 

The Vicomte de Valmont to Azolan, his servant 
(Enclosed in the preceding Ictter) 

You must be an imbecile, not to have known when you 
left here this morning that Madame de Tourvel was going 
too ; or, if you knew it, not to have come to tell me. What 
use is it your spending my money getting drunk with the 
footmen and passing the time you ought to give to my service 
in playing the agreeable with waiting-women, if I am not 
better informed of what is taking place ? But this is one of 

279 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

your negligences. I warn you that if there is one more in this 
affair, it will be your last in my service. 

You must find out for me everything that is happening 
at Madame de Tourvel’s ; her health ; if she sleeps ; if she is 
sad or gay; if she often goes out and where she goes ; if she 
receives company in her house and who comes to it ; how she 
spends her time, if she is bad-tempered with her women, 
particularly with the woman she brought here; what she 
does when she is alone; if when she reads, she reads con- 
tinuously or interrupts her Teading to meditate ; and similarly 
when she writes. Remember to become friendly with the 
servant who takes her letters to the post. Offer frequently 
to perform this duty in his place ; and when he accepts, only 
post those letters which seem to you unimportant and send 
the others to me, especially those to Madame de Volanges, 
if you come across any. 

Make your plans to remain for some time yet the favoured 
lover of your Julie. If she has another, as you thought, make 
her agree to share herself; and do not pique yourself upon 
ridiculous delicacy ; you will be in the position of many others 
who are worth far more than you are. However, if your 
second becomes too importunate, if you notice, for example, 
that he occupies Julie too much during the day and that she 
is consequently less often near her mistress, get rid of him in 
some way; or pick a quarrel with him; do not fear for 
the consequences, I will support you. Above all do not leave 
that house. Itis by assiduity that everything is seen and seen 
clearly. If by chance one of the servants is sent away, present 
yourself to take his place, as if you were no longer in my 
service. In this event, say that you have left me to look for 
a quieter and more orderly house. Try to get yourself accepted. 
I will continue you in my service during this time; it will 
be the same as it was with the Duchesse de ...; and in the 
end Madame de Tourvel will reward you in the same way. 

If you have enough adroitness and zeal these instructions 
ought to suffice you; but to make up for both I am sending 
you some money. The enclosed note authorises you, as you 
will see, to draw twenty-five Jowis from my agent ; for I have 
no doubt you are penniless. Out of this sum you will use 
so much as may be necessary to persuade Julie to establish 

280 

LETTER CII 

a correspondence with me. The rest will serve to buy drinks 
for the servants. Take care as much as possible to let this 
happen in the porter’s lodge, so that he wil! be glad to see you 
come. But do not forget that I am‘not paying for your 
pleasures but your services. 

Accustom Julie to observe everything and to report 
everything, even what appear to her to be details. It is 
better that she should write ten useless phrases than omit 
one important ; and often what seems to be unimportant is 
not so. Since I must be informed at once if anything happens 
which appears to you to deserve attention, as soon as you 
receive this letter you will send Philippe on the errands horse 
to wait at ....1; he will remain there until he receives fresh 
orders ; he will be a relay in case of necessity. For ordinary 
correspondence the Post will suffice. 

Be careful not to lose this letter. Read it over every 
day, both to make certain that you have forgotten nothing 
and to make certain you have not lost it. In short, do every- 
thing a man ought to do when he is honoured by my con- 
fidence. You know that if I am pleased with you, you will 
be so with me. 

From the Chdteau de... , 3rd of October, 17—. 

LETTER CII 
VWadame de Tourvel to Madame de Rosemonde 

You will be very surprised, Madame, when you learn I have 
left your house so suddenly. This step will appear very 
extraordinary to you; but how greatly your surprise will be 
increased when you know the reasons for it! Perhaps you 
will think that in confiding them to you I am not sufficiently 
respectful of the tranquillity necessary to your age: that 
I am even departing from those sentiments of veneration 
which are your due upon so many accounts? Ah! Madame, 
forgive me ; but my heart is over-laden ; it needs to pour out 
its grief upon the bosom of a friend who is both gentle and 

1A village half-way between Paris and Madame de Rosemonde’s 
Chdteau. (C. de L,) 

281 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

prudent ; what other but you could it choose ? Look upon 
me as your child. Show me the kindness of a mother ; | im- 
plore it. Perhaps I have some right to it through my feelings 
for you. 

Where is that time when, occupied solely with laudable 
scntiments, I was ignorant of those which bear into the soul 
the mortal disturbance I feel and take away the strength 
to combat them at the same time that they impose the duty 
of doing so? Ah! This fatal visit has ruined me. . . 

How shall I tell you? I love, yes, I love wildly. Alas ! 
that word which I write for the first time, that word so often 
asked for and never granted—I would give my life for the 
sweetness of being able once only to say it to him who in- 
spires it; and yet it must be refused for ever! He will still 
doubt my feelings ; he will think he has reason to complain 
of them. I am very unfortunate ! Why is it not as easy for 
him to read in my heart as it is for him to reign over it ? Yes, 
I should suffer less, if he knew all that I am suffering; but 
you, to whom I tell this, can have but a feeble idea of it. 

In a few moments I am about to fly from him and to hurt 
him. While he still thinks me near him I shall already be far 
away ; at the hour when I was accustomed to see him each 
day, I shall be in places where he has never been, where 
I must not permit him tocome. All my preparations are made; 
everything is here before my eyes ; I cannot rest them on any- 
thing which does not tell me of this cruel departure. Every- 
thing is ready, except me! ... And the more my heart 
refuses it, the more it proves to me the necessity for submitting. 

Without doubt I shall submit, it is better to die than 
to live guilty. Already I feel I am too much so; I have 
only saved my modesty, my virtue has vanished. Must 
I confess it ? What virtue I have left I owe to his generosity. 
Intoxicated with the pleasure of seeing him, of hearing him, 
with the sweetness of feeling him near me, with the greater 
happiness of being able to make him happy, I was without 
power and without strength ; I had scarcely enough to combat 
not enough to resist ; I shuddered at my danger without being 
able to escape it. Well! He saw my anguish and he pitied 
me. How can 1 not cherish him? I owe him more than 
life itself. 

282 

LETTER CII 

Ah! If by remaining near him I had only to tremble 
for my life, do not think that I should ever consent to go 
away. What is life to me without him; should I not be but 
too happy to lose it ? Condemned to: make him and myself 
unhappy for ever ; to dare neither to complain nor to console 
him ; to defend myself every day against him, against myself ; 
to give my attention to causing his pain when I wish to 
consecrate it all to his happiness—to live thus, is it not to die 
a thousand times? Yet that will be my fate. Yet I will 
endure it, I shall have the courage. O you, whom I choose 
as my mother, receive my oath ! 

Receive also the oath I make you never to hide from you 
any of my actions; receive it, I beg you; I ask it of you as 
an aid I sorely need ; thus, having promised to tell you every- 
thing, I shall grow accustomed to thinking myself always in 
your presence. Your virtue shall replace mine. Never indeed 
will I consent to blush at your gaze ; and, restrained by this 
powerful curb, I shall cherish in you the indulgent friend, the 
confident of my frailty, and I shall still honour in you the 
guardian Angel who will save me from shame. 

It is indeed sufficient shame to have to make this request. 
Fatal effect of a presumptious self-confidence! Why did 
I not sooner dread this feeling which I felt growing ? Why 
did I flatter myself that I could dominate or overcome it at 
will? Ah! If I had combatted it with more attention, 
perhaps it would have gained less power over me! Perhaps 
this departure would not then have been necessary ; or even, 
in submitting to this painful course, I should have been 
able not to break off entirely an acquaintance which it would 
have sufficed to render less frequent ! But to lose everything 
at once! And for ever! O my friend! ... But, even as 
{ write to you, am I not wandering into criminal wishes ? 
Ah! Let me go, let me go, and at least let these involuntary 
errors be expiated by my sacrifices. 

Farewell, my respected friend ; love me as your daughter, 
adopt me as such ; and be certain that, in spite of my weakness, 
I would rather die than render myself unworthy of your 
choice. 

From... , 3rd of October, at one o’clock in the morning. 

283 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER CIIlI 
Madame de Rosemonde to Madame de Tourvel 

I was more distressed, my dear Beauty, by your departure 
than surprised at its cause ; a long experience and the interest 
I take in you were sufficient to enlighten me as to the state 
of your heart; and if I must tell you everything, your letter 
told me little or nothing I did not know. If I had had no 
information but your letter I should still not know who it 
is you love ; for in speaking of him the whole time you have 
not written his name once. But I notice it because I recollect 
that was always the style of love. I see it is now as it used 
to be. 

I did not think I should ever again be in a situation to 
have to return to memories so distant from me and so foreign 
to my years. Yet, since yesterday I have truly thought much 
upon them, from my desire to find something in them which 
might be of use to you. But what can I do except admire and 
pity you? I praise the wise course you have taken ; but it 
frightens me, because I conclude you felt it necessary ; and 
when you have reached that point it is very difficult to remain 
always distant from him to whom your heart always draws 
you near. 

Yet do not be discouraged. Nothing should be impossible 
to your fine soul; and even if you should one day have the 
misfortune to succumb (which God forbid !) believe me, my 
dear Beauty, keep for yourself at least the consolation of 
having fought with all your strength. And then, what 
human wisdom cannot do, Divine grace operates when it 
pleases, Perhaps you are on the eve of receiving this aid and 
your virtue, tried in these terrible struggles, will emerge purer 
and more brilliant. Hope that you will receive to-morrow 
the strength you do not possess to-day. Do not expect it as 
a matter of course, but as an encouragement to use all your 
own strength. 

When I leave to Providence the care of aiding you in 
a danger against which I can do nothing, I reserve for myself 
the task of supporting and consoling you as much as I am able, 

284 

LETTER CIV 

T shall not relieve your anguish, but I shall share it. On 
this basis I] will gladly receive your confidences. I feel your 
heart must need to pour itself out. I open mine to you; age 
has not yet chilled it to the point of being insensible to 
friendship. You will find it always ready to receive you. It 
will be a poor relief to your pain, but at least you will not 
weep alone; and when this unhappy love gains too much 
power over you and forces you to speak of it, it is better that 
it should be with me than with him. You see I am talking as 
you did ; and I believe that the two of us will never succeed 
in naming him ; however, we understand each other. 

I do not know if I am doing right to tell you that he 
appeared to be keenly affected by your departure ; it would 
perhaps be wiser not to tell you this; but I do not like that 
wisdom which distresses its friends. Yet I am compelled not 
to speak of him much longer. My failing sight and my 
trembling hand do not permit me long letters when I have to 
write them myself. 

Good-bye then, my dear Beauty, good-bye, my sweet 
child ; yes, I gladly adopt you as my daughter, and you indeed 
possess all that is needed to make the pride and pleasure of a 
mother. 

From the Chateau de ... , 3rd of October, 17—. 

LETTER CIV 
The Marquise de Mertewil to Madame de Volanges 

Indeed, my dear and good friend, I found it hard to avoid 
a feeling of pride when I read your letter. What! You 
honour me with your complete confidence ! You even go so 
far as to ask my advice! Ah! Iam very happy if I deserve 
this favourable opinion on your part ; if I do not owe it only 
to the favour of friendship. But whatever the motive, it is 
none the less precious to my heart ; and to have obtained it 
is in my eyes but one more reason for labouring to deserve 
it. I shall then (but without pretending to give you advice) 
tell you freely what I think. I am mistrustful of it because 
it differs from yours ; but when I have given you my reasons 
) 285 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

you will form your judgment; and if you condemn them 
I accept your judgment beforehand. At least I shall have the 
wisdom not to think myself wiser than you. 

But if on this single occasion my opinion appears preferable, 
the cause must be sought in the illusions of maternal love. 
Since this is a laudable sentiment, you must possess it. How 
well it can be perceived in the course you are tempted to 
take! It is thus, that if you ever err, it is in the choice of 
virtues, 

It seems to me that prudence is the preferable virtue 
when we are disposing of the fate of others, especially when 
it 1s a matter of binding it with an indissoluble and sacred 
tie like that of marriage. It is then that a mother, equally 
wise and tender, ought, as you say so well “to help her 
daughter with her experience’. Now, I ask you, what has she 
to do to achieve that? To distinguish for herself between 
what is pleasing and what is expedient. 

Would it not be debasing maternal authority, would it 
not be annihilating it, to subordinate it to a frivolous inclina- 
tion whose illusory power is only felt by those who dread it, 
which disappears as soon as it is treated with contempt. 
For my part, I confess I have never believed in these over- 
powering and irresistible passions, which by general agree- 
ment seem to have been made the excuse for our licentiousness. 
I cannot conceive how an inclination, which is born one moment 
and dies the next, can have more strength than the inalterable 
principles of decency, honour, and modesty; and I do not 
understand how a woman who betrays them can be justified 
by a pretended passion, any more than a thief would be by 
the passion for money or a murderer by that of vengeance. 

Ah! Who can say she has never had to struggle ? But 
I have always tried to convince myself that it was sufficient 
to want to resist in order to be able to do so; and hitherto 
at least my experience has confirmed my opinion. What 
would virtue be without the duties it imposes? Its cult is 
in our sacrifices, its reward in our hearts. These truths can 
only be denied by those whose interest it is to disregard them 
and who, being already depraved, hope to create a moment 
of illusion by trying to justify their bad conduct with bad 
reasons, 

286 

LETTER CIV 

But can one fear this from a simple and timid child, 
from a child born of you, whose modest pure education can 
only have fortified her natural good cha.acter ? Yet to this 
fear, which I dare to call humiliating to «your daughter, you 
wish to sacrifice the advantageous marriage your prudence 
had arranged for her! I like Danceny very much; and for 
a long time, as you know, I have seen little of M. de Gercourt ; 
but my friendship for the one, my indifference to the other, 
do not prevent me from feeling the enormous difference 
between them as husbands. 

Their birth is equal, I admit ; but one has no fortune and 
the other’s wealth is such that even without good birth 
it would have sufficed to lead him anywhere. 1 admit that 
money does not make happiness: but it must be admitted 
also that it greatly facilitates happiness. As you say, 
Mademoiselle de Volanges is wealthy enough for two; and 
yet, the income of sixty thousand livres she will enjoy is 
already not much when she bears the name of Danceny, 
when she must display and keep up an establishment worthy 
of it. We are no longer in the times of Madame de Sévigné. 
-Luxury absorbs everything; we deplore it, but we must 
smitate it ; and superfluities end up by absorbing necessities. 

As to the personal qualities which you consider so im- 
portant, and with such good reason ; assuredly M. de Gercourt 
is irreproachable in that respect; he has given proofs of it. 
I like to think, and I do indeed think that Danceny yields to 
him in nothing; but are we as sure of this? It is true that 
hitherto he has appeared free from the faults of his age and 
that, in spite of the current tone, he shows a taste for good 
company which allows one to augur well of him; but who 
knows if he does not owe this apparent virtue to the 
mediocrity of his fortune ? Evén if a man fears to be a rogue 
or debauched, he needs money to be a gambler and a libertine 
and he may like the faults whose excess he fears. In short, 
he would not be the thousandth who has kept good company 
solely because he could do nothing better. 

I do not say (God forbid !) that I think all this of him; 
but still there is always a risk of it; and how you would 
blame yourself if the result were unhappy ! What would you 
reply to your daughter if she said to you: ‘“ Mother, I was 

287 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

young and inexperienced ; I was carried away by an error 
pardonable at my age; but Heaven, which had foreseen my 
frailty, had given me a wise mother to redress it and to 
preserve me. Why then, forgetting your prudence, did you 
consent to my misfortune ? Was it for me to choose a husband 
when I knew nothing of the condition of marriage ? Even 
if I wished to do so, was it not for you to oppose it? But 
I never had that foolish presumption. I had decided to 
obey you and awaited your choice with respectful obedience ; 
I never departed from the submission which I owed you and 
yet to-day I endure the pain which is the lot of rebellious 
children. Ah! Your weakness has ruined me. . .”’ Perhaps 
her respect would stifle these complaints ; but maternal love 
would guess them; and though your daughter’s tears were 
concealed they would none the less flow upon your heart. 
Where then will you seek for consolation ? Will it be in this 
foolish love, against which you ought to have fore-armed her 
and by which, on the contrary, you will have allowed yourself 
to be seduced ? | 

I do not know, my dear friend, if I have too strong a 
prejudice against this passion ; but I think it is to be dreaded, 
even in marriage. It is not that 1 have any disapproval of 
a soft and virtuous sentiment which should embellish the 
conjugal tie and soften, as it were, the duties imposed by 
it; but the sentiment should not form the tie; the illusion 
of a moment should not govern our choice for life. After all, 
to choose, we must compare ; and how can we compare when 
one person occupies us entirely, when we cannot even com- 
prehend him since we are plunged in ecstasy and blindness ? 

As you may suppose I have met several women infected 
with this dangerous disorder; and I have received the con- 
fidences of some of them. To listen to them you would 
think every lover was a perfect being; but these illusory 
perfections only exist in their imaginations. Their excited 
minds dream of nothing but attractions and virtues; they 
invest the man they prefer with them at pleasure; it is the 
drapery of a god, often worn by an abject model; but in any 
case, they have scarcely dressed him up in them when they 
are duped by their own handiwork and prostrate themselves 
to adore it. 

288 © 

LETTER CIV 

FKither your daughter does not love Danceny or she 
is undergoing this illusion; it is:common to them both, 
if their love is mutual. Thus your reason for uniting them for 
ever comes down to the certainty that they do not know each 
other, that they cannot know each other. But, you will say, 
do M. de Gercourt and your daughter know each other any 
better ? No, doubtless they do not ; but at least they do not 
delude themselves, they are merely ignorant of each other. 
What happens in a such a case between two married people, 
whom I suppose to be virtuous ? Each of them studies the 
other, observes the other, seeks for and soon perceives what 
must be yielded to the other’s tastes and wishes for their 
mutual tranquillity. These slight sacrifices are made without 
pain because they are mutual and because they have been 
foreseen ; soon they create a mutual good-will; and habit 
which strengthens all inclinations it does not destroy little 
by little brings with it that gentle friendship, that tender 
confidence which, added to esteem, form in my opinion the 
real, the solid happiness of marriage. 

The illusions of love may be sweeter; but who does not 
know that they are less durable ? And what dangers are 
brought by the moment which destroys those illusions! It 
is then that the slightest faults appear offensive and un- 
endurable from their contrast with the idea of perfection 
which had seduced us. Yet each one thinks that the other 
alone has changed and that he or she still possesses the worth 
a moment of error won for them. They are surprised at not 
creating the charm they no longer feel; they are humiliated ; 
wounded vanity embitters their minds, increases their errors, 
produces ill-temper, gives birth to hatred ; and idle pleasures 
are paid for by long misfortunes. 

That, my dear friend, is how I think of the subject which 
now occupies us; I do not defend it, I merely express it ; 
it is for you to decide. But if you persist in your opinion 
I ask you to let me know the reasons which overcome mine ; 
I shall be very glad to be enlightened by you and above all 
to be reassured as to the fate of your charming child, whose 
happiness I desire most ardently, both from my friendship 
with her and from that which unites me to you for life. 

Paris, 4th of October, 17—. 
289 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER CV 
The Marquise de Merteuil to Cécile Volanges 

Well, little one, you are very angry and very much 
ashamed, and this M. de Valmont is a wicked man, is he not ? 
Why! He dares to treat you as the woman he loves best. 
He teaches you what you were dying to know! Indeed, such 
proceedings are unpardonable. And you, for your part, 
wished to keep your modesty for your lover (who does not 
abuse it) ; you only cherish the pains of love, not its pleasures ! 
Nothing could be better, and you would make an excellent 
figure in a novel. Passion, misfortune, above all virtue, 
what excellent things! In the midst of this brilliant throng 
one is bored sometimes, it is true, but then it is in turn boring. 

Come, poor child, how she is to be pitied! She had 
Tings under her eyes the next morning! And what will you 
say when they are caused by your lover? Ah! my angel, 
‘you will not always have them so; all men are not Valmonts. 
And then ; not to dare to lift those eyes ! Ah ! you were quite 
right there; everyone would have read your adventure in 
them! Believe me, if that were so, our women and even 
our girls would have a more modest gaze. 

In spite of the praises I am compelled to give you, as 
you see, it must still be admitted that you missed your master 
stroke—that was to tell your Mamma everything. You began 
so well! You had already thrown yourself into her arms, 
you were sobbing and she was crying too; what a pathetic 
scene! And what a pity you did not complete it! Your 
tender mother would have been delighted and, to aid your 
virtue, would have shut you up for the rest of your life; and 
there you could have loved as much as you liked, without 
rivals and without sin ; you could have despaired at leisure, 
and Valmont assuredly would not have come to trouble your 
grief with annoying pleasures. 

Seriously now, can you at over fifteen be as childish as 
you are? You are right to say you do not deserve my kind- 
ness. Yet I should like to be your friend; perhaps you will 
need one with the mother you have and the husband she wants 

290 

LETTER CV. 

to give you! But if you do not develop more, what is to be 
done with you ? What can be hoped if that which gives girls 
understanding takes yours away ? 

If you could but persuade yourself to reason a little, 
you would soon find that you ought to be glad rather than to 
complain. But you are ashamed, and that troubles you! 
Hey ! Calm yourself; the shame love causes is like its pain ; 
we only feel it once. We may feign it afterwards, but we do 
not feel it. However, the pleasure remains, and that is indeed 
something. I think I could make out through your chatter 
that you might count it for a good deal. Come now, a little 
honesty. That disturbance which prevented you from 
‘‘ doing what you said’’, which made you find it so “ difficult 
to defend’ yourself, which made you “as if sorry”’ when 
Valmont went away-—was it caused by shame? Or was it 
pleasure ? “‘ And his way of saying things which one does 
not know how to answer ’’—does that not come from “ his 
way of pleasing’’ ? Ah, little girl, you tell an untruth, and 
to your friend too. That is not right. But let us have no 
more of this. 

What would be a pleasure for anyone, and be only a 
pleasure, in your situation becomes positive happiness, 
Indeed, placed as you are between a mother whose love is 
important to you and a lover by whom you desire to be loved 
always, how can you fail to see that the only way to obtain 
these opposite ends is to occupy yourself with a third ? 
Entertained by this new adventure, you will appear to your 
Mamma to sacrifice to your submission to her an inclination 
which displeases her, while with your lover you will acquire 
the honour of a long resistance. While you continually 
assure him of your love, you will not grant him the last proofs 
of it. These refusals, which are not difficult in your present 
situation, he will place to the credit of your virtue ; he will 
complain perhaps but he will love the more, and, to secure the 
double merit, in the eyes of the one of sacrificing love, in the 
eyes of the other of resisting it, you have to do nothing but 
enjoy its pleasures. O, how many women have lost their 
reputation who would have preserved it with care if they could 
have supported it by such means ! 

Does not the course I propose to you seem the most 

291 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

reasonable, as it is the pleasantest ? Do you know what you 
have gained by your present course ? Your Mamma attributes 
your increase of sadness to an increase of love ; she is angered 
by it and she is only waiting to be more certain to punish 
you. She has just written to me; she will try everything to 
obtain this admission from you. She will perhaps go so far, 
she tells me, as to propose Danceny to you as a husband ; and 
that to get you to speak! If you let yourself be deceived by 
this false tenderness, 1f you reply as your heart wishes, you 
will soon be shut up for a long time, perhaps for ever, where 
you can cry at pleasure over your blind credulity. 

You must combat this ruse she is going to make use of 
against you by another. Begin by showing less sadness, by 
making her believe that you are thinking less of Danceny. 
She will be the more readily convinced of it, since it is the 
usual effect of absence ; and she will be all the more pleased 
with you because it gives her an opportunity to congratulate 
herself on her prudence, which suggested this way. But if 
she retains some doubt and persists in testing you, if she speaks 
to you of marriage, show yourself, as a well-born girl should, 
completely submissive. After all, what do you risk? One 
husband is as good as another; and the most inconvenient 
is less so than a mother. 

Once she is more pleased with you, your Mamma will 
marry you; and you will be freer in your movements and 
you will be able to leave Valmont for Danceny as you choose, 
or even to keep them both. For, notice this, your Danceny 
is agreeable, but he is one of those men one can have when 
and as long as one wishes ; you can therefore be easy about 
him. It is not the same with Valmont ; it is difficult to keep 
him; and it is dangerous to leave him. With him you need 
a lot of skill, or, if you do not possess it, great docility. But | 
if you can succeed in attaching him to you as a friend, that 
would be good fortune! He would put you at once in the 
first rank of our fashionable women. That is the way to 
acquire a position in the world, not by blushing and crying 
as you did when the nuns made you eat your dinner kneeling. 

If you are wise you will try to patch matters up with 
Valmont, who must be very angry with you; and since we 
must make up for our silly mistakes, do not be afraid to make 

292 

LETTER CVI 

some advances to him ; you will soon learn that if men make 
the first advances to us, we are almost always obliged to make 
the second. You have a pretext for this ; for you must not 
keep this letter and [ insist that you "give it to Valmont as 
soon as you have read it. But do not forget to re-seal it 
first. You must be left the merit of the measure you are 
going to take with him and it must not seem to have been 
suggested to you; and then you are the only person in the 
world with whom I am friendly enough to speak as I am 
doing. 

Good-bye, my angel, follow my advice and tell me if it 
turns out well. 

P.S. By the way, I forgot. .. One word more. Try to 
take more care with your style. You still write like a child. 
I see why that is; it is because you say everything you think 
and nothing you do not think. That is all very well between 
you and me who have nothing to hide from each other, but 
with everyone else |! Above all with your lover! You will always 
seem like a little fool. You can see that when you write to 
someone it is for him and not for yourself; you ought then 
to try less to say what you are thinking than to say what will 
please him more. 

Good-bye, my heart; I kiss you instead of scolding you 
in the hope that you will be more reasonable. 

Paris, 4th of October, 17—. 

LETTER CVI 
The Marquise de Mertewl to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Wonderful! Vicomte, and this time I love you madly ! 
For the rest, after the first of your two letters the second 
might have been expected ; so it did not surprise me ; and 
while you were so proud of your success, while you solicited 
your reward and asked me if I were ready, I saw I had no such 
need to hurry. Yes, on my word of honour ; when I read the 
fine account of that tender scene and that you had been so 
“profoundly moved ” ; when I saw that restraint, worthy of 
the best ages of our chivalry, I said twenty times: That 
affair will be a failure ! 

293 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

But it could not have been otherwise. What do you 
expect a poor woman to do when she yields herself and is not 
taken ? Faith, in such cases, honour at least must be saved ; 
and that is what your Madame de Tourvel has done. For my 
part I know that the course she took is really not ineffective 
and I propose to make use of it on my own account, at the 
first serious opportunity which occurs ; but I promise that if 
the man for whom I go to the trouble does not profit by it 
better than you, he may certainly renounce me for ever. 

There you are, absolutely reduced to nothingness, and 
that between two women, one of whom was already at the 
day after and the other was asking nothing better than to be 
there! Well! You will think I am boasting and that it is 
easy to prophesy after the event; but I swear to you that 
I expected it. The fact is, you have not the genius of your 
condition ; you only know what you have learned, and you 
invent nothing. Thus, as soon as circumstances do not 
fit your usual formulas and you have to leave the beaten path, 
you are as taken aback as a schoolboy. So, on the one side 
a puerility, on the other side a return of prudery, are 
sufficient to disconcert you because they are not to be met 
with every day, and you can neither avoid nor remedy them. 
Ah! Vicomte, Vicomte, you teach me not to judge of men 
by their successes ; very soon we shall have to say of you: 
He was brave on such a day. And when you have piled 
stupidities on stupidities, you come to me! It appears I have 
nothing else to do but to retrieve them. I shall soon have 
plenty of work, it is plain. 

In any case, one of these two adventures was undertaken 
against my will and I shall not meddle with it; as to the 
other, since it was partly out of consideration for me, I make it 
my business. The letter I enclose, which you will read and then 
give to the Volanges girl, is more than sufficient to bring her 
back to you; but I beg you to give some attention to the 
child and let us together make her the despair of her mother 
and of Gercourt. There is no need to fear increasing the 
doses, I see clearly that the little person will not be frightened 
by it; and once we have carried out our intentions she will 
become what she can. 

I take no further interest in her. I had some idea of 

294 

LETTER CVI 

making her at least a subsidiary intriguer and to take her on 
to play second parts under me; but I see she has not the 
material in her; she has a silly ingent-ousness which has not 
even yielded to the specific you efhployed, which is hardly 
ever unsuccessful ; and in my opinion, it 1s the most danger- 
ous malady a woman can have. It shows especially a weak- 
ness of character, almost always incurable, which thwarts 
everything ; so that while we are trying to fit this girl for 
intrigue we shall make nothing of her but a facile woman. 
Now, I know nothing so flat as the facility of stupidity which 
yields without knowing how or why, solely because it 1s 
attached and does not know how to resist. These sorts of 
women are absolutely nothing but pleasure machines. 

You will tell me that that is the only thing to do and 
that it suffices for our plans. Well enough! But do not 
forget that very soon everybody gets to know the springs 
and contrivances of these machines; so, to make use of this 
one without danger, we must hurry, know when to stop, and 
then break it. After all, we shall have plenty of ways of 
getting rid of her, and Gercourt will always shut her up when 
we like to make him. Indeed, when he can no longer doubt 
his discomfiture, when it is public and notorious, what does it 
matter to us whether he revenges himself, so long as he has 
no consolation ? What I say of the husband, you doubtless 
think of the mother ; so it is as good as done. 

The course I consider best, and have fixed on, has de- 
cided me to lead the young person rather quickly, as you will 
see from my letter; this makes it very important to leave 
nothing in her hands which might compromise us, and I beg 
you will give your attention to this. This precaution once 
taken, I will look after the moral side, the rest concerns you. 
If we see later that she gets over her ingenuousness, we shall 
always have time to change our plans. One day or other we 
should have had to consider what we were going to do; in 
any event our trouble will not be wasted. 

Do you know my trouble was nearly wasted and that 
Gercourt’s star very nearly overcame my prudence ? Did not 
Madame de Volanges have a moment of maternal weakness ? 
And did she not want to give her daughter to Danceny ? 
That was what was meant by that more tender interest you 

295 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

noticed on ‘‘ the morning after”. It is you again who would 
have been the cause of this wonderful master stroke ! 
Happily, the tender mother wrote to me, and I hope my reply 
will disgust her with the idea. I talked so much of virtue 
and above all I flattered her so much that she is certain to 
think I am right. 

I am sorry I had not time to take a copy of my letter, 
to edify you with the austerity of my morals. You would 
have seen what scorn J have for women so depraved as to have 
a lover! It is convenient to be a rigorist in words! It 
never hurts others and does not hinder us in the least... . 
And then I happen to know that the good lady had weaknesses, 
like others, in her youth and I was not sorry to humiliate her, 
at least in her conscience; that consoled me a little for the 
praises I gave her against my own conscience. And in the 
same letter the idea of harming Gercourt gave me the courage 
to speak well of him. 

Good-bye, Vicomte ; I strongly approve your determina- 
tion to stay where you are for some time. I have no means 
of hastening your advance; but J invite you to chase away 
boredom with our common pupil. As to what concerns me, 
you will see (in spite of your polite quotation) that you must 
wait a little longer; and no doubt you will admit that it is 
not my fault. 

LETTER CVII 
Azolan to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Monsieur, 

In accordance with your orders I went, as soon as I got 
your letter, to M. Bertrand, who handed me twenty-five 
louis, as you ordered him. I asked him for two more for 
Philippe, whom I had told tostart at once, as Monsieur wrote 
me, and who had no money ; but your agent would not do it, 
saying that he had no order for it from you. I was obliged 
to give them myself and Monsieur will take this into account, 
if he will be so good. 

Philippe started yesterday evening. I warned him not 
to leave the inn, so that I can be sure to find him if necessary. 

296 

LETTER CVII 

Immediately afterwards I went to Madame de Tourvel’s 
house to see Mademoiselle Julie ; but she had gone out, and 
I only spoke to La Fleur, from whom I learned nothing, 
because since his return he has only been in the house to 
meals. The second footman is doing all the waiting, and 
Monsieur knows that I have no acquaintance with him. 
But I began to-day. 

I went back this morning to Mademoiselle Julie and she 
seemed very pleased to see me. I asked her what was the 
cause of her Mistress’s returning ; but she told me she knew 
nothing about it, and I think she was telling the truth. I re- 
proached her for not having told me she was going and she 
assured me she only knew it the same evening when she went 
to help Madame to bed; so she spent the whole night in 
packing and the poor girl did not have two hours sleep. She 
only left her Mistress’s room that evening after one o’clock, 
and when she went, her Mistress was beginning to write. 

In the morning when Madame de Tourvel was leaving she 
gave a packet to the Concierge of the Chdteau. Mademoiselle 
Julie does not know who it was for ; she says perhaps it was 
for Monsieur ; but Monsieur does not say anything about it. 

During the whole journey Madame had a large hood over 
her face, so she could not be seen; but Mademoiselle Julie 
thinks she can be sure she often cried. She did not say a word 
all the way and would not stop at ....1, as she did when 
coming; which did not please Mademoiselle Julie who had 
had no breakfast. But, as I told her, Masters are masters. 

On arriving, Madame went to bed; but she only stayed 
there two hours. When she got up she sent for the door- 
porter and told him to allow no one to come in. She made no 
toilet at all. She sat down at table to dine ; but she only ate 
a little soup and left at once. Her coffee was taken up to her 
and Mademoiselle Julie went in at the same time. She found 
her Mistress arranging papers in her writing-desk and she saw 
they were letters. I would wager they are Monsieur’s; and 
one of the three which came in the afternoon she kept in 
front of her all evening! I am sure it was another of 
Monsieur’s again. But why did she go away like that ? That 

1The same village mentioned before, half-way between Paris and 
the Chateau. (C. de L.). 

297 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

surprises me. Monsieur must surely know? But it is not 
my business. 

Madame de Tourvel went to the library in the afternoon 
and took two books which she brought up to her boudoir ; 
but Mademoiselle Julie assures me she did not read them a 
quarter of an hour all day, and that she did nothing but read 
this letter, think, and lean her head on her hand. As I thought 
Monsieur would be glad to know what these books were, and 
Mademoiselle Julie did not know, I got myself taken into 
the library, under the pretext of seeing it. There were empty 
places for only two books; one is the second volume of 
“Christian Thoughts ’’, and the other, the first volume of the 
book, has the title “ Clarissa’, I write it just as it was; 
Monsieur will perhaps know it. 

Yesterday evening Madame did not take supper; she 
only had some tea. 

She rang early this morning; she asked for her horses 
at once and before nine o’clock she went to the Feuillants, 
where she heard Mass. She wanted to go to confession, but 
her confessor was away and he will not be back for eight or 
ten days ; I thought it important to tell Monsieur that. 

Afterwards, she came back, had breakfast, and began to 
write, and remained at it until one o’clock. I soon found 
an opportunity to do what Monsieur most desires; and it 
was | took the letters to post. There was none for Madame de 
Volanges ; but I send one to Monsieur which was for Monsieur 
de Tourvel; I thought that would be the most important 
There was one for Madame de Rosemonde as well; but 
I supposed Monsieur could always see it when he wanted, so 
I let it go. Moreover, Monsieur will soon know everything 
since Madame de Tourvel writes to him also. In the future 
I shall have all the letters Monsieur wants, for it is almost 
always Mademoiselle Julie who gives them to the servants, 
and she assures me that from friendship to me, and to Monsieur 
too, she will gladly do what I want. : 

She even refused the money I offered her; but I think 
Monsieur would wish to give her some little present ; and if 
it is his wish and he will leave it to me, I shall easily find out 
what will please her. 

I hope that Monsieur will not think I have shown any 

a nO 

LETTER CVIII 

negligence in his service, and I have it upon my heart to 
justify myself from his reproaches. If I did not know that 
Madame de Tourvel was leaving, the reason is my zeal for 
Monsieur’s service, since it is he who made me leave at three 
o'clock in the morning; and that was why I did not see 
Mademoiselle Julie the night before, as usual, having gone to 
sleep at the roadside inn, so as not to wake the Chateau. 

As to what Monsieur says about my being often without 
money, first it 1s because I like to keep clean-looking, as 
Monsieur can see; and then I must keep up the honour of 
the cloth I wear; I know that I ought to save a little for the 
future ; but I confide entirely in the generosity of Monsieur, 
who is such a good Master. 

As to entering Madame de Tourvel’s service, while re- 
maining in Monsieur’s, I hope Monsieur will not insist on 
it. It was very different with Madame la Duchesse; but 
assuredly I will not wear livery, and a magistrate’s livery, 
after having had the honour to be Monsieur’s servant. In 
anything else Monsieur may dispose of him who has the honour 
to be with as much respect as affection, his most humble servant. 

Roux Azolan, Chasseur. 

Paris, 5th of October, 17—-, at eleven o’clock at night. 

LETTER CVIII 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Rosemonde 

O my indulgent mother! How many thanks I have to 
give you and what need I had of your letter! J read and re- 
read it continually ; I could not tear myself away from it. 
I owe to it the only less painful moments I have passed since 
I left. How good you are! Wisdom and virtue, then, can 
feel for weakness ! You have pity on my misfortunes! Ah! 
If you knew them! ... They are terrible. I thought I had 
endured the pains of love; but the inexpressible torture, the 
torture which must be felt for one to have any idea of, is to 
be separated from what one loves, and separated forever! ... 
Yes, the pain which overwhelms me to-day will return to- 
morrow, the day after to-morrow, all my life! Heaven! 
How young I am still, and how long I have yet to suffer ! 

299 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

_To be oneself the creator of one’s misery; to tear one’s 
heart with one’s own hands; and, while suffering these 
unendurable pains, to feel every instant that one could end 
them with a word and that this word is a sin! Ah! My 
friend! ... 

When I took this painful step of going away from him, 
I hoped that absence would increase my courage and my 
strength ; how much I was deceived! On the contrary, it 
seems to have completed their destruction. It is true I had 
more to struggle against ; but even in resistance everything 
was not deprivation; at least I saw him sometimes; often, 
without daring to raise my eyes to his, I felt his gaze fixed 
upon me; yes, my friend, I felt it, 1t seemed to warm my 
soul; and without passing through my eyes it none the less 
reached my heart. Now, in my painful solitude, isolated 
from everything that is dear to me, alone with my mis- 
fortune, every moment of my sad existence is marked by 
tears, and nothing softens their bitterness, no consolation 
mingles with my sacrifices ; those I have made hitherto only 
serve to make more painful those I have still to make. 

Yesterday I felt it very keenly. Among the letters brought 
to me there was one from him; I recognised it among the 
others when the servant was a yard away. Involuntarily 
I got up; I trembled, I had difficulty in hiding my emotion ; 
and this state was not without pleasure. A moment later 
I was alone and this deceptive pleasure soon vanished and 
left me only one sacrifice the more to make. Indeed, could 
I open that letter, which I was burning to read ? Through the 
fatality which pursues me, the consolations which appear 
to come to me, only impose new privations; and these 
become still more cruel, from the thought that M. de Valmont 
shares them. 

There it is at last, that name which continually occupies 
me and which I have such difficulty in writing; the kind 
of reproach you made me really alarmed me. I beg you to 
believe that my confidence in you was not lessened by false 
shame ; and why should I blush toname him? Ah! I blush 
for my feelings, not the person who causes them. Who else 
is more worthy of inspiring them! Yet I do not know why 
that name does not naturally come to my pen; and this 

300 

LETTER CIX 

time too, I had to think before putting it down. I come back 
to him. 

You tell me that he seemed keenly affected by my leaving. 
What has he done ? What has he said? Has he talked of 
returning to Paris? I beg you to dissuade him from it as 
much as youcan. If he has judged me rightly, he ought not 
to be angry with me for this step; but he ought to feel too 
that it is a final determination. One of my greatest tortures 
is not knowing what he thinks. I still have his letter here .. . 
but you will surely agree with me that I ought not to open it. 

It is only through you, my indulgent friend, that I am 
not entirely separated from him. I do not wish to impose 
upon your kindness; I understand perfectly that your 
letters cannot be long; but you will not refuse a word to your 
child ; a word to support her courage, a word to console her. 
Good-bye, my respected friend. 

Paris, 5th of October, 17—. 

LETTER CIX 
Cécile Volanges to the Marquise de Merteusl 

It is only to-day, Madame, that I returned to M. de Valmont 
the letter you did me the honour to write me. I kept it four 
days, in spite of my terror lest someone should find it, but I hid 
it very carefully ; and when my grief returned I locked myself 
in to read it. 

I see that what I thought a great misfortune is scarcely 
one at all; and J must admit there is great pleasure in it ; 
so I am scarcely at all unhappy. There is only the idea of 
Danceny which still torments me sometimes. But already 
there are many times when I do not think of him at all! And 
also M. de Valmont is very charming ! 

I made things up with him two days ago; it was very 
easy; for I had only said two words when he said that if 
I had anything to say to him he would come to my room at 
night, and I had only to say that I agreed. And then, when 
he came, he seemed no mote angry than if I had never done 
anything to annoy him. He only scolded me afterwards and 

301 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

then very gently and in sucha way. . . Just like you; which 
proves to me that he was friendly to me too. 

I cannot tell you how many funny things he has told me 
which I should never have thought, especially about Mamma. 
You would do me a great pleasure if you would tell me 
whether it is all true. What is certain is that I could not keep 
from laughing; so that once I laughed out loud, which 
frightened us very much; for Mamma might have heard it ; 
and if she had come to see what it was, what would have 
become of me? She would certainly have sent me back to 
the convent this time ! 

As we must be prudent and since, as M. de Valmont says, 
he would not risk compromising me for the world, we have 
agreed that henceforth he will simply come and open the door 
and we will go to his room. There is nothing to fear there ; 
I went there yesterday and as I write you now I am waiting 
for him to come. I hope, Madame, you will not scold me now. 

Yet there is one thing in your letter which surprised me ; 
it is what you say about Danceny and M. de Valmont when 
Iam married. I thought that one day at the Opera you said 
just the opposite, that when I was married I could only 
love my husband and that I should even have to forget 
Danceny; perhaps I did not hear properly and I should 
prefer it to be otherwise, because now I do not feel afraid 
of my marriage. I even want it, because I shall have more 
liberty ; I hope that I can then arrange things so as not to 
think of anything but Danceny. I feel I should only be really 
happy with him ; for the idea of him always torments me and 
I am not happy except when I do not think of him, which is 
very difficult; and as soon as I think of him, I become 
unhappy at once. 

What consoles me a little is that you assure me Danceny 
will love me all the more ; but are you quite sure? ... Oh! 
yes, you would not deceive me. Yet it is amusing that I should 
love Danceny and that M.de Valmont... But, as you say, 
perhaps it is a piece of good fortune! We shall see, in any 
case. 

I did not quite understand what you meant about my 
way of writing. It seems to me that Danceny likes my 
letters as they are. Yet I do not fee] that I should tell him 

202 

LETTER CX 

anything of what is going on between M. de Valmont and me ; 
so you have no reason to fear. 

Mamma has not yet spoken to me about my marriage ; 
but let things go ; when she speaks to me, I promise you I shall 
tell her lies, since she wants to catch me. 

Good-bye, my kind friend; I thank you very much and 
I promise you I shall never forget all your kindness to me. 
I must stop now, for it is after one o’clock ; M. de Valmont 
will be here soon. 

From the Chateau de ..., roth of October, 17-—. 

) 

LETTER CX 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteusl 

“Powers of Heaven, I had a soul for grief; give me one 
for joy! I think it is the tender Saint-Preux who expresses 
himself thus. Better gifted than he, I possess the two 
existences at once. Yes, my friend, Iam at the same time 
very happy and very unhappy; and since you have my 
entire confidence I owe you the double account of my pains 
and of my pleasures. 

Know then that my ungracious devotee is still severe to 
me. I am at the fourth returned letter. Perhaps I am wrong 
to say the fourth; for having guessed at the first return 
that it would be followed by many others, and not wishing 
to waste my time, I adopted the course of putting my com- 
plaints into commonplaces and adding no date; and since 
the second post it is always the same letter which goes to and 
fro; I only change the envelope. If my Beauty ends up as 
Beauties usually do, and softens one day, at least from lassi- 
tude, she will at last keep the missive and it will then be time 
to find out how things are going. You will see that with this 
new sort of correspondence I cannot be perfectly informed. 

Yet I have discovered that the unstable person has 
changed her confident ; at least I have made certain that 
since her departure from the Chdteau no letter has come 

1 Nouvelle Héloise. (C. de I..). 
393 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

from her for Madame de Volanges, while there have been two 
for old Rosemonde ; and as she has said nothing about it 
to us, as she no longer opens her mouth about “ her dear 
Beauty ,”’ whom she used to talk of ceaselessly, I concluded 
that it was she who now has her confidence. I presume that 
on the one hand, the need to speak of me, and on the 
other the little shame of having to make admissions to Madame 
de Volanges about a sentiment so long disavowed, have 
produced this great revolution. I am afraid I have lost by 
the change ; for the older women get, the more harsh and 
severe they become; the first would have said worse things 
about me; but the other will say them about love ; and the 
tender prude is much more terrified of the sentiment than 
of the person. 

The only way for me to find out is, as you see, to intercept 
this clandestine commerce. I have already sent orders 
about it to my man-servant; and I await the execution of 
them daily. Until then I can do nothing except at hazard ; 
so for the last week 1 have been vainly going over all the 
known methods, all those in novels and in my secret memolrs. 
I do not find one which suits either the circumstances of the 
adventure or the character of the heroine. The difficulty 
would not be to get into her house, even at night, or even 
to drug her and to make her a new Clarissa; but after more 
than two months of attentions and trouble, to have recourse 
to means which are not mine! To crawl servilely in the 
traces of others, and to triumph without glory! ... No, 
she shall not have “‘ the pleasures of vice and the honours of 
virtue.”’ ? It is not enough for me to possess her, I want 
her to yield to me. Now, to achieve that I must not. only 
get into her house but come there by her consent, find her 
alone and‘with the intention of listening to me, above all 
I must close her eyes to the danger, for if she sees it she will 
either overcome it or die. But the more I know what ought 
to be done, the more difficulty I find in carrying it out ; and 
even if you should laugh at me again, I must admit to you 
that my embarrassment increases the more I dwell on it. 

I think my head would turn, but for the pleasant distrac- 

1 Nouvelle Héloise. (C. de L.). 
304 

LETTER CX 

tions given me by our common pupil; I owe it to her that I 
have done something else except write elegies. 

Would you believe that the little girl was so timid that 
three whole days passed before your Jetter had produced all 
its effect ? See how a single false idea can spoil the best 
natures ! 

It was not until Saturday that she came circling about 
me and stammered a few words ; but spoken in so low a tone 
and so stifled by shame, that it was impossible for me to hear 
them. But the blushing they caused allowed me to guess their 
sense. Up till then I had remained proud ; but softened by 
sO amusing a repentance I promised to go to the pretty 
penitent the same evening; and this grace on my part was 
received with all the gratitude due to so great a benefit. 

As I never lose sight of your plans or of mine, I resolve 
to profit by this occasion to find out exactly what the child 
is worth and to accelerate her education. But to carry out 
this labour with more liberty, I needed to change the place 
of our rendez-vous ; for a mere closet, which separated your 
pupil’s room from her mother’s, could not inspire her with 
sufficient confidence to allow her to display herself freely. 
I had therefore promised myself to make some _ noise 
‘“innocently’’, which would cause her sufficient fear to 
persuade her to take a surer refuge in the future ; she spared 
me that trouble too. 

The little person laughs easily; and to encourage her 
gaiety I related to her, during our intervals, all the scandalous 
adventures which came into my head; and to make them 
more attractive and the better to hold her attention, I laid 
them all to the credit of her Mamma ; whom I amused myself 
in this way by covering with vices and ridicule. 

It was not without a reason that I made this choice ; 
it encouraged my timid pupil better than anything else and 
at the same time inspired her with a most profound contempt 
for her mother. I have long noticed that, if this method is 
not always necessary for seducing a girl, it is indispensable 
and often the most efficacious way, when you wish to deprave 
her ; for she who does not respect her mother will not respect 
herself, a moral truth which I think so useful that I was 
very glad to furnish an example in support of the precept. 

395 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

However, your pupil, who was not thinking of morality, 
was suffocated with laughter every instant ; and at last she 
once almost laughed out loud. I had no difficulty in making 
her believe that she had made “‘a terrible noise’’. I feigned 
a great terror which she easily shared. To make her remember 
it better I did not allow pleasure to reappear, and left her 
alone three hours earlier than usual; so, on separating, we 
agreed that from the next day onwards the meeting should 
be in my room. 

I have received her there twice ; and in this short space 
the scholar has become almost as learned as the master. 
Yes, truly, I have taught her everything, including the 
complaisances ! I only excepted the precautions. 

Occupied thus all night, I make up for it by sleeping a 
large part of the day; and as the present society of the 
Chateau has nothing to attract me, I scarcely appear in the 
drawing-room for an hour during the day. To-day I even 
decided to eat in my room and I only mean to leave it after 
this for short walks. These fantasies are supposed to be on 
account of myhealth. I declared that I was ‘‘ overcome with 
vapours’’; I also announced that I was rather feverish. 
It costs me nothing but the speaking in a slow, colourless 
voice. As to the change in my face, rely upon your pupil. 
“ Love will see to that.’’? I spend my leisure in thinking of 
means to regain my ungracious lady, of the advantages I have 
lost, and also in composing a kind of catechism of sensuality 
for the use of my scholar. I amuse myself by naming every- 
thing by the technical word ; and I laugh in advance at the 
interesting conversation this will furnish between her and 
Gercourt on the first night of their marriage. Nothing could 
be more amusing than the ingeniousness with which she already 
uses the little she knows of this speech ! She does not imagine 
that anyone can speak otherwise. The child is really seduc- 
tive! The contrast of naive candour with the language of 
effrontery makes a great effect; and, I do not know why, 
only fantastic things please me now. 

Perhaps I am giving myself up too much to this, since 
I am wasting both my time and my health; but I hope that 
my feigned illness, besides saving me from the boredom 

1 Regnard, Folies Amoureuses. (C. de L.). 

306 

LETTER CxI 

of the drawing-room, may also be of some use to me with the 
austere devotee, whose tigress virtue is nevertheless allied with 
soft sensibility ! I have no doubt that she already knows 
of this great event, and I should much like to know what 
she thinks of it; the more so since I should wager she will 
not fail to attribute the honour of it to herself. I shall regulate 
the state of my health according to the impression it makes 
on her. 

You now know, my fair friend, as much about my affairs 
as I do. I should like soon to have more important news to 
tell you ; and I beg you to believe that in the pleasure I promise 
myself, I count for a great deal the reward I expect from 
you. 

From the Chateau de , 11th of October, 17—. 

LETTER CX] 
The Comte de Gercourt to Madame de Volanges 

Everything in this country, Madame, seems as if it will be 
tranquil ; and we are daily expecting permission to return to 
France. I hope that you will not doubt I have still the 
same eagerness to return and to form the bonds which will 
unite me to you and to Mademoiselle de Volanges. But 
Monsieur le duc de .... my cousin, to whom as you know, 
I have so many obligations, has just informed me of his recall 
from Naples. He tells me that he means to pass through Rome 
and to see on his way that part of Italy he does not yet know. 
He invites me to accompany him on this journey, which will 
last for six weeks or two months. I do not hide from you that 
it would be agreeable for me to profit by this opportunity, 
since I feel that once I am married it will be difficult for me 
to take the time for other absences than those demanded by 
my service, And perhaps it would be more becoming to wait 
until the winter for this marriage, since all my relatives will 
not be gathered in Paris until then, and especially Monsieur 
le Marquis de ...., to whom I owe the hope of being related 
to you. In spite of these considerations, my plans in this 
matter shall be absolutely subordinated to yours. And should 

397 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

you prefer your first arrangement, I am ready to renounce 
mine. I only beg you to let me know your intentions in 
this matter as soon as possible. I shall await your reply here 
and my conduct will be guided by that alone. 

I am with respect, Madame, and with all the sentiments 
which befit a son, your most humble, etc. 

Comte de Gercourt. 
Bastia, roth of October, 17—. 

LETTER CxIl 

Madame de Rosemonde to Madame de Tourvel 
(Dictated) 

I have only just received, my dear Beauty, your letter 
of the eleventh,? and the gentle reproaches it contains. Confess 
that you would have liked to reproach me more; and that 
if you had not remembered you were “ my daughter’’, you 
would have really scolded me. Yet you would have been very 
unjust ! It was the desire and hope of being able to reply 
to you myself which made me put it off each day, and you 
see that to-day I am still obliged to borrow my waiting- 
woman’s hand. My unfortunate rheumatism has come back. 
It has settled this time in the right arm and I am absolutely 
one-armed. See what it is, young and fresh as you are, to 
have so old a friend! We suffer for these inconveniences. 

As soon as my pain gives me a little respite I promise 
to talk to you at length. Meanwhile I can only tell you that 
I have received your two letters; that they would have 
increased my tender friendship for you, had that been 
possible ; and that I shall never cease to be keenly interested 
in everything that touches you. 

My nephew is also a little indisposed, but without any 
danger and without the least cause for uneasiness; it is a 
slight inconvenience which, in my opinion, affects his temper 
- more than his health. We scarcely see him any more. 

His retirement and your departure do not make our 

1 This letter could not be found. (C. de L.). 
308 

LETTER CXIII 

little circle any gayer. The Volanges child especially finds 
great fault with you and all day long yawns incessantly. 
Particularly in the last few days she has done us the honour 
of going fast asleep after dinner. é 

Good-bye, my dear Beauty; I am always your good 
friend, your Mamma, your sister even, if my great age per- 
mitted me that title. In short, I am attached to you by all 
my tenderest feelings. 

(Signed Adelaide, for Madame de Rosemonde) 
From the Chiteau de , 14th of October, 17—. 

LETTER CXIII 
The Marquise de Merteutl to the Vicomte de Valmont 

I think I ought to warn you, Vicomte, that people in 
Paris are beginning to talk about you; that your absence 
has been noticed and that the cause is already guessed. 
Yesterday I was at a supper where many people were present ; 
it was positively announced that you were detained in a village 
by a romantic and unfortunate love; immediately joy was 
painted on the faces of all the men who envy your successes 
and of all the women you have neglected. If you will take 
my advice, you will not allow these dangerous rumours to gain 
ground, and you will return at once and destroy them by your 
presence. ) . 

Remember that once you allow the idea that you cannot 
be resisted to be destroyed, you will soon find that in fact 
you will be resisted more easily; that your rivals will also 
lose their respect for you and will dare to compete with you ; 
for which among them does not believe himself stronger than 
virtue ? Remember especially that among the multitude of 
women you have claimed, all those you have not had will try 
to undeceive the public, while the others will attempt to abuse 
it. In short, you must expect to be ranked perhaps as far 
below your value, as you have hitherto been ranked above it. 

Come back, Vicomte, and do not sacrifice your reputation 
to a childish caprice. You have done all we wanted with 
the Volanges girl; and as to your Madame de Tourvel, you 

399 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

will not satisfy your whim for her by remaining ten leagues 
distant from her. Do you think she will come to look for 
you ? Perhaps she no longer thinks of you or only concerns 
herself with you to congratulate herself on having humiliated 
you. Here at least you might find some opportunity of 
reappearing with effect, and you need it; and even if you 
persist in your ridiculous adventure I do not see that your 
return can make any difference. . .; on the contrary. 

Indeed, if your Madame de Tourvel “‘ adores you’; as 
you have told me so often and proved to me so little ; her one 
consolation, her only pleasure, now must be to talk about 
you, to know what you are doing, what you are saying, what 
you are thinking, down to the smallest things which concern 
you. These trifles gain value according to the privations one 
undergoes. They are the crumbs of bread falling from the 
rich man’s table ; he despises them ; but the poor man eagerly 
gathers them and is fed by them. At present poor Madame 
de Tourvel receives all these crumbs; and the more of them 
she has, the less she will be in a hurry to indulge in an appetite 
for the rest. 

Moreover, since you know her confident you can have no 
doubt that each letter from her contains at least a little sermon 
and everything she thinks likely ‘‘ to strengthen her modesty 
and fortify her virtue.” Then why leave the one resources 
for defence and the other the opportunities for harming you ? 

It is not that I am at all of your opinion about the loss 
you think you*have sustained by the change of confidents. 
First of all, Madame de Volanges hates you and hatred is 
always more clear-sighted and more ingenious than friend- 
ship. All your old aunt’s virtue will never bring her for a 
single instant to speak ill of her dear nephew ; for virtue also 
has its weaknesses. And then your fears are founded on an 
absolutely false observation. 

It is not true that ‘‘ the older women are, the more harsh 
and severe they become’’. It is between forty and fifty that 
the despair of seeing their beauty fade, the rage of feeling 
themselves obliged to abandon the pretentions and the 
pleasures to which they still cling, make almost all women © 
disdainfully prudish and crabbed. They need this long 

1 ‘On ne s’avise jamais de tout !’’ Comedy. (C. de L.). 

310 

LETTER CxIll 

interval to make the whole of that great sacrifice; but as 
soon as it is consummated, they all fall into two classes. 

The more numerous, that of women who have never had 
to their advantage anything but their face and their youth, 
fall into an imbecile apathy and never come out of it except 
to play cards and for a few devotional practices; this kind 
is always boring, often grumbling, sometimes a little quarrel- 
some but rarely spiteful. It cannot be said either that these 
women are or are not severe; without ideas and without 
existence, they repeat with indifference and without compre. 
hension everything they hear said, and in themselves remain 
absolute nullities. 

The other class, much more rare but really valuable, is 
that of women who, having had character and having not 
failed to nourish their minds, are able to create an existence 
for themselves when that of nature fails them, and adopt the 
course of giving to their minds all the ornaments they formerly 
employed for their faces. They generally have a very clear 
judgment, and a mind which 1s at once solid, gay,and gracious. 
They replace seductive charms by engaging kindness and still 
more by a cheerfulness whose charm increases in proportion 
to their age; in this way they succeed to some extent in be- 
coming friends with youth and in making themselves beloved 
by it. But then, far from being, as you say, “ harsh and 
severe’’, the habit of indulgence, their long reflections on 
human weakness, and above all the memories of their youth, 
by which alone they still hold to life, place them perhaps rather 
too near laxity. 

I can tell you as well that as I have always sought out 
old women, the usefulness of whose support I early recognised, 
I have found among them several to whom I returned as 
much from inclination as from interest. I pause here, for 
since you now grow inflamed so quickly and so morally 
I should be afraid lest you might suddenly fall in love with 
your old aunt and bury yourself with her in the tomb where 
you have already lived so long. I proceed then. 

In spite of the enchantment you appear to find in your 
little scholar, I cannot believe that she has any influence upon 
your plans. You found her at hand, you took her ; very well ! 
But this cannot be an inclination. To tell you the truth, 

311 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

it is not even a complete enjoyment ; you possess absolutely 
nothing but her person! I do not speak of her heart, about 
which I have no doubt you hardly concern yourself ; but you 
do not even occupy her head. I do not know if you have 
noticed it, but I have the proof of it tn the last letter she 
wrote me!; I send it to you for you to form your own opinion. 
Observe that when she speaks of you, it is always ‘‘ Monsieur 
de Valmont ’”’; that all her ideas, even those which start from 
you, always end up in Danceny, and she never calls him 
Monsieur, it is always ‘“‘Danceny”’ alone. By that she 
distinguishes him from all others ; and even as she yields her- 
self to you, she only grows familiar with him. If such a 
conquest appears “seductive ’’ to you, if the pleasures she 
gives “captivate you’’, assuredly you are modest and not 
hard to please! I am perfectly willing that you should keep 
her; that is part of my plans. But it seems to me that 
this is not worth putting oneself out for a quarter of an hour ; 
you ought to have some power over her and, for example, 
only allow her to come back to Danceny after having made 
her forget him a little more. 

Before I leave you and come to myself, I should still like 
to tell you that this method of being ill which you announce 
to me is very well known and quite worn out. Really, Vicomte, 
you are not inventive! I repeat myself sometimes also, as 
you will see; but I try to make up for it in the details and 
above all I am justified by success. I am going to try one more 
and to seek a new adventure. I admit it will not have the 
merit of difficulty; but at least it will be a diversion, and 
I am bored to death. 

I do not know why, but since my adventure with Prévan, 
Belleroche has become unendurable. He has so redoubled in 
attentions, in tenderness, in ‘‘ veneration’’, that I can stand 
it no longer. Just at first his anger appeared amusing to me ; 
but I had to calm it, for had I let him go on I should have 
been compromised ; and there was no way of making him 
listen to reason. So I adopted the plan of showing him more 
love in order to succeed more easily ; but he took it seriously 
and ever since then he has wearied me with his eternal delight. 
I have especially noticed the insulting reliance he has upon 

1See Letter CIX. (C. de L,). 
312 

LETTER CXIlIl 

me and the confidence with which he looks upon me as his 
for ever. I am positively humiliated by it. He cannot value 
me very highly if he thinks himself good enough to hold me ! 
Did he not tell me recently that I shail never have loved 
anyone but him? Oh! I needed all my prudence not to 
undeceive him at once by telling him the truth. Here indeed 
1S an amusing gentleman to have an exclusive right ! I admit 
he is well-made and tolerably handsome; but on the whole 
he is really only a manual labourer in love. In short the 
moment has come, we must separate. 

I have been trying for the last fortnight and, turn by 
turn, I have employed coolness, caprice, temper, quarrels ; 
but the tenacious creature does not leave hold so easily ; 
I must therefore adopt a more violent course and consequently 
J am taking him to my country house, We leave the day 
after to-morrow. There will only be with us a few uninterested 
and not very clear-sighted people, and we shall have almost 
as much liberty there as if we were alone. There, I shall so 
overburden him with love and caresses, we shall live so uniquely 
for one another, that I wager that, even more than I, he will 
desire the end of this visit which he thinks so great a happi- 
ness ; andif he does not come back more weary of me than Iam 
of him I will allow you to say that I know no more than you 

A pretence for this kind of retirement is to occupy myself 
seriously with my big law-suit, which will at last come up 
for judgment at the beginning of the winter. I am very glad 
of it; for it is really disagreeable to have all one’s money in 
the air. 

It is not that I am uneasy about the result; first of all 
I am right, all my lawyers assure me of it ; and even if I were 
not, I should be very unskilful if I could not win a law-suit 
when my only adversaries are minors still in the cradle and 
their old guardian! But since nothing should be neglected 
in so important a matter, I shall in fact have two lawyers 
with me. Does not this journey sound gay to you ? However, 
if it makes me win my law-suit and lose Belleroche I shall not 
regret my time. 

And now, Vicomte, guess his successor; I give you a 
hundred guesses. But there! Do I not know you never 
guess anything P Well, it is Danceny. You are surprised, 

313 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

are you not ? For after all Iam not yet reduced to educating 
children ! But he deserves to be an exception ; he has only 
the graces of youth, not its frivolity. His great reserve in 
company is very useful in keeping away all suspicion, and he 
is but the more charming when he opens out in private. It 
is not that I have yet had any such interview with him, I am 
still only his confident ; but under this veil of friendship I think 
he has a very keen inclination for me, and I feel I am acquiring 
a considerable one for him, It would really be a pity that so 
much wit and delicacy should be sacrificed and brutalised 
with that little imbecile of a Volanges! I hope he deceives 
himself in thinking he loves her ; she is so far from deserving 
him! It is not that I am jealous of her; but it would be 
a manslaughter, and I wish to save Danceny from it. I beg 
you then, Vicomte, to take care that he does not meet “ his 
Cécile’ (as he still has the bad habit of calling her). A first 
inclination has always more power than one thinks, and 
I should not be sure of anything if he saw her again now, 
especially during my absence. On my return I will take 
charge of everything and will answer for it. 

I had thought of taking the young man with me; but 
I made the sacrifice to my usual prudence; and then I was 
afraid he might notice something between Belleroche and me, 
and I should be in despair if he had the least idea of what 
is going on. I wish at least to offer myself to his imagination 
pure and unspotted; such indeed as one ought to be, to be 
really worthy of him. 

Paris, 15th of October, 17—. 

LETTER CXIV 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Rosemonde 

My dear friend, I give way to my deep uneasiness; and 
without knowing if you are in a condition to answer me, 
I cannot prevent myself from questioning you. Your telling 
me that Monsieur de Valmont’s condition is ‘‘ without 
danger’, does not leave me with as much confidence as you 
appear to have. It is not rare that melancholy and a disgust 
with the world are the preliminary symptoms of some serious 

314 

LETTER CXIV 

illness ; the sufferings of the body, like those of the mind, 
make us desire solitude and often we reproach a person with 
ill-humour when we should only pity their sickness. 

I think he ought at least to consult someone. How is it, 
that, being ill yourself, you have not a doctor with you ? 
I saw my doctor this morning and I will not conceal from you 
that I consulted him indirectly; his opinion is that with 
naturally active people this kind of sudden apathy should 
never be neglected ; and, as he said afterwards, illnesses do 
not yield to treatment when they are not taken in time. 
Why do you allow someone who is so dear to you torun this risk? 

My uneasiness is greatly increased since I have had no 
news of him for four days. Heavens! Are you not deceiving 
me about his condition? Why has he suddenly ceased to 
write to me? If it were merely the result of my persistence 
in sending back his letters, I think he would have adopted 
this course sooner. And then, without believing in presenti- 
ments, for some days I have felt a sadness which frightens me. 
Ah! Perhaps I am on the eve of the greatest of misfortunes ! 

You will not believe, and I am ashamed to tell you, how 
it grieves me not to receive any longer those very letters which 
I refused to read. At least I was sure that he was thinking 
of me! And I saw something which came from him. I did 
not open these letters, but I cried as I looked at them; my 
tears were sweeter and more easy; and they only partly 
relieve the continual oppression I have felt since my return. 
I beg you, my indulgent friend, write to me yourself as soon 
as you can, and meanwhile, let me receive news of you and of 
him every day. 

I see that I have scarcely said a word about you; you 
know my sentiments, my unreserved attachments, my tender 
gratitude for your sympathetic friendship; you will forgive 
the distress I am in, my extreme pain, the dreadful torture 
of having to dread ills of which I am perhaps the cause. 
Great Heaven! That desperate idea pursues me and tears 
my heart; this was a misfortune I lacked, and I feel I was 
born to endure them all. 

Good-bye, my dear friend ; love me, pity me. Shall I have 

a letter from you to-day ? 
Paris, 16th of October, 17—. 

315 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER CXV 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteutl 

It is an inconceivable thing, my fair friend, how easily as 
soon as people are apart, they cease to be in agreement. As 
long as I was near you, we had always the same perception, 
the same way of looking at things; and because I have not 
seen you for nearly three months, we no longer have the same 
opinion about anything. Which of us two is wrong? You 
certainly would not hesitate about the answer; but I, who 
am wiser or more polite, do not decide. I shall only reply to 
your letter and continue to inform you of what I am doing. 

First, I have to thank you for the information you give 
me of the rumours about me which are circulating; but 
I am not yet disturbed by them ; | think that very soon I am 
certain to have the means of ending them. Be at rest, I shall 
reappear in society more celebrated than ever and stil] more 
worthy of you. 

I hope that I shall even gain some credit for the adventure 
with the Volanges girl, which you seem to think so little of ; 
as 1f it were nothing to take a girl away from her beloved 
lover in an evening, to make use of her afterwards as much 
as I wanted, absolutely as my own property, and without 
any more difficulty to obtain from her what one does not even 
dare to exact from all the women who make their living by 
it; and that, without in the least upsetting her tender love ; 
without making her inconstant, not even unfaithful; for, 
indeed, I do not even occupy her head! So that when my 
whim is past, I shall return her to her lover’s arms, so to speak, 
without her having noticed anything. Is that then so ordinary 
a course ? And then, believe me, once she leaves my hands, 
the principles I have given her will develop none the less ; 
and I predict that the timid scholar will soon take her flight 
in a way which will do honour to her master. 

But if they prefer the heroic, I shall point to Madame de 
Tourvel, that often quoted model of all the virtues !_ Respected 
even by our greatest libertines! To such an extent that 
they had even abandoned the mere idea of attacking her ! 

316 

LETTER CXV 

I shall point to her, I say, forgetting her duties and her 
virtue, sacrificing her reputation and two years of modesty, 
to run after the happiness of pleasing me, to intoxicate herself 
with the happiness of loving me, thinking herself sufficiently 
recompensed for so many sacrifices by a word, by a look, 
which she even did not always obtain. I shall do more, 
I shall abandon her ; and either I do not know this woman or 
I shall have no successor. She will resist the need for consola- 
tion, the habit of pleasure, even the desire for vengeance. 
In short, she will have existed only for me and whether her 
course be more or less long, I alone shall have opened and 
Closed the barrier. Once I have achieved this triumph, I shall 
say to my rivals: ‘‘ Behold my work, and seek a second 
example in the age!”’ 

You will ask me whence comes this excess of confidence 
to-day ? For the past week I have been in my fair one’s con- 
fidence ; she does not tell me her secrets, but I surprise 
them. Two letters from her to Madame de Rosemonde have 
given me sufficient information, and I shall only read the 
others from curiosity. To succeed I only need to be near her, 
and I have found the way. I am going to make use of it 
immediately. 

You are curious, I think... ? But no, to punish you 
for not believing in my designs, you shall not know this way. 
Frankly, you deserve that I should withdraw my confidence 
from you, at least in this adventure ; indeed, but for the sweet 
prize attached by you to this success, I would not speak to 
you of it again. You see that I am annoyed. However, in 
the hope that you will reform, I will limit myself to this slight 
punishment; and, returning to indulgence, I will forget 
my great projects for a moment to reason with you about yours. 

And so you are in the country, which is as wearisome as 
sentiment and as dull as fidelity! And poor Belleroche ! 
You are not content to make him drink the water of oblivion, 
you put him to the torture with it! Howis he? How well 
does he endure the nausea of love? I greatly wish that it 
would only make him more attached to you; I am curious 
to see what more efficacious remedy you would come to use. 
Really, I pity you for being obliged to make use of this one. 
Only once in my life have I made love by procedure. I had 

317 © 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

certainly good grounds, since it was the Comtesse de... . ; and 
twenty times in her arms I have been tempted to say to her: 
‘‘ Madame, I renounce the place I solicited, allow me to leave 
that which I occupy.’’ So, among all the women I have had, 
she is the only one whom it gives me pleasure to speak ill of. 

As to your grounds, to tell you the truth, I think them very 
ridiculous ; and you were right to think I should not guess 
the successor. What! You are giving yourself all that 
trouble for Danceny! Hey! My dear friend, leave him to 
adore “ his virtuous Cécile’’, do not involve yourself in these 
children’s games. Leave the school-boys to be improved by 
“ good women ”’, or to play with school-girls at little inno- 
cent games, Why are you burdening yourself with a novice 
who will not know how to take you or when to leave you, and 
with whom you will have to do everything? I tell you 
seriously I disapprove of this choice, and however secret it 
remains it will humiliate you at least in my eyes and in your 
own consciousness. 

You say you have a great inclination for him; come, 
you are surely wrong, and IJ think I have found the cause of 
your error. This wonderful disgust with Belleroche came to 
you at a time of famine, and as Paris offered you no choice, 
your fancy, always too keen, fell upon the first object you 
met with. But remember, when you return you can choose 
among a thousand ; and if you dread the inaction into which 
you may fall by delaying, I offer myself to amuse your leisure. 

Between now and your arrival, my important affairs will 
be settled in one way or another ; and, assuredly, neither the 
Volanges girl nor Madame de Tourvel herself will then occupy 
me so much that I cannot be at your service as much as you 
desire. Perhaps by then I shall have already returned the 
little girl to the hands of her discreet lover. Without agreeing, 
whatever you may say, that it is not a ‘‘ captivating ”’ enjoy- 
ment, since my project is that all her life she shall keep an 
idea of me superior to all other men, I have adopted with her 
a tone which I cannot sustain for long without damaging my 
health ; and from this moment I am only bound to her by 
the kind of attention we owe to family affairs. . 

1‘ Bonnes ’’,a double entendre ; it means ‘‘ good women ”’, and 
““ maid-servants ”’. 

318 

LETTER CXV 

You do not understand me ; the truth is I am waiting for - 
a second period to confirm my hope and to be certain I have 
fully succeeded in my projects. Yes, my fair friend, I have 
already a first indication that my scholar’s husband will 
not run the risk of dying without posterity and that the head 
of the house of Gercourt will in future be only a cadet of the 
house of Valmont. But let me finish as I fancy an adventure 
I only undertook at your request. Remember, if you make 
Danceny unfaithful, you take away all the piquancy of this 
story. And then consider that when I offer myself to you as 
his representative I have, I think, some rights to the preference. 

I rely upon it so much, that I have not shrunk from acting 
contrary to your views, by assisting myself in augmenting 
the tender passion of the discreet lover for the first and 
worthy object of his choice. Yesterday I found your pupil 
engaged in writing to him, and having first disturbed her in 
this sweet occupation by another still sweeter, I asked after- 
wards to see her letter; and since I thought it cold and 
constrained I pointed out to her that this was not the way to 
console her lover and persuaded her to write another at my 
dictation ; in which, imitating her silly little chatter as Lest 
I could, I tried to feed the young man’s love with a more 
certain hope. The little girl was quite delighted, she told me, 
to find herself speaking so well ; and henceforth I am to take 
charge of the correspondence. What is there I shall not 
have done for Danceny ? I shall have been at once his friend, 
his confident, his rival, and his mistress! and again, at this 
moment, I am doing him the service of saving him from 
your dangerous bonds; for to possess you and to lose you, 
is to buy a moment of happiness with an eternity of regrets. 

Good-bye, my fair friend; have the courage to dispatch 
Belleroche as soon as you can. Leave Danceny, and prepare 
yourself to rediscover and to give me again the delicious 
pleasures of our first acquaintance. 

P.S. My compliments upon the near completion of your 
great law-suit. I shall be very glad if this happy event takes 
place under my reign. 

From the Chateau de , 19th of October, 17—. 

319 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER CXVI 
The Chevalier Danceny to Cécile Volanges 

Madame de Merteuil left this morning for the country ; 
thus, my charming Cécile, I am deprived of the sole pleasure 
which was left to me in your absence, that of talking about 
you to your friend and mine. Recently she has allowed me 
to give her that title; and I adopted it the more eagerly in 
that it seemed to draw me nearer to you. Heaven! What 
an amiable woman she is! And what a flattering charm she 
gives to friendship! It seems as if this gentle feeling is 
embellished and fortified in her by all that she refuses to love. 
If you knew how she loves you, how it pleases her to hear 
me talk of you! ... Doubtless it is this which so attaches 
me to her. What happiness to be able to live solely for you 
two, to pass continually from the delights of love to the 
sweetness of friendship, to consecrate all my existence to them, 
to be, as it were, the meeting point of your mutual attachment; 
and to feel always that in occupying myself with the happi- 
ness of the one I should equally be working for the happiness 
of the other! Love this adorable woman, love her very 
much, my charming friend, give an even greater value to my 
attachment for her by sharing it. Since I have enjoyed the 
charm of friendship I wish you to feel it in your turn. It 
seems to me I only half enjoy the pleasures I do not share 
with you. Yes, my Cécile, I should like to surround your 
heart with all the softest sentiments ; I should like each of 
these emotions to cause you a sensation of happiness and 
I should still think I could never return you more than a 
part of the felicity I gained from you. 

Why must these charming projects be nothing but a 
fantasy of my imagination, while reality on the contrary 
brings me only painful and indefinite privations ? I perceive 
that I must abandon the hope you gave me of seeing you in 
the country. My only consolation is to convince myself that 
this is not possible for you. And you neglect to tell me so, 
to lament over it with me! Already my complaints on this 
subject have twice gone unanswered. Ah! Cécile, Cécile, 

320 

LETTER CXVII 

I believe you love me with all the faculties of your soul, but 
your soul does not burn like mine! Why is it not my part 
to raise these obstacles ? Why is it not my interest which 
must be safeguarded instead of yours ? 'I could soon prove 
to you that nothing is impossible to love. 

You do not tell me either when this cruel absence is to 
end; here at least I might see you, your charming glances 
would reanimate my drooping spirits; their touching ex- 
pression would reassure my heart which sometimes needs it 
so much. Forgive me, Cécile; this fear is not a suspicion, 
I believe in your love, in your constancy. Ah! I should be 
too wretched if I doubted it. But so many obstacles ! 
Continually renewed ! My dear, I am sad, very sad. It seems 
as if Madame de Merteuil’s departure has renewed in me the 
feelings of all my misfortunes. 

Good-bye, Cécile; good-bye, my beloved. Remember 
that your lover is in distress, and that you alone can give him 
back happiness. 

Paris, 17th of October, 17—. 

LETTER CXVII 

Cécile Volanges to the Chevalier Danceny 
<Dictated by Valmont) 

Do you think, my dear, that you have to scold me for me 
to be sad when I know that you are distressed ? And do you 
doubt that I suffer as much as you in all your troubles ? 
I even share those which I cause you voluntarily ; and I suffer 
more than you when I see that you do not do me justice. Oh ! 
That is not kind. I can see what it is that annoys you; it 
is because I have not replied on the last two occasions when 
you asked me if you could-come here ; but is this such an easy 
reply to make ? Do you think I do not know that what you 
want is very wrong? And yet if it is so hard for me to refuse 
you at a distance, what would it be if you were here ? And 
then, I should be unhappy all my life for having wished to 
console you for a moment. 

321 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Come, I have nothing to hide from you; here are my 
reasons, judge for yourself. Perhaps I should have done what 
you wanted, had it not been that (as I told you) this Monsieur 
de Gercourt who is the cause of all our grief, will not arrive 
here so soon; and as Mamma has showed me much more 
kindness for some time; and as I am as caressing to her as 
I can be for my part; who knows what I might be able to 
obtain from her? And would it not be much better if we 
could be happy without my having anything to reproach 
myself with? If I am to believe what I have often been 
told, men do not love their wives so much when they have 
loved them too much before they were their wives. This 
fear restrains me more than all the rest. My friend, are you 
not sure of my heart and will there not always be time ? 

Listen, I promise you that if I cannot avoid the misfortune 
of marrying Monsieur de Gercourt, whom I hate so much 
before I know him, nothing will restrain me from being yours 
as much as I can, and even before everything. As I only care 
to be loved by you, and as you will see that if I do wrong it 
will not be my fault, the rest is of no concern to me; provided 
you promise me to love me always as much as you do now. 
But, my dear, until then let me go on as Iam; and do not 
ask me any more for a thing I have good reasons for not 
doing but which it hurts me to refuse you. 

I wish also that Monsieur de Valmont were not so pressing 
on your behalf ; it only serves to make me still sadder. Oh! 
You have a very good friend in him, I assure you! He does 
everything just as you would do it yourself. But good-bye, 
my dear ; it was very late when I began to write to you and 
I have spent part of the night on it. I am going to bed to 
make up for lost time. I kiss you, but do not scold me again. 

From the Chateau de... , 18th of October, 17—. 

LETTER CXVIII 
The Chevalier Danceny to the Marquise de Merteuil 

If I am to believe my almanac, my adorable friend, you 
have only been absent for two days; but if I am to believe 
my heart it is for two centuries, Now, I have it from you 

322 

LETTER CXVIII 

yourself, that we should always believe our hearts ; it is there- 
fore quite time for you to return and all your business must 
be more than finished. How do you expect me to be inter- 
ested in your law-suit, if, whether lost or’ gained, I must pay 
the costs, through the weariness of your absence ? Oh! How 
I should like to quarrel! And how sad it is, with such an 
excellent reason for ill temper, to have no right to show it ! 

Yet is it not a real infidelity, a wicked betrayal, to leave 
your friend far from you, after you have accustomed him to 
depend upon your presence ? However much you consult 
your lawyers they will not find you any justification for this 
wrong procedure ; and then such people only give reasons, 
and reasons are not a sufficient response to sentiments. 

For my part, you have so often told me that you were 
making this journey from reason, that you have altogether 
put me out of temper with reason. I never want to listen 
to it again; not even when it tells me to forget you. Yet 
that it a very reasonable reason ; and indeed it would not be 
so dificult as you might believe. It would be enough merely 
to lose the habit of always thinking about you; and I assure 
you nothing here would recall you to my mind. 

Our prettiest women, those who are said to be the most 
charming, are still so far from you that they could only give 
a very weak idea of you. I believe even that with practised 
eyes, the more one thought at first they resembled you, the 
more difference one would find afterwards; whatever they 
may do, and however much they put into it all their know- 
ledge, they will always fail to be you and it is there that the 
charm lies. Unfortunately, when the days are so long, and 
I am without occupation, I dream, I make castles in Spain, 
I create my fantasy; little by little the imagination grows 
warm; I wish to embellish my work; I bring together 
everything that can please, and at last I reach perfection ; 
and when I am there the portrait brings me back to the model, 
and I am amazed to find I have only been thinking of you. 

At this very moment I am again the dupe of an almost 
similar error. Perhaps you think I began to write to you to 
dwell on you? Not at all; it was to distract myself from you 
I had a hundred things to say to you, of which you were not 
the object, and which, as you know, interest me very deeply ; 

323 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

and yet it is from these I have been distracted. Since when 
does the charm of friendship distract from that of love ? Ah! 
If I looked at it very closely, perhaps I should have to blame 
myself a little! But hush! Let me forget this little fault 
for fear of falling into it again ; and let my friend ignore it. 

So why are you not here to reply to me, to bring me back 
if I wander, to talk to me of my Cécile, to increase—if that is 
possible—the happiness I feel in loving her by the delightful 
idea that it is your friend I love? Yes, I confess it, the love 
she inspires in me has become still more precious to me since 
you have condescended to receive my confidence. It gives 
me such pleasure to open my heart to you, to occupy yours 
with my feelings, to place them there without reserve! It 
seems to me that I cherish them the more as you deign to 
receive them; and then I look at you and say to myself: 
‘‘ It is in her that all my happiness is enclosed.” 

I have nothing new to tell you about my situation. The 
last letter I received from her increases and assures my hope, 
but still retards it. But her motives are so tender and so 
virtuous, that I cannot blame her or complain myself. Perhaps 
you do not quite understand what I am telling you; but 
why are you not here ? Although one says everything to a 
friend, one dares not write everything. The secrets of love 
especially are so delicate that one cannot let them go thus on 
their own good faith. If we sometimes let them go out, we 
must at least not lose sight of them; we must, as it were, 
see them enter their new refuge. Ah! Come back, my 
adorable friend, you see your return is necessary. Forget 
the ‘‘ thousand reasons’’ which detain you where you are, 
or teach me how to live away from you. 

I have the honour to be, etc. 

Paris, 19th of October, 17—. 

LETTER CXIX 
Madame de Rosemonde to Madame de Tourvel 

Although I am still suffering a great deal, my dear Beauty, 
I am trying to write to you myself so that I can speak to you 

324 

LETTER CXX 

of what interests you. My nephew still retains his mis- 
anthropy. He sends very regularly each day to have news of 
me; but he has not come once to inquire although I sent to 
ask him to do so and I see no more of him than if he were at 
Paris, I met him this morning, however, where I hardly 
expected it. It was in my chapel, to which I went down for 
the first time since my painful indisposition. I learned to-day 
that for the last four days he has gone there regularly to hear 
Mass. God grant that this lasts ! 

When I entered, he came to me and congratulated me 
very affectionately on the better state of my health. As 
Mass was beginning, I cut short the conversation which 
I intended to renew afterwards; but he disappeared before 
I could join him. I will not conceal from you that I found 
him a little changed. But, my dear Beauty, do not make me 
repent my confidence in your reason, by too keen an anxiety ; 
and above all be certain that I should rather distress you than 
deceive you. 

If my nephew continues to avoid me, I shall take the 
course of going to see him in his room, as soon as I am better ; 
and I shall try to find out the cause of this singular proceeding, 
in which I believe you have some part. I will let you know 
what I find out. I must leave you now, I cannot move my 
fingers any longer; and then if Adelaide knew I had been 
writing she would scold me all the evening. Good-bye, my 
dear Beauty. 

From the Chateau de... , 20th of October, 17—. 

LETTER CXX 

The Vicomte de Valmont to Father Anselme 
(Monk of St Bernard of the Convent in the rue St Honoré) 

I have not the honour to be known to you, Monsieur ; 
but I know the complete confidence which Madame de Tourvel 
has in you, and I know moreover how worthily that confidence 
is placed. I think I can address myself to you without indis- 
cretion, to obtain an essential service, worthy indeed of your 
holy ministry, in which the interest of Madame de Tourvel 
is joined with mine. 

325 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

I have in my hands certain important papers which concern 
her, which cannot be confided to anyone, which I must not and 
will not give into any hands but hers. I have no way to inform 
her of this, from reasons which perhaps you have learned from 
her but which I do not think myself justified in telling you, 
and which have caused her to refuse all correspondence from 
me; a course which I willingly admit to-day that I cannot 
blame, since she could not foresee the events I was myself 
very far from expecting ; events only possible to the more than 
human power I am forced to recognise in them. 

I beg you then, Monsieur, to be good enough to inform her 
of my new resolutions and to ask her on my behalf for a private 
interview, when I can at least partly atone for my faults 
by my excuses; and, as a last sacrifice, destroy before her 
eyes the sole existing traces of an error or of a fault which 
rendered me culpable towards her. 

Only after this preliminary expiation shall I dare to lay 
at your feet the humble admission of my long misconduct ; 
and to implore your mediation for a still more important 
reconciliationun, happily even more difficult. Can I hope, 
Monsieur, that you will not refuse me such necessary and such 
precious care ? That you will consent to support my weakness 
and to guide my steps in a new path which I most ardently 
desire to follow, but blush to admit I do not yet know ? 

I await your reply with the impatience of a repentance 
which desires to make reparation, and I beg you to believe that 
Iam, with as much gratitude as veneration, 

Your most humble, Etc. 

P.S. I authorise you, Monsieur, if you think fit, to hand this 

letter to Madame de Tourvel, whom I shall make it a duty all 

my life long to respect, and in whom J shall never cease to 

honour her whom Heaven made use of to bring back my soul 
to virtue through the moving spectacle of hers. 

From the Chateau de... , 22nd of October, 17—. 

LETTER CXXI 

The Marquise de Mertewil to the Chevalier Danceny 
I have received your letter, my too young friend; but 
before thanking you, I must scold you, and warn you that 
326 

LETTER CXX]I 

if you do not correct yourself, you will have no more reply 
from me. Be ruled by me, and abandon this tone of flattery 
which is nothing but a mere jargon as soon as it ceases to be 
the expression of love. Is that the style of friendship? No, 
my friend, each sentiment has its befitting language, and to use 
another is to disguise the thought one is expressing. I -know 
our little women understand nothing of what is said to them 
unless it is translated, as it were, into this customary jargon ! 
but I confess I think I deserve to be distinguished from them 
by you. Iam really annoyed, and perhaps more than I should 
be, that you have judged me so ill. 

You will only find in my letter then what is lacking in 
yours—frankness and simplicity. I will, for example, tell 
you that it would give me great pleasure to see you and 
that I am vexed to have near me only such people as weary 
me, instead of those who please me; but you translate this 
phrase thus: ‘‘ Teach me how to live away from you” ; 
so, I suppose, that even if you were with your mistress you 
could not live unless I made a third. What folly ! And those 
women, ‘‘ who always fail to be me’’,-—perhaps you find that 
your Cécile fails to be so! But that is where you are carried 
by a language which, from the abuse that is made of it to-day, 
is even beneath the jargon of compliments and becomes 
nothing more than a mere formula, in which people no more 
believe than in ‘‘ your most humble servant’”’ ! 

My friend, when you write to me, let it be to tell me your 
manner of thinking and feeling and not to send me phrases 
which I shall find, without your help, more or less well ex- 
pressed in the first modern novel. I hope you will not be angry 
with what I have said to you, even if you should see a little 
ill humour in it; for I do not deny that I am a little out of 
temper; but to avoid even the appearance of the fault 
I reproach you with, I shall not tell you that this i] humour 
is perhaps a little increased by my absence from you. Taking 
it all round, it seems to me that you are preferable to a law- 
suit and two lawyers, and perhaps even more so than the 
attenttf Belleroche. 

You see that instead of lamenting my absence, you ought 
to be glad of it; for I have never paid you so fine a compli- 
ment. I think that the example isinfecting me and that I shall 

327 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

be sending you flatteries too; but no, I prefer to stick to my 
frankness ; that alone then assures you of my tender friend- 
ship and of the interest it inspires in me. It is very delightful 
to have a young friend, whose heart is occupied elsewhere. 
It is not the habit of most women; but it is mine. It seems 
to me that we yield with more pleasure to a sentiment from 
which we can have nothing to fear ; so with you I have come 
to the réle of confident, perhaps rather early. But you 
choose your mistresses so young, that you have made me 
perceive for the first time that I am beginning to get old ! 
You do well to prepare yourself thus a long career of constancy, 
and I hope with all my heart that it may be mutual. 

You are right to give way “to the tender and virtuous 
motives’’ which, you tell me, ‘‘ retard your happiness ’’. 
A long defence is the sole merit left to those who do not 
always resist ; and I should think it inpardonable in anyone 
but a child like the Volanges girl not to have avoided a danger, 
of which she was sufficiently informed by her admission of 
her love. You men have no idea what virtue is, and what it 
costs to sacrifice it! But if a woman reasons a little, she 
must know that, independently of the wrong she commits, 
a weakness is for her the greatest of misfortunes ; and I cannot 
imagine how any woman ever allows herself to fall into it, 
when she has a moment to reflect. 

Do not combat this idea, for it is what principally attaches 
me to you. You will save me from the dangers of love ; and 
although I have hitherto been able to defend myself from 
them without you, I consent to be grateful for it and I shall 
like you better. 

And now, my dear Chevalier, I pray God to have you in 
his holy and lofty care. 

From the Chateau de... . 22nd of October, 17--- 

4 

LETTER CXXII 
AMfadame de Rosemonde to Madame de Tourvel 

I hoped, my amiable daughter, that at last I should be 
able to calm your anxieties; and I see with grief, on the 
contrary, that | am about to increase them still further. But, 

328 ; 

LETTER CXXII 

be calm ; my nephew is not in danger ; it cannot even be said 
that he is really ill. But there is surely something extra- 
ordinary passing within him, I do not understand it; but 
I left his room with a feeling of sadness ; perhaps even of terror, 
which I reproach myself for sharing with you and about which 
nevertheless I cannot prevent myself from talking to you. 
Here is an account of what happened ; you may be sure that 
it is a faithful one ; for were I to live another eighty years 
I should not forget the impression made upon me by this sad 
scene. 

This morning, then, I went to my nephew’s room ; I found 
him writing and surrounded with different piles of papers, 
which appeared to be the object of his labour. He was so 
absorbed in them that I was in the middle of his room before 
he had even turned his head to find out who had entered. 
As soon as he perceived me I noticed as he rose he tried to 
compose his features, and perhaps it is that which made me 
pay more attention. He was undressed and unpowdered ; 
but I thought him pale and wasted, and above all that his 
physiognomy had changed. His glance which we have seen 
so lively and so gay, was downcast and sad ; in short, let it 
be said between ourselves, I should not have wished you to 
see him thus ; for he looked very touching and very fit, I should 
think, to inspire that tender pity which is one of the most 
dangerous snares of love. 

Although I was struck by my observations, I began the 
conversation as if I had noticed nothing. First of all I spoke 
to him of his health; and, without saying that it was good, 
he did not in so many words say that it was bad. Then 
I complained of his retirement, which seemed a little like 
an obsession, and J tried to mingle some gaiety with my little 
reprimand ; but he only replied with an air of conviction : 
“It is one wrong the more I confess ; but it shall be repaired 
with the others.”” His air, even more than what he said, rather 
disturbed my cheerfulness, and I hastened to tell him that he 
attached too much importance to a single reproach of 
friendship. ; 

We then began to converse quietly. He told me, a little 
afterwards, that perhaps business, ‘‘ the most important 
business of his life’’, would soon recall him to Paris; but as 

329 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

I was afraid of guessing it, my dear Beauty, and feared this 
opening might lead me to a confidence I did not desire, 
I asked him no questions and contented myself by replying 
that more distraction would be useful to his health. I added 
that, on this occasion I would trouble him with no entreaties, 
since I loved my friends for their own sake ; at this very simple 
phrase he grasped my hands, and, speaking with a vehemence 
I cannot convey to you, said: ‘“‘ Yes, aunt, love, love a nephew 
who respects and cherishes you, and as you say, love him for 
himself. Do not feel distressed for his happiness, and do not dis- 
turb by any regret the eternal calm he soon hopes toenjoy. Tell 
me again that you love me, that youforgive me; _ yes, you will 
forgive me; I know your goodness ; but how can I hope for 
the same indulgence from those I have so offended ?”’ Then 
he leaned over me, to hide, I think, the signs of grief which 
in spite of himself were revealed to me by the sound of his 
voice. " 

More moved than I can tell you, I rose hastily; . and 
doubtless he noticed my terror; for composing himself im- 
mediately he went on: ‘‘ Forgive me, Madame, forgive me, 
I feel that I am falling into error in spite of myself. I beg 
you to forget what I have said and to remember only my 
profound respect. I shall not fail’, he added,”’ to come and 
renew my expression of it before I go.” It seemed to me 
that this last phrase was a hint to terminate my visit; and 
so I went away. 

But the more I reflect upon it, the less I can guess what 
he meant. What is this business, ‘‘ the most important of 
his life’ > Why did he ask my pardon ? What was the cause 
of his involuntary emotion in speaking to me? I have asked 
myself these questions a thousand times, without being able 
to reply to them. I see nothing in them which touches you ; 
yet, as the eyes of love are more clear-sighted than those of 
friendship, I was unwilling to leave you in ignorance of what 
passed between my nephew and me. 

I have four times resumed the writing of this long letter, 
which I would make longer but for the fatigue I feel. . . 
Good-bye, my dear Beauty. 

From the Chateau de... , 25th October, 17—. 

33° 

LETTER CXXIII 

4 
‘ 

LETTER CXNXIII 
Father Anselme to the Vicomte de Valmont 

I have received, Monsieur le Vicomte, the letter with which 
you honour me, and yesterday, in accordance with your desire, 
I went to the person in question. I informed her of the 
object and the motives of the application you asked me to make 
to her. However attached I found her to the wise course 
she had first adopted, upon my pointing out that by her re- 
fusal she was perhaps placing an obstacle to your happy con- 
version, and thus, as it were, opposing the merciful intentions 
of Providence, she has consented to receive your visit on con- 
dition that it is the last, and has charged me to tell you that 
it will be at her house on Thursday next, the twenty-eighth. 
If this day does not suit you, will you let her know and appoint 
another. Your letter will be received. 

But, Monsieur le Vicomte, let me ask you not to delay 
without very good reason, so that you can the sooner and the 
more entirely give yourself up to the praiseworthy designs of 
which you inform me. Remember that he who delays to 
profit by the moment of grace, runs the risk of its being 
withdrawn from him; that if the goodness of God 1s infinite 
his use of it 1s nevertheless regulated by justice; and that 
there may come a moment when the God of mercy is changed 
into a God of vengeance. 

If you continue to honour me with your confidence, I beg 
you to believe that all my exertions are at your command, as 
soon as you desire; however considerable my occupations 
may be, my most important business will always be to carry 
out the duties of the holy ministry, to which I am particularly 
devoted ; and the fairest moment of my life is that when 
I shall see my efforts prosper through the blessing of the 
Almighty. Weak sinners that we are, we can do nothing of 
ourselves! But the God who calls you back to Him can do 
everything; and we both owe it equally to His goodness, 
you the constant desire of uniting yourself to Him, and 

331 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

I the means of guiding you there. It is with His aid, that 
I hope soon to convince you that only our holy religion can 
give, even in this world, the solid and durable happiness we 
vainly search for in the blindness of human passions. 

I have the honour to be, with respectful esteem, etc. 

Paris, 25th of October, 17—-. 

LETTER CXXIV 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Rosemonde 

In the midst of the surprise which was caused me, Madame, 
by the news I learned yesterday, I do not forget the satis- | 
faction it must cause you, and | hasten to give you information 
of it. Monsieur de Valmont is now concerned neither with 
me nor with his love; and only desires to repair by a more 
edifying life the faults, or rather the errors, of his youth. 
I was informed of this great event by Father Anselme, to 
whom he applied for direction in the future, and also to 
procure him an interview with me, the principal object of which 
I think is to return me my letters which he has hitherto 
retained, in spite of the contrary request I had made him. 

Doubtless I cannot but applaud this happy change, and 
congratulate myself upon it, if, as he says, I have furthered 
it tosome extent. But why should I have to be the instrument, 
and why should it cost me a life-time’s tranquillity ? Could 
Monsieur de Valmont’s happiness only come about through 
my misfortune ? Oh! My indulgent friend, forgive me for 
this complaint, I know it is not for me to fathom the decrees 
of God ; but while I ceaselessly ask Him, and ask Him always 
in vain, for strength to overcome my unhappy love, He 
squanders it upon one who did not ask for it, and leaves me 
helpless, entirely surrendered to my weakness. 

But I must stifle this guilty murmur. Do I not know that 
the prodigal son on his return obtained more grace from his 
Father than the son who had never been away? What 
account have we to demand from Him who owes us nothing ? 
And even if it were possible that we should have some rights 
with Him, what could mine be? Should I boast a virtue, which 

337 

LETTER CXXIV 

already I only owe to Valmont ? He saved me, and I darc 
to complain of suffering for him! No; my sufferings will 
be dear to me, if his happiness is their reward. Doubtless 
he had to come back to the common Father in his turn. The 
God who created him must cherish His work. He did not 
ereate that charming being, to make him only a castaway. 
It is for me to bear the pain of my bold imprudence ; should 
I not have felt that, since it was forbidden me to love him 
I ought not to have allowed myself to see him ? 

My sin or my misfortune is that I refused too long to see 
this truth. You are my witness, my dear and worthy friend, 
that I submitted to this sacrifice as soon as I recognised its 
necessity ; but the one thing lacking to make it complete 
was that Monsieur de Valmont should not share it. Shall 
I confess to you that this idea is now my greatest torment P 
Unendurable pride, which softens the ills we feel by those we 
make others suffer! Ah! I will overcome this rebellious 
heart, I will accustom myself to humiliations. 

It is with the especial purpose of achieving this that 
I have consented to receive the painful visit of Monsieur de 
Valmont on Thursday next. There, I shall hear him tell me 
himself that I am nothing to him, that the faint and passing 
impression I had made upon him is entirely effaced! I shall 
see his gaze rest upon me without emotion, while the fear of 
revealing my own will make me keep my eyes lowered. I shall 
receive from his indifference those very letters which he 
refused so long to my reiterated request ; he will return them 
to me as useless objects which no longer interest him ; and as 
my trembling hands receive this shameful packet, they will 
feel that it is given to them by a calm, firm hand! And then, 
I shall see him go away. Go away for ever, and my gaze 
will follow him, will not see his turned back upon me ! 

And I was reserved for such humiliation! Ah! At least 
let me make it useful to myself, by letting it fill me with the 
sentiment of my weakness... Yes, I will carefully keep 
those letters he no longer cares to retain. I will impose upon 
myself the shame of re-reading them every, day, until my 
tears have washed out the last traces of them; and I shall 
burn his as being infected with the dangerous poison which 
has corrupted my soul. Oh! What then is love, if it makes 

333 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

us regret even the danger to which it exposes us; above all 
if we may dread to feel it still even when we no longer inspire 
it! Let me fly from this disastrous passion, which leaves no 
choice between shame and misery, and often unites them 
both; and at least let prudence replace virtue. 

How far off Thursday stillis ! Why can I not consummate 
this painful sacrifice at this instant, and forget at once both 
its cause and its object! This visit troubles me; I regret 
having promised it. Ah! Why does he need to see me again ! 
What are we to each other now? If he has offended me, 
I pardon him. I even congratulate him on the desire to 
repair his wrongs; I praise him for it. I will do more, I will 
imitate him ; and, seduced by the same errors, I will be saved 
by his example. But when his project is to fly from me, why 
does he begin by seeking me! Is not the most urgent matter 
for each of us to forget the other? Ah! Doubtless, and 
henceforth it shall be my one anxiety. 

If you permit it, my amiable friend, I shall come and 
occupy myself with this difficult labour near you. If I need 
aid, perhaps even consolation, I wish to receive them only 
from you. You alone can understand me and can speak to 
my heart. Your precious friendship will fill my whole ex- 
istence, Nothing will appear difficult to me to second the 
solicitude you might give me. I shall owe you my tranquillity, 
my happiness, my virtue ; and the fruit of your kindnesses to 
me will be to have made me worthy of them at last. 

I think I have wandered a good deal in this letter ; I pre- 
sume so, at least, from the agitation I have been in all the 
time I was writing to you. If it contains some sentiments 
at which I might have to blush, hide them with your indulgent 
friendship. I commit myself entirely to it. I do not wish to 
conceal any of the emotions of my heart from you. 

Farewell, my respectable friend. In a few days I hope 
to inform you of the day of my arrival. 

Paris, 25th October, 17—. 

END OF PART THREE 

334 

PART IV 

+ 

LETTER CXXV 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

She is conquered, that proud woman who dared to think 
she could resist me! Yes, my friend, she is mine, entirely 
mine ; after yesterday she has nothing left to grant me. 

I am still too full of my happiness to be able to appreciate 
it, but I am astonished by the unsuspected charm I felt. Is it 
true then that virtue increases a woman’s value even in her 
moment of weakness ? But let me put that puerile idea away 
with old woman’s tales. Does one not meet almost every- 
where a more or less well-feigned resistance to the first triumph? 
And have I not found elsewhere the charm of which I speak ? 
But yet it is not the charm of love; for after all, if I have 
sometimes had surprising moments of weakness with this 
woman resembling that pusillanimous passion, I have always 
been able to overcome them and return to my principles. 
Even if yesterday’s scene carried me, as I now think, a little 
further than I intended; even if I shared for a moment the 
agitation and ecstasy I created; that passing illusion would 
now have disappeared, and yet the same charm remains. 
I confess I should even feel a considerable pleasure in yielding 
to it, if it did not cause me some anxiety. Shall I, at my age, 
be mastered like a schoolboy, by an involuntary and un- 
suspected sentiment ? No; _ before everything else, I must 
combat and thoroughly examine it. 

And perhaps I have already a glimpse of the cause of it ! 
At least the idea pleases me and I should like it to be true. 

Among the crowd of women for whom I have hitherto 
filled the part and functions of a lover, I had never met one 
who had not at least as much desire to yield to me as I had 
to bring her to doing so; I had even accustomed myself to 
cal] ‘‘ prudes’’’ those who only came half way to meet me, in 
opposition to so many others whose provocative defence never 
covers but imperfectly the first advances they have made. 

335 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Herc on the contrary I found a first unfavourable prejudice, 
supported afterwards by the advice and reports of a woman 
who hated me but who was clear-sighted ; I found a natural 
and extreme timidity strengthened by an enlightened modcsty ; 
I found an attachment to virtue, controlled by religion, able 
to count two years of triumph already, and then remarkable 
behaviour inspired by different motives but all with the object 
of avoiding my pursuit. 

It was not then, as in my other adventures, a merely 
more or less advantageous capitulation which it is more easy 
to profit by than to feel proud of ; it was a complete victory, 
achieved by a hard campaign and decided by expert 
. manoeuvres. It is therefore not surprising that this success, 

which I owe to myself alone, should become more valuable 
to me; and the excess of pleasure I feel even yet is only 
the soft impression of the feeling of glory. I cling to this 
view which saves me from the humiliation of thinking I might 
depend in any way upon the very slave I have enslaved 
myself; that I do not contain the plenitude of my happiness 
in myself; and that the faculty of enjoying it in all its 
energy should be reserved to such or such a woman, exclusive 
of all others. 

These sensible reflections shall guide my conduct in this 
important occasion ; and you may be sure I shall not allow 
myself to be so enchained that I cannot break these new ties 
at any time, by playing with them, and at my will. But 
I am already talking to you of breaking off and you still 
do not know the methods by which I acquired the right to 
do so; read then, and see what wisdom is exposed to in trying 
to help folly. I observed my words and the replies I obtained 
so carefully that I hope to be able to report both with an 
exactness which will content you. 

You will see by the copies of the two enclosed letters! who 
was the mediator I chose to bring me back to my fair one 
and what zeal the holy person used to unite us, What I must 
still inform you of—a thing I learned from a letter intercepted 
as usual—is that the fear and little humiliation of being 
abandoned had rather upset the austere devotee’s prudence 
and had filled her heart and head with sentiments and ideas 

1 Letiers CXX and CXXII, (C.deL,). 

336 

LETTER CXXV 

which, though they lacked common sense, were none the less 
important. It was after these preliminaries, necessary for 
you to know, that yesterday, Thursday, the 28th, a day fixed 
beforehand by the ungrateful person hegselt, that I presented 
myself before her as a timid and repentant slave, and left a 
crowned conqueror. 

It was six o’clock in the evening when I arrived at the fair 
recluse’s house, for, since her return, her doors have been 
shut to everyone. She tried to rise when I was announced ; 
but her trembling knees did not allow her to remain in that 
position: she sat down at once. As the servant who had 
brought me in had some duty to perform in the room, she 
seemed to be made impatient by it. We filled up this interval 
with the customary compliments. But not to lose any time, 
every moment of which was precious, I carefully examined 
the locality ; and there and then I noted with my eyes the 
theatre of my victory. I might have chosen a more convenient 
one, for there was an ottoman in the same room. But I 
noticed that opposite it there was a portrait of the husband ; 
and I confess I was afraid that with such a singular woman 
one glance accidently directed that way might destroy in a 
moment the work of so many exertions. At last we were 
left alone and I began. 

After having pointed out in a few words that Father 
Anselme must have informed her of the reasons for my visit, 
I complained of the rigorous treatment I had received from 
her; and I particularly dwelt upon the ‘ contempt” which 
had been shown me. She defended herself, as I expected ; 
and as you would have expected too, I founded the proofs 
of it on the suspicion and fear I had inspired, on the scandal- 
ous flight which had followed upon them, the refusal to answer 
my letters, and even the refusal to receive them, etc., etc. 
As she was beginning a justification (which would have been 
very easy) I thought I had better interrupt ; and to obtain 
forgiveness for this brusque manner I covered it immediately 
by a flattery: ‘‘ If so many charms have made an impression 
on my heart’’, I went on, “so many virtues have made no 
less a mark upon my soul. Seduced no doubt by the idea of 
approaching them I dared to think myself worthy of doing 
so. I do not reproach you for having thought otherwise ; 

337 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

but I am punished for my error.”’ As she remained in an 
embarrassed silence, I continued: ‘‘I desired, Madame, 
either to justify myself in your eyes or to obtain from you 
forgiveness for the wrongs you think I have committed, so 
that at least I can end in some peace the days to which I no 
longer attach any value since you have refused to embellish 
them.” 

Here she tried to reply, however: ‘‘ My duty did not per- 
mit me.’”’ And the difficulty of finishing the lhe which duty 
exacted did not permit her to finish the phrase. I therefore 
went on in the most tender tones: ‘‘ It is true then that it 
was from me you fled?”’ ‘‘ My departure was necessary.’’ 
“ And what took you away from me ?”’ ‘‘ It was necessary.” 
‘“And for ever?” ‘It must be so.’ I do not need to tell 
you that during this short dialogue the tender prude was in 
a state of oppression and her eyes were not raised to me. 

I felt I ought to animate this languishing scene a little ; 
so, getting up with an air of pique, I said: ‘‘ Your firmness 
restores me allof my own. Yes, Madame, we shall be separated, 
separated even more than you think ; and you shall congratu- 
late yourself upon your handiwork at leisure.’”’ She was a 
little surprised by this tone of reproach and tried to answer. 
‘The resolution you have taken. . .” said she. ‘Is only 
the result of my despair’’, I replied with vehemence. ‘ It is 
your will that I should be unhappy ; I will prove to you that 
you have succeeded even beyond your wishes.” “I desire 
your happiness,’ she answered. And the tone of her voice 
began to show a rather strong emotion. So, throwing myself 
at her feet, I exclaimed in that dramatic tone of mine you 
know: ‘Ah! cruel woman, can there exist any happiness 
for me which you do not share? Ah! Never! Never!” 
I confess that at this point I had greatly been relying on the 
aid of tears; but either from a wrong disposition or perhaps 
only from the painful and continual attention I was giving 
to everything, it was impossible for me to weep. 

Fortunately I remembered that any method is equally 
good in subjugating a woman, and that it sufficed to astonish 
her with a great emotion for the impression to remain both 
deep and favourable. I made up therefore by terror for the 
sensibility I found lacking; and with that purpose, only 

| 338 

LETTER CXXV 

changing the inflection of my voice and remaining in the same 
position, I continued: ‘‘ Yes, I make an oath at your feet, 
to possess you or die.”’ As I spoke the last words our eyes met. 
I do not know what the timid person saw ur thought she saw 
in mine, but she rose with a terrified air, and escaped from my 
arms, which I had thrown round her. It is true I did nothing 
to detain her; for I have several times noticed that scenes 
of despair carried out too vividly become ridiculous as soon as 
they become long, or leave nothing but really tragic re- 
sources which I was very far from desiring to adopt. However, 
as she escaped from me, I added in a low and sinister tone, 
but loud enough for her to hear: ‘‘ Well, then! Death!” 

I then got up; and after a moment of silence I cast wild 
glances upon her which, however much they seemed to wander, 
were none the less clear-sighted and observant. Her ill-assured 
bearing, her quick breathing, the contraction of all her 
muscles, her trembling half-raised arms, all proved to me that 
the result was such as J had desired to produce ; but, since in 
love nothing is concluded except at very close quarters, and 
we were rather far apart, it was above all things necessary to 
get closer together. To achieve this, I passed as quickly as 
possible to an apparent tranquillity, likely to calm the effects 
of this violent state, without weakening its impression. 

My transition was: ‘‘] am very unfortunate. J wished 
to live for your happiness, and I have disturbed it. I sacrifice 
myself for your tranquillity, and I disturb it again.”’ Then 
in a composed but constrained way: ‘‘ Forgive me, Madame ; 
I am little accustomed to the storms of passions and can re- 
press their emotions but ill. If I am wrong to yield to them, 
remember at least that it is for the last time. Ah! Calm 
yourself, calm yourself, I beseech you.’ And during this 
long speech, I came gradually nearer. ‘‘ If you wish me to 
be calm’’, said the startled beauty, ‘“‘ you must yourself be 
more tranquil.’’ ‘‘ Well, then, I promise it,” said I. And 
I added in a weaker voice: “‘ If the effort is great, at least 
it will not be for long. But’’, I went on immediately in a 
distraught way, ‘“‘I came, did I not, to return you your 
letters ? I beg you, deign to receive them back. This painful 
sacrifice remained for me to accomplish; leave me nothing 
that can weaken my courage.’ And taking the precious 

339 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

collection from my pocket, I said: “‘ There it is, that deceitful _ 
collection of assurances of your friendship! It attached me 
to life,’ I went on. ‘ So give the signal yourself which must 
separate me from you for ever.” 

Here the frightened Mistress yielded entirely to her tender 
anxiety. ‘‘ But, M. de Valmont, what is the matter, and 
what do you mean ? Is not the step you are taking to-day a 
voluntary one? Is it not the fruit of your own reflections ? 
And are they not those which have made you yourself approve 
the necessary course I adopted from a sense of duty?” 
“Well ’’, I replied, ‘‘ that course decided mine.” ‘‘ And what 
is that ?’”’ ‘‘ The only one which, in separating me from you, 
can put an end to my own.” “ But tell me, what is it ?” 
Then I clasped her in my arms, without her defending herself 
in the least; and, judging from this forgetfulness of con- 
ventions, how strong and powerful her emotion was, I said, - 
risking a tone of enthusiasm: ‘‘ Adorable woman, you 
have no idea of the love you inspire ; you will never know 
to what extent you were adored, and how much this senti- 
ment is dearer to me than my existence! May all your days 
be fortunate and tranquil; may they be embellished by all 
the happiness of which you have deprived me! At least 
reward this sincere wish with a regret, with a tear; and 
believe that the last of my sacrifices will not be the most 
dificult for my heart. Farewell.” 

While I was speaking, I felt her heart beating violently ; 
I observed the change in her face; I saw above all that she 
was suffocated by tears but that only a few painful ones 
flowed. It was at that moment only that I feigned to go 
away; but, detaining me by force, she said quickly: ‘‘ No, 
listen to me.” ‘‘ Let me go,” I answered. ‘‘ You will listen 
to me, I wish it’. “I must fly from you, I must.” ‘‘ No’’, 
she cried. At this last word she rushed or rather fell into my 
arms in a swoon. As I still doubted of so lucky a success, 
I feigned a great terror; but with all my terror I guided, 
or rather, carried her towards the place designed beforehand 
as the field of my glory; and indeed she only came to her 
senses submissive and already yielded to her happy conqueror. 

Hitherto, my fair friend, I think you will find I adopted 
a purity of method which will please you; and you will see 

340 

LETTER CXXV 

that I departed in no respect from the true principles of 
this war, which we have often remarked is so like the other. 
Judge me then as you would Frederic or Turenne. I forced 
the enemy to fight when she wished only to refuse battle ; 
by clever manoeuvres I obtained the chcice of battle-field 
and of dispositions; I inspired the enemy with confidence, 
to overtake her more easily in her retreat; I was able to 
make terror succeed confidence before joining battle; I left 
nothing to chance except from consideration of a great 
advantage in case of success and from the certainty of other 
resources in case of defeat ; finally, I only joined action when 
I had an assured retreat by which I could cover and retain 
all I had conquered before. I think that is everything that 
can be done; but now I am afraid of growing softened in the 
delights of Capua, like Hannibal. This is what happened 
afterwards. 

I expected so great an event would not take place without 
the usual tears and despair; and if I noticed at first a little 
more confusion, and a kind of interior meditation, I attributed 
both to her prudishness; so, without troubling about these 
slight differences which I thought were purely local, I simply 
followed the high-road of consolations ; being well persuaded 
that, as usually happens, sensations would aid sentiment, 
and that a single action would do more than all the words 
in the world, which, however, I did not neglect. But I found 
a really frightening resistance, less from its excess that from 
the manner in which it showed itself, 

Imagine a woman seated, immovably still and with an 
unchanging face, appearing neither to think, hear, nor listen ; 
a woman whose fixed eyes flowed with quite continual tears 
which came without effort. Such was Madame de Tourvel 
while I was speaking ; but if I tried to recall her attention to 
me by a caress, even by the most innocent gesture, im- 
mediately there succeeded to this apparent apathy, terror, 
suffocation, convulsions, sobs, and at intervals a cry, but all 
without one: word articulated. 

These crises returned several times and always with 
more strength; the last was so violent that I was entirely 
discouraged and for a moment feared I had gained a useless 
victory. I fell back on the usual commonplaces, and among 

341 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

them was this: ‘‘ Are you in despair because you have made 
me happy?’ At these words the adorable woman turned 
towards me; and her face, although still a little distraught, 
had yet regained its heavenly expression. ‘‘ Your happiness !”’ 
said she. You can guess my reply. “ You are happy then ?”’ 
I redoubled my protestations, ‘‘ And happy through me ?”’ 
I added praises and tender words. While she was speaking, 
all her limbs relaxed; she fell back limply, resting on her 
armchair ; and abandoning to me a hand which IJ had dared 
to take, she said: ‘‘ [ feel that idea console and relieve me.”’ 

You may suppose that having found my path thus, I did 
not leave it again; it was really the right, and perhaps the 
only, one. So when I wished to attempt a second victory I 
found some resistance at first, and what had passed before 
made me circumspect ; but having called to my aid that same 
idea of happiness I soon found its results favourable. ‘‘ You 
are right’’, said the tender creature, ‘I cannot endure my 
existence except as it may serve to make you happy. I give 
myself wholly up to it; from this moment I give myself to 
you and you will experience neither refusals nor regrets from 
me.” 

It was with this naive or sublime candour that she sur- 
rendered to me her person and her charms, and that she 
increased my happiness by sharing it. The ecstasy was 
complete and mutual; and, for the first time, my own out- 
Jasted the pleasure. I only left her arms to fall at her knees, 
to swear an eternal love to her ; and, I must admit it, I believed 
what I said. Even when we separated, the idea of her did 
not Jeave me and I had to make an effort to distract myself. 

Ah! Why are you not here to balance the charm of 
this action by that of its reward ? But I shall lose nothing 
by waiting, shallI ? And I hope I can consider as a thing 
agreed on between us the pleasant arrangement I proposed 
to you in my last letter. You see I carry things out and that, 
as I promised you, my affairs have gone well enough for me 
to be able to give you part of my time. Make haste then to 
get rid of your heavy Belleroche,abandon the whining Danceny, 
and concern yourself with me. What can you be doing in 
the country that you do not even reply to me >? Do you know 
I should like to scold you for it > But happiness inclines us 

342 

LETTER CXXVI] 

to indulgence. And then I do not forget that by returning 
to my place among your numerous suitors I must again submit 
to your little caprices. But remember, the new lover wishes 
to lose none of his old rights asafriend.  - 

Good-bye, as of old... Yes, good-bye, my angel ! 
I send you all love's kisses, 

P.S. Do you know that Prévan, after a month’s im- 
prisonment, has been forced to leave his Corps? It is the 
news of all Paris to-day. Really, he is cruelly punished 
for a fault he did not commit, and your success is complete ! 

Paris, the 29th of October, 17—. 

LETTER CXXVI 
Madame de Rosemonde to Madame de Tourvel 

I should have answered you sooner, my dear child, if 
the fatigue of my last letter had not brought back my pains, 
which have again deprived me of the use of my arm during 
the past few days. I was very anxious to thank you for the 
good news you gave me of my nephew, and equally anxious 
to send you my sincere congratulations on your own account. 
We cannot help but see in this astroke of Providence which, 
by moving the one, has saved the other. Yes, my dear 
Beauty, God wished only to try you and helped you at the 
moment when your strength was exhausted; and, in spite 
of your little murmuring, I think you have some thanks to 
return Him. It is not that I am unaware that it would have 
been pleasanter for you if this resolution had come to you 
first and Valmont’s had only been the result of it; it even 
seems, humanly speaking, that the rights of our sex would 
have been better preserved, and we are unwilling to lose any 
of them! But what are these slight matters compared with 
the important objects which are attained ? Do we see a man 
who escapes from a shipwreck complain that he did not have 
a choice of ways? 

You will soon feel, my dear daughter, that the pain you 
dread will disappear of itself ; and even if it remains always 
and entire you will none the less feel that it is easier to endure 

343 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

than remorse and self-contempt. It would have been useless 
for me to speak to you with this apparent severity earlier ; 
love is an independent sentiment, which prudence may enable 
us to avoid but which she cannot overcome, and, once love is 
born, it only dies of a natural death or from a complete lack 
of hope. You are in the latter position and this gives me the 
courage and the right to tell you my opinion freely. It is 
cruel to frighten a despairing invalid, who can endure nothing 
but consolations and palliatives, but it 1s wise to enlighten a 
convalescent on the dangers he has run, to give him the 
prudence he needs and submission to advice which may 
still be necessary to him. 

Since you have chosen me for your doctor, I speak to you 
as such and tell you that the little discomforts you now feel 
(which perhaps require a few medicines) are yet nothing in 
comparison with the alarming illness whose cure is now 
assured. Then as your friend, as the friend of a reasonable 
and virtuous woman, I take it upon myself to add that this 
passion, in itself so unfortunate, became even more so through 
its object. If I am to believe what I am told, my nephew, 
whom I confess I love to a point of weakness and who, indeed, 
possesses many praiseworthy qualities and great charm, is 
not without danger for women and has wronged many, indeed 
prizes almost equally the seducing and the ruining of them. 
I believe you would have converted him, Doubtless no one 
was ever more worthy of doing so; but so many others have 
flattered themselves in the same way and their hope has been 
deceived, that I prefer you should not have been reduced to 
this resource. 

Think now, my dear Beauty, that instead of all the dangers 
you would have had to run, you will have the quiet of your 
own conscience, your own tranquillity, as well as the satis- 
faction of having been the principal cause of Valmont’s 
conversion. For my part, I have no doubt that it was largely 
due to your courageous resistance, and that a moment of 
weakness on your part might perhaps have left my nephew 
in a perpetual state of infidelity. I like to think so and wish 
to see you think the same; you will find in it your first con- 
solation and I new reasons for loving you still more. 

I expect you here in a few days, my charming daughter, 

344 

LETTER CXAXVII 

as you have promised me. Come and seek calm and happi- 
ness in the very place you lost them; above all come and 
rejoice with your tender mother that you have kept so well 
the promise you made her, that you would: never do anything 
which was unworthy of her and of you ! 

From the Chateau de... , 30th October, 17—. 

LETTER CXXVII 
The Marquise de Merteuil to the Vicomte de Valmont 

If I did not answer your letter of the rgth, Vicomte, the 
reason was not that I lacked time; it is merely that it 
annoyed me and that I thought it devoid of common sense. 
] thought I could not do better than leave it in oblivion ; 
but since you return to it and seem to value the ideas it 
contained while you take my silence for consent, I must 
plainly tell you my opinion. 

I] may sometimes have claimed to take the place of a 
harem by myself, but it has never suited me to be part of one. 
I thought you knew that. Now at least, when you know it, 
you will easily see how ridiculous your proposal seemed to 
me, What I! I sacrifice an inclination, a new inclination, 
to concern myself with you? And concern myself how ? 
By waiting my turn, like a submissive slave, for the sublime 
favours of your ‘‘ Highness!’’ When, for example, you 
wished to distract yourself for a moment from “ this un- 
suspected charm ”’ which you have only experienced with the 
‘‘ adorable, the heavenly ’’ Madame de Tourvel, or when you 
are afraid of compromising in the eyes of the “ delightful 
Cécile’ the superior idea you are very glad to have her retain 
of you: then, condescending to me, you will come to seek 
pleasures, less keen indeed, but without consequence; and 
your precious favours, although rather rare, will quite suffice 
for my happiness ! 

Assuredly, you are rich in your good opinion of yourself ; 
but apparently I am not so in modesty ; for, however much 
I examine myself, I cannot think I have fallen so low as that. 
Very likely I am wrong, but I warn you that I am so in many 
other matters. 

345 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

I am especially wrong in thinking that ‘ the schoolboy, 
the whining ’’ Danceny, entirely occupied with me, sacrificing 
to me, without even making a merit of it, a first passion, even 
before it has been satisfied, and loving me as men love at his 
age, could, in spite of his twenty years, work more effectively 
than you for my happiness and my pleasures. I take it upon 
me to add that if I had the caprice to give him a rival, it 
would not be you, at least at this moment. 

And for what reasons ? you will ask. But, in the first 
place, there might not be any; for the caprice which might 
make you preferred, might just as well exclude you. But 
for politeness’ sake I am willing to tell the motives of my 
decision. It seems to me that you would have too many 
sacrifices to make me; and I, instead of feeling grateful as 
you would not fail to expect, should be capable of thinking 
that you owed me even more! You see that our way of 
thinking keeps us so far apart that we cannot draw near each 
other in any way ; and I fear it will take a long time, a very 
long time, before my feelings change. I promise to let you 
know when | change. Until then, take my advice, make other 
arrangements, and keep your kisses, you have so many better 
ways of bestowing them ! 

‘Good-bye, as of old”’, you say ? But of old, it secms 
to me, you thought more of me; you did not destine me to 
play third parts; and above all you waited until I said yes 
before being certain of my consent. Excuse me then if, instead 
of saying ‘‘ Good-bye, as of old’’, 1 say to you ‘‘ Good-Lye, 
as at present ”’. 

Servant, Vicomte. 
From the Chateau de... , 31st of October, 17—. 

LETTER CXXVIII 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Rosemonde 

It was only yesterday, Madame, that I received your 
delayed reply. It would have killed me there and then, if 
my existence were still my own; but it belongs to another ; 
and that other is M. de Valmont. You see I hide nothing from 

346 

LETTER CXXVIII 

you. Even if you should now think me unworthy of your 
friendship, I would rather lose it than hold it by deceit. All 
I can tell you is that I was placed by M. de Valmont between 
his death or his happiness, and J chose'the latter. I neither 
boast of it nor blame myself for it ; I simply say what is, 

After that, you will easily imagine what an effect your 
letter and the severe truths it contained had upon me. Yet 
do not think it created any regret in me or can ever make me 
alter my feelings or my conduct, It is not that I do not pass 
through cruel moments; but when my heart is most torn, 
when I feel I can no longer endure my torture, I say to myself : 
Valmont is happy; and everything vanishes before that 
idea, or rather it changes everything into pleasure. 

I have then consecrated myself to your nephew; for 
his sake I am ruined. He has become the sole centre of my 
thoughts, of my feelings, of my actions. As long as my life 
is necessary to his happiness, it will be precious to me, and 
I shall think it a fortunate one. If some day he should think 
otherwise . . . he will hear no complaint and no reproach 
from me. I have dared already to fix my eyes upon that fatal 
moment and my mind is made up. 

You can now see how I must be affected by the fear you 
seem to have that one day M. de Valmont might ruin mc ; 
for before he wishes to do so, he must have ceased to love 
me; and what effect on me can be made by vain reproaches 
I shall not even hear ? He alone shall be my judge. As 
I shall only have lived for him, my memory will rest with 
him ; and if he is forced to recognise that I loved him, I shall 
be sufficiently justified. 

You have now read my heart, Madame. I prefer the 
misfortune of losing your esteem by my frankness to that 
of rendering myself unworthy of it by the degradation of a 
lie. I felt I owed this complete confidence to your former 
kindnesses to me. To add a word more might make you 
suspect that I have the pride to claim it still when, on the 
contrary, I do myself justice by abandoning any claim to 
it. I am with respect, Madame, your most humble and most 
obedient servant, 

Paris, 1st of November, 17-—. 

347 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER CXXIX 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteu:l 

Tell me, my fair friend, what is the reason for the tone 
of bitterness and banter which reigns in your last letter ? 
What is this crime I have committed, apparently without 
knowing it, which makes you so out of humour ? You blame 
me because I appeared to count upon your consent before 
I had obtained it; but I thought that what might appear 
presumption with other people, could never be taken for any- 
thing but confidence between you and me; and since when 
has that feeling harmed friendship and love? By adding 
hope to desire I only yielded to a natural impulse, which 
makes us always place the happiness we seek as near as 
possible ; and you took the result of my eagerness for that 
of pride. I know very well that custom has introduced a 
respectful doubt into this matter; but you know it is only 
a form, a protocol; and I think I had every reason to believe 
that these minute precautions were not necessary between 
us. 

It even seems to me that this frank and free proceeding, 
when it is founded upon old acquaintance, is very preferable 
to the insipid flattery which so often makes love tasteless. 
And perhaps the value I find in this manner only comes 
from that I attach to the happiness of which it reminds me 
but, for that very reason, it would be still more disagreeable 
for me to have you think otherwise. 

But that is the only fault I know of myself; for I do not 
imagine that you can have seriously believed there is a woman 
in the world whom I should prefer to you; and still less that 
I should have rated you as low as you feign to believe. You 
examined yourself in this matter, you tell me, and you do not 
think you have fallen so low as that. So I think and that 
simply proves that your mirror is faithful. But might you 
not have concluded more easily and with more justice that 
I certainly never had such an opinion of you ? 

I vainly look for a reason for this strange idea. But 
it seems to me that it comes more or less from the praises 

348 

LETTER CXXIN 

I have allowed myself to give other women. At least, so 
I infer from your affectation in dwelling upon the epithets 
of ‘ adorable’, ‘‘ heavenly’, ‘“‘ delightful’’. which I used in 
speaking to you of Madame de Tourvel or the Volanges girl. 
But do you not know that these words, taken at hazard rather 
than on reflection, do not so much express one’s opinion of 
the person as the situation one is in when speaking ? And if, 
at the very moment when I was so keenly affected by one or 
the other, I still desired you no less; if I gave you a marked 
preference over both of them, since I could not renew our 
first liatson except at the expense of both of them; I do not 
think there is any great reason for blaming me here. 

It would not be more difficult for me to justify myself 
on the ‘‘ unsuspected charm’’, by which you also seem to be 
a little annoyed ; for, first of all, it does not follow that it 
is stronger because it was unsuspected. Ah! Who could 
surpass you in the delicious pleasures which you alone can 
make always new and always more intense ? I merely wished 
to say it was of a kind I had not before experienced, but 
without intending to classify it; and I added, as I repeat to- 
day, that, whatever it may be, I shall combat and overcome it. 
I shall do this with even more zeal, if I can think that this 
slight labour is a homage I can offer you. 

As to little Ceécile—lI see no use in talking about her to you. 
You have not forgotten that I took charge of the child at your 
request, and only await your permission to get rid of her. 
I may have mentioned her ingenuousness and her freshness ; 
I may even for a moment have thought her “ delightful’’, 
because one is always more or less pleased with one’s own 
work ; but she certainly has not enough consistency in any 
way to hold one’s attention at all. | 

And now, my fair friend, I appeal to your justice, to your 
first favours to me; to the long and perfect friendship, to 
the complete confidence, which have so long bound us to 
each other: have I deserved the harsh tone you take towards 
me? But how easy it will be for you to compensate me for 
it whenever you choose! Say but a word, and you will see 
if all the charms and all the delights keep me here—not a 
day, but a minute. I shall fly to your feet and your arms, 
and I will prove to you a thousand times and in a thousand 

349 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

ways that you are, that you always will be, the true ruler of 
my heart. 

Good-bye, my fair friend; I expect your reply with 
great eagerness. 

Paris, 3rd of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXXX 
Madame de Rosemonde to Madame de Tourvel 

And why, my dear Beauty, do you no longer wish to be 
my daughter ? Why do you seem to declare that all corres- 
pondence between us is to be broken off ? Is it to punish me 
for not having guessed something which was contrary to all 
probability 2? Or did you suspect me of having voluntarily 
distressed you? No, I understand your heart too well to 
believe that it thinks of mine in this way. So the pain your 
letter caused me is much less relative to myself than to you ! 

O my friend! It is with pain I say it, but you are far 
too worthy of being loved, for love ever to make you happy. 
Ah! What really delicate and sensitive woman has not found 
misfortune in the very sentiment which promised her so much 
happiness ! Do men know how to appreciate the women they 
possess P 

Many of them are honourable in their behaviour and 
constant in their affection but, even among those, how few 
are able to place themselves in unison with our hearts! Do 
not think, my dear child, that their love is like ours. They 
feel indeed the same ecstasy; they often put more vehement 
emotion into it ; but they do not know that anxious eagerness, 
that delicate solicitude, which in us produce those tender and 
continuous attentions whose sole end is always the beloved 
person. Man enjoys the happiness he feels, woman the 
happiness she gives. This difference, so essential and so rarely 
noticed, has a very perceptible influence on the whole of their 
respective behaviour. The pleasure of one is the satisfaction 
of desires, the pleasure of the other is above all to create them. 
To please is for him only a method of success; but for her 
it is success itself. And coquetry, for which women are so 

350 

LETTER CXXX 

often blamed, is nothing but the excess of this way of feeling, 
and by that very fact proves its reality. Finally, that ex- 
clusive desire which particularly characterises love is, in man, 
only a preference which at most serves to mcrease a pleasure 
which another object would perhaps weaken but not destroy ; 
while with women it is a profound sentiment which not only 
annihilates every other desire but, being stronger than nature 
itself and out of its control, makes them feel nothing but 
repugnance and disgust even where it seems pleasure should 
be created. 

And donot think that the more or less numerous objections 
which may be quoted can be successfully opposed to these 
general truths ! They are supported by public opinion which 
in men alone distinguishes infidelity from inconstancy—a 
distinction which they are proud of when they ought to feel 
humiliated ; for our sex this distinction has only been adopted 
by those depraved women who are its shame, women to whom 
any way seems good if they can hope by it to be saved from 
the painful feeling of their baseness. 

I thought, my dear Beauty, it might be useful for you 
to have these reflections to oppose to the deceitful idcas of 
perfect happiness with which love never fails to abuse our 
imagination ; a fallacious hope to which we still cling even 
when forced to abandon it, the loss of which irritates and 
multiplies the griefs, already but too real, inseparable from a 
strong passion! This occupation of softening your troubles 
or diminishing their number is.the only one I can and will 
fulfil at this moment. In ills without remedy, advice can 
only be directed to the regimen. All I ask of you is to remem- 
ber that to pity an invalid is not to blame him. Ah! What 
are we, to blame one another? Let us leave the right of 
judging to Him who reads in our hearts; and I even dare to 
think that in his paternal eyes a host of virtues can atone for 
one weakness. 

But, I beg you, dear friend, avoid especially these violent 
resolutions which are less a sign of strength than of complete 
discouragement; do not forget that, by rendering another 
the possessor of your existence (to use your own expression) 
you cannot have frustrated your friends of what they possessed 
before, which they will continue to claim. 

351 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Good-bye, my dear daughter; think sometimes of your 
tender mother and believe that you will always and above 
everything be the object of her dearest thoughts. 

From the Chateau de... , 6th of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXXXI 
The Marquise de Mertewl to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Well and good, Vicomte, I am more pleased with you 
this time than before; but now let us discuss matters in a 
friendly way ; I hope to convince you that the arrangement 
you appear to desire would be a real folly for you as well as 
for me. 

Have you not yet noticed that pleasure, which is indeed 
the sole motive for the union of the two sexes, is not sufficient 
to form a bond between them ? And that, though it is pre- 
ceded by the desire which brings together, it is none the less 
followed by the disgust which repels? It is a law of nature 
that love alone can change ; and is one able to feel love at will ? 
Yet it is always necessary, and this would be really a difficulty 
had people not perceived that it was enough if love existed 
on one side, In this way the difficulty was halved, and without 
much loss; indeed, one enjoys the happiness of loving, the 
other that of pleasing, a little less animated it is true, but I 
add to it the pleasure of deceiving, which makes a balance ; 
and thus everything goes well. 

But tell me, Vicomte, which of us two will undertake to 
deceive the other! You know the story of the two rogues 
who recognised each other when gambling: ‘‘ We shall 
achieve nothing” they said, ‘‘ let us each pay half for the 
cards ’ }; and they gave up the game. Take my advice, let us 
follow this prudent example, and not lose together a time we 
could employ so much better elsewhere. 

To prove to you that your interest influences this decision 
as much as my own and that I am not acting from ill humour 
or caprice, I will not refuse you the reward agreed upon between 
us ; and I am quite certain that for one evening only we shall 

1(Q)r : ‘‘ et us share the stakes,”’ 

352 

LETTER CXXXI 

satisfy each other, and I have no doubt that we shall be able 
to embellish it in such a way that we shall see it end with 
regret. But do not forget that this regret is necessary to 
happiness ; and however pleasant our illusion may be, do not 
let us think it can be durable. ) 

You see that I fulfil my promise in my turn and that 
before you have carried out your part ; for I was to have the 
first letter from the heavenly prude and yet, either you still 
value it or you have forgotten the conditions of a bargain, 
which perhaps interests you less than you would like to per- 
suade me; but I have received nothing, absolutely nothing. 
Yet either I am wrong or the tender devotee must write 
often ; for what does she do when she is alone ? She surely 
has not the wit to amuse herself. If I wished, then, I might 
make you a few little reproaches ; but I leave them in silence 
to atone for a little ill-humour I may have had in my last letter. 

And now, Vicomte, I have nothing else to say but to make 
you a request which is as much for your sake as for mine; this 
is to put off a moment, which perhaps I desire as much as you 
do but which I think ought to be delayed until my return 
to town. On the one hand, we shall not have the necessary 
liberty here, for it would only need a little jealousy to attach 
to me more firmly than ever this dull Belleroche, who is now 
only hanging by a thread. He is already in the state of having 
to lash himself up to the point of loving me ; he is in such 
a state that I put as much malice as prudence into the caresses 
with which I overwhelm him. But at the same time you will 
see that this would not be a sacrifice to make you! A mutual 
infidelity will make the charm much more powerful. 

Do you know I sometimes regret that we are reduced to 
these resources. In the time when we loved each other, for | 
think it was love, I was happy; and you too, Vicomte! . 
But why trouble about a happiness which can never return ? 
No, whatever you may say, it is impossible. First of all, I 
should exact sacrifices which you would not or could not make 
me and which I may not deserve; and then, how is one to 
retain you? Oh! No, no, I will not even consider the idea ; 
and in spite of the pleasure I feel in writing to you, I prefer 
to leave you abruptly. Good-bye, Vicomte. 

From the Chateau de... , 6th of November, 17—. 

353 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER CXXXII 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Rosemonde 

I am touched by your kindness to me, Madame ;__I should 
yield entirely to it were I not restrained to some degree by 
the fear of profaning it by the acceptance. Why must it be 
that when I find it so precious I feel at the same time I am 
not worthy of it? Ah! I shall at least dare to express my 
gratitude to you; above all I shall admire that indulgence 
of virtue which only knows our faults to pity them, whose 
powerful charm keeps so sweet and so strong a domination 
over our hearts even beside the charm of love. 

But can I still deserve a friendship which no longer suffices 
for my happiness ? I say the same of your advice ; I feel its 
value but I cannot follow it. And how could I not believe in 
perfect happiness when I feel it at this very moment? Yes, 
if men are as you say, they must be avoided, they are hateful ; 
but how far is Valmont from resembling them ! If, like them, 
he has that violence of passion, which you call vehement 
emotion, is it not exceeded in him by his delicacy ! O, my 
friend! You speak of sharing my troubles, rejoice at my 
happiness ; I owe it to love and how much more to the object 
of that love who increases its value! You love your nephew, 
you say, perhaps to the point of weakness ? Ah! If you knew 
him as I do! I love him with idolatry, and even then much 
less than he deserves. No doubt he has been carried away 
into a few errors, he admits 1t himself ; but who has ever known 
real love as he does ? What more can I say to you? He feels 
it as he inspires it, 

You will think that this is ‘one of the deceitful ideas 
with which love never fails to deceive our imagination ”’ ; 
but in this case why should he become more tender, more 
ardent, now he has nothing more to obtain ? I will confess 
I had noticed in him formerly an appearance of reflection and © 
reserve which rarely left him and often brought me back, in 
spite of myself, to the false and cruel impressions I had been 
given of him. But since he has been able to yield unconstrain- 
edly to the emotions of his heart he seems to guess all the 

354 

LETTER CXXXIII 

desires of mine. Who knows whether we were not born for 
each other! If this happiness were not reserved for me-—-to 
be necessary to his! Ah! If it is an illusion, may I die before 
itends. But no; I want to live to cherish him, to adore him. 
Why should he cease to love me ? What other woman could 
make him happier than I do ? And I feelit myself ; this happi- 
ness one creates is the strongest bond, the only one which 
really binds. Yes, it is this delicious feeling which ennobles 
love, which, in a way, purifies it, and makes it really worthy of 
a tender and generous soul, like Valmont’s. 

Good-bye, my dear, my respectable, my indulgent friend. 
It would be vain for me to try to write longer to you; this 
is the time he promised to come and every other idea abandons 
me. Forgive me! But you desire my happiness and it is so 
great at this moment that I am scarcely capable of feeling it 
all. 

Paris, 7th of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXXXIII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteutl 

And what, my fair friend, are these sacrifices you think 
I would not make, the reward of which would be to please you ? 
Only let me know them and if I hesitate to offer them to you, 
I give you permission to refuse the homage of them. Hey! 
What have you been thinking of me for some time if, even in a 
mood of indulgence, you doubt my feelings and my energy ? 
Sacrifices I would not or could not make ! So you think me in 
love, subjugated ? And the value I put upon the victory 
you suspect me of attaching to the person ? Ah! Thanks be 
to Heaven, I am not yet reduced to that and I offer to prove 
it to you. Yes, I will prove it to you, even if it must be at the 
expense of Mme de Tourvel. After that you cannot surely 
have any doubts. 

I think I may give some time,without compromising myself, 
to a woman who at least has the merit of belonging to a class 
one rarely meets, And perhaps the dead season in which this 
adventure happened made me give myself up to it more com- 

355 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

pletely ; and even now, when the full rush of society has 
hardly begun, it is not surprising that it absorbs me almost 
entirely. But remember it is hardly a week ago that I enjoyed 
the fruit of three months of trouble. I have so often stayed 
longer with someone who was worth less and had not cost me 
somuch!... And you never drew any conclusions from them 
about me. 

And then, would you know the real cause of the ardour 
I put into it? Here it is. The woman is naturally timid ; 
at first, she continually doubted her happiness, and this doubt 
was enough to disturb her, so that I am scarcely beginning 
to be able to notice how far my power extends in this class. 
Yet it is a thing I was curious to know, and the opportunity is 
not so easily found as people think. 

First, for a great many women pleasure is always pleasure, 
and is never anything more; whatever title may be given 
us, to them we are never anything but factors, mere agents 
whose sole merit is activity, and among whom he who does 
most, does best. 

In another class, perhaps the most numerous to-day, 
the celebrity of the lover, the pleasure of taking him away from 
another woman, the fear of his being taken away in turn, 
preoccupy women almost entirely; we have a share, to a 
greater or less extent, in the kind of happiness they enjoy, 
. but it is rather a matter of the circumstances than the person. 
It comes to them by way of us and not from us. 

For my observations I needed to find a delicate and sensi- 
tive woman who would make love her sole interest and who' 
in love itself would see only her lover ; a woman whose emotion, 
far from following the ordinary track, would start from the 
heart and reach the senses; whom I have seen, for example 
(and I am not speaking of the first day) emerge from pleasure 
in tears and a moment later regain delight through a word 
which replied to her soul. And then, it was necessary for her 
to add to all this the natural candour which has become 
insurmountable from the habit of yielding to it, which does 
not allow her to dissimulate any of the feelings of her heart. 
Now, you will admit that such women are rare ; and I am ready 
to believe that but for her I should never have met with one 
perhaps. 

356 

LETTER CXXXIII 

It would not be surprising then if she should hold me 
longer than another woman would ; and since the experiment 
I wish to make with her demands that I sender her happy, 
perfectly happy, why should I refuse to do so, especially when 
it aids and does not hinder me? But because the mind is 
engaged, does it follow that the heart is enslaved ? Certainly 
not. So the value I do not deny that I set on this adventure 
will not prevent my seeking others or even my sacrificing it 
to more agreeable ones. 

I am so free that I have not even neglected the Volanges 
girl, for whom I care so little. Her mother is bringing her back 
to town in three days’ time; yesterday I arranged my com- 
munications ; some money to the porter, a few compliments 
to his wife, arranged the whole matter. Can you imagine that 
Danceny did not find out so simple a way ? And yet people 
say love makes them ingenious ! On the contrary those it 
dominates it makes stupid. And I am unable to protect myself 
from it! Ah! You need not be uneasy. In a few days I shall 
weaken, by sharing it elsewhere, the possibly too lively impres- 
sion I have received ; and if sharing it with one only is not 
enough, I shall share it with several. 

I shall be quite ready, however, to hand the schoolgirl 
over to her discreet lover as soon as you think fitting. It 
seems to me you have no further reason to prevent it, and I 
agree to render poor Danceny this signal service. Indeed it 
is the least I can do for him in exchange for all those he has 
done me. At the present moment he isin a great state of anxiety 
to know whether Mme de Volanges will receive him; I calm 
him as best I can by assuring him I will make him happy on 
the first opportunity ; and meanwhile I continue to take 
charge of his correspondence which he wishes to continue on 
the arrival of ‘‘ his Cécile’. I have six letters from him already 
and I shall have one or two more before the happy day. He 
must be a very unoccupied young man ! 

But let us leave this childish couple and come back to our- 
selves ; let me concentrate solely on the delightful hope your 
letter gave me. Yes, of course, you will hold me and I should 
not forgive you for doubting it. Our ties were loosened, not 
broken; and the so-called breaking-off was merely an error of 
our imagination; our feelings, our interests, remained just as 

357 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

united as ever. Like a traveller who returns home undeceived, 
I shall realise, like him, that I had left happiness to pursue hope 
and IJ shall say with Harcourt : 

‘The more foreigners I saw, the more I loved my 
country.”!? Do not oppose any longer the idea, or rather, 
the sentiment which brings you back to me ; and after having 
tried all pleasures in our different paths, let us enjoy the happi- 
ness of feeling that none of them is comparable with that we 
have experienced, which we shall once more find still more 
delicious ! 

Good-bye, my charming friend. I consent to wait until 
you return; but hasten it, and do not forget how much I 
desire it. 

Paris, 8th of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXXXIV 
The Marquise de Merteuil to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Really, Vicomte, you are like children, in whose presence 
one must never say anything and to whom one can never show 
anything without their wanting to get hold of it once ! A mere 
idea comes to me and I warn you I do not intend to dwell on 
it; and, because I speak of it to you, you take advantage of 
this to bring back my attention to it, to hold me to it when I 
wish to be diverted from it and, as it were, to make me share 
your absurd desires in spite of myself! Is it generous of you 
to leave me to bear the whole burden of prudence ? I tell you 
again, and I repeat it to myself still more often, the arrangement 
you propose is really impossible. Even if you put into it all 
the generosity you show at the moment, do you think I have 
not any delicacy myself, that I would accept sacrifices which 
would injure your happiness ? 

Now, Vicomte, have you really any illusions about the 
sentiment which attaches you to Madame de Tourvel ? It is 
love, or love never existed ; you may deny it in a hundred ways 
but you prove it in a thousand. For example, what subter- 
fuge is this you make use of against yourself (for I think you 
are sincere with me) which makes you attribute to a desire 

1Du Belloi. Tragedy of The Siége of Calais. (C. de L.). 
358 

LETTER CXXXIV 

for observation the wish to keep this woman, a wish you can 
neither hide nor combat ? Would one not say you had never 
made another woman happy, perfectly happy ? Ah! If you 
doubt that, you have very little memory | But no, it is not 
that. Your heart simply abuses your mind and makes it accept 
bad reasons ; but I, who have a great interest in not allowing 
myself to be deceived, am not so easily contented. 

Thus, in noticing your politeness which made you carefully 
suppress all the words which you thought had displeased me, 
I yet perceived that you had none the less preserved the same 
ideas, perhaps without realising it. Indeed, it is no longer 
the adorable,the heavenly Madame de Tourve!, but ‘“‘ an amaz- 
ing woman, a delicate and sensitive woman’”’, and that to the 
exclusion of all others; ‘‘a rare woman’”’, such that ‘a 
second one like her could never be met with ’’. It is the same 
with that unsuspected charm which is not ‘‘ the more 
powerful’. Well! So be it; but since you have never found 
it until now, it is to be supposed that you would never find it 
again in the future, and the loss you would make would be 
just as irreparable. Vicomte, either these are the certain 
symptoms of love or one must give up ever looking for them. 

Rest assured, this time I am speaking to you without ill 
humour. I have promised myself not to be out of humour 
again; I have realised but too well that it may become a 
dangerous snare. Take my advice, let us be friends and remain 
as we are. Be thankful to me only for my courage in 
defending myself; yes, my courage, for it is needed some- 
times even to avoid taking a course one knows to be the 
wrong one. 

It is therefore not with the purpose of bringing you round 
to my opinion by persuasion that I reply to the request you 
make about the sacrifices I should exact, and you could not 
make. I use the word “‘ exact ’’ on purpose, because I am sure 
that in a moment you will indeed think me too exacting ; but 
so much the better ! Far from being annoyed by your refusal, 
I shall thank you for it. Come, I will not dissimulate with 
you, though perhaps I need it. 

I should exact then—see the cruelty of it !—that this rare, 
this astonishing Madame de Tourvel be no more to you than 
an ordinary woman, a woman such as she really is; for we 

359 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

must not deceive ourselves: this charm we think we find in 
others exists in us, and love alone embellishes so much the 
beloved person. Perhaps you would make the effort to promise 
me, to swear to me that you would do what I ask, however 
impossible it may be; but, I confess, I should not believe 
mere words, I could only be persuaded by your whole conduct. 

That is not all; I should be capricious. I should not pay 
any attention to the sacrifice of little Cécile which you offer 
me so graciously. On the contrary I should ask you to continue 
this painful service until further orders from me; _ either 
because I should like to abuse my power or because from indul- 
gence or justice it would suffice me to control your sentiments 
without thwarting your pleasures. In any case, I should want 
to be obeyed ; and my orders would be very harsh ! 

It is true that I should then think myself obliged to thank 
you and—who knows ?—perhaps even to reward you. For 
example, I should certainly cut short an absence which would 
become unendurable to me. I should see you at last, Vicomte, 
and I should see you... how?... But remember this is 
nothing more than a conversation, a mere account of an 
impossible project, and I do not want to forget it alone... 

Do you know I am a little anxious about my law-suit. 
I wanted to find out exactly what my rights are; my lawyers 
quote me a few laws and a great many “ precedents ”’ as they 
call them ; but I do not see as much reason and justice in it. 
I am almost at the point of regretting that I did not agree 
toa compromise. However, I reassure myself by remembering 
that the solicitor is sharp, the barrister eloquent, and the client 
pretty. If these three methods do not succeed, the whole 
course of affairs would have to be changed, and what would 
become of respect for ancient customs ! 

This law-suit is now the only thing which keeps me here. 
Belleroche’s is over; nonsuited, each side to pay its own 
costs. He is now regretting this evening’s ball—it is indeed the 
regret of an idler! I shall return him complete liberty when 
I get back to town. I make him this painful sacrifice and 
console myself for it by the generosity he perceives in it ! 

Good-bye, Vicomte, write to me often ; the recital of your 
pleasure will compensate me to some extent for the boredom 

I endure. 
From the Chateau de... , 11th of November, 17--. 

360 

LETTER CXXXV 

LETTER CXXXV 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Rosemonde 

I am trying to write to you without knowing if I shall 
be able to do so. Ah! Heaven, when I think that in my last 
letter it was the excess of my happiness which prevented my 
continuing it ! And now it is the excess of my despair which 
overwhelms me, which leaves me no strength except to feel 
my pain, and takes away from me the strength to express it. 

Valmont... Valmont loves me no more, he never loved 
me. Love does not disappear in this way. He deceives me, 
he betrays me, he outrages me. I endure all the misfortunes 
and humiliations which can be gathered together, and they 
come upon me from him. 

And do not think this is a mere suspicion; I was so far 
from having any! I have not the happiness to be able to 
doubt. Isaw him; what can he say to justify himself? .. . 
But what does it matter to him! He will not even attempt 
it... Wretch that I am! What will my tears and re- 
proaches matter to him ? What does he care forme !... 

It is true that he has sacrificed me, surrendered me .. . 
and to whom?...a vile creature... But what am 
I saying? Ah! I have lost even the right to scorn her. 
She has betrayed fewer duties, she is less guilty than I. Oh! 
How painful is grief when it is founded on remorse! I feel 
my tortures increase. Farewell, my dear friend; however 
unworthy of your pity I have rendered myself, you will yet 
have some pity for me if you can form any idea of what I am 
suffering. 

I have just re-read my letter, and I see that it tells you 
nothing ; I will try to have the courage to relate this cruel 
event. It was yesterday; for the first time since my return 
I was to dine out. Valmont came to see me at five; never 
had he seemed so tender. He let me know that my plan 
of going out vexed him, and, as you may suppose, I soon 
decided to stay at home. However, suddenly, two hours 
later his manner and tone changed perceptibly. I do not 
know if anything escaped me which could offend him; but 

361 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

in any case, a little later he pretended to recollect an engage- 
ment which forced him to leave me and he went away; yet 
it was not without expressing very keen regrets which seemed 
to me tender and which I then thought sincere. 

Left to myself, I thought it more polite not to avoid my 
first engagement since I was free to carry it out. I completed 
my toilet and entered my carriage. Unhappily my coach- 
man took me by the Opera and I found myself in the con- 
fusion of the exit ; a few steps in front of me in the next line 
I saw Valmont’s carriage. My heart beat at once, but it was 
not from fear; and the one idea which filled me was the 
desire that my carriage would go forward. Instead of that, 
his was forced to retire, and stopped opposite mine. I leaned 
forward at once; what was my astonishment to see at his 
side a woman of ill-repute, well known as such! I leaned 
back, as you may suppose; this alone was enough to rend 
my heart; but, what you will scarcely believe, this same 
creature, apparently informed by an odious confidence, did 
not leave her carriage window, kept looking at me, and laughed 
so loudly it might have made a scene. 

In the state of prostration I was in I allowed myself 
to be driven to the house where I was to sup, but it was 
impossible to remain there; every moment I felt ready to 
faint and I could not restrain my tears. 

When I returned I wrote to M. de Valmont and sent him 
my letter immediately ; he was not at home. Desirous, at 
any price, to emerge from this state of death or to have it 
confirmed for ever, I sent the man back with orders to wait, 
but my servant returned before midnight and told me that 
the coachman, who had come back, had said that his master 
would not be in that night. This morning I thought there 
was nothing to do but to ask for my letters once more and to 
request him never to come to my house again. I gave orders 
to that effect ; but doubtless they were useless. It is nearly 
midday ; he has not yet arrived and I have not even received 
a word from him. 

And now, my dear friend, I have nothing more to add; 
you know all about it and you know my heart. My one hopeis 
that I shall not be here long to distress your tender friendship. 

Paris, 15th of November, 17—. 

362 

LETTER CXXXVII 

LETTER CXXXVI 
Madame de Tourvel to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Doubtless, Monsieur, after what happened yesterday you 
will not expect to be received in my house again and, doubtless, 
you have no great wish to do so! The object of this note, 
then, is not somuch to ask you not to come again as to request 
from you once more those letters which ought never to have 
existed ; letters which, if they may have amused you for a 
moment as proofs of the delusion you created, cannot but be 
indifferent to you now that it is dissipated and now that they 
express nothing but a sentiment you have destroyed. 

I recognise and confess I was wrong to give you a con- 
fidence by which so many other women before me have been 
victimised ; in this I blame myself alone; but I thought at 
least I did not deserve from you that I should be abandoned 
to contempt and insult. I thought that in sacrificing myself 
to you, in losing for you alone my rights to the esteem of 
others and of myself, that I might expect not to be judged by 
you with more severity than by the public, whose opinion 
still recognises an immense difference between a weak woman 
and a depraved woman. These wrongs, which would be wrongs 
to anyone, are the only ones of which I speak. I am silent 
upon those of love ; your heart would not understand mine. 
Farewell, Monsieur. 

Paris, 15th of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXXXVII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Tourvel 

Your letter, Madame, has only just been handed to me ; 

I shuddered on reading it, and it has left me scarcely strength 

to reply. What a dreadful idea of me you hold! Ah! No 

doubt I have done wrong, and such wrong that I shall never 

forgive myself for it in my life, even if you should hide it with 

your indulgence. But how far from my soul those wrongs 
363 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

you reproach me with have ever been! WhatI! I humiliate 
you! I degrade you! When I respect you as much as 
I cherish you, when my pride dates from the moment when 
you thought me worthy of you! Appearances have deceived 
you ; and I confess they may have been against me ; but why 
have you not in your heart that which should combat them ? 
Why was it not revolted at the mere idea that it could have 
any reason to complain of mine? Yet you believed this } 
So you not only thought me capable of this atrocious madness, 
but you even feared you had made yourself liable to it by your 
favours tome. Ah! Since you feel yourself so degraded by 
your love J am then very vile in your eyes ? 

Oppressed by the painful feeling this idea causes me, 
I am wasting in resenting it the time I should employ in 
destroying it. I will confess all; but another consideration 
still restrains me. Must I then relate facts I wish to annihilate 
and fix your attention and mine upon a moment of error which 
I should like to atone for by the remainder of my life, whose 
cause I have yet to comprehend, whose memory must for ever 
bring me humiliation and despair? Ah! If by accusing my- 
self I must excite your anger, you will at least not have to 
seek far for your vengeance ; it will suffice you to leave me to 
my remorse. 

Yet—-who would believe it ?-—the first cause of this event 
is the all-powerful charm I feel in your presence. It was 
that which made me forget too long an important engage- 
ment which could not be postponed. When I left you it was 
too late and I did not find the person I was looking for. I hoped 
to find him at the Opera and this step was equally fruitless. 
Emile, whom I found there, whom I knew at a time when 
I was far from knowing either you or love; Emilie had no 
carriage and asked me to take her to her home close at hand. 
I saw no objection and consented. But it was then that 
I met you and I felt at once that you would be tempted to 
think me guilty. 

The fear of displeasing or distressing you is so powerful 
in me that it must have been, and was indeed, speedily 
noticed. I confess even that it made me request the woman 
not to show herself; this precaution of delicacy turned 
against my love. Accustomed, like all those of her condition, 

304 

LETTER CXXXVII 

never to be certain of a power which is always usurped, except 
through the abuse they allow themselves to make of it, Emilie 
took care not to allow so striking an opportunity to escape. 
The more she saw my embarrassment increase the more pains - 
she took to show herself; and her silly mirth—TI blush to 
think that you could have believed for a moment that: you 
were its object—was only caused by the cruel anxiety I felt, 
which was itself the result of my respect and my love. 

So far I am certainly more unfortunate than guilty ; and 
these wrongs ‘‘ which would be wrongs to anyone and are 
the only ones of which you speak ”’ cannot be blamed upon me 
since they do not exist. But it is in vain that you are silent 
upon the wrongs of love; I shall not keep the same silence 
about them; too great an interest compels me to break it. 

In my shame at this inconceivable aberration I cannot 
recall its memory without extreme pain. JI am deeply con- 
vinced of my errors and would consent to bear their punish- 
ment or to await their forgiveness from time, from my un- 
ending affection, and from my repentance. But how can I be 
silent when what I have to say is important to your 
sensibility ? 

Do not think I am looking for a roundabout way to 
excuse or palliate my error; I confess myself guilty. But 
I do not confess, I will never confess that this humiliating 
fault can be regarded as a wrong to love. Ah! What can 
there be in common between a surprisal of the senses, between 
a moment of self-forgetfulness soon followed by shame and 
regret, and a pure sentiment which can only be born in a 
delicate soul, can only be sustained there by esteem, and 
whose fruit is happiness! Ah! Do not profane love thus! 
Above all, fear to profane yourself by collecting under the 
same point of view what can never be confounded. Let vile 
and degraded women dread a rivalry they feel can be estab- 
lished in spite of them, let them endure the torments of a 
jealousy which is both cruel and humiliating ; but you, turn 
your eyes away from objects which sully your gaze and, pure 
as the Divinity itself, punish, like it, the offence without 
resenting it. 

But what punishment can you inflict upon me which 
could be more painful than that I feel, which can be compared 

365 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

with the regret of having displeased you, to the despair of 
having distressed you, to the crushing idea of having rendered 
myself less worthy of you? You are thinking how to punish 
me! And I ask you for consolation ; not that I deserve it, 
but because it is necessary to me and can only come to me 
from you. 

If, suddenly forgetting my love and yours and setting 
no value upon my happiness, you wish, on the contrary, to 
give me over to an eternal pain, you have the right to do 
so; strike; but if, being more indulgent or more tender, you 
remember still the sweet feelings which united our hearts— 
that pleasure of the soul, always reborn and always more 
deeply felt ; those days, so sweet, so happy, which each of us 
owes to the other; all those treasures of love which love 
alone procures—perhaps you may prefer the power of re- 
creating them to that of destroying them. What more shall 
I say ? I have lost everything, and lost it through my own 
fault ; but I can regain all by your benefaction. It is for you 
to decide now. I add only one word. Yesterday you swore 
to me that my happiness was certain as long as it depended 
on you! Ah! Madame, will you abandon me to-day to an 
eternal despair ? 

Paris, 15th of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXXXVIII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Mertewil 

I persist, my fair friend; no, I am not in love; and 
it is not my fault if circumstances force me to play the part. 
Only consent and come back ; you will soon see for yourself 
that I am sincere. I gave proofs of it yesterday and they 
cannot be destroyed by what is happening to-day. 

I went to see the tender prude and went without having 
any other engagement ; for the Volanges girl, in spite of her 
age, was to spend the whole night at Madame V...’s pre- 
cocious ball. At first, lack of occupation made me desire to 
prolong this evening with her and I had even, with this 
purpose, exacted a small sacrifice ; but scarcely was it granted 

366 

LETTER CXXXVIIT 

when the pleasure I promised myself was disturbed by the 
idea of this love which you persist in believing of me, or at 
least in accusing me of ; to such an extent that I felt no other 
desire than that of being able at the same time to assure my- 
self and to convince you that it was a pure calumny on your 
part. 

I therefore adopted a violent course ; and on some slight 
pretext I left my Beauty in great surprise and doubtless even 
more distressed. For myself, I went off calmly to meet 
Emilie at the Opera; and she can inform you that no regret 
troubled our pleasures until we separated this morning. 

Yet I had a fair enough cause for anxiety if my perfect 
indifference had not preserved me from it; for you must 
know that I was barely four houses from the Opera, with 
Fmilie in my carriage, when the austere devotee’s carriage 
came up exactly opposite mine and a block kept us for nearly 
ten minutes beside one another. We could see each other 
as plainly as at midday and there was no way to escape. 

But that is not all ; it occurred to me to confide to Emilie 
that this was the woman of the letter. (Perhaps you will 
remember that jest and that Emilie was the writing-table’). 
She had not forgotten it; she is a merry creature; and she 
had no rest until she had observed at her ease ‘‘ that virtue’, 
as she called it, and that with peals of laughter outrageous 
enough to provoke a temper. 

That is still not all; did not the jealous creature send 
to my house that very evening ? I was not there; but, in 
her obstinacy, she sent there a second time with orders to 
wait for me. As soon as I had decided to remain with Emilie 
I sent back my carriage with no orders to the coachman 
except to come for me there next morning ; when he got back 
he found the messenger of love, and thought it quite simple 
to say that I was not returning that night. You can guess 
the effect of this news and that when I returned I found 
my dismissal expressed with all the dignity demanded by the 
situation. 

So this adventure which you think interminable might 
have been ended this morning, as you see ; if it is not ended 
the reason is not, as you will think, that I set any value on its 

1 Letters XLVI and XLVII. (C.deL,). 
367 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

continuance ; the reason is that, on the one hand, I did not 
think it decent to allow myself to be deserted ; and, on the 
other hand, that I wished to reserve the honour of this 
sacrifice for you. 

I have therefore replied to the severe note by a long senti- 
mental letter; I gave lengthy reasons and I relied on love 
to get them accepted as good. I have just received a second 
note, still very rigorous and still confirming the eternal breach, 
as was to be expected ; but its tone was not the same. She 
will above all things not see me; this determination is 
announced four times in the most irrevocable manner. 
I concluded I ought not to lose a moment before presenting 
myself. I have already sent my servant to get hold of the 
door-porter, and in a moment I shall go myself to have my 
pardon signed ; for in wrongs of this kind there is only one 
formula which gives a general absolution and that can only 
be obtained in person. 

Good-bye, my charming friend; I am now going to 
attempt this great event. 

Paris, 15th of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXXXIX 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Rosemonde 

How I blame myself, my tender friend, for having spoken 
to you of my passing troubles too much and too soon! It is 
because of me that you are now in distress; the grief which 
came to you from me still lasts while I am happy. Yes, all 
is forgotten, forgiven; let me express it better, all is re- 
trieved. Calm and bliss have succeeded grief and anguish. 
O joy of my heart, how shall I express you! Valmont is 
innocent—a man who loves so much cannot be guilty. He 
had not done me the heavy, offensive injuries for which 
I blamed him with such bitterness; and if I needed to be 
indulgent in one point, had I not my own injustices to 
repair P 

I will not tell you in detail the facts or reasons which 
justify him ; perhaps the mind would not thoroughly appreciate 

368 

LETTER CXL 

them ; the heart alone is capable of feeling them. Yet if you 
suspect me of weakness, I shall appeal to your own judgment 
in support of mine. For men, you said yourself, infidelity is 
not inconstancy. 

It is not that I do not feel that this distinction, which 
opinion authorises in vain, wounds my susceptibility ; but 
how can mine complain when Valmont’s susceptibility suffers 
even more ? Do not think that he pardons or can console 
himself for this very fault which I forgive; and yet, how he 
has retrieved this little error by the excess of his love and of 
my happiness ! 

Either my felicity is greater or I am more conscious of 
its value since I feared I had lost it ; in any case I can say that 
if I felt I had the strength to endure again distress as cruel 
as that I have just passed through, I should not think I was 
buying too dearly this increase of happiness I have since 
enjoyed. ©! my tender mother, scold your inconsiderate 
daughter for having troubled you over-much by her hasti- 
ness ; scold her for having judged rashly and calumniated 
him whom she ought never to have ceased to adore; but as 
you recognise that she is imprudent, see that she is happy, 
and increase her joy by sharing it. 

Paris, 16th of November, 17—, in the evening. 

LETTER CXL 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

How does it happen, my fair friend, that I have had no 
answer from you? Yet it seems to me that my last letter 
deserved a reply and, though I ought to have received it three 
days ago, I am still waiting for it ! I am vexed, to put it at 
the lowest; so I shall not talk to you about my important 
affairs at all. 

That the reconciliation had its full result; that instead 
of reproaches and suspicion, it produced only new affection ; 
that I it was who received excuses and compensation due to 
my mistrusted candour; of all this I will not say a word ; 
and, but for the unforeseen occurrence of last night, I should 

369 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

not write to you at all. But as this concerns your pupil and 
as she will probably not be in a position herself to inform you 
of it at least for some time, I have undertaken this task. 

For reasons which you will guess, or which you will not 
guess, Madame de Tourvel has not occupied me so much for 
the last few days, and as these reasons could not exist with 
the Volanges girl, I became more assiduous with her. Thanks 
to the obliging porter, I had no obstacle to overcome ; and 
your pupil and I were leading a regular and convenient life. 
But habit leads to carelessness ; the first days we could not 
take too many precautions for our safety ; we trembled even 
behind bolts. Yesterday, an incredible carelessness caused the 
accident I am about to tell you; and if, for myself, I escaped 
with nothing but the fright, 1t cost the little girl more dearly. 

We were not asleep, but we were in the repose and abandon- 
ment which follow pleasure, when we heard the door of the 
room suddenly open. I leaped for my sword at once, both 
for my own defence and for that of our common pupil ; 
I advanced and saw nobody ; but the door was actually open. 
Since we had a light I investigated and found no living soul. 
Then I remembered that we had forgotten our usual pre- 
cautions ; and doubtless the door had been only pushed to 
or partly closed and had opened of itself. 

I returned to calm my timid companion, but did not find 
her in the bed ; she had fallen or had hidden herself between 
it and the wall; in any case, she was lying there unconscious 
and with no’ movement but rather violent convulsions. 
Imagine my embarrassment ! However, I succeeded in getting 
her back to bed and in bringing her back to consciousness ; 
but she had hurt herself in her fall and very soon felt the 
results of it. 

Pains in the loins, violent colics, still less uncertain 
symptoms soon enlightened me as to her condition; but 
to tell her what it was I had first to inform her of the state 
she was in before, for she did not suspect it. Never perhaps 
until now has a girl kept so much innocence while doing so 
effectually everything necessary to get rid of it! Oh! She 
is not one to waste her time in reflection ! 

But she wasted a lot of time in lamenting and I felt some- 
thing had to be done. I finally agreed with her that I would 

37° 

LETTER CXLI 

go at once to the Physician and the Surgeon of the family, 
that I would tell them to come to her and at the same time 
confide everything to them under the seal of secrecy; that 
she would ring for her waiting-woman ; that she would or 
would not take the woman into her confiderice, as she chose ; 
but that she would send for assistance and especially forbid 
that Madame de Volanges should be awakened—a delicate 
and natural consideration on the part of a daughter who 
did not wish to cause her mother anxiety. 

I carried out my two errands and two confessions as 
quickly as I could and then went home and have not since 
gone out; but the Surgeon, whom I knew before, came to 
me at midday to give me news of the invalid. I was not 
wrong; but he hopes that if no accident happens, nothing 
will be noticed in the house. The waiting-woman is in the 
secret; the Physician has given some name to the illness ; 
and this affair will be arranged like a hundred others, unless 
it is afterwards useful to us to have it talked about. 

But is there still any common interest between you and 
me? Your silence might make me think so; I should even 
have ceased to believe there was, if my desire for it did not 
make me seek all means of retaining hope of it. 

Good-bye, my fair friend ; I kiss you, with a grudge. 

Paris, 21st of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXLI 
The Marquise de Mertewl to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Heavens, Vicomte, how you worry me with your obstinacy ! 
What does my silence matter to you? Do you think that I 
keep silence because I lack reasons to defend myself? Ah! 
How much better it would be! But no, it is only that it is 
painful to me to tell them to you. 

Tell me the truth; are you deluding yourself or are you 
trying to deceive me? The difference between your words 
and your actions leaves me no choice except between these 
two sentiments ; which is the true one ? What do you expect 
me to say to you when I do not know what to think myself ? 

371 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

You appear to make a great merit of your last scene 
with Madame de Tourvel; but what does it prove for your 
system or against mine? Assuredly I never told you that 
you loved the woman enough not to be unfaithful to her, 
not to seize all opportunities which might appear pleasant 
or easy; I even felt that it would be almost the same to you 
to satisfy with another woman, the first who came to hand, 
the very desires which she alone could create ; and I am not 
surprised that, from a libertinage of mind which it would 
be wrong to deny you, you should have once done from 
design what you have done on a thousand other occasions . 
from opportunity. Who does not know that it is the mere 
run of the world and the custom of all of you from the scoundrel 
to the ‘‘ creatures?’ ! He who abstains from it to-day is 
considered romantic; and I do not think that is the fault 
I blame you for. 

But what I said, what I thought, what I still think, is 
that you are none the less in love with your Madame de 
Tourvel ; not indeed with a very pure or very tender love, 
but with the kind of love you can feel; the kind of love, for 
example, which makes you think a woman possesses the 
charms or qualities she does not possess, which puts her in 
a class apart and ranks all others in a second order, which 
holds you still to her even when you insult her ; such a love in 
fact as I suppose a Sultan might feel for a favourite Sultana, 
which does not prevent his often preferring a mere odalisque 
to her. My comparison seems to me all the more accurate 
because, like a Sultan, you are never a woman’s lover or 
friend, but always her tyrant or her slave. So I am quite 
sure you humiliated yourself, degraded yourself, to return to 
this fair creature’s good graces! And you were but too 
happy to have succeeded, so that as soon as you thought the 
moment had come to obtain your forgiveness, you left me 
“for this great event’’. 

Even in your last letter, if you do not speak to me wholly 
of this woman it is because you do not want to tell me any- 
thing of “ your important affairs’’; they seem to you so 
important that to be silent about them appears to you a kind 
of punishment to me. And after a thousand proofs of your 

1‘ Especes ’’—eighteenth century polite slang. 
372 

LETTER CXLI 

decided preference for another, you ask me calmly if there 
is still “‘a common interest between you and me!” Be care- 
ful, Vicomte ! If I once reply, my answer will be irrevocable ; 
and to fear to do so now, is perhaps already to say too much. 
So I absolutely will not speak of it. 

All I can do is to tell you a story. Perhaps you will not 
have time to read it or time to give it enough attention to 
understand it properly ? It is for you to choose. At worse, 
it will only be a story wasted. 

A man I know had entangled himself, like you, with a 
woman who did him very little honour. At intervals he had 
indeed the wit to see that sooner or later the adventure would 
do him harm; but although he blushed for it, he had not 
the courage to break away. His embarrassment was the 
greater because he had boasted to his friends that he was 
entirely free and he realised that one’s ridiculousness increases 
in proportion as one denies it. Thus he passed his life, con- 
tinually doing foolish things and continually saying after- 
wards: “ It is not my fault.” This man had a woman friend 
who was for a moment tempted to exhibit him to the public 
in this state of intoxication and thus to make his ridiculous- 
ness perpetual; but yet, more generous than malignant, 
or perhaps from some other motive, she wished to try one 
last means to be able in any event to say like her friend: 
“It is not my fault.’’ She therefore sent him without any 
other remark the following letter, as a remedy whose applica- 
tion might be useful to his disease. 

‘“One grows weary of everything, my angel, it is a law 
of Nature; it is not my fault. 

‘‘ Tf therefore Iam weary to-day of an adventure which has 
wholly preoccupied me for four mortal months, itis not my 
fault. 

“Tf, for example, I had just as much love as you had virtue 
(and that is surely saying a lot) it isnot astonishing that one 
should end at the same time as the other. It is not my fault 

‘“From this it follows that for some time I have been 
deceiving you; but then your pitiless affection forced me, as 
it were, todoso! Itis not my fault. 

‘To-day, a woman I love madly insists that I sacrifice 
you to her. It is not my fault. 

373 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

‘T realise that this is a fine opportunity of crying out 
upon perjury; but if Nature has only given men assurance, 
while she gave women obstinacy, it is not my fault. 

‘Take my advice, choose another lover, as I have chosen 
another mistress. This is good advice, very good; if you 
think it bad, it is not my fault. 

‘‘ Farewell, my angel, I took you with pleasure, I abandon 
you without regret ; perhaps I shall come back to you. So 
goes the world. It is not my fault.”’ 

This is not the moment, Vicomte, to tell you the result 
of this last effort and what followed upon it; but I promise 
to tell you in my next letter. You will also find in it my 
‘ultimatum ”’ on the renewal of the treaty which you propose 
to me, Until then, good-bye and nothing more. . . 

By the way, thank you for your details about the Volanges 
girl; itis a matter to reserve until the day after the marriage 
for the Scandalmonger’s Gazette. Meanwhile, I send you my 
complimentary condolences on the loss of your posterity. 
Good night, Vicomte. 

From the Chateau de... , 24th of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXLII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to Madame de Merteuil 

Faith, my fair friend, I am not sure whether I have mis- 
read or misunderstood your letter, the story you relate and 
the little epistolary model which accompanied it. What I can 
tell you is that the letter seemed to me original and lhkely 
to maké an effect; so I simply copied it out, and still more 
simply I sent it to the heavenly Madame de Tourvel. I did 
not waste a moment, for the tender missive was sent off 
yesterday evening. I preferred it thus, because first of all 
I had promised to write to her yesterday; and then too 
because I thought she would not have too much time if she 
took all night to meditate and consider “ this great event”, 
even if you should a second time reproach me for that 
expression. 

I hoped to be able to send you this morning my beloved’s 

374 

LETTER CXLIUI 

answer ; but it is nearly midday and I have not yet received 
anything. I shall wait until five o’clock; and if I have no 
news then I shall go for them in person ; fev especially in such 
proceedings it is only the first step which is troublesome. 

As you may suppose, I am now very eager to learn the 
end of the story of the man you know who is so violently 
suspected of being unable to sacrifice a woman when necessary. 
Has he not reformed ? And will his generous woman friend 
not show him some favour ? 

I am not less anxious to receive your “ ultimatum’”’, as 
you call it so politely! Above all I am curious to know 
whether you will still see love in this latest step of mine. 
Ah! No doubt, there is a great deal! But for whom ? 
However, I do not mean to lay stress on anything, and I await 
everything from your goodness, 

Farewell, my charming friend; I shall not close this 
letter until two o’clock in the hope that I may be able to 
enclose the desired reply. 

Two o'clock in the afternoon. 

Still nothing, and I have no time; I have not time to 
add a word ; but this time will you still refuse the tenderest 
kisses of love ? 

Paris, 27th of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXLIII 
Madame de Tourvel to Madame de Rosemonde 

The veil is torn, Madame, the veil upon which was painted 
the illusion of my happiness. The disastrous truth enlightens 
me and allows me to see nothing but a certain and near death, 
the path to which is laid between shame and remorse. I shall 
follow it. . . I shall cherish my tortures if they shorten my 
existence. I send you the letter I received yesterday ; I will 
add no reflections upon it, they are carried init. It is no longer 
the time to complain; there is nothing to do but suffer. 
It is not pity I need, but strength. 

Receive, Madame, the only farewell I shall make and 
grant my last prayer; it is to leave me to my fate, to forget 

375 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

me entirely, to feel as if I were no longer on the earth. There 
is a limit in misery after which friendship itself increases our 
sufferings and cannot heal them. When wounds are mortal 
all aid becomes inhuman. Every feeling but that of despair 
is foreign to me. Nothing now can befit me save the profound 
night where I go to bury my shame. There I shall weep my 
errors, if I can still weep! Since yesterday I have not shed 
a tear. My broken heart grants me none. 

Farewell, Madame. Do not reply to me. I have sworn 
upon that cruel letter never to receive another. 

Paris, 27th of November, 17-—. 

LETTER CXLIV 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

Yesterday, at three o'clock in the afternoon, growing 
impatient at receiving no news, I presented myself at the 
house of the abandoned fair one ; I was told she had gone out. 
In this phrase I only saw a refusal to receive me which neither 
vexed nor surprised me; and I left in the hope that this 
step would at least force so polite a woman to honour me 
with a word of reply. My desire to receive it made me return 
home expressly about nine o'clock, and I found nothing. 
Surprised by this silence, which I did not expect, I ordered 
my servant to collect information and to find out if the 
affectionate creature were dead or dying. At length, when 
I returned, he informed me that Madame de Tourvel had 
indeed gone out at eleven o’clock in the morning, that she 
had driven to the Convent of ..., and that at seven o’clock 
in the evening she had sent back her carriage and her servants, 
with the message that she was not to be expected home. 
Certainly, she is doing the right thing. The convent is the 
proper refuge for a widow; and if she persists in so praise- 
worthy a resolution I shall add to all the obligations I already 
owe her that of the celebrity which will follow this adventure. 

Some time ago I told you that, in spite of your anxieties, 
I should only reappear on the world’s stage shining with a 
new lustre. Now let those malignant critics who accused me 

376 

LETTER CXLIV 

of a romantic and unlucky love show themselves, let them 
break off with more rapidity and brilliance ; but no, let them 
do better, let them present themselves as consolers, the way 
is marked out for them. Well! Let them only attempt the 
course I have run through completely, and if one of them 
obtains the least success, I yield him first place. But they 
will all find that when I give my attention to it, the im- 
pression I leave is ineffaceable. Ah! This one will certainly 
be so; and I should count all my other triumphs as nothing, 
if ever I should have a rival preferred by this woman. 

The course I have adopted flatters my self-love, I admit ; 
but I am sorry she found sufficient strength to separate 
herself from me so completely. There will then be obstacles 
between us other than those I have placed there myself ! 
What ! If I wished to return to her, she would be in a position 
not to allow it; what am I saying ? not to desire it, no longer 
to make it her supreme happiness! Is that the way to love ? 
And do you think, my fair friend, that I ought to endure 
it? For example, am I not able, and would it not be better, 
to bring the woman back to the point of foreseeing the possi- 
bility of a reconciliation, which people always desire as long 
as they hope ? I might attempt this without attaching any 
importance to it, and consequently without offending you. 
On the contrary! It would be a mere attempt which we 
would make together ; and even if I should succeed, 1t would 
only be one way more of repeating at your will a sacrifice 
which seems to be pleasing to you. And now, my fair friend, 
I still have to receive the reward and all my wishes are tor 
your return. Come back quickly and find once more your 
lover, your pleasures, your friends, and the regular course 
of adventures. 

The Volanges girl’s adventure has turned out excellently. 
Yesterday, when my anxiety did not allow me to stay any- 
where, I went among other expeditions to call on Madame de 
Volanges. I found your pupil already in the drawing-room, 
still in her invalid’s dress, but in full convalescence, and only 
the fresher and more attractive for it. In a similar case you 
women would remain a month on your sofas ; faith, long live 
girls! Really she made me want to find out if her cure is 
complete. 

377 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

I have still to tell you that the little girl’s accident almost 
drove your ‘“‘sentimental” Danceny mad. First, it was 
with grief; then, it was with joy. ‘‘ His Cécile” was ill! 
You can guess how he lost his head in such a misfortune. 
Three times a day he sent for news and did not let a day pass 
without calling himself; finally he sent a handsome letter 
to the Mamma asking permission to come and congratulate 
her on the convalescence of so dear an object, and Madame de 
Volanges consented ; so that I found the young man installed 
there as of old, except for a little familiarity which he dared 
not yet take. | 

It is from him that I learned these details; for I left at 
the same time as he did and I made him chatter. You have 
no idea of the effect this visit made upon him. It is impossible 
to describe his joy, his desires, his transports. I like these 
great emotions and made him lose his head entirely by assuring 
him that in a very few days I would enable him to see his 
fair one still more intimately. 

In fact, I have decided to hand her back to him as soon 
as I have made my experiment. I want to devote myself 
entirely to you; and then would it be worth while for your 
pupil to be mine also if she were to be unfaithful only to her 
husband ? The master-stroke is to be unfaithful to her lover 
and particularly to her first lover! For I cannot reproach 
myself with having uttered the word love to her. 

Good-bye, my fair friend; return as quickly as possible 
to enjoy your power over me, to accept my submission, and 
to give me its reward. 

Paris, 28th of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXLV 
The Marquise de Merteuil to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Seriously, Vicomte, you have deserted Madame de Tourvel ? 
You sent her the letter I composed for her! Really, you are 
charming, and you have surpassed my expectation! I admit 
freely that this triumph flatters me more than all those 
I have obtained up till now. You will perhaps think I value 

378 

LETTER CXLV 

this woman very highly after having formerly rated her so 
low; not at all; I have not obtained this advantage over 
her, but over you; that is the amusing thing and it is really 
delicious. ‘ 

Yes, Vicomte, you loved Madame de Tourvel very much 
and you still love her; you love her like a madman: but 
because I amused myself by making you ashamed of it, 
you have bravely sacrificed her. You would have sacrificed 
a thousand rather than endure one jest. Where vanity will 
take us! The wise man is indeed right when he says that 
it is the enemy of happiness. 

Where would you be now if I had wanted to do more 
than play you a trick ? But I am incapable of deceiving, as 
you well know; and even if you should reduce me in turn 
to despair and a convent, I will run the risk and yield to my 
conqueror. 

Yet if I capitulate, it is from the merest weakness ; for, 
if I wanted, how many cavils I should still have to raise ! 
And perhaps you would deserve them ? For example, I marvel 
at the skill or clumsiness with which you calmly propose 
that I should let you patch things up with Madame de Tourvel. 
It would suit you very well, would it not, to take the credit 
for breaking off without losing the pleasures of possession ? 
And as this apparent sacrifice would no longer be one for 
you, you make me an offer to repeat it at my will! By this 
arrangement the heavenly devotee would still think herself 
the one choice of your heart, while I should pride myself 
upon being the preferred rival ; we should both be deceived, 
but you would be pleased, and what matters the rest 

It is a pity that with so much talent for planning you 
have so little for execution ; and that by one unconsidered 
step you have placed an invincible obstacle between you and 
what you most desire. 

What! You think of making things up and you could 
have written that letter I sent! You must have thought 
me very clumsy in my turn! Ah! Believe me, Vicomte, 
when a woman strikes at another woman’s heart, she rarely 
fails to find the sensitive place, and the wound is incurable. 
When I struck her, or rather when I guided your blows, 
I did not forget that this woman was my rival, that for a 

379 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

moment you had thought her preferable to me and, in short, 
that you had placed me beneath her. If I am deceived in 
my vengeance, I consent to put up with the mistake. So, 
I agree to your trying every means; I even invite you to do 
so and promise not to be angry at your success, if you manage 
to obtain any. I am so much at ease upon this matter, that 
I shall not concern myself with it further. Let us speak of 
other things. 

For example, the Volanges girl’s health. You will give 
me precise news of it on my return, will you not ? I shall be 
very glad to haveit. After that, it is for you to judge whether 
it suits you better to hand the little girl back to her lover, or 
to try to become a second time the founder of a new branch 
of the Valmonts, under the name of Gercourt. This idea 
seemed rather amusing to me and, while I leave the choice 
to you, I still request you not to make up your mind definitely 
until we have talked it over together. This is not putting you 
off for an indefinite time, because I shall be back in Paris 
immediately. I cannot tell you which day positively, but be 
certain that you shall be the first to be informed of my 
arrival. 

Good-bye, Vicomte; in spite of my quarrels, my tricks, 
and my reproaches, I still love you very much and I am 
preparing to prove it to you. Until we meet, my friend. 

From the Chateau de... , 29th of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXLVI 
The Marquise de Merteuil to the Chevalier Danceny 

At last Iam leaving here, my young friend, and tomorrow 
evening I shall be back in Paris. In the midst of all the 
confusion which a journey brings with it I shall receive no 
one. However, if you have any very urgent confidence to 
make me, I will except you from the general rule ; but I shall 
except no one else ; so I beg you to keep my arrival a secret. 
Even Valmont will not know it. 

If anyone had told me a little time ago that you would 
soon have my complete confidence, I should not have believed 

380 

LETTER CXLVII 

it. But yours has impelled mine. I should be tempted to 
think that you had put adroitness into it, perhaps even 
seduction. That would be very wrong, at the least! But 
it would not be dangerous now ; you have indeed other things 
to do! When the heroine is on the stage nobody cares about 
the confidante. 

So you have had no time to inform me of your new 
successes ? When your Cécile was away, the days were not 
long enough to listen to your tender complaints. You would 
have made them to the echoes, if I had not been there to hear 
them. When later she was ill, you still even honoured me with 
an account of your anxieties; you needed someone to tell 
them to. But now that she whom you love is in Paris, that 
she is well, and especially since you see her sometimes, she 
suffices for everything and your friends are now nothing to you. 

I do not blame you ; it is the fault of your youth. Do we 
not know that from Alcibiades down to you, young people 
have never wanted friendship except in their troubles ? 
Happiness sometimes makes them indiscreet but never con- 
fiding. I will say with Socrates: ‘“‘ ] like my friends to come 
to me when they are unhappy ”’ ; but as he was a philosopher, 
he could get on without them when they did not come. In 
that respect, I am not quite so wise as he, and I felt your 
silence with all a woman’s weakness. 

But do not think me exacting ; I am far from being that ! 
The same feeling which makes me notice these deprivations 
makes me endure them with courage, when they are the proof 
or the cause of my friend’s happiness. I do not count upon 
seeing you tomorrow evening then, unless love leaves you 
free and unoccupied, and I forbid you to make me the least 
sacrifice. 

Good-bye, Chevalier; it will be a great delight to me 
to see you again; will you come ? 

Froni the Chateau de... , 29th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CXLVII 
Madame de Volanges to Madame de Rosemonde 

You will certainly be as distressed as I am, my excellent 
friend, when you hear of Madame de Tourvel’s condition ; 
381 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

she has been ill since yesterday ; her illness came upon her 
suddenly and shows such grave symptoms that I am really 
alarmed. 

A burning fever, a violent and almost continual delirium, 
a thirst which nothing can quench, are all that can be observed. 
The doctors say they cannot yet prognosticate anything ; 
and the treatment will be the more difficult because the invalid 
obstinately refuses any assistance whatever, to such an extent 
that she had to be held down by main force to be bled; and 
twice afterwards force has had to be used to replace her bandage 
which in her delirium she kept wanting to tear off. 

You who saw her, as I did, so delicate, so timid, and so 
gentle, can you imagine that four persons could hardly restrain 
her and that she becomes inexpressibly furious 1f one attempts 
to point anything out to her? For my part, I am afraid it 
is something more than delirium and that it is a real mental 
alienation. 

What happened yesterday increases my fears in this respect. 

On that day she arrived at the Convent of... at eleven 
o'clock in the morning with her waiting-woman. Since she 
was brought up in that house and has the habit of going to 
it sometimes, she was received in the usual way, and appeared 
calm and well to everybody. About two hours later she en- 
quired if the room she occupied as a schoolgirl was vacant, 
and when she was told it was, she asked to see it again ; 
the Prioress accompanied her with several other nuns. She 
then declared that she had come back to live in this room which 
(she said) she ought never to have left ; and she added that 
she would only leave it ‘‘ for death ” ; that was her expression. 

At first they did not know what to say; but after their 
first astonishment, they pointed out that as she was a married 
woman she could not be received there without a special 
permission. This reason and a thousand others had no effect 
on her; from that moment she persisted not only that she 
would not leave the convent but even her room. Finally, 
growing weary of the discussion, at seven o’clock in the evening 
they consented that she should spend the night there. They 
sent away her carriage and her servants and put off taking any 
steps until the next day. 

I am assured that during the whole evening her air and 

382 

LETTER CXLVII 

behaviour had nothing disordered about them, both were 
composed and thoughtful; only, four or five times she fell 
into a reverie so profound that each time she could not be 
drawn out of it by being spoken to; and each time, before 
coming out of it, she lifted both hands to her head which she 
appeared to clasp tightly ; whereupon one of the nuns who 
were present asked her if she were suffering in her head and 
she gazed at her a long time before answering, saying at last : 
‘“‘ The pain is not there.”” A moment later she asked to be 
left alone and requested that she should be asked no more 
questions. 

Everyone retired, except her waiting-woman, who luckily 
was to sleep in the same room, from lack of other 
accommodation. 

According to the girl’s account, her mistress was quite 
calm until eleven o'clock at night. She then said she wished 
to go to bed; but, before she was entirely undressed, she 
began to walk up and down her room with a great deal of 
motion and frequent gestures. Julie, who had been a witness 
of what had happened during the day, did not dare say any- 
thing to her, and waited in silence for nearly an hour. At 
last, Madame de Tourvel called twice in quick succession ; 
she had barely time to rush forward when her mistress fell 
into her arms, saying: ‘‘ I am exhausted.’ She let herself 
be guided to her bed, would not take anything nor allow any 
assistance to be sent for. She simply had water placed beside 
her and ordered Juhe to go to bed. 

Julie declares that she did not go to sleep until two o’clock 
and that during that time she heard neither movement nor 
complaints. But she says she was awakened at five o'clock 
by her mistress’ speaking in a loud voice, that she then asked 
if she needed anything and, obtaining no reply, found a light 
and took it to Madame de Tourvel’s bed but Madame de 
Tourvel did not recognise her and, suddenly breaking off the 
incoherent words she was saying, exclaimed: ‘“‘ Let me be 
left alone, let me be left in darkness; it is darkness which 
befits me.” I have myself noticed to-day that she often 
repeats this phrase. | 

Julie made this apparent order an excuse to go for other 
people and help, but Madame de Tourvel refused both with 

383 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

the wildness and delirium which have returned to her so 
often since. 

The difficulty in which the whole convent was placed by 
this determined the Prioress to send for me at seven o'clock 
in the morning... It was not yet daylight. I hastened 
thither at once. When I was announced to Madame de 
Tourvel, she seemed to regain consciousness and replied : 
‘““Ah! Yes, let her come in.’ But when [ went up close to 
her bed, she gazed steadfastly at me, took my hand quickly 
and pressed it, and said to me in a clear but melancholy 

voice: ‘‘ I am dying because I did not trust in you.” Im- 
mediately afterwards she hid her eyes and returned to her 
most frequent expression: “‘ Let me be left alone, &c’”’ ; and 

she lost all consciousness. 

This remark she made me and some others which escaped 
her in delirium make me fear this cruel illness has a still more 
cruel cause. But we must respect our friend’s secret and 
content ourselves with pitying her misfortune. 

The whole of yesterday was equally stormy, and was 
divided between outbursts of terrifying delirium and moments 
of swooning exhaustion, the only moments when she takes 
any rest. I did not leave her bed-side until nine o’clock at 
night and I am returning there this morning to spend the day. 
I shall assuredly not abandon my unhappy friend ; but what 
is distressing is her persistence in refusing all attention and 
help. 

I send you last night’s bulletin which I have just received » 
as you will see, it is the reverse of consoling. [ shall be 
careful to send them all to you. 

Good-bye, my excellent friend, I must now go to the 
invalid. My daughter, who is happily nearly well again, 
presents her respects to you. 

Paris, 29th of November, 17—. 

LETTER CXLVIII 
The Chevalier Danceny to the Marquise de Merteuil 

O you whom I love! O you whom I adore! O you who 
began my happiness! O you who completed it! Sensitive 

384 

LETTER CXLVIII 

friend, tender lover, why does the memory of your pain come 
to trouble the charm I feel? Ah! Madame, compose your- 
self, it is friendship that asks this of you. O my friend! Be 
happy, that is the prayer of love. 

Ah! What reproaches have you to make yourself ? 
Believe me, your susceptibility misleads you. The regrets 
it causes you, the faults of which it accuses me, are equally 
illusory ; and I feel in my heart that there has been no other 
seducer between us but love. Fear no longer to give yourself 
up to the feelings which you inspire, to let yourself be imbued 
with all the passions you create. What! Can our hearts 
be less pure because they were late enlightened ? No, indeed. 
On the contrary, it is seduction, which, never acting except 
from design, can organise its advance and its methods and 
foresee events from afar. But true love does not allow us to 
meditate and reflect thus; it diverts us from our thoughts 
by our feelings; its power is never stronger than when it 1s. 
unknown ; and it is in silence that love binds us by ties which 
it is equally impossible to perceive and to break. 

Thus, even yesterday, in spite of the keen emotion caused 
me by the idea of your return, in spite of the extreme pleasure 
I felt in seeing you again, I still thought I was called and 
guided by friendship alone ; or rather, I was so entirely given 
up to the soft feelings of my heart that I gave very little 
attention to distinguishing their origin or cause. Like me, my 
tender friend, you felt without realising it that despotic 
charm which delivered up our souls to the sweet influences of 
affection ; and we both only recognised love when we emerged 
from the ecstasy into which God had plunged us. 

But that alone justifies us instead of condemning us. 
No, you have not betrayed friendship, neither have I abused 
your trust. It is true we were both in ignorance of our 
feelings ; but we experienced the illusion only, we did not 
try to create it. Ah! We should not complain of it, we 
should only think of the happiness it gives us; let us not 
disturb it by unjust reproaches, Jet us concern ourselves with 
increasing it even more by the charm of trust and confidence. 
O! My friend! How precious that hope is to my heart ! 
Yes, henceforth freed from all fear and entirely given up to 
love, you will share my desires, my transports, the delir1um 

385 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

of my senses, the ecstasy of my soul; and every moment of 
our happy days will be marked by a new pleasure. 

Farewell, you whom I adore! I shall see you this evening, 
but shall I find you alone? I dare not hope it. Ah! You 
do not desire it as much as I. 

Paris, 1st of December, 17—. 

LETTER CXLIX 
Madame de Volanges to Madame de Rosemonde 

I hoped almost all day yesterday, my excellent friend, 
that I should be able to give you this morning more favourable 
news of our dear invalid’s health ; but after yesterday evening 
that hope has vanished and I have nothing left but the regret 
of losing it. An occurrence, quite unimportant in appearance, 
but very cruel from the results it has had, rendered the 
invalid’s condition at least as unfavourable as it was before, 
if it has not made it worse. 

I should have understood nothing of this sudden change, 
had I not yesterday received our unhappy friend’s complete 
confidence. Since she did not conceal from me that you are 
also informed of all her misfortunes, I can speak to you 
without reserve about her sad situation. 

Yesterday morning, when I reached the Convent, I was 
told that the invalid had been asleep for more than three 
hours, and her sleep was so profound and so calm that for a 
time they were afraid it was a swoon. Some time later she 
awoke and herself drew the bed-curtains. She looked at us 
with an air of surprise, and, as I got up to go to her, she re- 
cognised me, called me by name, and asked me to come to 
her. She left me no time to put any question to her, but 
asked me where she was, what she was doing there, if she were 
ill, and why she was not at home. At first I thought this was 
a new attack of delirium, of a calmer kind than the others ; 
but I noticed that she quite understood my replies. She had 
indeed recovered her reason, but not her memory. 

She questioned me in great detail about everything which - 
had happened to her since she had been at the convent, to 
386 

LETTER CXLIX 

which she did not remember coming. I answered her truth- 
fully, only suppressing what I thought might frighten her 
too much; and when in turn [ asked her how she felt, she 
replied that she was not in any pain at the moment, but that 
she had been very harassed in her sleep and that she felt tired. 
I urged her to compose herself and not to speak much ; after 
which, I partly closed the curtains, leaving them’ a little 
apart, and sat down at her bed-side. At the same time she 
was offered some soup, which she accepted and enjoyed. 

She remained in this state for about half an hour, during 
which she only spoke to thank me for the care I had taken of 
her ; and she put into her thanks the charm and grace which 
you will remember she had. After this, she remained 
absolutely silent for some time and then broke her silence 
by saying: ‘ Ah! yes, I remember coming here’’, and a 
moment afterwards she exclaimed sorrowfully : ‘ My friend, 
my friend, pity me; I have recovered all my miseries.’’ As 
I then went towards her, she seized my hand, leaned her head 
against it, and went on: ‘‘ Great Heaven! Why can I not 
die ?’’ Her look, even more than her words, moved me to 
tears; she noticed them from my voice and said: ‘‘ You 
pity me! Ah! If you knew!” ... And then she inter- 
rupted herself: ‘Let us be left alone, I will tell you 
everything.” | 

As I think I hinted to you, I had already some suspicions 
of what the subject of this confidence might be; and as 
I feared that this conversation (which I foresaw would be long 
and sad) might perhaps be harmful to our friend’s condition, 
I refused at first, on the pretext that she needed rest; but 
she insisted and I yielded to her request. As soon as we were 
alone, she told me everything which you have heard from 
her, for which reason I shall not repeat it to you. 

At last, when she was speaking to me of the cruel way 
in which she had been sacrificed, she added : ‘I thought 
I was quite certain to die of it, and I had the courage to do 
so; but what is impossible to me is to survive my misery 
and my shame.” I tried to combat this discouragement or 
rather this despair with the weapons of religion, hitherto so 
powerful over her ; but I soon felt I had not strength enough 
for these august functions, and I limited myself to proposing 

387 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

that Father Anselme should be sent for, since I know he has 
her entire confidence. She consented and even seemed to 
wish it greatly. He was sent for and came at once. He 
remained for a very long time with the invalid and, on coming 
out, said that if the doctors were of the same opinion he 
thought that the ceremony of the sacraments might be 
postponed, and that he would return the next day. 

It was then about three o’clock in the afternoon, and 
until five our friend was fairly composed, to such an extent 
that we had all regained hope. Unfortunately, a letter was 
then brought to her. When they tried to give it to her, she 
said at first that she would receive none, and nobody insisted. 
But from that moment she appeared more agitated. Very 
soon afterwards she asked where this letter came from. It 
was not stamped. Who had brought it ? Nobody knew. On 
whose behalf it had been delivered ? The door-keepers had 
not been told. She then remained silent for some time; after 
which she began to speak, but her disconnected words only 
showed us that the delirium had returned. 

However, there was again an interval of calm, until at 
length she asked to be given the letter which had been brought 
for her. As soon as she looked at it, she exclaimed: ‘‘ From 
him! Great Heaven!’ And then in a weaker voice: 
‘Take it away, take it away.’ She had the bed-curtains 
closed at once and forbade anyone to approach ; but almost 
immediately afterwards we were compelled to return to her. 
The delirium had returned with more violence than ever 
and it was accompanied by truly frightful convulsions. These 
symptoms did not cease all evening, and this morning’s 
bulletin informs me that the night has been no less stormy. 
In short, she in such a condition that I am surprised she has 
not already succumbed to it, and I will not conceal from you 
that I have very little hope remaining. 

I suppose this unfortunate letter is from M. de Valmont ; 
but what can he dare say to her now? Forgive me, my dear 
friend, I restrain myself from any remarks; but it is very 
cruel to see perish so cruelly a woman until now so happy 
and so worthy of being so. 

Paris, 2nd of December, 17—. 

388 

LETTER CL 

LETTER CL 
The Chevalier Danceny to the Marquise de Merteuil 

While awaiting the pleasure of seeing you, my tender 
friend, I abandon myself to the pleasure of writing to you ; 
and I charm away the regret of being absent from you by 
occupying myself with you. It is a true delight to my heart 
to trace my feelings, to remember yours; and im this way 
the very time of deprivation still offers a thousand precious 
treasures to my love. Yet, if I am to believe you, I shall 
obtain no reply from you; this very letter will be the last 
and we shall deprive ourselves of a familiar intercourse which, 
in your opinion, is dangerous and ‘“‘ unnecessary to us”’. 
Assuredly I shall believe you, if you persist ; for what is there 
you can wish that I should not also wish for that very reason ? 
But before you decide finally, will you not allow us to discuss 
it together ? 

You alone must judge the matter of danger; I can 
calculate nothing and limit myself to begging you to take care 
of your safety, for I cannot be calm if you are anxious. In 
this respect, it is not we two who are one, it is you who are 
both of us. 

It is not the same “ about the necessity’; here we can 
only have the same thought; and if we differ in opinion, it 
can only be from lack of explaining ourselves or of understand- 
ing each other. This is what I think I feel. 

Doubtless, a letter appears not very necessary when we 
can see each other freely. What can it say which a word, 
a look, or even silence do not express a hundred times better ? 
This seemed so true to me that when you spoke to me of not 
writing any longer, the idea glided easily over my soul ; perhaps 
the idea incommoded it, but did not make an effect on it. 
It was much the same as when I wish to set a kiss upon your 
heart and meet a ribbon or a gauze—I merely put it aside and 
yet do not feel there was an obstacle. 

But since then, we have separated ; and as soon as you 
were no longer present, the idea of letters returned to torment 
me. Why, I asked myself, this additional privation ? What ! 
Because we are apart, have we nothing more to say to each 

389 
ce 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

other ? I will suppose that we are favoured by circumstances 
and that we spend a whole day together ; must we take time 
to talk from that of enjoyment? Yes, of enjoyment, my 
tender friend; for beside you even moments of rest still 
provide delicious enjoyment. But at last, whatever the time 
may be, we end by separating; and then one is so lonely ! 
It is then that a letter is so precious ; if one does not read it, 
at least one looks at it... Ah! Certainly, one can look at 
a letter without reading it, as it seems to me that at night 
I should still have some pleasure in touching your portrait. . . 

Your portrait, did I say? But a letter is the soul’s por- 
trait. It is not like a cold image, with its stagnation, so 
remote from love; it lends itself to all our emotions; turn 
by turn it grows animated, it enjoys, it rests... Your 
feelings are all so precious to me—will you deprive me of the 
means of collecting them ? 

| Are you then certain that the necessity for writing will 

never torment you? If in solitude your heart dilates or is 
oppressed, if an emotion of joy passes to your soul, if an 
involuntary sadness should trouble it for a moment, would 
you not pour out your happiness or your grief in the bosom of 
your friend? Will you have a feeling which he does not 
share ? Will you then leave him to wander dreamily and in 
solitude far from you? My friend... my tender friend ! 
But it is for you to decide. I only wished to argue, not to 
seduce you; I have given you only reasons, I dare to think 
that I should have been more potent by using entreaties. 
If you persist, I shall try not to be afflicted ; J shall make 
efforts to say to myself what you would have written me ; 
but there ! you would say it better than I and I should above 
all take more pleasure in hearing it. 

Good-bye, my charming friend ; the hour at last approaches 
when I can see you; I leave you hastily to come to meet you 
the sooner. 

Paris, 3rd of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLI 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteutl 

No doubt, Marquise, you do not think me so little ex- 
perienced as to believe that I could be deceived about the 

39° 

LETTER CLI. 

private conversation I found you in, and about “ the extra- 
ordinary chance ’”’ which brought Danceny to your house ! 
Your practised face was indeed able to take on marvellously 
the expression of calm and serenity arid.you betrayed your- 
self by none of those phrases which sometimes escape owing 
to disorder or regret. I even agree that your docile looks 
served you perfectly and that if they could have made them- 
selves believed as easily as they made themselves understood, 
I should have been far from feeling or retaining the least 
suspicion and should not have doubted one moment the 
extreme annoyance caused you by “ this importunate third 
party ’’. But, if you do not want to display such great talents 
in vain, if you wish to obtain the success you count on, if 
you wish to produce the illusion you tried to create, you must 
first of all train your novice of a lover with more care. 

Since you are beginning to take charge of educations, 
teach your pupils not to blush and grow disconcerted at the 
least pleasantry, not to deny so vehemently about one woman 
the same things they deny so languidly about all others. 
Teach them also to be able to hear their mistress praised with- 
out thinking themselves obliged to do the honours of it ; and, if 
you allow them to gaze at you in company, let them at least 
know beforehand how to disguise that look of possession which 
is so easily recognised and which they so clumsily confuse 
with the gaze of love. Then you can let them appear in your 
“public exercises without their conduct doing any harm to 
their modest schoolmistress ; and I myself, but too happy to 
contribute towards your celebrity, promise you to make and 
publish the programmes of this new college. 

But I must admit I am surprised that you should have 
tried to treat me like a schoolboy. Oh! How soon I should 
be avenged with any other woman! With what pleasure 
I should do so! And how easily it would surpass the pleasure 
she would think she had made me miss! Yes, it is indeed 
with you alone that I can prefer reparation to vengeance ; 
and do not think I am restrained by the least doubt, by the 
least uncertainty ; I know everything. 

You have been four days in Paris ; and each day you have 
seen Danceny and you have seen him alone. To-day even, 
your door was still shut ; and to prevent my coming in upon 

391 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

you, your porter only lacked an assurance equal to your own. 
But you wrote me that I should be the first to be informed of 
your. arrival, of this arrival whose date you could not tell me, 
though you wrote to me on the eve of your departure. , Wilk 
you deny these facts or will you try to excuse yourself ? 
Either is equally impossible ; and yet I still restrain myself ! 
See then your power; but, take my advice, be content with 
having tested it and do not abuse it any longer. We both 
know each other, Marquise ; that ought to be enough for you. 

You are going out all day tomorrow yousaid ? Very good, 
if you do really go; and you will realise that I shall know it. 
But then, you will come back in the evening ; and to effect our 
difficult reconciliation we shall not have too much time between 
then and the next morning. Let me know if we are to make our 
numerous and mutual atonements at your house or ‘‘ at the 
other’. Above all,no more Danceny. Your silly head was 
filled with the idea of him and it is possible for me not to be 
jealous of this delirium of your imagination ; but remember 
that from this moment on, what was merely a fancy would 
become a marked preference. I do not think I was made for 
that humiliation and I do not expect to receive it from you. 

I even hope that this sacrifice will not appear to be one 
to you. But even if it cost you something, I think I have 
given you quite a good example! JI think a beautiful and 
sensitive woman, who only lived for me, who at this very 
moment is perhaps dying of love and regret, is well worth a 
schoolboy who (if you like) lacks neither face nor wit, but 
who so far has neither experience nor stability. 

Good-bye, Marquise; I say nothing of my feelings for 
you. All I can do at this moment is not to scrutinize my 
heart. J await your reply. When you make it, remember, 
remember carefully that the more easy it is for you to make me | 
forget the offence you have given me, the more a refusal on 
your part, a mere delay, would engrave it upon my heart in 
permanent characters. 

Paris, 3rd of December, 17—. 
LETTER CLII 
The Marquise de Merteuil to the Vicomte de Valmont 
Pray be careful, Vicomte, and treat my extreme timidity 
392 

LETTER CLII 

with more caution! How do you expect me to endure the 
crushing idea of incurring your indignation and, especially, 
not to succumb to the fear of your vengeance >? The more 
SO, since, as you know, if you do anythirfg cruel to me it would 
be impossible for me to revenge it! Whatever I said, your 
existence would not be less brilliant or less peaceful. After 
all, what would you have to fear ? To be obliged to leave the 
country—if you were given time to doso! But do not people 
live abroad as they do here ? After all, provided the Court 
of France left you in peace at the foreign court you resided 
at, it would only mean for you that you had changed the scene 
of your triumphs, After this attempt to make you cool again 
with these moral considerations, let me come back to our 
affairs. 

Do you know why I never remarried, Vicomte ? It was 
certainly not because I could not find advantageous 
matches ; it was solely because I would not allow anyone the 
right to criticize my actions. I am not even afraid of being 
unable to carry out my wishes, for I should always have 
achieved that at length; but it would have annoyed me if 
there had been anyone who had the right even to complain 
of them ; in short, I wanted to deceive only for my pleasure, 
not from necessity. And then you write the most marital 
letter one could ever behold! You speak to me of nothing 
but wrongs on my side and forgiveness on yours! But how 
can one fail a person to whom one owes nothing ?_ I cannot 
conceive how ! 

Come, what is it all about ? You found Danceny at my 
house and it displeased you ? Very well; but what could you 
deduce from this? Either that it was the result of chance, 
as I told you; or the result of my wish, as I did not tell you. 
In the first case, your letter is unjust; in the second, it is 
ridiculous ; it was not worth the trouble of writing! But you 
are jealous and jealousy does not reason. Well! I will reason 
for you. 

Either you have a rival or you have not. If you have 
one, you must please if you wish to be preferred to him; if 
you have not a rival, you must still please in order to avoid 
having one. In either case, you have the same line of conduct 
to follow; so, why torment yourself? Why, especially, 

393 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

torment me? Are you now unable to be the more charming 
of the two? Are you no longer sure of your successes ? Come, 
Vicomte, you wrong yourself. But, it is not that; for your 
own sake I do not want you to give yourself so much trouble. 
You want my favours less than you want to abuse your power, 
Ah, you are ungrateful! There! I believe that is senti- 
ment! And if I went on a little further this letter might 
become very tender; but you do not deserve it. 

You do not deserve either that I should justify myself. 
To punish you for your suspicions, you shall keep them ; 
so I shall say nothing about the date of my return or about 
Danceny’s visits. You gave yourself a lot of trouble to 
obtain information about it, did you not ? Well, are you any 
better off ? I hope you found a great deal of pleasure in it ; 
for my part, it did no harm to my pleasure. 

All I can say in answer to your threatening letter, then, 
is that it has neither the gift of pleasing me nor the power of 
intimidating me ; and that at the moment I could not be less 
disposed to grant your demands. 

To accept you as you show yourself to-day would 
positively be showing you a real infidelity. It would not be 
returning to my former lover ; it would be taking a new one 
who is far from being worth the other. I have not so far 
forgotten the first as to deceive myself thus. The Valmont 
I loved was charming. I will even admit that I have not met 
a more delightful man. Ah! I beg you, Vicomte, to bring 
him to me if you meet him ; he will always be well received. 

But warn him that in any case it cannot be to-day or 
tomorrow. His twin-brother has done him a little harm ; 
and if he pressed me too much I should be afraid of making a 
mistake ; or perhaps I have made arrangements with Danceny 
for those two days? And your letter informs me that you do 
not joke when someone breaks his word. So you see what 
you have to expect. 

But what does it matter to you? You can always avenge 
yourself on your rival. He will do nothing worse to your 
mistress than you do to his, and, after all, is not one woman 
worth as much as another? They are your own principles. 
Even she who is “ tender and sensitive, who only lived for 
you, and who would die at last of love and regret’ would 

394 

LETTER CLIII 

none the less be sacrificed to the first fancy, to the fear of being 
laughed at for a moment; and you expect people to put 
themselves out for you! Ah! That is rot just. 

Good-bye, Vicomte; make yourself pleasant once more. 
Why, I ask nothing better than to think you charming ; and 
as soon as I am sure of it, I promise to prove it to you. 
Positively I am too good. 

Paris, 4th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLIII 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 

I answer your letter at once; I shall try to make myself 
clear, which is not easy with you when once you have made 
up your mind to misunderstand. 

Long phrases were not necessary to show that, since each 
of us possesses all that is needed to ruin the other, we have an 
equal interest in treating each other with mutual considera- 
tion ; so, that is not the question. But between the violent 
course of ruining each other and the obviously better course 
of remaining united as we have been, or becoming still more 
so by renewing our former affair—between these two courses, 
I say, there are. a thousand others which might be adopted. 
It was therefore not ridiculous to tell you and is not ridiculous 
to repeat to you that from this day on I shall be either your 
lover or your enemy. 

I am perfectly aware that this choice incommodes you ; 
that you would much prefer to evade it ; and Iam not ignorant 
that you never liked to be placed between yes and no; but 
you must be aware also that I cannot let you out of this 
narrow circle, without running the risk of being tricked ; and 
you ought to have foreseen that I would not endure that. 
It is for you to decide now; I can leave you the choice, but 
not remain in uncertainty. 

I only warn you that you will not impose upon me with 
your reasons, good or bad; nor will you seduce me any the 
more by the few flatteries with which you attempt to dress up 
your refusals; in fact the moment has come to be frank. 

395 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

I ask nothing better than to give you an example of frankness 
and I tell you gladly that I prefer peace and union, but if 
one or the other must be broken, I think I have the right and 
the means, 

I add to this that the least obstacle presented on your 
part will be taken on my part as a real declaration of war ; 
you see that the reply I ask from you needs neither long nor 
fine phrases. A word will do, 

Paris, 4th of December, 17—. 

The Marquise de Merteutl’s reply, written at the end of 
the above letter - 

Very well! War. 

LETTER CLIV 
Madame de Volanges to Madame de Rosemonde 

The bulletins will inform you better than I can do, my dear 
friend, of our poor invalid’s unhappy condition. I am entirely 
occupied with the attention I give her and only take time to 
write to you when there are other events besides those of the 
illness. Here is one, which I certainly did not expect. It is 
a letter I received from M. de Valmont, who has been pleased 
to choose me as a confident and even as a mediator between 
himself and Madame de Tourvel, for whom he enclosed a 
letter in the one to me. I sent back the one when I replied 
to the other. I send you the latter and I think you will be of 
my opinion, that I could not do and ought not to do what © 
he asks me. Even if I had wanted to do it, our unfortunate 
friend is not in a state to understand me. Her delirium is 
continuous. But what do you say to this despair of M. de 
Valmont’s ? Is one to believe in it, or does he only want to 
deceive everyone and that until the end ??_ If he is sincere this 
time, he may well tell himself that he has made his own happi- 
ness, I think he will not be very pleased with my reply ; but 

1Monsieur de Valmont’s letter has been suppressed because nothing 

could be found in the remainder of their correspondence to settle these 
questions, (C. de L.). 

396 

LETTER CLV 

I confess that everything which fixes my attention on this 
unhappy adventure makes me more and more indignant 
with the author of it. 

Good-bye, my dear friend; I am now going back to my 
sad duties, which become far more so from the little hope 
I have of their proving successful. You know my feelings 
for you. 

Paris, 5th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLV 
The Vicomte de Valmont to the Chevalier Danceny 

I have twice been to your house, my dear Chevalier ; but 
since you have abandoned your role of lover for that of a 
ladies’ man it has become impossible to find you, as one might 
expect. Your man-servant tells me, however, that you come 
home at night; that he had orders to wait for you; but I, who 
know your projects, know very well that you only return 
for a moment, to adopt the custom of the thing, and that 
you immediately start again on your victorious career. Well 
and good ; I can do nothing but applaud ; but perhaps this 
evening you may be tempted to change its direction. You 
only know half your affairs yet; I must tell you about the 
other half and then you will decide. But take the time to read 
my letter. It will not distract you from your pleasures, since 
on the contrary its only object is to give you a choice between 
them. _ 

If I had had your complete confidence, if I had learned 
from you that part of your secrets which you have left me to 
guess, I should have been informed in time ; my zeal would 
have been less clumsy and would not impede your progress 
to-day. But let us start from the point where we are. What- 
ever course you adopt, the worst you do will make someone 
else happy. 

You have a rendez-vous for to-night, have you not ? With 
a charming woman whom you adore ? For at your age, what 
woman does one not adore, at least for the first week! The 
setting of the scene will add even more to your pleasures 

397 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

A delicious ‘‘ little house’, ‘‘ which has only been taken for 
you” will embellish the pleasure with the charms of liberty 
and of mystery. Allis agreed; you are expected; and you 
are burning to go! That is what we both know, although 
you have told me nothing. Now, here is what you do not 
know, which I must tell you. 

Since my return to Paris I have busied myself with the 
means of bringing you and Mademoiselle de Volanges together ; 
I had promised it to you; and the very last time I spoke to 
you of it J had reason to think from your replies, I might say 
from your ecstasies, that I was busying myself with your 
happiness. I could not succeed unaided in this rather difficult 
enterprise ; but after having prepared the means, I left the 
rest to the zeal of your young mistress. In her love she has 
found resources which were lacking to my experience; in 
short, your misfortune has willed it that she should succeed. 
She told me this evening that for the last two days all 
obstacles have been overcome and that your happiness only 
depends upon yourself. 

For the last two days also she has been flattering herself 
that she would give you this news herself, and, in spite of her 
Mamma’s absence, you would have been received; but you 
did not even call! And to tell you everything, the little 
person (either from caprice or reason) seemed to me a little 
annoyed by this lack of eagerness on your part. At all events, 
she succeeded in bringing me to her and made me promise 
to give you as soon as possible the letter I enclose with this. 
From her eagerness I would wager that it is concerned with 
a rendez-vous for this evening. However that may be, 
I promised upon honour and friendship that you should have 
the tender missive to-day and I cannot and will not break 
my word. 

And now, young man, what are you going to do? You 
are placed between coquetry and love, between pleasure and 
happiness ; what will your choice be ?_ If I were speaking to 
the Danceny of three months ago, even to the Danceny of a 
week ago, I should be certain of his heart and of what he 
would do ; but the Danceny of to-day is snatched at by women, 
runs after adventures, and has become, as always happens, 
something of a scoundrel; will he prefer a very timid girl 

398 

LETTER CLV 

who has nothing on her side but her beauty, her innocence and 
her love to the charms of a perfectly ‘‘ accustomed woman ? ”’ 

For my part, my dear fellow, it seems to me that even 
with your new principles (which I confess are also mine to 
some extent) circumstances would make me decide for the 
young mistress. First, it is one more, and then there is the 
novelty and again the fear of losing the fruit of your exertions 
by neglecting to gather it ; for, in this respect, it would really 
be a lost opportunity, especially for a first weakness : in such 
a case, it often needs only a moment of ill-humour, a jealous 
suspicion, even less, to frustrate the fairest triumph. Drowning 
virtue sometimes clutches at a straw and, once it has escaped, 
is On its guard and is not easily surprised. 

What do you risk on the other side ? Not even a breaking 
off ; at most a quarrel where the pleasure of a reconciliation 
is purchased by a few attentions. What course can be taken 
by a woman who has already yielded, except that of in- 
dulgence ? What would she gain by severity ? The loss of 
her pleasures, with no profit to her pride. 

If, as I suppose, you adopt the course of love (which also 
seems to me that of reason) I think it would be prudent not 
to send excuses about the missed rendez-vous ; let her simply 
wait for you ; if you try to give a reason, she may be tempted 
to verify it. Women are curious and obstinate ; everything 
might be discovered; as you know, I have just been an 
example of this myself. But if you leave hope, which will be 
supported by vanity, it will not be lost until long after the 
time for enquiries has past; then tomorrow you can choose 
the insurmountable obstacle which detained you; you can 
have been ill, dead if necessary, or anything else which might 
have reduced you to despair, and everything will be made up. 

For the rest, whichever way you decide, I only ask you 
to let me know; and as | have no interest in the matter, 
I shall approve whatever you do. Good-bye, my dear friend. 

I must just add that I regret Madame de Tourvel; [I am 
in despair at being separated from her ; I would pay with one 
half my life the happiness of devoting the other half to her 
Ah! Believe me, we are only happy through love 

Paris, 5th of December, 17—. 

399 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER CLVI 

Cécile Volanges to the Chevalier Danceny 
(Enclosed with the preceding letter) 

How does it happen, my dear, that I have ceased to see 
you at a time when I have not ceased to desire it ? Do you 
not want it any more as much as I? Ah! Now I am very 
sad! Sadder then when we were quite separated. The grief 
which I endured through others now comes to me from you, 
and that is much worse. 

For some days Mamma has been out, as you know; and 
I hoped you would try to profit by this time of freedom ; but 
you do not even think of me; I am very miserable! You 
told. me so often that I did not love as much as you! I knew 
to the contrary, and this is the proof of it. If you had come to 
see me, you would have seen me ; for I am not like you, I only 
think of what will unite us. You do not deserve that I should 
tell you anything of what I have arranged for it, which 
I took so much trouble about ; but I love you too much and 
I want to see you too much to be able to prevent myself from 
telling you. And then, I shall see afterwards if you really 
love me ! 

I have so arranged it that the porter is on our side and 
he has promised me that every time you come, he will let 
you come in as if he did not see you ; and we can rely on him, 
for he is a very honest man. The only other difficulty is that | 
you must not let yourself be seen in the house; and that 
will be quite easy if you only come in the evening when there 
will be nothing at all to fear. For example, since Mamma has 
been away all day she has been going to bed at eleven o’clock 
each evening; so we should have plenty of time. 

The porter says that when you want to come in this way, 
instead of knocking at the door, you must just tap on his 
window and he will let you in at once ; you will easily find the 
little stairway and, as you cannot have any light, I will leave 
my bedroom door ajar which will give you a little light. 
You must be very careful not to make a noise, especially 
when passing the side door into Mamma’sroom. It does not 

400 

LETTER CLVII 

matter about my waiting-woman’s door, because she has 
promised me she will not wake up; and she is a very good | 
girl! And it will be the same when you Jeave. Now, we shall 
see whether you will come. to 

Heaven, why does my heart beat so fast as I write to 
you! Will some misfortune fall on me, or is it the hope of 
seeing you which so upsets me ! What I do feel is that I never 
loved you so much and never desired so much to tell you so. 
Come, my friend, my dear friend; let me repeat to you a 
hundred times that I love you, that I adore you, that I shall 
never love anyone but you. 

I found a way to let M. de Valmont know I had something 
to say to him ; and, as he is a very good friend, he will surely 
come tomorrow and I shall beg him to give you this letter 
at once. So I shall expect you tomorrow evening and you 
will not fail to come unless you want your Cécile to be very 
miserable., 

Good-bye, my dear; I kiss you with all my heart. 

Paris, 4th of December, 17—. in the evening. 

LETTER CLVII 
The Chevalier Danceny to the Vicomte de Valmont 

Do not doubt either my heart or my actions, my dear 
Vicomte ; how could I resist a desire of my Cécile’s ? Ah! 
It is she, she only, whom I love, whom I shall love for ever ! 
Her ingenuousness, her affection, have a charm for me, a charm 
from which I may have been weak enough to allow myself 
to be distracted, but which nothing will ever efface. I was 
engaged in another adventure, as it were without realising 
it, and often the memory of Cécile has troubled me in the most 
delightful pleasures; and perhaps my heart never paid her 
truer tribute than at the very moment when I was unfaithful 
to her. But let us spare her susceptibility, my friend, and 
hide my errors from her ; not to deceive her, but to save her 
from distress. Cécile’s happiness is my most ardent desire ; 
I should never forgive myself for a fault which cost her a tear. 

I know I deserved your jest about what you call my new 

401 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

principles; but you may believe me, I am not guided by 
them at this moment; and tomorrow I am determined to 
prove it. I shall go and confess to her who caused my error 
and who has shared it; I shall say to her: “ Read in 
my heart; it has the most tender friendship for you ; 
friendship united with desire is so like love! .. We have 
both been deceived; but though I am liable to error I am 
incapable of bad faith.”’ I know this woman friend of mine ; 
she is as honourable as she is indulgent; she will do more 
than forgive me, she will approve of what I do. She has 
often reproached herself for betraying friendship; her 
delicacy often frightened her love ; she is wiser than I and 
she will strengthen in my soul these useful fears which 
I rashly attempted to suppress in hers. I shall owe it to her 
that I am better, as I shall owe it to you that I am happier. 
O! my friend, share my gratitude ! The idea that I owe my 
happiness to you increases its value. 

Good-bye, my dear Vicomte. The excess of my joy does 
not prevent me from thinking of your troubles and sharing 
them. Why can I not be of use to you! Does Madame de 
Tourvel remain inexorable ? I hear too she is very ill. Heavens, 
how I pity you! May she regain both health and indulgence 
and make you happy for ever! These are the wishes of 
friendship ; I dare to hope they will be granted by love. 

I should like to talk longer with you; but time presses 
and perhaps Cécile is waiting for me already 

Paris, 5th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLVIII 

The Vicomte de Valmont to the Marquise de Merteuil 
(First thing in the morning) 

Well, Marquise, how are you after last night’s pleasures ? 
Are you not a little tired ? Confess now, Danceny is charm; 
ing! The young man performs prodigies! You did not 
expect that of him, did you? Come now, I estimate myself 
justly, such a rival deserved that I should be sacrificed to 
him. Seriously, he has many good qualities ! But, especially, 
how much love, constancy, delicacy! Ah! If you are ever 

402 

LETTER CLIX 

loved by him as his Cécile is, you will have no rivals to fear ; 
he proved it to you last night. Perhaps another woman by 
dint of coquetry might take him away from you for a moment 
——a young man never knows how to resigt provocative advances 
—but, as you see, one word from the beloved person is suffi- 
cient to dissipate this illusion ; so you have only to become 
that person to be perfectly happy. 

Certainly, you will not make any mistake in the matter ; 
you have too sure a tact for there to be any fear of this. 
But the friendship which unites us, as sincere on my part as 
it is well recompensed on yours, made me desire last night’s 
proof for your sake ; 1t 1s the work of my zeal ; it succeeded ; 
but, pray, no thanks, it is not worth the trouble; nothing 
could have been easier. 

After all, what did it cost me? A slight sacrifice and a 
little skill. I consented to share with the young man his 
mistress’s favours; but then he had quite as much right to 
them as I, and I cared so little for them! The letter sent him 
by the young person was dictated by me; but it was only to 
gain time, since we had a better use for it. As to the letter 
I sent with it—oh ! 1t was nothing, practically nothing ; a few 
friendly ideas to guide the new lover’s choice; but upon 
honour, they were unnecessary ; to tell you the truth, he did 
not hesitate a moment. 

And then, in his candour, he is to come to you to-day to 
tell you everything; and that will certainly be a_ great 
pleasure for you! He willsay to you: ‘‘ Read in my heart ”’ ; 
he writes me this ; and, as you see, that patches everything 
up. I hope that when you read what he wants in his heart 
you will perhaps also read that such young lovers have their 
dangers; and in addition that it is better to have me for a 
friend than an enemy. 

Good-bye, Marquise, until the next occasion. 
Paris, 6th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLIX 

The Marquise de Mertewil to the Vicomte de Valmont 
(A note) 

I do not like people who add paltry jokes to paltry pro- 
403 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

ceedings ; it is neither my way nor tomy taste, When I have 
reason to complain of someone, I do not jest ; I do something 
better; I avenge myself. However pleased with yourself 
you may be now, do not forget that this is not the first time 
you have congratulated yourself too soon and alone in the 
hope of a triumph which escapes you at the very moment you 
rejoice over it. Good-bye. 

Paris, 6th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLX 
Madame de Volanges to Madame de Rosemonde 

I am writing to you from the bedroom of your unfortunate 
friend, whose condition is still about the same. This after- 
noon there is to be a consultation of four doctors. Unhappily, 
as you know, this is more often a proof of danger than a means 
of aid. 

It appears, however, that she recovered partial conscious- 
ness last night. The waiting-woman told me this morning 
that about midnight her mistress called her, desired to be left 
alone with her and dictated quite a long letter. Julie added 
that, while she was making the envelope, Madame de Tourvel’s 
delirium returned, so that the girl did not learn to whom the 
letter was to be addressed. I was surprised at first that the 
letter itself was not enough to tell her; but on her replying 
that she was afraid of making a mistake and that her mistress 
had ordered her to send it at once, I took it upon myself to 
open the letter. 

I found the enclosed writing, which indeed is not addresed 
to anyone but to too many. I think, however, that our un- 
happy friend at first wished to write to M. de Valmont; and 
that, without realising it, she yielded to the disorder of her 
ideas. However this may be, I felt that the letter ought not 
to be sent to anyone. I am forwarding it to you because you 
will see from it, better than I could tell you, what are the 
thoughts which occupy our invalid’s head. As long as she 
remains so deeply affected I shall have hardly any hope. It 
is difficult for the body to regain health when the mind is so 
disordered. 

404 

LETTER CLXI 

Good-bye, my dear and excellent friend. I am glad that 
you are far away from the sad spectacle I have continually 

before my eyes. 
Paris, 6th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLXI 

Madame de Tourvel to . 
(Dictated by her and written by her waiting-woman) 

Cruel and malevolent being, will you never grow weary 
of persecuting me? Is it not enough for you that you have 
tormented me, degraded me, debased me, that you wish to 
ravish from me even the peace of the grave ? What! In this 
dwelling place of darkness in which I have been forced by 
ignominy to bury myself, is pain without cessation, is hope 
unknown ? I do not implore a mercy I do not deserve ; 
I will suffer without complaint if my sufferings do not exceed 
my strength. But do not make my tortures unendurable. 
Leave me my grief, but take from me the cruel memory of 
the treasures I have lost. When it is you who ravished them 
from me, do not again draw their agonising image before my 
eyes. I was innocent and at peace; it is because I saw you 
that I have lost my peace of mind; it is by listening to you 
that I became criminal. You are the author of my sins ; what 
right have you to punish them ? 

Where are the friends who cherished me, where are they ? 
My misfortune terrifies them. None dares to approach me. 
I am crushed and they leave me without aid! I am dying 
and none weeps for me. All consolation is refused me. Pity 
stays on the brink of the gulf into which the criminal plunges. 
He is torn by remorse and his cries are not heard ! 

And you, whom I have outraged ; you, whose esteem adds 
to my torture; you, whoalone have theright to avenge your- 
self, what are you doing so far from me? Come, punish a 
faithless wife. Let me suffer deserved torments at last. 
Already I should have submitted to your vengeance, but 
courage failed me to confess my shame to you. It was not 
dissimulation, it was shame. At least may this letter tell you 

405 

DD 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

my repentance. Heaven took up your cause and avenges you 
for an injury you did not know. It is Heaven which bound 
my tongue and restrained my words; it feared you might 
have pardoned a fault it wished to punish. It has removed 
me from your indulgence which would have wounded its 
justice. 

Pitiless in its vengeance, it has delivered me up to him 
who ruined me. It is at once through him and by him that 
I suffer. I try to fly him, in vain, he follows me ; he is there ; 
he besets me continually. But how different he is from 
himself! His cyes only express hatred and scorn. His 
mouth only utters insult and blame. His arms embrace me 
only to rend me. Who will save me from his barbarous 
fury ? 

But what! Itis he... I am not deceived; I see him 
again. O! Mycharming love! Receive me into your arms ; hide 
me in your bosom; yes, it is you, it is indeed you! What 
disastrous illusion made me mistake you? How I have 
suffered in your absence! Let us not separate again, let us 
never be separated. Let me breathe. Feel my heart, feel 
howit beats! Ah! Itisno longer fear, it is the sweet emotion 
of love. Why do you refuse my tender caresses ? Turn that 
soft gaze upon me! What are those bonds you try to break ? 
Why do you prepare that equipment of death? What can 
have so altered those features ? What are you doing ? Leave 
me; I shudder! God! It is that monster again! My 
friends, do not abandon me. You who call upon me to fly, 
help me to combat him; and you, more indulgent, you who 
promised to lessen my pain, come nearer to me. Where are 
you both? If I am not allowed to see you again, at least 
answer this letter ; let me know that you still love me. 

Leave me, cruel one! What new frenzy animates you? 
Are you afraid some gentle sentiment might pierce to my 
soul ? You redouble my tortures ; you force me to hate you. 
Oh! How painful hate is! How it corrodes the heart which 
distills it! Why do you persecute me? What more can 
you have to say to me? Have you not made it impossible 
for me to listen to you, impossible to reply to you? Expect 
nothing more of me. Farewell, Monsieur. 

Paris, 5th of December, 17—. 

406 

LETTER CLXIII 

LETTER CLXII 
The Chevalier Danceny to the Vicomte de Valmont 

I am informed, Monsieur, of your conduct towards me. 
I know as well that, not content with basely duping me, you 
have not feared to boast of it, to congratulate yourself on it. 
I have seen the proof of your betrayal written by your own 
hand. I confess it broke my heart and that I felt some shame 
at having contributed so much myself to your odious abuse 
of my blind confidence ; yet I do not envy you this shameful 
advantage; I am only curious to know if you will keep all 
other advantages over me. I shall learn this, if, as I hope, 
you will be good enough to meet me tomorrow morning, 
between eight and nine o'clock, at the Bois de Vincennes gate; 
Village of Saint-Mandé. I shall take care to bring there 
everything necessary for the explanations I yet have to make 
with you. 

The Chevalier Danceny. 

Paris, 6th of December, 17—, in the evening. 

LETTER CLXIII 
M. Bertrand to Madame de Rosemonde 

Madame, 

It is with great regret that I carry out the sad duty of 
announcing to you an event which will cause you such cruel 
grief. Allow me first of all to exhort you to that pious resigna- 
tion which everyone has so often admired in you and which 
alone can enable us to endure the ills which strew our 
miserable life. 

Your nephew. .. Heaven! Must I so afflict so respect- 
able a lady! Your nephew has had the misfortune to die 
in a duel he had this morning with the Chevalier Danceny. 
I am entirely ignorant of the cause of the quarrel; but it 
appears, from the note I found in the Vicomte’s pocket, which 

407 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

I have the honour to send you ; it appears, I say, that he was 
not the aggressor. And it was he whom Heaven allowed 

to die ! | 

I was waiting for M. le Vicomte at his house at the very 
time when he was brought home. Imagine my terror at 
seeing your nephew carried in by two of his servants, soaked 
in his own blood. He had two sword wounds in his body 
and was already very weak. M. Danceny was there too and 
was even weeping. Ah! No doubt he must weep; but it 
is too late to shed tears when one has caused an irreparable 
misfortune ! 

I lost control of myself ; and in spite of my humble rank 
I told him what I thought of him. But it was there that 
M. le Vicomte showed himself truly great. He ordered me to 
be silent ; and he took the hand of his murderer, called him his 
friend, embraced him in our presence and said to us: “ I order 
you to treat this gentleman with all the respect due to a brave 
and gallant man.’’ Moreover, in my presence, he handed to 
him a voluminous mass of papers with which I am not 
acquainted but to which I know he attached great importance. 
Then he desired that they should be left alone for a time. 
Meanwhile I sent for aid, spiritual and temporal; but alas! 
the ill was beyond remedy. Less than half an hour after- 
wards M. le Vicomte lost consciousness. He could receive 
nothing but the extreme unction; and the ceremony was 
barely over when he breathed his last sigh. 

Ah Heavens! When I received into my arms at his 
birth this precious support of so illustrious a family, could 
I foresee that he would die in my arms, and that I should 
have to weep his death >? A death so early and so unhappy ! 
My tears flow in spite of me; I beg your pardon, Madame, 
for daring thus to mingle my grief with yours; but in all 
ranks we have a heart and sensibility ; and I should be very 
ungrateful if I did not mourn all my life a Lord who was so 
kind to me, who honoured me with so much confidence. 

Tomorrow, after the body is taken away, I shall have 
seals put on everything and you can rely entirely upon my 
services. You know, Madame, that this unfortunate event 
puts an end to the entail and leaves your disposal entirely 
free. If I can be of any use to you, I beg you will be good 

408 

LETTER CLXAIV 

enough to send me your orders; I will give all my attention 
to carrying them out punctually. 
I am with the deepest respect, Madame, your most 
humble, etc., etc. + 
Bertrand 

Paris, 7th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLXIV 
Madame de Rosemonde to Af, Bertrand 

1 have just received your letter, my dear Bertrand, and 
learn from it the terrible event of which my nephew has 
been the unhappy victim. Yes, certainly I have orders to 
give you and it is only with them that I concern myself with 
anything but my mortal grief. 

M. Danceny’s note, which you sent me, is a very con- 
vincing proof that he provoked the duel, and it is my intention 
that you should lodge a complaint against him in my name. 
By forgiving his enemy, his murderer, my nephew satisfied 
his natural generosity ; but I must avenge at once his death, 
humanity, and religion. The severity of the laws cannot be 
too much excited against this remnant of barbarity which 
still infects our customs and I do not think that this is a case 
when we are commanded to forgive injuries. I expect you to 
carry out this business with all the zeal and activity of which 
I know you capable and which you owe to the memory of 
my nephew. 

Before everything else, you will be careful to see M. le 
Président de...! on my behalf and to confer with him. 
I am not writing to him, I am in haste to give myself up 
entirely to my grief. You will make my excuses to him and 
show him this letter. 

Farewell, my dear Bertrand; I praise you and thank 
you for your right feelings and, for life, I am yours, etc. 

From the Chateau de... , 8th of December, 17—. 
1A Magistrate. 
409 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER CLXV 
Madame de Volanges to Madame de Rosemonde 

I know you are informed, my dear and excellent friend, 
of your recent loss ; I knew your affection for M. de Valmont 
and I share very sincerely the affliction you must feel. I am 
truly pained to have to add new regrets to those you already 
feel; but alas ! there is nothing left but tears for you to give 
our unfortunate friend. We lost her yesterday at eleven 
o’clock in the evening. By the fatality attached to her lot 
which seemed to mock at all human prudence, the short 
time she survived M. de Valmont was long enough for her to 
learn of his death ; and, as she said herself, to succumb under 
the weight of her misfortunes only when the measure was 
filled. 

You have already heard that for the last two days she 
was absolutely unconscious; yesterday morning, when her 
doctor came, and we both went over to her bed, she recognised 
neither of us and we could not obtain a word or the least sign 
from her. Well, we had scarcely returned to the fire-place 
where the doctor was telling me of the sad happening of 
M. de Valmont’s death, when the unfortunate woman re- 
gained her senses, either because nature alone produced this 
change or because the repetition of the words ‘‘ M. de Valmont” 
and ‘‘ death’ may have recalled to the invalid the only ideas 
which have so long occupied her. ‘ 

However this may be, she suddenly opened her bed- 
curtains, exclaiming: ‘“‘ What! What isit yousay? M. de 
Valmont is dead?” I hoped to make her think she was 
mistaken and I assured her at first that she had misunderstood 
us; but far from being convinced thus, she compelled the 
doctor to repeat the cruel announcement and when I tried 
once more to dissuade her, she called me to her and said in a 
low voice: ‘‘ Why try to deceive me? Was he not already 
dead for me!” I was forced to yield then. 

Our unhappy friend listened to the account at first calmly 
enough, but very soon she interrupted, saying: ‘‘ Enough, 
I know enough.” She immediately requested that her curtains 

410 

LETTER CLXV 

might be closed ; and when the doctor then tried to give her 
his professional services, she would never allow him to come 
near her, 

As soon as he had gone, she sent away her nurse and 
her waiting-woman as well ; and when we were alone together 
she asked me to help her to get upon her knees in bed and to 
support her. There she remained for some time in silence 
with no other expression than that of her tears which flowed 
abundantly. At last, clasping her hands and lifting them to 
Heaven, she said in a weak but fervent voice: ‘‘ Almighty 
God, I submit myself to your justice ; but pardon Valmont. 
May my misfortunes, which I know I deserved, not be blamed 
upon him and [I will bless your mercy!’’ I have allowed 
myself, my dear and excellent friend, to dwell upon these 
details concerning a matter which I know must renew and 
aggravate your grief, because I have no doubt that Madame 
de Tourvel’s prayer will bring great consolation to your spirit. 

After our friend had spoken these few words, she fell 
back in my arms; she was scarcely back in bed when she 
fell into a long swoon, which yielded at length to the usual 
remedies, As soon as she regained consciousness, she asked 
me to send for Father Anselme, and added: “ He is now the 
only doctor I need; I feel that my woes will soon be over.”’ 
She complained greatly of a feeling of oppression and spoke 
with difficulty. 

A little time after she sent me by her waiting-woman a 
casket (which I send to you) which she said contained papers 
of hers, charging me to send them to you immediately after 
her death. Afterwards she spoke to me of you and of your 
friendship for her, as much as her condition allowed her and 
with great tenderness. 

Father Anselme arrived about four o’clock and remained 
nearly an hour alone with her. When we returned, the 
invalid’s face was calm and serene; but it was easy to see 
that Father Anselme had wept a great deal. He remained 
to be present at the last ceremonies of the Church. This 
spectacle, always so imposing and painful, became more so 
from the contrast between the sick person’s calm resignation 

1 This casket contained all the letters relating to her adventure with 
M. de Valmont. (C. de L.). 

411 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

and the profound grief of her venerable confessor, who burst 
into tears beside her. The emotion became general; and she 
whom we al] wept for was the one person who did not weep. 

The remainder of the day was spent in the customary 
prayers which were only interrupted by the invalid’s frequent 
swoons. Finally, about eleven o'clock at night, she seemed 
to me more oppressed and in greater pain. I put out my hand 
to find her arm ; she still had strength enough to take it and 
put it on her heart. I could not feel it beating ; and in fact 
our unhappy friend expired at that very moment. 

You remember, my dear friend, that on your last. journey 
here less than a year ago, we were talking of a few persons 
whose happiness seemed more or less assured and we dwelt 
with complaisance on the fate of this same woman whose 
misfortunes and death we weep to-day! So many virtues, 
praiseworthy qualities and charms; so gentle and so easy a 
character ; a husband whom she loved and by whom she was 
adored : a society which pleased her and which she delighted ; 
good looks, youth, wealth ; so many advantages united have 
been lost through a single imprudence! O Providence ! 
Doubtless we must adore your decrees, but how incomprehen- 
sible they are! 1 restrain myself, I am afraid of increasing 
your sadness by yielding to my own. 

I must leave you and go to my daughter who is a little 
indisposed. When she heard this morning of the sudden 
death of these two persons of her acquaintance, she became 
unwell and I sent her to bed. But I hope this slight indis- 
position will have no evil results. At her age, they are un- 
accustomed to grief and its impression is sharper and deeper. 
No doubt this active sensibility is a praiseworthy quality, 
but how much one learns to dread it after what one sees every 

aay ! Good-bye, my dear and excellent friend. 
Paris, 9th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLXVI 
M. Bertrand to Madame de Rosemonde. 

Madame, 

In consequence of the orders you did me the 
honour of sending me, I had the honour to see M. le Président 
de..., and I handed him your letter, informing him at the 

412 

LETTER CLXVII 

same time that, in accordance with your orders, I should do 
nothing except upon his advice. That respectable Magistrate 
commands me to inform you that the complaint you intend 
to lodge against M. le Chevalier Danceny weuld equally com- 
promise the memory of your nephew and that his honour 
would inevitably be stained by the sentence of the Court, 
which undoubtedly would be a great misfortune. His opinion 
is that no step whatever should be taken ; or, if one must be 
taken, it should be to try to prevent the Public Prosecutor 
from taking notice of this unfortunate adventure, which has 
already become too public. 

These remarks seemed to-’me full of wisdom and I have 
determined to await fresh orders from you. 

Permit me, Madame, to ask you to be so kind, when you 
send me your orders, as to add a word on the state of your 
health, on whose account I dread extremely the result of so 
many griefs. I hope you will pardon this liberty in considera- 
tion of my attachment and my zeal. 

I am with respect, Madame, your, &c. 

Paris, 10th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLXVII 
Anonymous to the Chevaher Danceny 

Monsieur, 

I have the honour to inform you that this morning, 
at the Public Prosecutor’s office, His Majesty’s legal advisers 
discussed the meeting which took place a few days ago between 
you and M. le Vicomte de Valmont, and there is reason to 
fear that the Public Prosecutor may lodge a complaint. 
I thought this warning might be useful to you, either for you 
to put in motion your protectors to prevent these unpleasant 
consequences ; or, in case you are unable to achieve this, for 
you to be in a position to look after your personal safety. 

If you will allow me to advise you, I think you would do 
well for a short time to show yourself less than you have 
been accustomed to do recently. Although this sort of affair 
is usually treated with indulgence, yet this form of respect is 
nevertheless due to the law. 

413 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

This precaution becomes the more necessary since I have 
heard that a Madame de Rosemonde, said to be an aunt of 
M. de Valmont, wishes to lodge a complaint against you, 
in which case the Public Prosecutor could not refuse her 
demand. It might be useful if you could find someone to 
speak to this lady. 

Private reasons prevent me from signing this letter. 
But I hope that, although you do not know from whom it 
comes, you will not render less justice to the sentiment which 
dictated it. 

I have the honour to be, etc. 

Paris, 1ryth of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLXVIII 
Madame de Volanges to Madame de Rosemonde 

Very surprising and annoying rumours, my dear and 
excellent friend, are being spread here concerning Madame 
de Merteuil. I am certainly very far from believing them and 
I would wager that it is only a dreadful calumny ; but I know 
too well how the least probable spitefulness gains credit and 
how hard it is to erase the impression it leaves, not to be very 
alarmed by these, however easily I think they may be des- 
troyed. But it was very late yesterday when I heard of these 
horrors which are only beginning to be repeated; and this 
morning, when I sent to Madame de Merteuil’s house, she had 
gone to the country where she is to remain for two days. 
I could not hear where she had gone. Her second waiting- 
woman, whom I sent for to speak to me told me that her 
mistress had simply given her orders to expect her on 
Thursday, and none of the servants she has left here know 
more than this. I myself cannot conjecture where she can 
be ; I do not recollect anyone she knows who remains in the 
country so late in the season. 

However that may be, I hope that you will be able to 
procure me between now and her return certain explanations 
which may be useful to her, for these odious stories are 
founded upon the circumstances of M. de Valmont’s death, 

414 

LETTER CLXVIII 

of which you would apparently have been informed if they 
were true, or at least, it will be easy for you to find out about 
them, which I beg you to do. This is what people say, or, to 
express it better, what they are still murmuring ; but it cannot 
be long before it breaks out more openly: 

It is said, then, that the quarrel between M. de Valmont 
and the Chevalier Danceny is the work of Madame de Merteuil, 
who was unfaithful to both of them; that, as almost always 
happens, the two rivals began by fighting and did not come 
to an explanation until afterwards; that this explanation 
produced a sincere reconciliation ; and that, to complete the 
Chevalier Danceny’s knowledge of Madame de Merteuil and 
also to justify himself completely, M. de Valmont added to 
his words a whole mass of letters, forming a regular corres- 
pondence which he kept up with her, in which she relates about 
herself the most scandalous anecdotes in the most licentious 
style. 

It is added that Danceny, in his first indignation, showed 
these letters to anyone who wished to see them and that 
they are all over Parisnow. Two in particular’ are mentioned ; 
one in which she tells the whole story of her life and principles 
and which is said to be the height of enormity; the other 
which entirely justifies M. de Prévan (whose history you will 
remember) from the proof it gives that he only yielded to the 
most marked advances on the part of Madame de Merteuil 
and that the rendez-vous was agreed to by her. 

Happily, I have the strongest reasons to believe that 
these imputations are as false as they are odious. First of 
all, we both know that M. de Valmont was certainly not 
devoting himself to Madame de Merteuil and I have every 
reason to think that Danceny was not doing so either ; so it 
seems proved that she could not have been either the reason 
or the creator of the quarrel. I do not understand either how 
it could have been to the interest of Madame de Merteuil 
(who is supposed to have been in agreement with Prévan) to 
make a scene which could never have been anything but 
disagreeable by its publicity and might have become very 
dangerous to her, since she thus made an irreconcilable enemy 
of a man who was master of part of her secret and who then 

1 Letters LXXXI and LXXXV, of this collection. (C. de L.). 

415 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

had many supporters. Yet it is to be obsetved that since this 
adventure not a single voice has been raised in favour of 
Prévan and that there has been no protest even on his part. 

These reflections make me suspect him as the author of 
the rumours to-day and I regard these base accusations as 
the work of the hatred and vengeance of a man who, seeing 
himself ruined, hopes in this way at least to spread doubts and 
perhaps to cause a useful diversion. But wherever these 
spiteful rumours come from, the most urgent thing is to 
destroy them. They would fall of themselves, if, as is probable, 
M. de Valmont and Danceny did not speak to each other 
after their unfortunate affair and if no papers were handed 
Over. 

In my impatience to verify these facts I sent this morning 
to M. Danceny ; he is no longer in Paris. His servants told 
my footman that he left last night after a warning he received 
yesterday and that the place where he is staying is a secret. 
Apparently he is afraid of the results of this affair. It is 
therefore only through you, my dear and excellent friend, 
that I can obtain these details which interest me so much 
and which may become so necessary to Madame de Merteuil. 
I renew my request that you will let me have them as soon 
as possible. 

PS. My daughter’s indisposition had no bad result ; 
she sends you her respect. 

Paris, 11th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLXIX 
The Chevalier Danceny to Madame de Rosemonde 

Perhaps you will think the step I am taking to-day a very 
strange one; but, I beg you, hear me out before you judge 
me and do not see boldness and temerity where there is only 
respect and confidence. I do not conceal from myself the 
wrongs I have done you, and I should not forgive myself for 
them all my life if I could for a moment think that it would 
. have been possible to avoid them. Be sure, Madame, that 
though I think myself free from blame I am not free from 

416 

LETTER CLXIX 

tegrets ; and I can say with sincerity that the regrets I have 
caused you are a considerable part of those I feel myself. To 
believe these sentiments which I dare to express to you, it 
will suffice you to do justice to yourself and to know that, 
without having the honour to be known by you, I have that 
of knowing you. 

Yet, while I groan at a fatality which has caused at once 
your grief and my misery, I am made to fear that you are 
given up entirely to thoughts of vengeance, that you are 
seeking the means of satisfying it even through the severity 
of the law. 

Allow me to point out to you in this respect, that here 
you are carried away by your grief, since in this point my 
interest is essentially one with that of M. de Valmont who 
would himself be involved in the condemnation you provoked 
against me. I should then think, Madame, that I might rather 
count upon aid than obstacles on your part in the care 1 am 
obliged to take so that this unhappy incident may remain 
buried in silence. 

But this resource of complicity which suits equally the 
guilty and the innocent is insufficient for my delicacy ; while 
I desire to remove you as an opponent, I claim you as my 
judge. The esteem of persons one respects is too precious for 
me to allow yours to be torn from me without defence, and 
I think I have the means to do so. 

Indeed if you agree that vengeance is allowed, let me 
rather say is a duty, when one has been betrayed in 
one’s love, in one’s friendship, in one’s confidence above 
all; if you agree to that, my injuries to you will disappear 
in your eyes. Do not rely on what I say but read, if you have 
the courage, the correspondence I hereby place in your 
hands.!. The number of original letters among them appear 
to render authentic those which only exist in copy. More- 
over, I received these papers just as I have the honour to hand 
them to you, from M. de Valmont himself. I have added 
nothing to them and I have only taken from them two letters 
which I have taken the liberty to publish. 

1From this correspondence, from that delivered on the death of 
Madame de Tourvel, from letters confided to Madame de Rosemonde by 
Madame de Volanges, the present collection has been formed, the 
originals of which are in the possession of Madame de Rosemonde’s 
heirs. (C. de L,). 

417 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

One was necessary to the common vengeance of M. de 
Valmont and myself, to which we both had a right and which 
he expressly charged me with. Moreover, I thought it was 
rendering a service to society to unmask a woman so really 
dangerous as Madame de Merteuil and who, as you can see, 
is the only, the real cause of all that passed between M. de 
Valmcnt and me. 

A sentiment of justice induced me also to publish the 
second for the justification of M. de Prévan, whom I hardly 
know, but who by no means deserved the rigorous treatment 
he has endured nor the still more formidable severity of public 
condemnation under which he has suffered since that time, 
without having anything for his defence. 

You will therefore only find copies of these two letters 
whose originals I must retain. As to the remainder, I think 
I cannot piace in surer hands a collection which it is important 
for me not to have destroyed, but which I should blush to 
abuse. By confiding these papers to you, Madame, I think 
I am serving the persons they concern as well as if I handed 
them over to themselves ; and I save them from the embarrass- 
ment of receiving them from me and of knowing that I am 
informed of their adventures, of which doubtless they wish 
everybody to be kept in ignorance. 

I think I ought to inform you that the enclosed corres- 
pondence is only part of a much more voluminous collection 
from which M. de Valmont took it in my presence; you will 
find it, when the seals are broken, under the title, which 
I saw myself, of ‘‘ Account opened between the Marquise de 
Merteuil and the Vicomte de Valmont.” You will take in 
this matter the course which your prudence suggests. 

I am with respect, Madame, etc. 

P.S. Certain warnings I have received and the advice of 
my friends have determined me to leave Paris for some time ; 
but the place of my retirement, which is kept secret from 
everyone else, will not be so kept from you. If you honour 
me with a reply, I beg you to address it to the Commandery 
of P...., under cover to M. le Commandeur de .... It is 
from his residence that I have the honour to write to you. 

Paris, 12th of December, 17—. 

418 

LETTER CLXX 

LETTER CLXX 
Madame de Volanges to Madame de Ke semonde 

I go, my dear friend, from surprise to surprise, from 
grief to grief. Only a mother can have an idea of what 
I suffered all yesterday morning ; and, though my most cruel 
anxieties have since been calmed, I still retain a keen 
affliction, the end of which I cannot foresee. 

Yesterday, about ten o'clock in the morning, astonished 
at not having seen my daughter, I sent my waiting-woman 
to find what was the reason for this lateness. She returned 
a moment later in great fear, and frightened me still more 
by announcing that my daughter was not in her room and 
that her waiting-woman had not found her there this morning. 
Imagine my position! JI called together all my servants, 
especially the porter ; all swore they knew nothing and could 
tell me nothing about this event. I then went at once to my 
daughter's room. The disorder it was in showed me that 
apparently she had only left that morning; but I found no 
explanation. I examined her wardrobes and her writing- 
table ; I found everything in its place and all her possessions, 
except the dress she had gone out in. She had not even 
taken the little money she had with her. 

As it was only yesterday that she heard all that is being 
said about Madame de Merteuil to whom she is very much 
attached, to such an extent that she did nothing but weep all 
evening ; as I remembered also that she did not know Madame 
de Merteuil is in the country ; my first idea was that she had 
wished to see her friend and had been heedless enough to 
go there alone. But the time which elapsed without her 
returning brought back all my anxieties. Every moment 
increased my pain and, while I burned to find out what had 
happened, I did not dare to make any enquiries in the fear 
of giving publicity to an event which perhaps I should after- 
wards wish hidden from everyone. No, I have never suffered 
so much all my life ! 

At length, it was not until after two o’clock that I received 
at once a letter from my daughter and another from the 

419 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

Mother Superior of the Convent of... My daughter’s letter 
merely informed me that she had been afraid lest I should 
thwart the vocation she felt to become a nun and that she 
had not dared to speak to me about it; the rest was only 
excuses for having taken this course without my permission, 
a course, she added, which I should certainly not disapprove 
if I knew her motives which, however, she begged me not 
to ask her. 

The Mother Superior informed me that, seeing a young 
person arrive alone, she had at first refused to receive her ; 
but, having questioned her and having learnt who she was, 
she thought she would be doing me a service by giving shelter 
to my daughter and thereby saving her from other expeditions, 
which she seemed determined to make. The Mother Superior, 
while she naturally offers to return me my daughter, exhorts 
me, as her profession requires, not to thwart a vocation 
which she calls ‘“‘ so decided ”’ ; she also tells me that she could 
not give me earlier information of this occurrence owing to 
the difficulty she had in making my daughter write to me, 
for her project was to keep everyone in ignorance of her place 
of retirement. The unreasonableness of children is a cruel 
thing ! 

I went to the Convent at once; and after having seen 
the Mother Superior, I asked to see my daughter; she only 
could be made to come with difficulty and she trembled very 
much, I spoke to her in the presence of the nuns and I spoke 
to her in private ; all I could obtain from her in the midst of 
many tears was that she could only be happy in the Convent ; 
I decided to allow her to remain there, but not yet as one of 
the Novices, as she desired. I fear that the deaths of Madame 
de Tourvel and M. de Valmont have too much affected her 
young mind. However much I respect a religious vocation 
I could not see my daughter embrace that condition without 
pain, and even without fear. It seems to me that we already 
have enough duties to fulfil without creating new ones for 
ourselves ; and, moreover, that at her age we hardly know 
what is most suitable for us. 

My embarrassment is greatly increased by the very near 
return of M. de Gercourt ; ought I to break off so advantageous 
a marriage ? How can we make our children happy if it is 

420 

LETTER CLXXI 

insufficient to desire their happiness and to give all our 
attention to it? You would greatly oblige me if you would 
tell me what you would do in my place ; I cannot decide upon 
any course; I think nothing is so terrifying as to have to 
decide the fate of others and in this presént situation I am 
equally afraid of showing the severity of a judge or the 
weakness of a mother. 

I keep reproaching myself for increasing your griefs by 
speaking to you of mine; but I know your heart; the con- 
solation you could give others would become for you the 
greatest you could receive. 

Good-bye, my dear and excellent friend; I await your 
two replies in great impatience. 

Paris, 13th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLXXI 
Madame de Rosemonde to the Chevalier Danceny 

After the information you have given me, Monsieur, 
there is nothing left but to weep and to be silent. I regret 
to be still alive when I learn such horrors; I blush that I am 
a woman when I see one capable of such excesses. 

In what concerns myself, Monsieur, I will gladly consent 
to leave in silence and forgetfulness everything connected 
with these sad events and their consequences. I even hope 
that they may never cause you any griefs save those in- 
separable from the unhappy advantage you gained over my 
nephew. In spite of his faults, which I am compelled to 
recognise, I feel I shall never be consoled for his loss; but 
my eternal affliction will be the only vengeance I shall allow 
myself to take upon you; it is for your heart to perceive 
the extent of it. 

If you will allow me, at my age, to make an observation 
which is never made at yours, I would say that if we under- 
stood our true happiness we should never seek it outside the 
limits prescribed by the Laws and Religion. 

You may be sure that I shall faithfully and willingly 
guard the collection you have confided to me; but I ask you 
421 

EE 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

to authorise me not to hand it over to anyone, not even to 
you, Monsieur, unless it becomes necessary for your justifica- 
tion. I dare to think that you will not refuse this request 
and that you now feel that one often regrets having yielded 
even to the most just vengeance. 

I do not pause in my requests, so persuaded am I of your 
generosity and your delicacy; it would be worthy of both 
if you also placed in my hands Mademoiselle de Volanges’ 
letters which you have apparently preserved and which 
doubtless are no longer of interest to you. I know that this 
young person did you great injuries; but I do not believe 
you would think of punishing her for them; if only from 
self-respect you would not degrade the person you had loved 
so much. It is not necessary therefore for me to add that 
the consideration the daughter does not deserve is at least 
due to her mother, to that respectable woman to whom you 
have many amends to make ; for, after all, however you try 
to delude yourself by a pretended delicacy of sentiment, he 
who first attempts to seduce a still simple and virtuous heart 
by that very fact renders himself the first instigator of her 
corruption and must for ever be held accountable for the ex- 
cesses and misconduct which follow it. 

Do not be surprised, Monsieur, at so much severity on 
my part ; itis the greatest proof I can give you of my complete 
esteem. You will acquire still further rights to it by con- 
senting, as I desire, to the preservation of a secret whose 
publicity would do harm to yourself and would carry death 
to a maternal heart which you have already wounded. And 
then, Monsieur, I wish to do my friend this service ; if I could 
fear that you would refuse me this consolation, I would ask 
you first to remember that it is the only one you have left me. 

From the Chateau de... , 15th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLXXII 
Madame de Rosemonde to Madame de Volanges 

If I had been obliged, my dear friend, to send to Paris 
and wait for the explanations you ask concerning Madame de 
422 

LETTER CLXXII 

Merteuil, it would not be possible yet for me to give them 
to you; and I should certainly only have received in this way 
vague and uncertain ones; but I received explanations | did 
not expect, which I had no reason to expect ; and they are but 
too precise. O my friend! How that woman deceived you ! 

It is repugnant to me to enter into any of the details of 
this mass of enormities ; but whatever may be said about her, 
be assured that it is still less than the truth. I hope, my 
dear friend, that you know me well enough to believe me on 
my bare word and that you will not require any proofs from 
me. Let it suffice you to know that masses of proofs exist 
and that they are now in my hands. 

It is not without extreme pain that I also request you 
not to force me to give you my reasons for the advice you ask 
me concerning Mademoiselle de Volanges. I urge you not to 
oppose yourself to the vocation she shows. Certainly, no 
reason can authorise one to compel another to adopt that 
state when the subject is not called to it; but sometimes it 
is very fortunate that she should be ; and you see your daughter 
herself tells you that you would not disapprove if you knew 
her motives. He who inspires our feelings knows, far better 
than our vain wisdom can know, what befits each of us; and 
often that which appears an act of His severity 1s on the 
contrary an act of His clemency. 

My advice then, which I know will distress you and which 
for that very reason you will realise is not given you without 
deep reflection, is that you leave Mademoiselle de Volanges 
in the Convent, since this determination is her choice ; that 
you encourage rather than oppose the plan she seems to have 
formed; and that, in expectation of its being carried out, 
you do not hesitate to break off the marriage you had arranged. 

After having fulfilled these painful duties of friendship 
and in my powerlessness to add any consolation, I have one 
favour left to ask you; it is that you will not question me 
any further about these sad events; let us leave them in the 
oblivion which befits them; and, without seeking for 
useless and distressing explanations, let us submit ourselves 
to the decrees of Providence, let us believe in the wisdom of 
its views, even when it does not permit us to understand them. 
Good-bye, my dear friend. 

From the Chateau de .. . , 15th of December, 17— 

423 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

LETTER CLXXIII 
Madame de Volanges to Madame de Rosemonde 

Oh! My friend! What a fearful veil you wrap about 
my daughter’s fate! And you seem to fear lest I should 
attempt to raise it! What does it conceal which could more 
distress a mother’s heart than the dreadful suspicions to which 
you abandon me ? The more I know your friendship, your 
indulgence, the more my tortures increase ; twenty times since 
yesterday I have wanted to leave these cruel uncertainties 
and to ask you to inform me without circumspection and 
without evasion; and each time I shuddered with fear, re- 
membering your request that I should not question you. 
At last, I have decided on a course which still leaves me some 
hope ; and I expect of your friendship that it will not refuse 
me what I desire—it is to answer me if I have practically 
understood what you might have to tell me, not to be afraid 
to tell me everything that maternal indulgence might excuse, 
that is not impossible to repair. If my misfortunes exceed 
this measure, I consent to allow you only to explain yourself 
by your silence. Here then is what I know already and 
the extent to which my fears go. 

My daughter showed some inclination for the Chevalier 
Danceny and I was informed that she went so far as to re- 
ceive letters from him and even to answer him ; but I thought 
I had succeeded in preventing any dangerous consequence 
from this childish error; to-day, when I fear everything, 
I suppose it was possible that my vigilance may have been 
deceived and I fear that my daughter has been seduced, has 
carried her misconduct to its height. 

I remember several circumstances which might strengthen 
this fear. I told you that my daughter was taken unwell at 
the news of M. de Valmont’s misfortune ; perhaps the only 
cause of this sensibility was the thought of the risks M. Danceny 
had run in this combat. Later, when she wept so much at 
learning what was said of Madame de Merteuil, perhaps what 
I thought was the grief of friendship was only the result of 
jealousy or regret at finding her lover unfaithful. Her last 

424 

LETTER CLXXIII 

step, I think, can be explained in the same way. We often 
feel ourselves called to God merely because we feel in revolt 
against men. Supposing that these are true facts and that 
you knew them, no doubt you might have tho ight them suffi- 
cient to authorise the severe advice you give me. 

Yet, if this is so, while I blame my daughter I think 
I should still owe it to her to attempt every means to save her 
from the tortures and dangers of an illusory and temporary 
vocation. If M. Danceny is not lost to all sense of honour, 
he will not refuse to repair a wrong of which he is the sole 
author, and I dare to think that marriage with my daughter 
is so advantageous that he might be flattered by it, as well as 
his family. 

That, my dear and excellent friend, is the one hope left 
me; hasten to confirm it, if it is possible for you to do so. 
You will understand how much I desire that you should 
teply to me and what a dreadful blow to me your silence 
would be. 

I was about to close this letter when a man of my acquaint- 
ance came to see me and told me of the cruel scene endured 
by Madame de Merteuil the day before yesterday. As I have 
seen nobody for the last few days I had heard nothing of 
this occurrence ; here is an account of it, as I received it from 
an eye-witness. 

Madame de Merteuil on returning from the country the 
day before yesterday, Thursday, was set down at the Comédie 
Italienne, where she has a box ; she was alone and, what must 
have seemed very extraordinary to her, no man entered it 
during the whole of the play. When it was over she went, as 
she was accustomed, to the small drawing-room which was 
already filled with people; there was at once a murmur, but 
apparently she did not think she was the cause of it. She 
noticed an empty place on one of the benches and went to sit 
down in it ; but immediately all the women who were already 
there rose as if in concert and left her absolutely alone. This 
marked movement of general indignation was applauded by 
all the men and increased the murmurs, which, they say, 
became hooting. 

For there to be nothing lacking to her humiliation, her 

1 No answer was sent to this letter. (C. de L.). 

425 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

ill-luck would have it that M. de Prévan, who had showed 
himself nowhere since his adventure, entered the small 
drawing-room at that moment. As soon as he was observed 
everyone, men and women, surrounded and applauded him ;: 
and he was carried, as it were, before Madame de Merteuil 
by the public who made a circle around them. I am assured 
that she preserved an air of seeing and hearing nothing and 
that she did not even change countenance ! But I think that 
fact exaggerated. However that may be, this situation, so 
ignominious for her, lasted until her carriage was announced ; 
and at her departure the scandalous hootings were redoubled. 
It is dreadful to be a relative of this woman. That same 
evening, M. de Prévan was welcomed by all the officers of his 
Corps who were present and no one doubts that he will soon 
regain his post and his rank. 

The same person who gave me these details told me that 
the following night Madame de Merteuil was seized with a 
strong fever, which was at first thought to be fhe result of 
the violent situation in which she had been placed ; but since 
yesterday evening it is known that a confluent small-pox of 
a very bad kind has shown itself. Really, I think it would be 
fortunate for her if she died of it. It is also said that this 
adventure will perhaps do her great harm in her law-suit which 
will soon be decided and for which they say she needed a 
great deal of favour. 

Good-bye, my dear and excellent friend. In all this 
I see the wicked are punished, but I find no consolation in 
it for the unhappy victims. 

Paris, 18th of December, 17—. 

LETTER CLXXIV 
The Chevalier Danceny to Madame de Rosemonde 

You are right, Madame, and I shall certainly not refuse 
you anything which depends upon me and to which you appear 
to attach some value. The packet I have the honour to 
send you contains all Mademoiselle de Volanges’s letters. 
If you read them, you will see perhaps not without astonish- 

426 

LETTER CLXXIV 

ment how so much ingenuousness and so much perfidy can be 
united. At least, that is what most struck me at the last 
reading I have just given them. 

But, especially, can one resist the keensst indignation 
against Madame de Merteuil when one recol’ects with what 
dreadful pleasure she gave all her attention to perverting so 
much innocence and candour ? 

No, I am no longer in love. I retain nothing of a senti- 
ment so unworthily betrayed ; it is not love which makes me 
seek to justify Mademoiselle de Volanges. But yet, would 
not that simple heart, that gentle, facile character, have been 
conducted even more easily towards good than they were led 
towards evil? What other girl, coming thus from a Convent 
without experience and almost without ideas, bringing into 
society (as almost always happens) only an equal ignorance 
of good and evil—what other girl, I say, would have resisted 
any better such criminal cunning? Ah! To be indulgent 
it suffices to reflect on how many circumstances, independent 
of ourselves, depends the dreadful alternative of delicacy or 
the degradation of our feelings. You did me justice then, 
Madame, when you thought that the injuries done me by 
Mademoiselle de Volanges, though I felt them keenly, do not 
inspire me with any idea of vengeance. It is sufficient to be 
obliged to give up loving her! It would cost me too much to 
hate her. 

I needed no reflection to make me desire that everything 
which concerns her and might harm her should for ever remain 
unknown to the world. If 1 have seemed to delay for some 
time my compliance with your wishes in this respect, I think 
I need not conceal my motive from you; I wished first of all 
to be sure that I should not be molested about the consequences 
of my unhappy affair. At a time when I was asking for your 
indulgence, when I even dared to think I had some right to 
it, I should have been unwilling to seem in any way to be 
buying it by this compliance on my part ; I was certain of the 
purity of my motives and, I confess it, 1 was proud enough to 
desire that you should have no doubt of it. I hope you will 
pardon this delicacy, perhaps too susceptible to the veneration 
you inspire in me, to the value I set on your esteem. 

The same feeling makes me ask you as a last favour to be 

427 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

good enough to tell me if you think I have fulfilled all the 
duties imposed upon me by the unfortunate circumstances in 
which I was placed. Once assured of this, my course is plain; 
I shall leave for Malta; I shall go there to make gladly and to 
keep religiously the vows which will separate me from the 
world, of which, while yet so young, I have already so much 
reason to complain; I shall go and try to forget under a 
foreign sky the idea of so many accumulated enormities, whose 
memory can never but sadden and wither my soul. 
I am with respect, Madame, your most humble, etc. 

Paris, 26th of December, 17-—. 

LETTER CLXXV 
Madame de Volanges to Madame de Rosemonde 

Madame de Merteuil’s destiny seems at last accomplished, 
my dear and excellent friend; and it is such that her worst 
enemies are divided between the indignation she merits and 
the pity she inspires. I was indeed right to say that it would 
perhaps be fortunate for her if she died of her small-pox. 
She has recovered, it is true, but horribly disfigured; and 
particularly by the loss of one eye.1. You may easily imagine 
that I have not seen her again ; but I am told she is positively 
hideous. 

The Marquis de ...., who never misses the opportunity 
of saying a spiteful thing, speaking of her yesterday, said that 
her disease had turned her round and that now her soul is 
in her face. Unhappily, everyone thought the expression a 
very true one. 

Another event has increased her disgrace and her errors, 
Her law-suit was decided yesterday and she lost it by a 
unanimous vote. Costs, damages, and interest, restitution 
of profits—everything was given to the minors; so that the 
small part of her fortune which was not concerned in this 
suit is more than absorbed by its expenses. 

As soon as she heard this news, although she was still 

1 This is perhaps the weakest thing in the book ; it is perhaps inten- 
tionally so. See Introduction, 

428 

LETTER CLXXV 

unwell, she made her arrangements and left, alone and by 
night. Her servants say to-day that not one of them would 
follow her. It is thought that she went in the direction of 
Holland. 

This departure has caused even more comment than 
all the rest because she took with her the very valuable dia- 
monds which ought to have been comprised in her husband’s 
estate, her silver, her jewels, in fact everything she could, 
while she leaves behind nearly 50,000 livres of debts. It is a 
positive bankruptcy. 

The family is to meet to-day to discuss what arrangements 
shal] be made with the creditors. Although I am a very 
distant relative, I have offered to assist ; but I shall not be 
at this gathering, for I have to be present at a still sadder 
ceremony. Tomorrow my daughter takes the veil as a Novice. 
I hope you will not forget, my dear friend, that my only motive 
for thinking myself forced to make this great sacrifice is the 
silence you have kept towards me. 

M. Danceny left Paris nearly a fortnight ago. It is said 
that he is going to Malta and intends to remain there. There 
might be yet time to detain him? ... My friend!... 
My daughter is very culpable then! ... You will surely 
pardon a mother for only yielding with difficulty to this 
dreadful certainty. 

What fatality is that which has spread about me ee 
and has struck me through my dearest possessions! My 
daughter and my friend ! 

Who would not shudder at thinking of the miseries which 
may be caused by one dangerous acquaintance! And what 
griefs we should avoid if we reflected more upon this! What 
woman would not flee from the first words of aseducer ! What 
mother could see, without trembling, anyone but herself 
talking to her daughter! But these tardy reflections never 
occur until after the event; and one of the most important 
truths, which is also perhaps one of the most generally re- 
cognised, remains stifled and unregarded in the whirl of our 
inconsequent morals. 

Farewell, my dear and excellent friend; I feel at this 
moment that our reason, so incapable of foreseeing our 

429 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

misfortunes, is still less capable of consoling us for them? 

APPENDIX 

(The two following letters are contained in the MS. of the 
Liaisons Dangereuses ; they have been printed at the end of 
several modern editions in France and are given here for 
completeness’ sake. The first—Valmont to Madame de 
Volanges~-was cancelled by Laclos and replaced by the note 
to Letter CLV. The second—Madame de Tourvel to Valmont 
—is placed at the end of the MS. as a lost letter just recovered. 
It was suppressed by the publishers, who substituted the note 
which now ends the book. Such, at least, is the explanation 
supplied by M. A. van Bever). 

The Vicomte de Valmont to Aladame de Volanges 

I know you do not like me, Madame; I know also that 
you have always been against me with Madame de Tourvel 
and I have no doubt that you are more than ever of the same 
opinion, I even confess that you have reason to think it well 
founded ; but I address myself to you to ask you to hand 
Madame de Tourvel the letter I enclose for her and also to 
ask you to persuade her to read it; to bring her to do it by 
assuring her of my repentance, of my regrets, above all of my 
Jove. I know that this step will seem a strange one to you. 
It surprises me; but despair seizes any means and does not 
calculate them. And then an interest so great, so dear, and 
common to us both, should put every other consideration 
aside. Madame de Tourvel is dying, Madame de Tourvel is 
unhappy, she must be given back life, health, and happiness. 
That is the object to be attained ; any way is good which can 
assure or hasten its success. If you reject the help I offer, 

1Private reasons and other consideration which we feel it our 
duty to respect, force us to stop here. 

For the moment we cannot give the reader the continuation of 
Mademoiselle de Volanges’ adventures nor inform him of the sinister 
event which completed the misfortunes or the punishment of Madame 
de Merteuil. Perhaps some day we may be allowed to complete this 
work; but we cannot make any undertaking to do so, and even if we 
could, we think the public taste ought first to be consulted, since it has 
not our reasons for taking an interest in reading these matters. 

(Publishers Note: 1782) 

430 

APPENDIX : 

you will remain responsible for the result; her death, your 
regrets, my eternal despair, all will be your work. 

I know I have basely outraged a woman worthy of all 
my adoration; I know that my dreadful actions have alone 
caused all the ills she suffers ; I do not try to dissimulate my 
faults or to excuse them ; but, Madame, do not become their 
accomplice by preventing me from atoning for them. I plunged 
the dagger in your friend’s heart, but I alone can draw the 
steel from the wound; I alone know how to cure it. What 
matters it that I] am guilty if I can be useful! Save your 
friend ! Save her! She needs your help, not your vengeance. 

Madame de Tourvel to the Vicomte de Valmont 

O my friend ! what is this disturbance I feel the moment 
you leave me—a little tranquillity is so necessary to me ! 
How does it happen that I am given over to an agitation which 
becomes a pain and causes me real terror ? Would you believe 
it? I feel that I need to collect strength and recall my 
reasoning faculty even to write to you. Yet I tell myself, 
I repeat to myself, that you are happy; but, this idea, which 
is so dear to my heart and which you called so aptly the 
gentle calmative of love, has now become its ferment and 
makes me succumb beneath a too great felicity; while, if 
I try to tear myself from this delicious meditation, I im- 
mediately fall into those cruel agonies which I have so often 
promised you to avoid and from which I ought indeed so 
carefully to preserve myself, since they impair your happiness. 
My dear, you have easily taught me to live only for you ; 
teach me now how to live absent from you. .. No, that is 
not what I meant, rather I would say that absent from you 
I would not live at all, or at least forget my existence. When 
I am abandoned to myself, I can endure neither my happiness 
nor my pain; I feel the need of rest and all rest is impossible 
to me; vainly have I called upon sleep, sleep flies from me ; 
I can neither occupy myself nor remain idle, by turns a 
burning fire devours me and a mortal shuddering prostrates 
me; every movement fatigues me and I cannot remain still. 
How shall I express it ? I should suffer less in the burning of 

43% 

LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES 

the most violent fever and, without being able to explain it 
or understand it, I yet feel that this state of suffering only 
comes from my inability to contain or to direct a crowd of 
sentiments to whose charm, however, I should think myself 
happy if I could abandon my whole soul. 

At the very moment you had left, I was less tormented ; 
some agitation was mingled with my regrets, but I attributed 
this to the impatience caused me by the presence of my woman 
who came in at that moment and whose duties, always too 
long for my choice, seemed to be prolonged a thousand times 
more than usual. I wanted to be alone above everything ; 
I did not doubt that, surrounded by such sweet memories, 
I should find in solitude the only happiness of which I am 
capable in your absence. How could I foresee that, while 
strong enough near you to endure the shock of so many 
different sentiments, so rapidly experienced, alone I could not 
even endure their memory ? I was rapidly undeceived. . . 
Here, my tender friend, I hesitate to tell you everything. . . 
yet, am I not yours, entirely yours, and ought I to hide one 
of my thoughts from you? Ah! That would be quite 
impossible; only, I claim your indulgence for involuntary 
faults which my heart does not share; in accordance with 
my custom, I had sent my woman away before going to 
bed. ... (Letter imperfect). 

432 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

(This abbreviated description of the various editions of 
Les Liatsons Dangereuses is taken from that published by 
M. A. van Bever in 1920. Very few of these editions are in 
the British Museum Library.) 

Manuscript 

The original MS of the Liaisons Dangereuses in the hand- 
writing of Choderlos de Laclos was presented to the Bibli- 
otheque Nationale in 1849, by Madame Charles de Laclos. 
Its Press-mark 1s Ms. Francais, 12845. It is written in a fine 
hand, almost without corrections, difficult to read. The 
original title was Le Danger des Liaisons, subsequently altered 
by Laclos to the one by which we now know it. This MS. 
shows that the novel was originally divided into two, not four 
parts. 

Printed Editions 

Les Liatsons Dangereuses ou Lettres Recuetllies dans une 
Société et publiées pour Tinstruction de quelques autres, 
par M. C...de L... A Amsterdam ; et se trouve a Paris, 
chez Durand Neveu, Libraire a la Sagesse, rue Galande. 
M.D.CCLXXXII, 4 vols, in-12. 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. . . Geneve, 1782, 4 vols, 
small in-12. 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. .. A Neufchatcl, 1782, 
4 vols, 1n-I2. 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. .. Amsterdam and Paris, 

1784, 4 vols, in-I2. 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. . . Genéve, 1784, 1786, 1792, 
4 vols, 1n-12, 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. . . augmentée d'une Corres- 
pondance de |’Auteur avec Madame Riccoboni, et de ses 
Piéces Fugitives. (Without editor's name or place of 
address). DCC, LXXXVII (sic) 4 vols. (One copy only 
known, at Nantes). 

433 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c, as above. M.DCC.LXAXXVITI. 
2 vols, in-12. (Unique copy in the possession of Mr Arthur 
Symons). 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. .. Amsterdam and Paris, 
1788, 4 vols. 
Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. . . Geneve, 1792 and 1793, 

4 vols,, in-I2 or in-18, with 8 plates by Le Barbier, 
engraved by Dambrun, Delignon, MHalbou, Simonet, 
and Thomas. 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. .. Londres (Paris) 1796, 
2 vols. in-8. 2 Frontispieces and 13 plates by Monnet, 
Mademoiselle Gérard, and Fragonard fils, engraved by 
Baquoy, Duplessis-Bertaux, Dupréel, Godefroy, Langlois, 
Lemire, Lingée, Masquelier, Patas, Pauquet, Simonet, and 
Triére. (Reprinted 1815 with date 1796). 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. . . Paris. L. Duprat-Duverger. 
181r, 4 vols, small in-12, (Engravings by Canu). 
Reprinted 1820 in-18. 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, Paris. Bossange, 1820, 2 vols. in-12. 
Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. . . Paris. Impr. L. T. Cellot,’ 
1820, 2 vols. in-8. (Plates by Deveria, but not signed). 

Ditto. Paris, Parmentier, 182 3. 

Ditto. Paris, Libr. associés, 1828. 

Ditto. Paris, chez les marchands de Nouveautés. 1833-1834. 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. . . par C. Delaclos. Bruxelles, 
Librairie universelle de Rosez, 1869, 2 vols., small in-12. 

, 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. ... Garnier, (No date), 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses (par C. Delaclos) suivies de: Les 
Exercices de Dévotion de M. V. Roch, par l’Abbé de 
Voisenon, Paris, Dentu, 1894, in-12. (Selections, contains 
only gg letters). | 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. . . Paris, Boulenger, 1894, 
small in-16. 

Les Liatsons Dangereuses, &c. . . Edition collationnée sur 
le manuscrit original, suivie d’une notice, de variantes et 
de lettres inédites, ornée d’une reproduction en hélte- 
gravure du portrait de Laclos par Boilly. Paris, Mercure 
de France, 1903. in-18, 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses, &c. . . Librarie Moderne, Bauche. 
(Paris), 1907. large in-8. 

434 

Les Liatsons Dangereuses, &c. . . Coloured lithographs by 
Lubin de Beauvais. Paris. Ferroud, 1908. (300 copies 
only). 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses. Edition publiée d’apres le texte 
original, avec une étude sur Choderlos de Laclos et une 
bibhiographie ..., par Ad. van Bever. 20 original 
etchings by Martin Van Maele. Paris. J. Chevrel, rg08. 
Large in-8. (225 copies only). 

L’CEuvre de Choderlos de Laclos. ‘“* Les Liaisons Dangereuses, 
&c.” Ouvrage orné de 12 illustrations d’aprés les 
gravures de Fragonard fils, Monnet, Mlle Gerard, Paris, 
Bibliotheque des Curieux, Ig13. in-8. 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses. Edition publiée . . . par Ad. van 
Bever. Two portraits. Paris. G. Cres et Cie, rgrg. 
2 vols., in-18. 

Les Liaisons Dangereuses. Edition publiée . . . par Ad. Van 
Bever. 17 plates, Paris, G. Crés et Cie, 1920, 2 vols., 
in-18. 

ae » . * 
wee 

435 

Printed tn Great Britain by 
F. Robinson & Co., at The Library Press 
Lowestoft 

BROADWAY 

TRANSLATIONS 
1927 

Published by 
GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS LID, 
Broadway House: 68-74 Carter Lane 
London, E.C. 4 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

eae ae an rea mete nd 

FOREWORD 

The object of this series is to put before the public 
the masterpieces of foreign literature of every country 
and in every age. Already nearly fifty volumes have 
been issued, and the reception given to them by the 
Press may be judged from the opposite page. 

The publishers have kept three main objects in mind. 
Firstly, that the translations shall be as accurate and 
readable as possible. For this reason they have in 
some instances reprinted the magnificent Tudor or 
other existing translations, sometimes entrusted the 
work to be done afresh by an expert. 

Secondly, that the editions shall be complete and 
definitive. Each volume has therefore been entrusted 
to an expert Editor, who has, where necessary, pro- 
vided notes, and in all cases written an Introduction, 
explaining or criticizing the book and placing it against 
a historical background and environment. 

Thirdly, that the books chosen for inclusion shall be 
those which for the most part it is difficult or 
impossible to obtain elsewhere. 

FORMAT 

The volumes are issued in one of two sizes, crown 8vo 
at 7/6 net, demy 8vo at 12/6net. The larger volumes 
contain about twice as many words as the smaller, 
thus allowing many famous books to be included which 
would otherwise have been too long. The binding is 
quarter-vellum with a leather label: each language 
is allotted a distinctive colour of binding, label, and 
end-paper. Suitable books are illustrated. 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 
2 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

PRESS NOTICES 

Times Literary Supplement: ‘‘ That excellent series.” 

Spectator: ‘‘ Messrs. Routledge’s valuable and important 
series,”’ 

London Mercury: ‘‘ Messrs. Routledge are putting us deep 
in their debt with the Broadway Translations, an enterprise 
that cannot be too highly recommended. We wish this series 
Inck ; itis really covering fresh ground.’’ 

The Bookman: ‘A series that is winning a well-deserved 
renown for its publishers. The volumes are beautifully 
pele on good paper and strongly and very tastefully 

und,’ 

The Nation and Athenaeum: ‘‘ The Broadway Translations 
are rightly making a name for themselves.”’ 

Journal of Education: ‘‘It would be difficult to imagine 
volumes more pleasing in appearance than these; their 
vellum-like backs with leather labels and gold lettering, 
combined with good paper and clear print, reflect great 
credit upon the publisher. And their contents do not belie 
their pleasing exteriors.’”’ 

Queen: ‘“‘ Those veritable treasures from the inexhaustible 
mine of classical literature.’’ 

Manchester Guardian: ‘ A series which opens up windows on 
fascinating seas where voyagers from this country rarely 
go,” 

Bystander: ‘‘ It is really something quite new. The editor of 
this series has his own ideas, and is gradually bringing 
together a shelf-ful of good books which you are not likely 
to find elsewhere.”’ 

Daily Graphic: ‘ Still they come in, this amazing series ; 
some of the least known, but most prized (by the elect) of 
all the books in the world.”’ 

Bookman’s Journal: ‘‘ One of the most delightful literary 
enterprises that one remembers.” 

T.P's. and Cassell's Weekly : ‘‘ Outstanding examples of what 
can be produced by scholarly editors finding pleasure in their 
work and encouraged by publishers of a scholarly mind.” 

Daily News: ‘‘ There are few libraries that will not be the 
richer for the volumes in the Broadway Translations.’’ 

Glasgow Herald: ‘‘ Every successive volume adds to the 
sense of obligation to publishers and editors.” 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

A SBOE Ott AP LON aR Fe CCRT eee NI AE ER CS RC tt A ee 

Crown 8vo, 7/6 net 

PETRONIUS’ SATYRICON. Translated by J. M. 
Mitchell, with Notes and an Introduction on ‘ The 

Book and its Morals’, etc. 

Fourth Edition. 

‘‘ An intimate picture of life under the Roman Empire. It is 

a civilization, elaborate, highly-organized, luxurious, pluto- 

cratic, modern, filthy, scurrilous, and immoral; and the 

characters are a very succession of Macheaths and Filches, 

Pollies and Lucies, and worse still. We are nearer to the 

heart of life than many a ‘ best-seller’ dares to bring us.’’ 
—Westminster Gazette, 

THE GIRDLE OF APHRODITE : the Fifth Book of 
the Palatine Anthology. Translated into verse by 
F. A. Wright, M.A, With an Introduction on 

‘Love in Greek Literature ’, etc. 

Second Edition. 

‘‘The joyous work of a really gifted translator. Again and 
again using rhyme as an equivalent for the subtle vowel 
modulations of the Greek, he achieves a fine translation. 
His work has the force and delicacy of our Caroline classics. 
The subject of these epigrams runs through the whole gamut 
of loving as a fine art.”’-—E. B. Osborn, in Morning Post. 

THE POETS OF THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY: a 
Companion Volume to ‘ The Girdle of Aphrodite ’. 
By F. A. Wright. 

“Mr Wright has pieced together the life-stories of certain 

makers of the Greek epigrams, and illustrated them by a large 

number of his delightful verse translations, and so produced a 

book that is a book—a labour of love which will be gratefully 

received by all.’—E. B. Osborn, in Morning Post. 

MASTER TYLL OWLGLASS : his Marvellous 
Adventures and Rare Conceits. Translated by 
kK. R, H. Mackenzie, with an Introduction and 
Appendices. With 26 illustrations by Al/fred 
Crowquill. 

‘The knaveries of Master Owlglass are permanently part of 
the world’s laughing-stock, because its author was an artist 
in an age where writers were apt to be pedants. The divert- 
ing history of Owlglass is a satire upon the essential fool of 
all time. It belongs to life. Mackenzie’s rendering is too 
well-known to need further approval.”—Times Lit. Supp. 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LID. 
4 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

MONTESQUIEU’S PERSIAN LETTERS. Translated 
by John Davidson, with an Introduction on 
‘Montesquieu’s Life and Work’. With 4 etchings 
by Edward de Beaumont, | 

“What is enthralling is the account of harem life: women, 
slaves, eunuchs, are all real, and the inevitable climax is 
superbly told. The place of these letters upon the book- 
shelf is between Hajji Baba and The Thousand and One 
Nights. Montesquieu’s genius is unquestionable; in its 
own genre it is unsurpassed. The introduction is by the 
most considerable poet of the English nineties, and for the 
translation it will suffice to say that the work reads like an 
original.’’-—Bookman’s Journal. 
CYRANO DE BERGERAC’S VOYAGES TO THE 
MOON AND THE SUN. Translated by Richard 
Aldington, with an Introduction on ‘ The Libertin 

Question ’, etc. Ten curious illustrations. 
‘‘ For anyone who likes a queer, old satirical book, the work 
of a writer with a touch of rare, wayward genius in him, 
I recommend the book. I cannot recall a modern translation 
of an old book which is more successful than this in keeping 
the spirit of the original and in being at the same time 
distinguished and finished English prose.””—Nation. 
ALCIPHRON’S LETTERS FROM COUNTRY AND 

TOWN :: of Fishermen, Farmers, Parasites, and 

Courtesans. Translated by F. A. Wright, with an 

Introduction on ‘ The Beginnings of Romance ’. 
‘Which of Horace’s classics can compare with Alciphron 
in charm, in naivety, in direct and sometimes risky humour 
—in short, in just those qualities which men seek for their 
reading. The Alciphron of our day would be a best-seller.’’ 
—Manchester Guardian. 

OVID : THE LOVER’S HANDBOOK. Translated into 

English verse by-F. A. Wright; with an Introduc- 

tion on ‘ Ovid’s Life and Exile ’, etc. 

Second Edition, 

This translation of the 4rs Amatoria is in three Parts: How 
to Win Love, How to Keep Love, The Lady's Companion. 
‘ Usually people fight shy of this poem. Naughty it may bein 
parts. But its value is great. Moreover, Mr Wright 1s a cun- 
ning translator.”’—Bystander. ‘This rendering of Ovid is 
not only masterly, but delightful, audacious, charming. Mr 
Wright’s gusto and lightness triumph over every difficulty. 
He shows how necessary wit isin the translator of a witty work. 
He is full of it, and he flags as little as Ovid himself. An 
altogether delightful book.’’—New Age. 

tna ne ee 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LID. 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

a a er 

THE TRAVELS OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN. Edited 
by William Rose, Ph.D.; with an Introduction. 
With 20 illustrations by Alfred Crowgquill. 

‘“A glorious liar, Munchausen is one of the immortals; as 
long as it is human nature to like truth made digestible by 
a spice of lying his fame and name will flourish. The Baron 
as we know him is a magnificent example of the gallant 
adventurers to be met with on all the resounding highways 
of Eighteenth-Century Europe.”—Morning Post. 

FOUR FRENCH COMEDIES OF THE XVIIIth 
CENTURY. Translated by Richard Aldington ; with 
an Introduction on ‘ French and English Comedy ’. 

Illustrated with four portraits. 

Regnard’s The Residuary Legatee, a brilliant farce; Tesage’s 
Turcavet oy The Financier, a moral play; Marivaux’s The 
Game of Love and Chance, a delightful fantasy ; Destouches’ 
The Conceited Count, a sentimental comedy; are the plays 
included. ‘‘ We are glad to welcome this addition to the 
excellent Broadway Translations. The selection is an excellent 
one,”"—Times Literary Supplement, 

HELIODORUS’ AN AETHIOPIAN ROMANCE: 
The Love-Story of Theagenes and Chariclea. Trans- 
lated by Thos. Underdowne, 1587. Revised by 

F, A. Wright; with an Introduction. 

* The Aethiopica is the oldest and by far the first in excellence 
of construction and general interest of those Greek stories of 
love and adventure which have survived through the Middle 
Ages. Nobody who reads it even to-day will think it inferior 
in interest to the best kind of modern adventure story. The 
‘rich colour and romantic vigour ’ of the translation are not 
exaggerated, and make this work one of the classics of the 
language." — Morning Post. 

LUNACHARSKI: THREE PLAYS. Translated by 
L. A, Magnus, Li.B, and K. Walter. With an 

author’s Preface, and a portrait. 
These plays (Faust and the City, The Magi, Vasilisa the Wise) 
are poetical dramas of most unusual merit. The Times 
Literary Supplement reviewing Vastlisa spoke of it as ‘“‘ A play 
rich in fantasy and in splendid visions ; it sets one dreaming. 
It means nothing; it means a thousand things; it has the 
logic and cohesion of its own strange beauty.” 

6 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

HEINRICH HEINE: POEMS, SONGS, AND BALLADS. 
Translated into verse by Louis Untermeyer; with a 
critical and biographical Introduction, and a 
portrait. 

‘Mr Untermeyer, one feels sure, may be trusted as an inter- 

preter, and that in itself is no small thing. The reader ought 

not to fail to enjoy these pages. Many of the poems read well, 
in particular some of the longer ones. Mr Untermeyer’s 
excellent appreciation of Heine’s gifts ought to be of help. 

It is clear that he has got deeper into Heine’s mind than many 

translators.’’—Times Literary Supplement. 

THE IDYLLS OF THEOCRITUS, with the fragments 
of Bion and Moschus. Translated into verse by 
J. H. Hallard, M.A., with an Introduction on 

‘Greek Bucolic Poetry ’. 

“Mr Hallard’s volume is altogether delightful and entirely 

worthy of the Broadway Translations. I had hitherto believed 

that Calverley said the last word in the translation of Theocritus. 

But it wants no very great experience to realize at once that 

Mr Hallard ‘has the advantage’, because there is more 

vitality in his verse, and just that touch of archaism which is 

demanded. Exquisite pieces. . .”—J. St. Loe Strachey, in 

Spectator. 

THREE TIBETAN MYSTERY PLAYS, as performed in 
the Tibetan Monasteries. Translated from the l'rench 
version of Jacgues Bacot (with an Introduction, 
Notes and Index) by A. J. lVoolf. With numerous 

illustrations from native designs by V. Goloubew. 
‘The publishers deserve credit for issuing a book so limited 
in its appeal and so uncommon in its interest. The plays are 
religious in subject, and seem to be rather epic than dramatic 
in interest. We can perceive through the pages of this book 
the world as it appears to the unsophisticated mind; vast, 
shadowy, marvellous, and controlled by a rough but simple 
justice.”"—Golden Hind. 
VOLTAIRE’S ZADIG AND OTHER ROMANCES. 

Translated by H. J. Woolf, with an Introduction on 

‘Voltaire and his Religion ’. 
“Have you ever read Zadig? Be not put off. Zudig is a real 
story, as is also The Simple Soul. They are not the stiff and 
stilted affairs that perhaps you may have thought them, but 
the most gracious entertainment. Read this new translation, 

and you should find Voltaire very much to your liking.”"— 
Bystander. 

sete ee eA ke Re ee te eR ee et a nn idm 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 

Anal ee TT 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

REYNARD THE FOX. Translated by William 
Caxton, 1481. Modernized and edited by William 
Swan Stallybrass, Introduction by William Rose, 
M.A., Ph.D. Also THE PHYSIOLOGUS, trans- 
lated by James Carlill, with an ;Introduction. 

With 32 illustrations after Kaulbach. 
‘““ Reynard the Fox is surely one of the best stories ever told. 
It was very popular in the Middle Ages,and was translated and 
printed by Caxton in 1481. This version, very well modernized, 
is the one used. It is excellently written and does justice to 
the story. The illustrations are nearly as good as the story.”’— 
Weekly Westminsier. ‘The present edition is unexpurgated. 
To it is added the Physiologus, a curious and very ancient 
collection of animal-stories, mostly fabulous. 
COUNT LUCANOR: the Fifty Pleasant Tales of 
Patronio. Translated from the Spanish of Don 
Juan Manuel by James York, M.D, Introduction 

by J/. B. Trend. With 30 plates by L. S. Wood. 

‘I have been enjoying one of the latest of the Broadway 

Translations. Itis one of those Spanish collections of tales and 

anecdotes which have had so much influence on European 

literature, and this one in particular is full of fine worldly 
wisdom and shrewd humour. There is an excellent introduction, 
and I can heartily recommend it.’’—Saturday Review. 

MME. DE LAFAYETTE’S PRINCESS OF CLEVES. 
Translated by Professor H, Ashton, with an Intro- 
duction. 

“One reads her novel as if it were a true story told with 

exquisite tact by a woman who not only knew how to write, 

but also knew exactly how the heroine had thought and felt. 

The Princess of Cleves is a masterpiece, and there is no need to 

say any more about this translation than to point out that it 

is by Professor Ashton who knows the whole period well, and 
that he has done his work so tactfully that it is a pleasure to 
read.”"—New Statesman. 

SIR THOMAS MORE’S UTOPIA. Translated by 
Ralph Robinson, Introduction by Hugh Goitein, 
Also BACON’S ATLANTIS, Illustrated with wood- 
cuts by Langford Jones. 

“‘ These two famous books have been carefully edited with an 

Introduction, Notes, and a Glossary, and the Utopia has been 

illustrated for the first time by some charming drawings. 

We can commend the book in every way; it is in clear type, 

well got up, and contains everything needful for easy perusal.” 

—Saturday Review. 

remanent nee 

ee ne ree te nea re 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 

8 

0 ee 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

et Tae eR mires em bt aren SRR 

THE HISTORY OF MANON LESCAUT. Translated 
from the French of L’ Abbé Prévost by George Dunning 
Gribble, with an Introduction, 

‘No denunciations by moralists, no interdiction by the 
police, has affected it. Burn it, but read it first, was 
the advice given on its fist appearance.”’— Field. ‘‘ Like 
The Princess of Cleves this book is one of the landmarks 
in the history of romance-writing. In it Prévost reached the 
height of art, simplicity and style, sympathy and power, which 
leave us passionate admirers. Even after two centuries the 
book retains its charm, which is not lost in the translation.” 
—Saturday Review. 
BUDDHIST BIRTH-STORIES (Jataka Tales). With 

the Commentarial Introduction entitled Nidana 
Katha or The Story of the Lineage. Translated from 
Professor Fausboll’s Pali text by T. W. Khys Davids. 

New and revised edition by \frs Rhys Davids, D.Litt, 
Originally published in 1880 in Trubner’s Oriental Series, this 
volume has long been out of print and has become extremely 
rare. It contains the only translation into any European 
language of the Nidana-Katha or ‘ narrative introducing ‘ the 
great collection of stories known as the Jatakas. ‘‘ A work 
of high interest and value, it isa sort of Introduction to the 
jataka, a collection of stories which have formed the origin of 
much of our European popular literature.”—Saturday Review, 
THREE PLAYS OF PLAUTUS. Translated by F ila 

Wright and H. Lionel Rogers, with an Introduction 

by the former. 
‘The plays chosen here, the Rudens |The Shp Knot], the 
Pseudolus (The Trickster], and the Aulularia | The Crock of Gold], 
make a good selection. The first has a whiff of sea and shipwreck 
and distressed damosels, the Audularia attracts as a story of hid- 
den treasure,and the Pseudolus hasa scheming slave and a pimp, 
both of fine and frank impuience.”’"~-New Statesman. “' He 

(and his colleague’s) Plautus is at its best, rollicking, resource - 

ful, Rabelaisian.’—London Mercury. 
IL NOVELLINO: the Hundred Old Tales. Translated 
from the Italian by Edward Storey, with an 

Introduction. 
‘Even Boccaccio, with all his art, does not give a truer picture 
of the Italian character.”-— Daily Herald, ‘‘ Not quite fubles, 
not quite fairy stories, these delightful old tales .. , may still 
be read for profit as well as for amusement.’’---Dazly News. 
‘‘ The translation is excellent. The simple force of the original 
is wonderfully retained, and a cold steely beauty evoked.” 
—Times Literary Supplement. 

a a he a he ne re mene oe: 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 
9 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

THE MIRROR OF VENUS ; Love Poems and Stories 
from Ovid. Translated by F. A. Wright, with an 

Introduction on ‘ Love in Latin Literature.’ 

‘‘ The introductory essay is full of original ideas and enthusias- 
tic scholarship; and his rendering into English verse of a 
large selection of Ovid’s amatory poems are really delightful.” 
—Westminster Gazette. ‘ Very well worthits place. It may 
be taken as a companion volume to his Lovey’s Handbook. 
It is a joyous book—one more attempt to make people under- 
stand that the old Latins were not dullards.’’—Bystander. 

DOCTOR JOHN FAUSTUS; his Damnable Life and 
Deserved Death, 1592. Together with the Second 
Report of Faustus, containing his Appearances and 
the Deeds of Wagner, 1594. Both modernized and 
edited by William Rose, M.A. Ph.D., with an 

Introduction and 24 curious illustrations. 

‘“Few of the volumes of the Broadway Translations can 
equal this one in interest. This is, in the main, due to the 
subject itself, but also to the glamour added to it by tradition, 
drama, and opera. Dr Rose successfully expounds the deep 
significance of the world-old story. The volume is to be 
commended both for its scholarship and its delineation of 
this perennial problem,.’’—J ournal of Education. 

THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF GUIBERT, Abbot of 
Nogent Sous Coucy. Translated by C.C. 5. Bland. 
Introduction by G. G. Coulton. 

‘ One of the most informative and reliable writers of his time. 
The translation reads extraordinarily well. This fact accounts 
in part for the attraction the book should have for the general 
reader. It is much more than a picture of monastic life and 
affairs in the twelfth century; it is also a portrait of deep 
human interest and literary distinction.”’—Times Literary 
Supplement. 

CATULLUS’ COMPLETE POEMS. Translated and 

edited by F. A. Wright, with an Introduction. 

“Mr. Wright’s interesting and scholarly book.’”—IV. L. 
Courtney, in Daily Telegraph. ‘‘ Catullus describes his passion 
for Clodia from the first rapture of discovery to the final pang 
of disillusionment. She was the ‘femme de trente ans’ with 
more charm than Balzac’s heroine and unvexed by scruples.’ 
—E. B. Osborn, in Morning Post. ‘‘ He has really been 
amazingly cunning. You begin to see these poems, not as 
the average schoolboy regards them, but as real living things 
about real living people.’”’—Ralph Straus, in Bystander. 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 

ee eee 
yi 

IO 

- BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

THE FIFTEEN JOYS OF MARRIAGE. Translated 
from the old French by Richard Aldington, with an 
Introduction, | 

“Mr, Aldington is our perfect translator, and his version of 
the 15th century French satire on womankind is a notable 
addition to the series.”"—-Manchester Guardian. ‘‘ Holds and 
deserves its place among the classics of misogyny. It is a 
gallery of scolds, shrews, and worse, amusing enough in its 
shrewdness to make one regret that the author never carried 
out his undertaking to produce a companion volume for the 
special delectation of wives. A racy translation.’”’-—Birming- 
ham Post. 

VOLTAIRE’S CANDIDE AND OTHER ROMANCES. 
Translated by Richard Aldington, with an Introduc- 
tion. 

An earlier volume of this series contains Voltaire’s Zadig, 
Micromegas, A Good Brahmin, The Simple Soul and The 

| Princess of Babylon. The storics included here are shorter 
but not less brilliant. Together the two volumes contain 
most of Voltaire’s ‘ Romans’ and certainly the best of them. 
The present volume contains Babouc, ov the World as tt is (a 
ruthless exposure of social abuses), Cosi-Sancta (a prose version 
of a Boccaccio tale), Memmnon (a satire against sclf-rightcous- 
ness), Bababec and the Fakirs (a squib-like attack on the clergy), 
Scarmentado’s Travels (a protest against religious fanaticism), 
Jeannot and Colin (perhaps the most brilliant of all the shorter 
tales), Lord Chesterfield’s Ears (written when Voltaire was 
over eighty) and the superb and well-known Candide. 

seer Ae eee nape etre epee 
es ae eee ae 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 

II 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

Demy 8vo, 12/6 net. 

SUETONIUS: HISTORY OF TWELVE CAESARS. 
Translated by Philemon Holland, 1606. Edited by 
J. H. Freese, M.A.; with an Introduction and 
Notes. 

‘“‘ Suetonius is the descriptive journalist. Acting for some 
time as secretary to the Emperor Hadrian he not only had 
access to the imperial archives, but was in a position to pick 
up all the back-stairs gossip, to overhear anecdotes and 
intrigues of the most intimate nature. It is for this reason 
that his Lives is such a vastly entertaining book, more 
entrancing and more exciting than any work of fiction.” —Queen, 

ESQUEMELING : THE BUCCANEERS OF AMERICA. 
Translation of 1684-5, with the excessively rare 
Fourth Part, and facsimiles of all the original 
engraving, portraits, maps, etc. Edited by Willzam 
Swan Stallybrass; with Notes and Index. With 

Andrew Lang’s Essay on the Buccaneers. 

Second Edition, 

‘‘ Esquemeling tells us very interesting things about the origin 
of the most famous pirates of the time and their peculiar 
manners and customs. He gives a spirited account of their 
careers, and then comes to his principal villain, Captain 
Morgan, This reckless rascal, who lacked fear and shame 
completely, is the subject of several thrilling chapters... 
Here is the good raw stuff of fifty romances, Rum and brandy 
flow like water. Plate-ships, fire-ships, torturings, pillagings, 
hunting, Spaniards, Indians, how a beautiful woman preserved 
her virtue amidst incredible perils—all that ever went with the 
South Seas is to be found in these pages,’’—Times Literary 
Supplement. 

CELESTINA, THE SPANISH BAWD : or The Tragi- 
Comedy of Calisto and Melibea. Translated from 
the Spanish of De Rojas by James Mabbe, 1631. 
Edited by H. Warner Allen; with an Introduction 

on ‘ The Picaresque Novel ’, 

‘It was indeed a happy thought to add Mabbe’s version of 
1631 to the excellent series of Broadway Translations. In the 
Celestina, a strain of the older Spanish romanticism persists in 
the simple story of the two star-crossed lovers. But the 
central figure is the venerable bawd Celestina, most illustrious 
of Spanish rogues, and about her a set of dishonest servants and 
lights o’ love that give place to her alone in vigorous drawing.” 
—Natton. 

er re es venga no 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 

12 

ee 

AKSAKOV’S CHRONICLES OF A RUSSIAN FAMILY. 
Translated by M. C. Beverley, introduction by 
Prince D, S. Mirsky, 

“It is late in the day to praise the Chronicles after so many 

have praised it. One had better accept it with gratitude as 

the finest thing the Broadway Translations have given us, 
for mirabile dict! here is a translator who can translate, 
who has made the immortal love-story live in pure and 
convincing English that will, one hopes, make the young 
Russian lovers as familiar and beloved as Richard Feverel.” 
—'‘ Northern Review,” 

GESTA ROMANORUM: Monks’ Tales. ‘Translated 
by Charles Swan. Introduction by Dr E. A. Baker. 

‘Tt is a book that influenced the imagination of Europe, and 
it can still be read with pleasure, largely on account of its 
quaintness of incident and moral. It makes an entertaining 
addition to the excellent series of Broadway Translations.'’— 
Robert Lynd, in Daily News. ‘‘ Few old works have proved a 
richer mine for the story-teller than the Gesta; it has never 
lost its charm.”’—IWestminster Gazette. 

A BOOK OF ‘CHARACTERS’. Edited by Richard 

Aldington ; with an Introduction and Notes. 

“ Delightfully learned, but extremely entertaining.””— Daily 
Express, ‘‘ Theophrastus (newly translated), Hall, Overbury, 
and Earle, are given complete. Breton, Fuller, Butler, La 
Bruyere, Vativenargues, are fully drawn upon, and some 
seventy other authors are represented. There has been no 
indulgence in expurgation. The book is a wonderful collection 
and presents for the first time a complete view of an extremely 
prolific branch of English literature. Invaluable.”— 
Birmingham Post. | 

SIMPLICISSIMUS THE VAGABOND. Translated by 
A. T. S. Goodrick, M.A, With an Introduction by 
Wiliam Rose, Ph.D. 
“%t is remarkable that English readers should have had to 
| wait until now for a translation of one of the greatest of German 
classics. This admirable translation should tind a public who, 
| on reading it, may well express their surprise that such an 
indispensable document, such a readable work of literature, 
should have been allowed to remain closed to thein for so long.” 
—Times Literary Supplement. 

Pl a ere A te a RS A A EA SAS HS MONA AL LR La 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LID. 

t3 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

BANDELLO’S TRAGICAL TALES. Translated by 
Geoffrey Fenton, 1567. Edited and modernized with 
a Glossary by Hugh Harris, M.A. Introduction by 
Robert Langton Douglas. 

‘ Bandello’s amusing and often risqué tales are here expanded 
with all the gorgeous rhetoric of the Elizabethan spacious days.” 
—Voeue. ‘ Fenton’s Bandello is surely a monument of decor- 
ative English prose. What prose in the world can match the 
Eligabethan for beauty, richness, stateliness, and harmony ? 
Where else will you find language so pithy, vivid, and 
expressive ? Oh, rare Sir Geoffrey Fenton | ’’—Spectator. 

LACLOS’ DANGEROUS ACQUAINTANCES (Les 
Liaisons Dangereuses), Translated by Richard 
Aldingion, with an Introduction and Notes, 

A profoundly immoral book. The translation is a really 
brilliant piece of work.’ —Weekly Westminster. ‘' A remark- 
able work of fiction. An age which has tolerated the brutality 
of a La Garconne, and the fou) chaos of Ulysses must not make 
itself ridiculous by throwing stones at Les Liaisons Dangereuses.” 
—Edmund Gosse 1n Sunday Times, ‘‘ His two great creations 
are the arch-intriguers, Valmont and Mme de Merteuil. We 
are as enthralled by them as if we were forced to watch two 
surgeons of diabolistic genius at work in an operating theatre. 
It is this moment which definitely lifts the book to greatness. 
It is this spectacle of a slow and pitiless fascination which 
Laclos works up to an almost unbearable pitch.”—Tsmes 
Literary Supplement. 

MARTIAL’S EPIGRAMS. Translated into verse by 
J. A. Pott and F. A. Wright. Introduction by 
F, A, Wright. 

“There have been many English renderings, partial or com- 
plete. Among the latter the handsome volume recently 
published in the Broadway Translations may be welcomed as 
taking the first place."—Times Litevary Supplement. 
‘Translated with superb success."—R. Ellis Roberts, in 
Guardian. ‘‘ For stark realism, for caustic humour, and for 
cleverness, are not to be matched. The student of history will 
find them a strange and realistic addition to the conventional 
history books.”—Datly Herald. 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

A HUGUENOT FAMILY IN THE XVI CENTURY ; 
the Memoirs of Philippe de Mornay, Sieur du 
Plessis Marly, written by his Wife. Translated by 
Lucy Crump, with an Introduction. With 8 plates. 

‘A most fascinating book, memorable for its vivid and 
ersonal account of the massacre on St. Bartholomew’s Day. 
his is one of the books which really make the past live.’’— 

Guardian. ‘‘ Mrs. Crump is much to be thanked for making this 

delightful book available; it has a sort of domestic charm 

all its own.’’—Ezleen Power, in Nation, 

TIBETAN TALES, derived from Indian Sources. 
Translated from the Tibetan by F, A. von 
Schiejner and W. R. S. Ralston, M.A. New edition 

with a Preface by C. A. F. Rhys Davids, D.Litt. 

‘* This latest classic to achieve the dignity of the admirable 
print, paper, and quarter-vellum covers of the Broadway 
Translations is a treasure-house of mythological lore in which 
the strangest of happenings befall gods, rulers, princes, mortals 
and beasts with a legendary exuberance somewhat baffling 
to the Western mind. .. . A most scholarly and painstaking 
Introduction,’’—Observer. 

SAPPHO’S POEMS AND FRAGMENTS. Greek text 
with a verse translation by C, R. Haines, M.A., 

and an Introduction, Notes, Glossary, and 20 Plates, 
‘ This is easily the best we have seen of the Broadway Trans- 
lations, a book which not only presents all Sappho’s extant 
writings, but also considers all that is known or conjectured 
about her life. The justification for this book is the newly- 
acquired material. ... Mr Haines is neat and effective as 
a translator.’’—Saturday Review. 

QUEVEDO’S HUMOROUS AND SATIRICAL WORKS. 
Translated by Sir Roger l’Estrange, John Stevens, 
and others. Revised and edited with an Intro- 
duction, Notes, and a Version of the ‘Life of the 
Great Rascal’, by Charles Duff. 

‘This volume is a worthy addition to the series, and no praise 
can be higher. Mr. Duff has done his work very well indeed. 
We can say that this is a wise and very readable book, better 
than any of Dekker’s—in fact, probably as good as anything 
Smollett ever wrote. The Vistons, perhaps, raise him to the 
level of Defoe ; and that, after all, is very high praise indeed.” 
—Bonamy Dobrée in Nation. ‘‘ Among the more important 
books in the series there is hardly one that we value more. 
It fills a gap in English libraries. . . .""—Saturday Review. 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 

BROADWAY TRANSLATIONS 

NEARLY READY 

MEMOIRS OF THE COURT OF ENGLAND IN 1675. 
By Marie Catherine, Baronne d’Aulnoy. Trans- 
lated from the French by Mrs W. H. Arthur. 

. Edited and revised with Notes by G. D. Gilbert. 
With 8 Plates. 

eee mt ements erst erm a eg TE RI en Nn See 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LTD. 

Printed in Great Britain by M.F. Robinson & Co., Lid,, Lowestoft 

go OF DEPRAVITY 

And in proportion that sin renders him unlike to God, in 
the same proportion he removes from him. His substance 
is consumed, while life and thought are clogged and 
degraded by base actions. Thus, as it is said of the son 
in the Gospel, ‘He began to want; and joining himself to 
a citizen of that country, he was placed on a farm to feed 
swine’ &c. The son begins to want, when his virtuous 
feelings are overwhelmed in sin ; for, as the Psalmist says, 
‘The rich want, and are hungry.’ He joined himself to 
a citizen, namely, to the dev: ,; because devils are citizens 
and rulers of the darkness of this world. According to 
the remark of the Apostle, ‘We do not struggle against 
flesh and blood’ &c. Swine are unclean animals, because 
they delight in filth, and therefore the devils may be com- 
pared to them, who are saturated with the filth of sin, 
proceeding from themselves. Refuse is the proper food 
of sin; thus, fornication, drunkenness, and gluttony, are 
the food of devils. The sinner seeks to fill his belly with 
such refuse, because no one supplies him with food enough, 
and because voluptuousness is always hungry. The devil 
often denies man the power of gratifying his appetite, 
knowing that the cup of his iniquity is full, and that he is 
dead in sin. Nevertheless, the Lord, by his grace, enables 
him to throw away the sword of vice; and the sinner then 
exclaims: ‘Pity me, O God, while thou correctest: I 
acknowledge my transgressions.’ The Almighty Being 
compassionates his distress, and, as it were, falls upon his 
neck, and kisses him. ‘Bring forth’, he says, ‘the most 
sumptuous apparel, and clothe him; put a ring upon his 
finger, and shoes upon his feet. Slay likewise the fatted 
calf, that we may eat; for my son, which was dead, is 
alive again ; he was lost and is found.’ Thus our heavenly 
Father, when the repentant sinner stands awe-struck 
before him, falls upon his neck, kisses him, and comforts 
him with many words. As it is written: ‘ He shall kiss 
me with the kiss of his lip.” The splendid vesture is put 
upon him, when, as a true penitent, he entertains the love 
of Christ. The ring on his finger denotes the seal of 
Christ’s similitude, manifested in good works. He, there- 
fore, bears the ring, whose actions resemble our Lord’s 
‘labours of love’. The shoes on the feet are the living 
examples of departed saints. For as shoes defend the 
feet, so do the examples of holy men secure the soul. 

MANAGEMENT OF THE SOUL gt! 

The fatted calf is Christ, sacrificed for our sakes upon the 
altar of the cross; and fatted, because filled with the Holy 
Ghost. Let then the city of thy hearf, waving over its 
battlements the standard of our blessed Lord, prove that 
it is defended by his best and bravest soldiers. It is said 
that ‘if we love God, all things may be forgiven ’—that is, 
if we are penitent, our errors will be done away. If we 
carry along with us the favour and fear of God, we shall 
obtain everlasting life ; to which, of His infinite mercy, 
may he lead us. 

TALE X 

OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THE SOUL 

THe Emperor Vespasian lived a long time without chil- 
dren ; but at last, by the counsel of certain wise men, he 
espoused a beautiful girl, brought to him from a distant 
country. He afterwards travelled with her into foreign 
lands, and there became father of a son. In the course 
of time, he wished to revisit his own kingdom ; but his 
we obstinately refused to comply, and said, ‘If you 
leave me, I will kill myself.’ The Emperor, therefore, 
in his dilemma, constructed two rings; and upon the 
jewels with which they were richly ornamented he sculp- 
tured images possessing very singular virtues. One bore 
an efigy of memory, and the other an effigy of oblivion. 
They were placed upon the apex of each ring ; and that 
which represented oblivion he bestowed upon his wife. 
The other he retained himself; and as their love had 
been, such was the power of the rings. The wife pre- 
sently forgot her husband, and the husband cared but 
little for the memory of his wife. Seeing, therefore, that 
his object was achieved, he departed joyfully to his own 
dominions, and never afterwards returned to the lady. 
So he ended his days in peace. 

APPLICATION 

My beloved, by the Emperor understand the human 
soul, which ought to return to its own country, that is, to 
Heaven, by which path alone it can arrive at security. 
Therefore, the Psalmist says: ‘Save me, O God’ &c. 
The wife is our Jody, which holds the soul in sensual
