The Divine Institutes (Lactantius)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf07.iii.ii.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

the divine institutes

  book i.

  of the false worship of the gods.

 preface.--of what great value the knowledge of the truth is and always has
 been.

 Men of great and distinguished talent, when they had entirely devoted
 themselves to learning, holding in contempt all actions both private
 and public, applied to the pursuit of investigating the truth whatever
 labour could be bestowed upon it; thinking it much more excellent to
 investigate and know the method of human and divine things, than to be
 entirely occupied with the heaping up of riches or the accumulation of
 honours. For no one can be made better or more just by these things,
 since they are frail and earthly, and pertain to the adorning of the
 body only. Those men were indeed most deserving of the knowledge of the
 truth, which they so greatly desired to know, that they even preferred
 it to all things. For it is plain that some gave up their property, and
 altogether abandoned the pursuit of pleasures, that, being disengaged
 and without impediment, they might follow the simple truth, and it
 alone. And so greatly did the name and authority of the truth prevail
 with them, that they proclaimed that the reward of the greatest good
 was contained in it. But they did not obtain the object of their wish,
 and at the same time lost their labour and industry; because the truth,
 that is the secret of the Most High God, who created all things, cannot
 be attained by our own ability and perceptions. Otherwise there would
 be no difference between God and man, if human thought could reach to
 the counsels and arrangements of that eternal majesty. And because it
 was impossible that the divine method of procedure should become known
 to man by his own efforts, God did not suffer man any longer to err in
 search of the light of wisdom, and to wander through inextricable
 darkness without any result of his labour, but at length opened his
 eyes, and made the investigation of the truth His own gift, so that He
 might show the nothingness of human wisdom, and point out to man
 wandering in error the way of obtaining immortality.

 But since few make use of this heavenly benefit and gift, because the
 truth lies hidden veiled in obscurity; and it is either an object of
 contempt to the learned because it has not suitable defenders, or is
 hated by the unlearned on account of its natural severity, which the
 nature of men inclined to vices cannot endure: for because there is a
 bitterness mingled with virtues, while vices are seasoned with
 pleasure, offended by the former and soothed by the latter, they are
 borne headlong, and deceived by the appearance of good things, they
 embrace evils for goods,--I have believed that these errors should be
 encountered, that both the learned may be directed to true wisdom, and
 the unlearned to true religion. And this profession is to be thought
 much better, more useful and glorious, than that of oratory, in which
 being long engaged, we trained young men not to virtue, but altogether
 to cunning wickedness. [21] Certainly we shall now much more rightly
 discuss respecting the heavenly precepts, by which we may be able to
 instruct the minds of men to the worship of the true majesty. Nor does
 he deserve so well respecting the affairs of men, who imparts the
 knowledge of speaking well, as he who teaches men to live in piety and
 innocence; on which account the philosophers were in greater glory
 among the Greeks than the orators. For they, the philosophers, were
 considered teachers of right living, which is far more excellent, since
 to speak well belongs only to a few, but to live well belongs to all.
 Yet that practice in fictitious suits has been of great advantage to
 us, so that we are now able to plead the cause of truth with greater
 copiousness and ability of speaking; for although the truth may be
 defended without eloquence, as it often has been defended by many, yet
 it needs to be explained, and in a measure discussed, with distinctness
 and elegance of speech, in order that it may flow with greater power
 into the minds of men, being both provided with its own force, and
 adorned with the brilliancy of speech.

 [21] [This, St. Augustine powerfully illustrates. See Confessions, lib.
 iii. cap 3. Note also Ib., lib. ix. cap 5.]

 Chap. i.-- of religion and wisdom.

 We undertake, therefore, to discuss religion and divine things. For if
 some of the greatest orators, veterans as it were of their profession,
 having completed the works of their pleadings, at last gave themselves
 up to philosophy, and regarded that as a most just rest from their
 labours, if they tortured their minds in the investigation of those
 things which could not be found out, so that they appear to have sought
 for themselves not so much leisure as occupation, and that indeed with
 much greater trouble than in their former pursuit; how much more justly
 shall I betake myself as to a most safe harbour, to that pious, true,
 and divine wisdom, in which all things are ready for utterance,
 pleasant to the hearing, easy to be understood, honourable to be
 undertaken! And if some skilful men and arbiters of justice composed
 and published Institutions of civil law, by which they might lull the
 strifes and contentions of discordant citizens, how much better and
 more rightly shall we follow up in writing the divine Institutions, in
 which we shall not speak about rain-droppings, or the turning of
 waters, or the preferring of claims, but we shall speak of hope, of
 life, of salvation, of immortality, and of God, that we may put an end
 to deadly superstitions and most disgraceful errors.

 And we now commence this work under the auspices of your name, O mighty
 Emperor Constantine, who were the first of the Roman princes to
 repudiate errors, and to acknowledge and honour the majesty of the one
 and only true God. [22] For when that most happy day had shone upon the
 world, in which the Most High God raised you to the prosperous height
 of power, you entered upon a dominion which was salutary and desirable
 for all, with an excellent beginning, when, restoring justice which had
 been overthrown and taken away, you expiated the most shameful deed of
 others. In return for which action God will grant to you happiness,
 virtue, and length of days, that even when old you may govern the state
 with the same justice with which you began in youth, and may hand down
 to your children the guardianship of the Roman name, as you yourself
 received it from your father. For to the wicked, who still rage against
 the righteous in other parts of the world, the Omnipotent will also
 repay the reward of their wickedness with a severity proportioned to
 its tardiness; for as He is a most indulgent Father towards the godly,
 so is He a most upright Judge against the ungodly. And in my desire to
 defend His religion and divine worship, to whom can I rather appeal,
 whom can I address, but him by whom justice and wisdom have been
 restored to the affairs of men?

 Therefore, leaving the authors of this earthly philosophy, who bring
 forward nothing certain, let us approach the right path; for if I
 considered these to be sufficiently suitable guides to a good life, I
 would both follow them myself, and exhort others to follow them. But
 since they disagree among one another with great contention, and are
 for the most part at variance with themselves, it is evident that their
 path is by no means straightforward; since they have severally marked
 out distinct ways for themselves according to their own will, and have
 left great confusion to those who are seeking for the truth. But since
 the truth is revealed from heaven to us who have received the mystery
 of true religion, and since we follow God, the teacher of wisdom and
 the guide to truth, we call together all, without any distinction
 either of sex or of age, to heavenly pasture. For there is no more
 pleasant food for the soul than the knowledge of truth, [23] to the
 maintaining and explaining of which we have destined seven books,
 although the subject is one of almost boundless and immeasurable
 labour; so that if any one should wish to dilate upon and follow up
 these things to their full extent, he would have such an exuberant
 supply of subjects, that neither books would find any limit, nor speech
 any end. But on this account we will put together all things briefly,
 because those things which we are about to bring forward are so plain
 and lucid, that it seems to be more wonderful that the truth appears so
 obscure to men, and to those especially who are commonly esteemed wise,
 or because men will only need to be trained by us,--that is, to be
 recalled from the error in which they are entangled to a better course
 of life.

 And if, as I hope, we shall attain to this, we will send them to the
 very fountain of learning, which is most rich and abundant, by copious
 draughts of which they may appease the thirst conceived within, and
 quench their ardour. And all things will be easy, ready of
 accomplishment, and clear to them, if only they are not annoyed at
 applying patience in reading or hearing to the perception of the
 discipline of wisdom. [24] For many, pertinaciously adhering to vain
 superstitions, harden themselves against the manifest truth, not so
 much deserving well of their religions, which they wrongly maintain, as
 they deserve ill of themselves; who, when they have a straight path,
 seek devious windings; who leave the level ground that they may glide
 over a precipice; who leave the light, that, blind and enfeebled, they
 may lie in darkness. We must provide for these, that they may not fight
 against themselves, and that they may be willing at length to be freed
 from inveterate errors. And this they will assuredly do if they shall
 at any time see for what purpose they were born; for this is the cause
 of their perverseness,--namely, ignorance of themselves: and if any
 one, having gained the knowledge of the truth, shall have shaken off
 this ignorance, he will know to what object his life is to be directed,
 and how it is to be spent. And I thus briefly define the sum of this
 knowledge, that neither is any religion to be undertaken without
 wisdom, nor any wisdom to be approved of without religion.

 [22] [It thrills me to compare this modest tribute of Christian
 confidence, with Justin's unheeded appeal to the Stoical Antonine.]

 [23] [Pilate is answered at last out of the Roman court itself .]

 [24]

 ["How charming is divine philosophy!

 Not harsh and crabbed, as dull fools suppose."--Milton, Comus.]

 Chap. II.--That there is a providence in the affairs of men.

 Having therefore undertaken the office of explaining the truth, I did
 not think it so necessary to take my commencement from that inquiry
 which naturally seems the first, whether there is a providence which
 consults for all things, or all things were either made or are governed
 by chance; which sentiment was introduced by Democritus, and confirmed
 by Epicurus. But before them, what did Protagoras effect, who raised
 doubts respecting the gods; or Diagoras afterwards, who excluded them;
 and some others, who did not hold the existence of gods, except that
 there was supposed to be no providence? These, however, were most
 vigorously opposed by the other philosophers, and especially by the
 Stoics, who taught that the universe could neither have been made
 without divine intelligence, nor continue to exist unless it were
 governed by the highest intelligence. But even Marcus Tullius, although
 he was a defender of the Academic system, discussed at length and on
 many occasions respecting the providence which governs affairs,
 confirming the arguments of the Stoics, and himself adducing many new
 ones; and this he does both in all the books of his own philosophy, and
 especially in those which treat of the nature of the gods. [25]

 And it was no difficult task, indeed, to refute the falsehoods of a few
 men who entertained perverse sentiments by the testimony of communities
 and tribes, who on this one point had no disagreement. For there is no
 one so uncivilized, and of such an uncultivated disposition, who, when
 he raises his eyes to heaven, although he knows not by the providence
 of what God all this visible universe is governed, does not understand
 from the very magnitude of the objects, from their motion, arrangement,
 constancy, usefulness, beauty, and temperament, that there is some
 providence, and that that which exists with wonderful method must have
 been prepared by some greater intelligence. And for us, assuredly, it
 is very easy to follow up this part as copiously as it may please us.
 But because the subject has been much agitated among philosophers, and
 they who take away providence appear to have been sufficiently answered
 by men of sagacity and eloquence, and because it is necessary to speak,
 in different places throughout this work which we have undertaken,
 respecting the skill of the divine providence, let us for the present
 omit this inquiry, which is so closely connected with the other
 questions, that it seems possible for us to discuss no subject, without
 at the same time discussing the subject of providence.

 [25] [Ingeniously introduced, and afterward very forcibly expanded.]

 Chap. III.--Whether the universe is governed by the power of one god or of
 many.

 Let the commencement of our work therefore be that inquiry which
 closely follows and is connected with the first: Whether the universe
 is governed by the power of one God or of many. There is no one, who
 possesses intelligence and uses reflection, who does not understand
 that it is one Being who both created all things and governs them with
 the same energy by which He created them. For what need is there of
 many to sustain the government of the universe? unless we should happen
 to think that, if there were more than one, each would possess less
 might and strength. And they who hold that there are many gods, do
 indeed effect this; for those gods must of necessity be weak, since
 individually, without the aid of the others, they would be unable to
 sustain the government of so vast a mass. But God, who is the Eternal
 Mind, is undoubtedly of excellence, complete and perfect in every part.
 And if this is true, He must of necessity be one. For power or
 excellence, which is complete, retains its own peculiar stability. But
 that is to be regarded as solid from which nothing can be taken away,
 that as perfect to which nothing can be added.

 Who can doubt that he would be a most powerful king who should have the
 government of the whole world? And not without reason, since all things
 which everywhere exist would belong to him, since all resources from
 all quarters would be centred in him alone. But if more than one divide
 the government of the world, undoubtedly each will have less power and
 strength, since every one must confine himself within his prescribed
 portion. [26] In the same manner also, if there are more gods than one,
 they will be of less weight, others having in themselves the same
 power. But the nature of excellence admits of greater perfection in him
 in whom the whole is, than in him in whom there is only a small part of
 the whole. But God, if He is perfect, as He ought to be, cannot but be
 one, because He is perfect, so that all things may be in Him. Therefore
 the excellences and powers of the gods must necessarily be weaker,
 because so much will be wanting to each as shall be in the others; and
 so the more there are, so much the less powerful will they be. Why
 should I mention that this highest power and divine energy is
 altogether incapable of division? For whatever is capable of division
 must of necessity be liable to destruction also. But if destruction is
 far removed from God, because He is incorruptible and eternal, it
 follows that the divine power is incapable of division. Therefore God
 is one, if that which admits of so great power can be nothing else: and
 yet those who deem that there are many gods, say that they have divided
 their functions among themselves; but we will discuss all these matters
 at their proper places. In the meantime, I affirm this, which belongs
 to the present subject. If they have divided their functions among
 themselves, the matter comes back to the same point, that any one of
 them is unable to supply the place of all. He cannot, then, be perfect
 who is unable to govern all things while the others are unemployed. And
 so is comes to pass, that for the government of the universe there is
 more need of the perfect excellence of one than of the imperfect powers
 of many. But he who imagines that so great a magnitude as this cannot
 be governed by one Being, is deceived. For he does not comprehend how
 great are the might and power of the divine majesty, if he thinks that
 the one God, who had power to create the universe, is also unable to
 govern that which He has created. But if he conceives in his mind how
 great is the immensity of that divine work, when before it was nothing,
 yet that by the power and wisdom of God it was made out of nothing--a
 work which could only be commenced and accomplished by one--he will now
 understand that that which has been established by one is much more
 easily governed by one.

 Some one may perhaps say that so immense a work as that of the universe
 could not even have been fabricated except by many. But however many
 and however great he may consider them,--whatever magnitude, power,
 excellence, and majesty he may attribute to the many,--the whole of
 that I assign to one, and say that it exists in one: so that there is
 in Him such an amount of these properties as can neither be conceived
 nor expressed. And since we fail in this subject, both in perception
 and in words--for neither does the human breast admit the light of so
 great understanding, nor is the mortal tongue capable of explaining
 such great subjects--it is right that we should understand and say this
 very same thing. I see, again, what can be alleged on the other hand,
 that those many gods are such as we hold the one God to be. But this
 cannot possibly be so, because the power of these gods individually
 will not be able to proceed further, the power of the others meeting
 and hindering them. For either each must be unable to pass beyond his
 own limits, or, if he shall have passed beyond them, he must drive
 another from his boundaries. They who believe that there are many gods,
 do not see that it may happen that some may be opposed to others in
 their wishes, from which circumstance disputing and contention would
 arise among them; as Homer represented the gods at war among
 themselves, since some desired that Troy should be taken, others
 opposed it. The universe, therefore, must be ruled by the will of one.
 For unless the power over the separate parts be referred to one and the
 same providence, the whole itself will not be able to exist; since each
 takes care of nothing beyond that which belongs peculiarly to him, just
 as warfare could not be carried on without one general and commander.
 But if there were in one army as many generals as there are legions,
 cohorts, divisions, [27] and squadrons, first of all it would not be
 possible for the army to be drawn out in battle array, since each would
 refuse the peril; nor could it easily be governed or controlled,
 because all would use their own peculiar counsels, by the diversity of
 which they would inflict more injury than they would confer advantage.
 So, in this government of the affairs of nature, unless there shall be
 one to whom the care of the whole is referred, all things will be
 dissolved and fall to decay.

 But to say that the universe is governed by the will of many, is
 equivalent to a declaration that there are many minds in one body,
 since there are many and various offices of the members, so that
 separate minds may be supposed to govern separate senses; and also the
 many affections, by which we are accustomed to be moved either to
 anger, or to desire, or to joy, or to fear, or to pity, so that in all
 these affections as many minds may be supposed to operate; and if any
 one should say this, he would appear to be destitute even of that very
 mind, which is one. But if in one body one mind possesses the
 government of so many things, and is at the same time occupied with the
 whole, why should any one suppose that the universe cannot be governed
 by one, but that it can be governed by more than one? And because those
 maintainers of many gods are aware of this, they say that they so
 preside over separate offices and parts, that there is still one chief
 ruler. The others, therefore, on this principle, will not be gods, but
 attendants and ministers, whom that one most mighty and omnipotent
 appointed to these offices, and they themselves will be subservient to
 his authority and command. If, therefore, all are not equal to one
 another, all are not gods; for that which serves and that which rules
 cannot be the same. For if God is a title of the highest power, He must
 be incorruptible, perfect, incapable of suffering, and subject to no
 other being; therefore they are not gods whom necessity compels to obey
 the one greatest God. But because they who hold this opinion are not
 deceived without cause, we will presently lay open the cause of this
 error. Now, let us prove by testimonies the unity of the divine power.

 [26] [A hint to Cæsar himself, the force of which began soon after very
 sorely to be felt in the empire.]

 [27] Cunei; properly, soldiers arranged in the shape of wedge.

 Chap. IV.--That the one god was foretold even by the prophets.

 The prophets, who were very many, proclaim and declare the one God;
 for, being filled with the inspiration of the one God, they predicted
 things to come, with agreeing and harmonious voice. But those who are
 ignorant of the truth do not think that these prophets are to be
 believed; for they say that those voices are not divine, but human.
 Forsooth, because they proclaim one God, they were either madmen or
 deceivers. But truly we see that their predictions have been fulfilled,
 and are in course of fulfilment daily; and their foresight, agreeing as
 it does to one opinion, teaches that they were not under the impulse of
 madness. For who possessed of a frenzied mind would be able, I do not
 say to predict the future, but even to speak coherently? Were they,
 therefore, who spoke such things deceitful? What was so utterly foreign
 to their nature as a system of deceit, when they themselves restrained
 others from all fraud? For to this end were they sent by God, that they
 should both be heralds of His majesty, and correctors of the wickedness
 of man.

 Moreover, the inclination to feign and speak falsely belongs to those
 who covet riches, and eagerly desire gains,--a disposition which was
 far removed from those holy men. For they so discharged the office
 entrusted to them, that, disregarding all things necessary for the
 maintenance of life, they were so far from laying up store for the
 future, that they did not even labour for the day, content with the
 unstored food which God had supplied; and these not only had no gains,
 but even endured torments and death. For the precepts of righteousness
 are distasteful to the wicked, and to those who lead an unholy life.
 Wherefore they, whose sins were brought to light and forbidden, most
 cruelly tortured and slew them. They, therefore, who had no desire for
 gain, had neither the inclination nor the motive for deceit. Why should
 I say that some of them were princes, or even kings, [28] upon whom the
 suspicion of covetousness and fraud could not possibly fall, and yet
 they proclaimed the one God with the same prophetic foresight as the
 others?

 [28] [Not David merely, nor only other kings of the Hebrews.
 Elucidation I.]

 Chap. V.--Of the testimonies of poets and philosophers.

 But let us leave the testimony of prophets, lest a proof derived from
 those who are universally disbelieved should appear insufficient. Let
 us come to authors, and for the demonstration of the truth let us cite
 as witnesses those very persons whom they are accustomed to make use of
 against us,--I mean poets and philosophers. From these we cannot fail
 in proving the unity of God; not that they had ascertained the truth,
 but that the force of the truth itself is so great, that no one can be
 so blind as not to see the divine brightness presenting itself to his
 eyes. The poets, therefore, however much they adorned the gods in their
 poems, and amplified their exploits with the highest praises, yet very
 frequently confess that all things are held together and governed by
 one spirit or mind. Orpheus, who is the most ancient of the poets, and
 coeval with the gods themselves,--since it is reported that he sailed
 among the Argonauts together with the sons of Tyndarus and
 Hercules,--speaks of the true and great God as the first-born, [29]
 because nothing was produced before Him, but all things sprung from
 Him. He also calls Him Phanes [30] because when as yet there was
 nothing He first appeared and came forth from the infinite. And since
 he was unable to conceive in his mind the origin and nature of this
 Being, he said that He was born from the boundless air: "The
 first-born, Phaethon, son of the extended air;" for he had nothing more
 to say. He affirms that this Being is the Parent of all the gods, on
 whose account He framed the heaven, and provided for His children that
 they might have a habitation and place of abode in common: "He built
 for immortals an imperishable home." Thus, under the guidance of nature
 and reason, he understood that there was a power of surpassing
 greatness which framed heaven and earth. For he could not say that
 Jupiter was the author of all things, since he was born from Saturn;
 nor could he say that Saturn himself was their author, since it was
 reported that he was produced from the heaven; but he did not venture
 to set up the heaven as the primeval god, because he saw that it was an
 element of the universe, and must itself have had an author. This
 consideration led him to that first-born god, to whom he assigns and
 gives the first place.

 Homer was able to give us no information relating to the truth, for he
 wrote of human rather than divine things. Hesiod was able, for he
 comprised in the work of one book the generation of the gods; but yet
 he gave us no information, for he took his commencement not from God
 the Creator, but from chaos, which is a confused mass of rude and
 unarranged matter; whereas he ought first to have explained from what
 source, at what time, and in what manner, chaos itself had begun to
 exist or to have consistency. Without doubt, as all things were placed
 in order, arranged, and made by some artificer, so matter itself must
 of necessity have been formed by some being. Who, then, made it except
 God, to whose power all things are subject? But he shrinks from
 admitting this, while he dreads the unknown truth. For, as he wished it
 to appear, it was by the inspiration of the Muses that he poured forth
 that song on Helicon; but he had come after previous meditation and
 preparation.

 Maro was the first of our poets to approach the truth, who thus speaks
 respecting the highest God, whom he calls Mind and Spirit: [31] --


 "Know first, the heaven, the earth, the main,

 The moon's pale orb, the starry train,

 Are nourished by a Soul,

 A Spirit, whose celestial flame

 Glows in each member of the frame,

 And stirs the mighty whole."

 And lest any one should happen to be ignorant what that Spirit was
 which had so much power, he has declared it in another place, saying:
 [32] "For the Deity pervades all lands, the tracts of sea and depth of
 heaven; the flocks, the herds, and men, and all the race of beasts,
 each at its birth, derive their slender lives from Him."

 Ovid also, in the beginning of his remarkable work, without any
 disguising of the name, admits that the universe was arranged by God,
 whom he calls the Framer of the world, the Artificer of all things.
 [33] But if either Orpheus or these poets of our country had always
 maintained what they perceived under the guidance of nature, they would
 have comprehended the truth, and gained the same learning which we
 follow. [34]

 But thus far of the poets. Let us come to the philosophers, whose
 authority is of greater weight, and their judgment more to be relied
 on, because they are believed to have paid attention, not to matters of
 fiction, but to the investigation of the truth. Thales of Miletus, who
 was one of the number of the seven wise men, and who is said to have
 been the first of all to inquire respecting natural causes, said that
 water was the element from which all things were produced, and that God
 was the mind which formed all things from water. Thus he placed the
 material of all things in moisture; he fixed the beginning and cause of
 their production in God. Pythagoras thus defined the being of God, "as
 a soul passing to and fro, and diffused through all parts of the
 universe, and through all nature, from which all living creatures which
 are produced derive their life." Anaxagoras said that God was an
 infinite mind, which moves by its own power. Antisthenes maintained
 that the gods of the people were many, but that the God of nature was
 one only; that is, the Fabricator of the whole universe. Cleanthes and
 Anaximenes assert that the air is the chief deity; and to this opinion
 our poet has assented: [35] "Then almighty father Æther descends in
 fertile showers into the bosom of his joyous spouse; and great himself,
 mingling with her great body, nourishes all her offspring." Chrysippus
 speaks of God as a natural power endowed with divine reason, and
 sometimes as a divine necessity. Zeno also speaks of Him as a divine
 and natural law. The opinion of all these, however uncertain it is, has
 reference to one point,--to their agreement in the existence of one
 providence. For whether it be nature, or æther, or reason, or mind, or
 a fatal necessity, or a divine law, or if you term it anything else, it
 is the same which is called by us God. Nor does the diversity of titles
 prove an obstacle, since by their very signification they all refer to
 one object. Aristotle, although he is at variance with himself, and
 both utters and holds sentiments opposed to one another, yet upon the
 whole bears witness that one Mind presides over the universe. Plato,
 who is judged the wisest of all, plainly and openly maintains the rule
 of one God; nor does he name Him Æther, or Reason, or Nature, but, as
 He truly is, God, and that this universe, so perfect and wonderful, was
 fabricated by Him. And Cicero, following and imitating him in many
 instances, frequently acknowledges God, and calls Him supreme, in those
 books which he wrote on the subject of laws; and he adduces proof that
 the universe is governed by Him, when he argues respecting the nature
 of the gods in this way: "Nothing is superior to God: the world must
 therefore be governed by Him. Therefore God is obedient or subject to
 no nature; consequently He Himself governs all nature." But what God
 Himself is he defines in his Consolation: [36] "Nor can God Himself, as
 He is comprehended by us, be comprehended in any other way than as a
 mind free and unrestrained, far removed from all mortal materiality,
 perceiving and moving all things."

 How often, also, does Annæus Seneca, who was the keenest Stoic of the
 Romans, follow up with deserved praise the supreme Deity! For when he
 was discussing the subject of premature death, he said "You do not
 understand the authority and majesty of your Judge, the Ruler of the
 world, and the God of heaven and of all gods, on whom those deities
 which we separately worship and honour are dependent." Also in his
 Exhortations: "This Being, when He was laying the first foundations of
 the most beautiful fabric, and was commencing this work, than which
 nature has known nothing greater or better, that all things might serve
 their own rulers, although He had spread Himself out through the whole
 body, yet He produced gods as ministers of His kingdom." And how many
 other things like to our own writers did he speak on the subject of
 God! But these things I put off for the present, because they are more
 suited to other parts of the subject. At present it is enough to
 demonstrate that men of the highest genius touched upon the truth, and
 almost grasped it, had not custom, infatuated by false opinions,
 carried them back; by which custom they both deemed that there were
 other gods, and believed that those things which God made for the use
 of man, as though they were endowed with perception, were to be held
 and worshipped as gods.

 [29] proto'gonon.

 [30] pha'neta, the appearer.

 [31] Æn., vi. 724.

 [32] Georg., iv. 221. [These passages seem borrowed from the Octavius
 of Minucius, cap. 19, vol. iv. p. 183.]

 [33] [Fabricatorem mundi, rerum opificem.]

 [34] [Concerning the Orphica, see vol. i. p. 178, [4]note 1, and pp.
 [5]279, [6]290. For Sibyllina, Ibid., p. 169, [7]note 9, and pp.
 [8]280-289. Note also vol. ii. p. 194, [9]note 2, and T. Lewis, Plato
 cont. Ath., p. 99.]

 [35] Virg., Georg., ii. 325-327.

 [36] [See (Sigonius) p. 144, ed. Paris, 1818.]

 Chap. VI.--Of divine testimonies, and of the sibyls and their predictions.

 Now let us pass to divine testimonies; but I will previously bring
 forward one which resembles a divine testimony, both on account of its
 very great antiquity, and because he whom I shall name was taken from
 men and placed among the gods. According to Cicero, Caius Cotta the
 pontiff, while disputing against the Stoics concerning superstitions,
 and the variety of opinions which prevail respecting the gods, in order
 that he might, after the custom of the Academics, make everything
 uncertain, says that there were five Mercuries; and having enumerated
 four in order, says that the fifth was he by whom Argus was slain, and
 that on this account he fled into Egypt, and gave laws and letters to
 the Egyptians. The Egyptians call him Thoth; and from him the first
 month of their year, that is, September, received its name among them.
 He also built a town, which is even now called in Greek Hermopolis (the
 town of Mercury), and the inhabitants of Phenæ honour him with
 religious worship. And although he was a man, yet he was of great
 antiquity, and most fully imbued with every kind of learning, so that
 the knowledge of many subjects and arts acquired for him the name of
 Trismegistus. [37] He wrote books, and those in great numbers, relating
 to the knowledge of divine things, in which be asserts the majesty of
 the supreme and only God, and makes mention of Him by the same names
 which we use--God and Father. And that no one might inquire His name,
 he said that He was without name, and that on account of His very unity
 He does not require the peculiarity of a name. These are his own words:
 "God is one, but He who is one only does not need a name; for He who is
 self-existent is without a name." God, therefore, has no name, because
 He is alone; nor is there any need of a proper name, except in cases
 where a multitude of persons requires a distinguishing mark, so that
 you may designate each person by his own mark and appellation. But God,
 because He is always one, has no peculiar name.

 It remains for me to bring forward testimonies respecting the sacred
 responses and predictions, which are much more to be relied upon. For
 perhaps they against whom we are arguing may think that no credence is
 to be given to poets, as though they invented fictions, nor to
 philosophers, inasmuch as they were liable to err, being themselves but
 men. Marcus Varro, than whom no man of greater learning ever lived,
 even among the Greeks, much less among the Latins, in those books
 respecting divine subjects which he addressed to Caius Cæsar the chief
 pontiff, when he was speaking of the Quindecemviri, [38] says that the
 Sibylline books were not the production of one Sibyl only, but that
 they were called by one name Sibylline, because all prophetesses were
 called by the ancients Sibyls, either from the name of one, the
 Delphian priestess, or from their proclaiming the counsels of the gods.
 For in the Æolic dialect they used to call the gods by the word Sioi,
 not Theoi; and for counsel they used the word bule, not boule;--and so
 the Sibyl received her name as though Siobule. [39] But he says that
 the Sibyls were ten in number, and he enumerated them all under the
 writers, who wrote an account of each: that the first was from the
 Persians, and of her Nicanor made mention, who wrote the exploits of
 Alexander of Macedon;--the second of Libya, and of her Euripides makes
 mention in the prologue of the Lamia;--the third of Delphi, concerning
 whom Chrysippus speaks in that book which he composed concerning
 divination;--the fourth a Cimmerian in Italy, whom Nævius mentions in
 his books of the Punic war, and Piso in his annals;--the fifth of
 Erythræa, whom Apollodorus of Erythræa affirms to have been his own
 countrywoman, and that she foretold to the Greeks when they were
 setting out for Ilium, both that Troy was doomed to destruction, and
 that Homer would write falsehoods;--the sixth of Samos, respecting whom
 Eratosthenes writes that he had found a written notice in the ancient
 annals of the Samians. The seventh was of Cumæ, by name Amalthæa, who
 is termed by some Herophile, or Demophile, and they say that she
 brought nine books to the king Tarquinius Priscus, and asked for them
 three hundred philippics, and that the king refused so great a price,
 and derided the madness of the woman; that she, in the sight of the
 king, burnt three of the books, and demanded the same price for those
 which were left; that Tarquinias much more considered the woman to be
 mad; and that when she again, having burnt three other books, persisted
 in asking the same price, the king was moved, and bought the remaining
 books for the three hundred pieces of gold: and the number of these
 books was afterwards increased, after the rebuilding of the Capitol;
 because they were collected from all cities of Italy and Greece, and
 especially from those of Erythræa, and were brought to Rome, under the
 name of whatever Sibyl they were. Further, that the eighth was from the
 Hellespont, born in the Trojan territory, in the village of Marpessus,
 about the town of Gergithus; and Heraclides of Pontus writes that she
 lived in the times of Solon and Cyrus;--the ninth of Phrygia, who gave
 oracles at Ancyra;--the tenth of Tibur, by name Albunea, who is
 worshipped at Tibur as a goddess, near the banks of the river Anio, in
 the depths of which her statue is said to have been found, holding in
 her hand a book. The senate transferred her oracles into the Capitol.

 The predictions of all these Sibyls [40] are both brought forward and
 esteemed as such, except those of the Cumæan Sibyl, whose books are
 concealed by the Romans; nor do they consider it lawful for them to be
 inspected by any one but the Quindecemviri. And there are separate
 books the production of each, but because these are inscribed with the
 name of the Sibyl they are believed to be the work of one; and they are
 confused, nor can the productions of each be distinguished and assigned
 to their own authors, except in the case of the Erythræan Sibyl, for
 she both inserted her own true name in her verse, and predicted that
 she would be called Erythræan, though she was born at Babylon. But we
 also shall speak of the Sibyl without any distinction, wherever we
 shall have occasion to use their testimonies. All these Sibyls, then,
 proclaim one God, and especially the Erythræan, who is regarded among
 the others as more celebrated and noble; since Fenestella, a most
 diligent writer, speaking of the Quindecemviri, says that, after the
 rebuilding of the Capitol, Caius Curio the consul proposed to the
 senate that ambassadors should be sent to Erythræ to search out and
 bring to Rome the writings of the Sibyl; and that, accordingly, Publius
 Gabinius, Marcus Otacilius, and Lucius Valerius were sent, who conveyed
 to Rome about a thousand verses written out by private persons. We have
 shown before that Varro made the same statement. Now in these verses
 which the ambassadors brought to Rome, are these testimonies respecting
 the one God:--


 1. "One God, who is alone, most mighty, uncreated."

 This is the only supreme God, who made the heaven, and decked it with
 lights.


 2. "But there is one only God of pre-eminent power, who made the
 heaven, and sun, and stars, and moon, and fruitful earth, and waves of
 the water of the sea."

 And since He alone is the framer of the universe, and the artificer of
 all things of which it consists or which are contained in it, it
 testifies that He alone ought to be worshipped:--


 3. "Worship Him who is alone the ruler of the world, who alone was and
 is from age to age."

 Also another Sibyl, whoever she is, when she said that she conveyed the
 voice of God to men, thus spoke:--


 4. "I am the one only God, and there is no other God."

 I would now follow up the testimonies of the others, were it not that
 these are sufficient, and that I reserve others for more befitting
 opportunities. But since we are defending the cause of truth before
 those who err from the truth and serve false religions, what kind of
 proof ought we to bring forward [41] against them, rather than to
 refute them by the testimonies of their own gods?

 [37] [See vol. i. p. 289 [10]note 2, this series.]

 [38] The Quindecemviri were the fifteen men to whom the care of the
 Sibylline books was entrusted. At first two (Duumviri) were appointed.
 The number was afterwards increased to ten, and subsequently to
 fifteen. It appears probable that this last change was made by Sulla.

 [39] [i.e., Counsel of God. See p. 14 supra, and 16 infra.]

 [40] [Concerning the Sibyls, see also, fully, Lardner, Credib., ii.
 258, 334, etc. On the use here and elsewhere made of them by our
 author, Ibid., p. 343, and iii. 544; also pp. 14 and 15, supra.]

 [41] [Vol. ii. cap. 28, [11]p. 143.]

 chap. VII.--Concerning the testimonies of apollo and the gods.

 Apollo, indeed, whom they think divine above all others, and especially
 prophetic, giving responses at Colophon,--I suppose because, induced by
 the pleasantness of Asia, he had removed from Delphi,--to some one who
 asked who He was, or what God was at all, replied in twenty-one verses,
 of which this is the beginning:--


 "Self-produced, untaught, without a mother, unshaken,

 A name not even to be comprised in word, dwelling in fire,

 This is God; and we His messengers are a slight portion of God."

 Can any one suspect that this is spoken of Jupiter, who had both a
 mother and a name? Why should I say that Mercury, that thrice greatest,
 of whom I have made mention above, not only speaks of God as "without a
 mother," as Apollo does, but also as "without a father," because He has
 no origin from any other source but Himself? For He cannot be produced
 from any one, who Himself produced all things. I have, as I think,
 sufficiently taught by arguments, and confirmed by witnesses, that
 which is sufficiently plain by itself, that there is one only King of
 the universe, one Father, one God.

 But perchance some one may ask of us the same question which Hortensius
 asks in Cicero: If God is one only, [42] what solitude can be happy? As
 though we, in asserting that He is one, say that He is desolate and
 solitary. Undoubtedly He has ministers, whom we call messengers. And
 that is true, which I have before related, that Seneca said in his
 Exhortations that God produced ministers of His kingdom. But these are
 neither gods, nor do they wish to be called gods or to be worshipped,
 inasmuch as they do nothing but execute the command and will of God.
 Nor, however, are they gods who are worshipped in common, whose number
 is small and fixed. But if the worshippers of the gods think that they
 worship those beings whom we call the ministers of the Supreme God,
 there is no reason why they should envy us who say that there is one
 God, and deny that there are many. If a multitude of gods delights
 them, we do not speak of twelve, or three hundred and sixty-five as
 Orpheus did; but we convict them of innumerable errors on the other
 side, in thinking that they are so few. Let them know, however, by what
 name they ought to be called, lest they do injury to the true God,
 whose name they set forth, while they assign it to more than one. Let
 them believe their own Apollo, who in that same response took away from
 the other gods their name, as he took away the dominion from Jupiter.
 For the third verse shows that the ministers of God ought not to be
 called gods, but angels. He spoke falsely respecting himself, indeed;
 for though he was of the number of demons, he reckoned himself among
 the angels of God, and then in other responses he confessed himself a
 demon. For when he was asked how he wished to be supplicated, he thus
 answered:--


 "O all-wise, all-learned, versed in many pursuits, hear, O demon."

 And so, again, when at the entreaty of some one he uttered an
 imprecation against the Sminthian Apollo, he began with this verse:--


 "O harmony of the world, bearing light, all-wise demon."

 What therefore remains, except that by his own confession he is subject
 to the scourge of the true God and to everlasting punishment? For in
 another response he also said:--


 "The demons who go about the earth and about the sea

 Without weariness, are subdued beneath the scourge of God."

 We speak on the subject of both in the second book. In the meantime it
 is enough for us, that while he wishes to honour and place himself in
 heaven, he has confessed, as the nature of the matter is, in what
 manner they are to be named who always stand beside God.

 Therefore let men withdraw themselves from errors; and laying aside
 corrupt superstitions, let them acknowledge their Father and Lord,
 whose excellence cannot be estimated, nor His greatness perceived, nor
 His beginning comprehended. When the earnest attention of the human
 mind and its acute sagacity and memory has reached Him, all ways being,
 as it were, summed up and exhausted, [43] it stops, it is at a loss, it
 fails; nor is there anything beyond to which it can proceed. But
 because that which exists must of necessity have had a beginning, it
 follows that since there was nothing before Him, He was produced from
 Himself before all things. Therefore He is called by Apollo
 "self-produced," by the Sibyl "self-created," "uncreated," and
 "unmade." And Seneca, an acute man, saw and expressed this in his
 Exhortations. "We," he said, "are dependent upon another." Therefore we
 look to some one to whom we owe that which is most excellent in us.
 Another brought us into being, another formed us; but God of His own
 power made Himself.

 [42] [1 John iv. 8. The Divine Triad "is Love."]

 [43] Subductis et consummatis.

 Chap. viii.--that god is without a body, nor does he need difference of sex
 for procreation.

 It is proved, therefore, by these witnesses, so numerous and of such
 authority, that the universe is governed by the power and providence of
 one God, whose energy and majesty Plato in the Timæus asserts to be so
 great, that no one can either conceive it in his mind, or give
 utterance to it in words, on account of His surpassing and incalculable
 power. And then can any one doubt whether any thing can be difficult or
 impossible for God, who by His providence designed, by His energy
 established, and by His judgment completed those works so great and
 wonderful, and even now sustains them by His spirit, and governs them
 by His power, being incomprehensible and unspeakable, and fully known
 to no other than Himself? Wherefore, as I often reflect on the subject
 of such great majesty, they who worship the gods sometimes appear so
 blind, so incapable of reflection, so senseless, so little removed from
 the mute animals, as to believe that those who are born from the
 natural intercourse of the sexes could have had anything of majesty and
 divine influence; since the Erythræan Sibyl says: "It is impossible for
 a God to be fashioned from the loins of a man and the womb of a woman."
 And if this is true, as it really is, it is evident that Hercules,
 Apollo, Bacchus, Mercury, and Jupiter, with the rest, were but men,
 since they were born from the two sexes. But what is so far removed
 from the nature of God as that operation which He Himself assigned to
 mortals for the propagation of their race, and which cannot be affected
 without corporeal substance?

 Therefore, if the gods are immortal and eternal, what need is there of
 the other sex, when they themselves do not require succession, since
 they are always about to exist? For assuredly in the case of mankind
 and the other animals, there is no other reason for difference of sex
 and procreation and bringing forth, except that all classes of living
 creatures, inasmuch as they are doomed to death by the condition of
 their mortality, may be preserved by mutual succession. But God, who is
 immortal, has no need of difference of sex, nor of succession. Some one
 will say that this arrangement is necessary, in order that He may have
 some to minister to Him, or over whom He may bear rule. What need is
 there of the female sex, since God, who is almighty, is able to produce
 sons without the agency of the female? For if He has granted to certain
 minute creatures [44] that they


 "Should gather offspring for themselves with their mouth from leaves
 and sweet herbs,"

 why should any one think it impossible for God Himself to have
 offspring except by union with the other sex? No one, therefore, is so
 thoughtless as not to understand that those were mere mortals, whom the
 ignorant and foolish regard and worship as gods. Why, then, some one
 will say, were they believed to be gods? Doubtless because they were
 very great and powerful kings; and since, on account of the merits of
 their virtues, or offices, or the arts which they discovered, they were
 beloved by those over whom they had ruled, they were consecrated to
 lasting memory. And if any one doubts this, let him consider their
 exploits and deeds, the whole of which both ancient poets and
 historians have handed down.

 [44] [The bees, according to Virgil, Georg., iv. 199.]

 Chap. IX.--Of hercules and his life and death. [45]

 Did not Hercules, who is most renowned for his valour, and who is
 regarded as an Africanus among the gods, by his debaucheries, lusts,
 and adulteries, pollute the world, which he is related to have
 traversed and purified? And no wonder, since he was born from an
 adulterous intercourse with Alcmena.

 What divinity could there have been in him, who, enslaved to his own
 vices, against all laws, treated with infamy, disgrace, and outrage,
 both males and females? Nor, indeed, are those great and wonderful
 actions which he performed to be judged such as to be thought worthy of
 being attributed to divine excellence. For what! is it so magnificent
 if he overcame a lion and a boar; if he shot down birds with arrows; if
 he cleansed a royal stable; if he conquered a virago, and deprived her
 of her belt; if he slew savage horses together with their master? These
 are the deeds of a brave and heroic man, but still a man; for those
 things which he overcame were frail and mortal. For there is no power
 so great, as the orator says, which cannot be weakened and broken by
 iron and strength. But to conquer the mind, and to restrain anger, is
 the part of the bravest man; and these things he never did or could do:
 for one who does these things I do not compare with excellent men, but
 I judge him to be most like to a god.

 I could wish that he had added something on the subject of lust,
 luxury, desire, and arrogance, so as to complete the excellence of him
 whom he judged to be like to a god. For he is not to be thought braver
 who overcomes a lion, than he who overcomes the violent wild beast shut
 up within himself, viz. anger; or he who has brought down most
 rapacious birds, than he who restrains most covetous desires; or he who
 subdues a warlike Amazon, than he who subdues lust, the vanquisher [46]
 of modesty and fame; or he who cleanses a stable from dung, than he who
 cleanses his heart from vices, which are more destructive evils because
 they are peculiarly his own, than those which might have been avoided
 and guarded against. From this it comes to pass, that he alone ought to
 be judged a brave man who is temperate, moderate, and just. But if any
 one considers what the works of God are, he will at once judge all
 these things, which most trifling men admire, to be ridiculous. For
 they measure them not by the divine power of which they are ignorant,
 but by the weakness of their own strength. For no one will deny this,
 that Hercules was not only a servant to Eurystheus, a king, which to a
 certain extent may appear honourable, but also to an unchaste woman,
 Omphale, who used to order him to sit at her feet, clothed with her
 garments, and executing an appointed task. Detestable baseness! But
 such was the price at which pleasure was valued. What! some one will
 say, do you think that the poets are to be believed? Why should I not
 think so? For it is not Lucilius who relates these things, or Lucian,
 who spared not men nor gods, but these especially who sting the praises
 of the gods.

 Whom, then, shall we believe, if we do not credit those who praise
 them? Let him who thinks that these speak falsely produce other authors
 on whom we may rely, who may teach us who these gods are, in what
 manner and from what source they had their origin, what is their
 strength, what their number, what their power, what there is in them
 which is admirable and worthy of adoration--what mystery, in short,
 more to be relied on, and more true. He will produce no such
 authorities. Let us, then, give credence to those who did not speak for
 the purpose of censure, but to proclaim their praise. He sailed, then,
 with the Argonauts, and sacked Troy, being enraged with Laomedon on
 account of the reward refused to him, by Laomedon, for the preservation
 of his daughter, from which circumstance it is evident at what time he
 lived. He also, excited by rage and madness, slew his wife, together
 with his children. Is this he whom men consider a god? But his heir
 Philoctetes did not so regard him, who applied a torch to him when
 about to be burnt, who witnessed the burning and wasting of his limbs
 and sinews, who buried his bones and ashes on Mount OEta, in return for
 which office he received his arrows.

 [45] [Vol. ii. p. [12]179. It is interesting to observe the influence
 of Justin and Clement on the reasoning of the later fathers, not
 excepting St. Augustine.]

 [46] Debellatricem.

 Chap. X.--Of the life and actions of Æsculapius, apollo, neptune, mars,
 castor and pollux, mercury and bacchus.

 What other action worthy of divine honours, except the healing of
 Hippolytus, did Æsculapius perform, whose birth also was not without
 disgrace to Apollo? His death was certainly more renowned, because he
 earned the distinction of being struck with lightning by a god.
 Tarquitius, in a dissertation concerning illustrious men, says that he
 was born of uncertain parents, exposed, and found by some hunters; that
 he was nourished by a dog, and that, being delivered to Chiron, he
 learned the art of medicine. He says, moreover, that he was a
 Messenian, but that he spent some time at Epidaurus. Tully also says
 that he was buried at Cynosuræ. What was the conduct of Apollo, his
 father? Did he not, on account of his impassioned love, most
 disgracefully tend the flock of another, and build walls for Laomedon,
 having been hired together with Neptune for a reward, which could with
 impunity be withheld from him? And from him first the perfidious king
 learned to refuse to carry out whatever contract he had made with gods.
 And he also, while in love with a beautiful boy, offered violence to
 him, and while engaged in play, slew him.

 Mars, when guilty of homicide, and set free from the charge of murder
 by the Athenians through favour, lest he should appear to be too fierce
 and savage, committed adultery with Venus. Castor and Pollux, while
 they are engaged in carrying off the wives of others, ceased to be
 twin-brothers. For Idas, being excited with jealousy on account of the
 injury, transfixed one of the brothers with his sword. And the poets
 relate that they live and die alternately: so that they are now the
 most wretched not only of the gods, but also of all mortals, inasmuch
 as they are not permitted to die once only. And yet Homer, differing
 from the other poets, simply records that they both died. For when he
 represented Helen as sitting by the side of Priam on the walls of Troy,
 and recognising all the chieftains of Greece, but as looking in vain
 for her brothers only, he added to his speech a verse of this kind:--


 "Thus she; unconscious that in Sparta they,

 Their native land, beneath the sod were laid."

 What did Mercury, a thief and spendthrift, leave to contribute to his
 fame, except the memory of his frauds? Doubtless he was deserving of
 heaven, because he taught the exercises of the palæstra, and was the
 first who invented the lyre. [47] It is necessary that Father Liber
 should be of chief authority, and of the first rank in the senate of
 the gods, because he was the only one of them all, except Jupiter, who
 triumphed, led an army, and subdued the Indians. But that very great
 and unconquered Indian commander was most shamefully overpowered by
 love and lust. For, being conveyed to Crete with his effeminate
 retinue, he met with an unchaste woman on the shore; and in the
 confidence inspired by his Indian victory, he wished to give proof of
 his manliness, lest he should appear too effeminate. And so he took to
 himself in marriage that woman, the betrayer of her father, and the
 murderer of her brother, after that she had been deserted and
 repudiated by another husband; and he made her Libera, and with her
 ascended into heaven.

 What was the conduct of Jupiter, the father of all these, who in the
 customary prayer is styled [48] Most Excellent and Great? Is he not,
 from his earliest childhood, proved to be impious, and almost a
 parricide, since he expelled his father from his kingdom, and banished
 him, and did not await his death though he was aged and worn out, such
 was his eagerness for rule? And when he had taken his father's throne
 by violence and arms, he was attacked with war by the Titans, which was
 the beginning of evils to the human race; and when these had been
 overcome and lasting peace procured, he spent the rest of his life in
 debaucheries and adulteries. I forbear to mention the virgins whom he
 dishonoured. For that is wont to be judged endurable. I cannot pass by
 the cases of Amphitryon and Tyndarus, whose houses he filled to
 overflowing with disgrace and infamy. But he reached the height of
 impiety and guilt in carrying off the royal boy. For it did not appear
 enough to cover himself with infamy in offering violence to women,
 unless he also outraged his own sex. This is true adultery, which is
 done against nature. Whether he who committed these crimes can be
 called Greatest is a matter of question, undoubtedly he is not the
 Best; to which name corrupters, adulterers, and incestuous persons have
 no claim; unless it happens that we men are mistaken in terming those
 who do such things wicked and abandoned, and in judging them most
 deserving of every kind of punishment. But Marcus Tullius was foolish
 in upbraiding Caius Verres with adulteries, for Jupiter, whom he
 worshipped, committed the same; and in upbraiding Publius Clodius with
 incest with his sister, for he who was Best and Greatest had the same
 person both as sister and wife.

 [47] [See vol. v. [13]p. 43, and [14]note, p. 46, this series.]

 [48] [Nat. Deor., iii. 36. De Maistre, Soirèes, i. p. 30, and note, p
 63.]

 Chap. xi.--of the origin, life, reign, name and death of jupiter, and of
 saturn and uranus. [49]

 Who, then, is so senseless as to imagine that he reigns in heaven who
 ought not even to have reigned on earth? It was not without humour that
 a certain poet wrote of the triumph of Cupid: in which book he not only
 represented Cupid as the most powerful of the gods, but also as their
 conqueror. For having enumerated the loves of each, by which they had
 come into the power and dominion of Cupid, he sets in array a
 procession, in which Jupiter, with the other gods, is led in chains
 before the chariot of him, celebrating a triumph. This is elegantly
 pictured by the poet, but it is not far removed from the truth. For he
 who is without virtue, who is overpowered by desire and wicked lusts,
 is not, as the poet feigned, in subjection to Cupid, but to everlasting
 death. But let us cease to speak concerning morals; let us examine the
 matter, in order that men may understand in what errors they are
 miserably engaged. The common people imagine that Jupiter reigns in
 heaven; both learned and unlearned are alike persuaded of this. For
 both religion itself, and prayers, and hymns, and shrines, and images
 demonstrate this. And yet they admit that he was also descended from
 Saturn and Rhea. How can he appear a god, or be believed, as the poet
 says, to be the author of men and all things, when innumerable
 thousands of men existed before his birth--those, for instance, who
 lived during the reign of Saturn, and enjoyed the light sooner than
 Jupiter? I see that one god was king in the earliest times, and another
 in the times that followed. It is therefore possible that there may be
 another hereafter. For if the former kingdom was changed, why should we
 not expect that the latter may possibly be changed, unless by chance it
 was possible for Saturn to produce one more powerful than himself, but
 impossible for Jupiter so to do? And yet the divine government is
 always unchangeable; or if it is changeable, which is an impossibility,
 it is undoubtedly changeable at all times.

 Is it possible, then, for Jupiter to lose his kingdom as his father
 lost it? It is so undoubtedly. For when that deity had spared neither
 virgins nor married women, he abstained from Thetis only in consequence
 of an oracle which foretold that whatever son should be born from her
 would be greater than his father. And first of all there was in him a
 want of foreknowledge not befitting a god; for had not Themis related
 to him future events, he would not have known them of his own accord.
 But if he is not divine, he is not indeed a god; for the name of
 divinity is derived from god, as humanity is from man. Then there was a
 consciousness of weakness; but he who has feared, must plainly have
 feared one greater than himself. But he who does this assuredly knows
 that he is not the greatest, since something greater can exist. He also
 swears most solemnly by the Stygian marsh: "Which is set forth the sole
 object of religious dread to the gods above." What is this object of
 religious dread? Or by whom is it set forth? Is there, then, some
 mighty power which may punish the gods who commit perjury? What is this
 great dread of the infernal marsh, if they are immortal? Why should
 they fear that which none are about to see, except those who are bound
 by the necessity of death? Why, then, do men raise their eyes to the
 heaven? Why do they swear by the gods above, when the gods above
 themselves have recourse to the infernal gods, and find among them an
 object of veneration and worship? But what is the meaning of that
 saying, that there are fates whom all the gods and Jupiter himself
 obey? If the power of the Parcæ is so great, that they are of more
 avail than all the heavenly gods, and their ruler and lord himself, why
 should not they be rather said to reign, since necessity compels all
 the gods to obey their laws and ordinances? Now, who can entertain a
 doubt that he who is subservient to anything cannot be greatest? For if
 he were so, he would not receive fates, but would appoint them. Now I
 return to another subject which I had omitted. In the case of one
 goddess only he exercised self-restraint, though he was deeply
 enamoured of her; but this was not from any virtue, but through fear of
 a successor. But this fear plainly denotes one who is both mortal and
 feeble, and of no weight: for at the very hour of his birth he might
 have been put to death, as his elder brother had been put to death; and
 if it had been possible for him to have lived, he would never have
 given up the supreme power to a younger brother. But Jupiter himself
 having been preserved by stealth, and stealthily nourished, was called
 Zeus, or Zen, [50] not, as they imagine, from the fervor of heavenly
 fire, or because he is the giver of life, or because he breathes life
 into living creatures, which power belongs to God alone; for how can he
 impart the breath of life who has himself received it from another
 source? But he was so called because he was the first who lived of the
 male children of Saturn. Men, therefore, might have had another god as
 their ruler, if Saturn had not been deceived by his wife. But it will
 be said the poets feigned these things. Whoever entertains this opinion
 is in error. For they spoke respecting men; but in order that they
 might embellish those whose memory they used to celebrate with praises,
 they said that they were gods. Those things, therefore, which they
 spoke concerning them as gods were feigned, and not those which they
 spoke concerning them as men; and this will be manifest from an
 instance which we will bring forward. When about to offer violence to
 Danae, he poured into her lap a great quantity of golden coins. This
 was the price which he paid for her dishonour. But the poets who spoke
 about him as a god, that they might not weaken the authority of his
 supposed majesty, feigned that he himself descended in a shower of
 gold, making use of the same figure with which they speak of showers of
 iron when they describe a multitude of darts and arrows. He is said to
 have carried away Ganymede by an eagle; it is a picture of the poets.
 But he either carried him off by a legion, which has an eagle for its
 standard; or the ship on board of which he was placed had its tutelary
 deity in the shape of an eagle, just as it had the effigy of a bull
 when he seized Europa and conveyed her across the sea. In the same
 manner, it is related that he changed Io, the daughter of Inachus, into
 a heifer. And in order that she might escape the anger of Juno, just as
 she was, now covered with bristly hair, and in the shape of a heifer,
 she is said to have swam over the sea, and to have come into Egypt; and
 there, having recovered her former appearance, she became the goddess
 who is now called Isis. By what argument, then, can it be proved that
 Europa did not sit on the bull, and that Io was not changed into a
 heifer? Because there is a fixed day in the annals on which the voyage
 of Isis is celebrated; from which fact we learn that she did not swim
 across the sea, but sailed over. Therefore they who appear to
 themselves to be wise because they understand that there cannot be a
 living and earthly body in heaven, reject the whole story of Ganymede
 as false, and perceive that the occurrence took place on earth,
 inasmuch as the matter and the lust itself is earthly. The poets did
 not therefore invent these transactions, for if they were to do so they
 would be most worthless; but they added a certain colour to the
 transactions. [51] For it was not for the purpose of detraction that
 they said these things, but from a desire to embellish them. Hence men
 are deceived; especially because, while they think that all these
 things are feigned by the poets, they worship that of which they are
 ignorant. For they do not know what is the limit of poetic licence, how
 far it is allowable to proceed in fiction, since it is the business of
 the poet with some gracefulness to change and transfer actual
 occurrences into other representations by oblique transformations. But
 to feign the whole of that which you relate, that is to be foolish and
 deceitful rather than to be a poet.

 But grant that they feigned those things which are believed to be
 fabulous, did they also feign those things which are related about the
 female deities and the marriages of the gods? Why, then, are they so
 represented, and so worshipped? unless by chance not the poets only,
 but painters also, and statuaries, speak falsehoods. For if this is the
 Jupiter who is called by you a god, if it is not he who was born from
 Saturn and Ops, no other image but his alone ought to have been placed
 in all the temples. What meaning have the effigies of women? What the
 doubtful sex? in which, if this Jupiter is represented, the very stones
 will confess that he is a man. They say that the poets have spoken
 falsely, and yet they believe them: yes, truly they prove by the fact
 itself that the poets did not speak falsely; for they so frame the
 images of the gods, that, from the very diversity of sex, it appears
 that these things which the poets say are true. For what other
 conclusion does the image of Ganymede and the effigy of the eagle admit
 of, when they are placed before the feet of Jupiter in the temples, and
 are worshipped equally with himself, except that the memory of impious
 guilt and debauchery remains for ever? Nothing, therefore, is wholly
 invented by the poets: something perhaps is transferred and obscured by
 oblique fashioning, under which the truth was enwrapped and concealed;
 as that which was related about the dividing of the kingdoms by lot.
 For they say that the heaven fell to the share of Jupiter, the sea to
 Neptune, and the infernal regions to Pluto. Why was not the earth
 rather taken as the third portion, except that the transaction took
 place on the earth? Therefore it is true that they so divided and
 portioned out the government of the world, that the empire of the east
 fell to Jupiter, a part of the west was allotted to Pluto, who had the
 surname of Agesilaus; because the region of the east, from which light
 is given to mortals, seems to be higher, but the region of the west
 lower. Thus they so veiled the truth under a fiction, that the truth
 itself detracted nothing from the public persuasion. It is manifest
 concerning the share of Neptune; for we say that his kingdom resembled
 that unlimited authority possessed by Mark Antony, to whom the senate
 had decreed the power of the maritime coast, that he might punish the
 pirates, and tranquillize the whole sea. Thus all the maritime coasts,
 together with the islands, fell to the lot of Neptune. How can this be
 proved? Undoubtedly ancient stories attest it. Euhemerus, an ancient
 author, who was of the city of Messene, collected the actions of
 Jupiter and of the others, who are esteemed gods, and composed a
 history from the titles and sacred inscriptions which were in the most
 ancient temples, and especially in the sanctuary of the Triphylian
 Jupiter, where an inscription indicated that a golden column had been
 placed by Jupiter himself, on which column he wrote an account of his
 exploits, that posterity might have a memorial of his actions. This
 history was translated and followed by Ennius, whose words are these:
 "Where Jupiter gives to Neptune the government of the sea, that he
 might reign in all the islands and places bordering on the sea."

 The accounts of the poets, therefore, are true, but veiled with an
 outward covering and show. It is possible that Mount Olympus may have
 supplied the poets with the hint for saying that Jupiter obtained the
 kingdom of heaven, because Olympus is the common name both of the
 mountain and of heaven. But the same history informs us that Jupiter
 dwelt on Mount Olympus, when it says: "At that time Jupiter spent the
 greatest part of his life on Mount Olympus; and they used to resort to
 him thither for the administration of justice, if any matters were
 disputed. Moreover, if any one had found out any new invention which
 might be useful for human life, he used to come thither and display it
 to Jupiter." The poets transfer many things after this manner, not for
 the sake of speaking falsely against the objects of their worship, but
 that they may by variously coloured figures add beauty and grace to
 their poems. But they who do not understand the manner, or the cause,
 or the nature of that which is represented by figure, attack the poets
 as false and sacrilegious. Even the philosophers were deceived by this
 error; for because these things which are related about Jupiter
 appeared unsuited to the character of a god, they introduced two
 Jupiters, one natural, the other fabulous. They saw, on the one hand,
 that which was true, that he, forsooth, concerning whom the poets
 speak, was man; but in the case of that natural Jupiter, led by the
 common practise of superstition, they committed an error, inasmuch as
 they transferred the name of a man to God, who, as we have already
 said, because He is one only, has no need of a name. But it is
 undeniable that he is Jupiter who was born from Ops and Saturn. It is
 therefore an empty persuasion on the part of those who give the name of
 Jupiter to the Supreme God. For some are in the habit of defending
 their errors by this excuse; for, when convinced of the unity of God,
 since they cannot deny this, they affirm that they worship Him, but
 that it is their pleasure that He should be called Jupiter. But what
 can be more absurd than this? For Jupiter is not accustomed to be
 worshipped without the accompanying worship of his wife and daughter.
 From which his real nature is evident; nor is it lawful for that name
 to be transferred thither, [52] where there is neither any Minerva nor
 Juno. Why should I say that the peculiar meaning of this name does not
 express a divine, but human power? For Cicero explains the names
 Jupiter and Juno as being derived from giving help; [53] and Jupiter is
 so called as if he were a helping father,--a name which is ill adapted
 to God: for to help is the part of a man conferring some aid upon one
 who is a stranger, and in a case where the benefit is small. No one
 implores God to help him, but to preserve him, to give him life and
 safety, which is a much greater and more important matter than to help.

 And since we are speaking of a father, no father is said to help his
 sons when he begets or brings them up. For that expression is too
 insignificant to denote the magnitude of the benefit derived from a
 father. How much more unsuitable is it to God, who is our true Father,
 by whom we exist, and whose we are altogether, by whom we are formed,
 endued with life, and enlightened, who bestows upon us life, gives us
 safety, and supplies us with various kinds of food! He has no
 apprehension of the divine benefits who thinks that he is only aided by
 God. Therefore he is not only ignorant, but impious, who disparages the
 excellency of the supreme power under the name of Jupiter. Wherefore,
 if both from his actions and character we have proved that Jupiter was
 a man, and reigned on earth, it only remains that we should also
 investigate his death. Ennius, in his sacred history, having described
 all the actions which he performed in his life, at the close thus
 speaks: Then Jupiter, when he had five times made a circuit of the
 earth, and bestowed governments upon all his friends and relatives, and
 left laws to men, provided them with a settled mode of life and corn,
 and given them many other benefits, and having been honoured with
 immortal glory and remembrance, left lasting memorials to his friends,
 and when his age [54] was almost spent, he changed [55] his life in
 Crete, and departed to the gods. And the Curetes, his sons, took charge
 of him, and honoured him; and his tomb is in Crete, in the town of
 Cnossus, and Vesta is said to have founded this city; and on his tomb
 is an inscription in ancient Greek characters, "Zan Kronou," which is
 in Latin, "Jupiter the son of Saturn." This undoubtedly is not handed
 down by poets, but by writers of ancient events; and these things are
 so true, that they are confirmed by some verses of the Sibyls, to this
 effect:--


 "Inanimate demons, images of the dead,

 Whose tombs the ill-fated Crete possesses as a boast."

 Cicero, in his treatise concerning the Nature of the Gods, having said
 that three Jupiters were enumerated by theologians, adds that the third
 was of Crete, the son of Saturn, and that his tomb is shown in that
 island. How, therefore, can a god be alive in one place, and dead in
 another; in one place have a temple, and in another a tomb? Let the
 Romans then know that their Capitol, that is the chief head of their
 objects of public veneration, is nothing but an empty monument.

 Let us now come to his father who reigned before him, and who perhaps
 had more power in himself, because he is said to be born from the
 meeting of such great elements. Let us see what there was in him worthy
 of a god, especially that he is related to have had the golden age,
 because in his reign there was justice in the earth. I find something
 in him which was not in his son. For what is so befitting the character
 of a god, as a just government and an age of piety? But when, on the
 same principle, I reflect that he is a son, I cannot consider him as
 the Supreme God; for I see that there is something more ancient than
 himself,--namely, the heaven and the earth. But I am in search of a God
 beyond whom nothing has any existence, who is the source and origin of
 all things. He must of necessity exist who framed the heaven itself,
 and laid the foundations of the earth. But if Saturn was born from
 these, as it is supposed, how can he be the chief God, since he owes
 his origin to another? Or who presided over the universe before the
 birth of Saturn? But this, as I recently said, is a fiction of the
 poets. For it was impossible that the senseless elements, which are
 separated by so long an interval, should meet together and give birth
 to a son, or that he who was born should not at all resemble his
 parents, but should have a form which his parents did not possess.

 Let us therefore inquire what degree of truth lies hid under this
 figure. Minucius Felix, in his treatise which has the title of
 Octavius, [56] alleged these proofs: "That Saturn, when he had been
 banished by his son, and had come into Italy, was called the son of
 Coelus (heaven), because we are accustomed to say that those whose
 virtue we admire, or those who have unexpectedly arrived, have fallen
 from heaven; and that he was called the son of earth, because we name
 those who are born from unknown parents sons of earth." These things,
 indeed, have some resemblance to the truth, but are not true, because
 it is evident that even during his reign he was so esteemed. He might
 have argued thus: That Saturn, being a very powerful king, in order
 that the memory of his parents might be preserved, gave their names to
 the heaven and earth, whereas these were before called by other names,
 for which reason we know that names were applied both to mountains and
 rivers. For when the poets speak of the offspring of Atlas, or of the
 river Inachus, they do not absolutely say that men could possibly be
 born from inanimate objects; but they undoubtedly indicate those who
 were born from those men, who either during their lives or after their
 death gave their names to mountains or rivers. For that was a common
 practise among the ancients, and especially among the Greeks. Thus we
 have heard that seas received the names of those who had fallen into
 them, as the Ægean, the Icarian, and the Hellespont. In Latium, also,
 Aventinus gave his name to the mountain on which he was buried; and
 Tiberinus, or Tiber, gave his name to the river in which he was
 drowned. No wonder, then, if the names of those who had given birth to
 most powerful kings were attributed to the heaven and earth. Therefore
 it appears that Saturn was not born from heaven, which is impossible,
 but from that man who bore the name of Uranus. And Trismegistus attests
 the truth of this; for when he said that very few had existed in whom
 there was perfect learning, he mentioned by name among these his
 relatives, Uranus, Saturn, and Mercury. And because he was ignorant of
 these things, he gave another account of the matter; how he might have
 argued, I have shown. Now I will say in what manner, at what time, and
 by whom this was done; for it was not Saturn who did this, but Jupiter.
 Ennius thus relates in his sacred history: "Then Pan leads him to the
 mountain, which is called the pillar of heaven. Having ascended
 thither, he surveyed the lands far and wide, and there on that mountain
 he builds an altar to Coelus; and Jupiter was the first who offered
 sacrifice on that altar. In that place he looked up to heaven, by which
 name we now call it, and that which was above the world which was
 called the firmament, [57] and he gave to the heaven its name from the
 name of his grandfather; and Jupiter in prayer first gave the name of
 heaven to that which was called firmament, [58] and he burnt entire the
 victim which he there offered in sacrifice." Nor is it here only that
 Jupiter is found to have offered sacrifice. Cæsar also, in Aratus,
 relates that Aglaosthenes says that when he was setting out from the
 island of Naxos against the Titans, and was offering sacrifice on the
 shore, an eagle flew to Jupiter as an omen, and that the victor
 received it as a good token, and placed it under his own protection.
 But the sacred history testifies that even beforehand an eagle had sat
 upon his head, and portended to him the kingdom. To whom, then, could
 Jupiter have offered sacrifice, except to his grandfather Coelus, who,
 according to the saying of Euhemerus, [59] died in Oceania, and was
 buried in the town of Aulatia?

 [49] [Compare the remorseless satire of Arnobius, vol. vi. [15]p. 498.]

 [50] Zeu`s, or Zen. [Quad sit auctor vitæ. Delphin note.]

 [51] [On the Poets, vol. i. cap. 2, [16]p. 273.]

 [52] Eo, i.e., to those.

 [53] Juvando. [Nat. Deor., iii. 25, 26.]

 [54] Ætate pessum acta. [See plural Joves, Nat. Deor., iii. 16.]

 [55] Commutavit; others read consummavit, "he completed."

 [56] [Condensed from cap. xxii. See vol. iv. [17]p. 186, this series.]

 [57] Æther. [Tayler Lewis, Plato cont. Ath., pp. 126-129.]

 [58] Æther. [Tayler Lewis, Plato cont. Ath., pp. 126-129.]

 [59] Euhemerus was a Sicilian author of the age of Alexander the Great.
 He wrote a sacred history containing an account of the several gods who
 were worshipped in Greece, whom he represents as having originally been
 men who had distinguished themselves by their exploits, or benefits
 conferred upon men, and who were therefore, after their death,
 worshipped as gods. The Christian writers frequently refer to Euhemerus
 as helping them to prove that the pagan mythology consisted only of
 fables invented by men. See Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography.

 Chap. xii.--that the stoics transfer the figments of the poets to a
 philosophical system.

 Since we have brought to light the mysteries of the poets, and have
 found out the parents of Saturn, let us return to his virtues and
 actions. He was, they say, just in his rule. First, from this very
 circumstance he is not now a god, inasmuch as he has ceased to be. In
 the next place, he was not even just, but impious not only towards his
 sons, whom he devoured, but also towards his father, whom he is said to
 have mutilated. And this may perhaps have happened in truth. But men,
 having regard to the element which is called the heaven, reject the
 whole fable as most foolishly invented; though the Stoics, (according
 to their custom) endeavour to transfer it to a physical system, whose
 opinion Cicero has laid down in his treatise concerning the Nature of
 the Gods. They held, he says, that the highest and ethereal nature of
 heaven, that is, of fire, which by itself produced all things, was
 without that part of the body which contained the productive organs.
 Now this theory might have been suitable to Vesta, if she were called a
 male. For it is on this account that they esteem Vesta to be a virgin,
 inasmuch as fire is an incorruptible element; and nothing can be born
 from it, since it consumes all things, whatever it has seized upon.
 Ovid in the Fasti says: [60] "Nor do you esteem Vesta to be anything
 else than a living flame; and you see no bodies produced from flame.
 Therefore she is truly a virgin, for she sends forth no seed, nor
 receives it, and loves the attendants of virginity."

 This also might have been ascribed to Vulcan, who indeed is supposed to
 be fire, and yet the poets did not mutilate him. It might also have
 been ascribed to the sun, in whom is the nature and cause of the
 productive powers. For without the fiery heat of the sun nothing could
 be born, or have increase; so that no other element has greater need of
 productive organs than heat, by the nourishment of which all things are
 conceived, produced, and supported. Lastly, even if the case were as
 they would have it, why should we suppose that Coelus was mutilated,
 rather than that he was born without productive organs? For if he
 produces by himself, it is plain that he had no need of productive
 organs, since he gave birth to Saturn himself; but if he had them, and
 suffered mutilation from his son, the origin of all things and all
 nature would have perished. Why should I say that they deprive Saturn
 himself not only of divine, but also of human intelligence, when they
 affirm that Saturn is he who comprises the course and change of the
 spaces and seasons, and that he has that very name in Greek? For he is
 called Cronos, which is the same as Chronos, that is, a space of time.
 But he is called Saturn, because he is satiated with years. These are
 the words of Cicero, setting forth the opinion of the Stoics: "The
 worthlessness of these things any one may readily understand. For if
 Saturn is the son of Coelus, how could Time have been born from Coelus,
 or Coelus have been mutilated by Time, or afterwards could Time have
 been despoiled of his sovereignty by his son Jupiter? Or how was
 Jupiter born from Time? Or with what years could eternity be satiated,
 since it has no limit?" [61]

 [60] vi. 291. [Tayler Lewis (ut supra), note xii. p. 119.]

 [61] De Nat. deor., ii. 64.

 Chap. xiii.--how vain and trifling are the interpretations of the stoics
 respecting the gods, and in them concerning the origin of jupiter,
 concerning saturn and Ops.

 If therefore these speculations of the philosophers are trifling, what
 remains, except that we believe it to be a matter of fact that, being a
 man, he suffered mutilation from a man? Unless by chance any one
 esteems him as a god who feared a co-heir; whereas, if he had possessed
 any divine knowledge, he ought not to have mutilated his father, but
 himself, to prevent the birth of Jupiter, who deprived him of the
 possession of his kingdom. And he also, when he had married his sister
 Rhea, whom in Latin we call Ops, is said to have been warned by an
 oracle not to bring up his male children, because it would come to pass
 that he should be driven into banishment by a son. And being in fear of
 this, it is plain that he did not devour his sons, as the fables
 report, but put them to death; although it is written in sacred history
 that Saturn and Ops, and other men, were at that time accustomed to eat
 human flesh, but that Jupiter, who gave to men laws and civilization,
 was the first who by an edict prohibited the use of that food. Now if
 this is true, what justice can there possibly have been in him? But let
 us suppose it to be a fictitious story that Saturn devoured his sons,
 only true after a certain fashion; must we then suppose, with the
 vulgar, that he has eaten his sons, who has carried them out to burial?
 But when Ops had brought forth Jupiter, she stole away the infant, and
 secretly sent him into Crete to be nourished. Again, I cannot but blame
 his want of foresight. For why did he receive an oracle from another,
 and not from himself? Being placed in heaven, why did he not see the
 things which were taking place on earth? Why did the Corybantes with
 their cymbals escape his notice? Lastly, why did there exist any
 greater force which might overcome his power? Doubtless, being aged, he
 was easily overcome by one who was young, and despoiled of his
 sovereignty. He was therefore banished and went into exile; and after
 long wanderings came into Italy in a ship, as Ovid relates in his
 Fasti:--


 "The cause of the ship remains to be explained. The scythe-bearing god
 came to the Tuscan river in a ship, having first traversed the world."

 Janus received him wandering and destitute; and the ancient coins are a
 proof of this, on which there is a representation of Janus with a
 double face, and on the other side a ship; as the same poet adds:--


 "But pious posterity represented a ship on the coin, bearing testimony
 to the arrival of the stranger god."

 Not only therefore all the poets, but the writers also of ancient
 histories and events, agree that he was a man, inasmuch as they handed
 down to memory his actions in Italy: of Greek writers, Diodorus and
 Thallus; of Latin writers, Nepos, Cassius, and Varro. For since men
 lived in Italy after a rustic fashion, [62] --


 "He brought the race to union first,

 Erewhile on mountain tops dispersed,

 And gave them statutes to obey,

 And willed the land wherein he lay

 Should Latium's title bear."

 Does any one imagine him to be a god, who was driven into banishment,
 who fled, who lay hid? No one is so senseless. For he who flees, or
 lies hid, must fear both violence and death. Orpheus, who lived in more
 recent times than his, openly relates that Saturn reigned on earth and
 among men:--


 "First Cronus ruled o'er men on earth,

 And then from Cronus sprung the mighty king,

 The widely sounding Zeus."

 And also our own Maro says: [63]


 "This life the golden Saturn led on earth;"

 and in another place: [64] --


 "That was the storied age of gold,

 So peacefully, serenely rolled

 The years beneath his reign."

 The poet did not say in the former passage that he led this life in
 heaven, nor in the latter passage that he reigned over the gods above.
 From which it appears that he was a king on earth; and this he declares
 more plainly in another place: [65] --


 "Restorer of the age of gold,

 In lands where Saturn ruled of old."

 Ennius, indeed, in his translation of Euhemerus says that Saturn was
 not the first who reigned, but his father Uranus. In the beginning, he
 says, Coelus first had the supreme power on the earth. He instituted
 and prepared that kingdom in conjunction with his brothers. There is no
 great dispute, if there is doubt, on the part of the greatest
 authorities respecting the son and the father. But it is possible that
 each may have happened: that Uranus first began to be pre-eminent in
 power among the rest, and to have the chief place, but not the kingdom;
 and that afterwards Saturn acquired greater resources, and took the
 title of king.

 [62] Virg., Æneid, viii. 321.

 [63] Georg., ii. 538.

 [64] Æneid, viii. 324.

 [65] Ibid., vi. 793.

 Chap. xiv.--what the sacred history of euhemerus and ennius teaches
 concerning the gods.

 Now, since the sacred history differs in some degree from those things
 which we have related, let us open those things which are contained in
 the true writings, that we may not, in accusing superstitions, appear
 to follow and approve of the follies of the poets. These are the words
 of Ennius: "Afterwards Saturn married Ops. Titan, who was older than
 Saturn, demands the kingdom for himself. Upon this their mother Vesta,
 and their sisters Ceres and Ops, advise Saturn not to give up the
 kingdom to his brother. Then Titan, who was inferior in person to
 Saturn, on that account, and because he saw that his mother and sisters
 were using their endeavours that Saturn might reign, yielded the
 kingdom to him. He therefore made an agreement with Saturn, that if any
 male children should be born to him, he would not bring them up. He did
 so for this purpose, that the kingdom might return to his own sons.
 Then, when a son was first born to Saturn, they slew him. Afterwards
 twins were born, Jupiter and Juno. Upon this they present Juno to the
 sight of Saturn, and secretly hide Jupiter, and give him to Vesta to be
 brought up, concealing him from Saturn. Ops also brings forth Neptune
 without the knowledge of Saturn, and secretly hides him. In the same
 manner Ops brings forth twins by a third birth, Pluto and Glauca. Pluto
 in Latin is Dispater; others call him Orcus. Upon this they show to
 Saturn the daughter Glauca, and conceal and hide the son Pluto. Then
 Glauca dies while yet young." This is the lineage of Jupiter and his
 brothers, as these things are written, and the relationship is handed
 down to us after this manner from the sacred narrative. Also shortly
 afterwards he introduces these things: "Then Titan, when he learned
 that sons were born to Saturn, and secretly brought up, secretly takes
 with him his sons, who are called Titans, and seizes his brother Saturn
 and Ops, and encloses them within a wall, and places over them a
 guard."

 The truth of this history is taught by the Erythræan Sibyl, who speaks
 almost the same things, with a few discrepancies, which do not affect
 the subject-matter itself. Therefore Jupiter is freed from the charge
 of the greatest wickedness, according to which he is reported to have
 bound his father with fetters; for this was the deed of his uncle
 Titan, because he, contrary to his promise and oath, had brought up
 male children. The rest of the history is thus put together. It is said
 that Jupiter, when grown up, having heard that his father and mother
 had been surrounded with a guard and imprisoned, came with a great
 multitude of Cretans, and conquered Titan and his sons in an
 engagement, and rescued his parents from imprisonment, restored the
 kingdom to his father, and thus returned into Crete. Then, after these
 things, they say that an oracle was given to Saturn, bidding him to
 take heed lest his son should expel him from the kingdom; that he, for
 the sake of weakening the oracle and avoiding the danger, laid an
 ambush for Jupiter to kill him; that Jupiter, having learned the plot,
 claimed the kingdom for himself afresh, and banished Saturn; and that
 he, when he had been tossed over all lands, followed by armed men whom
 Jupiter had sent to seize or put him to death, scarcely found a place
 of concealment in Italy.

 Chap. xv.--how they who were men obtained the name of gods.

 Now, since it is evident from these things that they were men, it is
 not difficult to see in what manner they began to be called gods. [66]
 For if there were no kings before Saturn or Uranus, on account of the
 small number of men who lived a rustic life without any ruler, there is
 no doubt but in those times men began to exalt the king himself, and
 his whole family, with the highest praises and with new honours, so
 that they even called them gods; whether on account of their wonderful
 excellence, men as yet rude and simple really entertained this opinion,
 or, as is commonly the case, in flattery of present power, or on
 account of the benefits by which they were set in order and reduced to
 a civilized state. Afterwards the kings themselves, since they were
 beloved by those whose life they had civilized, after their death left
 regret of themselves. Therefore men formed images of them, that they
 might derive some consolation from the contemplation of their
 likenesses; and proceeding further through love of their worth, [67]
 they began to reverence the memory of the deceased, that they might
 appear to be grateful for their services, and might attract their
 successors to a desire of ruling well. And this Cicero teaches in his
 treatise on the Nature of the Gods, saying "But the life of men and
 common intercourse led to the exalting to heaven by fame and goodwill
 men who were distinguished by their benefits. On this account Hercules,
 on this Castor and Pollux, Æsculapius and Liber" were ranked with the
 gods. And in another passage: "And in most states it may be understood,
 that for the sake of exciting valour, or that the men most
 distinguished for bravery might more readily encounter danger on
 account of the state, their memory was consecrated with the honour paid
 to the immortal gods." It was doubtless on this account that the Romans
 consecrated their Cæsars, and the Moors their kings. Thus by degrees
 religious honours began to be paid to them; while those who had known
 them, first instructed their own children and grandchildren, and
 afterwards all their posterity, in the practice of this rite. And yet
 these great kings, on account of the celebrity of their name, were
 honoured in all provinces.

 But separate people privately honoured the founders of their nation or
 city with the highest veneration, whether they were men distinguished
 for bravery, or women admirable for chastity; as the Egyptians honoured
 Isis, the Moors Juba, the Macedonians Cabirus, the Carthaginians
 Uranus, the Latins Faunus, the Sabines Sancus, the Romans Quirinus. In
 the same manner truly Athens worshipped Minerva, Samos Juno, Paphos
 Venus, Lemnos Vulcan, Naxos Liber, and Delos Apollo. And thus various
 sacred rites have been undertaken among different peoples and
 countries, inasmuch as men desire to show gratitude to their princes,
 and cannot find out other honours which they may confer upon the dead.
 Moreover, the piety of their successors contributed in a great degree
 to the error; for, in order that they might appear to be born from a
 divine origin, they paid divine honours to their parents, and ordered
 that they should be paid by others. Can any one doubt in what way the
 honours paid to the gods were instituted, when he reads in Virgil the
 words of Æneas giving commands to his friends: [68] --


 "Now with full cups libation pour

 To mighty Jove, whom all adore,

 Invoke Anchises' blessed soul."

 And he attributes to him not only immortality, but also power over the
 winds: [69] --


 "Invoke the winds to speed our flight,

 And pray that he we hold so dear

 May take our offerings year by year,

 Soon as our promised town we raise,

 In temples sacred to his praise."

 In truth, Liber and Pan, and Mercury and Apollo, acted in the same way
 respecting Jupiter, and afterwards their successors did the same
 respecting them. The poets also added their influence, and by means of
 poems composed to give pleasure, raised them to the heaven; as is the
 case with those who flatter kings, even though wicked, with false
 panegyrics. And this evil originated with the Greeks, whose levity
 being furnished [70] with the ability and copiousness of speech,
 excited in an incredible degree mists of falsehoods. And thus from
 admiration of them they first undertook their sacred rites, and handed
 them down to all nations. On account of this vanity the Sibyl thus
 rebukes them:--


 "Why trustest thou, O Greece, to princely men?

 Why to the dead dost offer empty gifts?

 Thou offerest to idols; this error who suggested,

 That thou shouldst leave the presence of the mighty God,

 And make these offerings?"

 Marcus Tullius, who was not only an accomplished orator, but also a
 philosopher, since he alone was an imitator of Plato, in that treatise
 in which he consoled himself concerning the death of his daughter, did
 not hesitate to say that those gods who were publicly worshipped were
 men. And this testimony of his ought to be esteemed the more weighty,
 because he held the priesthood of the augurs, and testifies that he
 worships and venerates the same gods. And thus within the compass of a
 few verses he has presented us with two facts. For while he declared
 his intention of consecrating the image of his daughter in the same
 manner in which they were consecrated by the ancients, he both taught
 that they were dead, and showed the origin of a vain superstition.
 "Since, in truth," he says, "we see many men and women among the number
 of the gods, and venerate their shrines, held in the greatest honour in
 cities and in the country, let us assent to the wisdom of those to
 whose talents and inventions we owe it that life is altogether adorned
 with laws and institutions, and established on a firm basis. And if any
 living being was worthy of being consecrated, assuredly it was this. If
 the offspring of Cadmus, or Amphitryon, or Tyndarus, was worthy of
 being extolled by fame to the heaven, the same honour ought undoubtedly
 to be appropriated to her. And this indeed I will do; and with the
 approbation of the gods, I will place you the best and most learned of
 all women in their assembly, and will consecrate you to the estimation
 of all men." Some one may perhaps say that Cicero raved through
 excessive grief. But, in truth, the whole of that speech, which was
 perfect both in learning and in its examples, and in the very style of
 expression, gave no indications of a distempered mind, but of constancy
 and judgment; and this very sentence exhibits no sign of grief. For I
 do not think that he could have written with such variety, and
 copiousness, and ornament, had not his grief been mitigated by reason
 itself, and the consolation of his friends and length of time. Why
 should I mention what he says in his books concerning the Republic, and
 also concerning glory? For in his treatise on the Laws, in which work,
 following the example of Plato, he wished to set forth those laws which
 he thought that a just and wise state would employ, he thus decreed
 concerning religion: [71] "Let them reverence the gods, both those who
 have always been regarded as gods of heaven, and those whose services
 to men have placed them in heaven: Hercules, Liber, Æsculapius, Castor,
 Pollux, and Quirinus." Also in his Tusculan Disputations, [72] when he
 said that heaven was almost entirely filled with the human race, he
 said: "If, indeed, I should attempt to investigate ancient accounts,
 and to extract from them those things which the writers of Greece have
 handed down, even those who are held in the highest rank as gods will
 be found to have gone from us into heaven. Inquire whose sepulchres are
 pointed out in Greece: remember, since you are initiated, what things
 are handed down in the mysteries; and then at length you will
 understand how widely this persuasion is spread." He appealed, as it is
 plain, to the conscience of Atticus, that it might be understood from
 the very mysteries that all those who are worshipped were men; and when
 he acknowledged this without hesitation in the case of Hercules, Liber,
 Æsculapius, Castor and Pollux, he was afraid openly to make the same
 admission respecting Apollo and Jupiter their fathers, and likewise
 respecting Neptune, Vulcan, Mars, and Mercury, whom he termed the
 greater gods; and therefore he says that this opinion is widely spread,
 that we may understand the same concerning Jupiter and the other more
 ancient gods: for if the ancients consecrated their memory in the same
 manner in which he says that he will consecrate the image and the name
 of his daughter, those who mourn may be pardoned, but those who believe
 it cannot be pardoned. For who is so infatuated as to believe that
 heaven is opened to the dead at the consent and pleasure of a senseless
 multitude? Or that any one is able to give to another that which he
 himself does not possess? Among the Romans, Julius was made a god,
 because it pleased a guilty man, Antony; Quirinus was made a god,
 because it seemed good to the shepherds, though one of them was the
 murderer of his twin brother, the other the destroyer of his country.
 But if Antony had not been consul, in return for his services towards
 the state Caius Cæsar would have been without the honour even of a dead
 man, and that, too, by the advice of his father-in-law Piso, and of his
 relative Lucius Cæsar, who opposed the celebration of the funeral, and
 by the advice of Dolabella the consul, who overthrew the column in the
 forum, that is, his monuments, and purified the forum. For Ennius
 declares that Romulus was regretted by his people, since he represents
 the people as thus speaking, through grief for their lost king: "O
 Romulus, Romulus, say what a guardian of your country the gods produced
 you? You brought us forth within the regions of light. O father, O
 sire, O race, descended from the gods." On account of this regret they
 more readily believed Julius Proculus uttering falsehoods, who was
 suborned by the fathers to announce to the populace that he had seen
 the king in a form more majestic than that of a man; and that he had
 given command to the people that a temple should be built to his
 honour, that he was a god, and was called by the name of Quirinus. By
 which deed he at once persuaded the people that Romulus had gone to the
 gods, and freed the senate from the suspicion of having slain the king.

 [66] [Vol. ii. cap. 28, [18]p. 143, this series.]

 [67] Per amorem meriti. Some editions omit "meriti."

 [68] Æneid, vii. 133.

 [69] Ibid., v. 59.

 [70] Instructa. [Vol. ii. cap. 18, [19]p. 137, this series.]

 [71] [De Legibus, ii. cap. 8.]

 [72] [Liber i. capp. 12, 13.]

 Chap. xvi.-- by what argument it is proved that those who are distinguished
 by a difference of sex cannot be gods. [73]

 I might be content with those things which I have related, but there
 still remain many things which are necessary for the work which I have
 undertaken. For although, by destroying the principal part of
 superstitions, I have taken away the whole, yet it pleases me to follow
 up the remaining parts, and more fully to refute so inveterate a
 persuasion, that men may at length be ashamed and repent of their
 errors. This is a great undertaking, and worthy of a man. "I proceed to
 release the minds of men from the ties of superstitions," as Lucretius
 [74] says; and he indeed was unable to effect this, because he brought
 forward nothing true. This is our duty, who both assert the existence
 of the true God and refute false deities. They, therefore, who
 entertain the opinion that the poets have invented fables about the
 gods, and yet believe in the existence of female deities, and worship
 them, are unconsciously brought back to that which they had
 denied--that they have sexual intercourse, and bring forth. For it is
 impossible that the two sexes can have been instituted except for the
 sake of generation. But a difference of sex being admitted, they do not
 perceive that conception follows as a consequence. And this cannot be
 the case with a God. But let the matter be as they imagine; for they
 say that there are sons of Jupiter and of the other gods. Therefore new
 gods are born, and that indeed daily, for gods are not surpassed in
 fruitfulness by men. It follows that all things are full of gods
 without number, since forsooth none of them dies. For since the
 multitude of men is incredible, and their number not to be
 estimated--though, as they are born, they must of necessity die--what
 must we suppose to be the case with the gods who have been born through
 so many ages, and have remained immortal? How is it, then, that so few
 are worshipped? Unless we think by any means that there are two sexes
 of the gods, not for the sake of generation, but for mere
 gratification, and that the gods practise those things which men are
 ashamed to do, and to submit to. But when any are said to be born from
 any, it follows that they always continue to be born, if they are born
 at any time; or if they ceased at any time to be born, it is befitting
 that we should know why or at what time they so ceased. Seneca, in his
 books of moral philosophy, not without some pleasantry, asks, "What is
 the reason why Jupiter, who is represented by the poets as most
 addicted to lust, ceased to beget children? Was it that he was become a
 sexagenarian, and was restrained by the Papian law? [75] Or did he
 obtain the privileges conferred by having three children? Or did the
 sentiment at length occur to him, What you have done to another, you
 may expect from another;' and does he fear lest any one should act
 towards him as he himself did to Saturn?" But let those who maintain
 that they are gods, see in what manner they can answer this argument
 which I shall bring forward. If there are two sexes of the gods,
 conjugal intercourse follows; and if this takes place, they must have
 houses, for they are not without virtue and a sense of shame, so as to
 do this openly and promiscuously, as we see that the brute animals do.
 If they have houses, it follows that they also have cities; and for
 this we have the authority of Ovid, who says, "The multitude of gods
 occupy separate places; in this front the powerful and illustrious
 inhabitants of heaven have placed their dwellings." If they have
 cities, they will also have fields. Now who cannot see the
 consequence,--namely, that they plough and cultivate their lands? And
 this is done for the sake of food. Therefore they are mortal. And this
 argument is of the same weight when reversed. For if they have no
 lands, they have no cities; and if they have no cities, they are also
 without houses. And if they have no houses, they have no conjugal
 intercourse; and if they are without this, they have no female sex. But
 we see that there are females among the gods also. Therefore there are
 not gods. If any one is able, let him do away with this argument. For
 one thing so follows the other, that it is impossible not to admit
 these last things. But no one will refute even the former argument. Of
 the two sexes the one is stronger, the other weaker. For the males are
 more robust, the females more feeble. But a god is not liable to
 feebleness; therefore there is no female sex. To this is added that
 last conclusion of the former argument, that there are no gods, since
 there are females also among the gods.

 [73] And that the office of propagating (his race) does not fall within
 the nature of God.

 [74] i. 931. [i.e., De Rerum Natura, lib. i. verse 931.]

 [75] [Cicero, De Officiis, lib. iii. 11.]

 Chap. xvii.--concerning the same opinion of the stoics, and concerning the
 hardships and disgraceful conduct of the gods.

 On these accounts the Stoics form a different conception of the gods;
 and because they do not perceive what the truth is, they attempt to
 join them with the system of natural things. And Cicero, following
 them, brought forward this opinion respecting the gods and their
 religions. Do you see then, he says, how an argument has been drawn
 from physical subjects which have been well and usefully found out, to
 the existence of false and fictitious gods? And this circumstance gave
 rise to false opinions and turbulent errors, and almost old-womanly
 superstitions. For both the forms of the gods, and their ages, and
 clothing and ornaments, are known to us; and moreover their races, and
 marriages, and all their relationships, and all things reduced to the
 similitude of human infirmity. What can be said more plain, more true?
 The chief of the Roman philosophy, and invested with the most
 honourable priesthood, refutes the false and fictitious gods, and
 testifies that their worship consists of almost old-womanly
 superstitions: he complains that men are entangled in false opinions
 and turbulent errors. For the whole of his third book respecting the
 Nature of the Gods altogether overthrows and destroys all religion.
 What more, therefore, is expected from us? Can we surpass Cicero in
 eloquence? By no means; but confidence was wanting to him, being
 ignorant of the truth, as he himself simply acknowledges in the same
 work. For he says that he can more easily say what is not, than what
 is; that is, that he is aware that the received system is false, but is
 ignorant of the truth. [76] It is plain, therefore, that those who are
 supposed to be gods were but men, and that their memory was consecrated
 after their death. And on this account also different ages and
 established representations of form are assigned to each, because their
 images were fashioned in that dress and of that age at which death
 arrested each.

 Let us consider, if you please, the hardships of the unfortunate gods.
 Isis lost her son; Ceres her daughter; Latona, expelled and driven
 about over the earth, with difficulty found a small island [77] where
 she might bring forth. The mother of the gods both loved a beautiful
 youth, and also mutilated him when found in company with a harlot; and
 on this account her sacred rites are now celebrated by the Galli [78]
 as priests. Juno violently persecuted harlots, because she was not able
 to conceive by her brother. [79] Varro writes, that the island Samos
 was before called Parthenia, because Juno there grew up, and there also
 was married to Jupiter. Accordingly there is a most noble and ancient
 temple of hers at Samos, and an image fashioned in the dress of a
 bride; and her annual sacred rites are celebrated after the manner of a
 marriage. If, therefore, she grew up, if she was at first a virgin and
 afterwards a woman, he who does not understand that she was a human
 being confesses himself a brute. Why should I speak of the lewdness of
 Venus, who ministered to the lusts of all, not only gods, but also men?
 For from her infamous debauchery with Mars she brought forth Harmonia;
 from Mercury she brought forth Hermaphroditus, who was born of both
 sexes; from Jupiter Cupid; from Anchises Æneas; from Butes Eryx; from
 Adonis she could bring forth no offspring, because he was struck by a
 boar, and slain, while yet a boy. And she first instituted the art of
 courtesanship, as is contained in the sacred history; and taught women
 in Cyprus to seek gain by prostitution, which she commanded for this
 purpose, that she alone might not appear unchaste and a courter of men
 beyond other females. Has she, too, any claim to religious worship, on
 whose part more adulteries are recorded than births? But not even were
 those virgins who are celebrated able to preserve their chastity
 inviolate. For from what source can we suppose that Erichthonius was
 born? Was it from the earth, as the poets would have it appear? But the
 circumstance itself cries out. For when Vulcan had made arms for the
 gods, and Jupiter had given him the option of asking for whatever
 reward he might wish, and had sworn, according to his custom, by the
 infernal lake, that he would refuse him nothing which he might ask,
 then the lame artificer demanded Minerva in marriage. Upon this the
 excellent and mighty Jupiter, being bound by so great an oath, was not
 able to refuse; he, however, advised Minerva to oppose and defend her
 chastity. Then in that struggle they say that Vulcan shed his seed upon
 the earth, from which source Erichthonius was born: and that this name
 was given to him from eridos and chthsno's, that is, from the contest
 and the ground. Why, then, did she, a virgin, entrust that boy shut up
 with a dragon and sealed to three virgins born from Cecrops? An evident
 case of incest, as I think, which can by no means be glossed over.
 Another, when she had almost lost her lover, who was torn to pieces by
 his madened horses, called in the most excellent physician Æsculapius
 for the treatment of the youth; and when he was healed,


 "Trivia kind her favourite hides,

 And to Egeria's care confides,

 To live in woods obscure and lone,

 And lose in Virbius' name his own." [80]

 What is the meaning of this so diligent and anxious care? Why this
 secret abode? Why this banishment, either to so great a distance, or to
 a woman, or into solitude? Why, in the next place, the change of name?
 Lastly, why such a determined hatred of horses? What do all these
 things imply, but the consciousness of dishonour, and a love by no
 means consistent with a virgin? There was evidently a reason why she
 undertook so great a labour for a youth so faithful, who had refused
 compliance with the love of his stepmother.

 [76] [Nat. Deor., liber i. 32.]

 [77] Delos.

 [78] The priests of Cybele were called Galli.

 [79] Jupiter.

 [80] Virg., Æneid, vii. 774.

 Chap. xviii.--on the consecration of gods, on account of the benefits which
 they conferred upon men.

 In this place also they are to be refuted, who not only admit that gods
 have been made from men, but even boast of it as a subject of praise,
 either on account of their valour, as Hercules, or of their gifts, as
 Ceres and Liber, or of the arts which they discovered, as Æsculapius or
 Minerva. But how foolish these things are, and how unworthy of being
 the causes why men should contaminate themselves with inexpiable guilt,
 and become enemies to God, in contempt of whom they undertake offerings
 to the dead, I will show from particular instances. They say that it is
 virtue [81] which exalts man to heaven,--not, however, that concerning
 which philosophers discuss, which consists in goods of the soul, but
 this connected with the body, which is called fortitude; and since this
 was pre-eminent in Hercules, it is believed to have deserved
 immortality. Who is so foolishly senseless as to judge strength of body
 to be a divine or even a human good, when it has been assigned in
 greater measure to cattle, and it is often impaired by one disease, or
 is lessened by old age itself, and altogether fails? And so Hercules,
 when he perceived that his muscles were disfigured by ulcers, neither
 wished to be healed nor to grow old, that he might not at any time
 appear to have less strength or comeliness than he once had. [82] They
 supposed that he ascended into heaven from the funeral pile on which he
 had burnt himself alive; and those very qualities which they most
 foolishly admired, they expressed by statues and images, and
 consecrated, so that they might for ever remain as memorials of the
 folly of those who had believed that gods owed their origin to the
 slaughter of beasts. But this, perchance, may be the fault of the
 Greeks, who always esteemed most trifling things as of the greatest
 consequence. What is the case of our own countrymen? Are they more
 wise? For they despise valour in an athlete, because it produces no
 injury; but in the case of a king, because it occasions widely-spread
 disasters, they so admire it as to imagine that brave and warlike
 generals are admitted to the assembly of the gods, and that there is no
 other way to immortality than to lead armies, to lay waste the
 territory of others, to destroy cities, to overthrow towns, to put to
 death or enslave free peoples. Truly the greater number of men they
 have cast down, plundered, and slain, so much the more noble and
 distinguished do they think themselves; and ensnared by the show of
 empty glory, they give to their crimes the name of virtue. I would
 rather that they should make to themselves gods from the slaughter of
 wild beasts, than approve of an immortality so stained with blood. If
 any one has slain a single man, he is regarded as contaminated and
 wicked, nor do they think it lawful for him to be admitted to this
 earthly abode of the gods. But he who has slaughtered countless
 thousands of men, has inundated plains with blood, and infected rivers,
 is not only admitted into the temple, but even into heaven. In Ennius
 Africanus thus speaks: "If it is permitted any one to ascend to the
 regions of the gods above, the greatest gate of heaven is open to me
 alone." Because, in truth, he extinguished and destroyed a great part
 of the human race. Oh how great the darkness in which you were
 involved, O Africanus, or rather O poet, in that you imagined the
 ascent to heaven to be open to men through slaughters and bloodshed!
 And Cicero also assented to this delusion. It is so in truth, he said,
 O Africanus, for the same gate was open to Hercules; as though he
 himself had been doorkeeper in heaven at the time when this took place.
 I indeed cannot determine whether I should think it a subject of grief
 or of ridicule, when I see grave and learned, and, as they appear to
 themselves, wise men, involved in such miserable waves of errors. If
 this is the virtue which renders us immortal, I for my part should
 prefer to die, rather than to be the cause of destruction to as many as
 possible. If immortality can be obtained in no other way than by
 bloodshed, what will be the result if all shall agree to live in
 harmony? And this may undoubtedly be realized, if men would cast aside
 their pernicious and impious madness, and live in innocence and
 justice. Shall no one, then, be worthy of heaven? Shall virtue perish,
 because it will not be permitted men to rage against their fellow-men?
 But they who reckon the overthrow of cities and people as the greatest
 glory will not endure public tranquillity: they will plunder and rage;
 and by the infliction of outrageous injuries will disturb the compact
 of human society, that they may have an enemy whom they may destroy
 with greater wickedness than that with which they attacked.

 Now let us proceed to the remaining subjects. The conferring of
 benefits gave the name of gods to Ceres and Liber. I am able to prove
 from the sacred writings that wine and corn were used by men before the
 offspring of Coelus and Saturnus. But let us suppose that they were
 introduced by these. Can it appear to be a greater thing to have
 collected corn, and having bruised it, to have taught men to make
 bread; or to have pressed grapes gathered from the vine, and to have
 made wine, than to have produced and brought forth from the earth corn
 itself, or the vine? God, indeed, may have left these things to be
 drawn out by the ingenuity of man; yet all things must belong to Him,
 who gave to man both wisdom to discover, and those very things which
 might be discovered. The arts also are said to have gained immortality
 for their inventors, as medicine for Æsculapius, the craft of the smith
 for Vulcan. Therefore let us worship those also who taught the art of
 the fuller and of the shoemaker. But why is not honour paid to the
 discoverer of the potter's art? Is it that those rich men despise
 Samian vessels? There are also other arts, the inventors of which
 greatly profited the life of man. Why have not temples been assigned to
 them also? But doubtless it is Minerva who discovered all, and
 therefore workmen offer prayers to her. Such, then, was the low
 condition [83] from which Minerva ascended to heaven. Is there truly
 any reason why any one should leave the worship of Him who created [84]
 the earth with its living creatures, and the heaven with its stars, for
 the adoration of her who taught men to set up the woof? What place does
 he hold who taught the healing of wounds in the body? Can he be more
 excellent than Him who formed the body itself, and the power of
 sensibility and of life? Finally, did he contrive and bring to light
 the herbs themselves, and the other things in which the healing art
 consists?

 [81] Virtus in its first meaning denotes valour, the property of a man
 (vir); then it is used to signify moral excellence.

 [82] Lit., than himself.

 [83] Ab his sordibus.

 [84] Exorsus est. The word properly denotes to begin a web, to lay the
 warp; hence the use of "ordiri" In the following clause.

 Chap. xix.--that it is impossible for any one to worship the true god
 together with false deities.

 But some one will say that this supreme Being, who made all things, and
 those also who conferred on men particular benefits, are entitled to
 their respective worship. First of all, it has never happened that the
 worshipper of these has also been a worshipper of God. Nor can this
 possibly happen. For if the honour paid to Him is shared by others, He
 altogether ceases to be worshipped, since His religion requires us to
 believe that He is the one and only God. The excellent poet exclaims,
 that all those who refined life by the invention of arts are in the
 lower regions, and that even the discoverer himself of such a medicine
 and art was thrust down by lightning to the Stygian waves, that we may
 understand how great is the power of the Almighty Father, who can
 extinguish even gods by His lightnings. But ingenious men perchance
 thus reasoned with themselves: Because God cannot be struck with
 lightning, it is manifest that the occurrence never took place; nay,
 rather, because it did take place, it is manifest that the person in
 question was a man, and not a god. For the falsehood of the poets does
 not consist in the deed, but in the name. For they feared evil, if, in
 opposition to the general persuasion, they should acknowledge that
 which was true. But if this is agreed upon among themselves, that gods
 were made from men, why then do they not believe the poets, if at any
 time they describe their banishments and wounds, their deaths, and
 wars, and adulteries? From which things it may be understood that they
 could not possibly become gods, since they were not even good men, and
 during their life they performed those actions which bring forth
 everlasting death.

 Chap. xx.--of the gods peculiar to the Romans, and their sacred rites.

 I now come to the superstitions peculiar to the Romans, since I have
 spoken of those which are common. The wolf, the nurse of Romulus, was
 invested with divine honours. And I could endure this, if it had been
 the animal itself whose figure she bears. Livy relates that there was
 an image of Larentina, and indeed not of her body, but of her mind and
 character. For she was the wife of Faustulus, and on account of her
 prostitution she was called among the shepherds wolf, [85] that is,
 harlot, from which also the brothel [86] derives its name. The Romans
 doubtless followed the example of the Athenians in representing her
 figure. For when a harlot, by name Leæna, had put to death a tyrant
 among them, because it was unlawful for the image of a harlot to be
 placed in the temple, they erected the effigy of the animal whose name
 she bore. Therefore, as the Athenians erected a monument from the name,
 so did the Romans from the profession of the person thus honoured. A
 festival was also dedicated to her name, and the Larentinalia were
 instituted. Nor is she the only harlot whom the Romans worship, but
 also Faula, who was, as Verrius writes, the paramour of Hercules. Now
 how great must that immortality be thought which is attained even by
 harlots! Flora, having obtained great wealth by this practice, made the
 people her heir, and left a fixed sum of money, from the annual
 proceeds of which her birthday might be celebrated by public games,
 which they called Floralia. And because this appeared disgraceful to
 the senate, in order that a kind of dignity might be given to a
 shameful matter, they resolved that an argument should be taken from
 the name itself. They pretended that she was the goddess who presides
 over flowers, and that she must be appeased, that the crops, together
 with the trees or vines, might produce a good and abundant blossom. The
 poet followed up this idea in his Fasti, and related that there was a
 nymph, by no means obscure, who was called Chloris, and that, on her
 marriage with Zephyrus, she received from her husband as a wedding gift
 the control over all flowers. These things are spoken with propriety,
 but to believe them is unbecoming and shameful. And when the truth is
 in question, ought disguises of this kind to deceive us? Those games,
 therefore, are celebrated with all wantonness, as is suitable to the
 memory of a harlot. For besides licentiousness of words, in which all
 lewdness is poured forth, women are also stripped of their garments at
 the demand of the people, and then perform the office of mimeplayers,
 and are detained in the sight of the people with indecent gestures,
 even to the satiating of unchaste eyes.

 Tatius consecrated an image of Cloacina, which had been found in the
 great sewer; and because he did not know whose likeness it was, he gave
 it a name from the place. Tullus Hostilius fashioned and worshipped
 Fear and Pallor. What shall I say respecting him, but that he was
 worthy of having his gods always at hand, as men commonly wish? The
 conduct of Marcus Marcellus concerning the consecration of Honour and
 Valour differs from this in goodness of the names, but agrees with it
 in reality. The senate acted with the same vanity in placing Mind [87]
 among the gods; for if they had possessed any intelligence, they would
 never have undertaken sacred rites of this kind. Cicero says that
 Greece undertook a great and bold design in consecrating the images of
 Cupids and Loves in the gymnasia: it is plain that he flattered
 Atticus, and jested with his friend. For that ought not to have been
 called a great design, or a design at all, but the abandoned and
 deplorable wickedness of unchaste men, who exposed their children, whom
 it was their duty to train to an honourable course, to the lust of
 youth, and wished them to worship gods of profligacy, in those places
 especially where their naked bodies were exposed to the gaze of their
 corruptors, and at that age which, through its simplicity and
 incautiousness, can be enticed and ensnared before it can be on its
 guard. What wonder, if all kinds of profligacy flowed from this nation,
 among whom vices themselves have the sanction of religion, and are so
 far from being avoided, that they are even worshipped? And therefore,
 as though he surpassed the Greeks in prudence, he subjoined to this
 sentence as follows: "Vices ought not to be consecrated, but virtues."
 But if you admit this, O Marcus Tullius, you do not see that it will
 come to pass that vices will break in together with virtues, because
 evil things adhere to those which are good, and have greater influence
 on the minds of men; and if you forbid these to be consecrated, the
 same Greece will answer you that it worships some gods that it may
 receive benefits, and others that it may escape injuries.

 For this is always the excuse of those who regard their evils as gods,
 as the Romans esteem Blight and Fever. If, therefore, vices are not to
 be consecrated, in which I agree with you, neither indeed are virtues.
 For they have no intelligence or perception of themselves; nor are they
 to be placed within walls or shrines made of clay, but within the
 breast; and they are to be enclosed within, lest they should be false
 if placed without man. Therefore I laugh at that illustrious law of
 yours which you set forth in these words: "But those things on account
 of which it is given to man to ascend into heaven--I speak of mind,
 virtue, piety, faith--let there be temples for their praises." But
 these things cannot be separated from man. For if they are to be
 honoured, they must necessarily be in man himself. But if they are
 without man, what need is there to honour those things which you do not
 possess? For it is virtue, which is to be honoured, and not the image
 of virtue; and it is to be honoured not by any sacrifice, or incense,
 or solemn prayer, but only by the will and purpose. For what else is it
 to honour virtue, but to comprehend it with the mind, and to hold it
 fast? And as soon as any one begins to wish for this, he attains it.
 This is the only honour of virtue; for no other religion and worship is
 to be held but that of the one God. To what purport is it, then, O
 wisest man, to occupy with superfluous buildings places which may turn
 out to the service of men? To what purport is it to establish priests
 for the worship of vain and senseless objects? To what purport to
 immolate victims? To what purport to bestow such great expenditure on
 the forming or worshipping of images? The human breast is a stronger
 and more uncorrupted temple: let this rather be adorned, let this be
 filled with the true deities. For they who thus worship the
 virtues--that is, who pursue the shadows and images of virtues--cannot
 hold the very things which are true. Therefore there is no virtue in
 any one when vices bear rule; there is no faith when each individual
 carries off all things for himself; there is no piety when avarice
 spares neither relatives nor parents, and passion rushes to poison and
 the sword: no peace, no concord, when wars rage in public, and in
 private enmities prevail even to bloodshed; no chastity when unbridled
 lusts contaminate each sex, and the whole body in every part. Nor,
 however, do they cease to worship those things which they flee from and
 hate. For they worship with incense and the tips of their fingers those
 things which they ought to have shrunk from with their inmost feelings;
 and this error is altogether derived from their ignorance of the
 principal and chief good.

 When their city was occupied by the Gauls, and the Romans, who were
 besieged in the Capitol, had made military engines from the hair of the
 women, they dedicated a temple to the Bald Venus. They do not therefore
 understand how vain are their religions, even from this very fact, that
 they jeer at them by these follies. They had perhaps learned from the
 Lacedæmonians to invent for themselves gods from events. For when they
 were besieging the Messenians, and they (the Messenians) had gone out
 secretly, escaping the notice of the besiegers, and had hastened to
 plunder Lacedæmon, they were routed and put to flight by the Spartan
 women. But the Lacedæmonians, having learned the stratagem of the
 enemy, followed. The women in arms went out to a distance to meet them;
 and when they saw that their husbands were preparing themselves for
 battle, supposing them to be Messenians, they laid bare their persons.
 But the men, recognising their wives, and excited to passion by the
 sight, rushed to promiscuous intercourse, for there was not time for
 discrimination. In like manner, the youths who had on a former occasion
 been sent by the same people, having intercourse with the virgins, from
 whom the Partheniæ were born, in memory of this deed erected a temple
 and statue to armed Venus. And although this originated in a shameful
 cause, yet it seems better to have consecrated Venus as armed than
 bald. At the same time an altar was erected also to Jupiter Pistor (the
 baker), because he had admonished them in a dream to make all the corn
 which they had into bread, and throw it into the camp of the enemy; and
 when this was done, the siege was ended, since the Gauls despaired of
 being able to reduce the Romans by want.

 What a derision of religious rites is this! I were a defender of these,
 what could I complain of so greatly as that the name of gods had come
 into such contempt as to be mocked by the most disgraceful names? Who
 would not laugh at the goddess Fornax, or rather that learned men
 should be occupied with celebrating the Fornacalia? Who can refrain
 from laughter on hearing of the goddess Muta? They say that she is the
 goddess from whom the Lares were born, and they call her Lara, or
 Larunda. What advantage can she, who is unable to speak, afford to a
 worshipper? Caca also is worshipped, who informed Hercules of the theft
 of his oxen, having obtained immortality through the betrayal of her
 brother; and Cunina, who protects infants in the cradle, and keeps off
 witchcraft; and Stercutus, who first introduced the method of manuring
 the land; and Tutinus, before whom brides sit, as an introduction to
 the marriage rites; and a thousand other fictions, so that they who
 regarded these as objects of worship may be said to be more foolish
 than the Egyptians, who worship certain monstrous and ridiculous
 images. These however, have some delineation of form. What shall I say
 of those who worship a rude and shapeless stone under the name of
 Terminus? This is he whom Saturnus is said to have swallowed in the
 place of Jupiter; nor is the honour paid to him undeservedly. For when
 Tarquinius wished to build the Capitol, and there were the chapels of
 many gods on that spot, he consulted them by augury whether they would
 give way to Jupiter; and when the rest gave way, Terminus alone
 remained. From which circumstance the poet speaks of the immoveable
 stone of the Capitol. Now from this very fact how great is Jupiter
 found to be, to whom a stone did not give way, with this confidence,
 perhaps, because it had rescued him from the jaws of his father!
 Therefore, when the Capitol was built, an aperture was left in the roof
 above Terminus himself, that, since he had not given way, he might
 enjoy the free heaven; but they did not themselves enjoy this, who
 imagined that a stone enjoyed it. And therefore they make public
 supplications to him, as to the god who is the guardian of boundaries;
 and he is not only a stone, but sometimes also a stock. What shall I
 say of those who worship such objects, unless--that they above all
 others are stones and stocks?

 [85] Lupa. [See vol. iii. cap. 10, [20]p. 138, this series.]

 [86] Lupanar.

 [87] Mens. [Tayler Lewis, Plato, etc., p. 219.]

 Chap. xxi.--of certain deities peculiar to barbarians, and their sacred
 rites; and in like manner concerning the romans.

 We have spoken of the gods themselves who are worshipped; we must now
 speak a few words respecting their sacrifices and mysteries. Among the
 people of Cyprus, Teucer sacrificed a human victim to Jupiter, and
 handed down to posterity that sacrifice which was lately abolished by
 Hadrian when he was emperor. There was a law among the people of
 Tauris, a fierce and inhuman nation, by which it was ordered that
 strangers should be sacrificed to Diana; and this sacrifice was
 practised through many ages. The Gauls used to appease Hesus and Teutas
 with human blood. Nor, indeed, were the Latins free from this cruelty,
 since Jupiter Latialis is even now worshipped with the offering of
 human blood. What benefit do they who offer such sacrifices implore
 from the gods? Or what are such deities able to bestow on the men by
 whose punishments they are propitiated? But this is not so much a
 matter of surprise with respect to barbarians, whose religion agrees
 with their character. But are not our countrymen, who have always
 claimed for themselves the glory of gentleness and civilization, found
 to be more inhuman by these sacrilegious rites? For these ought rather
 to be esteemed impious, who, though they are embellished with the
 pursuits of liberal training, turn aside from such refinement, than
 those who, being ignorant and inexperienced, glide into evil practices
 from their ignorance of those which are good. And yet it is plain that
 this rite of immolating human victims is ancient, since Saturn was
 honoured in Latium with the same kind of sacrifice; not indeed that a
 man was slain at the altar, but that he was thrown from the Milvian
 bridge into the Tiber. And Varro relates that this was done in
 accordance with an oracle; of which oracle the last verse is to this
 effect: "And offer heads to Ades, and to the father a man." [88] And
 because this appears ambiguous, both a torch and a man are accustomed
 to be thrown to him. But it is said that sacrifices of this kind were
 put an end to by Hercules when he returned from Spain; the custom still
 continuing, that instead of real men, images made from rushes were cast
 forth, as Ovid informs us in his Fasti: [89] "Until the Tirynthian came
 into these lands, gloomy sacrifices were annually offered in the
 Leucadian manner: he threw into the water Romans made of straw; do you,
 after the example of Hercules, cast [90] in the images of human
 bodies."

 The Vestal virgins make these sacred offerings, as the same poet says:
 [91] "Then also a virgin is accustomed to cast from the wooden bridge
 the images of ancient men made from rushes."

 For I cannot find language to speak of the infants who were immolated
 to the same Saturn, on account of his hatred of Jupiter. To think that
 men were so barbarous, so savage, that they gave the name of sacrifice
 to the slaughter of their own children, that is, to a deed foul, and to
 be held in detestation by the human race; since, without any regard to
 parental affection, they destroyed tender and innocent lives, at an age
 which is especially pleasing to parents, and surpassed in brutality the
 savageness of all beasts, which--savage as they are--still love their
 offspring! O incurable madness! What more could those gods do to them,
 if they were most angry, than they now do when propitious, when they
 defile their worshippers with parricide, visit them with bereavements,
 and deprive them of the sensibilities of men? What can be sacred to
 these men? Or what will they do in profane places, who commit the
 greatest crimes amidst the altars of the gods? Pescennius Festus
 relates in the books of his History by a Satire, that the Carthaginians
 were accustomed to immolate human victims to Saturn; and when they were
 conquered by Agathocles, the king of the Sicilians, they imagined that
 the god was angry with them; and therefore, that they might more
 diligently offer an expiation, they immolated two hundred sons of their
 nobles: "So great the ills to which religion could prompt, which has
 ofttimes produced wicked and impious deeds." What advantage, then, did
 the men propose by that sacrifice, when they put to death so large a
 part of the state, as not even Agathocles had slain when victorious?

 From this kind of sacrifices those public rites are to be judged signs
 of no less madness; some of which are in honour of the mother of the
 gods, in which men mutilate themselves; others are in honour of Virtus,
 whom they also call Bellona, in which the priests make offsprings not
 with the blood of another victim, but with their own. [92] For, cutting
 their shoulders, and thrusting forth drawn swords in each hand, they
 run, they are beside themselves, they are frantic. Quintilian therefore
 says excellently in his Fanatic: "If a god compels this, he does it in
 anger." Are even these things sacred? Is it not better to live like
 cattle, than to worship deities so impious, profane, and sanguinary?
 But we will discuss at the proper time the source from which these
 errors and deeds of such great disgrace originated. In the meantime,
 let us look also to other matters which are without guilt, that we may
 not seem to select the worse parts through the desire of finding fault.
 In Egypt there are sacred rites in honour of Isis, since she either
 lost or found her little son. For at first her priests, having made
 their bodies smooth, beat their breasts, and lament, as the goddess
 herself had done when her child was lost. Afterwards the boy is brought
 forward, as if found, and that mourning is changed into joy. Therefore
 Lucan says, "And Osiris never sufficiently sought for." For they always
 lose, and they always find him. Therefore in the sacred rites there is
 a representation of a circumstance which really occurred; and which
 assuredly declares, if we have any intelligence, that she was a mortal
 woman, and almost desolate, had she not found one person. And this did
 not escape the notice of the poet himself; for he represents Pompey
 when a youth as thus speaking, on hearing the death of his father: "I
 will now draw forth the deity Isis from the tomb, and send her through
 the nations; and I will scatter through the people Osiris covered with
 wood." This Osiris is the same whom the people call Serapis. For it is
 customary for the names of the dead who are deified to be changed, that
 no one, as I believe, may imagine them to be men. For Romulus after his
 death became Quirinus, and Leda became Nemesis, and Circe Marica; and
 Ino, when she had leapt into the sea, was called Leucothea; and the
 mother Matuta; and her son Melicerta was called Palæmon and Portumnus.
 And the sacred rites of the Eleusinian Ceres are not unlike these. For
 as in those which have been mentioned the boy Osiris is sought with the
 wailing of his mother, so in these Proserpine is carried away to
 contract an incestuous marriage with her uncle; and because Ceres is
 said to have sought for her in Sicily with torches lighted from the top
 of Etna, on this account her sacred rites are celebrated with the
 throwing of torches.

 At Lampsacus the victim to he offered to Priapus is an ass, and the
 cause of the sacrifice of this animal is thus set forth in the
 Fasti:--When all the deities had assembled at the festival of the Great
 Mother, and when, satiated with feasting, they were spending the night
 in sport, they say that Vesta had laid herself on the ground for rest,
 and had fallen asleep, and that Priapus upon this formed a design
 against her honour as she slept; but that she was aroused by the
 unseasonable braying of the ass on which Silenus used to ride, and that
 the design of the insidious plotter was frustrated. On this account
 they say that the people of Lampsacus were accustomed to sacrifice an
 ass to Priapus, as though it were in revenge; but among the Romans the
 same animal was crowned at the Vestalia (festival of Vesta) with
 loaves, [93] in honour of the preservation of her chastity. What is
 baser, what more disgraceful, than if Vesta is indebted to an ass for
 the preservation of her purity? But the poet invented a fable. But was
 that more true which is related by those [94] who wrote "Phenomena,"
 when they speak concerning the two stars of Cancer, which the Greeks
 call asses? That they were asses which carried across father Liber when
 he was unable to cross a river, and that he rewarded one of them with
 the power of speaking with human voice; and that a contest arose
 between him and Priapus; and Priapus, being worsted in the contest, was
 enraged, and slew the victor. This truly is much more absurd. But poets
 have the licence of saying what they will. I do not meddle with a
 mystery so odious; nor do I strip Priapus of his disguise, lest
 something deserving of ridicule should be brought to light. It is true
 the poets invented these fictions, but they must have been invented for
 the purpose of concealing some greater depravity. Let us inquire what
 this is. But in fact it is evident. For as the bull is sacrificed to
 Luna, [95] because he also has horns as she has; and as "Persia
 propitiates with a horse Hyperion surrounded with rays, that a slow
 victim may not be offered to the swift god;" so in this case no more
 suitable victim could be found than that which resembled him to whom it
 is offered.

 At Lindus, which is a town of Rhodes, there are sacred rites in honour
 of Hercules, the observance of which differs widely from all other
 rites; for they are not celebrated with words of good omen [96] (as the
 Greeks term it), but with revilings and cursing. And they consider it a
 violation of the sacred rites, if at any time during the celebration of
 the solemnities a good word shall have escaped from any one even
 inadvertently. And this is the reason assigned for this practice, if
 indeed there can be any reason in things utterly senseless. When
 Hercules had arrived at the place, and was suffering hunger, he saw a
 ploughman at work, and began to ask him to sell one of his oxen. But
 the ploughman replied that this was impossible, because his hope of
 cultivating the land depended altogether upon those two bullocks.
 Hercules, with his usual violence, because he was not able to receive
 one of them, killed both. But the unhappy man, when he saw that his
 oxen were slain, avenged the injury with revilings,--a circumstance
 which afforded gratification to the man of elegance and refinement. For
 while he prepares a feast for his companions, and while he devours the
 oxen of another man, he receives with ridicule and loud laughter the
 bitter reproaches with which the other assails him. But when it had
 been determined that divine honours should be paid to Hercules in
 admiration of his excellence, an altar was erected in his honour by the
 citizens, which he named, from the circumstance, the yoke of oxen; [97]
 and at this altar two yoked oxen were sacrificed, like those which he
 had taken from the ploughman. And he appointed the same man to be his
 priest, and directed him always to use the same revilings in offering
 sacrifice, because he said that he had never feasted more pleasantly.
 Now these things are not sacred, but sacrilegious, in which that is
 said to be enjoined, which, if it is done in other things, is punished
 with the greatest severity. What, moreover, do the rites of the Cretan
 Jupiter himself show, except the manner in which he was withdrawn from
 his father, or brought up? There is a goat belonging to the nymph
 Amalthea, which gave suck to the infant; and of this goat Germanicus
 Cæsar thus speaks, in his poem translated from Aratus: [98] --


 "She is supposed to be the nurse of Jupiter; if in truth the infant
 Jupiter pressed the faithful teats of the Cretan goat, which attests
 the gratitude of her lord by a bright constellation."

 Musæus relates that Jupiter, when fighting against the Titans, used the
 hide of this goat as a shield, from which circumstance he is called by
 the poets shield-bearer. [99] Thus, whatever was done in concealing the
 boy, that also is done by way of representation in the sacred rites.
 Moreover, the mystery of his mother also contains the same story which
 Ovid sets forth in the Fasti:--


 "Now the lofty Ida resounds with tinklings, that the boy may cry in
 safety with infant mouth. Some strike their shields with stakes, some
 beat their empty helmets. This is the employment of the Curetes, this
 of the Corybantes. The matter was concealed, and imitations of the
 ancient deed remain; the attendant goddesses shake instruments of
 brass, and hoarse hides. Instead of helmets they strike cymbals, and
 drums instead of shields; the flute gives Phrygian strains, as it gave
 before."

 Sallust rejected this opinion altogether, as though invented by the
 poets, and wished to give an ingenious explanation of the reasons for
 which the Curetes are said to have nourished Jupiter; and he speaks to
 this purport: Because they were the first to understand the worship of
 the deity, that therefore antiquity, which exaggerates all things, made
 them known as the nourishers of Jupiter. How much this learned man was
 mistaken, the matter itself at once declares. For if Jupiter holds the
 first place, both among the gods and in religious rites, if no gods
 were worshipped by the people before him, because they who are
 worshipped were not yet born; it appears that the Curetes, on the
 contrary, were the first who did not understand the worship of the
 deity, since all error was introduced by them, and the memory of the
 true God was taken away. They ought therefore to have understood from
 the mysteries and ceremonies themselves, that they were offering
 prayers to dead men. I do not then require that any one should believe
 the fictions of the poets. If any one imagines that these speak
 falsely, let him consider the writings of the pontiffs themselves, and
 weigh whatever there is of literature pertaining to sacred rites: he
 will perhaps find more things than we bring forward, from which he may
 understand that all things which are esteemed sacred are empty, vain,
 and fictitious. But if any one, having discovered wisdom, shall lay
 aside his error, he will assuredly laugh at the follies of men who are
 almost without understanding: I mean those who either dance with
 unbecoming gestures, or run naked, anointed, and crowned with chaplets,
 either wearing a mask or besmeared with mud. What shall I say about
 shields now putrid with age? When they carry these, they think that
 they are carrying gods themselves on their shoulders. For Furius
 Bibaculus is regarded among the chief examples of piety, who, though he
 was prætor, nevertheless carried the sacred shield, [100] preceded by
 the lictors, though his office as proetor gave him an exemption from
 this duty. He was therefore not Furius, but altogether mad, [101] who
 thought that he graced his prætorship by this service. Deservedly then,
 since these things are done by men not unskilful and ignorant, does
 Lucretius exclaim:--


 "O foolish minds of men! O blinded breasts! In what darkness of life
 and in how great dangers is passed this term of life, whatever be its
 duration!"

 Who that is possessed of any sense would not laugh at these mockeries,
 when he sees that men, as though bereft of intelligence, do those
 things seriously, which if any one should do in sport, he would appear
 too full of sport and folly?

 [88] Or, lights. The oracle is ambiguous, since the word phos signifies
 a man, and also light. [i.e., pho`s = man, and phos = light.]

 [89] v. 629.

 [90] Jace. Others read "jaci."

 [91] v. 621.

 [92] So the priests of Baal cut themselves, 1 Kings xviii. 28.

 [93] Panibus, loaves made in the shape of crowns.

 [94] [See this page, note 6, infra.]

 [95] The moon.

 [96] euphemia. It was supposed that words of ill omen, if uttered
 during the offering of a sacrifice, would render the gods unpropitious:
 the priest therefore, at the commencement of a sacrifice, called upon
 the people to abstain from ill-omened words: euphemeite, "favete
 linguis."

 [97] Bou'zugon.

 [98] Aratus was the author of two Greek astronomical poems, the
 Phaino'mena and the Diosemeia Virgil, in his Georgics, has borrowed
 largely from the latter. Germanicus Cæsar, the grandson of Augustus, as
 stated in the text, translated the Phaino'mena.

 [99] aigiochos; "scutum habens."

 [100] Ancile, the sacred shield, carried by the Salii, or priests of
 Mars, in the processions at the festival of that deity.

 [101] Non Furius, sed plane furiosus.

 Chap. xxii.--who was the author of the vanities before described in italy
 among the romans, and who among other nations.

 The author and establisher of these vanities among the Romans was that
 Sabine king who especially engaged [102] the rude and ignorant minds of
 men with new superstitions: and that he might do this with some
 authority, he pretended that he had meetings by night with the goddess
 Egeria. There was a very dark cavern in the grove of Aricia, from which
 flowed a stream with a never failing spring. Hither he was accustomed
 to withdraw himself without any witnesses, that he might be able to
 pretend that, by the admonition of the goddess his wife, he delivered
 to the people those sacred rites which were most acceptable to the
 gods. It is evident that he wished to imitate the craftiness of Minos,
 who concealed himself in the cave of Jupiter, and, after a long delay
 there, brought forward laws, as though delivered to him by Jupiter,
 that he might bind men to obedience not only by the authority of his
 government, but also by the sanction of religion. Nor was it difficult
 to persuade shepherds. Therefore he instituted pontiffs, priests,
 Salii, and augurs; he arranged the gods in families; and by these means
 he softened the fierce spirits of the new people and called them away
 from warlike affairs to the pursuit of peace. But though he deceived
 others, he did not deceive himself. For after many years, in the
 consulship of Cornelius and Bebius, in a field belonging to the scribe
 Petilius, under the Janiculum, two stone chests were found by men who
 were digging, in one of which was the body of Numa, in the other seven
 books in Latin respecting the law of the pontiffs, and the same number
 written in Greek respecting systems of philosophy, in which he not only
 annulled the religious rites which he himself had instituted, but all
 others also. When this was referred to the senate, it was decreed that
 these books should be destroyed. Therefore Quintus Petilius, the prætor
 who had jurisdiction in the city, burnt them in an assembly of the
 people. This was a senseless proceeding; for of what advantage was it
 that the books were burnt, when the cause on account of which they were
 burnt--that they took away the authority due to religion--was itself
 handed down to memory? Every one then in the senate was most foolish;
 for the books might have been burnt, and yet the matter itself have
 been unknown. Thus, while they wish to prove even to posterity with
 what piety they defended religious institutions, they lessened the
 authority of the institutions themselves by their testimony.

 But as Pompilius was the institutor of foolish superstitions among the
 Romans, so also, before Pompilius, Faunus was in Latium, who both
 established impious rites to his grandfather Saturnus, and honoured his
 father Picus with a place among the gods, and consecrated his sister
 Fatua Fauna, who was also his wife; who, as Gabius Bassus relates, was
 called Fatua because she had been in the habit of foretelling their
 fates to women, as Faunus did to men. And Varro writes that she was a
 woman of such great modesty, that, as long as she lived, no male except
 her husband saw her or heard her name. On this account women sacrifice
 to her in secret, and call her the Good Goddess. And Sextus Claudius,
 in that book which he wrote in Greek, relates that it was the wife of
 Faunus who, because, contrary to the practice and honour of kings, she
 had drunk a jar of wine, and had become intoxicated, was beaten to
 death by her husband with myrtle rods. But afterwards, when he was
 sorry for what he had done, and was unable to endure his regret for
 her, he paid her divine honours. For this reason they say that a
 covered jar of wine is placed at her sacred rites. Therefore Faunus
 also left to posterity no slight error, which all that are intelligent
 see through. For Lucilius in these verses derides the folly of those
 who imagine that images are gods: "The terrestrial [103] Lamiæ, which
 Faunus and Numa Pompilius and others instituted; at and these he
 trembles, he places everything in this. As infant boys believe that
 every statue of bronze is a living man, so these imagine that all
 things feigned are true: they believe that statues of bronze contain a
 heart. It is a painter's gallery; [104] there is nothing true; all
 things are fictitious." The poet, indeed, compares foolish men to
 infants. But I say that they are much more senseless than infants. For
 they (infants) suppose that images are men, whereas these take them for
 gods: the one through their age, the others through folly, imagine that
 which is not true: at any rate, the one soon ceased to be deceived; the
 foolishness of the others is permanent, and always increases. Orpheus
 was the first who introduced the rites of father Liber into Greece; and
 he first celebrated them on a mountain of Boeotia, very near to Thebes,
 where Liber was born; and because this mountain continually resounded
 with the strains of the lyre, it was called Cithæron. [105] Those
 sacred rites are even now called Orphic, in which he himself was
 lacerated and torn in pieces; and he lived about the same time with
 Faunus. But which of them was prior in age admits of doubt, since
 Latinus and Priam reigned during the same years, as did also their
 fathers Faunus and Laomedon, in whose reign Orpheus came with the
 Argonauts to the coast of the Trojans.

 Let us therefore advance further, and inquire who was really the first
 author of the worship of the gods. Didymus, [106] in the books of his
 commentary on Pindar, says that Melisseus, king of the Cretans, was the
 first who sacrificed to the gods, and introduced new rites and parades
 of sacrifices. He had two daughters, Amalthæa and Melissa, who
 nourished the youthful Jupiter with goats' milk and honey. Hence that
 poetic fable derived its origin, that bees flew to the child, and
 filled his mouth with honey. Moreover, he says that Melissa was
 appointed by her father the first priestess of the Great Mother; from
 which circumstance the priests of the same Mother are still called
 Melissæ. But the sacred history testifies that Jupiter himself, when he
 had gained possession of power, arrived at such insolence that he built
 temples in honour of himself in many places. For when he went about to
 different lands, on his arrival in each region, he united to himself
 the kings or princes of the people in hospitality and friendship; and
 when he was departing from each, he ordered that a shrine should be
 dedicated to himself in the name of his host, as though the remembrance
 of their friendship and league could thus be preserved. Thus temples
 were founded in honour of Jupiter Atabyrius and Jupiter Labrandius; for
 Atabyrius and Labrandius were his entertainers and assistants in war.
 Temples were also built to Jupiter Laprius, to Jupiter Molion, to
 Jupiter Casius, and others, after the same manner. This was a very
 crafty device on his part, that he might both acquire divine honour for
 himself, and a perpetual name for his entertainers in conjunction with
 religious observances. Accordingly they were glad, and cheerfully
 submitted to his command, and observed annual rites and festivals for
 the sake of handing down their own name. Æneas did something like this
 in Sicily, when he gave the name of his host [107] Acestes to a city
 which he had built, that Acestes might afterwards joyfully and
 willingly love, increase, and adorn it. In this manner Jupiter spread
 abroad through the world the observance of his worship, and gave an
 example for the imitation of others. Whether, then, the practice of
 worshipping the gods proceeded from Melisseus, as Didymus related, or
 from Jupiter also himself, as Euhemerus says, the time is still agreed
 upon when the gods began to be worshipped. Melisseus, indeed, was much
 prior in time, inasmuch as he brought up Jupiter his grandson. It is
 therefore possible that either before, or while Jupiter was yet a boy,
 he taught the worship of the gods, namely, the mother of his
 foster-child, and his grandmother Tellus, who was the wife of Uranus,
 and his father Saturnus; and he himself, by this example and
 institution, may have exalted Jupiter to such pride, that he afterwards
 ventured to assume divine honours to himself.

 [102] Implicavit.

 [103] Terricolas. Another reading is terriculas, bugbears.

 [104] Pergula. The word properly means a projection attached to a
 house. Apelles is said to have placed his pictures in such an adjunct,
 and to have concealed himself behind them, that he might hear the
 comments of persons passing by.

 [105] Cithæron, from "cithara," a lyre.

 [106] Didymus. A celebrated Alexandrian grammarian, a follower of the
 school of Aristarchus. He is distinguished from other grammarians who
 bore the name of Didymus, by the surname Chalcenteros, which he is said
 to have received from his unwearied diligence in study. Among his
 productions, which are all lost, was one on the Homeric poems. He also
 wrote a commentary on Pindar, to which allusion is made in the text.
 See Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography.

 [107] Cf. Virg., Æneid, v. [verse 718].

 Chap. xxiii.--of the ages of vain superstitions, and the times at which they
 commenced.

 Now, since we have ascertained the origin of vain superstitions, it
 remains that we should also collect the times during which they whose
 memory is honoured lived. Theophilus, [108] in his book written to
 Autolycus respecting the times, [109] says that Thallus relates in his
 history, that Belus, who is worshipped by the Babylonians and
 Assyrians, is found to have lived 322 years before the Trojan war; that
 Belus, moreover, was contemporary with Saturnus, and that they both
 grew up at one time;--which is so true, that it may be inferred by
 reason itself. For Agamemnon, who carried on the Trojan war, was the
 fourth [110] in descent from Jupiter; and Achilles and Ajax were of the
 third [111] descent from him; and Ulysses was related in the same
 degree. Priam, indeed, was distant by a long series of descents. But
 according to some authorities, Dardanus and Iasius were sons of
 Coritus, not of Jupiter. For if it had been so, Jupiter could not have
 formed that unchaste connection with Ganymede, his own descendant.
 Therefore, if you divide the years which are in agreement, the number
 will be found in harmony with the parents of those whom I have named
 above. Now, from the destruction of the Trojan city fourteen hundred
 and seventy years are made up. From this calculation of times, it is
 manifest that Saturnus has not been born more than eighteen hundred
 years, and he also was the father of all the gods. Let them not glory,
 then, in the antiquity of their sacred rites, since both their origin
 and system and times have been ascertained. There still remain some
 things which may be of great weight for the disproving of false
 religions; but I have determined now to bring this book to an end, that
 it may not exceed moderate limits. For those things must be followed up
 more fully, that, having refuted all things which seem to oppose the
 truth, we may be able to instruct in true religion men who, through
 ignorance of good things, wander in uncertainty. But the first step
 towards wisdom is to understand what is false; the second, to ascertain
 what is true. Therefore he who shall have profited by this first
 discussion of mine, in which we have exposed false things, will be
 excited to the knowledge of the truth, than which no pleasure is more
 gratifying to man; and he will now be worthy of the wisdom of heavenly
 training, who shall approach with willingness and preparation to the
 knowledge of the other subjects.

 [108] Theophilus was bishop of Antioch in the latter part of the second
 century. He was originally a heathen, and was converted to
 Christianity, as he tells us, by the reading of the Scriptures. [See
 vol. ii. pp. [21]87 and [22]120, this series.]

 [109] De Temporibus. Among the extant works of Theophilus there is not
 any with this title, but his work to Autolycus contains an apology for
 Christianity in three books. It is to this that Lactantius here refers.

 [110] Abnepos, son of a great-grandchild.

 [111] Pronepotes, great-grandsons.


the divine institutes.

  Book II.

  Of the Origin of Error.

 Chap. i.--that forgetfulness of reason makes men ignorant of the true god,
 whom they worship in adversity and despise in prosperity.

 Although I have shown in the first book that the religious ceremonies
 of the gods are false, because those in whose honour the general
 consent of men throughout the world by a foolish persuasion undertook
 various and dissimilar rites were mortals, and when they had completed
 their term of life, yielded to a divinely appointed necessity and died,
 yet, lest any doubt should be left, this second book shall lay open the
 very fountain of errors, and shall explain all the causes by which men
 were deceived, so that at first they believed that they were gods, and
 afterwards with an inveterate persuasion persevered in the religious
 observances which they had most perversely undertaken. For I desire, O
 Emperor Constantine, now that I have proved the emptiness of these
 things, and brought to light the impious vanity of men, to assert the
 majesty of the one God, undertaking the more useful and greater duty of
 recalling men from crooked paths, and of bringing them back into favour
 with themselves, that they may not, as some philosophers do, so greatly
 despise themselves, nor think that they are weak and useless, and of no
 account, and altogether born in vain. For this notion drives many to
 vicious pursuits. For while they imagine that we are a care to no God,
 or that we are about to have no existence after death, they altogether
 give themselves to the indulgence of their passions; and while they
 think that it is allowed them, they eagerly apply themselves to the
 enjoyment of pleasures, by which they unconsciously run into the snares
 of death; for they are ignorant as to what is reasonable conduct on the
 part of man: for if they wished to understand this, in the first place
 they would acknowledge their Lord, and would follow after virtue and
 justice; they would not subject their souls to the influence of
 earth-born fictions, nor would they seek the deadly fascinations of
 their lusts; in short, they would value themselves highly, and would
 understand that there is more in man than appears; and that they cannot
 retain their power and standing unless men lay aside depravity, and
 undertake the worship of their true Parent. I indeed, as I ought, often
 reflecting on the sum of affairs, am accustomed to wonder that the
 majesty of the one God, which keeps together and rules all things, has
 come to be so forgotten, that the only befitting object of worship is,
 above all others, the one which is especially neglected; and that men
 have sunk to such blindness, that they prefer the dead to the true and
 living God, and those who are of the earth, and buried in the earth, to
 Him who was the Creator of the earth itself.

 And yet this impiety of men might meet with some indulgence if the
 error entirely arose from ignorance of the divine name. But since we
 often see that the worshippers of other gods themselves confess and
 acknowledge the Supreme God, what pardon can they hope for their
 impiety, who do not acknowledge the worship of Him whom man cannot
 altogether be ignorant of? For both in swearing, and in expressing a
 wish, and in giving thanks, they do not name Jupiter, or a number of
 gods, but God; [112] so entirely does the truth of its own accord break
 forth by the force of nature even from unwilling breasts. And this,
 indeed, is not the case with men in their prosperity. For then most of
 all does God escape the memory of men, when in the enjoyment of His
 benefits they ought to honour His divine beneficence. But if any
 weighty necessity shall press them, then they remember God. If the
 terror of war shall have resounded, if the pestilential force of
 diseases shall have overhung them, if long-continued drought shall have
 denied nourishment to the crops, if a violent tempest or hail shall
 have assailed them, they betake themselves to God, aid is implored from
 God, God is entreated to succour them. If any one is tossed about on
 the sea, the wind being furious, it is this God whom he invokes. If any
 one is harassed by any violence, he implores His aid. If any one,
 reduced to the last extremity of poverty, begs for food, he appeals to
 God alone, and by His divine and matchless name [113] alone he seeks to
 gain the compassion of men. Thus they never remember God, unless it be
 while they are in trouble. When fear has left them, and the dangers
 have withdrawn, then in truth they quickly hasten to the temples of the
 gods: they pour libations to them, they sacrifice to them, they crown
 [114] them with garlands. But to God, whom they called upon in their
 necessity itself, they do not give thanks even in word. Thus from
 prosperity arises luxury; and from luxury, together with all other
 vices, there arises impiety towards God.

 From what cause can we suppose this to arise? Unless we imagine that
 there is some perverse power which is always hostile to the truth,
 which rejoices in the errors of men, whose one and only task it is
 perpetually to scatter darkness, and to blind the minds of men, lest
 they should see the light,--lest, in short, they should look to heaven,
 and observe the nature [115] of their own body, the origin [116] of
 which we shall relate at the proper place; but now let us refute
 fallacies. For since other animals look down to the ground, with bodies
 bending forward, because they have not received reason and wisdom,
 whereas an upright position and an elevated countenance have been given
 to us by the Creator God, it is evident that these ceremonies paid to
 the gods are not in accordance with the reason of man, because they
 bend down the heaven-sprung being to the worship of earthly objects.
 For that one and only Parent of ours, when He created man,--that is, an
 animal intelligent and capable of exercising reason,--raised him from
 the ground, and elevated him to the contemplation of his Creator. As an
 ingenious poet [117] has well represented it:--


 "And when other animals bend forward and look to the earth, He gave to
 man an elevated countenance, and commanded him to look up to the
 heaven, and to raise his countenance erect to stars."

 From this circumstance the Greeks plainly derived the name anthropos,
 [118] because he looks upward. They therefore deny themselves, and
 renounce the name of man, who do not look up, but downward: unless they
 think that the fact of our being upright is assigned to man without any
 cause. God willed that we should look up to heaven, and undoubtedly not
 without reason. For both the birds and almost all of the dumb creation
 see the heaven, but it is given to us in a peculiar manner to behold
 the heaven as we stand erect, that we may seek religion there; that
 since we cannot see God with our eyes, we may with our mind contemplate
 Him, whose throne is there: and this cannot assuredly be done by him
 who worships brass and stone, which are earthly things. But it is most
 incorrect that the nature of the body, which is temporary, should be
 upright, but that the soul itself, which is eternal, should be abject;
 whereas the figure and position have no other signification, except
 that the mind of man ought to look in the same direction as his
 countenance, and that his soul ought to be as upright as his body, so
 that it may imitate that which it ought to rule. But men, forgetful
 both of their name and nature, cast down their eyes from the heaven,
 and fix them upon the ground, and fear the works of their own hands, as
 though anything could be greater than its own artificer.

 [112] [See Tertullian, vol. iii. [23]p. 176, this series.]

 [113] Nomen. Another reading is numen, deity.

 [114] It was a custom among the heathen nations to crown the images of
 the gods with garlands of flowers.

 [115] The allusion is to the upright attitude of man, as compared with
 other created beings. The argument is often used by Lactantius.

 [116] This sentence is omitted in some editions.

 [117] Ovid, Metamorphosis [book i. 85.

 Os homini sublime dedit: coelumque tueri

 Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus].

 [118] The allusion is to the supposed derivation of the word anthropos,
 from ana`, tre'po, ops, to turn the face upwards.

 Chap. ii.--what was the first cause of making images; of the true likeness
 of god, and the true worship of him.

 What madness is it, then, either to form those objects which they
 themselves may afterwards fear, or to fear the things which they have
 formed? But, they say, we do not fear the images themselves, but those
 beings after whose likeness they were formed, and to whose names they
 are dedicated. You fear them doubtless on this account, because you
 think that they are in heaven; for if they are gods, the case cannot be
 otherwise. Why, then, do you not raise your eyes to heaven, and,
 invoking their names, offer sacrifices in the open air? Why do you look
 to walls, and wood, and stone, rather than to the place where you
 believe them to be? What is the meaning of temples [119] and altars?
 what, in short, of the images themselves, which are memorials either of
 the dead or absent? For the plan of making likenesses was invented by
 men for this reason, that it might be possible to retain the memory of
 those who had either been removed by death or separated by absence. In
 which of these classes, then, shall we reckon the gods? If among the
 dead, who is so foolish as to worship them? If among the absent, then
 they are not to be worshipped, if they neither see our actions nor hear
 our prayers. But if the gods cannot be absent,--for, since they are
 divine, they see and hear all things, in whatever part of the universe
 they are,--it follows that images are superfluous, since the gods are
 present everywhere, and it is sufficient to invoke with prayer the
 names of those who hear us. But if they are present, they cannot fail
 to be at hand at their own images. It is entirely so, as the people
 imagine, that the spirits of the dead wander [120] about the tombs and
 relics of their bodies. But after that the deity has begun to be near,
 there is no longer need of his statue.

 For I ask, if any one should often contemplate the likeness of a man
 who has settled in a foreign land, that he may thus solace himself for
 him who is absent, would he also appear to be of sound mind, if, when
 the other had returned and was present, he should persevere in
 contemplating the likeness, and should prefer the enjoyment of it,
 rather than the sight of the man himself? Assuredly not. For the
 likeness of a man appears to be necessary at that time when he is far
 away; and it will become superfluous when he is at hand. But in the
 case of God, whose spirit and influence are diffused everywhere, and
 can never be absent, it is plain that an image is always superfluous.
 But they fear lest their religion should be altogether vain and empty
 if they should see nothing present which they may adore, and therefore
 they set up images; and since these are representations of the dead,
 they resemble the dead, for they are entirely destitute of perception.
 But the image of the ever-living God ought to be living and endued with
 perception. But if it received this name [121] from resemblance, how
 can it be supposed that these images resemble God, which have neither
 perception nor motion? Therefore the image of God is not that which is
 fashioned by the fingers of men out of stone, or bronze, or other
 material, but man himself, since he has both perception and motion, and
 performs many and great actions. Nor do the foolish men understand,
 that if images could exercise perception and motion, they would of
 their own accord adore men, by whom they have been adorned and
 embellished, since they would be either rough and unpolished stone, or
 rude and unshapen wood, [122] had they not been fashioned by man.

 Man, therefore, is to be regarded as the parent of these images; for
 they were produced by his instrumentality, and through him they first
 had shape, figure, and beauty. Therefore he who made them is superior
 to the objects which were made. And yet no one looks up to the Maker
 Himself, or reverences Him: he fears the things which he has made, as
 though there could be more power in the work than in the workman.
 Seneca, therefore, rightly says in his moral treatises: They worship
 the images of the gods, they supplicate them with bended knee, they
 adore them, they sit or stand beside them through the whole day, they
 offer to them contributions, [123] they slay victims; and while they
 value these images so highly, they despise the artificers who made
 them. What is so inconsistent, as to despise the statuary and to adore
 the statue; and not even to admit to your society him who makes your
 gods? What force, what power can they have, when he who made them has
 none? But he was unable to give to these even those powers which he
 had, the power of sight, of hearing, of speech, and of motion. Is any
 one so foolish as to suppose that there is anything in the image of a
 god, in which there is nothing even of a man except the mere
 resemblance? But no one considers these things; for men are imbued with
 this persuasion, and their minds have thoroughly imbibed the deception
 [124] of folly. And thus beings endowed with sense adore objects which
 are senseless, rational beings adore irrational objects, those who are
 alive adore inanimate objects, those sprung from heaven adore earthly
 objects. It delights me, therefore, as though standing on a lofty
 watch-tower, from which all may hear, to proclaim aloud that saying of
 Persius: [125] --


 "O souls bent down to the earth, and destitute of heavenly things?"

 Rather look to the heaven, to the sight of which God your Creator
 raised you. He gave to you an elevated countenance; you bend it down to
 the earth; you depress to things below those lofty minds, which are
 raised together with their bodies to their parent, as though it
 repented you that you were not born quadrupeds. It is not befitting
 that the heavenly being should make himself equal to things which are
 earthly, and incline to the earth. Why do you deprive yourselves of
 heavenly benefits, and of your own accord fall prostrate upon the
 ground? For you do wretchedly roll yourselves [126] on the ground, when
 you seek here below that which you ought to have sought above. For as
 to those vain [127] and fragile productions, the work of man's hands,
 from whatever kind of material they are formed, what are they but
 earth, out of which they were produced? Why, then, do you subject
 yourselves to lower objects? why do you place the earth above your
 heads? For when you lower yourselves to the earth, and humiliate
 yourselves, you sink of your own accord to hell, and condemn yourselves
 to death; for nothing is lower and more humble than the earth, except
 death and hell. And if you wished to escape these, you would despise
 the earth lying beneath your feet, preserving the position of your
 body, which you received upright, in order that you might be able to
 direct your eyes and your mind to Him who made it. But to despise and
 trample upon the earth is nothing else than to refrain from adoring
 images, because they are made of earth; also not to desire riches, and
 to despise the pleasures of the body, because wealth, and the body
 itself, which we make use of as a lodging, is but earth. Worship a
 living being, that you may live; for he must necessarily die who has
 subjected [128] himself and his soul to the dead.

 [119] The word temples is not here applied to the buildings which the
 faithful set apart for the worship of God, but to the places used by
 the heathens for their rites and sacrifices. [For three centuries
 templa was the word among Christians for the idolatrous places.] That
 buildings were set apart by Christians from the earliest ages for their
 religious assemblies, is gathered from the express testimony of
 Tertullian, Cyprian, and other early writers. They were called
 ecclesiæ; churches, not temples. [For kuriako`n, dominicum, basilica,
 etc., see Bingham, book viii. cap i. sec. 2.]

 [120] The heathens thought that the souls of the unburied dead wandered
 about on the earth, until their remains were committed to the tomb.

 [121] The words simulacrum, "an image," and similitudo, "a likeness" or
 "resemblance," are connected together through the common root similis,
 "like."

 [122] Materia is especially used in the sense of wood or timber.

 [123] Stipem jaciunt, "they throw a coin." The word properly means a
 "coin," money bearing a stamped impression; hence stipendium,
 "soldiers' pay."

 [124] Fucus, "colouring juice;" hence anything not genuine, but
 artificial. Others read succum, "juice."

 [125] Persius, Satire 2d, 6. Lactantius uses the testimony of heathen
 writers against the heathen.

 [126] Or wallow--"voluto."

 [127] Ludicra, "diversions." The word is applied to stage-plays.

 [128] Adjudicavit, adjudged, made over. Cf. Hor., Ep., i. 18: "Et, si
 quid abest, Italis adjudicat armis."

 Chap. iii.--that cicero and other men of learning erred in not turning away
 the people from error.

 But what does it avail thus to address the vulgar and ignorant, when we
 see that learned and prudent men, though they understand the vanity of
 these ceremonies, nevertheless through some perverseness persist in the
 worship of those very objects which they condemn? Cicero was well aware
 that the deities which men worshipped were false. For when he had
 spoken many things which tended to the overthrow of religious
 ceremonies, he said nevertheless that these matters ought not to be
 discussed by the vulgar, lest such discussion should extinguish the
 system of religion which was publicly received. What can you do
 respecting him, who, when he perceives himself to be in error, of his
 own accord dashes himself against the stones, that all the people may
 stumble? or tears out his own eyes, that all may be blind? who neither
 deserves well of others, whom he suffers to be in error, nor of
 himself, since he inclines to the errors of others, and makes no use of
 the benefit of his own wisdom, so as to carry out [129] in action the
 conception of his own mind, but knowingly and consciously thrusts his
 foot into the snare, that he also may be taken with the rest, whom he
 ought, as the more prudent, to have extricated? Nay rather, if you have
 any virtue, Cicero, endeavour to make the people wise: that is a
 befitting subject, on which you may expend all the powers of your
 eloquence. For there is no fear lest speech should fail you in so good
 a cause, when you have often defended even bad ones with copiousness
 and spirit. But truly you fear the prison of Socrates, [130] and on
 that account you do not venture to undertake the advocacy of truth.
 But, as a wise man, you ought to have despised death. And, indeed, it
 would have been much more glorious to die on account of good words than
 on account of revilings. Nor would the renown of your Philippics have
 been more advantageous to you than the dispersion of the errors of
 mankind, and the recalling of the minds of men to a healthy state by
 your disputation.

 But let us make allowance for timidity, which ought not to exist in a
 wise man. Why, then, are you yourself engaged in the same error? I see
 that you worship things of earth made by the hand: you understand that
 they are vain, and yet you do the same things which they do, whom you
 confess to be most foolish. What, therefore, did it profit you, that
 you saw the truth, which you were neither about to defend nor to
 follow? If even they who perceive themselves to be in error err
 willingly, how much more so do the unlearned vulgar, who delight in
 empty processions, and gaze at all things with boyish minds! They are
 delighted with trifling things, and are captivated with the form of
 images; and they are unable to weigh every object in their own minds,
 so as to understand that nothing which is beheld by the eyes of mortals
 ought to be worshipped, because it must necessarily be mortal. Nor is
 it matter of surprise if they do not see God, when they themselves do
 not even see man, whom they believe that they see. For this, which
 falls under the notice of the eyes, [131] is not man, but the
 receptacle of man, the quality and figure of which are not seen from
 the lineaments of the vessel which contains them, but from the actions
 and character. They, therefore, who worship images are mere bodies
 without men, because they have given themselves to corporeal things,
 and do not see anything with the mind more than with the body; whereas
 it is the office of the soul to perceive those things more clearly
 which the eye of the body cannot behold. And that philosopher and poet
 severely accuses those men as humble and abject, who, in opposition to
 the design of their nature, prostrate themselves to the worship of
 earthly things; for he says: [132] --


 "And they abase their souls with fear of the gods, and weigh and press
 them down to earth."

 When he said these things, indeed, his meaning was different--that
 nothing was to be worshipped, because the gods do not regard the
 affairs of men.

 In another place, at length, he acknowledges that the ceremonies and
 worship of the gods is an unavailing office: [133] --


 "Nor is it any piety to be often seen with veiled head to turn to a
 stone, and approach every altar, and fall prostrate on the ground, and
 spread the hands before the shrines of the gods, and sprinkle the
 altars with much blood of beasts, and to offer vow after vow."

 And assuredly if these things are useless, it is not right that sublime
 and lofty souls should be called away and depressed to the earth, but
 that they should think only of heavenly things.

 False religious systems, therefore, have been attacked by more
 sagacious men, because they perceived their falsehood; but the true
 religion was not introduced, because they knew not what and where it
 was. They therefore so regarded it as though it had no existence,
 because they were unable to find it in its truth. And in this manner
 they fell into a much greater error than they who held a religion which
 was false. For those worshippers of fragile images, however foolish
 they may be, inasmuch as they place heavenly things in things which are
 earthly and corruptible, yet retain something of wisdom, and may be
 pardoned, because they hold the chief duty of man, if not in reality,
 yet still in their purpose; since, if not the only, yet certainly the
 greatest difference between men and the beasts consists in religion.
 But this latter class, in proportion to their superior wisdom, in that
 they understood the error of false religion, rendered themselves so
 much the more foolish, because they did not imagine that some religion
 was true. And thus, because it is easier to judge of the affairs of
 others than of their own, while they see the downfall of others, they
 have not observed what was before their own feet. On either side is
 found the greatest folly, and a certain trace [134] of wisdom; so that
 you may doubt which are rather to be called more foolish--those who
 embrace a false religion, or those who embrace none. But (as I have
 said) pardon may be granted to those who are ignorant and do not own
 themselves to be wise; but it cannot be extended to those who, while
 they profess [135] wisdom, rather exhibit folly. I am not, indeed, so
 unjust as to imagine that they could divine, so that they might find
 out the truth by themselves; for I acknowledge that this is impossible.
 But I require from them that which they were able to perform by reason
 [136] itself. For they would act more prudently, if they both
 understood that some form of religion is true, and if, while they
 attacked false religions, they openly proclaimed that men were not in
 possession of that which is true.

 But this consideration may perhaps have influenced them, that if there
 were any true religion, it would exert itself and assert its authority,
 and not permit the existence of anything opposed to it. For they were
 unable to see at all, on what account, or by whom, and in what manner
 true religion was depressed, which partakes of a divine mystery [137]
 and a heavenly secret. And no man can know [138] this by any means,
 unless he is taught. The sum of the matter is this: The unlearned and
 the foolish esteem false religions as true, because they neither know
 the true nor understand the false. [139] But the more sagacious,
 because they are ignorant of the true, either persist in those
 religions which they know to be false, that they may appear to possess
 something; or worship nothing at all, that they may not fall into
 error, whereas this very thing partakes largely of error, under the
 figure of a man to imitate the life of cattle. To understand that which
 is false is truly the part of wisdom, but of human wisdom. Beyond this
 step man cannot proceed, and thus many of the philosophers have taken
 away religious institutions, as I have pointed out; but to know the
 truth is the part of divine wisdom. But man by himself cannot attain to
 this knowledge, unless he is taught by God. Thus philosophers have
 reached the height of human wisdom, so as to understand that which is
 not; but they have failed in attaining the power of saying that which
 really is. It is a well-known saying of Cicero: [140] "I wish that I
 could as easily find out the truth as I can refute false things." And
 because this is beyond the power of man's condition, the capability of
 this office is assigned to us, to whom God has delivered the knowledge
 of the truth; to the explaining of which the four last books shall be
 devoted. Now, in the meantime, let us bring to light false things, as
 we have begun to do.

 [129] Fill up and complete the outline which he has conceived.

 [130] Lactantius charges Cicero with want of courage, in being
 unwilling to declare the truth to the Romans, lest he should incur the
 peril of death. The fortitude with which Socrates underwent death, when
 condemned by the Athenians, is related by Xenophon and Plato.

 [131] Lactantius here follows Plato, who placed the essence of man in
 the intellectual soul. The body, however, as well as the soul, is of
 the essence of man; but Lactantius seems to limit the name of man to
 the higher and more worthy part. [Rhetorically, not dogmatically.]

 [132] Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, vi. 5. ["Premunt ad terram."]

 [133] Lucretius, v. 1197.

 [134] Odor quidam sapientiæ.

 [135] Rom. i. 22: "Professing themselves to be wise, they became
 fools."

 [136] The apostle teaches the same, Rom. i. 19-21.

 [137] Divini sacramenti. 1 Cor. ii. 7: "We speak the wisdom of God in a
 mystery."

 [138] 1 Cor ii. 14: "The natural man receiveth not the things of the
 Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know
 them, because they are spiritually discerned."

 [139] [2 Pet. iii. 16. Even among believers such perils exist.]

 [140] De Natura Deorum, lib. i. [cap. 32. Quam falsa convincere].

 Chap. iv.--of images, and the ornaments of temples, and the contempt in
 which they are held even by the heathens themselves.

 What majesty, then, can images have, which were altogether in the power
 of puny man, either that they should be formed into something else, or
 that they should not be made at all? On which account Priapus thus
 speaks in Horace: [141]


 "Formerly I was the trunk of a fig-tree, [142] a useless log, when the
 carpenter, at a loss whether he should make a bench or a Priapus,
 decided that it should be a god. Accordingly I am a god, a very great
 terror to thieves and birds."

 Who would not be at ease with such a guardian as this? For thieves are
 so foolish as to fear the figure of Priapus; though the very birds,
 which they imagine to be driven away by fear of his scythe, settle upon
 the images which are skilfully made, that is, which altogether resemble
 men, build their nests there, and defile them. But Flaccus, as a writer
 of satire, ridiculed the folly of men. But they who make the images
 fancy that they are performing a serious business. In short, that very
 great poet, a man of sagacity in other things, in this alone displayed
 folly, not like a poet, but after the manner of an old woman, when even
 in those most highly-finished [143] books he orders this to be done:--


 "And let the guardianship of Priapus of the Hellespont, [144] who
 drives away thieves and birds with his willow scythe, preserve them."

 Therefore they adore mortal things, as made by mortals. For they may be
 broken, or burnt, or be destroyed. For they are often apt to be broken
 to pieces, when houses fall through age, and when, consumed by
 conflagration, they waste away to ashes; and in many instances, unless
 aided by their own magnitude, or protected by diligent watchfulness,
 they become the prey of thieves. What madness is it, then, to fear
 those objects for which either the downfall of a building, or fires, or
 thefts, may be feared! What folly, to hope for protection from those
 things which are unable to protect themselves! What perversity, to have
 recourse to the guardianship of those which, when injured, are
 themselves unavenged, unless vengeance is exacted by their worshippers!
 Where, then, is truth? Where no violence can be applied to religion;
 where there appears to be nothing which can be injured; where no
 sacrilege can be committed.

 But whatever is subjected to the eyes and to the hands, that, in truth,
 because it is perishable, is inconsistent with the whole subject of
 immortality. It is in vain, therefore, that men set off and adorn their
 gods with gold, ivory, and jewels, as though they were capable of
 deriving any pleasure from these things. What is the use of precious
 gifts to insensible objects? Is it the same which the dead have? For as
 they embalm the bodies of the dead, wrap them in spices and precious
 garments, and bury them in the earth, so they honour the gods, who when
 they were made did not perceive it, and when they are worshipped have
 no knowledge of it; for they did not receive sensibility on their
 consecration. Persius was displeased that golden vessels should be
 carried into the temples, since he thought it superfluous that that
 should be reckoned among religious offerings which was not an
 instrument of sanctity, but of avarice. For these are the things which
 it is better to offer as a gift to the god whom you would rightly
 worship:--


 "Written law [145] and the divine law of the conscience, and the sacred
 recesses of the mind, and the breast imbued with nobleness." [146]

 A noble and wise sentiment. But he ridiculously added this: that there
 is this gold in the temples, as there are dolls [147] presented to
 Venus by the virgin; which perhaps he may have despised on account of
 their smallness. For he did not see that the very images and statues of
 the gods, wrought in gold and ivory by the hand of Polycletus,
 Euphranor, and Phidias, were nothing more than large dolls, not
 dedicated by virgins, to whose sports some indulgence may be granted,
 but by bearded men. Therefore Seneca deservedly laughs at the folly
 even of old men. We are not (he says) boys twice, [148] as is commonly
 said, but are always so. But there is this difference, that when men we
 have greater subjects of sport. Therefore men offer to these dolls,
 which are of large size, and adorned as though for the stage, both
 perfumes, and incense, and odours: they sacrifice to these costly and
 fattened victims, which have a mouth, [149] but one that is not
 suitable for eating; to these they bring robes and costly garments,
 though they have no need of clothing; to these they dedicate gold and
 silver, of which they who receive them are as destitute [150] as they
 who have given them.

 And not without reason did Dionysius, the despot of Sicily, when after
 a victory he had become master of Greece, [151] despise, and plunder
 and jeer at such gods, for he followed up his sacrilegious acts by
 jesting words. For when he had taken off a golden robe from the statue
 of the Olympian Jupiter, he ordered that a woollen garment should be
 placed upon him, saying that a golden robe was heavy in summer and cold
 in winter, but that a woollen one was adapted to each season. He also
 took off the golden beard from Æsculapius, saying that it was
 unbecoming and unjust, that while his father Apollo was yet smooth and
 beardless, the son should be seen to wear a beard before his father. He
 also took away the bowls, and spoils, and some little images [152]
 which were held in the extended hands of the statues, and said that he
 did not take them away, but received them: for that it would be very
 foolish and ungrateful to refuse to receive good things, when offered
 voluntarily by those from whom men were accustomed to implore them. He
 did these things with impunity, because he was a king and victorious.
 Moreover, his usual good fortune also followed him; for he lived even
 to old age, and handed down the kingdom in succession to his son. In
 his case, therefore, because men could not punish his sacrilegious
 deeds, it was befitting that the gods should be their own avengers. But
 if any humble person shall have committed any such crime, there are at
 hand for his punishment the scourge, fire, the rack, [153] the cross,
 and whatever torture men can invent in their anger and rage. But when
 they punish those who have been detected in the act of sacrilege, they
 themselves distrust the power of their gods. For why should they not
 leave to them especially the opportunity of avenging themselves, if
 they think that they are able to do so? Moreover, they also imagine
 that it happened through the will of the deities that the sacrilegious
 robbers were discovered and arrested; and their cruelty is instigated
 not so much by anger as by fear, lest they themselves should be visited
 with punishment if they failed to avenge the injury done to the gods.
 And, in truth, they display incredible shallowness in imagining that
 the gods will injure them on account of the guilt of others, who by
 themselves were unable to injure those very persons by whom they were
 profaned and plundered. But, in fact, they have often themselves also
 inflicted punishment on the sacrilegious: that may have occurred even
 by chance, which has sometimes happened, but not always. But I will
 show presently how that occurred. Now in the meantime I will ask, Why
 did they not punish so many and such great acts of sacrilege in
 Dionysius, who insulted the gods openly, and not in secret? Why did
 they not repel this sacrilegious man, possessed of such power, from
 their temples, their ceremonies, and their images? Why, even when he
 had carried off their sacred things, had he a prosperous voyage--as he
 himself, according to his custom, testified in joke? Do you see, he
 said to his companions who feared shipwreck, how prosperous a voyage
 the immortal gods themselves give to the sacrilegious? But perhaps he
 had learnt from Plato that the gods have no [154] power.

 What of Caius Verres? whom his accuser Tully compares to this same
 Dionysius, and to Phalaris, and to all tyrants. Did he not pillage the
 whole of Sicily, carrying away the images of the gods, and the
 ornaments of the temples? It is idle to follow up each particular
 instance: I would fain make mention of one, in which the accuser, with
 all the force of eloquence--in short, with every effort of voice and of
 body--lamented about Ceres of Catina, or of Henna: the one of whom was
 of such great sanctity, that it was unlawful for men to enter the
 secret recesses of her temple; the other was of such great antiquity,
 that all accounts relate that the goddess herself first discovered
 grain in the soil of Henna, and that her virgin daughter was carried
 away from the same place. Lastly, in the times of the Gracchi, when the
 state was disturbed both by seditions and by portents, on its being
 discovered in the Sibylline predictions that the most ancient Ceres
 ought to be appeased, ambassadors were sent to Henna. This Ceres, then,
 either the most holy one, whom it was unlawful for men to behold even
 for the sake of adoration, or the most ancient one, whom the senate and
 people of Rome had appeased with sacrifices and gifts, was carried away
 with impunity by Caius Verres from her secret and ancient recesses, his
 robber slaves having been sent in. The same orator, in truth, when he
 affirmed that he had been entreated by the Sicilians to undertake the
 cause of the province, made use of these words: "That they had now not
 even any gods in their cities to whom they might betake themselves,
 since Verres had taken away the most sacred images from their most
 venerable shrines." As though, in truth, if Verres had taken them away
 from the cities and shrines, he had also taken them from heaven. From
 which it appears that those gods have nothing in them more than the
 material of which they are made. And not without reason did the
 Sicilians have recourse to you, O Marcus Tullius, that is, to a man;
 since they had for three years experienced that those gods had no
 power. For they would have been most foolish if they had fled for
 protection against the injuries of men, to those who were unable to be
 angry with Caius Verres on their own behalf. But, it will be urged,
 Verres was condemned on account of these deeds. Therefore he was not
 punished by the gods, but by the energy of Cicero, by which he either
 crushed his defenders or withstood his influence. [155] Why should I
 say that, in the case of Verres himself, that was not so much a
 condemnation as a respite from labour? So that, as the immortal gods
 had given a prosperous voyage to Dionysius when he was carrying off the
 spoils of gods, so also they appear to have bestowed on Verres quiet
 repose, in which he might with tranquility enjoy the fruits of his
 sacrilege. For when civil wars afterwards raged, being removed from all
 danger and apprehension, under the cloak of condemnation he heard of
 the disastrous misfortunes and miserable deaths of others; and he who
 appeared to have fallen while all retained their position, he alone, in
 truth, retained his position while all fell; until the proscription of
 the triumvirs,--that very proscription, indeed, which carried off
 Tully, the avenger of the violated majesty of the gods,--carried him
 off, satiated at once with the enjoyment of the wealth which he had
 gained by sacrilege, and with life, and worn out by old age. Moreover,
 he was fortunate in this very circumstance, that before his own death
 he heard of the most cruel end of his accuser; the gods doubtless
 providing that this sacrilegious man and spoiler of their worship
 should not die before he had received consolation from revenge.

 [141] Horat., 1 Serm. 8. 1.

 [142] The wood of the fig-tree is proverbially used to denote that
 which is worthless and contemptible.

 [143] The Georgics, which are much more elaborately finished than the
 other works of Virgil.

 [144] Priapus was especially worshipped at Lampsacus on the Hellespont;
 hence he is styled Hellespontiacus.

 [145] Compositum jus, fasque animi. Compositum jus is explained as "the
 written and ordained laws of men;" fas, "divine and sacred law." Others
 read animo, "human and divine law settled in the mind."

 [146] Persius, Sat., ii. 73.

 [147] Pupæ, dolls or images worn by girls, as bullæ were by boys. On
 arriving at maturity, they dedicated these images to Venus. See Jahn's
 note on the passage from Persius.

 [148] The allusion is to the proverb that "old age is second
 childhood."

 [149] An allusion to Ps. cxv. 5: "They have mouths, but they speak
 not."

 [150] Quæ tam non habent qui accipiunt, quam qui illa donarunt. The
 senseless images can make no use of the treasures.

 [151] Justin relates that Græcia Magna, a part of Italy, was subdued by
 Dionysius. Cicero says that he sailed to Peloponnesus, and entered the
 temple of the Olympian Jupiter. [De Nat. Deor., iii. 34.]

 [152] Sigilla. The word is also used to denote seals, or signets.

 [153] Equuleus: an instrument of torture resembling a horse, on which
 slaves were stretched and tortured.

 [154] Nihil esse [= are nothing.]

 [155] The allusion is to the efforts made by the partisans of Verres to
 prevent Cicero from obtaining the necessary evidence for the
 condemnation of Verres. But all these efforts were unavailing: the
 evidence was overwhelming, and before the trial was over Verres went
 into exile.

 Chap. v.--that god only, the creator of all things, is to be worshipped, and
 not the elements or heavenly bodies; and the opinion of the stoics is
 refuted, who think that the stars and planets are gods.

 How much better, therefore, is it, leaving vain and insensible objects,
 to turn our eyes in that direction where is the seat and dwelling-place
 of the true God; who suspended the earth [156] on a firm foundation,
 who bespangled the heaven with shining stars; who lighted up the sun,
 the most bright and matchless light for the affairs of men, in proof of
 His own single majesty; who girded the earth with seas, and ordered the
 rivers to flow with perpetual course!


 "He also commanded the plains to extend themselves, the valleys to sink
 down, the woods to be covered with foliage, the stony mountains to
 rise." [157]

 All these things truly were not the work of Jupiter, who was born
 seventeen hundred years ago; but of the same, "that framer of all
 things, the origin of a better world," [158] who is called God, whose
 beginning cannot be comprehended, and ought not to be made the subject
 of inquiry. It is sufficient for man, to his full and perfect wisdom,
 if he understands the existence of God: the force and sum of which
 understanding is this, that he look up to and honour the common Parent
 of the human race, and the Maker of wonderful things. Whence some
 persons of dull and obtuse mind adore as gods the elements, which are
 both created objects and are void of sensibility; who, when they
 admired the works of God, that is, the heaven with its various lights,
 the earth with its plains and mountains, the seas with their rivers and
 lakes and fountains, struck with admiration of these things, and
 forgetting the Maker Himself, whom they were unable to see, began to
 adore and worship His works. Nor were they able at all to understand
 how much greater and more wonderful He is, who made these things out of
 nothing. And when they see that these things, in obedience to divine
 laws, by a perpetual necessity are subservient to the uses and
 interests of men, they nevertheless regard them as gods, being
 ungrateful towards the divine bounty, so that they preferred their own
 works to their most indulgent God and Father. But what wonder is it if
 uncivilized or ignorant men err, since even philosophers of the Stoic
 sect are of the same opinion, so as to judge that all the heavenly
 bodies which have motion are to be reckoned in the number of gods;
 inasmuch as the Stoic Lucilius thus speaks in Cicero: [159] "This
 regularity, therefore, in the stars, this great agreement of the times
 in such various courses during all eternity, are unintelligible to me
 with out the exercise of mind, reason, and design; and when we see
 these things in the constellations, we cannot but place these very
 objects in the number of the gods." And he thus speaks a little before:
 "It remains," he says, "that the motion of the stars is voluntary; and
 he who sees these things, would act not only unlearnedly, but also
 impiously, if he should deny it." We in truth firmly deny it; and we
 prove that you, O philosophers, are not only unlearned and impious, but
 also blind, foolish, and senseless, who have surpassed in shallowness
 the ignorance of the uneducated. For they regard as gods only the sun
 and moon, but you the stars also.

 Make known to us, therefore, the mysteries of the stars, that we may
 erect altars and temples to each; that we may know with what rites and
 on what day to worship each, with what names and with what prayers we
 should call on them; unless perhaps we ought to worship gods so
 innumerable without any discrimination, and gods so minute in a mass.
 Why should I mention that the argument by which they infer that all the
 heavenly bodies are gods, tends to the opposite conclusion? For if they
 imagine that they are gods on this account, because they have their
 courses fixed and in accordance with reason, they are in error. For it
 is evident from this that they are not gods, because it is not
 permitted them to deviate [160] from their prescribed orbits. But if
 they were gods, they would be borne hither and thither in all
 directions without any necessity, as living creatures on the earth, who
 wander hither and thither as they please, because their wills are
 unrestrained, and each is borne wherever inclination may have led it.
 Therefore the motion of the stars is not voluntary, but of necessity,
 because they obey [161] the laws appointed for them. But when he was
 arguing about the courses of the stars, while he understood from the
 very harmony of things and times that they were not by chance, he
 judged that they were voluntary; as though they could not be moved with
 such order and arrangement, unless they contained within them an
 understanding acquainted with its own duty. Oh, how difficult is truth
 to those who are ignorant of it! how easy to those who know it! If, he
 says, the motions of the stars are not by chance, nothing else remains
 but that they are voluntary; nay, in truth, as it is plain that they
 are not by chance, so is it clear that they are not voluntary. Why,
 then, in completing their courses, do they preserve their regularity?
 Undoubtedly God, the framer of the universe, so arranged and contrived
 them, that they might run through their courses [162] in the heaven
 with a divine and wonderful order, to accomplish the variations of the
 successive seasons. Was Archimedes [163] of Sicily able to contrive a
 likeness and representation of the universe in hollow brass, in which
 he so arranged the sun and moon, that they effected, as it were every
 day, motions unequal and resembling the revolutions of the heavens, and
 that sphere, while it revolved, [164] exhibited not only the approaches
 and withdrawings of the sun, or the increase and waning of the moon,
 but also the unequal courses of the stars, whether fixed or wandering?
 Was it then impossible for God to plan and create the originals, [165]
 when the skill of man was able to represent them by imitation? Would
 the Stoic, therefore, if he should have seen the figures of the stars
 painted and fashioned in that brass, say that they moved by their own
 design, and not by the genius of the artificer? There is therefore in
 the stars design, adapted to the accomplishment of their courses; but
 it is the design of God, who both made and governs all things, not of
 the stars themselves, which are thus moved. For if it had been His will
 that the sun should remain [166] fixed, it is plain that there would be
 perpetual day. Also if the stars had no motions, who doubts that there
 would have been eternal night? But that there might be vicissitudes of
 day and night, it was His will that the stars should move, and move
 with such variety that there might not only be mutual interchanges of
 light and darkness, by which alternate courses [167] of labour and rest
 might be established, but also interchanges of cold and heat, that the
 power and influence of the different seasons might be adapted either to
 the production or the ripening of the crops. And because philosophers
 did not see this skill of the divine power in contriving the movements
 of the stars, they supposed them to be living, as though they moved
 with feet and of their own accord, and not by the divine intelligence.
 But who does not understand why God contrived them? Doubtless lest, as
 the light of the sun was withdrawn, a night of excessive darkness
 should become too oppressive with its foul and dreadful gloom, and
 should be injurious to the living. And so He both bespangled the heaven
 with wondrous variety, and tempered the darkness itself with many and
 minute lights. How much more wisely therefore does Naso judge, than
 they who think that they are devoting themselves to the pursuit of
 wisdom, in thinking that those lights were appointed by God to remove
 the gloom of darkness! He concludes the book, in which he briefly
 comprises the phenomena of nature, with these three verses:--


 "These images, so many in number, and of such a figure, God placed in
 the heaven; and having scattered them through the gloomy darkness, He
 ordered them to give a bright light to the frosty night."

 But if it is impossible that the stars should be gods, it follows that
 the sun and moon cannot be gods, since they differ from the light of
 the stars in magnitude only, and not in their design. And if these are
 not gods, the same is true of the heaven, which contains them all.

 [156] Ps. cxlviii. 6: "He hath established them for ever and ever."

 [157] Ovid, Metam., lib. i. [79. Jussit et extendi campos, etc.].

 [158] Ovid, Metam., lib. i. [79. Jussit et extendi campos, etc.].

 [159] [De Nat. Deor., ii. cap. 21.]

 [160] Exorbitare, "to wander from their orbits."

 [161] Deserviunt, "they are devoted to."

 [162] Spatium; a word borrowed frown the chariot-course, and applied
 with great beauty to the motions of the stars.

 [163] Archimedes was the greatest of ancient mathematicians, and
 possessed in an eminent degree inventive genius. He constructed various
 engines of war, and greatly assisted in the defence of Syracuse when it
 was besieged by the Romans. His most celebrated work, however, was the
 construction of a sphere, or "orrery," representing the movements of
 the heavenly bodies. To this Lactantius refers.

 [164] Dum vertitur.

 [165] Illa vera. [Newton showed his orrery to Halley the atheist, who
 was charmed with the contrivance, and asked the name of the maker.
 "Nobody," was the ad hominem retort.]

 [166] Staret.

 [167] Spatia.

 Chap. vI.--that neither the whole universe nor the elements are god, nor are
 they possessed of life.

 In like manner, if the land on which we tread, and which we subdue and
 cultivate for food, is not a god, then the plains and mountains will
 not be gods; and if these are not so, it follows that the whole of the
 earth cannot appear to be God. In like manner, if the water, which is
 adapted to the wants [168] of living creatures for the purpose of
 drinking and bathing, is not a god, neither are the fountains gods from
 which the water flows. And if the fountains are not gods, neither are
 the rivers, which are collected from the fountains. And if the rivers
 also are not gods, it follows that the sea, which is made up of rivers,
 cannot be considered as God. But if neither the heaven, nor the earth,
 nor the sea, which are the parts of the world, can be gods, it follows
 that the world altogether is not God; whereas the same Stoics contend
 that it is both living and wise, and therefore God. But in this they
 are so inconsistent, that nothing is said by them which they do not
 also overthrow. For they argue thus: It is impossible that that which
 produces from itself sensible objects should itself be insensible. But
 the world produces man, who is endowed with sensibility; therefore it
 must also itself be sensible. Also they argue: that cannot be without
 sensibility, a part of which is sensible; therefore, because man is
 sensible, the world, of which man is a part, also possesses
 sensibility. The propositions [169] themselves are true, that that
 which produces a being endowed with sense is itself sensible; and that
 that possesses sense, a part of which is endowed with sense. But the
 assumptions by which they draw their conclusions are false; for the
 world does not produce man, nor is man a part of the world. For the
 same God who created the world, also created man from the beginning:
 and man is not a part of the world, in the same manner in which a limb
 is a part of the body; for it is possible for the world to be without
 man, as it is for a city or house. Now, as a house is the
 dwelling-place of one man, and a city of one people, so also the world
 is the abode [170] of the whole human race; and that which is inhabited
 is one thing, that which inhabits another. But these persons, in their
 eagerness to prove that which they had falsely assumed, that the world
 is possessed of sensibility, and is God, did not perceive the
 consequences of their own arguments. For if man is a part of the world,
 and if the world is endowed with sensibility because man is sensible,
 therefore it follows that, because man is mortal, the world must also
 of necessity be mortal, and not only mortal, but also liable to all
 kinds of disease and suffering. And, on the contrary, if the world is
 God, its parts also are plainly immortal: therefore man also is God,
 because he is, as you say, a part of the world. And if man, then also
 both beasts of burden and cattle, and the other kinds of beasts and of
 birds, and fishes, since these also in the same manner are possessed of
 sensibility, and are parts of the world. But this is endurable; for the
 Egyptians worship even these. But the matter comes to this: that even
 frogs, and gnats, and ants appear to be gods, because these also have
 sensibility, and are parts of the world. Thus arguments drawn from a
 false source always lead to foolish and absurd conclusions. Why should
 I mention that the same philosophers assert that the world was
 constructed [171] for the sake of gods and men as a common dwelling?
 Therefore the world is neither god, nor living, if it has been made:
 for a living creature is not made, but born; and if it has been built,
 it has been built as a house or ship is built. Therefore there is a
 builder of the world, even God; and the world which has been made is
 distinct from Him who made it. Now, how inconsistent and absurd is it,
 that when they affirm that the heavenly fires [172] and the other
 elements of the world are gods, they also say that the world itself is
 God! How is it possible that out of a great heap of gods one God can be
 made up? If the stars are gods, it follows that the world is not God,
 but the dwelling-place of gods. But if the world is God, it follows
 that all the things which are in it are not gods, but members [173] of
 God, which clearly cannot by themselves [174] take the name of God. For
 no one can rightly say that the members of one man are many men; but,
 however, there is no similar comparison between a living being and the
 world. For because a living being is endowed with sensibility, its
 members also have sensibility; nor do they become senseless [175]
 unless they are separated from the body. But what resemblance does the
 world present to this? Truly they themselves tell us, since they do not
 deny that it was made, that it might be, as it were, a common abode for
 gods and men. If, therefore, it has been constructed as an abode, it is
 neither itself God, nor are the elements which are its parts; because a
 house cannot bear rule over itself, nor can the parts of which a house
 consists. Therefore they are refuted not only by the truth, but even by
 their own words. For as a house, made for the purpose of being
 inhabited, has no sensibility by itself, and is subject to the master
 who built or inhabits it; so the world, having no sensibility of
 itself, is subject to God its Maker, who made it for His own use.

 [168] Is subservient to.

 [169] Lactantius speaks after the manner of Cicero, and uses the word
 proposition to express that which logicians call the major proposition,
 as containing the major term: the word assumption expresses that which
 is called the minor proposition, as containing the minor term.

 [170] Thus Cicero, De Finibus, iii., says: "But they think that the
 universe is governed by the power of the gods, and that it is, as it
 were, a city and state common to men and gods, and that every one of us
 is a part of that universe."

 [171] If the world was created out of nothing, as Christians are taught
 to believe, it was not born; for birth (ge'nesis) takes place when
 matter assumes another substantial form.--Betuleius.

 [172] The stars.

 [173] Membra, "limbs," "parts."

 [174] Sola, "alone." Another reading is solius, "of the only God."

 [175] Brutescunt.


 Chap. vii.--of god, and the religious rites of the foolish; of avarice, and
 the authority of ancestors.

 The foolish, therefore, err in a twofold manner: first, in preferring
 the elements, that is, the works of God, to God Himself; secondly, in
 worshipping the figures of the elements themselves under human form.
 For they form the images of the sun and moon after the fashion of men;
 also those of fire, and earth, and sea, which they call Vulcan, Vesta,
 and Neptune. Nor do they openly sacrifice to the elements themselves.
 Men are possessed with so great a fondness for representations, [176]
 that those things which are true are now esteemed of less value: they
 are delighted, in fact, with gold, and jewels, and ivory. The beauty
 and brilliancy of these things dazzle their eyes, and they think that
 there is no religion where these do not shine. And thus, under pretence
 of worshipping the gods, avarice and desire are worshipped. For they
 believe that the gods love whatever they themselves desire, whatever it
 is, on account of which thefts and robberies and murders daily rage, on
 account of which wars overthrow nations and cities throughout the whole
 world. Therefore they consecrate their spoils and plunder to the gods,
 who must undoubtedly be weak, and destitute of the highest excellence,
 if they are subject to desires. For why should we think them celestial
 if they long for anything from the earth, or happy if they are in want
 of anything, or uncorrupted if they take pleasure in those things in
 the pursuit of which the desire of men is not unreservedly condemned?
 They approach the gods, therefore not so much on account of religion,
 which can have no place in badly acquired and corruptible things, as
 that they may gaze upon [177] the gold, and view the brilliancy of
 polished marble or ivory, that they may survey with unwearied
 contemplation garments adorned with precious stones and colours, or
 cups studded with glittering jewels. And the more ornamented are the
 temples, and the more beautiful the images, so much the greater majesty
 are they believed to have: so entirely is their religion confined [178]
 to that which the desire of men admires.

 These are the religious institutions handed down to them by their
 ancestors, which they persist in maintaining and defending with the
 greatest obstinacy. Nor do they consider of what character they are;
 but they feel assured of their excellence and truth on this account,
 because the ancients have handed them down; and so great is the
 authority of antiquity, that it is said to be a crime to inquire into
 it. And thus it is everywhere believed as ascertained truth. In short,
 in Cicero, [179] Cotta thus speaks to Lucilius: "You know, Balbus, what
 is the opinion of Cotta, what the opinion of the pontiff. Now let me
 understand what are your sentiments: for since you are a philosopher, I
 ought to receive from you a reason for your religion; but in the case
 of our ancestors it is reasonable to believe them, though no reason is
 alleged by them." If you believe, why then do you require a reason,
 which may have the effect of causing you not to believe? But if you
 require a reason, and think that the subject demands inquiry, then you
 do not believe; for you make inquiry with this view, that you may
 follow it when you have ascertained it. Behold, reason teaches you that
 the religious institutions of the gods are not true: what will you do?
 Will you prefer to follow antiquity or reason? And this, indeed, was
 not imparted [180] to you by another, but was found out and chosen by
 yourself, since you have entirely uprooted all religious systems. If
 you prefer reason, you must abandon the institutions and authority of
 our ancestors, since nothing is right but that which reason prescribes.
 But if piety advises you to follow your ancestors, then admit that they
 were foolish, who complied with religious institutions invented
 contrary to reason; and that you are senseless, since you worship that
 which you have proved to be false. But since the name of ancestors is
 so greatly objected to us, let us see, I pray, who those ancestors were
 from whose authority it is said to be impious to depart. [181]

 Romulus, when he was about to found the city, called together the
 shepherds among whom he had grown up; and since their number appeared
 inadequate to the founding of the city, he established an asylum. To
 this all the most abandoned men flocked together indiscriminately from
 the neighbouring places, without any distinction of condition. Thus he
 brought together the people from all these; and he chose into the
 senate those who were oldest, and called them Fathers, by whose advice
 he might direct all things. And concerning this senate, Propertius the
 elegiac poet thus speaks:--


 "The trumpet used to call the ancient Quirites to an assembly; [182]
 those hundred in the field often formed the senate. The senate-house,
 which now is raised aloft and shines with the well-robed senate,
 received the Fathers clothed in skins, rustic spirits."

 These are the Fathers whose decrees learned and sagacious men obey with
 the greatest devotion; and all posterity must judge that to be true and
 unchangeable which an hundred old men clothed in skins established at
 their will; who, however, as has been mentioned in the first book,
 [183] were enticed by Pompilius to believe the truth of those sacred
 rites which he himself delivered. Is there any reason why their
 authority should be so highly esteemed by posterity, since during their
 life no one either high or low judged them worthy of affinity? [184]

 [176] Imaginum.

 [177] Ut oculis hauriant.

 [178] Nihil aliud est.

 [179] Cicero, De Nat. Deor., iii. 2.

 [180] Insinuata.

 [181] [See Clement, vol. ii. cap. 10, [24]p. 197, this series.]

 [182] Ad verba.

 [183] Twenty-second chapter.

 [184] Relationship by marriage. The allusion is to the well-known
 story, that all the neighbouring towns refused to intermarry with the
 Romans.

 Chap. viii.--of the use of reason in religion; and of dreams, auguries,
 oracles, and similar portents.

 It is therefore right, especially in a matter on which the whole plan
 of life turns, that every one should place confidence in himself, and
 use his own judgment and individual capacity for the investigation and
 weighing of the truth, rather than through confidence in others to be
 deceived by their errors, as though he himself were without
 understanding. God has given wisdom to all alike, [185] that they might
 be able both to investigate things which they have not heard, and to
 weigh things which they have heard. Nor, because they preceded us in
 time, did they also outstrip us in wisdom; for if this is given equally
 to all, we cannot be anticipated [186] in it by those who precede us.
 It is incapable of diminution, as the light and brilliancy of the sun;
 because, as the sun is the light of the eyes, so is wisdom the light of
 man's heart. Wherefore, since wisdom--that is, the inquiry after
 truth--is natural to all, they deprive themselves of wisdom, who
 without any judgment approve of the discoveries of their ancestors, and
 like sheep are led by others. But this escapes their notice, that the
 name of ancestors being introduced, they think it impossible that they
 themselves should have more knowledge because they are called
 descendants, or that the others should be unwise because they are
 called ancestors. [187] What, therefore, prevents us from taking a
 precedent [188] from them, that as they handed down to posterity their
 false inventions, so we who have discovered the truth may hand down
 better things to our posterity? There remains therefore a great subject
 of inquiry, the discussion of which does not come from talent, but from
 knowledge: and this must be explained at greater length, that nothing
 at all may be left in doubt. For perhaps some one may have recourse to
 those things which are handed down by many and undoubted authorities;
 that those very persons, whom we have shown to be no gods, have often
 displayed their majesty both by prodigies, and dreams, and auguries,
 and oracles. And, indeed, many wonderful things may be enumerated, and
 especially this, that Accius Navius, a consummate augur, when he was
 warning Tarquinius Priscus to undertake the commencement of nothing new
 without the previous sanction of auguries, [189] and the king,
 detracting from [190] the credit due to his art, told him to consult
 the birds, and then to announce to him whether it was possible for that
 which he himself had conceived in his mind to be accomplished, and
 Navius affirmed that it was possible; then take this whetstone, he
 said, and divide it with a razor. But the other without any hesitation
 took and cut it.

 In the next place is the fact of Castor and Pollux having been seen in
 the Latin war at the lake of Juturna washing off the sweat of their
 horses, when their temple which adjoins the fountain had been open of
 its own accord. In the Macedonian war the same deities, mounted on
 white horses, are said to have presented themselves to Publius Vatienus
 as he went to Rome at night, announcing that King Perseus had been
 vanquished and taken captive on that day, the truth of which was proved
 by letters received from Paulus [191] a few days afterwards. That also
 is wonderful, that the statue of Fortune, in the form [192] of a woman,
 is reported to have spoken more than once; also that the statue of Juno
 Moneta, [193] when, on the capture of Veii, one of the soldiers, being
 sent to remove it, sportively and in jest asked whether she wished to
 remove to Rome, answered that she wished it. Claudia also is set forth
 as an example of a miracle. For when, in accordance with the Sibylline
 books, the Idæan mother was sent for, and the ship in which she was
 conveyed had grounded on a shoal of the river Tiber, and could not be
 moved by any force, they report that Claudia, who had been always
 regarded as unchaste on account of her excess in personal adornment,
 with bended knees entreated the goddess, if she judged her to be
 chaste, to follow her girdle; and thus the ship, which could not be
 moved by all the strong men, [194] was moved by a single woman. It is
 equally wonderful, that during the prevalence of a pestilence,
 Æsculapius, being called from Epidaurus, is said to have released the
 city of Rome from the long-continued plague.

 Sacrilegious persons can also be mentioned, by the immediate punishment
 of whom the gods are believed to have avenged the injury done to them.
 Appius Claudius the censor having, against the advice of the oracle,
 transferred the sacred rites of Hercules to the public slaves, [195]
 was deprived of his eyesight; and the Potitian gens, which abandoned
 [196] its privilege, within the space of one year became extinct.
 Likewise the censor Fulvius, when he had taken away the marble tiles
 from the temple of the Lacinian [197] Juno, to cover the temple of the
 equestrian Fortuna, which he had built at Rome, was deprived of his
 senses, and having lost his two sons who were serving in Illyricum, was
 consumed with the greatest grief of mind. Turullius also, the
 lieutenant of Mark Antony, when he had cut down a grove of Æsculapius
 in Cos, [198] and built a fleet, was afterwards slain at the same place
 by the soldiers of Cæsar. To these examples is added Pyrrhus, who,
 having taken away money from the treasure of the Locrian Proserpine,
 was shipwrecked, and dashed against the shores near to the temple of
 the goddess, so that nothing was found uninjured except that money.
 Ceres of Miletus also gained for herself great veneration among men.
 For when the city had been taken by Alexander, and the soldiers had
 rushed in to plunder her temple, a flame of fire suddenly thrown upon
 them blinded them all.

 There are also found dreams which seem to show the power of the gods.
 For it is said that Jupiter presented himself to Tiberius Atinius, a
 plebeian, in his sleep, and enjoined him to announce to the consuls and
 senate, that in the last Circensian [199] games a public dancer had
 displeased him, because a certain Antonius Maximus had severely
 scourged a slave under the furca [200] in the middle of the circus, and
 had led him to punishment, and that on this account the games ought to
 be repeated. And when he had neglected this command, he is said on the
 same day to have lost his son, and to have been himself seized by a
 severe disease; and that when he again perceived the same image asking
 whether he had suffered sufficient punishment for the neglect of his
 command, he was carried on a litter to the consuls; and having
 explained the whole matter in the senate, he regained strength of body,
 and returned to his house on foot. And that dream also was not less
 wonderful, to which it is said that Augustus Cæsar owed his
 preservation. For when in the civil war with Brutus he was afflicted
 with a severe disease, and had determined to abstain from battle, the
 image of Minerva presented itself to his physician Artorius, advising
 him that Cæsar should not confine himself to the camp on account of his
 bodily infirmity. He was therefore carried on a litter to the army, and
 on the same day the camp was taken by Brutus. Many other examples of a
 similar nature may be brought forward; but I fear that, if I shall
 delay too long in the setting forth of contrary subjects, I may either
 appear to have forgotten my purpose, or may incur the charge of
 loquacity.

 [185] Pro virili portione. The phrase properly denotes the share that
 falls to a person in the division of an inheritance, hence equality.

 [186] It cannot be forestalled or preoccupied.

 [187] Majores. There is a play upon the words for ancestors and
 descendants in Latin which our translation does not reproduce. The word
 translated ancestors may also mean "men who are greater or superior:"
 the word translated descendants may mean "men who are less or
 inferior."

 [188] Exemplum, "an example for imitation."

 [189] Until he had consulted auguries.

 [190] Elevans, "disparaging," or "diminishing from."

 [191] Paulus Æmilius, who subdued Macedonia.

 [192] Muliebre. Others read Fortunæ muliebris.

 [193] The name is said to be derived from monendo, "giving warning," or
 "admonition."

 [194] The youth of military age.

 [195] The circumstance is related by Livy, book ix. c. 29.

 [196] Prodidit, "betrayed."

 [197] Lacinian, so called from the promontory Lacinia, near Croton.

 [198] The island of Cos lies off the coast of Caria; it had a
 celebrated temple of Æsculapius.

 [199] The Circensian games were instituted by Romulus, according to the
 legend, when he wished to attract the Sabine population to Rome for the
 purpose of obtaining wives for his people. They were afterwards
 celebrated with great enthusiasm.

 [200] Furca, an instrument of punishment to which the slave was bound
 and scourged.

 Chap. ix.--of the devil, the world, god, providence, man, and his wisdom.

 I will therefore set forth the method of all these things, that
 difficult and obscure subjects may be more easily understood; and I
 will bring to light all these deceptions [201] of the pretended deity,
 led by which men have departed very far from the way of truth. But I
 will retrace the matter far back from its source; that if any,
 unacquainted with the truth and ignorant, shall apply himself to the
 reading of this book, he may be instructed, and may understand what can
 in truth be "the source and origin of these evils;" and having received
 light, may perceive his own errors and those of the whole human race.

 Since God was possessed [202] of the greatest foresight for planning,
 and of the greatest skill for carrying out in action, before He
 commenced this business of the world,--inasmuch as there was in Him,
 and always is, the fountain of full and most complete goodness,--in
 order that goodness might spring as a stream from Him, and might flow
 forth afar, He produced a Spirit like to Himself, who might be endowed
 with the perfections of God the Father. But how He willed that, I will
 endeavour to show in the fourth book. [203] Then He made another being,
 in whom the disposition of the divine origin did not remain. Therefore
 he was infected with his own envy as with poison, and passed from good
 to evil; and at his own will, which had been given to him by God
 unfettered, [204] he acquired for himself a contrary name. From which
 it appears that the source of all evils is envy. For he envied his
 predecessor, [205] who through his stedfastness [206] is acceptable and
 dear to God the Father. This being, who from good became evil by his
 own act, is called by the Greeks diabolus: [207] we call him accuser,
 because he reports to God the faults to which he himself entices us.
 God, therefore, when He began the fabric of the world, set over the
 whole work that first and greatest Son, and used Him at the same time
 as a counsellor and artificer, in planning, arranging, and
 accomplishing, since He is complete both in knowledge, [208] and
 judgment, and power; concerning whom I now speak more sparingly,
 because in another place [209] both His excellence, and His name, and
 His nature must be related by us. Let no one inquire of what materials
 God made these works so great and wonderful: for He made all things out
 of nothing.

 Nor are the poets to be listened to, who say that in the beginning was
 a chaos, that is, a confusion of matter and the elements; but that God
 afterwards divided all that mass, and having separated each object from
 the confused heap, and arranged them in order, He constructed and
 adorned the world. Now it is easy to reply to these persons, who do not
 understand the power of God: for they believe that He can produce
 nothing, except out of materials already existing [210] and prepared;
 in which error philosophers also were involved. For Cicero, while
 discussing the nature of the gods, [211] thus speaks: "First of all,
 therefore, it is not probable [212] that the matter [213] from which
 all things arose was made by divine providence, but that it has, and
 has had, a force and nature of its own. As therefore the builder, when
 he is about to erect any building, does not himself make the materials,
 but uses those which are already prepared, and the statuary [214] also
 uses the wax; so that divine providence ought to have had materials at
 hand, not of its own production, but already prepared for use. But if
 matter was not made by God, then neither was the earth, and water, and
 air, and fire, made by God." Oh, how many faults there are in these ten
 lines! First, that he who in almost all his other disputations and
 books was a maintainer of the divine providence, and who used very
 acute arguments in assailing those who denied the existence of a
 providence, now himself, as a traitor or deserter, endeavoured to take
 away providence; in whose case, if you wish to oppose [215] him,
 neither consideration nor labour is required: it is only necessary to
 remind him of his own words. For it will be impossible for Cicero to be
 more strongly refuted by any one than by Cicero himself. But let us
 make this concession to the custom and practice of the Academics, [216]
 that men are permitted to speak with great freedom, and to entertain
 what sentiments they may wish. Let us examine the sentiments
 themselves. It is not probable, he says, that matter was made by God.
 By what arguments do you prove this? For you gave no reason for its
 being improbable. Therefore, on the contrary, it appears to me
 exceedingly probable; nor does it appear so without reason, when I
 reflect that there is something more in God, whom you verily reduce to
 the weakness of man, to whom you allow nothing else but the mere
 workmanship. In what respect, then, will that divine power differ from
 man, if God also, as man does, stands in need of the assistance of
 another? But He does stand in need of it, if He can construct nothing
 unless He is furnished with materials by another. But if this is the
 case, it is plain that His power is imperfect, and he who prepared the
 material [217] must be judged more powerful. By what name, therefore,
 shall he be called who excels God in power?--since it is greater to
 make that which is one's own, than to arrange those things which are
 another's. But if it is impossible that anything should be more
 powerful than God, who must necessarily be of perfect strength, power,
 and intelligence, it follows that He who made the things which are
 composed of matter, made matter also. For it was neither possible nor
 befitting that anything should exist without the exercise of God's
 power, or against His will. But it is probable, he says, that matter
 has, and always has had, a force and nature of its own. [218] What
 force could it have, without any one to give it? what nature, without
 any one to produce it? If it had force, it took that force from some
 one. But from whom could it take it, unless it were from God? Moreover,
 if it had a nature, which plainly is so called from being produced, it
 must have been produced. But from whom could it have derived its
 existence, except God? For nature, from which you say that all things
 had their origin, if it has no understanding, can make nothing. But if
 it has the power of producing and making, then it has understanding,
 and must be God. For that force can be called by no other name, in
 which there is both the foresight [219] to plan, and the skill and
 power to carry into effect. Therefore Seneca, the most intelligent of
 all the Stoics, says better, who saw "that nature was nothing else but
 God." Therefore he says, "Shall we not praise God, who possesses
 natural excellence?" For He did not learn it from any one. Yes, truly,
 we will praise Him; for although it is natural to Him, He gave it to
 Himself, [220] since God Himself is nature. When, therefore, you assign
 the origin of all things to nature, and take it from God, you are in
 the same difficulty:--


 "You pay your debt by borrowing, [221] Geta."

 For while simply changing the name, you clearly admit that it was made
 by the same person by whom you deny that it was made.

 There follows a most senseless comparison. "As the builder," he says,
 "when he is about to erect any building, does not himself make the
 materials, but uses those which are already prepared, and the statuary
 also the wax; so that divine providence ought to have had materials at
 hand, not of its own production, but already prepared for use." Nay
 rather it ought not; for God will have less power if He makes from
 materials already provided, which is the part of man. The builder will
 erect nothing without wood, for he cannot make the wood itself; and not
 to be able to do this is the part of human weakness. But God Himself
 makes the materials for Himself, because He has the power. For to have
 the power is the property of God; for if He is not able, He is not God.
 Man produces his works out of that which already exists, because
 through his mortality he is weak, and through his weakness his power is
 limited and moderate; but God produces His works out of that which has
 no existence, because through His eternity He is strong, and through
 His strength His power is immense, which has no end or limit, like the
 life of the Maker Himself. What wonder, then, if God, when He was about
 to make the world, first prepared the material from which to make it,
 and prepared it out of that which had no existence? Because it is
 impossible for God to borrow anything from another source, inasmuch as
 all things are in Himself and from Himself. For if there is anything
 before Him, and if anything has been made, but not by Him, He will
 therefore lose both the power and the name of God. But it may be said
 matter was never made, like God, who out of matter made this world. In
 that case, it follows that two eternal principles are established, and
 those indeed opposed to one another, which cannot happen without
 discord and destruction. For those things which have a contrary force
 and method must of necessity come into collision. In this manner it
 will be impossible that both should be eternal, if they are opposed to
 one another, because one must overpower the other. Therefore the nature
 of that which is eternal cannot be otherwise than simple, so that all
 things descended from that source as from a fountain. Therefore either
 God proceeded from matter, or matter from God. Which of these is more
 true, is easily understood. For of these two, one is endued with
 sensibility, the other is insensible. The power of making anything
 cannot exist, except in that which has sensibility, intelligence,
 reflection, and the power of motion. Nor can anything be begun, or
 made, or completed, unless it shall have been foreseen by reason how it
 shall be made before it exists, and how it shall endure [222] after it
 has been made. In short, he only makes anything who has the will to
 make it, and hands to complete that which he has willed. But that which
 is insensible always lies inactive and torpid; nothing can originate in
 that source where there is no voluntary motion. For if every animal is
 possessed of reason, it is certain that it cannot be produced from that
 which is destitute of reason, nor can that which is not present in the
 original source [223] be received from any other quarter. Nor, however,
 let it disturb any one, that certain animals appear to be born from the
 earth. For the earth does not give birth to these of itself, but the
 Spirit of God, without which nothing is produced. Therefore God did not
 arise from matter, because a being endued with sensibility can never
 spring from one that is insensible, a wise one from one that is
 irrational, one that is incapable of suffering from one that can
 suffer, an incorporeal being from a corporeal one; but matter is rather
 from God. For whatever consists of a body solid, and capable of being
 handled, admits of an external force. That which admits of force is
 capable of dissolution; that which is dissolved perishes; that which
 perishes must necessarily have had an origin; that which had an origin
 had a source [224] from which it originated, that is, some maker, who
 is intelligent, foreseeing, and skilled in making. There is one
 assuredly, and that no other than God. And since He is possessed of
 sensibility, intelligence, providence, power, and vigour, He is able to
 create and make both animated and inanimate objects, because He has the
 means of making everything. But matter cannot always have existed, for
 if it had existed it would be incapable of change. For that which
 always was, does not cease always to be; and that which had no
 beginning must of necessity be without an end. Moreover, it is easier
 for that which had a beginning to be without an end, than for that
 which had no beginning, to have an end. Therefore if matter was not
 made, nothing can be made from it. But if nothing can be made from it,
 then matter itself can have no existence. For matter is that out of
 which something is made. But everything out of which anything is made,
 inasmuch as it has received the hand of the artificer, is destroyed,
 [225] and begins to be some other thing. Therefore, since matter had an
 end, at the time when the world was made out of it, it also had a
 beginning. For that which is destroyed [226] was previously built up;
 that which is loosened was previously bound up; that which is brought
 to an end was begun. If, then, it is inferred from its change and end,
 that matter had a beginning, from whom could that beginning have been,
 except from God? God, therefore, is the only being who was not made;
 and therefore He can destroy other things, but He Himself cannot be
 destroyed. That which was in Him will always be permanent, because He
 has not been produced or sprung from any other source; nor does His
 birth depend on any other object, which being changed may cause His
 dissolution. He is of Himself, as we said in the first book; [227] and
 therefore He is such as He willed that He should be, incapable of
 suffering, unchangeable, incorruptible, blessed, and eternal.

 But now the conclusion, with which Tully finished the sentiment, is
 much more absurd. [228] "But if matter," he says, "was not made by God,
 the earth indeed, and water, and air, and fire, were not made by God."
 How skilfully he avoided the danger! For he stated the former point as
 though it required no proof, whereas it was much more uncertain than
 that on account of which the statement was made. If matter, he says,
 was not made by God, the world was not made by God. He preferred to
 draw a false inference from that which is false, than a true one from
 that which is true. And though uncertain things ought to be proved from
 those which are certain, he drew a proof from an uncertainty, to
 overthrow that which was certain. For, that the world was made by
 divine providence (not to mention Trismegistus, who proclaims this; not
 to mention the verses of the Sibyls, who make the same announcement;
 not to mention the prophets, [229] who with one impulse and with
 harmonious [230] voice bear witness that the world was made, [231] and
 that it was the workmanship of God), even the philosophers almost
 universally agree; for this is the opinion of the Pythagoreans, the
 Stoics, and the Peripatetics, who are the chief of every sect. [232] In
 short, from those first seven wise men, [233] even to Socrates and
 Plato, it was held as an acknowledged and undoubted fact; until many
 ages afterwards [234] the crazy Epicurus lived, who alone ventured to
 deny that which is most evident, doubtless through the desire of
 discovering novelties, that he might found a sect in his own name. And
 because he could find out nothing new, that he might still appear to
 disagree with the others, he wished to overthrow old opinions. But in
 this all the philosophers who snarled [235] around him, refuted him. It
 is more certain, therefore, that the world was arranged by providence,
 than that matter was collected [236] by providence. Wherefore he ought
 not to have supposed that the world was not made by divine providence,
 because its matter was not made by divine providence; but because the
 world was made by divine providence, he ought to have concluded that
 matter also was made by the Deity. For it is more credible that matter
 was made by God, because He is all-powerful, than that the world was
 not made by God, because nothing can be made without mind,
 intelligence, and design. But this is not the fault of Cicero, but of
 the sect. For when he had undertaken a disputation, by which he might
 take away the nature of the gods, respecting which philosophers prated,
 in his ignorance of the truth he imagined that the Deity must
 altogether be taken away. He was able therefore to take away the gods,
 for they had no existence. But when he attempted to overthrow the
 divine providence, which is in the one God, because he had begun to
 strive against the truth, his arguments failed, and he necessarily fell
 into this pitfall, from which he was unable to withdraw himself. Here,
 then, I hold him firmly fixed; I hold him fastened to the spot, since
 Lucilius, who disputed on the other side, was silent. Here, then, is
 the turning-point; [237] on this everything depends. Let Cotta
 disentangle himself, if he can, from this difficulty; [238] let him
 bring forward arguments by which he may prove that matter has always
 existed, which no providence made. Let him show how anything ponderous
 and heavy either could exist without an author or could be changed, and
 how that which always was ceased to be, so that that which never was
 might begin to be. And if he shall prove these things, then, and not
 till then, will I admit that the world itself was not established by
 divine providence, and yet in making this admission I shall hold him
 fast by another snare. For he will turn round again to the same point,
 to which he will be unwilling to return, so as to say that both the
 matter of which the world consists, and the world which consists of
 matter, existed by nature; though I contend that nature itself is God.
 For no one can make wonderful things, that is, things existing with the
 greatest order, except one who has intelligence, foresight, and power.
 And thus it will come to be seen that God made all things, and that
 nothing at all can exist which did not derive its origin from God.

 But the same, as often as he follows the Epicureans, [239] and does not
 admit that the world was made by God, is wont to inquire by what hands,
 by what machines, by what levers, by what contrivance, He made this
 work of such magnitude. He might see, if he could have lived at that
 time in which God made it. But, that man might not look into the works
 of God, He was unwilling to bring him into this world until all things
 were completed. But he could not be brought in: for how could he exist
 while the heaven above was being built, and the foundations of the
 earth beneath were being laid; when humid things, perchance, either
 benumbed with excessive stiffness were becoming congealed, or seethed
 with fiery heat and rendered solid were growing hard? Or how could he
 live when the sun was not yet established, and neither corn nor animals
 were produced? Therefore it was necessary that man should be last made,
 when the finishing [240] hand had now been applied to the world and to
 all other things. Finally, the sacred writings teach that man was the
 last work of God, and that he was brought into this world as into a
 house prepared and made ready; for all things were made on his account.
 The poets also acknowledge the same. Ovid, having described the
 completion of the world, and the formation of the other animals, added:
 [241] --


 "An animal more sacred than these, and more capacious of a lofty mind,
 was yet wanting, and which might exercise dominion over the rest. Man
 was produced."

 So impious must we think it to search into those things which God
 wished to be kept secret! But his inquiries were not made through a
 desire of hearing or learning, but of refuting; for he was confident
 that no one could assert that. As though, in truth, it were to be
 supposed that these things were not made by God, because it cannot be
 plainly seen in what manner they were created! If you had been brought
 up in a well-built and ornamented house, and had never seen a workshop,
 [242] would you have supposed that that house was not built by man,
 because you did not know how it was built? You would assuredly ask the
 same question about the house which you now ask about the world--by
 what hands, with what implements, man had contrived such great works;
 and especially if you should see large stones, immense blocks, [243]
 vast columns, the whole work lofty and elevated, would not these things
 appear to you to exceed the measure of human strength, because you
 would not know that these things were made not so much by strength as
 by skill and ingenuity?

 But if man, in whom nothing is perfect, nevertheless effects more by
 skill than his feeble strength would permit, what reason is there why
 it should appear to you incredible, when it is alleged that the world
 was made by God, in whom, since He is perfect, wisdom can have no
 limit, and strength no measure? His works are seen by the eyes; but how
 He made them is not seen even by the mind, because, as Hermes says, the
 mortal cannot draw nigh to (that is, approach nearer, and follow up
 with the understanding) the immortal, the temporal [244] to the
 eternal, the corruptible to the incorruptible. And on this account the
 earthly animal is as yet incapable of perceiving [245] heavenly things,
 because it is shut in and held as it were in custody by the body, so
 that it cannot discern all things with free and unrestrained
 perception. Let him know, therefore, how foolishly he acts, who
 inquires into things which are indescribable. For this is to pass the
 limits of one's own condition, and not to understand how far it is
 permitted man to approach. In short, when God revealed the truth to
 man, He wished us only to know those things which it concerned man to
 know for the attainment of life; but as to the things which related to
 a profane and eager curiosity [246] He was silent, that they might be
 secret. Why, then, do you inquire into things which you cannot know,
 and if you knew them you would not be happier. It is perfect wisdom in
 man, if he knows that there is but one God, and that all things were
 made by Him.

 [201] The tricks of a juggler.

 [202] Most prudent.

 [203] Chap. vi., infra

 [204] Free.

 [205] The Son of God, afterwards spoken of.

 [206] By perseverance. There seems to be a contrast between the Son,
 who remained stedfast, and the evil spirits who fell.

 [207] dia'bolos, "slanderer or accuser." The Greek and Latin words
 employed by Lactantius have the same meaning.

 [208] Providence.

 [209] Book iv. ch. vi., etc. [Deus, igitur, machinator constitutorque
 rerum, etc.]

 [210] Lying under; answering to the Greek expression hupokeime'ne hule,
 subject matter.

 [211] Not now found in the treatise which bears this title.

 [212] Capable of proof.

 [213] Materia; perhaps from "mater," mother stuff--matter out of which
 anything is composed.

 [214] The moulder. The ancients made statues of wax or clay, as well as
 of wood, ivory, and marble.

 [215] Contradict.

 [216] Alluding to the well-known practise of the Academics, viz., of
 arguing on both sides of a question.

 [217] The founder or preparer of the material.

 [218] [Quam vim potuit habere nullo dante?]

 [219] Providentia.

 [220] Sibi illam dedit. There is another reading, illa sibi illam
 dedit, but it does not give so good a sense.

 [221] A proverbial expression, signifying "to get out of one difficulty
 by getting into another." The passage in the text is a quotation from
 Terence, Phorm , v. 2. 15. [Not in some editions of our author; e.g.,
 Basil, 1521.]

 [222] Stand firm and stedfast.

 [223] Which does not exist there, from whence it is sought.

 [224] Fountain.

 [225] Distruitur, "pulled to pieces." The word is thus used by Cicero.

 [226] Distruitur, "pulled to pieces." The word is thus used by Cicero.

 [227] Ch. 3 and 7. [See pp. [25]11, [26]17, supra.]

 [228] [Multo absurdior.]

 [229] Lactantius seems to refer not to the true prophets, but to those
 of other nations, such as Orpheus and Zoroaster, or the magi of the
 Persians, the gymnosophists of the Indians, or the Druids of the Gauls.
 St. Augustine often makes mention of these. It would seem inconsistent
 to mention Moses and the prophets of God with the prophets of the
 heathens. [Compare, however, "Christian analogies," etc., in Justin.
 See vol. i. [27]169; also Ibid., pp. [28]182, [29]283-286.]

 [230] Pari voce.

 [231] The work of the world, and the workmanship of God.

 [232] Qui sunt principes omnis disciplinæ. There is another reading:
 quæ sunt principes omnium disciplinæ, "which are the leading sects of
 all."

 [233] Thales said that the world was the work of God.

 [234] This statement is incorrect, as Plato was born b.c. 430, and
 Epicurus b.c. 337.

 [235] There is probably an allusion to the Cynics.

 [236] Conglobatam. Another reading is, quàm materiâ providentiam
 conglobatam.

 [237] Hinge.

 [238] Abyss.

 [239] As often as he is an Epicurean.

 [240] The last hand.

 [241] Metamorph , book i.

 [242] Fabrica. The word is also used to denote the exercise of skill in
 workmanship.

 [243] Cæmenta, rough stones from the quarry.

 [244] Pertaining to time, as opposed to eternal.

 [245] Looking into.

 [246] A curious and profane eagerness.

 Chap. X.--Of the World, and Its Parts, the Elements and Seasons.

 Now, having refuted those who entertain false sentiments respecting the
 world and God its Maker, let us return to the divine workmanship of the
 world, concerning which we are informed in the sacred [247] writings of
 our holy religion. Therefore, first of all, God made the heaven, and
 suspended it on high, that it might be the seat of God Himself, the
 Creator. Then He founded the earth, and placed it under the heaven, as
 a dwelling-place for man, with the other races of animals. He willed
 that it should be surrounded and held together by water. But He adorned
 and filled His own dwelling-place with bright lights; He decked it with
 the sun, and the shining orb of the moon, and with the glittering signs
 of the twinkling stars; but He placed on the earth the darkness, which
 is contrary to these. For of itself the earth contains no light, unless
 it receives it from the heaven, in which He placed perpetual light, and
 the gods above, and eternal life; and, on the contrary, He placed on
 the earth darkness, and the inhabitants of the lower regions, and
 death. For these things are as far removed from the former ones, as
 evil things are from good, and vices from virtues. He also established
 two parts of the earth itself opposite to one another, and of a
 different character,--namely, the east and the west; and of these the
 east is assigned to God, because He Himself is the fountain of light,
 and the enlightener [248] of all things, and because He makes us rise
 to eternal life. But the west is ascribed to that disturbed and
 depraved mind, because it conceals the light, because it always brings
 on darkness, and because it makes men die and perish in their sins. For
 as light belongs to the east, and the whole course of life depends upon
 the light, so darkness belongs to the west: but death and destruction
 are contained in darkness. [249] Then He measured out in the same way
 the other parts,--namely, the south and the north, which parts are
 closely united with the two former. For that which is more glowing with
 the warmth of the sun, is nearest to and closely united with the east;
 but that which is torpid with colds and perpetual ice belongs to the
 same division as the extreme west. For as darkness is opposed to light,
 so is cold to heat. As, therefore, heat is nearest to light, so is the
 south to the east; and as cold is nearest to darkness, so is the
 northern region to the west. And He assigned to each of these parts its
 own time,--namely, the spring to the east, the summer to the southern
 region, the autumn belongs to the west, and the winter to the north. In
 these two parts also, the southern and the northern, is contained a
 figure of life and death, because life consists in heat, death in cold.
 And as heat arises from fire, so does cold from water. And according to
 the division of these parts He also made day and night, to complete by
 alternate succession with each other the courses [250] and perpetual
 revolutions of time, which we call years. The day, which the first east
 supplies, must belong to God, as all things do, which are of a better
 character. But the night, which the extreme west brings on, belongs,
 indeed, to him whom we have said to be the rival of God.

 And even in the making of these God had regard to the future; for He
 made them so, that a representation of true religion and of false
 superstitions might be shown from these. For as the sun, which rises
 daily, although it is but one,--from which Cicero would have it appear
 that it was called Sol, [251] because the stars are obscured, and it
 alone is seen,--yet, since it is a true light, and of perfect fulness,
 and of most powerful heat, and enlightens all things with the brightest
 splendour; so God, although He is one only, is possessed of perfect
 majesty, and might, and splendour. But night, which we say is assigned
 to that depraved adversary of God, [252] shows by a resemblance the
 many and various superstitions which belong to him. For although
 innumerable stars appear to glitter and shine, [253] yet, because they
 are not full and solid lights, and send forth no heat, nor overpower
 the darkness by their multitude, therefore these two things are found
 to be of chief importance, which have power differing from and opposed
 to one another--heat and moisture, which God wonderfully designed for
 the support and production of all things. For since the power of God
 consists in heat and fire, if He had not tempered its ardour and force
 by mingling matter of moisture and cold, nothing could have been born
 or have existed, but whatever had begun to exist must immediately have
 been destroyed by conflagration. From which also some philosophers and
 poets said that the world was made up of a discordant concord; but they
 did not thoroughly understand the matter. Heraclitus said that all
 things were produced from fire; Thales of Miletus from water. Each saw
 something of the truth, and yet each was in error: for if one element
 only had existed, water could not have been produced from fire, nor, on
 the other hand, could fire from water; but it is more true that all
 things were produced from a mingling of the two. Fire, indeed, cannot
 be mixed with water, because they are opposed to each other; and if
 they came into collision, the one which proved superior must destroy
 the other. But their substances may be mingled. The substance of fire
 is heat; of water, moisture. Rightly therefore does Ovid say: [254] --


 "For when moisture and heat have become mingled, they conceive, and all
 things arise from these two. And though fire is at variance with water,
 moist vapour produces all things, and discordant concord [255] is
 adapted to production."

 For the one element is, as it were, masculine; the other, as it were,
 feminine: the one active, the other passive. And on this account it was
 appointed by the ancients that marriage contracts should be ratified by
 the solemnity [256] of fire and water, because the young of animals are
 furnished with a body by heat and moisture, and are thus animated to
 life.

 For, since every animal consists of soul [257] and body, the material
 of the body is contained in moisture, that of the soul in heat: which
 we may know from the offspring of birds; for though these are full of
 thick moisture, unless they are cherished by creative [258] heat, the
 moisture cannot become a body, nor can the body be animated with life.
 Exiles also were accustomed to be forbidden the use of fire and water:
 for as yet it seemed unlawful to inflict capital punishment on any,
 however guilty, inasmuch as they were men. When, therefore, the use of
 those things in which the life of men consists was forbidden, it was
 deemed to be equivalent to the actual infliction of death on him who
 had been thus sentenced. Of such importance were these two elements
 considered, that they believed them to be essential for the production
 of man, and for the sustaining of his life. One of these is common to
 us with the other animals, the other has been assigned to man alone.
 For we, being a heavenly and immortal race, [259] make use of fire,
 which is given to us as a proof of immortality, since fire is from
 heaven; and its nature, inasmuch as it is moveable and rises upward,
 contains the principle of life. But the other animals, inasmuch as they
 are altogether mortal, make use of water only, which is a corporeal and
 earthly element. And the nature of this, because it is moveable, and
 has a downward inclination, shows a figure of death. Therefore the
 cattle do not look up to heaven, nor do they entertain religious
 sentiments, since the use of fire is removed from them. But from what
 source or in what manner God lighted up or caused [260] to flow these
 two principal elements, fire and water, He who made them alone can
 know. [261]

 [247] Secret writings.

 [248] Apos. Const. (so-called), book ii. cap. 57. See Bingham, book
 viii. cap. 3, sec. 3; also vol. ii. [30]note 1, p. 535, this series,
 and vol. iii. [31]note 1, p. 31. So Cyril of Jerusalem, Augustine, and
 later Fathers. Bingham book xiii. cap. 8, sec. 15.]

 [249] [In baptism, the renunciations were made with face turned to the
 west. Bingham, book xi. cap. 7, sec. 4.]

 [250] Spatia; an expression derived from the chariot-race.

 [251] A play upon the words Sol, the sun, and solus, alone.

 [252] Antitheus, one who takes the place of God: as Antichrist,
 anti'christos, one who sets himself in the place of Christ.

 [253] Emit rays.

 [254] Metamorph., i. 430.

 [255] [Discors concordia.]

 [256] Sacramento Torches were lighted at marriage ceremonies, and the
 bride was sprinkled with water.

 [257] The living principle.

 [258] The artificer.

 [259] Animal.

 [260] Eliquaverit. "strained off," "made liquid."

 [261] [So Izaak Walton: "Known only to him whose name is Wonderful."]

 Chap. XI.--Of Living Creatures, of Man; Prometheus, Deucalion, the ParcÆ.

 Therefore, having finished the world, He commanded that animals of
 various kinds and of dissimilar forms should be created, both great and
 smaller. And they were made in pairs, that is, one of each sex; from
 the offspring of which both the air and the earth and the seas were
 filled. And God gave nourishment to all these by their kinds [262] from
 the earth, that they might be of service to men: some, for instance,
 were for food, others for clothing; but those which are of great
 strength He gave, that they might assist in cultivating the earth,
 whence they were called beasts of burthen. [263] And thus, when all
 things had been settled with a wonderful arrangement, He determined to
 prepare for Himself an eternal kingdom, and to create innumerable
 souls, on whom He might bestow immortality. Then He made for Himself a
 figure endowed with perception and intelligence, that is, after the
 likeness of His own image, than which nothing can be more perfect: He
 formed man out of the dust of the ground, from which he was called man,
 [264] because He was made from the earth. Finally, Plato says that the
 human form [265] was godlike; as does the Sibyl, who says,--


 "Thou art my image, O man, possessed of right reason." [266]

 The poets also have not given a different account respecting this
 formation of man, however they may have corrupted it; for they said
 that man was made by Prometheus from clay. They were not mistaken in
 the matter itself, but in the name of the artificer. For they had never
 come into contact with a line of the truth; but the things which were
 handed down by the oracles of the prophets, and contained in the sacred
 book [267] of God; those things collected from fables and obscure
 opinion, and distorted, as the truth is wont to be corrupted by the
 multitude when spread abroad by various conversations, everyone adding
 something to that which he had heard,-- those things they comprised in
 their poems; and in this, indeed, they acted foolishly, in that they
 attributed so wonderful and divine a work to man. For what need was
 there that man should be formed of clay, when he might be generated in
 the same way in which Prometheus himself was born from Iapetus? For if
 he was a man, he was able to beget a man, but not to make one. But his
 punishment on Mount Caucasus declares that he was not of the gods. But
 no one reckoned his father Iapetus or his uncle [268] Titan as gods,
 because the high dignity of the kingdom was in possession of Saturn
 only, by which he obtained divine honours, together with all his
 descendants. This invention of the poets admits of refutation by many
 arguments. It is agreed by all that the deluge took place for the
 destruction of wickedness, and for its removal from the earth. Now,
 both philosophers and poets, and writers of ancient history, assert the
 same, and in this they especially agree with the language of the
 prophets. If, therefore, the flood took place for the purpose of
 destroying wickedness, which had increased through the excessive
 multitude of men, how was Prometheus the maker of man, when his son
 Deucalion is said by the same writers to have been the only one who was
 preserved on account of his righteousness? How could a single descent
 [269] and a single generation have so quickly filled the world with
 men? But it is plain that they have corrupted this also, as they did
 the former account; since they were ignorant both at what time the
 flood happened on the earth, and who it was that deserved on account of
 his righteousness to be saved when the human race perished, and how and
 with whom he was saved: all of which are taught by the inspired [270]
 writings. It is plain, therefore, that the account which they give
 respecting the work of Prometheus is false.

 But because I had said [271] that the poets are not accustomed to speak
 that which is altogether untrue, but to wrap up in figures and thus to
 obscure their accounts, I do not say that they spoke falsely in this,
 but that first of all Prometheus made the image of a man of rich and
 soft clay, and that he first originated the art of making statues and
 images; inasmuch as he lived in the times of Jupiter, during which
 temples began to be built, and new modes of worshipping the gods
 introduced. And thus the truth was corrupted by falsehood; and that
 which was said to have been made by God began also to be ascribed to
 man, who imitated the divine work. But the making of the true and
 living man from clay is the work of God. And this also is related by
 Hermes, [272] who not only says that man was made by God, after the
 image of God, but he even tried to explain in how skilful a manner He
 formed each limb in the human body, since there is none of them which
 is not as available for the necessity of use as for beauty. But even
 the Stoics, when they discuss the subject of providence, attempt to do
 this; and Tully followed them in many places. But, however, he briefly
 treats of a subject so copious and fruitful, which I now pass over on
 this account, because I have lately written a particular book on this
 subject to my disciple Demetrianus. But I cannot here omit that which
 some erring philosophers say, that men and the other animals arose from
 the earth without any author; whence that expression of Virgil: [273]
 --


 "And the earth-born [274] race of men raised its head from the hard
 fields."

 And this opinion is especially entertained by those who deny the
 existence of a divine providence. For the Stoics attribute the
 formation of animals to divine skill. But Aristotle freed himself from
 labour and trouble, by saying that the world always existed, and
 therefore that the human race, and the other things which are in it,
 had no beginning, but always had been, and always would be. But when we
 see that each animal separately, which had no previous existence,
 begins to exist, and ceases to exist, it is necessary that the whole
 race must at some time have begun to exist, and must cease at some time
 because it had a beginning.

 For all things must necessarily be comprised in three periods of
 time--the past, the present, and the future. The commencement [275]
 belongs to the past, existence to the present, dissolution to the
 future. And all these things are seen in the case of men individually:
 for we begin when we are born; and we exist while we live; and we cease
 when we die. On which account they would have it that there are three
 Parcæ: [276] one who warps the web of life for men; the second, who
 weaves it; the third, who cuts and finishes it. But in the whole race
 of men, because the present time only is seen, yet from it the past
 also, that is, the commencement, and the future, that is, the
 dissolution, are inferred. For since it exists, it is evident that at
 some time it began to exist, for nothing can exist without a beginning;
 and because it had a beginning, it is evident that it will at some time
 have an end. For that cannot, as a whole, be immortal, which consists
 of mortals. For as we all die individually, it is possible that, by
 some calamity, all may perish simultaneously: either through the
 unproductiveness of the earth, which sometimes happens in particular
 cases; or through the general spread of pestilence, which often
 desolates separate cities and countries; or by the conflagration of the
 world, as is said to have happened in the case of Phaethon; or by a
 deluge, as is reported in the time of Deucalion, when the whole race
 was destroyed with the exception of one man. And if this deluge
 happened by chance, it might assuredly have happened that he who was
 the only survivor should perish. But if he was reserved by the will of
 divine providence, as it cannot be denied, to recruit mankind, it is
 evident that the life and the destruction of the human race are in the
 power of God. And if it is possible for it to die altogether, because
 it dies in parts, it is evident that it had an origin at some time; and
 as the liability to decay [277] bespeaks a beginning, so also it gives
 proof of an end. And if these things are true, Aristotle will be unable
 to maintain that the world also itself had no beginning. But if Plato
 and Epicurus extort this from Aristotle, yet Plato and Aristotle, who
 thought that the world would be everlasting, will, notwithstanding
 their eloquence, be deprived of this also by Epicurus, because it
 follows, that, as it had a beginning, it must also have an end. But we
 will speak of these things at greater length in the last book. Now let
 us revert to the origin of man.

 [262] By species.

 [263] Jumenta, "beasts of burthen," as though derived from juvo, "to
 aid."

 [264] Homo, "man," from humus, "the ground." [P. 56, supra ]

 [265] This image, or likeness of God, in which man was originally
 created, is truly described not by Plato, but by St. Paul: 2 Cor. iv.
 6; Col. iii. 10; Eph. iv. 24.

 [266] Another reading is, "Man is my image."

 [267] Sacrario, "the shrine."

 [268] Father's brother.

 [269] Gradus.

 [270] Prophetical writings.

 [271] Book i. [ch. 11, p. [32]22, supra].

 [272] The title ho demiourgos, the Architect, or Creator, is used by
 Plato and Hermes.

 [273] Georg., ii. 341. [Terrea progenies duris caput extulit arvis.]

 [274] Terrea. Another reading is ferrea, "the race of iron."

 [275] The origin.

 [276] The fable of the three Parcæ--Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos--is
 derived from Hesiod.

 [277] Frailty.

 Chap. XII.--That Animals Were Not Produced Spontaneously, But by a Divine
 Arrangement, of Which God Would Have Given Us the Knowledge, If It Were
 Advantageous for Us to Know It.

 They say that at certain changes of the heaven, and motions of the
 stars, there existed a kind of maturity [278] for the production of
 animals; and thus that the new earth, retaining the productive seed,
 brought forth of itself certain vessels [279] after the likeness of
 wombs, respecting which Lucretius [280] says,--


 "Wombs grew attached to the earth by roots;"

 and that these, when they had become mature, being rent by the
 compulsion of nature, produced tender animals; afterwards, that the
 earth itself abounded with a kind of moisture which resembled milk, and
 that animals were supported by this nourishment. How, then, were they
 able to endure or avoid the force of the cold or of heat, or to be born
 at all, since the sun would scorch them or the cold contract them? But,
 they say, at the beginning of the world there was no winter nor summer,
 but a perpetual spring of an equable temperature. [281] Why, then, do
 we see that none of these things now happens? Because, they say, it was
 necessary that it should once happen, that animals might be born; but
 after they began to exist, and the power of generation was given to
 them, the earth ceased to bring forth, and the condition of time [282]
 was changed. Oh, how easy it is to refute falsehoods! In the first
 place, nothing can exist in this world which does not continue
 permanent, as it began. For neither were the sun and moon and stars
 then uncreated; nor, having been created, were they without their
 motions; nor did that divine government, which manages and rules their
 courses, fail to begin its exercise together with them. In the next
 place, if it is as they say, there must of necessity be a providence,
 and they fall into that very condition which they especially avoid. For
 while the animals were yet unborn, it is plain that some one provided
 that they should be born, that the world might not appear gloomy [283]
 with waste and desolation. But, that they might be produced from the
 earth without the office of parents, provision must have been made with
 great judgment; and in the next place, that the moisture condensed from
 the earth might be formed into the various figures of bodies; and also
 that, having received from the vessels with which they were covered the
 power of life and sensation, they might be poured forth, as it were,
 from the womb of mothers, is a wonderful and indescribable [284]
 provision. But let us suppose that this also happened by chance; the
 circumstances which follow assuredly cannot be by chance,--that the
 earth should at once flow with milk, and that the temperature of the
 atmosphere should be equable. And if these things plainly happened,
 that the newly born animals might have nourishment, or be free from
 danger, it must be that some one provided these things by some divine
 counsel.

 But who is able to make this provision except God? Let us, however, see
 whether the circumstance itself which they assert could have taken
 place, that men should be born from the earth. If any one considers
 during how long a time and in what manner an infant is reared, he will
 assuredly understand that those earth-born children could not possibly
 have been reared without some one to bring them up. For they must have
 lain for many months cast forth, until their sinews were strengthened,
 so that they had power to move themselves and to change their place,
 which can scarcely happen within the space of one year. Now see whether
 an infant could have lain through many months in the same manner and in
 the same place where it was cast forth, without dying, overwhelmed and
 corrupted by that moisture of the earth which it supplied for the sake
 of nourishment, and by the excrements of its own body mixed together.
 Therefore it is impossible but that it was reared by some one; unless,
 indeed, all animals are born not in a tender condition, but grown up:
 and it never came into their mind to say this. Therefore the whole of
 that method is impossible and vain; if that can be called method by
 which it is attempted that there shall be no method. For he who says
 that all things are produced of their own accord, and attributes
 nothing to divine providence, he assuredly does not assert, but
 overthrows method. But if nothing can be done or produced without
 design, it is plain that there is a divine providence, to which that
 which is called design peculiarly belongs. Therefore God, the Contriver
 of all things, made man. And even Cicero, though ignorant of the sacred
 writings, saw this, who in his treatise on the Laws, in the first book,
 [285] handed down the same thing as the prophets; and I add his words:
 "This animal, foreseeing, sagacious, various, acute, gifted with
 memory, full of method and design, which we call man, was produced by
 the supreme Deity under remarkable circumstances; for this alone of so
 many kinds and natures of animals, partakes of judgment and reflection,
 when all other animals are destitute of them." Do you see that the man,
 although far removed from the knowledge of the truth, yet, inasmuch as
 he held the image of wisdom, understood that man could not be produced
 except by God? But, however, there is need of divine [286] testimony,
 lest that of man should be insufficient. The Sibyl testifies that man
 is the work of God:--


 "He who is the only God being the invincible Creator, He Himself fixed
 [287] the figure of the form of men, He Himself mixed the nature of all
 belonging to the generation of life."

 The sacred writings contain statements to the same effect. Therefore
 God discharged the office of a true father. He Himself formed the body;
 He Himself infused the soul with which we breathe. Whatever we are, it
 is altogether His work. In what manner He effected this He would have
 taught us, if it were right for us to know; as He taught us other
 things, which have conveyed to us the knowledge both of ancient error
 and of true light.

 [278] Ripeness, or suitableness.

 [279] Little bags, or follicles.

 [280] Book v. 806. [Uteri terram radicibus apti.]

 [281] A perpetual temperature and an equable spring.

 [282] The seasons were varied.

 [283] Be rough.

 [284] Inextricabilis, that cannot be disentangled.

 [285] [De Legibus, book i. cap. 7.]

 [286] That is, according to the notions of the heathen.

 [287] Made fast, established.

 Chap. XIII.--Why Man is of Two Sexes; What is His First Death, and What the
 Second and of the Fault and Punishment of Our First Parents.

 When, therefore, He had first formed the male after His own likeness,
 then He also fashioned woman after the image of the man himself, that
 the two by their union might be able to perpetuate their race, and to
 fill the whole earth with a multitude. But in the making of man himself
 He concluded and completed the nature of those two materials which we
 have spoken of as contrary to each other, fire and water. For having
 made the body, He breathed into it a soul from the vital source of His
 own Spirit, which is everlasting, that it might bear the similitude of
 the world itself, which is composed of opposing elements. For he [288]
 consists of soul and body, that is, as it were, of heaven and earth:
 since the soul by which we live, has its origin, as it were, out of
 heaven from God, the body out of the earth, of the dust of which we
 have said that it was formed. Empedocles--whom you cannot tell whether
 to reckon among poets or philosophers, for he wrote in verse respecting
 the nature of things, as did Lucretius and Varro among the
 Romans--determined that there were four elements, that is, fire, air,
 water, and earth; perhaps following Trismegistus, who said that our
 bodies were composed of these four elements by God, for he said that
 they contained in themselves something of fire, something of air,
 something of water, and something of earth, and yet that they were
 neither fire, nor air, nor water, nor earth. And these things indeed
 are not false; for the nature of earth is contained in the flesh, that
 of moisture in the blood, that of air in the breath, that of fire in
 the vital heat. But neither can the blood be separated from the body,
 as moisture is from the earth; nor the vital heat from the breath, as
 fire from the air: so that of all things only two elements are found,
 the whole nature of which is included in the formation of our body.
 Man, therefore, was made from different and opposite substances, as the
 world itself was made from light and darkness, from life and death; and
 he has admonished us that these two things contend against each other
 in man: so that if the soul, which has its origin from God, gains the
 mastery, it is immortal, and lives in perpetual light; if, on the other
 hand, the body shall overpower the soul, and subject it to its
 dominion, it is in everlasting darkness and death. [289] And the force
 of this is not that it altogether annihilates [290] the souls of the
 unrighteous, but subjects them to everlasting punishment. [291]

 We term that punishment the second death, which is itself also
 perpetual, as also is immortality. We thus define the first death:
 Death is the dissolution of the nature of living beings; or thus: Death
 is the separation of body and soul. But we thus define the second
 death: Death is the suffering of eternal pain; or thus: Death is the
 condemnation of souls for their deserts to eternal punishments. This
 does not extend to the dumb cattle, whose spirits, not being composed
 of God, [292] but of the common air, are dissolved by death. Therefore
 in this union of heaven and earth, the image of which is developed
 [293] in man, those things which belong to God occupy the higher part,
 namely the soul, which has dominion over the body; but those which
 belong to the devil occupy the lower [294] part, manifestly the body:
 for this, being earthly, ought to be subject to the soul, as the earth
 is to heaven. For it is, as it were, a vessel which this heavenly
 spirit may employ as a temporary dwelling. The duties of both are--for
 the latter, which is from heaven and from God, to command; but for the
 former, which is from the earth and the devil, to obey. And this,
 indeed, did not escape the notice of a dissolute man, Sallust, [295]
 who says: "But all our power consists in the soul and body; we use the
 soul to command, the body rather to obey." It had been well if he had
 lived in accordance with his words; for he was a slave to the most
 degrading pleasures, and he destroyed the efficacy of his sentiment by
 the depravity of his life. But if the soul is fire, as we have shown,
 it ought to mount up to heaven as fire, that it may not be
 extinguished; that is, it ought to rise to the immortality which is in
 heaven. And as fire cannot burn and be kept alive unless it be
 nourished [296] by some rich fuel [297] in which it may have
 sustenance, so the fuel and food of the soul is righteousness alone, by
 which it is nourished unto life. After these things, God, having made
 man in the manner in which I have pointed out, placed him in paradise,
 [298] that is, in a most fruitful and pleasant garden, which He planted
 in the regions of the East with every kind of wood and tree, that he
 might be nourished by their various fruits; and being free from all
 labours, [299] might devote himself entirely to the service of God his
 Father.

 Then He gave to him fixed commands, by the observance of which he might
 continue immortal; or if he transgressed them, be punished with death.
 It was enjoined that he should not taste of one tree only which was in
 the midst of the garden, [300] in which He had placed the knowledge of
 good and evil. Then the accuser, envying the works of God, applied all
 his deceits and artifices to beguile [301] the man, that he might
 deprive him of immortality. And first he enticed the woman by fraud to
 take the forbidden fruit, and through her instrumentality he also
 persuaded the man himself to transgress the law of God. Therefore,
 having obtained the knowledge of good and evil, he began to be ashamed
 of his nakedness, and hid himself from the face of God, which he was
 not before accustomed to do. Then God drove out the man from the
 garden, having passed sentence upon the sinner, that he might seek
 support for himself by labour. And He surrounded [302] the garden
 itself with fire, to prevent the approach of the man until He execute
 the last judgment on earth; and having removed death, recall righteous
 men, His worshippers, to the same place; as the sacred writers teach,
 and the Erythræan Sibyl, when she says: "But they who honour the true
 God inherit everlasting life, themselves inhabiting together paradise,
 the beautiful garden, for ever." But since these are the last things,
 [303] we will treat of them in the last part of this work. Now let us
 explain those which are first. Death therefore followed man, according
 to the sentence of God, which even the Sibyl teaches in her verse,
 saying: "Man made by the very hands of God, whom the serpent
 treacherously beguiled that he might come to the fate of death, and
 receive the knowledge of good and evil." Thus the life of man became
 limited in duration; [304] but still, however, long, inasmuch as it was
 extended to a thousand [305] years. And when Varro was not ignorant of
 this, handed down as it is in the sacred writings, and spread abroad by
 the knowledge of all, he endeavoured to give reasons why the ancients
 were supposed to have lived a thousand years. For he says that among
 the Egyptians months are accounted [306] as years: so that the circuit
 of the sun through the twelve signs of the zodiac does not make a year,
 but the moon, which traverses that sign-bearing circle in the space of
 thirty days; which argument is manifestly false. For no one then
 exceeded the thousandth year. But now they who attain to the hundredth
 year, which frequently happens, undoubtedly live a thousand and two
 hundred months. And competent [307] authorities report that men are
 accustomed to reach one hundred and twenty years. [308] But because
 Varro did not know why or when the life of man was shortened, he
 himself shortened it, since he knew that it was possible for man to
 live a thousand and four hundred months.

 [288] i.e., man.

 [289] It was necessary to remove ambiguity from the heathen, to whom
 the word death conveys no such meaning. In the sacred writings the
 departure of the soul from the body is often spoken of as sleep, or
 rest. Thus Lazarus is said to sleep. 1 Thess. iv. 14, "Them that sleep
 in Jesus will God bring with Him,"--an expression of great beauty and
 propriety as applied to Christians. On the other hand, the prophets
 speak of "the shadow of death."

 [290] Extinguishes. Compare the words of Christ Himself, John v. 29;
 Acts xxiv. 15.

 [291] [Must not be overlooked. See vol. iv. p. [33]495, and elucidation
 (after book. iv.) on p. [34]542.]

 [292] [Eccles. iii. 18-21. Answered, Eccles. xii. 7.]

 [293] Portrayed or expressed.

 [294] It is not to be supposed that Lactantius, following the error of
 Marcion, believed that the body of man had been formed by the devil,
 for he has already described its creation by God. He rather speaks of
 the devil as exercising a power permitted to him over the earth and the
 bodies of men. Compare 2 Cor. iv. 4.

 [295] Preface to Catiline

 [296] The word teneo is used in this sense by Cicero (De Nat. Deor.,
 11. 54): "Tribus rebus animantium vita tenetur, cibo, potione,
 spiritu."

 [297] Material.

 [298] Gen. ii.

 [299] We are not to understand this as asserting that the man lived in
 idleness, and without any employment in paradise; for this would be
 inconsistent with the Scripture narrative, which tells us that Adam was
 placed there to keep the garden and dress it. It is intended to exclude
 painful and anxious labour, which is the punishment of sin. See Gen.
 iii. 17.

 [300] Paradise.

 [301] Another reading is, ad dejiciendum hominem, "to overthrow the
 man."

 [302] Circumvallavit, "placed a barrier round." See Gen. iii. 24: "He
 placed at the east of the garden of Eden cherubims, and a flaming
 sword, which turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life."

 [303] [Not novissima, but extrema here. He refers to book vii. cap. 11,
 etc.]

 [304] Temporary. The word is opposed to everlasting.

 [305] No one actually lived a thousand years. They who approached
 nearest to it were Methuselah, who lived 969 years, Jared 962, and Noah
 950.

 [306] It appears that the practise of the Egyptians varied as to the
 computation of the year.

 [307] Philo and Josephus.

 [308] ["Old Parr," born in Shropshire, a.d. 1483, died in 1635: i.e.,
 born before the discovery of America, he lived to the beginning of
 Hampden's career in England.]

 Chap. XIV.--Of Noah the Inventor of Wine, Who First Had Knowledge of the
 Stars, and of the Origin of False Religions.

 But afterwards God, when He saw the earth filled with wickedness and
 crimes, determined to destroy mankind with a deluge; but, however, for
 renewing the multitude, He chose one man, who, [309] when all were
 corrupted, stood forth pre-eminent, as a remarkable example of
 righteousness. He, when six hundred years old, built an ark, as God had
 commanded him, in which he himself was saved, together with his wife
 and three sons, and as many daughters-in-law, when the water had
 covered all the loftiest mountains. Then when the earth was dry, God,
 execrating the wickedness of the former age, that the length of life
 might not again be a cause of meditating evils, gradually diminished
 the age of man by each successive generation, and placed a limit at a
 hundred and twenty years, [310] which it might not be permitted to
 exceed. But he, when he went forth from the ark, as the sacred writings
 inform us, diligently cultivated the earth, and planted a vineyard with
 his own hand. From which circumstance they are refuted who regard
 Bacchus as the author of wine. For he not only preceded Bacchus, but
 also Saturn and Uranus, by many generations. And when he had first
 taken the fruit from the vineyard, having become merry, he drank even
 to intoxication, and lay naked. And when one of his sons, whose name
 was Cham, [311] had seen this, he did not cover his father's nakedness,
 but went out and told the circumstance to his brothers also. But they,
 having taken a garment, entered with their faces turned backwards, and
 covered their father. [312] And when their father became aware of what
 had been done he disowned and sent away his son. But he went into
 exile, and settled in a part of that land which is now called Arabia;
 and that land was called from him Chanaan, and his posterity
 Chanaanites. This was the first nation which was ignorant of God, since
 its prince and founder did not receive from his father the worship of
 God, being cursed by him; [313] and thus he left to his descendants
 ignorance of the divine nature. [314]

 From this nation all the nearest people flowed as the multitude
 increased. But the descendants of his father were called Hebrews, among
 whom the religion of the true God was established. [315] But from these
 also in after times, when their number was multiplied exceedingly,
 since the small extent of their settlements could not contain them,
 then young men, either sent by their parents or of their own accord, by
 the compulsion of poverty, leaving their own lands to seek for
 themselves new settlements, were scattered in all directions, and
 filled all the islands and the whole earth; and thus being torn away
 from the stem of their sacred root, they established for themselves at
 their own discretion new customs and institutions. But they who
 occupied Egypt were the first of all who began to look up to and adore
 the heavenly bodies. And because they did not shelter themselves in
 houses on account of the quality of the atmosphere, and the heaven is
 not overspread with any clouds in that country, they observed the
 courses of the stars, and their obscurations, [316] while in their
 frequent adorations they more carefully and freely beheld them. Then
 afterwards, induced by certain prodigies, they invented monstrous
 figures of animals, that they might worship them; the authors of which
 we will presently disclose. But the others, who were scattered over the
 earth, admiring the elements of the world, began to worship the heaven,
 the sun, the earth, the sea, without any images and temples, and
 offered sacrifices to them in the open air, until in process of time
 they erected temples and statues to the most powerful kings, and
 originated the practice of honouring them with victims and odours; and
 thus wandering from the knowledge of God, they began to be heathens.
 They err, therefore, who contend that the worship of the gods was from
 the beginning of the world, and that heathenism was prior to the
 religion of God: for they think that this was discovered afterwards,
 because they are ignorant of the source and origin of the truth. Now
 let us return to the beginning of the world.

 [309] The reading is quod, which in construction refers not to the
 preceding, but to the following substantive. Qui has been suggested as
 a preferable reading.

 [310] Lactantius understands the hundred and twenty years (mentioned
 Gen. vi. 3) as the limit of human life, and regards it as a mark of
 severity on God's part. But Chrysostom, Jerome, Augustine, and most
 commentators, regard it rather as a sign of God's patience and
 long-suffering, in giving them that space for repentance. And this
 appears to be confirmed by the Apostle Peter, 1 Ep. iii. 20, "When once
 the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was
 a preparing."

 [311] Ham.

 [312] Gen. ix. 23.

 [313] This refers to that prophetic denunciation of divine judgment on
 the impiety of Ham, which Noah, by the suggestion of the Holy Spirit,
 uttered against the posterity of the profane man. Gen. ix. 25: "Cursed
 be Canaan." The curse was not uttered in a spirit of vengeance or
 impatience on account of the injury received, but by the prophetic
 impulse of the Divine Spirit. [The prophet fixes on the descendant of
 Ham, whose impiety was foreseen, and to whom it brought a curse so
 signal.]

 [314] [Our author falls into a hysteron-proteron: the curse did not
 work the ignorance, but wilful ignorance and idolatry wrought the
 curse, which was merely foretold, not fore-ordained.]

 [315] Resedit.

 [316] Eclipses.

 Chap. XV.--Of the Corruption of Angels, and the Two Kinds of Demons.

 When, therefore, the number of men had begun to increase, God in His
 forethought, lest the devil, to whom from the beginning He had given
 power over the earth, should by his subtilty either corrupt or destroy
 men, as he had done at first, sent angels for the protection and
 improvement [317] of the human race; and inasmuch as He had given these
 a free will, He enjoined them above all things not to defile themselves
 with contamination from the earth, and thus lose the dignity of their
 heavenly nature. [318] He plainly prohibited them from doing that which
 He knew that they would do, that they might entertain no hope of
 pardon. Therefore, while they abode among men, that most deceitful
 ruler [319] of the earth, by his very association, gradually enticed
 them to vices, and polluted them by intercourse with women. Then, not
 being admitted into heaven on account of the sins into which they had
 plunged themselves, they fell to the earth. Thus from angels the devil
 makes them to become his satellites and attendants. But they who were
 born from these, because they were neither angels nor men, but bearing
 a kind of mixed [320] nature, were not admitted into hell, as their
 fathers were not into heaven. Thus there came to be two kinds of
 demons; one of heaven, the other of the earth. The latter are the
 wicked [321] spirits, the authors of all the evils which are done, and
 the same devil is their prince. Whence Trismegistus calls him the ruler
 of the demons. But grammarians say that they are called demons, as
 though doemones, [322] that is, skilled and acquainted with matters:
 for they think that these are gods. They are acquainted, indeed, with
 many future events, but not all, since it is not permitted them
 entirely to know the counsel of God; and therefore they are accustomed
 to accommodate [323] their answers to ambiguous results. The poets both
 know them to be demons, and so describe them. Hesiod thus speaks:--


 "These are the demons according to the will of Zeus, Good, living on
 the earth, the guardians of mortal men."

 And this is said for this purpose, because God had sent them as
 guardians to the human race; but they themselves also, though they are
 the destroyers of men, yet wish themselves to appear as their
 guardians, that they themselves may be worshipped, and God may not be
 worshipped. The philosophers also discuss the subject of these beings.
 For Plato attempted even to explain their natures in his "Banquet;" and
 Socrates said that there was a demon continually about him, who had
 become attached to him when a boy, by whose will and direction his life
 was guided. The art also and power of the Magi altogether consists in
 the influences [324] of these; invoked by whom they deceive the sight
 of men with deceptive illusions, [325] so that they do not see those
 things which exist, and think that they see those things which do not
 exist. These contaminated and abandoned spirits, as I say, wander over
 the whole earth, and contrive a solace for their own perdition by the
 destruction of men. Therefore they fill every place with snares,
 deceits, frauds, and errors; for they cling to individuals, and occupy
 whole houses from door to door, and assume to themselves the name of
 genii; for by this word they translate demons in the Latin language.
 They consecrate these in their houses, to these they daily pour out
 [326] libations of wine, and worship the wise demons as gods of the
 earth, and as averters of those evils which they themselves cause and
 impose. And these, since spirits are without substance [327] and not to
 be grasped, insinuate themselves into the bodies of men; and secretly
 working in their inward parts, they corrupt the health, hasten
 diseases, terrify their souls with dreams, harass their minds with
 phrenzies, that by these evils they may compel men to have recourse to
 their aid.

 [317] Cultum.

 [318] Substantiæ, "essence."

 [319] See 2 Cor. iv. 4, "the god of this world."

 [320] Middle.

 [321] Unclean.

 [322] dae'mones. Other derivations have been proposed; but the word
 probably comes from dai'o, "to distribute destinies." Plato approves of
 the etymology given by Lactantius; for he says that good men,
 distinguished by great honours, after their death became demons, in
 accordance with this title of prudence and wisdom. [See the whole
 subject in Lewis' Plato, etc., p. 347. ]

 [323] To combine, qualify, or temperate.

 [324] Aspirations.

 [325] Blinding tricks, juggleries.

 [326] They lavish. The word implies a profuse and excessive liberality.

 [327] Thin, unsubstantial, as opposed to corporeal. The ancients
 inclined to the opinion that angels had a body, not like that of man,
 but of a slight and more subtle nature. Probably Lactantius refers to
 this idea in using the word tenuis. How opposed this view is to
 Scripture is manifest. [Not so manifest as our translator supposes. I
 do not assert what Lactantius says to be scripturally correct: but it
 certainly is not opposed to many facts as Scripture states them;
 whether figuratively or otherwise, I do not venture a suggestion.]

 Chap. XVI.--That Demons Have No Power Over Those Who are Established in the
 Faith.

 And the nature of all these deceits [328] is obscure to those who are
 without the truth. For they think that those demons profit them when
 they cease to injure, whereas they have no power except to injure.
 [329] Some one may perchance say that they are therefore to be
 worshipped, that they may not injure, since they have the power to
 injure. They do indeed injure, but those only by whom they are feared,
 whom the powerful and lofty hand of God does not protect, who are
 uninitiated in the mystery [330] of truth. But they fear the righteous,
 [331] that is, the worshippers of God, adjured by whose name they
 depart [332] from the bodies of the possessed: for, being lashed by
 their words as though by scourges, they not only confess themselves to
 be demons, but even utter their own names--those which are adored in
 the temples--which they generally do in the presence of their own
 worshippers; not, it is plain, to the disgrace of religion, but [333]
 to the disgrace of their own honour, because they cannot speak falsely
 to God, by whom they are adjured, nor to the righteous, by whose voice
 they are tortured. Therefore ofttimes having uttered the greatest
 howlings, they cry out that they are beaten, and are on fire, and that
 they are just on the point of coming forth: so much power has the
 knowledge of God, and righteousness! Whom, therefore, can they injure,
 except those whom they have in their own power? In short, Hermes
 affirms that those who have known God are not only safe from the
 attacks of demons, but that they are not even bound by fate. "The only
 protection," he says, "is piety, for over a pious man neither evil
 demon nor fate has any power: for God rescues the pious man from all
 evil; for the one and only good thing among men is piety." And what
 piety is, he testifies in another place, in these words: "For piety is
 the knowledge of God." Asclepius also, his disciple, more fully
 expressed the same sentiment in that finished discourse which he wrote
 to the king. Each of them, in truth, affirms that the demons are the
 enemies and harassers of men, and on this account Trismegistus calls
 them wicked angels; so far was he from being ignorant that from
 heavenly beings they were corrupted, and began to be earthly.

 [328] Augustine gives an account of these deceits, De Civit. Dei, ix.
 18.

 [329] Thus the ancient Romans worshipped Fever, Fear, etc., to avoid
 injury from them.

 [330] Sacramento

 [331] See Acts of Apostles xvi. 18, and xix. 15, 16. In the Gospels the
 demons say to Jesus, "Art Thou come to torment us before the time?"
 [Suggestive of 2 Pet. ii. 4.]

 [332] The practise of exorcism was used in the early ages of the
 Church, and the faithful were supposed to possess power over demons.
 See book iv. ch. 27. Justin, Tertullian and other writers attest the
 same. There were also exorcists in the Jewish synagogues. See Acts xix.
 13.

 [333] Sed. Other editions read et; but the one adopted in the text
 brings out the meaning more distinctly by contrast = they did not
 disgrace religion, but their own honour.

 Chap. XVII.--That Astrology, Soothsaying, and Similar Arts are the Invention
 of Demons.

 These were the inventors of astrology, and soothsaying, and divination,
 and those productions which are called oracles, and necromancy, and the
 art of magic, and whatever evil practices besides these men exercise,
 either openly or in secret. Now all these things are false of
 themselves, as the Erythræan Sibyl testifies:--


 "Since all these things are erroneous,

 Which foolish men search after day by day."

 But these same authorities by their countenance [334] cause it to be
 believed that they are true. Thus they delude the credulity of men by
 lying divination, because it is not expedient for them to lay open the
 truth. These are they who taught men to make images and statues; who,
 in order that they might turn away the minds of men from the worship of
 the true God, cause the countenances of dead kings, fashioned and
 adorned with exquisite beauty, to be erected and consecrated, and
 assumed to themselves their names, as though they were assuming some
 characters. But the magicians, and those whom the people truly call
 enchanters, [335] when they practice their detestable arts, call upon
 them by their true names, those heavenly names which are read in the
 sacred writings. Moreover, these impure and wandering spirits, that
 they may throw all things into confusion, and overspread the minds of
 men with errors, interweave and mingle false things with true. For they
 themselves feigned that there are many heavenly beings, and one king of
 all, Jupiter; because there are many spirits of angels in heaven, and
 one Parent and Lord of all, God. But they have concealed the truth
 under false names, and withdrawn it from sight.

 For God, as I have shown in the beginning, [336] does not need a name,
 since He is alone; nor do the angels, inasmuch as they are immortal,
 either suffer or wish themselves to be called gods: for their one and
 only duty is to submit to the will of God, and not to do anything at
 all except at His command. For we say that the world is so governed by
 God, as a province is by its ruler; and no one would say that his
 attendants [337] are his sharers in the administration of the province,
 although business is carried on by their service. And yet these can
 effect something contrary to the commands of the ruler, through his
 ignorance; which is the result of man's condition. But that guardian of
 the world and ruler of the universe, who knows all things, from whose
 divine eyes nothing is concealed, [338] has alone with His Son the
 power over all things; nor is there anything in the angels except the
 necessity of obedience. Therefore they wish no honour to be paid to
 them, since all their honour is in God. But they who have revolted from
 the service of God, because they are enemies of the truth, and
 betrayers [339] of God attempt to claim for themselves the name and
 worship of gods; not that they desire any honour (for what honour is
 there to the lost?), nor that they may injure God, who cannot be
 injured, but that they may injure men, whom they strive to turn away
 from the worship and knowledge of the true Majesty, that they may not
 be able to obtain immortality, which they themselves have lost through
 their wickedness. Therefore they draw on darkness, and overspread the
 truth with obscurity, that men may not know their Lord and Father. And
 that they may easily entice them, they conceal themselves in the
 temples, and are close at hand at all sacrifices; and they often give
 prodigies, that men, astonished by them, may attach to images a belief
 in their divine power and influence. Hence it is that the stone was cut
 by the augur with a razor; that Juno of Veii answered that she wished
 to remove to Rome; that Fortuna Muliebris [340] announced the
 threatening danger; that the ship followed the hand of Claudia; that
 Juno when plundered, and the Locrian Proserpine, and the Milesian
 Ceres, punished the sacrilegious; that Hercules exacted vengeance from
 Appius, and Jupiter from Atinius, and Minerva from Cæsar. Hence it was
 that the serpent sent for from Epidaurus freed the city of Rome from
 pestilence. For the chief of the demons was himself carried thither in
 his own form, without any dissembling; if indeed the ambassadors who
 were sent for that purpose brought with them a serpent of immense size.

 But they especially deceive in the case of oracles, the juggleries of
 which the profane [341] cannot distinguish from the truth; and
 therefore they imagine that commands, [342] and victories, and wealth,
 and prosperous issues of affairs, are bestowed by them,--in short, that
 the state has often been freed from imminent dangers by their
 interposition; [343] which dangers they have both announced, and when
 appeased with sacrifices, have averted. But all these things are
 deceits. For since they have a presentiment [344] of the arrangements
 of God, inasmuch as they have been His ministers, they interpose
 themselves in these matters, that whatever things have been
 accomplished or are in the course of accomplishment by God, they
 themselves may especially appear to be doing or to have done; and as
 often as any advantage is hanging over any people or city, according to
 the purpose of God, either by prodigies, or dreams, or oracles, they
 promise that they will bring it to pass, if temples, honours, and
 sacrifices are given to them. And on the offering of these, when the
 necessary [345] result comes to pass, they acquire for themselves the
 greatest veneration. Hence temples are vowed, and new images
 consecrated; herds of victims are slain; and when all these things are
 done, yet the life and safety of those who have performed them are not
 the less sacrificed. But as often as dangers threaten, they profess
 that they are angry on account of some light and trifling cause; as
 Juno was with Varro, because he had placed a beautiful boy on the
 carriage [346] of Jupiter to guard the dress, and on this account the
 Roman name was almost destroyed at Cannæ. But if Juno feared a second
 Ganymede, why did the Roman youth suffer punishment? Or if the gods
 regard the leaders only, and neglect the rest of the multitude, why did
 Varro alone escape who acted thus, and why was Paulus, who was
 innocent, [347] slain? Assuredly nothing then happened to the Romans by
 "the fates of the hostile Juno," [348] when Hannibal by craft and
 valour despatched two armies of the Roman people. For Juno did not
 venture either to defend Carthage, where were her arms and chariot, or
 to injure the Romans; for


 "She had heard that sons of Troy

 Were born her Carthage to destroy." [349]

 But these are the delusions of those who, concealing themselves under
 the names of the dead, lay snares for the living. Therefore, whether
 the impending danger can be avoided, they wish it to appear that they
 averted it, having been appeased; or if it cannot be avoided, they
 contrive that it may appear to have happened through disregard [350] of
 them. Thus they acquire to themselves authority and fear from men, who
 are ignorant of them. By this subtilty and by these arts they have
 caused the knowledge of the true and only God to fail [351] among all
 nations. For, being destroyed by their own vices, they rage and use
 violence that they may destroy others. Therefore these enemies of the
 human race even devised human victims, to devour as many lives as
 possible.

 [334] By their presence.

 [335] Malefici--evil doers. The word is specially used of enchanters.

 [336] Book i. ch. vi.

 [337] Apparitors. The word is especially applied to public servants, as
 lictors, etc.

 [338] Surrounded, shut in.

 [339] Prævaricatores. The word is properly applied to an advocate who
 is guilty of collusion with his antagonist, and thus betrays his
 client.

 [340] Womanly Fortune.

 [341] Unbelievers.

 [342] Governments.

 [343] At their nod, or suggestion.

 [344] They presage.

 [345] That which was necessary according to the purpose and arrangement
 of God.

 [346] Tensa; a carriage on which the images of the gods were carried to
 the circus at the Circensian games.

 [347] Deserved nothing, had nothing worthy of punishment. Varro and
 Paulus Æmilius were the two consuls who commanded at Cannæ. Varro
 escaped, Paulus was slain.

 [348] Virg., Æn., viii. 292.

 [349] Ibid., i. 19.

 [350] Contempt.

 [351] They have made old.

 Chap. XVIII.--Of the Patience and Vengeance of God, the Worship of Demons,
 and False Religions.

 Some one will say, Why then does God permit these things to be done,
 and not apply a remedy to such disastrous errors? That evils may be at
 variance with good; that vices may be opposed to virtues; that He may
 have some whom He may punish, and others whom He may honour. For He has
 determined at the last times to pass judgment on the living and the
 dead, concerning which judgment I shall speak in the last book. He
 delays, [352] therefore, until the end of the times shall come, when He
 may pour out His wrath with heavenly power and might, as


 "Prophecies of pious seers

 Ring terror in the 'wildered ears." [353]

 But now He suffers men to err, and to be impious even towards Himself,
 just, and mild, and patient as He is. For it is impossible that He in
 whom is perfect excellence should not also be of perfect patience.
 Whence some imagine, that God is altogether free from anger, because He
 is not subject to affections, which are perturbations of the mind; for
 every animal which is liable to affections and emotions is frail. But
 this persuasion altogether takes away truth and religion. But let this
 subject of discussing the anger of God be laid aside for the present;
 because the matter is very copious, and to be more widely treated in a
 work devoted to the subject. Whoever shall have worshipped and followed
 these most wicked spirits, will neither enjoy heaven nor the light,
 which are God's; but will fall into those things which we have spoken
 of as being assigned in the distribution of things to the prince of the
 evil ones himself,--namely, into darkness, and hell, and everlasting
 punishment.

 I have shown that the religious rites of the gods are vain in a
 threefold manner: In the first place, because those images which are
 worshipped are representations of men who are dead; and that is a wrong
 and inconsistent thing, that the image of a man should be worshipped by
 the image of God, for that which worships is lower and weaker than that
 which is worshipped: then that it is an inexpiable crime to desert the
 living in order that you may serve memorials of the dead, who can
 neither give life nor light to any one, for they are themselves without
 it: and that there is no other God but one, to whose judgment and power
 every soul is subject. In the second place, that the sacred images
 themselves, to which most senseless men do service, are destitute of
 all perception, since they are earth. But who cannot understand that it
 is unlawful for an upright animal to bend itself that it may adore the
 earth? which is placed beneath our feet for this purpose, that it may
 be trodden upon, and not adored by us, who have been raised from it,
 and have received an elevated position beyond the other living
 creatures, that we may not turn ourselves again downward, nor cast this
 heavenly countenance to the earth, but may direct our eyes to that
 quarter to which the condition of their nature has directed, and that
 we may adore and worship nothing except the single deity of our only
 Creator and Father, who made man of an erect figure, that we may know
 that we are called forth to high and heavenly things. In the third
 place, because the spirits which preside over the religious rites
 themselves, being condemned and cast off by God, wallow [354] over the
 earth, who not only are unable to afford any advantage to their
 worshippers, since the power of all things is in the hands of one
 alone, but even destroy them with deadly attractions and errors; since
 this is their daily business, to involve men in darkness, that the true
 God may not be sought by them. Therefore they are not to be worshipped,
 because they lie under the sentence of God. For it is a very great
 crime to devote [355] one's self to the power of those whom, if you
 follow righteousness, you are able to excel in power, and to drive out
 and put to flight by adjuration of the divine name. But if it appears
 that these religious rites are vain in so many ways as I have shown, it
 is manifest that those who either make prayers to the dead, [356] or
 venerate the earth, or make over [357] their souls to unclean spirits,
 do not act as becomes men, and that they will suffer punishment for
 their impiety and guilt, who, rebelling against God, the Father of the
 human race, have undertaken inexpiable rites, and violated every sacred
 law.

 [352] Jerome says "Great is the anger of God when He does not correct
 sins, but punishes blindness with blindness. On this very account God
 sends strong delusion, as St. Paul writes to the Thessalonians, that
 they should believe a lie, that they all may be damned who have not
 believed the truth. They are unworthy of the living fountain who dig
 for themselves cisterns."

 [353] Virg., Æn., iv. 464. Some read priorum instead of piorum

 [354] Roll themselves.

 [355] Addico, "to adjudge," is the legal term, expressing the sentence
 by which the prætor gave effect to the right which he had declared to
 exist.

 [356] [Let this be noted.]

 [357] Mancipo. The word implies the making over or transferring by a
 formal act of sale. Debtors, who were unable to satisfy the demands of
 their creditors, were made over to them, and regarded as their slaves.
 They were termed addicti. Our Lord said (John viii. 34), "Whosoever
 committeth sin, is the servant of sin." Thus also St. Paul, Rom. vi.
 16, 17.

 Chap. XIX.--Of the Worship of Images and Earthly Objects.

 Whoever, therefore, is anxious to observe the obligations to which man
 is liable, and to maintain a regard for his nature, let him raise
 himself from the ground, and, with mind lifted up, let him direct his
 eyes to heaven: let him not seek God under his feet, nor dig up from
 his footprints an object of veneration, for whatever lies beneath man
 must necessarily be inferior to man; but let him seek it aloft, let him
 seek it in the highest place: for nothing can be greater than man,
 except that which is above man. But God is greater than man: therefore
 He is above, and not below; nor is He to be sought in the lowest, but
 rather in the highest region. Wherefore it is undoubted that there is
 no religion wherever there is an image. [358] For if religion consists
 of divine things, and there is nothing divine except in heavenly
 things; it follows that images are without religion, because there can
 be nothing heavenly in that which is made from the earth. And this,
 indeed, may be plain to a wise man from the very name. [359] For
 whatever is an imitation, that must of necessity be false; nor can
 anything receive the name of a true object which counterfeits the truth
 by deception and imitation. But if all imitation is not particularly a
 serious matter, but as it were a sport and jest, then there is no
 religion in images, but a mimicry of religion. That which is true is
 therefore to be preferred to all things which are false; earthly things
 are to be trampled upon, that we may obtain heavenly things. For this
 is the state of the case, that whosoever shall prostrate his soul,
 which has its origin from heaven, to the shades [360] beneath, and the
 lowest things, must fall to that place to which he has cast himself.
 Therefore he ought to be mindful of his nature and condition, and
 always to strive and aim at things above. And whoever shall do this, he
 will be judged altogether wise, he just, he a man: he, in short, will
 be judged worthy of heaven whom his Parent will recognise not as
 abject, nor cast down to the earth after the manner of the beasts,
 [361] but rather standing and upright as He made him.

 [358] [Quare non est dubium quin religio nulla sit ubicunque simulacrum
 est. Such is the uniform Ante-Nicene testimony.]

 [359] Simulacrum, "an image," from simulo, "to imitate."

 [360] The infernal regions.

 [361] Quadrupeds.

 Chap. XX.--Of Philosophy and the Truth.

 A great and difficult portion of the work which I have undertaken,
 unless I am deceived, has been completed; and the majesty of heaven
 supplying the power of speaking, we have driven away inveterate errors.
 But now a greater and more difficult contest with philosophers is
 proposed to us, the height of whose learning and eloquence, as some
 massive structure, is opposed to me. For as in the former [362] case we
 were oppressed by a multitude, and almost by the universal agreement of
 all nations, so in this subject we are oppressed by the authority of
 men excelling in every kind of praise. But who can be ignorant that
 there is more weight in a smaller number of learned men than in a
 greater number of ignorant persons? [363] But we must not despair that,
 under the guidance of God and the truth, these also may be turned aside
 from their opinion; nor do I think that they will be so obstinate as to
 deny that they behold with sound and open eyes the sun as he shines in
 his brilliancy. Only let that be true which they themselves are
 accustomed to profess, that they are possessed with the desire of
 investigation, and I shall assuredly succeed in causing them to believe
 that the truth which they have long sought for has been at length
 found, and to confess that it could not have been found by the
 abilities of man.

 [362] In this second book.

 [363] [Quis autem nesciat plus esse momenti in paucioribus doctis, quam
 in pluribus imperitis?]


the divine institutes

  Book III.

  Of the False Wisdom of Philosophers.

 Chap. I.--A Comparison of the Truth with Eloquence: Why the Philosophers Did
 Not Attain to It. Of the Simple Style of the Scriptures.

 Since it is supposed that the truth still lies hidden in
 obscurity--either through the error and ignorance of the common people,
 who are the slaves of various and foolish superstitions, or through the
 philosophers, who by the perverseness of their minds confuse rather
 than throw light upon it--I could wish that the power of eloquence had
 fallen to my lot, though not such as it was in Marcus Tullius, for that
 was extraordinary and admirable, but in some degree approaching it;
 [364] that, being supported as much by the strength of talent as it has
 weight by its own force, the truth might at length come forth, and
 having dispelled and refuted public errors, and the errors of those who
 are considered wise, might introduce among the human race a brilliant
 light. And I could wish that this were so, for two reasons: either that
 men might more readily believe the truth when adorned with
 embellishments, since they even believe falsehood, being captivated by
 the adornment of speech and the enticement of words; or, at all events,
 that the philosophers themselves might be overpowered by us, most of
 all by their own arms, in which they are accustomed to pride themselves
 and to place confidence.

 But since God has willed this to be the nature of the case, that simple
 and undisguised truth should be more clear, because it has sufficient
 ornament of itself, and on this account it is corrupted when
 embellished [365] with adornings from without, but that falsehood
 should please by means of a splendour not its own, because being
 corrupt of itself it vanishes and melts away, unless it is set off
 [366] and polished with decoration sought from another source; I bear
 it with equanimity that a moderate degree of talent has been granted to
 me. But it is not in reliance upon eloquence, but upon the truth, that
 I have undertaken this work,--a work, perhaps, too great to be
 sustained by my strength; which, however, even if I should fail, the
 truth itself will complete, with the assistance of God, whose office
 this is. For when I know that the greatest orators have often been
 overcome by pleaders of moderate ability, because the power of truth is
 so great that it defends itself even in small things by its own
 clearness: why should I imagine that it will be overwhelmed in a cause
 of the greatest importance by men who are ingenious and eloquent, as I
 admit, but who speak false things; and not that it should appear bright
 and illustrious, if not by our speech, which is very feeble, and flows
 from a slight fountain, but by its own light? Nor, if there have been
 philosophers worthy of admiration on account of their literary
 erudition, should I also yield to them the knowledge and learning of
 the truth, which no one can attain to by reflection or disputation. Nor
 do I now disparage the pursuit of those who wished to know the truth,
 because God has made the nature of man most desirous of arriving at the
 truth; but I assert and maintain this against them, that the effect did
 not follow their honest and well-directed will, because they neither
 knew what was true in itself, nor how, nor where, nor with what mind it
 is to be sought. And thus, while they desire to remedy the errors of
 men, they have become entangled in snares and the greatest errors. I
 have therefore been led to this task of refuting philosophy by the very
 order of the subject which I have undertaken.

 For since all error arises either from false religion or from wisdom,
 [367] [368] in refuting error it is necessary to overthrow both. For
 inasmuch as it has been handed down to us in the sacred writings that
 the thoughts of philosophers are foolish, this very thing is to be
 proved by fact and by arguments, that no one, induced by the honourable
 name of wisdom, or deceived by the splendour of empty eloquence, may
 prefer to give credence to human rather than to divine things. Which
 things, indeed, are related in a concise and simple manner. For it was
 not befitting that, when God was speaking to man, He should confirm His
 words by arguments, as though He would not otherwise [369] be regarded
 with confidence: but, as it was right, He spoke as the mighty Judge of
 all things, to whom it belongs not to argue, but to pronounce sentence.
 He Himself, as God, is truth. But we, since we have divine testimony
 for everything, will assuredly show by how much surer arguments truth
 may be defended, when even false things are so defended that they are
 accustomed to appear true. Wherefore there is no reason why we should
 give so much honour to philosophers as to fear their eloquence. For
 they might speak well as men of learning; but they could not speak
 truly, because they had not learned the truth from Him in whose power
 it was. Nor, indeed, shall we effect anything great in convicting them
 of ignorance, which they themselves very often confess. Since they are
 not believed in that one point alone in which alone they ought to have
 been believed, I will endeavour to show that they never spoke so truly
 as when they uttered their opinion respecting their own ignorance.

 [364] [A modest confession of his desire to "find out acceptable
 words." Eccles. xii. 10. His success is proverbial.]

 [365] Stained, counterfeit.

 [366] Embellished.

 [367]

 [368] [i.e., false sophia = "philosophy falsely so called." Vol. v. p.
 [35]81.]

 [369] Aliter. This word is usually read in the former clause, but it
 gives a better meaning in this position.

 Chap. II.--Of Philosophy, and How Vain Was Its Occupation in Setting Forth
 the Truth.

 Now, since the falsehood of superstitions [370] has been shown in the
 two former books, and the origin itself of the whole error has been set
 forth, it is the business of this book to show the emptiness and
 falsehood of philosophy also, that, all error being removed, the truth
 may be brought to light and become manifest. Let us begin, therefore,
 from the common name of philosophy, that when the head itself is
 destroyed, an easier approach may be open to us for demolishing the
 whole body; if indeed that can be called a body, the parts and members
 of which are at variance with one another, and are not united together
 by any connecting link, [371] but, as it were, dispersed and scattered,
 appear to palpitate rather than to live. Philosophy is (as the name
 indicates, and they themselves define it) the love of wisdom. By what
 argument, then, can I prove that philosophy is not wisdom, rather than
 by that derived from the meaning of the name itself? For he who devotes
 himself to wisdom is manifestly not yet wise, but devotes himself to
 the subject that he may be wise. In the other arts it appears what this
 devotedness effects, and to what it tends: for when any one by learning
 has attained to these, he is now called, not a devoted follower of the
 profession, but an artificer. But it is said it was on account of
 modesty that they called themselves devoted to wisdom, and not wise.
 Nay, in truth, Pythagoras, who first invented this name, since he had a
 little more wisdom than those of early times, who regarded themselves
 as wise, understood that it was impossible by any human study to attain
 to wisdom, and therefore that a perfect name ought not to be applied to
 an incomprehensible and imperfect subject. And, therefore, when he was
 asked what was his profession, [372] he answered that he was a
 philosopher, that is, a searcher after wisdom. If, therefore,
 philosophy searches after wisdom, it is not wisdom itself, because it
 must of necessity be one thing which searches, and another which is
 searched for; nor is the searching itself correct, because it can find
 nothing.

 But I am not prepared to concede even that philosophers are devoted to
 the pursuit of wisdom, because by that pursuit there is no attaining to
 wisdom. For if the power of finding the truth were connected [373] with
 this pursuit, and if this pursuit were a kind of road to wisdom, it
 would at length be found. But since so much time and talent have been
 wasted in the search for it, and it has not yet been gained, it is
 plain that there is no wisdom there. Therefore they who apply
 themselves to philosophy do not devote themselves to the pursuit of
 wisdom; but they themselves imagine that they do so, because they know
 not where that is which they are searching for, or of what character it
 is. Whether, therefore, they devote themselves to the pursuit of wisdom
 or not, they are not wise, because that can never be discovered which
 is either sought in an improper manner, or not sought at all. Let us
 look to this very thing, whether it is possible for anything to be
 discovered by this kind of pursuit, or nothing.

 [370] [Religionum falsitas. He does not here employ superstitio By the
 way, Lactantius derives this word from those "qui superstitem memoriam
 hominum, tanquam deorum, colerent." Cicero, however, derives it from
 those who bother the gods with petitions,--"pro superstite prole." See
 note of the annotator of the Delphin Cicero, on the Natura Deor., i.
 17.]

 [371] A joint or fastening.

 [372] What he professed--gave himself out to be.

 [373] Subjaceret.

 Chap. III.--Of What Subjects Philosophy Consists, and Who Was the Chief
 Founder of the Academic Sect.

 Philosophy appears to consist of two subjects, knowledge and
 conjecture, and of nothing more. Knowledge cannot come from the
 understanding, nor be apprehended by thought; because to have knowledge
 in oneself as a peculiar property does not belong to man, but to God.
 But the nature of mortals does not receive knowledge, except that which
 comes from without. For on this account the divine intelligence has
 opened the eyes and ears and other senses in the body, that by these
 entrances knowledge might flow through to the mind. For to investigate
 or wish to know the causes of natural things,--whether the sun is as
 great as it appears to be, or is many times greater than the whole of
 this earth; also whether the moon be spherical or concave; and whether
 the stars are fixed to the heaven, or are borne with free course
 through the air; of what magnitude the heaven itself is, of what
 material it is composed; whether it is at rest and immoveable, or is
 turned round with incredible swiftness; how great is the thickness of
 the earth, or on what foundations it is poised and suspended,--to wish
 to comprehend these things, I say, by disputation and conjectures, is
 as though we should wish to discuss what we may suppose to be the
 character of a city in some very remote country, which we have never
 seen, and of which we have heard nothing more than the name. If we
 should claim to ourselves knowledge in a matter of this kind, which
 cannot be known, should we not appear to be mad, in venturing to affirm
 that in which we may be refuted? How much more are they to be judged
 mad and senseless, who imagine that they know natural things, which
 cannot be known by man! Rightly therefore did Socrates, and the
 Academics [374] who followed him, take away knowledge, which is not the
 part of a disputant, but of a diviner. It remains that there is in
 philosophy conjecture only; for that from which knowledge is absent, is
 entirely occupied by conjecture. For every one conjectures that of
 which he is ignorant. But they who discuss natural subjects, conjecture
 that they are as they discuss them. Therefore they do not know the
 truth, because knowledge is concerned with that which is certain,
 conjecture with the uncertain.

 Let us return to the example before mentioned. Come, let us conjecture
 about the state and character of that city which is unknown to us in
 all respects except in name. It is probable that it is situated on a
 plain, with walls of stone, lofty buildings, many streets, magnificent
 and highly adorned temples. Let us describe, if you please, the customs
 and deportment of the citizens. But when we shall have described these,
 another will make opposite statements; and when he also shall have
 concluded, a third will arise, and others after him; and they will make
 very different conjectures to those of ours. Which therefore of all is
 more true? Perhaps none of them. But all things have been mentioned
 which the nature of the circumstances admits, so that some one of them
 must necessarily be true. But it will not be known who has spoken the
 truth. It may possibly be that all have in some degree erred in their
 description, and that all have in some degree attained to the truth.
 Therefore we are foolish if we seek this by disputation; for some one
 may present himself who may deride our conjectures, and esteem us as
 mad, since we wish to conjecture the character of that which we do not
 know. But it is unnecessary to go in quest of remote cases, from which
 perhaps no one may come to refute us. Come, let us conjecture what is
 now going on in the forum, what in the senate-house. That also is too
 distant. Let us say what is taking place with the interposition of a
 single wall; [375] no one can know this but he who has heard or seen
 it. No one therefore ventures to say this, because he will immediately
 be refuted not by words, but by the presence of the fact itself. But
 this is the very thing which philosophers do, who discuss what is
 taking place in heaven, but think that they do that with impunity,
 because there is no one to refute their errors. But if they were to
 think that some one was about to descend who would prove them to be mad
 and false, they would never discuss those subjects at all which they
 cannot possibly know. Nor, however, is their shamelessness and audacity
 to be regarded as more successful because they are not refuted; for God
 refutes them to whom alone the truth is known, although He may seem to
 connive at their conduct, and He reckons such wisdom of men as the
 greatest folly.

 [374] It is evident that the Academy took its rise from the doctrine of
 Socrates. Plato, the disciple of Socrates, founded the Academy. However
 excellent their system may appear to many, the opinion of Carneades the
 Stoic seems just, who said that "the wise man who is about to
 conjecture is about to err, for he who conjectures knows nothing." Thus
 knowledge is taken from them by themselves.--Betul.

 [375] With nothing but an inner wall between.

 Chap. IV.--That Knowledge is Taken Away by Socrates, and Conjecture by Zeno.

 Zeno and the Stoics, then, were right in repudiating conjecture. For to
 conjecture that you know that which you do not know, is not the part of
 a wise, but rather of a rash and foolish man. Therefore if nothing can
 be known, as Socrates taught, or ought to be conjectured, as Zeno
 taught, philosophy is entirely removed. Why should I say that it is not
 only overthrown by these two, who were the chiefs of philosophy, but by
 all, so that it now appears to have been long ago destroyed by its own
 arms? Philosophy has been divided into many sects; and they all
 entertain various sentiments. In which do we place the truth? It
 certainly cannot be in all. Let us point out some one; it follows that
 all the others will be without wisdom. Let us pass through them
 separately; in the same manner, whatever we shall give to one we shall
 take away from the others. For each particular sect overturns all
 others, to confirm itself and its own doctrines: nor does it allow
 wisdom to any other, lest it should confess that it is itself foolish;
 but as it takes away others, so is it taken away itself by all others.
 For they are nevertheless philosophers who accuse it of folly. Whatever
 sect you shall praise and pronounce true, that is censured by
 philosophers as false. Shall we therefore believe one which praises
 itself and its doctrine, or the many which blame the ignorance of each
 other? That must of necessity be better which is held by great numbers,
 than that which is held by one only. For no one can rightly judge
 concerning himself, as the renowned poet testifies; [376] for the
 nature of men is so arranged, that they see and distinguish the affairs
 of others better than their own. Since, therefore, all things are
 uncertain, we must either believe all or none: if we are to believe no
 one, then the wise have no existence, because while they separately
 affirm different things they think themselves wise; if all, it is
 equally true that there are no wise men, because all deny the wisdom of
 each individually. Therefore all are in this manner destroyed; and as
 those fabled sparti [377] of the poets, so these men mutually slay one
 another, so that no one remains of all; which happens on this account,
 because they have a sword, but have no shield. If, therefore, the sects
 individually are convicted of folly by the judgment of many sects, it
 follows that all are found to be vain and empty; and thus philosophy
 consumes and destroys itself. And since Arcesilas the founder of the
 Academy understood this, he collected together the mutual censures of
 all, and the confession of ignorance made by distinguished
 philosophers, and armed himself against all. Thus he established a new
 philosophy of not philosophizing. From this founder, therefore, there
 began to be two kinds of philosophy: one the old one, which claims to
 itself knowledge; the other a new one, opposed to the former, and which
 detracts from it. Between these two kinds of philosophy I see that
 there is disagreement, and as it were civil war. On which side shall we
 place wisdom, which cannot be torn asunder? [378] [379] If the nature
 of things can be known, this troop of recruits will perish; if it
 cannot, the veterans will be destroyed: if they shall be equal,
 nevertheless philosophy, the guide of all, will still perish, because
 it is divided; for nothing can be opposed to itself without its own
 destruction. But if, as I have shown, there can be no inner and
 peculiar knowledge in man on account of the frailty of the human
 condition, the party of Arcesilas prevails. But not even will this
 stand firm, because it cannot be the case that nothing at all is known.

 [376] Terent., Heautont., iii. sec. 97.

 [377] spartoi', those who sprung from the dragon's teeth.

 [378]

 [379] Distrahi, which is the reading of some editions, is here followed
 in preference to the common reading, detrahi.

 Chap. V.--That the Knowledge of Many Things is Necessary.

 For there are many things which nature itself, and frequent use, and
 the necessity of life, compel us to know. Accordingly you must perish,
 unless you know what things are useful for life, in order that you may
 seek them; and what are dangerous, that you may shun and avoid them.
 Moreover, there are many things which experience finds out. For the
 various courses of the sun and moon, and the motions of the stars, and
 the computation of times, have been discovered, and the nature of
 bodies, and the strength of herbs by students of medicine, and by the
 cultivators of the land the nature of soils, and signs of future rains
 and tempests have been collected. In short, there is no art which is
 not dependent on knowledge. Therefore Arcesilas ought, if he had any
 wisdom, to have distinguished the things which were capable of being
 known, and those which were incapable. But if he had done this, he
 would have reduced himself to the common herd. For the common people
 have sometimes more wisdom, because they are only so far wise as is
 necessary. And if you inquire of them whether they know anything or
 nothing, they will say that they know the things which they know, and
 will confess that they are ignorant of what they are ignorant. He was
 right, therefore, in taking away the systems of others, but he was not
 right in laying the foundations of his own. For ignorance of all things
 cannot be wisdom, the peculiar property of which is knowledge. And
 thus, when he overcame the philosophers, and taught that they knew
 nothing, he himself also lost the name of philosopher, because his
 system is to know nothing. For he who blames others because they are
 ignorant, ought himself to have knowledge; but when he knows nothing,
 what perverseness or what insolence it is, to constitute himself a
 philosopher on account of that very thing for which he takes away the
 others! For it is in their power to answer thus: If you convict us of
 knowing nothing, and therefore of being unwise because we know nothing,
 does it follow that you are not wise, because you confess that you know
 nothing? What progress, therefore, did Arcesilas make, except that,
 having despatched all the philosophers, he pierced himself also with
 the same sword?


 Chap. VI.--Of Wisdom, and the Academics, and Natural Philosophy.

 Does wisdom therefore nowhere exist? Yes, indeed, it was amongst them,
 but no one saw it. Some thought that all things could be known: these
 were manifestly not wise. Others thought that nothing could be known;
 nor indeed were these wise: the former, because they attributed too
 much to man; the latter, because they attributed too little. A limit
 was wanting to each on either side. Where, then, is wisdom? It consists
 in thinking neither that you know all things, which is the property of
 God; nor that you are ignorant of all things, which is the part of a
 beast. For it is something of a middle character which belongs to man,
 that is, knowledge united and combined with ignorance. Knowledge in us
 is from the soul, which has its origin from heaven; ignorance from the
 body, which is from the earth: whence we have something in common with
 God, and with the animal creation. Thus, since we are composed of these
 two elements, the one of which is endowed with light, the other with
 darkness, a part of knowledge is given to us, and a part of ignorance.
 Over this bridge, so to speak, we may pass without any danger of
 falling; for all those who have inclined to either side, either towards
 the left hand or the right, have fallen. But I will say how each part
 has erred. The Academics argued from obscure subjects, against the
 natural philosophers, that there was no knowledge; and satisfied with
 the examples of a few incomprehensible subjects, they embraced
 ignorance as though they had taken away the whole of knowledge, because
 they had taken it away in part. But natural philosophers, on the other
 hand, derived their argument from those things which are open, and
 inferred that all things could be known, and, satisfied with things
 which were manifest, retained knowledge; as if they had defended it
 altogether, because they had defended it in part. And thus neither the
 one saw what was clear, nor the others what was obscure; but each
 party, while they contended with the greatest ardour either to retain
 or to take away knowledge only, did not see that there would be placed
 in the middle that which might guide them to wisdom.

 But Arcesilas, who teaches that there is no knowledge, [380] when he
 was detracting from Zeno, the chief of the Stoics, that he might
 altogether overthrow philosophy on the authority of Socrates, undertook
 this opinion to affirm that nothing could be known. And thus he
 disproved the judgment of the philosophers, who had thought that the
 truth was drawn forth, [381] and found out by their talents,--namely,
 because that wisdom was mortal, and, having been instituted a few ages
 before, had now attained to its greatest increase, so that it was now
 necessarily growing old and perishing, the Academy [382] suddenly
 arose, the old age, as it were, of philosophy, which might despatch it
 now withering. And Arcesilas rightly saw that they are arrogant, or
 rather foolish, who imagine that the knowledge of the truth can be
 arrived at by conjecture. But no one can refute one speaking falsely,
 unless he who shall have previously known what is true; but Arcesilas,
 endeavouring to do this without a knowledge of the truth, introduced a
 kind of philosophy which we may call unstable or inconstant. [383] For,
 that nothing may be known, it is necessary that something be known. For
 if you know nothing at all, the very knowledge that nothing can be
 known will be taken away. Therefore he who pronounces as a sentiment
 that nothing is known, professes, as it were, some conclusion already
 arrived at and known: therefore it is possible for something to be
 known.

 Of a similar character to this is that which is accustomed to be
 proposed in the schools as an example of the kind of fallacy called
 asystaton; that some one had dreamt that he should not believe dreams.
 For if he did believe them, then it follows that he ought not to
 believe them. But if he did not believe them, then it follows that he
 ought to believe them. Thus, if nothing can be known, it is necessary
 that this fact must be known, that nothing is known. But if it is known
 that nothing can be known, the statement that nothing can be known must
 as a consequence be false. Thus there is introduced a tenet opposed to
 itself, and destructive of itself. But the evasive [384] man wished to
 take away learning from the other philosophers, that he might conceal
 it at his home. For truly he is not for taking it from himself who
 affirms anything that he may take it from others: but he does not
 succeed; for it shows itself, and betrays its plunderer. How much more
 wisely and truly he would act, if he should make an exception, and say
 that the causes and systems of heavenly things only, or natural things,
 because they are hidden, cannot be known, for there is no one to teach
 them; and ought not to be inquired into, for they cannot be found out
 by inquiry! For if he had brought forward this exception, he would both
 have admonished the natural philosophers not to search into those
 things which exceeded the limit of human reflection; and would have
 freed himself from the ill-will arising from calumny, and would
 certainly have left us something to follow. But now, since he has drawn
 us back from following others, that we may not wish to know more than
 we are capable of knowing, he has no less drawn us back from himself
 also. For who would wish to labour lest he should know anything? or to
 undertake learning of this kind that he may even lose ordinary
 knowledge? For if this learning exists, it must necessarily consist of
 knowledge; if it does not exist, who is so foolish as to think that
 that is worthy of being learned, in which either nothing is learned, or
 something is even unlearned? Wherefore, if all things cannot be known,
 as the natural philosophers thought, nor nothing, as the Academics
 taught, philosophy is altogether extinguished.

 [380] The master of ignorance.

 [381] Erutam.

 [382] The New Academy.

 [383] In Greek, asu'staton, "without consistency, not holding
 together;" in Latin, "instabile" or "inconstans."

 [384] Versutus, one who turns and shifts.

 Chap. VII.--Of Moral Philosophy, and the Chief Good.

 Let us now pass to the other part of philosophy, which they themselves
 call moral, in which is contained the method of the whole of
 philosophy, since in natural philosophy there is only delight, in this
 there is utility also. And since it is more dangerous to commit a fault
 in arranging the condition of life and in forming the character,
 greater diligence must be used, that we may know how we ought to live.
 For in the former subject [385] some indulgence may be granted: for
 whether they say anything, they bestow no advantage; or if they
 foolishly rave, they do no injury. But in this subject there is no room
 for difference of opinion, none for error. All must entertain the same
 sentiments, and philosophy itself must give instructions as it were
 with one mouth; because if any error shall be committed, life is
 altogether overthrown. In that former part, as there is less danger, so
 there is more difficulty; because the obscurity of the subject compels
 us to entertain different and various opinions. But in this, as there
 is more danger, so there is less difficulty; because the very use of
 the subjects and daily experiments are able to teach what is truer and
 better. Let us see, therefore, whether they agree, or what assistance
 they give us for the better guidance of life. It is not necessary to
 enlarge on every point; let us select one, and especially that which is
 the chief and principal thing, in which the whole of wisdom centres and
 depends. [386] Epicurus deems that the chief good consists in pleasure
 of mind, Aristippus in pleasure of the body. Callipho and Dinomachus
 united virtue with pleasure, Diodorus with the privation of pain,
 Hieronymus placed the chief good in the absence of pain; the
 Peripatetics, again, in the goods of the mind, the body, and fortune.
 The chief good of Herillus is knowledge; that of Zeno, to live
 agreeably to nature; that of certain Stoics, to follow virtue.
 Aristotle placed the chief good in integrity and virtue. These are the
 sentiments of nearly all. In such a difference of opinions, whom do we
 follow? whom do we believe? All are of equal authority. If we are able
 to select that which is better, it follows that philosophy is not
 necessary for us; because we are already wise, inasmuch as we judge
 respecting the opinions of the wise. But since we come for the sake of
 learning wisdom, how can we judge, who have not yet begun to be wise?
 especially when the Academic is close at hand, to draw us back by the
 cloak, and forbid us to believe any one, without bringing forward that
 which we may follow.

 [385] Natural philosophy.

 [386] The hinge of wisdom altogether turns.

 Chap. VIII.--Of the Chief Good, and the Pleasures of the Soul and Body, and
 of Virtue.

 What then remains, but that we leave raving and obstinate wranglers,
 and come to the judge, who is in truth the giver of simple and calm
 wisdom? which is able not only to mould us, and lead us into the way,
 but also to pass an opinion on the controversies of those men. This
 teaches us what is the true and highest good of man; but before I begin
 to speak on this subject, all those opinions must be refuted, that it
 may appear that no one of those philosophers was wise. Since the
 inquiry is respecting the duty of man, the chief good of the chief
 animal ought to be placed in that which it cannot have in common with
 the other animals. But as teeth are the peculiar property of wild
 beasts, horns of cattle, and wings of birds, so something peculiar to
 himself ought to be attributed to man, without which he would lose the
 fixed [387] order of his condition. For that which is given to all for
 the purpose of life or generation, is indeed a natural good; but still
 it is not the greatest, unless it be peculiar to each class. Therefore
 he was not a wise man who believed that pleasure of the mind is the
 chief good, since that, whether it be freedom from anxiety or joy, is
 common to all. I do not consider Aristippus even worthy of an answer;
 for since he is always rushing into pleasures of the body, and is only
 the slave of sensual indulgences, no one can regard him as a man: for
 he lived in such a manner that there was no difference between him and
 a brute, except this only, that he had the faculty of speech. But if
 the power of speaking were given to the ass, or the dog, or swine, and
 you were to inquire from these why they so furiously pursue the
 females, that they can scarcely be separated from them, and even
 neglect their food and I drink; why they either drive away other males,
 or do not abstain from the pursuit even when vanquished, but often,
 when bruised by stronger animals, they are more determined in their
 pursuit; why they dread neither rain nor cold; why they undertake
 labour, and do not shrink from danger;--what other answer will they
 give, but that the chief good is bodily pleasure?--that they eagerly
 seek it, in order that they may be affected with the most agreeable
 sensations; and that these are of so much importance, that, for the
 sake of attaining them, they imagine that no labour, nor wounds, nor
 death itself, ought to be refused by them? Shall we then seek precepts
 of living from these men, who have no other feelings than those of the
 irrational creatures?

 The Cyrenaics say that virtue itself is to be praised on this account,
 because it is productive of pleasure. True, says the filthy dog, or the
 swine wallowing in the mire. [388] For it is on this account that I
 contend with my adversary with the utmost exertion of strength, that my
 valour may procure for me pleasure; of which I must necessarily be
 deprived if I shall come off vanquished. Shall we therefore learn
 wisdom from these men, who differ from cattle and the brutes, not in
 feeling, but in language? To regard the absence of pain as the chief
 good, is not indeed the part of Peripatetic and Stoic, but of clinical
 philosophers. For who would not imagine that the discussion was carried
 on by those who were ill, and under the influence of some pain? What is
 so ridiculous, as to esteem that the chief good which the physician is
 able to give? We must therefore feel pain in order that we may enjoy
 good; and that, too, severely and frequently, that afterwards the
 absence of pain may be attended with greater pleasure. He is therefore
 most wretched who has never felt pain, because he is without that which
 is good; whereas we used to regard him as most happy, because he was
 without evil. He was not far distant from this folly, who said that the
 entire absence of pain was the chief good. For, besides the fact that
 every animal avoids pain, who can bestow upon himself that good,
 towards the obtaining of which we can do no more than wish? But the
 chief good cannot make any one happy, unless it shall be always in his
 power; and it is not virtue, nor learning, nor labour, which affords
 this to man, but nature herself bestows it upon all living creatures.
 They who joined pleasure with virtuous principle, wished to avoid this
 common blending together of all, but they made a contradictory kind of
 good; since he who is abandoned to pleasure must of necessity be
 destitute of virtuous principle, and he who aims at principle must be
 destitute of pleasure.

 The chief good of the Peripatetics may possibly appear excessive,
 various, and--excepting those goods which belong to the mind, and what
 they are is a great subject of dispute--common to man with the beasts.
 For goods belonging to the body--that is, safety, freedom from pain,
 health--are no less necessary for dumb creatures than for man; and I
 know not if they are not more necessary for them, because man can be
 relieved by remedies and services, the dumb animals cannot. The same is
 true of those which they call the goods of fortune; for as man has need
 of resources for the support of life, so have they [389] need of prey
 and pasture. Thus, by introducing a good which is not within the power
 of man, they made man altogether subject to the power of another. Let
 us also hear Zeno, for he at times dreams of virtue. The chief good, he
 says, is to live in accordance with nature. Therefore we must live
 after the manner of the brutes. For in these are found all the things
 which ought to be absent from man: they are eager for pleasures, they
 fear, they deceive, they lie in wait, they kill; and that which is
 especially to the point, they have no knowledge of God. Why, therefore,
 does he teach me to live according to nature, which is of itself prone
 to a worse course, and under the influence of some more soothing
 blandishments plunges headlong into vices? Or if he says that the
 nature of brutes is different from the nature of man, because man is
 born to virtue, he says something to the purpose; but, however, it will
 not be a definition of the chief good, because there is no animal which
 does not live in accordance with its nature.

 He who made knowledge the chief good, gave something peculiar to man;
 but men desire knowledge for the sake of something else, and not for
 its own sake. For who is contented with knowing, without seeking some
 advantage from his knowledge? The arts are learned for the purpose of
 being put into exercise; but they are exercised either for the support
 of life, or pleasure, or for glory. That, therefore, is not the chief
 good which is not sought for on its own account. What difference,
 therefore, does it make, whether we consider knowledge to be the chief
 good, or those very things which knowledge produces from itself, that
 is, means of subsistence, glory, pleasure? And these things are not
 peculiar to man, and therefore they are not the chief goods; for the
 desire of pleasure and of food does not exist in man alone, but also in
 the brutes. How is it with regard to the desire of glory? Is it not
 discovered in horses, since they exult in victory, and are grieved when
 vanquished? "So great is their love of praises, so great is their
 eagerness for victory." [390] Nor without reason does that most
 excellent poet say that we must try "what grief they feel when
 overcome, and how they rejoice in victory." But if those things which
 knowledge produces are common to man with other animals, it follows
 that knowledge is not the chief good. Moreover, it is no slight fault
 of this definition that bare knowledge is set forth. For all will begin
 to appear happy who shall have the knowledge of any art, even those who
 shall know mischievous subjects; so that he who shall have learned to
 mix poisons, is as happy as he who has learned to apply remedies. I
 ask, therefore, to what subject knowledge is to be referred. If to the
 causes of natural things, what happiness will be proposed to me, if I
 shall know the sources of the Nile, or the vain dreams of the natural
 philosophers respecting the heaven? Why should I mention that on these
 subjects there is no knowledge, but mere conjecture, which varies
 according to the abilities of men? It only remains that the knowledge
 of good and evil things is the chief good. Why, then, did he call
 knowledge the chief good more than wisdom, when both words have the
 same signification and meaning? But no one has yet said that the chief
 good is wisdom, though this might more properly have been said. For
 knowledge is insufficient for the undertaking of that which is good and
 avoiding that which is evil, unless virtue also is added. For many of
 the philosophers, though they discussed the nature of good and evil
 things, yet from the compulsion of nature lived in a manner different
 from their discourse, because they were without virtue. But virtue
 united with knowledge is wisdom.

 It remains that we refute those also who judged virtue itself to be the
 chief good, and Marcus Tullius was also of this opinion; and in this
 they were very inconsiderate. [391] For virtue itself is not the chief
 good, but it is the contriver and mother of the chief good; for this
 cannot be attained without virtue. Each point is easily understood. For
 I ask whether they imagine that it is easy to arrive at that
 distinguished good, or that it is reached only with difficulty and
 labour? Let them apply their ingenuity, and defend error. If it is
 easily attained to, and without labour, it cannot be the chief good.
 For why should we torment ourselves, why wear ourselves out with
 striving day and night, seeing that the object of our pursuit is so
 close at hand, that any one who wishes may grasp it without any effort
 of the mind? But if we do not attain even to a common and moderate good
 except by labour, since good things are by their nature arduous and
 difficult, [392] whereas evil things have a downward tendency, it
 follows that the greatest labour is necessary for the attainment of the
 greatest good. And if this is most true, then there is need of another
 virtue, that we may arrive at that virtue which is called the chief
 good; but this is incongruous and absurd, that virtue should arrive at
 itself by means of itself. If no good can be reached unless by labour,
 it is evident that it is virtue by which it is reached, since the force
 and office of virtue consist in the undertaking and carrying through of
 labours. Therefore the chief good cannot be that by which it is
 necessary to arrive at another. But they, since they were ignorant of
 the effects and tendency of virtue, and could discover nothing more
 honourable, stopped at the very name of virtue, and said that it ought
 to be sought, though no advantage was proposed from it; and thus they
 fixed for themselves a good which itself stood in need of a good. From
 these Aristotle was not far removed, who thought that virtue together
 with honour was the chief good; as though it were possible for any
 virtue to exist unless it were honourable, and as though it would not
 cease to be virtue if it had any measure of disgrace. But he saw that
 it might happen that a bad opinion is entertained respecting virtue by
 a depraved judgment, and therefore he thought that deference should be
 paid to what in the estimation of men constitutes a departure from what
 is right and good, because it is not in our power that virtue should be
 honoured simply for its own deserts. For what is honourable [393]
 character, except perpetual honour, conferred on any one by the
 favourable report of the people? What, then, will happen, if through
 the error and perverseness of men a bad reputation should ensue? Shall
 we cast aside virtue because it is judged to be base and disgraceful by
 the foolish? And since it is capable of being oppressed and harassed,
 in order that it may be of itself a peculiar and lasting good, it ought
 to stand in need of no outward assistance, so as not to depend by
 itself upon its own strength, and to remain stedfast. And thus no good
 is to be hoped by it from man, nor is any evil to be refused.

 [387] Rationem, "the plan or method of his condition."

 [388] [Sus ille lutulentus. 2 Pet. ii. 22.]

 [389] They, i.e., the beasts of prey and the tame animals.

 [390] Virg., Georg., iii. 112, 102.

 [391] [De Finibus, book v. cap. 28.]

 [392] Literally, "since the nature of good things is placed on a steep
 ascent, that of evil things on a precipitous descent."

 [393] Honestas is used with some latitude of meaning, to express
 respectability of character, or honourable feeling, or the principle of
 honour, or virtue itself. [See Philipp. iv. 8.]

 Chap. IX.--Of the Chief Good, and the Worship of the True God, and a
 Refutation of Anaxagoras.

 I now come to the chief good of true wisdom, the nature of which is to
 be determined in this manner: first, it must be the property of man
 alone, and not belong to any other animal; secondly, it must belong to
 the soul only, and not be shared with the body; lastly, it cannot fall
 to the lot of any one without knowledge and virtue. Now this limitation
 excludes and does away with all the opinions of those whom I have
 mentioned; for their sayings contain nothing of this kind. I will now
 say what this is, that I may show, as I designed, that all philosophers
 were blind and foolish, who could neither see, nor understand, nor
 surmise at any time what was fixed as the chief good for man.
 Anaxagoras, when asked for what purpose he was born, replied that he
 might look upon the heaven and the sun. This expression is admired by
 all, and judged worthy of a philosopher. But I think that he, being
 unprepared with an answer, uttered this at random, that he might [394]
 not be silent. But if he had been wise, he ought to have considered and
 reflected with himself; for if any one is ignorant of his own
 condition, he cannot even he a man. But let us imagine that the saying
 was not uttered on the spur of the moment. Let us see how many and what
 great errors he committed in three words. First, he erred in placing
 the whole duty of man in the eyes alone, referring nothing to the mind,
 but everything to the body. But if he had been blind, would he lose the
 duty of a man, which cannot happen without the ruin [395] of the soul?
 What of the other parts of the body? Will they be destitute, each of
 its own duty? Why should I say that more depends upon the ears than
 upon the eye, since learning and wisdom can be gained by the ears only,
 but not by the eyes only? Were you born for the sake of seeing the
 heaven and the sun? Who introduced you to this [396] sight? or what
 does your vision contribute to the heaven and the nature of things?
 Doubtless that you may praise this immense and wonderful work.
 Therefore confess that God is the Creator of all things, who introduced
 you into this world, as a witness and praiser of His great work. You
 believe that it is a great thing to behold the heaven and the sun: why,
 therefore, do you not give thanks to Him who is the author of this
 benefit? why do you not measure with your mind the excellence, the
 providence, and the power of Him whose works you admire? For it must
 be, that He who created objects worthy of admiration, is Himself much
 more to be admired. If any one had invited you to dinner, and you had
 been well entertained, should you appear in your senses, if you
 esteemed the mere pleasure more highly than the author of the pleasure?
 So entirely do philosophers refer all things to the body, and nothing
 at all to the mind, nor do they see beyond that which fails under their
 eyes. [397] But all the offices of the body being put aside, the
 business of man is to be placed in the mind alone. Therefore we are not
 born for this purpose, that we may see those things which are created,
 but that we may contemplate, that is, behold with our mind, the Creator
 of all things Himself. Wherefore, if any one should ask a man who is
 truly wise for what purpose he was born, he will answer without fear or
 hesitation, that he was born for the purpose of worshipping God, who
 brought us into being for his cause, that we may serve Him. But to
 serve God is nothing else than to maintain and preserve justice by good
 works. But he, as a man ignorant of divine things, reduced a matter of
 the greatest magnitude to the least, by selecting two things only,
 which he said were to be beheld by him. But if he had said that he was
 born to behold the world, although he would comprise all things in
 this, and would use an expression of greater [398] sound, yet he would
 not have completed the duty of man; for as much as the soul excels the
 body, so much does God excel the world, for God made and governs the
 world. Therefore it is not the world which is to be contemplated by the
 eye, for each is a body; [399] but it is God who is to be contemplated
 by the soul: for God, being Himself immortal, willed that the soul also
 should be everlasting. But the contemplation of God is the reverence
 and worship of the common Parent of mankind. And if the philosophers
 were destitute of this, and in their ignorance of divine things
 prostrated themselves to the earth, we must suppose that Anaxagoras
 neither beheld the heaven nor the sun, though he said that he was born
 that he might behold them. The object proposed to man is therefore
 plain [400] and easy, if he is wise; and to it especially belongs
 humanity. [401] For what is humanity itself, but justice? what is
 justice, but piety? And piety [402] is nothing else than the
 recognition of God as a parent.

 [394] That he might be able to make some answer.

 [395] The fall or overthrow.

 [396] This sight or spectacle, that is, into this world. This
 expression is used for the place from which the sight is beheld.

 [397]

 [398] Would use a greater sound.

 [399] Each, viz., the world and the eye.

 [400] Expedita, "free from obstacles," "unembarrassed."

 [401] Humanity, properly that which is characteristic of man, then
 kindness and humaneness.

 [402] Pietas. The word denotes not only piety towards God, but also the
 affection due to a parent.

 Chap. X.--It is the Peculiar Property of Man to Know and Worship God.

 Therefore the chief good of man is in religion only; for the other
 things, even those which are supposed to be peculiar to man, are found
 in the other animals also. For when they discern and distinguish their
 own voices [403] by peculiar marks among themselves, they seem to
 converse: they also appear to have a kind of smile, when with soothed
 ears, and contracted mouth, and with eyes relaxed to sportiveness, they
 fawn upon man, or upon their own mates and young. Do they not give a
 greeting which bears some resemblance to mutual love and indulgence?
 Again, those creatures which look forward to the future and lay up for
 themselves food, plainly have foresight. Indications of reason are also
 found in many of them. For since they desire things useful to
 themselves, guard against evils, avoid dangers, prepare for themselves
 lurking-places standing open in different places with various outlets,
 assuredly they have some understanding. Can any one deny that they are
 possessed of reason, since they often deceive man himself? For those
 which have the office of producing honey, when they inhabit the place
 assigned to them, fortify a camp, construct dwellings with unspeakable
 skill, and obey their king; I know not if there is not in them perfect
 prudence. It is therefore uncertain whether those things which are
 given to man are common to him with other living creatures: they are
 certainly without religion. I indeed thus judge, that reason is given
 to all animals, but to the dumb creatures only for the protection of
 life, to man also for its prolongation. And because reason itself is
 perfect in man, it is named wisdom, which renders man distinguished in
 this respect, that to him alone it is given to comprehend divine
 things. And concerning this the opinion of Cicero is true: "Of so many
 kinds of animals," he says, "there is none except man which has any
 knowledge of God; and among men themselves, there is no nation either
 so uncivilized or so savage, which, even if it is ignorant of due
 conceptions of the Deity, does not know that some conception of Him
 ought to be entertained." From which it is effected, that he
 acknowledges God, who, as it were, calls to mind the source from which
 he is sprung. Those philosophers, therefore, who wish to free the mind
 from all fear, take away even religion, and thus deprive man of his
 peculiar and surpassing good, which is distinct from living uprightly,
 and from everything connected with man, because God, who made all
 living creatures subject to man, also made man subject to Himself. What
 reason is there why they should also maintain that the mind is to be
 turned in the same direction to which the countenance is raised? For if
 we must look to the heaven, it is undoubtedly for no other reason than
 on account of religion; if religion is taken away, we have nothing to
 do with the heaven. Therefore we must either look in that direction or
 bend down to the earth. We are not able to bend down to the earth, even
 if we should wish, since our posture is upright. We must therefore look
 up to the heaven, to which the nature of the body calls us. And if it
 is admitted that this must be done, it must either be done with this
 view, that we may devote ourselves to religion, or that we may know the
 nature of the heavenly objects. But we cannot by any means know the
 nature of the heavenly objects, because nothing of that kind can be
 found out by reflection, as I have before shown. We must therefore
 devote ourselves to religion, and he who does not undertake this
 prostrates himself to the ground, and, imitating the life of the
 brutes, abdicates the office of man. Therefore the ignorant are more
 wise; for although they err in choosing religion, yet they remember
 their own nature and condition.

 [403] The sounds uttered by the beasts, by which they are able to
 distinguish one another. [Rousseau's theory goes further.]

 Chap. XI.--Of Religion, Wisdom, and the Chief Good.

 It is agreed upon, therefore, by the general consent of all mankind,
 that religion ought to be undertaken; but we have to explain what
 errors are committed on this subject. God willed this to be the nature
 of man, that he should be desirous and eager for two things, religion
 and wisdom. But men are mistaken in this, that they either undertake
 religion and pay no attention to wisdom, or they devote themselves to
 wisdom alone, and pay no attention to religion, though the one cannot
 be true without the other. The consequence is, that they fall into a
 multiplicity of religions, but false ones, because they have left
 wisdom, which could have taught them that there cannot be many gods; or
 they devote themselves to wisdom, but a false wisdom, because they have
 paid no attention to the religion of the Supreme God, who might have
 instructed them to the knowledge of the truth. Thus men who undertake
 either of these courses follow a devious path, and one full of the
 greatest errors, inasmuch as the duty of man, and all truth, are
 included in these two things which are inseparably connected. I wonder,
 therefore, that there was none at all of the philosophers who
 discovered the abode and dwelling-place of the chief good. For they
 might have sought it in this manner. Whatever the greatest good is, it
 must be an object proposed to all men. There is pleasure, which is
 desired by all; but this is common also to man with the beasts, and has
 not the force of the honourable, and brings a feeling of satiety, and
 when it is in excess is injurious, and it is lessened by advance of
 age, and does not fall to the lot of many: for they who are without
 resources, who constitute the greater part of men, must also be without
 pleasure. Therefore pleasure is not the chief good; but it is not even
 a good. What shall we say of riches? This is much more [404] true of
 them. For they fall to the lot of fewer men, and that generally by
 chance; and they often fall to the indolent, and sometimes by guilt,
 and they are desired by those who already possess them. What shall we
 say of sovereignty itself? That does not constitute the chief good: for
 all cannot reign, but it is necessary that all should be capable of
 attaining the chief good.

 Let us therefore seek something which is held forth to all. Is it
 virtue? It cannot be denied that virtue is a good, and undoubtedly a
 good for all men. But if it cannot be happy because its power and
 nature consist in the endurance of evil, it assuredly is not the chief
 good. Let us seek something else. But nothing can be found more
 beautiful than virtue, nothing more worthy of a wise man. For if vices
 are to be avoided on account of their deformity, virtue is therefore to
 be desired on account of its beauty. What then? Can it be that that
 which is admitted to be good and honourable should be requited with no
 reward, and be so unproductive as to procure no advantage from itself?
 That great labour and difficulty and struggling against evils with
 which this life is filled, must of necessity produce some great good.
 But what shall we say that it is? Pleasure? But nothing that is base
 can arise from that which is honourable. Shall we say that it is
 riches? or commands? But these things are frail and uncertain. [405] Is
 it glory? or honour? or a lasting name? But all these things are not
 contained in virtue itself, but depend upon the opinion and judgment of
 others. For virtue is often hated and visited with evil. But the good
 which arises from it ought to be so closely united with it as to be
 incapable of being separated or disunited from it; and it cannot appear
 to be the chief good in any other way than if it belongs peculiarly to
 virtue, and is such that nothing can be added to it or taken from it.
 Why should I say that the duties of virtue consist in the despising of
 all these things? For not to long for, or desire, or love pleasures,
 riches, dominions, and honours, and all those things which are esteemed
 as goods, as others do overpowered by desire, that assuredly is virtue.
 Therefore it effects something else more sublime and excellent; nor
 does anything struggle against these present goods but that which longs
 for greater and truer things. Let us not despair of being able to find
 it, if we turn our thoughts in all directions; for no slight or
 trifling rewards are sought.

 [404] Multo magis is the reading of the mss.; but multo minus--"much
 less"--seems preferable.

 [405] Liable to fall, perishable.

 Chap. XII.--Of the Twofold Conflict of Body and Soul; And of Desiring Virtue
 on Account of Eternal Life.

 But our inquiry is as to the object for which we are born: and thus we
 are able to trace out what is the effect of virtue. There are two [406]
 parts of which man is made up, soul and body. There are many things
 peculiar to the soul, many peculiar to the body, many common to both,
 as is virtue itself; and as often as this is referred to the body, it
 is called fortitude for the sake of distinction. Since, therefore,
 fortitude is connected with each, a contest is proposed to each, and
 victory held forth to each from the contest: the body, because it is
 solid, and capable of being grasped, must contend with objects which
 are solid and can be grasped; but the soul, on the other hand, because
 it is slight [407] and subtle, and invisible, contends with those
 enemies who cannot be seen and touched. But what are the enemies of the
 soul, but lusts, vices, and sins? And if virtue shall have overcome and
 put to flight these, the soul will be pure and free from stain. Whence,
 then, are we able to collect what are the effects of fortitude of soul?
 Doubtless from that which is closely connected with it, and resembles
 it, that is, from fortitude of the body; for when this has come to any
 encounter and contest, what else does it seek from victory but life?
 For whether you contend with a man or beast, the contest is for safety.
 Therefore, as the body obtains by victory its preservation from
 destruction, so the soul obtains a continuation of its existence; and
 as the body, when overcome by its enemies, suffers death, so the soul,
 when overpowered by vices, must die. What difference, therefore, will
 there be between the contest carried on by the soul and that carried on
 by the body, except that the body seeks for temporal, but the soul
 eternal life? If, therefore, virtue is not happy by itself, since its
 whole force consists, as I have said, in the enduring of evils; if it
 neglects all things which are desired as goods; if in its highest
 condition it is exposed to death, inasmuch as it often refuses life,
 which is desired by others, and bravely undergoes death, which others
 fear; if it must necessarily produce some great good from itself,
 because labours, endured and overcome even until death, cannot fail of
 obtaining a reward; if no reward, such as it deserves, is found on
 earth, inasmuch as it despises all things which are frail and
 transitory, what else remains but that it may effect some heavenly
 reward, since it treats with contempt all earthly things, and may aim
 at higher things, since it despises things that are humble? And this
 reward can be nothing else but immortality.

 With good reason, therefore, did Euclid, no obscure philosopher, who
 was the founder of the system of the Megareans, differing from the
 others, say that that was the chief good which was unvarying and always
 the same. He certainly understood what is the nature of the chief good,
 although he did not explain in what it consisted; but it consists of
 immortality, nor anything else at all, inasmuch as it alone is
 incapable of diminution, or increase, or change. Seneca also
 unconsciously happened to confess that there is no other reward of
 virtue than immortality. For in praising virtue in the treatise which
 he wrote on the subject of premature death, he says: "Virtue is the
 only thing which can confer upon us immortality, and make us equal to
 the gods." But the Stoics also, whom he followed, say that no one can
 be made happy without virtue. Therefore, the reward of virtue is a
 happy life, if virtue, as it is rightly said, makes a happy life.
 Virtue, therefore, is not, as they say, to be sought on its own
 account, but on account of a happy life, which necessarily follows
 virtue. And this argument might have taught them in what the chief good
 consisted. But this present and corporeal life cannot be happy, because
 it is subjected to evils through the body. Epicurus calls God happy and
 incorruptible, because He is everlasting. For a state of happiness
 ought to be perfect, so that there may be nothing which can harass, or
 lessen, or change it. Nor can anything be judged happy in other
 respects, unless it be incorruptible. But nothing is incorruptible but
 that which is immortal. Immortality therefore is alone happy, because
 it can neither be corrupted nor destroyed. But if virtue falls within
 the power of man, which no one can deny, happiness also belongs to him.
 For it is impossible for a man to be wretched who is endued with
 virtue. If happiness falls within his power, then immortality, which is
 possessed of the attribute of happiness, also belongs to him.

 The chief good, therefore, is found to be immortality alone, which
 pertains to no other animal or body; nor can it happen to any one
 without the virtue of knowledge, that is, without the knowledge of God
 and justice. And how true and right is the seeking for this, the very
 desire of this life shows: for although it be but temporary, and most
 full of labour, yet it is sought and desired by all; for both old men
 and boys, kings and those of the lowest station, in fine, wise as well
 as foolish, desire this. Of such value, as it seemed to Anaxagoras, is
 the contemplation of the heaven and the light itself, that men
 willingly undergo any miseries on this account. Since, therefore, this
 short and laborious life, by the general consent not only of men, but
 also of other animals, is considered a great good, it is manifest that
 it becomes also a very great and perfect good if it is without an end
 and free from all evil. In short, there never would have been any one
 who would despise this life, however short it is, or undergo death,
 unless through the hope of a longer life. For those who voluntarily
 offered themselves to death for the safety of their countrymen, as
 Menoeceus did at Thebes, Codrus at Athens, Curtius and the two Mures at
 Rome, would never have preferred death to the advantages of life,
 unless they had thought that they should attain to immortality through
 the estimation of their countrymen; and although they were ignorant of
 the life of immortality, yet the reality itself did not escape their
 notice. For if virtue despises opulence and riches because they are
 frail, and pleasures because they are of brief continuance, it
 therefore despises a life which is frail and brief, that it may obtain
 one which is substantial and lasting. Therefore reflection itself,
 advancing by regular order, and weighing everything, leads us to that
 excellent and surpassing good, on account of which we are born. And if
 philosophers had thus acted, if they had not preferred obstinately to
 maintain that which they had once apprehended, they would undoubtedly
 have arrived at this truth, as I have lately shown. And if this was not
 the part of those who extinguish the heavenly souls together with the
 body, yet those who discuss the immortality of the soul ought to have
 understood that virtue is set before us on this account, that, lusts
 having been subdued, and the desire of earthly things overcome, our
 souls, pure and victorious, may return to God, that is, to their
 original source. For it is on this account that we alone of living
 creatures are raised to the sight of the heaven, that we may believe
 that our chief good is in the highest place. Therefore we alone receive
 religion, that we may know from this source that the spirit of man is
 not mortal, since it longs for and acknowledges God, who is immortal.

 Therefore, of all the philosophers, those who have embraced either
 knowledge or virtue as the chief good, have kept the way of truth, but
 have not arrived at perfection. For these are the two things which
 together make up that which is sought for. Knowledge causes us to know
 by what means and to what end we must attain; virtue causes us to
 attain to it. The one without the other is of no avail; for from
 knowledge arises virtue, and from virtue the chief good is produced.
 Therefore a happy life, which philosophers have always sought, and
 still do seek, has no existence either in the worship of the gods or in
 philosophy; and on this account they were unable to find it, because
 they did not seek the highest good in the highest place, but in the
 lowest. For what is the highest but heaven, and God, from whom the soul
 has its origin? And what is the lowest but the earth, from which the
 body is made? Therefore, although some philosophers have assigned the
 chief good, not to the body, but to the soul, yet, inasmuch as they
 have referred it to this life, which has its ending with the body, they
 have gone back to the body, to which the whole of this time which is
 passed on earth has reference. Therefore it was not without reason that
 they did not attain to the highest good; for whatever looks to the body
 only, and is without immortality, must necessarily be the lowest.
 Therefore happiness does not fall to the condition of man in that
 manner in which philosophers thought; but it so falls to him, not that
 he should then be happy, when he lives in the body, which must
 undoubtedly be corrupted in order to its dissolution; but then, when,
 the soul being freed from intercourse with the body, he lives in the
 spirit only. In this one thing alone can we be happy in this life, if
 we appear to be unhappy; if, avoiding the enticements of pleasures, and
 giving ourselves to the service of virtue only, we live in all labours
 and miseries, which are the means of exercising and strengthening
 virtue; if, in short, we keep to that rugged and difficult path which
 has been opened for us to happiness. The chief good therefore which
 makes men happy cannot exist, unless it be in that religion and
 doctrine to which is annexed the hope of immortality.

 [406] According to St. Paul, man consists of three parts--body, soul
 and spirit. Lactantius appears to use the word soul in the same sense
 in which the Scriptures speak of spirit. [Vol. i. p. [36]532.]

 [407] Tenuis, as applied to the soul, opposed to solidus, applied to
 the body.

 Chap. XIII.--Of the Immortality of the Soul, and of Wisdom, Philosophy, and
 Eloquence.

 The subject seems to require in this place, that since we have taught
 that immortality is the chief good, we should prove this also, that the
 soul is immortal. On which subject there is great disputation among
 philosophers; nor have they who held true opinions respecting the soul
 been able to explain or prove anything: for, being destitute of divine
 knowledge, they neither brought forward true arguments by which they
 might overcome, nor evidence by which they might convince. But we shall
 treat of this question more conveniently in the last book, when we
 shall have to discuss the subject of a happy life. There remains that
 third part of philosophy, which they call Logic, in which the whole
 subject of dialectics and the whole method of speaking are contained.
 Divine learning does not stand in need of this, because the seat of
 wisdom is not the tongue, but the heart; and it makes no difference
 what kind of language you employ, for the question is not about words,
 [408] but facts. And we are not disputing about the grammarian or the
 orator, whose knowledge is concerned with the proper manner of
 speaking, but about the wise man, whose learning is concerned with the
 right manner of living. But if that system of natural philosophy before
 mentioned is not necessary, nor this of logic, because they are not
 able to render a man happy, it remains that the whole force of
 philosophy is contained in the ethical part alone, to which Socrates is
 said to have applied himself, laying aside the others. And since I have
 shown that philosophers erred in this part also, who did not grasp the
 chief good, for the sake of gaining which we are born; it appears that
 philosophy is altogether false and empty, since it does not prepare us
 for the duties of justice, nor strengthen the obligations and settled
 course of man's life. Let them know, therefore, that they are in error
 who imagine that philosophy is wisdom; let them not be drawn away by
 the authority of any one; but rather let them incline to the truth, and
 approach it. There is no room for rashness here; we must endure the
 punishment of our folly to all eternity, if we shall be deceived either
 by an empty character or a false opinion. But man, [409] such as he is,
 if he trusts in himself, that is, if he trusts in man, is (not to say
 foolish, in that he does not see his own error) undoubtedly arrogant,
 in venturing to claim for himself that which the condition of man does
 not admit of.

 And how much that greatest author of the Roman language is deceived, we
 may see from that sentiment of his; for when, in his "Books on
 Offices," [410] he had said that philosophy is nothing else than the
 desire of wisdom, and that wisdom itself is the knowledge of things
 divine and human, added: "And if any one censures the desire of this, I
 do not indeed understand what there is which he imagines praiseworthy.
 For if enjoyment of the mind and rest from cares is sought, what
 enjoyment can be compared with the pursuits of those who are always
 inquiring into something which has reference to and tends to promote a
 good and happy life? Or if any account is taken of consistency and
 virtue, either this is the study [411] by which we may attain them, or
 there is none at all. To say that there is no system in connection with
 the greatest subjects, when none of the least is without a system, is
 the part of men speaking inconsiderately, and erring in the greatest
 subjects. But if there is any discipline of virtue, where shall it be
 sought when you have departed from that kind of learning?" For my own
 part, although I endeavoured to attain in some degree to the means of
 acquiring learning, on account of my desire to teach others, yet I have
 never been eloquent, inasmuch as I never even engaged in public
 speaking; but the goodness of the cause cannot fail of itself to make
 me eloquent, and for its clear and copious defence the knowledge of
 divinity and the truth itself are sufficient. I could wish, therefore,
 that Cicero might for a short time rise from the dead, that a man of
 such consummate eloquence might be taught by an insignificant person
 who is devoid of eloquence, first, what that is which is deemed worthy
 of praise by him who blames that study which is called philosophy; and
 in the next place, that it is not that study by which virtue and
 justice are learned, nor any other, as he thought; and lastly, that
 since there is a discipline of virtue, he might be taught where it is
 to be sought, when you have laid aside that kind of learning, which he
 did not seek for the sake of hearing and learning. For from whom could
 he hear when no one knew it? But, as his usual practice was in pleading
 causes, he wished to press his opponent by questioning, and thus to
 lead him to confession, as though he were confident that no answer
 could be given to show that philosophy was not the instructress of
 virtue. And in the Tusculan disputations he openly professed this,
 turning his speech to philosophy, as though he was showing himself off
 by a declamatory style of speaking. "O philosophy, thou guide of life,"
 he says; "O thou investigator of virtue, and expeller of vices; what
 could not only we, but the life of men, have effected at all without
 thee? Thou hast been the inventor of laws, thou the teacher of morals
 and discipline;"--as though, indeed, she could perceive anything by
 herself, and he were not rather to be praised who gave her. In the same
 manner he might have given thanks to food and drink, because without
 these life could not exist; yet these, while they minister to sense,
 confer no benefit. But as these things are the nourishment of the body,
 so wisdom is of the soul.

 [408] There is a memorable story related by ecclesiastical historians,
 about a very clever disputant, whose sophistries could not be answered
 by his fellow-disputants, but who was completely silenced by the simple
 answers of a Christian otherwise unknown. When questioned about his
 sudden silence, the sophist replied that others exchanged words for
 words, but that this simple Christian fought with virtue.

 [409] There seems to be a reference to a passage of Terence, in which
 the poet represents it as the property of man to err. [Or to Cicero,
 rather: Cujusvis hominis est errare, etc. Philipp. xii. 2.]

 [410] Cicero, De Officiis, ii. 2.

 [411] Ars denotes study, method, or system. The word is applied both to
 theoretical knowledge and practical skill.

 Chap. XIV.--That Lucretius and Others Have Erred, and Cicero Himself, in
 Fixing the Origin of Wisdom.

 Lucretius, accordingly, acts more correctly in praising him who was the
 first discoverer of wisdom; but he acts foolishly in this, that he
 supposed it to be discovered by a man,--as though that man whom he
 praises had found it lying somewhere as flutes at the fountain, [412]
 according to the legends of the poets. But if he praised the inventor
 of wisdom as a god,--for thus he speaks: [413] --


 "No one, I think, who is formed of mortal body. For if we must speak,
 as the acknowledged majesty of the subject itself demands, he was a
 god, he was a god, most noble Memmius,"--

 yet God ought not to have been praised on this account, because He
 discovered wisdom, but because He created man, who might be capable of
 receiving wisdom. For he diminishes the praise who praises a part only
 of the whole. But he praised Him as a man; whereas He ought to have
 been esteemed as a God on this very account, because He found out
 wisdom. For thus he speaks: [414] --


 "Will it not be right that this man should be enrolled among the gods?"

 From this it appears, either that he wished to praise Pythagoras, who
 was the first, as I have said, [415] to call himself a philosopher; or
 Thales of Miletus, who is reported to have been the first who discussed
 the nature of things. Thus, while he seeks to exalt, he has depressed
 the thing itself. For it is not great if it could have been discovered
 by man. But he may be pardoned as a poet. But that same accomplished
 orator, that same consummate philosopher, also censures the Greeks,
 whose levity he always accuses, and yet imitates. Wisdom itself, which
 at one time he calls the gift, at another time the invention, of the
 gods, he fashions after the manner of the poets, and praises on account
 of its beauty. He also grievously complains that there have been some
 who disparaged it. "Can any one," he says, "dare to censure the parent
 of life, and to defile himself with this guilt of parricide, and to be
 so impiously ungrateful?"

 Are we then parricides, Marcus Tullius, and in your judgment worthy to
 be sewed [416] up in a bag, who deny that philosophy is the parent of
 life? Or you, who are so impiously ungrateful towards God (not this god
 whose image you worship as he sits in the Capitol, but Him who made the
 world and created man, who bestowed wisdom also among His heavenly
 benefits), do you call her the teacher of virtue or the parent of life,
 having learned [417] from whom, one must be in much greater uncertainty
 than he was before? For of what virtue is she the teacher? For
 philosophers to the present time do not explain where she is situated.
 Of what life is she the parent? since the teachers themselves have been
 worn out by old age and death before they have determined upon the
 befitting course of life. Of what truth can you hold her forth as an
 explorer? since you often testify that, in so great a multitude of
 philosophers, not a single wise man has yet existed. What, then, did
 that mistress of life teach you? Was it to assail with reproaches the
 most powerful consul, [418] and by your envenomed speeches to render
 him the enemy of his country? But let us pass by those things, which
 may be excused under the name of fortune. You applied yourself, in
 truth, to the study of philosophy, and so, indeed, that no one ever
 applied himself more diligently; since you were acquainted with all the
 systems of philosophy, as you yourself are accustomed to boast, and
 elucidated the subject itself in Latin writings, and displayed yourself
 as an imitator of Plato. Tell us, therefore, what you have learned, or
 in what sect you have discovered the truth. Doubtless it was in the
 Academy which you followed and approved. But this teaches nothing,
 excepting that you know your own ignorance. [419] Therefore your own
 books refute you, and show the nothingness of the learning which may be
 gained from philosophy for life. These are your words: "But to me we
 appear not only blind to wisdom, but dull and obtuse to those very
 things which may appear in some degree to be discerned." If, therefore,
 philosophy is the teacher of life, why did you appear to yourself
 blind, and dull, and obtuse? whereas you ought, under her teaching,
 both to perceive and to be wise, and to be engaged in the clearest
 light. But how you confessed the truth of philosophy we learn from the
 letters addressed to your son, in which you advise him that the
 precepts of philosophy ought to be known, but that we must live as
 members of a community. [420]

 What can be spoken so contradictory? If the precepts of philosophy
 ought to be known, it is on this account that they ought to be known,
 in order to our living well and wisely. Or if we must live as members
 of a community, then philosophy is not wisdom, if it is better to live
 in accordance with society than with philosophy. For if that which is
 called philosophy be wisdom, he assuredly lives foolishly who does not
 live according to philosophy. But if he does not live foolishly who
 lives in accordance with society, it follows that he who lives
 according to philosophy lives foolishly. By your own judgment,
 therefore, philosophy is condemned of folly and emptiness. And you
 also, in your Consolation, that is, not in a work of levity and mirth,
 introduced this sentiment respecting philosophy: "But I know not what
 error possesses us, or deplorable ignorance of the truth." Where, then,
 is the guidance of philosophy? or what has that parent of life taught
 you, if you are deplorably ignorant of the truth? But if this
 confession of error and ignorance has been extorted almost against your
 will from your innermost breast, why do you not at length acknowledge
 to yourself the truth, that philosophy which, though it teaches
 nothing, you extolled with praises to the heavens, cannot be the
 teacher of virtue?

 [412] A proverbial expression, denoting an accidental occurrence.

 [413] Book v. 6.

 [414] Book v. 51.

 [415] Ch. ii.

 [416] The allusion is to the punishment of parricides, who were sewed
 into a bag with an ape, a serpent, and a cock, and thus thrown into the
 sea.

 [417] If any one has approached her as a learner.

 [418] Marcus Antonius, who was consul with C. Cæsar in the year when
 Cæsar was assassinated. It was against Antonius that Cicero wrote those
 speeches full of invectives, which, in imitation of Demosthenes, he
 named Philippics.

 [419] This point is discussed by Cicero in his Academic questions.

 [420] [Advice which he took to heart as a swinish debauchee.]

 Chap. XV.--The Error of Seneca in Philosophy, and How the Speech of
 Philosophers is at Variance with Their Life.

 Under the influence of the same error (for who could keep the right
 course when Cicero is in error?), Seneca said: "Philosophy is nothing
 else than the right method of living, or the science of living
 honourably, or the art of passing a good life. We shall not err in
 saying that philosophy is the law of living well and honourably. And he
 who spoke of it as a rule of life, gave to it that which was its due."
 He evidently did not refer to the common name of philosophy; for, since
 this is diffused into many sects and systems, and has nothing
 certain--nothing, in short, respecting which all agree with one mind
 and one voice,--what can be so false as that philosophy should be
 called the rule of life, since the diversity of its precepts hinders
 the right way and causes confusion? or the law of living well, when its
 subjects are widely discordant? or the science of passing life, in
 which nothing else is effected by its repeated contradictions than
 general [421] uncertainty? For I ask whether he thinks that the Academy
 is philosophy or not? I do not think that he will deny it. And if this
 is so, none of these things, therefore, is in agreement with
 philosophy; which renders all things uncertain, abrogates law, esteems
 art as nothing, subverts method, distorts rule, entirely takes away
 knowledge. Therefore all those things are false, because they are
 inconsistent with a system which is always uncertain, and up to this
 time explaining nothing. Therefore no system, or science, or law of
 living well, has been established, except in this the only true and
 heavenly wisdom, which had been unknown to philosophers. For that
 earthly wisdom, since it is false, becomes varied and manifold, and
 altogether opposed to itself. And as there is but one founder and ruler
 of the world, God, and as truth is one; so wisdom must be one and
 simple, because, if anything is true and good, it cannot be perfect
 unless it is the only one of its kind. But if philosophy were able to
 form the life, no others but philosophers would be good, and all those
 who had not learned it would be always bad. But since there are, and
 always have been, innumerable persons who are or have been good without
 any learning, but of philosophers there has seldom been one who has
 done anything praiseworthy in his life; who is there, I pray, who does
 not see that those men are not teachers of virtue, of which they
 themselves are destitute? For if any one should diligently inquire into
 their character, he will find that they are passionate, covetous,
 lustful, arrogant, wanton, and, concealing their vices under a show of
 wisdom, doing those things at home which they had censured in the
 schools. [422]

 Perhaps I speak falsely for the sake of bringing an accusation. Does
 not Tullius both acknowledge and complain of the same thing? "How few,"
 he says, "of philosophers are found of such a character, so constituted
 in soul and life, as reason demands! how few who think true instruction
 not a display of knowledge, but a law of life! how few who are obedient
 to themselves, and submit to their own decrees! We may see some of such
 levity and ostentation, that it would be better for them not to have
 learned at all; others eagerly desirous of money, others of glory; many
 the slaves of lusts, so that their speech wonderfully disagrees with
 their life." Cornelius Nepos also writes to the same Cicero: "So far am
 I from thinking that philosophy is the teacher of life and the
 completer of happiness, that I consider that none have greater need of
 teachers of living than many who are engaged in the discussion of this
 subject. For I see that a great part of those who give most elaborate
 precepts in their school respect-modesty and self-restraint, live at
 the same time in the unrestrained desires of all lusts." Seneca also,
 in his Exhortations, says: "Many of the philosophers are of this
 description, eloquent to their own condemnation: for if you should hear
 them arguing against avarice, against lust and ambition, you would
 think that they were making a public disclosure [423] of their own
 character, so entirely do the censures which they utter in public flow
 back upon themselves; so that it is right to regard them in no other
 light than as physicians, whose advertisements [424] contain medicines,
 but their medicine chests poison. Some are not ashamed of their vices;
 but they invent defences for their baseness, so that they may appear
 even to sin with honour." Seneca also says: "The wise man will even do
 things which he will not approve of, that he may find means of passing
 to the accomplishment of greater things; nor will he abandon good
 morals, but will adapt them to the occasion; and those things which
 others employ for glory or pleasure, he will employ for the sake of
 action." Then he says shortly afterwards: "All things which the
 luxurious and the ignorant do, the wise man also will do, but not in
 the same manner, and with the same purpose. But it makes no difference
 with what intention you act, when the action itself is vicious; because
 acts are seen, the intention is not seen."

 Aristippus, the master of the Cyrenaics, had a criminal intimacy with
 Lais, the celebrated courtesan; and that grave teacher of philosophy
 defended this fault by saying, that there was a great difference
 between him and the other lovers of Lais, because he himself possessed
 Lais, whereas others were possessed by Lais. O illustrious wisdom, to
 be imitated by good men! Would you, in truth, entrust your children to
 this man for education, that they might learn to possess a harlot? He
 said that there was some difference between himself and the dissolute,
 that they wasted their property, whereas he lived in indulgence without
 any cost. And in this the harlot was plainly the wiser, who had the
 philosopher as her creature, that all the youth, corrupted by the
 example and authority of the teacher, might flock together to her
 without any shame. What difference therefore did it make, with what
 intention the philosopher betook himself to that most notorious harlot,
 when the people and his rivals saw him more depraved than all the
 abandoned? Nor was it enough to live in this manner, but he began also
 to teach lusts; and he transferred his habits from the brothel to the
 school, contending that bodily pleasure was the chief good. Which
 pernicious and shameful doctrine has its origin not in the heart of the
 philosopher, but in the bosom of the harlot.

 For why should I speak of the Cynics, who practised licentiousness in
 public? What wonder if they derived their name and title from dogs,
 [425] since they also imitated their life? Therefore there is no
 instruction of virtue in this sect, since even those who enjoin more
 honourable things either themselves do not practice what they advise;
 or if they do (which rarely happens), it is not the system which leads
 them to that which is right, but nature which often impels even the
 unlearned to praise.

 [421] Than--that no one knows anything.

 [422] Sallust as a writer abounds in denunciations of vice. But see
 book ii. cap. 13, note 4, p. 62, supra.]

 [423] Indicium sui professos putes; others read judicium, "you would
 think that they were passing sentence on themselves."

 [424] Tituli, "titles."

 [425] Augustine in many places expresses his opinion that the Cynics
 were so called from their immodesty. Others suppose that the name was
 given to them on account of their snarling propensity.

 Chap. XVI.--That the Philosophers Who Give Good Instructions Live Badly, by
 the Testimony of Cicero; Therefore We Should Not So Much Devote Ourselves to
 the Study of Philosophy as to Wisdom.

 But when they give themselves up to perpetual sloth, and undertake no
 exercise of virtue, and pass their whole life in the practice of
 speaking, in what light ought they to be regarded rather than as
 triflers? For wisdom, unless it is engaged on some action on which it
 may exert its force, is empty and false; and Tullius rightly gives the
 preference, above teachers of philosophy, to those men employed in
 civil affairs, who govern the state, who found new cities or maintain
 with equity those already founded, who preserve the safety and liberty
 of the citizens either by good laws or wholesome counsels, or by
 weighty judgments. For it is right to make men good rather than to give
 precepts about duty to those shut up in corners, which precepts are not
 observed even by those who speak them; and inasmuch as they have
 withdrawn themselves from true actions, it is manifest that they
 invented the system of philosophy itself, for the purpose of exercising
 the tongue, or for the sake of pleading. But they who merely teach
 without acting, of themselves detract from the weight of their own
 precepts; for who would obey, when they who give the precepts
 themselves teach disobedience? Moreover, it is a good thing to give
 right and honourable precepts; but unless you also practice them it is
 a deceit, and it is inconsistent and trifling to have goodness not in
 the heart, but on the lips.

 It is not therefore utility, but enjoyment, which they seek from
 philosophy. And this Cicero indeed testified. "Truly," he says, "all
 their disputation, although it contains most abundant fountains of
 virtue and knowledge, yet, when compared with their actions and
 accomplishments, I fear lest it should seem not to have brought so much
 advantage to the business of men as enjoyment to their times of
 relaxation." He ought not to have feared, since he spoke the truth; but
 as if he were afraid lest he should be arraigned by the philosophers on
 a charge of betraying a mystery, he did not venture confidently to
 pronounce that which was true, that they do not dispute for the purpose
 of teaching, but for their own enjoyment in their leisure; and since
 they are the advisers of actions, and do not themselves act at all,
 they are to be regarded as mere talkers. [426] But assuredly, because
 they contributed no advantage to life, they neither obeyed their own
 decrees, nor has any one been found, through so many ages, who lived in
 accordance with their laws. Therefore philosophy [427] must altogether
 be laid aside, because we are not to devote ourselves to the pursuit of
 wisdom, for this has no limit or moderation; but we must be wise, and
 that indeed quickly. For a second life is not granted to us, so that
 when we seek wisdom in this life we may be wise in that; each result
 must be brought about in this life. It ought to be quickly found, in
 order that it may be quickly taken up, lest any part of life should
 pass away, the end of which is uncertain. Hortensius in Cicero,
 contending against philosophy, is pressed by a clever argument;
 inasmuch as, when he said that men ought not to philosophize, he seemed
 nevertheless to philosophize, since it is the part of the philosophers
 to discuss what ought and what ought not to be done in life. We are
 free and exempt from this calumny, who take away philosophy, because it
 is the invention of human thought; we defend wisdom, because it is a
 divine tradition, and we testify that it ought to be taken up by all.
 He, when he took away philosophy without introducing anything better,
 was supposed to take away wisdom; and on that account was more easily
 driven from his opinion, because it is agreed upon that man is not born
 to folly, but to wisdom.

 Moreover, the argument which the same Hortensius employed has great
 weight also against philosophy,--namely, that it may be understood from
 this, that philosophy is not wisdom, since its beginning and origin are
 apparent. When, he says, did philosophers begin to exist? Thales, as I
 imagine, was the first, and his age was recent. Where, then, among the
 more ancient men did that love of investigating the truth lie hid?
 Lucretius also says: [428] --


 "Then, too, this nature and system of things has been discovered
 lately, and I the very first of all have only now been found able to
 transfer it into native words."

 And Seneca says: "There are not yet a thousand years since the
 beginnings of wisdom were undertaken." Therefore mankind for many
 generations lived without system. In ridicule of which, Persius says:
 [429] --


 "When wisdom came to the city,

 Together with pepper and palms;"

 as though wisdom had been introduced into the city together with
 savoury merchandise. [430] For if it is in agreement with the nature of
 man, it must have had its commencement together with man; but if it is
 not in agreement with it, human nature would be incapable of receiving
 it. But, inasmuch as it has received it, it follows that wisdom has
 existed from the beginning: therefore philosophy, inasmuch as it has
 not existed from the beginning, is not the same true wisdom. But, in
 truth, the Greeks, because they had not attained to the sacred letters
 of truth, did not know how wisdom was corrupted. And, therefore, since
 they thought that human life was destitute of wisdom, they invented
 philosophy; that is, they wished by discussion to tear up the truth
 which was lying hid and unknown to them: and this employment, through
 ignorance of the truth, they thought to be wisdom.

 [426] [See p. 83, note 2, and p. 84, note 1.]

 [427] Lactantius must be understood as speaking of that kind of
 philosophy which teaches errors and deceits, as St. Paul speaks, Col.
 ii. 8: "Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain
 deceit."

 [428] Lucretius, v. 336.

 [429] Persius, Sat., vi 38.

 [430] [The force of the poet's satire is in this petty merchandise.]

 Chap. XVII.--He Passes from Philosophy to the Philosophers, Beginning with
 Epicurus; And How He Regarded Leucippus and Democritus as Authors of Error.

 I have spoken on the subject of philosophy itself as briefly as I
 could; now let us come to the philosophers, not that we may contend
 with these, who cannot maintain their ground, but that we may pursue
 those who are in flight and driven from our battle-field. The system of
 Epicurus was much more generally followed than those of the others; not
 because it brings forward any truth, but because the attractive name of
 pleasure invites many. [431] For every one is naturally inclined to
 vices. Moreover, for the purpose of drawing the multitude to himself,
 he speaks that which is specially adapted to each character separately.
 He forbids the idle to apply himself to learning; he releases the
 covetous man from giving largesses to the people; he prohibits the
 inactive man from undertaking the business of the state, the sluggish
 from bodily exercise, the timid from military service. The irreligious
 is told that the gods pay no attention to the conduct of men; the man
 who is unfeeling and selfish is ordered to give nothing to any one, for
 that the wise man does everything on his own account. To a man who
 avoids the crowd, solitude is praised. One who is too sparing, learns
 that life can be sustained on water and meal. If a man hates his wife,
 the blessings of celibacy are enumerated to him; to one who has bad
 children, the happiness of those who are without children is
 proclaimed; against unnatural [432] parents it is said that there is no
 bond of nature. To the man who is delicate and incapable of endurance,
 it is said that pain is the greatest of all evils; to the man of
 fortitude, it is said that the wise man is happy even under tortures.
 The man who devotes himself to the pursuit of influence and distinction
 is enjoined to pay court to kings; he who cannot endure annoyance is
 enjoined to shun the abode of kings. Thus the crafty man collects an
 assembly from various and differing characters; and while he lays
 himself out to please all, he is more at variance with himself than
 they all are with one another. But we must explain from what source the
 whole of this system is derived, and what origin it has.

 Epicurus saw that the good are always subject to adversities, poverty,
 labours, exile, loss of dear friends. On the contrary, he saw that the
 wicked were happy; that they were exalted with influence, and loaded
 with honours; he saw that innocence was unprotected, that crimes were
 committed with impunity: he saw that death raged without any regard to
 character, without any arrangement or discrimination of age; but that
 some arrived at old age, while others were carried off in their
 infancy; that some died when they were now robust and vigorous, that
 others were cut off by an untimely death in the first flower of youth;
 that in wars the better men were especially overcome and slain. But
 that which especially moved him, was the fact that religious men were
 especially visited with weightier evils, whereas he saw that less evils
 or none at all fell upon those who altogether neglected the gods, or
 worshipped them in an impious manner; and that even the very temples
 themselves were often set on fire by lightning. And of this Lucretius
 complains, [433] when he says respecting the god:--


 "Then he may hurl lightnings, and often throw down his temples, and
 withdrawing into the deserts, there spend his rage in practising his
 bolt, which often passes the guilty by, and strikes dead the innocent
 and unoffending."

 But if he had been able to collect even a small particle of truth, he
 would never say that the god throws down his own temples, when he
 throws them down on this account, because they are not his. The
 Capitol, which is the chief seat of the Roman city and religion, was
 struck with lightning and set on fire not once only, but frequently.
 But what was the opinion of clever men respecting this is evident from
 the saying of Cicero, who says that the flame came from heaven, not to
 destroy that earthly dwelling-place of Jupiter, but to demand a loftier
 and more magnificent abode. Concerning which transaction, in the books
 respecting his consulship, he speaks to the same purport as
 Lucretius:--


 "For the father thundering on high, throned in the lofty Olympus,
 himself assailed his own citadels and famed temples, and cast fires
 upon his abode in the Capitol.

 In the obstinacy of their folly, therefore, they not only did not
 understand the power and majesty of the true God, but they even
 increased the impiety of their error, in endeavouring against all
 divine law to restore a temple so often condemned by the judgment of
 Heaven.

 Therefore, when Epicurus reflected on these things, induced as it were
 by the injustice of these matters (for thus it appeared to him in his
 ignorance of the cause and subject), he thought that there was no
 providence. [434] And having persuaded himself of this, he undertook
 also to defend it, and thus he entangled himself in inextricable
 errors. For if there is no providence, how is it that the world was
 made with such order and arrangement? He says: There is no arrangement,
 for many things are made in a different manner from that in which they
 ought to have been made. And the divine man found subjects of censure.
 Now, if I had leisure to refute these things separately, I could easily
 show that this man was neither wise nor of sound mind. Also, if there
 is no providence, how is it that the bodies of animals are arranged
 with such foresight, that the various members, being disposed in a
 wonderful manner, discharge their own offices individually? The system
 of providence, he says, contrived nothing in the production of animals;
 for neither were the eyes made for seeing, nor the ears for hearing,
 nor the tongue for speaking, nor the feet for walking; inasmuch as
 these were produced before it was possible to speak, to hear, to see,
 and to walk. Therefore these were not produced for use; but use was
 produced from them. If there is no providence, why do rains fall,
 fruits spring up, and trees put forth leaves? These things, he says,
 are not always done for the sake of living creatures, inasmuch as they
 are of no benefit to providence; but all things must be produced of
 their own accord. From what source, therefore, do they arise, [435] or
 how are all things which are carried on brought about? There is no
 need, he says, of supposing a providence; for there are seeds floating
 through the empty void, and from these, collected together without
 order, all things are produced and take their form. Why, then, do we
 not perceive or distinguish them? Because, he says, they have neither
 any colour, nor warmth, nor smell; they are also without flavour and
 moisture; and they are so minute, that they cannot be cut and divided.

 Thus, because he had taken up a false principle at the commencement,
 the necessity of the subjects which followed led him to absurdities.
 For where or from whence are these atoms? Why did no one dream of them
 besides Leucippus only? from whom Democritus, [436] having received
 instructions, left to Epicurus the inheritance of his folly. And if
 these are minute bodies, and indeed solid, as they say, they certainly
 are able to fall under the notice of the eyes. If the nature of all
 things is the same, how is it that they compose various objects? They
 meet together, he says, in varied order and position as the letters
 which, though few in number, by variety of arrangement make up
 innumerable words. But it is urged the letters have a variety of forms.
 And so, he says, have these first principles; for they are rough, they
 are furnished with hooks, they are smooth. Therefore they can be cut
 and divided, if there is in them any part which projects. But if they
 are smooth and without hooks, they cannot cohere. They ought therefore
 to he hooked, that they may be linked together one with another. But
 since they are said to be so minute that they cannot be cut asunder by
 the edge of any weapon, how is it that they have hooks or angles? For
 it must be possible for these to be torn asunder, since they project.
 In the next place, by what mutual compact, by what discernment, do they
 meet together, so that anything may be constructed out of them? If they
 are without intelligence, they cannot come together in such order and
 arrangement; for nothing but reason can bring to accomplishment
 anything in accordance with reason. With how many arguments can this
 trifling be refuted! But I must proceed with my subject. This is he


 "Who surpassed in intellect the race of man, and quenched the light of
 all, as the ethereal sun arisen quenches the stars." [437]

 Which verses I am never able to read without laughter. For this was not
 said respecting Socrates or Plato, who are esteemed as kings of
 philosophers, but concerning a man who, though of sound mind and
 vigorous health, raved more senselessly than any one diseased. And thus
 the most vain poet, I do not say adorned, but overwhelmed and crushed,
 the mouse with the praises of the lion. But the same man also releases
 us from the fear of death, respecting which these are his own exact
 words:--


 "When we are in existence, death does not exist; when death exists, we
 have no existence: therefore death is nothing to us."

 How cleverly he has deceived us! As though it were death now completed
 which is an object of fear, by which sensation has been already taken
 away, and not the very act of dying, by which sensation is being taken
 from us. For there is a time in which we ourselves even yet [438]
 exist, and death does not yet exist; and that very time appears to be
 miserable, because death is beginning to exist, and we are ceasing to
 exist.

 Nor is it said without reason that death is not miserable. The approach
 of death is miserable; that is, to waste away by disease, to endure the
 thrust, to receive the weapon in the body, to be burnt with fire, to be
 torn by the teeth of beasts. These are the things which are feared, not
 because they bring death, but because they bring great pain. But rather
 make out that pain is not an evil. He says it is the greatest of all
 evils. How therefore can I fail to fear, if that which precedes or
 brings about death is an evil? Why should I say that the argument is
 false, inasmuch as souls do not perish? But, he says, souls do perish;
 for that which is born with the body must perish with the body. I have
 already stated that I prefer to put off the discussion of this subject,
 and to reserve it for the last part of my work, that I may refute this
 persuasion of Epicurus, whether it was that of Democritus or
 Dicæarchus, both by arguments and divine testimonies. But perhaps he
 promised himself impunity in the indulgence of his vices; for he was an
 advocate of most disgraceful pleasure, and said that man was born for
 its enjoyment. [439] Who, when he hears this affirmed, would abstain
 from the practice of vice and wickedness? For; if the soul is doomed to
 perish, let us eagerly pursue riches, that we may be able to enjoy all
 kinds of indulgence; and if these are wanting to us, let us take them
 away from those who have them by stealth, by stratagem, or by force,
 especially if there is no God who regards the actions of men: as long
 as the hope of impunity shall favour us, let us plunder and put to
 death. [440] For it is the part of the wise man to do evil, if it is
 advantageous to him, and safe; since, if there is a God in heaven, He
 is not angry with any one. It is also equally the part of the foolish
 man to do good; because, as he is not excited with anger, so he is not
 influenced by favour. Therefore let us live in the indulgence of
 pleasures in every possible way; for in a short time we shall not exist
 at all. Therefore let us suffer no day, in short, no moment of time, to
 pass away from us without pleasure; lest, since we ourselves are doomed
 to perish, the life which we have already spent should itself also
 perish.

 Although he does not say this in word, yet he teaches it in fact. For
 when he maintains that the wise man does everything for his own sake,
 he refers all things which he does to his own advantage. And thus he
 who hears these disgraceful things, will neither think that any good
 thing ought to be done, since the conferring of benefits has reference
 to the advantage of another; nor that he ought to abstain from guilt,
 because the doing of evil is attended with gain. If any chieftain of
 pirates or leader of robbers were exhorting his men to acts of
 violence, what other language could he employ than to say the same
 things which Epicurus says: that the gods take no notice; that they are
 not affected with anger nor kind feeling; that the punishment of a
 future state is not to be dreaded, because souls die after death, and
 that there is no future state of punishment at all; that pleasure is
 the greatest good; that there is no society among men; that every one
 consults for his own interest; that there is no one who loves another,
 unless it be for his own sake; that death is not to be feared by a
 brave man, nor any pain; for that he, even if he should be tortured or
 burnt, should say that he does not regard it. There is evidently
 sufficient cause why any one should regard this as the expression of a
 wise man, since it can most fittingly be applied to robbers!

 [431] [See Plato's remark upon what he calls this disease, De Leg., x.,
 finely expounded in Plato cont. Atheos (note ix. p. 114) by Tayler
 Lewis.]

 [432] There is another reading, "adversus parentes impio," "to the son
 whose conduct to his parents is unnatural."

 [433] Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, ii. 1101, Munro.

 [434] [This age is favoured with a reproduction of these absurdities;
 and what has happened in consequence before, will be repeated now.]

 [435] See Lucretius, book ii.

 [436] [See vol. ii. [37]p. 465, the whole of 14th chapter.]

 [437] Lucretius, iii. 1056.

 [438] The reading of the text, which appears to be the true one, is
 "quo nos etiamnum sumus." There is another reading, "quo et nos jam non
 sumus." This latter reading would be in accordance with the sentiment
 of Epicurus, which is totally opposed to the view taken by Lactantius.

 [439] [For his pious talk, however, see T. Lewis, Plato, etc., p. 258.]

 [440] [These operations of the unbelieving mind have appeared in our
 day in the Communisme of Paris. They already threaten the American
 Republic, the mass of the population being undisciplined in moral
 principle, and our lawgivers as well.]

 Chap. XVIII.--The Pythagoreans and Stoics, While They Hold the Immortality
 of the Soul, Foolishly Persuade a Voluntary Death.

 Others, again, discuss things contrary to these, namely, that the soul
 survives after death; and these are chiefly the Pythagoreans and
 Stoics. And although they are to be treated with indulgence because
 they perceive the truth, yet I cannot but blame them, because they fell
 upon the truth not by their opinion, but by accident. And thus they
 erred in some degree even in that very matter which they rightly
 perceived. For, since they feared the argument by which it is inferred
 that the soul must necessarily die with the body, because it is born
 with the body, they asserted that the soul is not born with the body,
 but rather introduced into it, and that it migrates from one body to
 another. They did not consider that it was possible for the soul to
 survive the body, unless it should appear to have existed previously to
 the body. There is therefore an equal and almost similar error on each
 side. But the one side are deceived with respect to the past, the other
 with respect to the future. For no one saw that which is most true,
 that the soul is both created and does not die, because they were
 ignorant why that came to pass, or what was the nature of man. Many
 therefore of them, because they suspected that the soul is immortal,
 laid violent hands upon themselves, as though they were about to depart
 to heaven. Thus it was with Cleanthes [441] and Chrysippus, [442] with
 Zeno, [443] and Empedocles, [444] who in the dead of night cast himself
 into a cavity of the burning Ætna, that when he had suddenly
 disappeared it might be believed that he had departed to the gods; and
 thus also of the Romans Cato died, who through the whole of his life
 was an imitator of Socratic ostentation. For Democritus [445] was of
 another persuasion. But, however,


 "By his own spontaneous act he offered up his head to death; " [446]

 and nothing can be more wicked than this. For if a homicide is guilty
 because he is a destroyer of man, he who puts himself to death is under
 the same guilt, because he puts to death a man. Yea, that crime may be
 considered to be greater, the punishment of which belongs to God alone.
 For as we did not come into this life of our own accord; so, on the
 other hand, we can only withdraw from this habitation of the body which
 has been appointed for us to keep, by the command of Him who placed us
 in this body that we may inhabit it, until He orders us to depart from
 it; and if any violence is offered to us, we must endure it with
 equanimity, since the death of an innocent person cannot be unavenged,
 and since we have a great Judge who alone always has the power of
 taking vengeance in His hands.

 All these philosophers, therefore, were homicides; and Cato himself,
 the chief of Roman wisdom, who, before he put himself to death, is said
 to have read through the treatise of Plato which he wrote on the
 immortality of the soul, and was led by the authority of the
 philosopher to the commission of this great crime; yet he, however,
 appears to have had some cause for death in his hatred of slavery. Why
 should I speak of the Ambraciot, [447] who, having read the same
 treatise, threw himself into the sea, for no other cause than that he
 believed Plato?--a doctrine altogether detestable and to be avoided, if
 it drives men from life. But if Plato had known and taught by whom, and
 how, and to whom, and on account of what actions, and at what time,
 immortality is given, he would neither have driven Cleombrotus nor Cato
 to a voluntary death, but he would have trained them to live with
 justice. For it appears to me that Cato sought a cause for death, not
 so much that he might escape from Cæsar, as that he might obey the
 decrees of the Stoics, whom he followed, and might make his name
 distinguished by some great action; and I do not see what evil could
 have happened to him if he had lived. For Caius Cæsar, such was his
 clemency, had no other object, even in the very heat of civil war, than
 to appear to deserve well of the state, by preserving two excellent
 citizens, Cicero and Cato. But let us return to those who praise death
 as a benefit. You complain of life as though you had lived, or had ever
 settled with yourself why you were born at all. May not therefore the
 true and common Father of all justly find fault with that saying of
 Terence: [448] --


 "First, learn in what life consists; then, if you shall be dissatisfied
 with life, have recourse to death."

 You are indignant that you are exposed to evils; as though you deserved
 anything good, who are ignorant of your Father, Lord, and King; who,
 although you behold with your eyes the bright light, are nevertheless
 blind in mind, and lie in the depths of the darkness of ignorance. And
 this ignorance has caused that some have not been ashamed to say, that
 we are born for this cause, that we may suffer the punishment of our
 crimes; but I do not see what can be more senseless than this. For
 where or what crimes could we have committed when we did not even
 exist? Unless we shall happen to believe that foolish old man, [449]
 who falsely said that he had lived before, and that in his former life
 he had been Euphorbus. He, I believe, because he was born of an ignoble
 race, chose for himself a family from the poems of Homer. O wonderful
 and remarkable memory of Pythagoras! O miserable forgetfulness on the
 part of us all, since we know not who we were in our former life! But
 perhaps it was caused by some error, or favour, that he alone did not
 touch the abyss of Lethe, or taste the water of oblivion; doubtless the
 trifling old man (as is wont to be the case with old women who are free
 from occupation) invented fables as it were for credulous infants. But
 if he had thought well of those to whom he spoke these things; if he
 had considered them to be men, he would never have claimed to himself
 the liberty of uttering such perverse falsehoods. But the folly of this
 most trifling man is deserving of ridicule. What shall we do in the
 case of Cicero, who, having said in the beginning of his Consolation
 that men were born for the sake of atoning for their crimes, afterwards
 repeated the assertion, as though rebuking him who does not imagine
 that life is a punishment? He was right, therefore, in saying
 beforehand that he was held by error and wretched ignorance of the
 truth.

 [441] Cleanthes was a Stoic philosopher, who used to draw water by
 night for his support, that he might devote himself to the study of
 philosophy by day. He ended his life by refusing to take food.

 [442] Chrysippus was a disciple of Zeno, and, after Cleanthes, the
 chief of the Stoic sect. According to some accounts, he died front an
 excessive draught of wine; according to others, from excessive
 laughter.

 [443] Zeno, the chief of the Stoic sect. He is said to have died from
 suffocation.

 [444] Empedocles was a philosopher and poet. There are various accounts
 of his death; that mentioned in the text is usually received.

 [445] There are various accounts respecting the death of Democritus.

 [446] Lucretius, iii. 1041.

 [447] Cleombrotus of Ambracia.

 [448] Heautontim., v. 2, 18. This advice is given to a young man, who,
 not knowing the value of life, is prepared rashly to throw it away in
 consequence of some check to his plans.

 [449] Pythagoras taught the doctrine of the transmigration of souls,
 and affirmed that he had lived already as Euphorbus, one of the heroes
 of Troy, who was slain by Menelaus in the Trojan war. Lactantius again
 refers to this subject, book vii. ch. 23, infra.

 Chap. XIX.--Cicero and Others of the Wisest Men Teach the Immortality of the
 Soul, But in an Unbelieving Manner; And that a Good or an Evil Death Must Be
 Weighed from the Previous Life.

 But those who assert the advantage of death, because they know nothing
 of the truth, thus reason: If there is nothing after death, death is
 not an evil; for it takes away the perception of evil. But if the soul
 survives, death is even an advantage; because immortality follows. And
 this sentiment is thus set forth by Cicero concerning the Laws: [450]
 "We may congratulate ourselves, since death is about to bring either a
 better state than that which exists in life, or at any rate not a
 worse. For if the soul is in a state of vigour without the body, it is
 a divine life; and if it is without perception, assuredly there is no
 evil." Cleverly argued, as it appeared to himself, as though there
 could be no other state. But each conclusion is false. For the sacred
 writings [451] teach that the soul is not annihilated; but that it is
 either rewarded according to its righteousness, or eternally punished
 according to its crimes. For neither is it right, that he who has lived
 a life of wickedness in prosperity should escape the punishment which
 he deserves; nor that he who has been wretched on account of his
 righteousness, should be deprived of his reward. And this is so true,
 that Tully also, in his Consolation, declared that the righteous and
 the wicked do not inhabit the same abodes. For those same wise men, he
 says, did not judge that the same course was open for all into the
 heaven; for they taught that those who were contaminated by vices and
 crimes were thrust down into darkness, and lay in the mire; but that,
 on the other hand, souls that were chaste, pure, upright, and
 uncontaminated, being also refined by the study and practice of virtue,
 by a light and easy course take their flight to the gods, that is, to a
 nature resembling their own. But this sentiment is opposed to the
 former argument. For that is based on the assumption that every man at
 his birth is presented with immortality. What distinction, therefore,
 will there be between virtue and guilt, if it makes no difference
 whether a man be Aristides or Phalaris, whether he be Cato or Catiline?
 But a man does not perceive this opposition between sentiments and
 actions, unless he is in possession of the truth. If any one,
 therefore, should ask me whether death is a good or an evil, I shall
 reply that its character depends upon the course of the life. For as
 life itself is a good if it is passed virtuously, but an evil if it is
 spent viciously, so also death is to be weighed in accordance with the
 past actions of life. And so it comes to pass, that if life has been
 passed in the service of God, death is not an evil, for it is a
 translation to immortality. But if not so, death must necessarily be an
 evil, since it transfers men, as I have said, to everlasting
 punishment. [452]

 What, then, shall we say, but that they are in error who either desire
 death as a good, or flee from life as an evil? unless they are most
 unjust, who do not weigh the fewer evils against the greater number of
 blessings. For when they pass all their lives in a variety of the
 choicest gratifications, if any bitterness has chanced to succeed to
 these, they desire to die; and they so regard it as to appear never to
 have fared well, if at any time they happen to fare ill. Therefore they
 condemn the whole of life, and consider it as nothing else than filled
 with evils. Hence arose that foolish sentiment, that this state which
 we imagine to be life is death, and that that which we fear as death is
 life; and so that the first good is not to be born, that the second is
 an early death. And that this sentiment may be of greater weight, it is
 attributed to Silenus. [453] Cicero in his Consolation says: "Not to be
 born is by far the best thing, and not to fall upon these rocks of
 life. But the next thing is, if you have been born, to die as soon as
 possible, and to flee from the violence of fortune as from a
 conflagration." That he believed this most foolish expression appears
 from this, that he added something of his own for its embellishment. I
 ask, therefore, for whom he thinks it best not to be born, when there
 is no one at all who has any perception; for it is the perception which
 causes anything to be good or bad. In the next place, why did he regard
 the whole of life as nothing else than rocks, and a conflagration; as
 though it were either in our power not to be born, or life were given
 to us by fortune, and not by God, or as though the course of life
 appeared to bear any resemblance to a conflagration?

 The saying of Plato is not dissimilar, that he gave thanks to nature,
 first that he was born a human being rather than a dumb animal; in the
 next place, that he was a man rather than a woman; that he was a Greek
 rather than a barbarian; [454] lastly, that he was an Athenian, and
 that he was born in the time of Socrates. It is impossible to say what
 great blindness and errors are produced by ignorance of the truth would
 altogether contend that nothing in the affairs of men was ever spoken
 more foolishly. As though, if he had been born a barbarian, or a woman,
 or, in fine, an ass, he would be the same Plato, and not that very
 being which had been produced. But he evidently believed Pythagoras,
 who, in order that he might prevent men from feeding on animals, said
 that souls passed from the bodies of men to the bodies of other
 animals; which is both foolish and impossible. It is foolish, because
 it was unnecessary to introduce souls that have long existed into new
 bodies, when the same Artificer who at one time had made the first, was
 always able to make fresh ones; it is impossible, because the soul
 endued with right reason can no more change the nature of its
 condition, than fire can rush downwards, or, like a river, pour its
 flame obliquely. [455] The wise man therefore imagined, that it might
 come to pass that the soul which was then in Plato might be shut up in
 some other animal, and might be endued with the sensibility of a man,
 so as to understand and grieve that it was burthened with an
 incongruous body. How much more rationally would he have acted, if he
 had said that he gave thanks because he was born with a good capacity,
 and capable of receiving instruction, and that he was possessed of
 those resources which enabled him to receive a liberal education! For
 what benefit was it that he was born at Athens? Have not many men of
 distinguished talent and learning lived in other cities, who were
 better individually than all the Athenians? How many thousands must we
 believe that there were, who, though born at Athens, and in the times
 of Socrates, were nevertheless unlearned and foolish? For it is not the
 walls or the place in which any one was born that can invest a man with
 wisdom. Of what avail was it to congratulate himself that he was born
 in the times of Socrates? Was Socrates able to supply talent to
 learners? It did not occur to Plato that Alcibiades also, and Critias,
 were constant hearers of the same Socrates, the one of whom was the
 most active enemy of his country, the other the most cruel of all
 tyrants.

 [450] This passage is not contained in Cicero's treatise on the Laws,
 but the substance of it is in the Tusculan Questions

 [451] See Dan. xii.; Matt. iii., xiii., xxv.; John xii.

 [452] [See vol. iii. [38]p. 231, and same treatise sparsim ]

 [453] Silenus was the constant companion of Dionysus. He was regarded
 as an inspired prophet, who knew all the past and the most distant
 future, and as a sage who despised all the gifts of fortune.

 [454] The Greeks included all nations, except themselves, under the
 general name of barbarians.

 [455] In transversum, "crosswise or transversely."

 Chap. XX.--Socrates Had More Knowledge in Philosophy Than Other Men,
 Although in Many Things He Acted Foolishly.

 Let us now see what there was so great in Socrates himself, that a wise
 man deservedly gave thanks that he was born in his times. I do not deny
 that he was a little more sagacious than the others who thought that
 the nature of things could be comprehended by the mind. And in this I
 judge that they were not only senseless, but also impious; because they
 wished to send their inquisitive eyes into the secrets of that heavenly
 providence. We know that there are at Rome, and in many cities, certain
 sacred things which it is considered impious for men to look upon.
 Therefore they who are not permitted to pollute those objects abstain
 from looking upon them; and if by error or some accident a man has
 happened to see them, his guilt is expiated first by his punishment,
 and afterwards by a repetition of sacrifice. What can you do in the
 case of those who wish to pry into unpermitted things? Truly they are
 much more wicked who seek to profane the secrets of the world and this
 heavenly temple with impious disputations, than those who entered the
 temple of Vesta, or the Good Goddess, or Ceres. And these shrines,
 though it is not lawful for men to approach them, were yet constructed
 by men. But these men not only escape the charge of impiety, but, that
 which is much more unbecoming, they gain the fame of eloquence and the
 glory of talent. What if they were able to investigate anything? For
 they are as foolish in asserting as they are wicked in searching out;
 since they are neither able to find out anything, nor, even if they had
 found out anything, to defend it. For if even by chance they have seen
 the truth--a thing which often happens--they so act that it is refuted
 by others as false. For no one descends from heaven to pass sentence on
 the opinions of individuals; wherefore no one can doubt that those who
 seek after these things are foolish, senseless, and insane.

 Socrates therefore had something of human wisdom, [456] who, when he
 understood that these things could not possibly be ascertained, removed
 himself from questions of this kind; but I fear that he so acted in
 this alone. For many of his actions are not only undeserving of praise,
 but also most deserving of censure, in which things he most resembled
 those of his own class. Out of these I will select one which may be
 judged of by all. Socrates used this well-known proverb: "That which is
 above us is nothing to us." Let us therefore fall down upon the earth,
 and use as feet those hands which have been given us for the production
 of excellent works. The heaven is nothing to us, to the contemplation
 of which we have been raised; [457] in fine, the light itself can have
 no reference to us; undoubtedly the cause of our sustenance is from
 heaven. But if he perceived this, that we ought not to discuss the
 nature of heavenly things, he was unable even to comprehend the nature
 of those things which he had beneath his feet. What then? did he err in
 his words? It is not probable; but he undoubtedly meant that which he
 said, that we are not to devote ourselves to religion; but if he were
 openly to say this, no one would suffer it.

 For who cannot perceive that this world, completed with such wonderful
 method, is governed by some providence, since there is nothing which
 can exist without some one to direct it? Thus, a house deserted by its
 inhabitant fails to decay; a ship without a pilot goes to the bottom;
 and a body abandoned by the soul wastes away. Much less can we suppose
 that so great a fabric could either have been constructed without an
 Artificer, or have existed so long without a Ruler. But if he wished to
 overthrow those public superstitions, I do not disapprove of this; yea,
 I shall rather praise it, if he shall have found anything better to
 take their place. But the same man swore [458] by a dog and a goose. Oh
 buffoon (as Zeno the Epicurean [459] says), senseless, abandoned,
 desperate man, if he wished to scoff at religion; madman, if he did
 this seriously, so as to esteem a most base animal as God! For who can
 dare to find fault with the superstitions of the Egyptians, when
 Socrates confirmed them at Athens by his authority? But was it not a
 mark of consummate vanity, that before his death he asked his friends
 to sacrifice for him a cock which he had vowed to Æsculapius? He
 evidently feared lest he should be put upon his trial before
 Rhadamanthus, the judge, by Æsculapius on account of the vow. I should
 consider him most mad if he had died under the influence of disease.
 But since he did this in his sound mind, he who thinks that he was wise
 is himself of unsound mind. Behold one in whose times the wise man
 congratulates himself as having been born!

 [456] Lactantius here uses cor, "the heart," for wisdom, regarding the
 heart as the seat of wisdom.

 [457] The allusion is to the upright figure of man, as opposed to the
 other animals, which look down upon the earth, whereas man looks
 upward. [Our author is partial to this idea. See [39]p. 41, supra.]

 [458] This oath is mentioned by Athenæus. Tertullian makes an excuse
 for it, as though it were done in mockery of the gods. Socrates was
 called the Athenian buffoon, because he taught many things in a jesting
 manner.

 [459] To be distinguished from Zeno of Citium, the Stoic, and also from
 Zeno of Elea.

 Chap. XXI.--Of the System of Plato, Which Would Lead to the Overthrow of
 States.

 Let us, however, see what it was that he learned from Socrates, who,
 having entirely rejected natural philosophy, betook himself to
 inquiries about virtue and duty. And thus I do not doubt that he
 instructed his hearers in the precepts of justice. Therefore, under the
 teaching of Socrates, it did not escape the notice of Plato, that the
 force of justice consists in equality, since all are born in an equal
 condition. Therefore (he says) they must have nothing private or their
 own; but that they may be equal, as the method of justice requires,
 they must possess all things in common. This is capable of being
 endured, as long as it appears to be spoken of money. But how
 impossible and how unjust this is, I could show by many things. Let us,
 however, admit its possibility. For grant that all are wise, and
 despise money. To what, then, did that community lead him? Marriages
 also, be says, ought to be in common; so that many men may flock
 together like dogs to the same woman, and he who shall be superior in
 strength may succeed in obtaining her; or if they are patient as
 philosophers, they may await their turns, as in a brothel. Oh the
 wonderful equality of Plato! Where, then, is the virtue of chastity?
 where conjugal fidelity? And if you take away these, all justice is
 taken away. But he also says that states would be prosperous, if either
 philosophers were their kings, or their kings were philosophers. But if
 you were to give the sovereignty to this man of such justice and
 equity, who had deprived some of their own property, and given to some
 the property of others, he would prostitute the modesty of women; a
 thing which was never done, I do not say by a king, but not even by a
 tyrant.

 But what motive did he advance for this most degrading advice? The
 state will be in harmony, and bound together with the bonds of mutual
 love, if all shall be the husbands, and fathers, and wives, and
 children of all. What a confusion of the human race is this? How is it
 possible for affection to be preserved where there is nothing certain
 to be loved? What man will love a woman, or what woman a man, unless
 they shall always have lived together,--unless devotedness of mind, and
 faith mutually preserved, shall have made their love indivisible? But
 this virtue has no place in that promiscuous pleasure. Moreover, if all
 are the children of all, who will be able to love children as his own,
 when he is either ignorant or in doubt whether they are his own? Who
 will bestow honour upon any one as a father, when he does not know from
 whom he was born? From which it comes to pass, that he not only esteems
 a stranger as a father, but also a father as a stranger. Why should I
 say that it is possible for a wife to be common, but impossible for a
 son, who cannot be conceived except from one? The community, therefore,
 is lost to him alone, nature herself crying out against it. It remains
 that it is only for the sake of concord that he would have a community
 of wives. But there is no more vehement cause of discords, than the
 desire of one woman by many men. And in this Plato might have been
 admonished, if not by reason, yet certainly by example, both of the
 dumb animals, which fight most vehemently on this account, and of men,
 who have always carried on most severe wars with one another on account
 of this matter.

 Chap. XXII.--Of the Precepts of Plato, and Censures of the Same.

 It remains that the community of which we have spoken admits of nothing
 else but adulteries and lusts, for the utter extinction of which virtue
 is especially necessary. Therefore he did not find the concord which he
 sought, because he did not see whence it arises. For justice has no
 weight in outward circumstances, not even in the body, [460] but it is
 altogether employed on the mind of man. He, therefore, who wishes to
 place men on an equality, ought not to take away marriage and wealth,
 but arrogance, pride, and haughtiness, that those who are powerful and
 lifted up on high may know that they are on a level even with the most
 needy. For insolence and injustice being taken from the rich, it will
 make no difference whether some are rich and others poor, since they
 will be equal in spirit, and nothing but reverence towards God can
 produce this result. He thought, therefore, that he had found justice,
 whereas he had altogether removed it, because it ought not to be a
 community of perishable things, but of minds. For if justice is the
 mother [461] of all virtues, when they are severally taken away, it is
 also itself overthrown. But Plato took away above all things frugality,
 which has no existence when there is no property of one's own which can
 be possessed; he took away abstinence, since there will be nothing
 belonging to another from which one can abstain; he took away
 temperance and chastity, which are the greatest virtues in each sex; he
 took away self-respect, shame, and modesty, if those things which are
 accustomed to be judged base and disgraceful begin to be accounted
 honourable and lawful. Thus, while he wishes to confer virtue upon all,
 he takes it away from all. For the ownership of property contains the
 material both of vices and of virtues, but a community of goods
 contains nothing else than the licentiousness of vices. For men who
 have many mistresses can be called nothing else than luxurious and
 prodigal. And likewise women who are in the possession of many men,
 must of necessity be not adulteresses, because they have no fixed
 marriage, but prostitutes and harlots. Therefore he reduced human life,
 I do not say to the likeness of dumb animals, but of the herds and
 brutes. For almost all the birds contract marriages, and are united in
 pairs, and defend their nests, as though their marriage-beds, with
 harmonious mind, and cherish their own young, because they are well
 known to them; and if you put others in their way, they repel them. But
 this wise man, contrary to the custom of men, and contrary to nature,
 chose more foolish objects of imitation; and since he saw that the
 duties of males and females were not separated in the case of other
 animals, he thought that women also ought to engage in warfare, and
 take a share in the public counsels, and undertake magistracies, and
 assume commands. And therefore he assigned to them horses and arms: it
 follows that he should have assigned to men wool and the loom, and the
 carrying of infants. Nor did he see the impossibility of what he said,
 from the fact that no nation has existed in the world so foolish or so
 vain as to live in this manner. [462]

 [460] The Stoics not only regarded accidental things, but also our
 bodies themselves, as being without us.

 [461] Justice comprises within herself all the virtues. And thus
 Aristotle calls her the mother of the other virtues, because she
 cherishes as it were in her bosom all the rest.

 [462] [This caustic review of Plato is painfully just. Alas! that such
 opprobria should be incapable of reply.]

 Chap. XXIII.--Of the Errors of Certain Philosophers, and of the Sun and
 Moon.

 Since, therefore, the leading men among the philosophers are themselves
 discovered to be of such emptiness, what shall we think of those lesser
 [463] ones, who are accustomed never to appear to themselves so wise,
 as when they boast of their contempt of money? Brave spirit! But I wait
 to see their conduct, and what are the results of that contempt. They
 avoid as an evil, and abandon the property handed down to them from
 their parents. And lest they should suffer shipwreck in a storm, they
 plunge headlong of their own accord in a calm, being resolute not by
 virtue, but by perverse fear; as those who, through fear of being slain
 by the enemy, slay themselves, that by death they may avoid death. So
 these men, without honour and without influence, throw away the means
 by which they might have acquired the glory of liberality. Democritus
 is praised because he abandoned his fields, and suffered them to become
 public pastures. I should approve of it, if he had given them. But
 nothing is done wisely which is useless and evil if it is done by all.
 But this negligence is tolerable. What shall I say of him who changed
 his possessions into money, which he threw into the sea? I doubt
 whether he was in his senses, or deranged. Away, he says, ye evil
 desires, into the deep. I will cast you away, lest I myself should be
 cast away by you. If you have so great a contempt for money, employ it
 in acts of kindness and humanity, bestow it upon the poor; this, which
 you are about to throw away, may be a succour to many, so that they may
 not die through famine, or thirst, or nakedness. Imitate at least the
 madness and fury of Tuditanus; [464] scatter abroad your property to be
 seized by the people. You have it in your power both to escape the
 possession of money, and yet to lay it out to advantage; for whatever
 has been profitable to many is securely laid out.

 But who approves of the equality of faults as laid down by Zeno? But
 let us omit that which is always received with derision by all. This is
 sufficient to prove the error of this madman, that he places pity among
 vices and diseases. He deprives us of an affection, which involves
 almost the whole course of human life. For since the nature of man is
 more feeble than that of the other animals, which divine providence has
 armed with natural means of protection, [465] either to endure the
 severity of the seasons or to ward off attacks from their bodies,
 because none of these things has been given to man, he has received in
 the place of all these things the affection of pity, which is truly
 called humanity, by which we might mutually protect each other. For if
 a man were rendered savage by the sight of another man, which we see
 happen in the case of those animals which are of a solitary [466]
 nature, there would be no society among men, no care or system in the
 building of cities; and thus life would not even be safe, since the
 weakness of men would both be exposed to the attacks of the other
 animals, and they would rage among themselves after the manner of wild
 beasts. Nor is his madness less in other things.

 For what can be said respecting him who asserted that snow was black?
 How naturally it followed, that he should also assert that pitch was
 white! This is he who said that he was born for this purpose, that he
 might behold the heaven and the sun, who beheld nothing on the earth
 when the sun was shining. Xenophanes most foolishly believed
 mathematicians who said that the orb of the moon was eighteen times
 larger than the earth; and, as was consistent with this folly, he said
 that within the concave surface of the moon there was another earth,
 and that there another race of men live in a similar manner to that in
 which we live on this earth. Therefore these lunatics have another
 moon, to hold forth to them a light by night, as this does to us. And
 perhaps this globe of ours may be a moon to another earth below this.
 [467] Seneca says that there was one among the Stoics who used to
 deliberate whether he should assign to the sun also its own
 inhabitants; he acted foolishly in doubting. For what injury would he
 have inflicted if he had assigned them? But I believe the heat deterred
 him, so as not to imperil so great a multitude; lest, if they should
 perish through excessive heat, so great a calamity should be said to
 have happened by his fault.

 [463] That is, philosophers of less repute and fame.

 [464] Cicero speaks of Tuditanus as scattering money from the rostrum
 among the people.

 [465] [Anacreon, Ode 2. tois adra'sin phro'nema.]

 [466] Animals of a solitary nature, as opposed to those of gregarious
 habits.

 [467] [He was nearer truth than he imagined, if the planet Mars may be
 called below us.]

 Chap. XXIV.--Of the Antipodes, the Heaven, and the Stars.

 How is it with those who imagine that there are antipodes [468]
 opposite to our footsteps? Do they say anything to the purpose? Or is
 there any one so senseless as to believe that there are men whose
 footsteps are higher than their heads? or that the things which with us
 are in a recumbent position, with them hang in an inverted direction?
 that the crops and trees grow downwards? that the rains, and snow, and
 hail fall upwards to the earth? And does any one wonder that hanging
 gardens [469] are mentioned among the seven wonders of the world, when
 philosophers make hanging fields, and seas, and cities, and mountains?
 The origin of this error must also be set forth by us. For they are
 always deceived in the same manner. For when they have assumed anything
 false in the commencement of their investigations, led by the
 resemblance of the truth, they necessarily fall into those things which
 are its consequences. Thus they fall into many ridiculous things;
 because those things which are in agreement with false things, must
 themselves be false. But since they placed confidence in the first,
 they do not consider the character of those things which follow, but
 defend them in every way; whereas they ought to judge from those which
 follow, whether the first are true or false.

 What course of argument, therefore, led them to the idea of the
 antipodes? They saw the courses of the stars travelling towards the
 west; they saw that the sun and the moon always set towards the same
 quarter, and rise from the same. But since they did not perceive what
 contrivance regulated their courses, nor how they returned from the
 west to the east, but supposed that the heaven itself sloped downwards
 in every direction, which appearance it must present on account of its
 immense breadth, they thought that the world is round like a ball, and
 they fancied that the heaven revolves in accordance with the motion of
 the heavenly bodies; and thus that the stars and sun, when they have
 set, by the very rapidity of the motion of the world [470] are borne
 back to the east. Therefore they both constructed brazen orbs, as
 though after the figure of the world, and engraved upon them certain
 monstrous images, which they said were constellations. It followed,
 therefore, from this rotundity of the heaven, that the earth was
 enclosed in the midst of its curved surface. But if this were so, the
 earth also itself must be like a globe; for that could not possibly be
 anything but round, which was held enclosed by that which was round.
 But if the earth also were round, it must necessarily happen that it
 should present the same appearance to all parts of the heaven; that is,
 that it should raise aloft mountains, extend plains, and have level
 seas. And if this were so, that last consequence also followed, that
 there would be no part of the earth uninhabited by men and the other
 animals. Thus the rotundity of the earth leads, in addition, to the
 invention of those suspended antipodes.

 But if you inquire from those who defend these marvellous fictions, why
 all things do not fall into that lower part of the heaven, they reply
 that such is the nature of things, that heavy bodies are borne to the
 middle, and that they are all joined together towards the middle, as we
 see spokes in a wheel; but that the bodies which are light, as mist,
 smoke, and fire, are borne away from the middle, so as to seek the
 heaven. I am at a loss what to say respecting those who, when they have
 once erred, consistently persevere in their folly, and defend one vain
 thing by another; but that I sometimes imagine that they either discuss
 philosophy for the sake of a jest, or purposely and knowingly undertake
 to defend falsehoods, as if to exercise or display their talents on
 false subjects. But I should be able to prove by many arguments that it
 is impossible for the heaven to be lower than the earth, were is not
 that this book must now be concluded, and that some things still
 remain, which are more necessary for the present work. And since it is
 not the work of a single book to run over the errors of each
 individually, let it be sufficient to have enumerated a few, from which
 the nature of the others may be understood.

 [468] [Vol. v. [40]p. 14.]

 [469] He alludes to the hanging gardens of Semiramis at Babylon.

 [470] [World here means universe. See vol. ii. p. 136, [41]note 2.]

 Chap. XXV.--Of Learning Philosophy, and What Great Qualifications are
 Necessary for Its Pursuit.

 We must now speak a few things concerning philosophy in general, that
 having strengthened our cause we may conclude. That greatest imitator
 of Plato among our writers thought that philosophy was not for the
 multitude, because none but learned men could attain to it.
 "Philosophy," says Cicero, [471] "is contented with a few judges, of
 its own accord designedly avoiding the multitude." It is not therefore
 wisdom, if it avoids the concourse of men; since, if wisdom is given to
 man, it is given to all without any distinction, so that there is no
 one at all who cannot acquire it. But they so embrace virtue, which is
 given to the human race, that they alone of all appear to wish to enjoy
 that which is a public good; being as envious as if they should wish to
 bind or tear out the eyes of others that they may not see the sun. For
 what else is it to deny wisdom to men, than to take away from their
 minds the true and divine light? But if the nature of man is capable of
 wisdom, it was befitting that both workmen, and country people, and
 women, and all, in short, who bear the human form, should be taught to
 be wise; and that the people should be brought together from every
 language, and condition, and sex, and age. Therefore it is a very
 strong argument that philosophy neither tends to wisdom, nor is of
 itself wisdom, that its mystery is only made known by the beard and
 cloak of the philosophers. [472] The Stoics, moreover, perceived this,
 who said that philosophy was to be studied both by slaves and women;
 Epicurus also, who invites those who are altogether unacquainted with
 letters to philosophy; and Plato also, who wished to compose a state of
 wise men.

 They attempted, indeed, to do that which truth required; but they were
 unable to proceed beyond words. First, because instruction in many arts
 is necessary for an application to philosophy. Common learning must be
 acquired on account of practice in reading, because in so great a
 variety of subjects it is impossible that all things should be learned
 by hearing, or retained in the memory. No little attention also must be
 given to the grammarians, in order that you may know the right method
 of speaking. That must occupy many years. Nor must there be ignorance
 of rhetoric, that you may be able to utter and express the things which
 you have learned. Geometry also, and music, and astronomy, are
 necessary, because these arts have some connection with philosophy; and
 the whole of these subjects cannot be learned by women, who must learn
 within the years of their maturity the duties which are hereafter about
 to be of service to them for domestic uses; nor by servants, who must
 live in service during those years especially in which they are able to
 learn; nor by the poor, or labourers, or rustics, who have to gain
 their daily support by labour. And on this account Tully says that
 philosophy is averse from the multitude. But yet Epicurus will receive
 the ignorant. [473] How, then, will they understand those things which
 are said respecting the first principles of things, the perplexities
 and intricacies of which are scarcely attained to by men of cultivated
 minds?

 Therefore, in subjects which are involved in obscurity, and confused by
 a variety of intellects, and set off by the studied language of
 eloquent men, what place is there for the unskilful and ignorant?
 Lastly, they never taught any women to study philosophy, except
 Themiste [474] only, within the whole memory of man; nor slaves, except
 Phædo [475] only, who is said, when living in oppressive slavery, to
 have been ransomed and taught by Cebes. They also enumerate Plato and
 Diogenes: these, however, were not slaves, though they had fallen into
 servitude, for they had been taken captive. A certain Aniceris is said
 to have ransomed Plato for eight sesterces. And on this account Seneca
 severely rebuked the ransomer himself, because he set so small value
 upon Plato. He was a madman, as it seems to me, who was angry with a
 man because he did not throw away much money; doubtless he ought to
 have weighed gold as though to ransom the corpse of Hector, or to have
 insisted upon the payment of more money than the seller demanded.
 Moreover, they taught none of the barbarians, with the single exception
 of Anacharsis the Scythian, who never would have dreamed of philosophy
 had he not previously learned both language and literature.

 [471] Tusc., ii. 1.

 [472] A long beard and cloak were the badges of the philosophers. [See
 vol. ii. p. 321, [42]note 9.]

 [473] [Platonic philosophy being addressed to the mind, and the
 Epicurean to lusts and passions.]

 [474] Themiste is said to have been the wife of Leontius; Epicurus is
 reported to have written to her. Themistoclea, the sister of
 Pythagoras, is mentioned as a student of philosophy; besides many other
 women in different ages.

 [475] Plato dedicated to Phædo his treatise on the immortality of the
 soul: according to other accounts, Phædo was ransomed by Crito or
 Alcibiades at the suggestion of Socrates.

 Chap. XXVI.--It is Divine Instruction Only Which Bestows Wisdom; And of What
 Efficacy the Law of God is.

 That, therefore, which they perceived to be justly required by the
 demands of nature, but which they were themselves unable to perform,
 and saw that the philosophers could not effect, is accomplished only by
 divine instruction; for that only is wisdom. Doubtless they were able
 to persuade any one who do not even persuade themselves of anything; or
 they will crush the desires, moderate the anger, and restrain the lusts
 of any one, when they themselves both yield to vices, and acknowledge
 that they are overpowered by nature. But what influence is exerted on
 the souls of men by the precepts of God, because of their simplicity
 and truth, is shown by daily proofs. Give me a man who is passionate,
 scurrilous, and unrestrained; with a very few words of God,


 "I will render him as gentle as a sheep." [476]

 Give me one who is grasping, covetous, and tenacious; I will presently
 restore him to you liberal, and freely bestowing his money with full
 hands. Give me a man who is afraid of pain and death; he shall
 presently despise crosses, and fires, and the bull of Phalaris. [477]
 Give me one who is lustful, an adulterer, a glutton; you shall
 presently see him sober, chaste, and temperate. Give me one who is
 cruel and bloodthirsty: that fury shall presently be changed into true
 clemency. Give me a man who is unjust, foolish, an evil-doer; forthwith
 he shall be just, and wise, and innocent: for by one laver [478] all
 his wickedness shall be taken away. So great is the power of divine
 wisdom, that, when infused into the breast of man, by one impulse it
 once for all expels folly, which is the mother of faults, for the
 effecting of which there is no need of payment, or books, or nightly
 studies. These results are accomplished gratuitously, easily, and
 quickly, if only the ears are open and the breast thirsts for wisdom.
 Let no one fear: we do not sell water, nor offer the sun for a reward.
 The fountain of God, most abundant and most full, is open to all; and
 this heavenly light rises for all, [479] as many as have eyes. Did any
 of the philosophers effect these things, or is he able to effect them
 if he wishes? For though they spend their lives in the study of
 philosophy, they are neither able to improve any other person nor
 themselves (if nature has presented any obstacle). Therefore their
 wisdom, doing its utmost, does not eradicate, but hide vices. But a few
 precepts of God so entirely change the whole man, and having put off
 the old man, render him new, that you would not recognise him as the
 same.

 [476] Terence, Adelphi, iv. 1.

 [477] Perillus invented the brazen bull, which the tyrant Phalaris used
 as an instrument of torture. It was so constructed that the groans of
 the victims appeared to resemble the bellowing of the bull.

 [478] The baptismal font. [i.e., as signifying Zech. xiii. 1.]

 [479] See John i. 9.

 Chap. XXVII.--How Little the Precepts of Philosophers Contribute to True
 Wisdom, Which You Will Find in Religion Only.

 What, then? Do they enjoin nothing similar? Yes, indeed, many things;
 and they frequently approach the truth. But those precepts have no
 weight, because they are human, and are without a greater, that is,
 that divine authority. No one therefore believes them, because the
 hearer imagines himself to be a man, just as he is, who enjoins them.
 Moreover, there is no certainty with them, nothing which proceeds from
 knowledge. But since all things are done by conjecture, and many
 differing and various things are brought forward, it is the part of a
 most foolish man to be willing to obey their precepts, since it is
 doubted whether they are true or false; and therefore no one obeys
 them, because no one wishes to labour for an uncertainty. The Stoics
 say that it is virtue which can alone produce a happy life. Nothing can
 be said with greater truth. But what if he shall be tormented, or
 afflicted with pain? Will it be possible for any one to be happy in the
 hands of the executioners? But truly pain inflicted upon the body is
 the material of virtue; therefore he is not wretched even in tortures.
 Epicurus speaks much more strongly. The wise man, he says, is always
 happy; and even when shut up in the bull of Phalaris he will utter this
 speech: "It is pleasant, and I do not care for it." Who would not laugh
 at him? Especially, because a man who is devoted to pleasure took upon
 himself the character of a man of fortitude, and that to an immoderate
 degree; for it is impossible that any one should esteem tortures of the
 body as pleasures, since it is sufficient for discharging the office of
 virtue that one sustains and endures them. What do you, Stoics, say?
 What do you, Epicurus? The wise man is happy even when be is tortured.
 If it is on account of the glory of his endurance, he will not enjoy
 it, for perchance he will die under the tortures. If it is on account
 of the recollection of the deed, either he will not perceive it if
 souls shall perish, or, if he shall perceive it, he will gain nothing
 from it.

 What other advantage is there then in virtue? what happiness of life?
 Is it that a man may die with equanimity? You present to me the
 advantage of a single hour, or perhaps moment, for the sake of which it
 may not be expedient to be worn out by miseries and labours throughout
 the whole of life. But how much time does death occupy? on the arrival
 of which it now makes no difference whether you shall have undergone it
 with equanimity or not. Thus it happens that nothing is sought from
 virtue but glory. But this is either superfluous and short-lived, or it
 will not follow from the depraved judgments of men. Therefore there is
 no fruit from virtue where virtue is subject to death and decay.
 Therefore they who said these things saw a certain shadow [480] of
 virtue; they did not see virtue itself. For they had their eyes fixed
 on the earth, nor did they raise their countenances on high that they
 might behold her


 "Who showed herself from the quarters of heaven." [481]

 This is the reason why no one obeys their precepts; inasmuch as they
 either train men to vices, if they defend pleasure; or if they uphold
 virtue, they neither threaten sin with any punishment, except that of
 disgrace only, nor do they promise any reward to virtue, except that of
 honour and praise only, since they say that virtue is to be sought for
 its own sake, and not on account of any other object. The wise man
 therefore is happy under tortures; but when he suffers torture on
 account of his faith, on account of justice, or on account of God, that
 endurance of pain will render him most happy. For it is God alone who
 can honour virtue, the reward of which is immortality alone. And they
 who do not seek this, nor possess religion, with which eternal life is
 connected, assuredly do not know the power of virtue, the reward of
 which they are ignorant; nor look towards heaven, as they themselves
 imagine that they do, when they inquire into subjects which do not
 admit of investigation, since there is no other cause for looking
 towards heaven, unless it be either to undertake religion, or to
 believe that one's soul is immortal. For if any one understands that
 God is to be worshipped, or has the hope of immortality set before him,
 his mind [482] is in heaven; and although he may not behold it with his
 eyes, yet he does behold it with the eye of his soul. But they who do
 not take up religion are of the earth, for religion is from heaven; and
 they who think that the soul perishes together with the body, equally
 look down towards the earth: for beyond the body, which is earth, they
 see nothing further, which is immortal. It is therefore of no profit
 that man is so made, that with upright body he looks towards heaven,
 unless with mind raised aloft he discerns God, and his thoughts are
 altogether engaged upon the hope of everlasting life.

 [480] A shadow; outline, or resemblance.

 [481] Lucretius, i. 65.

 [482] Thus St. Paul, Col. iii. 2, exhorts us to set our affections on
 things above, not on things of the earth.

 Chap. XXVIII.--Of True Religion and of Nature. Whether Fortune is a Goddess,
 and of Philosophy.

 Wherefore there is nothing else in life on which our plan and condition
 can depend but the knowledge of God who created us, and the religious
 and pious worship of Him; and since the philosophers have wandered from
 this, it is plain that they were not wise. They sought wisdom, indeed;
 but because they did not seek it in a right manner, they sunk down to a
 greater distance, and fell into such great errors, that they did not
 even possess common wisdom. For they were not only unwilling to
 maintain religion, but they even took it away; while, led on by the
 appearance of false virtue, they endeavour to free the mind from all
 fear: and this overturning of religion gains the name of nature. For
 they, either being ignorant by whom the world was made, or wishing to
 persuade men that nothing was completed by divine intelligence, said
 that nature was the mother of all things, as though they should say
 that all things were produced of their own accord: by which word they
 altogether confess their own ignorance. For nature, apart from divine
 providence and power, is absolutely nothing. But if they call God
 nature, what perverseness is it, to use the name of nature rather than
 of God! [483] But if nature is the plan, or necessity, or condition of
 birth, it is not by itself capable of sensation; but there must
 necessarily be a divine mind, which by its foresight furnishes the
 beginning of their existence to all things. Or if nature is heaven and
 earth, and everything which is created, nature is not God, but the work
 of God.

 By a similar error they believe in the existence of fortune, as a
 goddess mocking the affairs of then with various casualties, because
 they know not from what source things good and evil happen to them.
 They think that they are brought together to do battle with her; nor do
 they assign any reason by whom and on what account they are thus
 matched; but they only boast that they are every moment carrying on a
 contest for life and death with fortune. Now, as many as have consoled
 any persons on account of the death and removal of friends, have
 censured the name of fortune with the most severe accusations; nor is
 there any disputation of theirs on the subject of virtue, in which
 fortune is not harassed. M. Tullius, in his Consolation, says that he
 has always fought against fortune, and that she was always overpowered
 by him when he had valiantly beaten back the attacks of his enemies;
 that he was not subdued by her even then, when he was driven from his
 home and deprived of his country; but then, when he lost his dearest
 daughter, he shamefully confesses that he is overcome by fortune. I
 yield, he says, and raise my hand. [484] What is more wretched than
 this man, who thus lies prostrate? He acts foolishly, he says; but it
 is one who professes that he is wise. What, then, does the assumption
 of the name imply? What that contempt of things which is laid claim to
 with magnificent words? What that dress, so different from others? Or
 why do you give precepts of wisdom at all, if no one has yet been found
 who is wise? And does any one bear ill-will to us because we deny that
 philosophers are wise, when they themselves confess that they neither
 have knowledge nor wisdom? For if at any time they have so failed that
 they are not even able to feign anything, as their practice is in other
 cases, then in truth they are reminded of their ignorance; and, as
 though in madness, they spring up and exclaim that they are blind and
 foolish. Anaxagoras pronounces that all things are overspread with
 darkness. Empedocles complains that the paths of the senses are narrow,
 as though for his reflections he had need of a chariot and four horses.
 Democritus says that the truth lies sunk in a well so deep that it has
 no bottom; foolishly, indeed, as he says other things. For the truth is
 not, as it were, sunk in a well to which it was permitted him to
 descend, or even to fall, but, as it were, placed on the highest top of
 a lofty mountain, or in heaven, which is most true. For what reason is
 there why he should say that it is sunk below rather than that it is
 raised aloft? unless by chance he preferred to place the mind also in
 the feet, or in the bottom of the heels, rather than in the breast or
 in the head.

 So widely removed were they from the truth itself, that even the
 posture of their own body did not admonish them, that the truth must be
 sought for by them in the highest place. [485] From this despair arose
 that confession of Socrates, in which he said that he knew nothing but
 this one thing alone, that he knew nothing. From this flowed the system
 of the Academy, if that is to be called a system in which ignorance is
 both learnt and taught. But not even those who claimed for themselves
 knowledge were able consistently to defend that very thing which they
 thought that they knew. For since they were not in agreement [486] with
 one another, through their ignorance of divine things they were so
 inconsistent and uncertain, and often asserting things contrary to one
 another, that you are unable to determine and decide what their meaning
 was. Why therefore should you fight against those men who perish by
 their own sword? Why should you labour to refute those whom their own
 speech refutes and presses? [487] Aristotle, says Cicero, accusing the
 ancient philosophers, declares that they are either most foolish or
 most vainglorious, since they thought that philosophy was perfected by
 their talents; but that he saw, because a great addition had been made
 in a few years, that philosophy would be complete in a short time.
 What, then, was that time? In what manner, when, or by whom, was
 philosophy completed? For that which he said, that they were most
 foolish in supposing that philosophy was made perfect by their talents,
 is true; but he did not even himself speak with sufficient discretion,
 who thought that it had either been begun by the ancients, or increased
 by those who were more recent, or that it would shortly be brought to
 perfection by those of later times. For that can never be investigated
 which is not sought by its own way.

 [483] [Quod si Deum naturam vocant quæ perversitas est naturam potius
 quam Deum nominare. Observe this terse maxim of our author. It rebukes
 the teachers and scientists of our day, who seem afraid to "look
 through nature up to nature's God," in their barren instruction. They
 go back to Lucretius, and call it progress!]

 [484] To raise or stretch out the hand was an acknowledgment of defeat.

 [485] [See p. 91, note 3, supra, and sparsim in this work.]

 [486] Literally, "their accounts did not square."

 [487] Afficit, "presses and harasses." Another reading is affligit,
 "casts to the ground."

 Chap. XXIX.--Of Fortune Again, and Virtue.

 But let us return to the subject which we laid aside. Fortune,
 therefore, by itself, is nothing; nor must we so regard it as though it
 had any perception, since fortune is the sudden and unexpected
 occurrence of accidents. But philosophers, that they may not sometimes
 fail to err, wish to be wise in a foolish matter; and say that she is
 not a goddess, as is generally believed, but a god. Sometimes, however,
 they call this god nature, sometimes fortune, "because he brings
 about," says the same Cicero, "many things unexpected by us, on account
 of our want of intelligence and our ignorance of causes." Since,
 therefore, they are ignorant of the causes on account of which anything
 is done, they must also be ignorant of him who does them. The same
 writer, in a work of great seriousness, in which he was giving to his
 son precepts of life drawn from philosophy, says, "Who can be ignorant
 that the power of fortune is great on either side? For both when we
 meet with a prosperous breeze from her we gain the issues which we
 desire, and when she has breathed contrary to us we are dashed on the
 rocks." [488] First of all, he who says that nothing can be known,
 spoke this as though he himself and all men had knowledge. Then he who
 endeavours to render doubtful even the things which are plain, thought
 that this was plain, which ought to have been to him especially
 doubtful; for to a wise man it is altogether false. Who, he says, knows
 not? I indeed know not. Let him teach me, if he can, what that power
 is, what that breeze, and what the contrary breath.

 It is disgraceful, therefore, for a man of talent to say that, which if
 you were to deny it, he would be unable to prove. Lastly, he who says
 that the assent must be withheld because it is the part of a foolish
 man rashly to assent to things which are unknown to him, he, I say,
 altogether believed the opinions of the vulgar and uninstructed, who
 think that it is fortune which gives to men good and evil things. For
 they represent her image with the horn of plenty and with a rudder, as
 though she both gave wealth and had the government of human affairs.
 And to this opinion Virgil [489] assented, who calls fortune
 omnipotent; and the historian [490] who says, But assuredly fortune
 bears sway in everything. What place, then, remains for the other gods?
 Why is she not said to reign by herself, if she has more power than
 others; or why is she not alone worshipped, if she has power in all
 things? Or if she inflicts evils only, let them bring forward some
 cause why, if she is a goddess, she envies men, and desires their
 destruction, though she is religiously worshipped by them; why she is
 more favourable to the wicked and more unfavourable to the good; why
 she plots, afflicts, deceives, exterminates; who appointed her as the
 perpetual harasser of the race of men; why, in short, she has obtained
 so mischievous a power, that she renders all things illustrious or
 obscure according to her caprice rather than in accordance with the
 truth. Philosophers, I say, ought rather to have inquired into these
 things, than rashly to have accused fortune, who is innocent: for
 although she has some existence, yet no reason can be brought forward
 by them why she should be as hostile to men as she is supposed to be.
 Therefore all those speeches in which they rail at the injustice of
 fortune, and in opposition to fortune arrogantly boast of their own
 virtues, are nothing else but the ravings of thoughtless levity.

 Wherefore let them not envy us, to whom God has revealed the truth:
 who, as we know that fortune is nothing, so also know that there is a
 wicked and crafty spirit who is unfriendly to the good, and the enemy
 of righteousness, who acts in opposition to God; the cause of whose
 enmity we have explained in the second book. [491] He therefore lays
 plots against all; but those who are ignorant of God he hinders by
 error, he overwhelms with folly, he overspreads with darkness, that no
 one may be able to attain to the knowledge of the divine name, in which
 alone are contained both wisdom and everlasting life. Those, on the
 other hand, who know God, he assails with wiles and craft, that he may
 ensnare them with desire and lust, and when they are corrupted by the
 blandishments of sin, may impel them to death; or, if he shall have not
 succeeded by stratagem, he attempts to cast them down by force and
 violence. For on this account he was not at once thrust down by God to
 punishment at the original transgression, that by his malice he may
 exercise man to virtue: for unless this is in constant agitation,
 unless it is strengthened by continual harassing, it cannot be perfect,
 inasmuch as virtue is dauntless and unconquered patience in enduring
 evils. From which it comes to pass that there is no virtue if an
 adversary is wanting. When, therefore, they perceived the force of this
 perverse power opposed to virtue, and were ignorant of its name, they
 invented for themselves the senseless name of fortune; and how far this
 is removed from wisdom, Juvenal declares in these verses: [492] --


 "No divine power is absent if there is prudence; but we make you a
 goddess, O Fortune, and place you in heaven."

 It was folly, therefore, and error, and blindness, and, as Cicero says,
 [493] ignorance of facts and causes, which introduced the names of
 Nature and Fortune. But as they are ignorant of their adversary, so
 also they do not indeed know virtue the knowledge of which is derived
 from the idea of an adversary. And if this is joined with wisdom, or,
 as they say, is itself also wisdom, they must be ignorant in what
 subjects it is contained. For no one can possibly be furnished with
 true arms if he is ignorant of the enemy against whom he must be armed;
 nor can he overcome his adversary, who in fighting does not attack his
 real enemy, but a shadow. For he will be overthrown, who, having his
 attention fixed on another object, shall not previously have foreseen
 or guarded against the blow aimed at his vitals.

 [488] Cicero, De Offic., ii. 6. The expressions are borrowed from the
 figure of a ship at sea.

 [489] Æn., viii. 33.

 [490] Sallust, Cat., viii.

 [491] Chapter xvi.

 [492] Satire x. 365: Nullum numen abest. Others read, Nullum numen
 habes. You have no divine power, O Fortune, if there is prudence, etc.

 [493] Acad., i. 7. [Let our sophists feel this rebuke of Tully.]

 Chap. XXX.--The Conclusion of the Things Before Spoken; And by What Means We
 Must Pass from the Vanity of the Philosophers to True Wisdom, and the
 Knowledge of the True God, in Which Alone are Virtue and Happiness.

 I have taught, as far as my humble talents permitted, that the
 philosophers held a course widely deviating from the truth. I perceive,
 however, how many things I have omitted, because it was not my province
 to enter into a disputation against philosophers. But it was necessary
 for me to make a digression to this subject, that I might show that so
 many and great intellects have expended themselves in vain on false
 subjects, lest any one by chance being shut out by corrupt
 superstitions, should wish to betake himself to them as though about to
 find some certainty. Therefore the only hope, the only safety for man,
 is placed in this doctrine, which we defend. All the wisdom of man
 consists in this alone, the knowledge and worship of God: this is our
 tenet, this our opinion. Therefore with all the power of my voice I
 testify, I proclaim, I declare: Here, here is that which all
 philosophers have sought throughout their whole life; and yet, they
 have not been able to investigate, to grasp, and to attain to it,
 because they either retained a religion which was corrupt, or took it
 away altogether. Let them therefore all depart, who do not instruct
 human life, but throw it into confusion. For what do they teach? or
 whom do they instruct, who have not yet instructed themselves? whom are
 the sick able to heal, whom can the blind guide? Let us all, therefore,
 who have any regard for wisdom, betake ourselves to this subject. Or
 shall we wait until Socrates knows something? or Anaxagoras finds light
 in the darkness? or until Democritus draws forth truth from the well?
 or Empedocles extends the paths of his soul? or until Arcesilas and
 Carneades see, and feel, and perceive?

 Lo, a voice from heaven teaching the truth, and displaying to us a
 light brighter than the sun itself. [494] Why are we unjust to
 ourselves, and delay to take up wisdom, which learned men, though they
 wasted their lives in its pursuit, were never able to discover. Let him
 who wishes to be wise and happy hear the voice of God, learn
 righteousness, understand the mystery of his birth, despise human
 affairs, embrace divine things, that he may gain that chief good to
 which he was born. Having overthrown all false religions, and having
 refuted all the arguments, as many as it was customary or possible to
 bring forward in their defence; then, having proved the systems of
 philosophy to be false, we must now come to true religion and wisdom,
 since, as I shall teach, they are both connected together; that we may
 maintain it either by arguments, or by examples, or by competent
 witnesses, and may show that the folly with which those worshippers of
 gods do not cease to upbraid us, has no existence with us, but lies
 altogether with them. And although, in the former books, when I was
 contending against false religions, and in this, when I was
 overthrowing false wisdom, I showed where the truth is, yet the next
 book will more plainly indicate what is true religion and what true
 wisdom.

 [494] [A noble utterance from Christian philosophy, now first gaining
 the ear and heart of humanity.]


the divine institutes

  Book IV.

  Of True Wisdom and Religion.

 Chap. I.--Of the Former Religion of Men, and How Error Was Spread Over Every
 Age, and of the Seven Wise Men of Greece.

 When I reflect, O Emperor Constantine, and often revolve in my mind the
 original condition of men, it is accustomed to appear alike wonderful
 and unworthy that, by the folly of one age embracing various
 superstitions, and believing in the existence of many gods, they
 suddenly arrived at such ignorance of themselves, that the truth being
 taken away from their eyes, the religion of the true God was not
 observed, nor the condition of human nature, since men did not seek the
 chief good in heaven, but on earth. And on this account assuredly the
 happiness of the ancient ages was changed. For, having left God, the
 parent and founder of all things, men began to worship the senseless
 works [495] of their own hands. And what were the effects of this
 corruption, or what evils it introduced, the subject itself
 sufficiently declares. For, turning away from the chief good, which is
 blessed and everlasting on this account, because it cannot be seen,
 [496] or touched, or comprehended, and from the virtues which are in
 agreement with that good, and which are equally immortal, gliding down
 to these corrupt and frail gods, and devoting themselves to those
 things by which the body only is adorned, and nourished, and delighted,
 they sought eternal death for themselves, together with their gods and
 goods relating to the body, because all bodies are subject to death.
 Superstitions of this kind, therefore, were followed by injustice and
 impiety, as must necessarily be the case. For men ceased to raise their
 countenances to the heaven; but, their minds being depressed downwards,
 clung to goods of the earth, as they did to earth-born superstitions.
 There followed the disagreement of mankind, and fraud, and all
 wickedness; because, despising eternal and incorruptible goods, which
 alone ought to be desired by man, they rather chose temporal and
 short-lived things, and greater trust was placed by men in evil,
 inasmuch as they preferred vice to virtue, because it had presented
 itself as nearer at hand. [497]

 Thus human life, which in former ages had been occupied with the
 clearest light, was overspread with gloom and darkness; and in
 conformity with this depravity, when wisdom was taken away, then at
 length men began to claim for themselves the name of wise. For at the
 time when all were wise, no one was called by that name. And would that
 this name, once common to all the class, though reduced to a few, still
 retained its power! For those few might perhaps be able, either by
 talent, or by authority, or by continual exhortations, to free the
 people from vices and errors. But so entirely had wisdom died out, that
 it is evident, from the very arrogance of the name, that no one of
 those who were so called was really wise. And yet, before the discovery
 of this philosophy, as it is termed, there are said to have been seven,
 [498] who, because they ventured to inquire into and discuss natural
 subjects, deserved to be esteemed and called wise men.

 O wretched and calamitous age, in which through the whole world there
 were only seven who were called by the name of men, for no one can
 justly be called a man unless he is wise! But if all the others besides
 themselves were foolish, even they themselves were not wise, because no
 one can be truly wise in the judgment of the foolish. So far were they
 removed from wisdom, that not even afterwards, when learning increased,
 and many and great intellects were always intent upon this very
 subject, could the truth be perceived and ascertained. For, after the
 renown of those seven wise men, it is incredible with how great a
 desire of inquiring into the truth all Greece was inflamed. And first
 of all, they thought [499] the very name of wisdom arrogant, and did
 not call themselves wise men, but desirous of wisdom. By which deed
 they both condemned those who had rashly arrogated to themselves the
 name of wise men, of error and folly, and themselves also of ignorance,
 which indeed they did not deny. For wherever the nature of the subject
 had, as it were, laid its hands upon their minds, so that they were
 unable to give any account, they were accustomed to testify that, they
 knew nothing, and discerned nothing. Wherefore they are found to be
 much wiser, who in some degree saw themselves, than those who had
 believed that they were wise.

 [495] Figmenta. [Rom. i. 21-23.]

 [496] Thus St. Paul, 1 Cor. ii. 9: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
 neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath
 prepared for them that love Him."

 [497] In its rewards.

 [498] The seven wise men were, Thales, Pittacus, Bias, Solon,
 Cleobulus, Chilo, and Periander. To these some add Anacharsis the
 Scythian. [Vol. v. [43]p. 11, supra. For Thales, vol. ii. [44]p. 140.]

 [499] This was the opinion of Pythagoras. See Book iii. 2.

 Chap. II.--Where Wisdom is to Be Found; Why Pythagoras and Plato Did Not
 Approach the Jews.

 Wherefore, if they were not wise who were so called, nor those of later
 times, who did not hesitate to confess their want of wisdom, what
 remains but that wisdom is to be sought elsewhere, since it has not
 been found where it was sought. But what can we suppose to have been
 the reason why it was not found, though sought with the greatest
 earnestness and labour by so many intellects, and during so many ages,
 unless it be that philosophers sought for it out of their own limits?
 And since they traversed and explored all parts, but nowhere found any
 wisdom, and it must of necessity be somewhere, it is evident that it
 ought especially to be sought there where the title of folly [500]
 appears; under the covering of which God hides the treasury of wisdom
 and truth, lest the secret of His divine work should be exposed to
 view. [501] Whence I am accustomed to wonder that, when Pythagoras, and
 after him Plato, inflamed with the love of searching out the truth, had
 penetrated as far as to the Egyptians, and Magi, and Persians, that
 they might become acquainted with their religious rites and
 institutions (for they suspected that wisdom was concerned with
 religion), they did not approach the Jews only, in whose possession
 alone it then was, and to whom they might have gone more easily. But I
 think that they were turned away from them by divine providence, that
 they might not know the truth, because it was not yet permitted for the
 religion of the true God and righteousness to become known to men of
 other nations. [502] For God had determined, as the last time drew
 near, [503] to send from heaven a great leader, [504] who should reveal
 to foreign nations that which was taken away from a perfidious [505]
 and ungrateful people. And I will endeavour to discuss the subject in
 this book, if I shall first have shown that wisdom is so closely united
 with religion, that the one cannot be separated from the other.

 [500] See 1 Cor. i. 20-22.

 [501] ["Thou art a God that hidest thyself," Isa xlv. 15. Wisdom must
 be searched after as hidden treasure.]

 [502] See Eph. i. 9, 10; Col. i. 26, 27. [This is a mysterious truth:
 God's election of men and nations has been according to their desire to
 be enlightened. Christ must be the "Desire of Nations."]

 [503] The last time is the last dispensation, the time of the new
 covenant. Heb. i. 2.

 [504] See Isa. lv. 4: "Behold, I have given Him for a leader and
 commander to the people."

 [505] Matt. xxi.

 Chap. III.--Wisdom and Religion Cannot Be Separated: the Lord of Nature Must
 Necessarily Be the Father of Every One.

 The worship of the gods, as I have taught in the former book, does not
 imply wisdom; not only because it gives up man, who is a divine animal,
 to earthly and frail things, but because nothing is fixed in it which
 may avail for the cultivation of the character and the framing of the
 life; nor does it contain any investigation of the truth, but only the
 rite of worship, which does not consist in the service of the mind, but
 in the employment of the body. And therefore that is not to be deemed
 true religion, because it instructs and improves men by no precepts of
 righteousness and virtue. Thus philosophy, inasmuch as it does not
 possess true religion, that is, the highest piety, is not true wisdom.
 For if the divinity which governs this world supports mankind with
 incredible beneficence, and cherishes it as with paternal indulgence,
 wishes truly that gratitude should be paid, and honour given to itself,
 man cannot preserve his piety if he shall prove ungrateful for the
 heavenly benefits; and this is certainly not the part of a wise man.
 Since, therefore, as I have said, philosophy and the religious system
 of the gods are separated, and far removed from each other; seeing that
 some are professors of wisdom, through whom it is manifest that there
 is no approach to the gods, and that others are priests of religion,
 through whom wisdom is not learned; it is manifest that the one is not
 true wisdom, and that the other is not true religion. Therefore
 philosophy was not able to conceive the truth, nor was the religious
 system of the gods able to give an account of itself, since it is
 without it. But where wisdom is joined by an inseparable connection
 with religion, both must necessarily be true; because in our worship we
 ought to be wise, that is, to know the proper object and mode of
 worship, and in our wisdom to worship, that is, to complete our
 knowledge by deed and action.

 Where, then, is wisdom joined with religion? There, indeed, where the
 one God is worshipped, where life and every action is referred to one
 source, and to one supreme authority: in short, the teachers of wisdom
 are the same, who are also the priests of God. [506] Nor, however, let
 it affect any one, because it often has happened, and may happen, that
 some philosopher may undertake a priesthood of the gods; and when this
 happens, philosophy is not, however, joined with religion; but
 philosophy will both be unemployed amidst sacred rites, and religion
 will be unemployed when philosophy shall be treated of. For that system
 of religious rites is dumb, not only because it relates to gods who are
 dumb, but also because its observance is by the hand and the fingers,
 not by the heart and tongue, as is the case with ours, which is true.
 Therefore religion is contained in wisdom, and wisdom in religion. The
 one, then, cannot be separated from the other; because wisdom is
 nothing else but the worship of the true God with just and pious
 adoration. But that the worship of many gods is not in accordance with
 nature, may be inferred and conceived even by this argument: that every
 god who is worshipped by man must, amidst the solemn rites and prayers,
 be invoked as father, not only for the sake of honour, but also of
 reason; because he is both more ancient than man, and because he
 affords life, safety, and sustenance, as a father does. Therefore
 Jupiter is called father by those who pray to him, as is Saturnus, and
 Janus, and Liber, and the rest in order; which Lucilius [507] laughs at
 in the council of the gods: "So that there is none of us who is not
 called excellent father of the gods; so that father Neptunus, Liber,
 father Saturnus, Mars, Janus, father Quirinus, are called after one
 name." But if nature does not permit that one man should have many
 fathers (for he is produced from one only), therefore the worship of
 many gods is contrary to nature, and contrary to piety.

 One only, therefore, is to be worshipped, who can truly be called
 Father. He also must of necessity be Lord, because as He has power to
 indulge, so also has He power to restrain. He is to be called Father on
 this account, because He bestows upon us many and great things; and
 Lord on this account, because He has the greatest power of chastising
 and punishing. But that He who is Father is also Lord, is shown even by
 reference to civil law. [508] For who will be able to bring up sons,
 unless he has the power of a lord over them? Nor without reason is he
 called father of a household, [509] although he only has sons: for it
 is plain that the name of father embraces also slaves, because
 "household" follows; and the name of "household" comprises also sons,
 because the name of "father" precedes: from which it is evident, that
 the same person is both father of his slaves [510] and lord of his
 sons. Lastly, the son is set at liberty as if he were a slave; and the
 liberated slave receives the name [511] of his patron, as if he were a
 son. But if a man is named father of a household, that it may appear
 that he is possessed of a double power, because as a father he ought to
 indulge, and as a lord to restrain, it follows that he who is a son is
 also a slave, and that he who is a father is also a lord. As,
 therefore, by the necessity of nature, there cannot be more than one
 father, so there can only be one lord. For what will the slave do if
 many lords [512] shall give commands at variance with each other?
 Therefore the worship of many gods is contrary to reason and to nature,
 since there cannot be many fathers or lords; but it is necessary to
 consider the gods both as fathers and lords.

 Therefore the truth cannot be held where the same man is subject to
 many fathers and lords, where the mind, drawn in different directions
 to many objects, wanders to and fro, hither and thither. Nor can
 religion have any firmness, when it is without a fixed and settled
 dwelling-place. Therefore there can be no true worship of many gods;
 just as that cannot be called matrimony, in which one woman has many
 husbands, but she will either be called a harlot or an adulteress. For
 when a woman is destitute of modesty, chastity, and fidelity, she must
 of necessity be without virtue. Thus also the religious system of the
 gods is unchaste and unholy, because it is destitute of faith, for that
 unsettled and uncertain honour has no source or origin.

 [506] [Iidem sunt doctores sapientiæ qui et De. sacerdotes.]

 [507] [The satirist, not Cicero's friend; Nat. Deor., iii.]

 [508] Fathers in ancient times had the greatest power over their
 children, so that they had the right of life and death, as masters had
 over their slaves.

 [509] Pater familias--a title given to the master of a household,
 whether he had sons or not; the slaves of a house were called familia

 [510] It has been judged better to keep the words "slave" and "lord"
 throughout the passage, for the sake of uniformity of expression,
 though in some places "servant" and "master" might seem more
 appropriate.

 [511] Among the Romans slaves had no prænomen or distinguishing name;
 when a slave was set at liberty, he was allowed to assume the name of
 his master as a prænomen. Thus, in Persius (Sat., v.), "Dama," the
 liberated slave, becomes "Marcus Dama."

 [512] Thus the slave in Terence wished to know how many masters he had.

 Chapter IV.--Of Wisdom Likewise, and Religion, and of the Right of Father
 and Lord.

 By these things it is evident how closely connected are wisdom and
 religion. Wisdom relates to sons, and this relation requires love;
 religion to servants, and this relation requires fear. For as the
 former are bound to love and honour their father, so are the latter
 bound to respect and venerate their lord. But with respect to God, who
 is one only, inasmuch as He sustains the twofold character both of
 Father and Lord, we are bound both to love Him, inasmuch as we are
 sons, and to fear Him, inasmuch as we are servants. [513] Religion,
 therefore, cannot be divided from wisdom, nor can wisdom be separated
 from religion; because it is the same God, who ought to be understood,
 which is the part of wisdom, and to be honoured, which is the part of
 religion. But wisdom precedes, religion follows; for the knowledge of
 God comes first, His worship is the result of knowledge. Thus in the
 two names there is but one meaning, though it seems to be different in
 each case. For the one is concerned with the understanding, the other
 with action. But, however, they resemble two streams flowing from one
 fountain. But the fountain of wisdom and religion is God; and if these
 two streams shall turn aside from Him, they must be dried up: for they
 who are ignorant of Him cannot be wise or religious.

 Thus it comes to pass that philosophers, and those who worship many
 gods, either resemble disinherited sons or runaway slaves, because the
 one do not seek their father, nor the other their master. And as they
 who are disinherited do not attain to the inheritance of their father,
 nor runaway slaves impunity, so neither will philosophers receive
 immortality, which is the inheritance of the heavenly kingdom, that is,
 the chief good, which they especially seek; nor will the worshippers of
 gods escape the penalty of everlasting death, which is the punishment
 of the true Master against those who are deserters [514] of His majesty
 and name. But that God is Father and also Lord was unknown to both, to
 the worshippers of the gods as well as to the professors of wisdom
 themselves: inasmuch as they either thought that nothing at all was to
 be worshipped; or they approved of false religions; or, although they
 understood the strength and power of the Supreme God (as Plato, who
 says that there is one God, Creator of the world, and Marcus Tullius,
 who acknowledges that man has been produced by the Supreme God in an
 excellent condition), nevertheless they did not render the worship due
 to Him as to the supreme Father, which was their befitting and
 necessary duty. But that the gods cannot be fathers or lords, is
 declared not only by their multitude, as I have shown above, [515] but
 also by reason: because it is not reported that man was made by gods,
 nor is it found that the gods themselves preceded the origin of man,
 since it appears that there were men on the earth before the birth of
 Vulcan, and Liber, and Apollo, and Jupiter himself. But the creation of
 man is not accustomed to be assigned to Saturnus, nor to his father
 Coelus.

 But if none of those who are worshipped is said to have originally
 formed and created man, it follows that none of these can be called the
 father of man, and so none of them can be God. Therefore it is not
 lawful to worship those by whom man was not produced, for he could not
 be produced by many. Therefore the one and only God ought to be
 worshipped, who was before Jupiter, and Saturnus, and Coelus himself,
 and the earth. For He must have fashioned man, who, before the creation
 of man, finished the heaven and the earth. He alone is to be called
 Father who created us; He alone is to be considered Lord who rules, who
 has the true and perpetual power of life and death. And he who does not
 adore Him is a foolish servant, who flees from or does not know his
 Master; and an undutiful son, who either hates or is ignorant of his
 true Father.

 [513] Fear, in the language of the prophets often implies reverence of
 the divine majesty. Lactantius seems to refer to Mal. i. 6: "A son
 honoureth his father, and a servant his master: if then I be a father,
 where is mine honour? and if I be a master, where is my fear?"

 [514] Literally, runaways. The reference is, as before, to runaway
 slaves.

 [515] Chap. iii. [[45]p. 103].

 Chap. V.--The Oracles of the Prophets Must Be Looked Into; And of Their
 Times, and the Times of the Judges and Kings.

 Now, since I have shown that wisdom and religion cannot be separated,
 it remains that we speak of religion itself, and wisdom. I am aware,
 indeed, how difficult it is to discuss heavenly subjects; but still the
 attempt must be ventured, that the truth may be made clear and brought
 to light, and that many may be freed from error and death, who despise
 and refuse the truth, while it is concealed under a covering of folly.
 But before I begin to speak of God and His works, I must first speak a
 few things concerning the prophets, whose testimony I must now use,
 which I have refrained from doing in the former books. Above all
 things, he who desires to comprehend the truth ought not only to apply
 his mind to understand the utterances of the prophets, but also most
 diligently to inquire into the times during which each one of them
 existed, that he may know what future events they predicted, and after
 how many years their predictions were fulfilled. [516] Nor is there any
 difficulty in making these computations; for they testified under what
 king each of them received the inspiration of the Divine Spirit. And
 many have written and published books respecting the times, making
 their commencement from the prophet Moses, who lived about seven
 hundred years before the Trojan war. But he, when he had governed the
 people for forty years, was succeeded by Joshua, who held the chief
 place twenty-seven years.

 After this they were under the government of judges during three
 hundred and seventy years. Then their condition was changed, and they
 began to have kings; and when they had ruled during four hundred and
 fifty years, until the reign of Zedekiah, the Jews having been besieged
 by the king of Babylon, and carried into captivity, [517] endured a
 long servitude, until, in the seventieth year afterwards, the captive
 Jews were restored to their own lands and settlements by Cyrus the
 elder, who attained the supreme power over the Persians, at the time
 when Tarquinius Superbus reigned at Rome. Wherefore, since the whole
 series of times may be collected both from the Jewish histories and
 from those of the Greeks and Romans, the times of the prophets
 individually may also be collected; the last of whom was Zechariah, and
 it is agreed on that he prophesied in the time of King Darius, in the
 second year of his reign, and in the eighth month. Of so much greater
 antiquity [518] are the prophets found to be than the Greek writers.
 And I bring forward all these things, that they may perceive their
 error who endeavour to refute Holy Scripture, as though it were new and
 recently composed, being ignorant from what fountain the origin of our
 holy religion flowed. But if any one, having put together and examined
 the times, shall duly lay the foundation of learning, and fully
 ascertain the truth, he will also lay aside his error when he has
 gained the knowledge of the truth.

 [516] [See Pusey's Daniel; also Minor Prophets.]

 [517] See 2 Kings xxv.; Jer. xxxix. and lii.

 [518] The same is asserted by Justin Martyr [vol. i. [46]p. 277],
 Eusebius, Augustine, and other writers. See Augustine, De Civitate Dei,
 book xviii. 37. Pythagoras, one of the most ancient of the Greek
 philosophers, was contemporary with the latest prophets.

 Chap. VI.--Almighty God Begat His Son; And the Testimonies of the Sibyls and
 of Trismegistus Concerning Him.

 God, therefore, the contriver and founder of all things, as we have
 said in the second book, before He commenced this excellent work of the
 world, begat a pure and incorruptible Spirit, whom He called His Son.
 And although He had afterwards created by Himself innumerable other
 beings, whom we call angels, this first-begotten, however, was the only
 one whom He considered worthy of being called by the divine name, as
 being powerful in His Father's excellence and majesty. But that there
 is a Son of the Most High God, who is possessed of the greatest power,
 is shown not only by the unanimous utterances of the prophets, but also
 by the declaration of Trismegistus and the predictions of the Sibyls.
 Hermes, in the book which is entitled The Perfect Word, made use of
 these words: "The Lord and Creator of all things, whom we have thought
 right to call God, since He made the second God visible and sensible.
 But I use the term sensible, not because He Himself perceives (for the
 question is not whether He Himself perceives), but because He leads
 [519] to perception and to intelligence. Since, therefore, He made Him
 first, and alone, and one only, He appeared to Him beautiful, and most
 full of all good things; and He hallowed Him, and altogether loved Him
 as His own Son." The Erythræan Sibyl, in the beginning of her poem,
 which she commenced with the Supreme God, proclaims the Son of God as
 the leader and commander of all, in these verses:--


 "The nourisher and creator of all things, who placed the sweet breath
 in all, and made God the leader of all."

 And again, at the end of the same poem:--


 "But whom God gave for faithful men to honour."

 And another Sibyl enjoins that He ought to be known:--


 "Know Him as your God, who is the Son of God."

 Assuredly He is the very Son of God, who by that most wise King
 Solomon, full of divine inspiration, spake these things which we have
 added: [520] , "God founded [521] me in the beginning of His ways, in
 His work before the ages. He set me up in the beginning, before He made
 the earth, and before He established the depths, before the fountains
 of waters came forth: the Lord begat me before all the hills; He made
 the regions, and the uninhabitable [522] boundaries under the heaven.
 When He prepared the heaven, I was by Him: and when He separated His
 own seat, when He made the strong clouds above the winds, and when He
 strengthened the mountains, and placed them under heaven; when He laid
 the strong foundations of the earth, I was with Him arranging all
 things. I was He in whom He delighted: I was daily delighted, when He
 rejoiced, the world being completed." But on this account Trismegistus
 spoke of Him as "the artificer of God," and the Sibyl calls Him
 "Counsellor," because He is endowed by God the Father with such wisdom
 and strength, that God employed both His wisdom and hands in the
 creation of the world.

 [519] Literally, "sends." The passage appears to be corrupt:
 hupopi'ptei has been suggested instead of hupope'mpei, "falls under
 perception," "is an object of perception."

 [520] Prov. viii. 22-31. Lactantius quotes from the Septuagint.

 [521] According to the Hebrew, "possessed me in the beginning," and so
 the authorized version.

 [522] Fines inhabitabiles. Other editions read terras inhabitabiles,
 "uninhabitable lands."

 Chap. VII.--Of the Name of Son, and Whence He is Called Jesus and Christ.

 Some one may perhaps ask who this is who is so powerful, so beloved by
 God, and what name He has, who was not only begotten at first before
 the world, [523] but who also arranged it by His wisdom and constructed
 it by His might. First of all, it is befitting that we should know that
 His name is not known even to the angels who dwell in heaven, but to
 Himself only, and to God the Father; nor will that name be published,
 as the sacred writings relate, before that the purpose of God shall be
 fulfilled. In the next place, we must know that this name cannot be
 uttered by the mouth of man, as Hermes teaches, saying these things:
 "Now the cause of this cause is the will of the divine good which
 produced God, whose name cannot be uttered by the mouth of man." And
 shortly afterwards to His Son: "There is, O Son, a secret word of
 wisdom, holy respecting the only Lord of all things, and the God first
 perceived [524] by the mind, to speak of whom is beyond the power of
 man." But although His name, which the supreme Father gave Him from the
 beginning, is known to none but Himself, nevertheless He has one name
 among the angels, and another among men, since He is called Jesus [525]
 among men: for Christ is not a proper name, but a title of power and
 dominion; for by this the Jews were accustomed to call their kings. But
 the meaning of this name must be set forth, on account of the error of
 the ignorant, who by the change of a letter are accustomed to call Him
 Chrestus. [526] The Jews had before been directed to compose a sacred
 oil, with which those who were called to the priesthood [527] or to the
 kingdom might be anointed. And as now the robe of purple [528] is a
 sign of the assumption of royal dignity among the Romans, so with them
 the anointing with the holy oil conferred the title and power of king.
 But since the ancient Greeks used the word chri'esthai to express the
 art of anointing, which they now express by alei'phesthai, as the verse
 of Homer shows,


 "But the attendants washed, and anointed [529] them with oil;"

 on this account we call Him Christ, that is, the Anointed, who in
 Hebrew is called the Messias. Hence in some Greek writings, which are
 badly translated [530] from the Hebrew, the word eleimmenos [531] is
 found written, from the word aleiphesthai, [532] anointing. But,
 however, by either name a king is signified: not that He has obtained
 this earthly kingdom, the time for receiving which has not yet arrived,
 but that He sways a heavenly and eternal kingdom, concerning which we
 shall speak in the last book. But now let us speak of His first
 nativity.

 [523] Literally, "whose first nativity not only preceded the world." He
 speaks of the eternal generation of the Son, as distinguished from His
 incarnation, which he afterwards speaks of as His second nativity. [See
 vol. vi. [47]p. 7.]

 [524] Or, perceiving.

 [525] Jesus, that is, [Joshua = ] Saviour.

 [526] Suetonius speaks of Christ as Chrestus. The Christians also were
 called Chrestians, as Tertullian shows in his Apology. The word
 chresto's has the signification of kind, gentle, good. [Vol. i. [48]p.
 163.]

 [527] Each has reference to Christ, as He is King and Priest. Of the
 anointing of kings, see 1 Sam., and of priests, Lev. viii. [Of
 prophets, 1 Kings xix. 16.] The priesthood of Christ is most fully set
 forth in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

 [528] Thus Horatius, Carm., i. 35, "Purpurei metuunt tyranni;" and
 Gray, Ode to Adversity, "Purple tyrants vainly groan."

 [529] chrisan.

 [530] Interpretatæ sunt, used here in a passive sense.

 [531] eleimme'nos.

 [532] alei'phesthai.

 Chap. VIII.--Of the Birth of Jesus in the Spirit and in the Flesh: of
 Spirits and the Testimonies of Prophets.

 For we especially testify that He was twice born, first in the spirit,
 and afterwards in the flesh. Whence it is thus spoken by Jeremiah:
 [533] "Before I formed Thee in the womb I knew Thee." And likewise by
 the same: "Who was blessed before He was born;" [534] which was the
 case with no one else but Christ. For though He was the Son of God from
 the beginning, [535] He was born again [536] a second time [537]
 according to the flesh: and this twofold birth of His has introduced
 great terror into the minds of men, and overspread with darkness even
 those who retained the mysteries of true religion. But we will show
 this plainly and clearly, that they who love wisdom may be more easily
 and diligently instructed. He who hears the Son of God mentioned ought
 not to conceive in his mind so great impiety as to think that God begat
 Him by marriage and union with a woman, which none does but an animal
 possessed of a body, and subject to death. But with whom could God
 unite Himself, since He is alone? or since His power was so great, that
 He accomplished whatever He wished, assuredly He did not require the
 co-operation [538] of another for procreation. Unless by chance we
 shall [profanely] imagine, as Orpheus supposed, that God is both male
 and female, because otherwise He would have been unable to beget,
 unless He had the power of each sex, as though He could have
 intercourse with Himself, or without such intercourse be unable to
 produce.

 But Hermes also was of the same opinion, when he says that He was "His
 own father," and "His own mother." [539] But if this were so, as He is
 called by the prophets father, so also He would be called mother. In
 what manner, then, did He beget Him? First of all, divine operations
 cannot be known or declared [540] by any one; but nevertheless the
 sacred writings teach us, in which it is laid down [541] that this Son
 of God is the speech, or even the reason [542] of God, and also that
 the other angels are spirits [543] of God. For speech is breath sent
 forth with a voice signifying something. But, however, since breath and
 speech are sent forth from different parts, inasmuch as breath proceeds
 from the nostrils, speech from the mouth, the difference between the
 Son of God and the other angels is great. For they proceeded from God
 as silent spirits, because they were not created to teach [544] the
 knowledge of God, but for His service. But though He is Himself also a
 spirit, yet He proceeded from the mouth of God with voice and sound, as
 the Word, on this account indeed, because He was about to make use of
 His voice to the people; that is, because He was about to be a teacher
 of the knowledge of God, and of the heavenly mystery [545] to be
 revealed to man: which word also God Himself first spoke, that through
 Him He might speak to us, and that He might reveal to us the voice and
 will of God.

 With good reason, therefore, is He called the Speech and the Word of
 God, because God, by a certain incomprehensible energy and power of His
 majesty, enclosed the vocal spirit proceeding from His mouth, which he
 had not conceived in the womb, but in His mind, within a form which has
 life through its own perception and wisdom, and He also fashioned other
 spirits of His into angels. Our spirits [546] are liable to
 dissolution, because we are mortal: but the spirits of God both live,
 and are lasting, and have perception; because He Himself is immortal,
 and the Giver both of perception [547] and life. Our expressions,
 although they are mingled with the air, and fade away, yet generally
 remain comprised in letters; how much more must we believe that the
 voice of God both remains for ever, and is accompanied with perception
 and power, which it has derived from God the Father, as a stream from
 its fountain! But if any one wonders that God could be produced from
 God by a putting forth of the voice and breath, if he is acquainted
 with the sacred utterances of the prophets he will cease to wonder.
 That Solomon and his father David were most powerful kings, and also
 prophets, may perhaps be known even to those who have not applied
 themselves to the sacred writings; the one of whom, who reigned
 subsequently to the other, preceded the destruction of the city of Troy
 by one hundred and forty years. His father, the writer of sacred hymns,
 thus speaks in the thirty-second Psalm: [548] "By the word of God were
 the heavens made firm; and all their power [549] by the breath of His
 mouth." And also again in the forty-fourth Psalm: [550] "My heart hath
 given utterance to a good word; I speak of my doings towards the king;"
 testifying, in truth, that the works of God are known to no other than
 to the Son alone, who is the Word of God, and who must reign for ever.
 Solomon also shows that it is the Word of God, and no other, [551] by
 whose hands these works of the world were made. "I," He says, "came
 forth out of the mouth of the Most High before all creatures: I caused
 the light that faileth not to arise in the heavens, and covered the
 whole earth with a cloud. I have dwelt in the height, and my throne is
 in the pillar of the cloud." [552] John also thus taught: "In the
 beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
 God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by
 Him, and without Him was not anything made." [553]

 [533] Jer. i. 5. It can only be in a secondary sense that this prophecy
 refers to Christ; in its primary sense it refers to the prophet
 himself, as the context plainly shows.

 [534] This passage is not found in Jeremiah, or in the Bible.

 [535] [See vol. iii. [49]p. 612.]

 [536] Regeneratus est.

 [537] Denuo, i.e., de nova, "afresh."

 [538] Societate alterius. [Profanely arguing to God from man. Humanity
 has a procreant power of a lower sort; but the ideal is divine, and
 needs no process like that of man's nature.]

 [539] au'topa'tora kai` auetome'tora.

 [540] Thus Isa. liii. 8: "Who shall declare His generation?"

 [541] Cautum est.

 [542] Thus lo'gos includes the two senses of word and reason.

 [543] There is great difficulty in translating this passage, on account
 of the double sense of spiritus (as in Greek, pneuma), including
 "spirit" and "breath." It is impossible to express the sense of the
 whole passage by either word singly. There is the same difficulty with
 regard to pneuma, as in Heb. i. 7: "He maketh His angels spirits," more
 correctly "winds." See Delitzsch on Hebrews, and comp. Ps. civ. 4.

 [544] Ad tradendam.

 [545] Coelestis arcani. See Rom. xvi. 25.

 [546] Lactantius is speaking of the breath: he cannot refer to the
 soul, which he everywhere speaks of as immortal.

 [547] Sensus.

 [548] In our version, Ps. xxxiii. 6.

 [549] Quoted from the Septuagint version.

 [550] Ps. xlv. 1. [See vol. i. [50]p. 213.]

 [551] Ipsum.

 [552] Ecclus. xxiv. 5-7. This book is attributed to Solomon by many of
 the Fathers, though it bears the title of the Wisdom of Jesus the son
 of Sirach.

 [553] John i. 1-3.

 Chap. IX.--Of the Word of God.

 But the Greeks speak of Him as the Logos, [554] more befittingly than
 we do as the word, or speech: for Logos signifies both speech and
 reason, inasmuch as He is both the voice and the wisdom of God. And of
 this divine speech not even the philosophers were ignorant, since Zeno
 represents the Logos as the arranger of the established order of
 things, and the framer of the universe: whom also He calls Fate, and
 the necessity of things, and God, and the soul of Jupiter, in
 accordance with the custom, indeed, by which they are wont to regard
 Jupiter as God. But the words are no obstacle, since the sentiment is
 in agreement with the truth. For it is the spirit of God which he named
 the soul of Jupiter. For Trismegistus, who by some means or other
 searched into almost all truth, often described the excellence and
 majesty of the word, as the instance before mentioned declares, in
 which he acknowledges that there is an ineffable and sacred speech, the
 relation of which exceeds the measure of man's ability. I have spoken
 briefly, as I have been able, concerning the first nativity. Now I must
 more fully discuss the second, since this is the subject most
 controverted, that we may hold forth the light of understanding to
 those who desire to know the truth.

 [554] lo'gos.


 Chap. X.--Of the Advent of Jesus; Of the Fortunes of the Jews, and Their
 Government, Until the Passion of the Lord.

 In the first place, then, men ought to know that the arrangements of
 the Most High God have so advanced from the beginning, that it was
 necessary, as the end of the world [555] approached, that the Son of
 God should descend to the earth, that He might build a temple for God,
 and teach righteousness; but, however, not with the might of an angel
 or with heavenly power, but in the form of man and in the condition of
 a mortal, that when He had discharged the office of His ministry, [556]
 He might be delivered into the hands of wicked men, and might undergo
 death, that, having subdued this also by His might, He might rise
 again, and bring to man, whose nature He had put on [557] and
 represented, the hope of overcoming death, and might admit him to the
 rewards of immortality. And that no one may be ignorant of this
 arrangement, we will show that all things were foretold which we see
 fulfilled in Christ. Let no one believe our assertion unless I shall
 show that the prophets before a long series of ages published that it
 should come to pass at length that the Son of God should be born as a
 man, and perform wonderful deeds, and sow [558] the worship of God
 throughout the whole earth, and at last be crucified, and on the third
 day rise again. And when I shall have proved all these things by the
 writings of those very men who treated with violence their God who had
 assumed a mortal body, what else will prevent it from being manifest
 that true wisdom is conversant with this religion only? Now the origin
 of the whole mystery is to be related.

 Our ancestors, [559] who were chiefs of the Hebrews, when they were
 distressed by famine and want, passed over into Egypt, that they might
 obtain a supply of corn; and sojourning there a long time, they were
 oppressed with an intolerable yoke of slavery. Then God pitied them,
 and led them out, and freed them from the hand of the king of the
 Egyptians, after four hundred and thirty [560] years, under the
 leadership of Moses, through whom the law was afterwards given to them
 by God; and in this leading out God displayed the power of His majesty.
 For He made His people to pass through the midst of the Red Sea, His
 angel [561] going before and dividing the water, so that the people
 might walk over the dry land, of whom it might more truly be said (as
 the poet says [562] ), that "the wave, closing over him after the
 appearance of a mountain, stood around him." And when he heard of this,
 the tyrant of the Egyptians followed with this great host of his men,
 and rashly entering the sea which still lay open, was destroyed,
 together with his whole army, by the waves returning [563] to their
 place. But the Hebrews, when they had entered into the wilderness, saw
 many wonderful deeds. For when they suffered thirst, a rock having been
 struck with a rod, a fountain of water sprung forth and refreshed the
 people. And again, when they were hungry, a shower [564] of heavenly
 nourishment descended. Moreover, also, the wind [565] brought quails
 into their camp, so that they were not only satisfied with heavenly
 bread, but also with more choice banquets. And yet, in return for these
 divine benefits, they did not pay honour to God; but when slavery had
 been now removed from them, and their thirst and hunger laid aside,
 they fell away into luxury, and transferred their minds to the profane
 rites of the Egyptians. For when Moses, their leader, had ascended into
 the mountain, and there tarried forty days, they made the head [566] of
 an ox in gold, which they call Apis, [567] that it might go before them
 as a standard. [568] With which sin and crime God was offended, and
 justly visited the impious and ungrateful people with severe
 punishments, and made them subject to the law [569] which He had given
 by Moses.

 But afterwards, when they had settled in a desert part of Syria, the
 Hebrews [570] lost their ancient name; and since the leader of their
 host [571] was Judas, they were called Jews, [572] and the land which
 they inhabited Judæa. And at first, indeed, they were not subject to
 the dominion of Kings, but civil Judges presided over the people and
 the law: they were not, however, appointed only for a year, as the
 Roman consuls, but supported by a perpetual jurisdiction. Then, the
 name of Judges being taken away, the kingly power was introduced. But
 during the government of the Judges the people had often undertaken
 corrupt religious rites; and God, offended by them, as often brought
 them into bondage to strangers, until again, softened by the repentance
 of the people, He freed them from bondage. Likewise under the Kings,
 being oppressed by wars with their neighbours on account of their
 iniquities, and at last taken captive and led to Babylon, they suffered
 punishment for their impiety by oppressive slavery, until Cyrus came to
 the kingdom, who immediately restored the Jews by an edict. Afterwards
 they had tetrarchs until the time of Herod, who was in the reign of
 Tiberius Cæsar; in whose fifteenth year, in the consulship of the two
 Gemini, on the 23d of March, [573] the Jews crucified Christ. This
 series of events, this order, is contained in the secrets of the sacred
 writings. But I will first show for what reason Christ came to the
 earth, that the foundation and the system of divine religion may be
 manifest.

 [555] The boundary of the age. Thus the Scriptures speak of the end of
 the world, the last days.

 [556] Magisterio, "teaching."

 [557] An expression frequently used by the Fathers to denote the
 assumption of our nature by Christ.

 [558] Seminaret, "sow" or "spread." [I have put "sow" into the text,
 and brought down "spread," for an obvious reason.]

 [559] The patriarchs. The idea appears to be that Christians from the
 Gentiles, having succeeded to the privileges of the Jews, are, as it
 were, their posterity.

 [560] The duration of the captivity in Egypt was two hundred and
 fifteen years. The period of four hundred and thirty years is reckoned
 from the call of Abram out of Ur of the Chaldees to the final departure
 from Egypt.

 [561] The Angel of the Covenant, who so often presented Himself to the
 Hebrews. See Ex. xxiii. 20. [The Jehovah-Angel. Compare Justin, vol. i.
 [51]pp. 223-226, and others passim, this series.]

 [562] Virgil, Georg., iv. 361. He describes Aristæus as descending to
 the chamber of his mother Cyrene, in the depths of the river Peneus.
 The waters separate on each side to make a way for him, and then close
 over his head.

 [563] Coeuntibus aquis, "meeting together."

 [564] See Ps. lxxviii. 24: "He rained down manna upon them to eat."

 [565] See Num. xi. 31.

 [566] Some of the Fathers think, with Lacantius, that it was the head
 only, and not the whole figure, of a calf which they made.

 [567] Apis is the name given by the Egyptians to the calf which they
 worshipped.

 [568] In signo.

 [569] The moral law had been already given to Moses on the mount before
 the making of the golden calf. The law here referred to may well be
 taken to express the burthensome routine of the ceremonial law, which
 Peter (Acts xv. 10) describes as a "yoke which neither their fathers
 nor they were able to bear." [Our author expresses himself with
 accuracy: He subjected them by the oppressive ceremonial law to the
 moral law He had just given.]

 [570] The Hebrews are said to have derived their name from Heber the
 descendant of Noah by Shem; or more probably from Abram the Hebrew,
 that is, the man who had crossed the river,--a name given to him by the
 Canaanites. See Gen. xiv. 13.

 [571] Examinis.

 [572] There seems to be no authority for this derivation of the name.
 They were doubtless called Jews from Judah. As those who returned from
 the captivity at Babylon were principally of the tribe of Judah, though
 some from the other tribes returned with them, they were called Jews
 after the captivity.

 [573] There appears to be no reasonable doubt that the day on which our
 Lord suffered was the 14th of Nisan, that is, April 7. See Gresswell's
 Dissertations, vol. iii. p. 168; also Ellicott's Lectures on the Life
 of Christ [Gresswell is not to be too readily accepted in this. See the
 learned inquiry of Dr. Jarvis, of whom, vol. ii. p. 477.]

 Chap. XI.--Of the Cause of the Incarnation of Christ.

 When the Jews often resisted wholesome precepts, and departed from the
 divine law, going astray to the impious worship of false gods, then God
 filled just and chosen men with the Holy Spirit, appointing them as
 prophets in the midst of the people, by whom He might rebuke with
 threatening words the sins of the ungrateful people, and nevertheless
 exhort them to repent of their wickedness; for unless they did this,
 and, laying aside their vanities, return to their God, it would come to
 pass that He would change His covenant, [574] that is, bestow [575] the
 inheritance of eternal life upon foreign nations, and collect to
 Himself a more faithful people out of those who were aliens [576] by
 birth. But they, when rebuked by the prophets, not only rejected their
 words; but being offended because they were upbraided for their sins,
 they slew the prophets themselves with studied [577] tortures: all
 which things are sealed up and preserved in the sacred writings. For
 the prophet Jeremiah says: [578] "I sent to you my servants the
 prophets; I sent them before the morning light; but ye did not hearken,
 nor incline your ears to hear, when I spake unto you: let every one of
 you turn from his evil way, and from your most corrupt affections; and
 ye shall dwell in the land which I gave to you and to your fathers for
 ever. [579] Walk ye not after strange gods, to serve them; and provoke
 me not to anger with the works of your hands, that I should destroy
 you." The prophet Ezra [580] also, who was in the times of the same
 Cyrus by whom the Jews were restored, thus speaks: "They rebelled
 against Thee, and cast Thy law behind their backs, and slew Thy
 prophets which testified against them, that they might turn unto Thee."

 The prophet Elias also, in the third book of Kings: [581] "I have been
 very jealous [582] for the Lord God of hosts, because the children of
 Israel have forsaken Thee, thrown down Thine altars, and slain Thy
 prophets with the sword; and I only am left, and they seek my life to
 take it away." On account of these impieties of theirs He cast them off
 for ever; [583] and so He ceased to send to them prophets. But He
 commanded His own Son, the first-begotten, [584] the maker of all
 things, His own counsellor, to descend from heaven, that He might
 transfer the sacred religion of God to the Gentiles, [585] that is, to
 those who were ignorant of God, and might teach them righteousness,
 which the perfidious people had cast aside. And He had long before
 threatened that He would do this, as the prophet Malachi [586] shows,
 saying: "I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord, and I will not
 accept an offering from your hands; for from the rising of the sun even
 unto its setting, my name shall be great [587] among the Gentiles."
 David also in the seventeenth Psalm [588] says: "Thou wilt make me the
 head of the heathen; a people whom I have not known shall serve me."
 Isaiah [589] also thus speaks: "I come to gather all nations and
 tongues; and they shall come and see my glory; and I will send among
 them a sign, and I will send those that escape of them unto the nations
 which are afar off, which have not heard my fame; and they shall
 declare my glory among the Gentiles." Therefore, when God wished to
 send to the earth one who should measure [590] His temple, He was
 unwilling to send him with heavenly power and glory, that the people
 who had been ungrateful towards God might be led into the greatest
 error, and suffer punishment for their crimes, since they had not
 received their Lord and God, as the prophets had before foretold that
 it would thus happen. For Isaiah whom the Jews most cruelly slew,
 cutting him asunder with a saw, [591] thus speaks: [592] "Hear, O
 heaven; and give ear, O earth: for the Lord hath spoken, I have
 begotten sons, and lifted [593] them up on high, and they have rejected
 me. The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's stall; but
 Israel hath not known, my people has not understood." Jeremiah also
 says, in like manner: [594] "The turtle and the swallow hath known her
 time, and the sparrows of the field have observed [595] the times of
 their coming: but my people have not known the judgment of the Lord.
 How do you say, We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us? The
 meting out [596] is in vain; the scribes are deceived and confounded:
 the wise men are dismayed and taken, for they have rejected the word of
 the Lord."

 Therefore (as I had begun to say), when God had determined to send to
 men a teacher of righteousness, He commanded Him to be born again a
 second time in the flesh, and to be made in the likeness of man
 himself, to whom he was about to be a guide, and companion, and
 teacher. But since God is kind and merciful [597] to His people, He
 sent Him to those very persons whom He hated, [598] that He might not
 close the way of salvation against them for ever, but might give them a
 free opportunity of following God, that they might both gain the reward
 of life if they should follow Him (which many of them do, and have
 done), and that they might incur the penalty of death by their fault if
 they should reject their King. He ordered Him therefore to be born
 again among them, and of their seed, lest, if He should be born of
 another nation, they might be able to allege a just excuse from the law
 for their rejection of Him; and at the same time, that there might be
 no nation at all under heaven to which the hope of immortality should
 be denied.

 [574] Testamentum, properly the solemn declaration of a will.

 [575] Converteret, "turn to."

 [576] Alienigenis. Comp. Eph. ii. 12: "Aliens from the commonwealth of
 Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise."

 [577] Exquisitis.

 [578] Jer. xxv. 4-6.

 [579] From generation to generation.

 [580] Neh. ix. 26. The book of Nehemiah is called by the Greek writers
 the second book of Ezra. The words quoted are spoken by the Levites.

 [581] 1 Kings xix. 10. The 1st and 2d Samuel are in the Septuagint 1st
 and 2d Kings, and 1st and 2d Kings are 3d and 4th.

 [582] I have been jealous with jealousy--Æmulando æmulatus sum,--a
 Hebraism. So Luke xxii. 15; John iii. 29.

 [583] Fathers were said to disown (abdicare) and cast off degenerate
 sons.

 [584] Thus Col. i. 18, "who is the beginning, the first-born from the
 dead."

 [585] The nations.

 [586] Mal. i. 10, 11.

 [587] In the Septuagint dedo'xastai, "has been glorified."

 [588] Ps. xviii. 43. The quotation is from the Septuagint, kataste'eis;
 our version reads, "Thou hast made me."

 [589] Isa. lxvi. 18, 19. The quotation is again taken from the
 Septuagint.

 [590] See Ezek. xli., where an angel measures the temple; and Rev. xi.,
 where an angel directs John to measure it.

 [591] The Scriptures do not make mention of the death of Isaiah. It is
 supposed that there is an allusion to it in Heb. xi. 37.

 [592] Isa. i. 2, 3.

 [593] Filios genui et exaltavi. This is quoted from the Septuagint.

 [594] Jer. viii. 7-9.

 [595] This is quoted from the Septuagint; literally, have watched for,
 custodierunt.

 [596] Metatura. There is considerable difference in the readings of
 this passage. The text, as given above, deviates considerably from the
 Septuagint, which is more nearly expressed by the reading of other
 editions: "Incassum facta est metatura falsa, scribæ confusi sunt."

 [597] Pius. The word is often used to represent kindness.

 [598] Men are represented as being enemies to God. The enmity is on
 man's side, but if persisted in, must make God his enemy. See Rom. v.
 9, 10, and Isa. lxiii. 10.

 Chap. XII.--Of the Birth of Jesus from the Virgin; Of His Life, Death, and
 Resurrection, and the Testimonies of the Prophets Respecting These Things.

 Therefore the Holy Spirit of God, descending from heaven, chose the
 holy Virgin, that He might enter into her womb. [599] But she, being
 filled by the possession [600] of the Divine Spirit, conceived; and
 without any intercourse with a man, her virgin womb was suddenly
 impregned. But if it is known to all that certain animals are
 accustomed to conceive [601] by the wind and the breeze, why should any
 one think it wonderful when we say that a virgin was made fruitful by
 the Spirit of God, to whom whatever He may wish is easy? And this might
 have appeared incredible, had not the prophets many ages previously
 foretold its occurrence. Thus Solomon speaks: [602] "The womb of a
 virgin was strengthened, and conceived; and a virgin was made fruitful,
 and became a mother in great pity." Likewise the prophet Isaiah, [603]
 whose words are these: "Therefore God Himself shall give you a sign:
 Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son; and ye shall call His
 name Emmanuel." What can be more manifest than this? This was read by
 the Jews, who denied Him. If any one thinks that these things are
 invented by us, let him inquire of them, let him take especially from
 them: the testimony is sufficiently strong to prove the truth, when it
 is alleged by enemies themselves. But He was never called Emmanuel, but
 Jesus, who in Latin is called Saving, or Saviour, [604] because He
 comes bringing salvation to all nations. But by this name the prophet
 declared that God incarnate was about to come to men. For Emmanuel
 signifies God with us; because when He was born of a virgin, men ought
 to confess that God was with them, that is, on the earth and in mortal
 flesh. Whence David [605] says in the eighty-fourth Psalm, "Truth has
 sprung out of the earth;" because God, in whom is truth, hath taken a
 body of earth, that He might open a way of salvation to those of the
 earth. In like manner Isaiah also: [606] "But they disbelieved, and
 vexed His Holy Spirit; and He was turned to be their enemy. And He
 Himself fought against them, and He remembered the days of old, [607]
 who raised up from the earth a shepherd of the sheep." But who this
 shepherd was about to be, he declared in another place, [608] saying:
 "Let the heavens rejoice, and let the clouds put on righteousness; let
 the earth open, and put forth a Saviour. For I the Lord have begotten
 Him." But the Saviour is, as we have said before, Jesus. But in another
 place the same prophet also thus proclaimed: [609] "Behold, unto us a
 child is born, unto us a Son is given, whose dominion is upon His
 shoulders, and His name is called Messenger of great counsel." For on
 this account He was sent by God the Father, that He might reveal to all
 the nations which are under heaven the sacred mystery of the only true
 God, which was taken away from the perfidious people, who ofttimes
 sinned against God. Daniel also foretold similar things: [610] "I saw,"
 he said, "in a vision of the night, and, behold, one like the Son of
 man coming with the clouds of heaven, and He came even to the Ancient
 of days. And they who stood by brought Him near [611] before Him. And
 there was given unto Him a kingdom, and glory, and dominion; and all
 people, tribes, and languages shall serve Him: and His dominion is
 everlasting, which shall never pass away, and His kingdom shall not be
 destroyed." How then do the Jews both confess and expect the Christ of
 God? who rejected Him on this account, because He was born of man. For
 since it is so arranged by God that the same Christ should twice come
 to the earth, once to announce to the nations the one God, then again
 to reign, why do they who did not believe in His first advent believe
 in the second?

 But the prophet comprises both His advents in few words. Behold, he
 says, one like the Son of man coming with the clouds of heaven. He did
 not say, like the Son of God, but the Son of man, that he might show
 that He had [612] to be clothed with flesh on the earth, that having
 assumed the form of a man and the condition of mortality, He might
 teach men righteousness; and when, having completed the commands of
 God, He had revealed the truth to the nations, He might also suffer
 death, that He might overcome and lay open [613] the other world also,
 and thus at length rising again, He might proceed to His Father borne
 aloft on a cloud. [614] For the prophet said in addition: And came even
 to the Ancient of days, and was presented to Him. He called the Most
 High God the Ancient of days, whose age and origin cannot be
 comprehended; for He alone was from generations, and He will be always
 to generations. [615] But that Christ, after His passion and
 resurrection, was about to ascend to God the Father, David bore witness
 in these words in the cixth Psalm: [616] "The Lord said unto my Lord,
 Sit Thou at my right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool."
 Whom could this prophet, being himself a king, call his Lord, who sat
 at the right hand of God, but Christ the Son of God, who is King of
 kings and Lord of lords? And this is more plainly shown by Isaiah,
 [617] when he says: "Thus saith the Lord God to my Lord Christ, whose
 right hand I have holden; I will subdue nations before Him, and will
 break the strength of kings. I will open before Him gates, and the
 cities shall not be closed. I will go before Thee, and will make the
 mountains level; and I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and
 shatter the bars of iron; and I will give Thee the hidden and invisible
 treasures, that Thou mayest know that I am the Lord God, which call
 Thee by Thy name, the God of Israel." Lastly, on account of the
 goodness and faithfulness which He displayed towards God on earth,
 there was given to Him a kingdom, and glory, and dominion; and all
 people, tribes, and languages shall serve Him; and His dominion is
 everlasting, and that which shall never pass away, and His kingdom
 shall not be destroyed. And this is understood in two ways: that even
 now He has an everlasting dominion, when all nations and all languages
 adore His name, confess His majesty, follow His teaching, and imitate
 His goodness: He has power and glory, in that all tribes of the earth
 obey His precepts. And also, when He shall come again with majesty and
 glory to judge every soul, and to restore the righteous to life, then
 He shall truly have the government of the whole earth: then, every evil
 having been removed from the affairs of men, a golden age (as the poets
 call it), that is, a time of righteousness and peace, will arise. But
 we will speak of these things more fully in the last book, when we
 shall speak of His second advent; now let us treat of His first advent,
 as we began.

 [599] Se insinuaret.

 [600] Divino spiritu hausto.

 [601] So Virgil, Georgic iii. 274:--

 "Et sæpe sine ullis

 Conjugiis vento gravidæ, mirabile dictu."
 This theory of the impregnation of mares by the wind was general among
 the ancients.

 [602] This passage does not occur in the writings of Solomon, or in the
 Old Testament. [Possibly from some copy (North African) of the "Book of
 Wisdom," interpolated from a marginal comment.]

 [603] Isa. vii. 14.

 [604] Salutaris, sive Salvator.

 [605] Ps. lxxxv. 12, quoted from the Septuagint.

 [606] Isa. lxiii. 10.

 [607] The days of the age. In the next clause the text differs both
 from the Hebrew and the Septuagint--which the English authorized
 version follows--"who raised up out of the sea."

 [608] Isa. xlv. 8, quoted from the Septuagint.

 [609] Isa. ix. 6, from the Septuagint.

 [610] Dan. vii. 13, 14.

 [611] Obtulerunt eum, "presented Him."

 [612] Quod carne indui haberet in terrâ. Another reading is "deberet,"
 but the present is in accordance with the style of Lactantius.

 [613] Inferos resignaret.

 [614] Acts i. 9: "A cloud received Him out of their sight."

 [615] Ps. xc. 2.

 [616] Ps. cx. 1.

 [617] Isa. xlv. 1-3. The quotation is from the Septuagint. It expressly
 refers to Cyrus, whom God raised up to accomplish His will; but the
 prophecy may have a further reference to Christ, as is here supposed.

 Chap. XIII.--Of Jesus, God and Man; And the Testimonies of the Prophets
 Concerning Him.

 Therefore the Most High God, and Parent of all, when He had purposed to
 transfer [618] His religion, sent from heaven a teacher of
 righteousness, that in Him or through Him He might give a new law to
 new worshippers; not as He had before done, by the instrumentality of
 man. Nevertheless it was His pleasure that He should be born as a man,
 that in all things He might be like His supreme Father. For God the
 Father Himself, who is the origin and source of all things, inasmuch as
 He is without parents, is most truly named by Trismegistus "fatherless"
 and "motherless," [619] because He was born from no one. For which
 reason it was befitting that the Son also should be twice born, that He
 also might become "fatherless" and "motherless." For in His first
 nativity, which was spiritual, He was "motherless," because He was
 begotten by God the Father alone, without the office of a mother. But
 in His second, which was in the flesh, He was born of a virgin's womb
 without the office of a father, that, bearing a middle substance
 between God and man, He might be able, as it were, to take by the hand
 this frail and weak nature of ours, and raise it to immortality. He
 became both the Son of God through the Spirit, and the Son of man
 through the flesh,--that is, both God and man. The power of God was
 displayed in Him, from the works which He performed; the frailty of the
 man, from the passion which He endured: on what account He undertook it
 I will mention a little later. In the meantime, we learn from the
 predictions of the prophets that He was both God and man--composed
 [620] of both natures. Isaiah testifies that He was God in these words:
 [621] "Egypt is wearied, [622] and the merchandise of Ethiopia, and the
 Sabæans, men of stature, shall come over unto Thee, and shall be Thy
 servants: and they shall walk behind Thee; in chains they shall fall
 down unto Thee, and shall make supplication unto Thee, Since God is in
 Thee, and there is no other God besides Thee. For Thou art God, and we
 knew Thee not, the God of Israel, the Saviour. They shall all be
 confounded and ashamed who oppose Thee, and shall fall into confusion."
 In like manner the prophet Jeremiah [623] thus speaks: "This is our
 God, and there shall none other be compared unto Him. He hath found out
 all the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob His servant, and
 to Israel His beloved. Afterward He was seen upon earth, and dwelt
 among men."

 David also, in the forty-fourth Psalm: [624] "Thy throne, O God, is for
 ever and ever; a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of Thy
 kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated wickedness; therefore
 God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness." By which
 word he also shows His name, since (as I have shown above) He was
 called Christ from His anointing. Then, that He was also man, Jeremiah
 teaches, saying: [625] "And He is a man, and who hath known Him?" Also
 Isaiah: [626] "And God shall send to them a man, who shall save them,
 shall save them by judging." But Moses also, in Numbers, [627] thus
 speaks: "There shall arise a star out of Jacob, and a man [628] shall
 spring forth from Israel." On which account the Milesian Apollo, [629]
 being asked whether He was God or man, replied in this manner: "He was
 mortal as to His body, being wise with wondrous works; but being taken
 with arms under Chaldean judges, with nails and the cross He endured a
 bitter end." In the first verse he spoke the truth, but he skilfully
 deceived him who asked the question, who was entirely ignorant of the
 mystery of the truth. For he appears to have denied that He was God.
 But when he acknowledges that He was mortal as to the flesh, which we
 also declare, it follows that as to the spirit He was God, which we
 affirm. For why would it have been necessary to make mention of the
 flesh, since it was sufficient to say that He was mortal? But being
 pressed by the truth, he could not deny the real state of the case; as
 that which he says, that He was wise.

 What do you reply to this, Apollo? If he is wise, then his system of
 instruction is wisdom, and no other; and they are wise who follow it,
 and no others. Why then are we commonly esteemed as foolish, and
 visionary, and senseless, who follow a Master who is wise even by the
 confession of the gods themselves? For in that he said that He wrought
 wonderful deeds, by which He especially claimed faith is His divinity,
 he now appears to assent to us, when he says the same things in which
 we boast. But, however, he recovers himself, and again has recourse to
 demoniacal frauds. For when he had been compelled to speak the truth,
 he now appeared to be a betrayer of the gods and of himself, unless he
 had, by a deceptive falsehood, concealed that which the truth had
 extorted from him. He says, therefore, that He did indeed perform
 wonderful works, yet not by divine power, but by magic. What wonder if
 Apollo thus persuaded men ignorant of the truth, when the Jews also,
 worshippers (as they seemed to be) of the Most High God, entertained
 the same opinion, though they had every day before their eyes those
 miracles which the prophets had foretold to them as about to happen,
 and yet they could not be induced by the contemplation of such powers
 to believe that He whom they saw was God? On this account, David, whom
 they especially read above the other prophets, in the twenty-seventh
 Psalm [630] thus condemns them: "Render to them their desert, because
 they regard not the works of the Lord." Both David himself and other
 prophets announced that of the house of this very David, Christ should
 be born according to the flesh. Thus it is written in Isaiah: [631]
 "And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, and He who shall arise
 to rule over the nations, in Him shall the Gentiles trust; and His rest
 shall be glorious." And in another place: [632] "There shall come forth
 a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a blossom [633] shall grow out of
 his root; and the Spirit of God shall rest upon Him, the spirit of
 wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and of might, the
 spirit of knowledge and of piety; and He shall be filled [634] with the
 spirit of fear of the Lord." Now Jesse was the father of David, from
 whose root he foretold that a blossom would arise; namely him of whom
 the Sibyl speaks, "A pure blossom shall spring forth."

 Also in the second book of Kings, the prophet Nathan was sent to David,
 who wished to build a temple for God; and this was the word of the Lord
 to Nathan, saying: [635] "Go and tell my servant David, Thus saith the
 Lord Almighty, Thou shall not build me a house for me to dwell in; but
 when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I
 will raise up thy seed after thee, and I will establish His kingdom. He
 shall build me a house for my name, and I will set up His throne for
 ever; and I will be to Him for a father, and He shall be to me for a
 son; and His house shall be established, [636] and His kingdom for
 ever." But the reason why the Jews did not understand these things was
 this, because Solomon the son of David built a temple for God, and the
 city which he called from his own name, Jerusalem. [637] Therefore they
 referred the predictions of the prophets to him. Now Solomon received
 the government of the kingdom from his father himself. But the prophets
 spoke of Him who was then born after that David had slept with his
 fathers. Besides, the reign of Solomon was not everlasting; for he
 reigned forty years. In the next place, Solomon was never called the
 son of God, but the son of David; and the house which he built was not
 firmly established, [638] as the Church, which is the true temple of
 God, which does not consist of walls, but of the heart [639] and faith
 of the men who believe on Him, and are called faithful. But that temple
 of Solomon, inasmuch as it was built by the hand, fell by the hand.
 Lastly, his father, in the cxxvith Psalm, prophesied in this manner
 respecting the works of his son: [640] "Except the Lord build the
 house, they have laboured in vain that built it; except the Lord keep
 the city, the watchman hath waked but in vain."

 [618] From the Israelites, to whom He first revealed Himself, to the
 Gentile world at large.

 [619] apa'tor and ame'tor. See Heb. vii. 3, where Melchisedec is a type
 of Christ.

 [620] Ex utroque genere permistum. Though the Godhead and the manhood
 are joined together in one person in our Lord Jesus Christ, there is no
 confounding of the two natures: each is whole and perfect. While
 Nestorius held that there were two persons in Christ, Eutyches fell
 into the opposite error, and taught that the two natures were so
 blended together as to form one mixed nature. The expression in the
 text is not very clear.

 [621] Isa. xlv. 14-16.

 [622] Fatigata est Ægyptus. This is taken from the Septuagint.

 [623] This quotation is from the apocryphal book of Baruch iii. 35-37,
 which is sometimes spoken of as the book of Jeremiah Baruch.

 [624] Ps. xlv. 6, 7.

 [625] Jer. xvii. 9. The passage is quoted from the Septuagint.

 [626] Isa. xix. 20, quoted from the Septuagint.

 [627] Num. xxiv. 17. The well-known prophecy of Balaam is here spoken
 of as though given by Moses, who only records it. [In an elucidation
 touching the Sibyls, I shall recur to the case of Balaam.]

 [628] Exsurget homo ex Israel This is taken from the Septuagint,
 instead of the ordinary reading, "A sceptre shall rise out of Israel."

 [629] [The oracle of Apollo Didymæus; from the Milesian temple burnt by
 Xerxes. Readers will remember the humour of Arnobius about these divers
 names, vol. vi. [52]p. 419, this series.]

 [630] Ps. xxviii. 4, 5.

 [631] Isa. xi. 10.

 [632] Isa. xi. 1, 2.

 [633] Flos. Quoted from the Septuagint, anthos.

 [634] Implebit eum spiritus timoris Dei.

 [635] 2 Sam. vii. 4, 5, 12-14, 16.

 [636] Fidem consequetur, following the Septuagint pistothe'setai.

 [637] Hierosolyma. As though derived from iero'n and Solomon. But
 Solomon was not the founder of the city. The name is probably derived
 from Salem, of which city Melchisedec was king. Some derive it from
 Jebus (the ancient name of the city) and Salem. [See vol. ii. p. 107,
 [53]note 3, this series.]

 [638] Non est fidem consecuta, as above.

 [639] Thus Peter speaks, 1 Ep. ii. 5, "Ye are built up a spiritual
 house."

 [640] Ps. cxxvii. 1.

 Chap. XIV.--Of the Priesthood of Jesus Foretold by the Prophets.

 From which things it is evident that all the prophets declared
 concerning Christ, that it should come to pass at some time, that being
 born with a body [641] of the race of David, He should build an eternal
 temple in honour of God, which is called the Church, and assemble all
 nations to the true worship of God. This is the faithful house, this is
 the everlasting temple; and if any one hath not sacrificed in this, he
 will not have the reward of immortality. And since Christ was the
 builder of this great and eternal temple, He must also have an
 everlasting priesthood in it; and there can be no approach to the
 shrine of the temple, and to the sight of God, except through Him who
 built the temple. David in the cixth Psalm teaches the same, saying:
 [642] "Before the morning-star I begat Thee. The Lord hath sworn, and
 will not repent; Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of
 Melchisedec." Also in the first book of Kings: [643] "And I will raise
 me up a faithful Priest, who shall do all things that are in mine
 heart; and I will build him a sure [644] house; and he shall walk in my
 sight [645] all his days." But who this was about to be, to whom God
 promised an everlasting priesthood, Zechariah most plainly teaches,
 even mentioning His name: [646] "And the Lord God showed me Jesus [647]
 the great Priest standing before the face of the angel of the Lord, and
 the adversary [648] was standing at His right hand to resist Him. And
 the Lord said unto the adversary, The Lord who hath chosen Jerusalem
 rebuke thee; and lo, a brand plucked out of the fire. And Jesus was
 clothed with filthy garments, and He was standing before the face of
 the angel. And He answered and spake unto those that stood around
 before His face, saying, Take away the filthy garments from Him, and
 clothe Him with a flowing [649] garment, and place a fair mitre [650]
 upon His head; and they clothed Him with a garment, and placed a fair
 mitre upon His head. And the angel of the Lord stood, and protested,
 saying to Jesus: Thus saith the Lord of hosts, If Thou wilt walk in my
 ways, and keep my precepts, Thou shalt judge my house, and I will give
 Thee those that may walk with Thee in the midst of these that stand by.
 Hear, therefore, O Jesus, Thou great Priest."

 Who, therefore, would not believe that the Jews were then deprived of
 understanding, who, when they read and heard these things, laid impious
 hands upon their God? But from the time in which Zechariah lived, until
 the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Cæsar, in which Christ was
 crucified, nearly five hundred years are reckoned; since he flourished
 in the time of Darius and Alexander, [651] who lived not long after the
 banishment of Tarquinius Superbus. But they were again misled and
 deceived in the same manner, in supposing that these things were spoken
 concerning Jesus [652] the son of Nave, who was the successor of Moses,
 or concerning Jesus the high priest the son of Josedech; to whom none
 of those things which the prophet related was suited. For they were
 never clothed in filthy garments, since one of them was a most powerful
 prince, and the other high priest; or suffered any adversity, so that
 they should be regarded as a brand plucked from the fire: not did they
 ever stand in the presence of God and the angels; nor did the prophet
 speak of the past so much as of the future. He spoke, therefore, of
 Jesus the Son of God, to show that He would first come in humility and
 in the flesh. For this is the filthy garment, that He might prepare a
 temple for God, and might be scorched [653] as a brand with fire--that
 is, might endure tortures from men, and at last be extinguished. For a
 half-burnt brand drawn forth from the hearth and extinguished, is
 commonly so called. [654] But in what manner and with what commands He
 was sent by God to the earth, the Spirit of God declared through the
 prophet, teaching us that when He had faithfully and uniformly
 fulfilled the will of His supreme Father, He should receive judgment
 [655] and an everlasting dominion. If, He says, Thou wilt walk in my
 ways, and keep my precepts, then Thou shalt judge my house. What these
 ways of God were, and what His precepts, is neither doubtful nor
 obscure. For God, when He saw that wickedness and the worship of false
 gods had so prevailed throughout the world, that His name had now also
 been taken away from the memory of men (since even the Jews, who alone
 had been entrusted with the secret of God, had deserted the living God,
 and, ensnared by the deceits of demons, had gone astray, and turned
 aside to the worship of images, and when rebuked by the prophets did
 not choose to return to God), He sent His Son [656] as an ambassador to
 men, that He might turn them from their impious and vain worship to the
 knowledge and worship of the true God; and also that He might turn
 their minds from foolishness to wisdom, and from wickedness to deeds of
 righteousness. These are the ways of God, in which He enjoined Him to
 walk. These are the precepts which He ordered to be observed. But He
 exhibited faith towards God. For He taught that there is but one God,
 and that He alone ought to be worshipped. Nor did He at any time say
 that He Himself was God; for He would not have maintained His
 faithfulness, if, when sent to abolish the false gods, and to assert
 the existence of the one God, He had introduced another besides that
 one. This would have been not to proclaim one God, nor to do the work
 of Him who sent Him, but to discharge a peculiar office for Himself,
 and to separate Himself from Him whom He came to reveal. On which
 account, because He was so faithful, because He arrogated nothing at
 all to Himself, that He might fulfil the commands of Him who sent Him,
 He received the dignity of everlasting Priest, and the honour of
 supreme King, and the authority of Judge, and the name of God.

 [641] Corporaliter.

 [642] Ps. cx. 3, 4, quoted from the Septuagint. With reference to this
 priesthood, see Heb. v.

 [643] 1 Sam. ii. 35.

 [644] Fidelem, i.e.; firm and stedfast.

 [645] In conspectu meo. The Septuagint, eno'pion christou mou; and so
 the English authorized version, "before my anointed."

 [646] Zech. iii. 1-8.

 [647] The authorized version reads Joshua, which has the same meaning
 with Jesus. See Heb. iv. 8. [Compare Justin, vol. i. [54]note 4, p.
 227.]

 [648] Diabolus, i.e., the calumniator. To stand on the right hand is to
 accuse with authority. See Ps. cix. 6.

 [649] Tunica talaris, a garment reaching to the ankles; in Greek,
 pode'res.

 [650] Cidarim; an Eastern word denoting a head-dress worn by the
 Persian kings, or, as in this passage, the mitre of the Jewish high
 priest.

 [651] Not the Great, but the tenth, a much earlier king of Macedon.

 [652] i.e., Joshua the son of Nun, as he is generally called. [Justin,
 vol. i. pp. [55]174, [56]266.]

 [653] Ambureretur. The word is applied to anything which is partly
 burned, burnt around, scorched. Hence Cicero jestingly speaks of
 Munatius Plancus, at whose instigation the people set fire to the
 senate-house, as tribunus ambustus. Cic., pro Milone

 [654] i.e., the word titio, "a firebrand," is thus used.

 [655] i.e., authority to judge. [Ps. lxxii. 1 and John v. 22.]

 [656] After these words some editions, "principem angelorum," the chief
 of angels.

 Chap. XV.--Of the Life and Miracles of Jesus, and Testimonies Concerning
 Them.

 Having spoken of the second nativity, in which, He showed Himself in
 the flesh to men, let us come to those wonderful works, on account of
 which, though they were signs of heavenly power, the Jews esteemed Him
 a magician. When He first began to reach maturity [657] He was baptized
 by the prophet John in the river Jordan, that He might wash [658] away
 in the spiritual laver not His own sins, for it is evident that He had
 none, but those of the flesh, [659] which He bare; that as He saved the
 Jews by undergoing circumcision, so He might save the Gentiles also by
 baptism--that is, by the pouring forth [660] of the purifying dew. Then
 a voice from heaven was heard: "Thou art my Son, to-day have I begotten
 Thee." [661] Which voice is found to have been foretold by David. And
 the Spirit of God descended upon Him, formed after the appearance of a
 white dove. [662] From that time He began to perform the greatest
 miracles, not by magical tricks, which display nothing true and
 substantial, but by heavenly strength and power, which were foretold
 even long ago by the prophets who announced Him; which works are so
 many, that a single book is not sufficient to comprise them all. I will
 therefore enumerate them briefly and generally, without any designation
 of persons and places, that I may be able to come to the setting forth
 of His passion and cross, to which my discourse has long been
 hastening. His powers were those which Apollo called wonderful: [663]
 that wherever He journeyed, by a single word, and in a single moment,
 He healed the sick and infirm, and those afflicted with every kind of
 disease: so that those who were deprived of the use of all their limbs,
 having suddenly received power, were strengthened, and themselves
 carried their couches, on which they had a little time before been
 carried. But to the lame, and to those afflicted with some defect [664]
 of the feet, He not only gave the power of walking, but also of
 running. Then, also, if any had their eyes blinded in the deepest
 darkness, He restored them to their former sight. He also loosened the
 tongues of the dumb, so that [665] they discoursed and spake
 eloquently. He also opened the ears of the deaf, and caused them to
 hear; [666] He cleansed the polluted and the blemished. [667] And He
 performed all these things not by His hands, or the application of any
 remedy, [668] but by His word and command, as also the Sibyl had
 foretold: "Doing all things by His word, and healing every disease."

 Nor, indeed, is it wonderful that He did wonderful things by His word,
 since He Himself was the Word of God, relying upon heavenly strength
 and power. Nor was it enough that He gave strength to the feeble,
 soundness of body to the maimed, health to the sick and languishing,
 unless He also raised the dead, as it were unbound from sleep, and
 recalled them to life.

 And the Jews, then, when they saw these things, contended that they
 were done by demoniacal power, although it was contained in their
 secret writings that all things should thus come to pass as they did.
 They read indeed the words of other prophets, and of Isaiah, [669]
 saying: "Be strong, ye hands that are relaxed; and ye weak knees, be
 comforted. Ye who are of a fearful [670] heart, fear not, be not
 afraid: our Lord shall execute judgment; He Himself shall come and save
 us. Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the
 deaf shall hear: then shall the lame man leap as a deer, and the tongue
 of the dumb speak plainly: [671] for in the wilderness water hath
 broken forth, and a stream in the thirsty land." But the Sibyl also
 foretold the same things in these verses:--


 "And there shall be a rising again of the dead; and the course of the
 lame shall be swift, and the deaf shall hear, and the blind shall see,
 the dumb shall speak."

 On account of these powers and divine works wrought by Him when a great
 multitude followed Him of the maimed, or sick, or of those who desired
 to present their sick to be healed, He went up into a desert mountain
 to pray there. And when He had tarried there three days, and the people
 were suffering from hunger, He called His disciples, and asked what
 quantity of food [672] they had with them. But they said that they had
 five loaves and two fishes in a wallet. Then He commanded that these
 should be brought forward, and that the multitude, distributed by
 fifties, should recline on the ground. When the disciples did this, He
 Himself broke the bread in pieces, and divided the flesh of the fishes,
 and in His hands both of them were increased. And when He had ordered
 the disciples to set them before the people, five thousand men were
 satisfied, and moreover twelve baskets [673] were filled from the
 fragments which remained. What can be more wonderful, either in
 narration or in action? But the Sibyl had before foretold that it would
 take place, whose verses are related to this effect:--


 "With five loaves at the same time, and with two fishes,

 He shall satisfy five thousand men in the wilderness;

 And afterwards taking all the fragments that remain,

 He shall fill twelve baskets to the hope of many."

 I ask, therefore, what the art of magic could have contrived in this
 case, the skill of which is of avail for nothing else than for
 deceiving [674] the eyes? He also, when He was about to retire to a
 mountain, as He was wont, for the sake of prayer, directed His
 disciples to take a small ship and go before Him. But they, setting out
 when evening was now coming on, began to be distressed [675] through a
 contrary wind. And when they were now in the midst of the sea, [676]
 then, setting His feet on the sea, [677] He came up to them, walking as
 though on the solid ground, [678] not as the poets fable Orion walking
 on the sea, who, while a part of his body was sunk in the water,


 "With his shoulder rises above the waves." [679]

 And again, when He had gone to sleep in the ship, and the wind had
 begun to rage, even to the extremity of danger, being aroused from
 sleep, He immediately ordered the wind to be silent; and the waves,
 which were borne with great violence, were still, and immediately at
 His word there followed a calm.

 But perhaps the sacred writings [680] speak falsely, when they teach
 that there was such power in Him, that by His command He compelled the
 winds to obey, the seas to serve Him, diseases to depart, the dead to
 be submissive. Why should I say that the Sibyls before taught the same
 things in their verses? one of whom, already mentioned, thus speaks:--


 "He shall still the winds by His word, and calm the sea

 As it rages, treading with feet of peace and in faith."

 And again another, which says:--


 "He shall walk on the waves, He shall release men from disease.

 He shall raise the dead, and drive away many pains;

 And from the bread of one wallet there shall be a satisfying of men."

 Some, refuted by these testimonies, are accustomed to have recourse to
 the assertion that these poems were not by the Sibyls, but made up and
 composed by our own writers. But he will assuredly not think this who
 has read Cicero, [681] and Varro, and other ancient writers, who make
 mention of the Erythræan and the other Sibyls, from whose books we
 bring forward these examples; and these authors died before the birth
 of Christ according to the flesh. But I do not doubt that these poems
 were in former times regarded as ravings, since no one then understood
 them. For they announced some marvellous wonders, of which neither the
 manner, nor the time, nor the author was signified. Lastly, the
 Erythræan Sibyl says that it would come to pass that she would be
 called mad and deceitful. But assuredly


 "They will say that the Sibyl

 Is mad, and deceitful: but when all things shall come to pass,

 Then ye will remember me; and no one will any longer

 Say that I, the prophetess of the great God, am mad."

 Therefore they were [682] neglected for many ages; but they received
 attention after the nativity and passion of Christ had revealed secret
 things. Thus it was also with the utterances of the prophets, which
 were read by the people of the Jews for fifteen hundred years and more,
 but yet were not understood until after Christ had explained [683] them
 both by His word and by His works. For the prophets spoke of Him; nor
 could the things which they said have been in any way understood,
 unless they had been altogether fulfilled.

 [657] Cum primus coepit adolescere.

 [658] Aboleret.

 [659] Not of His own flesh, but of human nature. Our Lord Himself gives
 a better explanation of His baptism, in His reply to the Baptist, who
 at first forbade him: "Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh us
 to fulfil all righteousness" (Matt. iii. 15).

 [660] Perfusione.

 [661] Compare Matt. iii. 17 with Ps. ii. 7.

 [662] ["A brilliant dove" is the idea. Ps. lxviii. 13. Comp. Justin,
 vol. i. [57]note 6, p. 243.]

 [663] Portentificas.

 [664] Pedum vitio afflictos.

 [665] In eloquium sermonemque solvebat.

 [666] Insinuabat auditum.

 [667] Aspersos maculis, i.e., lepers.

 [668] Except in the case of the blind man, whose eyes He anointed with
 clay. John ix. 9.

 [669] Isa. xxxv. 3-6. The passage is quoted from the Septuagint. The
 authorized English version follows the Hebrew, "Strengthen ye the weak
 hands," etc.

 [670] Pusilli animi.

 [671] Plana erit, "shall be intelligible."

 [672] Quantos secum cibos gestarent. See Matt. xiv.; Mark vi.; Luke
 ix.; John vi.

 [673] Cophini. This miracle is always distinguished from the feeding of
 the four thousand by the use of this word. Thus Juvenal: "Judæis,
 quorum cophinus, foenumque supellex."

 [674] Ad circumscribendos oculos. Cicero also uses the word
 "circumscriptio" to denote "fraud and deceit."

 [675] Laborare.

 [676] Pedibus mare ingressus.

 [677] Matt. xiv. 24.

 [678] In solido. So Virg., Georg., ii. 231:--

 "Alteque jubebis"

 In solido puteum demitti."

 [679] Virg., Æn., x. 765.

 [680] Matt. viii.; Mark iv.; Luke viii.

 [681] Cicero, De Natura Deorum, ii.

 [682] Jacuerunt. [Elucidation II.]

 [683] Interpretatus est.

 Chap. XVI.--Of the Passion of Jesus Christ; That It Was Foretold.

 I come now to the passion itself, which is often cast in our teeth as a
 reproach: [684] that we worship a man, and one who was visited and
 tormented with remarkable punishment: that I may show that this very
 passion was undergone by Him in accordance with a great and divine
 plan, and that goodness and truth and wisdom are contained in it alone.
 For if He had been most happy on the earth, and had reigned through all
 His life in the greatest prosperity, no wise man would either have
 believed Him to be a God, or judged Him worthy of divine honour: which
 is the case with those who are destitute of true divinity, who not only
 look up [685] to perishable riches, and frail power, and the advantages
 arising from the benefit of another, but even consecrate them, and
 knowingly do service to the memory of the dead, worshipping fortune
 when it is now extinguished, which the wise never regarded as an object
 of worship even when alive and present with them. For nothing among
 earthly things can be venerable and worthy of heaven; but it is virtue
 alone, and justice alone, which can be judged a true, and heavenly, and
 perpetual good, because it is neither given to any one, nor taken away.
 And since Christ came upon earth, supplied with virtue and
 righteousness, yea rather, since He Himself is virtue, and Himself
 righteousness, He descended that He might teach it and mould the
 character of man. And having performed this office and embassy from
 God, on account of this very virtue which He at once taught and
 practised, He deserved, and was able, to be believed a God by all
 nations. Therefore, when a great multitude from time to time flocked to
 Him, either on account of the righteousness which He taught or on
 account of the miracles which He worked, and heard His precepts, and
 believed that He was sent by God, and that He was the Son of God, then
 the rulers and priests of the Jews, excited with anger because they
 were rebuked by Him as sinners, and perverted by envy, because, while
 the multitude flocked to Him, they saw themselves despised and
 deserted, and (that which was the crowning point of their guilt)
 blinded by folly and error, and unmindful of the instructors sent from
 heaven, and of the prophets, they caballed against Him, and conceived
 the impious design of putting Him to death, and torturing Him: of which
 the prophets had long before written.

 For both David, in the beginning of his Psalms, foreseeing in spirit
 what a crime they were about to commit, says, [686] "Blessed is the man
 who hath not walked in the way of the ungodly; "and Solomon in the book
 of Wisdom used these words: [687] "Let us defraud the righteous, for he
 is unpleasant to us, and upbraideth us with our offences against the
 law. He maketh his boast that he has the knowledge of God; and he
 calleth himself the Son of God. He is made to reprove [688] our
 thoughts: it grieveth us even to look upon him: for his life is not
 like the life of others; his ways are of another fashion. [689] We are
 counted by him as triflers, [690] he withdraweth himself from our ways
 as from filthiness; he commendeth greatly [691] the latter end of the
 just, and boasteth that he has God for his Father. Let us see,
 therefore, if his words be true; let us prove what end [692] he shall
 have; let us examine him with rebukes and torments that we may know his
 meekness, [693] and prove his patience; let us condemn him to a
 shameful death. Such things have they imagined, and have gone astray.
 For their own folly hath blinded them, and they do not understand the
 mysteries [694] of God." Does he not describe that impious design
 entered into by the wicked against God, so that he clearly appears to
 have been present? But from Solomon, who foretold these things, to the
 time of their accomplishment, ten hundred and ten years intervened. We
 feign nothing; we add nothing. They who performed the actions had these
 accounts; they, against whom these things were spoken, read them. But
 even now the inheritors of their name and guilt have these accounts,
 and in their daily readings re-echo their own condemnation as foretold
 by the voice of the prophets; nor do they ever admit them into their
 heart, which is also itself a part of their condemnation. The Jews,
 therefore, being often reproved by Christ, who upbraided them with
 their sins and iniquities, and being almost deserted by the people,
 were stirred up to put Him to death.

 Now His humility emboldened them to this deed. For when they read with
 what great power and glory the Son of God was about to descend from
 heaven, but on the other hand saw Jesus humble, peaceful, of low
 condition, [695] without comeliness, they did not believe that He was
 the Son of God, being ignorant that two advents on His part were
 foretold by the prophets: the first, obscure in humility of the flesh;
 the other, manifest in the power of His majesty. Of the first David
 thus speaks in the seventy-first Psalm: [696] "He shall descend as rain
 upon a fleece; and in His days shall righteousness spring forth, and
 abundance of peace, as long as the moon is lifted up." For as rain, if
 it descends upon a fleece, cannot be perceived, because it makes no
 sound; so he said that Christ would come to the earth without exciting
 the notice [697] of any, that He might teach righteousness and peace.
 Isaiah also thus spoke: [698] "Lord, who hath believed our report? and
 to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? We made proclamation [699]
 before Him as children, and as a root in a thirsty land: He has no form
 nor glory; and we saw Him, and He had no form nor comeliness. But His
 form was without honour, and defective beyond the rest of men. He is a
 man acquainted [700] with grief, and knowing how to endure infirmity,
 because He turned [701] His face away from us; and He was not esteemed.
 He carries our sins, and He endures pain for us: and we thought that He
 Himself [702] was in pain, and grief, and vexation. But He was wounded
 for our transgressions, He was bruised [703] for our offences; the
 chastisement [704] of our peace was upon Him, by His bruises [705] we
 are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, and God hath delivered
 Him up for our sins." And in the same manner the Sibyl spoke: "Though
 an object of pity, dishonoured, without form, He will give hope to
 those who are objects of pity." On account of this humility they did
 not recognise their God, and entered into the detestable design of
 depriving Him of life, who had come to give them life.

 [684] The pagans upbraided Christians, that they worshipped a man who
 was put to d eath as a slave.

 [685] Suspiciunt, "view with admiration."

 [686] Ps. i. 1.

 [687] Wisd. ii. 12-22.

 [688] In traductionem cogitationum nostrarum. Traductio is sometimes
 used, as here, to denote exposure to ignominy.

 [689] Immutatæ sunt.

 [690] Nugaces. In the Greek it is eis kibdelon, as a counterfeit.

 [691] Præfert. The Greek has makari'zei, "deems happy."

 [692] Quæ ventura sunt illi.

 [693] Reverentiam.

 [694] Sacramenta Dei

 [695] Sordidum.

 [696] Ps. lxxii. 6, 7, quoted from the Septuagint,

 [697] Sine cujusquam suspicione.

 [698] Isa. liii. 1-6.

 [699] Annuntiavimus coram ipso sicut pueri; and so the Septuagint,
 anengei'lamen ena'ntion autou hos paidi'on. It is most difficult to
 account for this remarkable translation. The meaning of the passage is
 plain, that the Messiah would spring from an obscure source.
 [Elucidation III.]

 [700] Homo in plagâ positus. The Septuagint, anthropos en plegeo`n.

 [701] Aversus est. So also the Septuagint, ape'straptai to` pro'sopon
 autou. Some have supposed that there is a reference to lepers, who were
 compelled to cover their faces.

 [702] i.e., for Himself, as though He were bearing the punishment of
 His own sins.

 [703] Infirmatus est.

 [704] Doctrina pacis nostræ, "the correction."

 [705] Livore ejus nos sanati sumus. The word "livor" properly denotes
 the blackness arising from a bruise.

 Chap. XVII.--Of the Superstitions of the Jews, and Their Hatred Against
 Jesus.

 But they alleged other causes for their anger and envy, which they bore
 shut up [706] within in their hearts--namely, that He destroyed the
 obligation [707] of the law given by Moses; that is, that He did not
 rest [708] on the Sabbath, but laboured for the good [709] of men; that
 He abolished circumcision; that He took away the necessity of
 abstaining from the flesh of swine; [710] --in which things the
 mysteries of the Jewish religion consist. On this account, therefore,
 the rest of the people, who had not yet withdrawn [711] to Christ, were
 incited by the priests to regard Him as impious, because He destroyed
 the obligation of the law of God, though He did this not by His own
 judgment, but according to the will of God, and after the predictions
 of the prophets. For Micah announced that He would give a new law, in
 these terms: [712] "The law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the
 Lord from Jerusalem. And He shall judge among many people, and rebuke
 strong nations." [713] For the former law, which was given by Moses,
 was not given on Mount Zion, but on Mount Horeb; [714] and the Sibyl
 shows that it would come to pass that this law would be destroyed by
 the Son of God:--


 "But when all these things which I told you shall be accomplished, then
 all the law is fulfilled with respect to Him."

 But even Moses himself, by whom the law was given which they so
 tenaciously maintain, though they have fallen away from God, and have
 not acknowledged God, had foretold that it would come to pass that a
 very great prophet would be sent by God, who should be above the law,
 and be a bearer of the will of God to men. In Deuteronomy he thus left
 it written: [715] "And the Lord said unto me, I will raise them up a
 Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee; and I will put my
 word in His mouth, and He shall speak unto them all that I shall
 command Him. And whosoever will not hearken to those things which that
 Prophet shall speak in my name, I will require [716] it of him." The
 Lord evidently announced by the law-giver himself that He was about to
 send His own Son--that is, a law alive, and present [717] in person,
 and destroy that old law given by a mortal, [718] that by Him who was
 eternal He might ratify afresh a law which was eternal.

 In like manner, Isaiah [719] thus prophesied concerning the abolition
 of circumcision: "Thus saith the Lord to the men of Judah who dwell at
 Jerusalem, Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.
 Circumcise yourselves to the Lord your God, and take away the foreskins
 of your heart, lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none
 can quench it." Also Moses himself says: [720] "In the last days the
 Lord shall circumcise thine heart to love the Lord thy God." Also Jesus
 [721] the son of Nun, his successor, said: "And the Lord said unto
 Jesus, Make thee knives of flint very sharp, and sit and circumcise the
 children of Israel the second time." He said that this second
 circumcision would be not of the flesh, as the first was, which the
 Jews practice even now, but of the heart and spirit, which was
 delivered by Christ, who was the true Jesus. For the prophet does not
 say, "And the Lord said unto me," but "unto Jesus," that he might show
 that God was not speaking of him, but of Christ, to whom God was then
 speaking. For that Jesus represented [722] Christ: for when he was at
 first called Auses, [723] Moses, foreseeing the future, ordered that he
 should be called Jesus; that since he had been chosen as the leader of
 the warfare against Amalek, who was the enemy of the children of
 Israel, he might both subdue the adversary by the emblem [724] of the
 name, and lead the people into the land of promise. And for this reason
 he was also successor to Moses, to show that the new law given by
 Christ Jesus was about to succeed to the old law which was given by
 Moses. For that circumcision of the flesh is plainly irrational; since,
 if God had so willed it, He might so have formed man from the
 beginning, that he should be without a foreskin. But it was a figure of
 this second circumcision, signifying that the breast is to be laid
 bare; that is, that we ought to live with an open and simple heart,
 since that part of the body which is circumcised has a kind of
 resemblance to the heart, and is to be treated with reverence. On this
 account God ordered that it should be laid bare, that by this argument
 He might admonish us not to have our breast hidden [725] in obscurity;
 that is, not to veil any shameful deed within the secrets of
 conscience. This is the circumcision of the heart of which the prophets
 speak, which God transferred from the mortal flesh to the soul, which
 alone is about to endure. For being desirous of promoting our life and
 salvation in accordance with His own goodness, in that circumcision He
 hath set before us repentance, that if we lay open our hearts,--that is
 if we confess our sins and make satisfaction to God,--we shall obtain
 pardon, which is denied to those who are obstinate and conceal their
 faults, by Him who regards not the outward appearance, as man does, but
 the innermost secrets of the heart. [726]

 The forbidding of the flesh of swine also has the same intention; for
 when God commanded them to abstain from this, He willed that this
 should be especially understood, that they should abstain from sins and
 impurities. For this animal is filthy and unclean, [727] and never
 looks up to heaven, [728] but prostrates itself to the earth with its
 whole body and face: it is always the slave of its appetite and food;
 nor during its life can it afford any other service, as the other
 animals do, which either afford a vehicle for riding, [729] or aid in
 the cultivation of the fields, or draw waggons by their neck, or carry
 burthens on their back, or furnish a covering with their skins, [730]
 or abound with a supply of milk, or keep watch for guarding our houses.
 Therefore He forbade them to use the flesh of the pig for food, that
 is, not to imitate the life of swine, which are nourished only for
 death; lest, by devoting themselves to their appetite and pleasures,
 they should be useless for working righteousness, and should be visited
 with death. Also that they should not immerse themselves in foul lusts,
 as the sow, which wallows in the mire; [731] of that they do not serve
 earthly images, and thus defile themselves with mud: for they do bedaub
 themselves with mud who worship gods, that is, who worship mud and
 earth. Thus all the precepts of the Jewish law have for their object
 the setting forth of righteousness, since they are given in a
 mysterious [732] manner, that under the figure of carnal things those
 which are spiritual might be known.

 [706] Intus inclusam. Another reading is, "Intus inclusâ malitia," with
 malice shut up within.

 [707] Solveret, "He loosened or relaxed."

 [708] Non vacaret.

 [709] Operans in salutem hominum, "by healing diseases and doing good."

 [710] There is no mention of this in the Gospels.

 [711] Secesserat: "withdrawn themselves from the teaching of the
 scribes and Pharisees, and betaken themselves to Christ."

 [712] Mic. iv. 2, 3.

 [713] Some read, "evincet et deliget validas nationes;" but the reading
 "deliget" seems to have arisen from a corrupt reading of the
 Septuagint,--ekle'xei, "he shall choose," having been substituted for
 exelenxei, "he shall rebuke."

 [714] The scene of the giving of the law is sometimes spoken of as
 Horeb, as Ex. iii., and sometimes as Sinai, as Ex. xix. The difficulty
 of discriminating the two is very great. See Stanley's Sinai and
 Palestine [pp. 29, 32, 36-37, 40-42, etc. Robinson, vol. i. 177, 551.]

 [715] Deut. xviii. 17-19.

 [716] Ego vindicabo in eum.

 [717] Vivam præsentemque legem.

 [718] Another reading is, "per Moysen," by Moses.

 [719] The quotation is not from Isaiah, but from Jer. iv. 3, 4.

 [720] Deut. xxx. 6.

 [721] i.e., Joshua See Josh. v. 2.

 [722] "Figuram gerebat," typified, or set forth as in a figure.

 [723] i.e., Osee, Oshea, or Hoshea, as Joshua was first called. See
 Num. xiii. 8. [But note Num. xiii. 16. The change was significant. See
 Pearson On the Creed, art. ii. 125-128. Thus, "Jehovah-Saviour" =
 Jesus, and the change was prophetic of "the Name which is above every
 name." Compare Gen. xxxii. 29 and Phil. ii. 9, 10.]

 [724] Per figuram nominis. The name Jesus or Joshua signifies a
 deliverer or saviour. [Nay, more, Jehovah-Salvator, thus: Hoshea + Jah
 = Jehoshua = Joshua = Jesus.]

 [725] Involutum. Thus Seneca: "Non est tibi frons ficta, nec in alienam
 voluptatem sermo compositus, nec cor involutum."

 [726] 1 Sam. xvi. 7: "The Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh
 on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart."

 [727] Lutulentum (besmeared with mud) "et immundum." See 2 Pet. ii. 22.

 [728] ["The swine gorges his acorns, and never looks up to the tree
 from which they fall," as a parable of nature for swinish men.]

 [729] Sedendi vehiculum. "Sedeor" is sometimes used in this sense for
 riding.

 [730] Exuviis, used in the same sense as "pellibus."

 [731] Ingurgitat coeno, "plunges into the mire." ["Sus lota in
 volutabro luti." 2 Pet. ii. 22, Vulgate.]

 [732] Per figuram. [This Typology has never yet been fully or
 satisfactorily treated. Yet the volumes of Dr. Fairbairn (Typology of
 Scripture, Clarks, Edin.) ought to be known to every Bible student.]

 Chap. XVIII.--Of the Lord's Passion, and that It Was Foretold.

 When, therefore, Christ fulfilled these things which God would have
 done, and which He foretold many ages before by His prophets, incited
 by these things, and ignorant of the sacred Scriptures, they conspired
 together to condemn their God. And though He knew that this would come
 to pass, and repeatedly [733] said that He must suffer and be put to
 death for the salvation of many, nevertheless He withdrew Himself with
 His disciples, not that He might avoid that which it was necessary for
 Him to undergo and endure, but that He might show what ought to take
 place in every persecution, that no one should appear to have fallen
 into it through his own fault: and He announced that it would come to
 pass that He should be betrayed by one of them. And thus Judas, induced
 by a bribe, delivered up to the Jews the Son of God. But they took and
 brought Him before Pontius Pilate, who at that time was administering
 the province of Syria as governor, [734] and demanded that He should be
 crucified, though they laid nothing else to His charge except that He
 said that He was the Son of God, the King of the Jews; also His own
 saying, [735] "Destroy this temple, which was forty-six years in
 building, and in three days I will raise it up again without
 hands,"--signifying that His passion would shortly take place, and that
 He, having been put to death by the Jews, would rise again on the third
 day. For He Himself was the true temple of God. They inveighed against
 these expressions of His, as ill-omened and impious. And when Pilate
 had heard these things, and He said nothing in His own defence, he gave
 sentence that there appeared nothing deserving of condemnation in Him.
 But those most unjust accusers, together with the people whom they had
 stirred up, began to cry out, and with loud voices to demand His
 crucifixion.

 Then Pontius [736] was overpowered both by their outcries, and by the
 instigation of Herod the tetrarch, [737] who feared lest he should be
 deposed from his sovereignty. He did not, however, himself pass
 sentence, but delivered Him up to the Jews, that they themselves might
 judge Him according to their law. [738] Therefore they led Him away
 when He had been scourged with rods, and before they crucified Him they
 mocked Him; for they put upon Him a scarlet [739] robe, and a crown of
 thorns, and saluted Him as King, and gave Him gall for food, and
 mingled for Him vinegar to drink. After these things they spat upon His
 face, and struck Him with the palms of their hands; and when the
 executioners [740] themselves contended about His garments, they cast
 lots among themselves for His tunic and mantle. [741] And while all
 these things were doing, He uttered no voice from His mouth, as though
 He were dumb. Then they lifted Him up in the midst between two
 malefactors, who had been condemned for robbery, and fixed Him to the
 cross. What can I here deplore in so great a crime? or in what words
 can I lament such great wickedness? For we are not relating the
 crucifixion of Gavius, [742] which Marcus Tullius followed up with all
 the spirit and strength of his eloquence, pouring forth as it were the
 fountains of all his genius, proclaiming that it was an unworthy deed
 that a Roman citizen should be crucified in violation of all laws. And
 although He was innocent, and undeserving of that punishment, yet He
 was put to death, and that, too, by an impious man, who was ignorant of
 justice. What shall I say respecting the indignity of this cross, on
 which the Son of God was suspended and nailed? [743] Who will be found
 so eloquent, and supplied with so great an abundance of deeds and
 words, what speech flowing with such copious exuberance, [744] as to
 lament in a befitting manner that cross, which the world itself, and
 all the elements of the world, bewailed?

 But that these things were thus about to happen, was announced both by
 the utterances of the prophets and by the predictions of the Sibyls. In
 Isaiah it is found thus written: [745] "I am not rebellious, nor do I
 oppose: I gave my back to the scourge, and my cheeks to the hand: [746]
 I turned not away my face from the foulness of spitting." In like
 manner David, in the thirty-fourth Psalm: [747] "The abjects [748] were
 gathered together against me, [749] and they knew me not: [750] they
 were dispersed, nor did they feel remorse; they tempted me, and greatly
 [751] derided me; and they gnashed upon me with their teeth." The Sibyl
 also showed that the same things would happen:--


 "He shall afterwards come into the hands of the unjust and the
 faithless; and they shall inflict on God blows with impure hands, and
 with polluted mouths they shall send forth poisonous spittle; and He
 shall then absolutely [752] give His holy back to stripes."

 Likewise respecting His silence, which He perseveringly maintained even
 to His death, Isaiah thus spoke again: [753] "He was led as a sheep to
 the slaughter; and as a lamb before the shearer is dumb, so He opened
 not His mouth." And the above-mentioned Sibyl said:--


 "And being beaten, He shall be silent, lest any one should know what
 the Word is, or whence it came, that it may speak with mortals; and He
 shall wear the crown of thorns."

 But respecting the food and the drink which they offered to Him before
 they fastened Him to the cross, David thus speaks in the sixty-eighth
 Psalm: [754] "And they gave me gall for my meat; and in my thirst they
 gave me vinegar to drink." The Sibyl foretold that this also would
 happen:--


 "They gave me gall for my food, and for my thirst vinegar; this
 inhospitable table they will show."

 And another Sibyl rebukes the land of Judæa in these verses:--


 "For you, entertaining hurtful thoughts, did not recognise your God
 sporting [755] with mortal thoughts; but crowned Him with a crown of
 thorns, and mingled dreadful gall."

 Now, that it would come to pass that the Jews would lay hands upon
 their God, and put Him to death, these testimonies of the prophets
 foretold. In Esdras it is thus written: [756] "And Ezra said to the
 people, This passover is our Saviour and our refuge. Consider and let
 it come into your heart, that we have to abase Him in a figure; and
 after these things we will hope in Him, lest this place be deserted for
 ever, saith the Lord God of hosts. If you will not believe Him, nor
 hear His announcement, ye shall be a derision among the nations." From
 which it appears that the Jews had no other hope, unless they purified
 themselves from blood, and put their hopes in that very person whom
 they denied. [757] Isaiah also points out their deed, and says: [758]
 "In His humiliation His judgment was taken away. Who shall declare His
 generation? for His life shall be taken away from the earth; from the
 transgressions of my people He was led away to death. And I will give
 Him the wicked for His burial, and the rich for His death, because He
 did no wickedness, nor spoke guile with His mouth. Wherefore He shall
 obtain [759] many, and shall divide the spoils of the strong; because
 He was delivered up to death, and was reckoned among the transgressors;
 and He bore the sins of many, and was delivered up on account of their
 transgressions." David also, in the ninety-third Psalm: [760] "They
 will hunt after the soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent
 blood; and the Lord is become my refuge." Also Jeremiah: [761] "Lord,
 declare it unto me, and I shall know. Then I saw their devices; I was
 led as an innocent [762] lamb to the sacrifice; [763] they meditated a
 plan against me, saying, Come, let us send wood into his bread, [764]
 and let us sweep away his life from the earth, and his name shall no
 more be remembered." Now the wood [765] signifies the cross, and the
 bread His body; for He Himself is the food and the life of all who
 believe in the flesh which He bare, and on the cross upon which He was
 suspended.

 Respecting this, however, Moses himself more plainly spoke to this
 effect, in Deuteronomy: [766] "And Thy life shall hang [767] before
 Thine eyes; and Thou shall fear day and night, and shalt have no
 assurance of Thy life." And the same again in Numbers: [768] "God is
 not in doubt as a man, nor does He suffer threats [769] as the son of
 man." Zechariah also thus wrote: [770] "And they shall look on me, whom
 they pierced." Also David in the twenty-first Psalm: [771] "They
 pierced my hands and my feet; they numbered all my bones; they
 themselves looked and stared upon me; they divided my garments among
 them; and upon my vesture they did cast lots." It is evident that the
 prophet did not speak these things concerning himself. For he was a
 king, and never endured these sufferings; but the Spirit of God, who
 was about to suffer these things, after ten hundred and fifty years,
 spoke by him. For this is the number of years from the reign of David
 to the crucifixion of Christ. But Solomon also, his son, who built
 Jerusalem, prophesied that this very city would perish in revenge for
 the sacred cross: [772] "But if ye turn away from me, saith the Lord,
 and will not keep my truth, I will drive Israel from the land which I
 have given them; and this house which I have built for them in my name,
 I will cast it out from all: [773] and Israel shall be for perdition
 [774] and a reproach to the people; and this house shall be desolate,
 and every one that shall pass by it shall be astonished, and shall say,
 Why hath God done these evils to this land and to this house? And they
 shall say, Because they forsook the Lord their God, and persecuted
 their King most beloved by God, and crucified Him with great
 degradation, [775] therefore hath God brought upon them these evils."

 [733] Subinde, "from time to time."

 [734] Legatus. This title was given, in the time of the Roman emperors,
 to the governors sent by them into the provinces. Pontius Pilate was
 procurator of Judæa, which was not a separate province, but a
 dependency of the province of Syria, which was at this time governed by
 Silanus.

 [735] John ii. 19, 20. The forty-six years spoken of were not occupied
 with the rebuilding of the temple, which was completed in nine years,
 but with the additional works which Herod the Great and his successors
 were continually carrying on for the adorning and beautifying of the
 temple. See Prideaux. [I regret the loose references of the translator,
 and yet more that the inexorable demands of the press give me time to
 supply only the more important ones. See Connections, book ix. vol. ii.
 p. 394.]

 [736] [It is probable, that, owing to the perpetual and universal
 recitation of the Creed, this unhappy name has been more frequently
 uttered and recalled to human memory than that of any other human
 being.]

 [737] Herod Antipas the tetrarch of Galilee. According to St. Luke
 (xxiii. 15), Herod agreed with Pilate in declaring the innocency of
 Jesus.

 [738] This statement requires some modification. Pilate did indeed say
 to the Jews, "Take ye Him, and judge Him according to your law;" but
 they declared that it was not lawful for them to put any man to death.
 The punishment was entirely Roman, the mode of death Roman, the
 executioners Roman soldiers. There were two distinct trials,--one
 before the Jewish Sanhedrim on a charge of impiety, the other before
 the Roman governor on a charge of treason.

 [739] Punicei coloris. The colour was a kind of red, not purple. [It
 was mixed with blue, so as to be at once purple and in some reflections
 scarlet.]

 [740] The quaternion of Roman soldiers who carried out the execution.

 [741] De tunicâ et pallio. The "tunica" was the inner garment, the
 "pallium" a mantle or cloak. Thus the proverbial phrase, "tunica
 proprior pallio." [Vol. iv. p. 13, [58]Elucidation I., this series.]

 [742] Gavius was crucified by Verres. [In Verrem, act ii. cap. 62. This
 event providentially illustrated the extreme wickedness of what was
 done to our Lord, but so quickened the Roman conscience that it
 prevented like injustice to St. Paul, although a Roman citizen, over
 and over again. Acts xvi. 37, 38, and xxii. 24, 25.]

 [743] Suffixus.

 [744] Tantæ affluentiæ ubertate. [Compare Cicero (ut supra): Crux,
 crux! inquam infelici et ærumnoso, qui nunquam istam potestatem viderat
 comparabatur.]

 [745] Isa. l. 5, 6, quoted from the Septuagint.

 [746] i.e., of the smiters; Gr. eis rapi'smata, "blows with the hand."

 [747] Ps. xxxv. 15, 16. The quotation is from the Septuagint, and
 differs widely from the authorized English version.

 [748] Flagella, said to be used for men deserving the scourge; wicked
 men.

 [749] Super me, "over me."

 [750] Ignoraverunt. Others read "ignoravi," I knew it not.

 [751] Deriserunt me derisu. So the Greek, exemukterisan me mukterismon

 [752] haplos.

 [753] Isa. liii. 7.

 [754] Ps. lxix. 21.

 [755] paizonta. Another reading is ptai'onta, which would imply that
 they regarded Christ as a transgressor.

 [756] Justin Martyr quotes this passage in his Dialogue with Trypho,
 and complains that it had been expunged by the Jews. [See vol. i.
 [59]p. 234, and remarks of Bishop Kaye, Justin Martyr, p. 44, on
 passages suppressed by the Jews.]

 [757] Negaverunt. Another reading is "necaverunt," they put to death.

 [758] Isa. liii. 8-10, 12. The quotation is made from the Septuagint.

 [759] Consequetur. In the Greek, kleronome'sei, "shall inherit."

 [760] Ps. xciv. 21, 22.

 [761] Jer. xi. 18, 19, quoted from the Septuagint.

 [762] Sine malitiâ. Another reading is "sine maculâ," without spot.

 [763] Ad victimam.

 [764] For the various explanations, see Pole's Synopsis Some suppose
 that there is a reference to the corruption of food by poisonous wood;
 others that the meaning is a substitution of wood for bread. Another
 explanation is, that the word translated bread denotes fruit, as in the
 English authorized version, "Let us destroy the tree, with the fruit
 thereof." But see Pole on the passage. [Jer xi. 19. Here is a very
 insufficient note, the typology of Scripture not being duly observed.
 Compare Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 166, especially at [60]note 10, which
 illustrates the uniform spirit of the Fathers in dealing with the Jews.
 And note Bishop Kaye's remark, vol. ii. p. 206, [61]note 5, this
 series.]

 [765] This explanation appears altogether fanciful and unwarranted.

 [766] Deut. xxviii. 66.

 [767] So the Septuagint. The English authorized version appears
 accurately to express the idea intended to be conveyed: "Thy life shall
 hang in doubt before Thee."

 [768] The idea is that God is not in doubt, as a man, as to His
 conduct, nor is He liable to change His mind, or to be influenced by
 threats or in any other way.

 [769] Minas patitur.

 [770] Zech. xii. 10.

 [771] Ps. xxii. 16-18. [Compare vol. i. p. 176, [62]note 4, this
 series.]

 [772] 1 Kings ix. 6-9, with some additions and omissions; and 1 Chron.
 vii. 19-22.

 [773] Ex omnibus. The English authorized version has, "out of my
 sight."

 [774] In perditionem et improperium.

 [775] This is not taken from the passages cited, nor from the Old
 Testament.


 Chap. XIX.--Of the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Jesus; And the
 Predictions of These Events.

 What more can now be said respecting the crime of the Jews, than that
 they were then blinded and seized with incurable madness, who read
 these things daily, and yet neither understood them, nor were able to
 be on their guard so as not to do them? Therefore, being lifted up and
 nailed to the cross, He cried to the Lord with a loud voice, and of His
 own accord gave up His spirit. And at the same hour there was an
 earthquake; and the veil of the temple, which separated the two
 tabernacles, was rent into two parts; and the sun suddenly withdrew its
 light, and there was darkness from the sixth [776] even to the ninth
 hour. Of which event the prophet Amos testifies: [777] "And it shall
 come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that the sun shall go down at
 noon, and the daylight shall be darkened; and I will turn your feasts
 into mourning, and your songs into lamentation." Also Jeremiah: [778]
 "She who brings forth is affrighted, and vexed in spirit; her sun is
 gone down while it was yet mid-day; she hath been ashamed and
 confounded; [779] and the residue of them will I give to the sword in
 the sight of their enemies." And the Sibyl:--


 "And the veil of the temple shall be rent, and at midday there shall be
 dark vast night for three hours,"

 When these things were done, even by the heavenly prodigies, they were
 not able to understand their crime.

 But since He had foretold that on the third day He should rise again
 from the dead, fearing lest, the body having been stolen by the
 disciples, and removed, all should believe that He had risen, and there
 should be a much greater disturbance among the people, they took Him
 down from the cross, and having shut Him up in a tomb, they securely
 surrounded it with a guard of soldiers. But on the third day, before
 light, there was an earthquake, and the sepulchre was suddenly opened;
 and the guard, who were astonished and stupefied with fear, seeing
 nothing, He came forth uninjured and alive from the sepulchre, and went
 into Galilee to seek His disciples: but nothing was found in the
 sepulchre except the grave-clothes in which they had enclosed and wrapt
 His body. Now, that He would not remain in hell, [780] but rise again
 on the third day, had been foretold by the prophets. David says, in the
 fifteenth Psalm: [781] "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither
 wilt Thou suffer Thine holy one to see corruption." Also in the third
 Psalm: [782] "I laid me down to sleep, and took my rest, and rose
 again, for the Lord sustained me." Hosea also, the first of the twelve
 prophets, testified of His resurrection: [783] "This my Son is wise,
 therefore He will not remain in the anguish of His sons: and I will
 redeem Him from the power [784] of the grave. Where is thy judgment, O
 death? or where is thy sting?" The same also in another place: [785]
 "After two days, He will revive us in the third day." And therefore the
 Sibyl said, that after three days' sleep he would put an end to
 death:--


 "And after sleeping three days, He shall put an end to the fate of
 death; and then, releasing Himself from the dead, He shall come to
 light, first showing to the called ones the beginning of the
 resurrection."

 For He gained life for us by overcoming death. No hope, therefore, of
 gaining immortality is given to man, unless he shall believe on Him,
 and shall take up that cross to be borne and endured.

 [776] i.e., from noon. [Elucidation IV.]

 [777] Amos viii. 9, 10.

 [778] Jer. xv. 9.

 [779] Confusa est et maledicta.

 [780] i.e., Hades, the place of departed spirits.

 [781] Ps. xvi. 10.

 [782] Ps. iii. 5.

 [783] Hos. xiii. 13, 14.

 [784] De manu inferorum.

 [785] Hos. vi. 2.

 Chap. XX.--Of the Departure of Jesus into Galilee After His Resurrection;
 And of the Two Testaments, the Old and the New.

 Therefore He went into Galilee, for He was unwilling to show Himself to
 the Jews, lest He should lead them to repentance, and restore them from
 their impiety to a sound mind. [786] And there He opened to His
 disciples again assembled the writings of Holy Scripture, that is, the
 secrets of the prophets; which before His suffering could by no means
 be understood, for they told of Him and of His passion. Therefore
 Moses, and the prophets also themselves, call the law which was given
 to the Jews a testament: for unless the testator shall have died, a
 testament cannot be confirmed; nor can that which is written in it be
 known, because it is closed and sealed. And thus, unless Christ had
 undergone death, the testament could not have been opened; that is, the
 mystery of God could not have been unveiled [787] and understood.

 But all Scripture is divided into two Testaments. That which preceded
 the advent and passion of Christ--that is, the law and the prophets--is
 called the Old; but those things which were written after His
 resurrection are named the New Testament. The Jews make use of the Old,
 we of the New: but yet they are not discordant, for the New is the
 fulfilling of the Old, and in both there is the same testator, even
 Christ, who, having suffered death for us, made us heirs of His
 everlasting kingdom, the people of the Jews being deprived and
 disinherited. [788] As the prophet Jeremiah testifies when he speaks
 such things: [789] "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will
 make a new testament [790] to the house of Israel and the house of
 Judah, not according to the testament which I made to their fathers, in
 the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of
 Egypt; for they continued not in my testament, and I disregarded [791]
 them, saith the Lord." Also in another place he says in like manner:
 [792] "I have forsaken my house, I have given up mine heritage into the
 hand of its enemies. Mine heritage is become unto me as a lion in the
 forest; it hath cried out against me, therefore have I hated it." Since
 the inheritance is His heavenly kingdom, it is evident that He does not
 say that He hates the inheritance itself, but the heirs, who have been
 ungrateful towards Him, and impious. Mine heritage, he says, is become
 unto me as a lion; that is, I am become a prey and a devouring to my
 heirs, who have slain me as the flock. It hath cried out against me;
 that is, they have pronounced against me the sentence of death and the
 cross. For that which He said above, that He would make [793] a new
 testament to the house of Judah, shows that the old testament which was
 given by Moses was not perfect; [794] but that that which was to be
 given by Christ would be complete. But it is plain that the house of
 Judah does not signify the Jews, whom He casts off, but us, who have
 been called by Him out of the Gentiles, and have by adoption succeeded
 to their place, and are called sons [795] of the Jews, which the Sibyl
 declares when she says:--


 "The divine race of the blessed, heavenly Jews."

 But what that race was about to be, Isaiah teaches, in whose book the
 Most High Father addresses His Son: [796] "I the Lord God have called
 Thee in righteousness, and will hold Thine hand, and will keep Thee:
 [797] and I have given Thee for a covenant of my race, [798] for a
 light of the Gentiles; to open the eyes of the blind, to bring out the
 prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
 prison-house." When, therefore, we who were in time past as it were
 blind, and as it were shut up in the prison of folly, were sitting in
 darkness, ignorant of God and of the truth, we have been enlightened by
 Him, who adopted us by His testament; and having freed us from cruel
 chains, and brought us out to the light of wisdom, He admitted us to
 the inheritance of His heavenly kingdom.

 [786] [A very feeble exposition of Luke xix. 42, 44.]

 [787] Revelari, to be laid bare, uncovered, brought to light.

 [788] Abdicato et exhæredato. The two expressions are joined together,
 to give strength. "Abdicati" were sons deprived of a share in their
 father's possessions during his life; "exhæredati," disinherited, those
 who have forfeited the right of succession after their father's death.

 [789] Jer. xxxi. 31, 32.

 [790] Or rather "covenant," diathe'ke, for this signification is much
 more in accordance with the general meaning of the passage.

 [791] Neglexi; Gr. heme'lesa.

 [792] Jer. xii. 7, 8.

 [793] Consummaturum, "would complete," "make perfect," as in the next
 clause.

 [794] See Heb. viii. 13, "In that He saith, a new covenant, He hath
 made the first old."

 [795] St. John's testimony is more distinct, i. 12: "But as many as
 received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to
 them that believe on His name."

 [796] Isa. xlii. 6, 7.

 [797] Confirmabo te, "will strengthen Thee."

 [798] In testamentum generis mei. The word here rendered "covenant" is
 the same (testamentum) as that translated in other places "testament,"
 which does not supply the sense here required. The attempt to give the
 meaning "testament" in all places causes much confusion, as in this
 passage.

 Chap. XXI.--Of the Ascension of Jesus, and the Foretelling of It; And of the
 Preaching and Actions of the Disciples.

 But when He had made arrangements with His disciples for the preaching
 of the Gospel and His name, a cloud suddenly surrounded Him, and
 carried Him up into heaven, on the fortieth day after His passion, as
 Daniel had shown that it would be, saying: [799] "And, behold, one like
 the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient
 of days." But the disciples, being dispersed through the provinces,
 everywhere laid the foundations of the Church, themselves also in the
 name of their divine [800] Master doing many and almost incredible
 miracles; for at His departure He had endowed them with power and
 strength, by which the system [801] of their new announcement might be
 founded and confirmed. But He also opened to them all things which were
 about to happen, which Peter and Paul preached at Rome; and this
 preaching being written for the sake of remembrance, [802] became
 permanent, in which they both declared other wonderful things, and also
 said that it was about to come to pass, that after a short time God
 would send against them a king who would subdue [803] the Jews, and
 level their cities to the ground, and besiege the people themselves,
 worn out with hunger and thirst. Then it should come to pass that they
 should feed on the bodies of their own children, and consume one
 another. Lastly, that they should be taken captive, and come into the
 hands of their enemies, and should see their wives most cruelly
 harassed before their eyes, their virgins ravished and polluted, their
 sons torn in pieces, their little ones dashed to the ground; and
 lastly, everything laid waste with fire and sword, the captives
 banished for ever from their own lands, because they had exulted over
 the well-beloved and most approved Son of God. And so, after their
 decease, when Nero had put them to death, Vespasian destroyed the name
 and nation of the Jews, and did all things which they had foretold as
 about to come to pass.

 [799] Dan. vii. 13.

 [800] Magistri Dei.

 [801] i.e., the new doctrine which they announced.

 [802] In memoriam scripta. This is said to have been the title of a
 spurious book now lost.

 [803] Expugnaret. The word properly signifies to take by storm.

 Chap. XXII.--Arguments of Unbelievers Against the Incarnation of Jesus.

 I have now confirmed, as I imagine, the things which are thought false
 and incredible by those who are not instructed in the true knowledge of
 heavenly learning. But, however, that we may refute those also who are
 too wise, not without injury to themselves, and who detract from the
 credit due to divine things, let us disprove their error, that they may
 at length perceive that the fact ought to have been as we show that it
 actually was. And although with good judges either testimonies are of
 sufficient weight without arguments, or arguments without testimonies,
 we, however, are not content with the one or the other, since we are
 supplied with both, that we may not leave room for any one of depraved
 ingenuity either to misunderstand or to dispute on the opposite side.
 They say that it was impossible for anything to be withdrawn [804] from
 an immortal nature. They say, in short, that it was unworthy of God to
 be willing to become man, and to burthen Himself with the infirmity of
 flesh; to become subject of His own accord to sufferings, to pain, and
 death: as though it had not been easy for Him to show Himself to men
 without [805] the weakness incident to a body, and to teach them
 righteousness (if He so wished) with greater authority, as of one who
 acknowledged [806] Himself to be God. For in that case all would have
 obeyed the heavenly precepts, if the influence and power of God
 enjoining them had been united with them. Why, then (they say), did He
 not come as God to teach men? why did He render Himself so humble and
 weak, that it was possible for Him both to be despised by men and to be
 visited with punishment? why did He suffer violence from those who are
 weak and mortal? why did He not repel by strength, or avoid by His
 divine knowledge, [807] the hands of men? why did He not at least in
 His very death reveal His majesty? but He was led as one without
 strength to trial, was condemned as one who was guilty, was put to
 death as one who was mortal. I will carefully refute these things, nor
 will I permit any one to be in error. For these things were done by a
 great and wonderful plan; and he who shall understand this, will not
 only cease to wonder that God was tortured by men, but also will easily
 see that it could not have been believed that he was God if those very
 things which he censures had not been done.

 [804] Ut naturæ immortali quidquam decederet.

 [805] Citra.

 [806] Professi Dei. The expression denotes one who shows himself in his
 real character, without any veiling or concealment. There is another
 reading--"professi Deum."

 [807] Divinitate.

 Chap. XXIII.--Of Giving Precepts, and Acting.

 If any one gives to men precepts for living, and moulds the characters
 of others, I ask whether he is bound himself to practice the things
 which he enjoins, or is not bound. If he shall not do so, his precepts
 are annulled. For if the things which are enjoined are good, if they
 place the life of men in the best condition, the instructor ought not
 to separate himself from the number and assemblage of men among whom he
 acts; and he ought himself to live in the same manner in which he
 teaches that men ought to live, lest, by living in another way, he
 himself should disparage [808] his own precepts, and make his
 instruction of less value, if in reality he should relax the
 obligations of that which he endeavours to establish by his words. For
 every one, when he hears another giving precepts, is unwilling that the
 necessity of obeying should be imposed upon him, as though the right of
 liberty were taken from him. Therefore he answers his teacher in this
 manner: I am not able to do the things which you command, for they are
 impossible. For you forbid me to be angry, you forbid me to covet, you
 forbid me to be excited by desire, you forbid me to fear pain or death;
 but this is so contrary to nature, that all animals are subject to
 these affections. Or if you are so entirely of opinion that it is
 possible to resist nature, do you yourself practice the things which
 you enjoin, that I may know that they are possible? But since you
 yourself do not practice them, what arrogance is it, to wish to impose
 upon a free man laws which you yourself do not obey! You who teach,
 first learn; and before you correct the character of others, correct
 your own. Who could deny the justice of this answer? Nay! a teacher of
 this kind will fall into contempt, and will in his turn be mocked,
 because he also will appear to mock others.

 What, therefore, will that instructor do, if these things shall be
 objected to him? how will he deprive the self-willed [809] of an
 excuse, unless he teach them by deeds before their eyes [810] that he
 teaches things which are possible? Whence it comes to pass, that no one
 obeys the precepts of the philosophers. [811] For men prefer examples
 rather than words, because it is easy to speak, but difficult to
 accomplish. [812] Would to heaven that there were as many who acted
 well as there are who speak well! But they who give precepts, without
 carrying them out into action, are distrusted; [813] and if they shall
 be men, will be despised as inconsistent: [814] if it shall be God, He
 will be met with the excuse of the frailty of man's nature. It remains
 that words should be confirmed by deeds, which the philosophers are
 unable to do. Therefore, since the instructors themselves are overcome
 by the affections which they say that it is our duty to overcome, they
 are able to train no one to virtue, which they falsely proclaim; [815]
 and for this cause they imagine that no perfect wise man has as yet
 existed, that is, in whom the greatest virtue and perfect justice were
 in harmony with the greatest learning and knowledge. And this indeed
 was true. For no one since the creation of the world has been such,
 except Christ, who both delivered wisdom by His word, and confirmed His
 teaching by presenting virtue to the eyes of men. [816]

 [808] Ipse præceptis suis fidem detrahat.

 [809] Contumacibus.

 [810] Præsentibus factis.

 [811] [See Augustine, quoted in elucidation, vol. vi. [63]p. 541.]

 [812] Præstare.

 [813] Abest ab iis fides.

 [814] Leves.

 [815] [What neither Platonists nor Censors, in their judgments, could
 effect by their sophia, the crucified Jesus has done by His Gospel. The
 impotence of philosophers as compared with the Carpenter's Son, to
 change the morals of nations, cannot be gainsaid. See Young's Christ of
 History ]

 [816] Præsenti virtute.

 Chap. XXIV.--The Overthrowing of the Arguments Above Urged by Way of
 Objection.

 Come, let us now consider whether a teacher sent from heaven can fail
 to be perfect. I do not as yet speak of Him whom they deny to have come
 from God. Let us suppose that some one were to be sent from heaven to
 instruct the life of men in the first principles of virtue, and to form
 them to righteousness. No one can doubt but that this teacher, who is
 sent from heaven, would be as perfect in the knowledge of all things as
 in virtue, lest there should be no difference between a heavenly and an
 earthly teacher. For in the case of a man his instruction can by no
 means be from within and of himself. [817] For the mind, shut in by
 earthly organs, and hindered by a corrupt [818] body, of itself can
 neither comprehend nor receive the truth, unless it is taught from
 another source. [819] And if it had this power in the greatest degree,
 yet it would be unable to attain to the highest virtue, and to resist
 all vices, the materials of which are contained in our bodily [820]
 organs. Hence it comes to pass, that an earthly teacher cannot be
 perfect. But a teacher from heaven, to whom His divine nature gives
 knowledge, and His immortality gives virtue, must of necessity in His
 teaching also, as in other things, be perfect and complete. But this
 cannot by any means happen, unless He should take to Himself a mortal
 body. And the reason why it cannot happen is manifest. For if He should
 come to men as God, not to mention that mortal eyes cannot look upon
 and endure the glory of His majesty in His own person, assuredly God
 will not be able to teach virtue; for, inasmuch as He is without a
 body, He will not practice the things which He will teach, and through
 this His teaching will not be perfect. Otherwise, if it is the greatest
 virtue patiently to endure pain for the sake of righteousness and duty,
 if it is virtue not to fear death itself when threatened, and when
 inflicted to undergo it with fortitude; it follows that the perfect
 teacher ought both to teach these things by precept, and to confirm
 them by practice. For he who gives precepts for the life, ought to
 remove every method [821] of excuse, that he may impose upon men the
 necessity of obedience, not by any constraint, but by a sense of shame,
 and yet may leave them liberty, that a reward may be appointed for
 those who obey, because it was in their power not to obey if they so
 wished; and a punishment for those who do not obey, because it was in
 their power to obey if they so wished. How then can excuse be removed,
 unless the teacher should practice what he teaches, and as it were go
 before [822] and hold out his hand to one who is about to follow? But
 how can one practice what he teaches, unless he is like him whom he
 teaches? For if he be subject to no passion, a man may thus answer him
 who is the teacher: It is my wish not to sin, but I am overpowered; for
 I am clothed with frail and weak flesh: it is this which covets, which
 is angry, which fears pain and death. And thus I am led on against my
 will; [823] and I sin, not because it is my wish, but because I am
 compelled. I myself perceive that I sin; but the necessity imposed by
 my frailty, which I am unable to resist, impels me. What will that
 teacher of righteousness say in reply to these things? How will he
 refute and convict a man who shall allege the frailty of the flesh as
 an excuse for his faults, unless he himself also shall be clothed with
 flesh, so that he may show that even the flesh is capable of virtue?
 For obstinacy cannot be refuted except by example. For the things which
 you teach cannot have any weight unless you shall be the first to
 practice them; because the nature of men is inclined to faults, and
 wishes to sin not only with indulgence, but also with a reasonable
 plea. [824] It is befitting that a master and teacher of virtue should
 most closely resemble man, that by overpowering sin he may teach man
 that sin may be overpowered by him. But if he is immortal, he can by no
 means propose an example to man. For there will stand forth some one
 persevering in his opinion, and will say: You indeed do not sin,
 because you are free from this body; you do not covet, because nothing
 is needed by an immortal; but I have need of many things for the
 support of this life. You do not fear death, because it can have no
 power against you. You despise pain, because you can suffer no
 violence. But I, a mortal, fear both, because they bring upon me the
 severest tortures, which the weakness of the flesh cannot endure. A
 teacher of virtue therefore ought to have taken away this excuse from
 men, that no one may ascribe it to necessity that he sins, rather than
 to his own fault. Therefore, that a teacher may be perfect, no
 objection ought to be brought forward by him who is to be taught, so
 that if he should happen to say, You enjoin impossibilities; the
 teacher may answer, See, I myself do them. But I am clothed with flesh,
 and it is the property of flesh to sin. [825] I too bear the same
 flesh, and yet sin does not bear rule in me. It is difficult for me to
 despise riches, because otherwise I am unable to live in this body.
 See, I too have a body, and yet I contend against every desire. I am
 not able to bear pain or death for righteousness, because I am frail.
 See, pain and death have power over me also; and I overcome those very
 things which you fear, that I may make you victorious over pain and
 death. I go before you through those things which you allege that it is
 impossible to endure: if you are not able to follow me giving
 directions, follow me going before you. In this way all excuse is taken
 away, and you must confess that man is unjust through his own fault,
 since he does not follow a teacher of virtue, who is at the same time a
 guide. You see, therefore, how much more perfect is a teacher who is
 mortal, because he is able to be a guide to one who is mortal, than one
 who is immortal, for he is unable to teach patient endurance who is not
 subject to passions. Nor, however, does this extend so far that I
 prefer man to God; but to show that man cannot be a perfect teacher
 unless he is also God, that he may by his heavenly authority impose
 upon men the necessity of obedience; nor God, unless he is clothed with
 a mortal body, that by carrying out his precepts to their completion
 [826] in actions, he may bind others by the necessity of obedience. It
 plainly therefore appears, that he who is a guide of life and teacher
 of righteousness must have a body, and that his teaching cannot
 otherwise be full and perfect, unless it has a root and foundation, and
 remains firm and fixed among men; and that he himself must undergo
 weakness of flesh and body, and display in himself [827] the virtue of
 which he is a teacher, that he may teach it at the same time both by
 words and deeds. Also, he must be subject to death and all sufferings,
 since the duties of virtue are occupied with the enduring of suffering,
 and the undergoing death; all which, as I have said, a perfect teacher
 ought to endure, that he may teach the possibility of their being
 endured.

 [817] Propria.

 [818] Tabe corporis.

 [819] Thus our Lord tells us that flesh and blood cannot reveal to us
 mysteries.

 [820] Visceribus.

 [821] Omnium excusationum vias. [Here is the defect of Cicero's
 philosophy. See William Wilberforce, Practical Christianity, p. 25, ed.
 London, 1815.]

 [822] Prævius.

 [823] Thus St. Paul complains, Rom. vii. 15: "What I would, that do I
 not; but what I hate, that do I;" and ver. 21, "I find then a law that
 when I would do good, evil is present with me." But (viii. 3) he says,
 "What the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God,
 sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, condemned sin in
 the flesh."

 [824] Cum ratione.

 [825] This is urged as an excuse by him to whom the precept is
 addressed. In this and the following sentences there is a dialogue
 between the teacher and the taught.

 [826] Præcepta sua factis adimplendo.

 [827] Virtutem in se recipere.

 Chap. XXV.--Of the Advent of Jesus in the Flesh and Spirit, that He Might Be
 Mediator Between God and Man.

 Let men therefore learn and understand why the Most High God, when He
 sent His ambassador and messenger to instruct mortals with the precepts
 of His righteousness, willed that He should be clothed with mortal
 flesh, and be afflicted with torture, and be sentenced to death. For
 since there was no righteousness on earth, He sent a teacher, as it
 were a living law, to found a new name and temple, [828] that by His
 words and example He might spread throughout the earth a true and holy
 worship. But, however, that it might be certain that He was sent by
 God, it was befitting that He should not be born as man is born,
 composed of a mortal on both sides; [829] but that it might appear that
 He was heavenly even in the form of man, He was born without the office
 of a father. For He had a spiritual Father, God; and as God was the
 Father of His spirit without a mother, so a virgin was the mother of
 His body without a father. He was therefore both God and man, being
 placed in the middle between God and man. From which the Greeks call
 Him Mesites, [830] that He might be able to lead man to God--that is,
 to immortality: for if He had been God only (as we have before said),
 He would not have been able to afford to man examples of goodness; if
 He had been man only, He would not have been able to compel men to
 righteousness, unless there had been added an authority and virtue
 greater than that of man.

 For, since man is composed of flesh and spirit, and the spirit must
 earn [831] immortality by works of righteousness, the flesh, since it
 is earthly, and therefore mortal, draws with itself the spirit linked
 to it, and leads it from immortality to death. Therefore the spirit,
 apart from the flesh, could by no means be a guide to immortality for
 man, since the flesh hinders the spirit from following God. For it is
 frail, and liable to sin; but sin is the food and nourishment [832] of
 death. For this cause, therefore, a mediator came--that is, God in the
 flesh--that the flesh might be able to follow Him, and that He might
 rescue man from death, which has dominion over the flesh. Therefore He
 clothed Himself with flesh, that the desires of the flesh being
 subdued, He might teach that to sin was not the result of necessity,
 but of man's purpose and will. For we have one great and principal
 struggle to maintain with the flesh, the boundless desires of which
 press upon the soul, nor allow it to retain dominion, but make it the
 slave of pleasures and sweet allurements, and visit it with everlasting
 death. And that we might be able to overcome these, God has opened and
 displayed to us the way of overcoming the flesh. And this perfect and
 absolutely complete [833] virtue bestows on those who conquer, the
 crown and reward of immortality.

 [828] Thus, Heb. viii. 2, Christ is spoken of as "a minister of the
 sanctuary, and the true tabernacle."

 [829] Having a human father and mother.

 [830] mesi'tes, a mediator, one who stands between two parties to bring
 them together. Thus 1 Tim. ii. 5, "There is one God, and one mediator
 (mesi'tes) between God and men, the man Christ Jesus." In the Epistle
 to the Hebrews Christ is spoken of as the "mediator of the new
 covenant." And Gal. iii. 20, "A mediator is not of one:" the very idea
 of a mediator implies that he stands between two parties as a
 reconciler.

 [831] Emereri, "to earn or obtain." The word is specially applied to
 soldiers who have served their time, and are entitled to their
 discharge.

 [832] Pabulum.

 [833] Omnibus numeris absoluta.

 Chap. XXVI.--Of the Cross, and Other Tortures of Jesus, and of the Figure of
 the Lamb Under the Law.

 I have spoken of humiliation, and frailty, and suffering--why God
 thought fit to undergo them. Now an account must be taken of the cross
 itself, and its meaning must be related. What the Most High Father
 arranged from the beginning, and how He ordained all things which were
 accomplished, not only the foretelling by the prophets, which preceded
 and was proved true [834] in Christ, but also the manner of His
 suffering itself teaches. For whatever sufferings He underwent were not
 without meaning; [835] but they had a figurative meaning [836] and
 great significance, as had also those divine works which He performed,
 the strength and power of which had some weight indeed for the present,
 but also declared something for the future. Heavenly influence opened
 the eyes of the blind, and gave light to those who did not see; and by
 this deed He signified that it would come to pass that, turning to the
 nations which were ignorant of God, He might enlighten the breasts of
 the foolish with the light of wisdom, and open the eyes of their
 understanding to the contemplation of the truth. For they are truly
 blind who, not seeing heavenly things, and surrounded with the darkness
 of ignorance, worship earthly and frail things. He opened the ears of
 the deaf. It is plain that this divine power did not limit its exercise
 to this point; [837] but He declared that it would shortly come to
 pass, that they who were destitute of the truth would both hear and
 understand the divine words of God. For you may truly call those deaf
 who do not hear the things which are heavenly and true, and worthy of
 being performed. He loosed the tongues of the dumb, so that they spake
 plainly. [838] A power worthy of admiration, [839] even when it was in
 operation: but there was contained in this display [840] of power
 another meaning, which showed that it would shortly come to pass that
 those who were lately ignorant of heavenly things, having received the
 instruction of wisdom, might speak respecting God and the truth. For he
 who is ignorant of the divine nature, he truly is speechless and dumb,
 although he is the most eloquent of all men. For when the tongue has
 begun to speak truth--that is, to set forth the excellency and majesty
 of the one God--then only does it discharge the office of its nature;
 but as long as it speaks false things it is not rightly employed: [841]
 and therefore he must necessarily be speechless who cannot utter divine
 things. He also renewed the feet of the lame to the office of
 walking,--a strength of divine work worthy of praise; but the figure
 implied this, that the errors of a worldly and wandering life being
 restrained, the path of truth was opened by which men might walk to
 attain the favour of God. For He is truly to be considered lame, who,
 being enwrapped in the gloom and darkness of folly, and ignorant in
 what direction to go, with feet liable to stumble and fall, walks in
 the way of death.

 Likewise He cleansed the stains and blemishes of defiled bodies,--no
 slight exercise of immortal power; but this strength prefigured that by
 the instruction of righteousness His doctrine was about to purify those
 defiled by the stains of sins and the blemishes of vices. For they
 ought truly to be accounted as leprous and unclean, [842] whom either
 boundless lusts compel to crimes, or insatiable pleasures to
 disgraceful deeds, and affect with an everlasting stain those who are
 branded with the marks of dishonourable actions. He raised the bodies
 of the dead as they lay prostrate; and calling them aloud by their
 names, He brought them back from death. What is more suitable to God,
 what more worthy of the wonder of all ages, than to have recalled [843]
 the life which has run its course, to have added times to the completed
 times of men, to have revealed the secrets of death? But this
 unspeakable power was the image of a greater energy, which showed that
 His teaching was about to have such might, that the nations throughout
 the world, which were estranged from God and subject to death, being
 animated by the knowledge of the true light, might arrive at the
 rewards of immortality. For you may rightly deem those to be dead, who,
 not knowing God the giver of life, and depressing their souls from
 heaven to earth, run into the snares of eternal death. The actions,
 therefore, which He then performed for the present, were
 representations of future things; the things which He displayed in
 injured and diseased bodies were figures [844] of spiritual things,
 that at present He might display to us the works of an energy which was
 not of earth, and for the future might show the power of His heavenly
 majesty. [845]

 Therefore, as His works had a signification also of greater power, so
 also His passion did not go before us as simple, or superfluous, or by
 chance. But as those things which He did signified the great efficacy
 and power of His teaching, so those things which He suffered announced
 that wisdom would be held in hatred. For the vinegar which they gave
 Him to drink, and the gall which they gave Him to eat, held forth
 hardships and severities [846] in this life to the followers of truth.
 And although His passion, which was harsh and severe in itself, gave to
 us a sample of the future torments which virtue itself proposes to
 those who linger in this world, yet drink and food of this kind, coming
 into the mouth of our teacher, afforded us an example of pressures, and
 labours, and miseries. All which things must be undergone and suffered
 by those who follow the truth; since the truth is bitter, and detested
 by all who, being destitute of virtue, give up their life to deadly
 pleasures. For the placing of a crown of thorns upon His head, declared
 that it would come to pass that He would gather to Himself a holy
 people from those who were guilty. For people standing around in a
 circle are called a corona. [847] But we, who before that we knew God
 were unjust, were thorns--that is, evil and guilty, not knowing what
 was good; and estranged from the conception and the works of
 righteousness, polluted all things with wickedness and lust. Being
 taken, therefore, from briars and thorns, we surround the sacred head
 of God; for, being called by Himself, and spread around Him, we stand
 beside God, who is our Master and Teacher, and crown Him King of the
 world, and Lord of all the living.

 But with reference to the cross, it has great force and meaning, which
 I will now endeavour to show. For God (as I have before explained),
 when He had determined to set man free, sent as His ambassador to the
 earth a teacher of virtue, who might both by salutary precepts train
 men to innocence, and by works and deeds before their eyes [848] might
 open the way of righteousness, by walking in which, and following his
 teacher, man might attain to eternal life. He therefore assumed a body,
 and was clothed in a garment of flesh, that He might hold out to man,
 for whose instruction He had come, examples of virtue and incitements
 to its practice. But when He had afforded an example of righteousness
 in all the duties of life, in order that He might teach man also the
 patient endurance of pain and contempt of death, by which virtue is
 rendered perfect and complete, He came into the hands of an impious
 nation, when, by the knowledge of the future which He had, He might
 have avoided them, and by the same power by which He did wonderful
 works He might have repelled them. Therefore He endured tortures, and
 stripes, and thorns. At last He did not refuse even to undergo death,
 that under His guidance man might triumph over death, subdued and bound
 in chains with all its terrors. But the reason why the Most High Father
 chose that kind of death in preference to others, with which He should
 permit Him to be visited, is this. For some one may perchance say: Why,
 if He was God, and chose to die, did He not at least suffer by some
 honourable kind of death? why was it by the cross especially? why by an
 infamous kind of punishment, which may appear unworthy even of a man if
 he is free, [849] although guilty? First of all, because He, who had
 come in humility that He might bring assistance to the humble and men
 of low degree, and might hold out to all the hope of safety, was to
 suffer by that kind of punishment by which the humble and low usually
 suffer, that there might be no one at all who might not be able to
 imitate Him. In the next place, it was in order that His body might be
 kept unmutilated, [850] since He must rise again from the dead on the
 third day.

 Nor ought any one to be ignorant of this, that He Himself, speaking
 before of His passion, also made it known that He had the power, when
 He willed it, of laying down His life and of taking it again.
 Therefore, because He had laid down His life while fastened to the
 cross, His executioners did not think it necessary to break His bones
 (as was their prevailing custom), but they only pierced His side. Thus
 His unbroken body was taken down from the cross, and carefully enclosed
 in a tomb. Now all these things were done lest His body, being injured
 and broken, should be rendered unsuitable [851] for rising again. That
 also was a principal cause why God chose the cross, because it was
 necessary that He should be lifted up on it, and the passion of God
 become known to all nations. For since he who is suspended upon a cross
 is both conspicuous to all and higher than others, the cross was
 especially chosen, which might signify that He would be so conspicuous,
 and so raised on high, that all nations from the whole world should
 meet together at once to know and worship Him. Lastly, no nation is so
 uncivilized, no region so remote, to which either His passion or the
 height of His majesty would be unknown. Therefore in His suffering He
 stretched forth His hands and measured out the world, that even then He
 might show that a great multitude, collected together out of all
 languages and tribes, from the rising of the sun even to his setting,
 was about to come under His wings, and to receive on their foreheads
 that great and lofty sign. [852] And the Jews even now exhibit a figure
 of this transaction when they mark their thresholds with the blood of a
 lamb. For when God was about to smite the Egyptians, to secure the
 Hebrews from that infliction He had enjoined them to slay a white [853]
 lamb without spot, and to place on their thresholds a mark from its
 blood. And thus, when the first-born of the Egyptians had perished in
 one night, the Hebrews alone were saved by the sign of the blood: not
 that the blood of a sheep had such efficacy in itself as to be the
 safety of men, but it was an image of things to come. For Christ was
 the white lamb without spot; that is, He was innocent, and just, and
 holy, who, being slain by the same Jews, is the salvation of all who
 have written on their foreheads the sign of blood--that is, of the
 cross, on which He shed His blood. For the forehead is the top of the
 threshold in man, and the wood sprinkled with blood is the emblem [854]
 of the cross. Lastly, the slaying of the lamb by those very persons who
 perform it is called the paschal feast, from the word "paschein," [855]
 because it is a figure of the passion, which God, foreknowing the
 future, delivered by Moses to be celebrated by His people. But at that
 time the figure was efficacious at the present for averting the danger,
 that it may appear what great efficacy the truth itself is about to
 have for the protection of God's people in the extreme necessity of the
 whole world. But in what manner or in what region all will be safe who
 have marked on the highest part of their body this sign of the true and
 divine blood, [856] I will show in the last book.

 [834] i.e., was shown by the event to be true, not doubtful or
 deceptive.

 [835] Inania, "empty."

 [836] Figuram.

 [837] Hactenus operata est.

 [838] In eloquium solvit.

 [839] See Matt. ix. 33, "The dumb spake, and the multitudes marvelled;"
 Mark vii. 37, "They were beyond measure astonished, saying, He hath
 done all things well: He maketh both the deaf to hear and the dumb to
 speak."

 [840] Inerat huic virtuti.

 [841] In usu suo non est.

 [842] Elephantiaci, those afflicted with "elephantiasis," a kind of
 leprosy, covering the skin with incrustations resembling the hide of an
 elephant.

 [843] Resignasse, "to have unsealed or opened."

 [844] Figuram gerebant.

 [845] [It is undoubtedly true that all our Lord's miracles are also
 parables. Such also is the entire history of the Hebrews.]

 [846] Acerbitates et amaritudines.

 [847] The word "corona" denotes a "crown," and also, as here, a "ring"
 of persons standing around. The play on the word cannot be kept up in
 English. [Thus "corona tibi et judices defuerunt." Cicero, Nat. Deor.,
 ii. 1. So Ignatius, ste'phanon tou presbuteri'ou = corona presbyterii,
 vol. i. [64]p. 64, this series."]

 [848] Præsentibus.

 [849] The cross was the usual punishment of slaves.

 [850] Integrum.

 [851] A weak and senseless reason. The true cause is given by St. John
 xix. 36: "These things were done that the scripture should be
 fulfilled, A bone of Him shall not be broken." [The previous question,
 however, remains: Why was the Paschal lamb to be of unbroken bones, and
 why the special providence that fulfilled the type? Doubtless He who
 raised up His body could have restored it, had the bones also been
 broken; but the preciousness of Christ's body was thus indicated as in
 the new tomb, the fine linen and spices, and the ministry of "the rich
 in his death, because He had done no violence," etc.--Isa. liii. 9.]

 [852] The sign of the cross used in baptism.

 [853] The account, Ex. xii., makes no mention of colour. "Without spot"
 is equivalent to "without blemish." [But the whiteness implied.
 "Without spot" excludes "the ring-streaked and speckled," and a black
 lamb a fortiori --1 Pet. i. 19. "Without spot" settles the case. Isa.
 i. 18 proves that the normal wool is white.]

 [854] Significatio.

 [855] a`po tou pa'schein, "from suffering" The word "pascha" is not
 derived from Greek, as Lactantius supposes, but from the Hebrew
 "pasach," to pass over.

 [856] [See book vii., and the Epitome, cap. li., infra.]

 Chap. XXVII.--Of the Wonders Effected by the Power of the Cross, and of
 Demons.

 At present it is sufficient to show what great efficacy the power of
 this sign has. How great a terror this sign is to the demons, he will
 know who shall see how, when adjured by Christ, they flee from the
 bodies which they have besieged. For as He Himself, when He was living
 among men, put to flight all the demons by His word, and restored to
 their former senses the minds of men which had been excited and
 maddened by their dreadful attacks; so now His followers, in the name
 of their Master, and by the sign of His passion, banish the same
 polluted spirits from men. And it is not difficult to prove this. For
 when they sacrifice to their gods, if any one bearing a marked forehead
 stands by, the sacrifices are by no means favourable. [857]


 "Nor can the diviner, when consulted, give answers." [858]

 And this has often been the cause of punishment to wicked kings. For
 when some of their attendants who were of our religion [859] were
 standing by their masters as they sacrificed, having the sign placed on
 their foreheads, they caused the gods of their masters to flee, that
 they might not be able to observe [860] future events in the entrails
 of the victims. And when the soothsayers understood this, at the
 instigation of the same demons to whom they had sacrificed, [861]
 complaining that profane men were present at the sacrifices, they drove
 their princes to madness, so that they attacked the temple of the god,
 and contaminated themselves by true sacrilege, which was expiated by
 the severest punishments on the part of their persecutors. Nor,
 however, are blind men able to understand even from this, either that
 this is the true religion, which contains such great power for
 overcoming, or that that is false, which is not able to hold its ground
 or to come to an engagement.

 But they say that the gods do this, not through fear, but through
 hatred; as though it were possible for any one to hate another, unless
 it be him who injures, or has the power of injuring. Yea, truly, it
 would be consistent with their majesty to visit those whom they hated
 with immediate punishment, [862] rather than to flee from them. But
 since they can neither approach those in whom they shall see the
 heavenly mark, nor injure those whom the immortal sign [863] as an
 impregnable wall protects, they harass them by men, and persecute them
 by the hands of others: and if they acknowledge the existence of these
 demons, we have overcome; for this must necessarily be the true
 religion, which both understands the nature of demons, and understands
 their subtlety, and compels them, vanquished and subdued, to yield to
 itself. If they deny it, they will be refuted by the testimonies of
 poets and philosophers. But if they do not deny the existence and
 malignity of demons, what remains except that they affirm that there is
 a difference between gods and demons? [864] Let them therefore explain
 to us the difference between the two kinds, that we may know what is to
 be worshipped and what to be held in execration; whether they have any
 mutual agreement, or are really opposed to one another. If they are
 united by some necessity, how shall we distinguish them? or how shall
 we unite the honour and worship of each kind? If, on the other hand,
 they are enemies, how is it that the demons do not fear the gods, or
 that the gods cannot put to flight the demons? Behold, some one excited
 by the impulse of the demon is out of his senses, raves, is mad: let us
 lead him into the temple of the excellent and mighty Jupiter; or since
 Jupiter knows not how to cure men, into the fane of Æsculapius or
 Apollo. Let the priest of either, in the name of his god, command the
 wicked spirit to come out of the man: that can in no way come to pass.
 What, then, is the power of the gods, if the demons are not subject to
 their control? But, in truth, the same demons, when adjured by the name
 of the true God, immediately flee. What reason is there why they should
 fear Christ, but not fear Jupiter, unless that they whom the multitude
 esteem to be gods are also demons? Lastly, if there should be placed in
 the midst one who is evidently suffering from an attack of a demon, and
 the priest of the Delphian Apollo, they will in the same manner dread
 the name of God; and Apollo will as quickly depart from his priest as
 the spirit of the demon from the man; and his god being adjured and put
 to flight, the priest will be for ever silent. [865] Therefore the
 demons, whom they acknowledge to be objects of execration, are the same
 as the gods to whom they offer supplications.

 If they imagine that we are unworthy of belief, let them believe Homer,
 who associated the supreme Jupiter [866] with the demons; and also
 other poets and philosophers, who speak of the same beings at one time
 as demons, and at another time as gods,--of which names one is true,
 and the other false. For those most wicked spirits, when they are
 adjured, then confess that they are demons; when they are worshipped,
 then falsely say that they are gods; in order that they may lead men
 into errors, [867] and call them away from the knowledge of the true
 God, by which alone eternal death can be escaped. They are the same
 who, for the sake of overthrowing man, have founded various systems of
 worship for themselves through different regions, [868] --under false
 and assumed names, however, that they might deceive. For because they
 were unable by themselves to aspire to divinity, they took to
 themselves the names of powerful kings, under whose titles they might
 claim for themselves divine honours; which error may be dispelled, and
 brought to the light of truth. For if any one desires to inquire
 further into the matter, let him assemble those who are skilled in
 calling forth spirits from the dead. Let them call forth [869] Jupiter,
 Neptune, Vulcan, Mercury, Apollo, and Saturnus the father of all. All
 will answer from the lower regions; and being questioned they will
 speak, and confess respecting themselves and God. After these things
 let them call up Christ; He will not be present, He will not appear,
 for He was not more than two days in the lower regions. What proof can
 be brought forward more certain than this? I have no doubt that
 Trismegistus arrived at the truth by some proof of this kind, who spoke
 many things [870] respecting God the Son which are contained in the
 divine secrets.

 [857] Litant, a word peculiar to the soothsayers, used when the
 sacrifices are auspicious.

 [858] Virg., Georg., iii. 491.

 [859] Nostri, i.e., Christians.

 [860] Depingere; to make observations on the entrails of the victims,
 so as to foretell future events.

 [861] Prosecrârant. Others read "prosecârant," a sacrificial word,
 properly denoting the setting apart some of the victim for offering to
 the gods.

 [862] Præsentibus poenis, "on the spot."

 [863] i.e., the sign of the cross, with which the early Christians
 frequently marked themselves. [So long as Christians were mocked and
 despised as followers of a crucified one, there was a silent testimony
 and bold confession in this act which must be wholly separated from the
 mere superstition of degenerate Christians. It used to mean just what
 the Apostle says, Gal. vi. 14. In this sense it is retained among
 Anglicans.]

 [864] [See vol. iii. pp. 37, 176, 180, and iv. 189-190.]

 [865] [The cessation of oracles is attested by Plutarch. See also
 Tertullian, vol. iii. [65]p. 38, this series, and Minucius, vol. iv.
 [66]p. 190. Demonology needs further exposition, for Scripture is
 express in its confirmation of patristic views of the subject.]

 [866] There is probably a reference to Iliad, i. 221, where Athene is
 represented as going to Olympus:--

 he d' Oulupo'nde bebe'kei

 do'mat' es aigio'choio Dio`s meta` dai'monas allous

 [867] Ut errores hominibus immittant.

 [868] Per diversa regionum. There is another reading, "perversâ
 religione"--by perverted religion.

 [869] The reference is to necromancy, or calling up the spirits of the
 dead by magic rites.

 [870] There is another reading: "qui de Deo patre omnia, et de filio
 locutus est multa;" but this is manifestly erroneous.

 Chap. XXVIII.--Of Hope and True Religion, and of Superstition.

 And since these things are so, as we have shown, it is plain that no
 other hope of life is set before man, except that, laying aside
 vanities and wretched error, he should know God, [871] and serve God;
 except he renounce this temporary life, and train himself by the
 principles of righteousness for the cultivation of true religion. For
 we are created on this condition, that we pay just and due obedience to
 God who created us, that we should know and follow Him alone. We are
 bound and tied to God by this chain of piety; [872] from which religion
 itself received its name, not, as Cicero explained it, from carefully
 gathering, [873] for in his second book respecting the nature of the
 gods he thus speaks: "For not only philosophers, but our ancestors
 also, separated superstition from religion. For they who spent whole
 days in prayers and sacrifices, that their children might survive [874]
 them, were called superstitious. But they who handled again, and as it
 were carefully gathered all things which related to the worship of the
 gods, were called religious from carefully gathering, [875] as some
 were called elegant from choosing out, and diligent from carefully
 selecting and intelligent from understanding. For in all these words
 there is the same meaning of gathering which there is in the word
 religious: thus it has come to pass, that in the names superstitious
 and religious, the one relates to a fault, the other belongs to
 praise." How senseless this interpretation is, we may know from the
 matter itself. For if both religion and superstition are engaged in the
 worship of the same gods, there is little or rather no difference
 between them. For what cause will he allege why he should think that to
 pray once for the health of sons is the part of a religious man, but to
 do the same ten times is the part of a superstitious man? For if it is
 an excellent thing to pray once, how much more so to do it more
 frequently! If it is well to do it at the first hour, then it is well
 to do it throughout the day. If one victim renders the deity
 propitious, it is plain that many victims must render him more
 propitious, because multiplied services oblige [876] rather than
 offend. For those servants do not appear to us hateful who are
 assiduous and constant in their attendance, but more beloved. Why,
 therefore, should he be in fault, and receive a name which implies
 censure, [877] who either loves his children more, or sufficiently
 honours the gods; and he, on the contrary, be praised, who loves them
 less? And this argument has weight also from the contrary. For if it is
 wrong [878] to pray and sacrifice during whole days, therefore it is
 wrong to do so once. If it is faulty frequently to wish for the
 preservation of our children, therefore he also is superstitious who
 conceives that wish even rarely. Or why should the name of a fault be
 derived from that, than which nothing can be wished more honourable,
 nothing more just? For as to his saying, that they who diligently take
 in hand again the things relating to the worship of the gods are called
 religious from their carefully gathering; how is it, then, that they
 who do this often in a day lose the name of religious men, when it is
 plain from their very assiduity that they more diligently gather those
 things by which the gods are worshipped?

 What, then, is it? Truly religion is the cultivation of the truth, but
 superstition of that which is false. And it makes the entire difference
 what you worship, not how you worship, or what prayer you offer. [879]
 But because the worshippers of the gods imagine themselves to be
 religious, though they are superstitious, they are neither able to
 distinguish religion from superstition, nor to express the meaning of
 the names. We have said that the name of religion is derived from the
 bond of piety, [880] because God has tied man to Himself, and bound him
 by piety; [881] for we must serve Him as a master, and be obedient to
 Him as a father. And therefore Lucretius [882] better explained this
 name, who says that He loosens the knots of superstitions. [883] But
 they are called superstitious, not who wish their children to survive
 them, for we all wish this; but either those who reverence the
 surviving memory of the dead, or those who, surviving their parents,
 reverenced their images at their houses as household gods. For those
 who assumed to themselves new rites, that they might honour the dead as
 gods, whom they supposed to be taken from men and received into heaven,
 they called superstitious. But those who worshipped the public and
 ancient gods [884] they named religious. From which Virgil says: [885]
 --


 "Superstition vain, and ignorant of ancient gods."

 But since we find that the ancient gods also were consecrated in the
 same manner after their death, therefore they are superstitious who
 worship many and false gods. We, on the other hand, are religious, who
 make our supplications to the one true God.

 [871] So our Lord, John xvii. 3: "This is life eternal, that they might
 know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent."

 [872] [" Hoc vinculo pietatis obstricti Deo et religati sumus." He
 returns to this in the same chapter, infra.]

 [873] A religendo. There is little doubt that the true derivation of
 "religio" is from religere, not from religare According to this, the
 primary meaning is, "the dwelling upon a subject, and continually
 recurring to it."

 [874] Superstites, et superstitiosi.

 [875] [Here the famous passage should be given with accurate reference
 to its place, as much of its force vanishes in translation. Cicero's
 etymology is thus given: "Qui autem omnia quæ ad cultum deorum
 pertinerent, diligentes retractarent et tamquam relegerent sunt dicti
 religiosi, ex relegendo, ut elegantes ex eligendo, tamquam a diligendo
 diligentes, ex intelligendo intelligentes."--De Nat. Deor., lib. ii.
 cap. 28.]

 [876] Demerentur, "they lay under an obligation."

 [877] Criminis est.

 [878] Vitiosum.

 [879] [This seems very loose language when compared with Matt. vi. 9
 and 1 Cor. xi. 1, 2. The whole epistle shows the how and the what to be
 important in worship, and that the Apostle had prescribed certain laws
 about these.]

 [880] [See note 4, supra.]

 [881] [Lactantius has generally been sustained by Christian criticism
 in the censures thus passed upon Cicero, and in making the word religio
 out of religare His own words are desirable here, to be compared with
 those which he endeavors to refute (note 4, supra): "Diximus nomen
 religionis a vinculo pietatis esse deductum, quod hominem sibi Deus
 religarit," etc.; i.e., it binds again what was loosed.]

 [882] Lucret., i. 931.

 [883] Religionum.

 [884] i.e., those worshipped in public temples, and with public
 sacrifices, as opposed to the household gods of a family, and ancient
 as opposed to those newly received as gods.

 [885] Virg., Æneid, viii. 187.

 Chap. XXIX.--Of the Christian Religion, and of the Union of Jesus with the
 Father.

 Some one may perhaps ask how, when we say that we worship one God only,
 we nevertheless assert that there are two, God the Father and God the
 Son: which assertion has driven many into the greatest error. For when
 the things which we say seem to them probable, they consider that we
 fail in this one point alone, that we confess that there is another
 God, and that He is mortal. We have already spoken of His mortality:
 now let us teach concerning His unity. When we speak of God the Father
 and God the Son, we do not speak of them as different, nor do we
 separate each: because the Father cannot exist without the Son, nor can
 the Son be separated from the Father, since the name of Father [886]
 cannot be given without the Son, nor can the Son be begotten without
 the Father. Since, therefore, the Father makes the Son, and the Son the
 Father, they both have one mind, one spirit, one substance; but the
 former [887] is as it were an overflowing fountain, the latter [888] as
 a stream flowing forth from it: the former as the sun, the latter as it
 were a ray [889] extended from the sun. And since He is both faithful
 to the Most High Father, and beloved by Him, He is not separated from
 Him; just as the stream is not separated from the fountain, nor the ray
 from the sun: for the water of the fountain is in the stream, and the
 light of the sun is in the ray: just as the voice cannot be separated
 from the mouth, nor the strength or hand from the body. When,
 therefore, He is also spoken of by the prophets as the hand, and
 strength, and word of God, there is plainly no separation; for the
 tongue, which is the minister of speech, and the hand, in which the
 strength is situated, are inseparable portions of the body.

 We may use an example more closely connected with us. When any one has
 a son whom he especially loves, who is still in the house, and in the
 power [890] of his father, although he concede to him the name and
 power of a master, yet by the civil law the house is one, and one
 person is called master. So this world [891] is the one house of God;
 and the Son and the Father, who unanimously inhabit the world, are one
 God, for the one is as two, and the two are as one. Nor is that
 wonderful, since the Son is in the Father, for the Father loves the
 Son, and the Father is in the Son; for He faithfully obeys the will of
 the Father, nor does He ever do nor has done anything except what the
 Father either willed or commanded. Lastly, that the Father and the Son
 are but one God, Isaiah showed in that passage which we have brought
 forward before, [892] when he said: [893] "They shall fall down unto
 Thee, and make supplication unto Thee, since God is in Thee, and there
 is no other God besides Thee." And he also speaks to the same purport
 in another place: [894] "Thus saith God the King of Israel, and His
 Redeemer, the everlasting God; I am the first, and I am the last; and
 beside me there is no God." When he had set forth two persons, one of
 God the King, that is, Christ, and the other of God the Father, who
 after His passion raised Him from the dead, as we have said [895] that
 the prophet Hosea showed, [896] who said, "I will redeem Him from the
 power of the grave:" nevertheless, with reference to each person, he
 introduced the words, "and beside me there is no God," when he might
 have said "beside us;" but it was not right that a separation of so
 close a relationship should be made by the use of the plural number.
 For there is one God alone, free, most high, without any origin; for He
 Himself is the origin of all things, and in Him at once both the Son
 and all things are contained. Wherefore, since the mind and will of the
 one is in the other, or rather, since there is one in both, both are
 justly called one God; for whatever is in the Father [897] flows on to
 the Son, and whatever is in the Son descends from the Father. Therefore
 that highest and matchless God cannot be worshipped except through the
 Son. He who thinks that he worships the Father only, as he does not
 worship the Son, so he does not worship even the Father. But he who
 receives the Son, and bears His name, he truly together with the Son
 worships the Father also, since the Son is the ambassador, and
 messenger, and priest of the Most High Father. He is the door of the
 greatest temple, He the way of light, He the guide to salvation, He the
 gate of life.

 [886] [i.e., the Everlasting Father implies the Everlasting Son.]

 [887] Ille, i.e., the Father.

 [888] Hic, i.e., the Son.

 [889] Thus, Heb. i. 3, the Son is described as the effulgence of the
 Father's glory: apau'gasma tes do'xes aupsou.

 [890] In manu patris. Among the Romans the father had the power of life
 and death over his children.

 [891] [Mundus una Dei domus. World here = universe. See vol. ii. p.
 136, [67]note 2, this series.]

 [892] Ch. xiii.

 [893] Isa. xlv. 14.

 [894] Isa. xliv. 6.

 [895] Ch. xix.

 [896] Hos. xiii. 14.

 [897] Thus Christ Himself speaks, John x. 30, "I and my Father are
 one;" and iii. 35, "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all
 things into His hand."

 Chap. XXX.--Of Avoiding Heresies and Superstitions, and What is the Only
 True Catholic Church.

 But since many heresies have existed, and the people of God have been
 rent into divisions at the instigation of demons, the truth must be
 briefly marked out by us, and placed in its own peculiar
 dwelling-place, that if any one shall desire to draw the water of life,
 he may not be borne to broken cisterns [898] which hold no water, but
 may know the abundant fountain of God, watered by which he may enjoy
 perpetual light. Before all things, it is befitting that we should know
 both that He Himself and His ambassadors foretold that there must be
 numerous sects and heresies, [899] which would break the unity [900] of
 the sacred body; and that they admonished us to be on our guard with
 the greatest prudence, lest we should at any time fall into the snares
 and deceits of that adversary of ours, with whom God has willed that we
 should contend. Then that He gave us sure commands, which we ought
 always to treasure in our minds; for many, forgetting them, and
 abandoning the heavenly road, have made for themselves devious paths
 amidst windings and precipices, by which they might lead away the
 incautious and simple part of the people to the darkness of death: I
 will explain how this happened. There were some of our religion whose
 faith was less established, or who were less learned or less cautious,
 who rent the unity and divided the Church. But they whose faith was
 unsettled, [901] when they pretended that they knew and worshipped God,
 aiming at the increase of their wealth and honour, aspired to the
 highest sacerdotal power; and when overcome by others more powerful,
 preferred to secede with their supporters, than to endure those set
 over them, over whom they themselves before desired to be set. [902]

 But some, not sufficiently instructed in heavenly learning, when they
 were unable to reply to the accusers of the truth, who objected that it
 was either impossible or inconsistent that God should be shut up in the
 womb of a woman, and that the Majesty of heaven could not be reduced to
 such weakness as to become an object of contempt and derision, a
 reproach and mockery to men; lastly, that He should even endure
 tortures, and be affixed to the accursed cross; and when they could
 defend and refute all these things neither by talent nor learning, for
 they did not thoroughly perceive their force and meaning, they were
 perverted [903] from the right path, and corrupted the sacred writings,
 so that they composed for themselves a new doctrine without any root
 and stability. But some, enticed by the prediction of false prophets,
 concerning whom both the true prophets and he himself had foretold,
 fell away from the knowledge of God, and left the true tradition. But
 all of these, ensnared by frauds of demons, which they ought to have
 foreseen and guarded against, by their carelessness lost the name and
 worship of God. For when they are called Phrygians, [904] or Novatians,
 [905] or Valentinians, [906] or Marcionites, [907] or Anthropians,
 [908] or Arians, [909] or by any other name, they have ceased to be
 Christians, who have lost the name of Christ, and assumed human and
 external names. Therefore it is the Catholic Church alone which retains
 true worship.

 This is the fountain of truth, this is the abode of the faith, this is
 the temple of God; into which if any one shall not enter, or from which
 if any shall go out, he is estranged from the hope of life and eternal
 salvation. No one ought to flatter himself with persevering strife. For
 the contest is respecting life and salvation, which, unless it is
 carefully and diligently kept in view, will be lost and extinguished.
 But, however, because all the separate assemblies of heretics call
 themselves Christians in preference to others, and think that theirs is
 the Catholic Church, it must be known that the true Catholic Church is
 that in which there is confession and repentance, [910] which treats in
 a wholesome manner the sins and wounds to which the weakness of the
 flesh is liable. I have related these things in the meanwhile for the
 sake of admonition, that no one who desires to avoid error may be
 entangled in a greater error, while he is ignorant of the secret [911]
 of the truth. Afterwards, in a particular and separate work, we will
 more fully and copiously [912] contend against all divisions of
 falsehoods. It follows that, since we have spoken sufficiently on the
 subject of true religion and wisdom, we discuss the subject of justice
 in the next book.


 General Notes by the American Editor.

 I.

 (On cap. 29.)

 Here we should look for something also concerning the Holy Spirit. But
 our author's principle is doubtless a reflection of the prevailing
 sentiment of the Church at this period, which was perhaps a violent
 exaggeration of our Lord's example (Mark iv. 33). And see something of
 this on p. 140, note 6, infra; also Matt. vii. 6.

 II.

 (On cap. 30.)

 The simplicity with which our author gives a note of the Catholic
 Church, in accordance with African canons and the teaching of Cyprian,
 is very noteworthy. It never occurred to him that communion with any
 one particular See was the note. Hippolytus alone would have reminded
 him that the worst heretics had been in communion with both Zephyrinus
 and Callistus in his days (see vol. v. pp. [68]156 and [69]160; also
 Ibid., [70]125, [71]130), and that orthodoxy had been persecuted by
 these bishops of Rome.

 [898] So Jer. ii. 13.

 [899] See Matt. xviii. 7; Luke xvii. 1; 1 Cor. xi. 19; 2 Pet. ii. 1.

 [900] Concordiam.

 [901] Lubrica.

 [902] [N.B.--The Callistians, Novatians, etc.; vol. v. [72]Elucidation
 XIV. p. 160; and Ibid., p. [73]319, [74]321-333.]

 [903] Depravati sunt.

 [904] The Phrygians were the followers of Montanus, who was the founder
 of a sect in the second century. He is supposed to have been a native
 of Ardaba, on the borders of Phrygia, on which account his followers
 were called the Phrygian or Cataphrygian heretics. Montanus gave
 himself out for the Paraclete or Comforter whom our Lord promised to
 send. The most eminent of his followers were Priscilla and Maximilla.
 [But see vol. ii. pp. [75]4 and 5; also vol. iii. and iv. this series,
 and notes on Tertullian, passim ]

 [905] The Novatians were the followers of Novatus, in the third
 century, They assumed to themselves the title of Cathari, or the pure.
 They refused to re-admit to the ir communion those who had once fallen
 away, and allowed no place for repentance.

 [906] The Valentinians were the followers of Valentinus, an Egyptian
 who founded a sect in the second century. His system somewhat resembled
 the Gnostics. He taught that Christ had a heavenly or spiritual body,
 and assumed nothing from the Virgin Mary.

 [907] The Marcionites were the followers of Marcion, a heretic of the
 second century, who held the Oriental belief of two independent,
 eternal, co-existing principles, one of good, the other of evil. He
 applied this doctrine to Christianity. His chief opponent was
 Tertullian.

 [908] The Anthropians held that Jesus Christ was nothing but man
 (anthropos).

 [909] This word is omitted by some editors, as Lactantius wrote before
 the Arian heresy had gained strength. [See vol. vi. [76]p. 291.]

 [910] This is directed against the Novatians. See preceding note on the
 Novatians, [and vol. v., this series, passim].

 [911] Penetrale, "the interior of a house or temple."

 [912] Uberius. Others read "verius," more truly; but the reading of the
 text is preferable.


the divine institutes

  Book V.

  Of Justice.

 Chap. I.--Of the Non-Condemnation of Accused Persons Without a Hearing of
 Their Cause; From What Cause Philosophers Despised the Sacred Writings; Of
 the First Advocates of the Christian Religion.

 I Entertain no doubt, O mighty Emperor Constantine, [913] --since they
 are impatient through excessive superstition,--that if any one of those
 who are foolishly religious should take in hand this work of ours, in
 which that matchless Creator of all things and Ruler of this boundless
 world is asserted, he would even assail it with abusive language, and
 perhaps, having scarcely read the beginning, would dash it to the
 ground, cast it from him, curse it, and think himself contaminated and
 bound by inexpiable guilt if he should patiently read or hear these
 things. We demand, however, from this man, if it is possible, by the
 right of human nature, [914] that he should not condemn before that he
 knows the whole matter. For if the right of defending themselves is
 given to sacrilegious persons, and to traitors and sorcerers, and if it
 is lawful for no one to be condemned beforehand, his cause being as yet
 untried, we do not appear to ask unjustly, that if there shall be any
 one who shall have fallen upon this subject, if he shall read it, he
 read it throughout; if he shall hear it, that he put off the forming of
 an opinion until the end. But I know the obstinacy of men; we shall
 never succeed in obtaining this. For they fear lest they should be
 overcome by us, and be compelled at length to yield, truth itself
 crying out. They interrupt, therefore, and make hindrances, that they
 may not hear; and close their eyes, that they may not see the light
 which we present to them. Wherefore they themselves plainly show their
 distrust in their own abandoned system, since they neither venture to
 investigate, nor to engage with as, because they know that they are
 easily overpowered. And therefore, discussion being taken away,


 "Wisdom is driven from among them, they have recourse to violence,"

 as Ennius says; and because they eagerly endeavour to condemn as guilty
 those whom they plainly know to be innocent, they are unwilling to be
 agreed respecting innocence itself; as though, in truth, it were a
 greater injustice to have condemned innocence, when proved to be such,
 than unheard. But, as I said, they are afraid lest, if they should
 hear, they should be unable to condemn.

 And therefore they torture, put to death, and banish the worshippers of
 the Most High God, that is, the righteous; nor are they, who so
 vehemently hate, themselves able to assign the causes of their hatred.
 Because they are themselves in error, they are angry with those who
 follow the path of truth; and when they are able to correct themselves,
 they greatly increase [915] their errors by cruel deeds, they are
 stained with the blood of the innocent, and they tear away with
 violence souls dedicated to God from the lacerated bodies. Such are the
 men with whom we now endeavour to engage and to dispute: these are the
 men whom we would lead away from a foolish persuasion to the truth, men
 who would more readily drink blood than imbibe the words of the
 righteous. What then? Will our labour be in vain? By no means. For if
 we shall not be able to deliver these from death, to which they are
 hastening with the greatest speed; if we cannot recall them from that
 devious path to life and light, since they themselves oppose their own
 safety; yet we shall strengthen those who belong to us, whose opinion
 is not settled, and founded and fixed with solid roots. For many of
 them waver, and especially those who have any acquaintance with
 literature. For in this respect philosophers, and orators, and poets
 are pernicious, because they are easily able to ensnare unwary souls by
 the sweetness of their discourse, and of their poems flowing with
 delightful modulation. These are sweets [916] which conceal poison. And
 on this account I wished to connect wisdom with religion, that that
 vain system may not at all injure the studious; so that now the
 knowledge of literature may not only be of no injury to religion and
 righteousness, but may even be of the greatest profit, if he who has
 learned it should be more instructed in virtues and wiser in truth.

 Moreover, even though it should be profitable to no other, it certainly
 will be so to us: the conscience will delight itself, and the mind will
 rejoice that it is engaged in the light of truth, which is the food of
 the soul, being overspread with an incredible kind of pleasantness. But
 we must not despair. Perchance


 "We sing not to the deaf." [917]

 For neither are affairs in so bad a condition that there are no sound
 minds to which the truth may be pleasing, and which may both see and
 follow the right course when it is pointed out to them. Only let the
 cup be anointed [918] with the heavenly honey of wisdom, that the
 bitter remedies may be drunk by them unawares, without any annoyance,
 whilst the first sweetness of taste by its allurement conceals, under
 the cover [919] of pleasantness, the bitterness of the harsh flavour.
 For this is especially the cause why, with the wise and the learned,
 and the princes of this world, the sacred Scriptures are without
 credit, because the prophets spoke in common and simple language, as
 though they spoke to the people. And therefore they are despised by
 those who are willing to hear or read nothing except that which is
 polished and eloquent; nor is anything able to remain fixed in their
 minds, except that which charms their ears by a more soothing sound.
 But those things which appear humble [920] are considered anile,
 foolish, and common. So entirely do they regard nothing as true, except
 that which is pleasant to the ear; nothing as credible, except that
 which can excite [921] pleasure: no one estimates [922] a subject by
 its truth, but by its embellishment. Therefore they do not believe the
 sacred writings, because they are without any pretence; [923] but they
 do not even believe those who explain them, because they also are
 either altogether ignorant, or at any rate possessed of little
 learning. For it very rarely happens that they are wholly eloquent; and
 the cause of this is evident. For eloquence is subservient to the
 world, it desires to display itself to the people, and to please in
 things which are evil; since it often endeavours to overpower the
 truth, that it may show its power; it seeks wealth, desires honours; in
 short, it demands the highest degree of dignity. Therefore it despises
 these subjects as low; it avoids secret things as contrary to itself,
 inasmuch as it rejoices in publicity, and longs for the multitude and
 celebrity. Hence it comes to pass that wisdom and truth need suitable
 heralds. And if by chance any of the learned have betaken themselves to
 it, they have not been sufficient for its defence.

 Of those who are known to me, Minucius Felix was of no ignoble rank
 among pleaders. His book, which bears the title of Octavius, declares
 how suitable a maintainer of the truth he might have been, if he had
 given himself altogether to that pursuit. [924] Septimius Tertullianus
 also was skilled in literature of every kind; but in eloquence he had
 little readiness, and was not sufficiently polished, and very obscure.
 Not even therefore did he find sufficient renown. Cyprianus, therefore,
 was above all others [925] distinguished and renowned, since he had
 sought great glory to himself from the profession of the art of
 oratory, and he wrote very many things worthy of admiration in their
 particular class. For he was of a turn of mind which was ready,
 copious, agreeable, and (that which is the greatest excellence of
 style) plain and open; so that you cannot determine whether he was more
 embellished in speech, or more ready in explanation, or more powerful
 in persuasion. And yet he is unable to please those who are ignorant of
 the mystery except by his words; inasmuch as the things which he spoke
 are mystical, and prepared with this object, that they may be heard by
 the faithful only: in short, he is accustomed to be derided by the
 learned men of this age, to whom his writings have happened to be
 known. I have heard of a certain man who was skilful indeed, who by the
 change of a single letter called him Coprianus, [926] as though he were
 one who had applied to old women's fables a mind which was elegant and
 fitted for better things. But if this happened to him whose eloquence
 is not unpleasant, what then must we suppose happens to those whose
 discourse is meagre and displeasing, who could have had neither the
 power of persuasion, nor subtlety in arguing, nor any severity at all
 for refuting?

 [913] These words are omitted in some editions. The chapter is a kind
 of preface to the whole book, in which he complains that punishment has
 been inflicted on the Christians, without due inquiry into their cause.
 [Religious = superstitious. See p. [77]131, supra.]

 [914] Jure humanitatis.

 [915] Coacervant, "they heap up."

 [916] Mella.

 [917] Virgil, Bucol., x. 8.

 [918] There is a reference here to a well-known passage of Lucretius,
 i. 935: "As physicians, when they purpose to give nauseous wormwood to
 children, first smear the rim round the bowl with the sweet yellow
 juice of honey, that the unthinking age of children may be fooled as
 far as the lips, but though beguiled, not be betrayed."

 [919] Sub prætextu.

 [920] Sordida.

 [921] Incutere. So Lucretius, i. 19, "incutiens amorem."

 [922] Ponderat.

 [923] Sine fuco.

 [924] [Vol iv. [78]173. Note our author's reference to the founders of
 Latin Christianity, all North-Africans, like Arnobius and himself. See
 vol. iv. pp. [79]169, 170.]

 [925] Unus.

 [926] The word kopri'as is applied to sycophants and low buffoons and
 jesters, who, for the sake of exciting laughter, made boastful and
 extravagant promises.

 Chap. II.--To What an Extent the Christian Truth Has Been Assailed by Rash
 Men.

 Therefore, because there have been wanting among us suitable and
 skilful teachers, who might vigorously and sharply refute public
 errors, and who might defend the whole cause of truth with elegance and
 copiousness, this very want incited some to venture to write against
 the truth, which was unknown to them. I pass by those who in former
 times in vain assailed it. When I was teaching rhetorical learning in
 Bithynia, having been called thither, and it had happened that at the
 same time the temple of God was overthrown, there were living at the
 same place two men who insulted the truth as it lay prostrate and
 overthrown, I know not whether with greater arrogance or harshness: the
 one of whom professed himself the high priest of philosophy; [927] but
 he was so addicted to vice, that, though a teacher of abstinence, he
 was not less inflamed with avarice than with lusts; so extravagant in
 his manner of living, that though in his school he was the maintainer
 of virtue, the praiser of parsimony and poverty, he dined less
 sumptuously in a palace than at his own house. Nevertheless he
 sheltered [928] his vices by his hair [929] and his cloak, and (that
 which is the greatest screen [930] ) by his riches; and that he might
 increase these, he used to penetrate with wonderful effort [931] to the
 friendships of the judges; and he suddenly attached them to himself by
 the authority of a fictitious name, not only that he might make a
 traffic of their decisions, but also that he might by this influence
 hinder his neighbours, whom he was driving from their homes and lands,
 from the recovery of their property. This man, in truth, who overthrew
 his own arguments by his character, or censured his own character by
 his arguments, a weighty censor and most keen accuser against himself,
 at the very same time in which a righteous people were impiously
 assailed, vomited forth three books against the Christian religion and
 name; professing, above all things, that it was the office of a
 philosopher to remedy the errors of men, and to recall them to the true
 way, that is, to the worship of the gods, by whose power and majesty,
 as he said, the world is governed; and not to permit that inexperienced
 men should be enticed by the frauds of any, lest their simplicity
 should be a prey and sustenance to crafty men.

 Therefore he said that he had undertaken this office, worthy of
 philosophy, that he might hold out to those who do not see the light of
 wisdom, not only that they may return to a healthy state of mind,
 having undertaken the worship of the gods, but also that, having laid
 aside their pertinacious obstinacy, they may avoid tortures of the
 body, nor wish in vain to endure cruel lacerations of their limbs. But
 that it might be evident on what account he had laboriously worked out
 that task, he broke out profusely into praises of the princes, whose
 piety and foresight, as he himself indeed said, had been distinguished
 both in other matters, and especially in defending the religious rites
 of the gods; that he had, in short, consulted the interests of men, in
 order that, impious and foolish superstition having been restrained,
 all men might have leisure for lawful sacred rites, and might
 experience the gods propitious to them. But when he wished to weaken
 the grounds of that religion against which he was pleading, he appeared
 senseless, vain, and ridiculous; because that weighty adviser of the
 advantage of others was ignorant not only what to oppose, but even what
 to speak. For if any of our religion were present, although they were
 silent on account of the time, nevertheless in their mind they derided
 him; since they saw a man professing that he would enlighten others,
 when he himself was blind; that he would recall others from error, when
 he himself was ignorant where to plant his feet; that he would instruct
 others to the truth, of which he himself had never seen even a spark at
 any time; inasmuch as he who was a professor of wisdom, endeavoured to
 overthrow wisdom. All, however, censured this, that he undertook this
 work at that time in particular, in which odious cruelty raged. O
 philosopher, a flatterer, and a time-server! But this man was despised,
 as his vanity deserved; for he did not gain the popularity which he
 hoped for, and the glory which he eagerly sought for was changed into
 censure and blame. [932]

 Another [933] wrote the same subject with more bitterness, who was then
 of the number of the judges, and who was especially the adviser of
 enacting persecution; and not contented with this crime, he also
 pursued with writings those whom he had persecuted. For he composed two
 books, not against the Christians, lest he might appear to assail them
 in a hostile manner but to the Christians, that he might be thought to
 consult for them with humanity and kindness. And in these writings he
 endeavoured so to prove the falsehood of sacred Scripture, as though it
 were altogether contradictory to itself; for he expounded some chapters
 which seemed to be at variance with themselves, enumerating so many and
 such secret [934] things, that he sometimes appears to have been one of
 the same sect. But if this was so, what Demosthenes will be able to
 defend from the charge of impiety him who became the betrayer of the
 religion to which he had given his assent, [935] and of the faith the
 name of which he had assumed, [936] and of the mystery [937] which he
 had received, unless it happened by chance that the sacred writings
 fell into his hands? What rashness was it, therefore, to dare to
 destroy that which no one explained to him! It was well that he either
 learned nothing or understood nothing. For contradiction is as far
 removed from the sacred writings as he was removed from faith and
 truth. He chiefly, however, assailed Paul and Peter, and the other
 disciples, as disseminators of deceit, whom at the same time he
 testified to have been unskilled and unlearned. For he says that some
 of them made gain by the craft of fishermen, as though he took it ill
 that some Aristophanes or Aristarchus did not devise that subject.

 [927] [Let us call him Barbatus; for one so graphically described by
 our author deserves a name worthy of his sole claim to be a
 philosopher.]

 [928] Protegebat.

 [929] It was the custom of the philosophers to wear a beard; to which
 practise Horace alludes, Serm., ii. 3, "Sapientem pascere barbam," to
 nourish a philosophic beard. [The readers of this series no longer
 require this information: but it may be convenient to recur to vol. ii.
 [80]note 9, p. 321; also, perhaps, to Clement's terrible defence of
 beards, Ibid., pp. [81]276-277.]

 [930] Velamentum.

 [931] Ambitu. The word denotes the unlawful striving for a post.

 [932] [On the reference to these two adversaries, see Lardner, Credib.,
 iii. cap. 65, p. 491; vii. cap. 39, p. 471; also vii. 207.]

 [933] Hierocles is referred to, who was a great persecutor of the
 Christians in the beginning of the fourth century. He was the chief
 promoter of the persecution which the Christians suffered under
 Diocletian. [Wrote a work (Philalethes) to show the contradictions of
 Scripture. Acts xiii. 10.]

 [934] [Intima, i.e., of an esoteric character, known only to those
 within the school or sect.]

 [935] Cui fuerat assensus. Other editions read "accensus," i.e.,
 reckoned among.

 [936] Induerat.

 [937] Sacramenti.

 Chap. III.--Of the Truth of the Christian Doctrine, and the Vanity of Its
 Adversaries; And that Christ Was Not a Magician.

 The desire of inventing, [938] therefore, and craftiness were absent
 from these men, since they were unskilful. Or what unlearned man could
 invent things adapted to one another, and coherent, when the most
 learned of the philosophers, Plato and Aristotle, and Epicurus and
 Zeno, themselves spoke things at variance with one another, and
 contrary? For this is the nature of falsehoods, that they cannot be
 coherent. But their teaching, because it is true, everywhere agrees,
 [939] and is altogether consistent with itself; and on this account it
 effects persuasion, because it is based on a consistent plan. They did
 not therefore devise that religion for the sake of gain and advantage,
 inasmuch as both by their precepts and in reality they followed that
 course of life which is without pleasures, and despised all things
 which are reckoned among good things, and since they not only endured
 death for their faith, but also both knew and foretold that they were
 about to die, and afterwards that all who followed their system would
 suffer cruel and impious things. But he [940] affirmed that Christ
 Himself was put to flight by the Jews, and having collected a band of
 nine hundred men, committed robberies. Who would venture to oppose so
 great an authority? We must certainly believe this, for perchance some
 Apollo announced it to him in his slumbers. So many robbers have at all
 times perished, and do perish daily, and you yourself have certainly
 condemned many: which of them after his crucifixion was called, I will
 not say a God, but a man? But you perchance believed it from the
 circumstance of your having consecrated the homicide Mars as a god,
 though you would not have done this if the Areopagites had crucified
 him.

 The same man, when he endeavoured to overthrow his wonderful deeds, and
 did not however deny them, wished to show that Apollonius [941]
 performed equal or even greater deeds. It is strange that he omitted to
 mention Apuleius, [942] of whom many and wonderful things are
 accustomed to be related. Why therefore, O senseless one, does no one
 worship Apollonius in the place of God? unless by chance you alone do
 so, who are worthy forsooth of that god, with whom the true God will
 punish you everlastingly. If Christ is a magician because He performed
 wonderful deeds, it is plain that Apollonius, who, according to your
 description, when Domitian wished to punish him, suddenly disappeared
 on his trial, was more skilful than He who was both arrested and
 crucified. But perhaps he wished from this very thing to prove the
 arrogance of Christ, in that He made Himself God, that the other may
 appear to have been more modest, who, though he performed greater
 actions, as this one thinks, nevertheless did not claim that for
 himself. I omit at present to compare the works themselves, because in
 the second and preceding book I have spoken respecting the fraud and
 tricks of the magic art. I say that there is no one who would not wish
 that that should especially befall him after death which even the
 greatest kings desire. For why do men prepare for themselves
 magnificent sepulchres why statues and images? why by some illustrious
 deeds, or even by death undergone in behalf of their countrymen, do
 they endeavour to deserve the good opinions of men? Why, in short, have
 you yourself wished to raise a monument of your talent, built with this
 detestable folly, as if with mud, except that you hope for immortality
 from the remembrance of your name? It is foolish, therefore, to imagine
 that Apollonius did not desire that which he would plainly wish for if
 he were able to attain to it; because there is no one who refuses
 immortality, and especially when you say that he was both adored by
 some as a god, and that his image was set up under the name of
 Hercules, the averter of evil, and is even now honoured by the
 Ephesians.

 He could not therefore after death be believed to be a god, because it
 was evident that he was both a man and a magician; and for this reason
 he affected [943] divinity under the title of a name belonging to
 another, for in his own name he was unable to attain it, nor did he
 venture to make the attempt. But he of whom we speak [944] could both
 be believed to be a god, because he was not a magician, and was
 believed to be such because he was so in truth. I do not say this, he
 says, that Apollonius was not accounted a god, because he did not wish
 it, but that it may be evident that we, who did not at once connect a
 belief in his divinity with wonderful deeds, are wiser than you, who on
 account of slight wonders believed that he was a god. It is not
 wonderful if you, who are far removed from the wisdom of God,
 understand nothing at all of those things which you have read, since
 the Jews, who from the beginning had frequently read the prophets, and
 to whom the mystery [945] of God had been assigned, were nevertheless
 ignorant of what they read. Learn, therefore, if you have any sense,
 that Christ was not believed by us to be God on this account, because
 He did wonderful things, but because we saw that all things were done
 in His case which were announced to us by the prediction of the
 prophets. He performed wonderful deeds: we might have supposed Him to
 be a magician, as you now suppose Him to be, and the Jews then supposed
 Him, if all the prophets did not with one accord [946] proclaim that
 Christ would do those very things. Therefore we believe Him to be God,
 not more from His wonderful deeds and works, than from that very cross
 which you as dogs lick, since that also was predicted at the same time.
 It was not therefore on His own testimony (for who can be believed when
 he speaks concerning himself?), but on the testimony of the prophets
 who long before foretold all things which He did and suffered, that He
 gained a belief in His divinity, which could have happened neither to
 Apollonius, [947] nor to Apuleius, nor to any of the magicians; nor can
 it happen at any time. When, therefore, he had poured forth such absurd
 ravings [948] of his ignorance, when he had eagerly endeavoured utterly
 to destroy the truth, he dared to give to his books which were impious
 and the enemies of God the title of "truth-loving." O blind breast! O
 mind more black than Cimmerian darkness, as they say! He may perhaps
 have been a disciple of Anaxagoras, [949] to whom snows were as black
 as ink. But it is the same blindness, to give the name of falsehood to
 truth, and of truth to falsehood. Doubtless the crafty man wished to
 conceal the wolf under the skin of a sheep, [950] that he might ensnare
 the reader by a deceitful title. Let it be true; grant that you did
 this from ignorance, not from malice: what truth, however, have you
 brought to us, except that, being a defender of the gods, you had at
 last betrayed those very gods? For, having set forth the praises of the
 Supreme God, whom you confessed to be king, most mighty, the maker of
 all things, the fountain of honours, the parent of all, the creator and
 preserver of all living creatures, you took away the kingdom from your
 own Jupiter; and when you had driven him from the supreme power, you
 reduced him to the rank of servants. Thus your own conclusion [951]
 convicts you of folly, vanity, and error. For you affirm that the gods
 exist, and yet you subject and enslave them to that God whose religion
 you attempt to overturn.

 [938] Fingendi.

 [939] Undique quadrat.

 [940] Hierocles, referred to in chapter 2.

 [941] Apollonius, a celebrated Pythagorean philosopher of Tyana: his
 works and doctrines are recorded by Philostratus, from whom Lactantius
 appears to have derived his account. The pagans compared his life and
 actions with those of Christ. [See Origen, vol. iv. [82]p. 591, this
 series.]

 [942] Apuleius, a native of Madaura, a city on the borders of the
 province of Africa, he professed the Platonic philosophy. He was
 reputed a magician by the Christian writers. [Author of The Golden Ass,
 a most entertaining but often indecent satire, which may have inspired
 Cervantes, and concerning which see Warburton, Div. Legat., vol. ii. p.
 177 (et alibi), ed. London, 1811.]

 [943] Affectavit divinitatem.

 [944] Noster.

 [945] Sacramentum.

 [946] With one spirit, "uno spiritu."

 [947] [But Apollonius was set up as an Antichrist by Philostratus as
 Cudworth supposes, and so other men of learning. But no student should
 overlook l.ardner's valuable commentary on this character, and his
 quotations from Bishop Parker of Oxford, Credib., vol. vii. p. 486, and
 also p. 508, cap. 29, and appendix.]

 [948] Deliramenta.

 [949] See book ii. ch. 23.

 [950] Cf. Matt. vii. 15.

 [951] Epilogus.

 Chap. IV.--Why This Work Was Published, and Again of Tertullian and Cyprian.

 Since, therefore, they of whom I have spoken had set forth their
 sacrilegious writings in my presence, and to my grief, being incited
 both by the arrogant impiety of these, and by the consciousness of
 truth itself, and (as I think) by God, I have undertaken this office,
 that with all the strength of my mind I might refute the accusers of
 righteousness; not that I should write against these, who might be
 crushed with a few words, but that I might once for all by one attack
 overthrow all who everywhere effect, or have effected, the same work.
 For I do not doubt that very many others, and in many places, and that
 not only in Greek, but also in Latin writings, have raised a monument
 of their own unrighteousness. And since I was not able to reply to
 these separately, I thought that this cause was to be so pleaded by me
 that I might overthrow former writers, together with all their
 writings, and cut off from future writers the whole power of writing
 and of replying. [952] Only let them attend, and I will assuredly
 effect that whosoever shall know these things, must either embrace that
 which he before condemned, or, which is next to it, cease at length to
 deride it. Although Tertullian fully pleaded the same cause in that
 treatise which is entitled the Apology, [953] yet, inasmuch as it is
 one thing to answer accusers, which consists in defence or denial only,
 and another thing to instruct, which we do, in which the substance of
 the whole system must be contained, I have not shrunk from this labour,
 that I might complete the subject, which Cyprian did not fully carry
 out in that discourse in which he endeavours to refute Demetrianus (as
 he himself says) railing at and clamouring [954] against the truth.
 Which subject he did not handle as he ought to have done; for he ought
 to have been refuted not by the testimonies of Scripture, which he
 plainly considered vain, fictitious, and false, but by arguments and
 reason. For, since he was contending against a man who was ignorant of
 the truth, he ought for a while to have laid aside divine readings, and
 to have formed from the beginning this man as one who was altogether
 ignorant, [955] and to have shown to him by degrees the beginnings of
 light, that he might not be dazzled, [956] the whole of its brightness
 being presented to him. [957]

 For as an infant is unable, on account of the tenderness of its
 stomach, to receive the nourishment of solid and strong food, but is
 supported by liquid and soft milk, until, its strength being confirmed,
 it can feed on stronger nourishment; so also it was befitting that this
 man, because he was not yet capable of receiving divine things, should
 be presented with human testimonies--that is, of philosophers and
 historians--in order that he might especially be refuted by his own
 authorities. And since he did not do this, being carried away by his
 distinguished knowledge of the sacred writings, so that he was content
 with those things alone in which faith consists, I have undertaken,
 with the favour of God, to do this, and at the same time to prepare the
 way for the imitation of others. And if, through my exhortation,
 learned and eloquent men shall begin to betake themselves to this
 subject, and shall choose to display their talents and power of
 speaking in this field of truth, no one can doubt that false religions
 will quickly disappear, and philosophy altogether fall, if all shall be
 persuaded that this alone is religion and the only true wisdom. But I
 have wandered from the subject further than I wished.

 [952] [Future Writers. This laying of an anchor to windward is
 characteristic of Lactantius.]

 [953] [See elucidations, vol. iii. [83]pp. 56-60, this series.]

 [954] Oblatrantem atque obstrepentem veritati. These words are taken
 from Cyprian, vol. v. [84]p. 457, this series.

 [955] Rudem.

 [956] Caligaret.

 [957] [This censure of Cyprian fully exculpates Minucius, Arnobius, and
 others, superficially blamed for their few quotations from Holy Writ.
 Also, it explains our author's quotations from the Sibyl, etc.]

 Chap. V.--There Was True Justice Under Saturnus, But It Was Banished by
 Jupiter.

 Now the promised disputation concerning justice must be given; which is
 either by itself the greatest virtue, or by itself the fountain of
 virtue, which not only philosophers sought, but poets also, who were
 much earlier, and were esteemed as wise before the origin of the name
 of philosophy. These clearly understood that this justice was absent
 from the affairs of men; and they feigned that it, being offended with
 the vices of men, departed from the earth, and withdrew to heaven; and
 that they may teach what it is to live justly (for they are accustomed
 to give precepts by circumlocutions), they repeat examples of justice
 from the times of Saturnus, which they call the golden times, and they
 relate in what condition human life was while it delayed on the earth.
 [958] And this is not to be regarded as a poetic fiction, but as the
 truth. For, while Saturnus reigned, the religious worship of the gods
 not having yet been instituted, nor any [959] race being as yet set
 apart in the belief of its divinity, God was manifestly worshipped. And
 therefore there were neither dissensions, nor enmities, nor wars.


 "Not yet had rage unsheathed maddened swords,"

 as Germanicus Cæsar speaks in his poem translated from Aratus, [960]


 "Nor had discord been known among relatives."

 No, nor even among strangers: but there were no swords at all to be
 unsheathed. For who, when justice was present and in vigour, would
 think respecting his own protection, since no one plotted against him;
 or respecting the destruction of another, since no one desired
 anything?


 "They preferred to live content with a simple mode of life,"

 as Cicero [961] relates in his poem; and this is peculiar to our
 religion. "It was not even allowed to mark out or to divide the plain
 with a boundary: men sought all things in common;" [962] since God had
 given the earth in common to all, that they might pass their life in
 common, not that mad and raging avarice might claim all things for
 itself, and that that which was produced for all might not be wanting
 to any. And this saying of the poet ought so to be taken, not as
 suggesting the idea that individuals at that time had no private
 property, but it must be regarded as a poetical figure; that we may
 understand that men were so liberal, that they did not shut up the
 fruits of the earth produced for them, nor did they in solitude brood
 over the things stored up, but admitted the poor to share the fruits of
 their labour:--


 "Now streams of milk, now streams of nectar flowed." [963]

 And no wonder, since the storehouses of the good liberally lay open to
 all. Nor did avarice intercept the divine bounty, and thus cause hunger
 and thirst in common; but all alike had abundance, since they who had
 possessions gave liberally and bountifully to those who had not. But
 after that Saturnus had been banished from heaven, and had arrived in
 Latium,--


 "Exiled from his throne

 By Jove, his mightier heir," [964] --

 since the people either through fear of the new king, or of their own
 accord, had become corrupted and ceased to worship God, and had begun
 to esteem the king in the place of God, since he himself, almost a
 parricide, was an example to others to the injury of piety,--


 "The most just Virgin in haste deserted the lands;" [965]

 but not as Cicero says, [966]


 "And settled, in the kingdom of Jupiter, [967] [968] and in a part of
 the heaven."

 For how could she settle or tarry in the kingdom of him who expelled
 his father from his kingdom, harassed him with war, and drove him as an
 exile over the whole world?


 "He gave to the black serpents their noxious poison,

 And ordered wolves to prowl;" [969]

 that is, he introduced among men hatred, and envy, and stratagem; so
 that they were poisonous as serpents, and rapacious as wolves. And they
 truly do this who persecute those who are righteous and faithful
 towards God, and give to judges the power of using violence against the
 innocent. Perhaps Jupiter may have done something of this kind for the
 overthrow and removal of righteousness; and on this account he is
 related to have made serpents fierce, and to have whetted the spirit of
 wolves.


 "Then war's indomitable rage,

 And greedy lust of gain;" [970]

 and not without reason. For the worship of God being taken away, men
 lost the knowledge of good and evil. Thus the common intercourse of
 life perished from among then, and the bond of human society was
 destroyed. Then they began to contend with one another, and to plot,
 and to acquire for themselves glory from the shedding of human blood.

 [958] [Striking is the language of the Pollio ("Redit et Virgo," etc.)
 in which the true Virgin seems to be anticipated.]

 [959] Ulla. Another reading is "illâ," as though there were a reference
 to the family of Saturnus.

 [960] Germanicus Cæsar, the grandson of Augustus, translated in verse a
 part of the poems of Aratus. [See p. 36, supra.]

 [961] Cicero translated in verse part of the poems of Aratus. [This
 poet is quoted by St. Paul, tou gar kai` ge'nos esme'n, Acts xvii. 28.
 Archdeacon Farrar does not consider the natural and impedantic spirit
 of the Apostle in suiting this quotation to time and place; and, if it
 was a common-place proverb, all the more suggestive is the accuracy of
 the reference to "one of your own poets."]

 [962] Virg., Georg., i. 126.

 [963] Ovid, Metam., i. 111.

 [964] Virg. Æn., viii. 320.

 [965] Germ. Cæs., Arat., 136.

 [966] [That is, in his translation of the poetry of Aratus.]

 [967]

 [968] [Et Jovis in regno, coelique in parte resedit. For this
 fragmentary verse we are indebted to our author; other fragments are
 given in good editions of Cicero. He translated the Phenomena of Aratus
 in his youth. My (Paris) edition contains nearly the whole.]

 [969] Virg., Georg., i. 139.

 [970] Virg., Æn., viii. 327.

 Chap. VI.--After the Banishment of Justice, Lust, Unjust Laws, Daring,
 Avarice, Ambition, Pride, Impiety, and Other Vices Reigned.

 And the source of all these evils was lust; which, indeed, burst forth
 from the contempt of true majesty. For not only did they who had a
 superfluity fail to bestow a share upon others, but they even seized
 the property of others, drawing everything to their private gain; and
 the things which formerly even individuals laboured to obtain for the
 common use of men, [971] were now conveyed to the houses of a few. For,
 that they might subdue others by slavery, they began especially to
 withdraw and collect together the necessaries of life, and to keep them
 firmly shut up, that they might make the bounties of heaven their own;
 not on account of kindness, [972] a feeling which had no existence in
 them, but that they might sweep together all the instruments of lust
 and avarice. They also, under the name of justice, passed most unequal
 and unjust laws, by which they might defend their plunder and avarice
 against the force of the multitude. They prevailed, therefore, as much
 by authority as by strength, or resources, or malice. And since there
 was in them no trace of justice, the offices of which are humanity,
 equity, pity, they now began to rejoice in a proud and swollen
 inequality, and made [973] themselves higher than other men, by a
 retinue of attendants, and by the sword, and by the brilliancy of their
 garments. For this reason they invented for themselves honours, and
 purple robes, and fasces, that, being supported by the terror produced
 by axes and swords, they might, as it were by the right of masters,
 rule them, stricken with fear, and alarmed. Such was the condition in
 which the life of man was placed by that king who, having defeated and
 put to flight a parent, did not seize his kingdom, but set up an
 impious tyranny by violence and armed men, and took away that golden
 age of justice, and compelled men to become wicked and impious, even
 from this very circumstance, that he turned them away from God to the
 worship of himself; and the terror of his excessive power had extorted
 this.

 For who would not fear him who was girded about with arms, whom the
 unwonted gleam of steel and swords surrounded? Or what stranger would
 he spare who had not even spared his own father? Whom, in truth, should
 he fear, who had conquered in war, and destroyed by massacre the race
 of the Titans, which was strong and excelling in might? What wonder if
 the whole multitude, pressed by unusual fear, had given themselves up
 to the adulation of a single man? Him they venerated, to him they paid
 the greatest honour. And since it is judged to be a kind of
 obsequiousness to imitate the customs and vices of a king, all men laid
 aside piety, lest, if they should live piously, they might seem to
 upbraid the wickedness of the king. Thus, being corrupted by continual
 imitation, they abandoned divine right, and the practice of living
 wickedly by degrees became a habit. And now nothing remained of the
 pious and excellent condition of the preceding age; but justice being
 banished, and drawing with her the truth, left to men error, ignorance,
 and blindness. The poets therefore were ignorant, who sung that she
 fled to heaven, to the kingdom of Jupiter. For if justice was on the
 earth in the age which they call "golden," it is plain that she was
 driven away by Jupiter, who changed the golden age. But the change of
 the age and the expulsion of justice is to be deemed nothing else, as I
 have said, than the laying aside of divine religion, which alone
 effects that man should esteem man dear, and should know that he is
 bound to him by the tie of brotherhood, since God is alike a Father to
 all, so as to share the bounties of the common God and Father with
 those who do not possess them; to injure no one, to oppress no one, not
 to close his door against a stranger, nor his ear against a suppliant,
 but to be bountiful, beneficent, and liberal, which Tullius [974]
 thought to be praises suitable to a king. This truly is justice, and
 this is the golden age, which was first corrupted when Jupiter reigned,
 and shortly afterwards, when he himself and all his offspring were
 consecrated as gods, and the worship of many deities undertaken, had
 been altogether taken away.

 [971] Hominum. Another reading is "omnium," of all, as opposed to the
 few.

 [972] Propter humanitatem.

 [973] Altiores se...faciebant. Another reading is, "altiores
 cæteris...fulgebant."

 [974] [Compare Cicero, De Officiis, i. 14, with Luke xxii. 25.]

 Chap. VII.--Of the Coming of Jesus, and Its Fruit; And of the Virtues and
 Vices of that Age.

 But God, as a most indulgent parent, when the last time approached,
 sent a messenger to bring back that old age, and justice which had been
 put to flight, that the human race might not be agitated by very great
 and perpetual errors. Therefore the appearance of that golden time
 returned, and justice was restored to the earth, but was assigned to a
 few; and this justice is nothing else than the pious and religious
 worship of the one God. But perhaps some may be inclined to ask, why,
 if this be justice, it is not given to all mankind, and the whole
 multitude does not agree to it. This is a matter of great disputation,
 why a difference was retained by God when He gave justice to the earth;
 and this I have shown in another place, and whenever a favourable
 opportunity shall occur it shall be explained. Now it is sufficient
 very briefly to signify it: that virtue can neither be discerned,
 unless it has vices opposed to it; nor be perfect, unless it is
 exercised by adversity. [975] For God designed that there should be
 this distinction between good and evil things, that we may know from
 that which is evil the quality of the good, and also the quality of the
 evil from the good; nor can the nature of the one be understood if the
 other is taken away. God therefore did not exclude evil, that the
 nature of virtue might be evident. For how could patient endurance
 [976] retain its meaning and name if there were nothing which we were
 compelled to endure? [977] How could faith devoted to its God deserve
 praise, unless there were some one who wished to turn us away from God?
 For on this account He permitted the unjust to be more powerful, that
 they might be able to compel to evil; and on this account to be more
 numerous, that virtue might be precious, because it is rare. And this
 very point is admirably and briefly shown by Quintilian in "the muffled
 head." [978] "For what virtue," he says, "would there be in innocence,
 had not its rarity furnished it with praises? But because it is
 provided by nature that hatred, desire, and anger drive men blindly to
 that object to which they have applied themselves, to be free from
 fault appears to be beyond the power of man. Otherwise, if nature had
 given to all men equal affections, piety would be nothing."

 How true this is, the necessity of the case itself teaches. For if it
 is virtue to resist with fortitude evils and vices, it is evident that,
 without evil and vice, there is no perfected virtue; and that God might
 render this complete and perfect, He retained that which was contrary
 to it, with which it might contend. For, being agitated by evils which
 harass it, it gains stability; and in proportion to the frequency with
 which it is urged onward, is the firmness with which it is
 strengthened. This is evidently the cause which effects that, although
 justice is sent to men, yet it cannot be said that a golden age exists;
 because God has not taken away evil, that He might retain that
 diversity which alone preserves the mystery of a divine religion.

 [975] [To establish this, would be to go far in a theodicy to reconcile
 the permission of evil with the divine goodness.]

 [976] Patientia.

 [977] Pati.

 [978] Caput obvolutum. This appears to be the title of a lost
 declamation of Quintilian.

 Chap. VIII.--Of Justice Known to All, But Not Embraced; Of the True Temple
 of God, and of His Worship, that All Vices May Be Subdued.

 They, therefore, who think that no one is just, have justice before
 their eyes, but are unwilling to discern it. For what reason is there
 why they should describe it either in poems or in all their discourse,
 complaining of its absence, when it is very easy for them to be good if
 they wish? Why do you depict to yourselves justice as worthless, [979]
 and wish that she may fall from heaven, as it were, represented in some
 image? Behold, she is in your sight; receive her, if you are able, and
 place her in the abode of your breast; and do not imagine that this is
 difficult, or unsuited to the times. Be just and good, and the justice
 which you seek will follow you of her own accord. Lay aside every evil
 thought from your hearts, and that golden age will at once return to
 you, which you cannot attain to by any other means than by beginning to
 worship the true God. But you long for justice on the earth, while the
 worship of false gods continues, which cannot possibly come to pass.
 But it was not possible even at that time when you imagine, because
 those deities whom you impiously worship were not yet produced, and the
 worship of the one God must have prevailed throughout the earth; of
 that God, I say, who hates wickedness and requires goodness; whose
 temple is not stones or clay, but man himself, who bears the image of
 God. And this temple is adorned not with corruptible gifts of gold and
 jewels, but with the lasting offices of virtues. Learn, therefore, if
 any intelligence is left to you, that men are wicked and unjust because
 gods are worshipped; and that all evils daily increase to the affairs
 of men on this account, because God the Maker and Governor of this
 world has been neglected; because, contrary to that which is right,
 impious superstitions have been taken up; and lastly, because you do
 not permit God to be worshipped even by a few.

 But if God only were worshipped, there would not be dissensions and
 wars, since men would know that they are the sons of one God; and,
 therefore, among those who were connected by the sacred and inviolable
 bond of divine relationship, there would be no plottings, inasmuch as
 they would know what kind of punishments God prepared for the
 destroyers of souls, who sees through secret crimes, and even the very
 thoughts themselves. There would be no frauds or plunderings if they
 had learned, through the instruction of God, to be content with that
 which was their own, though little, so that they might prefer solid and
 eternal things to those which are frail and perishable. There would be
 no adulteries, and debaucheries, and prostitution of women, if it were
 known to all, that whatever is sought beyond the desire of procreation
 is condemned by God. [980] Nor would necessity compel a woman to
 dishonour her modesty, to seek for herself a most disgraceful mode of
 sustenance; since the males also would restrain their lust, and the
 pious and religious contributions of the rich would succour the
 destitute. There would not, therefore, as I have said, be these evils
 on the earth, if there were by common consent a general observance
 [981] of the law of God, if those things were done by all which our
 people alone perform. How happy and how golden would be the condition
 of human affairs, if throughout the world gentleness, and piety, and
 peace, and innocence, and equity, and temperance, and faith, took up
 their abode! In short, there would be no need of so many and varying
 laws to rule men, since the law of God alone would be sufficient for
 perfect innocence; nor would there be any need of prisons, or the
 swords of rulers, or the terror of punishments, since the wholesomeness
 of the divine precepts infused into the breasts of men would of itself
 instruct them to works of justice. But now men are wicked through
 ignorance of what is right and good. And this, indeed, Cicero saw; for,
 discoursing on the subject of the laws, [982] he says: "As the world,
 with all its parts agreeing with one another, coheres and depends upon
 one and the same nature, so all men, being naturally confused among
 themselves, disagree through depravity; nor do they understand that
 they are related by blood, and that they are all subject to one and the
 same guardianship: for if this were kept in mind, assuredly men would
 live the life of gods." Therefore the unjust and impious worship of the
 gods has introduced all the evils by which mankind in turn destroy one
 another. For they could not retain their piety, who, as prodigal and
 rebellious children, had renounced the authority of God, the common
 parent of all.

 [979] Inanem.

 [980] [This is not consistent with the Church's allowance of matrimony
 to women past child-bearing, nor with the language of the Apostle, 1
 Cor. vii. 2-7. See my [85]note (2), vol. ii. p. 262.]

 [981] Si ab omnibus in legem Dei conjuraretur. The word "conjuro,"
 contrary to its general use, is here employed in a good sense.

 [982] [See ed. Klotz, vol. ii. p. 403, Lips., 1869.]

 Chap. IX.--Of the Crimes of the Wicked, and the Torture Inflicted on the
 Christians.

 At times, however, they perceive that they are wicked, and praise the
 condition of the former ages, and conjecture that justice is absent
 because of their characters and deserts; for, though she presents
 herself to their eyes, they not only fail to receive or recognise her,
 but they even violently hate, and persecute, and endeavour to banish
 her. Let us suppose, in the meantime, that she whom we follow is not
 justice: how will they receive her whom they imagine to be the true
 justice, if she shall have come, when they torture and kill those whom
 they themselves confess to be imitators of the just, because they
 perform good and just actions; whereas, if they should put to death the
 wicked only, they would deserve to be unvisited by justice, who had no
 other reason for leaving the earth than the shedding of human blood?
 How much more so when they slay the righteous, and account the
 followers of justice themselves as enemies, yea, as more than enemies;
 who, though they eagerly seek their lives, and property, and children
 by sword and fire, yet are spared when conquered; and there is a place
 for clemency even amidst arms; or if they have determined to carry
 their cruelty to the utmost, nothing more is done towards them, except
 that they are put to death or led away to slavery! But this is
 unutterable which is done towards those who are ignorant of crime, and
 none are regarded as more guilty than those who are of all men
 innocent. Therefore most wicked men venture to make mention of justice,
 men who surpass wild beasts in ferocity, who lay waste the most gentle
 flock of God,--


 "Like gaunt wolves rushing from their den,

 Whom lawless hunger's sullen growl

 Drives forth into the night to prowl." [983]

 But these have been maddened not by the fury of hunger, but of the
 heart; nor do they prowl in a black mist, but by open plundering; nor
 does the consciousness of their crimes ever recall them from profaning
 the sacred and holy name of justice with that mouth which, like the
 jaws of beasts, is wet with the blood of the innocent. What must we say
 is especially the cause of this excessive and persevering hatred?


 "Does truth produce hatred," [984]

 as the poet says, as though inspired by the Divine Spirit, or are they
 ashamed to be bad in the presence of the just and good? Or is it rather
 from both causes? For the truth is always hateful on this account,
 because he who sins wishes to have free scope for sinning, and thinks
 that he cannot in any other way more securely enjoy the pleasure of his
 evil doings, than if there is no one whom his faults may displease.
 Therefore they endeavour entirely to exterminate and take them away as
 witnesses of their crimes and wickedness, and think them burthensome to
 themselves, as though their life were reproved. For why should any be
 unseasonably good, who, when the public morals are corrupted, should
 censure them by living well? Why should not all be equally wicked,
 rapacious, unchaste, adulterers, perjured, covetous, and fraudulent?
 Why should they not rather be taken out of the way, in whose presence
 they are ashamed to lead an evil life, who, though not by words, for
 they are silent, but by their very course of life, so unlike their own,
 assail and strike the forehead of sinners? For whoever disagrees with
 them appears to reprove them.

 Nor is it greatly to be wondered at if these things are done towards
 men, since for the same cause the people who were placed in hope, [985]
 and not ignorant of God, rose up against God Himself; and the same
 necessity follows the righteous which attacked the Author of
 righteousness Himself. Therefore they harass and torment them with
 studied kinds of punishments, and think it little to kill those whom
 they hate, unless cruelty also mocks their bodies. But if any through
 fear of pain or death, or by their own perfidy, have deserted the
 heavenly oath, [986] and have consented to deadly sacrifices, these
 they praise and load [987] with honours, that by their example they may
 allure others. But upon those who have highly esteemed their faith, and
 have not denied that they are worshippers of God, they fall with all
 the strength of their butchery, as though they thirsted for blood; and
 they call them desperate, [988] because they by no means spare their
 body; as though anything could be more desperate, than to torture and
 tear in pieces him whom you know to be innocent. Thus no sense of shame
 remains among those from whom all kind feeling is absent, and they
 retort upon just men reproaches which are befitting to themselves. For
 they call them impious, being themselves forsooth pious, and shrinking
 from the shedding of human blood; whereas, if they would consider their
 own acts, and the acts of those whom they condemn as impious, they
 would now understand how false they are, and more deserving of all
 those things which they either say or do against the good. For they are
 not of our number, but of theirs who besiege the roads in arms,
 practice piracy by sea; or if it has not been in their power openly to
 assail, secretly mix poisons; who kill their wives that they may gain
 their dowries, or their husbands that they may marry adulterers; who
 either strangle the sons born from themselves, or if they are too
 pious, expose them; who restrain their incestuous passions neither from
 a daughter, nor sister, nor mother, nor priestess; who conspire against
 their own citizens and country; who do not fear the sack; [989] who, in
 fine, commit sacrilege, and despoil the temples of the gods whom they
 worship; and, to speak of things which are light and usually practised
 by them, who hunt for inheritances, forge wills, either remove or
 exclude the just heirs; who prostitute their own persons to lust; who,
 in short, unmindful of what they were born, contend with women in
 passivity; [990] who, in violation of all propriety, [991] pollute and
 dishonour the most sacred part of their body; who mutilate themselves,
 and that which is more impious, in order that they may be priests of
 religion; who do not even spare their own life, but sell their lives to
 be taken away in public; who, if they sit as judges, corrupted by a
 bribe, either destroy the innocent or set free the guilty without
 punishment; who grasp at the heaven itself by sorceries, as though the
 earth would not contain their wickedness. These crimes, I say, and more
 than these, are plainly committed by those who are worshippers of the
 gods.

 Amidst these crimes of such number and magnitude, what place is there
 for justice? And I have collected a few only out of many, not for the
 purpose of censure, but to show their nature. Let those who shall wish
 to know all take in hand the books of Seneca, who was at the same time
 a most true describer and a most vehement accuser of the public morals
 and vices. But Lucilius also briefly and concisely described that dark
 life in these verses: "But now from morn to night, on festival and
 ordinary day alike, the whole people and the fathers with one accord
 display themselves in [992] the forum, and never depart from it. They
 have all given themselves to one and the same pursuit and art, that
 they may be able cautiously to deceive, to fight treacherously, to
 contend in flattery, each to pretend that he is a good man, to lie in
 wait, as if all were enemies to all." But which of these things can be
 laid to the charge of our people, [993] with whom the whole of religion
 consists in living without guilt and without spot? Since, therefore,
 they see that both they and their people do those things which we have
 said, but that ours practice nothing else but that which is just and
 good, they might, if they had any understanding, have perceived from
 this, both that they who do what is good are pious, and that they
 themselves who commit wicked actions are impious. For it is impossible
 that they who do not err in all the actions of their life, should err
 in the main point, that is, in religion, which is the chief of all
 things. For impiety, if taken up in that which is the most important,
 would follow through all the rest. And therefore [994] it is impossible
 that they who err in the whole of their life should not be deceived
 also in religion; inasmuch as piety, if it kept its rule in the chief
 point, would maintain its course in others. Thus it happens, that on
 either side the character of the main subject may be known from the
 state of the actions which are carried on.

 [983] Virg., Æn., ii. 355.

 [984] Ter., Andr., i. 1, 41.

 [985] The Jewish people. Thus St. Paul speaks, Acts xxvi. 6: "I stand
 and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our
 fathers."

 [986] i.e., the Christian religion.

 [987] Mactant.

 [988] Desperati, equivalent to para'boloi, a word borrowed from combats
 with wild beasts, and applied to Christians as being ready to devote
 their lives to the cause of God.

 [989] There is an allusion to the punishment of parricides, who were
 enclosed in a bag with a dog, a serpent, an ape, and a cock, and thrown
 into the sea.

 [990] Patientia, in a bad sense. [The text of the translator gives
 "endurance," for which I venture to substitute as above.]

 [991] Contra fas omne.

 [992] Induforo. "Indu" and "endo" are archaisms, used by Lucretius and
 other writers in the same sense as "in."

 [993] i.e., Christians. [See vol. i. pp. [86]26, 27.]

 [994] Eoque fieri non potest. Others read "æque fieri," etc.

 Chap. X.--Of False Piety, and of False and True Religion.

 It is worth while to investigate their piety, that from their merciful
 and pious actions it may be understood what is the character of those
 things which are done by them contrary to the laws of piety. And that I
 may not seem to attack any one with harshness, I will take a character
 from the poets, and one which is the greatest example of piety. In
 Maro, that king


 "Than who

 The breath of being none e'er drew,

 More brave, more pious, or more true," [995] --

 what proofs of justice did he bring forward to us?


 "There walk with hands fast bound behind

 The victim prisoners, designed

 For slaughter o'er the flames." [996]

 What can be more merciful than this piety? what more merciful than to
 immolate human victims to the dead, and to feed the fire with the blood
 of men as with oil? But perhaps this may not have been the fault of the
 hero himself, but of the poet, who polluted with distinguished
 wickedness "a man distinguished by his piety." [997] Where then, O
 poet, is that piety which you so frequently praise? Behold the pious
 Æneas:--


 "Four hapless youths of Sulmo's breed,

 And four who Ufens call their sire,

 He takes alive, condemned to bleed

 To Pallas' shade on Pallas' pyre." [998]

 Why, therefore, at the very same time when he was sending the men in
 chains to slaughter, did he say,


 "Fain would I grant the living peace," [999]

 when he ordered that those whom he had in his power alive should be
 slain in the place of cattle? But this, as I have said, was not his
 fault--for he perhaps had not received a liberal education--but yours;
 for, though you were learned, yet you were ignorant of the nature of
 piety, and you believed that that wicked and detestable action of his
 was the befitting exercise of piety. He is plainly called pious on this
 account only, because he loved his father. Why should I say that


 "The good Æneas owned their plea," [1000]

 and yet slew them? For, though adjured by the same father, and


 "By young Iulus' dawning day," [1001]

 he did not spare them,


 "Live fury kindling every vein" [1002]

 What! can any one imagine that there was any virtue in him who was
 fired with madness as stubble, and, forgetful of the shade of his
 father, by whom he was entreated, was unable to curb his wrath? He was
 therefore by no means pious who not only slew the unresisting, but even
 suppliants. Here some one will say: What then, or where, or of what
 character is piety? Truly it is among those who are ignorant of wars,
 who maintain concord with all, who are friendly even to their enemies,
 who love all men as brethren, who know how to restrain their anger, and
 to soothe every passion of the mind with calm government. How great a
 mist, therefore, how great a cloud of darkness and errors, has
 over-spread the breasts of men who, when they think themselves
 especially pious, then become especially impious? For the more
 religiously they honour those earthy images, so much the more wicked
 are they towards the name of the true divinity. And therefore they are
 often harassed with greater evils as the reward of their impiety; and
 because they know not the cause of these evils, the blame is altogether
 ascribed to fortune, and the philosophy of Epicurus finds a place, who
 thinks that nothing extends to the gods, and that they are neither
 influenced by favour nor moved by anger, because they often see their
 despisers happy, and their worshippers in misery. And this happens on
 this account, because when they seem to be religious and naturally
 good, they are believed to deserve nothing of that kind which they
 often suffer. However, they console themselves by accusing fortune; nor
 do they perceive that if she had any existence, she would never injure
 her worshippers. Piety of this kind is therefore deservedly followed by
 punishment; and the deity offended with the wickedness of men who are
 depraved in their religious worship, [1003] punishes them with heavy
 misfortune; who, although they live with holiness in the greatest faith
 and innocence, yet because they worship gods whose impious and profane
 rites are an abomination to the true God, are estranged from justice
 and the name of true piety. Nor is it difficult to show why the
 worshippers of the gods cannot be good and just. For how shall they
 abstain from the shedding of blood who worship bloodthirsty deities,
 Mars and Bellona? or how shall they spare their parents who worship
 Jupiter, who drove out his father? or how shall they spare their own
 infants who worship Saturnus? how shall they uphold chastity who
 worship a goddess who is naked, and an adulteress, and who prostitutes
 herself as it were among the gods? how shall they withhold themselves
 from plunder and frauds who are acquainted with the thefts of
 Mercurius, who teaches that to deceive is not the part of fraud, but of
 cleverness? how shall they restrain their lusts who worship Jupiter,
 Hercules, Liber, Apollo, and the others, whose adulteries and
 debaucheries with men and women are not only known to the learned, but
 are even set forth in the theatres, and made the subject of songs, so
 that they are notorious [1004] to all? Among these things is it
 possible for men to be just, who, although they were naturally good,
 would be trained to injustice by the very gods themselves? For, that
 you may propitiate the god whom you worship, there is need of those
 things with which you know that he is pleased and delighted. Thus it
 comes to pass that the god fashions the life of his worshippers
 according to the character of his own will, [1005] since the most
 religious worship is to imitate.

 [995] Virg., Æn., i. 544.

 [996] Ibid., xi. 81.

 [997] Ibid., i. 10.

 [998] Ibid., x. 517.

 [999] Ibid., xi. 111.

 [1000] Virg., Æn., xi. 106.

 [1001] Ibid., x. 524.

 [1002] Ibid., xii. 946.

 [1003] Hominum prave religiosorum.

 [1004] Omnibus notiora.

 [1005] Pro qualitate numinis sui.

 Chap XI.--Of the Cruelty of the Heathens Against the Christians.

 Therefore, because justice is burthensome and unpleasant to those men
 who agree with the character of their gods, they exercise with violence
 against the righteous the same impiety which they show in other things.
 And not without reason are they spoken of by the prophets as beasts.
 Therefore it is excellently said by Marcus Tullius: [1006] "For if
 there is no one who would not prefer to die than to be changed into the
 figure of a beast, although he is about to have the mind of a man, how
 much more wretched is it to be of a brutalized mind in the figure of a
 man! To me, indeed, it seems as much worse as the mind is more
 excellent than the body." Therefore they view with disdain the bodies
 of beasts, though they are themselves more cruel than these; and they
 pride themselves on this account, that they were born men, though they
 have nothing belonging to man except the features and the eminent
 figure. For what Caucasus, what India, what Hyrcania ever nourished
 beasts so savage and so bloodthirsty? For the fury of all wild beasts
 rages until their appetite is satisfied; and when their hunger is
 appeased, immediately is pacified. That is truly a beast by whose
 command alone


 "With rivulets of slaughter reeks

 The stern embattled field."

 "Dire agonies, wild terrors swarm,

 And Death glares grim in many a form." [1007]

 No one can befittingly describe the cruelty of this beast, which
 reclines in one place, and yet rages with iron teeth throughout the
 world, and not only tears in pieces the limbs of men, but also breaks
 their very bones, and rages over their ashes, that there may be no
 place for their burial, as though they who confess God aimed at this,
 that their tombs should be visited, and not rather that they themselves
 may reach the presence of God.

 What brutality is it, what fury, what madness, to deny light to the
 living, earth to the dead? I say, therefore, that nothing is more
 wretched than those men whom necessity has either found or made the
 ministers of another's fury, the satellites of an impious command. For
 that was no honour, or exaltation of dignity, but the condemnation of a
 man to torture, and also to the everlasting punishment of God. But it
 is impossible to relate what things they performed individually
 throughout the world. For what number of volumes will contain so
 infinite, so varied kinds of cruelty? For, having gained power, every
 one raged according to his own disposition. Some, through excessive
 timidity, proceeded to greater lengths than they were commanded; others
 thus acted through their own particular hatred against the righteous;
 some by a natural ferocity of mind; some through a desire to please,
 and that by this service they might prepare the way to higher offices:
 some were swift to slaughter, as an individual in Phrygia, who burnt a
 whole assembly of people, together with their place of meeting. But the
 more cruel he was, so much the more merciful [1008] is he found to be.
 But that is the worst kind of persecutors whom a false appearance of
 clemency flatters; he is the more severe, he the more cruel torturer,
 who determines to put no one to death. Therefore it cannot be told what
 great and what grievous modes of tortures judges of this kind devised,
 that they might arrive at the accomplishment of their purpose. But they
 do these things not only on this account, that they may be able to
 boast that they have slain none of the innocent,--for I myself have
 heard some boasting that their administration has been in this respect
 without bloodshed,--but also for the sake of envy, lest either they
 themselves should be overcome, or the others should obtain the glory
 due to their virtue. And thus, in devising modes of punishment, they
 think of nothing else besides victory. For they know that this is a
 contest and a battle. I saw in Bithynia the præfect wonderfully elated
 with joy, as though he had subdued some nation of barbarians, because
 one who had resisted for two years with great spirit appeared at length
 to yield. They contend, therefore, that they may conquer and inflict
 exquisite [1009] pains on their bodies, and avoid nothing else but that
 the victims may not die under the torture: as though, in truth, death
 alone could make them happy, and as though tortures also in proportion
 to their severity would not produce greater glory of virtue. But they
 with obstinate folly give orders that diligent care shall be given to
 the tortured, that their limbs may be renovated for other tortures, and
 fresh blood be supplied for punishment. What can be so pious, so
 beneficent, so humane? They would not have bestowed such anxious care
 on any whom they loved. This is the discipline of the gods: to these
 deeds they train their worshippers; these are the sacred rites which
 they require. Moreover, most wicked murderers have invented impious
 laws against the pious. For both sacrilegious ordinances and unjust
 disputations of jurists are read. Domitius, in his seventh book,
 concerning the office of the proconsul, has collected wicked rescripts
 of princes, that he might show by what punishments they ought to be
 visited who confessed themselves to be worshippers of God.

 [1006] [De Republica, iv. i. 3.]

 [1007] Virg., Æn., xi. 646, ii. 368. [Dan. vii. 7.]

 [1008] The more severe torture, as causing immediate death, may be
 regarded as merciful, in comparison with a slow and lingering
 punishment. [This by an eye-witness of Diocletian's day.]

 [1009] Exquisitis, "carefully studied."

 Chap. XII.--Of True Virtue; And of the Estimation of a Good or Bad Citizen.

 What would you do to those who give the name of justice to the tortures
 inflicted by tyrants of old, who fiercely raged against the innocent;
 and though they are teachers of injustice and cruelty, wish to appear
 just and prudent, being blind and dull, and ignorant of affairs and of
 truth? Is justice so hateful to you, O abandoned minds, that ye regard
 it as equal with the greatest crimes? Is innocence so utterly lost in
 your eyes, that you do not think it worthy of death only, [1010] but it
 is esteemed as beyond all crimes to commit no crime, and to have a
 breast pure from all contagion of guilt? And since we are speaking
 generally with those who worship gods, let us have your permission to
 do good with you; for this is our law, this our business, this our
 religion. If we appear to you wise, imitate us; if foolish, despise us,
 or even laugh at us, if you please; for our folly is profitable to us.
 Why do you lacerate, why do you afflict us? We do not envy your wisdom.
 We prefer this folly of ours--we embrace this. We believe that this is
 expedient for us,--to love you, and to confer all things upon you, who
 hate us.

 There is in the writings of Cicero [1011] a passage not inconsistent
 with the truth, in that disputation which is held by Furius against
 justice: "I ask," he says, "if there should be two men, and one of them
 should be an excellent man, of the highest integrity, the greatest
 justice, and remarkable faith, and the other distinguished by crime and
 audacity; and if the state should be in such error as to regard that
 good man as wicked, vicious, and execrable, but should think the one
 who is most wicked to be of the highest integrity and faith; and if, in
 accordance with this opinion of all the citizens, that good man should
 be harassed, dragged away, should be deprived of his hands, have his
 eyes dug out, should be condemned, be bound, be branded, be banished,
 be in want, and lastly, should most justly appear to all to be most
 wretched; but, on the other hand, if that wicked man should be praised,
 and honoured, and loved by all,--if all honours, all commands, all
 wealth, and all abundance should be bestowed upon him,--in short, if he
 should be judged in the estimation of all an excellent man, and most
 worthy of all fortune,--who, I pray, will be so mad as to doubt which
 of the two he would prefer to be?" Assuredly he put forth this example
 as though he divined what evils were about to happen to us, and in what
 manner, on account of righteousness; for our people suffer all these
 things through the perverseness of those in error. Behold, the state,
 or rather the whole world itself, is in such error, that it persecutes,
 tortures, condemns, and puts to death good and righteous men, as though
 they were wicked and impious. For as to what he says, that no one is so
 infatuated as to doubt which of the two he would prefer to be, he
 indeed, as the one who was contending against justice, thought this,
 that the wise man would prefer to be bad if he had a good reputation,
 than to be good with a bad reputation.

 But may this senselessness be absent from us, that we should prefer
 that which is false to the true? Or does the character of our good man
 depend upon the errors of the people, more than upon our own conscience
 and the judgment of God? Or shall any prosperity ever allure us, so
 that we should not rather choose true goodness, though accompanied with
 all evil, than false goodness together with all prosperity? Let kings
 retain their kingdoms, the rich their riches, as Plautus says, [1012]
 the wise their wisdom; let them leave to us our folly, which is
 evidently proved to be wisdom, from the very fact that they envy us its
 possession: for who would envy a fool, but he who is himself most
 foolish? But they are not so foolish as to envy fools; but from the
 fact of their following us up with such care and anxiety, they allow
 that we are not fools. For why should they rage with such cruelty,
 unless it is that they fear lest, as justice grows strong from day to
 day, they should be deserted together with their decaying [1013] gods?
 If, therefore, the worshippers of gods are wise, and we are foolish,
 why do they fear lest the wise shall be allured by the foolish?

 [1010] Ne morte quidem simplici dignum putetis.

 [1011] [From the Republic, iii. xvii. 27.]

 [1012] Curcul., i. 3, 22.

 [1013] Cariosis. There is a great variety of readings in this place.

 Chapter XIII.--Of the Increase and the Punishment of the Christians. [1014]

 But since our number is continually increased from the worshippers of
 gods, but is never lessened, not even in persecution itself,--since men
 may commit sin, and be defiled by sacrifice, but they cannot be turned
 away from God, for the truth prevails by its own power,--who is there,
 I pray, so foolish and so blind as not to see on which side wisdom is?
 But they are blinded by malice and fury, that they cannot see; and they
 think that those are foolish who, when they have it in their power to
 avoid punishments, nevertheless prefer to be tortured and to be put to
 death; whereas they might see from this very circumstance, that it is
 not folly to which so many thousands throughout the world agree with
 one and the same mind. For if women fall into error through the
 weakness of their sex (for these persons sometimes call it a womanish
 and anile superstition), men doubtless are wise. If boys, if youths are
 improvident through their age, the mature and aged doubtless have a
 fixed judgment. If one city is unwise, it is evident that the other
 innumerable cities cannot be foolish. If one province or one nation is
 without prudence, the rest must have understanding of that which is
 right. But since the divine law has been received from the rising even
 to the setting of the sun, and each sex, every age, and nation, and
 country, with one and the same mind obeys God--since there is
 everywhere the same patient endurance, the same contempt of death--they
 ought to have understood that there is some reason in that matter, that
 it is not without a cause that it is defended even to death, that there
 is some foundation and solidity, which not only frees that religion
 from injuries and molestation, but always increases and makes it
 stronger. For in this respect also the malice of those is brought to
 light, who think that they have utterly overthrown the religion of God
 if they have corrupted men, when it is permitted them to make
 satisfaction also to God; and there is no worshipper of God so evil who
 does not, when the opportunity is given him, return to appease God, and
 that, too, with greater devotedness. For the consciousness of sin and
 the fear of punishment make a man more religious, and the faith is
 always much stronger which is replaced through repentance. If,
 therefore, they themselves, when they think that the gods are angry
 with them, nevertheless believe that they are appeased by gifts, and
 sacrifices, and incense, what reason is there why they should imagine
 our God to be so unmerciful and implacable, that it should appear
 impossible for him to be a Christian, who by compulsion and against his
 will has poured a libation to their gods? Unless by chance they think
 that those who are once contaminated are about to change their mind, so
 that they may now begin of their own accord to do that which they have
 done under the influence of torture. Who would willingly undertake that
 duty which began with injury? Who, when he sees the scars on his own
 sides, would not the more hate the gods, on account of whom he bears
 the traces of lasting punishment, and the marks imprinted upon his
 flesh? Thus it comes to pass, that when peace is given from heaven,
 those who were estranged [1015] from us return, and a fresh crowd
 [1016] of others are added on account of the wonderful nature [1017] of
 the virtue displayed. For when the people see that men are lacerated by
 various kinds of tortures, and that they retain their patience
 unsubdued while the executioners are wearied, they think, as is really
 the case, that neither the agreement of so many nor the constancy of
 the dying is without meaning, and that patience itself could not
 surmount such great tortures without the aid of God. Robbers and men of
 robust frame are unable to endure lacerations of this kind: they utter
 exclamations, and send forth groans; for they are overcome by pain,
 because they are destitute of patience infused [1018] into them. But in
 our case (not to speak of men), boys and delicate women in silence
 overpower their torturers, and even the fire is unable to extort from
 them a groan. Let the Romans go and boast in their Mutius or
 Regulus,--the one of whom gave himself up to be slain by the enemy,
 because he was ashamed to live as a captive; the other being taken by
 the enemy, when he saw that he could not escape death, laid his hand
 upon the burning hearth, that he might make atonement for his crime to
 the enemy whom he wished to kill, and by that punishment received the
 pardon which he had not deserved. Behold, the weak sex and fragile age
 endure to be lacerated in the whole body, and to be burned: not of
 necessity, for it is permitted them to escape if they wished to do so;
 but of their own will, because they put their trust in God. [1019]

 [1014] [Vol. iv. p. 116; same vol., p. 125.]

 [1015] Et qui fuerint aversi, redeant. The common reading is, "et qui
 fugerunt, universi redeant."

 [1016] Alius novas populus.

 [1017] Propter miraculum virtutis.

 [1018] Deest illis inspirata patientia.

 [1019] [Vol. iii. [87]p. 700, this series.]

 Chap. XIV.--Of the Fortitude of the Christians.

 But this is true virtue, which the vaunting philosophers also boast of,
 not in deed, but with empty words, saying that nothing is so befitting
 the gravity and constancy of a wise man as to be able to be driven away
 from his sentiment and purpose by no torturers, but that it is worth
 his while [1020] to suffer torture and death rather than betray a trust
 or depart from his duty, or, overcome by fear of death or severity of
 pain, commit any injustice. Unless by chance Flaccus appears to them to
 rave in his lyrics, when he says,


 "Not the rage of the million commanding things evil;

 Not the doom frowning near in the brows of the tyrant,

 Shakes the upright and resolute man

 In his solid completeness of soul." [1021]

 And nothing can be more true than this, if it is referred to those who
 refuse no tortures, no kind of death, that they may not turn aside from
 faith and justice; who do not tremble at the commands of tyrants nor
 the swords of rulers, [1022] so as not to maintain true and solid
 liberty with constancy of mind, which wisdom is to be observed in this
 alone. For who is so arrogant, who so lifted up, as to forbid me to
 raise my eyes to heaven? Who can impose upon me the necessity either of
 worshipping that which I am unwilling to worship, or of abstaining from
 the worship of that which I wish to worship? What further will now be
 left to us, if even this, which must be done of one's own will, [1023]
 shall be extorted from me by the caprice of another? No one will effect
 this, if we have any courage to despise death and pain. But if we
 possess this constancy, why are we judged foolish when we do those
 things which philosophers praise? Seneca, in charging men with
 inconsistency, rightly says the highest virtue appears to them to
 consist in greatness of spirit; and yet the same persons regard him who
 despises death as a madman, which is plainly a mark of the greatest
 perverseness. But those followers of vain religions urge this with the
 same folly with which they fail to understand the true God; and these
 the Erythræan Sibyl calls "deaf and senseless," [1024] since they
 neither hear nor perceive divine things, but fear and adore an earthen
 image moulded by their own fingers.

 [1020] Tanti est...ne.

 [1021] Horat., Carm., iii. 3, Lord Lytton's translation.

 [1022] i.e., of provinces.

 [1023] Voluntate.

 [1024] kophou`s kai` anoe'tous.

 Chap. XV.--Of Folly, Wisdom, Piety, Equity, and Justice.

 But the reason on account of which they imagine those who are wise to
 be foolish has strong grounds of support (for they are not deceived
 without reason). And this must be diligently explained by us, that they
 may at length (if it is possible) recognise their errors. Justice by
 its own nature has a certain appearance of folly, and I am able to
 confirm this both by divine and human testimonies. But perhaps we
 should not succeed with them, unless we should teach them from their
 own authorities that no one can be just, a matter which is united with
 true wisdom, unless he also appears to be foolish. Carneades was a
 philosopher of the Academic sect; and one who knows not what power he
 had in discussion, what eloquence, what sagacity, will nevertheless
 understand the character of the man himself from the praises of Cicero
 or of Lucilius, in whose writings Neptune, discoursing on a subject of
 the greatest difficulty, shows that it cannot be explained, even if
 Orcus should restore Carneades himself to life. This Carneades, when he
 had been sent by the Athenians as ambassador to Rome, disputed
 copiously on the subject of justice, in the hearing of Galba and Cato,
 who had been censor, who were at that time the greatest of orators. But
 on the next day the same man overthrew his own argument by a
 disputation to the contrary effect, and took away the justice which he
 had praised on the preceding day, not indeed with the gravity of a
 philosopher, whose prudence ought to be firm and his opinion settled,
 but as it were by an oratorical kind of exercise of disputing on both
 sides. And he was accustomed to do this, that he might be able to
 refute others who asserted anything. L. Furius, in Cicero, makes
 mention of that discussion in which justice is overthrown. [1025] I
 believe, inasmuch as he was discussing the subject of the state, he did
 it that he might introduce the defence and praise of that without which
 he thought that a state could not be governed. But Carneades, that he
 might refute Aristotle and Plato, the advocates of justice, in that
 first disputation collected all the arguments which were alleged in
 behalf of justice, that he might be able to overthrow them, as he did.
 For it was very easy to shake justice, having no roots, inasmuch as
 there was then none on the earth, that its nature or qualities might be
 perceived by philosophers. And I could wish that men, so many and of
 such a character, had possessed knowledge also, in proportion to their
 eloquence and spirit, for completing the defence of this greatest
 virtue, which has its origin in religion, its principle in equity! But
 those who were ignorant of that first part could not possess the
 second. But I wish first to show, summarily and concisely, what it is,
 that it may be understood that the philosophers were ignorant of
 justice, and were unable to defend that with which they were
 unacquainted. Although justice embraces all the virtues together, yet
 there are two, the chief of all, which cannot be torn asunder and
 separated from it--piety and equity. For fidelity, temperance,
 uprightness, innocence, integrity, and the other things of this kind,
 either naturally or through the training of parents, may exist in those
 men who are ignorant of justice, as they have always existed; for the
 ancient Romans, who were accustomed to glory in justice, used evidently
 to glory in those virtues which (as I have said) may proceed from
 justice, and be separated from the very fountain itself. But piety and
 equity are, as it were, its veins: for in these two fountains the whole
 of justice is contained; but its source and origin is in the first, all
 its force and method in the second. But piety is nothing else but the
 conception [1026] of God, as Trismegistus most truly defined it, as we
 have said in another place. If, therefore, it is piety to know God, and
 the sum of this knowledge is that you worship Him, it is plain that he
 is ignorant of justice who does not possess the knowledge of God. For
 how can he know justice itself, who is ignorant of the source from
 which it arises? Plato, indeed, spoke many things respecting the one
 God, by whom he said that the world was framed; but he spoke nothing
 respecting religion: for he had dreamed of God, but had not known Him.
 But if either he himself or any other person had wished to complete the
 defence of justice, he ought first of all to have overthrown the
 religions of the gods, because they are opposed to piety. And because
 Socrates indeed tried to do this, he was thrown into prison; that even
 then it might be seen what was about to happen to those men who had
 begun to defend true justice, and to serve the only God.

 The other part of justice, therefore, is equity; and it is plain that I
 am not speaking of the equity of judging well, though this also is
 praiseworthy in a just man, but of making himself equal to others,
 which Cicero calls equability. [1027] For God, who produces and gives
 breath to men, willed that all should be equal, that is, equally
 matched. [1028] He has imposed on all the same condition of living; He
 has produced all to wisdom; He has promised immortality to all; no one
 is cut off from His heavenly benefits. For as He distributes to all
 alike His one light, sends forth His fountains to all, supplies food,
 and gives the most pleasant rest of sleep; so He bestows on all equity
 and virtue. In His sight no one is a slave, no one a master; for if all
 have the same Father, by an equal right we are all children. No one is
 poor in the sight of God, but he who is without justice; no one is
 rich, but he who is full of virtues; no one, in short, is excellent,
 but he who has been good and innocent; no one is most renowned, but he
 who has abundantly performed works of mercy; no one is most perfect,
 but he who has filled all the steps of virtue. Therefore neither the
 Romans nor the Greeks could possess justice, because they had men
 differing from one another by many degrees, from the poor to the rich,
 from the humble to the powerful; in short, from private persons to the
 highest authorities of kings. For where all are not equally matched,
 there is not equity; and inequality of itself excludes justice, the
 whole force of which consists in this, that it makes those equal who
 have by an equal lot arrived at the condition of this life.

 [1025] [See Rep., iii. cap. 6, part iv. vol. 2, p. 300, ed. Klotz.]

 [1026] Notio.

 [1027] [De Officiis, i. 26; and see vol. ii. [88]p. 421, this series.]

 [1028] [A striking parallel to Cyprian's saying, vol. v. [89]note 2, p.
 460, this series.]

 Chap. XVI.--Of the Duties of the Just Man, and the Equity of Christians.

 Therefore, since those two fountains of justice are changed, all virtue
 and all truth are taken away, and justice itself returns to heaven. And
 on this account the true good was not discovered by philosophers,
 because they were ignorant both of its origin and effects: which has
 been revealed to no others but to our people. [1029] Some one will say,
 Are there not among you some poor, and others rich; some servants, and
 others masters? Is there not some difference between individuals? There
 is none; nor is there any other cause why we mutually bestow upon each
 other the name of brethren, except that we believe ourselves to be
 equal. For since we measure all human things not by the body, but by
 the spirit, although the condition of bodies is different, yet we have
 no servants, but we both regard and speak of them as brothers in
 spirit, in religion as fellow-servants. Riches also do not render men
 illustrious, except that [1030] they are able to make them more
 conspicuous by good works. For men are rich, not because they possess
 riches, but because they employ them on works of justice; and they who
 seem to be poor, on this account are rich, because they are not [1031]
 in want, and desire nothing.

 Though, therefore, in lowliness of mind we are on an equality, the free
 with slaves, and the rich with the poor, nevertheless in the sight of
 God we are distinguished by virtue. And every one is more elevated in
 proportion to his greater justice. For if it is justice for a man to
 put himself on a level even with those of lower rank, although he
 excels in this very thing, that he made himself equal to his inferiors;
 yet if he has conducted himself not only as an equal, but even as an
 inferior, he will plainly obtain a much higher rank of dignity in the
 judgment of God. [1032] For assuredly, since all things in this
 temporal life are frail and liable to decay, men both prefer themselves
 to others, and contend about dignity; than which nothing is more foul,
 nothing mere arrogant, nothing more removed from the conduct of a wise
 man: for these earthly things are altogether opposed to heavenly
 things. For as the wisdom of men is the greatest foolishness with God,
 and foolishness is (as I have shown) the greatest wisdom; so he is low
 and abject in the sight of God who shall have been conspicuous and
 elevated on earth. For, not to mention that these present earthly goods
 to which great honour is paid are contrary to virtue, and enervate the
 vigour of the mind, what nobility, I pray, can be so firm, what
 resources, what power, since God is able to make kings themselves even
 lower than the lowest? And therefore God has consulted our interest in
 placing this in particular among the divine precepts: "He that exalteth
 himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be
 exalted." [1033] And the wholesomeness of this precept teaches that he
 who shall simply place himself on a level with other men, and carry
 himself with humility, is esteemed excellent and illustrious in the
 sight of God. For the sentiment is not false which is brought forward
 in Euripides to this effect:--


 "The things which are here considered evil are esteemed good in
 heaven."

 [1029] [Cap. xv. p. 150, supra ]

 [1030] Nisi quòd. Some editions read, "nisi quos," except those whom,
 etc.

 [1031] Quia non egent. Some editors omit non; but this is not so good.

 [1032] [Jas. i. 9, 10, and ii. 1-8.]

 [1033] Luke xiv. ii.

 Chap. XVII.--Of the Equity, Wisdom, and Foolishness of Christians.

 I have explained the reason why philosophers were unable either to find
 or to defend justice. Now I return to that which I had purposed.
 Carneades, therefore, since the arguments of the philosophers were
 weak, undertook the bold task of refuting them, because he understood
 that they were capable of refutation. The substance of his disputation
 was this: "That men [1034] enacted laws for themselves, with a view to
 their own advantage, differing indeed according to their characters,
 and in the case of the same persons often changed according to the
 times: but that there was no natural law: that all, both men and other
 animals, were borne by the guidance of nature to their own advantage;
 therefore that there was no justice, or if any did exist, it was the
 greatest folly, because it injured itself by promoting the interests of
 others." And he brought forward these arguments: "That all nations
 which flourished with dominion, even the Romans themselves, who were
 masters of the whole world, if they wish to be just, that is, to
 restore the possessions of others, must return to cottages, and lie
 down in want and miseries." Then, leaving general topics, he came to
 particulars. "If a good man," he says, "has a runaway slave, or an
 unhealthy and infected house, and he alone knows these faults, and on
 this account offers it for sale, will he give out that the slave is a
 runaway, and the house which he offers for sale is infected, or will he
 conceal it from the purchaser? If he shall give it out, he is good
 indeed, because he will not deceive; but still he will be judged
 foolish, because he will either sell at a low price or not sell at all.
 If he shall conceal it, he will be wise indeed, because he will consult
 his own interest; but he will be also wicked, because he will deceive.
 Again, if he should find any one who supposes that he is selling copper
 ore when it is gold, or lead when it is silver, will he be silent, that
 he may buy it at a small price; or will he give information of it, so
 that he may buy it at a great price? It evidently appears foolish to
 prefer to buy it at a great price." From which he wished it to be
 understood, both that he who is just and good is foolish, and that he
 who is wise is wicked; and yet that it may possibly happen without
 ruin, for men to be contented with poverty. Therefore he passed to
 greater things, in which no one could be just without danger of his
 life. For he said: "Certainly it is justice not to put a man to death,
 not to take the property of another. What, then, will the just man do,
 if he shall happen to have suffered shipwreck, and some one weaker than
 himself shall have seized a plank? Will he not thrust him from the
 plank, that he himself may get upon it, and supported by it may escape,
 especially since there is no witness in the middle of the sea? If he is
 wise, he will do so; for he must himself perish unless he shall thus
 act. But if he choose rather to die than to inflict violence upon
 another, in this case he is just, but foolish, in not sparing his own
 life while he spares the life of another. Thus also, if the army of his
 own people shall have been routed, and the enemy have begun to press
 upon them, and that just man shall have met with a wounded man on
 horseback, will he spare him so as to be slain himself, or will he
 throw him from his horse, that he himself may escape from the enemy? If
 he shall do this, he will be wise, but also wicked; if he shall not do
 it, he will be just, but also of necessity foolish." When, therefore,
 he had thus divided justice into two parts, saying that the one was
 civil, the other natural, he subverted both: because the civil part is
 wisdom, but not justice; but the natural part is justice, but not
 wisdom. These arguments are altogether subtle and acute, [1035] and
 such as Marcus Tullius was unable to refute. For when he represents
 Lælius as replying to Furius, and speaking in behalf of justice, he
 passed them by as a pitfall without refuting them; so that the same
 Lælius appears not to have defended natural justice, which bad fallen
 under the charge of folly, but that civil justice which Furius had
 admitted to be wisdom, but unjust. [1036]

 [1034] [From the Republic, book iii. cap. 12, sec. 21.]

 [1035] Venenata [See De Finibus, book v. cap. 23.]

 [1036] [See p. 150, supra ]

 Chap. XVIII.--Of Justice, Wisdom, and Folly.

 With reference to our present discussion, I have shown how justice
 bears the resemblance of folly, that it may appear that those are not
 deceived without reason who think that men of our religion are foolish
 in appearing to do such things as he proposed. Now I perceive that a
 greater undertaking is required from me, to show why God wished to
 enclose justice under the appearance of folly, and to remove it from
 the eyes of men, when I shall have first replied to Furius, since
 Lælius has not sufficiently replied to him; who, although he was a wise
 man, as he was called, yet could not be the advocate of true justice,
 because he did not possess the source and fountain of justice. But this
 defence is easier for us, to whom by the bounty of Heaven this justice
 is familiar and well known, and who know it not in name, but in
 reality. For Plato and Aristotle desired with an honest will to defend
 justice, and would have effected something, if their good endeavours,
 their eloquence, and vigour of intellect had been aided also by a
 knowledge of divine things. Thus their work, being vain and useless,
 was neglected: nor were they able to persuade any of men to live
 according to their precept, because that system had no foundation from
 heaven. But our work must be more certain, since we are taught of God.
 For they represented justice in words, and pictured it when it was not
 in sight; nor were they able to confirm their assertions by present
 examples. For the hearers might have answered that it was impossible to
 live as they prescribed in their disputation; so that none have as yet
 existed who followed that course of life. But we show the truth of our
 statements not only by words, but also by examples derived from the
 truth. Therefore Carneades understood what is the nature of justice,
 except that he did not sufficiently perceive that it was not folly;
 although I seem to myself to understand with what intention he did
 this. For he did not really think that he who is just is foolish; but
 when he knew that he was not so, but did not comprehend the cause why
 he appeared so, he wished to show that the truth lay hidden, that he
 might maintain the dogma of his own sect, [1037] the chief opinion of
 which is, "that nothing can be fully comprehended."

 Let us see, therefore, whether justice has any agreement with folly.
 The just man, he says, if he does not take away from the wounded man
 his horse, and from the shipwrecked man his plank, in order that he may
 preserve his own life, is foolish. First of all, I deny that it can in
 any way happen that a man who is truly just should be in circumstances
 of this kind; for the just man is neither at enmity with any human
 being, nor desires anything at all which is the property of another.
 For why should he take a voyage, or what should he seek from another
 land, when his own is sufficient for him? Or why should he carry on
 war, and mix himself with the passions of others, when his mind is
 engaged in perpetual peace with men? Doubtless he will be delighted
 with foreign merchandise or with human blood, who does not know how to
 seek gain, who is satisfied with his mode of living, and considers it
 unlawful not only himself to commit slaughter, but to be present with
 those who do it, and to behold it! But I omit these things, since it is
 possible that a man may be compelled even against his will to undergo
 these things. Do you then, O Furius--or rather O Carneades, for all
 this speech is his--think that justice is so useless, so superfluous,
 and so despised by God, that it has no power and no influence in itself
 which may avail for its own preservation? But it is evident that they
 who are ignorant of the mystery [1038] of man, and who therefore refer
 all things to this present life, cannot know how great is the force of
 justice. For when they discuss the subject of virtue, although they
 understand that it is very full of labours and miseries, nevertheless
 they say that it is to be sought for its own sake; for they by no means
 see its rewards, which are eternal and immortal. Thus, by referring all
 things to the present life, they altogether reduce virtue to folly,
 since it undergoes such great labours of this life in vain and to no
 purpose. But more on this subject at another opportunity.

 In the meanwhile let us speak of justice, as we began, the power of
 which is so great, that when it has raised its eyes to heaven, it
 deserves all things from God. Flaccus therefore rightly said, that the
 power of innocence is so great, that wherever it journeys, it needs
 neither arms nor strength for its protection:--


 "He whose life hath no flaw, pure from guile, need not borrow

 Or the bow or the darts of the Moor, O my Fuscus!

 He relies for defence on no quiver that teems with

 Poison-steept arrows.

 Though his path be along sultry African Syrtes,

 Or Caucasian ravines, where no guest finds a shelter,

 Or the banks which Hydaspes, the stream weird [1039] with fable,

 Licks languid-flowing." [1040]

 It is impossible, therefore, that amidst the dangers of tempests and of
 wars the just man should be unprotected by the guardianship of Heaven;
 and that even if he should be at sea in company with parricides and
 guilty men, the wicked also should not be spared, that this one just
 and innocent soul may be freed from danger, or at any rate may be alone
 preserved while the rest perish. But let us grant that the case which
 the philosopher proposes is possible: what, then, will the just man do,
 if he shall have met with a wounded man on a horse, or a shipwrecked
 man on a plank? I am not unwilling to confess he will rather die than
 put another to death. Nor will justice, which is the chief good of man,
 on this account receive the name of folly. For what ought to be better
 and dearer to man than innocence? And this must be the more perfect,
 the more you bring it to extremity, and choose to die rather than to
 detract from the character of innocence. It is folly, he says, to spare
 the life of another in a case which involves the destruction of one's
 own life. Then do you think it foolish to perish even for friendship?

 Why, then, are those Pythagorean friends praised by you, of whom the
 one gave himself to the tyrant as a surety for the life of the other,
 and the other at the appointed time, when his surety was now being led
 to execution, presented himself, and rescued him by his own
 interposition? Whose virtue would not be held in such glory, when one
 of them was willing to die for his friend, the other even for his word
 [1041] which had been pledged, if they were regarded as fools. In fine,
 on account of this very virtue the tyrant rewarded them by preserving
 both, and thus the disposition of a most cruel man was changed.
 Moreover, it is even said that he entreated [1042] them to admit him as
 a third party to their friendship, from which it is plain that he
 regarded them not as fools, but as good and wise men. Therefore I do
 not see why, since it is reckoned the highest glory to die for
 friendship and for one's word, it is not glorious to a man to die even
 for his innocence. They are therefore most foolish who impute it as a
 crime to us that we are willing to die for God, when they themselves
 extol to the heavens with the highest praises him who was willing to
 die for a man. In short, to conclude this disputation, reason itself
 teaches that it is impossible for a man to be at once just and foolish,
 wise and unjust. For he who is foolish is unacquainted with that which
 is just and good, and therefore always errs. For he is, as it were, led
 captive by his vices; nor can he in any way resist them, because he is
 destitute of the virtue of which he is ignorant. But the just man
 abstains from all fault, because he cannot do otherwise, although he
 has the knowledge of right and wrong.

 But who is able to distinguish right from wrong except the wise man?
 Thus it comes to pass, that he can never be just who is foolish, nor
 wise who is unjust. And if this is most true, it is plain that he who
 has not taken away a plank from a shipwrecked man, or a horse from one
 who is wounded, is not foolish; because it is a sin to do these things,
 and the wise man abstains from sin. Nevertheless I myself also confess
 that it has this appearance, through the error of men, who are ignorant
 of the peculiar character [1043] of everything. And thus the whole of
 this inquiry is refuted not so much by arguments as by definition.
 Therefore folly is the erring in deeds and words, through ignorance of
 what is right and good. Therefore he is not a fool who does not even
 spare himself to prevent injury to another, which is an evil. And this,
 indeed, reason and the truth itself dictate. [1044] For we see that in
 all animals, because they are destitute of wisdom, nature is the
 provider of supplies for itself. Therefore they injure others that they
 may profit themselves, for they do not understand that the [1045]
 committing an injury is evil. But man, who has the knowledge of good
 and evil, abstains from committing an injury even to his own damage,
 which an animal without reason is unable to do; and on this account
 innocence is reckoned among the chief virtues of man. Now by these
 things it appears that he is the wisest man who prefers to perish
 rather than to commit an injury, that he may preserve that sense of
 duty [1046] by which he is distinguished from the dumb creation. For he
 who does not point out the error of one who is offering the gold for
 sale, in order that he may buy it for a small sum, or he who does not
 avow that he is offering for sale a runaway slave or an infected house,
 having an eye to his own gain or advantage, is not a wise man, as
 Carneades wished it to appear, but crafty and cunning. Now craftiness
 and cunning exist in the dumb animals also: either when they lie in
 wait for others, and take them by deceit, that they may devour them; or
 when they avoid the snares of others in various ways. But wisdom falls
 to man alone. For wisdom is understanding either with the purpose of
 doing that which is good and right, or for the abstaining from improper
 words and deeds. Now a wise man never gives himself to the pursuit of
 gain, because he despises these earthly advantages: nor does he allow
 any one to be deceived, because it is the duty of a good man to correct
 the errors of men, and to bring them back to the right way; since the
 nature of man is social and beneficent, in which respect alone he bears
 a relation to God.

 [1037] i.e., The Academic School.

 [1038] Sacramentum, "the true theory of human life."

 [1039] Fabulosus.

 [1040] Hor., Carm., i. 22. 1, Lord Lytton's translation.

 [1041] Pro fide.

 [1042] Deprecatus esse dicitur.

 [1043] Proprietatem.

 [1044] Conciliatricem sui.

 [1045] Nesciunt, quia malum est nocere.

 [1046] Officium.

 Chap. XIX.--Of Virtue and the Tortures of Christians, and of the Right of a
 Father and Master.

 But undoubtedly this is the cause [1047] why he appears to be foolish
 who prefers to be in want, or to die rather than to inflict injury or
 take away the property of another,--namely, because they think that man
 is destroyed by death. And from this persuasion all the errors both of
 the common people and also of the philosophers arise. For if we have no
 existence after death, assuredly it is the part of the most foolish man
 not to promote the interests of the present life, that it may be
 long-continued, and may abound with all advantages. But he who shall
 act thus must of necessity depart from the rule of justice. But if
 there remains to man a longer and a better life--and this we learn both
 from the arguments of great philosophers, and from the answers of
 seers, and the divine words of prophets--it is the part of the wise man
 to despise this present life with its advantages, since its entire loss
 is compensated by immortality. The same defender of justice, Lælius,
 says in Cicero: [1048] "Virtue altogether wishes for honour; nor is
 there any other reward of virtue." There is indeed another, and that
 most worthy of virtue, which you, O Lælius, could never have supposed;
 for you had no knowledge of the sacred writings. And this reward it
 easily receives, and does not harshly demand. You are greatly mistaken,
 if you think that a reward can be paid to virtue by man, since you
 yourself most truly said in another place: "What riches will you offer
 to this man? what commands? what kingdoms? He who regards these things
 as human, judges his own advantages to be divine." Who, therefore, can
 think you a wise man, O Lælius, when you contradict yourself, and after
 a short interval take away from virtue that which you have given to
 her? But it is manifest that ignorance of the truth makes your opinion
 uncertain and wavering.

 In the next place, what do you add? "But if all the ungrateful, or the
 many who are envious, or powerful enemies, deprive virtue of its
 rewards." Oh how frail, how worthless, have you represented virtue to
 be, if it can be deprived of its reward! For if it judges its goods to
 be divine, as you said, how can there be any so ungrateful, so envious,
 so powerful, as to be able to deprive virtue of those goods which were
 conferred upon it by the gods? "Assuredly it delights itself," he says,
 "by many comforts, and especially supports itself by its own beauty."
 By what comforts? by what beauty? since that beauty is often charged
 upon it as a fault, and turned into a punishment. For what if, as
 Furius said, [1049] a man should be dragged away, harassed, banished,
 should be in want, be deprived of his hands, have his eyes put out, be
 condemned, put into chains, be burned, be miserably tortured also? will
 virtue lose its reward, or rather, will it perish itself? By no means.
 But it will both receive its reward from God the Judge, and it will
 live, and always flourish. And if you take away these things, nothing
 in the life of man can appear to be so useless, so foolish, as virtue,
 the natural goodness and honour of which may teach us that the soul is
 not mortal, and that a divine reward is appointed for it by God. But on
 this account God willed that virtue itself should be concealed under
 the character of folly, that the mystery of truth and of His religion
 might be secret; that He might show the vanity and error of these
 superstitions, and of that earthly wisdom which raises itself too
 highly, and exhibits great self-complacency, that its difficulty being
 at length set forth, that most narrow path might lead to the lofty
 reward of immortality.

 I have shown, as I think, why our people are esteemed foolish by the
 foolish. For to choose to be tortured and slain, rather than to take
 incense in three fingers, and throw it upon the hearth, [1050] appears
 as foolish as, in a case where life is endangered, to be more careful
 of the life of another than of one's own. For they do not know how
 great an act of impiety it is to adore any other object than God, who
 made heaven and earth, who fashioned the human race, breathed into them
 the breath of life, and gave them light. But if he is accounted the
 most worthless of slaves who runs away and deserts his master, and if
 he is judged most deserving of stripes and chains, and a prison, and
 the cross, and of all evil; and if a son, in the same manner, is
 thought abandoned and impious who deserts his father, that he may not
 pay him obedience, and on this account is considered deserving of being
 disinherited, and of having his name removed for ever from his
 family,--how much more so does he who forsakes God, in whom the two
 names entitled to equal reverence, of Lord and Father, alike meet? For
 what benefit does he who buys a slave bestow upon him, beyond the
 nourishment with which he supplies him for his own advantage? And he
 who begets a son has it not in his power to effect that he shall be
 conceived, or born, or live; from which it is evident that he is not
 the father, but only the instrument [1051] of generation. Of what
 punishments, therefore, is he deserving, who forsakes Him who is both
 the true Master and Father, but those which God Himself has appointed?
 who has prepared everlasting fire for the wicked spirits; and this He
 Himself threatens by His prophets to the impious and the rebellious.
 [1052]

 [1047] Thus far he has refuted the arguments of Furius, the advocate of
 injustice. He now shows the reasons why Lælius, who was esteemed most
 wise, does not worthily maintain the cause of justice, i.e., because he
 was ignorant of heavenly wisdom. [See cap. xvii. [90]p. 152, supra.]

 [1048] De Republ., i. 3.

 [1049] Vid. ch. xii.

 [1050] [In focum. Here it means the brazier placed before an image.]

 [1051] Generandi ministrum.

 [1052] [Perpetually recurring are such ideas and interpretations of
 God's warnings. Vol. iv. [91]p. 542.]

 Chap. XX.--Of the Vanity and Crimes, Impious Superstitions, and of the
 Tortures of the Christians.

 Therefore, let those who destroy their own souls and the souls of
 others learn what an inexpiable crime they commit; in the first place,
 because they cause their own death by serving most abandoned demons,
 whom God has condemned to everlasting punishments; in the next place,
 because they do not permit God to be worshipped by others, but
 endeavour to turn men aside to deadly rites, and strive with the
 greatest diligence that no life may be without injury on earth, which
 looks to heaven with its condition secured. What else shall I call them
 but miserable men, who obey the instigations of their own plunderers,
 [1053] whom they think to be gods? of whom they neither know the
 condition, nor origin, nor names, nor nature; but, clinging to the
 persuasion of the people, they willingly err, and favour their own
 folly. And if you should ask them the grounds of their persuasion, they
 can assign none, but have recourse to the judgment of their ancestors,
 saying that they were wise, that they approved them, that they knew
 what was best; and thus they deprive themselves of all power of
 perception: they bid adieu to reason, while they place confidence in
 the errors of others. Thus, involved in ignorance of all things, they
 neither know themselves nor their gods. And would to heaven that they
 had been willing to err by themselves, and to be unwise by themselves!
 But they hurry away others also to be companions of their evil, as
 though they were about to derive comfort from the destruction of many.
 But this very ignorance causes them to be so cruel in persecuting the
 wise; and they pretend that they are promoting their welfare, that they
 wish to recall them to a good mind.

 Do they then strive to effect this by conversation, or by giving some
 reason? By no means; but they endeavour to effect it by force and
 tortures. O wonderful and blind infatuation! It is thought that there
 is a bad mind in those who endeavour to preserve their faith, but a
 good one in executioners. Is there, then, a bad mind in those who,
 against every law of humanity, against every principle of justice, are
 tortured, or rather, in those who inflict on the bodies of the innocent
 such things, as neither the most cruel robbers, nor the most enraged
 enemies, nor the most savage barbarians have ever practised? Do they
 deceive themselves to such an extent, that they mutually transfer and
 change the names of good and evil? Why, therefore, do they not call day
 night--the sun darkness? Moreover, it is the same impudence to give to
 the good the name of evil, to the wise the name of foolish, to the just
 the name of impious. Besides this, if they have any confidence in
 philosophy or in eloquence, let them arm themselves, and refute these
 arguments of ours if they are able; let them meet us hand to hand, and
 examine every point. It is befitting that they should undertake the
 defence of their gods, lest, if our affairs should increase (as they do
 increase daily), theirs should be deserted, together with their shrines
 and their vain mockeries; [1054] and since they can effect nothing by
 violence (for the religion of God is increased the more it is
 oppressed), let them rather act by the use of reason and exhortations.

 Let their priests come forth into the midst, whether the inferior ones
 or the greatest; their flamens, augurs, and also sacrificing kings, and
 the priests and ministers of their superstitions. Let them call us
 together to an assembly; let them exhort us to undertake the worship of
 their gods; let them persuade us that there are many beings by whose
 deity and providence all things are governed; let them show how the
 origins and beginnings of their sacred rites and gods were handed down
 to mortals; let them explain what is their source and principle; let
 them set forth what reward there is in their worship, and what
 punishment awaits neglect; why they wish to be worshipped by men; what
 the piety of men contributes to them, if they are blessed: and let them
 confirm all these things not by their own assertion (for the authority
 of a mortal man is of no weight), but by some divine testimonies, as we
 do. There is no occasion for violence and injury, for religion cannot
 be imposed by force; the matter must be carried on by words rather than
 by blows, that the will may be affected. Let them unsheath the weapon
 of their intellect; if their system is true, let it be asserted. We are
 prepared to hear, if they teach; while they are silent, we certainly
 pay no credit to them, as we do not yield to them even in their rage.
 Let them imitate us in setting forth the system of the whole matter:
 for we do not entice, as they say; but we teach, we prove, we show. And
 thus no one is detained by us against his will, for he is unserviceable
 to God who is destitute of faith and devotedness; and yet no one
 departs from us, since the truth itself detains him. Let them teach in
 this manner, if they have any confidence in the truth; let them speak,
 let them give utterance; let them venture, I say, to discuss with us
 something of this nature; and then assuredly their error and folly will
 be ridiculed by the old women, whom they despise, and by our boys. For,
 since they are especially clever, they know from books the race of the
 gods, and their exploits, and commands, and deaths, and tombs; they may
 also know that the rites themselves, in which they have been initiated,
 had their origin either in human actions, or in casualties, or in
 deaths. [1055] It is the part of incredible madness to imagine that
 they are gods, whom they cannot deny to have been mortal; or if they
 should be so shameless as to deny it, their own writings, and those of
 their own people, will refute them; in short, the very beginnings of
 the sacred rites will convict them. [1056] They may know, therefore,
 even from this very thing, how great a difference there is between
 truth and falsehood; for they themselves with all their eloquence are
 unable to persuade, whereas the unskilled and the uneducated are able,
 because the matter itself and the truth speaks.

 Why then do they rage, so that while they wish to lessen their folly,
 they increase it? Torture [1057] and piety are widely different; nor is
 it possible for truth to be united with violence, or justice with
 cruelty. But with good reason they do not venture to teach anything
 concerning divine things, lest they should both be derided by our
 people and be deserted by their own. For the common people for the most
 part, if they ascertain that these mysteries were instituted in memory
 of the dead, will condemn them, and seek for some truer object of
 worship.


 "Hence rites of mystic awe" [1058]

 were instituted by crafty men, that the people may not know what they
 worship. But since we are acquainted with their systems, why do they
 either not believe us who are acquainted with both, or envy us because
 we have preferred truth to falsehood? But, they say, the public rites
 of religion [1059] must be defended. Oh with what an honourable
 inclination the wretched men go astray! For they are aware that there
 is nothing among men more excellent than religion, and that this ought
 to be defended with the whole of our power; but as they are deceived in
 the matter of religion itself, so also are they in the manner of its
 defence. For religion is to be defended, not by putting to death, but
 by dying; not by cruelty, but by patient endurance; not by guilt, but
 by good faith: for the former belong to evils, but the latter to goods;
 and it is necessary for that which is good to have place in religion,
 and not that which is evil. For if you wish to defend religion by
 bloodshed, and by tortures, and by guilt, it will no longer be
 defended, but will be polluted and profaned. For nothing is so much a
 matter of free-will as religion; in which, if the mind of the
 worshipper is disinclined to it, religion is at once taken away, and
 ceases to exist. The right method therefore is, that you defend
 religion by patient endurance or by death; in which the preservation of
 the faith is both pleasing to God Himself, and adds authority to
 religion. For if he who in this earthly warfare preserves his faith to
 his king in some illustrious action, if he shall continue to live,
 because more beloved and acceptable, and if he shall fall, obtains the
 highest glory, because he has undergone death for his leader; how much
 more is faith to be kept towards God, the Ruler of all, who is able to
 pay the reward of virtue, not only to the living, but also to the dead!
 Therefore the worship of God, since it belongs to heavenly warfare,
 requires the greatest devotedness and fidelity. For how will God either
 love the worshipper, if He Himself is not loved by him, or grant to the
 petitioner whatever he shall ask, when he draws nigh to offer his
 prayer without sincerity or reverence? But these men, when they come to
 offer sacrifice, present to their gods nothing from within, nothing of
 their own--no uprightness of mind, no reverence or fear. Therefore,
 when the worthless sacrifices are completed, they leave their religion
 altogether in the temple, and with the temple, as they had found it;
 and neither bring with them anything of it, nor take anything back.
 Hence it is that religious observances of this kind are neither able to
 make men good, nor to be firm and unchangeable. And thus men are easily
 led away from them, because nothing is learned in them relating to the
 life, nothing relating to wisdom, nothing to faith. [1060] For what is
 the religion of those gods? what is its power? what its discipline?
 what its origin? what its principle? what its foundation? what its
 substance? what is its tendency? or what does it promise, so that it
 may be faithfully preserved and boldly defended by man? I see nothing
 else in it than a rite pertaining to the fingers only. [1061] But our
 religion is on this account firm, and solid, and unchangeable, because
 it teaches justice, because it is always with us, because it has its
 existence altogether in the soul of the worshipper, because it has the
 mind itself for a sacrifice. In that religion nothing else is required
 but the blood of animals, and the smoke of incense, and the senseless
 pouring out of libations; but in this of ours, a good mind, a pure
 breast, an innocent life: those rites are frequented by unchaste
 adulteresses without any discrimination, by impudent procuresses, by
 filthy harlots; they are frequented by gladiators, robbers, thieves,
 and sorcerers, who pray for nothing else but that they may commit
 crimes with impunity. For what can the robber ask when he sacrifices,
 or the gladiator, but that they may slay? what the poisoner, but that
 he may escape notice? what the harlot, but that she may sin to the
 uttermost? what the adulteress, but either the death of her husband, or
 that her unchastity may be concealed? what the procuress, but that she
 may deprive many of their property? what the thief, but that he may
 commit more peculations? But in our religion there is no place even for
 a slight and ordinary offence; and if any one shall come to a sacrifice
 without a sound conscience, he hears what threats God denounces against
 him: that God, I say, who sees the secret places of the heart, who is
 alway hostile to sins, who requires justice, who demands fidelity. What
 place is there here for an evil mind or for an evil prayer? But those
 unhappy men neither understand from their own crimes how evil it is to
 worship, since, defiled by all crimes, they come to offer prayer; and
 they imagine that they offer a pious sacrifice if they wash their skin;
 as though any streams could wash away, or any seas purify, the lusts
 which are shut up within their breast. How much better it is rather to
 cleanse the mind, which is defiled by evil desires, and to drive away
 all vices by the one laver of virtue and faith! For he who shall do
 this, although he bears a body which is defiled and sordid, is pure
 enough.

 [1053] Prædonum. Some refer this to the priests; others, with greater
 probability, to the demons alluded to in the sentence.

 [1054] Ludibriis.

 [1055] Ex mortibus. Another reading is, ex moribus.

 [1056] [That is, the introductions, historically recorded, of such
 rites; e.g., by Numa. See vol. iii. [92]p. 36, this series.]

 [1057] Carnificina.

 [1058] Virg., Æn., iii. 112.

 [1059] Suscepta publicè sacra.

 [1060] ["Parcus Deorum cultor et infrequens:" so Horace describes
 himself in this spirit. Odes, book i. 34, p. 215, ed. Delphin.]

 [1061] [See p. 155, note 2, supra.]

 Chap. XXI.--Of the Worship of Other Gods and the True God, and of the
 Animals Which the Egyptians Worshipped.

 But they, because they know not the object or the mode of worship,
 blindly and unconsciously fall into the contrary practice. Thus they
 adore their enemies, they appease with victims their robbers and
 murderers, and they place their own souls to be burned with the very
 incense on detestable altars. The wretched men are also angry, because
 others do not perish in like manner, with incredible blindness of
 minds. For what can they see who do not see the sun? As though, if they
 were gods, they would need the assistance of men against their
 despisers. Why, therefore, are they angry with us, if they have no
 power to effect anything? Unless it be that they destroy their gods,
 whose power they distrust, they are more irreligious than those who do
 not worship them at all. Cicero, in his Laws, [1062] enjoining men to
 approach with holiness to the sacrifices, says, "Let them put on piety,
 let them lay aside riches; if any one shall act otherwise, God Himself
 will be the avenger." This is well spoken; for it is not right to
 despair about God, whom you worship on this account, because you think
 Him powerful. For how can He avenge the wrongs of His worshippers, if
 He is unable to avenge His own? I wish therefore to ask them to whom
 especially they think that they are doing a service in compelling them
 to sacrifice against their will, Is it to those whom they compel? But
 that is not a kindness which is done to one who refuses it. But we must
 consult their interests, even against their will, since they know not
 what is good. Why, then, do they so cruelly harass, torture, and weaken
 them, if they wish for their safety? or whence is piety so impious,
 that they either destroy in this wretched manner, or render useless,
 those whose welfare they wish to promote? Or do they do service to the
 gods? But that is not a sacrifice which is extorted from a person
 against his will. For unless it is offered spontaneously, and from the
 soul, it is a curse; when men sacrifice, compelled by proscription, by
 injuries, by prison, by tortures. If they are gods who are worshipped
 in this manner, if for this reason only, they ought not to be
 worshipped, because they wish to be worshipped in this manner: they are
 doubtless worthy of the detestation of men, since libations are made to
 them with tears, with groaning, and with blood flowing from all the
 limbs.

 But we, on the contrary, do not require that any one should be
 compelled, whether he is willing or unwilling, to worship our God, who
 is the God of all men; nor are we angry if any one does not worship
 Him. For we trust in the majesty of Him who has power to avenge
 contempt shown towards Himself, as also He has power to avenge the
 calamities and injuries inflicted on His servants. And therefore, when
 we suffer such impious things, we do not resist even in word; but we
 remit vengeance to God, not as they act who would have it appear that
 they are defenders of their gods, and rage without restraint against
 those who do not worship them. From which it may be understood how it
 is not good to worship their gods, since men ought to have been led to
 that which is good by good, and not by evil; but because this is evil,
 even its office is destitute of good. But they who destroy religious
 systems must be punished. Have we destroyed them in a worse manner than
 the nation of the Egyptians, who worship the most disgraceful figures
 of beasts and cattle, and adore as gods some things which it is even
 shameful to speak of? Have we done worse than those same who, when they
 say that they worship the gods, yet publicly and shamefully deride
 them?--for they even allow pantomimic [1063] representations of them to
 be acted with laughter and pleasure. What kind of a religion is this,
 or how great must that majesty be considered, which is adored in
 temples and mocked in theatres? And they who have done these things do
 not suffer the vengeance of the injured deity, but even go away
 honoured and praised. Do we destroy them in a worse manner than certain
 philosophers, who say that there are no gods at all, but that all
 things are spontaneously produced, and that all things which are done
 happen by chance? Do we destroy them in a worse manner than the
 Epicureans, who admit the existence of gods, but deny that they regard
 anything, and say that they are neither angry nor are influenced by
 favour? By which words they plainly persuade men that they are not to
 be worshipped at all, inasmuch as they neither regard their
 worshippers, nor are angry with those who do not worship them.
 Moreover, when they argue against fears, they endeavour to effect
 nothing else than that no one should fear the gods. And yet these
 things are willingly heard by men, and discussed with impunity.

 [1062] [Lib ii. cap. 10. A noble reference in this chapter to equality
 among men.]

 [1063] Mimos agi.

 Chap. XXII.--Of the Rage of the Demons Against Christians, and the Error of
 Unbelievers.

 They do not therefore rage against us on this account, because their
 gods are not worshipped by us, but because the truth is on our side,
 which (as it has been said most truly) produces hatred. What, then,
 shall we think, but that they are ignorant of what they suffer? For
 they act [1064] with a blind and unreasonable fury, which we see, but
 of which they are ignorant. For it is not the men themselves who
 persecute, for they have no cause of anger against the innocent; but
 those contaminated and abandoned spirits by whom the truth is both
 known and hated insinuate themselves into their minds, and goad them in
 their ignorance to fury. For these, as long as there is peace among the
 people of God, flee from the righteous, and fear them; and when they
 seize upon the bodies of men, and harass their souls, they are adjured
 by them, and at the name of the true God are put to flight. For when
 they hear this name they tremble, cry out, and assert that they are
 branded and beaten; and being asked who they are, whence they are come,
 and how they have insinuated themselves into a man, confess it. Thus,
 being tortured and excruciated by the power of the divine name, they
 come out of the man. [1065] On account of these blows and threats, they
 always hate holy and just men; and because they are unable of
 themselves to injure them, they pursue with public hatred those whom
 they perceive to be grievous to them, and they exercise cruelty, with
 all the violence which they can employ, that they may either weaken
 their faith by pain, or, if they are unable to effect that, may take
 them away altogether from the earth, that there may be none to restrain
 their wickedness. It does not escape my notice what reply can be made
 on the other side. Why, then, does that God of surpassing power, that
 mighty One, whom you confess to preside over all things, and to be Lord
 of all, permit these things to be done, and neither avenge nor defend
 His worshippers? Why, in short, are they who do not worship Him rich,
 and powerful, and happy? and why do they enjoy honours and kingly
 state, and have these very persons [1066] subject to their power and
 sway?

 We must also give a reason for this, that no error may remain. For this
 is especially the cause why it is thought that religion has not the
 power of God, because men are influenced by the appearance of earthly
 and present goods, which in no way have reference to the care of the
 mind; and because they see that the righteous are without these goods,
 and that the unrighteous abound in them, they both judge that the
 worship of God is worthless, in which they do not see these things
 contained, and they imagine that the rites of other gods are true,
 since their worshippers enjoy riches and honours and kingdoms. But they
 who are of this opinion do not attentively consider the power and
 method of man, which consists altogether in the mind, and not in the
 body. For they see nothing more than is seen, namely the body; and
 because this is to be seen and handled, [1067] it is weak, frail, and
 mortal; and to this belong all those goods which are their desire and
 admiration, wealth, honours, and governments, since they bring
 pleasures to the body, and therefore are as liable to decay as the body
 itself. But the soul, in which alone man consists since it is not
 exposed to the sight of the eyes, and its goods cannot be seen, for
 they are placed in virtue only, must therefore be as firm, and
 constant, and lasting as virtue itself, in which the good of the soul
 consists.

 [1064] Pergitur enim...furore. Another reading is, "Perciti enim
 perferuntur...furore."

 [1065] Exsulantur. Other readings are, "exsolantur," "expelluntur,"
 "exultantur." [Compare p. 393, [93]note 1, vol. v., this series.]

 [1066] Eos ipsos, i.e., Christians.

 [1067] Quia oculis manuque tractabile est.

 Chap. XXIII.--Of the Justice and Patience of the Christians.

 It would be a lengthened task to draw forth all the appearances of
 virtue, to show respecting each how necessary it is for a wise and just
 man to be far removed from those goods, the enjoyment of which by the
 unjust causes the worship of their gods to be regarded as true and
 efficacious. As our present inquiry is concerned, it will be sufficient
 to prove our point from the case of a single virtue. For instance,
 patience is a great and leading virtue, which the public voices of the
 people and philosophers and orators alike extol with the highest
 praises. But if it cannot be denied that this is a virtue of the
 highest kind, it is necessary that the just and wise man should be in
 the power of the unjust, for obtaining patience; for patience is the
 bearing with equanimity of the evils which are either inflicted or
 happen to fall upon us. Therefore the just and wise man, because he
 exercises virtue, has patience in himself; but he will be altogether
 free from this if he shall suffer no adversity. On the other hand, the
 man who lives in prosperity is impatient, and is without the greatest
 virtue. I call him impatient, because he suffers nothing. He is also
 unable to preserve innocency, which virtue is peculiar to the just and
 wise man. But he often acts unjustly also, and desires the property of
 others, and seizes upon that which he has desired by injustice, because
 he is without virtue, and is subject to vice and sin; and forgetful of
 his frailty, he is puffed up with a mind elated with insolence.

 From this cause the unjust, and those who are ignorant of God, abound
 with riches, and power, and honours. For all these things are the
 rewards of injustice, because they cannot be perpetual, and they are
 sought through lust and violence. But the just and wise man, because he
 deems all these things as human, as it has been said by Lælius, and his
 own goods as divine, neither desires anything which belongs to another,
 lest he should injure any one at all in violation of the law of
 humanity; nor does he long for any power or honour, that he may not do
 an injury to any one. For he knows that all are produced by the same
 God, and in the same condition, and are joined together by the right of
 brotherhood. [1068] But being contented with his own, and that a
 little, because he is mindful of his frailty, he does not seek for
 anything beyond that which may support his life; and even from that
 which he has he bestows a share on the destitute, because he is pious;
 but piety is a very great virtue. To this is added, that he despises
 frail and vicious pleasures, for the sake of which riches are desired;
 since he is temperate, and master of his passions. He also, having no
 pride or insolence, does not raise himself too highly, nor lift up his
 head with arrogance; but he is calm and peaceful, lowly [1069] and
 courteous, because he knows his own condition. Since, therefore, he
 does injury to none, nor desires the property of others, and does not
 even defend his own if it is taken from him by violence, since he knows
 how even to bear with moderation an injury inflicted upon him, because
 he is endued with virtue; it is necessary that the just man should be
 subject to the unjust, and that the wise should be insulted by the
 foolish, that the one may sin because he is unjust, and the other may
 have virtue in himself because he is just.

 But if any one shall wish to know more fully why God permits the wicked
 and the unjust to become powerful, happy, and rich, and, on the other
 hand, suffers the pious to be humble, wretched, and poor, let him take
 the book of Seneca which has the title, "Why many evils happen to good
 men, though there is a providence;" in which book he has said many
 things, not assuredly with the ignorance of this world, but wisely, and
 almost with divine inspiration. [1070] "God," he says, "regards men as
 His children, but He permits the corrupt and vicious to live in luxury
 and delicacy, because He does not think them worthy of His correction.
 But He often chastises the good whom He loves, and by continual labours
 exercises them to the practice of virtue: nor does He permit them to be
 corrupted and depraved by frail and perishable goods." From which it
 ought to appear strange to no one if we are often chastised by God for
 our faults. Yea, rather, when we are harassed and pressed, then we
 especially give thanks to our most indulgent Father, because He does
 not permit our corruption to proceed to greater lengths, but corrects
 it with stripes and blows. From which we understand that we are an
 object of regard to God, since He is angry when we sin. For when He
 might have bestowed upon His people both riches and kingdoms, as He had
 before given them to the Jews, whose successors and posterity we are;
 on this account He would have them live under the power and government
 of others, lest, being corrupted by the happiness of prosperity, they
 should glide into luxury and despise the precepts of God; as those
 ancestors of ours, who, ofttimes enervated by these earthly and frail
 goods, departed from discipline and burst the bonds of the law.
 Therefore He foresaw how far He would afford rest to His worshippers if
 they should keep His commandments, and yet correct them if they did not
 obey His precepts. Therefore, lest they should be as much corrupted by
 ease as their fathers had been by indulgence, [1071] it was His will
 that they should be oppressed by those in whose power He placed them,
 that He may both confirm them when wavering, and renew them to
 fortitude when corrupted, and try and prove them when faithful. For how
 can a general prove the valour of his soldiers, unless he shall have an
 enemy? And yet there arises an adversary to him against his will,
 because he is mortal, and is able to be conquered; but because God
 cannot be opposed, He Himself stirs up adversaries to His name, not to
 fight against God Himself, but against His soldiers, that He may either
 prove the devotedness and fidelity of His servants, or may strengthen
 them, until He corrects their wasting discipline by the stripes of
 affliction. [1072]

 There is also another cause why He permits persecutions to be carried
 on against us, that the people of God may be increased. [1073] Nor is
 it difficult to show why or how this happens. First of all, great
 numbers are driven from the worship of the false gods by their hatred
 of cruelty. For who would not shrink from such sacrifices? In the next
 place, some are pleased with virtue and faith itself. Some suspect that
 it is not without reason that the worship of the gods is considered
 evil by so many men, so that they would rather die than do that which
 others do that they may preserve their life. Some one desires to know
 what that good is which is defended even to death, which is preferred
 to all things which are pleasant and beloved in this life, from which
 neither the loss of goods, nor of the light, nor bodily pain, nor
 tortures of the vitals deter them. These things have great effect; but
 these causes have always especially increased the number of our
 followers. The people who stand around hear them saying in the midst of
 these very torments that they do not sacrifice to stones wrought by the
 hand of man, but to the living God, who is in heaven: many understand
 that this is true, and admit it into their breast. In the next place,
 as it is accustomed to happen in matters of uncertainty while they make
 inquiry of one another, what is the cause of this perseverance, many
 things which relate to religion, being spread abroad and carefully
 observed by rumour among one another, are learned; and because these
 are good they cannot fail to please. Moreover, the revenge which
 follows, as always happens, greatly impels men to believe. Nor, indeed,
 is it a slight cause that the unclean spirits of demons, having
 received permission, throw themselves into the bodies of many; and when
 these have afterwards been driven out, they who have been healed cling
 to the religion, the power of which they have experienced. These
 numerous causes being collected together, wonderfully gain over a great
 multitude to God. [1074]

 [1068] See vol. iii. (cap. 36), p. 45, [94]note 1, this series.]

 [1069] Planus et communis.

 [1070] ["Deus homines pro liberis habet sed corruptos." He attributes a
 sort of inspiration to such a writer, as to Orpheus and the Sibyl.]

 [1071] Licentiâ.

 [1072] Pressuræ verberibus. The word "pressura" is used by the Fathers
 to express persecution or calamity.

 [1073] [See Tertullian, vol. iii. pp. 36 ([95]note 1), 45 ([96]note 2),
 [97]49, [98]55, and [99]60.]

 [1074] [A most important résumé of the effects upon the heathen of
 Christian fortitude and patience. See Tertullian on "the Seed of the
 Church," vol. iii. pp. [100]55 and [101]60; also vol. iv. p. [102]126.]

 Chap. XXIV.--Of the Divine Vengeance Inflicted on the Torturers of the
 Christians.

 Whatever, therefore, wicked princes plan against us, God Himself
 permits to be done. And yet most unjust persecutors, to whom the name
 of God was a subject of reproach and mockery, must not think that they
 will escape with impunity, because they have been, as it were, the
 ministers of His indignation against us. For they will be punished with
 the judgment of God, who, having received power, have abused it to an
 inhuman degree, and have even insulted God in their arrogance, and
 placed His eternal name beneath their feet, to be impiously and
 wickedly trampled upon. On this account He promises that He will
 quickly take vengeance upon them, and exterminate the evil monsters
 [1075] from the earth. But He also, although He is accustomed to avenge
 the persecutions [1076] of His people even in the present world,
 commands us, however, to await patiently that day of heavenly judgment,
 in which He Himself will honour or punish every man according to his
 deserts. Therefore let not the souls of the sacrilegious expect that
 those whom they thus trample upon will be despised and unavenged. Those
 ravenous and voracious wolves who have tormented just and innocent
 souls, without the commission of any crimes, will surely meet with
 their reward. Only let us labour, that nothing else in us may be
 punished by men but righteousness alone: let us strive with all our
 power that we may at once deserve at the hands of God the avenging of
 our suffering and a reward.

 [1075] Bestias malas. Lactantius in several passages applies this
 expression to the persecutors of the Christians. [A quotation from the
 Cretian poet cited by St. Paul. "Cretenses semper mendaces malæ bestiæ,
 ventres pigri." Tit. ii. 12.]

 [1076] "Vexationes."


the divine institutes

  Book VI.

  Of True Worship.

 Chap. I.--Of the Worship of the True God, and of Innocency, and of the
 Worship of False Gods.

 We have completed that which was the object of our undertaking, through
 the teaching of the Divine Spirit, and the aid of the truth itself; the
 cause of asserting and explaining which was imposed upon me both by
 conscience and faith, and by our Lord Himself, without whom nothing can
 be known or clearly set forth. I come now to that which is the chief
 and greatest part of this work--to teach in what manner or by what
 sacrifice God must be worshipped. For that is the duty of man, and in
 that one object the sum of all things and the whole course of a happy
 life consists, since we were fashioned and received the breath of life
 from Him on this account, not that we might behold the heaven and the
 sun, as Anaxagoras supposed, but that we might with pure and
 uncorrupted mind worship Him who made the sun and the heaven. But
 although in the preceding books, as far as my moderate talent
 permitted, I defended the truth, yet it may especially be elucidated
 [1077] by the mode of worship itself. For that sacred and surpassing
 majesty requires from man nothing more than innocence alone; and if any
 one has presented this to God, he has sacrificed with sufficient piety
 and religion. But men, neglecting justice, though they are polluted by
 crimes and outrages of all kinds, think themselves religious if they
 have stained the temples and altars with the blood of victims, if they
 have moistened the hearths with a profusion of fragrant and old wine.
 Moreover, they also prepare sacred feasts and choice banquets, as
 though they offered to those who would taste something from them.
 Whatever is rarely to be viewed, whatever is precious in workmanship or
 in fragrance, that they judge to be pleasing to their gods, not by any
 reference to their divinity, of which they are ignorant, but from their
 own desires; nor do they understand that God is in no want of earthly
 resources.

 For they have no knowledge of anything except the earth, and they
 estimate good and evil things by the perception and pleasure of the
 body alone. And as they judge of religion according to its pleasure, so
 also they arrange the acts of their whole life. And since they have
 turned away once for all from the contemplation of the heaven, and have
 made that heavenly faculty the slave of the body, they give the reins
 to their lusts, as though they were about to bear away pleasure with
 themselves, which they hasten to enjoy at every moment; whereas the
 soul ought to employ the service of the body, and not the body to make
 use of the service of the soul. The same men judge riches to be the
 greatest good. And if they cannot obtain them by good practices, they
 endeavour to obtain them by evil practices; they deceive, they carry
 off by violence, they plunder, they lie in wait, they deny on oath; in
 short, they have no consideration or regard for anything, [1078] if
 only they can glitter with gold, and shine conspicuous with plate, with
 jewels, and with garments, can spend riches upon their greedy appetite,
 and always walk attended with crowds of slaves through the people
 compelled to give way. [1079] Thus devoting [1080] themselves to the
 service of pleasures, they extinguish the force and vigour of the mind;
 and when they especially think that they are alive, they are hastening
 with the greatest precipitation to death. For, as we showed in the
 second book, the soul is concerned with heaven, the body with the
 earth. [1081] They who neglect the goods of the soul, and seek those of
 the body, are engaged with darkness and death, which belong to the
 earth and to the body, because life and light are from heaven; and they
 who are without this, by serving the body, are far removed from the
 understanding of divine things. The same blindness everywhere oppresses
 the wretched men; for as they know not who is the true God, so they
 know not what constitutes true worship.

 [1077] Elucere potest.

 [1078] Nihil moderati aut pensi habent. The expression is borrowed from
 Sallust, Catiline, xii.

 [1079] Per dimotum populum.

 [1080] Addicti et servientes voluptatibus.

 [1081] [See book ii. cap. 2, p. 43, supra.]

 Chap. II.--Of the Worship of False Gods and the True God.

 Therefore they sacrifice fine and fat victims to God, as though He were
 hungry; they pour forth wine to Him, as though He were thirsty; they
 kindle lights to Him, as though He were in darkness. [1082] But if they
 were able to conjecture or to conceive in their mind what those
 heavenly goods are, the greatness of which we cannot imagine, while we
 are still encompassed with an earthly body, they would at once know
 that they are most foolish with their empty offices. Or if they would
 contemplate that heavenly light which we call the sun, they will at
 once perceive how God has no need of their candles, who has Himself
 given so clear and bright a light for the use of man. [1083] And when,
 in so small a circle, which on account of its distance appears to have
 a measure no greater than that of a human head, there is still so much
 brilliancy that mortal eye cannot behold it, and if you should direct
 your eye to it for a short time mist and darkness would overspread your
 dimmed eyes, what light, I pray, what brightness, must we suppose that
 there is in God, with whom there is no night? For He has so attempered
 this very light, that it might neither injure living creatures by
 excessive brightness or vehement heat, and has given it so much of
 these properties as mortal bodies might endure or the ripening of the
 crops require. Is that man, therefore, to be thought in his senses, who
 presents the light of candles and torches as an offering to Him who is
 the Author and Giver of light? The light which He requires from us is
 of another kind, and that indeed not accompanied with smoke, but (as
 the poet says) clear and bright; I mean the light of the mind, on
 account of which we are called by the poets photes, [1084] which light
 no one can exhibit unless he has known God. But their gods, because
 they are of the earth, stand in need of lights, that they may not be in
 darkness; and their worshippers, because they have no taste for
 anything heavenly, are recalled to the earth even by the religious
 rites to which they are devoted. [1085] For on the earth there is need
 of a light, because its system and nature are dark. Therefore they do
 not attribute to the gods a heavenly perception, but rather a human
 one. And on this account they believe that the same things are
 necessary and pleasing to them as to us, who, when hungry, have need of
 food; or, when thirsty, of drink; or, when we are cold, require a
 garment; or, when the sun has withdrawn himself, require a light that
 we may be able to see. [1086]

 From nothing, therefore, can it be so plainly proved and understood
 that those gods, since they once lived, are dead, as from their worship
 itself, which is altogether of the earth. For what heavenly influence
 can there be in the shedding of the blood of beasts, with which they
 stain their altars? unless by chance they imagine that the gods feed
 upon that which men shrink from touching. And whoever shall have
 offered to them this food, [1087] although he be an assassin, an
 adulterer, a sorcerer, or a parricide, he will he happy and prosperous.
 Him they love, him they defend, to him they afford all things which he
 shall wish for. Persius therefore deservedly ridicules superstitions of
 this kind in his own style: [1088] "With what bribe," he says, "dost
 thou win the ears of gods? Is it with lungs and rich intestines?" He
 plainly perceived that there is no need of flesh for appeasing the
 majesty of heaven, but of a pure mind and a just spirit, and a breast,
 as he himself says, which is generous with a natural love of honour.
 This is the religion of heaven--not that which consists of corrupt
 things, but of the virtues of the soul, which has its origin from
 heaven; this is true worship, in which the mind of the worshipper
 presents itself as an undefiled offering to God. But how this is to be
 obtained, how it is to be afforded, the discussion of this book will
 show; for nothing can be so illustrious and so suited to man as to
 train men to righteousness. [1089]

 In Cicero, Catulus in the Hortensius, while he prefers philosophy to
 all things, says that he would rather have one short treatise
 respecting duty, than a long speech in behalf of a seditious man
 Cornelius. And this is plainly to be regarded not as the opinion of
 Catulus, who perhaps did not utter this saying, but as that of Cicero,
 who wrote it. I believe that he wrote it for the purpose of
 recommending these books which he was about to write on Offices, in
 which very books he testifies that nothing in the whole range of
 philosophy is better and more profitable than to give precepts for
 living. But if this is done by those who do not know the truth, how
 much more ought we to do it, who are able to give true precepts, [1090]
 being taught and enlightened by God? Nor, however, shall we so teach as
 though we were delivering the first elements of virtue, which would be
 an endless task, but as though we had undertaken the instruction of him
 who, with them, appears to be already perfect. For while their precepts
 remain, which they are accustomed to give correctly, with a view to
 uprightness, we will add to them things which were unknown to them, for
 the completion and consummation of righteousness, which they do not
 possess. But I will omit those things which are common to us with them,
 that I may not appear to borrow from those whose errors I have
 determined to convict and bring to light.

 [1082] [The ritual use of lights was unknown to primitive Christians,
 however harmless it may be.]

 [1083] [The ritual use of lights was unknown to primitive Christians,
 however harmless it may be.]

 [1084] photes. There is here a play on the double meaning of the
 word--phos, a light, and pho's, a man. Some editions read "phos
 nuncupatur."

 [1085] [The ritual use of lights was unknown to primitive Christians,
 however harmless it may be.]

 [1086] [The Lutherans retain altar-lights in Europe, and their use has
 never been wholly obsolete in the Anglican churches; but it is evident
 from our author that "from the beginning it was not so." This is not
 said with any scruple against their use where it is authorized by
 competent legislation.]

 [1087] Saginam, thick coarse food, such as that which was given to
 gladiators.

 [1088] Persius, Sat., ii. 29.

 [1089] [Ad justitiam. In Christian use, it means more than "justice,"
 which is put here by the translator.]

 [1090] [1 John iii. 1-8. The ethical truth of the Gospel was understood
 and exemplified by the primitive faithful.]

 Chap. III.--Of the Ways, and of Vices and Virtues; And of the Rewards of
 Heaven and the Punishments of Hell.

 There are two ways, [1091] O Emperor Constantine, by which human life
 must proceed--the one which leads to heaven, the other which sinks to
 hell; and these ways poets have introduced in their poems, and
 philosophers in their disputations. And indeed philosophers have
 represented the one as belonging to virtues, the other to vices; and
 they have represented that which belongs to virtues as steep and rugged
 at the first entrance, in which if any one, having overcome the
 difficulty, has climbed to the summit, they say that he afterwards has
 a level path, a bright and pleasant plain, and that he enjoys abundant
 and delightful fruits of his labours; but that those whom the
 difficulty of the first approach has deterred, glide and turn aside
 into the way of vices, which at its first entrance appears to be
 pleasant and much more beaten, but afterwards, when they have advanced
 in it a little further, that the appearance of its pleasantness is
 withdrawn, and that there arises a steep way, now rough with stones,
 now overspread with thorns, now interrupted by deep waters or violent
 with torrents, so that they must be in difficulty, hesitate, slip
 about, and fall. And all these things are brought forward that it may
 appear that there are very great labours in undertaking virtues, but
 that when they are gained there are the greatest advantages, and firm
 and incorruptible pleasures; but that vices ensnare the minds of men
 with certain natural blandishments, and lead them captivated by the
 appearance of empty pleasures to bitter griefs and miseries,--an
 altogether wise discussion, if they knew the forms and limits of the
 virtues themselves. For they had not learned either what they are, or
 what reward awaits them from God: but this we will show in these two
 books.

 But these men, because they were ignorant or in doubt that the souls of
 men are immortal, estimated both virtues and vices by earthly honours
 or punishments. Therefore all this discussion respecting the two ways
 [1092] has reference to frugality and luxury. For they say that the
 course of human life resembles the letter Y, because every one of men,
 when he has reached the threshold of early youth, and has arrived at
 the place "where the way divides itself into two parts," [1093] is in
 doubt, and hesitates, and does not know to which side he should rather
 turn himself. If he shall meet with a guide who may direct him wavering
 to better things--that is, if he shall learn philosophy or eloquence,
 or some honourable arts by which he may turn to good conduct, [1094]
 which cannot take place without great labour--they say that he will
 lead a life of honour and abundance; but if he shall not meet with a
 teacher of temperance, [1095] that he falls into the way on the left
 hand, which assumes the appearance of the better,--that is, he gives
 himself up to idleness, sloth, and luxury, which seem pleasant for a
 time to one who is ignorant of true goods, but that afterwards, having
 lost all his dignity and property, he will live in all wretchedness and
 ignominy. Therefore they referred the end of those ways [1096] to the
 body, and to this life which we lead on earth. The poets perhaps did
 better, who would have it that this twofold way was in the lower
 regions; but they are deceived in this, that they proposed these ways
 to the dead. Both therefore spoke with truth, but yet both incorrectly;
 for the ways themselves ought to have been referred to life, their ends
 to death. We therefore speak better and more truly, who say that the
 two ways [1097] belong to heaven and hell, because immortality is
 promised to the righteous, and everlasting punishment is threatened to
 the unrighteous.

 But I will explain how these ways either exalt to heaven or thrust down
 to hell, and I will set forth what these virtues are of which the
 philosophers were ignorant; then I will show what are their rewards,
 and also what are vices, and what their punishments. For perhaps some
 one may expect that I shall speak separately of vices and virtues;
 whereas, when we discuss the subject of good or evil, that which is
 contrary may also be understood. For, whether you introduce virtues,
 vices will spontaneously depart; or if you take away vices, virtues
 will of their own accord succeed. The nature of good and evil things is
 so fixed, that they always oppose and drive out one another: and thus
 it comes to pass that vices cannot be removed without virtues, nor can
 virtues be introduced without the removal of vices. Therefore we bring
 forward these ways in a very different manner from that in which the
 philosophers are accustomed to present them: first of all, because we
 say that a guide is proposed to each, and in each case an immortal: but
 that the one is honoured who presides over virtues and good qualities,
 the other condemned who presides over vices and evils. But they place a
 guide only on the right side, and that not one only, nor a lasting one;
 inasmuch as they introduce any teacher of a good art, who may recall
 men from sloth, and teach them to be temperate. But they do not
 represent any as entering upon that way except boys and young men; for
 this reason, that the arts are learned at these ages. We, on the other
 hand, lead those of each sex, every age and race, into this heavenly
 path, because God, who is the guide of that way, denies immortality to
 no human being. [1098] The shape also of the ways themselves is not as
 they supposed. For what need is there of the letter Y in matters which
 are different and opposed to one another? But the one which is better
 is turned towards the rising of the sun, the other which is worse
 towards its setting: since he who follows truth and righteousness,
 having received the reward of immortality, will enjoy perpetual light;
 but he who, enticed by that evil guide, shall prefer vices to virtues,
 falsehood to truth, must be borne to the setting of the sun, and to
 darkness. [1099] I will therefore describe each, and will point out
 their properties and habits.

 [1091] [One wonders whether the Duæ Viæ here be not a reference to the
 "Apost. Constitutions" (book vii.), which, with the Bryennios
 discovery, will receive attention hereafter.]

 [1092] [Again the Duæ Viæ. See capp. 1 and 5, in (eds. Hitchcock and
 Brown) the Bryennios ms., pp. 3 and 13.]

 [1093] Virg., Æneid, vi. 540.

 [1094] Evadat ad bonam frugem.

 [1095] Frugalitatis.

 [1096] [Again the Duæ Viæ. See capp. 1 and 5, in (eds. Hitchcock and
 Brown) the Bryennios ms., pp. 3 and 13.]

 [1097] [Again the Duæ Viæ. See capp. 1 and 5, in (eds. Hitchcock and
 Brown) the Bryennios ms., pp. 3 and 13.]

 [1098] [Universal redemption is lovingly set forth by our author.]

 [1099] [A reference to the baptismal rite; the catechumen renouncing
 the works of darkness with his face to the west, and turning eastward
 to confess the Sun of Righteousness.]

 Chap. IV.--Of the Ways of Life, of Pleasures, Also of the Hardships of
 Christians.

 There is one way, therefore, of virtue and the good, which leads, not,
 as the poets say, to the Elysian plains, but to the very citadel of the
 world:--


 "The left gives sinners up to pain,

 And leads to Tartarus' guilty reign." [1100]

 For it belongs to that accuser who, having invented false religions,
 turns men away from the heavenly path, and leads them into the way of
 perdition. And the appearance and shape of this way is so composed to
 the sight, that it appears to be level and open, and delightful with
 all kinds of flowers and fruits. For there are placed [1101] in it all
 things which are esteemed on earth as good things--I mean wealth,
 honour, repose, pleasure, all kinds of enticements; but together with
 these also injustice, cruelty, pride, perfidy, lust, avarice, discord,
 ignorance, falsehood, folly, and other vices. But the end of this way
 is as follows: When they have reached the point from which there is now
 no return, it is so suddenly removed, together with all its beauty,
 that no one is able to foresee the fraud before that he falls headlong
 into a deep abyss. For whoever is captivated by the appearance of
 present goods, and occupied with the pursuit and enjoyment of these,
 shall not have foreseen the things which are about to follow after
 death, and shall have turned aside from God; he truly will be cast down
 to hell, and be condemned to eternal punishment.

 But that heavenly way is set forth as difficult and hilly, or rough
 with dreadful thorns, or entangled with stones jutting out; so that
 every one must walk with the greatest labour and wearing of the feet,
 and with great precautions against falling. In this he has placed
 justice, temperance, patience, faith, chastity, self-restraint,
 concord, knowledge, truth, wisdom, and the other virtues; but together
 with these, poverty, ignominy, labour, pain, and all kinds of hardship.
 For whoever has extended his hope beyond the present, and chosen better
 things, will be without these earthly goods, that, being lightly
 equipped and without impediment, he may overcome the difficulty of the
 way. For it is impossible for him who has surrounded himself with royal
 pomp, or loaded himself with riches, either to enter upon or to
 persevere in these difficulties. And from this it is understood that it
 is easier for the wicked and the unrighteous to succeed in their
 desires, because their road is downward and on the decline; but that it
 is difficult for the good to attain to their wishes, because they walk
 along a difficult and steep path. Therefore the righteous man, since he
 has entered upon a hard and rugged way, must be an object of contempt,
 derision, and hatred. For all whom desire or pleasure drags headlong,
 envy him who has been able to attain to virtue, and take it ill that
 any one possesses that which they themselves do not possess. Therefore
 he will be poor, humble, ignoble, subject to injury, and yet enduring
 all things which are grievous; and if he shall continue his patience
 unceasingly to that last step and end, the crown of virtue will be
 given to him, and he will be rewarded by God with immortality for the
 labours which he has endured in life for the sake of righteousness.
 These are the ways which God has assigned to human life, in each of
 which he has shown both good and evil things, but in a changed and
 inverted order. In the one he has pointed out in the first place
 temporal evils followed by eternal goods, which is the better order; in
 the other, first temporal goods followed by eternal evils, which is the
 worse order: so that, whosoever has chosen present evils together with
 righteousness, he will obtain greater and more certain goods than those
 were which he despised; but whoever has preferred present goods to
 righteousness, will fall into greater and more lasting evils than those
 were which he avoided. For as this bodily life is short, therefore its
 goods and evils must also be short; but since that spiritual life,
 which is contrary to this earthly life, is everlasting, therefore its
 goods and evils are also everlasting. Thus it comes to pass, that goods
 of short duration are succeeded by eternal evils, and evils of short
 duration by eternal goods.

 Since, therefore, good and evil things are set before man at the same
 time, it is befitting that every one should consider with himself how
 much better it is to compensate evils of short duration by perpetual
 goods, than to endure perpetual evils for short and perishable goods.
 For as, in this life, when a contest with an enemy is set before you,
 you must first labour that you may afterwards enjoy repose, you must
 suffer hunger and thirst, you must endure heat and cold, you must rest
 on the ground, must watch and undergo dangers, that your children,
 [1102] and house, and property being preserved, you may be able to
 enjoy all the blessings of peace and victory; but if you should choose
 present ease in preference to labour, you must do yourself the greatest
 injury: for the enemy will surprise you offering no resistance, your
 lands will be laid waste, your house plundered, your wife and children
 become a prey, you yourself will be slain or taken prisoner; to prevent
 the occurrence of these things, present advantage must be put aside,
 that a greater and more lasting advantage may be gained;--so in the
 whole of this life, because God has provided an adversary for us, that
 we might be able to acquire virtue, present gratification must be laid
 aside, lest the enemy should overpower us. We must be on the watch,
 must post guards, must undertake military expeditions, must shed our
 blood to the uttermost; in short, we must patiently submit to all
 things which are unpleasant and grievous, and the more readily because
 God our commander has appointed for us eternal rewards for our labours.
 And since in this earthly warfare men expend so much labour to acquire
 for themselves those things which may perish in the same manner as that
 in which they were acquired, assuredly no labour ought to be refused by
 us, by whom that is gained which can in no way be lost.

 For God, who created men to this warfare, desired that they should
 stand prepared in battle array, and with minds keenly intent should
 watch against the stratagems or open attacks of our single enemy, who,
 as is the practice of skilful and experienced generals, endeavours to
 ensnare us by various arts, directing his rage according to the nature
 and disposition of each. For he infuses into some insatiable avarice,
 that, being chained by their riches as by fetters, he may drive them
 from the way of truth. He inflames others with the excitement of anger,
 that while they are rather intent upon inflicting injury, he may turn
 them aside from the contemplation of God. He plunges others into
 immoderate lusts, that, giving themselves to pleasure of the body, they
 may be unable to look towards virtue. He inspires others with envy,
 that, being occupied with their own torments, they may think of nothing
 but the happiness of those whom they hate. He causes others to swell
 with ambitious desires. These are they who direct the whole occupation
 and care of their life to the holding of magistracies, that they may
 set a mark upon the annals, [1103] and give a name to the years. The
 desire of others mounts higher, not that they may rule provinces with
 the temporal sword, but with boundless and perpetual power may wish to
 be called lords of the whole human race. [1104] Moreover, those whom he
 has seen to be pious he involves in various [1105] superstitions, that
 he may make them impious. But to those who seek for wisdom, he dashes
 philosophy before their eyes, [1106] that he may blind them with the
 appearance of light, lest any one should grasp and hold fast the truth.
 Thus he has blocked up all the approaches against men, and has occupied
 the way, rejoicing in public errors; but that we might be able to
 dispel these errors, and to overcome the author of evils himself, God
 has enlightened us, and has armed us with true and heavenly virtue,
 respecting which I must now speak.

 [1100] Virg., Æneid, vi. 542.

 [1101] Posita sunt omnia. There is another reading, "posuit Deus
 omnia."

 [1102] Pignoribus.

 [1103] It was customary in many of the ancient states to connect the
 year with the name of the chief magistrate who was then in office. Thus
 at Athens the title of the chief magistrate was Archon Eponymus, giving
 name to the year; and at Rome, the year was reckoned by the names of
 the consuls then in office.

 [1104] [Ut infinita et perpetua potestate dominos se dici velint
 universi generis humani. A bold hint to Constantine.]

 [1105] Variis. Another reading is "vanis."

 [1106] Philosophiam in oculos impingit. [A warning to the emperor, a
 reflection on such as the Antonines, and a prolepsis of Julian.]

 Chap. V.--Of False and True Virtue; And of Knowledge.

 But before I begin to set forth the separate virtues, I must mark out
 the character of virtue itself, which the philosophers have not rightly
 defined, as to its nature, or in what things it consisted; and I must
 describe its operation and office. For they only retained the name, but
 lost its power, and nature, and effect. But whatever they are
 accustomed to say in their definition of virtue, Lucilius puts together
 and expresses in a few verses, which I prefer to introduce, lest, while
 I refute the opinions of many, I should be longer than is necessary:--


 "It is virtue, O Albinus, to pay the proper price,

 To attend to the matters in which we are engaged, and in which we live.

 It is virtue for a man to know the nature of everything.

 It is virtue for a man to know what is right and useful and honourable,

 What things are good, and what are evil.

 What is useless, [1107] base, and dishonourable.

 It is virtue to know the end of an object to be sought and the means of
 procuring it

 It is virtue to be able to assign their value to riches.

 It is virtue to give that which is really due to honour;

 To be the enemy and the foe [1108] of bad men and manners, but, on the
 other hand, the defender of good men and manners;

 To esteem these highly, to wish them well, to live in friendship with
 them,

 Moreover, to consider the interest of one's country first;

 Then those of parents, to put our own interests in the third and last
 place."

 From these definitions, which the poet briefly puts together, Marcus
 Tullius derived the offices of living, following Panætius the Stoic,
 [1109] and included them in three books.

 But we shall presently see how false these things are, that it may
 appear how much the divine condescension has bestowed on us in opening
 to us the truth. He says that it is virtue to know what is good and
 evil, what is base, what is honourable, what is useful, what is
 useless. He might have shortened his treatise if he had only spoken of
 that which is good and evil; for nothing can be useful or honourable
 which is not also good, and nothing useless and base which is not also
 evil. And this also appears to be thus to philosophers, and Cicero
 shows it likewise in the third book of the above-mentioned treatise.
 [1110] But knowledge cannot be virtue, because it is not within us, but
 it comes to us from without. But that which is able to pass from one to
 the other is not virtue, because virtue is the property of each
 individual. Knowledge therefore consists in a benefit derived from
 another; for it depends upon hearing. Virtue is altogether our own; for
 it depends upon the will of doing that which is good. As, therefore, in
 undertaking a journey, it is of no profit to know the way, unless we
 also have the effort and strength for walking, so truly knowledge is of
 no avail if our virtue fails. For, in general, even they who sin
 perceive what is good and evil, though not perfectly; and as often as
 they act improperly, they know that they sin, and therefore endeavour
 to conceal their actions. But though the nature of good and evil does
 not escape their notice, they are overpowered by an evil desire to sin,
 because they are wanting in virtue, that is, the desire of doing right
 and honourable things. Therefore that the knowledge of good and evil is
 one thing, and virtue another, appears from this, because knowledge can
 exist without virtue, as it has been in the case of many of the
 philosophers; in which, since not to have done what you knew to be
 right is justly censurable, a depraved will and a vicious mind, which
 ignorance cannot excuse, will be justly punished. Therefore, as the
 knowledge of good and evil is not virtue, so the doing that which is
 good and the abstaining from evil is virtue. And yet knowledge is so
 united with virtue, that knowledge precedes virtue, and virtue follows
 knowledge; because knowledge is of no avail unless it is followed up by
 action. Horace therefore speaks somewhat better: "Virtue is the fleeing
 from vice, and the first wisdom is to be free from folly." [1111] But
 he speaks improperly, because he defined virtue by its contrary, as
 though he should say, That is good which is not evil. For when I know
 not what virtue is, I do not know what vice is. Each therefore requires
 definition, because the nature of the case is such that each must be
 understood or not understood. [1112]

 But let us do that which he ought to have done. It is a virtue to
 restrain anger, to control desire, to curb lust; for this is to flee
 from vice. For almost all things which are done unjustly and
 dishonestly arise from these affections. For if the force of this
 emotion which is called anger be blunted, all the evil contentions of
 men will be lulled to rest; no one will plot, no one will rush forth to
 injure another. Also, if desire be restrained, no one will use violence
 by land or by sea, no one will lead an army to carry off and lay waste
 the property of others. Also, if the ardour of lusts be repressed,
 every age and sex will retain its sanctity; no one will suffer, or do
 anything disgraceful. Therefore all crimes and disgraceful actions will
 be taken away from the life and character of men, if these emotions are
 appeased and calmed by virtue. And this calming of the emotions and
 affections has this meaning, that we do all things which are right. The
 whole duty of virtue then is, not to sin. And assuredly he cannot
 discharge this who is ignorant of God, since ignorance of Him from whom
 good things proceed must thrust a man unawares into vices. Therefore,
 that I may more briefly and significantly fix the offices of each
 subject, knowledge is to know God, virtue is to worship Him: the former
 implies wisdom, the latter righteousness.

 [1107] [Inutilia.]

 [1108] Hostem atque inimicum: the former word signifies a "public," the
 latter a "private enemy."

 [1109] [De Officiis, passim. Notably, to begin with, book i. cap. 3:
 "Triplex igitur," etc.]

 [1110] [De Nat. Deor., iii. See also De Off., cap. 5, sec. 18.]

 [1111] Epist., i. 1. 41.

 [1112] [To be taken with a grain of salt, but apparently comprehended
 in our author's personal theodicy.]

 Chap. VI.--Of the Chief Good and Virtue, and or Knowledge and Righteousness.

 I have said that which was the first thing, that the knowledge of good
 is not virtue; and secondly, I have shown what virtue is, and in what
 it consists. It follows that I should show this also, that the
 philosophers were ignorant of what is good and evil; and this briefly,
 because it has been almost [1113] made plain in the third book, when I
 was discussing the subject of the chief good. And because they did not
 know what the chief good was, they necessarily erred in the case of the
 other goods and evils which are not the chief; for no one can weigh
 these with a true judgment who does not possess the fountain itself
 from which they are derived. Now the source of good things is God; but
 of evils, he who is always the enemy of the divine name, of whom we
 have often spoken. From these two sources good and evil things have
 their origin. Those which proceed from God have this object, to procure
 immortality, which is the greatest good; but those which arise from the
 other have this office, to call man away from heavenly things and sink
 him in earthly things, and thus to consign him to the punishment of
 everlasting death, which is the greatest evil. Is it therefore doubtful
 but that all those were ignorant of what was good and evil, who neither
 knew God nor the adversary of God? Therefore they referred the end of
 good things to the body, and to this short life, which must be
 dissolved and perish: they did not advance further. But all their
 precepts, and all the things which they introduce as goods, adhere to
 the earth, and lie on the ground, since they die with the body, which
 is earth; for they do not tend to procure life for man, but either to
 the acquisition or increase of riches, honour, glory, and power, which
 are altogether mortal things, as much so indeed as he who has laboured
 to obtain them. Hence is that saying, [1114] "It is virtue to know the
 end of an object [1115] to be sought, and the means of procuring it;"
 for they enjoin by what means and by what practices property is to be
 sought, for they see that it is often sought unjustly. But virtue of
 this kind is not proposed to the wise man; for it is not virtue to seek
 riches, of which neither the finding nor the possession is in our
 power: therefore they are more easy to be gained and to be retained by
 the bad than by the good. Virtue, then, cannot consist in the seeking
 of those things in the despising of which the force and purport of
 virtue appears; nor will it have recourse to those very things which,
 with its great and lofty mind, it desires to trample upon and bruise
 under foot; nor is it lawful for a soul which is earnestly fixed on
 heavenly goods to be called away from its immortal pursuits, that it
 may acquire for itself these frail things. But the course [1116] of
 virtue especially consists in the acquisition of those things which
 neither any man, nor death itself, can take away from us. Since these
 things are so, that which follows is true: "It is virtue to be able to
 assign their value to riches:" which verse is nearly of the same
 meaning as the first two. But neither he nor any of the philosophers
 was able to know the price itself, either of what nature or what it is;
 for the poet, and all those whom he followed, thought that it meant to
 make a right use of riches,--that is, to be moderate in living, not to
 make costly entertainments, not to squander carelessly, not to expend
 property on superfluous or disgraceful objects. [1117]

 Some one will perhaps say, What do you say? Do you deny that this is
 virtue? I do not deny it indeed; for if I should deny it, I should
 appear to prove the opposite. But I deny that it is true virtue;
 because it is not that heavenly principle, but is altogether of the
 earth, since it produces no effect but that which remains on the earth.
 [1118] But what it is to make a right use of wealth, and what advantage
 is to be sought from riches, I will declare more openly when I shall
 begin to speak of the duty of piety. Now the other things which follow
 are by no means true; for to proclaim enmity against the wicked, or to
 undertake the defence of the good, may be common to it with the evil.
 For some, by a pretence of goodness, prepare the way for themselves to
 power, and do many things which the good are accustomed to do, and that
 the more readily because they do them for the sake of deceiving; and I
 wish that it were as easy to carry out goodness in action as it is to
 pretend to it. But when they have begun to attain to their purpose and
 their wish in reaching the highest step of power, then, truly laying
 aside pretence, these men discover their character; they seize upon
 everything, and offer violence, and lay waste; and they press upon the
 good themselves, whose cause they had undertaken; and they cut away the
 steps by which they mounted, that no one may be able to imitate them
 against themselves. But, however, let us suppose that this duty of
 defending the good belongs only to the good man. Yet to undertake it is
 easy, to fulfil it is difficult; because when you have committed
 yourself to a contest and an encounter, the victory is placed at the
 disposal of God, not in your own power. And for the most part the
 wicked are more powerful both in number and in combination than the
 good, so that it is not so much virtue which is necessary to overcome
 them as good fortune. Is any one ignorant how often the better and the
 juster side has been overcome? From this cause harsh tyrannies have
 always broken out against the citizens. All history is full of
 examples, but we will be content with one. Cnoeus Pompeius wished to be
 the defender of the good, since he took up arms in defence of the
 commonwealth, in defence of the senate, and in defence of liberty; and
 yet the same man, being conquered, perished together with liberty
 itself, [1119] and being mutilated by Egyptian eunuchs, was cast forth
 unburied. [1120]

 It is not virtue, therefore, either to be the enemy of the bad or the
 defender of the good, because virtue cannot be subject to uncertain
 chances.


 "Moreover, to reckon the interests of our country as in the first
 place."

 When the agreement of men is taken away, virtue has no existence at
 all; for what are the interests of our country, but the inconveniences
 of another state or nation?--that is, to extend the boundaries which
 are violently taken from others, to increase the power of the state, to
 improve the revenues,--all which things are not virtues, but the
 overthrowing of virtues: for, in the first place, the union of human
 society is taken away, innocence is taken away, the abstaining from the
 property of another is taken away; lastly, justice itself is taken
 away, which is unable to bear the tearing asunder of the human race,
 and wherever arms have glittered, must be banished and exterminated
 from thence. This saying of Cicero [1121] is true: "But they who say
 that regard is to be had to citizens, but that it is not to be had to
 foreigners, these destroy the common society of the human race; and
 when this is removed, beneficence, liberality, kindness, and justice
 are entirely [1122] taken away." For how can a man be just who injures,
 who hates, who despoils, who puts to death? And they who strive to be
 serviceable to their country do all these things: for they are ignorant
 of what this being serviceable is, who think nothing useful, nothing
 advantageous, but that which can be held by the hand; and this alone
 cannot be held, because it may be snatched away.

 Whoever, then, has gained for his country these goods--as they
 themselves call them--that is, who by the overthrow of cities and the
 destruction of nations has filled the treasury with money, has taken
 lands and enriched his country-men--he is extolled with praises to the
 heaven: in him there is said to be the greatest and perfect virtue. And
 this is the error not only of the people and the ignorant, but also of
 philosophers, who even give precepts for injustice, lest folly and
 wickedness should be wanting in discipline and authority. Therefore,
 when they are speaking of the duties relating to warfare, all that
 discourse is accommodated neither to justice nor to true virtue, but to
 this life and to civil institutions; [1123] and that this is not
 justice the matter itself declares, and Cicero has testified. [1124]
 "But we," he says, "are not in possession of the real and life-like
 figure of true law and genuine justice, we have nothing but
 delineations and sketches; [1125] and I wish that we followed even
 these, for they are taken from the excellent copies made by nature and
 truth." It is then a delineation and a sketch which they thought to be
 justice. But what of wisdom? does not the same man confess that it has
 no existence in philosophers? "Nor," he says, [1126] "when Fabricius or
 Aristides is called just, is an example of justice sought from these as
 from a wise man; for none of these is wise in the sense in which we
 wish the truly wise to be understood. Nor were they who are esteemed
 and called wise, Marcus Cato and Caius Lælius, actually wise, nor those
 well-known seven; [1127] but from their constant practice of the middle
 duties,' [1128] they bore a certain likeness and appearance [1129] of
 wise men." If therefore wisdom is taken away from the philosophers by
 their own confession, and justice is taken away from those who are
 regarded as just, it follows that all those descriptions of virtue must
 be false, because no one can know what true virtue is but he who is
 just and wise. But no one is just and wise but he whom God has
 instructed with heavenly precepts.

 [1113] Poene: others read "plenè," and "planè." [c. 30, p. 100, supra.]

 [1114] [The first of the three inutilia of Lucilius, ut supra, thus:
 (1) "Virtus quærendæ rei finem scire, modumque;" (2) "Virtus divitiis
 pretium persolvere posse;" (3) "Virtus id dare quod re ipsa debetur
 honori." See [103]p. 167, supra.]

 [1115] See chap. v. [[104]p. 167, supra.]

 [1116] Ratio virtutis.

 [1117] [How I love our author for his winning reproof of mere
 philosophical virtue in contrast with evangelical righteousness!]

 [1118] [See the Quis Dives Salvetur of Clement, vol. ii. [105]p. 591,
 this series.]

 [1119] [Haggai. ii. 7. "La journée de Pharsale fut la dernière heure de
 la liberté. Le sénat, les lois, le peuple, les moeurs, le mond romain
 étaient anéantis avec Pompée."--Lamartine.]

 [1120] [See, on Pharsalia, etc., Lamartine's eloquent remarks, Vie des
 Grands Hommes (César), vol. v. pp. 276-277, ed. Paris, 1856.]

 [1121] De Offic., iii. 6.

 [1122] Funditus, "from the very foundation."

 [1123] Moremque civilem.

 [1124] De Offic., iii. 17.

 [1125] Umbrâ et imaginibus. The figure is borrowed partly from
 sculpture and partly from painting. "Effigies" is the moulded form, as
 opposed to the mere outline, "umbra" and "imago."

 [1126] De Offic., iii. 4. The words, "aut ab illis fortitudinis, aut,"
 have not been translated, because they refer to the "Decii" and the
 "Scipiones," who are mentioned by Cicero as examples of bravery, but
 are omitted by Lactantius.

 [1127] [See [106]p. 101, supra]

 [1128] [Ex mediorum officiorum frequentia, etc.]

 [1129] [Rom. i. 22.]

 Chap. VII.--Of the Way of Error and of Truth: that It is Single, Narrow, and
 Steep, and Has God for Its Guide.

 For all those who, by the confessed folly of others, are thought wise,
 being clothed with the appearance of virtue, grasp at shadows and
 outlines, but at nothing true. Which happens on this account, because
 that deceitful road which inclines to the west has many paths, on
 account of the variety of pursuits and systems which are dissimilar and
 varied in the life of men. For as that way of wisdom contains something
 which resembles folly, as we showed in the preceding book, so this way,
 which belongs altogether to folly, contains something which resembles
 wisdom, and they who perceive the folly of men in general seize upon
 this; and as it has its vices manifest, so it has something which
 appears to resemble virtue: as it has its wickedness open, so it has a
 likeness and appearance of justice. For how could the forerunner [1130]
 of that way, whose strength and power are altogether in deceit, lead
 men altogether into fraud, unless he showed them some things which
 resembled the truth? [1131] For, that His immortal secret might be
 hidden, God placed in his way things which men might despise as evil
 and disgraceful, that, turning away from wisdom and truth, which they
 were searching for without any guide, they might fall upon that very
 thing which they desired to avoid and flee from. Therefore he points
 out that way of destruction and death which has many windings, either
 because there are many kinds of life, or because there are many gods
 who are worshipped.

 The deceitful [1132] and treacherous guide of this way, that there may
 appear to be some distinction between truth and falsehood, good and
 evil, leads the luxurious in one direction, and those who are called
 temperate [1133] in another; the ignorant in one direction, the learned
 in another; the sluggish in one direction, the active in another; the
 foolish in one direction, the philosophers in another, and even these
 not in one path. For those who do not shun pleasures or riches, he
 withdraws a little from this public and frequented road; but those who
 either wish to follow virtue, or profess a contempt for things, he
 drags over certain rugged precipices. But nevertheless all those paths
 which display an appearance of honours are not different roads, but
 turnings off [1134] and bypaths, which appear indeed to be separated
 from that common one, and to branch off to the right, but yet return to
 the same, and all lead at the very end to one issue. For that guide
 unites them all, where it was necessary that the good should be
 separated from the bad, the strong from the inactive, the wise from the
 foolish; namely, in the worship of the gods, in which he slays them all
 with one sword, because they were all foolish without any distinction,
 and plunges them into death. But this way--which is that of truth, and
 wisdom, and virtue, and justice, of all which there is but one
 fountain, one source of strength, one abode--is both simple, [1135]
 because with like minds, and with the utmost agreement, we follow and
 worship one God; and it is narrow, because virtue is given to the
 smaller number; and steep, because goodness, which is very high and
 lofty, cannot be attained to without the greatest difficulty and
 labour.

 [1130] Præcursor: the exact meaning of the word is a "scout."

 [1131] Verisimilia: the word generally means "probabilities."

 [1132] Prævaricator; properly an advocate who, by collusion, favours
 the cause of his opponent.

 [1133] Frugi.

 [1134] Diverticula.

 [1135] Simplex, as opposed to the various paths of the other.

 Chap. VIII.--Of the Errors of Philosophers, and the Variableness of Law.

 This is the way which philosophers seek, but do not find on this
 account, because they prefer to seek it on the earth, where it cannot
 appear. Therefore they wander, as it were, on the great sea, and do not
 understand whither they are borne, because they neither discern the way
 nor follow any guide. For this way of life ought to be sought in the
 same manner in which their course is sought by ships over the deep: for
 unless they observe some light of heaven, they wander with uncertain
 courses. But whoever strives to hold the right course of life ought not
 to look to the earth, but to the heaven: and, to speak more plainly, he
 ought not to follow man, but God; not to serve these earthly images,
 but the heavenly God; not to measure all things by their reference to
 the body, but by their reference to the soul; not to attend to this
 life, but the eternal life. Therefore, if you always direct your eyes
 towards heaven, and observe the sun, where it rises, and take this as
 the guide of your life, as in the case of a voyage, your feet will
 spontaneously be directed into the way; and that heavenly light, which
 is a much brighter sun [1136] to sound minds than this which we behold
 in mortal flesh, will so rule and govern you as to lead you without any
 error to the most excellent harbour of wisdom and virtue.

 Therefore the law of God must be undertaken, which may direct us to
 this path; that sacred, that heavenly law, which Marcus Tullius, in his
 third book respecting the Republic, [1137] has described almost with a
 divine voice; whose words have subjoined, that I might not speak at
 greater length: "There is indeed a true law, right reason, agreeing
 with nature, diffused among all, unchanging, everlasting, which calls
 to duty by commanding, deters from wrong by forbidding; which, however,
 neither commands nor forbids the good in vain, nor affects the wicked
 by commanding or forbidding. It is not allowable to alter [1138] the
 provisions of this law, nor is it permitted us to modify it, nor can it
 be entirely abrogated. [1139] Nor, truly, can we be released from this
 law, either by the senate or by the people; nor is another person to be
 sought to explain or interpret it. Nor will there be one law at Rome
 and another at Athens; one law at the present time, and another
 hereafter: but the same law, everlasting and unchangeable, will bind
 all nations at all times; and there will be one common Master and Ruler
 of all, even God, the framer, arbitrator, and proposer of this law; and
 he who shall not obey this will flee from himself, and, despising the
 nature of man, will suffer the greatest punishments through this very
 thing, even though he shall have escaped the other punishments which
 are supposed to exist." Who that is acquainted with the mystery of God
 could so significantly relate the law of God, as a man far removed from
 the knowledge of the truth has set forth that law? But I consider that
 they who speak true things unconsciously are to be so regarded as
 though they prophesied [1140] under the influence of some spirit. But
 if he had known or explained this also, in what precepts the law itself
 consisted, as he clearly saw the force and purport of the divine law,
 he would not have discharged the office of a philosopher, but of a
 prophet. And because he was unable to do this, it must be done by us,
 to whom the law itself has been delivered by the one great Master and
 Ruler of all, God.

 [1136] Multo clarior sol est, quàm hic. Others read, "Multo clarius
 sole est, quàm hic," etc.

 [1137] [Repub., iii. cap. 22, 16.]

 [1138] Abrogo is to repeal or abrogate wholly; "derogo," to abrogate in
 part, or modify; "obrogo," to supersede by another law.

 [1139] Abrogo is to repeal or abrogate wholly; "derogo," to abrogate in
 part, or modify; "obrogo," to supersede by another law.

 [1140] Divinent. [Illustrative of the Sibyllina, and, in short, of
 Balaam; and not less of Rom. ii. 14, 15.]

 Chap. IX.--Of the Law and Precept of God; Of Mercy, and the Error of the
 Philosophers.

 The first head of this law is, to know God Himself, to obey Him alone,
 to worship Him alone. For he cannot maintain the character of a man who
 is ignorant of God, the parent of his soul: which is the greatest
 impiety. For this ignorance causes him to serve other gods, and no
 greater crime than this can be committed. Hence there is now so easy a
 step to wickedness through ignorance of the truth and of the chief
 good; since God, from the knowledge of whom he shrinks, is Himself the
 fountain of goodness. Or if he shall wish to follow the justice of God,
 yet, being ignorant of the divine law, he embraces the laws of his own
 country as true justice, though they were clearly devised not by
 justice, but by utility. For why is it that there are different and
 various laws amongst all people, but that each nation has enacted for
 itself that which it deemed useful for its own affairs? But how greatly
 utility differs from justice the Roman people themselves teach, who, by
 proclaiming war through the Fecials, and by inflicting injuries
 according to legal forms, by always desiring and carrying off the
 property of other, have gained for themselves the possession of the
 whole world. [1141] But these persons think themselves just if they do
 nothing against their own laws; which may be even ascribed to fear, if
 they abstain from crimes through dread of present punishment. But let
 us grant that they do that naturally, or, as the philosopher says, of
 their own accord, which they are compelled to do by the laws. Will they
 therefore be just, because they obey the institutions of men, who may
 themselves have erred, or have been unjust?--as it was with the framers
 of the twelve tables, who certainly promoted the public advantage
 according to the condition of the times. Civil law is one thing, which
 varies everywhere according to customs; but justice is another thing,
 which God has set forth to all as uniform and simple: and he who is
 ignorant of God must also be ignorant of justice.

 But let us suppose it possible that any one, by natural and innate
 goodness, should gain true virtues, such a man as we have heard that
 Cimon was at Athens, who both gave alms to the needy, and entertained
 the poor, and clothed the naked; yet, when that one thing which is of
 the greatest importance is wanting--the acknowledgment of God--then all
 those good things are superfluous and empty, so that in pursuing them
 he has laboured in vain. [1142] For all his justice will resemble a
 human body which has no head, in which, although all the limbs are in
 their proper position, and figure, and proportion, yet, since that is
 wanting which is the chief thing of all, it is destitute both of life
 and of all sensation. Therefore those limbs have only the shape of
 limbs, but admit of no use, as much so as a head without a body; and he
 resembles this who is not without the knowledge of God, but yet lives
 unjustly. For he has that only which is of the greatest importance; but
 he has it to no purpose, since he is destitute of the virtues, as it
 were, of limbs.

 Therefore, that the body may be alive, and capable of sensation, both
 the knowledge of God is necessary, as it were the head, and all the
 virtues, as it were the body. Thus there will exist a perfect and
 living man; but, however, the whole substance is in the head; and
 although this cannot exist in the absence of all, it may exist in the
 absence of some. And it will be an imperfect and faulty animal, but yet
 it will be alive, as he who knows God and yet sins in some respect. For
 God pardons sins. And thus it is possible to live without some of the
 limbs, but it is by no means possible to live without a head. This is
 the reason why the philosophers, though they may be naturally good, yet
 have no knowledge and no intelligence. All their learning and virtue is
 without a head, because they are ignorant of God, who is the Head of
 virtue and knowledge; and he who is ignorant of Him, though he may see,
 is blind; though he may hear, is deaf; though he may speak, is dumb.
 But when he shall know the Creator and Parent of all things, then he
 will both see, and hear, and speak. For he begins to have a head, in
 which all the senses are placed, that is, the eyes, and ears, and
 tongue. For assuredly he sees who has beheld with the eyes of his mind
 the truth in which God is, or God in whom the truth is; he hears, who
 imprints on his heart the divine words and life-giving precepts; he
 speaks, who, in discussing heavenly things, relates the virtue and
 majesty of the surpassing God. Therefore he is undoubtedly impious who
 does not acknowledge God; and all his virtues, which he thinks that he
 has or possesses, are found in that deadly road which belongs
 altogether to darkness. Wherefore there is no reason why any one should
 congratulate himself if he has gained these empty virtues, because he
 is not only wretched who is destitute of present goods, but he must
 also be foolish, since he undertakes the greatest labours in his life
 without any purpose. For if the hope of immortality is taken away,
 which God promises to those who continue in His religion, for the sake
 of obtaining which virtue is to be sought, and whatever evils happen
 are to be endured, it will assuredly be the greatest folly to wish to
 comply with virtues which in vain bring calamities and labours to man.
 For if it is virtue to endure and undergo with fortitude, want, exile,
 pain, and death, which are feared by others, what goodness, I pray, has
 it in itself, that philosophers should say that it is to be sought for
 on its own account? Truly they are delighted with superfluous and
 useless punishments, when it is permitted them to live in tranquillity.

 For if our souls are mortal, if virtue is about to have no existence
 after the dissolution of the body, why do we avoid the goods assigned
 to us, as though we were ungrateful or unworthy of enjoying the divine
 gifts? For, that we may enjoy these blessings, we must live in
 wickedness and impiety, because virtue, that is, justice, is followed
 by poverty. Therefore he is not of sound mind, who, without having any
 greater hope set before him, prefers labours, and tortures, and
 miseries, to those goods which others enjoy in life. [1143] But if
 virtue is to be taken up, as is most rightly said by these, because it
 is evident that man is born to it, it ought to contain some greater
 hope, which may apply a great and illustrious solace for the ills and
 labours which it is the part of virtue to endure. Nor can virtue, since
 it is difficult in itself, be esteemed as a good in any other way than
 by having its hardship compensated by the greatest good. We can in no
 other way equally abstain from these present goods, than if there are
 other greater goods on account of which it is worth while to leave the
 pursuit of pleasures, and to endure all evils. But these are no other,
 as I have shown in the third book, [1144] than the goods of everlasting
 life. Now who can bestow these except God, who has proposed to us
 virtue itself? Therefore the sum and substance of everything is
 contained in the acknowledging and worship of God; all the hope and
 safety of man centres in this; this is the first step of wisdom, to
 know who is our true Father, and to worship Him alone with the piety
 which is due to Him, to obey Him, to yield ourselves to His service
 with the utmost devotedness: let our entire acting, and care, and
 attention, be laid out in gaining His favour. [1145]

 [1141] [Dan vii. 23. An appeal for reformation.]

 [1142] [1 Cor. iii. 11-15. But are the heathen to be judged by the New
 Covenant? See vol. ii. (Clement, sparsim), this series.]

 [1143] [1 Cor. xv. 19.]

 [1144] [See cap. 12, [107]p. 79, supra.]

 [1145] In eo promerendo. [John xvii. 3.]

 Chap. X.--Of Religion Towards God, and Mercy Towards Men; And of the
 Beginning of the World.

 I have said what is due to God, I will now say what is to be given to
 man; although this very thing which you shall give to man is given to
 God, for man is the image of God. But, however, the first office of
 justice is to be united with God, the second with man. But the former
 is called religion; the second is named mercy or kindness; [1146] which
 virtue is peculiar to the just, and to the worshippers of God, because
 this alone comprises the principle of common life. For God, who has not
 given wisdom to the other animals, has made them more safe from attack
 in danger by natural defences. But because He made him naked and
 defenceless, [1147] that He might rather furnish him with wisdom, He
 gave him, besides other things, this feeling of kindness; [1148] so
 that man should protect, love, and cherish man, and both receive and
 afford assistance against all dangers. Therefore kindness is the
 greatest bond of human society; and he who has broken this is to be
 deemed impious, and a parricide. For if we all derive our origin from
 one man, whom God created, we are plainly of one blood; and therefore
 it must be considered the greatest wickedness to hate a man, even
 though guilty. On which account God has enjoined that enmities are
 never to be contracted by us, but that they are always to be removed,
 so that we soothe those who are our enemies, by reminding them of their
 relationship. Likewise, if we are all inspired and animated by one God,
 what else are we than brothers? And, indeed, the more closely united,
 because we are united in soul rather than in body. [1149] Accordingly
 Lucretius does not err when he says: [1150] "In short, we are all
 sprung from a heavenly seed; all have that same father." Therefore they
 are to be accounted as savage beasts who injure man; who, in opposition
 to every law and right of human nature, plunder, torture, slay, and
 banish.

 On account of this relationship of brotherhood, God teaches us never to
 do evil, but always good. And He also prescribes [1151] in what this
 doing good consists: in affording aid to those who are oppressed and in
 difficulty, and in bestowing food on those who are destitute. For God,
 since He is kind, [1152] wished us to be a social animal. Therefore, in
 the case of other men, we ought to think of ourselves. We do not
 deserve to be set free in our own dangers, if we do not succour others;
 we do not deserve assistance, if we refuse to render it. There are no
 precepts of philosophers to this purport, inasmuch as they, being
 captivated by the appearance of false virtue, have taken away mercy
 from man, and while they wish to heal, have corrupted. [1153] And
 though they generally admit that the mutual participation of human
 society is to be retained, they entirely separate themselves from it by
 the harshness of their inhuman virtue. This error, therefore, is also
 to be refuted, of those who think that nothing is to be bestowed on any
 one. They have introduced not one origin only, and cause of building a
 city; but some relate that those men who were first born from the
 earth, when they passed a wandering life among the woods and plains,
 and were not united by any mutual bond of speech or justice, but had
 leaves and grass for their beds, and caves and grottos for their
 dwellings, were a prey to the beasts and stronger animals. Then, that
 those who had either escaped, having been torn, or had seen their
 neighbours torn, being admonished of their own danger, had recourse to
 other men, implored protection, and at first made their wishes known by
 nods; then that they tried the beginnings of conversation, and by
 attaching names to each object, by degrees completed the system of
 speech. But when they saw that numbers themselves were not safe against
 the beasts, they began also to build towns, either that they might make
 their nightly repose safe, or that they might ward off the incursions
 and attacks of beasts, not by fighting, but by interposing barriers.
 [1154]

 O minds unworthy of men, which produced these foolish trifles! O
 wretched and pitiable men, who committed to writing and handed down to
 memory the record of their own folly; who, when they saw that the plan
 of assembling themselves together, or of mutual intercourse, or of
 avoiding danger, or of guarding against evil, or of preparing for
 themselves sleeping-places and lairs, was natural even to the dumb
 animals, thought, however, that men could not have been admonished and
 learned, except by examples, what they ought to fear, what to avoid,
 and what to do, or that they would never have assembled together, or
 have discovered the method of speech, had not the beasts devoured them!
 These things appeared to others senseless, as they really were; and
 they said that the cause of their coming together was not the tearing
 of wild beasts, but rather the very feeling of humanity itself; and
 that therefore they collected themselves together, because the nature
 of men avoided solitude, and was desirous of communion and society. The
 discrepancy between them is not great; since the causes are different,
 the fact is the same. Each might have been true, because there is no
 direct opposition. But, however, neither is by any means true, because
 men were not born from the ground throughout the world, as though
 sprung from the teeth of some dragon, as the poets relate; but one man
 was formed by God, and from that one man all the earth was filled with
 the human race, in the same way as again took place after the deluge,
 which they certainly cannot deny. [1155] Therefore no assembling
 together of this kind took place at the beginning; and that there were
 never men on the earth who could not speak except those who were
 infants, [1156] every one who is possessed of sense will understand.
 Let us suppose, however, that these things are true which idle and
 foolish old men vainly say, that we may refute them especially by their
 own feelings and arguments.

 If men were collected together on this account, that they might protect
 their weakness by mutual help, therefore we must succour man, who needs
 help. For, since men entered into and contracted fellowship with men
 for the sake of protection, either to violate or not to preserve that
 compact which was entered into among men from the commencement of their
 origin, is to be considered as the greatest impiety. For he who
 withdraws himself from affording assistance must also of necessity
 withdraw himself from receiving it; for he who refuses his aid to
 another thinks that he stands in need of the aid of none. But he who
 withdraws and separates himself from the body [1157] at large, must
 live not after the custom of men, but after the manner of wild beasts.
 But if this cannot be done, the bond of human society is by all means
 to be retained, because man can in no way live without man. But the
 preservation [1158] of society is a mutual sharing of kind offices;
 that is, the affording help, that we may be able to receive it. But if,
 as those others assert, the assembling together of men has been caused
 on account of humanity itself, man ought undoubtedly to recognise man.
 But if those ignorant and as yet uncivilized men did this, and that,
 when the practice of speaking was not yet established, what must we
 think ought to be done by men who are polished, and connected together
 by interchange of conversation and all business, who, being accustomed
 to the society of men, cannot endure solitude?

 [1146] Humanitas.

 [1147] Fragilem. [Phu'sis ke'rata tau'rois hopla`s d' edoken
 ippoi's tois andra'sin phro'nema, k t l Anacreon, Ode 2.]

 [1148] Hunc pietatis affectum.

 [1149] Conjunctiores, quòd animis, quàm quòd (others read "qui")
 corporibus.

 [1150] [Modern followers of Lucretius may learn from him:-- Denique
 coelesti sumus omnes semine oriundi; Omnibus ille idem pater est.]
 ii. 991.

 [1151] Isa. lviii. 6, 7; Ezek. xviii. 7; Matt. xxv. 35.

 [1152] Pius.

 [1153] Dum volunt sanare, vitiaverunt. There is another reading: "dum
 volunt sanare vitia, auxerunt," while they wish to apply a remedy to
 vices, have increased them.

 [1154] Objectis aggeribus. "Agger" properly signifies a mound of earth
 or other material.

 [1155] [Gen. x. 32.]

 [1156] Prater infantiam--others read "propter infans"--properly means,
 one unable to speak. [See fine remarks on language, etc., in De
 Maistre, Soirées, etc., vol. i. p. 105 and notes, ed. Lyon, 1836.]

 [1157] A corpore, that is, from society.

 [1158] Retentio. The word sometimes signifies a "withholding," or
 "drawing back;" but here, as in other passages, Lactantius uses it to
 express "preservation."

 Chap. XI.--Of the Persons Upon Whom a Benefit is to Be Conferred.

 Therefore humanity is to be preserved, if we wish rightly to be called
 men. But what else is this preservation of humanity than the loving a
 man because he is a man, and the same as ourselves? Therefore discord
 and dissension are not in accordance with the nature of man; and that
 expression of Cicero is true, which says [1159] that man, while he is
 obedient to nature, cannot injure man. Therefore, if it is contrary to
 nature to injure a man, it must be in accordance with nature to benefit
 a man; and he who does not do this deprives himself of the title of a
 man, because it is the duty of humanity to succour the necessity and
 peril of a man. I ask, therefore, of those who do not think it the part
 of a wise man to be prevailed upon and to pity, If a man were seized by
 some beast, and were to implore the aid of an armed man, whether they
 think that he ought to be succoured or not? They are not so shameless
 as to deny that that ought to be done which humanity demands and
 requires. Also, if any one were surrounded by fire, crushed by the
 downfall of a building, plunged in the sea, or carried away by a river,
 would they think it the duty of a man not to assist him? They
 themselves are not men if they think so; for no one can fail to be
 liable to dangers of this kind. Yes, truly, they will say that it is
 the part of a human being, and of a brave man too, to preserve one who
 was on the point of perishing. If, therefore, in casualties of this
 nature which imperil the life of man, they allow that it is the part of
 humanity to give succour, what reason is there why they should think
 that succour is to be withheld if a man should suffer from hunger,
 thirst, or cold? But though these things are naturally on an equality
 with those accidental circumstances, and need one and the same
 humanity, yet they make a distinction between these things, because
 they measure all things not by the truth itself, but by present
 utility. For they hope that those whom they rescue from peril will make
 a return of the favour to them. But because they do not hope for this
 in the case of the needy, they think that whatever they bestow on men
 of this kind is thrown away. Hence that sentiment of Plautus is
 detestable: [1160] --


 "He deserves ill who gives food to a beggar;

 For that which he gives is thrown away, and

 It lengthens out the life of the other to his misery."

 But perhaps the poet spoke for the actor. [1161]

 What does Marcus Tullius say in his books respecting Offices? Does he
 not also advise that bounty should not be employed at all? For thus he
 speaks: [1162] "Bounty, which proceeds from our estate, drains the very
 source of our liberality; and thus liberality is destroyed by
 liberality: for the more numerous they are towards whom you practice
 it, the less you will be able to practice it towards many." And he also
 says shortly afterwards: "But what is more foolish than so to act that
 you may not be able to continue to do that which you do willingly?"
 This professor of wisdom plainly keeps men back from acts of kindness,
 and advises them carefully to guard their property, and to preserve
 their money-chest in safety, rather than to follow justice. And when he
 perceived that this was inhuman and wicked, soon afterwards, in another
 chapter, as though moved by repentance, he thus spoke: "Sometimes,
 however, we must exercise bounty in giving: nor is this kind of
 liberality altogether to be rejected; and we must give from our
 property to suitable [1163] persons when they are in need of
 assistance." What is the meaning of "suitable?" Assuredly those who are
 able to restore and give back the favour. [1164] If Cicero were now
 alive, I should certainly exclaim: Here, here, Marcus Tullius, you have
 erred from true justice; and you have taken it away by one word, since
 you measured the offices of piety and humanity by utility. For we must
 not bestow our bounty on suitable objects, but as much as possible on
 unsuitable objects. For that will be done with justice, piety, and
 humanity, which you shall do without the hope of any return!

 This is that true and genuine justice, of which you say that you have
 no real and life-like figure. [1165] You yourself exclaim in many
 places that virtue is not mercenary; and you confess in the books of
 your Laws [1166] that liberality is gratuitous, in these words: "Nor is
 it doubtful that he who is called liberal and generous is influenced by
 a sense of duty, and not by advantage." Why therefore do you bestow
 your bounty on suitable persons, unless it be that you may afterwards
 receive a reward? With you, therefore, as the author and teacher of
 justice, whosoever shall not be a suitable person will be worn out with
 nakedness, thirst, and hunger; nor will men who are rich and abundantly
 supplied, even to luxuriousness, assist his last extremity. If virtue
 does not exact a reward; if, as you say, it is to be sought on its own
 account, then estimate justice, which is the mother and chief of the
 virtues, at its own price, and not according to your advantage: give
 especially to him from whom you hope for nothing in return. Why do you
 select persons? Why do you look at bodily forms? He is to be esteemed
 by you as a man, whoever it is that implores you, because he considers
 you a man. Cast away those outlines and sketches of justice, and hold
 fast justice itself, true and fashioned to the life. Be bountiful to
 the blind, the feeble, the lame, the destitute, who must die unless you
 bestow your bounty upon them. They are useless to men, but they are
 serviceable to God, who retains them in life, who endues them with
 breath, who vouchsafes to them the light. Cherish as far as in you
 lies, and support with kindness, the lives of men, that they may not be
 extinguished. He who is able to succour one on the point of perishing,
 if he fails to do so, kills him. But they, because they neither retain
 their nature, nor know what reward there is in this, while they fear to
 lose, do lose, and fall into that which they chiefly guard against; so
 that whatever they bestow is either lost altogether, or profits only
 for the briefest time. For they who refuse a small gift to the
 wretched, who wish to preserve humanity without any loss to themselves,
 squander their property, so that they either acquire for themselves
 frail and perishable things, or they certainly gain nothing by their
 own great loss.

 For what must be said of those who, induced by the vanity of popular
 favour, [1167] expend on the exhibition of shows wealth that would be
 sufficient even for great cities? Must we not say that they are
 senseless and mad who bestow upon the people that which is both lost to
 themselves, and which none of those on whom it is bestowed receives?
 Therefore, as all pleasure is short and perishable, and especially that
 of the eyes and ears, men either forget and are ungrateful for the
 expenses incurred by another, or they are even offended if the caprice
 of the people is not satisfied: so that most foolish men have even
 acquired evil for themselves by evil; or if they have thus succeeded in
 pleasing, they gain nothing more than empty favour and the talk [1168]
 of a few days. Thus every day the estates of most trifling men are
 expended on superfluous matters. Do they then act more wisely who
 exhibit to their fellow-citizens more useful and lasting gifts? They,
 for instance, who by the building of public works seek a lasting memory
 for their name? Not even do they act rightly in burying their property
 in the earth; because the remembrance of them neither bestows anything
 upon the dead, nor are their works eternal, inasmuch as they are either
 thrown down and destroyed by a single earthquake, or are consumed by an
 accidental fire, or they are over through by some attack of an enemy,
 or at any rate they decay and fall to pieces by mere length of time.
 For there is nothing, as the orator says, [1169] made by the work of
 man's hand which length of time does not weaken and destroy. But this
 justice of which we speak, and mercy, flourish more every day. They
 therefore act better who bestow their bounty on their tribesmen and
 clients, for they bestow something on men, and profit them; but that is
 not true and just bounty, for there is no conferring of a benefit where
 there is no necessity. Therefore, whatever is given to those who are
 not in need, for the sake of popularity, is thrown away; or it is
 repaid with interest, and thus it will not be the conferring of a
 benefit. And although it is pleasing to those to whom it is given,
 still it is not just, because if it is not done, no evil follows.
 Therefore the only sure and true office of liberality is to support the
 needy and unserviceable.

 [1159] De Offic., iii. 5.

 [1160] Trinumm., ii. 2. 58.

 [1161] Pro personâ.

 [1162] De Offic., ii. 15.

 [1163] Idoneis. Lactantius uses this word as though its meaning were
 "the rich;" and though it seems to have passed into this sense in later
 times, it is plain from the very words of Cicero himself that he uses
 it of deserving persons who need assistance.

 [1164] [Luke vi. 32-34.]

 [1165] De Offic., iii. 17. Solidam et expressam.

 [1166] [De Leg., iii., and De Offic., i. cap. 16.]

 [1167] Populari levitate ducti: an expression somewhat similar to
 "popularis aura."

 [1168] Fabulam.

 [1169] Cic., Pro Marcello [Nihil opere et manu factum.]

 Chap. XII.--Of the Kinds of Beneficence, and Works of Mercy.

 This is that perfect justice which protects human society, concerning
 which philosophers speak. This is the chief and truest advantage of
 riches; not to use wealth for the particular pleasure of an individual,
 but for the welfare of many; not for one's own immediate enjoyment, but
 for justice, which alone does not perish. We must therefore by all
 means keep in mind, that the hope of receiving in return must be
 altogether absent from the duty of showing mercy: for the reward of
 this work and duty must be expected from God alone; for if you should
 expect it from man, then that will not be kindness, but the lending of
 a benefit at interest; [1170] nor can he seem to have deserved well who
 affords that which he does, not to another, but to himself. And yet the
 matter comes to this, that whatever a man has bestowed upon another,
 hoping for no advantage from him, he really bestows upon himself, for
 he will receive a reward from God. God has also enjoined, that if at
 any time we make a feast, we should invite to the entertainment those
 who cannot invite us in return, and thus make us a recompense, so that
 no action of our life should be without the exercise of mercy. Nor,
 however, let any one think that he is debarred from intercourse with
 his friends or kindness with his neighbours. But God has made known to
 us what is our true and just work: we ought thus to live with our
 neighbours, provided that we know that the one manner of living relates
 to man, the other to God. [1171]

 Therefore hospitality is a principal virtue, as the philosophers also
 say; but they turn it aside from true justice, and forcibly apply
 [1172] it to advantage. Cicero says: [1173] "Hospitality was rightly
 praised by Theophrastus. For (as it appears to me) it is highly
 becoming that the houses of illustrious men should be open to
 illustrious guests." He has here committed the same error which he then
 did, when he said that we must bestow our bounty on "suitable" persons.
 For the house of a just and wise man ought not to be open to the
 illustrious, but to the lowly and abject. For those illustrious and
 powerful men cannot be in want of anything, since they are sufficiently
 protected and honoured by their own opulence. But nothing is to be done
 by a just man except that which is a benefit. But if the benefit is
 returned, it is destroyed and brought to an end; for we cannot possess
 in its completeness that for which a price has been paid to us.
 Therefore the principle of justice is employed about those benefits
 which have remained safe and uncorrupted; but they cannot thus remain
 by any other means than if they are be stowed upon those men who can in
 no way profit us. But in receiving illustrious men, he looked to
 nothing else but utility; nor did the ingenious man conceal what
 advantage he hoped from it. For he says that he who does that will
 become powerful among foreigners by the favour of the leading men, whom
 he will have bound to himself by the right of hospitality and
 friendship. O by how many arguments might the inconsistency of Cicero
 be proved, if this were my object! Nor would he be convicted so much by
 my words as by his own. For he also says, that the more any one refers
 all his actions to his own advantage, the less he is a good man. He
 also says, that it is not the part of a simple and open man to
 ingratiate himself in the favour of others, [1174] to pretend and
 allege anything, to appear to be doing one thing when he is doing
 another, to feign that he is bestowing upon another that which he is
 bestowing upon himself; but that this is rather the part of one who is
 designing [1175] and crafty, deceitful and treacherous. But how could
 he maintain that that ambitious hospitality was not evil intention?
 [1176] "Do you run round through all the gates, that you may invite to
 your house the chief men of the nations and cities as they arrive, that
 by their means you may acquire influence with their citizens; and wish
 yourself to be called just, and kind, and hospitable, though you are
 studying to promote your own advantage?" But did he not say this rather
 incautiously? For what is less suitable for Cicero? But through his
 ignorance of true justice he knowingly and with foresight fell into
 this snare. And that he might be pardoned for this, he testified that
 he does not give precepts with reference to true justice, which he does
 not hold, but with reference to a sketch and outline of justice.
 Therefore we must pardon this teacher who uses sketches and outlines,
 [1177] nor must we require the truth from him who admits that he is
 ignorant of it.

 The ransoming of captives is a great and noble exercise of justice, of
 which the same Tullius also approved. [1178] "And this liberality," he
 says, "is serviceable even to the state, that captives should be
 ransomed from slavery, and that those of slender resources should be
 provided for. And I greatly prefer this practice of liberality to
 lavish expenditure on shows. This is the part of great and eminent
 men." Therefore it is the appropriate work of the just to support the
 poor and to ransom captives, since among the unjust if any do these
 things they are called great and eminent. For it is deserving of the
 greatest praise for those to confer benefit from whom no one expected
 such conduct. For he who does good to a relative, or neighbour, or
 friend, either deserves no praise, or certainly no great praise,
 because he is bound to do it, and he would be impious and detestable if
 he did not do that which both nature itself and relationship require;
 and if he does it, he does it not so much for the sake of obtaining
 glory as of avoiding censure. But he who does it to a stranger and an
 unknown person, he truly is worthy of praise, because he was led to do
 it by kindness only. Justice therefore exists there, where there is no
 obligation of necessity for conferring a benefit. He ought not
 therefore to have preferred this duty of generosity to expenditure on
 shows; for this is the part of one making a comparison, and of two
 goods choosing that which is the better. For that profusion of men
 throwing away their property into the sea is vain and trifling, and
 very far removed from all justice. Therefore they are not even to be
 called gifts, [1179] in which no one receives but he who does not
 deserve to receive.

 Nor is it less a great work of justice to protect and defend orphans
 and widows who are destitute and stand in need of assistance; and
 therefore that divine law prescribes this to all, since all good judges
 deem that it belongs to their office to favour them with natural
 kindness, and to strive to benefit them. But these works are especially
 ours, since we have received the law, and the words of God Himself
 giving us instructions. For they perceive that it is naturally just to
 protect those who need protection, but they do not perceive why it is
 so. For God, to whom everlasting mercy belongs, on this account
 commands that widows and orphans should be defended and cherished, that
 no one through regard and pity for his pledges [1180] should be
 prevented from undergoing death in behalf of justice and faith, but
 should encounter it with promptitude and boldness, since he knows that
 he leaves his beloved ones to the care of God, and that they will never
 want protection. Also to undertake the care and support of the sick,
 who need some one to assist them, is the part of the greatest kindness,
 and of great beneficence; [1181] and he who shall do this will both
 gain a living sacrifice to God, and that which he has given to another
 for a time he will himself receive from God for eternity. The last and
 greatest office of piety is the burying of strangers and the poor;
 which subject those teachers of virtue and justice have not touched
 upon at all. For they were unable to see this, who measured all their
 duties by utility. For in the other things which have been mentioned
 above, although they did not keep the true path, yet, since they
 discovered some advantage in these things, retained as it were by a
 kind of inkling [1182] of the truth, they wandered to a less distance;
 but they abandoned this because they were unable to see any advantage
 in it.

 Moreover, there have not been wanting those who esteemed burial as
 superfluous, and said that it was no evil to lie unburied and
 neglected; but their impious wisdom is rejected alike by the whole
 human race, and by the divine expressions which command the performance
 of the rite. [1183] But they do not venture to say that it ought not to
 be done, but that, if it happens to be omitted, no inconvenience is the
 result. Therefore in that matter they discharge the office, not so much
 of those who give precepts, as of those who suggest consolation, that
 if this shall by chance have occurred to a wise man, he should not deem
 himself wretched on this account. But we do not speak of that which
 ought to be endured by a wise man, but of that which he himself ought
 to do. Therefore we do not now inquire whether the whole system of
 burial is serviceable or not; but this, even though it be useless, as
 they imagine, must nevertheless be practised, even on this account
 only, that it appears among men to be done rightly and kindly. For it
 is the feeling which is inquired into, and it is the purpose which is
 weighed. Therefore we will not suffer the image and workmanship of God
 to lie exposed as a prey to beasts and birds, but we will restore it to
 the earth, from which it had its origin; and although it be in the case
 of an unknown man, we will fulfil the office of relatives, into whose
 place, since they are wanting, let kindness succeed; and wherever there
 shall be need of man, there we will think that our duty is required.
 [1184] But in what does the nature of justice more consist than in our
 affording to strangers through kindness, that which we render to our
 own relatives through affection? And this kindness is much more sure
 and just when it is now afforded, not to the man who is insensible, but
 to God alone, to whom a just work is a most acceptable sacrifice. Some
 one will perhaps say: If I shall do all these things, I shall have no
 possessions. For what if a great number of men shall be in want, shall
 suffer cold, shall be taken captive, shall die, since one who acts thus
 must deprive himself of his property even in a single day, shall I
 throw away the estate acquired by my own labour or by that of my
 ancestors, so that after this I myself must live by the pity of others?

 Why do you so pusillanimously fear poverty, which even your
 philosophers praise, and bear witness that nothing is safer and nothing
 more calm than this? That which you fear is a haven against anxieties.
 Do you not know to how many dangers, to how many accidents, you are
 exposed with these evil resources? These will treat you well if they
 shall pass without your bloodshed. But you walk about laden with booty,
 and you bear spoils which may excite the minds even of your own
 relatives. Why, then, do you hesitate to lay that out well which
 perhaps a single robbery will snatch away from you, or a proscription
 suddenly arising, or the plundering of an enemy? Why do you fear to
 make a frail and perishable good everlasting, or to entrust your
 treasures to God as their preserver, in which case you need not fear
 thief and robber, nor rust, nor tyrant? He who is rich towards God can
 never be poor. [1185] If you esteem justice so highly, lay aside the
 burthens which press you, and follow it; free yourself from fetters and
 chains, that you may run to God without any impediment. It is the part
 of a great and lofty mind to despise and trample upon mortal affairs.
 But if you do not comprehend this virtue, that you may bestow your
 riches upon the altar [1186] of God, in order that you may provide for
 yourself firmer possessions than these frail ones, I will free you from
 fear. All these precepts are not given to you alone, but to all the
 people who are united in mind, and hold together as one man. If you are
 not adequate to the performance of great works alone, cultivate justice
 with all your power, in such a manner, however, that you may excel
 others in work as much as you excel them in riches. And do not think
 that you are advised to lessen or exhaust your property; but that which
 you would have expended on superfluities, turn to better uses. Devote
 to the ransoming of captives that from which you purchase beasts;
 maintain the poor with that from which you feed wild beasts; bury the
 innocent dead with that from which you provide men for the sword.
 [1187] What does it profit to enrich men of abandoned wickedness, who
 fight with beasts, [1188] and to equip them for crimes? Transfer things
 about to be miserably thrown away to the great sacrifice, that in
 return for these true gifts you may have an everlasting gift from God.
 Mercy has a great reward; for God promises it, that He will remit all
 sins. If you shall hear, He says, the prayers of your suppliant, I also
 will hear yours; if you shall pity those in distress, I also will pity
 you in your distress. But if you shall not regard nor assist them, I
 also will bear a mind like your own against you, and I will judge you
 by your own laws. [1189]

 [1170] Beneficii foeneratio.

 [1171] The meaning appears to be this: To benefit our friends and
 relatives, relates to man, i.e., is a merely human work; but to benefit
 those who cannot make a recompense is a divine work, and its reward is
 to be expected from God.

 [1172] Rapiunt.

 [1173] De Offic., ii. 18.

 [1174] Ambire.

 [1175] Malitiosi et astuti.

 [1176] Malitia, roguery. The word properly signifies some legal trick
 by which the ends of justice are frustrated, though the letter of the
 law is not broken.

 [1177] Umbratico et imaginario præceptori.

 [1178] De Officiis, ii. 18.

 [1179] Munera. The same word is used for "shows," as of gladiators, or
 contests of wild beasts, exhibited to the people.

 [1180] i.e., children.

 [1181] Operationis.

 [1182] Quasi odore quodam veritatis. The word "odor" is sometimes used
 to express "a presentiment" or "suspicion."

 [1183] [Gen. xlix. 29-31; Mark xiv. 8, 9.]

 [1184] [Ennius; also in Cicero, De Offic., i. cap. 16]

 [1185] [1 Tim. vi. 8-10.]

 [1186] In aram Dei. Others read "arcam," the chest.

 [1187] i.e., "gladiators purchased from a trainer for the gratification
 of the people."

 [1188] Bestiarios: men who fought with beasts in the amphitheatre.

 [1189] [Matt. xviii. 21-35. Exposition of vi. 14.]

 Chap. XIII.--Of Repentance, of Mercy, and the Forgiveness of Sins.

 As often, therefore, as you are asked for aid, believe that you are
 tried by God, that it may be seen whether you are worthy of being
 heard. Examine your own conscience, and, as far as you are able, heal
 your wounds. Nor, however, because offences are removed by bounty,
 think that a licence is given you for sinning. For they are done away
 with, if you are bountiful to God because you have sinned; for if you
 sin through reliance on your bounty, they are not done away with. For
 God especially desires that men shall be cleansed from their sins, and
 therefore He commands them to repent. But to repent is nothing else
 than to profess and to affirm that one will sin no more. Therefore they
 are pardoned who unawares and incautiously glide into sin; he who sins
 wilfully has no pardon. Nor, however, if any one shall have been
 purified from all stain of sin, let him think that he may abstain from
 the work of bounty because he has no faults to blot out. Nay, in truth,
 he is then more bound to exercise justice when he is become just, so
 that that which he had before done for the healing of his wounds he may
 afterwards do for the praise and glory of virtue. To this is added,
 that no one can be without fault as long as he is burthened with a
 covering of flesh, the infirmity of which is subject to the dominion of
 sin in a threefold manner--in deeds, in words, and thoughts.

 By these steps justice advances to the greatest height. The first step
 of virtue is to abstain from evil works; the second, to abstain also
 from evil words; the third, to abstain even from the thoughts of evil
 things. He who ascends the first step is sufficiently just; he who
 ascends the second is now of perfect virtue, since he offends neither
 in deeds nor in conversation; [1190] he who ascends the third appears
 truly to have attained the likeness of God. For it is almost beyond the
 measure of man not even to admit to the thought [1191] that which is
 either bad in action or improper in speech. Therefore even just men,
 who can refrain from every unjust work, are sometimes, however,
 overcome by frailty itself, so that they either speak evil in anger,
 or, at the sight of delightful things, they desire them with silent
 thought. But if the condition of mortality does not suffer a man to be
 pure from every stain, the faults of the flesh ought therefore to be
 done away with by continual bounty. For it is the single work of a man
 who is wise, and just, and worthy of life, to lay out his riches on
 justice alone; for assuredly he who is without this, although he should
 surpass Croesus or Crassus in riches, is to be esteemed as poor, as
 naked, as a beggar. Therefore we must use our efforts that we may be
 clothed with the garment of justice and piety, of which no one may
 deprive us, which may furnish us with an everlasting ornament. For if
 the worshippers of gods adore senseless images, and bestow upon them
 whatever they have which is precious, though they can neither make use
 of them nor give thanks because they have received them, how much more
 just and true is it to reverence the living images of God, that you may
 gain the favour of the living God! For as these make use of what they
 have received, and give thanks, so God, in whose sight you shall have
 done that which is good, will both approve of it and reward your piety.

 [1190] [Jas. iii. 2.]

 [1191] In cogitationem. Others read "cogitatione."

 Chap. XIV.--Of the Affections, and the Opinion of the Stoics Respecting
 Them; And of Virtue, the Vices, and Mercy.

 If, therefore, mercy is a distinguished and excellent gift in man, and
 that is judged to be very good by the consent both of the good and the
 evil, it appears that philosophers were far distant from the good of
 man, who neither enjoined nor practised anything of this kind, but
 always esteemed as a vice that virtue which almost holds the first
 place in man. It pleases me here to bring forward one subject of
 philosophy, that we may more fully refute the errors of those who call
 mercy, desire, and fear, diseases of the soul. They indeed attempt to
 distinguish virtues from vices, which is truly a very easy matter. For
 who cannot distinguish a liberal man from one who is prodigal (as they
 do), or a frugal man from one who is mean, or a calm man from one who
 is slothful, or a cautious man from one who is timid? Because these
 things which are good have their limits, and if they shall exceed these
 limits, fall into vices; so that constancy, unless it is undertaken for
 the truth, becomes shamelessness. In like manner, bravery, if it shall
 undergo certain danger, without the compulsion of any necessity, or not
 for an honourable cause, is changed into rashness. Freedom of speech
 also, if it attack others rather than oppose those who attack it, is
 obstinacy. Severity also, unless it restrain itself within the
 befitting punishments of the guilty, becomes savage cruelty.

 Therefore they say, that those who appear evil do not sin of their own
 accord, or choose evils by preference, but that, erring [1192] through
 the appearance of good, they fall into evils, while they are ignorant
 of the distinction between good things and evil. These things are not
 indeed false, but they are all referred to the body. For to be frugal,
 or constant, or cautious, or calm, or grave, or severe, are virtues
 indeed, but virtues which relate to this short [1193] life. But we who
 despise this life have other virtues set before us, respecting which
 philosophers could not by any means even conjecture. Therefore they
 regarded certain virtues as vices, and certain vices as virtues. For
 the Stoics take away from man all the affections, by the impulse of
 which the soul is moved--desire, joy, fear, sorrow: the two former of
 which arise from good things, either future or present; the latter from
 evil things. In the same manner, they call these four (as I said)
 diseases, not so much inserted in us by nature as undertaken through a
 perverted opinion; and therefore they think that these can be
 eradicated, if the false notion of good and evil things is taken away.
 For if the wise man thinks nothing good or evil, he will neither be
 inflamed with desire, nor be transported with joy, nor be alarmed with
 fear, nor suffer his spirits to droop [1194] through sadness. We shall
 presently see whether they effect that which they wish, or what it is
 which they do effect: in the meantime their purpose is arrogant and
 almost mad, who think that they apply a remedy, and that they are able
 to strive in opposition to the force and system of nature.

 [1192] Lapsos. [All this shows the need of an Augustine.]

 [1193] Temporariæ. [Admirable so far as our author goes.]

 [1194] Contrahetur.

 Chap. XV.--Of the Affections, and the Opinion of the Peripatetics Respecting
 Them.

 For, that these things are natural and not voluntary, the nature of all
 living beings shows, which is moved by all these affections. Therefore
 the Peripatetics act better, who say that all these cannot be taken
 from us, because they were born with us; and they endeavour to show how
 providently and how necessarily God, or nature (for so they term it),
 armed us with these affections; which, however, because they generally
 become vicious if they are in excess, can be advantageously regulated
 by man,--a limit being applied, so that there may be left to man as
 much as is sufficient for nature. Not an unwise disputation, if, as I
 said, all things were not referred to this life. The Stoics therefore
 are mad who do not regulate but cut them out, and wish by some means or
 other to deprive man of powers implanted in him by nature. And this is
 equivalent to a desire of taking away timidity from stags, or poison
 from serpents, or rage from wild beasts, or gentleness from cattle. For
 those qualities which have been given separately to dumb animals, are
 altogether given to man at the same time. But if, as physicians affirm,
 the affection of joy has its seat in the spleen, [1195] that of anger
 in the gall, of desire in the liver, of fear in the heart, it is easier
 to kill the animal itself than to tear anything from the body; for this
 is to wish to change the nature of the living creature. But the skilful
 men do not understand that when they take away vices from man, they
 also take away virtue, for which alone they are making a place. For if
 it is virtue in the midst of the impetuosity of anger to restrain and
 check oneself, which they cannot deny, then he who is without anger is
 also without virtue. If it is virtue to control the lust of the body,
 he must be free from virtue who has no lust which he may regulate. If
 it is virtue to curb the desire from coveting that which belongs to
 another, he certainly can have no virtue who is without that, to the
 restraining of which the exercise of virtue is applied. Where,
 therefore, there are no vices, there is no place even for virtue, as
 there is no place for victory where there is no adversary. And so it
 comes to pass that there can be no good in this life without evil. An
 affection therefore is a kind of natural fruitfulness [1196] of the
 powers of the mind. For as a field which is naturally fruitful produces
 an abundant crop of briars, [1197] so the mind which is uncultivated is
 overgrown with vices flourishing of their own accord, as with thorns.
 But when the true cultivator has applied himself, immediately vices
 give way, and the fruits of virtues spring up.

 Therefore God, when He first made man, with wonderful foresight first
 implanted in him these emotions of the mind, that he might be capable
 of receiving virtue, as the earth is of cultivation; and He placed the
 subject-matter of vices in the affections, and that of virtue in vices.
 For assuredly virtue will have no existence, or not be in exercise, if
 those things are wanting by which its power is either shown or exists.
 Now let us see what they have effected who altogether removes vices.
 With regard to those four affections [1198] which they imagine to arise
 from the opinion of things good and evil, by the eradication of which
 they think that the mind of the wise man is to be healed, since they
 understand that they are implanted by nature, and that without these
 nothing can be put in motion, nothing be done, they put certain other
 things into their place and room: for desire they substitute
 inclination, as though it were not much better to desire a good than to
 feel inclination for it; they in like manner substitute for joy
 gladness, and for fear caution. But in the case of the fourth they are
 at a loss for a method of exchanging the name. Therefore they have
 altogether taken away grief, that is, sadness and pain of mind, which
 cannot possibly be done. For who can fail to be grieved if pestilence
 has desolated his country, or an enemy overthrown it, or a tyrant
 crushed its liberty? Can any one fail to be grieved if he has beheld
 the overthrow of liberty, [1199] and the banishment or most cruel
 slaughter of neighbours, friends, or good men?--unless the mind of any
 one should be so struck with astonishment that all sensibility should
 be taken from him. Wherefore they ought either to have taken away the
 whole, or this defective [1200] and weak discussion ought to have been
 completed; that is, something ought to have been substituted in the
 place of grief, since, the former ones having been so arranged, this
 naturally followed.

 For as we rejoice in good things that are present, so we are vexed and
 grieved with evil things. If, therefore, they gave another name to joy
 because they thought it vicious, so it was befitting that another name
 should be given to grief because they thought it also vicious. From
 which it appears that it was not the object itself which was wanting to
 them, but a word, through want of which they wished, contrary to what
 nature allowed, to take away that affection which is the greatest. For
 I could have refuted those changes of names at greater length, and have
 shown that many names are attached to the same objects, for the sake of
 embellishing the style and increasing its copiousness, or at any rate
 that they do not greatly differ from one another. For both desire takes
 its beginning from the inclination, and caution arises from fear, and
 joy is nothing else than the expression of gladness. But let us suppose
 that they are different, as they themselves will have it. Accordingly
 they will say that desire is continued and perpetual inclination, but
 that joy is gladness bearing itself immoderately; and that fear is
 caution in excess, and passing the limits of moderation. Thus it comes
 to pass, that they do not take away those things which they think ought
 to be taken away, but regulate them, since the names only are changed,
 the things themselves remain. They therefore return unawares to that
 point at which the Peripatetics arrive by argument, that vices, since
 they cannot be taken away, are to be regulated with moderation.
 Therefore they err, because they do not succeed in effecting that which
 they aim at, and by a circuitous route, which is long and rough, they
 return to the same path.

 [1195] [After fifteen centuries, physicians know as little about the
 spleen as ever. See Dunglison, Med. Dict., sub voce "spleen."]

 [1196] Ubertas animorum.

 [1197] Exuberat in sentes, "luxuriates into briars."

 [1198] [Cap. xiv. [108]p. 179, supra.]

 [1199] [After Pharsalia. Note this love of freedom.]

 [1200] Curta, i.e., "maimed."

 Chap. XVI.--Of the Affections, and the Refutation of the Opinion of the
 Peripatetics Concerning Them; What is the Proper Use of the Affections, and
 What is a Bad Use of Them.

 But I think that the Peripatetics did not even approach the truth, who
 allow that they are vices, but regulate them with moderation. For we
 must be free even from moderate vices; yea, rather, it ought to have
 been at first effected that there should be no vices. For nothing can
 be born vicious; [1201] but if we make a bad use of the affections they
 become vices, if we use them well they become virtues. Then it must be
 shown that the causes of the affections, and not the affections
 themselves, must be moderated. We must not, they say, rejoice with
 excessive joy, but moderately and temperately. This is as though they
 should say that we must not run swiftly, but walk quietly. But it is
 possible that he who walks may err, and that he who runs may keep the
 right path. What if I show that there is a case in which it is vicious
 not only to rejoice moderately, but even in the smallest degree; and
 that there is another case, on the contrary, in which even to exult
 with transports of joy is by no means faulty? What then, I pray, will
 this mediocrity profit us? I ask whether they think that a wise man
 ought to rejoice if he sees any evil happening to his enemy; or whether
 he ought to curb his joy, if by the conquest of enemies, or the
 overthrow of a tyrant, liberty and safety have been acquired by his
 countrymen. [1202]

 No one doubts but that in the former case to rejoice a little, and in
 the latter to rejoice too little, is a very great crime. We may say the
 same respecting the other affections. But, as I have said, the object
 of wisdom does not consist in the regulation of these, but of their
 causes, since they are acted upon from without; nor was it befitting
 that these themselves should be restrained; since they may exist in a
 small degree with the greatest criminality, and in the greatest degree
 without any criminality. But they ought to have been assigned to fixed
 times, and circumstances, and places, that they may not be vices, when
 it is permitted us to make a right use of them. For as to walk in the
 right course is good, but to wander from it is evil, so to be moved by
 the affections to that which is right is good, but to that which is
 corrupt is evil. For sensual desire, if it does not wander from its
 lawful object, although it be ardent, yet is without fault. But if it
 desires an unlawful object, although it be moderate, yet it is a great
 vice. Therefore it is not a disease to be angry, nor to desire, nor to
 be excited by lust; but to be passionate, to be covetous or licentious,
 is a disease. For he who is passionate is angry even with him with whom
 he ought not to be angry or at times when he ought not. He who is
 covetous desires even that which is unnecessary. He who is licentious
 pursues even that which is forbidden by the laws. The whole matter
 ought to have turned on this, that since the impetuosity of these
 things cannot be restrained, nor is it right that it should be, because
 it is necessarily implanted for maintaining the duties of life, it
 might rather be directed into the right way, where it may be possible
 even to run without stumbling and danger.

 [1201] [See Augustine against Pelagius: another view.]

 [1202] [Again this love of liberty, but loosely said.]

 Chap. XVII.--Of the Affections and Their Use; Of Patience, and the Chief
 Good of Christians.

 But I have been carried too far in my desire of refuting them; since it
 is my purpose to show that those things which the philosophers thought
 to be vices, are so far from being vices, that they are even great
 virtues. Of others, I will take, for the sake of instruction, those
 which I think to be most closely related to the subject. They regard
 dread or fear as a very great vice, and think that it is a very great
 weakness of mind; the opposite to which is bravery: and if this exists
 in a man, they say that there is no place for fear. Does any one then
 believe that it can possibly happen that this same fear is the highest
 fortitude? By no means. For nature does not appear to admit that
 anything should fall back to its contrary. But yet I, not by any
 skilful conclusion, as Socrates does in the writings of Plato, who
 compels those against whom he disputes to admit those things which they
 had denied, but in a simple manner, will show that the greatest fear is
 the greatest virtue. No one doubts but that it is the part of a timid
 and feeble mind either to fear pain, or want, or exile, or
 imprisonment, or death; and if any one does not dread all these, he is
 judged a man of the greatest fortitude. But he who fears God is free
 from the fear of all these things. In proof of which, there is no need
 of arguments: for the punishments inflicted on the worshippers of God
 have been witnessed at all times, and are still witnessed through the
 world, in the tormenting of whom new and unusual tortures have been
 devised. For the mind shrinks from the recollection of various kinds of
 death, when the butchery of savage monsters has raged even beyond death
 itself. But a happy and unconquered patience endured these execrable
 lacerations of their bodies without a groan. This virtue afforded the
 greatest astonishment to all people and provinces, and to the torturers
 themselves, when cruelty was overcome by patience. But this virtue was
 caused by nothing else than the fear of God. Therefore (as I said) fear
 is not to be uprooted, as the Stoics maintain, nor to be restrained, as
 the Peripatetics wish, but to be directed into the right way; and
 apprehensions are to be taken away, but so that this one only may be
 left: for since this is the only lawful and true one, it alone effects
 that all other things may not be feared. Desire also is reckoned among
 vices; but if it desires those things which are of the earth, it is a
 vice; on the other hand, if it desires heavenly things, it is a virtue.
 For he who desires to obtain justice, God, perpetual life, everlasting
 light, and all those things which God promises to man, will despise
 these riches, and honours, and commands, and kingdoms themselves.

 The Stoic will perhaps say that inclination is necessary for the
 attainment of these things, and not desire; but, in truth, the
 inclination is not sufficient. For many have the inclination; but when
 pain has approached the vitals, inclination gives way, but desire
 perseveres: and if it effects that all things which are sought by
 others are objects of contempt to him, it is the greatest virtue, since
 it is the mother of self-restraint. And therefore we ought rather to
 effect this, that we may rightly direct the affections, a corrupt use
 of which is vice. For these excitements of the mind resemble a
 harnessed chariot, in the right management of which the chief duty of
 the driver is to know the way; and if he shall keep to this, with
 whatever swiftness he may go, he will not strike against an obstacle.
 But if he shall wander from the course, although he may go calmly and
 gently, he will either be shaken over rough places, or will glide over
 precipices, or at any rate will be carried where he does not need to
 go. So that chariot of life which is led by the affections as though by
 swift horses, if it keeps the right way, will discharge its duty.
 Dread, therefore, and desire, if they are cast down to the earth, will
 become vices, but they will be virtues if they are referred to divine
 things. On the other hand, they esteem parsimony as a virtue; which, if
 it is eagerness for possessing, cannot be a virtue, because it is
 altogether employed in the increase or preservation of earthly goods.
 But we do not refer the chief good to the body, but we measure every
 duty by the preservation of the soul only. But if, as I have before
 taught, we must by no means spare our property that we may preserve
 kindness and justice, it is not a virtue to be frugal; which name
 beguiles and deceives under the appearance of virtue. For frugality is,
 it is true, the abstaining from pleasures; but in this respect it is a
 vice, because it arises from the love of possessing, whereas we ought
 both to abstain from pleasures, and by no means to withhold money. For
 to use money sparingly, that is, moderately, is a kind of weakness of
 mind, either of one fearing lest he should be in want, or of one
 despairing of being able to recover it, or of one incapable of the
 contempt of earthly things. But, on the other hand, they call him who
 is not sparing of his property prodigal. For thus they distinguish
 between the liberal man and the prodigal: that he is liberal who
 bestows on deserving objects, and on proper occasions, and in
 sufficient quantities; but that he is prodigal who lavishes on
 undeserving objects, and when there is no need, and without any regard
 to his property.

 What then? shall we call him prodigal who through pity gives food to
 the needy? But it makes a great difference, whether on account of lust
 you bestow your money on harlots, or on account of benevolence on the
 wretched; whether profligates, gamesters, and pimps squander your
 money, or you bestow it on piety and God; whether you expend it upon
 your own appetite, [1203] or lay it up in the treasury of justice. As,
 therefore, it is a vice to lay it out badly, so it is a virtue to lay
 it out well. If it is a virtue not to be sparing of riches, which can
 be replaced, that you may support the life of man, which cannot be
 replaced; then parsimony is a vice. Therefore I can call them by no
 other name than mad, who deprive man, a mild and sociable animal, of
 his name; who, having uprooted the affections, in which humanity
 altogether consists, wish to bring him to an immoveable insensibility
 of mind, while they desire to free the soul from perturbations, and, as
 they themselves say, to render it calm and tranquil; which is not only
 impossible, because its force and nature consist in motion, but it
 ought not even to be so. For as water which is always still and
 motionless is unwholesome and more muddy, so the soul which is unmoved
 and torpid is useless even to itself: nor will it be able to maintain
 life itself; for it will neither do nor think anything, since thought
 itself is nothing less than agitation of the mind. In fine, they who
 assert this immoveableness of the soul wish to deprive the soul of
 life; for life is full of activity, but death is quiet. They also
 rightly esteem some things as virtues, but they do not maintain their
 due proportion. [1204]

 Constancy is a virtue; not that we resist those who injure us, for we
 must yield to these; and why this ought to be done I will show
 presently: but that when men command us to act in opposition to the law
 of God, and in opposition to justice, we should be deterred by no
 threats or punishments from preferring the command of God to the
 command of man. Likewise it is a virtue to despise death; not that we
 seek it, and of our own accord inflict it upon ourselves, as many and
 distinguished philosophers have often done, which is a wicked and
 impious thing; but that when compelled to desert God, and to betray our
 faith, we should prefer to undergo death, and should defend our liberty
 against the foolish and senseless violence of those who cannot govern
 themselves, and with fortitude of spirit we should challenge all the
 threats and terrors of the world. Thus with lofty and invincible mind
 we trample upon those things which others fear--pain and death. This is
 virtue; this is true constancy--to be maintained and preserved in this
 one thing alone, that no terror and no violence may be able to turn us
 away from God. Therefore that is a true sentiment of Cicero: [1205] "No
 one," he says, "can be just who fears death, or pain, or exile, or
 want." Also of Seneca, who says, in his books of moral philosophy:
 "This is that virtuous man, not distinguished by a diadem or purple, or
 the attendance of lictors, but in no respect inferior, who, when he
 sees death at hand, is not so disturbed as though he saw a fresh
 object; who, whether torments are to be suffered by his whole body, or
 a flame is to be seized by his mouth, or his hands are to be stretched
 out on the cross, [1206] does not inquire what he suffers, but how
 well." But he who worships God suffers these things without fear.
 Therefore he is just. By these things it is effected, that he cannot
 know or maintain at all either the virtues or the exact limits of the
 virtues, whoever is estranged from the religion of the one God.

 [1203] Ventri ac gulæ ingeras.

 [1204] Sed earum modum non tenent. [Augustine's anthropology better.]

 [1205] De Offic., ii. 11.

 [1206] Per patibulum.

 Chap. XVIII.--Of Some Commands of God, and of Patience.

 But let us leave the philosophers, who either know nothing at all, and
 hold forth this very ignorance as the greatest knowledge; or who,
 inasmuch as they think they know that of which they are ignorant, are
 absurdly and arrogantly foolish. Let us therefore (that we may return
 to our purpose), to whom alone the truth has been revealed by God, and
 wisdom has been sent from heaven, practice those things which God who
 enlightens us commands: let us sustain and endure the labours of life,
 by mutual assistance towards each other; nor, however, if we shall have
 done any good work, let us aim at glory from it. For God admonishes us
 that the doer of justice ought not to be boastful, lest he should
 appear to have discharged the duties of benevolence, not so much from a
 desire of obeying the divine commands, as of pleasing men, and should
 already have the reward of glory which he has aimed at, and should not
 receive the recompense of that heavenly and divine reward. The other
 things which the worshipper of God ought to observe are easy, when
 these virtues are comprehended, that no one should ever speak falsely
 for the sake of deceiving or injuring. For it is unlawful for him who
 cultivates truth to be deceitful in anything, and to depart from the
 truth itself which he follows. In this path of justice and all the
 virtues there is no place for falsehood. Therefore the true and just
 traveller will not use the saying of Lucilius: [1207] --


 "It is not for me to speak falsely to a man who is a friend and
 acquaintance;"

 but he will think that it is not his part to speak falsely even to an
 enemy and a stranger; nor will he at any time so act, that his tongue,
 which is the interpreter of his mind, should be at variance with his
 feeling and thought. If he shall have lent any money, he will not
 receive interest, that the benefit may be unimpaired which succours
 necessity, and that he may entirely abstain from the property of
 another. For in this kind of duty he ought to be content with that
 which is his own; since it is his duty in other respects not to be
 sparing of his property, in order that he may do good; but to receive
 more than he has given is unjust. And he who does this lies in wait in
 some manner, that he may gain booty from the necessity of another.

 But the just man will omit no opportunity of doing anything mercifully:
 nor will he pollute himself with gain of this kind; but he will so act
 that without any loss to himself, that which he lends may be reckoned
 among his good works. He must not receive a gift from a poor man; so
 that if he himself has afforded anything, it may be good, inasmuch as
 it is gratuitous. If any one reviles, he must answer him with a
 blessing; [1208] he himself must never revile, that no evil word may
 proceed out of the mouth of a man who reverences the good Word. [1209]
 Moreover, he must also diligently take care, lest by any fault of his
 he should at any time make an enemy; and if any one should be so
 shameless as to inflict injury on a good and just man, he must bear it
 with calmness and moderation, and not take upon himself his revenge,
 but reserve it for the judgment of God. [1210] He must at all times and
 in all places guard innocence. And this precept is not limited to this,
 that he should not himself inflict injury, but that he should not
 avenge it when inflicted on himself. For there sits on the
 judgment-seat a very great and impartial Judge, the observer and
 witness of all. Let him prefer Him to man; let him rather choose that
 He should pronounce judgment respecting his cause, whose sentence no
 one can escape, either by the advocacy of any one or by favour. Thus it
 comes to pass, that a just man is an object of contempt to all; and
 because it will be thought that he is unable to defend himself, he will
 be regarded as slothful and inactive; but if any one shall have avenged
 himself upon his enemy, he is judged a man of spirit and activity--all
 honour and reverence him. And although the good man has it in his power
 to profit many, yet they look up to him who is able to injure, rather
 than to him who is able to profit. But the depravity of men will not be
 able to corrupt the just man, so that he will not endeavour to obey
 God; and he would prefer to be despised, provided that he may always
 discharge the duty of a good man, and never of a bad man. Cicero says
 in those same books respecting Offices: "But if any one should wish to
 unravel this indistinct conception of his soul, [1211] let him at once
 teach himself that he is a good man who profits those whom he can, and
 injures no one [1212] unless provoked by injury."

 Oh how he marred a simple and true sentiment by the addition of two
 words! For what need was there of adding these words, "unless provoked
 by injury?" that he might append vice as a most disgraceful tail to a
 good man and might represent him as without patience, which is the
 greatest of all the virtues. He said that a good man would inflict
 injuries if he were provoked: now he must necessarily lose the name of
 a good man from this very circumstance, if he shall inflict injury. For
 it is not less the part of a bad man to return an injury than to
 inflict it. For from what source do contests, from what source do
 fightings and contentions, arise among men, except that impatience
 opposed to injustice often excites great tempests? But if you meet
 injustice with patience, than which virtue nothing can be found more
 true, nothing more worthy of a man, it will immediately be
 extinguished, as though you should pour water upon a fire. But if that
 injustice which provokes opposition has met with impatience equal
 [1213] to itself, as though overspread with oil, it will excite so
 great a conflagration, that no stream can extinguish it, but only the
 shedding of blood. Great, therefore, is the advantage of patience, of
 which the wise man has deprived the good man. For this alone causes
 that no evil happens; and if it should be given to all, there will be
 no wickedness and no fraud in the affairs of men. What, therefore, can
 be so calamitous to a good man, so opposed to his character, as to let
 loose the reins to anger, which deprives him not only of the title of a
 good man, but even of a man; since to injure another, as he himself
 most truly says, is not in accordance with the nature of man? For if
 you provoke cattle or horses, [1214] they turn against you either with
 their hoof or their horn; and serpents and wild beasts, unless you
 pursue them that you may kill them, give no trouble. And to return to
 examples of men, even the inexperienced and the foolish, if at any time
 they receive an injury, are led by a blind and irrational fury, and
 endeavour to retaliate upon those who injure them. In what respect,
 then, does the wise and good man differ from the evil and foolish,
 except that he has invincible patience, of which the foolish are
 destitute; except that he knows how to govern himself, and to mitigate
 his anger, which those, because they are without virtue, are unable to
 curb? But this circumstance manifestly deceived him, because, when
 inquiry is made respecting virtue, he thought that it is the part of
 virtue to conquer in every kind of contention. Nor was he able in any
 way to see, that a man who gives way to grief and anger, and who
 indulges these affections, against which he ought rather to struggle,
 and who rushes wherever injustice shall have called him, does not
 fulfil the duty of virtue. For he who endeavours to return an injury,
 desires to imitate that very person by whom he has been injured. Thus
 he who imitates a bad man can by no means be good.

 Therefore by two words he has taken away from the good and wise man two
 of the greatest virtues, innocence and patience. But, as Sallustius
 relates was said by Appius, because he himself practised that canine
 [1215] eloquence, be wished man also to live after the manner of a dog,
 so as, when attacked, to bite in return. And to show how pernicious
 this repayment of insult is, and what carnage it is accustomed to
 produce, from what can a more befitting example be sought, than from
 the most melancholy disaster of the teacher himself, who, while he
 desired to obey these precepts of the philosophers, destroyed himself?
 For if, when attacked with injury, he had preserved patience--if he had
 learned that it is the part of a good man to dissemble and to endure
 insult, and his impatience, vanity, and madness had not poured forth
 those noble orations, inscribed with a name derived from another
 source, [1216] he would never, by his head affixed to them, have
 polluted the rostra on which he had formerly distinguished himself, nor
 would that proscription have utterly destroyed the state. Therefore it
 is not the part of a wise and good man to wish to contend, and to
 commit himself to danger, since to conquer is not in our power, and
 every contest is doubtful; but it is the part of a wise and excellent
 man not to wish to remove his adversary, which cannot be done without
 guilt and danger, but to put an end to the contest itself, which may be
 done with advantage and with justice. Therefore patience is to be
 regarded as a very great virtue; and that the just man might obtain
 this, God willed, as has been before said, that he should be despised
 as sluggish. For unless he shall have been insulted, it will not be
 known what fortitude he has in restraining himself. Now if, when
 provoked by injury, he has begun to follow up his assailant with
 violence, he is overcome. But if he shall have repressed that emotion
 by reasoning, he altogether has command over himself: he is able to
 rule himself. And this restraining [1217] of oneself is rightly named
 patience, which single virtue is opposed to all vices and affections.
 This recalls the disturbed and wavering mind to its tranquillity; this
 mitigates, this restores a man to himself. Therefore, since it is
 impossible and useless to resist nature, so that we are not excited at
 all; before, however, the emotion bursts forth to the infliction of
 injury, as far [1218] as is possible let it be calmed [1219] in time.
 God has enjoined us not to let the sun go down upon our wrath, [1220]
 lest he should depart as a witness of our madness. Finally, Marcus
 Tullius, in opposition to his own precept, concerning which I have
 lately spoken, gave the greatest praises to the forgetting of injuries.
 "I entertain hopes," he says, "O Cæsar, who art accustomed to forget
 nothing except injuries." [1221] But if he thus acted--a man most
 widely removed not only from heavenly, but also from public and civil
 justice--how much more ought we to do this, who are, as it were,
 candidates for immortality?

 [1207] [Homini amico ac familiari non est mentiri meum.]

 [1208] Matt. v. 44; Luke vi. 28; Rom. xii. 14.

 [1209] i.e., Jesus Christ the Son of God = the Word of God.

 [1210] Rom. xii. 19; Heb. x. 30.

 [1211] Animi sui complicitam notionem evolvere.

 [1212] [Nisi lacessitus injuria.]

 [1213] Comparem. Injustice and impatience are here represented as a
 pair of gladiators well matched against each other.

 [1214] Pecudes, including horses and cattle.

 [1215] Caninam, i.e., resembling a dog, cutting.

 [1216] The allusion is to the Philippics of Cicero, a title borrowed
 from Demosthenes.

 [1217] Sustentatio sui.

 [1218] Quoad fieri potest. Others read, "quod fieri potest."

 [1219] Maturius sopiatur.

 [1220] Eph. iv. 26.

 [1221] Cicero, Pro Ligar., 12.

 Chap. XIX.--Of the Affections and Their Use; And of the Three Furies.

 When the Stoics attempt to uproot the affections from man as diseases,
 they are opposed by the Peripatetics, who not only retain, but also
 defend them, and say that there is nothing in man which is not produced
 in him with great reason and foresight. They say this indeed rightly,
 if they know the true limits of each subject. Accordingly they say that
 this very affection of anger is the whetstone of virtue, as though no
 one could fight bravely against enemies unless he were excited by
 anger; by which they plainly show that they neither know what virtue
 is, nor why God gave anger to man. And if this was given to us for this
 purpose, that we may employ it for the slaying of men, what is to be
 thought more savage than man, what more resembling the wild beasts,
 than that animal which God formed for communion and innocence? There
 are, then, three affections which drive men headlong to all crimes: (1)
 anger, (2) desire, and (3) lust. [1222] On which account the poets have
 said that there are three furies which harass the minds of men: anger
 longs for revenge, desire for riches, lust for pleasures. But God has
 appointed fixed limits to all of these; and if they pass these limits
 and begin to be too great, they must necessarily pervert their nature,
 and be changed into diseases and vices. And it is a matter of no great
 labour to show what these limits are. [1223] Cupidity [1224] is given
 us for providing those things which are necessary for life;
 concupiscence, [1225] for the procreation of offspring; the affection
 of indignation, [1226] for restraining the faults of those who are in
 our power, that is, in order that tender age may be formed by a severer
 discipline to integrity and justice: for if this time of life is not
 restrained by fear, [1227] licence will produce boldness, and this will
 break out into every disgraceful and daring action. Therefore, as it is
 both just and necessary to employ anger towards the young, so it is
 both pernicious and impious to use it towards those of our own age. It
 is impious, because humanity is injured; pernicious, because if they
 oppose, it is necessary either to destroy them or to perish. But that
 this which I have spoken of is the reason why the affection of anger
 has been given to man, may be understood from the precepts of God
 Himself, who commands that we should not be angry with those who revile
 and injure us, but that we should always have our hands over the young;
 that is, that when they err, we should correct them with continual
 stripes, [1228] lest by useless love and excessive indulgence they
 should be trained to evil and nourished to vices. But those who are
 inexperienced in affairs and ignorant of reason, have expelled those
 affections which have been given to man for good uses, and they wander
 more widely than reason demands. From this cause they live unjustly and
 impiously. They employ anger against their equals in age: hence
 disagreements, hence banishments, hence wars have arisen contrary to
 justice. They use desire for the amassing of riches: hence frauds,
 hence robberies, hence all kinds of crimes have originated. They use
 lust only for the enjoyment of pleasures: hence debaucheries, hence
 adulteries, hence all corruptions have proceeded. Whoever, therefore,
 has reduced those affections within their proper limits, which they who
 are ignorant of God cannot do, he is patient, he is brave, he is just.
 [1229]

 [1222] [Rather, indignation, cupidity, and concupiscence, answering to
 our author's "ira, cupiditas, libido." The difference involved in this
 choice of words, I shall have occasion to point out.]

 [1223] [Here he treats the "three furies" as not in themselves vices,
 but implanted for good purposes, and becoming "diseases" only when they
 pass the limits he now defines. Hence, while indignation is virtuous
 anger, it is not a disease; cupidity, while amounting to honest thrift,
 is not evil; and concupiscence, until it becomes "evil concupiscence"
 (epithumi'an kake`n, Col. iii. 5), is but natural appetite, working to
 good ends.]

 [1224] Desire. [See note 6, supra.]

 [1225] Lust.

 [1226] Anger.

 [1227] [Quæ, nisi in metu cohibetur.]

 [1228] [Assiduis verberibus. This might be rendered "careful
 punishments."]

 [1229] [Quod ignorantes Deum facere non possunt. In a later age
 Lactantius might have been charged with Semi-Pelagianism, many of his
 expressions about human nature being unstudied. But I note this
 passage, as, like many others, proving that he recognizes the need of
 divine grace.]

 Chap. XX.--Of the Senses, and Their Pleasures in the Brutes and in Man; And
 of Pleasures of the Eyes, and Spectacles.

 It remains that I should speak against the pleasures of the five
 senses, and this briefly, for the measure of the book itself now
 demands moderation; all of which, since they are vicious and deadly,
 ought to be overcome and subdued by virtue, or, as I said a little
 before respecting the affections, be recalled to their proper office.
 The other animals have no pleasure, except the one only which relates
 to generation. Therefore they use their senses for the necessity of
 their nature: they see, in order that they may seek those things which
 are necessary for the preservation of life; they hear one another, and
 distinguish one another, that they may be able to assemble together;
 they either discover from the smell, or perceive from the taste, the
 things which are useful for food; they refuse and reject the things
 which are useless, they measure the business of eating and drinking by
 the fulness of their stomach. But the foresight of the most skilful
 Creator gave to man pleasure without limit, and liable to fall into
 vice, because He set before him virtue, which might always be at
 variance with pleasure, as with a domestic enemy. Cicero says, in the
 Cato Major: [1230] "In truth, debaucheries, and adulteries, and
 disgraceful actions are excited by no other enticements than those of
 pleasure. And since nature or some God has given to man nothing more
 excellent than the mind, nothing is so hostile to this divine benefit
 and gift as pleasure. For when lust bears sway there is no place for
 temperance, nor can virtue have any existence when pleasure reigns
 supreme." But, on the other hand, God gave virtue on this account, that
 it might subdue and conquer pleasure, and that, when it passed the
 boundaries assigned to it, it might restrain it within the prescribed
 limits, lest it should soothe and captivate man with enjoyments, render
 him subject to its control, and punish him with everlasting death.

 The pleasure arising from the eyes is various and manifold, which is
 derived from the sight of objects which are pleasant in intercourse
 with men, or in nature or workmanship. The philosophers rightly took
 this away. For they say that it is much more excellent and worthy of
 man to look upon the heaven [1231] rather than carved works, and to
 admire this most beautiful work adorned with the lights of the stars
 shining through, [1232] as with flowers, than to admire things painted
 and moulded, and varied with jewels. But when they have eloquently
 exhorted us to despise earthly things, and have urged us to look up to
 the heaven, nevertheless they do not despise these public spectacles.
 Therefore they are both delighted with these, and are gladly present at
 them; though, since they are the greatest incitement to vices, and have
 a most powerful tendency to corrupt our minds, they ought to be taken
 away from us; for they not only contribute in no respect to a happy
 life, but even inflict the greatest injury. For he who reckons it a
 pleasure, that a man, though justly condemned, should be slain in his
 sight, pollutes his conscience as much as if he should become a
 spectator and a sharer of a homicide which is secretly committed.
 [1233] And yet they call these sports in which human blood is shed. So
 far has the feeling of humanity departed from the men, that when they
 destroy the lives of men, they think that they are amusing themselves
 with sport, being more guilty than all those whose blood-shedding they
 esteem a pleasure. I ask now whether they can be just and pious men,
 who, when they see men placed under the stroke of death, and entreating
 mercy, not only suffer them to be put to death, but also demand it, and
 give cruel and inhuman votes for their death, not being satiated with
 wounds nor contented with bloodshed. Moreover, they order them, even
 though wounded and prostrate, to be attacked again, and their caresses
 to he wasted [1234] with blows, that no one may delude them by a
 pretended death. They are even angry with the combatants, unless one of
 the two is quickly slain; and as though they thirsted for human blood,
 they hate delays. They demand that other and fresh combatants should be
 given to them, that they may satisfy their eyes as soon as possible.
 Being imbued with this practice, they have lost their humanity.
 Therefore they do not spare even the innocent, but practice upon all
 that which they have learned in the slaughter of the wicked. It is not
 therefore befitting that those who strive to keep to the path of
 justice should be companions and sharers in this public homicide. For
 when God forbids us to kill, He not only prohibits us from open
 violence, [1235] which is not even allowed by the public laws, but He
 warns us against the commission of those things which are esteemed
 lawful among men. Thus it will be neither lawful for a just man to
 engage in warfare, since his warfare is justice itself, nor to accuse
 any one of a capital charge, because it makes no difference whether you
 put a man to death by word, or rather by the sword, since it is the act
 of putting to death itself [1236] which is prohibited. Therefore, with
 regard to this precept of God, there ought to be no exception at all;
 but that it is always unlawful to put to death a man, whom God willed
 to be a sacred animal. [1237]

 Therefore let no one imagine that even this is allowed, to strangle
 [1238] newly-born children, which is the greatest impiety; for God
 breathes into their souls for life, and not for death. But men, that
 there may be no crime with which they may not pollute their hands,
 deprive souls as yet innocent and simple of the light which they
 themselves have not given. Can any one, indeed, expect that they would
 abstain from the blood of others who do not abstain even from their
 own? But these are without any controversy wicked and unjust. What are
 they whom a false piety [1239] compels to expose their children? Can
 they be considered innocent who expose their own offspring [1240] as a
 prey to dogs, and as far as it depends upon themselves, kill them in a
 more cruel manner than if they had strangled them? Who can doubt that
 he is impious who gives occasion [1241] for the pity of others? For,
 although that which he has wished should befall the child--namely, that
 it should be brought up--he has certainly consigned his own offspring
 either to servitude or to the brothel? But who does not understand, who
 is ignorant what things may happen, or are accustomed to happen, in the
 case of each sex, even through error? For this is shown by the example
 of OEdipus alone, confused with twofold guilt. It is therefore as
 wicked to expose as it is to kill. But truly parricides complain of the
 scantiness of their means, and allege that they have not enough for
 bringing up more children; as though, in truth, their means were in the
 power of those who possess them, or God did not daily make the rich
 poor, and the poor rich. Wherefore, if any one on account of poverty
 shall be unable to bring up children, it is better to abstain from
 marriage [1242] than with wicked hands to mar the work of God.

 If, then, it is in no way permitted to commit homicide, it is not
 allowed us to be present at all, [1243] lest any bloodshed should
 overspread the conscience, since that blood is offered for the
 gratification of the people. And I am inclined to think that the
 corrupting influence of the stage is still more contaminating. [1244]
 For the subject of comedies are the dishonouring of virgins, or the
 loves of harlots; and the more eloquent they are who have composed the
 accounts of these disgraceful actions, the more do they persuade by the
 elegance of their sentiments; and harmonious and polished verses more
 readily remain fixed in the memory of the hearers. In like manner, the
 stories of the tragedians place before the eyes the parricides and
 incests of wicked kings, and represent tragic [1245] crimes. And what
 other effect do the immodest gestures of the players produce, but both
 teach and excite lusts? whose enervated bodies, rendered effeminate
 after the gait and dress of women, imitate [1246] unchaste women by
 their disgraceful gestures. Why should I speak of the actors of mimes,
 [1247] who hold forth instruction in corrupting influences, who teach
 adulteries while they feign them, and by pretended actions train to
 those which are true? What can young men or virgins do, when they see
 that these things are practised without shame, and willingly beheld by
 all? They are plainly admonished of what they can do, and are inflamed
 with lust, which is especially excited by seeing; and every one
 according to his sex forms [1248] himself in these representations. And
 they approve of these things, while they laugh at them, and with vices
 clinging to them, they return more corrupted to their apartments; and
 not boys only, who ought not to be inured to vices prematurely, but
 also old men, whom it does not become at their age to sin.

 What else does the practice of the Circensian games contain but levity,
 vanity, and madness? For their souls are hurried away to mad excitement
 with as great impetuosity as that with which the chariot races are
 there carried on; so that they who come for the sake of beholding the
 spectacle now themselves exhibit more of a spectacle, when they begin
 to utter exclamations, to be thrown into transports, and to leap from
 their seats. Therefore all spectacles ought to be avoided, not only
 that no vice may settle in our breasts, which ought to be tranquil and
 peaceful; but that the habitual indulgence of any pleasure may not
 soothe and captivate us, and turn us aside from God and from good
 works. [1249] For the celebrations of the games are festivals in honour
 of the gods, inasmuch as they were instituted on account of their
 birthdays, or the dedication of new temples. And at first the huntings,
 which are called shows, were in honour of Saturnus, and the scenic
 games in honour of Liber, but the Circensian in honour of Neptune. By
 degrees, however, the same honour began to be paid also to the other
 gods, and separate games were dedicated to their names, as Sisinnius
 Capito teaches in his book on the games. Therefore, if any one is
 present at the spectacles to which men assemble for the sake of
 religion, he has departed from the worship of God, and has betaken
 himself to those deities whose birthdays and festivals he has
 celebrated. [1250]

 [1230] C. 12.

 [1231] Coelum potius quàm coelata. There appears to be an allusion to
 the supposed derivation of "coelum" from "coelando."

 [1232] [Intermicantibus astrorum luminibus. It does not seem to me that
 the learned translator does full justice here to our author's idea.
 "Adorned with the twinkling lights of the stars" would be an admissible
 rendering.]

 [1233] [It is unbecoming for a Christian, unless as an officer of the
 law or a minister of mercy, to be a spectator of any execution of
 criminals. Blessed growth of Christian morals.]

 [1234] Dissipari. [A very graphic description of the brutal shows of
 the arena, which were abolished by the first Christian emperor, perhaps
 influenced by these very pages.]

 [1235] Lactrocinari.

 [1236] i.e., without reference to the manner in which death is
 inflicted. [Lactantius goes further here than the Scriptures seem to
 warrant, if more than private warfare be in his mind. The influence of
 Tertullian is visible here. See Elucidation II. [109]p. 76, and cap.
 xi. [110]p. 99, vol. iii., this series.]

 [1237] [Sanctum animal. See [111]p. 56, supra. But the primal law on
 this very subject contains a sanction which our author seems to forget.
 Because he is an animal of such sacred dignity, therefore "whoso
 sheddeth man's blood," etc. (Gen. ix. 6). The impunity of Cain had led
 to bloodshed (Gen. vi. 11), to which as a necessary remedy this
 sanction was prescribed.]

 [1238] Oblidere.

 [1239] They thought it less criminal to expose children than to
 strangle them.

 [1240] Sanguinem suum.

 [1241] i.e., by exposing them, that others may through compassion bring
 then up.

 [1242] Ab uxoris congressione.

 [1243] i.e., at the shows of gladiators.

 [1244] [How seriously this warning should be considered in our days,
 when American theatricals have become so generally licentious beyond
 all bounds, I beg permission to suggest. See Elucidation I. [112]p.
 595, vol. v.; also Ibid., pp. [113]277, [114]575, this series.]

 [1245] Cothurnata scelera.

 [1246] Mentiuntur.

 [1247] The mimus was a species of dramatic representation, containing
 scenes from common life, which were expressed by gesture and mimicry
 more than by dialogue.

 [1248] Præfigurat, not a word of classical usage.

 [1249] [see Tertullian, vol. iii cap. 25, [115]p. 89, this series.]

 [1250] See p. 27, supra; also vol. vi. [116]pp. 487, 488.]

 Chap. XXI.--Of the Pleasures of the Ears, and of Sacred Literature.

 Pleasure of the ears is received from the sweetness of voices and
 strains, which indeed is as productive of vice as that delight of the
 eyes of which we have spoken. For who would not deem him luxurious and
 worthless who should have scenic arts at his house? But it makes no
 difference whether you practice luxury alone at home, or with the
 people in the theatre. But we have already spoken of spectacles: [1251]
 there remains one thing which is to be overcome by us, that we be not
 captivated by those things which penetrate to the innermost perception.
 For all those things which are unconnected with words, that is,
 pleasant sounds of the air and of strings, may be easily disregarded,
 because they do not adhere to us, and cannot be written. But a
 well-composed poem, and a speech beguiling with its sweetness,
 captivate the minds of men, and impel them in what direction they
 please. Hence, when learned men have applied themselves to the religion
 of God, unless they have been instructed [1252] by some skilful
 teacher, they do not believe. For, being accustomed to sweet and
 polished speeches or poems, they despise the simple and common language
 of the sacred writings as mean. For they seek that which may soothe the
 senses. But whatever is pleasant to the ear effects persuasion, and
 while it delights fixes itself deeply within the breast. Is God,
 therefore, the contriver both of the mind, and of the voice, and of the
 tongue, unable to speak eloquently? Yea, rather, with the greatest
 foresight, He wished those things which are divine to be without
 adornment, that all might understand the things which He Himself spoke
 to all.

 Therefore he who is anxious for the truth, who does not wish to deceive
 himself, must lay aside hurtful and injurious pleasures, which would
 bind the mind to themselves, as pleasant food does the body: true
 things must be preferred to false, eternal things to those which are of
 short duration, useful things to those which are pleasant. Let nothing
 be pleasing to the sight but that which you see to be done with piety
 and justice; let nothing be agreeable to the hearing but that which
 nourishes the soul and makes you a better man. And especially this
 sense ought not to be distorted to vice, since it is given to us for
 this purpose, that we might gain the knowledge of God. Therefore, if it
 be a pleasure to hear melodies and songs, let it be pleasant to sing
 and hear the praises of God. This is true pleasure, which is the
 attendant and companion of virtue. This is not frail and brief, as
 those which they desire, who, like cattle, are slaves to the body; but
 lasting, and affording delight without any intermission. And if any one
 shall pass its limits, and shall seek nothing else from pleasure but
 pleasure itself, he designs for himself death; for as there is
 perpetual life in virtue, so there is death in pleasure. For he who
 shall choose temporal things will be without things eternal; he who
 shall prefer earthly things will not have heavenly things.

 [1251] [See [117]p. 187, supra.]

 [1252] Fundati, having the foundation well laid, trained. Some read,
 "Ab aliquo imperito doctore fundati."

 Chap. XXII.--Of the Pleasures of Taste and Smell.

 But with regard to the pleasures of taste and smell, which two senses
 relate only to the body, there is nothing to be discussed by us; unless
 by chance any one requires us to say that it is disgraceful to a wise
 and good man if he is the slave of his appetite, if he walks along
 besmeared with unguents and crowned with flowers: and he who does these
 things is plainly foolish and senseless, and is worthless, and one whom
 not even a notion of virtue has reached. Perhaps some one will say,
 Why, then, have these things been made, except that we may enjoy them?
 However, it has often been said that there would have been no virtue
 unless it had things which it might overpower. Therefore God made all
 things to supply a contest between two things. Those enticements of
 pleasures, then, are the instruments of that whose only business it is
 to subdue virtue, and to shut out justice from men. With these soothing
 influences and enjoyments it captivates their souls; for it knows that
 pleasure is the contriver of death. For as God calls man to life only
 through virtue and labour, so the other calls us to death by delights
 and pleasures; and as men arrive at real good through deceitful evils,
 so they arrive at real evil through deceitful goods. Therefore those
 enjoyments are to be guarded against, as snares or nets, lest,
 captivated by the softness of enjoyments, we should be brought under
 the dominion of death with the body itself, to which we have enslaved
 ourselves.

 Chap. XXIII. [1253] --De Tactus Voluptate Et Libidine, Atque de Matrimonio
 Et Continentiâ.

 Venio nunc ad eam, quæ percipitur ex tactu, voluptatem: qui sensus est
 quidem totius corporis. Sed ego non de ornamentis, aut vestibus, sed de
 solâ libidine dicendum mihi puto; quæ maxime coercenda est, quia maxime
 nocet. Cure excogitasset Deus duorum sexuum rationero, attribuit iis,
 ut se invicem appeterent, et conjunctione gauderent. Itaque
 ardentissimam cupiditatem cunctorum animantium corporibus admiscuit, ut
 in hos affectus avidissime ruerent, eaque ratione propagari et
 multiplicari genera possent. Quæ cupiditas et appetentia in homine
 vehementior et acrior invenitur; vel quia hominum multitudinem voluit
 esse majorem, vel quoniam virtutem soli homini dedit, ut esset laus et
 gloria in coercendis voluptatibus, et abstinentia sui. Seit ergo
 adversarius ille noster, quanta sit vis hujus cupiditatis, quam quidam
 necessitatem dicere maluerunt; eamque a recto et bono, ad malum et
 pravum transfert. Illicita enim desideria immittit, ut aliena
 contaminent, quibus habere propria sine delicto licet. Objicit quippe
 oculis irritabiles formas, suggeritque fomenta, et vitiis pabulum
 subministrat: tum intimis visceribus stimulos omnes conturbat et
 commovet, et naturalem illum incitat atque inflammat ardorem, donee
 irretitum hominem implicatumque decipiat. Ac ne quis esset, qui
 poenarum metu abstineret alieno, lupanaria quoque constituit; et
 pudorem infelicium mulierum publicavit, ut ludibrio haberet tam eos qui
 faciunt, quam quas pati necesse est.

 His obscoenitatibus animas, ad sanctitatem genitas, velut in coeni
 gurgite demersit, pudorem extinxit, pudicitiam profligavit. Idem etiam
 mares maribus admiscuit; et nefandos coitus contra naturam contraque
 institutum Dei machinatus est: sic imbuit homines, et armavit ad nefas
 omne. Quid enim potest esse sanctum iis, qui ætatem imbecillam et
 præsidio indigentem, libidini suæ depopulandam foedandamque
 substraverint? Non potest hæc res pro magnitudine sceleris enarrari.
 Nihil amplius istos appellare possum, quam implos et parricidas, quibus
 non sufficit sexus a Deo datus, nisi eliare suum profane ac petulanter
 illudant. Hæc tamen apud illos levia, et quasi honesta sunt. Quid dicam
 de iis, qui abominandam non libidinem, sod insaniam potius exercent!
 Piget dicere: sed quid his fore credamus, quos non piget facere? et
 tamen dicendum est, quia fit. De istis loquor, quorum teterrima libido
 et execrabilis furor ne capiti quidem parcit. Quibus hoc verbis, aut
 qua indignatione tantum nefas prosequar? Vincit officium linguæ
 sceleris magnitudo. Cum igitur libido hæc edat opera, et hæc facinora
 designer, armandi adversus earn virtute maxima sumus. Quisquis affectus
 illos frænare non potest, cohibeat eos intra præ scriptum legitimi
 tori, ut et illud, quod avide expetat, consequatur, et tamen in
 peccatum non incidat. Nam quid sibi homines perditi volunt? Nempe
 honesta opera voluptas sequitur: si ipsam per se appetunt, justa et
 legitima frui licet.

 Quod si aliqua necessitas prohibebit tum vero maxima adhibenda virtus
 erit, ut cupiditati continentia reluctetur. Nec tanturn alienis, quæ
 attingere non licet, veriun etiam publicis vulgatisque corporibus
 abstinendum, Deus præcepit; docetque nos, cum duo inter se corpora
 fuerint copulata, unum corpus efficere. Ita qui se coeno immerserit,
 coeno sit oblitus necesse est; et corpus quidem cito ablui potest: mens
 autem contagione impudici corporis inquinata non potest, nisi et longo
 tempore, et multis bonis operibus, ab ea quæ inhæ serit colluvione
 purgari. Oportet ergo sibi quemque proponere, duorum sexuum
 conjunctionem generandi causa datam esse viventibus, eamque legera his
 affectibus positam, ut successionera parent. Sicut autem dedit nobis
 oculos Deus, non ut spectemus, voluptatemque capiamus, sed ut videamus
 propter eos actus, qui pertinent ad vitæ necessitatem, ita genitalem
 corporis partem, quod nomen ipsum docet, nulla alia causa nisi
 efficiendæ sobolis accepimus. Huic divinæ legi summa devotione parendum
 est. Sint omnes, qui se discipulos Dei profitebuntur, ita morati et
 instituti, ut imperare sibi possint. Nam qui voluptatibus indulgent,
 qui libidini obsequuntur, ii animam suam corpori mancipant, ad
 mortemque condemnant: quia se corpori addixerunt, in quod habet mors
 potestatem. Unusquisque igitur, quantum potest, formet se ad
 verecundiam, pudorem colat, castitatem conscientia et mente tueatur;
 nec tantum legibus publicis pareat: sed sit supra omnes leges, qui
 legem Dei sequitur. Quibus bonis si assueverit, jam pudebit eum ad
 deteriora desciscere: modo placeant recta et honesta, quæ melioribus
 jucundiora sunt quam prava et inhonesta pejoribus.

 Nondum omnia castitatis officio exsecutus sum: quam Deus fion modo
 intra privatos parietes, sed etiam præ scripto lectuli terminat; ut cum
 quis hobeat uxorem, neque servam, neque liberam habere insuper velit,
 sed matrimonio fidem server. Non enim, sicut juris publici ratio est,
 solo mulier adultera est, quæ habet allure, maritus outem, etiam si
 plures habeat, a crimine adulterii solutus est. Sed divina lex ira duos
 in matrimonium, quod est in corpus unum, pari jure conjungit, ut
 adulter habeatur, quisquis compagem corporis in diversa distraxerit.
 Nec ob aliam cansam Deus, cam cæteras animantes suscepto foetu maribus
 repugnare voluisset, solam omnium mulierem patientem viri fecit;
 scilicet ne foeminis repugnantibus, libido cogeret viros aliud
 appetere, eoque facto, castitatis gloriam non tenerent. [1254] Sed
 neque mulier virtutem pudicitiæ caperet, si peccare non posset. Nam
 quis mutum animal pudicum esse dixerit, quod suscepto foe tu mari
 repugnat? Quod ideo facit, quia necesse est in dolorem atque in
 periculum veniat, si admiserit. Nulla igitur laus est, non facere quod
 facere non possis. Ideo autem pudicitia in homine laudatur, quia non
 naturalis est, sed voluntaria. Servanda igitur fides ab utroque alteri
 est: immo exemplo continentia: docenda uxor, ut se caste gerat. Iniquum
 est enim, ut id exigas, quod præ stare ipse non possis. Quæ iniquitas
 effecit profecto, ut essent adulteria, foe minis ægre ferentibus præ
 stare se fidem non exhibentibus mutuam charitatem. Denique nulla est
 tam perditi pudoris adultera, quæ non hanc causam vitiis suis præ
 tendat; injuriam se peccando non facere, sed referre. Quod optime
 Quintilianus expressit: Homo, inquit, neque alieni matrimonii
 abstinens, neque sui custos, quæ inter se natura. connexa sunt. Nam
 neque maritus circa corrumpendas aliorum conjuges occupatus potest
 vacare domesticæ sanctitati; et uxor, cum in tale incidit matrimonium,
 exemplo ipso concitara, out imitari se putat, out vindicari.

 Cavendum igitur, ne occasionem vitiis nostra intemperantia demus: sed
 assuescant invicem mores duorum, et jugum paribus animis ferant. Nos
 ipsos in altero cogitemus. Nam fere in hoc justitiæ summa consistit, ut
 non facias alteri, quidquid ipse ab altero pati nolis. Hæc sunt quæ ad
 continentiam præ cipiuntur a Deo. Sed tamen ne quis divina præ cepta
 circumscribere se putet posse, adduntur ilia, ut omnis calumnia, et
 occasio fraudis removeatur, adulterum esse, qui a marito dimissam
 duxerit, et eum qui præ tercrimen adulterii uxorem dimiserit, ut
 alteram ducat; dissociari enim corpus et distrahi Deus noluit. Præ
 terea non tanturn adulterium esse vitandum, sed etiam cogitationem; ne
 quis aspiciat alienam, et animo concupiscat: adulteram enim fieri
 mentem, si vel imaginem voluptatis sibi ipsa depinxerit. Mens est enim
 profecto quæ peccat; quæ immoderata: libidinis fructum cogitatione
 complectitur; in hac crimen est, in hac omne delictum. Nam etsi corpus
 nulla sit lobe maculatum, non constat tamen pudicitiæ ratio, si animus
 incestus est; nec illibata castitas videri potest, ubi conscientiam
 cupiditas inquinavit. Nec verb aliquis existimet, difficile esse fræ
 nos imponere voluptati, eamque vagam et errantem castitatis pudicitiæ
 que limitibus includere, cum propositum sit hominibus etiam vincere, ac
 plurimi beatam atque incorruptam corporis integritatem retinuerint,
 multique sint, qui hoc coe lesti genere vitæ felicissime perfruantur.
 Quod quidem Deus non ira fieri præ cepit, tanquam astringat, quia
 generari homines oportet; sed tanquam sinat. Scit enim, quantam his
 affectibus imposuerit necessitatem. Si quis hoc, inquit, facere
 potuerit, habebit eximiam incomparabilemque mercedem. Quod continentiæ
 genus quasi fastigium est, omniumque consummatio virtutum. Ad quam si
 quis eniti atque eluctari potuerit, hunc servum dominus, hunc
 discipulum magister agnoscet; hic terrain triumphabit, hic erit
 consimilis Deo, qui virtutem Dei cepit. Hæc quidem difficilia videntur;
 sed de eo loquimur, cui calcatis omnibus terrenis, iter in coelum
 paratur. Nam quia virtus in Dei agnitione consistit, omnia gravia sunt,
 dum ignores; ubi cognoveris, facilia: per ipsas difficultates nobis
 exeundum est, qui ad summum bonum tendimus.

 [1253] It has been judged advisable to give this chapter in the
 original Latin. [Compare Clement, vol. ii. p. 259, notes [118]3,
 [119]7, this series.]

 [1254] [Non bene conveniunt igitur legibus divinis quæ supradicta sunt
 auctore nostro (vide p. 143, apud n. 2) sed hæc verba de naturâ
 muliebri minime imperita, esse videntur.]

 Chap. XXIV.--Of Repentance, of Pardon, and the Commands of God.

 Nor, however, let any one be disheartened, or despair concerning
 himself, if, overcome by passion, or impelled by desire, or deceived by
 error, or compelled by force, he has turned aside to the way of
 unrighteousness. For it is possible for him to be brought back, and to
 be set free, if he repents of his actions, and, turning to better
 things, makes satisfaction to God. Cicero, indeed, thought that this
 was impossible, whose words in the third book of the Academics [1255]
 are: "But if, as in the case of those who have gone astray on a
 journey, it were permitted those who have followed a devious course to
 correct their error by repentance, it would be more easy to amend
 rashness." It is altogether permitted them. For if we think that our
 children are corrected when we perceive that they repent of their
 faults, and though we have disinherited and cast them off, we again
 receive, cherish, and embrace them, why should we despair that the
 mercy of God our Father may again be appeased by repentance? Therefore
 He who is at once the Lord and most indulgent Parent promises that He
 will remit the sins of the penitent, and that He will blot out all the
 iniquities of him who shall begin afresh to practice righteousness. For
 as the uprightness of his past life is of no avail to him who lives
 badly, because the subsequent wickedness has destroyed his works of
 righteousness, so former sins do not stand in the way of him who has
 amended his life, because the subsequent righteousness has effaced the
 stain of his former life. For he who repents of that which he has done,
 understands his former error; and on this account the Greeks better and
 more significantly speak of metanoia, [1256] which we may speak of in
 Latin as a return to a right understanding. [1257] For he returns to a
 right understanding, and recovers his mind as it were from madness, who
 is grieved for his error; and he reproves himself of madness, and
 confirms his mind to a better course of life: then he especially guards
 against this very thing, that he may not again be led into the same
 snares. In short, even the dumb animals, when they are ensnared by
 fraud, if by any means they have extricated themselves so as to escape,
 become more cautious for the future, and always avoid all those things
 in which they have perceived wiles and snares. Thus repentance makes a
 man cautious and diligent to avoid the faults into which he has once
 fallen through deceit.

 For no one can be so prudent and so circumspect as not at some time to
 slip; and therefore God, knowing our weakness, of His compassion [1258]
 has opened a harbour of refuge for man, that the medicine of repentance
 might aid this necessity to which our frailty is liable. [1259]
 Therefore, if any one has erred, let him retrace his step, and as soon
 as possible recover and reform himself.


 "But upward to retrace the way,

 And pass into the light of day,

 Then comes the stress of labour." [1260]

 For when men have tasted sweet pleasures to their destruction, [1261]
 they can scarcely be separated from them: they would more easily follow
 right things if they had not tasted their attractions. But if they tear
 themselves away from this pernicious slavery, all their error will be
 forgiven them, if they shall have corrected their error by a better
 life. And let not any one imagine that he is a gainer if he shall have
 no witness of his fault: for all things are known to Him in whose sight
 we live; and if we are able to conceal anything from all men, we cannot
 conceal it from God, to whom nothing can be hidden, nothing secret.
 Seneca closed his exhortations with an admirable sentiment: "There is,"
 he says, "some great deity, and greater than can be imagined; and for
 him we endeavour to live. Let us approve ourselves to him. For it is of
 no avail that conscience is confirmed; we lie open to the sight of
 God." What can be spoken with greater truth by him who knew God, than
 has been said by a man who is ignorant of true religion? For he both
 expressed the majesty of God, by saying that it is too great for the
 reflecting powers of the human mind to receive; and he touched upon the
 very fountain of truth, by perceiving that the life of men is not
 superfluous, [1262] as the Epicureans will have it, but that they make
 it their endeavour to live to God, if indeed they live with justice and
 piety. He might have been a true worshipper of God, if any one had
 pointed out to him God; [1263] and he might assuredly have despised
 Zeno, and his teacher Sotion, if he had obtained a true guide of
 wisdom. Let us approve ourselves to him, he says. A speech truly
 heavenly, had it not been preceded by a confession of ignorance. It is
 of no avail that conscience is confined; we lie open to the sight of
 God. There is then no room for falsehood, none for dissimulation; for
 the eyes of men are removed by walls, but the divine power of God
 cannot be removed by the inward parts from looking through and knowing
 the entire man. The same writer says, in the first book of the same
 work: "What are you doing? what are you contriving? what are you
 hiding? Your guardian follows you; one is withdrawn from you by foreign
 travel, another by death, another by infirm health; this one adheres to
 you, and you can never be without him. Why do you choose a secret
 place, and remove the witness? Suppose that you have succeeded in
 escaping the notice of all, foolish man! What does it profit you not to
 have a witness, [1264] if you have the witness of your own conscience?

 And Tully speaks in a manner no less remarkable concerning conscience
 and God: "Let him remember," he says, "that he has God as a witness,
 that is, as I judge, his own mind, than which God has given nothing
 more divine to man." [1265] Likewise, in speaking of the just and good
 man, he says: "Therefore such a man will not dare not merely to do, but
 even to think, anything which he would not dare to proclaim." Therefore
 let us cleanse our conscience, which is open to the eyes of God; and,
 as the same writer says, "let us always so live as to remember that we
 shall have to give an account;" [1266] and let us reckon that we are
 looked upon at every moment, not, as he said, in some theatre of the
 world by men, but from above by Him who is about to be both the judge
 and also the witness, to whom, when He demands an account of our life,
 it will not be permitted any one to deny his actions. Therefore it is
 better either to flee from conscience, or ourselves to open our mind of
 our own accord, and tearing open our wounds to pour forth destruction;
 which wounds no one else can heal but He alone who made the lame to
 walk, restored sight to the blind, cleansed the polluted limbs, and
 raised the dead. He will quench the ardour of desires, He will root out
 lusts, He will remove envy, He will mitigate anger. He will give true
 and lasting health. This remedy should be sought by all, inasmuch as
 the soul is harassed by greater danger than the body, and a cure should
 be applied as soon as possible to secret diseases. For if any one has
 his eyesight clear, all his limbs perfect, and his entire body in the
 most vigorous health, nevertheless I should not call him sound if he is
 carried away by anger, swollen and puffed up with pride, the slave of
 lust, and burning with desires; but I should rather call him sound who
 does not raise his eyes to the prosperity of another, who does not
 admire riches, who looks upon another's wife with chaste eye, who
 covets nothing at all, does not desire that which is another's, envies
 no one, disdains no one; who is lowly, merciful, bountiful, mild,
 courteous: peace perpetually dwells in his mind.

 That man is sound, he is just, he is perfect. Whoever, therefore, has
 obeyed all these heavenly precepts, he is a worshipper of the true God,
 whose sacrifices are gentleness of spirit, and an innocent life, and
 good actions. And he who exhibits all these qualities offers a
 sacrifice as often as he performs any good and pious action. For God
 does not desire the sacrifice of a dumb animal, nor of death and blood,
 but of man and life. And to this sacrifice there is neither need of
 sacred boughs, nor of purifications, [1267] nor of sods of turf, which
 things are plainly most vain, but of those things which are put forth
 from the innermost breast. Therefore, upon the altar of God, which is
 truly very great, [1268] and which is placed in the heart of man, and
 cannot be defiled with blood, there is placed righteousness, patience,
 faith, innocence, chastity, and abstinence. This is the truest
 ceremony, this is that law of God, as it is called by Cicero,
 illustrious and divine, which always commands things which are right
 and honourable, and forbids things which are wrong and disgraceful; and
 he who obeys this most holy and certain law cannot fail to live justly
 and lawfully. And I have laid down a few chief points of this law,
 since I promised that I would speak only of those things which
 completed the character [1269] of virtue and righteousness. If any one
 shall wish to comprise all the other parts, let him seek them from the
 fountain itself, from which that stream flowed to us.

 [1255] [From a lost book.]

 [1256] meta'noia. The word properly denotes a change of mind, resulting
 in a change of conduct.

 [1257] Resipiscentiam. [Note the admitted superiority of the Greek.]

 [1258] Pro pietate suâ. Augustine (De Civitate Dei, x. 1) explains the
 use of this expression as applied to God.

 [1259] [Concerning the "planks after shipwreck," see Tertullian, pp.
 [120]659 and [121]666, vol. iii., this series.]

 [1260] Virg., Æneid, vi. 128.

 [1261] Male.

 [1262] Supervacuam, i.e., useless, without an object. [P. 171. n. 2.]

 [1263] [May I be pardoned for asking my reader to refer to refer to The
 Task of the poet Cowper (book ii.): "All truth is from the sempiternal
 source," etc. The concluding lines illustrate the kindly judgment of
 our author:-- "How oft, when Paul has served us with a text, Has
 Epictetus, Plato, Tully, preached! Men that, if now alive, would sit
 content And humble learners of a Saviour's worth, Preach it who
 might. Such was their love of truth, Their thirst of knowledge, and
 their candour too." But turn to our author's last sentence in cap.
 17, p. 183, supra.]

 [1264] Conscium.

 [1265] De Offic., iii. 10.

 [1266] Ibid., iii. 19.

 [1267] Februis, a word used in the Sabine language for purgations.
 Others read "fibris," entrails, offered in sacrifice.

 [1268] There is an allusion to the altar of Hercules, called "ara
 maxima." [Christian philosophy is heard at last among Latins.]

 [1269] Quæ summum fastigium imponerent. The phrase properly means to
 complete a building by raising the pediment or gable. Hence its
 figurative use. [See cap. 2, [122]p. 164.]

 Chap. XXV.--Of Sacrifice, and of an Offering Worthy of God, and of the Form
 of Praising God.

 Now let us speak briefly concerning sacrifice itself. "Ivory," says
 Plato, "is not a pure offering to God." What then? Are embroidered and
 costly textures? Nay, rather nothing is a pure offering to God which
 can be corrupted or taken away secretly. But as he saw this, that
 nothing which was taken from a dead body ought to be offered to a
 living being, why did he not see that a corporeal offering ought not to
 be presented to an incorporeal being? How much better and more truly
 does Seneca speak: "Will you think of God as great and placid, and a
 friend to be reverenced with gentle majesty, and always at hand? not to
 be worshipped with the immolation of victims and with much blood--for
 what pleasure arises from the slaughter of innocent animals?--but with
 a pure mind and with a good and honourable purpose. Temples are not to
 be built to Him with stones piled up on high; He is to be consecrated
 by each man in his own breast." Therefore, if any one thinks that
 garments, and jewels, and other things which are esteemed precious, are
 valued by God, he is altogether ignorant of what God is, since he
 thinks that those things are pleasing to Him which even a man would be
 justly praised for despising. What, then, is pure, what is worthy of
 God, but that which He Himself has demanded in that divine law of His?

 There are two things which ought to be offered, the gift [1270] and the
 sacrifice; the gift as a perpetual offering, the sacrifice for a time.
 But with those who by no means understand the nature of the Divine
 Being, a gift is anything which is wrought of gold or silver; likewise
 anything which is woven of purple and silk: a sacrifice is a victim,
 and as many things as are burnt upon the altar. But God does not make
 use either of the one or the other, because He is free from corruption,
 and that is altogether corruptible. Therefore, in each case, that which
 is incorporeal must be offered to God, for He accepts this. His
 offering is innocency of soul; His sacrifice praise and a hymn. [1271]
 For if God is not seen, He ought therefore to be worshipped with things
 which are not seen. Therefore no other religion is true but that which
 consists of virtue and justice. But in what manner God deals with the
 justice of man is easily understood. For if man shall be just, having
 received immortality, he will serve God for ever. But that men are not
 born except for justice, both the ancient philosophers and even Cicero
 suspects. For, discussing the Laws, [1272] he says: "But of all things
 which are discussed by learned men, nothing assuredly is of greater
 importance than that it should be entirely understood that we are born
 to justice." We ought therefore to hold forth and offer to God that
 alone for the receiving of which He Himself produced us. But how true
 this twofold kind of sacrifice is, Trismegistus Hermes is a befitting
 witness, who agrees with us, that is, with the prophets, whom we
 follow, as much in fact as in words. He thus spoke concerning justice:
 "Adore and worship this word, O son." But the worship of God consists
 of one thing, not to be wicked. Also in that perfect discourse, when he
 heard Asclepius inquiring from his son whether it pleased him that
 incense and other odours for divine sacrifice were offered to his
 father, exclaimed: "Speak words of good omen, O Asclepius. For it is
 the greatest impiety to entertain any such thought concerning that
 being of pre-eminent goodness. For these things, and things resembling
 these, are not adapted to Him. For He is full of all things, as many as
 exist, and He has need of nothing at all. But let us give Him thanks,
 and adore Him. For His sacrifice consists only of blessing." And he
 spoke rightly. [1273]

 For we ought to sacrifice to God in word; inasmuch as God is the Word,
 as He Himself confessed. Therefore the chief ceremonial in the worship
 of God is praise from the mouth of a just man directed towards God.
 [1274] That this, however, may be accepted by God, there is need of
 humility, and fear, and devotion in the greatest degree, lest any one
 should chance to place confidence in his integrity and innocence, and
 thus incur the charge of pride and arrogance, and by this deed lose the
 recompense of his virtue. But that he may obtain the favour of God, and
 be free from every stain, let him always implore the mercy of God, and
 pray for nothing else but pardon for his sins, even though he has none.
 [1275] If he desires anything else, there is no need of expressing it
 in word to one who knows what we wish; if anything good shall happen to
 him, let him give thanks; if any evil, let him make amends, [1276] and
 let him confess that the evil has happened to him on account of his
 faults; and even in evils let him nothing less give thanks, and make
 amends in good things, that he may be the same at all times, and be
 firm, and unchangeable, and unshaken. And let him not suppose that this
 is to be done by him only in the temple, but at home, and even in his
 very bed. In short, let him always have God with himself, consecrated
 in his heart, inasmuch as he himself is a temple of God. But if he has
 served God, his Father and Lord, with this assiduity, obedience, and
 devotion, justice is complete and perfect; and he who shall keep this,
 as we before testified, has obeyed God, and has satisfied the
 obligations of religion and his own duty.


 [1270] Donum, a free-will offering or gift. See Ex. xxv. 2.

 [1271] [i.e., "the Eucharist" as a sacrifice of praise and
 thanksgiving. And mark what follows, note 3, infra.]

 [1272] [Nos ad justitiam esse natos.]

 [1273] [Ps. l. 23.]

 [1274] [Ps. l. 23.]

 [1275] i.e., no known sins. Thus the Psalmist prays: "Cleanse thou me
 from my secret faults." [So St. Paul, 1 Cor. iv. 4, where the archaic
 "by" = adversus.]

 [1276] Satisfaciat, "let him make satisfaction by fruits worthy of
 repentance."

The Divine Institutes.

  Book VII.

  Of a Happy Life.

 Chap. I.--Of the World, and Those Who are About to Believe, and Those Who
 are Not; And in This the Censure of the Faithless.

 It is well: the foundations are laid, as the illustrious orator says.
 But we have not only laid the foundations, which might be firm and
 suitable for the support of the work; but we have raised the entire
 edifice, with great and strong buildings, almost to the summit. There
 remains, a matter which is much easier, either to cover or adorn it;
 without which, however, the former works are both useless and
 displeasing. For of what avail is it, either to be freed from false
 religions [1277] or to understand the true [1278] one? Of what avail,
 either to see the vanity of false wisdom, [1279] or to know what is
 true? [1280] Of what avail is it, I say, to defend that heavenly
 justice? [1281] Of what avail to hold the worship of God [1282] with
 great difficulties, which is the greatest virtue, unless the divine
 reward of everlasting blessedness attends it? Of which subject we must
 speak in this book, lest all that is gone before should appear vain and
 unprofitable: if we should leave this, on account of which they were
 undertaken, in uncertainty, lest any one should by chance think that
 such great labours are undertaken in vain; while he distrusts their
 heavenly reward, which God has appointed for him who shall have
 despised the present sweet enjoyments of earth in comparison of
 solitary and unrewarded [1283] virtue. Let us satisfy this part of our
 subject also, both by the testimonies of the sacred writings and also
 by probable arguments, that it may be equally manifest that future
 things are to be preferred to those which are present; heavenly things
 to earthly; and eternal things to those which are temporal: since the
 rewards of vices are temporal, those of virtues are eternal.

 I will therefore set forth the system of the world, that it may easily
 be understood both when and how it was made by God; which Plato, who
 discoursed about the making of the world, could neither know nor
 explain, inasmuch as he was ignorant of the heavenly mystery, which is
 not learned except by the teaching of prophets and God; and therefore
 he said that it was created for eternity. Whereas the case is far
 different, since whatever is of a solid and heavy body, as it received
 a beginning at some time, so it must needs have an end. For Aristotle,
 when he did not see how so great a magnitude of things could perish,
 and wished to escape this objection, [1284] said that the world always
 had existed, and always would exist. He did not at all see, that
 whatever material thing exists must at some time have had a beginning,
 and that nothing can exist at all unless it had a beginning. For when
 we see that earth, and water, and fire perish, are consumed, and
 extinguished, which are clearly parts of the world, it is understood
 that that is altogether mortal the members of which are mortal. Thus it
 comes to pass, that whatever is liable to destruction must have been
 produced. But everything which comes within the sight of the eyes must
 of necessity be material, and capable of dissolution. Therefore
 Epicurus alone, following the authority of Democritus, spoke truly in
 this matter, who said that it had a beginning at some time, and that it
 would at some time perish. Nor, however, was he able to assign any
 reason, either through what causes or at what time this work of such
 magnitude should be destroyed. But since God has revealed this to us,
 and we do not arrive at it by conjectures, but by instruction from
 heaven, we will carefully teach it, that it may at length be evident to
 those who are desirous of the truth, that the philosophers did not see
 nor comprehend the truth; but that they had so slight a knowledge
 [1285] of it, that they by no means perceived from what source that
 fragrance [1286] of wisdom, which was so pleasant and agreeable,
 breathed upon them.

 In the meantime, I think it necessary to admonish those who are about
 to read this, that depraved and vicious minds, since the acuteness of
 their mind is blunted by earthly passions, which weigh down all the
 perceptions and render them weak, will either altogether fail to
 understand these things which we relate, or, even if they shall
 understand them, they will dissemble and be unwilling for them to be
 true: because they are drawn away by vices, and they knowingly favour
 their own evils, by the pleasantness of which they are captivated, and
 they desert the way of virtue, by the bitterness of which they are
 offended. For they who are inflamed with avarice and a certain
 insatiable thirst for riches--because, when they have sold or
 squandered the things in which they delight, they are unable to live in
 a simple style--undoubtedly prefer that by which they are compelled to
 renounce their eager desires. Also, they who, urged on by the
 incitements of lusts, as the poet says, [1287]


 "Rush into madness and fire,"

 say that we bring forward things plainly incredible; because the
 precepts about self-restraint wound their ears, which restrain them
 from their pleasures, to which they have given [1288] up their soul,
 together with their body. But those who, swollen with ambition or
 inflamed with the love of power, have bestowed all their efforts on the
 acquisition of honours, will not, even if we should bear the sun
 himself in our hands, believe that teaching which commands them to
 despise all power and honour, and to live in humility, and in such
 humility that they may be able to receive an injury, and if they have
 received one, be unwilling to return it. These are the men who cry out
 [1289] in any way against the truth with closed eyes. But they who are
 or shall be of sound mind, that is, not so immersed in vices as to be
 incurable, will both believe these things, and will readily approach
 them; and whatever things we say, they will appear to them open, and
 plain, and simple, and that which is chiefly necessary, true and
 unassailable.

 No one favours virtue but he who is able to follow it; but it is not
 easy for all to follow it: they can do so whom poverty and want have
 exercised, and made capable of virtue. For if the endurance of evils is
 virtue, it follows that they are not capable of virtue who have always
 lived in the enjoyment of good things; because they have never
 experienced evils, nor can they endure them, through their
 long-continued use and desire of good things, which alone they know.
 Thus it comes to pass that the poor and humble, who are unencumbered,
 more readily believe God than the rich, who are entangled with many
 hindrances; [1290] yea, rather, in chains and fetters they are enslaved
 to the nod of desire, their mistress, which has ensnared them with
 inextricable bonds; nor are they able to look up to heaven, since their
 mind is bent down to the earth, and fixed on the ground. But the way of
 virtue does not admit those carrying great burthens. The path is very
 narrow by which justice leads man to heaven; no one can keep this
 unless he is unencumbered and lightly equipped. For those wealthy men,
 who are loaded with many and great burthens, proceed along the way of
 death, which is very broad, since destruction rules with extended sway.
 The precepts which God gives for justice, and the things which we bring
 forward under the teaching of God respecting virtue and the truth, are
 bitter and as poisons to these. And if they shall dare to oppose these
 things, they must own themselves to be enemies of virtue and justice. I
 will now come to the remaining part of the subject, that an end may be
 put to the work. But this remains, that we should treat of the judgment
 of God, which will then be established when our Lord shall return to
 the earth to render to every one either a reward or punishment,
 according to his desert. Therefore, as we spoke in the fourth book
 concerning His first advent, [1291] so in this book we will relate His
 second advent, which the Jews also both confess and hope for; but in
 vain, since He must return to the confusion [1292] of those for whose
 call He had before come. For they who impiously treated Him with
 violence in His humiliation, will experience Him in His power as a
 conqueror; and, God requiting them, they will suffer all those things
 which they read and do not understand; inasmuch as, being polluted with
 all sins, and moreover sprinkled with the blood of the Holy One, they
 were devoted to eternal punishment by that very One on whom they laid
 wicked hands. But we shall have a separate subject against the Jews, in
 which we shall convict them of error and guilt.

 [1277] The subject of the first and second books.

 [1278] The subject of the sixth book.

 [1279] The subject of the third book.

 [1280] The subject of the fourth book.

 [1281] The subject of the fifth book.

 [1282] The subject of the sixth book.

 [1283] Nuda.

 [1284] Præscriptionem.

 [1285] Ita leviter odoratos.

 [1286] Odor.

 [1287] Virg., Georg., iii. 244.

 [1288] Adjudicaverunt.

 [1289] Latrant.

 [1290] Impedimentis.

 [1291] [See p. [123]108, supra.]

 [1292] Ad confundendos. Others read "consolandos."

 Chap. II.--Of the Error of the Philosophers, and of the Divine Wisdom, and
 of the Golden Age.

 Now let us instruct those who are ignorant of the truth. It has been so
 determined by the arrangement of the Most High God, that this
 unrighteous age, having run the course [1293] of its appointed times,
 should come to an end; and all wickedness being immediately
 extinguished, and the souls of the righteous being recalled to a happy
 life, a quiet, tranquil, peaceful, in short, golden age, as the poets
 call it, should flourish, under the rule of God Himself. This was
 especially the cause of all the errors of the philosophers, that they
 did not comprehend the system of the world, which comprises the whole
 of wisdom. But it cannot be comprehended by our own perception and
 innate intelligence, which they wished to do by themselves without a
 teacher. Therefore they fell into various and ofttimes contradictory
 opinions, out of which they had no way of escape,


 And they remained fixed in the same mire,

 as the comic writer [1294] says, since their conclusion does not
 correspond with their assumptions; [1295] inasmuch as they had assumed
 things to be true which could not be affirmed, and proved without the
 knowledge of the truth and of heavenly things. And this knowledge, as I
 have often said already, cannot exist in a man unless it is derived
 from the teaching of God. For if a man is able to understand divine
 things, he will be able also to perform them; for to understand is, as
 it were, to follow in their track. But he is not able to do the things
 which God does, because he is clothed with a mortal body; therefore he
 cannot even understand those things which God does. And whether this is
 possible is easy for every one to measure, from the immensity of the
 divine actions and works. For if you will contemplate the world, with
 all the things which it contains, you will assuredly understand how
 much the work of God surpasses the works of men. Thus, as great as is
 the difference between divine and human works, so great must be the
 distance between the wisdom of God and man. For because God is
 incorruptible and immortal, and therefore perfect because He is
 everlasting, His wisdom also is perfect, as He Himself is; nor can
 anything oppose it, because God Himself is subject to nothing.

 But because man is subject to passion, his wisdom also is subject to
 error; and as many things hinder the life of man, so that it cannot be
 perpetual, so also his wisdom must be hindered by many things: so that
 it is not perfect in entirely perceiving the truth. Therefore there is
 no human wisdom, if it strives by itself to attain to the conception
 and knowledge of the truth; inasmuch as the mind of man, being bound up
 with a frail body, and enclosed in a dark abode, is neither able to
 wander at large, nor clearly to perceive the truth, the knowledge of
 which belongs to the divine nature. For His works are known to God
 alone. But man cannot attain this knowledge by reflection or
 disputation, but by learning and hearing from Him who alone is able to
 know and to teach. Therefore Marcus Tullius, [1296] borrowing from
 Plato the sentiment of Socrates, who said that the time had come for
 himself to depart from life, but that they before whom he was pleading
 his cause were still alive, says: Which is better is known to the
 immortal gods; but I think that no man knows. Wherefore all the sects
 of philosophers must be far removed from the truth, because they who
 established them were men; nor can those things have any foundation or
 firmness which are unsupported by any utterances of divine voices.

 [1293] Decurso temporum spatio. A metaphor taken from the chariot
 course; spatium being used for the length of the course, between the
 metæ, or goals.

 [1294] Ter., Phorm., v. 2.

 [1295] Assumptio: often used for the minor proposition in a syllogism.

 [1296] Tusc. Disp., i. 41.

 Chap. III.--Of Nature, and of the World; And a Censure of the Stoics and
 Epicureans.

 And since we are speaking of the errors of philosophers, the Stoics
 divide nature into two parts--the one which effects, the other which
 affords itself tractable for action. They say that in the former is
 contained all the power of perception, in the latter the material, and
 that the one cannot act without the other. How can that which handles
 and that which is handled be one and the same thing? If any one should
 say that the potter is the same as the clay, or that the clay is the
 same as the potter, would he not plainly appear to be mad? But these
 men comprehend under the one name of nature two things which are most
 widely different, God and the world, the Maker and the work; and say
 that the one can do nothing without the other, as though God were mixed
 up in nature with the world. For sometimes they so mix them together,
 that God Himself is the mind of the world, and that the world is the
 body of God; as though the world and God began to exist at the same
 time, and God did not Himself make the world. And they themselves also
 confess this at other times, when they say that it was made for the
 sake of men, and that God could, if He willed it, exist without the
 world, inasmuch as God is the divine and eternal mind, separate and
 free from a body. And since they were unable to understand His power
 and majesty, they mixed Him [1297] with the world, that is, with His
 own work. Whence is that saying of Virgil: [1298] --


 "A spirit whose celestial flame

 Glows in each member of the frame,

 And stirs the mighty whole."

 What, then, becomes of their own saying, that the world was both made
 and is governed by the divine providence? For if He made the world, it
 follows that He existed without the world; if He governs it, it is
 plain that it is not as the mind governs the body, but as a master
 rules the house, as a pilot the ship, as a charioteer the chariot. Nor,
 however, are they mixed with those things which they govern. For if all
 these things which we see are members of God, then God is rendered
 insensible by them, since the members are without sensibility, and
 mortal, since we see that the members are mortal.

 I can enumerate how often lands shaken by sudden motions [1299] have
 either opened or sunk down precipitously; how often cities and islands
 have been overwhelmed by waves, and gone into the deep; marshes have
 inundated fruitful plains, rivers and pools have been dried up; [1300]
 mountains also have either fallen precipitously, or have been levelled
 with plains. Many districts, and the foundations of many mountains, are
 laid waste by latent and internal fire. And this is not enough, if God
 does not spare His own members, unless it is permitted man also to have
 some power over the body of God. Seas are built up, mountains are cut
 down, and the innermost bowels of the earth are dug out to draw forth
 riches. Why, should I say that we cannot even plough without lacerating
 the divine body? So that we are at once wicked and impious in doing
 violence to the members of God. Does God, then, suffer His body to be
 harassed, and endure to weaken Himself, or permit this to be done by
 man? Unless by chance that divine intelligence which is mixed with the
 world, and with all parts of the world, abandoned the first outer
 aspect [1301] of the earth, and plunged itself into the lowest depths,
 that it might be sensible of no pain from continual laceration. But if
 this is trifling and absurd, then they themselves were as devoid of
 intelligence as those are who have not perceived that the divine spirit
 is everywhere diffused, and that all things are held together by it,
 not however in such a manner that God, who is incorruptible, should
 Himself be mixed with heavy and corruptible elements. Therefore that is
 more correct which they derived from Plato, that the world was made by
 God, and is also governed by His providence. It was therefore befitting
 that Plato, and those who held the same opinion, should teach and
 explain what was the cause, what the reason, for the contriving of so
 great a work; why or for the sake of whom He made it.

 But the Stoics also say the world was made for the sake of men. I hear.
 But Epicurus is ignorant on what account or who made men themselves.
 For Lucretius, when he said that the world was not made by the gods,
 thus spoke: [1302]


 "To say, again, that for the sake of men they have willed to set in
 order the glorious nature of the world"--

 then he introduced:--


 "Is sheer folly. For what advantage can our gratitude bestow on
 immortal and blessed beings, that for our, sake they should take in
 hand to administer aught?"

 And with good reason. For they brought forward no reason why the human
 race was created or established by God. It is our business to set forth
 the mystery of the world and man, of which they, being destitute, were
 able neither to reach nor see the shrine of truth. Therefore, as I said
 a little before, when they had assumed that which was true, that is,
 that the world was made by God, and was made for the sake of men, yet,
 since their argument failed them in the consequences, they were unable
 to defend that which they had assumed. In fine, Plato, that he might
 not make the work of God weak and subject to ruin, said that it would
 remain for ever. If it was made for the sake of men, and so made as to
 be eternal, why then are not they on whose account it was made eternal?
 If they are mortal on account of whom it was made, it must also itself
 be mortal and subject to dissolution, for it is not of more value than
 those for whose sake it was made. But if his argument [1303] were
 consistent, he would understand that it must perish because it was
 made, and that nothing can remain for ever except that which cannot be
 touched.

 But he who says that it was not made for the sake of men has no
 argument. For if he says that the Creator contrived these works of such
 magnitude on His own account, why then were we produced? Why do we
 enjoy the world itself? what means the creation of the human race, and
 of the other living creatures? why do we intercept the advantages of
 others? why, in short, do we grow, decrease, and perish? What reason is
 implied in our production itself? what in our perpetual succession?
 Doubtless God wished us to be seen, and to frame, as it were,
 impressions [1304] with various representations of Himself, with which
 He might delight Himself. Nevertheless, if it were so, He would esteem
 living creatures as His care, and especially man, to whose command He
 made all things subject. But with regard to those who say that the
 world always existed: I omit that point, that itself cannot exist
 without some beginning, from which they are unable to extricate
 themselves; but I say this, if the world always existed, it can have no
 systematic arrangement. [1305] For what could arrangement have effected
 in that which never had a beginning? For before anything is done or
 arranged, there is need of counsel that it may be determined how it
 should be done; nor can anything be done without the foresight of a
 settled plan. Therefore the plan precedes every work. Therefore that
 which has not been made has no plan. But the world has a plan by which
 it both exists and is governed; therefore also it was made: if it was
 made, it will also be destroyed. Let them therefore assign a reason, if
 they can, why it was either made in the beginning or will hereafter be
 destroyed.

 And because Epicurus or Democritus was unable to teach this, he said
 that it was produced of its own accord, the seeds [1306] coming
 together in all directions; and that when these are again resolved,
 discord and destruction will follow. Therefore he perverted [1307] that
 which he had correctly seen, and by his ignorance of system entirely
 overthrew the whole system, and reduced the world, and all things which
 are done in it, to the likeness of a most trifling dream, if no plan
 exists in human affairs. But since the world and all its parts, as we
 see, are governed by a wonderful plan; since the framing of the heaven,
 and the course of the stars and of the heavenly bodies, which is
 harmonious [1308] even in variety itself, the constant and wonderful
 arrangement of the seasons, the varied fruitfulness of the lands, the
 level plains, the defences and heapings up of mountains, the verdure
 and productiveness of the woods, the most salubrious bursting forth of
 fountains, the seasonable overflowings of rivers, the rich and abundant
 flowing [1309] in of the sea, the opposite and useful breathing [1310]
 of the winds, and all things, are fixed with the greatest regularity:
 who is so blind as to think that they were made without a cause, in
 which a wonderful disposition of most provident arrangement shines
 forth? If, therefore, nothing at all exists nor is done without a
 cause; if the providence of the Supreme God is manifest from the
 disposition of things, His excellency from their greatness, and His
 power from their government: therefore they are dull and mad who have
 said that there is no providence. I should not disapprove if they
 denied the existence of gods with this object, that they might affirm
 the existence of one; but when they did it with this intent, that they
 might say that there is none, he who does not think that they were
 senseless is himself senseless.

 [1297] Eum. Others read "eam," referring it to "majestatem."

 [1298] Æneid, vi. 726.

 [1299] i.e., earthquakes.

 [1300] Siccaverunt: rarely used in a neuter sense.

 [1301] Primam terræ faciem: as opposed to the inner depths.

 [1302] De Rer. Nat., v. 157-166.

 [1303] Quòd si ratio ei quadraret.

 [1304] Little images, sigilla.

 [1305] Rationem.

 [1306] i.e., atoms.

 [1307] Corrupit.

 [1308] Æqualis.

 [1309] Interfusio.

 [1310] Aspiratio.

 Chap. IV.--That All Things Were Created for Some Use, Even Those Things
 Which Appear Evil; On What Account Man Enjoys Reason in So Frail a Body.

 But we have spoken sufficiently on the subject of providence in the
 first book. For if it has any existence, as appears from the wonderful
 nature of its works, it must be that the same providence created man
 and the other animals. Let us therefore see what reason there was for
 the creation of the human race, since it is evident, as the Stoics say,
 that the world was made for the sake of men, although they make no
 slight error in this very matter, in saying it was not made for the
 sake of man, but of men. For the naming of one individual comprehends
 the whole human race. But this arises from the fact that they are
 ignorant that one man only was made by God, and they think that men
 were produced in all lands and fields like mushrooms. But Hermes was
 not ignorant that man was both made by God and after the likeness of
 God. But I return to my subject. There is nothing, as I imagine, which
 was made on its own account; but whatever is made at all must
 necessarily be made for some purpose. For who is there either so
 senseless or so unconcerned as to attempt to do anything at random,
 from which he expects no utility, no advantage? He who builds a house
 does not build it merely for this purpose, that it may be a house, but
 that it may be inhabited. He who builds a ship does not bestow his
 labour on this account, only that the ship may be visible, but that men
 may sail in it. Likewise he who designs and forms any vessel does not
 do it on this account, that he may only appear to have done it, but
 that the vessel when made may contain something necessary for use. In
 like manner, other things, whatever are made, are plainly not made
 superfluously, but for some useful purposes.

 It is plain, therefore, that the world was made by God, not on account
 of the world itself; for since it is without sensibility, it neither
 needs the warmth of the sun, or light, or the breath of the winds, or
 the moisture of showers, or the nourishment of fruits. But it cannot
 even be said that God made the world for His own sake, since He can
 exist without the world, as He did before it was made; and God Himself
 does not make use of all those things which are contained in it, and
 which are produced. It is evident, therefore, that the world was
 constructed for the sake of living beings, since living beings enjoy
 those things of which it consists; and that these may live and exist,
 all things necessary for them are supplied at fixed times. Again, that
 the other living beings were made for the sake of man, is plain from
 this, that they are subservient to man, and were given for his
 protection and service; since, whether they are of the earth or of the
 water, they do not perceive the system of the world as man does. We
 must here reply to the philosophers, and especially to Cicero, who
 says: "Why should God, when He made all things on our account, make so
 large a quantity of snakes and vipers? why should He scatter so many
 pernicious things by land and by sea?" A very wide subject for
 discussion, but it must be briefly touched upon, as in passing. Since
 man is formed of different and opposing elements, soul and body, that
 is, heaven and earth, that which is slight and that which is
 perceptible to the senses, that which is eternal and that which is
 temporal, that which has sensibility and that which is senseless, that
 which is endued with light and that which is dark, reason itself and
 necessity require that both good and evil things should be set before
 man--good things which he may use, and evil things which he may guard
 against and avoid.

 For wisdom has been given to him on this account, that, knowing the
 nature of good and evil things, he may exercise the force of his reason
 in seeking the good and avoiding the evil. For because wisdom was not
 given to the other animals, they were both defended with natural
 clothing and were armed; but in the place of all these He gave to man
 that which was most excellent, reason only. Therefore He formed him
 naked and unarmed, that wisdom might be both his defence and covering.
 He placed his defence and ornament not without, but within not in the
 body, but in the heart. Unless, therefore, there were evils which he
 might guard against, and which he might distinguish from good and
 useful things, wisdom was not necessary for him. Therefore let Marcus
 Tullius know that reason was either given to man that he might take
 fishes on account of his own use, and avoid snakes and vipers for the
 sake of his own safety; or that good and evil things were set before
 him on this account, because he had received wisdom, the whole force of
 which is occupied in distinguishing things good and evil. [1311] Great,
 therefore, and right, and admirable is the force, and reason, and power
 of man, for whose sake God made the world itself and all things, as
 many as exist, and gave him so much honour that He set him over all
 things, since he alone could admire the works of God. Most excellently,
 therefore, does our Asclepiades, [1312] in discussing the providence of
 the Supreme God in that book which he wrote to me, say: "And on this
 account any one may with good reason think that the divine providence
 gave the place nearest to itself to him who was able to understand its
 arrangement. For that is the sun: who so beholds it as to understand
 why it is the sun, and what amount of influence it has upon the other
 parts of the system? this is the heaven, who looks up to it? this is
 the earth, who inhabits it? this is the sea, who sails upon it? this is
 fire, who makes use of it?" Therefore the Supreme God did not arrange
 these things on account of Himself, because He stands in need of
 nothing, but on account of man, who might fitly make use of them.

 [1311] [The parables of nature are admirably expounded by Jones of
 Nayland. See his Zoologica Ethica, his Book of Nature, and his Moral
 Character of the Monkey, vols. iii., xi., and xii., Works, London,
 1801.]

 [1312] Asclepiades was a Christian writer, and contemporary of
 Lactantius, to whom he wrote a book on the providence of God.
 [According to Eusebius, a bishop of this name presided at Antioch from
 a.d. 214 to 220; but this is evidently another.]

 Chap. V.--Of the Creation of Man, and of the Arrangement of the World, and
 of the Chief Good.

 Let us now assign the reason why He made man himself. For if the
 philosophers had known this, they would either have maintained those
 things which they had found to be true, or would not have fallen into
 the greatest errors. For this is the chief thing; this is the point on
 which everything turns. And if any one does not possess this, the truth
 altogether glides away from him. It is this, in short, which causes
 them to be inconsistent with reason; [1313] for if this had shone upon
 them, if they had known all the mystery [1314] of man, the Academy
 would never have been in entire opposition [1315] to their
 disputations, and to all philosophy. As, therefore, God did not make
 the world for His own sake, because He does not stand in need of its
 advantages, but for the sake of man, who has the use of it, so also He
 made man himself for His own sake. What advantage is there to God in
 man, says Epicurus, that He should make him for His own sake? Truly,
 that there might be one who might understand His works; who might be
 able both to admire with his understanding, and to express with his
 voice, the foresight displayed in their arrangement, the order of their
 creation, the power exerted in their completion. And the sum of all
 these things is, that he should worship God. [1316] For he who
 understands these things worships Him; he follows Him with due
 veneration as the Maker of all things, He as his true Father, who
 measures the excellence of His majesty according to the invention, the
 commencement, and completion of His works. What more evident argument
 can be brought forward that God both made the world for the sake of
 man, and man for His own sake, than that he alone of all living
 creatures has been so formed that his eyes are directed towards heaven,
 his face looking towards God, his countenance is in fellowship with his
 Parent, so that God appears, as it were, with outstretched hand to have
 raised man from the ground, and to have elevated him to the
 contemplation of Himself. "What, then," he says, "does the worship paid
 by man confer on God, who is blessed, and in want of nothing? Or if He
 gave such honour to man as to create the world for his sake, to furnish
 him with wisdom, to make him lord of all things living, and to love him
 as a son, why did He make him subject to death and decay? why did He
 expose the object of His love to all evils? when it was befitting that
 man should be happy, as though closely connected with God, and
 everlasting as He is, to the worship and contemplation of whom he was
 formed."

 Although we have taught these things for the most part in a scattered
 manner in the former books, nevertheless, since the subject now
 specially requires it, because we have undertaken to discuss the
 subject of a happy life, these things are to be explained by us more
 carefully and fully, that the arrangement made by God, and His work and
 will, may be known. Though He was always able by His own immortal
 Spirit to produce innumerable souls, as He produced the angels, to whom
 there exists immortality without any danger and fear of evils, yet He
 devised an unspeakable work, in what manner He might create an infinite
 multitude of souls, which being at first united with frail and feeble
 bodies, He might place in the midst between good and evil, that He
 might set virtue before them composed as they were of both natures;
 that they might not attain to immortality by a delicate and easy course
 of life, but might arrive at that unspeakable reward of eternal life
 with the utmost difficulty and great labours. Therefore, that He might
 clothe them with limbs which were heavy and liable to injury, [1317]
 since they were unable to exist in the middle void, the weight and
 gravity of the body sinking downwards, He determined that an abode and
 dwelling-place should first be built for them. And thus with
 unspeakable energy and power He contrived the surpassing works of the
 world; and having suspended the light elements on high, and depressed
 the heavy ones to the depths below, He strengthened the heavenly
 things, and established the earthly. It is not necessary at present to
 follow out each point separately, since we discussed them all together
 in the second book.

 Therefore He placed in the heaven lights, whose regularity, and
 brightness, and motion, were most suitably proportioned to the
 advantage of living beings. Moreover, He gave to the earth, which He
 designed as their dwelling-place, fruitfulness for bringing forth and
 producing various [1318] things, that by the abundance of fruits and
 green herbs it might supply nourishment according to the nature and
 requirements of each kind. Then, when He had completed all things which
 belonged to the condition of the world, He formed man from the earth
 itself, which He prepared for him from the beginning as a habitation;
 that is, He clothed and covered his spirit with an earthly body, that,
 being compacted of different and opposing materials, he might be
 susceptible of good and evil; and as the earth itself is fruitful for
 the bringing forth of grain, so the body of man, which was taken from
 the earth, received the power of producing offspring, that, inasmuch as
 he was formed of a fragile substance, and could not exist for ever,
 when the space of his temporal life was past, he might depart, and by a
 perpetual succession renew that which he bore, which was frail and
 feeble. Why, then, did He make him frail and mortal, when He had built
 the world for his sake? First of all, that an infinite number of living
 beings might be produced, and that He might fill all the earth with a
 multitude; in the next place, that He might set before man virtue, that
 is, endurance of evils and labours, by which he might be able to gain
 the reward of immortality. For since man consists of two parts, body
 and soul, of which the one is earthly, the other heavenly, two lives
 have been assigned to man: the one temporal, which is appointed for the
 body; the other everlasting, which belongs to the soul. We received the
 former at our birth we attain to the latter by striving, that
 immortality might not exist to man without any difficulty. That earthly
 one is as the body, and therefore has an end; but this heavenly one is
 as the soul, and therefore has no limit. We received the first when we
 were ignorant of it, this second knowingly; for it is given to virtue,
 not to nature, because God wished that we should procure life for
 ourselves in life.

 For this reason He has given us this present life, that we may either
 lose that true and eternal life by our vices, or win it [1319] by
 virtue. The chief good is not contained in this bodily life, since, as
 it was given to us by divine necessity, so it will again be destroyed
 by divine necessity. Thus that which has an end does not contain the
 chief good. But the chief good is contained in that spiritual life
 which we acquire by ourselves, because it cannot contain evil, or have
 an end; to which subject nature and the system of the body afford an
 argument. For other animals incline towards the ground, because they
 are earthly, and are incapable of immortality, which is from heaven;
 but man is upright and looks towards heaven, [1320] because immortality
 is proposed to him; which, however, does not come, unless it is given
 to man by God. For otherwise there would be no difference between the
 just and the unjust, since every man who is born would become immortal.
 Immortality, then, is not the consequence [1321] of nature, but the
 reward and recompense of virtue. Lastly, man does not immediately upon
 his birth walk upright, but at first on all fours, [1322] because the
 nature of his body and of this present life is common to us with the
 dumb animals; afterwards, when his strength is confirmed, he raises
 himself, and his tongue is loosened so that he speaks plainly, and he
 ceases to be a dumb animal. And this argument teaches that man is born
 mortal; but that he afterwards becomes immortal, when he begins to live
 in conformity with the will [1323] of God, that is, to follow
 righteousness, [1324] which is comprised in the worship of God, since
 God raised man to a view of the heaven and of Himself. And this takes
 place when man, purified in the heavenly laver, lays aside [1325] his
 infancy together with all the pollution of his past life, and having
 received an increase of divine vigour, becomes a perfect and complete
 man.

 Therefore, because God has set forth virtue before man, although the
 soul and the body are connected together, yet they are contrary, and
 oppose one another. The things which are good for the soul are evil to
 the body, that is, the avoiding of riches, the prohibiting of
 pleasures, the contempt of pain and death. In like manner, the things
 which are good for the body are evil to the soul, that is, desire and
 lust, by which riches are desired, and the enjoyments of various
 pleasures, by which the soul is weakened and destroyed. [1326]
 Therefore it is necessary, that the just and wise man should be engaged
 in all evils, since fortitude is victorious over evils; but the unjust
 in riches, in honours, in power. For these goods relate to the body,
 and are earthly; and these men also lead an earthly life, nor are they
 able to attain to immortality, because they have given themselves up to
 pleasures which are the enemies of virtue. Therefore this temporal life
 ought to be subject to that eternal life, as the body is to the soul.
 Whoever, then, prefers the life of the soul must despise the life of
 the body; nor will he in any other way be able to strive after that
 which is highest, unless he shall have despised the things which are
 lowest. But he who shall have embraced the life of the body, and shall
 have turned his desires downwards [1327] to the earth, is unable to
 attain to that higher life. But he who prefers to live well for
 eternity, will live badly [1328] for a time, and will be subjected to
 all troubles and labours as long as he shall be on earth, that he may
 have divine and heavenly consolation. And he who shall prefer to live
 well [1329] for a time, will live ill to eternity; for he will be
 condemned by the sentence of God to eternal punishment, because he has
 preferred earthly to heavenly goods. On this account, therefore, God
 seeks to be worshipped, and to be honoured by man as a Father, that he
 may have virtue and wisdom, which alone produce immortality. For
 because no other but Himself is able to confer that immortality, since
 He alone possesses it, He will grant [1330] to the piety of the man,
 with which he has honoured God, this reward, to be blessed to all
 eternity, and to be for ever in the presence of God and in the society
 of God.

 N.B.--The following paragraphs to the end of the chapter are wanting
 many mss., and it is very doubtful whether they were written by
 Lactantius.

 Nor can any one shelter himself under the pretext that the fault
 belongs to Him who made both good and evil. For why did He will that
 evil should exist if He hated it? Why did He not make good only, that
 no one might sin, no one commit evil? Although I have explained this in
 almost all the former books, and have touched upon it, though slightly,
 above, yet it must be mentioned repeatedly, because the whole matter
 turns on this point. For there could be no virtue unless He had made
 contrary things; nor can the power of good be at all manifest, except
 from a comparison with evil. Thus evil is nothing else but the
 explanation of good. Therefore if evil is taken away, good must also be
 taken away. If you shall cut off your left hand or foot, your body will
 not be entire, nor will life itself remain the same. Thus, for the due
 adjustment of the framework of the body, the left members are most
 suitably joined with the right. In like manner, if you make chessmen
 [1331] all alike, no one will play. If you shall give one colour [1332]
 only to the circus, no one will think it worth while to be a spectator,
 all the pleasure of the Circensian games being taken away. For he who
 first instituted the games was a favourer of one colour; but he
 introduced another as a rival, that there might be a contest, and some
 partisanship [1333] in the spectacle. Thus God, when He was fixing that
 which was good, and giving virtue, appointed also their contraries,
 with which they might contend. If an enemy and a fight be wanting,
 there is no victory. Take away a contest, and even virtue is nothing.
 How many are the mutual contests of men, and with what various arts are
 they carried on! No one, however, would be regarded as surpassing in
 bravery, swiftness, or excellence, if he bad no adversary with whom he
 might contend. And where victory is wanting, there also glory and the
 reward of victory must be absent together with it. Therefore, that he
 might strengthen virtue itself by continual exercise, and might make it
 perfect from its conflict with evils, He gave both together, because
 each of the two without the other is unable to retain its force.
 Therefore there is diversity, on which the whole system of truth
 depends.

 It does not escape my notice what may here be urged in opposition by
 more skilful persons. If good cannot exist without evil, how do you say
 that, before he had offended God, the first man lived in the exercise
 of good only, or that he will hereafter live in the exercise of good
 only? This question is to be examined by us, for in the former books I
 omitted it, that I might here fill up the subject. We have said above
 that the nature of man is made up of opposing elements; for the body,
 because it is earth, is capable of being grasped, of temporary
 duration, senseless, and dark. But the soul, because it is from heaven,
 is unsubstantial, [1334] everlasting, endued with sensibility, and full
 of lustre; [1335] and because these qualities are opposed to one
 another, it follows of necessity that man is subject to good and evil.
 Good is ascribed to the soul, because it is incapable of dissolution;
 evil to the body, because it is frail. Since, therefore, the body and
 the soul are connected and united together, the good and the evil must
 necessarily hold together; nor can they be separated from one another,
 unless when they (the body and soul) are separated. Finally, the
 knowledge of good and of evil was given at the same time to the first
 man; and when he understood this, he was immediately driven from the
 holy place in which there is no evil; for when he was conversant with
 that which was good only, he was ignorant that this itself was good.
 But after that he had received the knowledge of good and evil, it was
 now unlawful for him to remain in that place of happiness, and he was
 banished to this common world, that he might at once experience both of
 those things with the nature of which he had at once become acquainted.
 It is plain, therefore, that wisdom has been given to man that he may
 distinguish good from evil--that he may discriminate between things
 advantageous and things disadvantageous, between things useful and
 things useless--that he may have judgment and consideration as to what
 he ought to guard against, what to desire, what to avoid, and what to
 follow. Wisdom therefore cannot exist without evil; and that first
 author [1336] of the human race, as long as he was conversant with good
 only, lived as an infant, ignorant of good and evil. But, indeed,
 hereafter man must be both wise and happy without any evil; but this
 cannot take place as long as the soul is clothed with the abode of the
 body.

 But when a separation shall have been made between the body and the
 soul, then evil will be disunited from good; and as the body perishes
 and the soul remains, so evil will perish and good be permanent. Then
 man, having received the garment of immortality, will be wise and free
 from evil, as God is. He, therefore, who wishes that we should be
 conversant with good only, especially desires this, that we should live
 without the body, in which evil is. But if evil is taken away, either
 wisdom, as I have said, or the body, will be taken from man; wisdom,
 that he may be ignorant of evil; the body, that he may not be sensible
 of it. But now, since man is furnished with wisdom to know, and a body
 to perceive, God willed that both should exist alike in this life, that
 virtue and wisdom may be in agreement. Therefore He placed man in the
 midst, between both, that he might have liberty to follow either good
 or evil. But He mingled with evil some things which appear good, that
 is, various and delightful enjoyments, that by the enticements of these
 He might lead men to the concealed evil. And He likewise mingled with
 good some things which appear evil--that is, hardships, and miseries,
 and labours--by the harshness and unpleasantness of which the soul,
 being offended, might shrink back from the concealed good. But here the
 office of wisdom is needed, that we may see more with the mind than
 with the body, which very few are able to do; because while virtue is
 difficult and rarely to be found, pleasure is common and public. Thus
 it necessarily happens that the wise man is accounted as a fool, who,
 while he seeks good things which are not seen, permits those which are
 seen to slip from his hands; and while he avoids evils which are not
 seen, runs into evils which are before the eyes; which happens to us
 when we refuse neither torture nor death in behalf of the faith, since
 we are driven to the greatest wickedness, so as to betray the faith and
 deny the true God, and to sacrifice to dead and death-bearing gods.
 This is the cause why God made man mortal, and made him subject to
 evils, although he had framed the world for his sake, namely, that he
 might be capable of virtue, and that his virtue might reward him with
 immortality. Now virtue, as we have shown, is the worship of the true
 God.

 [1313] Illis non quadrare rationem.

 [1314] Sacramentum.

 [1315] De transverso jugulasset. The Academics, affirming that nothing
 was certain, opposed the tenets of the other philosophers, who
 maintained their own opinions respectively.

 [1316] [The law of his being is stated in Bacon's words: "Homo naturæ
 minister et interpres," Nov. Org., i. 1. It is his duty to comprehend
 what he expounds, and to lend his voice to nature in the worship of
 God. See the Benedicite, or "Song of the Three Children," in the
 apocryphal Bible.]

 [1317] Vexabilibus.

 [1318] Varia. Others read, "fæcunditatem variam generandi."

 [1319] Mereamur.

 [1320] [Our author never wearies of this reference to Ovid's beautiful
 verses. Compare Cowper (Task, book v.) as follows:-- "Brutes graze
 the mountain-top with faces prone And eyes intent upon the scanty
 herb It yields them; or, recumbent on its brow, Ruminate heedless
 of the scene outspread Beneath, beyond, and stretching far away
 From inland regions to the distant main. Not so the mind that has
 been touched from heaven. . . . She often holds, With those fair
 ministers of light to man That nightly fill the skies with silent
 pomp, Sweet conference," etc.]

 [1321] Sequela.

 [1322] Quadrupes.

 [1323] Ex Deo.

 [1324] [Justitiam sequi. I have substituted righteousness for the
 translator's justice here (see c. 25, p. 126, supra). Coleridge remarks
 on the weakness of the latter word. It may be, our author is quoting
 St. Paul (1 Tim. vi. 11 and 2 Tim. ii.), sectare justitiam, "follow
 after righteousness."]

 [1325] Exponit.

 [1326] Enervatus exstinguitur.

 [1327] In terram dejecerit.

 [1328] i.e., "in discomfort," liable to the evils of this life.

 [1329] i.e., in comfort and luxury. On the whole passage see John xii.
 25: "He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life
 in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal."

 [1330] Afficiet. Others read "afficit."

 [1331] Calculi, called also "latrunculi." There were two sets, the one
 white, the other red or black.

 [1332] The chariot-drivers in the contests of the circus were
 distinguished by different colours. Originally there were but two
 factions or parties, the white and the red; afterwards they were
 increased to four, the green and the azure being added. Domitian
 increased the number to six, but this was not in accordance with the
 usual practise.

 [1333] Gratia. Thus Pliny, "Tanta gratia, tanta auctoritas in unâ
 vilissimâ tunicâ." Cf. Juv., Sat., xi. 195. Gibbon thus describes the
 scene: "The spectators remained in eager attention, their eyes fixed on
 the charioteers, their minds agitated with hope and fear for the
 success of the colour which they favoured."

 [1334] Tenuis.

 [1335] Illustris.

 [1336] Princeps.

 Chap. VI.--Why the World and Man Were Created. How Unprofitable is the
 Worship of False Gods.

 Now let us mark the whole argument by a brief definition. [1337] The
 world has been created for this purpose, that we may be born; we are
 born for this end, that we may acknowledge the Maker of the world and
 of ourselves--God; we acknowledge Him for this end, that we may worship
 Him; we worship Him for this end, that we may receive immortality as
 the reward of our labours, since the worship of God consists of the
 greatest labours; for this end we are rewarded with immortality, that
 being made like to the angels, we may serve the Supreme Father and Lord
 for ever, and may be to all eternity a kingdom to God. This is the sum
 of all things, this the secret of God, this the mystery of the world,
 from which they are estranged, who, following present gratification,
 have devoted themselves to the pursuit of earthly and frail goods, and
 by means of deadly enjoyments have sunk as it were in mire and mud
 their souls, which were born for heavenly pursuits.

 Let us now, in the next place, inquire whether there is anything
 reasonable in the worship of these gods; for if they are many, if they
 are worshipped only on this account by men, that they may afford them
 riches, victories, honours, and all things, which are of no avail
 except for the present; if we are produced without cause--if no
 providence is employed in the production of men--if we are brought
 forth by chance for ourselves, and for the sake of our own pleasure--if
 we are nothing after death,--what can be so superfluous, so empty, so
 vain, as the affairs of man, and the world itself? which, though it is
 of incredible magnitude, and constructed with such wonderful
 arrangement, is nevertheless occupied with trifling subjects. For why
 should the breathings of the winds put the clouds in motion? Why should
 lightnings shine forth, thunders roar, or showers fall, that the earth
 may bring forth its increase, and nourish its various productions? Why,
 in short, should all nature labour that nothing may be wanting of those
 things by which the life of man is sustained, if it is vain, if we
 utterly perish, if there is in us nothing of greater advantage to God?
 But if it is unlawful to be spoken, and is not to be thought possible,
 that that which you see to be most in accordance with reason was not
 established on account of some reason of importance, what reason can
 there be in these errors of depraved religions, and in this persuasion
 of philosophers, by which they imagine that souls perish? Assuredly
 there is none; for what have they to say why the gods so regularly
 supply to men everything in its season? Is it that we may present to
 them corn and wine, and the odour of incense, and the blood of cattle?
 Which things cannot be acceptable to the immortals, because they are
 perishable; nor can they be of use to beings destitute of bodies,
 because these things have been given for the use of those possessed of
 bodies; and yet if they required these things, they could bestow them
 upon themselves when they wished. Whether, therefore, souls perish or
 exist for ever, what principle is involved in the worship of the gods,
 or by whom was the world established? Why, or when, or how long, or how
 far were men produced, or on what account? Why do they arise, die,
 succeed one another, are renewed? What do the gods obtain from the
 worship of those who after death are about to have no existence? What
 do they perform, what do they promise, what do they threaten, which is
 worthy of men or of gods? Or if souls remain after death, what do they
 do or are they about to do respecting them? What need is there to them
 of a treasure-house of souls? From what source do they themselves
 arise? How, or why, or whence are they so many? Thus it comes to pass,
 that if you depart from that sum of things which we comprised above,
 all system is destroyed, and all things return [1338] to nothing.

 [1337] Circumscriptione.

 [1338] Revolvantur. Others read "resolvantur."

 Chap. VII.--Of the Variety of Philosophers, and Their Truth.

 And because the philosophers did not comprehend this main point, they
 were neither able to comprehend truth, although they for the most part
 both saw and explained those things of which the main point itself
 consists. But different persons brought forward all these things, and
 in different ways, not connecting the causes of things, nor the
 consequences, nor the reasons, so that they might join together and
 complete that main point which comprises the whole. But it is easy to
 show that almost the whole truth has been divided by philosophers and
 sects. For we do not overthrow philosophy, as the Academics are
 accustomed to do, whose plan was to reply to everything, which is
 rather to calumniate and mock; but we show that no sect was so much out
 of the way, and no philosopher so vain, as not to see something of the
 truth. [1339] But while they are mad with the desire of contradicting,
 while they defend their own arguments even though false, and overthrow
 those of others even though true, not only has the truth escaped from
 them, which they pretended that they were seeking, but they themselves
 lost it chiefly through their own fault. But if there had been any one
 to collect together the truth which was dispersed amongst individuals
 and scattered amongst sects, and to reduce it to a body, he assuredly
 would not disagree with us. But no one is able to do this, unless he
 has experience [1340] and knowledge of the truth. But to know the truth
 belongs to him only who has been taught by God. For he cannot in any
 other way reject the things which are false, or choose and approve of
 those which are true; but if even by chance he should effect this, he
 would most surely act the part of the philosopher; and though he could
 not defend those things by divine testimonies, yet the truth would
 explain itself by its own light. Wherefore the error of those is
 incredible, who, when they have approved of any sect, and have devoted
 themselves to it, condemn all others as false and vain, and arm
 themselves for battle, neither knowing what they ought to defend nor
 what to refute; and make attacks everywhere, without distinction,
 [1341] upon all things which are brought forward by those who disagree
 with them.

 On account of these most obstinate contentions of theirs, no philosophy
 existed which made a nearer approach to the truth, for the whole truth
 has been comprised by these in separate portions. [1342] Plato said
 [1343] that the world was made by God: the prophets [1344] speak the
 same; and the same is apparent from the verses of the Sibyl. They
 therefore are in error, who have said either that all things were
 produced of their own accord or from an assemblage of atoms; [1345]
 since so great a world, so adorned and of such magnitude, could neither
 have been made nor arranged and set in order without some most skilful
 author, and that very arrangement by which all things are perceived to
 be kept together and to be governed bespeaks [1346] an artificer with a
 most skilful mind. The Stoics say that the world, and all things which
 are in it, were made for the sake of men: the sacred writings [1347]
 teach us the same thing. Therefore Democritus was in error, who thought
 that they were poured forth from the earth like worms, without any
 author or plan. For the reason of man's creation belongs to a divine
 mystery; and because he was unable to know this, he drew [1348] down
 man's life to nothing. Aristo asserted that men were born to the
 exercise of virtue; we are also reminded of and learn the same from the
 prophets. Therefore Aristippus is deceived, who made man subject to
 pleasure, that is, to evil, as though he were a beast. Pherecydes and
 Plato contended that souls were immortal; but this is a peculiar
 doctrine in our religion. Therefore Dicæarchus was mistaken, together
 with Democritus, who argued that souls perished with the body and were
 dissolved, Zeno the Stoic taught that there were infernal regions, and
 that the abodes of the good were separated from the wicked; and that
 the former enjoyed peaceful and delightful regions, but that the latter
 suffered punishment in dark places, and in dreadful abysses of mire:
 the prophets show the same thing. Therefore Epicurus was mistaken, who
 thought that that was an invention [1349] of the poets, and explained
 those punishments of the infernal regions, which are spoken of, as
 happening in this life. Therefore the philosophers touched upon the
 whole truth, and every secret of our holy religion; but when others
 denied it, they were unable to defend that which they had found,
 because the system did not agree [1350] with the particulars; nor were
 they able to reduce to a summary those things which they had perceived
 to be true, as we have done above.

 [1339] [See Clement, sparsim, and notably (cap. 5 of Stromata) vol. ii.
 [124]p. 305, this series.]

 [1340] Veri peritus ac sciens.

 [1341] Sine delectu.

 [1342] Particulatim.

 [1343] In the Timæus

 [1344] Gen. i.; Ps. xxxiii.

 [1345] Minutis seminibus conglobatis.

 [1346] Confitetur.

 [1347] Gen. i.; Ps. viii.; Heb. ii.

 [1348] Deduxit ad nihilum.

 [1349] Figmentum.

 [1350] Singulis ratio non quadravit.

 Chap. VIII.--Of the Immortality of the Soul.

 The one chief good, therefore, is immortality, for the reception of
 which we were originally formed and born. To this we direct our course;
 human nature regards this; to this virtue exalts us. And because we
 have discovered this good, it remains that we should also speak of
 immortality itself. The arguments of Plato, although they contribute
 much to the subject, have little strength to prove and fill up the
 truth, since he had neither summed up and collected into one the plan
 of the whole of this great mystery, nor had he comprehended the chief
 good. For although he perceived the truth respecting the immortality of
 the soul, yet he did not speak respecting it as though it were the
 chief good. We, therefore, are able to elicit the truth by more certain
 signs; for we have not collected it by doubtful surmise, [1351] but
 have known it by divine instruction. Now Plato thus reasoned, that
 whatever has perception by itself, and always moves, is immortal; for
 that that which has no beginning of motion is not about to have an end,
 because it cannot be deserted by itself. But this argument would give
 eternal existence even to dumb animals, unless he had made a
 distinction by the addition of wisdom. He added, therefore, that he
 might escape this common [1352] linking together, that the soul of man
 could not be otherwise than immortal, since its wonderful skill in
 invention, its quickness in reflection, and its readiness in perceiving
 and learning, its memory of the past, and its foresight of the future,
 and its knowledge of innumerable arts and subjects, which other living
 creatures do not possess, appear divine and heavenly; because of the
 soul, which conceives such great things, and contains such great
 things, no origin can be found on earth, since it has nothing of
 earthly admixture united with it. But that which is ponderous in man,
 and liable to dissolution, must be resolved into earth; whereas that
 which is slight and subtle is incapable of division, and when freed
 from the abode of the body, as from prison, it flies to the heaven, and
 to its own nature. This is a brief summary of the tenets of Plato,
 which are widely and copiously explained in his own writings.

 Pythagoras also was previously of the same sentiments, and his teacher
 Pherecydes, whom Cicero reported to have been the first who discoursed
 respecting the immortality of the soul. And although all these excelled
 in eloquence, nevertheless in this contest at least, those who argued
 against this opinion had no less authority; Dicæarchus first, then
 Democritus, and lastly Epicurus: so that the matter itself, respecting
 which they were contending, was called into doubt. Finally, Tullius
 also having set forth the opinions of all these respecting immortality
 and death, declared that he did not know what was the truth. "Which of
 these opinions is true," he said, "some God may see." [1353] And again
 he says in another place: "Since each of these opinions had most
 learned defenders, it cannot be divined what is certainty." But we have
 no need of divination, since the divinity itself has laid open to us
 the truth.

 [1351] Suspicione.

 [1352] Communitatem.

 [1353] ["We must wait patiently," said Socrates, "until some one,
 either a god or man, teach us our moral and religious duties, and
 remove the darkness from our eyes."--Alcibiad , ii., Opera, vol. v. p.
 101, Bipont.]

 Chap. IX.--Of the Immortality of the Soul, and of Virtue.

 By these arguments, therefore, which neither Plato nor any other
 invented, the immorality of souls can be proved and perceived: which
 arguments we will briefly collect, since my discourse hastens on to
 relate the great judgment of God, which will be celebrated on the earth
 at the approaching end of the world. [1354] Before all things, since
 God cannot be seen by man, lest any one should imagine from this
 circumstance that God does not exist, because He was not seen by mortal
 eyes, among other wonderful arrangements. [1355] He also made many
 things the power of which is manifest, but the substance is not seen,
 as the voice, smell, the wind, that by the token and example of these
 things we might perceive God from His power and operation and works,
 although He did not fall under the notice of our eyes. What is clearer
 than the voice, or stronger than the wind, or more forcible than smell?
 Yet these, when they are borne through the air and come to our senses,
 and impel them by their efficacy, are not distinguished by the
 eyesight, but are perceived by other parts of the body. In like manner,
 God is not to be perceived by us through the sight or other frail
 sense; but He is to be beheld by the eyes of the mind, since we see His
 illustrious and wonderful works. For as to those who have altogether
 denied the existence of God, I should not only refuse to call them
 philosophers, but even deny them the name of men, who, with a close
 resemblance to dumb animals, consisted of body only, discerning nothing
 with their mind, and referring all things to the bodily senses, who
 thought that nothing existed but that which they beheld with their
 eyes. And because they saw that adversity befell the wicked, or
 prosperity happened to the good, they believed that all things were
 carried on by fortune, and that the world was established by nature,
 and not by providence.

 Hence they at once fell into the absurdities [1356] which necessarily
 followed such a sentiment. But if there is a God who is incorporeal,
 invisible, and eternal, therefore it is credible that the soul, since
 it is not seen, does not perish after its departure from the body; for
 it is manifest that something exists which perceives and is vigorous,
 and yet does not come into sight. But, it is said, it is difficult to
 comprehend with the mind how the soul can retain its perception without
 those parts of the body in which the office of perception is contained.
 What about God? Is it easy to comprehend how He is vigorous without a
 body? But if they believe in the existence of gods who, if they exist,
 are plainly destitute of bodies, it must be that human souls exist in
 the same way, since it is perceived from reason itself, and
 discernment, that there is a certain resemblance in man and God.
 Finally, that proof which even Marcus Tullius [1357] saw is of
 sufficient strength: that the immortality of the soul may be discerned
 from the fact that there is no other animal which has any knowledge of
 God; and religion is almost the only thing which distinguishes man from
 the dumb creation. And since this falls to man alone, it assuredly
 testifies that we may aim at, desire, and cultivate that which is about
 to be familiar and very near.

 Can any one, when he has considered the nature of other animals, which
 the providence of the Supreme God has made abject, with bodies bending
 down and prostrated to the earth, so that it may be understood from
 this that they have no intercourse with heaven, fail to understand that
 man alone of all animals is heavenly and divine, whose body raised from
 the ground, [1358] elevated countenance, and upright position, goes in
 quest of its origin, and despising, as it were, the lowliness of the
 earth, reaches forth to that which is on high, because he perceives
 that the highest good is to be sought by him in the highest place, and
 mindful of his condition in which God made him illustrious, looks
 towards his Maker? And Trismegistus most rightly called this looking a
 contemplation of God, [1359] which has no existence in the dumb
 animals. Since therefore wisdom, which is given to man alone, is
 nothing else but the knowledge of God, it is evident that the soul does
 not perish, nor undergo dissolution, but that it remains for ever,
 because it seeks after and loves God, who is everlasting, by the
 impulse of its very nature perceiving either from what source it has
 sprung, or to what it is about to return. Moreover, it is no slight
 proof of immortality that man alone makes use of the heavenly element.
 For, since the nature of the world consists of two elements [1360]
 which are opposed to one another--fire and water--of which the one is
 assigned to the heaven, the other to the earth, the other living
 creatures, because they are of the earth and mortal, make use of the
 element which is earthly and heavy: man alone makes use of fire, which
 is an element light, rising upward, [1361] and heavenly. But those
 things which are weighty depress to death, and those which are light
 elevate to life; because life is on high, and death below. And as there
 cannot be light without fire, so there cannot be life without light.
 Therefore fire is the element of light and life; from which it is
 evident that man who uses it is a partaker of an immortal condition,
 because that which causes life is familiar to him.

 The gift of virtue also to man alone is a great proof that souls are
 immortal. For this will not be in accordance with nature if the soul is
 extinguished; for it is injurious to this present life. For that
 earthly life, which we lead in common with dumb animals, both seeks
 pleasure, by the varied and agreeable fruits of which it is delighted,
 and avoids pain, the harshness of which, by its unpleasant sensations,
 injures the nature of living beings, and endeavours to lead them to
 death, which dissolves the living being. If, therefore, virtue both
 prohibits man from those goods which are naturally desired, and impels
 him to endure evils which are naturally avoided, it follows that virtue
 is an evil, and opposed to nature; and he must necessarily be judged
 foolish who pursues it, since he injures himself both by avoiding
 present goods, and by seeking equally evils, without hope of greater
 advantage. For when it is permitted us to enjoy the sweetest pleasures,
 should we not appear to be without sense if we should not prefer to
 live in lowliness, in want, in contempt and ignominy, or not to live at
 all, but to be tormented with pain, and to die, when from these evils
 we should gain nothing to compensate us for the pleasure which we have
 given up? But if virtue is not an evil, and acts honourably, inasmuch
 as it despises vicious and shameful pleasures, and bravely, inasmuch as
 it neither fears pain nor death, that it may discharge its duty,
 therefore it must obtain some greater good than those things are which
 it despises. But when death has been undergone, what further good can
 be hoped for except immortality?

 [1354] Appropinquante sæculorum fine.

 [1355] Institutorum miracula.

 [1356] Deliramenta.

 [1357] De Leg., i. 8.

 [1358] [Here again the reference to Ovid's maxim. See pp. [125]41,
 [126]56, and [127]58, supra.]

 [1359] theo'pida. Others read theori'an, i.e., "a contemplation."

 [1360] [See the most instructive pages of Taylor Lewis again: Plato
 against the Atheists, p. 121.]

 [1361] Sublime.

 Chap. X.--Of Vices and Virtues, and of Life and Death.

 Let us now in turn pass on to those things which are opposed to virtue,
 that from these also the immortality of the soul may be inferred. All
 vices are for a time; for they are excited for the present. The
 impetuosity of anger is appeased when vengeance has been taken; the
 pleasure of the body puts an end [1362] to lust; desire is destroyed
 either by the full enjoyment of the objects which it seeks, or by the
 excitement of other affections; ambition, when it has gained the
 honours which it wished for, loses [1363] its strength; likewise the
 other vices are unable to stand their ground and remain, but they are
 ended by the very enjoyment which they desire. Therefore they withdraw
 and return. But virtue is perpetual, without any intermission; nor can
 he who has once taken it up depart from it. For if it should have any
 interruption, [1364] if we can at any time do without it, vices, which
 always oppose virtue, will return. Therefore it has not been grasped,
 if it deserts its post, if at any time it withdraws itself. But when it
 has established for itself a firm abode, it must necessarily be engaged
 in every act; nor can it faithfully drive away and put to flight vices,
 unless it shall fortify with a perpetual guard the breast which it
 inhabits. Therefore the uninterrupted duration [1365] of virtue itself
 shows that the soul of man, if it has received virtue, remains
 permanent, because virtue is perpetual, and it is the human mind alone
 which receives virtue. Since, therefore, vices are contrary to virtue,
 the whole systems must of necessity differ from and be contrary to each
 other. Because vices are commotions and perturbations of the soul;
 virtue, on the contrary, is mildness and tranquillity of mind. Because
 vices are temporary, and of short duration; virtue is perpetual and
 constant, and always consistent with itself. Because the fruits of
 vices, that is, pleasures, equally with themselves, are short and
 temporary, therefore the fruit and reward of virtue are everlasting.
 Because the advantage of vices is immediate, therefore that of virtue
 is future.

 Thus it happens that in this life there is no reward of virtue, because
 virtue itself still exists. For as, when vices are completed in their
 performance, pleasure and their rewards follow; so, when virtue has
 been ended, its reward follows. But virtue is never ended except by
 death, since its highest office is in the undergoing of death:
 therefore the reward of virtue is after death. In fine, Cicero, in his
 Tusculan Disputations, [1366] perceived, though with doubt, that the
 chief good does not happen to man except after death. "A man will go,"
 he says, "with confident spirit, if circumstances shall so happen, to
 death, in which we have ascertained that there is either the chief good
 or no evil." Death, therefore, does not extinguish man, but admits him
 to the reward of virtue. But he who has contaminated himself, [1367] as
 the same writer says, with vices and crimes, and has been the slave of
 pleasure, he truly, being condemned, shall suffer eternal punishment,
 which the sacred writings call the second death, which is both eternal
 and full of the severest torments. [1368] For as two lives are proposed
 to man, of which the one belongs to the soul, the other to the body; so
 also two deaths are proposed,--one relating to the body, which all must
 undergo according to nature, the other relating to the soul, which is
 acquired by wickedness and avoided by virtue. As this life is temporary
 and has fixed limits, because it belongs to the body; so also death is
 in like manner temporary and has a fixed end, because it affects the
 body.

 [1362] Libidinis finis est.

 [1363] Senescit.

 [1364] Intervallum.

 [1365] Perpetuitas.

 [1366] Tusc. Disp., i. 46.

 [1367] Ibid., i. 30.

 [1368] [Tayler Lewis, Plato, etc., pp. 294-300; more especially, pp.
 318-322.]

 Chap. XI.--Of the Last Times, and of the Soul and Body.

 Therefore, when the times which God has appointed for death shall be
 completed, death itself shall be ended. And because temporal death
 follows temporal life, it follows that souls rise again to everlasting
 life, because temporal death has received an end. Again, as the life of
 the soul is everlasting, in which it receives the divine and
 unspeakable fruits of its immortality; also its death must be eternal,
 in which it suffers perpetual punishments and infinite torments for its
 faults. Therefore things are in this position, that they who are happy
 in this life, pertaining to the body and the earth, are about to be
 miserable for ever, because they have already enjoyed the good things
 which they preferred, which happens to those who adore false gods and
 neglect the true God. In the next place, they who, following
 righteousness, have been miserable, and despised, and poor in this
 life, and have often been harassed with insults and injuries on account
 of righteousness itself, because virtue cannot otherwise be attained,
 are about to be always happy, that since they have already endured
 evils, they may also enjoy goods. Which plainly happens to those who,
 having despised gods of the earth and frail goods, follow the heavenly
 religion of God, whose goods are everlasting, as He Himself who gave
 them. What shall I say of the works of the body and soul? Do not they
 show that the soul is not subject to death? For, as to the body, since
 it is itself frail and mortal, whatever works it contrives are equally
 perishable. For Tullius says that there is nothing which is wrought by
 the hands of man which is not at some time reduced to destruction,
 either through injury caused by men, or through length of time, which
 is the destroyer of all things.

 But truly we see that the productions of the mind are immortal. For as
 many as, devoting themselves to the contempt of present things, have
 handed down to memory the monuments of their genius and great deeds,
 have plainly gained by these an imperishable name for their mind and
 virtue. Therefore, if the deeds of the body are mortal for this reason,
 because the body itself is mortal, it follows that the soul is shown to
 be immortal from this, because we see that its productions are not
 mortal. In the same manner also, the desires of the body and of the
 soul declare that the one is mortal, the other everlasting. For the
 body desires nothing except what is temporal, that is, food, drink,
 clothing, rest, and pleasure; and it cannot desire or attain to these
 very things without the assent and assistance [1369] of the soul. But
 the soul of itself desires many things which do not extend [1370] to
 the duty or enjoyment of the body; and those are not frail, but
 eternal, as the fame of virtue, as the remembrance of the name. For the
 soul even in opposition to the body desires the worship of God, which
 consists in abstinence from desires and lusts, in the enduring of pain,
 in the contempt of death. From which it is credible that the soul does
 not perish, but is separated from the body, because the body can do
 nothing without the soul, but the soul can do many and great things
 without the body. Why should I mention that those things which are
 visible to the eyes, and capable of being touched by the hand, cannot
 be eternal, because they admit of external violence; but those things
 which neither come under the touch nor under the sight, but are
 apparent only in their force and method and effect, are eternal because
 they suffer no violence from without? But if the body is mortal on this
 account, because it is equally open to the sight and to the touch,
 therefore the soul is immortal for this reason, because it can be
 neither touched nor seen.

 [1369] Sine nutu et adminiculo animi.

 [1370] Redundent.

 Chap. XII.--Of the Soul and the Body, and of Their Union and Separation and
 Return.

 Now let us refute the arguments of those who maintain the opposite
 opinions, which Lucretius has related in his third book. Since, he
 says, the soul is born together with the body, it must necessarily die
 with the body. But the two cases are not similar. For the body is
 solid, and capable of being grasped [1371] both by the eyes and the
 hand; but the soul is slight, [1372] and eluding the touch and sight.
 The body is formed from the earth, and made firm; the soul has in it
 nothing concrete, nothing of earthly weight, as Plato maintained. For
 it could not have such great force, such great skill, such great
 rapidity, unless it derived its origin from heaven. The body,
 therefore, since it is made up of a ponderous and corruptible element,
 and is tangible and visible, is corrupted and dies; nor is it able to
 repel violence, because it comes under the sight and under the touch;
 but the soul, which by its slightness avoids all touch, can be
 dissolved by no attack. Therefore, although they are joined and
 connected together from birth, and the one which is formed of earthly
 material [1373] is, as it were, the vessel of the other, which is drawn
 out from heavenly fineness, when any violence has separated the two,
 which separation is called death, then each returns into its own
 nature; that which was of earth is resolved into earth; that which is
 of heavenly breath remains fixed, and flourishes always, since the
 divine spirit is everlasting. In fine, the same Lucretius, forgetting
 what he asserted, and what dogma he defended, wrote these verses:
 [1374] --


 "That also which before was from the earth passes back into the earth,
 and that which was sent from the borders of ether is carried again by
 the quarters of heaven." [1375]

 But this language was not for him to employ, who contended that souls
 perished with the bodies; but he was overcome by the truth, and the
 true system stole upon him unawares. Moreover, that very inference
 which he draws, that the soul suffers dissolution, that is, that it
 perishes together with the body, since they are produced together, is
 both false, and is capable of being turned to the opposite direction.
 For the body does not perish together with the soul; but when the soul
 departs it remains entire for many days, and frequently by medical
 preparations it remains entire for a very long time. For if they both
 perished together, as they are produced together, the soul would not
 hastily depart and desert the body, but both would be dispersed alike
 at one point of time; and the body also, while the breath still
 remained in it, would dissolve and perish as quickly as the soul
 departs: yes, truly, the body, being dissolved, the soul would vanish,
 as moisture poured forth from a broken vessel. For if the earthly and
 frail body after the departure of the soul does not immediately flow
 away and waste into earth, from which it has its origin, therefore the
 soul, which is not frail, endures to eternity, since its origin is
 eternal. He says, since the understanding increases in boys, and is
 vigorous in young men, and is lessened in the aged, it is evident that
 it is mortal. First, the soul is not the same thing as the mind; for it
 is one thing that we live, another that we reflect. For it is the mind
 of those who are asleep which is at rest, [1376] not the soul; and in
 those who are mad, the mind is extinguished, the soul remains; and
 therefore they are not said to be without a soul, but to be deprived of
 their mind. [1377] Therefore the mind, that is, the understanding, is
 either increased or lessened according to age. The soul is always in
 its own condition; and from the time when it receives the power of
 breathing, it remains the same even to the end, until, being sent forth
 from the confinement of the body, it flies back to its own abode. In
 the next place, the soul, although inspired by God, yet, because it is
 shut up in a dark abode of earthly flesh, does not possess knowledge,
 which belongs to divinity. Therefore it hears and learns all things,
 and receives wisdom by learning and hearing; and old age does not
 lessen wisdom, but increases it, if the age of youth has been passed in
 virtue; and if excessive old age shall have enfeebled the limbs, it is
 not the fault of the mind if the sight has vanished, if the tongue has
 become benumbed, if the hearing has grown deaf, but it is the fault of
 the body. But, it is said, the memory fails. What wonder, if the mind
 is oppressed by the ruin of the falling house, and forgets the past,
 not about to be divine on any other condition than if it shall have
 escaped the prison in which it is confined?

 But the soul, he says, is also subject to pain and grief, and loses its
 senses through drunkenness, whence it is evidently frail and mortal. On
 this account, therefore, virtue and wisdom are necessary, that both
 grief, which is contracted by the suffering and the sight of unworthy
 objects, may be repelled by fortitude, and that pleasure may be
 overcome, not only by abstaining from drinking, but also from other
 things. For if it be destitute of virtue, if it be given up to
 pleasure, and thus rendered effeminate, it will become subject to
 death, since virtue, as we have shown, is the contriver of immortality,
 as pleasure is of death. But death, as I have set forth, does not
 entirely extinguish and destroy, but visits with eternal torments. For
 the soul cannot entirely perish, since it received its origin from the
 Spirit of God, which is eternal. The soul, he says, is sensible even of
 disease of the body, and suffers forgetfulness of itself; and as it
 grows ill, so also it is often healed. This is therefore the reason why
 virtue is especially to be used, that the mind--not the soul [1378]
 --may not be harassed by any pain of the body, or undergo oblivion of
 itself. And since this has its seat in a certain part of the body, when
 any violence of disease has vitiated that part, it is moved from its
 place; and as though shaken, it departs from its station, about to
 return when a cure and health shall have remodelled its abode. For,
 since the soul is united with the body, if it is destitute of virtue,
 it grows sick by the contagion of the body, and from sharing its
 frailty the weakness extends to the mind. But when it shall be
 disunited from the body it will flourish by itself; nor will it now be
 assailed by any condition of frailty, because it has laid aside its
 frail covering. As the eye, he says, when torn out and separated from
 the body, can see nothing, so also the soul, when separated, can
 perceive nothing, because it is itself also a part of the body. This is
 false, and dissimilar to the case supposed; for the soul is not a part
 of the body, but in the body. As that which is contained in a vessel is
 not a part of the vessel, and these things which are in a house are not
 said to be a part of the house; so the mind is not a part of the body,
 because the body is either the vessel or the receptacle of the soul.

 Now, that is a much more empty argument which says that the soul
 appears to be mortal because it is not quickly sent forth from the
 body, but gradually unfolds itself from all the members, beginning from
 the extremity of the feet; as though, if it were eternal, it would
 burst forth in a single moment of time, which takes place in those who
 die by the sword. But they who are slain by disease are longer in
 breathing forth their spirit, so that as the limbs grow cold the soul
 is breathed forth. For, since it is contained in the material of the
 blood, as light is in the oil, that material being consumed by the heat
 of fevers, the extremities of the limbs must grow cold; since the more
 slender veins are extended into the extremities of the body, and the
 extreme and smaller streams are dried up when the fountain-spring
 fails. It must not, however, be supposed that, because the perception
 of the body fails, the sensibility of the soul is extinguished and
 perishes. For it is not the soul that becomes senseless when the body
 fails, but it is the body which becomes senseless when the soul takes
 its departure, because it draws all sensibility with it. But since the
 soul by its presence gives sensibility to the body, and causes it to
 live, it is impossible that it should not live and perceive by itself,
 since it is in itself both consciousness and life. For as to that which
 says,


 "But if our mind were immortal, it would not when dying complain so
 much of its dissolution as it would rejoice in passing abroad and
 quitting its vesture like a snake," [1379]

 I never saw any one who complained of his dissolution in death; but he
 perhaps had seen some Epicurean philosophizing even in death, and with
 his latest breath discoursing about his dissolution.

 How can it be known whether he feels that he is in a state of
 dissolution, or that he is being set free from the body, when his
 tongue grows dumb at his departure? For as long as he perceives and has
 the power of speech, he is not yet dissolved; when he has suffered
 dissolution, he is now unable either to perceive or to speak, so that
 either he is not yet able to complain of his dissolution, or he is no
 longer able. But, it is said, he understands before he undergoes
 dissolution, that he must undergo it. Why should I mention that we see
 many of the dying, not complaining that they are undergoing
 dissolution, but testifying that they are passing out, and setting
 forth on their journey and walking? and they signify this by gesture,
 or if they still are able, they express it also by their voice. From
 which it is evident that it is not a dissolution which takes place, but
 a separation; and this shows that the soul continues to exist. Other
 arguments of the Epicurean system are opposed to Pythagoras, who
 contends that souls migrate from bodies worn out with old age and
 death, and gain admission [1380] into those which are new and recently
 born; and that the same souls are always reproduced at one time in a
 man, at another time in a sheep, at another in a wild beast, at another
 in a bird; and that they are immortal on this account, because they
 often change their abodes, consisting of various and dissimilar bodies.
 And this opinion of a senseless man, since it is ridiculous and more
 worthy of a stage-player than of a school of philosophy, ought not even
 to have been refuted seriously; for he who does this appears to be
 afraid lest any one should believe it. Therefore we must pass by those
 things which have been discussed in behalf of falsehood against
 falsehood; it is sufficient to have refuted those things which are
 against the truth.

 [1371] Comprehensibile.

 [1372] Tenuis.

 [1373] De terrenâ concretione.

 [1374] De Rer. Nat., ii. 999.

 [1375] [Ex ætheris oris. Concerning aithe'r consult Lewis, Plato, etc.,
 pp. 127-129.]

 [1376] Sopitur.

 [1377] Non exanimes, sed dementes vocantur.

 [1378] [The original must be compared: Ne ullo corporis dolore
 frangatur et oblivionem sui non anima, sed mens patiatur. For nous and
 psuche', see Lewis, ut supra, pp. 219, etc.]

 [1379] Lucret., iii. 611.

 [1380] Se insinuare.

 Chap. XIII.--Of the Soul, and the Testimonies Concerning Its Eternity.

 I have made it evident, as I think, that the soul is not subject to
 dissolution. It remains that I bring forward witnesses by whose
 authority my arguments may be confirmed. And I will not now allege the
 testimony of the prophets, whose system and divination consist in this
 alone, the teaching that man was created for the worship of God, and
 for receiving immortality from Him; but I will rather bring forward
 those whom they who reject the truth cannot but believe. Hermes,
 describing the nature of man, that he might show how he was made by
 God, introduced this statement: "And the same out of two natures--the
 immortal and the mortal--made one nature, that of man, making the same
 partly immortal, and partly mortal; and bringing this, he placed it in
 the midst, between that nature which was divine and immortal, and that
 which was mortal and changeable, that seeing all things, he may admire
 all things." But some one may perhaps reckon him in the number of the
 philosophers, although he has been placed among the gods, and honoured
 by the Egyptians under the name of Mercury, and may give no more
 authority to him than to Plato or Pythagoras. Let us therefore seek for
 greater testimony. A certain Polites asked Apollo of Miletus whether
 the soul remains after death or goes to dissolution; and he replied in
 these verses:--


 "As long as the soul is bound by fetters to the body, perceiving
 corruptible sufferings, it yields to mortal pains; but when, after the
 wasting of the body, it has found a very swift dissolution of
 mortality, it is altogether borne into the air, never growing old, and
 it remains always uninjured; for the first-born providence of God made
 this disposition."

 What do the Sibylline poems say? Do they not declare that this is so,
 when they say that the time will come when God will judge the living
 and the dead?--whose authority we will hereafter bring forward. [1381]
 Therefore the opinion entertained by Democritus, and Epicurus, and
 Dicæarchus concerning the dissolution of the soul is false; and they
 would not venture to speak concerning the destruction of souls, in the
 presence of any magician, who knew that souls are called forth from the
 lower regions by certain incantations, and that they are at hand, and
 afford themselves to be seen by human eyes, and speak, and foretell
 future events; and if they should thus venture, they would be
 overpowered by the fact itself, and by proofs presented to them. But
 because they did not comprehend the nature of the soul, which is so
 subtle that it escapes the eyes of the human mind, they said that it
 perishes. What of Aristoxenus, who denied that there is any soul at
 all, even while it lives in the body? But as on the lyre harmonious
 sound, and the strain which musicians call harmony, is produced by the
 tightening of the strings, so he thought that the power of perception
 existed in bodies from the joining together of the vitals, and from the
 vigour of the limbs; than which nothing can be said more senseless.
 Truly he had his eyes uninjured, but his heart was blind, with which he
 did not see that he lived, and had the mind by which he had conceived
 that very thought. But this has happened to many philosophers, that
 they did not believe in the existence of any object which is not
 apparent to the eyes; whereas the sight of the mind ought to be much
 clearer than that of the body, for perceiving those things the force
 and nature of which are rather felt than seen.

 [1381] [ "Dies iræ, dies illa,... Teste David et Sibylla " i.e.,
 divine and ethnic oracles alike are full of it. See note 9, p. 116,
 supra. Elucidation V.]

 Chap. XIV.--Of the First and Last Times of the World.

 Since we have spoken of the immortality of the soul, it follows that we
 teach how and when it is given to man; that in this also they may see
 the errors of their perverseness and folly, who imagine that some
 mortals have become gods by the decrees and dogmas of mortals; either
 because they had invented arts, or because they had taught the use of
 certain productions of the earth, or because they had discovered things
 useful for the life of men, or because they had slain savage beasts.
 How far these things were from deserving immortality we have both shown
 in the former books, and we will now show, that it may be evident that
 it is righteousness alone which procures for man eternal life, and that
 it is God alone who bestows the reward of eternal life. For they who
 are said to have been immortalized by their merits, inasmuch as they
 possessed neither righteousness nor any true virtue, did not obtain for
 themselves immortality, but death by their sins and lusts; nor did they
 deserve the reward of heaven, but the punishment of hell, which impends
 over them, together with all their worshippers. And I show that the
 time of this judgment draws near, that the due reward may be given to
 the righteous, and the deserved punishment may be inflicted on the
 wicked.

 Plato and many others of the philosophers, since they were ignorant of
 the origin of all things, and of that primal period at which the world
 was made, said that many thousands of ages had passed since this
 beautiful arrangement of the world was completed; and in this they
 perhaps followed the Chaldeans, who, as Cicero has related in his first
 book respecting divination, [1382] foolishly say [1383] that they
 possess comprised in their memorials four hundred and seventy thousand
 years; in which matter, because they thought that they could not be
 convicted, they believed that they were at liberty [1384] to speak
 falsely. But we, whom the Holy Scriptures instruct to the knowledge of
 the truth, know the beginning and the end of the world, respecting
 which we will now speak in the end of our work, since we have explained
 respecting the beginning in the second book. Therefore let the
 philosophers, who enumerate thousands of ages from the beginning of the
 world, know that the six thousandth year is not yet completed, and that
 when this number is completed the consummation must take place, and the
 condition of human affairs be remodelled for the better, the proof of
 which must first be related, that the matter itself may be plain. God
 completed the world and this admirable work of nature in the space of
 six days, as is contained in the secrets of Holy Scripture, and
 consecrated the seventh day, on which He had rested from His works. But
 this is the Sabbath-day, which in the language of the Hebrews received
 its name from the number, [1385] whence the seventh is the legitimate
 and complete number. For there are seven days, by the revolutions of
 which in order the circles of years are made up; and there are seven
 stars which do not set, and seven luminaries which are called planets,
 [1386] whose differing and unequal movements are believed to cause the
 varieties of circumstances and times. [1387]

 Therefore, since all the works of God were completed in six days, the
 world must continue in its present state through six ages, that is, six
 thousand years. For the great day of God is limited by a circle of a
 thousand years, as the prophet shows, who says [1388] "In Thy sight, O
 Lord, a thousand years are as one day." And as God laboured during
 those six days in creating such great works, so His religion and truth
 must labour during these six thousand years, while wickedness prevails
 and bears rule. And again, since God, having finished His works, rested
 the seventh day and blessed it, at the end of the six thousandth year
 all wickedness must be abolished from the earth, and righteousness
 reign for a thousand years; and there must be tranquillity and rest
 from the labours which the world now has long endured. But how that
 will come to pass I will explain in its order. We have often said that
 lesser things and things of small importance are figures and previous
 shadowings forth of great things; as this day of ours, which is bounded
 by the rising and the setting of the sun, is a representation [1389] of
 that great day to which the circuit of a thousand years affixes its
 limits. [1390]

 In the same manner also the fashioning of the earthly man held forth to
 the future the formation of the heavenly people. For as, when all
 things were completed which were contrived for the use of man, last of
 all, on the sixth day, He made man also, and introduced him into this
 world as into a home now carefully prepared; so now on the great sixth
 day the true man is being formed by the word of God, that is, a holy
 people is fashioned for righteousness by the doctrine and precepts of
 God. And as then a mortal and imperfect man was formed from the earth,
 that he might live a thousand years in this world; so now from this
 earthly age is formed a perfect man, that being quickened by God, he
 may bear rule in this same world through a thousand years. But in what
 manner the consummation will take place, and what end awaits the
 affairs of men, if any one shall examine the divine writings he will
 ascertain. But the voices also of prophets of the world, agreeing with
 the heavenly, announce the end and overthrow of all things after a
 short time, describing as it were the last old age of the wearied and
 wasting world. But the things which are said by prophets and seers to
 be about to happen before that last ending comes upon the world, I will
 subjoin, being collected and accumulated from all quarters.

 [1382] i. 19.

 [1383] Delirant.

 [1384] Liberum esse.

 [1385] The word Sabbath means rest. [He derives it from shvts: but one
 wonders how these divers etymologies came into the use of Gentile
 believers. Compare vol. ii. Elucidation VIII. [128]p. 443.]

 [1386] Errantia.

 [1387] [Efficere creduntur. Our author seems to guard himself against
 affirming the verity of the science of his times.]

 [1388] Ps. xc. 4; see also 2 Pet. iii. 8.

 [1389] Speciem gerere.

 [1390] Determinat. [Compare [129]p. 220, infra.]

 Chap. XV.--Of the Devastation of the World and Change of the Empires.

 It is contained in the mysteries of the sacred writings, that a prince
 of the Hebrews, compelled by want of corn, passed into Egypt with all
 his family and relatives. And when his posterity, remaining long in
 Egypt, had increased into a great nation, and were oppressed by the
 heavy and intolerable yoke of slavery, God smote Egypt with an
 incurable stroke, and freed His people, leading them through the midst
 of the sea, when, the waves being cut asunder and parted on either
 side, the people went over on dry ground. And the king of the Egyptians
 endeavouring to follow them as they fled, the sea returning to its
 place, he was cut off, with all his people. And this deed so
 illustrious and so wonderful, although for the present it displayed to
 men the power of God, was also a foreshadowing and figure of a greater
 deed, which the same God was about to perform at the last consummation
 of the times, for He will free His people from the oppressive bondage
 of the world. But since at that time the people of God were one, and in
 one nation only, Egypt only was smitten. But now, because the people of
 God are collected out of all languages, and dwell among all nations,
 and are oppressed by those bearing rule over them, it must come to pass
 that all nations, that is, the whole world, be beaten with heavenly
 stripes, that the righteous people, who are worshippers of God, may be
 set free. And as then signs were given by which the coming destruction
 was shown to the Egyptians, so at the last time wonderful prodigies
 will take place throughout all the elements of the world, by which the
 impending destruction may be understood by all nations.

 Therefore, as the end of this world approaches, the condition of human
 affairs must undergo a change, and through the prevalence of wickedness
 become worse; so that now these times of ours, in which iniquity and
 impiety have increased even to the highest degree, may be judged happy
 and almost golden in comparison of that incurable evil. For
 righteousness will so decrease, and impiety, avarice, desire, and lust
 will so greatly increase, that if there shall then happen to be any
 good men, they will be a prey to the wicked, and will be harassed on
 all sides by the unrighteous; while the wicked alone will be in
 opulence, but the good will be afflicted in all calumnies and in want.
 All justice will be confounded, and the laws will be destroyed. No one
 will then have anything except that which has been gained or defended
 by the hand: boldness and violence will possess all things. There will
 be no faith among men, nor peace, nor kindness, nor shame, nor truth;
 and thus also there will be neither security, nor government, nor any
 rest from evils. For all the earth will be in a state of tumult; wars
 will everywhere rage; all nations will be in arms, and will oppose one
 another; neighbouring states will carry on conflicts with each other;
 and first of all, Egypt will pay the penalties of her foolish
 superstitions, and will be covered with blood as if with a river. Then
 the sword will traverse the world, mowing down everything, and laying
 low all things as a crop. And--my mind dreads to relate it, but I will
 relate it, because it is about to happen--the cause of this desolation
 and confusion will be this; because the Roman name, by which the world
 is now ruled, will be taken away from the earth, and the government
 return to Asia; and the East will again bear rule, and the West be
 reduced to servitude. [1391] Nor ought it to appear wonderful to any
 one, if a kingdom founded with such vastness, and so long increased by
 so many and such men, and in short strengthened by such great
 resources, shall nevertheless at some time fall. There is nothing
 prepared by human strength which cannot equally he destroyed by human
 strength, since the works of mortals are mortal. Thus also other
 kingdoms in former times, though they had long flourished, were
 nevertheless destroyed. For it is related that the Egyptians, and
 Persians, and Greeks, and Assyrians had the government of the world;
 and after the destruction of them all, the chief power came to the
 Romans also. And inasmuch as they excel all other kingdoms in
 magnitude, with so much greater an overthrow will they fall, because
 those buildings which are higher than others have more weight for a
 downfall. [1392]

 Seneca therefore not unskilfully divided the times of the Roman city by
 ages. For he said that at first was its infancy under King Romulus, by
 whom Rome was brought into being, and as it were educated; then its
 boyhood under the other kings, by whom it was increased and fashioned
 with more numerous systems of instruction and institutions; but at
 length, in the reign of Tarquinius, when now it had begun as it were to
 be grown up, it did not endure slavery; and having thrown off the yoke
 of a haughty tyranny, it preferred to obey laws rather than kings; and
 when its youth was terminated by the end of the Punic war, then at
 length with confirmed strength it began to be manly. [1393] For when
 Carthage was taken away, which was long its rival in power, it
 stretched out its hands by land and sea over the whole world, until,
 having subdued all kings and nations, when the materials [1394] for war
 now failed, it abused its strength, by which it destroyed itself. This
 was its first old age, when, lacerated by civil wars and oppressed by
 intestine evil, it again fell back to the government of a single ruler,
 as it were revolving to a second infancy. [1395] For, having lost the
 liberty which it had defended under the guidance and authority of
 Brutus, it so grew old, as though it had no strength to support itself,
 unless it depended on the aid of its rulers. But if these things are
 so, what remains, except that death follow old age? And that it will so
 come to pass, the predictions of the prophets briefly announce under
 the cover [1396] of other names, so that no one can easily understand
 them. Nevertheless the Sibyls openly say that Rome is doomed to perish,
 and that indeed by the judgment of God, because it held His name in
 hatred; and being the enemy of righteousness, it destroyed the people
 who kept [1397] the truth. Hystaspes also, who was a very ancient king
 of the Medes, from whom also the river which is now called Hydaspes
 received its name, handed down to the memory of posterity a wonderful
 dream upon the interpretation of a boy who uttered divinations,
 announcing long before the founding of the Trojan nation, that the
 Roman empire and name would be taken away from the world.

 [1391] [This could not have been ventured before Constantine's time,
 and must have been bold even then. 2 Thess. ii. 7. [130]P. 213, infra.]

 [1392] [The Colosseum and its traditions may have influenced our author
 in this passage. See vol. iii. [131]p. 108, supra.]

 [1393] Juvenescere.

 [1394] Materia.

 [1395] [See p. 169, notes 1, 2, supra.]

 [1396] Sub ambage; properly a "circumlocution."

 [1397] Alumnum veritatis. [P. 212, note 1, supra.]

 CHAP. XVI.--OF THE DEVASTATION of the World, and Its Prophetic Omens. [1398]

 But, test any one should think this incredible, I will show how it will
 come to pass. First, the kingdom will be enlarged, and the chief power,
 dispersed among many and divided, [1399] will be diminished. Then civil
 discords will perpetually be sown; nor will there be any rest from
 deadly wars, until ten kings arise at the same time, who will divide
 the world, not to govern, but to consume it. These, having increased
 their armies to an immense extent, and having deserted the cultivation
 of the fields, which is the beginning of overthrow and disaster, will
 lay waste and break in pieces and consume all things. Then a most
 powerful enemy will suddenly arise against him from the extreme
 boundaries of the northern region, who, having destroyed three of that
 number who shall then be in possession of Asia, shall be admitted into
 alliance by the others, and shall be constituted prince of all. He
 shall harass the world with an intolerable rule; shall mingle things
 divine and human; shall contrive things impious to relate, and
 detestable; shall meditate new designs in his breast, that he may
 establish the government for himself: he will change the laws, and
 appoint his own; he will contaminate, plunder, spoil, and put to death.
 And at length, the name being changed and the seat of government being
 transferred, confusion and the disturbance of mankind will follow.
 Then, in truth, a detestable and abominable time shall come, in which
 life shall be pleasant to none of men.

 Cities shall be utterly overthrown, and shall perish; not only by fire
 and the sword, but also by continual earthquakes and overflowings of
 waters, and by frequent diseases and repeated famines. For the
 atmosphere will be tainted, and become corrupt and pestilential--at one
 time by unseasonable rains, at another by barren drought, now by colds,
 and now by excessive heats. Nor will the earth give its fruit to man:
 no field, or tree, or vine will produce anything; but after they have
 given the greatest hope in the blossom, they will fail in the fruit.
 Fountains also shall be dried up, together with the rivers; so that
 there shall not be a sufficient supply for drinking; and waters shall
 be changed into blood or bitterness. On account of these things, beasts
 shall fail on the land, and birds in the air, and fishes in the sea.
 Wonderful prodigies also in heaven shall confound the minds of men with
 the greatest terrors, and the trains of comets, and the darkness of the
 sun, and the colour of the moon, and the gliding of the falling stars.
 Nor, however, will these things take place in the accustomed manner;
 but there will suddenly appear stars unknown and unseen by the eyes;
 the sun will be perpetually darkened, so that there will be scarcely
 any distinction between the night and the day; the moon will now fail,
 not for three hours only, but overspread with perpetual blood, will go
 through extraordinary movements, so that it will not be easy for man to
 ascertain the courses of the heavenly bodies or the system of the
 times; for there will either be summer in the winter, or winter in the
 summer. Then the year will be shortened, and the month diminished, and
 the day contracted into a short space; and stars shall fall in great
 numbers, so that all the heaven will appear dark without any lights.
 The loftiest mountains also will fall, and be levelled with the plains;
 the sea will be rendered unnavigable.

 And that nothing may be wanting to the evils of men and the earth, the
 trumpet shall be heard from heaven, which the Sibyl foretells in this
 manner:--


 "The trumpet from heaven shall utter its wailing voice."

 And then all shall tremble and quake at that mournful sound. [1400] But
 then, through the anger of God against the men who have not known
 righteousness, the sword and fire, famine and disease, shall reign;
 and, above all things, fear always overhanging. Then they shall call
 upon God, but He will not hear them; death shall be desired, but it
 will not come; not even shall night give rest to their fear, nor shall
 sleep approach to their eyes, but anxiety and watchfulness shall
 consume the souls of men; they shall deplore and lament, and gnash
 their teeth; they shall congratulate the dead, and bewail the living.
 Through these and many other evils there shall be desolation on the
 earth, and the world shall be disfigured and deserted, which is thus
 expressed in the verses of the Sibyl:--


 "The world shall be despoiled of beauty, through the destruction of
 men."

 For the human race will be so consumed, that scarcely the tenth part of
 men will be left; and from whence a thousand had gone forth, scarcely a
 hundred will go forth. Of the worshippers of God also, two parts will
 perish; and the third part, which shall have been proved, will remain.

 [1398] Prodigiis. [These primitive interpretations of Daniel and St.
 John may be compared with the expositions of Victorinus, infra.]

 [1399] Concisa.

 [1400] [P. 210, note 2, supra Tuba spargens mirum sonum.]

 Chap. XVII.--Of the False Prophet, and the Hardships of the Righteous, and
 His Destruction.

 But I will more plainly set forth the manner in which this happens.
 When the close of the times draws nigh, a great prophet shall be sent
 from God to turn men to the knowledge of God, and he shall receive the
 power of doing wonderful things. [1401] Wherever men shall not hear
 him, he will shut up the heaven, and cause it to withhold its rains; he
 will turn their water into blood, and torment them with thirst and
 hunger; and if any one shall endeavour to injure him, fire shall come
 forth out of his mouth, and shall burn that man. By these prodigies and
 powers he shall turn many to the worship of God; and when his works
 shall be accomplished, another king shall arise out of Syria, born from
 an evil spirit, the overthrower and destroyer of the human race, who
 shall destroy that which is left by the former evil, together with
 himself. He shall fight against the prophet of God, and shall overcome,
 and slay him, and shall suffer him to lie unburied; but after the third
 day he shall come to life again; and while all look on and wonder, he
 shall be caught up into heaven. But that king will not only be most
 disgraceful in himself, but he will also be a prophet of lies; and he
 will constitute and call himself God, and will order himself to be
 worshipped as the Son of God; and power will be given him to do signs
 and wonders, by the sight of which he may entice men to adore him. He
 will command fire to come down from heaven, and the sun to stand and
 leave his course, and an image to speak; and these things shall be done
 at his word,--by which miracles [1402] many even of the wise shall be
 enticed by him. Then he will attempt to destroy the temple of God, and
 persecute the righteous people; and there will be distress and
 tribulation, [1403] such as there never has been from the beginning of
 the world.

 As many as shall believe him and unite themselves to him, shall be
 marked by him as sheep; but they who shall refuse his mark will either
 flee to the mountains, or, being seized, will be slain with studied
 [1404] tortures. He will also enwrap righteous men with the books of
 the prophets, and thus burn them; and power will be given him to
 desolate [1405] the whole earth for forty-two months. That will be the
 time in which righteousness shall be cast out, and innocence be hated;
 in which the wicked shall prey upon the good as enemies; neither law,
 nor order, nor military discipline shall be preserved; no one shall
 reverence hoary locks, nor recognise the duty of piety, nor pity sex or
 infancy; all things shall be confounded and mixed together against
 right, and against the laws of nature. Thus the earth shall be laid
 waste, as though by one common robbery. When these things shall so
 happen, then the righteous and the followers of truth shall separate
 themselves from the wicked, and flee into solitudes. And when he hears
 of this, the impious king, inflamed with anger, will come with a great
 army, and bringing up all his forces, will surround all the mountain in
 which the righteous shall be situated, that he may seize them. But
 they, when they shall see themselves to be shut in on all sides and
 besieged, will call upon God with a loud voice, and implore the aid of
 heaven; and God shall hear them, and send from heaven a great king to
 rescue and free them, and destroy all the wicked with fire and sword.

 [1401] [A final apparition of Elijah was anticipated by primitive
 believers, who regarded Mal. i. 5 as only partially fulfilled in the
 Baptist and the typical judgment of Jerusalem and the Jews under
 Vespasian. See Enoch and Elias, vol. v. [132]p. 213; also [133]iii.
 591.]

 [1402] Rev. xiii.; 2 Thess. ii.

 [1403] Pressura et contritio.

 [1404] Exquisitis cruciatibus.

 [1405] Dan. vii.; Rev. ii.

 Chap. XVIII.--Of the Fortunes of the World at the Last Time, and of the
 Things Foretold by the Soothsayers.

 That these things will thus take place, all the prophets have announced
 from the inspiration of God, and also the soothsayers at the
 instigation of the demons. For Hystaspes, whom I have named above,
 having described the iniquity of this last time, says that the pious
 and faithful, being separated from the wicked, will stretch forth their
 hands to heaven with weeping and mourning, and will implore the
 protection of Jupiter: that Jupiter will look to the earth, and hear
 the voices of men, and will destroy the wicked. All which things are
 true except one, that he attributed to Jupiter those things which God
 will do. But that also was withdrawn from the account, not without
 fraud on the part of the demons, viz., that the Son of God would then
 be sent, who, having destroyed all the wicked, would set at liberty the
 pious. Which, however, Hermes did not conceal. For in that book which
 is entitled the Complete Treatise, after an enumeration of the evils
 concerning which we have spoken, he added these things: "But when these
 things thus come to pass, then He who is Lord, and Father, and God, and
 the Creator of the first and one God, looking upon what is done, and
 opposing to the disorder His own will, that is, goodness, and recalling
 the wandering and cleansing wickedness, partly inundating it with much
 water, and partly burning it with most rapid fire, and sometimes
 pressing it with wars and pestilences, He brought His world to its
 ancient state and restored it." The Sibyls also show that it would not
 be otherwise than that the Son of God should be sent by His supreme
 Father, to set free the righteous from the hands of the wicked, and to
 destroy the unrighteous, together with their cruel tyrants. One of whom
 thus wrote:--


 "He shall come also, wishing to destroy the city of the blest; and a
 king sent against him from the gods shall slay all the great kings and
 chief men: then judgment shall thus come from the Immortal to men."

 Also another Sibyl:--


 "And then God shall send a king from the sun, who shall cause all the
 earth to cease from disastrous war."

 And again another:--


 "He will take away the intolerable yoke of slavery which is placed on
 our neck, and he will do away with impious laws and violent chains."

 Chap. XIX.--Of the Advent of Christ to Judgment, and of the Overcoming of
 the False Prophet.

 The world therefore being oppressed, since the resources of men shall
 be insufficient for the overthrow of a tyranny of immense strength,
 inasmuch as it will press upon the captive world with great armies of
 robbers, that calamity so great will stand in need of divine
 assistance. Therefore God, being aroused both by the doubtful danger
 and by the wretched lamentation of the righteous, will immediately send
 a deliverer. Then the middle of the heaven shall be laid open in the
 dead and darkness of the night, that the light of the descending God
 may be manifest in all the world as lightning: of which the Sibyl spoke
 in these words:--


 "When He shall come, there will be fire and darkness in the midst of
 the black night."

 This is the night which is celebrated by us in watchfulness on account
 of the coming of our King and God: [1406] of which night there is a
 twofold meaning; because in it He then received life when He suffered,
 and hereafter He is about to receive the kingdom of the world. For He
 is the Deliverer, and Judge, and Avenger, and King, and God, whom we
 call Christ, who before He descends will give this sign: There shall
 suddenly fall from heaven a sword, that the righteous may know that the
 leader of the sacred warfare is about to descend; and He shall descend
 with a company of angels to the middle of the earth, and there shall go
 before Him an unquenchable fire, and the power of the angels shall
 deliver into the hands of the just that multitude which has surrounded
 the mountain, and they shall be slain from the third hour until the
 evening, and blood shall flow like a torrent; and all his forces being
 destroyed, the wicked one shall alone escape, and his power shall
 perish from him.

 Now this is he who is called Antichrist; but he shall falsely call
 himself Christ, and shall fight against the truth, and being overcome
 shall flee; and shall often renew the war, and often be conquered,
 until in the fourth battle, all the wicked being slain, subdued, and
 captured, he shall at length pay the penalty of his crimes. But other
 princes also and tyrants who have harassed the world, together with
 him, shall be led in chains to the king; and he shall rebuke them, and
 reprove them, and upbraid them with their crimes, and condemn them, and
 consign them to deserved tortures. Thus, wickedness being extinguished
 and impiety suppressed, the world will be at rest, which having been
 subject to error and wickedness for so many ages, endured dreadful
 slavery. No longer shall gods made by the hands be worshipped; but the
 images being thrust out from their temples and couches, shall be given
 to the fire, and shall be burnt, together with their wonderful gifts:
 which also the Sibyl, in accordance with the prophets, announced as
 about to take place:--


 "But mortals shall break in pieces the images and all the wealth."

 The Erythræan Sibyl also made the same promise:--


 "And the works made by the hand of the gods shall be burnt up."

 [1406] [Not the eve of Easter, but that of the Nativity. This
 corroborates St. Chrysostom's testimony concerning the observance of
 that feast in the West. See Opp., Serm. 287, tom. v. 804.]

 Chap. XX.--Of the Judgment of Christ, of Christians, and of the Soul.

 After these things the lower regions shall be opened, and the dead
 shall rise again, on whom the same King and God shall pass judgment, to
 whom the supreme Father shall give the great power both of judging and
 of reigning. And respecting this judgment and reign, it is thus found
 in the Erythræan Sibyl:--


 "When this shall receive its fated accomplishment, and the judgment of
 the immortal God shall now come to mortals, the great judgment shall
 come upon men, and the beginning."

 Then in another:--


 "And then the gaping earth shall show a Tartarean chaos; and all kings
 shall come to the judgment-seat of God."

 And in another place in the same:--


 "Rolling along the heavens, I will open the caverns of the earth; and
 then I will raise the dead, loosing fate and the sting of death; and
 afterwards I will call them into judgment, judging the life of pious
 and impious men."

 Not all men, however, shall then be judged by God, but those only who
 have been exercised in the religion of God. For they who have not known
 God, since sentence cannot be passed upon them for their acquittal, are
 already judged and condemned, since the Holy Scriptures testify that
 the wicked shall not arise to judgment. [1407] Therefore they who have
 known God shall be judged, and their deeds, that is, their evil works,
 shall be compared and weighed against their good ones: so that if those
 which are good and just are more [1408] and weighty, they may be given
 to a life of blessedness; but if the evil exceed, they may be condemned
 to punishment. Here, perhaps, some one will say, If the soul is
 immortal, how is it represented as capable of suffering, and sensible
 of punishment? For if it shall be punished on account of its deserts,
 it is plain that it will be sensible of pain, and even of death. If it
 is not liable to death, not even to pain, it follows that it is not
 capable of suffering.

 This question or argument is thus met by the Stoics: that the souls of
 men continue to exist, and are not annihilated [1409] by the
 intervention of death: that the souls, moreover, of those who have been
 just, being pure, and incapable of suffering, and happy, return to the
 heavenly abodes from which they had their origin, or are borne to some
 happy plains, where they may enjoy wonderful pleasures; but that the
 wicked, since they have defiled themselves with evil passions, have a
 kind of middle nature, between that of an immortal and a mortal, and
 have something of weakness, from the contagion of the flesh; and being
 enslaved to its desires and lusts, they contract an indelible stain and
 earthly blot; and when this has become entirely inherent through length
 of time, souls are given over to its nature, so that, though they
 cannot altogether be extinguished, inasmuch as they are from God,
 nevertheless they become liable to torment through the taint of the
 body, which being burnt in by means of sins, produces a feeling of
 pain. Which sentiment is thus expressed by the poet: [1410] --


 "Nay, when at last the life has fled,

 And left the body cold and dead,

 E'en then there passes not away

 The painful heritage of clay:

 Full many a long contracted stain

 Perforce must linger deep in grain.

 So penal sufferings they endure

 For ancient crime, to make them pure."

 These things are near to the truth. [1411] For the soul, when separated
 from the body, is, as the same poet says, [1412] such as


 "No vision of the drowsy night,

 No airy current half so light,"

 because it is a spirit, and by its very slightness incapable of being
 perceived, but only by us who are corporeal but capable of being
 perceived by God, since it belongs to Him to be able to do all things.

 [1407] The reference is to Ps. i. 5: "The ungodly shall not stand in
 the judgment." They shall indeed arise, but it will be to "the
 resurrection of damnation." See Dan. xii. 2; John v. 28, 29; Acts xxiv.
 15.

 [1408] Good and bad actions will not be compared by reference to
 number: "For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
 point, he is guilty of all."--Jas. ii. 10. [The figure, however, is not
 dissimilar in Job xxxi. 6. We must be judged by our works, though saved
 by faith in Christ.]

 [1409] In nihilum resolvi.

 [1410] Virg., Æneid, vi. 735.

 [1411] [1 Cor. iii. 13-15. An approximation to this truth is recognised
 by our author in a heathen poet. See p. 217, n. 2.]

 [1412] Virg., Æneid, vi. 702.

 Chap. XXI.--Of the Torments and Punishments of Souls.

 First of all, therefore, we say that the power of God is so great, that
 He perceives even incorporeal things, and manages them as He will. For
 even angels fear God, because they can be chastised by Him in some
 unspeakable manner; and devils dread Him, because they are tormented
 and punished by Him. What wonder is it, therefore, if souls, though
 they are immortal, are nevertheless capable of suffering at the hand of
 God? For since they have nothing solid and tangible in themselves, they
 can suffer no violence from solid and corporeal beings; but because
 they live in their spirits only, they are capable of being handled by
 God alone, whose energy and substance is spiritual. But, however, the
 sacred writings inform us in what manner the wicked are to undergo
 punishment. For because they have committed sins in their bodies, they
 will again be clothed with flesh, that they may make atonement in their
 bodies; and yet it will not be that flesh with which God clothed man,
 like this our earthly body, but indestructible, and abiding for ever,
 that it may be able to hold out against tortures and everlasting fire,
 the nature of which is different from this fire of ours, which we use
 for the necessary purposes of life, and which is extinguished unless it
 be sustained by the fuel of some material. But that divine fire always
 lives by itself, and flourishes without any nourishment; nor has it any
 smoke mixed with it, but it is pure and liquid, and fluid, after the
 manner of water. For it is not urged upwards by any force, as our fire,
 which the taint of the earthly body, by which it is held, and smoke
 intermingled, compels to leap forth, and to fly upwards to the nature
 of heaven, with a tremulous movement. [1413]

 The same divine fire, therefore, with one and the same force and power,
 will both burn the wicked and will form them again, and will replace as
 much as it shall consume of their bodies, and will supply itself with
 eternal nourishment: which the poets transferred to the vulture of
 Tityus. Thus, without any wasting of bodies, which regain their
 substance, it will only burn and affect them with a sense of pain. But
 when He shall have judged the righteous, He will also try them with
 fire. Then they whose sins shall exceed either in weight or in number,
 shall be scorched by the fire and burnt: [1414] but they whom full
 justice and maturity of virtue has imbued will not perceive that fire;
 for they have something of God in themselves which repels and rejects
 the violence of the flame. So great is the force of innocence, that the
 flame shrinks from it without doing harm; which has received from God
 this power, that it burns the wicked, and is under the command of the
 righteous. Nor, however, let any one imagine that souls are immediately
 judged after death. For all are detained in one and a common place of
 confinement, until the arrival of the time in which the great Judge
 shall make an investigation of their deserts. [1415] Then they whose
 piety shall have been approved of will receive the reward of
 immortality; but they whose sins and crimes shall have been brought to
 light will not rise again, but will be hidden in the same darkness with
 the wicked, being destined to certain punishment.

 [1413] Cum trepidatione mobili. [See vol. vi. p. 375, [134]note 1.]

 [1414] Perstringentur igni atque amburentur. [See p. 216, n. 5, supra.]
 This idea of passing through flames of the final judgment has in it
 nothing in common with "purgatory" as a place and as a punishment from
 which admission into heaven may be gained before judgment.]

 [1415] [See vol. iii. [135]p. 59, supra, Elucidation X.]

 Chap. XXII.--Of the Error of the Poets, and the Return of the Soul from the
 Lower Regions.

 Some imagine that these things are figments of the poets, not knowing
 whence the poets received them, and they say that these things are
 impossible; and it is no wonder that it so appears to them. For the
 matter is related by the poets in a manner which is different from the
 truth; for although they are much more ancient than the historians and
 orators, and other kinds of writers, yet because they were ignorant of
 the secret of the divine mystery, and mention of a future resurrection
 had reached them by an obscure rumour, yet they handed it down, when
 carelessly and lightly heard, after the manner of a feigned story. And
 yet they also testified that they did not follow a sure authority, but
 mere opinion, as Maro, who says, [1416]


 "What ear has heard let tongue make known."

 Although, therefore, they have partly corrupted the secrets of the
 truth, yet the matter itself is found to be more true, because it
 partly agrees with the prophets: which is sufficient for us as a proof
 of the matter. Yet some reason is contained in their error. For when
 the prophets proclaimed with continual announcements that the Son of
 God was about to judge the dead, and this announcement did not escape
 their notice; inasmuch as they supposed that there was no other ruler
 of heaven but Jupiter, they reported that the son of Jupiter was king
 in the lower regions, but not Apollo, or Liber, or Mercurius, who are
 supposed to be gods of heaven, but one who was both mortal and just,
 either Minos, or Æacus, or Rhadamanthus. Therefore with poetic licence
 they corrupted that which they had received; or, the opinion being
 scattered through different mouths and various discourses, changed the
 truth. For inasmuch as they foretold that, when a thousand years had
 been passed in the lower regions, they should again be restored to
 life, as Maro said: [1417] --


 "All these, when centuries ten times told

 The wheel of destiny have rolled,

 The voice divine from far and wide

 Calls up to Lethe's river side,

 That earthward they may pass once more,

 Remembering not the things before,

 And with a blind propension yearn

 To fleshly bodies to return:"

 this matter escaped their notice, that the dead will rise again, not
 after a thousand years from their death, but that, when again restored
 to life, they may reign with God a thousand years. For God will come,
 that, having cleansed the world from all defilement, He may restore the
 souls of the righteous to their renewed bodies, and raise them to
 everlasting blessedness. Therefore the other things are true, except
 the water of oblivion, which they feigned on this account, that no one
 might make this objection: why, therefore, did they not remember that
 they were at one time alive, or who they were, or what things they
 accomplished? But nevertheless it is not thought probable, and the
 whole matter is rejected, as though licentiously and fabulously
 invented. But when we affirm the doctrine of the resurrection, and
 teach that souls will return to another life, not forgetful of
 themselves, but possessed of the same perception and figure, we are met
 with this objection: So many ages have now passed; what individual ever
 arose from the dead, that through his example we may believe it to be
 possible? But the resurrection cannot take place while unrighteousness
 still prevails. For in this world men are slain by violence, by the
 sword, by ambush, by poisons, and are visited with injuries, with want,
 with imprisonment, with tortures, and with proscriptions. Add to this
 that righteousness is hated, that all who wish to follow God are not
 only held in hatred, but are harassed with all reproaches, and are
 tormented by manifold kinds of punishments, and are driven to the
 impious worship of gods made with hands, not by reason or truth, but by
 dreadful laceration of their bodies.

 Ought men therefore to rise again to these same things, or to return to
 a life in which it is impossible for them to be safe? Since the
 righteous, then, are so lightly esteemed, and so easily taken away,
 what can we suppose would have happened if any one returning from the
 dead had recovered life by a recovery [1418] of his former condition?
 He would assuredly be taken away from the eyes of men, lest, if he were
 seen or heard, all men with one accord should leave the gods and betake
 themselves to the worship and religion of the one God. Therefore it is
 necessary that the resurrection should take place once only when evil
 shall have been taken away, since it is befitting that those who have
 risen again should neither die any more, nor be injured in any way,
 that they may be able to pass a happy life whose death has been
 annulled. [1419] But the poets, knowing that this life abounds with all
 evils, introduced the river of oblivion, lest the souls, remembering
 their labours and evils, should refuse to return to the upper regions;
 whence Virgil says: [1420] --


 "O Father! and can thought conceive

 That happy souls this realm would leave,

 And seek the upper sky,

 With sluggish clay to reunite?

 This dreadful longing for the light,

 Whence comes it, say, and why?"

 For they did not know how or when it must take place; and therefore
 they supposed that souls were born again, and that they returned afresh
 to the womb, and went back to infancy. Whence also Plato, while
 discussing the nature of the soul, says that it may be known from this
 that souls are immortal and divine, because in boys minds are pliant,
 and easy of perception, and because they so quickly comprehend the
 subjects which they learn, that they appear not then to be learning for
 the first time, but to be recalling them to mind and recollecting them:
 in which matter the wise man most foolishly believed the poets.

 [1416] Virg., Æn., vi. 266.

 [1417] Ibid., 748.

 [1418] Postliminio. For the uses of this word, see Smith's Dictionary
 of Greek and Roman Antiquities

 [1419] Resignata est, properly "unsealed."

 [1420] Virg., Æn., vi. 719.

 Chap. XXIII.--Of the Resurrection of the Soul, and the Proofs of This Fact.

 Therefore they will not be born again, which is impossible, but they
 will rise again, and be clothed by God with bodies, and will remember
 their former life, and all its actions; and being placed in the
 possession of heavenly goods, and enjoying the pleasure of innumerable
 resources, they will give thanks to God in His immediate presence,
 because He has destroyed all evil, and because He has raised them to
 His kingdom and to perpetual life. Respecting which resurrection the
 philosophers also attempted to speak as corruptly as the poets. For
 Pythagoras asserted that souls passed into new bodies; but foolishly,
 that they passed from men into cattle, and from cattle into men; and
 that he himself was restored from Euphorbus. Chrysippus says better,
 whom Cicero speaks of as supporting the portico of the Stoics, who, in
 the books which he wrote concerning providence, when he was speaking of
 the renewing of the world, introduced these words: "But since this is
 so, it is evident that nothing is impossible, and that we, after our
 death, when certain periods of time have again come round, are restored
 to this state in which we now are." But let us return from human to
 divine things. The Sibyl thus speaks:--


 "For the whole race of mortals is hard to be believed; but when the
 judgment of the world and of mortals shall now come, which God Himself
 shall institute, judging the impious and the holy at the same time,
 then at length He shall send the wicked to darkness in fire. But as
 many as are holy shall live again on the earth, God giving them at the
 same time a spirit, and honour, and life."

 But if not only prophets, but even bards, and poets, and philosophers,
 agree that there will be a resurrection of the dead, let no one ask of
 us how this is possible: for no reason can be assigned for divine
 works; but if from the beginning God formed man in some unspeakable
 manner, we may believe that the old man can be restored by Him who made
 the new man.

 Chap. XXIV.--Of the Renewed World.

 Now I will subjoin the rest. Therefore the Son of the most high and
 mighty God shall come to judge the quick and the dead, as the Sibyl
 testifies and says:--


 "For then there shall be confusion of mortals throughout the whole
 earth, when the Almighty Himself shall come on His judgment-seat to
 judge the souls of the quick and dead, and all the world."

 But He, when He shall have destroyed unrighteousness, and executed His
 great judgment, and shall have recalled to life the righteous, who have
 lived from the beginning, will be engaged among men a thousand years,
 and will rule them with most just command. Which the Sibyl proclaims in
 another place, as she utters her inspired predictions:--


 "Hear me, ye mortals; an everlasting King reigns."

 Then they who shall be alive in their bodies shall not die, but during
 those thousand years shall produce an infinite multitude, and their
 offspring shall be holy, and beloved by God; but they who shall be
 raised from the dead shall preside over the living as judges. [1421]
 But the nations shall not be entirely extinguished, but some shall be
 left as a victory for God, that they may be the occasion of triumph to
 the righteous, and may be subjected to perpetual slavery. About the
 same time also the prince of the devils, who is the contriver of all
 evils, shall be bound with chains, and shall be imprisoned during the
 thousand years of the heavenly rule in which righteousness shall reign
 in the world, so that he may contrive no evil against the people of
 God. After His coming the righteous shall be collected from all the
 earth, and the judgment being completed, the sacred city shall be
 planted in the middle of the earth, in which God Himself the builder
 may dwell together with the righteous, bearing rule in it. And the
 Sibyl marks out this city when she says:--


 "And the city which God made, this He made more brilliant than the
 stars, and sun, and moon."

 Then that darkness will be taken away from the world with which the
 heaven will be overspread and darkened, and the moon will receive the
 brightness of the sun, nor will it be further diminished: but the sun
 will become seven times brighter than it now is; and the earth will
 open its fruitfulness, and bring forth most abundant fruits of its own
 accord; the rocky mountains shall drop with honey; streams of wine
 shall run down, and rivers flow with milk: in short, the world itself
 shall rejoice, and all nature exult, being rescued and set free from
 the dominion of evil and impiety, and guilt and error. Throughout this
 time beasts shall not be nourished by blood, nor birds by prey; but all
 things shall be peaceful and tranquil. Lions and calves shall stand
 together at the manger, the wolf shall not carry off the sheep, the
 hound shall not hunt for prey; hawks and eagles shall not injure; the
 infant shall play with serpents. In short, those things shall then come
 to pass which the poets spoke of as being done in the reign of
 Saturnus. Whose error arose from this source,--that the prophets bring
 forward and speak of many future events as already accomplished. For
 visions were brought before their eyes by the divine Spirit, and they
 saw these things, as it were, done and completed in their own sight.
 And when fame had gradually spread abroad their predictions, since
 those who were uninstructed in the mysteries [1422] of religion did not
 know why they were spoken, they thought that all those things were
 already fulfilled in the ancient ages, which evidently could not be
 accomplished and fulfilled under the reign of a man. [1423] But when,
 after the destruction of impious religions and the suppression of
 guilt, the earth shall be subject to God,--


 "The sailor [1424] himself also shall renounce the sea, nor shall the
 naval pine

 Barter merchandise; all lands shall produce all things.

 The ground shall not endure the harrow, nor the vineyard the pruning
 hook;

 The sturdy ploughman also shall loose the bulls from the yoke.

 The plain shall by degrees grow yellow with soft ears of corn,

 The blushing grape shall hang on the uncultivated brambles,

 And hard oaks shall distil the dewy honey.

 Nor shall the wool learn to counterfeit various colours;

 But the ram himself in the meadows shall change his fleece,

 Now for a sweetly blushing purple, now for saffron dye;

 Scarlet of its own accord shall cover the lambs as they feed.

 The goats of themselves shall bring back home their udders distended
 with milk;

 Nor shall the herds dread huge lions." [1425]

 Which things the poet foretold according to the verses of the Cumæan
 Sibyl. But the Erythræan thus speaks:--


 "But wolves shall not contend with lambs on the mountains, and lynxes
 shall eat grass with kids; boars shall feed with calves, and with all
 flocks; and the carnivorous lion shall eat chaff at the manger, and
 serpents shall sleep with infants deprived of their mothers."

 And in another place, speaking of the fruitfulness of all things:--


 "And then shall God give great joy to men; for the earth, and the
 trees, and the numberless flocks of the earth shall give to men the
 true fruit of the vine, and sweet honey, and white milk, and corn,
 which is the best of all things to mortals."

 And another in the same manner:--


 "The sacred land of the pious only will produce all these things, the
 stream of honey from the rock and from the fountain, and the milk of
 ambrosia will flow for all the just."

 Therefore men will live a most tranquil life, abounding with resources,
 and will reign together with God; and the kings of the nations shall
 come from the ends of the earth with gifts and offerings, to adore and
 honour the great King, whose name shall be renowned and venerated by
 all the nations which shall be under heaven, and by the kings who shall
 rule on earth.

 [1421] [This is "the first resurrection" as conceived of by the
 ancients, and the (Phil. iii. 11) exana'stasis of St. Paul.]

 [1422] Profani a sacramentis.

 [1423] [This rationale of the Orphica and Sibyllina deserves thought.]

 [1424] Vector, i.e., the passenger, as opposed to one who sails in a
 ship of war.

 [1425] Virg., Bucol., iv. 21-45. The order of the lines is changed.
 [This, the famous Pollio, greatly influenced Constantine. See p. 140,
 note 7, supra.]

 Chap. XXV.--Of the Last Times, and of the City of Rome.

 These are the things which are spoken of by the prophets as about to
 happen hereafter: but I have not considered it necessary to bring
 forward their testimonies and words, since it would be an endless task;
 nor would the limits of my book receive so great a multitude of
 subjects, since so many with one breath speak similar things; and at
 the same time, lest weariness should be occasioned to the readers if I
 should heap together things collected and transferred from all;
 moreover, that I might confirm those very things which I said, not by
 my own writings, but in an especial manner by the writings of others,
 and might show that not only among us, but even with those very persons
 who revile us, the truth is preserved, [1426] which they refuse to
 acknowledge. [1427] But he who wishes to know these things more
 accurately may draw from the fountain itself, and he will know more
 things worthy of admiration than we have comprised in these books.
 Perhaps some one may now ask when these things of which we have spoken
 are about to come to pass? I have already shown above, that when six
 thousand years shall be completed this change must take place, and that
 the last day of the extreme conclusion is now drawing near. It is
 permitted us to know respecting the signs, which are spoken by the
 prophets, for they foretold signs by which the consummation of the
 times is to be expected by us from day to day, and to be feared. When,
 however, this amount will be completed, those teach, who have written
 respecting the times, collecting them from the sacred writings and from
 various histories, how great is the number of years from the beginning
 of the world. And although they vary, and the amount of the number as
 reckoned by them differs considerably, yet all expectation does not
 exceed the limit of two hundred years. The subject itself declares that
 the fall and ruin of the world will shortly take place; except that
 while the city of Rome remains it appears that nothing of this kind is
 to be feared. [1428] But when that capital of the world shall have
 fallen, and shall have begun to be a street, [1429] which the Sibyls
 say shall come to pass, who can doubt that the end has now arrived to
 the affairs of men and the whole world? It is that city, that only,
 which still sustains all things; and the God of heaven is to be
 entreated by us and implored--if, indeed, His arrangements and decrees
 can be delayed--lest, sooner than we think for, that detestable tyrant
 should come who will undertake so great a deed, and dig out that eye,
 by the destruction of which the world itself is about to fall. Now let
 us return, to set forth the other things which are then about to
 follow.

 [1426] Consignatam teneri.

 [1427] [See [136]p. 218, supra, and Victorinus, sparsim, infra.]

 [1428] [Again a reference, as on p. 213 note 1, supra.]

 [1429] rume. There are other readings, as pur and "pyra."

 Chap. XXVI.--Of the Loosing of the Devil, and of the Second and Greatest
 Judgment.

 We have said, a little before, that it will come to pass at the
 commencement of the sacred reign, that the prince of the devils will be
 bound by God. But he also, when the thousand years of the kingdom, that
 is, seven thousand of the world, shall begin to be ended, will be
 loosed afresh, and being sent forth from prison, will go forth and
 assemble all the nations, which shall then be under the dominion of the
 righteous, that they may make war against the holy city; and there
 shall be collected together from all the world an innumerable company
 of the nations, and shall besiege and surround the city. Then the last
 anger of God shall come upon the nations, and shall utterly [1430]
 destroy them; and first He shall shake the earth most violently, and by
 its motion the mountains of Syria shall be rent, and the hills shall
 sink down precipitously, and the walls of all cities shall fall, and
 God shall cause the sun to stand, so that he set not for three days,
 and shall set it on fire; and excessive heat and great burning shall
 descend upon the hostile and impious people, and showers of brimstone,
 and hailstones, and drops of fire; and their spirits shall melt through
 the heat, and their bodies shall be bruised by the hail, and they shall
 smite one another with the sword. The mountains shall be filled with
 carcases, and the plains shall be covered with bones; but the people of
 God during those three days shall be concealed under caves of the
 earth, until the anger of God against the nations and the last judgment
 shall be ended.

 Then the righteous shall go forth from their hiding-places, and shall
 find all things covered with carcases and bones. But the whole race of
 the wicked shall utterly perish; and there shall no longer be any
 nation in this world, but the nation of God alone. Then for seven
 continuous years the woods shall be untouched, nor shall timber be cut
 from the mountains, but the arms of the nations shall be burnt; and now
 there shall be no war, but peace and everlasting rest. But when the
 thousand years shall be completed, the world shall be renewed by God,
 and the heavens shall be folded together, and the earth shall be
 changed, and God shall transform men into the similitude of angels, and
 they shall be white as snow; and they shall always be employed in the
 sight of the Almighty, and shall make offerings to their Lord, and
 serve Him for ever. At the same time shall take place that second and
 public resurrection [1431] of all, in which the unrighteous shall be
 raised to everlasting punishments. These are they who have worshipped
 the works of their own hands, who have either been ignorant of, or have
 denied the Lord and Parent of the world. But their lord with his
 servants shall be seized and condemned to punishment, together with
 whom all the band of the wicked, in accordance with their deeds, shall
 be burnt for ever with perpetual fire in the sight of angels and the
 righteous.

 This is the doctrine of the holy prophets which we Christians follow;
 this is our wisdom, which they who worship frail objects, or maintain
 an empty philosophy, deride as folly and vanity, because we are not
 accustomed to defend and assert it in public, since God orders us in
 quietness and silence to hide His secret, and to keep it within our own
 conscience; and not to strive with obstinate contention against those
 who are ignorant of the truth, and who rigorously assail God and His
 religion not for the sake of learning, but of censuring and jeering.
 For a mystery ought to be most faithfully concealed and covered,
 especially by us, who bear the name of faith. [1432] But they accuse
 this silence of ours, as though it were the result of an evil
 conscience; whence also they invent some detestable things respecting
 those who are holy and blameless, and willingly believe their own
 inventions.


 The address to Constantine is wanting in some mss. and editions, but is
 inserted in the text by Migne, as found in some important mss., and as
 in accordance with the style and spirit of Lactantius.

 But all fictions have now been hushed, most holy Emperor, since the
 time when the great God raised thee up for the restoration of the house
 of justice, and for the protection of the human race; for while thou
 rulest the Roman state, we worshippers of God are no more regarded as
 accursed and impious. Since the truth now comes forth [1433] from
 obscurity, and is brought into light, we are not censured as
 unrighteous who endeavour to perform the works of righteousness. No one
 any longer reproaches us with the name of God. None of us, who are
 alone of all men religious, is any more called irreligious; since
 despising the images of the dead, we worship the living and true God.
 The providence of the supreme Deity has raised thee to the imperial
 dignity, that thou mightest be able with true piety to rescind the
 injurious decrees of others, to correct faults, to provide with a
 father's clemency for the safety of men,--in short, to remove the
 wicked from the state, whom being cast down by pre-eminent piety, God
 has delivered into your hands, that it might be evident to all in what
 true majesty consists.

 For they who wished to take away the worship of the heavenly and
 matchless [1434] God, that they might defend impious superstitions, lie
 in ruin. [1435] But thou, who defendest and lovest His name, excelling
 in virtue and prosperity, enjoyest thy immortal glories with the
 greatest happiness. They suffer and have suffered the punishment of
 their guilt. The powerful right hand of God protects thee from all
 dangers; He bestows on thee a quiet and tranquil reign, with the
 highest congratulations of all men. And not undeservedly has the Lord
 and Ruler of the world chosen thee in preference to all others, by whom
 He might renew His holy religion, since thou alone didst exist of all,
 who mightest afford a surpassing example of virtue and holiness: in
 which thou mightest not only equal, but also, which is a very great
 matter, excel the glory of ancient princes, whom nevertheless fame
 reckons among the good. They indeed perhaps by nature only resembled
 the righteous. For he who is ignorant of God, the Ruler of the
 universe, may attain to a resemblance of righteousness, but he cannot
 attain to righteousness itself. But thou, both by the innate sanctity
 of thy character, and by thy acknowledgment of the truth and of God in
 every action, dost fully perform [1436] the works of righteousness.
 [1437] It was therefore befitting that, in arranging the condition of
 the human race, the Deity should make use of thy authority and service.
 Whom we supplicate with daily prayers, that He may especially guard
 thee whom He has wished to be the guardian of the world: then that He
 may inspire thee with a disposition by which thou mayest always
 continue in the love of the divine name. For this is serviceable to
 all, both to thee for happiness, and to others for repose.

 [1430] Usque ad unum.

 [1431] [This clearly proves that the better sort of Chiliasm was not
 extinct in the Church,]

 [1432] [i.e., "the faithful," a title often used to designate
 Christians. This discipline was based on Heb. v. 14 and Matt. vii. 6.]

 [1433] Jam emergente atque illustratâ veritate.

 [1434] Singularis.

 [1435] Profligati jacent.

 [1436] Consummas. [Art fulfilling; i.e., as a catechumen.]

 [1437] [In admonishing the great, the form was to ascribe to them the
 characters they should cultivate. Lactantius here speaks as a courtier,
 but guardedly.]

 Chap. XXVII.--An Encouragement and Confirmation of the Pious.

 Since we have completed the seven courses [1438] of the work which we
 undertook, and have advanced to the goal, it remains that we exhort all
 to undertake wisdom together with true religion, the strength and
 office of which depends on this, that, despising earthly things, and
 laying aside the errors by which we were formerly held while we served
 frail things, and desired frail things, we may be directed to the
 eternal rewards of the heavenly treasure. And that we may obtain these,
 the alluring pleasures of the present life must as soon as possible be
 laid aside, which soothe the souls of men with pernicious sweetness.
 How great a happiness must it be thought, to be withdrawn from these
 stains of the earth, and to go to that most just Judge and indulgent
 Father, who in the place of labours gives rest, in the place of death
 life, in the place of darkness brightness, and in the place of short
 and earthly goods, gives those which are eternal and heavenly: with
 which reward the hardships and miseries which we endure in this world,
 in accomplishing the works of righteousness, can in no way be compared
 and equalled. Therefore, if we wish to be wise and happy, not only must
 those sayings of Terence be reflected upon and proposed to us,


 "That we must ever grind at the mill, we must be beaten, and put in
 fetters;" [1439]

 but things much more dreadful than these must be endured, namely, the
 prison, chains, and tortures: pains must be undergone, in short, death
 itself must be undertaken and borne, when it is clear to our conscience
 that that frail pleasure will not be without punishment, nor virtue
 without a divine reward. All, therefore, ought to endeavour either to
 direct themselves to the right way as soon as possible, or, having
 undertaken and exercised virtues, and having patiently performed the
 labours of this life, to deserve to have God as their comforter. For
 our Father and Lord, who built and strengthened the heaven, who placed
 in it the sun, with the other heavenly bodies, who by His power weighed
 the earth and fenced it with mountains, surrounded it with the sea, and
 divided it with rivers, and who made and completed out of nothing
 whatever there is in this workmanship of the world; having observed the
 errors of men, sent a Guide, who might open to us the way of
 righteousness: let us all follow Him, let us hear Him, let us obey Him
 with the greatest devotedness, since He alone, as Lucretius says,
 [1440]


 "Cleansed men's breasts with truth-telling precepts, and fixed a limit
 to lust and fear, and explained what was the chief good which we all
 strive to reach, and pointed out the road by which, along a narrow
 track, we might arrive at it in a straightforward course."

 And not only pointed it out, but also went before us in it, that no one
 might dread the path of virtue on account of its difficulty. Let the
 way of destruction and deceit, if it is possible, be deserted, in which
 death is concealed, being covered by the attractions of pleasure.

 And the more nearly each one, as his years incline to old age, sees to
 be the approach of that day in which he must depart from this life, let
 him reflect how he may leave it in purity, how he may come to the Judge
 in innocency; not as they do, to whose dark minds the light is denied,
 [1441] who, when the strength of their body now fails, are admonished
 in this of the last pressing necessity, that they should with greater
 eagerness and ardour apply themselves to the satisfying of their lusts.
 From which abyss let everyone free himself while it is permitted him,
 while the opportunity is present, and let him turn himself to God with
 his whole mind, that he may without anxiety await that day, in which
 God, the Ruler and Lord of the world, shall judge the deeds and
 thoughts of each. Whatever things are here desired, let him not only
 neglect, but also avoid them, and let him judge that his soul is of
 greater value than those deceitful goods, the possession of which is
 uncertain and transitory; for they take their departure every day, and
 they go forth much more quickly than they had entered, and if it is
 permitted us to enjoy them even to the last, they must still, without
 doubt, be left to others. We can take nothing with us, except a well
 and innocently spent life. That man will appear before God with
 abundant resources, that man will appear in opulence, to whom there
 shall belong self-restraint, mercy, patience, love, and faith. This is
 our inheritance, which can neither be taken away from any one, nor
 transferred to another. And who is there who would wish to provide and
 acquire for himself these goods?

 Let those who are hungry come, that being fed with heavenly food, they
 may lay aside their lasting hunger; let those who are athirst come,
 that they may with full mouth draw forth the water of salvation from an
 ever-flowing fountain. [1442] By this divine food and drink the blind
 shall both see, and the deaf hear, and the dumb speak, and the lame
 walk, and the foolish shall be wise, and the sick shall be strong, and
 the dead shall come to life again. For whoever by his virtue has
 trampled upon the corruptions of the earth, the supreme and truthful
 arbiter will raise him to life and to perpetual light. Let no one trust
 in riches, no one in badges of authority, no one even in royal power:
 these things do not make a man immortal. For whosoever shall cast away
 the conduct becoming a man, [1443] and, following present things, shall
 prostrate himself upon the ground, will be punished as a deserter from
 his Lord, his commander, and his Father. Let us therefore apply
 ourselves to righteousness, which will alone, as an inseparable
 companion, lead us to God; and "while a spirit rules these limbs,"
 [1444] let us serve God with unwearied service, let us keep our posts
 and watches, let us boldly engage with the enemy whom we know, that
 victorious and triumphant over our conquered adversary, we may obtain
 from the Lord that reward of valour which He Himself has promised.


 General Note.

 For remarks on the dubious passages which bear upon that of [137]p.
 221, supra, see the General Note suffixed to the tractate on the
 Workmanship of God, [138]p. 300, infra.

 [1438] Decursis septem spatiis,--an expression borrowed from the
 chariot race: here applied to the seven books of this treatise.

 [1439] Terent., Phorm., ii. 1. 19.

 [1440] De Nat. Rer., vi. 24.

 [1441] Quorum cæcis mentibus lux negatur. Others read, "Quidam cæcis
 mentibus viri."

 [1442] [This evident quotation from Rev. xxi. 7 and xxii. 17 is
 noteworthy as proof of the currency of the Apocalypse in North Africa.]

 [1443] Rationem hominis.

 [1444] Virg., Æneid, iv. 336.


  The Epitome of the Divine Institutes.

 Addressed to His Brother Pentadius.

 The Preface.--The Plan and Purport of the Whole Epitome, [1445] And of the
 Institutions.

 Although the books of the Divine Institutions which we wrote a long
 time since to illustrate the truth and religion, may so prepare and
 mould the minds of the readers, that their length may not produce
 disgust, nor their copiousness be burthensome; nevertheless you desire,
 O brother Pentadius, that an epitome of them should be made for you, I
 suppose for this reason, that I may write something to you, and that
 your name may be rendered famous by my work, such as it is. I will
 comply with your desire, although it seems a difficult matter to
 comprise within the compass of one book those things which have been
 treated of in seven large volumes. [1446] For the whole matter becomes
 less full when so great a multitude of subjects is to be compressed
 within a narrow space; and it becomes less clear by its very brevity,
 especially since many arguments and examples, on which the elucidation
 of the proofs depends, must of necessity be omitted, since their
 copiousness is so great, that even by themselves they are enough to
 make up a book. And when these are removed, what can appear useful,
 what plain? But I will strive as much as the subject permits, both to
 contract that which is diffuse and to shorten that which is long; in
 such a manner, however, that in this work, in which truth is to be
 brought to light, matter may not seem to be wanting for copiousness,
 nor clearness for understanding it. [1447]

 [1445] [A specimen of the abridgments made by authors and editors,
 owing to the great expense of books in manuscript. They have been
 sources of great injury to literature.]

 [1446] [We have here only a fragment of the Epitome The rest is lost.]

 [1447] [Christian morals were now to be taught openly in schools: hence
 the need of such manuals.]

 Chap. I.--Of the Divine Providence.

 First a question arises: Whether there is any providence which made or
 governs the world? That there is, no one doubts, since of almost all
 the philosophers, except the school of Epicurus, there is but one voice
 and one opinion, that the world could not have been made without a
 contriver, and that it cannot exist without a ruler. Therefore Epicurus
 is refuted not only by the most learned men, but also by the
 testimonies and perceptions of all mortals. For who can doubt
 respecting a providence, when he sees that the heavens and the earth
 have been so arranged and that all things have been so regulated, that
 they might be most befittingly adapted, not only to wonderful beauty
 and adornment, but also to the use of men, and the convenience of the
 other living creatures? That, therefore, which exists in accordance
 with a plan, cannot have had its beginning without a plan: thus [1448]
 it is certain that there is a providence.

 [1448] Quoniam. This word appears to be out of place, as its proper
 meaning is "since." Either it must be taken as above, or, with some
 editors, the last clause of this chapter may be taken as the beginning
 of the next chapter--"Since there is a providence," etc.

 Chap. II.--That There is But One God, and that There Cannot Be More.

 Another question follows: Whether there be one God or more? And this
 indeed contains much ambiguity. For not only do individuals differ
 among themselves, but also peoples and nations. But he who shall follow
 the guidance of reason will understand that there cannot be a Lord
 except one, nor a Father except one. For if God, who made all things,
 is also Lord and Father, He must be one only, so that the same may be
 the head and source of all things. Nor is it possible for the world
 [1449] to exist unless all things be referred to one person, unless one
 hold the rudder, unless one guide the reins, and, as it were, one mind
 direct all the members of the body. If there are many kings in a swarm
 of bees, they will perish or be scattered abroad, while


 "Discord attacks the kings with great commotion." [1450]

 If there are several leaders in a herd, they will contend until one
 gains the mastery. [1451] If there are many commanders in an army, the
 soldiers cannot obey, since different commands are given; nor can unity
 be maintained by themselves, since each consults his own interests
 according to his humours. [1452] Thus, in this commonwealth of the
 world, unless there were one ruler, who was also its founder, either
 this mass would be dissolved, or it could not have been put together at
 all.

 Moreover, the whole authority could not exist in many deities, since
 they separately maintain their own duties and their own prerogatives.
 No one, therefore, of them can be called omnipotent, which is the true
 title of God, since he will be able to accomplish that only which
 depends upon himself, and will not venture to attempt that which
 depends upon others. Vulcan will not claim for himself water, nor
 Neptune fire; nor will Ceres claim acquaintance with the arts, nor
 Minerva with fruits; nor will Mercury lay claim to arms, nor Mars to
 the lyre; Jupiter will not claim medicine, nor Æsculapius the
 thunderbolt: he will more easily endure it when thrown by another, than
 he will brandish it himself. If, therefore, individuals cannot do all
 things, they have less strength and less power; but he is to be
 regarded as God who can accomplish the whole, and not he who can only
 accomplish the smallest part of the whole.

 [1449] Rerum summa.

 [1450] Virg., Georg., iv. 68.

 [1451] Obtineat.

 [1452] Pro moribus. Another reading is "pro viribus," with all their
 power.

 Chap. III.--The Testimonies of the Poets Concerning the One God.

 There is, then, one God, perfect, eternal, incorruptible, incapable of
 suffering, subject to no circumstance or power, Himself possessing all
 things, ruling all things, whom the human mind can neither estimate in
 thought nor mortal tongue describe in speech. For He is too elevated
 and great to be conceived by the thought, or expressed by the language
 of man. In short, not to speak of the prophets, the preachers of the
 one God, poets also, and philosophers, and inspired women, [1453] utter
 their testimony to the unity of God. Orpheus speaks of the surpassing
 God who made the heaven and the sun, with the other heavenly bodies;
 who made the earth and the seas. Also our own Maro calls the Supreme
 God at one time a spirit, at another time a mind, and says that it, as
 though infused into limbs, puts in motion the body of the whole world;
 also, that God permeates the heights of heaven, the tracts of the sea
 and lands, and that all living creatures derive their life from Him.
 Even Ovid was not ignorant that the world was prepared by God, whom he
 sometimes calls the framer of all things, sometimes the fabricator of
 the world. [1454]

 [1453] Vates, i.e., the Sibyls.

 [1454] [I shall not multiply references to the seven books, which are
 so readily compared by turning back to the pages here epitomized.]

 Chap. IV.--The Testimonies of the Philosophers to the Unity of God.

 But let us come to the philosophers, whose authority is regarded as
 more certain than that of the poets. Plato asserts His monarchy, saying
 that there is but one God, by whom the world was prepared and completed
 with wonderful order. Aristotle, his disciple, admits that there is one
 mind which presides over the world. Antisthenes says that there is one
 who is God by nature, [1455] the governor of the whole system. It would
 be a long task to recount the statements which have been made
 respecting the Supreme God, either by Thales, or by Pythagoras and
 Anaximenes before him, or afterwards by the Stoics Cleanthes and
 Chrysippus and Zeno, or of our countrymen, by Seneca following the
 Stoics, and by Tullius himself, since all these attempted to define the
 being of God, [1456] and affirmed that the world is ruled by Him alone,
 and that He is not subject to any nature, since all nature derives its
 origin from Him.

 Hermes, who, on account of his virtue and his knowledge of many arts,
 deserved the name of Trismegistus, who preceded the philosophers in the
 antiquity of his doctrine, and who is reverenced by the Egyptians as a
 god, in asserting the majesty of the one God with infinite praises,
 calls Him Lord and Father, and says that He is without a name because
 He does not stand in need of a proper name, inasmuch as He is alone,
 and that He has no parents, since He exists of Himself and by Himself.
 In writing to his son he thus begins: To understand God is difficult,
 to describe Him in speech is impossible, even for one to whom it is
 possible to understand Him; for the perfect cannot be comprehended by
 the imperfect, nor the invisible by the visible.

 [1455] Naturalem.

 [1456] Quid sit Deus.

 Chap. V.--That the Prophetic Women--That Is, the Sibyls--Declare that There
 is But One God.

 It remains to speak of the prophetic women. Varro relates that there
 were ten Sibyls,--the first of the Persians, the second the Libyan, the
 third the Delphian, the fourth the Cimmerian, the fifth the Erythræan,
 the sixth the Samian, the seventh the Cumæan, the eighth the
 Hellespontian, the ninth the Phrygian, the tenth the Tiburtine, who has
 the name of Albunea. Of all these, he says that there are three books
 of the Cumæan alone which contain the fates of the Romans, and are
 accounted sacred, but that there exist, and are commonly regarded as
 separate, books of almost all the others, but that they are entitled,
 as though by one name, Sibylline books, excepting that the Erythræan,
 who is said to have lived in the times of the Trojan war, placed her
 name in her book: the writings of the others are mixed together. [1457]

 All these Sibyls of whom I have spoken, except the Cumæan, whom none
 but the Quindecemviri [1458] are allowed to read, bear witness that
 there is but one God, the ruler, the maker, the parent, not begotten of
 any, but sprung from Himself, who was from all ages, and will be to all
 ages; and therefore is alone worthy of being worshipped, alone of being
 feared, alone of being reverenced, by all living beings;--whose
 testimonies I have omitted because I was unable to abridge them; but if
 you wish to see them, you must have recourse to the books themselves.
 Now let us follow up the remaining subjects.

 [1457] [See Cyprian on Balaam, vol. v. p. 502, [139]note 7. A hint as
 to the qualified inspiration of these women.]

 [1458] The appointed guardians of the Sibylline books. At first there
 were two; the number was afterwards increased to ten, and subsequently
 to fifteen, termed Quindecemviri.

 Chap. VI.--Since God is Eternal and Immortal, He Does Not Stand in Need of
 Sex and Succession.

 These testimonies, therefore, so many and so great, clearly teach that
 there is but one government in the world, and one power, the origin of
 which cannot be imagined, or its force described. They are foolish,
 therefore, who imagine that the gods were born of marriage, since the
 sexes themselves, and the intercourse between them, were given to
 mortals by God for this reason, that every race might be preserved by a
 succession of offspring. But what need have the immortals either of sex
 or succession since neither pleasure nor death affects them? Those,
 therefore, who are reckoned as gods, since it is evident that they were
 born as men, and that they begat others, were plainly mortals: but they
 were believed to be gods, because, when they were great and powerful
 kings, on account of the benefits which they had conferred upon men,
 they deserved to obtain divine honours after death; and temples and
 statues being erected to them, their memory was retained and celebrated
 as that of immortals.

 Chap. VII.--Of the Wicked Life and Death of Hercules.

 But though almost all nations are persuaded that they are gods, yet
 their actions, as related both by poets and historians, declare that
 they were men. Who is ignorant of the times in which Hercules lived,
 since he both sailed with the Argonauts on their expedition, and having
 stormed Troy, slew Laomedon, the father of Priam, on account of his
 perjury? From that time rather more than fifteen hundred years are
 reckoned. He is said not even to have been born honourably, but to have
 been sprung from Alcmena by adultery, and to have been himself addicted
 to the vices of his father. He never abstained from women, or males,
 and traversed the whole world, not so much for the sake of glory as of
 lust, nor so much for the slaughter of beasts as for the begetting of
 children. And though he was unvanquished, yet he was triumphed over by
 Omphale alone, to whom he gave up his club and lion's skin; and being
 clothed in a woman's garment, and crouching at a woman's feet, he
 received his task [1459] to execute. He afterwards, in a transport of
 frenzy, killed his little children and his wife Megara. At last, having
 put on a garment sent by his wife Deianyra, when he was perishing
 through ulcers, being unable to endure the pain, he constructed for
 himself a funeral pile on Mount OEta, and burnt himself alive. Thus it
 is effected, that although on account of his excellence [1460] he might
 have been believed to be a god, nevertheless on account of these things
 be is believed to have been a man.

 [1459] Pensa quæ faceret. "Pensum" properly signifies the wool daily
 weighed out and given to each servant.

 [1460] Ob virtutem.

 Chap. VIII.--Of Æsculapius, Apollo, Mars, Castor and Pollux, and of
 Mercurius and Bacchus.

 Tarquitius relates that Æsculapius was born of doubtful parents, and
 that on this account he was exposed; and being taken up by hunters, and
 fed by the teats of a hound, was given to Chiron for instruction. He
 lived at Epidaurus, and was buried at Cynosuræ, as Cicero says, [1461]
 when he had been killed by lightning. But Apollo, his father, did not
 disdain to take charge of another's flock that he might receive a wife;
 [1462] and when he had unintentionally killed a boy whom he loved, he
 inscribed his own lamentations on a flower. Mars, a man of the greatest
 bravery, was not free from the charge of adultery, since he was made a
 spectacle, being bound with a chain together with the adulteress.

 Castor and Pollux carried off the brides of others, but not with
 impunity, to whose death and burial Homer bears witness, not with
 poetical, but simple faith. Mercurius, who was the father of Androgynus
 by his intrigue with Venus, deserved to be a god, because he invented
 the lyre and the palæstra. Father Bacchus, after subduing India as a
 conqueror, having by chance come to Crete, saw Ariadne on the shore,
 whom Theseus had forced and deserted. Then, being inflamed by love, he
 united her in marriage to himself, and placed her crown, as the poets
 say, conspicuously among the stars. The mother of the gods [1463]
 herself, while she lived in Phrygia after the banishment and death of
 her husband, though a widow, and aged, was enamoured of a beautiful
 youth; and because he was not faithful, she mutilated, and rendered him
 effeminate: on which account even now she delights in the Galli [1464]
 as her priests.

 [1461] Cicero, De Nat. Deor., iii. 22.

 [1462] When Pelias had promised his daughter Alcestis to Admetus, on
 condition of his coming to her in a chariot drawn by lions and boars,
 Apollo enabled Admetus to fulfil this condition.

 [1463] Rhea or Cybele.

 [1464] Galli, the priests of Cybele, were so called: they mutilated
 themselves, and performed many raving ceremonies.

 Chap. IX.--Of the Disgraceful Deeds of the Gods.

 Whence did Ceres bring forth Proserpine, except from debauchery? Whence
 did Latona bring forth her twins, except from crime? Venus having been
 subject to the lusts of gods and men, when she reigned in Cyprus,
 invented the practice of courtesanship, and commanded women to make
 traffic of themselves, that she might not alone be infamous. Were the
 virgins themselves, Minerva and Diana, chaste? Whence, then, did
 Erichthonius arise? Did Vulcan shed his seed upon the ground, and was
 man born from that as a fungus? Or why did Diana banish Hippolytus
 either to a retired place, or give him up to a woman, where he might
 pass his life in solitude among unknown groves, and having now changed
 his name, might be called Virbius? What do these things signify but
 impurity, which the poets do not venture to confess?

 Chap. X.--Of Jupiter, and His Licentious Life.

 But respecting the king and father of all these, Jupiter, whom they
 believe to possess the chief power in heaven,--what power [1465] had
 he, who banished his father Saturnus from his kingdom, and pursued him
 with arms when he fled? What self-restraint had he, who indulged every
 kind of lust? For he made Alcmena and Leda, the wives of great men,
 infamous through his adultery: he also, captivated with the beauty of a
 boy, carried him off with violence as he was hunting and meditating
 manly things, that he might treat him as a woman. Why should I mention
 his debaucheries of virgins? and how great a multitude of these there
 was, is shown by the number of his sons. In the case of Thetis alone he
 was more temperate. For it bad been predicted that the son whom she
 should bring forth would be more powerful than his father. Therefore he
 struggled with his love, that one might not be born greater than
 himself. He knew, therefore, that he was not of perfect virtue,
 greatness, and power, since he feared that which he himself had done to
 his father. Why, therefore, is he called best and greatest, since he
 both contaminated himself with faults, which is the part of one who is
 unjust and bad, and feared a greater than himself, which is the part of
 one who is weak and inferior?

 [1465] Quid potestatis. Others read "pietatis," which appears more
 suitable to the sense of the passage.

 Chap. XI.--The Various Emblems Under Which the Poets Veiled the Turpitude of
 Jupiter.

 But some one will say that these things are feigned by the poets. This
 is not the usage of the poets, to feign in such a manner that you
 fabricate the whole, but so that you cover the actions themselves with
 a figure, and, as it were, with a variegated veil. Poetic licence has
 this limit, not that it may invent the whole, which is the part of one
 who is false and senseless, but that it may change something
 consistently with reason. They said that Jupiter changed himself into a
 shower of gold, that he might deceive Danae. What is a shower of gold?
 Plainly golden coins, by offering a great quantity of which, and
 pouring them into her bosom, he corrupted the frailty of her virgin
 soul by this bribe. Thus also they speak of a shower of iron, when they
 wish to signify a multitude of javelins. He carried off his catamite
 upon an eagle. What is the eagle? Truly a legion, since the figure of
 this animal is the standard of the legion. He carried Europa across the
 sea on a bull. What is the bull? Clearly a ship, which had its tutelary
 image [1466] fashioned in the shape of a bull. So assuredly the
 daughter of Inachus was not turned into a cow, nor as such did she swim
 across, but she escaped the anger of Juno in a ship which had the form
 of a cow. Lastly, when she had been conveyed to Egypt, she became Isis,
 whose voyage is celebrated on a fixed day, in memory of her flight.

 [1466] Tutela. The image of some deity, supposed to be the tutelary
 guardian of the ship, was usually painted on the stern.

 Chap. XII.--The Poets Do Not Invent All Those Things Which Relate to the
 Gods.

 You see, then, that the poets did not invent all things, and that they
 prefigured some things, that, when they spoke the truth, they might add
 something like this of divinity to those whom they called gods; as they
 did also respecting their kingdoms. For when they say that Jupiter had
 by lot the kingdom of Coelus, they either menu Mount Olympus, on which
 ancient stories relate that Saturnus, and afterwards Jupiter, dwelt, or
 a part of the East, which is, as it were, higher, because the light
 arises thence; but the region of the West is lower, and therefore they
 say that Pluto obtained the lower regions; but that the sea was given
 to Neptune, because he had the maritime coast, with all the islands.
 Many things are thus coloured by the poets; and they who are ignorant
 of this, censure them as false, but only in word: for in fact they
 believe them, since they so fashion the images of the gods, that when
 they make them male and female, and confess that some are married, some
 parents, and some children, they plainly assent to the poets; for these
 relations cannot exist without intercourse and the generation of
 children.

 Chap. XIII.--The Actions of Jupiter are Related from the Historian
 Euhemerus.

 But let us leave the poets; let us come to history, which is supported
 both by the credibility of the facts and by the antiquity of the times.
 Euhemerus was a Messenian, a very ancient writer, who gave an account
 of the origin of Jupiter, and his exploits, and all his posterity,
 gathered from the sacred inscriptions of ancient temples; he also
 traced out the parents of the other gods, their countries, actions,
 commands, and deaths, and even their sepulchres. And this history
 Ennius translated into Latin, whose words are these:--


 "As these things are written, so is the origin and kindred of Jupiter
 and his brothers; after this manner it is handed clown to us in the
 sacred writing."

 The same Euhemerus therefore relates that Jupiter, when he had five
 times gone round the world, and had distributed governments to his
 friends and relatives, and had given laws to men, and had wrought many
 other benefits, being endued with immortal glory and everlasting
 remembrance, ended his life in Crete, and departed to the gods, and
 that his sepulchre is in Crete, in the town of Gnossus, and that upon
 it is engraved in ancient Greek letters Zankronou, which is Jupiter the
 son of Saturnus. It is plain, therefore, from the things which I have
 related, that he was a man, and reigned on the earth.

 Chap. XIV.--The Actions of Saturnus and Uranus Taken from the Historians.

 Let us pass on to former things, that we may discover the origin of the
 whole error. Saturnus is said to have been born of Coelus and Terra.
 This is plainly incredible; but there is a certain reason why it is
 thus related, and he who is ignorant of this rejects it as a fable.
 That Uranus was the father of Saturnus, both Hermes affirms, and sacred
 history teaches. When Trismegistus said that there were very few men of
 perfect learning, he enumerated among them his relatives, Uranus,
 Saturnus, and Mercurius. Euhemerus relates that the same Uranus was the
 first who reigned on earth, using these words: "In the beginning Coelus
 first had the chief power on earth: he instituted and prepared that
 kingdom for himself together with his brothers." [1467]

 [1467] From this point the manuscripts are defective to ch. xx.

 Chap. XX.--Of the Gods Peculiar to the Romans.

 I have spoken of the religious rites which are common to all nations. I
 will now speak of the gods which the Romans have peculiar to
 themselves. Who does not know that the wife of Faustulus, the nurse of
 Romulus and Remus, in honour of whom the Larentinalia were instituted,
 was a harlot? And for this reason she was called Lupa, and represented
 in the form of a wild beast. Faula also and Flora were harlots, of whom
 the one was the mistress of Hercules, as Verrius relates; the other,
 having acquired great wealth by her person, made the people her heir,
 and on this account the games called Floralia are celebrated in her
 honour.

 Tatius consecrated the statue of a woman which had been found in the
 principal sewer, and called it by the name of the goddess Cloacina. The
 Romans, being besieged by the Gauls, made engines for throwing weapons
 of the hair of women; and on this account they erected an altar and
 temple to Venus Calva: [1468] also to Jupiter Pistor, [1469] because he
 had advised them in a dream to make all their corn into bread, and to
 throw it upon the enemy; and when this had been done, the Gauls,
 despairing of being able to reduce the Romans by famine, had abandoned
 the siege. Tullus Hostilius made Fear and Pallor gods. Mind is also
 worshipped; but if they had possessed it, they would never, I believe,
 have thought that it ought to be worshipped. Marcellus originated
 Honour and Virtue.

 [1468] i.e., Venus the bald.

 [1469] i.e., Jupiter the baker.

 Chap. XXI.--Of the Sacred Rites of the Roman Gods.

 But the senate also instituted other false gods of this kind,--Hope,
 Faith, Concord, Peace, Chastity, Piety; all of which, since they ought
 truly to be in the minds of men, they have falsely placed within walls.
 But although these have no substantial existence outside of man,
 nevertheless I should prefer that they should be worshipped, rather
 than Blight or Fever, which ought not to be consecrated, but rather to
 be execrated; than Fornax, together with her sacred ovens; than
 Stercutus, who first showed men to enrich the ground with manure; than
 the goddess Muta, who brought forth the Lares; than Cumina, who
 presides over the cradles of infants; than Caca, who gave information
 to Hercules respecting the stealing of his cattle, that he might slay
 her brother. How many other monstrous and ludicrous fictions there are,
 respecting which it is grievous to speak! I do not, however, wish to
 omit notice of Terminus, since it is related that he did not give way
 even to Jupiter, though he was an unwrought stone. They suppose that he
 has the custody of the boundaries, and public prayers are offered to
 him, that he may keep the stone of the Capitol immoveable, and preserve
 and extend the boundaries of the Roman empire.

 Chap. XXII.--Of the Sacred Rites Introduced by Faunus and Numa.

 Faunas was the first in Latium who introduced these follies, who both
 instituted bloody sacrifices to his grandfather Saturnus, and wished
 that his father Picus should be worshipped as a god, and placed Fatua
 Fauna his wife and sister among the gods, and named her the good
 goddess. Then at Rome, Numa, who burthened those rude and rustic then
 with new superstitions, instituted priesthoods, and distributed the
 gods into families and nations, that he might call off the fierce
 spirits of the people from the pursuits of arms. Therefore Lucilius, in
 deriding the folly of those who are slaves to vain superstitions,
 introduced these verses:--


 "Those bugbears [1470] the Lamiæ, which Faunus and Numa Pompilius and
 others instituted, at these he trembles; he places everything in this.
 As infant boys believe that every statue of bronze is a living man, so
 these imagine that all things reigned are true: they believe that
 statues of bronze contain a heart. It is a painter's [1471] gallery;
 nothing is real, everything fictitious."

 Tullius also, writing of the nature of the gods, complains that false
 and fictitious gods have been introduced, and that from thus source
 have arisen false opinions, and turbulent errors, and almost old
 womanly superstitions, which opinion ought in comparison [1472] with
 others to be esteemed more weighty, because these things were spoken by
 one who was both a philosopher and a priest.

 [1470] Terriculas. There is another reading, "terricolas." See note at
 Institutes, book i. ch. 22 [140]p. 38, supra.

 [1471] See preceding note and reference.

 [1472] Comparari. Others read "compatari."

 Chap. XXIII.--Of the Gods and Sacred Rites of the Barbarians.

 We have spoken respecting the gods: now we will speak of the rites and
 practices of their sacred institutions. A human victim used to be
 immolated to the Cyprian Jupiter, as Teucer had appointed. Thus also
 the Tauri used to offer strangers to Diana; the Latian Jupiter also was
 propitiated with human blood. Also before Saturnus, men of sixty years
 of age, according to the oracle [1473] of Apollo, were thrown from a
 bridge into the Tiber. And the Carthaginians not only offered infants
 to the same Saturnus; but being conquered by the Sicilians, to make an
 expiation, they immolated two hundred sons of nobles. And not more mild
 than these are those offerings which are even now made to the Great
 Mother and to Bellona, in which the priests make an offering, not with
 the blood of others, but with their own blood; when, mutilating
 themselves, they cease to be men, and yet do not pass over to the
 women; or, cutting their shoulders, they sprinkle the loathsome altars
 with their own blood. But these things are cruel.

 Let us come to those which are mild. The sacred rites of Isis show
 nothing else than the manner in which she lost and found her little
 son, who is called Osiris. For first her priests and attendants, having
 shaved all their limbs, and beating their breasts, howl, lament, and
 search, imitating the manner in which his mother was affected;
 afterwards the boy is found by Cynocephalus. Thus the mournful rites
 are ended with gladness. The mystery of Ceres also resembles these, in
 which torches are lighted, and Proserpine is sought for through the
 night; and when she has been found, the whole rite is finished with
 congratulations and the throwing about of torches. The people of
 Lampsacus, offer an ass to Priapus as an appropriate victim. [1474]
 Lindus is a town of Rhodes, where sacred rites in honour of Hercules
 are celebrated with revilings. For when Hercules had taken away his
 oxen from a ploughman, and had slain them, he avenged his injury by
 taunts; and afterwards having been himself appointed priest, it was
 ordained that he himself, and other priests after him, should celebrate
 sacrifices with the same revilings. But the mystery of the Cretan
 Jupiter represents the manner in which he was withdrawn from his
 father, or brought up. The goat is beside him, by the teats of which
 Amalthea nourished the boy. The sacred rites of the mother of the gods
 also show the same thing. For because the Corybantes then drowned the
 cry of the boy by the tinkling of their helmets and the striking of
 their shields, a representation of this circumstance is now repeated in
 the sacred rites; but cymbals are beaten instead of helmets, and drums
 instead of shields, that Saturnus may not hear the cries of the boy.

 [1473] Ex responso. The common reading is "ex persona."

 [1474] Ea enim visa est aptior victima, quæ ipsi, cui mactatur,
 magnitudine virilis obsceni posset æquari.

 Chap. XXIV.--Of the Origin of Sacred Rites and Superstitions.

 These are the mysteries of the gods. Now let us inquire also into the
 origin of superstitions, that we may search out by whom and at what
 times they were instituted. Didymus, in those books which are inscribed
 Of the Explanation of Pindar, relates that Melisseus was king of the
 Cretans, whose daughters were Amalthea and Melissa, who nourished
 Jupiter with goats' milk and honey; that he introduced new rites and
 ceremonies of sacred things, and was the first who sacrificed to gods,
 that is, to Vesta, who is called Tellus,--whence the poet says:--


 "And the first of the gods,

 Tellus,"--

 and afterwards to the mother of the gods. But Euhemerus, in his sacred
 history, says that Jupiter himself, after that he received the
 government, erected temples in honour of himself in many places. For in
 going about the world, as he came to each place he united the chiefs of
 the people to himself in friendship and the right of hospitality; and
 that the remembrance of this might be preserved, he ordered that
 temples should be built to him, and annual festivals be celebrated by
 those connected with him in a league of hospitality. Thus he spread the
 worship of himself through all lands. But at what time they lived can
 easily be inferred. For Thallus writes in his history, that Belus, the
 king of the Assyrians, whom the Babylonians worship, and who was the
 contemporary and friend of Saturnus, was three hundred and twenty-two
 years before the Trojan war, and it is fourteen hundred and seventy
 years since the taking of Troy. From which it is evident, that it is
 not more than eighteen hundred years from the time when mankind fell
 into error by the institution of new forms of divine worship.

 Chap. XXV.--Of the Golden Age, of Images, and Prometheus, Who First
 Fashioned Man.

 The poets, therefore, with good reason say that the golden age, which
 existed in the reign of Saturnus, was changed. For at that time no gods
 were worshipped, but they knew of one God only. After that they
 subjected themselves to frail and earthly things, worshipping idols of
 wood, and brass, and stone, a change took place from the golden age to
 that of iron. For having lost the knowledge of God, and broken off that
 one bond of human society, they began to harass one another, to plunder
 and subdue. But if they would raise their eyes aloft and behold God,
 who raised them up to the sight of heaven and Himself, they never would
 bend and prostrate themselves by worshipping earthly things, whose
 folly Lucretius severely rebukes, saying: [1475]


 "And they abase their souls with fear of the gods, and weigh and press
 them down to the earth." [1476]

 Wherefore they tremble, and do not understand how foolish it is to fear
 those things which you have made, or to hope for any protection from
 those things which are dumb and insensible, and neither see nor hear
 the suppliant. What majesty, therefore, or deity can they have, which
 were in the power of a man, that they should not be made, or that they
 should be made into some other thing, and are so even now? For they are
 liable to injury and might be carried off by theft, were it not that
 they are protected by the law and the guardianship of man. Does he
 therefore appear to be in possession of his senses, who sacrifices to
 such deities the choicest victims, consecrates gifts, offers costly
 garments, as if they who are without motion could use them? With
 reason, then, did Dionysius the tyrant of Sicily plunder and deride the
 gods of Greece when he had taken possession of it as conqueror; and
 after the sacrilegious acts which he had committed, he returned to
 Sicily with a prosperous voyage, and held the kingdom even to his old
 age: nor were the injured gods able to punish him.

 How much better is it to despise vanities, and to turn to God, to
 maintain the condition which you have received from God, to maintain
 your name! For on this account he is called anthropos, [1477] because
 he looks upward. But he looks upward who looks up to the true and
 living God, who is in heaven; who seeks after the Maker and Parent of
 his soul, not only with his perception and mind, but also with his
 countenance and eyes raised aloft. But he who enslaves himself to
 earthly and humble things, plainly prefers to himself that which is
 below him. For since he himself is the workmanship of God, whereas an
 image is the workmanship of man, the human workmanship cannot be
 preferred to the divine; and as God is the parent of man, so is the man
 of the statue. Therefore he is foolish and senseless who adores that
 which he himself has made, of which detestable and foolish handicraft
 Prometheus was the author, who was born from Iapetus the uncle of
 Jupiter. For when first of all Jupiter, having obtained supreme
 dominion, wished to establish himself as a god, and to found temples,
 and was seeking for some one who was able to imitate the human figure,
 at that time Prometheus lived, who fashioned the image of a man from
 thick clay with such close resemblance, that the novelty and cleverness
 of the art was a wonder. At length the men of his own time, and
 afterwards the poets, handed him down as the maker of a true and living
 man; and we, as often as we praise wrought statues, say that they live
 and breathe. And he indeed was the inventor of earthenware images. But
 posterity, following him, both carved them out of marble, and moulded
 them out of bronze; then in process of time ornament was added of gold
 and ivory, so that not only the likenesses, but also the gleam itself,
 might dazzle the eyes. Thus ensnared by beauty, and forgetful of true
 majesty, sensible beings considered that insensible objects, rational
 beings that irrational objects, living beings that lifeless objects,
 were to be worshipped and reverenced by them.

 [1475] De Nat. Deor., vi. 52.

 [1476] Quare tremunt. Another reading is, "qua reddunt," which is
 unintelligible.

 [1477] hanthoopos, man; said to be compounded of hano, tre'po, and ops,
 to turn the face upwards. [Needlessly repeated from [141]p. 41, supra.]

 Chap. XXVI.--Of the Worship of the Elements and Stars.

 Now let us refute those also who regard the elements of the world as
 gods, that is, the heaven, the sun, and the moon; for being ignorant of
 the Maker of these things, they admire and adore the works themselves.
 And this error belongs not to the ignorant only, but also to
 philosophers; since the Stoics are of opinion that all the heavenly
 bodies are to be considered as among the number of the gods, since they
 all have fixed and regular motions, by which they most constantly
 preserve the vicissitudes of the times which succeed them. They do not
 then possess voluntary motion, since they obey prescribed laws, and
 plainly not by their own sense, but by the workmanship of the supreme
 Creator, who so ordered them that they should complete unerring [1478]
 courses and fixed circuits, by which they might vary the alternations
 of days and nights, of summer and winter. But if men admire the effects
 of these, if they admire their courses, their brightness, their
 regularity, their beauty, they ought to have understood how much more
 beautiful, more illustrious, and more powerful than these is the maker
 and contriver Himself, even God. But they estimated the Divinity by
 objects which fall under the sight of men; [1479] not knowing that
 objects which come within the sight cannot be eternal, and that those
 which are eternal cannot be discerned by mortal eyes.

 [1478] Inerrabiles. There is another reading, "inenarrabiles,"
 indescribable.

 [1479] Humanis visibus.

 Chap. XXVII.--Of the Creation, Sin, and Punishment of Man; And of Angels,
 Both Good and Bad.

 One subject remains, and that the last: that, since it usually happens,
 as we read in histories, that the gods appear to have displayed their
 majesty by auguries, by dreams, by oracles, and also by the punishments
 of those who had committed sacrilege, I may show what cause produced
 this effect, so that no one even now may fall into the same snares into
 which those of old fell. When God, according to His excellent majesty,
 had framed the world out of nothing, and had decked the heaven with
 lights, and had filled the earth and the sea with living creatures,
 then He formed man out of clay, and fashioned him after the resemblance
 of His own likeness, and breathed into him that he might live, [1480]
 and placed him in a garden [1481] which He had planted with every kind
 of fruit-bearing tree, and commanded him not to eat of one tree in
 which He had placed the knowledge of good and evil, warning him that it
 would come to pass, that if he did so he would lose his life, but that
 if he observed the command of God he would remain immortal. Then the
 serpent, who was one of the servants of God, envying man because he was
 made immortal, enticed him by stratagem to transgress the command and
 law of God. And in this manner he did indeed receive the knowledge of
 good and evil, but he lost the life which God had given him to be for
 ever.

 Therefore He drove out the sinner from the sacred place, and banished
 him into this world, that he might seek sustenance by labour, that he
 might according to his deserts undergo difficulties and troubles; and
 He surrounded the garden itself with a fence of fire, that none of men
 even till the day of judgment might attempt secretly [1482] to enter
 into that place of perpetual blessedness. Then death came upon man
 according to the sentence of God; and yet his life, though it had begun
 to be temporary, had as its boundary a thousand years, and that was the
 extent of human life even to the deluge. For after the flood the life
 of men was gradually shortened, and was reduced to a hundred and twenty
 years. But that serpent, who from his deeds received the name of devil,
 that is, accuser or informer, did not cease to persecute the seed of
 man, whom he had deceived from the beginning. At length he urged him
 who was first born in this world, under the impulse of envy, to the
 murder of his brother, that of the two men who were first born he might
 destroy the one, and make the other a parricide. [1483] Nor did he
 cease upon this from infusing the venom of malice into the breasts of
 men through each generation, from corrupting and depraving them; in
 short, from overwhelming them with such crimes, that an instance of
 justice was now rare, but men lived after the manner of the beasts.

 But when God saw this, He sent His angels to instruct the race of men,
 and to protect them from all evil. He gave these a command to abstain
 from earthly things, lest, being polluted by any taint, they should be
 deprived of the honour of angels. But that wily accuser, while they
 tarried among men, allured these also to pleasures, so that they might
 defile themselves with women. Then, being condemned by the sentence of
 God, and cast forth on account of their sins, they lost both the name
 and substance of angels. Thus, having become ministers of the devil,
 that they might have a solace of their ruin, they betook themselves to
 the ruining of men, for whose protection they had come. [1484]

 [1480] Inspiravit ad vitam.

 [1481] Paradiso.

 [1482] Irrepere.

 [1483] Parricidam. The word first means the murderer of a parent or
 near relative; then simply a murderer.

 [1484] [This is a curious enlargement of the idea as taught elsewhere.
 See vol. ii. [142]p. 142, this series.]

 Chap. XXVIII.--Of the Demons, and Their Evil Practices.

 These are the demons, of whom the poets often speak in their poems,
 whom Hesiod calls the guardians of men. For they so persuaded men by
 their enticements and deceits, that they believed that the same were
 gods. In fine, Socrates used to give out that he had a demon as the
 guardian and director of his life from his first childhood, and that he
 could do nothing without his assent and command. They attach
 themselves, therefore, to individuals, and occupy houses under the name
 of Genii or Penates. To these temples are built, to these libations are
 daily offered as to the Lares, to these honour is paid as to the
 averters of evils. These from the beginning, that they might turn away
 men from the knowledge of the true God, introduced new superstitions
 and worship of gods. These taught that the memory of dead kings should
 be consecrated, temples be built, and images made, not that they might
 lessen the honour of God, or increase their own, which they lost by
 sinning, but that they might take away life from men, deprive them of
 the hope of true light, lest men should arrive at that heavenly reward
 of immortality from which they fell. They also brought to light
 astrology, and augury, and divination; and though these things are in
 themselves false, yet they themselves, the authors of evils, so govern
 and regulate them that they are believed to be true. They also invented
 the tricks of the magic art, to deceive the eyes. By their aid it comes
 to pass, that that which is appears not to be, and that which is not
 appears to be. They themselves invented necromancies, responses, and
 oracles, to delude the minds of men with lying divination by means of
 ambiguous issues. They are present in the temples and at all
 sacrifices; and by the exhibition of some deceitful prodigies, to the
 surprise of those who are present, they so deceive men, that they
 believe that a divine power is present in images and statues. They even
 enter secretly into bodies, as being slight spirits; and they excite
 diseases in the vitiated limbs, which when appeased with sacrifices and
 vows they may again remove. They send dreams either full of terror,
 [1485] that they themselves may be invoked, or the issues of which may
 correspond with the truth, that they may increase the veneration paid
 to themselves. Sometimes also they put forth something of vengeance
 against the sacrilegious, that whoever sees it may become more timid
 and superstitious. Thus by their frauds they have drawn darkness over
 the human race, that truth might be oppressed, and the name of the
 supreme and matchless God might be forgotten.

 [1485] Plena terroris. Another reading is, "aut plane terrores."

 Chap. XXIX.--Of the Patience and Providence of God.

 But some one says: Why, then, does the true God permit these things to
 be done? Why does He not rather remove or destroy the wicked? Why, in
 truth, did He from the beginning give power [1486] to the demon, so
 that there should be one who might corrupt and destroy all things? I
 will briefly say why He willed that this should be so. I ask whether
 virtue is a good or an evil. It cannot be denied that it is a good. If
 virtue is a good, vice, on the contrary, is an evil. If vice is an evil
 on this account, because it opposes virtue, and virtue is on this
 account a good, because it overthrows vice, it follows that virtue
 cannot exist without vice; and if you take away vice, the merits of
 virtue will be taken away. For there can be no victory without an
 enemy. Thus it comes to pass, that good cannot exist without an evil.

 Chrysippus, a man of active mind, saw this when discussing the subject
 of providence, and charges those with folly who think that good is
 caused by God, but say that evil is not thus caused. Aulus Gellius
 [1487] has interpreted his sentiment in his books of Attic Nights; thus
 saying: "They to whom it does not appear that the world was made for
 the sake of God and men, and that human affairs are governed by
 providence, think that they use a weighty argument when they thus
 speak: If there were a providence, there would be no evils. For they
 say that nothing is less in agreement with providence, than that in
 this world, on account of which it is said that God made men, [1488]
 the power of troubles and evils should be so great. In reply to these
 things, Chrysippus, when he was arguing, in his fourth book respecting
 providence, said: Nothing can be more foolish than those who think that
 good things could have existed, if there were not evils in the same
 place. For since good things are contrary to evil, they must of
 necessity be opposed to each other, and must stand resting, as it were,
 on mutual and opposite support. [1489] Thus there is no contrary
 without another contrary. For how could there be any perception of
 justice, unless there were injuries? or what else is justice, but the
 removal of injustice? In like manner, the nature of fortitude cannot be
 understood, except by placing [1490] beside it cowardice, or the nature
 of self-control except by intemperance. Likewise, in what manner would
 there be prudence, unless there were the contrary, imprudence? On the
 same principle, he says, why do the foolish men not require this also,
 that there should be truth and not falsehood? For there exist together
 good and evil things, prosperity and trouble, pleasure and pain. For
 the one being bound to the other at opposite poles, as Plato says, if
 you take away one, you take away both." You see, therefore, that which
 I have often said, that good and evil are so connected with one
 another, that the one cannot exist without the other. Therefore God
 acted with the greatest foresight in placing the subject-matter of
 virtue in evils which He made for this purpose, that He might establish
 for us a contest, in which He would crown the victorious with the
 reward of immortality. [1491]

 [1486] arche'n. Others read daimonarchi'an, "the power of demons."

 [1487] Lib. vi. 1.

 [1488] Propter quem homines fecisse dicatur Deus. Others read, "Quem
 propter homines," etc.

 [1489] Quasi mutuo adversoque fulta nisu consistere.

 [1490] Appositione. Others read "oppositione."

 [1491] [Philosophically, not dogmatically, asserted. God's wisdom in
 permitting evil (which originated in the fall of free intellects) to
 last for a season, will vindicate itself in judgment.]

 Chap. XXX.--Of False Wisdom.

 I have taught, as I imagine, that the honours paid to gods are not only
 impious, but also vain, either because they were men whose memory was
 consecrated after death; or because the images themselves are
 insensible and deaf, inasmuch as they are formed of earth, and that it
 is not right for man, who ought to look up to heavenly things, to
 subject himself to earthly things; or because the spirits who claim to
 themselves those acts of religious service are unholy and impure, and
 on this account, being condemned by the sentence of God, fell to the
 earth, and that it is not lawful to submit to the power of those to
 whom you are superior, if you wish to be a follower of the true God. It
 remains that, as we have spoken of false religion, we should also
 discuss the subject of false wisdom, which the philosophers
 profess,--men endued with the greatest learning and eloquence, but far
 removed from the truth, because they neither know God nor the wisdom of
 God. And although they are clever and learned, yet, because their
 wisdom is human, I shall not fear to contend with them, that it may be
 evident that falsehood can be easily overcome by truth, and earthly
 things by heavenly.

 They thus define the nature of philosophy. Philosophy is the love or
 pursuit of wisdom. Therefore it is not wisdom itself; for that which
 loves must be different from that which is loved. If it is the pursuit
 of wisdom, not even thus is philosophy identical with wisdom. For
 wisdom is the object itself which is sought, but the pursuit is that
 which seeks it. Therefore the very definition or meaning of the word
 plainly shows that philosophy is not wisdom itself. I will say that it
 [1492] is not even the pursuit of wisdom, in which wisdom is not
 comprised. For who can be said to devote himself to the pursuit of that
 to which he can by no means attain? He who gives himself to the pursuit
 of medicine, or grammar, or oratory, may be said to be studious of that
 art which he is learning; but when he has learned, he is now said to be
 a physician, a grammarian, or an orator. Thus also those who are
 studious of wisdom, after they had learned it, ought to have been
 called wise. But since they are called students of wisdom as long as
 they live, it is manifest that that is not the pursuit, because it is
 impossible to arrive at the object itself which is sought for in the
 pursuit, unless by chance they who pursue wisdom even to the end of
 life are about to be wise in another world. Now every pursuit is
 connected with some end. That, therefore, is not a right pursuit which
 has no end.

 [1492] Philosophy.

 Chap. XXXI.--Of Knowledge and Supposition.

 Moreover, there are two things which appear to fall under the subject
 of philosophy--knowledge and supposition; and if these are taken away,
 philosophy altogether falls to the ground. But the chief of the
 philosophers themselves have taken away both from philosophy. Socrates
 took away knowledge, Zeno supposition. Let us see whether they were
 right in doing so. Wisdom is, as Cicero defined it, [1493] the
 knowledge of divine and human things. Now if this definition is true,
 wisdom does not come within the power of man. For who of mortals can
 assume this to himself, to profess that he knows divine and human
 things? I say nothing of human affairs; for although they are connected
 with divine, yet, since they belong to man, let us grant that it is
 possible for man to know them. Certainly he cannot know divine things
 by himself, since he is a man; whereas he who knows them must be
 divine, and therefore God. But man is neither divine nor God. Man,
 therefore, cannot thoroughly know divine things by himself. No one,
 therefore, is wise but God, or certainly that man whom God has taught.
 But they, because they are neither gods, nor taught by God, cannot be
 wise, that is, acquainted with divine and human things. Knowledge,
 therefore, is rightly taken away by Socrates and the Academics.
 Supposition also does not agree with the wise man. For every one
 supposes that of which he is ignorant. Now, to suppose that you know
 that of which you are ignorant, is rashness and folly. Supposition,
 therefore, was rightly taken away by Zeno. If, therefore, there is no
 knowledge in man, and there ought to be no supposition, philosophy is
 cut up by the roots.

 [1493] De Offic., ii. 2.

 Chap. XXXII.--Of the Sects of Philosophers, and Their Disagreement.

 To this is added, that it [1494] is not uniform; but being divided into
 sects, and scattered into many and discordant opinions, it has no fixed
 state. For since they all separately attack and harass one another, and
 there is none of them which is not condemned of folly in the judgment
 of the rest, while the members are plainly at variance with one
 another, the whole body of philosophy is brought to destruction. Hence
 the Academy afterwards originated. For when the leading men of that
 sect saw that philosophy was altogether overthrown by philosophers
 mutually opposing each other, they undertook war against all, that they
 might destroy all the arguments of all; while they themselves assert
 nothing except one thing--that nothing can be known. Thus, having taken
 away knowledge, they overthrew the ancient philosophy. But they did not
 even themselves retain the name of philosophers, since they admitted
 their ignorance, because to be ignorant of all things is not only not
 the part of a philosopher, but not even of a man. Thus the
 philosophers, because they have no defence, must destroy one another
 with mutual wounds, and philosophy itself must altogether consume and
 put an end to itself by its own arms. But they say it is only natural
 philosophy which thus gives way. How is it with moral? Does that rest
 on any firm foundation? Let us see whether philosophers are agreed in
 this part at any rate, which relates to the condition of life.

 [1494] i.e., philosophy.

 Chap. XXXIII.--What is the Chief Good to Be Sought in Life.

 What is the chief good must be an object of inquiry, that our whole
 life and actions may be directed to it. When inquiry is made respecting
 the chief good of man, it ought to be settled to be of such a kind,
 first, that it have reference to man alone; in the next place, that it
 belong peculiarly to the mind; lastly, that it be sought by virtue. Let
 us see, therefore, whether the chief good which the philosophers mark
 out be such that it has reference neither to a dumb animal nor to the
 body, and cannot be attained without virtue.

 Aristippus, the founder of the Cyrenaic sect, who thought that bodily
 pleasure was the chief good, ought to be removed from the number of
 philosophers, and from the society of men, because he compared himself
 to a beast. The chief good of Hieronymus is to be without pain, that of
 Diodorus to cease to be in pain. But the other animals avoid pain; and
 when they are without pain, or cease to be in pain, are glad. What
 distinction, then, will be given to man, if his chief good is judged to
 be common with the beasts? Zeno thought that the chief good was to live
 agreeably to nature. But this definition is a general one. For all
 animals live agreeably to nature, and each has its own nature.

 Epicurus maintained that it was pleasure of the soul. What is pleasure
 of the soul but joy, in which the soul for the most part luxuriates,
 and unbends itself either to sport or to laughter? But this good
 befalls even dumb animals, which, when they are satisfied with pasture,
 relax themselves to joy and wantonness. Dinomachus and Callipho
 approved of honourable pleasure; but they either said the same that
 Epicurus did, that bodily pleasure is dishonourable; or if they
 considered bodily pleasures to be partly base and partly honourable,
 then that is not the chief good which is ascribed to the body. The
 Peripatetics make up the chief good of goods of the soul, and body, and
 fortune. The goods of the soul may be approved of; but if they require
 assistance for the completion of happiness, they are plainly weak. But
 the goods of the body and of fortune are not in the power of man; nor
 is that now the chief good which is assigned to the body, or to things
 placed without us, because this double good extends even to the cattle,
 which have need of being well, and of a due supply of food. The Stoics
 are believed to have entertained much better views, who said that
 virtue was the chief good. But virtue cannot be the chief good, since,
 if it is the endurance of evils and of labours, it is not happy of
 itself; but it ought to effect and produce the chief good, because it
 cannot be attained without the greatest difficulty and labour. But, in
 truth, Aristotle wandered far from reason, who connected honour with
 virtue, as though it were possible for virtue at any time to be
 separated from honour, or to be united with baseness.

 Herillus the Pyrrhonist made knowledge the chief good. This indeed
 belongs to man, and to the soul only, but it may happen to him without
 virtue. For he is not to be considered happy who has either learnt
 anything by hearing, or has gained the knowledge of it by a little
 reading; nor is it a definition of the chief good, because there may be
 a knowledge either of bad things, or at any rate of things that are
 useless. And if it is the knowledge of good and useful things which you
 have acquired by labour, nevertheless it is not the chief good, because
 knowledge is not sought on its own account, but on account of something
 else. For the arts are learnt on this account, that they may be to us
 the means of gaining support, or a source of glory, or even of
 pleasure; and it is plain that these things cannot be the chief goods.
 Therefore the philosophers do not observe the rule even in moral
 philosophy, inasmuch as they are at variance with one another on the
 main point [1495] itself, that is, in that discussion by which the life
 is moulded. For the precepts cannot be equal, or resembling one
 another, when some train men to pleasure, others to honour, others
 indeed to nature, others to knowledge; some to the pursuit, others to
 the avoiding of riches; some to entire insensibility to pain, others to
 the endurance of evils: in all which, as I have shown before, they turn
 aside from reason, because they are ignorant of God.

 [1495] In ipso cardine. [Horace, Sat., book ii. 6, 71-76.]

 Chap. XXXIV.--That Men are Born to Justice.

 Let us now see what is proposed to the wise man as the chief good.
 [1496] That men are born to justice is not only taught by the sacred
 writings, but is sometimes acknowledged even by these same
 philosophers. Thus Cicero says: "But of all things which fall under the
 discussion of learned men, nothing assuredly is more excellent than
 that it should be clearly understood that we are born to justice." This
 is most true. [1497] For we are not born to wickedness, since we are a
 social and sociable animal. The wild beasts are produced to exercise
 their fierceness; for they are unable to live in any other way than by
 prey and bloodshed. These, however, although pressed by extreme hunger,
 nevertheless refrain from animals of their own kind. Birds also do the
 same, which must feed upon the carcases of others. How much more is it
 befitting, that man, who is united with man both in the interchange of
 language and in communion of feeling, should spare man, and love him!
 For this is justice.

 But since wisdom has been given to man alone, that he may understand
 God, and this alone makes the difference between man and the dumb
 animals, justice itself is bound up in two duties. He owes the one to
 God as to a father, the other to man as to a brother; for we are
 produced by the same God. Therefore it has been deservedly and rightly
 said, that wisdom is the knowledge of divine and human affairs. For it
 is right that we should know what we owe to God, and what to man;
 namely, to God religion, to man affection. But the former belongs to
 wisdom, the latter to virtue; and justice comprises both. If,
 therefore, it is evident that man is born to justice, it is necessary
 that the just man should be subject to evils, that he may exercise the
 virtue with which he is endued. For virtue is the enduring of evils. He
 will avoid pleasures as an evil: he will despise riches, because they
 are frail; and if he has them, he will liberally bestow them, to
 preserve the wretched: he will not be desirous of honours, because they
 are short and transitory; he will do injury to no one; if he shall
 suffer, he will not retaliate; and he will not take vengeance upon one
 who plunders his property. For he will deem it unlawful to injure a
 man; and if there shall be any one who would compel him to depart from
 God, he will not refuse tortures nor death. Thus it will come to pass,
 that he must necessarily live in poverty and lowliness, and in insults,
 or even tortures.

 [1496] Some editions repeat the words "summum bonum," but these words
 appear to obstruct the sense.

 [1497] [i.e., philosophically; our moral constitution dictating what is
 just.]

 Chap. XXXV.--That Immortality is the Chief Good.

 What, then, will be the advantage of justice and virtue, if they shall
 have nothing but evil in life? But if virtue, which despises all
 earthly goods, most wisely endures all evils, and endures death itself
 in the discharge of duty, cannot be without a reward, what remains but
 that immortality alone is its reward? For if a happy life falls to the
 lot of man, as the philosophers will have it, and in this point alone
 they do not disagree, therefore also immortality falls to him. For that
 only is happy which is incorruptible; that only is incorruptible which
 is eternal. Therefore immortality is the chief good, because it belongs
 both to man, and to the soul, and to virtue. We are only directed to
 this; we are born to the attainment of this. Therefore God proposes to
 us virtue and justice, that we may obtain that eternal reward for our
 labours. But concerning that immortality [1498] itself we will speak in
 the proper place. There remains the philosophy of Logic, [1499] which
 contributes nothing to a happy life. For wisdom does not consist in the
 arrangement of speech, but in the heart and the feeling. But if natural
 philosophy is superfluous, and this of logic, and the philosophers have
 erred in moral philosophy, which alone is necessary, because they have
 been unable in any way to find out the chief good; therefore all
 philosophy is found to be empty and useless, which was unable to
 comprehend the nature of man, or to fulfil its duty and office.

 [1498] Non mortalitate.

 [1499] logike`, philosophia. Under this is included everything
 connected with the system of speaking.

 Chap. XXXVI.--Of the Philosophers,--Namely, Epicurus and Pythagoras.

 Since I have spoken briefly of philosophy, now also I will speak a few
 things about the philosophers. This is especially the doctrine of
 Epicurus, that there is no providence. And at the same time he does not
 deny the existence of gods. In both respects he acts contrary to
 reason. For if there are gods, it follows that there is a providence.
 For otherwise we can form no intelligible idea of God, for it is His
 peculiar province to foresee. [1500] But Epicurus says He takes no care
 about anything. Therefore He disregards not only the affairs of men,
 but also heavenly things. How, therefore, or from what, do you affirm
 that He exists? For when you have taken away the divine providence and
 care, it would naturally follow that you should altogether deny the
 existence of God; whereas now you have left Him in name, but in reality
 you have taken Him away. Whence, then, did the world derive its origin,
 if God takes no care of anything? There are, he says, minute atoms,
 which can neither be seen nor touched, and from the fortuitous meeting
 of these all things arose, and are continually arising. If they are
 neither seen nor perceived by any part of the body, how could you know
 of their existence? In the next place, if they exist, with what mind do
 they meet together to effect anything? If they are smooth, they cannot
 cohere: if they are hooked and angular, then they are divisible; for
 hooks and angles project, and can be cut off. But these things are
 senseless and unprofitable. Why should I mention that he also makes
 souls capable of extinction? who is refuted not only by all
 philosophers and general persuasion, but also by the answers of bards,
 by the predictions of the Sibyls, and lastly, by the divine voices of
 the prophets themselves; so that it is wonderful that Epicurus alone
 existed, who should place the condition of man on a level with the
 flocks and beasts.

 What of Pythagoras, who was first called a philosopher, who judged that
 souls were indeed immortal, but that they passed into other bodies,
 either of cattle, or of birds, or of beasts? Would it not have been
 better that they should be destroyed, together with their bodies, than
 thus to be condemned to pass into the bodies of other animals? Would it
 not be better not to exist at all, than, after having had the form of a
 man, to live as a swine or a dog? And the foolish man, to gain credit
 for his saying, said that he himself had been Euphorbus in the Trojan
 war, and that, when he had been slain, he passed into other figures of
 animals, and at last became Pythagoras. O happy man! to whom alone so
 great a memory was given; or rather unhappy, who, when changed into a
 sheep, was not permitted to be ignorant of what he was! And would to
 Heaven that he alone had been thus senseless! He found also some to
 believe him, and some indeed among the learned, [1501] to whom the
 inheritance of folly passed.

 [1500] Providere.

 [1501] Inter doctos homines. Others read "indoctos homines," but this
 does not convey so good a meaning.

 Chap. XXXVII.--Of Socrates and His Contradiction.

 After him Socrates held the first place in philosophy, who was
 pronounced most wise even by the oracle, because he confessed that he
 knew one thing only,--namely, that he knew nothing. And on the
 authority of this oracle it was right that the natural philosophers
 should restrain themselves, lest they should either inquire into those
 things which they could not know, or should think that they knew things
 which they did not know. Let us, however, see whether Socrates was most
 wise, as the Pythian god proclaimed. He often made use of this proverb,
 that that which is above us has also no reference to us. He has now
 passed beyond the limits of his opinion. For he who said that he knew
 one thing only, found another thing to speak of, as though he knew it;
 but that in vain. For God, who is plainly above us, is to be sought
 for; and religion is to be undertaken, which alone separates us from
 the brutes, which indeed Socrates not only rejected, but even derided,
 in swearing by a goose and a dog, as if in truth he could not have
 sworn by Æsculapius, to whom he had vowed a cock. Behold the sacrifice
 of a wise man! And because he was unable to offer this in his own
 person, since he was at the point of death, he entreated his friends to
 perform the vow after his death, lest forsooth he should be detained as
 a debtor in the lower regions. He assuredly both pronounced that he
 knew nothing, and made good his statement. [1502]

 [1502] [Other and more creditable explanations are given. Socrates
 recognized the rites of his countrymen. See Tayler Lewis in a noble
 chapter, Plato, etc., p. 250.]

 Chap. XXXVIII.--Of Plato, Whose Doctrine Approaches More Nearly to the
 Truth.

 His disciple Plato, whom Tully speaks of as the god of philosophers,
 alone of all so studied philosophy that he approached nearer to the
 truth; and yet, because he was ignorant of God, he so failed in many
 things, that no one fell into worse errors, especially because in his
 books respecting the state he wished all things to be common to all.
 This is endurable concerning property, though it is unjust. For it
 ought not to be an injury to any one, if he possesses more than another
 through his own industry; or to be a profit to any one, if through his
 own fault he possesses less. But, as I have said, this is capable of
 being endured in some way. Shall there be a community of wives also,
 and of children? Shall there be no distinction of blood, or certainty
 of race? Shall there be neither families, nor relationships, nor
 affinities, but all things confused and indiscriminate, as in herds of
 cattle? Shall there be no self-restraint in men, no chastity in women?
 What conjugal affection can there be in these, between whom on either
 side there is no sure or peculiar [1503] love? Who will he dutiful
 towards a father, when he knows not from whom he was born? Who will
 love a son, whom he will reckon as not his own? [1504] Moreover, he
 opened [1505] the senate house to women, and entrusted to them warfare,
 magistracies, and commands. [1506] But how great will be the calamity
 of that city, in which women shall discharge the duties of men! But of
 this more fully at another opportunity.

 Zeno, the master of the Stoics, who praises virtue, judged that pity,
 which is a very great virtue, should be cut away, as though it were a
 disease of the mind, whereas it is at the same time dear to God and
 necessary for men. For who is there who, when placed in any evil, would
 be unwilling to be pitied, and would not desire the assistance of those
 who might succour them, which is not called forth so as to render aid,
 except by the feeling of pity? Although he calls this humanity and
 piety, he does not change the matter itself, only the name. This is the
 affection which has been given to man alone, that by mutual assistance
 we might alleviate our weakness; and he who removes this affection
 reduces us to the life of the beasts. For his assertion that all faults
 are equal, proceeds from that inhumanity with which also be assails
 pity as a disease. For he who makes no difference in faults, either
 thinks that light offences ought to be visited with severe punishments,
 which is the part of a cruel judge, or that great offences should be
 visited with slight punishments, which is the part of a worthless
 judge. In either case there is injury to the state. For if the greatest
 crimes are lightly punished, the boldness of the wicked will increase,
 and go on to deeds of greater daring; and if a punishment of too great
 severity is inflicted for slight offences, inasmuch as no one can be
 exempt from fault, many citizens will incur peril, who by correction
 might become better.

 [1503] Proprius.

 [1504] Alienum.

 [1505] Reseravit. Others read "reservavit."

 [1506] [A republic of "philosophers" (credula gens) was set up in
 France (a.d. 1793), to prove their idiotic incompetency for practical
 affairs.]

 Chap. XXXIX.--Of Various Philosophers, and of the Antipodes.

 These things, truly, are of small importance, but they arise from the
 same falsehood. Xenophanes said that the orb of the moon is eighteen
 times larger than this earth of ours; and that within its compass is
 contained another earth, which is inhabited by men and animals of every
 kind. About the antipodes also one can neither hear nor speak without
 laughter. It is asserted as something serious, that we should believe
 that there are men who have their feet opposite to ours. The ravings of
 Anaxagoras are more tolerable, who said that snow was black. And not
 only the sayings, but the deeds, of some are ridiculous. Democritus
 neglected his land which was left to him by his father, and suffered it
 to become a public pasture. Diogenes with his company of dogs, [1507]
 who professes that great and perfect virtue in the contempt of all
 things, preferred to beg for his support, rather than to seek it by
 honest labour, or to have any property. Undoubtedly the life of a wise
 man ought to be to others an example of living. If all should imitate
 the wisdom of these, how will states exist? But perhaps the same Cynics
 were able to afford an example of modesty, who lived with their wives
 in public. I know not how they could defend virtue, who took away
 modesty.

 Nor was Aristippus better than these, who, I believe, that he might
 please his mistress Lais, instituted the Cyrenaic system, by which he
 placed the end of the chief good in bodily pleasure, that authority
 might not be wanting to his faults, or learning to his vices. Are those
 men of greater fortitude to be more approved, who, that they might be
 said to have despised death, died by their own hands? Zeno, Empedocles,
 Chrysippus, Cleanthes, Democritus, and Cato, imitating these, did not
 know that he who put himself to death is guilty of murder, according to
 the divine right and law. For it was God who placed us in this abode of
 flesh: it was He who gave us the temporary habitation of the body, that
 we should inhabit it as long as He pleased. Therefore it is to be
 considered impious, to wish to depart from it without the command of
 God. Therefore violence must not be applied to nature. He knows how to
 destroy [1508] His own work. And if any one shall apply impious hands
 to that work, and shall tear asunder the bonds of the divine
 workmanship, he endeavours to flee from God, whose sentence no one will
 be able to escape, whether alive or dead. Therefore they are accursed
 and impious, whom I have mentioned above, who even taught what are the
 befitting reasons for voluntary death; so that it was not enough of
 guilt that they were self-murderers, unless they instructed others also
 to this wickedness. [1509]

 [1507] i.e., the Cynics.

 [1508] Resolvat.

 [1509] [A succinct statement of the sixth command in its bearing on
 suicide.]

 Chap. XL.--Of the Foolishness of the Philosophers.

 There are innumerable sayings and doings of the philosophers, by which
 their foolishness may be shown. Therefore, since we are unable to
 enumerate them all, a few will be sufficient. It is enough that it is
 understood that the philosophers were neither teachers of justice, of
 which they were ignorant, nor of virtue, of which they falsely boast.
 For what can they teach, who often confess their own ignorance? I omit
 to mention Socrates, whose opinion is well known. Anaxagoras proclaims
 that all things are over-spread with darkness. Empedocles says that the
 paths for finding out the truth of the senses are narrow. Democritus
 asserts that truth lies sunk in a deep well; and because they nowhere
 find it, they therefore affirm that no wise man has as yet existed.
 Since, therefore, human wisdom has no existence (Socrates says in the
 writings of Plato), let us follow that which is divine, and let us give
 thanks to God, who has revealed and delivered it to us; and let us
 congratulate ourselves, that through the divine bounty we possess the
 truth and wisdom, which, though sought by so many intellects through so
 many ages, philosophy [1510] was not able to discover.

 [1510] Philosophia non potuit invenire. Other editions have,
 "philosophiam nemo potuit invenire." ["The world by wisdom (sophia)
 knew not God," etc.; 1 Cor. i. 21.]

 Chap. XLI.--Of True Religion and Wisdom.

 Now, since we have refuted false religion, which is in the worship of
 the gods, and false wisdom, which is in the philosophers, let us come
 to true religion and wisdom. And, indeed, we must speak of them both
 conjointly, because they are closely connected. For to worship the true
 God, that and nothing else is wisdom. For that God who is supreme and
 the Maker of all things, who made man as the image of Himself, on this
 account conferred on him alone of all animals the gift of reason, that
 he might pay back honour to Him as his Father and his Lord, and by the
 exercise of this piety and obedience might gain the reward of
 immortality. This is a true and divine mystery. But among those, [1511]
 because they are not true, there is no agreement. Neither are sacred
 rites performed in philosophy, nor is philosophy treated of in sacred
 things; and on this account their religion is false, because it does
 not possess wisdom; and on this account their wisdom is false, because
 it does not possess religion. But where both are joined together, there
 the truth must necessarily be; so that if it is asked what the truth
 itself is, it may be rightly said to be either wise religion or
 religious wisdom.

 [1511] i.e., the philosophers before mentioned.

 Chap. XLII.--Of Religious Wisdom: the Name of Christ Known to None, Except
 Himself and His Father.

 I will now say what wise religion, or religious wisdom, is. God, in the
 beginning, before He made the world, from the fountain of His own
 eternity, and from the divine and everlasting Spirit, [1512] begat for
 Himself a Son incorruptible, faithful, corresponding to His Father's
 excellence and majesty. He is virtue, He is reason, He is the word of
 God, He is wisdom. With this artificer, as Hermes says, and counsellor,
 as the Sibyl says, He contrived the excellent and wondrous fabric of
 this world. In fine, of all the angels, whom the same God formed from
 His own breath, [1513] He alone was admitted into a participation of
 His supreme power, He alone was called God. For all things were through
 Him, and nothing was without Him. In fine, Plato, not altogether as a
 philosopher, but as a seer, spoke concerning the first and second God,
 perhaps following Trismegistus in this, whose words I have translated
 from the Greek, and subjoined: "The Lord and Maker of all things, whom
 we have thought to be called God, created [1514] a second God, who is
 visible and sensible. But by sensible I mean, not that He Himself
 receives sensation, but that He causes sensation and sight. When,
 therefore, He had made this, the first, and one, and only one, He
 appeared to Him most excellent, and full of all good qualities." The
 Sibyl also says that God the guide of all was made by God, and another,
 that


 "God the Son of God must be known,"

 as those examples which I have brought forward in my books declare. Him
 the prophets, filled with the inspiration of the Divine Spirit,
 proclaimed; of whom especially Solomon in the book of Wisdom, and also
 his father, the writer of divine hymns--both most renowned kings, who
 preceded the times of the Trojan war by a hundred and eighty years
 [1515] --testify that He was born of God. His name is known to none,
 except to Himself and the Father, as John teaches in the Revelation.
 [1516] Hermes says that His name cannot be uttered by mortal mouth. Yet
 by men He is called by two names--Jesus, which is Saviour, and Christ,
 which is King. He is called Saviour on this account, because He is the
 health and safety of all who believe in God through Him. He is called
 Christ on this account, because He Himself will come from heaven at the
 end of this dispensation [1517] to judge the world, and, having raised
 the dead, to establish for Himself an everlasting kingdom.

 [1512] [This refers to the Spirit of the Father, as Cyprian (vol. v. p.
 516), "My heart hath breathed out a good Word."]

 [1513] De suis spiritibus.

 [1514] [Plato does not speak dogmatically, but with a marvellous
 intuition of truth. The Son is "begotten, not made."]

 [1515] This is an error. Both David and Solomon lived after the
 supposed taking of Troy.

 [1516] Rev. xix. 12.

 [1517] In sæculi hujus consummatione.

 Chap. XLIII.--Of the Name of Jesus Christ, and His Twofold Nativity.

 But lest by any chance there should be any doubt in your mind why we
 call Him Jesus Christ, who was born of God before the world, and who
 was born of man three hundred years ago, I will briefly explain to you
 the reason. The same person is the son of God and of man. For He was
 twice born: first of God, in the spirit, before the origin of the
 world; afterwards in the flesh of man, in the reign of Augustus; and in
 connection with this fact is an illustrious and great mystery, in which
 is contained both the salvation of men and the religion of the Supreme
 God, and all truth. For when first the accursed and impious worship of
 gods crept in through the treachery of the demons, then the religion of
 God remained with the Hebrews alone, who, not by any law, but after the
 manner of their fathers, observed the worship handed down to them by
 successive generations, [1518] even until the time when they went forth
 out of Egypt under the leadership of Moses, the first of all the
 prophets, through whom the law was given to them from God; and they
 were afterwards called Jews. Therefore they served God, being bound by
 the chains of the law. But they also, by degrees going astray to
 profane rites, undertook the worship of strange gods, and, leaving the
 worship of their father, sacrificed to senseless images. Therefore God
 sent to them prophets filled with the Divine Spirit, to upbraid them
 with their sins and proclaim repentance, to threaten them with the
 vengeance which would follow, and announce that it would come to pass,
 if they persisted in the same faults, that He would send another as the
 bearer of a new law; and having removed the ungrateful people from
 their inheritance, He would assemble to Himself a more faithful people
 from foreign nations. But they not only persisted in their course, but
 even slew the messengers themselves. Therefore He condemned them on
 account of these deeds: nor did He any longer send messengers to a
 stubborn people; but He sent His own Son, to call all nations to the
 favour of God. Nor, however, did He shut them out, impious and
 ungrateful as they were, from the hope of salvation: but He sent Him to
 them before all others, [1519] that if they should by chance obey, they
 might not lose that which they had received; but if they should refuse
 to receive their God, then, the heirs being removed, [1520] the
 Gentiles would come into possession. Therefore the supreme Father
 ordered Him to descend to the earth, and to put on a human body, that,
 being subject to the sufferings of the flesh, He might teach virtue and
 patience not only by words, but also by deeds. Therefore He was born a
 second time as man, of a virgin, without a father, that, as in His
 first spiritual birth, being born of God alone, He was made a sacred
 spirit, so in His second and fleshly birth, being born of a mother
 only, He might become holy flesh, that through Him the flesh, which had
 become subject to sin, might be freed from destruction.

 [1518] Per successiones.

 [1519] Potissimum.

 [1520] Hæredibus abdicatis.

 Chap. XLIV.--The Twofold Nativity of Christ is Proved from the Prophets.

 That these things should thus take place as I have set them forth, the
 prophets had before predicted. In the writings of Solomon it is thus
 written: [1521] "The womb of a virgin was strengthened, and conceived:
 and a virgin was impregned, and became a mother in great pity." In
 Isaiah [1522] it is thus written: "Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and
 bear a son, and ye shall call His name Immanuel;" which, being
 interpreted, is God with us. [1523] For He was with us on the earth,
 when He assumed flesh; and He was no less God in man, and man in God.
 That He was both God and man was declared before by the prophets. That
 He was God, Isaiah [1524] thus declares: "They shall fall down unto
 Thee, they shall make supplication unto Thee; since God is in Thee, and
 we knew it not, even the God of Israel. They shall be ashamed and
 confounded, all of them who oppose themselves to Thee, and shall go to
 confusion." Also Jeremiah: [1525] "This is our God, and there shall
 none other be compared unto Him; He hath found out all the way of
 knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob His servant, and to Israel His
 beloved. Afterward He was seen upon earth, and dwelt among men."
 Likewise that He was man, the same Jeremiah [1526] says: "And He is
 man, and who knew Him?" Isaiah also thus speaks: [1527] "And the Lord
 shall send them a man who shall save them, and with judgment shall He
 heal them." Also Moses himself in the book of Numbers: [1528] "There
 shall come a star out of Jacob, and a man shall arise out of Israel."
 For this cause, therefore, being God, He took upon Him flesh, that,
 becoming a mediator [1529] between God and man, having overcome death,
 He might by His guidance lead man to God.

 [1521] See Instit., iv. 12.

 [1522] Isa. vii. 14.

 [1523] Matt. i. 23.

 [1524] Isa. xlv. 14-16.

 [1525] Baruch iii. 35-37.

 [1526] xvii. 9. This and the following quotations are from the
 Septuagint.

 [1527] Isa. xix. 20.

 [1528] Num. xxiv. 17. The prophecy of Balaam.

 [1529] Inter deum et hominem medius factus.

 Chap. XLV.--The Power and Works of Christ are Proved from the Scriptures.

 We have spoken of His nativity; now let us speak of His power and
 works, which, when He wrought them among men, the Jews, seeing them to
 be great and wonderful, supposed that they were done by the influence
 of magic, not knowing that all those things which were done by Him had
 been foretold by the prophets. He gave strength to the sick, and to
 those languishing under various diseases, not by any healing remedy,
 but instantaneously, by the force and power of His word; He restored
 the weak, He made the lame to walk, He gave sight to the blind, He made
 the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear; He cleansed the polluted and
 unclean, He restored their right mind to those who were maddened with
 the attack of demons, He recalled to life and light those who were dead
 or now buried. He also fed and satisfied [1530] five thousand men with
 five loaves and two fishes. He also walked upon the sea. He also in a
 tempest commanded the wind to be still, and immediately there was a
 calm; all which things we find predicted both in the books of the
 prophets and in the verses of the Sibyls.

 When a great multitude resorted to Him on account of these miracles,
 and, as He truly was, believed Him to be the Son of God, and sent from
 God, the priests and rulers of the Jews, filled with envy, and at the
 same time excited with anger, because He reproved their sins and
 injustice, conspired to put Him to death; and that this would happen,
 Solomon had foretold a little more than a thousand years before, in the
 book of Wisdom, using these words: [1531] "Let us defraud the
 righteous, for he is unpleasant to us, and upbraideth us with our
 offences against the law. He maketh his boast that he has the knowledge
 of God, and he calleth himself the Son of God. He is made to reprove
 our thoughts: it grieveth us even to look upon him; for his life is not
 like the life of others, his ways are of another fashion. We are
 counted by him as triflers; he withdraweth himself from our ways, as
 from filthiness; he commendeth greatly the latter end of the just, and
 boasteth that he has God for his father. Let us see, therefore, if his
 words be true; let us prove what end he shall have; let us examine him
 with rebukes and torments, that we may know his meekness and prove his
 patience; let us condemn him to a shameful death. Such things have they
 imagined, and have gone astray; for their own folly hath blinded them,
 and they do not understand the mysteries of God."

 Therefore, being unmindful of these writings which they read, they
 incited the people as though against an impious man, so that they
 seized and led Him to trial, and with impious words demanded His death.
 But they alleged against Him as a crime this very thing, that He said
 that He was the Son of God, and that by healing on the Sabbath He broke
 the law, which He said that He did not break, but fulfilled. And when
 Pontius Pilate, who then as legate had authority in Syria, perceived
 that the cause did not belong to the office of the Roman judge, he sent
 Him to Herod the Tetrarch, and permitted the Jews themselves to be the
 judges of their own law: who, having received the power of punishing
 His guilt, sentenced [1532] Him to the cross, but first scourged and
 struck him with their hands, put on Him a crown of thorns, spat upon
 His face, gave Him gall and vinegar to eat and drink; and amidst these
 things no word was heard to fall from His lips. Then the executioners,
 having cast lots over His tunic and mantle, suspended Him on the cross,
 and affixed Him to it, though on the next day they were about to
 celebrate the Passover, that is, their festival. Which crime was
 followed by prodigies, that they might understand the impiety which
 they had committed; for at the same moment in which He expired, there
 was a great earthquake, and a withdrawing [1533] of the sun, so that
 the day was turned into night.

 [1530] Saturavit.

 [1531] Wisd. ii. 12-22. See Instit., iv. 16, [143]p. 117, supra.

 [1532] Addixerunt. Some read "affixerunt," affixed Him to the cross.

 [1533] Deliquium solis. [Elucidation IV.]

 Chap. XLVI.--It is Proved from the Prophets that the Passion and Death of
 Christ Had Been Foretold.

 And the prophets had predicted that all these things would thus come to
 pass. Isaiah thus speaks: [1534] "I am not rebellious, nor do I oppose:
 I gave my back to the scourge, and my cheeks to the hand: I turned not
 away my face from the foulness of spitting." The same prophet says
 respecting His silence: [1535] "I was brought as a sheep to the
 slaughter, and as a lamb before its shearers is dumb, so He opened not
 His mouth." David also, in the xxxivth Psalm: [1536] "The abjects were
 gathered together against me, and they knew me not: they were
 scattered, yet felt no remorse: they tempted me, and gnashed upon me
 with their teeth." The same also says respecting food and drink in the
 lxviiith Psalm: [1537] "They gave me also gall for my meat, and in my
 thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." Also respecting the cross of
 Christ: [1538] "And they pierced my hands and my feet, they numbered
 all my bones: they themselves have looked and stared upon me; they
 parted my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture." Moses
 also says in Deuteronomy: [1539] " And thy life shall hang in doubt
 before thine eyes, and thou shall fear day and night, and shall have
 none assurance of thy life." Also in Numbers: [1540] "God is not in
 doubt as a man, nor does He suffer threats as the son of man." Also
 Zechariah says: [1541] "And they shall look on me whom they pierced."
 Amos [1542] thus speaks of the obscuring of the sun: "In that day,
 saith the Lord, the sun shall go down at noon, and the clear day shall
 be dark; and I will turn your feasts into mourning, and your songs into
 lamentation." Jeremiah [1543] also speaks of the city of Jerusalem, in
 which He suffered: "Her sun is gone down while it was yet day; she hath
 been confounded and reviled, and the residue of them will I deliver to
 the sword." Nor were these things spoken in vain. For after a short
 time the Emperor Vespasian subdued the Jews, and laid waste their lands
 with the sword and fire, besieged and reduced them by famine, overthrew
 Jerusalem, led the captives in triumph, and prohibited the others who
 were left from ever returning to their native land. And these things
 were done by God on account of that crucifixion of Christ, as He before
 declared this to Solomon in their Scriptures, saying, [1544] "And
 Israel shall be for perdition and a reproach [1545] to the people, and
 this house shall be desolate; and every one that shall pass by shall be
 astonished, and shall say, Why hath God done these evils to this land,
 and to this house? And they shall say, Because they forsook the Lord
 their God, and persecuted their King, who was dearly beloved by God,
 and crucified Him with great degradation, therefore hath God brought
 upon them these evils." For what would they not deserve who put to
 death their Lord, who had come for their salvation?

 [1534] Isa. l. 5.

 [1535] Isa. liii. 7.

 [1536] Ps. xxxv. 15, 16. See Instit., iv. 18.

 [1537] Ps. lxix. 21.

 [1538] Ps. xxii. 16-18.

 [1539] Deut. xxviii. 66.

 [1540] Num. xxiii. 19.

 [1541] Zech. xii. 10.

 [1542] Amos viii. 9, 10.

 [1543] Jer. xv. 9.

 [1544] 1 Kings ix. 7-9.

 [1545] See Instit., iv. 18, [144]p. 121, supra.

 Chap. XLVII.--Of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, the Sending of the
 Apostles, and the Ascension of the Saviour into Heaven.

 After these things they took His body down from the cross, and buried
 it in a tomb. But on the third day, before daybreak, there was an
 earthquake, and the stone with which they had closed the sepulchre was
 removed, and He arose. But nothing was found in the sepulchre except
 the clothes in which the body had been wrapped. [1546] But that He
 would rise again on the third day, the prophets had long ago foretold.
 David, in the xvth Psalm: [1547] "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell,
 neither wilt Thou suffer Thine Holy One to see corruption." Likewise
 Hosea: [1548] This my Son is wise, therefore He shall not stay long in
 the anguish of His sons: and I will ransom Him from the hand of the
 grave. Where is thy judgment, O death, where is thy sting? "The same
 again says: [1549] "After two days He will revive us on the third day."

 Therefore, after His resurrection He went into Galilee, and again
 assembled His disciples, who had fled through fear; and having given
 them commands which He wished to be observed, and having arranged for
 the preaching of the Gospel throughout the whole world, He breathed
 into them the Holy Spirit, [1550] and gave them the power of working
 miracles, that they might act for the welfare of men as well by deeds
 as words; and then at length, on the fortieth day, He returned to His
 Father, being carried up into a cloud. The prophet Daniel [1551] had
 long before shown this, saying, "I saw in the night vision, and,
 behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and
 came to the Ancient of days; and they who stood beside Him brought Him
 near before Him. And there was given Him a kingdom, and glory, and
 dominion, and all people, tribes, and languages shall serve Him; and
 His power is an everlasting one, which shall not pass away, and His
 kingdom that which shall not be destroyed." Also David in the cixth
 Psalm: [1552] "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou at my right hand,
 until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool."

 [1546] Exuviæ corporis.

 [1547] Ps. xvi. 10.

 [1548] Hos. xiii. 13, Septuagint version.

 [1549] Hos. vi. 2.

 [1550] [Here is an incidental token of the orthodoxy of our Christian
 philosopher as to the Third Person. He is deficient, however, in
 practically enforcing the Spirit's work and our need of His grace. This
 may have been from a worthy motive, and according to discipline.]

 [1551] Dan. vii. 13.

 [1552] Ps. cx. 1.

 Chap. XLVIII.--Of the Disinheriting of the Jews, and the Adoption of the
 Gentiles.

 Since, therefore, He sits at the right hand of God, about to tread down
 His enemies, who tortured Him, when He shall come to judge the world,
 it is evident that no hope remains to the Jews, unless, turning
 themselves to repentance, and being cleansed from the blood with which
 they polluted themselves, they shall begin to hope in Him whom they
 denied. [1553] Therefore Esdras thus speaks: [1554] "This passover is
 our Saviour and our refuge. Consider and let it come into your heart,
 that we have to abase Him in a figure: and after these things we have
 hoped [1555] in Him."

 Now that the Jews were disinherited, because they rejected Christ, and
 that we, who are of the Gentiles, were adopted into their place, is
 proved by the Scriptures. Jeremiah [1556] thus speaks: "I have forsaken
 mine house, I have given mine heritage into the hands of her enemies.
 Mine heritage is become unto me as a lion in the forest; it hath given
 forth its voice against me: therefore have I hated it." Also Malachi:
 [1557] "I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord, neither will I
 accept an offering at your hand. For from the rising of the sun even
 unto the going down thereof, my name shall be great among the
 Gentiles." Isaiah also thus speaks: [1558] "I come to gather all
 nations and tongues: and they shall come and see my glory." The same
 says in another place, [1559] speaking in the person of the Father to
 the Son: "I the Lord have called Thee in righteousness, and will hold
 Thine hand, and will keep Thee, and give Thee for a covenant of my
 people, for a light of the Gentiles; to open the eyes of the blind, to
 bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness
 out of the prison-house."

 [1553] Negaverunt; others read "necaverunt," killed.

 [1554] See Instit., iv. 18, [145]p. 121, supra.

 [1555] Speravimus; others "sperabimus."

 [1556] Jer. xii. 7, 8.

 [1557] Mal. i. 10, 11.

 [1558] Isa. lxvi. 18.

 [1559] Isa. xlii. 6, 7.

 Chap. XLIX.--That God is One Only.

 If therefore the Jews have been rejected by God, as the faith due to
 the sacred writings shows, and the Gentiles, as we see, brought in, and
 freed from the darkness of this present life and from the chains of
 demons, it follows that no other hope is proposed to man, unless he
 shall follow true religion and true wisdom, which is in Christ, and he
 who is ignorant of Him is always estranged from the truth and from God.
 Nor let the Jews, or philosophers, flatter themselves respecting the
 Supreme God. He who has not acknowledged the Son has been unable to
 acknowledge the Father. [1560] This is wisdom, and this is the mystery
 of the Supreme God. God willed that He should be acknowledged and
 worshipped through Him. [1561] On this account He sent the prophets
 beforehand to announce His coming, that when the things which had been
 foretold were fulfilled in Him, then He might be believed by men to be
 both the Son of God and God.

 Nor, however, must the opinion be entertained that there are two Gods,
 for the Father and the Son are one. For since the Father loves the Son,
 and gives all things to Him, and the Son faithfully obeys the Father,
 and wills nothing except that which the Father does, it is plain that
 so close a relationship cannot be separated, so that they should be
 said to be two in whom there is but one substance, and will, and faith.
 Therefore the Son is through the Father, and the Father through the
 Son. One honour is to be given to both, as to one God, and is to be so
 divided through the worship of the two, that the division itself may be
 bound by an inseparable bond of union. He will leave nothing to
 himself, who separates either the Father from the Son, or the Son from
 the Father. [1562]

 [1560] [1 John iv. 15.]

 [1561] [John xiv. 6, 13, and v. 23.]

 [1562] 1 John i. 22, 23.]

 Chap. L.--Why God Assumed a Mortal Body, and Suffered Death.

 It remains to answer those also, who deem that it was unbecoming and
 unreasonable that God should be clothed with a mortal body; that He
 should be in subjection to men; that He should endure insults; that He
 should even suffer tortures and death. I will speak my sentiments, and
 I will sum up, as I shall be able, an immense subject in few words. He
 who teaches anything, ought, as I think, himself to practice what he
 teaches, that he may compel men to obey. For if he shall not practice
 them, he will detract from the faith due to his precepts. Therefore
 there is need of examples, that the precepts which are given may have
 firmness, and if any one shall prove contumacious, and shall say that
 they cannot be carried out in practice, the instructor may refute him
 by actual fact. [1563] Therefore a system of teaching cannot be
 perfect, when it is delivered by words only; but it then becomes
 perfect, when it is completed by deeds.

 Since therefore Christ was sent to men as a teacher of virtue, for the
 perfection of His teaching it was plainly befitting that He should act
 as well as teach. But if He had not assumed a human body, He would not
 have been able to practice what He taught,--that is, not to be angry,
 not to desire riches, not to be inflamed with lust, not to fear pain,
 to despise death. These things are plainly virtues, but they cannot be
 done without flesh. Therefore He assumed a body on this account, that,
 since He taught that the desires of the flesh must be overcome, He
 might in person first practice it, that no one might allege the frailty
 of the flesh as an excuse.

 [1563] Præsenti opere convincat.

 Chap. LI.--Of the Death of Christ on the Cross.

 I will now speak of the mystery of the cross, lest any one should
 happen to say, If death must be endured by Him, it should have been not
 one that was manifestly infamous and dishonourable, but one which had
 some honour. I know, indeed, that many, while they dislike the name of
 the cross, shrink from the truth, though there is in it great
 reasonableness and power. For since He was sent for this purpose, that
 He might open to the lowest men the way to salvation, He made Himself
 humble that He might free them. Therefore He underwent that kind of
 death which is usually inflicted on the humble, that an opportunity of
 imitation might be given to all. Moreover, since He was about to rise
 again, it was not allowable that His body should be in any way
 mutilated, or a bone broken, which happens to those who are beheaded.
 Therefore the cross was preferred, which reserved the body with the
 bones uninjured for the resurrection.

 To these grounds it was also added, that having undertaken to suffer
 and to die, it was befitting that He should be lifted up. Thus the
 cross exalted Him both in fact and in emblem, [1564] so that His
 majesty and power became known to all, together with His passion. For
 in that He extended His hands on the cross, He plainly stretched out
 His wings towards the east and the west, under which all nations from
 either side of the world might assemble and repose. But of what great
 weight this sign is, and what power it has, is evident, since all the
 host of demons is expelled and put to flight by this sign. And as He
 Himself before His passion put to confusion demons by His word and
 command, so now, by the name and sign of the same passion, unclean
 spirits, having insinuated themselves into the bodies of men, are
 driven out, when racked and tormented, and confessing themselves to be
 demons, they yield themselves to God, who harasses them. What therefore
 can the Greeks expect from their superstitions and with their wisdom,
 when they see that their gods, whom they do not deny to be demons also,
 are subdued by men through the cross?

 [1564] Significatione.

 Chap. LII.--The Hope of the Salvation of Men Consists in the Knowledge of
 the True God, and of the Hatred of the Heathens Against the Christians.

 There is therefore but one hope of life for men, one harbour of safety,
 one refuge of liberty, if, laying aside the errors by which they were
 held, they open the eyes of their mind and recognise God, in whom alone
 is the abode of truth; despise earthly things, and those made from the
 ground esteem as nothing philosophy, which is foolishness with God; and
 having undertaken true wisdom, that is, religion, become heirs of
 immortality. But indeed they are not so much opposed to the truth as to
 their own safety; and when they hear these things, they abominate them
 as some inexpiable wickedness. But they do not even endure [1565] to
 hear: they think that their ears are polluted with impiety [1566] if
 they hear; nor do they now refrain from reproaches, but assail them
 with the most insulting words; and also, if they have obtained the
 power, persecute them as public enemies, yea, even as worse than
 enemies; for enemies, when they have been vanquished, are punished with
 death or slavery; nor is there any torturing after the laying down of
 arms, although those deserved to suffer all things who wished so to
 act, that piety might have place among swords.

 Cruelty, combined with innocence, is unheard of, nor is it worthy of
 the condition of victorious enemies. What is the so powerful cause of
 this fury? Doubtless, because they cannot contend on the ground of
 reason, they urge forward their cause by means of violence; and, with
 the subject not understood, they condemn those as most pernicious
 persons who have declined to make a stand respecting the fact of their
 innocence. Nor do they deem it sufficient that those whom they
 unreasonably hate should die by a speedy and simple death; but they
 lacerate them with refined tortures, that they may satisfy their
 hatred, which is not produced by any fault, but by the truth, which is
 hateful to those who live wickedly, because they take it ill that there
 are some whom their deeds cannot please. They desire in every way to
 destroy these, that they may be able to sin without restraint in the
 absence of any witness.

 [1565] Ne audire quidem patiuntur; others read "patienter."

 [1566] Sacrilegio.

 Chap. LIII.--The Reasons of the Hatred Against the Christians are Examined
 and Refuted.

 But they say that they do these things for the defence of their gods.
 In the first place, if they are gods, and have any power and influence,
 they have no need of the defence and protection of men, but they
 manifestly defend themselves. Or how is man able to hope for aid from
 them, if they are unable to average even their own injuries? Therefore
 it is a vain and foolish thing to wish to be avengers of the gods,
 except that their distrust is more apparent from this. For he who
 undertakes the protection of the god whom he worships, admits the
 worthlessness of that god; but if he worships him on this account,
 because he thinks him powerful, he ought not to wish to defend him, by
 whom he himself ought to be defended. We therefore act rightly. For
 when those defenders of false gods, who are rebellious against the true
 God, persecute His name in us, we resist not either in deed or in word,
 but with meekness, and silence, and patience, we endure whatever
 cruelty is able to contrive against us. For we have confidence in God,
 from whom we expect that retribution will hereafter follow. Nor is this
 confidence ungrounded, since we have in some cases heard, and in other
 cases seen, the miserable ends of all those who have dared to commit
 this crime. Nor has any one had it in his power to insult God with
 impunity; but he who has been unwilling to learn by word has learned by
 his own punishment who is the true God.

 I should wish to know, when they compel men to sacrifice against their
 will, what reasoning they have with themselves, or to whom they make
 that offering. If it is made to the gods, that is not worship, nor an
 acceptable sacrifice, which is made by those who are displeasing to
 them, which is extorted by injury, which is enforced by pain. But if it
 is done to those whom they compel, it is plainly not a benefit, which
 any one would not receive, he even prefers rather to die. If it is a
 good to which you call me, why do you invite me with evil? why with
 blows, and not with words? why not by argument, but by bodily tortures?
 Whence it is manifest that that is an evil, to which you do not allure
 me willing, but drag me refusing. What folly is it to wish to consult
 the good of any one against his will! If any one, under the pressure of
 evils, attempts to have recourse to death, can you, if you either wrest
 the sword from his hand, or cut the halter, or drag him away from the
 precipice, or pour out the poison, boast yourself as the preserver of
 the man, when he, whom you think that you have preserved, does not
 thank you, and thinks that you have acted ill towards him, in averting
 from him the death which be desired, and in not permitting him to reach
 the end and rest from his labours? For a benefit ought not to be
 weighed according to the quality of the action, but according to the
 feelings of him who receives it. Why should you reckon as a benefit
 that which is an injury to me? Do you wish me to worship your gods,
 which I consider deadly to myself? If it is a good, I do not envy it.
 Enjoy your good by yourself. There is no reason why you should wish to
 succour my error, which I have undertaken by my judgment and
 inclination. If it is evil, why do you drag me to a participation in
 evil? Use your own fortune. I prefer to die in the practice of that
 which is good, than to live in evil.

 Chap. LIV.--Of the Freedom of Religion in the Worship of God.

 These things may indeed be said with justice. But who will hear, when
 men of furious and unbridled spirit think that their authority is
 diminished if there is any freedom in the affairs of men? But it is
 religion alone in which freedom has placed its dwelling. For it is a
 matter which is voluntary above all others, nor can necessity be
 imposed upon any, so as to worship that which he does not wish to
 worship. [1567] Some one may perhaps pretend, he cannot wish it. In
 short, some, through fear of torments, or overcome by tortures, have
 assented to detestable sacrifices: they never do that voluntarily which
 they did from necessity; but when the opportunity is again given to
 them, and liberty restored, they again betake themselves to God, and
 appease Him with prayers and tears, repenting not of the will, which
 they had not, but of the necessity which they endured; and pardon is
 not denied to those who make satisfaction. What then does he accomplish
 who pollutes the body, since he cannot change the will?

 But, in fact, men of weak understanding, if they have induced any man
 of spirit [1568] to sacrifice to their gods, with incredible alacrity
 insolently exult, and rejoice, as though they had sent an enemy under
 the yoke. But if any one, neither frightened by threats nor by
 tortures, shall have chosen to prefer his faith to his life, cruelty
 puts forth all its ingenuity against him, plans dreadful and
 intolerable things; and because they know that death for the cause of
 God is glorious, and that this is a victory on our side, if, having
 overcome the torturers, we lay down our life in behalf of the faith and
 religion, they also themselves strive to conquer us. They do not put us
 to death, but they search out new and unheard-of tortures, that the
 frailty of the flesh may yield to pains, and if it does not yield, they
 put off further punishment, and apply diligent care to the wounds, that
 while the scars are yet fresh, a repetition of the torture may inflict
 more pain; and while they practice this torture [1569] upon the
 innocent, they evidently consider themselves pious, and just, and
 religious (for they are delighted with such sacrifices to their gods),
 but they term the others impious and desperate. What perversity is
 this, that he who is punished, though innocent, should be called
 desperate and impious, and that the torturer, on the other hand, should
 be called just and pious!

 [1567] [Religious liberty maintained and introduced by the Gospel.
 Corrupted Christianity only is responsible for the reverse.]

 [1568] Fortem; some read "forte," by chance.

 [1569] Carnificinam.

 Chap. LV.--The Heathens Charge Justice with Impiety in Following God.

 But they say that those are rightly and deservedly punished, who
 dislike the public rites of religion handed down to them by their
 ancestors. What if those ancestors were foolish in undertaking vain
 religious rites, as we have shown before, shall we be prohibited from
 following true and better things? Why do we deprive ourselves of
 liberty, and become enslaved to the errors of others, as though bound
 [1570] to them? Let it be permitted us to be wise, let it be permitted
 us to inquire into the truth. But, however, if it pleases them to
 defend the folly [1571] of their ancestors, why are the Egyptians
 suffered to escape, who worship cattle and beasts of every kind as
 deities? Why are the gods themselves made the subjects of comic [1572]
 representations? and why is he honoured who derides them most wittily?
 Why are philosophers attended to, who either say that there are no
 gods, or that, if there are any, they take no interest in, and do not
 regard the affairs of men, or argue that there is no providence at all,
 which rules the world?

 But they alone of all are judged impious who follow God and the truth.
 And since this is at once justice, and wisdom, they lay to its charge
 either impiety or folly, and do not perceive what it is which deceives
 them, when they call evil good, and good evil. Many indeed of the
 philosophers, and especially Plato and Aristotle, spoke many things
 about justice, asserting and extolling that virtue with the greatest
 praise, because it gives to each its due, because it maintains equity
 in all things; and whereas the other virtues are as it were silent, and
 shut up within, that it is justice alone which is neither concerned
 [1573] for itself only, nor hidden, but altogether shows itself [1574]
 abroad, and is ready for conferring a benefit, so as to assist as many
 as possible: as though in truth justice ought to be in judges only, and
 those placed in any post of authority, and not in all men.

 And yet there is no one of men, not even of the lowest and of beggars,
 who is not capable of justice. But because they did not know what it
 was, from what source it proceeded, and what was its mode of operation,
 they assigned to a few only that highest virtue, that is, the common
 good of all, and said that it aimed at [1575] no advantages peculiar to
 itself, but only the interests of others. And not without reason was
 Carneades raised up, a man of the greatest talent and penetration, to
 refute their speech, and overthrow the justice, which had no firm
 foundation; not because he thought that justice was to be blamed, but
 that he might show that its defenders brought forward no firm or
 certain argument respecting justice.

 [1570] Addicti.

 [1571] Stultitiam. This word is wanting in the mss., but this or some
 such word is necessary to complete the sense.

 [1572] Mimi; wanting in some editions.

 [1573] Sibi tantum conciliata sit.

 [1574] Foras tota promineat.

 [1575] Aucupari.

 Chap. LVI.--Of Justice, Which is the Worship of the True God.

 For if justice is the worship of the true God (for what is so just with
 respect to equity, so pious with respect to honour, so necessary with
 respect to safety, as to acknowledge God as a parent, to reverence Him
 as Lord, and to obey His law or precepts?), it follows that the
 philosophers were ignorant of justice, for they neither acknowledged
 God Himself, nor observed His worship and law; and on this account they
 might have been refuted by Carneades, whose disputation was to this
 effect, that there is no natural justice, and therefore that all
 animals defended their own interests by the guidance of nature itself,
 and therefore that justice, if it promotes the advantages of others and
 neglects its own, is to be called foolishness. But if all people who
 are possessed of power, and the Romans themselves, who are masters of
 the whole world, were willing to follow justice, and to restore to
 every one his property which they have seized by force and arms, they
 will return to cottages and a condition of want. And if they did this,
 they might indeed be just, but they must of necessity be considered
 foolish, who proceed to injure themselves for the advantage of others.
 Then, if any one should find a man who was through a mistake offering
 for sale gold as mountain-brass, or silver as lead, and necessity
 should compel him to buy it, will he conceal his knowledge and buy it
 for a small sum, or will he rather inform the seller of its value? If
 he shall inform him, he will manifestly be called just; but he will
 also be foolish, for conferring an advantage upon another, and injuring
 himself. But it is easy to judge in a case of injury. What if he shall
 incur danger of his life, so that it shall be necessary for him either
 to kill another or to die, what will he do? It may happen that, having
 suffered shipwreck, he may find some feeble person clinging to a plank;
 or, his army having been defeated, in his flight he may find a wounded
 man on horseback: will he thrust the one from the plank, the other from
 his horse, that he himself may be able to escape? If he shall wish to
 be just, he will not do it; but he will also be judged foolish, who in
 sparing the life of another shall lose his own. If he shall do it, he
 will indeed appear wise, because he will provide for his own interests;
 but he will also be wicked, because he will commit a wrong.

 Chap. LVII.--Of Wisdom and Foolishness.

 These things indeed are said with acuteness; but we are able very
 readily to reply to them. For the imitation of names causes it thus to
 appear. For justice bears a resemblance to foolishness, and yet it is
 not foolishness; and at the same time malice bears a resemblance to
 wisdom, and yet it is not wisdom. But as that malice is intelligent and
 shrewd in preserving its own interests, it is not wisdom, but cunning
 and craftiness; so likewise justice ought not to be called foolishness,
 but innocence, because the just man must be wise, and the foolish man
 unjust. For neither reason nor nature itself permits that he who is
 just should not be wise, since it is plain that the just man does
 nothing except that which is right and good, and always avoids that
 which is perverted [1576] and evil. But who will be able to distinguish
 between good and evil, depravity and rectitude, but he who shall be
 wise? But the fool acts badly, because he is ignorant of what is good
 and evil. Therefore he does wrong, because he is unable to distinguish
 between things which are perverted and those which are right. Therefore
 justice cannot be befitting to the foolish man, nor wisdom to the
 unjust. He is not then a foolish person who has not thrust off a
 shipwrecked man from a plank, nor a wounded man from his horse, because
 he has abstained from injury, which is a sin; and it is the part of the
 wise man to avoid sin.

 But that he should appear foolish at first sight is caused by this,
 that they suppose the soul to be extinguished together with the body;
 and for this reason they refer all advantage to this life. For if there
 is no existence after death, it is plain that he acts foolishly who
 spares the life of another to his own loss, or who consults the gain of
 another more than his own. If death destroys the soul, we must use our
 endeavours to live for a longer time, and more to our own advantage;
 but if there remains after death a life of immortality and blessedness,
 the just and wise man will certainly despise this corporeal existence,
 with all earthly goods, because he will know what kind of a reward he
 is about to receive from God. Therefore let us maintain innocency, let
 us maintain justice, let us undergo the appearance of foolishness, that
 we may be able to maintain true wisdom. And if it appears to men
 senseless and foolish to prefer torture and death rather than to
 sacrifice to gods, and to escape without harm, let us however strive to
 exhibit faithfulness towards God by all virtue and by all patience. Let
 not death terrify us, nor pain subdue us, so as to prevent the vigour
 of our mind and constancy from being preserved unshaken. Let them call
 us foolish, whilst they themselves are most foolish, and blind and
 dull, and like sheep; who do not understand that it is a deadly thing
 to leave the living God, and prostrate themselves in the adoration of
 earthly objects; who do not know that eternal punishment awaits those
 who have worshipped senseless images; and that those who have neither
 refused tortures nor death for the worship and honour of the true God
 will obtain eternal life. This is the highest faith; this is true
 wisdom; this is perfect justice. It matters nothing to us what fools
 may judge, what trifling men may think. We ought to await the judgment
 of God, that we may hereafter judge those who have passed judgment on
 us.

 [1576] Pravum.

 Chap. LVIII.--Of the True Worship of God, and Sacrifice.

 I have spoken of justice, what was its nature. It follows that I show
 what is true sacrifice to God, what is the most just manner of
 worshipping Him, lest any one should think that victims, or odours, or
 precious gifts, are desired by God, who, if He is not subject to
 hunger, and thirst, and cold, and desire of all earthly things, does
 not therefore make use of all these things which are presented in
 temples and to gods of earth; but as corporeal offerings are necessary
 for corporeal beings, so manifestly an incorporeal sacrifice is
 necessary for an incorporeal being. But God has no need of those things
 which He has given to man for his use, since all the earth is under His
 power: He needs not a temple, since the world is His dwelling; He needs
 not an image, since He is incomprehensible both to the eyes and to the
 mind; He needs not earthly lights, for He was able to kindle the light
 of the sun, with the other stars, for the use of man. What then does
 God require from man but worship of the mind, which is pure and holy?
 For those things which are made by the hands, or are outside of man,
 are senseless, frail, and displeasing. This is true sacrifice, which is
 brought forth not from the chest but from the heart; not that which is
 offered by the hand, but by the mind. This is the acceptable victim,
 which the mind sacrifices of itself. For what do victims bestow? What
 does incense? What do garments? What does silver? What gold? What
 precious stones,--if there is not a pure mind on the part of the
 worshipper? Therefore it is justice only which God requires. In this is
 sacrifice; in this the worship of God, respecting which I must now
 speak, and show in what works justice must necessarily be contained.

 Chap. LIX.--Of the Ways of Life, and the First Times of the World.

 That there are two ways [1577] of human life was unknown neither to
 philosophers nor to poets, but both introduced them in a different
 manner. The philosophers wished the one to be the way of industry, the
 other of idleness; but in this respect they were less correct in their
 statements, that they referred them to the advantages of this life
 only. The poets spoke better who said that one of them was the way of
 the just, the other of the unjust; but they err in this, that they say
 that they are not in this life, but in the shades below. We manifestly
 speak more correctly, who say that the one is the way of life, the
 other that of death. And here, however, we say that there are two ways;
 but the one on the right hand, in which the just walk, does not lead to
 Elysium, but to heaven, for they become immortal; the other on the left
 leads to Tartarus, [1578] for the unjust are sentenced to eternal
 tortures. Therefore the way of justice, which leads to life, is to be
 held by us. Now the first duty of justice is to acknowledge God as a
 parent, and to fear Him as a master, to love Him as a father. For the
 same Being who begat us, who animated us with vital breath, who
 nourishes and preserves us, has over us, not only as a father but also
 as a master, authority to correct us, and the power of life and death;
 wherefore twofold honour is due to Him from man, that is, love combined
 with fear. The second duty of justice is to acknowledge man as a
 brother. For if the same God made us, and produced all men on equal
 terms to justice and eternal life, it is manifest that we are united by
 the relationship of brotherhood; and he who does not acknowledge this
 is unjust. But the origin of this evil, by which the mutual society of
 men, by which the bond of relationship has been torn asunder, arises
 from ignorance of the true God. For he who is ignorant of that fountain
 of bounty can by no means be good. Hence it is that, from the time when
 a multitude of gods began to be consecrated and worshipped by men,
 justice, as the poets relate, being put to flight, every compact was
 destroyed, the fellowship of human justice was destroyed. Then every
 one, consulting his own interest, reckoned might to be right, injured
 another, attacked by frauds, deceived [1579] by treachery, increased
 his own advantages by the inconvenience of others, did not spare
 relatives, or children, or parents, prepared poisoned cups for the
 destruction of men, beset the ways with the sword, infested the seas,
 gave the rein to his lust, wherever passion led him,--in short,
 esteemed nothing sacred which his dreadful desire did not violate. When
 these things were done, then men instituted laws for themselves to
 promote the public advantage, that they might meanwhile protect
 themselves from injuries. But the fear of laws did not suppress crimes,
 but it checked licentiousness. For laws were able to punish offences,
 they were unable to punish the conscience. Therefore the things which
 before were done openly began to be done secretly. Justice also was
 evaded by stealth, since they who themselves presided over the
 administration of the laws, corrupted by, gifts and rewards, made a
 traffic of their sentences, either to the escape [1580] of the evil or
 to the destruction of the good. To these things were added dissensions,
 and wars, and mutual depredations; and the laws being crushed, the
 power of acting with violence was assumed without restraint.

 [1577] [The Duæ Viæ A feature in the primitive catechizing. See Epistle
 of Barnabas, vol. i. [146]p. 148; also this volume, infra.]

 [1578] [See vol. v. p. 153, [147]note 1, and pp. [148]161, [149]174,
 this series.]

 [1579] Circumscribere.

 [1580] In remissionem.

 Chap. LX.--Of the Duties of Justice.

 When the affairs of men were in this condition, God pitied us, revealed
 and displayed Himself to us, that in Himself we might learn religion,
 faith, purity, and mercy; that having laid aside the error of our
 former life, together with God Himself we might know ourselves, whom
 impiety had disunited from Him, and we might choose [1581] the divine
 law, which unites human affairs with heavenly, the Lord Himself
 delivering it to us; by which law all the errors with which we have
 been ensnared, together with vain and impious superstitions, might be
 taken away. What we owe to man, therefore, is prescribed by that same
 divine law which teaches that whatever you render to man is rendered to
 God. But the root of justice, and the entire foundation of equity, is
 that you should not do that which you would be unwilling to suffer, but
 should measure the feelings of another by your own. If it is an
 unpleasant thing to bear an injury, and he who has done it appears
 unjust, transfer to the person of another that which you feel
 respecting yourself, and to your own person that which you judge
 respecting another, and you will understand that you act as unjustly if
 you injure another as another would if he should injure you. If we
 consider these things, we shall maintain innocence, in which the first
 step of justice is, as it were, contained. For the first thing is, not
 to injure; the next is, to be of service. And as in uncultivated lands,
 before you begin to sow, the fields must be cleansed by tearing up the
 thorns and cutting off all the roots of trunks, so vices must first be
 thrust out from our souls, and then at length virtues must be
 implanted, from which the fruits of immortality, being engendered by
 the word of God, may spring up.

 [1581] Sumere, "to take by selection and choice."

 Chap. LXI.--Of the Passions.

 There are three passions, or, so to speak, three furies, which excite
 such great perturbations in the souls of men, and sometimes compel them
 to offend in such a manner, as to permit them to have regard neither
 for their reputation nor for their personal safety: these are anger,
 which desires vengeance; love of gain, which longs for riches; lust,
 which seeks for pleasures. We must above all things resist these vices:
 these trunks must be rooted up, that virtues may be implanted. The
 Stoics are of opinion that these passions must be cut off; the
 Peripatetics think that they must be restrained. Neither of them judge
 rightly, because they cannot entirely be taken away, since they are
 implanted by nature, and have a sure and great influence; nor can they
 be diminished, since, if they are evil, we ought to be without them,
 even though restrained and used with moderation; if they are good, we
 ought to use them in their completeness. [1582] But we say that they
 ought not to be taken away nor lessened. For they are not evil of
 themselves, since God has reasonably implanted them in us; but inasmuch
 as they are plainly good by nature,--for they are given us for the
 protection of life,--they become evil by their evil use. And as
 bravery, if you fight in defence of your country, is a good, if against
 your country, is an evil, so the passions, if you employ them to good
 purposes, will be virtues, if to evil uses, they will be called vices.
 Anger therefore has been given by God for the restraining of offences,
 that is, for controlling the discipline of subjects, that fear may
 suppress licentiousness and restrain audacity. But they who are
 ignorant of its limits are angry with their equals, or even with their
 superiors. Hence they rush to deeds of cruelty, hence they rise to
 slaughters, hence to wars. The love of gain also has been given that we
 may desire and seek for the necessaries of life. But they who are
 unacquainted with its boundaries strive insatiably to heap up riches.
 Hence poisoning, hence defraudings, [1583] hence false wills, hence all
 kinds of frauds have burst forth. Moreover, the passion of lust is
 implanted and innate in us for the procreation of children; but they
 who do not fix its limits in the mind use it for pleasure only. Thence
 arise unlawful loves, thence adulteries and debaucheries, thence all
 kinds of corruption. These passions, therefore, must be kept within
 their boundaries and directed into their right course, in which, even
 though they should be vehement, they cannot incur blame.

 [1582] Integris abutendum est. Lactantius sometimes uses "abuti" for
 "uti."

 [1583] Circumscriptiones.

 Chap. LXII.--Of Restraining the Pleasures of the Senses.

 Anger is to be restrained when we suffer an injury, that the evil may
 be suppressed which is imminent from a contest, and that we may retain
 two of the greatest virtues, harmlessness and patience. Let the desire
 of gain be broken when we have that which is enough. For what madness
 is it to labour in heaping up those things which must pass to others,
 either by robbery, or theft, or by proscription, or by death? Let lust
 not go beyond the marriage-bed, but be subservient to the procreation
 of children. For a too great eagerness for pleasure both produces
 danger and generates disgrace, and that which is especially to be
 avoided, leads to eternal death. Nothing is so hateful to God as an
 unchaste mind and an impure soul. Nor let any one think that he must
 abstain from this pleasure only, quæ capitur ex foeminei corporis
 copulatione, but also from the other pleasures which arise from the
 rest of the senses, because they also are of themselves vicious, and it
 is the part of the same virtue to despise them. The pleasure of the
 eyes is derived from the beauty of objects, that of the ears from
 harmonious and pleasant sounds, that of the nostrils from pleasant
 odour, that of taste from sweet food,--all of which virtue ought
 strongly to resist, lest, ensnared by these attractions, the soul
 should be depressed from heavenly to earthly things, from things
 eternal to things temporal, from life immortal to perpetual punishment.
 In pleasures of the taste and smell there is this danger, that they are
 able to draw us to luxury. For he who shall be given up to these
 things, either will have no property, or, if he shall have any, he will
 expend it, and afterwards live a life to be abominated. But he who is
 carried away by hearing (to say nothing respecting songs, [1584] which
 often so charm the inmost senses that they even disturb with madness a
 settled state of the mind by certain elaborately composed speeches and
 harmonious poems, or skilful disputations) is easily led aside to
 impious worship. Hence it is that they who are either themselves
 eloquent, or prefer to read eloquent writings, do not readily believe
 the sacred writings, because they appear unpolished; they do not seek
 things that are true, but things that are pleasant; nay, to them those
 things appear to be most true which soothe the ears. Thus they reject
 the truth, while they are captivated by the sweetness of the discourse.
 But the pleasure which has reference to the sight is manifold. For that
 which is derived from the beauty of precious objects excites avarice,
 which ought to be far removed from a wise and just man; but that which
 is received from the appearance of woman hurries a man to another
 pleasure, of which we have already spoken above.

 [1584] [See vol. ii. p. 79, notes [150]1 and [151]2.]

 Chap. LXIII.--That Shows are Most Powerful to Corrupt the Minds.

 It remains to speak of public shows, which, since they have a more
 powerful influence on the corruption of the mind, ought to be avoided
 by the wise, and to be altogether guarded against, because it is said
 that they were instituted in celebration of the honours of the gods.
 For the exhibitions of shows are festivals of Saturnus. The stage
 belongs to Father Liber; but the Circensian games are supposed to be
 dedicated to Neptunus: so that now he who takes part in these shows
 appears to have left the worship of God, and to have passed over to
 profane rites. But I prefer to speak of the matter itself rather than
 of its origin. What is so dreadful, what so foul, as the slaughter of
 man? Therefore our life is protected by the most severe laws; therefore
 wars are detestable. Yet custom finds how a man may commit homicide
 without war, and without laws; and this is a pleasure to him, that he
 has avenged guilt. But if to be present at homicide implies a
 consciousness of guilt, and the spectator is involved in the same guilt
 as the perpetrator, then in these slaughters of gladiators, he who is a
 spectator is no less sprinkled with blood than he who sheds it; nor can
 he be free from the guilt of bloodshed who wished it to be poured out,
 or appear not to have slain, who both favoured the slayer and asked a
 reward for him. What of the stage? Is it more holy,--on which comedy
 converses on the subject of debaucheries and amours, tragedy of incest
 and parricide? The immodest gestures also of players, with which they
 imitate disreputable women, teach the lusts, which they express by
 dancing. For the pantomime is a school of corruption, [1585] in which
 things which are shameful are acted by a figurative representation,
 [1586] that the things which are true may be done without shame. These
 spectacles are viewed by youths, whose dangerous age, which ought to be
 curbed and governed, is trained by these representations to vices and
 sins. The circus, in truth, is considered more innocent, but there is
 greater madness in this, since the minds of the spectators are
 transported with such great madness, that they not only break out into
 revilings, but often rise to strifes, and battles, and contentions.
 Therefore all shows are to be avoided, that we may be able to maintain
 a tranquil state of mind. We must renounce hurtful pleasures, lest,
 charmed by pestilential sweetness, we fall into the snares of death.

 [1585] Mimus corruptelarum disciplina est.

 [1586] Per imaginem.

 Chap. LXIV.--The Passions are to Be Subdued, and We Must Abstain from
 Forbidden Things.

 Let virtue alone please us, whose reward is immortal when it has
 conquered pleasure. But when the passions have been overcome and
 pleasures subdued labour in suppressing other things is easy to him who
 is a follower of God and of truth: he will never revile, who shall hope
 for a blessing from God; he will not commit perjury, lest he should
 mock God; but he will not even swear, lest at any time, either by
 necessity or through habit, he should fall into perjury. He will speak
 nothing deceitfully, nothing with dissimulation; he will not refuse
 that which he has promised, nor will he promise that which he is unable
 to perform; he will envy no one, since he is content with himself and
 with his own possessions; nor will he take away from, or wish ill to
 another, upon whom, perhaps, the benefits of God are more plenteously
 [1587] bestowed. He will not steal, nor will he covet anything at all
 belonging to another. He will not give his money to usury, for that is
 to seek after gain from the evils of others; nor, however, will he
 refuse to lend, if necessity shall compel any one to borrow. He must
 not be harsh towards a son, nor towards a slave: he must remember that
 he himself has a Father and a Master. He will so act towards these as
 he will wish that others should act towards him. He will not receive
 excessive gifts from those who have less resources than himself; for it
 is not just that the estates of the wealthy should be increased by the
 losses of the wretched.

 It is an old precept not to kill, which ought not to be taken in this
 light, as though we are commanded to abstain only from homicide, which
 is punished even by public laws. But by the intervention of this
 command, it will not be permitted us to apply peril of death by word,
 nor to put to death or expose an infant, nor to condemn one's self by a
 voluntary death. We are likewise commanded not to commit adultery; but
 by this precept we are not only prohibited from polluting the marriage
 of another, which is condemned even by the common law of nations, but
 even to abstain from those who prostitute their persons. For the law of
 God is above all laws; it forbids even those things which are esteemed
 lawful, that it may fulfil justice. It is a part of the same law not to
 utter false witness, and this also itself has a wider meaning. For if
 false witness by falsehood is injurious to him against whom it is
 spoken, and deceives him in whose presence it is spoken, we must
 therefore never speak falsely, because falsehood always deceives or
 injures. Therefore he is not a just man who, even without inflicting
 injury, speaks in idle discourse. Nor indeed is it lawful for him to
 flatter, for flattery is pernicious and deceitful; but he will
 everywhere guard the truth. And although this may for the present be
 unpleasant, nevertheless, when its advantage and usefulness shall
 appear, it will not produce hatred, as the poet says, [1588] but
 gratitude.

 [1587] Proniora sunt.

 [1588] Terent., And., i. 1.

 Chap. LXV.--Precepts About Those Things Which are Commanded, and of Pity.

 I have spoken of those things which are forbidden; I will now briefly
 say what things are commanded. Closely connected with harmlessness is
 pity. For the former does not inflict injury, the latter works good;
 the former begins justice, the latter completes it. For since the
 nature of men is more feeble than that of the other animals, which God
 has provided with means of inflicting violence, and with defences for
 repelling it, He has given to us the affection of pity, that we might
 place the whole protection of our life in mutual aid. For if we are
 created by one God, and descended from one man, and are thus connected
 by the law of consanguinity, we ought on this account to love every
 man; and therefore we are bound not only to abstain from the infliction
 of injury, but not even to avenge it when inflicted on us, that there
 may be in us complete harmlessness. And on this account God commands us
 to pray always even for our enemies. Therefore we ought to be an animal
 fitted for companionship and society, that we may mutually protect
 ourselves by giving and receiving assistance. For our frailty is liable
 to many accidents and inconveniences. Expect that that which you see
 has happened to another may happen to you also. Thus you will at length
 be excited to render aid, if you shall assume the mind of him who,
 being placed in evils, implores your aid. If any one is in need of
 food, let us bestow it; if any one meets us who is naked, let us clothe
 him; if any one suffers injury from one who is more powerful than
 himself, let us rescue him. Let our house be open to strangers, or to
 those who are in need of shelter. Let our defence not be wanting to
 wards, or our protection to the defenceless. [1589] To ransom captives
 is a great work of pity, and also to visit and comfort the sick who are
 in poverty. If the helpless or strangers die, we should not permit them
 to lie unburied. These are the works, these the duties, of pity; and if
 any one undertakes these, he will offer unto God a true and acceptable
 sacrifice. This victim is more adapted for an offering to God, who is
 not appeased with the blood of a sheep, but with the piety of man, whom
 God, because He is just, follows up with His own law, and with His own
 condition. He shows mercy to him whom He sees to be merciful; He is
 inexorable to him whom He sees to be harsh to those who entreat him.
 Therefore, that we may be able to do all these things, which are
 pleasing to God, money is to be despised, and to be transferred to
 heavenly treasures, where neither thief can break through, nor rust
 corrupt, nor tyrant take away, but it may be preserved for us under the
 guardianship of God to our eternal wealth.

 [1589] Viduis.

 Chap. LXVI.--Of Faith in Religion, and of Fortitude.

 Faith also is a great part of justice; and this ought especially to be
 preserved by us, who bear the name of faith, especially in religion,
 because God is before and to be preferred to man. And if it is a
 glorious thing to undergo death in behalf of friends, of parents, and
 of children, that is, in behalf of man, and if he who has done this
 obtains lasting memory and praise, how much more so in behalf of God,
 who is able to bestow eternal life in return for temporal death?
 Therefore, when a necessity of this kind happens, that we are compelled
 to turn aside from God, and to pass over to the rites of the heathens,
 no fear, no terror should turn us aside from guarding the faith
 delivered to us. Let God be before our eyes, in our heart, by whose
 inward help we may overcome the pain of our flesh, and the torments
 applied to our body. Then let us think of nothing else but the rewards
 of an immortal life. And thus, even though our limbs should be torn in
 pieces, or burnt, we shall easily endure all things which the madness
 of tyrannical cruelty shall contrive against us. Lastly, let us strive
 to undergo death itself, not unwillingly or timidly, but willingly and
 undauntedly, as those who know what glory we are about to have in the
 presence of God, having triumphed over the world and coming to the
 things promised us; with what good things and how great blessedness we
 shall be compensated for these brief evils of punishments, and the
 injuries of this life. But if the opportunity of this glory shall be
 wanting, faith will have its reward even in peace.

 Therefore let it be observed in all the duties of life, let it be
 observed in marriage. For it is not sufficient if you abstain from
 another's bed, or from the brothel. Let him who has a wife seek nothing
 further, but, content with her alone, let him guard the mysteries of
 the marriage-bed chaste and undefiled. For he is equally an adulterer
 in the sight of God and impure, who, having thrown off the yoke,
 wantons in strange pleasure either with a free woman or a slave. But as
 a woman is bound by the bonds of chastity not to desire any other man,
 so let the husband be bound by the same law, since God has joined
 together the husband and the wife in the union of one body. On this
 account He has commanded that the wife shall not be put away unless
 convicted of adultery, and that the bond of the conjugal compact shall
 never be dissolved, unless unfaithfulness have broken it. [1590] This
 also is added for the completion of chastity, that there should be an
 absence not only of the offence, but even of the thought. For it is
 evident that the mind is polluted by the desire, though unaccomplished;
 and so that a just man ought neither to do, nor to wish to do, that
 which is unjust. Therefore the conscience must be cleansed; for God,
 who cannot be deceived, inspects it. The breast must be cleared from
 every stain, that it may be a temple of God, which is enlightened not
 by the gleam of gold or ivory, but by the brightness of faith and
 purity.

 [1590] [The law of divorce in Christian States. Sanderson, v. iv. p.
 135.]

 Chap. LXVII.--Of Repentance, the Immortality of the Soul, and of Providence.

 But it is true all these things are difficult to man, nor does the
 condition of his frailty permit that any one should be without blemish.
 Therefore the last remedy is this, that we have recourse to repentance,
 which has not the least place among the virtues, because it is a
 correction of oneself; that when we have happened to fail either in
 deed or in word, we may immediately come to a better mind, and confess
 that we have offended, and entreat pardon from God, which according to
 His mercy He will not deny, except to those who persist in their error.
 Great is the aid, great the solace of repentance. That is the healing
 of wounds and offences, that hope, that the harbour of safety; and he
 who takes away this cuts off from himself the way of salvation, because
 no one can be so just that repentance is never necessary for him. But
 we, even though there is no offence of ours, yet ought to confess to
 God, and to entreat pardon for our faults, and to give thanks even in
 evils. Let us always offer this obedience to our Lord. For humility is
 dear and lovely in the sight of God; for since He rather receives the
 sinner who confesses his fault, than the just man who is haughty, how
 much more will He receive the just man who confesses, and exalt him in
 His heavenly kingdom in proportion to his humility! These are the
 things which the worshipper of God ought to hold forth; these are the
 victims, this the sacrifice, which is acceptable; this is true worship,
 when a man offers upon the altar of God the pledges of his own mind.
 That supreme Majesty rejoices in such a worshipper as this, as it takes
 him as a son and bestows upon him the befitting reward of immortality,
 concerning which I must now speak, and refute the persuasion of those
 who think that the soul is destroyed together with the body. For
 inasmuch as they neither knew God nor were able to perceive the mystery
 of the world, they did not even comprehend the nature of man and of the
 soul. For how could they see the consequences, who did not hold the
 main point? [1591] Therefore, in denying the existence of a providence,
 they plainly denied the existence of God, who is the fountain and
 source of all things. It followed that they should either affirm that
 those things which exist have always existed, or were produced of their
 own accord, or arose from a meeting together of minute seeds.

 It cannot be said that that which exists, and is visible, always
 existed; for it cannot exist of itself without some beginning. But
 nothing can be produced of its own accord, because there is no nature
 without one who generates it. But how could there be original [1592]
 seeds, since both the seeds arise from objects, [1593] and, in their
 turn, objects from seeds? Therefore there is no seed which has not
 origin. Thus it came to pass, that when they supposed that the world
 was produced by no providence, they did not suppose that even man was
 produced by any plan. [1594] But if no plan was made use of in the
 creation of man, therefore the soul cannot be immortal. But others, on
 the other hand, thought there was but one God, and that the world was
 made by Him, and made for the sake of men, and that souls are immortal.
 But though they entertained true sentiments, nevertheless they did not
 perceive the causes, or reasons, or issues of this divine work and
 design, so as to complete the whole mystery of the truth, and to
 comprise it within some limit. But that which they were not able to do,
 because they did not hold the truth in its integrity, [1595] must be
 done by us, who know it on the announcement of God.

 [1591] Summam. Lactantius uses this word to express a compendious
 summary of divine mysteries.

 [1592] Semina principalia.

 [1593] Ex rebus.

 [1594] Aliquâ ratione.

 [1595] Perpetuo, i.e., without intermission.

 Chap. LXVIII.--Of the World, Man, and the Providence of God.

 Let us therefore consider what was the plan of making this so great and
 so immense a work. God made the world, as Plato thought, but he does
 not show why He made it. Because He is good, he says, and envying no
 one, He made the things which are good. But we see that there are both
 good and evil things in the system of nature. Some perverse person may
 stand forth, such as that atheist Theodorus was, and answer Plato: Nay,
 because He is evil, He made the things which are evil. How will he
 refute him? If God made the things which are good, whence have such
 great evils burst forth, which, for the most part, even prevail over
 those which are good? They were contained, he says, in the matter. If
 there were evil, therefore there were also good things; so that either
 God made nothing, or if He made only good things, the evil things which
 were not made are more eternal than the good things which had a
 beginning. Therefore the things which at one time began will have an
 end, and those which always existed will be permanent. Therefore evils
 are preferable. But if they cannot be preferable, they cannot indeed be
 more eternal. Therefore they either always existed, and God has been
 inactive, [1596] or they both flowed from one source. For it is more in
 accordance with reason that God made all things, than that He made
 nothing.

 Therefore, according to the sentiments of Plato, the same God is both
 good, because He made good things, and evil, because He made evil
 things. And if this cannot be so, it is evident that the world was not
 made by God on this account, because He is good. For He comprised all
 things, both good and evil; nor did He make anything for its own sake,
 but on account of something else. A house is built not for this purpose
 only, that there may be a house, but that it may receive and shelter an
 inhabitant. Likewise a ship is built not for this purpose, that it may
 appear only to be a ship, but that men may be able to sail in it.
 Vessels also are made, not only that the vessels may exist, but that
 they may receive things which are necessary for use. Thus also God must
 have made the world for some use. The Stoics say that it was made for
 the sake of men; and rightly so. For men enjoy all these good things
 which the world contains in itself. But they do not explain why men
 themselves were made, or what advantage Providence, the Maker of all
 things, has in them.

 Plato also affirms that souls are immortal, but why, or in what manner,
 or at what time, or by whose instrumentality they attain to
 immortality, or what is the nature of that great mystery, why those who
 are about to become immortal are previously born mortal, and then,
 having completed the course [1597] of their temporal life, and having
 laid aside the covering [1598] of their frail bodies, are transferred
 to that eternal blessedness,--of all this he has no comprehension.
 Finally, he did not explain the judgment of God, nor the distinction
 between the just and the unjust, but supposed that the souls which have
 plunged themselves into crimes are condemned thus far, that they may be
 reproduced in the lower animals, and thus atone for their offences,
 until they again return to the forms of men, and that this is always
 taking place, and that there is no end of this transmigration. In my
 opinion, he introduces some sport resembling a dream, in which there
 appears to be neither plan, nor government of God, nor any design.

 [1596] Otiosus.

 [1597] Decurso...spatio. The expression is borrowed from a chariot
 race.

 [1598] Corporum exuviis.

 Chap. LXIX.--That the World Was Made on Account of Man, and Man on Account
 of God.

 I will now say what is that chief [1599] point which not even those who
 spoke the truth were able to connect together, bringing into one view
 causes and reasons. The world was made by God, that men might be born;
 again, men are born, that they may acknowledge God as a Father, in whom
 is wisdom; they acknowledge Him, that they may worship Him, in whom is
 justice; they worship Him, that they may receive the reward of
 immortality; they receive immortality, that they may serve God for
 ever. Do you see how closely connected the first are with the middle,
 and the middle with the last? Let us look into them separately, and see
 whether they are consistent [1600] with each other. God made the world
 on account of man. He who does not see this, does not differ much from
 a beast. Who but man looks up to the heaven? who views with admiration
 the sun, who the stars, who all the works of God? Who inhabits the
 earth? who receives the fruit from it? Who has in his power the fishes,
 who the winged creatures, who the quadrupeds, except man? Therefore God
 made all things on account of man, because all things have turned out
 for the use of man.

 The philosophers saw this, but they did not see the consequence, that
 He made man himself on His own account. For it was befitting, and
 pious, and necessary, that since He contrived such great works for the
 sake of man, when He gave him so much honour, and so much power, that
 he should bear rule in the world, man should both acknowledge God, the
 Author of such great benefits, who made the world itself on his
 account, and should pay Him the worship and honour due to Him. Here
 Plato erred; here he lost the truth which he had at first laid hold of,
 when he was silent concerning the worship of that God whom he confessed
 to be the framer and parent of all things, and did not understand that
 man is bound to God by the ties of piety, whence religion itself
 receives its name, and that this is the only thing on account of which
 souls become immortal. He perceived, however, that they are eternal,
 but he did not descend by the regular gradations to that opinion. For
 the middle arguments being taken away, he rather fell into the truth,
 as though by some abrupt precipice; nor did he advance further, since
 he had found the truth by accident, and not by reason. Therefore God is
 to be worshipped, that by means of religion, which is also justice, man
 may receive from God immortality, nor is there any other reward of a
 pious mind; and if this is invisible, it cannot be presented by the
 invisible God with any reward but that which is invisible.

 [1599] Summa.

 [1600] Utrumne illis ratio subsistat.

 Chap. LXX.--The Immortality of the Soul is Confirmed.

 It may in truth be collected from many arguments that souls are
 eternal. Plato says that that which always moves by itself, and has no
 beginning of motion, also has no end; but that the soul of man always
 moves by itself, and because it is flexible for reflection, subtle for
 discovery, easy of perception, adapted to learning, and because it
 retains the past, comprehends the present, foresees the future, and
 embraces the knowledge of many subjects and arts, that it is immortal,
 since it contains nothing which is mixed with the contagion of earthly
 weight. Moreover, the eternity of the soul is understood from virtue
 and pleasure. Pleasure is common to all animals, virtue belongs only to
 man; the former is vicious, the latter is honourable; the former is in
 accordance with nature, the latter is opposed to nature, unless the
 soul is immortal. For in defence of faith and justice, virtue neither
 fears want, nor is alarmed at exile, nor dreads imprisonment, nor
 shrinks from pain, nor refuses death; and because these things are
 contrary to nature, either virtue is foolishness, if it stands in the
 way of advantages, and is injurious to life; or if it is not
 foolishness, then the soul is immortal, and despises present goods,
 because other things are preferable which it attains after the
 dissolution of the body. But that is the greatest proof of immortality,
 that man alone has the knowledge of God. In the dumb animals there is
 no notion [1601] of religion, because they are earthly and bent down to
 the earth. Man is upright, and beholds the heaven for this purpose,
 that he may seek God. Therefore he cannot be other than immortal, who
 longs for the immortal. He cannot be liable to dissolution, who is
 connected [1602] with God both in countenance and mind. Finally, man
 alone makes use of the heavenly element, which is fire. For if light is
 through fire, and life through light, it is evident that he who has the
 use of fire is not mortal, since this is closely connected, this is
 intimately related to Him without whom neither light nor life can
 exist.

 But why do we infer from arguments that souls are eternal, when we have
 divine testimonies? For the sacred writings and the voices of the
 prophets teach this. And if this appears to any one insufficient, let
 him read the poems of the Sibyls, let him also weigh the answers of the
 Milesian Apollo, that he may understand that Democritus, and Epicurus,
 and Dicæarchus raved, who alone of all mortals denied that which is
 evident. Having proved the immortality of the soul, it remains to teach
 by whom, and to whom, and in what manner, and at what time, it is
 given. Since fixed and divinely appointed times have begun to be filled
 up, a destruction and consummation of all things must of necessity take
 place, that the world may be renewed by God. But that time is at hand,
 as far as may be collected from the number of years, and from the signs
 which are foretold by the prophets. But since the things which have
 been spoken concerning the end of the world and the conclusion of the
 times are innumerable, those very things which are spoken are to be
 laid down without adornment, since it would be a boundless task to
 bring forward the testimonies. If any one wishes for them, or does not
 place full confidence in us, let him approach to the very shrine of the
 heavenly letters, and being more fully instructed through their
 trustworthiness, let him perceive that the philosophers have erred, who
 thought either that this world was eternal, or that there would be
 numberless thousands of years from the time when it was prepared. For
 six thousand years have not yet been completed, and when this number
 shall be made up, then at length all evil will be taken away, that
 justice alone may reign. And how this will come to pass, I will explain
 in few words.

 [1601] Suspicio.

 [1602] Cum Deo communis est.

 Chap. LXXI.--Of the Last Times.

 These things are said by the prophets, but as seers, to be about to
 happen. When the last end shall begin to approach to the world,
 wickedness will increase; all kinds of vices and frauds will become
 frequent; justice will perish; faith, peace, mercy, modesty, truth,
 will have no existence; violence and daring will abound; no one will
 have anything, unless it is acquired by the hand, and defended by the
 hand. If there shall be any good men, they will be esteemed as a prey
 and a laughing-stock. No one will exhibit filial affection to parents,
 no one will pity an infant or an old man; avarice and lust will corrupt
 all things. There will be slaughter and bloodshed. There will be wars,
 and those not only between foreign and neighbouring states, but also
 intestine wars. States will carry on wars among themselves, every sex
 and age will handle arms. The dignity of government will not be
 preserved, nor military discipline; but after the manner of robbery,
 there will be depredation and devastation. Kingly power will be
 multiplied, and ten men will occupy, portion out, and devour the world.
 There will arise another by far more powerful and wicked, who, having
 destroyed three, will obtain Asia, and having reduced and subdued the
 others under his own power, will harass all the earth. He will appoint
 new laws, abrogate old ones; he will make the state his own, and will
 change the name and seat of the government.

 Then there will be a dreadful and detestable time, in which no one
 would choose to live. In fine, such will be the condition of things,
 that lamentation will follow the living, and congratulation the dead.
 Cities and towns will be destroyed, at one time by fire and the sword,
 at another by repeated earthquakes; now by inundation of waters, now by
 pestilence and famine. The earth will produce nothing, being barren
 either through excessive cold or heat. All water will be partly changed
 into blood, partly vitiated by bitterness, so that none of it can be
 useful for food, or wholesome for drinking. To these evils will also be
 added prodigies from heaven, that nothing may be wanting to men for
 causing fear. Comets will frequently appear. The sun will be
 overshadowed with perpetual paleness. The moon will be stained with
 blood, nor will it repair the losses of its light taken away. All the
 stars will fall, nor will the seasons preserve their regularity, winter
 and summer being confused. Then both the year, and the month, and the
 day will be shortened. And Trismegistus has declared that this is the
 old age and decline of the world. And when this shall have come, it
 must be known that the time is at hand in which God will return to
 change the world. But in the midst of these evils there will arise an
 impious king, hostile not only to mankind, but also to God. He will
 trample upon, torment, harass and put to death those who have been
 spared by that former tyrant. Then there will be ever-flowing tears,
 perpetual wailings and lamentations, and useless prayers to God; there
 will be no rest from fear, no sleep for a respite. The day will always
 increase disaster, the night alarm. Thus the world will be reduced
 almost to solitude, certainly to fewness of men. Then also the impious
 man will persecute the just and those who are dedicated to God, and
 will give orders that he himself shall be worshipped as God. For he
 will say that he is Christ, though he will be His adversary. [1603]
 That he may be believed, he will receive the power of doing wonders, so
 that fire may descend from heaven, the sun retire from his course, and
 the image which he shall have set up may speak. And by these prodigies
 he shall entice many to worship him, and to receive his sign in their
 hand or forehead. And he who shall not worship him and receive his sign
 will die with refined tortures. Thus he will destroy nearly two parts,
 the third will flee into desolate solitudes. But he, frantic and raging
 with implacable anger, will lead an army and besiege the mountain to
 which the righteous shall have fled. And when they shall see themselves
 besieged, they will implore the aid of God with a loud voice, and God
 shall hear them, and shall send to them a deliverer.

 [1603] [See Hippolytus , vol. v. pp. [152]190-250.]

 Chap. LXXII.--Of Christ Descending from Heaven to the General Judgment, and
 of the Millenarian Reign. [1604]

 Then the heaven shall be opened in a tempest, [1605] and Christ shall
 descend with great power, and there shall go before Him a fiery
 brightness and a countless host of angels, and all that multitude of
 the wicked shall be destroyed, and torrents of blood shall flow, and
 the leader himself shall escape, and having often renewed his army,
 shall for the fourth time engage in battle, in which, being taken, with
 all the other tyrants, he shall be delivered up to be burnt. But the
 prince also of the demons himself, the author and contriver of evils,
 being bound with fiery chains, shall be imprisoned, that the world may
 receive peace, and the earth, harassed through so many years, may rest.
 Therefore peace being made, and every evil suppressed, that righteous
 King and Conqueror will institute a great judgment on the earth
 respecting the living and the dead, and will deliver all the nations
 into subjection to the righteous who are alive, and will raise the
 righteous dead to eternal life, and will Himself reign with them on the
 earth, and will build the holy city, and this kingdom of the righteous
 shall be for a thousand years. Throughout that time the stars shall be
 more brilliant, and the brightness of the sun shall be increased, and
 the moon shall not be subject to decrease. Then the rain of blessing
 shall descend from God at morning and evening, and the earth shall
 bring forth all her fruit without the labour of men. Honey shall drop
 from rocks, fountains of milk and wine shall abound. The beasts shall
 lay aside their ferocity and become mild, the wolf shall roam among the
 flocks without doing harm, the calf shall feed with the lion, the dove
 shall be united with the hawk, the serpent shall have no poison; no
 animal shall live by bloodshed. For God shall supply to all abundant
 and harmless [1606] food. But when the thousand years shall be
 fulfilled, and the prince of the demons loosed, the nations will rebel
 against the righteous, and an innumerable multitude will come to storm
 the city of the saints. Then the last judgment of God will come to pass
 against the nations. For He will shake the earth from its foundations,
 and the cities shall be overthrown, and He shall rain upon the wicked
 fire with brimstone and hail, and they shall be on fire, and slay each
 other. But the righteous shall for a little space be concealed under
 the earth, until the destruction of the nations is accomplished, and
 after the third day they shall come forth, and see the plains covered
 with carcases. Then there shall be an earthquake, and the mountains
 shall be rent, and valleys shall sink down to a profound depth, and
 into this the bodies of the dead shall be heaped together, and its name
 shall be called Polyandrion. [1607] After these things God will renew
 the world, and transform the righteous into the forms of angels, that,
 being presented with the garment of immortality, they may serve God for
 ever; and this will be the kingdom of God, which shall have no end.
 Then also the wicked shall rise again, not to life but to punishment;
 for God shall raise these also, when the second resurrection takes
 place, that, being condemned to eternal torments and delivered to
 eternal fires, they may suffer the punishments which they deserve for
 their crimes.

 [1604] [See vol. i. [153]p. 209.]

 [1605] In tempestate; others read "intempestâ nocte."

 [1606] Innocentem, "without injury to any."

 [1607] A name sometimes given to cemeteries, because many men (polloi`
 handres) are borne thither.

 Chap. LXXIII.--The Hope of Safety is in the Religion and Worship of God.

 Wherefore, since all these things are true and certain, in harmony with
 the predicted announcement of the prophets, since Trismegistus and
 Hystaspes and the Sibyls have foretold the same things, it cannot be
 doubted that all hope of life and salvation is placed in the religion
 of God alone. Therefore, unless a man shall have received Christ, whom
 God has sent, and is about to send for our redemption, unless he shall
 have known the Supreme God through Christ, unless he shall have kept
 His commandments and law, he will fall into those punishments of which
 we have spoken. Therefore frail things must be despised, that we may
 gain those which are substantial; earthly things must be scorned, that
 we may be honoured with heavenly things; temporal things must be
 shunned, that we may reach those which are eternal. Let every one train
 himself to justice, mould himself to self-restraint, prepare himself
 for the contest, equip himself for virtue, that if by any chance an
 adversary shall wage war, he may be driven from that which is upright
 and good by no force, no terror, and no tortures, may give [1608]
 himself up to no senseless fictions, but in his uprightness acknowledge
 the true and only God, may cast away pleasures, by the attractions of
 which the lofty soul is depressed to the earth, may hold fast
 innocency, may be of service to as many as possible, may gain for
 himself incorruptible treasures by good works, that he may be able,
 with God for his judge, to gain for the merits of his virtue either the
 crown of faith, or the reward of immortality.

 [1608] Se substernet.

 Elucidations.

 I.

 (Princes and kings, [154]p. 13.)

 How memorable the histories, moreover, of Nebuchadnezzar [1609] and his
 decrees; of Darius [1610] and his also; but especially of Cyrus and his
 great monumental edict! [1611] The beautiful narratives of the Queen of
 Sheba and of the Persian consort of Queen Esther (probably Xerxes) are
 also manifestations of the ways of Providence in giving light to the
 heathen world through that "nation of priests" in Israel.

 But Lactantius, who uses the Sibyls so freely, should not have omitted
 to show what Sibylline oracles God drew forth from "the princes of this
 world" also, by the illumination of the pharos which he established in
 Sion, "to be a light to lighten the Gentiles" until the great Epiphany
 should rise upon them in "the dayspring from on high."

 I extract from a paradoxical but most entertaining author, whom I have
 often quoted, certain extracts from Philo, which I translate from his
 note in the Soirées. Thus:--

 "Agrippa," says Philo, [1612] "having visited Jerusalem in Herod's
 time, was enchanted by the religion of the Jews, and could never cease
 to speak of it....Augustus ordered that every day, at his own expense,
 and under the legal forms, a bull and two lambs should be offered in
 holocaust to the Most High God on the altar at Jerusalem, though he
 knew that it contained no image, whether exposed or within the veil;
 for this great prince, surpassed by none in the philosophic spirit,
 felt the actual necessity in this world of an altar dedicated to a God
 invisible."

 Philo also says:--

 "Your great-grandmother Julia [1613] also made superb presents to the
 temple; and although women very reluctantly detach themselves from
 images, and rarely conceive of anything apart from sensation, this
 lady, nevertheless, greatly superior to her sex in culture and in
 natural endowments, arrived at that point in which she preferred to
 contemplate such things in the mind rather than in sensible objects,
 regarding these as mere shadows of the realities."

 In the same discourse, wasting words on Caligula, Philo reminds him
 that Augustus "not only admired, nay, rather, he adored (ethau'maze
 kai` prose'kunei, k.t.l.), this custom of employing no sort of image to
 represent, materially, a nature invisible in itself." Poor De Maistre,
 who quotes this testimony against images from Philo with intense
 appreciation, will yet sophisticate himself and others into the very
 contrary in behalf of his one predominant idea of (prosku'nesis) canine
 self-abasement to the decrees of the Vatican. On this account I am
 forced to consider him a sophist as well as a fanatic; but I delight to
 render justice to his genius, for, wherever he talks and reasons as a
 Christian merely, he fascinates and instructs me. He never conceived of
 "Catholicity," and lived under the delusion of the Decretals, a
 disciple of the Jesuits.

 II.

 (Therefore they were neglected for many ages, [155]p. 116.)

 The explicit statements of Lactantius, and his profuse quotations from
 the Sibyllina, persuade me that these curious fragments deserve a
 degree of scientific attention which they have not yet received. The
 Fathers all cite them, when it must have exposed them to scorn and
 overwhelming refutation had their quotations not been found in the
 Sibylline books of their adversaries. The influence of the Jewish
 religion upon the Gentiles under the Babylonian and Medo-Persian
 monarchies must have been considerable, but after Alexander's time it
 was vastly increased. Many versions of select prophets were doubtless
 produced in Greek before the authorized Septuagint. These were soon
 embedded in the Sibyls' books; and I cannot think the interpolations of
 early Christians were all frauds, by any means. Their numerous marginal
 annotations crept into other copies; and very likely, in the time of
 our author, they were inextricably confused with the text in the
 greater part of the "editions," so to speak, then current with
 booksellers.

 But in vol. viii. we shall have occasion to recur again to this
 interesting inquiry.

 III.

 (We made proclamation before him as children, [156]p. 117.)

 "Sicut pueri." This is not according to the Septuagint, hos paidi'on.
 It is not the Vulgate, of course; but its radical difference with that
 raises interesting inquiries: Is it a specimen of one of many African
 or old Italic versions? Does our author endeavour to translate from the
 Septuagint? May he not have had in hand a copy of Isaiah from among
 those which preceded the Septuagint?

 The Septuagint reading finds its key in cap. lii. 7, and in the tenth
 verse, where the "Arm of the Lord" ("His Holy Arm") is introduced as
 the personal Logos Incarnate. The thirteenth and fourteenth verses
 predict the amazing sequel, and its practical and blessed results; and
 then begins cap. liii., "Who hath believed" our message. To whom is
 "the Arm of the Lord" revealed? "Going before Him (i.e., as heralds),
 we have proclaimed Him as a child, and, as it were, a root in a thirsty
 land; He has no form nor glory," etc. In other words, "We have
 prophesied of Him who is elsewhere predicted ("unto us a child is
 born") as one who from His childhood is as a rush without
 water,--prematurely withered,--a man of sorrows, and the Carpenter's
 Son."

 It does not hint, therefore, the "obscurity" of the Messiah's birth,
 but rather what Irenæus insists upon, i.e., His (premature) old age;
 the worn and stricken appearance of senility in comparative youth.
 [1614] This is just what the messengers (Isa. lii. 7) had said in their
 proclamation (Isa. lii. 14) just before: "His visage was so marred more
 than any man, and His form more than the sons of men."

 IV.

 (There was darkness, etc., pp. [157]122, [158]240.)

 In former instances, where thought has turned to Phlegon the Trallian,
 [1615] I have failed to refer to an author whose excess of candour
 sometimes gives away more than is called for, in questions on which
 adversaries have contrived to fasten undue importance, in order to
 elicit indiscreet defences. But it is due to my readers that I should
 refer them to a most learned work, to be found in public libraries
 only, by my revered friend and instructor Dr. Jarvis. The sixth chapter
 (part ii.) of his Chronological Introduction to Church History [1616]
 is devoted to this matter, and I can do no better than give the summary
 of its contents as follows:--

 "Who Phlegon was; his work lost; extracts from it by Julius Africanus
 and Eusebius; their works, containing these extracts, lost; all we know
 is from versions and later writers; collation of extracts as given by
 the Armenian version of the Chronicon of Eusebius, St. Jerome's Latin
 version, the Chronographia of Syncellus, and the Chronicon Paschale;
 extract by Syncellus from Julius Africanus; remarks upon it; testimony
 of Origen concerning Phlegon's account; of John Philoponus (St.
 Maximus) Malala; summary of the whole; account of Phlegon's testimony;
 not noticed by the learned and voluminous writers of the fourth and
 fifth centuries when they speak of the darkness, etc.; Dr. Lardner's
 judgment [1617] adopted."

 Lardner's view, it will be observed, is thus sustained by an
 independent and most competent critic. This decision puts honour on the
 early writers: he thinks they were unwilling to claim a corroboration
 from evidence about which they were not well assured.

 V.

 (Divine and ethnic oracles, p. 210, note 2; p. 112, note 9.)

 The whole subject of ethnic oracles needs fresh study and illustration.
 Nothing would be more fascinating in theological inquiry, and Divine
 Inspiration might be richly illustrated by it, as anatomical science is
 clarified by "comparative anatomy." I commend this subject to men of
 faith, learning, and intellectual vigour. Notably, let it be observed:
 (1) That Balaam's ass is instanced by St. Peter as miraculously enabled
 to rebuke the madness of his master; and the same Apostle shortly
 before gives us the law as to divine inspiration in contrast. [1618]
 (2) Balaam himself, as mechanically as the beast he rode, [1619] had
 his own mouth opened (see Num. xxiv. 16-19). (3) The wicked Caiaphas in
 like manner (St. John xi. 51, 52) spoke prophetically, "not of
 himself." (4) St. Paul (Acts xvii. 28) quotes a heathen oracle very
 much as does our author. [1620] Now, in view of the boldness with which
 the early Christians follow the example of the Apostle in quoting the
 Orphica and Sibyllina, I cannot imagine that these citations were not
 honestly believed by them to be oracles of a certain sort, by which God
 permitted the heathen to be enlightened. [1621] Observe our author's
 moderate but most pregnant remark about such inspiration (on p. 170,
 supra, note 8), "almost with a divine voice;" then (on [159]p. 192)
 compare other almost inspired words of poor Tully (at note 2), and of
 Seneca also. [1622]

 Finally, and to close the subject, the reader will readily forgive me
 for introducing the following citations from the "Warburton Lecture" of
 Dr. Edersheim, on Prophecy and History [1623] in Relation to the
 Messiah Discussing the pseudepigraphic writings (in Lecture Eleventh),
 he says as follows: [1624] --

 "The Sibylline oracles, in Greek hexameters, consist, in their present
 form, of twelve books. They are full of interpolations, the really
 ancient portions forming part of the first two books and the largest
 part of book third (verses 97-807). These sections are deeply imbued
 with the Messianic spirit. [1625] They date from about the year 140
 before our era, while another small portion of the same book is
 supposed to date from the year 32 b.c.

 "As regards the promise of the Messiah, we turn in the first place, and
 with special interest, to the Sibylline Oracles. In the third book of
 these (such portions as I shall quote date from about 140 b.c.) the
 Messiah is described as the King sent from heaven, who would judge
 every man in blood and splendour of fire.' And the Vision of Messianic
 times opens with a reference to the King whom God will send from the
 Sun,' where we cannot fail to perceive a reference to the
 Seventy-second Psalm, [1626] especially as we remember that the Greek
 of the Seventy, which must have been present to the Hellenist Sibyl,
 fully adapted the Messianic application of the passage to a premundane
 Messiah. We also think of the picture drawn in the prophecies of
 Isaiah. According to the Sibylline books, King Messiah was not only to
 come, but He was to be specifically sent of God. He is supermundane, a
 King and a Judge [1627] of superhuman glory and splendour. And, indeed,
 that a superhuman kingdom, such as the Sibylline oracles paint, should
 have a superhuman king, seems only a natural and necessary
 inference....If, as certain modern critics contend, the book of Daniel
 is not authentic, [1628] but dates from Maccabean times, ...it may well
 be asked to what king the Sibylline oracles point, for they certainly
 date from that period; and what is the relationship between the
 (supposed Maccabean) prophecies of the book of Daniel and the certainly
 Messianic anticipations of the undoubted literature of that period?"

 Dr. Edersheim gives us the reference in the margin, to which I would
 call attention, as directing to the whole pseudepigraphic literature.
 [1629] But who can wonder, after what we thus learn, that Constantine
 [1630] was so profoundly impressed with Virgil's Pollio? In spite of
 all that has been said, [1631] I cannot but see Isaiah in its entire
 spirit.

 [1609] Dan. ii. 47, iii. 29, and iv.

 [1610] Dan. vi. 25.

 [1611] Ezra i. 2.

 [1612] In his Discourse to Caligula

 [1613] i.e., Livia, wife and empress of Augustus.

 [1614] Vol. i. p. 391, [160]note 12, this series.

 [1615] See vol. iii. Elucidation V. [161]p. 58.

 [1616] P. 419.

 [1617] Works, ed. London, 1788, vol. vii. p. 385.

 [1618] Comp. 2 Pet. i. 18-21 with ii. 16.

 [1619] P. 174, note 2, supra.

 [1620] See p. 140, note 10, supra.

 [1621] See p. 219, note 3.

 [1622] Compare Cyprian (vol. v. [162]p. 502, this series), and note his
 judicious reference to the inspiration of Balaam by the extreme
 instance of the miraculous voice of a dumb beast. Also, see vol. ii.
 Elucidation XIII. [163]p. 346, this series.

 [1623] Republished, New York, Randolph, 1885.

 [1624] Pp. 339, 343.

 [1625] Note, these are the "really ancient" portions.

 [1626] Verses 5, 6, etc., to the end.

 [1627] Ps. lxxii. 1, 2.

 [1628] An absurdity pulverized by the faith and learning of Dr. Pusey.

 [1629] Pseudepigrapha O. F. Fritzsche, Lips., 1871, Codex Pseudepigr.
 Vet. Test., ed. 1722.; J. A. Fabricius, Messias Judæorum, Hilgenfeld,
 Lips., 1869; also Drummond, The Jewish Messiah; and compare Jellinek,
 Bet-ha-Midrash, six parts, 1857-73.

 [1630] See the Greek of Constantine's quotations in Heyne's Virgil,
 excursus i. tom. i. p. 164.

 [1631] Heyne (Lips., 1788), vol. i. pp. 66-70.
