A Treatise on the Diseases of the Chest and on Mediate Auscultation
René Laennec, trans. John Forbes (1834)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The stethoscope's founding text in English: Sir John Forbes's 1821 translation of Laennec's 'De l'auscultation médiate' (1819), which introduced mediate auscultation and modern chest diagnosis to the English-speaking world. 1834 edition of the Forbes translation. This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

A  TREATISE


ON  THE

DISEASES  OF  THE  CHEST

AND  ON

MEDIATE  AUSCULTATION,

BY  R.  T.  H.  LAENNEC,  M.D.

REGIUS  PROFESSOR  OF  MEDICINE  IN  THE  COLLEGE  OF  FRANCE, CLINICAL  PROFESSOR
TO  THE  FACULTY  OF  MEDICINE  OF  PARIS,
&C.  &C.  &C.

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  L\TEST  FRENCH  EDITION,

WITH

COPIOUS  NOTES  AND  A  SKETCH  OF  THE  AUTHOR'S  LIFE,

BY  JOHN  FORBES,  M.D.  F.R.S.

MEMBER  OF  THE  ROYAL  COLLEGE  OF  PHYSICIANS, PHYSICIAN  TO  THE  CHICHESTFR
INFIRMARY, AND  PHYSICIAN  IN  ORDINARY  TO  HIS ROYAL  HIGHNESS
THE  DUKE  OF  CAMBRIDGE.


FOURTH  EDITION,

CONSIDERABLY  ENLARGED  AND  IMPROVED,  WITH  MANY  ADDITIONAL  NOTES
INI)  V>i  KXTENSIVE  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  DISEASES.

mitft  plates.

Me^a  5e  /xipos  riyevfj.ai  rrjs  r4xvr\s  elvai  tJ>  Swaadai  aKoir&LV. — iiippoc,

LONDON:

LONGMAN,  REES,  ORME,  BROWN,  GREEN,  AND  LONGMAN  J  WHITTAKER
AND  CO.;  SIMPKIN  AND  MARSHALL;  J.  CH1DLEY  ; E.  PORTWINfi  j

AND  HENRY  REN SHAW.

1834.


TO


JAMES  CLARK,  M.D.  F.R.S.

PHYSICIAN  IN  ORDINARY  TO  THEIR MAJESTIES THE KINO AND  QUEEN  OF

BELGIUM.


My  dear  friend,

The  translation  of  the  first  edition  of  this  Treatise  was
dedicated  to  our  eminent  friend,  the  late  Dr.  Baillie ;
and  although  there  remain  among  his  successors,  many
whose  names  would  do  honour  to  it  in  its  present  much
improved  form,  there  is  no  one  who  has  equal  claims
with  yourself  to  this  address.

Possessed  of  the  most  extensive  and  accurate  know-
ledge of  pathology,  and  of  a  rare  sagacity  in  discrimi-
nating the  minuter  shades  of  diseases,  you  are  in  a  more
especial  manner  qualified  to  judge  of  the  merits  of  the
present  work,  by  your  perfect  acquaintance  with  the
affections  of  which  it  treats,  and  by  your  constant  and
successful  practice  of  the  diagnostic  measures  recom-
mended in  it.  It  was,  moreover,  in  your  valuable
Notes  on  the  climate,  diseases,  hospitals,  and  medical
schools  of  France  and  Italy,  that  the  transcendent
merits  of  M.  Laennec's  work  were  first  made  known
in  this  country  ;  it  was  at  your  earnest  recommendation
and  request  that  I  undertook  the  translation  of  it;  it


VI


DEDICATION.


was  by  your  precept  and  example  that  I  was  led  to
practise  the  new  methods  of  diagnosis  therein  detailed :
it  is  to  you,  therefore,  in  a  great  measure,  that  the  pro-
fession is  indebted  for  any  benefits,  however  slight,  that
may  have  resulted  from  my  humble  labours.

But  you  have  a  claim  to  this  address,  of  more  weight
with  me  than  your  professional  talents  and  character,
however  distinguished,  and  the  acknowledgment  of
which,  I  flatter  myself,  will  be  more  acceptable  to  you
than  any  homage  I  could  offer  on  public  grounds — I
mean,  the  friendship  with  which  you  have  favoured  me
for  so  many  years,  and  to  which  I  am  so  much  indebted.

That  you  may  long  live  for  the  honour  and  interests
of  our  common  profession,  and  for  the  welfare  and  hap-
piness of  your  friends,  is  my  sincere  and  warmest  wish.

JOHN  FORBES.

Chichester,  Oct.  \,  1827,


TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE


TO  THE SECOND  EDITION.


With  all  its  imperfections  as  a  translation,  I  have  no  hesitation
in  pronouncing  the  following  work  to  be  one  of  the  most  valuable
that  has  ever  been  presented  to  the  medical  profession  in  this
country.  The  original  Treatise  will  remain  an  imperishable
monument  of  the  genius  and  industry  of  the  author ;  and  the
discovery  of  which  it  treats,  will  entitle  him  to  a  distinguished
rank  among  the  benefactors  of  mankind.  As  a  standard  work
on  the  pathology  and  diagnosis  of  the  diseases  of  the  chest,  it  is
not  only  without  an  equal,  but  may  be  considered  as  almost  per-
fect in  its  kind.  Much,  no  doubt,  will  hereafter  be  discovered
that  will  modify  and  improve  the  delineations  of  disease  which
he  has  left  us,  but  their  great  outlines  must  remain,  unalterable
as  nature  itself.

To  be  convinced  of  the  vast  importance  of  auscultation  as  a
means  of  diagnosis,  it  is  only  necessary  to  peruse  the  present
treatise  ;  and  I  can  offer  no  more  powerful  incentive  to  the  reader,
than  to  add  my  humble  testimony  in  support  of  every  statement
contained  in  it,  which  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  verifying.
Several  forms  of  disease  there  recorded,  have  not,  as  yet,  come
under  my  observation,  and  in  some  of  the  more  common  affec-
tions, I  have  not  hitherto  had  occasion  to  notice  every  one  of  the
signs  described;  but  in  no  case  have  I  met  with  any  circum-
stance, either  of  a  positive  or  negative  kind,  which  could  give
me  the  slightest  reason  to  doubt  any  essential  parts  of  the  au-
thor's statements.

At  the  same  time,  it  would  be  exacting  too  much  from  the
weakness  of  humanity,  to  expect,  that  the  author  of  Mediate
Auscultation  should,  in  no  case,  have  yielded  to  the  enthusiasm
naturally  inspired  by  the  consciousness  of  so  great  a  discovery.
And  if,  in  a  few  passages  of  his  book,  he  should  be  found  some-
what to  exaggerate  the  actual  or  relative  importance  of  his


viii


translator's  preface.


method,  or  even  sometimes  to  appear  rather  as  the  partisan  than
the  historian  of  the  stethoscope,  I  am  sure  that  a  fault  so  venial,
on  such  an  occasion,  and  in  such  a  man,  ought  not  to  be  visited
by  heavy  censure.  Indeed,  I  am  convinced  that  every  unpre-
judiced reader,  qualified  by  the  study  and  practice  of  auscul-
tation to  judge  of  the  character  of  his  work,  (and  none  else  are
qualified,)  must  confess  that  the  author  stands  in  need  of  less
indulgence  on  this  point  than  could  have  been  expected ;  cer-
tainly less  than  every  candid  and  honourable  mind  will  be  ready
to  concede.

To  estimate  fairly  the  correctness  of  M.  Laennec's  statements,
we  ought,  also,  to  take  into  account  his  vast  experience,  and  his
unequalled  practical  tact,  which  was  the  admiration  of  every  one
who  had  opportunities  of  observing  his  examinations.  In  no
case,  even  the  most  obscure,  did  he  shrink  from  pronouncing  his
opinions,  and  fixing  his  diagnosis;  and  rarely  indeed  was  he
mistaken.  These  circumstances  ought  to  make  his  successors
long  hesitate  before  they  call  in  question  the  correctness  of  his
statements,  even  although  they  should  fail  to  verify  them,  by
repeated  experience;  and  incline  them  rather  to  doubt  their  own
capacity  in  exploring,  and  the  accuracy  or  acuteness  of  their
perceptive  powers,  than  the  fidelity  of  the  records  which  he  has
bequeathed  to  them.

And  here  I  think  it  necessary  to  state,  in  the  most  distinct
and  unequivocal  terms,  that  although  nothing  is  easier  than  for
any  one  to  acquire  sufficient  evidence  of  the  truth  and  powers  of
Auscultation,  it  is  only  by  long  and  painful  trials,  {inter  ta>dia  et
labores,  as  Auenbrugger  says  of  his  congenerous  discovery,)  that
any  useful  practical  knowledge  of  it  can  be  acquired.  When,
therefore,  we  hear,  as  we  sometimes  do,  that  certain  persons  have
tried  the  stethoscope,  and  abandoned  it  upon  finding  it  useless  or
deceptive;  and  when  we  learn,  on  inquiry,  that  the  trial  has
extended  merely  to  the  hurried  examination  of  a  few  cases,  within
the  period  of  a  few  days  or  weeks ;  we  can  only  regret  that  such
students  should  have  been  so  misdirected,  or  should  have  so  mis-
understood the  fundamental  principles  of  the  method.  No  con-
clusions deduced  from  such  attempts — I  cannot  dignify  them
with  the  term  experience, — can  have  any  weight  with  those
qualified  to  judge  in  the  matter;  they  can  only  be  added  to  the
heap  of  false  facts,  as  they  have,  been  called,  with  which  medicine,


T  It  ANSL  A  T  O  lC  S P  It  E  FA  C  E .


and  indeed  every  department  of  human  knowledge,  is  overlaid,
and  which  are  the  characteristic  and  ready  offspring  of  minds  too
feeble  to  be  habitually  conversant  with  general  principles,  and
too  narrow  to  embrace  all  the  more  important  relations  of  the
objects  of  their  inquiry.

I  am  ready  and  willing  to  concede,  that  this  difficulty  of  at-
taining a  complete  practical  knowledge  of  Auscultation  is  one
of  the  greatest  drawbacks  to  its  value ;  as  it  will  ever  prevent
the  indolent  and  careless  from  making  themselves  masters  of  it.
But  I  will  venture  to  add,  that  no  one  who  has  once  mastered
its  difficulties,  and  who  cultivates  his  profession  in  that  spirit
which  its  high  importance  and  dignity  demand,  will  ever  regret
the  pains  taken  to  overcome  them,  or  willingly  forego  the  great
advantages  which  he  has  thereby  acquired.

It  must  not  be  supposed  from  any  thing  I  have  stated,  that  I
am  inclined  to  consider  the  methods  of  diagnosis  discovered  by
Auenbrugger  and  Laennec  as  all  in  all ;  as  not  only  unerring
in  their  nature,  but  also  sufficient  for  practical  purposes,  without
any  aid  from  the  common  and  general  symptoms  of  diseases.
So  far  is  this  from  being  the  case,  that  I  deem  it  necessary  in  this
place,  to  repeat,  what  I  have  substantially  declared  in  several  of
the  notes  appended  to  the  work,  that  such  a  doctrine  is  both  false
and  dangerous.  In  science,  as  well  as  in  religion  and  politics,
over-zealous  and  injudicious  friends  are  often  more  injurious  to
the  cause  they  advocate,  than  its  most  determined  enemies;  and
in  regard  to  auscultation,  I  am  convinced  that  the  most  certain
mode  of  preventing  its  general  adoption,  is  to  attempt  to  extend
it  beyond  its  just  limits,  or  to  raise  its  credit  at  the  expense  of
other  methods  in  more  general  use,  which  have  not  merely  the
sanction  of  the  experience  of  ages,  but  the  still  stronger  support
of  deep-rooted  prejudice,  in  their  favour.  So  far,  indeed,  am  I
from  advocating  its  exclusive  use,  that  (with  some  exceptions)  I
would  lay  it  down  as  a  general  rule,  that  the  physician  ought,
in  the  first  place,  to  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  nature  and  state
of  the  disease  by  the  common  symptoms  alone,  and  that  it  should
be  only  had  recourse  to  afterwards,  as  a  sort  of  experiment  urn
cruris,  to  fortify  his  convictions  in  obvious  cases,  or  remove  his
doubts  in  difficult  ones.  In  every  case,  however,  of  doubt  or
difficulty,  or  even  simply  of  danger,  I  consider  the  use  of  the
stethoscope  as  indispensable. In  the  great  majority  of  such  in-


X


translator's  preface.


stances,  it  will,  at  once,  remove  all  obscurity  and  difficulty ;  in
every  case  it  will  communicate  to  the  mind  of  the  practitioner  a
degree  of  certainty,  and  consequent  satisfaction  and  comfort,
which  no  combination  of  mere  symptoms  can  inspire,  and  which
will,  in  most  cases,  have  a  beneficial  influence  on  the  future
treatment.

The  best  proof  of  the  value  of  Auscultation  is,  however,  found
in  the  great  progress  which  the  practice  has  made  in  every  country
of  Europe,  as  is  sufficiently  evinced  by  the  medical  publications
of  the  last  few  years.  There  is,  indeed,  hardly  any  one  of  the
civilized  nations  of  the  world,  which  cannot  now  afford  examples
of  its  acknowledged  utility,  either  in  its  publications  or  in  the
practice  of  its  medical  professors.  France,  as  might  be  expected,
has  taken  the  lead  in  this  respect.  The  records  of  her  medical
literature  can  already  boast  of  several  works  not  unworthy  of
coming  after  the  Treatise  on  Auscultation  ;  and  in  the  ranks  of
her  most  eminent  practitioners,  are  several  well  qualified  by  their
zeal  and  their  practical  skill,  to  succeed  its  lamented  author.  As
claiming  especial  notice  in  this  respect,  I  must  mention  the  ex-
tremely valuable  works  of  MM.  Andral,  Louis  and  Bertin,  so
frequently  referred  to  in  my  notes.  Of  the  same  class  and  cha-
racter as  the  treatises  of  Corvisart,  Bayle  and  Laennec,  these
volumes  are  (with  many  others  which  could  be  named)  splendid
proofs  of  the  great  superiority  of  the  French  pathologists  over
those  of  any  other  country  in  Europe,  and  entitle  their  authors
to  the  highest  praise  for  zeal,  industry,  and  accuracy  of  research.
The  work  of  M.  Andral,  more  especially,  is  fraught  with  the
most  important  information  respecting  Auscultation.

At  the  time  of  the  publication,  of  my  Collection  of  Cases,  now
nearly  four  years  since,  I  took  occasion  to  lament  the  little  pro-
gress made  by  the  new  methods  of  diagnosis  in  this  country  ;  but
I  have  reason  to  believe  that  they  were  at  that  time  practised  to
a  greater  extent  than  I  was  then  aware  of.  Certain  it  is,  that
since  the  period  alluded  to,  our  medical  literature  has  borne  suf-
ficient testimony  to  their  increased  and  increasing  progress ;
while  I  have  learned  from  other  sources,  how  extensively  and
accurately  they  are  practised  by  many  physicians  and  surgeons,
of  distinguished  talents,  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland.*


*  See  the  Bibliographical  notice  on  Auscultation  at  the  end  of  llie  volume.


TRANSLATORS  PREFACE.


xi


But,  perhaps,  the  most  striking  tribute  rendered  to  Mediate
Auscultation,  in  this  or  any  other  country,  and  one  which  seems
likely  to  be  productive  of  the  most  important  results,  is  that  for
which  it  is  indebted  to  the  present  enlightened  Director  General
of  the  medical  department  of  the  British  army.  In  a  letter  with
which  I  was  honoured  by  Sir  James  Macgrigor,  on  the  publication
of  my  Collection  of  Cases  illustrating  the  use  of  the  Stethoscope
and  Percussion,  he  informed  me  that  he  had  given  general  direc-
tions to  the  medical  officers  of  the  army  to  make  trial  of  the  new
methods,  and  to  report  the  result.  I  have  also  learnt  from  my
friend  Sir  William  Burnett,  the  Physician  of  the  Navy,  that  no
opportunity  is  lost  in  that  department  of  the  public  service,  in
recommending  the  use  of  the  stethoscope.

The  translation  now  presented  to  the  public,  I  wish  to  be  con-
sidered as  complete,  in  as  far  as  regards  the  chief  subject  of  the
treatise.  The  Cases,  however,  needlessly  and  uselessly  diffuse  in
the  original,  I  have,  in  almost  every  instance,  abridged.  In  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  work,  also,  I  have  here  and  there  omitted  a
few  passages  which  seemed  to  have  no  necessary,  or  at  least  useful
connexion  with  the  subject  of  it.  The  whole  of  the  Treatise,
indeed,  I  have  endeavoured,  not  to  abridge  but  to  condense,  by
the  use  of  as  concise  a  mode  of  expression  as  possible :  and  if  I
have  succeeded  in  my  intentions,  my  translation,  I  flatter  myself,
will  be  more  valuable  than  if  it  had  been  strictly  literal ;  a  good
deal  of  the  original  being  written  in  a  diffuse  and  verbose  style
by  no  means  commendable  in  a  work  of  science.  By  these  means,
and  by  the  use  of  a  much  larger  page  and  closer  form  of  printing,
I  have  been  enabled  to  comprehend  the  whole  in  one  volume,
containing  only  about  the  same  number  of  pages  as  one  of  the  two
volumes  of  the  original.

Having  taken  considerable  pains  to  be  accurate  during  the  pro-
cess of  translation,  and  having  scrupulously  revised  the  sheets
before  going  to  press,  with  the  original  in  my  hand,  I  hope
it  will  be  found  that  my  version  is,  at  least,  faithful.  If,  in
addition,  I  have  succeeded  generally  (I  do  not  flatter  myself  to
have  done  so  always)  in  presenting  the  sense  of  my  author  in
tolerably  good  English,  in  spite  of  the  unfavourable  influence  of
a  foreign  idiom  constantly  before  me,  I  have  attained  all  that  I
had  in  view  ;  and,  indeed,  almost  all  that  the  translator  of  a  scien-
tific work  could-  desire. It  is  only  in  the  department  of  polite


XII


TRANSLATOR S  PREFACE.


literature,  that  elegance  of  style  can  be  considered  essential.
The  public,  however,  has  a  right  to  expect  from  all  those  who
undertake  to  inform  it,  at  least  correctness  of  language ;  and  I
sincerely  wish,  for  the  credit  of  the  medical  literature  of  this
country  at  the  present  time,  that  it  could  always  lay  claim  even
to  this  degree  of  merit.

In  the  notes  which  I  have  appended  to  the  translation,  my
object  has  been  rather  to  be  useful  than  to  appear  learned.
Many  of  them  are  expressly  designed  for  the  student ;  and  for
these,  I  trust  every  allowance  will  be  made  by  the  more  expe-
rienced and  learned  practitioner;  since  I  could  not,  in  justice,
overlook  the  advantages  of  those  who  will,  in  all  probability,
constitute  a  very  numerous  class  of  my  readers,  and  who,  cer-
tainly, stand  most  in  need  of  a  guide  and  counsellor.  With  a
little  more  trouble,  I  could  have  made  my  annotations  much  more
extensive ;  but  I  was  unwilling  to  load  my  pages  either  with  the
results  of  my  own  experience,  when  these  were  in  accordance
with  the  statements  in  the  text,  or  with  the  mere  parade  of  autho-
rities however  respectable.  It  will,  no  doubt,  be  found  that  I
have  omitted  to  notice  many  passages  in  authors,  at  least  as  im-
portant as  those  to  which  I  have  referred ;  and  some,  probably,
of  consequence  to  the  satisfactory  elucidation  of  the  subjects
under  consideration.  Another  opportunity  may  perhaps  occur
for  remedying  this  deficiency ;  and  in  the  mean  time,  I  hope  that
the  very  considerable  labour  necessarily  incurred  in  the  mere
translation  of  the  work,  undertaken  and  completed  amid  the
exigencies  of  an  active  practice,  will  be  received  by  the  profession
as  some  apology,  if  not  excuse,  for  this  and  other  imperfections.


October,  1827.


PREFACE


TO  THIi THIRD  EDITION.


It  is  extremely  gratifying  to  me  to  be  called  upon  for  a  new
edition  of  my  Translation,  within  a  period  of  little  more  than
twelve  months  from  the  publication  of  the  former.  This  rapid
sale  may,  I  hope,  be  considered  as  affording  satisfactory  evidence
of  two  things  by  which  I  am  necessarily  much  interested, — I
mean,  the  increasing  attention  of  the  Profession  to  the  subject  of
Auscultation,  and  the  approval  of  my  efforts  to  excite  and  gratify
this  attention.  As  I  am  thoroughly  convinced,  that  the  general
diffusion,  among  medical  men,  of  the  great  pathological  and  prac-
tical truths  contained  in  this  treatise,  is  calculated  extensively  to
benefit  mankind,  I  have  derived  from  the  very  favourable  manner
in  which  my  book  has  been  received,  a  pleasure  far  above  that
which  could  result  from  any  success,  however  great,  of  a  mere
literary  kind.  The  consciousness  of  being  the  instrument  of
good  to  many,  hallows  any  occupation,  and  gives  dignity  even  to
the  humble  labours  of  the  Translator.  As  such,  therefore,  I  am
proud  to  have  my  name  associated,  in  the  medical  annals  of  this
country,  with  the  great  name  of  Laennec,  although  bearing  and
claiming  no  higher  title  than  that  of  a  sincere  admirer  and
faithful  disciple.

In  preparing  this  edition  for  the  press,  I  have  carefully  revised
the  whole,  and  made  such  alterations  and  improvements  in  various
parts  of  it,  as  seemed  to  me  desirable.  I  have  modified  some  of
the  notes  in  the  former  edition,  and  have  added  several  new  ones,
which  I  hope  will  be  found  valuable.

I  confidently  trust  that  the  work,  in  its  present  form,  will  con-
tinue to  be  found  deserving  the  patronage  which  it  has  hitherto
so  liberally  received.

J.  F.

Chichester,  December  18,  1828.


PREFACE


TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION'.


In  once  more  presenting  the  great  work  of  Laennec  to  the  mem-
bers of  the  medical  profession  in  this  country,  it  is  gratifying  to
me  to  be  able  to  state  that  they  will,  in  my  opinion,  find  it  very
considerably  improved  in  this  the  Fourth  Edition.  The  text  is
enlarged  by  the  addition  of  numerous  short  passages  and  several
entire  cases,  not  translated  in  the  former  editions ;  while  the  style
of  the  whole  has  been  carefully  examined,  and  altered  where  it
seemed  to  require  amendment.

During  the  six  years  which  have  elapsed  since  the  publication
of  the  last  edition,  much  has  been  done  to  increase  our  knowledge
of  the  pathology  of  diseases  of  the  chest,  and  to  improve  the
means  of  their  successful  investigation  ;  and  it  has  been  my  duty,
as  annotator  and  commentator,  to  put  the  reader  in  possession  of
all  such  improvements  as  were  known  to  me,  and  seemed  likely
to  be  useful  or  interesting  to  him.  The  great  mass  of  additional
matter  in  the  notes  will,  at  least,  evince  that  I  have  not  shrunk
from  the  labour  incident  to  this  part  of  my  task  ;  and  I  trust  that
it  will  be  found,  on  examination,  that  my  efforts  have  not  been
altogether  misdirected  or  barren  of  useful  results.

In  accomplishing  my  task  I  have  derived  great  advantage  from
the  notes  appended  by  Dr.  Meriadec  Laennec  to  the  new  Parisian
edition  of  his  cousin's  Treatise.*  All  of  these  which  possessed
either  pathological  or  practical  interest,  I  have  translated  ;  but  I
have  left  nearly  untouched  the  very  copious  annotations  which  he
has  appended  to  various  chapters  under  the  head  of  Recapitu-
lation of  the  Auscultatory  Signs.  This  I  have  done,  partly,
because  these  recapitulations,  although  excellent  in  themselves,
are,  as  their  name  implies,  mere  repetitions  of  statements  already
given  in  the  text,  and  partly,  because  they  have  already  appeared
in  our  language  in  a  separate  form.-f*

*  Traite'  de  l'Auscultation,  &c.  Troisieme  Edition,  Augmentec  de  Notes,  par
Meriadec  Laennec,  D.M.P.  ancien  chef  de  Clinique  de  la  Facult6  de  Medecine,  Me-
decin  de  Dispensaires,  &c.  Paris,  1831.  3  vols.  8vo.

t  A  Manual  of  Percussion  and  Auscultation.  Composed  from  the  French  of  Me-
riadec Laennec. By  J.  B.  Sharp.  Lond.  1832.  12mo.


XV]


translator's  preface.


Numerous,  however,  and  important  as  are  the  annotations  de~
rived  from  the  industrious  researches  of  my  co-editor,  and  from
the  writings  of  Dr.  M.  Laennec's  zealous  and  learned  country-
men, my  readers  will  find  themselves  under  still  greater  obliga-
tions to  the  eminent  pathologists  of  our  own  country  who  have,
of  late  years,  so  successfully  cultivated  the  fields  of  auscultation
and  thoracic  pathology;  and  I  must  here  in  a  more  particular
manner  express  my  acknowledgments  to  my  distinguished  friends
Drs.  Carswell,  Clark,  Hope,  Stokes,  Townsend  and  Williams,
from  whose  respective  works,  published  in  a  distinct  form,  as
well  as  from  their  numerous  and  elaborate  communications  to
the  Cyclopaedia  of  Practical  Medicine,  I  have  derived  so  much
valuable  information.  Dr.  Hope's  elaborate  and  excellent  Trea-
tise on  the  Diseases  of  the  Heart,  and  Di\  Williams's  scientific
little  work  on  the  Signs  of  the  Diseases  of  the  Lungs  and  Pleura,
have  been  of  especial  service  to  me ;  and  I  should  not  be  doing
justice  to  my  sense  of  their  importance  if  I  did  not  strongly
recommend  them  to  all  who  are  interested  in  the  subject  of  the
present  Treatise.

Having,  from  these  and  other  similar  sources,  and  from  the
stores  of  my  own  experience,  done  my  best,  consistently  with  the
prescribed  limits  of  the  work,  to  make  good  some  original  defects
in  the  treatise,  and  to  supply  the  wants  which  the  progress  of
medical  science  has  created  since  the  date  of  its  first  publication,
I  would  fain  hope  that  the  present  edition  may  appear  to  com-
petent judges,  to  present  a  tolerably  accurate  and  complete  view
of  the  actual  state  of  our  knowledge  of  the  Pathology,  Diagnosis,
and  Treatment  of  Diseases  of  the  Chest.  I  may,  at  least,  ven-
ture to  assure  the  reader  that  whatever  is  found  defective  in  any
of  these  particulars,  will  be  supplied  from  the  sources  indicated
in  the  bibliographical  references,  now  for  the  first  time  appended
to  the  different  articles  in  the  treatise.

I  will  only  further  add,  in  conclusion,  and  as  an  acknowledg-
ment due  to  the  Publisher,  that  notwithstanding  the  great  quan-
tity of  additional  matter,  the  expense  of  engraving  new  plates,
and  the  superior  typographical  elegance  of  the  work,  it  is  offered
to  the  profession  at  a  price  very  considerably  below  that  of  the
preceding  editions.

J.  F.

Chichester,  Sept.  15,  1834.


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.


Rene  Theophile  Hyacinthe  Laennec  was  born  at  Quimper,  in
Lower  Brittany,  on  the  17th  February,  1781.* His  father  was  an
advocate  in  the  provincial  courts,  and  held  some  appointments  under
government,  in  his  native  county. He  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of
some  talent,  and  is  said  to  have  possessed,  along  with  the  art  of  the  poet,
not  a  little  of  the  instability  and  thoughtlessness  often  associated  with
that  character. Fortunately  his  son  was  the  heir  of  the  more  solid  parts
of  his  genius  ;  without  his  wit,  but  without  his  volatility. At  an  early
age  he  was  committed  to  the  charge  of  his  uncle,  his  father's  brother,  a
respectable  ecclesiastic,  at  that  time  in  charge  of  the  parish  of  Elian,  in
the  vicinity  of  Quimper. But  the  valuable  superintendence  of  this  gen-
tleman was  in  a  short  time  lost  to  young  Laennec,  first  by  the  promotion
of  his  uncle  to  an  higher  office  in  the  church,  and  afterwards  by  his  exile
in  the  general  proscription  of  the  clergy,  on  the  breaking  out  of  the
French  Revolution. He  was  then  transferred  to  the  care  of  another
uncle,  Dr.  Laennec  of  Nantes;  a  circumstance  which,  no  doubt,  gave
the  colour  to  his  subsequent  life,  and  was  the  remote  cause  of  all  his  fu-
ture greatness. Dr.  Laennec  was  a  man  of  the  highest  respectability
both  as  to  talent  and  conduct,  and  directed  the  studies  of  his  nephew
with  the  interest  and  affection  of  a  parent. The  young  scholar  did  credit
to  his  friends  and  teachers;  having  obtained  considerable  distinction
among  his  fellows  at  the  chief  school  of  the  department  of  the  Lower
Loire,  whither  he  had  been  sent  by  his  uncle. Having  completed  his
preparatory  studies  at  this  seminary,  his  thoughts  naturally  turned  to-
wards physic  as  a  profession.  He  willingly  engaged  himself  as  the  pupil
of  his  uncle,  and  entered  upon  the  study  of  his  future  profession  with  the
zeal  inherent  in  his  character,  and  with  success  indicative  of  his  subse-
quent eminence. Besides  the  instructions  derived  from  his  uncle,  who
was  at  that  time  senior  physician  of  the  hospital,  and  afterwards  Professor
of  Medicine  and  Materia  Medica  at  Nantes,  he  attended  the  courses  of
anatomy  given  by  the  surgeons  of  the  same  establishment,  and  is  said,
even  at  this  early  age,  to  have  shown  a  decided  predilection  for  morbid
anatomy  and  clinical  observation.

*  All  the  principal  statements  contained  in  this  Sketch  are  derived  from  two  short.
Memoirs  of  the  Author's  Life,  published  by  MM.  Kergaradec  and  Iiayle,  and  from
a  MS.  chiefly  in  the  form  of  Notes  on  these,  which  1  had  the  honour  of  receiving
from  Dr.  Meriadec  Laennec,  the  cousin  and  friend  of  the  subject  of  the  present
notice.

b


Will


LIFE OF  TTIE  AUTHOR


Towards  the  close  of  the  year  1799  he  was  for  a  short  period  engaged
in  the  puhlic  service,  and  officiated  as  assistant  surgeon  in  the  military
hospitals  at  that  time  established  at  Nantes  :  he  likewise  attended,  in
this  capacity,  the  detachment  of  The  Army  of  the  West,  which  marched
into  The  Morbihan,  to  quiet  the  troubles  at  that  time  prevalent  there.
In  the  following  year,  having  resigned  his  temporary  appointment  in  the
army,  he  went  to  Paris,  in  order  to  complete  his  medical  education.  He
immediately  attached  himself  to  the  clinical  school  of  La  Charite,  then
under  the  direction  of  the  celebrated  Corvisart,  whose  notice  and  regard
the  active  and  zealous  student  had  soon  the  good  fortune  to  engage.
Among  his  fellow-pupils  at  this  time,  was  Bayle,  afterwards  so  distin-
guished for  his  pathological  researches,  more  especially  in  phthisis  :  and
as  he  was  Laennec's  senior  by  several  years,  and  moreover  his  personal
friend,  there  is  little  doubt  that  his  example  must  have  had  considerable
weight  in  fixing  the  attention  of  the  young  student  on  his  own  favourite
pursuit.  Although  attached  in  a  more  particular  manner  to  the  clinic
of  La  Charite,  Laennec  attended  the  various  medical  lectures  at  that
time  delivered  at  The  School  of  Medicine ;  and,  as  well  by  his  talents
and  superior  knowledge  of  the  learned  languages,  as  by  his  great  zeal
and  assiduity  in  medical  pursuits,  he  speedily  attained  a  marked  degree  of
distinction  among  the  crowd  of  students  then  frequenting  the  Parisian
hospitals.  His  remarkable  industry  at  this  period  is  best  evinced  by  the
fact,  that  during  the  first  three  years  of  his  attendance  as  pupil  of  La
Charite,  he  drew  up  a  minute  history  of  nearly  four  hundred  cases  of
disease ;  and  the  talent  and  discrimination  of  the  youthful  reporter  must
appear  equally  conspicuous,  when  it  is  known  that  these  very  cases  fur-
nished the  groundwork  of  all  his  future  researches  and  discoveries.  This
fact  (which  I  give  on  the  authority  of  his  cousin,  Dr.  Meriadec  Laennec)
ought  to  prove  a  stimulus  to  the  industry  of  all  students  in  their  attend-
ance on  hospital  practice,  and  should  teach  them,  that  to  record  everv
important  case  they  meet  with,  is  not  only  a  most  useful  labour  at  the
time,  but  may  eventually  lead,  as  in  the  case  of  the  subject  of  this  me-
moir, to  results  of  the  highest  consequences  to  themselves  and  their  profes-
sion. At  an  early  period  of  his  labours,  he  began  to  communicate  some
of  their  results  to  the  public,  and  was  honoured  with  signal  marks  of
professional  distinction.  In  the  year  1802,  being  then  in  his  twentv-
first  year,  he  published  in  the  Journal  de  Medecine,  at  that  time  con-
ducted by  Corvisart,  Leroux,  and  Boyer,  several  papers  of  singular
merit;  and  likewise  obtained  the  two  chief  prizes  in  medicine  and  sur-
gery, granted  by  the  Minister  of  the  Interior,  through  the  then  Insti-
tute of  France.  His  first  paper  consists  of  an  interesting  case  of  dis-
eased heart,  and  appeared  in  the  number  for  Messidor,  an.  x.  (1802*).
Two  months  later,  in  the  same  year  (Fruclidor,  an  x.)  he  published  his
Histoircs  d Inflammation  du  Peritoincf,  consisting  of  a  series  of  cases
detailed  in  a  very  clear  and  satisfactory  manner,  illustrated  by  much
learned  annotation,  and  terminated  by  general  conclusions,  specifying
the  anatomical  character  and  signs  of  peritonitis  in  a  more  accurate  man-
ner than  had  been  previously  done.  This  memoir,  which  has  the  great
merit  of  being  six  years  anterior  to  the  publication  of  Broussais's  Phleg-
masies  Chroniques,  is  well  worthy  the  attention  of  pathologists.  It  bears
the  impress  of  great  learning  and  talent,  and  could  not  fail  to  give  great


•  Journ.  de  M6d.  t.  iv.  p.  295.


t  Ibid.  p.  499.


LIFE OF THE  AUTHOR.


XIX


promise  of  subsequent  eminence  in  its  youthful  author.  He  appears,
about  the  same  time,  to  have  commenced  his  career  as  a  critic  or  re-
viewer, (a  character  in  which  he  was  afterwards  conspicuous  for  many
years,)  as  there  appears  in  the  same  volume  of  the  Journ.  de  Med.
(p.  5(35)  a  review  of  the  French  translation  of  Benjamin  Bell's  Trea-
tise on  the  Venereal  Disease,  bearing  (as  is  usual  in  France)  the  name
of  the  reviewer,  R.  T.  H.  Laennec  at  its  head.

In  the  same  year  he  gave  as  striking  a  proof  of  his  superior  knowledge
of  natural  anatomy,  as  he  had  previously  done  of  his  pathological  know-
ledge in  his  Essay  on  Peritonitis,  by  the  publication  of  his  Lettre  sur  Irs
t  uniques  qui  envelopment  certains  visceres,  addressed  to  Dupuytren,
then  principal  anatomist  in  the  School  of  Medicine.*  In  this  memoir
his  object  was  to  describe  more  particularly  than  had  been  done  before,
peculiar  tonic  or  certain  viscera,  particularly  the  liver,  spleen,  and  kid-
ney, seated  beneath  the  peritoneal  coat,  and  constituting  the  proper
sheath  of  their  vessels : — if  we  admit  this  tunic  to  be  distinct  from  the
cellular  layer  which  unites  the  peritoneal  to  the  parenchyma  of  the  or-
gans, we  must  consider  Laennec  as  the  discoverer  of  it.  This  paper,
like  all  his  earlier  productions,  is  distinguished  by  much  literary  research,
and  a  spirit  of  liberality  towards  his  predecessors.  About  the  same  time
he  pointed  out  a  mode  whereby  the  lining  membrane  of  the  ventricles  of
the  brain  may  be  demonstrated,  a  thing  which  had  been  previously  ad-
mitted only  from  analogy  ;f  and  described  a  synovial  capsule,  before
unobserved,  situated  between  the  acromion  process  and  top  of  the  hu-
merus.;}: He  likewise  contributed  several  reviews  to  the  same  journal,
of  which  he  afterwards  (in  1804)  became  chief  editor,  and  continued  to
be  so  till  1809.  In  1803,  while  still  a  student  and  a  youth,  he  began  a
course  of  lectures  on  pathological  anatomy,  which  he  continued  for  three
years,  with  considerable  success ;  animated  in  his  exertions  not  merely
by  his  native  zeal  in  the  pursuit,  but  by  a  noble  spirit  of  rivalry  between
himself  and  Dupuytren,  who  commenced  a  course  of  the  same  kind  at
the  very  same  time.  In  February,  1804,  he  read  a  memoir  on  that  va-
riety of  hydatids  termed  by  him  Acephalocysts  before  the  Faculty  of
Medicine.  A  sketch  of  this  memoir  was  published  at  the  time  in  the
first  vol.  of  the  Bulletins  de  la  Facultt,  p.  131,  and  was  printed  at  length
in  their  Memoires,  which  have  hitherto  remained  unpublished.  On  the
11th  June,  in  the  same  year,  he  obtained  his  degree  of  Doctor  in  Medi-
cine. His  thesis,  entitled  "  Propositions  sur  la  doctrine  d'Hippocrate
appliquce  d  la  mcdecine-pratique,"  proved  him,  according  to  the  expres  -
sion of  M.  Bayle,  to  be  no  less  skilled  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Greek
language,  than  deeply  read  in  the  writings  of  the  father  of  physic.  M.
Laennec  was,  indeed,  always  a  great  admirer  of  Hippocrates  ;  and  there
are  few  of  his  writings  in  which  this  admiration  is  not  strongly  expressed.
After  his  graduation,  he  entered  formally  upon  the  practice  of  medicine,
and  continued  to  devote  himself  to  this  and  to  his  medical  studies,  until
obliged  by  ill  health  to  relinquish  both.  His  constitution,  naturally
feeble,  and  predisposed  to  disease,  was  unequal  to  the  labours  he  imposed
upon  himself;  and  as  his  private  practice  increased,  he  felt  himself  under
the  necessity  of  relinquishing  some  of  his  employments.  Accordingly

*  Journ.  de  M6d.  t.  v.  p.  589,  (Ventose,  an.  xi.)

t  Journ.  de  Med.  t.  v.  p.  254.  %  Ibid.  p.  442.

b  2


XX


LIFE OF  THE  AUTHOR.


he  discontinued  bis  course  of  pathological  anatomy  in  1806.  This  course
attracted  considerable  attention  during  its  continuance,  and  was  in  some
degree  founded  on  the  lectmer's  own  discoveries  and  researches.  Tbe
arrangement  of  it  was  quite  original,  and  indicated  at  once  a  clear  and
a  comprehensive  mind.  It  was  long  the  intention  of  Laennec  to  publish
a  complete  work  on  morbid  anatomy,  and  he  did  not  relinquish  the  idea
of  so  doing  for  several  years  after  the  close  of  bis  course  of  lectures.  The
only  portions  of  the  work,  however,  which  were  ever  completed  have  been
subsequently  published  as  separate  articles  in  the  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences
Medicates,  or  in  his  Trait'e  de  V Auscultation.  A  brief  exposition  of  the
classification  adopted  by  him  was  read  at  the  Sociele  de  I'Ecole  de  Medi-
cine, in  Jan.  1805  (6  Nivose,  an.  xiii.),  and  was  afterwards  published  in
the  Journ.  de  Med.  t.  ix.  360.  Enlarged  and  somewhat  altered,  it  subse-
quently formed  the  excellent  but  brief  article,  Anatomie  Pathologique,
contributed  by  him  to  the  Diet,  des  Sc.  Med.  (t.  ii.  p.  46.)  Among
other  discoveries  of  the  first  years  of  his  labours  in  the  dissecting  room,
the  morbid  alterations  named  by  him,  Encephaloid  Cancer  and  Mela-
nosis, deserve  particular  notice  for  their  importance.  Both  these  are
mentioned  by  him  in  the  memoir  read  before  the  School  of  Medicine,
in  1805;  and  although  it  is  true  that  the  former  was  previously  well
known  in  England,  having  been  described  by  Bums  in  1800,  by  Hey  in
1803,  and  by  Abernethy  in  1804,  the  subject  of  our  memoir  appears  to
have  been  totally  ignorant  of  this  fact,  and  is,  therefore,  equally  entitled
with  these  gentlemen  to  the  honour  of  having  discovered  it.  Besides  the
articles  mentioned,  and  numerous  reviews  which  he  published  in  the
Journ.  de  Med.,  he  read  several  papers  before  the  Society  of  Medicine,
and  likewise  communicated  some  valuable  articles  to  the  Diet,  des  Sc.
Med.,  to  which  he  had  become  one  of  the  joint  contributors.  The  arti-
cles written  by  him  in  this  work  are  the  following :  Anatomie  Patholo-
gique, t.  ii.  p.  46  ;  Ascarides,  ibid.  p.  339  ;  Cartilages  Accidentels,  t.  iv.
p.  123  ;  Degeneration,  t.  viii.  p.  201  ;  Disorganization,  ibid.  p.  536  ;
Detrachyceros,  t.  x.  p.  43 ;  Encephaloide,  t.  xii.  p.  165 ;  Filaire,  t.  xv.
p.  493.  This  last  article  was  published  in  1816,  and  closed  his  con-
nexion with  that  great  but  unequal  work,  from  which  he  was  called  off
by  more  urgent  duties,  and  by  one  of  the  most  brilliant  and  important
discoveries  that  had  ever  illustrated  practical  medicine.  Previously  to
this  period,  however,  namely  in  the  year  1814,  it  is  deserving  honour-
able mention,  that  he  was  one  of  the  physicians  who  volunteered  their
services  in  one  of  the  Parisian  hospitals  {La  Salpetrierc)  at  that  time
filled  with  sick  and  wounded  soldiers.  On  this  occasion,  owing  to  his
knowledge  of  the  Armorican  or  Breton  language,  he  had  an  opportunity
of  being  particularly  serviceable  to  some  of  his  unfortunate  countrymen.
Among  the  young  soldiers,  who  at  that  unhappy  period  crowded  the
hospitals,  overwhelmed  at  once  with  bodily  fatigue  and  distress  of  mind,
there  happened  to  be  a  great  number  of  conscripts  from  Brctagne,  who
did  not  know  one  word  of  French,  and  whose  sufferings,  in  consequence,
were  greatly  and  fatally  aggravated  by  nostalgia  of  the  worst,  description.
These  poor  fellows  were  speedily  congregated  in  the  wards  under  the
charge  of  Laennec ;  where  they  derived  as  much  benefit  from  the  care
and  kindness  of  their  countryman,  and  from  the  delight  of  being  under-
stood and  spoken  to  in  their  native  language,  as  from  the  medical  skill
with  which  they  were  treated.


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOK.


xxi


In  1816  Laennec  was  appointed  chief  physician  to  the  Necker  Hos-
pital,  the  duties  of  which  he  undertook  with  his  usual  zeal  and  activity,
and  in  which  he  was  speedily  rewarded  for  all  his  lahours  by  his  immortal
discovery  of  Mediate  Auscultation.  It  is  surprising,  as  he  himself  ob-
serves, that  this  discovery  had  never  been  made  before  :  especially  as  it
is  certain  that  Hippocrates  was  accustomed,  in  certain  cases,  to  apply  the
ear  to  the  chest,  with  the  view  of  ascertaining  the  presence  of  water  in
this  cavity;  and  the  wonder  becomes  still  greater,  after  the  great  analo-
gous discovery  of  Avenbrugger.  For  some  remarks  on  the  practice  of
Hippocrates  in  this  particular,  I  refer  to  the  article  on  Immediate  Jlus-
cultatio?i  in  the  following  treatise;  and  for  the  author's  own  narrative  of
his  discovery  of  Mediate  Auscultation,  I  refer  to  page  5  of  the  Introduc-
tion. From  the  time  of  his  discovery,  M.  Laennec  appears  to  have  de-
voted himself  with  astonishing  perseverance  to  the  perfection  of  the  new
system  of  diagnosis  which  he  founded  on  it :  and  with  a  degree  of  suc-
cess, and  a  fertility  of  results  much  more  remarkable  than  the  discovery
itself,  and  indicative  of  the  finest  powers  of  invention,  the  truest  charac-
teristic of  genius.  In  June  18J8,  that  is,  less  than  two  years  after  the
discovery,  the  author  read  a  memoir  before  the  Academy  of  Sciences,
containing  the  outlines  of  his  method  ;  and  in  September  of  the  following
year  he  published  the  first  edition  of  his  immortal  work,  in  two  volumes
octavo,  under  the  title  of  De  I'Auscultation  Mediate,  ou  Traite  du  Diag-
nostic des  Maladies  des  poumons  et  du  Cceur,  fonde  principalement  sur
ce  nouveau  moyen  d' 'exploration.

The  labour  necessary  to  perfect  his  discovery  and  to  compose  his
Treatise,  was  nearly  fatal  to  the  author ;  and  he  was  under  the  necessity
of  breaking  through  all  his  engagements,  and  retiring  to  the  country,
within  a  month  after  the  publication  of  his  work.  This  was  at  first  re-
reived  by  the  profession  with  considerable  distrust;  and  the  new  mode  of
diagnosis,  and  especially  the  instrument,  was  attempted  to  be  turned  into
ridicule.  Indeed,  but  for  the  admirable  descriptions  of  the  diseases  con-
tained in  the  work,  which  proved  the  vast  industry  and  talent  of  the
author,  and  rendered  his  volumes  infinitely  valuable,  whether  his  diag-
nostics were  true  or  false,  it  seems  probable  that  the  discovery  of  Laennec,
like  that  of  Avenbrugger,  might  have  been  allowed  to  fall  into  temporary
oblivion.  As  it  was,  however,  the  work  soon  excited  a  great  sensation
in  Paris,  and  the  new  method  of  diagnosis  was  hailed,  especially  by  the
younger  members  of  the  profession,  as  a  discovery  fraught  with  the  most
splendid  results.  Fortunately,  also,  the  whole  of  the  author's  investi-
gations had  taken  place  in  the  eye  of  the  public,  and  before  numerous
and  zealous  pupils,  both  able  and  willing  to  prosecute  the  methods  which
they  had  seen  productive  of  such  wonderful  effects  in  the  hands  of  their
master.  These  pupils,  with  a  warmth  natural  to  their  years,  soon  spread
the  practice  of  auscultation  not  only  in  France,  but  conveyed  it,  in  some
degree,  into  every  country  of  Europe.

Meanwhile  the  author  had  retired  to  his  native  province,  worn  down
with  bodily  and  mental  disease.  His  retreat  was  a  country-house  of  his
own,  near  Quimper  (named  in  the  language  of  the  country  Kerlouaruec,
the  place  of  foxes,)  on  the  shores  of  the  bay  of  Douarnenez.  His  illness
at  this  time  presented  none  of  the  characters  of  that  which  subsequently
terminated  his  life.  According  to  the  account  transmitted  to  me  by  Dr.
M.  Laennec,  it  was  a  slow  nervous  fever,  without  any  sign  of  severe  local


XXII


LIFE OF  THE  AUTHOR.


disease. The  principal  symptoms  were— dyspnoea  with  puerile  respi-
ration, and  without  cough  ;  dyspepsia  and  anorexia,  hut  without  redness
ol  the  tongue,  nausea,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  or  pain  in  the  ahdomen  ;  a
tendency  to  vertigo  but  without  heidache ;  great  muscular  dehility  with
disposition  to  fainting,  and  lowness  of  spirits  amounting  almost  to  tedium
vilce;  these  two  last  symptoms  were  the  most  prominent,  and  the  most
distressing  of  all. The  truly  nervous  character  of  Laennec's  disorder
was  sufficiently  proved  by  the  event  of  the  case ;  as  it  was  removed  in  a
surprisingly  short  time  by  his  residence  in  the  country. The  pure  air  of
the  sea-shore ;  the  freedom  from  care  and  mental  labour ;  exercise  par-
ticularly hunting,  of  which  he  was  passionately  fond,  and  the  delightful
associations  of  childhood  and  youth,  re-awakened  amid  the  very  scenes
which  had  given  them  birth,  spread  their  enchantments  over  his  wasted
rame  and  spirits,  and  restored  the  energy  of  both. It  is  no  wonder,
therefore,  that  he  was  unwilling  to  return  to  Paris. He  believed  that  he
could  not  preserve  his  health  there  more  than  six  months;  and  it  was
only  the  great  regard  he  bore  to  his  family,  and  the  powerful  influence
of  Ins  religious  principles,  that  had  sufficient  weight  to  make  him  leave
his  retreat. In  returning  to  the  metropolis,  we  are  assured  that  he  was
solely  influenced  by  the  idea  that  he  might  be  of  use  to  mankind,  by
extending  the  knowledge  of  auscultation. M.  Laennec  reached  Paris  on
the  15th  November,  1821,  and  immediately  resumed  his  duties  in  Necker
Mospital. He  likewise  commenced  a  course  of  Clinical  lectures,  chiefly
illustrative  of  his  new  discoveries,  which  were  attended  by  many  zealous
students,  and  particularly  by  foreigners. Two  months  after  his  return  to

teuT<  \  WaS  SeleCted  ,by  M-  HaI1*  (who  retired  on  account  of  ill
health)  for  his  successor,  as  physician  in  ordinary  to  the  Duchess  of  Berri :
and  on  the  death  of  this  gentleman,  in  March  following,  he  was  also
ffiS  hy/T  ™tho™y>  his  suc<*ssor  in  the  Chair  of  Medicine  in

Tnlv  lfil? ■  WinCe'  Thls/PPorme"t  took  place  on  the  last  day  of
July,  1822,  and  the  new  professor  delivered  his  first  lecture  on  the  2nd
of  December  m  the  same  year.*

-  Owing  to  disturbances"' among  the  pupils,  countenanced  by  some  of
of  MotSS°rS' 0n&nm"S  \n  caus<*  of  a  political  nature,  the  Faculty

lSniSoaoS  STTeSSCd'  W  aUthorit-v>  in  *»  Wiping  of
M  &  re-establlshed  «»riy the  succeeding  Felmfar v.

elicit  iSTA0"  th\SOCcasion>  ^nominated  Professor  of  Clinical  Me-
A  ril  of  nt  ,S  C°ATe  ,°f  Leclures'  at  LaCharite,on  the  1st  of

K  m!  T  i  h,g  1Cr  °ffice  llad  been  ofifered  10  namely,

c  eiTed  .1  n  hC  R°-Val  ?0Undl  0f  PubIic  ^ruction but  he

preferred  the  appointment  which  afforded  him  an  opportunity  of  con
nnung  Ins  researches  and  extending  the  WledgK fflLSrtE

I  was  here  (saysM.  Bayle)  at  La  Charity  surrounded  £hX32S
hat  we  had  an  opportunity  of  admiring,  at  once,  the  delight  hi  ook  in

of  hi  TtZuh^'^*  i,UC,eSt  he  had  *  ^inm^vetnt
ol  Ins  ait,  and  his  courage  m  surmounting  habitual  suffering  in  order
o  indulge  in  his  favourite  pursuits,  llispainful  effort*  w "rf  revalued
m  a  manner  the  inost  agreeable  to  him,  by  a  numerous  conco  r'e  of
pup.ls  and  even  of  distmguished  physicians,  whom  his  great  epu  atio
attracted  to  Paris  from  every  country  i„  Europe." «  wJsaw  hX{^

*  This  was  afterwards  published  i„  the  Archives  (Jfe, M.'d.  for  Jan.  18*.


LIFE OF THE  AUTHOR.


XX111


M.  Kevgaradec)  in  his  new  office,  displaying  the  same  zeal  and  the  same
exactness  which  distinguished  the  performance  of  all  bis  duties.  He
showed  the  utmost  courtesy  and  complaisance  to  all  who  were  attracted
to  his  clinic  by  his  great  name  and  the  wish  to  perfect  themselves  in  the
use  of  the  stethoscope.  His  auditors  consisted  of  the  natives  of  every
country  in  civilized  Europe,  many  of  whom  bad  come  purposely  to  Paris,
With  the  view  of  judging  personally  of  the  new  method  of  exploration,
and  of  seeing  the  illustrious  individual  who  was  entitled  to  the  twofold
honour  of  having  discovered  and  brought  it  to  perfection."

M.  Laennec's  assiduity  in  teaching,  did  not  make  him  neglect  the  work
on  which  the  great  reputation  he  now  enjoyed  was  chiefly  founded.
The  first  edition  of  the  Treatise  on  Auscultation  had  been  for  some  time
out  of  print ;  he,  therefore,  set  about  preparing  a  new  one,  with  the
utmost  care.  This  was  a  work  of  great  labour ;  as  the  alterations  made
in  the  second  edition  constitute  it  rather  a  new  treatise,  than  an  improved
copy  of  the  old.  He  not  only  altered  the  entire  plan  of  the  work,  but
he  submitted  all  his  facts  to  a  new  examination.  He  corrected  some
mis-statements,  cleared  up  many  doubtful  passages,  and  perfected  many
points  of  investigation  which  had  been  only  commenced  at  the  time  of
his  first  publication;  he  likewise  added  the  important  subject  of  treatment
to  his  previous  account  of  the  anatomy  and  diagnosis  of  the  diseases.
The  new  work  having  thus  received  the  most  careful,  and,  as  it  proved,
the  final  revision  of  the  author,  appeared  in  the  beginning  of  1826.  In
like  manner  as  at  the  time  of  the  publication  of  the  former  edition,  the
physical  powers  of  the  author  seem  to  have  been  completely  exhausted
by  the  exertions  he  made  to  finish  his  work,  combined  with  the  pressure
of  his  other  engagements  of  a  public  and  private  nature.  Scarcely  was
his  book  published,  when  the  disease  under  which  he  had  been  labouring
for  some  time,  increased  with  so  much  rapidity  as  soon  forced  him  to
relinquish  all  his  employments.  He  had  been  long  subject  to  a  dry
cough,  to  transient  pains  in  his  right  side,  and  to  a  diarrhoea,  which,  when
it  kept  within  moderate  bounds,  he  considered  rather  beneficial  than
otherwise.  Tn  the  beginning  of  April,  these  symptoms  became  aggra-
vated, with  the  addition  of  fever  and  dyspnoea  and  considerable  emaciation.
Bloodletting  and  other  appropriate  measures  were  had  recourse  to,  only
with  very  temporary  benefit ;  and  he  resolved  to  make  trial,  once  more,
of  the  means  from  which  he  had,  on  a  former  occasion,  derived  such
signal  benefit.  He  reached  his  country  residence,  after  a  fatiguing  jour-
ney, (which  was  rendered  still  more  distressing  by  an  accident  from  which
he  suffered  a  severe  local  injury,)  and  in  circumstances  very  different
from  those  attending  his  former  return.  The  pleasure  of  once  more  find-
ing himself  in  the  place  of  his  birth  and  of  his  affection,  the  freshness
oi  the  sea-air,  in  which  he  had  the  most  remarkable  confidence,  the  free-
dom from  all  professional  cares  and  duties,  and  gentle  airings  in  a  carriage,
seemed  for  a  short  space  to  reanimate  both  his  exhausted  spirits  and  his
wasted  frame.  But  the  relief  was  brief  and  illusive ;  the  bad  symptoms
all  returned  with  redoubled  force ;  and  he  died  on  the  13th  of  August,
1826,  in  the  forty-fifth  year  of  his  age.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  disease  of  which  Laennec  died  was
phthisis  pulmonalis ;  and  it  is  somewhat  curious  that  he  shared  the  fate
of  some  of  his  most  illustrious  predecessors,  in  falling  a  victim  to  a  dis-
ease, the  nature  of  which  he  had  taken  particular  pains  to  illustrate.


xxiv


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOK.


Lancisi  and  Corvisart  died  of  diseased  heart :  and  his  own  friend  Bayle
sunk,  like  himself,  under  the  ravages  of  the  disease  of  which  he  had  been
the  most  successful  illustrator,  and  of  the  inevitable  fatality  of  which  he
had  been  the  most  strenuous  assertor.  M.  Laennec's  case  presented  all
the  external  symptoms  of  consumption ;  and  its  nature  was,  moreover,
fullv  confirmed  by  the  very  art  which  he  had  himself  discovered.  Before
he  left  Paris,  Drs.  Recamier  and  Meriadec  Laennec  discovered  imperfect
but  evident  pectoriloquy,  under  the  clavicle,  and  in  the  supra-spinal
fossa  of  the  left  side ;  and  at  Quimper,  Drs.  Ambrose  Laennec  and
Ollivry  observed  the  same  in  the  infra-spinal  fossa.  There  can,  therefore,
be  no  question  that  tubercles,  in  a  state  of  softening,  existed  in  his  lungs.
Some  time  before  his  death,  his  medical  attendants  had  likewise  discovered
a  hard  irregular  tumour  in  the  abdomen,  the  precise  nature  of  which  was
never  ascertained,  as  the  body  was  not  examined  after  death.  This  ap-
pears a  rather  singular  omission,  considering  the  eminence  and  character
of  the  man,  the  period  of  his  death,  and  the  circumstances  of  his  life.
I  am  informed  by  his  cousin,  that  the  examination  did  not  take  place,
because  there  was  no  medical  person  near  him  at  the  time  of  his  decease.

M.  Laennec  was  of  diminutive  size  from  birth,  but  not  a  sufferer  from
disease  in  the  earlier  parts  of  his  life.  He  grew  up  small  in  stature,  very
thin,  but  of  greater  muscular  powers  than  his  figure  promised.*  During
the  latter  years  of  his  life,  he  was  attenuated  in  a  most  remarkable  de-
gree, insomuch  that  it  was  matter  of  astonishment  to  every  stranger  that
he  could  undergo  the  exertions  which  his  duties  required.  In  estimating
the  value  of  his  labours,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  view  the  state  of  his
health ;  for  if  great  results  were  produced  under  the  constant  pressure
of  disease,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  his  mind  was  capable  of  much
greater  efforts,  if  it  had  happily  been  united  with  a  material  fabric  of
greater  vigour.  M.  Laennec  was  married  only  two  years  before  his  death,
and  had  no  children.  His  widow  has  received  from  Government  a  pension
of  3000  francs  per  annum. -j-

M.  Laennec  was  a  man  of  the  greatest  probity,  habitually  observant
of  his  religious  and  social  duties.  He  was  a  sincere  Christian,  and  a
good  Catholic,  adhering  to  his  religion  and  his  church  through  good  re-
port and  bad  report.  "His  death  (says  M.  Bayle)  was  that  of  a  Chris-
tian. Supported  by  the  hope  of  a  better  life,  prepared  by  the  constant
practice  of  virtue,  he  saw  his  end  approach  with  composure  and  resig-
nation. His  religious  principles,  imbibed  with  his  earliest  knowledge,
were  strengthened  by  the  conviction  of  his  maturer  reason.  He  took
no  pains  to  conceal  them  when  they  were  disadvantageous  to  his  worldly
interests ;  and  he  made  no  boast  of  them,  when  their  avowal  might  have
been  a  title  to  favour  and  advancement."

In  the  practice  of  his  profession  lie  was  extremely  liberal  and  disin-

»  He  was  extremely  fond  of  field  sports,  and  took  great  delight  in  speaking  of  them.
The  exertions  he  was  capable  of  making  on  these  occasions,  were  remarkable,  consi-
dering, us  he  said,  "  l'air  chctif  de  son  exterieur."  For  instance :  he  would  walk
eigtri  or  ten  leagues,  carrying  his  bag  and  gun  ;  and  on  bis  return  home,  in  place  of
resting  himself,  he  would  enter  into  some  species  of  domestic  amusement.

t  buring  the  four  last  years  of  his  life  Laennec  practised  only  as  a  consulting
physician.  The  following  may  be  received  as  a  fair  approximation  towards  the
•amount  of  his  income  :  from  the  Facult6  de  Medecine  10,000  francs  ;  from  the  Col-
lege de  France  5,000;  from  the  Duchess  of  Berri  4,000;  from  bis  private  practice
from  20  to  29,000.


LIFE  OF THE  AUTHOR.


XXV


terestcd.  "  His  great  reputation,"  says  the  author  just  quoted,  "  caused
his  services  to  be  required  by  persons  of  the  highest  station,  as  well  as
by  the  poor :  the  former  he  frequently  refused  to  visit,  on  account  of  the
bad  state  of  his  health,  the  latter  never.  Nor  was  it  only  in  the  way  of
professional  advice  that  he  served  the  poor :  he  was  extremely  liberal  in
relieving  their  distresses  with  pecuniary  aid,  and  in  a  manner  so  unos-
tentatious, that  it  is  only  since  his  death  that  the  extent  of  his  bounty
has  come  to  light."

M.  Laennec  was  mild  and  agreeable  in  his  manners,  and  of  a  quiet
and  even  temper.  His  conversation  was  at  once  lively  and  instructive ;
and  his  natural  humility  and  kindness  of  heart  were  in  no  degree  lessened
by  his  great  reputation,  and  the  deference  that  was  paid  to  him  in  the
after  years  of  his  life.  He  was  remarkable  for  his  great  kindness  and
courtesy  to  foreigners,  particularly  the  English.  "  The  homage  paid  to
the  talents  of  Laennec,"  says  Dr.  Williams,  "  gives  me  a  gratification
that  almost  seems  personal ;  and  I  doubt  not  that  this  feeling  is  shared
by  others  of  his  pupils,  in  whom  his  urbane  and  amiable -deportment
created  a  sincere  regard  for  the  man,  as  his  great  mental  abilities  excited
our  respect.  His  great  talents  are  known  to  the  public  through  the
medium  of  his  writings ;  but  those  who  attended  his  clinique  can  alone
appreciate  the  wonderful  acuteness  of  perception  and  faculty  for  obser-
vation, that  enabled  him  to  carry  his  discovery  to  the  degree  of  perfection
in  which  he  left  it ;  and  they,  above  all,  witnessed,  felt,  and  profited  by
the  solicitous  interest  which  he  showed,  to  make  others  partake  of  its
inestimable  advantages."*  He  was,  however,  less  popular  with  many  of
his  own  countrymen,  and  especially  with  that  numerous  class  of  students
and  young  practitioners  who  were  disciples  of  the  school  of  Broussais.
With  this  physician  M.  Laennec  was  much  at  variance ;  and  a  contro-
versy was  for  some  time  kept  up  between  them,  which  redounded  little  to
the  credit  of  either.  It  must  be  admitted  that  M.  Laennec  was  not  free
from  prejudices:  and  he  could  never  be  brought  to  render  full  justice  to
the  doctrines  of  his  opponent.  This  is  much  to  be  regretted :  for  what-
ever be  the  errors  of  that  system,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  to  it  the
world  is  indebted  for  many  valuable  discoveries  in  pathology,  and  most
important  improvements  in  practical  medicine.  But,  even  if  this  were
not  the  case,  the  system  deserved,  at  least,  at  the  hands  of  a  philosopher,
to  be  examined  with  calmness,  and  its  good  separated  from  its  evil  with
candour.  It  is  true  that  the  opponents  of  M.  Laennec  in  this  controversy,
were  more  violent,  and  more  prejudiced  than  himself ;  and  every  one  must
admit,  that  to  retain,  amid  the  excitations  of  controversy,  the  golden  mean
of  truth  and  justice,  both  in  the  appreciation  of  the  facts  adduced  by  our
adversary,  and  in  the  expression  of  our  arguments,  is  only  permitted  to
few.  If  M.  Laennec  was  not  of  this  number,  it  ought  certainly  to  be
matter  of  regret,  but  not  of  surprise.

M.  Laennec  was  strongly  attached  to  the  existing  government  of
France ;  and  was  a  decided  enemy  to  the  liberal  opinions  in  politics,  which
characterized  the  popular  party  in  that  country.  He  is  even  reproached,
I  know  not  how  justly,  with  permitting  his  prejudices,  in  this  particular,

*  A  Rational  Exposition  of  the  physical  signs  of  the  diseases  of  the  lungs  and  pleura.
Preface  to  the  first  edition,  p.  ix.  I  gladly  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  of  strongly
recommending  this  very  valuable  work,  of  which  a  second  edition  is  now  published,
to  the  notice  of  the  student  of  auscultation.


xxvi


LIFE  OF THE  AUTHOK.


to  interfere  with  his  judgments  as  a  man  of  science  and  a  professor.  I
hope  this  is  not  true.

It  is  unnecessary,  after  what  has  heen  already  stated  in  this  sketch,  to
dwell  long  upon  the  character  of  M.  Laennec  as  a  pathologist  and  medical
writer.  His  whole  life  was  devoted  to  professional  pursuits ;  and  his  nu-
merous writings  afford  hrefragable  proof  of  great  talent,  aud  still  greater
industry.  His  genius  was  decidedly  inventive,  and  his  turn  of  thought
original.  His  writings  are  generally  marked  by  sound  sense,  clear  views,
and  perspicuous  order ;  they  are,  however,  often  diffuse,  and  sometimes
needlessly  minute.  He  was  an  excellent  Greek  and  Latin  scholar,  and
well  read  in  the  best  medical  authors,  who  have  written  in  those  languages.
He  was,  however,  by  no  means  equally  well  acquainted  with  modern
medical  literature  ;  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  his  more  important  wri-
tings are  deficient  in  references  both  to  his  predecessors  and  contempo-
raries. This  may  be  partly  accounted  for  by  his  impaired  health,  and
partly  by  his  devoting  almost  all  his  time,  during  his  latter  years,  to  the
perfection  of  his  great  discovery.  He  was  particularly  fond  of  the  Latin
language,  and,  in  different  parts  of  his  writings,  regrets  that  it  is  not  still
made  the  general  medium  of  intercourse  between  men  of  science.  He
was  accustomed,  in  the  clinical  hospital,  to  dictate  his  reports,  and  to
address  the  pupils  in  that  language ;  partly  from  a  wish  to  conceal  from
the  patients  his  opinions  of  their  complaints,  and  partly  from  his  having
always  among  his  followers  a  good  many  foreigners  who  might,  perhaps
be  unacquainted  with  the  French.  He  himself,  I  believe,  could  speak
or  read  no  modern  language  but  his  own.  On  this  account  he  was  some-
times in  the  habit  of  corresponding  in  Latin.*

However  eminent  as  a  pathologist,  however  qualified  for  accurate  obser-
vation, and  however  gifted  with  inventive  genius,  it  is  the  opinion  of  many

*  I  give  the  following  extracts  from  one  of  his  letters  to  myself,  as  a  specimen  of
liis  style.  They  are  likewise  in  place  here  :  the  first  as  relating  to  the  alterations  in
the  second  edition  of  his  work :  and  the  last  as  illustrating  his  taste  for  antiquarian
lore.

Novam  interea  Auscultationis  intermedia  editionem  molior,  quam,  vergente  anno,
publici  juris  faciam,  statimque  ac  in  lucem  prodibit,  ad  te  exemplarium  mittam.  Non
nulla  in  ea  nova  erunt,  multa  clariora  autcertiora.  Morborum  praeterea  pectoris  cu-
randorum  rationes,  usu  et  experientia  magis  comprobatas  addo.  Operis  ea  do  causa,
ordo  baud  parum  diversus,  nec  tamen  moles  multo  amplior  erit :  nam  non  nulla  delere
aut  saltern  contrahere  in  animo  est.  Ideo  te  non  nisi  postquam  opus  acceperis,  ad
novam  versionis  tuaj  editionem  faciendam,  accingendum  esse  arbitror;  tantum  historias
acgrotorum,  quas  in  prima  versione  breviter  indicasti,  fuse  vertere  potes,  nam  de  his
parum  demam,  nisi  quoad  stylum  forsan  attinet

p.  S.  Signata  jam  epistola,  titulum  tua;  versionis  relegi,  et  video  te  Societati  Geo-
logical Cornubiensi,  &  scriptis  esse  aut  fuisse.  Si  forte  opusculum  aliquod  antiqua
lingua  Cornubiensi  scriptum,  aut  quod  ejusdem  lingua;  notitiam  aliquara  contineret,
mihi  indicare  posses,  hoc  sane  me  incredibili  gaudio  perfunderet :  nam  Ariuorico-
Britannus  sum,  vernaculaique  lingua;,  id  est  Celtics,  ut  qui  maxiruc  cupidus  ;  inter
cujus  dialectos,  Cornubiensis  etiamsi  abbinc  80  annos  aut  circiter  penitus  obsoleverit,
tnmen  pbilologia;  Celtica;  semper  pretiosa  erit,  quia  tiexum  et  transitum  efficit  inter
Armoricanas  dialectos  et  Cambricas  (Vestrates  dicunt,  ni  fallor  Welsh  language).
Cambrica  scripta  majoris  momenti  fere  omnia  babeo;  sed  nihil  unqunm  de  Cornubiensi
lingua  novi,pra-ter  Lloydi  Arclxrologiam  Britannicam,  eximium  opus,  sed  rarissimuni,
quodque  semel  duntaxat,  in  bibliotheca  cujusdam  docti  viri,  videre  potius  quam  legere
licuit.  Si  vulgariora  qua'dam  populi  Cornubiensis,  nuper  elapso  sa«culo  prorsus
extincti,  monumenta  adliuc  supersunt,  ut  puta,  cantilena',  populares,  aut  Cbristia-
nanim  precum  libclli,  gratissimum  mihi  faceres,  si  posses  aliquid  ejusmodi  ad  me
mittere


LIFE  OF THE  AUTHOR.


XXVll


who  had  opportunities  of  personal  observation,  that  M.  Laennec  did  not
possess,  in  a  high  degree,  the  mental  qualifications  necessary  to  constitute  a
great  and  skilful  practitioner.  Even  in  the  very  class  of  diseases,  in  the
knowledge  of  whose  pathology  and  signs  he  was  without  a  rival,  his  prac-
tice was  not  reckoned  of  that  scientific  and  comprehensive  kind,  which
bespeaks  a  mind  accustomed  to  take  in  at  once  the  whole  of  the  morbid
processes,  and  quick  and  fertile  in  expedients  to  control  or  relieve  them.
This  I  think  is  evident  from  his  own  work,  the  therapeutical  parts  of  which
are  not  equal  to  the  others.  The  inventive  turn  of  his  genius  seemed  to
have  frequently  misled  him  from  the  most  obvious  and  best  path,  because
it  was  the  common  one ;  and  in  his  search  after  novelty,  he  would  some-
times adopt  measures  of  very  doubtful  powers,  and  altogether  overlook
others  of  known  and  approved  efficacy.  In  his  total  rejection  of  the  doc-
trines of  Broussais,  he  certainly  committed  a  great  practical  error ;  and  it
may  be  stated  generally  that  he  was  too  much  disposed  to  sacrifice  scien-
tific views  to  empiricism.

It  will  not  for  a  moment  be  supposed  that  the  kind  of  study  to  which
M.  Laennec  was  more  particularly  devoted,  could  have  any  effect  in  pro-
ducing this  result.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  thing  of  daily  observation
that  men,  in  every  other  respect  most  highly  qualified  by  natural  gifts,
and  by  general  education,  for  becoming  good  practitioners,  are  rendered
the  very  reverse  by  their  mere  ignorance  of  pathology ;  while  it  is  equally
common  to  find  others,  most  deficient  in  the  natural  qualifications,  who
pass  for  good  practitioners,  on  the  single  ground  of  their  pathological
knowledge.  It  is  only  where  the  peculiar  but  indefinite  talent  for  the  art
of  practical  medicine,  is  combined  with  a  talent  for  close  observation,  and
a  profound  knowledge  of  pathology,  that  we  find  the  physician  arrive  at
the  greatest  degree  of  perfection  in  his  practice.

The  most  remarkable  features  in  the  character  of  Laennec,  as  a  prac-
tical physician,  were  his  profound  acquaintance  with  organic  diseases,
and  his  accurate  diagnosis  of  them  in  the  living  body.  His  examinations
were  most  extensive  and  minute ;  and  the  judgments  he  founded  on  these,
were  such  as  might  be  expected  from  his  industry  and  his  talents.  In
the  diagnosis  of  the  diseases  of  the  chest,  he  was  universally  allowed  to  be
without  a  rival ;  and  it  is  but  justice  to  state,  that  whatever  was  his  zeal
for  his  new  diagnostic  measures,  he  seemed  always  more  desirous  of  ascer-
taining the  truth,  whatever  this  might  be,  than  to  obtain  results  that
might  redound  to  the  honour  of  his  discovery.

M.  Laennec  had  a  great  taste  for  mechanical  knowledge  ;  and  to  this
bias  of  his  mind  we  are  probably  indebted  for  the  invention  of  the  ste-
thoscope. He  was  also  conversant  with  practical  mechanics,  and  used  to
make  his  own  stethoscopes.

hi  the  preceding  pages  I  have  already  named  the  principal  published
writings  of  M.  Laennec ;  and  shall  now  subjoin  in  a  note,  a  list  of  the  few
that  remain  unnoticed,*  excepting  his  Revieivs. These  latter  produc-

*  Observation  sur  un  Suicide,  Journ.  de  M6d.  t.  v.
Observation  sur  une  Maladie  du  Occur,  Ibid.  t.  vii.
Reflexions  sur  niydroc6phale  interne  aigu,  Ibid.  t.  xi.
Observation  sur  un  Aneurisme  de  l'Aorte,  Ibid.  t.  xii.

Fievres  interniittentes  pernicieuses  survenues  dans  la  convalescence  d'  autres
maladies,  Ibid.  t.  xiv.

Observation  sur  unc  affection  aptlieuse,  Ibid.  t.  xxii.


XXV111


LIFE  OF  THE  AUTHOR.


tions  are  very  numerous  and  are  contained  principally  in  the  Joum.  de
Med.  from  1804  to  1814.  Many  of  them  were  written  when  the  author
was  still  very  young,  and  evince  considerable  talent.  Among  these,  an
article  on  the  system  of  John  Brown,  (Op.  Cit.  t.  xi.,)  and  another  on  the
doctrines  of  Gall,  (Ibid.  t.  xii.,)  both  written  in  his  25th  year,  are  excel-
lent in  their  kind.  The  following  brief  character  of  Brown  and  his  work
is  truly  drawn  and  forcibly  expressed.  "  L'  ensemble  ineme  de  Pouvrage,
quoique  souvent  mal  coordonne,  mal  lie  dans  ses  parties,  porte  cependant
partout  l'empreinte  d'un  esprit  peu  ordinaire.  11  faut  du  genie  pour
s'egarer,  ainsi  que  1'a  fait  Brown :  mais  dans  les  sciences  d'observation,  le
genie  n'est  qu'un  don  funeste  de  la  nature,  lorsqu'il  n'est  pas  accompagne
d'un  esprit  droit  et  juste.  Si  au  lieu  de  se  livrer  a  son  imagination,
Brown  eut  puise  dans  les  ouvrages  des  maitres  de  l'art  une  instruction
solide,  s'il  eut  consulte  la  nature  au  lieu  de  raisonner  sur  ses  lois,  il  eut
rendu  ses  talens  aussi  utiles  aux  progres  de  la  medecine,  qu'ils  peuvent
lui  devenir  funestes  par  Pusage  qu'il  en  fait."*  The  article  on  Gall,
which  may  fairly  bear  comparison  with  the  celebrated  one  by  Dr.  Gordon
in  the  25th  vol.  of  the  Edinburgh  Review,  and  which  it  preceded  by  no
less  than  nine  years,  is  forcibly  and  pleasantly  written  ;  but,  like  Dr.
Gordon's,  it  was  conceived  in  a  spirit  unbecoming  the  philosophic  in-
quirer after  truth,  and  composed  in  evident  ignorance  of  the  principles  of
the  doctrines  which  it  professes  to  expound. f  Laennec  was  a  true  Breton,
fond  of  his  country  and  consequently  jealous  of  its  honour.  It  is  amusing
to  observe  in  one  of  his  reviews  (Jonrn.  de  Med.  t.  xi.  p.  642)  the  high
tone  he  assumes  iu  refuting  a  charge,  brought  by  a  certain  writer  against
his  native  country,  for  being  infamous  for  an  epidemic  itch.  He  solemnly
assures  us  that  if,  in  very  truth,  "  la  gale  s  observe  quelquefois  en  Bre-
tagne,  on  en  doit  moins  accuser  les  localites,  que  le  passage  et  le  sejour
des  matelots,"  &c.

A  good  deal  has  been  said  respecting  the  manuscript  writings  left  by
Laennec,  and  one  of  his  biographers  has  led  the  public  to  expect  the
early  publication  of  a  considerable  part  of  them  by  his  cousin,  Dr.  Meri-
adec  Laennec,  to  whom  they  were  bequeathed.  This  is  a  mistake.  The
following  is  an  account  of  them  transmitted  to  me  by  Dr.  M.  Laennec.
1st.  a  very  great  number  of  Cases,  indeed  the  whole  drawn  up  by  the
author  during  the  course  of  his  medical  life. They  are  quite  unfit  for

Observation  sur  des  vers  ascarides,  &c.  Bulletins  de  la  Soc.  de  V  EcoU  de  Mkd.
t.  i.  p.  53.

M£moire  sur  les  vers  versiculaires,  Ibid.  p.  121.

Seance  du  6  thermidor  an.  xiii. Memoire  sur  le  Cysticerque  a  double  vessie.

du  51  frimairean.  xiv. Note  sur  la  non-existence  du  tccnia  visceralis.

.  du  an.  xiv. Note  sur  une  dilatation  partielle  de  la  valvule  mitrale.

du  l6Avril  1807.  Memoire  sur  uno  nouvelle  espece  d'  bernie  (lntrapel-

vienne.)

du  19  Decembre  1810. De  angina  pectoris  commentanus.

*  Journ.  de  Med.  t.  xi.  p.  230.

+  While  combating  bis  author  on  the  score  of  the  number  and  division  of  his  facul-
ties the  reviewer  asks  why  there  is  not  one  for  dancing  as  well  as  for  painting,  music,
fccand  pleasantly  adds,  that  the  doctor  might  have  high  authority  for  the  new  organ.
The  first  Vestris,  he  informs  us,  having  just  finished  a  dance  which  seemed  to  require
as  much  strength  as  agility,  was  asked  by  a  spectator  if  he  was  not  much  fatigued—
"  Monsieur  "  said  the  dancer,  "  dans  notre  art  la  fatigue  des  jambes  est  peu  de  chose :
c'estceci,"  he  added,  pointing  to  his  forehead—"  c'est  ceci  qui  travaille  !  "-  Joi<r»i.  de
Mdd.  t.  xii.  p.  285.


LIFE OF THE  AUTHOR.


xxix


publication.  The  greater  number  of  them  present  facts  now  well  known,
and  such  as  possess  peculiar  interest  or  novelty,  have  been  already  made
use  of  by  the  author  himself,  in  his  published  writings.  2nd.  Some
chapters  on  Accidental  Productions,  partly  published  in  the  Diet,  des
Sc.  Med.  and  in  his  Treatise  on  Auscultation.  3rd.  A  collection  of
notes  on  the  whole  subject  of  medicine,  from  which  he  delivered  his
lectures  at  the  College  de  France.  These  notes  are  in  general  very  short,
and  very  unconnected,  and  could  only  be  reduced  to  a  connected  form  by
much  labour,  and  by  some  one  who  had  heard  the  discourses  and  was  ac-
quainted with  the  lecturer's  method.  Dr.  M.  Laennec  says  it  is  his  inten-
tion to  attempt  this,  for  the  first  thirty  lectures  ;  and  if  he  succeeds  so  far
as  to  produce  a  work  not  unworthy  the  memory  of  the  author,  he  will
publish  it ;  but  not  otherwise.  In  this  task  Dr.  M.  Laennec's  labour  will
be  somewhat  analogous  to  my  own,  but  still  more  difficult.  I  have  had
only  to  express  in  new  language  ideas  already  expressed  :  he  will  have  to
call  up  from  the  stores  of  his  own  memory,  or  supply  from  his  own  judg-
ment, all  that  is  necessary  to  convert  the  fragments  in  his  hands  into  a
connected  whole  :  both  of  us,  probably,  may  consider  it  the  dearest  labour
of  our  lives,  and  our  highest  honour,  that  we  have  been  instrumental  in
spreading  among  the  members  of  our  common  profession  throughout
the  world,  the  knowledge  of  the  great  discovery  that  will  render  the
name  of  Laennec  immortal.

J.  F.


NOTICE  TO  BINDER.
Plate  II  to  face  the  Title.


ANALYTICAL  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


PACE


Dedication . . .  v

Translator's  Preface  to  the  Second  Edition  .  vii

to  tre  Third  Edition  . .  xiii

to  the  Fourth  Edition .  .  xv

Life  of  the  Author . .  .  xvii

Introduction .  I

PART  FIRST.

Of  the  Exploration  of  the  Chest .  9

Chap.  I.  Of  the  more  ancient  methods .  .  ib.

Sect.  1.  Manual  examination  of  the  chest  . .  ib.

Sect.  2.  Inspection  of  the  chest .  12

Sect.  3.  Succussion  of  the  chest  .  .14

Seci.  4.  Abdominal  pressure . .  .15

Chap.  II.  Of  Percussion. . .  16

Mode  of  percussion .  .  .17

Character  of  the  sound  in  different  parts  .  19

Chap.  III.  Of  Immediate  Auscultation  . .  24

Chap.  IV.  Of  Mediate  Auscultation .  .  27

Sect.  1.  Auscultation  of  the  respiration  . .  28

Vesicular  respiration .  29

Bronchial  respiration .  .  .33

Cavernous  respiration .  .  .34

Blowing  or  puffing  respiration .  ib.

Sect.  2.  Auscultation  of  the  voice .  .  .35

Bronchophony . .  .37

Pectoriloquy . .  38

iEgophony . .  .  .39

Sect.  3.  Auscultation  of  the  cough .  47

Sect.  4.  Auscultation  of  other  sounds  . .  48

Different  kinds  of  rhonchus .  . .  ib.

The  moist  crepitous  rhonchus .  .  49

The  mucous  rhonchus .  .  50

The  tracheal  rhonchus  .  .51

The  dry  sonorous  rhonchus .  53

The  dry  sibilous  rhonchus  . .  54

Dry  crepitous  rhonchus .  .  ib.

Of  the  metallic  tinkling •  .  56


xxxn


CONTENTS.


PART  SECOND.

DISEASES  OF  THE  BRONCHI,  LUNGS,  AND  PLEURA.

BOOK  FIRST.

DISEASES  OF  THE  BRONCHI.

PAGE

Chap.  I.  Of  the  catarrhal  and  inflammatory  affections


OF  THE  MUCOUS  MEMBRANE  .  61

Sect.  1.  Of  the  acute  mucous  catarrh  . .  ib.

Anatomical  characters  . .  62

Symptoms  and  progress  .  64

Occasional  causes .  .  .65

Pathognomonic  signs  . .  ib.

Treatment .  .  67

Sect.  2.  Of  the  Chronic  mucous  catarrh  . .  70

Symptoms  and  progress  .  ..71

Treatment . .  72

Sect.  3.  Of  the  Pituitous  catarrh  . .  76

Idiopathic  pituitous  catarrh  .  ib.

Acute  pituitous  catarrh  . .  .77

Chronic  pituitous  catarrh  . .  78

Treatment . .  .  .79

Sect.  4.  Of  the  suffocative  catarrh  .  80

In  old  persons .  .  ib.

With  oedema  of  the  lungs  . .  ib.

In  the  dying .  .  81

In  adults  and  children  . .  ib.

Treatment .  ib.

Sect.  5.  Of  the  dry  and  latent  catarrh  . .  83

Symptoms  and  progress  . .  85

Treatment . .  .  .87

Sect.  6.  Of  the  hooping  cough  .  91

Treatment •  .  93

Sect.  7.  Of  symptomatic  catarrh  . .  95

Chap.  II.  Of  Dilatation  of  the  Bronchi  .  .100

Anatomical  characters  . .  ib.

Occasional  causes .  .  .102

Signs  and  symptoms  . . .  ib.

Treatment .  . .  .104

Case  I.  105

Case  II. .  . .  106

Case  III.  . .  .107

Case  IV. .  .  .108


contents.  xxxiii

VACV.

Chap.  ITT.  Of  Croup . . .  .112
Anatomical  characters . .  .113

Symptoms . . .  .116

Occasional  causes . .  .119

Treatment . . .  .120

Chap.  IV.  Of  bronchial  Hemorrhage  .  . .  123

Anatomical  characters .  .124

Signs  and  symptoms . .  ib.

Occasional  causes . .  .125

Treatment . .  ib.

Chap.  V.  Of  Polypus  of  the  bronchial  membrane  .  126

Chap.  VI.  Of  Ulcers  of  the  bronchi .  .  128

Anatomical  characters .  ib.

Symptoms . . .  .129

Treatment . . .  .130

Chap.  VII.  Of  alterations  of  the  bronchial  coats  .  ib.

Chap.  VIII.  Of  foreign  bodies  in  the  bronchi  .  131

Chap.  IX.  Of  diseases  of  the  bronchial  glands  .  133

book  second.
DISEASES  OF  THE  LUNGS.

Structure  of  the  lungs . .  .  135

Chap.  I.  Of  hypertrophy  of  the  lungs .  .  139

Chap.  II.  Of  atrophy  of  the  lungs  .  .  140
Chap.  III.  Of  emphysema  of  the  lungs . .  141

Sect.  1.  Of  Vesicular  emphysema .  .  ib.

Anatomical  characters . .  ib.

Occasional  causes . .  .147

Signs  and  symptoms  .  .  .148
Progress  of  the  disease . .  .150

Treatment . . t  .  .152

Case  V.  ib.

Case  VI. . .  .153

Case  VII. .  .  154

Case  VIII. .  ,  155

Sect.  2.  Of  Interlobular  emphysema .  .  157

Anatomical  characters . .  .158

Occasional  causes . •  .159

Signs . . .  .160

Treatment . .  161

Chap.  IV.  Of  (Edema  of  the  lungs .  .  163

Anatomical  characters . .  .164

Symptoms  and  signs . .  .  ib.

Case  IX. . .  .  166

CaseX. . :  .  167

Case  XI. . .  .168

Case  XII. .  .  169

c


XXXIV  CONTENTS.


r  AGE


Chap.  V.  Of  pulmonary  apoplexy  . .  171

Anatomical  characters .  .  ib.

Signs  and  symptoms .  .  .174

Occasional  causes .  .  .179

Treatment . .  .  .180

Chap.  VI.  Of  pneumonia .  . .  182

Sect.  1.  Anatomical  characters  of  the  acute  .  .183

First  degree  (engorgement)  . .  ib.

Second  degree  (hepatization)  . .  ib.

Third  degree  (purulent  infiltration)  .  185

Abscess  of  the  lungs  . .  188

Resolution  of  pneumonia  .  .191

Duration  of  the  disease .  . .  192

State  of  the  bronchi .  . .  193

Sect.  2.  Signs  and  symptoms  of  Pneumonia  .  ib.

Physical  signs .  .  .194

Signs  of  suppuration .  . .  197

Signs  of  abscess .  .  ib.

Signs  of  resolution .  .  .198

Pulmonary  symptoms .  .  .201

General  symptoms  and  progress  . .  203

Occasional  causes .  . .  205

Sect.  3.  Of  gangrene  of  the  kings .  . .  207

Uncircumscribed  gangrene  . .  ib

Circumscribed  gangrene  . .  208

Anatomical  characters .  .  ib.

Physical  signs .  . .  209

Symptoms  and  progress .  .  .211

Case  XII.  (bis)  . .  ib.

Case  XIII. .  .  .212

Case  XIV. .  .  213

Case  XV. .  .  ib.

Sect.  4.  Of  Chronic  Pneumonia .  . .  216

Sect.  5.  Of  latent  and  symptomatic  Pneumonia  .  218

Sect.  6.  Treatment  of  Pneumonia .  .  .221

Bloodletting .  . .  222

Derivatives . .  .  226

Alkalis  and  Attcnuants  . .  ib.

Purgatives  and  Emetics .  • .  227

Tonics  .  .  .  228
Alieratives ....  229

Tartar  emetic  in  large  doses  . .  230

Regimen . .  . .  247

Case  XVI. .  .  248

Chap.  VII.  Of  phthisis  pulmonalis  . .  252

Sect.  1.  Anatomical  history  of  tubercles  . .  253

Miliary  tubercles .  .  ib.

Granular  tubercles .  . .  254


CONTEXTS.


XXXV


PAGE

Grey  tuberculous  infiltration  . .  256

Jelly-like  infiltration .  ib.

Encysted  tubercles .  . .  262

Organic  changes  accompanying  phthisis  .  267

Sect.  2.  Do  tubercles  arise  from  Inflammation?  ,  271

From  acute  pneumonia  ?  .  ib.

From  Chronic  pneumonia  ?  . .  273

From  catarrh  ? . .  .  274

From  pleurisy .  . .  276

Sect.  3.  Is  phthisis  curable  ? .  . .  279

Case  XVII. .  .  281

Case  XVIII.  . .  282

Case  XIX. .  .  283

Case  XX.  . .  284

Case  XXI. .  .  .285

Case  XXII.  . .  289

CaseXXHI. .  .  291

Case  XXIV. .  .  294

Case  XXV.  . .  296

Case  XXVI.  . .  298

Sect.  4.  Occasional  causes  of  phthisis .  . .  299

Sect.  5.  Physical  signs  of  tubercles  . .  308

Signs  of  crude  tubercles .  .  ib.

Signs  of  the  softening  of  tubercles  . .  ib.

Signs  of  the  discharge  of  tubercles  . .  309

Case  XXVII.  . .  314

Case  XXVIII. .  .  316

Case  XXIX. .  ib.

Sect.  6.  Symptoms  and  progress  of  phthisis  .  317

Regular  manifest  phthisis  . .  ib.

Vomica  of  the  lungs .  . .  323

Irregular  manifest  phthisis  . .  325

Latent  phthisis . .  .  327

Acute  phthisis .  . .  328

Chronic  phthisis .  .  329

Sect.  7.  Treatment  of  phthisis .  . .  ib.

Means  of  softening  tubercles  . .  332

Empirical  means *  .  334

Palliative  treatment  of  symptoms  . .  338

Chap.  VIII.  Of  cysts  in  the  lungs  . .  342

Chap.  IX.  Of  hydatids  in  the  lungs  . .  343

Treatmeut . .  .  346

Chap.  X.  Of  concretions  in  the  lungs  . .  347

Chap.  XI.  Of  melanosis  of  the  lungs  . .  351

Encysted  melanosis .  • •  352

Unencysted  melanosis .  • ■  353

Diffused  melanosis •  • .  ib.

Case  XXX. .  •  -359

Case  XXXI.  • •  ib.


c  2


XXXVI  CONTENTS.

h

\

Chap.  XII.  Of  Encephaloid  tumour  of  the  lum is
Encysted  medullary  tumour
Unencysted  medullary  tumour
Diffused  medullary  tumour

Chap.  XIII.  Of  diseases  of  the  pulmonary  vessels
Chap.  XIV.  Of  nervous  affections  of  the  lungs

Sect.  1 .  Neuralgia  of  the  lungs
Sect.  2.  Nervous  Dyspnaa

i.  Asthma  with  puerile  respiration

ii.  Spasmodic  asthma
Treatment


P.OOK  THIRD.

DISEASES  OF  THE  PLEURA.

Chap.  I.  Of  pleurisy

Sect.  t.  Of  simple  acute  pleurisy

Sect.  2.  Of  acute  hemorrhagic  pleurisy

Sect.  3.  Of  gangrene  of  the  pleura

Sect.  4.  Signs  and  symptoms  of  acute  pleurisy

Physical  signs

Double  pleurisy

Local  symptoms

General  symptoms  .
Sect.  5.  Of  chronic  pleurisy

Anatomical  characters

Signs  and  symptoms

Sect.  6.  Of  contraction  of  the  chest

Case  XXXI.  {bis.)
Case  XXXII.
Case  XXXIII.
Case  XXXIV.

Sect.  7.  Of  circumscribed  or  partial  pleurisy
Signs  and  symptoms

Sect.  8.  Of  latent  pleurisy
Sect.  9.  Treatment  of  pleurisy
Operation  of  empyema

Sect.  10.  Of  Pleuro-pneumonia

Pneumonia  with  slight  pleurisy
Pleurisy  with  slight  pneumonia
True  pleuro-pneumonia

Chap.  II.  Of  hvdrothorax

Sect.  I.  Of  idiopathic  hydrothorax
Signs  and  symptoms

Sect.  2.  Of  symptomatic  hydrothorax

Chap.  III.  Of  h^mathorax
Treatment


CONTENTS.

Chap.  IV.  Of  pneumothorax

Sect.  1.  Anatomical  characters  of  pneumothorax

Case  XXXV.'
Sect.  2. Symptoms  and  signs  of  pneumothorax

Case  XXXVI.
Sect.  3.  Of  pneumothorax  with  liq  uid  effusion

Case  XXXVII.
Case  XXXVIII.
Case  XXXIX.
Case  XL
Case  XLI.

Sect.  4.  Of  the  metallic  tinkling  as  a  sign

Case  XLII.
Treatment  of  pneumothorax

Case  XLIII.
Sect.  5.  Of  double  pneumothorax

Chap.  V.  Of  accidental  productions  in  the  pleura

Sect.  1 .  Productions  with  effusion
Sect.  2.  Solid  productions

Case  XLIV.
Sect.  3.  Productions  on  the  outer  surface
Sect.  4.  Diaphragmatic  hernia

PART  THIRD.

DISEASES  OF  THE  HEART  AND  ITS  APPENDAGES.

BOOK  FIRST.

OF  THE  EXPLORATION  OF  THE  ORGANS  OF  CIRCULATION.


General  remarks ....  494

Chap.  1.  Of  the  extent  of  the  heart's  pulsations  .  496

Chap.  II.  Of  the  shock  or  impulse . .  .  500

Chap.  IIT.  Of  the  sound .  .  502

Chap.  IV.  Of  the  rythm . .  .  504

Chap.  V.  Of  anomalous  sounds . .  .  516

Sect.  1.  Of  the  bellows- sound .  .  ib.

Proper  bellows-sound  .  .  .517

Sound  of  the  saw . .  ib.

Musical  bellows-sound .  ib.

Causes  of  the  bellows-sound .  .  518

Sect.  2.  Of  the  purring-thrill . .  •  523

Sect.  3.  Of  the  sound  of  pulsation  at  a  distance  .  526

Chap.  VI.  Of  Palpitation  of  the  heart .  .  527

Chap.  VII.  Of  irregularities  of  the  heart's  action  .  529

Chap.  VTII.  Of  intermissions  of  the  heart's  action  .  530


WXVll


456

ib.
.  460
.  461

.  464
.  465

.  470

.  472

.  474

.  475

.  476

.  479

.  482

.  485

.  486
.  487

.  488

ib.
.  490

ib.
.  492
ib.


XXXV111


CONTENTS.


BOOK  SECOND.


OFDISEASES  OF  THE  HEART.

PAGE

Chap.  I.  Of  diseases  of  the  heart  in  general  .  536

Sect.  1.  Of  the  symptoms  of  all  diseases  of  the  heart  .  ib.

Sect.  2.  Of  the  changes  produced  on  other  organs  .  539

Sect.  3.  Of  the  causes  of  diseases  of  the  heart  .■  542

Chap.  II.  Of  hypertrophy  of  the  heart  .  .  544
Signs  of  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ventricle  .  547
■  •  right  ventricle  .  549

Chap.  III.  Of  dilatation  of  the  ventricles  .  .  551
Anatomical  characters  .  .  ib.
Signs  of  dilatation  of  the  left  ventricle  .  553
right  ventricle  .  ib.

Chap.  IV.  Of  dilatation  with  hyp.  of  the  ventricles  .  555

Signs  •  .  .  .556

Chap.  V.  Of  dilat.  of  one  vent,  with  hyp.  of  the  other  .  557

Chap.  VI.  Of  dilatation  with  hypert.  of  the  auricles  560

Chap.  VII.  Of  partial  dilatation  of  the  heart  .  562

Chap.  VIII.  Of  induration  of  the  heart .  .  564

Chap.  IX.  Of  softening  of  the  heart .  .  565

Chap.  X.  Of  atrophy  of  the  heart .  .  570

Chap.  XI.  Of  displacement  of  the  heart •  .  571

Chap.  XII.  Of  malformation  of  the  heart .  .  573

Chap.  XIII.  Of  carditis . .  .  576

Chap.  XIV.  Of  rupture  of  the  heart .  .  579

Chap.  XV.  Of  fatty  disease  of  the  heart .  .  583

Chap.  XVI.  Of  ossification  of  the  heart .  ,  584

Chap.  XVII.  Of  accidental  growths  in  the  heart  .  586

Chap.  XVIII.  Of  ossification  of  the  valves  .  588

Sect.  1.  Anatomical  characters .  .  ib.

Sect.  2.  Signs . . •  .  591

Case  XLV. .  .  .594

Sect.  3.  Ossification  of  the  internal  membrane  of  the  heart  598

Chap.  XIX.  Of  polypi  of  the  heart .  .  599

Chap.  XX.  Of  inflammation  of  the  internal  membrane  603

Redness . » •  ib.

Pseudo-membranous  exudation .  .  606

Ulceration ...  .  607

Polypous  concretions . .  .  608

ri,an  XXI.  Of  excrescences  on  the  valves,  &c.  •  611

Chap.  aa CaseXLVI.  613

Case  XLVII. .  .  614

Case  XLVIIl. .  .  617

Casr  XLIX.  ,  .619

Chap.  XXII.  Of  pericarditis . .  .  620

Sect.  1.  Anatomical  characters . .  .  ib.

Sect.  2.  Signs • • •  623


CONTENTS.


\X.\1\'


IN  THE  PERICARD.


Chap.  XXIII.  Of  Hydro  pericardium
Signs

Chap.XXIV.  Of  Pneumopericardium
Chap.  XXV.  Of  Accidental  product

Case  L.

Chap.  XXVI.  Of  organic  affections  of  the  vessels
The  coronary  vessels
The  pulmonary  artery
The  pulmonary  veins

Cnap.  XXVII.  Of  the  organic  diseases  of  the  aorta
Sect  1.  Ossification  of  the  aorta
Sect.  2.  Malformation  of  the  aorta
Sect.  3.  Aneurism  of  the  aorta

Anatomical  characters

Signs

Chap.  XXVIII.  Of  the  treatment  of  diseases  of  the  hea
Chap.  XXIX.  Of  nervous  affections  of  the  heart,  &c.

Sect.  1.  Neuralgia  of  the  heart
Angina  pectoris

Treatment  .  .  .

Sect.  2.  Palpitation  of  the  heart

Sect.  3.  Spasm  of  the  heart

Sect.  4.  Nervous  affections  of  the  arteries

Neuralgia  .  .  .

Preternatural  pulsation

Spasm,  with  bellows-sound

Treatment  .  .  .


.  628
.  629

.  630
.  631
.  631

.  632

.  ib.

.  633

.  634

ib.
.  ib.
.  635
.  636
.  ib.
.  638

rt  641
.  648

.  ib.
.  649
.  652

.  655
,  657
.  658
ib.
ib.
659
660


APPENDIX.


Of  the  application  of  auscultation  to  other  cases


BESIDES  DISEASES  OF  THE  CHEST

Sect.  1 .  Of  the  diagnosis  of  pregnancy
Sect.  2.  Of  the  diagnosis  of  other  diseases

1.  Fractures

2.  Urinary  calculi  .

3.  Abscess  of  the  liver  .

4.  Diseases  of  the  tympanum,  fyc.

5.  Diseases  of  animals

Explanation  of  the  Plates


663

ib.

667
ib.

668

669
ib.

670

673


CONTENTS  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  NOTES.  *


PACE


Auscultation  prophesied  by  Hooke  and  indicated  by  Double  be-
fore the  publication  of  Laennec's  Treatise .  .  4
Different  forms  of  the  Stethoscope .  7
Utility  of  Manual  Examination  of  the  Chest .  .11
Value  and  mode  of  using  mensuration  of  the  Chest  .  12
Value  of  Inspection  as  a  means  of  Diagnosis  . .  .14
Capacity  of  the  lungs  to  contain  air,  as  a  test  of  their  soundness .  15
Biographical  notice  of  Avenbrugger . .  .16
Of  covering  and  exposing  the  chest  during  percussion .  .  17
Of  the  regional  subdivision  of  the  surface  of  the  chest .  .21
Of  mediate  percussion . . .  23
Relative  value  of  mediate  and  immediate  auscultation .  .  27
M.  Reynaud  on  segophony  (M.  L.) . . .  .  42
Dr.  Williams  on  the  cause  of  segophony . .  .44
Reasons  for  using  the  word  rhonchus  for  rale .  .48
The  translator's  classification  of  the  different  kinds  of  rhonchus  .  49
Of  the  nature  and  cause  of  the  crepitous  rhonchus .  .  50
Of  the  cavernous  rhonchus . . .  .52
Of  the  sound  of  friction  (M.  L.) . .  58
Of  the  treatment  of  catarrh . .  69
Of  the  employment  of  fumigations  and  balsams  in  catarrh  .  73
Of  the  use  of  chlorine  gas  in  catarrh  (ALL.) . .  .74
Of  the  use  of  colchicum  and  galvanism  in  catarrh .  .75
Of  the  author's  classification  of  bronchial  diseases  and  of  the  suffo-
cative catarrh ....  82
Of  the  dry  catarrh  as  the  cause  of  asthma,  and  of  the  prevention

and  treatment  of  the  latter  .  .  89
Opinions  of  authors  respecting  the  seat  and  nature  of  hooping

cough . . . •  .93

Of  the  treatment  of  hooping  cough .  94

Literature  of  hooping  cough . .  .95

Of  the  state  of  the  mucous  membranes  in  fever .  .  98

Literature  of  catarrh  and  bronchitis  .  .  .99
Andral  and  Williams  on  the  nature  and  cause  of  dilatation  of  the

bronchi . . . .  .109

Of  the  knowledge  of  croup  by  the  ancients . .  .112

Of  the  relation  of  croup  to  cynanchc  maligna  .  115

Of  the  discrimination -of  true  and  false  croup ( Af.  L.,  &  Tr.)  •  118

Dr.  Cheyne  on  blood-letting  in  croup . .  .120


*  The  notes  to  which  the  letters  M.  L.  are  appended,  are  either  wholly  or  in  part
by  Dr.  Meriadec  Laennec  ;  all  the  others  are  by  the  Translator.


1


CONTENTS.  \H

r  agf.

Of  local  applications  to  the  air  passages  in  croup (M.  L.)  .  121

Of  the  use  of  calomel  in  croup  .  .  122

Literature  of  croup  .  .  ib.

Of  the  bronchial  polypus  .  .  .  \2i

Louis  and  Hastings  on  ulcers  in  the  bronchi .  .  .128

Of  ulcerations  of  the  larynx  and  trachea .  .  ,130

Morbific  effects  of  the  inhalation  of  dust  .  .  .132

Andral  and  Piedagnel's  opinions  on  empyema  (M.  L.)  .  .145
Cause  of  the  dry  crepitous  rhonchus (M.  L.)  .  .  150

On  pulmonary  empyema  in  hares,  hawks,  &c. Opinions  of  Sir  J.

Floyer,  &c.  .  ...  151

Sir  John  Floyer's  proposal  for  curing  broken  wind  .  .152
Frequency  of  vesicular  emphysema  .  .  .157

Of  the  sound  of  friction  as  a  sign  of  emphysema  (M.  L.)  .  162
Literature  of  emphysema  of  the  lungs  .  . .  162

Treatment  of  oedema  of  the  lungs  (M.  L.,  &  Tr.)  .  .170
Analogy  of  pulmonary  and  cerebral  apoplexy  (M.  L.)  .  .172
Of  the  terminations  of  pulmonary  apoplexy  (M.  L.)  .  .174
Of  the  history,  nature,  and  causes  of  pulmonary  apoplexy .  1 76

M.  Rousset's  sign  of  the  complication  of  pulmonary  apoplexy  with

pneumonia (M.  L.)  .  .  . 178, 179

Drs.  Clark  and  Broussais  on  certain  effects  of  blood-letting  .  180

Literature  of  pulmonary  apoplexy  .  .  .  182

Of  the  cause  and  nature  of  the  granular  appearance  of  the  lungs

in  pneumonia  .  .  .  .184

Of  the  impression  of  the  ribs  on  inflamed  lungs  .  .  185

Andral's  idea  of  a  vesicular  pneumonia  (M.  L.)  .  .186
Of  the  relative  frequency  of  inflammation  in  the  upper  and  lower

lobes  of  the  lungs  .  ,  .  .187

Of  the  relative  frequency  of  inflammation  in  the  right  and  left  lungs  ib.
Rareness  of  pulmonary  abscess  .  .  .189

Rareness  of  pulmonary  abscess (M.  L.)  . .  190

Andral  and  Williams  on  the  crepitous  rhonchus  .  .  194

Of  the  value  of  the  crepitous  rhonchus  as  a  sign  in  pneumonia  .  195
On  the  difficulty  of  detecting  central  pneumonia .  .  200

On  certain  forms  of  expectoration  in  pneumonia,  and  on  the  impor-
tance of  observing  this  in  general  .  .  .  203
Influence  of  the  season  in  producing  pneumonia  .  .  205
Relation  of  pneumonia  to  the  age  of  the  subjects  •  .  206
Of  chronic  pneumonia — its  rareness  .  .  .217
Of  pneumonia  in  phthisis  .  .  .  220
Of  pneumonia  from  absorption  of  pus  .  .  .  22 1
Of  bloodletting  in  the  early  stages  of  pneumonia  .  ,  222
Of  bloodletting  in  the  later  stages  of  pneumonia  .  .  223
Of  local  bloodletting  in  pneumonia  .  .  .  224
Of  blisters  in  pneumonia  (M.  L.,  &  TV.)  ,  '»  .  •  226
Of  the  alkaline  treatment  of  pneumonia  .  .  •  227
Of  the  use  of  purgatives  in  pneumonia  .  •  •  228
Of  the  use  of  calomel  and  opium  in  pneumonia  .  •  229
Of  Dr.  A.  Laennec's  experience  of  tartar  emetic  (M.  L.)  •  237
Impropriety  of  emetics  in  pneumonia  complicated  with  gastric  irri-
tation . .  .  242


A


xlii


CONTENTS  .


PACK

Of  the  treatment  of  pneumonia  with  tartar  emetic  in  large  doses  .  244
Of  low  diet  in  pneumonia  .  .  .  247

Literature  of  pneumonia  .  .  .  251

Of  the  similarity  of  granulations  and  tubercles .  .  254

Of  the  nature  and  origin  of  tubercles (Af.  L.)  .  .  257

Dr.  Carswell's  opinions  respecting  tubercle .  .  .  259

Identity  of  grey  granulations  and  yellow  tubercles  (Af.  L.)  .  263
Relative  frequency  of  tubercles  in  the  two  lungs  .  .  264

Relative  frequency  of  tubercles  in  other  organs (Af.  L.)  .  266

Proportional  frequency  of  intestinal  ulcers  in  phthisis  .  .  268
Slate  of  the  mucous  membranes  in  phthisis (Af.  L.)  .  .  269

Proportional  frequency  in  phthisical  subjects,  of  organic  affections

in  other  organs  besides  the  lungs  .  •  .  269

Of  the  secretion  of  tubercles  in  the  air-cells (Af.  L.)  .  276

Of  catarrh,  &c.  considered  as  the  cause  of  tubercles  in  the  lungs  277
Different  opinions  of  the  origin  and  nature  of  tubercles  .  278

Of  cicatrices  in  the  lungs  .  .  .  289

Of  the  geographical  prevalence  of  phthisis .  . 299,  300,  301

Relation  of  haemoptysis  to  pulmonary  tubercles  (Af.  L.,  &  Tr.)  .  302
Of  the  depressing  passions  as  a  cause  of  phthisis .  .  303

Of  the  contagion  of  phthisis  .  .  .  304

Relation  of  phthisis  to  the  age  of  the  individual  (Af.  L.,  &  Tr.)  306
Relation  of  phthisis  to  sex  ....  307

Of  the  state  of  the  respiration  in  the  early  stage  of  phthisis  .  313

Of  perforation  of  the  lungs  in  phthisis .  .  .214

Actual  value  of  auscultation  as  a  means  of  diagnosis  in  phthisis  .  317
Of  pleuritic  pains  in  phthisis  .  .  .  320

Of  the  expectoration  in  phthisis  .  .  .  323

Of  diarrhoea  in  phthisis  ....  326

Of  latent  phthisis  :  328

Of  the  progress  and  duration  of  phthisis  .  .  .  329

Of  bloodletting  in  phthisis  .  .  .331

Of  issues  in  phthisis  .  •  332

Of  iodine  in  phthisis  ....  333
Of  the  use  of  chlorine  gas  in  phthisis  (Af.  L.,  &  7V.)  .  .  334
Of  h  ydrocyanic  acid  in  phthisis  .  .  •.  335

Of  change  of  climate  in  phthisis  .  .  ib.

Importance  of  prophylactic  treatment  in  phthisis  .  .  339

Literature  of  phthisis  pulmonalis  .  .  .  339

Dr.  Cnrswell  on  the  progress  of  melanosis  .  .  352

On  the  variety  of  melanosis  termed  liquid  (Af,  L.,  &  Tr.)  .  353
Chemical  analysis  of  the  matter  of  melanosis  (Af.  L.,  &  Tr.)  .  355
Relation  of  the  matter  of  melanosis  to  the  black  pulmonary  matter

and  the  colouring  matter  of  blood (Af.  L.,  &  Tr.)  .  356

Chemical  analysis  of  the  black  pulmonary  matter  . .  357

Dr.  Carswell's  classification  of  melanosis .  .  .  358

Literature  of  Melanosis  .  .  .  362

Opinions  respecting  encephaloid  cancer (M.  L.) .  .  366

History  of  encephaloid  cancer  .  .  .  367

Neuralgia  of  the  thoracic  parieles  .  .  .  370

Of  magnetism  as  a  remedy  in  neuralgia  .  .  .371

Of  the  varieties  and  pathology  of  asthma  .  .  381


CONTENTS.


xliii


PAGE

Of  the  treatment  of  asthma  .  .  386

lAterature  of asthma  .  .  •  .391

Of  the  period  of  effusion  in  serous  inflammations  •  .  394

•  Character  of  the  effused  fluid  at  different  periods  of  the  disease  .  396
Of  the  mobility  of  the  effused  fluid  by  change  of  position  .  .  407
Of  the  vibration  communicated  to  the  walls  of  the  chest  in  speaking,

as  a  sign  of  pleurisy (M.  L.)  .  •  •  410

Of  the  physical  diagnostics  of  pleurisy  and  pneumonia  .  .411
Of  tenderness  of  the  exterior  of"  the  chest  in  pleurisy .  .  413

Of  the  frequency  and  diagnosis  of  chronic  pleurisy .  .  418

Of  contraction  of  the  chest  after  pleurisy .  .  .431

Of  diaphragmitis  ....  432

Of  tartar  emetic  in  large  doses  in  pleurisy .  .  .  437

Of  the  operation  of  empyema  .  .  . .  443

Literature  of  pleurisy  ....  447

Of  the  existence  of  idiopathic  hydrothorax  .  .  .  448

Of  the  connexion  between  hydrothorax  and  inflammation  .  450

Of  the  general  symptoms  of  hydrothorax .  .  .  452

Of  the  treatment  of  hydrothorax  .  .  .  453

Literature  of  hydrothorax .  .  .  454

Of  the  usual  origin  and  cause  of  pneumothorax  .  .  457

Chemical  aualysis  of  the  gas  in  pneumothorax  .  .  459

Of  the  symptoms  of  pneumothorax .  .  .  463

Relative  frequency  of  pneumothorax  on  both  sides  (M.  L.)  .  484
Diagnostic  signs  of  pneumothorax  and  their  respective  value  .  485
True  rythm  or  progressive  movements  of  the  different  parts  of  the

heart  .  .  .  .  505

Non-isochronism  of  the  ventricular  systole  and  arterial  pulse  .  507
Critical  examination  of  the  opinions  of  authors  respecting  the  order

and  causes  of  the  motions  and  sounds  of  the  heart •  .511
Of  the  musical  bellows-sound  .  .  .517

Bellows-sound  produced  by  plethora;  bybronchocele  (M.  Z.,&  Tr.)  521
Origin,  causes,  and  indications  of  the  different  valvular  sounds  .  522
Of  the  purring  thrill  and  its  relation  to  the  rasp  sound  (M.  L.,  &  Tr.)  525
Peculiar  variety  of  intermitting  pulse  .  .  .531

Of  the  general  symptoms  of  disease  of  the  heart  .  .  537

Literature  of  diseases  of  the  heart  in  general  .  .  538

Of  the  relation  of  gangrene  of  the  limbs  to  disease  of  the  heart  .  541
Of  the  causes  of  diseases  of  the  heart  .  .  .  543

Classification  of  the  varieties  of  hypertrophy  of  the  ventricles  .  547
State  of  the  pulse  in  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ventricle .  .  548

State  of  the  cerebral  circulation  in  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ventricle  549
State  of  the  complexion  in  hypertrophy .  .  ib.

Of  swelling  and  pulsation  of  the  jugular  veins  in  hypertrophy  .  550
Relation  of  hypertrophy  of  the  right  ventricle  to  haemoptysis  .  551
Of  the  causes  of  dilatation  of  the  ventricles  .  .  552

Relation  of  dilatation  of  the  heart  to  enlarged  liver  and  ascites  .  554
Relation  of  dilatation  of  the  heart  to  angiua  pectoris,  headache,  &c.  555
Dr.  Hope's  classification  of  hypertrophy  with  dilatation .  .  557

Literature  of  displacement  of  the  heart .  .  .  572

Literature  of  malformation  of  the  heart  .  . .  576

Of  suppurative  carditis  ....  577


xliv


CONTENTS.


PAGE

Literature  of  carditis  and  pericardii  is . . .  579
Of  apoplexy  of  the  heart  as  a  cause  of  rupture  of  the  heart  ( Af .  L. )  581
Statistics  of  rupture  of  the  heart . . .  582
Literature  of  rupture  of  the  heart . .  ib.
Case  of  valvular  disease  of  the  heart . . .  590
Of  the  general  symptoms  of  valvular  disease . .  59 1
Of  the  rasp-sound  and  the  purring-sound (M.  L.) .  593
Of  the  particular  signs  of  valvular  disease . . .  594
Of  cardiac  asthma . .  596
Literature  of  polypus  of  the  heart . . .  602
Of  the  origin  of  valvular  excrescences . . .  612
Of  the  leather-creak  as  a  sign  of  pericarditis (M.  L.) .  625
Dr.  Stokes's  diagnostics  of  pericarditis . . .  626
Of  the  treatment  of  pericarditis . . .  627
Of  the  auscultatory  diagnostics  of  aneurism  of  the  aorta .  640
Of  the  macerating  treatment  of  Albertini  and  Valsalva,  in  aneu-
rism of  the  aorta . ...  643
Of  hydrocyome  acid  and  asparagus  in  organic  diseases  of  the  heart  644
Of  digitalis  in  diseases  of  the  heart . . .  645
Of  the  importance  of  removing  gastric  and  other  irritations  in  dis-
eases of  the  heart . . .  647
Of  the  nature,  varieties,  &c.  of  angina  pectoris .  .651
Of  the  treatment  of  angina  pectoris . . .  654
Literature  of  angina  pectoris . . .  656
Value  of  auscultation  in  the  diagnosis  of  pregnancy . .  666
Literature  of  auscultation ... .  670
Literature  of  diseases  of  the  chest  in  general . .  672


A  TREATISE


ON

DISEASES  OF  THE  CHEST,


INTRODUCTION.

Of  all  the  diseases  which  are  essentially  local,  those  of  the  tho-
racic organs  are  unquestionably  the  most  frequent ;  while  in
point  of  danger,  they  can  only  be  compared  with  organic  affec-
tions of  the  brain.  The  heart,  lungs,  and  brain  constitute,  ac-
cording to  the  happy  expression  of  Bordeu,  the  tripod  of  life;
and  none  of  these  organs  can  sustain  any  considerable  or  exten-
sive morbid  change,  without  the  greatest  danger.  The  delicacy
of  their  organization  and  their  incessant  motion,  account  for  the
frequency  and  severity  of  their  diseases.  In  no  other  texture  of
the  animal  system  is  idiopathic  and  primary  inflammation  so  fre-
quent a  source  of  severe  disorder  and  death,  as  in  the  lungs ;
and  no  other  is  so  liable  to  become  the  seat  of  accidental  produc-
tions of  every  kind,  more  especially  of  tubercles,  the  most  com-
mon of  all.  The  heart,  although  of  a  less  delicate  texture,  is
equally  obnoxious  to  morbid  changes.  Of  these,  it  is  true,  some
are  only  of  rare  occurrence :  but  others  are  extremely  common,
— for  instance,  thickening  of  its  muscular  substance,  and  dila-
tation of  its  cavities.

Diseases  of  the  chest,  in  respect  of  their  frequency  and  seve-
rity, hold  also  the  first  rank  among  those  affections  which,  either
as  complications  or  effects,  are  found  to  accompany  other  diseases
of  a  general  nature.  Thus  in  idiopathic  fevers,  a  slight  degree
of  peripneumony,  a  determination  of  blood  to  the  lungs,  or  a
catarrh  occasioning  redness  and  thickening  of  the  internal  mem-


JNTHODUCTTON.


brane  of  the  bronchi  and  pouring  into  them  an  augmented  secre-
tion of  mucus, — are  local  affections,  quite  as  constant  in  their
occurrence  as  the  redness,  thickenings,  or  ulcerations  of  the  mu-
cous membrane  of  the  intestines,  in  which  several  authors,  an-
cient and  modern,  have  fancied  they  discovered  the  cause  of
these  diseases.  It  may  even  be  asserted,  that  in  maladies  of
every  sort,  whatever  be  their  seat,  death  scarcely  ever  occurs
without  the  chest  becoming  affected  in  one  way  or  other ;  and
that,  in  most  cases,  life  does  not  seem  in  peril  until  the  superven-
tion of  a  congested  state  of  the  lungs,  serous  effusion  into  the
pleura,  or  great  disorder  of  the  circulation.  The  brain  in  gene-
ral becomes  affected  only  subsequently  to  these  changes ;  and
frequently  remains  undisturbed  even  to  the  last  moment  of  life.

However  dangerous  diseases  of  the  chest  may  be,  they  are,
nevertheless,  more  frequently  curable  than  any  other  severe  in-
ternal affection.  For  this  double  reason  medical  men,  in  all
ages,  have  been  desirous  of  obtaining  a  correct  diagnosis  of  them.
Hitherto,  however,  their  efforts  have  been  attended  by  little
success, — a  circumstance  which  must  necessarily  result  from
their  having  confined  their  attention  to  the  observation  and  study
of  the  deranged  functions  only.  From  the  continued  operation
of  the  same  cause,  we  must  even  now  confess,  with  Baglivi,  that
the  diagnosis  of  the  diseases  of  this  cavity  is  more  obscure  than
that  of  those  of  any  other  internal  organ.  Diseases  of  the  brain,
not  in  themselves  numerous,  are  distinguished,  for  the  most
part,  by  constant  and  striking  symptoms ;  the  soft  and  yielding
walls  of  the  abdomen  allow  us  to  examine,  through  the  medium
of  touch,  the  organs  of  that  cavity,  and  thus  to  judge,  in  some
measure,  of  their  size,  position,  and  degree  of  sensibility,  and
also  of  the  extraneous  substances  that  may  be  formed  in  them.
On  the  other  hand,  the  diseases  of  the  thoracic  viscera  are  very
numerous  and  diversified,  and  yet  have  almost  all  the  same  class
of  symptoms.  Of  these  the  most  common  and  prominent  are
cough,  dyspnoea,  and,  in  some,  expectoration.  These,  of  course,
vary  in  different  diseases ;  but  their  variations  are  by  no  means
of  that  determinate  kind  which  can  enable  us  to  consider  them
as  certain  indications  of  known  variations  in  the  diseases.  The
consequence  is,  that  the  most  skilful  physician  who  trusts  to  the
pulse  and  general  symptoms,  is  often  deceived  in  regard  to  the
most  common  and  best  known  complaints  of  this  cavity.  Nay,
I  will  go  so  far  as  to  assert,  and  without  fear  of  contradiction
from  those  who  have  been  long  accustomed  to  the  examination
of  dead  bodies, — that  before  the  discovery  of  Avenbruggcr,  one-
half  of  the  acute  cases  of  peripneumony  and  pleurisy,  and  al-
most all  the  chronic  pleurisies,  were  mistaken  by  practitioners;
and  that,  in  -such  instances  as  the  superior  tact  of  a  physician
enabled  him  to  suspect  the  true  nature  of  the  disease,  his  convic-
tion was  rarely  sufficiently  strong  to  prompt  and  justify  the  ap-


INTRODUCTION*


3


j)lication  of  very  powerful  remedies.  The  percussion  of  the
chest,  according  to  the  method  of  the  ingenious  observer  just
mentioned,  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  discoveries  ever  made  in
medicine.  By  means  of  it,  several  diseases  which  had  hitherto
been  cognisable  by  general  and  equivocal  signs  only,  are  brought
within  the  immediate  sphere  of  our  perceptions,  and  their  diag-
nosis, consequently,  rendered  both  more  easy  and  more  certain.
It  is  not  to  be  concealed,  however,  that  this  mode  of  exploration
is  very  incomplete.  Confined,  in  a  great  measure,  to  the  indica-
tion of  fulness  or  emptiness,  it  is  only  applicable  to  a  limited
number  of  organic  lesions ;  it  does  not  enable  us  to  discriminate
some  which  are  very  different  in  their  nature  or  seat ;  it  scarcely
affords  any  indication  except  in  extreme  cases,  and  cannot  there-
fore enable  us  to  detect,  or  even  to  suspect,  diseases  in  their  very
commencement.  It  is  more  particularly  in  diseases  of  the  heart
that  we  regret  the  insufficiency  of  this  method,  and  wish  for
something  more  precise.  The  general  symptoms  of  disease  in
this  organ  greatly  resemble  those  produced  by  many  nervous
complaints,  and  by  the  diseases  of  other  organs.  The  application
of  the  hand  affords  some  indications  as  to  the  extent,  strength,
and  rythm  of  the  heart's  motions ;  but  these  in  general  are  by
no  means  distinct,  while,  in  cases  of  considerable  fatness  or  ana-
sarca, they  become  very  obscure,  or  are  altogether  impercep-
tible. Within  these  few  years  some  physicians  have,  in  those
cases,  attempted  to  gain  further  information  by  the  application
of  the  ear  to  the  cardiac  region.  In  this  way,  the  pulsations  of
the  heart,  perceived  at  once  by  the  ear  and  touch,  become,  no
doubt,  more  distinct.  But  even  this  method  comes  far  short  of
what  might  be  expected  from  it.  Bayle  was  the  first  who  to  my
knowledge  had  recourse  to  it,  at  the  time  when  we  were  attend-
ing the  lectures  of  Corvisart.  This  great  man  himself  never
used  it :  he  says  only  that  he  had  several  times  heard  the  pulsa-
tion of  the  heart  in  listening  very  close  to  the  chest.*  We  shall
afterwards  find  that  this  phenomenon  is  different  from  ausculta-
tion, properly  so  called,  and  is  only  observable  in  some  particular
cases.  But  neither  Bayle  nor  any  other  of  our  fellow-students,
who  with  myself  might,  in  imitation  of  him,  employ  this  imme-
diate auscultation,  (of  which,  by  the  way,  the  first  notion  is  de-
rived from  Hippocrates,)  obtained  any  other  result  from  it  than
that  of  perceiving  more  distinctly  the  action  of  the  heart,  in  the
cases  where  this  was  not  very  perceptible  to  the  touch.f  The

*  Essai  sur  les  Maladies  du  Cceur.  3e.  Ed.  p.  396.

f  The  practice  of  Immediate  Auscultation  is  noticed  by  M.  Double,  in  the  second
volume  of  his  Semeiologie  Generate,  published  two  years  before  the  first  edition  of  tho
Treatise  of  Laennec.  Speaking  of  the  signs  furnished  by  respiration,  und  of  the
sounds  produced  by  it  within  the  chest  in  disease,  he  says  that,  with  the  view  of
hearing  them  more  distinctly,  "  we  must  apply  the  ear  closely  to  every  point  of  all
its  aspects  ;  by  which  means  we  can  distinguish,  not  merely  the  kind  and  degree  of
the  sound,  but  even  its  precise  site." He  adds,  "  I  have  frequently  derived  great

B  2


4


INTRODUCTION.


reason  of  this  limited  application  will  be  stated  hereafter.  But,
independently  of  its  deficiencies,  there  are  other  objections  to  its
use:  it  is  always  inconvenient  both  to  the  physician  and  patient;
in  the  case  of  females  it  is  not  only  indelicate  but  often  imprac-
ticable ;  and  in  that  class  of  persons  found  in  hospitals  it  is  dis-
gusting. For  these  various  reasons  this  measure  can  but  rarely
be  had  recourse  to,  and  cannot  therefore  become  practically  use-
ful ;  since  it  is  only  by  numerous  observations  and  the  compa-
rison of  numerous  facts  of  the  same  kind,  that  we  can  ever,  in
medicine,  separate  the  truth  from  the  errors  which  are  constantly
derived  from  the  inexperience  of  the  observer,  from  the  varying
fitness  of  his  perceptive  powers,  the  illusions  of  his  senses,  and
the  inherent  difficulties  of  the  method  of  exploration  which
he  employs. Observations  made  after  long  intervals  can  never

benefit  from  this  mode  of  investigation,  which  is  peculiar  to  myself,  and  to  which  I
was  naturally  led  by  the  employment  of  the  like  method  in  exploring  the  pulsation
of  the  heart."  Semeiol.  t.  ii.  p.  31.  Paris,  1817. — Long  before  this  period,  indeed,
one  of  our  own  countrymen,  not  of  the  medical  profession,  and  who,  in  all  probabi-
lity, was  unacquainted  with  the  writings  of  Hippocrates,  was  fully  aware  both  of
the  existence  and  great  importance  of  internal  sounds  as  a  means  of  diagnosis,  and,
as  Dr.  Elliotson  well  observes,  seems  almost  to  have  prophesied  the  stethoscope.
I  quote  the  more  striking  pans  of  the  passage  as  extremely  curious  in  the  literary
history  of  auscultation.  "  There  may  be  a  possibility,"  says  Hooke,  "  of  discover-
ing the  internal  motions  and  actions  of  bodies  by  the  sound  they  make.  Who  knows
but  that,  as  in  a  watch  we  may  hear  the  beating  of  the  balance,  and  the  running  of
the  wheels,  and  the  striking  of  the  hammers,  and  the  grating  of  the  teeth,  and  mul-
titudes of  other  noises  ; — who  knows,  I  say,  but  that  it  may  be  possible  to  discover
the  motions  of  the  internal  parts  of  bodies,  whether  animal,  vegetable,  or  mineral,
by  the  sound  they  make  ;  that  one  may  discover  the  works  performed  in  the  several
offices  and  shops  of  a  man's  body,  and  thereby  discover  what  instrument  or  engine
is  out  of  order,  what  works  are  going  on  at  several  times,  and  lie  still  at  others,  and
the  like." — "  I  have  this  encouragement  not  to  think  all  these  things  utterly  impos-
sible, though  never  so  much  derided  by  the  generality  of  men,  and  never  so  seem-
ingly mad,  foolish,  and  fantastic  ;  that,  as  the  thinking  them  impossible  cannot  much
improve  my  knowledge,  so  the  believing  them  possible  may,  perhaps,  be  an  occasion
for  taking  notice  of  such  things  as  another  would  pass  by  without  regard  as  use-
less. And  somewhat  more  of  encouragement  I  have  also  from  experience,  that
J  have  been  able  to  hear  very  plainly  the  beating  of  a  man's  heart ;  and  it  is
common  to  hear  the  motion  of  the  wind  to  and  fro  in  the  guts  and  other  small  ves-
sels :  the  stopping  in  the  lungs  is  easily  discovered  by  the  wheezing,  the  stopping
of  the  head  by  the  humming  and  whistling  noises,  the  slipping  to  and  fro  of  the
joints,  in  man)'  cases  by  crackling  and  the  like.  As  to  the  working  or  motion  of  the
parts  one  amongst  another,  methinks  1  could  receive  encouragement  from  hearing  the
hissing  noise  made  by  a  corrosive  menstruum  in  its  operation,  the  noise  of  fire  in  dis-
solving, of  water  in  boiling,  of  the  parts  of  a  bell  after  that  its  motion  is  grown  quite
invisible  as  to  the  eye  ;  for  to  me  these  motions  and  the  other  seem  only  to  differ
secundum  magis  et  minus,  and  so  .to  their  becoming  sensible,  they  require  either  that
their  motions  be  increased,  or  that  the  organ  be  made  more  nice  and  powerful  to
sensate  and  distinguish  them  [to  try  the  contrivance  about  an  artificial  tympanum]
as  they  are;  for  the  doing  of  both  which  1  think  it  is  not  impossible  but  that  in
many  cases  there  may  he  helps  found,  some  of  which  1  may,  as  opportunity  is  offer-
ed, make  trial  of,  which,  if  successful  and  useful,  I  shall  not  conceal."  (The  Post-
humous Works  of  Robert  Hook,  M.D.  p.  39,  40.  Lowd.  1705,  folio.)

There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  Laennec  was  acquainted  with  these  opinions
of  the  English  philosopher  ;  nor  if  he  had,  would  this  knowledge,  any  more  than
that  which  he  derived  from  the  writings  of  Hippocrates,  have  greatly  detracted
from  his  merits  as  the  discoverer  of  mediate  auscultation,  and  the  inventor  of  the
stethoscope. —  Trunsl.


INTRODUCTION'.


5


overcome  difficulties  of  this  kind.  Nevertheless,  I  had  been  in
the  habit  of  using  this  method  for  a  long  time,  in  obscure  cases,
and  where  it  was  practicable  ;  and  it  was  the  employment  of  it
which  led  me  to  the  discovery  of  one  much  better.

In  1816,  I  was  consulted  by  a  young  woman  labouring  under
general  symptoms  of  diseased  heart,  and  in  whose  case  percussion
and  the  application  of  the  hand  were  of  little  avail  on  account  of
the  great  degree  of  fatness.  The  other  method  just  mentioned
being  rendered  inadmissible  by  the  age  and  sex  of  the  patient,  I
happened  to  recollect  a  simple  and  well-known  fact  in  acoustics,
and  fancied  it  might  be  turned  to  some  use  on  the  present  occa-
sion. The  fact  I  allude  to  is  the  great  distinctness  with  which  we
hear  the  scratch  of  a  pin  at  one  end  of  a  piece  of  wood,  on  ap-
plying our  ear  to  the  other,  Immediately,  on  this  suggestion,  I
rolled  a  quire  of  paper  into  a  kind  of  cylinder  and  applied  one
end  of  it  to  the  region  of  the  heart  and  the  other  to  my  ear,  and
was  not  a  little  surprised  and  pleased,  to  find  that  I  could  there-
by perceive  the  action  of  the  heart  in  a  manner  much  more  clear
and  distinct  than  I  had  ever  been  able  to  do  by  the  immediate
application  of  the  ear.  From  this  moment  I  imagined  that  the
circumstance  might  furnish  means  for  enabling;  us  to  ascertain  the
character,  not  only  of  the  action  of  the  heart,  but  of  every  spe-
cies of  sound  produced  by  the  motion  of  all  the  thoracic  viscera,
and,  consequently,  for  the  exploration  of  the  respiration,  the
voice,  the  rhonchus,  and  perhaps  even  the  fluctuation  of  fluid
extravasated  in  the  pleura  or  the  pericardium.  With  this  con-
viction, I  forthwith  commenced  at  the  Hospital  Necker  a  series  of
observations  from  which  I  have  been  able  to  deduce  a  set  of  new
signs  of  diseases  of  the  chest,  for  the  most  part  certain,  simple,
and  prominent,  and  calculated,  perhaps,  to  render  the  diagnosis
of  the  diseases  of  the  lungs,  heart  and  pleura,  as  decided  and'
circumstantial,  as  the  indications  furnished  to  the  surgeon  by  the
introduction  of  the  finger  or  sound,  in  the  complaints  wherein
these  are  used.

The  following  work,  which  contains  the  result  of  these  obser-
vations, I  shall  divide  into  three  Parts.  In  the  First  I  shall  de-
tail the  various  methods  of  exploration  by  which  we  obtain  a
knowledge  of  the  diseases  of  the  chest ;  the  Second  will  contain  an
account  of  the  diseases  of  the  Bronchi,  Lungs  and  Pleura ;  the
Third,  of  the  diseases  of  the  Heart  and  its  appendages.

But  before  proceeding  with  my  subject,  it  may  be  well  to  say
something  on  the  attempts  I  have  made  to  perfect  my  instru-
ment of  exploration,  both  as  to  its  materials  and  shape,  in  order
that  others,  who  may  entertain  a  like  design,  may  follow  a  dif-
ferent route.

The  first  instrument  which  I  used  was  a  cylinder  of  paper,
formed  of  three  quires,  compactly  rolled  together,  and  kept  in
shape  by  paste. The  longitudinal  aperture  which  is  always  left


6


INTRODUCTION.


i

in  the  centre  of  paper  thus  rolled,  led  accidentally  in  my  hands
to  an  important  discovery.  This  aperture  is  essential  to  the  ex-
ploration of  the  voice.  A  cylinder  without  any  aperture  is  best
for  the  exploration  of  the  heart :  the  same  kind  of  instrument
will  indeed  suffice  for  the  respiration  and  rhonchus;  but  both
these  are  more  distinctly  perceived  by  means  of  a  cylinder  which
is  perforated  throughout,  and  excavated  into  somewhat  of  a
funnel  shape,  at  one  of  its  extremities,  to  the  depth  of  an  inch
and  a  half.  The  most  dense  bodies  do  not,  as  might  have  been
expected  from  analogy,  furnish  the  best  materials  for  these  in-
struments. Glass  and  metals,  exclusively  of  their  weight  and
the  sensation  of  cold  occasioned  by  their  application  in  winter,
convey  the  sounds  less  distinctly  than  bodies  of  inferior  density.
Upon  making  this  observation,  which  at  once  surprised  me,  I
wished  to  give  a  trial  to  materials  of  the  least  possible  density,
and,  accordingly,  caused  to  be  constructed  a  cylinder  of  gold-
beater's skin,  inflated  with  air,  and  having  the  central  aperture
formed  of  pasteboard.  This  instrument  I  found  to  be  inferior  to
all  the  others,  as  well  from  its  communicating  the  sounds  of  the
thoracic  organs  more  imperfectly,  as  from  its  giving  rise  to  fo-
reign sounds,  from  the  contact  of  the  hand,  &c.

Bodies  of  a  moderate  density,  such  as  paper,  the  lighter  kinds
of  wood,  or  Indian  cane,  are  those  which  I  always  found  prefer-
able to  others.  This  result  is  perhaps  in  opposition  to  an  axiom
in  physics  ;  it  has,  nevertheless  appeared  to  me  one  which  is  in-
variable. In  consequence  of  these  various  experiments  I  now
employ  a  cylinder  of  wood,  an  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter,  and
a  foot  long,  perforated  longitudinally  by  a  bore  three  lines  wide,
and  hollowed  out  into  a  funnel-shape,  to  the  depth  of  an  inch
and  a  half  at  one  of  its  extremities.  It  is  divided  into  two
portions,  partly  for  the  convenience  of  carriage,  and  partly  to
permit  its  being  used  of  half  the  usual  length.  The  instrument
in  this  form — that  is,  with  the  funnel-shaped  extremity, — is  used
in  exploring  the  respiration  and  rhonchus:  when  applied  to  the  ex-
ploration of  the  heart  and  the  voice,  it  is  converted  into  a  simple
tube,  with  thick  sides,  by  inserting  into  its  excavated  extremity
a  stopper  or  plug  traversed  by  a  small  aperture,  and  accurately
adjusted  to  the  excavation.  This  instrument  I  have  denomi-
nated the  Stethoscope.*  The  dimensions  mentioned  are  not  a
matter  of  indifference.  A  greater  diameter  renders  its  exact  ap-
plication to  certain  parts  of  the  chest,  impracticable;  greater
length  renders  its  retention  in  exact  apposition  mere  difficult,
and  when  shorter,  it  is  not  so  easy  to  apply  it  to  the  axilla,  while
it  exposes  the  physician  too  closely  to  the  patient's  breath,  and,
besides,  frequently  obliges  him  to  assume  an  inconvenient  pos-
ture,— a  thing  above  all  others  to  be  avoided,  if  we  wish  to  ob-


*  From  (ttyiOos,  pCCtat,  and  (TKOirtw,  cxplmo.


INTRODUCTION.


7


serve  accurately.  The  only  case  in  which  a  shorter  instrument
is  useful,  is  where  the  patient  is  seated  in  bed  or  on  a  chair,  the
head  or  back  of  which  is  close  to  him :  then  it  may  be  more  con-
venient to  employ  the  half-length  instrument.*

In  speaking  of  the  different  modes  of  exploration,  I  shall  no-
tice the  particular  positions  of  the  patient,  and  also  of  the  phy-
sician, most  favourable  to  correct  observation.  At  present  I
shall  only  observe  that,  on  all  occasions,  the  cylinder  should  be
held  in  the  manner  of  a  pen,  and  that  the  hand  of  the  observer
should  be  placed  very  close  to  the  body  of  the  patient  to  insure
the  correct  application  of  the  instrument.

The  end  of  the  instrument  which  is  applied  to  the  patient, —
that,  namely,  which  contains  the  stopper  or  plug, — ought  to  be
slightly  concave,  to  insure  its  greater  stability  in  application ;
and  when  there  is  much  emaciation,  it  is  sometimes,  though
rarely,  necessary  to  insert  between  the  ribs  a  piece  of  lint  or
cotton,  covered  with  cloth,  on  which  the  instrument  is  to  be
placed,  as,  otherwise,  the  results  might  be  affected  by  its  imper-
fect application.

Some  of  the  indications  afforded  by  mediate  auscultation  are
very  easily  acquired,  so  that  it  is  sufficient  to  have  heard  them
once  to  recognise  them  ever  after :  such  are  those  which  denote
ulcers  in  the  lungs,  hypertrophy  of  the  heart  when  existing  in  a
great  degree,  fistulous  communication  between  the  bronchi  and
cavity  of  the  pleura,  &c.  There  are  others,  however,  which  re-
quire much  study  and  practice  for  their  effectual  acquisition.

The  use  of  this  new  method  must  not  make  us  forget  that  of
Avenbrugger ;  on  the  contrary,  the  latter  acquires  quite  a  fresh
degree  of  value  through  the  simultaneous  employment  of  the
former,  and  becomes  applicable  in  many  cases,  wherein  its  soli-

*  The  stethoscope  has  undergone  various  modifications  of  form  since  the  time  of
Laennec,  but  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  one  last  used  and  recoiumeuded  by  him  is  still
tiie  best, — with  this  only  alteration,  of  having  the  stopper  made  conical  in  place  of
being  rounded.  In  the  modification  of  the  stethoscope,  now  very  commonly  used
and  originally  introduced  by  M.  Piorry,  too  much  has  been  sacrificed  to  portability
and  elegance.  It  is,  as  is  well  stated  by  Dr.  Williams,  (Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  iv.)
faulty  in  having  the  conducting  power  of  the  wood  impeded  by  screws  and  a  thick
cap  of  ivory  ;  besides  which  the  excavated  end  is  generally  very  ill  fitted.  The  fol-
lowing observations  by  the  same  author  are  very  just,  and  deserving  the  attention
of  the  young  auscultator: — "  The  general  excellence  of  this  instrument  will  depend
on  the  smoothness  and  true  turning  of  the  interior,  and  the  perfect  adaptation  of  the
stopper  to  the  cavity  ;  but  to  be  fully  available  to  the  auscultator,  the  auricular  end
should  be  made  wide  or  narrow,  flat  or  concave,  to  fit  comfortably  to  his  ear.  (Je-
nerally  it  will  be  found  useful  to  make  this  end  slightly  concave,  and  somewhat
wider,  by  a  ferule  of  ivory  or  ebony,  than  the  general  diameter  of  the  instrument,
or  this  width  may  be  formed  in  the  wood  itself.  A  beginner  should  not  choose  a
stethoscope  hastily,  but  when  one  is  found  exactly  to  fit  the  ear,  a  more  perfect  tact
will  be  acquired  by  keeping  to  the  same  instrument  than  by  using  a  variety."  Cyc.
Of  Pr.  Med.  vol.  iv.  Art.  Stethoscope. — The  flexible  caoutchouc  tube  terminating  in
a  small  ivory  funnel,  now  in  common  use  by  deaf  persons,  is  employed  by  some  aus-
cultatory, and  in  some  respects  answers  tho  purpose  well  enough  ;  but  it  is  in  others
decidedly  inferior  to  the  solid  instrument. (See  Plate  at  the  end.) — Traml.


8


INTRODUCTION.


tary  application  is  either  useless  or  hurtful.  It  is  by  this  com-
bination of  the  two  methods  that  we  obtain  certain  indications
of  emphysema  of  the  lungs,  pneumo-thorax,  and  of  the  existence
of  liquid  extravasations  in  the  cavity  of  the  pleura.  The  same
remark  may  be  extended  to  some  other  means,  of  more  partial
application,  such,  for  example,  as  the  Hippocratic  succussion,
the  mensuration  of  the  thorax,  and  immediate  auscultation ;  all
of  which  methods,  often  useless  in  themselves,  become  of  great
value  when  combined  with  the  results  procured  through  the
medium  of  the  stethoscope.

In  conclusion,  I  would  beg  to  observe,  that  it  is  only  in  an
hospital  that  we  can  acquire,  completely  and  certainly,  the  prac-
tice of  this  new  art  of  observation  ;  inasmuch  as  it  is  necessary
to  have  occasionally  verified,  by  examination  after  death,  the  di-
agnostics established  by  means  of  the  cylinder,  in  order  that  we
may  acquire  confidence  in  the  instrument  and  in  our  own  obser-
vation, and  that  we  may  be  convinced,  by  ocular  demonstration,
of  the  correctness  of  the  indications  obtained.  It  will  be  suffi-
cient, however,  to  study  any  one  disease  in  two  or  three  subjects,
to  enable  us  to  recognise  it  with  certainty ;  and  the  diseases  of
the  lungs  and  heart  are  so  common,  that  a  very  brief  attend-
ance on  an  hospital  will  put  it  in  the  power  of  any  one  to  ob-
tain all  the  knowledge  necessary  for  his  guidance  in  this  impor-
tant class  of  affections.

It  would  no  doubt  be  expecting  too  much  of  physicians  ac-
tively engaged  in  private  practice,  to  devote  much  time  to  the
acquisition  of  this  knowledge  in  an  hospital ;  but  they  may
readily  and  compendiously  obtain  the  necessary  opportunities
through  the  kindness  of  friends  attached  to  these  establishments,
who  can  make  them  acquainted  with  rare  or  interesting  cases  as
they  occur.  In  this  way  there  is  no  physician  who  may  not,  in
a  very  little  time,  learn  to  recognise  with  certainty  not  only  the
cases  above  mentioned,  but  peripneumony,  pleurisy,  latent  ca-
tarrhs, and  even  the  very  rudiments  of  these  affections :  and  this
last-mentioned  circumstance  is  unquestionably  the  chief  practical
benefit  of  auscultation,  inasmuch  as  these  diseases  are  the  more
easily  cured,  according  as  they  are  subjected  to  early  treatment.


PART  FIRST.


OF  THE  EXPLORATION  OF  THE  CHEST.


CHAPTER  I.

OF  THE MORE  ANCIENT  METHODS.

Ik  every  age  physicians  have  felt  the  insufficiency  of  those
equivocal  symptoms,  deduced  from  the  general  condition  of  the
patient  and  the  disturbance  of  the  functions,  to  make  known  in-
ternal diseases,  and  have  accordingly  endeavoured  to  discover
physical  signs  which  might  be  immediately  cognizable  by  the
senses.  It  is  with  this  view  that  almost  all  the  methods  of  ex-
ploration used  in  surgery  have  been,  at  different  times,  applied  to
the  study  of  diseases  of  the  chest ;  such  as  examination  by  the
hand,  inspection  of  the  shape  and  motions  of  the  thorax,  mensu-
ration, succussion,  and  finally,  immediate  auscultation.  But
owing  to  the  infrequency  of  the  instances  wherein  these  methods
are  productive  of  any  useful  result,  the  inconvenience  and  fatigue
— both  to  the  patient  and  physician — of  some  of  them,  and,  more
especially,  the  very  little  benefit  hitherto  derived  from  them,  they
had  all  fallen  into  such  disuse  as,  a  few  years  ago,  to  be  almost
unknown  to  practitioners.  I  think  it  however  necessary,  in  this
place,  to  examine  their  respective  value,  and  shall  add  to  those
already  named,  some  of  more  modern  origin.

Sect.  I.  Manual  examination  of  the  exterior  of  the  chest.

The  physical  structure  of  the  chest  prevents  our  obtaining
any  accurate  information  respecting  the  condition  of  the  organs
contained  in  it,  by  the  act  of  touching  or  handling  it  externally.
Fluctuation  in  the  intercostal  spaces,  reckoned  by  some  authors
among  the  signs  of  fluids  collected  in  the  pleura  or  pericardium,
can  only  be  observed  in  cases  where  the  fluids  have  penetrated
the  intercostal  muscles  and  become  cxtravasated  beneath  the
skin,  or  in  the  still  rarer  instance  where  the  intercostal  spaces


10


EXPLORATION  Of  THE  CHEST.


are  rendered  prominent  by  the  pressure  of  the  fluid  within  the
chest.

The  simple  application  of  the  hand  would  seem  to  furnish
some  signs  of  greater  utility ;  for  when  a  person  in  health  speaks
or  sings,  his  voice  excites  in  the  whole  walls  of  the  thorax  a  sort
of  vibration,  which  is  easily  perceived  on  applying  the  hand  to
the  chest.  This  phenomenon  is  no  longer  observable,  when,
through  disease,  the  lungs  have  ceased  to  be  permeable  to  the
air,  or  are  removed  from  the  walls  of  the  chest  by  an  effused
fluid.  This  sign  is,  however,  of  inferior  value,  since  a  great
many  causes  occasion  varieties  in  the  intensity  of  the  vibration,
or  completely  destroy  it.  For  instance,  it  is  little  sensible  in
fat  persons,  in  those  whose  integuments  are  rather  flaccid,  and
in  those  who  have  a  sharp  and  weak  voice.  Anasarca  of  the  chest
completely  destroysit,  even  when  the  lungs  are  quite  sound.
In  any  case  it  is  only  very  perceptible  at  the  anterior  and  supe-
rior part  of  the  chest,  on  the  sides,  and  in  the  middle  of  the
back.  From  these  and  other  causes  we  can  derive  little  prac-
tical benefit  from  attending  to  this  particular  circumstance.  We
can  only  presume  that  that  portion  of  the  lungs  where  it  exists
is  permeable  to  the  air;  but  are  not  justified  in  drawing  any
conclusions  from  its  absence.

Notwithstanding  the  inefficacy  of  this  ^method,  I  have  fre-
quently employed  it  in  practice,  and  the  following  are  the  results
obtained : — 1.  In  cases  of  abscess  of  the  lungs  communicating
with  the  cellular  substance  of  the  exterior  of  the  chest,  I  have
sometimes  perceived  a  sensation  indicative  of  the  passage  of  the
air  through  the  fluid.  2.  In  cases  of  extensive  tuberculous  ex-
cavations very  near  the  surface  of  the  lungs,  and  when  these
were  also  attached  to  the  costal  pleura,  I  have  sometimes  per-
ceived a  distinct  guggling  on  the  application  of  very  gentle  per-
cussion or  by  merely  pressing  or  touching  the  part.*  3.  In  suf-
focative catarrh,  or  the  rattles  of  dying  persons,  when  very
strong,  a  similar  guggling  is  perceived.  4.  I  believe  that  a  si-
milar result  is  produced  by  the  effusion  of  the  pus  of  an  abscess
of  the  lungs,  or  of  the  softened  matter  of  a  tubercle,  into'  the
pleura,  in  those  cases  where  the  pulmonary  and  costal  pleura  are
intimately  united  by  previous  disease.  5.  In  certain  subjects,  the
hand  is  sensible  of  a  vibration,  resembling  that  of  a  fiddle-string
when  touched,  recurring  after  long  intervals,  and  only  momen-
tarily. This  phenomenon,  which  is  of  slight  importance,  and
may  have  place  even  in  a  trifling  catarrh,  is  occasioned  by  the
contraction  of  some  bronchial  ramification  near  the  surface  of
the  lungs,  as  is  proved  by  the  employment  of  the  stethoscope.

*  The  same  circumstance  has  been  observed  by  Andral,  and  is  distinctly  stated
in  tlie  third  volume  of  his  Ciinique  Medicalo,  p.  66.  It  will  be  more  particularly
noticed  when  treating  of  the  diagnosis  of  rhthisis.— Trans/.


EXAMINATION UY  THE  HAND.


11


6.  Sometimes  in  cases  of  emphysema  of  the  lungs,  particularly
the  interlobular  emphysema,  a  species  of  dry  crepitation  is  felt
by  the  hand.  7.  Sometimes  also  we  can  perceive  the  fluctuation
which  takes  place  in  a  very  large  tuberculous  excavation,  or
where  there  exists  an  effusion  of  air  and  fluid  in  the  pleura  at
the  same  time,  on  the  patient  moving  the  chest  quickly :  in  this
case,  however,  we  hear  the  fluctuation  still  more  distinctly.

From  all  this  it  may  be  concluded  that  the  application  of  the
hand  to  the  walls  of  the  chest,  is  of  very  inferior  value  as  a  means
of  diagnosis  in  diseases  of  the  lungs  and  pleura,  and  that  even
where  its  indications  are  of  any  value,  they  are  in  some  measure
superfluous,  inasmuch  as  the  stethoscope  furnishes  us  with  others
which  are  more  constant  and  certain.*

The  application  of  the  hand  to  the  region  of  the  heart  was,
for  a  long  time,  the  chief  means  employed  by  the  ancient  phy-
sicians to  judge  of  the  strength,  weakness,  or  other  characters  of
the  pulse;  but  the  indistinctness  of  the  sensations  communicated
generally,  and  the  impossibility  of  perceiving  at  all  the  heart's
action  in  many  cases,  have  justly  given  the  preference  to  the  ex-
amination of  the  radial  artery.  Similar  obstacles  prevent  us  from
deriving  any  benefit  from  this  mode  of  exploration  in  most  dis-
eases of  the  heart.  A  very  marked  pulsation  frequently  indi-
cates nothing  more  than  thinness  of  the  thoracic  parietes,  or  a
state  of  mere  nervous  agitation  ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  there
sometimes  exists  no  perceptible  pulsation  even  in  cases  of  hyper-
trophy, or  great  dilatation  of  the  organ.  There  is  only  one  sign
of  some  value  obtained  by  the  application  of  the  hand, — I  mean
the  thrilling  sensation  analogous  to  the  purring  of  a  cat,  which
I  shall  have  occasion  to  notice  hereafter.

*  There  are  only  a  few  circumstances  relating  to  the  physical  condition  of  the  chest
which  cannot  he  ascertained  without  the  direct  application  of  the  hand.  Of  this
kind  is  soreness  or  tenderness  of  the  surface.  Much  tenderness  of  the  surface  of
the  chest  on  simple  touch  usually  indicates  an  affection  of  the  external  parts,  either
of  the  skin  or  muscles,  as  in  the  rheumatic  affection  termed  pleurodyne.  It  is,  how-
ever, sometimes  produced  by  internal  diseases,  as  when  a  collection  of  pus  in  the
pleura  is  making  its  way  outwards  by  perforation  of  an  intercostal  space.  When,
however,  considerable  pressure  is  made  in  the  intercostal  spaces,  pain  is  very  fre-
quently experienced  in  pleuritic  affections,  more  particularly  of  a  chronic  kind.  In
chronic  pneumonia  also,  and  in  phthisis,  when  the  lungs,  as  frequently  happens,
are  adherent  to  the  costal  pleura,  the  same  effect  is  frequently  observed ;  and  in
cases  of  this  kind  I  have  often  found  much  uneasiness  produced  by  even  the  gentlest
percussion,  more  particularly  if  made  without  the  pleximeter.

A  preternatural  degree  of  temperature  of  any  part  of  the  surface  of  the  body  has
been  always  considered  indicative  of  disease  of  the  particular  part,  or  of  the  tissues
or  organs  which  lie  beneath  it.  The  same  rule  is,  no  doubt,  equally  applicable  to
the  diseases  of  the  chest;  but  although  the  fact  may  be  so,  it  is  interesting  more  as
a  pathological  phenomenon  than  as  a  means  of  diagnosis,  as  it  scarcely  ever  exists
where  we  are  not  provided  with  more  certain  indications.

Manual  examination  discovers  the  presence  and  degree  of  muscular  robustness,
obesity,  or  emaciation,  also  oedema,  emphysema,  &c.  with  much  greater  certainty
and  accuracy  than  mere  inspection:  it  also  enables  us  to  judge  of  the  natural  degree
of  thickness  of  the  thoracic  parietes,  a  circumstance  sometimes  of  considerable  im-
portance in  appreciating  the  value  of  other  signs  derived  from  different  methods  of
physical  exploration. —  Trunsl.


12


EXPLORATION  OE THE  CHEST.


Sect.  II.  Inspection  of  the  exterior  of  the  chest,  and  mensuration.

The  inspection  of  the  naked  chest  enables  us  to  perceive  any
alteration  in  its  shape,  and  to  judge,  at  least  to  a  certain  extent,
of  the  changes  which  have  taken  place  in  the  motions  of  the  or-
gans it  contains.  It  makes  us  acquainted  with  the  alterations
produced  by  rickets,  and  also  with  the  important  fact  of  dilata-
tion of  the  chest  in  cases  of  extravasation  of  the  fluids  within  it,
and  of  its  contraction  in  ulterior  stages  of  some  of  the  same  dis-
eases which  occasion  its  dilatation.  It  enables  us  to  detect,  in
certain  cases,  aneurisms  of  the  aorta  in  their  latter  stages.

Mensuration,  by  means  of  a  cord  or  ribbon,  of  the  two  sides
of  the  chest,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  their  relative  size,
has  never  afforded  me  any  very  useful  results.  The  difference
of  half  an  inch  in  the  semi-circumference  is  very  perceptible  to
the  eye :  and  when  the  difference  is  less  than  this,  we  cannot  de-
pend so  entirely  on  the  accuracy  of  our  admeasurement,  as  to  feel
more  confidence  in  their  results  than  in  those  derived  from  simple
inspection*

The  inspection  of  the  movements  of  the  thorax  has  always  been
considered  as  affording  information  as  to  the  degree  of  perfection
or  imperfection  of  respiration.  It  has  been  particularly  had  re-
course to  by  veterinary  surgeons,  not  so  much,  however,  to  en-
able them  to  judge  accurately  of  disease,  and  to  prescribe  the
propesr  treatment,  as  to  aid  them  in  ascertaining  the  value  of  the

*  Andral's  opinion  differs  somewhat  from  our  author's  in  this  point.  He  says
that  when  one  side  exceeds  the  other  by  five  or  six  lines,  the  difference  is  very  per-
ceptible to  the  eye,  but  adds,  that  mistakes  are  very  likely  to  be  made  in  this  respect,
and  advises  mensuration  always  to  be  had  recourse  to. — Op.  Cit.  Tom.  ii.  565. —
I  agree  with  Andral  in  considering  mensuration  as  of  more  practical  value  than  our
author  is  disposed  to  admit.  Many  persons  differ  respecting  extent  as  measured
by  the  eye;  actual  physical  results  cannot  be  called  in  question.  As  the  contrac-
tion or  dilatation  may  be  in  both  the  transverse  and  vert'cal  directions,  it  is  necessary,
if  we  wish  to  be  extremely  precise,  to  make  two  admeasurements,  one  from  the  spine
to  the  sternum,  the  other  from  the  top  of  the  shoulder  to  the  lowest  rib.  In  ge-
neral, however,  the  transverse  admeasurement  is  all  that  is  requisite.  In  measuring
the  two  sides,  we  must  be  careful  to  apply  our  tapes  in  a  precisely  similar  manner
to  each  side.  In  ascertaining  the  transverse  extent,  we  first  make  our  measurements
after  a  complete  expiration,  and  then  after  a  full  inspiration.  It  will  thus  fre-
quently be  seen  thai,  although  little  or  no  difference  is  found  between  the  two  sides
in  the  former  case,  it  is  very  considerable  in  the  latter, — the  chest  on  the  diseased
side  not  at  all  expanding  during  inspiration,  and  probably  expanding  even  more
than  in  the  state  of  health  on  the  sound  side.  This  effect  is  rendered  particularly
striking  by  fixing  the  middle  of  the  piece  of  tape  on  the  spine,  and  allowing  the
two  ends  to  rest  somewhat  loosely  on  the  sternum,  so  as  to  be  moved  by  the  motions
of  the  chest :  on  the  patient  taking  a  deep  breath,  the  end  on  the  sound  side  is  seen
gradually  to  recede  from  the  sternum,  while  that  on  the  diseased  side  either  remains
stationary,  or  recedes  to  a  very  small  extent.  In  cases  of  contracted  chest  succeed-
ing acute  pleurisy,  in  which  a  cure  had  been  effected,  it  is  interesting  to  watch
month  by  month,  the  gradual  expansion  of  the  contracted  side.  In  such  instances
we  have  been  accustomed  to  supply  the  patient  with  a  marked  piece  of  tape,  and
have  been  gratified  to  prove  by  this  moans,  at  certain  intervals,  the  progressive
return  of  the  chest  to  its  natural  size. — Transl.


iN'SPF.rnov.


13


animal  from  the  habitual  condition  of  it*  respiration.*  In  this
respect  they  are  greatly  assisted  by  the  nudity  of  the  subject.
It  is  very  different  with  our  patients ;  to  whom  the  operation  of
uncovering  the  chest  is  attended  with  so  many  inconveniences,
that  it  is  no  wonder  that  this  method  of  exploration  has  been
more  recommended  than  practised.  Some  physicians  content
themselves  with  causing  their  patients  to  take  a  few  deep  inspi-
rations, without  uncovering;  but  it  is  obvious  that  this  plan  is
altogether  useless.  Indeed,  as  far  as  concerns  diagnosis,  the
inspection  of  the  naked  chest  is  almost  equally  defective.  The
respiration  is  considered  natural  when  the  anterior  and  lateral
parts  of  the  chest  dilate  equally,  distinctly,  yet  moderately,
during  inspiration,  and  when  the  number  of  inspirations  in  a
state  of  repose  is  from  twelve  to  fifteen  in  the  minute.  If  the  abdo-
men dilates  with  comparatively  much  greater  force  than  the  chest,
the  respiration  is  named  abdominal;  if  the  contrary  obtains,  it
is  called  pectoral.  This  last  variety  is  especially  observed  in  cer-
tain painful  affections  of  the  abdomen  :  but  the  diagnosis  of  these,
especially  of  peritonitis,  is  so  easy  as  to  render  this  additional
means  almost  superfluous.  The  abdominal  respiration  and  the
defective  or  diminished  dilatation  of  the  chest,  are  very  generally
considered  as  constantly  accompanying  extravasations  into  the
pleura,  and  every  kind  of  pulmonary  obstruction.  This  opinion
is,  however,  by  no  means  correct.  We  shall  afterwards  show
that  the  extreme  dilatation  both  of  the  abdominal  and  thoracic
parietes  in  inspiration,  occasionally  coincides  with  the  most  per-
fect respiration,  as  far  as  regards  the  action  of  the  lungs  and  ex-
pansion of  the  air-cells,  and  merely  indicates  an  increased  need  of
respiration,  of  a  purely  vital  character :  while,  on  the  other  hand,
a  diminished  expansion  of  the  same  parts  indicates  a  condition
merely  the  reverse,  and  which  is  found  to  vary  according  to  age,
the  state  of  wakefulness  or  sleep,  of  motion  or  repose,  and  of
calmness  or  agitation  of  mind.  Besides,  I  have  never  been  able
to  ascertain  a  constant  and  very  obvious  inequality  of  action  in
the  two  sides  of  the  chest,  except  in  cases  of  empyema  with  very
large  effusion  or  of  deformity,  while  I  have  repeatedly  assured
myself  that  the  dilatation  was  equable  in  phthisical  subjects,
whose  lungs  were  very  unequally  charged  with  tubercles,  and
likewise  in  cases  of  peripneumony  and  pleurisy  confined  to  one
side.f  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  state  that  anasarcha,  fatness,  and

*  I  learn  from  an  eminent  Veterinary  Surgeon  in  London,  that  it  is  the  practice
with  this  class  of  practitioners,  in  examining  the  soundness  of  a  horse,  to  attend  to
the  sound  of  the  respiration  also,  by  the  application  of  the  ear  to  the  vicinity  of  the
trachea. — Transl.

t  Andral  states  (Clin.  Med.  t.  iii.  97.)  that  there  will  be  observed  a  greater  or
less  degree  of  immobility  of  the  thoracic  parietes  over  the  site  of  a  large  accumula-
tion of  tubercles  ;  and  he  regards  it  as  indicating,  moreover,  the  presence  of  a  chro-
nic inflammation  developed  in  the  lung  around  the  tubercles  or  tuberculous  cavities.
He  has  observed  it  chiefly  between  the  clavicle  and  nipple  :  it  is  almost  constantly


14


EXPLORATION  OF  THE  CHEST.


very  large  mamma?,  will  greatly  obscure  the  motions  of  the
chest.

The  pulsation  of  the  heart  is  visible  in  some  persons  between
the  cartilages  of  the  fifth  and  seventh  ribs.  This  is  particularly
the  case  in  children  and  thin  subjects,  with  small  bones  and
narrow  chests,  but  is  no  indication  whatever  of  disease.

From  these  considerations  it  must  be  concluded,  that  the  in-
spection of  the  motions  of  the  chest  during  respiration,  is  of
little  utility.  Taken  by  itself  it  merely  shows  that  the  respira-
tion is  impeded,  a  circumstance  equally  pointed  out  by  the  fre-
quency of  the  inspirations;  while  in  conjunction  with  percus-
sion and  mediate  auscultation  it  becomes  altogether  superfluous;
as  I  do  not  know  a  single  case  wherein  it  can  add  any  tiling  to
the  certainty  of  the  results  obtained  by  them.

In  lean  subjects  we  can  sometimes  distinctly  perceive  the  effect
of  the  expansion  and  contraction  of  the  lungs,  in  the  alternating
prominence  and  depression  of  the  intercostal  spaces  of  the  carti-
lages of  the  upper  false  ribs ;  but  I  have  never  had  occasion  to
make  any  useful  application  of  this  phenomenon  to  diagnosis.*


Sect.  III. Succussion  of  the  chest.

By  succussion  I  mean  the  mode  of  exploration  used  by  Hip-
pocrates or  some  of  his  early  disciples,  as  a  means  of  discovering
the  presence  of  fluid  in  the  cavity  of  the  thorax.  This  method
being  only  useful  in  two  particular  cases,  I  shall  defer  noticing
it  until  I  come  to  treat  of  Pneumo-thorax  complicated  with  li-
quid effusion.

conjoined  with  a  dull  sound  on  percussion.  Dr.  Meriadec  Laennec  has  never  ob-
served this  partial  immobility  of  the  walls  of  the  chest,  and  argues  against  its  pro-
bability. I  have  certainly  observed  it. — Traml.

*  1  think  that  the  author  has,  in  this  section,  somewhat  underrated  the  value  of
the  inspection  of  the  motions  of  the  chest,  as  a  means  of  diagnosis.  To  those  who
do  not  employ  percussion  or  the  stethoscope,  this  method  of  exploration  is  especially
valuable,  and  leads  to  important  practical  results,  when  the  pulse  and  tongue  give  us
no  information,  or  mislead  us.  In  phthisis  which  has  been  very  slow  in  its  pro-
gress, and  when  tubercles  exist  in  both  lungs,  as  usually  happens,  we  find  both  sides
of  the  chest  contracted,  particularly  in  the  subclavian  regions.  In  asthma,  on  the
contrary,  both  sides  are  usually  considerably  dilated,  more  particularly  about  the
middle  of  the  chest,  and  rendered  much  more  convex  both  before  and  behind.  In
old  asthmatics  this  configuration  of  the  chest  is  sufficiently  conspicuous,  even  when
the  body  is  covered.  Its  presence  is  always  a  proof  of  a  permanent  dilatation  of
the  pulmonary  cells,  and,  generally,  of  an  incurable  disease.  It  is  only  by  inspection
thftt  we  can  ascertain  certain  conditions  of  the  mere  surface,  which  are,  however,
often  of  importance  to  diagnosis.  Of  this  kind  are  oedema  of  a  portion  of  the  chest,
the  relative  width  of  the  intercostal  spaces,  their  degree  of  prominence,  &c.  For
ampler  details  on  this  subject  I  beg  leave  to  refer  the  reader  to  Double — Scmtwlogie
Generalc,  torn.  ii. ;  Landr6-lieauvais — Senu'iotique,  p.  36;  Collin — Exploration  de  la
poitrine,  p.  5,  and  also  to  the  second  and  third  volumes  of  Andral's  Cliniqtie  Medicale ;
and  to  the  article  Chest,  Exploration  of,  in  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Pract.  Med. — Transl.


ABDOMINAL  PRESSURE.


15


Sect.  IV. Abdominal  pressure.

This  method,  introduced  by  Bichat,*  consists  in  pressing  for-
cibly upon  the  hypochondres  from  below  upwards,  and  watch-
ing the  degree  of  suffocation  and  distress  produced  by  it.  I
think  this  proposal  can  only  be  regarded  as  an  unlucky  notion
incautiously  dropped  by  a  man  of  fine  genius.  Bichat  had
himself  scarcely  made  trial  of  this  plan,  when  he  was  cut  off  in
the  prime  of  life,  and  would,  no  doubt,  have  abandoned  it  after
a  little  experience.  The  relative  degrees  of  oppression  pro-
duced by  it  in  empyema,  peripneumony,  and  the  different  kinds
of  asthma,  could  never  be  admitted  as  signs  deserving  confi-
dence, more  especially  as  a  high  degree  of  suffocation  is  pro-
duced by  it  in  persons  of  a  delicate  and  nervous  habit,  though
in  other  respects  perfectly  healthy.  But  even  if  this  method
were  capable  of  supplying  us  with  more  positive  indications,  it
ought  hardly  to  be  had  recourse  to,  since  we  are  not  permitted
to  put  our  patients  to  the  torture,  whatever  be  our  zeal  in  inter-
rogating naturcj-

*  Memoire  sur  la  pression  abdominale,  par  M.  Roux,  (Euv.  Chirurg.  de  Desault,
torn.  iii. Paris,  1813.

•f  In  addition  to  the  Memoire  of  M.  Roux  above  referred  to,  the  reader  may  con-
sult Corvisart's  work  on  Diseases  of  the  Heart,  (2d  Edit.  p.  375,)  and  the  Article
Pression  Abdominale,  by  Merat,  in  the  45th  Vol.  of  Diet,  des  Sec.  Med.

It  has  been  endeavoured  to  ascertain  the  capacity  of  the  chest,  or  rather  of  the
lungs,  on  another  principle,  namely,  by  ascertaining  the  quantity  of  air  the  lungs
were  capable  of  containing.  This  method  was  proposed  by  the  late  Mr.  Abernethy.
It  is  obvious  that  it  does  not  lead  to  the  same  results  as  mensuration  of  the  external
surface  of  the  chest ;  this  latter  giving  the  capacity  of  the  containing,  the  former  the
capacity  of  the  contained  parts.  Mr.  Abernethy's  method  consists  in  making  the
patient  take  as  deep  an  inspiration  as  possible,  and  then  expire  through  a  bent,  tube
communicating  with  an  inverted  jar  containing  water.  The  quantity  of  water  dis-
placed by  the  air  is  a  measure  of  the  capacity  of  the  lungs  to  contain  air.  A  person
in  good  health  with  sound  lungs  is  able  to  displace  six  or  eight  pints  ;  and  if  the
amount  be  greatly  less  than  this,  as  for  example,  only  one-third  or  one-quarter,  it
may  be  inferred  that  the  lungs  are  either  obstructed  by  disease  of  their  own  sub-
stance, or  compressed  from  without.  "  Muscular  debility  or  spasm,"  says  Mr.
Abernethy,  "  may  occasionally  make  the  result  of  this  experiment  doubtful,  yet  in
general  I  believe  it  will  afford  useful  information."  (Essays,  Part  II.  p.  157.)  In
this  judgment  I  agree  with  Mr.  Abernethy.

A  more  simple  test  of  the  capacity  of  the  lungs,  founded  on  the  same  principle,
has  been  proposed.  (Edin.  Med.  Jour.  vol.  xxxviii.  p.  453.)  It  consists  in  mea-
suring the  comparative  length  of  time  occupied  in  making  a  complete  expiration  after
a  complete  inspiration.  With  the  view  of  proving  that  the  expiration  is  continuous,
the  patient  is  desired  to  count  from  one  upwards,  as  far  as  he  can,  slowly  and  audi-
bly ;  and  the  number  of  seconds  during  which  he  is  able  to  count,  without  drawing-
breath,  is  noted  by  a  watch :  the  number  of  seconds  is  considered  a  proportional
sign  of  the  quantity  of  air  expired,  and  consequently  of  the  capacity  of  the  lungs.
Dr.  Lyons,  who  proposes  this  method,  says,  that  the  most  healthy  individual  will
not  continue  counting  beyond  thirty-five  seconds ;  but  in  this  he  is  certainly  mis-
taken, as  any  of  my  long-winded  readers  may  prove  by  personal  experiment.  In
confirmed  phthisis,  Dr.  L.  says,  the  period  of  expiration  never  exceeds  eight,  and  is
frequently  less  than  six  seconds ;  while  in  pleurisy  and  pneumonia  it  may  range
from  four  to  nine.  This  test  is  of  much  easier  application  than  Mr.  Abernethy's,
but  it  is  much  less  accurate  :  it  is  liable  to  vitiation  from  many  causes,  but  still,
like  Mr.  Abernethy's,  it  may  be  occasionally  useful. — Transl.


16


EXPLORATION  OF THE  CHEST.


CHAP.  II.

OF  PERCUSSION.

The  chest  of  a  healthy  person  when  slightly  struck,  ought  to
yield  over  its  whole  extent,  more  particularly  in  its  anterior  and
lateral  parts,  a  clear  and  distinct  sound,  owing  to  the  presence
of  the  air,  which  constantly  fills  the  lungs,  and  consequently  a
great  portion  of  the  cavity  of  the  thorax.  This  fact  was  no
doubt  known  to  the  ancients ;  and  in  our  own  times  there  are
few  persons  who  have  not  seen  the  common  people  striking
their  chests,  and  congratulating  themselves  on  the  good  hollow
sound  thus  produced.  From  the  knowledge  of  this  fact,  to
the  conclusion  that  the  same  sound  cannot  exist  in  cases  where
the  lung  is  obstructed,  or  the  cavity  of  the  pleura  filled  with
fluid,  seems  but  a  step;  and  yet  this  reflection  appears  never  to
have  occurred  to  any  one,  until  made  by  Avenbrugger,  about  the
middle  of  last  century.  After  seven  years  silent  investigation,
and,  as  he  himself  tells  us,  amid  laborious  and  disgusting  re-
searches ( inter  labores  et  tcedia?)  he  gave  his  discovery  to  the
world,  in  a  small  pamphlet.  The  only  reward  he  seems  to  have
obtained  for  his  fine  discovery,  was  a  slight  notice  of  it  by  Van
Swieten  and  Stoll :  this  however  failed  to  attract  the  attention
of  his  contemporaries,  and  he  died,  without  ever  perhaps  dream-
ing of  the  celebrity  which  his  discovery  was  destined  to  obtain.
Corvisart  is  entitled  to  the  honour  of  withdrawing  this  method
from  the  oblivion  into  which  it  had  fallen,  after  a  period  of
thirty  years,  and  of  making  allEurope,  and  even  the  native
country  of  its  author,  acquainted  with  its  merits.*

This  method  has  the  advantage  of  not  requiring  the  use  of
any  instrument ;  yet,  although  very  simple,  it  requires  long

*  Auenbrugger  was  born  in  Greets  in  Styrin,  in  1722.  He  graduated  at  Vienna,
and  afterwards  became  pbysician  in  ordinary  of  tbe  Spanisb  nation,  in  the  imperial
hospital  of  that  city.  In  Erssh  and  Puchelt's  Literatur  der  Medecin  he  is  recorded  as
the  author  of  two  other  medical  works,  relating  to  madness,  one  in  Latin,  published
in  1776,  and  the  other  in  German  in  1783.  In  the  same  record  Auenbrugger  is
stated  to  have  died  so  late  as  the  year  1809,  in  the  87tb  year  of  his  age.  The  work
on  Percussion  was  first  published  in  1761,  under  tbe  title  of  "  Inventvm  novum  ex
Percitssione  thoracis  humani,  ut  signo,  abstrusos  inlemi  pectoris  morbos  dctegendi."  It
was  first  translated  into  French  so  early  as  the  year  1770,  by  Roziere,  but  appears  to
have  drawn  little  attention  at  the  time.  Corvisart's  translation  was  published  in
1808.  The  only  English  translation  of  this  work  was  published  in  1824,  with  a
selection  of  Corvisart  s  Commentaries,  and  additional  Notes  by  tbe  translator  of  the
present  Treatise.  See  "  Original  Cases,  &o.  by  John  Forbes,  M.D.  London,  1824."
It  is  stated  in  the  notice  of  Lancisi,  in  the  Biographie  Medicale  (t.  5,  p.  502,)  that  this
physician  was  in  the  habit  of  employing  percussion  on  the  sternum  as  a  means  of
diagnosis;  but  upon  recently  referring  to  the  two  works  of  this  celebrated  author
which  treat  of  diseases  of  the  chest,  (  De  Suhitaveis  Martibus  and  De  Motu  Cordis  et
Aneurismalibus,)  I  cannot  find  any  indication  of  the  alleged  fact.— Trans.


PERCUSSION'.


17


habit,  and  a  degree  of  dexterity  which  many  persons  are  inca-
pable of  acquiring.  The  slightest  variation  in  the  inclination
under  which  the  fingers  strike  the  chest,  may  give  rise  to  the
belief  of  a  difference  of  sound  which  in  reality  does  not  exist.
A  person  who  has  acquired  by  experience  a  certain  degree  of
perfection  in  practice,  can  elicit  much,  little,  or  no  sound  at
all,  from  a  chest  perfectly  sonorous ;  the  same  results  are  fre-
quently obtained  involuntarily  by  physicians  not  sufficiently  ex-
perienced ;  some  of  whom,  moreover,  cannot  elicit  sufficient
sound  without  employing  a  degree  of  force  which  is  painful  to
the  patient.  -

Mode  of  Percussion.  The  patient  ought,  if  practicable,  to
be  either  seated  or  standing;  if  in  bed,  the  mattress,  still  more
the  pillows,  and  also  thick  curtains  always  render  the  sound  less.
The  chest  ought  to  be  covered  with  a  thin  dress,  or  the  physi-
cian should  have  a  glove  on.  This  precaution,  originally  re-
commended by  Avenbrugger,  is  particularly  necessary,  inas-
much as  the  contact  of  the  naked  hand  and  skin  occasions  a  sort
of  clatter  which  renders  the  pectoral  sound  less  perfect  and  dis-
tinct.* It  is  better  that  the  chest  should  be  covered  and  the
hand  naked,  since  the  glove  necessarily  diminishes  the  sensibility
of  the  touch,  and  because  the  sensation  of  elasticity  perceived
by  the  operator,  frequently  confirms  his  judgment  in  cases  where
the  difference  of  sound  is  only  doubtful.  In  every  case  the  percep-
tion of  the  sense  of  fulness  or  emptiness  conveyed  by  percussion
is  much  stronger  to  the  operator  than  the  mere  by-stander.  Per-
cussion ought  to  be  made  with  the  four  fingers  united  in  one
line,  the  thumb  being  placed,  in  opposition  to  them,  at  the  junc-
tion of  the  second  and  third  phalanges  of  the  index,  and  used
merely  in  maintaining  the  fingers  in  close  and  strong  apposition.
We  must  strike  with  the  ends  and  not  the  face  or  pulpy  portion
of  the  fingers,  not  obliquely  but  perpendicularly,  and  gently
and  quickly,  that  is,  raising  the  hand  immediately  from  the  skin,

When  we  percuss  comparatively  the  two  sides  of  the  chest,
we  must  be  careful  to  strike  successively  on  parts  that  are
similar,  with  a  like  force  and  under  an  equal  angle :  for  in-
stance, we  must  not  strike  one  side  in  a  direction  parallel
with  the  ribs,  and  across  them  on  the  other. The  omission

*  This  injunction  of  having  the  chest  covered,  so  strongly  insisted  on  by  the  ori-
ginal proposer  of  the  practice  and  by  our  author,  seems  to  me  of  inferior  conse-
quence, as  far  as  the  accuracy  of  diagnosis  is  concerned.  In  mv  own  practice,  I  have
often  followed  the  interdicted  method,  and  without  any  inconvenience,  as  far  as  I
am  aware.  A  much  greater  authority,  Corvisart,  did  the  same  :  and  lie  gives  it  as
his  opinion  that  percussion  may  be  equally  well  performed  in  one  way  as  the  other.
(See  his  Translation  of  Avenbrugger,  p.  20.)  He  however  says,  that  it  may  he  well
for  beginners  to  attend  to  the  precaution  recommended  by  Avenbrugger.  I  would
further  add,  that  if  the  operation  can  be  equally  well  performed  over  a  garment,  (as
no  doubt  it  can,)  there  are  very  obvious  reasons  for  giving  this  mode  the  preference.
Our  author  omits  to  state  the  additional  and  very  necessary  precaution,  given  by
Avenbrugger,  of  drawing  the  shirt  or  other  covering  tight  over  the  place. — Trans.

C


18


EXPLORATION  OF  THE  CHEST.


of  these  precautions  frequently  leads  to  errors  of  consequence.
If  we  keep  the  fingers  united  in  a  bundle  or  mass,  and  not  in  a
line,  or  apply  them  under  an  oblique  angle,  so  that  their  face
and  not  their  ends  come  in  contact  with  the  chest,  or  if  we  use
too  much  force,  or  permit  the  fingers  to  rest  after  the  blow  is
struck,  we  elicit  less  sound.  We  ought,  in  general,  to  apply
percussion  to  the  bones,  and  not  to  the  intercostal  spaces,  and  to
strike  the  anterior  and  lateral  parts  of  the  chest,  in  a  direction
parallel  to  the  ribs.  If,  however,  the  intercostal  spaces  are  not
very  sensible,  as  frequently  happens  in  fat  or  phlegmatic  persons,
it  is  better  to  strike  across  the  ribs.  On  the  back  we  cannot  do
otherwise  on  account  of  the  thickness  of  the  muscles ;  and  here
we  ought  to  prefer  the  angles  of  the  ribs  as  being  least  covered,
and  therefore  affording  the  best  sound.  In  any  point  where  the
muscles  covering  the  ribs  are  thick,  flabby,  or  relaxed,  we  should
endeavour  to  procure  their  tension  *  With  this  view,  when  we
apply  percussion  over  the  pectorals,  we  cause  the  patient  to
keep  the  trunk  erect,  the  shoulders  thrown  back,  and  the  head
elevated  ;  and  in  applying  it  over  the  muscles  at  the  side  of  the
spine  or  which  cover  the  scapula,  we  direct  the  arms  to  be  cross-
ed, the  head  to  be  stooped,  and  the  back  to  be  rounded.  In  per-
cussingthe  axilla  and  side,  we  cause  the  arm  to  be  raised  and
the  hand  to  be  placed  above  the  head.  If  the  muscles  are
very  much  relaxed,  or  if  there  is  oedema  or  a  flabby  fatness,  it
is  often  useful  to  stretch  and  compress  the  integuments  with  two
fingers  of  the  left  hand,  and  to  strike  between.  In  the  case  of
children  and  lean  persons,  it  is  found  sufficient  to  percuss  with
the  extremity  of  one  finger.  In  subjects  whose  chest  is  naturally
very  sonorous,  or  where  we  merely  wish  to  verify  results  already
known  and  easily  obtained,  we  may  operate  more  expeditiously
by  using  the  flat  of  the  hand,  taking  care  not  to  apply  the  palm.
This  method,  however,  is  less  to  be  depended  on,  inasmuch
as  the  percussion  extends  over  too  large  a  space,  and  is  somewhat
different  under  each  finger.  In  these  cases  I  occasionally  em-
ploy, and  with  more  success,  the  stethoscope,  in  percussing  ra-
pidly the  parts  on  the  back,  especially  where  the  muscles  are
flubby,  and  find  that  I  can  elicit  in  this  manner  a  greater  sound
with  less  force  of  percussion.

When  we  obtain  from  percussion  only  a  slight  difference  of
sound  on  the  two  sides,  leaving  the  result  doubtful,  it  is  advise-
able  to  repeat  the  operation,  in  changing  our  position  to  the
other  side  of  the  patient :  in  this  manner  we  frequently  obtain  a
result  entirely  different,  the  side  most  sonorous  in  the  former
trial  yielding  now  a  sound  inferior  to  the  other. This  precau-

*  This  is  less  necessary  in  mediate  percussion  ;  indeed  it  is  often  proper,  in  this
method,  to  keep  the  muscles  relaxed.— Piorry,  Du  Proc6d6  Operatoire.  Paris,
1830. — Transl.


PERCUSSION.  19

idon  is  never  to  be  omitted  in  doubtful  cases;  for,  I  repeat  it,
wercussion  yields  exact  results  in  the  hands  of  those  only  who
wring  to  its  exercise  experience,  dexterity,  and  much  atten-
tion.*

Character  of  the  sound  derived  from  Percussion.  This  is
llifferent  in  the  different  parts  of  the  chest ;  on  which  account  I
lhall  divide  its  surface  into  fifteen  regions,  twelve  of  which  are
Mouble.

1.  Subclavian  region.  This  includes  merely  the  portion  of
Ihe  chest  covered  by  the  clavicle.  When  struck  about  the  middle
)»r  sternal  extremity,  this  bone  yields  a  very  clear  sound  ;  its  hu-
meral extremity  on  the  contrary  yields  a  rather  dull  sound.  The
knowledge  of  the  natural  and  morbid  sound  of  the  chest  in  this
vegion  is  very  important,  inasmuch  as  from  it  are  usually  derived
Hie  first  signs  of  the  development  of  tubercles  in  the  lungs.'f
IWhen  the  clavicle  is  more  distant  from,  or  closer  to,  the  chest
than  usual,  in  consequence  of  the  more  arched  or  straighter  form
>i>f  this  bone,  the  sound  is  less  distinct :  this  is  especially  the
uase  in  the  latter  condition  of  the  clavicle.

2.  Anterior-superior  region.  This  is  bounded  by  the  clavicle
ikbove  and  the  fourth  rib  (inclusive)  below.  The  sound  is  here
maturally  very  clear,  but  somewhat  less  so,  however,  than  over
li.he  sternal  end  of  the  clavicle.

3.  Mammary  region.  This  begins  below  the  fourth  rib  and
tterminates  with  the  eighth.  It  can  rarely  be  percussed  in  fe-
nnales ;  and  in  the  male  it  seldom  yields  so  good  a  sound  as  the
nnterior-superior  region,  on  account  of  the  thickness  of  the  infe-
rrior  edge  of  the  pectoralis  major.

4.  Submammary  region.  This  extends  from  the  eighth  rib  to
tthe  cartilaginous  border  of  the  false  ribs.  On  the  right  side,  it
ailmost  yields  a  dull  sound  on  account  of  the  size  of  the  liver;
while  on  the  left  side,  it  frequently  yields  a  clearer  sound  than
nnatural,  and  which  may  be  called  almost  tympanitic,  owing  to

the  presence  of  the  stomach  distended  with  gas.  In  very  rare
iinstances  the  unusual  size  of  the  spleen  may  occasion  the  dull
Nsound.j

*  As  tbe  intensity  of  sound  depends  partly  on  the  quantity  of  air,  it  follows  that
tfthe  results  of  percussion  will  be  modified  by  the  particular  time,  in  the  act  of  respi-
ration, at  which  it  is  performed  ;  and  as  we  are  always  desirous  of  eliciting  as  loud
;ia  sound  as  possible,  it  is  generally  preferable  to  percuss  during  or  immediately  after
i  inspiration,  when  the  lungs  are  full ;  and  not  during  or  after  expiration,  when  they
aare  comparatively  empty.  In  obscure  cases,  it  is  frequently  necessary,  or  at  least
iiproper,  to  make  the  patient  take  a  deep  inspiration,  and  then  retain  his  breath  for
«i  few  seconds,  while  we  operate. — Transl.

t  It  is  now  well  known  that  tubercles  occupy  the  jupper  lobes  of  the  lungs,  ear-
Uier  and  in  greater  quantity,  than  tbe  other  lobes.  See  tbe  Chapter  on  Phthisis  in
tthis  work, See  also  Louis's  Recherches  sur  la  Phthisie,  Chap.  11.  p.  224. — Transl.

t  Andral  is  of  opinion  that  the  dulness  of  this  region  on  the  left,  owing  to  the
(.•presence  of  the  spleen,  is  of  more  frequent  occurrence  than  is  commonly  imagined.
I  Tom.  ii.  p.  338. — Transl.

c  2


20


EXPLORATION  Ol<' THE  CHEST.


5.  Sternal  regions — superior,  middle,  and  inferior.  Over  the
whole  extent  of  the  sternum  the  sound  is  as  clear  as  on  the  sternal
end  of  the  clavicle.  In  certain  cases,  however,  particularly  in
very  fat  persons,  the  lower  portion  of  the  sternum  yields  a  duller
pound,  on  account  of  the  great  quantity  of  fat  about  the  heart.*

f).  Axillary  region.  This  extends  from  the  upper  part  of
the  axilla  to  the  fourth  rib  inclusive;  it  yields  naturally  a  clear
sound.

7.  Lateral  region.  This  is  bounded  by  the  fourth  rib  above
and  terminates  with  the  eighth.  The  sound  in  this  region  is
always  good  on  the  left  side ;  on  the  right,  it  is  frequently  much
less,  owing  to  the  liver  rising  higher  than  usual,  and  thereby
compressing  the  lung  upwards,  and  rendering  it  more  dense  and
less  charged  with  air.  The  liver  itself  never  extends  above  the
level  of  the  sixth  or  fifth  rib,  at  least  when  sound.

8.  Inferior  lateral  region.  This  is  bounded  above  by  the
eighth  rib  and  terminates  with  the  border  of  the  false  ribs.  For
the  reasons  just  mentioned,  this  region  on  the  right  side  yields  a
completely  dull  sound,  and  is  almost  always  much  less  sonorous
than  the  left.  This  last,  on  the  contrary,  for  reasons  also  already
stated,  frequently  yields  a  clearer  sound  than  natural,  and  this
even  when  the  inferior  portion  of  the  lung  is  obstructed,  or  there
exists  an  effusion  of  fluid  in  the  pleura.

9-  Acromion  region.  This  is  comprehended  between  the  cla-
vicle, the  upper  edge  of  the  trapezius  muscle,  the  head  of  the
humerus,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  neck.  Here  there  is  no
sound  whatever,  the  soft  parts  in  this  place  yielding  passively  to
the  percussion.

10.  Upper  scapular  region.  This  corresponds  to  the  supra-
spinal fossa  of  the  scapula,  and  hardly  yields  any  sound  on  ac-
count of  the  muscle  that  fills  it.  The  spine  of  the  scapula,
which  bounds  this  region  below,  sometimes  yields  a  slight  sound,
but  never  considerable,  and  this  only  when  the  arms  are  very
forcibly  crossed.

11.  Lower  scapular  region.  This  corresponds  to  that  portion
of  the  scapula  below  its  spine,  and  yields  no  sound,  on  account
of  its  muscles.

12.  Inter-scapular  region.  This  includes  the  space  between
the  inner  margin  of  the  scapula  and  the  spine,  when  the  arms
are  crossed  on  the  breast.  It  is  not  easy  to  elicit  any  sound
from  it,  on  account  of  its  muscles. Sometimes,  however,  it

*  Avenbrugsrer  considers  this  diminution  of  sound,  under  a  part  of  the  sternum  as
general.  His  words  are — "Sternum  totum  percussum  resonat  ita  clare  ac  thoracis
latera,  excepto  illo  loco,  cui  cor  pro  parte  subjacet ;  ibi  enim  paulo  obscurior  sonus
percipitur."  The  opinion  of  Corvisart  coincides  with  that  of  our  author.  1  have
mvself  frequently  found  the  sound  dull  in  this  point,  when  there  was  no  reason  to
suspect  disease  of  the  heart.— Transl.


PERCUSSION.


21


wields  a  middling  but  sufficiently  distinct  sound,  especially  in
tthin  persons,  and  when  the  arms  are  strongly  crossed  and  the
Ihead  bent,  so  that  the  rhomboid  and  trapezius  muscles  are  made
iquite  tense.  The  spine  in  this  region  gives  a  good  sound,  as
[■does  also  that  portion  of  the  chest  included  between  the  inner
;iand  upper  angle  of  the  scapula  and  the  first  dorsal  vertebra.

13.  Inferior  dorsal  region.  This  begins  at  the  level  of  the
Uower  angle  of  the  scapula  and  terminates  ac  the  twelfth  dorsal
vvertebra.  To  elicit  from  this  region  all  the  sound  it  is  capable
cof  yielding,  we  ought,  especially  in  fat  subjects,  to  endeavour
:to  find  the  angle  of  the  ribs,  and  to  percuss  on  that  point  in  a
ttransverse  direction.  In  the  upper  part  of  the  region,  the  sound
ids  pretty  good ;  a  little  lower  it  is  often  slight  or  none,  and  on
tthe  right  side  it  is  almost  always  obscure,  on  account  of  the
jpresence  of  the  liver.  On  the  left  side  it  frequently  yields  the
(factitious  sound  so  often  mentioned  as  owing  to  the  presence  of
tthe  stomach*

*  Independently  of  the  relative  sonorousness  of  different  parts  in  the  same  chest,
^general  differences  occur  in  different  individuals,  which  it  is  not  always  easy  to
iaccount  for  ;  some  chests  heiug  very  sonorous,  and  others  comparatively  dull.  This
nmight  he  expected,  a  priori,  when  the  complexity  of  the  structure  of  the  contained
sand  containing  parts  is  considered.  The  greater  or  less  degree  of  robustness,  fat-
nness,  &c.  has  certainly  an  obvious  effect ;  lean  persons  having  always,  ceteris  pari-
^bus,  more  sonorous  chests  than  those  who  are  fat.  This  is  one  reason  why  percus
ssion  frequently  fails  to  detect  the  presence  of  tubercles  in  the  lungs,  the  increase  of
^-sonorousness  from  the  extenuation  of  parietes  compensating  for  the  augmented  dul-
nness  of  the  viscus  within.  In  children  generally,  the  chest  is  very  sonorous.  This
nmay  partly  arise  from  the  small  degree  of  development  of  their  muscles,  and  the
■absence  of  fat ;  but  it  is  probably,  also,  in  part  owing  to  the  peculiar  relations  of
tthe  lungs  to  the  air,  in  this  age.

M.  Piorry  has  recently  given,  in  his  work  on  Mediate  Percussion,  a  different  di-
vision of  the  surface  of  the  chest,  into  regions.  It  is  in  some  respects  even  more
•artificial  than  that  of  our  author,  and  I  am  not  aware  that  it  has  any  superior  prac-
tical advantages.  It  is  very  desirable,  for  the  sake  of  brevity  and  clearness  in  de-
scription, as  well  as  for  the  precision  in  diagnosis,  that  some  fixed  division  should
hbe  adopted.

In  the  article  Abdomen,  Exploration  of,  in  the  first  vol.  of  the  Cyclopedia  of  Bract.
'Med.  I  have  given  a  sketch  of  a  regional  subdivision  of  the  trunk  of  the  body,  sim-
fpler  than  that  of  Laennec  or  Piorry,  and  based  on  somewhat  firmer  grounds.  In  this
II  went  upon  the  fundamental  principle  of  defining  every  region  accurately,  in  every
i  individual  case,  by  drawing  all  the  lines  perfectly  straight,  and  between  points  that
aare  at  once  fixed  in  their  nature  and  obvious  to  the  senses.  By  these  means  there
rcan  never  be  any  doubt  as  to  the  intended  place  or  extent  of  particular  regions,
twhatever  objections  may  be  raised  against  the  propriety  of  the  divisions.  The  ab-
cdomen  and  chest  are  comprehended  in  the  same  plan,  but  I  shall  only  notice  in  this
[place  the  thoracic  regions.  The  vertical  lines  having  relation  to  the  chest  are  eight
iin  number,  and  run  as  follows  : — 1.  along  the  middle  of  the  sternum  from  its  upper
tto  its  lower  extremity  ;  2.  from  the  acromial  extremity  of  the  clavicle  to  the  ex-
tternal  tubercle  of  the  pubes  (right  and  left) ;  3.  from  the  posterior  boundary  of  the
aaxilla,  or  inferior  edge  of  the  latissimus  dorsi,  to  that  point  of  the  crest  of  the  ileum
■-on  which  it  falls  vertically  (right  and  left)  ;  4.  along  the  spinous  processes  of  the
(■cervical  and  dorsal  vertebra ;  5.  along  the  posterior  or  spinal  border  of  the  sca-
i  pulse,  from  the  clavicular  transverse  line  to  the  mammary  transverse  line.  The
\  horizontal  or  transverse  lines  are  four  in  number,  and  areas  follows: — 1.  around
:the  lower  part  of  the  neck,  sloping 'downwards  to  the  upper  end  of  the  sternum  an-
tteriorily,  and  to  the  last  cervical  vertebra  posteriority  ;  2.  around  the  upper  part  of


22


EXPLORATION  OF  THE  CHEST.


Percussion  of  the  chest  has  great  advantages  over  the  methods
already  noticed.  It  enables  us  to  detect  the  existence  of  an  ob-
struction of  the  lungs  or  an  effusion  into  the  pleura  of  a  moderate
extent ;  but  it  cannot  discriminate  these  from  each  other.  Many
causes,  moreover,  conspire  to  circumscribe  the  number  of  cases
in  which  it  is  of  use.  We  have  just  seen  that  in  many  places  of
the  chest  it  gives  no  satisfactory  result,  and  it  was  formerly
stated  that  its  chief  indication  (that  of  fulness)  is  not  obtained
in  pulmonary  diseases  until  the  organic  change  is  already  far
advanced.  Its  indications  are  very  equivocal  when  the  disease
occupies  the  centre  or  roots  of  the  lungs,  or  when  both  lungs
are  simultaneously  affected  ;  they  are  deceptive  when  the  chest
is  deformed  even  in  a  slight  degree ;  and  they  are  extremely  un-
certain or  cease  entirely  when  the  integuments  are  oedematous  or
loaded  with  fat,  and  yet  more,  when  they  have  become  flabby
from  the  removal  of  this  excessive  degree  of  obesity.

We  occasionally  also  meet  with  cases  where  the  chest,  even  of
spare  subjects,  sounds  very  badly,  and  equally  so  over  its  whole
surface,  although  the  respiration  is  found  to  be  good  en  the  appli-
cation of  the  stethoscope.  I  am  unacquainted  with  all  the  causes
of  this  phenomenon  ;  but  the  most  common  has  appeared  to  me
to  be  a  slight  and  equal  contraction  of  both  sides,  the  consequence
of  pleuritic  attacks  which  had  produced  numerous  adhesions  be-
tween the  lungs  and  costal  pleura.*

However,  if  percussion  taken  singly  frequently  furnishes  us

the  chest  in  the  line  of  the  clavicles  ;  3.  around  the  middle  of  the  chest,  crossing
the  nipples  anteriorily,  and  touching  the  inferior  borders  of  the  scapulae  behind  ;
around  the  lower  part  of  the  chest  on  the  scyphoid  cartilage.

By  these  imaginary  lines  the  trunk  is-divided  into  three  horizontal  and  eight  ver-
tical bands,  and  their  intersections  form,  in  all,  sixteen  compartments  or  regions,
of  which  two  are  superior,  four  anterior,  four  lateral,  (two  on  each  side,)  and  six
posterior.  They  are  named  as  follows : — superior  regions — humeral  (right  and  left) ;
anterior  regions — subclavian  (right  and  left),  mammary  (right  and  left)  ;  lateral
regions — axillary  (right  and  left),  subaxillary  or  lateral  (right  and  left) ;  posterior
regions — scapular  (right  and  left),  intra-scapular  (right  and  left),  subscapular  or  su-
perior dorsal  (right  and  left.)

There  are  few  more  useful  exercises  for  the  anatomical  student  than  endeavouring
to  imprint  on  his  mind  some  plan  of  this  kind,  and  to  teach  himself  by  observation,
and  by  multiplied  experiment  on  the  dead  subject,  the  precise  relations  of  the  re-
gions'to  the  viscera  that  lie  beneath  them.  He  ought  always  to  consider  his  know-
ledge as  imperfect,  until  he  is  able  to  state,  with  considerable  accuracy,  the  organs,
or  parts  of  organs,  that  will  be  wounded  by  a  stiletto  thrust  in  at  any  point.  It  is
only  after  possessing  such  a  degree  of  knowledge,  that  he  can  enter,  with  full  ad-
vantage, upon  the  study  of  the  various  methods  used  in  exploring  diseases  of  the
chest  or  abdomen,  and  that  he  can  expect  to  derive  from  them  the  great  practical
benefits  which  they  are  calculated  to  supply. — Transl.

*  There  is  an  objection  to  percussion  of  another  kind,  which  1  do  not  remember
to  have  seen  mentioned  bv  any  one,  but  which  it  has  occurred  to  me  more  than

once  to  witness,  namely,  the  alarm  produced  in  the  minds  of  the  patients  upon

their  perceiving  a  great'diflerence  of  sound  in  the  two  sides.  In  this  respect,  as
in  most  others,  mediate  auscultation  has  a  decided  advantage  ;  as,  however  ominous
may  be  the  results  obtained  by  it,  we  can  always  conceal  them  from  the  patient.—
Transl .


I'EltCUSSION.


23


only  with  indications  which  are  circumscribed  and  often  doubt-
ful, it  becomes  most  valuable  when  combined  with  mediate  aus-
cultation ;  and  we  shall  find  hereafter  that  the  pathognomonic
signs  of  several  important  diseases,  and  among  others  of  pneumo-
thorax, emphysema  of  the  lungs,  and  the  accumulation  of  un-
softened  tubercles  in  the  upper  lobes,  are  derived  from  the  con-
temporaneous employment  of  these  two  methods.*

*  An  important  improvement  on  the  method  of  percussion  was  recommended  some
time  since  by  M.  Piorry,  and  has  been  fully  explained  and  illustrated  in  the  follow-
ing two  valuable  treatises  published  by  him :  De  la  Percussion  Mediate.  Par.  1828.  8.
Du  Procede  Operatoire  a  suivre  dans  I' exploration  des  organes  pur  la  Percussion  Mediate.
Par.  1830.  8.  This  improvement  consists  in  interposing  between  the  point  of  the
fingers  and  the  chest,  a  small  plate  of  ivory  on  which  the  percussion  is  made  ;  and
from  which  circumstance  the  inventor  has,  in  imitation  of  Laennec,  given  the
name  of  Mediate  Percussion  to  his  method.  The  ivory  plate  (which  has  received  the
name  of  Pleximeter  or  Plessimeter,  from  the  words  ir\-fio-ao>,  I  strike,  or  irKrj^ts,  percus-
sion, and  fxerpov,  measure,)  is  of  a  circular  or  ovoid  shape,  from  an  inch  and  a  half  to
two  inches  in  diameter,  and  about  one-sixth  of  an  inch  in  thickness.  It  has  either
a  raised  edge  or  rim,  or  projecting  handles,  on  its  upper  side,  to  permit  its  being
held  between  the  finger  and  thumb  of  the  left  hand,  while  it  is  struck  witli  the  right.
In  making  use  of  this  instrument,  all  that  seems  essential  is  to  apply  it  accurately,
closely,  and  consequently  parallel  to  the  surface.  As  in  simple  percussion,  the
blow  may  be  made  with  one  or  more  fingers,  and  must  be  rapidly  executed,  with  the
points  but  not  the  nails  of  the  fingers  :  on  this  account  the  nails  must  be  kept  short.
The  pleximeter  may  be  applied  immediately  on  the  skin  or  over  some  portion  of  the
clothes;  and,  as  in  the  case  of  the  stethoscope,  it  is  necessary  on  some  parts  to  inter-
pose a  small  pledget  of  lint  or  soft  linen,  to  insure  its  accurate  apposition.

The  following  are  the  relative  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  the  two  methods,
as  stated  by  M.  Piorry.  1.  Direct  percussion  is  often  painful,  particularly  in  un-
skilful hands  ;  as  when  the  blows  are  too  forcible,  when  they  are  applied  upon  the
soft  parts  between  the  ribs,  or  when  the  nails  are  prominent:  even,  in  some  cases,
the  degree  of  impulse  necessary  to  produce  sufficient  sound  excites  either  a  sense  of
pain  on  the  skin,  or  a  painful  jarring  within  the  chest,  occasionally  lasting  some
time.  The  use  of  the  pleximeter  enables  us  to  avoid  all  these  inconveniences ;  in
the  first  place,  because  it  defends  the  skin  from  the  direct  impulse  of  the  fingers;
secondly,  because  a  less  degree  of  impulse  is  necessary  to  produce  the  requisite
sound;  and,  thirdly,  because  the  shock  is  much  less  felt  from  being  equally  diffused
over  a  considerable  space.  Even  in  the  case  of  recent  vesications,  the  interposition
of  the  plate  will  frequently  enable  us  to  employ  percussion  with  little  or  no  incon-
venience to  the  patient.  2.  As  the  walls  of  the  thorax  consist  of  very  different  ma-
terials in  different  places,  and  vary  likewise  greatly  as  to  their  thickness,  &c.  direct
percussion  can  only  be  effective  when  made  on  the  more  solid  points  of  the  thinner
parts  of  the  parietes ;  namely,  the  sternum,  clavicles,  ribs,  and  their  cartilages  :
when  made  on  the  intercostal  spaces,  pectoral  muscles,  or  mammae,  it  is  both  painful
and  ineffective ;  and  when  there  is  a  great  accumulation  of  fat  below  the  skin,  or  the
parts  are  anasarcous  or  emphysematous,  the  sound  is  still  more  imperfect.  Mediate
percussion  will  enable  us  to  get  over  most  of  these  difficulties.  By  means  of  the
interposed  plate  we  can  percuss  equally  on  the  bone  and  soft  parts  ;  and  the  precau-
tion so  requisite  in  direct  percussion,  to  percuss  on  similar  parts  on  both  sides,
becomes  unnecessary,  the  plate  constituting  a  sort  of  artificial  solid  wall  to  the  soft
parts.  In  the  case  of  anasarca  or  emphysema,  by  compressing  the  distended  parts
with  the  plate,  we  obtain  a  solid  point  whereon  to  employ  percussion,  and  thereby
obtain  results  otherwise  unattainable.  3.  Mediate  percussion  is  much  easier,  and
requires  much  fewer  precautions  than  the  ancient  method.  In  direct  percussion  we
must  never  lose  sight  of  the  rule  that  the  percussion  must  be  made  precisely  in  the
same  manner  on  the  two  opposite  sides  of  the  chest,  to  enable  us  to  deduce  safe  con-
clusions from  the  resulting  sounds  :  for  instance,  the  blows  must  be  made  on  similar
structures,  with  the  same  degree  of  force,  under  the  same  angle,  &c.  With  the
pleximeter  these  precautions  are  much  less  necessary,  because  we  have  here  always


CHAP.  III.


OF IMMEDIATE  AUSCULTATION.

Hippocrates  had  made  trial  of  immediate  auscultation,  as  is
proved  by  the  following  passage  of  the  treatise  De  Morbis;

the  same  flat  smooth  surface  whereon  to  strike,  and  an  artificial  wall  every  where  of
equal  density  and  elasticity,  Besides,  less  art  is  necessary  in  arranging  the  fingers
in  the  latter  case,  a  single  finger  heing  in  general  sufficient  to  elicit  the  necessary
degree  of  sound.

In  admitting  the  validity  of  these  advantages  of  mediate  over  direct  percussion,
we  must  allow  that  the  superiority  of  either  in  practice  will  depend  greatly  on
experience.  By  one  well  versed  indirect  percussion,  an  instrument  will  not  often  be
needed  in  the  exploration  of  the  chest,  as  his  experience  will  enable,  him  to  evade
most  of  the  inconveniences  attending  the  former.  The  necessity  of  carrying  an
instrument,  however  portable,  will  be  felt  by  some  to  be  an  inconvenience ;  but  this
can  never  be  admitted  as  a  reason  for  rejecting  the  employment  of  a  method  which
possesses  decided  advantages.

There  is  a  variety  of  mediate  percussion  in  common  use  still  more  si  ml  than
that  of  Piorry's,  and  which  is  well  deserving  the  attention  of  the  student.  This
consists  of  the  substitution  of  one  or  two  fingers  of  the  left  hand  for  the  pleximeter,
— the  back  of  the  fingers  being  uppermost.  This  proceeding  possesses  several  of
the  advantages  of  M.  Piorry's  method  ;  and  it  has  even  some  few  over  it,  exclusive
of  its  greater  simplicity.  In  cases  where  there  is  considerable  emaciation,  M.  Pi-
orry's method  is  liable  to  mislead,  unless  the  intercostal  spaces  are  carefully  tilled
with  some  soft  material ;  as,  without  this  precaution,  the  sound  may  be  modified  by
the  hollow  existing  between  the  plate  and  the  skin.  Direct  percussion  on  the  ribs,
or  the  employment  of  the  fingers  as  a  pleximeter,  is  often,  in  such  cases,  preferable.
If  we  are  careful  in  applying  the  fingers  so  as  to  make  them  fit  accurately  into  the
natural  depressions,  and  thus  form  one  body,  as  it  were,  with  the  thoracic  parietes,
— we  are  often  enabled  to  use  very  forcible  percussion  without  exciting  pain,  and
also  to  elicit  as  definite  sounds  as  by  either  of  the  other  methods.  This  proceeding
is  free  from  another  inconvenience  which  occasionally  attaches  to  M.  Piorry's  method,
especially  in  the  hands  of  beginners.  In  the  latter  it  sometimes  happens  that  the
loudness  and  sharpness  of  the  primary  sound  arising  from  the  contact  of  the  two
surfaces,  are  so  considerable  (particularly  if  the  vail  be  used,  which  it  ought  never
to  be)  as  to  drown,  as  it  were,  the  secondary  sound  resulting  from  the  modifying
influence  of  the  subjacent  parts,  from  which  modification  it  is  that  we  form  our  judg-
ment respecting  the  condition  of  those  parts.  When  the  fingers  constitute  the  plexi-
meter, we  have  little  or  none  of  this  immediate  clatter  when  the  blow  is  given.

In  the  percussion  of  the  abdomen,  possessed  as  it  is  of  soft  and  yielding  walls
only,  the  pleximeter  is  absolutely  necessary  to  the  production  of  the  requisite  degree
of  sound  ;  and  it  is  yet  further  necessary,  in  many  cases,  in  order  to  bring  the
superficial  walls,  by  pressure,  in  contact  with  the  subjacent  parts.  Mediate  per-
cussion alone  may  therefore  be  said  to  be  applicable  to  the  investigation  of  abdo-
minal diseases.  It  is  at  least  equally  applicable  with  direct  percussion  to  the  chest ;
and  as  it  has  decided  advantages  in  some  cases,  and  no  other  disadvantage  in  any
case  than  the  necessity  of  having  an  additional  instrument,  it  ought  to  take  prece-
dence of  the  original  method  of  Avenbrugger  in  the  investigation  of  pectoral  diseases
also.

An  observation  above.stated  by  Laennec  in  the  text,  (p.  16,)  that  the  indications
from  percussion  conveyed  to  the  operator  are  much  stronger  than  to  the  bystanders,
ought  never  to  be  overlooked  in  practice  :  the  peculiar  sensations  indicative  of  the
absence  or  presence  of  air  in  the  subsequent  parts,  are  often  distinctly  appreciable
as  communicated  through  the  percussing  fingers,  when  the  difference  of  sound  is
imperceptible

Different  things  have  been  used  as  pleximcters,  and,  among  others,  the  horn  cap


I MMEDIATE  AUSCU LT ATION'.


25


'^You  shall  know  by  this  that  the  chest  contains  water  and  not
pus,  if  in  applying  the  ear  during  a  certain  time  on  the  side,  you
perceive  a  noise  like  that  of  boiling  vinegar."*  I  need  hardly
state  that  the  assertion,  as  far  as  the  diagnosis  is  concerned,  is
erroneous.  The  sound  heard  by  Hippocrates  was  probably  that
of  simple  respiration,  or  this  intermixed  with  a  crepitous  rhonchus.
It  is  very  singular  that  this  passage  seems  never  to  have  engaged
the  attention  of  physicians,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  his  experi-
ment has  ever  been  repeated,  until  the  present  time.  It  is  true  that
1  had  myself  read  this  passage  of  Hippocrates  many  years  before
I  entertained  the  idea  of  mediate  auscultation  ;  but  at  the  time  I
considered  it,  as  it  indeed  is,  one  of  the  mistakes  of  that  great  man,
ai  d  had  altogether  forgotten  it.  If  Hippocrates  had  prosecuted
this  line  of  inquiry  further,  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  would  have
discovered  many  valuable  truths,  and  might  perhaps  have  arrived
at  mediate  auscultation  itself.  But  he  seems  to  have  proceeded
no  further  than  to  announce  the  incorrect  observation  above
quoted,  and  which  his  successors  appear  to  have  totally  disre-
garded. This  seems  at  first  sight  wonderful ;  and  yet  nothing
is  of  more  common  occurrence  :  it  is  not  given  to  any  man  to
comprehend  all  the  relations  and  all  the  consequences  of  the  most
s:mple  fact ;  and  we  know  that  nature's  secrets  are  more  fre-
quently betrayed  by  fortuitous  circumstances  than  obtained  by
the  force  of  our  scientific  efforts.

Since  the  publication  of  my  researches,  some  physicians  have
ittempted  to  repeat  them  by  immediate  auscultation  ;  and  there
one  or  two  of  these  who  seem  to  give  this  method  the  pre-
ference. Their  chief  reasons  are — that  it  saves  the  trouble  of
curying  an  instrument;  that  it  enables  us  to  perceive  more
soinds  at  once,  and  therefore  more  intelligibly  ;  and  that  it  is
niu-e  easy  to  apply  the  ear  than  to  keep  the  stethoscope  in  exact
coitact  with  the  side.

^hese  reasons  are  more  specious  than  well  founded. It  is

whicllis  now  commonly  affixed  to  the  auricular  extremity  of  the  stethoscope.  M.
Piorryobjects  to  this  on  account  of  the  liability  of  horn  to  warp,  and  also  on  account
of  the  erforation  in  its  centre.  Dr.  Williams,  however,  seems  to  consider  this  last
as  no  o^ection,  but  recommends  the  inner  surface  of  the  cap  to  be  lined  with  soft
leather.o  prevent  the  clacking  noise  produced  by  the  impulsion  of  the  fingers. —
(Rationa  Exposition,  p.  22.) — My  own  experience  is  against  the  use  of  the  perfo-
rated pleimeter  ;  exclusively  of  an  objection  I  have  to  the  cap  of  the  stethoscope
being  sonade  as  to  be  easily  removed.  In  M.  Piorry's  Stethoscope,  the  ivory
pleximeteijs  attached  to  its  pectoral  extremity,  and  indeed  forms  a  necessary  part
ot  it.  I  hiuvrangement  is  convenient,  and  is  perfectly  satisfactory  as  far  as  percus-
sion is  conc-ned  ;  but  I  have  already  objected  to  the  whole  instrument  regarded  as
a  stethoscope,  See  Plate  at  the  end.— Transl.

•  Tovrcp  &rypo^^  jfxt  ttSov,  a\\u  SSup  4art.  koI  t)u  iroWbv  XP^V0V  ^poaix^v  rh
oZs  axovaCri  "*bs  to.  n\evpa  ofet  eawdes  olov  ^/6pos.  i)e  Morbis,  ii.  §  59.  Vander-
liuden.

In  the  tran»tion  in  the  text  I  have  followed  the  interpretation  (the  only  reason-
able one)  ada^d  by  Vanderlinden,  Corunro,  and  Mercurialis,  as  if  it  were  feet
(fervet)  in  plac&f {piety— Author.


2G


EXPLORATION  OF  T1IJC  CHEST.


true  that  the  ear  applied  to  the  chest  enables  us  to  hear  more
sounds  than  we  do  by  the  stethoscope,  particularly  if  the  use  of
this  instrument  is  not  familiar  to  us.  But  this  arises  chiefly  from
this  circumstance,  that  all  the  parts  of  the  observer's  head  which
bear  upon  the  chest,  namely,  the  cheek-bone,  the  temples  and  the
angle  of  the  jaw,  become,  severally,  conductors  of  sound,  and  may
thus  convey  the  sound  of  respiration  to  the  ear,  although  none
exists  immediately  beneath  it.  This  circumstance  may  lead  to
serious  mistakes  in  cases  where  the  pulmonary  obstruction  is
partial  and  of  small  extent.  To  a  person  who  has  never  tried
either  of  the  methods,  it  is  no  doubt  an  easier  matter  to  apply
the  ear  to  the  chest  than  to  make  use  of  the  stethoscope ;  although
the  habit  of  using  this  instrument  may  be  acquired  in  a  very  few
days.  But  there  exist  innumerable  reasons  which  will  always
render  mediate  auscultation  a  much  surer  guide  and  of  much
more  extensive  employment.  I  will  here  notice  some  of  the  prin-
cipal of  these : —

1.  We  cannot  apply  the  ear  to  many  points  of  the  chest  where
important  signs  most  frequently  are  found,  such  as  the  axilla,  the
region  of  the  acromion,  the  angle  formed  by  the  clavicle  and  the
head  of  the  humerus,  (in  lean  persons,)  the  lower  end  of  the
sternum  when  much  depressed,  and,  frequently  also,  the  inter-
scapular region.  In  the  case  of  females,  exclusively  of  reasons  of
decorum,  it  is  impracticable  over  the  whole  space  occupied  by  the
mammas.

2.  Immediate  auscultation  is  more  fatiguing  to  the  patients
than  is  the  application  of  the  stethoscope,  inasmuch  as  this  las.
bears  only  on  one  small  point  and  needs  hardly  any  pressure,
while  the  due  application  of  the  naked  ear  requires  a  considerabe
pressure  on  the  chest.

3.  Owing  to  this  circumstance,  it  gives  rise  to  extranerus
sounds  from  the  contraction  of  the  muscles,  in  keeping  up  be
pressure,  as  we  shall  see  afterwards :  and  the  friction  of  theear
and  head  against  the  patient's  clothes,  produces  much  »ore
sound  than  when  the  stethoscope  is  used.  I  have  more  than
once  had  occasion  to  see  physicians,  or  pupils,  mistake  diese
extraneous  sounds  for  those  of  respiration.  This  mistake  if  more
easy  from  the  circumstance  of  the  factitious  sounds  beinj,  like
those  of  respiration,  subject  to  regular  intermission  fr<m  the
natural  motions  of  the  chest.

4.  The  uneasy  posture  which  one  is  frequently  forcd  into,
determines  the  blood  to  the  head  and  renders  the  heaMg  dull.
This  circumstance,  and  the  repugnance  which  every  me  must
feel  to  apply  the  ear  to  a  patient  that  is  dirty  or  whoe  chest  is
bathed  in  perspiration,  must  always  prevent  the  habiual  or  fre-
quent use  of  this  method ;  and  this  single  circumsance  takes
from  it  three-fourths  of  its  value;  for,  independntly  of  the
want  of  experience  which  must  be  the  nccessar  result,  we


MEDIATE  AUSCULTATION.


27


thereby  deprive  ourselves  of  the  very  best  and  most  practical
advantage  of  auscultation,  that,  namely,  of  recognizing  diseases
at  their  commencement ;  since  at  this  period  they  are  almost
alwavs  latent,  and  the  discovery  of  them  can  therefore  only  be
made  by  those  who  are  accustomed  to  explore  the  respiration  in
all  cases  whatsoever.

5.  Moreover,  some  of  the  most  important  of  the  stethoscopic
signs  have  for  one  of  their  causes  the  stethoscope  itself.  Thus,
perfect  pectoriloquy,  which  consists  in  the  transmission  of  the
voice  through  the  tube  of  the  instrument,  is  changed,  in  the
trial  of  immediate  auscultation,  into  a  simple  resonance,  stronger
no  doubt  in  the  natural  condition  of  the  parts,  but  such  as  to  be
with  difficulty  discriminated  from  agophony  and  bronchophony.
For  these  and  other  reasons,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  affirm,  that  the
physicians  who  shall  confine  themselves  to  immediate  auscultation,
will  never  acquire  great  certainty  in  diagnosis,  and  will  every  now
and  then  fall  into  serious  mistakes.*


CHAP.  IV.

OF MEDIATE  AUSCULTATION.

The  signs  afforded  by  mediate  auscultation  in  the  diseases  of
the  lungs  and  pleura,  are  derived  from  the  changes  presented  by
the  sound  of  respiration,  by  that  of  the  voice  and  coughing,
within  the  chest,  and  also  by  the  1'honchus,  as  well  as  certain
other  sounds  which  occasionally  are  heard  in  the  same  situation.
Of  these  signs  we  shall  now  proceed  to  give  some  account.  The
notice  of  those  which  refer  to  the  diseases  of  the  heart,  will  be
deferred  until  we  come  to  treat  of  the  affections  of  this  organ.

The  general  precautions  which  the  practice  of  auscultation
requires  are  the  following: — 1.  The  stethoscope  must  be  applied
very  exactly  and  perpendicularly  to  the  surface  on  which  it  rests,
so  as  to  leave  no  interval  between  the  skin  and  any  part  of  the
extremity  applied. — 2.  We  must  be  careful  not  to  produce  pain

*  I  entirely  agree  with  the  sentiment  expressed  by  M.  Meriadec  Laennec,  in  his
note  on  this  passage,  that  the  wise  and  peremptory  reflections  made  by  our  author
respecting  the  vast  superiority  of  mediate  over  immediate  auscultation,  are  unan-
swerable. The  only  instances  in  which  1  myself  have  found  immediate  auscultation
preferuble,  have  been  in  certain  diseases  of  infants,  who  are  sometimes  too  restless
or  too  timid  to  allow  the  proper  application  of  the  instrument ;  while  in  the  infinite
majority  of  cases,  it  has  been  proved  to  be  decidedly  inferior  for  every  purpose  of
practical  value.  To  use  the  words  of  Dr.  Williams,  and  at  the  same  time  to
strengthen  my  testimony  by  the  weight  of  his  high  authority,  "  I  would  express  my
conviction  that  although,  with  a  view  to  expedition  and  convenience,  immediate
auscultation  may  be  occasionally  substituted,  no  one  who  has  once  thoroughly  trained
his  ears  to  the  use  of  the  stethoscope,  will  ever  so  lightly  esteem  its  aid  as  again  to
abandon  it."— (Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.,  vol.  iv.  Art.  Stethoscope.) — Transl.


28


EXPLORATION  OF


by  too  strong  pressure ;  this  precaution  is  most  necessary  when
the  instrument  is  used  without  the  stopper,  and  when  the  person
is  lean. — 3.  Although  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  chest  should  be
uncovered, — as  all  the  positive  stethoscopic  signs,  and  frequently
also  the  negative  ones,  may  be  perceived  through  clothes  of  con-
siderable thickness,  provided  they  are  applied  closely  to  the  body,
— still  it  is  better  that  the  clothing  should  only  be  light ;  for  ex-
ample, a  flannel  waistcoat  and  shirt.  Silks  and  also  woollen  stuffs
are  often  inadmissible  on  account  of  the  noise  occasioned  by  their
friction  against  the  instrument.  The  examiner  ought  to  be
careful,  above  all  things,  not  to  place  himself  in  an  uncomfortable
posture,  nor  yet  to  stoop  too  much,  nor  turn  his  head  backwards
by  a  forced  extension  of  the  neck.  These  positions  determine
the  blood  to  the  head  and  thus  obscure  the  sense  of  hearing :
they  may  sometimes  be  properly  avoided  by  kneeling  on  one
knee.  In  examining  the  fore  parts  of  the  chest  we  ought  to
place  the  patient  on  his  back  in  a  recumbent  position,  or  in  a
chair,  and  gently  reclining  backwards.  When  we  examine  the
back,  we  cause  the  patient  to  lean  forwards  and  to  keep  his  arms
forcibly  crossed  in  front ;  and  when  we  examine  the  side,  we
cause  him  to  lean  gently  to  the  opposite  one  and  to  place  the  fore
arm  on  the  head.


Sect.  1.  Auscultation  of  the  respiration.

In  exploring  the  respiration  we  use  the  instrument  without  its
stopper.  In  commencing  our  examination  it  is  a  proper  precau-
tion to  cause  the  patient  to  take  a  few  inspirations  of  moderate
force  and  frequency,  followed  by  expirations  as  nearly  as  may  be
of  the  same  length.  It  sometimes  happens  that  perfectly  sound
lungs  give  hardly  any,  or,  at  most,  a  very  feeble  respiratory
sound  ;  and  in  these  cases  it  is  commonly  found  that  the  sound
is  weak  in  proportion  to  the  effort  made  by  the  patient  to  make
it  audible.  At  other  times  our  patients  fancying  that  something
uncommon  is  expected  from  them,  expand  their  chests  to  the
very  utmost  extent;  or  they  make  several  strong  inspirations,
one  after  another,  without  any  intervening  expiration ;  these
unnatural  efforts  produce  hardly  any  respiratory  sound.  In
such  cases,  and  indeed  in  all  others  where  the  sound  of  respira-
tion is  found  to  be  weak,  we  desire  the  patient  to  cough.  The
act  of  coughing,  particularly  intentional  coughing,  is  commonly
preceded  or  followed  by  a  real  inspiration,  which  is  then  found  to
be  as  sonorous  as  the  particular  condition  of  the  organ  admits;
and  in  these  cases  we  are  frequently  surprised  to  perceive  the
ready  penetration  of  the  air  into  lutlflS  which  we  should  have
considered  as  impermeable,  if  we  had  relied  on  our  first  trials.
We  sometimes  obtain  a  similar  end  in  making  the  patient  speak,


THE  RKSl'lltATION.


29


and  still  more,  in  making  him  read  or  recite.*  I  state  this  fact
not  only  because  it  is  of  practical  importance,  but  because  it
tends  to  the  conclusion  that  the  lungs  are  themselves  possessed  of
an  inherent  power  of  action,  the  seat  of  which  is  probably  in  the
smaller  bronchial  ramifications.

The  sound  of  respiration  is  different  in  the  lungs,  the  trachea,
and  the  larger  bronchial  tubes,  respectively.  These  differences
we  shall  now  describe.

I.  Vesicular  respiration.-]-  On  applying  the  cylinder,  with  its
funnel-shaped  cavity  open,  to  the  breast  of  a  healthy  person,  we
hear,  during  inspiration  and  expiration,  a  slight  but  extremely
distinct  murmur,  answering  to  the  entrance  of  the  air  into,  and
its  expulsion  from,  the  air-cells  of  the  lungs.  This  murmur
may  be  compared  to  that  produced  by  a  pair  of  bellows  whose
valve  makes  no  noise,  or,  still  better,  to  that  emitted  by  a  person
in  a  deep  and  placid  sleep,  who  makes  now  and  then  a  profound
inspiration.^  We  perceive  this  sound  almost  equally  distinct  in
every  part  of  the  chest,  but  more  particularly,  in  those  points
where  the  lungs,  in  their  dilatation,  approach  nearest  to  the
thoracic  parietes,  for  instance,  the  anterior-superior,  the  lateral,
and  the  posterior-inferior  regions.  The  hollow  of  the  axilla,
and  the  space  between  the  clavicle  and  superior  edge  of  the
trapezius  muscle,  exhibit  the  phenomenon  in  its  greatest  in-
tensity.

To  judge  correctly  of  the  state  of  respiration  by  this  method,
we  must  not  rely  on  the  results  of  the  first  moments  of  examina-
tion. The  sort  of  buzzing  sensation  often  caused  by  the  first
application  of  the  instrument,  the  fear,  restraint,  and  agitation
of  the  patient,  which  mechanically  lessen  the  force  of  respiration,
the  frequently  inconvenient  posture  of  the  observer,  and  the  great
sensation  occasionally  produced  by  the  action  of  the  heart, — are
all  causes  which  may  at  first  prevent  us  from  correctly  appre-
ciating, or  even  from  hearing  at  all,  the  sound  of  inspiration
and  expiration.  We  must,  therefore,  allow  some  seconds  to
pass  before  we  attempt  to  form  an  opinion.  I  need  hardly
observe,  that  there  must  be  no  noise  whatever  in  the  vicinity
of  the  patient.

I  have  already  mentioned  the  necessity  of  the  observer

*  No  doubt  all  these  arti6cial  modes  of  increasing  the  intensity  of  the  respiratory
sound  are  effectual,  and  are  occasionally  necessary  ;  in  the  great  majority  of  cases,
however,  a  little  patience  is  all  that  is  wanted  to  lead  to  the  most  satisfactory  result :
after  a  minute  or  two  of  quiet  exploration,  the  natural  character  of  the  respiration
will  generally  be  perceived. — TransL

t  1  have  ventured  to  substitute  the  term  vesicular  respiration,  introduced  by
Andral,  for  that  of  pulmonary  employed  by  our  author,  as  being  at  once  more  pre-
cise,-and  contrasting  better  with  the' other  varieties  to  be  noticed  below.  In  this  I
am  supported  by  the  authority  of  Dr.  Meriadec  Laennec,  in  his  new  edition  of  the
Treatise. — Transl .

t  The  student  will  most  readily  catch  its  true  character,  by  applying  the  naked  ear
to  the  chest  of  a  child. — Transl.


30


EXPLORATION  OF


avoiding  uneasy  postures.  Beside  the  inconveniences  stated,
this  may  also  mislead  by  occasioning  the  auscultator  to  hear  the
sound  of  the  contraction  of  his  own  muscles.  We  must  be
equally  on  our  guard  that  the  patient  does  not  excite  this  sound
in  his  own  muscles,  by  too  strong  a  contraction  of  them  in  cross-
ing the  arms,  leaning  forward  or  resting  on  the  elbow.  On  this
account,  in  the  examination  of  weak  subjects,  it  is  always  better
to  have  them  supported  by  assistants,  than  to  make  them  exhaust
their  remaining  strength  in  keeping  themselves  in  the  erect  posi-
tion. It  is  right  to  observe,  however,  that  all  these  precautions
are  only  necessary  to  beginners.  After  one  or  two  months1  ex-
perience, the  ear  becomes  accustomed  to  the  sound  it  is  in  search
of,  and  is  able  to  discriminate  it  from  all  the  others  with  which
it  may  be  combined,  even  when  weaker  than  they  are.

The  intervention  of  clothing,  even  when  of  considerable  thick-
ness, provided  it  be  of  a  compact  texture  and  fit  the  body  well,
does  not  sensibly  diminish  the  sound  of  respiration  ;*  but  we
must  be  careful  that  there  is  no  friction  between  this  and  the
instrument,  as  this  circumstance,  especially  if  the  clothes  be  of
silk,  or  of  fine,  hard,  woollen  stuff,  may  mislead  us  by  exciting
a  sensation  analogous  to  that  produced  by  respiration.  Fatness,
even  when  excessive,  and  anasarca  of  the  chest,  seem  to  have  no
effect  in  diminishing  the  peculiar  sound.  The  sound  is  more
distinct  in  proportion  as  the  respiration  is  more  frequent.  A
very  deep  inspiration  made  very  slowly,  will  sometimes  be  scarcely
audible,  while  an  imperfect  respiration — such,  for  instance,  as
hardly  at  all  elevates  the  chest,  provided  it  be  made  quickly, —
may  produce  a  very  loud  sound.  On  this  account,  when  ex-
amining a  patient,  more  especially  if  we  have  had  but  slight
practice  with  the  instrument,  we  should  desire  the  respiration
to  be  performed  rather  quickly.  This  is,  however,  a  very  unne-
cessary precaution  in  most  diseases  of  the  chest,  as  the  frequent
presence  of  dyspnoea  necessarily  renders  the  respiration  quick.
The  same  is  true  of  fever,  and  the  agitation  caused  by  nervous
affections.

Many  other  causes,  and  especially  the  age  of  the  individual,
alter  the  intensity  of  the  sound.  In  children  respiration  is  very
sonorous,  even  noisy,  and  can  be  heard  easily,  even  through  very
thick  clothing.  In  them  the  close  and  forcible  application  of  the
instrument,  to  prevent  the  friction  of  the  garments,  is  unneces-
sary, as  any  noise  that  might  arise  from  this  cause  is  lost  in  the
intensity  of  the  other. The  respiration  of  children  differs,  also,

*  This  must  not  be  taken  too  literally,  except  iu  the  case  of  children,  or  when  the
respiration  is  morbidly  strong.  In  adults,  the  intensity  of  the  respiratory  sound  is
certainly  considerably  lessened  by  thick  clothing,  even  when  there  is  no  extraneous
sound  from  friction  ;  and  in  all  cases  it  is  better  to  have  the  body  covered  only  with
one,  or,  at  most,  two  folds  of  linen  or  cotton  cloth,  (i.  e.  the  shirt,)  and  not  with
flannel. — Trautl.


THE  RESPIRATION.


31


from  that  of  adults  in  other  respects  besides  its  intensity.  It  is
impossible  to  describe  this  peculiarity,  but  it  will  easily  be  under-
stood by  comparative  trials.  It  appears  as  if,  in  children,  we
could  distinctly  hear  the  dilatation  of  all  the  air-cells  to  their
full  extent  :  whilst,  in  adults,  these  seem  as  if,  from  their  stiff-
ness, they  could  only  bear  a  partial  dilatation.  This  difference
of  sound  is  much  less  marked  in  expiration  than  inspiration.
The  dilatation  of  the  chest  in  inspiration  is  also  greater  in  the
child  ;  and  both  these  peculiarities  are  more  remarkable  as  the
child  is  younger :  they  continue,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  to
the  period  of  puberty  or  a  little  beyond  it.

The  sound  produced  by  respiration  varies,  also,  very  much  in
its  intensity  in  different  adults. In  some  men  it  is  scarcely  per-
ceptible unless  they  make  a  very  deep  inspiration,  and  even  then,
although  sufficiently  distinct,  it  is  not  one-half  so  audible  as  in
the  majority  of  persons. These  individuals  have  generally  a
rather  slow  respiration,  and  are  little  subject  to  dyspnoea,  or
breathlessness,  from  any  cause. Others,  however,  have  the  re-
spiration very  distinct  even  during  a  common  inspiration,  without
being,  on  this  account,  at  all  more  subject  to  shortness  of  breath
than  the  former. Some  few  individuals,  again,  preserve  through
life  a  state  of  respiration  resembling  that  of  children,  and  which
I  shall  therefore  denominate  puerile,  in  whatever  age  it  may  be
perceptible. Such  persons  are  almost  all  women,  or  men  of  a
nervous  temperament,  and  they  preserve,  in  some  other  respects,
the  character  of  childhood. Some  of  these  cannot  be  said  to
have  any  actual  disease  of  the  lungs,  but  they  soon  get  out  of
breath,  even  though  lean,  by  exercise,  and  are  very  liable  to
catch  cold. Others  of  this  class  are  affected  with  a  chronic  ca-
tarrh, attended  by  dyspnoea,  a  condition  constituting  one  of  those
cases  to  which  the  name  of  Asthma  is  usually  given. With  these
exceptions,  an  adult  cannot,  by  any  effort,  give  to  his  respiration
the  sonorous  character  it  has  in  childhood ;  but  in  some  morbid
states,  the  respiration  spontaneously  acquires  it,  without  being,
at  the  time,  performed  more  forcibly  than  usual. This  is  par-
ticularly the  case  when  one  whole  lung,  or  a  considerable  portion
of  both  lungs,  is  rendered  impermeable  to  air  through  disease,
especially  acute  disease. In  the  sound  portion  of  the  lungs,  in
these  cases,  the  respiration  is  perfectly  similar  to  that  of  children.
The  same  thing  is  observable  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the
lungs  in  some  cases  of  fever,  and  in  certain  nervous  diseases :  [and
also  in  cases  in  which  tubercles  are  disseminated  throughout  lungs
otherwise  healthy ;  and  in  the  earlier  stages  of  diseases  of  the
heart.]  *

At  first  we  are  tempted  to  believe  that  the  superior  intensity

•  The  clause  between  brackets  is  supplied  from  a  note  of  Dr.  M.  Laennec.  Dr.
Williams  says,  he  has  remarked  the  sound  of  respiration  to  be  more  distinct  after
meals. — (Rational  Exp.  p.  26.) — Translation.


32


EXP  1,011  AT  TON  OF


of  the  respiratory  murmur  in  children,  may  be  owing  to  the
tenuity  of  the  muscles  covering  the  chest,  and  to  the  superior
suppleness  of  the  texture  of  the  lungs.  But  the  first  cause  must
have  scarcely  any  effect  in  this  way,  since  we  find  that,  even  in
the  fattest  children,  and  in  those  most  thickly  clothed,  the  respi-
ration is  much  more  distinct  than  in  the  leanest  adult  examined
uncovered  ;  whilst  of  the  adults  who  possess  the  puerile  respira-
tion, many  are  very  robust  and  full  of  flesh.  Neither  does  the
quieter  respiration  of  the  adult  depend  on  any  induration  or  loss
of  pliability  in  the  pulmonary  texture,  since  it  sometimes  acci-
dentally returns  to  the  character  it  had  in  infancy.  I  am  rather
disposed  to  believe  that  the  difference  of  result  depends  on  the
fact  of  children  requiring  a  greater  proportion  of  air,  and  conse-
quently a  fuller  inspiration,  than  adults;  whether  this  necessity
arises  from  the  greater  activity  of  their  circulation,  or  from  some
difference  in  the  chemical  composition  of  the  blood.  The  respi-
ration which  is  most  audible  to  the  ear,  is  not  that  which  pro-
duces the  greatest  sound  in  the  interior  of  the  chest.  I  do  not
here  allude  to  that  species  of  respiration  which  is  accompanied
with  a  rattling  or  wheezing,  or  any  other  foreign  sound,  but  to
that  kind  of  respiration  which  is  simply  loud,  and  which  is  so
frequent  in  dyspnoea.  This  noise  is  merely  the  aggravation  of
the  natural  sound  made  by  many  persons  in  sleep,  and  is  caused
by  the  mode  in  which  the  air  impinges  upon  the  parts  in  the
fauces.  We  can  imitate  it  at  will.  I  am  acquainted  with  an
asthmatic  patient,  whose  habitual  respiration  can  be  heard  at  the
distance  of  twenty  feet,  and  whose  respiration,  as  heard  in  the
interior  of  the  chest,  is,  nevertheless,  weaker  than  in  the  majority
of  men.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  noise  ( snoring )
emitted  by  many  healthy  persons  during  sleep  ;  and,  also,  to  the
imitative  sounds  of  jugglers  and  ventriloquists, — all  of  which  are
produced  in  the  throat  and  posterior  nares,  and  are  quite  uncon-
nected with  the  sound  of  respiration  in  the  interior  of  the  chest.

When  we  can  distinctly  perceive,  and  with  a  uniform  intensity,
the  respiratory  sound  in  every  part  of  the  chest,  we  may  be  as-
sured that  there  exists  neither  effusion  into  the  cavity  of  the
pleura,  nor  any  species  of  obstruction  in  the  substance  of  the
lungs.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  find  the  respiration  is  not
to  be  distinguished  in  any  particular  point,  we  may  safely  con-
clude that  the  corresponding  portion  of  the  lungs  within,  is  be-
come impermeable  to  the  air  from  some  cause  or  other.  This
sign  is  as  easy  to  be  perceived  as  the  presence  or  absence  of  the
sound,  in  the  percussion  of  Avenbrugger,  and  affords  precisely
the  same  indications.  With  the  exception  of  some  peculiar  cases,
in  which  the  simultaneous  employment  of  the  two  different  me-
thods gives  us  signs  which  are  completely  pathognomonic — we
may  state  it  as  a  general  fact,  that  the  absence  of  the  sound  on
percussion  coincides  uniformly  with  the  absence  of  respiration,


THIC  KICSl'lHATlON.


as  ascertained  by  the  stethoscope.  Auscultation,  as  we  shall
find,  has  this  advantage  over  percussion,  that  it  points  but  more
correctly  the  various  degree  of  pulmonary  obstruction.  It  has
certainly  the  inconvenience  of  requiring  a  little  more  time  in  its
application  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  demands  less  care  and
attention,  and  moreover  can  be  employed  in  ali  cases,  even  in
those  wherein  percussion  affords  no  results  whatever.

2.  Bronchial  respiration. By  this  term  I  designate  the  sound
of  respiration  as  observed  in  the  larynx,  trachea,  and  larger
bronchial  trunks. When  we  apply  the  stethoscope  upon  the
larynx  or  cervical  portion  of  the  trachea,  we  perceive  that  the
respiratory  sound  is  without  that  slight  degree  of  crepitation
which  accompanies  the  dilatation  of  the  air  cells  of  the  lungs  :
the  idea  of  a  drier  sound  seems  to  be  suggested  to  us,  and  we  at
the  same  time  feel  distinctly  that  the  air  is  passing  through  a
large  empty  space. This  modification  of  the  respiratory  sound
may  be  perceived  over  the  greater  part  of  the  neck  :  it  is  strongly
marked  on  the  side  of  the  neck  ;  and  we  must  be  on  our  guard
against  it  when  exploring  the  acromion  region,  insomuch  that  if
we  direct  the  extremin  of  die  cylinder  towards  the  lower  portion
of  the  neck,  we  run  the  risk  of  hearing  the  tracheal  respiration
only,  and  may  thereby,  if  not  well  versed  in  the  distinctive  cha-
racters of  the  different  kinds  of  respiration,  be  led  to  consider  the
upper  lobes  as  quite  sound,  when  they  are  in  fact  altogether  im-
permeable to  air When  a  person  inspires  strongly  by  the  nos-
trils, a  like  sound,  originating  in  the  nasal  canal  and  fauces,  may
be  heard  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  head.  In  certain  subjects,
especially  if  very  lean,  the  respiration  possesses  somewhat  of  this
character  when  examined  over  the  sternum  and  at  the  roots  of
the  lungs,  that  is,  between  the  scapulae,  and  particularly  near
their  upper  and  inner  angle;  but  here  the  bronchial  sound  is  not
so  readily  distinguished,  because  of  its  intermixture  with  the
common  respiratory  or  vesicular  murmur.*  Still  less  are  we  able,
in  the  healthy  condition  of  the  lungs,  to  distinguish  this  peculiar
modification  of  the  respiration  in  the  smaller  bronchial  tubes,  in
other  points  of  the  chest. When,  however,  the  texture  of  the
lungs  becomes  indurated  or  condensed  from  any  cause,  such  af
pleuritic  effusion,  or  the  changes  occasioned  by  a  severe  peri-
pneumony  or  haemoptysis,  the  vesicular  respiration  having  then
disappeared,  or  being  much  lessened,  we  can  frequently  perceive
distinctly  the  bronchial  respiration,  not  only  in  the  large  but  even
in  the  small  ramifications  of  the  bronchi.  In  such  cases,  although
this  peculiar  modification  of  the  respiratory  sound  is  perceived
in  other  parts,  still  it  is  nowhere  so  distinct  as  at  the  roots  of  the
lungs. Next  to  the  roots,  the  upper  lobes  exhibit  it  most  fre-
quently;  and  it  is  here,  as  we  shall  afterwards  find,  that  the

*  Considered  as  a  sign  of  disease,  bronchial  respiration  is  more  valuable  in  pro-
portion as  it  is  perceived  at  a  distance  from  the  roots  of  the  lungd. — (M.  L.)

D


34


EXPLORATION OF  THE  VOICE.


bronchi  are  most  apt  to  become  dilated.  The  cause  of  this  bron-
chial respiration  appears  to  me  very  obvious  :  in  fact,  when  the
air  is  prevented  from  penetrating  the  cells,  this  is  the  only  kind
of  respiration  that  can  exist ;  and  it  is  found  to  be  louder  and
more  distinct  in  proportion  as  the  lung  is  more  condensed,  and
thereby  becomes  a  better  conductor  of  sound.

It  is  of  great  consequence  to  distinguish  accurately  the  bron-
chial from  the  vesicular  or  pulmonary  respiration,*  not  only  on
account  of  the  great  errors  of  diagnosis  which  must  result  from
their  being  confounded,  but  because  the  former  becomes  a  pathog-
nomonic sign  in  several  cases  of  importance.  In  peripneumony
it  is  one  of  the  first  indications  of  hepatization,  and  commonly
precedes  the  loss  of  the  natural  sound  on  percussion  :  it  is  like-
wise one  of  the  earliest  signs  of  an  accumulation  of  tubercles  in
the  upper  lobes  of  the  lungs.

3.  Cavernous  respiration.  I  understand  by  this  term,  the
sound  produced  by  inspiration  and  expiration  in  an  excavation
formed  in  the  substance  of  the  lungs,  whether  arising  from  the
softening  of  a  tubercle,  from  gangrene,  from  abscess,  [or  from
extensive  dilatation  of  the  bronchi.]  This  variety  has  the  same
character  as  the  preceding,  only  that  it  further  conveys  the  idea
of  air  entering  into  a  larger  cavity  than  a  bronchial  tube :  and
when  there  exists  any  doubt  as  to  this  being  really  the  case,
other  circumstances  connected  with  the  sound  of  the  voice  and
cough,  remove  all  uncertainty.

4.  Blowing  or  puffing  respiration.  In  those  cases  wherein
either  the  bronchial  or  cavernous  respiration  exists,  it  is  some-
times observed  that  when  the  patient  is  breathing  quickly  and  by
fits,  during  inspiration  the  air  appears  as  if  drawn  from  the  aus-
cultatory ear,  while  in  expiration  it  seems  blown  into  it.  This
species  of  respiration  is  one  of  those  phenomena  which  serve  to
confirm  the  existence  of  an  excavation  near  the  surface  of  the
lungs, — but  there  are  others  yet  more  precise  which  will  be  no-
ticed hereafter.  This  sort  of  puffing  or  blowing  is  equally  pro-
duced during  coughing  and  speaking.  The  illusion  of  blowing
into  the  ear  in  these  cases  is  so  perfect,  that  it  is  only  from  the
absence  of  the  feeling  of  titillation,  and  of  warmth  or  coldness,
which  a  blast  of  air  so  impelled  must  necessarily  occasion,  that
we  are  led  to  doubt  its  reality.  This  phenomenon  is  found  to
take  place  equally  in  the  bronchi  which  adjoin  the  surface  of  the
lungs,  and  particularly  in  the  large  branches  at  their  roots,  when
the  substance  of  the  lung  around  is  condensed,  as  in  pneumonia,
or  by  a  pleuritic  effusion.  In  the  case  of  excavations,  this  variety
of  respiration  always  indicates  that  they  are  very  close  to  the

*  Tbis  distinction  is  sufficiently  easy  in  the  adult,  but  much  less  so  in  infency,  on
account  of  the  intensity  of  the  vesicular  respiration.  Still,  the  bronchial  respiration
may  be  recognized  by  its  tubular  character, — that  is,  its  resemblance  to  the  sound
produced  by  blowing  into  a  wooden  or  metallic  tube. — {M.  L.)


THE  RESPIRATION.


35


surface  of  the  lungs.  It  sometimes  also  presents  a  further  modi-
fication, which  I  call  the  veiled  pujf (souffle  voile).  In  this  case,
it  seems  to  us  as  if  every  vibration  of  the  voice,  cough,  or  respira-
tion, agitates  a  sort  of  moveable  veil  interposed  between  the  ex-
cavation and  the  ear.  This  particular  modification  obtains  under
the  following  conditions: — 1.  in  tuberculous  excavations  of  which
the  walls  are  very  thin,  at  least  in  some  points,  and  which  are
unconnected  by  adhesions  with  the  costal  pleura ;  2.  in  perip-
neumonic  abscesses  of  which  the  walls  are  unequally  indurated,
and  in  some  places  only  congested  ;  3.  in  cases  of  peripneumony,
when  some  part  of  a  large  bronchial  ramification  passes  through
a  portion  of  lung  still  sound  or  only  slightly  congested ;  4.  in
dilatation  of  the  bronchi,  and  also  sometimes  in  pleurisy,  when
the  affected  branch  has  some  part  much  less  dense  than  the
rest.  We  must  be  careful  not  to  confound  this  phenomenon,
with  a  variety  of  mucous  rhonchus  which  sometimes  accompa-
nies it.


Sect.  II.  Auscultation  of  the  voice.

In  the  very  earliest  period  of  my  researches  on  mediate  aus-
cultation, I  attempted  to  ascertain  the  differences  which  the
sound  of  the  voice  within  the  chest  might  occasion.  In  examin-
ing several  subjects  with  this  view,  I  was  struck  with  the  disco-
very of  a  very  singular  phenomenon.  In  the  case  of  a  woman,
affected  with  a  slight  bilious  fever,  and  a  recent  cough  having
the  character  of  a  pulmonary  catarrh,  on  applying  the  cylinder
below  the  middle  of  the  right  clavicle,  while  she  was  speaking,
her  voice  seemed  to  come  directly  from  the  chest,  and  to  reach
the  ear  through  the  central  canal  of  the  instrument.  This  pecu-
liar phenomenon  was  confined  to  a  space  about  an  inch  square,
and  Avas  not  discoverable  in  any  other  part  of  the  chest.  Being
ignorant  of  the  cause  of  this  singularity,  I  examined,  with  the
view  to  its  elucidation,  the  greater  number  of  the  patients  in  the
hospital,  and  I  found  it  in  about  twenty.  Almost  all  these
were  consumptive  cases  in  an  advanced  stage  of  the  disease.  In
some  the  existence  of  tubercles  was  still  doubtful,  though  there
was  reason  to  suspect  them.  Two  or  three,  like  the  woman
above  mentioned,  had  no  symptom  of  this  disease,  and  their  ro-
bustness seemed  to  put  all  fears  of  it  out  of  the  question.  Not-
withstanding this  I  began  immediately  to  suspect  that  this  phe-
nomenon might  be  occasioned  by  tuberculous  excavations  in  the
lungs.  The  observation  of  the  same  thing  in  patients  who  had  no
other  symptoms  of  phthisis,  did  not  appear  to  me  conclusive  against
the  correctness  of  my  suspicions,  because  I  knew  it  to  be  by  no
means  unusual  to  find  in  the  lungs  of  persons  carried  off  by  some
acute  disease,  and  who  had  never  shown  any  sign  of  consump-


30


EXPLORATION  OF  THE  VOICE


tion,  tubercles  not  only  softened  but  excavated,  and  forming  the
very  case  denominated  ulceration  of  the  lungs.  The  subsequent
death,  in  the  hospital,  of  the  greater  number  of  the  individuals
who  had  exhibited  this  phenomenon,  enabled  me  to  ascertain  the
correctness  of  my  supposition  :  in  every  case  I  found  excavations
in  the  lungs  of  various  sizes,  the  consequence  of  the  dissolution
of  tubercles,  and  all  communicating  with  bronchial  tubes  of  vari-
able size.

I  found  this  peculiar  phenomenon  (which  I  have  denominated
Pectoriloquy)  to  be  more  perceptible  according  to  the  density  of
the  walls  of  the  excavation  and  its  proximity  to  the  superfices
of  the  lungs  ;  and  that  it  was  most  striking  when  these  adhered
to  the  pleura  in  such  a  manner  as  to  render  the  thoracic  parietes
almost  a  part  of  the  walls  of  the  ulcerous  excavation, — a  case  of
very  frequent  occurrence.

This  circumstance  naturally  led  me  to  think,  that  pectoriloquy
is  occasioned  by  the  superior  vibration  produced  by  the  voice,  in
parts  having  a  comparatively  more  solid  and  wider  extent  of  sur-
face than  the  air  cells  and  small  bronchial  tubes ;  and  I  imagined
that,  if  this  were  so,  the  same  effect  ought  to  result  from  the  ap-
plication of  the  cylinder  to  the  larynx  or  trachea  of  a  person  in
health.  My  conjecture  proved  correct.  There  is  an  almost  per-
fect identity  of  effect  between  pectoriloquy  and  the  sound  of  the
voice  as  heard  through  the  tube  resting  on  the  larynx  ;  and  this
experiment  offers  an  excellent  means  for  giving  us  an  exact  no-
tion of  the  phenomenon,  when  we  have  not  the  proper  subjects  for
observation.

The  sound  of  the  voice  in  the  different  parts  of  the  organs  of
respiration,  and  in  the  different  conditions  of  these,  in  health  and
in  disease,  offers  several  important  varieties  which  we  shall  now
consider.*  In  a  healthy  lung  it  is  very  slight,  whether  examined
by  the  naked  ear  or  stethoscope,  being  only  a  slight  vibration
analogous  to  that  felt  on  applying  the  hand.  I  have  already
noticed  the  character  of  the  voice  on  the  larynx  and  trachea :  it
resounds  strongly,  traverses  the  tube  of  the  stethoscope,  and  pre-
vents the  unarmed  ear  from  hearing  that  issuing  from  the  mouth.
The  same  thing  takes  place  over  nearly  the  whole  lateral  surface
of  the  neck,  and  even,  in  some  individuals,  towards  the  nape.
On  this  account,  in  examining  the  acromion  region,  we  must  re-
member the  precautions  stated  when  speaking  of  the  exploration

*  In  the  exploration  of  the  voice  the  stethoscope  is  to  be  used  complete,  that  is,
with  the  stopper  in  its  place,  the  instrument  being  pressed  with  considerable  force
upon  the  chest,  while  the  ear  is  laid  lightly  on  the  other  extremity.  In  the  case  of
pectoriloquy,  when  the  ear  is  pressed  too  forcibly  upon  the  stethoscope,  the  voice
seems  to  remain  at  its  pectoral  extremity,  while,  on  the  contrary,  it  completely  tra-
verses it  when  the  pressure  is  slight.  Dr.  Meriadec  l.aennec,  from  whom  I  hare
partly  taken  this  note,  says,  he  has  occasionally  hoard  perfect  pectoriloquy  at  some
distance  from  the  stethoscope,  when  he  was  approaching  his  ear  to  the  instrument,
hut  had  not  reached  it.— Transl.


HKONCHOIMIOXY.


37


of  the  respiration  in  the  same  place.  The  natural  resonance  of
the  voice  in  the  throat  and  nasal  fossae,  is  perceptible,  more  or
less,  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  head.  In  that  portion  of  the
trachea  lying  beneath  the  sternum,  it  sounds  loudly  but  does  not
traverse  the  tube;  on  this  account  we  must  distrust  doubtful
pectoriloquy  when  it  exists  only  about  the  upper  portion  of  the
sternum.

Bronchophony.  The  sound  of  the  voice  is,  in  most  cases,  still
more  obscure  in  the  larger  bronchial  trunks  at  the  roots  of  the
lungs,  that  is,  in  the  interscapular  region  :  nevertheless  it  is
always  somewhat  louder  in  this  place,  especially  about  the  up-
per and  inner  angle  of  the  scapula,  than  in  the  other  parts  of  the
chest.  It  is  indeed  very  rare  for  it  to  be  perceived  distinctly
traversing  the  stethoscope,  in  a  perfectly  healthy  subject ;  but  it
is  found  to  resound  so  loudly  at  its  extremity  as  to  be  more  rea-
dily heard  through  the  instrument,  than  the  voice  issuing  from
the  mouth  is  heard  by  the  other  ear.  In  persons,  however,  of  a
delicate  and  feeble  frame,  particularly  in  lean  children,  there
frequently  exists  in  this  situation,  a  bronchophony  very  similar
to  the  laryngophony  already  noticed.

The  sound  of  the  voice  is  scarcely  at  all  perceptible  in  the
bronchi  distributed  through  the  lungs,  when  these  organs  are
healthy.  This  might  be  expected  a  priori,  since  the  loose  tex-
ture of  the  lungs,  rendered  still  more  rare  by  its  intermixture
with  air,  is  a  bad  conductor  of  sound ;  and  the  softness  of  the
bronchial  branches,  after  they  cease  to  be  cartilaginous,  renders
them  very  unfit  for  its  production ;  while  the  smallness  of  their
calibre  must  render  whatever  sound  is  produced  more  acute  and
weaker  in  them  than  in  the  larger  trunks.  But  if  any  one  of
these  adverse  conditions  is  removed,  and  yet  more,  if  several  of
them  are  so  at  the  same  time,  the  sound  of  the  voice  may  become
perceptible  in  the  smaller  bronchial  tubes.  Accordingly  it  is
found  that  an  attack  of  peripneumony,  an  extensive  hemoptysi-
cal  induration,  or  the  accumulation  of  a  great  number  of  tuber-
cles in  the  same  point,  by  condensing  the  texture  of  the  lungs,
gives  occasion  to  a  sound  analogous  to  pectoriloquy.  This  phe-
nomenon, which  I  denominate  accidental  bronchophony,  is,  as
might  be  expected,  most  marked  when  the  pulmonary  indura-
tion has  place  near  the  roots  of  the  lungs.  This  sign  is  one  of
those  which  serve  best  to  measure  the  progress  of  a  recent  perip-
neumony.

The  dilatation  of  the  bronchi  gives  rise  to  the  same  phenome-
non, and  the  more  readily,  because  the  substance  of  the  lungs  in
the  neighbourhood  of  the  dilated  branches,  is  often  more  com-
pact than  in  the  natural  state.  Sometimes  two  of  the  causes
mentioned  conspire  to  produce  it;  for  instance,  the  cause  just
mentioned,  and  the  accumulation  of  tubercles.

Bronchophony  is  rarely  so  like  pectoriloquy  as  to  deceive  a


38


EXPLORATION  OF THE  VOICE.


person  even  of  moderate  experience.  In  the  former,  the  voice
merely  traverses  the  cylinder ;  its  tone  is  somewhat  like  that  of
a  speaking  trumpet ;  and  the  sound  is  more  diffused  in  its  seat
than  pectoriloquy.  Where  any  doubt  exists,  this  is  removed  by
the  cough  and  the  character  of  the  respiration  in  the  same  point:
neither  of  these  has  the  cavernous  character  :  we  feel  assured
that  the  whole  phenomena  have  for  their  site  a  series  of  tubes,
and  not  a  circumscribed  space.*

Pectoriloquy.  This  phenomenon  may  be  produced  under  very
different  circumstances :  1.  by  the  softening  of  tubercles  (by  far
the  most  common  cause) ;  2.  by  the  decomposition  of  a  gangre-
nous eschar;  3.  by  an  abscess,  the  consequence  of  peripneu-
mony  ;  4.  by  the  evacuation  of  a  cyst  into  the  bronchi ;  and  pro-
bably also  by  a  fistulous  communication  between  the  bronchi
and  an  abscess  of  the  mediastinum.

Pectoriloquy  offers  great  varieties,  in  respect  of  intensity  and
completeness. I  divide  it  into  perfect,  imperfect  or  doubtful.

Pectoriloquy  is  perfect  when  the  transmission  of  the  voice
through  the  stethoscope  is  complete,  and  when  it,  as  well  as  the
corresponding  results  obtained  from  the  exploration  of  the  cough
and  rhonchus,  are  exactly  circumscribed :  in  this  case  it  can
never  be  confounded  with  bronchophony.  It  is  imperfect,  when
some  one  of  those  characteristics  is  wanting,  and  particularly  if
the  transmission  of  the  voice  be  not  evident.  It  is  doubtful,
when  the  sound  of  the  voice  is  very  feeble,  and  when  it  can  be
distinguished  from  bronchophony  only  by  the  aid  of  other  signs
derived  from  the  consideration  of  its  site,  the  general  symptoms,
and  the  progress  of  the  disease.  These  last  circumstances  suffice,
in  almost  every  case,  to  enable  us  to  distinguish  the  nature  of  the
excavation.

The  circumstances  which  concur  to  render  pectoriloquy  per-
fect are — the  complete  emptiness  of  the  excavation,  the  increased
density  of  the  portion  of  lung  which  forms  its  walls,  its  ready
communication  with  one  or  more  bronchial  tubes  of  a  consider-
able size,  and  its  proximity  to  the  walls  of  the  chest.  It  is  pro-
per to  state,  however,  that  whatever  be  the  distance  of  the  cavity
from  the  surface  of  the  lungs,  if  it  possesses  the  other  qualities
indicated,  it  will  always  yield  perfect  pectoriloquy,  unless,  in-
deed, a  very  considerable  thickness  of  healthy  lung  be  inter-
posed, which,  owing  to  its  defective  density,  is  m  tvssarily  a  bad
conductor  of  sound. The  extent  of  the  excavation  contributes

*  Bronchophony  (that  is,  accidental  or  morbid  bronchophony — TV.)  may  exist  in
any  point  of  the  walls  of  the  chest ;  but  owing  to  the  vicinity  of  the  large  bronchial
trunks  and  to  the  greater  frequency  of  hepatization  of  the  pulmonary  substance  in
the  inferior  lobes,  it  is  found  most  frequently  between  the  scapula;  and  over  the  in-
fra-spinous  portion  of  these  bones.  It  is  also  observed  pretty  frequently  in  the  axilla
and  below  the  clavicles,  in  consequence  of  the  greater  prevalence  of  tubercles  in  the
upper  lobes. — (M.  L.)


EGOPHONY.


3!)


also  to  the  completeness  of  the  phenomenon  :  it  is  most  distinct
when  this  is  somewhat  considerable  ;  it  is  however  often  com-
plete when  the  cavity  is  very  small.  On  the  other  hand,  pecto-
riloquy is  sometimes  very  indistinct  where  the  excavations  are
very  large,  the  size  of  the  fist,  for  instance,  and  when  they  com-
municate with  the  bronchi  by  small  openings.*  It  has  several
times  been  manifest  to  me,  that  when  the  number  of  fistulous
openings,  by  which  a  very  large  excavation  communicates  with
the  bronchia,  increases,  pectoriloquy  becomes  less  evident,  or
ceases  altogether.  It  disappears  also  in  the  two  following  cases:
viz.  when  an  excavation  opens  into  the  pleura,  particularly  if  the
opening  is  large  and  direct ;  and  when  its  contents  make  their
way  through  the  walls  of  the  chest  into  the  cellular  membrane
outside.  Pectoriloquy  may  likewise  be  sometimes  suspended  for
several  hours,  and  even  days,  by  the  temporary  obstruction  of
the  communication  of  the  cavity  with  the  bronchi,  by  the  matter
contained  in  it.  We  shall  hereafter  point  out  the  method  of
obtaining  pectoriloquy,  or  other  equivalent  signs,  in  cases  of  this
kind/f

JEgoiphomj.  The  phenomenon  to  which  I  have  applied  this
name,  is,  of  all  those  furnished  by  auscultation,  that  which
seems  to  me  most  complex  in  its  causes.  It  may  readily  be  con-
founded, by  the  inexperienced,  with  pectoriloquy  ;  and  still  more
so  with  bronchophony.  I  was  myself  long  guilty  of  this  mis-
take ;  and  although  the  distinction  is  easy  when  the  respective
characters  of  each  are  strongly  marked,  there  occur  cases  in
which  this  is  hardly  practicable.  My  uncertainty  as  to  the  na-
ture of  segophony  was  of  longer  duration,  because  it  does  not
exist  in  every  case  of  pleurisy  ;  because  the  analogous  phenome-
non of  bronchophony  is  still  more  frequently  wanting  in  perip-
neumony ;  because  these  two  diseases  and  consequently  the  two
phenomena  in  question  are  frequently  combined ;  and,  finally,
because  the  number  of  fatal  cases  of  these  diseases,  more  particu-
larly of  acute  pleurisy,  is  too  inconsiderable  to  afford  many  op-
portunities of  verifying,  by  examination  after  death,  the  accuracy
of  the  diagnosis  derived  from  auscultation.^

Simple  a?gophony  consists  in  a  peculiar  sound  of  the  voice
which  accompanies  or  follows  the  articulation  of  words  :  it  seems

*  'Ibis  fact  may  be  explained  on  the  principles  of  acoustics,  and  by  a  reference
to  certain  musical  instruments. — Author.

t  Pectoriloquy  may  be  observed  on  any  part  of  the  thorax,  as  morbid  excavations
may  occur  in  any  part  of  the  lungs;  but  as  these  excavations  are  most  commonly-
produced  by  the  evacuation  of  the  matter  of  tubercles,  and  as  tubercles  are  princi-
pally developed  in  the  upper  lobes,  it  is  below  the  clavicles  and  in  the  axilla  that
we  ought  to  expect  to  meet  with  it  most  frequently. — (M.  L.)

t  This  assertion  may  seem  strange  to  the  practitioners  who  employ  only  bleeding
and  blisters  in  those  diseases,  but  will  be  confirmed  by  the  young  physicians  and
students  who  have  attended  my  Clinique  since  1  have  been  in  the  habit  of  using
Tartar  Emetic  in  large  doses.— Author.


40


EXPLORATION  OF  THE  VOICE.


as  if  a  kind  of  silvery  voice,  of  a  sharper  and  shriller  tone  than
that  of  the  patient,  was  vibrating  on  the  surface  of  the  lungs,
sounding  more  like  the  echo  of  the  voice  than  the  voice  itself.
It  rarely  appears  to  enter  the  tube  of  the  instrument,  and  scarcely
ever  passes  through  it  entirelv-  It  has,  moreover,  another  cha-
racter, so  constant  as  to  lead  me  to  derive  from  it  the  appellation
of  the  phenomenon, — I  mean  a  trembling  or  bleating  sound  like
the  voice  of  a  goat,  a  character  which  is  the  more  striking  be-
cause the  key  or  tone  of  it  approaches  that  of  thisanimars  voice.*
When  aegophony  exists  in  the  vicinity  of  a  large  bronchial  trunk,
particularly  towards  the  root  of  the  lungs,  it  is  frequently  com-
bined with  more  or  less  of  bronchophony.  The  reunion  of  these
affords  numerous  varieties,  of  which  we  may  have  a  good  idea
by  recollecting  the  following  phenomena:  1.  the  sound  of  the
voice  through  a  metallic  speaking  trumpet  or  cleft  reed  ;  2.  that
of  a  person  speaking  with  a  counter  between  his  lips  and  teeth  ;
3.  the  nasal  intonations  of  the  juggler  speaking  in  the  character
of  Punch  This  last  comparison  is  frequently  the  most  exact
imaginable,  particularly  in  persons  whose  voice  is  somewhat  bass
(grave).  Very  commonly,  the  same  individuals  who  exhibit  at
the  roots  of  the  lungs,  this  combination  of  the  two  phenomena,
yield  simple  aegophony,  about  the  outer  and  lower  edge  of  the
scapula.

The  sort  of  bleating  so  characteristic  of  aegophony  seems,  in
most  cases,  immediately  connected  with  the  articulation  of  the
words,  although  the  patient's  true  voice  has  nothing  of  the  sort :
sometimes,  however,  it  seems  unconnected  with  the  articulation,
so  that  we  can  hear,  at  the  same  time,  yet  separately,  the  sim-
ple sound  of  the  voice  and  the  bleating  silvery  sound  of  aego-
phony ;  which  last  appears  to  be  either  nearer  or  more  remote
than  the  resonance  of  the  simple  voice.  Sometimes,  even,  when
the  patient  speaks  slowly  and  interruptedly,  we  hear  the  bleat-
ing, like  an  imperfect  echo,  immediately  after  the  voice.  Thesfe
two  last-named  varieties  have  appeared  to  me  to  exist  only  in
cases  of  slight  effusion.  To  hear  this  sound  properly,  we  must
apply  the  cylinder  strongly  to  the  patient's  chest,  and  place  the
ear  gently  on  the  other  end.  If  the  latter  is  forcibly  applied,
the  bleating  sound  is  diminished  one  half,  and  the  phenomenon
approaches  nearer  to  bronchophony.

In  comparing  the  results  of  my  early  and  more  recent  experi-
ence respecting  aegophony,  it  seems  to  me  certain  that  it  exists
only  in  cases  of  pleurisy,  either  acute  or  chronic,  attended  by  a
moderate  effusion  in  the  pleura,  or  in  hydrothorax  or  other  liquid
extravasation  in  the  same  cavity.

All  the  cases  in  which  I  have  observed  aegophony,  since  I

*  The  word  /Ego/  homi  is  derived  from  cu{  (atyos)  a  gout,  and  tfHuinj,  voice.  In  ex-
ploring the  chest  for  it,  the  stethoscope  is  to  be  u&ed  as  directed  in  the  note  on
Fectoriloijuy,  p.  36.—  Transl.


.EGOPHON  V.


41


have  been  able  to  discriminate  it  from  pectoriloquy  and  broncho-
phony, have,  at  the  same  time,  afforded  other  undoubted  signs
of  effusion  into  the  chest.  In  the  examples  of  pleurisy  which  I
have  been  able  to  attend  to  from  their  commencement  to  their
close,  I  found  it  as  early  as  the  first  hours  of  the  attack ;  but  it
has  never  been  observed  strongly  marked  until  the  second,  third,
or  fourth  day,  and  hardly  ever  until  after  the  sound  of  respira-
tion has  become  almost  or  altogether  imperceptible  in  the  affect-
ed side,  and  until  this  has  yielded  the  dull  sound  on  percussion.
I  have  observed  aegophony  in  every  case  of  pleurisy  which  has
come  under  my  care  during  the  last  five  years,  except  in  a  few
very  slight  acute  cases,  where  the  effusion  (as  proved  by  the
auscultation  of  the  respiration  and  by  percussion)  was  inconsider-
able, and  in  those  which  did  not  come  under  my  notice  until  far
advanced  and  when  they  were  in  progress  towards  recovery.  I
have  discovered  this  sign  in  cases  where  there  did  not  exist  above
three  or  four  ounces  of  fluid  in  the  chest,  ./Egophony  decreases
and  gradually  disappears  as  the  effusion  is  absorbed.  In  very
acute  cases,  it  exists  frequently  two  or  three  days  only,  and  then
totally  disappears :  in  the  chronic  state  of  the  disease  with  mo-
derate effusion,  I  have  found  it  sometimes  continue  for  several
months,  with  variations  of  intensity  proportioned  to  the  varying
quantity  of  the  effused  fluid.  When  this  is  very  great,  parti-
cularly when  it  is  sufficient  to  cause  dilatation  of  the  chest,  aego-
phony ceases  entirely.  I  have  never  observed  it  in  old  cases  of
empyema  in  which  the  lungs  were  compressed  upon  the  medias-
tinum ;  but  have  detected  it,  in  an  imperfect  degree,  in  certain
cases  where  the  pleura  contained  from  two  to  three  pints  of  pus,
and  where  the  lungs  were  prevented  from  being  quite  removed
from  the  side  by  previous  adhesions.  On  the  other  hand,  I  have
found  that  those  cases,  which,  when  first  seen,  presented  all  the
other  signs  of  copious  effusion  except  aegophony,  yielded  this
sign  also  when  the  dilatation  of  the  side  diminished,  and  the  other
symptoms  indicated  the  partial  absorption  of  the  fluid.  In  two
cases  of  empyema  operated  on  hy  my  direction  in  1821  and  1822,
aegophony  became  much  more  manifest  after  the  escape  of  a  por-
tion of  the  pus.

iEgophony  is  not  like  pectoriloquy,  confined  to  one  point,  but
extends  over  a  certain  continuous  portion  of  the  chest.  Most
frequently  it  exists,  at  the  same  time,  over  the  whole  space
between  the  scapula  and  spine,  round  the  lower  angle  of  the
former  bone,  and  in  a  zone  from  one  to  three  fingers  broad,
following  the  line  of  the  ribs  from  its  middle  to  the  nipple.  This
portion  of  the  chest  evidently  corresponds  with  the  internal  parts
where  the  effused  fluid  forms  a  thin  layer  on  the  surface  of  the
lungs;  it  being  well  known  that,  in  cases  of  moderate  extravasa-
tion, the  fluid  collects  principally  in  the  lower  part  of  the  chest,
when  the  patient  is  seated  or  resting  on  the  back  ;  and  that,  even


42


EXPLORATION OF  THE  VOICE.


in  the  cases  where  the  whole  surface  of  the  lung  is  covered  by
it,  the  thickness  of  the  layer  progressively  diminishes  from  below
upwards,  and  is  always  much  less  before  than  behind.  In  a  very
few  instances  I  have  detected  aegophony,  at  the  commencement
of  the  disease,  over  the  whole  affected  side ;  in  two  of  these  I
ascertained,  by  examination  after  death,  that  this  peculiarity
depended  upon  the  retention  of  the  lung  in  partial  apposition
with  the  chest,  by  means  of  pretty  numerous  adhesions,  so  that
the  lung  became  invested  by  a  thin  layer  of  fluid  over  its  whole
surface.  In  cases  of  this  kind  the  sign  in  question  is  observable
during  the  whole  period  of  the  disease.

I  consider  aegophony  to  be  owing  to  the  natural  resonance  of
the  voice  in  the  bronchial  tubes,  rendered  more  distinct  by  the
compression  of  the  pulmonary  texture,  and  by  its  transmission
through  a  thin  layer  of  fluid  in  a  state  of  vibration.  This
opinion  is  supported  by  many  facts  and  reasons.  The  points
where  it  is  constantly  found,  correspond  with  the  upper  border  of
the  fluid,  and  where  it  is  of  least  thickness.  Moreover,  if  the
patient  turns  on  his  face,  the  sound  either  disappears  or  is
greatly  diminished  between  the  scapula  and  spine,  while  it  con-
tinues on  the  side  ;  and  if  he  turns  on  the  healthy  side,  the  same
result  is  obtained  in  the  diseased  side,  now  the  uppermost.*  In
respect  of  the  influence  of  change  of  position  upon  this  pheno-
menon, I  have  observed  that  the  change  was  much  less  in  cases
where  the  quantity  of  fluid  was  either  somewhat  above  or  below
the  mean,  than  when  it  was  of  middling  extent.  The  places
formerly  mentioned  as  yielding  most  distinct  aegophony,  are
those  where  the  bronchial  tubes  are  the  largest  and  most  nume-
rous. This  tends  to  confirm  the  truth  of  the  opinion  above
stated,  as  well  as  the  fact  of  the  cessation  of  the  sign  when  the
effusion  becomes  very  copious,  and  its  return  on  this  being
diminished :  in  the  former  case,  it  is  evident  that  the  bronchi,  as
well  as  the  lungs,  must  be  compressed,  while  in  the  latter,  they
must  be  the  first  to  recover  their  natural  shape  on  account  of  their
superior  elasticity.  The  following  circumstance,  which  I  have
now  and  then  observed,  leads  to  the  same  conclusion. In  cases

•  M.  Reynaud,  one  of  Laennec's  most  zealous  disciples,  has  ascertained,  that  if  an
jegophonous  patient  lies  on  his  belly,  or  leans  Forward  so  as  to  bring  the  body  into  an
almost  horizontal  position,  not  only  does  the  a>gopbony  disappear  from  the  intersca-
pular region,  but  is  replaced  by  a  bronchophony  of  a  greater  or  less  intensity
according  as  the  lung  is  sound  or  in  a  state  of  inflammation.  In  the  latter  case,  as
the  aegophony  vanishes,  the  crepitous  rhonchus,  or  the  bronchial  respiration,  reap-
pears. From  this,  M.  Reynaud  infers,  that  .vgophony  is  merely  a  remote  broncho-
phony, that  is  to  say,  a  bronchophony  heard  through  a  layer  of  fluid  of  greater  or
less  thickness.  (Journ.  hebdom.  de  Rled.  Dec.  1829.)  It  is,  however,  of  little
consequence  what  may  be  the  actual  nature  of  aegophony,  provided  it  be  ascertained
that  it  depends  on  an  anatomical  condition  of  parts  different  from  that  which  gives
occasion  to  bronchophony  properly  so  called.  And  M.  Reynaud's  observation  esta-
blishes this  fact  beyond  all  question,  and,  moreover,  supplies  us  with  the  means  of
distinguishing,  in  every  case,  aegophony  from  simple  bronchophony,  and  conse-
quently pleurisy  or  pleuro-pneumonia  from  simple  pneumonia.— (M.  L.)


-EGOPHONV.


43


where  aegophony  was  very  strongly  marked  in  the  zone  formerly
mentioned,  and  where  auscultation  of  the  respiration,  percussion,
and  the  general  symptoms  clearly  indicated  an  effusion,  I  have
remarked  from  day  to  day  the  following  changes  take  place  in
respect  of  this  sign,  and  precisely  at  the  same  moment  that  the
other  signs  just  enumerated  gave  evidence  of  the  progressive
absorption  of  the  fluid  :  it  had  become  less  loud  every  where  ; — it
had  lost  three  inches  in  extent,  reckoning  from  above  downwards,
in  the  interscapular  region,  and  one  inch  on  the  side,  and  had
entirely  disappeared  in  front ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  had
become  very  distinct,  though  not  loud,  over  the  whole  inferior
parts  of  the  side  and  back,  where  it  did  not  exist  at  all  on  the
preceding  day.  These  changes,  I  think,  indicated  the  recession
of  the  fluid  from  the  upper  parts,  and  its  diminution  in  the  lower.
In  fact,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  this  phenomenon  only  exists  when
the  lung  is  envoloped  with  a  thin  layer  of  fluid  ;  and  that  in  the
instances  just  mentioned  it  became  perceptible  on  the  lower  parts
of  the  chest,  only  because  the  quantity  of  this  had  diminished.
This  opinion  is  further  rendered  probable  by  the  fact  of  the
respiration  being  always  very  distinct  in  the  places  where  aego-
phony  exists,  while  it  is  not  observed  at  all  or  very  feebly  below
these  places  ;  and,  by  the  additional  observation,  that  when  the
aegophony  descends,  as  above  mentioned,  the  respiration  becomes
stronger  in  the  points  which  it  leaves,  and  re-appears  in  those
which  it  now  occupies.  I  have  already  stated,  that  in  cases  of
very  copious  effusion,  there  is  usually  no  aegophony,  or  if  it
exists  at  all,  it  is  only  near  the  roots  of  the  lungs,  a  situation
where  the  fluid  is  necessarily  less  than  any  where  else.

It  will  be  difficult  to  fix  more  precisely  than  I  have  now
endeavoured  to  do,  the  exact  relation  between  the  bronchi  and
the  thoracic  effusion,  which  gives  rise  to  aegophony.  This  will
be  the  more  difficult  on  account  of  the  small  number  of  cases
that  prove  fatal  during  the  existence  of  this  phenomenon.
W  hen  death  occurs  from  pleurisy  the  effusion  is  generally  very
abundant,  and  negophony  has  therefore  disappeared.  In  looking
for  assistance  from  morbid  anatomy,  in  this  instance,  we  are,
therefore,  reduced  to  the  very  small  number  of  cases  that  prove
fatal  from  some  concomitant  disease,  at  the  very  time  when  the
patients  happened  to  be  affected  with  pleurisy  in  that  stage
wherein  aegophony  exists.

I  made  an  experiment  with  the  view  to  ascertain  the  effect  of
an  interposed  fluid  in  modifying  the  voice  to  the  character  it
possesses  in  aegophony,  by  applying  a  bladder,  half  filled  with
water,  between  the  scapul  of  a  young  man  who  presented  a  well-
marked  natural  bronchophony  in  this  point.  In  this  case,  it
appeared  to  myself  and  several  persons  present,  that  the  voice,
as  transmitted  through  the  liquid,  became  more  acute,  and  also


14


EXPLORATION OK THE  VOICE.


slightly  tremulous,  although  less  decidedly  so  than  in  real  aego-
phony.  The  same  experiment  tried  over  the  larynx  gives  a
similar  result.

It  seems  probable  that  the  compression  of  the  bronchial  tubes
by  the  pleuritic  effusion  contributes  a  good  deal  to  the  production
of  this  phenomenon ;  since  this  must  bring  them  into  a  form
analogous  to  the  reeds  of  certain  wind  instruments,  such  as  the
oboe  and  bassoon,  which  have  something  of  the  bleating  sound
of  segophony.  This  alteration  of  form,  however,  will  not  of
itself  account  for  the  phenomenon,  without  the  presence  of  fluid,
else  it  would  exist  in  cases  of  contraction  of  the  chest  subsequent
to  pleurisy,  which  is  not  the  fact.  It  would  also  be  found  in
many  cases  of  phthisis,  wherein  tubercles  frequently  compress
the  bronchi  in  the  most  decided  manner.*

I  think  there  are  only  three  cases  of  pleurisy  in  which  this
phenomenon  will  not  be  observed:  these  are, — 1.  where  a  very
rapid  and  copious  effusion  has  suddenly  compressed  the  lung
against  the  mediastinum  ; — 2.  where  a  former  attack  of  the  same
disease  has  firmly  attached  the  posterior  parts  of  the  lung  to  the
pleura ;  and  3.  where  there  is  hardly  any  liquid  extravasation,
but  the  formation,  simply,  of  false  membranes.  This  last  case
is  very  rare  ;  and  besides  I  have  found  segophony  where  not  more
than  two  or  three  ounces  of  fluid  existed.

From  the  preceding  observations,  I  think  we  are  entitled  to
conclude  that  segophony  is  a  favourable  sign  in  pleurisy,  as  it
seems  uniformly  to  indicate  a  moderate  degree  of  effusion.  Its
continuance  for  some  time  is  a  favourable  omen,  as  showing  that
the  effusion  does  not  increase;  if  it  continues  as  long  as  the
fever,  or  longer,  we  may  be  assured  that  the  disease  will  not
become  chronic,  as  this  never  happens  except  when  the  effusion
is  extremely  abundant.  I  have  frequently  drawn  this  prognostic,
and  have  never  been  deceived  in  it.  In  every  case  where  I  have
seen  acute  pleurisy  terminate  in  chronic,  this  phenomenon  has
ceased,  or  been  much  lessened,  previously  to  the  decrease  of  the
febrile  symptoms.

./Egophony,  like  pectoriloquy,  is  sometimes  suspended  for  a
longer  or  shorter  time,  re-appearing  after  the  patient  has  coughed
or  expectorated. But  this  happens  much  less  frequentlv  in  the

*  Dr.  Williams  says,  that  this  additional  explanation  of  the  cause  of  segophony  is
not  only  unnecessary,  but  untenable.  "  The  reed  of  the  bassoon  and  hautboy,  he
observes,  "  sounds  only  on  the  passage  ofoi'r  through  it,  and  did  the  flattened  bronchi
represent  it  in  this  instance,  the  respiration,  and  not  the  voice,  should  make  the
sound."  In  accordance  with  the  previous  explanation  of  our  author,  Dr.  W.  says,
"  the  tremulous  or  subsultory  sound  of  the  aegophonic  voice  is  produced  by  succes-
sive undulations  of  the  liquid,  the  result  of  an  irregular  transmission  of  the  sonorous
vibrations."  The  same  author  says,  that  in  addition  to  the  preceding  requisites,  there
must  likewise  exist  a  certain  proportion  between  the  mass  of  liquid  and  the  pitch  and
strength  of  the  vocal  sounds,  otherwise  the  fluid  will  not  be  thrown  into  vibration.
This,  ho  says,  is  proved  by  the  fact,  that  certain  tones  of  the  6ame  voice  are  a^gopho-
nic,  and  others  not.— Rat.  Eipof.  ji.  107.  8.— Transl.


.EGOl'HON  V.


45


case  of  the  former,  as  might  be  expected  from  the  comparatively
small  bronchial  secretion  in  pleurisy.

Some  physicians  have  lately  fancied  that  they  have  met  with
asgophonv  in  cases  of  simple  peripneumony  without  any  pleurilic
effusion  ;  but  I  have  no  doubt  they  mistook  bronchophony  for  it.
It  must  be  admitted  that  the  two  phenomena  are  likely  to  be
confounded ;  I  shall,  therefore,  in  this  place,  compare  them  with
each  other,  as  well  as  with  pectoriloquy. 1.  Pectoriloquy  being,
in  the  great  majority  of  cases,  owing  to  the  presence  of  tubercu-
lous excavations,  is  almost  always  met  with  in  the  upper  lobes.
In  whatsoever  part,  however,  it  may  exist,  it  will  always  be
readily  distinguished  by  the  accompanying  cavernous  rhonchus,
respiration  and  cough. In  certain  rare  instances,  namely,  where
the  excavation  is  of  a  flattened  shape  with  rather  solid  walls,
pectoriloquy  may  assume  something  of  the  vibratory  character  of
asgophony  ;  but  it  will  almost  always  be  distinguished  from  it,
by  the  exact  circumscription  of  the  sound  to  a  small  space,  by  its
situation,  and  by  the  consideration  of  the  accompanying  pheno-
mena. 2.  Bronchophony  being  caused  by  the  simple  induration
of  the  substance  of  the  lungs,  does  not  yield  the  clear  transmis-
sion of  the  voice  through  the  tube,  except  at  the  roots  of  the
lungs. The  sphere  of  this  phenomenon  is  always  over  a  certain
extent,  and  no  one  small  point  can  be  said  to  be  its  exclusive  site.
The  same  is  true  of  the  respiration  and  cough  ;  the  former  is
frequently  found  to  be  bronchial,  and  the  latter  to  give  the
mucous  rhonchus,  but  they  are  diffused  over  a  certain  space,  and
not,  like  those  which  are  observed  in  cases  of  pectoriloquy,  con-
fined within  a  circumscribed  spot. Bronchophony  is  less  readily
suspended  than  pectoriloquy,  but  more  frequently  than  aegophony,
for  obvious  reasons  depending  on  the  relative  condition  of  the
bronchial  secretion  in  the  diseases  in  which  each  especially  occurs.
Finally,  the  tone  or  key  of  the  speaking  trumpet  completes  the
list  of  the  distinctive  characters  of  bronchophony. 3.  True  and
simple  asgophony  is  characterised  by  the  harsh  tremulous  silvery
tones  of  the  voice,  which  is  commonly  more  acute  than  the  na-
tural voice  of  the  patient,  and  seems  to  be  quite  superficial,  and
to  float,  as  it  were,  on  the  surface  of  the  lungs,  instead  of  coming
from  the  interior,  like  pectoriloquy  and bronchophony.  It
seems,  moreover,  to  be  rather  the  echo  of  the  voice,  repeating  the
words  or  their  final  syllables,  in  a  small  sharp  and  tremulous  key,
than  the  voice  itself. This  character  of  asgophony  is  especially
marked  when  it  exists  in  the  anterior  and  lateral  parts  of  the
chest ;  since  between  the  scapulas  and  at  their  lower  edge  (to
which  situation,  by  the  way,  it  is  most  commonly  restricted)  it
is  almost  always  conjoined  with  the  natural  bronchophony,  ren-
dered stronger  by  the  compression  of  the  lungs  in  that  part.
And  it  is  here,  in  the  space  between  the  inner  edge  of  the
scapula  and  the  spine,  and  in  this  part  only,  that  we  occasionally


46  EXPLORATION  OF  THK  VOICE.

perceive  the  bleating,  ccgophonic  voice  completely  traversing  the
tube,  with  the  most  perfect  resemblance  of  the  squeaking  of
Punch.  jEgophony  and  bronchophony  are  necessarily  con-
joined in  cases  of  pleuro-peripneumony ;  and,  indeed,  pectori-
loquy may  co-exist  with  them,  when  an  abscess  of  the  lung
supervenes.

When  I  published  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  I  was  not
quite  sure  that  aegophony  might  not  exist  in  simple  peripneu-
mony  :  farther  experience,  however,  has  completely  convinced
me  that  this  cannot  be  the  case.  Whatever  analogy  there  may
be  between  this  phenomenon  and  bronchophony,  it  is  easy  to
distinguish  them,  when  they  exist  separately  ;  and  an  experienced
ear  may  recognise  them,  in  most  cases,  when  they  co-exist  in
pleuro-peripneumony.  Certain  cases,  however,  will  always  be
doubtful ;  and  when  it  is  so,  we  must  be  contented  with  the
portion  that  is  certain.  The  following  positions  seemed  proved  :  1 .
that  segophony  exists  in  simple  pleurisy,  and  in  no  case  with  more
decided  characters:  2.  that  bronchophony  exists  frequently  in
peripneumony,  and  with  features  sufficiently  well  marked  to
distinguish  it  from  aegophony ;  3.  that  both  these  co-exist  in
certain  cases  of  pleuro-peripneumony.

When  we  meet  with  cases,  where  the  results  obtained  from
percussion  and  the  auscultation  of  the  respiration  leave  reason  to
doubt  as  to  the  existence  of  pleurisy  or  peripneumony,  if  we
find  aegophony  very  complete  and  little  mixed  with  bronchophony,
we  may  conclude  that  the  disease  is  exclusively  the  former,  or
nearly  so ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  bronchophony  is
strongly  marked,  and  with  merely  a  shade  of  the  stuttering
cracked  note  of  aegophony,  we  may  decide  upon  peripneumony
being  the  chief  disease,  conjoined,  probably,  with  a  slight  pleu-
ritic effusion.  We  may  even  conclude  against  the  existence  of
anv  effusion,  if  the  characteristics  of  aegophony  are  observed  only
at  the  inner  border  of  the  scapula  *

I  have  dwelt  the  longer  upon  these  distinctions,  because  thev
form  perhaps  the  most  difficult  point  in  auscultation,  and  parti-
cularly because  aegophony  is  the  only  one  among  the  stethoscope
signs,  whose  value  has  been  called  in  question^-  by  competent
judges.  Cases  of  simple  peripneumony,  in  which  aegophony  was
supposed  to  exist,  have  been  communicated  to  me  by  several  of
my  colleagues,  and  by  many  pupils.  All  these,  as  far  as  I  had
the  means  of  ascertaining,  were  examples  of  bronchophony  mis-

*  Allthese  diagnostic  signs  will  be  much  more  certain  if  we  examine  the  patient
in  different  positions.  Decubitus  on  the  abdomen  will,  in  particular,  enable  us  to
distinguish  simple  aegophony  from  simple  bronchophony,  or  from  bronchophony  con-
joined with  a-gophony.  (See  note,  p.  42.) (M.  L.)

t  A  curious  misprint  exists  in  this  passage,  in  the  new  edition  of  the  original,
vlz  0f  comtutie  for  contest™,  whereby  the  author  is  made  to  assert  directly  the  re-
verse of  what  he  intends. — Transl.


KCOFHONV.


47


taken  for  aegophony,  or  a  mixture  of  the  two.  In  like  manner
I  am  constantly  meeting  with  cases  in  the  hospital,  where  the
two  phenomena  are  confounded  by  the  pupils; — but  when  I
have  pointed  out  the  distinction  between  them,  and  they  have
acquired  more  experience,  they  hesitate  only  in  cases  which  are
really  doubtful.

Sect.  III.  Auscultation  of  the  Cough.

Coughing  in  a  healthy  state  of  the  lungs  excites  no  particular
sound  within  the  chest.  When  we  listen  with  the  cylinder  on
the  larynx  or  trachea,  and  at  the  roots  of  the  lungs  where  the
chest  is  narrow,  besides  the  shock  communicated  by  the  act  of
coughing,  we  hear,  at  the  same  time,  a  sound  as  of  the  transmis-
sion of  air  in  a  tube.  When  the  lungs  are  inflamed  to  the  degree
of  hepatization,  this  peculiar  sound  becomes  more  manifest,  at
the  root  of  the  lungs,  and  even  in  the  bronchial  tubes  not  larger
than  a  goose-quill,  than  it  is  in  the  trachea  in  a  state  of  health  ;
I  therefore  shall  designate  it  tuhary  cough.*  This  cough  is
found  also  in  cases  of  pleurisy,  but  at  the  roots  of  the  lungs
only.  It  exists  equally  in  cases  of  dilatation  of  the  bronchi,  and
may  serve  as  a  test  of  the  degree  of  dilatation.  Where  there
exists  an  excavation  in  the  lungs  communicating  with  the
bronchi,  the  cough  resounds  in  it  as  it  does  in  the  larynx,  but
is  confined  to  a  small  space :  it  also  gives  rise  to  the  cavernous
rhonchus,  and  more  readily  than  simple  respiration  does,  parti-
cularly if  there  is  still  much  matter  contained  in  it,  and  not  in  a
very  liquid  state.  If  the  excavation  is  empty,  this  emptiness  is
indicated  by  the  cavernous  cough,  better  than  any  other  pheno-
menon. Coughing  gives  also,  in  certain  cases,  the  metallic
tinkling,  when  it  is  not  perceptible  by  the  respiration  or  voice.
When  pectoriloquy  is  suspended  in  a  tuberculous  excavation,
from  obstruction  of  the  bronchi  by  the  sputa,  coughing  restores
it  by  the  expulsion  of  these,  or  excites  the  cavernous  rhonchus,
which  is  of  the  same  import  as  a  diagnostic  sign  :  it  clears,  in
like  manner,  the  fistulous  communications  between  the  pleura
and  bronchi.  In  the  excavations,  where  the  tuberculous  matter
has  only  begun  to  be  softened,  and  in  the  incipient  abscess  of
peripneumony,  while  simple  respiration  is  still  unable  to  excite
any  rhonchus,  coughing  will  often  give  a  very  strong  guggling.
And  it  may  be  stated  as  a  general  truth,  that  all  the  sounds  to
be  described  in  the  next  Section,  are  more  audible  during  the
act  of  coughing  than  during  simple  respiration.  However,  in
deducing  our  indications  from  the  auscultation  of  the  cough,

*  I  consider  the  term  bronchial  cough  employed  by  Andral  (Diet,  de  Med.  Prat.  t.
iii.  p.  662)  decidedly  preferable  to  that  in  the  text. — Transl.


48


EXPLORATION  OF THE  VOICE.


certain  precautions  are  necessary.  Sometimes  a  violent  cough
seems  rather  to  close  than  open  the  pulmonary  channels,  produc-
ing a  great  commotion  of  the  lungs  and  walls  of  the  thorax
without  giving  rise  to  any  guggling.  At  other  times,  in  timid
patients,  the  cough  seems  confined  to  the  throat,  and  excites  no
resonance  in  the  bronchi.*  One  of  the  cases  where  this  inten-
tional cough  is  most  useful,  is  in  that  variety  of  the  dry  catarrh,
wherein  the  respiratory  sound  is  inaudible  under  ordinary  cir-
cumstances. Here  the  act  of  coughing,  which,  as  we  have
formerly  observed,  is  always  either  preceded  or  followed  by  a
powerful  inspiration,  enables  us  to  hear  the  sound  of  respiration,
and  thereby  to  judge  of  the  condition  of  the  lungs.  The  same
measure  is  equally  valuable  in  incipient  peripneumony,  especially
if  grafted  on  a  chronic  dry  catarrh.  In  this  case,  percussion
elicits  a  sound  which  is  either  doubtful  or  delusive,  and  common
respiration  is  inaudible ;  but  the  cough  restores  the  respiratory
murmur,  whenever  the  lungs  are  permeable,  and  enables  us  to
detect  the  crepitous  rhonchus,  the  pathognomonic  sign  of  inci-
pient peripneumony.

It  is  proper  to  observe,  that  we  ought  not  to  have  recourse  to
the  factitious  cough,  as  a  means  of  exploration,  except  where
simple  respiration  is  insufficient,  as  it  may  fatigue  our  patients.
At  the  same  time  I  may  add,  that  its  inconveniences,  in  this
respect,  are  less  than  may  be  imagined  ;  as  one  single  cough,  and
that  rather  moderate  than  otherwise,  is  sufficient  to  afford  to  an
experienced  observer  all  the  signs  which  this  phenomenon  is
capable  of  yielding.

Sect.  IV.  Auscultation  of  sounds  not  necessarily  accompanyi?ig

the  respiratio?i  and  voice.

Various  sounds,  foreign  to  the  natural  respiratory  murmur  or
resonance  of  the  voice,  may  arise  within  the  chest  from  various
accidental  causes :  I  shall  class  these  under  two  heads — the
rhonchus  and  metallic  tinkling.

I.  Of  the  different  kinds  of  rhonchus.

For  want  of  a  better  or  more  generic  term  I  use  the  word
rhonchus\  to  express  all  the  sounds,  besides  those  of  health,

•  In  this  latter  ense  we  desire  the  patient  to  cough  nfter  taking  a  deep  inspiration.
Author.

t  It  is  very  desirable  that  some  name  might  be  found  for  this  phenomenon  which
would  prove" generally  acceptable  to  British  physicians.  In  the  former  edition  of
this  translation,  the  nearest  English  synonyme,  rattle,  was  used,  but  this  word  has
been  adopted  by  few  The  original  French  term  rule  appears  to  be  most  generally
employed  in  this"  country ;  but  there  are  several  objections  to  its  use.  In  the  pre-
sent work  I  shall  give  the  preference  to  the  Latin  synonyme,  rhoiichut,  aLoemployed
by  Laennec,  and  sanctioned  by  the  adoption  of  Dr.  \\  illiams  an?'  Dr  ("upland. — 7V.


OF T1IK  IUIONCHUS.


49


which  the  act  of  respiration  gives  rise  to,  from  the  passage  of  the
air  through  fluids  in  tlie  bronchi  or  lungs,  or  by  its  transmission
through  any  of  the  air  passages  partially  contracted.  These
sounds  likewise  accompany  the  cough,  and  are  made  even  more
perceptible  by  it ;  but  in  most  cases,  the  auscultation  of  the
respiration  suffices  for  their  exploration.  They  are  extremely
various ;  and  although  they  possess,  in  general,  very  striking
characters,  it  becomes  difficult  so  to  describe  them  as  to  convey
any  thing  like  a  correct  notion  to  those  who  have  never  heard
them.  Sensations,  we  know,  can  only  be  communicated  to
others  by  comparisons;  and  although  those  which  I  shall
employ  may  seem  to  myself  sufficiently  exact,  they  may  not  be
so  to  others.  I  expect,  however,  that  my  description  will  enable
any  observer,  of  ordinary  application,  to  recognise  them  when  he
meets  with  them,  as  they  are  much  more  easily  distinguished
than  described.

We  can  distinguish  five  principal  kinds  of  rhonchi :  1.  the
moist  crepitous  rhonchus,  or  crepitation;  2.  the  mucous  rhon-
chus,  or  guggling;  3.  the  dry  sonorous  rhonchus,  or  snoring;
4.  the  dry  sibilous  rhonchus,  or  whistling  ;  5.  the  dry  crepitous
rhonchus,  with  large  bubbles,  or  crackling.*'

1.  The  moist  crepitous  rhonchus^  has  evidently  its  site  in  the
substance  of  the  lungs.  It  resembles  the  sound  produced  by  the
crepitation  of  salts  in  a  vessel  exposed  to  a  gentle  heat,  or  that
produced  by  blowing  into  a  dried  bladder,  or  it  is  still  more  like

*  The  different  kinds  of  rhonchi  have  their  site  either  in  the  air  cells,  or  bronchial
tubes,  or  in  some  morbid  excavations  formed  in  the  substance  of  the  lungs  ;  and  they
are  caused  either  by  some  substance  within  these,  more  or  less  fluid,  and  moving  in
contact  with  air,  or  by  some  other  obstruction  in  the  air  passages  from  external  com-
pression or  alteration  of  their  coats,  A  consideration  of  these  different  causes,  and
of  the  sounds,  resulting  from  them,  seems  to  point  out  a  very  convenient  mode  of
arranging  them  as  follows  : — 1 .  Rhonchi  having  their  site  in  the  vesicles'  or  air  cells
— vesicular  rhonchi ;  2.  rhonchi  having  their  site  in  tlie  bronchial  tubes — bronchial
rhonchi ;  3.  rhonchi  having  their  site  in  morbid  excavations — cavernous  rhonchi.  All
the  causes  of  these  sounds  maybe  divided  into  two  kinds,  according  as  they  are
dependent  on  the  presence  of  a  liquid,  or  on  some  change  in  the  coats  or  caliber  of
the  air  passages,  or  on  obstruction  from  matter  of  a  solid  kind.  The  different  kinds
of  rhonchi  may  therefore  be  termed  either  bumid  or  dry.  We  shall  thus  have  our
classification  as  follows  : —

I. — Vesicular  rhonchi.

1.  Humid  vesicular  rhonchus — Moist  crepitous  rhonchus — Rale  crepitant  of
Laennec.

2.  Dry  vesicular  rhonchus — Dry  crepitous  rhonchus — Rale  crepitant  sec  a  grosses
bulles,  ou  craquement  of  Laennec.

II. — Bronchial  rhonchi.

1.  Humid  bronchial  rhonchus — Mucous  rhonchus — Rale  muqueux  of  Laennec.

2.  Dry  bronchial  rhonchus.  a.  Sibilous  rhonchus — Rale  sibilant  sec  of  Laennec.
h.  Sonorous  rhonchus  Rale  sonore  sec  of  Laennec.

HI. — Cavernous  rhonchi.

1.  Humid  cavernous  rhonchus — Cavernous  rhonchus — Gargouillement,  Rale  ca-
verneux  of  Laennec.

2.  Dry  cavernous  rhonchus.  This  species  isadded  more  onaccountof  uniformity,
and  because  it  is  possible,  than  because  such  a  variety  has  been  described.

t  Humid  vesicular  rhonchus. — Travsl.

K


50


THE  MUCOUS 11  HON C II US.


that  emitted  by  the  healthy  lungs  when  distended  by  air  and
compressed  in  the  hand, — only  stronger.*  Besides  the  sound  of
crepitation,  a  sensation  of  humidity  in  the  part  is  clearly  con-
veyed. We  feel  that  the  pulmonary  cells  contain  a  watery
fluid  as  well  as  air,  and  that  the  intermixture  of  the  two  fluids
produces  bubbles  of  extreme  minuteness.

This  species  of  rhonchus  is  one  of  the  most  important,  and
fortunately  it  is  most  easily  distinguished  ;  a  single  observation
being  sufficient  to  mark  it  ever  after.  It  is  the  pathognomonic
sign  of  the  first  stage  of  peripneumony,  disappearing  on  the
supervention  of  hepatization,  and  re-appearing  with  the  resolution
of  the  inflammation.  It  is  found  also  in  oedema  of  the  lungs,
and  sometimes  in  pulmonary  apoplexy,  but  in  these  two  cases,
the  bubbles  usually  seem  to  be  somewhat  larger  and  moister  than
in  the  rhonchus  of  peripneumony.  This  variety  I  call  subcre-
pitous.f

2.  The  mucous  rhonchus.\  This  is  produced  by  the  passage
of  the  air  through  sputa  accumulated  in  the  bronchi,  or  through
the  softened  matter  of  tubercles  yet  undischarged.  It  presents
many  varieties  of  character,  which  can  hardly  be  defined,  and  of
which  indeed  we  can  only  form  any  notion,  by  comparing  the
perceptions  derived  from  the  sense  of  hearing,  with  such  as  we
fancy  might  be  conveyed  by  the  sense  of  sight.  In  listening  to
it,  we  receive  the  impression  or  idea  of  bubbles,  such  as  are  pro-
duced by  blowing  through  a  pipe  into  soapy  water.  The  ear
seems  to  appreciate  most  distinctly  the  consistence  of  the  fluid
which  forms  the  bubbles,  and  also  their  varying  sizes.  The  con-
sistence of  the  fluid  appears  always  greater  in  the  mucous  than
in  the  crepitous  rhonchus.

*  This  variety  of  rhonchus  is  compared  hy  Andral  to  the  sound  produced  in  rub-
bing a  piece  of  parchment;  by  Dr.  Williams  to  the  sound  produced  in  rubbing  be-
tween the  finger  and  thumb  a  lock  of  hair,  close  to  the  ear.  Other  comparisons
have  been  adduced,  such  as  the  noise  of  boiling  butter,  that  occasioned  by  the  burst-
ing of  the  minute  bubbles  on  the  surface  of  beer  or  soda  water,  &c.  Of  these  the
comparison  of  Dr.  Williams  comes  nearest  the  natural  sound.  Perhaps  as  just  a
notion  of  it  may  be  conveyed  to  the  mind  by  imagining  the  quality  of  roughness  super-
added to  the  pure  or  smooth  sound  of  healthy  respiration. — Trans.

f  M.  Cruveilhier  calls  in  question  the  propriety  of  considering  the  crepitous  rhon-
chus as  a  sign  of  pneumonia,  cedema  of  the  lungs  or  pulmonary  apoplexy,  pretending
that  it  may  be  wanting  in  these  diseases,  and  be  present  in  others  of  a  different  kind.
(Revue  Med.  Fev.  1830.)  It  seems  probable,  from  this,  that  M.  Cruveilhier  is  unable
to  distinguish  the  true  crepitous  rhonchus  from  the  obscure  mucous  rhonchus. — (M.  L  )

There  is  reason  in  M.  Cruveilhier's  objection,  since  the  crepitous  rhonchus  is  cer-
tainly occasionally  perceptible  in  bronchitis,  and,  according  to  Dr.  Stokes,  (Irish
Trans,  vol.  v.  p.  326,)  in  the  early  stage  of  phthisis.

In  a  late  work  on  Auscultation,  by  Mr.  Spittal,  (a  Treatise  on  Auscultation,  by
Robert  Spittal,  Edin.,  1830,)  some  account  is  given  of  the  sounds  produced  by  the
burstin"  of  bubbles  on  the  surface  of  different  fluids  when  agitated.  He  found  that
fluids  of  the  density  and  tenacity  of  serum  gave  rise  to  sounds  most  nearly  resem-
bling those- of  the  moist  crepitous  rhonchus ;  and  M.  Piorry  states,  that  the  very  same
sound  is  produced  in  the  dead  body  by  injecting  fluids  into  the  lungs.  (Du  Pro-
cess Operatorne,  pp.  81,  94.)— Trans.

t  Humid  bronchial  rhonchus.— Tram.


THE TRACHEAL  HHONCHUS.


51


In  respect  of  the  size  of  the  bubbles  in  the  different  rhonchi,
they  may  be  estimated  as  very  large,  large,  middling,  small.
The  last  term  is  especially  applicable  to  the  crepitous  rhonchus
of  peripneumony,  in  which  it  seems  as  if  an  infinity  of  minute
equal-sized  bubbles,  formed  at  once,  were  thrilling  or  vibrating,
rather  than  boiling,  on  the  surface  of  a  fluid.  The  mucous  rhon-
chus, on  the  contrary,  appears  always  larger,  and  most  usually  un-
equal, so  as  to  convey  the  idea  of  a  liquid  into  which  some  one  is
blowing,  and  thereby  producing  bubbles,  of  which  some  are  of  the
size  of  a  filbert,  and  others  only  as  large  as  a  cherry-stone  or
hempseed.  We  can  estimate  the  quantity  as  well  as  the  size  of
the  bubbles,  and  may  thus  designate  the  rhonchus  as  abundant,  or
rare.  Accordingly,  it  sometimes  seems  that  the  point  of  lung
beneath  the  stethoscope,  is  filled  with  bubbles  that  touch  each
other;  and  at  other  times,  there  seems  to  be  only  one  here
and  there,  while  the  intervening  portion  of  lung  yields  the  simple
sound  of  respiration,  or  yields  no  sound  at  all,  as  the  case  may
be.  When  the  mucous  rhonchus  is  very  large  and  infrequent,
we  can  distinctly  perceive  the  bubbles  form  and  burst.  When  it
exists  at  once  copious,  large,  and  constant,  it  is  sometimes  so
noisy  as  to  resemble  the  rolling  of  a  drum.

A  variety  of  the  mucous,  is  the  tracheal  rhonchus.  It  is  ob-
served, when  there  is  accumulated  much  mucous  or  other  sputa
in  the  larynx,  trachea,  or  larger  bronchial  tubes,  and  may  be
readily  heard  by  the  unassisted  ear  ;  as  in  the  case  of  the  dead-
rattles  of  the  vulgar,  from  which  I  have  derived  the  general  ap-
pellation of  the  phenomenon.  This  species,  or  rather  variety,
may  exist  without  there  being  any  other  perceived  in  the  bronchi
by  the  stethoscope ;  but  the  reverse  of  this  is  much  more  com-
mon, namely,  that  the  instrument  conveys  to  us  a  rhonchus,  even
a  very  loud  one,  when  we  perceive  nothing  by  the  unassisted  ear.
When  examined  by  the  cylinder,  this  rhonchus,  which  has  its
seat  in  the  trachea,  has  almost  always  the  character  of  the  mucous
rhonchus  described  above.  The  bubbles  seem  to  be  extremely
numerous  and  very  large.  The  sound  is  occasionally  so  loud  as
to  resemble  a  drum,  or  the  noise  of  a  carriage  on  the  pavement.
In  these  cases  the  rhonchus  is  perceived  over  the  whole  sternum,
and  is  accompanied  by  a  vibration  very  perceptible  to  the  touch :
we  can  even  sometimes  perceive  it  over  the  whole  chest  and
through  the  interposed  lung.  In  this  last  case,  however,  there
is  no  vibration  attending  it,  and  we  recognize,  at  once,  that  the
sound  originates  in  a  remote  point.  This  variety  of  rhonchus  is
sometimes  so  noisy  as  to  mask  the  sound  of  the  heart's  action,
and  also  of  respiration,  over  a  great  portion  of  the  chest ;  and  in
all  cases  where  it  exists  in  a  certain  degree  of  intensity,  we  are
unable  to  perceive  the  heart's  pulsations  under  the  sternum,
unless  we  request  the  patient  to  suspend  respiration  for  a  moment.
The  tracheal  rhonchus  is  onlv  observed  in  this  great  degree,

e  2


52


THE  MUCOUS  UHONCHUS.


in  violent  haemoptysis,  and  in  the  severer  paroxysms  of  the
mucous  catarrh  of  old  persons  termed  suffocative  catarrh.  It  is
found  in  most  dying  persons,  particularly  in  cases  of  phthisis,
peripneumony,  diseases  of  the  heart,  and  severe  idiopathic  fevers.
In  all  cases,  when  it  exists  in  a  high  degree,  it  may  be  regarded
as  of  evil  omen.  In  a  lesser  degree,  it  exists  in  the  acute  pul-
monary catarrh,  in  the  severe  cases  of  the  chronic  mucous  ca-
tarrh, and  in  all  diseases  complicated  with  these.  It  may  be
reckoned  as  one  of  the  worst  symptoms  which  appear  in  fever.
In  concluding  this  notice  of  the  tracheal  rhonchus,  it  ought  to
be  observed,  that  when  too  slight  to  be  heard  by  the  naked  ear,
it  becomes  very  manifest  on  applying  the  stethoscope.

The  mucous  rhonchus,  properly  so  called,  exists  principally  in
the  pulmonary  catarrh  with  copious  secretion  of  mucus,  and  in
haetnoptisis ;  and  often  also  in  peripneumony  and  phthisis.  In
the  two  former  diseases,  it  is  caused  by  the  transmission  of  air
through  the  mucus  or  blood  contained  in  the  bronchi ;  in  the
two  latter,  it  may  have  its  seat  in  the  same  place,  but  it  may
also  originate  in  cavities  produced  by  an  abscess  or  eschar  of
the  lungs,  or  by  softened  tubercles.  In  the  latter  cases,  the
rhonchus  has  a  peculiar  character  which  I  shall  denominate  ca-
vernous :  it  is  more  than  usually  abundant  and  large,  and  is
confined  also  to  a  small  space,  within  which  we  commonly  ob-
serve, at  the  same  time,  both  the  cavernous  respiration  and  pec-
toriloquism.  It  is  more  especially  during  the  act  of  coughing
that  we  detect  this  circumscribed  or  cavernous  rhonchus.  On
some  occasions,  we  can  even  distinguish  the  consistence  of  the
fluid  contained  in  the  excavation,  by  means  of  the  particular  im-
pulse communicated  by  the  cough.*

In  certain  rare  instances  the  mucous  rhonchus  may  be  recog-
nized, or  at  least  suspected,  independently  of  auscultation,  either
mediate  or  immediate.  I  have  sometimes  noticed,  while  percuss-
ing the  clavicle  or  neighbouring  parts  of  the  chest,  in  phthisical

*  The  cavernous  rhonchi.  This  variety  deserves  a  more  distinct  notice  than  Laen-
nec  has  given  it.  All  the  other  rhonchi,  although  dependingon  a  morbid  condition
of  the  part  in  which  they  originate,  still  have  their  site  in  cavities  naturally  existing
in  the  state  of  health :  the  cavernous  rhonchus  is  in  every  respect  morbid — in  its
site  as  well  as  its  cause.  It  may  exist,  is  stated  in  the  text,  in  all  cases  where  there
is  a  morbid  excavation  in  the  lungs  containing  a  fluid,  and  communicating  with  the
bronchi ;  as  in  circumscribed  abscess,  and  in  local  gangrene  of  the  lungs,- and  in  the
latter  stages  of  tubercle.  The  last  named  is  by  far  the  most  usual  source  of  this
sign,  insomuch  that  I  doubt  if  it  arises  once  in  a  hundred  times  from  any  other  cause.
It  is  characterized  by  a  strongly  marked  mucous  rhonchus  or  guggling,  confined  to  a
small  spot,  instead  of  being  diffused  over  a  considerable  portion  of  the  lung,  as  is
usually  the  case  with  the  common  humid  bronchial  rhonchus.  It  is  particularly
heard  upon  the  patient  taking  a  deep  inspiration,  or  after  coughing;  and  if,  under
such  circumstances,  it  is  very  strongly  marked,  continues  fixed  in  the  same  point,
and  is  not  heard  in  any  other,  it  is  one  of  the  surest  signs  of  tuberculous  excavation,
even  without  pectoriloquy  and  the  cavernous  respiration,  which  will  generally  be
perceptible  in  the  same  point.  Andral,  a  high  authority,  considers  this  circum-
scribed bubbling  rhonchus,  when  well  marked,  as  the  very  surest  sign  of  a  tuberculous
cavity. — Transl.


THE SOXOROUS  RHONCHUS.


53


c  ases,  a  sort  of  vibration  like  that  yielded  by  a  cracked  pot  when
gently  struck,  accompanied  with  an  evident  hollow  resonance,
and  even  with  a  humid  crepitation  or  guggling.  The  phenome-
non indicates  the  presence  of  tuberculous  excavations  near  the
surface  of  the  lungs.  It  is,  however,  by  no  means  common,  and
has  only  been  observed  in  subjects  with  very  thin  elastic  chests,
and  (perhaps)  with  the  clavicular  ligaments  more  than  usually
lax.*  Some  of  these  patients  are  themselves  conscious  of  the
guggling  of  the  tuberculous  matter,  during  percussion  ;  and
others  can  point  out  the  seat  of  the  excavation,  from  the  sensa-
tion occasioned  by  the  detachment  of  the  sputa  from  it  during
expectoration.  This  last  circumstance  is,  however,  very  un-
common.

I  have  sometimes  also  perceived  in  tuberculous  excavations  of
the  upper  lobes,  a  mucous  rhonchus,  or  slight  guggling,  corres-
ponding with,  and  no  doubt  caused  by,  the  pulsation  of  the  sub-
clavian artery.  This  case  is  extremely  rare,  as  indeed  it  must  be,
when  we  consider  the  numerous  circumstances  that  must  conspire
towards  its  production.  In  an  equally  rare  class  of  cases,  a  strong
mucous  or  cavernous  rhonchus  can  sometimes  be  perceived  by
the  naked  ear,  or  on  applying  the  hand  to  the  part.  I  do  not
here  allude  to  the  guggling  rhonchus  of  the  trachea  or  the  bron-
chi, already  noticed,  but  to  one  confined  to  a  small  space,  and
this  often  at  a  distance  from  the  larger  bronchial  tubes.  I  have
observed  this  phenomenon  only  in  cases  where  the  matter  of  an
excavation  had  made  its  way  through  the  walls  of  the  chest,  and
formed  a  tumour  beneath  the  skin  ;  or  where  it  had  escaped  into
old  cellular  adhesions  uniting  the  lungs  to  the  chest ;  or,  finally,
where  a  large  anfractuous  excavation,  half  full  of  matter,  lay
near  the  surface  of  a  lung  closely  united  to  the  walls  of  the
chest.-j-

3.  The  dry  sonorous  rhonchus.%  This  is  more  variable  in  its
character  than  the  two  preceding  kinds.  It  consists  in  a  flat
(grave)  sound,  sometimes  extremely  loud,  resembling  at  times
the  snoring  of  a  person  asleep,  at  other  times  the  sound  produced

*  This  sign  has  been  noticed  somewhat  in  detail  by  M.  Martinet  in  the  Revue
Med.  torn.  ii.  1824,  p.  253.  It  was  previously  pointed  out  by  Laennec  in  his  first
edit.  torn.  ii.  p.  64,  and  was  known  to  him,  he  says,  as  early  as  1816.  He  says  he
has  not  met  with  it  more  than  twenty  or  thirty  times  in  all.  According  to  him,  it
may  be  readily  confounded  with  the  jingling  of  a  metallic  ornament  worn  on  the
breast,  such  as  a  loose-jointed  cross,  for  instance.  In  phthisical  subjects,  in  whom
it  usually  occurs,  it  is  found  by  far  more  distinct,  if  we  percuss  wlule  they  are  speak-
ing. It  is  also  found,  but  rarely,  in  cases  of  dilated  bronchi.  Andral  has  observed
this  sign  in  three  cases  only.  In  all  these  it  correctly  indicated  the  existence  of  a
tuberculous  cavity. Clin.  Med.  torn.  iii.  p.  6o.—Trunsl.

f  Sometimes  when  the  sound  of  respiration  is  suspended  or  very  weak,  the  bubbles
of  the  mucous  rhonchus  become  very  small,  few  in  number,  and  not  perceptible,  ex-
cept on  a  deep  inspiration  :  at  other  times,  when  the  respiration  is  pretty  good,  it  is
found  not  to  be  pure  or  clear.  An  inexperienced  auscultator  might  be  apt  to  confound
these  varieties  (which  may  be  named  obscure)  with  a  weak  crepitous  rhonchus. —
Author.

t  Dry  bronchial  rhonchus. — Transl.


45


THE SIBILOUS  UHONCHUS.


by  friction  on  a  bass  string,  and  occasionally  the  cooing  of  the
wood-pigeon.  This  resemblance  is  sometimes  so  striking,  that
we  might  be  tempted  to  believe  the  bird  concealed  under  the
patient's  bed.  This  last  variety  of  sound  is  commonly  confined
to  a  small  space.  I  have  sometimes  observed  it  in  cases  of  pul-
monary fistulas  of  a  middling  size,  and  also  in  cases  of  dilated
bronchi.  I  apprehend  it  can  hardly  exist  in  bronchial  tubes  of
a  small  diameter.  We  must  not  confound  the  sonorous  rhonchus
with  the  guttural  sounds  formerly  mentioned,  (p.  32,)  which,
unlike  this,  have  their  seat  in  the  fauces,  as  may  be  ascertained
by  the  application  of  the  stethoscope.

It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  the  precise  cause  of  this  species  of
rhonchus.  Neither  the  character  of  the  sound,  nor  the  examina-
tion of  the  parts  after  death,  leads  to  the  belief  that  it  depends
on  the  passage  of  the  breath  through  any  kind  of  matter.  On
the  contrary,  it  would  seem  to  depend  rather  on  some  alteration
in  the  shape  of  the  tubes  through  which  the  air  passes,  and  I  am
disposed  to  attribute  it  in  most  cases  to  the  contraction,  from
some  cause  or  other,  of  the  origin  of  a  bronchial  branch.  This
contraction  may  be  either  permanent  or  temporary,  and  may  be
occasioned  by  the  pressure  of  an  enlarged  gland,  or  of  a  circum-
scribed spot  of  inflammation,  the  presence  of  a  tenacious  clot  of
mucus,  or  the  local  thickening  of  the  mucous  membrane.  It
may  not  be  easy  on  these  grounds  to  explain  the  reason  of  the
key  of  the  sound  being  flatter  instead  of  sharper,  as  might  be
expected  from  the  contraction  of  the  aperture  ;  but  we  have  an
analogous  case  in  the  thickening  of  the  membrane  of  the  larynx
and  glottis  in  catarrh,  when  the  voice,  as  we  know,  becomes  hoarser
and  flatter  than  natural.*

4.  The  dry  sibilous  rhonchus.  This  is  also  of  very  various
character.  Sometimes  it  is  like  a  prolonged  whistle,  flat  or  sharp,
dull  or  loud  ;  sometimes  it  is  very  momentary,  and  resembles  the
chirping  of  birds,  the  sound  emitted  by  suddenly  separating  two
portions  of  smooth  oiled  stone,  or  by  the  action  of  a  small  valve.
The  different  kinds  often  exist  together  in  different  parts  of  the
lungs,  or  successively  in  the  same  part.  The  peculiar  nature  of
the  sound,  and  the  appearances  on  dissection,  seem  to  prove  the
sibilant  rattle  to  be  owing  to  minute  portions  of  very  viscid  mu-
cus obstructing,  more  or  less  completely,  the  small  bronchial
ramifications.  This  explanation  applies  more  especially  to  the
variety  resembling  the  sound  of  a  valve,  which  is  indeed  only  a
variety  of  the  mucous  rhonchus :  the  kind  more  strictly  sibilous,
is  probably  occasioned  rather  by  a  local  contraction  of  the  smaller
bronchi,  from  thickening  of  their  inner  membrane.

5.  The  dry  crepitous  rhonchus,  with  large  bubbles.f  This
species  is  observed  only  during  inspiration. It  conveys  the  im-


*  Dry  vesicular  rhonchus. — Trans. Crackling  rhonchus. — (W.  L.)


Till; S1BIL0US  RHONCHUS.


55


pression  as  of  air  entering  and  distending  lungs  which  had  been
dried — and  of  which  the  cells  had  been  very  unequally  dilated,
— and  entirely  resembles  the  sound  produced  by  blowing  into  a
dried  bladder.

This  variety  is  the  pathognomic  sign  of  emphysema  of  the
pulmonary  substance,  and  of  the  interlobular  emphysema.  In  the
last  disease  it  is  much  more  distinct.  We  have  a  sound  like
this  in  the  common  sub-cutaneous  emphysema,  on  pressing  in-
terruptedly with  the  ear  on  the  stethoscope,  or  with  the  fingers,
in  the  vicinity  of  the  affected  part.

Besides  the  peculiar  sound  produced  by  the  various  species  of
rhonchus,  there  is  also  to  be  noticed  a  slight  vibration  communi-
cated to  the  cylinder  when  the  seat  of  the  phenomenon  happens
to  be  immediately  beneath  it.  This  sensation,  like  that  occa-
sioned by  the  voice,  (p.  32,)  may  sometimes  be  felt  by  the  hand
very  distinctly.  It  is  usually  very  strongly  marked  in  the  mu-
cous and  sonorous  rhonchi,  less  in  the  crepitant,  and  still  less  in
the  sibilous.  When  the  rhonchus  has  its  seat  remote  from  the
point  where  the  instrument  rests,  although  it  is  •  heard  very
strongly,  no  vibration  is  felt ;  and  when  this  can  be  discovered
in  no  point  of  the  surface  of  the  chest,  we  may  conclude  that  the
cause  of  the  rhonchus  exists  in  the  central  parts  of  the  lungs.
This  distinction  may  appear  subtle,  but  I  can  assure  the  reader
that  it  is  one  very  easily  made ;  and  that  a  very  little  experience
will  enable  any  one  to  ascertain  the  distance  of  the  rhonchus
from  the  point  of  exploration.

Some  of  the  species  of  rhonchus,  especially  the  mucous  and
crepitous,  cannot  be  distinguished  at  the  distance  of  one  or  two
inches  from  their  site.  The  other  kinds  may  frequently  be  per-
ceived through  the  whole  width  of  the  chest,  and  are  thus  often
combined  with  the  former.  In  this  manner,  while  we  perceive  a
mucous  rhonchus  on  one  side  of  the  chest,  we  may  at  the  very
same  instant  hear  a  dry  sonorous  rhonchus,  which  has  its  seat  in
the  opposite  lung.  This  complication  is,  however,  very  easily
distinguished  from  a  simple  mucous  rhonchus,  however  noisy.

From  the  very  striking  and  conspicuous  characters  of  the  va-
rious rhonchi  described,  it  might  be  imagined  that  they  would
furnish  some  of  the  most  valuable  of  our  diagnostic  signs.  Taken
singly,  however,  they  are  very  inferior  in  their  respect  to  the
data  supplied  by  the  auscultation  of  the  respiration  and  the  voice.
Conjoined  with  other  signs  they  become  extremely  valuable  :  the
two  crepitous  rhonchi,  and  also  and  more  especially  the  caver-
nous, are  frequently  more  certain  than  any  other  of  our  signs.*

*  Tn  reference  to  all  the  louder  rhonchi,  it  is  well  to  recollect  that  they  are  often
audihle  through  a  pleuritic  effusion :  we  must  not  therefore  conclude  from  their  mere
presence,  that  the  lungs  are  in  contact  with  the  chest.

In  exploring  the  chest  for  the  rhonchus,  we  use  the  stethoscope  without  the  plug. —
Trans.


56


METALLIC  TINKLING.


II.  Of  the  metallic  tinkling.

This  phenomenon  consists  of  a  peculiar  sound  which  bears  a
striking  resemblance  to  that  emitted  by  a  cup  of  metal,  glass,  or
porcelain,  when  gently  struck  with  a  pin,  or  into  which  a  grain
of  sand  is  dropped.  This  sound  does  not  at  all  depend  on  the
nature  of  the  materials  of  which  the  stethoscope  is  composed  :
it  is  perceived  during  respiration,  speaking  and  coughing;  but
is  much  more  perceptible  during  the  two  latter  than  the  former.
The  reverse  of  this  is,  however,  sometimes  the  case.  It  is,  in
general,  heard  in  a  most  striking  manner,  during  coughing;  and
when  in  any  degree  doubtful,  this  action  ought  to  be  performed.

The  metallic  tinkling  produced  by  the  voice,  differs  according
as  pectoriloquy  exists  or  not.  In  the  former  case,  the  tinkling,
as  well  as  the  voice,  traverses  the  tube  ;  in  the  latter,  we  merely
hear  within  the  chest  a  slight  sharp  sound  like  that  occasioned
by  the  vibration  of  a  metallic  cord  touched  by  the  finger.

The  metallic  tinkling  always  originates  in  a  morbid  excavation
within  the  chest,  containing  partly  air  and  partly  liquid.  It  ex-
ists only  therefore  in  two  cases — viz.  where  a  serous  or  purulent
effusion  coexists  with  pneumo-thorax ;  or  when  a  large  tuber-
culous excavation  of  the  lung  is  only  partly  filled  with  very
liquid  pus.  It  is  further  necessary  for  the  manifestation  of  this
phenomenon,  in  cases  of  empyema  or  hydro-thorax  complicated
with  pneumo  thorax,  that  the  cavity  of  the  pleura  should  com-
municate directly  with  a  bronchial  tube  by  means  of  a  fistula,
such  as  has  place  when  a  tuberculous  vomica,  abscess  or  eschar
of  the  lungs,  opens  into  the  chest.  This  sign  may,  on  this  ac-
count, be  considered  as  pathognomonic  of  this  triple  lesion.*
From  it  we  may  also  further  have  an  idea  of  the  size  of  the  fis-
tulous perforation,  as  well  as  of  the  relative  proportion  of  air
and  liquid  in  the  chest  ;  since  the  phenomenon  is  more  distinct
according  as  the  fistula  is  larger ;  while  the  extent  of  the  vibra-
tions  of  the  sound  corresponds  with  the  extent  of  the  spaces
occupied  by  the  air.-f*

Sometimes  the  tinkling  assumes  another  character,  and  strik-
ingly resembles  the  sound  produced  by  blowing  into  a  flask  or
bottle.  This,  like  the  tinkling,  is  equally  produced  by  the
cough,  voice,  or  respiration  ; and  in  some  cases  the  tinkling

*  Dr.  Williams  has  shown  (Rnt.  Expos,  p.  136,  et  seq.)  that  communication  with
the  bronchi  is  not  essential  to  the  production  of  this  phenomenon  ;  and  certainly,  in
one  of  the  most  distinct  examples  of  the  phenomenon  that  I  ever  met  with,  no  com-
munication could  be  discovered,  on  dissection,  between  the  bronchi  and  the  fluids
on  the  sac  of  the  pleuift. — Trnnsl.

t  This  may  also  be  very  exactly  done  by  means  of  auscultation  and  percussion :
the  latter  gives  the  sound  of  great  emptiness,  intermixed  now  and  then  with  tinkling.
1  conceive  that  the  phenomenon  w  ill  he  less  distinct  when  the  liquid  is  in  very  smalt
quantity,  than  where  it  is  in  more  equal  proportion  with  the  air.— Author.


METALLIC  TINKLING.


57


accompanies  one  of  these,  and  the  buzzing  the  other.  I  have
named  it  from  analogy,  utricular  buxssmg,  or  amphoric  reson-
ance (bourdonnement  amphorique).  This  sound  sometimes
co-exists  and  sometimes  alternates  with  metallic  tinkling.  Where
the  resonance  or  buzzing  exists  alone,  or  much  more  frequently
than  the  tinkling,  I  have  been  led  to  attribute  it  either  to  there
being  more  than  one  fistulous  opening,  or  to  the  cavity  in  which
it  originates  being  very  large,  and  containing  only  a  very  small
quantity  of  liquid.*

I  had  long  suspected  that  the  metallic  tinkling  and  amphoric
resonance  would  be  heard  after  the  operation  of  empyema,  but
it  was  not  till  April,  1822,  that  I  was  enabled  to  verify  my  con-
jecture, in  the  case  of  a  patient  who  had  been  operated  on  about
a  month  before.  When  an  injection  was  thrown  in  by  the  wound,
the  fall  of  the  liquid  upon  that  previously  in  the  cavity  of  the
chest,  produced  a  well-marked  tinkling.  The  stethoscope  did
not  detect  any  respiratory  sound  in  the  part  affected,  but  the  en-
trance and  escape  of  the  air  through  the  wound  gave  rise  to  an
extremely  distinct  utricular  buzzing.  Upon  plugging  the  wound,
a  slight  and  dull  hissing,  occasioned  by  the  passage  of  the  air  by
the  side  of  the  tent,  was  only  heard ;  but  when  the  patient  spoke,
a  distinct  tinkling  was  perceived.  This  last  fact  would  seem  to
show  that  a  large  communication  with  the  external  air  converts
the  tinkling  into  simple  buzzing.  It  is  worthy  of  note  in  this
case,  that  there  was  no  fistulous  communication  between  the
pleura  and  bronchi,  and  consequently  that  the  tinkling  sound
could  only  be  produced  by  the  vibration  occasioned  by  the  re-
sonance of  the  voice  in  the  lung,  which  latter,  it  is  further  to  be
observed,  was  greatly  compressed  and  covered  with  a  strong
false  membrane.  The  metallic  tinkling  and  utricular  buzzing
never  exist  unless  where  the  air  in  the  pleura  communicates  with
the  bronchi,  except  in  the  rare  case  mentioned  in  the  first  note
in  this  page.-f-

I  expect  that  future  observation  will  discover  other  phenomena
foreign  to  those  naturally  produced  by  the  respiration,  cough,
and  action  of  the  heart,  and  which  may  prove  useful  signs  in
particular  cases ;  yet  I  think  it  probable  that  such  signs  will  be
few  in  number ;  since,  in  the  period  that  has  elapsed  since  the
publication  of  my  first  edition,  my  own  researches,  as  well  as

*  The  metallic  tinkling  is  also  sometimes  heard  independently  of  the  voice,  cough,
or  respiration ;  namely,  when  a  patient  affected  with  pneumo-thorax  with  liquid
effusion,  is  placed  in  the  sitting  posture,  and  some  of  the  fluid  which  still  adhores  to
the  upper  part  of  the  cavity,  falls  in  drops  into  that  beneath. — Author.

t  There  is  a  phenomenon  of  no  value  as  a  sign,  but  which  an  inexperienced  ob-
server might  perhaps  mistake  for  the  metallic  tinkling.  If  one  percusses  the  chest
at  the  same  time  that  the  stethoscope  is  applied,  more  especially  close  to  the  instru-
ment, we  perceive  a  sort  of  metallic  clicking,  very  like  that  produced  by  the  handling
of  fire-arms  in  the  military  exercise.  The  same  is  sometimes  perceived,  in  a  less
degree,  during  coughing. — Author.


58


METALLIC  TINKLING.


those  made  in  all  the  hospitals  of  Paris  by  a  great  many  phy-
sicians and  pupils,  have  discovered  only  a  single  one  of  the  kind.
I  owe  this  to  Dr.  Honore,  who  first  perceived  it  in  a  case  of
pleuro-peripneumony  in  the  spring  of  1824,  and  afterwards  in
June  the  same  year.  This  latter  patient  I  saw,  and  made  the
following  observations  on  his  case  :  the  sound  of  respiration  was
feeble  over  the  whole  chest,  and  nearly  extinct  in  the  inferior
part  of  the  left  side,  which  had  been  the  seat  of  the  effusion.  On
applying  the  stethoscope  on  the  fourth  rib,  about  three  inches
from  its  cartilaginous  portion,  I  perceived  a  dull  sound,  such  as
would  be  produced  under  the  stethoscope  by  the  friction  of  the
finger  against  a  bone,  and  further  conveying  the  sensation  as  of
a  body  rising  and  falling,  and  at  the  same  time  rubbing  some-
what harshly  against  another.  The  site  of  the  phenomenon  was
evidently  very  close  to  the  walls  of  the  chest.  It  was  only  very
distinct  when  the  inspirations  were  deep  ;  and  at  these  times  not
only  was  the  patient  sensible  of  the  circumstance,  but  it  was  per-
ceptible to  us  on  applying  the  hand  over  the  part.  I  have  since
observed  the  same  thing  in  twelve  or  fifteen  cases,  under  different
circumstances,  and  have  been  able  to  ascertain  its  most  frequent
cause.  In  most  cases,  then5  this  phenomenon  (which  I  shall  call  the
sound  of  friction  of  ascent  and  descent)  is  occasioned  by  the
interlobular  emphysema  of  the  lungs.  Together  with  the  crack-
ling rhonchus,  or  dry  crepitous  rhonchus  with  large  bubbles,  it
is  indeed  the  pathognomonic  sign  of  this  lesion  ;  and,  as  will  be
seen  hereafter,  may  offer  many  varieties  of  character.

In  passing  in  review  all  the  known  lesions  of  the  lungs  and
pleura,  there  is  one  other  which  might  possibly  give  occasion  to
this  sound  of  friction, — the  existence,  namely,  of  a  cartilaginous,
bony,  tuberculous,  or  other  indurated  tumor  projecting  from  the
surface  of  the  lung.  This  is,  however,  a  mere  conjecture  ;  but
should  it  prove  true,  it  is  probable  that  the  case  in  question
would  be  readily  distinguishable  from  emphysema, — firstly,  be-
cause it  would  present  none  of  the  other  signs  of  the  last-men-
tioned disease ;  and  secondly,  because,  owing  to  the  accompanying
humidity  of  the  surfaces,  the  resulting  sounds  would  be  duller
and  softer.*

•  Subsequent  observations  have  enabled  M.  Reynaud  to  establish  the  fact  which
Laennec  only  conjectured.  The  sound  of  friction  is  perceived  in  every  case  where
the  pleura  is  rough  or  uneven.  It  exists  in  pleurisy  with  little  or  no  liquid  effusion,
and  where  the  pleura  is  merely  covered  with  a  fulse  membrane ;  and  likewise  in
CHSes  where  the  fluid  is  only  in  moderate  quantity,  and  the  free  motion  of  the  lung;
is  not  impeded  by  ancient  adhesions.  In  this  last  case,  when  the  lung,  in  certain
positions  of  the  body,  rises  above  the  level  of  the  effusion,  and  rubs  against  the  tho-
racic parietes,  the  sound  of  friction  is  heard  immediately  over  this  point.  When
the  effusion  becomes  considerable,  it  disappears,  and  again  returns  when  the  fluid  is
lessened.  In  most  cases  the  sound  is  perceptible  by  the  application  of  the  hand,  as
well  as  by  auscultation :  it  may  even  be  heard  at  some  distance  from  the  patient  ;
and  sometimes  it  is  very  perceptible  to  the  latter.  The  sound  of  friction  is  not,  it
will  now  be  perceived,  exclusively  confined  to  the  case  of  pulmonary  emphysema  :


METALLIC  TINKLING.


59


As  the  exploration  of  the  heart  and  large  vessels  affords  only
diagnostic  signs  in  the  diseases  of  these  organs,  I  shall  defer  the
notice  of  this  branch  of  auscultation  until  I  come  to  treat  of  them  .
and  I  shall  transfer  to  the  Appendix  the  application  of  the
method  to  the  diagnosis  of  several  cases  unconnected  with  diseases
of  the  chest.

it  is  met  with  in  pleurisy,  and  may  be  regarded  as  a  good  sign,  since  it  indicates
that  the  effusion  is  not  so  great  as  to  prevent  the  lung  from  being  dilated,  so  as  to
reach  the  walls  of  the  chest.  Neither  does  it  appear,  as  Laennec  imagined,  to  be
different  in  the  two  cases.  I  am  even  disposed  to  believe,  that  when  it  exists  in
emphysema,  this  affection  is  complicated  with  pleurisy.  In  confirmation  of  this,  I
may  state,  that  in  the  notes  of  Laennec's  own  cases  taken  by  myself,  I  find,  almost
always,  this  complication  expressly  named,  where  the  sound  of  friction  is  recorded.
The  same  observation  applies  to  M.  Reynaud's  third  case  (Journ.  Hebd.  No.  65) ;
and  even  Andral  bears  testimony  to  the  accuracy  of  M.  Reynaud's  views.  (Clin.
Med.  t.  ii.  p.  613,  2nd  Ed.)

The  foregoing  pathological  facts  led  M.  Reynaud  to  examine  whether  there  might
not  exist  an  habitual  friction  between  the  pulmonary  and  costal  pleura  in  the  state
of  health.  And  this  seemed  established  by  a  priori  considerations, — namely,  by  the
invariable  formation  of  an  accidental  serous  tissue  wherever  a  false  joint  or  acci-
dental movement  is  established,  and  by  the  obliteration  of  the  articular  serous
cavities  on  the  abolition  of  all  motion  of  the  parts.  With  the  view  of  proving  the
fact,  M.  Reynaud  made  an  experiment  on  a  living  animal,  and  believed  that  he
could  distinctly  perceive  the  motion  of  the  lungs  against  the  ribs  during  inspiration
and  expiration.  In  the  state  of  health,  the  sound  produced  by  this  friction  of  the
parts  is  not  perceptible,  owing  to  the  slippery  smoothness  of  the  two  membranes,
or  is  confounded  with  that  of  the  respiration  ;  but  when  the  natural  condition  of  the
parts  is  altered  by  inflammation  or  any  other  cause,  it  then  becomes  manifest.  (See
Journ.  Hebdom.  de  Med.  No.  65.) — M.  L.


PART  SECOND.


DISEASES  OF  THE  BRONCHI,  LUNGS,  AND

PLEURA.

I  shall  not  here  attempt,  with  the  Nosologists,  to  divide  the
diseases  of  which  I  propose  to  treat,  into  genera  and  species.
Such  an  arrangement  appears  to  me  incompatible  with  the  nature
of  medical  science.  The  zoological  and  botanical  species  are  dis-
tinct beings,  while  diseases  are  merely  modifications  in  the  tex-
ture of  the  animal  organs,  in  the  composition  of  their  fluids,  or
in  the  order  of  their  functions.  I  shall  still  less  endeavour  to
ascertain  the  primary,  or,  as  they  are  called,  proximate  causes
of  diseases.  The  vanity  of  researches  of  this  kind  is  sufficiently
proved  by  the  profound  oblivion  into  which  all  theories  of  this
nature  have  successively  fallen.  I  shall  content  myself  with  de-
scribing the  diseases  of  the  thoracic  organs, — that  is  to  say,  such
pathological  phenomena  as  are  well  marked  and  easily  distin-
guishable from  others.  I  will  state  the  characters  by  which  they
may  be  recognized  during  life  and  in  the  dead  body  ;  and  the
treatment  which  experience  has  proved  to  be  most  efficacious.

When  the  disturbance  of  the  functions,  which  is  in  fact,  pro-
perly speaking,  the  disease,  is  clearly  dependent  on  the  change
of  structure,  or  is  so  connected  with  this  as  to  bear  a  direct
relation  to  it  as  to  intensity,  I  shall  commence  the  description  of
the  disease  with  this  organic  alteration ;  because  it  constitutes
the  part  of  the  disease  which  is  most  positive  and  least  subject  to
variation.

In  this  way,  I  shall  successively  notice  all  the  organic  lesions
to  which  the  several  textures  of  the  lungs  are  subject.  After-
wards I  shall  examine  the  disorders  of  this  organ,  which  may
exist  without  any  discoverable  change  of  structure,  and  which
must,  therefore,  be  considered  rather  as  alterations  in  the  fluids,
or  in  that  which  gives  motion  (to  use  the  language  of  Hippocrates
— rd  vp/jtot'Ta,)  in  other  words,  nervous  diseases.


BOOK  FIRST.
DISEASES  OF  THE  BRONCHI.


CHAPTER  I.

OF  THE CATARRHAL  AND INFLAMMATORY  AFFECTIONS  Ob'  T II E
MUCOUS  MEMBRANE  OF  THE  BRONCHI.

The  inflammatory  affections  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the
bronchi,  may  be  divided  into  the  catarrhal,  the  plastic  or  crusty
and  the  ulcerous.

The  pulmonary  catarrhs  present  a  great  many  varieties  in  re-
spect of  the  nature  and  quantity  of  the  expectoration,  of  the  acute
or  chronic  state  of  the  disease,  or  of  the  accompanying  circum-
stances. I  shall  describe  them  in  the  following  order : — 1.  the
acute  mucous  catarrh  ;  2.  the  chronic  mucous  catarrh  ;  3.  the
pituitous  catarrh ;  4.  the  dry  catarrh  ;  and  shall  conclude  by
noticing  some  other  varieties  produced  by  the  difference  of  the
occasional  causes  and  other  accessory  circumstances.

I  prefer  the  term  catarrh  to  that  of  bronchitis,  employed  by
some  modern  authors,  because  catarrh  forms  the  link  which
unites  the  inflammations  to  the  congestions,  and  to  the  fluxes
purely  passive,  and  because  in  certain  cases  of  chronic  catarrh,
it  is  at  least  very  doubtful  whether  the  disease  be  really  an  in-
flammation or  not.


Sect.  I.  Of  the  acute  mucous  catarrh.

Pulmonary  catarrh  is  unquestionably  one  of  the  most  frequent
of  diseases,  insomuch  that  most  persons  are  affected  with  it,  in
some  degree  or  other,  almost  every  year.  Notwithstanding  this
frequency,  it  is  perhaps  less  understood  than  many  rarer  diseases.
In  most  cases,  it  occurs  in  so  slight  a  degree  as  scarcely  to  de-
range, in  any  respect,  the  functions  of  the  body,  or  to  prevent
the  individual  from  following  his  usual  occupations ;  occasion-
ally, however,  it  is  of  sufficient  violence  to  endanger  life.

Doubts  may  still  be  raised  respecting  the  nature  of  this  disease.


02


ACUTE MUCOUS  CATARRH.


If  in  some  cases  it  approaches  the  nature  of  croup,  a  complaint
eminently  inflammatory,  in  most  other  instances  it  exhibits  the
character  of  a  simple  congestion  merely,  and  in  some,  those  only
of  an  atonic  or  passive  congestion.  Its  causes  are  not  better  un-
derstood :  for,  to  notice  only  the  one  most  commonly  adduced,
it  seems  certain  that  the  change  from  heat  to  cold  does  not  pro-
duce it  more  effectually,  than  the  change  from  cold  to  heat.  The
effects  of  catarrh  are  equally  matter  of  dispute; — many  still  con-
sidering it,  with  the  ancients,  as  the  cause  of  phthisis,  while  the
result  of  modern  pathological  researches  appears,  to  others,  en-
tirely to  invalidate  this  opinion.

Anatomical  characters.  A  redness  more  or  less  marked,  and
at  most  a  slight  thickening  of  the  internal  membrane  of  the
bronchi,  are  the  only  traces  which  this  disease  leaves  in  the
affected  organs  ;  if  we  except  a  certain  quantity  of  phlegm  in
the  bronchi,  resembling  that  expectorated  by  the  patient.  The
redness  and  swelling  very  rarely  occupy  the  whole  bronchial
membrane,  even  of  qne  lung.  When  the  contrary  is  the  case,
the  disease  is  very  severe,  and  accompanied  by  a  violent  fever.
Most  commonly  there  is  congestion  only  in  certain  parts  of  the
membrane,  in  one  or  both  lungs,  even  when  there  is  much  fever
and  expectoration.  The  portions  which  are  red  and  swollen,
are  usually  more  consistent  than  natural ;  sometimes  they  are
somewhat  softer,  particularly  in  the  catarrhs  which  accompany
severe  fevers ;  and  occasionally,  the  degree  of  the  softening  is
equal  to  that  which  occurs  in  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  sto-
mach and  intestines,  in  certain  cases,  and  which  led  Hunter  to
fancy  that  this  membrane  is  sometimes  dissolved  or  digested,
after  death.  The  extent  and  intensity  of  the  redness  are  not
always  proportioned  to  the  violence  of  the  inflammation,  the
quantity  of  the  expectoration,  or  the  acuteness  of  the  case.
Thus,  in  the  catarrh,  whether  latent  or  not,  which  complicates
fevers,  we  find  the  membrane  swollen  and  of  a  livid  red  over
almost  its  whole  extent,  and  also  softened  here  and  there ;  while
in  the  idiopathic  disease,  even  when  very  acute,  it  exhibits  marks
of  inflammation  in  certain  points  only.*

The  pulmonary  catarrh  is  accompanied,  from  its  very  com-
mencement, with  a  marked  alteration  of  the  bronchial  secretion.
At  first  this  is  scantier  than  natural,  or  is  almost  totally  sup-
pressed :  in  the  latter  case  it  possesses  the  characters  which  we
will  hereafter  notice  when  treating  of  the  dry  catarrh.  In  a
short  time  it  becomes  thin,  transparent,  and  acrid,  or  salt  to  the
taste. Towards  the  end  of  this  second  period,  especially  if  this

»  It  deserves  notice,  in  this  place,  that  the  redness  and  softening  of  the  bronchial
membrane  ore  alwavs  the  more  marked  according  as  the  examination  is  remote  from
the  period  of  death,' and  the  decomposition  of  the  body  more  advanced. — Author.


ACUTE  MUCOUS  CATARRH.


G3


has  lasted  some  days,  the  expectoration  becomes  thicker  and
slightly  viscid,  without  at  all  losing  its  transparency;  and  in
certain  cases  entirely  resembles  raw  white  of  egg.  It  then  gra-
dually becomes  opaque,  and  assumes  a  whitish,  yellowish,  or
slightly  greenish  colour,  and  is  more  consistent,  but  is  still  viscid.
In  this  state  it  obstructs,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  the  bronchial
tubes,  particularly  those  of  a  small  or  middle  size,  so  as  to  im-
pede the  free  transmission  of  the  breath,  and  to  give  rise  to  the
mucous  rhonchus.  In  this  case,  the  respiration  is  suspended  in
the  portion  of  the  lungs  supplied  by  the  obstructed  bronchi,
until  the  phlegm  is  discharged.  The  quantity  and  consistence
of  the  secreted  mucus  vary  extremely.  In  some  cases  it  is  almost
as  solid  as  a  polypous  concretion.  M.  Andral  relates  two  cases
where  the  principal  branch  distributed  to  the  upper  lobe  was  ob-
structed by  concrete  mucus  of  this  kind  ;  and  in  one  of  these  it
extended  into  three  or  four  of  the  divisions  of  this  branch.*

There  exists  no  sign  capable  of  distinguishing  this  from  other
obstructions  of  the  bronchi.  In  the  two  cases  of  Andral,  there
was  sudden  dyspnoea,  and  death  within  twenty -four  hours;  but  it
appears  to  me  doubtful,  after  what  has  been  stated  and  what  we
shall  notice  hereafter,  of  the  slight  degree  of  inconvenience
arising  from  the  suspension  of  respiration,  in  even  a  large  extent
of  lung,  that  the  death  of  these  patients  was  owing  to  the  cause
mentioned.  I  am  the  more  confirmed  in  this  opinion  from  having
seen  cases  apparently  similar,  of  which  the  subjects  could  hardly
be  considered  as  indisposed.  The  following  is  a  case  of  this
kind :  A  man  forty  years  of  age,  and  subject  to  a  dry  catarrh
(which  was  almost  always  latent)  for  the  last  twenty  years,
and  which  had  only  given  occasion  during  all  this  time  to
two  or  three  fits  of  asthma,  was  seized,  in  the  winter  of  1821,
with  a  slight  acute  catarrh,  which  did  not  prevent  him  from
following  his  usual  occupation.  This  catarrh  was  at  first  dry,
and  attended  with  little  cough  or  dyspnoea.  After  eight
days  he  began  to  cough  rather  violently  every  morning,  with
the  feeling  as  if  something  was  lodged  about  the  root  of  the
right  lung  ;  corresponding  to  which  point,  about  the  inner  edge
of  the  scapula,  he  experienced  a  sense  of  great  heat.  The  fit
of  coughing  returned,  but  with  less  violence,  every  evening.
Things  went  on  in  this  way  for  four  or  five  days,  when,  during
a  violent  fit  of  coughing,  accompanied  with  nausea  and  a  great
flow  of  tears,  he  expectorated  an  immense  clot  of  mucus,  capable
of  filling  a  spoon,  and  weighing  more  than  half  an  ounce.  It
was  yellow,  opaque,  viscid,  unmixed  with  air,  and  of  a  middle
consistence  between  that  of  the  usual  mucous  sputa  and  of  false
membrane.  Immediately  after  its  discharge,  the  sense  of  warmth

*  Clinique  Medicale,  Vol.  II.  Obs.  xi.  and  xii.


64


ACUTE MUCOUS  CATARKH.


existing  in  the  point  mentioned,  changed  to  a  painful  heat,  which
lasted  nearly  all  day,  but  which  did  not  hinder  the  man  from
going  abroad.  For  several  days  after  ttris  he  expectorated
every  morning,  but  with  ease,  some  mucous  sputa  of  a  moderate
size  and  the  usual  consistence;  and  these  entirely  ceased  within
the  week.

In  the  different  characters  of  the  expectoration,  in  the  succes-
sive stages  of  the  disease,  we  recognize  the  source  of  the  principal
varieties  of  the  pulmonary  catarrh.  The  dry  catarrh  is  that
which  never  proceeds  beyond  the  first  stage ;  the  pituitous  is
that  which  stops  at  the  second ;  and  the  mucous  is  that  which,
after  passing  through  the  two  former,  persists  in  the  third.

Symptoms  and  progress.  The  pulmonary  catarrh  is  usually
preceded  by  coryza,  which  is  an  affection  precisely  similar  of  the
pituitary  membrane.  After  some  days,  or  perhaps  hours,  and,
in  most  cases,  just  as  the  stuffing  of  the  nostrils  begins  to  yield,
the  inflammation  reaches  the  air  passages.  Its  transmission  to
the  larynx  is  indicated  by  a  sense  of  uneasiness  and  irritation,  or
a  titillation  like  that  of  itching,  which  provokes  to  cough  ;  and
if  the  mucous  membrane  is  much  affected,  there  is  hoarseness,
and  occasionally  loss  of  voice.  When  the  inflammation  extends
to  the  bronchi,  there  is  sometimes  a  slight  pain,  more  commonly
a  sense  of  dryness  and  roughness,  behind  the  sternum  or  at  its
lower  extremity.  When  the  disease  is  very  severe,  there  is
greater,  sometimes  indeed  very  sharp,  though  transient  pain  ex-
tending over  the  whole  chest,  particularly  after  the  fits  of  cough-
ing. When  the  cough  is  violent,  the  patient  feels  also  pain  and
weakness  about  the  attachments  of  the  diaphragm,  along  the
borders  of  the  false  ribs,  and  in  the  back.

The  cough,  at  first  dry,  is  soon  accompanied  by  a  serous  ex-
pectoration, which  is  saltish  and  slightly  glutinous,  but  not  dis-
tinguishable from  the  saliva  with  which  it  is  intermixed.  This,
in  adults,  is  usually  intermixed  with  some  small  pearly  sputa
which  are  more  or  less  tinged  with  the  black  pulmonary  matter,
and  generally  softer  than  those  expectorated  in  the  dry  catarrh.
As  the  disease  advances,  the  expectoration  becomes  thicker,  and
more  yellow,  and  is  intermixed  with  particles  of  an  opaque
whitish  colour :  by  degrees  the  whole  becomes  opaque,  of  a  pale
yellow,  or  slightly  greenish  hue,  viscid,  enclosing  air  bubbles,
tasteless,  or  somewhat  saltish,  and  occasionally  marked  with
dots,  or  small  streaks  of  blood.  The  cough  returns  by  fits,  and
is  more  or  less  frequent  according  as  the  expectoration  is  copious
or  otherwise ;  it  is  particularly  troublesome  on  waking  in  the
morning,  and  sometimes  after  meals.  When  the  sputa  are  very
large,  they  frequently  leave,  after  expectoration,  a  dull  pain
about  the  root  of  the  bronchi,  indicative  of  the  place  whence
they  have  been  detached  by  the  efforts  of  coughing.  Sometimes,


ACUTE MUCOUS I'ATAlt  It  IT.  ()5

ns  the  complaint  of  the  lungs  begins  to  give  way,  an  analogous
affection  seizes  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  intestines  and  pro-
duces diarrhoea.*

In  the  greater  number  of  cases,  the  foregoing  are  the  whole  of
the  symptoms,  except  that  there  is  occasionally  a  slight  degree  of
fever  during  the  first  few  days:  this  is  most  perceptible  in  the
evening,  and  terminates  towards  morning  with  a  slight  moisture
on  the  skin,  and  a  lateritious  sediment  in  the  urine. This  secre-
tion also  sometimes  presents  a  copious  mucous  cloud  or  deposit ;
and  this  circumstance,  together  with  the  heat  experienced  in
i passing  the  urine,  would  seem  to  indicate  an  affection  (though  a
very  slight  one)  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  bladder,  of  the
j  :  same  kind  as  that  of  the  lungs. Saepius  etiam  in  hoc  stadio
I  !  morbi,  seminis  deperditiones  noctu  interveniunt.

If  the  disease  is  more  severe,  there  is  fever  constantly  present,
i  usually  accompanied  by  sweating,  and  also  dyspnoea.  This  state
I  ]  may  last  some  weeks ;  and  if  the  local  affection  is  so  extensive  as
!  to  occupy  the  whole  of  one  lung  and  part  of  the  other,  the  op-
•  ipression  of  the  chest  is  considerable. In  this  case,  the  fever  runs
1  high  and  may  assume  the  characters  of  continued  fever  of  the

•  severest  kind,  giving  rise  to  those  cerebral  and  intestinal  con-
.  gestions,  and  that  alteration  of  the  fluids,  which  usually  accom-

:  |  pany  these  affections. This  is  the  catarrhal  fever. When  it  is
( distinguished  by  paroxysms,  the  catarrhal  affection  appears  re-
newed with  each  of  these  ;  the  coryza,  tightness  of  the  chest,
and  serous  expectoration,  coming  on  with  the  fit,  and  the  mucous

•  sputa  re-appearing  at  its  termination.

Occasional  causes.  The  most  common  occasional  cause  is  the
-  sudden  or  long-continued  impression  of  cold  when  the  body  is
i  warm.  The  reverse  of  this,  however,  is  also  a  frequent  cause,
(especially  in  spring.  This  effect  of  change  of  temperature  is
i  much  more  marked  in  persons  accustomed  to  a  sedentary  and

comfortable  or  luxurious  mode  of  living  :  as  we  see  them  take
v  cold  at  their  own  fire-sides,  and  even  in  their  beds,  much  more
!  frequently  than  the  labouring  classes  who  are  accustomed  to
i  work  in  the  open  air.  The  inhalation  of  acrid  fumes,  particu-
1  larly  those  of  chlorine,  vinegar,  and  other  acids,  sometimes  gives
i  rise  to  pulmonary  catarrh  ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the  disease,
<  when  produced  in  this  manner,  is  usually  slight,  aud  of  much

shorter  duration  than  when  otherwise  excited.

Pathognomonic  signs.  There  are  none  of  the  symptoms  above

detailed  which  can  be  considered  as  pathognomonic  of  the  dis-

*  This  tendency  of  catarrh  always  to  descend  had  not  escaped  the  notice  of  the
ancients,  and  no  doubt  gave  occasion  to  its  name — from  pew  jluo  and  x«T«  deorsum.

•  —Author.

This  is  a  strained  interpretation.  The  nomenclators  of  the  disease,  no  doubt,
i  were  satisfied  with  the  observation  of  the  discharge  flowing  downwards  from  the  head
(  or  nose. — Transl.

F


66


ACUTE MUCOUS  CATARRH.


ease.  Cough  is  common  to  almost  all  diseases  of  the  lungs.  The
expectoration  is  less  equivocal,  yet  is  insufficient  to  distinguish
pulmonary  catarrh  from  certain  cases  of  peripneumony,  pleurisy,
or  phthisis.  The  other  symptoms  may  be  met  with  in  almost
all  diseases.  Auscultation,  however,  either  singly  or  conjoined
with  percussion,  furnishes  us  with  several  signs  sufficient  not
merely  to  characterize  the  disease,  but  to  point  out  its  actual
severity,  and  to  discriminate  it  from  all  others.

When  the  catarrh  is  simple,  however  violent  it  may  be,  per-
cussion yields  every  where  the  natural  sound.  At  the  invasion
of  the  disease,  when  there  is  only  coryza,  with  hardly  any  cough,
or  with  merely  a  slight  irritation  in  the  fauces,  the  stethoscope
applied  to  the  chest  indicates,  even  in  this  stage,  a  rhonchus
which  is  often  very  loud.  This  rhonchus  is  usually  sonorous
and  deep,  (sonore-grave,)  but  sometimes  sibilous;  its  precise  seat
being  indicated  by  the  attendant  vibration.  When  the  rhonchus
is  very  loud,  it  may  be  heard  (but  less  distinctly  and  without
any  accompanying  vibration)  at  a  considerable  distance  from  its
site :  and  in  this  case,  even  though  possessing  the  deepest  or
gravest  tone  in  its  proper  site,  when  examined  at  the  remotest
point  where  it  can  be  heard,  it  seems  to  become  sharper  and
somewhat  like  the  sibilous  rhonchus.

The  rhonchus  is  the  more  sonorous  and  flatter  in  proportion
as  the  mucous  membrane  is  more  tumefied  and  its  secretion
scanty.  When  so  strong  as  to  resemble  the  prolonged  scrape  of
the  bow  on  a  large  violoncello-string,  or  the  note  of  the  wood-
pigeon,  there  are  usually  redness  and  swelling  of  the  membrane
at  the  bifurcation  of  some  of  the  principal  bronchi.  As  the
disease  advances,  and  the  mucous  secretion  increases,  the  sound'
gradually  assumes  the  characters  of  the  guggling  or  mucous
rhonchus,  formerly  described.

Bv  means  of  this  sign  we  can  readily  ascertain  the  site  and
extent  of  the  disease.  If  this  is  only  partial,  as  is  usually  the
case,  the  rhonchus  is  equally  partial.  The  knowledge  of  this
fact  is  very  important,  as  the  danger  of  the  disease  is  always
proportioned  to  the  extensiveness  of  the  local  affection.  When
the  rhonchus  exists  in  the  whole  of  one  lung,  or  in  the  greater
part  of  both,  the  disease  is  always  severe  ;  when  it  exists  over  the
whole  of  both,  (which  is  only  the  case  when  catarrh  supervenes
to  a  severe  idiopathic  fever,)  death  almost  always  follows,  except
in  very  early  age.  When  the  disease  is  slight  and  confined  to  a
small  portion  of  the  membrane,  the  mucous  rhonchus  only  exists
in  the  morning  previously  to  expectoration.

One  of  the  most  remarkable  things  attending  the  stethoscopic
exploration  of  pulmonary  catarrh,  is  the  occasional  suspension  of
the  respiration  in  the  affected  part.  This,  which  may  be  con-
sidered as  pathognomonic  of  the  disease,  frequently  comes  on  all
at  once,  and  passes  off  in  like  manner,  after  coughing  or  expecto-


ACUTE MUCOUS  CATAKKH.


67


ration.  It  is  occasioned  by  the  temporary  obstruction  of  one  of
the  bronchial  tubes  by  the  mucus  contained  in  it.  Sometimes
the  respiration  is  not  entirely  suspended,  but  only  greatly  dimi-
nished, so  as  to  be  scarcely  heard,  except  by  means  of  a  slight
mucous  or  obscure  sibilous  rhonchus,  which  is  now  and  then  per-
ceptible. This  rhonchus  seems  formed  by  as  small  bubbles  as
those  of  the  crepitous,  only  they  are  more  isolated,  and  evidently
produced  by  a  more  glutinous  fluid  ;  and  now  and  then  they
give  a  slight  click,  as  of  a  valve.*  This  modified  suspension
of  respiration  is  occasioned  by  the  intumescence  of  the  inner
membrane  of  the  smaller  bronchi.  It  is  necessary  to  remark,
that  even  in  the  most  complete  suspension  of  respiration  from  the
cause  above  mentioned,  the  sound  is  rather  masked  or  suffocated,
than  totally  extinct,  as  in  peripneumony.  Experience  alone  can
enable  us  to  make  the  distinction  between  these  two  negative
sensations.  This  suspension  of  the  respiration  might  readily
mislead  an  inattentive  observer,  and  induce  the  belief  of  hepati-
zation of  the  lung  or  effusion  into  the  pleura:  but  percussion
removes  at  once  all  doubt,  by  eliciting,  in  the  case  of  catarrh,
the  natural  sound  from  the  part  destitute  of  respiration.  It  is
indeed  true,  that  this  circumstance  will  not  distinguish  this  dis-
ease from  pneumo-thorax  and  emphysema  of  the  lungs ;  but
we  shall  hereafter  find  sufficient  distinctive  signs  for  these  dis-
eases also.-f*

Treatment.  Although  this  disease  consists  in  an  inflamma-
tion of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  lungs,  bleeding  is  rarely
useful  in  it,  except  in  very  robust  subjects,  or  where  the  symp-
toms are  so  severe  as  to  threaten  peripneumony,  or  where  there
is  blood  in  the  expectoration.  Accordingly,  this  measure,  with  the
exception  just  named,  has  always  been  rejected  by  good  practition-
ers, as  rendering  the  disease  of  longer  duration,  and  as  diminish-
ing and  sometimes  checking  the  expectoration.  Leeching  has  the
advantages  and  disadvantages  of  venesection,  only  in  a  less  degree.
Cupping  is  in  general  more  useful.  By  using  many  glasses,  and  yet
taking  away  only  a  small  quantity  of  blood  at  once,  and,  more  par-
ticularly, by  keeping  the  glasses  applied  for  a  considerable  time,
so  that  the  tumefaction  produced  by  them  does  not  too  speedily
subside,  we  frequently  obtain,  in  the  severer  cases,  marked  relief

*  It  is  this  obscure  mucous  rhonchus  which  has  led  some  persons  to  believe  that
the  crepitous  rhonchus  was  not  confined  exclusively  to  pneumonia.  It  is,  however,
proper  to  remark,  that  a  very  acute  pulmonary  catarrh  affecting  the  minutest  bronchi,
is  very  nearly  allied  to  pneumonia,  and  it  is  reasonable  that  there  should  be  a
corresponding  approximation  of  the  characters  of  the  sounds  in  the  two  cases  ;  still
the  two  rhonchi  must  not  be  confounded. — (M.  L.)

t  'I  be  partial  suspension  of  the  respirary  sound  in  pulmonary  catarrh  is  always
momentary.  Most  commonly  if  we  keep  our  stethoscope  on  the  same  spot  for  a
minute  or  two,  we  shall  find  the  respiration,  which  had  previously  been  weak  or
almost  extinct,  become  all  at  once  puerile,  and  vice  versa.  The  same  is  true  of  the
rhonchus,  which  is  found  to  change  its  character  audits  site  every  instant,  becoming,
by  turns,  sonorous,  sibilous,  mucous,  and  this  latter  varying  in  its  peculiar  characters.
This  variableness  of  the  auscultatory  phenomena  is  strikingly  characterist  c  of  pul-
monary catarrh. — (M.  L.)

F  2


(J8


ACUTE MUCOUS  CATARRH.


of  the  oppression  and  other  symptoms.  Blisters  are  not  so  bene-
ficial. Sometimes  they  are  hurtful,  producing  an  increase  of
fever,  and  augmenting  the  bronchial  congestion  :  this  is  more
especially  the  case  when  they  are  applied  during  the  acute  stage,
and  to  the  chest.  When  the  disease  has  been  of  some  conti-
nuance, and  there  seems  reason  to  apprehend  its  becoming
chronic,  or  if  it  be  supposed  to  be  grafted  on  a  latent  tubercu-
lous state  of  the  lungs, — in  either  of  these  cases  a  blister  to  the
arm  may  be  useful,  particularly  if  the  discharge  is  kept  up  for
some  time.  In  the  case  of  females,  it  is  in  general  preferable  to
apply  the  blister  to  the  thigh,  as  being  less  apt  to  occasion  sup-
pression of  the  catamenia  in  this  situation.  Emetic  medicines
have  been  much  employed  in  this  disease,  more  particularly
ipecacuan  and  the  emetic  tartar.  They  have  been  had  recourse
to  either  with  the  view  of  producing  vomiting  or  nausea,  or  given
in  doses  so  small  as  not  to  occasion  any  perceptible  effect,  but
with  the  intention  of  favouring  expectoration,  or  determining  to
the  skin.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  vomiting  is  often  beneficial
in  the  outset  of  catarrh,  provided  no  inflammatory  state  of  the
stomach  exists.  It  is  also  necessary  where  the  disease  is  com-
plicated with  a  bilious  affection,  as  is  commonly  the  case  in
seasons  when  the  latter  class  of  disorders  prevails.  The  tendency
of  vomiting  to  produce  moisture  on  the  skin,  and  to  facilitate
expectoration,  is  well  known:  but  the  beneficial  influence  of  the
same  medicines  given  as  incisives,  that  is,  in  small  doses, — or  of
the  other  simple  nauseating  preparations  occasionally  substituted
for  these,  such  as  the  oxymel  of  squills,  kermes  mineral,  &c. — is
much  less  certain.  The  efficacy  of  emetics  is  much  greater  in
the  case  of  children,  who  are  in  general  found  to  bear  this  kind
of  treatment  better  than  adults.  To  the  former  they  may  be
given,  without  inconvenience,  every  other  day,  or  even  every  day
for  a  week  or  more ;  and  this  practice  affords  the  best  guard
against  the  catarrhs  of  early  infancy  degenerating  into  the  hoop-
ing cough.

It  is  usual  to  prescribe  through  the  whole  course  of  catarrh,
various  emollient  drinks,  of  which  sugar,  gum,  and  infusions  of
the  most  inert  plants,  form  the  basis;  and  as  most  cases  of
the  disease  are  only  slight,  these  constitute,  in  general,  the  sole
treatment :  or  it  may  be  said  there  is  no  treatment ;  since  these
substances,  rather  alimentary  than  medicinal,  are  in  fact  mere
pretexts  of  the  expectant  method.  This  truth  is  known  to  the
vulgar,  and  is  well  embodied  in  the  adage,  "  a  cold  well  nursed
lasts  forty  days,  and  a  cold  not  nursed  lasts  six  weeks."  And
even  this  is  perhaps  according  more  to  the  treatment  than  it
deserves  :  but  in  general  the  disease  is  too  slight  to  require  one
more  energetic.

There  remains  to  be  noticed  another  mode  of  treating  catarrh,
equally  popular,  and  practised  from  time  immemorial,  although


ACUTE MUCOUS  CATAKK1I.


0*9


less  countenanced  by  physicians,  probably  from  apprehension  of
its  ill  effects, — I  mean  the  use  of  spirituous  preparations,  such
as  warm  wine,  burnt  brandy,  and  punch.  This  plan  is  unques-
tionably eminently  successful  in  a  vast  number  of  cases.  By
it  we  frequently  observe  a  cold,  which  seemed  to  threaten  great
severity,  cured  all  at  once  in  the  course  of  a  single  night.  The
fear  of  converting  catarrh  into  peripneumony,  is  no  doubt  what
prevents  this  plan  being  commonly  adopted  by  practitioners ;
and  I  must  confess  that  the  same  reasons  influenced  my  own
conduct  formerly.  My  experience,  however,  has  given  no
countenance  to  such  apprehensions ;  and  I  accordingly  now
always  employ  this  kind  of  treatment  where  there  exists  no
clear  contra-indications,  such  as  an  inflammation  of  the  stomach  or
intestines,  or  a  strongly-marked  sanguine  constitution,  or  one
easily  excited  by  spirits,  or  a  disease  so  violent  as  to  give  reason
to  apprehend  the  supervention  of  peripneumony  or  croup.  My
plan  is  to  give  to  the  patient  at  bed-time,  an  ounce  or  an  ounce
and  a  half  of  good  brandy  in  double  the  quantity  of  an  infusion
of  violets,  made  very  hot  and  sweetened  with  syrup  of  marsh
mallows.  This  dose  is  usually  followed  by  a  copious  perspira-
tion towards  morning ;  but  frequently  the  disorder  is  cured
without  any  perspiration.  If  this  is  not  the  case,  the  same  plan
is  followed  for  several  nights  successively.  It  is  particularly
in  the  very  onset  of  catarrh  that  this  treatment  is  most  suc-
cessful ;  it  is  much  less  so  after  the  supervention  of  the  loose
expectoration.*

I  do  not  believe  that  this  stimulant  treatment  can  be  safely
applied  (as  it  is  by  the  common  people)  to  diarrhoea,  even  when
arising  from  cold,  and  appearing  to  differ  from  pulmonary  catarrh
only  in  its  seat ;  since  I  have  witnessed  the  supervention  of  peri-
tonitis, severe  dysentery,  and  arachnitis,  to  fluxes  suppressed  by
the  use  of  hot  wine  and  spices.  This  imprudent  extension  of  a
useful  practice  has  originated  in  the  expectation  of  curing,  by
producing  sweat,  all  other  diseases,  as  well  as  catarrh,  which
manifestly  originate  from  cold ;  a  theory,  by  the  way,  derived
from  high  medical  authority  (Van  Helmont) ;  as  is  the  case
with  all  the  medical  prejudices  and  errors  current  among  the
vulgar.f

*  Or  opium  may  be  substituted  for  alcohol.  An  ounce  of  syrup  of  poppies  or  of
opium,  taken  at  one  dose  at  bed-time,  in  a  cup  of  very  hot  tisan,  excites  perspiration
even  more  certainly  than  the  author's  punch,  and  has  the  advantage,  moreover,  of
soothing  the  cough  and  promoting  sleep.  This  remedy,  however,  like  punch,  must
be  used  with  much  caution  and  reserve. — (M.  L.)

t  A  catarrh,  or  common  cold,  as  it  is  called,  is  of  such  every  day  occurrence,  and
in  general  of  such  moderate  severity,  as  seldom  to  come  within  the  pale  of  formal
medical  treatment.  The  very  tolerable  amount  of  its  evils,  and  the  confident  ex-
pectation of  being  speedily  freed  even  from  these,  by  the  simple  processes  of  nature,
no  doubt  render  it  frequently  of  long  duration,  when  it  might  be  removed  very
speedily,  and  occasion  many  remedial  measures  of  well-known  efficacy  to  fall  into
neglect.  Of  this  kind  is  the  inhalation  of  the  steam  of  warm  water,  conjoined  with
tbe  internal  use  of  diaphoretics  and  the  application  of  steam  to  the  surface  of  the


70


CHRONIC MUCOUS  CATARRH.


Sect.  II. Of  the  chronic  mucous  catarrh.

The  anatomical  characters  of  the  chronic  mucous  catarrh,  are
nearly  the  same  as  those  of  the  acute,  insomuch  that,  in  the
majority  of  cases,  it  would  not  be  possible  to  distinguish  the  two
diseases  in  the  dead  body.  It  may,  however,  be  observed,  that,
in  the  chronic  affection,  the  membrane  is  more  frequently  of  a
violet  colour,  and  irregularly  marked  here  and  there  with  spots
of  a  paler  or  darker  hue,  while  in  the  acute,  the  red  is  brighter,
and  verging  more  towards  purple  or  brown.  But  these  shades
of  difference  are  frequently  inappreciable,  owing  to  the  vascular
congestion  occurring  after  death,  and  which  always  exists  in  the
lungs,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree.  And  it  is  by  no  means  rare,
particularly  in  old  subjects,  and  in  catarrhs  of  long  standing,  to
find  the  membrane  very  pale  throughout,  or  of  a  yellowish  colour,
with  a  scarcely  perceptible  shade  of  red.*  The  chronic  catarrh
is  sometimes  accompanied  with  a  general  or  partial  dilatation  of
the  bronchi, — an  affection  which  I  shall  notice  hereafter.

The  expectoration  in  the  chronic  disease  is  sometimes  pre-
cisely similar  to  that  of  the  latter  stage  of  the  acute ;  but  most
commonly  it  is  less  glutinous,  more  opaque,  and  nearly  puriform.
Occasionally,  it  is  of  a  dirty  greyish  or  greenish  hue,  from  an
admixture  of  the  black  pulmonary  matter ;  and  in  this  state  it
cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  expectoration  of  phthisis.
Sometimes,  but  rarely,  it  is  tinged  with  blood,  an  appearance
which  generally  indicates  either  a  local  fullness  of  the  vessels,  of
little  consequence,  or  the  supervention  of  the  acute  to  a  chronic
affection.  It  is  usually  inodorous,  but  sometimes  becomes  more
or  less  fetid,  and  assumes  the  smell  as  well  as  the  other  physical

body,  formerly  recommended  by  Mr.  Mudge,  and  described  in  his  very  excellent
Essay,  entitled  "A  Radical  and  Expeditious  Cure  for  a  recent  Catarrhous  Cough,"
2nd  Ed.  London,  1779.  Whoever  will  be  at  the  expense  of  procuring  his  Inhaler,
and  will  take  the  trouble  to  use  his  process  at  the  exact  period  of  the  disease,  (t.  e.
at  the  very  onset,)  and  precisely  in  the  manner  recommended  by  him,  at  page  134
et  seq.,  will,  I  doubt  not,  find  therein  a  remedy  at  least  as  efficacious  and  speedy,
and  certainly  more  safe,  than  the  spirituous  treatment  of  our  author.  But,  perhaps,
after  all,  for  those  who  have  leisure  for  such  luxurious  medication,  and  who  do  not
consider  such  a  restrictive  mode  of  cure  as  worse  than  the  disease,  the  safest  and
surest  remedy  is  to  lie  in  bed  and  live  on  slops  for  a  day  or  two.

A  mode  of  treatment  of  recent  catarrh,  of  a  somewhat  novel  character,  has  lately
been  promulgated  by  Dr.  Charles  Williams,  in  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Practical  Medi-
cine (vol  i.  Art.  Coryza).  This  consists  essentially  inf/ie  total  abstinence  from  liquids.
Dr.  Williams  speaks  most  confidently  of  the  efficacy  of  this  plan,  and  1  can  myself
corroborate  his  statements  as  far  as  a  few  trials  in  my  own  case  go.  "  To  those
(says  Dr.  Williams)  who  have  the  resolution  to  bear  the  feeling  of  thirst  for  thirty-
six  or  forty-eight  hours,  we  can  promise  a  pretty  certain  and  complete  riddance  of
their  colds,  and,  what  is  perhaps  more  important,  a  prevention  of  those  coughs  which
commonly  succeed  to  them.  Nor  is  the  suffering  from  thirst  nearly  so  great  as
might  be  expected." {Loc.  Cit.  p.  481.)— Transl.

*  Bayle,  Rccherches  snr  la  Vhthisie,  obs.  49;  Andral,  Clin.  Med.  t.  ii.  obs.  16.


CHRON'IC MUCOUS (.'AT  A  It  It  II.


71


qualities  of  the  different  kinds  of  pus:  having,  at  one  time,  the
smell  of  good  pus  from  a  recent  wound ;  at  another,  the  strong
odour  of  the  contents  of  a  large  abscess,  and  occasionally  ap-
proaching the  gangrenous  fetor.  After  a  period,  this  bad  smell
disappears,  and  may  return  perhaps  several  times  in  the  course
of  the  year.  The  quantity  of  the  expectoration  is  more  variable
from  day  to  day,  but  almost  always  greater  than  in  the  acute
disease.  It  not  unfrequently  amounts  to  one  or  two  pounds  in
the  course  of  twenty-four  hours.  It  is  increased  on  every  fresh
attack  of  cold;  or  rather  the  mucous  secretion  is  at  first  less,
with  more  watery  discharge,  and  then,  after  a  few  days,  becomes
more  copious.  In  some  rare  instances  it  becomes  all  at  once,
and  usually  without  obvious  cause,  so  very  abundant  and  puri-
form,  as  to  lead  to  the  suspicion  of  a  vomica  being  opened  into
the  bronchi;  a  mistake  which  is  more  likely  to  happen  on  ac-
count of  the  oppression  which  usually  precedes  and  accompanies
this  state.  *  The  oppression,  however,  is  owing  merely  to  a
great  increase  of  the  morbid  secretion.  Nevertheless,  when  the
expectoration  happens  to  be  difficult,  from  weakness  or  other-
wise, the  case  just  mentioned  forms  one  of  the  varieties  of  the
suffocative  catarrh.*

Haemoptysis  of  any  degree  of  severity,  is  of  much  rarer  oc-
currence in  the  simple  chronic  catarrh  than  in  persons  with  no
apparent  disease.

The  disease  I  have  been  describing  is  very  common  in  old
persons,  and  is  indeed  the  most  frequent  infirmity  of  age.  It  is
not  very  rare  even  in  infancy,  particularly  after  hooping-cough ;
and  in  this  case  it  sometimes  persists  through  the  course  of  a
long  life.  It  seldom  begins  in  the  middle  period  of  life.  The
repulsion  of  cutaneous  eruptions,  acute  or  chronic,  and  the
suppression  of  an  habitual  discharge,  have  frequently  a  decided
influence  in  developing  this  disorder,  as  well  as  many  others.

Symptoms  and  progress.  This  disease  in  most  instances  suc-
ceeds a  severe  attack  of  the  acute  catarrh  ; — the  cough  and  ex-
pectoration continuing  after  the  fever  has  altogether  subsided;
or  the  fever  continuing  in  so  slight  a  degree  as  only  to  be  per-
ceptible towards  evening,  or  merely  during  an  increase  of  the
complaint.  The  appetite  and  strength  return,  but  the  patient
commonly  loses  a  little  flesh,  and  remains  paler  than  usual.
During  repose,  there  is  no  oppression  on  the  chest,  but  exercise
soon  brings  on  dyspnoea.  Sometimes  after  continuing  several
months,  or  even  one  or  two  years,  the  disease  gradually  and
entirely  passes  off*.  This  more  particularly  happens  in  young
subjects.  More  commonly,  however,  the  cough  and  expectora-
tion diminish,  or  entirely  disappear,  during  summer  only,  and
re-appear  in  winter. In  this  case,  in  the  intervals  of  obvious

*  A  remarkable  case  of  this  kind  is  given  by  Andral,  torn.  ii.  obs.  17. — Author.


72


(.HKONIC  MUCOUS  CATAKIIH.


disease,  there  still  remains  that  variety  of  the  complaint  which
will  afterwards  be  described  under  the  name  of  the  dry  latent
catarrh. The  return  of  the  complaint  in  winter  is  frequently
attended  by  fever,  particularly  if  the  expectoration  is  copious ;
and  after  several  renewals  of  this  kind,  it  terminates  in  a  con-
tinued mucous  catarrh. In  this  state,  the  pulse  and  heat  of
skin  remain  for  the  most  part  natural,  notwithstanding  the  great
expectoration  which  weakens  and  emaciates  the  patient.  In
some  rare  cases,  hectic  fever  comes  on,  with  rapid  emaciation,
and  the  disease  terminates  fatally  with  all  the  usual  symptoms  of
phthisis  pulmonalis.* In  fact,  the  most  perfect  similarity  exists
between  the  two  diseases,  as  far  as  regards  the  expectoration,  the
emaciation,  and  all  the  other  general  symptoms.  Percussionin  this
case  cannot  remove  the  difficulty,  as  the  chest  sounds  quite  well
in  many  consumptive  patients. The  indications  afforded  by  the
stethoscope  are  much  more  to  be  depended  on. In  such  cases,
if,  upon  properly  examining  a  patient,  at  different  hours,  and  for
a  certain  length  of  time,  we  find  neither  pectoriloquy,  nor  the
guggling  produced  by  softened  tubercles,  nor  the  cavernous
respiration  of  tuberculous  excavations ;  nor  the  permanent  ab-
sence of  respiration  in  certain  places  from  tuberculous  indurations
of  some  extent,  we  have  a  strong  presumption  that  the  disease
is  merely  chronic  catarrh  ;  and  if  the  same  results  uniformly
present  themselves  after  an  attendance  of  some  time,  (say  two  or
three  months,)  our  presumption  is  converted  into  certainty.  In
these  cases,  the  stethoscope  gives  no  other  signs  than  a  mucous
rhonchus,  sometimes  indeed  pretty  loud  and  abundant,  but  very
rarely  continuous,  and  still  more  rarely  general  over  the  chest.
Very  commonly  we  can  hear  distinctly  the  round  of  respiration
notwithstanding  the  rhonchus;  and  there  is  hardly  ever  ob-
served  that  total  suspension  of  respiration  which  occurs  in  the
acute  disease,  unless  indeed  there  should  happen  to  co-exist
with  the  chronic,  a  dry  or  pituitous  catarrh,  with  intense  con-
gestion of  some  portion  of  the  mucous  membrane. It  even
frequently  happens  that  the  respiration  becomes  puerile  over
nearly  the  whole  lungs,  in  these  chronic  catarrhs,  while,  at  the
same  time,  there  exists  a  continual  dyspnoea,  occasionally  ag-
gravated to  violent  paroxysms,  even  in  a  state  of  quietude.  This
constitutes  the  humid  asthma  of  practitioners.

Treatment.  The  treatment  most  in  use  for  this  complaint,
particularly  that  of  old  persons,  consists  in  the  establishment  of  a
permanent  drain  in  the  arm  or  thigh,  and  the  use  of  certain  aro-
matic bitters,  or  of  other  plants  nearly  inert,  such  as  hyssop,  hore-
hound,  ground-ivy,  sage,  veronica,  &c.  If  the  expectoration is
suspended,  the  oxymel  of  squills,  or  kermes  mineral,  in  small
doses,  is  prescribed  ;  and  if  the  cough  becomes  hard,  and  returns

*  See  Bayle'a  Rechcrches  snr  la  Phthisic,  p*.T$,  and  cases  18  and  49. — Author.


CHItONIC MCUOUS  CATARIUT.


by  fits,  some  slight  paregorics  are  ordered.  This  kind  of  treat-
ment is  simply  expectant;  although  it  is  applied  to  a  chronic
disease,  which  far  from  tending  naturally  towards  a  cure,  grows
worse  in  proportion  as  it  becomes  ancient,  and  as  the  age  of  the
subject  increases.

It  must  be  admitted  that  there  are  cases,  in  which  the  long
continuance  of  the  disease,  and  the  age  and  debility  of  the  pa-
tients, afford  slight  grounds  for  hope  from  a  more  active  mode
of  treatment ;  but  there  are  many  others,  on  the  other  hand,  in
which  the  practitioner  too  soon  despairs  of  success,  and  conse-
quently renounces  the  use  of  means  which  are  really  efficacious.
Among  these  means,  there  is  no  one  more  frequently  useful  than
emetics,  repeated  according  to  the  patient's  strength  and  his
power  of  supporting  their  action.  I  have  cured,  in  this  way,
catarrhs  of  very  long  standing  in  old  persons,  and  still  more  in
adults  and  children.  In  the  case  of  an  old  lady  of  eighty-five,
who  had  laboured  under  a  chronic  catarrh  for  eighteen  months,
with  an  expectoration  amounting  to  two  pounds  daily,  I  pre-
scribed fifteen  emetics  in  one  month,  and  with  complete  success,
as  the  patient  lived  eight  years  afterwards  free  from  the  com-
plaint. After  the  use  of  emetics,  tonics  given  in  small  doses  are
often  useful,  such  as  the  bark,  and  other  bitters,  and  prepara-
tions of  iron  :  these  frequently  carry  off'  the  remains  of  the  com-
plaint entirely,  or  greatly  moderate  it.

Spirituous  preparations,  and  particularly  punch,  sometimes
succeed  perfectly  in  the  same  case ;  but  it  is  necessary  to  con-
tinue their  use  much  longer  than  in  the  acute  disease.  The  bal-
sams are  frequently  equally  beneficial,  when  the  stomach  will
bear  them  ;  but  they  must  be  given  in  a  larger  dose  than  is  usual.
The  balsams  of  tolu  and  capaiba,  as  also  turpentine,  should  be
given  in  a  dose  of  from  eighteen  to  thirty-six  drops  daily,  and
sometimes  in  still  larger  quantity.  The  internal  use  of  tar  water,
as  the  ordinary  drink,  has  sometimes  proved  successful,  as  has
also  the  inhalation  of  the  fumes  of  this  substance  either  simply
or  mixed  with  water,  diffused  in  the  patient's  chamber.*

*  The  attention  of  practitioners  in  this  country  was,  a  few  years  since,  more  par-
ticularly called  to  the  use  of  the  balsam  of  copaiba,  in  chronic  inflammation  of  the
bronchi,  by  Dr.  Armstrong.  In  his  work  on  Scarlet  Fever,  Seepage  271,  2nd.  ed.
he  speaks  highly  of  its  beneficial  effects  in  this  disease.  He  says,  that  it  seems  to
exert  a  specific  influence  over  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  bronchi,  obviously  and
quickly  lessening,  in  many  cases,  the  expectoration,  cough,  and  irritation.  He
liowever  recommends  it  in  much  larger  quantity  than  even  our  author,  viz.  in  doses
of  about  thirty  or  forty  drops  three  times  a  day,  and  gradually  increased  afterwards,
until  sixty,  eighty,  or  more  drops  be  taken  at  each  time.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  1
have  not  derived  the  same  benefit  from  the  use  of  this  medicine.  My  own  expe-
rience accords  more  nearly  with  that  of  Dr.  Hastings,  as  stated  in  his  work  on  the
inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  lungs,  page  304.  "  Whenever  there
is  much  fever,"  says  Dr.  II.,  "  it  appears  to  be  increased  by  this  remedy,  and  il
does  not  always  allay  the  cough  or  alter  the  oxpectoration. It  frequently  disagrees


74


CHRONIC MUCOUS  CATARRH.


When  an  acute  catarrh  supervenes  to  the  chronic  disease,  we
are  sometimes  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  means  already  no-

with  the  stomach,  when  given  in  sufficient  doses  to  benefit  the  pectoral  symptoms,
and  sometimes  a  diarrhoea  comes  on  under  its  use.  Occasionally  it  produces  all
these  troublesome  effects  without  relieving  the  cough."  A  circumstance,  not  much
noticed  by  these  writers,  and  which  renders  all  such  plans  of  treatment  nugatory,
is  the  frequent  co-existence,  especially  in  old  persons,  of  a  similar  condition  of  the
mucous  membrane  of  the  upper  portions  of  the  alimentary  canal.  In  this  complica-
tion every  thing  stimulating,  whether  as  food  or  medicine,  is  decidedly  injurious  ;
while  the  most  remarkable  benefit  is  derived  from  such  mild  regimen  as  the  obvious
condition  of  the  membrane  indicates.  This  is  not  the  place  to  inquire  into  the
rationale  of  symptoms  in  such  cases,  or  whether  the  affection  of  either  of  the  two
portions  of  the  same  membrane — the  pulmonary  and  gastric — can  be  considered  as
the  cause  of  the  other  :  it  is  sufficient  for  our  present  purpose  to  be  assured  of  the
fact  of  the  co-existence  ;  and  it  is  highly  necessary  to  keep  it  in  mind  in  our  prac-
tice. See  Dr.  Fothergill's  paper  on  the  use  of  balsams,  vol.  ii.  p.  115.

The  inhalation  of  watery,  and  also  resinous  vapours  in  diseases  of  the  lungs  is  of
very  ancient  date.  In  Bennet's  Theatrum  Tabidorum,  we  find  an  account  of  cases
treated  in  this  manner,  together  with  delineations  of  the  fumigating  apparatus,  and
receipts  for  the  materials  used.  See  chap,  xxviii.  De  halituum  et  suffituum  admi-
nistratione.  Mr.  Mudge,  in  the  work  formerly  quoted,  page  80,  mentions  a  case  of
apparent  consumption,  wherein  much  benefit  was  derived  from  the  inhalation  of  the
vapour  of  resin.  But  it  is  to  Sir  Alexander  Crichton  that  we  are  indebted  for  the
introduction  of  the  vapour  of  boiling  tar  as  a  remedial  agent.  This  author  first  called
the  attention  of  English  practitioners  to  the  employment  of  tar  vapour  as  a  cure  for
consumption,  in  a  small  pamphlet,  published  in  1817;  and  endeavoured  to  impress
the  practice  more  particularly  on  their  notice  by  a  larger  work  "  On  the  treatment
and  cure  of  several  varieties  of  consumption,"  in  1823.  In  our  present  state  of  im-
proved knowledge  respecting  the  pathology  of  phthisis  pulmonalis,  it  is  hardly
necessary  to  say  that  the  proposal  to  cure  this  disease  by  such  means  would  now
appear  idle.  It  no  doubt  originated  from  false  and  fallacious  experience,  supported
by  the  well  known  difficulty  of  discriminating  certain  cases  of  chronic  bronchitis
from  true  phthisis.  A  severe  examination  of  all  the  trials  made  with  this  agent,  in-
cluding even  those  recorded  by  Sir  A.  Crichton  himself,  lead  to  the  conclusion  that
it  is  in  chronic  catarrh  or  bronchitis  only,  that  this  practice  has  been  at  all  bene-
ficial. Its  indiscriminate  employment  has  proved  it,  as  might  have  been  anticipated
to  be,  injurious  in  true  phthisis,  while  its  limited  use  has  certainly  been  bene-
ficial in  many  cases  of  the  chronic  mucous  catarrh.  Dr.  Hastings  says,  that  in
this  disease  it  seems  to  assist  other  remedies  in  restoring  the  mucous  membrane  to
its  healthy  secretion  ;  and  in  some  very  obstinate  cases  the  inhalation  alone  has  ap-
peared to  remove  the  diseased  action  in  it.  He  adds,  however,  that  in  other  in-
stances the  inflammation  has  been  aggravated  and  rendered  more  acute  by  it.  He
sums  up  the  result  of  his  experience  of  this  remedy  in  chronic  catarrh  in  the  follow-
ing words  :  "  When  the  habit  of  body  is  irritable,  and  the  inflammation  at  all  active,
the  symptoms  are  increased  by  its  use  ;  hut  if  the  disease  has  been  long  in  a  chronic
state,  and  the  habit  of  body  be  not  irritable,  relief  follows  its  application."  Op.  Cit.
p.  309.

In  a  valuable  paper  by  Dr.  James  Forbes,  published  in  the  Medical  and  Physical
Journal  for  October,  1822,  there  is  an  interesting  report  of  the  results  obtained  from
the  use  of  tar  vapour  in  one  of  the  military  hospitals.  It  is  there  stated  that,  while
of  nineteen  cases  of  phthisis,  it  produced  bad  effects  in  eleven,  nnd  no  effect  in
eight  ;  of  thirtv-two  cases  of  chronic  catarrh,  it  produced  a  cure  in  eight,  an  im-
provement in  six,  no  effect  in  eighteen,  and  bad  effects  in  none.  This  may  perhaps
be  considered  as  a  fair  average  of  its  probable  effects  in  this  disease. — Traml.

A  new  mode  of  treating  chronic  catarrh  has  latelv  been  proposed  by  M.  Gannal,
viz.  the  inhalation  of  chlorine  gas.  When  used  with  the  requisite  caution,  this
treatment  is  productive  of  none  of  the  inconveniencies  that  might  be  expected  from
it  at  first  sight:  it  neither  excites  cough  nor  increases  dyspnoea,  nor  gives  rise  to
any  pain  in  the  chest,  and  inclped  seems  to  act  merely  by  modifying,  in  a  greater  or
less  degree,  the  characteristic  secretion  of  the  bronchial  membrane,  which  gradually


CHRONIC MUCOUS  CATAKKH.


75


deed  when  treating  of  the  former,  particularly  blisters,  cupping,
and  other  derivatives  ;  but  in  the  simply  chronic  affection  I  have
never  found  either  blisters  or  issues  of  any  benefit. On  the  con-
trary, in  this,  as  in  many  other  chronic  complaints,  I  am  con-
vinced these  are  only  one  more  evil  in  addition  to  those  already
existing. It  would'no  doubt  be  imprudent  to  suppress  a  drain
of  this  kind  when  it  has  existed  for  several  years  ;  but  I  must
think  that  it  is  not  only  prudent  but  humane  to  prevent  these
from  acquiring  over  the  system  the  force  of  an  habitual  dis-
charge, when  it  is  ascertained  that  they  have  been  productive  of
no  benefit  after  a  fair  trial. When  the  dyspnoea  becomes  ex-
treme, narcotics,  particularly  the  recently  prepared  powder  of
belladonna  or  stramonium,  in  doses  of  half  a  grain  to  a  grain,
afford  most  relief. Their  administration  is  frequently  followed
by  the  speedy  but  temporary  cessation  of  the  dyspnoea.* If  the
expectoration  diminishes  or  is  altogether  suspended  by  the  con-
version of  the  disease  into  the  dry  catarrh,  a  circumstance  likely
to  happen  on  the  occurrence  of  a  fresh  cold,  the  membrane  be-
comes usually  more  tumefied,  and  the  dyspnoea  is  consequently
increased. In  these  cases  an  emetic  is  of  the  most  service  ;  and
when  the  dyspnoea  is  less  intense,  squill,  ipecacuan  and  kermes
given  in  small  doses. Should  this  state,  however,  continue  for
some  time,  we  must  have  recourse  to  the  means  which  will  be  in-
dicated when  we  come  to  speak  of  the  dry  catarrh. *f-

disappears  under  its  use.  As  chlorine  thus  applied  is  unquestionahly  an  irritant  to
the  mucous  membrane,  it  probably  produces  its  good  effects  by  substituting  one
inflammation  for  another.  The  following  is  the  mode  of  administering  this  remedy  :
The  apparatus  may  be  either  a  Wolff's  bottle  or  simply  a  wide-mouthed  bottle  having
its  cork  traversed  by  two  glass  tubes  disposed  as  in  Wolff's  apparatus  ;  into  this,
a  small  portion  of  water  is  poured  sufficient  for  the  immersion  of  the  extremity  of
one  of  the  tubes  to  the  extent  of  nearly  an  inch  ;  and  when  this  water  is  raised  to
nearly  the  temperature  of  90°  a  few  drops  of  liquid  chlorine  is  added  ;  this  chlorine
is  vaporised  along  with  the  warm  water,  and  is  inhaled  by  the  other  tube  along  with
the  watery  vapour  and  the  air  which  flows  in  through  the  longer  tube.  The  flask
must  be  at  least  half-pint  size,  otherwise  the  small  portion  of  water  which  it  would
contain  would  cool  too  soon,  and  the  chlorine  gas  would  not  be  mixed  with  a
sufficient  quantity  of  watery  vapour.  The  tubes  ought  to  be  from  four  to  six  lines
wide:  as.  if  smaller,  respiration  would  be  fatiguing.  The  chlorine  should  be  ex-
tremely pure,  and  at  first  we  ought  not  to  use  more  than  six  drops  at  a  time  ;  an
additional  drop  may  be  used  at  every  subsequent  trial,  until  the  dose  is  strong
enough  to  produce  some  uneasiness  in  the  chest :  when  this  occurs,  we  imme-
diately return  to  the  six-drop  dose,  and  ascend  progressively  as  before.  It  is  quite
essential  that  the  application  be  repeated  at  least  six  or  eight  times  daily. — (M.  L.)

*  If  at  this  period  of  relief  we  explore  the  respiration  by  the  stethoscope,  we  find
it  the  same  as  during  the  paroxysm,  a  proof  that  the  benefit  obtained  consists  simply
in  the  diminution  of  the  necessity  of  respiration. — Author.

t  A  medicine  unnoticed  by  our  author,  but  which  has  been  pretty  extensively
employed  in  this  country  of  late  years,  in  chronic  catarrh,  is  colchicum.  Like  the
balsams,  it  is  a  very  uncertain  remedy,  and  like  them  is  inapplicable  if  not  injurious
in  many  cases.  Like  them,  however,  it  is  also  occasionally  useful,  and  ought  not  to
be  neglected  by  the  judicious  practitioner.  The  following'is  the  account  given  of  it
by  Dr.  Hastings  :  "  It  allays  the  cough,  promotes  the  flow  of  urine,  and  keeps  up  a
regular  alvine  discharge.  It  can  be  given  much  more  generally  than  squills,  because
it  does  not  produce  that  feverishness  which  results  from  tho  use  of  the  latter  re-
medy, and  can  therefore  be  employed  where  there  is  considerable  fever. The  dose


76


PITUITOUS  CATAKItll.


Sect.  III. — Of  the  pituitous  <-<it<irrh.

I  give  this  name  to  that  variety  of  catarrh  in  which  the  expec-
toration is  colourless,  transparent,  ropy,  frothy  on  the  surface,
and  underneath  like  white  of  egg  diluted  with  water.  It  has
been  already  stated  that  this  kind  of  expectoration  commonly  ap-
pears at  the  onset  of  catarrh,  but  then  only  in  small  quantity ;
and  it  sometimes  re-appears  towards  the  close  of  the  disease.  It
is  frequently  intermixed  with  the  denser  sputa  of  the  chronic
mucous  catarrh,  particularly  when  this  is  aggravated  into  an
acute  character.  It  also  occurs  occasionally  during  the  resolu-
tion of  peripneumony,  and  in  the  oedema  of  the  lungs.  In  all
these  cases,  this  species  of  expectoration  exists  only  temporarily,
for  a  few  days  or  weeks  at  most ;  but  there  are  two  others  in
which  it  assumes  a  very  slow  progress.  The  first  of  these  I  shall
denominate  the  idiopathic  pituitous  catarrh  ;  the  second  co-exists
with  an  accumulation  of  miliary  tubercles  in  the  lungs.

Idiopathic  pituitous  catarrh. The  anatomical  characters  of

this  affection  are  a  middling:  degree  of  swelling  and  a  slight  Soften-
er o  _  o  o

ing  of  the  mucous  membrane,  with  a  slight  appearance  of  redness
here  and  there. It  may,  therefore,  be  considered  as  occupying

generally  prescribed  is  twenty  drops  (of  the  tincture)  three  times  a  day.  In  some
cases  this  must  be  diminished  on  account  of  its  action  on  the  bowels.  If  there  be
much  quickness  of  pulse  the  author  generally  adds  eight  or  ten  drops  of  the  tincture
of  foxglove,  from  which  combination  the  cough  is  often  relieved  and  the  quickness
of  the  pulse  diminished." Op.  Cit.  p.  303.

As  it  is  to  the  chronic  mucous  catarrh  that  the  greater  number  of  the  cases
denominated  humoral  asthma,  and  also  the  disease  described  under  the  name  of
habitual  asthma,  must  be  referred,  the  English  reader  will  consider  the  preceding
observations  as  applicable  to  these  affections.  In  reference  to  the  cases  denomi-
nated habitual  asthma,  the  scientific  and  highly  ingenious  mode  of  treating  these  by
galvanism,  introduced  by  Dr.  Wilson  Philip,  deserves  some  notice  in  this  place.
For  a  particular  account  of  this  practice  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  author's  "  Experi-
mental Inquiry  into  the  Laws  of  the  Vital  Functions." 2nd  Ed.  p.  331.

If  the  advantages  of  this  mode  of  treatment  shall  be  found  as  striking  in  the  hands
of  other  practitioners,  on  future  trials,  as  they  have  been  in  those  of  Dr.  Philip,  it
must  be  considered  rather  discreditable  to  the  profession,  that  such  trials  have  been
so  long  and  so  generally  delayed.  In  this  case,  as  in  that  of  mediate  auscultation,
it  is  probable  that  the  trouble  requisite  for  the  application  of  the  means,  is  the  prin-
cipal cause  of  their  not  being  applied.  Indolence  is  a  potent  and  prevailing
advocate,  even  with  the  most  active.  Wo  readily  persuade  ourselves  that  what  is
very  troublesome  to  do,  may  be  left  undone,  witli  little  detriment  to  ourselves  or
others;  and  that  an  easy  substitute  is  an  adequate  substitute.  If  the  mere  feeling
the  skin  could  convey  a  galvanic  shock,  or  the  simple  listening  to  the  breathing
could  stand  in  place  of  mediate  auscultation,  we  should,  1  suspect,  have  no  reason
to  complain  of  the  neglect  of  these  two  important  measures,  in  practice.  I  wish,  in
the  present  case,  as  well  as  others,  1  could  plead  less  guilty  to  the  charge  of  pro-
fessional indolence.  Several  years  since,  1  certainly  did  try  galvanism  in  a  few
cases  of  chronic  mucous  catarrh,  in  the  persons  of  Cornish  miners  ;  and  the  results,
as  far  as  they  went,  wereboth  interesting  and  satisfactory.  In  these  trials,  which
were  only  repeated  two  or  three  times,  the  breathing  was  temporarily  improved,
and  the  quantity  of  mucus  in  the  bronchi  diminished  under  the  immediate  action
of  the  "-alvanism,  as  was  proved  by  the  diminution  of  the  mucous  rhonchus  under  the
stethoscope.— Tmnsl.


P1TUIT0US  CATAItltll.


77


the  limits  between  the  serous  and  sanguineous  congestions,  and  as
belonging  rather  to  the  former  than  the  latter.

The  signs  of  this  affection  are  the  following :  the  expectoration
is  as  above  described  ;  the  chest  sounds  well  on  percussion  ;  the
sound  of  respiration  is  weaker  during  the  fits  of  coughing  than
in  the  intervals,  but  is  seldom  altogether  suspended  in  certain
points  of  the  chest ;  it  is  attended  by  a  sonorous  rhonchus,  flat
or  sibilous,  imitating  the  chirping  of  birds,  the  note  of  a  violon-
cello, or  the  cooing  of  the  wood-pigeon.  With  this  there  is  fre-
quently intermixed  a  mucous  rhonchus,  but  this  conveys  the
impression  of  being  produced  by  a  thinner  fluid  than  the  mucus
of  the  common  catarrh.  In  the  intervals  of  the  attacks,  these
various  rhonchi  exist,  but  in  a  much  less  degree  ;  and  sometimes
there  is  only  perceptible  a  very  slight  dull  whistling,  extending
over  the  whole  bronchi,  unlike  the  partial  and  acute  sound  which
constitutes  the  sibilous  rhonchus  properly  so  called.  (This  va-
riety of  the  phenomenon  may  be  denominated  subsibilant  respi-
ration.) The  respiratory  sound  is  louder  than  during  the
paroxysms;  sometimes  it  is  almost  puerile.  If  the  complaint
has  been  of  long  standing,  and  has  already  occasioned  dilatation
of  the  bronchi,  the  respiration  assumes  more  or  less  the  character
of  the  variety  called  bronchial.  In  all  cases  it  varies  in  intensity
in  different  points  of  the  chest,  and  these  points  vary  from  day
to  day.

This  disease  may  be  either  acute  or  chronic.  The  acute  pit  ni-
tons catarrh  constitutes  one  of  the  severest  species  of  the  suffo-
cative catarrh.  It  is  characterized  by  an  extreme  oppression
attended  by  a  copious  pituitous  expectoration.  It  sometimes  be-
gins as  a  common  cold ;  but  after  a  few  hours,  or  even  minutes,
its  severe  character  is  soon  declared  by  the  violence  of  the  cough,
the  intensity  of  the  dyspnoea  and  oppression,  the  lividity  of  the
face,  marks  of  cerebral  congestion,  disordered  circulation,  and
coldness  of  the  extremities.  In  children  it  is  sometimes  mistaken
for  croup.  I  had  occasion  to  know  a  case  of  this  kind  lately,
where,  on  examining  the  body  after  death,  we  found  the  bronchi
hardly  at  all  red,  but  nearly  filled  with  a  serous  fluid,  which  was
somewhat  viscid  and  slightly  frothy.

The  stethoscopic  signs  of  this  affection  are  the  varieties  of
rhonchus  already  noticed.  To  these  may  be  added  the  occasional
presence  of  a  crepitous  rhonchus,  produced  by  a  certain  degree  of
oedema  of  the  lungs  co-existing  with  the  serous  discharge.  The
chest  sounds  well  on  percussion.

These  attacks,  however  violent,  are  usually  transient.  In  cer-
tain cases  they  are  recurrent.  A  remarkable  instance  of  this  is
given  by  Bree,  of  a  woman  attacked  in  perfect  health  with  a
paroxysm  of  the  kind  described,  passing  entirely  off' after  a  few
hours,  and  returning  in  the  same  manner,  and  with  extreme  vio-
lence, after  an  interval  of  six  months. In  the  second  attack  this


78


PITUITOUS  CATARRH.


patient  expectorated  four  pints  of  a  frothy  serum  slightly  tinged
with  blood.

Transient  pulmonary  fluxes  of  this  kind  may  be  regarded  as
critical  and  as  one  of  the  modes  whereby  nature  seeks  to  get  rid
of  some  morbific  cause,  which  may  or  may  not  be  perceptible  to
us.  Accordingly,  we  occasionally  see  affections  of  the  kind  just
noticed,  and,  yet  more  frequently,  serous  vomitings  or  purgings,
of  an  analogous  kind,  followed,  in  a  few  days  or  even  hours,  by
the  dispersion  of  an  anasarca,  an  ascites,  or  hydrothorax.

I  shall  notice  the  treatment  of  these  acute  pulmonary  fluxes
when  I  come  to  notice  the  suffocative  catarrh.

The  chronic  pituitous  catarrh  occurs  only  in  advanced  life,
and  more  particularly  attacks  those  whose  constitutions  have
been  debilitated  by  excesses,  or  by  sedentary  habits.  It  is  com-
mon in  gouty  subjects  in  whom  the  gout  has  lost  its  regular  form,
and  becomes  less  strongly  marked.  It  is  also  the  consequence  of
frequently  repeated  attacks  of  the  acute  mucous  catarrh.  The
chronic  variety  never  succeeds  the  acute  species  which  we
have  just  described.  It  usually  comes  on  by  slow  degrees,  after
repeated  attacks  of  the  acute  mucous  or  dry  catarrh.  When
the  pituitous  discharge  is  once  fully  established,  it  becomes  fre-
quently intermittent,  and  often  with  considerable  regularity.
There  are  usually  two  paroxysms  of  cough  and  expectoration  in
the  twenty-four  hours,  the  one  on  waking  from  sleep,  the  other
in  the  evening  ;  but  sometimes  the  paroxysms  immediately  follow
the  patients  meals.  The  quantity  of  fluid  expectorated  is  al-
ways very  great :  I  have  known  some  patients  discharge,  in  the
course  of  one  or  two  hours,  from  two  to  three  pounds.*

During  the  attack  there  is  always  dyspnoea,  which  either  di-
minishes or  passes  off  with  it.  When  this  disease  has  existed
some  time,  the  countenance  assumes  a  pale  blueish  tint,  and  the
body  becomes  considerably  but  not  extremely  emaciated.  The
patient's  constitution  becomes  more  lymphatic  ;  the  blood  grows
thinner,  and  when  drawn  from  the  veins  exhibits  a  very  weak
coagulum.  The  patient  nevertheless  continues  fit  for  many  avo-
cations, and  can  be  considered  only  as  an  invalid.  In  this  state
the  complaint  may  exist  a  great  many  years ;  but  as  age  advances,
the  fits  become  longer  and  more  frequent,  the  dyspnoea  becomes
habitual,  and  the  disorder  then  acquires  the  name  of  asthma.
The  usual  termination  of  it  is  by  the  supervention  of  oedema  of
the  lungs,  and  finally  suffocation  from  inability  to  expectorate.

It  is  singular  how  many  years  patients  will  survive  under  the
immense  discharge  produced  by  this  disorder. M.  Alard  men-

*  It  has  been,  no  doubt,  the  suddenness  and  transient  nature  of  these  fluxes  which
have  led  Junker  and  Salmuth  to  give  them  the  name  of  phlegmatcrrhagies,  which  has
been  since  applied  by  M.  Alard  to  similar  discharges  from  the  mucous  membrane  of
the  stomach,  bowels,  uterus,  &c.  (Du  Siege  et  de  la  Nature  des  Maladies,  torn.  ii.
Paris,  J821>)  I  would  propose  phlegm  crrhagy  as  a  term  at  once  more  easily  pro-
nounced, and  more  conformable  to  the  analogy  of  medical  nomenclature. — Author.


PITUITOUS  CATARRH.


79


tions  some  interesting  examples  of  this  kind  ;  and  I  myself  am
acquainted  with  two  old  gentlemen,  whose  cases  may  be  added
to  the  number.  One  of  these,  who  is  upwards  of  seventy,  has
expectorated  during  the  last  ten  or  twelve  years,  in  two  daily
paroxysms,  about  four  pounds  of  a  colourless,  ropy,  and  frothy
fluid.  The  other  brings  up  every  morning,  by  gentle  sponta-
neous vomitings,  repeated  at  short  intervals  during  several  hours,
from  three  to  six  pounds  of  a  liquid  exactly  like  white  of  egg
mixed  with  a  third  part  of  water.  This  gentleman  is  upwards
of  sixty,  enjoys  tolerable  health,  and  walks  several  hours  every
day.  Some  patients,  however,  die  of  exhaustion  within  a  much
shorter  period,  and  from  a  much  smaller  discharge.  Two  cases
of  this  kind  are  given  by  M.  Andral : — the  one,  an  old  man,
carried  off  after  five  months,  by  the  daily  expectoration  of  about
two  pints  of  a  serous  fluid  ; — and  the  other,  a  person  of  forty-five
years  of  age,  who  died  after  bringing  up  three  pints  of  the  same
kind  every  day,  during  three  successive  years.  In  neither  of
these  cases  was  there  found  any  other  cause  of  death  ;  and  in  the
one  last  mentioned,  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  bronchi  was
found  extremely  pale :  *  so  true  it  is,  that  besides  the  light,  no
doubt  very  great,  thrown  by  morbid  anatomy  on  the  causes  of
these  diseases,  we  must,  in  certain  cases,  look  elsewhere  for  in-
formation.

It  is  rare  that  we  meet  with  idiopathic  cases  of  this  disorder
so  well  marked  as  those  just  noticed  ;  but  it  often  exists  in  a  high
degree  as  a  consequence  of  the  simultaneous  development  and
persistence  of  a  great  number  of  miliary  tubercles  in  the  lungs.
These  pituitous  discharges  were  indeed  considered  by  Bayle  as
the  pathognomonic  sign  of  this  variety  of  phthisis.'f'  The  symp-
tomatic pituitous  discharges  are  marked  by  less  regular  fits  of
coughing,  and  they  present,  moreover,  particular  signs,  depend-
ing on  their  organic  cause,  which  will  be  noticed  when  we  come
to  treat  of  phthisis.

Treatment.  The  idiopathic  pituitous  catarrh,  when  it  has
become  habitual,  may  be  considered  as  little,  if  at  all,  under  the
influence  of  medicine.  On  this  account,  when  the  mucous  or  dry
catarrhs  are  complicated  with  this  affection,  we  must  endeavour
to  remove  all  traces  of  these.  The  means  recommended  against
the  chronic  mucous  catarrh,  particularly  emetics,  are  often  bene-
ficial in  this  case ;  the  balsams  are  less  so,  and  ought  not  to  be
employed,  unless  the  disease  has  become  entirely  chronic.  Blis-
ters applied  first  on  the  chest,  and  subsequently  on  the  extremi-
ties, are  of  more  use  here  than  in  the  mucous  catarrh.  The  same
is  true  of  opium  given  in  small  doses  frequently  repeated.^

*  Op.  Cit.  Obs.  xiy.  and  xvi.  t  Recherches  sur  la  Phthisie.

X  The  chronic  pituitous  catarrh  from  its  obstinacy  seems  to  demand  more  than  any
of  the  other  kinds,  a  topical  treatment ;  and  it  is.  in  it  that  the  chlorine  gas  would
seem  to  promise  most  effectual  relief.  I  have  found  great  benefit  from  it  in  one
case.— (M.  L.)


so


SUFFOCATIVE  CATARRH.


Sect.  IV.  Of  the  suffocative  catarrh.

This  term  is  commonly  applied  to  those  cases  of  chronic  mu-
cous catarrh  of  long  standing,  very  frequent  in  old  persons,  in
which  death  supervenes  from  the  superabundant  accumulation
of  mucus  in  the  bronchi.  Considered  in  this  point  of  view,  it  is
rather  an  accident  which  may  occur  in  several  species  of  catarrh,
than  a  distinct  species  in  itself.  Its  anatomical  characters  vary
somewhat  according  to  its  causes;  but  in  every  case  the  bron-
chi are  in  a  great  measure  filled  with  a  mucous  or  pituitoos
secretion.

The  signs  of  this  affection  are  a  laryngeal  and  tracheal  rhon-
chus  extremely  strong,  perceptible  by  the  naked  ear  at  the  dis-
tance of  several  feet.  The  respiration  is  frequent,  and  the  mo-
tions of  the  chest  more  extensive,  and  more  apparent  than  in  the
sound  state,  except  at  the  approach  of  death.  The  stethoscope
detects  over  the  whole  chest  a  mucous  rhonchus,  composed  of  large
and  small  bubbles.  If  there  is  cough,  it  is  attended  by  a  moist
sibilous  rhonchus  ;  but  most  commonly  there  is  no  cough  ;  and
its  absence,  as  well  as  the  circumstances  under  which  the  disease
usually  occurs,  would  seem  to  show  that  there  is  paralysis  of
some  of  the  powers,  which,  in  the  natural  state,  produce  the  ex-
cretion of  the  pulmonary  mucus.  This  loss  of  power  appears  to
me  to  be  most  probably  seated  in  the  bronchi,  or  the  pulmonary
texture  itself,  since,  as  we  have  already  said,  the  action  of  the
muscles  of  inspiration  is  rather  increased  than  diminished,  at
least  in  the  beginning  of  the  attack.  Percussion  elicits  a  good
sound  over  the  whole  chest,  until  on  the  approach  of  death,
when  the  sound  is  found  to  be  lessened  towards  the  roots  or  base
of  the  lungs,  owing  to  the  mechanical  congestion  of  fluids  in
these  parts.  It  is  especially  in  this  disease,  that  the  motion  of
the  mucus  in  the  bronchi  may  frequently  be  perceived  by  apply-
ing the  hand  to  the  chest.

There  are  four  cases  in  which  catarrh  may  become  suffoca-
tive.— 1.  in  old  persons; — 2.  in  persons  affected  with  oedema  of
the  lungs; — 3.  in  the  dying; — 4.  the  acute  catarrh  may  some-
times assume  this  character  even  in  adults  and  children.

1.  In  old  persons.  This  accident,  which  is  almost  always
mortal,  occurs  principally  in  winter,  and  in  consequence  of  the
supervention  of  an  acute  catarrh  to  a  chronic  mucous  catarrh,  or
phlegmorrhagy.  If  of  any  continuance,  oedema  of  the  lungs  su-
pervenes and  hastens  the  fatal  termination.

2.  With  wdema  of  the  lungs.  (Edema  of  the  lungs  is  almost
always  accompanied  by  a  phlegmorrhagy  which  may  readily  be-
come suffocative,  from  the  accumulation  of  fluid  in  the  bronchi,
especiallv  in  weak  and  old  subjects.


SUFFOCATIVE  CATARRH.


81


3.  In  dying  persons.  The  last  agony  in  almost  all  diseases,  is
accompanied  by  a  copious  tracheal  rhonchus,  and  consequently  by
a  real  suffocative  catarrh,  except  in  those  cases  wherein  the  rhon-
chus is  owing  to  the  presence  of  blood  in  the  bronchi.  (Edema,
and  yet  more  commonly  a  sero-sanguineous  congestion  of  the
pulmonary  texture,  accompanies  the  flow  of  fluid  into  the  bron-
chi ;  and  it  is  to  this  circumstance  that  the  infiltration  of  the
posterior  parts  of  the  lungs,  observable  in  almost  all  dead  bodies,
is  to  be  attributed.

4.  Acute  siiffocatwe  catarrh  of  adults  and  children.  This
variety  does  not  appear  to  me  to  have  hitherto  sufficiently  en-
gaged the  attention  of  physicians.  It  is  very  rare  in  adults.  In
young  children  it  is  more  common,  and  is  often  in  them  con-
founded with  croup.  It  is  recognised  by  the  tracheal  rhonchus
perceptible  by  the  naked  ear,  and  by  the  imminent  suffocation,
and  frequent  lividity  of  the  face.  The  stethoscope  detects,
over  the  whole  chest,  a  loud  mucous  (and  very  liquid)  rhonchus,
and  a  very  frequent  and  usually  irregular  action  of  the  heart.
This  disease  is  an  acute  catarrh  affecting  the  whole,  or  a  very
large  portion  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  lungs.  Its  dura-
tion is  from  twenty-four  to  forty-eight  hours,  or  at  most,  some
days.  At  the  end  of  this  time,  either  the  patient  dies,  or  expec-
toration commences  and  puts  an  end  to  the  suffocation,  and  the
disorder  then  follows  the  progress  of  a  simple  acute  catarrh.
While  the  suffocation  lasts,  there  is  little  cough,  and  the  expec-
toration, if  any,  is  altogether  pituitous  or  fluid:  it  retains  this
character  for  some  days  at  least,  and  then  becomes  more  abun-
dant ;  but  recovery  sometimes  takes  place  without  its  ever  be-
coming properly  mucous ;  in  which  case,  the  disease  is  only  a
variety  of  the  acute  bronchial  phlegmorrhagy  or  pituitous  ca-
tarrh. When,  on  the  other  hand,  the  expectoration  becomes
mucous,  the  disease  is  simply  an  ordinary  acute  catarrh,  in
which  the  suffocative  character  of  the  invasion  is  caused  by  the
extent  of  tumefaction  of  the  bronchial  membrane,  and  by  the
great  quantity  of  fluid  secreted  at  once.

Treatment.  I  shall  notice  in  another  place  the  catarrh  which
accompanies  oedema  of  the  lungs;  and  I  need  not  here  stop  to
say  any  thing  respecting  that  of  the  dying.  The  suffocative
catarrh  of  old  persons  may  sometimes,  though  rarely,  be  cured
by  those  means  which  prove  successful  in  the  acute  affection  of
adults  and  children.  The  first  and  most  efficacious  of  these
means  are  emetics,  repeated  daily,  if  the  first  has  procured  only
slight  relief,  and  without  increase  of  the  expectoration.  Large
blisters  applied  at  the  same  time  to  the  thigh,  prove  often  salutary
derivatives.  I  prefer  this  situation  to  the  chest,  because  I  have
several  times  had  occasion  to  observe,  particularly  in  old  persons,
that  when  applied  to  the  latter,  they  rather  increased  the  suf-
focation. Besides  the  danger  common  to  all  derivatives  applied


82


SUFFOCATIVE  CATARRH.


near  the  part  affected,  of  augmenting  in  place  of  lessening  the
congestion,  the  blister  applied  to  the  chest  has  the  additional
disadvantage  of  impeding  the  thoracic  movements,  at  the  very
time  when  the  full  extent  of  inspiration  is  requisite  to  prevent
suffocation.  I  have  never  found  bleeding  indicated  in  the  suffo-
cative catarrhs  of  children,  or  in  the  few  cases  of  the  same  affec-
tion which  I  have  met  with  in  adults.  I  am  of  opinion,  however,
that  it  may  sometimes  be  advantageous  in  individuals  of  a  san-
guine constitution.  The  loss  of  blood  favours  absorption,  and
diminishes,  at  least  for  a  time,  the  greater  number  of  the  secre-
tions and  exhalations.  In  this  respect  it  may  be  useful  in
such  cases ;  but  if  carried  too  far  there  is  reason  to  fear  that
it  may  so  debilitate  the  patient  as  not  only  to  check  expectora-
tion, but  even  so  much  weaken  the  muscles  of  inspiration,  as  to
incapacitate  them  for  the  increased  labour  which  they  have  to
perform.*  We  must  likewise  endeavour  to  diminish  the  neces-
sity of  respiration  by  administering  paregorics,  among  which  I
give  the  preference  to  the  powdered  root  of  belladonna,  in  the
dose  of  half  a  grain  or  a  grain,  repeated  at  such  intervals  as
the  severity  of  the  suffocation  and  the  patient's  strength  seem  to
require.

In  two  cases  I  employed  no  other  means  than  the  emetic  tar-
tar, given  in  large  doses,  as  will  hereafter  be  particularly
described  in  the  chapter  on  pneumonia.  In  one  case  the  catarrh
was  complicated  with  oedema  of  the  lungs.  The  other  was  a
woman  twenty-four  years  of  age,  of  a  robust  constitution  ;  this
patient,  although  apparently  almost  expiring  when  she  came  into
the  hospital,  was  out  of  danger  in  twelve  hours.  The  other
patient  also  recovered,  but  more  slowly .-j-

*  This  is  evidently  written  under  the  influence  of  strong  prejudice.  It  cannot  he
questioned  that  bloodletting,  and  particularly  local  bloodletting,  is  indicated  in  the
true  suffocative  catarrh,  and  the  relief  afforded  by  it  is  so  speedy  and  complete,  that
it  is  very  unlikely  that  it  should  be  carried  too  far.  The  dread  of  weakening  the
patient  so  as  to  check  the  expectoration,  is  quite  visionarj',  since  we  know  that  the
violence  of  the  dyspnoea  arises  much  more  from  the  tumefaction  of  the  bronchial
membrane,  than  from  the  amount  of  the  bronchial  secretion.  Leeches,  in  large
numbers,  or,  still  better,  cupping  on  the  chest,  with  counter-irritation  by  means
of  blisters,  and  sinapisms  on  the  lower  extremities,  will  always  be  found  the
most  effectual  method  of  treating  the  suffocative  catarrh  of  children  and  adults.
— (M.  L.)

In  the  justness  of  the  above  remark  I  entirely  concur.  —  Transl.

t  I  am  of  opinion  that  our  author,  in  the  four  preceding  sections,  has  conveyed
to  the  reader  a  general  impression  of  less  severity  in  the  diseases  treated  of,  than  the
inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  bronchi  often  exhibits.  And  if  this
be  so,  I  suspect  that  the  cause  will  be  found  in  his  determination  to  describe  the
affections  under  the  name  catarrh  and  not  bnmchitit.  1  think  the  impression  would
have  been  more  clear  and  forcible,  although  the  delineation  might  not  have  been  at
all  more  accurate,  had  bronchitis  been  taken  as  the  genus,  and  the  varieties  of  ca-
tarrh above  described  given  as  species  of  this.  It  is  no  doubt  true,  as  remarked
by  the  author,  that  catarrh  frequently  forms  the  shade  between  inflammation  and
congestion  and  that  in  certain  cases  of  catarrh  it  is  very  doubtful  if  there  is  really
any  inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane.  But  it  is  equally  true,  that  very
unequivocal  and  violent  inflammations  of  this  membrane  do  exist,  exclusively  of


DRY  CATARRH.


83


Sect.  V.*  Of  the  dry  catarrh  and  the  latent  catarrh.

The  expression  dry  catarrh  involves  a  contradiction  if  we
look  to  etymology,  since  the  word  catarrh  denotes  a  flux  or  dis-
charge; but  as  this  phrase  has  been  used  by  the  moderns,  I  shall
employ  it  in  this  place  to  designate  those  inflammations  of  the
bronchi  which  are  attended  with  little  or  no  expectoration.  This
affection  is  extremely  common  in  the  chronic  state.  In  the  acute
state  it  exists  at  the  commencement  and  also  at  the  close  of  a
common  cold ;  but  in  this  last  case,  it  is  accompanied  by  a  pi-
tuitous  catarrh,  which  appears  to  have  its  seat  in  a  different  part
of  the  mucous  membrane.  It  frequently  exists,  also,  in  an  en-
tirely latent  state,  in  continued  fevers.

The  chronic  dry  catarrh  is  most  usually  an  idiopathic  affec-
tion. It  is  frequent  in  gouty  and  hypochondriacal  subjects,  in
persons  affected  with  cutaneous  eruptions,  and  in  those  whose
constitutions  are  broken  down  by  excesses  of  any  kind It  fre-
quently exists  in  a  slight  degree  in  individuals  who  are  otherwise
in  very  good  health.  Almost  all  the  inhabitants  of  cold  sea  coasts
;  and  damp  vallies,  are  perpetually  attacked  with  it  in  some  de-
I  gree  or  other ;  and  even  in  the  driest  parts  of  France,  in  one
i  half  at  least  of  persons  arrived  at  adult  age,  and  who  are  in  other
respects  in  perfectly  good  health,  the  stethoscope  detects  the
traces  of  a  slight  habitual  thickening  or  congestion,  in  some  part
i  or  other  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  lungs.

those  of  the  croupy  or  plastic  kind. And  the  history  of  the  disease  delivered  by
our  author,  seems  to  me  defective  in  not  containing  a  distinct  and  separate  account
of  this  severe  and  highly  inflammatory  variety. The  attention  of  the  reader  seems
I  too  much  directed  to  the  kind  of  secretion,  and  too  little  to  the  actual  disease  of
the  membrane,  the  cause  of  this. These  remarks  apply  most  forcibly  to  the  affec-
tions described  in  the  last  section  under  the  name  of  suffocative  catarrh,  which  can
only  be  considered  as  an  accidental  modification  of  the  kinds  previously  described,
and  ought  not,  therefore,  to  have  been  noticed  as  constituting  a  distinct  species.
This,  indeed,  is  admitted  by  the  author  himself  in  respect  of  all  the  varieties  in-
i  eluded  under  this  title,  except  the  last,  the  acute  suffocative  catarrh  of  adults  and
children. 1  his  variety  of  bronchitis  has  been  noticed  by  many  writers  under  dif-
!  ferent  names. For  a  very  complete  history  of  all  the  varieties  of  bronchitis,  and  a
;  pretty  complete  and  accurate  account  of  the  opinions  of  preceding  authors,  I  would
i  refer  to  the  work  of  Dr.  Hastings  formerly  quoted,  to  Dr.  Badham's  Essay  on  Bron-
chitis, and  to  the  second  volume  of  Andral's  Clinique  Medicale. The  disease  de-

•  scribed  by  Dr.  Millar,  ("Observations  on  the  Asthma  and  on  the  Hooping  Cough,
I  by  John  Millar,  M.D.  1769,")  under  the  name  of  Asthma,  and  which  occurred  as

an  epidemic  among  children  in  the  border  counties  of  England  and  Scotland  in  the

•  year  1755,  was  evidently  that  species  of  bronchitis,  described  by  our  author  as  the
acute  suffocative  catarrh. Several  well  marked  and  well  described  cases  of  the  suf-

i  focative  catarrh,  with  the  appearances  on  dissection,  are  detailed  by  the  late  Mr.

i  Chevalier  in  the  London  Med.  and  Phys.  Journal,  vol.  vii.  and  many  valuable  ob-
servations of  a  similar  kind  are  scattered  through  the  various  periodical  journals

;  and  transactions  published  in  this  country. See  also  two  short  but  excellent  pa-

j  pers  by  Dr.  Williams,  in  the  Cyclopajdia  of  Practical  Medicine,  viz.  the  articles
Bronchitis  and  Catarrh. — Traml.

*  In  this  section  I  have  included  two  of  the  original. — Traml.

6  2


84


DRY  CAT AH K H.


The  anatomical  characters,  of  this  affection  are — swelling,  to.
gether  with  an  obscure  redness,  or  violet  hue,  of  the  mucous
membrane.  This  swelling  is  particularly  remarkable  in  the
smaller  branches,  which  are  indeed  sometimes  almost  completely
obstructed  by  it.  When  the  swelling  is  less,  these  branches  are
frequently  blocked  up  by  a  very  glutinous  kind  of  matter,  of  the
consistence  of  pitch,  or  somewhat  firmer,  disposed  in  globules  of
the  size  of  hemp  or  millet  seed.  These  globules,  which  are
always  free  from  air,  are  semi-transparent  and  of  a  pearl-grey
colour;  which  colour  is  no  doubt  owing  to  an  intermixture  of  a
small  portion  of  black  pulmonary  matter,  as  this  occasionally
shows  itself  more  conspicuously  in  them  under  the  form  of  small
black  points.  This  matter,  which  many  persons,  who  do  not
consider  themselves  as  having  a  cold,  expectorate  in  small  quan-
tities every  morning,  has  been  called  by  Fourcroy  bronchial
mucus.  I  shall  denominate  it  pearly  expectoration  ( sputa  mar-
garitacea)  to  distinguish  it  from  the  pituitous  and  mucous  kinds
already  described.  Sometimes  a  portion  of  one  of  the  larger
bronchi  exhibits  over  a  space  of  only  a  few  lines  in  extent,  a
swelling  of  its  internal  membrane  sufficient  to  obstruct  almost
entirely  the  passage  of  the  air,  although  in  smaller  branches  of
the  same  trunk  it  is  much  less  tumefied.  Andral  has  published
two  cases  of  this  variety  of  the  dry  catarrh.*  It  is,  however,
much  more  common,  as  I  have  already  stated,  to  find  the  mem-
brane more  swollen  in  the  smaller  branches.  The  dry  catarrh
is  usually  the  more  extensive  the  longer  it  has  lasted  ;  although
even  in  young  children  we  occasionally  find  the  whole  mucous
membrane  affected.  When  universal,  or  when  only  very  exten-
sive, it  always  gives  rise  to  emphysema  of  the  lungs.

The  pathognomonic  signs  of  this  affection  are — a  perfect  reson-
ance of  the  chest,  and  a  complete  or  nearly  complete  want  of  the
natural  sound  of  respiration  in  the  parts  actually  affected.  These
parts  change  frequently,  particularly  when  the  disease  is  very
general ;  so  that  those  which  at  the  first  exploration  gave  no
respiratory  sound,  may,  after  a  few  hours,  give  it  more  distinctly
than  any  other,  and  vice  versa.  These  variations  are  accounted
for  by  the  varying  states  of  congestion  in  the  mucous  membrane,
and  by  the  varying  secretion  and  expectoration  of  the  pearly
sputa.  If  the  obstruction  of  the  smaller  bronchi  is  not  very
great,  the  respiration  is  still  perceptible,  but  in  a  much  feebler
degree  than  might  be  expected  from  the  resonance  of  the  chest.
Over  the  parts  affected,  we  also  distinguish  a  slight  sibilous
rhonchus,  and  more  rarely,  and  only  during  a  deep  inspiration,
a  clicking  like  that  of  a  small  valve,  occasioned,  no  doubt,  by
the  displacement  of  the  pearly  sputa.  The  respiration  continues
natural  in  the  parts  of  the  lungs  which  remain  sound,  and  rarely


*  Op.  Cit.  obs.  ii.  and  iii.


DRY  CATARIUI.


85


becomes  puerile  as  in  pleurisy  or  peripneumony  :  this  last  fact  is
explained  by  the  very  slow  progress  of  the  dry  catarrh,  which
has  gradually  accustomed  the  patients  to  an  imperfect  degree
of  respiration,  and  prevented  the  necessity  of  the  sound  portions
of  the  organ  supplying  the  deficiencies  of  the  diseased,  by  a  pre-
ternatural energy  of  action.  As  the  sound  of  the  pulmonary
respiration,  properly  so  called,  is  nearly  wanting  in  this  affec-
tion, it  might  naturally  be  expected  that  the  bronchial  respira-
tion would  be  occasionally  perceptible  in  it.  This,  however,  is
never  the  case,  according  to  my  experience ;  and  a  full  conside-
ration of  all  the  circumstances  appears  to  render  this  occurrence
very  improbable  if  not  impossible.  The  state  of  parts  in  this
disease  is  extremely  unfavourable  for  perceiving  every  kind  of
sound  originating  in  the  lungs.  In  the  first  place,  the  greater
number  of  the  air  cells  are  habitually  distended  by  the  air,  so
that  the  pulmonary  substance  is  rendered  less  dense,  and  thereby
less  fitted  for  the  transmission  of  sound  ;  and  in  the  second
place,  many  of  the  bronchial  tubes,  even  those  of  considerable
size,  are  habitually  obstructed  either  by  the  swelling  of  their
inner  membrane,  or  by  the  glutinous  matter  secreted  by  it.

The  habitual  dry  catarrh  is  sometimes,  though  rarely,  com-
plicated with  the  mucous  or  pituitous  catarrh,  acute  or  chronic.
In  this  case  we  find  the  signs  of  each  affection  in  different  por-
tions of  the  lungs;  while  the  re-union  of  the  three  varieties  is
further  proved  by  the  simultaneous  expectoration  of  their  cha-
racteristic sputa — the  pituitous,  the  mucous,  and  the  pearly.

Symptoms  and  progress.  This  disease  when  existing  in  a
middling  degree,  frequently  remains  altogether  latent  for  a  long
course  of  years, — the  subjects  of  it  being  no  further  conscious
of  its  presence  than  by  observing  that  they  are  shorter  breathed
than  others,  when  they  ascend  a  height  or  attempt  to  run.  When
the  bronchial  tumefaction  becomes  more  extended,  dyspnoea  is
then  experienced,  even  in  a  state  of  quietude,  and  particularly
after  meals  ;  and  this  state  of  oppression  is  referred  by  some  pa-
tients to  one  side  only,  and  sometimes  to  the  side  least  affected
After  a  time  the  dyspnoea  comes  on  in  fits  which  last  usually  se-
veral days,  and  are  so  severe  as  to  merit  and  obtain  the  name  of
asthma.  Towards  the  termination  of  these  attacks,  a  cough
conies  on  and  the  oppression  becomes  less;  and  after  the  cough
has  continued  a  few  days  the  dyspnoea  is  still  further  relieved
by  the  expectoration  of  some  of  the  pearly  sputa,  intermixed
with  phlegm.  In  the  slighter  cases,  these  sputa  lose  their  usual
consistence  and  globular  form,  and  become  more  copious,  and
feebly  opaline  from  an  intimate  intermixture  of  a  small  quantity
of  an  opaque  yellowish  or  whitish  mucus.  At  other  times  they
are  vitriform,  and  nearly  of  the  consistence  of  the  vitreous  hu-
mour of  the  eye,— consituting,  no  doubt,  the  glassy  pituita  of
the  ancients. An  expectoration  of  this  kind  is  habitual  with


86


DRY  CATARRH.


many  persons  affected  with  a  slight  degree  of  the  dry  catarrh ;
and  as  long  as  it  continues  they  are  never  liable  to  attacks  of
asthma.  Frequently  this  expectoration  is  in  such  small  quantity
that  the  patients  are  themselves  unconscious  either  of  it  or  the
cough ;  in  some  persons  there  is  in  fact  neither  the  one  nor  the
other;  and  in  many  there  is  merely  a  slight  cough  perfectly  dry,
and  perceptible  only  once  daily,  or  once  in  two  or  three  days.
Coughs  of  this  kind,  when  the  dry  catarrh  of  which  they  are
the  symptom  has  come  on  slowly  and  without  being  preceded  by
an  acute  affection,  are  usually  denominated  nervous.  Too  fre-
quently indeed  they  are  considered  sympathetic,  and  the  cause
of  them  is  sought  for  in  some  real  or  supposed  affection  of  the
stomach,  liver,  kidneys,  or  uterus.  Hence  the  coughs  called
gastric,  hepatic,  hysteric,  fyc. ;  all  of  which  are,  in  fact,  examples
of  the  co-existence  of  the  dry  catarrh  with  some  affection  of  the
particular  organs  indicated.  Very  commonly  the  cough  ceases
entirely  during  summer,  and  the  oppression  becomes  less;  no
doubt  because  the  increase  of  the  cutaneous  transpiration  dimi-
nishes the  gorged  state  of  the  bronchi  and  the  secretion  of  the
pearly  sputa.

When  a  person  subject  to  an  habitual  dry  catarrh  is  attacked
with  an  acute  catarrh,  this  rarely  goes  through  its  regular
course,  so  as  to  give  rise  to  the  copious  mucous  expectoration
characteristic  of  it.  On  the  contrary,  it  seems  never  to  get  be-
yond the  first  stage ;  but  after  a  few  days  the  cough  becomes
more  frequent,  and  is  attended  by  a  slight  pituitous  expectora-
tion, and  a  greater  discharge  than  usual  of  pearly  sputa  of  a
thinner  quality.  Sometimes,  indeed,  their  consistence  is  so  much
diminished,  that  they  lose  their  rounded  form  and  become  dif-
fluent;  and  in  this  state  they  exhibit  a  compound  of  the  pearly
and  glassy  sputa,  and  the  yellow  and  viscid  mucus  of  common
catarrh,  rendered  opaque  and  greyish  by  the  intermixture  of
much  black  pulmonary  matter.  The  supervention  of  the  acute
catarrh  usually  brings  on  a  fit  of  asthma,  or  at  least  aggravates
the  habitual  dyspnoea.  This  is  relieved  by  the  appearance  of
the  expectoration  ;  but  it  frequently  still  continues  worse  than
before  the  invasion  of  the  new  affection.  If  fever  comes  on  in
the  course  of  the  acute  catarrh,  it  perceptibly  lessens  the  op-
pression. The  same  is  true  of  sleep;  and  if  this  ever  comes  on
during  an  asthmatic  paroxysm,  the  moment  of  awaking  is  the
only  one  in  which  the  patient  fancies  that  he  can  breathe  freely.
Nevertheless,  even  during  these  intervals  of  ease,  the  respiration
examined  by  the  stethoscope,  is  not  at  all  more  perfect  than
during  the  severest  paroxysms;  a  fact  which  proves  that  both
fever  and  sleep  act  in  this  case  by  diminishing  the  necessity  of
respiration.  The  upright  posture  is  not  so  constantly  requisite
in  cases  of  asthma  depending  on  the  dry  catarrh,  as  in  oppressed
breathing  produced  by  diseases  of  the  heart,  or  effusions  into  the


MvY (  ATAR11I1.


87


chest.  After  an  extensive  dry  catarrh  has  continued  for  a  certain
length  of  time,  and  more  particularly  if  aggravated  by  repeated
attacks  of  the  acute  kind  above  described,  emphysema  of  the
lungs  supervenes,  with  its  characteristic  signs  and  symptoms.
The  name  of  neglected  cold  usually  given  to  phthisis,  is  there-
fore applicable  to  this  latter  affection.

The  dry  catarrh  is  denominated  latent  when  it  is  unattended
either  by  "cough  or  expectoration.  This  variety  is  distinguished
by  a  very  great  and  usually  unequal  feebleness  of  the  respira-
tory sound,  over  the  greater  part  of  the  chest;  by  the  complete
sonorousness  of  this  cavity  on  percussion  ;  and  by  the  occasional
though  rare  addition  of  a  slight  sibilous  or  obscure  mucous
rhonchus,  or  very  feeble  sound  of  the  valve :  these  last  signs
are  of  such  unfrequent  occurrence  that  we  may  explore  the  chest
several  days  successively  without  perceiving  them.  The  dry
catarrh  is  almost  always  latent,  when  slight  and  of  small  extent.
It  only  then  becomes  an  inconvenience  when  the  tumefaction  of
the  bronchi  has  increased  sufficiently,  either  in  extent  or  inten-
sity, to  impede  the  full  development  of  the  lungs  required  during
exercise.

The  symptomatic  catarrh  of  fevers  is  almost  always  latent,  par-
ticularly during  the  first  days  of  the  disease ;  not  but  that  the
patients,  in  this  case,  cough  occasionally ;  but  the  cough  is  so
slight  and  infrequent  as  to  be  either  unattended  to  or  altogether
overlooked  by  the  physician.  It  is  sometimes,  however,  noticed
by  the  attendants  when  unobserved  by  the  practitioner.  After
continued  fevers,  and  mucous  catarrhs  of  long  standing  or  fre-
quently renewed,  habitual  latent  dry  catarrhs  are  left,  which
eventually  terminate  in  the  production  of  asthma  and  emphysema
of  the  lungs.

The  frequency  of  the  dry  catarrh,  the  insidious  slowness  of  its
progress,  and  the  severity  of  its  effects  when  arrived  at  its  height,
ought  to  convince  us  how  necessary  it  is  not  to  consider  as  unim-
portant affections,  dry  coughs  of  long  standing,  however  slight
or  infrequent  they  may  be.  These  coughs,  as  I  have  already
said,  are  the  consequence  of  the  dry  catarrh,  except  in  the  par-
ticular case  wherein  they  are  caused  by  the  devolopment  of  mi-
liary tubercles  of  the  lungs.

Treatment.  The  means  which  are  most  useful  in  relieving
the  mucous  catarrh,  both  acute  and  chronic,  are  without  effect
in  the  dry  catarrh ;  or  if  of  any  use,  it  is  merely  by  the  removal
of  certain  accidental  symptoms  or  complications,  after  which
the  disease  returns  to  its  primitive  state.  In  this  way,  blood-
letting, either  general  or  local,  may  be  requisite  in  relieving  a
determination  of  blood  to  the  lungs ;  emetics  may  be  beneficial
on  the  supervention  of  a  fresh  cold  ;  while  paregorics  must  fre-
quently be  had  recourse  to,  as  well  to  lessen  the  necessity  of  re-
spiration, as  to  quiet  severe  fits  of  coughing. Opium  repeated


88


DRY  CATARRH.


in  very  small  doses,  I  find  very  efficacious  in  relieving  this
symptom,  and  the  preparation  I  most  commonly  employ  with
this  view,  is  the  syrup  of  poppies,  in  doses  of  a  tea-spoonful,
and  given  to  the  extent  of  one  or  two  ounces  daily.  The
kermes  mineral,  as  well  as  the  other  preparations  of  antimony,
and  also  squills,  have  never  appeared  to  me  of  any  use  in
the  dry  catarrh,  except  in  certain  cases  complicated  with  her-
petic affections.  The  indications  which  naturally  present  them-
selves are— to  relieve  the  vascular  congestion  or  sub-inflamma-
tory state,  which  exists  habitually  in  the  mucous  membrane  of  the
bronchi,  and  to  facilitate  the  expectoration  of  the  pearly  sputa.
In  regard  to  the  first  indication,  I  have  just  stated  that  the  de-
traction of  blood  is  useless ;  derivatives,  such  as  dry-cupping,
particularly  if  the  glasses  are  left  long  enough  to  cause  vesica-
tion, blisters,  emetics,  and  even  purgatives,  afford  some  slight
but  very  temporary  relief.  Nevertheless,  one  is  occasionally
under  the  necessity  of  having  recourse  to  some' applications  of
this  kind ;  and  that  which  I  prefer  is  a  pitch  plaster  powdered
with  tartar  emetic,  applied  between  the  shoulders.*

As  to  the  second  indication,  the  removal  of  the  pearly  sputa,
it  is  evident  that  the  glutinous  tenacity  of  these  is  the  chief
obstacle  to  their  ready  expulsion ;  and  I  am  of  opinion  that  we
possess  means,  if  not  infallible,  at  least  often  efficacious,  in  less-
ening this  tenacity  of  the  secretions  and  rendering  them  more
liquid.  This  practice  may  perhaps  seem  to  rest  on  the  exploded
humoral  pathology,  and  I  must  confess  that  the  theory  of  it
is  neither  mine  nor  of  this  age.  Sarconef  and  Morgagni.  after
many  others,  made  this  theory  one  of  the  bases  of  their  practice.
I  attach  no  value  to  it  as- a  theory  ;  but  I  can  state  from  expe-
rience, that  by  means  of  those  medicines  which  the  chemical  and
humoral  physicians  of  the  last  three  centuries  considered  as
proper  to  correct  the  tenacity  of  the  fluids,  I  have  succeeded  in
procuring  very  great  and  permanent  relief  to  many  indviduals
who  had  long  laboured  under  dry  catarrhs  of  great  severity.
The  means  employed  with  this  view  are  chiefly  the  milder  or
very  dilute  alkalies.  Those  I  have -been  in  the  habit  of  using
are  the  following: — 1.  Almond  soap  taken  in  the  form  of  pill,
with  the  patient's  meals,  to  the  amount  of  from  half  a  drachm
to  a  drachm  daily.  If  the  catarrh  is  complicated  with  spasm  of
the  bronchi,  (to  be  noticed  hereafter,)  I  sometimes  conjoin  with
the  pills,  the  gum  ammoniac,  in  the  dose  of  from  eight  to
twenty-four  grains  in  the  day.  2.  The  salt-water  bath  of  the
temperature  from  ninety-three  to  ninety-nine  degrees  of  Fahren-
heit ;  the  artificial  alkaline  bath,  with  four  ounces  of  the  carbo-
nate of  potass  or  soda,  and  the  sulphur  baths,  natural  or  artifi-

*  The  line  of  the  spine  must  he  avoided,  ou  account  of  the  excessive  pain  occa-
sioned hy  the  pustules  in  this  place. — Author.
t  Istoria  ragiouata  de'  Morbi,  etc.  Napoli,  1765.


DRY  CATARRH.


89


cial.  I  give  the  preference  to  the  last  in  herpetic  cases.  3.  The
internal  use  of  the  carbonates  of  soda,  potass,  or  ammonia,  in  a
dose  of  from  twelve  to  thirty-six  grains  per  day,  diffused  in  all
the  patient's  drink ;  or  the  sulphureous  saline  mineral  waters,
particularly  of  Bonnes  and  Cauterets.

The  employment  of  these  means  ought  to  be  persevered  in
for  several  months  at  least,  even  when  they  afford  the  most
speedy  relief.  I  have  never  observed  any  ill  effects  from  them,
and  I  have  frequently  employed  the  soap,  more  especially,  for
two  or  three  years  without  intermission.  A  great  many  per-
sons, who  had  already  emphysema  of  the  lungs,  and  either  in-
cessant dyspoena,  or  very  frequent  fits  of  asthma,  have,  to  my
own  knowledge,  been  restored,  under  this  kind  of  treatment,  to
a  state  of  health  so  comfortable,  that  they  hardly  exhibited  any
signs  of  disease,  and  considered  themselves  as  entirely  cured.
After  the  employment  of  these  means  for  a  certain  period,  the
pearly  sputa  become  more  abundant ;  or  if  there  had  been  pre-
viously no  expectoration  of  the  sort,  this  now  takes  place.  At
the  same  time  the  tenacity  of  the  sputa  is  diminished ;  they  be-
come diffluent,  and  lose  their  rounded  form ;  and  relief  of  the
oppression  is  experienced.  This  plan  of  treatment  is  often  most
efficacious  where  the  disease  is  most  severe.  I  know  not  what
may  be  thought  of  the  theory  on  which  it  is  founded.  Animal
chemistry  is  yet  too  imperfect  to  furnish  the  solution  of  the  pro-
blem.* No  doubt  it  would  be  better  if  we  could  dispense  with

*  The  preceding  section  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  valuable  in  the  whole
work.  In  it  I  think  we  have  more  insight  into  the  true  nature  of  one  very  nume-
rous class  of  cases  of  asthma,  than  in  all  the  voluminous  writings  of  authors  on  this
disease  ;  while  in  the  chapters  on  emphysema  of  the  lungs  and  on  nervous  asthma,
in  a  subsequent  part  of  the  treatise,  we  have  such  additional  light  thrown  upon  this
disease,  that  it  may  henceforth,  in  a  great  measure,  be  considered  as  raised  from
the  obscurity  of  hypothesis  into  the  light  of  rational  pathology.  Once  made  ac-
quainted with  the  existence  of  the  disease  described  in  the  preceding  section,  and
its  common  consequence,  emphysema  of  the  lungs,  we  perceive  their  applicability
to  the  explanation  of  most  of  the  phenomena  of  the  different  forms  of  asthma  not  de-
pendent on  disease  of  the  heart.  If  the  asthmatic  attack  itself  is  the  immediate
consequence  of  a  spasmodic  affection  of  the  minute  bronchi,  and  this,  I  think,  can
hardly  be  called  in  question — it  must  be  admitted  that  the  remote  cause  of  the  spasm,
in  a  great  many  cases,  is  to  be  found  in  that  condition  of  the  bronchial  membrane
which  constitutes  the  disease  so  admirably  described  by  our  author,  in  the  preceding-
section  ;  and  I  am  convinced  that  a  very  great  proportion  of  the  fits  of  asthma,  im-
mediately owe  their  origin  to  exciting  causes,  which  operate  by  aggravating  the
habitual  state  of  disorder  existing  in  the  membrane.  Of  these  causes,  beyond  com-
parison the  most  frequent  is  cold,  or  at  least  that  class  of  agencies,  which,  in  a  dif-
ferent degree  and  in  other  circumstances,  give  rise,  in  healthy  or  delicate  subjects,
to  the  phenomena  of  catarrh.  When  we  consider  that  this  disease  in  fact  habitu-
ally exists  in  these  persons,  keeping  up  a  most  unnatural  sensibility  in  the  affected
parts  to  impressions  from  without  and  when  we  consider,  at  the  same  time,  how
easily  a  part  that  is  in  a  state  of  inflammatory  irritation  is  excited  to  spasm,  we
need  not  be  surprised  at  the  facility  with  which  the  asthmatic  paroxysms  are  excited
by  perceptible  or  imperceptible  causes.  Of  these  exciting  causes,  as  I  have  al-
ready said,  the  impression  of  cold  or  at  least  the  alternation  of  temperature,  is  that
which  reasoning  would  lead  us  to  expect  to  be  incomparably  the  most  frequent,  and
which  we  accordingly  find  to  be  so  in  fact. A  minute  investigation  of  all  the  cir-


90


1HIY (' AT  Aftllll.


all  theory  ;  but  this  is  impossible:  the  numerous  and  diverse
facts  which  constitute  the  science  of  physic,  can  only  be  classed
in  the  memory  by  the  aid  of  some  systematic  bond,  It  is,  in-
deed, much  to  be  desired  that  less  importance  were  attributed  to
views,  which,  after  all,  can  only  be  considered  as  the  scaffolding
of  the  science ;  and  more  especially  it  is  to  be  wished  that  the

cumstances  attending  the  renewal  of  an  asthmatic  paroxysm,  will  convince  any  one
of  this,  in  a  great  majority  of  cases.  I  would  add,  that  in  all  cases  the  exciting
cause  is,  and  in  most  cases  can  he  traced  to  be,  an  irritant  of  some  kind  or  other,
acting  on  the  too  sensible  membrane  of  the  bronchi.  This  view  of  the  pathology  of
the  disease  is  supported  by  an  examination  of  the  facts  recorded  in  all  our  best  works
on  Asthma,  particularly  those  of  Floyer,  Withers,  Ryan  and  Bree.  In  the  writings
of  the  first  and  last  named  authors,  who  studied  the  complaint  in  their  own  persons,
there  is  abundant  evidence  that  the  disease  in  them  was  a  dry  catarrh,  and  that  the
paroxysms,  in  a  great  majority  of  instances,  were  excited  by  cold.  In  the  case  of
Dr.  Bree  this  is  more  particularly  evident.  In  the  very  sensible  work  of  Dr.  Ryan,
the  paramount  influence  of  cold  in  exciting  the  disease,  is  established  by  many  facts,
and  ingenious  observations.  The  same  influence  is  admirably  illustrated  in  some
cases  detailed  by  the  late  Dr.  Watt,  in  his  work  on  Diabetes,  &c.  page  247,  al-
though a  false  explanation  (I  conceive)  is  given  of  the  rationale  of  its  operation  in
producing  the  asthmatic  paroxysm.

As  in  every  other  case,  a  more  correct  pathology  in  this  disease  will  put  us  in  the
way  of  a  more  rational  practice.  Instead  of  wasting  our  efforts  in  attempting  to  ward
off  paroxysms  of  a  purely  spasmodic  nature,  by  measures  directed  to  the  nervous
system,  our  attention  will  be  directed  to  the  removal  of  the  real  disease,  the  struc-
tural alteration  and  preternatural  sensibility  of  the  bronchial  membrane.  How  far
the  attainment  of  the  first  of  these  two  objects,  the  removing  the  structural  alteration
is  within  our  power,  I  am  not  prepared  to  say  ;  but  I  presume  it  cannot  be  considered
as  essential  to  the  cure  of  the  disease,  since  we  know  that  this  state  may  and  does
exist,  in  innumerable  cases,  and  for  a  long  period,  without  producing  asthma.  Nei-
ther shall  I  inquire,  how  far  means  which  lessen  the  sensibility  of  the  membrane,
tend  to  restore  the  natural  organization.  I  think,  however,  both  reason  and  expe-
rience will  bear  us  out  in  expecting  more  benefit  from  means  that  lessen  the  sensi-
bility of  the  bronchial  membrane,  than  from  any  other.  And  with  this  view,  in  ad-
dition to  the  measures  recommended  in  the  text,  I  would  here  beg  leave  to  call  the
attention  of  practitioners  most  particularly  to  the  use  of  the  cold  bath.  This  remedy
was  rarely  recommended,  and  still  more  rarely  used  by  practitioners,  before  the  pub-
lication of  Dr.  Ryan's  excellent  work  on  asthma  in  1793.  In  this  work,  the  author
adduces  many  instances  of  successful  treatment  by  the  cold  bath,  and  recommends  its
adoption  in  very  strong  terms.  Since  Dr.  Ryan's  publication,  this  plan  has  been
more  frequently  had  recourse  to,  but  much  less  so,  I  conceive,  than  it  ought.  Dr.
Bree  appears  to  have  derived  great  benefit  from  it  in  his  own  case,  and  speaks  very
favourably  of  it.  as  a  remedy  ;  yet,  I  think,  he  dwells  much  less  upon  its  merits  than
it  would  appear  to  deserve,  I  have  myself  prescribed  it  with  much  benefit.  Every
practitioner  must  be  well  acquainted  with  the  effect  of  cold  bathing,  in  one  form  or
other,  in  lessening  the  sensibility  of  the  body  generally,  and  the  lungs  in  particular,
to  the  impressions  of  cold.  In  my  own  experience,  the  effect  of  sponging  the  chest
with  cold  water  and  salt  or  vinegar,  once  or  twice  a  day,  has  proved  of  immense
benefit  to  delicate  subjects,  and  more  especially  to  those  liable  to  catarrhal  affections,
and  to  persons  decidedly  phthisical.  In  these  cases,  although,  no  doubt,  the  prac-
tice proves  tonic  to  the  system  generally,  I  conceive  its  chief  operation  is  in  lessen-
ing the  sensibility  of  the  lungs  to  the  impression  of  cold.

To  the  list  of  remedies  mentioned  in  the  text,  there  are  two  which  ought  to  be
added  on  account  of  the  celebrity  they  have  obtained  in  this  country  in  the  cure  of
asthma  :  I  mean  the  oxvd  of  zinc  and  stramoniuJjb  For  a  full  account  of  the  opera-
tion of  the  former,  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  the  numerous  cases  treated  by  it  and
recorded  in  Dr.  Withers's  Treatise  on  the  Asthma,  published  in  1786.  In  many  of
these,  the  remedy  appears  to  have  been  efficacious  ;  although,  on  the  whole,  I  think
the  author  has  exaggerated  its  importance.  For  ampler  details  on  the  treatment  of
the  different  forms  of  asthma.  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  article,  Asthma,  in  the  Cyclo-
pedia of  Practical  Medicine,  written  by  the  translator  of  this  treatise.—  Traml.


CONVULSIVE CATAU  HIT.


91


attachment  to  theory  would  not  lead  many  persons  (as  it  does)
to  reject  the  very  facts  on  which  other  theories,  whether  ancient
or  modern,  hostile  to  their  own,  are  founded.

Sect.  VI. — Of  the  convulsive  catarrh  or  hooping-cough.

This  variety  of  the  pulmonary  catarrh  has  much  engaged  the
attention  of  practitioners,  as  well  on  account  of  its  frequency  as
its  occasional  severity.  It  holds  the  middle  place  between  the
pituitous  and  mucous  catarrh,  as  far  as  regards  the  nature  of  the
expectoration  and  the  bronchial  congestion,  and  it  possesses,  be-
sides, some  other  characters  peculiar  to  itself.  It  particularly
attacks  children,  and  seldom  occurs  twice  in  the  same  individual ;
hence,  no  doubt,  the  general  belief  of  its  contagious  nature.  The
truth  of  this  opinion  is,  however,  far  from  being  proved ;  and  it
is  certain  that  the  alternation  of  temperature  is  equally  a  cause
of  this  as  of  other  catarrhs.  The  cough  in  this  affection  returns
by  fits,  which  last  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  more.  Each  fit  is
composed  of  a  quick  succession  of  sonorous  coughs,  with  scarcely
any  perceptible  inspirations  between  ;  except  that  from  time  to
time  the  expirations  of  coughing  are  suddenly  interrupted  by  a
very  deep,  seemingly  convulsive  and  noisy  inspiration,  accom-
panied by  a  lengthened  hissing,  which  constitutes  the  pathogno-
monic sign  of  this  variety  of  catarrh.  The  face  becomes  swollen
and  livid  in  the  paroxysm,  and  particularly  before  the  sonorous
inspiration.  A  colourless  and  scarcely  frothy  but  ropy  phlegm
rather  flows  than  is  rejected  from  the  mouth,  after  each  paroxysm,
while  the  patient  leans  forward  to  favour  its  escape.  The  parox-
ysms at  first  recur  several  times  every  day,  being  almost  always
more  severe  towards  evening,  but  much  less  so  during  the  night.
After  a  certain  time,  they  return  only  in  the  morning  and  evening,
and  towards  the  end  of  the  disease,  in  the  evening  only.  There
is  more  of  periodicity  in  this  variety  of  catarrh  than  the  others :
before  it  goes  off  it  sometimes  assumes  a  tertian  period.  The
duration  of  the  hooping-cough  varies  from  a  few  weeks  to  several
months.  Before  it  terminates,  the  paroxysms  become  shorter,
lose  their  peculiar  characters,  and  are  attended  by  an  expectora-
tion more  decidedly  mucous.  It  is  not,  however,  easy  to  recog-
nize this  alteration,  on  account  of  the  habit  of  children  to  swallow
the  expectoration.  Sometimes  the  disease  degenerates  into  a
chronic  mucous  catarrh,  with  emaciation  and  other  symptoms  re-
st nibling  those  of  consumption.  In  the  intervals  of  the  parox-
ysms, the  patient  coughs  but  little,  preserves  his  appetite  and
strength,  and  has  rarely  any  fever  except  in  the  particular  case
just  mentioned,  or  in  the  onset  of  a  very  severe  attack.

The  stethoscopic  exploration  of  the  chest  in  the  intervals  of  the
fits,  supplies  only  the  usual  results  of  catarrh,  namelv,— a  feebler
:  respiration  than  natural,  or  the  complete  absence  of*  this  in  cer-


92


CONVULSIVE  CAT  ABB  H .


tain  points,  which  however  sound  well, — puerile  respiration  in
other  parts,  and,  occasionally,  a  slight  sonorous  or  sibilous  mucous
rhonchus.  During  the  fits,  we  can  only  perceive  the  shock  com-
municated to  the  chest  by  the  cough  ;  or,  at  most,  a  slight  de-
gree of  rhonchus,  and  also  of  the  respiratory  sound,  in  the  brief
intervals  between  the  coughs  ;  the  natural  sound  of  respiration,
whether  pulmonary  or  bronchial,  being  inaudible,  even  in  those
parts  of  the  lungs,  which,  immediately  before  and  after  the
paroxysm,  give  the  puerile  respiration.

The  peculiar  sonorous  inspiration,  pathognomonic  of  the  affec-
tion, appears  to  have  its  seat  exclusively  in  the  larynx  and  trachea.
The  absence  of  the  respiratory  sound  during  the  paroxysm,  can
only  be  explained  by  supposing  a  momentary  congestion,  from
blood  or  serum,  giving  rise  to  a  tumefaction  of  the  mucous  mem.
brane  sufficient  to  obstruct  the  bronchi,  or  by  a  spasmodic  con-
traction of  the  same  parts.  The  discovery  made  by  Reissessen*
of  a  circular  muscular  apparatus  in  the  smaller  bronchi,  would
satisfactorily  account  for  a  spasmodic  stricture  of  these  parts,
which  has  been  admitted  in  so  many  diseases  of  the  lungs,  by
numerous  authors,  without  further  proof  than  that  afforded  bv
the  symptoms.  I  must  confess  that  I  have  in  vain  looked  for  the
muscular  apparatus  described  by  Reissessen,  in  the  smaller  bron-
chial ramifications  of  the  human  subject ;  but  their  distinct  ex-
istence in  the  branches  of  a  larger  caliber, — some  facts  already
stated  by  me,  and  the  phenomena  of  several  of  the  varieties  of
asthma,  lead  me  to  regard  as  certain  the  possibility  of  the  tem-
porary occlusion,  by  spasmodic  contraction,  of  the  smaller  bron-
chial ramifications.  Be  this  as  it  may,  I  must  remark,  that  the
spasmodic  character  of  the  hooping-cough  is  sufficiently  evident
from  the  phenomena  which  occasionally  show  themselves  in  the
glottis,  larynx,  and  even  in  the  pendulous  veil  of  the  palate.  I
formerly  observed,  that  the  extraordinary  noises  made  by  certain
patients  in  breathing,  or  coughing,  are  owing  to  a  spasmodic  or
voluntary  contraction  of  the  parts  just  mentioned.  The  same  is
true  of  the  peculiar  sounds  which  attend  the  hooping-cough  ;  and
also  of  those  of  certain  cases  of  the  dry  catarrh,  commonly  deno-
minated nervous  or  gastric.  In  both  these  affections  I  have  met
with  patients  who  crowed  like  a  cock,  or  barked  like  a  dog.  Dr.
Bally  lately  sent  me  a  patient,  with  hooping-cough,  in  whom  the
paroxysms  were  accompanied  by  a  cooing  like  that  of  a  wood-
pigeon,  and  sufficiently  loud  to  be  heard  at  fifty  paces  distant.
This  latter  circumstance  at  once  convinced  me  that  the  sound  pro-
ceeded solely  from  the  fauces,  and  was  owing  to  a  spasmodic  con-
traction of  the  veil  of  the  palate  and  sides  of  the  glottis :  an  opinion
the  truth  of  which  the  application  of  the  stethoscope  at  once  de-
monstrated. This  opinion  was  still  further  confirmed  by  the  su-
pervention, a  few  days  afterwards,  of  a  cynanche  tonsillaris:  the

*  De  Fabrica  Pulmonis. Berlin,  1822.


CONVULSIVE  CATARRH.


93


cooing  disappeared  during  the  continuance  of  the  inflammation,
and  was  renewed,  but  in  a  less  degree,  on  its  subsidence.*

Treatment. — Bleeding  is  here  as  seldom  useful  as  in  the  other
varieties  of  catarrh.  Mucilaginous  and  saccharine  apozems  are
in  this  case,  as  in  others,  merely  expectant,  or  at  most  soothing
to  the  irritation  produced  by  the  cough  in  the  fauces.  There  is
one  other  way,  however,  in  which  they  may  exert  a  more  power-
ful and  direct  effect  on  the  disease.  If  the  patient  can  be  made
to  drink,  by  small  and  repeated  portions,  during  the  paroxysm,
this  is  sensibly  diminished  both  in  severity  and  duration ; — the
effort  of  deglutition  favouring  and  producing  deeper  inspirations,
probably  by  counteracting  the  spasm  of  the  bronchi. *f*  No  means
are  more  useful,  at  the  commencement  o^  hooping-cough,  than
emetics,  repeated  every  day  or  every  second  day,  for  one  or  two
weeks.  Children  are  well  known  to  support  this  kind  of  treat-
ment better  than  adults  ;  and  I  even  give  the  preference  in  their
case,  to  emetic  tartar  over  ipecacuan,  as  well  on  account  of  the
great  inequality  of  power  in  the  latter,  as  because  the  former,  on

*  The  opinions  of  the  numerous  authors  who  have  written  on  Hooping-Cough,
respecting  its  cause,  nature,  and  seat,  are  very  various.  The  completest  view
that  we  have  of  these  is  given  in  the  work  of  Desruelles,  published  in  182?  ;
and  to  this  and  the  Treatise  of  Dr.  Watt,  published  in  1813,  the  reader  is  referred
for  much  ampler  details  respecting  the  disease  generally,  than  are  to  be  found  in  the
present  work.  Our  author's  account  is  especially  defective  in  the  history  of  the  ear-
liest and  latest  stages,  as  he  neither  notices  the  slight  but  important  symptoms  which
usher  in  the  more  formal  malady,  nor  yet  traces  its  progress  through  the  ulterior
stages  when  it  terminates  fatally.  This  last  point  is  particularly  attended  to  in  the
work  of  Dr.  Watt.  The  following  is  a  brief  synoptical  view  of  the  principal  opinions
promulgated  by  the  moderns  concerning  the  seat  and  nature  of  the  hooping-cough,
with  the  names  of  their  chief  supporters.  It  is  proper,  however,  to  remark,  that  se-
veral of  the  writers  included  under  the  same  head,  although  agreeing  generally  as  to
the  nature  of  the  disease,  sometimes  advocate  considerable  and  peculiar  modifica-
tions of  the  common  doctrine.

1.  A  nervous  disease,  according  to  the  common  acceptation  of  that  term. — Cullen;
Bbhme;  Guibert.

2.  An  idiopathic  affection  of  the  pulmonic  and  diaphragmatic  nerves. — Hufeland  ;
Jahn  ;  Lobenstein  ;  Albers  ;  Wendt;  Paldamus.

3.  A  nervous  affection  of  the  lungs,  from  sympathy  with  other  organs,  but  chiefly
with  the  stomach  and  bowels. — Stoll ;  Butter;  Waldschmidt;  Chambon;  Danz(?).

4.  A  catarrh  of  the  lungs  and  stomach.  "  Affection  pneumogastrique  pituiteuse."
— Tourtelle.

5.  '1  he  same,  but  conjoined  with  a  spasmodic  affection  of  the  glottis  and  diaphragm.
— Gardien;  Millot.

6.  Primary  affection  of  the  brain,  exciting  spasmodic  affection  of  the  respiratory
apparatus. — Leroy  ;  Boisseau  ;  Webster  ;  Otto  ;  Begin.

7.  Inflammation  of  the  larynx  and  glottis. — Astruc  ;  Dawson.

8.  Primary  bronchitis,  or  pulmonary  catarrh,  inducing  directly  spasm  of  some  part
of  the  respiratory  apparatus. — Darwin  ;  Watt ;  Marcus;  Laennec;  Brossais ;  Guer-
sent;  Dewees;  Fourcade-Prunel ;  Duges.

9.  Primary  Bronchitis  inducing  cephilic  irritation,  and  this  in  its  turn  exciting  the
spasmodic  affection  o*"tbe  respiratory  organs.—  Desruelles.

10.  Insects  irritating  the  bronchial  membrane. — Rosenstein ;  Linnaeus.

Traml.

*  It  is  well  known  that  several  species  of  animals,  such  as  the  tortoise,  frog,  &c.,
whose  thorax  is  immovable,  perform  inspiration  only  by  means  of  deglutition. —
Author.


in


COXVULSIVK  I'ATAKltH.


account  of  its  solubility,  is  much  more  easily  administered  in
doses  proportioned  to  the  exigency  of  the  case.  After  emetics,
narcotics  in  small  doses  are  generally  very  beneficial.  Much  has
been  said,  of  late  years,  of  the  extract  and  recent  powder  of  the
belladonna ;  and  I  consider  it  to  be  superior  to  other  plants  of
the  same  family.  The  dose  is  from  an  eighth  to  half  a  grain.
Its  efficacy  in  lessening  the  severity  of  the  cough,  and  shortening
the  duration  of  the  disease,  may  be  accounted  for  in  several  ways:
it  lessens  the  necessity  of  respiration,  and  consequently  dyspnoea,
more  certainly  than  any  other  narcotic ;  and  it  seems  proper,
like  all  the  medicines  of  this  class,  to  obviate  the  spasm  of  the
bronchi,  to  diminish  the  irritation  produced  in  these  by  the
vascular  congestion  of  their  mucous  membrane,  and  to  lessen  its
augmented  secretion.  The  extract  of  common  daffodil  (narcis-
sus pseudo-narcissus,  L.)  and  also  the  infusion  of  its  petals,  were
proposed,  some  years  since,  as  a  sort  of  specific  against  this  dis-
ease. I  have  used  the  extract  much,  and  have  occasionally  seen
it  effect  surprisingly  rapid  cures, — for  instance,  in  five  or  six
days ;  but  this  result  is  rare ;  and  as  a  general  remedy  I  find  it
much  less  efficacious  than  belladonna.  The  usual  mode  of  ad-
ministering the  pseudo-narcissus,  is  to  give  half  a  grain,  a  grain,
or  two  grains,  every  two,  four,  or  six  hours,  according  to  the
patient's  strength.  Its  mode  of  action  is  yet  imperfectly  known.
In  a  pretty  large  dose,,  it  exerts  a  very  conspicuous  influence
over  the  nervous  system,  and  even  produces  convulsions.  When
the  paroxysms  of  hooping-cough  assume  a  periodical  type,  cin-
chona or  the  sulphate  of  quinine,  given  as  in  cases  of  ague,  are
often  as  efficacious  as  in  this  disease.  I  have  seldom  found  blis-
ters of  much  use.  Autenrieth  has  proposed,  as  a  substitute  for
these,  the  tartar  emetic  ointment  applied  in  succession  to  different
parts  of  the  chest.  I  have  occasionally  found  more  benefit  from
this  than  from  blisters.  Frictions  with  oil,  over  the  whole  sur-
face of  the  body,  have  been  recommended  as  the  principal
means  of  treatment  by  Poutingon  ;  and  I  have  sometimes  de-
rived benefit  from  their  employment.  I  have  also  seen  good
effects  from  these  in  certain  cases  of  the  chronic  dry  catarrh,
where  the  disease  was  constantly  aggravated  by  the  supervention
of  acute  attacks  on  the  slightest  alteration  of  the  weather.  This
mode  of  increasing  the  cutaneous  perspiration,  which  constituted
so  important  a  part  in  the  hygeine  of  the  ancients,  has  certainly
been  too  much  neglected  by  the  moderns.*

*  In  the  very  brief  notice  of  the  treatment  adapted  to  this  disease,  given  by  our
author,  many  modes  of  practice,  at  least  as  beneficial  as  those  mentioned,  hove  been
overlooked.  Notwithstanding  the  condemnation  of  bleeding  in  the  text,  it  is  un-
questionably very  proper  in  many  cases,  and  in  some  absolutely  necessary.  In  di-
recting its  employment,  which  is  indicated  chiefly  by  the  supervention  of  more
formal  inflammation  in  the  bronchi  or  lungs,  the  stethoscope  is  of  great  use.

In  a  short  but  excellent  article  on  this  disease,  by  Dr.  Johnson,  of  Dublin,  in
the  Cyclopa-dia  of  Practical  Medicine,  the  attention  of  the  practitioner  has  been  most


S  V  M 1'  T  O  M  A  T I G ( ■  A T  A  HUH.


95


Sect.  VII. — Of  symptomatic  catarrhs.

Pulmonary  catarrh  co-exists  habitually  with  a  great  many
affections  of  the  pleura  and  lungs,  and  likewise  with  most  diseases
of  a  general  nature,  such  as  fevers  of  all  kinds,  gout,  scurvy,  &c.

A  long  and  attentive  observation  of  the  phenomena  of  disease,
lboth  in  the  living  and  dead  body,  has  led  me  to  the  conclusion
which  I  am  now  about  to  state;  and  I  am  convinced  that  the  re-
petition of  the  same  means  will  lead  others  to  the  same  results:
,  r  nothing  proves  that  the  severest  and  most  prolonged  catarrh  tends
hto  produce  any  other  affection  of  the  chest,  if  we  except  (and
this  is  of  very  rare  occurrence)  emphysema  of  the  lungs  and  dila-

;  judiciously  called  to  the  more  important  affections  which  complicate  hooping-cough,
laas  the  points  on  which  the  event  of  the  disease,  at  least  in  the  severer  cases,  often

\  hinges.  The  chief  complications  noticed  by  him  are,  peripneumony,  gastric,  or  in-
fantile remittent  fever,  and  hydrocephalus.  In  each  of  these  complications  the  treat-
Ill  ment  of  the  superadded  disease  is  of  much  more  importance  than  that  of  the  primarv
4  i  hooping-cough.  In  these  complications  leeches  to  the  head  or  chest,  or  praecordia,
I  n  may  be  respectively  most  useful,  as  well  as  other  kinds  of  treatment  applicable  in
j \<  such  cases.  Many  medicines  supposed  to  possess  a  specific  power  in  curing  the
I  J  disease  have  been  recommended  by  various  authors,  and  are  still  in  constant  use,
■•  either  by  practitioners  or  the  vulgar.  Some  of  these,  if  not  all,  have  been  found  be-
I  aneficial  in  various  cases  ;  and  most  of  them  may  admit  of  a  trial,  without  risk,  in  the

]  latter  stages  of  the  disease,  when  no  inflammatory  complication  exists. I  copy  the
list  as  given  by  Dr.  Johnson  : — Opium,  cicuta,  belladonna,  digitalis,  bark,  cupraoss,

i arsenic,  nitrate  of  silver,  assafretida,  castor,  musk,  artificial  musk,  camphor,  oil  of
i  a  amber,  meadow  narcissus,  the  alkalies,  antimony,  cantharides,  acetate  of  lead,
jlccocbineal.  As  the  most  important  of  all  I  would  add,  change  of  air.  (See  Dr.  Clark'*
-  v  work  on  the  Influence  of  Climate.) — Transl.

LITERATURE  OF  HOOPING-COUGH.

The  following  are  the  principal  distinct  works  on  hooping-cough,  arranged  nearlv
iiin  the  order  of  their  publication. It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark,  that  the  disease
:is  also  treated  of  in  most  of  our  general  systematic  works,  and  in  the  treatises  on  dis-
ji eases  of  children. References  to  these,  as  well  as  to  the  multitude  of  Theses  on
1 Hooping  Cough  in  the  University  Collections,  and  to  the  almost  innumerable  papers-
in  the  transactions  of  societies  and  the  medical  journals  of  different  countries,  would
I  »■  swell  this  notice  to  an  inconvenient  and  disproportionate  size. And  I  may  take  this
1 opportunity  of  stating  that  the  same  remark  applies  to  all  the  bibliographical  notices
I  iiin  the  present  work.

1765. Williams  (John.)  Histories  of  wounds  of  the  head,  with  remarks  on  the  con-
vulsive cough. Falmouth,  8vo.
I  11757.  Fothergill  (J..M.D.) Letter  on  the  cure  of  chincough. Loud.  (Med.  Obs.
$  Inq.  vol.  iii.)

I  11769.  Millar  (John,  M.D.)  Observ.  on  the  asthma  and  hooping  cough. Lond.  8vo.
I  1 1770.  Mellin  (C.  J.) Von  dem  keickhusten  der  kinder. Frank/.  8vo.
I  11773.  Butter  (W.,  M.D.) Treatise  on  the  kinkcough.  Lond.  8vo.
11774.  Kirkland  (Thos  ) Pertussis. Animadversions  on  the  late  treatise  on  kink-
cough. Lond.  8vo.  (anon.)
1 1776.  Holdefreund  (F.  It.  S.)  Vom  epidemischen  stickhusten  der  kinder.  Helm.  8vo.
11786.  Hayes  (Th.^ A  serious  address  on  coughs,  with  obs.  on  hooping  cough. —

3rd  Ed.  Lond.  8vo.
11790.  Meltzer  (F.  K.) Abhandlung  vom  keichhusten. T.eipz.  8vo.


9G


SYMPTOMATIC  CATARRH.


tation  of  the  bronchi ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  scarcely
a  single  disease  of  the  lungs  and  pleura,  which  does  not,  from  its
very  onset,  give  rise  to  cough  and  expectoration,  in  other  words,
to  catarrh.  The  greater  number  of  peripneumonies  come  on
suddenly ;  some  cases  supervene  to  a  catarrh,  acute  or  chronic ;
but  nothing  is  more  uncommon  than  to  see  a  peripneumony  suc-
ceed to  a  catarrh  of  such  severity  as  to  lead  us  to  attribute,  with
any  degree  of  probability,  the  origin  of  the  former  to  the  exten-
sion of  the  inflammation  from  the  mucous  membrane.  It  is  still
rarer  to  witness  the  origin  of  pleurisy  under  these  circumstances.
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  scarcely  any  case  of  pleurisy  or  peri-
pneumony, even  latent,  which  is  not  accompanied,  at  least  to-
wards its  close,  with  catarrhal  expectoration.  In  the  latter
disease,  more  especially,  this  expectoration  is  sometimes  so  co-
pious, and  the  catarrhal  symptoms  so  strongly  marked,  as  to
mask  the  symptoms  of  peripneumony,  in  the  apprehension  of
practitioners  who  are  unacquainted  with  more  precise  signs  of
those  affections.  This  complication  constitutes  the  peripneu-
monia notha  of  Sydenham,  the  angina  bronchialis  of  Stoll,  and
the  false  fluxion  on  the  chest  of  the  French  practitioners  of  the
last  century.

Phthisis  pulmonalis  has  been  considered,  even  up  to  the  pre-
sent time,  as  a  frequent  consequence  of  pulmonary  catarrh.  Bayle
was  the  first  to  attack  this  opinion.  M.  Broussais,  who  had  sup-
ported it  at  a  time  when  no  one  thought  of  calling  its  truth  in
question,  still  defends  it.* This  question  is  of  sufficient  impor-

1791.  Danz  (F.  G.  W.) Versucli  einer  allgemein.  gescliicbte  des  keichhustens. —

Marb.  8vo.  (2nd  Ed.  1802.)
1794.  Jones  (Gale.) Obs.  on  the  nature  and  treatment  of  the  hooping  cough.

Lond.  8vo.  (Brunonian.)
1798.  Burton  (J.  M.  B.,  M.  D.) A  treat,  on  the  non-naturals,  with  an  essay  on  chin

cough. York.  8vo.

1805.  Paldamus  (V.  II.  L.) Der  Stickhusten  nach  neuern  nnsichten  bearbeitet.
Halle.  8vo.

1808.  Jabn  (F.) Ueber  den  keichhusten. Rudolst.  8vo.

1809.  Lando  (V.)  Memoria  sopra  la  tosse  in  Genoa  nelF  anno  1806.  Genoa.  8vo.
1811.  Loebenstein-Loebel  (E.) Erkenntniss  und  heilung  der  hautigen  briiune,  des

keichhustens,  &c. Lei),z.  8vo.
1813.  Watt  (Rob.,  M.D.) A  treatise  on  the  chin  cough. Glasgoiv.  8vo.
£ 1813.  Clossius  (J.)  Etwas  ueber  die  quellen,  &c.  deskeuchh.  der  kinder.  Hadam. 8vo.

1815.  Penada  (Giac.) Memoria  sulla  tosse  convulsiva. Verona.  8vo.

1816.  Marcus  (A.  F.) Der  keichhusten,  ueber  seine  erkenntniss,  &c. I^eipz.  8vo.

1821.  Id. Traite  de  la  coqueluche.  Trad,  par  E.  L.  Jacques. Paris.  8vo.

1822.  Waterhouse  (J.) On  tussis  convulsiva  or  whooping  cough.  Boston.  8vo.
1824.  Peirson  (  A.  L.) Medical  dissertation  on  chin  cougli. Salem.  8vo.
1827.  Desruelles  (H.) Traite  de  la  coqueluche. Paris.  8vo.

1813.  Gardien. Diet,  des  Sc.  Med.t.  6.
•  1823.  Guersent. Diet,  de  Med.  t.  6.

1830.  Duges. Diet,  de  Med.  et  de  Cbir.  Prat,  t.  5.
1833.  Johnson. Cyclopedia  of  Practical  Med. vol.  ii.

Willis. Sydenham.  Morton.  Cullen.  Frank.  Good. — Transl.


*  Ph1egma8ies  Chron.  Paris,  1821.


SYMPTOMATIC  CATARRH.


97


tance  to  merit  a  particular  investigation,  and  I  shall  return  to  it
when  treating  of  consumption.  At  present  I  shall  content  my-
self with  observing,  that  we  see  a  thousand  instances  of  catarrh
■for  one  of  phthisis ;  and  that  we  hardly  ever  meet  with  a  case  of
the  latter  disease  which  arrives  at  a  fatal  termination,  without
^exhibiting,  after  the  nature  of  it  has  become  clear,  an  abundant
ccatarrhal  expectoration.  Besides,  this  kind  of  expectoration  con-
stitutes always  the  greatest  portion  of  the  sputa  of  phthisical
subjects.

One  of  the  most  interesting  results  with  which  auscultation
hhas  furnished  me,  is  the  constant  presence  of  a  catarrhal  affec-
ttion  of  the  lungs,  either  latent  or  manifest,  during  the  whole
course  of  continued  fevers. At  the  commencement,  and  most
.commonly  through  the  whole  period  of  the  fever,  the  catarrh
lis  latent,  without  cough  or  expectoration,  and  only  to  be  dis-
covered by  the  stethoscope. Sometimes  it  becomes  manifest  on
:the  approach  of  a  crisis  ;  and  indeed  the  crisis  by  expectoration,
moticed  by  the  ancients,  and  which  I  have  myself  had  frequent
occasions  to  remark,  are  neither  more  nor  less  than  this  catarrh.
[Catarrhal  fevers  are  those  in  which  the  catarrh  just  stated  to  be
inseparable  from  continued  fevers,  early  unmasks  itself,  and
.gives  rise  to  a  copious  mucous  expectoration. The  same  term
has  also  been  applied  to  those  violent  catarrhs  which  are  ac-
companied by  a  symptomatic  fever  ;  but  in  this  case  the  fever,
[though  considerable  at  first,  and  often  of  long  continuance,  soon
Hoses  the  character  of  acute  fevers,  terminating  long  before  the
catarrhal  affection,  and  never  presents  that  combination  of  cere-
hbral  congestions  and  abdominal  disorder,  more  or  less  severe,
exhibited  by  true  idiopathic  fevers,  which  must  be  considered  as
diseases  affecting  at  the  same  time  a  great  many  organs,  and,
pperhaps,  still  more  particularly  the  fluids. In  eruptive  fevers
the  pulmonary  catarrh  is  equally  constant,  and  most  commonly
in  them  it  is  manifest. In  measles  it  is  well  known  always  to  be
so  ;  and  it  continues  often  for  a  long  time  after  this  disorder  is
cured. The  same  thing  occasionally  takes  place  after  simple
continued  fevers;  but  in  these,  I  have  also  had  frequent  occasion
to  observe,  that  when  a  crisis  takes  place,  at  the  very  time  when
the  lateritious  sediment  shows  itself  in  the  urine,  every  sign  (even
stethoscopic)  of  perhaps  a  very  intense  and  extended  catarrh
disappears  at  once,  with  the  coma,  tympanitic  affection,  quick
pulse,  heat,  and  earthy  character,  of  the  skin. During  the
irparoxysms  of  intermittent  fevers,  the  stethoscope  detects,  in  like
nmanner,  symptoms  of  catarrh,  for  the  most  part  dry  and  latent,
,iand  of  which  some  traces  remain  in  the  intervals. Even  the
f'feyers,  which  are  most  decidedly  symptomatic,  for  instance,  those
naming  from  a  wound,  very  commonly  present  the  same  pheno-
mena. It  would,  therefore,  seem,  that  the  first  effect  of  febrile


9K


S  V  M  ['TOM  A  TIC CAT  A  It  11 H .


action  is  to  produce  a  congestion  in  the  mucous  membrane  of  the
bronchi :  and  this  effect  is  readily  conceived  on  taking  into  con-
sideration the  energy  of  the  actions  of  concentration  and  expan-
sion which  constitute  fever.*  The  inflammatory  fever  of  noso-
logists,  that  is,  the  fever  characterised  by  a  flushed  countenance,
moist  and  clean  tongue,  and  a  moist  and  moderately  hot  skin,  is
of  all  fevers  that  in  which  the  marks  of  dry  catarrh  are  the  least
perceptible.  I  have  even  observed  two  cases  of  this  fever  in
which  the  sound  of  respiration  through  their  whole  course,  was
uniformly  strong  and  pure,  that  is,  unmixed  with  any  kind  of
rhonchus,  over  the  whole  extent  of  the  lungs.  It  may  here  be
remarked,  that  this  species  of  fever  is  of  all  the  least  liable  to
change  into  another  form ;  that  it  is  rarely  accompanied  by
symptoms  of  any  considerable  degree  of  cerebral  congestion  ;
that  it  is  hardly  ever  attended  by  signs  of  irritation,  or  by  erup-
tions, or  ulcerations  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  intestines,
or  by  a  tympanitic  state  of  the  same ;  and,  lastly,  that  it  is
almost  the  only  fever  in  which  the  blood  exhibits  the  inflamma-
tory crust.  In  all  these  respects,  then,  the  inflammatory  fever
appears  to  differ,  either  in  its  nature  or  cause,  from  other  con-
tinued fevers;  it  is  unquestionably  the  most  simple  of  any,  and
can  least  of  all  be  considered  as  a  primary  affection  of  the  solids.
Pulmonary  catarrh  is  occasionally  a  striking  symptom  of  per-
nicious remittent  fevers.  This  appears  to  have  been  the  case  in
the  epidemic  catarrhal  fever  of  1778,  since  we  find  a  French

*  "  Cet  effet  se  concoit  facilement  d'apres  l'energie  des  mouvement  de  concentra-
tion et  d'expansion  qui  constituent  la  fievre."  Although  1  have  translated  this  para-
graph, I  cannot  say  that  I  quite  understand  it.  The  statement  of  facts  immediately
preceding  it,  is  very  intelligible,  and  of  extreme  importance,  both  in  a  pathological
and  practical  point  of  view.  The  reader  will  not  fail  to  observe,  in  many  parts  of
this  work,  a  very  marked  hostility  to  tbe  doctrines  of  M.  Broussais  ;  and  no  doubt
this  discovery  of  the  constant  affection  of  the  bronchial  membrane  in  fever,  is  con-
sidered by  our  author  as  militating  most  powerfully  against  the  exclusive  doctrine  of
that  pathologist.  In  a  practical  point  of  view,  however,  I  only  see  in  it  a  cause  for
extending  the  general  principle  of  treatment  advocated  by  Broussais.

I  would  be  disposed  to  look  upon  Laennec's  demonstration  of  the  universal  pre-
sence of  bronchial  congestion  in  fever  as  an  additional  argument  in  favour  of  the
existence  of  a  similar  state  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach  and  intestines,
and  would  deduce  the  practical  conclusion  from  it,  that  we  should  also  endeavour  to
relieve  the  former  as  well  as  the  latter,  by  topical  applications  and  the  religious
avoidance  of  all  stimuli.  The  opinion  of  our  author,  that  the  congestion  of  the  mu-
cous membrane  is  the  effect  and  not  the  cause  of  the  Jirst  febrile  movement,  is  cer-
tainly more  tenable  than  the  reverse  ;  but  the  admission  of  its  being  the  effect  of  the
first  movements,  is  almost  equivalent,  in  a  practical  point  of  view,  to  the  admission  of
its  being  the  cause  of  these.

The  investigations  of  the  French  pathologists  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  very  fre-
quent affection  of  the  gastro  intestinal  mucous  membrane  in  fever ;  the  facts  just
stated  by  Laennec  equally  demonstrate  the  affection  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the
lungs ;  may  we  not,  therefore,  presume,  that  many  other  parts  of  the  system  are  in
an  analogous  state  1  And,  in  reference  to  this  opinion,  may  we  not  consider  the
state  of  the  tongue  (a  mucous  surface,  and  indeed  a  portion  of  the  great  intestinal
mucous  membrane)  as  an  index  of  the  existence  of  this  affection  of  the  mucous  sys-
tem, ymewherel—Trantl.


SYMPTOMATIC  ( :  A  T  A  R  R  H .


99


Medical  Society  about  this  time  giving  it  as  a  prize  question, —
"  To  ascertain  the  relations  of  remittent  catarrhal  and  pernici-
ous fevers."*

Gouty  persons  are  very  subject  to  pulmonary  catarrhs,  parti-
cularly when  the  gout  has  ceased  to  be  regular  ;  and  in  them  the
disease  puts  on  the  character  of  the  chronic  mucous  catarrh,  and
sometimes  of  the  suffocative. Scurvy,  chronic  eruptive  diseases,

*  LITERATURE  OF  CATARRH  AND  BRONCHITIS.

1556.  Paparella  (Sebast.) De  Catarrho  Lib.  II. Venet.  18mo.
1565.  Botallus  (L.) Comment,  de  Catarrbo. Lugd.  4to.
1597.  Kuurath  (H.) Von  allerlei  fluessen  und  Katarrhen.  Leipz.8vo.
1611.  Duval  (Jacq.) Methode  de  guerir  les  catarrhes. Rouen.  12mo.
1615.  Pascbettus  (Bart.) De  destillatione,  catarrho  vulgo  dicta. Venet.  4to.
1624.  Vigirius  (Joan.) Tractatus  de  catarrbo. Genev.  12mo.
1650.  Helmont  (J.  B.  Van.)  Deliramenta  catarrbi.  Transl.  by  Dr.  Charlton.  Lond.
4to.

1664.  Schneider  (Con.  Vict.) De  catarrhis. Witteb.  4to.

1696.  Graetz  (J.  H.) Epistola  de  arteria  et  vena  bronchiali  necnon  de  polypis

bronchiorum  ejectis. Amst.  4to.
1761.  Lower  (R.,  M.D  ) De  catarrho. Lond.  8vo.
1761.  Chandler  (J.) A  treatise  on  the  disease  called  a  cold. Lond.  8vo.
1763. Baker  (Sir  G.,  M.  D.) De  catarrho  et  dysenteria  Londinensi. Lond.  4to.
1776.  Moneta  (C.  J.  de) Abhandl.  dass  die  kalte  und  das  kalte  wasser  in  katarrh-

krankheiten  die  beste  huell'smittel  sind. Watschau.  8vo.
1786.  Hayes  (Th.)  A  serious  address  on  the  cons,  of  neglecting  coughs.  Lond.8vo.
1789.  Mudge  (John) A  radical  cure  for  a  catarrhous  cough. Lond.  8vo.
1792.  Beddoes  (Th.  M.D.) Observations  on  calculus,  catarrh,  &c. Lond.  8vo.
1795.  Davidson  (W.) Observations  on  the  pulmonary  system. Lond.  8vo.
1797.  Kelson  (T.  M.) Remarks  on  the  nature  and  cure  of  colds. Lond.  8vo.

1799.  Romain  ( ) Essai  sur  la  maniere  de  traiter  les  catarrhes. Verdun.  8vo.

1800.  Ibbeken  ( ) Ueber  die  gefahr  des  schnupfens. Stettin.  12mo.
1802.  La  Roche  (B.) Essai  sur  le  catarrhe  pulmonaire  aigu. Paris.  8 vo.
1804.  Tode  (J.  C.) Ueber  Husten  und  schnupfen. Kopenh.  8vo.

1807.  White  (E.L.) A  popular  essay  on  the  disease  termed  a  cold. Lond.  8vo.

1808.  Broussais  (F.  I.  V.) Histoire  des  phlegmasies  chron. Par.  3rd  ed.  1826.

1807.  Cabanis  (P.  J.  G.) Observations  sur  les  affections  catarrhales. Paris,  8vo.

1808.  Badham  (Ch.,  M.  D.) Observations  on  the  inflammatory  affections  of  the

mucous  membrane  of  the  bronchi. Lond.  12mo.

1809.  Cheyne  (J.,  M.D.)  The  pathol.  of  the  memb.  «f  thelarynx,  &c.  Edin.  8vo.
1813.  Duncan  (A.,  M.D.)  Obs.  on  the  different  species  of  consumption.  Ed.  8vo.
1813.  Traweitschek  (J.  J.  N.) Natur  and  heilung  des  nasenkatarrhs.  Bruns.  8vo.

1813.  Renauldin. Diet,  des  Sc.  Med. (Art.  catarrhe.)  t.  4. Par.  8vo.

1814.  Badham  (Ch.,  M.D.) An  essay  on  bronchitis,  2nd  ed. Lond.  12mo.
1818.  Armstrong  (J.,  M.D.)  Practical  observations  on  scarlet  fever,  &c.  Lond.  8vo.
1820.  Hastings  (Ch.,  M.D.)  Treat,  on  infl.ofthemuc.  memb.  of  the  lungs.  Lond.8vo.
1820.  Alcock  (Tbos.) On  inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  lungs.

(Med.  Intelligencer  No.  7,  8.) Lond.  8vo.
1822. Chomel. Diet,  de  med. (Art.  catarrhe.)  t.  4. Par.  8vo.
1824.  Andral  (G.) Clinique  medicale,  tome  II. Par.  1824,  8vo.
1826.  Porter  (W.  H.) On  the  surgical  pathology  of  the  larynx,  &c. Dub.  8vo.
1826.  Gendrin  (A.  N.) Histoire  anatomique  des  inflammations. 2  vols.  Par.  8vo.

1830.  Roche. Diet,  de  Med.  et  de  Chir. (Art.  bronchite.)  t.  4.  1830.

1831.  Horn. Encyclopaid.  Woerterbuch. (Art.  bronchitis.) B.  6. Berlin,  8vo.
1833.  Williams. Cyclopajdia  of  practical  medicine. Vol.  I. (Art.  catanh,  co-

ryzu,  bronchitis.)  Lond.
Forestus,  Willis,  Morton,  Stoll,  Sydenham,  Botallus,  &c.  &c.  &c.

Transl.
H  2


100


DILATATION  OF  THE  BKONCHI.


and  in  general  all  those  affections  wherein  there  exists  a  well-
marked  cachectic  state,  are  often  accompanied  by  a  catarrh,  either
manifest  or  latent.


CHAPTER  II.

OF  DILATATION  OF  THE  BRONCHI.

The  organic  lesion  which  I  am  now  to  notice,  seems  to  have
been  hitherto  entirely  overlooked,  both  by  the  anatomist  and  the
practitioner.  This  oversight  is  easily  accounted  for,  from  the
circumstance  of  its  generally  occurring  in  a  small  portion  of  a
bronchial  tube,  and  of  its  being  mistaken,  when  observed,  for  a
larger  branch.  It  can  only  be  detected  by  tracing  the  individual
bronchial  tubes  to  their  ultimate  ramifications,— a  thing  which  is
rarely  done  in  our  examination  of  the  lungs.

Anatomical  characters.  This  disease  presents  itself  in  various
forms.  Sometimes  it  exists  in  one  or  in  several  branches,  or  even
over  almost  the  whole  extent  of  one  lung,  without  any  other
change  in  the  appearance  of  the  affected  bronchi,  than  increase  of
volume:  thus,  ramifications  which  in  the  natural  state  would
scarcely  admit  a  fine  probe,  acquire  a  diameter  equal  to  that  of
a  crow-quill,  or  goose-quill,  or  even  of  the  finger.  These  dilated
branches  frequently  spring  from  a  trunk  of  a  much  smaller  dia-
meter than  their  own.  Occasionally  we  find  the  dilated  branch
resuming  all  at  once  its  natural  size ;  more  commonly  it  appears
to  terminate  in  an  irregularly  shaped  cul-de-sac,  into  which
several  small  branches  of  a  natural  size  are  found  to  open.  I
have  never  observed  a  dilatation  which  seemed  to  exist  in  the
ultimate  division  of  the  bronchi,  and  which  could  throw  any
light  upon  the  manner  in  which  these  terminate.  At  other  times,
the  dilated  bronchi  lose  their  natural  shape,  and  present  them-
selves under  the  form  of  a  cavity,  capable  of  containing  a  hemp-
seed,  a  cherry-stone,  an  almond,  or  even  a  walnut.  Several  suc-
cessive enlargements  of  this  kind  may  exist  in  the  course  of  the
same  tube.  Sometimes  the  dilatation  is  confined  to  one  or  two
branches  in  the  upper  lobe,  and  looks  like  a  tuberculous  excava-
tion transformed  into  a  fistula;  frequently  also,  several  continu-
ous or  contiguous  branches,  unequally  dilated,  and  forming  by
their  inter-communication  a  sort  of  burrow  filled  with  puriform
mucus,  present,  at  first  sight,  the  appearance  of  an  anfractuous
cavity  of  the  same  kind.  These  cases  may  occasion  some  diffi-
culty, especially  to  an  inexperienced  anatomist.  In  the  chapter
on  phthisis  I  shall  point  out  the  marks  which  will  always  dis-


DILATATION  OF  THE  BltOXCHI.


101


tin<niish  the  two  affections,  except  in  some  very  uncommon
cases.

The  density  and  consistence  of  the  dilated  tubes  are  extremely
various. Most  commonly  the  mucous  membrane  is  from  a
quarter  to  a  third  of  a  line  in  thickness,  uneven  in  its  surface,
softer  than  natural,  and  of  a  strong  violet  red  colour,  which  is
found  to  enter  deep  into  its  substance. The  softness  of  the
membrane  is  sometimes  so  great  that  we  can  separate  it  with  the
back  or  handle  of  the  scalpel. Outside  the  mucous  membrane
there  is  an  envelop  nearly  of  the  same  thickness,  white  and  very
firm,  consisting  partly  of  a  very  dense  cellular  substance  and
partly  of  a  fibrous  tissue. The  cartilaginous  circles  sometimes
remain  visible,  but  never  the  yellow  muscular  apparatus  which
distinguishes  the  sound  bronchi. In  the  bronchial  ramifications
of  a  smaller  order,  the  envelop  above  mentioned  has  here  and
there  a  cartilaginous  texture  ;  but  in  this  case  it  ceases  to  retain
its  symmetrical  form,  and  extends  in  different  points  more  or  less
into  the  substance  of  the  lungs. Sometimes  this  cartilaginous
production  occupies  the  greater  part,  or  the  whole  of  the  space
contained  between  the  dilated  bronchi ;  a  remarkable  example  of
which  will  be  noticed  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. At  other  times
the  dilated  bronchi  are  extremely  thin,  and  hardly  retain  any
trace  of  their  original  structure. In  this  state  they  are  some-
what firmer  than  the  healthy  mucous  membrane,  very  smooth
internally,  and  usually  red,  but  without  obvious  vascular  injec-
tion. Sometimes  their  tenuity  is  such  that  they  may  be  com-
pared to  the  pellicle  of  an  onion. I  have  never  seen  the  whole
course  of  the  bronchi  dilated  in  this  manner;  and  the  greatest  of
the  partial  enlargements  which  I  have  observed  might  have  con-
tained a  walnut  without  its  shell. These  dilated  bronchi  with
thin  parietes,  when  first  laid  open  by  the  scalpel,  have  a  striking
resemblance  to  the  vesicular  lungs  of  the  class  of  animals  deno-
minated batrachia. This  affection  may  exist  in  any  part  of  the
lungs,  but  is  most  common  in  the  superior  lobes. Ordinarily  it
exists  in  only  a  small  number  of  the  ramifications  of  the  bronchi :
sometimes,  however,  it  extends  to  all  the  branches  of  one  of  the
lobes. In  this  case,  the  dilatation  is  always  greater  (not  rela-
tively merely,  but  absolutely)  in  the  smaller  than  in  the  larger
ramifications,  and  greater  in  these  latter  than  in  the  trunks
whence  they  originate. The  common  trunks  are  rarely  dilated,
in  any  perceptible  degree,  even  in  the  cases  where  some  of  their
branches  emulate  them  in  diameter. When  the  dilatation  of
the  bronchi  is  so  great  as  this,  the  intermediate  substance  of  the
lung  is  flabby,  void  of  air,  evidently  compressed,  and,  in  short,
resembling,  in  every  respect,  the  same  substance  when  com-
pressed towards  the  spine,  by  an  effusion  of  serous  or  purulent
fluid  into  the  cavity  of  the  pleura.


102


DILATATION OF  THE  BRONCHI.


When  this  lesion  is  slight,  and  affects  only  the  smaller  branches
(in  which  it  always  commences,)  it  is  easily  mistaken  during  dis-
section. One  thing;  which  should  call  our  attention  to  it  is  the
observation  of  a  puriform  mucus  flowing  by  drops  from  the
smaller  bronchi,  upon  cutting  into  the  lungs.*

Occasional  causes. — The  dilatation  of  the  bronchi  is  only  met
with  in  cases  of  chronic  mucous  catarrh.  This  single  fact,  cou-
pled with  what  we  know  respecting  the  long  continuance  of  mu-
cous sputa  in  the  spot  where  they  have  been  secreted,  enables  us
to  conceive  the  mode  in  which  the  disease  is  formed.  A  tempo-
rary dilatation  produced  by  a  voluminous  sputum,  is  rendered
permanent  by  the  constantly  successive  secretion  of  similar  ones.
In  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  we  are  unable  to  explain
why  the  bronchial  tunics  should  in  one  case  be  thicker  and  in
another  thinner  than  natural,  any  more  than  we  can  explain  the
analogous  diversity  of  volume  which  is  produced  in  the  walls  of
the  heart  by  the  same  mechanical  obstruction.  The  bronchial
tubes  which  open  into  a  tuberculous  or  gangrenous  excavation,
are  commonly  dilated,  and  continue  so  after  the  transformation
of  the  cavity  into  a  fistula.  In  this  variety  of  dilatation,  the
bronchi  almost  always  retain  their  cylindrical  form ;  and  this
may  perhaps  be  accounted  for  by  the  contents  of  the  excavation
not  being  permitted  to  remain  long  in  them,  but  merely  to  tra-
verse them  under  the  impulse  of  an  energetic  cough.  The  same
circumstance  may  explain  the  inferior  frequency  of  occurrence,
and  likewise  the  slighter  degree  of  dilatation,  observed  in  the
larger  bronchi.*f-

Signs  and  symptoms. — The  physical  signs  by  which  we  can

*  Andral,  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  Laennec,  gives  the  following  summary
of  his  observations  on  this  affection.  In  some  cases,  tbe  texture  of  the  bronchial
tubes  is  considerably  thickened,  the  different  anatomical  elements  which  enter  into
their  composition  becoming  more  marked.  In  others,  the  dilated  tubes  are  dis-
tinctly atrophied,  their  whole  substance  consisting  of  a  very  thin  membrane,  in
which  we  can  no  longer  trace  either  fibrous  or  cartilaginous  tissue.  We  have,  there-
fore, three  different  kinds  of  dilated  bronchi,  in  regard  to  the  anatomical  constitution
of  their  tunics: — 1.  Dilatation  with  a  natural  condition  of  the  tunics  ;  2.  Dilatation,
with  increased  thickness  of  the  tunics  ;  3.  Dilatation  with  diminished  thickness  of
the  tunics.  (Anat.  Pathol,  p.  500.)  The  same  author  informs  us,  that  dilatation  of
the  bronchi  may  be  produced  in  a  very  short  time,  as  is  instanced,  he  conceives,  in
the  case  of  infants  who  had  never  suffered  from  cough  but  during  two  or  three
months  preceding  their  death.  In  these  cases,  however,  M.  Guersent  is  of  opinion,
that  the  dilatation  is  often  congenital ;  and  he  thinks  this  view  is  corroborated  by
the  comparatively  greater  frequency  of  this  lesion  in  children  than  in  adults,  even
in  adults  who  have  been  long  affected  with  habitual  and  severe  coughs.  (Diet,  de
Med.  Art  Coqueluche,  t.  vi.  p.  12.) — Transl.

t  Andral  is  of  opinion  that  the  varieties  of  dilatation  which  are  accompanied  by
hypertrophy  of  the  bronchial  tunics,  cannot  be  produced  in  the  mechanical  manner
described  by  Laennec:  the  augmentation  of  the  diameter  of  the  tubes,  he  thinks,
must  he  explained  in  the  same  manner  as  the  augmented  thickness  of  the  tissue,
both  being  the  result  of  a  vital  hypertrophy.  (Clin.  Med.  t.  ii.  p.  33.)  The  follow-
ing explanation  of  the  phenomena  is  given  by  M.  Roche,  (Diet,  de  Med.  et  de  Chir.
Prat.  Art.  lironchite,  t.  iv.  p.  263.  Paris,  1830.) "  We  consider  inflammation  to  be


DILATATION OF  THE  BRONCHI.


103


recognize  dilatation  of  the  bronchi,  are  pretty  numerous,  and
vary  according  to  the  extent  of  the  affection.  When  the  whole
of  one  lung  is  affected,  percussion  sometimes  elicits  a  duller
sound  than  natural,  owing  no  doubt  to  the  compression  of  the
pulmonary  substance ;  but  this  sign  is  seldom  well  marked  in
cases  of  simple  dilatation.  Over  the  seat  of  the  principal  dilata-
tions, pectoriloquy  more  or  less  perfect  is  perceived  ;  together
with  a  large  mucous  rhonchus,  precisely  like  the  cavernous
rhonchus  of  phthisis.  And  in  the  same  places  there  exists  the
bronchial  respiration,  which  an  inexperienced  observer  may  very
readily  confound  with  the  puerile,  on  account  of  the  intensity  of
the  sound.

The  bronchial  respiration  becomes  cavernous  over  the  site  of
the  greatest,  dilatations ;  and  in  those  nearest  the  surface  of  the
lungs,  the  cough  and  rattle  assume  also  the  cavernous  character.
In  the  same  points,  the  voice,  respiration,  and  cough,  frequently
yield  the  veiled  puff*  that  is,  a  sensation  as  if  a  thin  veil  or  wet
membrane  was  only  interposed  between  the  column  of  air  and  the
ear,  and  vibrated  at  each  breath.*

Sometimes  all  these  phenomena  disappear  for  a  time,  particu-
larly if  existing  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  lungs,  owing  to  the  ac-
cumulation of  sputa,  and  re-appear  after  a  copious  expectoration
or  a  change  of  posture.  When  the  dilatation  exists  only  in  one
point,  the  signs  just  mentioned  are  confined  to  that  point,  and
are  usually  less  strongly  marked.

If  the  dilatation  is  moderate  and  nearly  equal  in  several  of  the

the  undoubted  cause  of  this  lesion,  and  the  following  is  the  way  in  which  it  operates
in  producing  it.  By  diminishing  the  cohesion  of  the  tissues  in  which  it  is  situated,
the  inflammation  of  the  bronchi  occasions  them  to  yield  under  the  pressure  of  the
air  during  the  violent  fits  of  coughing  ;  and  the  temporary  dilatation,  through  fre-
quent recurrence,  at  length  becomes  permanent.  If  the  dilatation  is  produced
slowly,  which  is  the  most  common  case,  the  tube  still  preserving  a  certain  degree
of  resistance,  becomes  hypertrophied,  like  every  other  part  excited  to  inordinate
action.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  dilatation  is  rapid,  the  tunics  are  extended  beyond
their  natural  elasticity,  and  having  no  power  of  reaction,  become  atrophied."  This
opinion  is  partially  adopted  by  Dr.  Williams,  (Cyclopaedia  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  i.
Art.  Bronchitis,  p.  320.)  but  he  reverses,  in  one  respect,  the  cause  and  effect  in  the
explanation  of  M.  Roche.  "  The  physical  cause  of  dilatation  of  the  bronchi,"  savs
Dr.  Williams,  "  is  to  be  found  in  acts  of  respiration  and  cough,  exerting  a  degree
of  pressure  on  the  softened  membrane,  greater  than  its  elasticity  can  resist.  Thus
the  forcible  inspiration  which  succeeds  each  fit  of  coughing  acts  with  greater  effect
on  these  weaker  parts ;  and,  again,  the  violent  expiration  of  coughing  brings  an
undue  pressure  on  the  same  tubes,  which,  distended  in  one  part,  and  partially  ob-
structed by  the  thickening  of  their  membrane  in  another,  are  perpetually  exposed  to
a  straining  influence.  Induration,  the  effect  of  another  degree  of  the  inflammatory
process,  sometimes  succeeds,  giving  the  dilated  portions  that  rigidity  that  is  occa-
sionally noticed  in  them."

Dilatation  of  the  bronchi  is  incidentally  represented  in  the  First  Fasciculus  of  Dr.
Carswell's  Pathological  Anatomy,  (pi.  i.  fig.  4  ;  pi.  iv.  fig.  4.)  now  in  course  of
publication,  and  will  be  more  completely  illustrated  in  a  future  Fasciculus  of  this
incomparable  and  invaluable  work.  See  also  fig.  50  and  52  of  Dr.  Hope's  Illus-
trations of  Morbid  Anatomy. — Truml.

*  This  last  sign  may  tend  to  show  that  the  pulmonary  substance  has  not  become
cartilaginous,  in  this  point  at  least,  and  perhaps  in  others. — Author.


104


DILATATION  OF  THE  BRONCHI.


bronchi,  there  will  be  diffused  bronchophony  in  place  of  pectori-
loquy. When  the  dilatation  is  extensive,  bronchophony  and  bron-
chial respiration  exist  over  the  whole  space  affected,  and  perfect
pectoriloquy  in  some  points  only.

In  cases  even  of  the  most  extensive  dilatation,  the  symptoms
rarely  indicate  the  severity  of  the  disease.  Most  commonly
there  is  neither  fever  (at  least  continued  fever)  nor  emaciation  ;
and  if  the  patient  is  not  obliged  to  undergo  severe  bodily  labour,
he  is  scarcely  sensible  of  any  diminution  of  strength.  Even  the
respiration  is  not  impeded,  except  under  the  influence  of  quick
and  rapidly  renewed  movements.  The  expectoration  is  not  more
characteristic.  When  the  dilatation  is  very  extensive,  it  is  ex-
tremely copious.  It  is  always  mucous,  but  occasionally  resem-
bles the  secretion  in  the  last  stage  of  the  acute  catarrh,  and
sometimes  it  is  quite  puriform.  It  is  generally  without  smell,
but  occasionally  has  the  odour  of  pus,  of  good  or  bad  character.
The  secretion  is  sometimes  so  copious  as  to  simulate  the  rupture
of  a  vomica.

From  the  above  account  of  the  symptoms,  it  will  appear  that
dilatation  of  the  bronchi  has  many  signs  in  common  with  other
diseases,  particularly  with  phthisis,  peripneumony,  and  gan-
grenous excavations  in  the  lungs ;  yet  from  the  whole  view  of
these  signs  and  symptoms,  an  experienced  practitioner  can  never
have  any  difficulty  in  the  diagnosis.*

Treatment. — This  affection  being  only  a  consequence  and  a
complication  of  the  catarrh,  it  is  evident  that  the  onlv  means  we
possess  of  restoring  the  bronchi  to  their  natural  size,  is  by  dimi-
nishing the  secretion  of  the  mucous  membrane.  If  there  is  any
case  wherein  tonics,  bitters,  aromatics,  and  the  balsams  are
beneficial,  it  is  in  this;  and  if  there  exists  at  the  same  time  a
cachectic  state  of  the  system,  it  will  be  well  to  combine  with
these,  the  preparations  of  steel  and  the  medicines  called  anti-
scorbutic.

The  dilatation  of  the  bronchi,  without  being  a  very  common
affection,  is,  however,  much  less  rare  than  I  long  conceived  it  to
be.  It  is  not  unfrtquently  met  with  in  children  after  hooping
cough,  and  in  old  persons ;  and  within  these  last  six  years  I
have  met  with  a  great  many  instances  of  it.  Andral  has  re-
corded four  examples  of  this  affection,  when  existing  partially  ."f"
I  shall  here  give  some  account  of  two  of  these;  and  then  subjoin
four  others,  where  the  dilatation  was  more  general.  The  two
first  of  these  four  cases  were  communicated  to  me  by  M.  Cayol.
The  two  others  are  equally  remarkable  in  respect  of  their  ana-

*  That  the  diagnosis,  however,  between  phthisis  and  dilatation  of  the  bronchi  is
often  a  matter  of  great  difficulty,  is  proved  hy  the  inability  of  so  acute  and  experi-
enced an  observer  as  M.  Louis  to  distinguish  them,  in  one  case.  See  his  Recherches,
Obs.  xi.  p.  231,  et  seq. — Traiul.

t  Op.  Cit.  Obs.  v.  vi.  viii.  ix.


DILATATION OF THE  BRONCHI.


105


tomical  characters ;  and  the  last  one  may  perhaps  be  considered
no  less  so,  on  account  of  the  exactness  with  which  the  most
minute  circumstances  of  the  state  of  the  lungs  were  indicated  by
the  stethoscope.  M.  Andral's  first  patient  (obs.  vi.)  died  of  dis-
eased heart.  In  this  case  there  had  existed,  under  the  right
clavicle  and  in  the  subspinal  fossa  of  the  same  side,  a  diffuse
bronchophony  and  a  bronchial  and  puffing  respiration.  The
bronchial  ramifications  of  the  upper  lobe  on  this  side,  were  found
manifestly  dilated,  not  altered  in  shape,  but  with  thickening  of
their  parietes.  In  this  case,  the  branches  of  a  lesser  order  ex-
hibited as  distinct  circular  cartilages  as  at  the  bifurcation  of  the
trachea.  The  second  case  (obs.  viii.)  was  that  of  a  man  forty-six
years  old,  who  died  with  the  general  symptoms  of  phthisis.  The
expectoration  was  puriform ;  the  voice  resounded  strongly  over
the  whole  left  side ;  and  a  little  above  the  lower  angle  of  the
scapula,  there  was  distinct  pectoriloquy.  On  examination  after
death,  there  was  found  in  the  corresponding  point  of  the  lung  a
dilatation  of  one  of  the  bronchi,  of  the  size  of  a  walnut ;  and  in
the  same  lung  several  other  bronchi  were  dilated  partially  in  dif-
ferent successive  points,  to  triple  or  quadruple  their  natural
size.  The  intermediate  substance  of  the  lung  was  flabby  and
compressed.

Case  I.  Acute  dilatation  of  the  bronchi  after  hooping  cough. —
A  child,  three  and  a  half  years  old,  and  affected  with  hooping
cough  for  three  months,  came  into  the  Hopital  des  Enfans,  in
January,  1808.  The  cough  returned  in  fits  after  an  interval  of
several  hours,  and  was  followed  by  a  copious  expectoration  of  a
yellow,  very  fetid,  puriform  fluid.  This  fluid,  which  smelt  like
the  pus  from  an  abscess,  was  brought  up  by  mouthfuls,  rather
than  by  the  usual  process  of  expectoration.  The  child  always
lay  on  the  left  side,  which  was  found  to  yield  a  dull  sound  on
percussion.  In  the  intervals  of  the  cough  it  slept  well,  and
seemed  to  feel  no  pain.  It  died  about  a  fortnight  after  its  ad-
mission.

Dissection  thirty-six  hours  after  death. — The  left  lung  was
sound  in  the  upper  parts,  but  the  inferior  lobe  was  hard,  heavy,
livid,  and  slightly  adherent  to  the  costal  pleura.  On  cutting
into  it,  an  ounce  and  a  half  of  fetid  pus,  exactly  like  what  had
been  expectorated,  made  its  escape  from  a  multitude  of  round,
smooth  cavities,  varying  in  size  from  that  of  a  large  pea  to  that
of  a  finger-end.  On  further  examination  it  was  found  that  these
cavities  were  connected  with,  and  were  in  fact  mere  dilatations
of  the  bronchi.  Each  bronchial  branch,  after  running  about
half-an-inch  into  the  lung,  became  gradually  enlarged,  and
finally  terminated  in  a  cul-de-sac,  constituting  one  of  the  cavities
above  mentioned.  Towards  their  termination,  most  of  these
dilated  tubes  would  have  admitted  the  little  finger;  and  the
smaller  ones  would  have  contained  an  ordinary  quill. In  their


JOG


DILATATION  OF THE  BRONCHI.


course  they  gave  off  branches,  which,  after  running,  at  most,
two  inches,  terminated  in  similar  culs-de-sac.  The  mucous
membrane  lining  these  tubes  was  throughout  of  a  deep  livid  red.
It  was  thinner  than  natural,  but  was  not  in  the  slightest  degree
ulcerated.  These  dilated  tubes  were  so  numerous  that  an  incision
could  not  be  made  without  dividing  many  of  them  :  they  con-
stituted at  least  three-fourths  of  the  volume  of  this  part  of  the
lung.  The  intermediate  substance  was  of  a  greyish  colour,
compact  but  flabby,  and  retained  no  trace  of  its  natural  cellular
structure.  The  right  lung  was  sound.  The  mucous  membrane
of  the  trachea  was  of  a  livid  red,  particularly  at  its  lower  ex-
tremity ;  while  that  of  the  larynx,  on  the  contrary,  was  very
pale.  The  liver  was  very  large,  yellowish,  soft,  and  fatty.  The
other  viscera  were  sound.*

Case  II.  Chronic  dilatation  of  the  bronchi. — Miss  M.,  aged
seventy-two,  affected  upwards  of  fifty  years  with  a  complaint
which  presented  most  of  the  symptoms  of  phthisis,  viz.  frequent
haemoptysis,  habitual  cough  with  expectoration  of  opaque,  yellow
sputa,  (having  at  one  time  the  characters  of  pus,  and  at  others
those  of  puriform  mucus,)  and  short  and  oppressed  breathing.
These  symptoms  varied  much,  having  decided  remissions,  but
hardly  ever  a  distinct  intermission.  However,  she  was  always
able  to  attend  to  her  affairs,  and  indeed  never  considered  herself
as  sick.  On  her  admission  to  the  hospital,  although  broken  down
with  years,  she  did  not  appear  very  ill,  and  exhibited  merely  her
habitual  symptoms,  with  the  addition  of  a  slight  diarrhoea  and
some  oedema  of  the  legs.  This  latter  symptom,  however,  pro-
gressively increased,  with  great  increase  of  the  dyspnoea,  and
she  sunk,  apparently  more  from  the  dropsical  affection  than  from
the  original  disease.

Dissection  forty-four  hours  after  death. — The  lungs  were  at-
tached to  the  ribs  and  the  mediastinum  by  ancient  and  lax
cellular  adhesions.  The  substance  of  the  lungs  was  soft  and
unelastic,  and,  on  compressing  them  between  the  fingers,  hard
portions  of  various  size  were  felt,  especially  in  the  right  superior
lobe.  On  cutting  into  this  lobe,  a  great  many  rounded  cavities
were  found,  smooth,  and  of  reddish  colour  internally,  some  of
which  were  empty,  and  others  containing  a  fluid  like  that  expec-
torated by  the  patient.  These  cavities  were  of  very  unequal
size,  the  largest  being  capable  of  admitting  the  end  of  the  thumb.
They  were  separated  from  one  another  by  partitions  of  a  pretty
firm  consistence,  composed  of  the  condensed  pulmonary  tissue.
On  further  examination,  they  were  found  all  to  communicate
with  the  bronchi,  of  which  they  were  evidently  continuations.
These  tubes,  a  short  distance  from  their  origin,  and  just  where

*  This  case  is  considerably  abridged;  but  nothing  is  omitted  directly  bearing  on
the  subject  of  this  work.  Most  of  the  subsequent  cases  will  be  treated  in  the  same
way. — Transl.


DILATATION  OF THE  BRONCHI.


they  cease  to  be  cartilaginous,  were  found  to  be  considerably
dilated,  and  to  retain  this  increased  diameter,  or  to  become  pro-
gressively larger,  to  the  point  of  their  termination  near  the  sur-
rface  of  the  lung.  In  their  course  they  gave  off  branches,  some  of
i  "which  were  dilated  and  others  not.  The  dilated  portions  ex-
hibited here  and  there  small  cartilaginous  or  bony  points,  par-
ticularly at  the  origin  of  the  collateral  ramifications.  In  these
(diseased  bronchi  it  was  impossible  to  trace  the  different  layers  of
i  membrane ;  they  appeared  to  consist  of  one  only,  which  could
1  not  be  separated  from  the  substance  of  the  lungs,  and  which  was
lmuch  harder  and  smoother  than  that  which  naturally  exists  in
i  the  branches  which  are  deprived  of  cartilages.  There  was  not
I  the  slightest  mark  of  ulceration.  Almost  all  the  bronchi  of  the
i  right  superior  lobe  were  in  the  state  just  described.  The  largest
)  might  be  seven  or  eight  times  their  natural  size,  while  some  were
much  less  dilated,  and  others  hardly  at  all. The  whole  of  the

•  space  occupied  by  the  hollows  of  these  dilated  branches  was
;  about  three-fourths  that  of  the  whole  superior  lobe. Some  of  the
i  cavities  were  only  separated  from  each  other  by  very  thin  par-
titions, consisting  of  the  pulmonary  tissue  coudensed  into  the

•  state  of  membrane.  In  the  middle  and  inferior  lobes  of  the
i  same  side  there  were  only  a  few  of  the  bronchi  slightly  dilated.

In  the  left  superior  lobe,  two  or  three  of  them  were  considerably
dilated,  but  not  so  as  to  form  cavities  like  those  on  the  opposite
■  side  :  in  the  left  inferior  lobe  there  was  no  dilatation. The  mu-
i  cous  membrane  of  the  larynx  and  trachea  was  sound.

Case  III. General  dilatation  of  the  bronchi  of  one  lung.
i  Conversion  of  the  pulmonary  substance  into  Jibro-cartilage. —  A
;  patient  came  into  the  Hospital  Necker,  in  the  winter  of  1821-2,
who  had  been  affected  with  cough  and  copious  muco-purulent
expectoration  ever  since  an  attack  of  pleuro-peripneumony  twenty
years  before :  he  had  oppressed  breathing ;  and  on  the  left  side
i  of  the  chest,  which  was  one-third  smaller  than  the  right,  there

•  was  well-marked  bronchophony  around  the  lower  angle  of  the
scapula.  This  man  died  suddenly,  with  symptoms  of  apoplexy,
after  being  only  a  few  hours  in  the  hospital.

On  examination,  the  left  lung  was  found  reduced  to  the  size
of  the  two  fists,  and  every  where  closely  united  with  the  costal
I  pleura,  by  means  of  a  fibro-cartilaginous  membrane,  except  op-
;  posite  the  scapula,  where  it  was  distant  from  it  an  inch,  being  in
this  point  connected  by  sero-fibrous  adhesions  of  this  length.
This  space  also  contained  about  three  ounces  of  a  bloody  serosity.
The  whole  of  this  lung  was  converted  into  a  substance  in  appear-
ance and  consistence  intermediate  between  cartilage  and  fibrous
membrane. The  two  lobes,  though  intimately  united,  were  still
very  distinguishable  one  from  another,  the  up'per  being  of  a  uni-
form slate-grey  colour,  and  the  other  as  white  as  tendon.  When
i  cut  in  thin  slices,  this  substance  was  slightly  transparent,  and


108


DILATATION  OF  THE  BRONCHI.


had  nothing  of  the  flaccidity  of  a  lung  simply  deprived  of  air  by
compression.  The  bronchial  tubes  were  in  general  dilated,  the
diameter  of  the  latter  divisions  being  only  two  or  three  lines  less
than  that  of  the  first :  they  terminated  in  culs-de-sac.  The
greater  number  of  these  branches  contained  a  yellowish,  opaque
matter,  in  appearance  intermediate  between  opaque  mucous  sputa
and  very  soft  cheese.  Intermixed  with  this,  there  was  a  whiter
chalky  matter  which  resisted  the  scalpel.  The  mucous  mem-
brane of  almost  all  these  tubes,  was  of  the  colour  of  the  lees  of
red  wine,  and  slightly  thickened.  The  smaller  bronchial  branches
were  obliterated  and  lost  in  the  general  semi-cartilaginous  mass
into  which  the  substance  of  the  lung  was  converted.  There  was
no  sign  of  tubercles. The  right  lung  was  quite  sound.

Case  IV. Chronic  dilatation  of  the  bronchi. Acute  douJile
peripneumony* — A  coachman,  aged  forty-one,  was  received  into
the  clinical  wards  of  the  Faculte,  27th  March,  1825.  From
infancy  he  had  been  subject  to  a  cough  attended  by  an  expecto-
ration of  a  yellowish  or  greyish  colour,  but  which  had  not  in  any
way  prevented  him  from  following  his  occupation. During  the
last  six  months,  however,  his  complaints  had  increased ;  the
cough  had  all  at  once  become  very  frequent,  and  the  expectora-
tion of  thick,  yellow,  opaque,  and  fetid  matter,  very  copious.
At  the  same  time,  there  was  also  present,  a  slight  irregular  fever,
night  sweats,  diarrhoea,  emaciation,  and  increasing  weakness ;
and  six  weeks  before  his  admission  he  had  had  two  severe  attacks
of  haemoptysis.  He  had  suffered  from  pain  in  the  right  side,  but
never  in  the  left. The  only  remedy  to  which  he  had  had  re-
course during  his  illness,  was  a  pectoral  ptisan  ;  and  he  had  fol-
lowed his  business  to  within  a  few  days  of  his  admission  into  the
hospital. At  this  time  his  state  was  as  follows  :  emaciation  in-
considerable, skin  slightly  yellow  ;  pulse  frequent,  full,  but  not
strong;  cough  frequent,  expectoration  thick,  yellow,  opaque,
and  somewhat  fetid;  no  dyspncea;  appetite  moderate,  and  no
disorder  of  the  digestive  functions. The  chest  sounded  pretty
well  on  the  right  side,  much  less  so  on  the  left,  especially  in  the
lower  part,  which  was  evidently  contracted. The  respiration
was  good  on  the  right  side;  but  on  the  left,  it  was  hardly  per-
ceptible laterally  and  behind,  and  was  there  accompanied  by  an
obscure  mucous  rhonchus.  On  the  upper  parts  of  trie  same  side,
both  before  and  behind,  the  respiration  was  replaced  by  a  very-
distinct  cavernous  rhonchus;  and  about  the  lower  angle  of  the
scapula,  there  was  a  very  strong  mucous  rhonchus. Over  the
whole  of  the  left  scapula  there  was  imperfect  pectoriloquy.
From  these  signs  I  deduced  the  following  diagnosis:  Excava-
tion in  the  superior  part  of  the  left  lung ;  contraction  of  the
same  side  from  an  ancient  pleurisy.  I  left  in  doubt,  for  the  time,
the  question  as  to  the  nature  of  the  excavation;  the  probabilities
seeming  nearly  equally  in  favour  of  its  being  the  result  of  soft-


DILATATION  OF  THE  BRONCHI.


109


ened  tubercles,  and  of  a  gangrenous  eschar.  {Pectoral  infusion
with  two  drains  of  lime  water, — draught,  with  cether  and  half  a
dram  of  extract  of  bark.)

In  the  beginning  of  April  he  was  better  ;  the  fever  less,  the
complexion  and  appetite  good. Percussion  of  the  left  chest  a
little  above  the  nipple,  produced  a  distinct  guggling,  with  a  sen-
sation of  vibration  and  a  circumscribed  hollow  resonance,  indi-
cating, in  this  point,  a  cavity,  with  flexible  and  somewhat  elastic
walls,  and  containing  a  half-liquid  matter. Every  blow  given,
while  the  patient  was  speaking,  produced  a  very  marked  catch
or  stammer  in  the  voice. JprillO.  Expectoration  more  copious,
puriform  and  fetid ;  breath  very  offensive :  hardly  any  fever ;
appetite  middling. A  more  complete  exploration  of  the  chest
gave  the  following  results : On  the  left  chest,  distinct  pectori-
loquy from  the  clavicle  as  low  as  the  third  and  fourth  ribs  ante-
riorly ;  on  the  side,  from  the  axilla  to  the  fifth  rib;  and  behind,
from  the  top  of  the  shoulder  to  the  lower  angle  of  the  scapula  and
below. When  the  patient  lay  on  the  right  side,  pectoriloquy
was  also  very  evident  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  left  side,  both
posteriorly  and  latterly,  which  was  not  the  case  when  in  the
sitting  posture. A  cavernous  rhonchus,  still  more  distinct  than
the  pectoriloquy,  existed  in  the  same  points.  These  signs  allow-
ing only  two  suppositions,  namely,  a  general  and  very  consider-
able dilatation  of  the  bronchi,  or  an  anf  ractuous  or  multi-locular
tuberculous  excavation,  extending  over  nearly  the  whole  of  the
left  lung,  I  gave  my  opinion  in  favour  of  the  first,  from  consider-
ing the  general  condition  of  the  patient  and  the  progress  of  the
disease ;  still,  however,  leaving  in  doubt  the  co-existence  of  a
gangrenous  eschar  in  the  lung. 18th.  Considerable  increase  of
fever  during  the  two  last  days  ;  cough  more  frequent,  particularly
at  night ;  expectoration  very  copious,  greyish  and  very  fetid ;
return  of  the  diarrhoea ;  loss  of  appetite. ( Same  prescription.
Half  a  dram  of  diascordium*  twice  a  day.) 22nd.  Increase  of
all  the  symptoms ;  high  fever ;  cough  frequent ;  expectoration
puriform,  coherent,  of  an  ash-grey  colour,  and  still  more  offen-
sive than  usual,  prostration  of  strength;  tracheal  rhonchus.  On
the  right  side  the  chest  sounded  well ;  the  respiration  was  strong,
and  accompanied  by  a  deep  sonorous  rhonchus,  anteriorily  and
laterally  ;  while  posteriorly,  it  was  bronchial,  and  accompanied
in  some  places  by  a  strong  mucous  rhonchus. There  was  also  a
slight  crepitous  rhonchus  on  the  right  side,  about  the  anterior
part  of  the  sixth  rib,  and  towards  the  roots  of  the  lung,  in  which
points  the  respiration  was  bronchial ;  and  also  a  similar  rhonchus
at  the  roots  of  the  left  lung. Over  the  whole  of  the  trachea  there
was  a  deep  sonorous  rhonchus. From  these  signs  I  announced

*  A  very  complex  electuary  of  an  astringent  and  narcotic  quality  invented  by
Fracastorius.  It  is  named  from  the  plant  Scordium  (S.  Teucrium,  Linn..)  the  leaves
of  which  form  one  of  its  ingredients. — Trand.


110


DILATATION  OK  THE  BRONCHI.


the  existence  of  a  central  pneumonia  (i.  e.  not  having  yet  reached
the  surface  of  the  lung)  on  the  right  side,  and  also  an  incipient
inflammation  of  the  left  lung,  although  its  texture  was  com-
pressed by  the  dilated  bronchi.  ( Three  glasses  of  emulsion
with  six  grains  of  tartar  emetic, — white  decoction* — half  a  dram
of  diascordium,  ter.)  23rd.  Respiration  still  bronchial  at  the
root  of  the  right  lung;  crepitous  rhonchus  barely  perceptible  at
the  inner  edge  of  the  scapula :  chest  still  yielding  a  good  sound
on  the  right  side. He  died  next  day.-f-

Dissection  thirty-eight  hours  after  death. — The  right  lung
was  large  and  heavy,  and  scarcely  collapsed  at  all  on  the  thorax
being  laid  open.  Upon  cutting  into  it,  its  texture  was  found,  in
general,  pretty  sound,  but  containing  a  great  many  small  por-
tions, of  a  more  or  less  deep  red  colour,  almost  all  unconnected
with  each  other,  of  irregular  form,  dense,  compact,  exhibiting  a
granular  surface  when  incised,  and  yielding,  upon  the  slightest
pressure,  a  fluid  of  a  tawny  yellow  colour,  resembling  meat-soup.
These  portions  were  indurated  in  different  degrees ;  the  pul-
monary substance  of  some  of  them  being  still  crepitous,  either  at
their  exterior,  or  over  the  fourth,  third,  or  even  half  of  their
extent.  Their  colour  was  equally  various  : — the  greater  num-
ber and  the  hardest  were  of  a  deep  red,  approaching  to  violet ;
some  were  of  a  greyish  or  yellowish  red,  or  with  a  tinge  of  violet,
less  dense,  and  less  granular  ;  while  others  (and  these  were  the
smallest  number)  were  softer,  of  an  ash-grey,  and  very  slightly
semi-transparent.  In  these  last,  the  incised  surfaces  presented
scarcely  any  granular  appearance,  and  exhibited,  in  different
points,  the  healthy  cellular  texture  of  the  lungs.  These  diverse
shades  of  induration  were  sometimes  re-united  in  the  same  dis-
eased portion,  each  of  which  gradually  passed  into  the  natural
structure  of  the  viscus. The  indurated  lobules  formed  slight

{>rominences  on  the  surface  of  the  lungs,  and  felt  to  the  touch
ike  accidental  productions  contained  within  their  substance.
They  were  very  numerous  and  small  in  the  upper  lobe;  less
numerous,  larger,  and  more  distant  in  the  lower;  and  still  larger
and  much  closer  to  one  another  in  the  middle  lobe.  In  this
latter,  they  formed,  by  their  juxtaposition  towards  the  roots  of
the  bronchi,  a  compact  mass  nearly  two  inches  in  diameter.
Near  this  and  posteriorly,  there  was  a  small  excavation  entirely
filled  with  a  dirty,  black,  and  extremely  fetid  matter.  The
walls  of  this  excavation  Mere  not  lined  by  any  false  membrane,
but  consisted  of  condensed  pulmonary  substance  of  a  blackish
colour  which  became  gradually  more  dense  as  it  receded  from
the  cavity. This  was  evidently  a  gangrenous  eschar. In  the

•  A  watery  decoction  of  hartshorn  shavings  and  bread,  with  syrup. — Transl.

t  This  case  was  witnessed  by  Barry,  Crawford,  Carswell,  Gregory  (son  of  the
celebrated  professor  at  Edinburgh),  and  Townsend,  English  medical  gentlemen,
besides  many  others,  foreigners  as  well  as  French.— Author.


DILATATION  OF  THE  BltONCHI.


Ill


vicinity  of  this,  and  near  the  surface  of  the  lung,  were  two  or
three  bronchi  dilated  to  the  size  of  a  goose-quill ;  and  traversing
the  compact  mass  above  mentioned,  were  several  others  of  a  still
larger  diameter,  and  terminating  in  culs-de-sac  sufficiently  large
to  contain  a  pea. The  inner  membrane  of  all  these  bronchi  was
smooth  and  of  a  deep  violet-red  colour. There  was  not  a  tubercle
in  the  whole  lung. The  left  lung  was  much  smaller  than  the
right,  heavy,  flaccid,  and  very  little  crepitous. Upon  cutting
into  it,  a  great  number  of  ovoid  cavities  presented  themselves,
which  were  either  empty,  or  contained  a  small  quantity  of  a  dirty
blackish  or  yellowish-red  matter,  like  pus  mixed  with  blood,  and
of  a  fetor  approaching  that  of  gangrene. These  cavities  were
lined  by  the  bronchial  mucous  membrane,  which  was  of  a  very
deep  livid  colour  and  smooth,  though  puffy  and  softer  than
natural. They  were  of  very  different  size  in  different  portions
of  the  lung. In  the  lower  lobe,  they  were  very  numerous,  closely
approximated,  and  almost  all  capable  of  holding  an  almond  with
its  shell ;  while  in  the  upper,  they  were  much  smaller  and  much
more  distant  from  each  other. They  all  communicated  with  the
bronchi,  and,  in  fact,  were  found,  on  minute  inspection,  to  be
the  continuation  and  termination  of  these,  dilated  in  this  extraor-
dinary manner. The  whole  of  these  cavities  taken  together  were
nearly  equal  in  size  to  one  half  the  lung. It  will  be  observed
that  they  Avere  the  most  numerous  exactly  in  the  points  where
pectoriloquy  had  existed  during  life. In  the  lower  lobe,  they
were  so  close  to  one  another  as  to  leave  between,  only  very  thin
partitions  of  condensed  and  firm  pulmonary  substance. In  the
upper  lobe,  there  were  some  red  and  solid  portions  like  those  de-
scribed in  the  right  lung. The  walls  were  of  the  culs-de-sac
formed  by  the  dilated  bronchi,  were  as  thick  as  those  of  the
larger  branches,  and  this  thickening  was  caused  partly  by  the
thickened  mucous  membrane,  and  partly  by  the  fibro-cellular
envelop  of  the  bronchi  become  more  solid,  and  in  many  places
cartilaginous. In  some  places  the  partition  between  two  of  these
dilated  bronchi  was  become  wholly  cartilaginous,  and  formed  one
mass  with  the  degenerated  envelopes. Besides  these  cavities,
there  existed  another  small  one,  of  a  very  different  character,  near
the  origin  of  the  bronchi. It  contained  a  small  quantity  of  a
pulpy  matter,  of  a  decidedly  gangrenous  fetor. It  did  not  seem
to  have  any  communication  with  the  bronchi,  but  appeared  to  be
the  result  of  the  gangrene  of  one  of  the  bronchial  glands.

After  the  examination  I  placed  the  lungs  in  water  with  a  view
to  their  inspection  on  the  following  day.  On  looking  at  them
twenty-four  hours  afterwards,  I  found  that  the  maceration  had
whitened  the  incised  surfaces  in  contact  with  the  water ;  and  I
found,  moreover,  that  in  three  or  four  of  the  dilated  bronchi,
which  had  not  been  opened,  and  to  which  the  water  had  not  pen-


112


CROUP


etrated,  the  mucous  membrane  was  greatly  altered,  having  be-
come soft,  of  a  reddish,  greenish  or  blackish  colour,  and  exhaling
a  decidedly  gangrenous  fetor.*


CHAPTER  III.


OF  CROUP,  OR  PLASTIC  INFLAMMATION  OF  THE  AIR  PASSAGES.

Croup  has  not  been  well  understood  very  many  years.  It  ap-
pears to  have  been  unknown  to  the  Greek  and  Arabian  phy-
sicians ;  a  circumstance  less  to  be  wondered  at,  as  it  must  have
been  of  rare  occurrence  in  the  very  temperate  or  warm  climates
which  they  inhabited.^  Ballonius  (Baillon)  was  the  first  who
noticed  this  disease  in  1576,  %  although  there  can  belittle  doubt

*  Tbis  circumstance  points  out  tbe  necessity  of  pathological  anatomists  being  on
their  guard  against  changes  that  may  take  place  after  death.  It  seems  certain  that
tbose  bronchi  found  in  a  state  of  decomposition  resembling  gangrene  on  the  second
day  of  examination,  were  not  so  on  the  first,  if  we  may  be  allowed  to  judge  from  tbe
state  of  the  trunks  of  these  which  were  seen  in  the  same  condition  as  those  which  had
been  laid  open.  If,  then,  any  thing  had  retarded  the  examination  of  the  body  for
twenty-four  hours,  we  should  have  no  doubt  imagined  that  the  patient  had  died  of
an  universal  gangrene  of  the  mucous  lining  of  the  bronchi.  It  seems  even  probable,
that  the  partial  inflammatory  indurations  would,  in  this  case,  have  assumed  a  gan-
grenous appearance. — Author.

t  For  a  complete  bibliographical  history  of  croup  I  refer  tbe  reader  to  the  treatise
of  Micbaelis  "  Be  Angina  Polyposa ;''  Professor  Rubini's  "  Riflessioni  sulfa  malattia
communemamente  denominata  Cmp,"  Parma  1813  ;  and  to  the  recent  treatise  of  Dr.
Bretonneau,  "  De  la  Diphtherite  oit  Inflammation  pelliculaire,"  Paris  1826.  All  of
these  authors  prove  by  extracts  from  the  writings  of  the  ancient  physicians,  that  the
croup  was  known  to  several  of  them,  particularly  to  Hippocrates  and  Aretaeus ;
although  its  precise  anatomical  characters  were  not,  owing  to  the  imperfect  state  of
pathological  anatomy  in  those  ages.  The  description  of  Aretaeus,  in  particular,
(Lib.  i.  c.  9.)  is  conclusive  evidence,  although,  like  so  many  others,  he  had  con-
founded the  term  croup  with  the  diphtherite  of  Bretonneau,  or  crusty  pharyrgitis.
That  the  mildness  of  the  climates  inhabited  by  the  ancient  physicians  by  no  means
afforded  an  immunity  from  diseases  of  this  kind,  we  have  the  testimony  of  modern
writers  on  the  diseases  of  temperate  and  warm  climates.  Among  others  see  Hillary
on  the  diseases  of  Barbadoes  (second  ed.  p.  134)  for  an  account  of  a  severe  epidemi-
cal bronchitis  in  the  year  1758,  which  was  certainly,  if  not  croup,  nearly  allied  to  it.
'*  I  have  no  doubt  (says  Dr.  Cullen — Thomson's  edit  vol.  ii.  p.  41)  of  its  being  a
very  universnl  disease,  with  regard  to  place  and  country  :  but  we  can  easily  ac-
count for  its  not  being  much  noticed,  as  it  is  n  disease  which  occurs  in  infants  who
cannot  explain  their  feelings,  and  as  it  proves  suddenly  fatal,  leaving  less  time  for
calling  the  physician  to  observe  it.  And  considering  bow  lately  it  has  been  common
to  examine  disease  by  dissection,  we  can  easily  perceive  why,  for  so  long  a  time,  this
affection  has  passed  on  entirely  unobserved."— Transl.

X  Opera,  torn.  I.  Epidem.  et  Epbimer.  lib.  ii.  Constit.  Hiemal.  ann.  1576,  in
annotat.  Author.  It  appears,  however,  that  Ballonius  has  little  claim  to  be  con-
sidered as  tbe  first  observer  of  the  peculiar  characters  of  croup,  although  it  is  cer-
tainly in  his  works  that  the  existence  of  the  false  membrane  is  first  distinctly  re-
corded. From  his  own  account,  it  is  clear  that  he  learned  the  fact  of  the  false  mem-


CROUP.  113

I  that  the  disease  must  have  existed  before  that  time.  The  imper-
l  feet  state  of  morbid  anatomy,  and  the  great  infrequency  of  cases
wherein  the  expectoration  of  the  croupyor  false  membrane  strik-
lingly  and  at  once  characterizes  the  affection,  had  no  doubt  pre-
wented  this  disease  from  being  distinguished  from  many  others  of
tthe  larynx  and  lungs.  Even  in  much  later  times  these  diseases
\were  confounded  or  mistaken  ;  and  it  is  evident,  that  the  dis-
ccharge of  the  pretended  inner  membranes  of  the  bronchi,  and  of
tthe  veins  and  arteries  of  the  lungs,  described  by  Tulpius  *,  and
r other  observers  of  the  seventeenth  century,*f*  were  cases  of  croup.
rThe  first  good  description  which  we  have  of  this  disease  we  owe
tto  Ghisi,  a  physician  of  Cremona,  about  the  middle  of  the  last
ccentury  Shortly  after,  the  Scotch  and  English  physicians  §
rpaid  much  attention  to  the  subject,  and  were  soon  followed  by
tthe  Germans  and  French.  Quite  recently  Dr.  Bretonneau,  of
Tours,  has  made  us  more  fully  acquainted  with  the  disease,  than
aany  previous  inquirer.  ||

Anatomical  characters. — Croup  is  an  inflammation  of  the
mucous  membrane  of  the  air  passages,  with  exudation  of  plastic
pus,  (coagulable  lymph,)  which,  becoming  concrete  at  the  very
moment  of  its  formation,  lines  the  inner  surface  of  this  membrane
to  a  greater  or  less  extent. When  this  false  membrane  is  re-
moved, the  subjacent  tunic  is  found  of  a  deep  vivid  red  colour,
occasionally  livid,  and  somewhat  thickened. This  colour  is  com-
Jpimonly  very  uniform  over  the  whole  space  covered  by  the  false
vnmembrane,  but  is  also  not  unfrequently  unequal,  and  occasionally
is  even  altogether  wanting. ^[ In  the  greater  number  of  cases,  the
legree  of  redness  and  swelling  is  less  than  in  many  instances  of
tthe  dry  catarrh. We  cannot,  therefore,  attribute  the  plasticity
jf  the  pus  in  croup,  the  distinctive  feature  between  it  and  the
nucous  catarrh,  to  a  higher  degree  of  inflammation  simply.
iBBesides,  we  see  frequent  examples  of  chronic  plastic  inflamma-
tions of  the  mucous  coat  of  the  intestines  and  bladder,  with
lardly  any  pain,  or  other  particular  symptom. And  I  have
myself  seen  a  case  of  chronic  croup  of  the  same  sort,  which  was
:onfined  to  the  larynx,  and  supervened  during  the  suppuration

nrane  being  found,  from  another  person :  "  chirurgus  affirmavit  se  secuisse  cadaver
-oueri,'^  &c. See  Ballon.  Op.  Om.  Med.  Venet.  1734.  torn.  i.  p.  132. See  also
lEtubini's  remarks  on  this  passage — Bifiessioni,  p.  200,  et  seq — Transl.
*  N .  Tulpius's  Obs.  Leidae,  1641,  obs.  ix.  xii.  et  xiii.

f  Collect.  Acad.  torn.  vii.  p.  394. Several  of  the  cases  referred  to  were,  however,
ibrinous  concretions  formed  in  the  bronchi  during  hajmoptysis.— Transl.
t  Martin.  Ghisi,  Lettre  Medicbe. Cremona,  1749.

§  Dr.  Home's  "  Inquiry,"  which  is  the  first  systematic  account  of  croup  in  this
pountry,  was  published  in  1765  :  but  the  disease  had  been  previously  noticed  under
Uhesame  name  by  Dr.  Patrick  Bluir,  in  his  Observations  on  the  Practice  of  Physic,
liujublished  in  1718. — Transl.

||  See  his  work  Sur  la  Dipththerite,  which  has  been  published  since  our  author's
I  treatise  went  to  the  press. — Transl.
II  Hufeland's  Journal,  vi.  B.  p.  5&9.


114


('ROUP


of  a  scrofulous  tumour  of  the  thyroid  gland  :  here,  after  a  cough,
almost  dry,  of  more  than  two  months  standing,  and  attended  by
hardly  any  other  symptom,  the  false  membrane  was  expectorated,
without  any  previous  indications  of  its  presence  in  the  larynx.
The  false  membrane  which  so  frequently  forms  on  blisters  is,  of
itself,  sufficient  to  prove  that  it  is  much  less  to  the  degree  than
to  the  nature  of  the  inflammation,  that  we  are  to  attribute  this
concretion  or  coagulation  of  pus  in  certain  cases.  Indeed,  the
cause  of  it  is  much  more  probably  to  be  attributed  to  some
peculiar  disposition  of  the  fluids,  than  to  any  affection  of  the
solids.

The  false  membrane  of  croup  corresponds  exactly  with  the
form  of  the  canals  which  it  covers.  Its  thickness  is  usually
somewhat  greater  in  the  larynx  and  trachea  than  in  the  bronchi,
and  varies  from  less  than  half  a  line  to  a  line.  Its  consistence  is
about  that  of  boiled  white  of  egg ;  but  this  usually  diminishes
towards  its  extremities,  so  that  it  becomes  sometimes,  in  this
situation,  scarcely  more  solid  than  the  thick  phlegm  of  catarrh.
It  is  of  a  white  colour,  with  sometimes  a  shade  of  yellow,  and  is
almost  entirely  opaque.

Some  days,  or  even  hours,  after  its  formation,  the  false  mem-
brane begins  gradually  to  be  detached  from  the  mucous  coat  to
which  it  had  been  closely  adherent,  and  after  being  broken  into
fragments  by  the  cough,  is  sometimes  expectorated.  The  sepa-
ration is  effected  by  a  more  liquid  secretion,  which,  becoming  in
its  turn  also  concrete,  constitutes  a  second  false  membrane.  This
process  may  be  repeated  several  times  in  succession ;  but  in
general  each  successive  formation  is  less  consistent  than  the  pre-
ceding. The  croupy  membrane,  properly  so  called,  is  most
commonly  confined  to  the  larynx  and  upper  part  of  the  trachea,
degenerating  as  above  stated,  both  upwards  and  downwards,  into
a  substance  of  a  softer  texture,  which  is  the  chief  cause  of  the
imminent  suffocation  which  sometimes  occurs  even  durinar  the
first  hours  of  the  attack.  In  other  cases,  the  false  membrane
extends  over  a  great  portion  or  even  the  whole  of  the  bronchial
ramifications,  from  which  it  may  occasionally  be  separated,  aftel
death,  by  a  very  slight  degree  of  force.  Sometimes  the  disease
is  confined  to  the  bronchi  and  their  branches,  there  being  no
trace  of  it  in  the  larynx  and  trachea.  *  More  commonly,
as  has  been  shown  by  Bretonneau,  the  inflammation  commences
on  the  tonsils  of  the  pharynx,  and  from  thence  spreads,  at
the  same  time,  downwards  to  the  larynx  and  upwards  to  the

*  In  this  case  the  disease  is  not  in  reality  croup,  but  that  variety  of  bronchitit
nccompanied  by  false  membranes,  described  by  Horstius,  Raickem  and  Guersent
(Diet,  de  Med.  t.  vi.)  and  we  must  no  more  confound  them  under  one  head  than  we
confound  laryngitis  with  the  acute  mucous  catarrh. — (M.  L.)


cuoui'.


ir;


cavity  of  the  nostrils,  which  latter  it  sometimes  entirely  covers.
Tiie  affection  usually  stops  at  the  oesophagus,  but  occasion-
ally the  false  membrane  extends  to  the  stomach.  In  one
instance  M.  Bretonneau  saw  a  false  membrane  formed  be-
hind the  ear  of  a  child  ;  and  Dr.  Bourgeoise,  of  Paris,  has
published  his  own  case,  in  which  a  similar  formation  took  place
round  the  anus.  In  children,  the  disease  almost  always  begins
in  the  bronchi  or  larynx,  and  very  rarely  extends  beyond  the
glottis ;  while  in  adults  it  more  frequently  originates,  as  has
been  above  stated,  on  the  tonsils  or  pharynx. *  M.  Bretonneau
has  successfully  shown  that  such  cases  of  what  may  be  called
plastic  angina,  have  been  frequently  mistaken  for  the  gangrenous
affections  of  the  same  parts  ( cynanche  maligna ).  Perhaps  this
author  may  have  gone  somewhat  too  far  in  limiting  the  existence
of  the  last  disease.^-  Certain  it  is  that  examples  of  it  occur  as
well  with  as  without  false  membranes.  In  a  case  of  scarlatina  in
a  man  of  middle  age,  which  was  under  my  care  in  the  Necker
Hospital,  it  was  quite  clear  to  me  that  the  gangrenous  eschars
of  the  tonsillary  membrane  preceded  the  appearance  of  the  false
membrane,  which,  in  the  end,  extended  into  the  larynx ;  and  it
is  quite  easy  to  conceive  that  the  inflammation  by  which  nature
circumscribes  the  progress  of  the  gangrene,  or,  as  some  may
think,  which  is  excited  by  the  irritation  of  the  eschar, — may  be
itself  of  aplastic  kind  and  give  rise  to  a  false  membrane,  just  as
it  is  possible  that  the  intensity  of  the  inflammation  may  occasion
the  gangrene.  In  the  former  case  we  have  an  instance  of  idio-
pathic gangrene ;  in  the  latter  a  case  of  crusty  or  pellicular
pharyngitis  accompanied  by  gangrene.^  I  am  not  acquainted
with  any  instance  of  croup  which  originated  in  the  larynx  or
bronchi,  being  accompanied  by  gangrene  ;  but  in  cases  where  it
has  sprung  from  the  extension  of  a  gangrenous  and  plastic  cy-
nanche, 1  have  myself  seen  gangrenous  eschars  on  the  mucous
membrane  both  of  the  larynx  and  pharynx.  In  these  cases,  the
false  membrane  was  of  a  dirty  greyish  or  green  hue,  and  exhaled
the  horrible  fetor  peculiar  to  gangrene.  §

*  In  Mr.  Rumsey's  cases,  which  will  be  noticed  in  a  subsequent  note,  all  the
.  subjects  were  children. — Transl.

t  See  the  article  Angine  Couenneuse  in  the  Diet,  de  Medicive,  by  Gaersent.

X  Bretonneau  does  not  deny  that  gangrene  may  be  the  consequence  of  the  crusty
or  pellicular  inflammation  ;  but  merely  asserts  its  extreme  rarity  ;  he  himself  not
having  met  with  a  single  example  of  it  in  more  than  fifty  cases  examined  after
death. — (M.  L.)  }

§  No  reasonable  doubt,  I  think,  can  be  entertained  by  the  readers  of  M.  Breton-
neau's  work,  that  the  croup  and  cynanche  maligna  are  often  identical,  or  rather,  that
what  has  often  been  considered  as  a  gangrenous  affection  of  the  throat,  is  merely  an
inflammation  of  the  same  kind  as  that  of  croup,  and  characterized  by  the  formation
of  a  membranous  exudation  of  a  peculiar  kind.  But  however  we  may  concede  the
identity  of  the  nature  of  the  inflammation  in  the  two  diseuses,  we  cannot  admit  the
proposition  that  simple  croup,  that  is,  croup  unaccompanied  by  any  phnrvngeal

i  2


1 10


CROUP.


Symptoms. — When  the  disease  begins  in  the  larynx,  in  its
onset  it  is  frequently  altogether  like  that  of  a  common  cold  ;  but

affection,  does  not  exist  as  a  separate  disease.  Neither,  I  think,  can  w  e  agree  with
this  writer  in  considering  the  inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  in  the  scarla-
tina auginosa,  as  specifically  different  from  that  which  occurs  unaccompanied  by
cutaneous  eruption,  and  which  he  describes  under  the  name  of  Diphtherite.  The  fre-
quently fatal  termination  of  the  angina  maligna,  whether  accompanied  by  a  cutaneous
eruption  or  not,  by  extending  to  the  windpipe,  is  noticed  in  all  our  best  English
writers  on  this  disease.  The  account  given  by  Dr.  Starr  of  an  epidemic  of  this  kind,
which  raged  in  Cornwall  in  the  year  1748,  and  which  is  described  by  him  in
No.  495  of  the  Philosophical  Transactions  under  the  name  of  Morbus  Strangulato-
rius,  is  noticed  by  M.  Bretonneau.  Dr.  Fothergill,  whose  treatise  on  the  malignant
sore  throat  appeared  in  1748,  does  not  notice  this  termination  in  his  general  history
of  the  disease;  yet  we  find,  on  referring  to  the  fatal  cases  recorded  by  him,  that
"  great  difficulty  of  breathing"  took  place  in  all,  previously  to  the  fatal  termination.
See  his  works  by  Lettsom,  vol.i  p.  379,  382,  388.  In  Huxham's  account  of  the
epidemic  of  1752-3  the  same  termination  is  distinctly  noticed.  In  speaking  of  the
expectoration  of  what  he  terms  the  sloughs,  he  says  that  a  piece  of  the  internal  mem-
brane  of  the  windpipe  was  discharged,  meaning,  of  course,  the  false  membrane  of
croup.  He  also  notices  the  disease  as  "  killing  suddenly  in  a  peripneumonic  man-
ner."— Dissert,  on  the  Malig.  Ulcerous  Sore  Throat.  Dr.  James  Johnstone,  the  elder,
in  his  "  Dissertation  concerning  the  malignant  epidemical  fever  of  1756,"  speaking
of  the  malignant  angina,  says,  "  At  last,  when  death  is  at  hand,  respiration  becomes
unexpectedly  difficult,  quick,  and  peripneumonic."  p.  10.  But  it  is  in  the  treatise  by
Dr.  James  Johnstone,  son  of  the  preceding  writer,  that  we  find  the  connexion  of  the
angina  maligna  and  croup, — and  indeed  the  very  identity  of  these  contended  for  by
Bretonneau, — fully  and  distinctly  stated,  See  his  Treatise  on  the  Malignant  An-
gina, Worcester,  1779.  "  There  is  but  one  other  species  of  angina  (he  says)  from
which  this  disease  [A.  maligna]  requires  any  distinction,  and  that  is  the  croup.  A
small  degree  of  attention  to  the  several  divisions  of  that  distemper,  which  hare
been  made  by  the  best  writers,  will  show  that  in  respect  to  many  of  the  cases  there  can
be  no  distinction,  because  in  reality  there  is  no  difference,"  p.  54.  He  accordingly
divides  the  disease  into  two  species — A.  malig.  tonsillaris,  and  A.  malig.  trac.healis.
In  Dr.  Withering's  "  Account  of  the  Scarlet  Fever  and  Sore  Throat,"  published  in
the  same  year  as  Dr.  Johnstone's  treatise,  the  same  extension  of  the  disease  to  the
passages  opening  into  the  pharynx,  is  noticed. "  This  affection  of  the  fauces  (he

says)  in  some  patients  seemed  to  extend  down  the  gullet  to  the  stomach  :  in

others  it  spread  itself  down  the  windpipe  to  the  lungs,  as  was  evident  from  the  cough,
the  strait  breathing,  and  other  peripneumonic  symptoms.  And  in  others  again,  its
progress  along  the  Eustachian  tube  was  indicated  by  sharp  pains  in  the  ear,"  p.  13.
In  Dr.  Cullen's  account  of  the  cynanche  maligna  it  is  stated,  that  "  from  dissections
it  appears  that,  in  the  C.  Malig.  the  larynx  and  trachea  are  often  affected  in  the  same
manner  as  in  the  C.  trachealis  ;  and  it  is  probable  that,  in  consequence  of  that  affec-
tion, the  C.  maligna  often  proves  fatal  by  such  a  sudden  suffocation  as  happens  in
the  proper  cynanche  trachealis."  Thomson's  ed.  vol.  ii.  39  ;  and  in  his  chapter  on
C.  Trachealis  he  asserts  the  fact  still  more  explicitly.  "  It  frequently  happens  that
the  C.  Maligna,  which  has  its  first  and  principal  seat  in  the  mucous  membrane  of
the  tonsils  and  uvula,  communicates  and  spreads  down  to  the  glottis  and  trachea,
and  to  a  considerable  length  in  the  bronchia?,  and  is  there  attended  with  the  same
sloughs  that  happen  in  the  fauces,  and  then  it  will  produce  all  the  symptoms  of  the
C.  stridula,  or  trachealis." — Ibid.  p.  43.  In  a  paper  published  by  Mr.  Rumsey.  in
the  Transac.  of  a  Soc.  for  the  Improvement  of  Med.  and  Chirur.  Knowledge,  con-
taining an  account  of  an  epidemic  croup  observed  by  him  in  the  year  1790,  the  diph-
theritic affection  of  the  tonsils  is  noticed.  "  Most  of  the  cases  (he  says)  which  oc-
curred in  November  and  afterwards,  were  attended  with  inflammation  and  swelling
of  the  tonsils,  uvula  and  velum  pendulum  palati,  and  frequently  large  films  of  a  white
substance  were  formed  on  the  tonsils,"  vol.  ii.  p.  20.  The  same  appearances  have  been
more  recently  recorded  by  Mr.  Mackenzie  in  the  Edin.  Med.  and  Surg.  Journ.  for
April  1825,  by  Mr.  Pretty  in  the  Lond.  Med.  and  Phys.  Journ.  for  January,  1826,
and  by  Dr.  Hamilton  in  the  Ed.  Jonrn.  of  Med.  Science  for  October  1826.  The  first
writer  recommends  the  topical  use  of  a  strong  solution  of  lunar  caustic,  in  the  same
manner  as  the  muriatic  acid  is  applied  by  Bretonneau.

For  the  best  English  account  of  simple  croup,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Dr.  Cheyne  •


(Jtou  r.


117


after  the  lapse  of  some  hours,  sometimes  only  after  one  or  two
days,  the  cough  becomes  more  violent,  resounding  in  the  larynx
and  trachea  as  in  a  metallic  tube,  and  with  a  peculiarity  of  cha-
racter which  has  been  compared  to  the  crowing  of  a  cock.  Even
the  voice,  and  yet  more  the  inspirations  which  occur  in  the  fits  of
coughing,  have  something  of  the  same  sound.  This  is  denomi-
nated the  croupy  voice,  or  cough.  With  this  there  is  very  great
oppression,  which  is  changed  into  imminent  suffocation,  particu-
larly when  the  false  membrane  begins  to  separate.  This  threat-
ening suffocation  is  equally  excited  by  inspiration,  expiration,  or
cough,  and  soon  becomes  real  if  the  loosened  fragments  of  false
membrane  are  not  expectorated.  If  the  disease  is  confined  to
the  bronchi,  the  same  symptoms  exist,  with  the  exception  of  the
croupy  sound.  If  it  commences  in  the  fauces,  spots  of  a  yel-
lowish or  greenish  colour,  surrounded  by  a  deep  red,  are  at  first
perceived  on  the  tonsils,  the  pillars  of  the  veil  of  the  palate  or
the  back  part  of  the  pharynx.  These  specks  gradually  extend,
unite,  and  increase  in  thickness,  so  as  at  last  to  form  a  complete
i  crust,  like  that  of  inflamed  blood,  lining  the  whole  entrance  of
the  fauces,  and  extending  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  into  the
larynx,  trachea,  and  bronchi.*

If  the  croupy  affection  results  from  a  gangrenous  angina,  we
.  can  sometimes  distinguish  the  eschars  before  the  formation  of  the
;  false  membrane.f In  all  cases,  the  gangrene  is  indicated  by  its

■  work  on  the  Pathology  of  the  Larynx  and  Bronchi ;  and  to  Mr.  Porter's  Surgical
I  Pathology  of  the  Larynx  and  Trachea.  On  the  subject  of  croup,  as  on  most  other
i  contested  points  in  medical  history,  much  confusion  has  been  occasioned  by  the  cir-
l  cumstance  of  different  .names  being  given  to  the  same  disease,  on  the  one  hand,  and
(  of  different  diseases  being  described  under  the  same  name,  on  the  other  hand.  See
t  the  various  writers  on  Laryngitis,  Tracheitis,  Bronchitis,  Acute  Asthma,  Brcnchial
.  Polypus,  Suffocative  Catarrh,  3fc.  $fc.  See  also  the  articles  Croup  and  Throat,  Diseases
tof,  in  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Pract.  Med.  the  former  by  Dr.  Cheyne,  the  latter  by  Dr.
iTweedie:  and  the  elaborate  article  bv  Dr.  Copland,  in  the  Diet,  of  Pract.  Med.
!  In  these  articles  much  of  the  practical  difficulties  thrown  round  the  affections  of  the

pharynx,  larynx,  and  trachea,  by  the  French  authors,  will  be  found  removed  by
i  a  more  discriminate  classification  of  the  diseases. — Transl.

*  While  acknowledging  the  existence  of  true  gangrene  in  certain  cases  of  the

cynanche  maligna,  it  is  evident  that  Laennec  does  not  recognise  any  essential  dif-
ference between  this  affection  and  true  croup,  except  that  of  site. Accordingly,  we

find  him  coinciding  with  Bretonneau  and  Guersent,  in  regarding  Croup  simply  as  a

■  plastic  or  pseudo-membranous  inflammation,  either  confined  to  the  larynx,  or  ex-
pending at  the  same  time  to  the  trachea  and  bronchi,  but  not  rising  above  the  glottis  ;
>while  the  cynanche  maligna  is  regarded  as  an  inflammation  of  precisely  a  similar
kind,  but  commencing  in  the  throat,  and,  after  occupying  the  tonsils  and  pharynx,

« spreading,  more  or  less  rapidly,  over  the  veil  of  the  palate  and  nasal  fossae,  on  the
one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  creeping  into  the  larynx,  trachea,  and  bronchi.  Hence,
:it  will  be  observed,  that  in  the  remaining  portion  of  the  present  chapter,  he  does  not
Separate  the  consideration  of  the  two  affections. — (M.  L.)

f  Bretonneau  has  shown  that  these  pretended  eschars,  which  "  we  can  distinguish
"►before  the  formation  of  the  false  membrane,"  are  nothing  else  but  the  false  mem-
brane itself  changed  by  the  contact  of  the  air,  and  rendered  foetid  by  decomposition.
(Op.  Cit.  p.  44,  etreg.)— (M.  L.) — But  it  does  not  follow  that  this  is  invariably  the
Incase  ;  and  there  seems  no  good  reason  why  the  inflammation  surrounding  a  gangrenous
.peck  may  not  (as  is  above  observed  by  Laennec)  be  of  a  plastic  kind  and  give  risa
ro  the  diphtheritic  membrane. —  Transl.


118


CROUP.


peculiar  odour,  sooner  than  by  any  other  symptom.  If  the  dis-
ease terminates  favourably,  we  can,  day  by  day,  observe  the
progress  of  the  cure  in  examining  the  interior  of  the  throat :  the
false  membrane  falls  off  and  is  replaced  by  an  exudation  of  a
thinner  and  less  plastic  character,  or  one  not  at  all  differing  from
the  mucous  discharge  of  catarrh.  At  other  times,  the  membrane,
in  place  of  being  detached,  is  gradually  absorbed, — becoming  at
first  thinner  and  less  opaque,-  then  sufficiently  transparent  to
show  the  redness  of  the  membrane  beneath  it,  and  finally  disap-
pearing altogether.

Croup,  even  when  most  partial,  is  almost  always  accompanied
by  great  constitutional  disturbance.  In  the  majority  of  cases
the  symptomatic  fever  is  acute  and  very  severe;  the  action  of
the  heart  being,  at  the  same  time,  frequently  irregular.  In  some
cases,  particularly  such  as  occur  in  hospitals,  the  state  of  the
system  is  very  different,  there  being  evident  marks  of  a  septic
change  in  the  fluids  of  the  body :  the  pulse  is  but  little  accele-
rated, the  skin  harsh  and  dry,  the  debility  extreme,  and  the
breath  fetid  even  where  no  gangrenous  specks  exist.  This  va-
riety is  denominated  asthenic  by  Guersent  and  Bretonneau.  In
it  the  false  membrane,  especially  that  lining  the  throat,  is  fre-
quently soft  and  friable,  like  soft  cheese.

The  symptoms  above  enumerated  are  sufficient  to  indicate  the
disease  when  they  occur  in  a  certain  number  together;  but  it
must  be  allowed  that,  if  we  except  the  expectoration  of  mem-
branaceous fragments,  or  the  appearance  of  false  membrane  in
the  fauces,  there  is  not  one  of  them  which  is  pathognomonic*

*  This  is  so  much  the  case  that  it  has  been  found  necessary  to  admit  the  existence
of  a  false  croup,  in  which  there  is  no  formation  of  false  membrane,  and  which  yet,  at
its  very  commencement,  exhibits  all  the  symptoms  of  the  full-formed  disease,  inso-
much that  the  two  affections  are  scarcely  ever  sufficiently  discriminated  to  prevent
the  administration  of  improper  or  useless  remedies.  In  our  difficulties,  indeed,  we
have  merely  negative  and  insufficient  signs  to  direct  us — such  as  a  little  less  fever,
a  less  hissing  respiration  between  the  fits  of  coughing,  less  complete  loss  of  voice,
and  a  more  rapid  diminution  of  the  symptoms.  I  say  nothing  of  the  negative  signs
adduced  by  bretonneau,  viz.  the  want  of  the  redness  of  the  tonsils,  and  of  the  swelling
of  the  lymphatic  glands  of  the  neck,  because  they  would  only  be  then  valuable  if
the  inflammation  of  croup  always  commenced  in  the  pharynx,  which  remains  to  be
proved.  —  (M.  L.)

After  this  disheartening  statement,  I  cannot  resist  the  opportunity  of  laying  before
the  student  the  following  graphic  delineation  of  an  attack  of  the  true  croup,  by  a
most  experienced  observer,  and  not  without  hopes  that  it  may  so  fix  itself  on  the
mind  as  to  prove  an  ever-present  touchstone  or  pathognomonic  standard,  in  actual
practice  : — "  More  generally  the  patient  has  been  for  some  time  in  bed  and  asleep
before  the  nature  of  the  disease  with  which  he  is  threatened,  is  apparent;  then,
perhaps  without  waking,  he  gives  a  very  unusual  cough,  well  known  to  any  one
who  has  witnessed  an  attack  of  the  croup  ;  it  rings  as  if  the  child  had  coughed
through  a  brazen  trumpet, — it  is  truly  a  tttssis  clavgma  ;  it  penetrates  the  walls  and
floor  of  the  apartment,  and  startles  the  experienced  mother — 1  Oh  1  am  afraid  our
child  is  taking  the  croup  :'  she  runs  to  the  nursery,  finds  her  child  sleeping:  softly,
atid  hopes  she  may  be  mistaken.  But  remaining  to  tend  him,  before  long  the  ringing
rough,  n  single  cough,  is  repented  again  and  a^ain  the  patient  is  roused  and  then
a  new  symptom  is  remarked,— the  .sound  of  his  voice  is  changed  ;  puling  and  as  it


CROUP.


119


The  eroupy  voice  or  sound,  independently  of  its  not  being  always
well-marked,  does  not  occur  until  after  the  disease  has  made
great  progress.  The  cough  is  similar,  or  nearly  so,  in  other  dis-
eases, particularly  in  certain  cases  of  hooping  cough,  in  which
the  sonorous  inspirations  sometimes  perfectly  resemble  the  crow-
:  ing  of  a  cock.

I  have  only  met  with  one  case  of  bronchial  croup,  within
these  few  years,  of  sufficient  severity  to  be  recognized  from  the
beginning,  and  which  was  soon  more  fully  characterized  by  the

■  expectoration  of  fragments  of  false  membrane  moulded  on  bron-
chi of  different  diameters. In  this  case,  which  occurred  in  a

i  child  six  years  old,  the  stethoscope  detected,  during  the  whole
course  of  the  disease,  no  other  respiratory  sound,  but  that  of  a
dry  respiration,  evidently  tubular  or  bronchial,  unmixed  with

;  any  of  that  crepitous  dilatation  of  the  pulmonary  cells  so  strongly
marked  in  infancy.  This  sign  coinciding  with  a  natural  reso-
nance of  the  chest,  will  suffice  (if  it  is  constant,  as  I  presume  it
will  be  found  to  be)  to  indicate  the  bronchial  croup ;  since  it
exists  in  no  other  case,  except  sometimes  and  in  a  much  less  de-
cree, in  dilatation  of  the  bronchi ;  a  chronic  affection,  generally
of  very  partial  extent,  and  which  can  hardly  be  confounded
with  croup  by  the  most  inattentive  observer.*

Occasional  causes. — Croup  is  unquestionably  much  more  fre-
quent in  infancy  than  adult  age.  It  is  often  epidemic,  particu-
larly in  places  exposed  to  the  north  and  north-west  winds,  and
when  these  winds  are  more  than  usually  prevalent.  Eruptive

:  fevers,  particularly  scarlatina,  are  sufficiently  often  complicated
with  this  disease,  to  justify  our  considering  them,  or  the  causes

:  I  the  throat  were  swelled,  it  corresponds  with  the  cough  :  the  cough  is  succeeded  hy

I  i  a  sonorous  inspiration,  not  unlike  the  kink  of  pertussis  ;  the  breathing,  hitherto  in-
\  i  audible  and  natural,  now  becomes  audible,  and  a  little  slower  than  common,  as  if
J  i  the  breath  were  forced  through  a  narrow  tube  ;  and  this  is  the  more  remarkable  as
II I  the  disease  advances.  A  blush  of  inflammation  may  sometimes  be  detected  on  the
|  fauces,  and,  in  some  rare  instances,  a  slight  degree  of  swelling  round  the  larynx,
||  and  the  child  complains  of  uneasiness  in  his  throat,  and  says  he  is  choking.  The
Ji '  ringing  cough  followed  by  crowing  inflammation;  the  breathing,  as  if  air  were
| drawn  into  the  lungs  by  a  piston  ;  the  flushed  face  ;  the  tearful  and  bloodshot  eye  ;

quick,  hard,  and  incompressible  pulse;  hot,  dry  skin ;  thirst,  and  high-coloured
urine — form  a  combination  of  symptoms  which  indicate  the  complete  establishment
of  the  disease."—  Cxiclrpatdia.  of' Pract.  Med.  Art.  Croup,  (vol.  i.  p.  493.)  by  John
(  Cbeyne,  M.D.— Transl.

It  must  be  admitted  that  the  brief  exposition  given  by  Laennec  of  the  symptoms
and  progress  of  the  plastic  inflammation  of  the  air  passages  is  insufficient:  it  is
!  i  manifest  that  the  whole  chapter  was  written  in  great  haste. For  more  complete

II  details  1  refer  the  reader  to  the  writers  quoted  by  Laennec,  viz.  the  Treatise  on
Diphtherite,  by  M.  Bretonneau,  and  the  two  articles  of  M.  Guersent  in  the  Diet.

I  i  de  Med.

The  stethoscopic  phenomena  are  of  no  value  in  the  true  croup.  Auscultation
Ijl  practised  on  the  larynx  or  between  the  scapulas,  enables  us  merely  to  hear  more

II  i  distinctly  the  hissing  sound  so  perceptible  by  the  ear. — (M.  L.)

To  the  works  named  by  Dr.  Mer.  Laennec  in  the  above  note,  I  would  add  several
of  those  referred  to  at  the  end  of  this  chapter,  particularly  those  of  Cheyne,  Jurine,
Rubini,  and  Copland. — Traittt,


L


120


CKOUP.


of  them,  as  among  the  causes  of  croup.  The  wide  extension  of
this  plastic  inflammation  of  the  mucous  membranes,  and  its  af-
fecting parts  very  distant  and  even  unconnected  with  each  other,
might  lead  us  to  suspect,  at  least,  that  its  cause  is  rather  some
special  alteration  of  the  fluids  than  a  primary  irritation  of  the
membrane  on  which  it  is  developed.  The  asthenic  croup  pre-
vails particularly  in  hospitals,  and  would  seem  occasionally  to  be
propagated  by  infection.  Indeed,  many  practitioners  have  looked
upon  croup  in  general,  as  well  as  the  malignant  angina,  as  con-
tagious. This  question  may  still  be  considered  as  undetermined;
however,  the  case  of  M.  Bourgeoise,  already  alluded  to,  would
seem  to  show  that  it  is  not  safe  to  respire  too  closely  the  breath
of  patients  labouring  under  this  disease.*

Treatment. — If  croup  is  not  accompanied  by  a  strongly  marked
asthenic  diathesis,  or  does  not  occur  in  very  young  infants,  the
treatment  ought  to  commence  with  one  or  two  bleedings  from  the
arm  or  foot.  In  doubtful  cases,  it  would  seem  preferable  rather
to  omit  bleeding  than  to  destroy,  by  injudicious  depletion,  the
powers  requisite  for  the  separation  and  excretion  of  the  false
membrane. f  Blood-letting,  indeed,  in  this,  as  in  other  diseases
which  have  reached  the  period  of  suppuration,  is  rather  a  pre-
ventive of  future  mischief  than  a  measure  likely  to  lessen  that
which  already  exists.  And,  in  fact,  in  the  case  in  question,  the
danger  arises  much  less  from  the  inflammation  than  from  the  me-
chanical obstacle  to  the  respiration  occasioned  by  the  false  mem-
brane. In  children,  leeches  to  the  throat,  repeated  more  or  less

*  The  disease  of  M.  Bourgeoise  was  a  case  of  the  pellicular  or  pseudo-gangrenous
angina,  the  contagious  nature  of  which  has  been  rendered  extremely  probable  by  the
observations  of  Bretonneau,  Guersent,  and  others  ;  but  the  true  croup  appears  in-
susceptible of  transmission  by  contagion.  These  two  forms  of  plastic  inflammation
differ  in  some  other  points  of  view,  which  may  be  here  noticed  :  for  instance,  we
have  no  account  of  an  epidemic  of  the  true  or  simple  croup,  while  the  pseudo-
gangrenous  or  pellicular  angina,  is  rarely  sporadic  ;  again,  the  true  croup  is  rare
among  adults,  but  the  pellicular  angina  affects  indifferently  adults  and  children,
although  it  in  general  rages  more  severely  among  the  latter. — (ilf.  L.)

t  On  this  passage  Dr.  Cheyne  makes  the  following  judicious  remarks,  in  the
article  quoted  above.  "  As  to  the  question  of  bleeding  in  croup  when  the  disease  is
once  established,  no  doubt  ought  to  exist,  unless  perhaps  we  may  hesitate  with  re-
spect to  its  stage.  If  the  patient  is  in  the  first  or  inflammatory  stage,  no  experi-
enced physician  will  omit  bleeding ;  if  in  the  second,  or  that  of  suppuration,  no  phy-
sician will  propose  it.  If  it  were  doubtful  to  which  stage  the  symptoms  belonged,
it  would  be  preferable  to  bleed  :  the  anceps  remedium  ought  to  be  preferred.  Nothing
but  the  mingling  together  of  incongruities  and  consequent  misapprehensions  of
croup  could  have  induced  an  eminent  physician  like  Bretonneau  to  make  so  danger-
ous an  observation  as  the  following:  'I  am  forced  to  declare,  contrary  to  the  re-
ceived opinion,  that  bleeding  in  croup  has  done  harm,  and  accelerated  rather  than
retarded  the  spread  of  the  coriaceous  inflammation.  I  did  not  abandon  this  measure
till  after  reiterated  proofs  of  its  injurious  effects.'  Physicians  need  not  be  told  not
to  bleed  in  cynanche  maligna,  it  never  was  their  practice  to  do  so,  nor  would  they
willingly  bleed  in  any  form  of  membranous  angina  :  but  if  they  renounce  blood-let-
ting in  the  first  stage  of  croup,  which  they  are  taught  to  do  by  this  sweeping  dogma
of  alleged  experience,  they  will  part  with  the  best  s>haft  in  their  quiver."  Cyc.  of
Pract.  Med.  vol.  i.  p.  500.—  Traml.


cnoui'.


121


frequently  according  to  the  strength  of  the  patient  and  the  seve-
rity of  the  disease,  may  advantageously  take  the  place  of  vene-
section ;  and  in  adults,  their  repeated  application  may  be  useful
after  general  bleeding  has  been  had  recourse  to.  Leeches  have
the  advantage  of  producing,  in  addition  to  the  unloading  of  the
capillaries  in  the  vicinity  of  the  affected  part,  a  sort  of  local
eruption,  which  unquestionably  is  sometimes  beneficial  as  a  deri-
vative. Other  derivatives,  however,  and  of  the  most  energetic
kind,  must  be  put  in  requisition,  particularly  blisters  and  sinap-
isms. These  are,  in  general,  more  advantageously  applied  to  the
lower  extremities,  than  in  the  vicinity  of  the  disease.  Good
effects  have,  nevertheless,  been  obtained  from  the  application  of
a  cataplasm  wetted  with  muriatic  acid  to  the  anterior  part  of  the
larynx.  Perhaps  this  may  act  otherwise  than  as  a  rubefacient.
It  is  at  least  certain,  that  experience  has  proved  that  no  other
application  is  so  effectual  in  removing  the  false  membrane  from
the  fauces,  as  that  recommended  by  Van  Swieten,  viz.  one  part
of  muriatic  acid  and  three  of  honey,  with  which  the  specks  are
anointed  by  means  of  a  pencil.*  All  practitioners  who  have  had
occasion  to  see  a  good  deal  of  this  disease,  will  readily  admit,
that  these  measures,  although  very  rational  and  conformable  to
the  results  of  experience  in  the  treatment  of  inflammatory  dis-
eases in  general,  are  nevertheless  rarely  sufficient,  and  that  very
few  well  characterized  cases  have  yielded  to  their  influence.
Others  have  consequently  been  had  recourse  to.  I  shall  here
notice  those  only  which  have  been  found  decidedly  beneficial.
Of  this  kind  are  emetics  repeated  daily  or  even  twice  a  day.-f-
They  evidently  accelerate  the  separation  of  the  adventitious
membrane,  and  favour  its  expulsion. However  valuable  this

*  The  researches  of  Bretonneau  have  afresh  demonstrated  the  importance  of  topi-
cal applications  in  the  plastic  inflammations  of  the  air  passages.  The  mixture  of
Van  Swieten,  and,  still  better,  the  pure  muriatic  acid  applied  by  means  of  a  sponge  to
the  affected  part,  were  unquestionably  beneficial  in  the  epidemic  of  Tours  ;  and  how-
ever painful  the  practice  may  be,  it  can  never  henceforth  be  omitted  with  propriety,
in  the  cases  where  the  disease  commences  in  the  pharynx.  When  it  originates
below  the  glottis,  that  is,  in  the  tvue  cvoup,  .Bretonneau  lias  proposed  (and  daily  expe-
rience of  its  happy  effects  justifies  the  proposal)  to  introduce  pulverised  alum  into
the  air  passages.  This  is  effected  by  means  of  a  small  hollow  cylinder  of  wood  con-
taining the  alum,  to  which  two  tubes  are  attached  ;  through  one  of  these  the  operator
blows  forcibly,  so  as  to  convey  the  powder  to  its  destination.  The  operation  is  re-
peated two  or  three  times  daily.  It  immediately  occasions  a  great  heat  in  the  throat
and  an  intense  thirst,  which  are  allayed  by  allowing  the  patient  to  drink  cold  water
at  discretion.  Insufflations  of  this  kind  may  be  beneficially  applied  in  other  diseases.
M.  Ambroise  Laennec  of  Nantes  has  used  them  with  the  greatest  success  in  severe
tonsillitis,  in  the  variolous  cynanche,  and  in  oedema  of  the  glottis  ;  {Revue  Med.  Oct.
1828  ;)  and  we  might  anticipate  happy  results  from  the  practice  in  laryngeal
pthisis,  if  it  did  not  unfortunately  happen  that  this  affection  is  almost  always  com-
plicated with  tuberculous  disease  of  the  luncrS. — (M.  L.)

t  "In  very  few  cases  have  1  known  the  child  survive  the  second  stage  of  croup  ;
and  in  all  of  these  the  children  recovered  while  using  a  solution  of  tartarised  anti-
mony. Emetics  1  hud  repeatedly  given  in  the  second  stage  of  croup;  but  in  these
J cases,  the  patients  were  kept  sick  far  two  or  three  days,  with  scarce  any  interval." —
I  •  Chevne's  Pathology  of  the  Bronchia,  &c.  p.  irt.  —  Trunsl.


122


CHOUI'.


treatment  may  be,  and  I  have  myself  obtained  cures  which  I
could  attribute  to  it  alone,  it  is  no  doubt  too  true  that  the  greater
number  of  cases  still  prove  fatal,  even  when  it  is  called  in  to  aid
the  means  already  detailed.  The  internal  use  of  hydrosulphu-
ret  of  potass  was,  some  years  since,  cried  up  as  a  sort  of  specific
in  croup.  It  is  one  of  the  ancient  family  of  the  alkaline  resol-
vents, by  which  the  chemical  physicians,  followers  of  Sylvius  of
Leyden,  proposed  to  correct  the  too  great  plasticity  or  viscidity
of  the  fluids,  and  even  to  dissolve  concretions  already  formed.  I
have  before  spoken  of  this  alkaline  treatment.  In  the  present
case  it  is  sufficient  to  remark,  that  its  effects  are  too  slow  to  be
of  any  use  in  a  disease  of  such  rapid  progress  as  croup.  In  small
quantity  its  effects  are  insignificant ;  and  in  larger  and  more  re-
peated doses,  it  must  be  more  injurious  as  an  irritating,  acrid,
and  almost  caustic  substance,  than  it  can  be  beneficial  as  an  al-
kaline remedy.  Pretty  numerous  successful  results  have  been
obtained  from  mercurial  frictions  exhibited  in  such  doses  as
speedily  to  produce  salivation ;  and  in  the  actual  state  of  the
science  I  think  no  prudent  practitioner  ought  to  neglect  this  me-
thod conjointly  with  blood-letting  and  emetics.*  The  efficacy
of  this  practice,  even  in  a  very  striking  degree,  cannot  be  ques-
tioned in  many  other  inflammatory  diseases,  particularly  hepatitis
and  peritonitis.  Still  the  success  of  even  the  mercurial  treat-
ment is  not  sufficiently  great  to  hinder  us  from  looking  for  other
means ;  and  if  I  had  had  occasion  to  treat  this  disease  since  I
have  experienced  the  efficacy  of  emetic  tartar  in  large  doses  in
many  inflammatory  diseases,  I  would  certainly  have  had  recourse
to  it  with  considerable  confidence.

*  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  inform  the  English  reader  that  the  use  of  mercury,  in
the  form  of  calomel,  given  internally  in  large  and  frequently  repeated  doses,  has  been
carried  to  a  great  extent  in  this  country.  This  practice  was  introduced  by  Dr.  Rush,
and  was  extensively  used,  and  at  one  time  cried  up  as  almost  a  specific,  by  Dr.  Ha-
milton of  Edinburgh.  He  administered  tbe  medicine  in  doses  of  from  one  to  five
grains  every  hour.  In  the  later  editions  of  his  treatise,  this  author  admits  that  he
had  exaggerated  the  efficacy  of  calomel  in  this  disease ;  an  opinion  in  which  1  believe
he  will  be  joined  by  every  experienced  practitioner.  It  would  appear  from  Dr.  Bre-
tonneau's  treatise,  that  this  practice,  although  fallen  into  comparative  disuse  in  this
country,  is  likely  to  be  revived  in  France. — Traml.

d

LITERATURE  OF  CROUP.

1718.  Blair  (Pat.,  M.D.)  Miscell.  obs.  on  the  practice  of  Physic. 2  vol.  Lond.  8vo.

1749.  Ghisi  (Mart.) Lettere  mediche. Cremona.  1749.  4(o.

1764.  Wilcke  (H.  C.)  et  Aurivillius  (S.) De  Angina  Infantum. Upsal.  4to.

1765.  Home  (F.,  M.D.) An  inquiry  into  the  nature, -&c.  of  croup. Edin.  8vo.
1769.  Murray  (J.  A.)  Abhandl.  von  einer  bosartigen  Braune,  &c.  Goett.  8vo.

1778.  Micbaelis  (C.F.) De  angina  polyposa. Goett,  1778.  8vo.

1779.  Johnstone  (J..  M.D.)  Treatise  on  malignant  angina. Worcest.  1779.  8vo.
1794.  Rush  (B.,  M.D.)  Obs.  on  the  cynanche  troch.  (Med.  Obs.  &  Inq.)  Phil.  8vo.
1794.  Alexander  (Disney,  M.  D.) Treat,  on  the  nature  of  cynanche  ttfach.  or

croup. Iluddersf.  8vo.


U  H  ONC  M  I A  L ILK  MO  LI  K1IAUE.


123


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  BRONCHIAL  HEMORRHAGE.

By  this  term  I  wish  to  designate  that  kind  of  spitting  of  blood,
which  consists  in  simple  exhalation  from  the  surface  of  the  bron-
chial membrane.  Haemoptysis  was  attributed  by  the  ancients  to
rupture  of  the  vessels  of  the  lungs ;  and  this  opinion,  which  is

1798.  Archer  (J.)  Dissertation  on  cyn.  tracli.  commonly  called  croup.  Philad.  8vo.

1801.  Cheyne  (J.,  M.D.)  Essays  on  the  dis.  of  children.  I.  On  croup. Edin.  8vo.

1802.  Schwilgue  (C.  J.  A.)  Diss,  sur  le  croup  aigu  des  enfans.  Par.  1802.  8vo.
1808.  Recueil  des  ohs.  et  des  faits  relatif's  au  croup,  redige  par  la  faculty  de  med.

Paris.  8vo.

1808.  Portal  (Ant.)  Del' Angine  merahraneuse  (Mem.  sur  plusieurs  mal.)  Par.  8vo.
1808.  Caron  (J.  C.  F.) Traite  du  croup  aigu. Par.  1808.  8vo.
1808.  Id. Examen  du  recueil  des  faits  relatifs  au  croup. Par.  1808.  8vo.
;  1808.  Friedlander  (M.)  Samml.  von  beobachtungen  died,  hautige  braune  betreffen.
Tub.  1808.  8vo.

!  1808.  Hopff  ( J.  W.) Abhandlung  ueber  das  croup,  &c. Hanau.  1808.  8vo.
.'  1808.  Wolf  (W.  L.) Ueber  d.  luftrohren-braune  der  kinder. Alt.  1808.  8vo.
i  1809.  Hecker(A.F.)  Von.  d.  entzundung.  im  halse  besonders  angin.  polyp.  Berl.  8vo.
I  1810.  Marcus  (A.  F.) Ueber  die  natur,  &c.  der  hautigen  braune. Bamb.  8vo.
:  1810.  Jurine  (L.) Memoire  sur  le  croup  qui  a  partage  le  prix,  &c. Genet.  8vo.
!  1810.  Cheyne  (J.,  M.D.) The  pathol.  of  the  memb.  of  the  larynx  and  bronchia.
Ed.  8vo.

1811.  Loebenstein-Loebel  (E.)  Erkennt.  und  heilung  der  hautige  braune.  Leipz.  8vo.

1811.  Double  (F.  J.) Traite  du  croup. Par.  1811.  8vo.

181 1.  Geraudi  (C.) De  l'angine  tracheale  ou  croup. Par.  1811.  8vo.

1811.  Routte  (F.) Traite  de  l'asphyxie  connue  sous  le  nom  de  croup. Par.  8vo.

1811.  Hosack  (D.,  M.D.) Obs.  on  the  croup  or  hives. New  York.  1811.  8vo.

1812.  Eccard  (A.  W.)  Beobachtungen  &c.  der  hautige  braune.  Numb.  1812.  8vo.
1812.  Vieusseux  (G.)  Memoire  sur  le  croup  ou  angine  tracheale.  Geneve.  1812.  8vo.
1812.  Caillau  (J.  M.) Memoire  sur  le  croup. Bordeaux,  1812.  8vo.

1812.  Bonnafox  de  Malet  (J.) Memoire  sur  le  croup. Par.  1812.  8vo.
!  1812.  Valentin  (L.) Recherches  historiques  et  practiques  sur  la  croup. Par.  8vo.
!  1812.  Royei-Collard  (A.  A.) Rapport  sur  les  ouvr.  envoyes  au  cone,  sur  le  croup.
Par.  1812.  8vo.

!  1813.  Rubini  (P.) Riflessioni  sulla  malattia  denominata  crup.  Parma.  8vo.

I  1813.  Routte  (F.) Doutes  sur  l'existence  du  croup  essentielle. Par.  1813.  8vo.
|  I  1813.  Royer-Collard  (A.  A.) Diet,  des  Sc.  Med. (Art.  Croup  )  t.7. Par.  1813.
i  l  1815.  Erschenmayer  (L.  A.) Die  epidemie  des  croups  zu  Kirchheim. Tub.  8vo.
1 1  1816.  Albers  (J.  A.,  M.D.) Commentatio  de  tracheitide  infantum. Leipz.  8vo.
I  I  1820.  Eggert  (F.  F.  S.) Ueber  das  wesen  und  die  heilung  des  croups. Ham.  8vo.

I  1823.  Guersent. Diet,  de  Med. (Art.  Croup.)  t.  6. Par.  1833.
'11823.  Blaud(P.)  Nouvelles  recherches  sur  la  laryngo-tracheite  ou  croup.  Par.  8vo.
111826.  Bretonneau(P.)  Des  inflammations  specials  du  tissu  muqueux,  &c.  Par.8vo.

I  1826.  Porter  (W.  H.) Observations  on  the  surgical  pathology  of  the  larynx  and
trachea. Dub.  1826.  8vo.

1 1827.  Desruelles  (H.  M.  J.) Trait6  theorique  et  pratique  du  croup. Par.  8vo.
i  l  1827.  Emangard  (E.  P.) Traite  practique  du  croup. Par.  1827.

1  1828.  Id. Memoire  additionel  au  traite  du  croup. Par.  1828.
1828.  Sachse. Encycl.  Worterb. (Art.  Angina.) B.  2. Berlin,  1828.

I  1830.  Duges  (Ant.) Diet,  de  med.et  de  chir.  prat. (Art.  Croup.)  t.  5.  Par.  1830.

1  183.5.  Cheyne  (J.,  M.D.)  Cycl.  of  pract.  med.  (Art.  Croup.)  Vol.  i.  Lond.  1833.
I  l  1833.  Copland  (J.,  M.D.) Diet,  or ptact.  med. (Art.  Croup.) Lond.  1833.

Tiansl.


124


BR  ONCH I A  I- II -EM  OK  K II  AGli.


that  of  the  vulgar,  is  perhaps  still  held  by  certain  physicians  who
make  a  point  of  never  admitting  any  new  doctrines  until  they  are
so  generally  received  as  to  demand  their  assent  whether  they  will
or  no,  and  without  examination.  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  theory
in  question,  if  adopted  without  sufficient  proof,  has  been  perhaps
with  as  little  reason  abandoned,  since  the  phenomena  of  exhala-
tion, in  health  and  disease,  have  been  better  understood.  It  is
not  impossible  that  an  aneurism  of  one  of  the  branches  of  the
pulmonary  artery,  or  a  varix  of  the  veins,  may,  by  rupture,  give
occasion  to  haemorrhage,  although  no  well  described  instance  of
the  kind  has  come  to  my  knowledge.  When  softened  tubercles
burst  into  the  bronchi,  the  slight  haemorrhages  that  accompany
this  accident,  arise,  no  doubt,  from  the  rupture  of  small  vessels  ;
and  we  shall  find  hereafter  that  losses  of  blood  of  much  greater
consequence,  and  even  mortal,  may  result  from  the  rupture  of
a  vessel  traversing  a  tuberculous  excavation.  Other  instances  of
fatal  haemoptysis  arising  from  the  rupture  of  a  vessel,  are  afforded
by  aneurisms  opening  into  the  trachea,  bronchi,  or  substance  of
the  lungs.  However,  it  can  no  longer  admit  of  question,  in  the
present  state  of  medical  knowledge,  that  the  greater  number  of
cases  of  slight  or  moderate  haemoptysis,  consist  in  the  simple  ex-
halation of  blood  from  the  bronchial  membrane ;  while  the  severe
cases  originate  chiefly  in  the  vesicular  structure  of  the  lungs,  and
constitute  the  affection  which  will  be  noticed  hereafter  under  the
name  of  Pulmonary  Apoplexy.

Anatomical  characters. —  On  examining  subjects  who  have  died
of  bronchial  haemorrhage,  or  while  labouring  under  it,  more  or
less  of  coagulated  or  fluid  blood  is  found  in  the  bronchi.  On  the
surface  of  the  coagula,  we  sometimes  observe  fibrinous  concre-
tions in  the  form  of  polypi.  The  mucous  membrane  is  commonly
a  little  softened,  and  is  impregnated  or  tinged  with  blood  through
its  whole  depth.

Signs  and  symptoms. — The  discharge  is  small  or  at  most  mo-
derate, and  the  blood  is  frothy,  and  sometimes  clotted,  particu-
larly towards  the  end  of  the  attack.  Those  profuse  haemorrh-
ages, which  are  vulgarly  called  vomitings  of  blood,  arise  almost
always  from  pulmonary  apoplexy.  On  this  account,  the  small-
ness  of  the  discharge,  in  any  case,  may  be  considered  as  affording
a  strong  probability  that  the  haemoptysis  is  the  result  of  simple
exhalation.  The  absence  of  the  stethoscopic  signs  of  pulmonary
apoplexy,  adds  greatly  to  the  certainty  of  our  diagnosis.  In  the
bronchial  haemorrhage,  the  chest  is  perfectly  sonorous.  There
exists  no  crepitous  rhonchus;  but  only  a  mucous  rhonchus  with
unequal  bubbles,  which  are  usually  larger  than  those  of  catarrh,
and  seem  to  be  formed  by  more  liquid  materials,  and  to  burst
more  frequently.  The  rhonchus  is  more  or  less  abundant  ac-
cording to  the  quantity  of  blood  effused.  When  the  haemorrhage
is  slight,  there  is  no  general  disturbance  of  the  constitution  per-


HK0XCI11AI. II  F.MORRIIAli  E.  125

ceptible  :  even  the  pulse  continues  natural. When  the  haemop-
tysis is  more  considerable,  it  is  attended  by  a  distinct  febrile
i  state  ;  the  pulse  becomes  frequent,  and  exhibits  a  vibratory  cha-
racter, independent  of  either  its  force  or  frequency.

Occasional  causes. — These  are  such  as  produce  general  ple-
Ilthora,  or  local  conjestions  of  blood  in  the  lungs;  such  as  the
,  i  abuse  of  spirituous  liquors,  excessive  exertion,  particularly  of
the  organs  of  respiration  and  speech,  suppression  of  an  habitual
i  1  haemorrhage,  the  presence  of  numerous  crude  tubercles  in  the
i  I  lungs.  We  frequently  find  haemoptysis  vicarious  of  the  menses,
i hand  recurring  with  considerable  regularity;  and  discharges  of
this  kind  have  been  known  to  last  thirty  and  even  forty  years.*

I  !  Suppression  of  the  haemorrhoidal  discharge  appears  to  me  much
imore  frequently  to  give  rise  to  pulmonary  apoplexy.  Epileptics

j  ;  and  other  subjects  of  strong  convulsions  frequently  discharge  a
llbloody  froth  by  the  mouth. In  these  cases,  the  blood  comes  no

I I  doubt  partly  from  the  bronchial  membrane,  but  also  partly  from
it  the  lining  membrane  of  the  mouth. The  bronchi  of  a  great
jli  many  subjects,  dead  of  different  diseases,  are  found  covered  here

and  there  with  blood,  evidently  exhaled  in  the  last  moments  of
life ;  in  like  manner  as  the  pulmonary  congestions  occurring  after
death,  which  we  shall  notice  hereafter.

Treatment. — This  consists  most  commonly  in  the  more  or  less
rrepeated  use  of  blood-letting. Taking  blood  from  the  foot  is
si  ^generally  preferable  in  women  when  there  is  suppression  of  the
icatamenia. When  the  detraction  of  much  blood  is  not  requisite,
itthe  application  of  leeches  to  the  inner  side  of  the  thighs  or  below
tthe  ancles,  maybe  substituted. I  give  these  places  the  prefer-
1  cence  to  the  vulva,  for  various  reasons;  and  among  others,  be-
ccause  I  am  convinced  from  many  comparative  trials,  that  leeching
■  rfrom  the  last-mentioned  place  is  not  more  effective  as  a  deriva-
t  tive,  than  from  the  other  two,  particularly  if  the  blood  is  taken
ffrom  both  at  the  same  time. Dry  cupping  or  with  lancets,  si-
napisms, stimulating  foot-baths,  may  be  usefully  employed  after
venesection,  or  in  cases  where  this  is  not  necessary.

Rest  and  absolute  silence,  a  cool  air,  abstinence  from  wine  and
^stimulant  food,  and  a  regimen  proportioned  in  strictness  to  the
l  vseverity  and  extent  of  the  haemorrhage,  are  accessory  measures
by  no  means  to  be  neglected. The  same  remark  applies  to  the
use  of  mucilaginous  drinks,  such  as  decoction  of  comfrey-root  or
■marsh  mallow,  rice  water,  solution  of  gum  arabic  or  tragacanth,
'  bkc.f Acids  and  astringents  are  also  commonly  employed,  par-

*  Tulpius  lib.  ii.  cap.  ii — Nov.  Act.  Nat.  Cur.  vol.  i.  obs.  1.

t  These  latter  measures,  as  indeed  the  common  usage  of  practitioners,  are  in  di-
»ct  opposition  to  the  principle  of  cure  so  much  i
Observations  on  the  Pulmonary  System,"  viz.
uid. But  it  is  evident  that  his  practice  is  founc
«iology  of  nutrition  in  respect  of  liquids. — Transl.


It  It  O  N  C  J I 1 A  L M  EM  B  It  A  N  K .


ticularly  Veau  de  Rabel,*  or  the  sulphuric  acid  sufficiently  di-
luted, alum,  tormentilla,  bistort,  kino,  pomegranate  bark,  and,  of
late,  rhatany  root  and  its  extract.  These  means  are  more  hurt-
ful than  beneficial  at  the  commencement  of  the  haemorrhage;
but  they  may  sometimes  be  advantageously  employed  in  old
cases,  which  are  combined  with  an  atonic  state  of  the  system,  or
when  the  blood  is  only  slightly  coloured  and  feebly  concrescible.
In  this  last  case  I  have  sometimes  used  with  benefit  the  dry  sul-
hate  of  iron.  To  derive  advantage  from  astringents  they  must
e  given  in  larger  doses  than  is  usual.  I  give,  for  example,
from  one  to  four  drachms  of  alum  in  a  pint  of  any  sweet  mucila-
ginous drink.f

When  an  active  haemoptysis  is  checked,  Sydenham  advises  the
patient  to  be  purged,  and  looks  upon  this  means  as  most  likely
to  prevent  a  relapse.  I  have  always  adopted  the  same  practice,
(except  when  evidently  contra-indicated,)  and,  as  it  appeared,
frequently  with  advantage.  Obstinate  spittings  of  blood,  which
have  resisted  repeated  bleedings,  sometimes  terminate  instanta-
neously under  the  effect  of  a  purgative.


CHAPTER  V.

POLYPUS  OF  THE BRONCHIAL  MEMBRANE.

This  is  a  very  rare  affection.  I  have  only  met  with  three  ex-
amples of  it  on  record.^  These  appeared  to  be  of  the  same  na-
ture as  the  vesicular  polypi  of  the  nostrils,  ears,  and  os  uteri,  that
is  to  say,  of  a  texture  analogous  to  that  of  the  mucous  mem-
branes, and  containing  small  serous  cysts.  I  lately  met  with  a
concretion  in  one  of  the  large  bronchi  of  a  phthisical  subject,
which  might  have  been  easily  mistaken  for  a  polypus.  It  was
about  an  inch  and  a  half  long,  and  from  four  to  five  lines  thick,
and  almost  entirely  filled  the  canal  in  which  it  lay.  It  adhered
closely  to  the  angle  formed  by  the  union  of  the  two  larger  bron-
chi-, and  although  it  lay  in  the  left,  in  the  fits  of  coughing  its
moveable  extremity  plugged  up  the  opening  of  the  right  branch,
and  occasioned  at  the  time  imminent  suffocation. It  is  remark-

*  Aqua  Rabelliana,  so  named  from  its  inventor,  the  empiric  Rabel :  it  is  formed  of
three  parts  alcohol  and  one  part  sulphuric  acid,  and  constitutes  a  sort  of  sulphuric
ether. —  Transl.

t  A  saturated  solution  of  alum  has  recently  been  strongly  recommended  by  Dr.
Scudamore,  as  a  styptic. See  his  work  on  the  blood,  p.  161. — Trawl.

t  Murray,  Nov.  Comm.  Cior-tting.  IV.  44. — Cheune,  Ed.  Med.  and  Surg.  Journ.
IV. Horn,  Archiv.  1811,  Jan.  p.  176.


B  K O N C H  1  A  I .  MF,MliHA\E.


127


able,  however,  that  although  it  plugged  up  almost  entirely  the
left  branch,  insomuch  as  to  leave  not  more  than  half  a  line  of
space  for  the  passage  of  the  air,  it  neither  impeded  respiration
on  this  side,  nor  prevented  the  manifestation  of  pectoriloquy  in
a  cavity  in  the  upper  lobe.#  The  texture  of  this  concretion  was
compact  and  perfectly  resembled  the  polypus-like  concretions
found  in  the  heart  and  arteries,  except  that  it  was  much  firmer
and  drier,  having  evidently  undergone  incipient  organization.  It
was  white,  with  some  shades  of  yellow  and  red,  internally  ;  and
contained  some  small  blood-vessels  well  formed  and  finely  branch-
ed. Externally  it  was  of  a  pretty  deep  violet  red  colour,  and  still
more  distinctly  vascular.  This  concretion  was  no  doubt  the  re-
mains of  a  coagulum  of  blood  which  had  been  left  in  the  bron-
chial cavity,  after  an  attack  of  haemoptysis,  of  which  the  patient
had  had  several.  Many  other  facts  prove  the  possibility  of  the
organization  of  fibrine  when  separated  from  the  blood  ;  and  I
shall  myself  have  occasion  to  notice  several  of  the  kind,  when
treating  of  diseases  of  the  organs  of  circulation.  The  Jleshy
uterine  moles  are  of  the  same  origin  and  character ;  only  they
approach,  in  appearance  and  consistence,  nearly  to  fibrous  tex-
tures. I  am  also  of  opinion  that  those  pieces  of  Jlesh,  which
some  of  the  older  authors  state  to  have  been  expectorated,  were
derived  from  this  source.')'  This  is  evidently  the  case  in  those
instances  recorded  by  them  in  which  the  Jlesh  was  discharged
during  or  subsequent  to  severe  haemoptysis,^  or  where  the  con-
cretions expectorated  were  of  the  form  of  a  pulmonary  vessel. ||

*  Revue  Medicate,  Mare  1824,  p.  384.
t  Act.  Nat.  Cur.  vol.  v.  obs.  lxxiv.
t  Comm.  Litt.  Norimb.  1745.  p.  21 5.

||  Act.  Nat.  Cur.  vol.  vii.  obs.  xliv. — Tohn  in  Act.  Erud.  1683.  In  this  short  chap-
ter our  author  seems  hardly  to  retain  his  accustomed  correctness  and  clearness.  He
evidently  confounds  very  different  diseases  under  the  same  appellation.  The  true
polypus  of  the  bronchi,  1  mean  of  the  same  kind  as  the  chronic  growth  of  the  nose,
os  uteri,  and  other  mucous  membranes,  is  no  doubt  an  extremely  rare  disease  ;  and
M.  Laennec  commits  a  great  mistake  in  ranking  the  case  of  Dr.  Cheyne,  as  of  this
kind.  It  was  an  inorganized  concretion  analogous  to  that  of  croup,  the  result,  no
doubt,  of  a  chronic  inflammation  of  the  bronchial  membrane.  Another  variety  of  the
bronchial  polypus  is  that  which  follows  haemoptysis,  and  seems  to  be  precisely  of  the
kind  described  in  the  text  as  "  a  concretion  found  in  a  phthisical  subject."  For  va-
rious examples  of  both  these  kinds,  see  Cheyne's  Pathology  of  the  Larynx  and  Bron-
chia, p.  147.—  Transl.


L28


ULCERS  OF  THE  BRONCHI.


CHAPTER  VI.

ULCERS  OF  THE  BRONCHI.

Ulceration  of  the  bronchi  is  an  extremely  rare  affection  ;  al-
though it  would  perhaps  be  less  so,  if  we  were  more  in  the  habit  of
examining  the  bronchi  carefully  and  minutely.  In  this  case,  it  is
probable  that  we  should  occasionally  find  in  phthisical  subjects,
in  those  more  particularly  where  there  existed  a  like  affection  of
the  larynx,  ulcers  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  bronchi,*  the
consequence  of  the  small  tubercles  which  now  and  then  form  in
this  membrane.  The  part  of  the  bronchial  membrane  in  which
ulceration  has  been  most  frequently  observed,  is  that  comprised
between  the  point  where  the  trachea  enters  the  thorax,  and  the
bifurcation  of  the  bronchi.  M.  Cayol  was  the  first  who  gave  an
exact  description  of  this  affection,  of  which  nothing  was  previ-
ously known,  beside  some  examples  noticed  by  Morgagni.f

Anatomical  characters. — The  size  of  the  ulcers  varies  from  a
few  lines  to  an  inch  and  a  half.  They  are  of  a  greyish  dirty  co-
lour, covered  with  a  puriform  mucus,  generally  in  considerable
quantity,  with  edges  somewhat  swollen  and  marked  by  a  redness
which  extends  to  some  distance  around ;  and  the  bronchial  rings
and  the  muscular  and  ligamentous  substance  uniting  these,  are
sometimes  of  the  same  colour  throughout.  They  are  rarely  met
with  beyond  the  bifurcation  of  the  bronchi.

Andral  relates  three  cases  of  ulceration  of  the  bronchi. \  In
the  first,  as  in  the  cases  of  M.  Cayol,  the  ulcers  were  near  the
bifurcation  of  the  bronchi ;  in  the  second  they  existed  in  the
small  bronchial  branches. In  this  last  instance,  the  ulcerations,

*  M.  Louis's  laborious  and  most  minute  researches  bave  proved  tbe  correctness
of  M.  Laennec's  conjecture.  Of  one  bundred  and  two  phthisical  subjects,  tbe
trachea  was  found  ulcerated  in  thirty-one,  the  larynx  in  twenty-two,  and  the  epi-
glottis in  eighteen.  In  the  whole  of  his  researches  he  only  met  with  seven  cases  of
ulceration  of  the  bronchi ;  but  he  adds,  that  this  may  have  been  somewhat  more  fre-
quent, as  he  did  not  always  examine  the  bronchi  with  the  same  care  as  the  trachea.
See  his  Recherches  sur  la  Phthisie,  p.  44.  It  would,  however,  appear  from  Dr.  Hast-
ings' observations,  that  ulceration  of  the  bronchi  is  of  much  more  frequent  occurrence
than  even  Louis  supposes.  In  his  account  of  chronic  bronchitis  he  says — '*  It  is  not
at  all  uncommon  to  find  this  membrane  ulcerated.  'Ibis  happens  more  particularly
when  the  disease  has  arisen  from  the  irritation  of  mechanical  substances.  The  ulcers
are  always  superficial  and  generally  small  :  but  occasionally  in  the  larger  bronchial
cells  thev  are  of  considerable  magnitude,  and  oblong  or  oval  in  shape.  In  the  leather
dressers  of  this  town  (Worcester)  who  died  of  chronic  bronchitis,  the  mucou6  mem-
brane is,  according  to  the  observation  of  the  author,  always  ulcerated,  and  in  those
instances  he  has  seen  more  extensive  ulceration  than  in  any  other."  Treatise  on  In-
flammation of  the  Mucous  Membrane  of  the  Lungs,  p.  281.  See  also  cases  1,  2,  5,  8,
10,  11  14,  1ft,  18,  21 ,  22  ;  in  all  of  which  ulceration  of  the  bronchial  membrane  is
mentioned. — Tratisl.  ,

t  Recherches  sur  la  Phthisie  Tracheale,  Taris,  1810. — De  Sed.  et  Caus.  L.  ii.

Ep.  1ft.

t  Clinique  Med.  torn.  ii.  p.  7.


ULCIiKS OF T1IK  BliONCHL


L29


of  the  size  of  a  millet  seed,  were  circular  and  with  livid  and  tu-
mid borders.  The  patient  had  been  distressed  by  frequent  and
very  painful  fits  of  coughing;  and  his  expectoration  was  usually
tinged  with  blood.  He  died  of  aneurism  of  the  heart.  In  the
third  case,  the  trachea  from  its  origin  to  a  little  above  its  bifur-
cation, was  literally  like  a  sieve  from  an  immense  quantity  of  mi-
nute ulcers,  so  numerous  and  close  indeed,  that  the  space  oc-
cupied by  them  was  greater  than  the  sound  portion  of  the
membrane.  This  disease  had  been  attended  by  a  sensation  of
habitual  heat,  rather  than  pain,  in  the  trachea ;  and  inspiration
was  accompanied  by  a  remarkable  hissing,  occasioned  probablv
by  the  continual  tendency  of  the  glottis  to  descend,  on  account  of
the  irritation  produced  by  the  passage  of  the  air.  I  know  of  no
instance  of  complete  perforation  of  a  bronchial  trunk,  from  ulcer-
ation, before  entering  the  lungs.  The  author  just  quoted  re-
I  lates  two  cases  of  pei-foration  of  the  trachea  from  this  cause.  In
i  the  one,  the  ulcer  opened  into  the  oesophagus,  and  was  produc-
i  tive  of  no  further  inconvenience  than  a  little  uneasiness  and  cough

•  when  the  patient  swallowed  ;  in  the  other,  the  opening  was  in  the
I  back  part  of  the  trachea;  but  it  must  have  been  either  incom-
:  plete,  or  its  edges  must  have  been  united  to  the  neighbouring

parts,  as  there  appears  not  to  have  been  any  emphysema  around
i  it.

Symptoms. These  are — a  pain,  at  first  slight,  or  a  simple
t  feeling  of  irritation  at  the  bottom  of  the  trachea,  experienced
i  momentarily,  and  sometimes  only  when  the  patient  sings,  cries,  or
jrraises  the  voice  in  speaking. This  state  may  continue  a  long
jttime. I  know  a  lady  who  has  suffered  in  this  way  for  ten  years,
|\without  any  other  apparent  alteration  in  her  health. She  had
tried  various  means,  and  particularly  the  most  powerful  issues,
without  effect,  and  has  only  found  relief  in  preserving  absolute
silence. After  a  time,  the  pain  becomes  constant,  even  when  the
patient  is  silent ;  and  even  then  it  is  found  that  the  voice  is  not

•  always  perceptibly  altered  in  its  character.  Cough  soon  super-
venes, attended  by  a  colourless,  ropy,  pituitous  expectoration,
intermixed  with  opaque  puriform  particles.  When  this  becomes
abundant,  a  rhonchus,  perceptible  by  the  naked  ear,  is  heard  in
the  trachea;  and  when  not  so  heard,  I  have  found  it  very  dis-
tinct by  means  of  the  stethoscope.  This  instrument  detected  it
at  the  same  time  in  various  parts  of  the  lungs,  while  in  many

!  points  it  discovered  the  respiration  to  be  very  feeble.  This  was
lowing  probablv  to  the  accumulation  of  phi  egm  in  the  smaller
ll'bronchi,  since  the  respiration  became  good  after  expectoration.
<lThese  symptoms  are  soon  accompanied  by  extreme  dyspnoea,  the
Ippatient  being  obliged  to  remain  in  the  sitting  posture  night  and
lay  ;  and  when  he  awakes  after  an  imperfect  sleep  he  is  apt  to
jbbe  seized  with  a  suffocating  cough,  as  if  some  foreign  body  had
|?«jotinto  the  trachea;  and  this  continues  until  after  the  expecto-

K


130


ALTERATIONS  OF  THE COATS  OF  THE  BRONCHI.


ration  of  a  certain  quantity  of  mucus.  At  this  stage,  emaciation,
which  had  hitherto  been  slow  in  its  progress,  makes  rapid  ad-
vances, and  sometimes  produces  extreme  extenuation ;  and  the
patient  at  last  dies  with  all  the  symptoms  of  the  suffocative
catarrh.

Very  great  efforts  of  voice,  acute  cries,  violent  forcing  of  the
head  backwards,  have  sometimes  appeared  to  be  the  occasional
cause  of  the  ulcers  of  the  trachea.  Cutaneous  complaints  and
syphilis  would  seem  also  to  pre-dispose  to  them.  Although
sometimes  met  with  in  phthisical  cases,  they  are  found  more
commonly  in  subjects  whose  lungs  are  entirely  sound.*  We
must,  however,  except  those  cases  where  ulceration  of  the  trachea
or  upper  part  of  the  bronchi  is  occasioned  by  the  rupture  of
softened  tubercles  situated  in  one  of  the  cervical  or  bronchial
glands.  But  ulcers  of  this  kind  cannot  be  considered  as  at  all  of
an  idiopathic  nature,  being  entirely  analogous  to  those  fistulous
openings  produced  by  the  discharge  of  a  tubercle,  abscess,  or
gangrenous  eschar  of  the  lungs,  into  the  branches  of  the  bronchi.
Ulcers  of  this  kind  have  a  great  tendency  to  cicatrization,  and
are  found  after  a  certain  time,  smooth,  polished,  and  without  any
appearance  of  spreading.  The  tracheal  ulcer,  on  the  contrary,
appears  to  have  no  tendency  to  cicatrize,  and  I  know  of  no  well
authenticated  instance  of  the  cure  of  this  affection.

Treatment.  The  most  obvious  indication  in  this  case  is,  un-
questionably, the  employment  of  local  drains ;  and  the  most  ac-
tive ought  to  be  had  recourse  to.  Blisters  and  issues  applied  at
a  distance  from  the  affected  part,  have  never  appeared  to  me  of
any  use.  What  I  have  found  most  benefit  from,  is  the  repeated
application  of  small  moxas  on  the  anterior  and  lower  part  of  the
neck,  and  the  preservation  of  absolute  silence  by  the  patient.


CHAPTER  VII.


ALTERATIONS  OF  THE COATS  OF  THE  BRONCHI.

The  cartilaginous  rings  of  the  bronchi  become  occasionally  ossi-
fied in  old  persons,  and  sometimes  even  in  those  less  advanced  in

*  This  remark  of  our  author  appears,  from  the  researches  of  Louis,  already  quoted,
to  he  incorrect.  He  says — "  In  comparing  the  state  of  the  epiglottis,  larynx,  and
trachea,  in  persons  dead  of  other  diseases  (chiefly  chronic)  beside  phthisis,  I  hare
only  found  among  one  hundred  and  eighty  cases,  one  ulceration  of  the  larynx,  and
two  others  of  the  larynx  and  trachea  conjointly.  In  the  first  case  the  patient  died  of
peripneumony,  and  in  the  two  last  the  fatal  disease  was  cancer  or  softening  of  the
brain,  but  there  were  found  tuberculous  excavations  in  the  lungs."  When  this  state-
ment is  compared  with  that  in  the  preceding  note  we  seem  justified  in  concluding,
with  this  author,  in  direct  opposition  to  M.  Laennec,  *«  that  ulcerations  of  the
larynx,  and  more  particularly  those  of  the  trachea  and  epiglottis,  are  peculiar  to
phthisis." Op.  Cit.  p.  50.— Transl.


OF FOREIGN BODIES IN THE  BRONCHI.


131


life,  and  they  frequently  become  carious  in  the  vicinity  of  ulcers.
The  ossification  is  rarely  complete,  being  commonly  of  the  earthy
character,  that  is  to  say,  with  predominance  of  the  earthy  base
of  bone.  In  their  natural  state  the  bronchial  ramifications  have
no  cartilaginous  rings,  but  they  acquire  this  character  when  di-
lated and  thickened  :  they  may  even  become  entirely  cartilagi-
nous or  ossified,  and  this  whether  dilated  or  not.  These  degene-
rations are  rare  and  usually  very  partial ;  and  in  them  the  mu-
cous membrane  remains  healthy,  surrounded  with  its  bony  or
cartilaginous  sheath.

No  perceptible  alteration  in  the  functions  of  the  lungs  is  con-
nected with  this  condition  of  the  bronchi.


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF FOREIGN BODIES IN  THE  BRONCHI.

1  Morsels  of  food,  pins,  needles,  pieces  of  wood,  stones  of  fruits
-  sometimes  get  into  the  bronchi. Violent  irritation,  convulsive
i  cough,  and,  if  the  foreign  body  is  large,  threatening  suffocation,
are  the  immediate  consequence  of  this  accident,  which  is,  never-
:  t  theless,  unattended  by  any  very  pressing  danger,  unless  the  body
i  i introduced  is  sufficiently  large  to  obstruct,  more  or  less  com-
pletely, the  larynx  or  trachea. Cough,  accompanied  by  a  mil-
icous  or  bloody  expectoration,  is  the  most  usual  symptom  which
-supervenes  to  the  accident;  but  even  this  soon  passes  off,  parti-
cularly if  the  substance  is  small  and  falls  down  into  a  bronchial
rramification  ;  the  organ  becomes  accustomed  to  the  foreign  body,
and  no  inconvenience  is  produced  by  it.

Accidents  of  this  sort  arise  from  very  various  causes.  I  was
myself  witness  to  a  very  singular  case  of  the  kind.  Professor
Corvisart  being  desirous  of  exercising  an  unexpected  supervision
of  some  part  of  the  clinical  hospital,  came  to  it  one  evening  con-
trary to  his  custom,  and  suddenly  entered  the  apartments  of  the
steward,  who  had  been  indulging  in  a  too  plentiful  repast.  Taken
by  surprise,  the  man  becomes  sick  at  stomach,  but  making  a
violent  effort  to  repress  vomiting,  he  falls  to  the  ground  and  ex-
pires. On  examining  the  body,  the  larynx,  trachea,  and  bronchi
aare  found  filled  with  half-digested  food.

The  ancient  pathologists  regarded  foreign  bodies  introduced
idnto  the  bronchi  in  a  state  of  powder,  as  the  cause  of  several
severe  diseases  of  those  canals,  as  well  as  of  the  substance  of  the
lungs  ;  and  among  others,  of  phthisis  pulmonalis,  and  the  chalky
^concretions  of  the  lungs,  bronchial  glands  or  bronchial  tubes.
TThis  opinion  appears  to  me  altogether  without  foundation. It  is

k  2


132


OF FOREIGN BODIES  IN  THE  BRONCHI.


imagined  that  stone-cutters  and  lapidaries  are  particularly  sub-
ject to  formations  of  this  kind,  occasioned  by  the  inhalation  of
the  dust  amid  which  they  work.

It  is  needless  to  remark  that  this  dust  is  entirely  unlike  the
cretaceous  formations  in  the  lungs.  On  this  subject  it  deserves
notice  that  stage  coachmen,  who  spend  their  life  amid  much  more
dust,  are  usually  healthy,  or  suffer  only  from  diseases  produced
by  intemperance  and  the  inclemency  of  the  weather.  It  is  in-
deed singular  how  little  sensible  the  mucous  membrane  of  the
bronchi  is  to  solid  matters  when  reduced  to  an  impalpable  pow-
der, when  we  know  that  the  introduction  of  a  body  only  a  little
larger,  such  as  a  bit  of  sugar,  or  even  of  a  gummy  or  albuminous
fluid,  occasions  extreme  irritation  and  cough.  Every  one  is  oc-
casionally caught  in  a  cloud  of  dust,  and  merely  experience?,
while  breathing  in  it,  an  oppression  without  any  inclination  to
cough.  It  is  well  known  that  when  we  have  been  for  some  time
breathing  an  air  loaded  with  dust  or  smoke,  these  foreign  bodies
are  after  a  certain  time  expectorated  with  the  mucous  secretion
of  the  bronchi.*

For  these  reasons  I  consider  the  chalky  formations  in  the  bron-
chi, as  well  as  every  accidental  production  in  the  living  body,  as
the  result  of  perverted  secretion.  These  productions  in  the
bronchi  I  have  only  met  with  in  branches  which  are  dilated,  or  in
the  vicinity  of  old  tuberculous  excavations  cured  by  the  forma-
tion of  a  fistula  or  cartilaginous  cicatrice;  and  we  shall  find
hereafter,  when  treating  of  phthisis,  that  the  development  of  cre-
taceous matter  frequently  succeeds  that  of  tubercles.

*  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  correctness  of  our  author's  opinion  as  far  as  re-
gards the  production  of  cretaceous  matters  in  the  lungs  ;  but  it  does  not  admit  of
question,  that  the  habitual  inhalation  of  dust  of  various  kinds  is  a  fruitful  source  of
bronchial  inflammation,  among  artisans,  and  more  especially,  in  this  country,  needle
grinders,  leather-dressers,  and,  I  can  add  from  my  own  experience,  miners.  An  im-
mense proportion  of  the  miners  in  Cornwall  are  destroyed  by  chronic  bronchitis  ;  one
of  the  principal,  though  by  no  means  the  sole  cause  of  which,  I  consider  to  be  the
inhalation  of  dust.  See  Ramazzini  De  Morbis  Artif.  Diatriba ;  also  Ackermann's
German,  and  Patissier's  French  translation,  with  additions,  of  this  work.  See  also
Dr.  Johnstone's  Paper  on  the  Needle  Grinder's  Consumption  ;  Mem.  Med.  Soc.  vol.
v. ;  Dr.  Knight's  Paper  on  Grinder's  Asthma  in  the  North  of  England,  Med.  Journ.
vol.  i. ;  and  Dr.  Darwall's  Article  on  the  Diseases  of  Artisans,  in  theCyc.of  Pract.  Med.
and  Mr.  Thackrah's  treatise  on  the  influence  of  the  Arts  on  Health.  See  also  Dr.
Hasting's  treatise  already  quoted,  page  273,  and  cases  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13,  for  un-
doubted evidence  of  the  powerful  effect  of  the  inhalation  of  dust.  In  page  300  he
remarks — *'  The  leather  dressers  and  the  workers  in  the  china  manufactories  of  tl  is
town  are  very  frequently  affected  in  this  manner.  They  are  relieved  for  a  time  by
medicine ;  but  the  disease  always  destroys  them  if  they  do  not  quit  their  employ-
ment.''— Trunsl.


BRONCHIAL CI  LANDS.


133


CHAPTER  IX.

OF  DISEASES  OF  THE BRONCHIAL  GLANDS.

.These  glands  differ  from  all  other  lymphatic  glands  in  being,  in
tthe  adult,  of  a  deep  black  colour,  at  least  in  their  centre,  and
miost  commonly  through  their  whole  substance.  The  colouring
nmatter  is  evidently  united  with  the  lymph.  If  a  drop  of  this  is
applied  to  the  skin  and  permitted  to  dry,  the  black  spot  pro-
Lkiuced  is  washed  off  with  difficulty.  This  colour  of  the  glands
Unust  not  be  considered  as  morbid,  since  it  is  found  in  subjects
whose  lungs  are  perfectly  sound.  The  colouring  material  is  ob-
viously the  same  as  the  black  pulmonary  matter  to  be  noticed
hhereafter.

Inflammation  of  the  bronchial  glands  is  very  little  known,  and
appears  to  be  very  rare.  In  cases  of  peripneumony  these  glands
are  pretty  frequently  enlarged,  and  of  a  pale  red  or  slightly
I  brownish  hue,  but  not  indurated.  In  a  very  few  instances  only
I  have  I  met  with  abscess  in  them.  This  is  the  more  remarkable,
\  since  lymphatic  glands  generally  become  affected  from  the  in-
r flammation  of  the  organ  with  which  they  are  connected  being
communicated  to  them.

There  are  two  kinds  of  accidental  productions  very  commonly
i  net  with  in  these  glands,  namely,  cretaceous  matter  and  tuber-
cles. The  former  is  usually  situated  in  the  centre,  intermixed
,vith  the  glandular  substance. It  is  frequently  so  soft  as  to  be
'  breed  out  by  pressure,  and  sometimes  quite  dry  and  hard.  It
cry  rarely  involves  the  whole  structure  of  the  gland. I  have
lever  seen  it  with  the  character  of  bone. Most  commonly  it  co-
exists with  tubercle ;  in  which  case  it  occupies  the  centre  of  the
Hand,  and  contrasts,  by  its  dull  white  colour,  with  the  pale
vellow  of  the  tuberculous  matter. Frequently  both  these  sub-
stances, particularly  the  latter,  are  stained  with  black  bronchial
natter,  as  if  it  had  been  applied  to  the  surface  of  the  incised
Hand  by  a  pencil  or  crayon. These  stains  point  out  the  remains
)f  the  original  substance  of  the  gland  amid  the  accidental  pro-
ductions which  have  usurped  its  place.

The  tuberculous  matter  is  more  frequently  found  by  itself ;
md  is  sometimes  met  with  in  these  glands,  when  there  are  neither
ubercles  in  the  lungs  nor  marks  of  any  severe  affection  of  them.
This  is  particularly  the  case  in  scrophulous  children.  The  tu-
>crculous  matter  is  almost  always  disseminated  through  the  sub-
tance  of  the  glands  ;  in  very  rare  instances  it  is  collected  in
1  «solated  masses.  Glands  affected  in  this  manner  may  reach  the
ize  of  a  pigeon's  or  hen's  egg ;  and  several  are  often  united  in
me  mass.  These  tubercles  soften  in  two  different  ways, — by
Separating  into  two  portions  like  cheese  and  whey,  (in  scrophu-


134


BKONCHIAL  GLANDS.


lous  subjects,)  and  by  forming  a  thick  flaky  pus.  The  matter
thus  softened  is  either  carried  off  by  absorption,  or  opens  into  the
bronchi.  In  this  latter  case,  the  gland  sometimes  remains  exca-
vated, lined  by  an  adventitious  membrane  like  the  mucus,  and
forming  one  continuous  surface  with  the  inner  tunic  of  the
bronchi,  the  opening  into  which  remains  fistulous.  M.  Guersent,
physician  of  the  Children's  Hospital,  has  met  with  this  case
pretty  frequently,  and  has  even  known  such  fistula;  to  communi-
cate with  the  oesophagus.*  They  are  very  much  rarer  in  the
adult.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  cavities  in  the  glands  com-
municating with  the  bronchi,  ought  to  yield  pectoriloquy;  but
owing  to  the  situation,  it  would  be  difficult  to  distinguish  it  from
bronchophony,  which  I  have  stated  to  be  extremely  distinct,  par-
ticularly in  children,  at  the  root  of  the  lungs.  If,  however,
the  phenomenon  were  conjoined  with  a  circumscribed  cavernous
rhonchus,  the  diagnosis  would  be  nearly  certain.  The  develop-
ment of  tubercles  in  a  few  of  the  bronchial  glands,  is  of  very
slight  consequence,  provided  the  lungs  or  cervical  and  mesenteric
glands  are  free  from  them.

Treutler,  a  German  physician,  discovered  in  1789,  in  the  bron-
chial glands  of  a  phthisical  subject,  a  new  species  of  worm,  which
he  denominated  hamularia  lymphatica,  and  of  which  he  gives
the  following  description  :  <s  One  inch  in  length,  of  a  fawn  colour,
spotted  with  white ;  body  slender,  roundish,  flattened  at  the
sides ;  head  obtuse,  with  two  prominent  small  tentaculae,  be-
neath.'" i*  It  has  not  been  met  with  since.  This  circumstance,
taken  in  conjunction  with  the  tentaculse,  might  lead  us  to  sup-
pose that  this  author  had  mistaken  the  larva  of  some  insect  for
an  entozootic  worm.  Such  a  mistake  might  readily  enough  hap-
pen to  a  person  not  particularly  conversant  in  helminthology,  as
was  Treu tier's  case.  In  my  early  life  I  fancy  that  I  committed
a  similar  mistake,  in  describing  under  the  name  of  distonius  in-
tersectus,  and  as  a  new  species  of  worm,  an  animalcula  which  one
of  my  patients  conceived  to  have  passed  by  stool,  but  which  I
now  strongly  suspect  to  have  been  merely  the  larva  of  some  fly
accidentally  fallen  into  the  night  chair.  %

We  are  constantly  observing  in  the  medical  journals  cases
which  would  lead  us  to  imagine  that  nothing  was  more  common
than  the  degeneration  of  the  bronchial  glands  into  melanosis.
When  I  come  to  treat  of  melanosis  of  the  lungs,  this  subject  will
be  more  particularly  noticed;  I  shall  here  content  myself  witli
repeating  what  has  been  already  stated,  .and  what  has  been  long
well  known  to  anatomists,  that  the  ordinary  colour  of  the  bron-
chial glands  in  the  adult,  is  a  black,  more  or  less  general  and  more
or  less  deep.

*  Recherches  sur  uno  espece  do  plitliisie  particuliere  aux  enfans.  Par  M.  L«
Blond.— Porii,  1824.

t  Obs.  Pathol.  Anal.—  Ltip,  1793.  \  Sec  Bull,  de  la  Socu  te  de  Medeanc


135


BOOK  THIRD.


DISEASES  OF  THE  LUNGS.

Previously  to  giving  an  account  of  the  organic  alterations  to
which  the  lungs  are  liable,  it  will  be  proper  to  take  a  view  of
the  different  opinions  which  have  been  published  respecting  the
intimate  structure  of  these  organs.  Malpighi  conceived  that  the
air  cells  were  formed  by  the  inner  membrane  of  the  bronchi  be-
ing divided,  previously  to  their  termination,  into  cells  like  those
of  a  sponge.*  Helvetius  fancied  that  he  had  ascertained  by
direct  experiment,  that  the  air  cells  were  formed  by  a  simple
cellular  tissue,  disposed  without  any  regular  order,  and  derived
from  the  cellular  envelopes  of  the  various  vessels  by  which  the
lungs  are  traversed. -J-  Haller  entertained  almost  the  same  opi-
nion, which  is,  indeed,  that  of  the  greater  number  of  anatomists.j
Reisseissen,  on  the  other  hand,  by  means  of  a  great  many  mi-
croscopical observations  and  mercurial  injections,  has  ascertained
that  the  bronchi,  at  their  extremities,  are  subdivided  into  a  mul-
titude of  small  canals,  terminated  by  culs-de-sac  of  a  globular
form,  grouped  somewhat  in  the  manner  of  the  terminal  branch-
lets  of  the  cauliflower.^  A  pupil  of  the  Faculty  of  Paris,  in  his
inaugural  dissertation,  published  in  1823,  has  given  an  opinion
altogether  new  respecting  the  structure  of  the  lungs.  He  imagines
that  the  principal  bronchial  trunk  distributed  in  each  lobule,  be-
fore entering  this,  divides  into  two  branches,  each  of  these  into
two  more,  and  so  on  successively,  with  a  regular  continuous
bifurcation  ;  by  which  means  a  still  increasing  series  of  canals
are  formed,  which  cross  each  other  in  every  possible  direction,
and  each  of  which  is  accompanied  in  its  course  by  a  twig  of  the
pulmonary  artery  and  veins.  He  imagines  that  these  canals
terminate,  at  the  exterior  of  each  lobule,  in  the  cellular  mem-
brane which  surrounds  it,  without  being  reflected  and  without
anastomosing  with  one  another. ||  The  process  by  which  he  was
led  to  this  conclusion,  consists  in  drying  the  lungs  after  they
have  been  inflated,  and  then  cutting  them  in  slices,  with  a  sharp
bistoury. He  asserts  that  in  whatever  direction  the  incision  is

*  Epist.  i.  De  Pulmone. Bolon.  1661.

t  M6m.  de  l'Acad.  des  Sc.  1718.

$  E16men.  Physiol,  t.  iii.  p.  171,  et  seq.

§  De  Fubrica  Pulmonum  a  Reg.  Acad.  Scient.  Barotin,  vrtcm.  ornata.  Berolini,
18122,  in  fol.

||  Picard,  Dissertation  sur  la  Puenmonie  aigue. Paris,  1823.


136


STRUCTURE OF  THE  LUNGS.


made,  we  can  perceive  canals  which  are  perpendicular,  and  others
which  are  inclined  to  the  surface  of  the  incision.  I  have  repeated
this  experiment  without  coming  to  the  same  conclusion.  On  the
contrary,  beside  the  very  minute  bronchial  tubes  distinguishable
by  their  elongated  form,  I  have  always  observed  a  great  number
of  small  vesicles,  or  what  appeared  to  be  such.  Moreover,  the
process  of  insufflation  and  desiccation,  however  carefully  per-
formed, is  always  attended  with  a  contraction  or  crisping,  which
diminishes  the  regularity  of  shape  of  the  air  cells  and  bronchial
tubes,  and  prevents  our  seeing  any  thing  very  distinctly.  Neither
does  the  process  of  injection  yield  us  results  which  are  entirely
satisfactory.  It  is  well  known,  that  whether  we  inject  the
bronchi,  the  veins,  or  the  arteries,  the  matter  of  the  injection
always  passes,  more  or  less,  into  these  three  orders  of  vessels,
and  frequently  leaves  only  a  confused  mass.  However,  I  must
admit  that  the  most  successful  injections  which  I  have  made,
have  appeared  to  me  to  confirm  the  observations  of  Reisseissen ;
and  that  the  character  of  the  pulmonary  structure,  when  ex-
amined in  a  state  of  hepatization,  haemoptysical  induration,  or
emphysema,  is  much  more  in  accordance  with  his  ideas  than  with
those  of  the  others.  It  has  also  appeared  to  me,  that  in  the  pro-
cess of  insufflation  the  air  penetrated  the  small  blood  vessels,  a
circumstance  which  may  have  tended  to  mislead  M.  Picard.

We  may  here  observe,  that  the  intimate  structure  of  all  the
animal  organs,  is  nearly  as  little  within  the  reach  of  our  eye-
sight or  instruments,  as  is  that  of  the  lungs  ;  and,  consequently,
that  we  ought  to  consider  nothing  as  certain,  in  pathological
anatomy,  beyond  those  well-marked  alterations  of  structure
which  fall  within  the  cognizance  of  our  senses,  and  which  alter
the  organization  of  a  part,  in  a  way  evidently  incompatible  with
the  exercise  of  its  functions.  To  justify  us  in  considering  any
organic  alteration  as  the  cause  of  disease  or  death,  we  ought,
moreover,  to  be  certain  that  the  appearances  presented  to  us
have  not  been  the  result  of  decomposition  after  death,  or  of  con-
gestions which  take  place  during  the  course  of  diseases,  especially
in  the  last  agony,  and  which  are  susceptible  of  increase  in  the
period  immediately  subsequent  to  death.  If  these  principles  are
disregarded,  and  the  causes  of  severe  diseases  sought  for  in  mere
microscopical  alterations  of  structure,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid
running  into  consequences  the  most  absurd  :  and,  if  once  culti-
vated in  this  spirit,  pathological  anatomy,  as  well  as  that  of  the
body  in  a  sound  state,  will  soon  fall  from  the  rank  which  it  holds
among  the  physical  sciences,  and  become  a  mere  tissue  of  hypo-
theses, founded  in  optical  illusions  and  fanciful  speculations,
without  any  real  benefit  to  medicine.

But,  whatever  be  the  intimate  structure  of  the  pulmonary
tissue,  if  we  examine,  in  a  good  light,  the  surface  of  a  sound
lung,  we  can  ascertain  by  the  naked  eye,  through  the  transparent


STItUCTUKE  OF THE  LUNGS.


137


pleura,  that  its  parenchyma  is  formed  by  the  aggregation  of  a
multitude  of  small  vesicles,  of  an  irregularly  spheroid  or  ovoid
figure,  full  of  air,  and  separated  from  each  other  by  opaque
white  partitions.  These  vesicles,  which  on  the  surface  of  the
lungs  have  the  appearance  of  small  transparent  points,  are  not  of
an  uniform  size.  The  largest  are  equal  to  the  third  or  fourth
part  of  a  millet  seed.  They  are  grouped  in  masses  or  lobules,
divided  from  each  other  by  partitions  of  closely-condensed  cel-
lular membrane,  very  thin,  yet  thicker  and  more  opaque  than
the  partitions  between  the  individual  cells.  These  partitions
traverse  the  pulmonary  substance  in  all  directions,  and  crossing
each  other  under  various  angles,  form  figures  of  different  shapes,
such  as  lozenges,  squares,  trapeziums,  or  irregular  triangles.  It
is  along  the  bounding  lines  of  these  figures,  that  the  black  pul-
monary matter  is  deposited  in  greatest  abundance,  as  I  shall
show  more  particularly  when  treating  of  melanosis,  with  which
this  substance  is  frequently  confounded.  I  shall  only  remark  in
this  place,  that  it  is  from  this  substance  (which  cannot  be  con-
sidered as  morbid  since  it  always  is  found  in  adult  lungs)  that
the  small  black  dots  sometimes  observed  in  the  pearly  sputa  of
the  dry  catarrh,  are  derived ;  as  also  the  blackish  or  grey  colour

i  of  certain  kinds  of  mucous  expectoration,  and  the  greyish  tint
occasionally  exhibited  by  the  matter  of  pulmonary  abscess,  which
resembles  a  mixture  of  pus  and  ashes.  This  black  matter  is  not
found  in  the  lungs  of  young  children.  In  adults  and  elderly
persons  it  is  more  or  less  abundant ;  while  in  very  old  subjects
it  perhaps  is  found  in  less  quantity.  In  the  last-named  class  of
persons  the  lungs  present  some  other  remarkable  characters  :
the  caliber  of  all  their  vessels  seems  diminished  ;  they  become  in
some  sort  exsanguine ;  the  partitions  of  the  air  cells  appear
thinner  than  natural,  on  which  account  their  substance,  rendered

i  more  rare,  becomes  less  elastic,  and  thus  yielding  to  the  atmo-

•  spheric  pressure  on  the  opening  of  the  body,  they  are  found  to
occupy  not  more  than  one-third  of  the  cavity  of  the  pleura.
They  may  be  said  to  bear  the  same  relation  to  the  lungs  of  an
adult,  that  muslin  bears  to  a  finer  cloth,  which  is  of  a  texture  at
once  strong  and  close.  These  characters  are  especially  observ-
able in  the  lungs  of  octogenarians.

The  black  pulmonary  matter  is  not  the  only  cause  which  may
so  change  the  appearance  of  an  organic  disease  of  the  lungs,  as
to  render  it  occasionally  a  matter  of  some  difficulty  to  recognize
it  in  the  dead  body.  The  serous,  sanguinolent,  or  sanguineous
infiltrations,  found  toward  the  roots  and  posterior  parts  of  the

i  lungs,  in  almost  every  dead  body,  are  a  still  more  frequent
source  of  mistakes.  The  infiltrations  of  blood  vary  much  in  de-
gree and  in  appearance.  Externally  the  lung,  in  the  affected
part,  is  of  a  violet  colour  more  or  less  deep.  In  some  points  the
colour  is  almost  black,  and  when  these  points  are  exactly  cir-


138


STRUCTURE OE THE  LUNGS.


cumscribed,  they  may  be  mistaken  by  an  inexperienced  observer
for  gangrenous  eschars;  as  I  have  actually  seen  happen  in  reports
made  in  courts  of  justice.  Internally,  the  pulmonary  substance
is  gorged  with  a  greater  or  less  quantity  of  blood,  and  is  more
dense  and  less  crepitous  than  natural.  Frequently  the  contained
blood  appears  half  coagulated,  and  cannot  be  easily  expelled  by
pressure ;  but  it  is  not  nearly  so  concrete  nor  so  intimately  com-
bined with  the  pulmonary  substance,  as  in  the  infiltration  of
haemoptysis.  If  the  examination  has  not  been  made  until  some
time  after  death,  and  when  the  process  of  decomposition  has
already  begun,  the  infiltrated  parts  become  so  soft,  as,  when
pressed  between  the  fingers,  to  resemble  paste,  of  a  brownish  or
deep  violet  colour.  This  last  colour  is  particularly  observable
when  the  infiltration  has  commenced  before  death,  and  is  com-
bined with  some  degree  of  what  I  term  peripneumony  of  the
dying,  to  be  noticed  hereafter.

The  kind  of  infiltration  just  described,  is  that  observed  in  sub-
jects whose  blood-vessels  and  capillaries  contain  much  blood,  and
particularly  in  those  who  have  died  of  acute  fever  or  scurvy.  In
exsanguine  subjects,  on  the  contrary,  and  particularly  in  such  as
have  died  of  cancer,  the  infiltration  of  the  same  parts  exhibits
merely  a  simple  red  hue  of  the  pulmonary  substance,  and  does
not  render  this  at  all  less  crepitous,  or  more  disposed  to  pour
out  fluid  when  incised.  In  dropsical  cases,  in  place  of  blood,
there  is  frequently  a  very  frothy  serum,  more  or  less  tinged  with
blood.  Sometimes  this  is  nearly  colourless  ;  and  in  cases  of  this
kind  the  state  of  parts  sometimes  closely  resembles  the  first  stage
of  peripneumony  or  oedema  of  the  lungs,  and,  indeed,  can  only
be  distinguished  from  them  by  this  circumstance, — that  the  dis-
eases mentioned  affect  the  lungs  indifferently  and  without  regard
to  the  laws  of  hydrostatics ;  whilst  the  mechanical  infiltration
after  death,  is  always  most  considerable  in  the  lowest  portion  of
the  lungs.

Bichat  was  the  first  who  called  the  attention  of  morbid  ana-
tomists to  this  circumstance:  he  pointed  out  its  analogy  with
the  dark-coloured  marks  observed  on  the  back  and  under  parts
of  the  limbs  of  almost  all  dead  bodies ;  and  considered  both  as
owing  to  the  custom  of  placing  them  on  the  back.  His  opinion
was  founded  on  the  experiment,  which  I  have  myself  several
times  repeated,  of  placing  the  bodies  on  the  belly  immediately
after  death.

It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  we  sometimes  see  the  dark
stains  above  mentioned,  on  the  posterior  parts  of  the  body  one
or  two  days  before  death,  in  patients  who  are  extremely  debili-
tated, and  particularly  in  cases  of  severe  fever.  In  like  manner,
the  sanguineous  or  serous  infiltration  of  the  posterior  part  of  the
lungs,  frequently  commences  several  hours  before  death.  From
unwillingness  to  distress  the  dying,  I  have  not  ascertained  the


HYPERTROPHY OK THE  LUXCS.


139


correctness  of  this  statement  in  most  cases ;  but  I  have  done  so
in  almost  every  case  where  I  have  made  the  experiment.  A  sub-
orpitous  and  mucous  rhonchus  over  the  lower  parts  of  the  back
and  at  the  roots  of  the  lungs,  almost  constantly  accompanies  the
tracheal  rhonchus  of  the  last  agony.  It  is  in  this  way  that  we
account  for  the  oppressed  breathing  observable  in  most  dying
persons,  even  in  cases  where  the  organs  of  respiration  have  re-
mained without  any  appearance  of  disorder  through  the  whole
course  of  the  disease.*


CHAPTER  I.

OF HYPERTROPHY  OF THE  LUNGS.

Hypertrophy  or  superabundant  nutrition,  is  the  most  simple
morbid  alteration  to  which  our  organs  are  subject.  It  is  indicated
by  increase  of  the  size  and  sometimes  of  the  consistence  of  the
organic  texture.  It  is  productive  of  no  inconvenience,  unless  it
happens  to  affect  a  part,  whose  increased  energy  of  action  disturbs
the  equilibrium  of  the  functions  of  the  body.  In  certain  cases  it
evidently  results  from  the  efforts  of  nature  to  remove  disease ;
as  in  the  instance  of  the  lungs,  and  indeed  in  most  double  organs,
such  as  the  kidneys  and  testicles.  When  any  one  of  these  organs
is  destroyed,  or  from  any  cause  rendered  unfit  for  the  perform-
ance of  its  functions,  its  fellow  acquires  a  double  energy,  conse-
quently an  increase  of  nutrition,  and,  after  a  certain  time,  an
augmentation  of  volume.

In  the  case  of  the  lungs,  it  was  observed  by  Morgagni,  that
in  empyema  with  compression  of  the  lung,  the  viscus  on  the  op-
posite side  was  occasionally  increased  in  size.  The  circumstance
is  indeed  much  more  general  than  this  author  imagined ;  as  it,
in  fact,  occurs  in  every  instance  in  which  one  of  the  lungs  is  ren-
dered useless  for  a  certain  time, — a  few  months,  for  example.  It
is  accordingly  met  with  not  only  after  empyema,  but  after
pneu mo-thorax,  hydro-thorax,  and,  still  more,  after  contraction
of  the  chest,  the  consequence  of  severe  pleurisy,  or  pulmonary
excavations  of  a  large  size.  In  all  these  cases,  the  lung  increases
in  volume,  and  becomes,  at  the  same  time,  firmer,  more  elastic,
and  more  compact.  In  place  of  collapsing  when  the  chest  is  laid
open,  it  sometimes  protrudes  from  it,  as  if  the  space  that  con-
tained it  were  too  small. In  instances  of  this  sort  it  cannot  be

*  The  author  seems  here  to  overlook  the  gradual  failure  of  the  vital  powers,  as
specially  affecting  respiration  through  the  diminished  energy  of  the  muscles  of  re-
spiration of  the  heart. — Transl.


140


ATllOI'HY OF TlfK  LUNGS.


doubted  that  the  air  cells  are  enlarged,  and  that  their  parietes
have  acquired  a  preternatural  thickness;  although  it  is  extremely
difficult  to  prove  this,  even  with  the  aid  of  the  microscope.

Hypertrophy  of  the  lungs  is  sometimes  formed  in  a  very  short
space  of  time :  in  the  case  of  a  man  who  had  pleurisy  and  con-
sequent contraction  of  the  chest  (to  one-half  its  natural  size)
from  rupture  of  a  vast  tuberculous  excavation  into  the  pleura,
and  who  had  the  good  fortune  to  survive  this  complicated
malady,  I  found  the  hypertrophy  existing  in  the  highest  degree,
only  six  months  after  the  invasion  of  the  disease.*

Emphysema  of  the  lungs,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  is  also
accompanied,  in  most  cases,  with  hypertrophy  of  the  pulmonary
substance.

The  same  characters  of  firmness  and  elasticity  in  a  perfectly
crepitous  lung,  which  I  have  before  mentioned  as  belonging  to
hypertrophy  of  this  viscus,  are  sometimes  also  observable  imme-
diately after  the  resolution  of  pneumonia.  But  in  this  case  it  is
to  be  presumed  that  such  qualities  are  only  temporary,  and  de-
pend upon  an  interstitial  infiltration  of  serum.-j-


CHAPTER  II.

OF  ATROPHY  OF  THE  LUNGS.

The  lungs  belong  to  that  class  of  organs  which  are  unaffected,
at  least  perceptibly,  by  general  emaciation  of  the  body.  They
diminish  in  size  only  from  the  effects  of  external  pressure,  or  in
consequence  of  the  growth  of  accidental  productions  within  their
substance,  which  may  be  considered  as  exerting  a  pressure  from
within  outwards.  In  the  case  of  effusions  into  the  pleura,  par-
ticularly the  purulent,  the  lungs  are  compressed  against  the  me-
diastinum, and  are  sometimes  reduced  to  a  layer  not  half  so  thick
as  the  hand.  After  the  removal  of  effusions  of  less  extent,  they
continue  to  adhere  to  the  side,  and  hardly  ever  regain  their
original  volume,  even  after  the  restoration  of  very  perfect  respira-
tion. The  same  actual  wasting  of  the  pulmonary  tissue,  must
be  admitted  in  those  instances  in  which  a  great  number  of  tu-
bercles or  other  accidental  productions  are  developed  in  the
lungs,  without  any  condensation  of  the  intermediate  sound  sub-

•  This  man  was  killed,  shortly  after  his  cure,  by  a  blow  on  the  head. — Author.

t  For  ampler  details  respecting  hypertrophy  and  atrophy  of  the  lungs,  the  reader
is  referred  to  Andral's  Precis  d' Anatomic  Pathologique,  t.  ii.  p.  514,  et  seq. ;  or  to
the  translation  of  that  excellent  work  by  Townsend  and  West:  they  are  omitted
here,  as  having  no  direct  bearing  on  practice. — Trantt.


EMPHYSEMA OP  THE  I.UNCS.


141


stance;  and  indeed  we  frequently  observe  that  a  lung  which
contains  a  vast  number  of  tubercles  is  actually  less  than  that  of
the  opposite  side,  which  contains  a  much  smaller  number.  This
remark  was  made  by  Bayle;  but  he  went  a  little  too  far  in  draw-
ing the  conclusion  from  it  that  the  chest  of  every  phthisical  sub-
ject is  necessarily  contracted.


CHAPTER  III.

OF  EMPHYSEMA  OF  THE  LUNGS.

There  are  two  kinds  of  emphysema  of  the  lungs,  the  vesicular
or  pulmonary  properly  so  called,  and  the  interlobular.

Sect.  I.  Of  vesicular  Emphysema.

This,  next  to  hypertrophy,  is  the  most  simple  of  all  the  or-
ganic lesions  of  the  lungs,  since  it  consists  simply  in  the  dilata-
tion of  the  air  cells.  On  this  very  account  it  remained  long
unknown,  and  has  not  hitherto  been  correctly  described  by  any
author.  I  for  a  long  time  thought  it  very  uncommon,  because
I  had  observed  only  a  few  cases  of  it :  but  since  I  have  made
use  of  the  stethoscope,  I  have  verified  its  existence  as  well  on  the
living  as  the  dead  subject,  and  am  led  to  consider  it  as  by  no
means  infrequent.  I  consider  many  cases  of  asthma,  usually
deemed  nervous,  as  depending  on  this  cause.  The  chief  reason
of  this  affection  having  been  so  completely  overlooked  is,  that  it
is  in  some  sort  merely  the  exaggeration  of  the  natural  condition
of  the  viscus.

Anatomical  characters. — In  pulmonary  emphysema,  the  size
of  the  vesicles  is  much  increased,  and  is  less  uniform.  The
greater  number  equal  or  exceed  the  size  of  a  millet-seed,  while
some  attain  the  magnitude  of  hemp-seed,  cherry-stones,  or  even
French  beans  (haricot.)  These  latter  are  probably  produced  by
the  re-union  of  several  of  the  air  cells  through  rupture  of  the
intermediate  partitions ;  sometimes,  however,  they  appear  to
arise  from  the  simple  enlargement  of  a  single  vesicle.  The
largest  of  these  dilated  cells  are  often  in  no  respect  prominent  on
the  surface  of  the  lung ;  sometimes  they  form  a  slight  projection.
In  the  latter  case  the  structure  of  the  lung  acquires  a  striking
resemblance  to  the  vesicular  lungs  of  the  Linnsean  order  of  Rep-
tilia.  Sometimes,  though  more  rarely,  we  observe  on  the  surface
of  the  lung  single  vesicles,  distended  to  the  size  of  a  cherry-


142


EMPHYSEMA OF THE  LUNGS.


stone  or  larger,  quite  prominent,  exactly  globular,  and  apparently
pediculated.  I  say  apparently  pediculated,  because  on  cutting
into  them  we  find  that  there  is  no  real  pedicle,  but  merely  a  con-
striction at  the  point  where  the  cell  begins  to  rise  beyond  the
surface  of  the  lung.  The  cavity  of  these  dilated  cells  descends
some  little  way  into  the  substance  of  the  viscus,  and  there  its
walls  do  not  collapse,  when  cut,  as  in  the  projecting  portion.  At
the  bottom  of  this  inferior  portion  of  the  cavity,  we  find  small
openings  by  which  the  dilated  cell  communicates  with  the  ad-
joining ones,  and  with  the  bronchi.  That  these  projecting
vesicles  are  produced  by  the  dilatation  of  air  cells,  and  are  not
owing  to  the  extravasation  of  air  under  the  pleura,  is  proved,  as
well  by  the  prolongation,  just  mentioned,  of  their  cavity,  into  the
pulmonarv  substance,  as  by  the  circumstance  that  we  cannot
force  the  contained  air,  by  pressure  of  the  finger,  to  leave  its
place  and  to  pass  under  the  contiguous  pleura, — as  would  be  the
case  if  it  were  extravasated.

As  long  as  the  parts  continue  in  the  state  above  described,  the
disease  consists  merelv  in  an  excessive,  permanent,  and  unnatural
distension  of  the  air  cells,  the  air  being  still  contained  in  its
proper  cavities ;  but  when  the  distension  becomes  still  more
considerable,  or  takes  place  with  greater  rapidity,  the  air  cells
are  ruptured  in  certain  points,  and  the  surrounding  cellular
substance  of  the  lung  becomes  distended  by  extravasated  air,
exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  in  emphysema  of  the  subcutaneous
adipose  membrane.  In  this  case  we  find  on  the  surface  of  the
lung  vesicles  of  an  irregular  form,  which  can  be  made  to  change
their  place  by  pressure  with  the  finger.  They  vary  in  size  from
that  of  a  hemp-seed  to  that  of  a  walnut,  or  even  an  egg.  Like
the  simply  dilated  cells,  these  vesicles  contain  nothing  but  air,
which  makes  its  escape  on  their  being  punctured  with  a  pin.
Sometimes  the  air,  though  truly  extravasated  under  the  pleura,
cannot  be  displaced  by  pressure  in  the  manner  just  mentioned.
This  happens  when  the  extravasation  is  situated  at  the  point  of
re-union  of  the  partitions  which  divide  the  different  groups  of
air  cells,  as  above  mentioned.  In  this  case  the  projection  has
usually  a  triangular  shape  and  is  not  very  considerable.

I  have  never  found  this  extravasated  air  penetrate,  to  any
considerable  extent,  into  the  substance  of  these  interlobular  par-
titions, nor  into  the  cellular  substance  which  surrounds  the  larger
blood  vessels  and  bronchial  trunks;  but  I  have  seen  the  pulmo-
monary  substance  in  the  interior  of  the  lung  lacerated  by  over-
distension of  the  air  cells.  In  these  cases,  over  the  site  of  the
laceration  we  observe  an  irregular  projection,  on  which  the  di-
lated cells  are  as  distinct  as  elsewhere.  Upon  cutting  into  this,
at  a  greater  or  less  depth,  we  find  the  laceration  of  a  propor-
tionate size  to  the  external  projection.  This  is  found  to  contain
air,  and  sometimes  also  a  small  quantity  of  blood,  either  coagu-


EMPHYSEMA  OF THE  LUNGS.


143


latetl  or  loose ;  and  the  surrounding  air  cells,  which  form  the
immediate  walls  of  the  excavation  produced  by  the  rupture,  are
,  observed  to  be  loose,  flabby,  and  without  their  natural  globular
figure.

The  bronchial  tubes,  especially  those  of  a  small  caliber,  are
sometimes  very  evidently  dilated  in  those  portions  of  the  lung
where  the  emphysema  exists. This  fact  is  easily  proved  by

i  comparing  the  diseased  and  sound  portions  of  the  lungs.  It  was
to  be  expected  ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  singular  that  the  circumstance
is  not  more  common,  since  the  cause  which  dilates  the  air  cells

i  must  act  equally  on  the  bronchi ;  this  dilatation  is,  nevertheless,
very  rare.

To  enable  us  to  have  a  correct  notion  of  this  disease,  we  must
:  inflate  the  affected  lungs  and  immediately  dry  them.  If  they
;  are  then  cut  into  slices  with  a  fine  instrument,  we  perceive  at
i  once  that  the  air  cells  are  almost  always  more  dilated  than  they
;  appear  externally  ;  insomuch  that  those  which  form  a  projec-
!  tion  on  the  surface,  of  the  size  of  a  hemp-seed,  are  found  ca-
|  pable  of  containing  a  cherry-stone.  We  observe,  moreover,  that
-  some  of  the  cells  are  simply  dilated,  while  others  are  ruptured,
t  the  intervening  partitions  of  several  being  destroyed  more  or  less
completely.

When  we  blow  into  an  emphysematous  lung,  the  dilated  and
|  projecting  cells  seem  to  become  flatter  the  more  they  are  dis-
r  tended,  and  fall  down  to  the  general  level  of  the  surface.  This
i  is  owing  to  the  greater  relative  extensibility  and  elasticity  of  the
i  healthy  cells,  which  in  the  first  instance  rise  to  the  level  of  the
dilated  cells,  and  then  fall  below  them,  to  their  natural  level.
The  continued  projection  of  the  dilated  cells  may  be  partly
owing,  also,  to  the  difficulty  with  which  the  air  escapes  from
;  them,  more  especially  when  the  exciting  cause  of  the  emphysema
is  the  dry  catarrh.

Emphysema  may  affect  both  lungs  at  the  same  time,  one  only,
or  a  part  of  one  or  of  both.  In  the  latter  case, — and  indeed  in
iany  case,  as  long  as  there  do  not  exist  vesicles  of  considerable
I  size  on  the  surface  of  the  lungs, — it  is  easy  to  overlook  the  dis-
ease in  the  dead  subject,  and,  as  I  have  already  said,  I  am  con-
vinced that  this  has  often  been  done  by  the  best  practical  ana-
tomists as  well  as  by  myself.  I  am  now  well  assured,  that  if  we
carefully  examine  the  lungs  of  the  subjects  who  have  long  suf-
fered from  the  dyspnoea,  from  whatever  cause,  we  shall  almost
always  find  more  or  fewer  of  the  air  cells  dilated.  In  lungs
studded  with  tubercles,  which  presented  no  other  sign  of  em-
physema, I  have  sometimes  found  two  or  three  of  the  cells  di-
lated to  the  size  of  a  hemp-seed.

When  the  disease  exists  in  a  high  degree,  and  occupies  the
*  whole  of  one  or  both  lungs,  we  cannot  help  being  struck  with
!  the  appearance  of  the  parts. The  lungs  seem  as  if  confined  in


144


EMPHYSEMA  OF  THE  LUNGS.


their  natural  cavity,  and,  when  exposed,  instead  of  collapsing
as  usual,  they  rise  in  some  degree,  and  project  beyond  the  bor-
ders of  the  thorax.  If  we  examine  them  in  this  state,  they  feel
firmer  than  natural,  and  it  is  more  difficult  to  flatten  or  compress
them  than  in  ordinary  cases.  The  crepitation  they  afford,  on
pressure,  or  on  being  cut  into,  is  less,  and  of  a  kind  somewhat
different ;  it  is  more  like  the  sound  produced  by  the  slow  escape
of  air  from  a  pair  of  bellows;  and  the  air  makes  its  escape  from
the  cells  much  slower  than  in  a  healthy  state  of  the  organ.
When  we  detach  the  lung,  the  crepitation  is  found  to  be  still
less  perceptible,  and  the  sensation  conveyed  by  pressing  the  parts
is  very  like  that  produced  by  handling  a  pillow  of  down.  This
seems  to  indicate  either  a  more  difficult  communication  between
the  air  contained  in  the  air  cells  and  that  in  the  bronchi,  or  else
a  diminished  elasticity  of  the  air  cells  themselves.  Perhaps  both
these  causes  conspire  to  produce  the  effect  in  question.  The
first  clearly  exists  in  a  great  number  of  cases ;  since  we  know-
that  the  dry  catarrh,  and  the  obstruction  of  the  lesser  bronchi,
an  attendant  on  the  dry  catarrh,  are  the  most  common  causes  of
emphysema.  The  second  cause  indicated  is  equally  probable,
inasmuch  as  the  thickening  of  a  membrane  is  a  very  frequent
result  of  its  habitual  distension,  and,  in  the  present  case,  it  ap-
pears that  the  state  of  emphysema  is  productive  of  a  certain  de-
gree of  hypertrophy.  On  placing  an  emphysematous  lung  in  a
vessel  of  water,  it  sinks  much  less  than  a  healthy  lung  ;  some-
times it  floats  on  the  surface  with  scarcely  any  obvious  immer-
sion. The  pulmonary  tissue  is  drier  in  a  lung  affected  with
emphysema  than  in  a  healthy  one;  and  it  is  unusual  to  find,
even  towards  the  roots  of  the  lungs,  any  trace  of  the  common
serous  or  sanguineous  infiltrations  commonly  found  after  death.
The  contrary,  however,  sometimes  happens,  as  will  be  seen  in
the  cases  about  to  be  detailed.  A  history  of  what  appears  an-
other instance  of  this  complication  is  recorded  by  M.  Taranget*
In  cases  of  this  kind,  as  in  most  others  in  which  considerable  in-
filtrations of  the  pulmonary  substance  are  found  after  death,  it  is
probable  that  the  infiltration  took  place  only  a  few  moments
before  the  cessation  of  life.  Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  certain  that
this  mechanical  engorgement,  as  well  as  oedema  properly  so
called,  and  also  peripneumony,  render  it  sometimes  a  matter  of
difficulty  to  recognize  emphysema,  when  not  very  extensive,  in
the  dead  body.  When  a  single  lung  is  affected,  it  becomes
much  more  voluminous  than  the  other — so  much  so,  indeed,  as
sometimes  to  pass  aside  the  heart  and  mediastinum,  and  to  cause
an  evident  enlargement  of  the  bony  walls  of  that  side  of  the
chest.

From  these  observations  it  results,  that  pulmonary  emphysema


*  Recueil.  Period. de  la  Soc.  de  M(>d.  de  Paris,  torn.  xi.  p.  373.


EMPHYSEMA OF THE  LUNGS.


145


consists  essentially  in  the  dilatation  of  the  air  cells,  and  that  the
extravasation  of  the  air  on  the  surface  of  the  lungs,  constituting
the  larger  and  more  prominent  vesicles,  is  a  posterior  affection,
and  not  necessarily  connected  with  the  disease  in  question.*  The
latter  species  of  lesion  is,  moreover,  of  slight  consequence  com-
pared with  the  dilatation  of  the  cells,  as  we  can  hope  for  its  re-
moval by  absorption,  as  in  other  similar  cases ;  whilst  we  cannot
well  see  in  what  manner  either  nature  or  art  can  remedy  the
other  morbid  derangement.  At  the  same  time,  I  do  not  think
we  are  justified  in  considering  this  affection  as  altogether  in-
curable. In  several  instances  I  have  fancied  that  I  discovered
the  traces  of  cicatrization  of  ruptures  of  the  pulmonary  tissue,
of  the  kind  above  described.  In  the  case  of  subjects  affected
with  asthma,  I  have  several  times,  during  the  fits,  detected  a
crepitous  rhonchus  with  large  bubbles,  in  particular  points,
which  rhonchus  entirely  disappeared  afterwards  ;  and  it  is  quite
intelligible  that  if  we  can  diminish  the  intensity  of  the  cause
which  keeps  up  the  habitual  distension  of  the  cells,  we  may  in
the  end  hope  that  these  will  be  actually  lessened  in  volume.

The  emphysema  of  the  lungs,  of  which  I  have  just  given  the
description,  appears  to  me,  as  I  have  already  observed,  to  have
I  been  hitherto  unknown. No  general  description  of  it  certainly
<  exists ;  although  facts,  that  evidently  can  be  only  referred  to  it,
jj  ;  are  to  be  found  in  several  authors. Bonetusf  and  Morgagni^
:  give  several  examples  of  the  lungs  being  found  very  voluminous
and  distended  with  air. Van  Swieten§  and  Storck||  have  some
(cases  wherein  vesicles  of  air  were  found  under  the  pleura:  and
Floyer^f  noticed  the  same  thing  in  a  broken-winded  mare.  The
;  author  of  the  article  Kmphyseme  in  the  Diet,  des  Sciences  Med.
i  relates  a  case  precisely  similar  to  these  last  mentioned,  which  had
I  been  communicated  to  him  by  M.  Majendie;  but  none  of  these
'various  authors  appear  to  have  been  acquainted  with  the  real
character  of  the  affection,  viz. — dilatation  of  the  bronchial  cells.

*  This  proposition  is,  however,  now  much  disputed.  Andral  regards  the  pheno-
|  i  mena  described  as  vesicular  emphysema  by  Laennec,  as  merely  hypertrophy  or
1  t  atrophy  of  the  lungs,  and  recognises  no  other  species  of  pulmonary  emphysema,  but
that  which  our  author  terms  interlobular.  (Precis  d'Anat.  Path.  t.  ii.  p.  530.)  This  is
'  i  also  the  opinion  of  M.  Piedagnel,  (Recherches  sur  Vemphyseme  du  pouinon,  Paris.  1829,)
*  » who,  moreover,  contends  that  this  species  of  emphysema  exists  in  every  case  in
I  "which  the  lungs  are  found  crepitant,  or  yielding  the  crepitous  sound  on  compression.

It  is,  however,  evident  from  M.  Piedagnel's  own  observations  that  there  is,  in  reality,
|  i in  the  greater  number  of  cases,  a  dilatation  of  the  air  cells  antecedent  to  the  extra-
vasation of  the  air  in  the  interlobular  tissue  of  the  lungs  :  I  conceive,  therefore,  that
his  opinion  does  not  differ  materially  from  that  of  Laennec  which  he  combats  ;  the
latter  having  never  pretended  that  the  emphysema  consists  exclusively  in  dilatation
J  of  the  air  cells.— (M.  L.)

f  Sepulchret.  lib.  ii.  sect.  1.
t  Epist.  iv.  sect.  24.  et  Epist.  xviii.  sect.  I  t.
§  Comment,  in  Boerh.  apli.  1220.
||  Ann.  Med.  Prim.  p.  114.  Ann.  Med.  Secu  id.  p.  239.
f  Treatise  on  Asthma.


14G


EMPHYSEMA  OF  THE  LUNGS.


All  of  them  seem  to  have  thought,  with  the  last-mentioned  wri-
ter, who  expresses  his  opinion  in  a  positive  manner,  that  the  de-
rangement in  question  consisted  in  the  infiltration  of  the  cellular
substance  of  the  lungs  with  air.  Ruysch  and  Valsalva  are  the
only  authors,  as  far  as  I  know,  who  have  observed,  in  individual
cases,  the  dilatation  of  the  cells.  The  case  noticed  by  the  latter
is  an  example  of  partial  emphysema  of  the  lungs  complicated
with  empyema.  It  has  been  noticed  under  its  latter  character
by  Morgagni,  who  does  not  appear  to  have  understood  the
nature  of  the  former  change  of  structure.  This,  however,  he
has  described  in  a  manner  to  leave  no  doubt  of  its  true  nature.

"  Sinistri  pulmonis  lobus  superior  qua  claviculum  speeta-

bat,  vesiculas  ex  quibus  constat  mirum  in  modum  auctas  habe-
bat ;  ut  nonnullae  avellanae  magnitudinem  aequarent;  caeterae
multo  minores  erant.  Quasdam  globuli  figura,  reliquse  oblonga
et  ovali :  omnes  plenae  erant  aeris  ....  una  insuper  minim  aquas-
dam  foraminula  per  interiorem  faciem  hiantia  ostendit.,,#

The  case  noticed  by  Ruysch  is  also  one  of  partial  emphysema
of  the  lungs :  "  In  aliqua,  autem  pulmonis  parte  inveni  vesicula-
rum  pellucidarum  acervum,  ab  aere  expansarum  et  ita  obstruc-
tarum  ut  levi  compressione  eas  ab  aere  evacuare  haud  potuerim.
Impulsum  per  asperam  arteriam  flatum  nullum  commercium
cum  hisce  expansis  vesiculis  amplius  habere  propter  earum  ob-
structionem  expertus  sum.  Post  aere  per  asperam  arteriam
vehementer  adacto  disrumpebantur  nonnullas  ex  his  vesiculis.""i-
This  author  has,  perhaps,  a  second  case  of  the  same  kind,  (obs.
20,)  but  it  is  too  imperfectly  described  to  justify  any  deductions
from  it.

Dr.  Baillie,  author  of  the  Morbid  Anatomy,  has  correctly  ob-
served the  three  principal  circumstances  which  constitute  emphy-
sema of  the  lungs,  namely — the  great  size  of  these  organs, — the
dilatation  of  the  cells, — and  the  vesicles  formed  by  the  extrava-
sation of  air  under  the  pleura;  but  he  does  not  appear  to  have
been  acquainted  with  the  mutual  dependence  of  these  three
states,  and  describes  them  as  three  different  affections,  as  is  evi-
dent from  the  following  passages  which  contain  all  that  he  says
on  this  subject.

u  Lungs  distended  with  air.  In  opening  into  the  chest,  it  is
not  unusual  to  find  that  the  lungs  do  not  collapse,  but  that  they
fill  up  the  cavity  completely  on  each  side  of  the  heart.  When
examined,  their  cells  appear  full  of  air,  so  that  a  prodigious
number  of  small  white  vesicles  are  seen  upon  the  surface  of  the
lungs  immediately  under  the  pleura.  The  branches  of  the  trachea
are  often  at  the  same  time  a  good  deal  filled  with  the  mucous
fluid.  This  fluid  had  probably  prevented  the  ready  egress  of  the


*  De  Sed.  et  Caus.  Morb.,  lib.  ii.  epist.  xxii.  12  et  13.
t  Ruysch,  Obs.  Anat.  Centaur,  obs.  xix.


EMPHYSEMA OF THE LUNGS  147

air,  so  that  it  had  gradually  distended  the  air  cells  of  the  lungs,
and  had  prevented  the  lungs  from  collapsing."

"  Air  cells  of  the  lungs  enlarged.  The  lungs  are  sometimes,
although  I  believe  very  rarely,  formed  into  pretty  large  cells,  so
as  to  resemble  somewhat  the  lungs  of  an  amphibious  animal.  Of
this  I  have  now  seen  three  instances.  The  enlargement  of  the
cells  cannot  well  be  supposed  to  arise  from  any  other  cause,  than
the  air  being  not  allowed  the  common  free  egress  from  the  lungs,
and  therefore  accumulating  in  them.  It  is  not  improbable  also
that  this  accumulation  may  sometimes  break  down  two  or  three
contiguous  cells  into  one,  and  thereby  form  a  cell  of  a  very  large
size.

"  Air  vesicles  attached  to  the  edge  of  the  lungs.  Vesicles  con-
taining air  have  occasionally  been  seen  attached  to  the  edge  of  the
lungs.  They  do  not  communicate,  however,  with  the  structure  of
this  organ,  but  are  complete  in  themselves.  Upon  the  first  view,
it  might  be  thought  probable  that  they  were  merely  some  of  the
air  cells  enlarged;  but  as  they  do  not  communicate  with  any  of
the  air  cells,  this  opinion  is  not  well  founded.  It  is  most  likely
that  they  are  a  morbid  structure,  formed  in  the  same  manner  as
the  air  vesicles  attached  to  the  intestines  and  mysentery  of  some
quadrupeds,  and  that  the  very  minute  blood  vessels  which  ramify
upon  the  vesicles,  have  the  power  of  secreting  the  air.1,#

He  afterwards  a*dds,  (p.  86,)  "  When  the  cells  of  the  lungs  are
much  enlarged  in  their  size,  persons  have  been  remarked  to  have
been  long  subject  to  difficulty  of  breathing,  more  especially  on
motion  of  the  body  ;  but  I  believe  no  symptom  is  at  present
known,  by  which  this  disease  may  be  ascertained  from  some
others  incident  to  the  chest."

Occasional  causes.  Pulmonary  emphysema  supervenes  almost
always  to  an  extensive  and  severe  dry  catarrh  ;  and  nearly  all
the  subjects  of  asthma  from  the  last-named  disease,  on  examina-
tion after  death,  exhibit  a  greater  or  less  dilatation  of  some  of  the
bronchial  cells.  These  facts  lead  us  to  a  simple  explanation  of
the  mechanism  of  dilatation  of  the  air  cells.  It  has  been  already
shown  that,  in  the  dry  catarrh,  the  smaller  bronchial  tubes  are
frequently  completely  obstructed,  either  by  the  pearly  sputa  or
by  the  swelling  of  their  inner  membrane.  Now  since  the  muscles
of  inspiration  are  numerous  and  powerful,  while  expiration,  on
the  other  hand,  is  produced  merely  by  the  elasticity  of  the  parts
and  by  the  feeble  contraction  of  the  intercostal  muscles,  it  must
frequently  happen  that  the  air,  which  during  inspiration  had
overcome  the  resistance  opposed  to  its  entrance  by  the  tumid
state  of  the  bronchial  membrane  and  the  sputa,  is  unable  to
force  the  same  obstacles  during  expiration,  and  remains  therefore
imprisoned  in  the  cells,  by  a  mechanism  somewhat  similar  to  the

*  Morbid  Annt.  5th  ed.  p.  78,  et  seq.

L  2


i


148


EMPHYSEMA OF THE  LUNGS.


valve  of  an  air  gun.  The  succeeding  inspirations,  or  at  least
such  of  them  as  are  energetic,  introduce  a  fresh  supply  of  air  into
the  same  cells,  and  thereby  necessarily  occasion  their  dilatation  :
and  provided  the  obstruction  is  of  some  continuance,  the  dilated
condition  of  the  cells  will  be  rendered  permanent.  The  increased
temperature  and  consequent  dilatation  of  the  air,  after  it  is  re-
ceived into  the  lungs,  will  have  some  effect  also  in  distending  the
containing  cells.#  It  follows  from  this  view  of  the  matter,  that
the  dry  catarrh  tends  as  naturally  to  the  production  of  emphy-
sema of  the  lungs,  as  the  chronic  mucous  catarrh  leads  to  dilata-
tion of  the  bronchi.

I  have,  however,  some  reasons  for  believing  that,  in  certain
cases,  the  dilatation  of  the  cells  is  the  primary  affection,  and
the  catarrh  consecutive.  In  the  case  of  persons  suffocated  by
the  gases  of  cess-pools,  I  have  remarked  the  lungs  to  be  very
large,  and  to  remain  dilated  when  the  chest  was  laid  open,  al-
though perfectly  crepitous.  Is  this  owing  to  a  general  dilatation
of  the  air  cells  ?f

Certain  other  occasional  causes  may  excite  this  disease,  such
as  the  long  retention  of  the  breath  in  the  case  of  players  on  wind
instruments.  The  same  remark  applies  to  violent  efforts  of  any
kind  which  cause  the  long-continued  retention  of  the  breath  ;
but  these,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  give  occasion,  still  more  fre-
quently, to  the  interlobular  emphysema.

Among  the  rarer  causes  of  the  same  disease  may  be  reckoned
all  those  which  strongly  compress  the  large  bronchial  trunks,
such  as  tumours  in  the  bronchial  glands  or  mediastinum,  aneu-
risms of  the  aorta,  polypi  of  the  bronchi,  &c. ;  and  under  the
same  head  may  be  classed  large  tumours  developed  in  the  lungs
themselves,  such  as  cysts  or  tubercles.  It  is  by  no  means  un-
usual, in  lungs  filled  with  tubercles  of  a  pretty  large  size,  to  find
some  of  the  air  cells  dilated  in  different  points.  We  shall  find
hereafter  that  a  spasmodic  stricture  of  the  bronchi  is  a  frequent
attendant  on  dry  catarrh  ;  and  this  must  contribute  to  the  pro-
duction of  emphysema.

Signs  and  symptoms.  Both  the  local  and  general  symptoms
of  pulmonary  emphysema  are  rather  equivocal.  Dyspnoea  being
its  principal  feature,  it  is  usually  confounded  under  the  name  of
asthma.  The  difficulty  of  breathing  is  constant,  but  is  aggra-
vated by  paroxysms,  which  are  irregular  both  in  the  period  of

•  1  gave  this  explanation  of  the  phenomena  to  the  Royal  College  of  France  in  the
scholastic  year  of  1823-24:  on  which  occasion  one  of  my  pupils,  JVI.  Legallois,  sug-
gested, that  part  of  the  phenomena  of  expiration  might  he  explained  by  the  necessary
increase  of  volume  (,in  the  lungs)  of  the  inspired  air. — Author.

t  If  the  opinion  noticed  in  the  preceding  note  be  founded  in  truth,  and  I  think
the  explanation  must  be  admitted  to  a  certain  extent,  it  will  follow  that  asphyxia
from  carboriic  acid  gas  ought  more  especially  to  give  rise  to  this  dilatation  of  tb«
cells,  since  it  will  be  expired  with  more  difficulty,  on  account  of  its  greater  specific
gravity. — Author.


EMI'UYSKMA OF THE  LUNGS.


149


their  return  and  their  duration ;  it  is  likewise  increased  by  all
the  causes  which  usually  increase  dyspnoea,  from  whatever  source
arising ;  such  as  the  action  of  digestion,  flatulence  in  the  stomach
or  bowels,  anxiety,  living  in  elevated  situations,  strong  exercise,
running,  or  ascending  a  height,  and,  above  all,  the  supervention
of  an  acute  catarrh.  There  is  no  fever,  and  the  pulse  is  gene-
rally regular.  In  slight,  cases  the  complexion  and  habit  of  the
body  are  little  altered ;  but  when  the  affection  is  more  consider-
able, the  skin  usually  assumes  a  dull  earthy  hue,  with  a  slight
shade  of  blue  here  and  there.  The  lips  become  violet,  thick,
and  look  swollen.  In  every  case  that  I  have  met  with,  there
existed  an  habitual  cough.  Sometimes  this  was  infrequent,
slight,  and  either  dry  or  attended  with  a  trifling  expectoration
of  a  very  viscid  greyish  and  transparent  matter;  at  other  times,
it  was  more  severe,  returning  in  paroxysms,  and  accompanied
by  the  usual  mucous  expectoration.  In  some  instances  the  pa-
tients denied  having  either  habitual  cough  or  expectoration  :  but
on  watching  them  carefully,  it  was  found  that  they  coughed
slightly,  at  least  once  or  twice  daily,  and  expectorated  every
morning  a  little  of  the  viscid  bronchial  mucus  above  mentioned.

This  disease  begins  frequently  in  infancy,  and  may  continue  a
great  many  years.  It  does  not  always  prevent  the  subjects  of  it
from  attaining  an  advanced  age;  although  it  must  be  admitted
that  the  influence  it  may  have  in  unfavourably  modifying  other
accidental  diseases,  must  very  considerably  diminish  the  proba-
bilities of  life.  The  constant  and  frequently  very  great  efforts
which  the  patient  is  obliged  to  make  during  respiration,  often,  at
last,  give  rise  to  hypertrophy  or  dilation  of  the  heart.

When  the  emphysema  is  confined  to  one  lung,  or  is  much
greater  in  one  than  the  other,  the  side  most  affected  is  perceptibly
larger  than  the  other ;  its  intercostal  spaces  are  wider ;  and  it
yields  a  clearer  sound  on  percussion.  If  both  sides  are  affected
equally,  the  whole  chest  yields  a  very  distinct  sound,  and  instead
of  its  natural  compressed  shape,  it  exhibits  an  almost  round  or
globular  outline,  swelling  out  both  before  and  behind.  This
conformation  of  the  chest  is  sufficiently  remarkable  to  have  en-
abled me  sometimes  to  announce  the  existence  of  emphysema
from  simple  inspection.

The  pathognomonic  signs  of  this  disease  are  furnished  by  a
comparison  of  the  indications  derived  from  percussion  and  me-
diate auscultation.  The  respiratory  sound  is  inaudible  over  the
greater  part  of  the  chest,  and  is  very  feeble  in  the  points  where
it  is  audible  :  at  the  same  time,  a  very  clear  sound  is  produced
by  percussion.  From  time  to  time  also,  we  perceive,  while  ex-
ploring the  respiration  or  cough,  a  slight  sibilous  rhonchus  or
sound  of  the  valve,  as  in  the  dry  catarrh,  occasioned  by  the  dis-
placement of  the  pearly  sputa.  So  far,  indeed,  these  signs  are
merely  those  formerly  described  as  indicating  the  dry  catarrh,


150


KM  I'll  VS  EM  A  OF  THE  LUNGS.


to  which,  as  we  have  already  seen,  this  disease  is  almost  always
owing.  In  doubtful  cases,  the  long  continuance  of  the  disorder,
the  severity  of  the  habitual  dyspnoea,  and  the  asthmatic  pa-
roxysms occasionally  occurring,  will  suffice  to  point  out  the  ex-
istence of  emphysema  in  some  parts  of  the  lungs.  These  indica-
tions will  be  strengthened  by  the  existence  of  extreme  indistinct-
ness of  the  respiratory  sound  generally,  and  by  its  entire  absence
in  certain  points ;  characters  which  might  be  expected  to  be
much  more  marked  in  this  affection,  than  in  the  simple  dry  ca-
tarrh, owing  to  the  compression  of  the  neighbouring  cells  by
those  which  are  dilated.  The  cylindrical  form  of  the  chest,  and
the  slight  lividity  of  the  skin,  will  also  help  the  diagnosis.  In
the  case  of  one  lung  being  principally  affected,  the  augmented
sonorousness  and  increased  size  of  this  side  will  discriminate
the  disease  from  all  others,  except  pneumo-thorax,  from  which
likewise,  as  will  be  shown  when  we  come  to  treat  of  that  disease,
it  can  be  readily  distinguished.  When  existing  in  a  high  de-
gree, this  disease  may,  in  the  last  place,  be  recognized  by  a  sign
which  is  altogether  pathognomonic,  and  which  I  have  described
in  Part  First  under  the  name  of  the  crepitous  rhonchus  with  large
bubbles.  In  this  case,  the  sound  during  inspiration  or  coughing,
is  like  that  which  would  be  produced  by  blowing  into  half-dried
cellular  substance.  It  differs  from  the  common  crepitous  rhon-
chus, in  conveying  the  notion  of  dryness,  and  also  as  being  con-
nected with  bubbles  which  are  at  once  large  and  unequal,  the
other  rhonchus  having  qualities  exactly  the  reverse.  This  phe-
nomenon is  however  not  common,  and  when  it  exists,  it  is  of  very
short  duration,  and  is  observed  only  in  points  of  small  extent.
It  is  much  more  common  and  more  permanent  in  the  interlobular
emphysema.  In  some  instances  the  patients  have  been  sensible
of  a  crackling  in  the  spot  where  this  rhonchus  was  heard  ;  and
still  more  rarely  I  have  perceived,  in  thin  subjects,  a  crepitation
in  the  same  place,  when  pressing  it  externally  with  the  finger.*

Progress  of  the  disease.  The  organic  lesion  at  present  under
consideration  commonly  follows  an  attack  of  acute  dry  catarrh
when  supervening  to  a  chronic  affection  of  the  same  kind ;  and
the  repeated  return  of  these  acute  attacks,  gives  rise  to  most  of
the  cases  of  dry  asthma.  Asthmatic  paroxysms  of  this  kind  are
accompanied  by  an  an  extreme  oppression,  which,  however,  does
not  always  prevent  the  patient  from  assuming  the  horizontal

*  The  circumstances  mentioned  in  the  text,  coupled  with  the  fact  that  it  is  heard
continuously  in  the  interlobular  emphysema,  clearly  demonstrate  that  the  dry  crepi-
tous rhonchus  or  crackling,  only  exists  at  the  moment  of  rupture  of  the  aircells  :  and
it  is  extremely  probable  that  it  is  produced  by  this  accident  and  the  consequent  ex-
travasation of  the  air  into  the  surrounding:  cellular  substance.  It  is,  however,  by  no
means  allowable  to  explain,  in  the  same  manner,  the  obscure  sibilous  rhonchus  or
sound  of  the  valve  or  click,  also  perceptible  in  the  pulmonary  emphysema  ;  as  this
admission  would  necessarily  involve  the  belief  of  the  laceration  of  the  air  cells  in
the  case  of  catarrhs,  in  most  of  which  this  clicking;  is  perceptible  at  their  onset.
_(M.  L.)


EMPHYSEMA  OF TIL K  LUNGS.


151


posture.  If  fever  accompanies  the  attack  of  catarrh,  the  oppres-
sion becomes  less  ;  and  if  a  little  pituitous  or  mucous  expectora-
tion comes  on,  the  asthmatic  paroxysm  soon  terminates,  and  the
breathing  becomes  sometimes  freer  than  before :  in  this  case  it
would  seem  as  if  the  viscid  mucus  which  usually  obstructs  the
bronchi,  became  less  tenacious,  or  was  carried  off  by  the  more
liquid  and  less  adhesive  secretion  produced  by  the  recent  ca-
tarrh. If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  recent  catarrh  brings  no  alle-
viation, the  asthmatic  attack  is  of  long  continuance,  and  the
patient  only  slowly  returns  to  his  ordinary  state,  and  even  not
unfrequently  remains  more  habitually  oppressed  than  before.
The  severer  asthmatic  paroxysms  occur  only  after  very  long  in-
tervals, during  the  first  years  of  the  disease  ; — the  greater  number
of  the  catarrhal  affections  producing  merely  a  slight  and  tempo-
rary increase  of  the  usual  dyspnoea.  But  when  the  complaint  is
of  long  standing  and  the  patients  far  advanced  in  life,  the  pa-
roxysms become  more  frequent  and  severe.  Each  succeeding
attack  increases  the  extent  of  the  organic  lesion  ;  and  rupture  of
the  pulmonary  tissue,  and  sometimes  interlobular  emphysema,
then  ensues.

From  the  preceding  observations  it  must  be  concluded,  that
pulmonary  emphysema,  in  a  middling  degree,  is  not  a  disease  of
great  severity.  Of  all  the  varieties  of  asthma  it  is  unquestion-
ably that  which  affords  to  the  patient  the  best  prospect  of  long
life.  The  long  continuance  and  slow  progress  of  the  disease  and
the  nature  of  its  causes,  render  it  possible  to  struggle  against
the  organic  lesion,  and  permit  the  functional  disorders  resulting
from  it  to  be  kept  within  tolerable  bounds.*

*  In  Sir  John  Floyer's  "Treatise  of  the  Asthma,"  Lond.  1698,  referred  to  in
a  preceding  paee,  there  is  a  fuller  and  more  distinct  account  of  the  organic  lesion
treated  of  in  this  chapter,  than  our  author  seems  to  be  aware  of.  It  is  true,  the  lungs
examined  by  Sir  John  were  those  of  a  mare,  but  he  evidently  considers  the  remarks
he  makes,  as  applicable  to  the  human  subject.  Contrary  to  the  assertion  of  Laennec,
this  author  expressly  notices  the  dilatation  of  the  air  cells ;  and  in  several  passages
(see  p.  239 — 24?)  he  seems  to  entertain  ideas  relative  to  the  causes  and  effects  of  this
lesion  very  similar  to  those  of  M.  Laennec.  Sir  John  notices  the  same  affection  as  ex-
isting in  hawks,  and  being  the  cause  of  the  disease  in  them  termed  the  crocke,  a  kind
of  dyspnoea  produced  by  overstraining  in  flying,  (Phys.'s.  pulse  watch,  volii.  p.  400.)
Making  allowance  for  the  antiquated  phraseology,  the  following  piece  of  pathology
comes  very  near  our  author's  :  "  As  it  happens  'in  external  flatulent  tumours,  they
at  first  go  off  and  return,  but  at  last  fix  in  permanent  flatulent  tumours  ;  so  it  is  in
the  flatulent  asthma,  the  frequent  nervous  inflations  induce  at  last  a  constant  windy
tumour  or  inflation;  and  it  ought  to  be  considered  how  far  holding  the  breath  in
hysteric  fits,  or  the  violent  coughing  in  long  catarrhs,  or  the  great  distension  of  the
lungs  by  an  inflammation,  may  strain  the  bladders,  and  their  muscular  fibres,  and
thereby  produce  the  same  rupture,  or  dilatation,  or  hernia,  as  happens  in  the  broken-
winded.  This  must  be  observed  by  the  help  of  the  microscope  ;  and  if  the  air  blown
into  the  lobe  will  not  be  expelled  thence  by  the  natural  tone  or  muscle  of  the  blad-
ders, that  the  lobe  may  again  subside  of  itself,  'tis  certain  some  injury  is  done  to
the  ventiducts  ;  the  bladders  are  either  broken,  and  admit  the  air  into  the  membra-
nous interstices,  or  else  they  are  over-distended,  like  a  hernia  in  the  peritoneum  ;
and  this  will  produce  an  inflation  of  the  whole  substance  of  the  lungs,  and  that,  a
continual  compression  of  the  air  and  blood  vessels,  which  will  produce  a  constant


152


EMPHYSEMA  OF  THE  LUNG S.


Treatment.  Emphysema  of  the  lungs  being  almost  always
the  consequence  of  the  dry  catarrh,  presents  the  same  indications
of  cure  as  were  pointed  out  when  treating  of  that  disease.  Fric-
tions with  oil  are  often  very  useful  in  lessening  the  susceptibility
to  be  affected  by  catarrh.  In  the  case  of  pallid  cachectic  sub-
jects, the  subcarbonate  of  iron  has  occasionally  seemed  to  have
a  similar  effect,  and  to  tend  at  the  same  time,  to  diminish  the
congestion  of  the  mucuos  membrane,  and  also  the  spasmodic
stricture  of  the  bronchi.  In  the  severer  asthmatic  paroxysms,  it
is  frequently  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  venesection,  in  order
to  relieve  the  congestion  of  blood  in  the  lungs;  and  it  is
always  proper  to  diminish  the  necessity  of  respiration  by  means
of  narcotics.*

The  following  cases  will  furnish  examples  of  most  of  the  facts
stated  in  the  preceding  pages :

Case  V~. — Partial  emphysema  of  the  luyigs.  A  woman,  aged
fifty,  came  into  the  Necker  Hospital  in  December  1818,  affected
with  great  dyspnoea,  cough,  strong  action  of  the  heart,  anasarca
of  the  extremities,  &c.  which  were  said  to  have  existed  three
weeks. She  died  the  same  night. On  examination,  the  lungs

asthma." — {Treatise  on  Asthma,  p.  244.) — Pulmonary  emphysema  is  noticed  in  the
recorded  dissections  of  many  of  the  older  authors.  I  will  here  refer  to  a  few  :  Bo-
netus,  Sepulchret.  lib.  ii.  sect.  i.  obs.  54,  55,  56,  57,  58;  Ruysch,  obs.  19,  21  ;
Morgagni,  Ep.  iv.  24.  xviii.  14;  Ridley,  obs.  p.  219 — 234,  Lond.  1763;  sir  W.
Watson,  Phil  Tr.  Abr.  xii.  145  ;  Heberden,  Comment,  p.  63.

It  is  evident  that  the  disease  in  horses  termed  broken -wind ,  as  we  find  it  detailed
in  our  best  veterinary  works,  is  precisely  the  same  organic  lesion  as  that  described
in  the  text ;  although  I  have  not  met  with  any  one,  except  Floyer,  who  noticed  the
ditatation  of  the  cells.  In  an  article  on  "  Broken-wind"  in  Rees's  Cyclopedia,  the
disease  is  well  described,  and  the  morbid  condition  of  the  lung  is  there  termed  em-
physema. Several  dissections  of  this  disease  are  given  in  Mr.  Percivall's  "  Lectures
on  the  Veterinaiy  Art;"  and  in  one  of  these  the  author  states  that  "the  bronchial
and  tracheal  membranes,  though  of  their  natural  colour,  were  much  thickened  ;"  and
justly  adds,  that  if  this  appearance  is  constant,  it  will  throw  much  light  on  the  pa-
thology of  broken-wind.  (vol.  ii.  p.  357.) — The  pathology  of  broken-wind  in  horses,
has  been  since  more  accurately  investigated  by  Andral.  His  examinations  of  lungs
in  this  state  have  presented  to  him  the  three  species  of  lesion  described  by  Laennec
— 1,  simple  dilatation  of  the  small  bronchi  and  air  cells  ;  2,  rupture  of  the  walls  of
these  ;  3,  infiltration  of  the  air  into  the  interlobular  cellular  tissue  ; — each  being  the
consequence  of  theotber  in  the  order  stated.  M.  Andral  very  naturally  asks,  may
not  the  pulmonary  emphysema  be  produced  in  the  same  mechanical  manner  in  man
from  severe  and  long-continued  coughs  1  may  not  the  temporary  distension  of  the
air  cells  by  air  or  mucus  give  rise  to  their  permanent  dilatation  \  and  replies — that
all  that  is  necessary  to  insure  this  result  is  that  the  elastic  power  naturally  inhe-
rent in  the  air  cells  should  be  overcome  and  destroyed.  (Precis  d'Anat  Pathol.
t.  ii.  p.  526). These  views  accord  precisely  with  those  of  Laennec. — Transl.

*  The  fo'lowing  notable  proposal  for  curing  emphysema  of  the  lungs,  seems  worthy
of  record  in  this  place,  as  a  striking  illustration  of  the  absurdities  into  which  even
the  most  sensible  practitioners  could  be  led,  before  the  physical  researches  of  the
moderns  had  redeemed  pathology  from  the  dominion  of  metaphysical  theory  :  "  The
cure  of  the  broken  wind,"  says  Sir  John  Floyer,  "cannot  easily  be  projected  any
other  way  but  bv  a  paracentesis  in  the  thorax  ;  for  it  the  external  air  be  admitted,  it
will  compress  the  flatulent  tumour,  and  through  the  same  hole  n  styptic  and  carmi-
inlire  hydromel  may  be  injected,  to  restore  by  its  stvpticity  the  tone  of  the  mem-
branes, and  discuss  by  its  aromatic  acrimony  the  windy  spirits,  or  air  retained  in  the
lungs." — Treatise  of  the  Asthma,  p.  2 16. —  Transl.


EMPHYSEMA OF THE  LUNGS.


153


were  found  free  from  adhesions,  voluminous,  and  lighter  than
usual.  A  large  portion  of  the  right  lung  and  almost  all  the
lower  lobe  of  the  left,  were  smooth  and  shining,  yet  somewhat
irregular  on  the  surface;  and  they  collapsed  much  less  than  the
other  parts.  On  the  surface  of  these  portions,  there  was  a  great
number  of  transparent  vesicles,  of  the  size  of  a  millet  or  hemp-
seed,  and  some  as  large  as  cherry-stones  ; — the  former  being  level
with  the  general  surface,  the  latter  somewhat  prominent.  Upon
inspecting  these  vesicles  closely,  they  were  found  to  be  the  air
cells  in  a  state  of  dilatation.  The  cells  around  these,  and  indeed
over  the  whole  of  the  lung  that  remained  uncollapsed,  were  more
distinct  than  is  usual,  and  gave  the  parts  so  affected  a  resem-
blance to  the  vesicular  lungs  of  cold-blooded  animals.  In  two
or  three  points  there  were  bubbles  of  air  of  the  size  of  a  small
ifilbert,  extravasated  beneath  the  pleura.  These  were  readily
Idistinguished  from  the  dilated  cells,  by  being  easily  displaced  by
jpressure.  On  compressing  those  portions  of  the  lungs  where  the
cells  were  dilated,  the  resistance  afforded  by  them  was  softer,  and
the  sensation  communicated  was  unlike  the  natural  crepitation
usually  perceived.  The  air  in  escaping  from  these  parts  pro-
duced a  gentle  hissing.  On  puncturing  them  they  collapsed,
and  lost  the  appearance  above  described.  In  other  respects,  the
substance  of  the  lungs  was  sound.  The  bronchi,  particularly  the
smaller  branches,  in  the  affected  parts,  were  perceptibly  dilated,
:>f  a  deep  red  colour,  and  filled  with  a  very  viscid  and  nearly
colourless  mucus.

Case  VI. — General  emphysema  of  the  lungs. J.  B.  Cocard,
iged  37,  came  into  the  Necker  Hospital  in  May  1818. He  had
oeen  subject  to  habitual  cough,  and  mucous  expectoration,  ever
<ince  he  was  three  years  old. He  had  likewise  dyspnoea,  but
lever  sufficient,  in  the  early  part  of  his  life,  to  prevent  him  from
Allowing  his  occupations  as  a  labourer,  except  in  winter,  when
le  was  always  confined  to  bed  for  some  days,  on  account  of  the
ncrease  of  his  cough. In  his  thirty-third  year,  he  had  haemop-
tysis, which  had  no  further  immediate  consequences;  and  it  was
lot  till  three  years  afterwards  that  dropsical  symptoms  made
heir  appearance. When  he  came  into  the  hospital,  on  the  25th
>bf  May,  there  was  anasarca  of  the  abdomen  and  lower  extremities,
lie  lips  were  bluish,  the  respiration  short  and  much  oppressed,
Vequent  cough,  with  pituitous  expectoration,  pulse  frequent  and
vgular,  and  the  skin  of  natural  temperature. The  chest  sounded
(very  where  very  well. The  sound  of  respiration  could  be  per-
xived  with  difficulty  immediately  below  the  clavicles,  and  was
iltogether  imperceptible  over  the  remaining  parts  of  the  chest ;
ixcept  that,  now  and  then,  one  could  for  a  moment  fancy  that
le  heard  it,  at  which  times  it  was  accompanied  by  a  slight
ibilous  rhonchus,  like  the  clicking  of  small  valves  placed  in  the
un-onchi. The  chest,  both  before  and  behind,  was  remarkably


154


EMPHYSEMA  OF  THE  LUNGS.


rounded  and  prominently  arched.  The  heart  yielded  both
a  slight  impulse  and  sound.  After  a  short  stay  in  the  hos-
pital, the  dropsical  symptoms  were  removed,  and  he  went  out
on  the  9th  of  June.  On  the  first  of  the  following  month,
however,  he  returned,  in  the  same  state  as  when  first  admitted.
At  this  time,  I  was  led,  from  considering  as  well  the  symptoms
present,  as  the  absence  of  others,  and  from  comparing  the  case
with  some  which  I  had  recently  seen,  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that
the  disease  -was  general  emphysema  of  both  lungs.  The  dropsical
state  was  again  relieved  by  diuretics,  and  he  left  the  hospital  on
the  19th,  affected  merely  with  his  habitual  cough  and  dyspnoea.
During  the  whole  time  he  remained  in  the  hospital,  the  stetho-
scope never  detected  the  sound  of  respiration,  except  very  feebly
in  a  few  varying  points  of  the  chest,  particularly  between  the
clavicle  and  third  rib.  This  man  returned  once  more  to  the
hospital  in  September,  with  the  pectoral  symptoms  as  before,
and  with  the  addition  of  severe  diarrhoea.  He  was  getting  better
of  this,  when  he  was  seized  with  small-pox,  and  died  about  three
weeks  after  his  admission  into  the  hospital.

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death.  The  heart  was
double  its  natural  size,  both  ventricles  being  dilated  and  thick-
ened. Both  lungs  were  found  without  any  adhesions,  filling
completely  the  cavity  of  the  chest,  and  not  at  all  collapsing  on
the  admission  of  the  external  air.  Their  surface  was  smooth,
shining,  drier  than  natural,  and  seemingly  unctuous.  The  upper
lobes  presented  on  their  surface  some  transparent  vesicles,  vary-
ing in  size  from  that  of  a  filbert  to  that  of  an  almond,  and  even
a  walnut,  and  evidently  produced  by  the  extravasion  of  air  under
the  pleura.  The  specific  gravity  of  the  lungs  was  at  least  one-
half  less  than  natural.  When  placed  in  water,  they  hardly
dipped  even  a  few  lines  into  the  fluid.  When  compressed  in
the  hand,  the  sensation  communicated  was  rather  that  of  the  dis-
placement of  an  elastic  fluid,  than  the  natural  crepitation  of  the
viscus.  When  cut  into,  the  air  made  its  escape  with  a  slight
hissing.  The  substance  of  the  lungs  was  drier  than  natural,  ex-
cept in  some  spots  near  their  centre  and  roots,  which  were  less
emphysematous,  and  from  which  there  flowed  a  little  frothy  and
bloody  serum.  The  pulmonary  substance  was  in  other  respects
sound.*

Case  VII. — Slight  emphysema. — suffocative  catarrh  a?id
slight  peripneumony.  A  man,  of  delicate  health  in  childhood,  and
affected  with  spinal  curvature,  in  his  twenty-eighth  year  became
subject  to  slight  cough  and  habitual  dyspnoea.  Two  years  after-
wards he  caught  a  severe  cold,  with  much  aggravation  of  his

*  The  state  of  tbe  air  cells  is  not  noticed  in  this  case,  the  gentleman  who  made
the  examination  being  at  the  time  unacquainted  with  this  particular  lesion.  Upon
being  shown  afterwards  lungs  decidedly  emphysematous,  he  admitled  that  they  ex-
hibited a  precisely  similar  appearance  to  those  in  the  present  subject. — Anther.


EMPHYSEMA OF THE  LUNGS.


155


former  symptoms,  and  came  into  the  hospital  in  January.  At
I  this  time  the  following  report  was  made  of  the  case:  Thorax
prominently  arched  and  almost  cylindrical  anteriorly  ;  the  patient
keeping-  himself  nearly  in  a  sitting  posture  in  bed ;  the  trunk
inclined  forwards ;  heat  of  skin  moderate ;  respiration  high  and
short;  cough  in  fits; expectoration  of  a  ropy  frothy  mucus;
i  cheeks,  lips  and  nails  of  a  violet  colour. The  chest  yielded  a
very  clear  sound  throughout  except  on  the  lower  part  of  the
right  side  behind,  where  there  was  hardly  any. The  respiration
was  just  barely  perceptible  over  the  whole  left  side,  and  was  ac-
companied with  a  slight  degree  of  rhonchus,  sometimes  mucous
:  and  sometimes  sibilous. The  upper  part  of  the  right  side  afforded
i  the  same  results ;  but  on  the  lower  part,  there  was  a  slight  crepi-
i  tous  rhonchus  without  any  of  the  natural  sound  of  respiration.
The  pulsations  of  the  heart  were  feeble  and  indistinct. The  pulse
was  weak,  not  very  quick,  and  slightly  intermittent. The  ex-
i  ternal  jugulars  were  swollen  but  without  pulsation. Diagnosis  :
,  Emphysema  of  the  lungs,  with  suffocative  catarrh  and  slight
peripneumony  of  the  lower  part  of  the  right  lung. He  died  on
the  following  day.

Dissection  thirty-sioo  hours  after  death.  The  left  lung  filling
completely  the  cavity  of  the  chest,  and  projecting  beyond  the
mediastinum,  yielding  to  the  touch  a  sensation  intermediate  be-
tween that  afforded  by  a  bladder  half  filled  with  air,  and  the
natural  crepitation  of  the  healthy  viscus.  The  air  cells,  evi-
dently enlarged  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  lung,  had  the  same
appearance  to  the  naked  eye  as  the  healthy  cells  present  under
:  the  microscope,  the  largest  being  of  the  size  of  a  grape-stone,
and  the  smallest  of  the  size  of  a  millet-seed.  Their  shape  was
globular  or  ovoid.  On  different  points  of  the  surface  there  were
also  many  small  extravasations  of  air  beneath  the  pleura,  three  or
four  times  as  large  as  the  dilated  cells,  but  not  more  prominent
than  them.  On  cutting  into  them,  they  were  found  capable  of
containing  a  hemp-seed  or  even  a  cherry-stone.  The  substance
of  the  lungs  was  Jess  crepitous  than  natural,  when  cut  into,  and
was  extremely  dry.  The  bronchi  were  larger  than  natural,  very
red,  and  filled  with  white  ropy  mucus.  The  right  lung  exhibited
the  same  appearances  as  the  left,  in  the  upper  and  middle  lobes ;
but  the  lower  lobe  was  indurated,  and  posteriorly  it  was  as  hard
as  liver  In  this  point  it  was  of  a  violet  red  colour,  intermixed
with  yellowish  spots,  and  looked  granular  when  incised.  Above
this  spot,  and  anteriorly,  it  was  still  somewhat  crepitous,  though
much  gorged  with  blood  and  sanies.  The  other  organs  were
-  sound.

Case  VIII. — Emphysema,  with  rupture  of  the  pulmonary
substance,  in  a  patient  long  cured  of  pthisis.  A  woman  aged  52,
had  been  affected  for  the  last  eighteen  years  with  dyspnoea,
habitual  cough,  attended  with  little  expectoration,  but  often  so


156


EMPHYSEMA  OF  THE  LUNGS.


severe  as  to  prevent  sleep.  She  had  never  been  prevented  from
following  her  occupation  until  the  period  of  her  entry  into  the
hospital.  At  this  time  there  was  considerable  emaciation,  com-
plete incapacity  to  lie  in  the  horizontal  posture,  respiration  short
and  difficult,  very  frequent,  and  severe  cough,  of  a  convulsive
character,  like  that  of  the  hooping  cough,  with  mucuos  expec-
toration, pulse  quick,  and  skin  of  the  natural  temperature.  The
chest  sounded  well  on  percussion,  but  respiration  was  inaudible
in  the  greater  part  of  it.  Pectoriloquy  was  perfect  above  the
right  clavicle,  and  doubtful  at  the  roots  of  both  lungs.  I  caused
the  following  diagnosis  to  be  recorded  :  Excavation  in  the  top  of
the  right  lung,  dilatation  of  the  bronchi,  particularly  of  the
larger  trunks.  It  was  to  this  last  that  I  attributed  the  doubtful
pectoriloquy  towards  the  roots  of  the  lungs.  The  state  of  the
respiration,  the  comparison  of  the  signs  furnished  by  percussion
and  the  stethoscope,  and  the  whole  symptoms  taken  together,
indicated  also  emphysema  of  the  lungs ;  but  surprised  at  the
great  number  of  cases  in  which  I  had  recently  met  with  symp-
toms of  this  affection,  I  was  unwilling  to  come  to  a  decided
opinion  respecting  its  existence  in  the  present  case,  without  fur-
ther examination, — and  the  more  so,  as  the  dilatation  of  the
bronchi,  which  was  supposed  to  exist,  if  found  to  be  general
over  the  lungs,  might,  by  compressing  the  air  cells,  render  the
sound  of  respiration  very  indistinct.  This  woman  died  three
days  after  her  admission.

Dissection  thirty-six  hours  after  death.  Both  lungs  were  found
adhering  strongly  to  the  ribs  by  old  attachments.  The  upper
lobe  of  the  left  lung  was  divided  into  two  by  a  natural  intersec-
tion, the  superior  division  being  entirely  covered  with  semi-trans-
parent vesicles,  slightly  prominent,  and  varying  in  size  from  that
of  a  hemp-seed  to  a  cherry-stone.  These  vesicles  were  evidently
dilated  air-cells,  and  covered  more  than  two  thirds  of  the  super-
numerary lobe.  The  cells  between  these  were  also  dilated,  but
in  a  less  degree,  being  about  the  size  of  a  millet-seed.  There
were  likewise  two  vesicles  of  the  shape  and  size  of  peas,  quite
prominent  on  the  surface,  and  with  a  sort  of  neck  by  which  they
were  attached  to  the  lung.  Upon  cutting  into  these,  it  was
found  that  their  cavity  extended  within  the  pulmonary  substance
about  a  line,  and  was  there  seen  communicating  with  the  adjoin-
ing cells.  Over  nearly  all  the  rest  of  this  lung,  the  dilatation  of
the  cells  was  very  conspicuous,  though  in  a  less  degree  than  in
the  place  just  mentioned.  Almost  all  of  them  were  capable  of
containing  a  millet-seed,  and  a  few  of  them  would  have  received
a  hemp-seed  or  small  pea.  In  different  points  on  the  surface  of
this  lung,  there  were  also  four  or  five  protuberances  of  an  irregu-
lar oval  form,  and  of  the  size  of  an  almond,  corresponding  to
excavations  situated  two  or  three  lines  deep  in  the  lung,  and
which  were  produced  by  laceration  of  its  substance.  These


EMPHYSEMA OF THE  LUXCS.


157


cavities, — of  which  the  largest  might  have  contained  a  middling-
sized  walnut,  and  the  smallest  a  filbert, — were  full  of  air,  and
.collapsed  on  being  cut  into. The  internal  surface  of  two  of
i  these  were  tinged  with  blood,  and  one  of  them  contained  a  small
cclot  of  blood,  one-fourth  of  its  own  size. The  walls  of  the  others
\were  of  the  natural  colour  of  the  lung,  and  presented  a  layer  of
rruptured  and  compressed  cells,  to  the  depth  of  a  line  and  a  half.
IBeyond  this  depth,  on  all  sides,  the  cells  were  distended  beyond
ttheir  natural  size. It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  ruptured  por-
ittions  did  not  exist  in  any  place  at  a  greater  depth  under  the  sur-
tface  than  an  inch,  and  that,  below  this,  the  emphysematous  dila-
itation  of  the  cells  was  not  very  distinguishable. It  was  equally
eevident  that  the  cells  in  the  vicinity  of  these  lacerations  were
neither  larger  nor  more  numerous  than  elsewhere,  and  that  there
vwas  no  infiltration  or  extravasation  of  air  into  the  inter-alveolar
t tissue. The  right  lung  exhibited,  but  in  a  lesser  degree,  the
<same  dilatation  of  the  cells,  but  no  rupture  of  substance. In  the
uupper  and  posterior  part  of  this  lung,  however,  there  was  found
an  excavation  of  an  oval  shape,  about  two  inches  in  length,
fifteen  lines  broad  in  its  centre,  and  two  lines  deep. The  inner
-  surface  of  this  cavity  was  smooth  and  polished,  though  somewhat
irregular  ;  it  was  white,  but  interspersed  with  red  specks  arising
from  numerous  small  vessels. It  contained  some  small  fragments
of  an  opaque,  very  dry,  semi-friable  matter,  of  a  pale  ochre-
vyellow  colour,  and  attached  to  the  walls  of  the  cyst.  Three
hbronchial  tubes  of  the  size  of  a  goose-quill  terminated  with  open
mouths  in  this  cavity. Their  coats  were  continuous  with  its
walls,  and  their  communication  with  their  trunks  was  quite  free.

The  cases,  of  which  I  have  now  given  an  account,  exhibit
vvesicular  emphysema  of  the  lungs  in  its  different  degrees.  The
last  case  gives,  further,  an  example  of  a  cure  of  what  is  usually
i  called  an  ulcer  of  the  lungs,  the  true  nature  of  which  we  shall
Bee  hereafter  when  treating  of  phthisis.*

Sect.  II.  Interlobular  emphysema.

The  pulmonary  or  vesicular  emphysema,  as  we  have  just  seen,
■is  a  disease  essentially  chronic;  that  which  I  am  now  going  to
describe,  on  the  contrary,  is,  in  most  cases,  a  real  traumatic  lesion,

*  Vesicular  emphysema  of  the  lungs  is  a  much  more  frequent  disease  than  is
commonly  imagined.  I  meet  with  it  constantly  in  practice,  in  some  intermediate
degree  between  what  may  be  called  its  first  stage,  the  dry  catarrh,  and  its  complete
development  in  many  cases  of  prolonged  asthma.  There  is  no  disease  which  illus-
trates the  importance  and  necessity  of  percussion  more  than  this  ;  as  without  its
simultaneous  employment,  the  stethoscope  will,  in  many  cases,  lead  to  great  errors
Of  diagnosis.  The  outlines  of  two  cases  of  this  disease  are  given  in  my  work  en-
titled "  Original  Cases,"  &c.  p.  271—3;  and  1  could  here  add  many  more,  but
•deem  it  unnecessary,  as  they  tend  to  the  same  results  precisely  as  are  exhibited  in
the  text. —  Transl.


158


EMPHYSEMA  OF THE  LUNGS.


almost  suddenly  produced.  This  is  the  emphysema  admitted
by  surgeons;  universally  admitted,  indeed,  yet  very  little  known
according  to  its  true  anatomical  characters.  This  is  so  much  the
case,  that  I  do  not  know  where  any  exact  description  of  it,  drawn
from  nature,  is  to  be  found

Anatomical  characters.  This  affection  is  characterized  by
infiltration  of  air  between  the  lobules  of  the  lung.  The  texture
of  the  cellular  partitions  which  constitute  the  intersecting  planes
separating  these  lobules  from  each  other,  is  so  compact,  that  I
doubted,  a  few  years  ago,  the  possibility  of  an  infiltration  of  air
within  their  substance;*  but  I  have  since  that  time  met  with
several  examples  of  the  kind.  The  partitions  in  a  state  of  em-
physema, instead  of  the  scarcely  perceptible  thinness  natural  to
them,  present  a  thickness  varying  from  one  line  to  six,  or  nearly
an  inch  in  some  instances.  And  in  place  of  their  usual  white-
ness and  opacity,  they  exhibit  on  the  surface  of  the  lung,  and
towards  its  edges  principally,  transparent  bands,  which  formed  a
marked  contrast  with  the  opaque  pulmonary  substance.  These
bands  are  very  exactly  circumscribed,  and  upon  examination
are  found  to  intersect  the  lung  through  its  whole  thickness,  or
at  least  to  penetrate  deeply  into  its  substance.  The  want  of
colour  and  transparency  of  these  bands  is  owing  to  the  very  thin
and  half-dried  condition  of  the  cellular  tissue  within  which  the
air  is  extravasated.  The  emphysematous  partitions  are  usually
wider  on  the  surface  of  the  lungs,  and  gradually  get  thinner  as
they  approach  the  centre;  and,  in  this  respect,  they  may  be
compared  to  the  segments  of  an  orange,  which  we  mav  imagine
to  contain  air  instead  of  the  pulpy  juice  of  the  fruit.  Sometimes
several  bands  run  parallel  to  each  other,  containing  perfectly
sound  portions  between  them.  More  rarely,  the  infiltrated  band
runs  transversely,  and  thus  by  intersecting  several  of  the  vertical
bands,  one  or  more  of  the  pulmonary  lobules  become  completely
insulated.  Pretty  often  we  observe  along  the  course  of  the  vessels,
particularly  those  on  the  surface,  bubbles  of  air  extravasated
into  the  surrounding  cellular  substance,  somewhat  like  a  string
of  beads ;  and  in  this  variety,  much  more  frequently  and  plenti-
fully than  in  the  vesicular  emphysema,  we  find  bubbles  of  air
beneath  the  pleura.  When  the  extravasation  exists  near  the
roots  of  the  lungs,  it  speedily  extends  to  the  mediastinum,  and
from  thence  crosses  to  the  neck  and  over  the  whole  subcutaneous
and  intermuscular  cellular  substance  of  the  body.

Although  we  must  consider  this  affection  as  necessarily  de-
pending on  a  rupture  of  some  of  the  air-cells  in  the  first  place,
and  the  consequent  extravasation  of  the  air  contained  in  them,
into  the  cellular  substance  surrounding  the  lobules,  yet  we  are
unable  to  detect  any  actual  rupture  of  the  cells,  and,  indeed,


*  First  Edition,  torn.  ii.  pn^e  213.


KMl'lI  YSEMA OK THE LUNGS  159

can  rarely  observe  any  dilatation  of  these.  Even  the  cells  of
those  lobules  which  are  entirely  isolated  by  the  extravasation,
are  in  a  perfectly  sound  state.

To  have  a  correct  conception  of  the  anatomical  characters  of
the  interlobular  emphysema,  we  must  inflate  the  lung,  pass  a
ligature  above  the  affected  part,  and  then  dry  it  in  the  open  air.
If  we  then  cut  the  preparation  by  slices,  we  observe  the  inter-
lobular cellular  substance,  consisting  of  a  set  of  very  fine  plates,
perfectly  trasparent,  and  crossing  each  other  in  all  directions,  so
as  to  leave  a  series  of  intervening  cells  of  unequal  shape  and  size
and  all  communicating  with  each  other. I  have  already  ob-
served that  the  cells  of  the  insulated  lobules  are  in  a  sound
state  5  and  it  is  further  remarkable,  that  if  there  happens  to  be
,  an  accumulation  of  blood  in  the  part,  from  mechanical  subsidence
.  after  death,  the  lobules  are  alone  charged  with  it,  the  intersect-
;  ing  emphysematous  bands  being  quite  free  from  it.

I  do  not  affirm  positively  that  the  emphysematous  affection  of
i  the  cellular  partitions  never  extends  to  the  lobules  themselves;
on  the  contrary,  it  seems  probable  in  the  case  of  very  large  infil-
I  trations,  that  some  intermediate  lobules  may  have  been  obli-
terated ;  I  must  say,  however,  that  I  never  could  perceive  any
thing  of  the  kind,  in  my  researches.

Occasional  causes. The  most  common  of  these  is  the  pro-
longed forcible  retention  of  the  breath  during  powerful  and  long-
( continued  exertions,  as  in  child-bed,  in  relieving  the  bowels  when
v  constipated,  and  particularly  in  raising  heavy  weights.  Children
are  more  subject  to  this  disease  than  adults. In  them  it  occurs
t  frequently  during  an  attack  of  croup,  or  in  severe  catarrhs  in
i  which  the  bronchial  obstruction  is  very  great. In  these  cases  we
cannot  attribute  the  accident  to  the  act  of  crying,  since  this  takes
I  place  chiefly  during  expiration  ;  but  rather  to  the  violent  inspira-
tions which  they  take  immediately  before  crying,  or  during  fits
of  anger,  or  in  struggling,  so  common  in  this  stage  of  life.  It
occurs  also,  but  much  seldomer,  in  adults,  during  the  existence
of  the  before-mentioned  diseases. Of  these  the  most  efficient  in
its  production  is  the  acute  suffocative  catarrh,  particularly  if  of
some  days1  duration,  and  when  complicated  with  a  slight  peri-
pneumony. Perhaps  also  we  ought  to  range  among  the  causes
of  this  affection  a  spontaneous  exhalation  or  secretion  of  air ;  as
•we  find  a  similar  secretion  to  take  place  in  the  cellular  substance
iof  other  organs.

It  may  appear  surprising  that  the  interlobular  emphysema
does  not  almost  always  supervene  to  the  vesicular,  particularly
after  attacks  of  asthma,  the  consequence  of  the  renewal  of  the
Mdry  catarrh  in  an  acute  form.  Nevertheless,  although  I  have
myself  seen  several  cases  of  the  vesicular  species  since  the  publi-
cation of  my  first  edition,  and  although  I  have  received  from  my
pupils  many  preparations  of  the  same  lesion  collected  from  the


A


60


EMPHYSEMA OF THE  LUNGS.


different  hospitals  in  Paris,  I  have  never  observed  the  two  spe-
cies, combined,  nor  any  further  extravasation  of  air  than  into  the
cellular  substance  connecting  the  pleura  with  the  lungs.  This
is  no  doubt  owing  to  the  air  cells  having  become  thickened
during  the  continuance  of  the  other  species,  which  is  a  chronic
disease.  Besides,  Reisseissen  has  remarked  that  the  cellular
tissue  between  the  lobules  is  extremely  dense,  and  cannot  be
penetrated,  but  with  great  difficulty,  by  the  process  of  insuffla-
tion.

Signs.  There  is  one  sign  completely  pathognomonic  of  this
affection,  viz.  the  dry  crepitous  rhonchus  with  large  bubbles,
when  very  distinct  and  continuous,  or  nearly  so.  I  am  not  aware
that  this  sign  is  ever  wanting  in  this  case,  and  it  is  always  more
marked  than  in  the  vesicular  emphysema.  Together  with  this
sign  we  usually  perceive  also,  during  inspiration  and  expiration,
a  sound  or  sensation  as  of  one  or  more  bodies  rising,  and  falling,
and  rubbing  against  the  ribs.  These  phenomena  present  con-
siderable varieties.  They  are  commonly  re-united,  but  occa-
sionally they  exist  singly,  or  they  alternate.  The  friction  of
ascent  takes  place  during  inspiration  ;  the  dry  crepitous  rhon-
chus usually  does  the  same,  and  often  masks  the  former  com-
pletely. The  friction  of  descent  accompanies  expiration,  and  is
much  more  frequently  to  be  perceived  than  the  other  kind :  it
sometimes  takes  place  as  one  sound  ;  at  other  times  it  occurs  in
two  or  three  successive  sounds ;  very  frequently  it  is  only  per-
ceived immediately  after  expiration,  and  then  conveys  the  im-
pression as  if  something  were  descending  into  its  proper  place.
Most  commonly  the  friction  seems  to  take  place  against  the
costal  pleura ;  at  other  times  it  appears  to  have  its  site  on  the
diaphragm,  or  mediastinum,  or  between  the  lobes  of  the  lungs.
These  phenomena  are  sometimes  accompanied  by  a  crepitation
perceptible  by  the  hand.  This  sign  is,  however,  frequently
wanting,  and  usually  disappears  before  the  others ;  but  some-
times, though  rarely,  it  is  more  perceptible,  at  least  at  intervals,
than  they  are.  The  dry  crepitous  rhonchus  with  large  bubbles,
and  the  friction  of  ascent  and  descent,  are  less  liable  to  temporary
interruption  from  obstruction  of  the  bronchial  tubes,  than  most
of  the  other  stethoscopic  signs  ;  such  interruption,  however,  some-
timesdoes  take  place,  and  may  even  last  several  days  in  cases  where
the  lesion  is  confined  to  a  small  space.  In  some  cases  we  can
produce  the  crepitation  by  pressing  the  intercostal  spaces  over
the  affected  part.  The  chest  sounds  well  on  percussion  over  the
site  of  the  emphysema,  unless  there  happens  to  co-exist  a  gorged
state  of  the  lungs  from  peripneumony  or  other  cause.  Should
an  external  emphysema  make  its  appearance  at  the  same  time,
beginning  in  the  neck,  the  diagnosis  of  course  is  rendered  more
certain.  In  respect  of  symptoms  of  a  general  or  local  kind  in-
dicative of  this  disease,  I  believe  that  a  dyspnoea  coming  on  sud-


EMPHYSEMA OF THE LUNGS.  1G1

denly  after  a  violent  exertion,  or  continuing  in  a  marked  degree
after  croup,  suffocative  catarrh,  or  any  other  disease  which  may
have  given  rise  to  temporary  obstruction  of  the  bronchi,  is  the
only  one  from  which  its  existence  can  be  suspected.  To  this  it
may  be  added,  that  the  patients  are  sometimes  sensible  of  a  kind
of  crackling  in  the  part  affected.

Treatment.  Interlobular  emphysema  is  usually  an  affection
•  of  less  severity  than  we  might  be  led  to  expect.  When  the
.  aerial  infiltration  extends  to  the  external  parts,  a  few  pricks  with
the  lancet  at  the  lower  part  of  the  neck,  or  wherever  the  emphy-
:  sema  is  greatest,  usually  suffice  to  dissipate  it.  When  it  is  con-
i  fined  to  the  lungs,  the  air  appears  to  be  always  absorbed,  and
i  the  interlobular  partitions  gradually  return  to  their  natural  state,
i  I  never  met  with  a  fatal  result  from  this  disease  alone ;  and  I
I  have  seen  several  recoveries  from  it,  in  cases  where  its  existence,
I  even  to  a  great  extent,  was  most  satisfactorily  established.  I
i  will  here  notice  two  cases  of  the  kind.

1.  A  young  woman,  convalescent  from  a  severe  acute  catarrh,
in  the  winter  of  1823-4,  presented  the  most  evident  signs  of  this
disease,  on  the  right  side  over  a  space  larger  than  the  hand.  The
dry  crepitous  rhonchus  with  large  bubbles,  and  the  friction  of
ascent  during  inspiration  and  of  descent  during  expiration,  were
heard  strongly  and  distinctly.  A  sense  of  crepitation  was  also
felt  by  the  hand  during  the  stronger  inspirations  :  sometimes,
however,  this  was  altogether  wanting,  and  at  other  times  it  could

I" be  excited  by  pressure  in  the  intercostal  spaces.  The  dyspnoea,
vwhich  was  considerable  when  I  first  saw  the  patient,  gradually
diminished,  and  the  phenomena  above  mentioned  gradually  de-
creased with  it.  At  the  end  of  two  months  the  young  woman
left  the  hospital.  I  saw  her  in  the  ensuing  spring,  and  found
her  quite  well  and  without  any  symptom  of  emphysema.

2.  A  man  aged  twenty  came  into  the  clinical  wards  the  9th  of
MMay,  1825,  affected  with  a  very  severe  catarrh  of  three  weeks'

duration.  At  this  time  he  had  all  the  symptoms  of  the  acute
suffocative  catarrh,  extreme  dyspnoea,  tracheal  rhonchus,  high
fever.  The  chest,  on  percussion,  sounded  pretty  well  through-
out, but  perhaps  somewhat  imperfectly  on  the  left  back  ;  the
sound  of  respiration  was  feeble  or  moderate  every  where;  mucous,
sonorous,  and  sibilous  rhonchi,  singly  or  conjoined,  existed  in
different  points  ;  and  a  slight  crepitous  rhonclius  with  bronchial
respiration  was  perceived  at  the  roots  of  the  left  lung.  The
mucous  rhonchus  was  felt  by  the  hand  in  several  places,  particu-
larly on  the  sides.  There  was  also  a  sub-crepitous  rhonchus  at
the  root  of  the  right  lung.  These  latter  signs  being  indicative
jf  an  incipient  double  peripneumony,  although  there  was  as  yet
inardly  any  expectoration,  I  ordered  eight  ounces  of  blood  to  be
taken  from  the  arm,  and  prescribed  emetic  tartar  in  large  doses.

H


1


102


EMPHYSEMA  OF THE  LUNGS.


(See  the  chapter  on  Pneumonia.)  This  was  borne  moderately
well,  and  produced  considerable  action  on  the  bowels,  without
vomiting.  On  the  12th,  the  expectoration  was  glutinous  and
tinged  with  blood,  and  there  was  severe  pain  of  the  right  side,
in  consequence  of  which  cupping  glasses  were  applied.  But  the
tracheal  rhonchus  and  dyspnoea  were  somewhat  diminished,  and
it  was  further  discovered  by  the  stethoscope  that  the  peripneu-
mony  had  not  advanced  in  these  points  where  the  crepitous
rhonchus  had  been  found,  while  it  had  retrograded  in  those
where  the  bronchial  respiration  had  been  perceptible, — this  mark
of  hepatization  being  now  superseded  by  a  crepitous  rhonchus.
On  the  14th,  the  tracheal  rhonchus  being  less,  and  the  strength
improved,  I  added  some  syrup  of  poppy  to  the  antimonial  mix-
ture, and  allowed  the  patient  more  soup.  After  this  time,  the
fever,  diarrhoea,  and  dyspnoea  did  not  return  ;  the  respiration
began  to  be  pretty  distinct  over  the  whole  chest,  and  although
it  was  accompanied  by  different  kinds  of  rhonchi,  the  crepitous
was  not  among  them.  On  the  17th,  the  patient  was  quite  con-
valescent. On  the  20th,  on  examining  the  chest  more  closely,
I  discovered  the  friction  of  ascent  and  descent  on  both  sides  of
the  chest,  and  also  the  dry  crepitous  rhonchus  ivith  large  bubbles
— the  former  most  marked  on  the  left,  the  latter  on  the  right
side.  I  made,  in  consequence,  the  following  addition  to  the  dia-
gnostic ticket — Emphysema  interlobular  partium  inferiorum
utriusque  pulmonis.  This  patient  left  the  hospital  on  the  29th,
the  signs  of  the  emphysema,  although  daily  decreasing,  being
still  very  well  marked.*  At  the  end  of  three  weeks  he  called
upon  me,  when  I  found  him  quite  well,  and  without  any  of  the
stethoscopic  signs  above  mentioned. -f-

*  I  doubt  if  these  two  cases  can  be  regarded  as  instances  of  interlobular
emphysema  ;  being  disposed  rather  to  regard  them  as  examples  of  slight  pleurisy
grafted  upon  catarrh,  or  a  peripneumony  unaccompanied  by  effusion,  and  there-
fore unmarked  by  aegophony.  As  was  remarked  in  a  former  note,  the  sound  of
friction  is  equally  perceptible  in  pleurisy  as  in  interlobular  emphysema,  indicating
in  either  case,  according  to  M.  Reynaud,  an  unequal  or  roughened  condition  of  the
pleura.  Perhaps  it  is  even  exclusively  confined  to  the  former  of  these  affections,
as  the  dry  crepitous  rhonchus  seems  to  be  to  the  second  ;  the  reunion  of  the  two
signs  indicating  the  complication  of  the  two  diseases.  This  is,  at  least,  the  inference
which  I  draw  from  my  own  observations  while  officiating  in  M.  Laennec's  clinic ;
as  in  almost  every  case  where  the  sound  of  friction  is  noted,  the  card  of  the  diagnosis
bears  the  inscription  of  "  pleurisy  and  interlobular  emphysema."  The  same  conclu-
sion is  deducible,  still  more  certainly,  from  the  third  case  of  M.  Reynaud,  as  both
the  sounds  were  perceptible  during  life,  and  the  two  lesions  were  discovered  after
death.  (See  Journ.  Hehd.  No.  65,  p.  576.) — (M.  L.)

t  This  disease  has  been  only  hitherto  known  to  English  practitioners  when  mani-
fested by  the  extension  of  the  emphysema  to  the  external  subcutaneous  cellular
substance.  Various  cases  of  this  kind  occurring  during  labour  and  from  severe
coughing,  are  recorded  in  our  miscellaneous  collections.  I  shall  here  refer  to  some
of  the  most  remarkable  of  these  which  took  place  during  labour.  Med.  Commun.
vol.  i.  p.  176  ;  Med.  Facts,  vol.  ii.  p.  45;  Halliday  on  Kmphysema,  p.  46  :  Ed.  Journ.
vol.  vii.  p.  174;  Cyclopred.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  ii.  p.  16;  Dub.  Trans,  vol.  iii.
p.  112  ;  Louis,  M6m.de  i* Acad,  de  Chir.  t.  iv.j  Diet,  des  Sc.  Med.  t.  xii.  p.  7.  The


(EDEMA  Ol«' TllK  LUNGS.


Ifi3


CHAPTER  IV

OF (EDEMA  OF  THE  LUNGS.

i  (Edema  of  the  lungs  is  the  infiltration  of  serum  into  the  sub-
:  stance  of  this  organ,  in  such  degree  as  evidently  to  diminish  its
I  permeability  to  the  air,  in  respiration. Although  very  common,
l  this  disease  is  very  little  known. None  of  the  authors  who  have
t treated  formally  of  dropsy,  have  mentioned  it,  and  the  expression
dropsy  of  the  lungs,  which  occasionally  occurs  in  their  writings,
iis  generally  applied  to  cases  of  hydrothorax,  or  to  the  supposed
existence  of  cysts  of  serous  fluids  in  the  lungs,  the  rupture  of
which  was  considered  as  giving  rise  to  hydrothorax.*  Among
practical  writers,  Albertini-f-  and  Barrere  j  are  the  only  ones  who
have  paid  any  attention  to  this  disease,  and  who  have  given  any
cases  of  it. The  observations  of  the  latter,  particularly,  prove
that  he  was  well  acquainted  with  the  affection,  although  he,  per-
haps, attached  too  much  importance  to  it,  and  did  not  distin-
guish sufficiently  between  it  and  the  first  stage  of  peripneumony.

(Edema  of  the  lungs  is  rarely  a  primary  and  idiopathic  dis-
ease. It  comes  on,  most  commonly,  with  other  dropsical  affec-
tions, in  cachectic  subjects,  towards  the  fatal  termination  of
long-continued  fevers,  or  organic  affections,  especially  those  of
the  heart. Peripneumony  that  has  terminated  by  resolution,
nappears  also  to  leave  a  great  predisposition  to  it ;  and  the  most
oextensive  and  severe  cases  that  I  have  met  with,  occurred  during
( aa  temporary  convalescence  from  severe  attacks  of  this  disease.
Acute  and  chronic  catarrhs,  likewise,  predispose  to  it ;  and  in
>such  cases  it  often  proves  fatal  by  inducing  suffocation.  Although
*  t this  disease  is  commonly  a  mere  consequence  of  other  affections,
iand  often  takes  place  only  a  few  hours  before  death,  neverthe-

llliliterature  of  emphysema  of  the  lungs  is  very  limited  :  the  following  are  the  principal
1|  works  in  which  it  is  either  formally  or  incidentally  noticed  : —

In  1807.  Halliday  (And.,  M.D.)  Ohs.  on  Emphysema.  Lond.  8vo.
11815.  Breschet.  Diet  des  Sc.  Med.  (Art.  Emphyseme,)  t.  xii.

I  il820.  Cloquet  ( Jul.)  De  rintiuence  des  efforts  sur  les  organes  renfermes  dans  la

cavite  thoracique. Puris.  8vo.
In  1823.  Murat.  Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Emphyseme,)  t.  vii.

1829.  Piedagnel.  Recberches  sur  l'Emphyseme  du  Poumon.  Pat  •is,  8vo.
I  11831.  Bouillaud.  Diet,  de  M6d.  et  de  Cbir.  Pr.  (Art.  Emphyseme,)  t.  vii.
I  11833.  Townsend. Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med. (Art.  Emphysema  and  Emphysema  of  the

Luvgs.)  vol.  ii.  Traiisl.

I

I  *  Hippoc.  de  Intern.  Affect.— Carol.  Piso,  de  Morb.  a  serosa  Colluvie.— De  Ilaen,
I  BRatio  Med.  torn.  ii.  pars  v.  cap.  iii.  De  Hydrope  Pectoris.

t  Comment,  de  Bonon.  sc.  inst.  torn.  i.

t  Observat.  Anatom. —  Perpignan,  1753.

M  2


164


(EDEMA OF  THE  LUNGS.


less,  in  some  cases,  it  had  certainly  lasted  several  weeks,  and  even
months  ;  and,  in  a  few  of  these,  it  seems  to  have  been  idiopathic.
The  suffocative  orthopncea,  which  sometimes  carries  off  children
after  attacks  of  measles,  is  probably  idiopathic  anasarca  of  the
lungs.  I  have  not  hitherto  been  able  to  verify  this  conjecture
by  dissection ;  but  when  we  consider  the  dropsical  tendency  of
such  cases,  and  the  frequent  complication  of  measles  with  peri-
pneumony,  it  would  seem  to  be  well  founded.

Anatomical  characters.  When  oedema  occupies  the  whole  of
one  lung,  and  has  been  of  some  duration,  the  pulmonary  tissue
loses  entirely  the  slight  rose  tint  which  is  natural  to  it>  and  be-
comes of  a  pale  grey  colour  ;  it  is  denser  and  heavier  than  in  its
sound  state,  and  does  not  collapse  on  opening  the  chest.  It  is,
however,  still  nearly  as  crepitous  as  before.  It  retains  the  im-
pression of  the  finger  more  tenaciously  than  a  sound  lung.  Its
vessels  seem  to  contain  less  blood  than  usual,  and,  when  cut  into,
there  flows  from  it  an  abundance  of  serum,  which  is  either  co-
lourless or  very  slightly  tawny,  transparent,  and  just  perceptibly
spumous.  The  characters  last  mentioned  would  suffice  to  dis-
tinguish this  disease  from  the  first  degree  of  peripneumony  (in
which  the  serum  effused  into  the  inflamed  lung  is  strongly  tinged
with  blood,  and  very  frothy,)  even  if  the  characteristic  redness  of
inflammation  did  not  establish  a  very  marked  distinction  between
the  two  diseases.  However,  it  is  by  no  means  uncommon  to  find,
in  anasarcous  lungs,  some  spots  inflamed  (as  in  peripneumony)
in  the  first,  and  even  second  degree, — the  inflammatory  affection
gradually  shading  into  the  merely  cedematous  condition  of  the
surrounding  parts.  Facts  of  this  kind  point  to  the  great  affinity
(which  will  be  noticed  more  particularly  hereafter)  between  in-
flammation and  the  dropsical  diathesis.  When  the  disease  is  of
recent  occurrence,  the  serum  is  very  frothy.  That  variety  of  it
which  occurs  immediately  before  death,  is  usually  partial,  and
occupies  the  posterior  and  inferior  parts  of  the  lungs,  like  the
mechanical  infiltration  which  occurs  after  death,  and  with  which
it  may  be  considered  as  almost  identical.  Whatever  may  be  the
intensity  of  the  oedema,  it  produces  no  change  in  the  integrity  of
the  alveolar  structure  of  the  organ.  This  fact  is  not,  however,
quite  obvious  until  we  cut  into  the  diseased  lung,  owing  to  the
fluid  contained  in  the  cellular  tissue.  When  oedema  of  the  lungs
has  been  of  long  standing  and  universal,  we  do  not  commonly
perceive  the  sanguineous  congestion  of  the  posterior  parts  of  the
lungs,  as  in  ordinary  cases.  We  must  not  confound  with  the
true  pulmonary  anasarca  a  species  of  infiltration  which  often
takes  place  in  phthisis,  in  the  intervals  of  the  tuberculous  masses,
and  which  I  shall  notice  in  its  place.

Symptoms  and  signs.  The  symptoms  of  this  affection  are  ex-
tremely equivocal.  Impeded  respiration,  slight  cough  with
more  or  less  of  a  watery  expectoration,  are  the  only  signs  by


' i,  1  >  h  MA  OF T II K  LUNGS.


165


which  we  can  be  led  to  suspect  its  existence.  In  some  cases  there
:  is  scarcely  any  perceptible  expectoration  :  in  others  it  is  copious,
.colourless,  frothy,  and  of  a  consistence  and  appearance  resem-
ibling  white  of  egg  dissolved  in  equal  parts  of  water.  Like  the
e expectoration  of  peripneumony,  it  adheres  to  the  bottom  of  the
\  vessel  containing  it,  when  this  is  reversed,  but  it  is  much  more
1  liquid  and  less  tenacious.  In  cases  where  the  oedema  is  complicated
\with  partial  spots  of  pulmonic  inflammation,  amid  the  mass  of
(expectoration  just  described  there  are  found  some  sputa  of  a
ttawny,  greenish  or  light  rusty  colour,  but  still  transparent.  This
."-sort  of  expectoration  resembles  that  of  the  pituitous  catarrh.

Percussion  hardly  affords  any  useful  results  in  oedema  of  the
llungs. Both  lungs  are  either  equally  affected  at  the  same  time,
ioor  if  one  is  more  so  than  the  other,  there  appears  to  be  still  a
-sufficient  quantity  of  air  retained  in  it  to  prevent  its  yielding  the
ddull  sound. The  stethoscope  furnishes  two  means  of  diagnosis
;dn  this  case. The  respiration  is  much  feebler  than  might  be  ex-
pected, from  the  great  dilatation  of  the  thorax  ;  and  there  is,  at
the  same  time,  a  slight  crepitation,  as  in  the  first  degree  of  peri-
pneumony, more  like  a  rhonchusthan  the  natural  sound  of  respi-
ration. This  crepitous,  or  rather  subcrepitous  rhonchus,  is  more
humid  than  in  peripneumony,  and  the  bubbles  appear  larger  It
must  be  admitted,  however,  that  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  dis-
tinguish these  two  diseases  by  the  stethoscope  alone,  without
taking  into  account  the  general  symptoms. When  the  oedema  is
very  general  and  in  a  high  degree,  the  natural  sonorousness  of
tithe  chest  is  very  perceptibly  lessened  ;  and  in  these  cases  there
is  slight  bronchophony,  particularly  at  the  roots  of  the  lungs.
IBut  we  can  almost  always  distinguish  the  oedema  from  the  inci-
poient  peripneumony,  by  the  long  continuance  of  the  crepitous
rhonchus,  and  the  absence  of  the  general  symptoms  of  inflam-
nation  in  the  former  disease.

There  is  another  case  in  which  the  signs  of  oedema  are  ex-
reinely  obscure  or  altogether  wanting,  that,  namely,  where  it
iiipervenes  to  emphysema  or  the  severer  dry  catarrh. If  we  have
previously  ascertained  the  existence  of  the  catarrh  or  emphysema,
ve  shall  scarcely  be  aware  of  the  addition  of  the  oedema,  the
inspiration  being  too  feeble  to  permit  the  development  of  the
repitous  rhonchus;  and  if  the  case  is  first  presented  to  us  in  its
tate  of  complication,  the  nearly  total  absence  of  the  respiratory
ound,  the  sonorousness  of  the  chest,  and  the  slight  sibilous
rhonchus,  will  only  point  out  to  us  the  emphysema.*
Should  the  patient  die,  the  examination  of  the  body  is  likely
loo  lead  us  into  an  error  on  the  other  side  :  we  shall  at  first  per-
ceive only  the  oedema;  and,  indeed,  if  this  is  considerable,  some
ttention  will  be  necessary  to  enable  us  to  find  any  signs  of  the

*  In  this  case,  the  best  method  to  produce  the  crepitous  rhonchus  is  to  make  the
»  vatient  cough  or  hold  his  breath  for  a  considerable  time. — Author.


166


(El)  KM  A  OF  THE  LUNGS.


emphysema.  The  air-cells  when  charged  with  serum  lose  their
transparency,  the  lungs  do  not  collapse,  nor  are  the  dilated  cells
more  prominent  than  the  others.  It  is  here  to  be  observed,
however,  that  it  is  very  rare  for  the  whole  lungs  to  be  so  very
cedematous,  as  not  to  leave  some  points,  particularly  at  the  an-
terior edge  and  ends  of  the  lobes,  in  a  state  to  exhibit  the  emphy-
sema. When  there  is  any  doubt  as  to  state  of  the  parts,  we  must
inflate  the  suspected  portions,  include  them  within  a  ligature  and
then  dry  them ;  the  dilated  cells  will  become  more  apparent  as
the  surface  loses  its  humidity.  The  same  remarks  apply  still
more  forcibly  to  peripneumony,  as  masking,  in  the  dead  body,
the  characters  of  emphysema.  In  the  case  of  this  complication,
moreover,  it  will  be  often  a  matter  of  difficulty  to  recognize  the
peripneumony  in  the  living  subject,  if  the  disease  is  not  so  far
advanced  as  to  produce  a  dull  sound  on  percussion,  which  will
only  be  the  case  in  the  second  and  third  stages  of  the  inflamma-
tion. If,  indeed,  we  have  ascertained  the  existence  of  the  em-
physema previously,  percussion  will  enable  us  to  detect  the
peripneumonic  affection,  as  the  sound  will  become  entirely  dull
as  soon  as  the  disease  has  made  considerable  progress.

I  have  thought,  it  necessary  to  enter  into  these  details,  on  ac-
count of  the  occasional  difficulty  of  recognizing  these  diseases,
both  in  the  living  and  dead  subject,  when  they  are  combined ;
and  because  an  inattentive  observer,  after  being  mistaken  in  cases
of  this  kind,  might  be  led  to  conclude  that  the  signs  of  inflam-
mation, emphysema,  and  oedema  of  the  lungs,  laid  down  in  this
work,  are  neither  certain  nor  constant.  The  following  case
affords  an  example  of  the  facility  with  which  such  a  mistake
might  be  made  by  a  practitioner  ignorant  of  the  characters  of
emphysema,  both  in  the  living  and  dead  body.

Case  IX.  A  man,  sixty  years  of  age,  came  into  the  Necker
Hospital,  with  every  symptom  of  the  most  marked  emphysema.
The  chest  sounded  well,  and  the  respiration  was  perceptible  only
in  a  very  slight  degree  and  at  intervals,  in  different  points,  which
were  variable :  it  was  also  attended  by  a  slight  rhonchus  like  the
clicking;  of  a  valve.  Having;  ascertained  the  nature  of  the  disease,
and  the  patient  being  in  a  hopeless  state,  1  did  not  again  percuss
the  chest ;  but  I  ascertained  by  the  stethoscope  that  respiration
was  entirely  wanting  in  the  upper  part  of  the  right  side,  during
the  three  last  days  of  his  life.  Upon  examining  the  body,  the
superior  lobes  of  the  right  lung  were  found  inflamed,  being  very
red,  nearly  as  hard  as  liver,  and  without  any  trace  of  the  air
cells :  the  rest  of  this  lung  was  loaded  with  serum,  which  was
slightly  bloody  in  some  points,  and  quite  colourless  in  others.
The  left  lung  was  not  at  all  inflamed,  but  was  also  loaded  with
scrum,  although  in  a  less  degree  than  the  other.  The  serum  was
also  more  frothy,  and  more  generally  colourless.  At  first  sight
neither  of  the  lungs  seemed  to  be  emphysematous,  except  that


USD  EM  A OK THE  LUNGS.


107


there  was,  on  the  surface  of  the  upper  left  lobe,  one  air-cell  enor-
mously dilated,  very  like  a  grape-stone.  Upon  cutting  into  this,
there  was  found  a  cavity  within  the  pulmonary  substance  capable
of  containing  a  filbert,  and  whose  walls  were  formed  by  air-cells
which  seemed  to  open  into  it.  Upon  examining  attentively  the
surface  of  both  lungs,  a  great  number  of  cells,  here  and  there,
were  found  dilated  sufficiently  to  contain  a  millet  or  hemp-seed,
although  their  dilatation  did  not  strike  the  eye  at  first,  on  ac-
count of  the  loss  of  transparency  from  the  oedema.  There  were
also  three  or  four  protuberances,  corresponding  to  ruptures  of
the  pulmonary  tissue,  like  those  described  in  the  preceding
chapter.

This  patient  exhibited  the  signs  of  pulmonary  emphysema  in
so  striking  a  degree,  that  it  could  not  have  been  mistaken  even
by  the  least  informed  student,  after  reading  the  account  I  have
given  of  this  affection  :  and  yet  it  is  almost  certain  that,  upon
examining  the  body  after  death,  such  a  person  would  have  re-
cognized no  other  mark  of  it  besides  the  greatly  dilated  and
prominent  cell  above  mentioned,  and  would,  therefore,  have  con-
cluded either  that  he  was  mistaken  in  his  diagnosis,  or  that  the
signs  of  emphysema  are  uncertain.

I  shall  now  detail  three  more  cases  of  oedema  of  the  lungs —
the  first  exhibiting  the  disease  in  a  state  of  simplicity  ;  the  second
being  an  example  of  the  complication  just  noticed;  and  the  third
an  instance  of  this  affection  supervening  to  a  severe  peripneu-
mony,  and  before  the  resolution  of  the  inflammation  had  been
fully  established.

Case  X. — (Edema  of  the  lungs,  with  ascites  and  anasarca.
A  woman,  aged  forty-seven,  subject  to  irregular  menstruation  for
a  twelvemonth,  was  suddenly  seized  with  a  severe  pain  in  the  left
side,  attended  by  dyspnoea  and  cough.  She  came  into  the  hos-
pital a  fortnight  hereafter,  affected  with  oedema  of  the  superior
extremities,  particularly  the  left — dyspnoea  and  cough,  (not  very
frequent,)  with  expectoration  of  white  viscid  sputa,  intermixed
with  much  saliva.  These  symptoms  got  better  during  the  first
month ;  but  during  the  second,  the  anasarca  greatly  increased,
and  extended  over  the  whole  body,  except  the  face.  She  had
sometimes  pain  in  the  chest,  and  sometimes  in  the  abdomen.
The  pulsation  of  the  heart  was  irregular,  and  the  pulse  very  in-
distinct. The  patient  took  little  sleep,  coughed  a  little,  and  ex-
pectorated blackish  sputa.  During  all  this  time  the  respiration
was  pretty  distinctly  audible  throughout  the  chest,  but  accom-
panied by  a  slight  crepitous  rhonchus.  At  this  time  the  dia-
gnosis was  given — cedema  of  the  lungs  with  general  serous  diathe-
sis. A  fortnight  after  this,  and  a  month  before  her  death,  it  was
found,  on  applying  the  stethoscope,  that  the  respiration  was  very
distinct  on  both  sides  anteriorly,  and  was  accompanied  by  a  slight


168


(EDEMA OF THE  LUNGS.


crepitous  rhonchus  on  the  lower  parts  of  the  sides  and  baek.
She  died  about  three  months  after  her  admission.

Dissection  thirty  hours  after  death. — The  cavities  of  the  pleura
contained  somewhat  less  than  a  pint  of  a  limpid  serum  ;  the  lungs
adhered  nearly  through  their  whole  extent  by  long  cellular  at-
tachments, and  their  substance  was  throughout  little  crepitous,
and  injected  by  a  frothy  and  nearly  colourless  serum,  which  gave
the  lungs  a  sort  of  semi-transparency,  and  flowed  copiously  from
them  when  cut  into.  In  other  respects  the  pulmonary  tissue  was
sound,  of  a  pale  rose-colour,  free  from  tubercles,  and  exhibiting
no  trace  of  peripneumony,  nor  ev^n  of  sanguineous  congestion.
There  was  found  water  in  the  cavities  of  the  pericardium  and
peritoneum.

Case  XI. — (Edema  supervening  to  emphysema  of  the  lungs.
A  woman,  aged  forty-five,  who  had  been  affected  (according  to
her  own  account)  with  asthma  and  habitual  cough,  attended  by
a  slight  expectoration,  ever  since  she  was  nine  years  old,  came
into  the  Necker  Hospital  in  March  1819,  on  account  of  an  ag-
gravation of  her  dyspnoea  and  a  local  pain  of  the  leg.  At  this
time  the  respiration  was  short,  difficult,  and  interrupted  by  fits
of  coughing,  followed  by  yellow  mucous  expectoration  ;  the  skin
was  rather  cold,  the  action  of  the  heart  regular,  and  the  pulse  a
little  frequent.  The  sound  of  respiration  was  very  indistinct  over
the  whole  chest,  and  was,  now  and  then,  accompanied  by  a  slight
rhonchus,  which  was  atone  time  sibilous,  and  at  another  like  the
clicking  of  a  valve.  The  chest  sounded  somewhat  imperfectly
on  the  left  back.  From  these  indications  the  diagnosis  was
given—  Chronic  catarrh — Emphysema  of  the  lungs.  During  the
succeeding  month  the  oedema  of  the  lower  extremities,  which  was
very  slight  on  her  entrance,  increased  ;  and  she  had  comatose
symptoms,  which  seemed  to  threaten  apoplexy.  Thes*1  continued
more  or  less;  the  anasarca  became  general,  and,  together  with  a
severe  attack  of  diarrhoea,  exhausted  the  patient,  who  died  about
six  weeks  after  her  entry.

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death. — There  was  a  good
deal  of  water  in  the  head.  The  right  lung  exactly  filled  the
cavity  of  the  chest,  and  remained  uncollapsed ;  it  adhered
throughout  to  the  pleura  by  well-organized  cellular  laminae,
which  were  in  some  places  infiltrated  with  a  yellowish  serosity.
On  the  anterior  surface  of  the  lung  several  of  the  air-cells  were
dilated  to  the  size  of  a  hemp-seed.  The  lung  seemed  pretty
firm  ;  on  compression  it  was  found  to  retain  the  impression  of
the  finger,  and,  when  cut  into,  allowed  a  large  quantity  of  a  clear
and  slightly  frothy  serum  to  escape.  In  the  upper  part  of  it  there
were,  here  and  there,  some  points  of  small  extent,  which  were
somewhat  red,  compact,  and  not  alveolar,  and  which  exhibited  a
granulated  surface  when  incised. The  remainder  of  the  viscus


(EDEMA OF THE  LUNGS.


169


had  the  natural  aspect,  and  was  still  sufficiently  crepitous,  but
heavy  ;  it  did  not  yield,  like  the  sound  organ,  to  pressure,  being
injected  throughout  with  a  large  quantity  of  an  almost  colourless
serum,  which  could  be  squeezed  from  it  like  water  from  a  sponge.
The  left  lung  adhered,  in  like  manner,  to  the  pleura,  and,  with
the  exception  of  the  peripneumonic  appearances,  exhibited  the
same  morbid  condition  as  the  right.  There  was,  further,  on  the
superior  part,  a  patch  of  fibro-cartilaginous  membrane,  two  or
three  lines  thick,  which,  in  this  place,  formed  the  medium  of  ad-
hesion between  the  lungs  and  pleura  of  the  ribs,  to  both  of  which
it  was  intimately  united.  In  the  interior  of  this  lobe  there  was
a  vast  tuberculous  excavation,  capable  of  containing  a  middle-
sized  apple,  (reinette.)  and  which  contained  merely  a  small  quan-
tity of  a  very  limpid  mucosity.  It  was  lined  throughout  with  a
polished  diaphanous  membrane,  of  a  consistence  between  that  of
the  mucous  membrane  and  cartilage.  This  cavity  was  traversed,
in  different  directions,  by  very  white,  small,  rounded  columns,
which  proved,  on  close  examination,  to  be  obliterated  blood-
vessels, and  which,  although  continuous  with  the  lining  mem-
brane of  the  excavation,  were  sufficiently  distinguished  from  it
by  their  shining  whiteness  and  opacity.  The  trunks  of  these
obliterated  vessels  terminated  in  culs-de-sac,  either  a  few  lines
within  or  without  the  excavation.  In  the  obliterated  portions
the  original  cavity  of  the  vessel  was  still  distinguishable  by  a
longitudinal  band  of  greater  transparency.  Five  or  six  bronchial
tubes  opened  into  this  cavity,  in  the  manner  which  will  be  de-
scribed in  the  chapter  on  phthisis.*  The  pulmonary  tissue  in
the  inferior  part  of  this  excavation  was  crepitous,  though  injected
with  serum  ;  in  every  other  part  of  the  boundaries  of  the  cavity,
it  formed  a  layer,  two  or  three  lines  in  thickness,  which  was
flaccid,  and  of  a  very  deep  black  colour,  owing  to  the  accumula-
tion of  black  pulmonary  matter.  There  were  no  tubercles  in
either  lung.  There  was  some  water  in  the  pericardium  and
peritoneum.

Case  XII. — (Edema  of  the  lungs  supervening  during  conva-
lescence from  peripneumony.  A  woman,  aged  forty,  had  been
always  from  her  childhood  of  delicate  health,  and  habitually  sub-
ject to  great  difficulty  of  breathing  and  palpitation  of  the  heart.
This  state  was  aggravated,  in  her  twenty-seventh  year,  by  the
supervention  of  general  dropsy,  of  which,  however,  she  was  cured
by  diuretics  :  from  this  time  her  health  continued  still  to  decline.
In  the  beginning  of  January  1817,  after  having  sat  up  with  a
sick  person  for  several  nights,  her  respiration  became  extremely
difficult,  especially  on  motion ;  she  lost  her  sleep  and  appetite,
and  she  had  a  slight  cough,  with  mucous  expectoration. In  this

*  From  the  patient's  history  it  would  seem  that  this  vast  pulmonary  fistula  had
existed  ever  since  her  ninth  year.  The  case  is  further  remarkable  from  the  circum-
stance of  the  excavation  being  traversed  bv  blood-vessels.— Author.


170


(EDEMA OF THE  LUNGS.


state  she  came  into  the  Necker  Hospital  on  the  7th  of  March  fol-
lowing, with  oedema  of  the  lower  lungs,  livid  lips,  extreme  op-
pression, frequent  palpitation,  and  startings  during  sleep.  At
this  time  the  chest  on  percussion  yielded  an  imperfect  sound  on
the  left  side  before,  and  the  right  side  behind,  and  no  sound  at
all  in  the  region  of  the  heart;  and  in  all  these  points  the  stetho-
scope detected  no  respiratory  murmur.  The  heart  yielded  a
distinct  sound,  but  scarcely  any  impulse,  when  explored  by  the
stethoscope.  From  these  premises  the  diagnosis  was  given —
Partial  peripneumony  of  both  lungs — dilatation  of  the  heart
without  hypertrophy. She  died  on  the  2nd  of  June.

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death.  The  brain  was
natural,  but  with  a  small  quantity  of  serum  in  the  ventricles.
There  was  about  half  a  pint  of  serum  in  each  side  of  the  chest,
and  some  cellular  adhesions  on  the  right.  The  upper  part  of
the  right  lung  was  sound,  only  injected  with  a  colourless  serum.
The  middle  and  inferior  lobes  were  more  compact,  and  dis-
charged, when  cut  into,  a  great  quantity  of  transparent  colourless
serum,  intermixed  with  a  thicker,  yellowish,  puriform  fluid.
These  lobes  were,  nevertheless,  crepitous,  with  the  exception  of  a
few  spots,  of  small  extent,  here  and  there,  which  had  a  density
almost  equal  to  that  of  liver,  a  yellow  and  somewhat  reddish
colour,  and  a  granulated  surface  on  incision.  The  left  lung  was
in  the  same  state,  only  without  the  more  solid  portions.  Both
lungs  had  a  yellowish  grey  colour,  like  that  of  this  viscus  when
infiltration  with  pus  after  an  attack  of  peripneumony,  only  paler.
Indeed,  it  appeared  evident  that,  in  this  case,  a  peripneumony  of
the  inferior  portion  of  both  lungs  had  ended  in  suppuration,  and
that  the  greater  part  of  the  pus  had  been  absorbed,  the  final
restoration  of  the  part  failing  through  the  debility  of  the  system.
The  pericardium  contained  two  ounces  of  serum.  The  heart
was  large,  its  substance  soft  and  easily  torn,  and  its  cavities  very
voluminous.*

*  This  chapter  is  purely  anatomical ;  and  it  is  probable  that  all  notice  of  treat-
ment was  purposely  omitted  by  the  author.  (Edema  of  the  lungs  is  in  fact  so
generally  symptomatic,  that  its  treatment  must  merge  in  tbat  of  the  accompanying
affection.  I  will,  however,  subjoin  some  directions  on  this  point,  extracted  from  ftl.
Laennec's  notes  for  his  course  of  Lectures  on  Medicine  at  the  College  de  France.
When  the  oedema  of  the  lungs  is  active  or  subperipneumonic,  we  must  treat  it  as  we
do  pneumonia,  with  the  exception  of  bloodletting,  which  is  contra-indicated  by  the
serous  diathesis.  Tartar  emetic  in  large  doses,  and  its  substitutes  the  white  oxyd  of
antimony  and  kermes  mineral,  may  however  be  very  useful.  (Vide  the  Chapter
on  Pneumonia.)  When,  on  the  other  hand,  the  oedema  has  passed  to  the  chronic
sta^e,  or  when  it  has  put  on  the  passive  character  from  the  commencement,  we  must
have  recourse  to  the  ordinary  remedies  for  dropsy,  viz.  purgatives  and  diuretics,  and,
according  to  the  case,  tonics  and  steel.  The  preparations  of  squill,  nitre  in  large
doses,  and  the  acetate  of  potass,  are  the  diuretics  most  commonly  employed.  The
latter  medicine  in  particular  is  very  valuable,  if  given  in  a  sufficiently  large  dose,
(from  half  an  ounce  to  an  ounce  in  each  pint  of  tisane,)  as  it  then  operates  both  as
diuretic  and  purgative.  When  the  crdema  is  conjoined  with  disease  of  the  heart,  its
treatment  merges  entirely  in  that  of  the  latter  affection,  only  that  the  great  danger  of


171


CHAPTER  V

OF PULMONARY  APOPLEXY.

The  disease  which  I  designate  by  the  name  of  Pulmonary  Apo-
plexy, though  very  frequent,  is  yet  very  little  known  in  respect
of  its  anatomical  characters.  It  is,  however,  well  known  by  its
principal  symptom,  viz.  haemoptysis,  or  haemorrhage  from  the
lungs,  usually  severe  and  abundant.  We  have  already  shown
that  the  slighter  cases  of  haemoptysis  depend  upon  a  simple  ex-
halation from  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  bronchi.  Those
cases,  however,  of  violent  and  extreme  haemorrhage,  which  often
resist  all  medical  treatment,  arise  from  a  very  different  and  more
dangerous  cause.

Anatomical  characters.  This  alteration  consists  in  an  indu-
ration of  the  lung  equal  to  the  completest  hepatization.  The
induration,  however,  is  very  different  from  the  inflammatory
affection  of  the  lungs  distinguished  by  that  term.  It  is  always
partial,  and  scarcely  ever  occupies  a  considerable  portion  of  the
lungs ;  its  more  ordinary  extent  being  from  one  to  four  cubic
inches.  It  is  almost  always  very  exactly  circumscribed,  the  in-
duration being  as  considerable  at  the  very  point  of  termination
as  in  the  centre.  The  pulmonary  tissue  around  is  quite  sound
and  crepitous,  and  has  no  appearance  whatever  of  that  progres-
sive induration  found  in  the  peripneumonic  affection.  The  sub-
stance of  the  lung  is,  indeed,  often  very  pale  around  the  haemop-
tysical  induration  ;  sometimes,  however,  it  is  rose-coloured,  or
even  red,  as  if  tinged  with  fresh  blood ;  but,  even  in  this  case,
the  circumscription  of  the  indurated  part  is  equally  distinct.
The  indurated  portion  is  of  a  very  dark  red,  exactly  like  that  of
a  clot  of  venous  blood.  When  cut  into,  the  surface  of  the  in-
cisions is  granulated  as  in  a  hepatized  lung ;  but  in  their  other
characters,  these  two  kinds  of  pulmonic  induration  are  entirely

the  complication  renders  the  use  of  purgatives  more  applicable  than  ever,  that  is  to
say,  in  as  far  as  the  strength  will  permit  their  administration.  Blisters  are  rarely
beneficial  in  o?dema  of  the  lungs ;  and  they  are  particularly  contra-indicated  in
the  case  of  complication  with  disease  of  the  heart.— (M.  L.)

(Edema  of  the  lungs  is  noticed  by  many  English  authors.  Dr.  Baillie,  however,
says  he  has  not  seen  any  well-marked  example  of  it.  Morb.  Anat.  page  77.  Dr.
Parry  considers  it  (Elements,  page  106)  as  a  frequent,  and  indeed  necessary,  conse-
quence of  peripneumony ;  and  in  this  he  seems  corroborated  by  the  experience  of
our  author.  Dr.  Darwin  notices  it  among  other  dropsies,  under  the  title  Anasarca
Pulnumum.  See  Zoonom.  vol.  iii.  p.  172,  London,  1801 .  See  also  Dr.  Percival's
Essays  Med.  and  Exper.  vol.  ii.  p.  173,  et  seq.  This  author  recommends,  after  the
failure  of  other  means,  paracentesis  of  the  lungs,  (p.  179,  180,)  with  as  much  earnest-
ness and  reason  as  Floycr  recommends  the  same  operation  for  the  cure  of  emphysema
of  the  lungs  ! — Transl.


172


PULMONARY  APOPLEXY


different.  In  the  second  degree  of  hepatization,  along  with  the
red  colour  of  the  inflamed  pulmonary  tissue  we  can  perceive  dis-
tinctly the  dark  pulmonary  spots,  the  blood-vessels,  and  the  fine
cellular  intersections  ;  all  of  which,  together,  give  to  this  morbid
state  the  aspect  of  certain  kinds  of  granite.  In  the  induration  of
haemoptysis,  on  the  contrary,  the  diseased  part  appears  quite  homo-
geneous, being  altogether  black,  or  of  a  very  deep  brown,  and
disclosing  nothing  of  the  natural  texture  of  the  part,  except  the
bronchial  tubes  and  the  larger  blood-vessels.  The  latter  have
even  lost  their  natural  colour,  and  are  stained  with  blood.  The
veins  of  the  affected  part,  and  also  those  adjoining,  are  sometimes
filled  with  a  firmly  coagulated  and  half-dry  blood,  a  kind  of
infarctus  which  will  be  noticed  afterwards  when  we  come  to
treat  of  the  diseases  of  the  pulmonary  vessels.  In  scraping  the
incised  surfaces  of  these  parts,  we  can  detach  a  small  portion  of
very  dark,  half-congealed  blood,  but  in  a  much  less  proportion
than  we  can  press  out  the  bloody  serum  from  a  hepatized  lung.
The  granulations  on  the  incised  surfaces  have  also  appeared  to
me  larger  than  in  cases  of  hepatization.  Sometimes  the  centre
of  these  indurated  masses  is  soft,  and  filled  with  a  clot  of  pure
blood.

This  lesion  is  evidently  produced  by  an  effusion  of  blood  into
the  parenchyma  of  the  lungs,  in  other  words,  into  the  air  cells.
From  its  exact  resemblance  to  the  effusion  that  takes  place  in  the
brain  in  apoplexy,  I  have  thought  the  name  Pulmonary  apoplexy
very  applicable  to  it,  as  it  resembles  in  every  respect  the  cerebral
haemorrhage  commonly  termed  apoplexy.*

The  lungs  and  brain  are  not  the  only  organs  in  which  a  similar
effusion  may  take  place.  I  have  seen  such  happen  instantane-
ously in  the  subcutaneous  cellular  substance,  and  I  have  met

*  The  perfect  analogy  between  pulmonary  and  cerebral  apoplexy  has  been  com-
pletely established  in  a  very  admirable  thesis  by  M.  Rousset,  (Recherchcs  sur  let
Hemorrhagies,  Paris.  1827.)  and  in  the  recent  treatise  on  apoplexy,  by  Professor  Cru-
veilhier  (Diet,  de  Med.  Prat.  t.  iii.  p.  278.)  We  may  observe  in  the  lungs,  as  in
the  brain,  and  indeed  in  most  of  the  other  organs,  the  three  forms  of  haemorrhage,
viz. —  1.  The  blood-stroke,  (conp-de-saiig,)  an  instantaneous  and  universal  congestion
without  any  escape  of  blood  from  the  vessels;  of  this  form  the  lungs  offer  an  ex-
ample in  the  case  of  asphyxia,  in  which  the  pulmonary  tissue,  without  losing  its
wonted  crepitation  on  being  handled,  is  coloured  of  a  dark  red  hue,  and  pours  out,
when  incised,  a  profusion  of  fluid  black  blood  :  2.  Apoplexy,  properly  so  called,
such  as  is  described  in  the  text,  and  varying  from  simple  infiltration  to  the  largest
coagula  of  blood,  with  rupture  of  the  vessels  and  laceration  of  the  organ  ;  3.  Slow
hiemorrhagic  infiltration  or  spicnisation,  in  which  the  tissue  of  one  whole  lung  or  one
lobe  slowly  and  progressively  penetrated  by  blood,  assumes  a  darkish  red  colour,  and
becomes  smooth,  heavy,  homogeneous,  and  friable  as  the  spleen,  with  the  organiza-
tion of  which  it  presents  a  resemblance  more  or  less  close.  This  last  variety  of  pul
monary  apoplexy  is  common  in  old  persons  who  have  been  long  confined  to  bed  in
one  posture.  It  is  also  observed  after  diseases  of  an  adynamic  kind,  whether  acute
or  chronic.  The  splevised  portions  are  sometimes  softened  partially  or  totally,  being
converted  into  a  sort  of  blackish  paste,  which  we  might  mistake  for  the  effect  of  pu-
trefaction. In  some  cases  these  portions  are  intermixed  with  spots  of  the  inflam-
matory hepatization,  recognized  by  their  red  or  yellowish  colour,  and  which  contrast
well  with  the  dark  ground  of  the  general  mass.— (M.  L.)


PI  I.MOKARY  APOPI.EXV


173


with  them,  during  dissection,  in  almost  every  part  of  the  body, —
between  the  intestinal  tunics,  among  the  muscular  fibres  of  the
heart,  and  under  the  cellular  coverings  of  the  pancreas  and  kid-
neys. In  a  case  of  fatal  apoplexy  I  have  found  large  effusions
of  blood  in  the  cellular  membrane  of  every  limb,  of  the  trunk,
and  in  that  surrounding  most  of  the  abdominal  viscera.  Some
examples  have  occurred  of  sudden  death  from  haemoptysis,
wherein  the  substance  of  the  lungs  was  found  lacerated,  and  con-
taining clots  of  blood.  Corvisart  mentions  one  extraordinary
case  of  this  kind,  in  which  the  extravasion  had  lacerated  the  lung
and  filled  the  cavity  of  the  pleura.*  The  heemoptysical  engorge-
ment above  described,  is  only  a  lesser  degree  of  the  same  affec-
tion, in  which  the  effused  blood  (still  in  some  degree  under  the
influence  of  vital  action)  coagulates  in  the  air  cells,  in  such  a
manner  as  to  form  an  intimate  union  with  the  pulmonary  tissue,
very  different  from  what  would  be  produced  by  the  mere  physi-
cal coagulation  of  the  blood.  We  sometimes  find  two  or  three
similar  indurations  in  the  same  lung,  and  frequently  both  lungs
are  affected  at  the  same  time.  They  take  place  most  commonly
in  the  central  parts  of  the  lower  lobe,  or  towards  the  middle  and
posterior  part  of  the  lungs :  it  is  consequently  on  the  back  and
inferior  part  of  the  chest  that  we  ought  to  search  for  them  with
the  stethoscope.

This  affection  is  as  easily  distinguishable  from  the  congestions
that  take  place  after  death,  as  from  the  alterations  produced  by
peripneumony.  The  sanguineous  congestions  of  the  dead  body
consist  of  an  accumulation  of  blood  intermixed  with  serum,  often
spumous,  which  flows  plentifully  on  an  incision  of  the  part,  and
tinges  the  lungs  of  a  livid  or  vinous  colour.  Being  the  mere
consequence  of  gravitation,  the  engorgement  is  found  most  con-
siderable in  the  most  depending  parts  of  the  lungs,  and  gradually
lessens  towards  the  superior  parts.  Where  most  engorged,  the
part  still  retains  some  crepitation,  and  the  incised  surfaces  are
never  granulated,  even  when  the  congestion  is  so  great  as  to  de-
stroy the  spongy  character  of  the  lung.  By  washing,  we  can,  in
every  case,  remove  all  the  red,  and  restore  the  lung  to  that  sort
of  flaccidity  which  it  possesses  when  compressed  by  a  pleuritic
effusion.  The  engorgement  of  haemoptysis,  on  the  contrary,  is
accurately  circum scribed ,+  very  dense,  dark  red  or  brown,  gra-

*  Nouvelle  Methode,  <Sfc.  par  Avenbrugger  traduit  par  Corvisart.  p.  227.  A  few
other  cases  of  the  same  kind  are  on  record.  At  present  I  recollect  only  the  follow-
ing :  1.  The  case  of  Professor  Mahon  noticed  bv  Jjeroux,  Journ.  de  Med.  Chir.  et
Pharm.t.ix.  p.  136.  2.  A  case  by  Hohnbaum,  Ueber  den  Schlagjiuss,  Erlangen,
1817,  p.  75.  3.  A  case  by  Bayle,  Revue  Med.  Avril,  1828,  p.  61.  4.  A  case  by
Andral,  C Unique  M6d.  t.  iii.  p.  167.  5.  A  case  by  Dr.  Ferguson,  Dub.  Med.  Trans.
New  Series. Vol.  i.  p.  11 — Traml.

t  The  slow  haemorrhage  or  splenisation  is  not  accurately  circumscribed ;  but  it  is
sufficiently  distinguished  from  the  cadaveric  engorgement  by  its  other  characters,  and
particularly  by  the  blackish  colour  of  that  portion  of  the  pulmonary  tissue  wherein  it
is  seated. — (M.  L.)


174


PULMONARY  APOPLKXY


nulated,  and  almost  dry  when  incised,  and  grows  pale  by  washing,
but  without  losing  any  part  of  its  consistence.  Whatever  may
be  the  severity  of  this  disease,  resolution  seems  to  take  place
with  considerable  facility,  since  we  find  a  great  many  cases  of  re-
covery after  severe  haemoptysis.  I  have  not  had  many  oppor-
tunities of  tracing  the  progress  of  this  resolution  by  dissection  ;
but  in  the  small  number  of  cases  of  this  kind  which  I  have  met
with,  it  has  appeared  that  the  indurated  parts  passed  successively
from  dark  red  to  brown  and  pale  red,  and  that,  in  proportion  as
the  colour  faded,  the  parts  lost  their  granular  texture  and  their
density.  I  do  not  think  that  this  obstruction  is  followed,  at
least  constantly,  by  oedema,  as  is  the  case  with  the  obstruction  of
peripneumony.  When  the  resolution  is  complete,  it  leaves  no
trace  of  disease  in  the  pulmonary  substance,  since  I  have  never
been  able  to  find  any  vestige  of  the  induration  in  subjects  who
had  been  affected  with  severe  haemorrhage  at  a  period  of  some
years — or  only  some  months — anterior  to  their  death.*

Signs  and  symptoms.  The  principal  symptoms  of  this  dis-
ease are  the  following: — great  oppression,  cough  attended  by
much  irritation  of  the  larynx,  and  sometimes  by  very  acute  pain
in  the  chest ; — expectoration  of  bright  and  frothy  or  black  and
clotted  blood,  quite  pure  or  merely  intermixed  with  saliva,  or
some  bronchial  or  guttural  mucus;  pulse  frequent,  full,  and
with  a  particular  kind  of  vibration,  even  when  soft  and  weak,  as
it  frequently  is  after  a  day  or  two.  There  is  rarely  any  positive
fever,  and  the  heat  of  the  skin  continues  natural  or  nearly  so.
Frequently  the  heart  and  arteries  yield  the  bellows-sound  in  a
very  marked  degree,  the  character  of  which  phenomenon  will  be
given  when  we  come  to  treat  of  diseases  of  the  heart.  Of  all
these  symptoms  the  spitting  of  blood  is  the  most  constant  and

*  Pulmonary  apoplexy  does  not  always  terminate  in  resolution.  The  pulmonary
extravasations  may,  as  is  remarked  by Cruveilhier, (Op.  Cit.  Propos.22),  pass  through
the  same  stages  as  those  in  the  brain.  Thus,  the  pulmonary  lobules  affected  with
apoplexy,  when  the  fluid  part  of  the  blood  is  absorbed,  may  be  gradually  transformed
into  indurated  nodules  of  a  jet  dark  colour,  and  which  existing  as  so  many  foreign
bodies  in  the  lungs,  become  isolated  by  means  of  a  cyst,  in  the  same  way  as  takes
place  in  the  case  of  cerebral  effusions.  Perhaps  it  may  be  in  this  way  that  the
encysted  melanosis,  to  be  noticed  in  a  subsequent  part  of  this  work,  may  be  produced.
In  other  cases,  rare  indeed,  like  the  above,  the  affected  parts  of  the  lung  become
softened  and  resolved  into  pus.  In  cases  of  this  kind  we  find  in  the  lungs  real
cavities,  the  walls  of  which  are  either  gorged  with  blood  or  exhibit  the  natural  ap-
pearance of  the  pulmonary  substance,  according  as  the  softening  has  been  more  or  less
complete:  these  cavities  contain  a  thick  fluid,  of  the  colour  of  wine-lees,  and  con-
sisting of  a  mixture  of  pus,  blood  and  pulmonary  detritus.  It  is  probable  that  exca-
vations of  this  sort  may,  like  those  arising  from  tubercles,  become  lined  by  a  false
membrane,  and  undergo  analagous  transformations  and  even  cicatrization.  Although
this  last  result  has  never  been  actually  observed,  the  analogy  is  so  strong  as  almost
to  stand  in  lieu  of  direct  proof ;  it  being  infinitely  probable,  as  is  observed  by  M.
Rousset,  that  the  pulmonary  cicatrices — so  frequent  that  out  of  twenty  dead  bodies
four  at  least  will  be  found  to  exhibit  them — have,  in  a  considerable  portion  of  cases,
been  the  consequence  of  an  apoplectic  extravasation  and  not  of  phthisis,  which  is
not  likely  to  be  so  frequently  of  a  purely  local  character.—  (M.  L.  )


PULMONARY  APOPLEXY.


175


most  severe. This  is  commonly  very  copious,  returning  by  fits,
with  cough,  oppression,  anxiety,  intense  redness  or  extreme  pale-
ness of  face,  and  coldness  of  the  extremities. When  the  haemor-
rhage is  very  great  it  comes  on  sometimes  with  a  very  moderate
degree  of  cough,  and  is  accompanied  by  a  convulsive  elevation
of  the  diaphragm  like  that  which  takes  place  in  vomiting.  This
accounts  for  the  expression — vomiting  of  blood,  which  is  used  by
most  persons  who  have  suffered  a  violent  haemoptysis. And  I
am  of  opinion  that  this  expression  is  not  always  improperly  ap-
plied in  such  cases. It  is  hard  to  believe  that  those  immense
and  instantaneous  discharges  of  blood,  partly  too  in  a  state  of
coagulation,  which  burst  at  once  from  the  mouth  and  nostrils,
and  fill  a  basin  in  a  few  moments,  can  proceed  entirely  from  the
bronchi. The  very  size  of  the  coagula  seems,  in  many  cases,  to
render  this  impossible  ;  while  the  accompanying  action  of  vomit-
ing would  seem  to  confirm  the  co-existence  of  a  haematemesis
with  the  haemoptysis. This  conjecture  I  have  sometimes  proved
to  be  correct,  but  not  often ;  as  it  is  not  very  common  to  find
patients  die  during  the  very  course  of  a  severe  hcemoptysis;
while,  on  the  other  hand,  I  have  sometimes  found  in  the  stomach
only  a  very  small  quantity  of  blood,  (and  which  appeared  to
have  been  swallowed),  even  in  cases  where  the  haemorrhage  had
been  accompanied  by  very  decided  efforts  to  vomit. The  quan-
tity of  blood  discharged  is  sometimes  enormous. I  have  known
ten  pounds  lost  in  forty-eight  hours,  by  a  young  man,  who  died
under  the  haemorrhage. In  cases  of  a  less  acute  character,  I
have  seen  about  thirty  pounds  lost  in  a  period  of  fifteen  days.
Rhodius  (Cent.  ii.  obs.  xxx.)  relates  similar  instances.  Haemor-
rhage so  severe  as  this  almost  always  indicates  the  existence  of  a
haemoptysical  induration. Yet  this  conclusion  is  not  always
correct ;  since  we  have  already  seen  that  very  violent  discharges
may  proceed  from  the  bronchi  alone ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,
there  may  exist  an  extensive  haemoptysical  infiltration,  although
the  expectoration  of  blood  is  trifling,  for  instance,  not  more  than
from  two  to  six  ounces  in  the  twenty-four  hours. When  the
infiltration  is  only  of  moderate  extent,  as  from  one  to  two  inches
square,  there  may  be  no  expectoration  whatever  of  blood,  and
the  disease  may  be  latent. This  was  the  case  with  the  first  ex-
amples of  this  disease  that  occurred  to  myself;  and  I  was,  in
consequence,  puzzled  to  what  disease  I  should  refer  the  morbid
alteration,  of  which  I  had  previously  met  with  no  account.  Hall  or
is  the  only  author,  who  to  my  knowledge,  has  given,  under  the
name  of  peripneumony  from  exudation  of  blood,  a  brief  history
of  a  disease  which,  from  the  account  of  the  state  of  the  lungs,  I
consider  to  have  been  a  case  of  very  extensive  pulmonary  apo-
plexy. It  is  probable  that  in  this  case  there  was  no  haemoptysis
worth  noticing,  since  the  author  does  not  mention  it,  and  de-


176


PULMONARY  APOPLEXY.


scribes  the  disease  as  a  peripneumony.*  (Opusc. Pathol,  obs  xvi.
hist,  i.)

*  The  affection  described  in  the  preceding  pages  was  entirely  unknown  as  a  com-
mon cause  of  haemoptysis  before  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  our  author's
treatise;  although  some  varieties  of  it  had  been  noticed  by  former  writers,  and  the
name  of  pulmonary  apoplexy  applied  to  the  disease  by  one  or  two  of  these.  In
1816,  M.  Leveille  appears  to  have  read  a  memoir  on  this  subject  before  the  Academy
of  Sciences  at  Paris;  and  in  1817,  Dr.  Hohnbaum,  of  Hildburghausen,  published
an  essay  on  a  disease,  which  he  designated  Pulmonary  Apoplexy.  See  his  work
"  Ueber  den  Lungenschlagfluss  vebct  einer  Einleitung  veber  Schlugfliisse  iiberhaupt."
Erlangen,  1817.  M.  Laennec's  Treatise  was  not  published  until  1819.  But  no
preceding  writer  has  given  the  precise  characters  of  the  disease  recorded  in  the  text.
Hobnbaum  had  met  with  only  three  examples  of  the  disease  described  by  him  ;  and
as  there  may  be  some  doubt  whether  the  affection  is  the  same  as  that  described  by
Laennec,  or  one  of  a  different  kind,  I  shall  give  a  brief  outline  of  two  of  his  cases.
The  first  occurred  in  a  man  forty  years  of  age,  who  had  been  a  very  free  liver,  was
subject  to  paroxysms  of  asthma,  and  for  some  time  before  his  death  incapable  of
using  bodily  exertion  on  account  of  a  tightness  on  the  chest  which  was  produced  bv
it.  Without  any  precursory  symptoms,  this  man  fell  down  senseless  as  if  struck  by
apoplexy.  On  examining  the  body  on  the  following  day,  the  brain  and  its  vessels
were  found  quite  sound,  and  the  latter  rather  empty,  and  the  only  morbid  appearances
observed  were  in  the  chest.  Both  lungs  were  distended  with  dark-coloured  blood
partly  coagulated  and  partly  fluid,  and  the  pulmonary  substance  when  cut  in  slices
sunk  in  water.  The  same  kind  of  blood  was  found  in  the  bronchi.  The  right  ven-
tricle of  the  heart  was  also  filled  by  it,  while  the  left  contained  only  half  an  ounce  of
it.  p.  72.

The  subject  of  the  second  case  was  a  man  thirty  years  of  age,  who  had  also  lived
well  and  was  fat.  He  had  been  considered  as  in  good  health,  except  that  he  suf-
fered from  dyspnoea  and  head-ache  upon  attempting  the  slightest  exercise  on  foot.
This  man  took  a  long  journey  in  a  carriage  in  a  very  cold  day,  during  which  he  drank
freely.  Upon  returning  at  night  he  was  found  dead  in  the  carriage,  the  driver  having
some  time  before  observed  him  to  be  drowsy  and  somewhat  inarticulate  in  his  speech,
which  he  attributed  to  intoxication.  The  brain  was  found  perfectly  sound,  and  with
the  vessels  only  moderately  filled  with  blood,  but  there  was  slight  partial  thickenings
and  adhesions  of  the  membranes.  Upon  opening  the  chest  the  lungs  seemed  too
large  for  the  cavity,  distended  with  black  blood,  and  almost  like  liver  when  cut  into.
The  back  parts  of  the  lungs  were  most  filled  with  the  black  blood,  part  of  which  was
also  found  effused  in  the  cavity  of  the  chest.  The  right  ventricle  of  the  heart  con-
tained several  ounces  of  the  same  kind  of  blood — and  the  left  was  empty.  The  heart
and  larger  vessels  were  sound,  p.  75.  In  neither  case  was  there  any  spitting  of
blood.

Since  the  publication  of  Hohnbaum's  little  work,  and  the  first  edition  of  Laennec's
treatise,  a  vast  number  of  cases  of  pulmonary  apoplexy  have  been  recorded  by  dif-
ferent authors,  the  principal  of  which  are  referred  to  in  the  bibliographical  notice  at
the  end  of  the  present  chapter,  and  various  opinions  have  been  advanced  respecting
its  causes  and  nature.

Hohnbaum,  Lorinser,  and  other  German  pathologists,  consider  it  as  depending  on
a  sudden  paralysis  of  the  pulmonary  nerves,  with  a  consequent  comparative  over-
action  of  the  blood-vessels  of  the  lungs.  This  doctrine  of  local  palsy  and  consequent
effusion  of  blood,  they  extend  to  all  the  principal  organs  of  the  body,  naming  the
affection  apoplexy  wherever  it  occurs,  from  a  supposed  identity  of  character  with  the
cerebral  disease  commonly  so  denominated.  Whether  the  explanation  is  correctly
applied  or  not  to  the  affection  as  it  takes  place  in  other  organs,  we  ma}-  state  with
confidence  that  it  is  inapplicable  to  the  very  case  which  serves  these  pathologists  as
a  prototype,— cerebral  apoplexy  being  now  well  ascertained  to  depend  generally  on
very  different  causes.  It  may,  however,  be  more  applicable  to  other  organs  than  to
the  brain  j  and  some  countenance  is  given  to  this  doctrine  by  the  late  discoveries  of
Mr.  Charles  Bell,  and  the  demonstration  by  him  and  Mr.  Shaw  of  the  existence  of
local  paralytic  affections  of  the  external  nerves.

The  most  prevalent  opinion,  and  in  one  class  of  cases  unquestionably  the  true
opinion,  is,  that  pulmonary  apoplexy  depends  essentially  on  disease  of  the  heart,  aud


PULMONARY  APOPLEXY.


177


From  what  precedes,  it  is  obviously  impossible  to  distinguish,
by  the  symptoms  merely,  the  bronchial  from  the  pulmonary

particularly  on  those  forms  of  disease  which  throw  a  preternatural  volume  of  hlood
into  the  pulmonary  vessels,  viz.  hypertrophy  of  the  right  ventricle  or  contraction  of
some  of  the  orifices  on  the  left  side  of  the  heart,  or  both  conjoined.  This  view  of
the  case  seems  to  have  been  first  taken  many  years  ago  by  our  countryman,  Allan
Burns  ;  and  the  whole  modus  operandi  of  the  cause  is  clearly  explained  in  his  trea-
tise at  p.  51  et  seq.  He,  however,  lays  considerably  more  stress  on  the  active  effect
of  the  hypertrophied  right  ventricle,  than  on  the  passive  influence  of  obstructions  to
the  escape  of  blood  from  the  lungs  through  the  pulmonary  veins.  But  he  notices
this  last  also  in  the  section  "  On  the  Effects  of  Change  of  Structure  in  the  Valves,"
p.  163.  "  We  shall  take  it  for  granted,"  he  says,  "that  the  [right]  auricle  and  ventricle
are  each  of  them  dilated  so  far  as  easily  to  contain  three,  ounces  (in  place  of  tivo,  as  he
had  supposed  the  case  in  health)  of  fluid,  but  that  the  pulmonary  artery  remains  of  its
usual  size.  If  the  ventricle  propels  the  whole  of  this  blood,  the  consequence  must
be  terrible  ;  the  ultimate  branches  of  this  vessel  in  the  lungs  will  give  way.''  p.  52.
"  The  pulmonic  vessels,  by  the  congestion  and  continued  vis  a  tergo,  are  ruptured  ;
blood  is  forced  into  the  air  cells  ;  hemoptysis  is  produced  ;  or,  if  urged  still  further,
all  the  cellular  structure  of  the  lungs  is  crammed  with  blood ;  these  organs  cut  like
liver,  and  sink  when  put  into  water.  This  I  am  convinced  from  repeated  observa-
tions is  a  frequent  cause  of  haemorrhage  from  the  lungs  ;  and  I  have  seen  several  who
have  lost  their  lives  from  not  preserving  the  muscular  action  with  proper  limits."
Obs.  on  Bis.  of  the  Heart. Edin.  1809. 8vo.  p.  53.

The  same  explanation  of  the  disease  is  given  by  M.  Bertin,  (Traite  de  Maladies  du
Cceur,  p.  352,)  by  Bayle,  (Revue  Med.  Avril,  1828,)  by  Hope,  Dis.  of  the  Heart,
pp.  197,  211,  and  by  M.  Andral,  (Clinique  Medicale,  p.*518  :)  and  the  latter  author
further  considers  the  pulmonary  apoplexy  as  differing  from  the  common  bronchial  hae-
morrhage in  no  other  respect  except  that  the  effusion  of  blood  in  the  former  takes  place
into  the  very  minute  bronchial  ramifications,  instead  of  the  larger  bronchi,  as  in  the
latter  affection.  A  review  of  the  other  very  numerous  cases  of  pulmonary  apoplexy
recorded  by  authors,  places  in  a  striking  point  of  view  the  effect  of  disease  of  the
heart  in  producing  it,  as  this  complication  will  be  found  in  the  great  majority  of  the
examples.  Dr.  Townsend  informs  us,  that  out  of  twenty-two  cases  examined  by
himself,  fifteen  occurred  in  individuals  labouring  under  diseased  heart;  (Cyc.  of
Pract.  Med.  i.  138  ;)  and  we  are  disposed  to  regard  this  as  not  exceeding  the  general
proportion  of  such  cases.  A  very  ingenious  and  rising  young  member  of  our  pro-
fession, Mr.  Henry  Johnson,  has  recorded  four  cases  of  this  disease  occurring  under
his  own  notice,  within  a  short  space  of  time  at  St.  George's  Hospital,  all  of  which
were  complicated  with  contraction  of  the  left  auriculo-verticular  orifice  ;  and  he  has
endeavoured  to  establish  a  more  definite  relation  between  pulmonary  apoplexy  and
this  form  of  cardiac  disease  than  between  it  and  any  other  affection  of  the  heart,  a
view  which  is  adopted  by  Dr.  Hope,  (Dis.  of  the  Heart,  p.  197.)  The  same  obser-
vation was  made  by  Burns,  who  says,  "  when  the  mitral  valve  is  obstructed  we  find
that  the  blood,  impelled  by  the  pulmonary  artery,  meeting  in  its  course  a  back  stroke
from  the  left  auricle,  produces  rupture  of  tne  minute  branches  of  those  vessels  in  the
lungs."  p.  185.

There  can,  therefore,  be  no  doubt,  that  many  cases  of  pulmonary  apoplexy  are,  as
these  authors  suppose,  owing  to  diseased  heart ;  yet  I  think  those  best  deserving-
tins  name  ;  for  instance  those  described  by  Hohnbaum,  the  case  by  Corvisart,  and
that  by  Haller,  can  hardly  be  attributed  to  "this  cause  alone.  It  is  not  improbable
that  some  of  the  instances  of  sudden  death,  usually  attributed  to  cerebral  apoplexy,
or  disease  of  the  heart,  may  depend  upon  the  disease  described  by  Hohnbaum.  In
these  cases,  may  not  the  state  of  the  blood  itself  be  sometimes  the  cause  of  the  dis-
ease? At  all  events,  I  am  disposed  to  consider  a  preternatural  slowness  of  trans-
mission of  the  blood  through  the  lungs,  whether  depending  on  organic  disease  or  not
as  one  predisposing  cause  of  this  affection.  It  is  in  this  way  I  would  account  for
the  frequent  occurrence  of  haemoptysis  under  the  influence  of  the  depressing  passions  •
and  the  pathology  of  which  affection  1  would  illustrate  by  referring  to  the  physiology
of  sighing.  Some  of  the  most  severe  instances  of  pulmonary  haemorrhage  that  has
come  to  my  knowledge,  have  originated  under  the  influence  of  grief  and  anxiety  ;  uud
1  look  upon  moral  causes  of  this  kind  as  a  fertile  source  of  many  anomalous  yet
most  distressing  functional  affections  of  the  lungs  and  heart. This  view  of  such

N


178


PULMONARY  APOPLEXY.


haemorrhage.  This  end  is  frequently  attained,  however,  by
means  of  the  physical  signs  afforded  by  percussion  and  ausculta-
tion. The  haemoptysical  engorgement  is  usually  of  too  small
extent  to  be  recognizable  by  percussion ;  and,  besides,  it  fre-
quently has  its  seat  in  those  portions  of  the  lungs  which  are
beyond  the  reach  of  this  means  of  diagnosis.  However,  when  it
exists  to  a  pretty  considerable  extent,  percussion  elicits  a  dull
sound  over  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  chest ;  and  I  have
met  with  instances  where  this  was  the  case  over  the  third  part  of
one  of  the  sides.  The  stethoscope  furnishes  us  with  two  prin-
cipal signs  of  this  affection — the  want  of  the  sound  of  respiration
over  a  small  circumscribed  space,  and  a  crepitous  rhonchus  around
this  space.  This  rhonchus,  which  here  indicates  the  slight  infiltra-
tion of  blood  formerly  described,  is  always  found  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  disease,  but  is  frequently  wanting  in  the  latter
stages.  When  these  signs  co-exist  with  pulmonary  haemorrhage,
we  may  be  assured  that  the  site  of  the  discharge  is  in  the  pul-
monary substance,  and  not  in  the  bronchi  simply.  In  the  one
case,  however,  as  well  as  the  other,  there  is  found,  at  the  roots
of  the  lungs  more  particularly,  a  mucous  rhonchus  with  large
bubbles.  These  bubbles  seem  to  be  larger,  thinner,  and  formed
by  a  matter  more  liquid  than  mucus  ;  they  also  burst  more  fre-
quently, and  with  a  peculiarity  of  sound  which  cannot  be  mis-
taken.

The  haemoptysical  engorgement  is,  moreover,  frequently  ac-
companied by  an  exudation  of  blood  from  the  bronchial  mem-
brane, which  is  almost  always  found  much  reddened,  swollen,  and
somewhat  softened,  when  the  engorgement  is  of  some  extent,
and  more  particularly  in  its  vicinity.  When  the  induration  is
extensive,  the  absence  of  sound  on  percussion,  joined  with  the
preceding  signs,  leaves  no  doubt  of  the  nature  of  the  disease,  and
prevents  its  being  confounded  with  any  other  except  peripneu-
mony  ;  and  this  only  in  cases  where  the  spitting  of  blood  is  very
inconsiderable.  It  is  true  that  in  both  these  diseases,  there  exists
the  same  crepitous  rhonchus,  and  also  the  same  want  of  respira-
tion and  sound  on  percussion  ;  but  the  local  and  general  symj>-
toms  being  entirely  different  in  the  two  cases,  there  can  very
rarely  be  any  doubt  about  the  diagnosis.  When  the  two  dis-
eases are  combined,  a  thing  which  is  of  rare  occurrence,  the
diagnosis  is  more  difficult.* When  a  pneumonia  supervenes

cases  seems  to  me  explanatory  of  that  singular  effect  of  nostalgia  noticed  and  de-
scribed by  Avenbrugger,  viz.  an  induration  of  one  lung,  with  consequent  absence  of
the  natural  sound  on  percussion,  terminatingiatally.  See  my  Translation  of  Aven-
brugger in  Original  cases,  &c.  p.<4. — Transl.

•  This  complication,  according  to  M.  Rousset,  is  accompanied  so  constantly  by
one  symptom  that  it  may  he  regarded  as  pathognomonic  :  it  is  this  ;  the  expectoration
is  very  copious  and  very  fluid,  appearing  black  when  at  rest,  but  presenting,  when
agitated,  a  colour  like  that  of  a  solution  of  extract  of  liquorice.  (Op.  Cit.  p.  35.) —
(M.L.)


PULMONARY  APOPLKXY.


179


during  the  resolution  of  a  hoamoptysical  induration,  there  is  a
recurrence  of  the  crepitous  rhonchus,  without  any  fresh  discharge
of  blood,  or  with  an  expectoration  of  sputa  tinged  with  blood,
but  possessing  the  tenacity  of  those  of  peripneumony.  The  con-
comitance of  fever  in  the  case  of  inflammation,  tends  further  to
strengthen  the  diagnosis.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remark,  that
when  the  haemoptysical  infiltration  is  suddenly  formed,  so  as
instantly  to  occasion  suffocation,  as  in  Corvisart's  case,  there  is
no  time  for  the  occurrence  of  external  haemorrhage.  When  the
lesion  is  of  small  extent,  and  the  failure  of  respiration  in  the
affected  part  cannot  on  this  account  be  discovered,  it  is  some-
times difficult  to  determine  whether  the  haemorrhage  is  simply
bronchial  or  not.  In  the  beginning  of  the  attack,  the  presence
of  the  crepitous  rhonchus  will  decide  the  question  ;  later  in  the
disease,  the  decision  will  be  more  difficult ;  but  uncertainty  in
this  case  is  of  no  practical  importance.  The  crepitous  rhonchus
is  by  no  means  so  constant  during  the  resolution  of  haemoptysis
as  during  that  of  peripneumony.*

Occasional  causes. — These  are  in  general  the  same  as  those  of
the  bronchial  haemorrhage.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  however,  that
the  spitting  of  blood  which  accompanies  the  formation  of  tuber-
cles, is  most  frequently  of  the  latter  species ;  while  that  which
occurs  in  subjects  affected  with  disease  of  the  heart,  is  most  com-
monly of  the  former  kind.  The  suppression  of  habitual  dis-
charges— such  as  the  menses,  haemorrhoids,  or  epistaxis — gives
occasion  to  both  kinds  indifferently.  Plethora  and  the  sudden
or  long-continued  impression  of  excessive  heat  or  cold,  ought
also  to  be  numbered  among  the  occasional  causes  of  this,  as  of
many  other  diseases  of  a  very  different  kind  ;  but,  in  most  cases,
such  causes  are  merely  simple  occasions,  which  could  not  of  them-
selves have  given  rise  to  the  disorder,  without  some  peculiarity
of  constitution  in  the  individuals.

It  appears  to  me  impossible  to  witness  the  immense  losses  of
blood  which  sometimes  have  taken  place  in  haemoptysis  or  me-
:  norrhagia, — or  the  congestions  which  occur  suddenly,  and  at  the
•  same  instant,  in  all  the  internal  and  external  organs,  in  epilepsy
:  and  certain  cases  of  hysteria,  without  admitting,  that  the  blood
iin  such  cases  experiences  a  sudden  dilatation. We  know  that

•  When  pulmonary  apoplexy  terminates  by  the  softening  of  a  portion  of  tbe  indu-
rated lung  and  the  consequent  formation  of  an  abscess,  it  may  chance  that  this  may
suddenly  burst  into  the  bronchi  and  give  rise  to  a  sort  of  vomica.  In  this  case,  the
patient  expectorates  a  large  quantity  of  a  dirty  red  liquid,  containing  small  specks
like  those  we  observe  swimming  in  water  in  which  fresh  flesh  has  been  washed,  and
immediately  afterwards  pectoriloquy  will  be  found,  evincing  the  emptying  of  the  ex-
cavation. M.  Rousset  on  two  occasions  verified  the  existence  of  a' haemoptysical
abscess  by  this  sign,  as  was  proved  by  examination  after  death.  "  In  other  cases,
however,"  observes  i\J .  Rousset,  "  the  pulmonary  tissue  being  gradually  expectorated
as  it  becomes  liquefied,  the  excavation  is  formed  slowly,  and  the  quantity  of  matter
expectorated  at  one  time  is  too  small  to  enable  us  to  come  to  a  like  conclusion."
'(Op.  Ctt.ip.  33.)— (M.L.)

X  2


180


PULMONARY  APOPLEXY.


on  mountains  sufficiently  elevated  to  occasion  a  considerable
diminution  of  the  atmospheric  pressure,  most  persons  spit  blood,
and  that  in  severe  haemorrhages  the  blood  is  more  liquid  and
less  coagulable  than  natural.

Treatment. — This  must  be  the  same  as  in  the  bronchial
haemorrhage  ;  but  the  extreme  danger  which  attends  the  hae-
moptysical  induration  and  the  possibility  of  its  resolution,  ought
to  make  us  boldly  use  copious  venesection  from  the  onset  of  the
disease.  One  blood-letting  of  twenty  or  twenty-four  ounces  on
the  first  or  second  day,  will  have  more  effect  in  checking  the
haemorrhage  than  several  pounds  taken  away  in  the  course  of  a
fortnight.  It  is  even  beneficial  in  general  to  induce  partial  syn-
cope by  means  of  the  first  bleeding.  In  cases  of  this  kind,  the
fear  of  exhausting  the  patient's  strength  is  without  grounds,  since
we  know  that  the  most  copious  venesection  falls  short  of  the  loss
of  blood  sustained  from  pulmonary  haemorrhage,  in  young  and
robust  subjects,  even  in  the  course  of  a  few  minutes ;  while  the
debilitating  effect  of  the  haemorrhage  is  infinitely  greater  than  the
loss  of  blood  produced  by  the  lancet.  Should  the  haemorrhage
continue  after  the  pulse  has  become  small  and  weak,  and  the
strength  much  reduced,  it  will  not  be  prudent  to  employ  further
venesection,  but  to  have  recourse  to  derivatives,  among  which
purgatives  are  unquestionably  the  most  efficacious.  A  drastic
enema  or  cathartic  frequently  checks  the  haemorrhage,  and  even
the  haemorrhagic  molimen,  especially  if  they  are  productive  of
faintness.  This  practice  may  perhaps  appear  bold  to  many
practitioners ;  but  it  has  the  sanction  of  Sydenham  ;  and  I  have
employed  it  with  success  in  cases  of  great  severity.  I  have  never
seen  any  inconveniences  of  consequence  result  from  it ;  and  con-
sider it  as  unquestionably  preferable  to  the  common  practice  of
bleeding  to  eight  or  sixteen  ounces,  daily,  for  several  successive
days,  and  through  the  period  of  a  whole  month.  As  a  general
rule  it  is  proper,  in  cases  which  appear  to  originate  in  the  sup-
pression of  some  other  discharge,  to  make  the  artificial  loss  of
blood  derivative  ;  but  the  application  of  leeches  to  the  vulva  or
anus  in  such  cases,  must  be  deferred  until  after  the  vascular
system  is  unloaded  by  one  large  bleeding  from  the  foot  or  arm.
It  occasionally  happens  that  both  local  and  general  bleeding,  in
place  of  proving  derivative,  seem,  on  the  contrary,  to  excite
haemorrhage.  I  have  noticed  the  return  of  the  menses,  and
aggravation  of  menorrhagia,  during  the  application  of  leeches  to
the  epigastrium.  General  bleedings,  more  particularly  those  of
small  extent,  appear  sometimes  to  have  a  like  effect  on  haemopty-
sis •  and  cases  of  this  kind  are  clearly  those  in  which  purgatives
should  have  a  trial*

*  For  the  fir^t  part  of  the  following  note  on  this  passage  I  am  indehted  to  my
friend,  Dr.  James  Clark. "  This  fact  is  not  generally  known,  though  it  is  one  of


PULMONARY  APOPLEXY.


181


In  the  pulmonary  apoplexy,  still  more  than  in  the  bronchial
haemorrhage,  it  is  of  importance  to  have  recourse  to  the  means
formerly  recommended,  after  Sydenham,  for  preventing  a  re-
lapse. Dry  cupping  over  the  whole  trunk  and  extremities,  after
general  and  local  bleeding,  is  one  of  the  best  means  which  we
can  employ.  Blisters  and  sinapisms  are  of  less  frequent  benefit ;
and  the  irritation  produced  by  them  seems  occasionally  to  be
propagated  to  the  interior  of  the  chest.

In  two  or  three  desperate  cases  I  have  tried  the  tartar  emetic
in  large  doses,  in  the  manner  which  will  be  described  in  the  next
chapter  ;  and  have  never  seen  any  bad  effect  from  it.  On  the  con-
trary, it  appeared  to  lessen  the  discharge  considerably ;  but  it
did  not  certainly  produce  the  same  admirable  results  as  in  the
case  of  inflammatory  diseases.

When  the  haemorrhage  has  become  in  some  degree  chronic,
partial  shower  baths  (by  means  of  a  watering  pot)  gradually
changed  from  tepid  to  cold,  are  frequently  of  great  service  ;  and
it  is  always  proper  to  make  the  patient  get  up,  every  now  and
then,  in  order  to  keep  the  body  cool.  In  the  present  case,  still
more  than  in  the  bronchial  haemorrhage,  we  must  not  give
astringents  and  bitters  until  the  disease  has  assumed  a  chronic
character.  The  patient  must  be  kept  to  the  strictest  regimen,
more  particularly  in  the  onset  of  the  disease ;  but  if  the  discharge

great  practical  importance.  In  a  plethoric  person  threatened  with  apoplexy  of  the
brain,  or  haemoptysis,  the  application  of  leeches  may,  and  I  believe  frequently  does,
decide  the  very  occurrence  of  the  disease  it  was  intended  to  prevent.  I  have  more
than  once  seen  slight  haemoptysis  follow  the  application  of  leeches  round  the  anus
(and  have  warned  patients  not  to  be  alarmed  at  it)  when  applied  to  obviate  pul-
monary hoemorrhage.  In  one  case,  a  severe  attack  of  hujmoptysis  took  place  a  few
hours  after  the  application  of  the  leeches,  requiring  general  bleeding,  Sec.  A  very
small  bleeding  may  also,  as  Laennec  observes,  produce  the  same  effect ;  but  inde-
pendently of  the  quantity  of  blood  abstracted,  there  is  a  sympathetic  effect  produced
on  the  extreme  vessels  by  the  action  of  the  leeches  or  the  consequent  flow  of  blood
from  their  punctures,  which  is  very  desirable  and  useful  when  we  wish  to  promote
a  sanguine  secretion,  as  the  menses  ;  but  may  be  injurious  when  we  wish  to  obviate
an  effusion  of  blood  from  the  extreme  vessels:  a  general  bleeding  is  by  far  the  better
practice  in  the  cases  under  consideration."

A  remarkable  statement  of  M.  Brousais  on  the  effect  of  bleeding  in  cases  where
much  blood  has  been  previously  lost,  whether  from  haemorrhage  or  otherwise,  de-
serves notice  in  this  place.  He  says  that  local  bleedings  are  often  injurious  in  chro-
nic inflammations  of  the  viscera  where  the  stock  of  blood  is  small,  as  they  usually
increase  the  congestion  already  existing  in  them.  (Doctrines  Med.  Prep.  267.  p.  lxv.)
In  another  place  (Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  115)  be  says — "  where  the  loss  of  blood  has  been
too  great  for  the  demands  of  the  system,  the  fluids  of  the  secondary  and  less  im-
portant organs,  are  attracted  to  the  chief  viscera,  immediately  concerned  in  the  pre-
servation of  life.  Withdraw  from  the  heart,  the  brain,  the  lungs,  the  stomach,  their
necessary  and  indispensable  stimulus,  the  blood  and  its  constant  attendant,  caloric, —
and  immediately  the  materials  of  life  (materiaux  de  la  vie)  rush  from  all  the  other
parts  of  the  body,  which  have  not  so  instant  a  demand  for  them."  This  statement —
may  I  term  it  fact?— is  of  great  practical  importance.  It  seems  corroborated  by  the
result  of  the  experiments  made  by  Dr.  Seeds  and  Dr  Kellie,  in  bleeding  animals  to
death  ;  (see  the  first  volume  of  the  Transac.  of  the  Edin.  Med.  and  Chir.  Society  ;)
and  I  have  myself  observed  many  facts  in  practice  which,  in  my  mind,  tend  to  con-
firm its  truth. — Transl.


182


FNKUMONI  A.


is  prolonged,  we  must  allow  some  liquid  aliment,  and  gradually
increase  this  as  the  strength  decreases  and  the  spitting  of  blood
becomes  less.*


CHAPTER  VI.

OF  PNEUMONIA.

Under  the  terms  peripneumonia  and  pneumonia,  the  ancients
comprehended  all  the  acute  diseases  of  the  chest  which  are  un-
accompanied by  any  marked  pain  of  the  side.  With  most  modern
writers,  I  shall  limit  their  application  to  the  single  case  of  inflam-
mation of  the  pulmonary  substance.  This  disease  is  one  of  the
severest  and  most  common,  and,  in  cold  and  temperate  climates,
is  productive  of  more  deaths  than  any  other  acute  disease.  It
has  on  this  account  much  engaged  the  attention  of  medical  men,
who  have  examined  it  under  various  points  of  view.  In  the  pre-
sent chapter  I  shall  treat  of  it  under  the  following  heads :  1.
acute  pneumonia,  and  its  terminations  by  resolution  and  suppu-
ration ;  2.  partial  pneumonia,  and  pulmonary  abscess ;  3.  gan-
grene of  the  lungs;  4.  chronic  pneumonia;  and  5.  latent  and
symptomatic  pneumonia.  I  shall  not  speak  of  pleuro-pneumonia,
or  inflammation  of  the  lungs  complicated  with  pleurisy,  until
after  I  have  treated  of  the  latter  disease.  I  shall  then  likewise
examine  the  question,  so  much  agitated  during  the  last  century,

*  LITERATURE  OF  PULMONARY  APOPLEXY.

1755.  Haller.  Opusc.  Pathol.  Obs.  xvi.  Hist.  i. Lausan.  8vo.

1808.  Corvisart. Nouvelle  Methode,  &c.  par  Avenbrugger,  p.  227. Par.  8vo.

1809.  Burns  (Allan,) Obs.  on  Diseases  of  the  Heart. Edin.  8vo.
1817.  Hohnbaum  (C.) Ueber  den  Lungenscblagfluss. Erlang.  8vo.
1824.  Hertin  et  Bouillaud. Traite  des  maladies  du  coeur,  p.  351.  Par.
1824.  Chomel. Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Hemoptysie.)  t.  xi.

1826.  Andral. Clinique  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  164,  518. Par.  8vo.

1826.  Bouillaud. Archives  Gen.  de  Med.  Nov.  1826.

1827.  Bright  (R.,  M.D.) Med.  Reports,  vol  i.  p.  121. Lond.  4to.

1828.  Bayle  (A.L.J.,) Revue  Medicale.  (p.  60)  Avril,  1824.
1828.  Cruveilhier. Anat.  Pathol. Liv.  iii.  Par.

1828.  Pingrenon.  Revue  Med.  p.  213.  Nov.  1828.

1829.  Cruveilhier. Diet,  de  Med.  Pract.  (Art.  Apoplerie.)  t.  iii.  Par.

1830.  Johnson  (H.)  Med.  Chir.  Rev.  (N.  S.)  vol.  xii.  p.  555.  Lond.  8vo.
1830.  Ferguson  (J.  C.)  Dub.  Med.  Trans.  (N.  S.)  vol.  i.  p.  11.  Dub.  8vo.
1830.  Law  (A.  M.) Dub.  Med.  Trans.  (N.  S.)  vol.  i.  p.  89. Dub.  8vo.

1832. '  Johnson. Med.  Chir.  Rev.  vol.  xvi.  p.  473.  Lond.

1832!  Hope  (J.,  M.D.)  Treatise  on  Dis.  of  the  Heart  (p.  197,  211.)  Lond.

1833. '  Townsend. Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  i.  p.  134.  Lond.
1833.  Hope  (J.,  M.D.)  Morbid  Anat.  p.  38.  Lond.

Plntes  exhibiting  Pulm.  Apople.r. Cruveilhier,  Pathol.  Anat.  liv.  iii.  fig.  2,  3.
Carswell,  Pathol.  Anat. — Hope  Morbid.  Anat.  fig.  12,  32,  33,  34. — Trantl.


PNEUMONIA.


183


of  the  distinction  between  those  two  diseases,  contenting  myself
at  present  with  stating  that  nothing  is  more  common  than  to  find
pneumonia  altogether  simple,  or  complicated  only  with  so  slight
a  degree  of  pleurisy,  as  in  no  respect  to  add  to  its  danger  or
modify  its  progress.

Sect.  I.  Anatomical  characters  of  Acute  Pneumonia.

Considered  in  an  anatomical  point  of  view,  pneumonia  presents
three  degrees,  or  stages,  very  distinctly  marked  and  easily  recog-
nized, which  I  shall  distinguish  by  the  terms  engorgement  or
inflammatory  congestion  — hepatization — and  purulent  infiltra-
tion.

First  degree  {engorgement.) — In  this  degree  the  lung  is  exter-
nally of  a  livid  or  violet  hue,  heavier,  and  much  more  solid  than
natural.  It  is,  however,  still  crepitous,  but  much  less  so  than
in  a  sound  state,  and,  on  pressing  it  between  the  fingers,  we
perceive  that  it  is  injected  by  a  liquid.  It  retains  the  impression
of  the  fingers  nearly  like  an  cedematous  limb.  When  cut  into,
it  appears  of  a  livid  or  blood  colour,  is  quite  injected  with  a
frothy  serous  fluid,  more  or  less  sanguineous,  which  flows  from
it  abundantly.  We  can  still,  however,  discover  very  clearly,
the  natural  alveolar  and  spungy  texture  of  the  viscus,  except  in
some  points,  where  the  obstruction  is  more  solid  and  compact,
indicating  the  transition  from  the  first  to  the  second  decree  of
pneumonia.  This  is  the  condition  of  lung  entitled  by  M.  Bayle
engorgement  (engouement.*)

Second  degree  {hepatization.) — In  this  degree  the  lung  has
entirely  lost  its  crepitous  feel  under  the  finger,  and  has  acquired
a  consistence  and  weight  altogether  resembling  those  of  liver.
From  this  circumstance,  modern  anatomists  have  named  this
condition  of  the  organ  hepatization  or  carnification.  The  former
of  these  terms,  which  seems  to  have  been  first  used  by  Lcelius  a
Fonte,  is  sufficiently  correct;  the  last  is  very  improper,  and
would  be  more  applicable  to  a  morbid  condition  of  the  lungs  to
be  hereafter  described.  In  this,  the  second  degree  of  inflamma-
tion, the  lungs  are  frequently  less  livid  externally  than  in  the
first  variety  ;  but  they  exhibit  in  their  interior  a  redness  more
or  less  deep,  which  varies  in  different  points  from  that  of  violet-
grey  to  blood-red.  With  these  different  colours,  which  shade
into  each  other  like  those  of  certain  marbles,  a  striking  contrast
is  formed  by  the  bronchial  tubes,  the  blood-vessels,  the  specks
of  black  pulmonary  matter,  and  the  thin  cellular  partitions  which
divide  the  pulmonary  substance  into  portions  or  lobules  of  un-

.  *  For  want  of  a  proper  English  term  answering  to  this,  I  shall  use  congest ion  or
engorgement  in  the  limited  sense  in  which  engouement  is  used  in  the  text. — Truitsl.


184


PNEUMONIA.


equal  size.  These  partitions,  which  in  a  sound  state  of  the  organ
are  not  easily  perceived,  become  now  more  distinct.  They  fre-
quently seem  to  be  unaffected  by  the  inflammation,  or  to  be
affected  in  a  less  degree,  and  their  whiteness  consequently  ren-
ders them  sometimes  extremely  distinct.  If  we  cut  in  pieces  a
portion  of  lung  in  this  state,  hardly  any  fluid  escapes  from  it ;
but  if  we  scrape  the  incised  surfaces  with  the  scalpel,  a  small
quantity  of  a  bloody  serum  is  expressed,  which  is  more  turbid
and  thicker  than  that  formerly  mentioned,  and  intermixed  with
which  we  frequently  observe  another  kind  of  fluid,  thicker,
opaque,  whitish,  and  puriform.  When  the  incised  surfaces  are
exposed  to  the  light  in  a  proper  direction,  the  pulmonary  substance
has  lost  entirely  its  cellular  appearance,  and  presents  a  granular
aspect,  as  if  composed  of  small  red  grains,  oblong,  and  somewhat
flattened.  This  granular  texture  appears  to  me  the  distinguish-
ing anatomical  characteristic  of  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  by
which  it  may  be  best  discriminated  from  the  tubercular  obstruc-
tion :  it  exists  only  in  this  case  and  in  the  pulmonary  apoplexy.
This  granular  appearance  becomes  still  more  obvious  when  we
tear  asunder  a  portion  of  hepatized  lung.  In  this  case,  the  pul-
monary substance  seems  to  consist  of  an  infinity  of  small  grains,
round  or  ovoid,  very  equal  in  point  of  size,  and  of  the  different
colours  already  mentioned.  These  are  evidently  the  air  cells
converted  into  solid  grains  by  the  thickening  of  their  parietes
and  the  obliteration  of  their  cavities  by  a  concrete  fluid.*  When
a  lung  is  hepatized  throughout,  it  seems,  at  first  sight,  to  be
more  voluminous  than  natural.  This  appearance  is,  however,
deceptive,  and  is  occasioned  by  the  inability  of  the  lung  to  con-
tract, on  the  chest  being  laid  open,  as  in  the  sound  state  of  the

*  This  is  also  the  opinion  of  Andral,  who  considers  pneumonia  as  consisting  essen-
tially in  inflammation  of  the  air  cells,  the  internal  surface  of  which  secretes  at  first  a
muco-sanguineous  and  then  a  purulent  fluid.  (Clin.  Med.  torn.  ii.  p.  312.)  Andral's
opinion  is  greatly  corroborated  by  an  experiment  mentioned  by  M.  Louis.  (Re-
cherches  sur  la  Phtbisie,  p,  9.)  He  says,  that  if  we  throw  an  injection  gently  into
the  bronchi,  we  find  the  lungs  marked  by  an  infinity  of  small  masses,  which,  when
divided,  afford  precisely  the  granular  aspect  of  this  organ  in  a  state  of  hepatization.
Although  inflammation  of  the  pulmonary  tissue  is  generally  marked  by  the  granular
surface,  it  is  not  always  so,  as  is  supposed  by  Laennec.  "  In  some  cases,"  says
Dr.  Williams,  (Cyc.  of  Prac.  Med.  vol.  iii.  p.  410,)  the  granular  appearance  is  en-
tirely absent.  This  uniform  non-granular  solidification  of  the  lung,  described  by
Andral,  (Anat.  Path.  ii.  510,)  and  Chomel,  (Diet,  de  Med.  t.  17,  p.  237,)  is  not
recognized  by  Laennec  ;  but  from  having  seen  the  condition  observed  by  the  other
authors,  as  an  indubitable  result  of  inflammation,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  describe  it  as
a  variety  of  hepatization."  Dr.  Williams  differs  also  from  the  eminent  authorities
above  named,  as  to  the  cause  of  the  granular  appearance  when  it  does  exist.
"  Many  minute  examinations,"  he  says,  "  which  1  have  made  of  hepatized  lungs,
have  convinced  me  that  the  granulations  contain  no  viscid  mucus,  nor  does  their
appearance  by  any  means  confirm  the  opinion  of  Andral.  They  appear  rather  to
consist  simply  of  the  little  bunches  of  vesicles,  (in  which,  according  to  Reisseissen,
each  minute  bronchus  terminates,)  whose  membranous  tunics  have  become  so
swelled  by  the  deposition  of  a  soft  albuminous  matter  in  them,  as  well  as  from  the
increased  size  of  their  blood-vessels,  that  their  cavities  are  obliterated."  (Loc.  Cit.
p.  410.) — Transl.


PNEUMONIA.


185


viscus. I  have  frequently  measured  the  chest  in  cases  of
pneumonia,  both  on  the  living  and  dead  body,  and  have  never
been  able  to  discover  the  least  dilatation  of  the  affected  side ; — a
eirc  urn  stance  which,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  constitutes  in  it-
self a  marked  difference  between  the  signs  of  pneumonia  and
pleurisy. It  even  appears  that  the  inflamed  lung,  so  far  from
being  able  to  overcome  the  resistance  opposed  by  the  solid  walls
i  of  the  chest,  cannot  resist  the  slightest  compressing  cause.  I
i  once  saw  in  a  hepatized  lung  a  depression  more  than  a  line  in
i  depth,  accurately  circumscribed,  and  exactly  like  a  dint  made
'  by  a  hammer  on  a  piece  of  lead,  corresponding  to,  and  evidently
i  occasioned  by,  a  spot  of  false  membrane  of  the  consistence  of
I  boiled  white  of  egg. In  this  case,  all  the  rest  of  the  substance
i  of  the  lung  was  united  to  the  costal  pleura  by  an  organized  cel-
llular  tissue,  of  much  older  date  than  the  disease  of  which  the
]  patient  died.*

Third  degree  {purulent  infiltration.) — In  this  stage,  the  sub-
s  stance  of  the  lung  has  the  same  degree  of  hardness  and  the  gra-
nular appearance  above  described,  but  is  of  a  yellowish-pale  or

-  straw  colour. At  first,  the  pus,  as  it  begins  to  form,  appears  in

-  small  detached  yellow  points,  increasing  the  motley-coloured
s  shading  formerly  noticed. These  points  gradually  combine,  and

the  whole  lung  finally  assumes  a  uniform  straw,  or  lemon-yellow
t  colour,  and  when  incised  exudes,  in  greater  or  less  quantity,  a
\ yellow,  opaque,  viscid  matter,  evidently  purulent,  but  much  less

offensive  to  the  smell  than  the  pus  of  an  external  wound.  In
i  this  state,  the  pulmonary  substance  is  much  more  humid  and
-softer  than  in  the  red  hepatization.  The  granulated  texture
^gradually  disappears  as  the  purulent  softening  advances:  and
teven  before  this  latter  stage  has  attained  its  acme,  the  parenchyma
<  of  the  lungs  gives  way  beneath  the  fingers  like  a  soft  clot.  When
tthe  lung  contains  much  black  pulmonary  matter,  as  is  very  com-
:monly  the  case  in  adults  and  old  persons,  both  the  pus  and  the
i pulmonary  substance  assume  an  ash-grey  colour,  which  has  been
rrecently  denominated  by  some  writers  grey  hepatization.-^-  At

other  times,  particularly  in  children  and  young  persons,  the  infil-
:  trated  pus  is  of  a  fine  whitish-yellow  colour. This  pus  when  first

exhaled  is  concrete  or  plastic  like  the  false  membranes,  and  passes

rapidly  through  different  degrees  of  softening  before  it  acquires  its

*  M,  Broussais  says,  he  has  sometimes  seen  the  impression  of  the  ribs  on  hepatized
idungs. This  must  be  a  mistake. The  thing  is  impossible. — A  athor.

M.  Broussais,  in  his  Examen,  published  in  1821,  (torn.  ii.  p.  718,)  re-asserts  the
alleged  fact  of  the  impression  of  the  ribs  on  the  inflamed  lungs. He  brings  in  sup-
port of  his  assertion,  the  statement  of  Dr.  Pessvn,  who  says,  he  saw  the  same  appear-
♦ance  on  the  lungs  of  a  man  who  died  of  an  ancient  pleurisy,  in  the  year  1820.  Frank
makes  the  same  statement  as  Broussais,  De  cur.  Horn.  Morb.  vol.  ii.  p.  130.— Transl.

t  This  term,  which  is  incorrectly  applied  to  the  state  described  in  the  text,  inas-
-much  as  the  colour  is  not  grey,  hut  yellow-greyish  or  ash-colouied,  is  moreover  im-
proper, heing  applied  to  other  morbid'eonditions  of  the  lungs.— Author.


186


PNEUMONIA.


proper  mucilaginous  consistence.  When  it  begins  to  soften,  if  the
part  containing  it  is  pressed  or  scraped,  it  escapes  under  the
form  of  a  greasy  matter,  which  a  superficial  observer  might  mis-
take for  fat,  but  which  is  in  reality  albumen.*  The  state  just
described  is,  strictly  speaking,  the  suppuration  of  the  pulmonary
substance.  I  shall  presently  have  occasion  to  notice  those  rare
cases,  in  which  the  pus  is  collected  into  one  spot,  constituting
abscess  of  the  lungs.

The  three  degrees  of  inflammation  just  described  are  very
commonly  re-united  in  various  ways.  Sometimes  one  lung  is
inflamed  in  the  third  degree,  through  its  whole  extent,  while  the
other  contains  only  some  portions  affected  in  the  first  or  second
degree.  Frequently  the  three  degrees  are  found  in  the  same
lung,  dividing  it  into  as  many  zones,  strongly  contrasted,  or
gradually  and  insensibly  shading  one  into  another.  The  transition
of  one  stage  into  another  is  marked  by  the  occurrence  of  some
points  of  the  more  advanced  degree  amidst  a  part  which  is  only
affected  in  the  inferior  degree :  in  this  way,  the  transition  from
the  first  to  the  second  stage  is  indicated  by  a  red  tissue,  con-
taining much  frothy  and  bloody  serosity,  but  still  crepitous,
intermixed  with  which  are  some  portions  of  a  redder  colour,
much  more  solid,  not  at  all  crepitous,  containing  less  fluid,  and
granular  when  incised.  Sometimes  these  indurated  portions  are
exactly  circumscribed  by  a  pulmonary  lobule :  and,  in  children
more  especially,  we  sometimes  even  find  dispersed  in  the  centre
of  the  lungs,  a  certain  number  of  lobules  arrived  at  the  sta^e  of
hepatization,  while  those  immediately  surrounding  them  are  per-
fectly sound.  This  variety  of  pneumonia  has  in  some  recent
works  been  denominated  lobular.  In  these  cases  we  may  con-
sider the  inflammation  as  having  commenced  in  several  distinct
points  at  the  same  time,  and  being  interrupted  in  its  course  by
the  treatment  or  some  other  cause,  has  not  extended  to  the  rest
of  the  lung,  or,  having  extended  to  it  in  a  slight  degree,  has
terminated  in  resolution  before  death.  We  may  convince  our-
selves of  the  correctness  of  this  opinion  by  examining  different
lungs  in  different  stages  of  resolution  from  inflammation. f  The
transition  from  the  second  to  the  third  stage  is  marked  by  the
existence  of  yellowish,  irregular,  uncircumscribed  spots,  amid  a


•  Broussnis  has  clearly  fallen  into  this  error.  (Doct.  Med.  torn.  ii.  p.  735.) — Juth,
t  M-  Andi  al  hns  described  another  form  of  pneumonia  in  which  not  whole  lobules,
but  fractions  of  lobules,  that  is,  certain  air  cells  only,  are  inflamed.  This  vesicular
pneumonia  is  recognized  by  the  existence  of  red  granulations  disseminated,  in  greater
or  less  numbers,  in  a  portion  of  pulmonary  tissue  otherwise  healthy.  (Precis  d'Anot.
Path.  t.  ii.  p.  509.)  I  am  not  sure  that  this  form  of  disease  ought  to  be  recognised
as  a  variety  of  pneumonia.  1  have  myself  never  observed  these  isolated  red  granu-
lations ■  but  I  have  frequently  seen  lungs,  which  were  otherwise  healthy,  appear,
on  being  incised,  as  if  they  were  sprinkled  over  with  very  minute  ecchymosed
points,  resembling  flea-bites  on  the  skin.  Is  this  the  Erst  stage  of  vesicular  pneu-
monia?— (M.  L.)


I'XEUMONIA.


187


portion  of  lung  inHamed  in  the  second  degree,  the  one  colour
passing  insensibly  into  the  other.  It  is  this  state  of  lung  which,
by  the  union  of  the  two  colours  mentioned  with  the  black  or
grey  stripes  produced  by  the  black  pulmonary  matter,  presents
an  appearance  extremely  like  a  piece  of  granite,  composed  of  red
and  yellow  felspar,  grey  quartz,  and  black  mica.

The  lower  parts  of  the  lungs  are  those  most  commonly  occupied
by  pneumonia  ;*  and  when  the  disease  involves  the  whole  viscus,
it  is  almost  always  in  the  inferior  part  that  it  commences.  When
the  three  degrees  of  inflammation  exist  in  different  parts  of  the
same  lung,  the  site  of  the  more  advanced  stage  is  usually  in  the
same  inferior  portion.  It  is  much  more  uncommon  to  find  the
inflammation  confined  to  the  upper  lobe.  It  is  not  so  unusual,
however,  to  find  a  part  of  the  centre  of  the  lung  inflamed,  while
the  superficial  portion  is  in  a  sound  state.  We  never  find  the
whole  of  both  lungs  inflamed  in  the  third  or  even  second
degree ;  and  this  for  obvious  reasons ;  since  an  obstruction  of
this  kind  could  not  take  place  instantaneously,  and  must  render
respiration  quite  impossible.  But  it  is  by  no  means  uncommon
to  meet  with  cases  in  which  one  whole  lung  and  more  than  half
the  other  are  quite  impervious  to  air.  On  the  other  hand,  we
find  death  take  place  before  the  obstruction  has  reached  the
fourth  part  of  the  organs  of  respiration  ;  a  fact  which,  as  well  as
many  others,  proves  that  death  is  frequently  occasioned  much
more  by  the  exhaustion  of  the  vital  principle  than  by  the
extent  or  intensity  of  the  organic  alteration.  The  right  lung
is  more  frequently  affected  than  the  left,  not  only  in  cases  of
pneumonia,  but  in  almost  all  the  other  morbid  affections  to
which  these  organs  are  subject.  This  fact  has  been  long  no-
ticed by  practitioners  and  medical  writers,  and  is  noticed  among
others  by  Morgagni.f

*  This  fact,  which  cannot  be  denied,  proves  how  very  inexact  is  the  opinion  of  M.
Broussais,  that  tubercles  are  the  result  of  inflammation.  If  this  were  true,  the  in-
ferior and  not  the  upper  lobes  ought  to  be  the  principal  site  of  these  bodies  ;  but  the
reverse  is  well  known  to  be  the  truth. — Author.

This  statement  of  our  author  seems  less  supported  by  some  of  our  best  pathologists,
than  might  have  been  expected.  Andral  says,  that  out  of  eighty-eight  cases  of  pneu-
i  monia,  the  lower  lobe  was  affected  in  forty-seven,  the  upper  lobe  in  thirty,  and  the
whole  lung  in  eleven  cases  ;  (Op.  Cit.  p.  317  ;)  and  Chomel  informs  us,  (Diet,  de
Med.  t.  xvii.  p.  209,)  that  in  fifty-nine  cases,  the  upper  lobes  were  affected  in  thir-
i  teen,  the  lower  in  eleven,  the  whole  of  one  lung  in  thirty-one,  the  posterior  parts
i  in  two,  and  the  middle  in  one. M.  Broussais  says,  (Examen,  torn.  ii.  p.  720,1  that
•  since  the  publication  of  M.  Laennec's  work,  his  (M.  B.'s)  pupils  have  very  often
I  shown  him  cases  of  hepatization  of  the  upper  lobe,  with  the  view  of  pointing  out
Laennec's  mistake. Frank  states  his  experience  to  be  the  reverse  of  Laennec's  : —
"  Frequentius  forte  superiores  pulmonum  lobos  inflammatos  deteximus." (De  Cur.
I  Horn.  Morb.  torn.  ii.  p.  132.) He  says  also,  that  he  has  not  found  the  right  lung
l  more  frequently  affected  than  the  left — Transl.

t  This  is  strikingly  shown  by  the  following  statements  : — M.  Andral  says,  (CI.
Med.  t.  ii.p.317,)  that  out  of  two  hundred  and  four  cases  of  well-marked  pneumonia,
the  right  lung  was  affected  in  one  hundred  and  twenty-one,  the  loft  lung  in  fifty-
eight,  and  both  lungs  in  twenty-five. M.  Chomel  says,  (Diet,  de  Med.  t.  xvii.  p.


188


PXKUMOXIA.


Abscess,  and  partial  inflammation  of  the  lungs. — The  species
of  suppuration  above  described  is  the- only  one  of  common  occur-
rence in  the  lungs ;  for  notwithstanding  the  opinion  of  the  an-
cients, and  the  common  notions  of  mere  practical  physicians  of
the  present  day,  respecting  pulmonary  abscesses,  which  are
usually  termed  vomicce,  it  is  certain  that  there  is  no  organic
lesion  more  uncommon  than  a  real  collection  of  pus  in  the  sub-
stance of  the  lungs.  The  vomica  of  Hippocrates  and  our  com-
mon practitioners  is,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  the  result  of  the
softening  of  a  large  mass  of  tuberculous  matter.  Among  several
hundred  dissections  of  pneumonic  subjects  which  I  have  made  in
a  period  of  more  than  twenty  years,  1  have  not  met  with  a  col-
lection of  pus,  in  an  inflamed  lung,  more  than  five  or  six  times.
These  were  not  of  large  extent,  nor  numerous  in  the  same  lung.
They  were  dispersed  in  different  parts  of  the  lungs,  which  were
in  the  third  degree  of  inflammation  above  described.  The  walls
of  these  abscesses  were  formed  by  the  pulmonary  tissue,  infil-
trated with  pus,  and  in  a  state  of  soft  disorganization,  which
gradually  decreased  as  we  receded  from  the  centre  of  the  col-
lection. When  we  forcibly  drag  from  the  cavity  of  the  chest  an
inflamed  lung  attached  to  the  costal  pleura  by  old  cellular  ad-
hesions, it  frequently  happens  that  the  parts  most  infiltrated  with
pus  give  way  under  the  fingers,  or,  without  suffering  any  exter-
nal wound,  yield  internally  under  the  pressure  so  as  to  form  a
soft  sanious  mass,  which  an  inattentive  observer  might  mistake
for  a  collection  of  pus  :*  if  cases  of  this  kind  were  received  as
instances  of  pulmonary  abscess,  nothing  would  be  more  common/j-

508,)  that  in  fifty-nine  dissections  he  found  the  right  lung  affected  in  twenty-eight,
the  left  in  fifteen,  and  both  in  sixteen  :  and  he  adds,  that  in  the  instances  where
both  lungs  were  affected,  the  right  was  generally  most  so  ;  and  that  the  results
afforded  by  the  cases  of  recovery  were  precisely  of  the  same  kind.  Autenrieth
(Physiologie,  §  1045)  says,  that  the  right  side  is  most  obnoxious  to  acute,  and  the  left
to  chronic  diseases.  A  more  recent  statement  by  M.  Lombard,  and  on  a  still  larger
scale,  stronglv  supports  the  same  view  of  the  case.  He  found  that  of  868  cases  of
pneumonia,  413  were  on  the  right  side,  260  on  the  left  side,  and  195  on  both  sides.
(Archiv.  Gen.  de  Med.)  The  general  result  of  these  united  statements  is,  that  out
of  a  total  of  1131  cases,  the  right  side  was  affected  in  562,  the  left  in  333,  and  both
in  236.  Taking  these  results  in  round  numbers,  and  approximative!}',  and  assuming
them  to  give  a  fair  view  of  the  general  habitudes  of  the  disease,  we  would  say,  that
out  of  every  ten  cases  of  pneumonia,  we  might  expect  five,  or  one  half,  to  be  con-
fined to  the  right  side  ;  three  to  the  left ;  and  two  to  extend  to  both. — Transl.

*  Speaking  of  this  condition  of  lung,  Andral  says,  (Clin.  Med.  torn.  ii.  p.  310,)
"  Compressed  between  the  fingers,  it  falls  into  a  greyish  pulp,  which  only  differs
from  the  infiltrated  pus  by  being  a  little  thicker.  Owing  to  this  great  friability,  if
we  force  our  fingers  into  any  part  of  the  lung,  the  cavity  thus  artificially  formed  is
immediately  filled  with  pus,  and  might  be  mistaken  for  an  abscess." — Transl.

t  ltis.no  doubt,  this  circumstance  which  has  induced  M.  Andral  (Clin.  Med.  torn,
ii.)  to  propose  to  substitute  for  hepatization  and  suppuration  the  terms  red  softening
and  grey  softening'  But  in  the  red  hepatization,  there  is  really  induration,  although
the  pulmonary  substance  is  more  humid  than  natural.  The  same  is  true  of  the  puru-
lent infiltration,  so  long,  at  least,  as  it  is  not  converted  into  abscess.  To  express  M.
Andial's  ideas,  the  terms  increas*  of  humidity  would  have  been  more  appropriate. —
Author.


PNEUMONIA.


189


Once  only,  during  the  space  of  time  above  mentioned,  have  I
seen  a  collection  of  pus  in  the  lungs,  of  considerable  extent.
This  was  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  lung  anteriorly,  was  flat
and  elongated,  and  would  have  contained  three  fingers.  The
walls  of  this  abscess  had,  properly  speaking,  no  surface,  the  pus
being  observed  gradually  to  pass  into  a  purulent  detritus,  and
this  into  a  firmer  tissue,  still  loaded  with  pus,  as  we  receded  from
the  centre  of  the  collection :  and  at  length,  about  half  an  inch
from  the  matter,  the  purulent  infiltration  was  not  greater  than  it
usually  is  in  the  third  stage  of  pulmonary  inflammation.  In  this
case,  as  in  all  the  rest  where  abscess  was  found,  the  inflammation
occupied  only  a  part  of  one  lung.  This  circumstance  may  help
to  account  for  the  infrequency  of  collections  of  pus  in  the  lungs,
as  cases  of  partial  peripneumony  usually  yield  either  to  nature
or  art,  while  an  affection  of  great  extent  produces  death  before
the  purulent  infiltration  is  so  far  advanced  as  to  form,  by  the  de-
struction of  the  tissue  containing  it,  distinct  collections  of  pus.#
An  English  physician,  Sir  Alexander  Crichton,  has  accused
me  of  representing  the  occurrence  of  pulmonary  abscess  as  much
too  rare.  He  considers  this  as  taking  place  in  more  than  half
the  cases  of  pneumonia,  which  have  been  badly  treated.  Pro-
fessor Himly,  of  Goettingen,  has  made  the  same  remark.  If  the
opinion  of  these  physicians  is  founded  merely  on  the  observation
of  symptoms  during  life,  and  this  seems  the  case  with  Sir  A.
Crichton  at  least,  it  is  evident  that  it  can  have  no  weight  in  de-
ciding the  question,  purely  anatomical,  now  under  consideration.
If,  on  the  contrary,  their  statement  reposes  on  morbid  dissections,
we  must  conclude  either  that  cases  of  partial  peripneumony  are
more  frequent  in  the  north  of  Europe,  or  that  the  observations
of  these  authors  have  been  made  during  a  medical  constitution
when  they  were  particularly  prevalent.  I  have  myself  recently
witnessed  one  of  this  kind.  In  the  course  of  the  year  1823,  I
met  with  more  than  twenty  cases  of  partial  peripneumony  which
terminated  in  abscess.  All  these  patients  afforded  distinct  pec-
toriloquy and  an  evident  cavernous  rhonchus  in  the  place  of  the
excavation  ;  and  from  these  and  other  signs  to  be  noticed  shortly,
although  I  had  an  opportunity  of  proving  my  diagnosis  by  dis-
section in  two  cases  only,  the  rest  being  all  cured,  I  could  affirm

*  The  testimony  of  Broussais  on  this  point  is  very  strong.  He  says,  (Hist,  des
Phleg.  Chron.  torn.  ii.  p.  m,)  «  If  ulceration  of  the  lungs  without  tubercles  were
i  common,  we  should  meet  with  it  in  the  military  service  more  frequently  than  any
i  where  else,  since,  during  winter,  in  climates  only  moderately  cold,  there  is  not  one
1  patient  out  of  fifty  in  the  hospitals,  in  whom  the  lungs  are  not  more  or  less  inflamed,
;  and  very  few  of  these  in  whom,  on  examination  after  death,  the  lungs  are  not  found
i  indurated.  Now,  although  1  have  never  once  omitted  to  examine,  1  never  met  with
I  a  case  of  ulceration  without  tubercles  but  once  and  in  this  case  the  inflammation
i  was  produced  by  a  musket  ball  lodged  in  the  lungs  for  six  years.  It  is  hardly  neees-
■■  sary  to  observe  how  very  different  are  the  opinions  of  English  writers  respecting  the
<  frequency  of  pulmonary  abscess.  (See  Baillie,  Morb.  Anat.  p  70.)  I  believe  they
I  are  wrong — misled  (as  1  myself  have  been)  by  imperfect  examination.— Transl.


190


PNEUMONIA-.


the  existence  of  abscess  in  the  others  with  equal  certainty.  Some
of  these  abscesses  were  evidently  of  considerable  extent,  and  yet
perfect  cicatrization  took  place  within  a  period  of  from  fifteen  to
forty  days.  In  one  patient  who  yielded  pectoriloquy  and  the
cavernous  rhonchus  over  a  space  of  three  square  inches,  on  the
lower  part  of  the  right  back,  three  months  elapsed  before  these
signs  completely  disappeared  ;  and  in  another  case,  where  a  much
smaller  abscess  existed  in  the  top  of  the  left  lung,  they  did  not
entirely  disappear  until  after  six  months  :  previously,  however,  to
this  event,  both  these  patients  had  long  recovered  their  flesh  and
strength,  and  considered  themselves  as  completely  cured.*

One  of  the  best  proofs  which  I  can  give  of  the  rarity  of  ab-
scess of  the  lungs  is  derived  from  this  fact,  that  notwithstanding
the  zeal  with  which  morbid  anatomy  has  been  cultivated  in
France  during  the  last  twenty  years,  I  know  of  only  two  well-
authenticated  instances  of  this  affection,  besides  those  above-
mentioned.  In  a  preparation  presented  by  Dr.  Honore  to  the
Royal  Academy  of  Medicine,  in  1823,  there  existed  in  the  centre
of  a  hepatized  lobe,  an  excavation  filled  with  pus  and  capable  of
containing  a  middle-sized  apple.  The  patient  had  died  of  an
acute  pneumonia.  The  other  instance  is  given  by  M.  Andral,
and  occurred  in  the  case  of  a  man  who  died  on  the  nineteenth
day  of  the  disease.  The  middle  and  lower  lobes  on  the  right
side  were  in  a  state  of  purulent  infiltration,  and  "  towards  the
middle  of  the  lower  lobe,  the  tissue  was  found  degenerated  into
a  kind  of  paste,  in  the  centre  of  which  there  was  found  pure  pus.
The  substance  of  the  lung  surrounding  this,  gradually  assumed
more  firmness  in  receding  from  the  abscess."  (Clin.  Med.  tpm.  ii.
p.  313.)f

From  the  description  just  given  of  these  purulent  collections,
it  will  be  readily  perceived  how  much  they  differ  from  those
produced  by  softening  of  tuberculous  matter. In  these  last,

*  It  is  singular,  after  having  so  justly  remarked  that  the  opinions  of  Himly  and
Crichton  would  be  inadmissible  if  founded  merely  on  symptoms  observed  during  life,
that  Laennec  should  have  so  immediately  fallen  into  a  similar  train  of  reasoning.  The
stethoscopic  signs,  no  doubt,  deserve  more  confidence  than  the  varying  symptoms
which  depend  on  mere  disorder  of  function;  but  it  is  no  less  obvious  that  they  can-
not be  received  as  decisive  evidence  of  a  question  purely  anatomical.  Moreover,  in
the  greater  number  of  the  cases  referred  to,  the  existence  of  distinct  pectoiifoquy  and
distinct  cavernous  rhonchus,  was  not  merely  contestable,  but  was  actually  contested.
Andral  was,  therefore,  justified  in  asserting,  (Precis  d'Anat.  Path.  t.  ii.  p.  535,)  that
Laennec  was  in  this  case  deceived  by  auscultation. — (M.  L)  1  entirely  concur  in
the  opinions  advanced  in  this  note. —  Transl.

t  The  infrequency  of  pulmonary  abscess  is  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  M.
Chomel,  who  states,  that  during  a  period  of  seventeen  years,  be  had  only  twice  met
with  unequivocal  examples  of  it,  if  indeed  so  often.  (Diet,  de  Med.  t.  xvii.  p.  239.  )
Since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  the  Clinique  Medicate,  M.  Andral  has
twice  observed,  in  the  lungs  of  new-born  infants,  abscesses  bearing  no  resemblance
to  tuberculous  vomicre.  In  one  of  these  cases  the  abscesses  were  numerous  and
large.  (Clin.  Med.  2nd  Ed.  t.  i.  p.  507  ;  Precis  d'Anat.  Path.  i.  ii.  p.  535.)  Perhaps
collections  of  pus  nre  more  common  in  the  lungs  of  infants,  which  are  naturally  very
compact,  than  in  those  of  adults. — (M.  7.)


PNEUMONIA.  191

although  the  colour  and  appearance  of  the  tuberculous  matter
are,  in  some  cases,  pretty  much  like  those  of  pus,  they  generally
differ  in  containing  tuberculous  fragments  of  a  friable  consist-
ence. Besides  the  exact  circumscription  of  the  excavations,  the
solidity  of  their  walls,  the  soft  false  membrane  with  which  these
are  constantly  lined,  and  the  semi-cartilaginous  membrane  which
i  occasionally  succeeds  to  this,  suffice  to  discriminate  these  from
the  purulent  collections  above  described ;  independently  of  the
•  difference  of  the  stethoscopic  signs,  which  characterize  them  re-
;  spectively  in  the  living  body.

Notwithstanding  what  I  have  stated  of  the  great  in  frequency
— and  almost  impossibility — of  the  formation  of  a  great  abscess
i  of  the  lungs,  the  thing  appears  to  occur  in  rare  instances.
Twice  or  thrice  I  have  met  with  enormous  excavations  occupy-
:  ing  nearly  the  whole  of  one  lung,  and  which  did  not  seem  to
i  originate  in  softened  tubercles.  Among  others  I  may  mention
ithe  case  of  a  young  man  in  the  Necker  Hospital,  in  1822,  who
1  had  in  the  inferior  and  middle  parts  of  the  right  lung,  a  cavity
i  capable  of  containing  a  pint  and  a  half  of  fluid.  The  outer
I  boundary  of  this  cavity  was  entirely  destroyed  over  a  space  of
more  than  six  square  inches,  and  was  replaced  by  the  costal
I  pleura,  which  adhered  closely  to  the  lips  of  the  excavation.
!  Seven  or  eight  bronchial  tubes  opened  into  this  cavity,  which
i  was  lined  by  a  strong  false  membrane,  and  contained  only  a
Ibloody  serosity.  This  lung  contained  no  tubercles.  Both  metal-
1  lie  tinkling  and  Hippocratic  fluctuation  were  observable,  during
1  life,  in  this  excavation.*

Resolution  of  pneumonia. — When  resolution  takes  place,  be-
:fore  the  inflammation  has  reached  the  second  stage,  the  effused
! blood  is  absorbed,  and  the  pulmonary  tissue  appears  as  dry  as  in
the  sound  state,  only  red  as  if  dyed  ;  occasionally  a  serous  suc-
ceeds the  sanguineous  infiltration. When  the  inflammation  has
rreached  the  second  stage,  or  hepatization,  resolution  then  pre-
sents the  following  characters  :  the  indurated  parts  become  pale,
[passing  from  red  or  violet — first  to  violet-grey,  then  to  a  reddish
tflaxen  grey,  and  finally  to  a  pale  reddish,  the  natural  colour  of
'tthe  lungs;  they,  however,  frequently  retain  a  reddish  shade  for
-some  time  after  they  have  become  permeable  to  the  air.  While
t these  changes  of  colour  are  taking  place,  the  texture  of  the  part
tbecomes  softer,  more  humid,  and,  when  cut,  exudes  more  serum
than  blood. This  serum  is,  at  first,  intermixed  with  some  very
^small  air  bubbles,  and  gradually  becomes  more  frothy.  The
agranular  aspect  of  the  part  disappears,  and  the  cellular  vesicular
character  returns. At  last  the  pulmonary  tissue  resumes  its
innatural  dryness  and  colour,  but  for  some  time  still  remains  firmer,

*  Was  not  this  excavation  rather  the  consequence  of  an  apoplectic  affection  than  of
ha  true  abscess  of  the  pulmonary  substance  ?  I  am  led  to  think  so  from  the  bloody
>serosity  contained  in  it. — (M.  L.)


192


PNEUMONIA.


more  elastic,  and  heavier,  owing,  no  doubt,  to  a  remaining  thick-
ening of  the  walls  of  the  air  cells.  It  is  unusual  for  resolution  to
proceed  equally  in  the  whole  inflamed  parts.  Some  harder  spots
are  found  here  and  there,  retaining  the  characters  of  hepitiza-
tion  in  their  centre,  while  their  circumference  gradually  passes
through  the  lesser  degree  into  the  sound  texture  of  the  organ.
Frequently,  also,  we  can  perceive  on  the  surface  of  our  incisions,
a  slight  violet  or  reddish  patch,  as  if  made  bv  the  stroke  of  a
pencil,  pointing  out  the  site  of  the  inflammation,  after  the  part
had  been  completely  restored  to  its  functions.

Even  when  it  has  reached  the  third  stage,  or  that  of  purulent
infiltration,  peripneumony  may  still  terminate  in  resolution  by
the  absorption  of  the  pus,  and  without  disorganization  of  the
pulmonary  substance.  At  the  commencement  of  this  resolution,
the  yellow  or  ash  yellow  colour  of  the  part  becomes  paler  and
whiter.  The  pus  contained  in  it  is  intermixed  with  serum  ;  and
this  in  a  short  time  is  intermixed  with  small  air-bubbles ;  and
shortly  after,  the  pus  is  so  much  reduced  in  quantity  as  to  show
itself  merely  under  the  form  of  small  specks.  The  cellular  and
vesicular  aspect  of  the  viscus  re-appears ;  it  loses  its  hepatic
firmness,  and  has  now  only  the  solidity  possessed  by  the  first
degree  of  pneumonia  or  oedema  ;  it  is  slightly  crepitous,  and  does
not  always  sink  in  water;  but  when  incised  the  surfaces  are  still
of  a  dirty  yellowish  or  green  colour,  very  different  from  the
sound  lung.  If  resolution  is  far  advanced,  this  colour  is  the
only  morbid  appearance  left,  except  a  slight  serous  infiltration,
which  is  also  eventually  absorbed.

Previously  to  my  use  of  emetic  tartar  in  large  doses,  I  had  oc-
casion to  witness  this  resolution  of  pulmonary  inflammation  in  a
very  small  number  of  cases.  Since  I  have  adopted  this  practice,
I  have  lost  no  patients  affected  with  pneumonia,  except  such  as
were  attacked  by  it  in  the  course  of  other  severe  diseases ;  and
even  in  cases  of  this  kind,  the  resolution  of  the  pneumonic  affec-
tion was,  in  almost  all  of  them,  more  or  less  advanced,  at  the
period  of  death.  The  most  interesting  examples  of  this  kind
were  afforded  by  persons  labouring  under  diseases  of  the  heart ;
or  they  occurred  in  old  subjects  who  had  long  laboured  under
various  chronic  diseases.  When  I  employed  in  my  practice  only
blood-letting  and  derivatives,  I  was  accustomed  to  see  my  pa-
tients die  in  the  first  days  of  the  disease,  and  I  always  found  the
lungs  affected  with  the  inflammatory  engorgement,  or  the  hepatic
induration,  red  or  yellow.  At  present,  the  very  small  number
who  die  under  the  use  of  the  emetic  tartar,  evidently  fall  victims
to  the  concomitant  disease,  and  not  to  the  pneumonia,  since  I
almost  always  find  this  in  the  progress  of  resolution.

Duration  of  pneumonia  and  of  its  different  stages. — Acute
pneumonia  is  one  of  those  diseases,  which,  from  the  rapidity  and
brevity  of  their  course,  and  the  shortness  of  the  period  in  which


I'NKUMOXIA.


193


treatment  can  be  beneficially  applied,  demand  the  utmost  atten-
tion and  vigilance  on  the  part  of  the  physician.  Its  general  du-
ration, however,  as  well  as  that  of  each  of  its  stages,  is  variable.
I  have  several  times  seen  the  engorgement  (or  first  degree)  con-
tinue for  seven  or  eight  days,  and  affect  the  whole  lung  and  part
of  the  other,  and  prove  fatal  before  the  occurrence  of  any  very
distinct  hepatization.  This  result  was  very  common  in  the  epi-
demic of  1803-4,  (known  by  the  name  of  grippe,)  and  occurred
equally  in  cases  where  bleeding  had  been  largely  used,  and  where
it  had  not  been  used  at  all.  Two  examples  of  the  same  kind
are  recorded  by  M.  Andral  (Clin.  Med.  torn.  ii.  obs.  viii.  et  ix.
p.  112.  1 15.)  In  other  cases,  on  the  contrary,  particularly  when
the  disease  has  attacked  debilitated  or  very  old  subjects,  or  su-
pervened in  the  course  of  another  severe  malady,  the  inflamma-
tion reaches  the  stage  of  purulent  infiltration  in  the  short  space
of  thirty-six  or  even  twenty-four  hours.  With  the  exceptions
just  stated,  I  think  we  may  fix  the  duration  of  the  different
stages  of  pneumonia  as  follows :  the  obstruction  or  first  stage
usually  lasts  from  twelve  hours  to  three  days,  before  passing  to
the  state  of  complete  hepatization  ;  this  lasts  from  one  to  three
days  before  spots  of  purulent  infiltration  make  their  appearance ;
and  the  period  of  suppuration  (from  the  time  when  the  concrete
purulent  infiltration  is  distinctly  perceptible,  until  this  is  com-
pletely softened  to  a  viscid  fluid)  varies  from  two  to  six  days.
Blood-letting,  derivatives,  and  resolvents  or  stimulants  of  the
absorbent  system,  obviously  retard  the  progress  of  the  disease,
and  consequently  prolong  the  period  of  the  first  two  stages.
Convalescence  is  rapid  in  proportion  as  the  inflammation  is  of
small  extent,  and  has  been  early  checked.

State  of  the  bronchi. — The  lining  membrane  of  the  bronchi  is
commonly  very  red  in  the  portions  of  the  lung  affected  by  the  in-
flammation ;  it  is  also  occasionally  swollen,  and  sometimes  the
redness  extends  over  the  whole  bronchi,  but  both  these  cases  are
uncommon.  In  the  stage  of  purulent  infiltration,  the  membrane
is  sometimes  pale,  and  sometimes  entirely  red  or  violet-coloured,
and  in  both  these  cases  it  appears  to  be  softened.

Sect.  II.  Signs  and  symptoms  of  pneumonia.

This  is  one  of  the  diseases  most  anciently  known  ;  and  before
pathological  anatomy  (which  has  been  prosecuted  with  zeal  in
every  part  of  Europe  since  the  time  of  Morgagni)  had  investi-
gated the  true  nature  of  diseases,  it  was  generally  regarded  as
one  of  the  internal  affections  most  readily  recognized.  This,
however,  is  far  from  being  the  case.  It  is  not  easily  recognized
except  when  it  is  uncomplicated,  and  has  already  attained  a
considerable  degree  of  intensity.  When  complicated  with  an-
other disease,  and  also  in  its  very  commencement,  it  remains

o


194


1'NEUMONIA.


latent,  because  its  most  usual  symptoms  are  either  frequently
wanting,  or  are  common  to  other  diseases.

In  the  present  section,  I  shall  first  notice  the  physical  signs
which  characterise  the  disease  in  all  cases,  and  from  its  very
onset ;  I  shall  then  speak  of  the  symptoms  depending  on  the
disorder  of  the  functions  of  the  lungs,  and  examine  how  far,  and
in  what  cases  these  may  serve  as  signs ;  and,  finally,  I  shall  de-
scribe the  general  symptoms  and  the  progress  of  the  disease.

Physical  signs. — The  crepitous  rhonchus  js  the  pathognomo-
nic sign  of  the  first  stage  of  peripneumony.  It  is  perceptible
from  the  very  invasion  of  the  inflammation  :  at  this  time  it  con-
veys the  notion  of  very  small  equal-sized  bubbles,  and  seems
hardly  to  possess  the  character  of  humidity.  These  characters
are  more  marked,  according  as  the  inflamed  spot  is  near  the  sur-
face of  the  lungs.  The  sound  of  respiration  is  still  heard  dis-
tinctly, combined  with  the  crepitous  rhonchus ;  and  percussion
affords  the  natural  resonance.  The  extent  over  which  the  ste-
thoscope detects  the  rhonchus,  indicates  the  extent  of  the  inflam-
mation. This  is  frequently  hardly  greater  than  the  diameter  of
the  instrument.  The  further  we  remove  the  cylinder  from  the
point  affected,  the  rhonchus  becomes  more  obscure,  and  ceases  to
be  heard  altogether  at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  inches.  In
proportion  as  the  obstruction  increases  and  verges  towards  hepa-
tization, the  rhonchus  becomes  moister,  and  its  bubbles  more
unequal  and  less  numerous;  the  sound  of  respiration,  which  ac-
companied it  at  first,  gradually  disappears;  and  at  last,  as  hepa-
tization takes  place,  the  rhonchus  itself  ceases  to  be  heard.*  At
this  period  of  the  disease,  the  sound  on  percussion  does  not  sen-
sibly differ  from  that  of  health,  unless  the  obstruction  is  very  ex-
tensive, and  already  verging  on  hepatization.  In  this  latter  case,
it  becomes  somewhat  more  obscure.  But  when  the  obstruction
is  confined  to  a  small  portion  of  the  lung,  or  when  it  exists  in
the  form  of  isolated  masses  here  and  there,  percussion  affords  no
information.  This  is  also  frequently  the  case,  even  in  an  exten-
sive engorgement  of  the  lower  part  of  the  right  lung,  on  account
of  the  natural  obscurity  of  the  sound  in  that  region  from  the
presence  of  the  liver.

Such  are  the  physical  signs  of  pneumonia  in  the  first  degree.
Of  these  the  most  important  is  unquestionably  the  crepitous

*  Andral  (Op.  Cit.  p.  312,)  considers  the  crepitous  rhonchus  as  produced  by  the
intermixture  of  the  air  and  liquid  secretion  of  the  air-cells,  in  the  same  manner  as  the
mucous  rhonchus  is  produced  in  the  bronchi.  The  following  is  the  explanation  of
Dr.  Williams: — "The  distended  vessels,  and  the  serous  effusion  in  the  interstices,
press  on  the  minutest  bronchial  ramifications,  and  partially  obstruct  the  ingress  of
air  into  the  cells  to  which  they  lead  ;  whilst  the  viscid  secretion  of  the  mucous  mem-
brane, simultaneously  inflamed,  filling  the  calibre  of  the  tubes  thus  nnrrowed,  only
yields  to  the  air  in  respiration  forcing  its  way  through  it  in  successive  bubbles.  This
bubbling  passage  of  air  through  a  viscid  liquid,  contained  in  an  infinity  of  tubes  of
equally  diminished  oalibre,  causes  that  regular  and  equable  crepitation  which  con-
stitutes the  true  rhonchus  crepitans." — Rat.  Exp.  p.  81. —  Transl.


PNEUMONIA.


195


rhonchus;  inasmuch  as  it  is  invariably  present,  and  from  the
very  invasion  of  the  disease ;  and  exists  in  no  other  case,  except
in  oedema  of  the  lungs  and  pulmonary  apoplexy,  two  diseases
which  are  easily  distinguished  from  this  by  their  own  peculiar
signs  and  symptoms.  M.  Andral  is  mistaken  in  saying  that  the
crepitous  rhonchus  sometimes  exists  in  simple  acute  bronchitis ;
(CI.  Med.  torn.  ii.  p.  333;)  and  I  think  this  is  evident  from  his
own  cases.  From  its  constant  presence  in  this  disease,  I  regard
it  as  the  most  practically  useful  of  all  the  stethoscopic  signs,  in-
asmuch as  it  points  out,  in  its  very  earliest  stage,  one  of  the
most  severe  and  most  common  diseases,  and  thereby  enables  the
physician  to  apply  his  means  with  much  more  chance  of  success
than  he  could  have  done  even  a  few  hours  later.*

When  the  inflammation  has  reached  the  degree  of  hepatiza-
tion, we  no  longer  perceive  in  the  affected  part,  either  the  crepi-
tous rhonchus  or  the  respiratory  sound  ;  and  the  absence  of  these
phenomena  is  frequently  the  only  sign  we  have  of  hepatization
having  taken  place.  Bronchophony  exists  in  certain  cases,  par-
ticularly if  the  inflammation  is  seated  near  the  roots  of  the  lungs,
or  in  the  upper  lobes,  in  which  places  the  bronchial  tubes  are
largest.  When  the  pneumonia  is  central,  bronchophony  either
does  not  exist  at  all,  or  is  very  obscure ;  it  becomes  more  and
more  manifest,  as  the  inflammation  approaches  the  surface  of  the
lungs.  By  means  of  this  sign,  I  have  frequently  been  able  to
indicate,  previously  to  opening  the  chest,  the  precise  point  where
a  central  peripneumony  had  readied  the  exterior  of  the  organ.
This  is  easily  accounted  for  by  the  fact,  that  a  hepatized  lung
is  a  better  conductor  of  sound  than  a  healthy  one, — broncho-
phony being  nothing  more  than  the  resonance  of  the  voice  within


*  M.  Cruveilhier  regards  the  crepitous  rhonchus  as  a  sign  of  no  value  in  pneu-
monia, in  comparison  with  those  of  bronchophony  and  tubary  respiration.  This
opinion  is  tantamount  to  saying,  that  he  only  then  yields  confidence  to  the  results
of  auscultation  when  the  disease  has  advanced  so  far  that  its  existence  is  self-evi-
dent. M.  Chomel  also  asserts  (Diet,  de  Med.  t.  xvii.  p.  232)  that  this  sign  may
be  wanting  in  pneumonia,  and  be  present  in  cases  where  the  existence  of  in-
flammation is  extremely  doubtful.  The  doubts  of  men  so  eminent  as  Andral,  Cho-
mel, and  Cruveilhier,  demand  from  us  some  investigation  whether  there  may  not
exist  certain  circumstances  calculated  to  produce  mistrke  respecting  the  value  of
the  crepitous  rhonchus.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  possible  that  the  obscure  mucous
rhonchus  may  be  mistaken  for  it,  the  more  so  because  the  two  are  nearly  allied  both
in  their  cause  and  character,  and  are,  in  truth,  not  easily  discriminated' by  the  most
experienced.  Secondly,  the  crepitous  rhonchus  may  have  been  really  heard  during
life,  and  yet  no  trace  of  inflammation  be  found  after  death,  because  this  has  taken
place  during  the  stage  of  resolution  of  the  pneumonia.  Thirdly,  pneumonia  may
actually  be  present  and  yet  the  rhonchus  be  wanting,  from  the  circumstance  that
the  respiration  is  too  feeble  to  force  the  air  into  the  engorged  vesicles,  owing  to
the  age  of  the  patient,  or  the  debility  produced  by  preceding  disease.  For  an  ana-
logous reason,  of  an  opposite  kind,  the  crepitous  rhonchus  may  be  sometimes  per-
ceptible when  there  is  no  pneumonia,  in  the  case  of  children,  the  extreme  power  of
whose  respiration  may  excite  in  their  diminutive  bronchial  ramifications  a  mere
mucous  rhonchus  with  bubbles  as  small  as  those  which  constitute  the  crepitous.
— (M.  £.)

o  2


19G


PNEUMONIA.


the  bronchi  of  the  inflamed  part.  A  pleuritic  effusion,  if  oc-
curring subsequently  to  the  hepatization,  renders  bronchophony
stronger,  by  compressing  and  condensing  the  superficial  parts  of
the  lungs  not  yet  affected  by  the  inflammation ;  but  the  reverse
happens  when  the  pleurisy  precedes  the  pneumonia.  It  is  more
especially  when  existing  near  the  roots  of  the  lungs,  that  bron-
chophony is  rendered  much  stronger  by  the  interposition  of  a
small  layer  of  fluid ;  and  it  is  in  this  case  that  the  co -existence  of
aegophony  gives  rise  to  the  mixed  phenomena  described  in  the
First  Part.  Bronchophony  is  always  less  strongly  marked  and
more  diffused,  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  lungs,  owing  to  the  lesser
diameter  of  the  bronchi  there  ;  and  becomes  quite  imperceptible
in  this  situation  if  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  pleura  contain
a  fluid.  The  bronchial  respiration  and  cough  always  accom-
pany bronchophony  ;  and  the  former  are  sometimes  very  distinct
when  the  latter  is  not  so.  In  this  case,  an  attentive  examination
enables  us  to  discover  that  the  bronchial  respiration  and  cough
have  their  seat  in  the  interior  of  the  lungs,  and  that  the  superficial
parts  are  still  permeable  to  the  air,  or  simply  obstructed.  If  a
rhonchus  exists  in  the  bronchi  at  the  same  time,  the  hepatiza-
tion renders  it  much  stronger  and  more  distinct.  When  the
hepatization  is  near  the  surface,  and  involves  within  it  bronchial
tubes  of  a  considerable  size,  as  when  it  has  its  seat  at  the  roots
or  in  the  top  of  the  lungs,  bronchophony  becomes  then  almost
like  pectoriloquy.  In  this  case  it  is  frequently  accompanied  by
the  sensation  of  blowing  into  the  ear,  and  if  a  thin  portion  of
pulmonary  substance,  not  yet  hepatized,  intervenes  between  the
ear  and  the  affected  bronchi,  the  sensation,  denominated  the
veiled  puff,  is  produced.  As  long  as  the  inflammation  increases,
thecrepitous  rhonchus  extends  daily  around  the  hepatized  part,
or  arises  in  new  points ;  it  precedes  the  signs  of  hepatization,
which  commonly  are  found,  on  the  following  day,  very  distinct
in  those  points  where  the  crepitous  rhonchus  had  existed  the  day
before.*

These  are  the  physical  signs  of  hepatization  ;  which  is  always
further  accompanied  by  a  dull  sound  on  percussion,  over  the  af-
fected parts;  except  in  the  case  where  the  pneumonia  is  central
In  this  case,  and  especially  if  the  hepatization  occupies  the  centre
of  the  left  inferior  lobe,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  right  side
be  naturally  imperfectly  sonorous,  as  commonly  happens,  per-
cussion will  frequently  furnish  us  with  no  useful  result,  or  will
at  most  lead  us  to  suspect  the  affection  of  the  left  lower  lobe.
For  the  same  reason,  if  the  hepatization  occupies  the  right  infe-
rior lobe,  percussion  will  only  then  enable  us  to  recognize  its

*  It  is  an  important  practical  precept— always  to  attend  to  the  presence  of  an
unequally  strong,  although  still  perfectly  pure  or  healthy  respiration  ;  as  it  almost
always  indicates  obstruction  in  some  other  part  of  the  same  or  opposite  lung.  I  his
is  especially  the  case  in  pneumonia. — Transl.


PNEUMONIA.


197


presence,  where  we  had  previously  ascertained  the  natural  sono-
rousness of  this  part ;  since  there  are  many  persons  in  whom  the
right  side  of  the  chest,  as  high  as  the  fourth  or  fifth  rib,  is  natu-
rally destitute  of  sound.  In  almost  all  cases,  where  the  points
hepatized  are  of  small  extent,  percussion  gives  us  no  assistance.

Signs  of  suppuration. — The  infiltration  of  pus  within  the
pulmonary  tissue  furnishes  no  new  sign  so  long  as  the  pus  re-
mains concrete.  When  this  begins  to  soften,  we  perceive  in  the
bronchi  a  more  or  less  distinct  mucous  rhonchus,  occasioned
either  by  the  introduction  of  the  pus  into  them,  or  by  a  more
copious  catarrhal  secretion  which  then  takes  place.

■Signs  of  abscess. — When  the  pus  is  not  absorbed  or  expecto-
rated in  proportion  as  it  becomes  softened,  but  collects  into  one
spot,  a  very  strong  mucous  or  cavernous  rhonchus,  with  large
bubbles,  is  perceived  over  the  site  of  the  abscess.  The  bron-
chophony is  converted  into  pectoriloquy,  and  the  respiration  and
cough  change  from  bronchial  to  cavernous.  If  the  abscess  is  near
the  surface,  the  respiration  and  cough  yield  the  puffing  respira-
tion, and,  according  to  circumstances,  the  veiled  puff.  These
signs  are  almost  always  easily  distinguished  from  the  analogous
phenomena  which  exist  in  hepatization,  viz.  bronchophony,  bron-
chial cough  and  respiration,  and  bronchial  mucous  rhonchus.  A
little  experience  will  enable  us  to  discriminate  the  bronchial
from  the  cavernous  phenomena.  The  latter  always  are  distinctly
circumscribed,  and  appear  to  have  their  site  in  a  space  larger
than  any  bronchial  trunk.  The  intensity  of  the  rhonchus  when
the  abscess  is  only  half  full,  the  stuttering  sound  of  the  pectori-
loquy in  the  same  case,  and  the  small  extent  of  the  peripneu-
monic  affection  (which  had  either  been  partial  from  the  begin-
ning, or  is  now  become  so  by  the  resolution  of  the  remaining
parts),  are  additional  signs  which  in  most  cases  leave  no  room
for  doubt.  On  the  other  hand,  the  bronchial  phenomena  are
remarkable  by  their  diffused  character  ;  bronchophony  when
most  like  pectoriloquy,  always  differs  from  it  in  this  respect :
moreover,  in  bronchophony  the  voice  rarely  traverses  the  whole
extent  of  the  cylinder;  it  is  also  pure  in  this  case,  or,  if  accom-
panied by  a  mucous  rhonchus,  which  is  not  common,  this  has
never  the  exact  circumscription,  and  rarely  has  the  intensity,  of
the  cavernous  rhonchus.*

*  This  distinction  between  the  bronchial  and  the  cavernous  phenomena  is  of  great
practical  importance.  But  the  question  for  consideration  is — whether  these  caver-
nous signs  really  do  exist  sometimes  in  pure  pneumonia'?  Two  events  must  have
been  previously  established  before  we  can  resolve  this  question  in  the  affirmative  :
1st,  the  existence  of  an  excavation  in  the  lungs  containing  pus,  communicating  with
the  bronchi,  and  partly  empty  ;  2dly,  the  co-existence  along  with  the  cavernous
signs  (in  certain  cases  at  least)  of  a  considerable  expectoration  of  pus,  coming  on
rather  suddenly  ;  for  it  is  evident,  that  so  long  as  the  abscess  consists  in  a  close  bag
of  pus  amid  a  mass  of  hepatized  lung,  ( and  this  is  the  only  form  in  which  pulmonary
abscess  has  yet  been  observed,)  there  can  he  neither  pectoriloquy  nor  the  caver-


198


PNEUMONIA.


Signs  of  resolution. — When  resolution  takes  place  before  he-
patization has  supervened,  the  crepitous  rhonchus  becomes  daily
less  perceptible,  while  the  natural  sound  of  respiration  becomes
gradually  more  distinct,  and  at  last  is  alone  heard.  When  hepa-
tization has  taken  place,  its  resolution  is  invariably  announced  by
the  return  of  the  crepitous  rhonchus.  I  have  never  seen  this  sign
wanting  in  any  case  which  I  have  been  able  to  examine  daily :  I
commonly  denominate  it — the  renewed  crepitous  rhonchus  ( rhon-
chus crepitans  redux).  M.  Andral  has  noticed  it  in  most  of  his
examples  of  pneumonia  cured  (obs.  xi.  xii.  xiii.  xv.  xvi.  xxxviii.
xxxix.)  To  the  crepitous  rhonchus  is  gradually  joined  the  na-
tural sound  of  respiration,  which  becomes  daily  more  distinct,
and  at  last  exists  alone.  The  crepitous  rhonchus  equally  an-
nounces the  resolution  of  the  pneumonia  when  it  has  arrived  at
the  stage  of  suppuration ;  but  in  this  case  it  is  usually  preceded
by  a  mucous  or  submucous  rhonchus,  indicating  the  softening
of  a  part  of  the  pus.  In  this  case  the  natural  sound  of  respira-
tion returns  much  more  slowly  than  in  the  preceding  instances.
At  the  expiration  of  a  few  days,  or  even  sometimes  of  a  few
hours,  the  crepitous  rhonchus  becomes  subcrepitous,  indicating
the  supervention  of  oedema,  which  usually  attends  the  resolution
of  this  stage  of  pneumonia.  The  same  thing  is  observed  when
oedema  accompanies  the  resolution  of  the  other  two  stages  of  the
inflammation.  When  the  disease  has  extended  to  the  greater
part  of  the  lungs,  the  extreme  points  and  the  parts  most  recently
attacked  are  usually  those  in  which  resolution  commences:  the
contrary,  however,  is  sometimes  the  case.

There  are  some  cases  in  which  it  is  more  difficult  to  obtain  the
physical  signs  of  peripneumony,  especially  in  the  early  period  of
the  disease.  These  difficulties  are  owing —  1  to  the  inflammation
being  seated  in  the  central  parts  of  the  lungs,  and  — 2,  to  its  be-
ing complicated  with  other  affections.  M.  Andral  met  with
these  difficulties,  and  he  appears  to  have  exaggerated  their  de-
gree ;  as  he  goes  so  far  as  to  say,  that  not  only  the  central  pneu-
monia, but  those  seated  at  the  roots  and  base  of  the  lungs,  can-
not be  ascertained  by  auscultation.  I  can  however  state,  as  the
result  of  my  own  experience,  that  I  have  only  met  with  one
single  case  of  what  appeared  to  me  pneumonia,  in  which  all
the  stethoscopic  signs  were  wanting.  In  this  case,  there  was
expectoration  for  one  or  two  days  of  the  real  peripneumonic
sputa,  to  be  hereafter  described,  and  which  have  always  appeared
to  me  to  coincide  with  the  first  stage  of  the  disease;  but  on  exa-
mination I  detected  neither  crepitous  rhonchus  nor  bronchophony.

nous  rhonchus.  Now,  I  think  it  necessary  to  remark,  that  in  the  greater  number
of  the  cases  cited  above  by  Laennec,  as  examples  of  pulmonary  abscess  cured,  this
essential  co-existence  of  purulent  expectoration  with  the  cavernous  phenomena
was  not  observed  ;  neither  did  there  exist  that  exact  cha, inscription  which  these
phenomena  ought  to  present. — (.If.  L.)


PNEUMONIA.


19!)


The  six  first  cases  of  M.  Andral  (obs.  xxx. — xxxv.)  were  of  the
same  kind,  being  very  slight,  indicated  only  by  peculiar  expec-
toration, and  all  terminating  in  prompt  resolution.  In  opposition
to  these,  I  might  here  adduce  a  vast  number  of  cases,  in  which
not  only  myself,  but  pupils  who  had  not  practised  auscultation
six  months,  have  recognized,  by  means  of  the  crepitous  rhonchus,
central  pneumonia  of  not  greater  dimensions  than  an  almond  or
filbert.  (See  Case  IV.)  I  would  therefore  affirm,  in  conclusion,
that,  if  examined  from  the  very  beginning,  central  peripneumo-
nies,  and  those  denominated  lobular,  (which  begin  in  many  small
points  at  the  same  time,)  are  very  easily  recognized  in  most
cases,  and  only  require  particular  care  when  the  inflamed  portions
are  very  small.  It  is  moreover  to  be  here  observed,  that  cases  of
this  kind  are  slight,  and  are  unattended  with  danger  unless  they
extend  ;  in  which  case  the  stethoscopic  signs  become  distinctly
evident,  and  in  sufficient  time  for  practical  purposes.  I  have
often  ascertained  the  presence  of  small  inflamed  points  at  the
roots  and  base  of  the  lungs.  In  the  former  place,  more  particu-
larly, we  can  often  recognize  the  crepitous  rhonchus  at  a  great
depth ;  and  when  it  is  at  the  surface,  it  is  as  readily  heard  as  in
any  other  point.  Small  inflamed  spots,  in  the  centre  of  the  base
of  the  lungs,  are  unquestionably  more  difficult  of  recognition
than  any  other ;  yet  even  here  the  crepitous  rhonchus  is  often
very  distinctly  perceived.  But  we  can  not  only  recognize  the  ex-
istence of  pneumonia  of  moderate  extent  in  the  centre  of  the  lungs,
but  we  can  also  ascertain  that  it  is  central.  In  this  case,  at  the
beginning,  the  crepitous  rhonchus  is  heard  profoundly  in  a  cir-
cumscribed spot,  while  more  superficially  the  ordinary  murmur
of  respiration  is  heard  pure,  and  sometimes  almost  puerile.  The
last  character  is  especially  observed  when  there  are  several  spots
inflamed  at  the  same  time.  When  the  stage  of  hepatization  su-
pervenes, the  bronchial  respiration  is  heard  profoundly,  while
the  ordinary  respiration  is  heard  on  the  surface.  Sometimes
even  we  can  ascertain  a  profound  bronchophony  and  bronchial
cough.  The  peculiar  and  distinctive  character  of  these  pheno-
mena, when  profound  or  superficial,  can  easily  be  ascertained  by
a  person  of  only  moderate  experience.  I  have  known  pupils,
who  had  practised  auscultation  only  three  months,  make  the
distinction  without  hesitation.  This  distinction  is  of  great  im-
portance;  as  it  is  in  the  diagnosis,  and  consequently  in  the
treatment  of  pneumonia,  as  I  have  already  remarked,  that  the
greatest  practical  benefit  of  auscultation  will  be  found  ;  since
every  physician  will  be  ready  to  admit,  that  the  earlier  we  ascer-
tain the  existence  of  this  disease  the  more  easily  is  it  cured.
When  a  central  peripneumony  approaches  the  surface,  we  per-
ceive that  the  superficial  sound  of  the  natural  respiration  occu-
pies a  smaller  space  at  each  succeeding  exploration  ;  while  the
bronchial  respiration  and  bronchophony  gradually  approach  the


200


PNEUMONIA.


surface,  and  finally  reach  it,  within  a  space  which,  at  first,  might
be  covered  by  the  finger.*

Of  all  the  affections  of  the  organs  of  respiration  which  may  be
combined  with  pneumonia,  the  suffocative  catarrh  is  unquestion-
ably that  which  most  marks  its  characteristic  signs.  If  the  pneu-
monia is  of  a  very  small  extent,  and  supervenes  to  the  catarrh,
it  is  possible  that  it  may  be  masked  by  the  presence  of  the  very
loud  mucous  rhonchus  which  exists  over  the  whole  bronchi.  It
is  this  circumstance  which  renders  the  pneumonia  of  the  dying
so  difficult  to  be  recognized.  However,  even  in  this  case,  as  often
as  I  have  wished  to  ascertain  the  pneumonia,  in  order  to  exercise
the  pupils,  I  have  always  been  able  to  perceive  the  crepitous  in
the  middle  of  the  mucous  rhonchus.  As  far  as  regards  the  com-
plication with  the  suffocative  catarrh,  (which  is,  by  the  way,  a
very  rare  disease,)  the  difficulty  of  diagnosis  is  of  no  practical
importance ;  for  when  this  complication  takes  place,  either  the
patient  dies  before  the  pneumonic  affection  is  in  itself  of  any
severity  ;  or  if  the  progress  is  slower,  the  crepitous  rhonchus  and
other  signs  of  pneumonia  make  their  appearance.  The  dry  ca-
tarrh would  at  first  sight  seem  to  be  a  very  likely  means  of  pre-
venting the  development  of  the  crepitous  rhonchus ;  while  the
frequency  of  this  affection  would  thus  cause  pneumonia  to  be
frequently  mistaken,  especially  at  its  onset.  I  have  not  found
in  practice,  however,  that  the  crepitous  rhonchus  was  more  diffi-
cultly perceived  in  subjects  affected  with  dry  catarrh  than  in
others:  I  have  only  observed  that  the  respiration  does  not  be-
come so  puerile  in  the  sound  parts  as  in  other  cases.  It  is  pro-
bable that  the  inflammation  of  the  pulmonary  substance  pro-
duces, at  least  in  the  first  instance,  a  derivation,  which  unloads
the  smaller  bronchial  ramifications.  A  tumour  which  should
entirely  compress  the  large  bronchial  trunk  would,  no  doubt,
cause  all  the  stethoscopic  signs  to  disappear;  but  I  know  of  no

*  I  can  hardly  agree  with  our  author  as  to  the  certainty  of  detecting  all  the  pre-
ceding varieties  of  partial  pneumonia  by  the  stethoscope.  His  tact  and  experience
were  certaiuly  matchless  ;  and  no  doubt  he  did  what  few  of  his  followers  can  accom-
plish. At  all  events,  I  think  the  student  ought  hardly  to  expect  to  compass  so  mi-
nute a  diagnosis  ;  as  failure  might  weaken  his  confidence  in  the  unquestioned  and
uncpuestionable  powers  of  the  instrument.  The  following  remarks  on  this  point,  by
Dr.  Williams,  are  particularly  deserving  the  attention  of  the  young  practitioner: —
"  It  has  always  appeared  to  me,  that  the  more  the  student  in  auscultation  holds  in
view  the  pathological  state  on  which  the  signs  depend,  rather  than  those  signs
themselves,  and  habitually  reflects  on  their  physical  mechanism,  as  far  as  it  is  known,
without  empirically  dwelling  on  the  names  or  hare  descriptions  of  sound,  the  more
6urely  will  he  estimate  the  value  of  this  method  of  diagnosis,  and  the  more  instruc-
tion will  lie  receive  from  it.  He  will  thus  see  that  central  peripneumony  may  be
so  situated  as  to  yield  sometimes  no  physical  syirfptom,  and  at  others  these  to  be
discovered  only  by  a  very  careful  examination  ;  and  hence  he  will  see  the  impro-
priety of  a  partial  method  of  diagnosis,  and  the  great  importance  of  attending  to  the
sputa  and  other  indications.  When  the  inflammation  is  extensive,  all  these  diffi-
culties vanish,  and  the  more  intense  and  puerile  respiration  in  the  sound  portions  of
the  lung,  depending  on  the  more  rapid  and  forcible  passage  of  the  air  in  them,
further  shows  the  infringement  that  has  been  mado  on  the  proper  function  of  the
organ." (Cyc.  of  Tract.  Med.  vol.  iii.  p.  421.)— Transl.


PNEUMONIA.


201


example  of  such  a  case;  and  we  have  already  seen,  that  a  poly-
pus occupying  nineteen-twentieths  of  the  diameter  of  one  of  the
principal  bronchi,  did  not  impede  the  manifestation  of  pectori-
loquy and  the  cavernous  rhonchus.  Had  this  patient  been  at-
tacked with  pneumonia  we  ought  equally  to  have  heard  the
crepitous  rhonchus.

Symptoms  depending  on  the  disorder  of  the  functions  of  the
lungs. — These  usually  are — an  obtuse  and  deep-seated  pain,
dyspnoea,  quick  respiration,  cough,  and  expectoration  of  a  pecu-
liar kind.  To  these  symptoms,  decubitus  on  the  affected  side  is
commonly  added  ;  but  nothing  is  more  variable  than  this.  The
other  symptoms  are  more  constant,  though  each  of  them  may  be
wanting,  and  even,  in  particular  cases,  all  of  them  may  be  so  at
the  same  time.  Moreover,  they  may  all  co-exist  in  many  other
diseases  as  well  as  pneumonia  ;  and  each  of  them  exhibits  many
varieties.  Thus  the  pain,  which  is  commonly  slight  and  exten-
sively diffused,  is  sometimes  confined  to  a  point,  even  when  there
is  no  accompanying  pleurisy.  However,  when  it  becomes  very
acute,  it  is  commonly  on  account  of  the  inflammation  being  ex-
tended to  some  part  of  the  pleura.  The  dyspnoea  is  often  hardly
perceived  by  the  patient,  although  the  frequency  of  the  respira-
tion points  it  out  to  the  physician  ;  in  some  cases  this  is  not
more  frequent  than  in  health.  When  dyspnoea  does  exist,  the
inspection  of  the  chest  will  not  enable  us  to  decide  whether  or
not  it  depends  on  an  organic  affection  of  the  lungs,  as  the  dila-
tation of  the  chest  and  the  elevation  of  the  ribs  are  often  equal
on  the  sound  and  diseased  side, — a  remark  which  has  also  been
made  by  M.  Andral  (Op.  Cit.  p.  330.)  The  cough  is  commonly
frequent  and  pretty  strong;  but  sometimes  it  is  so  slight  as  to
be  denied  by  the  patient  and  the  attendants.  The  expectoration
in  a  great  many  cases  has  an  appearance  quite  characteristic,  and
which,  in  my  opinion,  may  by  itself  enable  us  to  recognize  the
disease,  as  I  have  never  met  with  it  in  any  other.  These  sputa,
which  I  shall  term  glutinous  or  pneumonic,  when  received  into  a
flat  and  open  vessel,  unite  into  so  viscid  and  tenacious  a  mass,
that  we  may  turn  it  upside  down,  even  when  full,  without  the
sputa  being  detached,  although  they  may  partially  hang  from
the  vessel's  mouth.  If  we  shake  the  vessel  its  contents  vibrate
like  jelly,  but  in  a  less  degree.  The  colour  of  this  expectoration
is  frequently  some  shade  of  red,  particularly  that  of  rust;  or  it
is  sea-green,  tawny,  orange,  saffron,  yellowish,  or  a  dull  green.
These  various  colours  are  frequently  intermixed,  in  stripes,  in
the  same  spitting-pot;  and  are  evidently  owing  to  blood  exist-
ing in  a  greater  or  less  proportion,  or  more  or  less  intimately
combined  with  the  expectorated  matter.  The  shades  of  green
appear  to  me  to  depend  on  the  same  cause,  although  they  con-
stitute the  bilious  sputa  of  Stoll  and  his  disciples.  Certain  it  is,
that  I  have  frequently  met  with  them  in  cases  where  there  ex-


L


202


PNEUMONIA.


isted  no  bilious  complication  ;  although  I  must  admit,  at  the
same  time,  that  I  have  sometimes  seen  them  disappear,  after
bilious  evacuations.  The  entire  body  of  the  expectoration  has
a  semi-transparency  like  that  of  horn,  and  sometimes  it  is  almost
as  transparent  as  white  of  egg  very  slightly  coloured.  Air-
bubbles,  of  unequal  size  and  sometimes  very  large,  are  contained
in  great  number  in  the  expectoration,  and  cannot  escape  on  ac-
count of  its  great  tenacity.  Jf  sputa  of  this  kind  existed  con-
stantly in  pneumonia,  we  should  require  no  other  sign  to  indicate
its  presence.  They  commonly  appear  in  the  stage  of  engorgement,
and  retain  their  character  until  hepatization  is  well  advanced  ;
they  then  vary  much  from  the  characters  above  described,  as  we
shall  see  presently.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  however,  that,  even
in  the  first  stages,  they  do  not  always  present  the  strongly-marked
features  we  have  just  described.  Frequently  they  are  less  vis-
cid, little  coloured,  and  nearly  destitute  of  air-bubbles  ;  and  at
other  times  we  perceive  only  a  few  glutinous  and  slightly  tawny
sputa,  amid  a  great  mass  of  mucous  or  pituitous  expectoration.
Pretty  frequently,  the  characteristic  sputa  are  observed  only  at
the  very  onset  of  the  disease,  and  during  a  few  hours  ;  and  some-
times they  do  not  show  themselves  even  at  this  period,  or  they
are  in  such  small  quantity  as  hardly  to  admit  of  being  collected.
This  appears  particularly  the  case  in  old  subjects,  and  in  very
rapid  attacks,  and  also  in  the  pneumonia  of  the  d}ring.  The  cha-
racter of  the  expectoration  is  much  more  marked  in  certain  epi-
demic constitutions  than  in  others.  This  was  particularly  the
case  in  the  catarrhal  epidemic  of  1803,  denominated  the  grippe.
The  numerous  cases  of  pneumonia  which  occurred  during  the
winter  of  this  year  were  all  marked  by  the  peculiar  expectora-
tion ;  which  was  so  very  different  from  that  attending  the  pre-
vailing catarrh,  that  M.  Bayle  and  myself,  who  noticed  it  then
for  the  first  time,  were  surprised  at  not  being  able  to  find  an  ex-
act description  of  it  in  authors.  Since  that  time,  on  the  other
hand,  I  have  seen  constitutions  in  which  the  glutinous  expecto-
ration was  unusual,  and  much  less  strongly  marked.  During
the  period  of  hepatization  the  expectoration  is  slight  and  variable
in  character;  it  usually  consists  of  a  small  quantity  of  pituitous
sputa,  more  or  less  viscid  and  vitriform,  or  of  a  whitish  or  yel-
lowish and  half-opaque  mucus.  After  the  purulent  infiltration
occurs,  the  expectoration  is  more  decidedly  mucous,  and  like
that  in  the  latter  stage  of  catarrh.  Sometimes  it  contains  specks
of  a  yellowish-white  colour  not  unlike  milk,  as  if  from  an  admix-
ture of  pus  :  rarely  the  expectoration  becomes  entirely  purulent.
Lerminier  and  Andral  consider  an  expectoration  of  sputa,  which
seem  to  consist  of  a  mixture  of  blackish  blood  and  diffluent  pi-
tuita,  as  characteristic  of  the  period  of  suppuration.  1  have
frequently  met  with  this  kind  of  expectoration,  which  greatly
resembles  the  juice  of  prunes,  (as  M.  Andral  has  remarked.)  but


PNEUMONIA.


203


as  it  always  appeared  to  occur  in  cachectic  subjects,  with  spongy
bleeding  gums,  and  even  in  persons  without  any  pneumonic  affec-
tion, I  have  not  paid  particular  attention  to  it  as  a  sign  of  pneu-
monia. I  do  not  even  think  that  the  opinion  of  M.  Andral  is
satisfactorily  made  out  by  a  reference  to  his  own  cases.*

General  symptoms  and  progress. — Pneumonia  is  attended  by
active  fever  from  its  very  invasion.  It  is  only  in  very  rare  cases
that  this  is  wanting,  or  even  that  it.  is  inconsiderable ;  indeed,
this  happens  only  when  the  disease  is  partial,  and  of  small  extent.
The  presence  of  this  degree  of  fever  accounts  for  the  flushing  of
the  face,  and  the  various  sanguineous  and  serous  congestions,
which  such  a  state  of  the  system  usually  occasions  in  the  brain
and  its  membranes,  and  in  the  intestinal  canal.  When  the  de-
termination of  blood  to  the  head  is  very  great,  and  marked  by
coma  in  the  beginning  of  the  disease,  as  often  is  the  case  in  old
persons  of  a  plethoric  habit,  the  symptom  is  extremely  unfavour-
able ;  as  the  patients  in  whom  it  occurs  usually  die  before  hepa-
tization is  completely  established ;  or  the  inflammation  reaches
the  stage  of  purulent  infiltration  in  the  space  of  a  few  hours.
A  furious  delirium  is  a  much  less  dangerous  symptom. -J-  Con-
gestion of  blood  in  the  stomach  is  indicated  by  a  very  intense
redness  of  the  tongue,  and  sometimes  by  its  becoming  soft  (par

*  The  safest  conclusion  to  come  to,  in  my  opinion,  respecting  this  prime-juice  or
liquorice-juice  expectoration  in  pneumonia,  is  to  regard  it  as  indicative  of  the  com-
plication with  pulmonary  apoplexy,  in  every  case  where  the  condition  of  the  gums,
&c,  does  not  indicate  a  cachectic  or  scorbutic  diathesis.  It  is,  at  least,  much  more
probable,  that  the  darkish  hue  and  great  liquidity  of  the  sputa,  should  be  owing  to
blood  rather  than  to  pus. — (M.  L.)

For  a  very  excellent  and  full  account  of  the  expectoration  in  peripneumony,  I  re-
fer the  reader  to  Andral's  admirable  work  so  often  quoted,  p.  339.  The  variety  of
expectoration  just  noticed  as  resembling  the  juice  of  prunes,  or  of  liquorice,  is  no-
ticed by  Huxham  as  occurring  in  scorbutic  patients.  He  describes  it  as  "  livid,
gleet}',  and  sanious,  frequently  resembling  the  lees  of  red  wine,  sometimes  more
black,"  &c. — Essay  on  Fevers,  §c.  p.  210.  I  would  here  remark,  that  Huxham  gives
a  fuller  account  of  the  varieties  of  expectoration  in  pneumonia  than  any  other  Eng-
lish author,  although  his  account  is  very  defective.  It  is,  indeed,  surprising  to  ob-
serve how  little  attention  is  paid  by  most  of  our  practical  authors  (and,  I  might  add,
practitioners)  to  this  most  important  symptom,  while  every  trifling  and  insignificant
variety  of  pulse,  tongue,  stools,  &c.  is  dwelt  on  with  tiresome  minuteness.  I  would
particularly  request  the  attention  of  young  practitioners  to  the  expectoration,  in  all
diseases  of  the  lungs  ;  and  can  assure  ihem  they  will  derive  more  useful  informa-
tion from  it  than  from  many  other  things  they  are  accustomed  to  observe  with  much
greater  care.  A  spitting-pot  1  consider  as  an  essential  part  of  the  bed-room  appa-
ratus of  the  pulmonic  patient,  and  its  daily  inspection  as  an  imperative  duty  of  the
medical  attendant.  To  those  who  do  not  practise  auscultation,  this  kind  of  obser-
vation is  particularly  necessary,  as  otherwise  they  will  constantly  be  deceived  in
their  diagnosis.  Children  generally  swallow  their  expectoration ;  young  persons,
and  even  adults,  often  do  the  same  •,  and  I  have  more  than  once  discovered  the  ex-
istence of  pneumonia  in  such  cases,  by  taking  measures  to  obtain  a  sight  of  the  sputa.
— Trausl.

t  The  general  opinion  of  writers  is,  that  delirium  is  an  extremely  dangerous  symp-
tom. It  is  so  stated  by  Cullen,  Frank,  &c.  Lommius  says,  (Obs.  Med.  Lib.  se-
cund.  p.  136,)  "  Potissiinum  lethalis  est  cum  insaniam  movit."  I  remember  the  late
Dr.  Gregory  to  have  stated  in  his  lectures  that  he  had  only  known  one  patient  reco-
ver who  had  hud  delirium. — Transl.


204


PNEUMONIA.


son  ramollissement.)  It  is  unusual  for  the  epigastrium  to  be
very  painful ;  or,  rather,  it  is  hard  to  say  whether  the  patients
suffer  from  pain  in  the  stomach,  produced  by  the  pressure,  or
from  the  impediment  thereby  occasioned  to  respiration.  Diarrhoea
sometimes  takes  place,  especially  if  the  fever  is  of  some  standing.
In  respect  of  this  symptom,  I  would  observe,  in  common  with
most  practitioners,  that  it  is  not  a  bad  sign,  especially  if  it  comes
on  towards  the  latter  part  of  the  disease,  and  is  moderate.  The
pneumonic  fever  may  be  accompanied  by  a  bilious  affection  ;  a
complication  which  was  very  common  towards  the  close  of  last
century,  but  which  is  now  extremely  rare.  Almost  all  the  pneu-
monia observed  by  Stoll  were  bilious ;  and  I  was  myself  witness
of  many  similar  cases  when  I  attended  the  lectures  of  Corvisart.
Since  1804,  however,  I  have  met  with  no  well-marked  example
of  the  kind.  1  formerly  remarked,  that  we  must  be  cautious  in
admitting  the  presence  of  bile  in  the  expectoration,  even  when
this  is  of  a  greenish  yellow.  The  fever  in  pneumonia  is  truly
symptomatic,  that  is  to  say,  is  the  effect  of  the  inflammation.  It
rises  and  falls  with  the  inflammatory  orgasm.  It  even  frequently
happens,  that  as  soon  as  this  latter  is  checked  by  the  lancet  or
otherwise,  the  fever  ceases  entirely,  although  the  perfect  resolu-
tion of  the  pulmonary  engorgement  will  not  be  accomplished  in
less  than  a  fortnight,  three  weeks,  or  even  a  month.  Occasion-
ally when  the  resolution  takes  place  slowly,  after  the  patient  has
been  free  from  fever  for  several  days,  the  pulse  resumes  its  fre-
quency, (but  not  its  fulness),  and  the  skin  becomes  somewhat
heated.  This  febricula,  however,  is  not  usually  followed  by
any  mischief,  and  frequently  does  not  even  prevent  the  return  of
a  good  appetite.  There  are  cases  of  a  different  kind,  where  the
fever  continues,  and  with  equal  severity,  although  the  inflamma-
tion is  in  the  progress  of  resolution.  In  these,  the  pneumonia  is
complicated  with  an  idiopathic*  fever,  or,  at  least,  a  fever  de-
pending on  other  causes  than  the  inflammation  of  the  lungs.
During  the  acute  stage  of  pneumonia,  the  urine  is  of  as  deep  a
red  as  if  it  held  blood  in  solution  ;  and  this  character  is  as
strongly  marked  in  it  as  in  any  inflammatory  disease  whatever.
The  blood  drawn  from  the  veins  quickly  coagulates,  and  ex-
hibits a  thick  coat  of  fibrin,  especially  at  the  first  bleedings.

Pneumonia  frequently  terminates  favourably  by  a  distinct
crisis,  not  only  in  the  cases  where  the  mildness  of  the  attack,  or
ignorance  of  its  character,  have  occasioned  the  disease  to  be  left

*  I  make  use  of  the  term  idiopathic  (essentiel(e)  for  want  of  a  better,  to  express
the  general  diseases,  denominated  by  the  ancients  simply — continued  or  intermittent
fevers.  No  doubt,  before  the  cultivation  of  morbid  anatomy,  practitioners  confounded
with  these  fevers  many  others,  which  are  in  reality  the  symptom  of  an  internal  in-
flammation. At  the  same  time,  it  is  no  less  true,  that  both  fact  and  reasoning  accord
in  demonstrating  that  the  lesions  found  in  the  intestinal  canal,  and  which  M.  Brous-
sais  considers  aa  the  cause  of  continued  fevers,  are,  in  reality,  the  consequence  of
these. — Author.


PNEUMONIA.


205


to  the  unassisted  efforts  of  nature,  but  even  when  repeated  vene-
sections have  been  employed  without  any  benefit.  The  most
common  of  these  critical  evacuations  is  a  lateritious  or  white
sediment  in  the  urine ;  and  we  should  distrust  any  other,  unless
this  also  occurs  at  the  same  time.  After  this  deposition,  a  sweat
and  moderate  diarrhoea  are  the  most  common  forms  of  crisis.
A  copious  expectoration  of  mucus  is  also  sometimes  critical,  but
much  less  frequently  than  the  practitioners  of  the  last  century
believed,  unless,  indeed,  it  be  in  those  cases  which  occur  during
the  course  of  a  catarrhal  epidemic.  Physicians  of  the  present
age,  even  those  most  devoted  to  the  Hippocratic  method,  pay,  in
general,  but  little  attention  to  the  crises  and  critical  days  of
pneumonia;  the  rarity  of  the  instances  wherein  the  efforts  of
nature  suffice  for  the  cure  of  the  disease,  leading  them  to  be-
stow all  their  attention  on  the  indications  of  cure.  We  owe,  on
this  account,  more  consideration  to  M.  Andral,  for  having  taken
pains  to  verify  this  point  of  doctrine  in  his  cases  (Op.  Cit.  p.  365).
Out  of  one  hundred  and  twelve  cases  of  pneumonia,  he  found
forty-three  give  way  on  the  7th,  11th,  14th,  or  20th  day, — viz.
on  the  days  most  usually  critical,  according  to  Hippocrates.  In
twenty-six  other  cases,  the  days  could  not  be  ascertained.  In
general,  if  we  observe  attentively,  we  shall  almost  always  find  that
the  solution  of  the  disease,  even  when  effected  by  repeated  venesec-
tions, is  attended  by  a  critical  deposition  in  the  urine,  or  a  mois-
ture on  the  skin.

Occasional  causes. — The  most  common  of  these  is  the  im-
pression of  cold,  either  long  continued,  or  received  when  the
body  is  moderately  heated  and  covered  with  perspiration.  This
cause  is  much  less  powerful  when  the  cold  immediately  succeeds
to  an  excessive  heat,  and  is  not  prolonged  for  a  considerable
time.  The  Russian  who  rolls  himself  in  the  snow  after  coming
out  of  the  hot  bath,  or  the  baker  who  goes  from  his  heated  oven,
almost  naked,  into  an  atmosphere  of  a  temperature  below  zero,  is
not  liable  to  attacks  of  this  disease :  while  the  porters,  whose
occupation  leads  them  to  stand  for  a  length  of  time  at  the
corners  of  streets,  are  frequently  affected  by  it.  In  general,  pneu-
monia is  a  disease  of  winter  and  of  cold  climates:*  it  is  rare  in

*  The  following  statistical  results,  extracted  from  Dr.  Williams's  excellent  Trea-
tise on  Pneumonia  in  Cyclopedia  of  Pract.  Med.,  illustrate  this  point  satisfactorily  :
tbey  are,  indeed,  only  in  accordance  with  the  common  observation  of  practitioners.
"  Of  ninety-seven  cases  recorded  by  Louis  in  Chomel's  wards  at  La  Cbarite  during
five  years,  eighty-one  occurred  between  February  and  August,  and  only  sixteen  in
the  remaining  five  months  of  these  years.  Of  the  cases  described  by  Andral,  the
number  occurring  in  March  and  April  amounted  to  a  third  of  the  whole  :  the  fewest
took  place  in  May,  October  and  November,  and  the  remaining  months  had  an  equal
share.  Of  two  hundred  and  forty-three  cases  which  were  treated  at  the  Edinburgh
New  Town  Dispensary  during  three  years,  ending  September  1,  1824,  sixty-seven
occurred  from  1st  September  to  1st  December  ;  one  hundred  and  four  from  1st  De-
cember to  1st  March  ;  ninety-four  from  1st  March  to  1st  June  ;  and  sixty-eight  from
1st  June  to  1st  September. We  have  observed  in  London  nearly  an  equal  prevn-


206


PNEUMONIA.


the  equatorial  regions.  The  poison  of  serpents,  particularly  that
of  the  rattle- snake,  frequently  induces  this  disease,  and  the  same
result  follows  the  injection  of  various  mendicamentous  substances
into  the  veins.*  It  is  probable  that  the  epidemic  peripneumony
is  often  owing  to  an  analogous  cause,  that  is  to  say,  to  deleterious
miasms  which  have  entered  the  system  by  means  of  the  cutane-
ous or  pulmonary  absorbents ;  since  nothing  is  more  common
than  to  meet  with  cases  of  this  disease  to  which  we  can  assign  no
occasional  cause.  How  many  persons  are  seized  with  it  in  their
very  chambers,  and  in  spite  of  the  utmost  care  taken  of  their
health  !  Most  pathologists  reckon  fulness  of  blood,  youth,  man-
hood, and  a  strong  constitution,  among  the  predisposing  causes
of  pneumonia.  It  is  no  doubt  true,  that,  in  subjects  possessing
these  conditions,  the  inflammation  is  more  acute,  the  fever  higher,
and  the  disease  more  readily  recognized  and  cured  ;  but  it  is  no
less  true  that  pneumonia  is  much  more  common  and  fatal  in  old
persons:  it  is  in  such  subjects,  more  particularly,  that  the  dis-
ease runs  rapidly  into  suppuration.  Children  are  likewise  very
subject  to  it,  and  the  more  so  the  younger  they  are.  In  them  the
disease  is  frequently  mistaken,  because  they  swallow  the  expec-
toration ;  and  death  most  commonly  takes  place  in  the  stage  of
engorgement,  or  after  the  supervention  of  only  a  lobular  hepati-
zation, that  is  to  say,  a  hepatization  occupying  only  some  de-
tached points.  The  facility  with  which  they  fall  victims  to  this
affection  even  in  its  onset,  is  explained  by  the  greater  necessity
of  respiration  at  this  period  of  life.-f*

lence  of  the  disease  from  the  beginning  of  December  to  the  end  of  April,  and  a  con-
siderably smaller  proportion  in  the  remaining  months;  but  it  appears  generally  that
the  latter  winter  and  early  spring  months  are  most  fertile  in  producing  pneumonia
in  these  climates  ''—Transl.

*  These  well-known  facts,  and  others  of  an  analogous  kind,  tend  to  confirm  the
truth  of  some  of  the  formerly  exploded,  but  now  reviving,  doctrines  of  the  humoral
pathology.  Many  physiological  and  pathological  facts  can  only  be  explained  on  the
supposition  of  an  immediate  alteration  in  the  composition  and  qualities  of  the  circu-
lating fluids. — Transl.

t  The  following  statement  by  M.  Chomel  in  the  l?th  volume  of  the  Diet,  de  Med.
Article,  Pneumonie,  p.  211,  will  throw  some  light  on  the  liability  of  different  ages  to
this  disease.  He  says,  that  out  of  fifty-six  individuals  affected  with  pneumonia,
twentv-eight  were  from  twenty  to  thirty  years  of  age;  nine  from  thirty  to  forty;
eleven  from  forty  to  fifty;  and  eight  from  fifty  to  sixty  ;  while,  on  another  occasion
(the  epidemic  of  1812-13,)  of  one  hundred  and  thirty-four  patients,  thirty-eight  were
from  fifteen  to  thirty  years  of  age;  thirty-four  from  thirty  to  forty-five;  thirty-four
from  forty-five  to  sixty  ;  and  twenty-eight  above  sixty.  Children  are  not  admitted
to  la  Charite,  the  hospital  from  which  these  statements  are  drawn  ;  but  respecting
the  great  prevalence  of  this  diseuse  in  infancy,  the  testimony  of  M.  Guersent,  phy-
sician to  the  Hopkal  des  Enfam,  and  a  person  of  vast  experience,  is  very  strong.
He  says  {Diet,  de  Med.  torn.  viii.  p.  96)  that  "  three-fifths  of  the  children  that  die  in
the  hospitals  between  birth  and  the  conclusion  of  the  first  dentition,  die  of  pneumonia,
chiefly  in  a  latent  state."  The  fatality  of  inflammation  of  the  lungs  in  children,  is,
no  doubt,  greatly  increased  in  their  case,  by  the  difficulty  of  the  diagnosis,  owing  to
particular  circumstances  connected  with  their  tender  age.  In  no  case  is  the  stetho-
scope more  useful  than  in  this  ;  as  it  supplies,  at  once,  by  its  infallible  indications,
the  otherwise  unsurmountable  deficiencies  in  the  diagnosis,  occasioned  by  the  inability
of  the  patients  to  explain  their  feelings,  the  deglutition  of  the  sputa,  &c— Traml.


GANGRENE OF THE  LUNGS.


207


Sect.  Ill — Of  Gangrene  of  the  Lungs.

This  is  rather  a  rare  disease.  It  can  scarcely  be  ranged  among
the  terminations  of  pulmonary  inflammation,  and  still  less  can  it
be  considered  as  the  consequence  of  its  intensity  ;  since  we  find,
in  cases  of  this  kind,  the  inflammatory  character  very  slightly
marked,  as  well  in  regard  of  the  symptoms,  as  of  the  engorge-
ment of  the  pulmonary  substance.  It  would,  on  the  contrary,
seem,  in  most  cases,  to  approach  the  nature  of  the  idiopathic
gangrenes,  such  as  the  anthrax,  malignant  pustule,  pestilential
bubo,  &c. ;  diseases  in  which  the  inflammation,  surrounding  the
gangrenous  spot,  seems  to  be  rather  the  effect  than  the  cause  of
the  sphacelus.  There  are  two  varieties  of  gangrene  of  the  lungs,
which  are  strongly  marked  as  well  in  their  effects  as  in  their
anatomical  characters.  These  are  the  uncircumscribed  and  the
circumscribed.

1.  Uncircumscribed  gangrene. — This  form  of  pulmonary  gan-
grene may  be  reckoned  among  the  rarest  of  organic  affections.
In  the  course  of  twenty-four  years  I  have  only  met  with  it  twice;
and  I  know  of  only  five  or  six  cases  of  it  that  have  occurred  in
the  Parisian  hospitals  during  the  same  space  of  time.*  It  pre-
sents the  following  characters  :  the  pulmonary  tissue,  more  hu-
mid and  less  cohesive  than  in  the  sound  state,  has  the  same
degree  of  density  as  in  the  first  stage  of  pneumonia,  oedema  of
the  lungs,  or  the  serious  engorgement  occurring  after  death  ;  its
colour  varies  from  a  dirty  white  or  slightly  greenish  hue,  to  a
deep  green  approaching  to  black,  with  a  mixture,  occasionally,  of
brown,  or  of  earthy  or  yellowish  brown.  These  different  shades
are  mixed  irregularly  in  different  parts  of  the  lungs,  in  which
we  likewise  observe  some  portions  of  a  livid  red  colour,  more
humid  than  the  rest,  and  seemingly  infiltrated  with  very  liquid
blood,  precisely  as  in  the  first  stage  of  pneumonia.  Some  points
here  and  there,  are  evidently  softened  and  converted  into  a  putrid
deliquim ;  and  from  these,  when  cut  into,  there  flows  a  turbid
sanies  of  a  greenish-grey  colour,  and  of  an  insupportable  gan-
grenous fetor.

The  gangrenous  affection  occupies,  at  least,  a  great  portion  of
one  lobe,  and  occasionally  the  greatest  part  of  one  lung :  it  is
never  circumscribed.  In  some  places  the  pulmonary  substance,
altogether  or  nearly  sound,  blends  insensibly  with  the  gangre-
nous parts ;  in  other  instances,  these  are  separated  by  a  portion
of  lung  inflamed  in  the  first  degree  ;  and,  in  still  rarer  instances,
by  a  hepatized  portion. If  the  disease  is  at  all  extensive,  its

*  Dr.  Carswell  regards  the  frequency  of  this  affection  as  considerably  underrated
by  Laennec,  and  informs  us,  that  he  had  himself  seen  twice  the  number  of  cases
mentioned  by  Laennec,  in  the  same  hospitals,  during  a  period  of  not  more  than  three
'  or  four  years.  (Cyc.  of  Tract.  Med.  vol.  iii„  Art.  Mortification,  p.  124.)—  Transl.


208


GANGRENE OK THE  LUNGS.


progress  is  extremely  rapid.  The  patient's  strength  is  prostrate
from  the  very  beginning ;  the  oppression  becomes  all  at  once
extreme ;  the  pulse  is  small,  compressed,  and  very  frequent ;  the
cough  is  rather  frequent  than  strong ;  the  expectoration  is  dif-
fluent, of  a  very  peculiar  green  colour,  and  exhaling  an  extreme
fetor  precisely  similar  to  that  of  a  sphacelated  limb.*  This  ex-
pectoration is  pretty  copious  for  a  time,  but  soon  ceases  through
loss  of  power,  and  the  patient  dies  suffocated.

2.  Circumscribed  or  idiopathic  gangrene. — This  differs  from
the  preceding  variety  in  occupying  only  a  small  part  of  the  lungs,
and  in  having  no  apparent  tendency  to  affect  the  neighbouring
parts.  From  this  circumstance,  its  progress  is  much  slower;
insomuch  that  it  has  been  ranged  by  Bayle  (Recherches,  p.  30)
among  the  species  of  phthisis.

Anatomical  characters. — This  partial  gangrene  may  occur
in  any  part  of  the  lungs.  It  exists  in  three  different  states,  that
of  recent  mortification  or  gangrenous  eschar,  that  of  deliquescent
sphacelus,  and  that  of  an  excavation  produced  by  the  softening
and  evacuation  of  the  sphacelated  spot.  These  gangrenous  eschars
are  of  irregular  shape  and*  of  very  variable  size.  Their  colour
is  black  verging  towards  green  ;  their  texture  more  humid,  more
compact  and  harder  than  that  of  the  sound  lungs ;  their  general
appearance  extremely  like  that  of  the  eschar  produced  on  the
skin  by  caustic ;  and  their  odour  decidedly  gangrenous.  The
portion  of  lung  immediately  surrounding  them  is  inflamed  and
indurated  either  in  the  first  or  second  degree.  Sometimes  in  the
progress  of  decomposition,  the  eschar  detaches  itself  from  the
surrounding  parts,  like  that  produced  by  the  cautery  or  caustic
potass,  forming  a  species  of  core  of  a  blackish,  greenish,  brown-
ish, or  yellowish  colour,  of  a  filamentous  texture,  and  more  flaccid
and  drier  than  the  recently-formed  eschar.  This  core  remains
isolated  in  the  middle  of  the  cavity  formed  by  the  decomposition
of  the  sphacelated  portion.  More  commonly,  however,  the  eschar
becomes  softened  throughout,  without  leaving  any  distinct  core,
being  converted  into  a  kind  of  putrid  paste,  of  a  dirty  greenish-
grey  colour,  occasionally  bloody,  and  horribly  fetid.  This
matter  soon  makes  its  way  into  some  of  the  neighbouring  bron-
chi, and  being  thus  gradually  discharged,  leaves  an  excavation
of  a  truly  ulcerous  character.  The  pulmonary  substance  around
the  excavation,  remains  lonff  inflamed  in  the  first  degree.  After
the  lapse  of  several  days,  the  most  solid  portions  of  the  part  thus
affected  have  hardly  attained  the  granular  character  ;  they  are  of
a  blackish-red,  very  humid,  and  contain  very  little  air.  When
the  eschar  is  separated,  the  walls  of  the  excavation  become  the
seat  of  a  secondary  inflammation,  which  seems  still  for  a  long

*  This  kind  of  expectoration  and  tbe  crepitous  rhonchus,  are  the  pathognomonic
signs  of  this  affection.— Author.


CiANGTlENK OK THE  l.UNGS.


time  to  retain  something  of  the  gangrenous  character:  the  walls
are  invested  by  a  false  membrane  of  a  greyish  or  dirty  yellow
colour,  soft  and  opaque,  which  secretes  a  grumous  pus  of  the
same  colour,  or  a  black  sanies,  both  of  which  retain  the  gangren-
ous fetor.  If  the  eschar  has  been  small,  the  false  membrane
may  fill  the  whole  space  left  by  its  solution,  and  may  be  even-
tually transformed  into  a  solid  cicatrix.  Sometimes  the  false
membrane  is  formed  previously  to  the  detachment  of  the  eschar,
and  serves,  in  fact,  to  separate  the  living  from  the  dead  parts.
Pretty  often  there  is  no  false  membrane  at  all,  and  the  pus  (of  a
sanious,  grumous,  blackish,  greenish,  greyish  or  reddish  colour,
and  always  more  or  less  fetid,)  is  secreted  immediately  by  the
walls  of  the  ulcer.  These  are  formed  of  a  tissue  which  is  usually
dense,  and  firmer  and  drier  than  that  of  the  acute  pneumonia.
It  creaks  under  the  scalpel ;  is  of  a  reddish  brown  colour  verg-
ing on  grey,  or  intermixed  with  shades  of  the  last  and  dirty
yellow  ;  and  exhibits  the  granular  aspect  on  the  incised  surfaces.
This  state  of  engorgement,  which  evidently  constitutes  a  chronic
pneumonia,  having  little  tendency  to  run  into  suppuration,  does
not  commonly  extend  above  half-an-inch  or  an  inch  from  the
excavation  ;  occasionally,  however,  it  extends  to  the  whole  lobe
in  which  it  is  situated.  At  other  times,  the  walls  of  the  excava-
tion are  softish,  fungous,  and  in  such  a  state  of  putrid  decompo-
sition as  to  be  easily  destroyed  by  the  touch  of  the  scalpel.
Pretty  large  blood  vessels,  naked  and  isolated,  but  still  sound,
sometimes  traverse  these  excavations ;  at  other  times,  the  vessels
are  destroyed,  and  from  their  open  mouths  fill  the  cavity  witli
coagulated  blood.*  These  gangrenous  excavations  constitute
the  ulcerous  phthisis  of  Bayle.  Although  he  does  not  exactly
describe  their  origin,  the  account  which  he  gives  of  them  and  the
cases  he  details,  show  that  he  suspected  it.  (Op.  Cit.  p.  30.  obs.
xxv — xxx.)  Perhaps  he  was  withdrawn  from  the  mode  of  inves-
tigation which  would  have  led  him  to  their  real  origin,  by  the
considerations,  which  (unreasonably  in  my  opinion)  led  him  to
consider  this  as  a  species  of  phthisis.  Sometimes  the  gangrenous
eschar,  in  a  state  of  decomposition,  makes  its  way  through  the
pleura,  and  excites  a  pleurisy,  usually  accompanied  by  pneumo-
thorax, which  latter  appears  to  be  the  effect  of  the  gas  exhaled
by  the  putrid  eschar.  At  other  times  the  gangrenous  excava-
tion opens  at  once  into  the  pleura  and  bronchia;  and  from  the
latter  is  derived  the  air  which  constitutes  the  pneumo-thorax.

Physical  Signs.  These  are  almost  the  same  as  those  of  ab-
scess of  the  lungs,  except  that  the  crepitous  rhonchus  is  not  so
common  as  in  the  latter. This  may  be  owing  to  the  insidious

*  See  a  case  of  this  kind  recorded  in  M.  Cruveilhier's  Anat.  Puthol.  Liv.  iii.,  in
which  the  gangrenous  excavation  communicated  with  the  sac  of  the  pleura,  and  into
which  two  pints  of  blood  were  extravasated. — (M.  L.)


-2H)


GANGRENE OK  THE  LUNGS.


nature  of  the  disease,  which  does  not  lead  us  to  examine  the
chest  during  the  first  days.  I  have  been  several  times  assured
that  the  crepitous  rhonchus  did  not  exist  until  after  the  produc-
tion of  the  eschar,  thereby  indicating  the  formation  of  the  inflam-
matory circle  which  was  to  operate  its  detachment.  Subsequently,
the  cavarnous  rhonchus  is  perceived ;  and  when  the  excavation
begins  to  empty  itself,  pectoriloquy  becomes  distinct.  When
the  eschar  opens  into  the  pleura,  we  have,  further,  the  signs  of
pneumo-thorax  combined  with  the  liquid  effusion  ;  and,  if  it
communicates  also  with  the  bronchi,  the  metallic  tinkling  or  the
utricular  resonance  becomes  perceptible.  The  resonance  of  the
voice  in  these  excavations  is  much  more  distinct  and  strong  than
in  the  pulmonary  abscess  :  it  has  nothing  of  that  floating  kind  of
sound  of  the  latter,  and  is  rarely  accompanied  by  the  veiled  pvff',
so  common  in  the  abscess.  In  the  resolution  of  the  pneumonia
which  succeeds  the  gangrene,  as  indeed  in  all  kinds  of  chronic
pneumonia,  it  is  not  easy  to  detect  the  crepitous  rhonchus.  In
this  affection  the  expectoration  is  so  characteristic  that  all  these
signs  would  be  quite  insufficient  without  it.  It  is  sometimes
green,  greenish,  or  brownish,  or  of  a  yellow  ash  grey  verging  on
greenish,*  more  or  less  puriform,  and  with  the  gangrenous  fetor.
In  the  beginning  of  the  disease  it  is  frequently  different.  It  has
not  then  the  peculiar  fetor  of  gangrene,  although  it  has  a  fetor
almost  as  insupportable.  Its  colour  is  milk-white,  and  it  is  nearly
opaque  and  of  the  consistence  of  mucilage.  Gradually  it  assumes
a  greenish  yellow,  a  brownish  or  ash-colour,  and  becomes  sanious
or  purulent.  When  the  disease  becomes  chronic,  and  particu-
larly when  it  is  in  progress  towards  a  cure,  the  sputa  become
yellow  and  acquire  the  consistence  and  odour  of  pus.  From  time
to  time,  however,  the  gangrenous  fetor  re-appears.  From  the
result  of  several  cases  of  recovery,  I  am  tempted  to  believe  that
the  fetor  and  aspect  of  the  expectoration  above  described,  do  not
necessarily  indicate  the  existence  of  a  gangrenous  eschar  in  the
lungs,  but  that  these  characters  may  depend  upon  a  general  dis-
position to  gangrene,  manifesting  itself  especially  in  the  mucous
secretion  of  the  bronchi.  We  might  indeed  suppose,  in  these
cases,  the  existence  of  small  eschars  such  as  I  have  described  in
Case  IV.  ;  only  that,  in  two  or  three  dissections  which  I  have
made  of  such  cases,  I  found  nothing  which  could  account  for  the
gangrenous  fetor,  unless  it  were  the  rapidity  with  which  the  body
generally,  and  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  lungs  more  parti-
cularly, ran  into  putrefaction.

*  The  render  will  not  hare  failed  frequently  to  remark  the  singular,  and,  as  it
would  seem,  unnecessary  minuteness  of  our  author  in  his  description  of  colours  ;  a
minuteness  which  is  only  to  be  paralleled  by  the  precision  of  my  most  excellent  and
learned  friend,  Professor  Jameson,  in  his  mineralogical  definitions.  It  is  scarcely
possible,  however,  to  follow  Laennec  in  some  of  his  rainutiee  ;  although  I  have  done
my  best  to  translate  them  faithfully,  even  while  doubting,  sometimes,  if  I  could  re-
cognize the  subject  of  my  own  description  if  in  bodily  presence  before  me. — Transl.


GANGREXE OF THE  LUNGS.


211


Symptoms  and  progress.  The  symptoms  of  the  partial  gan-
grene of  the  lungs  are  extremely  variable,  and  differ  greatly  in
the  different  periods  of  the  disease.  The  invasion  is  usually
characterised  by  symptoms  of  slight  pneumonia  ;  but  this  is  at-
tended by  a  degree  of  prostration  of  strength  or  anxiety,  quite
disproportioned  to  the  severity  of  the  local  symptoms,  and  to  the
small  extent  of  space  over  which  the  respiratory  murmur  and
sound  on  percussion  are  wanting.  In  a  short  time  the  patient
begins  to  expectorate  sputa  which  are  at  first  only  disagreeable,
but  soon  become  of  the  gangrenous  fetor.  At  the  same  time
there  are  occasionally  very  severe  pains  in  the  chest,  and  likewise
haemoptysis  more  or  less  abundant ;  and  the  patient's  complexion
becomes  pale,  or  rather  wan  and  leaden.  Very  often  the  inva-
sion of  the  disease  is  quite  insidious ;  nothing  but  the  general
debility  strikes  the  attention  of  the  physician,  and  nothing  seems
to  announce  a  severe  affection  of  the  chest.  When  the  disease
becomes  chronic,  there  is  a  constant  hectic  fever,  sometimes  con-
siderable, but  usually  less  so  than  in  most  cases  of  phthisis  ;  the
skin  is  hot,  and  the  expectoration  and  breath  fetid.  In  this  state,
emaciation  is  very  rapid,  and  the  disease  may  readily  be  mistaken
for  phthisis  ;  more  commonly,  however,  death  supervenes  before
the  emaciation  has  made  much  progress,,  the  disease  appearing
rather  to  have  a  tendency  to  produce  cachexia  than  marasmus.

However  dangerous  this  disease  may  be,  we  must  not  consider
it  as  inevitably  fatal.  I  have  known  several  patients  recover  who
had  all  the  symptoms  of  it ;  and  some  of  these,  judging  from
the  extent  of  the  pectoriloquy,  had  gangrenous  excavations  of
great  size.  In  one  case  the  eschar  made  its  way  into  the  pleura,
determining  a  pleurisy,  which  lasted  fifteen  months.  I  here
subjoin  four  cases  of  gangrene  of  the  lungs ;  one  of  which  was
communicated  to  me  by  M.  Cayol,  and  another  has  been  ex-
tracted from  the  unpublished  manuscripts  of  Bayle.

Case  XII.  Superficial  gangrenous  eschar  of  the  lungs  giving
rise  to  pleurisy.  A  man,  aged  forty,  after  a  fit  of  intoxication,
was  seized  with  head-ache,  pains  in  the  limbs,  fever,  and  deli-
rium, and  was  in  this  state  admitted  into  the  Necker  Hospital
on  the  28th  Nov.  1818.  At  this  time  he  only  complained  of
pain  in  the  limbs.  There  was  general  fever,  and  at  night  there
came  on  furious  delirium,  which  was  combated  by  the  applica-
tion of  twelve  leeches  to  the  throat,  ice  to  the  head,  and  sinap-
isms to  the  thighs.  The  same  state  of  general  fever,  delirium,
&c.  continued,  with  slight  variations  of  symptoms  and  treatment,
until  he  died,  on  the  11th  December.  Two  days  before  his  death
it  was  remarked  for  the  first  time,  that  the  respiration  was  some-
what impeded,  and  was  found  by  the  stethoscope  to  be  less  dis-
tinct on  the  right  side.  Percussion  yielded  an  equal  and  mid-
dling sound  on  both  sides.

Dissection  twenty-four  hoars  after  death. The  brain  was  in

p  2


212


GANGHENE  OF  THE  LUNGS.


a  natural  state.  There  was  some  serum  effused  in  the  ventricles,
at  the  base  of  the  brain,  and  also  under  the  pia  mater.  The
right  lung  adhered  anteriorly  to  the  costal  pleura  by  means  of
a  recent  false  membrane,  and  its  base  was  united  to  the  dia-
phragm by  a  similar  one.  The  middle  portion  of  the  lung  was
compressed  towards  the  mediastinum  by  a  pint  and  a  half  of  a
sero-purulent  fluid,  by  which  means  the  lung  was  reduced  to
nearly  one  half  its  natural  size.  It  was  every  where  sound,  ex-
cept that,  on  its  inferior  and  posterior  part,  there  existed  a  spot
of  the  size  of  a  large  bean,  of  a  greenish-black  colour,  and  ex-
haling the  decided  gangrenous  fetor.  It  looked  like  an  eschar
produced  by  the  application  of  caustic  potass,  but  it  was  humid
and  so  soft  as  to  be  reduced  into  a  putrid  mass  by  scraping  with
the  scalpel.  It  extended  about  six  lines  into  the  substance  of
the  lung,  which  was  hepatized  to  the  distance  of  an  inch  around.
The  left  lung  and  all  the  other  Aascera  were  sound.

Case  XIII.  (By  M.  C ay ol)—  Gangrene  of  the  kings.  A
man,  aged  fifty-three,  came  into  La  Charite  on  the  16th  J une,
1811,  having  been  ill  six  weeks.  At  this  time  the  respiration
was  oppressed,  and  there  was  frequent  cough  with  an  expecto-
ration of  yellow,  opaque,  thickish  sputa,  having  a  gangrenous
fetor,  which  was  however  still  more  offensively  marked  in  the
breath.  The  chest  sounded  wrell  on  percussion.  From  the  be-
ginning of  his  illness  this  man  had  experienced  a  daily  increasing
debility.  He  was  not  however  much  emaciated,  but  his  flesh
was  soft  and  his  complexion  very  w^an.  The  same  symptoms  con-
tinued, with  gradual  increase,  until  his  death,  which  took  place
on  the  20th  July.

Dissection  ten  hours  after  death.  The  thorax  sounded  well
on  the  right  side,  and  was  preternaturally  sonorous  on  the  left,
which  circumstance  made  M.  Bayle  predict  the  existence  of
pneumo-thorax.  This  opinion  was  soon  confirmed  by  the  escape
of  a  considerable  quantity  of  extremely  fetid  gas  through  an
opening  made  in  one  of  the  intercostal  spaces.  There  were  like-
wise on  this  side  of  the  chest,  two  or  three  pints  of  blackish
muddy  serosity  of  a  disgusting  fetor.  The  lung  was  of  a  black-
ish colour,  compressed  towards  the  mediastinum,  and  reduced  to
one-fifth  of  its  natural  size.  In  its  upper  lobe  there  was  an
irregular  excavation  large  enough  to  contain  a  duck's  egg.  The
portion  of  lung  in  which  this  cavity  was  situated,  was  so  thin
exteriorily  and  so  easily  torn,  that  we  doubted  whether  the  ca-
vity might  not  have  been  produced  by  the  efforts  used  to  destroy
the  adhesions.  M.  Bayle,  however,  thought  that  it  had  existed
before  death.  This  excavation  was  filled  by  the  same  liquid
which  occupied  the  pleura.  It  had  no  membranous  lining  of  any
kind,  but  its  boundaries  consisted  of  the  naked  pulmonary  tissue,
which  was  soft,  friable,  and  blackish.  There  were  many  lesser
cavities  opening  into  this,  all  of  which,  as  well  as  the  principal,


(JANG RENE OF  THE  LUNGS.


213


contained,  besides  pus,  insulated  masses  of  a  soft  putrid  sub-
stance. That  contained  in  the  largest  excavation  was  of  the  size
of  a  walnut.  These  masses  contained  blackish  filaments  resem-
bling- pulmonary  substance,  and  very  like  the  gangrenous  sloughs
of  cellular  substance  found  in  certain  abscesses :  they  were,  no
doubt,  eschars  detached  from  the  lungs.  There  were  adhesions
in  various  parts  of  this  lung,  and  also  recent  false  membrane
lining  a  large  portion  of  the  costal  pleura.  On  the  right  side  of
the  chest  there  was  a  pint  of  reddish  and  limpid  serum  ;  but  the
lung  on  this  side,  and  all  the  other  viscera,  were  sound.

Case  XIV.  (By  M.  Bayle) — Partial  gangrene  of  the  lungs.
A  man,  aged  forty-five,  had  been  affected  three  months  with
eoryza,  and  occasional  fever,  and  had  become  considerably  ema-
ciated and  unfit  for  labour,  when  he  came  into  La  Charite  on  the
15th  Oct.  1811.  At  this  period  the  patient  complained  only  of
stuffing  of  the  nose,  loss  of  appetite,  and  increasing  debility.
He  had  a  slight  cough,  but  without  expectoration.  He  had
never  spit  blood,  had  no  pain  of  the  chest,  lay  indifferently  on
either  side,  and  had  no  other  impediment  in  respiration  but  what
seemed  to  arise  from  the  nostrils.  It  being  supposed  that  he  had
a  polypus,  he  was  transferred  to  the  surgical  wards,  where  he
died  two  months  afterwards,  on  the  20th  Dec.  During  the  time
he  was  in  the  surgical  wards,  his  cough  increased,  and  latterly
the  respiration  was  much  oppressed,  and  he  had  also  a  severe  pain
in  the  larynx,  which  induced  M.  Boyer  to  think  he  was  affected
with  laryngeal  pthisis.

Dissection.  The  larynx,  trachea  and  bronchi  were  sound  ;  as
was  also  the  right  lung.  The  left  lung  was  dense  and  of  a  livid
red  in  its  lower  portion,  being  in  a  state  of  engorgement  ap-
proaching to  hepatization.  In  the  lower  part  of  the  inferior
lobe,  a  portion  of  the  pulmonary  substance  was  reduced  to  a
sort  of  greyish  putrid  paste  having  the  gangrenous  fetor.  This
mass  was  quite  continuous  with  the  surrounding  pulmonary  sub-
stance, which  was  red  and  engorged,  and  with  which  this  gan-
grenous spot  contrasted  both  as  to  colour  and  consistence.  There
existed  no  cavity  until  after  the  removal  of  the  gangrenous  clot.
This  had  no  regular  shape,  nor  was  it  accurately  circumscribed  :
it  was  about  the  size  of  a  large  walnut.  The  rest  of  the  lung
was  sound.

Case  XV.  Pleurisy  and  pneumo-thorax,  consequent  to  the
discharge  of  a  gangrenous  abscess  of  the  lungs.  A  man,  aged
forty-two,  in  good  health  until  his  twentieth  year,  after  which
he  laboured  under  different  complaints  at  different  times— fever,
severe  head-ache,  and,  latterly,  severe  pains  between  the  shoul-
ders, for  which  he  was  repeatedly  in  the  hospital — came  to  the
Necker  Hospital  on  the  30th  of  May,  1818.  In  April,  his  pains
ceased  after  taking  a  quack  medicine,  but  he  was  shortly  after
seized  with  loss  of  appetite,  and  cough,  accompanied  by  a  co-


B14


GANGItENE  OF  THE  LUNGS.


pious  and  extremely  fetid  expectoration. The  following  is  the
report  of  his  symptoms  on  admission  :  moderate  lustiness,  skin
brown,  decubitus  practicable  on  both  sides,  but  easiest  on  the
left ;  coiigh  frequent,  commonly  in  paroxysms,  expectoration
rather  copious,  yellow  and  opaque ;  respiration  very  good  on  the
right  side,  much  less  perfect  on  the  left,  and  attended  by  a  mu-
cous rhonchus  ;  resonance  on  percussion  somewhat  less  on  the
left  side,  both  before  and  behind. State  of  the  heart  natural.
From  these  premises  the  diagnosis  was  given — Slight  chronic
pneumonia  occupying  the  centre  of  the  left  lung.  The  same  state
continued  until  the  7th  June. At  this  time  the  respiration  was
still  good  on  the  right  side ;  but  on  the  left  it  was  only  percep-
tible at  the  roots  and  in  the  upper  lobe ; — in  the  latter  place  it
was  more  distinct  than  before,  in  the  former  it  was  much  less
distinct. The  sound  on  percussion  on  this  side  was  also  less
than  when  the  patient  came  into  the  hospital.  From  these  symp-
toms I  made  the  following  addition  to  the  diagnosis  : — the  pneu-
monia begins  to  disperse  at  the  roots  of  the  lungs,  but  there  has
supervened  pleurisy,  with  sero-purulent  effusion  in  the  left  side.
On  the  12th,  respiration  was  just  perceptible  under  the  left
clavicle ;  on  the  16th,  it  was  hardly  perceptible  over  the  whole
of  the  upper  half  of  this  side  anteriorly;  but  the  sound  on  per-
cussion was  now  particularly  clear  over  the  same  space. I  there-
fore subjoined  to  my  diagnosis — pneumo-thorax. On  the  17th,
the  pain,  which  had  been  absent  since  April,  re-appeared  between
the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs;  the  other  symptoms  continued  nearly
the  same. On  the  3rd  July,  percussion  elicited  a  good  sound
from  both  sides  of  the  chest  anteriorly  and  laterally.  The
sound  of  respiration  was  good  on  the  right,  but  was  entirely
wanting  on  the  left,  both  before  and  behind,  except  at  the  roots  of
the  lungs  and  perhaps  a  little  below  the  clavicle. The  pain  in
the  back  was  more  severe ;  the  cough  was  also  more  violent,  and
during  a  severe  fit  of  this  he  felt  an  acute  pain  in  the  left  side,
and  immediately  expectorated  about  half-a-pint  of  yellow,  opaque,
somewhat  ropy  and  purulent  sputa ; the  discharge  of  which
seemed  at  once  to  relieve  and  weaken  the  patient. The  expec-
toration continued  copious  for  some  time. During  several  ex-
aminations the  state  of  the  chest  continued  nearly  the  same,  ex-
cept that  respiration  was  very  slightly  audible  below  the  left
clavicle,  and  the  left  back  yielded  a  duller  sound  on  percussion.
The  patient  died  on  the  31st  July.

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death.  On  perforating
with  the  scalpel  the  left  chest,  a  considerable  quantity  of  gas,
having  the  fetor  of  gangrene,  made  its  escape.  The  left  lung
was  compressed  towards  the  spine  and  mediastinum,  but  was
united  at  its  anterior  edge  to  the  cartilages  of  the  ribs,  and  also
to  the  mediastinum  and  back  part  of  the  ribs,  by  means  of  a
membrane. One-half  of  the  space  comprised  between  the  lung


GANGBENE  OF  THE  LUNCS.


215


and  ribs  was  empty,  and  the  other  halt"  full  of  a  yellowish  semi-
transparent  liquid,  purulent  at  bottom.  The  base  of  the  lung
adhered  every  where  to  the  diaphragm,  except  over  a  small  space
near  its  anterior  edge.  In  this  point  there  was  a  perforation,
with  lacerated  blackish  borders,  which  would  have  admitted  a
large  goose-quill.  The  black  colour  extended  around  the  open-
ing to  the  distance  of  two  or  three  lines,  marking  out  a  speck,
Avhich,  from  its  want  of  cohesion,  its  odour,  and  its  exact  cir-
cumscription, had  all  the  characters  of  a  gangrenous  eschar.
The  perforation  extended  from  four  to  six  lines  into  the  sub-
stance of  the  lung,  and  then  terminated  in  an  excavation  capable
of  containing  a  large  walnut.  The  walls  of  this  cavity  were  an-
fractuous, and  lined  by  a  false  membrane  of  a  greyish-white,
smeared  with  an  ash-coloured  pus.  It  was  evidently  the  source
of  the  gangrenous  fetor  perceived  on  opening  the  chest,  as  it  ex-
haled this  odour  in  a  much  greater  degree.  Several  bronchial
tubes  opened  into  it.  The  substance  of  the  lung  was  flabby,
fleshy,  and  contained  little  blood  ;  it  was  firmer,  almost  hepatic,
to  the  distance  of  half  an  inch  around  the  excavation  ;  the  bron-
chi in  the  vicinity  of  this  were  greatly  dilatated  :  several  of
them,  naturally  of  the  size  of  a  crow-quill,  being  enlarged  to  the
diameter  of  a  small  goose-quill :  their  lining  membrane  was  red,
and  covered  with  a  sanious,  frothy  and  puriform  mucus.  The
right  lung  and  the  other  viscera  were  healthy.

Besides  the  idiopathic  kind  just  described,  there  exists  another
species  of  circumscribed  gangrene  of  the  lungs,  that,  namely,
which  occasionally  occurs  in  the  walls  of  a  tuberculous  excava-
tion. This  is  an  extremely  rare  affection,  being,  at  least,  ten
times  less  common  than  the  idiopathic  gangrene.  The  affection
is,  however,  analogous  to  others  which  are  very  common  ;  I  mean
those  superficial  sloughings  which  take  place  in  cancers  of  the
uterus,  stomach,  or  even  of  the  mamma.  When  a  tuberculous
excavation  becomes  affected  in  this  manner,  its  walls,  to  the
depth  of  one  or  two  lines,  are  converted  into  a  soft,  humid  eschar,
of  a  greyish,  brownish,  greenish  or  blackish  colour.  In  this
slough  we  cannot  distinguish  the  grey  induration  which  usually
surrounds  a  tuberculous  cavity,  but  we  may  perceive  any  crude
tubercles  that  may  happen  to  be  there,  only  discoloured  with  the
matter  of  the  eschar.  This  becomes  soft  and  is  gradually  ex-
pectorated ;  but,  as  in  the  case  of  the  idiopathic  gangrene  of  the
lungs,  the  walls  of  the  excavation  continue  for  a  long  time,  after
the  total  destruction  of  the  slough,  to  secrete  a  greyish  sanious
pus  of  a  decidedly  gangrenous  fetor.  This  peculiar  odour,  to-
gether with  the  greenish  or  greyish  colour  of  the  expectoration,
and  the  extreme  prostration  of  the  strength,  is  the  characteristic
sign  of  this  species  of  pulmonary  gangrene,  as  well  as  of  the  pre-
ceding. These  two  kinds,  however,  might  be  readily  distin-
guished, if  we  had  an  opportunity  of  watching  the  progress  of


216


CHltONIC  PNEU.MOXIA.


the  disease  and  had  recognized  the  existence  of  pectoriloquy  pre-
viously to  the  appearance  of  the  gangrenous  symptoms.  '

Sect.  IV. — Of  chronic  pneumonia.

Is  there  really  such  a  disease  as  chronic  pneumonia  ?  This
question  will  only  appear  singular  to  those  who  are  practically
unacquainted  with  pathological  anatomy.  And  the  fact  certainly
is,  that  data  for  its  right  determination  can  be  supplied  neither
by  ancient  nor  modern  writers.  If  we  consider  the  question  a
priori,  it  seems  hardly  probable  that  an  organ  so  vascular,  so
mobile,  and  so  essential  to  life  as  the  lungs,  can  remain  long  in
such  a  state  of  slow  and  inactive  inflammation,  as  we  know  to  be
frequently  the  condition  of  organs  less  necessary  to  life.  Ac-
cordingly, we  find  that  those  excellent  observers  of  nature,  the
Greeks,  have  made  no  mention  of  chronic  pneumonia ;  and  the
term  is  hardly  to  be  met  with  in  the  schools  of  more  modern
times,  although  it  must  be  confessed  that  these  have  been  too
much  in  the  habit  of  delineating  diseases  after  a  preconceived
theory.  If  any  physicians  of  the  present  day  in  Paris,  still  make
use  of  this  phraseology,  they  apply  it,  in  imitation  of  schools  the
most  ignorant  of  pathology,  to  pthisis  pulmonalis,  which  they
affect  to  consider  as  one  of  the  terminations  of  pneumonia.  This
is  the  opinion  of  M.  Broussais,  (Doct.  Med.  t.  ii.  passim,)  who
even  appears  to  consider  it  as  novel :  we  shall  hereafter  find
how  groundless  it  is.

I  am  acquainted  with  only  a  small  number  of  cases  which  can
be  considered  as  examples  of  chronic  pneumonia ;  and  they  are
extremely  rare.  As  I  have  stated  in  the  preceding  section,  I
have  occasionally  found  the  pulmonary  substance  around  a  gan-
grenous excavation,  much  harder  than  in  simple  hepatization,  and
creaking  under  the  scalpel.  The  incised  surfaces  in  this  case
have  the  granular  appearance  more  marked  than  in  the  acute
pneumonia.  This  appearance  is  still  more  distinct  when  we
tear  the  morbid  part ;  the  granulations  being  more  obvious,
much  firmer  and  drier,  and  very  much  like  the  eggs  of  certain
insects,  which  are  closely  pressed  together  without  any  interme-
diate substance. The  cut  surfaces  have  the  various  colouring

•  In  the  work  formerly  quoted  (Anat.  Path.  liv.  iii.)  M.  Craveilhier  gives  a  case
which  he  considers  ns  an  example  of  dry  and  non-fetid  gangrene  of  the  lung.  In  this
case  the  left  upper  lobe  was  converted  into  a  vast  excavation  communicating  with
the  pleura,  yet  still  containing  a  white  and  odourless  pus,  and  in  this  there  was  a
detached  fragment  of  pulmonary  tissue.  The  patient  had  lived  thirty-live  days  after
the  invasion  of  the  disease  ;  the  chief  symptoms  were  severe  dyspnrca  and  repeated
hemoptysis;  and  the  matter  expectorated  was.  by  turns,  mucous,  purifbrm,  san-
guineous, reddish,  and  without  fetor.  From  the  symptoms  and  appearances  after
death.  I  am  disposed  to  refer  this  remarkable  excavation  to  the  softening  and  sepa-
ration of  an  apoplectic  mass. —  (  Af.  I..)


i  HRONIC PNED  MO.VIA.


217


w  hich  is  observed  in  the  acute  hepatization  ;  but  the  violet  grey
and  the  livid  red  are  the  predominating  hues.  We  can  distin-
guish very  few  points  of  yellow  ;  but  sometimes  we  observe  a
distinct  greenish  shade,  the  result  of  the  gangrene  previously  ex-
isting in  the  vicinity.  The  diseased  parts  are  hardly  at  all
humid,  and  even  yield  scarcely  any  kind  of  fluid  when  scraped
by  the  scalpel.*  I  have  noticed  a  similar  condition  of  parts  after
an  haemoptysis,  which  has  been  succeeded  by  a  slight  pneumonia
of  several  weeks1  duration.  We  at  times  observe  something  of
the  same  kind,  but  very  rarely  and  indistinctly,  around  large
tuberculous  excavations,  and  in  the  small  interspaces  in  cases  of
numerous  tubercles;  but  in  both  these  examples  it  is  much  more
common  to  find  the  remarks  of  an  acute  hepatization,  which  had
occurred  only  a  few  hours  before  death.  In  instances  of  this
sort,  we  must  be  careful  not  to  confound  the  condition  of  parts
described,  with  the  grey  tuberculous  induration,  common  in
lungs  filled  with  tubercles,  and  which  is  only  one  of  the  forms
of  these  accidental  productions  :  the  tuberculous  induration  is
semi-transparent,  vitriform,  and  humid,  and  the  incised  surfaces
are  smooth  and  homogeneous.

We  may  also  term  those  cases  chronic,  in  which  the  pneu-
monia, although  originally  acute,  has  been  checked  in  its  pro-
gress by  blood-letting  or  other  antiphlogistic  means,  but  in  which
these  antiphlogistic  means  have  been  insufficient  to  procure
speedy  resolution,  or  even  to  prevent  relapses.  I  have  known
instances  of  this  kind  continue  two  months  in  the  stage  of  en-
gorgement, and  finally  terminate  in  simple  cedema  before  being
cured.  In  other  examples,  in  addition  to  the  engorgement,  there
existed  some  spots  in  the  state  of  hepatization.  I  have  even
known  abscess  of  the  lungs  occur  in  this  chronic  stage  of  the  dis-

i  •  •  •

ease.  Cases  of  this  kind  seldom  prove  fatal ;  but  in  the  small
number  in  which  I  have  been  able  to  examine  the  body  after
death,  I  have  found  different  parts  of  the  lungs,  here  and  there,
of  a  firmer  consistence,  and  drier  than  in  the  acute  hepatization,
but  in  other  respects  quite  similar.  In  the  intervals  of  these
portions,  the  pulmonary  substance  was  loaded  with  serosity  con-
taining small  specks  of  pus,  rather  suspended  than  dissolved,  and
which,  as  well  as  the  yellowish  hue  of  the  lungs,  seemed  to  me
to  point  out  the  resolution  of  a  case  of  pneumonia  which  had
reached  the  stage  of  suppuration.^

*  This  statement  appears  to  me  incorrect.  The  indurated  pulmonary  tissue  which
surrounds  gangrenous  masses,  far  from  being  dry,  is  usually  so  humid  as  to  be
(edematous. — ( JM".  L.)

t  The  statements  contained  in  this  section  will,  no  doubt,  appear  singular  to  many
English  readers;  and  I  confess,  that  if  1  felt  justified  in  placing  the  dissections  made
in  this  country  (including  my  own)  on  the  same  level,  as  to  minuteness  and  accuracy,
as  those  made  by  the  French  pathologists,  1  should  feel  disposed  to  question  the
truth  of  these  statements.  But.  as  every  candid  person  must,  admit  that  the  hurried
manner  in  which  dead  hodies  are  commonly  examined  in  this  country  (or  used  to  he


218


LATENT  l'NEUMONIA.


Sect.  V. — Of  latent  and  symptomatic  pneumonia.

When  we  consider  the  importance  of  the  organ  affected,  and
the  serious  mischief  produced  by  the  disorder  of  its  functions,  we
might  suppose  pneumonia  to  be  one  of  those  diseases  which  could
with  the  greatest  difficulty  escape  detection.  Nevertheless,  we
have  already  shown,  that  the  severest  instances  of  simple  inflam-
mation of  the  lungs,  are  sometimes  recognized  with  difficulty
during  the  first  days  of  the  attack ;  but  it  is  when  complicated
with  another  disease,  that  pneumonia  most  easily  escapes  the

so,  at  least)  renders  mistakes  extremely  probable  ;  and  as  we  must  likewise  confess
that  our  means  of  observation,  and  consequently  our  experience)  fall  vastly  short  of
theirs,  it  is  perhaps  no  great  stretch  of  candour  to  be  willing  to  receive  the  authority
of  such  men  as  Laennec,  Chomel,  Andral,  and  Louis,  in  preference  not  only  to  many
of  our  recorded  cases,  but  even  to  our  own  hurried  observation.  The  correctness  of
our  author's  statement  respecting  the  great  infrequency  of  pneumonia  in  a  chronic
form,  is  supported  by  the  concurring  testimony  of  the  most  experienced  pathologists
of  the  present  French  school.  Andral  says,  that  of  one  hundred  and  twelve  cases
observed  by  him,  only  one  lasted  more  than  thirty  days  ;  and  that  during  the  five
years  which  he  had  been  at  ha  Charite,  he  had  met  with  very  few  examples  of  hepa-
tization or  purulent  infiltration,  in  cases  of  more  than  two  months'  standing.  (]\led.
Clin.  t.  ii.  p.  365.)  M.  Chomel  states,  (Diet,  de  Med.  t.  xvii.  p.  25!?,)  that  in  the
course  of  the  last  sixteen  years,  during  which  he  has  examined,  on  an  average,  two
hundred  dead  bodies  annually,  he  has  only  met  with  two  well-marked  cases  of  this
affection.  Andral  notices  it  as  existing  under  two  forms,  the  grey  and  red  induration,
and  describes  it  briefly  as  being  dry  and  hard,  of  a  pale  red  or  greyish.  (Op.  Cit.
p.  310.)  Chomel  describes  the  lesion  in  the  two  cases  met  with  by  him,  as  consisting
of  a  grey  dense  induration,  without  granulations,  much  drier  and  harder  than  hepa-
tization, and  occupying  a  fourth  or  fifth  part  of  one  lung.  The  same  condition  of
lung  is,  I  think,  described  by  Corvisart,  in  his  Commentary  on  Avenbrugger,  p.  287,
aud  by  Avenbrugger  himself,  p.  262,  and  appears  to  be  that  found  by  myself  in  the
case  of  chronic  pleurisy,  detailed  in  "  Original  Cases,"  p.  247.  M.  Andral  likewise
considers  that  black  induration  of  the  lungs,  sometimes  existing  around  tuberculous
excavations,  and  which  Laennec  describes  as  a  particular  degeneration  under  the
name  of  melanosis,  as  being  frequently  the  result  of  chronic  inflammation.  (Op.  Cit.
iii.  p.  230.)  In  the  small  work  above  mentioned,  I  have  entitled  several  observa-
tions "  chronic  pneumonia ;"  and  1  certainly  have  been  in  the  habit  of  considering
many  cases  I  met  in  practice  as  examples  of  this  disease.  I  am  willing  to  admit,
however,  that  1  have  been  sometimes  mistaken,  and,  both  in  practice  and  in  my
dissections,  have  confounded  different  affections  under  this  name.

The  truth  seems  to  be,  that  inflammation  of  the  pulmonary  substance,  strictly  and
essentially  chronic,  (like  the  chronic  affection  of  the  serous  membranes,)  is  extremely
rare  ;  but  that,  as  a  sequel  of  the  acute  disease  imperfectly  resolved,  or  as  complicat-
ing other  organic  lesions  of  the  lungs,  it  is  by  no  means  uncommon.  Our  author
himself  admits  that  the  acute  disease,  made  chronic  by  treatment,  may  last  two
months  ;  and  Lorinser  says  that  this  period  may  be  doubled.  Both  M.  Andral  and
M.  Chomel,  however,  are  of  opinion  that  chronic  inflammation  of  the  pulmonary  sub-
stance is  very  common  under  another  name  and  form.  They  consider  the  thin  layer
of  grey  substance  which  is  found  surrounding  softened  tubercles  (and  which  Laennec
regards  as  simply  tuberculous)  to  be  the  product  of  chronic  inflammation.  Iu  this
opinion  they  are  joined  by  Louis  (Recherches,  p.  9.)  For  further  observations  on
this  subject,  see  the  chapter  on  phthisis  in  the  present  work.

Chronic  pneumoniu  is  not  indicated  by  any  peculiar  physical  signs,  presenting
those  only  of  obstruction  or  induration  of  more  or  less  of  the  pulmonary  tissue,  viz.
dulness  on  percussion,  absence  of  the  respiratory  murmur,  and  the  development  of
bronchophony  and  bronchial  respiration. — Trunsl.


It  A  X  E  X  T 1'  N  E  U  M  O  N I A .


219


notice  of  the  practitioner.  I  shall,  therefore,  proceed  to  point
out  the  complications  which  are  most  common,  and  most  likely
to  mislead.  I  will  not,  however,  notice,  in  this  place,  the  com-
bination with  pleurisy,  as  that  will  form  the  subject  of  a  distinct
section.  We  have  already  seen  that  pneumonia  is  sometimes
conjoined  with  haemoptysis :  it  still  more  frequently  supervenes
to  oedema  of  the  lungs.  The  sero-sanguineous  congestion  of  the
lungs,  which  takes  place  in  almost  all  dying  persons,  is  frequently
converted  into  pneumonia,  if  the  agony  is  at  all  protracted.  On
examination  after  death,  different  points  of  the  lungs  are  found
distinctly  hepatized,  more  particularly  during  the  prevalence  of
an  inflammatory  constitution.*  This  species,  which  I  term  pneu-
monia of  the  dying,  is  commonly  accompanied  with  a  very  strong
and  suffocating  tracheal  rhonchus;  but  the  presence  of  the  rhon-
chus  does  not  always  indicate  the  existence  of  this  disease.  This
rhonchus,  when  extremely  strong,  is  unquestionably  the  thing
most  apt  to  mask  the  crepitous  rhonchus  of  incipient  pneumonia.
Andral  encountered  this  difficulty,  and  would  seem  to  consider  it
as  insurmountable  (Op.  Cit.  p.  235,  &c.)  ;  but  I  am  of  opinion
that  attention  and  experience  will  always  enable  us  to  distinguish
the  crepitous,  amid  the  loudest  mucous  rhonchi.  I  have  never
experienced  any  difficulty  in  this  respect,  except  where  the  case
was  rather  the  cessation  of  life  than  a  formal  disease,  or  where
the  engorged  portion  of  lung  was  very  small. — Pneumonia  is
occasionally  combined  with  the  different  varieties  of  catarrh,  but
more  rarely  perhaps  than  with  any  other  disease  of  the  chest.  It
is  by  no  means  common  to  find  the  acute  catarrh  terminate  in  pneu-
monia; and  in  the  instances  of  epidemic  pneumonia,  persons
affected  with  chronic  mucous  or  pituitous  catarrhs,  are  perhaps
less  liable  to  be  attacked  than  those  who  are  in  perfect  health.
The  rule  is,  however,  not  without  exceptions.  The  suffocative
catarrh,  particularly  when  it  attacks  young  persons  or  adults,  is
often  complicated  with  pneumonia  ;  and  we  meet  with  indivi-
duals habitually  subject  to  chronic  catarrh  commonly  dry,  (but
becoming  occasionally  mucous,)  who  are  extremely  liable  to  be
attacked  by  this  disease,  from  the  slightest  causes,  and  who  have
two  or  three  seizures  in  the  course  of  the  year. — Phthisical  sub-
jects are  liable  to  attacks  of  pneumonia,  usually  of  small  extent,
and  the  symptoms  of  which  are,  therefore,  very  readily  con-
founded with  those  of  the  primary  disease.  On  this  account,  if
for  no  other  reason,  it  is  important  to  explore,  from  time  to  time,
the  chest  of  consumptive  patients,  more  particularly  when  there

*  Louis  states  (Recherches,  p.  39)  that  out  of  one  hundred  and  twelve  subjects,
who  died  of  various  chronic  diseases,  he  found  the  lungs  partially  inflamed  in  the
first  degree  (engorged)  in  ten,  and  in  the  second  degree  (hepatized)  in  twelve.  In
all  these  cases  he  says  that  it  was  evident  the  inflammation  had  supervened  only  a
few  days  before  death. — Trand.


220


LATENT  PNEUMONIA.


is  any  increase  of  fever,  or  any  sudden  decrease  of  strength.* —
Several  diseases  which  may  be  considered  of  a  general  kind,  have
a  singular  tendency  to  be  complicated  with  pneumonia,  or  to  ex-
cite this  affection  sympathetically.  It  is  thus  found  occasionally
to  supervene  to  an  attack  of  gout  or  rheumatism.  If  the  pains
of  the  limbs  cease  on  its  attack,  it  is  usually  recognized,  or  at
least  suspected,  from  obvious  symptoms;  but  if  the  pains  continue,
the  pulmonary  affection  remains  latent,  or  is  only  discovered  by
means  of  an  attentive  exploration.  The  eruptive  fevers  are
sometimes  combined  with  pneumonia.  Measles,  in  particular,
frequently  present  this  union,  at  the  period  of  the  disappearance
of  the  eruption.  In  this  case  the  pneumonic  affection  is  pretty
frequently  manifest ;  but  when  it  supervenes  in  the  course  of
confluent  small-pox,  or  severe  erysipelas,  it  is  almost  always
latent.  The  same  is  true  of  the  pneumonia  which  arises  in  the
course  of  violent  continued  fevers.  Nothing  is  more  common
than  this  last-named  complication,  especially  in  winter  and  during
the  prevalence  of  pneumonia ;  and  in  these  cases,  its  invasion  is
seldom  indicated  by  any  unusual  dyspnoea  or  expectoration,  or,
in  short,  by  any  of  the  ordinary  symptoms  of  inflammation  of  the
lungs.  It  is  true  that  it  only  occurs  towards  the  fatal  termina-
tion of  the  disease ;  but  probably  it  is  also  very  often  the  cause
of  this.  In  the  young  and  robust,  the  invasion  of  the  pneumonia
may  sometimes  be  suspected  from  a  marked  increase  of  fever
taking  place.  But  in  old  persons,  and  in  subjects  weakened  by
the  long  continuance  of  high  fever  and  low  diet,  it  comes  on  all  at
once,  attended  by  a  sudden  prostration  of  strength  and  loss  of
consciousness.  The  skin  becomes  harsh,  the  excretions  fetid,
the  teeth  and  tongue  covered  with  a  fuliginous  coating,  and  coma
or  the  tracheal  rhonchus  announces  the  approach  of  death.  These
latter  symptoms  frequently  indicate  the  supervention  of  pneu-
monia in  subjects  worn  out  by  severe  chronic  disease,  especially
cancer.  We  ought  to  range  among  sympathetic  pneumonies
that  which  constitutes  the  predominant  symptom  in  the  perni-
cious fevers  denominated  pneumonic.  The  morbid  anatomy  of
this  affection  is  yet  very  imperfectly  known,  from  the  circum-
stance of  its  proving  rarely  fatal;  as  we  fortunately  possess  in
cinchona,  when  administered  in  time,  a  certain  means  of  cure.

*  Andral  describes  the  intercurrent  pneumonia  of  phthisical  subjects  as  being  very
common,  and  as  often  occasioning  death,  from  being  overlooked.  In  the  acute  form
it  is  remarkable  for  its  frequent  occurrence  in  tne  same  subject,  it  being  by  no  means
uncommon  to  find  the  same  patient  affected  with  it  twelve  or  fifteen  times.  (CI.  M.  iii.
225.)  Louis  ( Rech.  p.  241)  whilo  he  admits  the  occurrence  of  this  complication
with  phthisis  in  the  early  stages,  (when  it  is  most  commonly  cured,)  notices  it  chiefly
as  supervening  towards  the  very  last  days  of  the  disease.  At  this  time  it  is  very
frequent,  yet,  he  says,  not  more  so  than  in  other  persons  dying  of  chronic  affections  ;
(see  the  preceding  note;)  so  that  he  conceives  himself  justified  in  stating  that  phthisis,
in  its  latter  stages,  has  no  particular  influence  in  exciting  pneumonia. — Transl.


TREATMENT  OE  PNEUMONIA.


221


We  have  some  facts,  however,  which  prove  that  traces  of  pneu-
monia have  been  found  in  subjects  dead  of  this  disease ;  I  have
myself,  in  two  accessions  of  this  fever,  witnessed  the  presence  of
the  glutinous  sputa,  and  a  very  intense  crepitous  rhonchus  *


Sect.  VI.  —  Treatment  of  pneumonia.

Pneumonia,  in  common  with  the  whole  class  of  inflammatory
affections,  seem  to  be  one  of  those  diseases  in  which  the  indica-
tions of  treatment  are  the  most  obvious.  And  yet  if  we  seek  to
establish  this  on  any  particular  theory,  we  shall  find  that  the

*  A  very  important  variety  of  pulmonic  inflammation,  important  no  less  from  the
causes  which  give  occasion  to  it  than  from  its  peculiar  characters,  has  been  lately
introduced  to  the  notice  of  the  profession  by  some  of  our  distinguished  surgical  patho-
logists :  I  allude  to  that  which  supervenes  to  wounds  and  the  larger  operations,  and
which  is,  I  fear,  too  often  latent.  See  Guthrie's  Treatise  on  Gunshot  Wounds,  (first
published  in  1815,)  2nd  Ed.  p.  284;  and  C.  Bell's  Surgical  Observations,  Part  iii.
p.  241.  Loncl.  1817.  From  the  statements  made  by  these  authors,  it  appears  that
pneumonia  is  a  very  frequent  cause  of  death  in  the  cases  in  question;  and  that  it
comes  on  in  the  most  insidious  manner,  scarcely  giving  warning  of  its  presence,  cer-
tainly not  of  its  violence,  until  too  late  for  beneficial  treatment.  In  these  cases  I
would  strongly  recommend  the  stethoscope  to  the  surgical  practitioner,  as  a  sure,
and  almost  exclusive,  means  of  acquiring  an  exact  knowledge  of  the  progress  of  the
disease.  From  the  account  given  of  it  by  M.  Guthrie  and  Sir  C.  Bell,  it  appears
evident  to  me,  that  had  this  instrument  been  applied  on  the  first  appearance  of  the
dyspnoea,  the  crepitous  rhonchus  would  have  immediately  pointed  out  the  presence  of
the  inflammation,  of  which  the  general  symptoms  gave  little  or  no  indication,  and
might  have  thereby  been  the  means  of  checking  its  fatal  progress  by  suggesting  the
proper  remedies.  At  the  same  time  that  I  state  this,  I  am  not  ignorant  that  cases
occur  (though  very  rarely)  so  completely  latent  as  not  only  to  be  unaccompanied  bv
dyspnoea,  cough,  or  expectoration,  but  even  to  yield  no  results  from  percussion  or
auscultation.  (See  Andral,  t.  ii.  p.  369.)  The  reason  of  the  lungs  becoming  affected
in  the  class  of  cases  just  noticed,  is  an  interesting  subject  of  inquiry,  but  one  on  which
I  cannot  here  enter.  It  is,  however,  very  doubtful  if  many  of  the  purulent  depo-
sitions found  in  the  lungs  after  operations  and  certain  diseases  which  give  rise  to
unhealthy  inflammation  and  phlebitis,  are,  in  reality,  the  consequence  of  any  pre-
ceding phlogosis  of  the  pulmonary  tissue.  They  would  certainly  seem,  in  some
cases,  to  be  rather  the  result  of  a  metastasis  or  transposition  of  pus  from  a  remote
part.

Cases  of  latent  pneumonia  had  not  escaped  the  notice  of  that  most  excellent  writer
J.  P.  Frank.  "  Est  tamen  (he  says)  ubi  in  thoracis  cavo  occulta  viscerum  inflam-
matio  latuit ;  cui  signa,  cum  viveret  aegrotans,  defuere  quidem  ;  sed  ubi  dira  inflam-
matio,  vel  facta  jam  pulmonis  suppuratio,  post  mortem  demum  in  conspectum
venerunt.  Eadem  in  pluribus  accidisse  vaccis  observavimus,  quas,  cum  epidemica
summeque  lethalis  has  bestias  prosequeretur  peripneumonia ;  vel  cum  saniores
apparerent,  experimenti  causa  mactatas,cum  duro  ac  inflammato  pulmone  secuimus."
De  Cur.  Horn.  Morb.  lib.  ii.  p.  135.  For  some  account  of  this  disease  among  cattle
by  Lorinser,  see  his  Lungenkrankheiten,  p.  212,  and  also,  Bojanus's  "  Anleitung  zur
kenntniss  und  behandlung  der  wichtigsten  seuchen,  unter  den  Hausthieren.  Berlin,  1820,
p.  165.  Lorinser  states  that  in  these  cases,  the  lungs  are  found  heptaized,  to  a
greater  or  less  extent ;  and  upon  comparing  the  size  and  weight  of  the  diseased  and
healthy  organ,  he  is  convinced  that  the  lungs  are  (as  Broussais  maintains)  actually
enlarged  in  pneumonia.  He  says,  that  he  found  the  diseased  lungs  weighing  from
twenty-five  to  thirty  pounds,  being  an  increase  of  from  twenty-two  to  twenty-seven
pounds  above  the  weight  of  the  sound  viscus.  For  some  valuable  observations  on
symptomatic  affections  of  the  lungs,  and  other  organs  in  surgical  cases,  I  refer  to  a
recent  paper  by  Mr.  Rose  in  the  14th  vol.  of  the  Med.  Chir.  Trans. — Tratid.


222


TREATMENT  OF  PNEUMONIA.


most  opposite  measures  have,  in  their  turn,  been  held  up  to  ex-
clusive commendation.  On  this  account  I  shall  here  content
myself  with  giving  an  exposition  of  the  results  of  observation
relative  to  the  chief  methods  of  treatment  hitherto  proposed.

Bloodletting.  From  the  time  of  Hippocrates  to  the  present
day,  most  medical  men  have  regarded  pneumonia  as  one  of  the
diseases  in  which  bloodletting  is  productive  of  the  most  striking
benefit.  To  this  general  truth  all  good  practitioners  have  ad-
mitted only  a  few  general  exceptions ;  and  it  has  only  been  by
some  few  theorists  and  medical  heretics  that  its  employment  has
been  proscribed.  The  same  uniformity  of  opinion,  however,
has  not  existed  respecting  the  quantity  of  blood  to  be  drawn  at
one  time,  the  period  of  the  disease  when  bloodletting  ceases  to
be  useful,  and  the  part  of  the  body  where  it  ought  to  be  per-
formed. The  greater  number  of  the  ancient  physicians  bled
only  at  the  onset  of  the  disease,  and  allowed  the  blood  to  flow
until  syncope  took  place.  This  practice  was  sometimes  followed
even  by  Galen.  It  was  much  used  in  the  century  before  the  last.
It  is  still  very  common  in  England  ;  many  of  the  physicians  of
that  country,  in  the  commencement  of  pneumonia,  directing  the
detraction  of  twenty-four,  thirty,  or  thirty-six  ounces  of  blood.
This  practice  is  not  to  be  found  fault  with  ;*  since  it  is  certain

*  After  the  matter  of  fact  statement  in  the  latter  part  of  this  sentence,  it  is  no
wonder  that  our  author  goes  the  length  of  admitting  that  the  English  practice  of
bleeding  largely  in  the  beginning  of  pneumonia  "  is  not  to  be  found  fault  with."
But  it  is  truly  wonderful  that  after  such  a  statement,  he  does  not  recommend  the
practice  in  preference  to  that  commonly  followed  by  most  continental  practitioners,
and  which  is  detailed  in  the  next  page.  To  the  readers  of  this  work  it  is  unneces-
sary to  say,  that  the  quantity  of  blood  mentioned  in  the  text  may  be  detracted
twice  or  even  thrice  within  the  period  of  twenty-four  hours,  in  the  beginning  of  the
disease,  not  only  with  safety,  but  unquestionable  benefit, — due  consideration  being
bad  to  the  severity  of  the  attack,  the  constitution  of  the  patient,  and  the  character  of
the  prevailing  epidemic.  It  is  only  in  the  more  advanced  stages  of  the  disease,  that
greater  caution  is  necessary  in  the  detraction  of  blood ;  and  it  is  the  prosecution  of
the  same  vigorous  treatment  at  this  latter  period,  too  common  in  this  country,  that
is  justly  obnoxious  to  the  criticism  of  foreign  practitioners.  In  such  circumstances,
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  small  bleedings  and  copious  leechings  used  abroad
are  vastly  preferable  ;  or  even  the  expectant  system,  with  its  starvation  and  its  in-
noxious ptisans.  The  system  of  medical  practice  in  this  country  is  perhaps  too
generally  chargeable  with  the  imputation  of  over  activity  ;  the  medicina  perturbatrix
is  too  exclusively  cultivated,  especially  by  the  younger  members  of  the  profession.
Poor  nature  with  her  vis  medicatrix  is  so  scorned  and  outraged,  in  what,  after  all,  is
truly  her  own  dominion,  that  it  is  no  wonder  if  the  acts  of  such  radical  reformers  of
her  plans  are  sometimes  turned  to  their  own  confusion.  1  believe,  however,  that  the
unlimited  intercourse  now  happily  existing  among  the  nations  of  Europe,  is  gra-
duallv  improving  the  medical  practice  of  each  individual  country.  This  is  obvious
in  respect  to  bloodletting  in  pneumonia.  M.  Andral  in  his  late  work  says,  that  the
first  bleeding  should  be  from  sixteen  to  twenty  ounces,  and  that  the  operation  may
be  repeated  twice  or  even  thrice  within  the  first  twenty-four  hours.  (Op.  Cit.  torn.  ii.
p.  379.)  M.  Chomel  also,  in  his  article  on  pneumonia  in  the  Dicf.  de  Med.  (torn,
xvii.  p.  243,)  says,  that  the  first  bleedings  should  bo  from  twelve  to  sixteen  ounces,
and  that  one  may  be  repeated  a  few  hours  after  another,  to  the  third  time  on  the
same  day.  In  a  recent  journal,  (L«  Clinique,  torn.  i.  No.  20,)  bleedings  of  from
two  to  three  pounds  repeated  every  twelve  hours,  are  strongly  recommended  by  M.
Renauldin. For  some  excellent  remarks  on  the  propriety  of  instituting  one  very


TREATMENT  OE  PNEUMONIA.


223


that  a  copious  bleeding  in  the  beginning  of  the  disease,  reduces
the  inflammatory  orgasm  much  more  speedily,  than  repeated
smaller  venesections  will  do  at  a  later  period,  and,  moreove  r,
leaves  less  chance  of  a  renewal  of  the  inflammation.  The  ancients
considered  bleeding  as  a  questionable  remedy  after  the  first  days
of  the  disease,  fearing  thereby  to  check  the  expectoration ;  and
the  best  practitioners  of  the  two  last  centuries  forbad  this  opera-
tion after  the  fifth  day,  if  the  discharge  was  mucous  and  abun-
dant. Apprehensions  of  this  kind  are  not  perhaps  unreasonable,
if  the  loss  of  blood  is  carried  to  syncope ;  but  we  know  from
experience,  that  in  a  lesser  degree,  though  still  pretty  copious,
bloodletting  "may  be  had  recourse  to  with  much  advantage,  in  a
very  advanced  period  of  pneumonia,  even  when  this  has  reached
the  suppurative  stage  and  is  attended  with  a  great  expectoration.*

copious  bleeding,  in  the  early  stage  of  pneumonia,  I  refer  the  reader  to  a  paper  by
Dr.  Robertson  in  the  Edin.  Journ.  vol.  x.  p.  192.  The  aphorism  of  Dr.  Gregory
there  quoted—"  the  danger  of  alarge  bleeding  is  less  than  the  danger  of  the  disease"

is  excellent ;  and  it  were  well  if  it  were  more  frequently  in  the  recollection  of

practitioners,  in  the  beginning  of  inflammatory  diseases.  Without  at  all  sanction-
ing the  practice  therein  detailed,  I  would  also  refer  the  reader  to  a  singular  docu-
ment in  the  same  journal  (vol.  xiii.  p.  165)  for  proofs  of  the  astonishing  extent  to
which  bloodletting  mav  be  carried  with  safety  at  least,  if  not  with  benefit.  The
writer,  Mr.  Comrie,  states,  that  his  practice  (the  disease  was  the  ardent  fever  of  the
West  Indies,  the  patients  seamen)  was,  to  take  away  fifty,  sixty,  or  seventy  ounces
of  blood  at  the  first  bleeding ;  and  that  his  patients  sometimes  lost  one  hundred
ounces  within  the  first  twelve  hours,  and  upwards  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  ounces
in  the  course  of  three  or  four  days!  I  once  knew  a  man  bled  to  eighty -four  ounces
at  one  bleeding,  in  an  attack  of  fever,  without  suffering  syncope,  or  any  ill  effect
except  great,  disorder  of  the  circulation  for  some  hours  afterwards.

In  the  following  short  sentence  of  a  celebrated  author,  we  have  at  once  the  very
best  practice  inculcated,  and  the  very  best  reasons  given  for  its  being  strenuously
enforced.  Speaking  of  the  treatment  of  pneumonia,  Diermerbroek  says — "  Vena
igitur  quam  citissime  in  brachio  secanda,  et  sanguis  liberaliter  extrahendus ;  eaque
vensesectio,  si  prima  vice  non  imminuitur  morbus,  postea  bis  terve  reiteranda  ;  qua
licet  vires  aliquando  dejiciantur,  et  tamen  de  causa  nihil  metuenclum,  quippe  prae-
stat  aegrum  debilem  sanari,  quam  fortem  mori."  Disput.  Pract.  de  Morb.  Capitis,
Thoracis,  &c.  p.  56.  The  pithy  remark  in  the  conclusion  of  this  sentence,  coupled
with  the  kindred  one  of  Dr.  Gregory,  ought  to  be  frequently  suggested  to  the  timid
practitioner. — Transl.

*  This  opinion  of  our  author  is  supported  by  almost  all  our  great  authorities,
and  among  others  by  Stoll,  Cullen,  Frank,  &c.  The  contrary  doctrine,  however,
has  the  sanction  of  many  most  respectable  names,  as  of  Pringle,  &c.  Andral  joins
with  Laennec  in  stating  that  bleeding  is  positively  beneficial  not  only  in  the  stage  of
hepatization,  but  even  in  that  of  suppuration.  To  the  testimony  of  facts  we  can  op-
pose no  equivalent  objection ;  although,  considering  the  very  limited  powers  of  art  in
removing  great  alterations  of  structure,  it  might  be  reasonably  conceived  a  priori,
that  a  hepatized  lung  was  not  likely  to  be  much  under  the  influence  of  venesection.
This  much,  at  least,  I  am  justified  in  stating  from  my  own  experience,  that  the
vastly  inferior  power  of  bleeding  in  the  second  and  third  stage  of  pneumonia,  ought
to  make  us  depend  principally  upon  what  we  can  effect  in  the  first  stage.  And  as
guiding  our  practice  in  this  most  important  particular,  I  consider  the  stethoscope  as
of  the  utmost  consequence  ;  for  without  it  who  shall  say  positively  that  the  disease
is  in  its  first  or  its  second  stage  1  On  this  point  of  practice,  the  opinion  of  Lorinser  is
strongly  against  bleeding  in  the  latter  stages.  He  says,  that  after  hepatization  has
taken  place,  bleeding,  by  weakening  the  powers  of  the  system,  impedes  or  altogether
prevents  the  absorption  of  the  effused  lymph  ;  and  that  while  one  or  two  venesec-
tions in  the  first  stage  often  suffice  to  produce  complete  resolution,  six  or  even  ten  in
the  latter  stage  will  not  only  have  no  good  effect,  but  will  decidedly  hasten  the  fatal


224


TREATMENT  OF  PNEUMONIA.


The  practice  most  commonly  followed  at  present,  over  the  whole
of  Europe,  is,  in  the  beginning  of  the  disease,  to  bleed  to  the  ex-
tent of  from  eight  to  sixteen  ounces,  and  to  repeat  the  operation
daily,  and  sometimes  even  twice  a  day,  if  the  inflammatory
symptoms  do  not  give  way,  or  if,  after  being  subdued  for  a  few
hours,  they  return  with  fresh  violence.  After  the  first  five  or
six  days,  the  bleedings  are  repeated  after  longer  intervals,  and
soon  cease  altogether,  except  in  cases  where  they  are  strongly
indicated  by  the  renewed  strength  of  the  pulse,  oppression  and
fever.*  Much  importance  was  formerly  attached  to  the  parti-
cular vein  to  be  opened,  the  preference  being  given  to  that  of
the  affected  side.  At  present  this  is  almost  universally  acknow-
ledged, to  be  a  matter  of  complete  indifference.

There  are  some  cases  in  which  bloodletting  is  clearly  contra-
indicated,  or,  at  least,  in  which  it  can  only  be  used  very  spa-
ringly, and  once  or  twice  at  most.  Of  this  kind  is  the  pneu-
monia which  attacks  old  persons  of  a  cachectic  habit,  and  that
which  supervenes  to  diseases  which  exhibit  obvious  'signs  of  a
septic  state  of  the  fluids,  such  as  the  violent  continued  fevers,
called  putrid  or  adynamic,  and  scurvy.  In  certain  epidemics,
which  have  occurred  among  persons  previously  subjected  to  the
influence  of  depressing  causes,  bleeding  has  been  found  uniformly
injurious.  I  was  myself  witness  of  an  instance  of  this  kind
among  the  conscripts  of  the  French  army  in  1814.  In  the  pneu-
monia then  prevalent,  I  very  seldom  found  bloodletting  indi-
cated, and  the  small  number  who  were  bled  bore  the  operation
so  ill  that  I  did  not  venture  to  repeat  it. In  gangrenous  pneu-

event.  He  adds,  that  be  has  repeatedly  proved  the  truth  of  this  doctrine  in  the  epi-
demic pneumonia  of  cattle  (Lungenseuche  der  Rinder)  in  which  he  invariably  found
bloodletting  if  not  injurious,  at  least  useless,  after  the  disease  bad  reached  the  stage
of  hepatization,  (Die  Lehrevon  den  Lungenkrankheiten,  p.  259.) — Transl.

*  It  would  appear  from  the  writings  of  the  modern  Italian  physicians,  that  bleed-
ing in  pneumonia  is  carried  to  a  greater  extent  in  Italy  than  our  author  seems  to  be
aware  of.  Among  others,  see  the  very  sensible  work  entitled  "  Annotaz ioni  di  Me-
dicina  Pratica  del  dottore  F.  Enrico  Acerbi."  Milano,  1819.  This  author  states
(Anno  primo,  p.  24.)  that  of  one  hundred  and  forty-two  cases  of  pneumonia  treated
by  him,  more  than  thirty  were  bled  from  ten  to  twenty  times,  each  bleeding  being
twelve  ounces  ;  and  that  the  usual  practice  was  to  bleed  night  and  morning,  so  that
in  the  course  of  eight  or  ten  days  from  fifteen  to  twenty  pounds  of  blood  were  taken
away.

It  is  singular  that  our  author  takes  no  notice  of  the  local  abstraction  of  blood  by
leeches  or  cupping,  so  important  an  auxiliary  to  the  lancet  in  all  inflammatory  dis-
eases, and  so  much  used,  especially  in  his  own  country,  in  this  very  disease.  It
appears  from  Andral's  work  (t.  ii.  p.  379)  that  M.  Lerminier  is  in  the  habit  of  using
venesection  and  leeches  simultaneously.  Immediately  after  V.  S.  or  even  while
the  blood  is  flowing,  "  M.  L.  fait  souvent  couvrir  de  sangsues  le  cote  douloureux."
It  is  a  good  general  rule  to  apply  a  large  number  of  leeches  (from  twenty  to  forty)
to  the  part  most  affected,  an  boiir  or  two  after  the  first  V.  S. ;  to  allow  them  not  to
remain  on  the  body  more  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour  or  twenty  minutes,  and  when  they
are  removed,  to  envelope  the  whole  side  in  a  large  soft  warm  poultice.  This  practice
is  still  more  indicated  when  there  exists  any  pleuritic  complication.  It  need  hardly
be  stated  that  the  local  bleeding  must  not  supersede  the  use  of  the  V.  S.  if  indi-
cated.— Transl.


TR  K AT ME NT OK 1'N  K  V  M  ()  NT I  A  .


■2->r>


monia,  one  bleeding  may  be  useful  at  first,  if  the  patient  is  strong
and  plethoric  and  the  inflammatory  symptoms  well  marked  ;  but
we  must  be  careful  not  to  augment  the  septic  tendency  by  carry-
ing depletion  too  far.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  remittent
fevers  denominated  pernicious  petipneumonic.  In  these,  it  may,
no  doubt,  be  sometimes  necessary  to  bleed  during  a  paroxysm,  in
order  to  prevent  suffocation  ;  but  the  utmost  caution  is  requisite
not  to  destroy  unnecessarily  the  strength  of  the  patient.  We
must  ever  keep  in  mind,  in  this  case,  that  bloodletting  cannot
cure  a  disease  which  will  certainly  return  after  a  few  hours  with
fresh  violence  ;  and  of  which  experience  has  long  since  demon-
strated bark  to  be  the  only  effectual  remedy.*  I  have  had  oc-
casion to  observe  some  cases  of  pernicious  fever,  existing  under
the  mask  of  different  inflammatory  affections,  which  were  treated
by  bleedings  too  frequently  repeated,  and  by  cinchona  given  in
too  small  doses,  or  left  off  too  soon.  These  fevers  were  only  im-
perfectly cured,  and  left  behind  them  various  lesions,  which,  in
some  cases,  ended  fatally,  and,  in  others,  tormented  the  patients
for  several  years.  The  same  result  was  observed  in  cases  where
no  blood  was  drawn,  but  in  which  the  bark  was  administered
in  too  small  quantity,  or  for  too  short  a  time:  an  instance  of  this
will  be  noticed  in  the  chapter  on  pneu mo-thorax.  When  pneu-
monia is  complicated  with  a  bilious  affection,  bleeding  must,  in
like  maimer,  be  much  more  sparingly  had  recourse  to,  than
when  the  inflammation  is  simple.  In  all  these  cases,  and  indeed
in  every  case  whatsoever,  the  more  feeble  the  pulse  is,  the  less
indication  is  there  for  venesection.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  well
known  to  every  practitioner  that  this  feebleness  is  sometimes  only
apparent,  and  that  bleeding  will  render  the  pulse  both  stronger
and  fuller.  To  discriminate  the  false  from  the  real  feebleness
of  pulse,  requires  the  tact  of  an  experienced  practitioner;  and,
unfortunately,  the  most  expert  are  in  this  often  deceived.  In
cases  of  this  kind,  the  use  of  the  stethoscope  will  tend  greatly  to
remove  our  doubts,  as  will  be  seen  when  we  come  to  treat  of  the
exploration  of  the  heart's  action.  At  present  I  shall  only  ob-
serve, that  whenever  the  pulsations  of  the  heart  are  (proportion-
ally) much  stronger  than  those  of  the  arteries,  we  may  bleed
without  fear,  and  with  the  certainty  of  finding  the  pulse  rise ;
but  that  if  the  heart  and  pulse  are  both  weak,  the  detraction

*  For  some  excellent  remarks  on  tlie  rehtion  which  exists  between  the  febrile
state  (strictly  so  called)  in  intermittent  fevers,  and  the  local  inflammations  with
which  these  are  so  generally  complicated,  I  beg  leave  to  refer  the  reader  to  the
valuable  though  too  hypothetical  work  of  3VI.  Bailly,  entitled  Traitt  des  Fievres
intern.itteiites  simples  el  ■pemicieuses.  Paris,  182.5.  In  this  work,  the  result  of  ex-
tensive clinical  and  pathological  observation  among  the  pernicious  fevers  of  Home,
the  absolute  necessity  of  administering  the  b  irk  in  order  to  check  the  progress  of  the
fever,  even  in  cases  complicated  with  the  greatest  visceral  inflammations,  is  clearlv
demonstrated.  See  particularly  p.  2G;>,  et  seq.  See  also  the  works  of  Morton,
Torti,  Quarin,  &C— ■Tranil.

Q


226


TREATMENT OF  PNEUMONIA.


of  blood  will  almost  always  occasion  complete  prostration  of
strength.*  I  have,  nevertheless,  observed  in  some  cases,  but
very  rarely,  that  a  small  bleeding,  even  in  such  circumstances,
has  succeeded  in  restoring  the  energy  of  the  circulation ;  and
this  has  been  when  the  debility  depended  on  cerebral  con-
gestion.

Derivatives. — Most  physicians  consider  blisters  as  being,  after
venesection,  the  most  efficacious  remedy  in  pneumonia.  Some
are  accustomed  to  apply  them  to  the  chest  immediately  after  the
first  bleeding.  Others,  from  an  apprehension  of  increasing  the
local  congestion,  have  recourse  to  them  only  at  a  later  period,  or
apply  them  to  the  extremities.  In  my  own  practice,  I  rarely
apply  blisters  to  the  chest,  particularly  in  the  acute  stage  of
the  disease,  from  having  very  rarely  observed  any  good  effects
from  them.  And,  indeed,  it  may  be  stated  as  generally  true,
that  blisters,  sinapisms,  dry  cupping,  and  other  cutaneous  ex-
citants, are  of  too  feeble  operation  to  displace  so  energetic  an
irritation  as  that  which  exists  in  acute  pneumonia.  Too  often
they  increase  the  fever,  and  consequently  the  congestion  in  the
chest.  And  this  latter  effect  is  still  more  probable  if  they  are
applied  to  the  thorax  ;  in  which  situation  they  are  further  inju-
rious by  impeding  the  action  of  the  muscles  of  inspiration.  For
these  various  reasons,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the  use  of  blisters
and  other  similar  applications,  ought  to  be  restricted  to  those
cases,  in  which  after  the  acute  stage,  resolution  proceeds  too
slowly,  and  to  the  disease  in  a  chronic  state ;  and  that  on  all  oc-
casions, we  should,  if  possible,  avoid  applying  them  to  the  most
moveable  parts  of  the  chest,  viz  the  middle  of  the  ribs.*f-

Alcalis  and  attenuants  ( Fondans.) — The  method  by  which

*  I  need  not  point  out  to  the  reader  the  high  practical  importance  of  this  observa-
tion. 1  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  have  only  proved  its  correctness  in  a  small  number
of  cases,  from  having  failed  to  institute  the  necessary  explorations.  To  derive  from
the  stethoscope  all  the  benefits  which  it  is  capable  of  affording,  it  ought  to  be  used
almost  as  frequently  as  the  watch. — Transl.

t  Blisters  are  in  general  indicated  in  pneumonia  by  the  exhaustion  of  the  patient,
the  weakness  of  the  pulse,  and  the  increase  of  dyspnoea  subsequently  to  the  first
general  bloodletting.  Good  practitioners  never  apply  them,  in  the  first  instance,  to
the  chest,  but  to  the  legs,  thighs,  or  inside  of  the  arms.  When  they  fail  to  act  as
derivatives,  blisters  st'll  operate  beneficially  by  exciting,  temporarily,  the  powers  of
the  system,  and  thereby  rendering  admissible  further  bleedings,  particularly  local
bleedings.  Sinapisms  act  in  the  same  manner,  but  in  a  less  degree.  It  is,  no  doubt,
proper  to  advise  caution  respecting  the  use  of  these  measures  ;  but  I  regard  as  erro-
neous the  recommendation  in  the  text,  to  restrict  their  application  to  cases  of  pneu-
monia which  are  slow  in  their  progress  towards  resolution,  and  yet  more  to  the
chronic  disease,  properly  so  called,  and  of  which  the  existence  is  always  so  proble-
matical.— (fM.  L.)

An  objection  to  the  use  of  blisters  on  the  chest,  in  the  early  stage  of  pneumonia,  not
noticed  by  our  author,  is  their  interfering,  in  certain  cases,  with  the  proper  explora-
tion of  the  chest  by  percussion  or  auscultation.  I  do  not,  however,  regard  this
objection  as  of  great  weight ;  as  blisters  should  not  be  applied  in  the  very  early
stage,  when  it  is  of  most  importance  to  institute  our  physical  examinations.  When
blisters  are  used  they  should  be  of  large  extent,  as  from  six  to  eight  or  even  ten
inches  square. — Transl.


TREATMENT OE  PNEUMONIA.


227


the  ancients  proposed  to  themselves  to  render  the  blood  less
plastic,  consists,  as  we  have  already  stated,  in  the  use  of  alcalis
more  or  less  neutralized,  particularly  the  subcarbonates  of
potass,  soda,  or  ammonia;  soap;  the  neutral  purgative  salts,
such  as  the  sulphates  of  soda,  potass,  &c.  given  in  doses  too  small
to  have  a  cathartic  effect.  Td  these  has  been  added,  during  the
last  century,  Virginian  snake-root,  from  its  supposed  efficacy  in
curing  the  bite  of  the  rattle-snake,  which  is  occasionally  found  to
cause  pneumonia.  This  medicine  has  been  much  used  by  the
Italian  physicians,  particularly  Sarcone;  but  both  it  and  the
others  above  mentioned,  have  appeared  to  me  of  little  use  in
the  treatment  of  pneunomia.  They  favour  expectoration  :  but
their  action  is  too  slow  and  feeble  to  obtain  for  them  much  of
our  confidence  as  means  of  arresting  a  disease  so  rapid  in  its
progress.  They  have  more  effect  when  the  disease  has  assumed
a  chronic  form.  These  means  are  rarely  used  as  expectorants  ;
most  practitioners  preferring,  with  this  view,  antimonials  or
squills,  and  these  only  towards  the  termination  of  the  disease :
during  the  acute  stage,  diluent  and  mucilaginous  drinks  are
employed.*

Purgatives  and  Emetics. — It  is  in  general  advisable  to  keep
the  bowels  open  in  pneumonia,  especially  on  the  approach  of
convalescence;  and  this  object  is  commonly  attained,  with  suffi-
cient effect  by  means  of  glysters  and  gentle  laxatives.  Purga-
tives under  the  name  of  derivatives,  are  employed  by  some  prac-

*  The  alcaline  treatment  of  pneumonia  was  revived  in  Italy  in  the  end  of  last
century,  with  seemingly  more  philosophical  views  and  in  a  more  active  form,  by  the
celebrated  Mascagni.  See  his  dissertation  Sull'  uso  del  carbonato  di  potassa  per  le
renelle  e  peripneumonie.  Mem.  della  Soc.  Ital.  delle  Scienze,  torn.  xii.  1804.  Partly
from  theoretical  notions  respecting  the  viscidity  of  the  blood  in  inflammation,  but
chiefly  from  witnessing  the  effect  of  solutions  of  the  alcalis  in  gravel,  and  in  dissolv-
ing lymphatic  concretions  and  in  softening  portions  of  hepatized  lungs  out  of  the
body,  he  was  led  to  try  and  to  recommend  their  employment  in  pneumonia.  And
this  practice,  it  is  said,  was  followed  with  wonderful  benefit  in  an  epidemic  of  this
kind  in  the  year  1800.  The  practice  of  Mascagni  was  adopted  by  his  pupil,  Dr.
Farnese,  and  by  him  extended  to  the  treatment  of  phthisis,  and,  according  to  his
testimony,  with  the  greatest  benefit.  See  Elogio  del  celebre  anatomico,  P.  Mascagni,
di  T.  Farnese.  Milano,  1816.  p.  84.  86.  108,  et  seq.  Dr-  Farnese's  practice  was  to
give  the  carbonate  of  potass  to  the  extent  of  from  a  drachm  to  an  ounce,  in  half  a
pint  of  water  daily.  '*  Whatever  be  the  severity  of  the  pneumonia  (says  Mascagni),
whatever  be  its  stage,  this  salt  procures  copious  evacuations  by  the  kidneys,  the
skin,  the  intestines;  and,  rendering  the  expectoration  less  viscid  and  more  copious
and  fluid,  speedily  resolves  the  inflammatory  infarctus  of  the  pulmonary  tissue."—
The  unquestionable  effects  of  alcaline  remedies  in  relieving  and  curing  calculous
complaints,  as  proved  by  Mrs.  Stephen's  medicine,  and  by  the  more  recent  and
scientific  experience  of  Brande,  Magendie,  &c,  give  considerable  countenance  to
the  plan  of  treating  pneumonia  recommended  by  Mascagni,  and  fully  iustify  more
ample  trials  of  it.  Speaking  of  the  treatment  of  this  disease,  Dr.  Darwin  (Zoon.
vol.  ii.  p.  314)  asks — whether  neutral  salts  may  not  augment  cough  by  their  sti-
mulus, as  they  increase  the  heat  of  urine  in  gonorrhoea  1  It  may  be  said  of  Darwin's
queries,  as  of  Newton's,  that  they  are  often  better  than  other  people's  assertions;
and  I  think  the  above  is  one  well  deserving  our  attention,  but  more  so,  perhaps,  in
bronchitis  than  in  simple  pneumonia. — Transl.

Q.2


228


TREATMENT  OF  PNEUMONIA.


titioners,  with  the  view  of  lessening  the  congestion  within  the
chest.*  Emetics  have  also  been  much  used,  either  as  deriva-
tives or  from  the  inflammation  being  complicated  with  bilious
disorder.  Stoll  employed  them  constantly,  in  conjunction  with
bloodletting,  in  the  beginning  of  the  disease;  and  the  same  prac-
tice was  followed  by  Corvisart.  Finke,  in  the  Tecklembourg
epidemic,  frequently  cured  pueumonia  (which  he  looked  upon
as  only  a  concealed  form  of  bilious  disease)  by  emetics  alone.
At  present  this  mode  of  practice  is  very  rarely  had  recourse  to,
bilious  affections  being  now  uncommon  and  of  little  severity

Tonics. — These,  and  especially  bark,  are  often  very  useful  in
the  pneumonias  of  old  persons  and  debilitated  and  cachectic
subjects,  especially  towards  the  termination  of  the  disease,  when,
after  the  suppurative  stage,  the  fever  passes  off  and  resolution
goes  on  very  slowly.  In  the  same  circumstances  the  ancients
recommended  wine,-f  a  practice  which  I  have  myself  sometimes
followed  with  success.  We  sometimes  even  meet  with  epidemic
pneumonias  in  which  bloodletting  is  constantly  hurtful,  and  the
bark  beneficial  in  every  stage  of  the  disease.  This  fact,  which
cannot  be  denied,  was  frequently  witnessed,  particularly  in  Ger-
manv,  towards  the  close  of  the  last  century  ;J  and  there  is  no
doubt,  that  Brown's  theory  was  indebted  to  this  medical  consti-
tution for  a  portion  of  the  fame  it  obtained  in  that  country.
Numerous  examples  of  the  same  kind  are  recorded  in  the  old
Journal  de  Medecine ;  and  I  have  myself  met  with  many,  par-
ticularly in  the  epidemic  among  the  troops  in  1814,  already  men-
tioned. In  gangrene  of  the  lungs,  cinchona  is  the  best  remedy.
I  have  used  it  successfully,  even  in  cases  where  the  hepatization
around  the  eschar  was  very  extensive ;  and  have  sometimes  even
combined  wine  and  opium  with  it,  when  the  violence  of  the  in-
flammatory symptoms  had  begun  to  subside.  To  be  effectual
it  must  be  given  to  the  extent  of  an  ounce  of  the  powder,  or  an
equivalent  portion  of  the  extract,  daily.  In  several  cases  I  have
continued  to  give  the  sulphate  of  quinine  for  more  than  a  month,
to  the  extent  of  eighteen  grains  in  the  twenty-four  hours.  Opium

*  There  has  been  much  difference  of  opinion  among  authors  on  the  eligibility  of
purgation  in  pneumonia.  1  bolieve  that  the  use  of  gentle  laxatives  recommended  in
the  text,  is  all  that  is  admissible.  The  common  practice  of  this  country  at  present,
is  too  much  disposed  towards  purgation  in  all  diseases.  In  pneumonia  this  practice
is  attended  by  many  disadvantages  ;  while  the  beneficial  effects  expected  from  it,
whether  derivative  or  simply  depletory,  can,  I  conceive,  be  obtained  much  more
certainlv  by  other  and  safer  measures.  In  the  not  unusual  complication  of  pneu-
monia with  gastric  inflammation  or  irritation,  purgatives  are  very  improper,  and,
I  believe,  do  much  mischief  in  the  hands  of  routine  practitioners  in  this  country.
— Transl,

t  Aret.  de  Curat.  Acut.  lib  ii.  cap.  1.

t  Bang,  Act.  Reg  Soc.  Med.  Ilafn.  v.  i.  p.  2o6  ;  Jadelot,  Mem.  de  la  Soc.  roy.  de
Med.  1776,  p.  87  ;  Frank,  Erlauferungen  der  Brownischen  arzeneylehr.  vi.  abschnir.
i.  ;  Horn,  Beytrnge  Zur.  Med.  Klin.  i.  p.  276.  547 ;  Gebel,  Hufeland  Journ.  xvii.
B.  p.  54;  Ratlemacher,  ibid.  xvi.  B.  p.  103.


TREATMENT  OK  PNEUMONIA.


229


by  itself  has  never,  as  far  as  I  know,  been  recommended  as  a  re-
medy in  pneumonia.  We  even  know  that  it  is  capable,  in  large
doses,  of  producing  the  disease — instances  of  which  I  have  my-
self seen  subsequent  to  cases  of  poisoning.  It  has,  however,  been
sometimes  employed  with  success  in  the  same  circumstances  as
the  bark.  With  these  exceptions,  it  should  only  be  used,  and
then  cautiously,  to  quiet  nervous  irritation,  to  procure  sleep,  or
to  check  an  excessive  diarrhoea.

Alteratives. — The  ancients  gave  the  name  of  alteratives  to  such
medicines,  as  without  occasioning  any  constant*  or  marked  eva-
cuation, effected  the  resolution  of  different  kinds  of  obstruction,
particularly  those  of  an  inflammatory  character.  Almost  all
these  agents  we  now  regard  as  stimulants  of  the  lymphatic  sys-
tem, and  in  this  way  explain  their  resolvent  action  :  of  this  kind
are  the  alcalis,  neutral  salts,  purgatives,  and  even  expectorants,
such  as  squills,  and  especially  antimony.  On  the  same  principle,
mercury  has  of  late  years  been  much  employed,  particularly  in
England  and  Germany,  although  perhaps  the  practice  was  still
earlier  used  in  Italy  by  Sarcone.  Calomel  and  the  soluble  mer-
cury of  Hahnemann,  are  the  preparations  most  used,  and  with
these  preparations  some  physicians  may  have  combined  opium,
to  prevent  their  action  on  the  bowels.  I  have  not  myself  had
sufficient  experience  of  this  method  [in  pneumonia]  to  be  able  to
appreciate  its  merits:  but  I  have  employed  it  enough  in  other
inflammatory  affections,  particularly  peritonitis,  to  be  able  to
state,  that  it  is  not  of  great  power  except  when  carried  to  the
extent  of  determining  an  incipient  ptyalism,  with  which  the  first
marks  of  resolution  show  themselves.  In  peritonitis,  the  in-
flammatory orgasm  decreases  as  soon  as  the  gums  begin  to  be
swollen.*

*  Both  opium  and  calomel,  separately  or  conjoined,  Lave  been  extensively  em-
ployed in  England,  in  the  cure  of  pneumonia  Rnd  other  acute  inflammations  ;  and
with  a  degree  of  success  which  entitles  them  to  the  greatest  confidence  of  practi-
tioners, as,  at  least,  powerful  auxiliaries  of  our  best  antiphlogistic  measures.  The
practice  was  first  introduced  to  the  notice  of  the  profession  by  Dr.  Robert  Hamilton
of  Lynn  Regis,  in  a  paper  printed  in  the  9th  vol.  of  the  Medical  Commentaries.  In
this  paper,  which  was  first  published  in  the  year  1785,  the  author  states  that  he  had
been  in  the  habit  of  employing  calomel  and  opium  in  the  cure  of  inflammatory  dis-
eases for  nearly  twenty  years.  His  practice  was,  after  bleeding  and  opening  the
bowels,  to  give  "  a  composition  consisting  of  from  five  to  one  grain  of  calomel,  and
from  one  to  one-fourth  grain  of  opium,  every  six,  eight,  or  twelve  hours,  as  the  de-
gree of  inflammation,  or  the  threatening  aspect  of  the  distemper  seemed  to  require  ;
and  a  plentiful  dilution  with  barley  water,  or  any  other  weak  tepid  beverage,  was  at
the  same  time  strictly  enjoined."  P.  199.  He  says  that  after  the  resolution  was
taken  to  make  trial  of  this  mode  of  treatment,  pneumonia  was  the  first  disease  that
fell  under  his  care,  and  adds — that  the  success  attending  the  administration  of  calo-
mel and  opium  in  this  disease  was  "  such  as  to  fill  him  with  astonishment."  P.  196.
This  practice  has  been  adopted  and  recommended  by  many  subsequent  writers  :  and
I  presume  there  are  few  practitioners  in  this  country  who  have  not  experienced  its
great  power  in  their  own  hands.  Dr.  Armstrong,  while  expressing  his  opinion  that
Dr.  Hamilton's  plan  is  defective,  inasmuch  as  the  precursory  depletion  is  too  slight,
and  the  doses  of  calomel  too  small  or  too  seldom  repeated,  savs  that  it  "  deserves  to
be  written  in  letters  of  gold,  on  account  of  its  great  practical  utility.*"  On  Typhus.


230


TREATMENT OF  PNEUMONIA.


Hie  means  above  detailed,  variously  combined,  constitute
nearly  all  the  curative  resources  employed  by  the  greater  num-
ber of  European  physicians.  Judging  from  the  necrologicai
tables  published  of  late  years,  and  from  the  information  I  have
obtained  front  the  practitioners  of  different  countries,  I  would
state  the  common  result  of  this  method  to  be,  a  mortality  of  one
in  eight  at  least,  and  one  in  six  at  most.

Tartar  emetic  in  large  closes. — The  preparations  of  antimony
have  been  employed  in  large  doses,  either  empirically  or  on
theoretical  grounds,  as  a  means  of  cure  in  different  inflammatory
diseases.  During  the  seventeenth  century,  more  especially,  to
judge  from  the  remaining  memorials  of  the  controversies  of
those  days,  some  brilliant  cures  and  many  unfortunate  events
were  the  consequence  of  this  practice.  These  latter  results  may
perhaps  be  attributable  partly  to  the  preparations  being  too

2nd  Ed.  p.  244.  To  the  author  just  named  we  are  indebted  not  merely  for  recalling
the  attention  of  practitioners  to  this  practice,  in  the  work  just  quoted,  but  for  an
important  modification  of  it  in  the  early  stage  of  inflammatory  diseases.  See  a  paper
On  the  Utility  of  Opium  in  certain  Inflammatory  Disorders,  in  the  Trans,  of  the
Apothecaries,  vol.  i.  In  this  paper,  although  the  author  recommends  calomel  to  be
conjoined  with  the  opium,  after  the  first  dose,  it  is  evident  that  he  considers  the
great  benefit  of  the  practice  as  flowing  from  the  opium  alone.  This  he  gives  immedi-
ately after  bleeding  to  syncope  or  approaching  syncope,  in  a  dose  of  at  least  three  grains.
Dr.  Armstrong  expresses  himself  in  the  strongest  terms  of  commendation  of  this
method  :  and  I  am  happy  to  add  my  own  testimony  to  the  same  effect,  in  the  cases
where  I  have  had  occasion  to  use  it.  To  such  as  have  not  seen  the  papers  of  Drs.
Hamilton  and  Armstrong  above  mentioned,  I  strongly  recommend  the  perusal  of
them.  The  following  observations  by  Dr.  Williams  on  this  plan  of  treatment  are
extremely  judicious,  and  merit  the  attention  of  the  young  practitioner: — "The  effi-
cacy of  this  combination  depends  in  a  great  measure  on  its  being  given  to  such  an
extent  as  to  affect  the  gums;  but  its  beneficial  operation  is  often  manifest  before
this  effect  is  produced,  and  in  some  cases,  especially  in  children,  without  its  occur-
ring at  all.  But  there  is  seldom  that  obvious  improvement  from  the  first  doses
which  is  often  apparent  in  the  exhibition  of  tartar-emetic  ;  the  operation  of  mercury
is  more  gradual,  and,  as  may  be  expected,  when  once  the  system  is  under  its  in-
fluence, the  effect  is  more  permanent.  It  is  therefore  especially  adapted  to  the  ad-
vanced stages  of  the  disease,  in  which  the  continued  operation  of  a  remedy  is  re-
quired to  resolve  a  solidification  of  the  lung ;  and  in  effecting  this,  and  in  preventing
those  remains  of  inflammation  which  lay  the  foundation  for  destructive  chronic  dis-
ease, mercury  is  pre-eminently  serviceable.  Some  doubt  has  existed  whether  the
mercury  or  the  opium  is  the  principal  agent  in  subduing  inflammation.  Dr.  Hamil-
ton considered  it  to  be  the  calomel,  and  he  combined  opium  with  it  to  relieve  pain,
and  to  prevent  it  from  passing  oft'by  the  bowels.  Dr.  Armstrong'held  that  the  opium
was  a  powerful  means  of  subduing  inflammation  after  bleeding  had  made  a  decided
impression  on  the  general  vascular  action.  In  pneumonic  inflammation,  however,
we  cannot  hut  admit  that  bolh  medicines  have  their  beneficial  effects,  each  by  its
own  influence,  and  by  modifying  the  action  of  the  other.  Thus  the  opium  acts  as  an
anodyne  in  subduing  the  pain  and  cough,  and  as  a  sedative  in  relieving  that  nervous
irritation  which  often  follows  both  bleeding  and  the  free  use  of  mercury,  and  which
tends  to  the  re-establishment  of  inflammation  ;  whilst  the  injurious  stimulant  and
restringent  operation  of  the  drug  is  prevented  by  the  previous  bloodletting  and  the
mercury.  The  latter  medicine  again,  besides  this  corrigent  effect,  more  gradually
exerts  that  specific  antiphlogistic  and  sorhefacient  action  which  has  established  its
value  in  many  diseases,  and  of  which  the  treatment  of  iritis  frequently  affords  a
visible  illustration.  If  we  adopt  this  view  as  a  guide  in  the  application  and  ma-
nagement of  these  combinations,  we  shall  find  that  it  leads  to  the  rules  which  expe-
rience has  already  sanctioned."  (Cyc.  of  Tract.  Mod.  vol.  iii.  p.  442). — Tran»l.


TREATMENT OF  PNEUMONIA.


231


active,  and  partly  to  ignorance  of  the  proper  method  of  using
them.  Be  this  as  it  may,  we  meet  with  traces  of  this  practice^
from  time  to  time,  in  the  writings  of  the  physicians  of  the  last
century.  I  do  not  here  allude  to  the  exhibition  of  the  medicine
in  small  doses  and  as  an  emetic,  nor  to  the  method  of  Riverius,
who  vomited  his  pneumonic  patients  with  it  daily,  or  every  se-
cond day ;  but  may  remark,  in  passing,  that  this  practice  has
always  had  partisans  among  practitioners.  Every  one  knows
the  anecdote  of  the  elder  Serane  quoted  by  Borden.*  It  was
constantly  followed,  to  my  own  knowledge,  by  M.  D'umangin,
Physician  to  La  Charite,  in  pneumonia.  This  gentleman  scarcely
ever  combined  bloodletting  with  it,  and  yet  his  practice  was  quite
as  successful  as  that  of  Corvisart,  who  bled  much  in  this  disease.
But  administered  in  this  way,  the  remedy  is  an  evacuant,  and
its  good  effects  may  consequently  be  attributed  to  the  derivation
operated  by  it  on  the  intestinal  canal.

The  employment  of  kermes  mineral  as  an  expectorant  may
be  considered  as  a  relict  of  its  ancient  use  as  an  alterant.  In
the  old  Formulaire  des  Hopitaux  de  Paris,  printed  in  1764,
we  find  the  remains  of  a  still  bolder  practice,  in  a  potion
entitled  in  pleuritide  et  in  peripneumonia,  and  which  consists  of
four  drachms  of  the  white  oxyd  of  antimony  in  four  ounces  of
the  infusion  of  borrage.  The  famous  bolus  ad  qaartanam  of
La  Charite,  is  another  proof  of  the  employment  of  antimony  in
large  doses,  and  as  an  alterant.  I  have  been  informed  that  the
practice  of  giving  antimony  to  this  extent,  was  longer  preserved
in  Italy  than  in  any  other  countries  of  Europe.  At  all  events,
it  is  to  a  modern  Italian  physician,  Rasori,  that  we  are  indebted
for  the  revival  and  demonstration  of  the  utility  of  this  method,
which  had  fallen  too  much  into  disuse.  I  say  nothing  here  of
this  author's  theory,  or  rather  of  his  modification  of  the  theory  of
Brown.  The  doctrine  of  stimulus  and  contra-stimulus  has
hitherto  found  partisans  only  in  Italy,  and  will  perhaps  never
reach  beyond  the  Alps ;  but  practical  facts  of  such  importance
as  those  in  question,  ought  to  find  all  medical  men,  whatever  be
their  theoretical  opinions,  disposed  to  put  them  to  the  test  of  ex-
periment. I  am  unacquainted  with  the  details  of  Rasori's  prac-
tice, the  first  idea  of  whose  method  I  derived  from  some  medical
men  who  had  been  in  Italy.  I  began  to  make  trial  of  it  in  1817,
and  learned  at  the  same  time  that  my  colleague,  M.  Kapeler,
had  tried  it  with  some  benefit,  and  without  any  inconvenience,
in  cases  of  apoplexy. For  a  long  time  I  restricted,  with  him,

*  Traite  du  Tissu  muuueui,  Par.  1767,  p.  2521.  Seraue  followed  tlie  method  of
Riverius,  and  very  successfully,  in  treating  fluxions  on  the  chest.  His  son,  how  -
ever, fresh  from  the  schools,  succeeded  in  persuading  him  that  he  bled  too  sparingly
and  gave  emetics  too  freely.  This  produced  a  singular  indecision  and  inactivity  of
practice  which  made  him  now  and  then  exclaim,  when  he  wishod  to  give  an  emetic,
but  did  not — Monjil,  m'abh  gastat  !  "  My  son,  you  have  spoilt  me  !" — Author.


TREATMENT  Ol-  PNEUMONIA.


my  trials  to  this  disease :  but  having  occasion  to  attend  two
cases  of  pneumonia,  in  which  venesection  was  not  practicable,  I
resolved  to  make  use  of  the  tartar  emetic  in  large  doses  :  and
the  recovery  of  both  patients,  equally  rapid  as  unexpected,  en-
couraged me  to  repeat  its  employment  in  many  other  cases.*

I  shall  here  detail  the  manner  in  winch  I  administer  this  re-
medy, and  which  differs,  I  believe,  in  some  respects  from  that  of
Rasori,  As  soon  as  I  recognize  the  existence  of  the  pneumonia,
if  the  patient  is  in  a  state  to  bear  venesection,  I  direct  from  eight
to  sixteen  ounces  of  blood  to  be  taken  from  the  arm.  I  very
rarely  repeat  the  bleeding,  except  in  the  case  of  patients  affected
with  disease  of  the  heart,  or  threatened  with  apoplexy,  or  some
other  internal  congestion.  More  than  once  I  have  even  effected
very  rapid  cures  of  intense  pneumonias  without  bleeding  at  all ;
but,  in  common,  I  do  not  think  it  right  to  deprive  myself  of  a
means  so  powerful  as  venesection,  except  in  cachectic  or  debili-
tated subjects.  In  this  respect  Rasori  does  the  same.  I  regard
bloodletting  as  a  means  of  allaying,  temporarily  at  least,  the  vio-
lence of  the  inflammatory  action,  and  giving  time  for  the  emetic
tartar  to  act.  Immediately  after  bleeding  I  give  one  grain  of
the  tartar  emetic,  dissolved  in  two  ounces  and  a  half  of  cold  weak
infusion  of  orange-leaf,  sweetened  with  half  an  ounce  of  syrup  of
marsh-mallows  or  orange-flowers;  and  this  I  repeat  every  second
hour  for  six  times ;  after  which  I  leave  the  patient  quiet  for
seven  or  eight  hours,  if  the  symptoms  are  not  urgent,  or  if  he
experiences  any  inclination  to  sleep.  But  if  the  pneumonia  has
already  made  progress,  or  if  the  oppression  is  great,  or  the  head
affected,  or  if  both  lungs  or  one  whole  lung  is  attacked,  I  con-
tinue the  medicine  uninterruptedly,  in  the  same  dose  and  after
the  same  intervals,  until  there  is  an  amendment,  not  only  in
the  symptoms  but  indicated  also  by  the  stethoscopic  signs.
Sometimes  even,  particularly  when  most  of  the  above-mentioned
unfavourable  symptoms  are  combined,  I  increase  the  dose  of
the  tartar  emetic  to  a  grain  and  a  half,  two  grains,  or  even
two  grains  and  a  half,  without  increasing  the  quantity  of  the
vehicle.  Many  patients  hear  the  medicine  without  being  either
vomited  or  purged.  Others,  and  indeed  the  greater  number,
vomit  twice  or  thrice  and  have  rive  or  six  stools  the  first  day;
on  the  following  days  they  have  only  slight  evacuations,  and
often  indeed  have  none  at  all.  When  once  tolerance  of  the  me-
dicine (to  use  the  expression  of  Rasori)  is  established,  it  even

*  It  was  in  18'21  that  Lnennec  began  to  employ  the  tartar  emetic  in  large  doses,
in  pneumonia  and  some  other  iullammatory  diseases ;  and  at  this  period  he  might
truly  say  that  he  w  as  unacquainted  with  the  details  of  Rasori's  practice,  as  it  was
then  verv  little  known  in  France.  In  1825,  however,  when  he  printed  his  second
edition,  he  was  not  ignorant  of*  it,  M.  Fontaneilles  having  given  an  account  of  it,
twelve  monlhs  before,  (Archives  Gen.  dr  M4d.  r  ev.  et  Mars,  1821,)  in  his  Translation
r:l  jlaaon's  Atom  ir  on  Pi  enmonin  and  the  Mrde  if  treating  it  by  Ewrtir  T«rti< . — (  M.L.)


TREATMENT  OK  PNEUMONIA.


233


very  frequently  happens  that  the  patients  are  so  much  consti-
pated as  to  require  clysters  to  open  the  body.  When  the  eva-
cuations are  continued  to  the  second  day,  or  when  there  is
reason  to  fear  on  the  first,  that  the  medicine  will  be  borne
with  difficulty,  I  add  to  the  six  doses,  to  be  taken  in  twenty-
four  hours,  one  or  two  ounces  of  the  syrup  of  poppies.  This  com-
bination is  in  opposition  to  the  theoretical  notions  of  Rasori  and
Tomrnasini,  but  has  been  proved  to  me  by  experience  to  be  very
useful.  In  general  the  effect  of  tartar  emetic  is  never  more
rapid  or  more  efficient  than  when  it  gives  rise  to  no  evacuation ;
sometimes,  however,  its  salutary  operation  is  accompanied  by  a
general  perspiration.  Although  copious  purging  and  frequent
vomiting  are  by  no  means  desirable,  on  account  of  the  debility
and  the  hurtful  irritation  of  the  intestinal  canal  which  they  may
occasion,  I  have  obtained  remarkable  cures  in  cases  in  which
such  evacuations  had  been  very  copious.  I  have  met  with  very
few  cases  of  pneumonia  where  the  patient  could  not  bear  the
emetic  tartar;  and  the  few  I  have  met  with  occurred  in  my
earliest  trials  ;  insomuch  that  this  result  now  appears  to  me  to
be  attributable  rather  to  the  inexperience  and  Avant  of  confidence
of  the  physician,  than  to  the  practice.  I  now  frequently  find
that  a  patient  who  bears  only  moderately  six  grains  with  the
syrup  of  poppies,  will  bear  nine  perfectly  well  on  the  following
day.  At  the  end  of  twenty-four  or  forty-eight  hours  at  most,
frequently  even  after  two  or  three  hours,  we  perceive  a  marked
improvement  in  all  the  symptoms.  And  sometimes  even,  we  find
patients,  who  seemed  doomed  to  certain  death,  out  of  all  danger
after  the  lapse  of  a  few  hours  only,  without  having  ever  experi-
enced any  crisis,  any  evacuation,  or  indeed  any  other  obvious
change  but  the  rapid  and  progressive  amelioration  of  all  the
symptoms.  In  such  cases  the  stethoscope  at  once  accounts
for  the  sudden  improvement,  by  exhibiting  to  us  all  the  signs
of  the  resolution  of  the  inflammation.  These  striking  results
may  be  obtained  at  any  stage  of  the  disease,  even  after  a
great  portion  of  the  lung  has  undergone  the  purulent  infil-
tration. As  soon  as  we  have  obtained  some  amelioration,
although  but  slight,  we  may  be  assured  that  the  continuation  of
the  remedy  will  effect  complete  resolution  of  the  disease,  without
any  fresh  relapse;  and  it  is  in  regard  to  this  point  more  particu-
larly, that  the  greatest  practical  difference  between  the  emetic
tartar  and  bloodletting  consists.  By  the  latter  measure,  we
almost  always  obtain  a  diminution  of  the  fever,  of  the  oppression
and  the  bloody  expectoration,  so  as  to  lead  both  the  patient  and
the  attendants  to  believe  that  recovery  is  about  to  take  place  :
after  a  few  hours,  however,  the  unfavourable  symptoms  return
with  fresh  vigour  ;  and  the  same  scene  is  renewed,  often  five  or
six  times,  after  as  many  successive  venesections.  On  the  other
hand,  I  can  state  that  I  have  never  witnessed  these  renewed


234


TREATMENT OF  PNEUMONIA.


attacks  under  the  use  of  the  tartar  emetic.  In  these  cases  we
observe  only,  in  the  progress  towards  convalescence,  occasional
stoppages.  And  this  is  more  particularly  the  case  in  respect  of
the  stethoscopic  signs ;  as  we  find  that,  between  the  period  when
the  patient  experiences  a  return  of  his  appetite  and  strength,  and
fancies  himself  quite  cured,  and  the  period  at  which  the  stetho-
scope ceases  to  give  any  indication  of  pulmonary  engorgement, —
more  time  frequently  elapses  than  between  the  invasion  of  the
disease  and  the  beginning  of  the  convalescence.  It  is  necessary
to  observe,  however,  that  this  remark  is  still  more  frequently
applicable  to  the  disease  when  treated  by  bloodletting  ;  and  more-
over, that  the  patients  subjected  to  the  antimonial  method  never
experience  the  long  and  excessive  debility  which  too  often  accom-
panies the  convalescence  of  those  who  had  been  treated  by  re-
peated venesections.

The  best  way  of  appreciating  any  particular  mode  of  treat-
ment is  by  its  results.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  only  began  last
year  [1824J  to  keep  an  exact  account  of  the  results  of  mine  by
the  tartar  emetic ;  but  I  can  affirm  that  I  have  no  recollection
of  death  from  acute  pneumonia  in  any  case  where  this  medicine
had  been  taken  long  enough  for  its  effects  to  be  experienced.
I  have  only  witnessed  a  few  fatal  terminations  where  the  case
was  a  slight  pneumonia  complicated  with  severe  pleurisy.  (We
shall  find,  when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  latter  disease,  that  after
the  first  stage,  the  emetic  tartar  has  little  effect  in  it.)  I  have
also  lost  some  patients  who,  besides  the  pneumonia,  were  affected
with  cancer,  phthisis,  disease  of  the  heart,  &c. ;  and  these  are
the  cases  where  I  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  the  different
degrees  of  resolution  in  this  disease.  Finally,  I  have  lost  some
who  were  brought  to  the  hospital  moribund,  and  who  sunk  before
they  had  taken  more  than  two  or  three  grains  of  the  remedy.

In  the  year  1824,  at  the  Clinic  of  the  Faculty  of  Medicine,  1
treated  by  the  tartar  emetic  twenty-eight  cases  of  pneumonia,
either  simple  or  complicated  with  slight  pleuritic  effusion.  Most
of  these  cases  were  very  severe,  yet  they  were  all  cured,  with  the
single  exception  of  a  cachectic  old  man  of  seventy,  who  took  but
little  of  the  rrtedicine  because  he  bore  it  badly.  During  the
present  year  [1825]  I  have  treated  thirty-four  cases  in  the  same
manner.  Of  these,  five  have  died  ;  but  of  this  number  two
women,  one  aged  fifty-nine  and  the  other  sixty-nine,  were
brought  to  the  hospital  moribund,  and  sunk  before  they  had
taken  more  than  two  or  three  doses  of  the  emetic  tartar ;  a  third
died  of  disease  of  the  heart  when  convalescent  from  the  pneu-
monia ;  and  a  fourth  fell  a  victim  to  chronic  pleurisy,  also  in  the
period  of  resolution  of  a  subacute  pneumonia.  These  two  last
cases  will  be  detailed  hereafter ;  the  one  at  the  end  of  the  pre-
sent chapter,  the  other  in  the  section  on  plcuro-pneumonia.  The
fifth  case  was  that  of  a  man,  seventy-two  years  of  age,  who  died


TREATMENT OE  PNEUMONIA.


235


of  cerebral  congestion  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  disease.  Of  these
five  cases,  then,  the  two  first  cannot  be  adduced  in  either  way  as
instances  of  the  effect  of  this  remedy  ;  and  the  two  next  afford
proofs  of  its  efficacy  in  pneumonia^  rather  than  the  contrary.
The  result,  therefore,  of  the  whole  is,  that  of  fifty-seven  cases  of
pneumonia  treated  by  the  tartar  emetic,  only  two  individuals,
both  upwards  of  seventy,  died  of  this  disease  conjoined  with  cere-
bral congestion, — that  is,  a  little  less  than  one  in  twenty-eight.*
In  private  practice,  during  the  last  three  or  four  years,  I  have
not  been  called,  in  consultation,  to  cases  of  acute  pneumonia,  or
to  cases  uncomplicated  with  violent  pleurisy,  except  such  as  ap-
peared already  threatening  a  fatal  termination  ;  and  yet  I  do  not
remember  a  single  case  which  proved  fatal  under  the  use  of  the
emetic  tartar,  except  that  of  a  plethoric  subject,  aged  seventy-
two,  whom  I  attended  along  with  Dr.  Juglar.  This  patient
laboured  under  a  relapse  of  pneumonia  after  a  delusive  conva-
lescence, the  third  attack  of  the  kind  he  had  had  during  the  pre-
ceding fifteen  months.  The  fever  was  intense,  with  sub-delirium
and  other  signs  of  cerebral  congestion.  He  took  the  emetic
tartar  to  the  amount  of  six  grains  daily  for  two  days:  tolerance
was  established  on  the  second  day ;  the  pneumonic  symptoms  de-
creased ;  th e  expectoration  became  again  mucous;  but  he  sunk
on  the  third  day  from  an  increase  of  the  cerebral  congestion.
To  this  case  I  can  oppose  two  others  where  the  probabilities  of
success  were  less,  and  where,  nevertheless,  a  rapid  recovery  took
place.

A  man  aged  forty-five,  weakened  by  various  excesses,  was
seized  with  pneumonia  in  1823.  I  saw  him  on  the  fourth  day  in  a
state  almost  hopeless.  The  right  lung  was  affected  throughout,
notwithstanding  venesection  had  been  repeatedly  used.  There
was  extreme  oppression  of  the  chest ;  and,  during  the  last
twelve  hours,  jaundice,  with  pain  in  the  region  of  the  liver,  had
come  on,  indicating  the  supervention  of  hepatitis.  I  recom-
mended the  tartar  emetic,  which  the  attendant,  Dr.  Michel,  the
more  readily  agreed  to,  from  having  seen  it  used  by  Rasori  at

*  In  this  calculation  Laennec  has  included  all  the  cases  of  pneumonia  received
into  the  Clinic,  without  distinction  as  to  severity  or  mildness.  Such  a  distinction,
howev  er,  is  necessary  to  enable  us  10  appreciate  accurately  the  effect  of  the  treatment
on  the  mortality.  It  cannot  be  proper  to  take  into  account,  in  such  comparative
statements,  cases  so  slight  th;it  abstinence  from  food,  confinement  to  bed,  a  few
leeches,  or  a  very  trifling  venesection,  sufficed  to  cure:  and  yet  1  know  that  of  the
fifty-seven  cases  of  pneumonia  cited  in  the  text,  the  fourth  part  at  least,  more  espe-
cially of  the  thirty-four  treated  in  1825,  were  of  this  kind.  In  reckoning  only  the
cases  of  well-marked  pneumonia  and  in  which  there  was  time  for  the  remedy  to  take
effect,  the  mortality,  according  to  my  notes,  ought  to  be  reckoned  as  one  in  tw  enty
or  even  eighteen.  It  is  probable  that  a  similar  correction  may  apply  to  the  results  of
treatment  recorded  by  M.  Renaben  who  informs  us,  in  a  very  interesting  memoir
recently  published  in  the  Revue  Mtdivule,  (Oct.  and  Dec.  1829,)  that  he  only  lost
one  patient  in  forty-five. — (  AT.  L.)


236


TREATMENT  DF  PNEUMONIA.


Milan.  We  prescribed  twenty  grains  to  be  taken  during  the
twenty-four  hours,  in  two-grain  doses ;  but  by  mistake  about
forty  grains  were  given,  within  the  same  period.  This  treatment
occasioned  but  little  evacuation,  and  on  the  following  day,  we
found  the  jaundice,  the  pain,  and  the  oppression  gone,  the  stetho-
scopic  signs  perceptibly  improved,  the  fever  less,  and  the  patient,
in  short,  out  of  danger.  Convalescence  proceeded  without  any
relapse.

In  June  1825,  I  was  called  to  M.  de  C — ,  aged  65,  by  M.
M.  Landre-Beauvais  and  Jadioux.  I  found  the  patient  in  the
eleventh  day  of  pneumonia.  He  had  been  repeatedly  bled  with
marked  relief,  but  this  was  always  speedily  followed  by  a  re-
newal of  the  violence  of  the  disease.  Since  the  preceding  day,
he  had  been  insensible,  and  he  now  lay  with  the  tracheal  rhon-
chus  of  the  dying,  and  covered  with  a  sweat,  which  felt  cold  on
the  extremities.  Two  days  before,  the  debility  not  justifying  the
loss  of  more  blood,  tartar  emetic  had  been  tried  ;  but  the  first
doses  having  increased  a  diarrhoea  which  the  patient  laboured
under,  and  the  evacuations  having  occasioned  syncope,  the  medi-
cine was  suspended  after  two  or  three  grains,  at  most,  had  been
given.  On  examination,  both  lungs  were  found  to  be  affected  ;
the  right,  over  a  great  extent  and  in  an  advanced  state  of  hepa-
tization ;  thf  left  at  the  roots  and  base,  in  the  stage  of  engorge-
ment and  incipient  hepatization.  I  recommended  the  aromatic
antimonial  infusion,  in  doses  of  a  grain  and  a  half  of  the  tartar
emetic,  with  the  syrup  of  poppy.  The  patient  bore  the  medi-
cine well,  and  took  eighteen  grains  during  the  first  twenty-four
hours.  It  did  not  occasion  more  purging  than  had  previously
existed.  During  the  administration  the  patient  recovered  his
consciousness  ;  the  rhonchus,  sweat  and  oppression  disappeared  ;
and  when  we  saw  him  on  the  following  day,  we  found  him  de-
cidedly convalescent,  the  stethoscopic  signs  indicating  resolution.
The  medicine  was  continued  for  some  days,  and  convalescence
proceeded  without  any  fresh  relapse.  It  was  questioned  whether
the  sweat  which  existed  at  the  time  when  the  tartar  emetic  was
administered,  might  not  have  been  critical  in  this  case.  I  cannot
believe  that  a  perspiration  of  the  kind  described,  coming  on  with
cerebral  congestion  and  the  tracheal  rhonchus  of  the  moribund,
can  be  considered  as  critical,  more  particularly  as  it,  as  well  as
the  other  mortal  symptoms,  passed  oft"  during  the  use  of  the
antimony.

The  above  results  of  my  practice  are  more  favourable  than
those  of  Iiasori\s,  lately  published.*  This  may  be  owing  to  two
causes, — first,  because  auscultation  enables  us  to  ascertain  the
existence  of  pneumonia  much  quicker  than  we  could  do  from  the


*  ArJiiv.  Gen.  de  Med.  t.  iv\ Mars  18'.M.


TREATMENT OF  PNEUMONIA.


237


ordinary  symptoms  ;  and,  secondly,  because,  in  all  probability,
many  cases  of  simple  pleurisy,  or  of  pleuropneumonia  with  pre-
dominance of  pleurisy,  are  comprehended  by  Rasori  under  the
name  of  pneumonia, — it  being  impossible  to  discriminate  these
different  affections  from  each  other,  without  the  aid  of  ausculta-
tion. I  have  already  stated  that  we  must  not  expect  equally
favourable  results  in  the  treatment  of  pleurisy,  as  in  the  treat-
ment of  pneumonia,  by  the  tartar  emetic.

My  cousin,  Dr.  A.  Laennec,  physician  of  the  Hotel  Dieu  of
Nantes,  has  treated  with  the  tartar  emetic,  during  the  last  two
vears,  forty  cases  of  pleuro-pneumonia.  Of  these  six  proved
fatal,  three  in  consequence  of  errors  of  regimen  during  conva-
lescence. Subtracting  these,  then,  the  proportion  of  deaths  will
be  one  in  thirty.*  Dr.  Hellis  of  Rouen  has  lately  presented  to
the  Royal  Academy  of  Medicine,  a  memoir  on  the  treatment  of
pneumonia  after  the  method  of  Riverius  and  Stoll,  that  is,  by
repeated  emetics.f  Of  forty-seven  cases  treated  by  him  he  lost
only  five,  being  a  proportion  somewhat  less  than  one  in  nine.
This  result,  although  much  less  favourable  than  that  which  has
followed  the  use  of  the  tartar  emetic  in  large  doses  in  my  prac-
tice, is  yet  more  so  than  that  obtained  from  the  employment  of
bloodletting  and  derivatives,  which  I  have  stated  to  be  one  in
six  or  eight.  Independently  of  being  less  successful,  the  practice
of  Riverius  has  not  even  the  merit  of  being  more  gentle  than  that
of  the  tartar  emetic  in  large  doses ;  as  the  repeated  evacuations
produced  by  it  occasion  great  distress  to  the  patients  and  alarm  to

*  An  account  of  seventeen  of  these  cases  is  published  in  the  Journ.  de  Med.  de  la
Sac.  de  la  Loire  Infer,  for  Sep.  1825.  These  are  all  severe  cases,  and  the  results  are
consequently  more  conclusive  than  those  recorded  in  the  practice  of  our  author.  One
of  these  cases  (the  tenth)  afforded  a  well-marked  instance  of  a  cure  of  pulmonary
abscess,  and  finely  corroborates  the  statement  advanced  by  me  in  a  former  note
of  the  necessity  of  the  presence  of  a  peculiar  form  of  expectoration  in  such
cases.  At  the  same  time  that  an  imperfect  pectoriloquy  and  guggling  rhonchus  were
observed,  the  patient  expectorated  copiously  during  two  days,  "  sputa  at  first  red,
then  resembling  the  washings  of  flesh,  and  finally  yellower  and  almost  purulent;"
and  when  this  temporary  discharge  had  ceased,  the  pectoriloquy  became  perfect,
the  cavernous  rhonchus  disappeared  and  was  replaced  by  a  very  pure  cavernous  re-
spiration.

Ever  since,  Dr.  Ambroise  Laennec  has  continued  to  treat  pneumonia  with  tartar
emetic  in  large  doses,  in  the  Hotel  Dieu  of  Nantes  and  in  his  private  practice,  and
always  with  a  result  as  satisfactory  at  least.  His  plan  is  to  commence  with  blood-
letting, repeated  according  to  circumstances,  and  not  to  administer  the  antimony  un-
less the  first  bleedings  have  produced  no  marked  amelioration.  But  if  the  inflam-
mation occupies  both  lungs  at  the  same  time,  or  if  it  have  already  reached  the  stage
of  hepatization,— in  other  words,  if  the  physical  signs  and  general  symptoms  indi-
cate the  presence  of  a  disease  so  severe  as  to  threaten  an  unfavourable  result, — he
prescribes  the  tartar  emetic  from  the  very  beginning,  and,  in  imitation  of  Rasori,  pro-
portions his  doses  to  the  severity  of  the  disease. — (M.  L.)

t  This  memoir  has  since  been  published  by  the  author  under  the  title  Clinique
MidieaU  de  I' Hotel  Dieu  de  Rouen,  Premiere  Ann6e.  Paris  1826.  From  this  work,
and  also  from  another  now  before  me  entitled  Mirnoire  sur  les  fluxions  de  poitrine,
par  Louis  Valentin,  M.  D.  Nancy,  1815;  it  would  seem  that  the  practice  of  giving
emetics  in  pneumonia,  so  much  employed  formerly  by  Stoll  and  others,  has  still
many  partisans  in  France. —  Tmnsl.


■238


TREATMENT OF  PNEUMONIA.


the  attendants,  while  such  effects  take  place,  in  the  other  method,
at  most  only  on  the  two  first  days.  I  continue  the  use  of  the
medicine  as  long  as  the  tolerance  lasts,  and  while  there  exists  any
remains  of  the  crepitous  rhonchus.  This  tolerance  I  every  day
find  to  continue  indefinitely,  in  patients  in  full  convalescence, —
a  fact  which  is  not  in  accordance  with  Rasori's  theory.  If  I  have
been  correctly  informed,  he  considers  the  tolerance  as  owing  to
the  excess  of  stimulus  existing  in  the  system,  and  which  pro-
duces the  disease  ;  and,  according  to  him,  as  soon  as  the  excess
of  stimulus  is  destroyed  by  the  contra-stimulant  effect  of  the
tartar  emetic,  the  tolerance  ought  to  cease.  It  is  certainly  true
that  after  the  acute  period  of  the  disease,  the  tolerance  dimi-
nishes or  sometimes  entirely  ceases ;  but  it  is  more  common  to
find  the  patient  become  habituated  to  the  medicine,  insomuch
that,  during  convalescence  and  when  he  has  begun  to  use  as  much
food  as  in  health,  he  will  take  daily,  without  knowing  it,  six,  nine,
twelve,  and  even  eighteen  grains  of  the  emetic  tartar.  Putting
aside  entirely  the  question  of  theory,  I  agree  with  Rasori  in
opinion,  that  the  tartar  emetic  is  in  general  better  supported,  and
produces  more  speedy  and  powerful  effects,  in  proportion  as  the
patient's  constitution  and  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  bear  the
marks  of  great  plethora  and  high  vital  action  ;  but  I  must,  at
the  same  time,  remark,  that  similar  results  are  occasionally  ob-
tained in  debilitated  and  cachectic  subjects,  who  have  not  been
able  to  bear  bloodletting,  notwithstanding  the  presence  of  an  in-
tense local  inflammation.

Upon  comparing  the  facts  which  I  have  witnessed  in  my  own
practice,  I  am  convinced  that  the  tolerance  depends  on  the  con-
currence of  several  circumstances.  In  the  first  place,  the  medi-
cine in  considerable  doses  is  less  emetic  than  in  small  doses ;  an
observation  which  had  been  already  made  by  most  practitioners.
In  the  second  place,  the  habit  which  accustoms  the  stomach  to
all  sorts  of  substances  seems  readily  formed  in  respect  of  this,
since  we  find  that  vomiting  or  purging  almost  always  follows  its
administration  on  the  first  day,  and  scarcely  ever  returns  after
the  second.  A  third  circumstance  which  contributes  much  to
the  prevention  of  vomiting  is  the  ingestion  of  the  medicine  in  an
agreeable  vehicle,  somewhat  aromatic  and  moderately  diluted.
The  intervention  of  a  period  of  two  hours  between  the  doses  also
contributes  to  the  same  result.  I  have  excited  copious  vomiting,
by  means  of  the  tartar  emetic  given  in  doses  of  two  grains  in
three  ounces  of  warm  water,  every  quarter  of  an  hour,  in  the  com-
mencement of  a  bilious  pneumonia;  while  the  same  patient  has
taken  it  on  the  following  and  subsequent  days,  in  doses  of  from
six  to  nine  grains,  in  the  manner  formerly  mentioned,  without  ex-
periencing evacuations  of  any  kind.  When  the  flavour  of  the
orange-leaf  is  disagreeable  to  the  patient,  I  give  the  medicine  in
some  other  aromatic  infusion,  or  sweetened  emulsion. When  it


TREATMENT  OF  PNEUMONIA.


239


occasions  too  copious  evacuations,  I  conjoin. with  it,  as  I  have
stntcd  above,  a  small  quantity  of  opium, — the  only  corrective  of
its  operation  in  this  way  that  I  have  been  able  to  find.  Cinchona
certainly  does  not  act  in  the  same  way,  although  it  has  been  sup-
posed to  neutralize  the  tartar  emetic  in  the  bolus  ad  quartannm
of  La  Charite  #  There  is  no  doubt  that  bark,  as  well  as  the
various  vegetable  infusions  usually  combined  with  tartar  emetic,
more  or  less  decompose  this  medicine  ;  but  this  change  of  state
does  not  seem  in  any  way  to  affect  its  virtues,  since  we  find  that
one  or  two  grains  dissolved  in  a  pint  of  vegetable  broth,  lemon-
ade, decoction  of  tamarinds,  or  even  strong  decoction  of  bark,
will  produce  very  effective  vomiting  :  and  this  result  we  also  ob-
serve occasionally  from  the  bolus  above  mentioned,  especially
Avhen  given  in  small  doses.

The  practice  above  detailed  is  not  in  reality  so  bold  as  it
seems  at  first  sight ;  since  only  one,  two,  or  at  most  three  grains
of  the  tartar  emetic  are  given  at  one  dose, — a  quantity  which
practitioners  have  been  long  accustomed  to  administer.  The
medicine  is,  moreover,  given  much  diluted,  and  is  thereby  de-
prived of  all  the  caustic  properties  which  it  possesses.  These,
be  it  remembered,  are  but  feeble,  since  we  know  that  it  only  then
produces  pustules  when  it  is  applied  in  substance,  and  retained
in  contact  with  the  skin  for  two  or  three  days.'p In  prescribing
the  medicine,  we  are  careful  not  to  repeat  the  dose  if  the  preced-
ing has  occasioned  any  ill  consequence,  a  circumstance  which
will  always  obviate  any  risk  from  its  employment,  in  the  hands
of  the  prudent  and  active  practitioner. I  have  been  in  the  daily
habit  of  employing  the  tartar  emetic  in  the  hospital  since  1816,
and  more  particularly  since  1821  ;  and  I  do  not  think  that  any
of  those  who  have  observed  my  practice,  have  ever  witnessed  any
ill  effect  of  consequence,  from  its  administration. And  I  can
give  a  like  report  of  its  effects  in  my  private  practice,  with  this
single  exception,  that  I  have  observed,  in  the  latter,  vomiting  to
be  more  frequent  than  in  the  hospital. This  difference  of  result
has  appeared  to  me  owing  to  the  patients  being  informed  by  the
nurses  or  their  friends,  that  they  were  taking  tartar  emetic,  a
thing  which  I  have  always  been  anxious  to  conceal  from  them.

I  have  employed  the  tartar  emetic  in  large  doses,  in  many
other  diseases  besides  pneumonia,  particularly  in  other  inflam-
matory affections,  and  in  fluxes  and  congestions  of  an  active  or
hypersthenic  kind. Convinced  of  the  importance  of  this  mode  of

*  The  bolus  ad  quartanam  used  by  M.  Laennec  in  Necker  hospital,  the  same  I  pre-
sume as  that  of  La  Charit6,  consists  of  one  grain  of  the  emetic  tartar  to  the  dram  of
bark,  made  into  a  mass  by  extract  of  juniper.  (Ratier,  Formul.  de  Hdpitaux,  p.  193.)
— Transl.

f  A  strong  solution  will  have  the  same  effect ;  and  this,  and  still  more  the  medi-
cine in  substance,  will  commonly  produce  its  characteristic  irritation  much  sooner
than  is  stated  in  the  text. — Transl.


210


TREATMENT  OF  PNEUMONIA.


treatment,  and  of  the  administration  of  many  other  medicines  in
much  larger  doses  than  are  usual,  I  think  it  right  to  give  in  this
place  a  brief  account  of  the  principal  results  which  I  have  ob-
tained in  this  way.  1.  Although  emetic  tartar  answers  in  gene-
ral well  in  inflammatory  and  sthenic  diseases,  all  inflammations
do  not  yield  to  it  in  the  same  degree.  2.  In  the  inflammations
of  serous  membranes,  and  particularly  in  pleurisy,  the  remedy  is
rarely  heroic,  and  never  unless  the  disease  is  very  acute.  It  in-
deed reduces  speedily  the  inflammatory  action  ;  but  when  the
fever  and  pain  have  ceased,  the  effusion  does  not  always  disap-
pear more  rapidly  under  the  use  of  the  tartar  emetic,  than  with-
out it.  I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  trying  the  effect  of
this  medicine  in  peritonitis,  and  indeed  I  should  feel  unwilling  to
do  so,  on  account  of  the  admirable  effects  which  I  have  found
from  another  kind  of  practice,  that,  namely,  of  mercurial  inunc-
tion, carried  rapidly  to  salivation,  after  one  or  two  applications
of  leeches.  In  a  case  which  presented  all  the  symptoms  of  acute
arachnitis,  I  obtained  a  complete  cure  by  the  tartar  emetic  in  a
period  of  forty-eight  hours.*  3.  In  three  instances,  and  nearly
in  the  same  space  of  time,  I  observed  all  the  symptoms  of  acute
hydrocephalus  disappear  under  the  use  of  the  tartar  emetic.  In
two  of  these,  the  cerebral  affection  supervened  in  the  course  of
continued  fever.  The  third  occurred  in  the  person  of  a  young
man,  who,  after  long  watching,  was  seized  with  vertigo  and  other
signs  of  cerebral  disorder.  For  these  complaints  he  had  leeches
and  cold  lotions  applied,  but  without  benefit :  at  the  end  of  two
months  he  fell  into  a  fit,  and,  after  five  days,  was  brought  into
the  Necker  Hospital.  At  this  time  he  was  insensible,  motion-
less, extremely  pale,  and  with  the  pupils  much  dilated.  Leeches
were  ordered  to  the  temples,  but  only  eight  fixed,  and  drew  little
blood.  I  prescribed,  at  the  same  time,  twelve  grains  of  the
tartar  emetic  to  be  taken  in  twenty-four  hours.  On  the  following
day  he  could  move  and  speak  a  little.  I  then  ordered  fifteen
grains  of  the  medicine,  and  found  him,  on  the  succeeding  day,
much  better  :  although  still  very  weak,  he  had  regained  en-
tirely both  sense  and  motion,  and  the  pupil  was  now  hardly  at
all  dilated.  As  he  had  had  no  evacuation  of  any  kind,  I  pre-
scribed eighteen  grains  of  the  tartar  emetic  and  also  some  food.
On  the  sixth  day  he  was  completely  convalescent,  and  had  re-
covered his  appetite.  He  continues  in  perfect  health.  I  for-
merly stated  that  I  have  found  this  medicine  useful  in  the  suffo-
cative catarrh  of  adults,  and  in  oedema  of  the  lungs,  especially
when  these  affections  are  combined  with  slight  pneumonia.  Dr.
Ambrose  Laennec  has  effected,  by  the  same  means,  a  cure  of  a

*  Revue  Med.  Juin,  1825,  p.  .144.  But  the  efficacy  of  the  antimony  may  be  here
questioned,  as  the  improvement  did  not  occur  until  after  bloodletting  (rom  the  foot.
— (M.  L.)


THE  AT  MIC  XT OF  PNEUMONIA.


2U


very  violent  idiopathic  tenatus,  in  the  space  of  a  very  few  days.*
I  had  lately  under  my  care  an  acute  inflammation  of  several  of  the
veins  in  the  arm,  treated  in  the  same  way. The  basilic  vein  was
greatly  enlarged,  hard  as  a  cord,  and  its  course  indicated  on  the
skin  by  a  line  of  a  deep  red  colour. The  fore-arm  was  very  hard,
enormously  swollen,  and  presenting  a  mixed  character  of  oedema
and  erysipelas. It  was  generally  pale  and  shining,  but  in  many
places  it  was  of  a  copper  colour  and  very  sensible  to  the  touch.
-  There  was  high  fever,  but  the  head  was  not  affected. I  ordered
twenty-four  leeches  to  be  applied  to  the  vulva,  and  six  grains  of
the  emetic  tartar  to  be  administered. On  the  following  day  the
inflammation  and  fever  had  subsided,  and  at  the  end  of  three
days,  complete  resolution  had  taken  place. This  cure  will  no
doubt  appear  remarkable  to  such  practitioners  as  have  had  occa-
sion to  see  cases  of  acute  phlebitis,  and  who  know  how  rarely  and
difficultly  it  is  cured  by  loss  of  blood.-j- In  some  cases  of  acute
chorea,  I  have  found  the  medicine  beneficial,  but  not  in  an  ex-
treme degree. This  is  the  only  nervous  affection  in  which  I  have
made  trial  of  the  practice,  and  only  in  cases  which  appeared  con-
nected with  a  congested  state  of  the  brain  or  spinal  marrow.
Articular  rheumatism  is,  next  to  pneumonia,  the  inflammatory
disease  in  which  the  tartar  emetic  has  appeared  to  me  the  most
efficacious. The  usual  duration  of  this  complaint,  treated  by
the  antimony,  is  from  seven  to  eight  days  ;  and  I  need  hardly  say
that,  when  treated  by  bleeding,  or  on  the  expectant  system,  it
lasts  from  one  to  two  months. This  remedy,  however,  succeeds
less  perfectly  when  muscular  rheumatism  is  combined  with  the
articular. Occasionally  I  have  found  a  relapse  of  the  articular
inflammation  to  take  place  during  the  continuance  of  the  anti-
mony ;  and  in  two  cases  I  was  obliged  to  leave  it  off  from  not
being  able  to  effect  the  tolerance. — In  some  cases  of  severe  oph-
thalmia and  angina,  I  have  obtained  as  speedy  cures  as  in  pneu-
monia.;};— I  have  not  hitherto  made  use  of  the  emetic  tartar  in
simple  inflammation  of  the  intestinal  mucous  membrane;  but  in
cases  of  pneumonia  or  articular  rheumatism,  I  have  not  been  de-

*  This  case  is  reported  in  Bayle's  Bib.  de  Therap.  (t.  i.  p.  298.)  Two  other  cases
of  idiopathic  tetanus  have  heen  since  treated  by  Dr.  A.  Laennec,  in  the  same  manner
and  with  like  success.  (See  Bib.  de  Therap.  p.  506,  and  Revue  M6d.  Oct.  1828.Y—
(AI.LO

f  See  a  full  account  of  this  case  in  the  Revue  Med.  for  Oct.

f  M.  Bayle  in  his  Bib.  de  Therap.  (t.  i.  p.  289,)  has  inserted  a  note  communicated
by  me,  giving  an  account  of  some  of  the  facts  referred  to  in  the  text.  I  will  only  here
notice  those  which  relate  to  articular  rheumatism.  Thirteen  cases  were  treated  with
the  tartar  emetic  with  the  following  results: — in  one,  the  remedy  was  injurious;  in
two  it  was  inefficacious  ;  in  two,  its  success  was  doubtful ;  in  eight,  it  was  evidently
useful.  These  results,  although  interesting,  only  afford  an  approximative  view  of  the
practice  of  Laennec.  He  treated  in  the  same  way  all  the  cases  of  rheumatism  ad-
mitted into  his  clinic,  (with  120  beds,)  in  the  Necker,  in  1822,  and  the  first  three
months  of  1823  ;  and  if  I  had  kept  more  accurate  notes,  the  number  of  observations
i  mis;ht  have  been  much  greater. — (M.  L.)


i:


242


TREATMENT OF  PNEUMONIA.


terred  from  using  it,  by  the  presence  of  redness  of  the  tongue,
considerable  pain  of  the  epigastrium  or  abdomen  augmented  by
pressure,  or  diarrhoea  and  tenesmus.  In  such  cases  I  have  ob-
served the  symptoms  just  mentioned  to  disappear  under  the  in-
fluence of  the  remedy,  as  speedily  as  those  of  the  principal  dis-
ease. In  a  word,  I  do  not  consider  the  gastro-enteritis  of  fevers
as  contra-indicating  the  use  of  the  emetic  tartar.  And  in  fact,
do  we  not  find  many  external  inflammations,  ophthalmias  for
instance,  yield  much  sooner  to  the  use  of  gently  stimulating
topical  applications  than  to  bleeding  and  emollients  ?* The  con-

*  In  a  former  note  I  have  referred  to  the  not  infrequent  complication  of  pneu-
monia with  gastric  inflammation,  and  of  the  impropriety  of  exhibiting  j  ur<ratires  in
such  eases.  My  objection  must  necessarily  be  still  stronger  and  more  valid  (if  at  all
valid)  against  the  use  of  tartar  emetic  in  large  doses  ;  and  I  must,  therefore,  enter  my
protest  against  the  treatment  recommended  in  the  text  in  all  instances  of  this  com-
plication. I  have  already  hinted  at  the  marked  dislike,  I  might  almost  say  unjustifi-
able prejudice,  of  our  author  to  the  doctrines  of  Broussais;  and  I  fear  I  must  be  so
uncharitable  as  to  receive  with  some  degree  of  caution  not  only  his  judgments,  but
even  the  statements  of  his  observation,  when  these  bear  very  directly  upon  the
favourite  doctrines  of  his  rival.  I  am  very  far  from  assenting  to  the  system  of  Brous-
sais as  a  code  of  medical  doctrine  ;  and  am  ready  to  admit  the  absurdity  of  not  a  few
of  his  opinions,  and  the  impropriety  of  a  good  deal  of  his  practice  in  several  diseases ;
at  the  same  time  I  feel  it  due  to  him  to  say,  that  I  consider  practical  medicine  under
deeper  obligations  to  him  than  to  any  other  individual  who  has  appeared  during  the
present  century,  perhaps  during  the  last  fifty  years.  His  great  merit  consists,  as  is
well  known,  in  having  almost  discovered,  certainly  in  having  clearly  demonstrated,
the  precise  nature  and  extreme  frequency  of  inflanmiation  or  irritation  of  the  mucous
membrane  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  and  in  having  pointed  out  the  vast  importance
and  indeed  necessity,  of  attending  to  this  in  all  cases  where  it  exists,  in  order  to
ensure  any  chance  of  success  from  the  application  of  our  remedial  measures.  The
best  proof  of  the  value  of  M.  Broussais's  doctrines  is  found  in  the  fact  of  their
having  modified,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  the  practice  of  the  physicians  in  every
country  of  Europe  ;  and  it  is  obvious  to  every  one  that,  even  in  England,  where
much  opposition  has  been  shown  to  them,  they  are  at  this  moment  influencing  the
conduct  of  most  of  those  who  are  loudest  in  decrying  them.  In  respect  of  the  admi-
nistration of  the  emetic  tartar  in  pneumonia  complicated  with  gastric  disorder,  I
should  say  that  it  requires  the  utmost  caution  generally,  and  the  greatest  attention
to  each  particular  case,  in  order  to  guard  against  producing  great  mischief  by  it.  In
many  of  those  cases  of  gastric  complication  recorded  by  Stoll,  Riverius,  Hellis,  and
others,  where  the  affection  consists  rather  in  a  loaded  condition  of  the  stomach,  duo-
denum and  liver,  and  a  vitiated  state  of  their  respective  secretions,  than  in  inflam-
mation or  high  irritation  of  the  mucous  membranes,  no  doubt  the  emetic  tartar  maybe
valuable,  at  all  events  as  an  emetic  ;  but  where  evident  signs  of  the  other  condition
of  parts  exist,  we  cannot  administer  this  remedy  without  imminent  danger  of  aug-
menting the  evils  we  are  attempting  to  alleviate.  That  even  in  these  latter  cases,
the  emetic  tartar  is  sometimes  useful,  I  do  not  deny  ;  but  I  believe  Broussais's  opi-
nion on  this  point  will  be  found  to  be  generally  correct :  he  says,  speaking  of  emetics
in  simple  inflammatory  affections  of  the  stomach,  "  leur  effet  est  incertain  dans  les
cas  leglrs  ;  et  dans  les  graves,  ils  sont  toujours  dangereux,  parcequ'ils  ne  manquent
jamais  d'augmenter  l'inflnmmation  qu'ils  n'ont  pas  reussi  a  enlever."  Propos.  de
Mkd.  Prop,  cclxxxvii.  But  my  principal  object  at  present  is  to  call  the  attention  of
practitioners  to  the  frequent  co-existence  of  gastric  affections  with  pneumonia  in  this
country,  and  to  point  out  the  absolute  necessity  in  such  cases  of  treating  both  diseases
at  the  same  time.  In  the  simple  disease  we  shall  generally  find  our  bleedings  from
the  nrm  and  our  tartar  emetic,  according  to  the  French  phrase,  heroic ;  while  in  the
complicated  affection,  we  shall  find  these  means,  if  not  injurious,  at  least  inefficacious,
if  we  fail  to  attack  the  gastric  affection  with  leeches  to  the  epigastrium,  saline  refri-
gerants, mucilaginous  diluents,  &c,  and  if  we  do  not  forbid  the  ingestion  of  stimu-
lant purgatives  and  other  irritants,  at  least  for  a  season. I  cannot  conclude  this  note


TREATMENT Ol-'  PNEUMONIA.


tra-indications  to  the  use  of  this,  as  of  all  other  medicines,  ought,
in  my  opinion,  to  be  founded  on  experience  alone.  The  chief  of
these  contra-indications  is,  defective  tolerance,  announced  by  too
copious  evacuations.  Some  diseases,  apparently  as  active  and
inflammatory  as  those  above  mentioned,  do  not  give  way  under
the  use  of  the  emetic  tartar  even  when  it  is  the  best  supported.
I  formerly  stated  haemoptysis  to  be  one  of  them  ;  and  to  this  I
may  add  apoplexy,  gout,  erysipelas,  and  most  chronic  inflam-
mations, except  some  of  those  which  have  degenerated  from  the
acute  to  the  chronic  state.  In  cases  of  this  kind,  I  have  seen
the  medicine  supported  perfectly  well,  in  doses  of  from  nine  to
twelve  grains  a  day,  without  any  obvious  result.  In  some  cases
of  apoplexy  I  have  gradually  increased  the  dose  to  a  dram  and  a
half,  without  any  sensible  effect ;  while,  in  others,  I  have  seen
the  symptoms  of  cerebral  compression  disappear  in  a  few  hours,
and  all  marks  of  paralysis  pass  off  rapidly.  This  fact  of  com-
plete tolerance  existing  without  any  effect  on  the  disease,,  is
strongly  against  the  theory  of  Rasori  and  Tommasini.  In  my
opinion  it  is  enough  for  the  practical  physician  to  be  able  to
appreciate  the  effects  of  a  remedy,  and  to  determine  experimen-
tally the  cases  in  which  it  is  useful.  At  the  same  time,  if  in  the
present  instance  it  is  thought  of  use  to  ascertain  the  mode  of
action  of  the  remedy,  I  should  say  that  its  most  constant  effect
is  the  rapid  resolution  of  inflammation,  and  sometimes  the  equally
speedy  absorption  of  the  inflammatory  effusion.  I  have  thus
seen,  in  the  case  of  articular  rheumatism,  a  well-marked  fluctu-
ation in  the  knee-joint  disappear  in  the  course  of  six  hours.  In
such  cases  we  cannot  attribute  the  result  to  derivation,  since  this
is  never  more  marked  than  when  there  has  existed  neither  vomit-
ing nor  any  other  kind  of  evacuation.  Sweats,  it  is  true,  and  also
a  copious  flow  of  urine,  sometimes  accompany  the  resolution  :  but
these  are  by  no  means  constant.  For  these  reasons,  it  appears
to  me  that  the  only  way  in  which  we  can  explain  the  action  of
this  medicine,  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge,  is,  by  ad-
mitting that  it  increases  the  activity  of  the  interstitial  absorp-
tion, particularly  when  there  is  present  in  the  system  an  excess  of
energy,  tone,  or  plethora.  I  ought  further  to  remark  in  this
place,  that,  after  having  cautiously  tried  the  effect  of  this  medi-
cine in  a  few  cases  of  dropsy  of  an  asthenic  character,  particularly

without  particularly  calling  the  attention  of  practitioners  to  some  most  valuable  prac-
tical remarks  on  the  complication  now  under  consideration,  contained  in  the  Appen-
dix to  Dr.  Philips's  excellent  treatise  on  Indigestion.  (See  particularly  pages  77.
81 — 85.)  These  remarks,  1  doubt  not,  will  be  novel  to  the  great  majority  of  his
readers  ;  and  will  probably  be  received  with  more  consideration  from  being  the
result  of  bis  own  practical  observation.  At  least,  I  conclude  from  his  having  made
no  allusion  to  any  continental  writers,  that  the  author  is  unacquainted  with  their
previous  observations  in  this  particular  case.  My  own  attention  was  first  called  to
this  important  subject  by  my  most  intelligent  and  observant  friend,  Dr.  .lames  Clark,
formerly  of  Rome,  now  of  London. —  Transl.

R  2


■2  l  -l


TREATMENT OF  PX  KUMOXI  A.


in  ascites  and  anasarca,  the  consequence  of  disease  of  the  heart  or
liver,  without  any  beneficial  result,  I  have  abandoned  the  prac-
tice in  such  circumstances.  On  the  other  hand,  in  a  case  of
acute  anasarca  of  the  extremities  complicating  a  similar  affection
of  the  lungs,  I  found  the  practice  completely  successful ;  and
I  am  of  opinion  that  it  would  be  frequently  useful  in  the
anasarcous  swellings  produced  by  measles  and  scarlatina.*

•  Since  its  first  introduction  into  the  practice  of  medicine,  antimony,  in  one  form
or  other,  has  been  very  generally  and  extensively  used  by  the  physicians  of  every
nation  in  Europe.  Like  all  powerful  remedies,  it  has  been,  at  different  times,  the
subject  alike  of  commendation  as  of  reprobation,  equally  unmeasured.  When  first
introduced  by  Paracelsus,  it  was  considered  as  an  antidote  to  the  most  terrible
diseases,  and  was  used  and  esteemed  as  such  in  the  plague  of  1562.  Only  four
years  after  this,  however,  it  was  declared  poisonous  by  the  Parliament  of  Paris,
and  its  use  interdicted  under  severe  penalties.  Further  and  more  extensive  expe-
rience restored  the  remedy  to  its  legitimate  rank  in  the  materia  medica  ;  and  since
the  middle  of  the  last  century,  more  especially,  it  has  been  verv  generally  and
extensively  used  in  febrile  aud  inflammatory  diseases,  principally  in  the  form  of
emetic  tartar.  In  proof  of  this  we  may  refer  to  almost  every  practical  writer  during
the  last  sixty  or  seventy  years.  Among  the  most  eminent  of  those  who  used  it
extensively  during  the  last  century  may  be  mentioned  Brendel,  Ricbter,  Hirschel,
Stoll,  Gmelin,  Riviere,  Pelligrini,  Huxham,  Pringle,  Cullen,  Withers,  &c.  &c.
Some  of  these  used  the  medicine  chiefly  as  an  emetic,  but  most  of  them  as  a  dia-
phoretic, and  in  doses  sufficient  to  produce  nausea.  The  partiality  of  Dr.  Cullen
to  this  medicine  is  well  known  ;  and  it  seems  at  present  probable  that  this  partiality
will  henceforward  be  as  much  cited  to  his  praise,  as  it  hasbeen  often  hitherto  adduced
to  his  discredit.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  it  is  to  the  Italian  physicians,
and  especially  Rasori,  that  we  are  indebted  for  the  introduction  of  the  tartar  emetic
in  large  doses,  as  a  cure  for  inflammatory  diseases.  The  author  just  mentioned  first
used  it  in  tbe  epidemic  fever  of  Genoa,  in  the  year  1799  or  1800,  giving  it  in  doses
of  four,  six,  eight,  or  more  grains  in  the  course  of  the  day,  in  any  watery  vehicle  the
patient  preferred.  (See  Storia  della  Febbre petechiule,  &c.  &c.  di  G.  Rasori.  Terza
edit.  Milano,  1813,  p.  38.)  Soon  after  this  period,  the  author  appears  to  have  em-
ployed this  remedy,  yet  more  extensively  and  in  larger  doses,  in  pneumonia.  In  his
memoir  on  this  disease,  referred  to  by  Laennec,  as  translated  into  French  by  Dr.
Fontaneilles,  and  published  in  the  Archives  Gen.  de  Mtd.  for  1824,  he  gives  the
result  of  his  clinical  practice  with  the  tartar  emetic  in  pneumonia,  in  the  years  1808,
9,  10.  His  general  method  was  to  commence  the  medicine,  usually  after  one  or
more  bleedings,  but  sometimes  without  any  previous  depletion  :  "  I  seldom  begin
(he  says)  with  less  than  twelve  grains  during  the  day,  and  as  many  during  the  night.
If  I  find  the  disease  already  advanced,  1  begin  with  a  scruple  or  half  a  drachm,  and
go  on  daily  increasing  the  dose,  until  it  amounts  to  a  drachm,  or  even  several
drachms,  in  the  course  of  the  twenty-four  hours."  The  result  of  this  practice  was
on  the  whole  successful ;  the  number  of  deaths  being  only  one  hundred  and  seventy-
three  out  of  eight  hundred  and  thirty-two  cases  of  pneumonia  treated  by  him ;  or
about  twenty-two  per  cent,  in  the  civil  hospital,  and  fourteen  per  cent,  in  the  mili-
tary. It  would  appear,  however,  from  the  testimony  of  others,  that  Rasori's  practice
basbeen  far  from  being  always  so  successful.  Wagner  informs  us  (Darslelluvg  vnd
Kritik  der  Italianischen  Lehre  vom  Contrastimuhis.  Berlin,  1819,)  that  out  of  thirteen
cases  of  pneumonia,  no  less  than  seven  died — victims,  according  to  this  writer's  be-
lief, more  to  the  practice  than  the  disease.  In  1808,  M.  Fontaneilles,  the  translator
of  Rasori's  essay  sent  an  account  of  this  author's  practice  to  the  Societe  de  Medicine
de  Paris,  in  a  memoir  which  was  afterwards  published  in  the  year  1819,  in  vol.  xlii.
of  the  "  Annates  Cliniques  de  Montpelier."  Since  the  introduction  of  it  by  Rasori,
tbe  emetic  tartar  has  been  in  very  general  use  by  the  Italian  physicians,  as  suf-
ficiently appears  from  the  writings  of  Brera,  Tomraasini,  Fanzago,  Borda,  Rubini,
Gentile,  Pozzi,  Tozetti,  &c.  Tommasini  states,  that  out  of  one  hundred  and  fifteen
cases  of  pneumonia,  treated  with  the  tartar  emetic,  (conjointly  with  bleeding,  &c.)
only  fourteen  died  :  see  his  works — "  Della  nouva  dott.  Ital."  Bologna,  1816  ;  **  Deile
peripneumonie  inflammatorie  e  del  cnrarle  principnlmcnte  col  tartaro  stiMulo,*'  Bologna,


TREATMENT OK 1'NKUMONI  A .


■1  to


I  have  made  trial,  in  large  doses,  of  some  other  medicines,
which,  according  to  the  statements  of  the  Italian  journals,  would

1817  ;  "  Prospetto  dei  Resulti,  &c.''  Pisa,  1823;  and  Dr.  Gentile  of  Naples  says  he
lost  only  one  in  forty. In  the  Bibliotheque  Uninersellc  of  Geneva  for  June,  1822,
there  is  a  memoir  by  M.  Feschier  on  the  use  of  this  remedy  in  the  same  disease,  in
which  he  gives  the  most  surprising  account  of  its  success. His  mode  of  using  it
was  to  dissolve  six,  twelve,  or  fifteen  grains,  in  six  ounces  of  water,  and  to  give  a
table-spoonfull  every  second  hour,  day  and  night,  together  with  an  aperient  ptisan  ;
adding  occasionally,  according  to  circumstances,  fether,  nitre,  or  tincture  of  opium.
He  usually  began  with  the  smaller  dose,  increasing  it  by  three  grains  daily,  but  never
exceeding  fifteen  in  the  twenty-four  hours. In  this  manner  he  had  treated  all  his
cases  of  pleurisy  and  pneumonia  for  the  preceding  five  years,  and,  according  to  his
account,  had  cured  almost  all  of  them,  in  a  short  space  of  time,  without  bloodletting,
and  generally  without  even  blisters ! — Much  about  the  same  time  that  the  Italian
treatment  was  embraced  by  M.  I.aennec  in  France,  l)r.  Balfour  appears  to  have
adopted  it  in  Edinburgh,  and  to  have  followed  it  up  with  vigour  and  success.  The
results  of  his  practice  were  first  given  to  the  public  in  1818,  and  excited  considerable
interest ;  as  maybe  inferred  from  the  appearance  of  an  enlarged  edition  of  his  work
next  year,  under  the  title  of"  Illustrations  of  the  power  of  emetic  tartar  in  the  cure
of  fever,  inflammation  and  asthma,  and  in  preventing  consumption  and  apoplexy."
Dr.  Balfour's  general  practice  appears  to  have  been  to  give  the  medicine  in  doses  of
one-third  or  one-half  of  a  grain  every  hour,  usually,  but  not  always,  combined  with
an  aperient  neutral  salt. The  remedy  in  the  bands  of  this  author  seems  to  have  been
productive  of  very  similar  effects  to  those  recorded  by  the  continental  physicians.
Some  of  his  cases  afford  very  striking  and  unequivocal  proofs  of  the  great  efficacv  of
the  practice  ;  although  1  suspect  few  of  his  readers  will  coincide  with  him  in  some
of  his  conclusions. Shortly  after  the  publication  of  Dr.  Balfour's  work,  the  practice
recommended  in  it  was  adopted  by  Mr.  Jeffreys,  in  several  surgical  diseases  ;  and  in
his  work  entitled  "  Cases  in  Surgery,''  published  in  1820,  seventeen  cases  of  external
local  inflammations  are  given,  treated  by  the  tartar  emetic  with  distinguished  success.
The  practice  appears  to  have  become  much  more  generally  known  and  adopted,  more
especially  in  Germany,  since  the  publication  of  Pesehier's  memoir;  although  neither
this  author,  nor  the  French  or  English  writers  already  mentioned,  can  lay  any  claim
to  the  discovery  or  invention  of  the  method,  the  honour  of  which  seems  justly  due
to  Rasori. In  Hufeland's  "  Journ.  dei-  prukt.  Heilkunde''  for  March,  1823,  Dr.  Wolff,
of  Warsaw,  gives  an  account  of  his  great  success  from  this  method  ;  and  a  similar
report  is  made  by  Dr.  Wesener,  in  the  same  Journal  for  May,  1824. In  a  thesis  by
Dr.  Burghardt,  (printed  at  Berlin,  in  1824,)  "  De  tartari  emetici  in  pectoris  injiamma-
tionibus  usu,"  the  efficacy  of  the  remedy  is  considered  as  fully  proved,  and  several
original  cases,  illustrating  its  powers,  are  given. To  the  body  of  evidence  above  re-
ferred to,  together  with  that  adduced  by  Eaennec  in  the  text,  it  is  hardly  necessarv
that  any  thing  should  be  added,  to  ensure  the  reader's  assent  to  the  great  powers  of
emetic  tartar  in  subduing  inflammation  of  the  lungs. 1  think  it  right,  however,  to
state,  that  my  own  experience  of  its  effects,  though  limited,  is  decidedly  in  favour  of
the  remedy. During  the  last  six  years  1  have  used  it  (after  pretty  copious  venesec-
tion, however)  in  a  good  many  cases  of  pneumonia,  and  in  a  few  of  acute  rheu-
matism. In  all  these  cases  the  termination  was  favourable  ;  but  1  know  too  well  the
extreme  difficulty  of  obtaining  certain  conclusions  in  practical  medicine,  to  feel  justi-
fied in  asserting  my  positive  belief,  that  the  cure  was  in  all  the  effect  of  the  tartar
emetic. I  cannot  be  mistaken,  however,  in  stating  the  result  of  my  own  experience
to  be,  that,  in  pure  pneumonia,  the  tartar  emetic,  in  large  doses,  is  the  most  certain
and  powerful  remedy  we  possess,  excepting,  perhaps,  bloodletting ;  and  that  in
many  cases  it  is  capable  of  producing  the  most  striking  and  beneficial  effects,  when
bloodletting  is  no  longer  applicable. Indeed  I  must  say,  that  I  regard  this  remedy,
in  the  proper  cases,  as  yielding  to  no  single  therapeutic  agent  in  potency  of  effect.
Like  those  of  quinine  and  a  very  minute  minority  of  other  medicines,  its  happy
effects,  unequivocally  demonstrated,  tend  to  keep  alive  in  the  mind  of  the  philosophic
physician,  that  faith  and  confidence  in  the  powers  of  his  art,  which  are  in  constant
jeopardy  from  the  loose  observations,  inconsequent  reasonings,  and  overweening  pre-
tensions of  cvery-day  practitioners. In  no  instance  but  one  have  I  seen  any  bad
•'fleets  from  it ;  and  in  this,  it  was  incautiously  administered  without  due  reference
to  the  co-existence  of  gastric  irritation. The  only  objection  to  its  use  appears  to  mo


246


TREATMENT  OK  PNEUMONIA.


seem  to  be  placet!  by  Rasori  and  Tommasini  nearly  on  the  same
footing  as  emetic  tartar;  such  as  the  kermes,  the  yellow  sul-
phuret  of  antimony,  nitre  and  digitalis.  Of  the  two  latter  I
shall  speak  when  I  come  to  treat  of  pleurisy.  Of  the  antimonial
preparations,  I  may  say  that  I  have  not  found  them  of  much

to  be  the  severity  of  its  operation,  previously  to  the  establishment  of  the  tolerance.
In  several  cases  I  have  found  the  tolerance  to  exist  from  the  first;  in  the  majority,
it  was  speedily  established  :  in  others,  distressing  nausea  continued  for  a  good  many
hours,  and  in  most  of  them  there  were  also  both  vomiting  and  purging.  After  a
short  time,  however,  all  the  obvious  effects  of  the  medicine,  if  we  except  sweating,
ceased,  and  returned  no  more,  although  it  was  continued  for  several  days  afterwards.
Of  the  mode  of  action  of  this  medicine  on  the  system  in  producing  the  resolution  of
inflammation,  there  are  many  opinions  advanced  by  various  authors;  and  it  would
be  no  very  difficult  matter  to  propound  more,  equally  plausible  at  least.  The
theory  of  Rasori  is  not,  I  imagine,  very  different  in  reality  from  that  of  Basil  Va-
lentine (or  whoever  was  the  author  of  the  Curris  Triumphalis  of  Antimony,)  who  says
that  although  in  itself  antimony  is  a  poison,  yet  that  having  the  power  to  drive  out
the  poison  of  the  disease,  it  thereby  becomes  a  most  peerless  remedy  ;  and  I  am  not
sure  that  Dr.  Balfour's  aphorism  ("  increased  arterial  or  inflammatory  action,  is  in-
compatible with  the  presence  of  emetic  tartar  in  the  system,")  tells  us  any  thing
more  than  what  we  knew  (or  believed)  before,  viz.  thatthe  remedy  cured  the  disease.

In  the  new  edition  of  the  present  treatise,  Dr.  Mer.  Laennec,  after  referring  to
the  vast  body  of  evidence  now  collected  on  the  subject  of  the  effect  of  tartar  emetic
in  pneumonia,  naturally  asks  how  it  has  happened  that  so  large  an  experience  has
not  established  with  certainty  the  good  and  evil  of  this  treatment  1  This  he  attributes
to  the  following  causes  :  because,  on  the  one  hand,  the  partisans  of  the  practice  have
announced  their  statements  too  enthusiastically,  concealing  or  depreciating  the  effects
attributable  either  to  nature  or  to  other  remedies  employed  simultaneously,  and
because  they  have  not  taken  proper  account  of  the  severity,  stage,  and  other  cir-
cumstances of  the  cases  ;  and  because,  on  the  other  hand,  the  opponents  of  the  prac-
tice have  greatly  overrated  the  ill  effects  which  it  may  have  had,  in  some  cases,  on
the  digestive  organs.  "  However,  (continues  Dr.  Mer.  Laennec,)  no  honest  man
who  carefully  weighs  all  the  evidence,  can  hesitate  to  assent  to  the  truth  of  the  two
following  propositions :  1.  Emetic  tartar  maybe  given,  in  doses  of  from  six  grains  to
a  drachm  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  in  pneumonia,  without  producing,  as  might  have
been  expected,  any  inflammation  of  consequence  in  the  gastro-intestinal  mucous
membrane;  2.  Tartar  emetic  in  large  doses  given  singly  or  in  conjunction  with  blood-
letting (and  most  certainly  if  so  combined)  is  of  undoubted  efficacy  in  pneumonia,
and  almost  always  brings  about  a  cure,  which  mere  antiphlogistic  remedies,  singly  or
combined  with  other  measures  in  ordinary  use,  could  not  have  effected."

I  find  from  a  note  to  Dr.  Williams's  Treatise  on  Pneumonia  in  the  Cyclopedia  of
Tract.  Med.  that  Dr.  Marryat  of  Bristol,  who  died  in  1793,  is  justly  entitled  to  the
honour  of  priority  in  the  administration  of  the  tartar  emetic  in  large  doses,  as  the
following  extract  from  the  last  edition  of  his  "  Therapeutics"  published  in  1790
(the  first  edition  in  English  was  published  in  1775)  unequivocally  proves: — "  Any
fever  (says  Dr.  Marryat")  may  be  soon  extinguished  by  the  use  of  the  following
powders  : — Take  of  tartarized  antimony  five  grains,  white  sugar  (or  nitre)  a  drachm  ;
let  them  be  well  rubbed  in  a  glass  mortar,  and  divided  into  six  powders  ;  one  to  be
taken  every  three  hours,  notwithstanding  the  nausea  the  first  may  possibly  occasion.
Tf  these  are  taken  (which  is  commonly  the  case)  without  any  manifest  inconvenience,
let  there  be  seven  grains  in  the  next  six  powders  ;  and  in  the  next  ten.  Here  1  beg
to  retract  what  I  said  in  some  former  edition  of  this  work,  viz.  that  till  sickness  and
vomiting  were  excited,  this  noble  medicine  was  not  to  be  depended  upon.  For  1
have  since  seen  many  instances  wherein  a  paper  has  been  given  even,''  three  hours,
(of  which  there  have  been  ten  grains  in  six  powders,)  without  the  least  sensible
operation,  either  by  sickness,  stool,  sweat,  or  urine,  and  though  the  patients  had  been
unremittedly  delirious  for  more  than  a  week,  with  subsultus  tendinum  and  all  the
appearances  of  hastening  death,  thev  have  perfectly  recovered  without  any  medical
aid,  a  clyster  every  other  day  excepted.  1  have  lately  seen  a  great  many  cases
similar  to  the  above,  and  the  tartarized  antimony  has  invariably  produced  the  same
effect," —  Transt.


TREATMENT OK  PNEUMONIA.


217


power  even  in  doses  of  thirty  grains.  They  are  supported  with
more  difficulty  than  even  the  emetic  tartar.  I  prefer  to  them
the  white  oxyd  of  antimony,  which  may  be  carried  to  the  extent
of*  four  or  five  drachms  per  day,  but  without  being,  even  in  this
close,  of  very  decided  power.

Regimen  in  pneumonia. — In  the  acute  stage  of  severe  pneu-
monia, the  patient  ought  to  be  debarred  from  every  kind  of  ali-
ment except  sugar  and  the  mucilaginous  matters  which  enter  into
the  composition  of  his  drinks.  As  soon,  however,  as  the  inflam-
matory action  has  subsided,  he  must  be  allowed  some  slight  food,
to  be  increased  as  the  appetite  returns.  In  general  we  ought,  in
all  diseases,  to  be  afraid  of  carrying  the  complete  inhibition  of
food  beyond  a  few  days.  Many  physicians  of  the  present  day
seem  to  have,  in  this  respect,  forgotten  the  wise  precepts  of  Hip-
pocrates (Aph.  16  et  seq.  sect,  i.)  who  lays  down  in  a  few
aphorisms  all  that  can  be  truly  and  exactly  predicated  of  absti-
nence. Some  even  seem  to  be  ignorant  that  a  sick  man  may  die  of
starvation  as  well  as  a  healthy  one  ;  and  appear  to  have  no  idea
that  the  symptoms  resulting  from  inanition  are,  in  a  great
measure,  similar  to  those  of  the  various  stomach  affections,  which
they  consider  as  gastritis.  The  great  and  most  frequent  evil  of
extreme  abstinence  in  acute  diseases,  is  to  create  such  an  irrita-
bility of  stomach,  as  renders  the  nourishing  of  the  patient,  after
the  fever  has  subsided,  extremely  difficult,  and  thereby  occasions
a  long  and  dangerous  convalescence.*  Too  great  heat,  produced
by  too  much  covering  or  defective  ventilation,  is  extremely  pre-
judicial. When  this  is  observed,  we  need  not  be  afraid  to  un-
cover the  patient  for  a  few  minutes,  and  expose  him  to  a  cooler
air.  Some  authors  have  recommended  bathing  in  this  disease.
I  have  little  experience  of  this  mode  of  treatment,  which  must
be  very  inefficient  in  an  affection  like  this.

I  shall  conclude  this  chapter  with  a  case  of  pneumonia  ending
in  resolution. I  would  gladly  have  added  a  case  of  chronic  pneu-

•  It  is  possible,  no  doubt,  to  cany  the  best  practice  to  an  injurious  extreme ;
and  we  may  unquestionably  starve  our  patients,  as  well  as  stimulate  them  into  dis-
ease. At  the  same  time,  1  am  convinced  by  every  day's  experience,  that  for  one
instance  of  mischief  produced  by  too  great  abstinence  in  the  convalescence  from
acute  and  especially  inflammatory  diseases,  there  are  a  thousand  occasioned  by  the
opposite  extreme;  and  I  would,  therefore,  earnestly  request  the  young  practitioner
not  to  be  seduced  into  the  too  early  exhibition  of  nutritive  food  to  his  convalescents,
from  fears  of  dangerous  debility,  or  any  other  cause.  W  hat  Broussais  says  in  respect
of  bloodletting,  is  equally  applicable  to  abstinence,  and  I  would  advise  the  student  1o
treasure  the  great  pathological  truth  contained  in  the  following  sentence,  as  contain-
ing in  itself  more  real  practical  utility  than  is  to  be  found  in  many  splendid  theories.
"  Ce  ne  sont  point  les  pertes  de  sang  qui  prolongent  les  convalescences  ;  ce  sont  les
points  d'irritation  qui  restent  dans  les  visceres ;  et  souvent  les  stimulants  et  les  pre-
tendus  toniques  que  Ton  s'empresse  de  prodiguer,  afin  de  reparer  les  forces  que  l'on
vient  d'enlever  par  la  saignee,  contribuent  a  entretenir  ces  foyers  chroniques  de
phlegraasie,  et  a  rendre  le  retablissement  plus  difficile."  (Examen  des  Doct.  Med.
p.  503.) — Transl.


218


T 11 E  A  T  M  E  N  T ( )  F PNKU  Al  O  S I A .


tnonia,  but  the  history  of  the  most  remarkable  of  these  has  been
lost.

Case  XVI.  Disease  of  the  heart. — Double  pneumonia  (in  a
state  of  resolution,)  with  partial  pleurisy.  A  man  twenty-two
years  of  age,  who  had  suffered,  during  the  five  preceding  years,
from  continual  dyspnoea  and  a  very  frequent  palpitation,  came
into  the  hospital  on  the  29th  March,  1825.  He  gave  a  very  im-
perfect account  cf  his  complaints,  but  it  appeared  that  they
supervened  to  an  acute  attack  of  fever  accompanied  by  bilious
vomiting  and  pains  in  the  abdomen.  He  had  likewise  been  sub-
ject, from  his  childhood,  to  frequent  fainting-fits,  which  some-
times lasted,  according  to  his  account,  ten  or  twelve  hours ;  but
these  attacks  had  ceased  about  the  age  of  puberty.  The  follow-
ing was  the  state  of  his  symptoms  on  his  admission  :  very  con-
siderable dyspnoea  ;  respiration  good  and  pure  anteriorly,  accom-
panied by  an  obscure  mucous  rhonchus  posteriorly  ;  palpitations  ;
action  of  the  heart  preternaturally  quick,  sensible  to  the  touch,
yielding  on  the  right  (that  is,  under  the  lower  part  of  the  ster-
num,) a  strong  impulse  and  a  very  considerable  sound,  and  on
the  left,  a  feebler  impulse  but  louder  sound.  Diagnosis  :  hyper-
trophy ivith  dilatation  of  the  heart,  particularly  on  the  rigid
side;  pulmonary  catarrh.  (V.S.to  12  o%. ;  barley  water;  a
scruple  of  digitalis  in  infusion,  with  a  mucilaginous  mixture  ;
two  grains  of  acetate  of  lead.)  April  11.  Better.  Pulse  which
had  been  rather  frequent,  more  natural ;  action  of  the  heart  sen-
sibly less.  Pains  in  the  feet,  but  without  redness  or  swelling.
Diagnosis:  hypertrophy  of  the  right  ventrical  certainly  exists,
but  it  is  not  sufficient  to  account  for  all  the  symptoms.  19th.
Has  had  sore  throat  during  the  last  two  days,  for  which  twelve
leeches  have  been  applied  with  relief.  There  is  now  a  slight
pain  of  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  accompanied  by  a  pretty  strong
sibilous  rhonchus,  intermixed  with  a  subcrepitous  mucous  one,
at  the  roots  of  the  left  lung,  and  mucous  expectoration.  ( Same
med.:  emollient  gargle.)  25th.  Since  the  day  before  yesterday
there  has  been  present  a  pretty  high  fever,  but  without  any  local
pain  or  much  general  disturbance  of  functions.  The  impulse  of
the  heart  is  much  stronger  than  before.  The  same  rhonchus  exists
at  the  roots  of  the  left  lung.  (  V.  S.  to  eight  ounces.  Same  med*)
26'th.  The  fever  continues  with  dyspnoea;  the  expectoration  is
somewhat  viscid,  but  without  any  evident  pneumonic  character.
There  is  no  pain  in  the  chest,  which  sounds  well  posteriorly.
Respiration  pretty  good  on  the  right  back,  with  a  slight  subcre-
pitous rhonchus  at  the  root  of  the  lung, — weaker  on  the  left
back  and  attended  by  a  distinct  crepitous  rhonchus :  no  bron-

*  The  existence  of  the  subcrepitous  rhonchus  Ht  the  roots  of  the  lungs  was  of  itself
no  proof  of  inflammation,  as  it  is  common  in  subjects  with  disease  of  the  heart.  Sus-
picion was  now  excited  as  to  pulmonic  inflammation,  and  bloodletting  was  prescribed
under  apprehension  of  incipient  pneumonia.—  Author*


TREATMENT  OF l'NEUMONI  A.


249


cliophony. Diagnosis:  double  pneumonia — slight  on  the  right
side,  more  considerable  on  the  left. (V.  S>f  to  eight  ounces)  :
almond  emulsion  with  six  grains  of  emetic  tartar  ;  mucilagi-
nous mixture ;  broth,  (boui'(lon).f  '  27th.  Fever  and  dyspnoea
somewhat  less:  repeated  vomiting  and  great  diarrhoea  ;  expecto-
ration rusty,  mixed  with  large  air-bubbles. The  chest  sounds
somewhat  imperfectly  on  the  left  back,  and  there  is  a  subcrepi-
tous,  mixed  here  and  there  with  a  mucous  rhonchus  over  the
whole  of  this  side ;  and  there  is  also  a  subcrepitous  rhonchus
in  different  points  over  the  whole  of  the  right  back,  and  even  on
the  side  :  Diagnosis  ;  lobular  pneumonia  of  the  posterior  parts
of  both  lungs,  especially  the  left, — the  inflammation  having  ex-
tended to  a  great  many  points. ( Six  grains  of  emetic  tartar
in  an  emulsion,  with  an  ounce  of  syrup  of  poppies ;  mucila-
ginous mixture  ;  abstinence  from  all  kinds  of  foode  ( diete.)
28th.  General  symptoms  the  same ;  no  vomiting  or  diarrhoea  ;
pulse  and  heart  still  preternatu rally  strong;  great  dyspnoea;
crepitous  or  subcrepitous  rhonchus  over  the  whole  left  side,  ex-
cept on  the  upper  part  anteriorly,  and  also  over  the  whole  right
back,  and  slightly  on  the  side  (same  med. ;  V.  S.  to  eight  ounces.)
Diagnosis: The  inflamed  points  unite;  the  pneumonia  ap-
proaches the  surface. — 29th .  Fever  and  dyspnoea  still  great ;
several  stools  but  no  vomiting ;  expectoration  no  longer  rusty
and  viscid,  but  white,  light,  yellow,  opaque,  and  almost  puri-
form. Chest  in  the  same  state,  except  that  the  crepitous  rhon-
chus now  approximates  in  character  to  the  mucous. The  hand
placed  on  the  chest  perceives  the  vibration  of  the  sputa  within
the  bronchi.  (  Emetic  tartar  nine  grains,  syrup  of  poppies  two
ounces.)  Diagnosis  :  the  expectoration  indicates  incipient  sup-
puration, in  some  points  at  least. — 30th.  Fever  and  prostration  ;
dyspnoea  increased  ;  expectoration  more  difficult,  sputa  almost
as  white  as  if  they  were  coloured  with  milk  ;  sore  throat  and
coryza  considerable ;  no  vomiting,  but  five  stools  within  the
twenty-four  hours;  respiration  every  where  pretty  good  on  the
right  side,  only  with  a  crepitous  rhonchus  towards  the  roots  of
the  lung, — better  also  on  the  left,  but  still  accompanied  on  the
back  by  a  crepitous  rhonchus  mingled  to-day  with  a  strong  mu-
cous one;  slight  bronchophony  on  the  left  side. (Same  med.:
V.  S.  to  eight  ounces.) Diagnosis  :  resolution  commences  on
the  right,  and  also  on  the  left  side  ;  but  in  the  latter,  there  is
still  one  point  much  indurated?  near  the  surface  of  the  lung,  on
the  side. The  patient  died  the  following  day.

*  The  bleeding  was  repeated  on  account  of  the  disease  of  the  heart,  the  presence
of  which  has  always  appeared  to  render  the  tartar  emetic  less  efficacious  in  pneu-
monia.— Author.

t  An  extremely  weak  decoction  of  veal,  or  chicken,  I  presume;  or  perhaps  simply
of  herbs.  The  bouillon  da  reuu  of  La  Charite  is  made  with  four  ounces  of  veal  to  two
pounds  of  water. — Transl.


250


TREATMENT  OF  PNEUMONIA.


Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death. — There  was  some
serous  effusion  under  the  membranes,  and  also  in  the  ventricles
of  the  brain,  which  had  no  doubt  taken  place  during  the  last
twenty-four  hours,  and  most  likely  in  a  great  measure  during
the  few  last  moments  of  life. The  right  lung  was  found  inti-
mately adhering  to  the  costal  pleura,  by  short  and  very  firm  old
cellular  attachments. It  was  large,  somewhat  flabby,  and  al-
though crepitous,  was  evidently  heavier,  and  more  compact  and
elastic  than  natural. Divided  longitudinally  through  its  whole
mass,  it  was  found  of  a  yellowish  red  pale  colour,  intermixed
with  shades  of  very  light  ash-grey. It  was  almost  as  dry  as  in
the  sound  state,  but  yielded  on  pressure  a  slightly  yellowish  and
somewhat  frothy  serosity. Its  vessels  contained  little  blood.  At
its  roots  and  lower  and  back  parts,  there  were  some  points  or
nodules  of  a  redder  colour,  more  dense  and  compact,  and  exud-
ing a  bloody  serum. These  nodules  were  for  the  most  part  con-
fined to  single  lobules,  but  comprised  in  some  places  two  or
three;  they  were  not  accurately  circumscribed,  nor  uniformly
indurated. The  greater  number  were  harder  in  the  centre,  and
exhibited  there  the  granular  texture  of  pneumonia  and  a  redness
more  or  less  violet :  towards  their  exterior,  they  passed  insen-
sibly through  a  shade  of  violet-grey  to  the  reddish  yellow  colour
of  the  natural  tissue. The  portions  which  were  violet-grey  were
injected  with  a  pretty  large  quantity  of  frothy  serum,  and  had
nothing  of  the  granular  texture. In  other  points  of  the  lungs
a  good  many  nodules  existed  of  the  same  violet-grey  colour
throughout,  without  any  central  induration ;  these  were  of  the
size  of  lentils,  or  at  most  double  this  size,  and  occupied  the
middle  of  the  lobules.* The  left  lung  was  also  united  to  the
pleura,  but  less  firmly  than  the  right. On  the  anterior-inferior
and  lateral  parts  there  was,  in  one  place,  about  the  size  of  the
hand,  an  exudation  of  concrete  pus  and  serosity  like  whey,
within  the  meshes  of  the  cellular  adhesions.-f- The  pulmonary
substance  presented  two  different  states:  anteriority  and  supe-
riority, it  was  nearly  natural,  and  somewhat  more  elastic,  firmer,
and  more  compact  than  the  sound  lung.  J Over  three-fourths  of
the  posterior  portion,  it  was  still  more  dense  and  compact,  as
elastic,  but  less  crepitous. Over  this  space,  the  whole  pulmo-
nary substance  was  of  a  pale  wine-lees  colour,  or  slightly  violet,
which  formed  a  marked  contrast  with  the  reddish  colour  of  the

*  These  characters  indicated  the  resolution  of  a  lobular  pneumonia,  which  had,
in  these  points,  reached  the  stage  of  hepatization.  The  weight  and  density  of  the
parts  that  were  still  crepitous,  proved  that  these  had  been  engorged,  and  were  not
yet  completely  in  a  state  of  resolution. — Author.

t  This  is  an  example  of  partial  pleurisy  developed  amid  an  ancient  pleuritic  cel-
lular tissue.  The  albuminous  exudation  in  this  part  was  the  cause  of  the  broncho-
phony observed  on  the  30th  Afr^.— Author.

$  A  mark  of  resolution  where  the  pneumonic  affection  had  probably  not  reached

beyond  the  first  stage. — Author.


TKEATMEN  I' Or  PNEUMONIA.


25]


anterior  parts.  It  exuded  on  pressure  a  small  quantity  of  yel-
lowish and  somewhat  frothy  serum,  intermixed  with  small  gra-
nules or  dots  of  a  puriform  fluid.  Some  pneumonic  nodules,  still
red  and  granular  in  their  centre,  existed  at  the  roots  and  base  of
the  lung  behind.  In  every  other  part  behind,  the  vesicular  tex-
ture was  perceptible,  even  in  the  redder  and  denser  portions  dis-
seminated through  it.  Both  lungs,  although  elastic  and  crepi-
tous  over  the  greater  part  of  them,  were  much  heavier  than  na-
tural. The  bronchial  membrane  was  every  where  red  ;  and  this
colour  extended,  though  in  a  less  degree,  to  the  trachea  and
larynx,  which  were  otherwise  perfectly  sound.  The  heart  was
equal  in  size  to  two  fists  of  the  individual.  The  left  ventricle
was  large  and  its  walls  thin  ;  the  right  was  of  the  natural  dimen-
sions, perhaps  somewhat  larger,  and  its  walls  were  almost  as
thick  as  those  of  the  left.  The  right  auricle  was  covered  exter-
nally by  a  great  many  small  cartilaginous  granulations,  of  the
size  of  half  a  millet  or  hempseed,  and  situated  beneath  the  se-
rous membrane.*

*  LITERATURE  OF  PNEUMONIA.

1565.  G all i  (A.) Fascis  de  Peste,  Peripneumonia  pestilente,  &c. Br'ix.  fol.

1618.  Tosii  (M.  A.) De  nova  Peripneumoniam  curandi  ratione. Ven.  4to.

1636.  Baronio  (Vine.)  De  Pleuripneum.  Flaminiam  infestante.  Lib.  ii.  Foroliv.  4to.

1664.  Diemerbroeck  (J.  de)  Disputationum  Pract.  P.  i.  ii.  de  morbis  capitis  et
thoracis. Utrecht.  l2mo.

1683.  Bellini  (Laur.j  De  Urinis,  de  Morbis  capitis,  et  pectoris,  &c. Bologna.  4to.

1739.  Huxham  (J.,  M  D.) Essay  on  Fevers,  on  Peripneumonic,  &c.  Lond.  8vo.

1742.  Tennent  (J.)  Epist.  to  Dr.  Mead  on  the  Epid.  Diseases  of  Virginia,  particu-
larly Pleurisy  and  Peripneumonv. Edin.  12mo.

1759.  Bouillet  (J.H.N.)  Mem.  sur  les  pieuro-pneumon.  epidemiques.  Bezieres.  4to.

1760  Paul  (M.)  Traite  de  la  peripneumonie  (Transl.  from  Boerb.)  Par.  12mo.

1775.  Bellini  (Horat.)  De  peripneumonia  in  vomicam  versa. Rom.  8vo.

1777.  Ilomain  (M.)  Essai  sur  la  maniere  de  trailer  les  peripneum.blieuses.  Metz.  8vo.

1777.  Loeber  (L.)  Von  der  lungenenzundung  eines  100-jahrigen  greises.  Dresd.  8vo.

1779.  Musgrave  (S.,  M.D.)  Gulstonian  Lect.(2nd  on  Pleur.  and  Pripn.)  Lond.  8vo.

1782.  Longrois  (J.  de,  M.D.)  De  la  Pulmonie,  de  ses  symptoms,  &c. Par.  8vo.

1788.  Fiorani  (A.)  Saggio  sopra  la  peripneumonia. Pisa.  4to.

1789.  Saalmann  (F.,  M.IJ.)  Descriptio  Pleuritidis,  Peripneumoniae,  &c.  Mon.W.  8vo.

1790.  Suchtleben  (D.  W.)  Bemerk.  ueber  die  heilung  der  briistenzundung.  Goett.
1793.  Scherer  (J.  A.)  Ueber  das  einatbmen  der  lebensluft  in  langwierigen  brusten-

zundung. Wein.  8vo.
1796.  Kreysig  (F.  L.) Comment,  de  peripneumonia  nervosa. Lips.  8vo.
1802.  Horn  (E.)  Ueber  die  erkenntniss,  &c.  der  Pneumonie. Frank/.  8vo.

1802.  Heun  (C.  G.)  De  Pneumonias  theoria,  &c. Lips.  4to.

1803.  Conradi  (J.  VV.  H.)  Pneumonie  und  Pleuritis  in  nosologischer  und  thera-

peutischer  hinsicht.  Marb.  8vo.
1803.  Racine  (C.)  Recherches  sur  la  pleurisie  et  sur  la  peripneumonie  latente

chronicjue. Pur.  Bvo.
1815.  Pacini  (L.) D'una  suppurazione  polmonale  relazione. Lucca.  8vo.

1815.  Valentin  (L) Memoire  sur  les  fluxions  de  poitrine. Nancy-  8vo.

1816.  Mann  (J  ) Med.  Sketches  of  the  Campaigns  of  1812-13-14,  with  obs.  on

peripneumonia  notha,  &c.  Dedham. (Amer.)  8vo.
1820.  Pinel  and  Bricheteau.  Diet,  des  Sc.  Med.  (Art.  Pneumonie,)  t.  43.  Par.  8vo.
18'27.  Chomel. Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Pneumonie,)  t.  17. Par.  8vo.
1834.  Will  iams. (.  yclopcedia  of  Pract,  Med.  (Art.  Pneumonia)  vol.  iii.  Lond.  8vo.

Transl.


252


I'llTJIlSlh  l'ULMOXAUS.


CHAPTER  VII.

OF  TITBEUCLES  IN THE  LUNGS,  OR  PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.

The  progress  of  pathological  anatomy  has  successfully  demon-
strated that  phthisis  pulmonalis  is  owing  to  the  development  in
the  lungs,  of  a  particular  species  of  accidentical  production,*  to
which  modern  anatomists  have  restricted  the  name  of  tubercle,  a
term  formerly  applied  to  every  kind  of  preternatural  tumour  or
protuberance.  This,  I  think,  is  the  only  kind  of  phthisis  which
we  should  admit,  unless,  indeed,  it  were  the  phthisis  nervosa  and
the  chronic  catarrh  stimulating  tuberculous  phthisis.  The  va-
rieties termed  scorbutic,  venereal,  &c.  are  all  essentially  tubercu-
lous, differing  only  from  the  common  species  by  the  cause  (per-
haps gratuitous)  to  which  the  development  of  the  tubercles  is
attributed.  In  respect  of  the  species  described  by  Bayle  under
the  name  of  granular,  ulcerous,  calculous,  concerous  and  with
melanosis,  I  may  here  remark,  that  the  first  is  a  mere  variety  of
the  tuberculous;  the  second  is  the  partial  gangrene  of  the  lungs,
formerly  described ;  and  the  three  others  are  affections  which
have  nothing  in  common  with  the  tuberculous  phthisis,  except
that  they  have  their  seat  in  the  same  organ.

The  progress  of  the  development  of  tubercles  has  been  de-
scribed by  Bayle  in  a  much  more  exact  and  complete  manner
than  had  been  done  before  him.-f  Nevertheless,  from  having
been  enabled  by  more  recent  observations  to  rectify  or  extend
several  of  his,  1  deem  it  essential  to  the  comprehension  of  what
I  shall  have  to  state,  to  give,  in  this  place,  an  abridged  exposi-
tion of  the  characters  and  mode  of  development  of  tubercles,  for
which  I  might  otherwise  have  contented  myself  by  a  reference
to  his  work.

*  Under  the  term  accidental  productions,  1  comprehend  ever}'  substance  foreign  to
the  natural  organization  of  a  part,  which  any'  aberration  in  the  nutrition  may  de-
velop in  our  "organs.  These  various  substances  maybe  divided  into  two  classes,
according  as  they  are,  or  are  not,  analogous  to  some  of  the  natural  textures  of  the
body.  Under  the  first  head  we  may  range  all  productions  of  a  cellular,  serous,  mu-
cous, fibrous,  bony,  &c.  character ;  under  the  second,  all  the  varieties  of  cancer.
In  the  following  chapters  1  shall  only  treat  of  those  accidental  productions  which  1
have  myself  had  occasion  to  observe  in  the  lungs.  These  are  :  1.  Cysts,  properly  so
called  •  2.  cysts,  containing  vesicular  worms,  or  hydatids  ;  3.  substances  of  a
fibrous',  cartilaginous,  bony  or  chalky  nature  ;  4.  tubercles  ;  5.  that  species  of  cancer
denominated  encephaloid  or  cerebriform  ;  and  6.  that  other  variety  of  cancer  which  1
have  termed  melanosis.  I  will  treat  of  tubercles  in  the  first  place,  because  what  1  shall
have  to  notice  respecting  this  variety  of  accidental  production,  will  tend  to  illustrate
the  history  of  the  other  varieties.— Author.

t  Recherches  sur  la  Phthisic  pulmonale. Tans,  1810.


PHTHISIS  PUI-MONAI-1S.


253


Sect.  I.  Anatomical  history  of  tubercles.

The  matter  of  tubercles  may  be  developed  in  the  lungs,
or  other  organs,  under  two  principal  forms, — that  of  insu-
lated bodies  and  infiltration.  Each  of  these  presents  several
varieties,  chiefly  referrable  to  the  different  degrees  of  develop-
ment. The  insulated  tubercles  present  four  chief  varieties
which  I  shall  denominate  miliary,  crude,  granular  and  encysted.
Tuberculous  infiltration  offers  in  like  manner  three  varieties,
whic  h  I  term  the  irregular,  the  grey  and  the  yellow.  Whatever
be  the  form  under  which  the  tuberculous  matter  is  developed,  it
presents  at  first  the  appearance  of  a  grey  semi-transparent  sub-
stance, which  gradually  becomes  yellow,  opaque,  and  very  dense.
Afterwards  it  softens,  and  gradually  acquires  a  fluidity  nearly
equal  to  that  of  pus ;  it  being  then  expelled  through  the  bron-
chi, cavities  are  left,  vulgarly  known  by  the  name  of  ulcers  of
the  lungs,  but  which  I  shall  designate  tuberculous  excavations.
I  shall  describe  the  different  varieties  in  succession.

Miliary  tubercles. — This  is  the  most  common  form  under
which  the  tuberculous  matter  appears  in  the  lungs. The  tuber-
cles in  this  variety  resemble  small  grains ;  they  are  of  a  grey
colour,  and  semi-transparent,  sometimes  even  transparent  and
colourless,  and  of  a  consistence  somewhat  less  than  that  of  carti-
lage. Their  size  varies  from  that  of  a  millet  to  that  of  a  hemp-
seed. Their  shape  roundish  at  first  sight,  is  found,  on  inspec-
tion, to  be  less  regular  when  examined  closely  and  with  a  lens  ;
they  sometimes  even  appear  somewhat  angular. They  adhere
intimately  to  the  pulmonary  substance,  insomuch  that  they  can-
not be  detached  without  bringing  with  them  some  portions  of  it.
They  grow  by  intus-susception,  and  thus  become  united  in
groups. Before  this  union,  however,  a  small  yellowish  opaque
speck  appears  in  the  centre  of  each  tubercle;*  this  speck  gra-
dually enlarges  and  finally  involves  the  whole  tubercle.  Very
frequently  the  tubercles  coalesce  before  their  whole  substance
undergoes  the  change  just  mentioned  ;  and  in  this  case,  when
we  divide  one  of  the  masses  formed  by  the  union  of  several,  we
can  regularly  recognize  the  small  yeilow  points,  indicating  the
centres  of  the  respective  tubercles,  and  the  zone  of  unchanged
grey  matter  surrounding  these. After  a  certain  time,  the  con-
version of  the  whole  into  this  yellow  matter  is  completed,  and
the  group  then  constitutes  only  a  single  homogeneous  mass  of  a
whitish  yellow  colour,  and  of  a  texture  somewhat  less  compact
and  moister  than  that  of  cartilage :  it  is  then  said  to  constitute
the  yellow  crude  tubercle  or  simply  the  crude  tubercle.  When
the  miliary  tubercles  are  a  little  distant  from  each  other,  they

*  Andral  says  (Clin.  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  5)  that  the  speck  does  not  always  appear
first  in  the  centre,  but  sometimes  even  on  the  surface. — Transl.


254-


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


frequently  reach  this  stage  without  coalescing,  and  while  they
are  still  only  of  the  size  of  millet  seed.  When  the  tubercles  are
very  few  in  number,  for  example,  a  hundred  only  in  each  lung,
they  sometimes  singly  acquire  the  size  of  a  cherry-stone,  a  fil-
bert, and  even  an  almond.  They  very  seldom  exceed  this  last
size;  and  the  larger  tuberculous  masses  are  usually  either  the
product  of  several  tubercles  united,  or  of  the  tuberculous  infil-
tration. In  general,  we  consider  it  a  sign  that  the  isolated  tu-
bercles have  originated  in  a  single  point  or  granule,  when  we
find  them  retaining  their  primitive  roundish  or  ovoid  shape.

The  pulmonary  tissue  around  the  miliary  tubercles  is  usually
perfectly  sound  and  crepitous,  and  this  the  more  so  according  as
they  are  small  in  size  and  of  recent  formation.

Granular  tubercles,  or  miliary  granulations. — This  rare  va-
riety of  tubercle  was  described  for  the  first  time  by  Bayle,  and,
on  account  of  its  very  peculiar  character,  was  considered  by
him  as  an  accidental  production  different  from  that  of  tuberck
These  granulations  are  nearly  of  the  size  of  a  millet  seed  ;  they
are  exactly  round  or  ovoid,  and  differ  still  further  from  common
tubercles  by  the  uniformity  of  their  size,  their  want  of  colour,
and  their  transparency.  They  are  commonly  disseminated  in
countless  numbers  over  the  whole  extent  of  one  lung,  or  a  great
ptirt  of  it,  without  being  at  all  found  to  coalesce  in  groups.  Some-
times, however,  from  their  vast  number  and  proximity  to  each
other,  they  constitute  solid  masses  or  nodules;  but  when  these
are  cut  into,  we  find  the  granulations  all  distinct  and  separated
from  each  other  by  cellular  substance,  which  is  either  quite
sound,  or,  at  most,  only  slightly  injected  with  serum.  Bayle  was
evidently  mistaken  in  considering  these  granulations  as  different
from  tubercles,  and,  still  more,  in  regarding  them  as  accidental
cartilages.  (Op.  Cit.  p.  48.)  Had  this  latter  opinion  been  well
founded,  we  should  sometimes  see  them  pass  into  the  state  of
bone,  which  is  never  the  case.  On  the  contrary,  if  we  examine
these  bodies  attentively,  we  shall  be  convinced  that  they  pass  into
yellow  and  opaque  tubercles.  Even  when  they  are  most  trans-
parent and  colourless5  we  find  some  of  them  with  an  opaline  or
slight  greyish  tint,  which  assimilates  them  with  the  common  tu-
bercles. In  cutting  into  these  we  find  their  centre  yellow  and
opaque,  a  sufficient  proof  of  their  incipient  transformation  into
the  yellow  crude  tubercle.*  Bayle  himself  (obs.  iv.)  cites  a  re-
markable instance  of  this. We  find  also,  in  other  cases,  the

*  Baylo's  opinion,  as  far  as  relates  to  the  difference  of  granulations  and  tubercles,
but  not  as  to  the  former  being  of  a  cartilaginous  nature,  is  maintained  by  Chomel
(Diet,  de  Med.  t.  x.  p.  345)  and  by  Andral  (Clin.  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  5.)  Both  these
writers  adduce  several  reasons  for  being  of  this  opinion.  Among  others,  Chomel
says,  that  the  granulations  never  coalesce  like  tubercles;  and  Andral  says,  they  exist
very  frequently  in  the  lower  lobes,  and  asks,  if  they  are  tubercles,  why  it  happens
that  they  never  give  rise  to  large  tuberculous  excavations  in  this  situation  ?  Louis,
however,  a  much  higher  authority  on  this  point,  (liecherehes,  p.  3,)  agrees  with
Laennec. — Transl.


PHTHISIS PULMONAMS.  255

lungs  filled  with  tubercles,  all  very  small,  and  equal  sized,  but
yellow  and  opaque,  and  sometimes,  in  a  well-marked  state  of
'softening.  Bayle  (obs.  xvi.)  gives  an  instance  of  this  also ;  and
although  he  warns  us  not  to  confound  these  miliary  tubercles
with  the  granulations,  it  appears  to  me  clear,  that  the  only  dif-
ference between  them  is  that  which  exists  between  a  ripe  and  a
green  fruit.  Besides,  these  miliary  granulations  are  never  met
with  except  in  lungs  in  which  there  exist  at  the  same  time  other
tubercles  of  a  larger  size,  and  sufficiently  advanced  to  render
their  character  no  longer  matter  of  question.  The  development
of  tubercles  in  other  organs  presents,  also,  a  series  of  facts  suffi-
cient to  prove,  that  in  their  first  state  and  when  recent,  they  are
always  diaphanous  or  semi-transparent  and  colourless,  or  of  a
slight  grey  colour.  On  the  surface  of  the  pleura  and  peritoneum,
they  are  sometimes  colourless  and  quite  transparent,  at  other
times  grey  and  only  semi-transparent.  In  both  cases  they  have
often  an  opaque  yellow  point  in  the  centre ;  and  sometimes  we
even  find  them  converted  into  tuberculous  matter  more  or  less
softened.  It  is  by  no  means  rare  to  observe  all  these  different
stages  on  the  same  membrane.  In  the  intestine  ulcers  of  phthi-
sical subjects  we  commonly  find  miliary  tubercles,  with  the  same
variety  of  colour  and  transparency.  Around  the  tubercles  which
are  found  in  lymphatic  glands,  we  also  observe  a  slight  semi-
transparency  and  a  pearl-grey  tint,  indicative  of  the  approaching
complete  transformation  of  the  gland  into  tuberculous  matter.
Finally,  Bayle  found  the  spleen  filled  with  small  greyish  bodies,
which  he  himself  regarded  as  tubercles.  (Obs.  xii.)#  Bayle's  error
in  respect  of  these  granulations  arose  from  his  not  having  suf-
ficiently distinguished  the  grey  and  semi-transparent  matter
which  constitutes  tubercles  in  their  early  or  crude  state.  Several
of  his  cases,  however,  particularly  the  6th,  12th,  13th,  and
24th,  show  that  he  observed  this,  but  without  ascertaining  the
relation  which  it  bears  to  the  yellow  and  opaque  tubercles.  It
is  moreover  worthy  of  remark  in  this  place,  that  all  the  acci-
dental productions  which  have  no  analogy  with  the  natural  tex-
tures of  the  body,  in  their  earliest  stage,  present  the  same  semi-

*  MM.  Andral  and  Chomel  were  the  first  to  deny  this  identity  of  granulations
in  other  organs  with  those  in  the  lungs.;  the  former  endeavouring  to  prove  that  the
pulmonary  granulations  were  merely  the  air- sells  indurated  and  hypertrophic d,  ( Clin.
Med.  t.  iii.  p.  5,)  the  latter  giving  no  reasons  for  his  opinion  (Diet,  de  Med.  t.  x.
art.  granulation).  M.  Andral  says,  these  apparent  granulations  are  only  met  with  on
the  free  surfaces  of  the  serous  and  mucous  membranes,  and  are,  in  the  former  case,
the  rudiments  of  false  membranes,  and  in  the  latter  hypertrophied  follicles  {Precis.
d'Anat.  Path.t.  i.  p.  411.)  In  opposition  to  these  opinions,  I  would  adduce  the
facts  (1)  that  granulations  are  met  with  in  intestinal  ulcers  with  complete  de-
struction of  the  mucous  membrane  ;  (2)  that  those  met  with  on  the  surface  of  serous
membranes  are  always  deposited  in  false  membrane.  Adopting  the  hypothesis  of
M.  Andral,  we  must  therefore  admit  that  mucous  follicles  may  exist  without  mucous
membrane,  and  that  the  rudiments  of  false  membranes  may  be  enclosed  within  other
false  membranes. — (M.  L.)


256


I'HTHISIS  l'l'T.MONALIS.


transparency,  and  arc  equally  hard,  with  the  single  exception  of
melanosis.  May  we  conceive  that  this  lardaceous  matter,  as  it
was  called  by  the  ancients,  so  little  varied  in  the  different  acci-
dental productions,  may  be  for  them  what  the  yolk  of  the  egg  is
to  the  chick,  and  the  primitive  animal  jelly  to  the  organs  formed
in  it, — viz.  a  sort  of  a  matrix  destined  to  receive  materials  foreign
to  the  natural  organization  of  the  part,  the  consequence  of  some
aberration  of  nutrition  ?

Independently  of  the  stages  of  development  above  mentioned,
certain  accidental  circumstances  may  change  the  colour  of  tuber-
cles. Jaundice  stains  them  yellow,  particularly  on  their  surface  ;
and  this  is  especially  the  case  when  they  are  situated  in  the  liver.
Gangrene  in  their  vicinity  gives  them  a  brownish  or  dirty  brown
colour.  The  black  pulmonary  matter  sometimes  stains  them
partially,  intermixing  some  black  or  grey  points  with  their  yel-
lowish white.  It  is  even  probable  that  the  grey  colour  of  the
tubercles  in  their  first  stage  of  crudity  and  transparency,  is  owing,
at  least  in  part,  to  an  admixture  of  a  small  portion  of  the  same
black  matter.  I  have  thought  that  I  had  observed  in  the  cases
where  the  miliary  granulations  were  most  transparent,  the  quan-
tity of  black  pulmonary  matter  in  the  lungs  was  the  least.  The
miliary  tubercles,  moreover,  whether  semi-transparent  or  opaque,
have  a  black  point  in  their  centre,  which  visually  disappears  as
they  enlarge.  I  formerly  remarked,  when  treating  of  the  bron-
chial glands,  that  the  tubercles  which  form  in  them,  have  often
in  their  interior  a  dash  of  black,  like  the  shading  of  a  crayon
drawing,  very  deep  in  some  points,  and  gradually  vanishing  as
we  recede  from  these.

Grey  tuberculous  infiltration. — This  kind  of  infiltration  is  fre-
quently formed  around  tuberculous  excavations.  We  sometimes
also  find  it  existing  primitively  in  cases  where  no  tubercles  exist;
but  this  is  extremely  rare.  In  other  cases,  we  find  tuberculous
masses  of  a  large  size,  in  the  first  or  semi-transparent  stage,
without  anv  previous  development  of  miliary  tubercles.  These
masses  are  dense,  humid,  quite  impermeable  to  air,  and  of  a  more
or  less  deep  grey  colour.  When  cut  in  thin  slices,  they  are
found  to  be  almost  as  compact  as  cartilage,  with  a  smooth  and
polished  surface,  and  a  homogeneous  texture,  in  which  the  vesi-
cular structure  of  the  lungs  is  no  longer  perceptible.  In  pro-
portion as  they  advance  towards  softening,  we  observe  a  quantity
of  small  yellow  opaque  specks  make  their  appearance,  which,
gradually  increasing  in  number* and  size,  at  length  involve  the
whole  mass,  and  convert  it  into  yellow  tuberculous  matter.  This
species  of  grey  tuberculous  infiltration  has  been,  of  late  years,
mistaken  by  inexperienced  observers,  for  chronic  pneumonia.
We  shall  presently  notice  the  anatomical  characters  by  which
this  degeneration  differs  from  inflammation.

Jelly-like  tuberculous  infiltration. — In  the  intervals  of  the


PHTHISIS  I'ULMONIALTS.


257


miliary  tubercles  we  very  frequently  observe  an  infiltration,  usu-
ally of  small  extent,  of  a  matter  which  may  be  said  to  be  very
humid  rather  than  fluid,  which  is  colourless,  or  slightly  sangui-
neous, and  has  more  the  appearance  of  a  fine  jelly  than  of  com-
mon serosity.  We  might  be  tempted  in  some  instances  to  con-
sider this  as  mere  oedema,  formed  by  a  very  viscid  lymph,  were
it  not  that  we  can  distinguish,  with  great  difficulty,  or  not  at  all,
the  natural  alveolar  structure  of  the  lungs  amid  the  gelatinous
mass.  By  degrees,  this  substance  acquires  greater  consistence,  and
is  gradually  and  insensibly  transformed  into  the  tuberculous  mat-
ter which  I  have  beeen  describing  above.  Where  this  substance
is  most  transparent  and  fluid,  we  frequently  observe  in  it  small
yellow  points,  evidently  of  a  tuberculous  character,  and  finally,
we  trace  it  through  all  the  stages  of  the  common  tuberculous
degeneration.  For  these  reasons,  I  consider  this  jelly-like  sub-
stance as  a  mere  variety  of  the  semi-transparent  grey  tubercu-
lous matter  ;  although  it  also,  like  the  last  variety,  has  been  re-
cently mistaken  for  a  product  of  chronic  inflammation.  The
conversion  of  the  grey  and  gelatinous  infiltration  into  yellow
tuberculous  matter,  is  sometimes  so  rapid,  that  in  examining
lungs,  containing  very  large  masses  of  the  latter,  we  sometimes
find  no  trace  of  the  former,  although  there  can  be  no  doubt  that
the  one  originated  in  the  other.  This  form  of  the  tuberculous
infiltration  is  found  in  different  points  of  the  lungs,  in  masses  of
a  yellowish  white  colour,  and  much  paler,  duller,  and  less  dis-
tinct from  the  substance  of  the  lungs  than  the  common  crude  tu-
bercles. These  masses  are  irregular,  angular,  and  never  have
the  nearly  round  shape  of  ordinary  tubercles.  Like  the  variety
described  in  the  last  paragraph,  and  the  diffused  grey  matter
formerly  noticed,  they  appear  to  be  produced  by  a  kind  of  infil-
tration of  the  tuberculous  matter  into  the  pulmonary  tissue;
whilst  the  common  round  tubercles  are  foreign  bodies,  which  se-
parate and  press  aside  the  substance  of  the  viscus,  on  all  sides,
rather  than  penetrate  into  its  parenchyma.  These  masses  occa-
sionally occupy  a  considerable  part  of  one  lobe,  without  at  all
altering  its  shape,  or  producing  any  protuberance  on  its  surface.
In  their  progress  they  become  first  yellow,  and  finally  soften  like
common  tubercles.*

*  M.  Laennec's  views  regarding  the  primary  state  of  tubercles  and  the  mode  of
their  development,  has  been  called  in  question  by  various  pathologists.  Indeed  the
researches  of  Majendie  (Jour,  de  Med.  t.  i.  1821)';  of  Cruveilhier  (Med.  Eclairee,  &c.
Par.  1821  j  Nouv.  Bib.  Med.  Sep.  et  Nov.  1826);  of  Andral  (Clin.  Med.  t.  iii. ;
Diet,  de  Med.  t.  xvi.  art.  Phthisie,  t.  xx,  art.  Tubercle.;  Precis  d'Anat.  Path.)  ;  of
Lombard  (Essai  sur  les  tubercles,  Par.  1827);  and  of  Boulland  (Recherches  sur  les
Tiss.  sans  analog.  Journ,  des  Progr.  t.  iv.  1827) ;  all  tend  to  establish  the  proposi-
tion, that  tubercle,  instead  of  being  an  accidental  production  possessing  a  proper
vitality,  and  developing  itself  by  intussusception,  like  organized  tissues,  is,  in  fact,
the  result  of  a  morbid  secretion — a  peculiar  species  of  pus — an  inorganic  product
formed  by  juxtaposition  ;  the  tubercle  is  in  the  first  instance  liquid,  but  speedily
concretes  under  the  form  of  minute  rouned  grains,  which  are  friable,  opaque,

S


258


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


In  whatever  manner  the  crude  tubercles  are  formed,  after  a
very  variable  period  of  time  they  finally  become  soft  and  fluid.

yellowish,  isolated  or  in  groups,  encysted  or  free,  and  which,  after  a  certain  time,
assume  once  more  the  liquid  form,  or  become,  at  least,  soft;  that  in  place  of  this
softening  process  proceeding  regularly  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference,  it  is
found  to  commence  at  any  point  indifferently,  the  liquefaction  being  the  consequence
of  a  fresh  purulent  secretion  occasioned  by  the  presence  of  the  tubercle  acting  as  a
foreign  body  ;  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  distinct  grey  tubercle, — what  has  been
mistaken  fortius  being  a  mere  variety  of  chronic  inflammation,  a  simple  hypertrophy
of  the  natural  tissues,  within  which  true  tubercle  is  frequently  developed,  but  by  no
means  as  a  necessary  consequence  ;  that  the  tubercular  secretion,  like  every  other
secretion,  takes  place  under  the  influence  of  an  active  sanguineous  congestion,  and
may,  like  that  of  pus,  succeed  to  a  local  inflammation  or  a  mechanical  irritation,  but
that  it  occurs  more  commonly  in  consequence  of  a  general  predisposition,  congenital
or  acquired,  and  which  predisposition  seems,  in  its  turn,  to  be  the  result,  at  least
most  frequently,  of  an  altered  condition  of  the  fluids  ;  finally,  that  the  cellular  tissue
is  the  most  common,  if  not  the  exclusive  site  of  the  tuberculous  secretion.

I  cannot  here  detail  the  facts,  more  or  less  questionable,  upon  which  this  very
specious  theory  of  tuberculization  rests,  which,  by  the  way,  is  fundamentally  a  mere
paraphrase  of  that  of  M.  Broussais.  I  will  only  remark,  that  if  we  reject  the  exist-
ence of  the  grey  tuberculous  matter,  and  regard  the  phenomenon  as  a  simple  hy-
pertrophy of  the  tissues,  the  consequence  of  a  chronic  inflammation,  we  must,  at
least,  admit  that  this  hypertropy  necessarily  precedes  the  development  of  the  yel-
low tubercles,  or  else  we  must  reject  one  of  the  most  legitimate  deductions  in  pa-
thological anatomy ;  we  must  further  admit  (what  appears  to  me  in  opposition  to  all
j  ust  observation;  that  a  tissue,  in  simply  augmenting  its  volume,  may  become  so  altered
in  form  as  to  retain  no  trace  of  its  primitive  organization.

Other  observers,  without  rejecting  all  that  Bayle,  Laennec,  Louis,  and  others,  re-
garded as  established,  have  advanced  the  opinion  that  the  grey  is  not  the  first  but
the  second  stage  of  the  yellow  tubercle,  being  preceded  by  a  red  or  reddish  yellow
body  of  the  size  of  from  one  fourth  to  a  whole  millet  seed,  pretty  solid  and  resisting,
being  flattened  under  the  nail  without  any  escape  of  fluid,  and  attached  to  the  sur-
rounding tissue  by  a  mass  of  cellular  or  vascular  filaments  constituting  a  sort  of  fo-
mentum,  or  down  around  them.  According  to  M.  Rochoux,  who  has  most  carefully
described  these  bodies,  although  they  had  beenp  reviously  noticed  by  Dalmazzone,
{Ripet.  di  Medic.  §c.  Nov.  1826,)  the  grey  tubercle  first  begins  to  show  itself  at
their  centre,  in  the  same  point  where  the  subsequent  softening  of  the  yellow  tu-
bercle commences.  The  tomentose  or  downy  envelope  of  these  nascent  tubercles
(which  present  no  traces  of  organization)  uniting  them,  as  by  radicles,  to  the  tissue
in  which  they  are  developed,  indicate  them  as  being  the  result  of  an  organic  pro-
cess, by  means  of  which  the  primary  form  of  the  particular  tissue  has  been  made  to
disappear  at  the  same  time  that  the  new  materials  have  been  incorporated  with  it ;
in  other  words,  that  there  has  been  a  real  removal  of  tissue,  and  not  a  mere  dis-
placement of  it.  {Bull.  Univ.  des  Sc.  Aout.  1829.)  M.  Rochoux  is  disposed  to  con-
clude from  his  researches  that  tubercle  is  neither  an  accidental  production  nor  a
secreted  matter,  but  a  degeneration  or  transformation  of  a  healthy  tissue  into  a  mor-
bid one.  This,  then,  is  a  third  theory  of  tuberculisation  quite  as  specious  as  the
last.

A  fourth  theory,  not  mentioned  by  Laennec,  although  he  was  well  acquainted
with  it,  is  that  of  Dr.  Baron,  who  contends  that  all  tubercles  are  in  their  origiu
transparent  vesicles  or  hydatids.  (Oh  the  nature  of  Tuherculated  Accretions,  &;c.  Lond.
1819;  Illustrations  of  the  Enquiry  respecting  'luherculous  Diseases.  Lond.  1822.)
This  opinion  is  evidently  that  of  a  man  little  versed  in  the  researches  of  pathological
anatomy,  and  more  conversant  with  slaughterhouses  than  dissecting  rooms,  who
has  not  been  able  to  discriminate  the  distinctive  progress  and  development  of  each
of  two  morbid  alterations  frequently  co-existing.  There  is  only  one  professed  ana-
tomist who  has  appeared  to  adopt  this  opinion  of  Dr.  Baron,  and  it  is  remarkable
that  he  is  one  whose  researches  have  been  more  in  comparative  than  human  ana-
tomy. (Dhpi/1/.  De  L'Affect.  Tuberc.  vulg.  appel6e  Morve,  &c.  Par.  1807.)  M.
Dupuy  has,  however,  been  very  reserved  in  stating  his  opinions,  contenting  him-
self with  saying,  that  he  has  found  tubercles  and  hydatids  co-existing  in  the  same
subjects,  and  often  in  the  same  viscus,  and  that  he  has  sometimes  seen  in  the  cysts


PHTHISIS  PULMONAI-ls.


259


The  process  begins  in  the  centre  of  each  mass,  and  gradually  in-
creases, the  tuberculous  matter  becoming  daily  softer  and  mois-
ter,  cheesy,  at  least  unctuous  to  the  touch  like  soft  cheese,  and
finally  acquires  the  viscidity  and  fluidity  of  pus.  The  soften-
ing gradually  attains  the  surface,  and  at  last  involves  the  whole
mass.

In  this  stage  the  tuberculous  matter  is  of  two  different  kinds
in  appearance  ; — the  one  resembling  thick  pus,  but  without
smell,  and  yellower  than  the  crude  tubercle  ;  the  other,  a  mixed

which  contained  hydatids  incipient  deposits  of  tuberculous  matter,  a  circumstance
which  would  lead  us  to  imagine  that  the  one  might  succeed  the  other. — (M.  L.)

The  last  writer  on  the  subject  of  Tubercle,  and  one  whose  talents,  industry,  and
most  extensive  opportunities,  entitle  his  authority  to  the  greatest  consideration,  is
Dr.  Carswell ;  and  1  shall  conclude  this  note  with  a  brief  notice  of  his  opinions,  as
recorded  in  the  first  fasciculus  of  his  invaluable  work  on  Pathological  Anatomy ;
and  in  the  article  Tubercle  in  the  4th  volume  of  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Pract.  Med.  It  will
be  seen  that  they  accord,  in  some  respects,  with  those  of  Andral,  and  Cruveilhier,
and  Lombard,  but  differ  in  others.  1.  The  seat  of  tubercle  may  be  any  of  the  tis-
sues, but  the  mucims  tissue  is  by  far  its  most  frequent  depository.  2.  The  form  of
tubercle  is  entirely  dependent  on  the  condition  of  the  parts  where  it  is  deposited  :
it  more  commonly  affects  the  rounded  form,  because  the  equal  pressure  of  contiguous
parts  in  certain  localities  naturally  tend  to  produce  this  shape.  3.  The  consistence
of  tubercle  varies  with  the  period  of  its  existence,  the  relations  of  the  surrounding
parts,  &c  ;  at  its  first  deposition  it  is  often  fluid,  or  of  the  consistence  of  soft  cheese
intermixed  with  water.  4.  The  grey  semi-transparent  condition  of  tubercle  is  by  no
means  a  necessary  precursor,  as  Laennec  imagines,  of  the  yellow  tubercle,  as  this
condition  is  only  observed  in  a  few  of  the  many  organs  where  yellow  tubercle  is
found.  The  following  quotation  will  at  once  explain  Dr.  Carswell's  view  of  the
manner  in  which  tuberculous  matter  is  secreted  generally,  and  his  manner  of  ac-
counting for  the  peculiar  character  of  one  form  of  the  pulmonary  tubercle : — 3  It  is
obvious  that  a  healthy  secreting  surface  may  separate  from  the  blood  not  only  the
materials  of  its  own  peculiar  secretion,  but  also  those  of  tuberculous  matter.  Such
is,  indeed,  what  takes  place  in  the  air-cells.  The  mucous  secretion  of  their  lining
membrane  accumulates  where  it  is  formed  ;  but  it  is  not  pure  mucus ;  it  contains  a
quantity  of  tuberculous  matter  mixed  up  with  it,  which,  after  a  certain  time,  is  sepa-
rated, and  generally  appears  in  the  form  of  a  dull  yellow,  opaque  point,  occupying
the  centre  of  the  grey,  semi-transparent,  and  sometimes  inspissated  mucus."  5.  Tu-
bercle is  completely  inorganic  and  incapable  of  alteration  except  from  external
agency  :  softening  therefore  takes  place  from  the  effect  of  the  pus,  &.C.  secreted
around  it :  this  process  consequently  commences  commonly  at  the  surface.  The
following  is  the  explanation  given  by  Dr.  Carswell  of  the  mistake  made  by  Laennec
as  to  the  commencement  of  softening  in  the  centre: — "  When  tuberculous  matter  is
formed  in  the  lungs,  it  is  generally  contained  in  the  air-cells  and  bronchi.  If,  there-
fore, this  morbid  product  is  confined  to  the  surface  of  either,  or  has  accumulated  to
such  a  degree  as  to  leave  only  a  limited  central  portion  of  their  cavities  unoccupied,
it  is  obvious  that  when  they  are  divided  transversely  the  following  appearances  will
be  observed  :  1.  A  bronchial  tube  will  resemble  a  tubercle  having  a  central  depres-
sion or  soft  central  point,  because  of  the  centre  of  the  tube  not  being,  or  never  hav-
ing been,  occupied  by  tuberculous  matter,  and  because  of  its  containing  a  small
quantity  of  mucus  or  other  secreted  fluids  ;  2.  the  air-cells  will  exhibit  a  number  of
similar  appearances  or  rings  of  tuberculous  matter  grouped  together  and  containing
in  their  centre  a  quantity  of  similar  fluids.  When  the  bronchi,  or  air-cells,  are  com-
pletely filled,  the  tuberculous  matter  presents  no  such  appearance ;  and  hence  the
reason  why  tubercle,  in  such  circumstances,  has  been  said  to  be  still  in  the  state  of
crudity,  or  that  condition  which  precedes  the  softening  process."  (Pathol.  Anat.
F(esc.  I.)  6.  The  term  encysted  is  almost  always  incorrect :  in  the  lungs,  it  is  gene-
rally the  distended  walls  of  the  air-cells  which  have  been  mistaken  for  cysts.  7.  The
cure  of  pulmonary  tubercle  by  cicatrization,  as  explained  by  Laennec,  is  fully  Corro-
borated bvthe  observation  of  Dr.  Carswell. —  Transl.

s  2


260


PHTHISIS  1'1'l.MONALIS.


fluid,  one  portion  of  it  being  very  liquid,  more  or  less  transpa-
rent, and  colourless,  unless  tinged  with  blood,  and  the  other  por-
tion opaque,  of  a  caseous  consistence,  soft  and  friable.  In  this
last  condition,  which  is  chiefly  observable  in  strumous  subjects,
the  fluid  often  perfectly  resembles  whey  having  small  portions  of
curd  floating  in  it.  When  the  softening  of  the  tuberculous  mass
is  completed,  this  finds  its  way  into  some  of  the  neighbouring
bronchial  tubes ;  and  as  the  opening  is  smaller  than  the  excava-
tion, both  it  and  the  latter  remain,  of  necessity,  fistulous,  even
after  the  complete  evacuation  of  the  tuberculous  matter.  It  is
extremely  rare  to  find  only  one  such  excavation  in  a  tuberculous
lung.  Most  commonly  the  cavity  is  surrounded  by  tubercles  in
different  stages  of  their  progress,  which,  as  they  successively
soften,  discharge  their  contents  into  it,  and  thus  gradually  form
those  irregular  and  continuous  excavations  so  frequently  observ-
able, and  which  sometimes  extend  from  one  extremity  of  the
lungs  to  the  other.  Bands,  composed  of  the  natural  tissue  of
the  organ,  condensed,  as  it  were,  and  charged  with  the  tubercu-
lous degeneration,  frequently  cross  these  cavities,  in  a  manner
something  resembling  the  columnce  carnece  of  the  ventricles.
These  bands  are  of  less  dimensions  in  their  middle  than  at  their
extremities,  and  have  often  been  mistaken  for  vessels.  M.  Bayle
himself  seems  to  have  fallen  occasionally  into  this  error,  since  he
says,  that  vessels  frequently  traverse  such  cavities;  whereas  this
is,  in  my  opinion,  a  very  rare  circumstance.  Nay  more,  I  have
never  even  found  a  vessel  of  any  consequence  included  within  the
substance  of  these  bands.  Neither  is  there  any  example  of  this
in  M.  Bayle's  work ;  and  I  only  remember  to  have  heard  him
mention  one  case  where  this  took  place,  viz.  in  a  fatal  haemoptysis,
where  the  ruptured  vessel  was  found  crossing  a  very  large  ca-
vity. In  the  very  few  cases  where  I  have  found  blood  vessels  in
such  bands,  they  constituted  only  a  small  portion  of  their  mass,
and  were,  for  the  most  part,  obliterated.  Generally,  indeed,
they  can  only  be  traced  for  a  small  space  into  these  columns,
being  soon  undistinguishable  from  the  pulmonary  tissue  injected
with  the  tuberculous  substance.*  It  would  appear  that  the  tu-
bercles, during  their  increase,  press  on  one  side,  and  separate
the  blood  vessels,  as  we  find  these,  sometimes  of  considerable
size,  lining  the  internal  surface  of  the  cavities,  and  forming  a
part  of  them.  These  vessels  are  generally  flattened,  but  rarely
obliterated  :  their  smaller  ramifications,  however,  which  stretch
towards  the  tuberculous  excavations,  or  towards  unevacuated
tubercles,  are  evidently  so,  as  is  proved  by  our  abortive  attempts
to  throw  an  injection  through  them  into  the  excavations.  Dr.
Baillie  had  already  made  the  same  observation ;  and  Dr.  Stark

*  Louia  (Op.  Cit.  p.  12)  snys  he  lins  only  met  with  fire  cases  in  which  vessel
were  disco  veruble  in  these  bands. — Transl.


PHTHISIS  FULM0NAL1S.


261


appears  to  have  found  these  vessels  obliterated  by  coagulated
blood.*  The  ramifications  of  the  bronchi,  on  the  contrary,
seem  rather  enveloped  than  pressed  aside  by  the  tuberculous
matter ;  and  it  would  appear  that  the  pressure  soon  obliterates
their  canal,  as  they  are  hardly  ever  to  be  detected  in  the  morbid
substance.  That  they  must,  nevertheless,  have  originally  tra-
versed the  spaces  now  occupied  by  the  tubercles,  seems  proved
by  the  fact,  that  in  every  excavation,  even  the  smallest,  we  find
one  or  more  bronchial  tubes  opening  into  it.  These  tubes
scarcely  ever  open  sideways,  but  are  cut  directly  across,  on  a
line  with  the  internal  surface  of  the  excavation  ;  and  their  direc-
tion is  such  as  shows  them  to  have  originally  crossed  this  space.

In  proportion  as  an  excavation  discharges  its  contents,  its
walls  become  covered  with  a  species  of  morbid  or  false  mem-
brane, thin,  smooth,  white,  nearly  quite  opaque,  of  a  very  soft
consistence,  and  almost  friable,  so  that  it  can  readily  be  scraped
off  with  the  scalpel.  This  membrane  is  generally  quite  perfect,
covering  the  whole  internal  surface  of  the  cavity.  Sometimes,  in
place  of  that  just  described,  we  find  a  membranous  exudation,
thinner,  more  transparent,  less  friable,  more  intimately  connected
with  the  walls  of  the  cavity,  and,  for  the  most  part,  lining  these
only  in  part.  When  completely  investing  the  cavity,  it  presents,
in  different  parts  of  its  surface,  points  here  and  there  of  greater
prominence,  as  if  the  exudation  had  begun  in  these  different
spots  at  the  same  time.  Frequently  we  find  this  second  mem-
brane beneath  the  first,  which  last  is  then  quite  loose,  and  lace-
rated in  several  places.  Occasionally,  also,  both  these  membranes
are  entirely  wanting,  and  the  walls  of  the  cavity  are  formed  di-
rectly by  the  natural  tissue  of  the  lungs,  which,  in  this  case,  is
commonly  condensed,  red,  and  charged  with  tuberculous  matter
in  different  stages  of  its  development.

From  these  facts  it  appears  to  me  that  the  second  species  of
false  membrane  just  mentioned,  is  only  the  first  stage  of  the  first
species ;  and  that  when  this  is  fully  formed  it  is  apt  to  be  de-
tached, and  discharged  in  a  greater  or  less  degree, — forming  one
portion  of  the  sputa  expectorated  by  the  consumptive.  JBayle
thinks  that  this  false  membrane  secretes  the  pus  expectorated  in
this  disease  :  an  opinion  which  is  founded  on  the  analogy  exist-
ing between  it  and  that  which  forms  on  the  surface  of  blisters
and  ulcers.  It  seems  certain,  however,  to  me,  at  least,  that  the
greater  part  of  the  matter  expectorated  is  the  product  of  the

*  I  think  it  due  to  the  memory  of  Dr.  Stark  to  state,  that  he  noticed  and  accu-
rately descrihed  the  early  appearance  and  progressive  development  of  tubercles  in
the  lungs,  long  before  they  attracted  the  attention  of  the  French  pathologists.  See
the  extract  from  his  MS.  read  before  the  Society  for  promoting  Medical  Knowledge,
January  13,  1784,  and  published  the  same  year  in  the  first  volume  of  the  "  Me-
dical Communications,"  ]>.  359.  The  best  previous  account  of  tubercles,  are  those
by  Wepfer  (Miscel.  Cur.  vol.  xix.)  and  Desault  (Sur  lea  Mai.  Vener,  &e  Bor-
deaux, 1733.)— Transl.


262


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


bronchial  secretion,  augmented  as  this  is  by  the  irritated  condi-
tion of  the  lungs.  I  do  not  assert  that  pus  is  not  formed  in
these  tuberculous  excavations  at  all,  but  I  certainly  have  ob-
served, that  when  these  are  lined  by  the  soft  membrane  described
above,  they  are  often  entirely  empty,  and  that  when  they  do
contain  any  puriform  matter,  this  bears  by  no  means  so  great  a
resemblance  to  the  sputa,  as  that  does  which  is  contained  in  the
bronchi.

If  the  disease  remains  long  stationary,  there  are  at  length  de-
veloped, in  different  points  under  this  false  membrane,  patches
of  a  greyish  white  colour,  semi-transparent,  of  a  texture  like  that
of  cartilage,  but  somewhat  softer,  and  adhering  closely  to  the
pulmonary  tissue.  These  patches  coalesce  as  they  grow  in  size,
so  as  eventually  to  form  a  complete  lining  to  the  ulcerous  exca-
vation, and  this  lining  seems  to  form  one  continuous  surface  with
the  internal  coat  of  the  bronchial  tubes  which  open  into  it.
When  this  cartilaginous  membrane  is  completely  formed,  it  is
commonly  white  or  of  a  pearl-grey ;  or  it  has  a  slight  reddish  or
violet  tint,  which  latter  colour  is  derived  from  the  colour  of  the
subjacent  tissue  being  seen  through  it.  Sometimes,  however,
even  when  the  membrane  is  of  considerable  thickness,  its  internal
surface  is  of  a  rose  or  red  colour,  which  does  not  yield  to  wash-
ing, and  which  is,  therefore,  probably  occasioned  either  by  the
vascularity  of  the  part,  (although  in  such  cases,  I  have  never
been  able  to  detect  any  distinct  vessel)  — or,  more  probably  still,
by  the  soaking  of  blood  after  death.  In  some  rare  instances  we
find  tubercles  entirely,  or  almost  entirely,  softened,  in  a  portion
of  lung  in  other  respects  quite  healthy  and  crepitous ;  and  in
such  cases  (four  or  five  of  which  only  I  have  met  with  in  twenty-
four  years)  the  walls  of  the  cavity  are  smooth,  and  seem  to  be
formed  merely  by  the  pulmonary  tissue  somewhat  condensed,
there  being  no  accidental  membranous  production  whatever.

Encysted  Tubercles  —  Sometimes,  but  very  rarely,  the  semi-
cartilaginous  membrane  is  perceptible  before  the  softening  of  the
tubercles,  and,  indeed,  seems  to  be  of  the  same  date  as  them-
selves. This  is  the  encysted  tubercle  of  Bayle.  (Op.  Cit.  p.  21.)
The  texture  of  these  cysts  is  entirely  cartilaginous,  only  a  little
less  solid  than  cartilage,  and  they  belong,  therefore,  to  the  class
of  imperfect  cartilages,  of  which  I  have  given  an  account  in
another  place.*  They  adhere  firmly  by  their  exterior  surface,
to  the  parts  which  surround  them,  so  as  only  to  be  separable
by  the  knife,  or  by  forcible  detraction.  The  tuberculous  matter
contained  in  these,  before  it  is  completely  softened,  adheres
strongly  to  their  sides,  and,  when  it  is  removed,  these  are  seen
to  be  smooth  and  polished,  though  more  or  less  uneven  or  rug-

*  Diet,  des  Scienc.  Med.  Art,  Cartillages  Accidenlels.


PHTHISIS  PULM0NAL1S


263


ged.  These  encysted  tubercles  are  more  frequent  in  the  bron-
chial glands  than  in  the  substance  of  the  lungs.*

I  have  myself  never  seen  these  cysts,  whether  primitive  or
secondary,  become  ossified  ;  this  morbid  state  must,  therefore,
be  very  rare ;  but  I  have  in  my  possession  a  cyst  of  the  size  of
a  hen's  egg,  converted  into  a  bony  substance,  which  was  found
in  the  lungs  of  a  subject  who  seemed  to  have  died,  as  far  as  I
could  learn,  of  phthisis.  In  this  case  the  imperfect  ossification
appears  to  have  commenced  in  three  different  points ;  as  the  cyst
is  composed  of  three  portions,  united  by  thin  plates  of  cartilage
not  yet  affected  with  the  osteo-petrous  degeneration.  Bayle
seems  also  to  have  found  some  bony  points  in  this  kind  of  cyst.
(Op.  Cit.  p.  22.)

When  there  exists  a  great  number  of  tubercles,  even  very
small  ones,  in  the  lungs,  death  will  sometimes  take  place  before
any  of  them  has  reached  such  a  degree  of  softness  as  to  have  their
contents  discharged  into  the  bronchi,  and  consequently  to  leave
any  ulcerous  excavation.  But  this  case  is  extremely  rare,  and
never  occurs  unless  there  exists  along  with  the  phthisis,  some
other  affection  equally  severe,  or  at  least  capable  of  accelerating
the  fatal  event.  When,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  only  a  small
number  of  tubercles,  we  sometimes  find  them  all  excavated  after
death.  In  the  majority  of  cases,  however,  the  developement  of
the  tubercles  is  evidently  successive,  so  that,  on  examination,  we
find  them  in  the  same  lung,  in  the  different  stages  formerly  de-
scribed, viz.  1.  In  the  state  of  granulations,  either  grey  or  co-
lourless, and  semi-transparent ;  2.  grey,  but  large,  and  yellow
and  opaque  in  the  centre;  3.  yellow  and  opaque  throughout,
but  still  firm  ;  4.  in  the  state  of  grey  tuberculous  infiltration,  ge-
latinous, or  yellow ;  5.  softened,  especially  in  the  centre;  6.  in
the  state  of  excavations  more  or  less  completely  empty.-f*  These
observations  are  important  in  a  therapeutical  point  of  view,  as
we  shall  see  afterwards  ;  and  I  would,  therefore,  beg  to  call  the
attention  of  the  practitioner  to  the  successive  developement  of

*  These  encysted  tubercles  have  been  seen  only  once  by  Louis  ;  (Op.  Cit.  p.  10. ;)
they  must,  therefore,  as  Laennec  says,  be  very  rare. — Transl.

t  The  almost  constant  coincidence  of  grey  granulations  and  yellow  tubercles  is
confirmed  by  the  researches  of  Louis,  who  out  of  358  subjects,  only  met  with  two
examples  of  tubercles  existing  without  granulations,  and  five  of  granulations  with-
out yellow  tubercles  ;  "  and  even  in  these  cases,"  he  says,  "  there  were  some  gra-
nulations more  or  less  yellowish  in  the  centre."  (Recherches,  p.  3.)  The  same  ob-
server never  met  with  the  jelly-like  matter  except  in  the  lungs  of  phthisical  persons,
and  he  might  have  said  the  same  of  the  grey  matter  in  mass,  even  while  admitting,
as  he  does,  with  M.  Chomel,  that  the  last  may,  in  some  instances,  be  only  a  form  of
chronic  pneumonia.  In  making  this  remark,  I  must  observe,  1st.  that  I  feel  a  diffi-
culty in  refusing  to  believe  that  two  alterations  so  constantly  reunited,  have  some
necessary  connexion  ;  and  2nd,  that  if  this  co-existence  of  yellow  tubercles  with
granulations  or  grey  matter  in  mass,  is  met  with  in  other  organs,  it  is  difficult  to  be-
lieve that  the  latter  when  seated  in  the  lungs,  is  merely  a  form  of  chronic  inflam-
mation, while  the  granulations  are  either  the  result  of  a  hypertrophy  of  the  air-cells,
(M.  Andral's  opinion,)  or  a  morbid  condition  of  the  blood-vessels  which  ramify
around  the  same  cells  (M.  Lombard's  opinion). — (M.  L.)


264


PHTHISIS  PULMONAL1S.


tubercles  in  the  different  parts  of  the  lungs.  They  begin  to
show  themselves,  in  the  first  place,  almost  always  in  the  top  of
the  upper  lobes,  more  particularly  in  the  right;*  and  it  is  in
these  points,  especially  in  that  last  mentioned,  that  we  most  com-
monly meet  with  the  tuberculous  excavations  of  vast  size.f  It
is  by  no  means  uncommon  to  meet  with  cavities  of  this  kind,  in
the  situation  just  named,  when  the  rest  of  the  lungs  are  quite
sound,  and  do  not  contain  a  single  tubercle  ;  but  in  this  class  of
cases,  the  patient,  during  life,  has  frequently  exhibited  no  sign
of  phthisis,  or  onlv  very  equivocal  ones. \  and  has  died  of  some
other  disease.  It  is  much  more  common,  however,  to  find  one
single  excavation,  and  several  crude  tubercles,  in  a  pretty  ad-
vanced state,  in  the  summit  of  the  lungs  ;  and  the  remainder  of
these  organs,  although  still  crepitous,  and  in  other  respects
sound,  crowded  with  innumerable  tubercles,  of  the  miliary  kind,
extremely  small,  semi-transparent,  and  hardly  any  of  them  with
the  yellow  speck  in  the  centre.  It  is  evident  that  these  miliary
tubercles  are  productions  of  a  much  later  date  than  those  which
had  given  rise  to  the  excavations.  As  well  from  the  result  of  my
dissections,  as  from  observation  of  the  sick,  I  am  well  assured
that  this  secondary  crop  of  tubercles  appears  about  the  time
when  the  first  set  begin  to  be  softened.  Very  commonly  we
observe  in  the  same  lung  evident  marks  of  two  or  three  succes-
sive eruptions  of  tubercles.  Almost  always,  in  these  cases,  we
find  that  the  most  ancient  of  those  which  occupy  the  summit  of
the  lung,  have  already  reached  the  stage  of  excavation  ;  that  the
second  crop,  situated  around  and  rather  below  these,  has  al-
ready become  yellow,  or  at  least  the  greater  part  of  them,  but
are  still  of  no  great  size ;  that  the  third  eruption  composed  of
crude  miliary  tubercles,  with  some  yellow  points  in  their  centre,

*  The  experience  of  M.  Louis  has  led  him  to  an  opposite  conclusion  respecting;
the  relative  frequency  of  tubercles  in  the  two  lungs.  The  following  facts  stated  by
him  tend  strongly  to  confirm  this  opinion  ;  the  only  question  is,  whether  his  cases
(123)  have  been  sufficiently  numerous  to  justify  our  adoption  of  the  results  furnished
by  them,  ns  applicable  generally  to  the  disease.  Of  thirty-eight  instances  in  which
he  found  one  upper  lobe  wholly  disorganized,  twenty-eight  were  on  the  leftside  ;  of
eight  cases  of  perforation,  seven  were  on  the  left  side  ;  and  of  the  seven  cases  in
which  the  tubercles  were  confined  to  one  lung,  five  were  on  the  left  side.  (Op.  Cit.
p.  7,  8,  9.)  These  facts  are  very  strongly  in  favour  of  his  opinion,  and  are  confirmed
by  the  observations  of  many  preceding  writers.  Stark  says,  *'  the  lungs  of  the  left
side  are  more  commonly  affected  than  those  of  the  right ;"  and  Dr.  Carmichael
Smyth,  in  his  remarks  on  this  passage,  (Op.  Cit.  p.  393,)  says,  "  that  the  left  side
of  the  chest  is  more  frequently  affected  by  disease  than  the  right,  is  a  fact  for  which
it  may  be  difficult  to  assign  a  reason,  but,  that  the  observation  is  strictly  true,  any
one  may  be  convinced,  who  will  take  the  trouble  (which  I  have  done)  of  comparing,
with  that  view,  the  numerous  cases  of  pulmonary  phthisis  related  by  Bonetus,  Mor-
gagni,  and  others." — Transl.

t  The  large  tuberculous  excavations  of  the  upper  lobe  are  found  nearer  the  poste-
rior than  the  anterior  parts  of  the  lungs,  according  to  the  original  statement  of  Stark.
(Op.  Cit.  p.  369,)  and  the  later  authority  of  Louis  (Op.  Cit.  p.  13). — ZVtfftcb

t  This  1  suspect  was  Lnonnec's  own,  case.  See  the  Memoir  ol  his  Life  prefixed  to
this  work. — Transl.-


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


265


is  situated  ^till  lower;  and,  finally,  that  the  basis  and  inferior
edo-e  of  the  lung  exhibit  the  most  recent  formation  of  all,  con-
sisting of  miliary  tubercles  quite  transparent. Some  of  this  last
variety  are  also  found  here  and  there,  in  the  intervals  between
the  zones  containing  the  other  formations. The  varieties  of  the
tuberculous  infiltration  which  I  have  denominated  grey  and  ge-
latinous, are  almost  always  of  secondary  formation ;  and  in  most
cases  take  place  only  subsequently  to  a  secondary  eruption  of
miliary  tubercles.  Exceptions  to  the  order  of  developement  just
described  are  by  no  means  common. It  is  extremely  rare  for
excavations  to  be  first  developed  in  the  middle  or  base  of  the
lungs  ;  it  is  less  unsual  to  find  the  left  lung  more  affected  than
the  right ;  it  is  excessively  rare  to  find  the  first  eruption  so  very
numerous  as  to  prove  fatal. In  cases  of  this  kind  the  patient
falls  a  victim  to  the  attendant  fever,  without  ever  exhibiting
very  considerable  or  sometimes  even  perceptible  emaciation  ;  and
on  opening  the  body  we  find  a  great  number  of  very  large  crude
yellow  tubercles,  more  or  less  softened,  and  without  any  admix-
ture of  the  miliary  variety. These  secondary  eruptions  of  tu-
bercles are  not  confined  to  the  lungs ;  at  the  same  period  of  the
softening  of  the  first  crop  in  the  lungs,  they  make  their  appear-
ance in  many  other  organs. In  fact  it  is  a  rare  case,  in  pthisical
subjects,  to  find  these  bodies  only  in  the  lungs ;  almost  always
they  exist,  at  the  same  time,  in  the  coats  of  the  intestines,  where
they  give  rise  to  ulcers,  which,  in  their  turn,  become  the  cause
of  the  colliquative  diarrhoea  which  so  often  accompanies  phthi-
sis. There  is  perhaps  no  organ  safe  from  the  attack  of  tuber-
cles, and  wherein  we  do  not,  occasionally,  discover  them  in  our
examination  of  phthisical  subjects. The  following  are  the  parts
in  which  I  have  met  with  these  degenerations,  and  I  enumerate
them  in  the  order  of  their  frequency  :  the  bronchial,  the  medias-
tinal,  the  cervical, and  the  mesenteric  glands;* the  other
glands  throughout  the  body  :  the  liver — in  which  they  attain  a
large  size,  but  come  rarely  to  maturation  ;  the  prostrate — in
which  they  are  often  found  completely  softened,  and  leave,  after
their  evacuation  by  the  urethra,  cavities  of  different  sizes  ;-f-  the
surface  of  the  peritoneum  and  pleura,  (or  in  the  false  membranes
investing  these,)  in  which  situations  they  are  found  small  and
very  numerous,  usually  in  their  first  stage,  and  occasion  death
by  dropsy  before  they  can  reach  the  period  of  softening ;  the
epididymis,  the  vasa  deferentia,  the  testicle,  spleen,  heart,  uterus,
the  brain  and  cerebellum,  the  bodies  of  the  cranial  bones,  the
substance  of  the  vertebra?,  or  the  point  of  union  between  these

*  M.  Louis  found  the  mesenteric  glands  more  frequently  affected  than  any  others,
viz.  in  one-fourth  of  the  cases.  He  also  found  the  kidneys  as  frequently  affected  as
the  spleen,  viz.  in  one-sixth  of  the  cases  Transl.

t  I  have  frequently  found  these  in  cases  where  no  symptoms  of  them  had  existed
during  life. — Author.


260


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


and  the  ligaments,  the  ribs,  and  lastly,  tumours  of  the  kind  usu-
ally denominated  schirrus  or  cancer,  in  which  the  tuberculous
matter  is  either  intimately  combined  with,  or  separated  in  dis-
tinct patches  from,  the  other  kinds  of  morbid  substance  existing
in  these.  Tubercles  are  found  more  rarely  in  the  muscles  of  vo-
luntary motion  than  in  any  other  part.  The  most  remarkable
case  of  this  sort  I  have  met  with,  was  that  of  a  consumptive  pa-
tient who  had  tubercles  in  almost  every  situation  mentioned
above,  and  who  had,  besides,  the  ureters  so  much  dilated  as  to
receive  the  thumb,  and  their  internal  coat  converted  into  an  ad-
hesive layer  of  tuberculous  matter.  In  this  person  the  lower
extremity  of  one  of  the  sterno-mastoid  muscles  was  converted
into  tuberculous  matter,  firm  and  consistent  ;  but  the  muscular
structure  was  still  preserved  in  the  parts  most  altered.  In  those
least  altered,  and  which  passed  by  insensible  gradation  into  the
sound  portion,  the  tuberculous  matter  was  in  its  early  stage,  grey
and  semi-transparent.  I  had  particularly  attended  to  this  man's
case ;  he  never  complained  of  pain  in  the  neck,  but  merely  of
some  difficulty  in  moving  it.  At  the  same  time  the  cervical
lymphatic  glands  were  full  of  tubercles,  and  much  enlarged.
Sometimes,  but  very  rarely,  the  production  of  tubercles  begins
in  the  parts  just  mentioned,  especially  in  the  mucous  membrane
of  the  intestines  and  in  the  lymphatic  glands,  and  their  appear-
ance in  the  lungs  is  the  result  of  a  secondary  formation.*

*  The  opinion  of  Laennec  on  the  relative  frequency  of  tubercles  in  other  organs
besides  the  lungs,  is  confirmed,  with  some  little  variation,  by  the  researches  of  Louis
and  Lombard.  The  following  is  the  order  of  frequency  observed  by  Louis  in  the
123  cases  of  phthisis  recorded  in  his  work  :  the  small  instestines  one-third  ;  mesen-
teric glands  one-fourth  ;  large  intestines  one-ninth  ;  cervical  glands  one-tenth  :  lum-
ber glands  one-fourteenth;  prostate  one-fifteenth;  spleen  one- sixteenth ;  ovaries
one- twentieth;  kidneys  one-fortieth.  He  only  found  tubercles  once  in  the  brain,
cerebellum,  spinal  marrow,  and  uterus ;  and  does  not  notice  their  occurrence  in  the
liver,  testicles,  bones,  muscles,  sub-serous  cellular  tissue,  &c.  Only  once  did  he  find
tubercles  in  false  membranes  on  the  pleura,  and  only  thrice  in  those  of  the  perito-
neum. In  one  case  only  out  of  358  tuberculous  subjects,  did  he  meet  with  tuber-
cles in  various  organs,  while  there  was  none  in  the  lungs.  {Rev.  Med.  Sept.  1825.)

Lombard, in  100 adult  subjects,  gives  the  following  as  the  proportional  frequency
of  the  tuberculated  organs  :  intestines,  26;  mesenteric  glands,  19  ;  bronchial  glands,
9  ;  cervical  glands,  7  ;  spleen,  6  ;  lumbar  glands,  sub-peritoneal  cellular  tissue,  4  ;
axillary  glands,  anterior  mediastinum,  3 ;  sub-arachnoid  cellular  tissue,  spinal  mar-
row, false  membranes  of  the  pleura  and  peritoneum,  intercostal  muscles,  ovaries,  2  ;
gall-bladder,  liver,  posterior  mediastinum,  pleura,  vertebrai,  ribs,  omentum,  uterus,
prostate,  bladder,  brain  and  cerebellum,  medulla  oblongata,  kidneys,  vesiculae  semi-
nales,  1.  It  is,  however,  worthy  of  remark  that  the  same  number  of  infant  subjects
gave  proportions  considerabty  different,  viz.  bronchial  glands,  87  ;  lungs,  73  ;  me-
senteric glands,  31  ;  spleen,  25;  kidneys,  11;  intestines,  nervous  centres,  9;  cer-
vical glands,  7  ;  meninges,  6  ;  pancreas,  gastro-hepatic  glands,  sub-peritoneal  cellu-
lar tissue,  5  ;  spleen  4  ;  (?)  inguinal  glands,  3  ;  sub-pleural  cellular  tissue,  2  ;  lum-
bar glands,  bladder,  omentum,  gall-bladder,  false  membranes  of  the  pleura,  1. —
(M.  L.)

M.  Louis  says,  that  with  one  single  exception,  he  never  found  tubercles  in  any
other  organ  without  their  existing  in  the  lungs  at  the  same  time,  insomuch  that  he
seems  to  consider  their  presence  in  the  lungs  ns  essential  to  their  developement  in
other  parts. This  view  of  the  subject  is  strengthened,  he  thinks,  by  the  fact,  tbnt


PHTHISIS  i'lILMONALIS.


Organic  changes  ivhich  usually  attend  phthisis. — The  greater
number  of  phthisical  subjects,  before  death,  attain  that  extreme
degree  of  emaciation  from  which  the  Greeks  derived  the  name  of
the  disease.  This  emaciation  is  strongly  marked  in  the  adipose
cellular  membrane  and  muscles,  but  not  at  all  in  the  internal  or-
gans. The  intestines  may  appear  contracted,  but  this  is  chiefly
owing  to  their  containing  but  little  air.  The  brain,  nerve,  ge-
nital organs,  spleen,  pancreas  and  other  glands,  present  no  marks
of  emaciation.  The  blood-vessels  appear  commonly  small ;  but
this,  no  doubt,  is  owing  to  their  having  been  a  long  time  accus-
tomed to  contain  only  a  small  quantity  of  fluid,  in  consequence
of  the  copious  evacuations  and  the  low  regimen  to  which  the  pa-
tients are  usually  subjected.  The  bones  lose  nothing  in  point  of
length,  but  I  have  frequently  thought  that  their  diameter  was
lessened  in  cases  of  protracted  marasmus.  They  become  certainly
of  less  specific  gravity  ;  and  this,  no  doubt,  is  true  of  all  the
other  organs;  although  the  effect  is  produced  in  a  variable  man-
ner ;  since  we  find,  that,  of  two  patients  arrived  at  the  same  de-
gree of  emaciation,  the  one,  with  broad  shoulders  and  tall,  shall
sometimes  be  much  lighter  than  another  of  a  feebler  constitu-
tion and  smaller  stature.  The  chest  of  consumptive  patients  is
usually  narrow  and  sometimes  evidently  contracted.  This  con-
traction had  obtained  the  notice  of  Bayle,  but  he  did  not  inves-
tigate its  causes.  It  appears  to  me  to  depend  on  one  or  other  of
the  two  following  causes  : — 1.  on  the  pleurisies  to  which  phthi-
sical patients  are  extremely  subject,  both  before  and  during  the
course  of  their  disease,  and  which,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  al-
ways give  rise  to  a  contraction  of  the  chest  when  they  terminate
favourably ;  or, — 2.  to  the  attempts  made  by  nature  to  cure
phthisis,  which,  as  we  shall  find  presently,  likewise  occasion  a
similar  result.  The  serous  membranes  and  the  skin  are  com-
monly very  pallid  and  bloodless  in  phthisical  subjects.  The
muscles,  on  the  contrary,  particularly  the  heart,  are  usually
of  a  bright  red.  The  latter  organ  is  moreover  always  remark-
able on  account  of  its  smallness  and  firmness :  may  it  be  affected
by  the  general  emaciation?  The  intestines  sometimes  exhibit
ulcers,  which  do  not  seem  owing  to  the  development  and  soften-
ing of  tubercles  situated  in  their  membranes  ;  but  those  arising
from  this  latter  cause  are  much  more  common.  Ulcers  of  the
kind  last  mentioned,  are  characterized  by  the  developement  of
small  miliary  tubercles,  or  of  tubercles  of  the  size  of  hempseed
at  most,  in  the  mucous  or  muscular  tunic,  and  sometimes  imme-
diately beneath  the  peritoneum. They  occur  most  frequently

(with  a  single  exception)  he  always  found  the  tuherculous  matter  much  more  ad-
vanced in  the  lungs  than  in  the  other  parts,  and  also  that  the  tubercles  in  all  the
other  parts  were  always  in  the  same  degree  of  developement.  In  the  single  case
above  alluded  to,  hp  found  tuberculous  matter  in  the  mesenteric  glands  when  none
existed  in  the  lungs.  (Op.  Cit.  p.  179.) — Truml.


'268


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


in  the  small  intestine,  and  chiefly  near  its  termination.  They
gradually  corrode  the  intestinal  tunics,  in  proceeding  from  with-
in outwards,  and  are  very  frequently  found  resting  on  the  peri-
toneum only.  Perforation  of  this  tunic,  is,  nevertheless,  uncom-
mon.* When  it  takes  place,  the  effusion  of  the  intestinal  matters
into  the  peritoneum  usually  produces  an  acute  inflammation
of  this  membrane  accompanied  by  tympanites.  However,  when
the  perforation  is  small,  it  is  frequently  obliterated  by  the  adhe-
sion of  the  edges  of  the  perforation  to  the  contiguous  portion  of
peritoneum  covering  the  intestines  or  other  viscus,  by  means  of
the  lymph  effused  in  the  first  moments  of  the  inflammation.  In
this  case,  the  peritonitis  may  become  chronic ;  and  almost  always,
when  this  happens,  a  very  plentiful  eruption  of  secondary  tuber-
cles is  formed  in  the  false  membranes  produced  by  the  inflamma-
tion. This  adhesion  of  the  perforated  intestine  presents  some-
times a  remarkable  variety.  At  the  very  moment  when  the
perforation  takes  place,  the  intestine  becomes  agglutinated  to  the
contiguous  peritoneum,  by  means  of  a  moderate  effusion  of  coa-
gulable  lymph,  like  thickish  paste,  in  such  manner  that  neither
effusion  of  the  intestinal  contents,  nor  peritonitis,  properly  so
called,  takes  place.  It  is  no  doubt  true  that  the  exudation  just
mentioned  must  be  considered  as  a  product  of  inflammation,  how-
ever slight ;  but  in  such  cases,  the  patient  during  life  complains
of  no  pain,  and  after  death  the  peritoneum  is  not  found  red.
This  species  of  sub-inflammation  and  the  secretion  resulting
from  it,  seem  to  be  very  analogous  to  the  adhesive  inflammation
of  wounds  which  unite  by  the  first  intention.  I  have  several
times  observed  similar  adhesions  in  the  case  of  perforation  of  the
stomach  and  intestines,  arising  from  other  causes,  particularly
cancers,  gangrenous  eschars,  or  the  colourless  softening  lately  de-
scribed by  Jaeger  +  and  Cruveilhier.J

The  mucous  membranes  are  generally  pale,  even  in  the  vici-
nity of  the  ulcers,  except  in  the  cases  where  an  acute  fever  and
prolonged  struggle  have  preceded  death,  and  given  rise  to  san-

*  "  There  existed  (says  M.  Louis)  ulcers  in  the  small  intestines,  of  a  greater  or
less  extent,  and  more  or  less  numerous,  in  five-sixths  of  the  cases.  They  were  al-
most as  frequent  in  the  large  intestines  ;  the  mucous  membrane  of  which,  moreover,
although  often  red  and  thickened,  was  as  soft  as  mucus,  over  its  whole  extent,  or  a
great  part  of  it,  in  one-half  the  cases.  Indeed,  I  found  this  intestine  sound  over  its
whole  extent' in  three  cases  only."  (Op.  Cit.  p.  175.)  Bayle  found  the  intestines
ulcerated  in  sixty-seven  cases  in  the  hundred.  Andralsays,  that  among  all  the  phthi-
sical cases  which  came  into  M.  Lerminier's  wards  for  five  years,  he  found  the  intes-
tines completely  sound  in  one-fifth  only.  (Clin.  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  .306.)  For  an  account
of  the  symptoms  resulting  from  perforation  of  the  intestines  in  acute  diseases,  see
M.  Louis's  memoir  on  this  subject  in  his  "  Memoires  ou  Recherches  Atiatamico-patholo-
gitjues."  Paris,  1826,  p.  136.  He  says  that  he  only  found  the  small  intestine  per-
forated once  in  one  hundred  and  fifty  cases  of  phthisis. — Transl.

t  Ilufeland's  Journ.  May,  1811.

%  Medicine  eclairte  pur  tAnat.  pathol. Paris,  1821.


PHTHISIS  PULMONALTS.


209


o-uineous  congestions  in  different  parts.*  It  is  a  common  opinion,
strengthened  by  the  adoption  of  it  by  Bordeu,  that  phthisical
subjects  are  particularly  liable  to  fistula  in  ano,  which  help  to
protract  the  termination  of  the  disease.  I  have  seldom  observed
this  complication  ;  and  where  it  existed  it  has  appeared  to  exert
no  influence  over  the  progress  of  the  case.+  The  liver  is  fre-
quently large,  of  a  very  pale  yellow  colour,  and  strongly  impreg-
nated with  a  fatty  matter,  not  always  of  the  same  nature.^
Sometimes  this  is  very  similar  to  fat :  but  at  other  times,  from  its
appearance  and  consistence,  it  would  seem  analogous  to  those
fatty  bodies,  long  confounded  under  the  general  name  of  adi-
pocire,  and  which  M.  Chevreul  has  proved  to  be  of  different
kinds.§  This  fatty  infiltration  of  the  liver  is  met  with  in  other
chronic  diseases  as  well  as  phthisis,  and  I  have  even  seen  it  in
cases  where  no  organic  affection  of  any  severity  co-existed. ||
Broussais  seems  to  think  that  this  condition  of  the  liver  is  sym-
pathetic of  the  inflammation  of  the  duodenum.  I  would  here
remark  that  I  have  seen  but  few  well-marked  instances  of  inflam-
mation of  this  intestine ;  and  I  suspect  that  it  will  be  admitted
to  be  extremely  rare,  by  all  anatomists  who  do  not  confound  the
congestions  of  the  dead  body  with  inflammation.  Certain  it  is,
that  I  have  frequently  found  the  duodenum  very  red  when  the
liver  was  sound,  and  the  fatty  disorganization  of  the  latter  pre-
sent, when  the  duodenum  was  very  pale.^[ The  animal  fluids

*  This  statement  is  not  correct.  The  gastro-intestinal  mucous  membrane  is  often
red  in  phthisical  subjects.  Andral  met  with  it  completely  pale  in  a  fifth  part,  at
most,  of  his  phthisical  subjects.  (Clin.  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  306.)  Louis  found  the  mucous
membrane  of  the  stomach  red,  softened,  thickened  in  one-twelfth  of  his  cases  ;  that
of  the  small  intestines  reddened  totally  or  partially  in  one  in  seven,  and  that  of  the
large  intestines  in  one  of  four.  (Recherches,  pp.  81,  96,  174.)  In  like  manner  the  mu-
cous membrane  of  the  trachea  is  very  often  both  red  and  ulcerated  ;  whilst  it  is  ex-
tremely rare  to  find  that  of  the  bronchi  perfectly  pale ;  in  this  last  case,  the  redness
is  generally  more  marked  in  the  vicinity  of  the  excavations,  no  doubt  in  consequence
of  the  irritation  produced  by  the  continual  passage  of  the  softened  tuberculous  mat-
ter.— (M.  L.)

\  Andral  says  he  only  met  with  one  instance  of  fistula  in  ano  in  about  eight  hun-
dred cases  of  phthisis. — Transl.

X  M.  Louis  found  the  fatty  degeneration  of  the  liver  in  one-third  of  his  cases  ;  and
exactly  the  same  proportion  is  recorded  by  M.  Andral,  as  the  result  of  his  experience.
—Transl.

§  Recherches  sur  les  Corps  gras,  <5fc. Paris,  1823.

fl  Such  cases  are,  however,  rare.  Louis  noticed  the  fatty  liver  in  one-third  of  his
phthisical  subjects,  while  he  only  met  with  it  twice  in  220  cases  of  other  diseases.
W.  Louis  further  observed  this  morbid  state  of  the  liver  in  phthisical  subjects  more
frequently  in  women  than  men  (in  the  proportion  of  four  to  one)  ;  and  likewise  that
in  the  great  majority  of  such  cases  the  duodenum  was  sound.  (Op.  Cit.  p.  115  et
seq.)—  (M.  L.)

^[  For  a  most  accurate  and  minute  account  of  the  various  lesions  usually  accom-
panying phthisis  pulmonalis,  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  three  classical  and  truly  ad-
mirable works  of  Bayle,  Andral,  and  Louis.  From  the  last  of  these,  more  particu-
larly, I  shall  here  extract  a  brief  notice  of  the  principal  of  these  complications,
not  already  fully  noticed  in  the  text.  Inflammation  of  some  portion  of  the  lungs  or
pleura  was  found  in  one-tenth  of  the  cases ;  but  we  have  seen  in  a  former  note
that  this  proportion  is  not  greater  than  in  the  subjects  dead  of  other  chronic  diseases.


•270


PHTHISIS  PULMONAI.IS.


seem  to  have  very  little  tendency  to  septical  decomposition  in
phthisis;  since  we  find  that  patients  in  this  disease,  are  much  less
liable  to  gangrenous  eschars  on  the  back,  from  long  confinement,
than  in  many  others,  and  that  their  bodies  after  death  are  slow
in  running  into  putrefaction.

I  shall  conclude  what  relates  to  the  morbid  anatomy  of  phthi-
sis, by  the  examination  of  two  important  questions,  which  can
only  be  resolved  by  means  of  the  data  supplied  by  anatomy.
These  questions  are  the  following: — 1.  Are  tubercles  the  effect
of  inflammation  ?  2.  Is  tuberculous  phthisis  susceptible  of  cure  ?

The  mucous  membrane  of  the  trachea  was  simply  red,  or  somewhat  thickened  and
softened  in  one-fifth  ;  and  ulcerated  in  a  somewhat  less  proportion  than  one-third.
The  larynx  and  epiglottis  were  ulcerated  in  one-fifth.  (Bayle  found  the  proportion
one-sixth  ;  and  Andral  found  the  larynx  affected  in  one  form  or  other  in  as  many  as
three-fourths.)  The  pericardium  contained  a  "  notable"  quantity  of  serum  in  one
tenth.  (Andral  found  the  heart  diseased  or  altered  in  as  great  a  proportion  as  two-
thirds.^  The  stomach  was  much  distended  and  lower  than  natural  in  one-twelfth  ;
its  mucous  membrane  was  softened  and  thinned, — or  very  red,  very  soft,  and  thick-
ened, in  one-fifth;  ulcerated  in  many  cases  ;  and  quite  sound  only  in  one-fifth.
(Andral  says  in  two-fifths.)  The  peritoneum  contained  an  effusion  of  serum,  from
one  to  six  pints,  in  one-fourth  ;  and  the  lateral  ventricles  were  distended  by  a  "  no-
table" quantity  of  the  same,  in  three-fourths.  The  brain  was  more  or  less  injected
in  one-seventh  ;  its  consistence  over  its  whole  mass  was  diminished  in  one-twen-
tieth, and  it  was  partially  softened  and  pulpy  in  the  same  proportion.  Of  these
lesions  the  following  supervened  only  during  the  days  of  life,  viz.  pneumony,  pleu-
risy, softening  and  redness  of  the  large  curvature  of  the  stomach,  pulpy  softening
of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  colon,  peritonis,  arachnitis,  partial  softening  of  the
brain.  Others  existed  long,  some  even  from  the  beginning  of  the  disease,  among
which  he  mentions  the  softening  with  extenuation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the
stomach,  and  (sometimes)  the  large  intestinal  ulcers.  Some  of  the  affections  just
enumerated,  are  considered  by  M.  Louis  as  peculiar  to  phthisis ;  others  as  indepen-
dent of  it,  and  existing  in  many  other  chronic  diseases.  Of  the  first  kind,  he  reckons
the  following  :  Ulcers  of  the  larynx,  and  more  particularly  of  the  trachea  and  epi-
glottis ;  ulcerations  of  the  intestines,  especially  of  the  smaller  ;  and  the  fatty  dege-
neration of  the  liver.  I  need  hardly  add  to  this  detail  of  the  various  and  numerous
severe  affections  that  complicate  phthisis,  an  admonition  to  the  young  practitioner  not
to  overlook  them  in  the  treatment  of  his  patients.  I  shall  probably  return  to  this
subject  hereafter  ;  but  I  cannot  resist  making  one  observation  relative  to  the  compli-
cation of  gastritis,  (both  acute  and  chronic,)  so  very  common  in  phthisis,  and,  I  fear,
so  frequently  lost  sight  of  in  the  practice  of  many  practitioners.  Andral  says—"  The
frequency  of  gastritis  in  consumption  being  well  proved,  it  follows  as  a  necessary
consequence,  that  it  is  only  with  the  greatest  care  and  attention  that  we  can  venture
to  apply  substances  of  an  irritating  nature  to  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach.
Many  of  the  inflammatory  affections  of  this  organ  in  phthisical  subjects  are  aggra-
vated and  rendered  permanent,  by  being  overlooked  and  left  to  'themselves,  merely
because  they  give  rise  to  no  very  prominent  symptoms."  (Clin.  Med.  torn.  iix.
p.  306.)  In  reference  to  this  complication,  I  would  here  merely  allude  to  two  very
opposite  yet  very  common  plans  of  diet,  recommended  in  this  disease,— one  almost
entirely  of  animal  food,  with  porter,  wine,  &c,  and  the  other  of  milk  and  vegetable
and  farinaceous  matters.  In  such  a  complication,  the  one  must  be  proper,  and,  if  it
do  not  tend  to  cure  the  disease,  cannot  at  least  accelerate  its  progress;  the  other
must  be  injurious  in  the  highest  degree,  both  in  its  present  operation  and  future  con-
sequences —  Transl.


PHTHISIS  PULM0NAL1S.


271


Sect.  II.  Examination  of  the  question,  whether  or  not  tuber-
cles are  the  consequence  of  inflammation.

The  ancients  attributed  to  inflammation,  the  developement  of
all  the  accidental  productions  with  which  they  were  acquainted,
and  which  they  generally  confounded  under  the  names  of  schir-
rhus,  tumour,  tubercle  (a^ppoi,  tyv/biara)  ;  and  although  this  opi-
nion had,  during  the  last  century,  been  rendered  doubtful  by  the
progress  of  pathological  anatomy,  yet  Bayle  was  the  first  who  ex-
ploded it  by  positive  facts.*  Broussais,  who  about  the  same  period
pursued  his  investigations  in  the  miliary  hospitals,  and  who  no
doubt  was  ignorant  of  what  was  passing  at  Paris,  maintained  the
ancient  opinion,  and  endeavoured  to  support  it  by  facts  observed
by  him.  More  recently  this  author  has  impugned  the  correct-
ness of  Bayle's  opinion  ;-f  and  he  still  constinues  to  do  so,  more
by  assertion  and  ratiocination,  however,  than  by  facts.  This  ques-
tion appears  to  me  so  important,  that  I  shall  consider  it  in  refer-
ence to  each  individual  texture  of  the  lungs ;  and  inquire  accord-
ingly, to  which  of  the  inflammatory  diseases  of  the  chest — pneu-
monia (acute  and  chronic),  catarrh,  pleurisy, — the  development
of  tubercles  is  owing.

Acute  pneumonia. — If  we  question  any  practitioner  ignorant
of  morbid  anatomy,  but  who  is  a  man  of  observation  and  free
from  prejudices,  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  will  give  it  as  his  opi-
nion that  it  is  very  rare  to  see  the  symptoms  of  phthisis  super-
vene to  acute  pneumonia.  Even  in  the  cases  where  this  sequence
is  observed,  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  the  pneumonia  has
given  rise  to  the  tubercles,  or  whether  these,  acting  as  irritating
bodies,  have  not  excited  the  pneumonia.  On  the  authority  of
pathological  anatomy,  the  solution  of  the  question  is  much  more
simple;  since  it  is  certain  that  we  very  rarely  find  tubercles  in
the  lungs  of  those  who  have  died  of  pneumonia,  and  that  the
greater  number  of  consumptive  subjects  exhibit  no  symptom  of
this  disease  during  the  progress  of  their  fatal  malady,  nor  any
trace  of  it  after  death.  Many  of  these  even,  have  never  been
affected  with  it  during  the  whole  course  of  their  life.  If  tuber-
cles were  merely  a  product  or  termination  of  acute  pneumonia,
we  should  be  able  to  ascertain  the  different  steps  of  the  tran-
sition of  the  one  into  the  other,  in  the  same  manner  as  we
are  able  to  describe  all  the  intermediate  degrees  between  the
simple  inflammatory  engorgement  and  the  pulmonary  abscess.
But  this  is  far  from  being  the  case.  It  is  said  that  chemical
analysis  discovers  no  difference  between  the  softened  matter  of
tubercles  and  true  pus ;  in  like  manner  I  say  that  it  discovers
none  between  the  albumen  of  the  egg  and  the  secretion  of  certain

"  Recherches  sur  la  Phthisie  pulmonaire,  p.  1 36,  et  passim.
f  Exam,  dea  Doct.  Med. Paris,  1816.


272


PHTHISIS  PUI.MOXALI9.


cancers;  but  these  facts  prove  the  imperfection  of  chemistry,
rather  than  the  identity  of  the  matters  in  question. In  almost
all  their  physical  characters,  tubercles  differ  from  pus ;  and  in
one  other  remarkable  particular  there  is  a  striking  diversity  be-
tween them  :  after  the  complete  evacuation  of  the  matter  of  a
softened  tubercle,  it  is  never  renewed  ;  while  the  walls  of  an  ab-
scess are  well  known  to  continue  to  secrete  pus,  after  it  has  been
opened. The  following  is  the  only  case  which  could  be  mis-
taken, even  by  an  inaccurate  and  prejudiced  observer,  for  the
termination  of  pneumonia  in  tuberculous  matter  : — Three  or  four
times  I  have  found  small  irregular  masses  of  yellow  tuberculous
matter  in  the  midst  of  a  portion  of  hepatized  lung. In  one  of
these  cases,  two  tuberculous  masses  of  the  size  of  filberts,  existed
in  the  centre  of  a  portion  of  lung  already  advanced  to  the  stage
of  purulent  infiltration. Even  in  this  case,  however,  the  tuber-
cles were  very  readily  distinguished  by  their  colour,  which  was
much  paler  than  that  of  the  surrounding  parts ;  and  indeed  it
formed  a  marked  contrast  with  the  deeper  yellow,  verging  on  ash-
grey  of  the  purulent  infiltration. These  parts  differed  in  another
respect  also  ;  on  scraping  the  surface  of  the  tuberculous  mass,  no
fluid  could  be  squeezed  out,  while  on  pressing  the  other,  a  bloody
pus  was  collected  on  the  scalpel. It  would  certainly  be  absurd  to
infer  from  this  very  rare  case,  that  the  tuberculous  masses  were
the  effect  and  termination  of  the  pulmonary  inflammation  ;  for
independently  of  the  rarity  of  the  case  in  question,  compared
with  the  frequency  of  hepatization,  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  tu-
bercles on  the  other,  I  have  found  tubercles  of  exactly  the  same
kind  in  lungs  which  were,  in  other  respects,  quite  sound. It  is
certainly  more  probable  that,  in  this  case,  the  tubercles  existed
previously  to  the  pneumonia,  or  even  that  they  gave  rise  to  it,
as  foreign  bodies  producing  irritation. On  referring  to  facts,  it
is  found  that  acute  pneumonia  and  tubercles  occasionally  co-exist;
but  this  co-existence  is  rare  when  we  take  into  account  the  great
frequency  of  both  diseases. In  nineteen-twentieths  of  the  cases
of  this  complication,  the  tuberculous  affection  evidently  precedes ;
and  we  may,  therefore,  infer  either  that  the  tubercles  are  the  oc-
casional cause  of  the  pneumonia,  or  that  the  diseases,  although
co-existing,  have  no  etiological  relation  to  each  other. I  am
willing  to  admit,  as  a  matter  of  no  evil  consequence  in  practice,
and  of  no  importance  in  theory,  (although  it  is  supported  neither
by  direct  experiment  nor  positive  observation.)  that,  in  the  small
number  of  cases  where  pththisis  is  seen  to  arise  during  the  con-
valescence from  acute  pneumonia,  the  inflammation  may  some-
times accelerate  the  developement  of  the  tubercles,  to  which  the
patient  was  previously  disposed,  from  some  other  cause,— of  the
nature  of  which  we  are  ignorant,  but  which  is  assuredly  different
from  inflammation. In  this  case,  although  the  inflammation
cannot,  by  itself,  produce  tubercles,  it  may,  through  the  excess
of  action  and  nutrition  wherewith  it  is  attended,  hasten  their  ap-


PHTHISIS  PUT.MONALIS.


273


pcarancc ;  in  the  same  way  (to  use  a  comparison,  which  is  per-
haps not  so  foreign  to  the  process  as  it  may  seem  at  first  sight)
as  a  soil  well  tilled  after  a  long  fallow,  or  left  fallow  after  several
i  ears'  culture,  will  cause  many  seeds  to  germinate  which  had
lain  within  it,  in  a  state  of  inactivity,  for  several  years.*

Chronic  pneumonia. — It  was  stated  in  a  former  chapter  how
rare  true  chronic  pneumonia  is ;  and  we  have  seen  how  different
the  appearance  and  physical  characters  of  this  affection  are  from
those  of  tubercles.  It  is  evident  that  in  chronic  pneumonia  the
inflammatory  engorgement  is  confined  to  the  air-cells,  which  are
seen  closely  pressed  together,  like  the  eggs  of  certain  insects,
without  any  intervening  space,  all  of  the  same  size,  and  of  a
reddish,  greenish,  or  yellowish  colour.  When  of  the  last-men-
tioned colour,  if  they  are  pricked  with  a  needle,  they  sometimes
exude  a  drop  of  pus.  If  we  compare  this  lesion  with  miliary
tubercles  of  the  smallest  size,  which  from  their  roundish  shape
mioht  seem  also  to  be  formed  in  the  interior  of  an  air-cell,  we
shall  find  an  immense  difference  between  them.  These  latter
bodies,  as  we  have  already  stated,  are  either  diaphanous  or  quite
transparent,  and,  however  numerous  they  may  be,  are  always
disseminated,  at  least  in  their  earliest  stage,  through  the  sound
and  crepitating  lung  :  they  grow  by  intus-susception,  and  do
not  coalesce  until  they  have  lost  their  primitive  shape  and  colour.
If  we  submit  the  other  varieties  of  the  tuberculous  degeneration
to  the  same  kind  of  comparison,  we  shall  find,  in  like  manner,
that  there  exists  no  relation  whatever  between  them  and  chronic
pneumonia.  M.  Broussais,  nevertheless,  who  seems  never  to
have  met  with  the  true  chronic  pneumonia,  wishes  to  consider
phthisis  as  such.  After  what  has  been  stated,  it  would  be  use-
less to  discuss  the  question  anatomically.  The  single  fact  of  the
existence  of  a  chronic  pneumonia,  very  different  from  the  tuber-
culous affection,  both  in  its  anatomical  characters  and  its  symp-
toms, is  sufficient,  in  my  opinion,  to  decide  the  question  in  the
negative,  -f*

*  Laennec  thus  admits  that  acute  pneumonia  may  sometimes  expedite  the  de-
velopment of  pulmonary  tubercles,  that  is,  be  the  occasional  cause  of  them  in  a  predis-
posed subject ;  but  he  contends,  with  much  apparent  reason,  that  it  cannot  be  the
proximate  cause  :  and  those  who  regard  tubercles  as  a  morbid  secretion  always  pre-
ceded by  an  inflammatory  or  congestive  process,  have  not  been  able  to  go  further
than  this.  (See  Andral,  Clin.  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  56.  Lombard,  Op.  Cit.  p.  30,  &c.) — (M.  L.)

t  The  distinction  which  Laennec  here  labours  to  establish  between  true  chronic
pneumonia  and  the  grey  or  jellylike  tuberculous  infiltration,  is  completely  rejected
by  the  new  anatomical  school  of  which  Andral  and  Cruveilhier  may  be  regarded  as
the  heads.  According  to  M.  Andral,  we  have  in  the  grey  infiltration  nothing  but
the  highest  degree  of  induration  of  the  air  cells  and  minute  bronchi,  (Precis  d'An.  Path,
t.  ii.  p.  547,)  and  in  the  jellylike  infiltration  a  secretion  sui  generis,  just  as  we  find
other  peculiar  kinds  in  the  system  (Diet,  de  Med.  Art.  Phthisie,  t.  xvi.)  I  will  not
attempt  to  refute  these  propositions,  although  thev  appear  to  me  far  from  being  proved .
I  will  merely  make  the  same  remark  in  reference  to  the  grey  infiltration,  which  1
made  respecting  the  granulations :  it  is  met  with  in  many  other  organs  beside  the  lime*.
— (M.  I.)  .  .

T


274-


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


Catarrh. — There  is  not  a  more  ancient  opinion  in  physic,  or
one  that  has  been  longer  adopted  by  the  vulgar,  than  that  an
ill-treated  or  neglected  cold  is  apt  to  degenerate  into  phthisis.
This  old  notion  has  been  adopted  by  M.  Broussais,  with  no
better  reason,  apparently,  than  that  which  influenced  its  early
patrons — post  hoc,  ergo  propter  hoc. We  shall  now  proceed  to

examine  the  foundation  on  which  it  is  considered  to  rest  It  is

no  doubt  true,  that  in  most  phthisical  cases,  the  first  symptom  >
are  those  of  pulmonary  catarrh  ;  but  it  is  equally  true,  that  we
find  very  large  and  very  numerous  tubercles  in  subjects  who
exhibit  no  signs  of  catarrh.  If  it  be  said  that  the  tubercles
are  the  product  of  former  catarrhs,  I  reply,  that  they  exist  in
persons  who  have  not  had  catarrh  for  years,  or  even,  as  far
as  they  can  recollect,  at  all.  We  indeed  frequently  observe
a  pulmonary  catarrh  (coming  on  suddenly  during  a  state
apparently  of  perfect  health,  or  after  slight  indisposition,
which  do  not  seem  at  all  to  affect  the  chest)  to  be  the  first  ob-
vious symptom  of  a  tuberculous  phthisis :  this,  however,  is
found  to  have  existed  long  in  a  latent  state ;  since  we  find,  on
examining  the  chest  of  such  subjects,  all  the  physical  signs  of
tubercles,  and  sometimes  even  of  tubercles  already  excavated.
The  same  thing  is  also  very  common  in  those  irregular  cases  of
phthisis,  of  which  the  first  and  chief  symptom  is  an  invincible
diarrhoea.  On  the  other  hand,  thousands  of  persons  have  catarrh
several  times  every  year,  and  yet  very  few  of  these  become
phthisical.  We  even  very  frequently  meet  with  individuals  who
take  cold  incessantly  from  the  slightest  changes  of  weather,  and
in  whom  each  cold  is  merely  an  aggravation  and  manifestation  of
an  habitual  latent  catarrh  under  which  they  labour,  as  I  stated
on  a  former  occasion.  There  is  another  numerous  class  of  per-
sons, who,  during  a  long  series  of  years,  are  affected  with  a  pi-
tuitous  or  mucous  catarrh,  with  copious  expectoration,  and  who,
nevertheless,  frequently  reach  an  advanced  age  without  becom-
ing phthisical.  The  inhabitants  of  our  coasts  are  much  more
subject  to  catarrh  than  those  in  the  interior ;  few  of  the  former
being  without  some  sign  of  this  disease,  latent  or  manifest;  and
yet  consumption  is  much  rarer  in  the  former  situation  than  in
the  latter.* I  am  far  from  wishing  to  infer  from  this  fact,  that

*  We  cannot  assent  implicitly  to  this  statement.  Sufficient  materials  whereon  to
build  a  solid  judgment  do  not  yet  exist;  nor  can  they  do  so,  until  the  neglected,  but
most  important  subjects  of  medical  topography  and  medical  statistics  are  much  more
cultivated  than  they  are  at  present.  As  far  as  regards  the  prevalence  of  different
diseases  in  different  places,  we  possess,  in  this  country,  the  most  correct  and  ready
means  of  judging,  in  our  numerous  dispensaries  and  hospitals.  All  that  is  wanting  is
co-operation  among  the  members  of  the  profession  ;  and  I  have  long  thought  that
this  might  be  obtained  without  much  difficulty.  In  respect  of  the  relative  preva-
lence of  consumption  in  different  places  of  this  island,  we  have  some  valuable  docu-
ments in  the  works  of  Haygarth,  Woolcombe,  Southey,  Bateman,  &c.  &c.  ;  but  none
of  sufficient  accuracy  to  enable  us  to  confirm  or  confute  the  assertion  in  the  text :  my
own  experience,  however,  leads  me  strongly  to  doubt  its  truth. — Transl.


PHTHISIS  l'ULMONAI.IS.


275


pulmonary  catarrh  is  a  preservative  against  the  developcment  of
tubercles,  but  I  think  I  may  conclude  t hat  it  is  not  the  cause
of  these.  I  am  moreover  of  opinion,  that  every  practitioner
who  shall  investigate  this  matter  attentively,  impartially,  and
thoroughly,  will  admit,  that  if  we  sometimes  observe  phthisis
occurring  in  subjects  very  liable  to  colds,  we  find  a  much  greater
number  of  these  not  becoming  phthisical ;  and  that,  on  the  other
hand,  we  meet  with  many  persons  whose  first  cold,  is  merely  the
catarrh  that  accompanies  phthisis,  excited,  no  doubt,  by  the  pre-
sence of  tubercles  in  the  lungs.  For  my  own  part,  the  result  of
my  whole  medical  experience  leads  me  to  look  with  suspicion
and  apprehension  on  the  Jirst  void,  if  it  shows  itself  after  the
twentieth  and  before  the  sixtieth  year.

I  would  here  return  to  the  consideration  of  the  question  in  an
anatomical  point  of  view,  and  shall  repeat  the  argument  formerly
used  in  regard  to  pneumonia.  To  prove  that  phthisis  is  an
effect  and  termination  of  catarrh,  it  would  be  necessary  to  ex-
hibit anatomically  the  marks  of  the  transition  of  the  one  into
the  other.  But  this,  I  conceive,  is  not  only  impracticable,  but
the  idea  almost  absurd,  inasmuch  as  we  know  that  catarrh  con-
sists in  an  inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  bronchia,
whilst  tubercles  are  accidental  productions,  that  is,  real  foreign
bodies,  which  spring  up  in  the  substance  of  the  lungs,  and  may
be  developed  in  any  other  texture  of  the  body;  whilst  nothing-
is  more  uncommon  than  to  meet  with  these  bodies  in  the  bron-
chial membrane  itself,  even  when  the  lungs  are  completely  charged
with  them.#  Substituting  hypothesis  for  fact,  we  may,  indeed,
suppose,  from  their  roundish  form,  that  miliary  tubercles  origi-
nate within  the  bronchial  cells,  and  are,  in  fact,  the  consequence
of  the  inflammation  of  these.-}*  We  may  suppose,  in  like  manner,
from  some  similarity  in  the  colour  and  other  physical  characters
between  incipient  tubercles  and  the  pearly  sputa,  that  the  former
are  composed  of  the  same  materials  as  the  latter,  only  more  con-
densed. By  such  hypotheses  as  these,  we  may  demonstrate  what-
ever we  please  to  those  who  will  receive  our  notions  without
proof;  but  minds  of  a  more  philosophic  temper  will  hesitate
before  they  pass  the  boundaries  of  observation  ;  and,  where  the
question  is  one  of  facts,  will  admit  of  no  solution  that  is  founded
merely  on  suppositions.  In  the  present  case,  anatomy  affords  us
no  assistance.  From  the  exact  round  or  ovoid  shape  of  certain
miliary  tubercles,  I  have  certainly  been  sometimes  disposed  to
imagine  that  they  might  be  formed  in  the  air-cells ;  but  I  have
never  been  able  to  convince  myself  of  the  fact. Besides,  if  such

*  I  do  not  think  the  argument  used  in  this  and  the  preceding  sentence  is  sound .
There  can  be  little  doubt,  I  presume,  that  enlargement  and  disease  of  the  mesenteric
glands  are  often  the  consequence  of  irritation  or  inflammation  of  the  mucous  mem-
brane  of  the  intestines,  when  we  can  trace  no  appearance  of  tubercles  in  this. — TransL

t  This  would  appear  to  be  the  opinion  of  Andral,  or,  at  least,  one  of  his  opinions—
for  he  seems  to  have  several. See  Clin.  Mod.  t.  iii.  p.  14. — TransU

T  2


276  PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.

were  the  case,  it  could  scarcely  happen  that  some  of  these  granu-
lations should  not  sometimes  be  dislodged  and  expectorated.  But
this  has  never  been  observed.  On  the  other  hand,  this  suppo-
sition is  rendered  extremely  improbable  by  the  very  irregular
form  of  most  of  the  grey  miliary  tubercles,  and  by  their  inti-
mate adherence  to  the  pulmonary  substance  ;  and  the  hypothesis
becomes  altogether  idle  and  frivolous,  when  we  recollect  that  it
is  still  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  the  pulmonary  tissue  is  in  fact
composed  of  cells  or  of  a  simple  intertexture  of  vessels.*  It  has
been  asserted  by  one  of  M.  Broussais's  disciples,  that  he  could
produce  tubercles  at  pleasure,  by  irritating  in  a  certain  manner
the  bronchi  of  a  dog  ;  but  I  believe  that  the  thing  has  never  yet
been  done,  nor  the  manner  of  doing  it  ever  explained.  It  can
only  be  when  the  process  is  exhibited  to  us,  that  we  can  ascer-
tain whether  a  secretion  of  pus  may  not  have  been  mistaken  for
tubercle.*!*

Pleurisy. — Without  entering  upon  the  hypothesis  used  by  M.
Broussais  in  his  attempts  to  explain  the  supposed  production  of
phthisis  by  pleurisy,  I  shall  confine  myself,  in  this  place,  to  the
examination  of  the  data  furnished  by  pathological  anatomy  to-

*  All  that  Laennec  regarded  as  possible,  or  supposable,  is  admitted  as  positive  by
those  who  regard  tubercles  as  a  species  of  pus.  M.  Magendie  was  the  first  who
imagined  that  the  secretion  of  this  pus  took  place  in  the  pulmonary  cells,  and  he  con-
ceived that  if  tbe  secreted  matter  did  not  exactly  fill  the  cellules,  it  might  be  at  once
expectorated.  (Journ.  de  Physiol,  t.  i.  p.  82.)  M.  Cruveilhier  went  further,  and
imagined  that  this  mode  of  formation  and  this  site  of  tubercles,  might  explain  at
once  their  rounded  form  and  their  simultaneous  developement  in  many  parts  of  the
lungs.  (Mtd.  Pract.  eclairie.  p.  175.)  More  lately  Andral,  considering  that  tuber-
cles are  not  found  exclusively  in  the  lungs,  believes  that  the  secretion  of  pulmonary
tubercles  may  take  place  indifferently  either  on  the  free  surface  of  the  bronchi  or  in
the  cellular  tissue  which  unites  together  the  various  parts  of  the  lungs.  {Clin.  Mid.
t.  iii.  p.  28.)  And,  finally,  M.  Lombard  regards  this  cellular  tissue  as  the  exclusive
site  of  the  tubercular  secretion,  and  chiefly  on  this  consideration — that  being  at  its
formation  a  fluid,  the  tubercular  matter  must  be  immediately  expectorated  and  would
show  itself  in  the  sputa,  if  deposited  in  the  bronchi.  (Essai  sur  les  Tuberc.  p.  22.) —
(M.  L.)

t  The  experiments  alluded  to  in  the  text  are  now  well  known  being  the  injection
of  mercury  into  the  air  passages,  whereby  tubercles  were  imagined  to  be  developed
in  the  lungs.  But,  as  Laennec  supposed,  in  this  experiment,  pus  was  mistaken  for
tuberculous  matter,  and  by  no  less  eminent  a  person  than  Professor  Cruveilhier.  "  I
injected,"  says  he,  "  through  an  opening  made  in  the  trachea  of  a  dog,  two  ounces  of
mercury,  the  greater  portion  of  which  was  rejected  by  coughing.  The  dog,  however,
became  apparently  phthisical,  and  died  emaciated  at  the  end  of  a  month.  The  lungs
were  crammed  with  tubercles  both  isolated  and  agglomerated,  having  all  the  cha-
racter of  miliary  tubercles."  (Nouv.  Bib.  Mid.  Sept.  1826,  p.  391.)  M.  Andral
made  the  same  experiment  conjointly  with  M.  Lombard,  but  he  reports  differently
of  the  results.  "  The  mercury  contained  in  the  smaller  bronchi  was  enveloped  in  a
thick  layer  of  puriform  mucus,  which  was  in  some  points  quite  liquid,  and  in  others
very  like  the  false  membrane  of  croup,  when  only  become  half-solid.  In  several
places  the  bronchial  parietes  wore  torn,  and  the  mercury  extra vasated  in  the  pul-
monary tissue  was  surrounded  by  purulent  matter :  ««  observed  nothing  beside*.
( Pricis  (TAnat.  Path.  t.  ii.  p.  551.)  1  may  here  observe,  that  M.  Andral.  who  main-
tained the  primary  liquidity  of  tubercles  in  1826  (Clin.  Mid.  t.  iii.  p.  4,  et  seq.)  doubts
this  in  1830,  and  seems  disposed  to  think  that,  like  the  epidermis,  tubercles  may  be
secreted  in  a  solid  form.  (  PrSris  d'Annt.  Path.  t.  i.  p.  413.)— t.)


PHTHISIS I'ULMONALIS.  277

wards  the  solution  of  the  question.  In  a  case  of  severe  pleurisy,
the  inflammatory  afflux  is  not  propagated  to  the  Lang:  an  the
contrary,  the  copious  secretion  of  serum  which  takes  place  at  the
very  beginning  of  the  disease  compresses  this  organ  against  the
mediastinum,  and  thereby  diminishes  its  stock  of  blood  and  other
juices.  It  ought  to  result  from  this,  that  if  (as  M.  Broussais
maintains)  tubercles  are  produced  by  inflammation  and  irritation,
pleurisy  should  seem  more  likely  to  prevent  than  facilitate  their
formation  in  the  pulmonary  substance,  since  it  extinguishes  nearly
all  their  vital  energy.  In  cases  of  empyema  of  more  than  a  year's
standing,  we  constantly  find  the  substance  of  the  lung  sound,
with  the  exception  of  its  being  compressed.  And  in  most  of  the
cases  in  which  I  have  met  with  the  tubercles  co-existing  with  em-
pyema, this  disease  has  been  the  consequence  either  of  perfora-
tion of  the  pleura  by  a  softened  tubercle,  or  of  the  presence  of  a
great  many  tubercles  immediately  beneath  this  membrane.  It
is  a  thing  of  every  day's  occurrence,  to  find  pleurisies,  either
latent  or  manifest,  supervene  in  the  progress  of  phthisis;  and  in
those  rare  cases  where  this  disease  seems  ushered  in  by  an  atten-
dant pleurisy,  the  stethoscope  enables  us  to  detect  in  many  of
them,  the  presence  of  a  great  accumulation  of  tubercles  in  the
upper  part  of  the  lungs,  or  even  of  some  already  softened  and
excavated.  We  may,  therefore,  I  conceive,  rigorously  conclude,
that  pleurisy  is  very  frequently  an  effect  of  the  presence  of  tu-
bercles in  the  lungs ;  and  that,  if  we  admit  that  it  is  sometimes
a  cause  of  them,  we  can  neither  demonstrate  this,  nor  yet  be  cer-
tainly convinced  of  it.*

From  all  that  has  gone  before,  we  are  authorised  to  conclude,
that  tubercles  are  not  the  product  of  inflammation  of  any  one  of
the  constituent  textures  of  the  lungs.  On  the  contrary,  a  mul-
titude of  facts  prove  that  the  development  of  the  tubercles  is  the
result  of  a  general  condition  of  the  body ;  that  it  takes  place
without  previous  inflammation  ;  and  that,  when  inflammation
coincides  with  tuberculous  affection,  it  is  most  frequently  pos-
terior to  it  in  its  origin. To  convince  ourselves  of  the  accuracy

*  For  some  strong  arguments  and  facts  against  the  doctrine  of  tubercles  being  a
consequence  of  pleurisy,  pneumonia,  and  catarrh,  I  refer  the  reader  to  M.  Louis's
Treatise,  p.  503,  et  seq.  He  says,  that  of  eighty  phthisical  subjects,  into  whose
previous  history  he  had  particularly  inquired,  only  seven  had  ever  been  affected  with
pneumonia,  and  four  of  these  had  been  perfectly  free  from  any  pectoral  affection  for
several  years  before  the  invasion  of  the  phthisis.  He  notices  the  fact  formerly  stated
by  our  author,  of  tubercles  being  most  frequent  in  the  upper  lobes,  while  pneu-
monia most  commonly  occupies  the  lower.  He  adds,  that  pneumonia  rarely  affects
both  lungs,  while  phthisis  almost  always  does  so  ;  and  that  the  former  is  most  com-
mon in  men,  while  the  latter  is  so  in  women.  The  same  remarks,  he  says,  apply  to
pleurisy  and  catarrh,  with  this  addition,  that  in  cases  of  chronic  pleurisy,  he  has
found  as  many  tubercles  in  the  lung  of  the  sound  as  in  that  of  the  diseased  side.  Out
of  the  eighty  cases  of  phthisis  above  alluded  to,  only  twenty-three  had  been  parti-
cularly subjec  t  to  catarrli :  and  out  of  one  hundred  and  forty-nine  cases  of  catarrh
treated  by  him,  only  fifty-two  occurred  in  women.— Transl.


278


I'HTHISIS  l'ULMONALIS.


of  this  last  proposition,  we  need  only  examine  the  progress  of
tubercles  in  scrophulous  glands.  We  very  frequently  find  these  to
swell,  and  remain  for  a  long  time  in  this  state,  and  without  any
redness  either  of  the  adjoining  skin  or  even  of  the  substance  of
the  gland  itself.  It  is  frequently  even  several  years  before  any
marks  of  inflammation  show  themselves ;  but  when  this  occurs,
it  seems  to  accelerate  the  softening  of  the  tuberculous  matter.
Sometimes,  however,  not  only  the  softening  of  this  matter,  but
even  the  perforation  of  the  skin,  and  the  discharge  of  the  pus
take  place  without  any  distinct  mark  of  inflammation.  When
this  occurs,  it  has  its  site  evidently  in  the  parts  contiguous  to
the  gland,  and  not  in  the  gland  itself.  Another  proof  of  the
same  fact,  and  one  equally  strong,  is  supplied  by  the  existence
of  those  secondary  eruptions  of  tubercles,  particularly  such  as
affect  many  organs  at  once,  and  which  originate  without  any
obvious  sign  of  inflammation.  In  instances  of  this  kind,  it  is
impossible  not  to  see  a  constitutional  or  general  affection. — What
has  just  been  said  of  inflammation,  applies  equally,  as  Bayle  has
well  observed,  to  other  general  and  local  causes  to  which  some
have  attributed  phthisis ;  such  as  syphilis,  croup,  scurvy,  erup-
tions, &c.  These  may  hasten  the  development  of  tubercles
already  existing ;  they  may  even  sometimes,  perhaps,  determine
their  development  in  subjects  predisposed  to  them  :  but  in  such
cases,  they  are  merely  occasional  causes  ;  the  real  cause,  like  that
of  all  diseases,  being  probably  beyond  our  reach.*

*  Very  various  opinions  respecting  the  origin  and  nature  of  tubercles  have  been
entertained  by  medical  writers  ;  for  a  brief  outline  of  wbicb  I  refer  the  reader  to  the
very  learned  work  of  Dr.  Young  on  consumptive  diseases.  It  is  hardly  necessary
to  refer  to  the  crude  notions  of  the  ancients  on  this  subject.  Hippocrates  considered
them  as  owing  to  the  putrefaction  of  the  phlegm  or  bile ;  and  the  opinions  of  bis
successors,  and  those  of  Galen,  for  many  centuries,  were  equally  intelligible  and  cor-
rect. In  more  modern  times  still  greater  variety  of  opinion  has  prevailed  respecting
tubercles.  They  have  been  considered  as  lymphatic  glands,  rendered  visible  by  in-
flammation, in  the  first  place,  and  then  subjected  to  the  common  progress  of  this  mor-
bid process,  such  as  suppuration,  ulceration,  &c.  This  was  the  opinion,  with  some
slight  difference,  of  Sylvius,  Wepfer,  Tralles,  and  a  great  many  of  our  more  modem
writers;  and  it  is  still  that  of  M.  Broussais.  By  many  others  they  have  been  con-
sidered as  the  direct  product  of  inflammation  of  the  pulmonary  substance,  as  stated
in  the  text.  Dr.  Reid,  with  many  early  writers,  considers  them  as  originating  in  an
obstructed  state  of  the  exhalent  vessels  of  the  lungs,  caused  by  the  viscidity  of  their
contents.  Dr.  Rush  says  they  are  a  collection  of  inorganic  mucus,  &c.  The  opinion
maintained  by  our  author,  and  which  is  that  of  Bayle,  and  indeed  of  almost  every
pathologist  of  eminence  since  his  time,  is  now  almost  universally  adopted  by  medical
men.  A  remarkable  deviation  from  this  general  assent,  however,  (as  was  noticed  in
a  preceding  note,)  has  been  maintained  with  singular  zeal  by  one  distinguished  Eng-
lish physician,  Dr.  13aron,  of  Gloucester,  who  attempts  to  prove  that  tubercles  are
essentially  hydatids,  and  that  the  progress  of  the  tuberculous  disease  is  precisely  the
reverse  of  that  desciibed  by  Laennec. — Transt.

The  discussion  in  the  text  respecting  the  inflammatory  or  non-inflammatory
origin  of  tubercles  in  the  lungs,  is  now  become  idle,  since  all  good  observers  are
of  accord  on  this  point — that  they  are  in  all  cases  the  consequence  of  a  predisposition
either  congenital  or  acquired.  It  is  of  little  consequence  whether  tubercles  are  or
are  not  the  consequence  of  inflammation,  if  it  be  shown  that  this  consequence  can
only  ensue  under  given  circumstances. The  only  thing  of  importance  is  to  know


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


279


Sect.  III. — Examination  of  the  question,  whether  or  not

Phthisis  is  curable.

To  many  practical  physicians,  who  are  not  anatomists,  the
possibility  of  a  cure  taking  place  after  the  formation  of  an  ulcer-
ous excavation  in  the  lungs  may  seem  quite  admissible.  This
opinion,  however,  will,  in  all  likelihood,  appear  quite  absurd  to
those  who  have  paid  much  attention  to  morbid  dissection.  Pre-
viously to  the  knowledge  of  the  true  character  and  mode  of  de-
velopment of  tubercles,  and  while  consumption  was  considered
simply  as  a  consequence  of  the  chronic  inflammation  and  slow
suppuration  of  the  pulmonary  tissue,  medical  men  did  not  ques-
tion (any  more  than  the  vulgar  now  do)  the  possibility  of  curing
this  disease  by  a  suitable  mode  of  treatment,  especially  if  taken
in  time,  and  during  the  first  stage  of  it.  M.  Broussais  still
flatters  himself  with  the  same  hope.  (Exam,  des  Doct.  Med.)
It  is  now,  however,  the  general  opinion  of  all  those  who  are  ac-
quainted with  the  actual  state  of  our  knowledge  respecting  the
pathology  of  diseases,  that  the  tubercular  affection,  like  cancer,
is  absolutely  incurable,  inasmuch  as  nature's  efforts  towards
effecting  a  cure  are  injurious,  and  those  of  art  are  useless.  Bayle,
in  particular,  advocates  the  incurability  of  this  disease ;  he,
however,  admits  the  possibility  of  its  being  almost  indefinitely
prolonged.  The  recent  researches  made  in  England  and  Ger-
many have  led  the  best  informed  physicians  of  those  countries  to
the  same  result.  The  observations  contained  in  the  treatise  of
M.  Bayle,  as  well  as  the  remarks  made  in  the  present  chapter,  on
the  development  of  tubercles,  sufficiently  prove  the  idea  of  the
cure  of  consumption  in  its  early  stage  to  be  perfectly  illusive.
Crude  tubercles  tend  essentially  to  increase  in  size  and  to  become
soft.  Nature  and  art  may  retard  or  even  arrest  their  progress,
but  neither  can  reverse  it.  But  while  I  admit  the  incurability
of  consumption  in  the  early  stages,  I  am  convinced,  from  a  great
number  of  facts,  that,  in  some  cases,  the  disease  is  curable  in  the
latter  stages,  that  is,  after  the  softening  of  the  tubercles  and  the
formation  of  an  ulcerous  excavation.

these  circumstances,  that  is,  to  ascertain  the  predisposing  causes  of  phthisis,  as  it  is
on  this  knowledge  alone  that  any  rational  treatment  of  this  dreadful  disease  can  be
founded.

I  may  here  remark,  that  with  the  exception  of  what  is  given  by  our  author  in  the
ensuing  section,  on  the  cicatrization  of  tuberculous  cavities,  the  anatomical  history
of  tubercles  has  been  enriched  by  no  new  fact  since  the  labours  of  Bayle  ;  what  M.
Andral  has  advanced  respecting  granulations  and  tuberculous  infiltration  cannot  be
considered  as  such.  M.  Rochoux  alone,  in  my  opinion,  has  any  claim  to  be  regarded
as  having  added  any  thing  to  what  was  previously  known  on  the  subject,  if  it  is  in-
deed true,  as  he  states,  and  as  my  own  observations  lead  me  to  believe,  that  tubercles
first  present  themselves  under  the  form  of  a  reddish  point,  previously  to  becoming
grey  and  semi-transparent  bodies. — (M.L.)


280


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


Occasionally,  while  examining  the  lungs  of  subjects  that  had
suffered  from  chronic  catarrh,  I  have  observed  irregular  cavities
lined  by  a  semi-cartilaginous  membrane  in  all  respects  similar  to
that  described  above  ;  and  these  cavities  accorded  perfectly  with
the  tuberculous  ulcerations,  except  that  they  were  empty.  In
carefully  investigating  the  history  of  such  subjects,  I  found
that  they  all  referred  the  origin  of  their  catarrh  to  a  severe  pre-
vious disease,  which  bore  the  character  of  consumption  so  strongly
as  to  make  their  case,  at  the  time,  be  considered  desperate.  On
the  other  hand,  in  subjects  dead  of  consumption,  whose  disease
had  lasted  very  long,  several  years  for  instance,  we  very  com-
monly find  similar  excavations  entirely  lined  by  semi-cartilagi-
nous membrane,  and  free,  or  almost  free,  from  tuberculous
matter.  In  the  same  lung  we  shall  also  find  excavations  having
the  cartilaginous  membrane  much  softer  and  less  complete,  and
still  containing  a  considerable  quantity  of  tuberculous  matter ;
while  other  excavations  are  observed  almost  filled  with  the  pun-
form  tuberculous  fluid,  and  with  scarcely  any  of  the  cartilagi-
nous lining.  In  conjunction  with  all  these,  we  almost  always  find
tubercles  in  various  degrees  of  maturation,  and  even  in  their
miliary  and  semi-transparent  stage.  This  re-union  of  tubercles
in  all  their  various  degrees  of  development,  considered  in  con-
junction with  the  slow  progress  of  the  disease,  decidedly  proves,
in  my  opinion,  that  the  tubercles  have  been  developed  at  different
periods ;  and  that  the  oldest — those  namely,  which  have  given
rise  to  the  empty  ulcerous  cavities  lined  by  the  cartilaginous
membrane — have  originated,  in  many  cases,  several  years  before
the  others.  The  formation  of  this  semi-cartilaginous  membrane
on  the  surface  of  tuberculous  excavations,  must  be  considered,  in
my  opinion,  as  a  curative  effort  of  nature.  When  completely
formed,  it  constitutes  a  sort  of  internal  cicatrix  analogous  to  a
fistula,  and  is,  in  many  cases,  not  more  injurious  to  health  than
this  species  of  morbid  affection.  All  the  persons  whose  cases  I
noticed  above,  died  of  diseases  not  referable  to  the  pulmonary
organs.  They  had  all  lived  a  greater  or  less  number  of  years  in
a  very  supportable  state  of  health,  being  merely  subject  to  a
chronic  catarrh.  Some  indeed  had  more  or  less  of  dyspnoea,  but
without  any  fever  or  emaciation.

I  have  within  these  few  years  had  under  my  care  several  pa-
tients affected  with  chronic  catarrh,  and  who  afforded  distinctly
the  sign  of  pectoriloquy,  although  they  had  in  no  other  respect
any  symptom  of  consumption.  I  have  met  with  several  other
cases,  wherein  this  phenomenon  was  observable  along  with  a
slight  habitual  cough,  very  little  expectoration,  and  scarcely  any
marked  alteration  in  the  general  health.  In  a  lady,  formerly  a
patietit  of  M.  Bayle,  fourteen  years  since,  and  whose  case  was
decidedly  consumption,  (as  appears  from  M.  Baylc's  notes  in  her
possession,)  the  sigh  of  pectoriloquy  is  most  distinct. This  lady


PHTHISIS  I'ULMONALIS.


281


recovered  beyond  all  expectation ;  she  is  now  stout  ,  and  the  only
symptom  she  bas  at  all  referable  to  the  lungs,  is  a  slight  cough.
I  have  no  doubt  that  the  cartilaginous  excavations  above  de-
scribed exist  in  this  person's  lungs.

Indeed,  I  feel  assured  that  when  the  use  of  the  stethoscope  be-
comes more  general,  it  will  be  found  that  in  those  cases  in  which
a  well-marked  phthisis  attended  by  pectoriloquy,  is  converted
into  a  chronic  catarrh,  the  pectoriloquy  will  frequently  continue
through  life,  and  anfractuous  cavities,  lined  by  a  semi-cartilagi-
nous membrane,  will  often  be  found  in  the  lungs  after  death.
Many  cases  of  this  kind  have  been  communicated  to  me  since
the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  this  work ;  several  others
have  been  recorded  in  the  medical  journals  ;  and  I  have  myself
collected  a  considerable  number.  To  render  the  statements  just
made,  more  clear  and  intelligible,  1  shall  now  detail  five  cases,
which  exhibit  instances  of  the  facts  1  have  related.

Case  XVII.  Ulcers  of  the  lungs  cured  by  transformation  into
semi-cartilaginous  jistidcB. —  A  woman,  aged  sixty-eight,  had
been  for  several  years  affected  with  much  cough  and  expectora-
tion ;  accompanied  by  habitual  shortness  of  breath,  greatly
aggravated  by  the  least  exercise.  In  other  respects  she  was
pretty  well,  and  was  able  to  discharge  the  laborious  duties  of  a
servant.  She  was  sufficiently  stout  and  had  a  good  appetite ;
but  her  lips  and  cheeks  were  of  a  bluish  red  colour.  On  the  last
day  of  December,  1817,  she  was  seized  with  fever,  very  severe
dyspnoea,  and  cough  attended  by  very  viscid  frothy  sputa,  of  a
pale  green  colour  and  semi-opaque.  She  was  bled,  and  thereby
obtained  some  relief.  Four  days  after  this  attack  she  was  re-
moved to  the  hospital,  and  presented  the  following  symptoms  on
being  examined  by  the  stethoscope  : — Respiration  was  barely
perceptible  to  the  height  of  about  the  fourth  rib,  and  was  ac-
companied by  a  well-marked  crepitous  rhonchus  in  the  inferior
and  left  part  of  the  chest.  Percussion  elicited  a  dull  sound  over
the  same  extent,  especially  on  the  back.  The  pulsation  of  the
heart  gave  no  shock,  but  was  perceptible  over  the  whole  anterior
and  lateral  part  of  the  chest,  and  slightly  on  the  left  side  of  the
back.  The  contraction  of  the  auricles  and  ventricles  produced
a  considerable  sound,  and  nearly  equally  so.  The  external  jugu-
lars were  swollen.  The  dyspnoea  and  expectoration  were  as
stated  above.  On  these  data  the  following  diagnostic  was  given  :
Pneumonia  of  the  inferior  part  of  the  left  lung  :  slight  dilatation
of  the  ventricles.  Fresh  bleedings  gave  temporary  relief ;  but
on  the  eighth  day  the  fever  increased  and  was  attended  by  stupor
and  delirium.  At  this  time  respiration  was  much  stronger  {caver-
nous) on  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side  than  anywhere  else,  and
daturally  led  us  to  suspect  the  existence  of  pectoriloquy  there;
but  the  patient  was  too  weak  to  have  this  tried,  and  died  the
following  day.


282


l'JITHISIS  PULM0NAI.1S.


Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death. — The  lungs  ad-
hered to  the  costal  pleura,  nearly  through  their  whole  extent,  by
means  of  well-organised  cellular  substance,  evidently  of  ancient
date.  The  right  lung  was  crepitous  .and  very  sound,  exclusive
of  the  upper  lobe,  which  contained  an  excavation  of  the  size  of  a
large  filbert.  This  was  lined  by  a  thin,  smooth,  equable  mem-
brane, pearl-grey,  and  of  a  semi-cartilaginous  nature.  Several
bronchial  tubes  opened  into  this,  extremely  dilated,  so  as,  at  first
sight,  to  look  like  appendices  of  the  cavity.  The  mucous  mem-
brane of  some  of  these  tubes  was  very  pale,  and  that  of  others
red,  but  not  swollen.  The  top  of  the  left  lung  contained  a  simi-
lar cavity,  only  larger,  being  capable  of  containing  a  walnut,
and  more  irregularly  shaped.  It  was  lined  by  a  membrane  of
the  same  kind,  which  was  continuous  with  the  mucous  coat  of  a
great  number  of  bronchial  tubes,  of  the  size  of  a  crow-quill,
which  opened  into  it.  It  contained  merely  a  small  portion  of
nearly  colourless  serosity.  The  substance  of  the  lungs  around
these  cavities  was  sound  and  crepitous  ;  except  in  the  places
where  some  of  the  projecting  angles  came  nearly  in  contact,  in
which  cases  the  intervening  substance  appeared  like  a  compound
of  fibro-cartilage  and  black  pulmonary  matter.  There  were  no
tubercles  whatever  in  the  lungs ;  but  the  whole  of  the  inferior
lobes,  and  the  lower  portion  of  the  superior,  had  a  consistence
equal  to  that  of  liver,  which,  when  cut,  exhibited  a  granulated
surface,  and  poured  out  a  purulent  fluid  intermixed  with  blood.
The  right  cavity  of  the  chest  was  larger  than  the  left.  The
heart  was  somewhat  larger  than  natural,  and  was  filled  with  co-
agula.  The  right  ventricle,  in  particular,  was  evidently  en-
larged, and  both  of  these  were  thin,  especially  the  right.

Case  XVIII.  Ulcer  of  the  lungs  converted  into  a  semi-carti-
laginous fistula.  A  man,  aged  thirty-two,  affected  at  intervals
during  the  preceding  six  months,  with  mania,  was  brought  to
Necker  hospital  26th  December,  1817,  in  a  state  of  stupor,  and
died  a  few  days  afterwards.  Sufficient  cause  of  death  was  found
in  the  brain.  I  shall  only  here  notice  the  condition  of  the  lungs.
The  left  lung  was  one-fourth  less  than  the  right,  and  adhered  by
numerous  cellular  attachments  to  the  pleura.  It  was,  through-
out, sound  and  crepitous,  but  contained  about  seven  or  eight
tubercles  of  the  size  of  hemp-seed,  having  a  yellow  and  opaque
speck  in  their  centre.  The  right  lung  was  in  its  summit  attached
to  the  pleura,  by  old  adhesions,  and  contained,  in  this  place,  an
excavation  capable  of  holding  an  egg.  This  cavity,  which  was
filled  by  a  clot  of  blood,  was  lined  by  a  semi-cartilaginous  mem-
brane, a  quarter  of  a  line  thick,  of  a  pearl-grey  colour,  and  very
smooth  and  polished,  yet  having  little  tuberosities  on  its  surface.
Several  bronchial  tubes  of  different  diameters  opened  into  it.
The  rest  of  the  lung  was  perfectly  crepitous  throughout,  even
around  the  excavation,  but  contained  an  immense  quantity  of


PHTHISIS  I'ULMONALIS.


283


tuberculous  granulations,  of  the  size  of  millet  seed  at  most,  be-
sides  three  or  four  other  tubercles  of  a  larger  size,  and  already
yellow,  opaque,  and  somewhat  friable  towards  their  centre.

Case  XIX.  Ulcer  of  the  lungs  converted  into  a  semi-carti-
laginous fistula,  #c.— A  woman,  aged  forty,  had  been  long  sub-
ject to  much  cough  and  dyspnoea,  varied  by  temporary  aggra-
vations, especially  during  certain  states  of  the  weather.  These
symptoms,  which  she  called  asthma,  had  not  incapacitated  her
for  labour,  until  the  last  fifteen  days,  at  the  end  of  which  time
she  came  into  the  hospital.  At  this  time  she  could  not  at  all  lie
down,— the  respiration  was  very  short  and  difficult, — the  face
pallid  and  swollen,  and  the  lips  blue,  and  there  was  anasarca  of
the  lower  limbs.  The  chest  yielded,  on  percussion,  a  pretty  good
sound  throughout,  though,  perhaps,  somewhat  less  than  natural.
Immediately  below  the  clavicle  on  each  side,  the  cylinder  dis-
covered a  well-marked  rhonchus.  The  thoracic  parietes  were
much  and  forcibly  elevated  at  each  inspiration.  The  cough  was
very  frequent,  and  followed  by  expectoration  of  opaque  yellow
sputa.  Pectoriloquy  was  not  discoverable.  The  pulse  was  fre-
quent, small,  and  regular  ;  the  external  jugulars  were  swelled  and
distinctly  pulsative ;  the  pulsations  of  the  heart,  examined  by
the  stethoscope,  were  deep  and  regular,  but  affording  little  sound
and  no  impulse  to  the  ear.  From  this  examination  I  thought
myself  justified  in  considering  the  heart  as  sound,  notwithstand-
ing the  contrary  indication  afforded  by  the  general  symptoms;
and  accordingly  gave  my  diagnostic — Phthisis  without  disease
of  the  heart.  ( Four  leeches  to  the  epigastrium  ;  pectoral  mix-
ture.) A  few  days  after,  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles  gave
some  impulse,  a  symptom  which,  taken  along  with  the  pulsation
of  the  jugulars,  gave  reason  to  suspect  slight  hypertrophy  of  the
right  ventricle.  The  symptoms,  especially  the  anasarca,  got
gradually  worse  ;  and  she  died  on  the  19th  of  February.  The
day  before  her  death  evident  pectoriloquy  was  discovered  about
the  anterior  third  of  the  fourth  intercostal  space,  on  the  right
side,  a  point  which  had  not  been  examined  before.

Dissection. — The  heart  was  of  the  natural  size.  The  right
ventricle  was  perhaps  a  little  thicker  than  natural ;  and  there
was  an  ecchymosed  spot,  the  size  of  the  nail,  on  the  inner  sur-
face of  the  pericardium.  There  was  about  a  pint  of  serum  in
the  left  side  of  the  chest,  and  the  lung  was  attached  to  the  costal
pleura,  at  it-,  top,  by  short  cellular  adhesions.  In  this  point
there  were  several  radiated  linear  impressions  depressed  in  the
point  of  their  union.  These  impressions  corresponded  to  three
or  four  laminae  of  condensed  cellular  tissue  traversing  the  sub-
stance of  the  lung.  In  the  same  place  there  was  a  dozen  of  tu-
bercles in  different  stages,  and  one  small  excavation  of  the  size
of  a  filbert,  lined  by  a  soft  membrane,  and  filled  by  softened
tuberculous  matter. The  rest  of  this  lung  was  crepitous  and


284


I'HTHISIS  l'ULMONALIS.


gorged  with  blood.  The  right  lung  adhered  firmly,  throughout
its  whole  extent,  to  the  costal  pleura.  Immediately  opposite  the
fourth  intercostal  space,  and  at  the  depth  of  half  an  inch,  there-
was  a  cavity  the  size  of  a  walnut.  It  was  lined  by  a  semi-carti-
laginous membrane,  of  the  kind  so  often  already  described,  and
contained  a  small  portion  of  a  yellowish  pus.  A  bronchial  tube
opened  into  this  on  the  inferior  side,  of  the  size  of  a  crow-quill,
but  partially  obstructed  by  a  small  chalky  concretion  which
lay  loose  in  it.  There  were  seven  or  eight  similar  concretions  in
other  parts  of  the  lung,  two  of  which,  situated  immediately  under
the  pleura,  were  of  the  size  of  prune-stones.  The  lungs  were  in
other  respects  sound.

Case  XX. Phthisis  Pulmonalis — cured  by  the  conversion  of
an  ulcerous  excavation  into  a  fistula. — This  patient  was  a  lady,
aged  forty-eight,  of  a  good  constitution,  and  had  been  healthy,
with  the  exception  of  a  local  disease,  until  her  thirtieth  year,
when  she  became  subject  to  very  severe  pulmonary  catarrhs,
several  of  which  confined  her  to  bed  for  two  or  three  months,  and
produced  considerable  emaciation. Subsequently  to  one  of  these
attacks  she  had  a  diarrhoea,  which  was  at  length  checked  with
great  difficulty,  but  her  bowels  continued  lax  for  several  years.
After  being  long  without  an  attack  of  catarrh,  and  in  very  good
health,  she  was,  in  the  beginning  of  1817,  attacked  with  a  dis-
tressing cough,  attended  by  a  slight  watery  viscid  and  colourless
expectoration. I  saw  her  in  July,  at  which  time  she  was  con-
siderably emaciated,  and,  though  still  able  to  attend  to  her  occu-
pation, weak  and  languid. The  pulse  and  skin  were  not  uni-
formly febrile. Respiration  was  very  perceptible  over  the  whole
chest,  but  less  distinctly  at  the  top  of  the  right  lung.  From
this,  and  the  nature  of  the  expectoration,  I  considered  her  as
having  tubercles  in  an  early  stage,  and  applied  leeches,  Sec.  The
symptoms  continued  nearly  the  same  throughout  the  summer
and  part  of  the  winter. In  the  end  of  February,  1818,  the
cough  became  suddenly  loose,  and  the  patient  began  to  have
thick  yellow  puriform  expectoration. This  state  of  the  sputa
lasted  a  month,  when  the  cough  in  a  great  measure  left  her  and
became  nearly  dry. I  did  not  see  the  patient  during  this  attack,
which  she  looked  upon  as  a  cold ;  but  I  visited  her  in  the  be-
ginning of  April,  and  upon  examining  her  chest  I  found  most
distinct  pectoriloquy  at  the  anterior  and  upper  part  of  the  right
side. I  was  convinced  by  this  that  the  supposed  catarrh  had
been  the  discharge  of  the  softened  tuberculous  matter.  The
sound  of  respiration  was  good  over  the  whole  chest ;  and  even  in
the  vicinity  of  the  pectoriloquous  spot ;  the  pulse  was  not  fre-
quent and  the  heat  moderate. On  this  account  I  entertained
hopes  of  her  recovery,  and  prescribed  ass's  milk. The  cough
and  expectoration  progressively  lessened,  the  flesh  and  strength
returned  ;  and,  in  the  beginning  of  July,  my  patient  had  regained


rilTNTSIS PUT.  MONALTS.


285


every  appearance  of  the  most  perfect  health,  although  the  pecto-
riloquy still  continued  most  distinct,  beneath  the  anterior  part
of  the  second  rib  on  the  right  side,  in  a  space  of  about  an  inch
square.  During  the  succeeding  winter  this  lady  had  an  attack
or  catarrh,  but  it  lasted  only  fifteen  days  and  was  not  severe.  In
other  respects  she  bore  the  winter  well,  and  she  continues  in
good  health,  though  still  pectoriloquous  in  the  same  degree.
I  [er  pulse  is  rather  slow,  and  she  has  little  cough  and  less  ex-
pectoration.

From  considering  the  foregoing  observations,  the  shape  of  the
pulmonary  fistula?,  the  smooth  and  polished  surface  of  their
lining  membrane,  and  the  analogy  of  fistulas  in  other  parts  of  the
body,  we  might  naturally  be  led  to  suppose  that  the  formation
of  the  semi-cartilaginous  membrane  is  the  last  effort  of  nature
<o\vards  a  cure,  after  the  formation  of  an  ulcerous  excavation  in
the  substance  of  the  lungs,  and  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  walls
of  a  cavity  lined  by  such  a  membrane  to  unite  and  cicatrize.
The  following  case,  however,  leads  me  to  the  contrary  con-
clusion.

Case  XXI.  Semi-cartilaginous  fistula  of  the  lungs  par-
tially cicatrized,  Sj-c. — A  patient,  admitted  into  the  hospital  for
a  diarrhoea,  and  who  was  observed  during  the  time  he  remained
there  to  have  also  cough  and  expectoration,  died  suddenly  of
apoplexy,  the  cause  of  which  was  found  in  the  brain.  Upon  ex-
amining the  chest,  the  right  lung,  at  its  summit,  was  found  to
adhere,  by  means  of  long  cellular  attachments,  to  the  pleura.
In  the  lateral  and  posterior  part  of  the  upper  lobe,  there  was
observed  on  the  surface  a  deep  depression,  which  seemed,  at  first
sight,  owing  to  the  falling  in  of  the  walls  of  an  ulcerous  excava-
tion, but  which  felt  to  the  touch  very  solid  and  resisting.  Upon
dividing  the  lung  in  this  point,  it  was  found  that  there  extended
inwards  from  the  centre  of  this  depression,  a  white  opaque  lamina,
about  half  a  line  in  thickness  and  of  the  consistence  of  cartilage,
only  hardly  so  firm.  When  it  had  reached  to  within  half  an
inch  of  the  opposite  surface  of  the  lung,  this  lamina  divided  into
two  parts  and  then  re-united,  so  as  to  leave  a  small  cavity  or
cyst  capable  of  containing  an  almond  or  prune-stone.  This
cavity  was  half-filled  by  a  flake  of  tuberculous  matter  of  a  yel-
lowish white  colour,  opaque,  friable,  much  drier  than  tubercu-
lous matter  of  this  consistence  usually  is,  but  still  easily  recog-
nized as  such,  as  well  by  its  peculiar  characters,  as  from  some
specks  of  black  pulmonary  matter  with  which  it  was  intermixed.
The  walls  of  this  cavity,  being  only  one-half  as  thick  as  the  car-
tilaginous lamina  with  which  they  were  connected,  and  of  which
they  appeared  to  be  a  separation,  were  slightly  semi-transparent,
and  exhibited  the  reddish  tint  of  the  pulmonary  substance  sur-
rounding them.  About  two  lines  above  this  membrane,  at  the
very  top  of  the  lung,  there  was  found  a  portion  of  the  pulmo-


286


PHTHISIS  l'ULMONALIS.


nary  substance,  about  an  inch  square,  quite  indurated.  This  in-
duration was  occasioned  by  a  great  number  of  small  tubercles,
of  a  whitish-yellow  colour,  opaque  in  the  centre,  grey  and  semi-
transparent  towards  the  circumference,  quite  distinct  from  each
other,  and  varying  in  size  from  that  of  a  millet  to  that  of  a
hemp  seed.  Some  of  them  were  quite  white  and  opaque,  and
were  beginning  to  soften  in  their  centre.  The  intervening  pul-
monary substance  was  infiltrated  by  a  semi-transparent  sero-san-
guineous  and  jelly-like  matter,  much  more  solid  than  jelly,  though
still  very  humid.  ( Jelly-like  tuberculous  infiltration.)  Many
other  similar  tubercles  were  contained  in  different  parts  of  this
lung,  which  was,  nevertheless,  crepitous  throughout,  with  the
exception  of  the  indurated  spot  above  mentioned,  and  a  portion
of  the  inferior  and  back  parts,  which  were  considerably  engorged.

The  left  lung  was  charged  with  tubercles  precisely  in  the  same
manner  as  the  right,  and  contained,  in  the  upper  part  of  the
superior  lobe,  a  cavity  somewhat  irregularly  shaped,  capable  of
holding  an  almond  in  its  shell.  This  was  entirely  empty,  and
covered  by  a  membrane  about  a  quarter  of  a  line  in  thickness,
which  was  smooth,  even,  semi-transparent,  and  of  the  consistence
of  cartilage,  but  more  friable.  Five  or  six  bronchial  tubes  opened
into  this  cavity,  their  inner  membrane  appearing  continuous  with
it.  The  substance  of  the  lungs  around  was  quite  sound  and
crepitating.*

The  foregoing  condition  of  parts  appears  to  me  evidently  pro-
duced by  the  imperfect  union  of  the  membrane  lining  two  sides
of  an  ulcerous  excavation,  and  which  has  been  rendered  imperfect
by  the  portion  of  tuberculous  matter  still  remaining  in  it  at  the
period  of  union.  This  must  be  regarded  as  a  very  rare  oc-
currence. It  is  the  only  one  of  the  kind  I  have  met  with.  It
is,  however,  not  at  all  uncommon  to  find  in  different  parts  of  the
lungs,  especially  in  the  upper  part  of  the  superior  lobes,  (in  which
situation  tubercles  are  well  known  to  be  of  most  frequent  occur-
rence,) bands  composed  of  a  condensed  cellular  substance,  inter-
mixed .sometimes  with  fibrous,  or  fibro-cartilaginous  portions,
which  by  their  whiteness  form  a  striking  contrast  with  the  natural
tissue  of  the  lungs.  These  bands  have  every  resemblance  to
cicatrices  in  the  pulmonary  substance.  Sometimes,  in  place  of
these  bands,  we  observe  masses  of  various  size,  of  condensed
cellular  or  fibro-cartilaginous  tissue.  Commonly,  the  substance
of  the  lungs  in  the  vicinity  of  these  accidental  productions,  is
much  more  impregnated  with  the  black  pulmonary  matter  than
elsewhere  ;  so  much  so,  that  it  would  seem  as  if  the  formation  of
such  foreign  bodies  were  necessarily  accompanied  by  an  extraor-
dinary secretion  of  this  peculiar  matter,  which  ought  not  to  be

*  This  excavation  would  have  infallibly  given  the  moat  perfect  pectoriloquy,  if  i<
had  been  sought  for.— Author.


PHTHISIS  PULMONAI.IS.


287


considered  as  a  morbid  production.  The  parts  most  deeply  im-
pregnated with  this  matter,  are  commonly  more  flabby  and  less
crepitous  than  natural,  and  have  intermixed  with  them  fibro-
cartilaginous bands.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  find  in  such  lungs
concretions  of  a  bony  or  earthy  nature ;  or  a  chalky  substance,
of  the  consistence  of  paste.

I  had  often  observed  the  above  state  of  things  without  know-
ing to  what  to  attribute  it,  and  without  attaching  much  impor-
tance to  the  appearance  ;  but  after  I  was  convinced  of  the  possi-
bility of  cure  in  the  case  of  ulcerations  of  the  lungs,  I  began  to
fancy  that  nature  might  have  more  ways  than  one  of  accomplish-
ing this  end,  and  that,  in  certain  cases,  the  excavations,  after  the
discharge  of  their  contents,  by  expectoration  or  absorption,  might
cicatrize  in  the  same  manner  as  solutions  of  continuity  in  other
organs,  without  the  previous  formation  of  the  semi-cartilaginous
membrane. In  consequence  of  this  idea,  I  examined  these  pro-
ductions more  closely,  and  came  to  the  conclusion,  that,  in  every
case,  they  might  be  considered  as  cicatrices,  and  that,  in  many
cases,  they  could  hardly  be  conceived  to  be  any  thing  else.  In
all  such  examples  of  supposed  cicatrization,  I  found  on  the  ex-
terior of  the  lung,  at  the  point  nearest  to  such  cicatrice,  a  depres-
sion of  greater  or  less  extent,  with  a  hard  and  irregular  surface,
furrowed  by  linear  marks,  which  sometimes  exhibited  an  irregular
net  work,  or  embroidery,  and  sometimes  resembled  the  mouth  of
a  purse,  by  their  common  union  in  one  central  point. In  the
same  place  there  are  usually  found  adhesions  between  the  pleura
of  the  ribs  and  lungs. These  depressions  are  found  most  fre-
quently on  the  posterior  or  exterior  side  of  the  upper  lobes.
When  they  are  very  deep,  it  sometimes  happens  that  the  anterior
part  of  the  lobe,  drawn  upwards  and  backwards  by  the  apparent
loss  of  substance  and  consequent  falling-in  of  the  part,  overlaps
the  depressed  portion  like  the  crest  of  a  helmet. The  posterior
portion  of  the  lung  has  sometimes  the  same  appearance,  but  in  a
manner  much  less  strongly  marked. Whatever  resemblance  these
depressions  may  have  to  cicatrices,  I  do  not  consider  them  as
really  such,  but  rather  as  analogous  to  those  depressions  met
with  in  scirrhous  mammas,  which  are,  in  like  manner,  occasioned
by  the  diseased  action  going  on  in  the  substance  within. In  the
one  case,  the  surface  of  the  lungs,  in  the  other  the  skin,  is  re-
tracted by  the  shrinking  of  the  subjacent  parts. In  carefully  ex-
amining such  lungs  as  showed  similar  depressions  on  their  sur-
face, I  have  invariably  found,  at  the  depth  of  half  a  line,  a  line,
or  two  lines  at  farthest,  a  cellular,  fibrous,  or  fibrocartilaginous
mass,  similar  to  those  described  above. The  pulmonary  tissue
comprehended  within  the  depressed  space, is  almost  always
flabby,  and  not  crepitous,  even  in  cases  where  there  is  no  sign  of
congestion  or  of  impregnation  with  the  black  pulmonary  matter.
Every  where  else,  however,  in  the  vicinity  of  these  productions,


288


PIITHTSIS  PULMONALTS.


the  lung  is  frequently  quite  sound.  In  tracing  the  bronchial
tubes  near  these  masses,  I  have  observed  that  such  as  held  a
direction  towards  them,  were  commonly  dilated.  In  some  cases
I  have  been  able  to  trace  them,  as  also  bloodvessels,  in  the  fibro-
cartilaginous mass,  with  which,  although  obliterated,  they  formed
but  one  substance.  This  fact  seems  to  me  to  leave  no  doubt  of  the
nature  of  these  productions,  and  of  the  possibility  of  cicatrization  in
ulcers  of  the  lungs.  It  further  proves,  that  a  bronchial  tube  may
traverse  a  tubercle,  and  afterwards  a  tuberculous  excavation,
without  being  destroyed  ;  a  case,  however,  as  we  have  already  ob-
served, which  is  extremely  rare.  Those  wrinkled  depressions,
then,  on  the  exterior  surface  of  the  lungs,  are  not  themselves
cicatrices,  but  the  consequence  of  true  cicatrization  in  the  interior
of  the  lung.

These  cicatrizations,  especially  when  complete  and  composed
of  a  substance  analogous  to  other  natural  tissues,  produce  no
symptoms  whatever  that  can  denote  their  existence.  I  have  only
remarked  in  some  cases,  where  there  was  reason  to  believe  their
presence,  that  the  respiration  was  less  distinctly  audible  in  the
supposed  diseased  point.  In  such  instances  also,  where  there  is
much  of  the  black  pulmonary  matter  intermixed,  and  still  more
where  there  are  calcareous  concretions,  there  is  generally  a  slight
degree  of  cough,  and  an  expectoration  of  mucus  which  is  very
viscid,  semi-transparent,  and  marked  by  dark  dots.

The  great  number  of  cases,  in  which  this  wrinkling  or  purs-
ing of  the  surface  of  the  upper  lobes  has  been  met  with  in  the
Parisian  hospitals  since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  this
work,  has  induced  some  physicians  to  maintain  that  they  do  not
depend  on  an  internal  cicatrice.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  how-
ever, of  this  being  the  fact,  in  the  cases  related  by  me ;  and  I
have  never  yet  met  with  an  example  of  the  internal  cicatrization,
unaccompanied  by  the  external  depression.  In  respect  of  the
cases  in  which  a  slight  external  wrinkling  is  observed  without
any  well-marked  cicatrice,  I  have  to  repeat,  that  it  requires  a
good  deal  of  attention  to  distinguish  a  cellular  cicatrice  amid  a
tissue  so  eminently  cellular  as  the  lungs.  In  cases  of  this  kind,
as  in  all  others  which  require  application,  it  is  much  easier  not
to  see  than  to  verify  the  fact.  It  is  indeed  true  that  these  exter-
nal depressions  are  very  numerous,  being  met  with  in  almost
every  case  of  phthisis,  and  in  a  fourth  part,  perhaps,  of  indivi-
duals dead  of  other  diseases.  But  we  need  not  be  surprised  at  this
frequency ;  since  we  know  that  from  a  fourth  to  a  fifth  part  of
the  inhabitants  of  Paris  die  of  phthisis.  Besides,  we  have  already
shown,  that  this  disease  exhibits  frequently  successive  crops  of
tubercles ;  and  it  is  probable  that  the  patient  who  at  last  falls  a
victim  to  it,  may  have  got  the  better  of  several  previous  attacks.
On  the  other  hand,  the  moderate  severity  of  the  general  symp-
toms where  there  exist  only  one  or  two  tuberculous  masses,  of  a


PHTHISIS  PULMONAl.IS.


289


small  or  even  a  considerable  size,  (that  of  a  small  apple,  for  in-
stance,) ought  to  make  us  believe  that  a  number  of  lesser-sized
tubercles  may  form,  acquire  the  size  of  a  hazel-nut,  soften,  dis-
charge their  contents  into  the  bronchi,  and  finally  cicatrize,  with-
out obvious  derangement  of  the  general  health.  There  is  nothing
more  common  than  to  find,  in  the  bodies  of  persons  dead  of  dis-
eases unconnected  with  the  chest,  a  small  number  of  tubercles,
sometimes  of  considerable  size,  and  some  of  them  softened  and
excavated,  disseminated  through  the  lungs  in  other  respects  quite
sound.  Nothing  having,  in  these  cases,  announced  the  existence
of  tubercles,  I  see  no  reason  for  doubting  that  the  same  thing  may
occur  in  persons  entirely  healthy.*  '  In  instances  of  this  sort,  the
softening  of  the  tuberculous  matter,  and  its  evacuation  by  the
bronchi,  or  by  the  absorbents,  will  be  followed  by  a  cicatrice  of
too  small  a  size,  in  general,  and  too  like  the  pulmonary  tissue,
to  be  readily  and  at  once  distinguished,  especially  by  those  who
proceed  to  the  examination  with  a  prejudiced  mind.  The  two
following  cases  afford  remarkable  examples  of  this  species  of
cicatrization.

Case  XXII.  Ancient  cicatrice  in  the  lungs  in  a  pat/cut  ivho
died  of  pleurisy  and  peritonitis. — A  man,  aged  sixty-five,  came
into  the  hospital  on  the  29th  of  November,  affected  with  slight
pulmonary  disorder,  chiefly  marked  by  dyspnoea,  to  which  he
had  been  long  subject,  and  which  he  considered  as  asthma.  Per-
cussion afforded  no  result,  owing  to  the  excessive  fatness  of  the
individual ;  only  the  chest  appeared  to  sound  somewhat  less  be-
low the  right  clavicle.  Respiration  was  inaudible  over  the  whole
of  the  right  side,  but  was  puerile  on  the  left.  From  these  re-
sults, I  considered  this  person  as  affected  with  a  latent  pleurisy
of  the  right  side  of  the  chest.  Five  days  after  this,  there  was
observed  slight  oedema  of  the  right  side  of  the  chest ;  and  on
applying  the  stethoscope  to  the  back,  respiration  was  somewhat

*  For  as  many  as  eight  or  ten  examples  of  cicatrization  of  the  lungs  after  tubercles,
I  refer  the  reader  to  M.  Andral's  Clin.  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  332.  These  cases  are  still  more
striking  than  those  recorded  in  the  text ;  and,  together  with  them,  put  the  fact  of
the  healing  of  individual  tuberculous  excavations,  at  least,  beyond  all  question.  At
the  same  time,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  M.  Laennec  has  exaggerated  the  frequency  of
cases  of  this  land  ;  and  has  considered  certain  appearances  as  signs  of  cicatrization,
which  were  probably  owing  to  other  causes.  I  think  it  not  unlikely  that  simple
pneumonia,  or  pleuro-pneumonia,  and  indeed  other  and  less  severe  diseases,  may
give  rise  to  many  of  the  slighter  deviations  from  the  natural  structure  considered  by
him  as  tuberculous  cicatrices.  On  this  point  the  following  statement  of  M.  Louis  is
important:  "  1  have  not  met  with  any  of  those  masses  of  condensed  cellular  sub-
stance in  the  upper  lobes,  in  which  bronchial  tubes,  more  or  less  enlarged,  are  seen
to  terminate,  and  which  M.  Laennec  looks  upon  as  cicatrices  of  tuberculous  excava-
tions. The  depressions  on  the  surface  of  the  same  parts,  around  which  the  substance
of  the  lung  is  found  pursed  or  wrinkled,  have  not  appeared  to  me  to  be  owing  to  any
determinate  lesion. — I  have  frequently  observed  them  in  cases  where  the  lung  was
quite  sound,  or  only  slightly  indurated  to  a  small  depth  immediately  beneath  the
pleura.  I  have  also  found  them  sometimes  when  there  existed  in  the  summit  of  the
upper  lobe,  tubercles  still  unsoftened,  small  excavations,  or  bony  concretions."— Re  -
cherches,  p.  36. — Transit

U


290


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


perceptible  along  the  edge  of  the  spine  on  the  right  side,  though
less  so  than  on  the  left.  There  was  very  little  cough,  and
scarcely  any  expectoration.  After  a  few  days  the  oppression  be-
came less,  and  we  began  to  hear  the  sound  of  respiration,  in  a
slight  degree,  below  the  right  clavicle ;  and  aegophony  was  per-
ceptible in  the  same  spot  for  a  few  days.  On  the  11th  of  De-
cember the  chest  sounded  still  better  in  this  point,  and  respiration
became  as  distinct  as  in  the  opposite  side,  but  was  not  percepti-
ble lower  than  the  third  rib  :  it  was  also  sufficiently  distinct  be-
tween the  spine  and  scapula.  At  this  time  the  patient  expec-
torated some  opaque,  yellow,  puriform  sputa.  The  symptoms
continued  much  the  same  until  the  middle  of  February,  when
he  died,  apparently  from  an  attack  of  peritonitis.

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death. — The  cavity  of  the
right  pleura  contained  about  a  pint  of  yellow  and  somewhat
turbid  serum.  The  lung  of  the  same  side  adhered  to  the  dia-
phragm and  posterior  part  of  the  chest,  by  a  strong,  short,  and
well-organized  cellular  tissue.  On  the  anterior  surface  of  the
lung,  about  its  middle,  there  was  a  false  membrane,  about  the
size  of  the  palm  of  the  hand,  soft,  opaque,  yellowish,  of  a  con-
sistence inferior  to  that  of  half-concrete  albumen,  and  appearing,
at  first  sight,  like  the  matter  of  thick  puriform  sputa.  This
patch  was  traversed  by  numerous  blood-vessels,  and  adhered  to
the  costal  pleura  by  a  lamina  of  greater  consistence,  also  very
vascular,  and  approaching  more  to  the  texture  of  cellular  mem-
brane. Above  and  behind,  another  firm  albuminous  crust,  yel-
low and  vascular,  attached  the  lungs  to  the  pleura.  The  sub-
stance of  the  lung  was  sufficiently  crepitous  in  the  upper  half,
although  somewhat  injected  with  a  bloody  serum.  Its  lower
portions  were  more  compact,  of  a  deeper  red,  and  in  spots  some-
what granular  on  incision  ;  it  was  also  gorged  with  bloody
serum,  and  less  crepitous  than  the  upper  parts.  The  left  lung
adhered  to  the  pleura,  at  its  summit,  by  no  means  of  old  cellular
attachments.  In  this  point  there  was  an  irregular  depression,  in
the  centre  of  which  lay  a  small  ossification.  From  this  spot
could  be  traced  into  the  substance  of  the  lung,  a  band  of  verj
white  cellular  tissue,  very  dense,  yet  scarcely  amounting  to  the
consistence  of  a  membrane.  This  band  was  about  an  inch  long,
six  lines  broad,  and  three  or  four  thick.  Its  white  colour  formed
a  striking  contrast  with  the  natural  pulmonary  tissue.  Some
bronchial  tubes  of  the  size  of  a  crow-quill,  or  larger,  terminated
and  became  lost  in  this  band, — which  an  accidental  circumstance
prevented  me  from  examining  more  minutely.  The  pulmonary
substance  was  crepitous  throughout,  and  there  were  no  tubercles
in  either  lung.  The  pericardium  contained  a  few  ounces  of
limpid  serum,  and  the  heart  was  larger  than  the  hand  of  the
individual.  The  walls  of  the  left  ventricle  were  about  eight
lines  thick  at  the  origin  of  the  columna?,  and  six  lines  at  the  base,


PHTHISIS  PTJI.MONALIS.


291


and  were  very  firm ;  the  cavity  of  the  ventricle  was  very  small.*
The  right  ventricle  seemed  small,  and  its  parietes  were  of  natural
thickness.  The  peritoneum  was  inflamed,  and  its  cavity  con-
tained Coagulated  lymph  and  serum.

Cask  XXIII.  Ancient  fbro-cartilaginous  cicatrice  of  the
lung  in  a  person  who  died  of  pneumonia. — A  man,  aged  sixty-
two,  had  been  affected  five  years  with  an  habitual  cough,  but
was  otherwise  of  a  good  constitution.  On  the  4th  of  April,  1818,
he  was  suddenly  seized  with  acute  pain  in  the  lower  part  of  the
left  chest,  which  soon  extended  over  nearly  the  whole  side,
attended  by  difficult  and  painful  respiration,  and  inability  to  lie
on  the  affected  part.  He  came  into  the  hospital  on  the  8th,  and
exhibited  the  following  symptoms: — general  paleness,  left  cheek
slightly  coloured  ;  lips  bluish  ;  external  juglars  swelled;  pulse
weak  and  frequent ;  breathing  short,  loud,  and  painful,  and  with
open  mouth ;  cough  not  very  frequent  and  by  fits ;  expectora-
tion scanty,  the  sputa  very  viscid,  frothy,  semi-transparent,  and
intermixed  with  some  yellow  and  opaque  matters.  Percussion
yielded  a  very  good  sound  on  the  right  side,  but  was  not  so  good
on  the  left.  Respiration  was  quite  inaudible  in  almost  the  whole
extent  of  the  left  side,  whilst  on  the  right  it  was  strong,  and
attended  by  a  rhonchus  and  sort  of  hissing  sound.  The  pulsa-
tions of  the  heart  were  regular.  The  contraction  of  the  ventri-
cles yielded  a  very  dull  sound,  and  a  slight  impulse ;  that  of  the
auricles  was  sonorous  and  heard  distinctly  below  the  clavicles.
The  paleness  of  this  man,  and  the  cough  to  which  he  had  been
so  long  subject,  leading  to  the  suspicion  of  tubercles,  we  ex-
amined the  chest  in  several  points  with  the  view  of  discovering
pectoriloquy,  but  did  not  find  it:  we  did  not  examine  with  this
view,  however,  the  top  of  the  shoulder,  on  account  of  the  patient's
weakness.  From  these  results  the  following  diagnostic  was  (pro-
visionally) made  :  Pleuro-pneumonia  of  the  left  side.  Tuber-
cles ?  Slight  dilatation  of  the  heart  ?  This  man  died  the  follow-
ing night.

Dissection  thirty-siv  hours  after  death. — The  left  cavity  of
the  chest  was  larger  than  the  right.  The  right  lung  adhered,
throughout,  to  the  pleura  by  means  of  ancient  attachments.  On
its  upper  part  there  was  a  fibro-cartilaginous  mass,  covering  the
lung  somewhat  like  a  cap  It  was  three  lines  in  thickness  in  its
centre,  and  formed,  in  this  point,  the  medium  of  adhesion  to  the
ribs.  At  the  level  of  the  second  rib,  it  insensibly  vanished  in
the  pleura.  The  substance  of  the  lung  was  very  crepitous  ante-
riorly, but  little  so  posteriorly,  in  what  part  it  was  flaccid  and
much  injected  by  very  fluid  blood.  This  lung  was  also  marbled
by  a  great  number  of  spots  formed  by  black  pulmonary  matter.

*  This  well-marked  case  of  hypertrophy  had  not  been  suspected,  although  the
heart  had  been  examined  several  times  by  the  stethoscope,  owing  to  the  existence  of
tho  disease  in  the  lungs,  which  masked  the  symptoms. — Author.

u  2


292


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


In  the  same  lobe,  included  in  the  pulmonary  tissue  and  strongly
adhering  to  it  by  continuity  of  substance,  there  was  found  a
fibro-cartilaginous  mass  of  a  similar  kind,  of  the  size  of  a  walnut,
and  of  an  irregular  conic  shape.  This  mass  was  of  a  brilliant
white  colour,  and  opaque,  and  formed  a  striking  contrast  with
the  surrounding  pulmonary  tissue,  which  contained  an  unusual
quantity  of  the  black  matter.  That  part  of  the  pulmonary  sub-
stance interposed  between  it  and  the  superficial  mass,  about  two
lines  in  thickness,  was  quite  black,  and  destitute  of  air,  although
its  natural  texture  was  very  perceptible.  This  fibro-cartilaginous
mass,  when  cut  into,  presented  all  the  characters  of  a  pulmonary
cicatrice.  In  one  or  two  small  portions  of  it,  the  texture  was
softer,  somewhat  cellular,  and  charged  with  a  transparent  serum.
Several  bronchial  tubes  terminated  and  were  obliterated  in  its  sub-
stance. Two,  especially,  which  terminated  in  it,  in  forming  a
cul-de-sac,  were  of  the  size  of  a  goose-quill.  One  of  these,  after
forming  a  cul-de-sac,  of  a  diameter  of  two  lines,  became  all  at
once  contracted  to  a  size  scarcely  equal  to  a  crow-quill,  on  enter-
ing the  tumour,  into  which  it  could  be  traced  half-an-inch.  In
this  tract,  however,  its  cavity  was  entirely  obliterated,  and  it
resembled  in  colour  and  texture  the  tumour,  from  which  it
was  only  distinguished  by  the  direction  of  its  fibres,  or  by  a
slight  shade  of  colour  which  pointed  out  both  its  coats  and
its  obliterated  canal.  In  the  superior  lobe  of  the  left  lung  there
was  a  small  cavity  capable  of  containing  a  filbert,  lined  by  a  fine
semi-transparent  membrane,  of  a  semi-cartilaginous  consistence,
and  through  which  the  black  pulmonary  matter  could  be  distin-
guished. This  excavation  contained  a  small  quantity  of  tubercu-
lous matter,  friable,  and  of  the  consistence  of  soft  cheese.  The
pulmonary  tissue  amid  which  it  was  placed  was  perfectly  sound
and  crepitous.  Near  the  origin  of  the  bronchi  was  observed  a
single  tubercle  of  the  size  of  a  barley-corn,  softened  to  the  con-
sistence of  soft  cheese,  and  surrounded  by  a  dense  membrane,
greyish  and  semi-transparent,  of  the  nature  of  the  bodies  termed
imperfect  cartilages.  In  its  anterior  quarter,  the  left  lung  was
crepitous,  but  the  remaining  part  was  of  the  consistence  of  liver.
The  base  of  this  lung  adhered  to  the  diaphragm  by  its  whole
border;  and  in  its  centre  there  was  a  patch  of  concrete  lymph  of
the  consistence  of  white  of  egg.  It  was  easily  separated  from
the  pleura  of  the  lungs,  which  appeared  redder  than  natural.
The  inner  surface  of  the  pericardium,  where  this  membrane  is
attached  to  the  diaphragm,  was  of  an  intense  punctuated  red  for
the  space  of  a  square  inch.  The  pericardium  contained  about
two  ounces  of  very  bloody  serum,  and  two  or  three  flakes  of  half-
concrete  lymph.  The  heart  was  larger  than  the  hand  of  the
subject,  and  exhibited  on  its  anterior  surface  a  white  spot  of  a
cellular  character,  of  the  size  of  the  nail.  The  right  ventricle
was  larger  than  natural,  of  the  usual  thickness,  but  yellowish


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


293


and  of  a  flaccid  texture.  The  left  ventricle  was  evidently  di-
lated, and  it  was  only  four  or  five  lines  thick;  its  texture  was
soft  and  pale  like  the  right.

The  foregoing  cases  prove,  I  think,  that  tubercles  in  the  lungs
are  not  in  every  case  a  necessary  and  inevitable  cause  of  death  ;
and  that  a  cure  may  take  place  in  two  different  ways,  after  the
formation  of  an  ulcerous  excavation  : — first,  by  the  cavity  be-
coming invested  by  a  new  membrane  analogous  to  some  of  the
textures  of  the  healthy  body  ;  and  secondly,  by  the  obliteration
of  the  excavation  by  means  of  a  cicatrix,  more  or  less  complete,
consisting  of  cellular,  fibrous,  and  cartilaginous  substance.  The
ide  ntity  of  the  excavations  observed  in  the  17th,  18th,  19th,  21st,
and  22nd  cases,  leaves  no  question  that  they  had  one  and  the  same
origin,  namely,  the  softening  and  discharge  of  the  tuberculous
matter  originally  contained  in  them.  The  17th  case  may  be
considered  as  affording  an  example  of  a  perfect  cure,  since  no
more  tubercles  existed  in  the  lungs.  The  same  may  be  said  of
the  23rd, — inasmuch  as  there  was  only  one  very  small  tubercle
in  the  lungs.  The  subjects  of  the  18th,  19th,  and  21st  cases
would,  no  doubt,  have  had  relapses  of  their  disease,  since  their
lungs  all  contained  tubercles  more  or  less  advanced,  and  which
must  necessarily  have  been  eventually  developed.  This  deve-
lopment, however,  might  have  been  remote ;  since  it  has  been
truly  shown  by  M.  Bayle,  that  crude,  and  still  more,  miliary
tubercles,  continue  to  exist  for  a  great  many  years  without  ma-
terially affecting  the  general  health.  Were  it  in  our  power  to
ascertain  the  previous  history  of  such  cases  as  exhibit  these  car-
tilaginous excavations  and  cicatrizations  in  the  lungs  after  death,
we  should,  in  all  probability,  find  that  the  patients  had  been  sub-
ject to  a  long-continued  cough,  and  severe  catarrh,  or  even
to  a  disease  considered  at  the  time  as  true  consumption,  and
which  had  been  very  unexpectedly  cured.*  These  morbid  ap-
pearances, at  least  sufficiently  explain  the  fact  of  the  seemingly
intermittent  character  of  certain  cases  of  consumption,  and  the
extraordinary  cure  of  others.

These  pulmonary  fistulse  and  cicatrices  are  very  common,  as
any  one  will  be  convinced  who  practises  morbid  dissections  in  an
hospital  for  any  length  of  time.  I  have  only  mentioned  a  few  of
those  I  have  met  with  lately  ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  only  lately  that
I  have  paid  any  minute  attention  to  such  appearances.  1  had,
however,  frequently  met  with  them  long  before,  and  have,  indeed,
partly  described  them  in  another  place.-]-  They  are  very  various
m  their  appearance  ;  and  it  would  seem  that  it  is  especially  by
the  production  of  this  adventitious  cartilaginous  tissue  that  na-

*  I  am  aware  that  phthisis  may  be  closely  simulated  by  a  common  catarrh.  I
rfball  notice  a  case  of  this  kind  hereafter,  (the  only  one  I  have  ever  met  with,)  and
M.  Hayle  details  two  in  his  work,  viz.  cases  48  and  49. — Author.

t  Diet,  des  Scienc.  Med.  Art.  Curt.  Accident.


294


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


ture  attempts  a  cure  of  tuberculous  excavations.  With  this  end
she  seems  occasionally  to  throw  out  a  superabundance  of  it ;  as
the  exterior  portion  of  the  lung  is  sometimes  coated  with  it,  as  in
one  of  the  cases  already  detailed.  On  other  occasions  the  carti-
laginous walls  of  the  cavity  are  observed  of  very  unequal  thick-
ness,— as  thick  in  some  places  as  half-an-inch  or  an  inch, — as  if
the  remedial  powers  of  nature  were  undetermined  whether  to
form  a  perfect  cicatrix  or  only  a  fistula.

Very  frequently  the  production  of  these  accidental  cartilages
is  accompanied  or  followed  by  a  copious  formation  of  phosphate
of  lime  in  their  vicinity.  It  is,  however,  uncommon  for  these
fistulous  cysts  to  ossify,  although  I  have  mentioned  an  instance
of  the  kind  ;  but  they  frequently  contain  the  salt  just  named  in
an  earthy  form,  and  humid.  Still  more  frequently,  the  substance
of  the  lungs  is  infiltrated  with  the  same  (more  or  less  dry,  and
mixed  with  black  matter)  in  the  points  formerly  occupied  by
tubercles.  Sometimes  we  find  a  few  small  tubercles,  the  product
of  a  previous  eruption,  some  of  which  are  crude  or  in  different
degrees  of  softening,  others  more  or  less  completely  destroyed  by
absorption,  and  replaced  by  the  earthy  phosphate,  which  would
seem  to  have  been  deposited  in  proportion  as  the  tuberculous
matter  was  absorbed.*

The  merely  temporary  cure  of  many  phthisical  cases  is  readily
explained,  as  above  remarked,  by  the  cicatrization  of  a  softened
tubercle,  and  by  the  eventual  softening  of  others  which  were  only
in  their  first  stage  at  the  period  of  the  cicatrization  of  the  first.
For  example,  we  can  easily  fancy  that  the  subject  of  Case  XXI,
detailed  above,  had  he  not  been  carried  off  by  another  disease,
might,  after  the  perfect  cicatrization  of  the  cavity  in  the  right
lung,  have  enjoyed  tolerable  health  for  several  years,  until  the
ultimate  maturation  of  the  miliary  tubercles,  which,  sooner  or
later,  must  inevitably  induced  phthisis.

I  had  occasion  in  the  year  1814  to  see  a  remarkable  instance
of  this  temporary  cure  of  consumption.

Case  XXIV. —  M.  Recamier  and  myself  were  consulted  by  a
young  lady  who  had  every  symptom  of  pulmonary  consump-
tion, such  a  frequent  cough,  purulent  expectoration,  much  ema-
ciation, hectic  fever,  and  night  sweats.  Several  of  the  lymphatic
glands  of  the  neck  were  swollen,  and  for  a  few  days  she  had
been  affected  with  very  severe  diarrhoea.  Astringents,  sulphur
baths,  and  asses'  milk  were  prescribed;  and  were  followed  by

*  It  is  the  observation  of  this  (act  that  has  led  M.  Andral  to  admit  two  termina-
tions of  the  solid  tubercle — the  purulent  and  cretaceous.  This  last  transformation
is  effected,  he  says,  by  the  subtraction  of  the  animal  matter  which  constitutes  the
greater  portion  of  tubercle,  and  by  an  augmentation  of  the  calcareous  secretion.  In
support  of  these  views  he  cites  the  analysis  by  M.  Thenard  of  the  matter  of  crude
tubercles,  and  of  tubercles  which  had  undergone  the  calcareous  transformation.
The  first  gave — animal  matters,  98.  15  ;  muriate  of  soda,  phosphate  and  carbonate
of  lime,  1.  85  ;  oxide  of  iron,  a  trace  ; — the  second  gave — animal  matters,  3  ;  saline
matters,  M.— (J*ftd«.  &*Anat.  Poth.  1.  i.  p.  41?.)— (M.  L.)


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


295


such  success  that,  in  the  course  of  two  months,  her  strength,  flesh,
and  colour,  were  quite  restored,  the  cervical  glands  were  dimi-
nished one-half,  and  in  short,  she  was  in  a  state  of  perfect  health.
She  passed  the  winter  very  well,  but  in  April  the  cough  and  all
the  other  phthisical  symptoms  returned,  and  she  died  in  the  end
of  the  summer.

Such  examples  of  a  perfect  though  only  temporary  cure  of
consumption  are  rare:  but  it  is  by  no  means  unusual  to  find
persons  affected  with  all  the  symptoms  of  this  disease  surviving
for  many  years,  alternately  experiencing  imperfect  convalescences
and  relapses  more  or  less  severe.  It  is  such  cases  M.  Bayle  had
in  view  when  he  said  consumption  may  continue  forty  years.
These  imperfect  cures  may,  I  think,  be  attributed  to  the  succes-
sive softening  of  several  tubercles,  and  their  subsequent  conver-
sion into  fistulas;  whilst  the  more  perfect,  though  still  temporary
cures,  may  depend  on  the  formation  of  a  cicatrix.  The  results
of  these  two  kinds  of  cure,  as  far  as  I  am  able  to  judge  from  the
cases  I  have  met  with,  seem  to  me  to  be  the  following : — the
cure  by  fistulae  usually  leaves  behind  it  a  chronic  catarrh,  more
or  less  severe,  and  is  accompanied  by  an  expectoration  which  is
sometimes  very  copious;  cicatrization,  on  the  contrary,  produces
no  other  inconvenience  than  a  dry  cough,  neither  frequent  nor
severe.  Sometimes,  indeed,  there  is  no  cough,  especially  where
the  texture  of  such  cicatrices  closely  resembles  that  of  other  na-
tural tissues  in  the  animal  economy,  especially  the  cellular  or
fibro-cartilaginous.  When,  however,  the  substance  of  the  cica-
trice is  less  perfect  and  more  remote  from  the  healthy  tissues  of
the  body,  and  when  it  is  impregnated  with  much  of  the  black
pulmonary  matter,  as  in  Case  XXIII,  we  find  an  habitual
cough,  either  dry  or  accompanied  by  a  mucous  expectoration,
and  cachetic  condition  of  the  body,  even  after  the  complete  de-
struction of  the  tubercles.

When  Ave  consider  that  the  formation  of  tubercles  in  the  lungs
seems  usually  to  be  the  consequence  of  a  general  diathesis ;  that
these  are  frequently  found  contemporaneously  in  the  intestines,
where  they  ultimately  occasion  ulceration  and  colliquative  diar-
rhoea ;  and  that,  in  some  cases,  also,  they  exist  in  the  lymphatic
glands,  the  prostate,  the  testicles,  the  muscles,  bones,  &c. ;  we
must  be  led  to  believe  the  most  perfect  cure  that  can  take  place
in  consumption  as  merely  temporary.  Admitting,  however,  the
justness  of  this  conclusion  in  those  extreme  cases  of  tuberculous
diathesis,  (which,  after  all,  are  but  rare  when  compared  with  the
vast  number  of  consumptions,)  we  are  still  entitled  to  hope  for
the  cure  of  many  cases  of  phthisis,  or  at  least,  for  such  a  suspen-
sion of  their  symptoms  as  may  be  deemed  almost  equal  to  a  cure,
as  the  individuals  may  enjoy  such  a  state  of  health,  as  may  en-
able them  to  fulfil  all  the  duties  of  civil  life,  for  several  years,  or
until  a  fresh  development  of  tubercles  produces  a  fresh  and


296


J'lITillSlS  PULMOXALIS.


final  seizure.  It  is  further  worthy  of  remark,  that,  although  in
the  majority  of  the  subjects  in  which  I  have  observed  these
fistula?  and  cicatrices,  the  lungs  contained  tubercles  in  different
stages  of  their  progress,  and,  consequently,  a  certain  though  per-
haps remote  cause  of  a  return  of  the  disease,  still  I  have  found
the  same  marks  of  a  cure  in  subjects  in  whom  there  were  no
tubercles  whatever,  either  in  the  lungs  or  in  any  other  organs.
Cases  XVII  and  XXIII  afford  examples  of  this  fact.  In  such
instances  it  may  be  supposed,  perhaps,  that  the  excavations  had
been  the  product  of  simple  inflammation  of  the  pulmonary  tissue,
and  not  of  tubercular  degeneration.  Such  a  supposition  is,  how-
ever, quite  gratuitous.  Those  accustomed  to  much  morbid  dis-
section have  almost  daily  experience  of  the  formation  of  these  car-
tilaginous membranes  on  the  surface  of  tuberculous  excavations  ;
while  the  collection  of  pus,  or  true  abscess  of  the  substance  of
the  lungs,  is  so  extremely  rare  (as  we  have  already  seen,  when
treating  of  pneumonia)  as  to  be  justly  esteemed  one  of  the  most
extraordinary  appearances  in  morbid  anatomy,  and,  therefore,
quite  inadequate  to  account  for  an  occurrence  so  common  as  that
of  fistulas  and  cicatrizations  of  the  lungs.

These  considerations  ought  to  induce  us  still  to  entertain  some
hope  in  those  cases  of  consumption  wherein  we  have  reason  to
be  lieve,  from  the  result  of  percussion  and  of  our  explorations
with  the  stethoscope,  that  the  greater  portion  of  the  lungs  re-
mains still  permeable  to  the  air.  Although  we  are,  therefore,
certain,  that  a  subject  that  is  pectoriloquous  has  an  ulcerated  ca-
vity in  the  lungs,  we  are  not,  on  this  account,  equally  certain
that  this  will  prove  the  cause  of  death.  We  may  even  be  justified
in  believing  that  a  case,  wherein  all  the  ordinary  symptoms  of
consumption  exist  together  with  pectoriloquy,  is  more  favourable
than  one  in  which  they  exist  without  this  peculiar  phenomenon  ;
since,  in  the  first  case,  we  may  attribute  the  symptoms  to  ihe
efforts  of  nature  in  nicituring  and  evacuating  the  tuberculous
matter,  and  may  hope  for  their  cessation  when  this  is  effected,
provided  the  greater  portion  of  the  lungs  is  in  other  respects
healthy ;  while,  in  the  second  case,  we  must  imagine  that  the
tubercles  are  very  numerous,  since  they  produce  such  violent  ge-
neral effects  previous  to  the  period  of  their  softening,  and  that,
therefore1,  they  will,  in  all  probability,  occasion  deatli  be-fore  the
epoch  of  possible  cure  arrives.

I  regret  that  it  was  not  in  my  power  to  lay  before  the  reader
any  account  of  the  diseases  which  had  produced  the  cicatrices  or
fistula?  observed  in  the  subjects  of  the  17th,  18th,  19th,  21st,
22nd,  and  23rd  cases ;  but  I  am  enabled  to  detail  two  others,
which)  as  well  as  21,  seem  to  be  a  counterpart  of  the  former.

Case  XXV.  Tuberculous  phthisis  cured. — An  English  gen-
tle-man, aged  thirty- six,  detained  in  Paris  as  a  prisoner  of  war,  in
September,  18i3,'had  an  attack  of  haemoptysis,  followed  by  a


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


cough,  at  first  dry,  but,  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks,  accompa-
nied by  a  purulent  expectoration.  To  these  symptoms  were
added  a  well-marked  hectic,  considerable  dyspnoea,  copious  night
sweats,  emaciation,  and  great  debility.  The  chest  sounded  well
every  where,  except  under  the  right  clavicle,  and  in  the  axilla  of
the  same  side.  The  haemoptysis  returned  in  a  slight  degree,  now
and  then,  and  in  December  he  had  diarrhoea,  which  was  with  dif-
ficulty checked  by  astringents.  In  the  beginning  of  January  he
was  so  much  reduced,  that  both  M.  Halle  and  Bayle  agreed
with  me  in  opinion,  that  his  death  might  be  daily  looked  for.
On  the  15th  of  January,  during  a  severe  fit  of  coughing,  and
after  bringing  up  some  blood,  he  expectorated  a  solid  mass,  of  the
size  of  a  filbert,  which,  on  examination,  I  found  to  be  evidently  a
tubercle  in  the  second  stage,  surrounded,  apparently,  by  a  por-
tion of  the  pulmonary  tissue,  such  as  has  been  already  described
as  impregnated  with  grey  tubercular  matter  in  the  first  stage,
often  met  with  around  these  bodies  when  large.  This  patient
remained  in  the  same  degree  of  extreme  emaciation  and  debility
all  January,  being  expected  to  die  daily ;  but  in  the  beginning
of  February  the  perspirations  and  diarrhoea  ceased  spontane-
ously, the  expectoration  sensibly  diminished,  and  the  pulse,
which  had  been  constantly  as  high  as  120,  fell  to  90.  In  a  few
days  the  appetite  returned,  the  patient  began  to  move  about  in
his  room,  his  emaciation  became  less,  and,  against  the  end  of  the
month,  his  convalescence  was  evident.  In  the  beginning  of  April
he  was  perfectly  recovered  ;  and  his  health  has  continued  good
ever  since,  without  even  the  least  cough,  and  without  his  being
at  all  particularly  guarded  in  his  climate  or  regimen.  In  1818
this  patient  again  consulted  me  for  a  different  complaint,  and  I
took  the  opportunity  of  examining  his  chest  by  means  of  the  ste-
thoscope. The  only  thing  I  could  detect,  was  the  comparative
indistinctness  of  respiration  in  the  superior  portion  of  the  right
lung,  as  low  as  the  third  rib.  This  part,  however,  sounded  as
well  on  percussion  as  the  opposite  side,  and  there  was  no  pectori-
loquy. From  these  circumstances,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the  ex-
cavation which  contained  the  expectorated  tubercle,  must  have
been  replaced  by  a  cellular  or  fibro-cartilaginous  cicatrice;  and
as  the  total  absence  of  cough,  dyspnoea,  and  expectoration,  for
so  long  a  period,  forbids  the  supposition  of  the  existence  of
others  in  the  lungs,  I  think  we  have  a  right  to  consider  this  pa-
tient as  perfectly  cured.  In  1824,  this  gentleman  was  examined
at  Home  by  Dr.  Clark,  an  English  physician,  who  practises
there  with  great  distinction,  and  who  recognized  him  as  the  sub-
ject of  the  case  just  detailed.  I  saw  him  also  the  same  year,  and
found  him  precisely  in  the  same  state  as  in  1818.*

*  I  learn  from  Dr.  Clark,  w  ho  is  now  resident  in  London,  and  whom  the  English
reader  will  identify  as  the  distinguished  author  of  The  Influence  of  Climate,  that
Mr.  G.  is  still  living,  (18'27,)  in  good  health.  Several  well-marked  cases  of  expec-
torated tubercle  are  on  record. A  very  remarkable  instance  is  mentioned  ia  the


298


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


Case  XXVI.  Phthisis  pulmona lis  cured. — This  case  is  de-
tailed in  M.  Bayle's  treatise,  (see  Case  LIV,)  and  is  that  of  a
gentleman  who,  after  having  experienced  all  the  symptoms  of
consumption  in  the  greatest  degree,  perfectly  recovered  by  change
of  air,  and  living  by  the  sea-side.  As  both  M.  Bayle  and  my-
self (for  this  was  my  patient)  then  considered  the  cure  of. phthi-
sis impossible,  we  considered  the  case  as  one  of  chronic  catarrh,
and  it  is  so  entitled  in  M.  Bayle's  book.  Since  then  I  have  had
an  opportunity  of  satisfying  myself,  by  means  of  the  stethoscope,
that  our  patient  had  had  more  than  a  mere  catarrh.  His  respira-
tion is  quite  perfect  throughout  the  whole  chest,  except  at  the
top  of  the  right  lung,  in  which  point  it  is  totally  wanting.
On  this  account,  I  am  certain  that  this  portion  of  lung  had
been  the  seat  of  an  ulcerous  excavation,  and  that  this  had  beeu
replaced  by  a  complete  and  solid  cicatrice.  The  health  of  this
gentleman  continues  good,  although  he  has  often  occasion  to
speak  in  public.  He  has  sometimes  a  little  dry  cough,  on  the
change  of  weather,  but  takes  cold  very  seldom.

I  here  terminate  what  I  had  to  say  respecting  the  possibility
of  curing  phthisis  pulmonalis.  I  hope  the  importance  of  the
subject  will  be  considered  as  sufficient  excuse  for  the  great  length
of  my  dissertation.  In  regard  to  the  facts  adduced  by  me  in
proof  of  the  curability  of  this  disease,  I  am  of  opinion  that  any
attentive  observer  who  shall  choose  to  employ  the  same  means,
viz.  auscultation  and  dissection,  will  frequently  meet  with  similar
results.  My  experience  leads  me  to  deem  such  cases  to  be  ex-
tremely common :  those  related  above  occurred  to  me  in  the
course  of  some  months;  and  I  have  since  met  with  many  others.
I  formerly  stated  that  I  had  often  previously  observed  similar
appearances,  without  paying  much  attention  to  them  ;  and  I
may  here  add,  that,  in  the  natural  sciences,  when  our  attention  is
not  particularly  directed  to  certain  objects,  we  may  meet  with
them  every  day  without  observing  them.  A  gardener  is  seldom
able  to  discriminate  the  tenth  part  of  the  plants  which  spring  on
the  very  soil  which  he  is  cultivating ;  and  an  anatomist  may  know
nothing  of  the  organic  changes  which  occur  in  the  human  body
(though  he  sees  them  every  day)  while  engaged  in  tracing  the
blood-vessels  or  nervous  filaments.  I  myself  can  bear  witness,
from  personal  experience,  that  it  is  quite  possible  for  one  to
forget,  in  part,  descriptive  anatomy,  although  in  the  daily  habit
of  opening  dead  bodies.  To  conclude,  I  think  that  the  cure  of
consumption,  where  (he  lungs  are  not  completely  disorganized,
ought  not  to  be  looked  upon  as  at  all  impossible,  in  reference  either
to  the  nature  of  the  disease,  or  of  the  organ  affected.  The  pul-
monary tubercles  differ  in  no  respect  from  those  found  in  scro-

Joum.  de  Med.  t.  70,  for  March,  1789.  In  this  case  also,  the  patient  recovered,  al-
though previously  on  the  brink  of  the  grave. —  Trans! .


OCCASIONAL  CAUSES.


299


phulous  glands;  and  we  know  that  the  softening  of  these  latter
is  frequently  followed  by  a  complete  cure.  On  the  other  hand,
the  destruction  of  a  part  of  the  substance  of  the  lungs  is  by  no
means  necessarily  mortal,  since  we  know  that  even  wounds  of
these  organs  are  frequently  cured,  notwithstanding  the  unfavour-
able condition  with  which  they  are  necessarily  complicated  by
the  perforation  of  the  walls  of  the  chest,  and  the  admission  of
air  into  the  pleura.

Sect.  IV — Occasional  causes  of  phthisis.

I  have  already  answered  in  the  negative  the  question  as  to
whether  consumption  is  the  result  of  the  inflammation  of  any  of
the  constituent  textures  of  the  lungs.  Cold  is  generally  admitted
as  one  of  the  most  powerful  occasional  causes  of  phthisis  ;  and  it
is  certain  that  this  disease  is  extremely  common  in  the  north  of
Europe  and  America.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  however,  on  the
one  hand,  that  in  northern  countries  the  inhabitants  suffer  less
frequently  from  cold  than  in  temperate  climates,  owing  to  the
warmer  clothing  and  houses  of  the  former,  which  the  severity  of
the  winter  obliges  them  to  adopt ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that
the  complaint  is  very  rare  among  the  natives  of  high  mountain-
ous countries,  particularly  the  Alps,  whose  winters  are  as  long
and  severe  as  those  of  the  north  of  Europe.  The  disease  is  also
very  common  in  temperate  countries,  as  in  France,  in  the  north
of  Spain,  of  Italy,  and  Greece.  It  appears  to  be  somewhat  less
frequent  in  the  most  southern  parts  of  Europe,  and  still  less  so
in  the  countries  between  the  tropics.* In  respect  of  the  last-

*  The  calculations  made  respecting  the  relative  prevalence  of  phthisis  in  different
places,  have  hitherto  been  founded  entirely  on  the  disease  in  an  open  form  ;  hut  it  is
frequently  latent;  and  it  is  not  impossible  that  it  may  hereafter  be  found  that  it  is
more  frequently  manifest  in  cold  climates,  and  commonly  latent  in  warm. — Author.

Although  not  without  voluminous  documents  relating  to  the  degree  of  prevalence
of  consumption  in  all  the  countries  in  Europe,  and  in  many  parts  of  Asia,  Africa,
and  America,  I  think  I  may  venture  to  assert,  that  we  are  still  destitute  of  data  suf-
ficiently accurate  and  extensive,  to  enable  us  to  come  to  such  conclusions  on  this
point,  as  will  satisfy  a  philosophical  mind.  This  much,  I  think,  appears  to  be  made
out — that  in  the  most  northern  parts  of  Europe,  particularly  Russia,  and  yet  more
between  the  tropics,  the  disease  is  considerably  less  prevalent  than  in  the  more  tem-
perate climates.  Rates  of  prevalence  for  the  different  countries  of  Europe,  and  for
different  parts  of  the  same  country,  have  been  drawn  out  by  many  authors,  and  are
to  be  met  with  in  most  recent  works  on  phthisis  ;  but  I  have  no  hesitation  in  stating,
that  they  are  very  little  entitled  to  our  confidence; — not  from  any  inaccuracy  or  in-
competence of  the  calculators,  but  from  the  almost  insurmountable  difficulties  of  the
subject,  in  the  present  extremely  imperfect  state  of  our  medico-statistical  knowledge.
One  thing,  at  least,  is  certain,  that  the  disease  is  extremely  prevalent  in  every  part
of  Great  Britain,  Germany,  France,  Italy,  Spain,  and  in  the  islands  and  on  all  the
coasts  of  the  Mediterranean  sea.  Our  author  is  fond  of  considering  maritime  situa-
tions as  much  less  liable  to  the  disease  than  the  interior  of  countries ;  but  we  have
no  positive  proof  of  this.  In  England,  at  least,  I  can  state,  from  a  long  residence  on
the  southern  coasts,  that  consumption  is  extremely  prevalent  there. — For  such  im-
perfect documents  as  we  possess  on  this  most  important  subject,  I  refer  to  the  au-


300


PHTHISIS  FULMONALIS.


mentioned  countries,  however,  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  parts
of  them  best  known  to  us,  are  on  the  sea  shore;  and  we  shall  see
presently  that  there  is  a  very  great  difference  in  this  respect  be-
tween coasts  and  the  interior  of  countries.  Too  light  clothing,
or  the  impression  of  cold,  when  the  body  is  heated,  seems  in  our
cities  to  be  the  occasional  cause  of  phthisis,  in  many  young
women,  whose  disease  begins,  or  at  least  the  severer  symptoms
of  it,  with  a  pulmonary  catarrh,  a  pneumony  or  pleurisy.*  In-
dependently of  temperature,  locality  has  no  doubt  an  influence
on  the  production  of  phthisis.  It  is,  for  example,  more  common
in  large  cities  than  in  small  ones,  and  more  frequent  in  the  latter
than  in  the  country.  The  ancients  had,  in  all  probability,  al-
ready remarked  that  it  was  less  common  in  maritime  situations,
since  they  recommended  sailing  to  their  phthisical  patients.  This
circumstance,  which  had  been  too  long  overlooked,  has  of  late
years  justly  attracted  the  attention  of  the  English  physicians,  and
they  are  now  in  the  constant  habit  of  sending  their  consumptive
invalids  to  Madeira.^  I  have  myself  paid  particular  attention  to
this  subject,  and  in  the  absence  of  exact  numerical  calculations,
which  could  only  be  procured  with  much  time  and  labour,  I  am
glad  to  be  able  to  lay  before  the  reader  some  materials  which  I
have  obtained  from  a  great  number  of  medical  men,  who  are  at
present  resident,  or  who  had  been  long  resident,  on  the  coast,  and
which  must  be  considered  as  very  valuable,  although  possessing
only  an  approximate  exactness.  Most  of  the  naval  surgeons
whom  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  conversing  with,  have  in-
formed me,  that  they  had  scarcely  ever  known  a  man  become
phthisical  in  the  course  of  a  long  voyage,  and  that  they  had  fre-
quently seen  sailors,  whose  chests  seemed  seriously  affected  at
the  time  of  putting  to  sea,  return  perfectly  well,  or  with  their
health  singularly  improved.^  On  the  south  coast  of  Bretagne,
the  proportion  of  deaths  from  phthisis  seems  to  be  but  about  one
in  forty ;  and  on  the  north  coast  of  the  same  province,  as  well  as

thors  mentioned  in  a  former  note,  and  also  to  the  more  recent  worts  of  Sir  Alex-
ander Crichion  and  Dr.  James  Clark  — TransL

*  But.  those  causes  give  rise  much  more  frequently  to  severe  catarrhs,  pneumo-
nies  and  pleurisies,  which  are  not  followed  by  the  tubercular  disease  ;  so  that,  as
1  have  formerly  observed,  we  may  conclude,  that  phthisis  when  it  follows  Uie  dis-
eases just  mentioned,  has  been  merely  accelerated  by  them,  the  tubercles  having  pre-
viously existed. — Author.

t  I  need  hardly  inform  the  reader  that  this  statement  is  overcharged.  Some
patients  are  certainly  sent  to  Madeira  every  year;  but  the  number  is  by  no  means
great ; — certainly  very  far  short  of  the  number  sent  to  the  south  of  France  and  Italy,
although  its  climate  is  certainly  very  superior  to  that  of  any  Kuropean  country.  It
must  not  be  concealed,  however,  that  consumption  is  very  prevalent  at  Madeira.  For
all  tbe  valtiahlo  information  we  possess  on  this  subject  1  refer  the  reader  to  Dr.
Clark's  admirable  work  On  the  Influence  of  Climate.—  Transt.

}  My  own  experience  is  not  in  accordance  with  this  statement,  nor  is,  I  fear,  that
of  most  Fnglish  naval  surgeons.  See  the  valuable  works  of  Blane,  Trotter,  Johnson,
Burnett,  &c.  See  also  a  Thesis  by  Dr.  Sinclair,  "  De  impetu  maris  Mediterranei,"
tct.  Kflin.  1817.— TransL


OCCASIONAL  CAUSES.


301


on  that  of  Normandy,  it  is  only  one  in  twenty, — at  least  in  the
country  and  small  towns.  In  Paris,  and  the  great  cities  in  the
interior  of  France,  the  proportion  is  well  known  to  he  as  great
as  one  in  four  or  five.*  The  disease  appears  more  frequent  on
the  coasts  of  England  and  northern  parts  of  Europe  ;  and  seems
also  to  be  more  prevalent,  ceteris  paribus,  on  the  shores  of  the
Mediterranean,  than  on  those  of  the  main  ocean.  The  influence
of  the  sea  air  appears  to  be  felt  only  a  small  distance  from  the
coast,  and  is  greater  in  proportion  as  we  approach  this.  I  have
myself  attended  carefulJy  to  this  point  of  medical  statistics,
during  the  two  years  which  I  have  been  obliged  to  spend  in  the
country,  on  account  of  ill  health,  since  the  publication  of  my
first  edition.  During  this  time  I  resided  in  Bretagne,  on  the
shores  of  the  bay  of  Douarnenez,  in  the  parish  in  which  the
small  town  of  the  same  name  is  situated.  The  population  of
this  parish  is  about  four  thousand,  and  the  ordinary  annual  mor-
tality about  one  hundred  and  forty.  During  the  two  years  above
mentioned,  I  only  saw  six  cases  of  phthisis,  of  which  number
three  were  cured  ;  and  from  the  information  I  received  on  the
spot,  I  do  not  think  that  the  annual  mortality  from  this  disease
can  be  rated  at  more  than  three.  This  statement  is  the  more  re-
markable, as  there  are  included  in  the  number  of  inhabitants
above  mentioned,  about  six  hundred  seamen,  one-half  of  whom,
at  least,  had  been  detained  for  several  years  prisoners  of  war  in
England. -f*  A  great  number  of  these  men  had  for  several  years
been  affected  with  constitutional  syphilis,  which  had  been  kept
at  bay  by  a  repeated  palliative  treatment ;  and  although  we  have
no  positive  proof  that  this  state  of  disorder  is  capable  of  causing
phthisis,  it  is  well  known  that  it  is  so  considered  by  many  prac-
titioners ;  and  it  is  even  probable  that  an  inveterate  syphylis  and
the  treatment  generally  had  recourse  to  for  its  removal,  may
prove  an  occasional  cause  of  it.

Haemoptysis  is  commonly  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  fre-
quent causes  of  consumption.  I  did  not  take  any  notice  of  this
affection  when  considering  the  question  of  the  production  of  tu-
bercles by  inflammation  ;  because  the  congestions  which  give  rise
to  haemorrhage,  not  having  any  tendency  to  produce  pus,  I  do
not  consider  them  as  being  truly  inflammations.  The  common
opinion  on  this  point  has  no  further  foundation  than  what  is
supplied  by  the  axiom—  jjost  hoc  ergo  propter  hoc. It  is  indeed

•  The  average  number  of  deaths  from  consumption  in  the  following  towns  in
England,  viz:  Bristol,  London,  Warrington,  Chester,  Shrewsbury,  Plymouth,  Ack-
worth,  and  Holy  Cross,  from  documents  given  in  Dr.  Woollcombe's  "work,  is  more
than  one  in  four.  Dr.  Young  says,  that  the  proportion  of  deaths  for  the  whole  of
Great  Britain  is  one-fourth. — Transl.

t  No  such  observations  have  been  made  at  Brest,  which  is  only  seven  leagues
from  Douarnenez,  and  the  population  of  which  consists  almost  exclusively  of  sea-
faring people.  On  the  contrarv,  consumption  is  there  almost  as  frequent  as  In  Paris.
-(M.  L.)


302


PHTHISrS  PULMONALTS.


true  that  the  first  symptom  of  an  alarming  kind  in  the  greater
number  of  phthisical  patients  is  haemoptysis  ;  but  if  we  examine
the  chest  at  this  time,  we  shall  frequently  detect  the  presence  of
tubercles  in  the  lungs.  And  when  we  consider  this,  and  know
that  the  haemorrhage  will  probably  return  again  and  again  in  the
progress  of  the  disease,  we  are  justified  in  concluding  that  tu-
bercles in  the  lungs  are  the  most  frequent  cause  of  haemoptysis.
Indeed  it  is  easily  conceived  how  this  is  so  ;  since  these  foreign
bodies,  in  their  development,  must  compress  and  irritate  the  pul-
monary tissue,  like  the  thorn  of  Van  Helmont.  On  the  other
hand,  we  have  no  positive  proof  that  haemoptysis,  by  itself,  is
capable  of  giving  rise  to  tubercles  ;  and,  indeed,  considered  ana-
tomically, it  is  not  easy  to  conceive  how  it  could  do  so.  If  such
were  the  case,  we  should  find  the  haemoptysical  engorgement
gradually  transformed  into  miliary  tubercles  :  and  this  I  have
never  seen.*  It  is,  moreover,  worthy  of  remark,  that  a  haemop-
tysis produced  by  violence,  as  by  a  blow  on  the  chest,  violent
running,  a  fit  of  passion,  immoderate  exercise  of  the  voice,  &c.  is
most  commonly  productive  of  no  further  consequences,  when  it
is  once  got  under;  whilst  phthisis  frequently  supervenes  imme-
diately to  a  haemorrhage  arising  without  any  obvious  cause,*  but
which,  no  doubt,  has  for  its  real  cause,  tubercles  which  had  pre-
viously, and  perhaps  for  a  long  time,  been  latent  in  the  lungs.i-

Among  the  occasional  causes  of  phthisis,  I  know  of  none  more
assured  operation  than  the  depressing  passions,  particularly  if
strong  and  of  long  continuance ;  and  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  that
it  is  the  same  cause  which  seems  to  contribute  most  to  the  deve-
lopment of  cancers,  and  all  the  other  accidental  productions

*  M.  Andral  gives  (Clin.  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  39)  a  case  which,  in  his  opinion,  proves
the  possibility  of  this  transformation.  In  the  lungs  of  a  man  afflicted  with  chronic
peritonitis,  and  who  had  latterly  been  subject  to  severe  hemoptysis,  several  masses
of  pulmonary  apoplexy  were  found,  one  of  which  contained  a  considerable  number  of
granulations  of  a  yellowish  white,  having  all  the  characters  of  incipient  miliary  tubercles ;
others  consisted  of  a  more  fluid  matter  resembling  drops  of  pus.  The  latter  part  of  this
statement  and  the  yellowish  colour  of  the  solid  granulations  evidently  prove,  in  mv
opinion,  that  what  M.  Andral  took  for  incipient  tubercles,  were  of  long  standing
and  partially  softened.  It  is  therefore  more  than  doubtful  that  they  were  developed
after  the  hemoptysical  engorgement,  and  it  is  even  much  more  probable  that  they
constituted  its  occasidnal  cause. — ( M.  L.)

t  The  testimony  of  M.Louis  is  most  strong  in  support  of  our  author's  opinion,
that  haemoptysis  is  the  consequence  and  not  the  cause  of  tubercles.  He  says,  that
during  the  last  three  years  he  had  interrogated  all  the  patients  that  came  under  his
observation  as  to  their  having  ever  spit  blood,  and  was  always  answered  negatively,
except  by  some  men  who  had  received  blows  on  the  chest,  and  women  who  had
laboured  under  suppression  of  the  menses.  He  adds,  that  with  these  exceptions,  this
symptom  "indicates  in  a  manner  infinitely  probable  the  presence  of  tubercles  in  the
lungs."  Recherches,  p.  194.  Andral  says,  that  his  experience  leads  him  to  con-
clude that,  of  persons  who  have  had  haemoptysis,  one-fifth  part  have  not  tubercles  in
the  lungs,  and  that  of  those  who  die  of  phthisis  one-sixth  do  not  spit  blood  at  any
period  of  their  disease.  Clin.  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  181.  Every  English  reader  is  aware  of
the  opinion  of  Dr.  Cullen,  and  many  preceding  writers,  that  consumption  is  the
effect  of  haemoptysis,  an  opinion  which  would  seem  to  be  still  the  prevailing  one  in
this  country. — Transl.


OCCASIONAL  CAUSES.


303


which  are  not  analogous  to  any  of  the  natural  tissues.  This  is
perhaps  the  only  cause  of  the  greater  frequency  of  consumption
in  large  cities.  In  these,  the  single  circumstance  of  the  inhabi-
tants having  more  numerous  relations  with  one  another,  is  in
itself  a  cause  of  more  frequent  and  deeper  vexation ;  while  the
greater  prevalence  of  immorality  of  every  kind,  is  a  constant
source  of  disappointment  and  misery,  which  no  kind  of  consola-
tion, and  not  even  time  itself,  can  effectually  remove.  I  had
under  my  own  eyes,  during  a  period  of  ten  years,  a  striking  ex-
ample of  the  effect  of  the  depressing  passions  in  producing
phthisis;  in  the  case  of  a  religious  association  of  women,  of  re-
cent foundation,  and  which  never  obtained  from  the  ecclesiastical
authorities  any  other  than  a  provisional  toleration,  on  account  of
the  extreme  severity  of  its  rules.  The  diet  of  these  persons  was
certainly  very  austere,  yet  it  was  by  no  means  beyond  what  na-
ture could  bear.  But  the  ascetic  spirit  which  regulated  their
minds,  was  such  as  to  give  rise  to  consequences  no  less  serious
than  surprising.  Not  only  was  the  attention  of  these  women
habitually  fixed  on  the  most  terrible  truths  of  religion,  but  it
was  the  constant  practice  to  try  them  by  every  kind  of  contra-
riety and  opposition,  in  order  to  bring  them,  as  soon  as  possible,
to  an  entire  renouncement  of  their  own  proper  will.  The  con-
sequences of  this  discipline  were  the  same  in  all :  after  being  one
or  two  months  in  the  establishment,  the  catamenia  became  sup-
pressed ;  and  in  the  course  of  one  or  two  months  thereafter,
phthisis  declared  itself!  As  no  vow  was  taken  in  this  society,  I
endeavoured  to  prevail  upon  the  patients  to  leave  the  house  as
soon  as  the  consumptive  symptoms  began  to  appear ;  and  almost
all  those  who  followed  my  advice  were  cured,  although  several  of
them  exhibited  well-marked  indications  of  the  disease.  During
the  ten  years  that  I  was  physician  of  this  association,  I  witnessed
its  entire  renovation  two  or  three  different  times,  owing  to  the
successive  loss  of  all  its  members,  with  the  exception  of  a  small
number,  consisting  chiefly  of  the  superior,  the  grate-keeper,  and
the  sisters  who  had  charge  of  the  garden,  kitchen,  and  infirmary.
It  will  be  observed,  that  these  individuals  were  those  who  had
the  most  constant  distractions  from  their  religious  tasks,  and  that
they  also  went  out  pretty  often  to  the  city,  on  business  connected
with  the  establishment.  In  like  manner,  in  other  situations,  it
has  appeared  to  me  that  almost  all  those  who  became  phthisical,
without  being  constitutionally  predisposed  to  the  disease,  might
attribute  the  origin  of  their  complaint  to  grief,  either  very  deep
or  of  long  continuance.* Severe  continued,  or  intermittent

•  This  is  a  most  singular  history.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  author  has  not
been  more  particular  in  his  details  as  to  the  number  of  the  sisters,  &c.  &c.  Such
a  statement  requires  every  confirmatory  document.  The  influence  of  the  depressing
passions  in  giving  rise  to  diseases  of  the  lungs,  and  particularly  phthisis,  has  been
noticed  by  many  writers. It  is  well  known  that  Morton  has  entitled  one  of  his


304


PHTHISIS  PULMONAI.IS.


fevers,  would  seem  to  be  pretty  often  the  occasional  cause  of  the
production  of  tubercles;  since  it  is  not  unusual  to  find,  on  ex-
amining the  bodies  of  those  who  have  died  of  these  affections,  a
certain  number  of  tubercles,  sometimes  pretty  large,  in  the  lungs
or  bronchial  glands,  and  more  particularly  in  the  latter.  It  is,
however,  probable,  that  eruptions  of  tubercles  of  this  kind  are
almost  always  of  small  extent,  and  rarely  succeeded  by  others,
and  that  they  terminate  favourably  by  the  absorption  or  evacu-
ation of  the  tuberculous  matter;  since  it  is  incomparably  more
rare  to  find  phthisis  supervening  to  fever,  than  to  find  tubercles
in  the  lung  of  those  who  die  of  this  disease.

Tubercular  consumption  has  long  passed  for  a  contagious
disease,  and  it  is  still  looked  upon  as  such  by  the  common  people,
by  magistrates,  and  by  some  medical  men,  especially  in  the
southern  parts  of  Europe.  In  France,  at  least,  it  does  not  ap-
pear to  be  contagious.  We  frequently  observe,  among  the
poorer  classes,  a  numerous  family  sleeping  in  the  same  apart-
ment with  a  consumptive  patient,  and  a  husband  occupying,  to
the  last,  the  same  bed  with  his  wife,  without  any  communication
of  the  disease.  The  woollen  apparel  and  the  beds  of  consump-
tive subjects,  which  it  is  the  custom  to  burn  in  some  countries,
are  not  generally  even  washed,  much  less  destroyed  in  France,
and  yet  I  have  never  seen  the  disease  communicated  by  them.
It  would  be  well,  nevertheless,  were  it  merely  on  the  score  of
prudence  and  cleanliness,  that  greater  precautions  were  taken  in
this  respect.  It  is  well  ascertained  that  a  disease,  not  usually
contagious,  may  become  so  in  certain  circumstances.* Is  it  pos-

species  of  consumption  "  Phthisis  a  Melancholia.''  In  many  parts  of  his  Phthisio-
logia,"  this  author's  opinion  respecting  the  great  effect  of  mental  causes  in  producing
this  disease,  is  strongly  expressed  : — "  Causa  vero  horum  tuberculorum  usitissima,
est  contractio  pulmonum  leviter  spasmodica,  diuturna,  et  continua,  cum  ponderis  et
oppressionis  sensu,  a  moestitia,  timore,  curis.  cogitatione  intensa,  atque  aliisejusmodi
animi  pathematis  effecta.''  Phthisiolagia,  p.  99.  "  Ita  etiam  iste  morbus  (phthisis,)
eos,  ut  plurimum,  ex  infortunii  alicujus  occasione  corripit  quae  res  metum,  mcestitiam,
cogitationem,  vel  aliquod  aliud  gravius  auinii  ira&qua,  idque  diuturnum  et  fixuiu
prius  inducit."  Ib.  p.  130.  "  Insuper,  pathemata  animi  graviora,  ut  plurimum
hystericam  et  hypochondriacam  affectionem,  pra*cedere,  vel  saltern  comitari,  omnibus
est  notum:  A  quibus  sappius  quam  a  frigore,  vel  aliqua  alia  de  causa  originem  suam
ducere  solet.''  lb.  p.  242.  In  relation  to  this  subject,  the  observations  of  Aven-
brugger  respecting  the  effect  of  nostalgia  in  producing  diseases  of  the  chest,  are
highly  worth}'  of  attention.  See  Corvisart's  Avenbrugger,  p.  170,  or  my  translation
of  the  same  work,  p.  24. — Transl.

•  The  contagion  of  phthisis,  like  that  of  many  other  diseases,  which  are  supposed
to  be  conveyed  by  an  invisible  medium,  will  in  all  probability  remain  for  ever  a  con-
tested point.  The  opinion  of  the  great  majority  of  medical  men  in  this  country  is
opposed  to  contagion  :  and  1  think  this  opinion  is  justified  equally  by  statistical  facts,
by  the  truths  of  pathology,  and  by  analogical  reasoning.  For  a  strong  statistical
argument  against  the  doctrine  of  contagion,  see  Dr.  Young's  Treatise  on  Consump-
tion, p.  46.  Although  myself  sceptical  as  to  the  contagious  powers  of  phthisis,  from
never  having  witnessed,  among  the  thousands  of  cases  of  this  disease  I  have  attended,
one  unequivocal  instance  of  the  fact,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  thing  is  in  itself
neither  impossible  nor  even  improbable.  It  is  well  known  to  have  been  believed,
and  still  to  be  believed,  by  some  of  the  most  respectable  authorities  in  physic.  Its


OCCASIONAL  CAUSES.


305


sible  to  give  rise  to  the  matter  of  tubercle,  at  least  locally,  by
direct  inoculation?  I  ana  acquainted  with  only  oik-  Tact  that
bears  on  this  point ;  and  although  I  am  aware  that  little  stress  can
be  laid  on  a  single  instance,  I  think  it  as  well  to  notice  it  in  this
place.  About  twenty  years  since,  while  examining  some  verte-
bra' containing  tubercles,  I  grazed  slightly  the  fore -finger  of  the
left  hand  by  a  stroke  of  the  saw.  The  scratch  was  so  small  that
I  paid  no  attention  to  it ;  but  on  the  following  day  it  was  slightly
inflamed,  and  there  gradually  formed  in  it,  and  almost  without
pain,  a  small  roundish  tumour,  apparently  confined  to  the  skin,
and  which  at  the  end  of  eight  days  was  of  the  size  of  a  large
cherry-stone.  At  this  period,  the  epidermis  cracked  and  showed
us  the  small  tumour  within,  which  was  yellowish,  firm,  and  in
every  respect  like  a  crude  yellow  tubercle.  I  cauterised  it  with
the  deliquescent  hydro-chlorate  of  antimony,  and  felt  no  pain
from  its  operation.  At  the  end  of  a  few  minutes,  however,  after
the  fluid  had  penetrated  the  whole  substance  of  the  tumour,  I
detached  it  by  a  gentle  pressure.  The  caustic  had  softened  it
and  made  it  exactly  like  a  soft  friable  tubercle.  The  walls  of
the  cavity  which  had  contained  this  body,  were  of  a  pearl-grey
colour,  slightly  semi-transparent,  and  without  any  redness.  I
applied  the  caustic  afresh  to  these.  The  part  soon  healed,  and
I  have  since  found  no  further  effects  from  the  accident.*

If  the  question  of  contagion  is  very  doubtful,  the  case  is  very
different  with  the  hereditary  predisposition  to  tubercles.  The
universal  and  habitual  experience  of  practitioners  proves  that
the  children  of  phthisical  parents  are  more  subject  to  this  dis-
ease than  others  are.  We  happily,  however,  meet  with  numer-
ous exceptions  to  this  rule ;  as  we  not  infrequently  see  families
in  which  only  one  or  two  of  its  members  become  consumptive  in
each  generation.  On  the  other  hand,  we  sometimes  find  large
families  of  children  destroyed  by  consumption,  whose  parents
had  never  shown  any  signs  of  the  disease.  One  family,  in  par-
probability  seems  considerably  increased  by  tbe  results  lately  obtained  in  France
from  the  insertion  of  pus  into  the  veins  of  animals  :  and  a  remark  made  by  M.  Louis
in  his  treatise  on  phthisis,  may  perhaps  be  considered  as  having  some  weight  on  the
same  side  of  the  argument.  He  informs  us  ( p.  46.)  that,  in  phthisis,  the  ulcerations
of  the  trachea  are  almost  always  situated  on  the  back  part  of  the  tube,  while  those
of  the  epiglottis  are  as  constantly  on  its  lower  part ; — points  which  the  sputa  rest
longest  upon  or  touch  most  frequently,  in  their  passage  outwards.  This  would  seem
to  prove,  at  least,  the  irritating  qualities  of  the  sputa  :  but  it  is,  no  doubt,  one  thing
to  irritate  and  inflame,  and  another  to  produce  a  specific  formation  like  that  of  tuber-
culous matter.  However,  in  a  practical  question,  of  such  high  importance  as  the
present,  it  is  certainly  the  duty  of  every  medical  man  to  act  cautiously,  and  not  un-
necessarily to  expose  the  friends  of  his  phthisical  patients  to  a  risk,  which,  although
he  may  deem  it  problematical  or  even  visionary,  may  not  be  so  in  reality. — Traust.

*  Two  French  physicians,  Hebreard  and  Lepelletier,  have  inoculated  animals  with
the  pus  of  scrophulous  ulcers ;  and  M.  Lepelletier  has  repeated  the  experiment  on
himself;  and  Kortum  and  another,  in  Germany,  have  even  ventured  to  inoculate
children  with  the  same.  None  of  these  experiments  succeeded  so  far  as  even  to
produce  local  effects.  (Diet,  de  Med.  t.  xix.  p.  194.) — (M.L.)

X


306


l'THTSIS  PULMONALE.


ticular,  I  myself  knew,  in  which  the  father  and  mother  died  up
wards  of  eighty  years  of  age,  and  of  acute  diseases,  after  having
seen  fourteen  children  (born  healthy  and  without  any  seeming
predisposition  to  the  disease)  successively  carried  off  by  consump-
tion, between  the  ages  of  fifteen  and  thirty-five.  One  other  child
of  the  same  family,  who  was  delicate  from  birth  and  with  decided
marks  of  tuberculous  predisposition,  is  however  still  living,  at  the
age  of  forty-eight,  after  having  suffered  several  severe  attacks  of
haemoptysis,  and  appeared  to  be  more  than  once  affected  with
phthisis.*  The  ancients,  and  especially  Aretaeus,  have  carefully
described  this  particular  temperament  or  constitution.  It  is  dis-
tinguished by  the  brilliant  whiteness  of  the  skin,  the  bright  red
of  the  cheeks,  the  narrowness  of  the  chest,  the  projecting  or
winged  configuration  of  the  scapulae,  and  the  slenderness  of  the
limbs  and  trunk,  which  is  however  combined  with  a  certain  de-
gree of  adipose  and  lymphatic  stoutness.  This  particular  consti-
tution is  attributed  by  Aretaeus  rather  to  haemoptysical  than  con-
sumptive subjects  ;  and  the  remark  is  worthy  of  this  accurate
and  clever  observer,  as  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  phthisical
subjects  possessing  this  configuration,  are  more  subject  to  hae-
moptysis than  others.  It  is  however  true,  that  individuals  of
this  particular  constitution,  form  the  smaller  number  of  consump-
tive patients ;  and  that  this  terrible  malady  frequently  cuts  off
those  who  are  the  most  robust  and  have  the  best  bodily  confi-
guration. The  ancients  thought  that  phthisis  made  its  attacks
particularly  between  the  age  of  eighteen  and  thirty-five  ;  (Hippoc.
Ap.  9.  sect.  v. ;)  and  it  cannot  be  denied  that  this  is  the  period
at  which  it  is  most  commonly  manifest,  and  most  easily  recog-
nised. Bayle,  however,  found,  in  the  hospitals  at  Paris,  that  it
was  most  common  from  the  fortieth  to  the  fiftieth  year.  But  no
age  is  exempt  from  it.  The  unborn  foetus  has  been  found
affected  with  it ;  and  it  is  extremely  common  among  the  chil-
dren of  the  common  people,  as  is  proved  by  the  records  of  the
Children's  Hospital  at  Paris.  It  is  likewise  very  frequent  in  old
age ;  I  once  opened  the  body  of  a  woman  who  died  of  this  dis-
ease upwards  of  ninety-nine  years  of  age.-f* Women  are  more

*  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  frequently  hereditary  character  of  consumption.
I  mention  the  subject  here  merely  with  the  view  of  enforcing  the  vast  importance  of
keeping  this  in  sight  in  the  physical  education  of  the  children  of  consumptive  parents.
The  predisposition  to  tubercles  cannot  be  obviated  in  such  cases ;  but  no  sufficient
reason  seems  to  exist,  why  we  may  not  obviate,  by  proper  management,  their  actual
development,  at  least  in  a  certain  portion  of  cases.— Transl.

f  The  statistical  researches  concerning  Paris  published  under  the  authority  of  M.
Chabrol,  tend  to  confirm  the  opinion  of  the  ancients,  as  to  the  comparative  frequency  of
phthisis  in  early  and  advanced  life :  the  following  are  the  decimal  periods,  in  the  order
of  the  frequency  of  deaths  from  phthisis,  at  each  particular  age  : — From  twenty  to
thirty,  thirty  to  forty,  ten  to  twenty,  forty  to  fifty,  fifty  to  sixty  ;  birth  to  ten,  sixty  to
seventy,  seventy  to  eighty,  eighty  to  ninety,  ninety  to  one  hundred.  It  is  proper  to
observe,  however,  that  these  tables  refer  to  tubercles  in  the  lungs  only :  had  their
occurrence  in  other  organs  been  taken  into  account,  the  age  from  two  to  ten  would,


OCCASIONAL  CAUSES.


307


subject  to  it  than  men.*  Of  all  the  occasional  causes  which  can
give  rise  to  a  considerable  development  of  tubercles,  the  most
powerful,  the  most  evident  and  most  frequent,  is,  unquestion-
ablv,  the  softening  of  a  certain  number  of  tubercles  previously
existing ;  since  we  know,  as  was  formerly  remarked,  that  it  is  at
this  period  that  the  secondary  eruptions  of  numerous  tubercles
take  place  in  the  lungs,  and  sometimes  also  in  other  organs.f  In
cases  of  this  kind,  at  least,  it  is  impossible  not  to  admit  the  ex-
istence of  an  aberration  of  nutrition — an  actual  and  peculiar
change  in  the  fluids,  which  gives  rise  to  tubercles,  and  tubercles
only.  To  admit  with  M.  Broussais,  that  irritation  or  inflam-
mation, which  according  to  him  are  only  degrees  of  the  same
affection,  may  produce,  indifferently,  tubercles,  encephaloid  can-
cer, melanosis,  fibrous,  bony,  cartilaginous  growths,  &c,  is  to
avow  at  once  that  inflammation  itself  is  only  an  occasional  cause.
We  must  look  for  some  other  cause  to  account  for  the  production
of  tubercles  rather  than  the  encephaloid  cancer, — or  for  an  erup-
tion of  tubercles  affecting  nearly  all  the  organs  of  the  body,

perhaps,  have  occupied  the  first,  instead  of  the  sixth  place.  It  results  from  the  re-
searches of  M.  Lombard  at  the  Childrens'  Hospital  in  Paris,  that  of  the  children
who  die  in  their  first  and  second  year,  tubercles  are  found  in  one-eighth  ;  in  two-
sevenths  of  those  who  die  from  two  to  three ;  in  four-sevenths  of  those  who  die  from
three  to  four;  and  in  three-fourths  of  those  who  die  from  four  to  five.  In  the  suc-
ceeding years  up  to  puberty,  tubercles  are  more  frequent  than  before  the  fourth,  but
much  less  frequent  than  from  the  fourth  to  the  fifth.  M.  Papavoine,  of  the  same
hospital,  has  recently  published  a  statement  which  confirms  the  observations  of  M.
Lombard,  although  with  some  slight  differences.  According  to  him,  the  total  num-
ber of  tuberculous  children  between  the  fourth  and  eleventh  year,  is  greater  than  of
those  who  are  not  tuberculous  ;  tubercles  being  particularly  prevalent  from  the  fourth
to  the  seventh  year.  Their  frequency  again  increased  about  the  twelfth  and  thir-
teenth year  ;  and  at  fourteen  and  fifteen,  the  degree  of  prevalence  is  the  same  as  at
four  and  five.  These  results  are  obtained  from  researches  made  on  nine  hundred
and  twenty  children  (three  hundred  and  eighty-eight  boys  and  five  hundred  and
thirty-two  girls)  between  the  ages  of  two  and  fifteen ;  and  out  of  the  whole  number  no
less  than  five  hundred  and  thirty-eight  (somewhat  less  than  three-fifths)  were  tuber-
culous. (Journ.des  Progres,  t.  ii.  1830  ;  Revue  Me"d.  Juin,  1830.) — (M,  L.)

Dr.  Young  says,  (Op.  Cit.  p.  45,)  that  "  if  we  consult  the  evidence  of  actual  regis-
ters of  cases,  we  shall  find  that  the  disease  is  more  frequent  above  thirty-five  than
below  it."  Of  two  hundred  and  twenty-three  deaths  from  phthisis  recorded  by  Bayle
and  Louis,  twenty-one  occurred  between  the  age  of  fifteen  and  twenty ;  sixty-two
from  twenty  to  thirty ;  fifty-six  from  thirty  to  forty  ;  forty-four  from  forty  to  fifty ;
twenty-seven  from  fifty  to  sixty ;  thirteen  from  sixty  to  seventy. — Transl.

*  This  opinion  is  corroborated  by  many  writers.  A  statement  given  by  NT.  Louis
(Op.  Cit.  p.  522,)  affords  a  strong  argument  in  its  favour  :  out  of  one  hundred  and
sixty-three  subjects  in  whose  lungs  tubercles  were  found  after  death,  ninety-three
were  women  and  sixty-eight  men.  The  statistical  tables  of  Paris,  out  of  nine  thou-
sand five  hundred  and  forty-two  cases  of  phthisis  give  five  thousand  five  hundred  and
eighty-two  women,  and,  consequently,  only  three  thousand  nine  hundred  and  sixty
men.  Several  obvious  causes  explain  the  greater  liability  of  females  to  phthisis.
The  chief  of  these  are — their  greater  original  delicacy  of  constitution — their  most
deleterious  system  of  physical  education  from  the  age  of  ten  to  puberty, — the  wearing
of  stays, — and  the  exposure  of  the  upper  parts  of  the  chest. — Transl.

t  In  making  this  statement,  I  think  our  author  is  justly  chargeable  with  the  appli-
cation of  the  axiom  so  much  reprobated  by  himself — post  hoc,  ergo  propter  hoc.  Why
should  not  the  original  causes  of  the  first  crop  of  tubercles  be  still  in  operation  1 —
7Vojis/.

x  2


308


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


rather  than  the  development  of  a  cartilaginous  substance  confined
to  the  part  first  affected,  and  converting  the  tuberculous  ulcer
into  a  fistula  with  hardly  any  evil  consequence  to  the  general
health.*


Sect.  V. — Physical  signs  of  tubercles.

With  the  exception  of  some  very  rare  cases,  tubercles  first
make  their  appearance  in  the  summit  of  the  lungs.  It  is  in  this
place,  therefore,  that  we  must  seek  them.  The  earliest  signs
usually  show  themselves  below  the  clavicle.  Small  tubercles,
separated  from  one  another  by  portions  of  healthy  lung  cannot
be  recognized.  But  at  this  period  of  their  progress,  the  health
is  commonly  still  good,  and  the  cough  too  slight  to  induce  the
patient  to  consult  a  medical  man.

Signs  of  the  accumulation  of  crude  or  miliary  tubercles. —
When  miliary  tubercles  are  accumulated  in  great  numbers  in  the
upper  portion  of  the  lungs,  the  sound  resulting  from  percussion
of  the  clavicles  becomes  less,  and  is  usually  unequal.  The  right
lung  being  in  general  the  earliest  and  most  severely  affected,  the
defect  of  resonance  is  almost  always  on  the  right  side.  This
deficiency  of  sound  extends  sometimes  over  the  upper  and  fore
parts  of  the  chest  as  low  as  the  fourth  rib.j  These,  indeed,  are
the  only  parts  of  the  chest  where  the  mere  accumulation  of  tuber-
cles can  give  rise  to  this  phenomenon ;  if  we  except  the  inter-
scapular region,  in  which  we  sometimes  find  a  deficiency  of  sound,
owing  to  the  great  accumulation  of  tubercles  at  the  roots  of  the
lungs  and  in  the  bronchial  glands.  When  the  sign  just  men-
tioned exists,  and  even  where  it  is  wanting,  a  diffused  broncho-
phony, more  or  less  marked,  is  perceived  beneath  the  clavicle,
over  the  infraspinal  fossa  of  the  scapula,  and  in  the  axilla.  We
must,  however,  disregard  this  last  sign,  if  it  is  perceived  only
about  the  inner  and  upper  angle  of  the  scapula,  on  account  of
the  vicinity  of  the  bronchi.

Signs  of  the  softening  of  tubercles. — When  the  tubercles  begin
to  soften,  the  same  signs  continue ;  and  in  addition  to  these,  the
cough  gives  rise  to  a  kind  of  guggling,  as  if  the  matter  that  pro-

*  Among  many  other  occasional  causes  usually  enumerated  by  authors,  and  un-
noticed by  M.  Laennec,  the  inhalation  of  dust,  by  various  classes  of  artisans  and
others,  deserves  notice ;  although  I  am  of  opinion  that  bronchitis  and  not  phthisis  is
the  disease  commonly  produced  by  causes  of  this  kind.  The  same  remark  is  appli-
cable, I  conceive,  to  the  great  majority  of  the  cases  of  consumption  complicated  with
gastric  disorder,  and  termed  dyspeptic  phthisis  by  Dr.  Philip. —  Traml.

f  In  no  case  is  the  importance  of  percussion  so  frequently  and  strikingly  evinced  as
in  the  earlier  stages  of  phthisis.  A  single  blow  on  the  clavicle  will  often  afford  the
means  of  a  more  certain  diagnosis  and  prognosis,  than  weeks  or  even  months  of  ob-
servation of  the  general  symptoms.  How  often  have  1  heard  in  this  ominous  sound
the  death-knell  of  my  patients  \—Transl.


PHYSICAL  SIGNS.


309


duced  it  were  thick,  and  agitated  en  masse.  The  guggling,
however,  soon  becomes  more  liquid  and  more  like  tin  ,  mucous
rhonchus ;  and  the  cough,  transformed  to  cavernous,  indicates
the  formation  of  a  pulmonary  excavation.  In  proportion  as  this
empties  itself,  the  respiration  also  assumes  the  cavernous  cha-
racter, and,  together  with  the  cough,  points  out  the  increasing
extent  of  the  cavity.  The  diffused  bronchophony  then  gives  way
to  pectoriloquy,  which  is  at  first  imperfect,  and  frequently  inter-
rupted, but  gradually  becomes  more  distinct.  Sometimes,  in
proportion  as  the  excavation  empties  itself,  the  resonance  of  the
chest,  which  had  been  obscure,  becomes  clearer ;  and  I  have
known  physicians  deceived  by  this  circumstance,  so  as  to  imagine
that  their  patient  was  improving.  Most  frequently,  however,
even  after  the  formation  of  a  considerable  excavation,  the  sound
does  not  become  louder,  because  there  is  developed  at  the  same
time  around  it,  a  great  number  of  crude  tubercles.  It  is  also  at
this  time,  when  the  tuberculous  matter  begins  to  soften,  that  we
sometimes  perceive  on  percussion,  a  guggling,  or  a  jar,  like  that
yielded  by  a  cracked  pot,  and  accompanied  by  the  resonance  in-
dicative of  the  presence  of  a  cavity.  This  sign  always  points
out  that  the  excavation  is  very  near  the  surface  of  the  lung  ;  and
is  never  observed  except  in  lean  subjects,  the  walls  of  whose
chest  are  thin,  and  the  ribs  more  than  usually  moveable.  When
a  superficial  excavation  has  some  of  its  walls  thin,  soft,  and  not  ad-
hering to  the  costal  pleura,  the  phenomenon  which  I  have  termed
the  auricular  puff,  simple,  or  veiled,  frequently  accompanies  the
cavernous  respiration  and  cough,  as  well  as  the  pectoriloquy.  In
this  case,  every  word  is  followed  by  a  puff  like  that  used  in
blowing  out  a  candle,  and  which  would  be  mistaken  for  a  puff
in  reality,  if  the  sense  of  touch  did  not  rectify  that  of  hearing.
By  making  the  patient  speak  in  monosyllables,  we  ascertain  that
the  puff  immediately  succeeds,  rather  than  accompanies,  the
voice.

Signs  of  the  complete  discharge  of  the  tuberculous  matter. —
When  a  tuberculous  excavation  is  completely  empty,  this  state
is  clearly  indicated  by  the  cavernous  respiration  and  cough.  In
most  cases  the  cavernous  rhonchus  is  no  longer  heard  ;  and  if  it
sometimes  takes  place,  owing  to  a  secretion  going  on  from  the
walls  of  the  cavity,  it  is  only  temporarily,  and  frequently  disap-
pears for  several  hours,  after  the  patient  has  expectorated.  At
this  period,  and  often  long  before  this,  pectoriloquy  becomes
quite  perfect.  I  have  in  a  former  part  of  this  volume  described
pectoriloquy,  the  most  important  of  those  signs  which  point  out
a  pulmonary  excavation.  On  account  of  its  great  value,  how-
ever, I  think  it  proper  to  enlarge  a  little  more  on  it,  in  this  place.
I  formerly  stated  that  pectoriloquy  may  be  perfect,  imperfect,  or
i  doubtful,  that  it  may  be  suspended  for  some  time,  and  in  certain
'cases  even  disappear  almost  entirely. When  pectoriloquy  is


310


1'IITHISIS  rilLMONALIS.


doubtful,  and  exists  only  in  the  interscapular  region,  below  the
axilla,  or  towards  the  junction  of  the  clavicle  and  sternum,  we
must  lay  no  stress  on  it.  Indeed,  we  may  extend  the  same  re-
striction to  the  whole  of  the  upper  parts  of  the  chest  as  low  as
the  upper  rib,  when  the  phenomenon  is  very  doubtful,  and  as
perceptible  on  one  side  as  the  other.  This  restriction  is  founded
on  the  circumstance  of  there  being  more  bronchial  tubes  of  a  cer-
tain diameter  in  the  top  of  the  lungs  than  elsewhere.  These  are
sometimes  very  superficial ;  and  when  this  is  the  case  they  fre-
quently give  rise  to  the  phenomenon  in  question  ;  which  is,  in  point
of  fact,  only  bronchophony.  When  we  explore  the  space  between
the  clavicle  and  upper  edge  of  the  trapezius  muscle,  we  must  be
very  careful  to  keep  the  stethoscope  perpendicular ;  because  if
we  give  it  the  slightest  direction  towards  the  neck,  we  hear  the
natural  resonance  of  the  voice  in  the  larynx  and  trachea,  and
will  be  very  apt  to  confound  this  with  pectoriloquy,  if  not  much
accustomed  to  the  practice  of  auscultation.  But  when  this
doubtful  pectoriloquy  is  observed  below  the  third  or  fourth  rib,
or  on  one  side  only,  it  affords  at  least  a  strong  presumption  of
the  existence  of  an  excavation  ;  and  if,  at  the  same  time,  it  does
not  exist  in  the  points  above  mentioned,  the  presumption  may  be
considered  as  amounting  to  certainty :  we  have  only  to  think
that  the  cavity  is  situated  deep  within  the  pulmonary  substance,
or  that  it  is  still,  in  a  great  measure,  filled  -with  tuberculous
matter  imperfectly  softened.  In  whatever  part  of  the  chest  it
may  be,  when  the  resonance  of  the  voice  is  much  stronger  than
on  the  opposite  side,  and  particularly  if  it  is  so  intense  as  to
seem  louder  and  nearer  the  ear  of  the  observer,  than  the  natural
voice  heard  without  the  stethoscope,  we  may  consider  the  sign
quite  as  certain  as  if  the  voice  traversed  the  tube  of  the  instru-
ment :  and  in  such  case  we  say  the  pectoriloquy  is  imperfect  and
not  doubtful.  Between  the  most  perfect  pectoriloquy  and  that
which  is  completely  doubtful,  there  are  many  degrees  which  can
only  be  learned  by  habit,  and  which  it  would  be  as  difficult  as  it
would  be  superfluous  to  describe.  In  one  degree,  for  example,
the  voice  seems  to  enter  a  short  way  into  the  extremity  of  the
tube,  but  does  not  traverse  it  completely.  Pectoriloquy  is  more
distinct  according  as  the  voice  of  the  individual  is  more  sharp  ;
and  as  women  and  children  are  the  subjects  in  which  this  cha-
racter is  most  strikingly  marked,  we  must  be  particularly  on  our
guard,  in  them,  not  to  confound  with  pectoriloquy  the  doubtful
bronchophony  which  exists  naturally  in  some  points  of  the  chest.
In  men,  on  the  other  hand,  who  have  a  very  deep  voice,  pecto-
riloquy is  frequently  imperfect,  and  sometimes  doubtful,  even
when  there  exist  in  the  lungs  excavations  of  the  sort  best  calcu-
lated for  producing  it.  The  deeper  the  voice  is,  the  resonance
within  the  chest  is  found  to  be  the  stronger  ;  and  in  cases  of  this
kind,  the  natural  vibration  of  the  walls  of  the  thorax  is  sometimes


PHYSICAL  SIGNS.


.'ill


so  great  as  to  mask  the  pectoriloquy.  In  such  persons,  the  voice,
tremulous  and  agitated,  seems  unable  to  penetrate  the  tube,  but
resounds  at  its  extremity  twice  or  thrice  as  loud  as  when  heard
by  the  naked  ear.  The  patient  seems  as  if  he  spoke  through  a
speaking  trumpet,  quite  close  to  us,  and  not  through  a  tube  into
our  ear.  This  particular  phenomenon  is  as  characteristic  of  the
lesion  in  question  as  pectoriloquy,  and  quite  sufficient  for  prac-
tical conclusions,  especially  if  it  exists  on  one  side  only.  It  be-
comes more  striking,  as  formerly  observed,  if  we  shut  the  other
ear :  and,  indeed,  the  difference  of  the  resonance  of  the  voice  in
the  diseased  and  sound  portions  of  the  lungs,  is  then  so  great,  as
to  render  the  certainty  of  an  excavation  quite  as  complete  as  if  it
were  announced  by  the  most  perfect  pectoriloquy.  It  is  only
when  slight  and  equally  distinct  on  both  sides  of  the  chest,  that
we  can  entertain  any  doubts  of  its  import.  The  most  evident
pectoriloquy  may  present  very  striking  differences:  in  some,  the
voice  passes  uninterruptedly  through  the  cylinder  ;  in  others,  it
is  intermittent,  and  heard  only  by  fits,  some  of  the  sharper  tones
merely  reaching  the  ear  occasionally.  This  intermission  occurs
when  the  excavations  open  into  bronchi  of  a  small  size,  or  when
the  openings  continue  to  be  partially  obstructed  by  the  sputa  :
whether  interrupted  or  continuous,  however,  the  phenomenon  is
equally  characteristic.  Even  in  cases  of  perfect  and  continuous
pectoriloquy,  the  sound  is  sometimes  interrupted  by  a  similar
cause  ;  as  we  frequently  find  it  wanting  in  patients  who  had  ex-
hibited it  in  the  most  striking  manner  only  a  few  hours,  or  even
minutes  previously.  In  cases  of  this  kind,  the  existence  of  the
cavernous  rhonchus  in  the  point  where  pectoriloquy  had  been
observed,  leaves  no  doubt  as  to  the  cause  of  the  cessation  of  the
latter.  For  this  reason,  we  must  never  pronounce  a  phthisical
patient  to  be  non-pectoriloquous,  until  after  we  have  examined
him  several  times,  at  different  hours  of  the  day,  and  particularly
just  after  he  has  been  expectorating.  It  frequently  happens  in
these  cases  of  suspension,  that  coughing  will  restore  the  pecto-
riloquy instantly.  This  phenomenon  presents  still  other  varie-
ties in  relation  to  the  character  of  the  voice  itself :  the  articula-
tion of  the  words  may  be  more  or  less  distinct ;  the  sound  of  the
voice  may  be  more  or  less  changed.  In  most  cases,  the  voice  is  a
little  sharper  than  when  heard  in  the  natural  manner,  and  is
moreover  somewhat  smothered,  like  that  of  ventriloquists.  As
with  these  mimics  also,  the  articulation  of  certain  words  is  very
distinct,  while  that  of  others  is  very  obscure.  Sometimes  the
voice  is  feebler  than  the  natural  voice  of  the  patient ;  but  usually
it  is  stronger.  I  have  frequently  observed,  while  examining  pa-
tients in  whom  pectoriloquy  existed  in  the  back,  and  whose  voice
was  very  weak,  that  I  could  distinctly  hear  their  replies,  through
the  cylnder;  whilst,  at  the  same  distance,  I  could  only  hear,
without  it,  some  broken  words. Finally,  in  cases  of  individuals


312


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


with  a  deep  voice,  but  in  whom  pectoriloquy  is  perfect,  the  voice
seems  conveyed  to  the  ear  by  a  speaking  trumpet  rather  than  a
tube.  Sometimes  the  patient  appears  speaking  right  into  the
ear,  without  any  conveyance,  and  so  loudly  as  to  be  disagreeable.
The  most  complete  extinction  of  the  voice  does  not  prevent  pec-
toriloquy from  being  heard  :  I  have  found  it  very  evident  in  in-
dividuals whose  voice  was  so  low  as  to  be  inaudible  three  or  four
feet  distant.*  Pectoriloquy,  as  I  have  already  observed,  is  the
more  evident,  the  thinner  the  walls  of  the  excavation  are  ;  but
the  difference  of  a  few  lines  in  this  respect,  is  of  no  great  conse-
quence. I  have  found  it  very  distinct  where  the  excavation  was
situated  more  than  an  inch  beneath  the  surface,  and  surrounded
by  a  portion  of  lung  very  healthy  and  quite  permeable  to  the
air; — a  condition  of  parts  which  would  seem  very  little  favour-
able to  the  propagation  of  sound.  The  excavations,  which  are  of
a  middling  size,  and  with  few  anfractuosities.  afford  the  most  per-
fect pectoriloquy ;  but  those  which  are  very  small,  frequently
yield  it  in  a  very  unequivocal  manner.  In  one  case,  I  found  it
very  evident  at  the  junction  of  the  third  rib  with  the  sternum,
and  in  no  other  part  of  the  chest.  On  examining  the  body  after
death,  the  lungs  were  found  full  of  tubercles  which,  with  one  ex-
ception, were  not  yet  completely  softened  :  a  single  excavation,  of
the  size  and  shape  of  a  prune-stone,  existed  in  the  inner  edge  of
the  lung,  and  corresponded  exactly  with  the  point  of  the  chest
where  the  pectoriloquy  had  been  perceived.  The  excavations,
which  are  much  larger  in  one  direction  than  in  another,  and
are  flattened  by  the  falling  together  of  their  sides,  are  the  least
proper  for  affording  pectoriloquy,  and  sometimes  do  not  afford  it
at  all.  This  is  particularly  the  case,  when  an  excavation  of  this
kind  exists  very  near  the  surface  of  the  lungs,  and  where  the
pleura,  which  almost  of  itself  forms  its  outer  boundary,  does  not
adhere  in  this  point  to  the  ribs.  In  examples  of  this  kind,  it  is
obvious  that  the  thin  outer  wall  of  the  cavity  must  fall  in,  while
the  patient  is  speaking,  (as  speech  takes  place  only  during  ex-
piration,) and  consequently,  that  pectoriloquy  cannot  be  pro-
duced. When  there  is  a  great  number  of  excavations  commu-
nicating with  one  another,  and  producing  a  multitude  of  anfrae-
tuosities,  the  patient's  voice  is  still  found  to  traverse  the  cylinder,
but  the  articulation  of  the  words  is  somewhat  smothered  and
confused.  This  is  almost  always  the  case  when  the  phenomenon
exists  over  a  great  part  of  the  chest.  Sometimes  even,  as  I  for-
merly observed,  pectoriloquy  is  more  commonly  suspended  in  irre-
gular excavations  of  this  kind.  When  pectoriloquy  is  continuous
and  distinct,  and  the  voice  in  traversing  the  cylinder  is  heard

*  This  statement  is  rather  an  exaggeration.  Pectoriloquy  is  seldom  evident  in
such  cases  ;  but  when  the  patient  attempts  to  speak  we  perceive  a  kind  of  pufl  and
guggling  which  are  of  equal  value  with  the  true  pectoriloquy. — (M.  L.)


PHYSICAL  SIGNS.


313


distinctly  and  articulately,  without  any  rhonchus  or  foreign
sound  being  perceived  in  the  same  point,  we  must  conclude  that
the  cavity  is  quite  empty,  and  its  communications  with  the  bron-
chi large  and  short.  When,  on  the  contrary,  the  sound  is  accom-
panied with  a  sort  of  guggling,  which  renders  the  articulation  of
words  less  distinct,  we  are  to  infer  that  the  cavity  contains  a  cer-
tain quantity  of  tuberculous  matter  of  the  consistence  of  pus.

No  one  of  the  stethoscopic  results  has  been  more  generally
verified,  as  well  in  France  as  in  other  parts  of  Europe,  than
the  uniform  co-existence  of  pectoriloquy  with  ulcerous  excava-
tions in  the  lungs.  I  shall  not,  therefore,  enlarge  further  on  this
point.  I  must,  however,  make  one  remark  in  this  place,  which
may  be  important  to  such  of  my  readers  as  are  not  much  accus-
tomed to  dissections  themselves,  or  who  employ  for  this  purpose
inexperienced  assistants :  in  the  hurry  of  examination  it  is  quite
possible  that  no  excavation  may  be  found,  although  one  really
exists.  This  circumstance  is  of  more  likely  occurrence  when  the
lung  adheres  firmly  to  the  walls  of  the  chest,  and  the  excavation
happens  to  be  very  superficial.  In  cases  of  this  kind,  as  the  lung
can  only  be  detached  by  forcible  detraction,  or  by  the  scalpel,  it
may  happen  that  either  the  whole  or  the  greater  part  of  the  ex-
cavation may  be  left  attached  to  the  side  of  the  chest.  A  cir-
cumstance of  this  kind  occurred  in  an  early  stage  of  my  researches ;
and  if  M.  Recamier,  who  assisted  at  the  examination,  (which  was
hastily  performed,)  had  not  fortunately  preserved  the  portion  of
the  detached  lung,  it  would  not  have  been  ascertained  that  an
excavation  did  exist  in  the  point  of  lung  over  which  pectoriloquy
had  been  perceived.

I  formerly  stated  that  pectoriloquy  sometimes  disappears  en-
tirely, or  exists  only  very  rarely  and  feebly,  in  excavations  which
are  extremely  large,  although  regularly  shaped.  But  in  cases  of
this  kind,  this  phenomenon  is  replaced  by  two  others  equally
certain  in  their  indications  ;  I  mean  the  cavernous  respiration
and  metallic  tinkling.  The  first  of  these  signs  more  particularly,
is  of  frequent  occurrence.*  Metallic  tinkling  can  only  occur
when  the  excavation  is  large,  communicating  with  the  bronchi,
and  containing  only  a  very  small  quantity  of  fluid. If  there  is

*  Our  author  seems  to  have  taken  less  notice  of  the  state  of  respiration  in  the  first
stage,  than  it  appears  to  deserve.  In  many  cases,  no  doubt,  as  is  particularly  re-
marked by  Andral,  it  is  perfectly  natural,  even  when  there  is  a  numerous  crop  of
tubercles  in  the  lungs  ;  and  even  sometimes  when  these  have  reached  the  state  of
excavation.  In  many  cases,  as  is  also  noticed  by  the  same  author,  the  respiration
is  puerile,  or  louder  than  natural,  in  different  parts  of  the  chest,  which  is  probably
owing  to  the  formation  of  many  tubercles  at  the  same  time  in  lungs  otherwise  healthy.
This  kind  of  respiration  in  adults  ought  always  to  excite  suspicion.  In  a  large  pro-
portion of  instances,  however,  the  respiration  is  less  than  natural  under  one  or  both
clavicles;  and  if  this  is  the  case  under  one  clavicle  only,  it  is  a  valuable  sign.  In
these  cases,  we  also  frequently  observe  in  the  same  points,  together  with  a  weak
respiration  and  diminished  sound  on  percussion,  different  kinds  of  rhonchus, — mu-
cous, crepitous,  or  sonorous. — Transl.


314


PHTH'IBlS  I'ULMONALIS.


no  fluid  whatever,  or  next  to  none,  in  the  excavation,  this  phe-
nomenon will  not  exist ;  but  in  this  case,  the  voice,  the  cough,
and  respiration,  will  be  accompanied  by  the  utricular  or  amphoric
resonance.  Pectoriloquy  ceases  entirely,  in  most  cases  at  least,
when  a  tuberculous  cavity  opens  into  the  pleura.  This  accident
is  easily  recognized  by  the  signs  of  pneumo-thorax  with  liquid
effusion,  which  immediately  supervenes,  and  of  which  I  shall
treat  hereafter.  M.  Louis  has  several  times  remarked,  that  im-
mediately on  the  perforation  taking  place,  a  violent  pain  is  pro-
duced in  the  chest,  sufficient  to  call  the  attention  of  the  physician
to  the  nature  of  the  case.  (Archives  de  Med.  1824.)  It  is  no
doubt  extremely  probable  that  such  a  pain  must  almost  always
take  place,  since  the  first  effect  of  the  perforation  is  immediately
to  produce  pleurisy  and  pneumo-thorax ;  but  the  patient  is  very
likely  to  confound  this  pain  with  his  habitual  sufferings,  and  the
physician  is  very  likely  to  overlook  it  for  the  same  reason.*  I
shall  conclude  the  section  with  two  cases  of  very  large  tubercu-
lous excavations  indicated  by  the  metallic  tinkling.

Case  XXVII.  Tuberculous  cavity  partly  converted  into
fistula,  producing  metallic  tinkling. — A  woman,  fifty  years  of
age,  who  had  been  affected  with  cough  and  expectoration  for  se-
veral years,  and  which  had  got  much  worse  within  a  few  months
past,  came  to  the  Necker  Hospital  on  the  13th  April,  1819,
having,  for  the  first  time,  been  obliged  to  desist  from  her  ordi-
nary occupation.  She  looked  much  older  than  she  was,  and
was  very  thin.  The  pulse  was  quick,  skin  slightly  hot,  and  the
expectoration,  which  was  in  moderate  quantity,  consisted  of  thick
yellow  sputa  intermixed  with  much  transparent  ropy  mucus.
The  stethoscope,  applied  to  the  anterior  and  upper  part  of  the
right  side,  and  to  the  right  axilla,  detected  distinct  pectoriloquy,
and  in  the  same  places,  when  the  patient  coughed  or  spoke,  and
still  more  during  respiration,  there  was  heard  a  tinkling,  like  that
of  a  small  bell  which  has  just  stopped  ringing,  or  of  a  gnat  buz-
zing within  a  porcelain  vase. A  mucous  rhonchus  or  strong

*  For  an  interesting  account  of  perforation  of  the  lungs,  including  the  detail  of
seven  cases,  1  refer  the  reader  to  M.  Louis's  Treatise  on  Phthisis,  Chap.  yii.  p.  446.
This  accident  is  much  more  common  than  is  usually  imagined  :  indeed,  it  has  been
rarely  taken  notice  of  in  this  country.  It  is,  however,  highly  deserving  the  atten-
tion of  physicians,  in  relation  both  to  the  prognosis  and  treatment.  In  M.  Louis's
cases,  the  rupture  of  the  tuberculous  excavation  was  indicated  by  the  instantaneous
surpervention  of  an  acute  pain  in  one  point  of  the  chest,  with  dyspnoea  and  extreme
anxiety  ;  which  symptoms  were  followed  by  the  usual  signs  of  acute  pleurisy,  termi-
nating in  death  within  a  period  varying  from  one  day  to  thirty-six.  In  one  case
only,  was  there  no  pain  ;  but  the  accident  was  pointed  out  by  the  instantaneous  su-
pervention of  extreme  dyspnoea  and  anxiety.  In  every  Case  of  this  kind,  the  diag-
nosis founded  on  the  common  symptoms,  derives  unerring  certainty  from  auscultation
and  percussion.  In  five  of  the  cases  detailed  by  M.  Louis,  the  perforation  occurred
in  the  same  point,  viz.  opposite  the  angle  of  the  third  or  fourth  rib  of  the  left  side  ;
and  I  may  add  that,  in  the  case  of  a  young  gentleman  whom  I  recently  attended,
and  who  survived  the  accident  only  four  days,  the  rupture  took  place  precisely  in
the  same  spot. — Transl.


PHYSICAL  SIGNS.


315


guggling  existed  in  the  same  points  ;  and  all  these  phenomena
were  distinctly  perceptible  over  the  whole  space  from  the  top  of
the  shoulder  to  the  fourth  rib, — being  only  more  distinc  t  ante-
riorly, and  under  the  axilla,  than  behind.  The  respiration  was
sufficiently  distinct  over  the  greater  part  of  the  chest,  except  at
the  roots  of  the  right  lung,  and  the  top  of  the  left,  where  it  was
scarcely  perceptible.  The  Hippocratic  succussion  afforded  no
re  sult.  From  these  various  signs  I  made  the  following  diagnosis  :
Vast  tuberculous  cavity  occupying  the  whole  of  the  superior  lobe
of  the  right  lung,  and  containing  a  small  quantity  of  Jluid :  tu-
bercles, especially  at  the  top  of  the  left  and  root  of  the  right
lung.  Four  days  after  her  entry  this  woman  was  discharged
for  irregularity.  She  came  into  the  hospital  again  in  the  end  of
May,  affected  with  precisely  the  same  symptoms.  She  died  sud-
denly on  the  6th  of  June.

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death. — On  penetrating
with  the  scalpel  between  the  fourth  and  fifth  ribs  of  the  right
side  a  small  quantity  of  air  escaped.*  The  lungs  on  this
side  were  flattened  from  within  outwards  towards  the  ribs,  and
adhered  throughout  to  the  pleura  of  the  ribs,  mediastinum
and  diaphragm.  Above  the  sixth  rib  the  adhesion  was  very
close.  The  upper  half  of  this  lung  was  occupied  by  a  vast  tu-
berculous cavity,  which  contained  about  two  spoonfuls  of  a  pu-
rulent fluid.  The  parietes  of  this  excavation  (except  on  the
lower  side)  consisted  of  condensed  pulmonary  tissue,  surrounded
by  a  thin  layer  of  a  fibrous  texture  like  the  lateral  ligaments  of
the  joints,  which  was  intimately  connected  with  the  pleura  of  the
ribs  and  lungs.  The  main  cavity  was  large  enough  to  contain
the  hand  of  the  largest  man,  and  branched  out  into  many  anfrac-
tuosities :  it  was  crossed  at  one  point  by  a  band  of  flaccid  pul-
monary tissue,  pretty  healthy,  and  covered  by  the  lining  mem-
brane of  the  excavation.  Here  and  there  blood-vessels  of  the
size  of  a  crow-quill  ramified  on  the  interior  of  this,  some  adhe-
rent, and  others  partially  detached,  some  quite  obliterated,  others
only  partially.  A  semi-cartilaginous  membrane,  extremely  un-
even and  of  very  variable  thickness,  lined  the  cavity  throughout ;
and  this  was  the  only  boundary,  on  the  inferior  part,  between  it
and  a  branch  of  the  pulmonary  artery  large  enough  to  admit  the
little  finger.  The  anterior  part  of  this  excavation  terminated  in
a  longish  cul-de-sac,  which  was  lined  by  a  membrane  entirely
cartilaginous,  and  much  thicker  than  that  of  the  other  parts  of
it.  In  cutting  this  part  of  the  lung  from  above  downwards,  we
could  trace  this  cartilaginous  lining  under  the  form  of  a  lamina
of  cartilage  for  more  than  an  inch  into  the  substance  of  the  lung
beyond  the  walls  of  the  excavation. This  was  no  doubt  the  re-

*  This  must  have  come  from  the  excavation  which  will  be  immediately  noticed,
as  the  cavity  of  the  pleura  was  ohliterated. — Author,


31 C


l'HTHlSIS  PULMOKALIS.


maining  cicatrice  of  a  cavity  which  )iad  communicated  with  that
which  existed  at  present.  Some  bronchial  tubes  that  stretched
towards  this  lamina  terminated  in  culs-de-sac  before  reaching  it,
still,  however,  retaining  a  considerable  calibre,  and  having  their
mucous  membrane  very  red  and  thickened.  Several  other
branches  of  the  bronchi  opened  into  the  existing  cavity,  with
their  terminations  quite  smooth  and  polished.  The  anterior  por-
tion of  the  superior  and  middle  lobes,  which  had  not  been  impli-
cated in  this  destruction,  was  still  crepitous,  and  contained,  in
different  parts,  small  groups  of  tubercles  in  different  stages,  as
did  also  the  lower  lobe.

On  puncturing  the  left  side  of  the  chest  there  was  an  escape  of
gas,  which  must  have  come  from  the  cavity  of  the  pleura.  There
was  no  effusion  in  this  side  of  the  chest,  and  the  greater  part  of
the  lung  was  unattached,  except  at  its  very  upper  point.  This
was  strongly  attached  to  the  costal  pleura  by  a  very  thick,
whitish,  fibrous  membrane,  covering  a  sort  of  cartilaginous  cica-
trice in  the  lung,  of  two  or  three  lines  in  thickness,  which  sur-
mounted an  irregular  cavity  of  the  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg.  The
walls  of  this  were  formed  by  a  condensed  pulmonary  substance,
and  inclosed  a  small  calcareous  concretion.  The  remaining  parts
of  this  lung  were  pretty  sound,  only  containing  some  tubercles.

Case  XXVIII.  Tuberculous  excavation  producing  the  me-
tallic tinkling. — A  woman,  aged  forty,  came  into  the  Necker
Hospital  29th  January,  1818,  having  been  affected  with  cough
for  five  months,  and  which  had  increased  since  her  confinement
three  months  before.  At  this  time  the  respiration  was  short  and
quick,  and  difficult ;  the  chest  sounded  pretty  well  on  the  back
and  left  side  before, — but  better  on  the  right  side ;  there  was
distinct  pectoriloquy  near  the  junction  of  the  sternum  and  left
clavicle,  and  the  same  phenomenon,  but  less  distinct,  on  the  same
side  where  the  arm  joined  the  chest ;  the  sound  of  the  ventricles
was  dull,  and  the  heart  gave  hardly  any  impulse.  Two  days
after,  by  means  of  the  cylinder,  we  distinguished  a  sound  resem-
bling fluctuation,  in  the  left  side,  when  the  patient  coughed,  and
the  metallic  tinkling  when  she  spoke.  Succussion  of  the  trunk
did  not  produce  the  sound  of  fluctuation.  From  these  results
the  following  diagnostic  was  given  :  Very  large  tuberculous  ex-
cavation in  the  middle  of  the  left  lung,  containing  a  small  quan-
tity of  very  liquid  matter. The  patient  died  five  days  after  this.

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death. — In  the  right  lung
through  its  whole  extent,  there  were  innumerable  tubercles  of  a
vellowish  white  colour,  and  varying  in  size  from  that  (if  a  hemp-
seed  to  a  cherry-stone,  and  even  a  large  filbert.  These  last
were  evidently  formed  by  the  reunion  of  several  smaller  ones,
and,  for  the  most  part,  were  more  or  less  softened.  Besides  these,
there  were,  in  other  parts,  several  cavities,  the  largest  of  which
would  have  contained  a  hazel  nut,  completely  filled  by  pus,


SYMPTOMS AND PROtt  R  ESS.


317


thicker  than  that  of  an  abscess,  and  lined  by  a  double  membrane,
the  inner  layer  of  which  was  white,  soft,  and  little  adherent  to
the  other  ;  the  outer  was  of  a  cartilaginous  character  and  semi-
transparent,  and  incomplete  in  certain  points.  The  left  lung
adhered  closely  to  the  pleura  of  the  ribs  and  pericardium.  On
its  anterior  and  lateral  part  it  contained,  near  its  surface,  three
cavities,  one  above  the  other,  and  communicating  by  two  large
openings.  The  upper,  of  the  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg,  occupied
the  top  of  the  lung,  and  corresponded  to  the  junction  of  the  cla-
vicle and  sternum  ;  the  second  might  have  contained  a  pullet's
egg,  and  the  lowest,  which  reached  within  an  inch  of  the  base  of
the  lung,  was  of  the  size  of  a  walnut.  These  excavations  were
lined  by  two  membranes,  like  those  in  the  right  lung,  containing
a  liquid  pus,  and  communicated  with  several  bronchial  tubes.
This  lung  contained  also  some  smaller  cavities  and  tubercles,
and  exhibited  marks  of  inflammation  in  various  places.*

Sect.  VI. — Symptoms  and  progress  of  phthisis.

Although  characterized  in  its  latter  stages  by  very  marked
symptoms,  phthisis  pulmonalis  is  extremely  variable  in  its  onset,
and  in  many  cases  it  is  difficult  to  recognize  it  from  its  symptoms
only,  in  any  part  of  its  course.  With  a  view  to  its  more  correct
discrimination,  I  shall  consider  it  under  five  different  forms  or
varieties.

1.  Regular  manifest  phthisis, — phthisis  of  the  ancients. —
Distinct  or  manifest  phthisis  frequently  begins  with  a  slight  dry
cough,  which  might  be  readily  mistaken  for  the  effect  of  a  dry
catarrh.  It  was  no  doubt  the  observation  of  this  seeming  catarrh
preceding  the  disease,  that  led  the  ancients  to  attribute  consump-
tion to  it.  And  this  opinion  must  have  appeared  probable,  be-
fore the  progress  of  pathological  anatomy  had  discovered  the  ex-
istence of  miliary  tubercles  in  the  lungs  previous  to  every  local
or  general  symptom  of  the  disease. This  kind  of  cough  may

*  I  think  it  highly  necessary,  in  this  place,  to  caution  the  student  against  yielding
too  implicit  confidence  to  auscultation  and  percussion,  as  means  of  diagnosis,,  to  the
neglect  or  exclusion  of  the  more  usual  methods.  It  is  no  doubt  true,  that  these
measures  are  of  the  very  first  importance  in  the  diagnosis  of  this,  as  of  almost  every
other  disease  of  the  chest ;  that  in  many  cases  they  alone  suffice  to  fix  the  diagnosis  ;
and  that  in  others  this  cannot  he  established  without  them  :  at  the  same  time,  it  is
equally  certain,  that  if  we  attempt,  as  our  general  practice,  to  draw  our  conclusions,
from  these  signs  alone,  without  reference  to  the  local  and  general  symptoms,  we  shall
frequently  not  merely  fail  to  attain  our  object  at  all,  but  we  shall  run  great  risk  of
falling  into  errors  of  the  most  serious  nature.  It  is  only  by  combining  the  practice
of  auscultation  with  the  faithful  observation  of  symptoms,  and  by  studying  the  re-
sults obtained  from  both  sources,  with  a  reference  to  the  pathology  of  the  disease,
that  we  can  hope  to  attain  such  a  certainty  of  diagnosis  as  can  satisfy  a  philosophical
mind.  I  dwell  the  more  upon  this  point,  on  the  present  occasion,  as  pectoriloquy
is  one  of  the  results  of  auscultation  most  likely  to  impress  strongly  the  mind  of  the
student,  and  because  1  am  of  opinion  that  our  author  lays  more  stress  on  it  than  it
deserves.  Though  very  valuable,  I  confess  that  it  is  far  from  being,  in  my  estima-
tion, the  most  valuable  of  the  stethoscopic  signs. —  Transl.


318


1IITHISIS  PULM0NA1-IS.


last  several  months,  or  sometimes  even  several  years,  without  any
other  accompanying  symptom ;  and  if  at  this  period  the  patient
should  chance  to  die  of  any  other  disease,  the  lungs  will  be  found
crowded  with  very  small  tubercles,  almost  all  of  which  are  still
entirely  grey  and  semi-transparent.  It  is  to  be  observed,  how-
ever, that  when  tubercles  remain  long  in  this  state,  it  is  much
more  common  for  them  to  occasion  an  abundant  pituitous  ex-
pectoration, as  was  remarked  by  Bayle.  Sometimes  the  disease
begins  (during  the  very  best  health  apparently,  or  after  some
slight  disorder  not  well  accounted  for)  with  an  acute  catarrh,  of
which  we  are,  at  the  time,  far  from  considering  tubercles  as  the
cause.  Pretty  frequently  an  haemoptysis,  more  or  less  severe,  is
the  first  sign  of  the  disease.  This  sign,  however,  is  never  cer-
tain ;  and  in  this  stage  of  the  complaint,  the  haemorrhage  may
return  repeatedly,  after  an  interval  of  weeks  or  months,  without
affording  any  positive  proof  of  the  existence  of  tubercles.*

In  whatever  way  the  disease  commences,  a  more  or  less  abun-
dant mucous  expectoration  and  a  constant  state  of  feverishness
gradually  supervene.  This  fever  has  commonly  two  accesses,
the  one  about  noon,  and  the  other  about  the  beginning  or  middle
of  the  night.  Sometimes  it  is  attended  at  the  beginning  by
chills,  which  return  with  the  tertian,  double  tertian,  or  quotidian
type ;  and  it  is  by  no  means  very  unusual  to  find  phthisis  de-
veloping itself  during  the  course  of  an  intermittent  fever.  To-
wards morning,  perspirations  come  on :  and  these  are  sometimes
so  enormous  as  to  wet  two  or  three  mattresses  in  the  course  of  a
single  night.  However  intense  this  hectic  fever  may  be,  (and
judging  from  the  frequency  of  the  pulse  and  heat  of  the  skin,  it
is  sometimes  very  great,)  it  is  hardly  ever  accompanied  by  many
of  the  severer  symptoms  which  we  frequently  observe  in  idiopa-
thic fevers,  having  the  two  symptoms  just  mentioned  in  a  much
less  degree.  In  the  symptomatic  fever  of  consumption,  the  head
is  free;  the  respiration  is  sometimes  scarcely  shorter  than  in
health  ;  the  digestive  functions  are  frequently  in  a  state  of  per-
fect integrity;  and  even  the  muscular  strength  does  not  fail  for
a  long  time, — and  when  it  does  give  way,  it  appears  to  be  owing
rather  to  the  excessive  evacuations,  than  to  the  severity  of  the
fever.  To  the  colliquative  sweats,  a  diarrhoea  no  less  debilita-
ting supervenes,  and  rapidly  wastes  the  patient's  strength  f.  I"
females  the  catamenia  are  almost  always  suppressed  shortly  after
the  development  of  the  fever,  and  sometimes  even  previously  to
any  obvious  symptom  of  disease.  In  these  latter  cases,  the  vul-
gar, and  even  physicians  themselves,  take  advantage  of  their
favourite  axiom — post  hoc,  ergo  propter  hoc, — and  attribute  the

•  Taken  singly,  haemoptysis  is  no  doubt  a  very  uncertain  sign  of  the  existence  of
tubercles:  but  when  showing  itself  with  several  other  symptoms,  not  more  certain
in  themselves,  it  adds  extremely  to  the  probability  of  the  case. — Traml.

t  This  diarrhoea  is  commonly  occasioned  by  a  secondary  eruption  of  tubercles  in
the  intestinal  tunics  ;  sometimes  it  arises  without  these,  and  even  without  any  ulce-
ration or  inflammation  of  the  intestines.— Author.


SYMPTOMS AMD PHOG  R12SS.


319


consumption  to  the  suppression;  although  the  fact  is,  that  this,
in  the  majority  of  cases,  is  only  the  effect  of  the  development  of
tubercles  in  the  lungs.* As  soon  as  the  hectic  fever  is  esta-
blished, wasting-  of  the  body  becomes  manifest,  and  makes  more
rapid  progress,  according  as  the  perspiration,  the  expectoration
and  the  diarrhoea  are  more  abundant. In  women  and  persons
of  a  lymphatic  habit,  the  skin  becomes  white  or  blueish-pale,
with  a  very  slight  shade  of  lemon-yellow. The  emaciation  then
makes  rapid  progress  towards  complete  marasmus ;  and  presents
to  us  the  picture  traced  with  such  frightful  truth  by  Areteeus.
The  nose  becomes  sharp  and  drawn  ;  the  cheeks  are  prominent
:  and  red, — and  appear  redder  by  contrast  with  the  surrounding
paleness;  the  conjunctiva  of  the  eyes  is  of  a  shining  white  or
with  a  shade  of  pearl-blue; the  cheeks  are  hollow;  the  lips
i  are  retracted,  and  seem  moulded  into  a  bitter  smile ;  the  neck
i  is  oblique,  and  impeded  in  its  movements ;  the  shoulder-blades
;are  projecting  and  winged  ;  the  ribs  become  prominent,  and  the
intercostal  spaces  sink  in,  particularly  on  the  upper  and  fore
[parts  of  the  chest. Sometimes  even  the  whole  chest  seems  con-
;  tracted,  as  was  observed  by  Bayle;  and  this  may  actually  be  the
t  case,  particularly  when  the  disease  is  very  chronic,  owing  to  the
( contraction  and  tendency  to  cicatrization  of  large  tuberculous
I  excavations. The  belly  is  flat  and  retracted  ;  the  larger  joints
iand  those  of  the  fingers,  appear  enlarged  from  the  falling  away
of  the  neighbouring  soft  parts  ;  and  even  the  nails  become  in-
ccurvated,  in  consequence  of  the  absorption  of  the  pulpy  extro
rmities  of  the  fingers. No  other  disease  gives  rise  to  so  com-
plete emaciation  as  phthisis, — except  cancer  and  continued  fever
of  long  duration.

But  neither  this  degree  of  emaciation  nor  the  other  symptoms

I  just  enumerated,  are  in  all  cases  proofs  of  an  incurable  disease.

II  have  already  noticed  (Cases  XXV.  and  XXVI.)  two  instances
of  cure  after  the  patients  had  been  reduced  to  the  most  extreme
-idegree  of  emaciation. But  death  may  take  place  long  before

the  disease  has  produced  this  degree  of  wasting. After  the
supervention  of  the  hectic  fever  and  expectoration,  the  course  of
the  disease  varies  in  general  very  little:  its  uniform  progress
towards  a  fatal  termination  being  only  hastened  by  the  occasional
increase  of  the  perspirations  or  diarrhoea. In  this  stage  of  the
ddisease,  haemoptysis,  to  any  extent  is  very  uncommon.  Now  and
:!then  there  only  appear  a  few  streaks  of  blood  in  the  expectora-
tion ;  and  indeed  the  greater  number  of  patients,  and  even  those
who  had  severe  haemorrhage  at  the  beginning,  exhibit  no  traces
j£  it  whatever. Pretty  often,  at  the  period  when  the  complete
vacuation  of  a  tuberculous  cavity  is  indicated  by  the  stetho-
^copic  signs,  the  patient  experiences  a  marked  improvement  in
lis  symptoms  ; — the  expectoration  and  fever  decrease,  and  if  the

*  See  Morton's  Phthisiologia,  Lib.  ii.  Cap.  ix.  "  De  Phthisi  a  chlorosi  et  sup-
fl'oresaione  menstruarum  purgationum  orta."— .Transl.


L


320


PHTHISIS  rULMONALIS.


improvement  only  lasts  a  little  while,  even  the  wasting  of  the
body  is  sometimes  diminished.  This  false  convalescence  is  usu-
ally only  of  a  few  days'  or  weeks1  duration  ;  but  it  may  extend  to
some  months,  and  may  even  seem  to  be  complete.  I  have  noticed
above  a  remarkable  instance  of  this  kind  of  deceptive  cure.  We
shall  immediately  see  that  in  the  chronic  cases,  it  may  last  for
years ;  and  as  has  been  already  proved  (Cases  XXV.  and
XXVI.)  it  may  even  in  some  rare  instances,  terminate  in  a  per-
fect and  permanent  restoration  of  health.  In  attentively  follow-
ing the  progress  of  phthisis  in  a  certain  number  of  subjects,  we
shall  find  that  there  is  hardly  one  of  them  that  does  not  present
some  signs  of  amendment  at  the  period  when  the  cavernous
rhonchus  and  respiration  indicate  the  complete  or  nearly  com-
plete destruction  of  the  primary  tuberculous  masses ;  and  that
the  return  of  the  general  symptoms  in  their  primitive  intensity,
is  more  or  less  rapid,  according  as  the  tubercles  of  the  secondary
eruptions  are  more  or  less  advanced  in  their  progress.  We  shall
likewise  observe  that  the  cases,  in  which  convalescence  becomes
apparently  confirmed  and  lasts  several  months,  are  those  in
which  the  secondary  eruptions  do  not  take  place  until  after  the
complete  softening  of  the  first  crop  of  tubercles.  I  am  convinced,
by  experience,  that  in  the  greater  number  of  cases,  eruptions  of
this  kind  take  place  at  an  earlier  period,  and  especially  at  the
time  when  the  primary  tubercles  begin  to  soften.  The  cases  of
complete  cure  are  evidently  those  in  which  the  secondary  erup-
tion does  not  take  place  at  all.

The  stethoscopic  signs  afford  the  only  certain  means  by  which
we  can  recognize  the  softening  of  the  tuberculous  matter  and  its
discharge  into  the  bronchi.  We  seldom  derive  any  assistance
from  the  local  symptoms,  in  this  respect.  Sometimes  only,  we
observe  a  few  streaks  of  blood  in  the  expectoration,  at  the  time
when  the  matter  makes  its  way  into  the  bronchi,  and  it  is  ex-
tremely rare  to  find  distinct  portions  of  tuberculous  matter  in  the
expectoration. — In  general  nothing  is  more  uncertain  than  the
local  pains  in  this  disease:  most  of  the  patients  have  some  pain;
many  have  none  at  all;  and  some  have  very  acute  pain,  occa-
sioned either  by  the  supervention,  from  time  to  time,  of  slight
pleurisies  or  peripneumonies,  or  by  simple  neuralgia,  unaccom-
panied by  any  mark  of  inflammation.  In  some  cases,  the  patients
are  sensible  of  the  guggling  of  the  softened  tuberculous  matter,
and  can  point  out  the  spot  whence  their  expectoration  comes.
This,  however,  is  very  unusual ;  and  we,  on  the  other  hand,  meet
with  many  others  who  suffer  most  pain  in  the  parts  of  the  lungs
which  are  the  soundest.*

*  M.  Louis  furnishea  strong  reasons  for  believing  that  the  pains  in  cases  of  phthisis
are  almost  always  owing  to  the  slight  chronic  pleurisies  which  occasion  the  cellular
adhesions  found  after  death.  These  adhesions,  it  is  well  known,  generally  coincide
with  the  presence  of  tubercles  or  tuberculous  excavations  in  the  lungs:  but  that  the
pains  are  owing  to  the  pleurisy  and  not  the  tubercles,  seems  probable  from  the  fol-


SYMPTOMS AND  PllOGItESS.


321


Notwithstanding  the  efforts  which  have  been  made,  in  all  ages,
to  deduce  pathognomonic  signs  from  the  appearance  of  the  expec-
toration in  phthisis,  it  must  be  confessed  that  this  affords  no
peculiar  characters  which  are  not  met  with  in  the  sputa  of  chronic
catarrh. And  modern  chemistry  has  thrown  no  new  light  on  the
subject. Three  different  kinds  of  matter  may  enter  into  the  com-
position of  the  sputa  of  consumptive  subjects,  viz.  catarrhal
n incus, — the  matter  of  tubercles  more  or  less  softened, — and
(sometimes)  the  pus  secreted  by  tuberculous  excavations  which
are  completely  empty.  Neither  chemical  analysis  nor  the  physical
characters  of  these  matters,  enable  us  certainly  to  discriminate
them  from  each  other. In  general,  no  doubt,  pus  is  more  opaque,
more  intimately  blended,  and  more  fetid  than  catarrhal  mucus;
yet  nothing  is  more  common  than  to  observe  in  simple  chronic
i  catarrhs,  sputa  of  a  character  entirely  puriform. It  is  extremely
:  rare  to  meet  with  well-marked  tuberculous  matter  in  the  expee-
t  toration. When  this  is  completely  softened,  it  combines  so  in-
timately with  the  puriform  mucus  secreted  by  the  bronchi,  that
it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other.  Besides,
tuberculous  matter  can  only  form  a  very  small  proportion  of  the
expectoration  when  this  is  at  all  considerable. If  it  amounts  to
more  than  a  pound  daily,  considering  how  slowly  the  excavations
i  empty  themselves,  we  cannot  believe  that  the  tuberculous  matter
can  amount  to  more  than  twelve  grains — that  is,  to  a  thousandth
part  of  the  whole. Sometimes,  indeed,  but  very  rarely,  we
observe  in  the  expectoration,  small  fragments  of  softened  tuber-
culous matter,  very  distinct. In  one  case  already  recorded,
[I  witnessed  the  expectoration  of  a  pretty  large  fragment  of
tuberculous  matter  with  a  portion  of  lung  attached  to  it.
EBut  we  may  be  very  easily  deceived  in  respect  to  this  kind  of
expectoration. The  mucous  follicles  of  the  tonsils  frequently
secrete  a  fatty  matter,  of  a  slightly  yellowish  white  colour,  half-
concrete  and  friable,  and  extremely  like  tuberculous  matter  in
appearance. It  differs  from  this,  however,  in  two  striking  cha-
racters :  it  emits  a  fetid  odour  when  squeezed,  and  it  greases  paper
when  heated  on  it. This  kind  of  secretion  is  often  very  great  in
persons  in  good  health. I  was  once  deceived  myself  by  a  case  of
t this  kind. A  patient  came  into  the  hospital  in  a  state  of  ex-
owing  considerations :— 1.  tubercles  exist  in  other  parts,  as  the  glands,  without  pain ;
>.  the  pain  in  cases  of  phthisis  resembles  that  of  pleurisy,  in  being  affected  by  respi-
ation,  Sue.  &c. ;  3.  in  some  cases  where  large  excavations  existed  on  one  side  with
tittle  or  no  adhesions,  and  numerous  adhesions  on  the  other  with  few  or  no  excava-
!  ions,  the  pain  had  been  principally  in  the  latter  side  ;  4.  in  the  cases  (twenty-two
•iin  number;  in  which  no  pain  had  existe:!,  adhesions  were  found  only  at  the  summit  of
ihe  lungs,  a  situation  in  which  pleuritic  pains  would  be  naturally  less,  owing  to  the
omparative  immobility  of  that  part  of  the  chest.  M.  Louis,  however,  admits,  that
fn  some  cases  pain  had  existed  when  no  trace  of  pleurisy  could  be  detected  after
Itath. llechcrches,  p.  205. — Transl.

Y


322


PHTHISIS  1MJLM0NALIS.


treme  emaciation,  and  with  considerable  expectoration,  reex-
amining his  spitting-pot,  I  observed  the  muco-puriform  sputa
intermixed  with  numerous  fragments  of  a  matter  resembling  that
of  tubercles,  and  some  larger  than  cherry-stones.  I  looked  upon
the  patient  as  phthisical ;  but  he  died  on  the  following  night,
before  I  had  an  opportunity  of  exploring  the  chest,  and  of  a  dis-
ease quite  unconnected  with  this  cavity.  Upon  examining  the
body,  the  lungs  were  found  quite  sound,  and  the  follicles  of  the
tonsils  filled  and  dilated  with  a  fatty  matter  similar  to  that  ex-
pectorated by  the  individual.  Generally  speaking,  then,  the
expectoration  in  phthisis  is  similar  to  that  of  chronic  catarrh —
being  mucous,  opaque,  little  soluble  in  water,  containing  a  few
air-bubbles,  of  a  pale-yellow,  or  yellowish- white,  and  sometimes
of  a  slightly  greenish  or  ash  colour.  These  characters  vary  some-
what with  the  period  of  the  disease.  In  the  beginning,  the  yel-
low and  formed  sputa  are  intermixed,  as  in  many  cases  of  acute
catarrh,  with  a  colourless  and  diffluent  watery  phlegm,  with
which  they  do  not  combine  on  account  of  their  comparative  in-
solubility. Later  in  the  disease,  the  watery  or  pituitous  expec-
toration ceases,  and  the  coricocted  or  formed  sputa  unite  in  one
mass.  Towards  the  close  of  the  disease,  the  expectoration  be-
comes usually  less  and  less  copious,  and  assumes  an  ash  or  dirty
green  colour.  At  this  time,  its  diminished  cohesion,  its  complete
opacity,  and  its  greater  solubility  in  water,  lead  to  the  opinion
that  it  contains  a  certain  proportion  of  black  pulmonary  matter
and  pus,  secreted  by  the  walls  of  excavations  nearly  empty.  In
every  stage  of  the  disease,  we  sometimes  observe  in  the  expecto-
ration, cylindrical  and  vermicular  portions  which  appear  moulded
in  the  smaller  bronchi.  To  conclude, — we  cannot  yield  much
confidence  to  the  inspection  of  the  sputa  in  this  disease,  inasmuch
as  those  which  are  most  characteristic, — viz.  the  ash-coloured,
puriform  and  vermicular, — are  frequently  met  with  in  chronic
catarrh  ;  and  because  it  appears,  from  what  was  formerly  stated,
that,  with  the  exception  of  about  a  thousandth  part,  the  whole
of  the  expectoration  is  the  product  of  the  pulmonary  catarrh,
with  which  the  tuberculous  affection  is  almost  always  compli-
cated. The  progress  of  this  catarrh  is  very  various.  Sometimes
the  yellow  mucous  expectoration  commences  with  the  first  obvious
symptoms  of  the  disease ;  sometimes  it  succeeds  these  ;  most  com-
monly it  appears  to  begin  at  the  period  of  the  softening  of  the
first  crop  of  tubercles ;  and,  lastly,  in  some  rare  cases,  it  shows
itself  only  when  the  tuberculous  matter  first  makes  its  way  into
the  bronchi.  It  is,  indeed,  to  the  re-union  of  these  two  circum-
stances, viz.  the  evacuation  of  a  large  tuberculous  excavation,
and  the  simultaneous  development  or  a  very  extensive  and  very
loose  catarrh,  that  we  must  attribute  the  greater  number  of  those
cases  known  to  practitioners  by  the  name  of  vomica, — respecting


SYMPTOMS AND  PROGRESS.


323


which  I  shall  here  make  a  few  remarks,  premising  merely  that  it
is  much  less  frequent  than  it  is  supposed  to  be.*

Vomica  of the  lungs. — By  this  term  is  commonly  understood


health.  More  commonly,  however,  after  a  temporary  amelio-
ration, the  disease  resumes  its  march,  becomes  even  more  distinct

•  I  do  not  think  that  our  author  has  done  sufficient  justice  to  the  expectoration,  as
a  sign  of  the  presence  of  tubercles  in  the  lungs ;  more  especially  in  the  latter  stages
of  the  disease.  It  is  no  doubt  true,  that  every  one  of  the  characters  of  phthisical
sputa  may  be  sometimes  met  with  in  those  of  chronic  catarrh  or  bronchitis  ;  but  1
believe  this  to  be  by  no  means  a  common  case :  and  I  think  that  we  hardly  ever
meet  with  an  instance  of  the  latter  disease  in  which  the  expectoration  undergoes
the  progressive  changes  so  frequently  observed  in  phthisis.  For  the  fullest  and  most
accurate  account  we  possess  of  the  expectorationinthis  disease,  I  refer  the  reader  to
Andral's  work,  torn.  iii.  p.  118  ;  and  for  a  correct  but  briefer  detail,  to  that  of  Louis,
p.  187.  The  expectoration  in  phthisis  has  engaged  the  attention  of  medical  writers
more  than  that  of  any  other  disease  of  the  lungs  ;  and  many  valuable  observations
respecting  it  are  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  the  ancients,  particularly  Hippocrates
and  Aretaeus  :  and  also  in  the  works  of  the  early  moderns,  among  which  those  of  our
countrymen,  Bennet  and  Morton,  deserve  particular  notice.  (Theatrum  Tabidorum.
— Phthisiolflgia.)  It  maybe  of  some  use  to  the  student,  if  I  state  here,  in  a  few
words,  what  appear  to  me  the  most  usual  characters  and  progressive  changes  of  the
expectoration  in  phthisis. — In  the  earliest  stage  of  the  disease,  the  cough  is  either
quite  dry,  or  attended  by  a  mere  watery  or  slightly  viscid,  frothy,  and  colourless
fluid  ;  this  on  the  approach  of  the  second  stage  gradually  changes  into  an  opaque,
greenish,  thicker  fluid,  intermixed  with  small  lines  or  fine  streaks  of  a  yellow  colour.
At  this  period,  also,  the  sputa  are  sometimes  intermixed  with  small  specks  of  a  dead
white  or  slightly  yellow  colour,  varying  from  the  size  of  a  pin's  head  to  that  of  a
grain  of  rice,  and  which  have  been  compared  by  Bayle  to  this  grain  when  boiled.
These  have  been  noticed  by  many  writers  from  Hippocrates  downwards.  After  the
complete  evacuation  of  the  tubercles,  the  expectoration  puts  on  various  forms  of  puru-
lency  ;  but  frequently  assumes  one  particular  character,  which  has  always  appeared
to  me  pathognomonic  of  phthisis,  although  the  more  accurate  and  extensive  observa-
tion of  modern  pathologists,  has  proved  the  same  to  exist  occasionally  in  simple
catarrh .  The  expectoration  to  which  I  allude,  consists  of  a  series  of  globular  masses,
of  a  wlfitish-yellow  colour,  with  a  rugged  woolly  surface,  and  somewhat  like  little
rolled  balls  of  cotton  or  wool.  These  commonly  but  not  always  sink  in  water.  This
kind  of  expectoration  has  appeared  to  me  most  common  in  young  subjects,  of  a
strongly  marked  strumous  habit,  and  in  whom  the  disease  was  hereditary.  At  other
times,  in  the  cases  in  which  these  globular  masses  are  observed,  and  also  in  those  in
which  thev  have  not  appeared,  the  expectoration  puts  on  the  common  characters  of
the  pus  of  an  abscess,  constituting  an  uniform,  smooth,  coherent,  or  diffluent  mass,
of  a  greenish,  or  rather  greyish  hue,  with  an  occasional  tinge  of  red,  (from  intermixed
blood,)  and  sometimes  more  or  less  fetid.  This  is  the  "  sputum  cinereum  et  camo-
sum,  argilla;  cujusdam  liquidioris  speciem  pra:  se  ferens"  of  Bennet.  It  is  unneces-
sary to  take  any  notice,  in  this  place,  of  the  point  once  so  much  discussed  and  deemed
so  important,  of  the  difference  between  pus  and  mucus,  and  of  the  chemical  tests  of
each  ;  since  it  has  been  long  ascertained  that  a  mucous  membrane  in  a  state  of  inflam-
mation, is  as  capable  of  secreting  true  pus,  as  an  ulcerated  surface.  The  alleged
sweetness  or  saltness  of  the  expectoration,  has  also,  I  believe,  been  long  discarded
by  pathologists  as  a  test  of  the  existence  of  tubercular  disease  of  the  lungs,  although
We  certainly  much  more  frequently  hear  our  phthisical  patients  notice  these  qualities
of  the  expectoration,  than  persons  affected  with  other  diseases  of  the  chest. — Tmnsl.


y2


32i


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


than  before,  and  soon  puts  an  end  to  the  patient's  life.  Cases  of
the  kind  just  mentioned,  had  early  engaged  the  attention  of
physicians.  Hippocrates  has  treated  largely  of  them  in  several
parts  of  his  writings.  He  considered  vomicae  as  true  abscesses
of  the  lungs,  and  denominated  the  patients  in  whom  they  oc-
curred, empyical  or  suppurated  (tfj.irvoi).  This  name  indeed
he  applies  to  all  those  who  have  an  abscess,  in  whatever  part  of
the  body  it  may  be  ;  but  in  modern  times  the  term  has  been  re-
stricted to  collections  of  matter  in  the  pleura.  Vomica?  of  the
lungs  were  considered  by  Hippocrates  as  differing  from  phthisis.
He  says  they  may  open  either  into  the  bronchi  or  the  cavity  of
the  pleura.  The  former  of  these  terminations  appeared  to  him
fortunate,  and  he  sometimes  even  endeavoured  to  produce  it
artificially,  by  forcibly  shaking  the  patient's  trunk.*  The  latter
was  reckoned  the  usual  cause  of  the  pleuritic  empyema.

These  notions,  although  very  inaccurate  in  several  respects,
are  still  entertained  by  many  physicians  who  are  ignorant  of  the
present  state  of  pathological  anatomy. In  one  very  important
point,  that  of  the  origin  of  the  affection,  these  views  of  Hip-
pocrates are  erroneous ;  since,  as  has  already  been  shown,  the
formation  of  an  abscess  in  the  lungs,  the  consequence  of  inflam-
mation, is  an  extremely  rare  case, — at  least  a  hundred  times
as  rare  as  a  well-marked  vomica,  and  a  thousand times  as
rare  as  an  empyema. I  consider  vomicae,  such  as  I  have  de-
scribed, and  such  as  are  so  named  by  practitioners,  as  the  result
of  the  softening  of  a  tuberculous  mass  of  a  large  size. It  is  to
be  remarked,  however,  that  the  copious  expectoration  which
usually  takes  place  during  several  days  after  their  rupture,  can-
not be  considered  as  the  sole  product  of  the  tuberculous  matter.
In  a  case  formerly  under  my  care,  the  patient,  after  having,  for
several  months,  been  subject  to  dry  cough,  dyspnoea,  nectic
fever,  and  other  symptoms  indicative  of  tubercles,  after  a  violent
fit  of  coughing  suddenly  expectorated  nearly  a  glassful  of  puri-
fonn  matter,  which  was  opaque  and  almost  diffluent. For  eight
days  afterwards,  he  brought  up  about  three  pints  of  a  similar
fluid  every  twenty-four  hours. The  expectoration  then  gra-
dually subsided,  and  at  last  ceased  entirely,  together  with  the
symptoms  which  had  preceded  it ;  and  the  patient  left  the  hos-
pital, at  the  end  of  a  month,  perfectly  cured. A  discharge  so
copious  as  this  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  secretion;  and  in
the  case  in  question,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  sources  of  the  ex-

*  That  HippocratOB  was  well  acquainted  with  Succutsion  as  a  moans  of  diagnosis
in  thoracic  diseases,  is  evident  from  many  passages  in  his  writings;  and  be  is  even
entitled  to  the  merit  of  having  practised  auscultation  (though  without  any  useful  re-
sult) bv  tho  application  of  the  ear  to  the  chest,  as  is  indeed  noticed  bv  M-  Laennec
in  the  beginning  of  the  present  work.  Not  contented  will)  this,  Dr.  Baron  in
his  "  Illustrations,"  contends  that  be  was  acquainted  also  with  /VrnisM"".  Ibis  I
conceive  to  be  an  opinion  not  at  all  supported  by  u  candid  examination  of  the  writings
of  Hippocrates. — Transl.


SYMPTOMS AND  rROCKKSS.


pectoration  were  the  walls  of  a  large  tuberculous  excavation,  and
the  bronchial  membrane  irritated  by  the  discharge  of  the  con-
tents; of  this.

It  is  to  be  remarked  in  this  place,  that  the  case  known  in
practice  by  the  term  vomica,  and  which  is  justly  considered  as
uncommon,  differs  in  nothing  but  degree  from  a  case  which  is
very  common,  and  which  may  be  frequently  observed  in  an
hospital,  by  any  one  who  carefully  attends  to  the  expectoration
of  a  great  number  of  phthisical  patients.  Some  other  affections
have  been  frequently  confounded,  under  the  name  of  vomica,
with  that  just  described  ;  and  particularly  abscess  of  the  lungs,
abscess  of  the  liver  opened  through  the  diaphragm  into  the  chest,
and  the  effusions  of  pleurisy  which  have  found  their  way  into
the  bronchi.

The  general  symptoms  above  described,  which  accompany
manifest  phthisis,  cannot  be  considered,  even  when  re-united  in
the  same  case,  as  certain  signs  of  the  existence  of  tubercles  in  the
lungs.  A  simple  catarrh  may  give  rise  to  the  same  effects.
Twenty  years  ago  I  witnessed  the  death  of  a  young  woman,  pre-
ceded by  all  the  symptoms  of  phthisis  pulmonalis,  whose  lungs
were  found,  on  examination,  perfectly  sound,  and  in  whom  no
organic  lesion  was  discoverable,  except  in  the  liver.  Bayle  gives
two  examples  of  the  same  kind,  (Cases  xlviii.  and  xlix.)  On
this  account,  we  ought  never  to  assert  positively  the  existence  of
phthisis  pulmonalis,  in  cases  where  none  of  the  physical  signs
afforded  by  percussion  and  auscultation,  are  found  to  exist.  In
the  course  of  the  last  year,  I  several  times  met  MM.  Recamier
and  Richerand  in  consultation,  on  the  case  of  a  young  lady  who
seemed  already  far  gone  in  a  consumption,  but  in  whom  I  con-
stantly affirmed  the  lungs  to  be  sound,  from  the  absence  of
physical  signs  in  this  case.  The  result  of  the  dissection  con-
firmed the  correctness  of  my  diagnosis  :  the  disease  was  schirrous
pancreas,  complicated  with  a  simple  catarrh.

2.  Irregular  manifest  phthisis. — I  wish  to  designate  by  this
term,  those  cases  of  phthisis,  in  which  the  disease  seems  to  begin
in  some  other  organ  besides  the  lungs.  It  is  by  no  means  un-
common to  find  the  local  and  general  symptoms  of  consumption,
preceded  by  a  chronic  diarrhoea  of  long  standing.  On  examining
the  bodies  of  such  persons  after  death,  we  find  a  great  many
ulcers  in  the  intestines,  and  in  most  of  these,  small  miliary  tuber-
cles, or  tubercles  already  softened  and  destroyed.  When  in  sucli
cases  perforation  of  the  intestinal  tunics  takes  place,  an  acute
peritonitis,  accompanied  by  peritoneal  tympany,  commonly  super-
venes suddenly.  This  double  affection  is  indicated  by  the  fol-
lowing signs :  viz.  sudden,  acute,  and  sometimes  most  extreme
pain  of  the  belly,  great  alteration  of  the  features,  and  complete
prostration  of  strength.  The  pain  is  increased  by  pressure,  but
usually  less  so  than  in  most  cases  of  acute  peritonitis. In  gently


32G


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


compressing  the  abdomen,  or  in  pressing  with  a  single  finger  the
parts  of  it  which  are  most  swollen,  we  arc  sensible  of  a  sort  of
dry  crepitation ;  and  in  percussing  the  part  gently,  while  at  the
same  time  we  apply  the  stethoscope  near  it,  we  hear  a  silvery  sort
of  resonance,  more  clear  than  in  common  intestinal  tympany.  If
the  adhesion  of  the  ulcer  to  the  parts  surrounding  it,  takes  placi-
immediately,  these  signs  in  general,  do  not  exist  at  all.  Perfo-
ration of  the  intestines  from  tuberculous  ulcers  may  also  take
place,  though  more  rarely,  in  examples  of  regular  phthisis,  and
when  the  intestinal  affection  shows  itself  only  at  an  advanced
period  of  the  disease.*  The  examples  of  consumption  which  are
preceded  by  a  prolonged  diarrhoea  t,  are  usually  attended  by  a
greater  emaciation  and  prostration  of  strength  than  in  common
cases ;  in  them  the  skin  is  also  harsh,  and  has  none  of  that  fineness,
and  that  pallid  white  and  waxen  hue,  which  exist  in  the  greater
number  of  common  consumptive  subjects.  In  these  cases  also,
death  soon  follows  the  establishment  of  the  expectoration  and

*  For  the  best  account  we  possess  of  perforation  of  the  intestines,  see  the  articles
Enteritis,  Peritonitis,  and  Perforation,  in  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Pract.  Med. — Trajisl.

t  For  the  most  valuable  illustrations  respecting  the  nature  and  degree  of  prevalence
of  diarrhoea  in  phthisis  which  we  possess,  I  must  still  refer  the  reader  to  the  works  of
Andral  and  Louis.  I  shall  here  abridge  some  of  the  observations  of  these  authors,
particularly  the  latter.  Out  of  one  hundred  and  twelve  cases  of  phthisis,  diarrhoea
was  wanting  in  five  only.  In  some,  it  preceded  any  sign  of  phthisis  pulmonalis  ;  in
about  one-eighth,  it  began  at  the  same  time  as  the  disease  of  the  lungs,  and  attended
its  whole  course,  from  five  to  twelve  months,  and  even,  in  some  cases,  during  the
greater  part  of  four  or  five  years ;  in  the  majority  of  cases,  it  began  in  the  latter  half
of  the  existence  of  phthisis;  and  in  one-fourth,  it  appeared  only  between  the  fiftieth
and  twentieth  day  preceding  death.  In  these  cases,  which  may  be  called  the  diarrha-a
of  tJie  latter  days,  the  intestines  were  found  diseased  in  every  case  but  one  :  in  one-
half,  there'was  ulceration  of  the  mucous  membrane  either  of  the  small  or  large  intes-
tines, or  both,  and  in  every  case  but  three,  the  ulcers  were  small  and  rare  ;  in  four-
fifths  of  the  cases,  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  colon  was  reduced  to  a  soft  pulp,
and  was  almost  always  more  or  less  red.  The  diarrhoea  was  proportioned  to  the  ex-
tent of  the  organic  lesion,  and  was  greater  when  the  membrane  was  softened,  than
when  it  was  simply  ulcerated.  The  diarrhara  of  long  standing  was  either  remittent
or  continued.  In  the  former  kind,  which  was  observed  in  fifteen  cases,  the  lesions
were  the  same  as  in  the  variety  just  described,  being  comparatively  slight.  The
diarrhoea  continued  from  forty-eight  days  to  five  months,  and  the  remissions  lasted
eight,  ten,  fifteen,  or  twenty  days.  The  continued  diarrhaa  of  long  standing  lasted
from  one  to  twelve  months.  Out  of  forty-one  cases,  the  small  intestines  were  ulcer-
ated in  thirty-live,  the  large  in  thirty-one;  in  twelve  cases,  the  small  intestines  were
ulcerated  through  their  whole  course,  and  in  thirteen,  the  ulcers  were  as  large  as  an
inch  in  diameter  ;  in  nineteen  cases  there  were  large  ulcerations  in  the  great  intes-
tines ;  in  thirty,  the  mucous  membrane  of  these  was  of  a  pulpy  softness,  and  in  seven-
teen it  was  red.  As  a  general  rule,  it  was  found,  that  when  the  diarrhoea  had  been
of  long  standing  and  continued,  the  ulcers  were  large  and  numerous.  The  diarrhoea
was  found  to  be  as  severo  when  the  ulcers  were  in  the  small,  as  when  they  were  in
the  large  intestines  ;  but  the  much  greater  frequency  of  softening  of  the  membrane  of
the  latter,  (which  appears  to  be  the  consequence  of  inflammation,)  proves  that  the
site  of  this  symptom  is  much  more  commonly  in  the  largo  than  the  small  intestines.
In  every  case  where  there  was  much  ulceration,  the  diarrhoea  was  not  only  of  long
duration  and  continued,  but  the  stools  were  also  frequent ;  and  the  loss  of  strength,
and  the  emaciation,  were  always  proportioned  to  the  number  and  frequency  of  the
stools.  There  appears  to  be  no  just  foundation  for  the  common  opinion,  of  diarrhoea
alternating  with  the  sweating  in  phthisis,  or  the  one  being  supplementary  of  the
olhwr.— Transl.


SYMPTOMS  AND  PROG11ESS.


,327


other  local  pectoral  symptoms;  although,  indeed,  by  means  of
the  stethoscope,  the  existence  of  tubercles  already  softened  or  even
excavated,  might  have  been  previously  ascertained.  In  scrophu-
lous  subjects,  particularly  children,  the  tuberculous  affection
begins,  pretty  frequently,  in  the  mesenteric  or  cervical  glands,  the
tubercles  in  the  lungs  (occasionally  few  in  number)  being  most
commonly  the  result  of  a  secondary  eruption.  Sometimes  even,
in  subjects  of  this  kind,  we  meet  only  with  tubercles  in  the  large
bronchial  glands  at  the  roots  of  the  lungs.  When  tuberculous
phthisis  begins  in  the  mesenteric  glands,  death  frequently  super-
venes from  defective  nutrition,  before  any  symptom  of  pulmonary
consumption  shows  itself.  In  examining  the  bodies  of  such  sub-
jects, however,  we  almost  always  meet  with  some  miliary  tuber-
cles in  the  lungs.

3.  Latent  phthisis. — It  very  seldom  happens  that  phthisis  is
latent  through  its  whole  course;  but  it  is  by  no  means  rare  to
meet  with  cases  in  which  the  characteristic  symptoms  show  them-
selves only  a  few  weeks,  or  even  days,  before  death ;  and  which
had  been  previously  mistaken  for  diseases  of  quite  a  different
nature.  Cases  of  this  kind  occur  most  commonly  during  the
course  of  another  chronic  disease,  capable  by  itself  of  occasioning
emaciation  and  slow  fever,  such  as  scurvy,  inveterate  syphilis,  &c.
These  scorbutic,  venereal,  or  mercurial  consumptions,  as  they  are
usually  called,  have  nothing  peculiar,  except  in  being  developed
during  the  presence  of  the  affections  mentioned  ;  and  to  which,  in
fact,  there  is  no  proof  of  their  being  owing.  Some  cases  of  phthisis,
beginning  with  diarrhoea,  prove  fatal,  without  being  ever  attended
by  cough  or  expectoration,  as  was  formerly  observed  by  M.
Portal ;  but  in  such  instances,  crude  tubercles  are  usually  found
in  the  lungs.  Phthisis  may  be  long  masked  by  nervous  symptoms.
I  have  known  several  cases  in  which  it  was  concealed  for  years
by  an  habitual  dyspepsia,  and  other  symptoms  of  hypochon-
driasis. One  of  these,  a  confirmed  hypochondriac  of  ten  years,
and  who  still  preserved  his  strength  and  plumpness,  was  suddenly
attacked  with  an  acute  catarrh,  which  was  succeeded,  after  five
days,  by  an  expectoration  of  puriform  mucus,  mixed  with  a  littJe
blood.  These  symptoms  subsided  in  the  course  of  a  few  days;
but  after  six  months  they  were  succeeded  by  symptoms  of  a  de-
cided phthisis,  which  carried  the  patient  off'  within  six  weeks.  Of
all  the  affections  of  the  lungs,  the  pulmonary  catarrh  is  the  most
apt  to  mask  phthisis ;  since,  on  the  one  hand,  it  may  itself  be  ac-
companied by  haemoptysis,  hectic  fever,  considerable  emaciation,
and  an  expectoration  which  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  from
that  of  phthisis;  and,  on  the  other,  the  symptomatic  catarrli  of
phthisis  may  last  several  months,  and  without  emaciation  or  fever.
In  respect  of  fever,  it  may  be  stated,  that  it  is  in  general  less
considerable,  the  fewer  the  tubercles,  and  the  more  unconnected
they  are  with  one  another. We  may  indeed  say  that  the  greater


328


PHTHISIS  PULMONAL1S.


number  of  cases  of  phthisis  are  latent  at  the  beginning,  since  we
have  seen  that  nothing  is  more  common  than  to  find  numerous
miliary  tubercles  in  lungs  otherwise  quite  healthy,  and  in  subjects
who  had  never  shown  any  symptoms  of  consumption.  On  the
other  hand,  from  considering  the  great  number  of  phthisical  and
other  subjects  in  whom  cicatrices  are  found  in  the  summit  of  the
lungs,  I  think  it  is  more  than  probable  that  hardly  any  person  is
carried  off  by  a  first  attack  of  phthisis.  Since  I  was  first  led  to
adopt  this  opinion,  on  anatomical  grounds,  it  has  frequently  ap-
peared quite  clear  to  me,  from  carefully  comparing  the  history  of
my  patients  with  the  appearances  on  dissection,  that  the  greater
number  of  those  first  attacks  are  mistaken  for  slight  colds,  and
that  others  are  quite  latent,  being  unaccompanied  with  either
cough  or  expectoration,  or  indeed  with  any  symptom  sufficient  to
impress  the  memory  of  the  patients  themselves.  Case  XX.  affords
an  example  of  this;  and  probably  in  Cases  XVII.  XVIII.  XIX.
XXI.  XXII.  XXIII.  the  defect  of  information  respecting  the
symptoms  that  accompanied  the  formation  of  the  cicatrices  found
after  death,  arose  from  those  symptoms  having  been  so  slight,  as
to  have  escaped  the  memory  if  not  the  notice  of  the  patient.*

4.  Acute  phthisis. — Under  this  term  are  included  those  cases,
which,  after  remaining  latent  for  a  longer  or  a  shorter  period,  at
length  unfold  themselves  all  at  once,  with  acute  fever,  emaciation,
and  other  symptoms  of  such  severity  as  to  carry  off  the  patient  at
the  end  of  six  weeks,  a  month,  or  even  sometimes  within  a  shorter
period.  In  examining  the  lungs,  in  cases  of  this  kind,  we  com-
monly meet  with  a  great  number  of  tuberculous  masses,  or  sepa-
rate tubercles,  which  have  softened  simultaneously,  or  we  find
secondary  eruptions  of  great  extent,  and  already  considerably  ad-
vanced in  their  progress.  In  one  remarkable  variety  of  acute  phthi-
sis, the  patients  sink  under  the  violence  of  the  fever,  previously  to
emaciation,  and  without  any  other  local  symptoms  but  those  of  a
very  severe  acute  catarrh.  In  this  case  we  commonly  find,  on
examining  the  body,  a  great  number  of  crude  yellow  tubercles,
more  or  less  softened,  and  of  considerable  size,  and  almost  al-
ways without  any  secondary  eruption.  These  cases  form  excep-
tions to  the  usual  course  of  the  disease  mentioned  above ;  the
primary  eruption  of  tubercles  having  been,  in  them,  very  nume-
rous, and  having  remained  latent  until  the  softening  of  them

*  Out  of  one  hundred  and  twenty-three  cases  of  phthisis  observed  bj  M.  Louis,
eight  were  latent,  that  is,  exhibited  neither  cough  nor  other  pectoral  symptoms  during
a  period  varying  from  five  months  to  two  years.  In  four  of  these  cases,  during  the
period  of  latency,  there  were  neither  local  nor  general  symptoms  ;  in  the  others,  there
was  considerable  general  disturbance,  viz.  fever,  anorexia,  emaciation,  etc.  long  he-
fore  the  supervention  of  the  pulmonary  symptoms,  Jiacherches,  p.  368.  For  some
valuable  and  interesting  observations  on  that  variety  of  latent  phthisis  which  begins
with  diarrhoea,  see  Andral's  work,  t.  Hi.  p.  323.  It  is  noticed  by  Morton,  under  the
head  Tabes  a  dysenierid  el  diarrlura,  Phthisiologia,  p.  38.  Kvery  practit  ioner,  as  well
as  myself,  has,  no  doubt,  met  with  instances  of  this  sort. —  Trattsl.


TREATMENT.


329


o-;ivi' occasion  to  the  symptoms  of  the  violent  pulmonary  catarrh.
I  met  with  a  remarkable  instance  of  this  kind  about  twenty  years
ago,  in  the  ease  of  a  girl,  eighteen  years  of  age,  who  died  in  the
Hospital  Cochin,  without  any  emaciation,  or  other  symptom,
except  those  of  a  severe  feverish  catarrh,  of  less  -than  a  month's
duration.  Upon  examining  the  body,  the  lungs  were  found  filled
with  tubercles  more  or  less  softened,  of  a  size  almost  uniform,
and  none  less  than  a  filbert  or  almond.*

5.  Chronic  phthisis. — Under  this  name  we  may  include  those
cases  which  last  sometimes  five  or  six  years,  or  even  much  longer,
marked  by  periods  of  increase,  during  which  the  hectic  fever  is
manifest,  and  emaciation  makes  rapid  progress ;  and  by  remis-
sions of  longer  or  shorter  duration,  and  sometimes  so  complete,
that  the  fever,  cough,  and  expectoration  cease,  and  the  patient
recovers  his  flesh.  Cases  of  this  kind,  as  must  appear  from  what
is  stated  above,  are  the  consequence  of  successive  eruptions  of
tubercles,  usually  also  few  in  number.  It  is  in  these  that  the
pulmonary  cicatrices  are  most  commonly  found.

From  all  that  has  gone  before,  it  appears  to  me  useless  to  talk
of  dividing  consumption  into  two  or  three  degrees, — phthisis  in-
c/piens,  confirmata,  desperata.  This  kind  of  distinction,  being
founded  on  the  greater  or  less  development  of  the  general  symp-
toms, has  nothing  fixed  or  constant;  since  we  scarcely  ever  find
these  general  symptoms  proportioned  to  the  state  of  the  expecto-
ration, or  to  the  extent  of  the  organic  lesions,  in  the  lungs.  Hec-
tic fever  and  emaciation  frequently  exist  in  a  high  degree  previ-
ously to  the  appearance  of  the  yellow  and  opaque  sputa,  and
even  prove  fatal  with  the  single  addition  of  dyspnoea.  At  other
times,  on  the  contrary,  the  natural  plumpness  of  the  individual,
and  a  very  tolerable  degree  of  general  health  continue,  for  a  con-
siderable period  after  the  supervention  of  the  opaque  expectora-
tion and  pectoriloquism.

Sect.  VII. — Treatment  of  phthisis  pulmonalis.

It  has  been  shown  above,  that  the  cure  of  phthisis  is  not  be-
yond the  powers  of  nature ;  but  it  must  be  admitted,  at  the  same
time,  that  art  possesses  no  certain  means  of  attaining  this  de-
sirable end.  To  be  convinced  of  this,  we  need  only  give  a  glance

*  For  several  interesting  examples  of  acute  phthisis,  I  refer  the  reader  to  Louis's
work,  p.  41 1 ,  and  to  Andral's,  p.  367.  Of  the  general  progress  and  duration  of  this
disease,  a  more  precise  idea  will  be  afforded  by  the  following  statement  of  the  re-
sults obtained  by  MM.  Bayle  and  Louis.  Out  of  three  hundred  and  fourteen  cases,
twenty-four  died  within  three  months  ;  sixty-nine  from  three  to  six  months  ;  sixty-
nine  from  six  to  nine  months  ;  thirty-two  from  nine  to  twelve  months  ;  forty-three
from  twelve  to  eighteen  months  ;  thirty  from  eighteen  months  to  two  years  ;  "twelve
from  two  to  three  years  ;  eleven  from  three  to  four  years;  five  from  four  to  five
years  ;  one  from  five  to  six  years  ;  three  from  six  to  seven  years ;  one  from  seven  to
eight  years  ;  three  from  eight  to  ten  years ;  eleven  from  ten  to  forty  years.— Trantl.


,'330


PHTHISIS  PIJLMONALIS.


at  the  innumerable  remedies  that  have  been  proposed  for  its  cure.*
We  may  be  well  assured  that  a  disease  is  irremediable,  when  we
find  employed  in  its  treatment  almost  every  known  medicament,
however  different  or  even  opposite  in  effect;  when  we  see  new
remedies  proposed  every  day,  and  old  ones  revived,  after  having
lain  long  in  merited  oblivion ;  when,  in  short,  we  find  no  plan
constant  but  that  of  giving  palliatives,  and  no  means  persevered
in,  but  such  as  are  proper  for  fulfilling  indications  purely  symp-
tomatic. On  these  grounds,  have  been  alternately  cried  up —
alkalis,  and  acids ;  spare  diet  and  rich  animal  diet ;  dry  air  and
moist  air;  pure  air  and  air  impregnated  with  fetid  vapours;
oxygen,  hydrogen,  and  carbonic  acid  ;  exercise  and  quiet;  emol-
lients and  tonics  ;  heat  and  cold ;  paregoric  and  other  anodynes
and  stimulants, — not  only  of  the  aromatic  and  antiscorbutic  kind,
but  the  most  irritating  preparations  of  mercury,  the  sulphate  of
copper,  arsenic,  &c.^J"

With  the  view  of  reducing  to  some  order,  so  sterile  a  super-
fluity, I  shall  enquire,  in  the  first  place,  what  are  the  indications
to  be  fulfilled  in  the  treatment  of  phthisis  ;  in  the  next  place  I
shall  enquire  whether  experience  has  led  us  to  the  knowledge  of
any  means  really  efficacious  in  its  cure  ;  and  lastly,  I  shall  give
some  account  of  the  means  calculated  to  fulfil  the  symptomatic
indications.  From  the  facts  formerly  detailed,  exhibiting  the
mode  in  which  nature  sometimes  cures  phthisis,  it  results,  that
the  most  rational  indications  should  be,  as  soon  as  we  have  as-
certained the  existence  of  the  disease,  to  prevent  the  secondary
eruption  of  tubercles  ;  as,  in  this  case,  if  the  primary  tubercular
masses  were  not  extremely  large  or  numerous,  which  they  very
seldom  are,  a  cure  would  necessarily  take  place  after  they  are
softened  and  evacuated.  The  second  indication  should  be,  to
promote  the  softening  and  evacuation  or  absorption  of  the  exist-
ing crop  of  tubercles.  Although  the  first  of  these  indications,
like  the  facts  on  which  it  rests,  is  new,  nevertheless,  all  the  means
which  have  been  thought  best  calculated  to  fulfil  it,  have  been
put  in  practice  from  time  immemorial ;  it  having  always  been
the  common  endeavour  of  physicians,  to  prevent  the  develope-
ment  of  phthisis  in  subjects  threatened  with  it,  either  from  con-
stitutional predisposition,  or  from  the  actual  presence  of  unplea-
sant symptoms.  I  have  formerly  proved  that,  in  the  latter
class  of  cases,  the  mischief  is  already  done,  inasmuch  as  the
first  symptoms  general  and  local,  and  even  the  physical  signs,
do  not  show  themselves  very  often  until  long  after  the  formation
of  tubercles.  Nevertheless,  I  shall  here  notice  the  means  which
have  been,  in  their  turns,  cried  up  as  calculated  to  prevent  the
dcvelopetncnt  of  tubercles.  Of  these  bleeding  and  derivatives
are  the  chief. Stoll  recommends  small  bleedings  frequently  re-

•  See  Ploucquel's  Litteratura  Med.  Higesta.  verb,  rimusis.— Author.
f  Ploucquet.  Op.  Cit.


TREATMENT.


331


peatcd,  and  gradually  diminished  in  extent, — a  precept  rendered
the  more  necessary  by  the  progressive  diminution  of  the  patient's
strength.  The  greater  number  of  physicians  who  have  employed
this  remedy,  have  not  considered  it  as  a  means  of  curing  or  even
preventing  phthisis,  but  only  as  calculated  to  allay  the  inflam-
matory affections  with  which  this  is  sometimes  complicated.  M.
Broussais,  however,  has  maintained  the  former  proposition.  "  In
putting  a  stop  (he  says)  to  these  three  kinds  of  inflammation
( catarrh,  mild  pneumonia,  and  pleurisy )  by  very  active  treat-
ment at  their  onset,  I  rendered  the  occurrence  of  phthisis  very
rare,  whatever  be  the  constitutional  predisposition  of  the  patient."
(Doct.  Med.  p.  686.)  The  reader  will  be  able  to  judge  of  the
truth  and  probability  of  this  statement,  from  the  contents  of  the
preceding  sections.  I  shall  content  myself  with  asserting  briefly,
in  this  place,  that  bleeding  can  neither  prevent  the  formation  of
tubercles  nor  cure  them  when  formed.  It  ought  never  to  be
employed  in  the  treatment  of  consumption  except  to  remove  in-
flammation or  active  determinations  of  blood,  with  which  the
disease  may  be  complicated ;  beyond  this,  its  operation  can  only
tend  to  an  useless  loss  of  strength.*  I  am  even  of  opinion  that  the
same  reasoning  is  applicable  to  the  catamenial  discharge.  I  have
already  said  that  the  suppression  of  this  is,  in  most  cases,  the
effect  and  not  the  cause  of  the  formation  of  tubercles ;  and  as  long
as  these  continue  to  form  and  to  increase  in  size,  with  the  atten-
dant general  symptoms,  it  is  at  least  useless  to  attempt  to  restore
the  process.  At  the  same  time,  should  there  arise,  in  such  cases,
a  sufficient  indication  for  taking  away  blood,  I  am  of  opinion  that
it  may  be  more  beneficially  obtained  by  the  application  of  leeches
to  the  inner  part  of  the  thighs,  than  in  any  other  manner.

The  actual  cautery  and  issues  would  seem  to  present  the  most
rational  means  for  preventing  the  formation  of  tubercles,  as  well
primarily  as  a  secondary  eruption  of  them.  This  method  is  very
ancient.  Hippocrates  directed  four  eschars  with  a  red  hot  iron  be-
low the  axilla,  on  the  breast  or  back.  Celsus  recommends  six —
one  beneath  the  chin,  one  on  the  throat,  one  under  each  nipple,
and  one  at  the  lower  angle  of  each  scapula.  I  have  used  ex-
tensively these  cauteries,  both  actual  and  potential,  in  the  treat-
ment of  phthisis,  and  I  must  confess  that  I  have  never  ob-

*  Bloodletting  has  been  a  favourite  remedy  with  many  physicians  of  great  emi-
nence. In  this  country,  its  advantages  have  been  strongly  advocated  by  Dover,
Pringle,  Fofhergill,  Stark,  Watt,  and  others.  The  first  and  last  mentioned  authors
carried  the  practice  to  a  very  great  extent ;  and  the  latter  advocated  its  utility  on
a  most  singular  principle,  viz.  that  of  producing  a  febrile  re-action,  with  the  view  of
"  restoring  the  blood,"  and  thereby  curing  the  disease.  See  "  Cases  of  Diabetes,"
&c.  by  R.  Watt,  1808,  p.  277.  I  have  seen  bloodletting  much  employed,  and  have
myself  used  it  much,  in  this  disease.  I  have  seen  great  benefit  derived  from  it,  but
chiefly  in  relieving  the  inflammatory  complications  of  phthisis.  With  our  present
knowledge  of  its  pathology,  it  can  hardly  bo  expected  to  benefit  the  tuberculous
affection,  and  my  experience  leads  me  to  condemn  its  use  in  every  case  of  pure  phthisis.
•—Transl.


,332


l'UTHISIS  PULM0XAL1S.


tained  a  cure  in  any  case  where  they  were  employed.  I  have
commonly  applied  them  beneath  the  clavicle,  or  in  the  supra-
spinal fossa ;  and  in  some  patients  I  have  repeated  the  applica-
tion of  the  searing  iron  as  many  as  twelve  or  fifteen  times.
It  is,  however,  only  a  very  small  number  of  patients  that  will
submit  to  a  mode  of  treatment  so  horribly  painful.  Small  moxas,
of  only  a  line  in  diameter,  applied  two  or  three  at  a  time,  and
repeatedly,  have  appeared  to  me  more  useful  than  the  searing
iron  ;  as  under  their  employment  I  have  sometimes  seen  a  very
striking  suspension  of  all  the  symptoms.  At  all  events,  I  have
now  almost  entirely  renounced  the  use  of  the  actual  cautery.
Measures  so  painful  ought  not  to  be  had  recourse  to,  unless  they
are  found  by  experience  to  hold  out  a  reasonable  hope  of  success.
For  this  reason,  I  noAv  restrict  myself  to  the  application  of  the
caustic  potass,  in  the  places  above  mentioned,  so  as  to  form
eschars  of  eight  or  ten  lines  in  diameter ;  and  I  do  not  even
insist  upon  this,  if  the  patient  is  very  averse  to  it.  In  regard  to
blisters  and  permanent  issues,  so  common  in  practice,  I  think  it
will  be  admitted  by  all  practitioners  that  little  benefit  is  produced
by  them  after  phthisis  is  fully  formed,  while  they  are  frequently
very  inconvenient  from  the  local  irritation  which  they  occasion.
They  ought  never  to  be  applied  to  the  chest  itself ;  for,  although
in  this  situation,  they  sometimes  produce  temporary  relief  when
there  are  acute  local  pains,  they  too  frequently  give  rise  to  a  de-
termination of  blood  to  the  thoracic  organs,  and  more  particularly
occasion  pleurisy.  When  from  custom  or  the  wish  of  the  patient,
I  prescribe  a  blister,  I  usually  direct  it  to  be  applied  to  the  inner
part  of  the  thigh ;  partly  because  this  affords  a  broader  surface
than  the  arm,  and  because,  in  women,  the  indication  of  restoring
the  catamenia  gives  it  an  additional  propriety.  Some  prac-
titioners have  of  late  years  attempted  to  apply  the  cautery  to  the
verge  of  the  anus,  and  to  produce  an  artificial  fistula  by  means  of
a  seton.  But  I  have  neither  seen  nor  heard  any  thing  which
tends  to  render  this  kind  of  derivation  more  useful  than  the  others.
The  cases  in  which  the  excitement  of  discharges  from  the  skin  is
most  indicated,  are,  no  doubt,  those  in  which  the  suppression  of
an  habitual  discharge,  or  the  repulsion  of  a  cutaneous  eruption,
has  appeared  to  be  the  occasional  cause  of  the  disease.*

Means  for  promoting  the  softening  of  the  tubercles. — The
means  which  seem  best  adapted  to  fulfil  this  indication,  have
been  often  employed  with  other  views,  according  to  the  prevailing
theory,  and  particularly  with  the  intention  of  healing  the  internal

•  Issues  of  a  very  large  size  have  been  especially  recommended  in  this  country  by
Dr.  Mudge.  See  his  "  Radical  cure  for  a  cough."  Setons,  perpetual  blisters,  and
other  external  irritants  have  been  equally  recommended,  used,  abandoned,  and  again
recommended.  More  lately,  the  tartar  emetic  has  been  again  strongly  recommended
by  Dr.  Jenner.  See  his  "  Letter  to  Dr.  Parry,''  Lond.  1822.  1  have  tried  them
all,  and  I  am  sorry  to  say,  without  any  benefit. — Traml.


TREATMENT.


333


ulcers  and  promoting  the  expectoration.  Of  this  kind  is  the
deobstruent  or  attenuant  alkaline  treatment  formerly  mentioned,
by  means  of  lime-water,  the  natural  and  artificial  sulphureous
waters,  internally  or  externally,  sal  amoniac,  the  subcarbonates
of  ammonia  and  soda,  nitrate  of  potass,  hydro-chlorate  of  soda,
&c.#  We  must  admit  that  these  means  sometimes  promote  ex-
pectoration,  and  they  seem  calculated  to  hasten  the  softening  of
the  tuberculous  matter.  However,  judging  from  their  slowness
at  least,  and  frequent  inefficacy  against  tubercles  in  the  glands,  we
ought  hardly  to  expect  much  from  them  in  the  case  of  pulmonary
tubercles.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  hydro-chlorate  of
lime,  the  preparations  of  mercury,  the  hydro-chlorate  of  barytes,
and  even  the  preparations  of  antimony,  which  are  in  fact  only
useful  in  promoting  expectoration,  or  in  opposing  an  intercurrent
pneumonia.  It  is  with  the  view  of  cicatrizing  the  internal
ulcers  that  different  practitioners  have  recommended  plants  of
an  antiscorbutic  and  aromatic  kind,  purgatives,  balsamics,  par-
ticularly the  balsams  of  Tolu,  Peru,  and  Mecca,  turpentine,
camphor,  sulphur  dissolved  in  volatile  oils,  &c.  The  same  end
has  been  sought  to  be  attained  by  mixing  with  the  air  breathed
by  the  patient,  certain  gases,  so  as  to  produce  an  artificial  atmo-
sphere. The  limited  extent  to  which  such  practices  have  been  car-
ried, sufficiently  proves  the  little  confidence  to  be  reposed  in  them.
On  this  principle,  have  been  cried  up,  in  their  turn,  the  vapours
from  decoctions  of  plants  of  an  emollient,  aromatic,  narcotic,  or
balsamic  kind  ;  the  fumes  of  different  kinds  of  resin  burned  on
a  hot  iron  or  a  brazier,  particularly  those  of  myrrh,  benzoin,

*  For  some  remarks  on  the  alkaline  or  deobstruent  treatment  of  diseases,  see  page
227.  In  the  work  of  Dr.  Farnese  there  referred  to,  (p.  110,)  the  author  speaks
highly  of  the  powers  of  carbonate  of  potass  (from  a  drachm  to  an  ounce,  in  half  a  pint
ot  water  daily,)  in  phthisis,  and  adduces  his  own  case  as  an  instance  of  a  complete
cure  effected  by  it.  It  is  somewhat  singular  that  among  the  alleged  deobstruents  or
sorbefacients,  our  author  takes  no  notice  of  one  of  the  most  potent  of  these,  Iodine.
From  its  remarkable  powers  in  removing  bronchocele,  and  in  reducing  the  size  of
diseased  lymphatic  glands  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  the  employment  of  Iodine  in
pulmonary  tubercles,  was  at  once  prompted  and  justified  by  the  fairest  analogy.  As
far  as  I  know,  Dr.  liaron  was  the  first  to  make  trial  of  it  in  this  case  (see  "  Illustra-
tions of  the  enquiry  respecting  tuberculous  diseases,"  p.  225)  ;  and  the  only  accounts
1  have  met  with  of  its  effects  in  phthisis,  are  those  given  in  his  work,  and  in  a  small
pamphlet  by  Dr.  Gardiner,  "On  the  effects  of  Iodine,"  published  in  1824.  Both
these  accounts,  however,  are  extremely  meagre,  and  afford  no  ground  for  expecting
benefit  from  this  remedy,  beyond  what  were  already  supplied  by  analogy.  It  is,  how-
ever, certainly  deserving  of  further  trial ;  more  especially  since  the  case  may  be
fairly  considered  as  hopeless,  and  since  the  researches  of  several  physicians,  as  well
in  this  country  as  on  the  continent,  have  proved  this  new  remedy  to  "be  efficacious  in
many  other  diseases  besides  bronchocele.  See  particularly,  professor  lirera's  Saggjbo
chmco  mil  Iodw,  I'adua,  1822,  Dr.  Manson's  Medical  Researches  on  Iodine,  Lond.
182.J,  and  above  all  Lugol's  recent  work  on  Scrofula,  translated  by  Dr.  O'Shaugh-
nessey.  1  have  myself  used  iodine  very  extensively  in  bronchocele  (which  is  en-
demic  in  many  parts  of  Sussex),  and  with  almost  uniform  success.  I  must  say,
however,  that  my  experience  as  to  its  occasionally  injurious  effects  on  the  system,  is
more  in  accordance  with  that  of  Breru  than  of  Dr.  Mauson.—  'Fraud.


331


PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.


petroleum,  tar,*  and  resin  intermixed  with  wax,  &c. ;  the  air  of
cow-houses ;  the  vapours  produced  by  the  sublimation  of  zinc,
lead,  sulphur,  &c.  Under  the  same  head  we  may  reckon  the
inspiration  of  the  different  gases,  by  means  of  an  appropriate
apparatus,  viz.  oxygen,  hydrogen,  sulphurated  hydrogen,  car-
bonic acid ;  and  also  air  charged  with  mephitic  vapours,  such  as
that  of  stagnant  water,  the  snuff*  of  candles,  &c.  -f

It  is  more  than  probable  that  a  great  number  of  the  cases  in
which  these  various  means  have  seemed  successful,  were  mere
chronic  catarrhs ;  and  it  is  possible  that,  from  a  peculiar  idio-
syncracy  in  particular  persons,  even  the  most  absurd  of  these  may
have  been  beneficial,  at  least  as  palliatives,  in  changing  for  a  time
the  existing  character  of  the  sensibility  of  the  lungs,  and
relieving  some  distressing  symptoms.  I  have  frequently
known  the  inspiration  of  stimulant  vapours  put  an  end  to  the
pains  of  the  chest  or  dyspnoea,  after  narcotic  and  emollient  va-
pours had  been  employed  without  success.

Empirical  means.  A  great  many  of  the  remedies  already
mentioned  might  very  properly  be  ranged  under  this  head,  al-

*  For  a  full  account  of  the  mode  of  using,  and  the  alleged  utility  of  tar  vapour,  I
refer  the  reader  to  Sir  A.  C  rich  ton's  "Practical  observations  on  Consumption,"
Lond.  1823.  (See  also  the  note,  p.  74.)  1  have  made  some  trial  of  this  remedy,
without  benefit  certainly,  in  every  case,  and  occasionally  with  temporary  increase  of
cough  and  irritation. — Transl.

t  The  inhalation  of  Chlorine,  noticed  in  a  former  note  (p.  74)  first  introduced  by
M.  Gannal,  has  been  much  used  of  late  years  in  the  different  stages  of  phthisis,  but
with  effects  extremely  problematical.  The  facts  adduced  by  M.  Gannal  are  any-
thing but  conclusive  :  most  of  his  patients  had  only  chronic  catarrhs,  and  where
phthisis  evidently  existed,  no  cure  ensued.  (Revue  Med.  Fev.,  Aout,  1828.)  Those
adduced  by  M.  Bayle  in  the  same  Journal  (Nov.  1829)  prove  nothing  more  :  out  of
twelve  patients  only  one  was  cured,  and  there  existed  no  certain  proof  that  this  was
a  case  of  true  phthisis.  I  say  nothing  of  certain  other  cases  of  cured  phthisis  pub-
lished in  some  half-medical  journals,  as  they  are  so  larded  with  the  varnish  of
quackery  that  it  is  impossible  to  put  any  faith  in  them.  On  the  other  hand,  scru-
pulous and  impartial  observers,  among  whom  I  would  name  my  brother,  Dr.  Am-
broise  Laennec  of  Nantes,  Dr.  Toulmouche  of  Rennes  and  Drs.  Flandin  and  Miguel
of  Paris,  have  administered  the  chlorine  gas  to  a  considerable  number  of  phthisical
subjects,  not  only  without  success,  but  sometimes  with  positive  disadvantage.  I
have  myself  frequently  employed  it,  without  ill  effects  certainly,  but  without  any
benefit  whatever.  All  my  patients,  it  is  true,  were  pectoriloquous,  and  in  this  stage  of
the  disease  M.  Gannal  says  the  remedy  is  not  effective:  but  surely  if  it  were  capable
of  discussing  crude  tubercles,  it  would  be  no  less  able  to  produce  cicatrization  of
tuberculous  excavations. — (M.  L.)

I  do  not  think  the  concluding  inference  of  my  brother  annotator  quite  legitimate,
as  it  is  very  conceivable  that  tubercles  may  be  absorbed  from  a  tissue  otherwise  com-
paratively sound,  and  yet  that  an  ulcer  which  succeeds  to  them  may  not  be  healed  by
the  same  means.  I,  however,  entirely  subscribe  to  the  judgment  he  has  passed  upon
the  inhalation  of  chlorine,  as  far  as  wo  are  borno  out  by  experience  of  its  practical
effects :  and  it  is  paiuful  to  be  obliged  to  add,  that  almost  the  only  accounts  wo  have  of
the  effects  of  the  inhalation  of  chlorine,  simply  or  in  combination  with  other  matters,
published  by  English  physicians,  are  so  cased  in  what  Dr.  M.  Laennec  calls  "  the
varnish  of  quackery,"  that  they  are  alike  unworthy  of  the  notice  of  the  philosophical
pathologist  and  the  honost  practitioner.— Traml.


TREATMENT.


335


though  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  elass  them  according  to  the
indications  they  are  supposed  capable  of  fulfilling.  I  shall  con-
tent myself  with  merely  enumerating  several  others,  the  in  efficacy
of  which  has  been  sufficiently  demonstrated.  Of  this  kind  are —
mercurial  salivation  ;  emetics  frequently  repeated,  or  continued
lor  a  long  period  in  doses  sufficient  to  excite  nausea  merely  ;
acorns,  roasted  or  raw  ;  charcoal ;  different  kinds  of  mushrooms,
and  among  others,  the  boletus  suaveolens  and  the  agaricus  pipe-
raius  and  deliciosus ;  red  cabbage;  crabs,  oysters,  and  other
shell-fish  ;  frogs ;  vipers ;  chocolate  ;  the  conserve  and  sugar  of
roses  in  large  doses ;  wine  and  spirits ;  sudorifics ;  electricity ;
millepedes ;  opium  ;  cicuta ;  wolfsbane  :  cinchona ;  the  seeds  of
the  phellandrium  aquaticum  ;  the  preparations  of  lead  ;  hydro-
cyanic acid  ;*  the  swing,  formerly  recommended  by  Themison
(apud  Casl  :  Aurel.)  and  revived  by  the  moderns,  &c.  &c.

Of  all  the  measures  hitherto  recommended  for  the  cure  of
phthisis,  none  has  been  followed  more  frequently  by  the  suspen-
sion or  complete  cessation  of  the  disease,  than  change  of  situation. f

*  Hydrocyanic  acid,  as  existing  in  laurel  water,  appears  to  have  been  employed  as
a  remedy  for  coughs  and  consumption  before  the  middle  of  last  century.  After  tbe
discovery  of  the  acid  in  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  it  was  employed  by  the
Italian  physicians,  particularly  Brera,  as  a  sedative,  in  diseases  of  excitement,  and
also  in  cougbs  and  tubercular  phthisis.  About  ten  years  since,  it  was  introduced
more  particularly  to  the  notice  of  the  profession,  by  M.Magendie,  in  France,  and  Dr.
Granville  in  England,  and  was  at  tbe  time,  and  has  been  since,  very  extensively  used
in  phthisis.  I  have  myself  used  it ;  and  regret  to  think,  that  the  results  not  merely  of
my  own  experience,  but  those  even  of  its  best  advocates,  wben  critically  examined,
lead  to  the  conclusion,  which  might  have  been  anticipated,  that  it  is  utterly  powerless
in  curing  tuberculous  consumption.  As  a  sedative,  it  is  certainly  occasionally  useful
in  quieting  the  cough.  See  Dr.  Granville's  "  Historical  and  Practical  Treatise  on
Hydrocyanic  acid." Second  Ed.  London.  1820. — TransL

t  During  a  residence  of  five  years  at  Penzance  in  Cornwall,  a  place  much  fre-
quented by  consumptive  patients  on  account  of  the  extreme  mildness  and  equability
of  its  temperature,  1  had  extensive  opportunities  of  observing  the  effect  of  change  of
climate  in  phthisis  ;  and  I  am  sorry  to  say  that,  in  the  greater  number  of  cases,  the
change  was  not  beneficial.  This  result,  however,  must  not,  in  fairness,  be  consi-
dered as  derogating,  in  any  considerable  degree,  either  from  the  propriety  of  the
practice  or  the  fitness  of  the  situation ;  since  it  must  be  confessed,  that  very  few  of
the  invalids  came  to  Penzance  in  that  period  of  tbe  disease  when  a  cure  could  be  ex-
pected, if,  indeed,  it  were  even  possible.  In  no  case  of  well  marked  tubercular
phthisis,  did  I  witness  a  cure,  or  even  a  temporary  alleviation,  that  could  fairly  be
attributed  to  change  of  climate.  In  a  good  many  cases,  however,  of  chronic  bron-
chitis, simulating  phthisis,  tbe  health  was  greatly  improved,  and  in  some  it  was
completely  restored,  from  a  state  of  great  debility  and  seeming  danger.  In  a  few
cases,  also,  of  young  persons  who  accompanied  their  diseased  relatives,  and  in  whom
the  hereditary  predisposition  was  strongly  marked,  if  there  was  not  already  evidence
of  nascent  tubercles, — a  great  and  striking  improvement  in  the  general  health  and
strength,  followed  within  a  short  period  after  their  arrival,  and  seemed  fairly  attri-
butable to  the  combined  influence  of  change  of  air,  scene  and  habits.  In  point  of
mildness  and  equability  of  temperature,  Penzance  exceeds  every  other  situation  fre-
quented by  invalids  in  this  island,  and  comes  not  very  far  short,  in  this  respect,  of
some  places  in  the  south  of  France  and  north  of  Italy.  (See  my  "  Observations  on
the  climate  of  Penzance,"  Lond.  1820.)  Like  the  whole  south  of  England,  how-
ever, it  is  very  inferior  to  the  places  just  mentioned  in  point  of  dryness,  the  number
of  clays  on  which  rain  falls  being  very  great;  and  on  this  account,  the  benefit  to  be
expected  from  its  mildness  of  temperature,  is  often  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the


336


PHTHISIS  PULMONALJS.


It  is  even  probable  that  the  good  effects  of  mineral  waters  are
partly  owing  to  this  cause  ;  since  we  find  that  these  are  by  them-
selves of  only  very  dubious  efficacy,  while  many  consumptive

frequent  inability  of  the  invalid  to  take  exercise  in  the  open  air.  It  is  proper  to
mention  that,  as  at  Marseilles,  Nice,  Rome,  and  other  favourite  spots  on  the  continent,
consumption  is  as  frequent  at  Penzance  as  elsewhere.

For  the  succeeding  portion  of  this  note  I  am  indebted  to  my  friend  Dr.  Clark,  late  of
Rome,  but  now  resident  in  London ;  whose  opportunities  of  witnessing  the  influence
of  climate  in  consumption,  have  been,  perhaps,  unequalled,  and  whose  accuracy  of
observation  and  soundness  of  judgment  are,  at  least,  equal  to  his  opportunities.  1  am
happy  to  say  that  Dr.  Clark  is  at  this  time,  preparing  for  publication  a  work  on  the
effect  of  climate  on  consumption  and  other  diseases,  which,  1  doubt  not,  will  throw
great  light  on  the  subject  now  under  consideration.

"  I  consider  consumption,  with  your  distinguished  author,  as  a  disease  very  gene-
rally consequent  to  a  deranged  or  cachectic  state  of  the  general  system,  originating
in  a  series  of  functional  disorders,  and  often  favoured  by  an  hereditary  predisposition
to  tubercles.  When  adopted  for  the  removal  of  this  state  of  the  system,  and  previ-
ously to  the  actual  development  of  tubercles  in  the  lungs,  I  look  upon  change  to  a
milder  climate  as  a  measure  of  the  utmost  importance,  and  likely,  when  well-timed  and
combined  with  such  other  treatment  as  the  case  may  require,  to  go  a  great  wav  to  the
attainment  of  this  most  desirable  object.  If  the  mischief  has  advancW  a  little  further,
and  there  are  good  reasons  for  believing  that  tubercles  are  already  formed  in  the  lungs,
more  especially  if  a  disposition  to  inflammation  of  these  organs  or  to  hjemoptysis  has
manifested  itself ;  then,  change  of  climate  becomes  a  more  doubtful  measure;  and,
unless  adopted  with  judgment  and  with  some  precaution,  may  accelerate  rather  than
retard  the  progress  of  the  disease.  In  cases  of  this  kind,  it  will  be  necessary,  pre-
viously to  undertaking  the  journey,  to  remove,  or  at  least  to  moderate,  the  more
evident  and  important  of  the  functional  derangements,  to  subdue  excitement,  and
diminish  phethora.  Much  evil  has  arisen  from  inattention  to  these  precautions.
Medical  men  in  general  seem  hardly  sufficiently  aware  of  the  great  excitement  pro-
duced in  the  system  by  travelling,  and  of  the  necessity,  therefore,  of  removing  those
morbid  complications  most  likely  to  suffer  aggravation  from  this.  If  the  disease  has
made  still  greater  progress,  and  the  cough,  expectoration,  emaciation,  hectic  fever,
uvd  the  results  of' auscidtation,  leave  no  doubt  of  the  advanced  stage  of  the  tubercles,
the  mischief  to  be  apprehended  from  the  exposure,  the  fatigue,  the  irritation  and  ex-
citement of  a  long  journey,  is  greatly  increased  ;  and  under  such  circumstances,  gene-
rally speaking,  no  advantage  is  to  be  expected  from  the  change,  and  very  often  the
fatal  termination  will  be  accelerated  by  it.  But  should  the  symptoms  just  enumerated,
from  whatever  cause,  have  become  much  mitigated,  and  more  especially  if  there  is
reason  to  believe,  from  a  careful  examination  of  the  chest,  that  the  disease  is  conlined
to  a  small  portion  of  the  lungs  ;  then,  a  residence  in  a  milder  climate  affords  the  best
opportunity  of  aiding  the  efforts  of  nature  in  the  work  of  reparation  ;  and,  by  con-
tributing to  the  re-establishment  of  the  general  health,  will  tend  to  prevent  the  fur-
ther formation  of  tubercles.

'•  A  change  of  climate  having  been  decided  on ;  the  particular  situation  to  be  selected
becomes  a  question.  Professor  Laennec's  decided  preference  of  a  maritime  residence
is  not,  perhaps,  founded  on  a  very  extensive  experience ;  certain  it  is,  however,  that,
as  well  in  this  country  as  on  the  continent,  the  places  usually  resorted  to  by  consump-
tive invalids,  are  on  the  sea-coast,  or  at  no  great  distance  from  it.  On  the  continent,
the  places  chiefly  frequented,  and  which  1  have  had  an  opportunity  of  observing,  are
Ilycres  in  the  south  of  France,  Nice  in  Piedmont,  Pisa,  Rome,  and  Naples  in  Italy.
Each  of  these  places  may  have  some  advantages  when  compared  with  the  others,
and  when  considered  in  reference  to  each  individual  case.  The  constitution  of  the
patient,  the  co-existence  of  other  diseased  states  with  the  pulmonary  affection,  the
previous  abode  and  habits  of  the  patient,  Sec.  &c.  must  be  taken  into  account  in  fixing
the  decision.  In  almost  every  case,  when  the  removal  to  a  milder  climate  can  be
conveniently  effected  by  sea,  this  moans  is  much  preferable  to  a  journey  by  land  ;  in
some  cases,  the  good  effects  produced  by  a  voyage  arc  very  remarkable."

Gemec Street,  May '2nd.  \M7.  ,

Since  the  date  of  the  foregoing  note.  Dr.  Clark  has  given  to  the  world  his  invalu-
able work  on  the  Influence  of  Climate  in  Chronic  Diseases,  a  work  which  contains


i


TREATMENT.


337


persons  find  themselves  benefited  by  a  residence  in  their  vicinity,
although  unable  to  take  the  waters  either  internally  or  externally.
We  find,  however,  that  the  air  of  mountains  is  far  from  agreeing
with  all  consumptive  patients  ;  and  it  seems  probable  that  those
with  whom  it  agrees  have  only  a  small  number  of  tubercles  in  the
lungs  ;  since  it  would  appear  that  though  phthisis  is  infrequent
in  mountainous  countries,  when  it  occurs,  it  runs  a  very  rapid
course.  The  air  of  the  country  agrees  in  general  better  than
that  of  the  town  ;  and  the  air  of  warm  climates  better  than  thai
of  cold.  A  residence  by  the  seaside,  particularly  in  mild  and
temperate  climates,  is  unquestionably  the  situation  in  which  most
consumptive  patients  have  been  known  to  recover.  On  this  point
both  the  ancients  and  the  moderns  seem  agreed.  Aretaeus  re-
commends sailing,  and  the  air  of  the  seashore.  Celsus  advises  a
voyage  to  Egypt.  For  a  vast  number  of  years,  the  physicians
of  nearly  the  whole  of  Europe  have  sent  their  patients  to  Hyeres
and  Nice ;  and  in  addition  to  these,  the  English  recommend  the
coast  of  Devonshire  and  the  Canary  Islands.  I  formerly  men-
tioned the  infrequency  of  phthisis  on  the  coast  of  Bretagne.  In-
deed, I  am  convinced,  that  in  the  actual  state  of  our  knowledge,
we  have  no  better  means  to  oppose  to  this  disease,  than  a  sea
voyage  and  a  residence  on  the  seacoast,  in  a  mild  climate  ;  and,
accordingly,  I  always  recommend  these  when  practicable.  Last
winter  I  made  an  attempt  in  a  small  ward  of  the  Clinical  Hos-
pital, to  establish  an  artificial  marine  atmosphere  by  means  of
fresh  sea-weed  (fucus  verrucosus ).  Twelve  consumptive  patients
were  subjected  to  this  treatment  for  four  months.  In  all  of  them
the  disease  remained  stationary ;  and  in  some,  the  emaciation  and
hectic  fever  were  sensibly  lessened.  Nine  of  them,  considering
themselves  cured,  left  the  hospital,  although  I  must  admit  that
only  one  of  these  afforded  any  real  hope  of  cure.  Our  supply  of
sea-weed  having  failed  towards  spring,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of
conveying  it,  the  disease,  from  this  time,  assumed  a  rapid  pro-
gress in  the  three  remaining  patients,  and  speedily  carried  them
to  the  grave.*

much  more  useful  practical  knowledge  respecting  the  treatment  of  phthisis.  More
recently  the  same  distinguished  physician  has  enriched  the  Cyclopedia  of  Practical
Medicine  with  a  complete  Treatise  on  Consumption  (vol.  iv.  Supplement),  which
leaves  at  a  great  distance,  as  to  accurate  and  comprehensive  pathological  views  and
the  true  principles  of  prevention  and  treatment,  every  work  hitherto  published  on  the
subject.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  Dr.  Clark  will  soon  publish  this  treatise  in  a  sepa-
rate form. — Trunsl.

9  I  cannot  pass,  without  remark,  the  imbecility  of  this  statement,  and  the  over-
weening and  unjustifiable  confidence  in  the  principle  on  which  the  practice  was
founded.  If  "  a  marine  atmosphere"  alone  sufficed  for  the  cure  of  phthisis,  happy
would  it  be  for  us  and  all  other  islanders,  who  could  so  easily  enjoy  the  benefit  of  its
influence,  in  all  its  natural  perfection,  and  without  the  aid  of  stinking  sea-weed  !  But
not  only  are  the  inhabitants  of  coasts  and  islands  as  much  subject  to  phthisis  as  those
of  inland  countries,  but  even  tliose  who  might  seem  placed  in  the  most  favourable  of

Z


338


1'IITIIISIS  PULMONAI.1S.


Palliative  treatment  of  symptoms. — If  wc  are  destitute  of  every
direct  and  effectual  means  of  resisting  this  disease,  we  are,  at
least,  able,  in  many  cases,  to  alleviate  its  troublesome  symptoms,
such  as  the  cough,  dyspnoea,  night-sweats,  and  diarrhoea.  For
quieting  the  cough,  emollient  drinks,  and  alimentary  matters  of
a  mucilaginous  nature,  have  been  always  in  use, — such  as  milk,
(woman's,  ass's,  cow's,  goat's,  mare's,)  sal oop,  sago,  gum,  Iceland
moss,  potato-starch,  arrow-root,  barley,  rice,  sugar,  and  the  infu-
sions of  inert  mucilaginous  plants,  properly  sweetened.  When
the  cough  is  dry,  and  the  expectoration  difficult,  also  when  there
is  a  want  of  sleep,  opium  in  small  doses,  or  any  other  narcotic-
extract,  is  added  with  advantage.  The  hydrocyanic  acid  also
sometimes  succeeds  very  well  in  relieving  the  cough  and  even  the
dyspnoea;  but  its  effects  are  less  certain  than  those  of  opium.
Antimonials,  although  at  different  times  much  cried  up,  have
never  appeared  to  me  of  great  efficacy,  even  in  aiding  expectora-
tion, The  diarrhoea  must  be  also  treated  by  mucilaginous  drinks,
and  the  milder  preparations  of  opium.  However,  when  it  de-
pends on  the  presence  of  tuberculous  ulcers  in  the  intestines,  as  it
almost  always  does,  we  can  only  hope  at  best  to  suspend  its  vio-
lence ;  and  we  cannot  always  even  effect  this.  The  acetate  of
lead  appears  sometimes  to  moderate  this  symptom  ;  but  it  is
much  more  efficacious  in  lessening  the  perspirations  :  indeed  it  is
almost  the  only  means  we  can  oppose  to  these.  Dyspnoea  must
be  combated  by  the  preparations  of  opium  and  other  narcotic
plants.  The  hydrocyanic  acid  and  musk  are  also  sometimes
beneficial  in  this  respect.  I  speak  not  here  of  pulmonary  con-
gestions, whether  terminating  in  inflammation,  haemorrhage,  or
serous  effusion.  I  shall  merely  remark,  that,  in  these  cases,  we
must  not  take  away  more  blood  than  is  absolutely  necessary  to
relieve  the  symptoms,  since  bleedings,  either  too  copious  or  too
frequent,  have  an  evident  effect  in  accelerating  the  progress  of
the  disease.

From  all  that  goes  before,  I  think  we  must  come  to  the  con-
clusion recorded  in  the  beginning  of  this  section,  that  although
the  cure  of  tuberculous  phthisis  be  possible  for  nature,  it  is  not
so  for  medicine.  Even  the  most  rational  of  our  indications,  that
of  derivation,  obtains  no  support  from  experience.  Nor  is  this  the
mode  followed  by  nature  in  her  cures,  as  we  very  seldom  find  any
evacuation  coinciding  with  the  convalescence:  the  return  of  the
catamenia,  or  haemorrhoids,  is  rather  the  effect  than  the  cause  of
the  cure. In  order  to  make  a  direct  attack  upon  the  disease,  we

all  circumstances  for  escaping  this  malady, — I  mean,  the  natives  of  small  islands  in
mild  and  warm  climatei;  for  instance,  Malta,  Madeira,  and  the  other  Atlantic  islands.
See  Dr.  Sutton's  papers  in  the  Lond.  Med.  and  Phys.  Journ.  for  March  and  August,
1815,  and  June  1817  ;  Dr.  GouiIav's  "  Observations  on  Madeira,''  Lond.  1B1 1 ;  Dr.
Clark's  Influence  of  Climate,  &c  —  Traml.


Tit  E  ATM E ST.


339


ou"-ht  probably  to  be  ablo  to  correct  an  unknown  alteration  in
the  assimilation  or  nutrition,  that  is,  an  alteration  in  the  state  of
the  fluids  of  the  body.*

*  The  result  of  all  our  knowledge  of  the  pathology  of  phthisis,  and  of  all  our  expe-
rience in  the  treatment  of  it,  leading  to  the  conclusion,  that  it  is  incurable  by  art,  after
tubercles  are  once  developed, — the  only  part  of  the  subject  that  is  really  of  any  prac-
tical importance  is,  the  plan  to  be  adopted  in  individuals  predisposed  to  the  disease,
with  the  view  of  obviating  the  formation  of  these  extraneous  bodies  :  and  this  is  a
part  of  the  subject  which  our  author  has  left  untouched.  Whatever  be  the  proximate
cause  of  tubercles,  or  whatever  may  be  the  precise  condition  of  the  whole  system,  or
of  the  lungs,  which,  as  applied  to  phthisis,  we  comprehend  under  the  term  predispo-
sition, there  seems  every  reason  for  concluding,  not  only  from  analogy,  but  experience,
that  it  is  a  morbid  condition,  which  is,  in  many  cases,  susceptible  of  being  induced,
aggravated,  or  removed.  This  conclusion  seems  borne  out  by  the  familiar  facts — of
all  the  children  of  a  consumptive  family  dying  of  the  disease,  except  perhaps  one  or
two,  while,  in  families  not  at  all  predisposed  to  phthisis,  one  child  out  of  many
shall  be  alone  affected ;  and  the  conclusion  is  at  once  strengthened  and  rendered  of
infinitely  more  importance  by  this  additional  fact,  also  not  very  uncommon,  of  the
children  so  dying,  or  so  escaping,  having  been  subjected  to  a  peculiar  mode  of  treat-
ment. Many  facts  observed  in  veterinary  medicine,  add  irresistible  evidence  to  the
truth  of  this  conclusion.  "  It  is  certain,  from  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Jenner,  that  we
can,  by  unsuitable  food,  soon  call  up  a  tuberculous  disease  in  rabbits  ;  and  it  is  equally
well  known,  that  a  wet  season  and  bad  pasture  wall  bring  into  existence  the  same  dis-
ease, to  a  much  greater  extent,  in  sheep  and  other  animals.  It  is,  besides,  ascer-
tained, that  the  disease  in  both  cases  may  be  got  rid  of  (provided  it  be  not  permitted
to  advance  too  far)  by  a  more  wholesome  diet,  and  judicious  removal  from  the  influ-
ence of  the  other  predisposing  causes.'' — Dr.  Baron's  "  Illustration  of  the  Enquiry,"
&c.  p.  212.  Although  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  Dr.  B.  has,  in  this  extract,  mis-
taken vesicular  worms,  or  hydatids,  for  tubercles  ;  still  the  fact,  though  possessing
the  force  of  analogy  only,  is  one  of  high  value  in  the  present  inquiry.  Indeed,  all  our
facts  and  reasoning  point  not  merely  to  the  necessity  of  watching  the  very  first
and  slightest  symptoms  of  incipient  consumption,  but  of  subjecting  every  child  which
seems  predisposed  to  it,  whether  from  hereditary  or  acquired  causes,  to  a  most  rigid
system  of  prophylactic  discipline.  For  some  most  valuable  observations  on  this  sub-
ject, I  refer  the  reader  to  Dr.  Baron's  work,  just  quoted,  and  regret  that  my  limits
will  only  permit  me  to  extract  a  single  sentence.  "  Since  it  appears  (says  Dr.  Baron)
that  whatever  enfeebles  the  frame,  or  deteriorates  the  constitution,  predisposes  to  the
diseases  in  question,  how  shall  we  avert  this  predisposition  1  The  answer  is  appa-
rent :  we  must  do  every  thing  in  our  power  to  invigorate  and  fortify  the  frame  ;
to  bring  all  its  functions  into  a  healthy  state ;  and  by  all  means  to  endeavour  to
keep  them  so."— Op.  Cit.  p.  215.  In  these  few  words,  we  have  unfolded  the  germ
of  a  system  of  prophylactic  treatment,  which  I  have  long  advocated,  and  of  the  incal-
culable importance  of  which  I  have  become  every  day  more  convinced,  not  merely  by
observation  of  its  value,  even  when  most  imperfectly  applied,  but  by  the  deep  con-
viction, founded  on  no  slight  experience,  that  every  measure  hitherto  proposed  for
the  removal  of  tubercles  in  the  lungs,  after  they  are  fully  developed,  is  utterly  value-
less. While  enforcing  a  system  of  invigoration  in  these  cases,  I  must  caution  the
young  practitioner  against  the  administration  of  stimulant  food  or  medicine,  when
there  exists  any  inflammatory  complication,  more  especially  of  the  stomach.  When
such  a  complication  exists,  I  need  hardly  observe,  that  what  are  usually  denominated
tonics,  will  act  as  the  most  powerful  debilitants,  and  that  for  the  preservation  or  re-
storation of  the  strength,  we  must  rely  on  abstinence  and  depletion.  See  p.  295.
Here  again  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  Dr.  Clark's  invaluable  treatise  for  the  develop-
ment of  the  principles  and  means  of  prophylaxis.


LITERATURE  OF  PHTHISIS  PULMONALIS.

1G47.  Garencieres  (Theoph.  de)  Angliae  Flagellum  seu  Tabes  Anglica.  Lond.  4to.
1656.  Bennet(Chr.)  Theatrum  Tabidorum  sive  Phthiseos  Xenodochium.  Lond.  8vo.
1666.  Harvey  (G.)  Morbus  Angiicus,  or  the  Anatomy  of  Consumption. Lond.  8vo

z  2


.'3*0


PHTHISIS  PULMONAI.IS.


1667.  Maynwaring  (Ev.) A  Treatise  of  Consumptions. Lond.  8vo.

1682.  Hawortb  (S.,  M.D.)  the  True  Method  of  Curing  Consumptions.  Lond.  12mo.

1684.  Archer  (John,  M.D.)  Secrets  Disclosed,  or  a  Treatise  of  Consump.  Lond.  8vo.

1685.  Byfield  (T.,  M.D.) Two  discourses ;  one  of  Consumptions. Lond.  4to.
1689.  Morton  (Rich.,  M.D.)  Phthisiologia. Lond.  8vo.

1697.  Nevett  (Th.,  M.  D.) A  treatise  of  consumptions. Lond.  8vo.

1700.  Needham  (Thom.)  Treat,  of  Consumption  and  Venereal  Diseases.  Lond.  8vo.

1722.  Marten  (John.) New  theory  of  consumption. Lond.  8vo.

1726.  Barry  (E.,  M.D.)  A  Treat,  on  a  Consumption  of  the  Lungs. Dub.  8vo.

1727.  Robinson  (Nich.,  M.D.)  A  new  method  of  treating  consumptions.  Lond.  8vo.
1727.  Leigh  (Car.)  Phthisiologia  Lancastrensis,curaccessitTentamen,&c.Ge«eu.  4to.
1733.  Dessault  (P.)  Dissertations  de  Medecine.  Sur  la  Phthisie,  &c.  Bord.  12mo.
1735.  Blackmore  (Sir  R.,  M.D.)  A  Treatise  of  Consumptions,  &c.  Lond.  8vo.
1752.  Raulin  (Jos.)  Obs.  de  Med.  et  sur  l'usage  du  lait  dans  la  Pulmonie.  Par.  12mo.
1754.  Packe  (Ch.,  M.B.)  Explanation  of  Boerhaave's  Aphorisms  on  C.  Lond.  8vo.
1760.  Stephens  (John,  M.D.)  A  practical  treatise  on  consumptions.  Lond.  8vo.
1764.  Hawkridge  (John)  On  Fevers,  Consumption,  &c. York.  8vo.

1769.  Healde  (Tho.)  Use  of  Oleum  Asphalti  in  Ulcers  of  the  Lungs,  &c.  Lond.  8- o.

1775.  Farr  (S.,  M.  D.)  Inquiry  into  the  propriety  of  bloodletting  in  C.  s.  Lond.  8vo.

1776.  Griffith  (Moses,  M.D.)  Pract.  Obs.  on  Hectic  Fevers  and  Consump.  Lond.

1777.  Castellani  (L.  F.)  Delia  insussistenza  del  contagio  tisico.  Mantova.  8vo.

1778.  Baumes  (J.  B.  T.)  Traite  de  la  Phth  isie  pulmonaire.  Montpel. — ( Par.  1805.)

1779.  Musgrave  (S.,  M.D.)  Gulstonian  Lectures  :  III.  On  the  Pulm.  C.  Lond.  8vo.

1780.  Simmons  (S.  F.,  M.D.)  Pract.  Obs.  on  the  Treat,  of  Consumptions.  Lond.  8vo.

1781.  Deslongeois  (Jeann.) De  la  pulmonie. Par.  12mo.

1782.  Reid  (Th.)  An  essay  on  the  nature  and  cure  of  the  Ph.  Pulm. Lond.  8vo.
1784.  Marx  (M.J.) Abhandl.  von  d.  Schwindlungensucht. Hann.  8vo.

1784.  Raulin  (Jos.)  Traite  de  la  Phthisie  Pulmonaire. Par.  8vo.

1787.  Ryan  (M.)  An  Inquiry  into  the  nature  &c.  of  Cons,  of  the  Lungs.  Dub.  8vo.

1787.  Smyth  (J.  C,  M.D.)  Of  the  Effects  of  Swinging  in  Pul.  Consump.  Lond.  8vo.

1787.  Salvadori  (Matt  )  Del  morbo  tisico. Trient.  8vo.  2  vols.

1788.  Charles  (Rich.)  An  Essay  on  the  Treatment  of  Consumption.  Lond.  8vo.

1789.  Cannella(B.)  Osservazioniintorno  le  cagioni,  &c,  della  tisichezza.  Venn.  4to.

1791.  Castellani  (L.)  Sulla  polmonare  tisichezza.  Mantua.

1792.  May  (W.,  M.D.)  Essay  on  Pulmonary  Consumptions.  Plymouth,  1792,  &c.
1792.  Mossman  (G.,  M.D.)  Essay  on  Scrofula  and  Gland.  Con.  ccc.  Bradford,  8vo.

1792.  White  ( W.,  M.  D.) Obs.  on  the  nature  and  cure  of  the  ph.  pulm. York.  8vo.

1793.  Rush  (B.,  M.  D.) Inquiry  into  the  causes  and  cure  of  C. Philad.  8vo.
1793.  Beddoes  (Th.,M.D.)  On  a  new  Method  of  treating  Consumption.  Bristol.  8vo.

1798.  Carrick  (A.,  M.D.)  Diss,  on  the  Bristol  Water,  with  practical  observations

on  the  prevention  and  treatment  of  consumption, Lond.  8vo.

1799.  Sutton  (Thom.)  Considerations  regarding  Pulmonary  C. Lond.  8vo.
1799.  Id.  Essay  on  the  Causes,  &c.  of  Pulmonary  Consumption. Lond.  8vo.
1801.  Id.  Obs.  on  the  Med.  and  Dom.  Management  of  the  Consumptive.  Lond.  8vo.

1801.  Pears  (Ch.)  Cases  of  Phthisis  Pulm.  cured  by  Tonics. Lond.  8vo.

1802.  Regnault  (J.  B.,  M.D.)  Obs.  on  Pulm.  C,  or  Essay  on  Lichen  Isl.  Lond.  8vo.

1803.  Poart(E.,  M.D.)  on  Cons,  of  the  Lungs,  with  a  new  mode, &c.  Lond.  8vo.

1804.  Bonnafox-Demalet  (Jul.)  Trait6  sur  la  Phthisic  Pulmonaire. Par.  8vo.

1805.  Busch  (J.  J.)  Untersuch.  uober  dicnatur  der  Lungenschwindsucht.  Duisb.  8vo.
1805.  Bourne  (Rob.,  M.D.)  Cases  of  Pulmonary  C.  treated  with  uva  ursi.  Oif.  8vo.

1805.  Lambe  (W.,  M.D.)  Inquiry  into  the  Origin,  &c.  of  Constitutional  Diseases,

particularly  Scrofula,  Consumption,  &c. Lond.  8vo.

1806.  Reid  (John,  M.D.)  A  Treatise  on  the  Origin.  &c.  of  Consump.  Lond.  8vo.
1808.  Sanders  (Jas.,  M.D.)  Treatise  on  Pulmonary  Consumption,  with  a  new  view

of  its  Treatment.  Edin.
1808.  Brieude  (M.)  Traite  de  la  Phthisie  Pulmonaire.  2  vols. Par.  8vo.
1808.  Wratt(Rob.,  M.D.).  Cases  of  Diabetes,  Consumption,  &c  Paisley.  8vo.

1808.  Woolcombe  (W.,  M.D.)  Remarks  on  the  Frequency  and  Fatality  of  different

Diseases,  the  increase  of  Consumption,  &c. Lond.  8vo.

1809.  Smyth  (John,  M.D.) Facts  and  Obs.  on  Pulm.  Consump. Utloreter.  8vo.
1809.  Storr  (L.)  Ueber  die  natur  und  heilung  der  Lungenscbwindsucbt.  Stuttg.  8vo.

1809. '  Portal  (Ant.)  Observ.  sur  la  Nature  et  leTraitementde  la  Phthisic  Paris.

1810.  Bayle  (G.  L.)  Recherches  sur  la  Phth  isie  Pulmonaire.  Par.  8vo.


1'IITII ISIS  PULMONALIS.


1810.  Uuxton  (J.,  M.D.)  An Essay  on  the  use  of  a  regulated  Temperature  in

Winter  Cough  and  Consumption. Lond.  8vo.
1812.  Walther  (J.  A.)  Ueber  das  wesen  der  phthysischen  constitution.  Frank.Qvo.

1812.  Turton  (\V.,  M.D.) Observations  on  consumption,  &c. Loud.  Qvo.

1813.  Duncan  (A.,  M.D.)  Obs.  on  three  different  species  of  Pulra.  Con.  Edin.  8vo.

1814.  Southey  (H.  H.,  M.D.)  Obs. on  Pulmonary  Consumption. Lond.  8vo.
1814.  Sutton  rrhos.,  M.D.)  Letters  to  the  Duke  of  Kent  on  Consump.  Lond.  Qvo.
1814.  Pears  (C.,  M.D.)  Obs.  on  the  nature  and  treat,  of  Consumption.  Lond.  Qvo.

1814.  Herholdt  (J.  D.) Ueber  die  lungenkrankheiten,  bes.  d.  Lungenschwind-

sucht. Numb.  Qvo.

18  15.  Young  (Thos.,  M.D.)  A  Pract.  and  Histor.  Treat,  on  Cons.  Dis.  Lond.  8vo.

1815.  Gallup  (I.  A.,  M.D.)  Sketches  of  Diseases,  with  Remarks  on  Pulmonary

Consumption. Boston.  8vo.
1815.  Lambe  (W.,  M.D.)  Rep.  of  the  Effects  of  a  peculiar  Regimen,  &c.  Lond.  8vo.

1817.  Tullidge  (H.  H.) Inquiry  into  the  nature  of  Pulm.  Consump. Lond.  Qvo.

1818.  Mansford  (J.  G.)  An  Inquiry  into  the  Influence  of  situation  on  C.  Lond.  Qvo.
1820.  Maygrier. Diet,  des  Sc.  M6d. (Art.  Phthisie  Pulm.)  t.  42.  Par.

1823.  Engelhard  (J.  F.) Die  Lungensucht  in  ihren  verschiedenen  formen  und

Zeitraumen. Auran.  Qvo.
1823.  Crichton  (Sir  A.,  M.D.)  Pract.  Obs.  on  the  varieties  of  Pulm.  C.  Lond.  Qvo.
1826.  Louis  (P.  C.  A.)  Recherches  Anat.-Pathologiques  sur  la  Phthisie.  Par.  8vo.

1826.  Andral. Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Phthisie.)  t.  16.  Par.

1827.  Hammersley  (And.,  M.D.)  A  Diss,  on  the  remote  and  proximate  causes  of

Phthisis  Pulmonalis.  2d.  ed. New  York.  12mo.
1830.  Gannall  (M.)  Two  memoirs  on  the  inhalation  of  Chlorine  in  Consumption.

Tr.  by  Potter. Lond.  8vo.
1830.  Murray  (J.)  Treatise  on  Pulmonary  Consumption. Lond.  Qvo.
1832.  Blackmore  (E.,  M.D.)  A  Pract.  Treat,  on  Pulm.  Consumpt. Lond.  Qvo.
1834.  Clark  (James,  M.  D.) Cycl.  of  Pract.  Med. Vol.  4.  Art.  Phthisis.
1834.  Ramadge  (F.,  M.D.)  Consumption  Curable,  &c.  Lond.  Qvo.

Transt.


CYSTS  IN  THE  LUNG'S.


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF  CYSTS  FORMED IN  THE  LUNGS.

By  the  term  cyst,  I  understand,  with  most  modern  anatomists,  an
accidental  membrane,  forming  a  sort  of  shut  sac,  commonly  of  a
roundish  shape,  but  sometimes  irregular  and  anfractuous,  and
containing  a  liquid  or  half  liquid  matter,  secreted  by  the  mem-
brane which  encloses  it. There  is,  indeed,  another  variety  of
cysts,  I  mean  those  which  contain  matters  of  a  more  solid  consist-
ence, and  of  a  kind  not  met  with  in  the  healthy  body,  such  as  the
matter  of  tubercles,  cancer,  &c. ;  but  I  do  not  intend  to  give  any
account  of  them  at  present. Cysts  of  the  first  kind  always  con-
sist of  a  substance  analogous  to  some  of  the  natural  tissues  of  the
body  :  most  commonly  they  resemble,  in  every  respect,  the  se-
rous membranes,  such  as  the  pleura  and  peritoneum,  as  was  re-
marked by  Bichat ;  sometimes,  however,  they  are  more  like  the
mucous  tunics  of  the  bladder  or  intestines. These  cysts  are  fre-
quently surrounded  by  a  layer  of  a  fibrous  or  condensed  cellular
substance,  (of  more  or  less  thickness,  and  commonly  incomplete,)
by  which  they  are  connected  with  the  neighbouring  parts.  Some-
times we  meet  with  cysts  composed  of  the  two  kinds  of  tissue  just
mentioned,  with  the  addition,  occasionally,  of  portions  of  carti-
lage and  even  laminae  of  bone,  of  a  greater  or  less  extent.  The
inner  surface  of  these  compound  cysts  has  scarcely  ever  the
smooth  and  polished  surface  of  the  serous  or  mucous  cysts,  being
uneven,  rough,  and  frequently  coated,  in  different  points,  by  an
albuminous  or  fibrous  and  half-concrete  substance,  constituting
one  body  with  the  sac,  and  passing  insensibly  into  it. Cysts  are,
of  all  the  kinds  of  accidental  productions,  that  which  is  most
rarely  met  with  in  the  human  lungs. Morgagni  gives  only  one
instance  of  the  sort.  (Epist.  lxix.  18.) They  are,  however,  by  no
means  rare  in  the  lungs  of  animals,  particularly  bullocks  and
sheep ;  and  they  are  usually  of  the  serous  kind,  the  sac  being
thin,  and  the  contained  liquor  thin  and  very  limpid. In  the  hu-
man subject,  on  the  other  hand,  I  have  only  met  with  the  com-
pound cysts  above  described,  and  this  only  three  or  four  times.
I  am  disposed  to  believe  that  these  had  formerly  contained  hy-
datids, (vesicular  worms,)  like  those  to  be  described  in  the  next
chapter. The  largest  of  these  cysts  was  situated  in  the  inferior
lobe  of  the  lungs,  and  might  have  held  an  apple. It  was  of  a
very  irregular  shape ;  its  walls  varied  in  thickness  from  two  to
four  lines,  and  were  lined  internally  by  an  albuminous  or  fibrous
substance  of  a  yellowish  white  colour,  quite  soft  in  some  points,
and  in  appearance  very  like  the  middle  coat  of  an  artery.  To-
wards its  surface,  this  cyst  had  a  perfectly  fibrous  appearance,


HYDATIDS  IN THE  LUNC.S.


343


like  tendon  ;  and  in  different  points  it  had  the  look  and  the  con-
sistence of  cartilage.  There  were  also  several  bony  plates  in  it,
some  of  which  were  parallel,  and  others  quite  perpendicular  to
the  walls,  and  prolonged  on  either  side,  so  as  to  project  at  once
into  the  cavity  of  the  cyst  and  into  the  pulmonary  substance,
with  which  latter  they  were  firmly  united  by  means  of  a  thick
layer  of  a  fibrous  substance.  This  sheath  invested  them  while
contained  in  the  walls  of  the  cyst,  but  left  them  to  project  quite
naked  into  its  interior,  which  contained  a  yellowish  puriform
fluid.  It  cannot  be  doubted,  that  a  cyst  of  this  size  must  have
occasioned  a  diminution  or  total  loss  of  the  sound  of  respiration
in  the  corresponding  points  of  the  chest.*


CHAPTER  IX.

OF  VESICULAR  WORMS,  OR  HYDATIDS  IN  THE  LUNGS.

The  only  species  of  vesicular  worms  that  I  have  met  with  in
the  lungs,  belongs  to  the  genus  to  which  I  have  given  the  name
of  Acephalocvst.-j-  These  animals,  formerly  named  hydatids,
and  long  confounded  with  cysts,  properly  so  called,  have  the
form  of  simple  vesicles  of  a  spheroid  or  ovoid  shape,  very  variable
in  size,  soft,  and  of  a  degree  of  consistence  and  an  appearance
exactly  like  that  of  half-boiled  white  of  egg.  Their  coats  are
diaphanous,  or  semi-transparent,  colourless,  or  of  a  milky  colour,
varying  sometimes  towards  reddish,  yellowish,  greenish,  or
greyish.  Sometimes  they  are  of  unequal  thickness ;  but  fre-
quently they  are  uniform  in  this  respect.  These  vesicles  con-
tain more  or  less  of  a  fluid  which  is  commonly  serous  and  limpid,
sometimes  turbid,  and  tinged  of  a  yellowish  or  sanguine  hue.
Sometimes  a  large  vesicle  includes  several  smaller  ones  ;  at  other
times,  still  smaller  ones  are  found  adherent  to  the  internal  or  ex-
ternal surface  of  their  parent,  from  which  they  only  appear  to  be
separated  when  they  have  attained  a  certain  size.  Acephalocysts
present  no  distinguishable  organ,  and  offer  the  simplest  example

*  For  further  details  respecting  the  organic  lesions  described  in  this  chapter,  I
refer  the  reader  to  Bichat's  Anatomie  Generate,  pax  Beclard,  Paris,  1821,  t.  i.  p.  198,
t.  iv.  p.  151. 158  ;  Cruveilhier's  Anatomie  Pathologique ;  Abemethy's  Surgical  Obser-
vations on  Tumours,  p.  107  ;  Diet,  de  Medicine,  t.  xii.  p.  525.  For  some  observations
on  the  origin  and  mode  of  development  of  these  cysts,  I  refer  to  an  article  by  Louis
in  the  Encyclopedic  Methodique,  to  the  work  of  Bichat  just  quoted,  and  to  an  article
by  Sir  Astley  Cooper  in  the  second  part  of  his  and  Mr.  Travers's  Essays,  p.  222.
For  an  account  of  the  difference  between  simple  cysts  and  hydatid  cysts,  see  Beclard' s
additions  to  Bichat,  t.  iv.  p.  460.—  Transl.

t  In  the  Memoirs  of  the  Faculty  of  Medicine,  printed  in  1806,  but  not  yet  pub-
lished. See  an  extract  from  this  in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Faculty,  No.  10,  1804."


314


HYDATIDS IN  THE  LUNGS,


of  an  animal  that  can  be  imagined.  This  extreme  simplicity  of
conformation  has  induced  Rudolphi  to  call  in  question  their  ani-
mal character.*  In  this  place  I  shall  merely  observe,  that  M.
Percy  has  seen  this  species  of  hydatids  move  in  a  very  distinct
manner,  and  I  have  myself  observed  all  the  stages  of  their  re-
production. This  takes  place,  as  in  certain  polypi,  by  a  process
somewhat  like  budding.  Small  buds  form  in  the  substance  of
the  coats  of  the  animalcule,  which  project,  either  exteriorly  or
interiorly,  grow  hollow,  assume  the  rounded  form  as  they  en-
large, and  finally  detach  themselves  from  their  parent.  Acepha-
locysts  are  always  inclosed  in  a  cyst,  which  completely  separates
them  from  the  surrounding  parts.  These  cysts  are  commonly  of
a  fibrous  nature,  but  frequently  there  are  found  in  them  portions
of  a  cartilaginous  or  bony  character.  Their  internal  surface  is
rarely  smooth  :  frequently  it  is  so  unequal  as  to  have  the  appear-
ance of  being  lacerated.  Sometimes  it  is  lined  by  an  opaque
albuminous  matter,  semi-concrete,  and  partially  reduced  to  de-
tritus, and  of  a  yellow  ochrey  or  tawny  colour.  When  there  are
several  hydatids  in  one  cyst,  this  further  contains  a  fluid  in  which
they  float,  which  is  sometimes  limpid,  sometimes  turbid,  yel-
lowish, or  sanguinolent.  When  the  cyst  contains  only  one
hydatid,  this  sometimes  fills  it  completely,  and  lines,  as  it  were,
its  internal  parietes.  This  species  of  Acephalocysts  may  origi-
nate in  almost  every  organ  in  the  bodv.  They  have  been  often
met  with  in  the  lungs  :  at  least,  all  the  cases  of  hydatids  recorded
as  being  found  in  this  viscus,  appear  to  me  to  belong  to  this
species.  The  most  remarkable  are  those  published  by  Johnson,-f-
Collet,J  Maloet,§  Beaumes,||  and  Geoffroy.^T  I  shall  here  give
an  abridgment  of  the  case  of  M.  GeofFroy,  because,  I  think  it
must  appear  evident  that,  by  means  of  the  stethoscope,  the  pro-
gress of  the  disease  might  have  been  easily  followed,  and  perhaps
even  a  diagnosis  sufficiently  precise  might  have  been  attained  to
justify  the  puncture  of  the  chest. **

A  young  man  had  an  attack  of  pneumonia  when  eighteen
years  of  age,  which  was  perfectly  cured,  and  he  remained  well
two  years ;  he  then  caught  a  violent  cold,  which  was  attended
by  acute  pain  in  the  left  side  which  prevented  him  lying  on  it.
He  never  got  well  of  this  last  symptom. He  was  afterwards

*  Entozoorum,  sive  Verm.  Intest.  Hist.  Nat.  Amstel.  1810,  vol.ii.  pars.ii.  p.  367.
f  Pbilos.  Trans.  Abridg.  $  Comment,  do  reb.  in  scient.  nat.  vol.  xiv.

§  Mem.  de  l'Acad.  des  Scienc.  an.  1782.  ||  Annales  de  Montpel.  torn.  i.

f  Bulletin  de  l'Ecole  de  Med.  an.  1805.

**  Many  cases  of  hydatids  discharged  by  expectoration  are  on  record,  and  still  more
in  which  they  were  found  in  the  lungs  after  death.  Of  the  former  kind  see  a  case
by  Dr.  Collet  in  the  Med.  Tram,  of  the  Coll.  of  Phys.  vol.  ii.  p.  4-86  ;  another  in  the
Lond.  Med.  Jonrn.  vol.  vi.  p.  293,  1785  ;  and  two  others  in  Andrei's  Clin.  Med.
t.  iii.  p.  3(.'3,  in  which  place  there  are  also  four  other  interesting  cases  of  pulmonary
hydatids.  For  further  accounts  of  Hydatids,  sec  Dr.  Hunter's  paper  in  the  Med.  and
Chir.Truvs.  vol.  i.  p.  34;  Bnillie's  Morbid  Anat.  p.  237  ;  and  Parr's  Med.  Diet,
vol.  i.  p.  765. — Transl.


HYDATIDS IN  THE  LUNGS.


345


nttackcd  with  jaundice  which  lasted  three  months,  and  he  also
passed  some  portions  of  taenia. The  cough  and  pain  of  side  re-
turned after  this,  very  violently,  and,  upon  their  cessation,  he
discovered  a  small  movable  tumour  situate  in  the  right  hypo-
chondre. This  tumour  increased  and  extended  towards  the
umbilicus,  being  attended  by  cholic  and  head-ache. The  pulsa-
tion of  the  heart  was  very  strong  in  the  epigastric  region.  The
principal  symptoms  at  the  end  of  three  years  were  constant
dyspnoea,  which  increased  to  a  feeling  of  suffocation  on  going  up
stairs ;  frequent  faintings ; occasional  cough  and  spitting  of
blood,  and  constant  tremblings. After  a  year  and  half,  these
symptoms  increased,  and  the  fits  of  suffocation  became  more
violent. In  one  of  these  he  suddenly  expired. On  examination
after  death,  a  large  hydatid  was  found,  partly  contained  in  the
liver,  and  partly  projecting  into  the  abdomen. Its  coats  were  thin
yet  fibrous. It  contained  a  fluid  of  a  brown  colour,  and  a  great
number  of  smaller  hydatids ;  most  of  them  of  the  size  of  peas  ;  one
or  two  as  large  as  the  yolk  of  an  egg. The  lower  end  of  the  sac
adhered  to  the  small  curvature  of  the  stomach. In  the  chest  there
was  found  on  each  side  an  enormous  hydatid  containing  five  pints
of  fluid. They  adhered  to  the  ribs  and  the  mediastinum,  and  by
their  increase  had  compressed  the  lungs  into  a  thin  layer  on  the
anterior  part  of  the  cavity. The  heart  was  completely  thrust  out
of  the  thorax  into  the  epigastrium. Each  hydatid  was  eleven  in-
ches long,  and  contained  full  five  pints  of  a  perfectly  limpid  fluid.
It  is  difficult  to  learn,  from  the  description  of  these  hydatids,
whether  they  originated  in  the  substance  of  the  lungs,  or  merely
beneath  the  pleura  pulmonalis  or  costalis. I  think  it,  however,
most  probable,  that  they  originated  in  the  substance  of  the  lungs.
M.  Cayol  has  since  presented  a  case  very  similar  to  the  above,
which  has  not  yet  been  made  public. In  the  Journal  de  Med.
for  1801,  there  is  the  case  of  a  man  who  expectorated  for  several
months  rounded  pellicles  which  were  evidently  the  remains  of
hydatids,  and  some  seemed  to  be  these  merely  flattened. I  have
myself  seen  two  similar  cases,  both  of  which,  as  well  as  that  re-
corded in  the  Journ.  de  Med.  were  cured. On  this  account,  the
actual  seat  of  these  bodies  could  not  be  determined,  but  there
can  be  little  doubt  of  its  having  been  the  lungs. About  fifteen
years  ago,  a  young  woman  consulted  me  on  account  of  beino-
affected  with  severe  dyspnoea,  cough,  abundant  expectoration
and  emaciation,— in  short,  all  the  ordinary  symptoms  of  phthisis
pulmonale. One  day,  after  acute  pain  of  the  epigastrium,  she
evacuated  by  stool  a  considerable  quantity  of  hydatids,  of  a  size
from  that  of  a  filbert  to  that  of  a  pigeon's  egg. From  this  very
day  the  hectic  fever,  the  catarrhal  symptoms,  and  dyspnoea
ceased,  and  shortly  after  the  patient  regained  her  flesh  and
strength. May  we  believe  in  this  case,  that  a  cyst  situated  in


3Mi


HYDATIDS  IN  THE  LUNGS.


the  left  lung  made  a  passage  into  the  stomacli  or  colon  through
the  diaphragm  ?  Be  this  as  it  may,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  I
think,  that  in  all  such  cases  the  stethoscope  would  enable  us  to
come  to  a  much  more  accurate  diagnosis  than  we  could  attain
without  it.  The  site  of  the  disease  and  its  extent,  would,  at
least,  be  easily  ascertained.  In  1S21,  Dr.  Beaugendre  of  Quim-
perle  afforded  me  an  opportunity  of  examining  the  chest  of  a
woman,  recovering  from  a  pectoral  affection,  during  the  conti-
nuance of  which  she  had  expectorated  a  great  number  of  acepha-
locysts.  There  still  remained  some  cavernous  rhonchus  in  the
site  of  the  cyst,  and  Dr.  Beaugendre  had  several  times  heard,  in
the  same  place,  a  slight  guggling  independent  of  the  respiratory
movements,  and  which  seemed  owing  to  the  automatic  contraction
of  the  hydatids.*

Treatment. — The  signs  of  a  vast  hydatid  cyst  seated  near
the  surface  of  the  lungs  or  beneath  the  costal  pleura,  being
the  same  as  those  of  empyema,  would  point  out  the  propriety
of  the  operation  used  in  this  disease ;  and  perhaps  such  an
operation  might  be  more  successful  in  the  case  of  the  hydatid
than  in  that  of  the  empyema.  When  the  expectoration  of  hy-
datids or  other  signs  point  out  their  existence  in  the  lungs,
common  salt  would  appear  most  deserving  a  trial  as  a  means
of  cure.  The  rot  and  the  staggers  in  sheep,  are  occasioned
by  the  development  of  two  species  of  vesicular  worms  (the  eys-
ticercus  lineaius  and  tenuicollis,  and  the  cocnurus  cerebralis,  of
Rudolphi,)  the  one  in  the  liver  or  some  other  of  the  abdominal
viscera,  and  the  other  in  the  ventricles  of  the  brain.  The  sheep
which  feed  in  salt  meadows  are  exempt  from  this  disorder,  and  a
removal  to  such  meadows  most  frequently  cures  those  already
affected  with  it.  I  have  more  than  once  employed  salt  water
baths,  with  seeming  success,  in  cases  of  individuals  affected  with
a  disease  of  this  kind.  It  is  not  necessary  that  the  hydatids
should  be  expelled  to  effect  a  cure :  it  suffices  that  these  are  de-
prived of  their  vitality.  In  this  case,  the  liquid  which  they  con-
tain, and  also  that  in  which  they  are  contained,  is  absorbed ;  the
cyst  contracts  into  a  very  small  compass ;  and  upon  cutting  into
the  tumours,  we  find  the  hydatids  quite  flattened,  closely  pressed

*  MM.  Briancon  and  Piorry  appear  to  have  observed  the  same  sounds  in  hyda-
tid tumours  of  the  abdomen,  where,  of  course,  there  could  be  no  mistake  as  to  the
respiratory  murmur.  Combined  with  this,  there  was  found  also,  on  percussion,  a
dull  sound  having  something  of  an  oscillatory  character,  and  the  two  phenomena
together,  they  conceived  to  be  indicative  of  the  presence  of  acephalocysts.  (Piorry,
I)e  la  Percussion  Med.  p.  158.)  Dr.  Ambroise  Laennec  has  also  observed,  in  a
case  of  abdominal  tumour  with  all  the  characters  of  an  ovarian  dropsy,  expansive  and
contractile  motions  bearing  no  relation  to  the  beat  of  the  pulse,  and  which  was,  pro-
bably, owing  to  the  automatic  movements  of  an  acephalocyst.  {Rev.  Med.  Oct.  1828.)
These'  observations,  however,  although  valuable  in  relation  to  the  diagnosis  of
abdominal  hydatids,  are  of  no  use  in  the  case  of  pulmonary  hydatids,  the  only  certain
sign  of  which  is  that  supplied  by  the  expectoration. — (M.  L.)


CONCRETIONS IN THE  LUNGS.


347


together,  and  sometimes  stratified  with  layers  of  the  albuminous
and  friable  matter  which  I  mentioned  above  in  describing  them.*
In  this  state  such  tumours  appear  to  exert  no  bad  influence  on
the  system  ;  and,  no  doubt,  cases  of  this  kind  have  been  mistaken
for  cancerous  swellings,  which,  in  rare  instances,  have  got  well
beyond  all  expectation.


CHAPTER  X.

OF  BODIES  OF  A  CARTILAGINOUS, BONY, CALCULOUS  AND
CHALKY  NATURE, FORMED IN THE  LUNGS.

These  various  productions  are  frequently  met  with  in  the  lungs,
and  they  have,  indeed,  been  noticed  by  almost  every  pathological
anatomist  since  the  sixteenth  century.  Besides  the  cartilaginous
productions  already  described  in  former  parts  of  this  work,  we
sometimes  find  in  the  lungs  cartilaginous  cysts  inclosing  bony  or
chalky  concretions,  of  the  kind  immediately  to  be  described  ;  and
also  cartilages  of  no  regular  shape  or  size,  containing  here  and
there  points  of  incipient  ossification.  The  bone  which  is  formed
in  these  cartilaginous  bodies,  or  without  their  previous  presence,
in  the  substance  of  the  lung,  is  never  of  a  perfect  kind ;  or,  at  least
I  have  never  met  with  any  accidental  production  of  this  kind  in
the  lungs  which  had  either  the  fibrous  texture  or  solidity  of  the
middle  of  the  long  bones,  or  the  spongy  character  of  the  ends  of
the  same  bones.  It  appears  that,  in  their  formation,  a  greater
quantity  of  calcareous  phosphate,  and  a  much  less  proportion  of
gelatine  is  employed,  than  in  true  bone ;  hence  these  bodies  re-
semble more  a  piece  of  stone  than  bone, — a  character  which  ac-
counts for  the  epithets  calculous  and  tophaceous  given  to  them
by  authors.  In  some  cases  they  do  not  contain  a  particle  of  gela-
tine ;  and,  in  this  case,  the  calcareous  phosphate  resembles  mois-
tened chalk.  I  shall  notice  these  different  varieties  under  the
name  of  imperfect  ossifications,  and  chalky  concretions.

*  In  a  former  note  I  had  occasion  to  refer  to  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Baron  respecting
the  supposed  origin  of  pulmonary  tubercles  in  hydatids,  and  to  state  my  belief  of  the
untenable  grounds  on  which  his  opinion  is  founded.  It  seems  probable,  as  stated  by
Dr.  M.  Laennec,  that  the  mistake  of  Dr.  B.  may  be  attributed  partly  to  his  having
mistaken  for  tubercles,  examples  of  that  degeneration  of  hydatids,  described  by  our
author  in  the  text,  as  resulting  from  the  death  of  these  animals;  and  partly  to  his
having  overlooked  the  distinctive  characters  of  the  different  species  of  hydatids  de-
scribed by  naturalists,  and  thereby  confounded  the  cysticercus Jinna  of  the  hog  (which
is  of  a  comparatively  solid  character,  and  has  very  rarely  been  met  with  in  the  human
body,  and  never  in  the  lungs,)  with  the  simple  acophalocyst.  See  tho  work  of  Rudol-
pht  See  also  a  reviow  of  Dr.  Baron's  work,  by  Dr.  Meriadec  Laennec,  in  the  Revue
Med.  for  April,  18<25. — Trausl.


348


CONCltETIONS IN  THE  LUNGS.


The  imperfect  ossifications  are  encysted,  or  not  encysted.  The
former  are  very  rare  in  the  lungs.  They  are  of  a  rounded  form,
of  a  size  from  that  of  a  hemp-seed  to  that  of  a  hazle-nut,  and  are
enclosed  in  a  cartilaginous  cyst,  of  half  a  line  to  a  line  in  thick-
ness, which  adheres  closely  to  them.  The  non-encysted  ossifi-
cations are  of  a  very  irregular  shape.  Their  surface  is  rugged
and  rough.  Interiorly  they  are  white,  opaque,  very  similar  to
calculous  productions,  and  readily  reduced  to  powder  by  being
bruised.  On  the  other  hand,  their  external  parts  are  somewhat
yellowish,  slightly  diaphanous,  more  difficultly  pulverizable,  and,
in  short,  in  a  more  perfect  state  of  ossification.  These  ossifi-
cations are  found  sometimes  included  in,  and  intimately  adherent
to,  the  pulmonary  tissue ;  at  other  times  they  are  observed  in
the  centre  of  a  cartilaginous  production  ;  and  frequently  in  the
body  of  a  tubercle,  especially  those  of  the  bronchial  glands.  In
the  latter  case,  when  the  tubercle  softens,  the  bony  concretion
may  be  found  loose  in  the  cavity,  or  may  be  expectorated,  if  it  is
not  of  too  great  a  size  to  pass  through  the  bronchi.  The  chalky
concretions  are  found  in  two  6tates, — one  resembling  chalk
slightly  moistened,  the  other  like  chalk  completely  softened  in
water.  In  the  last  state  they  are  always  encysted  ;  in  the  first
they  may,  or  may  not  be,  although  they  most  commonly  are  so.
When  crushed  between  the  finger  and  thumb,  they  are  sometimes
reducible  to  an  impalpable  powder,  but  frequently  they  give  the
feeling  as  if  grains  of  sand  were  intermixed  with  the  soft  chalk :
these  grains  are  small  ossified  points.  The  cysts  enclosing  these
cretaceous  productions  are  commonly  cartilaginous.  They  are
rounded,  or  without  any  regular  figure.  I  have  seen  one  in  the
form  of  a  pyramid  with  four  enequal  sides.  The  rounded  cysts
are  sometimes  bony,  but  of  an  imperfect  ossification,  and  resem-
bling, in  all  respects,  the  semi-transparent  external  crust  of  the
osseo-calcareous  concretions  described  above.  I  have  sometimes
found  concretions  of  this  sort  composed  of  several  bony  or  carti-
laginous cysts,  one  included  within  the  other,  and  each  separated
by  a  layer  of  soft  cretaceous  matter.  It  is  much  more  common
to  find  this  half-fluid  chalky  matter  in  the  centre  of  a  tubercle,
particularly  in  the  bronchial  glands.  In  this  case,  although  the
matter  is  equally  soft  as  the  substance  of  the  tubercle  itself,  still
it  is  easily  distinguished  from  it,  by  its  greater  opacity,  and  by  its
whiteness,  which  forms  a  considerable  contrast  with  the  pale  yel-
low colour  of  the  tuberculous  matter.  When  allowed  to  dry,
this  cretaceous  matter  becomes  white,  and  acquires  a  degree  of
cohesion  which  prevents  it  from  being  pulverized  by  the  mere
pressure  of  the  finger.  The  bony  or  cretaceous  concretions  of  the
lungs  are  commonly  very  small ;  I  have  never  seen  them  larger
than  an  almond.  Neither  have  I  ever  seen  a  complete  conversion
of  a  portion  of  lung  into  a  substance  of  this  sort,  but  sometimes  I


CONCltETIOXS IN THE LUNG 9.


349


have  observed  the  pulmonary  tissue  around  an  imperfect  cicatri-
zation, as  if  injected,  or  impregnated  with  a  small  quantity  of  dis-
seminated chalky  matter.

Very  singular  opinions  as  to  the  cause  and  origin  of  these  cal-
careous productions  are  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  most  patho-
logists. Cullen,  with  many  others,  regards  them  as  a  frequent
cause  of  asthma,  and  thinks  that  they  may  be  occasioned  by  the
powdery  substances  diffused  through  the  air  breathed  by  different
kinds  of  artisans— such,  for  instance,  as  starch-makers,  lapidaries,
lime-burners,  &c.  The  chemical  nature  of  the  concretions,  so
much  better  known  than  formerly,  renders  this  opinion  quite  un-
tenable at  the  present  day.  I  do  not  mean  to  deny  that  the  habi-
tual respiration  of  a  powdery  atmosphere  may  cause  a  temporary
dyspnoea,  and  even  be  the  source  of  a  formal  disease  of  the  lungs ;
but  as  a  proof  that  too  much  stress  has  been  laid  on  this  circum-
stance as  a  cause  of  pulmonary  diseases,  we  have  only  to  examine
the  expectoration  of  a  person  who  has  passed  the  night  in  an
apartment  the  air  of  which  has  been  rendered  turbid  by  the  smoke
of  a  lamp,  or  of  a  carrier  who  has  been  all  day  on  a  road  enve-
loped in  clouds  of  dust : — in  either  case,  we  shall  6nd  that,  in  the
course  of  four-and-twenty  hours,  the  whole  of  the  extraneous
matter  has  been  expelled  along  with  the  bronchial  mucus.*  Be-
sides, if  such  substances  could  be  retained  in  the  lungs,  they  would
be  retained  in  the  bronchi,  and  we  should,  in  such  a  case,  find
there  an  accumulation  of  such  matters,  differing  in  their  nature
according  to  the  particular  kind  of  occupation  of  the  individual.
Now,  I  believe,  nothing  of  this  kind  has  ever  been  discovered  on
dissection  ;  at  least,  I  can  assert  that  I  have  never  met  with  any
thing  of  the  sort,  though  I  have  examined  the  lungs  of  a  great
number  of  persons  who  had  passed  their  lives  in  workshops  of
which  the  atmosphere  was  constantly  charged  with  calcareous  or
other  kinds  of  dust.  Furthermore,  I  do  not  intend  denying  that
the  existence  of  a  great  number  of  bony  concretions  in  the  lungs
may  be  productive  of  habitual  dyspnoea,  more  or  less  severe ;  but  I
can  assert  that  I  have  met  with  such  concretions,  and  in  great  quan-
tity, in  the  lungs  of  persons  who  had  never  experienced  any  affec-
tion of  the  respiration  ;  and  I  am  convinced,  as  well  by  my  own
dissections,  as  by  those  given  by  other  observers,  that  such  con-
cretions have  never  been  found  sufficiently  voluminous,  nume-
rous, or  congregated,  to  justify  our  attributing  to  them  any  case
of  dyspnoea  so  intense  as  to  be  reckoned  by  practitioners  under
the  head  of  asthma.  The  opinions  of  M.  Bayle  respecting  the
effect  of  these  concretions  are  very  singular,  quite  unsupported

•  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  observe,  that  the  argument  in  the  text,  however  good
against  the  origin  of  earthy  concretions  in  the  lungs,  is  altogether  invalid  as  regards
the  production  of  other  diseases  of  the  pulmonary  or  bronchial  systems.  Indeed,  as
was  stated  in  a  former  note,  no  fact  is  bettor  established  than  the  power  of  a  powdery
atmosphere  to  cause,  directly,  pulmonary  disease. — Transl.


350


CONCRETIONS  IN  THE  LUNGS.


by  either  reasoning  or  analogy,  and,  indeed,  rather  invalidated
than  confirmed  by  the  facts  he  has  himself  adduced.  He  con-
siders them  as  one  cause  of  phthisis,  and  gives  the  following  state-
ment of  the  symptoms  produced  by  them  ;  "  The  majority  of
subjects,  (he  says)  affected  with  this  disease,  expectorate  small
calcareous  fragments,  of  a  greyish  or  whitish  colour,  often  in
great  number,  and  they  have  a  dry  cough  for  a  long  period."*
It  is  remarkable  that  M.  Bayle  mentions  neither  expectoration,
dyspnoea,  wasting,  nor  hectic  fever,  as  symptoms  of  the  com-
plaint, and  it  js  therefore  singular  how  he  has  been  led  to  reckon
it  as  a  species  of  consumption.  The  two  examples  adduced  by
him  are  very  little  to  the  purpose.  The  first  (Case  XXIII.)
is  the  case  of  a  man  affected  for  nine  months  with  a  slimy  expec-
toration, intermixed  with  puriform  sputa,  and  occasionally  with
small  chalky  fragments.  Hectic  fever  supervened  and  carried
him  off  in  six  weeks.  A  great  number  of  small  cretaceous  con-
cretions, some  soft,  some  hard,  some  encysted,  some  not  encysted,
were  found  in  the  lungs.  The  substance  of  the  lungs  was
slightly  indurated  around  these  concretions,  but,  in  other  re-
spects, healthy.  In  this  instance  it  is  evident  that  the  consump-
tion and  death  were  produced  by  a  chronic  catarrh  ;  and  I  see
no  reason  to  attribute  the  result  to  the  concretions,  since  we  often
find  them  equally  numerous  without  any  such  consequence.  The
second  example  (Case  XXXIV.)  is  that  of  a  man  who  died  of
fever  complicated  by  pleuro-pneumonia.  He  had  experienced,
for  twelve  months,  dyspnoea,  frequent  cough,  and  consequent
mucous  expectoration,  but  very  little  emaciation.  In  this,  as
well  as  the  former  case,  we  find  nothing  characteristic  of  true
consumption.  In  examining  the  cases  of  pulmonary  concretions
of  this  kind,  contained  in  the  writings  of  Morgagni,  Bonetus,
and  various  other  authors,  it  is  easy  to  perceive  that,  in  most  of
them,  the  existence  of  these  was  productive  of  no  severe  symp-
tom, and  that  even  the  dry  cough,  or  cough  with  ropy  expectora-
tion,— symptoms,  be  it  remembered,  of  very  uncertain  import, —
was  by  no  means  a  constant  attendant  on  such  a  condition  of  parts.
My  own  dissections  afford  a  similar  result.  I  have  often  found
concretions  of  this  kind  in  persons  who  had  no  disorder  of  the
respiration.  Others  had  a  dry  cough,  or  cough  with  expectora-
tion of  different  kinds,  and  with  or  without  dyspnoea ;  but  there
was,  in  almost  all  these,  some  other  morbid  alteration  of  the  pul-
monary tissue,  to  which  the  symptoms  might  be  attributed  with  as
much  justice  as  to  the  concretions,  or  more  so.  In  particular,  it
is  very  common  to  find  co-existing  with  these  concretions,  traces
of  cicatrizations  in  the  lungs,  of  the  kind  described  in  a  former
chapter ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  observe  the  pulmonary  tis-
sue flaccid,  hard,  and  impregnated  with  a  great  quantity  of


*  Recherches  sur  hi  Phthisic,  p.  34.


MELANOSIS OF  THE  LUNGS.


&5L


black  pulmonary  matter  around  the  concretions,  and  the  inter-
stices that  separate  them  from  the  cellular,  fibrous,  or  cartilagi-
nous cicatrices  alluded  to.  From  these  facts  I  am  led  to  be-
lieve, that,  in  most  cases,  these  concretions  are  consequent  to  tu-
berculous affections  that  have  been  cured,  and  are  the  product
of  the  curative  efforts  of  nature,  which  appear  to  have  elaborated
a  superabundance  of  the  calcareous  phosphate :  this  seems  ne-
cessary to  the  formation  of  the  cartilaginous  bodies  which  con-
stitute, for  the  most  part,  the  fistula?  and  cicatrices  found  in  such
cases  in  the  lungs.  Several  of  the  cases  related  (XIX.  and
XXII.)  countenance  this  opinion,  and  others  to  the  same  purport
will  be  given  afterwards.  I  by  no  means,  however,  wish  to  as-
sert that  concretions  of  this  kind  may  not  take  place  in  the  lungs
primarily,  and  independently  of  the  previous  existence  of  tuber-
cles ;  but  I  look  upon  such  cases  as  very  rare ;  and,  when  they
do  occur,  I  am  assured  that  they  give  rise  to  little  or  no  disorder
of  the  system.

The  bony  and  chalky  concretions  of  the  lungs  being  always  of
small  size,  their  existence  can  never  be  ascertained  nor  even  sus-
pected by  the  aid  of  the  stethoscope,  unless  they  are  situated  in  a
part  of  the  lungs  rendered  impermeable  to  air  from  the  cicatriza-
tion of  tuberculous  excavation.*


CHAPTER  XI.

OF  MELANOSIS  OF  THE  LUNGS.

The  older  surgeons,  and  after  them,  the  modern  anatomists,  have
confounded  under  the  name  of  Scirrhus,  Cancer,  or  Carcinoma,
different  morbid  growths  which  have  no  common  character  but
that  of  their  being  unlike  any  of  the  natural  or  healthy  tissues  of
the  body,— their  originating  in  an  indurated  state,— and  their
subsequent  softening  and  self-destruction.f  This  confusion  has
proved  a  great  bar  to  the  progress  of  morbid  anatomy.  Con-
vinced of  this,  I  have  paid  particular  attention  to  the  discrimina-
tion of  these  various  productions,  and  have  succeeded  in  pointing-
out  several  very  distinct  species.  That  which  I  have  now  to
notice,  and  which  I  described  many  years  ago,  (1806,)  in  an  un-
published memoir  presented  to  the  Faculte  de  Medicine,  is  the

*  These  bony  concretions  generally  consist  of  a  large  proportion  of  phosphate  of
hme,  a  small  proper Uon  of  carbonate,  and  animal  matter.  See  Thomson's  Chemistry,

Jt11'  VrrU  1Vr  p-57'2-  Seo  also  Dr-  Pout's  Analysis,  Loud.  Med.  Hopes,  vol.  xii.
p.  3d2. — I  ransl.  r

,on-See  des  Sc*  M6d-  Art'  Anat«  Pat1'01- !  ulso  Journ.  de  M6d.  t.  ix.  for  Jan.
180.:>.— Author.


352


MELANOSIS  OF  THE  LUNGS.


most  easily  recognized  in  all  the  organs  except  the  lungs,  in
which,  owing  to  its  colour,  it  is  sometimes  distinguished  with
much  difficulty,  from  the  black  pulmonary  matter.

In  their  early  or  crude  state,  these  productions  possess  a  con-
sistence equal  to  that  of  the  lymphatic  glands,  and  a  homoge-
neous and  somewhat  humid  composition  ;  they  are  opaque,  and,
in  structure,  very  much  resemble  the  bronchial  glands  in  the
adult.  When  they  begin  to  soften,  a  minute  portion  of  fluid  can
be  expressed  from  them,  of  a  thin  reddish  character,  intermixed
with  small  blackish  portions  of  a  substance  which  is  sometimes
firm,  sometimes  friable,  but  which,  even  when  friable,  conveys  to
the  touch  an  impression  of  flaccidity :  in  a  more  advanced  stage,
these  portions  first,  and  subsequently  the  whole  mass  in  which
they  are  contained,  become  quite  friable,  and  are  soon  converted
into  a  black  paste.*

Melanosis  may  exist  in  four  different  forms,  viz  :  1.  encysted;
2.  non-encysted  ;  3.  impregnating  or  infiltrated  into  the  natural
substance  of  an  organ ;  and  4.  deposited  on  the  surface  of  an
organ.

1.  Encysted  melanosis. — The  cysts  enclosing  this  species  are
very  regularly  rounded,  and  vary  in  size  from  that  of  a  small
hazel-nut  to  that  of  a  walnut.  At  least,  I  have  never  met  with
any  that  did  not  come  within  these  dimensions.  They  have  a
very  regular  and  equal  thickness,  which  is  never  greater  than
half  a  line.  Cellular  substance  appears  to  be  the  only  tissue  that
enters  into  their  composition.  They  adhere,  by  means  of  a  very
fine  cellular  tissue,  to  the  substance  of  the  organ  in  which  they  are
situated,  and  from  which  they  can  be  readily  separated  by  dis-
section. Their  interior  surface  is  rather  smooth,  but  adheres  to
the  morbid  matter  which  it  surrounds.  The  medium  of  this  ad-
hesion appears  to  me  to  be  a  very  fine  imperfect  cellular  tissue,
though  it  cannot  always  be  distinguished. I  have  hitherto  only

*  Laennec's  view  of  the  formation  and  progress  of  melanosis  is  now  very  gene-
rally abandoned  by  pathologists.  The  following  extracts  from  the  work  of  Dr.  Cars-
well,  the  highest  authority  on  this  subject,  gives,  I  believe,  an  accurate  representa-
tion of  the  facts  :• — "  Only  two  changes  are  observed  to  take  place  in  the  melanotic
matter  after  its  deposition.  The  first  consists  in  the  inspissation  or  solidification,
the  second  in  the  softening  or  liquefaction  of  the  melanotic  matter  The  mate-
rial of  which  melanosis  is  composed  exists  primarily  in  a  fluid  form,  and  every  in-
crease of  consistence  which  it  afterwards  acquires,  is  owing,  chiefly,  either  to  its
combination  with  the  molecular  structure,  or  the  dense  unyielding  nature  of  the  tis-
sues or  organs  in  which  it  is  deposited  It  follows  as  a  consequence,  that  the

process  of  softening  cannot  take  place  until  that  of  solidification  has  been,  at  least,
carried  to  a  certain  extent :  perhaps  it  never  does  take  place  until  it  has  been  car-
ried to  its  maximum  ;  for  the  softening  of  the  melanotic  deposit  is  observed  only
when  it  has  acquired  the  form  of  a  tumour,  or  occupies  an  irregular  portion  of  an
organ.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  softening  of  the  hardened  melanotic  mass  is
effected  in  the  two  following  ways :  first,  by  the  destruction  of  tissues  included
within  it  and  around  it ;  second,  by  the  effusion  of  serosity  caused  by  its  stimulat-
ing power  as  a  foreign  body.  The  liver  nnd  lungs  furnish  the  best  examples  of
softening  of  melanotic  tumours  from  destruction  of  the  tissues  in  which  they  are
formed." (CV.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  iii.  p.  95.)— Traml.


MELANOSIS OF  THE  LUNGS.


353


found  this  variety  of  melanosis  in  the  liver  and  lungs;  and,  in
the  latter  organ,  I  have  only  as  yet  met  with  a  single  mass  of  it.

2.  Unencysted  melanosis. — This  variety  is  much  less  rare  than
the  preceding :  I  have  met  with  it  in  the  lungs,  the  liver,  pitui-
tary gland,  and  the  nerves;  but  it  has  been  since  found  in  al-
most every  organ.  The  volume  of  masses  of  this  kind  is  quite
indeterminate, — varying  from  that  of  a  millet-seed  to  that  of  an  .
egg,  or  more.  They  are  also  quite  irregular  in  figure.  They
commonly  adhere  very  closely  to  the  parts  in  which  they  are  situ-
ated ;  sometimes,  however,  they  are  united  to  these  by  a  very
fine,  though  sufficiently  visible,  cellular  tissue,  which  permits
their  removal  without  any  laceration.  In  this  last  case  they  are
commonly  of  a  rounded  shape.

3.  Impregnation  of  the  natural  tissue  with  the  matter  of  me-
lanosis.— It  frequently  happens  that  this  morbid  matter,  in  place
of  being  segregated  in  distinct  masses,  is  disseminated  throughout
the  organs  in  which  it  is  found,  and  deposited  between  the  par-
ticles or  molecules  of  the  natural  tissue.  The  appearances  and
colour  of  parts  affected  in  this  manner,  present  a  good  many  va-
rieties, according  to  the  texture  of  the  organ,  the  quantity  of
morbid  matter  deposited,  and  the  particular  condition  of  this
matter.  When  the  infiltration  is  recent,  and  in  moderate  quan-
tity, the  appearance  of  the  affected  part  merely  differs  from  the
natural  condition  in  being  intermixed  with  small  black  dots  or
striae,  the  intermediate  portions  being  quite  of  a  healthy  cha-
racter. As  the  disease  increases,  the  dots  and  striae  enlarge  in
number  and  volume,  until  the  whole  of  the  natural  tissue  of  the
part  is  lost  in  the  morbid  degeneration.  It  is  usually  only  at  this
period  of  its  progress  that  the  melanose  matter  begins  to  soften ;
but  if  the  softening  takes  place  before  the  complete  removal  of
the  natural  tissue  of  the  part,  it  frequently  happens  that  this
softens  also,  and  intermingles  with  the  morbid  matter,  the  colour
of  which  is  thereby  changed  to  brownish,  yellowish,  or  greyish.*

*  Laennec  Las  omitted  to  notice  here  the  fourth  variety  of  melanosis,  that,  namely,
deposited  on  the  surface  of  organs  ;  probahly  because  he  treats  of  it  in  the  chap-
ter on  the  accidental  productions  of  the  pleura.  MM.  Breschet  and  Andral  re-
cognize still  another  form  of  melanosis,  viz.  one  primarily  fluid.  Andral  (Precis.
d'Anat.  Path.  t.  i.  p.  456)  adduces  as  example  of  this  :  1.  certain  cases  of  chronic
peritonitis  in  which  the  peritoneum  contained  a  very  black  fluid  ;  2.  a  case  of  black
urine  observed  by  Proust,  and  in  which  this  learned  chemist  conceives  that  he  dis-
covered a  new  acid  termed  by  him  melanic  acid  ;  3.  a  case  of  fibrous  cyst  containing
a  black  fluid,  found  in  a  horse  by  MM.  Trousseaux  and  Leblanc;  and  4.  those  cases
of  black  or  chocolate-coloured  vomitings  so  common  in  cancer  of  the  stomach. —
(M.L.)  *

The  omission  by  Laennec  of  all  distinct  notice  of  liquid  melanosis  (with  which  he
was  well  acquainted,  and  which  is,  in  fact,  the  same  as  his  4th  form)  is  well  ac-
counted for  by  Dr.  Carswell :— "  It  is  {he  says)  obviously  to  be  referred  to  a  funda-
mental error  in  the  pathological  doctrines  which  he  maintained,  regarding  the  mode
of  formation,  development,  and  termination  of  accidental  or  new  products;  for  he
believed  that  all  these  products  possessed  at  first  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  density,
to  which  state  he  gave  the  name  of  crudity  ;  and  that  thev  afterwards  undergo,  at
some  period  or  other  of  their  existence,  by  means  of  some  change  taking  place  within

A  A


354


MELANOSIS  OF  THE  LUNGS.


Melanosis,  like  all  the  other  accidental  productions  which
differ  from  the  natural  tissues  of  the  animal  economy,  gives  rise
to  constitutional  and  local  disorder.  Among  the  constitutional
or  general  effects,  the  most  constant  are,  the  gradual  diminution
of  the  vital  powers,  and  a  marked  change  in  the  process  of  nu-
trition, whence  result  emaciation  to  a  considerable  degree,  and
.  dropsy  of  the  cellular  membrane,  and,  sometimes,  of  the  serous
membranes.  The  subjects  whom  I  have  known  to  die  in  conse-
quence of  melanosis  in  any  organ,  had  no  continuous  or  well-
marked  fever;  and  this  is  true  of  cases  wherein  the  disease  ex-
tended to  a  great  portion  of  the  lungs,  and  is  also  observable  in
the  two  cases  (XX.  and  XXI.)  of  the  same  affection  given  in
the  work  of  M.  Bayle.  If  this  circumstance  holds  good  gene-
rally, as  I  am  much  disposed  to  believe,  it  will  assist  in  enabling
us  to  distinguish,  during  life,  consumption  produced  by  mela-
nosis of  the  lungs,  from  that  depending  on  tubercles ;  which
last,  as  is  well  known,  is  accompanied,  through  almost  its  whole
course,  by  a  hectic  fever,  which  is  usually  characterised  by  two
exacerbations, — one  towards  mid-day,  and  the  other  in  the  night.
The  most  constant  of  the  local  effects  produced  by  melanosis  of
the  lungs,  are  dyspnoea,  proportioned  to  the  extent  of  the  dis-
ease, and  cough,  which  is  often  dry,  but  sometimes  attended  by
a  mucous  expectoration  intermixed  with  some  puriform  sputa.
The  melanose  masses  in  the  lungs  may  be  sometimes  completely
softened,  so  as  to  leave,  after  their  evacuation  into  the  bronchi,
cavities,  resembling  those  produced  by  the  softening  down  of  tu-
bercles. I  have  myself  never  met  with  excavations  of  this  sort
in  the  lungs;  I  have  met  with  them,  however,  in  the  liver;  and
the  work  of  M.  Bayle  contains  two  cases  (XX.  and  XXI.)
which  incontestably  prove  the  possibility  of  their  formation  in
the  lungs.  In  these  cases  the  pulmonary  tissue,  so  much  impreg-
nated with  melanose  matter  as  to  be  as  firm  as  liver,  (or  even
firmer,)  contained  a  multitude  of  small  excavations  evidently
formed  by  the  partial  softening  of  the  same  matter.  It  is  clear
that  in  cases  of  this  kind,  pectoriloquy  would  be  found  wherever
such  excavations  came  to  communicate  with  the  bronchi.* It  is


themselves,  a  process  of  solution,  which  he  describes  as  the  period  or  state  of  sof-
tening. The  idea,  therefore,  of  melanosis  existing  primarily  in  a  fluid  form,  was  re-
pugnant to  such  doctrines;  consequently  this  form  of  the  disease  could  not  be  ad-
mitted by  him  into  the  class  of  accidental  tissues,  to  which  he  conceived  melanosis
to  belong." (Ci/c.  of  Prac.  Med.  vol.  iii.  p.  85.) — Transl.

*  M.  Bayle's  cases,  as  has  been  justly  remarked  by  Andral,  (Diet.  deMtd.  t.  xiv.
Art.  Melanose,)  by  no  means  prove  that  the  pulmonary  cavities  mentioned  in  them,
were  the  consequence  of  softening  of  the  melanotic  masses.  There  had  been,  during
life,  no  black  expectoration  ;  no  black  matter  was  found  in  the  bronchi  after  death,
nor  yet  in  the  cavities  themselves,  which  were,  on  the  contrary,  lined  by  a  mem-
brane covered  with  white  pus.  It  is,  therefore,  more  than  probable  that  the  exca-
vations were  of  a  tuberculous  character,  and  were  surrounded  by  a  tissue  impreg-
nated with  melanotic  matter.  Moreover,  Andral  regards  as  extremely  rare  the  soft-
ening of  melanotic  matter,  and  even  seems  disposed  to  reject  it  altogether.  (Loc.


MKLANOSIS  OF  THE  LUNGS.


355


equally  evident  that  the  stethoscope  would  enable  us  to  ascertain
the  impermeability  of  the  lungs,  in  the  cases  in  which  the  matter
of  melanosis  was  diffused  through  the  substance  of  these  organs  ;
but  could  not  enable  us  to  distinguish  it  from  chronic  pneu-
monia.

Melanosis  is  one  of  the  rarest  species  of  cancer,  and  is  very
seldom  met  with  in  the  lungs.  This  may  seem  an  extraordinary
assertion  after  the  contrary  assertion  of  M.  Bayle,  and  the  cases
given  in  his  work  under  the  name  of  Phthisis  with  Melanosis.
Whatever  distrust  I  may  have  of  my  own  opinions  when  they
differ  from  those  of  that  excellent  observer,  with  whose  extreme
correctness  I  had  better  opportunities  of  being  acquainted  than  any
other  person, — I,  nevertheless,  cannot  help  being  of  opinion,  that
he  was  deceived  on  this  particular  point,  and  that  he  sometimes
confounded  with  melanosis  the  natural  black  pulmonary  matter.
I  admit  that  these  two  substances  are  very  much  alike  in  their
external  characters,  and  I  am  not  sure  that  the  most  experienced
observer  could  discover  any  difference  between  a  melanose  mass
in  the  liver  or  any  other  organ,  and  a  bronchial  gland  of  a  per-
fectly black  colour,  such  as  they  are  often  found  in  very  sound
lungs.  I  will  not  say  that  the  following  characters  suffice  to
distinguish  the  two  substances,  but  they  may,  at  least,  assist  us
in  discriminating  them  : — The  matter  of  melanosis,  when  soft-
ened, and  even  that  which  can  be  expressed  from  it  while  yet
solid,  dyes  the  skin  black ;  but  this  colour  is  not  very  permanent,
and  can  be  easily  removed  by  washing ;  while  the  blackness  pro-
duced by  the  matter  of  the  bronchial  glands,  if  this  be  left  to  dry
before  washing,  will  remain  on  the  skin  for  several  days.  The
chemical  composition  of  the  two  bodies  also  differs  very  consider-
ably. The  bronchial  glands,  according  to  Fourcroy,  contain  a
large  portion  of  carbon  and  hydrogen,  while  the  matter  of  mela-
nosis contains  neither  of  these,  but  is  almost  entirely  composed
of  albumen  and  a  peculiar  colouring  matter.*

Cit.  &  Precis.  d'Anat.  Path.  t.  i.  p.  450.)  According  to  him,  the  softening-,  jn  cer-
tain cases,  is  dependent  on  that  of  the  natural  or  accidental  tissues  with  which  the
melanotic  matter  was  united  ;  while,  in  others,  the  supposed  softening  was  merely
the  existence  of  melanosis,  deposited  in  a  liquid  form,  in  aubstance  or  on  the  surface
of  other  tissues. — (M.  L.)

*  MM.  Lassaigne  and  Foy  have  analysed  the  matter  of  melanosis.  The  former
detected  in  it  fibrine,  a  peculiar  black  colouring  matter,  a  little  albumen,  and  vari-
ous salts,  among  which  were  the  phosphate  of  lime  and  the  oxide  of  iron  ;  the
second  found  much  albumen,  a  small  quantity  of  fibrine,  a  very  large  proportion  of  a
principle  eminently  carbonized— apparently  a  modification  of  the  cruor  of  the  blood  ;
and,  lastly,  the  various  salts  including  the  two  mentioned  in  the  analysis  of  M.  Las-
saigne. It  is  evident  from  these  analyses  that  the  constituent  principles  of  mela-
nosis are  nearly  the  same  as  those  of  the  blood,  there  being  merely  a  predominance
of  carbon,  and,  consequently,  that  there  is  no  essential  chemical  difference,  as  Laen-
nec  supposed,  between  the  matter  of  melanosis  and  that  of  the  black  bronchial  glands.
—(AT.  L.)

The  following  are  the  particulars  of  the  analysis  by  M.  Foy,  of  the  melanotic
tumour  of  the  horse  —


A  A  2


356


MELANOSIS OF THE  LUNGS.


Notwithstanding  its  resemblance  to  a  black  bronchial  gland,
melanosis  is  evidently  a  morbid  and  very  deleterious  production,
inasmuch  as  it  produces  all  the  local  and  general  effects  of  other
cancers,  when  it  exists  in  a  certain  extent ;  and  since  it  is  found
united  with  other  morbid  productions  in  compound  cancerous
tumours.  When  melanosis  forms  masses  of  considerable  extent,
or  when  it  impregnates  the  pulmonary  tissue  so  thoroughly  as  to
give  it  a  deep  black  colour,  and  a  consistence  equal  to  that  of
liver,  it  is  easily  recognized ;  but  when  the  impregnation  is  re-
cent, and  not  sufficiently  abundant  to  produce  any  considerable
induration  of  the  lung,  it  can,  with  difficulty,  be  distinguished
from  the  black  pulmonary  matter.*

I  have  already  mentioned  this  black  pulmonary  matter  se-
veral times.  It  has  been  little  noticed  by  anatomists  ;  yet  it
exists  so  commonly  in  the  lungs,  and  even  in  persons  in  the  most
perfect  health,  that  we  can  hardly  consider  it  as  a  morbid  pro-
duction. It  is  found  more  or  less  abundant  in  the  lungs  of  almost
every  adult,  and  seems  to  increase  with  the  age  of  the  individual.


Albumen . .  . 15,00  Muriate  of  Potass .  .  5,00

Febrine . .  , 6,25  Ditto Soda . .  .  3,75

Carbonized  Principle .  . 31,40  Carbonate  of  Soda .  .  2,50

Water ,  . 18,75  Ditto Lime .  .  3,75

Oxide  of  Iron .  .1,75  Ditto Magnesia  .  1,75

Sub-phosphate  of  Lime  . 8,75  Tartrate  of  Potass .  .  1,75

Dr.  Henry,  of  Manchester,  has  also  given  an  elaborate  analysis  of  the  matter  of
melanosis,  and  with  results  nearly  similar. — See  Fawdington  on  Melanosis. — TransL

*  The  efforts  of  Laennec  to  establish  a  distinction  between  the  matter  of  melanosis
and  the  black  pulmonary  matter,  have  been  generally  regarded  as  futile  ;  and  most
of  the  anatomists  of  the  present  day  consider  melanosis  not  as  an  accidental  produc-
tion, in  the  sense  in  which  this  word  is  used  by  Laennec,  but  merely  an  impregnation
of  a  tissue,  whether  normal  or  morbid,  with  a  black  matter  of  a  peculiar  kind.  The
only  difference  recognized  between  the  two  affections,  is,  that,  in  the  one  case,  the
colouring  matter  impregnates  a  healthy  tissue,  while  in  the  other  (melanosis)  it  im-
pregnates an  accidental  or  morhid  tissue  ;  the  alleged  softening  of  melanosis  being
merely  the  softening  of  the  tissue  wherewith  the  colouring  matter  is  combined.  But
what  is  the  nature  of  this  black  matter'?  Is  it  merely  altered  blood,  as  M.  Breschet
supposes,  and  as  the  chemical  analysis  tends  to  prove,  or  is  it  a  peculiar  morbid
product,  as  M.  Andral  supposes  !  It  is  probably  produced  in  both  ways.— (M.  L.)

Dr.  Carswell  agrees  with  those  who  regard  the  matter  of  melanosis  as  essentially
composed  of  the  colouring  material  of  the  blood,  and  states,  that  it  is  formed  in  thr
blood  in  the  first  instance,  and  afterwards  deposited  by  secretion  in  the  various  parts
where  it  is  found.  "  It  is  not  only  (says  Dr.  C.)  because  this  material  is  seen  in
the  blood  that  we  have  fixed  its  seat  in  this  fluid,  but  because  our  anatomical  re-
searches show  that  it  is  there  formed.''  "  The  much  greater  frequency  of  melanosis
in  the  grey  and  white  than  in  the  bay,  brown,  or  black  horse,  (continues  Dr.  C.)  is  a
circumstance  of  some  importance,  and  which  may  be  regarded  as  favourable  to  the
theory  which  ascribes  the  origin  of  melanosis  to  the  accumulation  in  the  blood  of  the
carbon  which  is  naturally  employed  to  colour  different  parts  of  the  body,  and  more
particularly  the  hair.  This  theory  we  are  disposed  to  adopt,  not  only  as  regards  the
formation  of  the  disease  under  these  circumstances  of  colour,  but  also  when  it  occurs
in  animals  of  a  diirk  colour,  and  in  man  indiscriminately,  whatever  may  be  the  pe-
culiar tint  of  the  skin  or  colour  of  the  hair.  In  the  first  instance,  the  colouring
matter  formed  is  not  deposited  in  the  regular  physiological  order  ;  in  the  second  it
is  formed  in  too  great  quantity.  In  both  cases,  its  presence  nnd  accumulation  in
the  blood  is  accounted  for." — Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.iii.  p.  95. — Transl.


MELANOSIS  OK  THE  LUXGS.


357


In  early  infancy,  we  perceive  no  trace  of  it,  and  the  lungs  are  of
as  pure  a  rose  colour  as  those  of  the  ox  and  several  other  animals.
Perhaps  this  peculiar  matter  exists  only  in  man,  and  the  carni-
vorous animals ;  but  I  have  been  too  little  practised  in  compa-
rative anatomy  to  advance  any  thing  positive  on  the  subject.  I
have  sometimes  imagined  that  this  matter  may  arise,  at  least  in
part,  from  the  smoke  of  lamps  or  other  bodies  in  combustion,
since  we  find  some  old  subjects  (and  I  have  thought  these  were
most  commonly  country  people  least  accustomed  to  the  use  of
artificial  lights)  in  whom  it  exists  in  very  small  quantity  both
in  the  lungs  and  bronchial  glands.  I  must  admit,  however,  that
I  have  seen  the  same  slight  degree  of  colouring  in  individuals
who  had  been  much  exposed  to  this  cause  ;  as  in  one  of  the  cases
detailed  at  the  close  of  this  chapter.  When  it  exists  only  in
small  quantity,  it  merely  gives  to  the  lungs  a  slight  grey  tint.
On  the  surface  it  appears  in  small  disseminated  black  dots,  which
are  more  numerous  and  thicker  along  the  intersecting  lines  of
the  cells,  so  as  to  form  striae,  small  spots,  or  punctuated  lines.
These  spots,  still  further  crowded  in  different  places,  as  well  in
the  interior  as  on  the  surface  of  the  lungs,  form  spots  still  larger
and  more  numerous,  so  as  sometimes  to  give  a  black  colour  to
large  portions  of  these  organs.  In  no  case,  however,  does  this
matter  affect  the  suppleness  or  permeability  of  the  lung,  a  cir-
cumstance which  forms  a  striking  contrast  with  the  melanose
infiltration.  It  is  particularly  in  the  bronchial  glands  that  this
black  matter  is  found  most  abundantly.  In  adults,  and  espe-
pecially  in  old  persons,  they  are  often  found  completely  black ;
in  others  they  are  only  partially  stained,  as  if  touched  by  a
pencil.  A  condition  of  parts  so  common  cannot  be  regarded  as
capable  of  producing  disease,  especially  as  it  is  often  unattended
by  any  symptom  whatever  of  disorder.  This  matter  in  the
bronchial  glands  would  appear  to  be  the  cause  of  the  grey  colour
of  the  bronchial  mucus,  which  many  healthy  persons  expectorate,
and  of  the  small  black  specks  found  frequently  intermixed  with
that  transparent  secretion.  This  character  of  the  bronchial
mucus  establishes  another  distinction  between  the  black  pul-
monary matter  and  the  matter  of  melanosis,  as  the  existence  of
the  latter,  even  in  the  greatest  degree,  never  gives  rise  to  an  ex-
pectoration of  a  black  colour,  unless,  perhaps,  at  the  very  mo-
ment of  the  escape  of  the  softened  melanose  mass  into  the
bronchi.*

*  In  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for  1813,  Dr.  Pearson  has  given  an  account
and  a  chemical  analysis  of  the  black  pulmonary  matter  as  existing  in  the  bronchial
glands.  I  give  the  result  of  Dr.  P.'s  examination  in  the  words  of  Dr.  Young: —
*'  He  (Dr.  Pearson)  considers  the  bronchial  bodies  as  true  lymphatic  glands,  and
thinks  the  black  substance  which  often  tinges  them,  consists  of  charcoal,  derived
from  small  particles  of  dust  floating  in  the  atmosphere,  which  have  been  taken  in  by
the  absorbents,  and  deposited  in  their  glands  !  and  he  has  found  some  of  the  lym-


358


Melanosis  of  the  lungs.


The  formation  of  tubercles  in  the  lungs,  and,  more  especially,
the  cicatrization  of  the  tuberculous  excavations,  frequently  pro-
duces, as  I  have  previously  observed,  a  more  abundant  secretion
of  the  black  pulmonary  matter.  In  some  cases,  this  abundance
is  such,  as, — in  conjunction  with  the  compression  of  the  pulmo-
nary tissue  produced  by  the  tubercles,  the  cartilaginous  cicatrices
and  the  chalky  matter  that  accompanies  them, — to  render  the
affected  part  considerably  indurated,  flaccid,  and  more  or  less
impermeable  to  air.  In  extreme  cases  of  this  kind,  it  is  difficult
to  say  whether  the  colour  and  density  of  the  affected  part  are  the
consequence  of  black  pulmonary  matter,  or  of  melanosis.  The
rule  of  distinction  we  ought  to  follow  in  such  cases  is  the  fol-
lowing : — We  ought  not  to  admit  the  existence  of  melanosis,
unless  we  find  some  of  it  in  portions  of  some  extent,  and  already
softened,  or,  at  least,  so  deposited  and  shaped,  as  to  distinguish
it  from  bronchial  glands.  We  ought  not  to  admit  the  existence
of  the  infiltration  of  this  matter,  unless  it  has  produced  in  the
lungs  a  degree  of  induration  equal  to  that  of  liver  :  and  when
this  degree  of  hardness  can  be  traced  to  the  presence  of  bony  or
cartilaginous  bodies,  we  ought  to  consider  the  black  colour  as
derived  from  the  black  pulmonary  matter.  To  render  this  dis-
tinction more  easy,  I  shall  here  detail  two  cases.  The  first  is  an
instance  of  melanosis  occurring  in  the  lungs,  and  in  several  other
parts  of  the  body.  I  prefer  it,  because  it  exhibits  the  disease  in
a  great  degree  of  development,  and  because  it  was  drawn  up
neither  by  myself  nor  by  my  direction ;  it  is  extracted  from  the
register  of  cases  by  the  hospital  pupils  for  1816,  preserved  in
the  office  of  the  board  of  administration.  The  second  case  offers
an  example  of  the  difficulty  of  distinguishing  the  black  pulmo-
nary matter  from  the  matter  of  melanosis.*

phatics  occasionally  filled  with  a  similar  substance.  He  supports  his  opinion  by
chemical  experiments,  which  show  the  insolubility  of  the  black  substance  in  nitric
acid,  while  he  has  been  unable  to  find  any  other  animal  substance,  the  ink  of  the
cuttle  fish  not  excepted,  that  resists  the  action  of  the  acid.  The  glands  of  the  mesen-
tery, he  says,  are  also  sometimes  black,  but  their  blackness  disappears  upon  immer-
sion in  the  nitric  or  muriatic  acid." — Young  on  Consumption,  p.  468.

Likewise  Dr.  Cbristison  (Edin.  Med.  Journ.,  vol.  36,  p.  393)  has  recorded  an
analysis  of  the  black  matter  (evidently  derived  from  an  external  source)  found
universnlly  discolouring  the  lungs,  in  the  very  interesting  case  by  Dr.  J.  C.Gregorv.
This  analysis  coincides,  in  the  main,  with  that  of  Dr.  Pearson. — Transl.

*  For  a  complete  view  of  all  that  is  known  respecting  melanosis,  and  certain  other
affections  which  have  been  confounded  with  it,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  Fourth
Fasciculus  of  Dr.  Caiswell's  invaluable  work  on  pathological  anatomy,  and  to  the
article  Melanosis,  by  the  same  author,  in  the  third  volume  of  the  Cyclopaedia  of
Practical  Medicine.  Dr.  Carswell  adopts  the  generic  term  Melanoma,  as  including
"  all  melanotic  formations,  black  discolorations,  or  products  described  by  Laennec
and  other  authors,"  but  separates  them  into  two  great  groups,  terming  the  one
true  melanosis,  the  other  spurious  melanosis.  Under  the  first  head  he  comprehends  all
the  black  formations  which  depend  on  a  modification  of  the  secretory  process,  which
gives  rise  to  the  natural  colour  of  certain  parts  of  the  body,  that  is,  all  such  products
as  can  be  regarded  as  constituting  an  idiopathic  disease:  under  the  second,  he
rano-es  all  those  which  originate  in  the  accumulation  of  a  carbonaceous  substance


MI  LANOSIS OF THIS  LUNGS.


359


Case  XXXI.  Melanosis  developed  in  a  great  number  of
organs. — A  woman,  aged  fifty-nine,  entered  the  Hospital  Saint
Louis  in  August  1816,  for  an  affection  of  two  months'  standing,
which  had  arisen  after  violent  grief.  The  disease  commenced
with  great  prostration  of  strength,  loss  of  appetite  and  sleep.
These  symptoms  were  followed  by  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  and
the  development  of  small  tumours,  of  a  black  colour,  in  different
parts  of  the  skin.  When  she  came  into  the  hospital,  a  great
number  of  these  tumours,  of  the  form  and  colour  of  black  cur-
rant seed,  occupied  the  anterior  part  of  the  thorax.  The  spaces
between  some  of  these  were  filled  with  small  spots  very  like  flea-
bites.  The  tumours  were  so  close  on  the  breasts  as  to  form  a
large  plate  or  crust.  Some  of  the  same  sort  existed  in  the
abdomen,  the  largest  being  two  inches  in  circumference.  The
arms  and  thighs,  especially  on  their  inside,  were  marked  in  a
similar  manner;  the  fore  arms  and  legs  were  without  any.
In  addition  to  the  symptoms  already  mentioned,  the  respiration
was  difficult,  there  was  frequent  cough,  and  the  pulse  was  ex-
tremely quick.  These  symptoms  gradually  increasing  in  degree,
and  being  followed  by  oedema,  the  patient  shortly  after  died.

Dissection. — The  cutaneous  tumours  were  found  to  consist  of
a  homogeneous  substance,  of  a  more  or  less  deep  black  colour,
and  of  a  consistence  in  some  cases  very  considerable,  in  others
merely  pulpy.  These  tumours  had  all  cysts  of  cellular  substance,
and  appeared  to  be  evidently  of  the  kind  already  described  as
melanosis.  They  were  found  in  almost  the  whole  of  the  subcu-
taneous cellular  tissue ;  also  in  the  same  tissue  which  incloses
the  vessels,  nerves,  and  the  lymphatic  glands.  In  some  places
they  formed,  by  their  aggregation,  masses  as  large  as  the  fist.
The  nerves  in  their  vicinity  were  sound,  but  the  blood-vessels
could  not  be  separated  from  them  without  rupture.  These
tumours  were  found  in  the  thyroid  gland ;  also,  in  small  quan-
tity, in  the  lungs.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  bronchial  glands
they  were  numerous  and  larger,  but  the  bronchial  glands  them-
selves were  not  black.  They  were  seen  in  the  substance  of  the
mediastinum,  and  under  the  pleura ;  also,  in  great  numbers,  in
the  mesentery  and  omentum.  All  the  abdominal  viscera,  except
the  liver,  were  sound,  but  the  cellular  substance  around  them
contained  similar  tumours. The  heart  and  brain  were  sound.

Case  XXX.  Imperfect  cicatrices  in  the  lungs,  intermixed
with  cartilaginous  and  chalky  productions,  and  a  great  accu-
mulation of  black  pulmonary  matter. -  A  man,  sixty  years  of

introduced  into  the  body  from  without,  in  the  action  of  chemical  agents  on  the  blood,
or  in  the  stagnation  of  the  blood  within  the  body.  Dr.  Carswell's  essay,  in  his
Pathological  Anatomy,  is  illustrated  by  admirable  representations  of  the  disease,  not
only  as  occurring  iu  the  lungs,  but  in  most  of  the  other  organs  of  the  body.  For
further  references  to  the  published  accounts  of  melunosis,  see  the  bibliographical
notice  at  the  eud  of  the  present  chapter. — Transl.


3(i0


MELANOSIS OF THE  LUNGS.


age,  came  into  the  Necker  Hospital  in  October,  1817,  in  a  state
of  marked  cachexy.  He  had  a  slight  cough,  with  expectoration
of  a  grey,  semi-transparent,  and  somewhat  ropy  fluid,  which  led
to  the  suspicion  of  tubercles.  He  continued  in  the  same  state
until  the  end  of  January  following,  when  the  cough  became  some-
what worse.  At  this  time  the  chest,  on  percussion,  seemed  not
to  sound  very  well  on  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side  before,  and
the  respiration  was  less  distinct  in  the  same  point.  These  results
seemed  to  confirm  the  preconceived  idea  of  incipient  tubercles,
and  this  diagnostic  was  accordingly  made  in  the  case-book.  In
the  end  of  March,  the  chest  was  found  to  yield  a  good  sound
throughout. He  died  on  the  13th  of  April.

Dissection. — The  right  lung  was  attached  to  the  costal
pleura  at  its  summit  by  means  of  a  firm  cellular  band,  which
sprung  from  a  depression  in  the  lung,  irregularly  marked  by
furrows  uniting  in  a  central  point,  and  having  every  appearance
of  cicatrices.  Beneath  this  depression,  in  the  substance  of  the
lung,  a  solid  tumour  was  felt,  of  the  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg,  which,
on  incision,  was  found  to  consist  of  a  grey  semi-transparent  sub-
stance, of  the  consistence  and  texture  of  cartilage,  intermixed
with  small  portions  of  the  natural  tissue  of  the  lung,  only  very
black  and  flabby.  There  were  also  found  in  it  small  cavities
filled  with  a  soft  chalky  matter.  The  whole  lobe  was  one  quarter
smaller  than  natural,  and  almost  entirely  of  a  dark  hue,  varying,
in  different  points,  from  a  slate  colour  to  that  of  the  blackest  ink.
In  the  interstices  of  the  cartilaginous  bands,  there  were  several
small  cavities,  quite  empty,  and  of  the  size  of  a  hemp-seed.  Seve-
ral bronchial  tubes,  much  dilated,  terminated  in  this  indurated
mass.  One  of  these,  as  large  as  a  goose-quill  before  entering  the
tumour,  was  contracted  immediately  within  it  to  the  size  of  a
crow-quill,  and  finally  terminated  abruptly  in  the  centre  of  the
mass  without  giving  off  any  other  branch.  The  middle  and  in-
ferior lobes  were  pretty  sound,  but  contained  a  few  miliary  tuber-
cles. The  upper  lobe  on  the  left  side  presented  the  same  appear-
ances as  the  right,  only  in  a  still  more  marked  degree.  In  this,
the  depression  was  several  lines  deep,  and  an  inch  square,  and
was  partly  covered  by  the  overlapping  of  the  adjoining  portion
of  sound  lung.  A  cellular  band  from  the  centre  of  this  depres-
sion united  the  lobe  to  the  costal  pleura.  The  whole  summit  of
this  lobe,  as  low  as  the  third  rib,  was  indurated  and  variegated
precisely  as  that  on  the  other  side.  There  were  adhesions  between
the  heart  and  pericardium,  and  the  ventricles  were  enlarged.  The
abdomen  contained  a  large  quantity  of  a  yellowish  limpid  fluid.
The  whole  peritoneum  was  of  a  dirty  grey  colour,  and  studded
with  innumerable  small,  red,  grey,  or  black  points.  The  red
points,  united  in  flakes,  had  all  the  marks  of  being  the  result  of
an  ancient  inflammation.  The  others  seemed  to  be  tubercles
in  the  first  stage,  grey  and  semi-transparent ;  they  formed  small


MELANOSIS OF  TIIK  I.UNOS.


301


tumours  on  the  surface  of  the  membrane,  and  some  of  them  Were
of  the  size  of  lauge  hemp-seeds.  Those  which  were  of  a  black
colour  and  opaque,  were  evidently  formed  of  the  matter  of  mela-
nosis. These  two  species  of  tubercles  were  most  numerous  on
the  intestinal  portion  of  the  peritoneum ;  the  red  spots  or  flakes
wore,  on  the  other  hand,  most  plentiful  on  the  mesentery  and
omentum.  This  last  was  rolled  together,  so  as  to  form  a  sort  of
hard  and  irregular  tumour  in  the  left  hypochondrium.  The  peri-
toneum seemed  much  thicker  and  much  softer  than  natural;  but
this  arose  from  its  being  covered  throughout,  between  the  granu-
lations above  mentioned,  with  a  thin  and  soft  coating  or  layer  of
albumen.

In  the  first  of  these  cases,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  nature
of  the  black  tumours  found  in  the  lungs.  The  co-existence  of
similar  tumours  in  divers  other  parts  of  the  body,  and  the  absence
of  the  black  colour  in  the  bronchial  glands  themselves,  leave  no
doubt  on  the  subject.  In  the  second  case,  the  question  as  to  the
nature  of  the  black  matter  in  the  indurated  portions  of  the  lungs,
is  much  more  difficult.  The  fact  of  the  existence  of  bodies  an-
swering to  the  character  already  assigned  to  pulmonary  cicatrices,
and  also  of  bony  and  cretaceous  tumours,  and,  further,  the  im-
mature tubercles  in  other  parts  of  the  lungs,  as  well  as  on  the
surface  of  the  peritoneum, — all  tend  to  support  the  opinion  of  the
black  colour  being  produced  merely  by  the  black  pulmonary
matter.  On  the  other  hand,  the  existence  of  some  melanose  tu-
mours on  the  peritoneum  give  some  colour  to  the  suspicion,  of  the
black  portion  of  the  lungs  having  derived  their  origin  from  the
same  source.  The  arguments,  however,  are  decidedly  in  favour
of  the  former  opinion.

I  have  already  observed,  that  M.  Bayle  appears  to  have  some-
times confounded  the  matter  of  melanosis  with  the  common  black
pulmonary  matter.  I  think  he  has  been  equally  wrong  in  class-
ing melanosis  of  the  lungs  as  a  species  of  phthisis.  In  fact,  the
melanose  affection,  in  place  of  producing  progressive  emaciation
and  hectic  fever,  the  most  constant  symptoms  of  tuberculous
phthisis,  rather  tends  to  produce  cachexy  and  anasarca,  and
usually  proves  fatal  before  the  supervention  of  any  marked  de-
gree of  emaciation.  If  we  were  to  class  diseases  from  so  feeble
analogies,  we  ought  to  range  among  consumptions,  chronic  pleu-
risy, pneumony,  and  catarrh,  as  well  as  several  affections  of
the  heart,  or,  indeed,  every  disease  attended  by  dyspnoea  and
emaciation.

In  medical  writings  we  find  but  few  cases  which  can  be  referred
to  this  disease,  melanosis  ;  a  circumstance  which,  no  doubt,  proves
its  extreme  rarity ;  since  its  characters,  especially  when  occurring
in  any  other  organ  besides  the  lungs,  are  so  well  marked,  as  hardly
to  be  mistaken.  Haller  relates  (Opus.  Pathol.)  sonic  of  the  best
marked  instances  of  it.  "  I  have  observed,11  he  says,  "  a  horrible


3C2


ENCEPHAL01D  TUMOUR  OF  THE  LUNGS.


species  of  pulmonary  consumption.  In  a  man  I  found  one  lung
filled,  not  with  pus,  but  with  a  matter  black  as  ink  ;  and  in  an-
other, I  have  since  found  a  similar  fluid  in  the  cavity  of  the
pleura."  Notwithstanding  the  brevity  of  these  notices,  it  is  im-
possible to  mistake,  in  the  first,  the  infiltration  of  the  lungs  with
the  melanose  matter  in  a  soft  state ;  and,  in  the  second,  a  secretion
of  the  same  matter  in  the  pleura.*


CHAPTER  XII.


OF  ENCEPHALOID, OR MEDULLARY  TUMOUR  OF  THE  LUNGS.

This  species  of  accidental  production,  which  was  described  for
the  first  time  in  the  Diet,  des  Sciences  Med.,  under  the  term
Encephaloides,  is  one  of  those  that  has  been  most  frequently  con-
founded under  the  name  Scirrhus  Cancer.  It  is,  indeed,  the
only  species  of  cancer  found  in  the  lungs  by  M.  Bayle  and  my-
self. It  has  received  its  name  from  its  striking  resemblance  to
brain.  M.  Bavle  has  considered  this  disease  as  constituting  a
variety  of  consumption,  and  has  named  it  Cancerous  Phthisis.

*  LITERATURE  OF  MELANOSIS  OF  THE  LUNGS.

1755.  Haller.  Opus.  Pathol.  (Obs.  xvii.) Lausanne.  8vo.

1810.  Bayle. Recherches  sur  la  Phthisie. Par.  8vo.

1813.  Gohier. Mem.  et  Obs.  sur  la  Chirurgie  et  la  Med.  Veter.  Lyon.

1817.  Alibert.  Nosologic  Nat.  t.  i.  Par.  4to.

Chornel. Nouv.  Journ.  de  Med. t.  iii.
1821 .  Brescbet  (G.)  Considerations  sur  une  alteration  organique  appellee  Degeneres-

cence  Noire,  Melanose,  &c. Par.  8vo.
1823.  Heusinger.  Untersucb.ueber  die  anomale  Koblen  und  pigmentbildung.  Eisenb.

1823.  Halliday. Lond.  Med.  Repos.  8vo.

1824.  Cullen  ( W.)  Carswell  (R.)  On  Melanosis.  (Edin.  Med.  Chir.  Trans,  vol.  i.  Ed.

1825.  Baillie. Morbid.  Anat.  Edit.  Wardrop. Lond.  8vo.

1826.  Fawdington,  (Th.) A  case  of  Melanosis. Lond.  8ro.
1826.  Andral. Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Melanose)  1. 14.  Par.

1826.  Noack. Comment,  de  Melan.  cum  in  hominibus  turn  in  equis. Lips.  4to.

1828.  Trousseau  &  Leblanc. Archives  de  Med.  Juin.

1829.  Andral. Precis.  d'Anat.  Patbol. t.  i.  p.  446.  Par.

1830.  Crampton  (J.,  M.D.)  Case  of  Melanosis.  (Dub.  Med.  Trans.  N.  S.  vol.  i.)

1831.  Gregory,  (J.  C,  M.D.)  Case  of  black  infiltration  of  the  lungs. (Ed.  Journ.

vol.  36.  p.  389.) Edin.  8vo.
1833.  Williams  (D.,  M.D.)  Trans,  of  the  Provincial  Med.  Ass.  vol.i.  Lond.  8vo.

1833.  Hope  (J.,  M.D.)  Morbid  Anat.  Part  II.  Lond.  8vo.

1834.  Carswell,  (R.i  M.D.)  Pathological  Anatomy. Fasc.  IV. Lond.  fol.

1834.  Carswell,  (R.,  M.D.)  Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  (Art.  Melanosis.)  vol.  iii.  Lond.

Plal  'es  rcpre<entin °  Melanosis. — Dr.  Carswell,  Pathol.  And.  Fasc.  IV.  Hope,  Mor-
bid Anat.  Part  II.  Fawdington,  Op.  Cit.  Williams,  Trans.  Provincial  As*,
vol.  i. — Transl.


ENCEPHALOID  TUMOUR OF  THE  LUNGS.


363


I  will  not  here  detail  my  reasons  for  rejecting  this  species,  as  they
are  nearly  the  same  as  already  adduced  against  the  admission  of
the  Phthisis  with  Melanosis  of  the  same  author. I  may  add,
that  in  all  the  cases  which  I  have  met  with  of  medullary  sarcoma
of  the  lungs,  death  has  been  produced  by  suffocation,  or  some
Other  affection,  before  the  period  when  any  thing  like  phthisical
symptoms  could  have  been  produced. And  I  am  of  opinion  that
the  cases  of  this  cancer,  uncomplicated  with  tubercles,  detailed  in
M.  Bayle's  work, — and  even  his  general  description  of  the  dis-
ease,— tend  to  establish  the  same  conclusion. Medullary  cancer
mav  exist  under  three  different  forms,  viz.  1st,  encysted ;  2nd,
in  irregular  masses,  without  a  cyst ;  and,  3rd,  diffused  in  the
tissue  of  an  organ. In  which  ever  of  these  forms  it  exists,  it  pre-
sents, in  its  progress,  three  different  and  distinct  stages, — viz.
1st,  the  incipient  or  crude  state;  2nd,  its  perfect  state,  in  which
it  exhibits  the  resemblance  to  brain,  which  forms  its  especial
characteristic  ;  and,  3rd,  its  soft  or  dissolved  state. I  shall  first
describe  it  as  it  it  is  observed  in  the  second,  or  perfect,  state,  as
this  is  the  condition  in  which  the  three  varieties  most  nearly
resemble  each  other,  there  being  much  difference  between  these
in  their  first  and  last  stages. In  its  perfect  state  it  is  homoge-
neous, of  a  milky  white,  and  very  like  the  medullary  substance  of
the  brain.*' In  different  parts  it  has  commonly  a  slight  rose  tint.
It  is  opaque  when  examined  in  mass,  but  in  thin  slices  it  is,  in  a
slight  degree,  semi-transparent. Its  consistence  is  like  that  of
the  human  brain,  but  it  is  commonly  less  coherent,  being  more
easily  broken  and  comminuted  by  the  finger. According  to  its
degrees  of  density,  it  resembles  one  part  of  the  brain  more  than
another;  but  it  is  more  commonly  like  the  medullary  substance
of  a  brain  that  is  more  than  ordinarily  soft,  (or  like  that  of  a
child's,)  than  the  healthy  brain. When  existing  in  anv  conside-
rable extent,  this  species  of  cancer  is,  in  general,  supplied  by  a
great  many  blood-vessels,  the  trunks  of  which  ramify  on  the  ex-
terior of  the  tumours,  or  between  their  lobes  only,  while  the
minuter  branches  penetrate  the  substance  of  the  tumours.  The
coats  of  these  blood-vessels  are  very  fine,  and  readily  ruptured  :
and  this  accident  gives  rise  to  clots  of  extravasated  blood  in  the
interior  of  the  tumours,  sometimes  of  considerable  size,  which
bear,  occasionally,  a  slight  resemblance  to  those  found  in  the  brain
of  subjects  dead  of  apoplexy. Extravasations  of  this  kind  may
sometimes  be  so  considerable  as  to  supplant  almost  the  whole  of
the  brain-like  matter;  so  that  the  true  nature  of  the  tumour  can
only  be  ascertained  by  some  small  points,  still  remaining,  of  the
original  growth. This  change  occurring  in  superficial  tumours
of  this  kind,  and  being  productive  of  much  haemorrhage,  appears

*  The  English  have  also  yarned  this  morhid  production,  from  its  resemblance  to
brain,  "  Medullary  tumour."  They  recognized  it  as  a  distinct  disease,  without  any
knowledge  of  what  had  been  done  in  France. — Author.


304


ENCEl'HALOIl) TUMOUR  OF THE  LUNGS.


to  me  to  have  given  rise  to  the  name  of  Fungus  Jlcematodes,  ap-
plied to  certain  cancers  by  modern  surgeons.  Under  this  name,
however,  I  am  also  convinced  that  they  have  confounded  tumours
of  different  kinds,  especially  those  commonly  called  varicose,
which  are  composed  of  an  accidental  tissue  very  analogous  to  that
of  the  corpus  cavernosum  penis.  I  have  never  observed  any
lymphatics  in  tumours  of  this  sort,  but  it  is  probable  that  the
circulating  system  is  complete  in  them,  as  I  have  seen  their  sub-
stance deeply  tinged  with  yellow  in  cases  of  icterus.  The  matter
of  Encephaloid  does  not  continue  long  in  the  state  just  described  ;
it  tends  incessantly  towards  a  softer  condition,  and  in  a  short
space  its  consistence  scarcely  equals  that  of  a  thickish  paste.
Then  begins  the  last  stage :  the  process  of  softening  becomes
more  rapid,  until  the  morbid  matter  becomes  as  liquid  as  thick
pus,  still,  however,  retaining  its  whitish  or  rosy-white  tint.  Some-
times at  this  period,  or  a  little  earlier,  the  blood  extravasated  from
the  vessels  contained  in  the  tumour,  becomes  intermixed  with  the
morbid  matter,  so  as  to  give  it  a  dark  red  colour,  and  the  resem-
blance of  clots  of  pure  blood.  In  a  short  time  the  extravasated
blood  is  decomposed ;  the  fibrin  concretes,  and,  together  with  the
colouring  matter,  unites  with  the  brain-like  matter  of  the  tumour,
and  the  serum  is  absorbed.  In  this  condition  the  morbid  growth
retains  no  resemblance  to  brain ;  it  is  of  a  reddish  or  blackish  co-
lour, and  of  a  consistence  like  that  of  paste,  somewhat  dry  and
friable.  Sometimes  the  change  of  structure  and  appearance  is  so
complete,  that  one  would  be  led  to  consider  the  tumours  as  of  a
different  kind,  but  for  the  existence  in  them  of  portions  of  the
original  matter  still  unchanged.  In  some  cases,  contempora-
neously with  tumours  that  have  been  changed  in  this  manner,
there  will  be  found  others  retaining  the  original  cerebral  charac-
ter ;  so  that,  in  all  cases,  we  are  able,  with  a  little  practice,  to
discover  the  true  nature  of  the  tumour  in  all  its  stages.

Such  are  the  characters  which  this  species  of  cancer  presents  in
its  two  latter  stages,  and  equally  in  all  the  three  varieties.  I
shall  now  describe  the  characters  of  each  of  these  varieties  in  the
first,  or  crude  state.

1.  Encysted  medullary  tumour.  The  size  of  this  species  is
very  various :  I  have  seen  the  tumours  as  small  as  a  hazel-nut,
and  larger  than  a  middle-sized  apple :  I  have  found  them  as  large
as  this  in  the  lungs.  The  cysts  are  of  pretty  equable  thickness ;
and  this  is  never  more  than  half  a  line ;  they  are  of  a  greyish-
white,  silvery,  or  milky  colour,  and  have  a  semi-transparency,
more  or  less,  according  to  their  thickness.  Their  texture  is  alto-
gether cartilaginous  and  rarely  fibrous ;  but  it  is  much  softer,
and  less  easily  broken  by  bending,  than  cartilage :  on  this  account
they  must  be  ranged  among  the  imperfect  cartilages.  The  me-
dullary matter  contained  in  these  cysts  can  be  easily  detached
from  their  inner  coat. It  is  commonly  divided  into  several  lobes


KKCRPHAT.OID TUMOUR OP" THE  LUNG?.


.'305


by  a  very  fine  cellular  tissue,  which  may  be  compared  with  the
pia  mater ;  and  it  resembles  this  the  more  owing  to  the  great
number  of  blood-vessels  which  traverse  it. The  fineness  and
brittleness  of  these  has  been  already  noticed,  and  also  their  pene-
tration of  the  cerebriform  matter  itself,  to  which  they  give  a  roso
tint,  here  and  there. It  is  their  rupture  that  gives  rise  to  the
clots  of  blood  formerly  mentioned. Sometimes,  also,  the  trunks
of  these  vessels  are  ruptured  in  the  interstices  of  the  lobules ;  and
the  blood  being  injected  beneath  the  fine  cellular  substance,  which
accompanies  them,  gives  this  the  appearance  of  a  distinct  mem-
brane. It  is  commonly  in  their  early  or  crude  stage  that  these
tumours  are  divided  into  distinct  lobes. These  are  especially
observable  on  their  surfaces,  and  have  sometimes  considerable
resemblance  to  the  convolutions  of  the  brain. The  cyst  does  not
at  all  enter  between  these  convolutions,  nor  does  it  even  indicate
on  its  surface  their  place  or  configuration. In  this  stage  the
cerebriform  matter  is  pretty  firm,  often  firmer  than  the  fat  of
bacon. It  is  of  a  dull  white,  pearl-grey,  or  even  yellowish  co-
lour, and,  in  thin  slices,  has  a  slight  degree  of  semi-transparency.
When  cut  into,  it  appears  subdivided  interiorly  into  lobules
much  smaller  than  those  seen  on  its  surface. These  lobules  arc
in  such  close  contact  as  to  leave  no  interval  whatever ;  and  their
separation  is  merely  indicated  by  the  reddish  lines  traced  by  the
vascular  cellular  tissue  by  which  the  separation  is  effected.
These  lines  rarely  cross  each  other,  but  exhibit  many  irregular
curves  and  convolutions. When  the  tumours  pass  into  the  se-
cond stage,  their  texture  becomes  more  homogeneous,  and  all  dis-
tinction of  the  small  interior  lobules  is  quite  lost ;  the  distinction,
however,  of  the  larger  exterior  lobes  still  continues. The  blood-
vessels which  run  between  these  lobes,  and  in  the  cellular  tissue
immediately  investing  the  tumour,  are  much  more  developed
than  in  the  early  stages  of  the  disease,  and  it  is  only  at  this  second
stage,  or  as  it  approaches  the  third,  that  the  extravasations  of
blood  take  place. The  third  stage  begins,  as  I  have  already  men-
tioned, when  the  medullary  matter  has  acquired  a  consistence
like  pap  or  paste,  or  like  that  of  a  brain  softened  by  commencing
putrefaction. In  this  state  it  has  still  much  resemblance  to  cere-
bral substance. I  have  never  found  that  this  morbid  growth
softens  still  more,  or  that  it  is  absorbed  or  evacuated,  so  as  to
leave  an  empty  cyst  or  cavity  like  tubercles;  consequently  it  is
not  probable  that  we  shall  ever  find  pectoriloquy  as  a  sign  of
this  affection. Hitherto  I  have  only  found  these  encysted  medul-
lary tumours  in  the  lungs,  liver,  and  cellular  substance  of  the
mediastinum.

2.  Unency.sh'd  medullary  tumour.— Medullary  tumours  of
this  species  are  very  frequently  met  with.  Their  size  is  very
variable ;  I  have  seen  them  from  the  size  of  the  head  of  a  full
grown  foetus  to  that  of  a  hemp-seed. Their  shape  is  commonly


366


ENCEPHALOID  TUMOUR  OF  THE  LUNGS.


spheroid,  but  occasionally  flattened,  ovoid,  or  altogether  irre-
gular. Their  external  surface  is  lobulated,  but  the  divisions  are
less  regular  than  in  the  encysted  species ;  their  internal  structure,
in  the  two  last  stages,  is  precisely  the  same.  The  cellular  mem-
brane which  invests  them,  is  more  or  less  marked,  according  as
they  are  placed  in  a  loose  cellular  tissue,  or  in  the  substance  of  a
viscus  of  firm  texture ;  in  the  latter  case,  their  investing  mem-
brane is  thinner  and  less  distinct.  In  their  first  or  crude  stage,
their  semi-transparency  is  greater  than  afterwards ;  they  are
almost  colourless,  or  have  a  very  slight  bluish  tint  in  ocellated
patches:  they  are  pretty  hard,  and  divided  into  numerous  lobes.
Their  substance  is  then  fatty,  like  lard ;  but  when  incised  it
does  not  at  all  grease  the  scalpel,  and  heat  coagulates  by  it  with-
out showing  a  particle  of  fat.  The  transition  from  the  first  to
the  second  stage  takes  place  in  the  following  manner : — the  sub-
stance of  the  tumour  becomes  more  opaque,  softer,  whiter,  and
its  inner  distinction  into  lobules,  for  the  most  part,  disappears.
The  original  texture  is  observed  longest  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  external  interlobular  fissures.  In  this  situation,  I  have  found
portions  still  in  a  state  of  induration,  after  the  mass  of  the  tu-
mours had  passed  into  the  third  stage.  I  am  led  to  conclude
that  the  encysted  medullary  tumour  follows  precisely  the  same
progress  as  that  just  described.  The  non-encysted  medullary
tumours  may  exist  in  any  part  of  the  body ;  but  they  are  most
frequently  met  with  in  the  loose  and  abundant  cellular  tissue  of
the  limbs,  and  in  the  larger  internal  cavities.  I  have  met  with
them  in  the  cellular  membrane  of  the  fore-arm,  thigh,  neck,  and
mediastinum ;  they  are  still  more  frequently  found  in  the  cel-
lular substance  around  the  kidneys  and  the  interior  part  of  the
spine,  and  in  these  situations  they  often  have  a  very  large  size.
Although  they  are  frequently  found  in  the  viscera,  they  are,
however,  much  rarer  there  than  in  the  cellular  substance.

3.  Infiltration  of  organs  by  the  matter  of  medullary  tumour.
— As  I  have  never  met  with  this  variety  in  the  lungs,  I  shall  not
describe  it  in  this  place.  I  may  merely  observe  that  it  is  distin-
guished from  the  unencysted  kind,  by  forming  masses  not  at  all
circumscribed,  in  which  the  medullary  matter  approaches  nearer
to  the  imperfect  or  crude  state,  the  more  distant  it  is  from  the
centre  of  the  tumour.  It  exhibits,  moreover,  a  very  heterogeneous
appearance,  produced  by  its  intermixture,  in  different  propor-
tions, with  the  different  organic  tissues  amid  which  it  is  de-
veloped.*

•  The  anatomical  history  of  Encephaloid  Cancer,  as  given  by  Laennec,  has  been,
like  that  of  Tubercle,  questioned  in  almost  every  particular.  According  to  many
pathologists,  Scirrhus  and  Encephaloid  Cancer  are  not  accidental  productions  or
tissues  of  new  formation,  developed  in  toto  within  the  substance  of  other  organs,
and  preserving  a  sort  of  individual  and  peculiar  life.  On  the  contrary,  they  are
regarded  as  mere  modifications  of  some  natural  tissue,  the  cellular,  or  cellulo-fibrous,
—assuming  different  forms  accordiug  to  the  mode  in  which  the  particular  elemen-


DISEASES  OF  THE PULMONARY  VESSELS.


3G7


During  the  greater  part  of  the  progress  of  Encephaloid  Cancer,
there  is  no  fever,  and  in  many  cases  it  proves  fatal  without  having
even  occasioned  any  change  in  the  pulse.  When  fever  makes  its
appearance,  it  is  commonly  owing  to  some  accidental  circum-
>t;mce,  as  when  the  tumour  presses  upon  any  important  organ,
and  occasions  great  irritation  or  inflammation.  This  disease
may  also  exist  for  a  long  period  without  producing  emaciation ;
but  this  state  always  supervenes  before  death,  and  then  makes
rapid  progress.  The  only  cases  in  which  death  supervenes  with-
out previous  emaciation,  are  those  in  which  the  fatal  result  is
immediately  owing  to  the  situation  of  the  tumours,  by  the  com-
pression they  make  on  organs  essential  to  life,  as  the  brain  or
lungs.  On  the  other  hand,  the  emaciation  begins  almost  as  early
as  the  disease  itself,  in  certain  cases  where  the  affection  is  so
situated  as  to  be  capable  of  occasioning  a  colliquative  discharge,
as  in  the  uterus.  Dropsy  is  not  a  necessary  effect  of  this  disease,
although  it  comes  on  very  frequently  towards  its  termination,
particularly  if  it  is  situated  in  the  liver  or  womb.

From  the  preceding  account  it  results,  that  the  stethoscope
ought  to  point  out  the  existence  of  the  medullary  tumour  of  the
lungs,  when  this  is  of  considerable  extent.  In  the  work  of  M.
JBayle  there  is  a  case  of  this  disease  in  the  lungs  (Case  XXXVI.)
communicated  to  him  by  me.  I  shall  not  add  any  case  in  this
place,  as  the  medullary  is  very  easily  distinguishable  from  every
other  species  of  cancer.*


CHAPTER  XIII.

DISEASES  OE  THE PULMONARY  VESSELS.

Organic  lesions  of  the  vessels  of  the  lungs  are  extremely  rare.
The  branches  of  the  pulmonary  artery  are,  no  doubt,  preserved

tary  tissue  is  continued  in  the  composition  of  the  different  organs.  According  to
this  view,  Scirrhus  is  merely  an  hypertrophy  of  the  cellular  tissue  carried  to  such
an  extent  that  all  the  cells  are  obliterated  and  the  whole  mass  condensed  into  a  ho-
mogenous and  apperently  lardaceous  substance.  Encephaloid  Cancer  is,  in  like  man-
ner, nothing  else  but  the  same  cellular  tissue  more  or  less  hypertrophied  or  otherwise
altered,  and  into  which  is  deposited,  by  a  true  morbid  secretion,  a  peculiar  inorganic
matter  having  some  resemblance  to  the  substance  of  the  brain  :  this  matter  may  be
separated  from  its  investing  tissue  by  strong  pressure,  and  only  retains  an  appear-
ance of  organization,  because  some  remains  of  the  cells  and  vessels  of  the  tissue  in
which  it  is  deposited,  still  are  visible  amidst  its  mass.  (Broussais,  Phleg.  Chron.
t.  i.  p.  22,  et  seq. — Andral,  Clin.  Med.  t.  iv.  p.  404.  Cruveilhier,  Noav.  Bib.  Med.
Janv.  &  Fev.  1827).— <iW.  L.)

*  The  disease  described  in  this  chapter  was  noticed  by  the  English  surgeons  be-
fore it  attracted  the  attention  of  our  author.  Their  researches,  however,  were  en-
tirely unknown  to  him  when  he  first  published  his  account  of  this  disease. It  was


368


DISEASES  OF  THE PULMOKAUY  VESSELS.


from  ancurisniatic  affections,  by  their  softness  and  elasticity  ;
and  I  have  never  seen  recorded,  nor  met  in  practice,  with  any
examples  of  ossification  in  them.  The  same  remark  applies  to
the  bronchial  arteries,  which  are  perhaps  protected  from  both
lesions  by  the  smallness  of  their  diameter.  The  pulmonary  veins
seem  equally  exempt  from  organic  derangement.  I  have  never
met  with  an  instance  of  the  varicose  state  of  them,  mentioned  by
Riolan  and  two  or  three  other  observers.*  The  only  structural
lesion  I  have  met  with  in  these  veins,  is  an  infarction  produced
by  the  concretion  of  their  contents,  and  which  I  shall  notice  when
treating  of  diseases  of  the  organs  of  circulation.  I  formerly  re-
marked, that  the  vessels  of  different  orders,  particularly  the
blood-vessels,  are  frequently  compressed  and  completely  flat-
tened in  the  vicinity  of  tuberculous  masses;  and  the  same  remark
may  be  extended  to  every  other  kind  of  engorgement  or  obstruc-
tion of  the  pulmonary  substance.  In  hepatization  from  pneu-
monia, and  even  in  the  haemoptysical  infarction,  when  it  has
become  hard,  in  whichever  direction  we  lay  open  the  indurated
portions,  we  find  only  very  few  vessels,  and  in  some  cases,  we
cannot  observe  over  the  whole  extent  of  a  surface  of  several
inches  square,  a  single  open  vessel.  In  these  cases,  injections
thrown  into  the  pulmonary  artery  or  veins,  scarcely  penetrate
the  hepatized  parts,  and  only  very  imperfectly  the  larger  trunks,
as  has  been  remarked  by  M.  Cruveilhier.  I  had  formerly  occa-
sion to  remark,  that  the  compression  of  the  vessels  produced  by
the  tuberculous  infarction  of  the  lungs,  frequently  occasioned
their  complete  obliteration,  either  within  the  bodies  of  the  tuber-
culous masses,  or  on  the  walls  of  the  excavations  which  succeed
these.  The  same  thing  must  happen  after  chronic  pneumonia,
particularly  that  which  supervenes  to  gangrenous  eschars.  In-
deed, in  this  case,  the  obliteration  of  the  greater  number  of  ves-
sels is  quite  evident ;  and  I  formerly  remarked,  that  the  dryness
of  the  part  affected,  is  one  of  the  essential  characters  of  this  or-
ganic lesion. The  pulmonary  vessels  are  likewise  more  or  less

noticed  by  Dr.  Baillie  in  his  Morbid  Anatomy,  published  in  1796,  under  the  name
of  the  pulpy  testicle;  but  it  was  Mr.  John  Burns,  of  Glasgow,  who  first  called  the
attention  of  practitioners  to  this  affection,  under  the  name  of  i-pongoid  Inflammation,
in  his  Dissertations  on  Inflammation,  published  in  18'I0.  Mr.  Hey,  of  Leeds,  with-
out any  knowledge  of  what  had  been  observed  by  Mr.  Burns,  gave  an  account  of
the  same  disease  (which  he  termed  fungus  ha'matodes,)  in  his  Practical  Observations
in  Surgery,  published  in  1805 ;  and  in  the  following  year  (1804)  Mr.  Aberneihy
described  the  affection  under  the  name  of  medullary  sarcom",  in  his  Surgical  Observa-
tions on  Tumours.  But  the  completest  and  best  account  of  this  disease  which  we
possess  in  the  English  language,  is  contained  in  Mr.  W ardrop's  Observations  on  Fun-
gus Ha-matodes  or  Soft  Cancer,  published  in  1809.  In  this  work  the  author  notices
the  disease  as  existing  in  most  of  the  organs  of  the  body.  In  1811  it  was  noticed
by  Dr.  Monro  (Morbid  Anatomy  of  the  Gullet,  p.  160,)  under  the  name  of  milt-like
tumour  of  the  mucous  membranes.  Since  then  the  periodical  publications  have  teemed
with  cases  of  this  disease.  For  an  accurate  history  and  delineation  of  this  disease,
see  Dr.  Carswell's  Pathological  Anatomy,  Fasc.  ii.  &  iii  — Tranti.

*  Sepulchret,  t.  ii.  sect,  lii.obs.  vii.  '  Caldani  Memoire  di  Fisica  del  soc.  Hal.  in
IWodena,  torn.  xii.  part  second. — Ilarlcs,  in  Floucquet,


OF  NEIIVOUS AFFECTIONS  OF THE  LUNGS.


30i)


flattened,  when  the  lungs  are  compressed  against  the  spine,  by  a
pleuritic  effusion,  but  in  this  case,  as  well  as  in  the  obstruction  of
haemoptysis  and  acute  pneumonia,  when  the  compressing  cause  is
removed,  the  blood  circulates  anew  in  its  wonted  channels,  there
not  having  been  sufficient  time  to  cause  adhesion  of  the  sides  of
the  vessels  to  each  other.  The  knowledge  of  this  state  of  com-
pression of  the  pulmonary  vessels,  in  all  cases  of  pulmonary  ob-
struction, ought  to  encourage  us  to  practise  the  operation  of
empyema,  with  more  boldness  than  is  customary.  We  know  that
it  has  more  than  once  happened,  that  the  surgeon,  after  pene-
trating the  intercostal  muscles,  has  not  ventured  to  proceed  fur-
ther, on  account  of  meeting  with  a  dense  substance,  which  he  has
been  afraid  to  penetrate,  lest  it  might  be  the  lungs  themselves,
but  which  was  in  most  cases  merely  a  false  membrane.  Such  a
doubt  will  hardly  be  entertained  at  present,  except  under  certain
circumstances  which  are  extremely  uncommon,  as  will  be  shown
in  the  chapter  on  pleurisy.  But  without  reference  to  these  signs,
we  may  be  assured,  that  in  every  case  where  the  sound  of  respira-
tion and  the  resonance  on  percussion  are  altogether  wanting,  and
have  been  so  for  some  time,  in  one  side  of  the  chest,  there  is  no-
thing to  dread  from  an  exploratory  puncture  ;  when  these  two
signs  are  present,  we  are  certain  that  there  exists  either  an  effusion
into  the  pleura,  or  a  chronic  infarction  of  the  lungs ;  in  the  first
case,  the  operation  will  be  proper,  and  in  the  last,  we  need  be
under  no  apprehension  of  any  dangerous  haemorrhage,  on  ac-
count of  the  compression  of  the  pulmonary  vessels.


CHAPTER  XIV.

OF  "NERVOUS  AFFECTIONS  OF  THE  LUNGS.

Sect.  I. — Of  Neuralgia  of  the  lungs.

Although  the  lungs  receive  a  great  many  filaments  from  the
pneumo-gastric  nerve,  their  sensibility  of  relation  is  very  slight,
even  in  a  state  of  disease.  In  the  most  acute  pneumonia  and
lia  tnoptysis,  the  pain  is  slight,  and  frequently  altogether  wanting,
unless  the  pleura  be  at  the  same  time  affected;  and  we  have
shown  that  in  the  case  of  phthisis  and  catarrh,  the  patients  can
rarely  point  out  the  spot  from  which  the  expectoration  proceeds.
On  the  other  hand,  however,  it  is  by  no  means  rare  to  meet  with
individuals  who,  without  any  physical  or  rational  sign  of  organic-
disease,  and  even  while  enjoying  the  most  perfect  health  in  other
respects,  suffer  acute  pain,  sometimes  even  extremely  acute  pain,
in  the  interior  of  the  chest. This  pain  may  be  momentary  or  of

n  a


370


OF NERVOUS AFFECTIONS  OF THE  LUNGS.


long  duration,  intermittent  or  continued,  confined  to  one  spot  or
diffused,  fixed  or  moveable  ;  and  sometimes  it  shoots  by  fits  along
the  walls  of  the  chest  and  neighbouring  parts,  in  the  course  of
the  intercostal  and  anterior  thoracic  nerve,  or  the  brachial  plexus
and  its  branches. It  is  frequently  deep  between  the  spine  and
scapula,  and  shoots  from  thence  in  such  directions  as  lead  to  the
belief  that  it  is  situated  in  the  great  sympathetic. I  have  been
consulted  by  persons  who  had  suffered  from  pains  of  this  kind
for  several  years  ;  and  in  cases  where  they  were  of  recent  occur-
rence, I  have  known  physicians,  otherwise  well  informed,  mistake
them  as  indications  of  incipient  pneumonia  or  tubercles,  and  pre-
scribe bloodletting,  with  the  effect  of  weakening  but  not  relieving
their  patients. It  appears  to  me  evident,  that  these  disorders
are  of  the  kind  to  which  we  give  the  name  neuralgia ;  a  class
of  affections  which  unquestionably  have  their  site  in  the  nerves,
since  the  pains  follow  the  course  of  these,  but  of  the  precise
nature  of  which  we  are  ignorant. In  these  cases,  dissection  has
afforded  variable  results  :  frequently  no  morbid  condition  of  the
nerve  has  been  found  ;  sometimes  it  has  been  found  smaller,  at
other  times  larger  than  natural. In  some  rare  instances,  the
neurilemma  has  appeared  red  from  injection  of  its  vessels,  or  sur-
rounded with  a  transparent  jelly,  without  any  mark  of  inflam-
mation, or  even  sometimes  (but  very  rarely  indeed)  infiltrated
with  pus. So  great  a  variety  of  appearances  ought,  I  think,  to
lead  us  to  suppose,  that  these  may  be  the  consequence  and  not
the  cause  of  the  neuralgia.*

The  means  which  I  have  found  most  efficacious  against  these
painful  affections  of  the  chest  are,  the  different  preparations  of
mercury,  particularly  frictions  with  corrosive  sublimate,  (from
four  to  nine  grains  to  half  a  drachm  of  lard,)  repeated  every
second  day,  and  always  on  a  fresh  place.  These  frictions  I  have
sometimes  continued  for  several  months  at  a  time  :  and  when
there  is  reason  for  fearing  that  this  preparation  may  be  too  irri-
tating to  the  organs  of  digestion  or  respiration,  I  substitute
calomel  in  a  like  dose.  I  have  also  sometimes  made  trial  of
balsams,  particularly  copaiba,  and  turpentine  combined  with  the
balsam  of  Tolu,  because  of  the  known  benefit  derived  from  these,

*  There  is  one  kind  of  neuralgia  of  the  thoracic  parietes  which  I  have  very  fre-
quently met  with  in  practice,  and  which,  I  believe,  is  often  mistaken  for  organic
disease  of  some  of  the  viscera  of  the  thorax  or  abdomen.  The  pain  is  commonly
Beated  about  the  middle  of  the  false  ribs  ;  it  is  frequently  of  long  continuance,  and  is
often  very  distressing  to  the  patient,  but  ratlier  on  account  of  its  obstinacy  tban
violence.  It  is  observed  almost  always  in  young  women,  and  is  in  most  cases  owing
(I  conceive)  to  pressure  upon  the  intercostal  nerve  as  it  passes  from  the  spine.  I
have  adopted  this  opinion  from  having  found  it  generally,  if  not  always,  connected
with  more  or  less  of  lateral  curvature  of  the  spine,  and  from  having  seen  it  always
relieved,  and  often  entirely  removed,  by  means  directed  to  remedy  tbe  spinal  derange-
ment. For  a  further  account  of  these  neuralgic  affections  of  the  lungs  and  other
viscera,  I  refer  the  reader  to  a  Memoir  by  P.  Jolly,  M.D.,  or  an  analysis  of  it  in  the
Med.  Chir.  Rev.  for  July,  18'28.— Trand.


OK  NERVOUS  DYSPNEA.


371


in  large  doses,  in  other  cases  of  neuralgia,  particularly  sciatica.
This  remedy  has  the  disadvantage  of  inducing  a  most  distressing
hypercatharsis,  and  of  speedily  disgusting  the  patients,  if  they
are  not  immediately  relieved.  When  the  pains  are  fixed,  I  have
frequently  relieved  them  by  the  long-continued  application  of
two  magnetised  plates,  disposed  in  such  a  manner  as  to  throw  the
magnetic  current  existing;  between  them  through  the  affected
part.*  When  they  are  situated  in  the  intercostal  nerves,  and,
still  more,  in  those  branches  which  arise  from  the  brachial  and
cervical  plexus,  and  are  distributed  over  the  fore  part  of  the
chest,  the  application  of  a  perpetual  blister  below  the  nipple,  or
on  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,  has  often  seemed  to  me  of
benefit.

We  must  be  careful  not  to  confound  these  neuralgic  affec-
tions with  other  pains  which  are  clearly  sympathetic  ;  such  as
the  pains  of  the  back  so  common  in  women  subject  to  leucor-
rhaea ;  the  sharp  burning  pains  in  different  parts  of  the  chest,
arising  from  indigestion,  flatulence,  &c.  ;  or  the  sensations  of
roughness,  heat  or  oppression  beneath  the  sternum,  in  certain
cases  of  catarrh.


Sect.  II. — Of  Nervous  Dyspnoea.

It  was  justly  remarked  by  Corvisart,  that  the  ancients  con-
founded, under  the  name  of  Asthma,  several  varieties  of  dyspnoea
arising  from  organic  diseases  of  different  kinds,  and  which  they
very  improperly  considered  as  nervous  affections.  Those  va-
rieties, in  particular,  which  depend  upon  organic  lesions  of  the
heart  and  large  vessels,  had  especially  engaged  this  author's
attention.  In  a  former  part  of  the  present  work,  I  have  shown,
that  the  most  common  cause  of  dyspnoea,  when  of  sufficient
severity  to  be  termed  asthma,  is  a  dry  catarrh,  latent  or  manifest,
and  emphysema  of  the  lungs,  the  consequence  of  this.  (Edema

•  The  recommendation  of  magnetism,  as  a  remedial  agent,  by  our  author,  much
more  his  assertion  of  benefit  derived  from  it,  will  probably  be  met  by  the  incredulity,
if  not  the  contempt,  of  most  English  readers.  Although  not  prepared  to  corroborate]
from  experience,  the  utility  of  this  practice,  I  am,  nevertheless,  far  from  considering
it  as  unworthy  our  consideration,  much  less  as  entitled  only  to  contempt,  as  the  off-
spring and  pretence  of  quackery  and  delusion.  The  close  analogy,  perhaps  we
might  say  identity,  of  this  power  (more  particularly  as  relates  to  the  living  body)
with  electricity  and  galvanism,  whose  influence  on  the  system  is  well  known,  and,
yet  more,  the  astonishing  and  now  unquestioned  power  of  acupuncture  in  many
neuralgic  and  other  diseases,  ought  to  make  us  hesitate  ere  we  reject  magnetism  as
a  remedial  agent,  even  if  we  had  not  the  testimony  of  practical  men  in  favour  of  its
positive  efficacy.  See  the  Report  of  the  Commission  appointed  by  the  Royal  Society
of  Medicine  of  Paris,  in  1775,  to  investigate  this  question,  published  in  their  memoirs.

Since  the  preceding  part  of  this  note  was  written,  (1B!27,)  magnetism  has  been
employed  on  the  continent  and  in  England,  to  some  extent,  in  neuralgic  affections,
and  it  is  said  with  considerable  benefit. — Transl.

B  B  2


372


OF NERVOUS  DYSPMEA.


of  the  lungs  may  also,  but  rarely,  have  so  slow  a  progress  as  to
give  rise  to  similar  symptoms.  Effusions  into  the  cavity  of  the
chest  can  hardly  be  enumerated  among  the  causes  which  occasion
asthma ;  or,  at  least,  the  difficulty  of  breathing  (often  extreme)
produced  by  these,  could  not  be  confounded  with  the  spasmodic
asthma  of  pathologists,  except  by  the  most  inattentive  and  unin-
formed observer  :  in  fact,  exclusively  of  the  physical  signs  of  the
effusion,  the  progress  of  the  disease  in  this  case,  its  comparatively
sudden  invasion,  and  its  duration,  (a  few  months  at  most,)  have
nothing  in  common  with  the  insensible  development  and  chronic
and  lengthened  course  of  nervous  asthma.  We  may,  in  like
manner,  frequently  consider  as  originating  in  an  organic  source,
the  breathlessness  which  often  accompanies  fits  of  apoplexy,
epilepsy,  hysteria,  and  syncope  ;  since,  in  most  of  these  cases,  it
is  evident  that  the  disorder  of  the  circulation  is  the  cause  of  that
of  the  respiration,  and  that  this  last  is  occasioned  by  the  tem-
porary congestion  of  blood  in  the  vessels  of  the  lungs.

But  in  the  cases  now  under  consideration,  and  in  which  the
dyspnoea  and  oppression  are  often  extreme,  we  have  frequently
no  sign  whatever  of  vascular  congestion,  or  of  any  other
organic  lesion ;  and,  consequently,  we  must  attribute  them
to  disorder  of  the  nervous  influence  simply.  The  same  pro-
position is  still  more  incontestable  in  many  other  instances.
Many  persons  of  a  delicate  and  mobile  constitution,  cannot
sustain  a  livety  emotion,  whether  from  physical  or  moral  causes,
without  being  immediately  seized  with  intense  dyspncea  ;  and
indeed  this  is  the  only  form  which  a  nervous  attack  assumes  in
many  women.  Now,  in  cases  of  this  kind,  the  circulation  is
frequently  not  at  all  affected. — The  dyspnoea  which  is  so  easily
produced  by  the  slightest  exercise  in  very  fat  subjects,  is  also,
in  great  part,  nervous,  and  must  be  chiefly  attributed  to  the
great  expenditure  of  nervous  influence  required  to  move  a
mass  so  disproportioned  to  the  ordinary  powers  of  motion.
In  this  case,  no  doubt,  the  acceleration  of  the  circulation  by  the
bodily  exercise,  acts  as  an  accessory  cause  of  the  dyspnoea. — In
some  rare  instances,  it  is  very  probable  that  dyspnoea  originates
in  an  imperfect  paralysis  of  the  diaphragm  and  other  muscles  of
inspiration,  this  is,  indeed,  self-evident  in  those  cases  of  palsy
produced  by  compression  of  the  spinal  marrow  above  the  fourth
cervical  vertebra;  and  we,  moreover,  now  and  then  meet  with
pains  (usually  called  rheumatic)  in  the  thoracic  parietes,  which
terminate  in  torpor,  as  in  cases  of  hemiplegia,  and  which  give
rise  to  great  oppression.  In  examples  of  impeded  respiration,
whatever  was  its  cause,  I  have  frequently  seen  its  violence  les-
sened (more  rarely  increased)  by  the  patient  merely  shutting  his
eyes.  I  have  seen  the  same  thing  in  many  other  pains  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  body,  and  particularly  in  pains  of  the  stomach
and  intestines,  (so  intense  as  to  simulate  those  of  inflammation,)


ASTHMA WITH  PUEltlLE UKSPJ  RATION.


373


which  the  patients  could  remove  or  induce  at  pleasure,  by  merely
opening  or  closing  the  eyes,  or  by  turning  their  look  to  or  from
a  bright  light.  In  such  cases,  it  is  evident  that  the  effects  can
only  depend  on  the  stimulation  communicated  to  or  subtracted
from  the  brain  by  the  light ;  and,  consequently,  that  disorder  of
the  nervous  influence  simply,  without  any  organic  lesion,  may
give  rise  to  dyspnoea,  as  well  as  other  nervous  affections.

Among  the  instances  of  dyspnoea  of  sufficient  severity  and  per-
manence to  merit  the  name  of  Asthma,  I  shall  notice  in  this  place
two  kinds  to  which  we  cannot  assign  any  discoverable  organic
lesion,  and  which  we  must  consequently  consider  as  nervous :  the
first  of  these  I  shall  denominate  Asthma  with  puerile  respiration ;
the  other  is  the  common  Spasmodic  Asthma  of  practitioners.


I. — Asthma  with  puerile  respiration.

The  wants  of  the  system,  in  respect  of  respiration,  may  be  ex-
actly measured  by  the  intensity  of  the  respiratory  sound.  I  have
already  stated,  when  treating  of  the  exploration  of  the  respira-
tion, that  the  intensity  of  the  respiratory  sound  varies  much,  ac-
cording to  many  circumstances,  and  particularly  according  to  the
age  of  the  individual,  it  being  much  greater  in  infancy  than  in
adult  life.  Whatever  be  the  cause  of  this  phenomenon,  there  is
no  doubt  of  its  existence.  There  is  no  morbid  affection  which
can  be  more  satisfactorily  referred  to  simple  disorder  of  the  ner-
vous influence,  than  this  dyspnoea,  accompanied  with  puerile
respiration,  and  which  I  formerly  alluded  to.  In  cases  of  this
kind,  the  respiratory  sound  has  resumed  all  the  intensity  which  it
possessed  in  early  infancy ;  we  perceive  distinctly  the  pulmonary
expansion  taking  place  with  uniformity,  completeness,  axidipuerile
promptitude,  in  all  the  air-cells;  and  yet  the  patient  is  oppressed
in  his  breathing,  or,  in  other  words,  he  constantly  feels  the  want
of  a  still  more  extensive  respiration  than  he  enjoys.  The  lungs,
dilated  as  they  are,  in  an  extraordinary  manner  for  an  adult,
nevertheless  have  not  capacity  enough  to  satisfy  the  wants  of  the
system.  This  affection  is  sufficiently  common  in  persons  affected
with  chronic  mucus  catarrhs,  attended  by  a  copious  and  easy  ex-
pectoration. In  such  cases,  the  dyspnoea  is  frequently  very  in-
tense, and  is  sometimes  so  aggravated  by  the  slightest  motion,
that  the  patient,  though  otherwise  in  pretty  good  health,  is  con-
demned to  a  life  of  inactivity,  or  even  to  an  almost  complete  state
of  immobility.  Attacks  of  asthma,  however,  properly  so  called,
are  less  frequent  in  such  subjects,  than  in  those  affected  with  the
dry  catarrh.  In  these  latter  cases,  the  imperfection  and  small
extent  of  the  respiration  easily  account  for  the  oppressed  breath-
ing. But  in  the  others,  even  during  the  severest  attacks,  the
completeness  with  which  the  respiration  is  performed,  is  quite


374


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


astonishing;  the  sound  of  it  is  quite  puerile ;  and,  as  in  the  case
of  a  strong  and  healthy  child,  we  are  sensible  of  the  dilatation  of
the  pulmonary  cells  to  their  full  capacity,  and  over  the  whole
extent  of  the  chest.  Nevertheless,  the  patient  is  oppressed,  and,
as  I  have  already  stated,  would  require  a  more  extensive  respi-
ration than  his  organization  allows;  in  other  words,  the  respira-
tion is  very  perfect,  but  the  wants  of  the  system  in  relation  to  it
are  increased  beyond  the  standard  of  health.  In  such  cases  it  is
not  in  the  lungs  that  we  must  look  for  the  cause  of  the  disease,
but  in  the  innervation  or  nervous  influence  itself ;  and  this  will
hold  equally  good,  even  if  we  adopt  the  chemical  theory  of  respi-
ration, and  refer  the  dyspnoea  to  an  extraordinary  want  of  oxygen
in  the  blood.  If  the  temporary  obstruction  of  the  bronchi  by  a
little  mucus,  impedes  the  transmission  of  the  air  to  even  a  small
portion  of  the  lungs,  the  patient  experiences  an  extreme  oppres-
sion. Such  a  circumstance,  however,  is  uncommon  and  usually
of  short  continuance,  since  the  expectoration  is  commonly  in  such
cases  very  free.  I  have  never  met  with  this  species  of  asthma,
except  in  persons  affected  with  chronic  mucus  catarrh ;  and,  in-
deed, I  am  of  opinion  that  the  dyspnoea  arising  from  the  mere
increase  of  the  natural  want  of  the  system  for  respiration,  can
never  amount  to  asthma,  without  the  catarrhal  complication.
This  want  of  the  system  for  respiration,  varies,  as  I  have  already
said,  according  to  the  age,  and  also  in  individuals  of  the  same
age.  The  adults  and  old  persons  who  have  puerile  respiration
without  catarrh,  are  not,  properly  speaking,  asthmatic  ;  but  they
are  short-breathed,  and  dyspnoea  is  induced  by  the  slightest  ex-
ercise ;  though  when  sitting  still,  they  frequently  experience  no
oppression  whatever.  The  dyspnoea  which  takes  place  in  some
kinds  of  nervous  affections,  particularly  hysteria,  is  frequently  of
the  kind  we  are  now  treating  of,  viz.  with  puerile  respiration.
The  increase  of  the  necessity  for  respiration  is  not  confined  to
the  cases  of  which  we  have  been  speaking;  it  sometimes  also
supervenes  in  cases  where  the  asthma  is  owing  to  other  causes.
Thus  we  frequently  find  an  attack  of  asthma  begin  and  terminate,
without  any  difference  in  the  state  of  the  respiratory  sound, — it
being  equally  feeble  through  the  whole  ;  and  in  such  cases,  where
the  attack  is  not  occasioned  by  a  congestion  of  blood  in  the  lungs
or  the  supervention  of  a  fresh  catarrh,  it  appears  to  me  that  the
paroxysms  can  only  be  considered  as  a  temporary  augmentation
of  the  want  of  the  system  for  respiration,  occasioned,  in  all  pro-
bability, by  some  unknown  modification  of  the  nervous  influence.


II. — Spasmodic  Asthma.

In  the  infancy  of  pathological  anatomy,  every  kind  of  dyspnoea
which  was  not  connected  with  an  evident  inflammatory  condition


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


375


of  the  thoracic  organs,  was  considered  as  spasmodic  asthma.
The  nosologists  of  the  last  century,  who  attempted  to  divide  dis-
eases into  species  characterised  by  the  aggregation  of  their  symp-
toms, and  more  especially  Sauvages  and  Cullen,  defined  asthma
to  be — a  dyspnoea  recurring  in  paroxysms  after  intervals  in
which  the  respiration  is  sometimes  quite  natural;  each  paroxysm
having  a  daily  aggravation,  coming  on  commonly  towards  even-
ing or  at  night,  and  going  off  in  the  morning  with  a  more  or  less
copious  expectoration.  In  the  present  day,  many  physicians
among  those  who  have  most  cultivated  pathological  anatomy,
formally  deny  the  possibility  of  a  spasmodic  dyspnoea,  and  this
opinion  is  also  embraced  by  the  majority  of  the  remaining  prac-
titioners. There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  symptoms  just  men-
tioned, are  met  with  in  many  cases  of  dyspnoea  which  evidently
depend  on  organic  lesions, — particularly  chronic  catarrh,  whether
dry,  pituitous  or  mucous,  and  hypertrophy  or  dilatation  of  the
heart.  Sometimes  also,  the  oppression  produced  by  effusion
into  the  chest,  exhibits  a  well-marked  nocturnal  access.  With
the  view  of  clearing  up  this  question,  I  shall  examine  it,  in  the
first  place,  in  an  anatomical  and  physiological  point  of  view,  and
shall  then  consider  the  facts  of  pathology  which  may  tend  to  set
it  at  rest.

Every  spasm  supposes,  at  least,  contraction  of  a  contractile
organ :  this  is  what  is  called  tonic  spasm.  When  there  is  alter-
nate contraction  and  relaxation,  the  spasm  is  called  clonic.  Some
physiologists  are  further  of  opinion  that,  in  certain  organs,  par-
ticularly such  as  are  hollow,  the  contraction  does  not  alter-
nate a  mere  relaxation  (the  consequence  of  an  intermission
in  the  contractile  process),  but  with  an  active  expansion  of  the
part.  Let  us  now  enquire  whether  the  bronchi  and  air-cells  pos-
sess either  of  these  qualities.

Reisseissen,  as  I  formerly  stated,  has  ascertained  the  existence
of  a  set  of  completely  circular  fibres  around  the  bronchial  rami-
fications, beginning  at  the  point  where  the  cartilaginous  circles
terminate.  I  also  mentioned  that  I  had  myself  verified  the  cor-
rectness of  his  observation  upon  branches  of  less  than  a  line  in
diameter;  and  may  now  add,  that,  although  it  appeared  to  be
difficult  to  follow  to  a  greater  distance  the  muscular  fibres,  ana-
logy leads  us  to  admit  their  existence,  certainly  in  the  smaller
branches,  and  perhaps  even  in  the  air-cells.  Taking  this  view  of
the  subject,  it  is  very  conceivable  that  the  spasmodic  contraction
of  these  fibres  may  be  carried  the  length  of  obstructing  the  air-
passages  to  such  a  degree  as  to  prevent  the  transmission  of  air  to
a  great  portion  of  the  lungs.  For  these  reasons,  we  cannot  re-
gard the  tonic  spasm  of  the  bronchi,  or  even  perhaps  of  the  air-
cells,  as  impossible;  since  every  muscle  is  susceptible  of  spasm.
Besides  it  is  by  no  means  demonstrated,  that  muscular  fibre  is
the  only  contractile  tissue  ;  indeed,  the  contrary  is  proved  by  the


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


fact,  that  animals  of  almost  a  mucilaginous  consistence,  are  ca-
pable of  evident  contraction. In  regard  to  expansion, — a  pheno-
menon more  or  less  observable  in  several  organs,  such  as  the
penis,  nipple,  heart,  retina,  uterus,  and  perhaps  even  in  the  cel-
lular substance  and  the  brain, — its  mechanism  is  so  little  under-
stood that  physiologists  have  been  forced  to  admit,  in  order  to
explain  it,  a  vital  property  under  the  name  of  expansibility  or
expansile  power* Without  investigating  the  probabilities  of
this  theory,  I  shall  here  content  myself  with  enquiring,  as  a  mat-
ter of  fact,  whether  the  lungs  are  capable  of  an  active  expansion,
independently  of  that  which  they  undergo,  from  the  effects  of
atmospheric  pressure,  in  following  the  dilatation  of  the  walls  of
the  chest  during  inspiration. If  we  lay  open  one  side  of  the
chest  of  a  living  dog,  we  find  the  lung  at  first  reduced  to  one-
fourth  of  its  former  dimensions ;  but  even  in  this  state  we  observe
it  swelling  and  contracting  with  an  alternate  motion. This  fact
was  noticed  by  M.  Roux,'f'  who  further  remarks,  that  we  cannot
account  for  the  escape  of  a  portion  of  lung  in  the  case  of  a
wound  of  the  chest,  but  by  an  active  expansion  of  the  viscus
itself. To  this  I  may  add  that,  in  the  case  just  stated,  the
protruded  portion  has  been  observed  to  be  dilated  during  inspi-
ration, a  result  which  could  not,  under  such  circumstances,  be
occasioned  by  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere. Another  argu-
ment in  favour  of  the  inherent  activity  of  the  lungs,  is  furnished
by  the  fact,  of  old  persons  being  still  able  to  breathe,  and
often  even  without  any  previous  dyspnoea,  in  whom  the  car-
tilages of  the  ribs  are  ossified,  and  the  ribs  themselves  immove-
ably  united  with  the  vertebrae. In  such  cases  it  is  not  probable
that  the  diaphragm  is  the  sole  agent  in  inspiration  and  expira-
tion.

The  study  of  respiration  by  means  of  auscultation,  furnishes
us,  both  in  health  and  disease,  with  still  more  numerous  pheno-
mena which  leave  no  room  to  doubt  that  the  lungs  possess  an  in-
herent power  of  action,  independently  of  the  other  powers  of
inspiration  and  expiration.  It  was  formerly  stated — 1.  that  a
healthy  adult  cannot,  by  any  effort  of  inspiration,  give  the  puerile
character  to  his  respiration  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  this  cha-
racter returns,  even  during  the  slightest  inspirations,  when  a  great
portion  of  thelung  has  been  rendered  impermeable  by  some  organic
lesion ; — 2.  that  a  forced  inspiration,  particularly  if  the  patient
fancies  that  we  expect  him  to  breathe  in  an  extreme  degree,  gives
hardly  any  sound  at  all,  and  is  consequently  very  incomplete;

*  Dr.  Prus  lias  attributed  this  property  to  many  other  organs  and  tissues,  and  par-
ticularly to  the  bronchi.  However  much  disposed  to  adopt  this  opinion,  I  cannot
regard  all  his  facts  as  probable,  particularly  the  visible  dilatation  of  the  bronchi,  which
I  formerly  stated  to  bo  owing  to  mechanical  causes.  De  V Irritation,  Sfc.  par  V.Prus,
M.  1),  Paris,  102.3. — iuthor.

t  Mclanpos  do  Chir.  &c.  p.  H7.


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


377


and— 3.  that  the  convulsive  and  sibilous  inspiration  that  takes
place  in  the  fits  of  hooping-cough,  is  not  accompanied  by  any
sound  of  pulmonary  expansion,  and  appears  not  to  force  the  air
into  the  air-cells.  I  have  observed  the  same  thing,  but  not  con-
stantly, in  sobbing  and  yawning :  I  have  not  attended  to  the
sound  of  respiration  in  sighing.  An  inspiration  made  inten-
tionally, and  by  repeated  efforts,  without  any  intermediate  expi-
ration, yields  very  little  sound,  or  none  at  all.  All  these  pheno-
mena appear  to  me  inexplicable  without  admitting  an  inherent
action  in  the  lungs.  We  cannot  comprehend  how  a  portion  of
lung  can  regain  the  puerile  character  of  respiration,  unless  we
admit  an  active  expansion  of  the  organ  ;  for  we  know  that  this
kind  of  respiration  is  not  accompanied,  at  least  not  constantly,
by  a  more  extensive  inspiration  than  usual ;  and,  moreover,  it
frequently  happens  that  the  sound  of  respiration,  which  is
frequently  scarcely  perceptible  in  such  inordinate  inspirations,
becomes  immediately  afterwards  puerile,  during  much  feebler
inspirations,  as  any  one  may  assure  himself  by  an  experiment
which  I  shall  immediately  notice.  On  the  other  hand,  the
great  inspirations  which  do  not  throw  the  air  into  the  air-cells,
can  only  be  attributed  (except  in  cases  of  pulmonary  infarc-
tion, not  now  under  consideration)  to  a  spasm  of  the  air-cells
themselves,  or,  at  least,  of  the  smaller  bronchial  tubes.  I  had
learned  by  expei'ience  that  the  inspiration  which  precedes
and  follows  coughing,  frequently  produces  a  pretty  strong
respiratory  sound  in  persons  who  yield  hardly  any  during  a
common  inspiration,  and  I  was  first  led  to  attribute  the  effect
to  the  displacement  of  mucus  by  the  cough  ;  but  having  since
observed  the  same  thing  in  individuals  who  did  not  cough,
and  who,  in  the  intervals  of  the  attacks  of  asthma,  afforded
no  symptoms  of  dry  catarrh,  I  began  to  suspect  that  the  phe-
nomena just  mentioned  might  be  owing  to  a  spasm  of  the
bronchi.  With  the  view  of  elucidating  this  point,  I  endea-
voured to  produce  the  same  effects  by  augmenting  artificially
the  necessity  for  respiration,  and  succeeded  perfectly.  Ac-
cordingly, when  I  meet  with  a  patient  in  whom  the  respiratory
sound  is  very  weak,  or  even  entirely  wanting,  in  more  or  fewer
parts  of  the  chest,  without  there  being  any  sign  of  dry  catarrh
or  other  organic  affection  which  could  produce  this  effect,  I
desire  the  individual  to  read  aloud,  and  to  continue  to  do  so  as
long  as  he  possibly  can,  without  drawing  his  breath,  and  when
he  stops,  to  take  steadily  a  deep  inspiration.  Such  an  inspiration
constantly  produces  a  well-marked  respiratory  sound,  and  some-
times one  which  is  very  loud.  Moreover,  it  frequently  happens
during  this  proceeding,  that  the  patient,  forgetting  the  recom-
mendation given  him,  yields  unconsciously  to  the  necessity  of
breathing,  in  the  middle  of  the  experiment,  and  takes  a  small
furtive  inspiration. And  it  frequently  happens  that  this  inspi-


378


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


ration,  short  as  it  is  and  unaccompanied  by  any  perceptible
elevation  of  the  walls  of  the  chest  or  abdomen,  produces  a  mo-
mentary return  of  puerile  respiration,  in  the  very  points  in  which
the  forced  inspirations  had  produced  no  respiratory  sound  at  all.
In  the  case  of  persons  who  cannot  read,  we  may  make  the  same
experiment,  by  getting  them  to  recite  something  which  they
know  by  heart,  such  as  prayers;  or  merely  by  causing  them  to
retain  their  breath  as  long  as  they  possibly  can,  and  then  to
breathe  at  their  ease. These  facts  appear  to  me  inexplicable,
except  by  the  admission  of  a  spasm  of  the  air-cells  and  small
bronchial  tubes,  which  yields  momentarily  to  the  increased  ne-
cessity of  breathing. I  have  occasionally  explored  the  respiration
of  fat  persons,  just  as  they  had  reached,  in  a  state  of  breathless-
ness,  the  top  of  the  stairs ;  and  also  that  of  strong  healthy  young
men  of  different  constitutions,  just  as  they  had  run  themselves
out  of  breath. In  both  these  cases,  I  find  the  respiratory
sound  very  indistinct,  and  frequently  it  is  imperceptible  over
the  greater  part  of  the  chest :  and  it  does  not  become  very  dis-
tinct until  after  the  individual  is  rested,  and  the  inspirations
have  resumed  their  natural  frequency. No  doubt,  in  these
instances,  the  congestion  of  blood  which  takes  place  in  the
lungs,  has  some  influence  in  producing  the  effects  witnessed ;
but  that  this  is  not  the  principal  cause  of  them,  is  proved  by  the
chest  continuing  to  be  perfectly  sonorous. From  these  experi-
ments, and  those  formerly  related  when  treating  of  the  exploration
of  the  respiration,  I  am  convinced,  not  only  that  the  air  cells  and
the  bronchial  tubes  can  be  spasmodically  contracted,  but  even
that  the  will  has  some  power  over  this  contraction. This  seems
proved  by  the  fact,  that  persons  in  perfect  health  can  make
inspirations  which  give  rise  to  no  sound ;  and  indeed  this  is
almost  invariably  the  case,  as  I  formerly  stated,  when  they  make
an  extraordinary  effort  to  breathe  deep,  from  a  belief  that  we
expect  something  very  unusual. I  have  met  with  only  a  very
small  number  of  asthmatics,  in  whom  there  was  evidence  of
pulmonary  spasm,  without  any  attendant  catarrhal  affection ;
but  some  few  I  have  met  with. On  the  other  hand,  I  have
known  a  great  number  of  patients,  in  whom  the  catarrh,  whether
dry,  pituitous  or  mucous,  was  too  slight  in  degree  or  too  small
in  extent,  to  be  considered  as  the  real  cause  of  their  asthma.  In
several  of  these,  the  sound  or  percussion  was  not  good,  although
there  was  no  sign  of  pulmonary  infarction  present ;  and  I  am
much  disposed  to  believe  that  the  long-continued  contraction,  or
at  least  moderate  distension  of  the  air  cells  may,  by  rendering
the  pulmonary  tissue  more  compact,  produce  the  same  effect.—
It  is  difficult  to  derive  from  morbid  anatomy  any  light  to  clear
tip  the  question. An  attack  of  purely  nervous  asthma  is  rarely
fatal,  and  indeed  is  hardly  ever  so,  without  giving  rise  previously
to  congestions  of  blood,  and  other  consequences  of  the  disorder


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


379


of  the  respiration  and  circulation  induced  by  it;  and  in  these
consequences  prejudiced  minds  may  see  the  causes  of  the  disease.
Some  cases,  however,  exist,  which  lead  irresistibly  to  the  belief
of  the  possibility  of  an  asthma  purely  nervous.  I  do  not  speak
of  cases  drawn  up  at  a  period  when  this  possibility  was  generally
considered  as  amounting  to  an  incontestable  fact,  and  when  spas-
modic asthma  was  reckoned  to  be  a  disease  very  common  and
very  well  understood.  But  even  at  the  present  time,  when  the
eyes  of  medical  men  are  particularly  directed  to  this  point,  and
when  many  of  the  best-informed  members  of  the  profession  doubt
whether  there  really  exists  any  severe  disease  depending  on  simple
disturbance  of  the  nervous  influence  and  without  any  primary
organic  lesion, — I  have  met  with  many  cases  in  which  it  was
impossible,  after  the  most  minute  research,  to  find  any  organic
lesion  whatsoever,  to  which  the  asthma  could  be  attributed.  An
instance  of  the  same  kind  is  given  by  M.  Andral  ( CI.  Med.  t.  ii.
ob.  xx.)  in  the  case  of  a  fatal  suffocation  supervening  to  the  sup-
pression of  a  discharge  from  an  ulcerated  leg.  The  lungs  in  this
case  were  sound,  except  that  there  existed  in  the  left  lower  lobe
a  small  hepatized  point,  of  less  extent  than  the  tenth  part  of  the
lobe  (pneumonia  of  the  dying,  according  to  all  appearances.)
The  heart  and  the  other  organs  were  equally  sound.  M.  Guer-
sent  has  likewise  seen  two  children  die,  after  a  few  days,  of  a
remitting  dyspnoea,  attended  with  dry  cough  and  precordial
anxiety,  in  whose  bodies  no  obvious  lesion  could  be  found  after
death.  (Diet,  de  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  126.)  I  am  convinced  that  in
the  greater  number  of  asthmatic  cases,  depending  on  dry  catarrh
and  pulmonary  emphysema,  the  asthmatic  paroxysm  can  be  in-
duced equally  by  the  supervention  of  a  fresh  catarrh  (latent  or
manifest)  and  by  a  deranged  state  of  the  nervous  influence,  occa-
sioning pulmonary  spasm  or  an  increase  of  the  necessity  of  res-
piration, and  sometimes  by  both  causes  at  once.  In  fact,  I
believe  there  are  few  cases  of  asthma  owing  to  any  one  of  these
causes;  and  in  old  men  more  particularly,  I  imagine  that  several
frequently  conspire  to  produce  the  result.  Of  this  kind  are,  de-
bility, the  ossification  of  the  cartilages  and  immobility  of  the  ribs,
rheumatism  affecting  the  walls  of  the  chest,  and  perhaps  also  the
tenuity  of  the  air-cells  and  of  all  the  pulmonary  vessels,  in  ad-
vanced life.  With  the  exception  of  the  different  kinds  of  catarrh,
the  occasional  causes  of  attacks  of  asthma  and  dyspnoea  are  almost
always  of  a  kind  to  give  occasion  to  an  immediate  and  evident
disturbance  of  the  nervous  influence.  Of  this  kind  are,  strong
mental  emotion;  venereal  excesses;  the  influence  of  light  or  dark-
ness; retrocession  of  gout  (an  affection  which,  from  its  mobility
and  various  effects,  can  only  be  considered  as  a  nervous  affection;)
certain  odours,  such  as  those  of  tuberose,  heliotrope,  stored
apples,  &c. ;  changes  of  the  atmospheric  electricity,  and  other
less  appreciable  conditions  of  the  atmosphere. We  thus  find


380


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


that  the  greater  number  of  asthmatic  patients  cannot  remain  with
impunity  in  a  low  close  apartment,  although  containing  much
more  air  than  they  could  consume  in  twenty-four  hours,  and
although  it  is  constantly  but  insensibly  renewed  by  the  doors
and  chimneys.  Some  cannot  bear,  without  experiencing  a  feeling
of  suffocation,  that  any  person  should  go  before  them,  or  that
any  thing  should  be  brought  close  to  them  ;  while  others,  on  the
contrary,  are  never  more  subject  to  dyspnoea  than  when  in  the
midst  of  a  vast  plain.  The  following  fact,  communicated  to  me
by  one  of  my  colleagues,  affords  a  curious  example  of  a  nervous
affection  of  a  similar  kind,  in  a  person  not  subject  to  asthma.
A  man  forty  years  of  age,  slightly  hypochondriacal,  but  otherwise
in  good  health,  wished  to  go  on  horseback  to  pay  a  visit  some
leagues  distant  from  his  house.  As  soon  as  he  left  the  town
where  he  resided,  which  is  situated  in  an  extensive  plain,  he  felt
an  immediate  oppression  on  the  chest,  from  the  impression  of  the
country  air.  He  took  no  notice  of  this  at  first;  but  the  dyspnoea
having  greatly  increased,  and  being  now  attended  by  a  sense  of
faintness,  he  determined  to  return.  He  had  scarcely  turned  his
horse,  when  he  found  himself  better;  and  in  a  few  minutes  he
recovered  both  his  breath  and  his  strength.  Not  suspecting  any
relation  between  this  momentary  uneasiness  and  his  journey,  he
once  more  attempted  to  advance,  and  was  again  soon  attacked
with  the  dyspnoea  and  faintness.  On  turning  towards  the  town
these  passed  off.  After  having  made  repeated  attempts  to  pro-
ceed, and  always  with  the  same  result,  he  finally  returned,  and
in  just  as  good  health  as  when  he  set  out.  i  lately  met  with  a
case  very  analogous  to  the  one  just  related,  only  that  in  this,  the
symptoms  were  more  severe,  and  the  cause  different,  being  the
want  of  light  and  a  free  circulation  of  air.  Count  H.  a  man  of
a  robust  constitution,  and  although  now  eighty- two  years  of  age,
still  possessed  of  a  degree  of  vigour  unusual  even  at  the  age  of
sixty,  has  been  subject  from  his  infancy  to  attacks  of  asthma,
and  is  habitually  somewhat  short  breathed.  Since  his  fiftieth
year  he  has  had  a  slight  cough,  and,  in  the  morning,  a  pituitous
expectoration  intermixed  occasionally  with  some  yellow  sputa.
The  asthmatic  attacks  have  always  been  infrequent  with  him;
but  they  have  invariably  come  on  if  any  person  has  inadvertently
shut  his  bed-room  door,  or  if  his  night  lamp  has  by  any  chance
gone  out.  As  soon  as  either  of  these  accidents  occurs,  he  im-
mediately awakes  with  a  feeling  of  oppressive  suffocation,  and
after  a  few  minutes  becomes  insensible.  I  have  explored  the
chest  of  this  patient,  and  have  only  detected  some  signs  of  a
slight  pituitous  catarrh  ;  the  sound  of  respiration  is  middling,  as
it  ouo-ht  to  be  in  the  adult,  and  is  intermixed,  in  a  few  points
only  of  small  extent,  with  a  slight  sibilous  or  mucous  rhonchus.
On  the  occasions  alluded  to,  the  attack  is  rot  rid  of  by  opening
the  doors  and  windows,  lighting  the  candles,  and  carrying  the


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


381


patient  into  the  open  air;  but  the  oppression  remains,  in  a  cer-
tain degree,  for  several  hours.

The  volatilized  oxyds  of  lead,  the  effects  of  which  on  the
nervous  system  are  incontestable,  frequently  give  occasion  to
asthma,  as  has  been  remarked  by  many  authors  both  ancient  and
modern  (Ploucqnet,  Art.  dyspneea.)  It  is  moreover  worthy  of
remark,  that  most  fits  of  asthma  are  accompanied  by  an  extra-
ordinary accumulation  of  gas  in  the  intestines,  a  circumstance
which  is  equally  observable  in  other  nervous  affections.  Other
nervous  symptoms,  of  greater  or  less  severity,  and  more  especially
convulsive  motions  in  various  parts  of  the  body,  are  likewise
frequent  attendants  on  asthma.  Furthermore,  if  we  carefully
study,  and  for  a  certain  length  of  time,  the  dry  catarrhs,  whether
latent  or  manifest,  which  almost  always  accompany  hypochon-
driasis and  continued  fevers,  we  shall  find  that  the  organic  dis-
ease is  under  the  direct  influence  of  the  nervous  affection,  and  is,
indeed,  probably  produced  by  this;  since  we  find  that  it  (the
catarrh)  is  increased  as  often  as  the  deranged  condition  of  the
nervous  influence  is  augmented  by  a  lively  emotion  or  by  any
other  cause. — From  all  these  facts  and  considerations,  I  think  I
am  entitled  to  conclude,  that  the  greater  number  of  asthmatic
paroxysms,  although  depending  on  several  causes  combined,  are
chiefly  induced  by  a  primary  and  momentary  alteration  in  the
state  of  the  nervous  influence.*

*  In  the  article  Asthma  of  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Practical  Medicine,  I  have  given  a
pretty  full  view  of  the  history  of  the  disease  here  treated  of  by  Laennec,  and  to  this
1  must  refer  the  reader  for  more  particular  information.  The  following  brief  extracts
will  point  out  the  distinctions  which  reasoning  and  observation  have  led  me  to
adopt,  in  regard  to  the  varieties  of  asthma.  I  will  merely  premise  that  I  consider
the  arguments  in  the  text  (and  many  others  might  be  adduced)  as  sufficient  to  prove
the  existence  of  a  nervous  asthma  properly  so  called,  that  is,  an  asthma  unattended
by  any  organic  lesion  of  the  thoracic  viscera.

"  It  must  not  be  imagined  that  we  consider  the  asthmatic  paroxysm  as  consisting
exclusively  of  a  muscular  spasm  of  parts  otherwise  healthy. This,  indeed,  may  be
the  case  in  a  few  instances  ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that,  in  the  great  majority  of
cases,  the  spasm  not  merely  affects  parts  previously  diseased,  but  that  the  pheno-
mena of  the  paroxysm  are  partly  dependent  on,  and  greatly  modified  by,  these  verv
lesions  co-existing  with  the  spasm,  aggravating  it,  and,  in  turn,  being  aggravated,
by  it.. . ...  We  shall  divide  cases  of  asthma  into  two  classes  or  groups,  according  as

there  exists  a  sound  or  a  diseased  state  of  the  bronchial  membrane  in  the  intervals
of  the  paroxysms ;  terming  those  of  the  first  class  nervous  asthma,  and  those  of  the
second  catarrhal  asthma.

I.  Nervous  asthma. — The  characteristic  quality,  or,  at  least,  the  most  manifest
physiological  peculiarity  of  the  individuals  subject  to  nervous  asthma,  is  the  extreme
susceptibility  of  their  nervous  system.  They  are  said,  in  common  language,  to  be
nervous,  or  to  possess  the  nervous  temperament.  This  is  the  asthma  of  hysterical
females,  and  is  indeed,  in  many  cases,  only  one  of  the  multiform  aspects  of  hysteria.
It,  however,  occurs  ecpjally  in  males,  and  in  females  who  have  no  other  symptom  of
hysteria.

For  the  sake  of  those  who  are  curious  in  nosological  arrangements,  rather  than
as  being  of  any  practical  value,  the  following  classificati  on  of  the  various  cases
which  come  under  the  head  of  nervous  asthma  is  submitted  to  the  reader.

1.  In  a  very  small  proportion  of  these  cases  we  cannot  detect  any  disorder  of  the
system,  general  or  local,  which  can  he  considered  as  at  all  influencing  the  occurrence
of  the  paroxysms. These  may  be  termed  cases  of  pure  nervous  asthma.


382


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


Treatment.  Since,  as  I  have  just  said,  the  periodic  asthma
commonly  depends  on  the  re-union  of  several  organic  and  nervous

2.  In  an  infinitely  larger  proportion  of  cases  we  find  more  or  less  of  disease  in  the
system  generally,  or  in  some  of  the  principal  organs  ;  and  which  disease  appears  to
be  the  remote  cause  of  the  paroxysms,  influencing  the  bronchial  muscles  indirectly
through  the  intermedium  of  the  brain.  Such  cases  may  be  termed  sympathetic  nervous
asthma.  This  order  may  be  subdivided  into  species,  according  to  the  nature  or  site
of  the  affection  which  constitutes  the  remote  cause  of  the  paroxysm.

3.  In  a  third  group  maybe  included,  under  the  name  of  symptomatic  nervous  asthma,
1,  those  cases  which  depend  on  diseases  immediately  affecting  the  pulmonary  nerves
themselves,  and  2,  those  in  which  the  paroxysms  are  directly  induced  by  organic
disease  of  the  lungs,  head,  pleura,  &c.

II.  Catarrhal  asthma. — In  studying  the  various  cases  of  asthma  met  with  in
practice,  while  we  find,  in  the  vast  majority  of  instances,  some  fixed  affection  of  the
bronchial  membrane,  we  find  great  variety  in  the  nature,  and  still  more  in  the  degree
of  this  affection.  In  one  class  of  cases  there  seems  to  be  merely  some  peculiar
modification  of  the  sensibility  of  the  bronchial  membrane,  which  renders  it  suscep-
tible of  being  excited  to  morbid  action  by  various  external  influences.  In  others,
however,  and  in  an  infinitely  larger  number,  there  exists  either  an  habitual  catarrh  of
a  formal  character,  or  such  a  predisposition  to  be  affected  by  catarrh,  as  practically

to  amount  to  alike  condition  of  the  parts  Sooner  or  later,  and  generally  very  soon,

the  mucous  membrane  becomes  disordered  permanently  ;  and  it  is  this  local  disease
of  the  lining  membrane  of  the  air-passages,  together  with  the  general  liability  to  be
affected  by  slight  degrees  of  cold,  which  constitutes  the  most  common  state  of  per-
sons subject  to  asthma.  Between  the  extreme  limits  of  this  bronchial  affection,
from  mere  increase  of  sensibility  up  to  the  most  acute  inflammation,  the  degrees  of
shades  are  infinite.

The  catarrhal  affections  with  which  the  asthmatic  spasm  may  be  combined  may
be  either  (a)  acute  or  (b)  chronic.  Of  these  the  chronic  varieties  are  by  far  the  most
common.

A.  1.  The  firstvariety  of  the  chronic  catarrhal  asthma  is  ranged  under  the  present
head  more  from  analogy  than  from  any  certain  proof  of  its  being  essentially  of  a  catar-
rhal nature.  Its  essential  characteristic  seems  to  be  a  peculiar  morbid  sensibility,  or
irritability  of  the  membrane  lining  the  bronchi,  rather  than  any  sensible  physical
alteration  of  it.  If  a  name  is  desired  for  it,  it  might,  in  the  language  of  Laenuec,  be
termed  latent  catarrhal  asthma. . . .  This  peculiar  irritability  of  membrane  in  many  cases
continues  perfectly  latent  until  rendered  manifest  by  the  application  of  certain  stimu-
lants. Some  individuals  are  affected  by  only  one  kind  of  substance,  others  by  two
or  more.  Ipecacuanha  seems  the  substance  which,  of  all  others,  exerts  the  greatest
influence  in  cases  of  this  kind.

2.  The  next  variety  of  chronic  catarrhal'  asthma  is  that  which  is  complicated  by
the  disease  termed  dry  catarrh  by  Laennec.  It  may,  therefore,  be  denominated  dry
catarrhal  asthma.  It  is,  perhaps,  the  most  common  form  of  asthma.  (See  the  chapter
on  Catarrh  in  the  present  work.)

3.  The  third  variety  of  chronic  catarrhal  asthma  is  that  which  is  combined  with
the  common  chronic  mucous  catarrh.  It  is  the  humoral  asthma  of  the  old  authors.  In
conformity  with  the  names  given  to  the  preceding  varieties,  it  may  be  denominated
the  mucous  catarrhal  asthma.  This  form  of  catarrh  is  occasionally  the  consequence
of  those  last  described  ;  but  it  is  still  more  frequently  produced  by  repeated  attacks
of  the  acute  catarrh.  It  is  the  common  chronic  catarrh,  frequent  in  old  age,  and  by
no  means  uncommon  in  youth.  It  is  often  the  sequel  of  acute  bronchitis,  and  is,  in-
deed, itself  only  a  form  of  the  same  disease  in  a  chronic  state. . . .  The  preceding  are  the
chief  affections  of  the  bronchial  membrane,  of  a  chronic  kind,  with  which  the  asth-
matic paroxysm  is  complicated.  There  are  some  others  of  an  acute  character  yet  to
be  noticed,  and  which,  when  co-existing  with  the  paroxysms  of  asthma,  entitle  this
to  the  name  of  the  acute  asthma.  Two  forms  of  this  species  are  met  with  in  prac-
tice, sometimes  sufficiently  well  marked  to  be  readily  distinguished  ;  but  frequently,
like  the  other  species  of  asthma,  so  intermingled  as  to  render  the  discrimination  im-
practicable.

B.  1.  The  first  of  these  two  varieties  may  be  termed  the  acute  congestive  asthma.
Were'  it  not  that  we  frequently  see  the  most  extensive  inflammation  and  consequent
tumefaction  of  the  bronchial  membrnne,  without  very  great  difficulty  of  breathing,


SPASMODIC ASTIINf  A.


333


affections,  it  is  necessary  in  every  case  to  study  with  care  all  the
elements  of  the  disease,  as  it  is  this  study  only  that  can  lead  us  to
the  most  rational  indications  of  cure.  I  shall  not  repeat  in  this
place,  what  was  formerly  stated  respecting  the  treatment  of  ca-
tarrh :  it  is  with  the  view  of  fulfilling  the  indications  supplied  by
this,  that  repeated  emetics,  soap,  alkaline  salts,  kermes,  squills,
ipecacuanha  in  small  doses,  &c,  have  been  had  recourse  to.
Many  means  maybe  opposed  to  the  disorder  of  the  nervous  func-
tion in  which  the  asthma  chiefly  consists ;  but  in  this  case,  as  in
every  nervous  affection,  nothing  is  more  variable  than  the  effect

certainly  without  any  of  that  extreme  and  peculiar  dyspnoea  which  characterizes  the
asthmatic  paroxysm,  we  might  agree  with  Parry  in  opinion  that  mere  vascular  con-
gestion, from  sudden  determination  of  blood  to  this  membrane,  might  account  for  all
the  phenomena  of  asthma. And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  in  a  certain  class  of
cases,  this  determination  of  blood  is  not  merely  the  precursor  of  the  spasm,  but  that
it  constitutes  the  greater  part  of  the  pathological  condition  of  the  affected  parts.  Of
course,  there  is  some  modification  of  the  nervous  condition  of  the  membrane  previ-
ously to  the  afflux  of  blood  to  it  ;  but  it  is  extremely  improbable  that  this  modification
is  of  a  spasmodic  nature  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  it  is  the
morbid  congestion  of  the  blood-vessels  which  irritates  the  muscular  fibres  into  spas-
modic stricture. 2.  The  last  variety  of  catarrhal  asthma  which  we  shall  notice  may
be  termed  acute  catarrhal  asthma. It  only  differs  from  the  last  in  coming  on  more
slowly,  and  in  being  complicated  with  a  common  catarrhal  affection  of  the  bronchial
membrane,  instead  of  a  rapid  congestion  of  the  same. Reasoning  a  priori,  one  might
expect  cases  of  this  kind  to  be  very  common. Such,  however,  is  not  the  fact.  The
disease  which  has  been  termed  the  hay  asthmu,  when  amounting  to  that  degree  of
paroxysmal  violence  deserving  the  name  of  asthma,  belongs  to  the  form  now  under
consideration  ;  although  this  affection  is  much  more  properly  designated  by  the  name
of  summer  catarrh."

The  following  recapitulation,  extracted  from  the  same  article,  appears  to  me  to  em-
brace the  chief  points  in  the  pathology  of  asthma,  that  are  well  established.  [It  will
be  remarked  that  I  take  no  account  of  the  very  important  class  of  cases  immediately
dependent  on  disease  of  the  heart :  these  will  be  noticed  hereafter  under  the  name  of
Cardiac  Asthma.]

U  In  the  disease  properly  termed  asthma,  there  is  always  present  a  spasmodic
contraction  of  the  muscles  of  the  bronchi,  and  sometimes  a  similar  state  of  the  mus-
cles of  the  trachea,  larynx,  and  external  muscles  of  respiration.

2.  In  a  small  proportion  of  cases,  the  spasmodic  stricture  may  take  place  (idiopa-
thically  or  symptomatically)  without  any  previous  disease  of  the  affected  parts.

3.  In  the  great  majority  of  cases  the  spasmodic  constriction  is  dependent  on  a
pre-existing  irritation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  air-passages.

4.  Phenomena  of  a  very  similar  character  are  sometimes  the  consequence  of  a
congested  state  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  air-passages,  without  any  attendant
spasm.

5.  The  congested  or  tumefied  state  of  the  mucous  membrane  almost  invariably
accompanies  the  paroxysms,  whether  this  state  be  a  cause  or  a  consequence  of  the
spasm.

6.  The  violence  of  the  paroxysms  is  modified  no  less  by  the  degree  of  the  con-
gestion than  by  the  degree  of  the  spasm ;  a  great  congestion  with  slight  spasm
producing,  probably,  the  same  result  as  a  slight  congestion  with  a  great  degree  of
spasm.

7.  In  some  cases,  the  tumefied  or  congested  state  of  the  bronchial  membrane
passes  off  entirely  with  the  spasm,  without  any  exhalation  from  the  vessels  or  aug-
mented secretion  from  the  mucous  follicles.  More  commonly  there  is  a  simultaneous
relaxation  of  the  spasm  of  the  muscular  fibres,  and  an  exhalation  from  the  mucous
coat.  This  exhalation  most  commonly  puts  an  end  to  the  disease  for  a  time ;  not  un-
frequently,  however,  the  congestive  passes  to  a  more  permanent  state  of  inflammatory
irritation,  under  the  form  of  pulmonary  catarrh  or  bronchitis."  Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.
Vol.  I. — Trans.


384


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


of  medicines.  Remedies  which  succeed  best  with  a  great  number
of  patients,  are  useless  to  many  others ;  and  in  the  same  indivi-
dual, we  find  that  a  medicine  which  at  first  produced  the  best
effects,  and  with  surprising  quickness,  becomes  entirely  power-
less after  a  few  days.  For  this  reason  it  is  necessary  to  try  succes-
sively several,  and  often  very  different  means.  I  shall  here  run
over  the  list  of  such  of  these  as  have  proved  most  beneficial.  I
formerly  took  notice  of  narcotics  as  a  means  of  lessening  the  need
of  respiration,  and  of  the  influence  of  sleep  on  dyspnoea.  I  may
add  to  what  was  there  stated,  that  in  the  case  of  animals  which
hybernate,  the  quantity  of  air  consumed  in  their  torpid  state,  is
nearly  a  hundred  times  less  than  in  the  state  of  activity  (being  as
14  to  1500,)  as  was  proved  by  Mangili  in  the  case  of  the  marmot
placed  under  a  glass  receiver  in  water.*  This  observation  which
is  allied  to  those  above  detailed,  accounts  for  the  state  of  tole-
rable health  and  freedom  from  dyspnoea,  which  many  persons
enjoy,  whose  respiration,  examined  by  the  stethoscope,  is  three
or  four  times  less  than  in  the  natural  state.  In  these  subjects,
all  that  they  require  is  that  they  approximate,  in  some  slight  de-
gree, the  condition  of  hybernating  animals.  This  theory  appears
to  me  the  more  probable,  from  being  founded  on  the  very  perfect
analogy  of  several  facts  drawn  from  certain  fortuitous  observa-
tions, which  seem,  at  first  sight,  very  dissimilar:  of  this  kind  are
— the  cessation  of  the  feeling  of  oppression  during  sleep  and  for
a  few  minutes  after  awaking,  in  most  cases  of  asthma,  and  the
momentary  relief  of  every  kind  of  d}'spncea  from  the  use  of  nar-
cotics, and  the  effects  of  quiet  and  darkness.  I  may  add  to  these
the  fact,  that  the  greater  number  of  persons  affected  with  an  ex-
tensive dry  catarrh,  and  who  are  nevertheless  free  from  any  habi-
tual oppression  on  the  chest,  eat  little  and  sleep  much ;  and  it
may  be  remarked  as  not  at  all  surprising  that  there  should  be
great  difference  as  to  the  necessity  of  respiration  in  different  per-
sons, any  more  than  in  the  necessity  for  food  or  drink.  We  every
day  observe,  among  men  living  in  almost  the  same  circumstances,
some  that  eat  four  times  more  than  others,  and  find  a  still  greater
disproportion  in  respect  of  drink.

Narcotics  may  act  not  merely  by  lessening  the  necessity  of
respiration,  but  also  by  overcoming  the  spasm  of  the  lungs  ;  and
we  ought,  therefore,  to  have  recourse  to  them  in  every  case  where
the  exploration  of  the  chest  enables  us  to  detect  either  of  these
changes  in  the  condition  of  the  nervous  influence.  Experience
has  long  since  led  medical  men  to  make  much  use  of  medicines
of  this  class,  in  the  treatment  of  asthma  ;  and  the  following  have
been  particularly  approved  of :  opium,  belladonna,  stramo-
nium, phellandrium  aquaticum,  aconitum  napellus,  colchicum,
tobacco,  smoked  or  taken  internally,  cicuta,  dulcamara,  hyoscy-


*  V.  I.  Muellor,  J)e  Re.spir.  fatus.  Comm.  physiol.  Lips:(r,


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


3S5


amus.  All  these  may  be  useful ;  and  we  are  sometimes  under
the  necessity  of  making  trial  of  them  one  after  another.  The
best  general  rule  for  their  administration,  is,  to  begin  with  a
small  dose,  to  increase  this  gradually,  and  to  employ  the  plants
in  substance,  well  preserved  and  recently  powdered.  If  we  em-
ploy extracts,  they  must  have  been  recently  prepared  and  pre-
served with  great  care.  No  means  would  seem  more  proper  for
relieving  the  dyspnoea  which  originates  in  an  increase  of  the
necessity  of  respiration,  than  the  breathing  of  oxygen.  I  have
myself  never  made  trial  of  it ;  and  it  is  well  known  to  have  dis-
appointed those  who  have  employed  it,  notwithstanding  the
eulogies  of  Beddoes  and  Fourcroy.  Besides  narcotics,  several
authors  have  cried  up  certain  vegetable  substances  which  act
powerfully  on  the  nervous  system,  and,  among  others,  lauro-
cerasus,  nux  vomica,  boletus,  suaveolens,  meadow  saffron,  &c.
Substances  of  another  class,  and  equally  irritating  to  the  stomach
and  nervous  system,  have  been  tried,  such  as  the  tincture  of  can-
tharides,  the  arsenical  solution  and  also  arsenic  in  vapour,  the
sulphate  of  zinc,  the  muriate  of  barytes.  Of  these  the  only  ones
I  have  made  trial  of  are,  the  distilled  water  of  the  cherry  laurel
and  the  diluted  prussic  acid.  They  frequently  ease  the  respi-
ration, but  less  certainly  than  narcotics.  The  same  is  true  of
the  nitric,  sulphuric  and  acetic  aethers.

After  narcotics,  no  class  of  medicines  has  been  more  recom-
mended, or  is,  indeed,  more  frequently  beneficial  in  nervous
dyspnoea,  than  the  resins  and  fetid  gums  and  some  other  medi-
cines of  analogous  powers.  Musk  and  castor,  more  especially,
many  times  give  more  speedy  relief ;  and  gum  ammoniac,  assa-
foetida,  camphor,  singly  or  dissolved  in  the  oil  of  petroleum,  and
myrrh,  frequently  relieve  the  dyspnoea,  and  moreover  favour  ex-
pectoration when  there  exists  any  catarrhal  complication.  Even
the  mere  smell  of  these  substances,  and  of  very  odorous  or  fetid
substances  in  general,  frequently  produces  a  temporary  allevi-
ation ;  sometimes,  however,  it  is  injurious.  When  the  asthmatic
paroxysms  have  a  strongly  marked  periodical  character,  cinchona
frequently  diminishes  their  severity,  and  sometimes  stops  them
altogether.  An  English  physician,  Dr.  Bree,  has  recently  lauded
the  subcarbonate  of  iron,  and  coffee,  as  able  not  only  to  dissipate
an  asthmatic  paroxysm  when  present,  but  to  prevent  its  return.
The  last  measure,  however,  had  already  been  proposed  by  one  of
his  countrymen,  Dr.  Percival,  in  his  essays.  I  have  myself  seen
several  cases  in  which  coffee  was  really  useful.  I  have  also  found
that  the  subcarbonate  of  iron,  given  in  graduated  doses,  from  a
scruple  to  a  drachm,  was  beneficial  in  retarding  the  accessions
and  in  lessening  their  violence,  in  persons  of  a  pallid  and  lym-
phatic constitution,  and  in  habits  relaxed  by  a  long  course  of
indolent  enjoyment :  and  it  has  appeared  to  me  equally  beneficial
whether  the  asthma  depended  chiefly  on  a  dry  catarrh,  or  was


386


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


almost  purely  nervous,  but  more  frequently  so  in  the  latter  class
of  cases.  Electricity,  formerly  cried  up  by  Sigaud  de  Lafond,
(DeTElect.  Med.  p.  250,)  has  been  recently  revived,  particularly
under  the  form  of  galvanism ;  and  although  it  has  frequently
succeeded  in  lessening  the  dyspnoea,  it  has  occasionally  increased
it.  I  have  obtained  analogous  effects,  but  less  quickly,  from  the
application  of  the  magnet. — Emetics  appear  frequently  to  act
not  merely  as  evacuants,  derivatives,  and  expectorants,  but  also
by  directly  influencing  the  nervous  system;  as  their  employment
is  often  followed  by  an  immediate  alleviation  of  the  paroxysm.
Whatever  be  the  occasional  causes,  or  the  elements  of  the  asthma,
we  must  never  omit  blood-letting  whenever  the  lividity  of  the
countenance,  the  strength  of  the  patient's  constitution,  or  the
over  action  of  the  heart,  indicate  pulmonary  congestion  ;  but  we
must  be  careful  not  to  abuse  this  practice,  which  in  general  pro-
duces only  a  temporary  advantage.  Venesection  is  rarely  useful
after  the  first  days ;  and  its  too  frequent  repetition,  by  weaken-
ing the  patient,  induces  a  risk  if  not  of  life,  at  least  of  greatly
prolonging  the  duration  of  the  attack.*

*  The  treatment  of  astbma,  like  that  of  all  periodic  diseases,  consists  of  two  parts,
that  proper  in  the  paroxysm,  and  that  in  the  interval.  Laennec  has  not  made  this
distinction  sufficiently  clear.  It  is  chiefly  in  the  parox3'sm  that  blood-lettirjg,  nar-
cotics, anti-spasmodics,  emetics,  expectorants,  derivants,  &c.  are  employed  ;  although
several  of  them  are  also  had  recourse  to  in  the  interval.  I  must  here  content  myself
with  a  few  remarks  on  some  of  the  more  important  of  these  means  ;  and,  in  doing  so,
shall  avail  myself  of  the  materials  contained  in  the  article  Asthma,  written  by  me  for
the  "  Cyclopaedia  of  Practical  Medicine."  For  further  details  I  refer  tbe  reader  to
that  article.

I.  Treatment  in  the  paroxysm. — Blood-letting. — The  extreme  suffering  of  the  patient
in  the  asthmatic  paroxysm  will  very  naturally  suggest  the  employment  of  so  power-
ful a  remedy  as  blood-letting.  This  is,  accordingly,  one  of  tbe  measures  which  the
young  practitioner  is  almost  sure  to  have  recourse  to  upon  being  first  called  to  a
severe  case.  Experience,  however,  will  inevitably  lead  to  opinions  less  favourable
to  its  use  tban  might  he  anticipated  before  a  sufficient  trial  of  its  efficacy.  It  is,  no
doubt,  a  very  proper  remedy  in  some  cases  ;  hut  it  cannot  be  recommended  as  one
that  is  generally  either  useful  or  safe.  It  may  he  occasionally  necessary  as  an
auxiliarv  to  other  means,  or  as  a  measure  of  precaution  against  the  ill  com-equences
likely  to  be  produced  by  the  paroxysm  on  other  parts  ;  but  it  should  never  be  looked
upon  as  a  measure  to  be  had  recourse  to,  like  many  others,  on  almost  empirical  prin-
ciples. It  is  a  remedy  too  important  to  be  trilled  with;  It  never,  1  believe,  puts
an  end  to  the  paroxysm,  much  less  does  it  cure  the  disease  ;  and  its  habitual  em-
ployment in  an  affection  of  frequent  recurrence  cannot  fail  to  be  highly  injurious.
It  is  indicated  in  the  early  attacks  of  young  and  robust  subjects;  in  cases  of  great
general  plethora ;  in  fits  of  great  violence,  in  which  tbe  pulmonary  circulation  is
much  impeded,  and  the  bruin  or  other  important  organs  are  likely  to  suffer  in  conse-
quence. Cases  of  this  kind  are  denoted  by  the  extreme  violence  of  the  dyspnoea,
lividity  of  the  face,  stupor,  &c.  Bleeding  with  leeches  is  never  proper  in  the
asthmntic  paroxysm  ;  cupping  may  be  occasionally  useful,  especially  when  there
exists  much  cerebral  congestion.

Narcotics,  antispasmodics,  tSfc. —  Medicines  of  this  class  seem  particularly  indicated
by  the  obviously  spasmodic  character  of  the  paroxysm,  and  by  its  violence;  and  ac-
cordingly they  have  been  very  generally  prescribed  in  it,  in  one  form  or  other,  from
the  earliest  times.  It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  the  success  of  such  remedies
has  been  very  limited,  and  the  practice  but  little  trusted  to  by  experienced  persons,
whether  practitioners  or  the  subjects  of  astbma.  In  the  great  majority  of  cases  in
which  Optulll  and  the  medicines  termed  anti-spasmodics  have  been  employed,  they


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


387


have  failed  to  afford  any  relief ;  while  in  many  they  have  proved  injurious,  either  at
the  time  or  in  their  subsequent  effects.  A  little  reflection  on  the  pathology  of  the
disease  will  readily  explain  this  result.  In  most  cases  the  only  portion  of  the  disease
which  such  remedies  are  calculated  to  relieve,  (the  spasm, )  is  conjoined  with  and
dependent  on  a  pathological  condition  of  the  bronchial  membrane  over  which  they
have  little  or  no  controul.  This  condition,  if  not  positively  inflammatory,  is  cer-
tainly of  an  analogous  kind,  and  the  experienced  reader  need  hardly  be  reminded  of
the  inutility  (to  use  no  stronger  term)  of  anti-spasraodics  in  other  cases  of  spasmodic
stricture  dependent  on  inflammatory  irritation  of  the  part,  until  this  primary  irritation
has  been  reduced  by  remedies  of  another  class.  It  is  only  in  cases  of  pure  nervous
asthma,  or  in  those  symptomatic  dyspnoeas,  simulating  asthma,  which  depend  on
organic  disease  of  the  heart,  &c.  that  opium  and  other  narcotics  and  anli-spasmodics
are  at  all  likely  to  prove  useful  ;  and  it  is  only  in  these  cases  that  they  should  be
prescribed.  In  the  hysteric  asthma  the  good  effect  of  opium  was  long  ago  recog-
nized by  Willis,  and  I  have  myself  seen  it  very  successful  in  the  spurious
forms  just  mentioned.  In  the  true  catarrhal  asthma  I  have  never  seen  it  useful,
and  have  often  seen  it  injurious.

Of  this  class  of  remedies  our  space  will  only  permit  us  to  refer  to  two  or  three  of
the  principal: — Stramonium  had  formerly  been  strongly  recommended  by  Stoerk  and
others  in  mania,  epilepsy,  &c.  but  experience  of  its  ineflicacy  had  long  occasioned
its  discontinuance  in  such  cases,  when  its  use  was  again  revived  in  English  practice
in  the  beginning  of  the  present  centurv,  as  a  remedy  for  asthma. It  had  been  pre-
viously employed  in  India  in  the  same  disease  with  much  reputation,  and  it  speedily
attained  great  fame  upon  its  introduction  by  Dr.  Sims  into  this  country. Since  that
time  it  has  been  very  much  used ;  and  although  its  virtues  are  found  to  be  greatly
less  than  was  at  first  believed,  they  have  been  satisfactorily  proved  to  be  such  as  to
entitle  it  to  the  first  rank  among  the  temporary  remedies  of  asthma. The  mode  of
its  administration  is  smoking  it  during  the  paroxysm,  in  the  manner  of  tobacco.
Tobacco  has  also  been  much  employed  by  asthmatics,  either  in  conjunction  with
stramonium,  or  by  itself. It  is  considered  in  general  as  beneficial  in  the  paroxysm,
and,  in  the  estimation  of  some  old  asthmatics,  its  effects  are  not  inferior  to  those  of  the
former  medicine. Neither  seems  productive  of  relief  unless  expectoration  is  excited.
Lobelia  Injiata  has  for  the  last  few  years  more  than  rivalled  stramonium  in  public
estimation ;  but  I  consider  its  pretensions  to  rest  on  much  slighter  grounds.  It
has  certainly  been  occasionally  productive  of  great  and  immediate  relief,  but  has
much  more  frequently  failed  altogether ;  and  in  cases  where  it  had  at  first  succeeded,
it  has  lost  its  efficacy  on  repeated  trials. I  have  found  it  occasionally  beneficial
in  checking  the  paroxysm  even  in  cases  of  catarrhal  asthma,  if  given  at  the  very
commencement ;  but  have  found  it  more  certainly  successful,  at  least  temporarily,  in
spurious  cases  produced  by  hydrothorax  and  disease  of  the  heart. Further  trials  are
necessary  to  enable  us  to  speak  confidently  of  its  real  merits.  It  is  given  in  the  form
of  a  saturated  tincture  of  the  leaves,  in  doses  of  from  half  a  drachm  to  a  drachm
and  a  half,  or  two  drachms. Coffee  has  obtained  considerable  reputation  in  asthma.
We  are  informed  by  Sir  John  Pringle,  that  "  Floyer,  during  the  latter  years  of  his
life,  kept  free  from,  or  at  least  lived  easy  under  his  asthma,  from  the  use  of  very
strong  coffee." If  this  be  true,  the  Knight  of  Lichfield  must  have  found  some  diffi-
culty in  reconciling  the  utility  of  this  "  hot  drink"  with  his  theories,  or  even  with
his  past  experience. But,  be  this  as  it  may,  Sir  John  Pringle  assures  us,  on  his  own
authority,  that  coffee  is  "  the  best  abater  of  the  paroxysms  of  asthma"  that  he  has
seen. He  says  the  coffee  is  to  be  made  very  strong,  ("  an  ounce  for  one  dish,")  and
the  dose  to  be  repeated  every  quarter  or  half  hour. This  practice  is  sanctioned  by
Dr.  Bree,  and  has  been  much  used  since  the  publication  of  his  Treatise. Mv  own
observation  and  inquiries  lead  me  to  rank  it  with  other  narcotics  and  stimulauts  and
therefore,  to  place  no  reliance  on  it  as  a  general  remedy.

Refrigerants. — Vegetable  acids  and  neutral  salts  of  a  cooling  nature  have  been
considered  beneficial  by  many,  particularly  nitre  and  vinegar.  Remedies  of  this
class  have  one  great  advantage  over  many  others  that  have  been  used  in  asthma,  that
they  are  not  likely  to  prove  injurious,  and  may  prevent  the  administration  of  such
as  are.  Combined  with  mild  diaphoretics  and  small  doses  of  ipecacuan,  I  look
upon  them  as  the  safest,  and  perhaps,  on  the  whole,  the  best,  in  the  most  common
cases,  namely,  the  catarrhal.  Indeed,  it  remains  yet  to  be  proved  if,  in  the  majority
of  cases  of  asthma,  medicine  possesses  any  resources  superior  to  those  found  most
useful  in  simple  catarrh.

Derivavts,  in  the  form  of  stimulant  pediluvia,  sinapisms  to  the  feet,  &c.  are  re-

c  c  2


388


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


commended,  most  particularly  by  foreign  physicians.  I  have  repeatedly  tried  tho
warm  foot-bath.  In  some  cases  it  afforded  relief ;  in  others  it  immediately  aggravated
the  dyspnoea.

There  are  two  points  in  the  pathology  of  asthma  which,  in  reference  to  the  treat-
ment in  the  paroxysm,  deserve  much  more  attention  than  they  have  hitherto  obtained.
These  points  are,  the  very  general  production  of  the  paroxysm  by  cold,  or  rather,  by
"  catching  cold ;"  and  the  identity  of  the  very  earliest  stage  of  the  disease — that  is,
the  stage  preceding  the  attack  of  actual  dyspnoea — with  that  of  common  catarrh.  If
the  invasion  of  this  stage  were  carefully  watched,  and  means  were  taken  calculated
to  check  its  progress,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  the  asthmatic  paroxysm  might  be
frequently  prevented.  In  Dr.  Ryan's  work, this  precursory  stage  of  asthma  is  noticed,
and  its  frequently  inflammatory  character  recognized. But  it  is  in  the  Essay  of  Dr.
Watt  (Cases  of  Diabetes,  &;c.  p.  248)  that  this  important  part  of  the  pathology  of
asthma  has  had  justice  done  to  it,  and  the  principles  of  treatment  to  which  it  leads
have  been  satisfactorily  explained. In  several  cases  there  recorded,  the  patients  are
shown  to  have  been  able  to  recognize  the  approach  of  the  paroxysm  some  consi-
derable time  before  its  actual  invasion  ;  and  by  adopting  very  simple  measures  "  to
check  the  cold,"  they  frequently  succeeded  in  averting  the  asthma  for  the  time.
Those  measures  were  warm  pediluvia,  warm  diluents,  and  diaphoretics  on  going  to
bed,  and  sometimes  purgatives. If  these  means  were  followed  by  evacuations  by
the  skin  and  bowels,  the  fit  was  almost  certainly  prevented. A  circumstance  men-
tioned by  one  of  Dr.  Watt's  patients  is  well  worthy  of  notice,  as  strikingly  illus-
trative at  once  of  the  pathology  and  proper  treatment  of  such  cases. If  the  pre-
cursory symptoms  of  the  attack  had  continued  for  a  number  of  hours  before  the.  pa-
tient had  recourse  to  the  usual  measures,  these  were  found  to  be  now  worse  than
useless. "  The  bathing  and  warm  drink,  which,  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  attack,
would  have  prevented  the  fit,  serve  now  to  bring  it  on  sooner  and  with  more  violence."
I  recommend  this  practice  to  the  particular  attention  of  the  profession,  convinced
from  my  own  experience,  as  well  as  from  that  of  the  author  just  named,  and  from
the  soundness  of  the  pathology  on  which  it  is  based,  that  it  will  be  found  of  the  most
essential  benefit  in  asthma. The  great  uncertainty  and  lamentable  feebleness  of  our
therapeutic  means,  after  the  disease  is  fully  formed,  enhance  extremely  the  value  of
any  kind  of  treatment  calculated  to  prevent  the  invasion  of  the  paroxysm.

II.  Treatment  in  the  interval. — It  will  be  obvious  to  any  one  who  considers  the
pathology  of  asthma,  its  different  forms  and  complications,  its  various  causes,  and  the
important  modifications  derived  from  difference  of  constitution  in  the  subjects  of  it,
that  the  treatment  of  this  disease,  in  the  interval,  must  vary  greatly  in  individual
cases.  Practical  precepts,  which  can  apply  generally,  must,  on  this  account,  be  very
brief.  They  can  only  have  reference  to  the  disease  in  its  simplest  state,  whether
this  has  been  its  original  character,  or  has  been  brought  about  by  the  removal  of  its
complications  by  previous  treatment.  When  called  on  to  treat  any  case,  our  first
object  will  be  to  ascertain  its  peculiarities ;  and,  having  ascertained  them,  we  must
regulate  our  practice  accordingly.  If  the  paroxysms  of  difficult  breathing  appear
to  be  unconnected  with  any  very  marked  disorders  of  the  system,  except  such  as  are
considered  to  constitute  an  essential  part  of  the  disease,  we  may  then  proceed  at
once  to  apply  the  remedies  which  we  consider  best  suited  to  the  cure  of  asthma  in
general.  If,  on  the  contrary,  we  find,  as  will  generally  be  the  case,  that  the  asthmatic
affection  is  complicated  with  and  apparently  influenced  by  some  disorder  of  other
parts,  it  will  be  wrong  to  apply  any  romedies  specially  directed  to  the  cure  of  the
asthma,  until  these  extraneous  disorders  are  removed,  or  at  least  attempted  to  be
removed.

Into  these  complicating  disorders  I  cannot  here  enter;  and  I  must  content
myself  with  a  mere  reference  to  some  of  the  chief  remedies  applicable  to  the  asthma
itself.

Cold  bathing. — Of  all  the  means  calculated  to  lessen  the  morbid  sensibility  of  tho
bronchial  membrane  to  the  impression  of  cold — in  other  words,  to  diminish  the  ten-
dency in  individuals  to  catch  cold — there  is  none  at  all  comparable  to  the  application
of  water  to  the  surface  of  the  body,  under  some  form  or  other  of  the  cold  bath.  In
a  climate  so  cold  and  variable  as  that  of  England,  it  is  utterly  vain  for  those  who  are
unfortunately  very  liable  to  catarrhal  complaints,  to  hope,  by  warm  clothing,  com-
ortable  rooms,  or  any  plan  of  seclusion  from  the  atmospheric  vicissitudes,  to  escape
them.  The  very  efforts  such  persons  moke  to  avoid  the  unfavourable  influence  of
the  climate  only  render  them  more  subject  to  it.  Here,  as  in  the  case  of  most  other
evils,  moral  as  well  ns  physical,  tho  host  chance  of  success  consists  in  strenuous  re-


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


389


sistance.  If  we  do  not  positively  attack  the  enemy,  wo  must  at  least,  if  we  hope  for
safety,  present  a  bold  front  and  maintain  a  strong  defensive.

It  is  only  by  the  return  to  hardier  habits  generally,  and  by  the  practice  of  cold
bathing,  that  the  persons  whose  cases  we  are  now  considering,  can  hope  to  re-estab-
lish the  natural  harmony  which  ought  always  to  exist  between  the  animal  and  the
climate  it  inhabits,  and  which  in  them  has  been  unfortunately  destroyed.  Cold
bathing  may  be  used  in  various  ways  ;  in  the  form  of  the  common  plunge-bath,  the
shower-bath,  or  by  simple  ablution  of  the  exposed  surface.  In  the  case  of  asthmatics,
the  latter  is  the  mode  generally  preferable  in  the  first  instance,  or  else  the  tepid
shower-bath.  Ablution,  when  proper,  has  a  very  great  advantage  over  all  the  other
forms  of  bathing,  in  being  attended  with  little  trouble,  and  being  accessible  to  all.
The  process  consists  in  simply  washing  with  a  sponge,  towel,  or  piece  of  flannel
dipped  in  water,  the  trunk  of  the  body,  and  then  drying  it,  using  strong  friction  at
the  same  time.  On  first  commencing  the  practice,  if  in  winter,  the  chill  must  be
taken  off  the  water.  A  portion  of  common  salt  must  be  always  dissolved  in  it,  in
the  proportion  of  one  or  two  ounces  to  the  pint,  or  an  equivalent  amount  of  vinegar
added.  The  time  for  using  the  water  is  immediately  on  getting  out  of  bed  ;  and
this  is  also  the  best  time  for  using  the  shower-bath,  if  the  system  is  sufficiently  vi-
gorous to  bear  the  shock  without  any  further  preparation.

Timics. — The  special  medicines  which  have  been  most  recommended  and  used  in
asthma,  belong  almost  exclusively  to  the  class  of  tonics.  But  before  proceeding  to
notice  these  particularly,  I  must  be  permitted  once  more  to  caution  the  practitioner
against  their  indiscriminate  use,  without  due  regard  to  the  state  of  the  system.  Great
discredit  bas  been  thrown  upon  many  valuable  medicines,  and  much  injury  done  to
asthmatic  patients,  by  premature  attempts  to  cure  the  disease  by  means  of  tonics,
and  other  specific  remedies,  directed  exclusively  to  act  on  the  nervous  system.  This
is,  indeed,  the  besetting  sin  of  British  practice  in  chronic  diseases  ;  and  1  have
good  reason  to  know  that  asthma  forms  no  exception  to  a  rule  too  general.  Medi-
cines of  a  kind  calculated  to  act  with  great  power  on  the  organ  to  which  they  are
primarily  applied,  are  frequently  prescribed  without  any  reference  to  the  existing
condition  of  that  organ.  If  general  debility  prevails,  and  still  more  surely,  if  the
stomach  refuses  to  perform  its  functions  with  vigour,  bitters,  bark,  steel,  are  imme-
diately prescribed,  with  little  or  no  regard  to  the  state  of  the  stomach,  although  this
may  be  such  as  altogether  to  contra-indicate  the  use  of  such  remedies.  While  active
irritation  or  chronic  inflammation  exists  in  the  intestinal  mucous  membrane,  the  true
tonics  are  leeches,  refrigerants,  and  low  diet;  and  it  is  only  after  the  recipient  lias
been  prepared  by  such  means,  that  tonics  can  be  administered  without  injury  even,
certainly  with  any  prospect  of  benefit.

Bark,  steel,  and  the  oxide  of  zinc  are  the  tonics  which  have  been  most  relied  on  in
the  treatment  of  asthma.  The  well-earned  fame  of  bark  in  the  cure  of  the  periodical
affections  which  originate  in  malaria,  would  naturally  suggest  its  employment  in  a
disease  like  that  of  asthma;  and  we  find,  accordingly,  that  it  has  been  prescribed
and  recommended  by  almost  every  one  who  has  written  on  this  disease  since  the
introduction  of  cinchona  into  European  practice.  Floyer  says,  that  nothing  is  more
likely  to  prevent  the  return  of  the  paroxysm  than  bark;  and  that,  even  in  the  cases
of  symptomatic  asthma,  "  though  it  cannot  prevent  the  fits,  yet  it  greatly  relieves  the
sweats  and  faintness  attending  the  fits,  and  headachs,  and  makes  the  intervals  of  the
fits  longer."  Bree  recommends  it,  but  less  forcibly.  He  says,  it  acts  as  other  tonics,
and  is  inferior  to  steel.  Ryan  says  that  "  there  are  few  cases  that  will  not  admit  of
its  use,  particularly  if  the  fits  are  kept  up  by  habit;"  but  he  adds,  that  his  success
with  this  remedy  "  has  not  generally  answered  his  expectations."  It  does  not  ap-
pear that  the  observations  made  on  the  use  of  this  remedy  in  the  text,  are  derived
from  personal  experience  of  the  author.  The  fact  appears  to  be,  that  bark  possesses
no  specific  powers  in  checking  the  return  of  the  common  asthmatic  paroxysm  ;  but
that  it  occasionally  acts  beneficially  in  two  classes  of  cases  ;  first,  when  the  asthma
is  complicated  with  ague,  as  it  sometimes  is,  and,  secondly,  when  the  stomach  or
general  system  is  in  a  state  in  which  a  tonic  of  this  kind  is  beneficial.  If  it  improves
the  general  health,  it  frequently  aids  in  the  cure  or  relief  of  asthma.  Steel  has  been
even  more  extensively  used  than  bark,  and,  I  apprehend,  with  more  general  suc-
cess. In  the  cases  which  are  attended  by  that  cachectic  state  of  the  system  indi-
cated by  more  or  less  of  the  pale  chlorotic  aspect,  this  remedy  is  often  extremely
beneficial,  by  imparting  vigour  to  the  stomach  and  system  generally. Bree  is  a

freat  advocate  for  steel,  which  he  considers  as  preferable  to  all  other  kinds  of  tonics,
loyer's  experience,  however,  both  personal  and  professional,  is  rather  against  the
use  of  steel. He  says,  "  most  asthmatics  complain  that  steel  heats  tbom,  stops  their


390


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


stomachs  and  breaths,  and  thickens  the  phlegm,  and  at  last  produces  a  severe  effer-
vescence which  gives  the  fit."  He  says,  that  both  himself  and  most  of  bis  patients
were  injured  by  the  use  of  the  chalybeate  mineral  waters,  although  some  were  better
for  them,  "  the  quantity  of  cool  water  (as  he  simply  observes)  doing  more  service
than  the  steel  could  do  injury."  The  fact,  no  doubt,  in  this  case,  as  in  that  of  bark,
is,  that  success  or  failure  will  depend  upon  tbe  proper  application  of  the  remedy.
If  tbe  general  state  of  tbe  system  seem  to  indicate  the  use  of  steel,  and  if  the  state
of  the  stomach  and  bowels  do  not  forbid  it,  I  have  no  doubt  that  it  will  often  prove
a  valuable  remedy  in  asthma ;  and  the  class  of  cases  which  are  most  likely  to  be
benefited  by  its  use,  are  either  those  which  occur  in  what  may  be  called  the  chlorotic
temperament,  or  those  which  seem  allied  to  neuralgic  affections,  not  dependent  on
malaria,  in  which  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  steel  is  often  highly  useful.  But  in
any  case  it  will  be  the  particular  condition  of  the  digestive  organs  and  the  general
system  that  will  point  out  the  propriety  of  the  remedy,  and  not  any  supposed  specific
powers  possessed  by  it  against  the  asthmatic  paroxysm.  If  it  is  contra-indicated  by
the  presence  of  such  circumstances  as  render  it  useless  or  injurious  in  other  cases,
the  addition  of  asthma  to  the  group  will  not  in  any  way  remove  this  contra-indication.

Oxyd  of  zinc  has  obtained  celebrity  as  a  remedy  for  asthma,  chiefly  through  the
publication  of  Dr.  Withers'  treatise,  in  which  it  is  strongly  recommended,  as  pos-
sessing extraordinary  powers  in  the  cure  of  this  disease.  The  author  records  many
cases  illustrative  of  its  effects.  In  several  it  certainly  appears  to  have  been  beneficial  ;
but,  like  most  promulgators  of  new  or  favourite  remedies,  he  has  greatly  exaggerated
its  importance  as  a  general  remedy.  Dr.  Withers  gave  the  medicine  in  doses,
varying  from  five  to  twenty  grains  twice  or  thrice  a  day.  This  tonic  may  be  given
in  states  of  the  stomach  when  bark  and  steel  are  inadmissible  ;  and  certainly  when
tonics  are  indicated,  it  is  entitled  to  a  trial,  from  tbe  ample  evidence  adduced  in  its
favour.

The  limits  of  this  work  will  not  allow  me  to  notice  other  remedies  or  plans
of  treatment ;  but  I  cannot  altogether  omit  reference  to  the  very  important  points —
tbe  effect  of  climate  and  regimen.  Asthma  is  one  of  tbe  diseases  in  which  tbe  effect
of  change  of  climate  or  change  of  air  is  most  conspicuous.  It  is  the  remark  of  every
writer  on  the  disease  that  certain  patients  have  an  increase  or  alleviation  of  their
symptoms  upon  changing  their  residence  from  one  place  to  another.  Sometimes  a
very  slight  change,  as  to  distance,  has  this  effect ;  and  even  when  little  or  no  dif-
ference in  the  nature  of  the  climate  or  locality  can  be  discovered.  According  to  my
present  experience  these  remarkable  results  can  be  explained  on  no  general  prin-
ciple; still,  attention  to  the  ascertained  influence  of  particular  climates  on  particular
diseases,  and  on  the  system  in  general,  and  a  close  study  of  the  pathology  of  the  in-
dividual cases  of  asthma,  will  enable  us  frequently  to  be  of  much  service  to  such  of
our  patients  as  have  it  in  their  power  to  make  choice  of  their  residence.

In  selecting  a  climate  for  an  asthmatic  patient,  we  must  be  guided  precisely  by  the
principles  which  direct  the  application  of  any  other  remedy  or  course  of  treatment.
A  minute  examination  of  the  individual  case  is  always  essential ;  and  in  making  this
with  a  view  to  the  apydication  of  climate,  we  must  endeavour  to  ascertain,  1st.  the
state  of  the  bronchi  ;  2d.  the  state  of  the  general  health,  or  the  diseases  with  which
the  asthma  may  be  complicated ;  3d.  the  relation,  as  to  the  cause  and  effect,  which
these  diseases  bear  to  the  asthma  ;  4th.  the  character  of  the  patient's  general  consti-
tution or  temperament ;  and,  lastly,  the  ascertained  effect  of  particular  climates,  loca-
lities, and  seasons,  upon  his  individual  case.

Although  asthma  is  a  disease  of  every  climate,  and  although  many  patients  have
their  severest  attacks  in  summer,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that,  in  the  great  majority  of
cases,  a  mild  and  equitable  climate  is  much  more  favourable  to  the  asthmatic  than
one  that  is  cold  and  variable.  Such  a  climate  proves  beneficial  in  various  ways,  more
especially  in  the  cases  dependent  on  any  form  of  chronic  catarrh.  It  tends  directly
to  remove  the  very  basis  of  the  disease — 1st.  by  the  direct  application  to  the  part  of
air  of  a  milder  and  more  agreeable  temperature  ;  '2d.  by  render  bag  the  attacks  of  acute
catarrh  less  frequent,  and  thereby  affording  longer  intervals  for  the  restoration  of  the
irritated  membrane  ;  3d.  by  promoting  the  cure  of  the  accompanying  disorders,  which
frequently  exert  a  most  unfavourable  influence,  both  on  the  structural  alteration  of
the  membrane,  and  on  the  spasmodic  affection  of  the  bronchial  muscles  ;  and  more
particularly  the  disorders  of  the  digestive  organs  and  the  skin  ;  4th.  by  enabling  the
patient  to  improve  the  general  health  and  strength,  and  to  fortify  the  system  against
the  impression  of  cold  by  constant  exercise  in  the  open  air,  and  by  the  uninterrupted
use  of  the  cold  bath  throughout  the  year.  (Soo  Dr.  Clark's  work  On  the  Influence  of
Climate  in  Chronic  Diseases.)


SPASMODIC  ASTHMA.


391


The  diet  to  all  chronic  diseases  is  a  matter  of  grout  practical  importance.  It  is  of
more  especial  importance  in  asthma,  because  disorder  of  the  stomach  is  so  frequent  a
concomitant  and  even  a  cause  of  the  disease.  All  the  good  writers  on  asthma  are
strong  advocates  for  moderation  in  diet ;  and  there  is  no  disease  in  which  patients
are  more  unanimous  on  the  same  point.  Floyer  is  particularly  zealous  against  ex-
cess both  in  eating  and  drinking.  "  Hunger  and  thirst  (he  says)  are  the  best  cure
for  the  asthma,  especially  little  and  very  small  drink."  "  The  less  the  asthmatics  are
nourished,  (he  says,  in  another  place,)  the  longer  are  the  intervals  of  the  fits,  and  the
clearer  is  their  breath."  The  principles  which  ought  to  regulate  the  diet  are  few  and
simple  ;  but  the  practice  must  be  modified  by  the  circumstances  of  individual  cases.
Temperance  and  moderation  are  universally  applicable  and  necessary,  as  is  also  habi-
tual vigilance  against  being  seduced  from  the  regularity  of  invalid  habits.  The  par-
ticular system  of  diet  is  indicated  much  more  by  the  concomitant  affections  than  by
the  asthma  itself.  If  the  disease  is  unattended  by  any  very  decided  disorder  of
structure  in  the  bronchi,  or  elsewhere,  the  diet  may  be  more  generous  and  less  strict
than  under  a  different  state  of  things.  If  there  is  marked  affection  of  the  bronchi,
with  little  disorder  of  other  parts,  the  only  circumstance  of  much  importance  to  be
attended  to  respecting  diet,  is,  that  it  does  not  tend,  by  being  over  full,  directly  to  in-
crease this  bronchial  affection,  and  to  induce  other  disorders  which  might  aggravate
the  primary  disease.  But  in  almost,  all  cases  of  asthma,  we  have  already  other  dis-
orders which  tend  powerfully  to  aggravate  and  keep  up  the  bronchial  affection,  and
in  the  alleviation  or  cure  of  which  diet  is  of  paramount  importance.  In  this  list  we
may  include  dyspepsia  with  its  numerous  progeny  of  general  and  local  diseases,  ple-
thora, gout,  gravel,  diseases  of  the  mucous  membranes  generally,  of  the  liver,  brain,
uterus,  skin,  &c.  &c.  For  the  dietetic  management  of  these  diseases  we  must  refer
the  reader  to  the  particular  authors  who  treat  of  them,  and  to  the  various  treatises  on
regimen  and  diet;  we  would  only  here  observe  that  the  co-existence  of  the  asth-
matic paroxysm  scarcely,  in  any  degree,  alters  the  diet  proper  in  these  affections.

LITERATURE  OF  ASTHMA.

1698.  Floyer  (Sir  J.,  M.D.) A  Treatise  of  the  Asthma. Land.  8vo.
1703.  Ridley  (H.,  M.D.) Observationes  de  Asthmate,  &c. Lond.  8vo.

1769.  Millar  (J.,  M.D.) Obs.  on  Asthma  and  Hooping  Cough. Lond.  8vo.

1770.  Rush  (Benj.,  M.D.)  A  Diss,  on  the  Spas.  Asthma  of  Children.  Lond.  8vo.
1773.  Falk,  (N.  D.,  M.D.)  A  Treatise  on  Disorders  of  the  Lungs,  &c.  Lond.  8vo.
1786.  Withers,  (Th.  M.D.) Treatise  on  the  Asthma. Lond.  8vo.

1793.  Ryan  (Mich.,  M. D.) Obs.  on  the  Hist,  and  Cure  of  Asthma. Lond.  8vo.
1795.  Davidson  (W.)  Obs.  on  the  Pulmonary  System,  &c. Lond.  8vo.
1797.  Bree  (R.,  M.D.) Pract.  Obs.  on  Disordered  Respiration. Lond.  8vo.
1797.  Lipscomb  (G.) Obs.  on  the  Hist,  and  Cause  of  Asthma,  in  a  letter  to  Dr.
Bree. Birm.  8vo.

1804.  Laubender  (B.)  Ueber  die  erkenntniss,  &c.  der  Engbrustigkeit. Num.  8vo.
1809.  Znllony  (M.)  Trait6  de  l'Asthme. Par.  8vo.

1811.  Phillips  (Sir  R.)  Communications  on  Stramonium  in  Asthma. Lond.  12mo.

1812.  Lullier-Winslow. Diet.  des.  Sc.  M. (Art.  Asthme.)  t.  ii.  Par.

1817.  Albers  (J.  C,  M.D.) Comm.  de  diagnosi  Asthmatis  Millari. Goett.  12mo.

1818.  Balfour  (  W„  M.D.)  Illustrations  of  the  Power  of  Emetic  Tartar,  &c.  Ed.  8vo.
1821.  Ferrus. Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Asthme.) t.  iii.  Par.

1821.  Guersent. Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Asthme  Aigu.)  t.  iii.  Par.

1828.  Suchet  (L.)  Essai  sur  la  Pneumolaryngalgie  ou  Asthme  aigu. Par.  8vo.

1829.  Jolly. Diet,  de  Med.  et  de  Chir. (Art.  Asthme.) t.  iii.  Par.
1829.  Kreysig. Encycl.  Woerterbuch. (Art.  Asthma.) B.  iii.  Berl.
1833.  Forbes. Cyclop,  of  Pract.  Med. (Art.  Asthma.) vol.  i.  Lond.
1833.  Copland. Diet,  of  Pract.  Med. (Art.  Asthmu.)  Lond.

Trail  si.


392


BOOK  THIRD.


DISEASES  OF  THE  PLEURA.


CHAPTER  I.

OF  PLEURISY.

Pleurisy,  or  inflammation  of  the  pleura,  derives  its  name  from
the  pain  of  the  side,  which  is  usually  its  principal  symptom.
The  word  nXe-uping  in  the  sense  in  which  it  was  used  by  Hippo-
crates, properly  speaking,  signifies  every  kind  of  pains  in  the
side,  particularly  such  as  are  of  considerable  violence,  continued,
and  accompanied  with  acute  fever.  This  circumstance,  and  the
small  progress  made  by  pathological  anatomy  before  the  end  of
last  century,  gave  occasion  to  many  controversies  respecting  the
true  characters  and  the  seat  of  pleurisy ;  some  considering  it  as
an  inflammation  of  the  pleura,  some  as  an  inflammation  of  the
lungs,  others  as  having  its  seat  in  both  these,  or  sometimes  in
one  and  sometimes  in  the  other ;  while  some  looked  for  its  cause
in  the  cellular  adhesions  which  so  frequently  unite  the  lungs  to
the  pleura  of  the  ribs.  At  a  recent  period  we  still  find  these
questions  discussed  at  length,  and  very  unsatisfactorily  decided,
by  Morgagni,  who  may  be  considered  as  the  father  of  patholo-
gical anatomy ;  *  as  well  as  by  Sarcone,  who  was  perhaps  the
most  remarkable  practitioner  of  the  last  century .f  More  re-
cently still,  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  celebrated  physicians  of
our  time,  considered  the  subject  under  the  same  point  of  view* J

These  questions  are  now  obsolete,  at  least  in  France,  where
the  term  pleurisy,  ever  since  the  publication  of  M.  Pinel,  lias
been  restricted  to  signify  inflammation  of  the  pleura.  It  is,
no  doubt,  true  that  pleurisy  and  pneumonia  are  very  frequently
combined ;  that,  in  cases  where  the  pleura  alone  is  inflamed,  the
stitch  of  the  side,  which  constitutes  the  principal  character  of
the  TrXevpiut  of  the  ancients,  and  also  of  many  moderns,  is

•  Epist.  xx.  38.  Epist.  xxi.  37,  et  seq.

t  Istor.  rngion.  de'  mnli  in  Napoli. Napoli,  1765.

}  MCm.  do  l'Acad.  des  Sciences,  1789. Obnervation  qui  protive,  &c  par  Portal.


SIMPLE  ACUTE  PLEURISY.


393


scarcely  perceptible  or  only  momentarily,  and  in  certain  cases  is
altogether  wanting  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  in  cases  where
a  violent  pneumonia  is  complicated  with  a  very  slight  pleurisy,
there  is  sometimes  a  most  violent  pain  of  the  side :  at  the  same
time,  it  is  equally  certain  that  one  of  these  inflammations  may
exist  without  the  other,  and  that  there  are  even  certain  epidemic
constitutions  in  which  they  are  commonly  found  distinct.  In
every  case,  the  nomenclature  adopted  in  this  work,  being  founded
on  the  difference  of  organs  and  not  of  symptoms,  can  lead  to  no
confusion :  with  us,  the  term  pleurisy  will  always  signify  in-
flammation of  the  pleura,  whether  it  is  attended  by  a  stitch  or
not ;  peripneumony  or  pneumonia  will  always  stand  for  inflam-
mation of  the  lungs,  even  when  accompanied  by  acute  pain  of  the
side,  while  pleuro-pneumonia  will  indicate  the  co-existence  of  in-
flammation in  both  organs.  In  this  chapter  I  shall  consider  the
pathology  and  treatment  of  pleurisy  under  the  following  heads :
—  1.  simple  acute  pleurisy;  2.  acute  haemorrhagic  pleurisy;
3.  chronic  pleurisy  ;  4.  contraction  of  the  chest,  consequent  to
pleurisy  ;  5.  circumscribed  or  partial  pleurisy  ;  6.  latent  pleurisy  ;
7«  pleuro-pneumonia  ;  8.  empyema.


Sect.  I. — Of  simple  Acute  Pleurisy.

The  anatomical  characters  of  pleurisy  are  drawn  from  the
state  of  the  pleura,  and  the  alteration  and  augmentation  of  the
secretion  which  always  accompanies  the  inflammation  of  this,  as
of  all  serous  membranes.

The  pleura  in  the  state  of  acute  inflammation  presents  a  punc-
tuated redness  ;  as  if  one  had  traced  with  a  pencil  upon  the
pleura,  an  infinity  of  small  bloody  spots  of  very  irregular  figure,
and  very  close  to  one  another.  These  red  points  occupy  the
whole  thickness  of  the  membrane,  and  leave  small  intermediate
portions  retaining  the  natural  white  colour.  It  cannot  be  doubted
that,  during  life,  the  redness  was  uniform  ;  and  that  the  punc-
tuated appearance  as  well  as  the  natural  colour  of  the  greater
part  of  the  membrane,  observed  after  death,  are,  according  to
the  remark  of  Bichat,  owing  to  that  anatomical  disposition  of
parts,  which  frequently  occasions  the  almost  total  disappearance
of  the  redness  of  erysipelas  after  death.  Besides  this  particular
redness, — and  even  in  those  instances  where  it  is  very  incon-
siderable,— we  always  find  the  superficial  blood-vessels  of  the
pleura  redder,  more  distinct,  and  more  distended  than  in  the
natural  state.  Many  consider  the  thickening  of  the  pleura  as  a
very  common  consequence  of  inflammation.  I  must  say,  how-
ever, that  I  never  clearly  perceived  this  ;  and  I  think  there  can
be  no  doubt  that,  in  the  greater  number  of  cases  wherein  it  had
been  thought  to  exist,  the  supposed  thickening  has  cither  been


3<H


SIMPLE  ACUTE  PLEURISY.


an  extensive  cougeries  of  miliary  tubercles  on  the  outer  or  inner
surface  of  the  pleura, — or  a  cartilaginous  incrustation  on  the
parts  covered  by  it,  or,  lastly,  false  membranes,  more  or  less
dense,  closely  adherent  to  its  internal  surface.  Inflammation  of
the  pleura  is  always  accompanied  by  an  extravasation  on  its  in-
ternal surface,  and  which  may  be  considered  as  the  species  of
suppuration  proper  to  serous  membranes.  This  extravasation
appears  to  commence  with  the  inflammation  itself.*  It  con-
sists, usually  at  least,  and,  in  my  opinion,  always,  of  two  very
different  matters  :  the  one  of  a  firmer,  semi-concrete  consistence,
is  usually  termed  false  membrane ;  the  other,  very  thin  and
watery,  is  called  serosity  or  sero-purulent  effusion.  Both  of
these  exhibit  great  varieties  of  character.

The  false  membranes  consist  of  a  yellowish-white,  opaque
or  slightly  semi-transparent  matter,  varying  from  the  consistence
of  a  thick  pus  to  that  of  boiled  white  of  egg,  or  of  the  buffy
coat  of  the  blood,  to  which  last  substance,  indeed,  these  adven-
titious membranes  bear  a  strong  resemblance  in  all  their  physical
characters.  This  substance  closely  invests  the  whole  inflamed
portion  of  the  pleura,  following  it,  when  the  inflammation  is
general,  through  its  whole  course,  as  well  on  the  lungs  as  on  the
chest,  and  forming  a  sort  of  complete  inner  lining  of  it.  When
the  inflammation  is  confined  to  either  the  pleura  pulmonalis,  or
costalis,  the  inflamed  portion  is  alone  covered  by  the  false  mem-
brane. In  cases  of  extensive  inflammation,  very  frequently  the
portions  of  false  membrane  covering  the  lungs  and  costal  pleura,
are  united  by  bands  of  the  same,  which  extend  from  one  to  the
other  through  the  serous  fluid  effused  into  the  cavity.  In  such
cases,  the  false  membrane  adheres  but  slightly  to  the  pleura,
being  readily  separable  by  the  handle  of  the  scalpel.  These
membranous  exudations  commonly  vary  in  thickness  from  half  a
line  to  two  lines ;  for  the  most  part  they  are  of  uniform  thick-
ness, though,  occasionally,  they  are  thicker  in  some  points,  espe-
cially on  the  lower  face  of  the  lung,  and  the  corresponding  parts
of  the  diaphragm.  In  some  instances,  there  are  partial  eleva-
tions, or  thickenings,  of  the  membrane  throughout  its  whole
extent,  in  the  form  of  lines  which  cross  each  other,  so  as  to
exhibit  a  sort  of  irregular  net-work. Sometimes  these  linear

*  Tbis  is  doubted  by  other  pathologists.  In  the  article  Pleurisy,  in  the  Cyclopedia
of  Practical  Medicine,  Dr.  Law  mokes  the  following  comment  on  tbe  opinion  of
Laennec  : — "  Although  in  the  larger  cavities,  viz.  the  abdomen,  heart,  and  chest,  our
examination  may  not  be  capable  of  that  degree  of  precision  which  would  enable  us
to  pronounce  with  certainty  upon  the  point,  still  there  are  other  cavities  in  which  the
train  of  morbid  phenomena  takes  place  more  immediately  under  the  cognizance  of
our  senses,  and  where  we  have  an  opportunity  of  recognising  a  determinate  interval
between  tbe  supervention  of  the  inflammation  and  the  effusion  ;  for  instance,  the
joints  and  the  tunica  vaginalis.  In  iritis  we  have  ocular  demonstration  that  it  is
some  time  after  the  pain  has  announced  the  inflammation,  that  the  increased  secre-
tion of  the  aqueous  humour  takes  place,  causing  an  unusual  prominence  of  the
cornea." — Transl.


SIMPLE ACUTE  PLEURISY.


395


elevations  are  so  close  together,  as  to  give  to  the  membrane  the
appearance  of  being  studded  or  granulated  with  small  irregular
tuberosities.  In  both  these  cases,  the  intermediate  points  re-
maining comparatively  thin  and  diaphanous,  when  contrasted
with  the  elevated  portions,  give  to  the  membrane  an  appearance
very  similar  to  the  omentum  when  moderately  loaded  with  fat.
This  resemblance  is  particularly  striking  after  the  formation  of
blood-vessels  in  it.

Occasionally,  and  particularly  when  the  effused  fluid  is  in
large  quantity,  the  false  membranes  become  separated  from  the
pleura,  either  wholly  or  in  part,  and  float  loosely  in  the  serum.
We  sometimes  even  find  pretty  large  masses  of  this  kind,  of  an
irregular  roundish  shape,  and  looking  as  if  they  had  never  been
attached  at  all  to  the  pleura.  This,  however,  appears  to  me  in-
conceivable ;  and  it  seems  probable  that  these  bodies  had  been
originally  formed  in  the  angular  parts  of  the  cavity  of  the  pleura,
at  the  origin  of  the  diaphragm,  or  roots  of  the  lungs,  and  had
acquired  their  globular  forms  after  their  separation.

The  serous  effusion  which attends  the  formation  of  false
membranes,  is  commonly  of  a  lemon,  or  light  yellow,  colour,
transparent,  or  with  its  transparency  only  slightly  disturbed  by
the  intermixture  of  small  fragments,  or  filaments,  of  a  concrete
pus,  or  pseudo-membranous  substance. In  the  latter  case,  it
very  closely  resembles  unstrained  whey. This  resemblance  is
so  great,  that  some  practitioners  have  really  fancied  that  they
discovered  milk  itself  in  the  sero-purulent  effusion  of  puerperal
peritonitis :  and  truly,  such  a  mistake  might  be  pardonable,  did
we  not  find  an  effusion  exactly  similar  in  the  inflammatory  affec-
tions of  all  serous  membranes,  and  in  men  as  well  as  women.
The  effused  fluid  is  generally  without  any  smell  in  the  acute
pleurisy. I  have  found  it  fetid  only  in  a  single  instance,  in  the
case  of  a  man  who  died  of  pleuro-pneumonia,  after  imperfect
poisoning  by  opium. In  this  case,  the  serosity  and  false  mem-
branes had  a  sharp  vinous  odour,  extremely  nauseous.  The
relative  proportions  of  the  effused  serum  and  albuminous  extra-
vasation, are  not  at  all  fixed. Sometimes  the  serum  is  extremely
abundant,  and  the  membranous  exudation  very  small,  and  vice
versa. Generally  speaking,  the  more  violent  the  inflammation,
the  more  extensive  and  thick  is  the  membranous  exudation.  In
weak  leucophlegmatic  subjects,  on  the  contrary,  we  find  a  great
quantity  of  limpid  serum,  with  a  small  portion  of  thin  membrane
often  floating  in  it. In  such  cases,  the  pleurisy  seems  to  pass  in-
sensibly into  hydrothorax,  as  we  shall  see  more  particularly  here-
after. In  general,  the  more  limpid  is  the  serum,  the  less  is  the
quantity  of  albuminous  exudation  ;  a  circumstance  to  be  ex-
pected, since  the  small  fragments  that  render  it  turbid  are  de-
rived from  this. In  some  rare  instances,  we  find  a  pseudo-mem-
branous exudation  uniting  the  contiguous  surfaces  of  the  pleura,


396


SIMPLE ACUTE  PLEUHISY.


without  any  serous  effusion.  This  would,  indeed,  he  a  very
common  case,  if  we  took  into  our  account  those  pleurisies  which
had  made  some  progress  towards  a  cure,  as  we  shall  find  directly
that  the  absorption  of  the  fluid  is  the  first  step  in  the  sanative
process.  The  cases,  however,  to  which  I  here  advert,  are  those
observed  in  persons  dying  of  some  other  disease,  and  who  were,
at  the  same  time,  affected  with  a  slight  and  partial  pleurisy.  In
these  cases  we  find  a  white,  almost  colourless,  semi-transparent
exudation,  which,  while  recent,  readily  allows  the  separation  of
the  parts  it  unites,  and  remains  on  the  surface  of  each,  exactly
like  a  thick  and  moist  paste  which  had  united  two  leaves  of
paper.*

In  cases  of  pneumonia,  also,  even  in  those  which  are  slight
and  partial,  we  sometimes  find  the  pleura  pulmonalis,  in  the
vicinity  of  the  part  inflamed,  invested  by  a  false  membrane
of  small  extent,  and  which,  according  as  it  is  more  or  less
recent,  is  yellow,  opaque,  and  slightly  attached  to  the  neigh-
bouring parts;  or  firm,  semi-transparent,  reddened  by  the
presence  of  a  great  number  of  small  vessels,  and  already  divided
into  membranaceous  layers.  In  some  cases,  we  find  no  serous
effusion  whatever  after  death ;  and  I  have  met  with  similar  ex-
amples of  partial  pleurisy,  in  which  the  stethoscope  afforded  no
sign  of  liquid  extravasation;  although  it  enables  us  to  detect  a
very  small  quantity,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter.  The  same  remark
applies  frequently  to  cases  of  phthisis;  as  it  would  appear  that
the  close  adhesions,  as  well  cellular  as  cartilaginous,  so  frequently
found  on  the  upper  lobes  in  this  disease,  are  usually  produced
in  this  way.  Such  instances  of  partial  pleurisy, — or,  as  we
might  name  them  in  contradistinction  to  the  others,  dry  pleurisy,
— are,  for  the  most  part,  mere  complications  of  some  much  more
serious  disease,  and  are  often  unperceived,  through  their  whole
course,  both  by  the  physician  and  patient. A  local  sensation  of

*  The  following  particulars  of  the  appearance  of  the  secretion  from  the  pleura,  in
a  case  of  pleurisy,  are  given  hy  Dr.  Law,  (Ci/c.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  iii.  p.  388).
The  difference  presented  by  the  secretion  at  the  different  periods  constitutes  a  very
interesting  feature  in  this  case.  In  a  case  of  acute  pleurisy,  in  which  the  urgency
of  the  symptoms  required  immediate  paracentesis,  "  the  fluid  drawn  off  was  of  a  yel-
lowish colour  and  oily  consistence,  very  much  resembling  in  appearance  copal
varnish.  On  remaining  a  short  time  in  the  vessel  in  which  it  was  drawn,  it  was
converted  into  a  tremulous  jelly,  and  after  some  hours  resolved  itself  into  two  dis-
tinct parts — a  thickish  crassamentum  floating  in  a  thin  serum  ;  it,  in  fact,  very  much
resembled  the  blood,  without  its  colouring  matter.  The  fluid  having  collected  again,
it  became  necessary,  in  the  courso  of  a  fortnight,  to  repeat  the  operation,  when  we
found  the  effusion  to  present  very  different  sensible  properties  from  those  of  the
original  fluid;  it  was  now  of  a  greenish  colour,  and  though  apparently  of  a  homo-
geneous consistence,  on  standing  a  short  time  it  separated  into  a  thick  purulent  sedi-
ment, and  a  thin  greenish  supernatant  liquor.  This  operation  afforded  a  very  tem-
porary relief;  the  individual  died  in  four  days,  and  on  examination  we  found  not
less  than  eight  pints  of  thick  purulent  matter  (such  as  is  met  with  in  a  phlegmonous
abscess)  in  the  left  side,  and  both  pleura  pulmonalis  and  costalis  densely  coated  with
lymph." — Transl.


SIMPLE ACUTE  PLEURISY.


397


boat,  or  occasional  slight  and  transient  pricking  pains,  are  the
only  indications  of  such  an  affection  in  cases  of  consumption.

Since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  too
much  importance  appears  to  me  to  have  been  given  to  these
cases  of  dry  pleurisy,  in  some  recent  works,  journals,  and  theses.
I  am  even  doubtful  whether  any  pleurisies  exist,  in  which  there
is  simple  secretion  of  a  false  membrane,  without  any  tendency  to
serous  exhalation  at  the  same  time.  All  the  cases  mentioned
may  be  reduced  to  two  kinds, — that  in  which  the  effused  serum
has  been  absorbed  before  death,  and  that  in  which  its  exhalation
has  been  mechanically  prevented  by  an  indurated  lung.  In
respect  of  the  first  kind,  we  know  how  rapidly  absorption  takes
place  in  certain  cases.  M.  Guersent  informs  me,  that  he  has
found  these  dry  pleurisies  more  frequently  in  children  than  in
adults;  and  we  know  that  absorption  is  much  more  rapid  in  this
period  of  life.  In  regard  to  the  second  class  of  cases,  I  would
observe,  that  compression  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  means  for
promoting  absorption ;  and  that  in  instances  of  pneumonia  arrived
at  the  stage  of  hepatization,  in  tuberculated  lungs,  and  in  cases
of  pretty  close  adhesions  between  the  lungs  and  pleura,  existing
previously  to  the  pleuritic  affection,  if  serous  exhalation  took
place,  it  would  probably  be  re-absorbed  immediately.  In  all
these  circumstances,  at  least,  if  we  find  serum  as  well  as  false
membranes,  the  former  is  always  in  small  quantity.  Andral
(CI.  Med.  t.  ii.)  relates  three  cases  which  he  considers  as  ex-
amples of  dry  pleurisy;  but  as  they  were  all  cured,  we  cannot
be  certain  that  they  were  not  cases  of  simple  pleurodyne.*

I  think  it  necessary  to  notice  in  this  place  a  common  error
respecting  the  period  at  which  the  pleuritic  effusion  takes  place.
Many  physicians  imagine  that  it  does  not  occur  till  after  a  certain
time,  and  even  some  days  ;  and  it  is  this  notion,  no  doubt,  which
has  given  rise  to  the  common  expression  of  pleurisy  terminated
by  effusion.  These  opinions  are  incorrect.  I  have  several  times
observed  all  the  physical  signs  of  effusion, — that  is,  aegophony
and  absence  of  the  respiration  and  sound  on  percussion, — in  the
course  of  one  hour  after  the  invasion  of  the  disease,  and  I  have
seen  the  side  manifestly  dilated  at  the  end  of  three  hours.  On
the  other  hand,  I  do  not  remember  to  have  met  with  a  single  case
in  which  the  effusion  was  doubtful  (under  the  stethoscope)  during
the  first  and  second  day,  and  distinct  in  the  succeeding  days.
The  utmost  that  we  can  admit  on  this  point  is,— that  the  effusion
continues  to  increase  for  several  days,  and  that  it  is  only  at  the

,.  Andral  imagines  that  we  might  recognize  the  dry  pleurisy  by  means  of  the
diminished  intensity  of  the  respiratory  sound,  occasioned  by  the  impediment  to  the
free  dilatation  of  the  chest,  made  by  the  pain  ;  but  he  seems  to  forget  that  this  impe-
diment would  not  exist,  if  there  happened  to  be  no  stitch,  and  that  it  would  be  found
equally  in  the  rheumatic  pleurodyne  ;  and,  moreover,  it  has  been  proved  by  many
facts,  formerly  stated,  that  the  intensity  of  the  respiratory  sound  is  far  from  being
always  proportioned  to  the  degree  of  dilatation  of  the  thorax.— Author'.


398


SIMPLE  ACUTE  PLEUTlfSY.


end  of  this  time  that  it  becomes  too  manifest  to  be  overlooked,
from  the  dilatation  of  the  affected  side,  and  the  total  absence  of
sound  on  percussion.  I  am,  however,  convinced  that  the  effusion
of  serum  is  contemporaneous  with  the  inflammation,  in  all  serous
membranes.

It  is  the  character  of  the  false  membranes  produced  in  pleurisy
to  be  changed  into  cellular  substance,  or  rather  into  a  true  serous
tissue,  like  that  of  the  pleura:  and  this  is  the  natural  progress
.of  the  process  when  left  quite  undisturbed.  This  change  is  pro-
duced in  the  following  manner:  the  serous  effusion  which  ac-
companied the  membranous  exudation  is  absorbed,  the  com-
pressed lung  expands,  and  the  false  membranes  investing  it  and
the  costal  pleura,  become  united  into  one  substance.  By  and
by,  this  substance  becomes  divided  into  layers,  pretty  thick  and
opaque,  which  are  separated  by  a  very  small  portion  of  serosity.
About  this  time  blood-vessels  begin  to  make  their  appearance  in
it,  the  first  rudiments  of  which  have  the  aspect  of  irregular  lines
of  blood,  much  larger  than  the  vessels  which  are  to  take  their
place.  The  blood  seems  as  if  it  had  been  forced  into  the  sub-
stance of  the  false  membrane  by  a  strong  injection;  and  we  find
the  corresponding  portions  of  the  pleura  redder  than  elsewhere,
and,  as  it  were,  spotted  with  blood.  After  a  time,  the  pseudo-
membranous layers  become  thinner  and  less  opaque;  the  lines
of  blood  assume  a  cylindrical  shape,  and  ramify  in  the  manner
of  blood-vessels,  but  still  preserving  their  augmented  diameter.
On  minutely  examining  these  at  this  stage,  we  find  their  external
coat  consisting  of  blood  scarcely  yet  concrete,  and  very  red  :
within  this  there  is  a  sort  of  mould,  or  rounded  substance,  whitish
and  fibrinous,  and  formed  evidently  of  concreted  fibrine,  perfo-
rated in  its  centre,  already  permeable  to  the  blood,  and  evidently
containing  it.  Eventually  the  layers  of  the  false  membrane  be-
come quite  transparent,  and  nearly  as  thin  as  those  of  the  ordi-
nary cellular  tissue;  and  the  blood-vessels  resemble,  in  every
respect,  those  which  ramify  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  pleura.
It  wants,  however,  the  firmness  of  the  natural  cellular  substance,
being  easily  torn  in  our  attempts  to  examine  it;  its  vessels  still
retain  the  large  diameter  indicative  of  their  recent  formation ;
and  it  requires  some  considerable  time  for  them  to  attain  the
perfect  character  of  the  original  tissues  of  the  body.  These
productions  are  not  homogeneous;  they  consist  of  many  folds,
which  are  united  together  by  surfaces  which  are  cellular,  like  the
outer  surface  of  the  pleura,  and  which  contain  the  vessels;  while
their  exterior  surface  is  smooth,  shining,  and  evidently  exhalent,
like  the  inner  surface  of  the  pleura  to  which  they  adhere.  I
have  sometimes,  though  very  rarely,  met  with  portions  of  fat  in
the  duplicatures  of  these  bodies.  These  accidental  productions
have,  for  the  most  part,  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the  surfaces
whereon  they  originate ;  that  is  to  say,  the  line  of  their  direction,


SIMPLE  ACUTE  PLEURISY.


399


from  the  opposite  points  to  which  they  are  attached,  forms,  in
general,  nearly  a  light  angle  with  the  pleura.  After  having
attained  this  stage,  whatever  may  be  their  extent,  they  do  not,
in  general,  affect  the  health  ;  the  respiration  even,  except  in  some
particular  cases,  does  not  suffer  from  their  presence.  They  pas*
sl  ss,  in  fact,  all  the  characters  of  the  natural  serous  tissues,  being
capable  of  exhalation  and  absorption  like  them,  and  often  con-
taining, in  cases  of  dropsy,  a  considerable  quantity  of  effused
serum.  Sometimes  they  even  inflame,  and,  in  this  case,  become
invested  by  false  membranes,  similar  to  what  they  themselves
had  originally  been.  This  is,  however,  very  rare;  and  it  would
even  seem  that  a  severe  pleurisy,  which  has  terminated  by  nu-
merous adhesions,  renders  the  part  so  affected  much  less  liable
to  an  attack  of  the  same  disease,  than  a  sound  part.  I  have  only
hitherto  met  with  eight  or  ten  instances  of  inflammation  of  these
adventitious  membranes,  although  nothing  is  more  common  than
to  find  the  lungs  completely  adherent  to  the  costal  pleura.  It
is  even  found  that,  in  cases  of  a  second  attack  of  pleurisy  in  a
person  whose  lungs  adhere  to  the  pleura  from  the  effects  of  the
first,  the  inflammation,  albuminous  exudation,  and  sero-purulent
effusion,  do  not  invade  the  adherent  parts:  insomuch  that  we
may  lay  it  down  as  a  principle,  that  the  severer  has  been  an
attack  of  pleurisy,  the  less  likely  is  a  return  of  the  same  disease.

The  conversion  of  albuminous  exudations  into  cellular  sub-
stance has  only  been  thoroughly  understood  for  a  short  time,
although  the  observation  of  the  fact  is  of  very  ancient  date.
Hippocrates  was  acquainted  with  the  pulmonary  adhesions;*
Diemerbroeck  imagined  that  they  must  be  the  product  of  inflam-
mation and  ulceration  ;f  Boerhaave  considered  them  as  the  con-
sequence of  pleurisy.^  Some  observations  of  Stoll§  indicate  a
more  perfect  knowledge  of  the  conversion  of  false  membranes
into  cellular  substance;  and  yet,  about  the  same  time,  we  find
Morgagni,  after  having  collected  and  collated  the  testimonies
and  opinions  of  authors,  still  uncertain  respecting  them,  and
inclined  towards  the  ridiculous  notion  of  Vernojus,  who  considered
them  as  the  effect  of  laughing.  ||  At  a  still  more  recent  date,  one
of  the  most  distinguished  professors  of  the  Faculty  of  Medieine
of  Paris,  imagined  them  to  be  the  result  of  some  sort  of  dis-
organization of  the  pleura.^  The  extensive  investigations  in
morbid  anatomy  made  over  the  whole  of  Europe,  and  particularly
in  France,  during  the  last  thirty  years,  leave  now  no  doubt  upon
this  subject.  One  remarkable  circumstance  relative  to  these
adhesions  is,  that  although  the  concrete  pus  when  first  thrown

*  De  Morb.  lib.  ii.  Pulmo  ad  latus  prolapsus ;  also  Lib.  <le  Locis.

t  Anat.  lib.  ii.  cap.  13.  j  Prelect,  ad  Instit.  sect.  606.

$  Rat.  Med.  pars  v.  p.  5.  16.  228,  et  seq.  p.  243.  255.  261.397  ;  pars  vii.  p.  210.

||  Epist.  xvi.  lib.  ii.  sect.  16.

If  Journ.  (Jen.  de  M6d6cine,  t.  xx.  p.  68.


400


SIMPLE  ACUTE  PLEURISY.


out  is  identical  on  every  different  organ,  it  nevertheless  invariably
assumes,  in  its  transformation,  the  texture  of  the  membrane  which
secretes  it :  this  is  observable,  for  example,  in  the  synovial  cap-
sules, on  the  surface  of  the  mucous  and  serous  membranes,  and
in  the  cellular  substance,  respectively. — A  question  may  perhaps
arise  respecting  the  vitality  of  those  portions  of  coagulable  lymph
which  we  find  floating  in  the  serum,  without  any  attachment  to
the  membrane  that  secreted  them.  In  those  cases  which  form
the  connecting  link  between  pleurisy  and  acute  hydrothorax,  I
have  sometimes  observed  long  filaments  of  this  kind  exhibiting
marks  of  incipient  transformation  into  serous  tissue,  although
they  were  floating  loose  in  a  great  quantity  of  serum,  and  ex-
hibited no  sign  of  having  been  ever  attached  to  the  pleura.  In
considering  this  subject,  it  is  not  to  be  forgotten  that  fluids  are
possessed  of  life  as  well  as  solids;  and  certainly  there  appears
to  me  a  great  analogy  between  the  formation  of  the  egg  and  the
conversion  of  the  concrete  pus  into  a  substance  of  the  same  nature
as  that  which  secretes  it.

When  the  pleurisy  is  simple,  we  find  no  sign  whatever  of  in-
flammation of  the  pulmonary  tissue,  even  in  the  vicinity  of  the
most  inflamed  portions  of  the  pleura :  only  we  find  the  substance
of  the  lungs,  in  such  cases,  more  dense  and  less  crepitous,  owing
to  the  compression  produced  by  the  effused  fluids.  If  the  ex-
travasation has  been  very  great,  the  lung  becomes  flattened  and
completely  flaccid;  it  ceases  to  contain  air,  and  consequently  to
crepitate ;  its  vessels  are  compressed  and  contain  little  blood ;
and  the  bronchi  (and  sometimes  even  the  largest  trunks,)  are
evidently  rendered  smaller.  The  peculiar  texture  of  the  lung,
however,  is  still  very  perceptible,  there  being  no  trace  of  obstruc-
tion like  that  produced  in  pneumonia ;  and  if  air  is  blown  into
the  bronchi,  the  lungs  become  expanded  more  or  less  complete] v.
When  the  pleura  is  in  a  healthy  state,  and  free  from  any  ad-
hesions when  the  effusion  takes  place,  the  fluid  is  spread  over  the
whole  surface  of  the  lung,  but  is  collected  in  greater  quantity
on  the  lowermost  parts  and  on  the  side.  As  the  effusion  increases,
the  lung  is  forced  inwards  and  somewhat  backwards  and  up-
wards, upon  the  mediastinum  and  spine,  where  it  becomes  com-
pressed into  a  smaller  space  than  the  hand  of  the  individual,  if
the  quantity  of  fluid  is  very  considerable.  Previous  adhesions,
and  certain  circumstances,  which  I  shall  notice  when  treating  of
partial  pleurisy,  are  the  only  things  which  alter  the  usual  mode
of  this  compression.  In  the  former  case,  for  example,  if  adhe-
sions exist  in  the  upper  part  of  the  lung  only, — a  thing  which
very  commonly  happens, — the  compression  will  take  place  from
below  upwards ;  if  they  exist  on  the  lower  part, — which  is
unusual, — the  result  will  be  the  reverse;  and  if  they  exist  on
the  side  only, — which  is  a  still  rarer  case, — the  compression  will
take  place  from  within  outwards,  and  from  before  backwards.


ACUTE HEMORRHAGIC  PLEURISY.


401


Partial  pleurisies,  as  we  shall  find,  present  still  more  remarkable
deviations  from  the  common  course.

Sect.  II. — Of  Acute  Hcemorrhagic  Pleurisy.

By  this  name  1  wish  to  designate  the  re-union  of  haemorrhage
(usually  slight)  with  inflammation  of  the  pleura.  This  case,
which  is  by  no  means  rare,  differs  from  the  simple  acute  pleurisy,
not  merely  in  its  pathological  character,  but  even  as  to  its  pro-
gress and  treatment.  The  effused  serum  is  more  or  less  tinged
with  blood ;  commonly  the  quantity  of  blood  is  very  small ;
sometimes,  besides  that  dissolved  in  the  serum,  there  are  found
some  small  coagula  of  it.  It  is  very  unusual  for  the  proportion
of  blood  to  be  so  great  as  to  give  to  the  effusion  the  appearance
rather  of  a  very  liquid  blood  than  of  an  admixture  of  blood  and
serum;  and  it  is  equally  unusual  to  find  the  coagula  large  or
numerous.*  In  the  cases  where  this  occurs,  and  which  constitute
what  the  ancients  called  sanguineous  empyema,  the  haemorrhagic
affection  evidently  controuls  the  inflammatory ;  the  coagulable
lymph  is  secreted  in  much  smaller  quantity  than  in  common
pleurisy,  and  the  false  membranes  are  thin  and  sometimes  cover
only  a  small  portion  of  the  pleura.  In  the  more  common  cases,
in  which  the  serum  is  merely  tinged  with  blood,  the  false  mem-
branes remain  usually  white,  yellowish,  or  colourless,  on  their
attached  surface,  over  a  great  part  of  their  extent.  Here  and
there,  however,  they  are  deeply  charged  with  blood,  as  well  as
the  corresponding  points  of  the  pleura;  and  indeed  this  mem-
brane, throughout,  is  commonly  much  redder  than  in  simple
pleurisy.  It  is  very  uncommon  for  the  bloody  patches  just  men-
tioned, to  extend  beyond  the  adherent  surface  of  the  false  mem-
branes ;  sometimes,  however,  these  are  coloured  in  this  manner
through  their  whole  thickness  but  only  over  a  small  space.  It
is  much  more  common  to  find  (even  in  cases  where  the  serum  is
only  slightly  coloured)  the  whole  external  or  unattached  surface
of  the  false  membranes,  of  a  scarlet  or  somewhat  bluish  colour :
and  this  happens,  although  there  may  only  be  comparatively
few  red  spots  on  the  adherent  surface  of  the  false  membrane,  and
although  the  interior  of  this  retains  its  natural  whiteness.  It  is
necessary  to  remark  in  this  place,  in  respect  of  the  deepness  of
colouring  of  the  patches,  particularly  those  found  on  the  ad-
herent surface  of  the  membranes,  that  it  is  certainly  heightened
by  transudation  after  death,  as  will  be  more  particularly  noticed
when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  diseases  of  the  aorta.  It  appears
to  me  certain,  from  the  collation  of  the  results  of  many  cases,
that  the  haemorrhagic  pleurisy,  although  frequently  possessing

*  A  case  of  this  kind,  however,  iB  recorded  by  Andral,  Clin.  Med.  t.  ii.  obs.  xv.—
Author.

D  D


402


ACUTE  H.EMOllUHAUIC  1'LEUttISV.


this  character  from  the  very  beginning,  in  some  cases  becomes  so
only  during  the  course  of  the  disease,  and  particularly  at  the
time  when  the  blood-vessels  begin  to  be  formed  in  the  false  mem-
branes ;  in  which  case,  the  haemorrhage  is  a  mere  excess  or  aber-
ration of  the  restorative  operations  of  nature.  These  two  va-
rieties may  sometimes  be  distinguished  in  practice :  the  primitive
haemorrhagic  pleurisy  being  remarkable  from  the  very  beginning
for  the  severity  of  the  signs  of  effusion ;  while  the  other  only
assumes  this  character,  more  or  less  suddenly,  in  the  course  of
the  disease,  and  after  a  delusive  appearance  of  convalescence.
Generally  speaking,  in  the  haemorrhagic,  the  effusion  of  fluid  is
more  abundant  than  in  the  simple  pleurisy.  In  the  former,  also,
the  tendency  to  absorption  is  much  less,  and  the  cure,  when  it
takes  place,  much  more  protracted.  This  is  the  case  which  most
commonly  constitutes  the  acute  empyema,  of  which  I  shall  have
occasion  to  speak  hereafter.

It  is  chiefly,  and  perhaps  solely,  in  cases  of  haemorrhagic  pleu-
risy, that  we  meet  with  a  peculiar  transformation  of  the  false
membranes,  very  different  from  that  described  above.  In  these
cases,  and  perhaps  also  in  some  others  in  which  the  effusion  has
been  of  long  continuance,  the  false  membranes  investing  the  lungs
and  pleura  acquire  a  particular  hardness,  a  sort  of  bluish  semi-
transparency,  and  an  incipient  fibrous  or  cartilaginous  organi-
zation.* After  this,  they  are  no  longer  susceptible  of  conversion
into  the  adventitious  serous  tissue.  When  the  effusion  is  ab-
sorbed, the  lung,  long  compressed  by  it,  and  further  bound  down
by  the  strong  false  membrane  just  described,  which  completely
invests  it,  cannot  dilate  itself  promptly  enough  to  keep  pace  with
the  progress  of  the  absorption;  the  ribs,  consequently,  contract,
and  the  cavity  of  the  chest  is  thus  diminished.  When  the  fluids
are  completely  absorbed,  the  costal  and  pulmonic  exudations
come  into  close  contact  and  finally  unite,  so  as  to  form  only  one
substance.  The  consistence  of  this  becomes  daily  firmer,  and,
after  a  few  months,  acquires  the  consistence  and  all  the  other
characters  of  a  fibrous  or  fibrocartilaginous  membrane.  If  we
dissect  carefully  this  species  of  membranous  production,  we  find
that,  although  it  adheres  closely  to  the  pleura  of  the  ribs  and  of
the  lungs,  it  can  be  detached  from  these  almost  entirely.  If  we
cut  it  transversely,  we  find  it  composed  of  three  different  layers;
two  exterior,  which  are  opaque,  white,  almost  completely  fibrous,
sometimes  cartilaginous  and  even  ossified  in  certain  points ;  and
one  intermediate,  which  is  semi-transparent,  and  resembling,  in
every  respect,  the  central  and  most  transparent  portions  of  the
intervertebral  cartilages.  This  last  layer  is  evidently  the  medium
of  union  between  the  two  others.  Although  it  be  obviously  a
posterior  production,  and  can  only  have  taken  place  after  the

•  See  a  case  of  this  kind  in  "  Original  Cases,  &c.  by  John  Forbes,  M.D."  p.  247.
. — Trantl.


ACUTE II.KMORKIIAfilC P  I,  EUHTSY.


103


organization  of  the  false  membranes  had  been  far  advance,!,  T  do
not  consider  it  as  strictly  the  product  of  inflammation.  I  would
rather  consider  it  as  analogous  to  the  gelatinous  and  semi-trans-
parent exudation,  which  constitutes  the  first  step  in  the  process
of  re-union  of  the  fractured  ends  of  bone  and  tendon.

A  remarkable  case  which  occurred  to  myself  corroborates  this
opinion.  In  examining  the  body  of  a  man  who  died  sometime
after  being  cured  of  a  chronic  pleurisy,  I  found  the  left  lung
adhering,  through  its  whole  extent,  by  means  of  a  false  mem-
brane like  that  just  described.  This  membrane  was  of  a  pretty
uniform  thickness  (from  three  to  four  lines)  over  its  whole  ex-
tent, except  opposite  the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs,  where  it  was,  in
one  place,  eight  lines  thick.  This  increase  was  owing  to  the
presence  of  a  transparent  and  nearly  colourless  substance,  of
somewhat  firmer  consistence  than  animal  jelly.  It  became  gra-
dually much  more  solid  towards  its  exterior,  and  in  the  points
where  it  was  united  with  the  middle  layer  of  the  accidental  mem-
brane, it  had  the  look  and  consistence  of  fibro-cartilage.  The
costal  and  pulmonary  layers  of  the  accidental  membrane  were
quite  fibrous  and  opaque,  and,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  enlarge-
ment just  described,  were  only  a  line  and  a  half  in  thickness.
The  ordinary  thickness  of  these  fibro-cartilaginous  membranes,
varies  from  two  to  five  lines.  This  gradually  lessens  for  a  time
after  their  formation ;  it  is  proportioned  to  the  thickness  of  the
layers  which  have  given  rise  to  it ;  and  is  always  considerably
less  than  them.

In  some  cases  of  partial  chronic  pleurisy,  I  am  disposed  to  be-
lieve that  there  may  be  an  albuminous  extravasation  on  the
pleura  of  from  one  to  six  inches  square,  without  any  observable
serous  effusion.  I  have  met  with  exudations  of  this  kind,  which
were  evidently  very  recent,  as  they  were  still  very  yellow,  and
hardly  so  consistent  as  indurated  white  of  egg  ;  they  united  the
lungs  and  pleura  together,  and  were  unaccompanied  by  any
serum,  except  a  few  drops  here  and  there  in  the  substance  of  the
exudation  itself.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  there  may  have
been  a  serous  extravasation  in  such  cases,  and  which  had  been
quickly  absorbed.  It  is  in  this  manner,  perhaps,  that  are  formed
those  partial  adhesions  of  a  fibro-cartilaginous  nature,  which  do
not  exhibit  in  a  distinct  manner,  the  three  layers  above  men-
tioned ;  and  it  is  possibly  in  the  same  way  that  these  cartilagi-
nous masses  originate,  which  we  sometimes  meet  with  on  the
summit  of  the  lungs,  in  cases  of  tuberculous  excavations.  I  am,
however,  of  opinion,  that  the  most  usual  mode  of  formation  of
these  accidental  fibro-cartilaginous  membranes,  is  that  formerly
mentioned,  particularly  such  as  exhibit  the  three  layers.  These
appear  to  me  to  be  certainly  the  result  of  a  haemorrhagic  pleurisy,
or  irregularity  in  the  natural  process,  whereby  the  blood  Vessels
are  formed  in  the  false  membrane. It  would  seem  that  at  the

i)  i)  2


101-


ACUTE HEMORRHAGIC  PLEURISY.


moment  of  the  exhalation  of  blood  necessary  for  the  formation  of
the  vessels,  a  certain  quantity  of  fibrine  becomes  intermixed  with
the  albumen  which  composed  the  false  membrane  in  the  first  in-
stance, and  thus  disposes  it  to  be  converted  into  fibrous  or  carti-
laginous tissue.  This  mode  of  formation  is  proved  to  me  by
many  cases  in  which  I  have  found  them  of  every  degree  of  con-
sistence. In  every  instance  of  acute  pleurisy  that  has  come
under  my  notice,  which  has  become  chronic  in  consequence  of
attendant  haemorrhage,  I  have  always  found  the  attached  portion
of  the  false  membranes  much  more  consistent  than  the  superficial
parts,  and  in  a  more  or  less  advanced  stage  of  the  fibro-cartila-
ginous  transformation.  Even  when  this  deeper  layer  was  softer,
it  presented  an  appearance,  in  some  sort,  intermediate  between
those  of  the  fibrine  of  the  blood,  the  fibrinous  coat  of  the  arteries,
and  the  common  albuminous  false  membranes.*

The  possibility  of  this  admixture  of  the  fibrine  of  the  blood,
or  of  blood  itself,  with  the  pseudo-membranous  albumen,  for
the  formation  of  the  adventitious  membranes  in  question,  is  sup-
ported by  several  analogies.  %Ve  observe  not  only  on  the  pleura,
but  on  other  serous  membranes,  pseudo-membranous  exudations
strongly  impregnated  with  blood,  or  even  composed  of  layers  of
half-concrete  albumen  and  coagulated  blood.  The  false  mem-
branes which  we  sometimes  find  after  chronic  peritonitis,  stained
of  a  violet,  brown,  or  ochre-yellow  colour,  appear  to  me  to  have
the  same  origin ;  and  if  we  compare  the  exudation  which  pro-
duces callus  in  cases  of  fracture,  with  several  analogous  facts  of
morbid  anatomy,  we  shall  find  it  extremely  probable,  that  the
exudation  of  fibrine  is  as  necessary  for  the  formation  of  a  bony,
fibrous,  or  cartilaginous  tissue  of  an  adventitious  kind,  as  the
exudation  of  albumen  is  necessary  to  the  development  of  the
serous  tissue  which  forms  the  serous  adhesions  subsequent  to
pleurisy  or  other  inflammations  of  serous  membranes. — These
fibro-cartilaginous  membranes  have  been  commonly  described
under  the  name  of  thickenings  of  the  pleura ;  and  this  is  a  mis-
take very  likely  to  be  committed  by  those  who  trust  to  their
mere  appearance,  without  further  examination.  On  dissecting
them,  however,  we  can  always  separate  them  from  the  pleura,
which  is  found  of  its  natural  thickness.  We  must  not  confound
these  membranes  with  the  fibro-cartilaginous  incrustations  of  a

•  I  am  doubtful  of  the  propriety  of  separating  the  form  of  pleurisy  described  in
this  section,  from  that  described  in  the  preceding  ;  and  I  am  led  by  my  own  experi-
ence to  be  more  than  doubtful  of  the  correctness  of  our  author's  opinion,  that  it  is
almost  exclusively  in  this  variety  that  the  contraction  of  the  chest  occurs.  Indeed,  I
thin*  it  will  appear,  from  many  expressions  in  this  and  the  subsequent  sections,
that  M.  Laennec's  own  experience  was  incompatible  with  this  statement  1  have  the
satisfaction  to  find  that  M.  Chomel  (Diet,  de  Med.  t.  xvii.  p.  140)  agrees  with  me  in
this  opinion.  It  is  proved  by  chemical  anulysis,  (Andrei,  Precis,  t.  i.  p.  479,)  that
the  false  membranes,  termed  albuminous,  by  Laennec,  contain  fibrine.  The  hemor-
rhagic pleurisy  is  briefly  noticed  by  Broussais  (Phleg.  Chron.  t.  i.  p.S42-3). — Trunsl.


GANGRENE  OK 1'HB  l'LEURA.


405


like  nature,  which  are  sometimes  formed  on  the  exterior  or  ad-
herent surface  of  the  pleura,  and  which  I  have  described  else-
where.*

Sect.  III. — Of  Gangrene  of  the  Pleura,  and  of  the  false  Mem-
branes consequent  to  Pleurisy. — Perforation  of  the  Pleura.

Gangrene  of  the  pleura  is  a  very  rare  disease ;  it  is  hardly
ever  general,  or  even  of  any  considerable  extent.  It  is  as  seldom
a  primary  affection  ;  and  I  have  only  met  with  one  case  where  it
appeared  to  be  a  termination  of  the  acute  inflammation.  Most
commonly  it  is  the  consequence  of  the  bursting  of  a  gangrenous
abscess  of  the  lungs  into  the  pleura,  and  occasionally  it  super-
venes to  chronic  pleurisy.  The  affected  parts  present  the  ap-
pearance of  soft  gangrenous  spots,  of  a  brownish  or  blackish
green,  round  or  irregular,  and  often  not  extending  beyond  the
pleura.  When  these  gangrenous  patches  have  been  removed  by
the  softening  down  of  their  substance,  the  borders  of  the  ulcers
left  behind  remain  blackish  for  a  long  time.  Sometimes  the  parts
beneath  the  pleura  are  affected  to  a  very  small  depth  ;  and  al-
most always  the  subjacent  cellular  substance  becomes  greenish,
and  filled  with  serum  to  some  distance  around  the  eschar.  In
some  instances,  the  intercostal  muscles,  the  neighbouring  portions
of  the  lung,  and  even  the  ribs,  participate  more  or  less  in  the
disease ;  and  all  exhale  the  gangrenous  fetor.  A  general  in-
flammation of  the  pleura,  and  the  consequent  formation  of  false
membranes  to  a  great  extent,  and  a  copious  effusion,  always  fol-
low gangrenous  affections  of  the  pleura,  if  these  are  not  them-
selves the  consequence  of  an  old  pleurisy.  In  every  case,  the
false  membranes,  whether  old  or  new,  put  on  the  gangrenous  cha-
racter in  a  greater  or  less  degree.  This  is  particularly  observable
in  the  case  of  a  gangrenous  abscess  bursting  into  the  pleura.
Only  once  have  I  found  this  state  of  the  pleuritic  membranes,  in
a  case  in  which  there  were,  at  the  same  time,  some  gangrenous
cavities  in  the  lung,  half  filled  with  a  greyish  and  horribly  fetid
sanies.  None  of  these  excavations  communicated  with  the  cavity
of  the  pleura,  and  yet  this  contained  half  a  pint  of  a  fluid  pre-
cisely similar,  only  somewhat  thinner.  This  fluid,  which  occu-
pied the  lower  part  of  the  right  side,  was  contained  in  a  soft  half-
putrid  membrane  of  a  brownish  grey  colour,  and  of  a  strong
<;;u)grenous  fetor.  It  is  evident  that,  in  this  case,  the  gangrene
of  the  false  membrane  was  the  effect  of  a  general  condition  of  the
system.

It  sometimes  happens,  in  chronic  pleurisy,  that  a  gangrenous
eschar  forms  on  the  pleura,  and  permits  the  effused  fluids  to

*  Diet,  cles  Sc.  Med. Cartilages  Acoidenlels.


406


PHYSICAL SIGNS OF  ll.EUKISY.


escape  through  the  intercostal  muscles,  so  as  to  be  finally  eva-
cuated, either  naturally  or  artificially,  and  that  the  empyema  is
thus  cured.  This  species  of  abscess  has  been  long  known  j  and
its  puncture  constitutes  what  is  commonly  called  empyema  from
necessity.  It  is,  however,  very  rare :  M.  llecamier  has  only
seen  it  twice ;  and  I  have  only  met  with  one  case  of  it.  Besides
gangrene  of  the  pleura,  nature  has  one  other  way  of  evacuating,
externally,  the  sero-purulent  effusion  of  the  chest  ;  this  is  by  the
formation  of  an  abscess  between  the  layers  of  the  intercostal
muscles,  or  between  these  muscles  and  the  skin,  which,  bursting
both  externally  and  internally,  affords  a  passage  for  the  discharge
of  the  contained  fluids.  I  have  only  met  with  a  single  case  of
this  kind.  Andral,  however,  gives  two  cases  of  it  ;*  one  from
his  own  experience,  the  other  observed  in  England.  A  cure  has,
perhaps,  more  frequently  followed  the  evacuation  procured  by
means  of  these  kinds  of  abscesses,  than  that  of  the  artificial  em-
pyema. This,  however,  is  not  always  complete,  as  it  is  common
for  the  disease  to  degenerate  into  an  incurable  fistula,  which  is
frequently  kept  up  by  a  carious  state  of  the  neighbouring  ribs-
It  is  still  more  usual  for  these  collections  of  matter  to  be  eva-
cuated into  the  bronchi.  The  ancient  physicians  considered  the
rupture  of  an  abscess  of  the  lungs  into  the  pleura,  as  a  common
cause  of  empyema ;  but  they  do  not  appear  to  have  suspected  the
possibility  of  the  reverse  of  this.  I  believe  Bayle  to  have  first
clearly  proved  this.  It  scarcely  ever  occurs  but  in  chronic-
pleurisy  ;  although  Andral  relates  a  remarkable  case  of  it  in  the
acute  disease. (CI.  Med.  t.ii.  Obs.  xxxvi.)f


Sect.  IV. — Of  the  Signs  and  Symptoms  of  Acute  Pleurisy.

Physical  sig?is. — As  soon  as  the  effusion  takes  place,  the
natural  sound  of  the  chest,  on  percussion,  fails  over  the  whole
space  occupied  by  the  fluid.  From  this  result  simply,  we  could
not  indeed  be  certain  whether  the  disease  is  pleurisy  or  pneu-
monia, although  the  common  symptoms,  general  and  local,  must
assist  us  in  making  the  distinction.  Under  these  circumstances,
I  have  seen  physicians  endeavour  to  obtain  a  mark  of  distinction

•  Andral  gives  three  cases  of  it,  viz.  one  from  the  Italian  Journals,  besides  tlie  two
noticed  in  the  text.  In  cases  of  chronic  pleurisy,  the  escape  of  the  matter  through
the  walls  of  the  chest  is  by  no  means  very  uncommon.  J  have  myself  met  with  more
than  one  instance  of  it. —  Tratiil.

i  Manv  instances  of  this  mode  of  escape  of  the  pus  in  chronic  pleurisv  are  on  re-
cord. I  have  myself  met  with  a  case  of  the  kind,  and  have  had  several  undoubted
instances  related  to  me  by  practitioners.  BroUBSais  gives  two  cases  of  gangrenous
perforation  of  the  pleura  pulmonalis  in  chronic  pleurisy  :  and  another  in  which  the
co7iimunieati<  n  seems  to  have  taken  place  from  simple  ulceration.  1'hleg.  (  hron.
t.  ii.  p  290.  297.  30] .— Trail  si.


PHYSICAL SIGNS OF  PLEURISY.


407


between  the  two  diseases,  by  placing  the  patient  in  different  posi-
tions; and  I  have  myself  made  a  like  experiment,  but  without
any  satisfactory  result.  This  might  be  expected,  since  the  chest
is  always  full ;  and  fluids  change  place  by  position,  only  in  a  ves-
sel that  is  more  or  less  empty  :  in  the  chest,  the  extravasated  fluid
can  only  change  its  position  by  compressing  the  lung.  It  is  true,
that  when  the  effusion  is  inconsiderable,  it  tends  to  the  posterior
or  inferior  parts  of  the  chest,  (when  the  patient  lies  on  the  back,)
on  account  of  its  being  heavier  than  the  lungs  ;  but  if  it  exists  in
considerable  quantity,  it  diffuses  itself  over  the  whole  surface  of
the  lungs,  except  in  the  points  where  old  adhesions  exist.*  To
these  natural  impediments  to  change  of  position  of  the  extrava-
sated fluids  may  be  added,  the  increased  fixedness  of  the  lungs
from  the  compression  of  their  substance  by  the  effusion,  and  from
the  presence  of  old  adhesions ;  besides,  even  if  this  motion  of  the
fluids  were  practicable,  the  frequent  co-existence  of  pneumonia
would  often  render  the  result  of  percussion  of  no  value,  as  a  mark
of  discrimination.  The  great  extent  of  surface  over  which  the
sound  is  wanting,  is,  however,  a  much  more  certain  and  practical
indication  :  in  the  case  of  pleurisy,  it  frequently  happens,  that,  in
the  course  of  a  few  hours  from  the  attack,  the  dull  sound  exists
over  the  whole  affected  side,  or,  at  least,  over  its  lower  half,  — a
thing  which  is  never,  or  almost  never,  observed  in  pneumonia.
But  mediate  auscultation  furnishes  us  with  much  more  certain
means  of  discriminating  these  two  diseases,  and  enables  us  to  as-
certain with  precision,  not  merely  the  existence  of  the  effusion,
but  its  quantity.  The  signs  by  which  the  stethoscope  effects
this,  are,  1st,  the  total  absence,  or  great  diminution,  of  the  respi-
ratory sound ;  and,  2nd,  the  appearance,  disappearance,  and
return  of  jftgophony.

When,  as  is  often  the  case,  the  pleuritic  effusion  is  very  co-
pious from  its  very  commencement,  the  sound  of  respiration  is
then  totally  absent  through  the  whole  of  the  side  affected,  except
in  a  space  of  three  fingers'  breadth  along  the  vertebral  column,
where  it  is  still  heard,  though  less  strongly  than  on  the  other  side.
This  complete  disappearance  of  respiration  after  the  existence  of
disease  for  a  few  hours,  is  quite  pathognomonic  of  pleurisy  with
copious  effusion,  whether  there  exists  pain  in  the  side  or  not.  In
pneumonia,  the  disappearance  of  the  respiration  is  gradual,  and
is  perceived  to  be  unequal  in  different  parts  of  the  chest ;  it  is
scarcely  ever  quite  wanting  below  the  clavicle  ;  and  when  this
takes  place,  it  is  not  till  after  some  days,  or  even  weeks. It  is,

*  The  experiments  and  observations  of  Piorry,  Reynaud,  and  others,  appear  to
render  more  than  doubtful,  the  correctness  of  Laennec's  opinion  respecting  the  im-
mobility of  the  fluid  effused  in  pleurisy,  from  change  of  the  position  of  the  body.  In
fact,  the  very  circumstance  of  the  effused  fluid  being  of  greater  specific  gravity  than
the  air-filled  pulmonary  tissue,  renders  the  change  of  position  of  the  fluid  an  inevi-
table consequence  of  the  change  of  posture,  in  many  cases  at  least. — Traml.


408


PHYSICAL  SIGNS  OF  PLEURISY.


further,  preceded,  for  twenty-four  or  thirty-six  hours,  by  the  cre-
pitous  rhonchus,  which  is  quite  characteristic.  In  pleurisy  with
copious  effusion,  on  the  contrary,  the  loss  of  the  respiratory  mur-
mur is  sudden,  equable,  uniform,  and  so  complete,  that  no  effort
of  inspiration  can  render  it  perceptible.  The  continuance  of  the
respiration  along  the  spinal  column  is  an  equally  constant  sign.
This  exists  equally  in  the  chronic  disease,  attended  with  the  most
copious  effusion  ;  and  even  in  cases  wherein,  on  examination
after  death,  the  lungs  are  found  so  much  compressed,  as  to  be
discovered  with  some  difficulty.  The  thing  is  explained  by  the
compression  of  the  lungs  backwards  towards  their  roots.  In
many  cases,  the  respiration  still  continues  to  be  perceived  imme-
diately under  the  clavicle,  when  all  the  other  signs  announce  the
existence  of  a  large  effusion  ;  a  circumstance  which  is  explained,
in  such  cases,  by  the  presence  of  old  adhesions  in  that  spot.  But
when  the  same  thing  is  observed  when  the  extravasation  is  mo-
derate, we  can  only  infer,  either  that  the  fluid  does  not  reach  so
high,  or  covers  the  upper  lobe  with  a  very  thin  layer.  In  these
cases  of  sudden  and  complete  cessation  of  the  sound  of  respira-
tion, we  must  not  imagine  that,  although  extensive,  the  extrava-
sation is  so  abundant  as  it  is  in  many  cases  of  chronic  pleurisy,
in  which  we  find  the  lungs  completely  flattened  against  the  media-
stinum. In  the  instances  now  under  notice,  it  would  seem,  that
the  lung  is  suddenly  choked,  as  it  were,  and  ceases  to  admit  the
air  in  respiration,  although  it  has  hardly  yet  lost  one- fourth  of  its
volume,  and  is  only  slightly  compressed  And  it  frequently
happens,  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  days,  that  the  lung  becoming
habituated  to  the  pressure,  recommences  its  functions ;  so  that  we
again  can  hear  the  sound  of  respiration  in  some  points,  although
the  effusion  continues  undiminished,  or  even  is  somewhat  in-
creased. This  fact  I  have  more  than  once  proved  by  dissection,
and  by  the  comparison  of  the  signs  of  auscultation  and  mensu-
ration of  the  chest,  of  which  last  I  shall  presently  have  occasion
to  speak.  These  copious  and  sudden  effusions  occur  chiefly  in
old  persons,  or  in  adults  of  weak  and  cachectic  habits,  and  in  the
haemorrhagic  pleurisy.  The  sudden  and  complete  cessation  of
the  respiration  in  such  cases,  must,  therefore,  be  considered  as
affording  a  very  bad  prognostic;  as  we  may  be  assured  that  the
conversion  of  the  false  membranes  into  cellular  substance,  and  the
absorption  of  the  effusion,  will  take  place  either  not  at  all,  or  im-
perfectly, and  the  disease  will  soon  pass  into  the  chronic  state.
In  children  and  persons  of  a  good  constitution,  the  effusion  be-
comes scarcely  ever  so  suddenly  abundant.

After  some  hours,  or  even  days,  the  respiration  is  still  percep-
tible over  the  whole  affected  side ;  and  even  more  distinctly  than
we  might  be  led  to  expect  from  the  imperfection  of  the  sound  on
percussion.  It  is,  however,  much  less  than  on  the  healthy  side;
and  is  without  any  rhonchus,  except  in  the  rare  case  of  a  catar-


PHYSICAL SIGNS OF  PLEURISY".


400


rhal  complication.  If  the  effusion  increases,  the  respiratory
sound  becomes  less;  it  then  appears  to  be  heard  more  remotely,
and  finally  disappears  entirely,  except  at  the  root  of  the  lungs,
where  it  always  is  more  or  less  perceptible.  The  decrease  of  the
resonance  from  percussion,  does  not  by  any  means  preserve  this
regular  progression ;  the  sound  being  usually  as  dull  at  the  pe-
riod when  the  respiratory  murmur  is  merely  diminished,  as  when
it  has  entirely  ceased.  When  the  pleuritic  effusion  is  at  all  con-
siderable, the  respiration  only  becomes  puerile  on  the  sound  side.
It  even  sometimes  happens  that  this  puerile  respiration  is  trans-
mitted through  the  effused  fluid,  and  is  perceived  over  the  whole
extent  of  the  diseased  side.  To  prevent  this  being  mistaken  for
respiration  existing  in  the  affected  parts,  we  must  explore  the
w  hole  of  these,  and  we  shall  then  find  that  the  sound  becomes
louder  the  nearer  we  approach  the  other  side.  Besides,  the  qua-
lity of  the  sound,  its  distance  and  its  clearness,  indicate  its  real
site;  and  this  may  sometimes  be  further  demonstrated  by  a  mo-
mentary compression  of  the  healthy  side,  which  will  cause  it  to
cease.  But  exclusively  of  these,  the  other  signs  afforded  by
ajgophony,  percussion,  and  mensuration,  prevent  any  misconcep-
tion, respecting  the  effusion.  This  particular  case  is,  moreover,
uncommon,  and  only  occurs  in  the  chronic  disease.*

When  the  effusion  begins  to  diminish,  by  absorption,  this  is
first  observable  by  the  augmented  intensity  of  the  respiratory
sound  along  the  side  of  the  spine,  where  it  had  never  quite  dis-
appeared. Shortly  after,  it  is  perceptible  on  the  anterior-supe-
rior part  of  the  chest,  and  top  of  the  shoulder ;  and  in  a  few  days
it  returns  below  the  scapula,  and  at  last  gradually  re-appears,
successively,  on  the  side,  and  the  lower  part  of  the  chest  before
and  behind.  Wherever  there  are  adhesions  between  the  lungs
and  pleura,  of  any  considerable  extent,  the  respiration  continues
audible  over  them,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  throughout  the
w  hole  period  of  the  effusion  ;  and  the  commencement  of  the  ab-
sorption is  perceived  by  the  augmented  intensity  of  sound  in
these  places,  and  in  the  summit  and  anterior  border  of  the  lung,
which  parts  had  been  but  little  affected.  The  return  of  the  re-
spiratory sound  is  much  more  slow  in  pleurisy  than  pneumonia.
Sometimes,  and  particularly  in  cachectic  subjects,  it  is  weeks  and
even  months,  after  the  re-appearance  of  it  near  the  clavicle,  be-
fore it  is  perceptible  in  the  inferior  parts  of  the  chest ;  and  often
for  months  after  the  convalescence  of  a  patient,  it  is  only  one-half
so  distinct  in  the  affected  side  as  in  the  sound  one.  This  is  owing,
I  conceive,  partly  to  the  very  slow  process  by  which  the  false
membranes  are  converted  into  cellular  substance,  and  partly  to
the  diminution  of  the  inherent  action  of  the  lung;,  on  account  of

"  M.  Cayol  pointed  out  to  me  a  case  in  which  a  similar  transmission  of  sound  took
place  through  a  copious  collection  of  air  in  the  chest. — Author.


410


PHYSICAL  SIGNS  OF  PLEURISY.


the  long  compression  which  it  had  undergone.  The  resonance  of
the  chest  is  still  longer  in  being  restored,  and,  indeed,  in  many
cases,  it  never  returns  to  the  natural  condition,  in  consequence  of
the  contraction  of  the  chest,  which  succeeds  the  absorption  of  the
fluid.  In  examples  of  this  kind,  percussion  yields  a  completely
dull  sound  long  after  the  re-appearance  of  the  respiration  under
the  stethoscope.*

The  successive  increase  and  diminution  of  the  quantity  of  the
extravasation,  are  also  indicated  by  another  sign,  which,  although
much  less  evident,  less  constant,  and  less  certain  than  the  prece-
ding, is,  nevertheless,  frequently  of  use  :  I  mean  mensuration  of
the  chest.  If  we  uncover  the  chest  of  a  person  affected  with  pleu-
risy with  abundant  effusion,  we  shall,  in  most  cases,  easily  per-
ceive, that  the  affected  side  is  larger  than  the  sound  one.  This
dilatation  of  the  affected  side  has  been  noticed  by  all  writers  on
empyema  since  the  time  of  Hippocrates ;  but  I  have  ascertained
that  the  same  thing  takes  place  in  the  effusions  of  a  recent  pleurisy.
I  have  often  found  it  very  distinct  after  two  days'1  illness.  It  is,
of  course,  much  more  evident  in  lean  than  fat  persons  ;  and  it  is
very  indistinct  in  women  with  large  mammae.  On  measuring  the
affected  side  with  a  piece  of  ribbon,  we  find  it  enlarged,  but
never  so  much  as  it  appears  to  the  eye.  An  increase  of  half  an
inch  on  the  circumference  is  very  obvious  to  the  sight.  In  pro-
portion as  the  effusion  diminishes,  the  dilatation  of  the  chest  in-
sensibly disappears  ;  and  sometimes,  as  we  shall  see  more  parti-
cularly hereafter,  the  affected  side  becomes  narrower  than  before
the  disease.-f*

To  these  signs  we  must  add  another,  also  formerly  noticed,
JEgophony ;  a  sign  which  is  quite  pathognomonic  when  it  exists,
and  which  always  indicates  a  moderate  degree  of  effusion.  I  shall
not  here  repeat  what  I  stated  formerly,  but  will  merely  remind
the  reader — 1.  that  aegophony  appears  about  the  period  when
the  effusion  begins  to  be  somewhat  considerable,  when  the  sound

*  Sometimes  when  the  pleurisy  has  succeeded  in  a  chronic  catarrh,  the  sound  on
percussion  returns  hefore  the  respiratory  sound,  the  oir  in  this  case  heing  long  impeded
in  its  passage  hy  the  obstruction  of  the  bronchia  by  mucus. — Author.

t  The  simple  application  of  the  hand  upon  the  walls  of  the  chest  may,  like  mensu-
ration, afford  some  useful  results  in  pleurisy.  It  was  stated  in  the  First  Part,  (p.  10,)
that  the  vibrations  communicated  to  the  thoracic  parietes  by  speaking,  are  "  no  longer
observable  when,  through  disease,  the  lungs  have  ceased  to  he  permeable,  or  are  re-
moved from  the  walls  of  the  chest  by  an  effused  fluid."  M.  Reynaud  has  applied  this
observation  to  use,  and  he  states  that,  by  observing  the  places  where  this  vibration
is  wanting,  we  may  not  merely  recognize  the  side  on  which  the  effusion  exists,  but
its  extent  and  its  variations  of  level.  The  ascertaining  whether  the  absence  of  the
vibration  depends  on  pleuritic,  effusion  or  peripneumonic  thickening,  will  be  effected
by  ascertaining  whether  there  exists  ajgophouy  or  bronchophony  and  the  crepitous
rhonchus.  It  is  proper  to  remind  the  reader,  that  it  is  in  pleurisy  that  the  sound  oj
Jrictim,  of  ascent  und  descent,  was  observed  by  M.  Reynaud,  and  thattlrs  is  the  sign
of  a  pleurisy  without  effusion.  (See  page  58,  note.)  1  stated  in  a  former  note  how
my  own  observations  tended  to  confirm  this  diagnostic  sign  ;  and,  a  much  higher  au-
thority, M.  Andral,  assures  us  (Clin.  M(d.  2nd  Kd.  t.  ii.  p.  613.)  that  he  has  liim-
fcelf  verified  the  accuracy  of  all  M.  Reynaud's  observations.— (M.  L.)


PHYSICAL SIGNS 01«'  PLEURISY.


411


on  pi  mission  becomes  dull,  and  the  respiratory  murmur  fails  in
the  affected  side ;  2.  that  it  disappears  when  the  extravasation
becomes  very  abundant ;  3.  that  it  may  continue  during  several
months,  when  the  quantity  of  fluid  remains  stationary ;  4.  that
after  having  disappeared,  it  re-appears  upon  the  quantity  of  the
extravasation  being  lessened  ;  5!  that  it  goes  off  entirely  when  the
fluid  is  altogether  or  nearly  absorbed.  I  would  also  repeat,  that
the  site  of  this  phenomenon  appears  to  be  the  upper  or  thinnest
part  of  the  layer  of  effused  fluid  ;  that  where  it  is  present,  we  fre-
quently observe  also  bronchial  respiration  and  bronchophony  ;
and,  finally,  that  when  it  is  perceived  over  the  whole  or  greater
part  of  one  side,  it  indicates  a  moderate  quantity  and  equable
diffusion  of  fluid  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  lung.  In  this
case,  we  also  perceive,  almost  every  where,  some  remains  of  the
respiratory  sound,  the  effusion  being  insufficient  to  compress  the
lung  sufficiently  to  exclude  the  air  from  it;  and  should  things
remain  in  the  same  state  during  the  whole  duration  of  the  dis-
ease, we  may  be  assured  that  the  lung  is  retained  at  a  small  dis-
tance from  the  ribs,  by  means  of  adhesions  on  different  points  of
its  surface.

yEgophony  is  never  wanting  in  the  beginning  of  pleurisy  in
cases  wherein  the  pleura  had  been  heretofore  quite  sound  ;  and
the  only  thing  which  occasionally  prevents  its  being  manifest,  are
previous  adhesions  over  a  great  portion  of  the  lung.  It  never
fails  to  re-appear  in  acute  cases,  which  are  rapid  in  their  progress,
when  the  extravasation  is  sufficiently  diminished ;  and  it  is  more
marked  according  as  this  has  been  of  short  duration.  But  in
chronic  cases,  and  even  in  acute  cases  wherein  the  absorption  is
slow,  this  renewed  cegophony  (cBgophonia  reduce)  is  much  less
perceptible,  and  sometimes  is  entirely  wanting ;  a  circumstance
easily  explained  by  the  theory  formerly  given  of  this  pheno-
menon. None  of  the  stethoscopic  signs  are  more  characteristic
than  this ;  and,  accordingly,  it  has  been  readily  recognised  by  all
the  physicians  who  have  sought  to  verify  my  researches.  Andral
has  taken  notice  of  aegophony  in  most  of  his  cases  of  pleurisy,
although  many  of  these  were  recorded  at  a  period  when  he  evi-
dently had  little  acquaintance  with,  or  experience  of,  ausculta-
tion #  ;  he  has  also  several  times  noted  renewed  aegophony  upon
the  decrease  of  the  effusion. f  To  the  foregoing  physical  signs
we  have  to  add — the  depression  of  the  liver,  in  cases  where  the
effusion  is  extremely  copious.  Stoll  even  observed  a  similar  de-
pression of  the  spleen,  in  one  case,  from  a  collection  of  fluid  in  the
left  side;  but  this  viscus  must  be  morbidly  large  before  it  can
be  felt  by  the  hand,  even  in  such  a  case.;}:

*  Clin.  Med.  t.  ii.  obs.  4,  5.  7,  8,  9.  12.  15,  16.  21.  26.  30.  32,  33.
f  Ibid .  obs.  5.7.  15,  16.

t  To  a  complete  master  of  nuscultation  and  pathology,  like  our  author,  I  am  willing
to  concede  the  ability  to  distinguish  pletirisy  from  pneumonia  in  every  period  of  the


412


SYMPTOMS  OF  PLEURISY.


Double  Pleurisy. — It  occasionally  happens  that  the  pleura  is
inflamed  on  both  sides  of  the  chest  at  the  same  time.  This,  how-
ever, is  a  rare  event,  if  we  except  those  slight  double  pleurisies
which  occur  a  very  few  hours  before  death,  in  most  acute  and
chronic  diseases  during  the  prevalence  of  an  inflammatory  con-
stitution. In  cases  of  this  kind,  it  is  by  no  means  unusual  to
meet  with  slight  pleuritic  effusion  on  both  sides,  together  with
some  thin  false  membranes,  soft  and  evidently  recent.  Neither
is  it  very  rare  to  find,  in  the  case  of  a  severe  pleurisy  or  pleuro-
pneumonia, the  sound  side  become  affected  during  the  last  hours
of  life.  It  is,  however,  extremely  rare  to  see  the  pleura  of  both
sides  simultaneously  attacked  with  violent  inflammation,  accom-
panied by  numerous  false  membranes  and  an  abundant  effusion:
and  when  a  case  of  this  kind  occurs,  it  is  almost  always  speedily
fatal.  Indeed  the  same  result  very  generally  ensues  when  there
is  copious  effusion  on  one  side,  and  slight  effusion  on  the  other,
or  even  when  there  is  a  middling  effusion  on  both.  If  we  occa-
sionally see  double  pleurisies  last  some  time,  or  even  become
chronic,  we  may  be  certain  they  are  partial  and  of  small  extent,
on  one  side  at  least ;  and  even  that  the  affection  on  one  of  the
sides,  most  commonly  supervenes  only  a  very  short  time  before
death.  Cases  of  this  kind  are  recognized  by  the  same  signs  as
the  single  pleurisy;  only  that,  in  them,  percussion  and  the  in-
spection of  the  chest  scarcely  ever  afford  any  indication.  ^Ego-
phony,  however,  and  the  exploration  of  the  respiration,  enable  us
readily  to  recognize  them,  except  when  they  are  merely  precur-
sors of  death ;  in  which  case  their  investigation  is  equally  unin-
teresting as  useless.

Local  symptoms. — The  local  symptoms  of  pleurisy  are,  the
stitch,  dyspnoea,  cough  and  recumbency  on  the  affected  side.
These  symptoms  are  more  or  less  variable.  The  stitch  is  the
most  constant,  but  it  is  occasionally  wanting  in  the  most  acute
cases ;  it  may  exist  in  any  part  of  the  chest,  but  is  most  common
below  the  nipple,  or  on  the  side,  at  the  same  height.  Sometimes

disease,  and  even  to  recognize  their  respective  presence  when  co-existing  in  the
same  individual.  I  am,  however,  ready  to  confess  that  1  have  not  always  been  able
to  make  this  distinction  ;  and  I  find  that  I  am  not  singular,  in  this  respect,  among
the  followers  of  Laennec.  See  Andral's  Clin.  Med.  t.  ii.  p.  574;  and  a  paper  just
published  by  Dr.  Stack  in  vol.  iv.  of  the  Dublin  Hosp.  Reports,  p.  90.  In  making
this  admission,  I  feel  it  but  just  to  add  my  conviction,  that  the  instances  are  ex-
tremely rare  in  which  a  careful  attention  to  the  history  of  the  case,  and  to  the  general
and  local  symptoms,  together  with  the  practice  of  auscultation  and  percussion,  will
not  enable  any  one  to  make  the  distinction  in  question.  And  here  1  would  again
impress  upon  the  student  the  necessity,  in  all  cases,  of  attending  to  the  common
symptoms  ns  well  as  to  the  physical  signs ;  and,  still  more,  the  necessity  of  acquiring
a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  natural  history  and  pathology  of  every  individual  dis-
ease, before  any  attempt  is  made  to  recognize  it  in  the  living  body  by  means  of
auscultation.  With  all  its  wonderful  power  and  precision  even  the  stethoscope  opens
no  roual  road  to  the  knowledge  of  diseases  :  without  attention  to  the  common  symp-
toms, mistakes  will  frequently  occur  ;  without  an  acquaintance  with  pathology,  the
grossest  errors  are  inevitable. — Transl.


SYMPTOMS OF  PLEURISY.


413


it  shifts  its  place;  and  it  is  even  by  no  means  unusual  to  find  it
passing-  to  the  other  side,  without  any  transference  of  the  inflam-
mation :  occasionally  even,  from  the  beginning  of  the  disease,  we
have  the  stitch  on  the  right  side  and  the  pleurisy  on  the  left.
This  pain  is  increased  by  inspiration,  (which  action  it  therefore
impedes,)  and  is  extremely  aggravated  by  cough.  Pressure,  even
in  the  intercostal  spaces,  seldom  excites  it ;  and  never  except
there  exists  a  rheumatic  affection  of  the  muscles.* — The  dyspnoea
is  very  variable  as  to  intensity. In  some  cases  the  patients  are
unconscious  of  its  existence,  although  it  is  perceptible  to  the  by-
standers ;  and  sometimes  it  is  equally  unobserved  by  both  ;  in
other  cases  it  is  extremely  urgent,  and  speedily  reaches  the  de-
gree of  impending  suffocation. When  the  dyspnoea  is  not  severe,
it  appears  to  be  rather  occasioned  by  the  pain  of  the  side,  which
moderates  the  inspiration,  than  by  the  compression  of  the  lung
by  the  effused  fluid ;  since  we  find  that  it  commonly  ceases,  after
a  few  days,  with  the  pain  and  other  symptoms  of  acute  inflam-
mation, although  at  this  time  the  effusion  is  more  copious  than
before. No  doubt  the  influence  of  habit  and  the  development  of
puerile  respiration  in  the  sound  side,  contribute  considerably  to
the  diminution  of  dyspnoea  in  this  case. The  following  circum-
stances have  most  effect  in  producing  extreme  dyspnoea:  1.  a
dry  catarrh  anterior  to  the  pleurisy,  which  prevents  the  respira-
tion from  becoming  puerile  in  the  sound  side ;  2.  a  spasmodic
asthma,  producing  the  like  effect;  3.  an  extremely  copious  ex-
travasation occurring  early,  increasing  rapidly,  and  giving  rise,
in  the  course  of  a  few  days,  to  anasarca  of  the  affected  side  and
even  of  the  whole  body. This  last-mentioned  case  is  rare  in  sim-
ple acute  pleurisy ;  it  is  more  common  in  the  haemorrhagic  va-
riety, and  in  those  cases  which  assume  a  chronic  tendency  from
their  origin :  it  constitutes  the  acute  empyema. — The  cough  is
usually  infrequent,  dry  and  moderate ;  sometimes  it  is  altogether
wanting. If  expectoration  exists,  it  is  scanty,  pituitous,  or  con-
sisting of  a  colourless  mucus,  at  times  intermixed  with  some
streaks  of  blood  ;  it  is  only  mucous  and  plentiful,  when  the  pleu-
risy is  complicated  with  pulmonary  catarrh. — The  patient  gene-
rally lies  on  the  affected  side,  or  on  the  back  ;  and  cannot  turn
on  the  sound  side  without  experiencing  a  great  increase  of  dysp-
noea. The  contrary,  however,  is  by  no  means  uncommon  ;  as
many  patients  can  only  lie  on  the  side  not  affected. But  all  the
other  local  symptoms,  as  well  as  this,  may  be  wanting;  and  this
is  the  case  to  which  we  give  the  name  of  the  latent  acute
pleurisy.

*  My  own  experience  leads  me  to  consider  a  tenderness  of  the  intercostal  spaces  on
pressure  as  far  from  unusual  in  acute  pleurisy  ;  and  as  extremely  common  in  chronic
pleurisy. I  am  supported  in  this  opinion  by  Andral  (CI.  Med.  t.  ii.  p.  555),  by

Cliomel  (Diet,  de  Med.  t.  xvii.  p.  129)  and  also  by  Broussuis  (Phleg.  Chron.  t.  i.j

Traml.


414


SYMPTOMS  OF  PLEURISY.


General  symptoms. — A  high  fever  attends  pleurisy  from  its
invasion.  Most  commonly,  however,  this  only  lasts  a  few  days,
particularly  if  the  disease  is  treated  by  prompt  bleedings.  The
fever  ceases  along  with  the  stitch,  and  the  patient,  finding  his
appetite  and  strength  return,  fancies  himself  cured,  although
there  still  exists  an  abundant  extravasation  in  the  chest,  which
cannot  be  got  rid  of  for  a  long  period,  even  should  nothing  inter-
fere to  check  the  process  of  absorption.  And  the  physician  who
does  not  explore  the  chest,  must  fall  into  the  same  mistake  as  his
patient.  I  have  known  cases  in  which  the  thoracic  resonance  and
respiratory  sound  have  not  completely  returned  before  the  expi-
ration of  six  months,  although  the  patients,  judging  from  the
continuance  of  the  pain  and  fever,  asserted  that  they  had  only
been  ill,  in  all,  four  or  five  days.  It  is  very  rare,  even  in  the
mildest  cases  of  acute  pleurisy,  and  in  which  the  inflammation  is
most  speedily  checked,  for  the  effusion,  if  at  all  considerable,  to
be  completely  absorbed,  and  the  false  membranes  converted  into
cellular  substance,  in  less  than  a  month  ;  most  commonly  this  is
not  effected  in  less  than  two  or  three.  When  from  any  cause  the
absorption  is  checked,  the  pulse  becomes  again  frequent,  a  slight
fever  arises,  and  the  disease  becomes  chronic,  or,  at  least,  the
absorption  of  the  extravasated  fluid  is  retarded  for  several  weeks
or  even  months.  I  have  known  cases  of  pleurisy,  very  acute  at
their  onset,  in  which  the  chest  was  not  freed  from  fluid  before  the
end  of  two  years.  Generally,  indeed,  even  the  true  and  simple
pleurisy  does  not  preserve  the  character  of  an  acute  disease,  be-
yond the  first  days,  and  rarely  does  it  prove  fatal  within  this
period.  The  disease  has  an  essential  tendency  to  become  pro-
longed;  and,  indeed,  the  state  of  resolution  of  the  most  acute
pleurisy  has  all  the  characters  of  a  chronic  affection.  After  all,
the  extreme  frequency  of  pulmonary  adhesions  proves,  that  the
greater  number  of  pleurisies  are  sooner  or  later  cured.  The
double  pleurisy  is  commonly  latent,  not  only  on  account  of  the
frequent  absence  or  dullness  of  the  pain,  but  because  it  occurs
only  as  an  intercurrent  affection  of  some  other  dangerous  disease.

The  occasional  causes  of  pleurisy  are  those  of  inflammatory
diseases  in  general.  The  inclemency  of  winter,  and  the  long  con-
tinued impression  of  cold  after  violent  exercise,  are  the  most  com-
mon. The  metastasis  of  -gout,  rheumatism,  or  cutaneous  erup-
tions, the  suppression  of  an  habitual  discharge,  and  causes  of  a
purely  mechanical  nature,  such  as  a  blow  on  the  chest  or  fracture
of  the  ribs,  have  sometimes  produced  the  disease.  It  has  even
been  asserted  by  some  creditable  observers,  to  be  contagious,  in
certain  epidemics  ;  *  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  many  inflam-
matory and  other  diseases.

Among  predisposing  causes,  the  most  evident  are,  a  slender

*  Valleriola,  lib.  vi.  obs.  ii.;  Maret,  Nouv.  M6m.  de  l'Acad.  de  Dijon,  1784.


CHIIONIC  PLEURISY.


415


frame,  narrowness  of  the  chest,  the  immoderate  use  of  spirits,  and,
most  of  all,  tubercles  in  the  lungs.  These  last,  even  previously
to  their  becoming  soft,  seem  to  be  the  cause  of  those  successive
attacks  of  pleurisy  in  the  same  person,  which  we  sometimes  meet
with,  and  which  have  a  great  tendency  to  become  chronic. — In
conclusion,  I  would  remark  of  pleurisy,  as  of  pneumonia,  that  the
occasional  and  predisposing  causes  are  frequently  hidden  from
us,  or  at  least  seem  insufficient  to  account  for  the  attack.  Thus,
for  instance,  although  we  frequently  find  in  youth  and  middle
life,  that  plethora,  violent  exercise,  a  debauch  or  cold,  frequently
occasion  pleurisy ;  we  know  that  it  is  still  more  frequent  among
old  persons,  in  subjects  of  delicate  constitution,  and  valetudina-
rians who  take  great  care  of  their  health.  The  most  severe  cases
occur  in  the  weakest  subjects,  in  persons  of  a  cachectic  habit,  or
in  such  as  are  debilitated  by  excesses  of  any  kind — by  gout,  sy-
philis, scurvy,  cancer,  and,  most  of  all,  by  years.


Sect.  V. — Chronic  Pleurisy.

There  are  three  kinds  of  chronic  pleurisy;  1st.  that  which  is
chronic  from  its  origin ;  2nd.  acute  pleurisy  become  chronic  ;
3rd.  pleurisy  complicated  with  certain  organic  productions  on  the
surface  of  the  pleura,  bearing  a  gross  resemblance  to  cutaneous
eruptions.  I  shall  not  notice  this  last  variety  in  the  present
chapter.

Anatomical  characters.  Chronic  pleurisy  does  not  differ  essen-
tially, in  its  anatomical  characters,  from  the  acute.  In  the  chronic
disease,  the  pleura  is  commonly  of  a  deeper  red,  and  the  serous
effusion  is  more  abundant  and  almost  always  less  limpid,  being
mixed  with  a  great  quantity  of  very  small  albuminous  flocculi.
The  abundance  and  minuteness  of  these  are  sometimes  so  consi-
derable, as  to  render  the  liquid  quite  puriform,  even  when  left
undisturbed.  More  commonly,  the  serum  is  of  a  lemon  colour,
although  still  less  limpid  than  in  the  acute  disease,  and  thickly
intermixed  with  the  small  fragments  just  mentioned,  which,  like
coarse  flour  diffused  through  water,  fall  to  the  bottom  when  at
rest.  In  such  cases,  these  puriform  fragments  accumulate  in
great  quantity  in  the  most  depending  parts  of  the  thoracic  cavity,
and  by  their  consistence  form  a  link  between  the  sero-purulent
effu  sion  and  the  false  membranes.  These  latter  never  have  the
consistence  of  boiled  white  of  egg  as  in  the  acute  pleurisy.  We
break  them  with  the  greatest  facility  in  detaching  them  from  the
pleura;  they  arc  friable  between  the  fingers,  and  sometimes  their
cohesion  is  so  slight  that  we  might  mistake  them  for  a  deposition
of  the  thicker  parts  of  the  pus.  The  extravasatcd  fluids  in
chronic  pleurisy  are  rarely  so  free  from  smell  as  in  the  acute ;
semetimes  they  have  a  heavy  odour,  more  disagreeable  than  that


416


CHRONIC  PLEURISY.


of  healthy  pus,  or  a  strong  alliaceous  odour,  analogous  to  that  of
gangrene.*  Confining  the  term  chronic  pleurisy  to  the  affection
just  described,  and,  therefore,  not  even  including  those  cases  of
acute  pleurisy  which  are  chronic  in  respect  of  their  length  of
duration,  we  may  say  that  the  disease  has  rarely  any  natural  ten-
dency towards  resolution.  In  cases  of  extravasations  which  have
lasted  several  months,  we  frequently  find  no  mark  of  any  step
towards  the  conversion  of  the  false  membranes  into  cellular  sub-
stance. A  cure,  however,  is  sometimes  effected  in  another  man-
ner, as  will  be  shown  presently.

The  effusion  produced  by  chronic  pleurisy  tends,  most  com-
monly, to  become  daily  more  considerable.  The  affected  side
becomes  manifestly  larger  ;  the  intercostal  spaces  grow  broader,
and  rise  to  a  level  with  the  ribs,  and  sometimes  even  higher.
The  lung  of  the  affected  side,  compressed  towards  the  media-
stinum and  spine,  and  retained  in  this  position  by  the  pseudo-
membranous exudation  which  covers  it  completely,  is  sometimes
reduced  to  so  small  a  size,  as  to  be  hardly  from  four  to  six  lines
thick,  even  in  its  middle ;  and  without  a  careful  examination,
might  be  considered  as  totally  destroyed.  In  this  state,  the  pul-
monary tissue  is  soft,  supple,  and  dense  like  a  piece  of  skin,  with-
out any  crepitation,  more  pale  than  natural,  greyish,  and  almost
entirely  without  blood.  Its  blood-vessels  are  flattened,  and  fre-
quently appear  quite  empty.  The  alveolar  texture  is  never-
theless still  very  distinct.  This  case  constitutes  the  most  com-
mon species  of  empyema,  the  'purulent  empyema  of  surgeons,  or,
at  least,  of  modern  surgeons;  for  I  apprehend  no  one  now  con-
siders empyema  as  the  product  of  a  vomica  which  has  burst  into
the  cavity  of  the  pleura.  A  softened  tubercle  may,  indeed,  dis-
chai'ge  its  contents  in  this  manner,  and  may  thus  become  the
cause  of  a  considerable  effusion,  by  exciting  a  chronic  pleurisy,
but  in  such  a  case  the  tuberculous  matter  must  only  be  con-
sidered in  the  light  of  an  extraneous  body  determining  inflam-
mation, and  consequent  effusion,  by  its  mechanical  or  chemical
qualities.  It  is  also  to  this  species  of  pleurisy  that  we  must  refer
those  histories  of  lungs  entirely  destroyed  by  suppuration  which
we  find  recorded  in  the  older  writers.

There  is  still  another  variety  of  chronic  pleuritic  effusion  ;
although  it  is  of  rare  occurrence.  In  this,  the  serosity  is  greenish,
and  the  pus  of  a  yellowish  colour,  and  of  a  degree  of  consistence

*  The  great  and  ■peculiar  fetor  of  the  expectoration,  has  been  considered  by  some
writers  as  almost  characteristic  of  the  communication  between  the  bronchi  and  the  sac
of  the  pleura,  in  cases  of  chronic  pleurisy.  Some  have  compared  this  odour  to  garlic,
some  to  that  of  phosphorated  hydrogen,  and  others  to  other  ill  smells.  See  Andral's
Clin  M6d.  t.  it.  p.  561.  Professor  Nespoli,  in  an  ingenious  pamphlet  on  the  diagnosis
of  diseases  of  the  chest,  published  at  Florence  in  1825,  dwells  a  good  deal  on  this
sifjn  See  his  Discorso  recitato  nel  riaprire  il  corso,  &c.  1825.  This  author  describes
the  expectoration  in  such  cases  as  having  "  l'odore  di  assafetida  ma  assai  piu  di
questa  penetrants  e  acido."  p.  25.— Traml.


CHRONIC  PLEURISY.


417


very  like  that  of  certain  sputa.  This  variety  is  especially  found
in  cases  wherein  the  effusion  is  scanty  and  confined,  on  account
of  previous  adhesions.  This  species  of  pus  has  a  greater  ten-
dency to  be  converted  into  the  accidental  tissue,  than  that  for-
merly described.  Sometimes,  even,  I  have  seen  its  thickest  parts
already  divided  into  irregular  spaces,  like  those  of  cellular  sub-
stance.— Occasionally  the  effusion  of  the  chronic,  as  well  as  of
the  acute  pleurisy,  finds  its  way  into  the  bronchi  or  through  the
walls  of  the  chest.

Signs  and  symptoms. — The  physical  signs  of  chronic  pleurisy
differ  in  no  respect  from  those  of  the  acute,  with  this  exception,
that  we  rarely  meet  with  aegophony  in  the  former,  because  the
effusion  is  almost  always  abundant  before  the  patient  determines
to  consult  the  physician.  The  disease  usually  begins  in  an  in-
sidious manner.  Either  the  stitch  does  not  exist  at  all,  or  it  is
obscure,  momentary,  and  felt  after  long  intervals.  A  slow  fever
creeps  on  by  degrees ;  there  is  cough,  and,  more  frequently  than
in  the  acute  disease,  the  cough  is  attended  by  a  mucous,  some-
times even  by  a  puriform  expectoration.  Emaciation  proceeds
with  more  or  less  rapidity  ;  the  digestive  functions  become  dis-
ordered ;  frequently  the  sensibility  of  the  stomach  is  at  times  so
much  increased,  that  the  patient  can  hardly  bear  not  merely  the
lightest  food,  but  not  even  drink.  Sometimes  a  puriform  expec-
toration comes  on  all  at  once,  and  is  so  copious  as  to  lead  to  the
apprehension  that  the  pus  has  made  its  way  into  the  bronchi.
This  appearance  may  be  repeated  several  times  in  the  twenty-
four  hours  ;  and  it  is  observed,  in  many  cases,  where  there  exists
no  communication  with  the  bronchi.

Chronic  pleurisy  constitutes,  as  stated  above,  the  purulent
empyema  of  surgeons.  Although  its  presence  indicates  a  more
unfavourable  state  of  the  constitution  than  exists  in  the  acute
disease,  it  affords  a  more  favourable  chance  for  the  success  of  the
operation  of  empyema.  The  chief  obstacle  to  the  success  of  this
operation,  in  the  acute  disease,  consists  in  the  difficulty  which  the
lung  finds  to  unfold  itself  to  its  former  dimensions,  bound  down,
as  it  is,  and  compressed  against  the  spine  and  mediastinum,  by
the  false  membranes.  Now,  in  the  case  of  the  chronic  disease,
this  obstacle  docs  not  exist,  since  in  it  there  are  either  no  false
membranes,  or  they  are  soft,  friable,  and  seemingly  formed  of  the
thicker  portion  of  the  purulent  fluid.

The  true  chronic  pleurisy  is  essentially  chronic.  At  no  period
of  its  course  does  it  present  the  intense  fever,  severe  pain,  or
energetic  re -action,  which  characterize  an  acute  disease.  It  only
attacks  persons  who  have  become  cachectic  from  some  cause  or
other,  and  particularly  in  consequence  of  a  tuberculous  affection
of  the  lungs.  The  complication  just  named,  as  well  as  the  mo-
derate degree  of  the  local  and  general  symptoms,  conspire  to

e  rc


418


CHRONIC  PLKUKISY.


make  it  most  commonly  latent.  Hence  it  has  almost  always  been
confounded  with  phthisis  pulmonalis.*

The  acute  pleurisy  become  chronic,  differs  from  the  preceding
variety  in  some  essential  points.  The  disease  assumes  this  course
whenever  any  thing  interferes  with  the  speedy  absorption  of  the
effused  fluid,  and  the  conversion  of  the  false  membranes  into  the
adventitious  serous  tissue ;  and  the  cause  of  this  interruption  is,
in  general,  a  state  of  debility  or  cachexy,  originating  in  some
complication  anterior  or  posterior  to  the  pleuritic  attack.  The
extreme  abundance  of  the  effusion  is  one  of  the  circumstances
from  which  we  may  most  certainly  augur  that  the  disease  will  be-
come chronic,  if  indeed  it  does  not  prove  fatal  in  the  acute  stage.
The  hasmorrhagic  pleurisy,  as  already  stated,  almost  constantly
affects  this  course.  The  transition  from  the  acute  to  the  chronic
state  is  announced  by  the  gradual  diminution  of  the  fever.  This
is  at  times  entirely  absent,  but  almost  constantly  re-appears  to-
wards evening ;  and  every  now  and  then,  from  some  slight  error
of  regimen,  or  without  any  appreciable  cause,  it  becomes  intense.
With  these  exceptions,  the  greater  number  of  the  animal  func-
tions exhibit  no  disorder  ;  in  many  cases  there  is  even  no  dysp-
noea, when  the  patient  is  quiet.  The  digestion  is  often  good  ;
but  the  stomach  is  more  delicate  than  in  health  :  it  can  only  re-
ceive a  small  portion  of  food  at  a  time ;  and  when  the  patient
happens  to  have  a  good  appetite  (which  is  by  no  means  uncom-
mon) and  indulges  it,  he  is  frequently  affected  with  vomiting,
diarrhoea,  or,  at  least,  by  uneasy  digestion.

The  physical  signs  of  this  variety  are  nearly  the  same  as  of
the  preceding.  JEgophony  is  no  longer  perceptible  after  the
effusion  has  become  considerable  ;  and  it  rarely  re-appears  upon
the  diminution  of  this,  as  in  the  acute  disease  when  a  speedy
resolution  takes  place,  owing  to  the  destruction  of  the  elasticity
and  tonicity  of  the  bronchi,  occasioned  by  the  long  compression
of  the  lung.  For  the  same  reason,  the  respiratory  sound  is  long
in  returning,  at  least  in  the  lower  parts  of  the  lungs.  In  the
upper  parts,it  frequently  returns  before  the  dilatation  of  the  chest
is  at  all  diminished.  A  cure  in  this  affection  is  not  common,
and  certainly  does  not  take  place  in  more  than  one  half  the  cases.
Death  in  general  does  not  ensue  before  the  occurrence  of  great
emaciation  ;  and  it  is  accelerated  by  the  supervention  of  anasarcn,

*  True  chronic  pleurisy  is  a  very  common  disease  ;  and  there  are  few  more  de-
serving the  particular  attention  of  practitioners.  It  is,  as  our  author  observes,  almost
always  confounded  with  phthisis  pulmonalis.  Many  examples  of  this  mistake  could
be  cited  from  our  periodical  literature,  and  still  more  could  be  furnished  by  every  pa-
thological practitioner  of  experience.  Sometimes,  however,  it  is  entirely  overlooked
ns  a  pectoral  affection.  For  several  interesting-  examples  of  this  disease  I  refer  to  my
"  Original  Cases,"  &c.  ;  and  for  some  admirable  remarks  on  the  diagnosis  between
it  And  phthisis,  I  refer  the  reader  to  Broussais's  Phlcg.  Chrmi.t.  ii.  p.  203.  One  of  the
most  striking  of  the  general  diagnostic  symptoms  there  mentioned,  and  which  I  have
frequently  observed,  is  the  return  of  the  pulse  to  the  natural  frequency  after  rest,  par-
ticularly after  a  night's  rest,  in  the  pleuritic  affection. — Iravsl,


CONTRACTION  OK THE  CHEST.


419


or  sanguineous  or  serous  congestions  in  the  brain,  or  of  slight
inflammations  of  the  lungs,  which  organs  had  hitherto  continued
healthy.  When  the  anasarca  becomes  general,  it  is  greatest  in  the
arm  and  leg,  and  also  on  the  trunk,  of  the  diseased  side.

Sect.  VI. — Contraction  of  the  Chest,  consequent  to  certain

Pleurisies.

There  are  some  cases  of  pleurisy  wherein  the  affected  side
never  becomes  sonorous  in  the  trial  of  percussion,  although  the
disease  has  been  completely  cured  and  the  effused  fluids  absorbed.
Although  cases  of  this  sort  are  not  very  rare,  they  have  not
hitherto  attracted  sufficiently  the  attention  of  practitioners;  and
I  apprehend  that  the  pathological  character  of  the  affection,  al-
though noticed  by  several  authors,  has  not  as  yet  been  correctly
or  completely  described.  The  subjects  of  this  morbid  alteration
are  sufficiently  distinguishable  even  by  their  external  shape,  and
by  their  gait.  They  seem  constantly  to  lean  towards  the  affected
side.  This  is  always  manifestly  narrower  than  the  opposite  side,
there  being  frequently  more  than  an  inch  of  difference,  when  they
are  both  measured  by  means  of  a  cord.  The  length  of  the  chest
is  equally  diminished  :  the  ribs  are  closer  to  one  another;  the
shoulder  is  lower;  and  the  muscles,  especially  the  pectoral,  are
only  half  the  size  of  those  of  the  opposite  side.  The  difference
of  the  two  sides  is  so  remarkable,  that,  at  first  sight,  we  would
think  it  much  greater  than  it  is  found  to  be  by  admeasurement.
The  spinal  column  generally  remains  straight;  sometimes,  how-
ever, it  at  length  yields  through  the  effect  of  the  habitual  leaning
towards  the  diseased  side.  This  habit  gives  to  the  individual
the  appearance  of  being  somewhat  lame.  The  greater  number
of  individuals  in  whom  I  have  detected  this  deformity,  attributed
it  to  some  severe  and  long-continued  disease  of  the  chest,  the
exact  character  of  which  had  never  been  ascertained :  some  had
well-marked  attacks  of  pleurisy  or  pneumonia  of  long  stand-
ing. I  have  more  than  once  pointed  out  this  alteration  of  the
form  of  the  chest  to  individuals,  in  whom  it  existed  in  a  great
degree,  who  were  not  themselves  at  all  aware  of  its  existence.
All  of  these  had  experienced  a  disease  of  long  duration,  the
principal  seat  of  which  had  seemed  to  be  in  the  thorax  :  but  in
several  the  affection  appeared  to  have  been  only  slight.

I  had  long  observed  this  contraction  of  the  chest  before  I  had
an  opportunity  of  proving,  by  dissection,  the  particular  lesion  to
which  it  was  owing.  I  attended  a  patient  for  several  years,  in
whom  it  had  existed  in  the  greatest  degree  for  fifteen  years.  He
was  subject  to  a  chronic  catarrh,  and  was  so  short-breathed  that
he  might  be  considered  as  asthmatic.  In  this  instance,  however,
it  is  probable  that  the  dyspnoea  was  more  owing  to  the  catarrh

E  E  2


420


CONTRACTION  OF THE  CHEST.


than  the  deformity  of  the  chest;  as,  in  the  greater  number  of
cases  in  which  I  have  observed  this  state,  although  the  respira-
tion was  shorter  than  usual,  still  it  could  riot  be  considered  as
amounting  to  habitual  dyspnoea. A  remarkable  instance  of  this

is  furnished  in  his  own  person  by  M.  ,  a  very  distinguished

surgeon  of  Paris.  In  this  gentleman,  the  left  side  of  the  chest
has  been  contracted  ever  since  an  attack  of  pleurisy  in  his  youth.
It  yields  a  completely  dull  sound  on  percussion  on  the  lower  and
lateral  parts;  but  the  respiratory  sound  is  distinct,  only  some-
what weaker  than  on  the  other  side. M.  enjoys  excellent

health  :  he  has  a  strong  and  sonorous  voice,  and  has  for  several
years  past  delivered  lectures,  sometimes  two  in  one  day,  each  of
an  hour,  without  inconvenience.  Six  or  seven  years  since,  he
had  a  very  severe  attack  of  fever,  in  which  the  respiration  did
not  suffer  more  than  in  persons  in  general.

Cases  of  very  great  contraction  are  rare:  but  those  in  which
the  alteration  of  the  shape  and  the  decrease  of  resonance  on  per-
cussion are  only  slight,  are  very  common.  This  contraction,
when  strongly  marked,  coincides  always  with  the  formation  of
the  adventitious  fibro-eartilaginous  membranes  formerly  de-
scribed. The  cause,  no  doubt,  of  this  lesion  having  been  so  long
unknown,  is  its  dependence  on  so  obscure  a  disease  as  the  haemor-
rhagic  pleurisy.  The  symptoms  of  this  affection  are,  indeed,
very  variable.,  and  its  progress  very  irregular.  In  its  commence-
ment, it  has  frequently  no  resemblance  to  the  simple  acute  pleu-
risy :  and  it  is  truly  better  entitled  to  the  name  of  latent,  than
any  other  variety-  In  it,  the  pain  is  infrequent,  temporary,  and
often  so  trifling  as  not  to  be  mentioned  by  the  patient,  unless
questioned  respecting  it.  The  dyspnoea  is  sometimes  very  slight;
the  cough  infrequent  and  dry.  Sometimes,  however,  particularly
in  asthmatic  persons  and  in  those  subject  to  catarrh,  there  is
much  dyspnoea,  and  a  more  or  less  abundant  expectoration :  but
in  cases  of  this  kind,  the  whole  complexion  of  the  disease  is
rather  that  of  catarrh  or  asthma,  than  of  pleurisy.  In  short,
in  many  cases,  one  would  be  misled  by  the  symptoms  to  look  for
the  site  of  the  disease  any  where  else,  rather  than  in  the  chest.
A  state  of  languor  and  extreme  debility,  a  slight  degree  of  fever,
a  loss  of  appetite  disproportioned  to  the  apparent  mildness  of  the
disease,  are  frequently  the  only  symptoms.  The  cough  is  so
inconsiderable,  as  to  be  frequently  overlooked  both  by  the  patient
and  the  physician.

In  cases  of  this  kind,  the  stethoscope  and  percussion  afford
the  only  means  of  ascertaining  the  nature  of  the  disease.  By
itself,  indeed,  percussion  will  only  enable  us  to  suspect  the  pre-
cise nature  of  the  affection,  as  the  absence  of  sound  may  be  owing
to  infarction  of  the  lung  as  well  as  effusion  into  the  chest;  but
when  conjoined  with  auscultation,  which  will  detect  the  respi-
ratory sound  at  the  root  of  the  lungs  only,  the  nature  of  the  case


CONTK ACTION OF THE  CHEST.


421


will  be  at  once  evident.  The  contraction  of  the  chest,  which
coincides  with  the  absorption  of  the  serous  portion  of  the  effusion,
begins  at  an  early  period  of  the  disease ;  but  it  is  often  not  very
perceptible  until  after  several  months;  and,  frequently  even,  the
patient  has  long  been  in  a  state  of  doubtful  convalescence  before
it  is  at  all  manifest.  At  length,  however,  after  a  long  period  of
ill  health,  sometimes  of  no  less  duration  than  two  or  three  years,
the  strength,  appetite,  &c.  return,  and  the  patient  regains  perfect,
and  in  many  cases,  permanent  health.  The  affected  side,  never-
theless, still  yields  a  dull  sound —frequently  the  complete  fleshy
sound — on  percussion  ;  and  the  respiratory  sound  is  commonly
weaker  than  natural  over  the  whole  of  it,  and  in  the  lower  parts
it  is  either  not  perceived  at  all,  or  it  is  extremely  indistinct.  On
examining  the  chests  of  those  who  had  this  contraction  in  a  very
decided  manner,  I  have  uniformly  found  the  fibrocartilaginous
adhesions  above  described,  and  the  lung  so  compressed  and  flac-
cid, as  to  have  the  appearance  of  muscular  substance,  of  which
the  fibres  are  so  fine  as  to  be  undistinguishable.  Sometimes  the
compressed  lung  is  as  red  as  muscle ;  at  other  times,  it  is  of  a
grey  colour,  somewhat  deeper  but  less  transparent  than  the  mus-
cles of  fishes.  This  last  I  consider  as  the  proper  colour  of  lung
simply  compressed,  and  imagine  the  red  colour  to  be  owing  to  a
passive  congestion  of  blood  in  the  part,  like  what  occurs  after
death.

The  absence  of  the  respiratory  sound  in  the  case  of  contraction
of  the  chest,  is  not,  as  might  be  imagined,  owing  to  the  thickness
of  the  adventitious  membranes.  Even  in  the  acute  pleurisy,
with  the  most  copious  effusion,  it  is  not  the  mere  distance  of  the
lung  from  the  side,  that  occasions  the  failure  of  the  sound  of
respiration.  This  is  proved  by  the  fact,  that  the  greatest  de-
gree of  fatness,  the  size  of  the  female  breast,  the  anasarcous
state  of  the  integuments,  or  thick  clothing,  do  not  sensibly  di-
minish the  sound,  when  it  is  considerable ;  whilst,  on  the  other
hand,  it  is  hardly  at  all  perceptible  even  in  the  leanest  subjects,
when  they,  either  naturally  or  from  nervous  apprehension  under
the  first  application  of  the  stethoscope,  breathe  in  an  imperfect
manner.  It  is,  therefore,  evident  in  these  cases,  that  the  dimi-
nution or  absence  of  the  respiratory  sound,  is  much  more  owing
to  the  imperfect  dilatation  of  the  air-cells,  than  the  thickness  of
the  compressing  body.  In  the  less  severe  cases  of  this  nature,
and  when  the  contraction  of  the  chest  is  not  very  considerable,
after  the  complete  conversion  of  the  false  membrane vinto  the
cartilaginous  substance,  the  respiration  returns  in  a  slight  degree
in  the  affected  side,  but  less  strongly  than  in  the  opposite  one.
As  an  instance  how  long  it  may  be  before  this  variety  of  pleurisy
is  completely  terminated,  I  may  state,  that,  in  the  patient  from
whose  chest  I  had  some  drawings  made,  it  was  not  until  two
years  and  a  half,  to  reckon  from  the  invasion  of  the  disease,  or  a


422


CONTRACTION OF  THE  CHEST.


year,  to  reckon  from  the  period  of  his  convalescence,  that  I  began
to  perceive  a  slight  sound  of  respiration  below  the  clavicle  and
on  the  upper  part  of  the  back.  In  certain  cases,  the  respiration
becomes  good  over  the  superior  parts  of  the  chest,  without  being
at  all  restored  on  the  inferior ;  and  this  may  be  owing  to  the
fibro-cartilaginous  membrane  not  extending  to  the  upper  lobe :
and  in  all  cases,  even  where  the  respiration  is  perceptible  in
some  degree  over  the  whole  chest,  it  is  always  stronger  in  this
situation.

However  weak  and  imperfect  the  respiration  may  be  in  a  lung
compressed  in  this  manner,  the  contraction  of  the  chest  must,
nevertheless,  be  considered  as  a  mode  of  cure.  In  the  cases
where  it  exists  in  the  greatest  degree,  it  does  not  always  render
the  individual  an  invalid,  but  may  even  be  compatible  with  a
considerable  degree  of  general  vigour.  It,  moreover,  takes  away
every  apprehension  of  a  relapse;  for  if,  as  we  have  already  said,
pleurisy  is  very  rare  in  the  cases  of  cellular  union  of  the  lungs
and  pleura,  it  must  be  considered  as  almost  impossible  when  the
union  is  effected  by  means  of  a  tissue  so  little  disposed  to  inflam-
mation, as  is  the  fibro-cartilaginous.

Although  in  all  the  cases  I  have  met  with  of  decided  contrac-
tion of  the  chest,  I  have  found  the  lung  attached  by  means  of
the  fibro-cartilaginous  membranes  above  described,  closely  united
to  one  another  by  a  cellular  tissue  of  subsequent  formation ;  I
am,  nevertheless,  of  opinion,  that  the  contraction  may  be  found
in  an  equal  degree,  subsequently  to  a  pleurisy  which  has  termi-
nated very  slowly  with  the  formation  of  merely  cellular  adhesions.
Indeed,  in  every  case  wherein  I  have  found  one  lung  adherent
throughout,  by  means  of  a  pretty  copious  cellular  tissue,  I  have
always  thought  this  side  of  the  chest  narrower  than  the  other.
I  may  add  that  this  condition  of  parts  is  so  constant,  that  it  is
surprising  the  morbid  alteration  of  shape  we  are  now  considering
had  not  before  attracted  the  notice  of  anatomists.  The  difference
between  the  sides  is  particularly  observable  after  both  lungs  are
removed.  I  had  noticed  this  circumstance  when  I  was  a  student,
and  before  I  had  ascertained  that  the  smaller  side  was  always
that  in  which  the  adhesions  existed,  or  in  which  they  were  most
considerable.  I  mentioned  the  thing  to  one  of  my  teachers,  and
was  informed  that  this  inequality  of  size  was  owing  to  an  original
malformation. — When  both  lungs  are  adherent,  the  chest  is
generally  very  narrow  ;  and  the  resonance  on  percussion  is  im-
perfect even  when  the  sound  of  respiration  is  pretty  good.  With
all  this,  it  must  be  admitted,  that  these  cellular  adhesions,  even
when  very  extensive,  have  no  bad  effect  on  the  respiration  and
general  health;  almost  every  adult  subject  having  these,  as  it  is
well  known,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree.

In  the  case  of  large  pulmonary  abscesses,  or  extensive  or  nu-
merous tuberculous  excavations,  the  containing  parte  begin  gra-


CONTRACTION  OF  THE  CJIKST.


423


dually  to  collapse  shortly  after  the  discharge  of  the  matter,  and
the  walls  of  the  chest  follow  the  retrocession  of  the  soft  parts.
This  partial  contraction,  which  is  chiefly  found  on  the  upper  and
anterior  parts,  is  very  perceptible  after  the  cicatrization  is  com-
plete. Bayle  made  the  observation  that  the  chest  seemed  to  be
contracted  in  the  case  of  phthisis  of  long  standing,  but  he  does
not  seem  to  have  been  acquainted  with  the  cause  of  it.  In  the
case  of  phthisis  this  cause  is  usually  twofold;  depending  no  less
on  the  contraction  of  the  tuberculous  excavations,  than  on  the
latent  or  manifest  pleurisies,  with  which  these  are  commonly  com-
plicated.

From  what  has  gone  before,  it  results,  that  it  is  not  to  the
adhesions  themselves  that  we  are  to  attribute  the  contraction  of
the  chest,  but  to  the  more  or  less  chronic  manner  of  their  de-
velopment; and,  further,  we  may  conclude  that  the  more  rapid
has  been  the  absorption  of  the  effusion,  the  less  fear  is  there  of
any  contraction  ensuing.  In  fact,  the  longer  the  lung  has  been
retained  in  a  state  of  compression,  the  greater  is  its  loss  of  na-
tural elasticity;  and  in  this  respect  it  is  merely  in  accordance
with  other  organs;  a  muscle  long  compressed  by  a  bandage  is  in
a  like  predicament.  The  bony  compages  of  the  chest  necessarily
contract  as  the  effusion  is  diminished,  and  exactly  in  the  same
degree,  unless  the  lungs  are  proportionally  expanded :  there
cannot  remain  a  vacuum  in  any  part  of  the  animal  body.  In
pleurisies  accompanied  with  a  copious  extravasation,  and  whose
resolution  is  consequently  slow,  the  contraction  of  the  affected
side  is  almost  always  very  discoverable  by  the  eye  and  by  men-
suration, very  long  before  the  complete  absorption  of  the  fluid.

As  the  affection  now  treated  of  is  very  little  known,  I  shall
subjoin  four  cases  of  it.  The  first  and  second  of  these  exhibit
the  disease  at  its  termination ;  the  third  points  out  the  progres-
sive stages  as  well  as  the  state  of  the  affected  parts,  very  near  its
close ;  the  fourth  is  an  example  of  the  hsemorrhagic  pleurisy,
which  would  have  terminated  in  the  same  manner  if  a  cure  had
been  effected.

Case  XXXI. — Contraction  of  the  chest  in  a  consumptive
patient.  A  woman,  aged  about  thirty-seven,  came  into  the  Necker
Hospital  in  May,  1818.  She  had  been  affected  with  cough  for
several  years,  but  more  severely  within  the  last  four  months.
She  was  in  a  state  of  great  emaciation,  and  was  decidedly  hectic.
The  voice  resounded  strongly  beneath  the  clavicle  and  in  the
axilla  of  the  right  side,  but  did  not  traverse  the  stethoscope —
(bronchophony  from  congregated  tubercles.)  Over  the  same
points,  there  was  a  strong  guggling  rhonchus,  indicative  of  the
transmission  of  air  through  the  softened  tubercles  (cavernous
rhonchus. )  The  sputa  were  yellow,  opaque,  puriform,  and  some-
what diffluent.  It  being  apparent  from  these  results  that  this
was  a  case  of  hopeless  consumption,  the  patient  was  not  more


424


CON"  !  Kv\CT10K  OF  THE  ClIliST.


particularly  examined  afterwards;  except  that,  on  the  19th,  pec-
toriloquy was  found  very  distinct  in  the  right  axilla.  She  died
on  the  24th.

Dissection—  Upon  inspecting  the  body  after  death,  the  left
side  of  the  chest  was  found  to  be  evidently  diminished  in  all  its
dimensions;  the  intercostal  spaces  were  so  much  contracted  that
the  ribs  seemed  to  touch  each  other.  The  right  side  was  of
natural  form  and  size,  and  appeared  larger  than  the  other  by
one-half.  This  deformity  had  not  been  observed  during  life,
owing  to  the  patient's  clothing.  The  right  lung  adhered  to  the
diaphragm  and  the  mediastinum,  in  its  whole  extent,  by  well
organized  cellular  adhesions.  In  the  superior  lobe  there  was
one  tuberculous  excavation  capable  of  containing  a  small  pullet's
egg.  In  it  there  were  about  two  spoonfuls  of  tuberculous  matter
of  the  consistence  of  pus.  In  the  same  upper  lobe,  there  were
several  other  lesser  cavities,  still  filled  with  tuberculous  matter,
softened  to  the  same  degree;  and  also  many  crude  tubercles.
The  left  lung  was  one-half  less  than  the  right;  it  was  depressed
towards  the  spine  and  ribs,  so  that  its  internal  surface  was  turned
forwards,  yet  did  not  reach  further  than  the  origin  of  the  carti-
lages, and  did  not  at  all  cover  the  heart:  it  adhered  so  firmly  to
the  ribs  that  it  could  not  be  separated  without  detaching  it  from
its  investing  pleura.  This  adhesion  was  effected  by  the  medium
of  a  substance  altogether  similar,  in  texture,  colour,  and  con-
sistence, to  the  fibro-cartilaginous  bodies.  This  substance  was
about  two  lines  in  thickness,  and  was  divided  into  two  layers,
which  were  separated  from  each  other  by  a  third,  much  thinner.
This  was  of  a  bluish  grey  colour  and  semi-transparent, — qua-
lities which  formed  a  contrast  with  the  whiteness  and  opacity  of
the  others.  The  intermediate  layer  resembled  perfectly  the
transparent  central  portion  of  the  intervertebral  fibro-cartilages ;
it  was  less  solid  than  the  other  two,  yet  possessed,  with  them,  the
fibrous  structure.  The  pleura  pulmonalis  and  costalis,  especially
the  former,  were  very  distinct,  exteriorly  to  these  false  mem-
bianes.  The  pulmonary  tissue,  more  flaccid  and  redder  than
natural,  had  lost  its  crepitous  feel,  and  was  of  the  aspect  and
consistence  of  muscle.  In  the  upper  lobe  there  was  a  tuberculous
excavation  capable  of  holding  a  large  walnut,  and,  like  that  on
tlie  other  side,  was  lined  by  a  soft  and  whitish  membrane.

Case  XXX II. — Contraction  of  the  chest  subsequent  to  cliro-
nic  p  'enrisy,  with  the  supervention  of  fatal  acute  pleurisy.  In
March  1818,  a  man,  aged  eighteen,  came  into  the  Necker  Hos-
pital, affected  with  recent  diarrhoea  and  a  complaint  of  the  chest
of  some  standing.  In  the  winter  of  1816  he  had  been  affected
with  a  violent  cold,  attended  by  severe  cough,  much  dyspnoea,
and  great  pain  of  the  left  side.  This  side  of  the  chest  was  now
evidently  smaller  than  the  right  in  every  dimension;  and  the
shoulder  being  thereby  lower,  the  man  had  the  appearance  of


(ONTUACTION OF THE  CIIKST.


125


being  lame.  He  bent  the  left  leg  more  than  the  right,  and  when
he  stood  upright  he  seemed  to  support  himself  on  his  left  hip.
This  side  yielded  a  dull  sound  on  percussion,  and  the  sound  of
respiration  was  scarcely  audible,  except  very  feebly  below  the
second  rib  and  along  the  spine.  The  right  side,  on  the  contrary,
sounded  well  on  percussion,  and  afforded  perfect  respiration
under  the  stethoscope  The  diagnostic  was  here  given — Diar-
rhcea,  in  a  person  cured  of  pleurisy  by  adhesion  of  the  lungs  to
the  pleura  by  means  of  a  fibrocartilaginous  membrane.  For
the  first  month  after  this  man's  admission,  he  remained  much  in
the  same  state.  In  the  succeeding  month,  his  health  improved.
The  diarrhoea  ceased ;  the  slight  cough  which  he  had  had,  dis-
appeared, and  the  appetite  and,  in  some  degree,  the  strength,
returned.  The  respiratory  sound  became  much  more  perceptible
at  the  roots  of  the  left  lung  and  on  the  upper  and  fore  part  of
the  chest  on  the  same  side,  where,  indeed,  it  was  very  distinct
from  the  clavicle  to  the  fourth  rib,  only  weaker  than  on  the  op-
posite side.  In  May  the  diarrhoea  returned,  and  he  was  also
attacked  with  a  slight  pain  of  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  which
yielded  to  the  application  of  leeches.  He  from  this  time  gradually
got  worse ;  and  well-marked  symptoms  of  chronic  peritonitis
were  added  to  those  already  existing,  with  great  aggravation  of
suffering  and  loss  of  strength.  On  the  12th  July,  he  was  further
seized  with  a  very  violent  and  sharp  pain  in  the  right  side,
aggravated  by  cough  and  deep  inspirations.  The  chest  was
again  examined  at  this  time.  On  the  left  side,  anteriorly,  the
respiratory  sound  was  distinct  and  of  moderate  strength  from  the
clavicle  to  the  fourth  rib ;  and,  posteriorly,  from  the  top  of  the
shoulder  to  the  sixth  rib  :  it  was  also  beginning  to  be  perceptible
on  the  lower  parts  of  this  side.*  Now,  however,  it  was  no  longer
perceptible  over  the  whole  of  the  right  side,  except  between  the
clavicle  and  the  second  rib,  along  the  sterno-costal  cartilages ;
and  even  in  these  points  it  was  much  less  than  in  the  upper  part
of  the  left  side.  On  the  right  back  it  was  more  perceptible,  but
intermixed  with  a  slight  rhonchus;  and  exactly  at  the  roots  of
the  lung  on  this  side,  it  was  louder  than  in  any  other  part  of  the
chest.  After  this  exploration  the  following  addition  was  made
to  the  diagnostic — Recent  pleuro-pneumonia  of  the  right  side  ;
the  effusion  not  yet  very  considerable,  but  in  greatest  quantity
in  the  lateral  parts  of  the  cavity  of  the  pleura.  On  the  14th,
the  pain  of  the  side  was  nearly  gone;  but  the  cough  was  severe,
and  the  expectoration  yellow,  frothy,  but  not  adhesive ;  the  res-
piration was  now  heard  equally  over  the  whole  right  side,  but

*  Tliis  return  of  respiration  in  parts  where  it  had  previously  been  imperceptible,
is  analogous  to  the  establishment  of  puerile  respiration  in  a  sound  lung  upon  the
oilier  becoming  diseased  j  and  seems  to  me  confirmatory  of  what  I  had  occasion  to
state  above  (page  415,  et  setj.)  respecting  the  active  dilatation  of  the  lungs.—  Author.


426


CONTKACTION  OF  THE  CHEST.


only  in  a  slight  degree;*  it  was  also  perceptible  over  the  whole
of  the  left  side,  except  below  the  sixth  rib.  The  patient  became
somewhat  relieved  after  this  period,  but  he  finally  sunk  on  the
12th  August.

Dissection. — The  left  side  of  the  chest  was  found  one-third
smaller  than  the  right,  and  the  intercostal  spaces  much  narrower.
The  lung  on  this  side  was  intimately  united  to  the  pleura  of  the
ribs,  in  its  whole  extent,  by  a  false  membrane  one  line  thick  in
its  superior  part,  and  two  lines  in  its  inferior  part.  It  was  white,
of  a  consistence  almost  equal  to  that  of  fibro-cartilage,  and  of  a
texture  somewhat  similar  ;  as  fibres,  both  longitudinal  and  trans-
verse, were  very  visible  in  it,  especially  at  its  inferior  part.  In
several  places  this  false  membrane  was  united  to  the  pleura  by
means  of  cellular  substance  containing  serum ;  in  other  places,
these  two  were  closely  united,  yet  still  very  distinguishable  from
each  other.  The  lung  was  flattened  upon  the  mediastinum.
Its  substance  was  still  somewhat  crepitous,  but  flaccid  and  in-
jected with  serum.  It  contained  many  tubercles,  for  the  most
part  miliary.  The  right  lung  adhered  to  the  costal  pleura  by
means  of  a  soft  false  membrane,  which  exhibited  reddish  vascular
points  on  its  surface.  A  still  thicker  layer  of  the  same  kind
invested  the  diaphragm  and  adjoining  lung.  There  was  about
a  glassful  of  reddish  serosity  in  the  cavity  of  the  pleura.  The
tissue  of  the  lung  was  crepitous,  containing  a  considerable  quan-
tity of  serosity,  and  also  several  miliary  tubercles.  The  whole
of  the  intestines  were  united  together  in  one  mass,  and  to  the
peritoneum,  by  well-organised  cellular  substance,  intermixed  with
small  tuberculous  masses.  The  mucous  membrane  of  the  ccecum
and  colon  were  ulcerated.

Case  XXXIII.  II cemorrhagic  pleurisy.  Incipient  cont ruc-
tion of  the  chest.  — A  man  aged  sixty-six,  in  October  1817,
caught  a  severe  cold,  and  became  affected  with  a  dry  cough,  and
loss  of  appetite.  In  the  following  January,  haemorrhage  from
the  lungs,  and  pains  of  the  chest,  were  added  to  his  complaints.
He  got  worse,  with  a  good  deal  of  irregular  fever,  and  great
dyspnoea  on  motion,  and  came  into  the  Necker  Hospital  on  the
12th  of  March.  At  this  time  the  face  was  flushed,  the  tongue
white,  and  the  pulse  hard  and  frequent;  there  was  much  cough,
with  an  expectoration  of  yellowish,  semi-transparent,  and  some-
what frothy  sputa,  so  viscid  as  to  adhere  to  the  bottom  of  the
vessel  when  reversed.  On  the  left  side,  percussion  elicited  every
where  the  natural  sound,  and  the  stethoscope  indicated  the  respi-
ration to  be  good  On  the  right  side,  percussion  did  not  give  a
very  good  sound  anteriorly,  and  gave  an  imperfect  sound  pos-
teriorly ;  and  the  respiration  was  "inaudible  over  the  lower  half

*  These  si"-ns,  compared  with  those  of  the  day  hcfore,  indicated  that  the  effiiMon
was  small  in  quantity,  and  diffused  uniformly  over  the  surface  of  tlie  lungs.  At  this
time  I  was  verv  imperfectly  acquainted  with  .llg^homj.— Author.


CONTRACTION OF THE  CHEST.


427


of  the  back  and  side.  The  following  was  the  diagnostic  recorded  :
Chronic  pleurisy  on  the  right  side,  ivith  a  slight  acute  pneu-
monia ;  tubercles*  The  patient  was  bled  and  leeched  with  relief.
On  the  3rd  April,  he  felt  pretty  well;  there  was  little  fever;
and  the  chest  sounded  nearly  equally  well  under  both  clavicles:
the  respiration,  however,  was  still  weaker  under  the  right,  and
was  not  at  all  perceptible  over  the  remainder  of  this  side.
During  the  following  fortnight,  the  patient  continued  to  improve  :
he  always  lay  on  the  sound  side.  On  the  22nd,  the  chest  sounded
worse  on  the  right  back,  but  much  better  on  the  upper  parts
before.  The  respiration,  however,  was  in  these  very  indistinct,
and  was  not  at  all  audible  below  the  second  rib ;  in  the  axilla,  it
was  accompanied  by  a  slight  rhonchus  posteriorly;  it  was  per-
ceptible in  a  slight  degree,  over  a  space  three  fingers  in  width,
along  the  spine,  but  nowhere  else  on  this  side.  During  the
month  of  May,  the  patient  became  anasarcous,  pale,  and  ema-
ciated. However,  the  sound  improved  over  the  upper  part  of
the  right  side  before,  and  the  sphere  of  the  respiration  was  ex-
tended ;  it  being  now  perceptible,  in  a  slight  degree,  over  the
cartilages  of  the  false  ribs.  On  the  6th  June,  it  was  observed
that  the  intercostal  spaces  on  the  right  side  were  becoming
smaller,  and  that  the  chest  seemed  to  be  contracting  on  this  side:
and  on  the  18th  the  contraction  was  quite  obvious.  The  patient
died  on  the  28th.

Dissection  twenty-eight  hours  after  death. — On  examining  the
chest  it  was  found  that  the  diameter  of  the  right  side,  both
laterally  and  from  before  backwards,  was  less  by  an  inch  than
that  of  the  left ;  and  the  intercostal  spaces  were  narrower.  The
left  lung  was  of  the  natural  size,  had  no  adherence  to  the  pleura,
and  was  crepitous  throughout. It  was  gorged  with  blood,  es-
pecially on  the  posterior  part. It  contained  some  tubercles  in
the  early  stages. The  left  lung  was  one  third  less  than  the  right,
and  adhered  intimately  to  the  costal  pleura  by  its  whole  upper
lobe  as  low  down  as  the  second  and  third  ribs. This  adhesion
was  effected  by  a  well-organized  cellular  tissue,  evidently  of
ancient  date. The  remaining  pleura  of  the  lungs  and  ribs,  in
the  whole  of  the  lower  part  of  the  lung  and  the  anterior  portion
corresponding  with  the  false  ribs,  was  also  closely  united ;  but
this  adhesion,  which  was  evidently  of  recent  date,  was  effected  by
means  of  a  concrete  albuminous  layer,  three  lines  in  thickness,
of  a  yellow  colour  and  opaque,  and  partially  tinged  with  blood.
This  membraniform  layer  could  be  removed  in  plates,  which  were
of  greater  firmness  the  nearer  they  approached  the  pleura,  on  either
side, — especially  the  pleura  pulmonalis, — on  which  they  had  a

*  The  pneumonia  was  indicated  by  the  exploration.  I  do  not  know  what  led  mo
to  suspect  the  existence  of  tubercles:  probably  the  progress  of  the  disease  at  its
commencement. — Author.


4-28


C0NTKACT10N  OF  THE  CHEST.


degree  of  consistence  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  fibro-cartilages.
On  the  contrary,  the  centrical  layers  were  hardly  of  a  tenacity
double  that  of  boiled  white  of  egg.  At  the  point  of  junction  of
the  ribs  with  their  cartilages,  and  on  the  anterior  and  exterior
parts  of  the  lung,  this  albuminous  stratum  was  divided  into  two
layers,  one  of  which  invested  all  that  portion  of  the  lung  remaining
unattached  to  the  side,  and  the  other  the  corresponding  portion
of  the  pleura ;  and  these  two  afterwards  united  so  as  to  form  a
shut  sac  or  pouch.  The  inner  surface  of  this  sac  was  nearly
every  where  of  a  bright  red  colour,  which  seemed  as  if  applied
with  a  pencil,  and  amid  which  no  traces  of  vessels  could  be  dis-
tinguished. This  red  colour  did  not  at  all  enter  into  the  sub-
stance of  the  albuminous  stratum,  which  was,  throughout,  of  a
yellowish-white  colour,  and  slightly  semi-transparent,  becoming
more  white  and  opaque  as  it  approached  the  pleura.  This  sac
contained  about  two  glassfuls  of  a  bloody  but  limpid  serum,
which  compressed,  at  this  part,  the  lung  towards  the  mediastinum,
leaving  a  space  between  it  and  the  ribs  of  an  inch  and  a  half  at
its  greatest  width.  Eight  or  ten  pseudo- membranous  bands
crossed  this  cavity,  being  attached,  at  each  end,  to  the  pleuritic
layers.  These  were  softer  and  more  fragile  than  old  cellular  ad-
hesions ;  they  were  very  thin,  diaphanous,  and  colourless,  to-
wards their  middle,  but  at  their  extremities  they  assumed  greater
firmness,  and  also  the  opacity  and  colour  of  the  layers  to  which
they  were  attached.  In  the  top  of  this  lung  there  was  an  external
depression,  corresponding  with  a  fibrocartilaginous  substance
internally,  such  as  was  formerly  described  under  phthisis  pulmo-
nalis,  and  which  was  proved  to  be  a  true  cicatrization  of  a  tuber-
culous cavity.  In  its  interior  parts  the  lung  was  flaccid,  not
crepitous,  dry,  and  resembling  muscular  flesh,  over  the  lower
three- fourths ;  while,  in  the  superior  fourth,  it  was  crepitous,
rose-coloured,  and  contained  a  little  frothy  serum.  In  the  upper
portion  there  were  many  immature  tubercles.  The  pleura,  in
the  parts  corresponding  to  the  false  membranes,  was  much  redder
than  natural.  The  heart  was  sound. — The  cavity  of  the  perito-
neum contained  about  four  pints  of  a  reddish  serosity,  partially
limpid.  The  whole  of  the  peritoneum,  as  well  on  the  abdominal
parietcs,  as  on  the  mesentery  and  intestines,  was  studded  with
innumerable  small,  grey,  semi-transparent  tubercles.  Upon  the
mesentery  and  bowels  these  were  quite  transparent,  and  of  the
size  of  millet-seed  ;  on  the  abdominal  parietes  they  were  flatter,
greyer,  and  less  diaphanous.  The  peritoneum  was,  moreover,
marked  in  different  places,  by  red  punctuated  spots,  which  were
either  of  a  bright  red,  or  almost  black.  In  these  points,  on
scraping  with  the  scalpel,  a  small  quantity  of  a  semi-transparent
exudation,  of  a  grey  colour,  and  mixed  with  dots  of  blood,  could
be  detached. This  matter  was  very  like  paste,  only  a  little  firmer.


CONTRACTION OF  THE  CHEST.


429


It  was  so  thin  as  only  to  be  discovered  by  scraping:  after  its
removal  the  peritoneum  appeared  somewhat  less  red.  The  tu-
bercles seemed  to  be  so  intimately  connected  with  the  peritoneum,
as  not  to  be  detached  by  scraping:  this  membrane  was  not  sen-
sibly thickened.

Case  XXXIV. Hemorrhagic  pleurisy  of  the  left  side,  with
ascites  and  organic  disease  of  the  liver. — A  man  had  had  an
attack  in  the  chest  when  twenty-four  years  old ;  but  afterwards
enjoyed  very  good  health,  until  the  summer  of  1818,  when  he
became  affected  with  slight  anasarca ;  and  this  was  followed,  in
December,  by  cough. He  came  into  the  hospital  on  the  13th  of
the  following  March,  in  his  forty-seventh  year. At  this  time  he
presented  the  following  symptoms :  moderate  oedema  of  the  feet
and  legs,  slight  expectoration,  partly  white  and  frothy,  partly
yellow  and  opaque. The  chest  sounded  equally  well  throughout,
and  the  respiration  (on  a  hasty  examination)  seemed  scarcely  per-
ceptible on  both  sides. 17th.  The  chest,  on  a  more  careful  ex-
amination, gave  the  following  results :  the  left  side  behind  seems
to  sound  worse  than  the  right, — both  sides  laterally  yield  a  very
dull  sound, — the  anterior-superior  parts  sound  better. The  re-
spiration is  very  distinct  over  the  whole  of  the  right  side;  on  the
left,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  but  very  little  perceptible  below  the
clavicle  and  at  the  roots  of  the  lungs,  and  not  at  all  audible  over
the  remaining  parts  of  this  side. The  following  diagnosis  was
given :  Imperfectly  cured  pleurisy  of  the  left  side,  co- existing
perhaps  with  tubercles. In  the  end  of  March  the  oedema,  which
had  been  lessened,  now  became  greater,  the  belly  swelled,  and  the
appetite  diminished. At  this  time,  the  respiration  on  the  right
side  was  accompanied  with  a  strong  and  sonorous  rhonchus,  on
the  lateral  parts  anteriorly,  and  was  scarcely  perceptible  behind,
and  over  the  whole  of  the  left  side. Percussion  elicited  a  very
imperfect  sound  from  the  whole  of  the  left  side,  except  on  the
anterior-superior  part;  but  the  whole  right  side  sounded  well.
yEgophony  existed  very  distinctly  over  the  supra-spinous  fossa  of
the  left  scapula.  The  voice,  having  the  bleating  character  strongly
marked,  seemed  to  come  through  the  tube  of  the  stethoscope,
and  was  more  acute  than  the  natural  voice  of  the  patient.  In
consequence,  I  modified  the  diagnosis  as  follows :  chronic  pleurisy
of  tlie  left  side,  with  pulmonary  catarrh. From  the  30th  March
to  the  15th  April,  the  repeated  examination  of  the  chest  showed
that,  on  the  right  side,  the  sonorous  rhonchus  had  in  a  great
measure  ceased,  and  that  the  respiration  was  louder  than  natural
( puerile);  whilst,  on  the  left  side,  the  respiration  seemed  extinct,
except  along  the  inner  border  of  the  scapula  and  immediately
below  the  clavicle,  in  whic  h  place  s  it  was  just  barely  perceptible.
The  point  just  mentioned  (under  the  clavicle)  was  the  only  one
on  this  side  which  yielded  any  sound  on  percussion. During  the
first  days  of  April,  aegophony  was  still  audible  along  the  inner


430


CONTRACTION  OF  THE  CHEST.


margin  of  the  scapula,  but  the  voice  had  assumed  a  grave  key,
and  was  heard  better  with  the  stopper  of  the  tube  removed ;  it
disappeared  entirely  on  the  5th.  The  natural  respiration  was
short  and  somewhat  noisy.  The  patient  lay  usually  on  the  left
side,  sometimes  on  the  back,  but  he  could  not  lie  on  the  right  side.
About  the  middle  of  the  month,  the  respiration  seemed  more
easy,  and  the  patient  could  lie  two  or  three  hours  on  the  right
side ;  but  the  anasarca  increased,  and  hectic  fever  came  on.
From  the  7th  to  the  14th  of  May,  the  resonance  of  the  chest  be-
came clearer  on  the  anterior  and  upper  part  of  the  left  side,  and
the  respiration  became  more  audible  in  the  same  points ;  it  was
also  somewhat  perceptible  below  the  axilla,  and  was  here  accom-
panied by  a  pretty  strong  mucous  rhonchus:  in  every  other  part
of  this  side  both  the  resonance  and  the  respiration  were  wanting.
He  died  on  the  17th.

Dissection  thirty  hours  after  death. — The  thorax  appeared
larger  on  the  upper  part,  and  smaller  on  the  lower  part,  of  the
left  side,  than  the  right.  The  left  cavity  of  the  pleura  contained
at  least  two  pints  of  a  very  bloody  serum,  and  the  lung,  on  this
side,  was  thereby  compressed  towards  the  mediastinum  and  upper
part  of  the  chest.  A  large  vacant  space  was  thus  left  between
the  lung  and  ribs,  which  space  gradually  lessened  from  below
upwards,  but  was  still  an  inch  in  diameter  as  high  as  the  middle
of  the  scapula.  This  space  was  lined  by  a  false  membrane,  the
internal  surface  of  which  was  tinged  uniformly  of  a  bright  scarlet
colour,  and  was  crossed  in  every  direction  by  fine  fibrous  bands
of  the  same  kind.  In  many  parts  of  these  false  membranes  there
were  clots  and  thin  layers  of  a  dark-coloured  blood.  The  under
layer  of  membrane  which  adhered  to  the  pleura  was  of  a  greyish
yellow  colour,  homogeneous,  and  of  a  structure  and  consistence  re-
sembling the  fibro-cartilages.  It  contained  within  it  an  immense
multitude  of  greyish  tubercles,  of  a  size  from  that  of  a  millet-
seed  to  a  grain  of  corn,  or  even  a  pea.  These  were  of  a  firmer
consistence  than  the  including  membrane ;  and  they  formed  more
than  one  half  of  its  whole  substance.  The  left  lung,  compressed
as  already  mentioned,  was  reduced  to  nearly  one-fourth  of  its
natural  size;  it  was  adhering  to  the  pleura  by  its  inner  side,  its
summit,  and  by  two-thirds  of  its  exterior  and  superior  aspect.
Detached  from  the  false  membrane  it  was  sound,  only  com-
pressed, flaccid,  and  void  of  air  except  in  its  lower  lobe.  The
blood-vessels  and  smaller  bronchial  tubes  were  flattened  and
much  contracted.  The  right  lung  adhered  to  the  ribs  only  in  a
few  points,  and  by  old  and  perfectly  organised  attachments.  It
was  gorged  with  a  great  quantity  of  frothy  serum  which  flowed
out  on  its  being  cut.  The  cavity  of  the  peritoneum  contained
five  or  six  pints  of  serum.  The  liver  was  reduced  to  one-third
of  its  usual  size,  and  when  cut  into  was  found  to  be  entirely
composed  of  a  multitude  of  small  grains  of  a  round  or  ovoid


PARTIAL  Pl.KURISY.


431


shape,  and  varying  in  size  from  that  of  a  millet-seed  to  a  hemp-
seed.*


Sect.  VII. — Of  circumscribed  or  partial  Pleurisy.

It  occasionally  happens,  particularly  in  chronic  pleurisy,  that
the  effused  fluid  is  confined  to  a  partial  space  of  small  extent,


is  excited  with  much  more  difficulty,  and  occurs  more  rarely,  in  a
pleura,  the  different  parts  of  which  are  united  by  old  cellular
adhesions,  than  in  a  perfectly  sound  membrane.  It  is  no  doubt
from  the  same  cause,  that,  in  the  event  of  a  fresh  inflammation


*  Since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  which  contained  the  ear-
liest history  of  this  singular  termination  of  pleurisy,  contraction  of  the  chest  has  been
noticed  by  many  authors  as  well  in  this  country  as  on  the  continent. I  stated  in  a
former  note  my  opinion  that  this  deformity  is  not  the  consequence  of  the  hemorrhagic
pleurisy  exclusively  ;  and  I  may  here  add,  that  the  fact  of  its  occurrence  after  trau-
matic pleurisy,  and  after  the  operation  of  empyema,  is  sufficient  proof  of  the  correct-
ness of  that  opinion. Baron  Larrey  in  the  Journ.  Compliment,  des  Sc.  M6d.  for
May,  1820,  details  several  interesting  cases  of  chronic  pleurisy  and  empyema  result-
ing from  wounds,  in  some  of  which  the  contraction  was  strongly  marked. In  Dr.
Hasting's  valuable  paper  on  Empyema  in  the  first  Number  of  the  Ed.  Journ.  of  Med.
Science,  p.  17,  several  cases  of  the  same  kind,  following  the  operation  of  empyema,
are  mentioned ;  and  a  like  contraction  took  place  after  a  successful  operation  in  em-
pyema, in  the  very  interesting  case  recorded  by  Mr.  Jowett  (Med.  Chir.  Rev.  for
July,  1826,  p.  267). It  may  indeed  be  said,  and  perhaps  truly,  that  the  morbid  alte-
ration of  structure  within  the  chest  is  not  the  same  in  the  two  classes  of  cases.  In
my  work  entitled  "  Original  Cases,"  two  instances  of  contracted  chest  are  given
(Cases  xxiv.  xxv.  p.  237.  245). The  event  of  the  first  case  is  given  in  that  publi-
cation ;  that  of  the  second  I  shall  here  state. After  the  date  of  the  last  report  in
May,  1824,  I  saw  the  poor  man  occasionally  during  the  remainder  of  that  year  and
part  of  the  succeeding,  when  he  continued  much  in  the  same  state. I  then  lost  sight
of  him,  and  only  learned  lately  that  he  died  in  the  end  of  1826,  after  having  lone-
laboured  under  symptoms  which  leave  no  room  to  doubt  that  perforation  of  the  lung
and  consequent  communication  between  the  bronchi  and  pleuritic  effusion  had  taken
place. In  another  case,  of  which  a  brief  notice  is  given  in  my  little  work  (the  Case
of  Mr.  U.  p.  225,  Case  xxn.)  contraction  of  the  chest  has  taken  place  in  a  very
marked  degree,  and  has  happily  been  the  medium  of  a  complete  cure. Mr.  U.  is
now  (Aug.  1834)  in  perfect  health,  but  with  the  alteration  of  shape  so  beautifully
detailed  in  the  preceding  section. In  Mr.  Jowett's  case,  the  contraction  of  the  chest
appears  to  have  been  partially  removed  in  the  progress  of  the  cure. This  fact  is
sufficient  proof  that  the  contraction,  in  this  instance,  was  not  effected  by  means  of
the  fibro-cartilaginous  membranes. It  is  necessary  to  distinguish  this  species  of
contraction  from  that  congenital  variety  recently  described  by  M.  Dupuytren,  under
the  name  of  Lateral  depression  of  the  thoracic  parietes. See  Repertoire  G6n.  d'Anat.
1828.— Transl.


432


PARTIAL  PLEURISY.


of  the  cavity  of  the  pleura.  In  these  cases  the  effused  fluid,
which  is  commonly  puriform,  is  enclosed  in  a  false  membrane
which  lines  very  exactly  the  surrounding  parts.  When  seated
in  the  fissures  between  the  lobes,  the  edges  of  these  are  found
closely  adherent  by  means  of  a  very  short  cellular  substance,  of
a  formation  evidently  of  more  antient  date  than  the  present  dis-
ease, while  the  opposing  surfaces  of  the  lobes  themselves  are
separated  by  the  interposed  effusion.  Bayle  was  the  first  who
described  this  species  of  partial  pleurisy,  which  an  inattentive
observer  might  easily  mistake  for  an  abscess  of  the  lung.  This
species  is  rare;  a  thing  which  seems  rather  singular,  when  we
consider  how  often  we  find  the  edges  of  these  interlobular  fissures
adherent  in  cases  of  pneumonia  attended  by  a  slight  pleurisy ;
even  when  the  remaining  surfaces  of  these  fissures  are  quite  free
from  adhesion.  In  such  cases  it  would  seem  that  the  resolution
of  the  pneumonia  leaves  these  fissures  converted  into  a  sort  of
sac,  which  will  occasion  the  circumscribed  effusion  we  have  been
describing,  in  the  event  of  that  part  of  the  pleura  being  afterwards
attacked  by  inflammation.  In  order  to  effect  this  circumscrip-
tion of  the  fluid,  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  that  the  adhesions
on  the  edges  of  the  fissures  shall  be  so  numerous  or  close  as
actually  to  close  the  passage  of  a  liquid  into  the  common  sac  of
the  pleura;  if  they  are  only  pretty  numerous,  although  with
some  intervals  between  them,  they  suffice  to  limit  the  progress  of
the  inflammation.  And  the  same  thing  occurs,  as  formerly  men-
tioned, in  other  instances  of  circumscribed  pleurisy;  the  albu-
minous effusion  of  the  recent  inflammation,  never  penetrating
more  than  a  few  lines  into  the  meshes  of  the  old  adhesions,  how-
ever loose  and  unconnected  these  may  be  with  regard  to  each
other.  The  effusion  between  the  base  of  the  lung  and  the  dia-
phragm, is  usually  circumscribed  by  the  borders  of  the  lung
agglutinated  by  some  previous  inflammation.  Occasionally,  how-
ever, the  extravasation  is  confined  to  a  portion  of  the  base,  the
remainder  being  adherent.* The  circumscribed  effusions  on  the

*  This  variety  of  partial  pleurisy,  and  which  constitutes  what  is  sometimes  termed
Diuphragmitis,  is  by  no  means  uncommon  :  it  often  presents  such  a  group  of  symp-
toms as  entitle  it  to  particular  notice.  The  following  description  of  it  by  Dr.  Law
(Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  iii.  p.  395J)  accurately  represents  the  symptoms  in  many
cases  of  this  affection.  "  Its  characteristic  features  are,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary
constitutional  symptoms  of  acute  pleurisy,  pain  more  or  less  acute  of  the  cartilagi-
nous border  of  the  false  ribs,  extending  into  the  hypochondria,  and  even  the  flanks ;
complete  immobility  of  the  diaphragm  in  inspiration,  which  is  performed  by  the
elevation  of  the  ribs  ;  orthopnoca  with  an  inclination  of  the  body  forwards  ;  an  inex-
pressible anxiety  of  countenance,  marked  by  a  sudden  change  of  features  ;  the  respi-
ration more  hurried  and  jerky  than  in  ordinary  pleurisy,  the  voice  low  and  inter-
rupted ;  a  frequent  desire  to  cough,  but  an  obvious  dread  of  it  from  the  pain  which  it
causes.  The  intellect  is  at  first  free,  but  when  the  case  is  aggravated,  and  the  con-
stitutional symptoms  run  high,  delirium  comes  on  These  may  be  regarded

as  the  most  constant  aud  unequivocal  signs  of  diaphragmatic  pleurisy;  others  are
occasionally  present,  viz.  hiccup,  nausea,  vomiting,  jaundice,  &c.  It  was  the  pre-
sence of  jaundice  that  led  Valsalva  to  regard  the  accidental  complication  as  the


PARTIAL PLEURISY.  433

lateral  and  posterior-inferior  parts  of  the  chest,  are  more  common
than  the  others.  Sometimes  I  have  met  with  partial  effusions  of
this  sort,  near  the  summit  of  a  lung,  adherent  in  every  other
point,  consisting  only  of  one  or  two  spoonsful;  and  I  have
observed  similar  collections  between  the  inner  edge  of  the  lung
and  mediastinum .  Andral  has  recorded  a  more  extensive  example
of  this  variety.*

Certain  cases  of  circumscribed  pleurisy  are  formed  in  another
manner  and  independently  of  any  preceding  adhesions :  in  some
instances  of  very  slight  pleurisy,  particularly  such  as  accom-
pany pneumonia,  it  frequently  happens  that  the  pseudo-mem-
braneous exudation  is  confined  to  the  sharp  edges  of  the  lungs,
or,  at  least,  is  vastly  thicker  on  these  parts  than  elsewhere,
thereby  forming  a  sort  of  border,  of  a  yellowish-white  colour,
and  more  or  less  opaque.  Should  it  happen  that  these  prominent
borders  adhere  to  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  costal  pleura,
and  any  renewal  of  the  inflammation  takes  place,  it  will  be  found
that  the  fresh  inflammation  and  its  accompanying  effusion,  are
confined  within  these  boundaries.  Some  acute  circumscribed
pleurisies  of  this  sort  I  have  seen  both  on  the  diaphragm  and  in
the  interlobular  fissures.  Andral  relates  three  cases  of  diaphrag-
matic pleurisy  which  probably  were  of  the  kind  just  mentioned  ;f
although  the  scantiness  of  the  details  renders  this  somewhat
doubtful.  A  fourth  case  of  his,  produced  by  the  rupture  of  a
gangrenous  cavity  on  the  base  of  the  lung,  was  certainly  of  this
kind.

Wherever  these  partial  pleuritic  collections  are  situated,  if  at
all  abundant,  they  strongly  depress  the  pulmonary  substance
(being  unable  to  extend  themselves  in  any  other  direction)  and
form  a  sort  of  cavity  within  it,  which,  at  first  sight,  one  would
be  disposed  to  consider  as  formed  by  an  actual  loss  of  continuity
of  the  lung:  however,  upon  removing  the  pus  and  the  false
membrane,  we  find  the  pulmonary  substance  merely  compressed
and  quite  sound. — Partial  pleurisies  of  the  first  kind,  are  less
severe  in  themselves,  because  they  are  almost  always  compli-
cations of  much  more  dangerous  diseases,  and  particularly
phthisis  pulmonalis.  Those  of  the  second  kind,  on  the  other
hand,  are  not  of  much  consequence  in  any  point  of  view ;  and
this  is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  fact,  that  it  is  extremely  rare  to
meet  with  such  actually  existing  in  the  dead  body,  while  it  is
very  common  to  find  the  traces  of  their  cure.

Signs  and  symptoms. — These  circumscribed  and  partial  effu-

original  disease  ;  a  mistake  which  might  naturally  occur  if,  as  happens  in  many
cases,  the  features  of  the  preceding  pleurisy  had  not  been  strongly  marked.  The
risus  sardemicus,  to  which  the  antients  attributed  so  much  importance  as  characteristic
of  this  modification  of  disease,  has  not  been  found  constant  by  modern  observers.'  —
Trantl.

•  CI.  Med.  t.  ii.  obs.  xxiv.  f  CI.  Med.  obs.  xix.  xxxii.


1''  V


434


LATENT  1M.EUKISY.


sions  may  be  readily  recognized  by  absence  of  respiration  and
resonance,  and  sometimes  even  by  a?gophony,  over  their  site,
when  they  are  of  a  certain  extent.  I  have  perceived  aegophony
in  cases  in  which  the  effusion  did  not  exceed  a  few  ounces.
Andral  met  with  it  also  in  the  case  of  a  more  considerable  effu-
sion confined  between  the  diaphragm,  the  basis  of  the  lung,  and
the  mediastinum  (CI.  Med.  obs.  xxxii.)  However,  when  aego-
phony is  wanting,  and  if  a  stitch  did  not  exist  at  the  commence-
ment, it  may  be  very  difficult  to  distinguish  a  partial  pleurisy
from  a  large  tumour  in  the  substance  of  the  lungs.

Sect.  VIII.— Of  latent  Pleurisy.

Several  physicians  of  the  last  century,  and  particularly  Stoll,
had  remarked,  that,  in  many  cases  of  pleurisy,  the  stitch,  which
commonly  attracts  attention  to  the  character  of  the  disease,  is
altogether  wanting  ;  and  that  the  insidious  mildness  of  the  whole
symptoms,  in  the  early  stage,  is  such  as  not  even  to  excite  any
suspicion  of  a  severe  affection.  Notwithstanding  these  hints,
however,  it  cannot  be  denied,  that,  previously  to  the  use  of  per-
cussion and  auscultation,  many  pleurisies  which  in  the  first
instance  were  taken  for  trifling  affections,  in  a  later  stage  were
regarded  as  consumptions,  especially  by  the  physicians  who  were
not  accustomed  to  seek  in  dissection  for  the  tests  of  the  truth  of
their  diagnosis.  It  occurred  to  myself  not  many  years  since,
to  prescribe  the  operation  of  empyema  in  the  case  of  a  young
man  who  had  been  put  under  my  care  as  a  consumptive  subject
in  extremis,  but  in  whose  lungs,  when  examined  after  death,  there
did  not  exist  a  single  tubercle.*  Indeed  the  subject  of  latent
pleurisy  must  be  rendered  much  less  difficult,  by  the  details  al-
ready given  in  this  chapter;  insomuch  that  I  consider  myself
justified  in  asserting,  that,  to  the  physician  who  employs  percus-
sion and  auscultation,  these  cases  will  be  reduced  to  a  very  small
number,  and,  in  fact,  will  consist,  only  of  such  as  it  is  of  little
practical  importance  to  distinguish.  These  will  be  the  following :
—  1.  a  few  partial  pleurisies  of  small  extent;  2.  those  which

*  In  tli is  case  the  operation,  in  the  first  instance,  proved  very  successful,  insomuch
that  the  patient,  at  the  end  of  a  fortnight,  was  ahle  to  walk  abroad  ;  and  although  the
progress  of  the  cure  was  subsequently  checked  by  frequent  excesses  at  table,  the  flesh
and  strength  nevertheless  returned  completely.  At  the  end  of  the  eighth  month,  there
existed  only  a  small  fistula  into  which  one  or  two  spoonsful,  at  most,  could  be  injected.
The  patient  now  thought  it  incumbent  on  him  to  celebrate  his  recovery  ;  and  termi-
nated his  f6te  by  being  carried  from  the  table  dead-drunk,  together  with  the  whole  of
his  guests.  This  debauch  was  followed  by  a  severe  fever  accompanied  by  delirium,
during  which  he  would  not  permit  the  wound  to  be  dressed  ;  and  when  it  was  exa-
mined, at  the  end  of  a  fortnight,  the  pleura  was  found  detached,  and  the  cavity  so
enlarged  as  to  be  capable  of  receiving  a  pint  of  injection.  From  this  time  the  suppu-
ration assumed  a  bad  character,  emaciation  returned,  and  the  man  died,  worn  out,
after  a  few  months. — Author.


TREAT. MK NT  OF  PLEURISY.


435


supervene  during  the  last  hours  of  most  diseases,  particularly
phthisis  and  severe  continued  fevers,  and  for  the  most  part  in
winter  ;  and  3.  the  dry  pleurisies,  or  such  as  are  almost  unaccom-
panied by  effusion ;  all  of  which  belong  to  the  second  class  of
cases,  or  to  pleuro-pneumonia,  with  the  predominance  of  pneu-
monia. These  cases,  moreover,  are  only  recognized  with  dif-
ficulty, because  of  our  unwillingness  to  disturb  uselessly,  the  last
moments  of  our  patients;  more  particularly  in  exploring  the
posterior-inferior  parts  of  the  chest,  where  the  effusion  first  shows
itself.*

Sect.  IX. — Treatment  of  Pleurisy.

In  acute  pleurisy,  when  the  patient  is  strong  and  plethoric,
venesection  has  been  uniformly  recommended  by  the  best  prac-
titioners of  all  ages.-J-  Should  the  pain  and  fever  not  yield  to  the
first  or  second  bleeding,  however,  it  will  be  better  practice  in  this,
as  in  all  other  inflammations  of  serous  membranes,  to  follow  up
the  cure  by  local  bleedings.  These,  generally  speaking,  must  be
continued  until  the  pain  and  fever  go  off ;  and  must  be  repeated
should  they  afterwards  return.  Cupping,  in  these  cases  is,  in
my  opinion,  preferable  to  leeches,  and  for  many  reasons :  by  the
former  method  we  can  take  away  the  exact  quantity  of  blood
which  we  want,  while  the  operation  is  at  the  same  time  much
quicker  and  less  painful.  Leeches  are  often  very  tedious  and
painful  in  their  action ;  sometimes  they  scarcely  fill  themselves
with  blood,  and  at  other  times  their  punctures  will  continue
bleeding  for  twenty-four  hours,  and  can  only  be  closed  by  the

*  Pleurisy  in  some  one  or  other  of  its  forms,  has  in  all  ages  attracted  the  marked
attention  of  practitioners  :  on  this  account  its  literature  is  extremely  extensive.  For
a  list  of  the  best  works  of  the  older  writers  on  the  subject,  I  refer  the  reader  to  Dr.
Young's  Medical  Literature,  2nd  £d.  p.  231.  In  these  the  student  will  obtain  much
information  respecting  the  general  symptoms  and  treatment  of  pleurisy  ;  and,  after
studying  the  real  pathology  of  the  disease  in  our  author,  will  derive  much  practical
information  from  the  perusal  of  them.  The  only  works,  however,  which,  in  a  patho-
logical point  of  view,  can  at  all  bear  comparison  with  the  admirable  account  given
by  M.  Laennec  in  the  present  chapter,  are  those  of  Broussais  and  Andral.  See  Phlegm-
asies  Chroniques,  t.  i.  p.  220  :  Clinique  Medicate,  t.  ii.  p.  85.  Compared  with  these
works  it  is  but  simple  justice  to  state,  that  all  our  English  writings  relative  to  the
pathology  of  pleurisy  sink  into  insignificance.  The  earlier  authors  best  deserving  the
student's  attention  on  the  subject  of  pleurisy  are  Stoll,  Morgagni,  Baglivi,  Wendt,
Triller,  Hoffmann,  Huxham,  Cleghorn,  Frank,  &c.  For  some  valuable  remarks  on
the  chronic  form  of  the  disease,  I  refer  to  Dr.  A  rmstrong's  Treatise  on  Scarlet  Fever,
p.  193  ;  to  Dr.  Abercrombie's  Essay  on  the  Pathology  of  Consumptive  Diseases,  Edin.
Journ.  vol.  xvii.  p.  29;  and  to  Dr.  Hastings's  paper  on  Empyema  already  noticed.
I  would  also  refer  the  reader  to  the  excellent  articles  on  pleurisy  in  the  Diet,  de  Sciene.
Med.  t.  xliii.  p.  185,  by  Pinel  and  Bricheteau  ;  the  Diet,  de  Med.  t.  xvii.  p.  127,  by
Chomel  ;  and  The  Cyclopcedia  of  Practical  Medicine,  by  Dr.  Law.  Of  these  the  essays
by  M.  Chomel  and  Dr.  Law  may  be  recommended  to  the  student  as  admirable  epi-
tomes of  all  that  is  known  respecting  the  pathology  of  this  disease. — Transl.

t  In  females,  near  the  period  of  the  catanienia,  tho  blood  has  been  by  preference,
and  properly,  taken  from  tho  foot. — Author.

F  F  2


430


TREATMENT OF  PLEURISY.


cautery.  I  am  acquainted  with  recent  (and  even  fatal)  examples
of  this  accident,  which  has  occurred  in  different  hospitals, — and
which  might  have  been  safely  left  to  nature.*  During  the  first
days  of  the  disease,  the  patient  (unless  an  infant)  ought  to  receive
no  food;  but  should  be  allowed  some  liquid  aliment,  at  least,
after  three  or  four  days.  This  indulgence  is  the  surest  way  of
escaping  those  interminable  convalescences,  occasioned  by  the
passage  of  the  pleurisy  into  the  chronic  state.  Sydenham^  prac-
tice of  getting  the  patient  out  of  bed,  if  he  can  bear  the  fatigue,
and  of  keeping  him  up  several  hours  every  day,  is  very  proper ;
and  has  frequently  appeared  to  me  to  contribute  powerfully  to-
wards subduing  the  inflammation. — I  shall  say  nothing  in  this
place  of  the  various  topical  applications,  hot  or  tepid,  dry  or
moist,  which  were  formerly  cried  up  as  remedies  in  pleurisy.
These  rarely  afford  any  relief;  and  the  humid  applications,  in
particular,  are  frequently  more  injurious  than  useful,  from  their
becoming  cold.  When  the  stitch  does  not  yield  speedily  to  the
general  and  local  bleedings,  some  practitioners  are  in  the  habit  of
applying  a  blister  over  the  affected  part,  and  sometimes  of  keeping
up  the  discharge  from  it.  I  have  sometimes  thought  that  the
use  of  this  remedy,  in  a  very  early  stage  of  the  disease,  was  im-
mediately followed  by  an  increase  of  the  pleuritic  effusion ;  and
I  cannot  consider  the  practice  as  advisable,  until  after  the  com-
plete cessation  of  the  pain  for  several  days,  and  unless  the  pro-
gress of  the  absorption  is  slow,  and  the  disease  threatens  to  be-
come chronic. — Tartar  emetic  in  large  doses,  is  commonly  very
well  borne  by  patients  affected  with  pleurisy,  and  I  am  in  the
habitual  employment  of  it  in  this  disease  as  well  as  in  pneumonia.
It  contributes  powerfully,  in  most  cases  speedily,  to  subdue  the
inflammatory  action,  and  does  away  with  the  necessity  of  ab-
stracting so  large  a  quantity  of  blood.  However,  when  the
violence  of  the  fever  and  the  stitch  have  ceased,  it  loses  almost
all  its  power  over  the  disease  ;  or,  at  least,  it  retains  a  little  of
its  admirable  efficacy,  even  although  the  system  bears  its  employ-
ment very  well.  I  have  often  continued  its  administration  in  a
dose  of  nine  grains  [per  diem]  for  several  successive  weeks,
without  its  having  any  apparent  effect  in  accelerating  the  absorp-
tion, and  indeed  without  any  effect  whatever  on  the  system.
For  these  reasons  I  now  restrict  its  employment  to  the  acute
stage.  The  practice  of  giving  antimonials  in  pleurisy  has  been
much  in  use.  Stoll  and  his  disciples  were  in  the  almost  constant
habit  of  giving  the  tartar  emetic  in  the  commencement  of  the  dis-

*  The  danger  of  bleeding  from  leech-bites,  in  adults,  at  least,  is  here  much  exag-
gerated. One  of  the  many  practical  advantages  of  accurate  diagnosis  in  pleurisy  and
pneumonia,  is  the  much  greater  benelit  derived  from  local  bleeding  in  the  former,
than  in  the  latter  disease.  1  believe  we  are  accustomed  in  this  country  to  trust  toi>
much  to  general  and  too  little  to  local  bleeding  in  this  disease  :  botli  combined  in
moderation  are  greatly  preferable  to  either  in  excess. — Transl.


'ill  LATMENT OK  i'l.KUUISY


437


case,  to  produce  vomiting-;  and  a  vast  number  of  practitioners
have  com  mended  the  use  of  kermes  in  frequently  repeated  doses.*
To  the  means  above  mentioned  we  must  add  calomel  and
opium,  so  strongly  recommended  by  Dr.  Robert  Hamilton,  to
whom  we  owe  the  employment  of  the  same  remedies  in  hepatitis,
peritonitis,  and,  indeed,  in  most  inflammatory  diseases.  I  have
myself  hardly  any  experience  of  this  practice  in  pleurisy  ;  as  I
generally  give  the  preference  to  mercurial  inunction  carried  to  a
considerable  extent.  There  exists  no  doubt  in  my  mind,  that
mercury  aids  the  resolution  of  inflammatory  diseases,  even  such
as  are  chronic;  and  I  have  proved  their  utility  in  promoting
absorption  subsequent  to  pleurisy. 1"

The  means  now  enumerated,  suffice,  in  most  cases,  to  subdue
the  inflammatory  action  and  fever,  and  even  to  establish  perfect
convalescence. But  it  must  be  admitted,  that,  in  this  as  in  most
acute  diseases,  the  unaided  resources  of  nature  are  very  great :
and  that  the  greater  number  of  pleurisies,  if  left  entirely  to  them-
selves, would  do  well. This  much  is  certain,  that  a  cure  fre-
quently takes  place,  when  the  treatment  amounts  to  almost
nothing,  or  even  when  it  is  conducted  on  principles  opposed  both
by  reason  and  experience. It  is  even  now  by  no  means  un-
common, particularly  in  country  places,  to  meet  with  persons
who  attempt  the  cure  of  pleurisy  according  to  the  sudorific  plan
of  Paracelsus  and  Vanhelmont,  that  is,  with  hot  wine  or  brandy
and  aromatics,  such  as  pepper,  ginger,  cinnamon,  and  juniper  or
woriander  berries;  the  dung  of  horses  or  sheep  infused  in  wine,
&c. And  yet  all  the  patients  of  these  sages  do  not  die ;  a  salu-
tary crisis  occasionally  triumphs  over  both  the  disease  and  the
treatment. The  most  common  kinds  of  crisis  in  pleurisy,  are
those  by  urine,  sweat,  or  haemorrhage :  diarrhoea  is  also  fre-
quently critical;  a  crisis  by  expectoration  is  more  rare,  and  only
occurs  in  the  case  of  pleuro-pneumonia. In  some  instances,  an
erysipelas,  a  miliary  or  some  other  cutaneous  eruption,  and  even
jaundice,  has  proved  critical;  and  the  same  thing  has  sometimes
been  observed  of  salivation  and  inflammation  of  the  parotids.
As  a  general  rule  in  pleurisy,  pneumonia,  and  other  cases  of  pure
inflammation,  it  may  be  stated,  that  we  ought  neither  to  dis-
regard (much  less  disturb  by  too  active  treatment)  an  incipient
crisis,  nor  yet  lose  precious  time  in  waiting  for  it.

*  Tartar  emetic  in  large  doses  is  a  bad  remedy  in  pleurisy  :  its  benefit  is  very
equivocal,  and  it  sometimes  gives  rise  to  serious  metastases.  "  In  one  case,  in  the
Clime  of  La  Charite,  1  witnessed  this  transference  of  inflammation  to  the  pericardium
and  arachnoid.  If  we  make  use  of  antimonial  medicines  in  this  case,  we  ought  to
confine  ourselves  to  the  white  oxyd,  as  was  done  by  the  ancient  physicians  of  La
Charite,  as  in  the  famous  potion  in  pteuritide. — (M.  L.)

My  own  experience  leads  me  to  join  in  the  condemnation  of  tartar  emetic  in
large  doses,  in  pure  pleurisy :  nothing  can  be  more  striking  than  the  difference  of
effect  of  this  potent  remedy  in  this  disease  and  in  pneumonia  ;  and  nothing  can  place
in  a  stronger  light  the  importance  of  the  means  which  tend  to  discriminate  the  two
diseases  in  practice.— •  Transl.

f  See  note,  page  2'29. —  Transl.


4,38


TREATMENT  OF  PLEURISY.


When  the  fever  and  pain  have  ceased,  the  disease  then  enters
the  chronic  stage,  or  that  of  absorption,  which  is  seldom  of  less
than  a  month's  duration,  and  may  sometimes  extend  to  two  years,
as  formerly  mentioned.  It  is  at  the  beginning  of  this  period
that  blisters  to  the  affected  side  may  be  employed  with  advantage;
later  in  the  disease  a  seton  is  preferable.  We  must  at  the  same
time  assist  the  absorption  of  the  fluid  by  purgatives  and  diuretics.
Acute  pleurisy  become  chronic  has  a  great  analogy  with  dropsy ;
and  indeed  it  was  only  by  confounding  these  two  diseases  together,
that  hydrothorax  was  considered  so  common  an  affection  by
several  physicians  of  the  last  century.  To  be  useful,  purgatives
ought  to  be  pretty  frequently  repeated.  They  are  particularly
indicated,  subsequently  to  blood-letting,  when  the  abundance  of
the  effusion,  or  the  rapidity  of  its  formation  and  the  general
symptoms,  give  reason  to  presume  that  the  pleurisy  is  haemor-
rhagic.  It  was  justly  remarked  by  Sydenham,  that  purgatives
afford  the  best  means  of  checking  haemorrhage,  after  the  vessels
have  been  emptied  by  blood-letting.  Diuretics  seem  to  have  no
evident  effect  upon  the  absorption  unless  they  are  given  in  larger
doses  than  is  customary.  I  am  in  the  habit  of  carrying  the
acetate  of  potass  to  the  extent  of  six  drachms,  or  even  to  two
ounces,  in  the  day.  In  like  manner,  I  gradually  increase  the
dose  of  nitre  from  forty  grains  to  three  or  four  drachms,  if  the
patient  bears  it  well :  and  with  this  latter  salt  I  sometimes  com-
bine sal  ammoniac,  according  to  the  method  of  Triller.  I  have
sometimes  also  given,  with  advantage,  the  extract  of  squills,  as
recommended  by  Quarin,  viz.  in  a  minimum  dose  of  two  grains
every  three  hours.  If  the  effusion  has  been  of  long  standing,  and
there  is  no  hectic  fever  present,  it  is  often  of  use  to  combine
bitters  with  our  diuretics,  and  to  administer  them  in  white  wine,
as  in  the  formula  known  by  the  name  of  the  hitler  and  diuretic
wine  of  La  Charite.*  Immediately  after  the  acute  stage,  I
prefer  the  watery  infusion  of  digitalis,  beginning  with  the  dose
of  eighteen  grains,  (to  the  pint  of  water,)  and  gradually  aug-
menting it  to  half  a  drachm  or  more,  if  the  patient  bears  it  well.
I  have  occasionally  used  with  benefit  urea,  in  doses  of  twelve
grains  daily,  gradually  increased  to  a  drachm  and  more.  In  res-
pect of  diuretics  generally,  it  may  be  said  that  the  mode  of  evacu-
ation by  them  is,  next  to  that  by  sweat,  the  least  under  the  com-
mand of  medicine.  Sometimes,  however,  they  are  wonderfully
successful.  Two  years  since,  I  had  occasion  to  see,  in  consul-
tation with  MM.  Cayol  and  Marjolin,  a  child,  who  had  laboured
under  pleurisy  for  several  weeks,  and  in  whom  the  effusion  was

*  According  to  the  formulary  of  Rntier  (p.  334)  this  is  made  by  the  infusion  of
the  following  articles  in  two  pounds  of  wine  for  twenty-four  hours,  viz.  Winter's  bark,
cinchona,  cinnamon,  of  each  an  ounce ;  augelica,  squills,  juniper  berries,  mace,  of
each  two  ounces;  leaves  of  wormwood  and  halm,  of  each  two  handfuls.  The  dose  is
•aid  to  be  from  one  to  four  ounces  daily.—  TrrtmL


TREATMENT OV  PLEUltlSY.


439


so  copious  as  to  impress  us,  at  first,  unanimously,  with  the  neces-
sity of  the  operation  of  empyema.  I  however  proposed  to  make
trial  of  nitre  in  large  doses;  and  was  gratified  to  find,  at  the  end
of  twenty-four  hours,  that  the  oppression  was  perceptibly  less,
under  a  copious  flow  of  urine  which  had  been  excited  :  during
the  following  days,  the  dilatation  of  the  affected  side  rapidly
diminished,  and  the  patient  eventually  recovered  without  any
operation.

The  treatment  of  pleurisy  which  is  chronic  from  the  begin-
ning, *  does  not  differ  materially  from  the  acute  disease  become
chronic  ;  and  indeed  we  must  be  contented  with  the  same  means,
although  the  affections  are  of  very  different  severity.  Sometimes
in  the  beginning  of  this  species,  we  may  take  away  blood  with
benefit,  if  pain  is  occasionally  present,  and  if  the  fever  is  con-
siderable, though  of  the  hectic  character.  But  we  must  be  on
our  guard  not  to  pass  the  just  limits;  and  weaken  unnecessarily
a  constitution  already  too  much  enfeebled.  Small  local  bleedings
are  in  general  sufficient;  and  it  is  better  to  repeat  these  occa-
sionally than  to  make  them  too  copious.  Blisters,  caustic  issues,
and  particularly  setons,  on  the  affected  side,  are  still  more  indi-
cated in  this  variety  than  in  that  which  had  been  originally  acute :
and  it  is  also  in  this  case,  more  especially,  that  we  must  combine
tonics  with  our  diuretics,  particularly  bitters  and  those  denomi-
nated anti-scorbutics.

Of  Empyema  and  the  operation  of  Empyema. — The  name  of
empyema  was  originally  applied  by  the  ancients  to  every  collec-
tion of  purulent  matter ;  it  was  subsequently  confined  to  effusions
into  the  pleura  and  abscesses  of  the  lungs ;  and  is  now  applied
by  modern  surgeons  to  effusions  into  the  pleura  only :  hence  the
names  of  empyema  of  pus,  of  blood,  of  water  and  air,  are  often
used  as  synonymes  of  pleurisy,  hemothorax,  hydrothorax,  and
pneumothorax.  With  the  exception  of  that  last  named,  these
diseases  give  rise  to  symptoms  very  much  alike.  The  signs  by
which  we  are  guided  in  determining  upon  the  operation  of  em-
pyema, are  chiefly  these  : — the  dilatation  of  the  affected  side ;
oedema  of  the  same  side,  and  arm,  or  the  proportionally  greater
(Edema  of  these  parts  when  the  affection  is  general ;  depression  of
the  liver;  displacement  of  the  heart  towards  the  side  free  from
fluid.  We  have  already  shown  that  all  these  signs  (which  on  ex-
amination will  be  found  referrible  to  one  cause,  viz.  dilatation  of
the  affected  side)  may  be  wanting ;  and  it  even  frequently  hap-
pens that  at  the  very  time  when  an  operation  is  proper,  the  affected
side,  although  full  of  pus,  is  smaller  than  the  opposite  one,  in
consequence  of  the  absorption  which  has  already  taken  place,
and  the  contraction  consequent  to  this. But  in  all  cases  of  this

*  I  inak'i  use  of  thi3  expression  for  want  of  a  better,  although  1  am  well  aware  of
ftfl  incorrectness. — Author.


440


TREATMENT OF  PLEUIUSY.


kind,  the  results  of  percussion  and  auscultation  leave  no  doubt
respecting  the  existence  of  the  effusion.

There  are  two  cases  of  pleurisy  in  which  the  operation  of
empyema  ought  to  be  performed.  The  first  is  when,  in  an
acute  pleurisy,  the  effusion  is  ver^  copious  from  the  begin-
ning, and  increases  so  rapidly  as  to  give  rise,  after  a  few  days,
to  a  general  or  local  anasarca,  and  to  threaten  suffocation.
This  is  the  case  which  I  shall  designate  acute  empyema.*
The  second  case  is  that  which  I  term  chronic  empyema,  and  is
either  the  consequence  of  a  pleurisy  essentially  and  originally
chronic,  or  of  the  acute  disease  degenerated  to  this  state.  In
such  circumstances,  when  oedema  of  the  affected  side  has  come
on,  when  the  long  continuance  of  the  disease,  the  progressive
emaciation  and  debility  of  the  patient,  and  the  failure  of  every
measure  employed  to  produce  absorption,  leave  us  nothing  to
expect  from  other  means,  we  are  justified  in  having  recourse  to
the  operation.  This  operation,  however,  is  rarely  followed  by
success,  owing  to  various  causes,  all  of  which  are  not  equally
well  understood.  1.  The  first  of  these,  is  the  bad  condition  of
the  lung  itself,  this  being  frequently  tuberculous.  This  is  no
doubt  a  very  serious  evil ;  but  it  ought  not  to  be  considered  as
amounting  to  an  absolute  prohibition  of  the  operation  ;  even  in
the  case  where  pectoriloquy  is  discovered  in  the  upper  lobe  of
the  compressed  lung,  provided  the  other  be  sound:  what  was
formerly  stated  respecting  the  possibility  of  curing  phthisis,  and
some  facts  to  be  noticed  hereafter,  suffice  to  prove,  that  we  must
not  abandon  all  hope  of  cure  even  when  there  exists  so  serious  a
complication  as  this.  2.  The  irritation  produced  on  the  surface
of  the  pleura,  by  the  admission  of  air  into  the  chest,  has  parti-
cularly engaged  the  attention  of  surgeons,  who  have  chiefly  re-
ferred to  this  cause  the  great  and  offensive  discharge  which  too
often  succeeds  the  operation,  and  carries  off  the  patient.  There
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  admission  of  air  into  the  chest  affects
the  action  of  the  organs  contained  in  it ;  but,  in  the  present  case,
its  immediate  impression  is  not  on  the  pleura.  In  the  case  of
acute  pleurisy,  or  such  as  was  so  originally,  the  pleura  is  invested
with  a  false  membrane ;  while  in  the  chronic  variety,  there  is  at
least  a  layer  of  thick  pultaceous  pus  between  it  and  the  air.
But  even  in  the  event  of  actual  contact,  the  air  could  only  at
most  give  rise  to  a  more  acute  state  of  inflammation,  which
would  not  in  itself  prevent  the  cure.  On  the  contrary,  the  false
membranes  thereby  produced,  being  susceptible  of  transformation
into  serous  tissue,  might  unite  the  pleura  pulmonalis  and  costalis

*  For  a  strongly  marked  case  of  this  kind,  and  one  in  which  1  have  never  ceased
to  regret  tho  non-performance  of  paracentesis,  I  refer  the  reader  to  Case  XXV.  in
*'  Original  Cases,"  &c.  p.  215.  I  have  denominated  this  disease  Idiopathic  Bjfdro-
thorax,  but  it  will  be  seen  from  the  Remarks,  appended,  that  I  considered  it  at  the
time  to  be  the  cBse  described  in  the  text. — T rami.


TREATMENT  OF  PLEURISY.


441


together,  and  thereby  tend  to  facilitate  the  recovery.  3.  But
khe  cause  which,  in  my  opinion,  affords  the  greatest  obstacle  to
the  success  of  the  operation,  is  the  compression  of  the  lung
against  the  spine  and  mediastinum,  and  the  nature  of  the  invest-
ing false  membrane.  The  viscus,  from  long  compression,  has
lost  its  elasticity  and  expansibility ;  it  is  penetrated  with  diffi-
culty by  the  inspired  air,  and  only  recovers  very  slowly  the  di-
mensions which  it  had  before  the  disease.  It  never,  indeed,  re-
turns to  its  original  size.  (See  the  section  On  Contraction  of
the  Chest.)  If  the  investing  false  membrane  is  of  the  kind  which
has  a  tendency  to  be  converted  into  fibrous  tissue,  as  happens  in
the  case  of  haemorrhagic  pleurisy,  the  dilatation  of  the  chest  be-
comes more  difficult  still ;  as  it  cannot  take  place  unless  this  very
strong  membrane  relaxes  and  gives  way,  which  can  only  be  a
work  of  time.  Meanwhile  the  atmospheric  air  continually  irri-
tates the  exhalent  surface  of  this  partially  organized  membrane,
and  excites  a  purulent  discharge  so  copious  as  to  exhaust  the
patient's  strength,  while  it  is  productive  of  no  local  benefit,  the
parts  being  still  too  far  apart  to  be  agglutinated.  For  this  rea-
son, the  acute  empyema  affords  more  chance  of  success  than  the
chronic ;  and  the  variety  of  the  latter,  which  is  chronic  from  the
beginning,  affords  a  better  prospect  than  the  acute  degenerated
to  this  state,  although  the  condition  of  the  fluid  in  the  former
seems  more  unfavourable.

The  mode  of  operation  commonly  employed  at  present  does
not  seem  susceptible  of  much  improvement.  I  presume  no  one
will  ever  think  of  reviving  the  perforation  of  the  rib  employed
by  the  followers  of  Hippocrates,  since  it  has  many  disadvantages
peculiar  to  itself,  and  no  advantage  over  the  common  methods.
Puncture  of  an  intercostal  space  by  means  of  a  trocar  has  been
repeatedly  had  recourse  to.  It  was  employed  by  Morand,  among
others,  without  success.  M.  Recamier  has  several  times  per-
formed this  operation,  using  a  very  small  trocar ;  and  I  have
myself  repeatedly  done  so,  but  without  ever  having  obtained  any
permanent  benefit  from  it.  This  operation,  however,  is  not  at-
tended by  any  inconvenience,  and  gives  always  temporary  relief,
— but  only  temporary.  As  soon  as  the  instrument  is  withdrawn,
the  adaption  of  the  wound  of  the  skin  and  of  the  intercostal
muscles  is  destroyed  :  no  discharge  takes  place;  the  wound  heals
entirely  in  the  course  of  a  few  days,  and  the  chest  fills  anew.
If  this  measure  should  ever  prove  successful,  I  think  it  will  be
in  cases  of  acute  empyema,  in  which  successive  punctures  might,
perhaps,  at  once  aid  the  absorption,  and  accelerate  the  conversion
of  the  false  membranes.  There  are  two  other  cases  in  which  I
willingly  have  recourse  to  puncture:  1st.  when  the  patient  is  so
debilitated,  as  to  occasion  apprehension  lest  the  complete  dis-
charge of  the  fluid  might  occasion  a  dangerous  syncope;  2nd.
as  a  means  of  relief  in  cases  which  are  incurable,  on  account  of


Tit  15 ATM E NT  OF  1'LEUIUSV.


the  co-existence  of  numerous  tuberculous  excavations.  When
there  exists  considerable  oedema  of  the  side,  it  is  sometimes  im-
possible to  perform  this  operation  from  the  inability  of  the  sur-
geon to  distinguish  the  intercostal  spaces.

The  place  of  election,  commonly  adopted  by  surgeons,  for  this
operation,  is  the  most  dependent  point  in  the  anterior  and  lateral
parts  of  the  chest. This  rule,  however,  cannot  hold  good  con-
stantly, since  the  most  dependent  point  varies  with  the  position
of  the  patient. The  natural  posture  of  a  patient  affected  with
empyema  is  to  lie  on  the  diseased  side ;  and  in  this  case  the  most
depending  point  is  the  space  between  the  fifth  and  six  ribs.  Many
other  reasons  point  out  this  spot  as  being  the  best  suited  for  the
operation. For  instance,  we  know  that  the  upper  lobe  adheres
to  the  ribs  more  frequently  than  any  other  part  of  the  lungs,  and
that  the  lower  lobe  is  frequently  attached  to  the  diaphragm.
On  the  right  side,  we  know  that  an  enlarged  liver  frequently
reaches  as  high  as  the  sixth  or  even  the  fifth  rib  ;  and  that,  on
both  sides,  the  thickest  false  membranes,  and  consequently  adhe-
sions, exist  at  the  junction  of  the  diaphragm  with  the  walls  of
the  chest. Finally,  we  know  that  the  greatest  portion  of  the
effused  fluid  is  collected  about  the  middle  of  the  side. The  in-
tercostal space  mentioned  ought,  therefore,  to  be  preferred,  and
the  best  point  is  a  little  anterior  to  the  digitations  of  the  serratus
major. Should  there  chance  to  be  any  old  adhesions  in  this
point,  we  shall  readily  and  certainly  discover  them  by  means  of
some  remains  of  respiration  over  their  site. If,  then,  we  are  as-
sured, by  repeated  examination,  that  the  sound  on  percussion  is
dull  over  this  point  (or  indeed  over  any  other)  and  that  the  sound
of  respiration  is  wanting,  we  may  safely  make  an  incision,  and
with  less  caution  and  slowness  than  are  commonly  used. I  for-
merly showed  that  the  fear  of  wounding  an  adherent  and  com-
pressed lung  has  been  exaggerated. I  am  well  assured  that  this
operation  will  become  more  common,  and  more  frequently  useful,
in  proportion  as  the  employment  of  auscultation  is  extended.
This  method  of  exploration,  either  singly  or  conjoined  with  per-
cussion (and  sometimes  with  succession),  enabling  us  to  recognize
effusions  at  their  origin,  we  have  it  thereby  in  our  power  to
operate  early  and  consequently  with  greater  chance  of  success.
Hitherto,  in  fact,  the  simple  empyema  and  idiopathic  hydrothorax
have  never  been  distinguished  until  the  disease  was  of  long  stand-
ing and  of  great  extent  ;  and,  indeed,  even  in  this  period  of  their
progress,  these  affections  have  frequently  escaped  the  notice  of
the  best  informed  physicians  and  surgeons:  how  much  more
likely,  then,  are  the  slighter  cases  which  offer  most  chance  of
success,  to  be  overlooked  ? I  do  not  think  I  go  too  far,  when  I
assert  that,  in  the  state  in  which  the  science  was  left  by  Aven-
brugger  and  Corvisart,  empyema  was  not  recognized  until  after
the  effusion  had  become  very  great,  or  unless  it  had  been  pre-


PLEUUO-PNEUMON1A.


443


ceded  by  the  symptoms  of  manifest  pleurisy.  It  has  lately  oc-
curred to  me,  from  witnessing  the  effect  of  the  piston  cupping-
glass,  that  the  employment  of  this  instrument  might  perhaps
enable  us  to  overcome  the  chief  obstacle  to  the  success  of  the
operation,  viz.  the  difficulty  of  procuring  the  expansion  of  the
compressed  lung.  Accordingly,  I  have  it  in  contemplation,  at
the  first  opportunity  that  offers  for  performing  the  operation  of
empyema,  to  apply  the  exhausting  glass  over  the  wound,  imme-
diately after  the  discharge  of  the  liquid,  and  to  produce  a
vacuum  in  the  chest,  more  or  less  quickly,  continuously,  and
completely,  according  to  the  effects ;  taking  care  to  defend  the
skin  from  the  pressure  of  the  glass  by  interposing  a  piece  of
leather,  and  by  using  in  succession  glasses  of  different  diameters.*


Skct.  X. — Of  Pleuro-pneumonia.

Pleurisy  is  frequently  conjoined  with  pneumonia ;  and  it  is  no
doubt  from  this  circumstance,  that  these  diseases  have  been  so
long  confounded.  However,  even  in  the  cases  in  which  they
are  conjoined,  it  frequently  happens  that  one  of  the  affections  is
so  much  more  violent  than  the  other,  as  to  render  the  latter  a
complication  of  hardly  any  consequence.  On  this  account,  we
can  distinguish  in  practice  three  different  varieties  of  pleuro-
pneumonia, which  present  real  differences  in  their  progress,  and
in  the  mode  of  treatment  best  suited  to  them.  These  are —
1.  pneumonia  complicated  with  slight  pleurisy ;  2.  pleurisy  com-
plicated with  a  slight  pneumonia;  and  3.  pleuro-pneumonia,
properly  so  called,  in  which  both  affections  exist  in  a  nearly
equal  degree.

1.  Pneumonia  complicated  with  sliyht  pleurisy. — There  are
few  examples  of  simple  pneumonia,  if  by  this  term  we  understand
such  only  as  are  unaccompanied  by  false  membranes  on  any  part
of  the  pleura  pulmonalis  or  costalis,  or  by  serous  effusion  even

*  For  a  minute  and  most  elaborate  history  of  the  operation  of  empyema,  from  the
earliest  times,  I  refer  the  reader  to  Sprengel's  History  of  Medicine,  vol.  ix.  p.  1  ;
and  for  a  very  complete  and  scientific  view  of  the  whole  subject,  in  the  actual  state
of  our  knowledge,  I  refer  him  to  the  article  Empyema  in  the  Cyclopedia  of  Pract.  Med.
written  by  Dr.  Townsend,  a  most  able  physician  and  practical  auscultator.  The
subject  is  treated  of  by  all  our  best  surgical  writers ;  and  I  would  particularly  refer
the  student  to  the  following  works:  Sharp's  Critical  Enquiry;  Warner's  Cases  in
Surgery;  Kirkland's  Medical  Surgery:  White's  Surgery;  Hey 's  Practical  Obser-
vations; Pearson's  Principles  of  Surgery;  C.  Bell's  Operative  Surgery;  to  many
cases  in  the  various  Medical  Journals,  and  particularly  to  the  papers  of  Dr.  Hastings
and  Mr.  Jowett  referred  to  in  a  former  note.  The  last  named  writer  proposes
to  revive,  on  an  improved  plan,  the  method  of  removing  the  fluid  by  means  of  a
syringe,  as  formerly  recommended  by  Scultetus  and  Anel ;  (See  Jourdan's  translation
pf  Sprengel,  t.  ix.  p.  23.  35  ;)  a  proposition  that  seems  to  hold  out  many  advantages,
in  certain  cases.  This  plan,  if  successfully  put  in  execution,  will  do  away  with  the
necessity  of  the  more  problematical  suggestion  in  the  text,  of  attempting  to  elevate
the  compressed  lung  by  means  of  an  air-pump. — Transl.


444


PLEU  RO-PNEUMONIA.


in  small  quantity.  In  almost  every  case  of  pneumonia,  when  the
inflammation  reaches  the  surface  of  the  lungs  in  any  point,  the
contiguous  portion  of  the  pleura  inflames  and  becomes  invested
with  an  albuminous  false  membrane.  This  membrane  is  usually
thin,  and  is  frequently  confined  exactly  to  that  portion  of  the
pleura  pulmonalis  which  corresponds  with  the  hepatized  space
that  has  reached  the  surface.  In  this  case  the  inflammation  seems
to  have  a  greater  tendency  to  propagate  itself  by  contiguity  than
by  continuity;  since  we  frequently  find  a  false  membrane  of  the
same  kind  on  the  corresponding  portion  of  the  costal  pleura.
If  the  hepatization  occupies  only  a  part  of  the  lung,  it  is  ac-
companied by  a  slight  sero-purulent  effusion ;  but  if  nearly  the
whole  lung  is  so  affected,  then  there  is  no  effusion  whatever;
only  we  observe  on  its  surface  a  very  thin  and  imperfect  false
membrane,  thicker  along  the  edges  and  in  the  interlobular  fis-
sures, and  also  in  some  other  points,  where  the  inflammation  had
first  reached  the  surface.  This  is  the  most  common  variety  of
what  is  called  dry  pleurisy ;  but  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  in
cases  of  this  kind,  the  pleurisy  is  evidently  a  mere  accidental
consequence,  of  little  importance  in  itself,  and  scarcely  at  all
modifying  the  severity  or  the  progress  of  the  pneumonia.  In
this  particular  state  of  the  disease,  it  would  be  extremely  diffi-
cult to  distinguish  the  pneumonia  from  a  pleurisy  with  copious
effusion,  if  we  had  not  seen  the  patient  before  this  period :  we
should  have  here  as  complete  an  absence  of  the  thoracic  reso-
nance as  if  the  whole  surface  of  the  lung  were  covered  by  a
pleuritic  effusion,  while  the  stitch,  which  is  by  no  means  uncom-
mon at  the  time  when  the  inflammation  reaches  the  surface  of
the  lung,  would  further  lead  us  to  suspect  an  affection  of  the
pleura.  However,  even  in  these  circumstances,  it  is  still  in  our
power  to  obtain  a  more  accurate  diagnosis.  When  the  lung  is
completely  hepatized,  without  any  accompanying  effusion,  there
exists  always  a  strongly  marked  bronchophony,  almost  like  pec-
toriloquy, in  different  points,  and  particularly  towards  the  sum-
mit and  roots  of  the  lungs, — a  thing  which  never  exists  in  the
same  degree,  or  over  the  same  extent,  in  pleurisy  or  pleuro-
pneumonia. If  we  have  had  opportunities  of  seeing  the  patient
from  the  origin  of  the  disease,  the  diagnosis  will  be  much  more
easy;  or,  rather,  any  mistake  will  be  impossible.  In  the  case
of  pneumonia,  the  existence  of  the  crepitous  rhonchus  previously
to  the  complete  disappearance  of  the  respiratory  murmur,  and
the  gradual  diminution  of  the  sound  on  percussion,  will  leave  no
doubt  of  the  nature  of  the  affection :  in  pleurisy,  the  loss  of  re-
sonance is  sudden  or  almost  without  gradation,  and  exists  at
once  over  the  whole  of  the  affected  side,  at  least  in  cases  in  which
the  lungs  had  been  previously  healthy  and  without  adhesions.
Moreover,  in  the  case  of  pleurisy,  tegophony  is  always  percep-
tible, at  least  for  one  or  two  days.


I'l.K  I'  RO-l'N'Kl'MON'IA.


1  V>


2.  Pleurisy  complicated  with  slight  pneumonia. — In  tHe  ease
of  a  severe  pleurisy,  attended  by  an  effusion  sufficiently  abundant
and  rapid  suddenly  to  compress  the  lung  upon  its  roots,  it  is  by
no  means  uncommon  for  an  inflammation  of  some  points  of  the
pulmonary  substance  to  arise  at  the  same  time,  particularly  in
the  lower  lobe. These  points  of  inflammation  frequently  remain
distinct,  and  consequently  of  small  extent;  and  constitute  one  of
the  varieties  of  the  affection  which  has  been  termed  lobular  pneu-
monia by  some  recent  observers. The  pulmonary  inflammation
is  here  very  remarkably  modified  by  the  pleuritic  effusion.  The
compression  produced  by  this,  clearly  moderates  the  inflammatory
action  ;  and  it  is  no  doubt  owing  to  this  cause  that  in  the  present
case  more  than  any  other,  the  phlogosis  remains  confined  to
some  particular  lobules. It  also  very  rarely  reaches  the  suppu-
rative stage;  its  resolution  is  much  slower;  and  its  anatomical
characters  are  quite  peculiar, The  hepatized  parts  are  here  in
the  first  instance  much  more  flabby,  and  less  solid  than  in  simple
pneumonia;  and  become  converted  into  a  substance  completely
resembling,  both  in  appearance  and  consistence,  muscular  flesh,
which  has  been  beaten  to  make  it  tender. In  this  state  it  has  of
course  lost  the  granulated  surface  characteristic  of  hepatization  ;
it  is  completely  flabby,  and  is  of  a  red  or  violet  colour,  sometimes
with  a  tint  of  greyish. This  is  the  lesion  to  which  I  give  the
name  of  carnification,  a  term  which  has  sometimes  been  very
improperly  applied  to  common  hepatization. I  have  constantly
met  with  it  in  the  case  in  question,  and  never  in  any  other.  I
am,  however,  disposed  to  believe,  that  the  imperfect  resolution
of  the  haemoptysical  infarction,  when  complicated  with  pleuritic
effusion,  sometimes  produces  the  same  effect. Pulmonary  sub-
stance thus  carnified,  presents  a  homogeneous  texture,  is  supple
and  compact,  and  retains  no  trace  of  air-cells:  it,  however,  still
exhibits  the  ramification  of  the  bronchial  tubes  and  vessels.  It
is  as  dry  as  muscle,  and  does  not  contain  a  particle  of  air.  The
resolution  of  the  inflamed  lung  is  much  slower  under  the  in-
fluence of  the  pleuritic  effusion  than  in  other  circumstances ;  as
I  have  sometimes  found  the  state  of  carnification  very  strongly
marked,  after  all  symptoms  of  pneumonia  had  disappeared  for
more  than  two  months.  In  proportion,  however,  as  the  resolution
is  near  its  completion,  the  carnified  spot  becomes  first  paler,  then
violet-pale,  and  finally  flaxen-grey ;  while  the  original  vesicular
texture  of  the  healthy  viscus  is  simultaneously  developed.  I
have  very  rarely  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  the  traces  of
resolution  when  the  inflammation  had  reached  the  stage  of  puru-
lent infiltration,  under  the  influence  of  a  pleuritic  effusion.
However,  in  some  instances  of  pleuro-pneumonia,  and  in  subjects
who  had  died  of  some  concomitant  affection,  one,  two,  or  even
three  weeks  after  the  complete  cessation  of  every  inflammatory
symptom,  and,  indeed,  of  every  sign  of  pleurisy  except  such  as


t


446  PLETJH0-PNF.UMON]  A.

depend  immediately  on  the  presence  of  a  fluid  in  the  pleura,—
I  have  found  the  affected  portions  of  the  lung  flabby,  dry,  and
yellowish,  with  the  vesicular  structure  discoverable  in  some
points,  but  the  vesicles  apparently  filled  with  a  half-concrete
pus.

When  a  pneumonia,  even  slight,  supervenes  to  a  pleurisy  with
copious  effusion,  it  is  almost  always  recognized  by  means  of  the
crepitous  rhonchus,  which  is  usually  observed  towards  the  roots
of  the  lungs,  under  the  scapula,  in  the  axilla  or  a  little  beneath
the  clavicles,  that  is,  in  the  parts  of  the  lungs  which  are  with
most  difficulty  compressed  by  the  effusion. — It  is,  moreover,  to
be  remarked  in  this  place,  that  the  complication  just  described
can  only  take  place  at  the  onset  of  the  disease,  and  when  the
effusion  is  still  small  in  quantity ;  since  we  know  that  a  lung
thoroughly  compressed  is  no  longer  susceptible  of  inflammation.
And  this  case  is  analogous  to  others  met  with  in  practice.  When
a  violent  inflammation  is  produced  by  a  sprain,  or  luxation,  or
burn,  the  application  of  a  compressing  bandage  is  a  sure  means
of  moderating,  in  a  great  degree,  the  intensity  and  extent  of  the
inflammation ;  and  the  same  result  has  been  frequently  obtained
in  erysipelas.

3.  Pleui'o-pneumonia,  properly  so  called. — The  conjunction
of  an  inflammation  of  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the  pleura  with
pretty  copious  effusion,  and  a  severe  pneumonia,  is  a  much  rarer
case  than  either  of  the  two  just  described.  Pleurisy  conjoined
with  pneumonia  does  not  increase  the  danger  of  the  latter ;  on
the  contrary,  it  lessens  it,  as  we  have  just  stated,  by  exerting  a
compressing  force  on  the  lung.  On  the  other  hand,  the  pneu-
monia at  first  augments  the  danger  of  the  pleurisy,  (which  is
rarely  fatal  in  the  acute  stage,)  but  it  occasions  a  more  rapid
absorption  of  the  effusion,  by  preventing  this  from  being  so
copious  as  in  simple  pleurisy,  the  inflammation  rendering  the
lung  less  compressible.  Ceteris  paribus,  then,  pleuro-pneumonia
ought  to  be  regarded  as  less  dangerous  than  either  the  simple
pleurisy  or  pneumonia;  and  I  think  this  opinion  is  supported  no
less  by  experience  than  by  reasoning.

rieuro-pneumonia  is  easily  recognized  by  the  re-union  of  the
signs  of  pleurisy  and  pneumonia.  Some  of  the  pathognomonic
signs  are  even  more  permanent  in  this,  than  in  either  of  the
simple  affections,  for  the  reason,  just  stated,  that  they  mutually
impede  and  retard  one  another's  progress.  We  thus  often  observe
the  crepitous  rhonchus  on  the  one  hand,  and  a?gophony  on  the
other,  up  to  the  period  of  convalescence.  In  cases  of  this  kind,
segophony  is  seldom  simple :  it  is  perceptible  only  at  the  roots
of  the  lungs  around  the  lower  angle  of  the  scapula ;  and,  on
account  of  the  vicinity  of  the  large  bronchial  trunks  and  the
density  of  the  pulmonary  substance,  it  is  usually  combined  with
a  marked  bronchophony. This  case  of  the  conjunction  of  these


PLEUIIO-PNKUMO'NI  A.


447


two  phenomena,  is  that  in  which  we  frequently  observe  the  com-
plete resemblance  to  the  squeaking  of  Punchinello*

The  treatment  of  pleuro-pneumonia  must  be  regulated  accord-
ing to  the  predominance  of  either  affection.  I  shall,  therefore,
content  myself  with  referring  to  what  has  been  already  said  re-
specting these  individually.-j"

*  M.  Chomel  notices  a  case  of  pleuro-pneumonia,  in  which  the  crepitous  rhonchus
was  only  perceptible  during  the  inspirations  which  succeeded  the  effort  of  coughing.
The  rhonchus  was  accompanied  by  ajgophony,  the  bronchial  respiration,  &c.  and
denoted,  according  to  M.  Chomel,  that  the  affection  of  the  pleura  corresponded
exactly  with  that  of  the  lungs.  (Diet,  de  Med.  t.  xvii.  art.  Pneumonic.)  This  con-
clusion appears  to  me  by  no  means  justifiable ;  for  ever}' one  has  had  occasion  to
notice  cases  in  which  not  merely  the  crepitous  rhonchus  but  also  the  cavernous
rhonchus  and  indeed  all  the  varieties  of  the  bronchial  rhonchus,  were  perceptible
only  during  fits  of  coughing.  All  that  is  necessary  to  produce  this  result,  is,  that
the  part  affected  lies  deep  and  at  a  distance  from  that  to  which  the  ear  or  instrument
is  applied.  Thus  we  often  observe  the  same  thing  in  lobular  pneumonia,  which  is
usually  central,  more  particularly  if  there  exists,  at  the  same  time,  a  pulmonary
catarrh.  M.  Chomel's  remark  is  not  therefore  new ;  and  indeed  it  had  been  pre-
viously made  by  Laennec ;  nay,  more,  it  might  have  been,  that  the  supposed  pleuro-
pneumonia of  M.  Chomel,  was  only  a  simple  pneumonia  which  had  reached  the  stage
of  hepatization  at  the  circumference  of  the  lungs,  but  was  less  advanced  towards
their  centre,— -from  which  condition  of  parts  would  result  the  bronchial  respiration  and
bronchophony  (taken  for  fegophony)  from  the  surface,  and  the  crepitous  rhonchus
from  the  deeper  parts, — which  last,  owing  to  its  remoteness,  would  only  be  percep-
tible during  the  fits  of  coughing  — (M.  L.)

t  LITERATURE  OF  PLEURISY.

1537.  Turinus  (A.)  De  Curatione  Pleuritidis  per  venajsectionem. Basil.  4to.

1549.  Anna  (J.  F.)  De  Pleuritide. Ferrara.  8vo.

1562.  Bulleyn  (W.)  Regiment  against  the  Pleurisie. Lond.  8vo.

1564.  Cassanus  (F.)  De  Venaesectione  in  Pleuritide. Patav.  12mo.

1622.  Moreau  (R.)  De  Missione  sanguinis  in  Pleuritide. Par.  8vo.

1634.  Benedictus  (J.  C.)  Tutelaris  columna,  qua  statuitur  pleuritidem  fieri  dum  una

pulmonis  ala  afficitur. Rom.  4to.
1641.  Moreau  (R.)  De  loco  affecto  in  Pleuritide. Par.  8vo.
1657.  Fontanus  (G.)  Apologeticon  circa  Pleuritidis  ideam,  &c. Lugd.  4to.
1664.  Diemerbroeck(J.de)  Disput.  Pract.  De  morbis  capitis  et  thoracis.  Utr.  12mo.
1672.  Banda  (A.)  Discours  contre  l'abus  de  la  Saigneedans  les  pleurisies.  Sed.  8vo.
1683.  Bellini  (L.)  De  Urinis  el  Pulsibus  .  .  .  De  morbis  capitis  et  Pectoris.  Bon.  4to.
1686.  Baronius  (V.)  De  Pleuripneumonia  Flaminiam  infestante.  Lib.ii.  Forol.  4to.
1690.  Knisel  (J.  S.)  Historia  Pleuritidis  et  abscessus  pectoris. Tub.  4to.
1692.  Campen  (C.  Von.)  Collectanea  de  pleuritide  et  apoplexia. Breda.  8vo.

1701.  Fonseca  (Rod.  A.)  Pleurologia,  de  Pleuritide  ejusque  curatione. Lisb.  4to.

1702.  Pascoli  (A.)  Observationes  de  pleuritide. Venet.  8vo.

1713.  Verna  (J.  B.)  Princeps  Morborum  Acutorum  Pleuritis. Venet.  4to.

1735.  Camerarius  et  Seeger. De  Pleuritide  maligna,  (Hal.  Dis.  II.)

1740.  Triller  (M.  A.)  Succincta  Comment,  de  Pleuritide. Francf.  8vo.

1742.  Tennent  (J.)  Epist.  to  Dr.  Mead  on  the  Pleurisy,  &c.  of  Virginia,  Edin.  12mo.

1759.  Bouillet  (J.  II.  N.)  Memoire  surles  pleuro-peripneumonies  epid.  Beziers.  4to.

1761.  Zeviani  (G.  V.)  Delia  Rachitide  e  della  Pleuritide. Verona.  4to.

1762.  Flemyng  (M.;  M.D.)  Adhes.  of  the  lungs  to  the  Pleura  considered.  Lond.  8v<>.
1779.  Musgrave  (S.,iW.D.)  Gulstonian  Lectures.— II.  On  Pleurisy,  &c.  Lond.  8vo.
1786.  Triller  (D.  W.)  Abhandlung  vom  Seitenstechen. Leips.  8vo.

1789.  Saalmann  (F.,  M.D.)  Descriptio  Pleuritidis,  &c. Mon.  W.  8vo.

1790.  Sachtleben  (D.  W.)  Bemerk.  ueber  brustenzundung. Goett.  8vo.

1791.  Fiorani  (A.)  Saggio  sopra  la  pleuritide  biliosa. Firenze.  8vo.

1793.  Maschke  (G.  T.)  Historia  litis  de  loco  V.  S.  in  Pleuritide. Hal.  4to.


448


IDIOPATHIC  HYDROTHORAX.


CHAPTER  II.

OF  HYDROTIIORAX.

This  disease  is  considered  by  many  practitioners,  and  by  extra-
professional  persons  generally,  as  a  very  common  disease,  and  a
frequent  cause  of  death.  When  truly  idiopathic,  however,  and
existing  in  a  degree  sufficient  to  occasion  death  by  itself,  I  con-
sider it  as  one  of  the  rarest  diseases ;  and  do  not  think  we  are
justified  in  rating  its  fatality  higher  than  one  in  two  thousand
deaths.*  I  have  often  seen  practitioners,  who  were  but  imper-
fectly acquainted  with  morbid  anatomy,  and  consequently  very
ignorant  of  diagnosis,  mistake  for  this  affection  hypertrophy  of
the  heart,  aneurism  of  the  aorta,  irregular  consumption,  and  even
scirrhus  of  the  stomach  or  liver, — when  there  was  no  co-existing
effusion  into  the  pleura,  or,  at  least,  none  other  except  what  took
place  immediately  preceding  death.  Corvisart  formerly  pointed
out  these  mistakes,  particularly  in  regard  to  the  two  first-named
diseases.  One  circumstance  which  has  more  especially  led  to  the
belief  of  the  frequency  of  this  disease,  is  the  common  mistake  of
taking  a  sero-purulent  effusion  for  it.  This  has  arisen  from  the
transparency  of  a  part  of  these  effusions.  Indeed,  it  is  only
within  these  few  years  that  the  nature  of  the  pleuritic  effusion
has  been  properly  known ;  and  the  mistake  we  have  mentioned
has  been  made  by  men  of  great  eminence  at  no  very  remote  period.
For  example,  Morand  gives  under  the  name  of  dropsy  of  the
chest,  a  case  of  pleurisy  cured  by  the  operation  of  empyema,  f

1803.  Conradi  (J.  W.  H.)  Pneuraonie  und  Pleuritis  in  nosologischer  und  thera-

peutischer  hinsicht. Marb.  8vo.
1803.  Racine  (C.)  Rech.  sur  la  pleurisie  etla  Peripn.  latente  chronique.  Par.
1808.  Broussais  (F.  J.  V.)  Phlegmasies  Chroniques. Par.  8vo.
1820.  Pinel  et  Bricheteau.  Diet,  des  Sc.  M.  (Art.  Pleurisie)  t.  53. P<» .

1826.  Andral  (G._)  Clinique  Medical,  t.  iii. Par.  8vo.

1827.  Chomel  Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Pleurisie)  t.  17.  Par.
1834.  Law. Cyclopaxl.  of  Pract.  Med.  (Art.  Pleurisy.)  vol.  iii.

Cullen.  Burserius,  Darwin,  Frank,  Pinel,  Good,  &c.  Transl.
•  Dr.  Darwall  goes  further,  and  altogether  denies  the  existence  of  such  a  disease
as  idiopathic  hydrothorax.  "  There  is  no  such  disease  (he  says)  as  hydrothorax
independent  of  inflammation  of  the  pleura  or  organic  disease  of  some  other  part."
(Cycl.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  ii.  p.  519.)  This,  I  think,  is  carrying  the  point  too  far,
although  I  fully  coincide  with  Laennec  as  to  the  extreme  rarity  of  the  idiopathic
affection. — Transl.

t  M6m.de  l'Acad.  de  Chir.  tom.ii.p.  545. — Our  periodical  literature  abounds
with  mistakes  of  this  kind  :  see  a  remarkable  instauce  in  the  Edin.  Journ.  vol.  xvi.
p.  529.  See  also  Good's  Study  of  Medicine  (hydrothorax)  where  the  same  mistake
is  committed. — Transl.


miop.vnirc  iiyduotiiouaw


4 1!)


Sect.  I. — Of  Idiopathic  Hijdrothora.v.

Idiopathic  hydrothorax  commonly  exists  only  on  one  side.
Its  anatomical  characters  are  simply  an  accumulation  of  serum
in  the  cavity  of  the  pleura;  this  membrane  being  quite  healthy
in  other  respects;  and  the  lung  being  compressed  towards  the
mediastinum,  flaccid,  and  destitute  of  air,  as  in  cases  of  pleuritic
effusion.  When  the  effusion  is  very  great,  the  affected  side  is
evidently  larger  than  the  other.  I  have  seen  this  when  there  was
no  other  dropsical  affection,  nor  any  organic  lesion  to  which  it
could  be  attributed.  In  one  case  of  this  kind  the  right  pleura
contained  twelve  pounds  of  a  colourless  and  limpid  serum,  and
seemed  in  other  respects  quite  healthy.

S'xjnsand  symptoms. — The  chief  and  almost  the  only  symptom
of  this  disease  is  the  impeded  respiration.  Percussion  affords  the
dead  sound,  and  the  stethoscope  indicates  the  absence  of  respira-
tion every  where  except  at  the  roots  of  the  lung.  At  the  time  of
the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  I  imagined  that
aegophony  ought  also  to  exist  in  this  case ;  and  since  then  I  have
more  than  once  proved  the  correctness  of  this  opinion.  This  was
the  case  in  the  two  following  examples: — 1.  Last  year  a  woman
came  into  the  hospital  with  every  sign  of  hypertrophy  and  dila-
tation of  the  heart,  and  of  an  effusion  in  each  side  of  the  chest.
The  effusion  was,  in  particular,  very  abundant  on  the  left  side.
In  this  case  aegophony  was  distinct  on  both  sides.  As  there
was  neither  fever  nor  stitch  present,  I  looked  upon  the  effu-
sions as  serous,  and  prescribed  the  acetate  of  potass,  to  the
amount  of  an  ounce  and  an  ounce  and  a  half  daily,  and  also  nitre,
in  a  dose  increased  from  one  to  two  scruples.  This  treatment
proved  so  successful,  that  every  sign  of  effusion  disappeared  in
the  course  of  eight  days.  During  the  present  year,  the  same
patient  came  once  more  into  the  hospital,  affected  with  acute
pleuro-pneumonia  of  the  right  side,  and  died  there.  On  examin-
ation after  death,  the  left  lung  was  found  perfectly  free  from
adhesions.  2.  The  second  case  was  that  of  a  lady,  whom  I  at-
tended two  years  ago  with  MM.  Recamier  and  Moreau  de  la
Sarthe.  She  had  been  affected  for  several  years  with  hypertrophy
and  dilatation  of  the  heart ;  and  during  the  last  months  of  her
life,  she  presented  all  the  signs  of  an  effusion  into  the  pleura  on
the  right  side,  and  particularly  a  constant  and  very  distinct
aegophony  at  the  roots  of  the  lung,  around  the  whole  lower  angle
of  the  scapula,  occasionally  extending  to  the  axilla.  Upon  ex-
amining the  body,  we  found  about  a  pint  and  a  half  of  a  perfectly
limpid  serum,  occupying  the  lower  two-thirds  of  the  right  pleura,
which  was  in  this  place  perfectly  healthy,  and  without  any  false
membranes,  old  or  new. Above  this,  the  pulmonary  and  costal

G  G


450


IDIOPATHIC  HYDliOTHOIlAX.


pleura  were  united  by  means  of  a  plentiful  cellular  tissue,  which
was  strong,  and  obviously  of  long  standing.

Its  progress,  and  the  state  of  the  general  symptoms,  can  alone
distinguish  this  disease  from  chronic  pleurisy.  There  are  cases,
even,  where  the  distinction  between  these  two  diseases  is  difficult
in  the  dead  body.  Whatever  may  be  the  difference,  both  in  the
general  symptoms  and  the  organic  lesion,  between  a  case  of  hydro-
thorax  and  an  acute  pleurisy  ;  or  between  a  case  of  ascites  from
general  debility  or  organic  disease  of  the  heart  or  liver,  and  the
same  disease  from  an  attack  of  peritonitis ;  or,  in  short,  whatever
may  be  the  difference,  in  general,  between  a  dropsy  and  an  in-
flammation,— there  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  two  affections,  so
opposite  in  their  extreme  degrees,  are  nevertheless  often  very
nearly  allied  in  their  slighter  shades.  We  frequently  find  amid
the  serum  of  ascites  or  hydrothorax,  filaments  of  a  milk-white  or
yellowish  colour  and  semi-transparent,  formed  of  concrete  albu-
men, almost  as  solid  as  false  membrane.  And  we  observe  analo-
gous facts  in  other  diseases.  Thus,  for  instance,  it  is  not  always
easy  to  distinguish  oedema  of  the  lungs  from  the  first  degree  of
pneumonia.  Again,  we  frequently  observe  prevailing  at  the  same
time,  erysipelas,  accompanied  by  a  greater  or  less  oedema  of  the
neighbouring  parts,  and  general  oedema  of  the  greater  part  of  the
body  attended  merely  with  a  slight  erythema :  while  in  the  in-
flammation of  serous,  mucous,  and  synovial  membranes,  a  copious
serous  effusion  always  accompanies  the  extravasation  of  pus  whe-
ther concrete  or  fluid  :  and  the  same  thing  is  frequently  observed
in  the  inflammation  of  the  cellular  substance.  These  facts  tend
to  explain  the  admission  made,  by  certain  authors,  of  inflam-
matory dropsies,  and  the  fact  of  blood-letting  being  occasionally
beneficial  in  dropsy,  and  injurious  in  diseases  truly  inflammatory.*
This  last  is  especially  the  case  when  the  inflammation  is  of  a
chronic  kind,  or  originates  in  a  cause  which  is  not  within  the  cou-
troul  of  antiphlogistic  treatment.

The  causes  of  diseases  are  unfortunately,  for  the  most  part,
beyond  our  reach,  yet  we  learn  from  daily  experience,  that  the
particular  character  of  the  causes,  occasions  greater  difference  s
among  diseases  (especially  as  regards  their  cure)  than  the  nature
and  kind  of  the  organic  lesions. Many  cases  of  pleurisy  and

•  The  great  rarity  of  the  true  hydrothorax  ought  to  make  us  cautious  how  we  give
this  name  to  so  many  affections  as  we  are  accustomed  to  do ;  and  the  undoubted  fact
of  a  serous  effusion  being  an  almost  uniform  attendant  on  the  inflammation  of  serous
membranes,  ought  to  make  us  slow  to  trust  to  mere  diuretics  and  other  similar  reme-
dies in  cases  wherein  we  have  strong  reason  for  suspecting  dropsical  effusion,  espe-
cially in  the  chest.  The  now  very  generally  allowed  connexion  between  dropsy  and
inflammation,  mentioned  by  our  author  in  many  parts  of  his  treatise,  is  still  mucti
better  understood  in  England  than  France.  For  ample  and  most  valuable  illustra-
tions of  this  doctrine  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  well-known  works  of  Ulackall,  Parry,
Crampton,  and  Ayre,  and  to  the  various  articles  in  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Pract.  Med.
by  Dr.  Dnrwall,  on  the  subject  of  Dropsy. — Transl.


SYMPTOMATIC  HYDROTHORAX.


451


peritonitis  are  equally  untractable  by  venesection,  as  a  bubo  or
venereal  ulcer,  or  as  the  local  inflammation  of  gout,  or  that  which
precedes  hospital  gangrene. — I  am  far  from  calling  in  question
the  utility  of  the  study  of  diseases  according  to  their  anatomical
characters.  This  study,  lias,  indeed,  been  my  constant  occupa-
tion, and  this  work  is  entirely  devoted  to  the  exposition  of  its
results.  I  am  of  opinion  that  this  study  can  alone  constitute  the
basis  of  all  positive  knowledge  in  medicine  ;  and  that  we  can
never  lose  sight  of  it  in  our  etiological  researches,  without  risk  of
pursuing  illusions,  and  of  creating  phantoms  in  order  to  combat
them.  It  is  not  given  to  all  men  to  reach,  like  Sydenham,  that
high  degree  of  medical  tact,  whereby  we  can  safely  disregard  the
details  of  diagnosis  and  direct  our  practice  by  the  indications
only:  and  I  believe  that  this  great  man  would  have  been  still
more  distinguished  as  a  practitioner,  could  he  have  applied  to  the
morbid  anatomy  of  diseases,  the  same  talent  for  observation,
which  he  showed  in  the  study  of  symptoms  and  in  the  application
of  remedies.  At  the  same  time,  I  consider  it  no  less  dangerous
to  bestow  such  an  exclusive  attention  on  the  local  affections,  as  to
make  us  lose  sight  of  the  causes  whence  they  spring.  The  neces-
sary consequence  of  this  mode  of  proceeding,  is  to  make  us  fre-
quently mistake  the  effect  for  the  cause,  and  to  commit  the  still
more  serious  error  of  considering  as  identical,  and  of  treating  in
the  same  manner,  all  diseases  which  present  the  same  anatomical
characters.  This  error,  which  appears  to  be  that  of  some  prac-
titioners of  the  present  time,  is  to  me  quite  inconceivable.  It  may
perhaps  be  the  consequence  of  a  slight  superficial  attention  to  the
study  of  morbid  anatomy ;  but  I  consider  it  as  impossible,  that
any  person  of  good  sense,  who  follows  up  this  study  carefully  and
without  systematic  prejudices,  can  continue  long  under  such  a
delusion.

Sect.  II. — Of  Symptomatic  Hydrothorax.

The  symptomatic  hydrothorax  is  as  frequent  as  the  idiopathic
is  rare.  The  symptomatic  dropsy  may  accompany  almost  every
disease,  acute  or  chronic,  general  or  local :  its  presence  almost
always  announces  their  approaching  and  fatal  termination,  and
often  precedes  this  only  a  few  moments.  It  is  not  perhaps  more
frequent  in  cases  of  ascites  and  general  anasarca  than  in  other  dis-
eases. It  is  most  commonly  met  with  in  persons  who  have  died
of  acute  fever,  disease  of  the  heart,  or  tubercles  or  cancer  of
different  organs.  Its  symptoms,  which  are  in  every  respect  like
those  of  the  idiophatic  disease,  do  not,  in  general,  make  their
appearance  but  a  few  days,  or  even  hours,  before  death.  Nothing
is  more  uncommon,  even  in  organic  affections  of  the  liver  and

g  g  2


452


isY M l'TOM ATIC  HYDROTHOIt AX.


heart,  attended  by  ascites  and  general  anasarca,  than  to  meet  with'
the  signs  of  h ydrothorax  so  long  as  eight  days  before  death.  W e
may  even  consider  this  disease  as  peculiar  to  the  moribund.*
When  the  effusion  takes  place  on  both  sides  of  the  chest,  it  pro-
duces a  very  painful  suffocation.  Sometimes,  however,  we  find  a
considerable  effusion  on  both  sides,  in  cases  where  there  had  been
no  very  marked  dyspnoea  before  death.  Might  not  the  effusion
in  such  cases  take  place  in  the  very  moment  of  dissolution, — or
even  after  death?  We  know  that  the  functions  of  the  capillary
system  do  not  cease  immediately  after  death.  I  have  sometimes
found  more  than  a  pound  of  serum  in  the  cavity  of  the  pleura,
in  persons  who  exhibited  no  sign  of  effusion  even  a  quarter  of  an
hour  before  death :  and  twice  or  thrice,  in  cases  of  pleurisy,  I
have  hardly  found  one  or  two  ounces  of  serosity,  although  aego-
phony  had  been  distinct  during  life.  Is  it  not  probable,  in  the
first  of  these  cases,  that  the  effusion  took  place  after  death  ;  and

*  I  cannot  at  all  subscribe  to  this  opinion  of  our  author,  as  I  have  repeatedly
treated,  cases  of  symptomatic  hydrothorax  which  existed  for  months,  and  even  years
before  death ;  and  the  true  nature  of  which  was  not  merely  demonstrated  by  the  phy-
sical signs,  and  by  the  relief  afforded  by  diuretics,  but  by  the  state  of  the  membranes
after  death.

In  regard  to  the  symptoms  of  hydrothorax,  although  it  may  be  strictly  true,  as
Laennec  observes,  that  the  chief  and  almost  the  only  one  is  dvspneea,  still  there  are
commonly  present  others  which  convey  to  the  experienced  practitioner,  even  although
not  an  auscultator,  a  prett}'  strong  assurance  of  the  true  nature  of  the  disease.  1  will
extract  a  few  passages  from  Dr.  Darwall's  paper  (Cyc.of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  ii.  p.  519,
520.)  illustrative  of  the  point.  "To  whatever  affection  of  the  thoracic  viscera  hydro-
thorax  is  to  be  traced,  the  earliest  symptom  of  effusion  is  an  ocdematous  state  of  the
eyelids,  occurring  chiefly  in  the  morning.  This  is  sometimes  so  little  remarkable,
that  it  escapes  attention  until  inquiry  be  made  by  the  medical  attendant ;  and  often
it  is  only  remembered  when  the  feet  and  ancles  have  been  observed  to  swell  in  the
evening.  The  progress  of  the  disease  from  this  point  is  exceedingly  variable,  and
this  variableness  seems  to  depend  much  upon  the  nature  of  the  original  affections.
In  diseases  of  the  heart  the  early  progress  is  usually  slow,  the  breathing  being  mani-
festly more  difficult  than  before  the  external  oedema  was  perceived,  but  for  some  time
not  aggravated  in  any  remarkable  degree.  Gradually,  however,  the  external  oedema
increases,  and,  pari  passu,  the  thoracic  oppression,  the  difficulty  of  lying  down,  the
dyspnoea,  &c.  beccine  more  distressing.  At  first,  probably,  little  attention  is  paid  to
the  difficulty  of  assuming  the  recumbent  posture,  the  patient  satisfying  himself  with
having  his  head  raised  by  more  pillows.  The  necessity  of  having  additional  pillows
continually  augments,  till  at  length  perfect  orthopnoea  is  established,  and  he  is  only
able  to  sleep  in  a  chair.  The  dyspnoea  undergoes  also  at  times  very  severe  exacerba-
tions, the  cause  of  which  is  not  very  readily  ascertainable The  duration  of

this  state  varies  considerably  in  different  individuals,  sometimes  lasting  for  weeks
without  any  alleviation  of  symptoms,  sometimes  admitting  of  great  relief  by  medicine,
and  intervals  of  almost  perfect  ease;  at  other  times  its  progress  is  extremely  rapid,
a  few  days  only  intervening  between  the  first  symptoms  of  effusion  and  dissolution.

What  we  have  said  refers  to  hydrothorax  from  disease  of  the  heart ;  when  it

succeeds  to  bronchitis  or  pneumonia  the  progress  is  somewhat  different.  The  palpi-
tations and  other  cardiac  symptoms  are  usually  wanting,  and  there  is  nothing  more
manifested  than  increased  dyspnoea.  Previously  to  this  becoming  very  marked,
however, the  face  and  feet  swell  as  in  the  former  instance;  the  patient  then  requires
the  head  and  shoulders  to  be  raised;  and  at  length,  as  in  the  former  case,  he  is
unable  to  lie  down  at  all.  In  these  cases  the  termination  is  seldom  so  sudden  as
when  the  heart  is  diseased,  neither  does  the  countenance  exhibit  in  the  same  degree
the  purplr  and  livid  appearance." — Trajnl.


SYMPTOMATIC HYDllOTHOH  AX.


in  the  second,  on  the  contrary,  that  a  part  of  the  effused  fluid
was  absorbed  in  the  mortal  agony,  or  even  after  death  ?  #  The
quantity  of  serum  effused  varies  from  a  few  ounces  to  one  or  two
pints.  It  is  commonly  colourless  or  yellowish,  sometimes  tawny,
reddish,  or  even  bloody.

Considering  the  infrequency  of  true  hydrothorax,  it  is  hardly
necessary  to  say  any  thing  of  its  treatment.  I  would  only  observe
that  it  would  be  wrong  to  consider  the  disease  as  incurable  merely
because  it  was  complicated  with  disease  of  the  heart.  I  noticed
above,  an  example  of  this  kind,  in  which  the  treatment  was
rapidly  successful.  Diuretics  and  purgatives  are  the  chief  means.
I  shall  not  repeat  what  I  formerly  stated  respecting  their  employ-
ment in  thoracic  effusions,  as  almost  every  thing  recommended
for  the  cure  of  the  chronic  pleurisy  is  applicable  to  that  of  hydro-
thorax.  The  discharge  of  the  fluid  by  an  operation  would  seem
to  afford  more  chances  of  success  in  hydrothorax  than  in  pleurisy,
owing  to  the  freedom  of  the  lung  in  the  former  disease.t

*  Some  of  my  readers,  I  suspect,  will  be  more  ready  to  believe  that  mediate  aus-
cultation, in  these  cases,  gave  a  false  indication  of  the  state  of  the  parts  within  the
chest  before  death  :  but  it  is  evidently  impossible  to  determine  the  point  one  way  or
other. — Transl.

t  Symptomatic  hydrothorax  is  a  very  common  affection  ;  and  is  more  under  the
controul  of  medicine  than  many  less  important  diseases.  Indeed,  digitalis,  par-
ticularly the  infusion  in  large  doses,  is  almost  a  specific  in  removing  the  fluid,
at  least  for  a  time.  Dropsy  of  the  chest  frequently  accompanies  organic  disease  of
the  heart ;  but  still  more  frequently,  perhaps,  is  the  latter  disease,  when  unattended
by  any  effusion  into  the  pleura,  mistaken  for  the  former.  In  cases  of  this  kind  the
stethoscope  is  of  great  use  in  directing  the  treatment ;  as  the  means  so  successful
in  relieving  the  dropsical  affection,  are.  at  best,  useless,  in  the  lesions  of  the
heart.  Dr.  Maclean's  work  on  hydrothorax  is  well  deserving  the  attention  of  prac-
titioners, as  illustrating  the  power  of  digitalis  in  this  disease,  although  it  abounds
with  grievous  errors  in  pathology  and  diagnosis.  These  mistakes  were  perhaps
pardonable  at  the  time  he  wrote  ;  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  thev  could
hardly  be  committed  ;  certainly  if  committed,  they  would  be  now  unpardonable.

The  best  form  of  administering  digitalis  is  that  of  infusion,  in  doses  of  half  an
ounce  every  eight  or  six  hours,  and  continued  until  it  has  increased  the  flow  of  urine,
or  otherwise  manifested  its  specific  effects  upon  the  pulse  or  general  system.  This
remedy  is  most  effective  in  the  asthenic  diathesis  where  there  is  much  debilitv,  with
pallid  skin  and  feeble  pulse.  The  diuretic  effect  of  digitalis  in  such  cases,  is  often
increased  by  combination  with  opium,  and  1  have  been  usually  in  the  habit  of  con-
joining with  it  the  carbonate  of  potass  and  nitrous  ajther  as  practised  by  Dr.  Maclean.
If  the  hydrothorax  supervenes  to  disease  of  the  heart,  while  there  still  exists  a  good
deal  of  power  in  the  system,  venesection  is  almost  always  proper;  and,  in  such
cases,  drastic  purgative*,  and  especially  elaterium,  often  produce  most  striking  relief.
W  hen  the  elaterium  is  found  to  act  beneficially,  it  should  be  repeated  every  two  or
three  days,  if  the  strength  of  the  system  supports  its  action.  When  the  state  of
debilitv  is  great,  we  must  either  combine  with  our  diuretics,  or  immediately  follow
them  up  by  tonics,  particularly  the  milder  preparations  of  steel,  as  the  ferrum  tartari-
zatuin  or  the  hydriodate  of  iron.  In  the  agonizing  paroxysms  of  dyspnoea  in  the
last  stage,  art  is  nearly  powerless  in  ministering  relief:  our  only  hope  of  even  tem-
porary ease,  is  in  large  and  repeated  doses  of  opium,  particularly  the  black  drop  of
Battley's  sedative,  not  regulated  by  times  or  quantities,  but  by  their  effects  :  with
these  we  commonly  combine  a-ther,  and  probably  not  without  reason.

In  regard  to  the  operation  of  paracentesis,  which  Laennec  seems  to  regard  some-
what favourably,— I  believe  the  cases  of  hydrothorax  are  extremely  few  where  il  is
advUable  or  even  justifiable.  The  very  circumstance  of  the  effusion  being  generr  llv
pri'se  it  in  both  sides  at  the  same  time,  is  a  strong  objection  :  and  the  assured  brevity


454


CHAPTER  III.


OF  BLOOD  EFFUSED  INTO  THE CAVITY  OF THE  PLEURA.

Penetrating  wounds,  or  even  a  severe  contusion  of  the  chest,
may  produce  an  effusion  of  blood  into  the  cavity  of  the  pleura.
The  same  thing  takes  place  in  certain  cases  of  disease,  and  may
follow  the  rupture  of  an  aortic  aneurism.  In  some  cases,  also,
there  is  no  doubt  that  a  very  oopious  exhalation  of  blood  may
take  place  spontaneously,  without  any  solution  of  continuity  or
external  violence.  I  do  not  here  allude  to  those  effusions  which
accompany  the  hsemorrhagic  pleurisy,  or  which  sometimes  attend
the  formation  of  blood-vessels  in  the  false  membranes,  or  which
confer  on  certain  other  effusions  a  sanguineous  tint  merely  ; — but
to  a  primary  and  idiopathic  effusion  of  blood,  analogous  to  the
haemorrhages,  active  or  passive,  of  other  organs. This  case  is

of  the  relief  is  a  still  stronger  :  yet  when  the  distress  is  extreme,  and  we  have  good
ground  for  believing  that  the  chief  part  of  this  depends  more  on  the  effusion  than  on
the  organic  disease,  and  particularly  if  the  fluid  is  entirely  or  chiefly  confined  to  one
sac  of  the  pleura,  I  do  not  think  we  ought  to  he  deterred  from  affording  even  the
equivocal  relief  offered  by  the  operation.  Out  of  23  cases  of  effusion  into  the  chest,
in  which  the  operation  of  paracentesis  was  performed  under  the  directions  of  Dr.
Thomas  Davies,  of  London,  11  were  simple  empyema,  9  pneumothorax  with  effusion,
and  3  hydrothorax  :  of  the  first,  8  recovered,  while  of  the  latter,  all  died.  It  is
proper  to  state,  however,  that  the  three  patients  with  hydrothorax  (all  from  disease
of  the  heart)  were  relieved  by  the  operation  for  a  considerable  time.  (Ct/c.  of  Pract.
Med.  vol.  ii.  p.  43.) — Transl.


LITERATURE  OF  HYDROTHORAX.

1766.  Bouillet,  (J.  et  J.  H.  N.)  Obs.  sur  l'anasarque,  les  hydropisies  de  poitrine,  &c.
Ber.  12mo.

1790.  Haering,  (P.  P.) De  hydrothorace. Lips. 4to. Id.  Abhandl.  von  der

brustwassermcht.  Neueste  Saminl. Lips.  1794.  8vo.
179n.  Gutberlet,  ( J.  C.)  De  signis  hydropis  pectoris. Wttrtzh.  8vo.
1799.  Chardel,  (F.)  Obs.  sur  l'hydropisie  de  poitrine,  &c. Par.  8vo.

1802.  Gerard,  (F.  M.)  Essai  sur  l'hydrothorax. Par.  8vo.

1803.  Lerouse,  (A.  H.)  Recherches  sur  la  Paracenthese  dans  les  Hydropisies  de

poitrine. Par.  8vo.
1807.  Hamilton,  (W.,  M.D.)  Obs.  on  Digitalis  in  Dropsy  of  the  Chest, &c.  Lond.  8vo.
1810.  Maclean,  (L.,  M.D.)  An  Enquiry  into  the  nature,  &c.  of  Hydrothorax.

Sudbury.  8vo.

181.5.  Romerus,  (F.)Observatio  exper.confirmata  prohydrope  pectoris,  &c.  Par.  8vo.

1818.  Itard. Diet,  des  Sc.  Med.  (Art.  Hydrothorax,)  t.  22.  Par.

1822.  Conte,  (J.  B.)  De  l'hydropisie  de  poitrine,  &c. Par.  (2nd  ed.)  8vo.

1824.  Rayer. Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Hydrothorax,)  t.  11.  Par.

1833.  Bouillaud. Diet,  de  Med.  et  de  Chir.  (Art.  Hydrothorax.)  Par.

1833.  Darwall. Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  (Art.  Hydrothorax),  vol.  ii.  Lond.

1834.  Copland. Diet,  of  Pract.  Med.  (Art.  Dropsy  of  the  Chest).  Lend.
Morgagni,  Stoll,  De  Haen,  Cullen,  Burserius,  Frank,  Good.


HI.OOD IN THE  PLEUKA.


455


doubtless  very  rare;  yet  some  examples  can  bear  no  otber  expla-
nation. These  various  cases  constitute  what  has  been  improperly
called  sanguineous  empyema.  The  most  common  of  these  is,
unquestionably,  that  which  occurs  in  the  haemorrhagic  pleurisy  ;
and  almost  all  those  which  I  have  seen  become  the  subject  of
operation  have  been  of  this  kind.  The  extravasations  of  blood
produced  by  a  violent  contusion  are  in  general  easily  dispersed  ;
and  those  which  are  the  consequence  of  a  wound,  are  discharged
by  the  wound  itself.  The  most  dangerous  species  is  the  sponta-
neous, inasmuch  as,  being  usually  the  effect  of  a  general  haemor-
rhagic diathesis,  the  removal  of  it,  however  affected,  will,  in  all
probability,  be  followed  by  a  similar  effusion  in  some  other  place.
Blood  effused  into  the  cavity  of  the  pleura  may  be  absorbed  as
readily  as  when  thrown  into  the  cellular  substance  in  consequence
of  a  blow ;  and  we  know  that  enormous  extravasations  of  this  sort
are  frequently  re-absorbed  in  a  few  weeks,  or  even  in  a  few  days.
When  absorption  does  not  take  place  quickly,  the  blood  is  some-
times decomposed,  and  an  aeriform  fluid  is  disengaged,  producing
particular  symptoms,  as  we  shall  see  more  particularly  in  the
chapter  on  pneumothorax.

The  effusion  of  blood  into  the  pleura  affords  the  same  results
from  percussion  and  mediate  auscultation  as  other  liquid  extra-
vasations into  the  same  cavity.  I  shall  not,  therefore,  repeat  what
was  formerly  stated  on  this  subject.  In  the  case  where  the  effused
blood  should  be  entirely  or  almost  entirely  coagulated,  I  presume
that  aegophony  would  not  exist ;  since  the  transmission  of  the
voice  through  a  fluid  appears  one  of  the  most  essential  conditions
for  the  production  of  this  phenomenon.

Treatment. — I  shall  not  repeat  here  what  was  formerly  said  of
the  haemorrhagic  pleurisy.  The  effusion  of  blood  produced  by
a  severe  contusion  of  the  chest,  or  the  fracture  of  a  rib,  requires,
in  general,  the  employment  of  blood-letting  in  the  first  instance,
to  relieve  the  dyspnoea  and  moderate  the  succeeding  inflammation.
Diuretics  and  slight  purgatives,  given  from  time  to  time,  are
then  the  best  measures  for  promoting  the  absorption  of  the
blood.  In  the  effusions  occasioned  by  a  penetrating  wound  in-
volving the  vessels  of  the  lungs,  the  most  rational  indication  is  to
confine  the  blood  within  the  chest,  so  as  to  make  it  compress  the
lung  and  thereby  check  the  haemorrhage  if  possible :  the  absorp-
tion of  the  blood  afterwards,  will  not  be  more  difficult  than  in
the  preceding  instance.  The  spontaneous  effusion  is  unquestion-
ably the  least  under  the  controul  of  art,  being  always  the  conse-
quence of  a  haemorrhagic  diathesis,  which  is  got  the  better  of
with  much  difficulty.  This  case  is,  however,  extremely  rare:
and,  moreover,  almost  all  that  was  formerly  stated  respecting  the
liEemorrhagic  pleurisy  is  applicable  to  it.


436


CHAPTER  IV

'OF PNEUMOTHORAX, Oil THE ACCUMULATION OF AIR IN  THE

CAVITY  OF  THE  CHEST.

Sect. I. — Anatomical  Characters  and  Varieties  of  Pneumothorax .

Occasionally  we  find  aeriform  fluids  in  the  cavity  of  the  pleura.
These  are  sometimes  without  smell,  more  commonly  fetid,  and  of
a  fetor  resembling  that  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  gas.  These
fluids  are  sometimes  in  such  quantity  as  very  forcibly  to  com-
press the  lung,  and  to  distend  the  thoracic  parietes  in  a  very
sensible  manner.  In  this  case  the  ribs  are  found  more  or  less
separated, — and  the  diaphragm  projects  into  the  cavity  of  the
abdomen  :  when  the  disease  exists  on  the  left  side  of  the  chest,  the
muscle  is  found  considerably  prominent  downward ;  and  when  it
is  in  the  right  side  the  liver  is  thrust  below  the  margin  of  the
ribs.  Although  this  affection  cannot  be  said  to  be  of  excessive
rarity,  it  has  hitherto  been  but  little  noticed  by  medical  men.
All  that  we  find  respecting  it  in  practical  writers,  are  a  few  ex-
amples very  imperfectly  described ;  and,  in  general,  we  know  it
merely  from  the  casual  observations  of  anatomists  and  surgeons,
who  have  occasionally  noticed  the  escape  of  air  in  opening  the
chest  after  death,  or  in  performing  the  operation  of  empyema.*
There  exists  no  special  memoir  on  this  subject,  to  the  best  of  my
knowledge,  but  an  inaugural  dissertation  of  twenty  pages,  by
M.  Itard,  at  present  physician  to  the  institution  for  the  deaf  and
dumb-t  The  disease  is  named  by  M.  Itard,  Pneumothorax.
He  details  five  cases  of  it,  three  of  which  are  original,  one
extracted  from  Selle,  and  the  lifth  furnished  by  M.  Bayle.  In
these  the  aerial  effusion  co-existed  with  phthisis  and  chronic  pleu-
risy ;  and  in  all  of  them  the  lungs  of  the  affected  side  were  com-
pressed into  a  small  compass  towards  their  roots.  The  fluid  was
more  or  less  fetid.  The  cavity  of  the  pleura  was  invested  In  a
false  puriform  membrane,  at  least  in  the  instances  noticed  with
any  degree  of  detail,  and  contained  a  few  spoonsful  of  pus.  The
author  of  this  memoir,  in  conformity  with  the  then  established
notions,  considers  the  pneumothorax  as  an  affection  always  con-
sequent to  and  depending  on  a  latent  phthisis;  and  that  its  ex-
citing cause  is  "the  decay  of  the  lungs  by  means  of  a  chronic
suppuration,  together  with  the  partial  absorption  and  decom-

•  Vide  Riolati,  Encliirid.  Aunt.  lib.  iii.  cap-  ii.— Pout  am,  Giuv.Posl.  l.iii.
t  DisserlHl.  sur  lc  Pneumothorax,  &c. rarit,  1808.


PNEUMOTHORAX.


457


position  of  the  pus  owing  to  its  long  stagnation  in  a  confined
cavity."  We  have  already  seen  that  this  consumption  of  the
lung  {pit Imone.s  assumpii  of  Lieutaud,)  is  not  owing  to  the
destruction  of  that  viscusby  suppuration,  but  that  the  collection  of
purulent  matter  is  the  cause  and  not  the  effect  of  the  diminished
size  of  the  lungs.  This  fact,  which  I  believe  M.  Corvisart  was
the  first  to  demonstrate  in  his  clinical  lectures,  is  now  considered
as  unquestionable  by  every  one  well  acquainted  with  morbid
anatomy;  In  former  pages  we  have  ourselves  shown  that  the
lungs  may  be  reduced  to  a  very  small  volume  by  purulent  or
watery  effusions,  without  containing  tubercles,  or  showing  any
mark  of  suppuration.  All  the  cases  of  M.  Itard,  then,  are  to  be
considered  as  pneumothorax  consequent  to  a  latent  pleurisy,
which  co-existed  with  the  phthisis,  and  in  which  the  greater  part
of  the  effused  liquid  had  been  absorbed.

It  is  sufficiently  probable  that,  in  these  cases,  the  gas  was  the
product  of  the  decomposition  of  some  portion  of  the  effused  albu-
minous and  puriform  matter :  the  character  of  its  smell  leads  to
this  opinion.  This  species  of  pneumothorax  is  pretty  frequent.*
There  are  several  other  varieties  sufficiently  distinct.  I  have
several  times  discovered  this  affection  co-existing  with  a  con-
siderable  sero-purulent  effusion  of  the  pleura,  and  a  communi-
cation between  this  cavity  and  the  bronchi,  owing  to  the  rupture
of  a  vomica,  or  softened  tubercle,  simultaneously  into  the  bronchi
and  pleura.  I  consider  this  species  as  the  commonest  of  all ;  at
least,  I  have  met  with  it  most  frequently.*!-  I11  this  case  it  is
reasonable  to  believe  the  air  contained  in  the  cavity  of  the
pleura  to  be  simply  the  atmospheric  air  conveyed  thither  by  the
bronchi. I  shall  subjoin  several  remarkable  instances  of  this

*  The  subsequent  more  extended  experience  of  pathologists  render  this  opinion
of  Itard  and  Laennec  respecting  the  source  of  the  air  in  these  and  other  similar
cases,  more  than  problematical.  Indeed  there  can,  1  think,  be  little  doubt  that  tlie
air  in  M.  Itard's  cases  originated  in  a  fistulous  communication  with  the  bronchi,  al-
though this  was  not  detected  on  examination.  I  am  even  disposed  to  doubt,  with
Dr.  Houghton  and  other  modern  pathologists,  if  pneumothorax  is  ever  produced  by
the  decomposition  of  a  pleuritic  effusion.  "  It  may  be  laid  down  as  proved  (says
.  Dr.  Houghton)  that  where  pneumothorax  exists,  the  air  has  been  introduced  from
without;  for  cases  of  an  opposite  description  are  so  rare  that  they  must  be  considered
as  exceptions  to  the  rule." — (Cyc.  of  Pruct.  Med.  vol.  iii.  p.  452). — Transl.

t  "  This  species  of  the  affection,"  [that  is,  pneumothorax  from  the  bursting  of  a
tubercular  absess  into  the  pleura,]  says  Dr.  Houghton,  "  is,  beyond  all  comparison,
more  frequent  than  ifll  others.  If  we  were  to  conclude  from  the  experience  of  the
medical  men  of  Dublin  who  have  given  most  attention  to  the  subject,  it  might  be
asserted  that  it  constitutes  fully  nine-tenths  of  the  cases  of  pneumothorax,  with  the
exception  of  the  trumatic  variety;  and  this,  or  even  a  greater  proportion,  is  es-
tablished by  the  cases  found  in  medical  writings  since  the  publication  of  Laennec's

work  The  rupture  may  occur  in  any  of  the  lobes  of  the  lung  ;  but  the  inferior

l>;irt  of  the  upper  lobe,  and  the  superior  part  of  that  beneath  it,  is  the  place  where  it
has  been  most  usually  observed.  In  a  great  majority  of  cases  it  has  been  found  to
Lapp  en  on  a  line  with  the  third  rib,  posteriorly  about  the  costal  angle  and  just  under
the  reflection  of  the  false  membrane  by  which  the  superior  lobe  is  so  generally  ad-
herent. But  it  may  happen  at  any  part  of  the  pulmonary  substance."  {Cyc.  of
Tract,  Med.  vol.  iii.  p.  451.  sq.) — Truntl.


4)58


l'NKUMOTHOKAX.


variety.  It  is  possible  that,  in  this  case,  the  introduction  of  the  air
into  the  pleura  may  excite  inflammation  of  that  membrane,  and
that,  consequently,  the  pleurisy  maybe  the  effect  of  its  presence,
and  not  the  cause,  as  in  the  instances  given  by  M.  Itard.  It  is,
however,  also  possible,  that  a  vomica  may  burst  into  this  cavity
without  at  the  same  time  communicating  with  the  bronchi,  and
may  thus  excite  a  pleurisy,  and  consequent  pneumothorax,
through  the  decomposition  of  the  pleuritic  fluids.  This  case
comes  under  the  same  head  as  those  of  Itard,  with  this  difference,
that  the  original  effusion  is  here  considerable.  Pneumothorax
may  also  be  conjoined  with  hydrothorax ;  and  indeed  the  phe-
nomena of  certain  cases  that  have  occurred  demonstrate  its  exist-
ence. It  is,  no  doubt,  probable  that  most  of  the  supposed  cases
of  this  kind  have  been  truly  pleuritic  effusions,  mistaken  for  the
simple  serous  exhalation ;  but  M.  Bayle  gives  one  incontestable
instance  of  this  sort,  in  a  person  where  there  was  found  a  small
portion  of  serum  and  a  great  quantity  of  air  in  the  pleura.*  I
have  myself  frequently  observed  a  certain  quantity  of  air,  toge-
ther with  the  serum,  in  the  symptomatic  hydrothorax,  super-
vening just  before  death.

Pneumothorax  also  occurs  almost  always  when  a  gangrenous
eschar  of  the  lungs  is  softened  and  evacuated  into  the  cavity  of
the  pleura.  In  this  case  gas  is  evolved  during  the  chemical
decomposition  of  such  matter ;  and  this,  together  with  the  fluids
effused  by  the  irritated  pleura,  compresses  the  lung,  and  dilates
the  affected  side.  We  have  already  given  two  examples  (Cases
XV.  and  XVII.)  of  this  species  of  pneumothorax.  Gangrene
of  the  pleura,  also,  commonly  produces  the  same  effect.  A  case
of  this  kind  will  be  subjoined.  The  same  results  follow  the
decomposition  of  blood  effused  into  this  cavity.  .On  examining
the  body  of  a  man  that  died  after  an  illness  of  five  days,  Littre
found  in  the  chest  two  pints  of  blood,  and  an  enormous  quantity
of  air.  This  affection  may,  further,  be  produced  by  rupture  of
the  pleura  of  the  lungs  from  external  violence.  A  case  of  this
kind  is  mentioned  by  Hewson.-f*

It  is  likewise  probable  that  in  the  case  of  emphysema  of  the
lungs,  with  rupture  of  some  of  the  air-cells  and  extravasation  of
air  under  the  pleura,  this  membrane  may  sometimes  be  ruptured,
and  the  disease  in  question  be  thus  formed.  I  saw  a  case  of  this
kind  a  short  time  since.  It  seems  further  probable  that  in  the
case  of  emphysema  of  the  lungs  with  rupture  of  the  air-cells  and
extravasation  of  the  air  under  the  pleura,  this  membrane  may
itself  be  ruptured  and  thereby  give  rise  to  pneumothorax.  I
think  I  have  met  with  such  a  case ;  but  as  the  note  I  made  of  it
is  lost,  I  will  not  venture  to  assert  the  thing  as  positive.  Even
in  the  acute  pleurisy  in  its  commencement,  and  without  any

*  Recherches  sur  In  Phthisie,  p.  176,  Obs.  xi.
t  jYled.  Obs  and  Inq.  vol.  iii.


PNEUMOTHORAX.


459


chemical  decomposition  of  the  effused  fluid,  there  may  co-exist
a  gaseous  effusion ;  and  I  shall  detail  a  remarkable  example  of
this  at  the  end  of  the  present  section.  Finally,  an  aeriform  fluid
may  be  formed  in  the  cavity  of  the  chest,  without  there  being
any  solution  of  continuity,  any  other  effusion,  or  any  perceptible
change  of  structure  whatever.  I  have  often  perceived  the  escape
of  an  inodorous  gas,  in  opening  the  thorax,  where  there  was  no
perceptible  affection  of  the  pleura.  Sometimes,  indeed,  this
membrane  appeared  to  be  drier  than  natural ;  and  I  remember
one  case  in  which  it  was,  in  some  places,  almost  as  dry  as  parch-
ment. Even  in  these  cases  a  rupture  of  the  pleura,  so  slight  as
to  be  unperceived,  may  be  imagined ;  but,  independently  of  the
circumstance  that  sucli  rupture  cannot  well  be  supposed  without
some  external  violence,  we  know  that  an  idiopathic  formation  or
secretion  of  air  can  and  does  take  place  in  the  animal  system.  It
is  thus  that  we  sometimes  find  air,  in  considerable  quantity,  in
the  pericardium,  in  the  synovial  capsules,  and  under  the  arachnoid
in  cases  where  there  exists  no  other  effusion  within  these  mem-
branes; we  find  the  same,  also,  though  more  rarely,  in  the  cavity
of  the  peritoneum.  It  would  even  appear  that  air,  or  an  aeri-
form fluid,  exists  naturally,  in  small  quantity,  in  the  cavity  of
the  pleura.  At  least,  M.  Ribes  assures  me  that  he  has  found,
in  opening  the  serous  cavities  of  dogs,  a  small  quantity  of  air
constantly  to  escape.  This  may  probably,  however,  be  merely
the  natural  serous  exhalation  in  a  state  of  vapour.*

Whatever  be  the  nature  of  the  gas  contained  in  the  cavity  of
the  pleura,  in  simple  pneumothorax,  we  can  conceive  that  it  may
long  remain  there,  without  giving  rise  to  any  inflammatory  affec-
tion of  the  pleura,  as  would  no  doubt  be  the  effect  of  atmospheric
air  introduced  by  means  of  a  tuberculous  excavation  communi-
cating simultaneously  with  the  bronchi  and  pleura,  f  In  fact,
air  secreted  by  the  vessels  of  the  pleura,  must  be  in  some  sort
animalized,  and,  therefore,  much  less  likely  to  irritate,  than  a
body  so  thoroughly  extraneous  to  the  animal  system,  as  the  air
of  the  atmosphere.  That  air  introduced  into  the  pleura  in  the
manner  just  indicated,  is  not  always  productive  of  a  fatal  or  even
severe  pleurisy,  is  proved  by  the  following  case,  which,  moreover,

*  There  is  still  another  mode  in  which  pneumothorax  originates,  viz.  from  the
perforation  of  the  pleura  and  bronchi,  from  without  inwards,  that  is,  by  the  matter
of  an  empyema.  A  case  by  Dr.  Archer  (Trans.  Dub.  Assoc.  vol.  ii.),  and  another
by  Dr.  Hawthorne  (Ed.  Journ.  vol.  xv.)  appear  to  be  of  this  kind.  It  often  happens,
however,  that  the  matter  of  empyema  perforates  the  lung  and  is  discharged  by  the
bronchi  without  the  supervention  of  pneumothorax. — Transl.

t  The  air  contained  in  the  sac  of  the  pleura  in  pneumothorax  has  been  chemically
examined  by  Dr.  Davy  and  Apjohn  (Phil.  Trans.  1824.— Dub.  Trans,  of  Coll.  Phys.
vol.  v.)  and  has  been  found  to  be  atmospheric  air  slightly  modified.  By  Dr.  Apjohn's
analysis  the  100  parts  consisted  of  carbonic  acid,  8;  oxygen,  10;  nitrogen,  82.  In
Dr.  Davy's  cases  the  gas  consisted  of  7  or  8  parts  of  carbonic  acid,  and  92  or  93  of
oxygen.  In  one  of  Louis's  cases  (Sur  la  Phthisie,  obs.  x.  41 )  the  gas  is  said  to  have
been  carbonic  acid,  but  no  positive  analysis  is  stated  to  have  been  made.— Transl.


400


PNEUMOTHORAX.


affords  a  good  example  of  a  disease  but  little  known  and  imper-
fectly described.

Case  XXXV.— Simple  pneumothorax',  conjoined  with  la-
tent phthisis. — A  man,  aged  sixty-five,  of  a  strong  constitu-
tion, subject  for  two  years  to  a  cough  which  did  not  prevent  him
from  following  his  business,  was  attacked  on  the  15th  October,
1816,  with  violent  pains  in  the  abdomen,  and  died  the  same
night,  in  the  Necker  Hospital.

After  death,  the  body,  though  emaciated,  still  retained  con-
siderable muscularity.  The  right  side  of  the  chest  was  evidently
larger  than  the  left,  and  yielded  a  louder  sound  on  percussion
than  even  the  chest  of  a  healthy  person  usually  does. The  left
side  yielded  a  sound  comparatively  obscure  through  its  whole
extent. There  were  found  some  diseased  appearances  in  the
brain. On  penetrating  by  the  scalpel  the  right  cavity  of  the
chest,  an  inodorous  gas  escaped,  and  in  large  quantity,  to  judge
by  the  force  and  duration  of  the  sound  occasioned  by  its  exit.
The  lung  on  this  side  was  somewhat  compressed  towards  its
roots,  but  still  retained  three-fourths  of  its  natural  dimensions.
The  side  of  the  chest  was  considerably  dilated,  and,  besides  the
lung,  might  have  contained  about  two  pints  of  liquid, — the  quan-
tity, no  doubt,  of  gas  that  had  made  its  escape. The  whole  of
the  pleura  was  drier  than  usual,  and  rather  slightly  unctuous
than  humid ;  there  were  no  false  membranes  nor  any  effused
fluid. The  lung  adhered  to  the  costal  pleura  at  its  upper  lobe,
by  means  of  cellular  layers  an  inch  in  length,  which  seemed  of
no  very  ancient  date. This  adhesion  was  attached  at  one  end  to
a  species  of  cartilaginous  incrustation  of  the  size  of  the  palm
of  the  hand,  which  adhered  closely  to  the  pleura  pulmonalis.  In
detaching  the  cellular  adhesions  from  this  fibrocartilaginous
body,  there  remained  in  the  centre  of  the  latter,  a  small  oval
opening,  about  a  line  and  a  half  in  diameter,  which  communi-
cated with  an  excavation  in  the  lung,  which  could  have  contained
an  orange. I  am  not  quite  certain  whether  the  oval  opening,
above  mentioned,  existed  before,  or  was  formed  by  the  act  of
detaching  the  lung  from  its  adhesions ;  though  I  am  inclined  to
consider  it  as  previously  existing. The  excavation  was  nearly
empty,  containing  only  about  a  spoonful  of  pus. Its  parietes
were  immediately  formed  by  the  pulmonary  tissue,  except  in
that  space  answering  to  the  cartilaginous  incrustation,  where,  to
the  extent  of  more  than  an  inch  square,  they  consisted  solely  of
tin's  false  membrane. There  were  many  tubercles,  in  different
stages,  and  also  numerous  hard  melanose  tumours  in  different
parts  of  the  lung. The  left  lung  adhered  to  the  costal  pleura  in
its  whole  extent. It  also  contained  tubercles  and  melanose  tu-
mours. There  was,  likewise,  a  tuberculous  cavity,  of  consider-
able size,  in  the  tipper  lobe,  and  there  was  disease  in  the  large
intestines.


SIGNS -VXD  SYMPTOMS.


4G1


In  the  above  case  the  aeriform  effusion  into  the  right  side  of
the  pleura,  may  with  equal  probability  be  attributed  either  to
the  rupture  of  the  tuberculous  excavation  existing  in  the  upper
part  of  the  lung  into  the  bronchi  and  pleura  at  the  same  time;
or  to  the  simple  exhalation  of  air  into  the  pleura.  The  former
supposition  is  supported  by  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  the  open-
ing (if  indeed  such  did  exist)  at  the  summit  of  the  lung  and  by
the  state  of  the  false  membranes,  particularly  their  thickness  at
the  base :  the  latter  is  rendered  more  probable  by  the  co-exist-
ence of  air  in  the  pericardium,  a  circumstance  which  would  seem
to  indicate  a  general  disposition  of  the  serous  membranes  to
secrete  air;  and  this  probability  is  heightened  by  the  doubt
which  exists  as  to  whether  there  really  was  any  opening  into  the
pleura.

Sect.  II. — Of  the  Symptoms  and  Signs  of  Pneumothorax.

The  symptoms  of  pneumothorax  are  very  obscure,  inasmuch
as  they  may  belong  to  many  other  affections. The  only  one
which  is  pretty  constant  is  a  certain  degree  of  dyspnoea :  cough
does  not  seem  necessarily  to  accompany  it. Percussion  by  itself
does  not  supply  any  certain  result. When  the  accumulation  of
air  is  very  considerable,  the  affected  side  yields  a  clearer  sound
than  the  other;  but  this  difference,  even  when  very  distinct,  so
far  from  pointing  out  the  existing  disease,  rather  leads  us  into  a
two-fold  error,  by  making  us  consider  the  side  which  yields  the
dullest  sound  as  diseased,  and  that  which  really  is  so,  as  sound.
It  moreover  frequently  happens,  that  when  the  pneumothorax  is
complicated  with  a  liqud  effusion,  both  sides  sound  equally  well,
or  even  that  the  affected  side  sounds  less  than  the  other,  accord-
ing to  the  quantity  of  the  effused  air. The  comparative  size  of
the  two  sides  is  not  more  satisfactory. Not  only  is  the  affected
side  not  always  larger,  but  it  sometimes  becomes  even  smaller  than
the  other,  from  the  absorption  of  a  part  of  the  air  and  liquid  con-
tained in  it.  Even  in  the  cases  where  the  dilatation  of  the  side  is
obvious,  it  does  not  furnish  any  surer  indication  than  percussion.
From  its  superior  size  and  resonance,  one  will  be  apt  to  consider
the  diseased  side  as  sound  and  the  healthy  one  as  contracted,  in
the  manner  formerly  described. Mistakes  of  this  kind  we  may
consider  as  quite  inevitable  ;  or  if,  by  chance,  the  dilatation  and
tympanitic  resonance  point  out  the  disease,  (as  was  done  by  Bayle
in  a  case  formerly  related,)  it  will  more  frequently  happen  that
these  signs  shall  deceive  rather  than  assist  us. This  will  be  more
fully  shown  in  the  ensuing  section. I  shall  content  myself  at
present,  with  remarking,  that  during  the  period  of  my  'attend-
ance on  the  clinical  lectures  of  Corvisart,  I  saw  many  cases  of
pneumothorax  in  the  dead  body,  none  of  which  had  been  sus-
pected during  the  life-time  of  the  patient. No  one  will  refuse  to


4G2


PNEUMOTHORAX.


this  celebrated  teacher  either  the  talent  for  observation,  or  the
ability  to  make  the  most  of  percussion ;  consequently  the  best  proof
that  can  be  afforded  of  the  insufficiency  of  this  method  to  detect
pneumothorax,  is  the  fact  of  his  being  mistaken  in  these  cases.

The  certain  diagnosis  of  pneumothorax  is  afforded  by  the  com-
parison of  the  results  of  percussion  and  mediate  auscultation
Whenever  we  find  one  side  of  the  chest  sounding  more  distinctly
than  the  other,  and,  at  the  same  time,  perceive  the  respiration
very  well  in  the  least  sonorous  side  and  not  at  all  on  the  other, —
we  may  be  assured  that  there  exists  pneumothorax  on  the  latter.
We  may  be  equally  sure  of  our  diagnosis  when  both  sides  are
alike  sonorous,  and  even  although  the  affected  side  were  some-
what less  sonorous  than  the  sound  one.  This  latter  case  occurs
when  the  pneumothorax  supervenes  to  pleuritic  effusion,  or  any
other  fluid  extravasation.  Here,  before  the  supervention  of  the
pneumothorax,  the  affected  side  yields  a  perfectly  dull  sound,
and  the  respiration  is  either  entirely  absent,  or  is  heard  very  in-
distinctly. As  soon  as  the  gas  begins  to  accumulate,  the  reso-
nance of  the  chest  returns,  in  some  degree,  in  the  situation  occu-
pied by  the  air,  without,  however,  being  as  distinct  as  in  the
sound  side.  Day  by  day,  the  extent  and  intensity  of  this  reso-
nance increase,  without  any  return  of  the  sound  of  respiration  ;
and  if  there  had  previously  been  any  remains  of  the  respiratory
murmur,  even  this  now  totally  vanishes.  There  is  only  one  cir-
cumstance which  can  render  the  diagnosis  more  difficult  in  such
cases  :  this  is  the  case  of  the  lung  being  attached  to  the  side  by
means  of  a  very  short  cellular  tissue  :  in  the  point  of  adhesion
the  respiration  will  be  still  audible ;  and  an  inattentive  observer,
who  might  have  applied  the  instrument  on  this  place  only,  might
still  mistake  this  disease.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  observe,  that,
in  pneumothorax,  as  in  pleurisy  and  hydrothorax,  some  degree
of  respiration  will  be  still  perceptible  in  that  \>art  of  the  back
corresponding  to  the  roots  of  the  lungs.  Air  being  a  worse  con-
ductor of  sound  than  liquids,  it  is  more  difficult  to  perceive  the
respiratory  sound  of  the  healthy  side  on  that  which  is  diseased,
in  pneumothorax  than  in  empyema.  M.  Cayol,  however,  lately
pointed  out  to  me  a  case  of  this  kind ;  but  it  is  proper  to  state
that  there  was  here  a  liquid  as  well  as  a  gaseous  effusion.  I  for-
merly pointed  out  the  means  of  avoiding  the  mistake  in  question.

The  only  other  disease  which  presents  analogous  signs,  is  em-
physema of  the  lungs,  the  consequence  of  an  extensive  dry  ca-
tarrh ;  but  the  differences  between  these  diseases  is  so  striking,
that  they  could  only  be  mistaken  by  a  very  inattentive  observer.
These  differences  are  chiefly  in  the  following:  in  the  case  of
pneumothorax,  the  respiratory  sound  is  completely  lost,  even  in
the  most  energetic  inspirations,  over  every  part  of  the  chest,  ex-
cept between  the  scapula  and  spine,  where  it  is  still  audible,
although  weaker  than  in  the  natural  state. In  the  case  of  em-


SIGNS AND  SYMPTOMS.


463


physema,  there  is  never  the  total  loss  of  the  respiratory  sound
generally,  nor  its  comparative  integrity  at  the  root  of  the  lungs;
in  it,  even  in  the  most  severe  cases,  the  respiration  is  still  audible,
though  very  feeble,  in  some  variable  points.  The  slight  rhonchus
which  accompanies  the  dry  catarrh,  and  still  less  the  dry  crepi-
tous  rhonchus  which  is  its  pathognomonic  sign,  are  never  present
in  the  pneumothorax.  The  effusion  of  air  comes  on  suddenly,
and  cannot  exist  for  any  length  of  time  without  giving  rise  to
severe  symptoms  and  even  producing  death.  I  have  never  seen
pneumothorax  in  any  person  who  was  not  confined  to  bed  ;  while
emphysema  comes  on  gradually,  and  does  not  always  incapacitate
the  patient  for  exertion,  even  when  existing  in  the  most  intense
degree  in  both  lungs.  The  signs  just  mentioned  are  the  same  in
every  variety  of  pneumothorax  ;  but  when  there  exists  a  collection
of  liquid  as  well  as  air,  we  have  the  want  of  both  respiration  and
resonance  over  the  part  occupied  by  the  former,  and  the  want  of
respiration  only  over  the  part  occupied  by  the  latter.  This  com-
plication, as  well  as  the  fistulous  communication  between  the
pleura  and  bronchi,  is  moreover  recognized  by  the  Hippocratic
succussion;  and  the  last-mentioned  case  will,  further,  be  in-
stantly pointed  out  by  the  metallic  tinkling  or  the  amphoric
buzzing.  The  importance  of  these  two  signs  induces  me  to  ap-
propriate a  separate  article  to  each  ;  but  I  shall  previously  give
an  example  of  pneumothorax  recognized  during  the  patient's
life-time.*  A  similar  case  was  indeed  formerly  detailed  (Case
XVII.)  and  several  others  will  be  given  at  the  end  of  this  sec-
tion. The  case  which  I  am  now  to  relate  is  remarkable,  inas-
much as  the  effusion  of  air  was  detected  at  its  very  formation,
and  its  progressive  increase  followed  from  day  to  day.  I  could
have  added  other  cases  of  simple  pneumothorax  supervening  to

«  Among  the  rational  symptoms  supposed  to  indicate  pneumothorax,  besides
those  mentioned  in  the  text,  the  following  have  been  particularly  dwelt  on  by  dif-
ferent writers  :  decubitus,  or  the  posture  assumed  by  the  patient  in  bed  ;  displace-
ment of  the  heart ;  d  epression  of  the  liver.  In  respect  to  decubitus,  I  believe  we
may  assert  that  although  different  patients  prefer  different  sides,  yet  that  the  majo-
rity prefer  lying  on  the  affected  side.  When  the  effusion  is  on  the  left  side  there  is
often  great  displacementof  the  heart  to  the  right  side,  as  in  the  case  of  simple  empyema  :
and  when  it  is  on  the  right  side,  there  is  frequently  a  very  marked  depression  of  the
diaphragm  and  liver.  An  observation  recently  made  by  Dr.  Stokes,  in  a  valuable
paper  on  the  diagnosis  of  empyema,  (Dub.  Journ.  vol.  iii.  p.  50,)  deserves  notice  in
this  place,  a3  it  is  equally  applicable  to  pneumothorax  as  to  empyema, — if  indeed,
these  two  diseases  were  not  almost  always  conjoined.  The  observation  refers  to  the
discrimination  of  a  tumid  hypochondre  produced  by  an  enlarged  liver,  from  one  pro-
duced by  a  sound  liver,  depressed  from  thoracic  effusion.  "  If  it  be  the  first,"  says
ih.  Stokes,  "  we  find  the  tumour  presenting  a  continuous  surface  and  feeling  of  re-
sistance from  its  most  prominent  position  to  where  it  can  no  longer  be  traced  under
the  ribs,  the  lower  margin  of  which  seems  tilted  out.  But  if  it  be  a  displaced  liver,
we  find,  between  its  most  convex  portion  and  the  edge  of  the  false  ribs,  a  sulcus,
evident  to  the  sight  and  to  manual  examination,  presenting  much  less  resistance,
and  evidently  the  result  of  the  space  left  around  the  point  of  contact  of  two  convex
bodies,  one  the  upper  portion  of  the  liver,  the  other  the  most  prominent  point  of  the
depressed  diaphragm." — Transl.


4G4-


PNEUMOTHORAX.


other  diseases  three  or  four  days  before  death  and  instantly  re-
cognized ;  but  as  they  were  not  in  other  respects  of  an  interest-
ing kind,  I  shall  not  here  detail  them'.

Case  XXXVI. —Pleurisy  followed  by  pneumothorax. — M

C  ,  a  physician,  of  the  Faculty  of  Paris,  aged  thirty-six,

was  attacked  in  May,  1822,  with  fever,  diarrhoea  and  cholic,
complaints  to  which  he  had  been  subject.  He  had  twice  applied
leeches  to  the  abdomen  before  I  saw  him  on  the  27th.  I  ordered
them  to  be  repeated,  with  the  effect  of  relieving  his  pains,  but
not  the  fever.  Finding  that  this  fever  was  of  a  remitting  nature,
I  prescribed  bark  in  large  doses,  combined  with  tartar  emetic,
which  cut  short  the  periodical  accessions,  and  left  a  very  slight
degree  of  fever.  On  the  8th  day  of  this  false  convalescence,
upon  paying  a  visit  to  the  patient,  (who  considered  himself  as
almost  cured,)  I  thought  I  observed  the  respiration  to  be  quicker
than  usual.  In  consequence,  I  applied  the  stethoscope,  and  dis-
covered all  the  signs  of  an  acute  pleurisy  of  the  right  side,  viz.
complete  absence  of  respiration  and  resonance,  and  aegophony,
(slight  as  to  degree,  but  of  a  very  sharp  and  bleating  character,)
over  the  whole  of  the  side  and  even  on  the  upper  parts.  I  had
never  met  with  so  extended  aegophony,  and  I  could  only  account
for  it,  by  considering  the  lung  as  attached  to  the  costal  pleura
by  ancient  adhesions  in  different  points,  so  as  to  prevent  the
viscus  from  being  separated  from  the  walls  of  the  chest  to  any
great  distance.  This  pleurisy  was  completely  latent,  as  there
was  neither  stitch  nor  oppression,  and  no  more  cough  than  that
slight  dry  cough  which  attends  almost  all  continued  and  even
intermittent  "fevers.  I  applied  twelve  leeches  to  the  side.  On
the  following  days  the  aegophony  became  less,  and  gradually  dis-
appeared over  the  upper  half  of  the  chest;  the  part  where  it
began  to  be  heard  becoming  every  day  lower.  Percussion  now
yielded  the  natural  sound  over  the  space  left  by  the  aegophony,
but  there  was  no  respiratory  sound  whatever,  although  this  was
perceived  in  a  very  slight  degree  over  the  lower  two-thirds,
where  the  aegophony  was  still  strongly  marked,  and  the  sound
on  percussion  entirely  dead.  It  was  evident  from  these  signs
that  pneumothorax  had  supervened  to  the  pleuritic  effusion.  I
did  not  attempt  to  confirm  my  diagnosis  by  means  of  succussion,
for  fear  of  alarming  the  patient.  As  the  side  was  not  at  all  di-
lated, and  there  was  no  metallic  tinkling.  I  concluded  that  pneu-
mothorax was  not  the  consequence  of  a  pulmonary  fistula,  but  of
simple  exhalation  into  the  pleura ;  and  that  the  scro-purulent
fluid  was  absorbed  in  proportion  as  the  gas  accumulated.  This
last  circumstance  was  moreover  quite  evident  from  the  fact,
that  the  aegophony  and  dead  sound  were  found  to  retreat  daily
before  the  pneumothorax.  Fifteen  days  from  the  appearance  ol
the  pleurisy,  and  thirty  from  the  attack  of  fever,  aegophony  and
the  sound  of  respiration  were  confined  to  the  middle  of  the  back.


si  cms AND  SYMPTOMS.


4C5


The  anterior-superior  half  of  the  left  side  yielded  on  percussion
a  decidedly  clearer  sound  than  the  other  side  ;  and  on  the  lower
parts  the  sound  of  respiration  was  entirely  wanting.  From  this
time  the  patient  gradually  sunk,  with  various  symptoms,  con-
nected as  well  with  the  fever  as  the  pneumothorax,  and  died  on
the  17th  July.

Dissection  thirty  hours  after  death—  Upon  penetrating  the
left  side  of  the  chest  a  large  quantity  of  inodorous  gas  made  its
escape  with  a  hissing  sound  ;  and  upon  laying  open  the  chest,
the  lung  was  found  compressed  towards  the  mediastinum,  (no
doubt  by  the  air  that  had  escaped,)  leaving  a  space  between  it
and  the  costal  pleura  capable  of  containing  more  than  a  pint  of
liquid.  The  lung  was  attached  to  the  pleura  of  the  ribs  by  five
or  six  points,  two  at  its  anterior  border  and  the  other  at  its  outer
and  posterior  surface,  in  such  manner  that  it  could  not  be  com-
pletely compressed  against  the  mediastinum,  and  was  not  indeed,
in  any  point,  more  than  two  inches  distant  from  the  walls  of  the
chest.  The  lower  and  back  parts  of  this  side  contained  about
ten  ounces  of  a  bloody  serosity,  and  a  large  quantity  of  false
membranes,  of  a  yellow  colour,  pretty  thick,  and  of  a  tolerably
firm  consistence.  The  remaining  part  of  the  pleura  pulmonalis
was  healthy:  and  the  costal  pleura  on  its  upper  and  lateral  parts
was  of  a  dead  white  colour  and  of  a  shining  appearance  like  that
of  cartilage  ;  here  and  thereon  its  surface  there  were  some  tuber-
osities of  the  size  and  shape  of  hemp-seed,  and  whose  texture,
as  well  as  that  of  the  pleura  itself,  seemed  intermediate  between
that  of  the  healthy  pleura  and  fibro-cartilage.  This  portion  of
the  pleura  was  at  least  a  quarter  of  a  line  thick.  Upon  dissect-
ing it,  some  tuberculous  masses,  yellow  and  opaque  and  of  the
size  of  a  lentil  or  hemp-seed,  but  for  the  most  part  flattened,
were  found  on  its  exterior  or  adherent  surface,  so  as  to  give  rise
to  elevations  on  its  inner  surface,  less  regular  in  appearance  than
the  small  tuberosities  already  described.  The  lung  was  com-
pressed  so  as  to  be  not  larger  than  twice  the  thickness  of  the
hand.  It  was  of  a  violet  hue,  soft  and  flabby,  but  otherwise
healthy,  and  did  not  contain  a  single  tubercle.  The  right  lung
was  universally  adherent  byN  means  of  old  cellular  attachments;
and  its  upper  lobe  contained  many  tubercles  in  every  stage  of
their  progress.


Sect.  III. — Of  Pneumothorax  with  liquid  (ffiusion,  and  of  its
exploration  by  Succussion  of  the  Chest.

When  I  first  began  to  make  use  of  the  stethoscope,  I  was  in
hopes  that  this  instrument  might  furnish  some  sign,  analogous  to
the  rhonchus,  calculated  to  discover  collections  of  serum  or  pus
within  the  chest,  by  means  of  fluctuation. Two  methods  of

J  i  i[


4GG


PNEUMOTHORAX.


effecting  this  exploration  naturally  presented  themselves:  one
was  to  percuss  the  chest  on  one  side,  as  in  ascites,  and  apply  the
stethoscope  to  the  opposite  one  ;  the  other  was  to  listen  simply
to  the  sounds  occasioned  by  the  agitation  of  the  fluid  from  the
natural  action  of  the  heart  and  lungs.  A  little  reflection  might
have  convinced  me  of  the  unlikelihood  of  my  expectations;  yet
this  conviction  did  not  arise  till  after  many  vain  attempts  to  ob-
tain the  object  I  had  in  view.  I  ascertained  that  the  instrument
readily  communicated  the  shock  in  the  cases  of  ascites;  but  1
never  could  obtain  a  similar  result  in  the  case  of  thoracic  effu-
sions :  and  the  reason  of  this  is  obvious.  On  account  of  the  solid
and  bony  character  of  the  walls  of  the  chest,  the  percussion  used
to  produce  the  fluctuation,  conveys  more  impulse  and  sound  to
the  ear  of  the  observer,  than  does  the  shock  produced  by  the
liquid,  and  consequently  completely  masks  the  latter.  This  re-
sult is  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  known  principle  that  solids
communicate  impulse  and  sound  better  than  fluids.  In  the  case-
of  ascites,  the  shock  communicated  to  one  side  of  the  abdomen,  is
not  transmitted  by  the  abdominal  parietes  on  account  of  their
softness;  and  in  aeriform  collections  in  this  cavity,  the  impul-
is  not  conveyed  by  the  air,  on  account  of  its  being  a  worse  con-
ductor than  fluid.

Simple  auscultation  would  seem,  from  reasoning,  to  be  more
capable  of  supplying  some  signs  of  the  effusion  of  fluids  into  the
pleura  ;  but  from  causes  to  be  hereafter  detailed,  it  will  appear
evident,  that  this  could  only  be  the  case  when  there  existed  at  the
same  time  a  liquid  and  aeriform  effusion,  and  when  fluctuation
was  excited  by  means  of  a  severe  cough.  The  thing,  however,
does  not  seem  altogether  impossible  ;  although  1  am  doubtful
if  it  ever  yet  was  observed.  I  have  already  stated  that  we  can
sometimes  distinctly  hear  fluctuation  in  tuberculous  excavations
of  considerable  size,  when  they  are  only  half  filled  with  a  very
liquid  matter ;  and  this  is  easily  explained  by  the  relative  con-
dition of  the  parts  concerned  in  the  production  of  this  pheno-
menon. In  this  case  the  quantity  of  fluid  to  be  moved  is  small,
the  communication  with  the  bronchi  is  usually  narrow,  and  the
soft  walls  of  the  excavation  are  strongly  impressed  both  by  the
mediate  and  immediate  compressions  produced  by  the  cough.
Air  effused  into  the  pleura,  on  the  contrary,  almost  always  com-
municates with  the  air  in  the  larger  bronchi,  by  means  of  a  short
and  wide  channel ;  and  being  confined  between  the  bony  walls  of
the  chest  and  the  lung  bound  down  against  the  spinal  column,
it  is  very  little  susceptible  of  compression,  much  less  of  agitation,
by  the  action  of  coughing  The  fistulous  opening  is,  moreover,
rarely  situated  below  the  level  of  the  fluid.  For  these  reasons,
then,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the  cough  will  hardly,  in  any  case,
occasion  an  audible  fluctuation  of  a  liquid  contained  in  the
pleura;  and  we  may  be  assured  that,  whenever  such  fluctuation


SUCCUSSIOX  OF  THE  CHEST.


467


is  heard,  the  cause  of  it  is  situated  in  an  ulcerous  excavation
We  can  have  still  less  expectation  of  hearing  any  sounds  of  this
kind  by  simple  auscultation,  independently  of  coughing.  I  have
repeatedly  endeavoured  to  do  this,  in  cases  wherein  the  co-exist-
ence of  air  and  liquid  was  proved  by  other  means,  and  always
unsuccessfully.  In  cases  of  simple  hydrothorax  or  empyema
without  any  accompanying  extravasation  of  air,  the  impossibility
of  doing  this,  is  still  more  clearly  demonstrated.

I  ought  to  be  the  less  surprised  at  these  unsuccessful  results  of
my  attempts,  as  Hippocrates  himself,  as  I  have  elsewhere  shown,
committed  the  same  mistake. But  if  auscultation  by  itself  can-
not, as  Hippocrates  supposed,  detect  the  presence  of  a  fluid  in
the  chest,  we  obtain  at  least  from  the  writings  of  this  great  man,
or  those  of  his  disciples,  a  sign  very  characteristic  of  this  affec-
tion, in  one  particular  form  of  it. This  method  of  exploration,
which  perhaps  has  never  been  practised  but  by  the  Asclepiades,
consists  in  shaking  the  patient's  trunk,  and  at  the  same  time
listening  to  the  sounds  thereby  produced. This  process  is  de-
scribed by  the  author  of  the  treatise  De  Morbis  (lib.  ii.  45)  in
the  following  terms :  "  Having  placed  the  patient  in  a  firm  seat,
cause  his  hands  to  be  held  by  an  assistant,  and  then  shake  him
by  the  shoulder,  in  order  to  hear  on  which  side  the  disease  shall
produce  a  sound." Although  this  method  is  described  in  a  work
which  is  not  unanimously  attributed  to  Hippocrates,  we  cannot
doubt  of  its  having  been  known  to  him,  and  of  its  having  been  a
common  practice  among  his  followers :  many  passages  in  the  Hip-
pocratic  writings  either  speak  of  it  formally,  or  by  implication.
On  this  point,  as  on  several  others,  the  Asclepiades  have  gene-
ralized too  much  on  the  facts  observed  by  them :  every  where
they  mention  this  method  as  a  sure  means  of  recognizing  em-
pyema ;  and  yet  there  cannot  be  a  doubt,  as  will  be  shown  here-
after, that  the  simple  empyema  was  never  so  detected. It  is,  no
doubt,  owing  to  the  fruitless  attempts  made  in  different  times  to
discover  the  simple  disease  in  this  manner,  to  which  we  are  to
attribute  the  entire  abandonment  of  the  method  in  question.  So
complete,  indeed,  has  been  this  abandonment,  that  in  reading  the
Commentators  of  Hippocrates  we  do  not  find  a  single  indication
of  the  plan  having  been  ever  put  in  practice  by  any  of  them  ;
and  we  even  find  that  the  cleverest  of  them  do  not  seem  to  have
always  well  understood  the  passages  in  which  it  is  mentioned.
Succeeding  practitioners  appear  to  have  paid  as  little  attention
to  it ;  although  most  of  the  systematic  writers  on  surgery  men-
tion it,  but  doubtfully,  and,  as  it  would  seem,  merely  out  of  re-
spect to  Hippocrates. I  know  of  no  author  who  states  his
having  himself  practised  it;  but  a  few  observers  mention  cases
in  which  the  spontaneous  movements  of  the  chest,  produced
a  sound  of  fluctuation  perceptible  by  the  patient,  and  some-
times by  the  attendants.  Morgagni  was  witness  of  a  fact  of  this

h  H  2


46H


J'NT  EUMOTHORAX.


kind,*  and  has  recorded  four  others  observed  by  Fanton,f  Mau-
chart,}  Wolff',  §  and  Willis.||  To  th  ese  we  ought  to  add  another
noticed  by  Parcel  but  omitted  by  Morgagni,  and  perhaps  some
more  that  have  escaped  my  research  as  well  as  his.  At  all  events,
cases  of  this  kind  have  hitherto  been  considered  as  extremely
rare.  None  of  the  observers  just  mentioned,  seem  to  have
thought,  of  ascertaining,  even  in  the  cases  described  by  themselves,
whether  succussion  would  produce  the  sound,  as  well  as  the  spon-
taneous movements  of  the  patient ;  and  some  of  them,  particu-
larly Morgagni  and  Fanton,  have  even  endeavoured  to  show  that
the  method  of  Hippocrates  can  be  productive  of  no  result.

This  opinion  is,  no  doubt,  quite  correct,  in  relation  to  the  class
of  cases  considered  by  them,  viz.  collections  of  fluids  simply,
without  any  accompanying  air.  The  sound  of  fluctuation  cannot,
in  fact,  be  ever  perceived  in  simple  empyema  or  hydrothorax,
even  under  the  most  powerful  succussion,  as  I  have  many  times
proved.  When,  however,  pneumothorax  is  conjoined  with  either
of  these  affections,  the  phenomenon  is  distinctly  perceptible.
Sometimes,  also,  the  spontaneous  movements  of  the  patient  in
bed,  or  while  walking,  produce  a  fluctuation  sufficiently  loud  to
be  heard  by  himself  or  the  bystanders.  In  some  of  the  cases
which  I  shall  relate,  this  phenomenon  was  present;  but  the  only
practitioner  whom  I  have  met  with,  that  has  noticed  a  similar
fact,  is  M.  Boyer:  he  informs  me  that  he  saw  a  young  man,  in
consultation  with  MM.  Halle  and  Jeanroi,  who  very  distinctly
perceived  the  sound  of  fluctuation  within  the  chest,  when  coming
down  stairs.  When  the  sound  cannot  be  perceived  by  the  naked
ear,  on  account  of  its  feebleness,  the  stethoscope  enables  us  to  do
so  very  distinctly,  as  will  be  seen  in  two  of  the  cases  at  the  end
of  this  chapter.  Such  a  circumstance  will  particularly  occur  at
the  commencement  of  the  effusion  of  air,  and  while  this  is  still
in  small  quantity.  As  soon  as  the  accumulation  becomes  con-
siderable, the  sound  is  heard  very  distinctly  by  the  unassisted
ear.  In  some  cases  I  have  even  observed,  that  the  motion  of  the
fluid  could  be  perceived  by  the  hand  during  the  alternate  stoop-
ing and  raising  of  the  chest.

The  Hippocratic  fluctuation  is  among  the  few  signs  which  of
themselves  convey  to  the  least  experienced  observer,  a  full  and
entire  conviction  of  the  existence  of  the  disease.  Nevertheless,
there  are  still  some  cases  in  which  it  must  not  be  received  with
unlimited  confidence.  I  have  already  observed,  that  the  same
phenomenon  may  take  place  in  the  case  of  a  very  large  tuber-
culous excavation  half  full  of  liquid.  Such  a  case,  however,  is
very  rare,  and  it  has  never  occurred  to  me  but  once. In  this

*  De  Sed.  et  Cuus.  Morb.  Bp.  xvi.  nrt.  xxxvi.  t  Anat.  obs.  xxix.

|  Epliem.  Nat.  Cur.  Cent.  vii.  obs.  c. $  J.  P.  Wolftii.  Ibid.  torn.  r.  obs.  xxxiv.
||  Sepulchret.  lib.  ii.  Scliol.  nd  obs.  lxxv.
T  (Euvr.  d'Ambroise  Pure,  liv.  viii.  cliKp.  x.


SUCCUSSION OK  THE  CHEST.


469


instance,  the  lower  two-thirds  of  the  right  lung  were  occupied
by  a  vast  excavation,  in  such  manner  that  the  lung  formed
merely  the  walls  of  the  cyst,  being  everywhere  adherent  to  the
walls  of  the  chest  and  reduced  to  the  thickness  of  only  one  or
two  lines:  in  one  point,  about  the  size  of  the  palm  of  the  hand,
the  pleura  itself  appeared  to  form  the  immediate  boundary  of
the  excavation. I  must  admit  that  such  a  case  as  this  cannot  be
distinguished  from  pneumothorax  with  liquid  effusion  and  bron-
chial fistula,  unless  one  had  had  an  opportunity  of  watching  it
from  the  besinnino-. There  is  likewise  another  circumstance
which  might  mislead  an  inexperienced  observer:  some  persons
whose  stomachs  constantly  contain  air,  after  having  drunk  a  cer-
tain quantity  of  fluid,  exhibit  the  phenomena  of  fluctuation,
upon  the  trunk  being  shaken. One  of  my  pupils  possessed  this
power  in  an  eminent  degree,  and  sometimes  used  to  amuse  his
comrades  with  the  exhibition  of  it. This  error,  however,  is  very
easily  avoided  ;  as  the  alternate  application  of  the  stethoscope  to
the  chest  and  epigastrium  readily  points  out  the  source  of  the
sound. Besides,  in  this  case  always,  and  in  the  greater  number
of  instances  in  which  fluctuation  is  afforded  by  a  tuberculous
excavation,  the  absence  of  the  other  signs  supplied  by  percussion
and  auscultation,  will  prevent  us  from  committing  the  mistake
in  question.

Although  Hippocrates  was  unacquainted  with  pneumothorax,
in  one  of  the  passages  where  he  speaks  of  succussion,  we  find
some  remarks,  which  if  they  had  been  often  repeated,  would
have  necessarily  led  to  the  knowledge  of  this  disease  and  of  its
co-existence  with  empyema  in  every  case  in  which  succussion  of
the  chest  produces  the  sound  of  fluctuation. The  passage  is  the
following:  "Among  the  patients  affected  with  empyema,  those
who  produce  most  sound,  when  shaken  by  the  shoulder,  have  less
pus  in  the  chest  than  those  who  yield  less  sound,  and  who  are
more  flushed  and  breathless:  in  respect  of  those  who  do  not
yield  any  sound,  but  who  have  the  nails  livid  and  a  great  dys-
pnoea, they  are  full  of  pus,  and  their  case  is  desperate."  (Preen.
Coac.  ii.  432.) And  at  the  end  of  the  passage  in  which  the  suc-
cussion of  the  chest  is  described,  the  author  adds  that  "  some-
times (eVtore)  the  thickness  and  quantity  of  the  pus  prevent  us
from  hearing  the  fluctuation.11 (De  Morb.  ii.  45.) These  pas-
sages ought  to  convince  us  that  the  Asclepiades  had  an  idea  that
there  must  be  some  vacuity  in  the  chest  before  a  fluid  contained
in  it  can  produce  any  sound;  in  the  same  manner  as  wine  con-
tained in  a  bottle  when  shaken,  yields  the  more  sound  the  more
empty  it  is. Indeed  one  of  the  commentators  makes  use  of  this
very  comparison ;  but  the  notions  entertained  by  them  on  this
subject  were  confused  and  imperfect:  they  imagined  a  vacuum
in  some  part  of  the  chest,  which  we  know  cannot  exist.  Even
Morgagni  had  hardly  more  correct  ideas  on  this  subject;  for


470


PNEUMOTHORAX.


after  having  stated  that  the  fluctuation  cannot  be  perceived  when
either  the  fluid  is  in  very  great  or  very  small  quantity,  he  adds —
"  at  saltern,  inquies,  eo  temporis  spatio,  quo  ab  exigua  copia.
aqua  crescit,  nec  ad  summum  tamen  adhuc  pervenit,  ejus  fluc-
tuatio  videtur  percipi  debere.  Videtur  utique.  Sed  quidam
certe  non  percipiunt, — alii  non  attendunt :  alii  denique  non  in-
dicant medicis — Humerus  vero  apprehendere,  et  concutere  aut
aliter  agitare  non  omnes  aegros  sane  licet.1'  (Epist.  xvi.  37.)
We  further  gather  from  this  passage  that  Morgagni,  without
absolutely  denying  the  possibility  of  fluctuation  in  these  cases,
considered  the  sign  as  almost  useless,  on  account  of  its  great  in-
frequency ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  he  considered  succussion
as  attended  with  such  inconveniences  as  ought  to  cause  its  rejec-
tion in  most  cases.  This  opinion,  however,  is  totally  unfounded.
When  properly  used,  succussion  is  not  more  fatiguing  to  the
patient  than  the  percussion  of  the  chest,  or  the  examination  of
the  abdomen  by  compressing  its  contents.  To  enable  us  to  hear
the  sound,  it  is  not  necessary  to  shake  the  body  much;  all  that  is
required  being  merely  to  shake  the  shoulder  pretty  quickly,  and
to  stop  all  at  once.  I  have  employed  this  mode  of  exploration
in  the  case  of  a  great  number  of  patients,  several  of  whom  were
in  a  state  of  great  suffering  and  debility  ;  and  yet  I  never  heard
any  complaints  of  it.  There  are  no  grounds,  therefore,  for
leaving  it  in  the  oblivion  into  which  it  has  fallen.  The  cases  in
which  it  supplies  us  with  certain  signs  are  much  more  common
than  might  be  supposed  from  the  small  number  of  examples  on
record.  Sufficient  proof  of  this  is  supplied  by  the  five  following
cases,  which  occurred  in  the  course  of  a  single  year  in  an  hospital
containing  one  hundred  beds.  Three  other  cases  of  the  same
sort,  one  of  which  I  have  already  noticed  (Case  XVII.)  were  ob-
served during  the  same  period.  Since  the  publication  of  the  first
edition  of  this  work,  I  have  seen  at  least  thirty  similar  cases,  and
I  have  had  occasion  to  know  of  many  others  in  the  hospitals  of
Paris.  There  are  certainly  many  much  rarer  diseases,  which  are
better  understood.

Case  XXXVII. — Pleurisy  and  Pneumothorax,  with  fistulous
communication  between  the  pleura  and  brondii.  A  man  aged
thirty,  was  attacked  for  the  first  time,  in  May  1817,  with  a  ca-
tarrhal affection,  attended  by  cough,  dyspnoea,  &c.  which  con-
tinued, with  variable  severity,  until  the  beginning  of  November,
when  he  came  under  my  care  in  the  Necker  Hospital.  At  this
time  there  were  considerable  emaciation,  hot  skin,  small  and
frequent  pulse,  short  and  quick  respiration,  much  cough,  and
considerable  expectoration  of  opaque,  yellow,  and  rather  viscid
sputa.  On  percussion,  the  chest  afforded  an  imperfect  sound  on
the  upper  and  fore  parts  of  the  right  side,  only  a  middling  sound
between  the  scapula,  particularly  on  the  right  side,  and  a  good
sound  every  where  else.  The  Stethoscope  detected  the  respiratory


PMJnUMOTHOH  A\.


471


sound  over  the  whole  chest,  only  it  was  somewhat  feebler  than
natural  below  the  clavicles,  particularly  the  right.  Pectoriloquy
existed,  though  rather  doubtful,  below  the  right  clavicle  and  in
the  axilla. The  action  of  the  heart  was  natural. Diagnosis  :
Tuberculous  phthisis. On  the  12th,  pectoriloquy  was  distinct
under  the  right  clavicle  and  in  the  axilla  of  the  same  side;  and
the  respiration  was  more  perceptible  over  the  whole  of  the  left,
than  on  the  right  side. I  therefore  added  to  my  diagnosis  :-
tuberculous  excavations  in  the  summit  of  the  right  lung.  On
the  18th,  metallic  tinkling  was  perceptible  in  the*  same  points.
Between  this  time  and  the  end  of  December,  the  fever  became
greater  and  the  emaciation  greatly  increased. Acute  pains  in
different  parts  of  the  chest  supervened;  at  the  same  time,  the
cough  became  more  troublesome,  and  to  the  yellow  opaque  sputa
there  was  now  superadded  a  copious  discharge  of  transparent
and  frothy  mucus. Percussion  of  the  thorax  yielded  a  much
clearer  sound  on  the  right  than  on  the  left  side,  where  it  was
almost  dull  about  the  third  rib ;  while  the  respiratory  murmur
was  distinct  in  the  latter,  and  not  at  all  perceptible  in  the  former,
except  along  the  vertebral  column. The  metallic  tinkling  also
continued  to  be  very  audible  on  the  right  side. The  patient  lay
almost  constantly  on  the  right  side,  the  intercostal  spaces  of
which  could  now  be  perceived  to  be  wider  and  more  prominent
than  natural,  and  the  subcutaneous  veins  more  obvious.  All
these  symptoms  indicated  the  supervention  of  a  pleurisy,  with
effusion  of  both  air  and  a  liquid  of  some  sort  into  the  right  side
of  the  chest ;  and  I  accordingly  added  to  my  diagnosis — Pleurisy
with  effusion,  and  pneumothorax. Towards  the  end  of  January,
the  patient  first  perceived  the  fluctuation  of  a  liquid  in  his  chest
when  he  turned  himself:  the  same  thing  was  very  distinctly
heard  by  the  bystanders  when  the  trunk  was  shaken  in  a  sitting-
posture. It  was  difficult  to  distinguish  by  the  naked  ear  on
which  side  of  the  chest  the  sound  existed,  but  the  difficulty  was
immediately  removed  by  the  application  of  the  stethoscope,
(without  the  stopper,)  the  fluctuation  being  distinctly  heard  on
the  right  side  and  not  at  all  on  the  left. In  February,  the  sputa
amounted  to  about  six  ounces  in  twenty-four  hours :  they  were
yellow,  opaque,  and  puriform,  intermixed  with  bubbles  of  air,
and  swimming,  as  it  were,  in  a  large  proportion  of  a  transparent
and  diffluent  mucus,  in  which  there  werp  sometimes  streaks  of
blood. One  day  in  this  month,  he  expectorated,  after  a  fit  of
coughing,  as  much  as  he  usually  did  in  the  whole  twenty-four
hours. At  this  time  the  operation  of  empyema  was  performed,
between  the  sixth  and  seventh  ribs,  by  means  of  a  trocar  only
one  line  in  diameter. Two  pounds  of  matter  flowed  in  twenty
minutes. This  matter  was  puriform,  opaque,  of  a  slightly-
greenish  yellow  colour,  and  scarcely  fetid. As  it  flowed  it  was
intermixed  with  some  air-bubbles;  and  on  settling,  it  separated


472


l  N  BT7M0TH0HAX.


into  two  portions, — the  one,  opaque  and  yellow,  and  composed
of  small  yellowish  flocculi, — the  other,  thinner  and  transparent.
At  the  end  of  twenty  minutes  the  discharge  became  intermittent,
and  each  expiration  was  accompanied  by  the  expulsion,  with  a
loud  sound,  of  a  great  quantity  of  air  through  the  canula.  The
instrument  was  then  withdrawn,  and  the  natural  retraction  of  the
skin  immediately  destroyed  the  apposition  of  the  wounds  in  the
integuments  and  intorcostal  muscles.  Immediately  after  the
operation,  the  metallic  tinkling  was  heard  much  louder  than
before.  The  patient  felt  relieved  in  proportion  as  the  matter
flowed,  and  this  alleviation  continued  for  two  days,  but  he  sunk
on  the  12th  day  after  the  operation.

On  examining  the  body  after  death,  we  found  that  the  suc-
cussion  of  the  trunk  produced  the  sound  of  fluctuation  as  before.
On  puncturing  the  right  side  of  the  thorax,  which  was  larger
than  the  left,  a  gaseous  fluid  escaped,  and  it  was  found  to  contain
two  pints  of  a  sero-purulent  fluid. The  whole  extent  of  the
pleura,  on  this  side,  was  lined  by  a  thick  layer  of  coagulable
lymph,  the  consistence  of  which  varied  in  different  places,  from
that  of  soft  cheese  to  one  nearly  equal  to  that  of  cartilage :  it
was  softer  on  the  surface,  and  more  dense  where  it  touched  the
pleura. It  was  several  lines  thick  on  the  lungs,  and  on  the  right
side  of  the  mediastinum  and  diaphragm;  it  was  thinner,  softer,
and  more  easily  detached,  on  the  pleura  of  the  ribs  and  remain-
ing portion  of  the  diaphragm,  both  of  which  were  of  an  intense
punctuated  red  colour. The  pleura  of  the  lungs  had  none  of
this  punctuated  appearance,  and  the  layer  in  contact  with  it,
which  was  of  a  cartilaginous  firmness,  could  not  be  detached  from
it. The  lung  was  compressed  towards  the  spine  and  posterior
part  of  the  ribs  (to  which  it  closely  adhered,)  so  that  it  hardly
occupied  one-third  part  of  the  cavity. The  pulmonary  tissue
was  flaccid,  but  still  somewhat  crepitous,  and  permeable  to  the
air  in  its  posterior  part. There  were  several  tubercles  in  this
lung,  from  the  size  of  a  cherry-stone  to  that  of  a  filbert,  and
almost  all  softened  to  the  consistence  of  curd. Five  of  these,  of
a  somewhat  larger  size,  quite  softened  and  nearly  empty,  com-
municated on  the  one  side  with  the  bronchi,  and,  on  the  other,
with  the  cavity  of  the  pleura,  by  openings  of  from  one  to  three
lines  in  diameter. The  left  lung  was  of  the  natural  size,  and
contained  also  a  great  many  tubercles  in  different  stages  of  ma-
turity : — the  greater  number  being  small  and  diaphanous ;  a  few,
quite  softened  but  not  communicating  with  the  bronchi.  The
ivucous  membrane  was  very  red  through  its  whole  extent,  and
exhibited  a  small  ulcer  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  larynx.
There  was  a  small  quantity  of  serum  in  the  pericardium,  and
also  in  the  peritoneum.

Cask  XXXVIII. — Acute  pleurisy  and  pnenmothorar  in  a
phthisical  patient. — A  man,  aged  twenty,  who  bad  been  unwell  (he


PNEUMOTHORAX


said)  for  six  months,  and  who  had  suffered  from  diarrhoea  for
the  three  last,  came  into  the  hospital  in  January,  exhibiting  all
the  usual  symptoms  of  confirmed  phthisis.  The  chest  sounded
badly  on  percussion  on  the  upper  part  of  the  right  side  before,
and  on  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side  behind.  Pectoriloquy  was
very  evident  on  the  right  side,  below  the  clavicle,  in  the  axilla,
and  also  on  the  shoulder  between  the  upper  edge  of  the  trapezius
muscle  and  clavicle.  The  patient  remained  long  in  a  stationary
state.  In  February  the  pectoriloquy  was  accompanied  by  the
veiled  puff.  In  the  beginning  of  March  a  sudden  alteration  took
place  in  the  symptoms;  the  respiration  becoming  more  difficult,
attended  with  pricking  pains  in  the  right  side,  the  pulse  getting
quicker,  the  skin  hotter,  and  the  face  flushed.  On  examining
the  chest  at  this  time  by  percussion  and  the  stethoscope,  it  was
found  that  it  yielded  a  good  sound  over  the  whole  anterior  parts,
and  that  the  upper  portion  of  the  right  side,  which  on  the  day
before  had  yielded  only  a  dull  sound,  now  resounded  more  than
the  other ;  while  the  respiration  was  very  perceptible  on  the  left
side,  and  not  at  all  on  the  right.  These  symptoms  I  regarded
as  indicating  pleurisy,  arising  from  the  irruption  of  tuberculous
matter  into  the  cavity  of  the  pleura,  and  attended  both  by  liquid
and  gaseous  effusion.  1  wished  further  to  ascertain  the  effusion
by  succussion  of  the  chest,  but  the  patient  was  too  weak  to
undergo  the  trial,  and  he  di°d  four  days  after  the  marked  change
in  the  symptoms.

The  fluctuation  of  the  fluid  in  the  right  cavity  of  the  chest
was  very  perceptible,  on  succussion,  after  death.  This  side  ap-
peared, also,  larger  than  the  left ;  when  struck  it  emitted  a  clear
sound  ;  and  when  punctured  an  elastic  fluid  escaped  from  it  with
a  hissing  noise.  There  was  found  in  the  cavity  of  the  pleura  a
considerable  quantity  of  a  sero-purulent  liquid,  of  a  greenish-
yellow  colour,  very  frothy  on  the  surface,  and  semi-transparent,
notwithstanding  the  great  portion  of  puriform  fragments  that
floated  in  it.  The  pleura  was  lined  throughout  with  an  opaque
albuminous  exudation,  of  a  yellowish-white  colour,  easily  scraped
off  by  the  scalpel,  and  of  the  consistence  of  curdled  milk.  This
layer  was  of  considerable  thickness  on  some  parts  of  the  ribs  and
diaphragm,  and  thinner  on  the  lungs.  The  lung  on  this  side
was  compressed  into  one  third  or  one  fourth  its  natural  volume
against  the  spine  and  mediastinum,  to  which  last  it  closely  ad-
hered. It  was  flabby  and  very  imperfectly  crepitous  through
its  whole  extent,  and  contained  hard  tumours,  which  were  evi-
dently tubercles.  On  the  closest  examination  no  opening  could
be  discovered  on  its  surface.  In  the  very  summit  of  the  superior
lobe  there  were  found  three  tuberculous  excavations;  two  of
which,  of  the  size  of  an  hazel  nut,  were  full  of  soft  matter,  and
the  third,  six  times  as  large,  and  capable  of  containing  a  pullet1  s-
egg,  nearly  empty. This  vast  cavity  was  lined  by  two  mem-


474


lWKUMOTIIOUAX.


branes,  the  interior  (that  in  immediate  and  close  contact  with  the
pulmonary  tissue)  of  a  semi-cartilaginous  density,  and  the  ex-
terior soft,  almost  entirely  opaque,  and  easily  torn.  The  former
existed  only  in  some  points ;  the  latter  was  complete.  On  the
anterior  parts,  this  cavity  was  only  separated  from  the  surface
by  the  thickness  of  the  pleura  and  the  two  membranes  just  de-
scribed;  a  state  of  parts  which  accounts  for  the  phenomena  of
the  veiled  puff.  The  remainder  of  the  lung  was  filled  by  miliary
tubercles.  The  left  lung  appeared  quite  sound,  only  containing
a  few  miliary  tubercles.

Case  XXXIX. — Chronic  pleurisy  and  pneumothorax  occa-
sioned by  the  rupture  of  a  tuberculous  excavation  into  the  cavity  of
the  pleura. — A  man,  thirty-five  years  of  age,  while  in  an  hospital
for  a  chronic  affection  of  the  knee,  was  suddenly  attacked,  in
January,  with  pleuritic  symptoms,  viz.  head-ache,  pain  in  the
chest  aggravated  by  respiration,  frequent  cough,  and  expectora-
tion of  white  and  very  copious  sputa.  Getting  better  he  left  the
hospital  in  the  end  of  February,  but  returned  again  in  March.
On  his  admission  into  the  Necker  Hospital  on  the  14th,  he  pre-
sented the  following  symptoms:  skin  somewhat  hot  and  dry,
pulse  frequent,  dyspnoea,  frequent  cough  with  a  slight  expecto-
ration of  frothy  mucus.  The  chest  on  percussion  yielded  the
dead  sound  over  the  whole  of  the  left  side,  and  sounded  pretty
well  on  the  right  side.  On  the  left  side,  respiration  was  inaudible,
except  along  the  spine,  and  even  here  it  was  very  feeble,  and  ac-
companied by  a  slight  sibilous  rhonchus:  it  was  distinct  on  the
right  side.  Pectoriloquy  existed  in  the  supra-spinal  fossa  of  the
right  scapula.  Succussion  of  the  trunk  produced  no  sound.  In
consequence  of  these  signs  the  following  diagnosis  was  given  :
Phthisis,  chronic  pleurisy  with  considerable  extravasation  on  the
left  side.  On  the  20th  March,  doubtful  pectoriloquy  was  found
below  the  left  clavicle;  and  on  the  16th  April,  perfect  pecto-
riloquy was  found  in  the  same  place.  The  same  symptoms  con-
tinued, with  increase  of  emaciation  and  cough  in  June  and  July.
In  August,  diarrhoea  supervened,  with  still  greater  cough  and
fetid  purulent  expectoration,  to  the  amount,  for  a  short  time,  of
a  pound  and  a  half  in  the  twenty-four  hours.  In  October,  there
was  again  copious  fetid  expectoration,  with  dyspnoea  and  much
cough,  and  inability  to  lie  on  the  right  side.  At  this  time  both
sides  yielded  the  same  sound  on  percussion,*  but  respiration
could  be  perceived  in  the  right  side  only.  Fluctuation  in  the
left  side  was  also  perceptible  on  succussion,  by  means  of  the
cylinder,  but  not  without  it.  The  patient  said  that  a  momentary
attempt  to  lie  on  the  right  side  increased  the  frequency  of  the
cough,  and  greatly  augmented  the  expectoration. He  was  not,

*  The  return  of  natural  sound  on  the  [eft  side,  with  the  continued  absence  of  the
respiration,  indicated  the  development  of  pneumothorax. — Author.


]»N  UUMOTHOKAX.


475


liowever,  sensible  of  any  fluctuation  in  the  chest. He  died  in
the  beginning  of  November.

On  examination  after  death,  the  left  side  of  the  thorax  was
found  larger  than  the  right ;  the  left  intercostal  spaces  were  wider
and  raised  to  a  level  with  the  ribs,  while  the  right  were  sunk
below  that  level. On  puncturing  the  thorax  on  the  left  side,  an
extremely  fetid  gas  made  its  escape  with  a  hissing  sound.  On
laying  it  open  it  was  found  to  contain  about  three  pints  of  a
blackish-grey  liquid,  extremely  fetid,  and  having  somewhat  of
the  smell  of  garlick. The  lung  on  this  side  was  compressed
against  the  spine,  and  was  not  larger  than  the  hand. Its  surface
was  covered  with  a  laver  of  a  half-concrete  white  matter,  inter-
mixed  with  a  very  soft  black  substance. On  it  there  were  two
openings  of  the  size  of  the  finger,  which  terminated,  interiorly,
in  the  substance  of  the  lungs,  in  culs-de-sac  not  communicating
with  the  bronchi.  They  were  evidently  the  remains  of  tubercular
excavations  which  had  discharged  their  contents  into  the  cavity
of  the  pleura. The  whole  of  the  false  membrane  which  invested
the  pleura  was  black  and  soft  on  the  surface,  but  below  this  it
was  firmer  and  whitish. The  right  lung  adhered  to  the  pleura,
throughout,  by  old  attachments,  and  contained,  internally,  a  great
number  of  miliary  tubercles. In  its  upper  lobe  there  was  an
empty  excavation,  of  the  size  of  a  filbert,  lined  by  a  well  organ-
ized semi-cartilaginous  membrane. In  the  middle  of  the  same
lobe  there  were  found  several  white  bands  resembling  ancient
cicatrices. Two  of  these  united  in  the  form  of  the  letter  V,  and
contained  between  them  a  mass  of  tuberculous  matter.*

Case  XL. — Pneumothorax  with  pleuritic  effusion.  A  woman
aged  twenty-six  came  into  the  Necker  Hospital  in  January,.
1819,  having  been  ill  three  months  with  what  she  called  a  cold.
The  chest  yielded  a  middling  good  sound  every  where,  except
on  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side,  where  the  sound  was  duller.
In  the  same  place  imperfect  pectoriloquy,  and  also  cavernous
respiration,  existed  ;  and  in  the  axilla  of  the  same  side,  a  distinct
cavernous  rhonchus  was  perceived.  The  diagnosis  was  therefore
given — Tubercles  in  the  lungs ;  excavation  in  the  top  of  the  left
lung.  As  this  patient  was  clearly  in  a  hopeless  state,  she  was
not  often  examined.  On  the  17th  March  the  metallic  tinkling
was  found  very  distinctly  on  the  upper  part  of  the  left  side,  which
was  now  found  to  sound  much  better  than  the  right.  Inspira-
tion was  good  on  the  right  side,  but  was  inaudible  on  the  left.
I  then  announced  that  the  Hippocratic  succussion  would  occasion
the  sound  of  fluctuation ;  and  this  was  found  most  distinctly  to
be  t  he  case,  on  trial.  Pectoriloquy  continued  to  be  very  distinct
between  the  clavicle  and  second  rib,  and  also  in  the  supra-spinal
fossa  of  the  left  side. In  consequence  of  these  observations  I

*  This  case  affords  another  proof  of  the  cicatrization  of  tuberculous  cavities,  and
also  of  their  conversion  into  fistula:. — Authnr,


470'


PNEUMOTHORAX.


caused  the  following  addition  to  be  made  to  the  diagnosis  for-
merly recorded  :  Pleurisy  arid  pneumothorax  of  the  left  side
produced  by  the  discharge  of  a  softened  tubercle  into  the  cavity
of  the  pleura. The  patient  died  on  the  following  night.

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death. — Upon  puncturing
the  left  side  of  the  chest,  a  great  quantity  of  gas,  nearly  free
from  smell,  made  its  escape  with  a  hissing  noise ;  and  upon  laying
it  open,  the  cavity  of  the  pleura  appeared  half-empty,  the  lung
being  compressed  upwards  and  backwards  and  reduced  to  less
than  one-third  its  natural  size.  The  surface  of  the  pleura  was
here  and  there  of  a  punctuated  red,  and  its  cavity  contained
about  half  a  pin  t  of  a  transparent  fluid,  slightly  yellowish  and  in-
termixed with  some  whitish  flakes.  Nearly  the  whole  upper  lobe
was  closely  attached  to  the  costal  pleura ;  and  immediately  below
this  adhesion,  on  a  level  with  the  third  rib,  there  was  an  ulcer  or
aperture  of  the  size  of  the  nail,  covered  with  a  thick  yellow  mu-
cus, from  which  a  slight  pressure  forced  out  bubbles  of  air.
This  opening  was  the  extremity  of  a  very  short  fistulous  canal  of
the  thickness  of  the  finger,  which  communicated  with  a  vast  ex-
cavation occupying  a  great  part  of  the  upper  lobe,  and  nearly
quite  empty.  Into  this  cavity,  which  was  anfractuous  and  lined
by  a  false  membrane,  two  or  three  bronchial  tubes,  of  the  size  of
crow  quills,  were  found  to  open.  The  right  lung  adhered
throughout  to  the  costal  pleura,  and  contained  many  tubercles
of  the  size  of  cherrv-stones.

Case  XLI. — Chronic  pleurisy  and  pneumothorax  with  par-
tial gangrene  of  the  pleura.— A  man  aged  twenty-two,  became
affected,  in  the  beginning  of  October,  with  a  severe  catarrh,  which
lie  attributed  to  drinking  cold  water  while  hot.  This  was  followed
by  a  constant  cough  and  considerable  haemoptysis.  He  went  into
an  hospital  at  the  end  of  two  months,  and  after  remaining  there
a  fortnight  and  being  bled,  his  cough  having  become  somewhat
better,  he  left  it.  Having  had  a  fresh  attack  ten  days  thereafter,
he  came  into  the  hospital  under  my  care.  At  this  time  he  was
affected  with  prostration  of  strength,  impeded  respiration,  fre-
quent cougli  with  viscid,  frothy  and  somewhat  adhesive  expec-
toration, and  acute  pain  in  the  whole  right  side  of  the  chest.
Respiration  was  perfect  over  the  whole  of  the  left  side,  but  was
not  perceptible  on  the  right,  except  under  the  clavicle,  and  to-
wards the  roots  of  the  lung,  in  which  point  there  was  a  distinct
crepitous  rhonchus.  Percussion  gave  a  good  sound  on  the  left
side ;  but  this  was  less  dear  on  the  right  side  before,  and  was
quite  dull  posteriorly.  From  these  signs,  I  made  out  my  dia-
gnosis— Pleuro  pneumonia  of  the  right  side.  The  patient  was
bled  three  times,  had  leeches  applied  also  three  times,  and  was
kept  on  low  diet.  After  a  continuation  of  this  treatment  the  pain
of  the  side  disappeared,  and  the  respiration  became  freer,  but  the
patient  did  $ot  recover  strength,  and  he  was,  further,  attacked


I'M  a:  MOT  MOHAN.


477


with  diarrhoea Suspecting  the  existence  of  tubercles,  I  caused
the  patient  to  be  examined  with  the  stethoscope,  by  one  ot  my
pupils  who  detected  pectoriloquy  about  the  right  shoulder-blade.
I  further  found  at  this  time  that  the  respiration  continual  to  be
very  indistinct  in  the  right  side,  while  percussion  elicited  from  it
a  much  clearer  sound  than  from  the  left. Tins  fact,  ami  the
additional  sign  of  the  metallic  tinkling,  discovered  at  this  time,
convinced  me  of  the  existence  both  of  pleuritic  effusion  and
effused  air  (having  a  communication  with  the  bronei.i)  m  the
right  side  of  the  chest. This  was  further  confirmed  by  the  noise
of  fluctuation  produced  bv  the  Hippocratic  succussion. 1  here
was,  at  this  time,  no  appearance  of  (edema  on  the  right  side;  the
intercostal  spaces  were  not  at  all  enlarged  ;  nor  did  the  liver
appear  to  be  at  all  pressed  downwards  into  the  abdomen.  How-
ever, as  the  patient  had  lo»t  scarcely  any  flesh,  and  his  strength
seemed  ratlu-r  oppressed  than  exhausted,  I  entertained  hopes  of
saving  him  by  the  operation  of  empyema. Immediately  after
this  determination,  the  patient  expectorated  a  very  great  quantity
of  a  very  fetid pu«  quite  different  from  his  usual  sputa;  and  this
was  followed  by  increased  difficulty  of  respiration,  and  Other
symptoms  indicating  a  recent  pneumonic  attack  on  the  left  side.
The  operation  was  then  performed,  the  incision  being  made  be-
tween the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs,  (counting  from  above,)  about  tlu  ir
middle;  but  no  matter  flowed,  although  the  passage  of  air  by
the  wound  during  respiration  proved  the  penetration  of  thechist
by  the  incision. Shortly  afterwards  he  again  expectorated  a
large  quantity  of  very  fetid  pus,  and  died  four  hours  after  the
operation.

On  examining  the  body  after  death,  the  right  side  of  the  thorax
appeared  somewh.t  smaller  than  the  left.* Succus-don  of  the
bodv  produced  the  sound  of  fluctuation,  but  Lett  distinctly  than
before  death. On  puncturing  the  right  side  of  the  chest,  near
the  junction  of  the  third  rib  with  its  cartilage,  a  large  quantity
of  extremely  fetid  gas  made  its  escape; and,  on  making  a
puncture  about  the  middle  of  the  fourth  intercostal  space*,  a
very  great  quantity  of  pus  flowed  out :  this  was  very  liquid,  of
a  slightly  greenish-yellow  colour,  and  of  an  intolerable  gangre-
nous fetor. The  whole  of  the  fluid  contained  in  this  side  of  tin-
chest  amounted  to  about  a  pint-and-half. The  lung  was  much
flattened  towards  the  mediastinum,  being  only  an  inch  thick  at
its  superior  part ;  it  gradually  enlarged  downwards,  and  at  its
inferior  margin  was  two  inches  and-a -half  in  width. The  lung
had  thus  three  side's  ; — the  one  internal,  attached  by  means  of
short  cellular  adhesions  to  the  mediastinum  ;  the  other  anterior,
of  a  triangular  shape,  and  attached  by  old  cellular  adhesions  to


•  This  is  uailtmry  t«  t!>e  nttl  state  of  things  in  liydrntliornx  nd  enii'vemn.  In

QnwtMBt  fii.se  it  was  tli«*  consequence  of  an  (interior  attack  ot  j.leurijiv. — Author.


478


PNEUMOTHORAX.


the  sterno-costal  pleura;  and  (he  third  external,  separated  from
the  ribs  by  a  space,  nearly  four  fingers'  breadth  wide,  which
formed  the  inner  wall  of  the  excavation  which  had  contained  the
effusion.  This  excavation  (of  which  the  ribs  and  diaphragm
formed  the  remaining  boundaries)  was  completely  lined  bv  a  false
membrane,  of  a  degree  of  consistence  intermediate  between  that
of  boiled  white  of  egg  and  cartilage,  of  a  pretty  uniform  thick-
ness of  from  a  line  to  a  line  and  a  half,  and  of  a  pearl-grey  colour,
and  semi-transparent.  It  seemed  composed  of  two  layers,  the
under  being  firmer  than  the  upper.  About  the  middle  of  the
fourth  rib  this  membrane  was  pierced  by  a  small  ulcer  of  the  size
of  the  nail,  which  extended  to  the  rib,  and  had  all  the  characters
of  one  produced  by  the  detachment  of  a  gangrenous  eschar.  A
somewhat  similar  ulceration,  but  extending  only  through  the
false  membrane  and  subjacent  pleura,  was  perceptible  on  the
external  side  of  the  compressed  lung.  It  had  the  gangrenous
fetor,  and  was,  obviously,  an  example  of  the  partial  gangrene  of
the  pleura  and  false  membranes.  On  the  same  exterior  border
of  the  compressed  lung,  at  its  posterior  margin,  there  were  two
more  openings,  which  were  found  to  communicate  with  two  large
tuberculous  excavations  in  the  substance  of  the  lung,  partly
filled  with  purulent  matter.  On  blowing  into  the  trachea,  air
made  its  escape  into  the  cavity  of  the  chest,  into  which  these
fistulae  opened,  yet  we  could  not  detect  the  exact  medium  of  com-
munication with  the  bronchi.  The  substance  of  the  lung,  though
flaccid,  was  still  crepitous,  and  contained  some  tubercles.  Upon
removing  the  lungs,  it  was  evident  that  the  side  of  the  chest  was
much  shorter  than  natural.  The  diaphragm  was  found  intimately
adhering  anteriorly  to  the  seventh  rib,  through  two-thirds  of  its
length,  the  adhesion  sloping  backwards  to  the  ninth  rib,  so  as  to
leave  on  the  lower  and  posterior  part  of  the  chest,  a  species  of  cul-
de-sac,  of  not  more  than  two  fingers'  breadth.  This  state  of
parts  accounted  for  the  result  of  the  operation.  The  incision
had  penetrated  through  the  diaphragm  into  the  cavity  of  the
abdomen,  parallel  with  the  upper  surface  of  the  liver.  The  left
lung  was  of  the  natural  size,  and  contained  in  its  upper  lobe,  a
cicatrice  of  the  kind  described  in  the  chapter  on  phthisis,  about
an  inch  in  length,  as  wide  as  the  finger,  and  of  the  thickness  of
two  lines  in  its  centre.  Around  this  cicatrice  the  pulmonary
tissue  was  quite  sound  and  crepitous.  A  little  lower,  and  also  in
the  superior  and  posterior  part  of  the  same  lobe,  it  was  indurated
to  the  degree  of  hepatization,  and  was  granular  when  cut  into.
The  remainder  of  the  lung  was  crepitous,  but  much  redder  than
the  right  lung,  and  gorged  with  a  bloody  serum.  It  contained
some  small  tuberculous  masses  like  the  right  lung.  The  liver
was  quite  sound,  and  entirely  concealed  beneath  the  false  ribs.
Between  it  and  the  diaphragm  passed  the  incision  made  in
operating.


M  KT  A  I.I.IC  TINKl.INC.


The  failure  of  the  operation  in  the  above  case  was  inevitable :
the  same  thing  would  have  happened  if  the  incision  had  been
made  three  inches  further  back  ;  and  still  more  certainly  had  it
been  made  in  the  place  of  election.  I  am  not  aware  that  this
operation  has  before  been  frustrated  by  a  similar  obstacle.  I
apprehend  so  close  an  adhesion  of  the  diaphragm  to  the  pleura
of  the  ribs  must  be  very  rare.  In  the  present  case  I  conceive  it
must  be  attributed  to  a  pleurisy  long  anterior  to  that  which  caused
the  death  of  the  patient.  I  have  met  with  cases  where  the  liver
ascended  as  high  as  the  fifth  rib,  and  where  the  diaphragm  lay
in  juxtaposition  with  the  pleura,  all  the  way  from  its  natural
attachments  to  this  point,  without  there  being  any  disease  of  the
lungs  or  pleura.  In  such  cases  an  attack  of  pleurisy  must  have
produced  the  extensive  adhesion  described  in  the  last  case.

Sect.  IV. — Of  the  Metallic  Tinkling  in  effusions  into  the  chest.

The  metallic  tinkling  is  scarcely  ever  found  in  the  simple  hydro-
pneumothorax,  that  is,  without  communication  with  the  bronchi.
In  this  case,  neither  the  respiration,  voice,  nor  cough  produces
this  phenomenon  ;  but  it  sometimes  takes  place  in  another  manner.
Should  the  patient  happen  to  raise  himself  suddenly  in  bed,  and
a  drop  of  fluid  fall  from  the  upper  part  of  the  cavity  of  the  pleura
into  the  fluid  beneath,  it  produces  a  sound  like  that  occasioned
by  a  drop  of  water,  let  fall  into  a  flask  three  parts  empty  ;  and
this  sound  is  immediately  followed  by  a  very  distinct  metallic
tinkling,  of  longer  duration  than  that  produced  in  another
manner.  (I  shall  give  an  example  of  this  rare  case  at  the  end  of
the  present  section.)  It  is  by  means  of  the  stethoscope  that
I  have  heard  this  modification  of  the  tinkling  ;  and  I  am  doubtful
if  it  could  be  heard  without  it.  A  pretty  exact  idea  of  it  may
be  obtained  by  applying  the  instrument  to  the  epigastrium  of  a
person  in  the  erect  position,  while  he  is  swallowing  a  little  water,
drop  by  drop:  and  sometimes  an  analogous  sound  is  perceived  in
the  region  of  the  heart,  just  as  the  individual  has  swallowed  his
saliva. — ISut  if  the  phenomenon  is  rare  in  the  simple  hydro-pneu-
mothorax,  it  is  constantly  observable  during  coughing,  speaking,
and  breathing,  in  the  case  of  a  fistulous  communication  between
the  bronchi  and  pleura ;  or  at  least,  the  utricular  buzzing  is  so,
if  the  tinkling  is  not  fully  developed.  And  indeed  these  are  the
only  signs  which  enable  us  to  recognize  the  fistulous  communi-
cation in  question,  in  the  case  of  empyema  and  pneumothorax  :
and  such  is  their  certainty,  that  this  is  not  augmented  by  the
co-existence  of  any  other,  not  even  the  sudden  and  repeated
expectoration  of  a  large  quantity  of  pus,  which  sometimes  takes
place  in  these  cases,  but  which  may  be  likewise  the  result  of


480


PNEUMOTHORAX.


a  mere  bronchial  secretion.  The  extent  over  which  the  metallic
tinkling  and  buzzing  are  perceived,  together  with  the  Hippocratic
fluctuation,  serve  to  discriminate  the  case  in  question,  from  a  vast
tuberculous  excavation.  The  Hippocratic  succussion,  no  doubt,
of  itself  demonstrates  the  nature  of  the  affection  ;  but  even  here,
the  other  sign  is  highly  important ;  as  we  cannot  be  too  well
assured  of  the  existence  of  a  disease  so  severe  as  this,  and  which
has  hitherto,  perhaps,  never  been  recognized  in  the  living  subject.
This  may  seem  a  bold  assertion ;  but  I  am  well  assured  of  its
correctness;  and  in  proof  of  this  I  shall  content  myself  with
referring  to  the  work  of  M.  Bayle.  His  treatise,  which  is
unquestionably  the  most  accurate  and  full  of  any  that  have  been
written  on  diseases  of  the  chest,  contains  five  cases  of  pneumo-
thorax with  serous  or  puriform  effusion  (Cases  XI.  XL.  XL II.
XLIII.  XLV.)  In  no  one  of  these,  was  the  disease  suspected
during  life ;  and  in  two  of  them  (XLII.  and  XLIII.)  the  aeriform
effusion  does  not  appear  to  have  been  discovered  even  after
death,  although  the  existence  of  this  appears  clearly  from  the
dissection.

And  yet  Bayle  was  a  practitioner  who  carried  the  precision  of
diagnosis  as  far  as  ever  any  man  did.  Few,  indeed,  have  pos-
sessed, in  so  eminent  a  degree,  the  qualities  which  constitute  a
good  practitioner  and  correct  observer.  His  acute  and  penetrat-
ing genius  was  perceptible  at  first  sight  ;  and  a  very  slight
acquaintance  was  sufficient  to  discover  in  him  a  mind  no  less  cool
than  comprehensive,  and  a  most  extensive  erudition,  acquired  by
a  study  of  the  best  writings,  and  by  personal  and  practical
researches,  pursued  to  an  extent  and  with  an  assiduity  almost
superhuman.*  Endued  with  a  vast  power  of  attention,  and  with
patience  which  nothing  could  rebut  or  weary,  application  seemed
a  part  of  his  natural  character ;  and  no  one  of  his  friends  or  fel-
low-labourers ever  perceived  that  fatigue,  discouragement,  or
negligence  made  him,  on  any  occasion,  omit  to  do  all  and  every
thing  that  was  proper  to  be  done.  Religious,  moreover,  and
stedfast  in  his  principles  even  to  severity,  from  a  mere  sentiment
of  duty  he  attended  as  carefully  to  the  patients  who  held  out  no
prospect  of  supplying  him  with  information,  as  to  those  whose
cases  were  the  most  curious  and  interesting;  and  yet,  in  the  in-
stances now  under  consideration,  he  did  not  discover  the  disease;
and  even  in  two  of  them  he  seems  to  have  quite  overlooked  the
pneumothorax,  after  death,  although  this  appears  clearly  from
his  own  descriptions  to  have  been  present.  The  fact  is,  that  with
the  so^  indications  supplied  by  the  general  symptoms,  and  by

*  From  tbe  year  1801  to  the  time  of  his  death,  a  period  of  fourteen  yews,  hardly
a  day  passed  in  which  he  did  not  examine  one  or  more  dead  bodies,  lie  took  accu-
rate "notes  of  all  his  dissections,  as  well  us  of  the  diseases  of  which  the  iudi  viduals  hud
died. — A  nthor.


METALLIC  TINKLING.


Ml


percussion,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  discover  pneumothorax  during
life;  and  when  this  has  been  the  case,  the  air  may  easily  escape
notice  upon  examination  of  the  body.

In  some  instances  wherein  I  have  had  the  attendance  of  several
of  my  medical  brethren,  while  verifying  by  dissection  the  stetho-
scopic  indications,  I  found  that  some  of  them  were  of  opinion  that
the  preternatural  or  tympanitic  resonance,  on  percussion,  is  of
itself  sufficient  to  point  out  pneumothorax.  This  might  certainly
be  so,  at  least  in  some  extreme  cases;  but  I  am  doubtful  if  such
a  thing  ever  actually  occurred.  Bayle  employed  percussion  in
the  case  of  all  his  patients ;  and  the  five  above  mentioned  had
been  subjected  to  the  same  trial.  On  a  former  occasion  I  related
a  case  (Case  XV.)  in  which  this  physician  did  detect  pneumo-
thorax by  means  of  the  co-existence  of  the  tympanitic  sound  and
the  dilatation  of  the  chest :  but  this  was  in  the  dead  body  :  and
we  know  that  percussion  affords  much  more  marked  results  in
the  case  of  a  subject  stretched  on  the  table  of  a  dissecting  room,
than  in  that  of  a  living  body  in  bed.  The  same  thing  is  true  of
the  inequality  of  size  in  the  two  sides  of  the  chest,  which  is  very
perceptible  in  the  naked  body,  though  hardly  discoverable  in
a  person  with  merely  a  shirt  on.#  Neither  Avenbrugger  nor
Corvisart  mention  pneumothorax ;  and  yet  both  of  them  must
have  seen  examples  of  it,  especially  the  latter,  both  in  the  living
and  dead  body  :  for  this  disease  is  by  no  means  so  rare,  as  to  make
it  possible  to  be  in  the  habitual  examination  of  the  living  and
dead  body,  for  several  years  together,  without  meeting  cases  of
it.  Even  in  the  instance  of  the  tympanitic  sound  combined  with
dilatation  of  the  side,  there  still  remains  the  uncertainty  whether
the  larger  side  is  really  preternatu rally  dilated,  or  the  other  is
contracted  in  consequence  of  pleurisy.  And  when  the  dilatation
of  the  side  either  does  not  exist  or  is  not  perceived,  we  will
be  liable  to  a  more  serious  error,  that,  namely,  of  considering  the
side  which  sounds  well,  as  healthy,  and  the  other  as  the  seat  of
pneumonia  or  pleurisy :  and,  in  fact,  this  is  the  conclusion  come
to  by  all  the  physicians  to  whom  I  showed  my  cases  of  pneumo-
thorax, previously  to  communicating  to  them  the  indications  of
the  stethoscope.  The  only  instance  wherein  percussion  will
supply  positive  results,  is  that  in  which  air  and  liquid  co-exist;
and  these  results  will  be  obtained  by  that  method  of  which  I
have  shown  the  inefficacy  in  the  case  of  simple  hydrothorax  or
pleurisy, — I  mean,  percussion  exercised  in  different  positions  of
the  chest.  In  these  circumstances,  the  gas  rising  always  to  the
the  part  of  the  cavity  which  is  superior,  the  sphere  of  the  dead
sound  will  vary  with  each  posture  of  the  patient. But  indepen-

*  The  argument  here  used  is  invalid  ;  as,  assuredly,  no  physician  would  fail  to  ex-
amine the  naked  chest  under  such  circumstances  as  those  contemplated  in  the  case  in
question.  —  Transl.

I  I


482


PNEUMOTHORAX.


dentlv  of  the  mistakes  which  might  still  be  occasioned  in  such
cases  by  adhesions  of  the  lungs,  the  great  inconvenience  of  suc  h
a  method,  both  to  the  patient  and  physician,  will  prevent  its
being  used,  except  where  the  nature  of  the  affection  is  already
suspected.

If  the  cases  observed  by  Bayle,  and  those  which  must  have
been  seen  by  Avenbrugger  and  Corvisart,  had  come  before  a
physician  acquainted  with  the  practice  of  mediate  auscultation,
they  must  of  necessity  have  been  recognized.  The  metallic  tink-
ling by  itself  would,  in  several  cases,  have  pointed  out  the  whole
complicated  character  of  the  disease,  viz.  the  pneumothorax,  the
extravasated  fluid,  and  the  fistulous  opening  between  the  pleura
and  bronchi.  In  the  cases  in  which  this  communication  did  not
exist,  the  absence  of  the  respiratory  sound  would  have  led  him  to
percuss  the  chest ;  and  the  results  obtained  from  percussion, —
pointing  necessarily  either  to  pneumothorax  or  emphysema  of  the
lungs, —  would  have  led  to  the  exploration  of  the  whole  chest,
and  consequently  to  the  discoverv  of  the  actual  disease.  Having
proved  the  affection  to  be  pneumothorax,  he  would  have  ascer-
tained whether  it  was  simple  or  complicated  with  liquid  effusion,
by  means  of  the  Hippocratic  succussion. — I  am  far  from  wishing
to  throw  blame  on  the  excellent  observers  just  named,  for  what
they  did  not  do.  I  have  been  merely  desirous  of  showing  that
various  methods  may  be  combined,  with  great  advantage,  to  obtain
the  end  in  view ;  and  that  this  combination  is  infinitely  more  cer-
tain in  its  results  than  the  method  which  has  been  hitherto  exclu-
sively employed.

Case  XLII. — Pneumothorax  and  subacute  pleurisy,  in  a
phthisical  subject.  A  man,  aged  twenty-nine,  caught  a  severe
catarrh  from  exposure  to  much  cold  in  the  beginning  of  October,
1818,  which  he  neglected,  as  he  had  done  a  cough  with  which  he
had  been  affected  in  the  preceding  spring.  This  catarrh,  after  a
few  weeks,  was  followed  by  spitting  of  blood  for  several  days,
and,  subsequently,  by  a  continual  cough,  dyspnoea  and  emacia-
tion. On  the  5th  of  February,  1819,  he  came  into  the  Necker
Hospital.  At  this  time  he  was  evidently  in  a  confirmed  con-
sumption— being  affected  with  great  emaciation,  frequent  cough,
yellow  opaque  sputa,  dyspnoea,  diarrhoea,  and  pectoriloquy  below
both  clavicles,  evident  on  the  left,  doubtful  on  the  right  side.
Things  continued  much  in  the  same  way  until  the  17th,  when  at
the  hour  of  visit  I  found  the  patient  agitated  and  exhausted,
with  quicker  pulse  and  hot  skin.  Presuming  that  a  slight  pneu-
monia had  supervened  to  the  tuberculous  affection,  I  explored
the  chest  with  the  stethoscope.  The  respiration  was  inaudible
on  the  left  side  anteriorly  and  laterally,  although  the  chest  was
fully  dilated  at  each  inspiration :  behind,  over  the  roots  of  the
lungs,  it  was  perceptible,  but  in  a  less  degree  than  natural ;  per-
cussion yielded  a  good  sound  every  where. Having  the  cylinder


METALLIC  TINKLING.


483


applied  to  the  chest  below  the  left  clavicle,  as  the  patient  placed
himself  in  a  sitting  posture,  I  heard  distinctly  a  sound  like  that
produced  by  a  drop  of  liquid  let  fall  into  a  flask  containing
a  very  small  quantity  of  water ;  and  this  sound  was  followed  for
a  second,  by  a  tinkling  such  as  is  occasioned  by  striking  a  glass
with  a  pin.  Neither  the  voice,  cough,  nor  respiration,  was
attended  by  any  sound  of  the  same  kind.  The  respiration  was
good  on  the  right  side,  but  was  accompanied  by  a  rhonchus,
which  was  sibilous,  sonorous,  and  mucous,  in  different  points.
The  whole  of  this  side  sounded  much  less  than  the  other;  indeed
the  sound  was  comparatively  quite  dull.  These  signs  pointing
out,  with  certainty,  the  existence  of  pneumothorax  on  the  left
side,  I  had  the  patient  undressed  in  order  to  see  if  this  side  was
dilated :  some  difference  seemed  observable,  particularly  on  the
lower  part,  but  it  was  so  slight  that  we  could  be  by  no  means
certain  of  it.  Suspecting  from  the  metallic  tinkling  that  there
existed  a  small  effusion  of  liquid  along  with  the  pneumothorax,
I  applied  the  test  of  succussion,  and  heard,  both  by  the  stetho-
scope and  the  naked  ear,  the  sound  of  fluctuation,  apparently  in
the  left  side.  I  added,  in  consequence,  to  my  diagnosis — Pneu-
mothorax with  a  small  effusion  of  pus  in  the  left  side  of  the
chest ;  and  subjoined  an  opinion,  founded  on  the  absence  of  the
metallic  tinkling  during  coughing  and  speaking,  that  the  effusion
did  not  originate  in  the  rupture  of  a  softened  tubercle  into  the
pleura  and  bronchi.  Seeing  no  other  means  of  relieving  the
patient,  I  proposed  the  operation  of  empyema.  This,  however,
was  not  performed,  as  he  died  the  same  day,  although  at  the
hour  of  the  visit  there  did  not  seem  any  thing  indicative  of  so
sudden  a  termination  of  his  disease.

On  examining  the  body  after  death,  the  left  side  of  the  chest
appeared  to  me  evidently  enlarged  ;  but  this  was  doubted  by
some  of  the  persons  present.  On  percussion  it  certainly  yielded
a  much  clearer  sound  than  the  other,  and  succussion  of  the  trunk
produced  the  noise  of  fluctuation.  On  puncturing  the  thorax
with  a  scalpel  on  the  left  side,  a  nearly  inodorous  gas  continued
to  escape,  with  a  hissing  noise,  for  nearly  a  minute ;  and,  on
opening  it,  it  was  found  three-fourth  parts  empty,  the  lung  being
found  only  of  one-third  its  natural  size,  and  compressed  towards
the  mediastinum,  but  without  adhering  to  it.  In  the  same  cavity
there  was  nearly  a  pound  of  a  liquid  resembling  whey,  of  a
whitish  colour,  turbid,  and  containing  portions  of  yellowish  half-
concrete  albumen  :  it  was  quite  covered  with  transparent  bubbles,
exactly  resembling  those  produced  by  agitating  or  blowing  into
soapy  water.  The  whole  of  the  lung,  on  this  side,  was  covered
with  an  irregular  albuminous  membrane,  which  in  several  places
greatly  resembled  an  omentum  moderately  loaded  with  fat.  In
the  top  of  the  superior  lobe  there  were  two  excavations,  con-
taining only  a  soft  tuberculous  pus,  and  each  capable  of  holding

r  t  2


l'NEUMOTHOHAX.


a  walnut.  But  these  were  lined  with  a  double  membrane,  and
communicated  with  bronchial  tubes.  The  whole  lung  was  filled
by  tubercles,  in  every  stage  of  their  progress.  The  upper  lobe
of  the  right  lung  adhered  to  the  pleura,  and  contained  a  series  of
large  tuberculous  excavations,  partly  empty,  and  all  lined  by  the
semi-cartilaginous  membrane.  This  lobe  further  contained
many  immature  tubercles;  the  other  lobes  were  sound.*

In  reviewing  the  series  of  signs  detailed  in  this  chapter,  we  per-
ceive that  pneumothorax  is  not  only  of  easy  recognition,  but  that
each  of  its  varieties  may  be  readily  distinguished  from  the  others.
These  varieties,  in  a  diagnostic  point  of  view,  may  be  reduced  to
the  following :  1.  simple  pneumotharax ;  2.  pneumothorax  with
liquid  effusion  ;  3.  pneumothorax  with  liquid  effusion  and  fistu-
lous opening  between  the  bronchi  and  pleura.  In  the  first  of
these  cases,  the  affected  side  sounds,  at  least,  well,  and  sometimes
is  preternaturally  sonorous;  while  the  respiration  is  not  at  all
perceptible. -f-  When  pneumothorax  is  combined  with  liquid
extravasation,  the  same  signs  exist,  with  these  in  addition :  the
most  dependent  parts  of  the  chest  yield  a  dull  sound,  and  these
parts  vary  with  the  position  of  the  patient;  and  the  Hippocratic
succussion  gives  the  sound  of  fluctuation.  In  the  third  variety,
to  all  the  preceding  signs  we  have  to  add  the  metallic  tinkling  or
amphoric  resonance,  which  commonly  alternate.  I  The  two  first
varieties  cannot  be  confounded  with  any  other  affection ;  the  last
presents  signs  very  analogous  to  those  afforded  by  a  vast  tuber-
culous evcavation  nearly  empty.  But  even  here  a  mistake  is  very
unlikely.  In  the  pulmonary  excavation,  we  have  some  remains
of  pectoriloquy ;  the  sphere  of  the  tinkling,  amphoric  buzzing,
and  tympanitic  resonance  on  percussion,  is  very  circumscribed ;
and  there  is  no  fluctuation  on  succussion,  while  the  cough  some-
times occasions  a  guggling  or  slight  fluctuation,  which  is  never
the  case  in  pneumothorax. §

*  In  the  eight  cases  of  pneumothorax  above  detailed,  the  disease  appears  to  have
equally  affected  the  two  sides  of  the  chest ;  in  two  cases  formerly  given  (Cases  XV.
and  XVI.)  the  site  of  the  affection  was  the  left  side  :  the  result  of  the  whole  being  six
on  the  left  and  four  on  the  right  side.  The  collation  of  all  the  known  cases  of  pneumo-
thorax (forty-nine  in  number)  by  M.  lleynaud,  gives  thirty-two  on  the  left,  and
seventeen  on  the  right.  (Journ.  Hebdom.  A  vril,  1830. )  It  would  thus  appear  that  pneu-
mothorax,— the  reverse  of  tubercles,  with  which  it  is  nevertheless  almost  alwa}  s  con-
joined,— is  generally  more  frequent  on  the  left  than  on  the  right  side.  1  do  not,
however,  think  that  the  number  of  our  ohservations  are  yet  sufficient  to  justify  our
establishing  an  absolute  rule  as  to  relative  frequency  of  site  of  this  disease.  (M.  L.)

f  We  must  here  except  the  rare  case,  formerly  mentioned,  where  the  puerile  respi-
ration of  the  sound  lung  is  heard  through  the  diseased  side. — Author.

|  The  precise  period  of  occurrence  of  this  last  variety  is  commonly  indicated  by
a  particular  set  of  symptoms  formerly  noticed,  and  to  which  M.  Louis  has  more  parti-
cularly called  attention  ;  (Reck,  sur  la  Phth.  p.  445  ;)  viz.  sudden  acute  pain  on  one
side  of  the  chest,  accompanied  with  a  strong  sense  of  suffocation  and  great  anxiety.
Sometimes,  however,  the  pain  and  suffocation  are  not  sufficiently  marked  to  attract
the  attention  of  the  patient  or  his  medical  attendant  ;  and  these  symptoms  are,  con-
sequently, only  of  value  when  they  harmonize  with  the  stethoscopic  signs. (M.  L).

§  1  here  subjoin  a  brief  summary  of  the  principal  diagnostic  signs  of  pneumo-


METALLIC TINKLING.  485

Treatment. — The  exact  diagnosis  of  pneumothorax,  and
of  each  particular  variety  of  it,  must  not  be  considered  as  a
matter  of  purely  speculative  knowledge,  or  as  useful  only  in
respect  of  the  prognosis  of  the  disease.  Jt  is  extremely  probable,
as  has  been  remarked  by  Hewson*  and  Rullier,-f-  that  simple
pneumothorax  is  the  case  which  holds  out  most  prospect  of  suc-
cess from  the  operation  of  puncturing  the  chest.  This  opinion  is
corroborated  by  an  observation  of  Riolan,  who  informs  us  that
he  had  several  times  seen  the  operation  of  paracentesis  success-
fully performed  on  patients  considered  as  affected  with  dropsy,
but  from  whose  chests  only  air  made  its  escape. J  In  cases  of
this  kind,  the  puncture  with  the  trocar  would  unquestionably  be
preferable  to  incision.  But  I  would  here  remark,  that,  ex-
clusively of  the  great  infrequency  of  the  simple  pneumothorax,
I  think  it  must  be  generally  considered  as  of  no  great  severity,
the  gas  being  more  readily  absorbed  than  the  liquid  effusion.
I  think  myself  justified,  at  least,  in  drawing  this  conclusion  from
the  frequency  of  gaseous  effusions  in  other  situations,  which  dis-
appear spontaneously,  and  frequently  in  the  course  of  a  few  days
or  even  hours.  Of  this  kind  is  the  pneumo-pericardium,  and
the  various  kinds  of  pneumarthrosis,  particularly  that  of  the
knee,  which  so  frequently  arises  during  the  convalescence  from
articular  rheumatism,  as  well  as  in  other  circumstances.  On  this
account,  before  proceeding  to  puncture  the  chest,  we  ought  to
endeavour  to  excite  absorption  by  aromatic  and  spirituous  fric-
tions, and  by  the  internal  use  of  slight  tonics.

Pneumothorax  complicated  with  liquid  effusion  and  still  more
with  pulmonary  fistula,  is  a  case  of  a  most  serious  nature,  and
leaves  little  hope  of  a  cure  being  effected.  This,  however,  must
not  be  considered  as  quite  impossible,  even  in  the  severest  cases,
I  formerly  proved  the  possibility  of  the  cicatrization  of  tuber-
culous excavations;  and  the  observations  of  Bacqua,  Jaymes
and  Robin,  (Journ.  Gen.  de  Med.  1813,)  to  which  I  could  add
a  more  recent  case  of  the  same  kind,  (I  mean  cases  where  the
patients  recovered  after  the  operation  of  empyema,  although  the

thorax,  with  the  estimated  value  of  each,  from  the  very  valuable  Treatise  on  Pneu-
mothorax by  Dr.  Houghton,  in  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Practical  Medicine.  The  young
practitioner  will  find  his  advantage  in  referring  to  this  recapitulation  after  perusing
the  text  of  our  author  and  the  various  notes  which  have  been  appended  to  this°
"1.  The  sensation  of  something  giving  way  in  the  chest,  and  of  air  entering  the
pleural  cavity :  very  valuable,  but  often  absent  or  unnoticed.  2.  In  a  phthisical
individual,  the  sudden  supervention  of  overwhelming  dyspncea  and  pain:  rarely
absent,  therefore  very  valuable ;  still  more  so  if  succeeding  last  sign.  3.  Comparison  of
auscultation  and  percussion.  Nullity  of  respiration  over  one  side,  together  with
tympanitic  clearness  of  sound,  which  below  terminates  abruptly  in  complete  dulness  :
if  accurately  established,  amounting  to  positive  certainty,  but  sometimes  not  easy  to  estab-
lish :  /Egophony  rare.  4.  Fluctuation  on  succussion  :"  positive  certainty,  but  should  be
unquestionably  verified.  5.  Metallic  tinkling :  positive  certainty,  but  should  be  unques-
tionably verified." — Transl.

*  Med.  Obs.  and  Inn.  v.  iii.  p.  72.  t  Diet,  de  Sc.  Med.  art.  Empyeme.

$  Enchyrid.  Anat.  l.nii.  chap.  ii.


48G


PNEUM0T1I0HAX.


injections  thrown  into  the  wound  were  found  to  be  discharged
by  the  mouth,)  sufficiently  prove,  that,  even  in  such  cases,  we
may  adopt  the  mode  of  cure  just  named,  with  some  prospect  of
success.  Even  nature  by  herself  may  sometimes  overcome,  more
or  less  completely,  a  lesion  of  the  kind  in  question,  as  I  shall
show  in  a  case  to  be  detailed  at  the  end  of  the  present  chapter.
I  saw  another  case  of  the  same  kind,  in  1820,  in  a  man  who  came
on  horseback  thirty  leagues,  to  consult  me.  In  this  person  there
was  every  sigri  of  the  complication  in  question  existing  on  the
right  side.  The  disease  was  of  two  years'1  standing,  and  nature
had  already  made  considerable  progress  towards  a  cure,  as  the
affected  side  was  evidently  contracted.  I  ascertained  in  1824
that  this  man  was  still  alive,  and  attending  to  his  business ;  he
was  improved  in  health,  though  still  an  invalid.  It  cannot  be
denied,  however,  that  cases  of  this  kind  are  exceptions  to  the
general  rule ;  and  that  the  two  last  varieties  of  pneumothorax
afford  much  less  chance  of  success  from  the  operation  of  empyema,
than  the  simple  effusion,  whether  of  air  or  liquid.  Accordingly,
I  think  that  we  ought  never  to  attempt  this  operation  in  such
cases,  unless  there  is  imminent  risk  of  suffocation,  or  rapidly
increasing  emaciation  and  debility ;  and  never  after  the  long
continuance  of  the  disease,  unless  the  lung  on  the  sound  side
gives  no  indication  of  tubercles.  In  every  other  case,  I  think
that  we  ought  to  content  ourselves  with  supporting  the  patient's
strength,  promoting  absorption  by  the  means  formerly  mentioned,
and  by  a  regimen  regulated  according  to  the  state  of  the  diges-
tive functions, — neither  too  rigid  nor  too  analeptic.

Case  XLIII. —  Pleurisy  with  contraction  of  the  chest,  and
pulmonary  fistula  opening  outwards. — A  boy,  twelve  years  of
age,  was  attacked  with  a* severe  pectoral  affection,  marked  by
violent  cough,  acute  pain  of  the  side,  dyspnoea  and  fever,  fol-
lowed, in  a  few  days,  by  considerable  haemoptysis,  and,  subse-
quently, by  expectoration  of  a  purulent  fluid  in  great  quantity.
The  disease  then  took  a  chronic  form ;  and  in  the  course  of  a
few  months,  an  abscess  pointed  externally  between  the  cartilages
of  the  seventh  and  eighth  ribs,  which,  when  open,  discharged  a
considerable  quantity  of  pus.  Since  then  (now  six  years)  the
aperture  had  remained  fistulous,  daily  discharging  one  or  two
spoonsful  of  pus.  Occasionally,  during  a  temporary  obstruction
of  the  orifice,  the  expectoration  of  this  patient  had  become  aug-
mented, and  the  sputa  had  been  then  always  perfectly  like  the
pus  usually  evacuated  from  the  abscess.  At  this  period  I  exa-
mined the  boy.  He  was  much  emaciated,  but  not  like  one  wasted
by  consumption,  the  emaciation  being  confined  rather  to  the
bones  and  muscles,  than  to  the  cellular  membrane.  He  was  ex-
tremely small  for  his  age.  The  left  side  of  the  chest  was  at
least  one-third  narrower  than  the  right,  and  this  contraction  was
not  remarkable  at  the  inferior  margin  and  in  the  antero-poslerior


not'  BLE I'N  EU  MOTlloi;  A  \.


Ml


diameter.  On  examining  the  thorax  the  whole  right  side  yielded
a  clear  sound  on  percussion,  but  one  less  distinct  on  the  left.
The  respiration  was  quite  distinct  over  the  whole  of  the  right
side ;  it  was  very  indistinct  in  the  superior  part  of  the  left  side,
and  quite  inaudible  in  the  whole  inferior  portion.  Pectoriloquy,
also,  existed  in  the  lateral  and  superior  part  of  the  same  side.

From  circumstances  of  the  above  case  it  is  evident  that,  in  the
first  instance,  the  maturation  of  one  or  more  tuberculous  masses
had  been  attended  by  an  acute  pleurisy;  that,  although  the
tubercles,  when  softened,  had  been  expectorated,  yet  that  a  com-
munication between  the  remaining  excavations  and  the  pleura
had  been  subsequently  established,  which  had  given  rise  to  the
external  abscess.  The  eventual  formation  of  a  fibrocartilaginous
membrane  had  produced  the  union  of  the  lungs  and  pleura,  and
the  consequent  contraction  of  that  side  of  the  chest.  As  this
patient  has  already  lived  so  long  with  this  affection,  it  is  probable,
if  the  expectoration  does  not  greatly  increase,  that  he  may  sur-
vive a  long  time  yet.  Willis  relates  a  case  similar  to  the  above,
in  so  far  as  regards  the  possibility  of  a  cure  after  the  operation  of
empyema.  In  this  case  the  fluctuation  of  the  liquid  effused  into
the  chest  was  heard.  The  patient  was  cured,  but  the  wound
produced  by  the  operation  remained  fistulous.*

Sect.  V. — Of  double  Pneumothorax.

It  is  by  no  means  very  uncommon  to  perceive  the  escape  of  a
small  quantity  of  air  (discovered  by  the  hissing  sound)  from  each
side  of  the  pleura,  on  opening  the  chest  in  the  dead  body.  Ac-
cumulations of  air  of  this  kind  are  commonly  small  in  quantity,
are  usually  combined  with  a  small  portion  of  liquid,  and  must
be  considered  as  the  product  of  the  changes  immediately  pre-
ceding death.  But  double  pneumothorax  occurs  under  other
circumstances;  though  it  is  certainly  extremely  rare.  I  shall
here  give  a  brief  note  of  the  only  two  cases  I  am  acquainted  with.
In  the  year  1814  M.  Recamier  had  under  his  care  in  the  Hotel
Dieu,  a  man  about  sixty  years  old,  who  came  into  the  hospital
labouring  under  an  attack  which  resembled  asthma.  The  face
was  swollen,  the  lips  and  cheeks  purple,  the  feet  cold  and  cede-
matous,  the  pulse  small,  hard  and  intermittent,  the  action  of  the
heart  strong  and  irregular,  with  extreme  dyspnoea  and  distressing
cough.  The  chest  was  large  and  rounded,  and  yielded  a  good
sound  on  percussion. The  patient  died  after  a  few  days.

A  great  quantity  of  air  made  its  escape  on  puncturing  each
side  of  the  chest.  The  lungs  were  compressed  against  the  spine,
and  did  not  exceed  the  size  of  the  hand ;  they  were  dry  on  the

*  Op.  Om.  Sect.  I.  cap.  xiii.  lib.  ii. De  Medicament.  Operat.  p.  215.


488


ACCIDENTAL  PRODUCTIONS IN THE  PLEURA.


surface,  but  were  in  other  respects  sound.  The  pleura  was
healthy,  but  was  detached  in  many  points  from  the  ribs  by  bub-
bles of  air  contained  in  the  subjacent  cellular  substance.  The
heart  was  slightly  hypertrophied  and  dilated.  I  myself  saw  a
similar  case  in  1816  in  the  person  of  a  patient  in  the  earlier  stages
of  phthisis,  who  was  suddenly  seized  with  extreme  dyspnoea  and
frequent  faintings,  and  died  three  days  thereafter.  The  lungs
were  found  reduced  to  one-third  their  natural  size,  and  com-
pressed upon  the  mediastinum.  Each  cavity  of  the  pleura  con-
tained about  a  pint  and  half  of  limpid  serum  and  an  equal  volume
of  gas.  The  lungs  contained  only  a  small  number  of  miliary
tubercles.  Cases  of  this  kind  are  beyond  all  the  resources  both
of  nature  and  art.#


CHAPTER  V.

OF  ACCIDENTAL  PRODUCTIONS  DEVELOPED  IN  THE  PLEURA.

Sect.  I. — Of  Accidental  Productions  which  are  usually  accom-
panied with  liquid  effusion.

The  accidental  productions  of  the  pleura  which  are  commonly
accompanied  by  a  liquid  extravasation  or  chronic  inflammation,
are  chiefly  of  a  cancerous  or  tuberculous  kind.  The  first  are
most  commonly  of  the  medullary  species  of  cancer.  They  ad-
here strongly  to  the  membrane,  and  consist  of  masses  of  variable
size,  but  rarely  larger  than  an  almond.  They  are  usually  sur-
rounded by  increased  redness  of  the  pleura,  produced  by  an  in-
finity of  finely  ramified  vessels;  and  we  sometimes  observe  little
black  lines  stretching  from  their  base  over  the  adjoining  pleura,
produced  by  melanose  matter.  Tumours  of  this  kind  are  seldom
numerous. — On  the  other  hand,  the  tubercles  of  the  pleura  exist
usually  in  very  great  numbers,  and  vary  in  size  from  that  of  a
millet  sued  to  a  hemp  seed. They  are  placed  very  close  together,

•LITERATURE  OF  PNEUMOTHORAX.

1803.  Hard,  (Yj.  M.)  Diss,  sur  le  Pneumothorax. Par.  8vo.

1820.  Piorry,  Diet,  des  Sc.  M. (Art.  Pneumato-lhorax.) t.  xliii.  8vo.  Par.

1827.  Chomel,  Diet,  do  M6d. (Art.  Pneumatose.) t.  xvii.  Par.

1834.  Houghton,  Cyc.  of  Pract.  J\led. (An.  Pneumothorax.) vol.  iii.

Resides  the  above  treatises,  there  are  numerous  cases  recorded  in  the  periodical
literature  of  this  and  other  countries  since  the  distinct  recognition  of  the  disease  by
Laennec;  also  several  others  incidentally  noticed,  particularly  by  surgical  writers,
before  the  nature  of  the  affection  was  understood,  In  a  considerable  proportion  o!
the  cases  published  under  the  name  of  I'.mpycnnt,  pneumothorax  has  heen  a  conco-
mitant.— Trnml.


ACCIDENTAL PRODUCTIONS IN THE  PLEURA.


489


and  are  frequently  connected  by  means  of  a  very  soft  semi-trans-
parent false  membrane. When  we  have  an  opportunity  of  ob-
serving this  species  of  production  near  the  period  of  its  forma-
tion, we  can  sometimes  scrape  off  the  false  membrane,  and  the
greater  number  of  the  tubercles  along  with  it ;  a  circumstance
which  seems  to  prove  these  bodies  to  be  developed  in  this  mem-
brane, and  to  appertain  to  it  rather  than  the  pleura. At  an
ulterior  stage,  the  false  membrane  is  no  longer  perceptible,  having
become  organized,  and  cemented  with  the  pleura,  which  then
appears  as  if  thickened. The  tubercles,  in  this  case,  are  ex-
tremely adherent,  and  seem  implanted  in  the  very  substance  of
the  pleura. Sometimes  the  tubercles  are  in  their  first  stage,  that
is,  semi-transparent,  greyish,  or  almost  colourless;  at  other  times
they  are  in  the  second  stage,  or  yellow  and  opaque. I  have
never  found  them  softened. The  intermediate  portions  of  the
pleura  are  frequently  very  red,  and  even  injected  very  distinctly
with  blood-vessels. In  this  state  the  pleura  has  very  much  the
appearance  of  the  skin  in  certain  miliary  eruptions. — Although,
as  I  have  said,  the  tubercles  most  commonly  originate  in  a  false
membrane,  they  may,  nevertheless,  be  developed  in  the  very  sub-
stance of  the  serous  membrane,  and  indeed  in  any  membrane,
without  any  sign  of  preceding  inflammation  discoverable  before
or  after  death. We  occasionally  also  meet  with  another  species
of  granulations  on  the  surface  of  the  pleura,  consisting  of  small,
opaque,  white  grains,  of  a  flattened  form,  placed  close  to  one
another,  and  resembling,  from  their  great  density,  the  fibrous
membranes. This  species  of  eruption,  which  is  likewise  accom-
panied with  thickening  of  the  pleura,  appears  to  me  to  be  the
consequence  of  an  imperfect  process  of  organization  in  a  granu-
lated false  membrane  of  the  kind  formerly  described.* The  two
last-mentioned  productions  are  not  often  met  with  on  the  pleura;
but  are  extremely  common  on  the  peritoneum. Bichat  first
noticed  these  bodies,  but  he  does  not  seem  to  have  well  under-
stood their  nature. They  are  always  attended  with  hydrothorax.
This  is  usually  the  case  with  the  cancerous  productions  also ;
but  by  no  means  so  constantly  as  the  others. In  all  cases,  the
effused  serum  is  almost  always  red  or  bloody. When  the  ex-
travasation has  taken  place,  it  will  always  be  discoverable  by  the
stethoscope;  but  this  instrument  affords  us  no  aid  in  discovering
the  primary  cause  of  the  effusion :  we  can  in  this  respect  derive
assistance  from  the  general  symptoms  only.

*  These  are  the  granulations  formed  by  the  rudiments  of  false  membranes,  (see  note,
Chap,  on  Phthisis)  which  Andral  considers  identical  with  the  grey  tuhercular  gra-
nulations. The  reader  must  judge  whether  there  is  or  is  not,  in  reality,  some  dif-
ference between  flattened,  white,  opaque  grains,  and  roundish,  greyish  or  nearly  colour-
less, seini-trampareut  grains  :  they  are  both  hard. — ( M.  L.)


490


ACCIDENTAL  PRODUCTIONS IN THE  PLEURA.


Sect.  II — Of  Accidental  Productions  of  a  solid  kind.

The  pleura,  like  all  the  serous,  and  even  mucous  membranes
of  the  body,  may  be  so  altered  in  its  nature  as  to  secrete  tuber-
culous or  cancerous  matter  in  place  of  its  natural  fluid.  This
matter  may  be  formed  in  such  quantity  as  completely  to  fill  one
of  the  cavities  of  the  chest  compressing  the  lungs  upon  the  spine.
This  is  a  very  different  case  from  that  already  mentioned,  of  the
development  of  tubercles  on  the  surface  of  the  pleura:  in  this
latter  case  the  tuberculous  matter  is  not  secreted  by  the  pleura,
but  originates  in  the  false  membranes  of  pleurisy.  Such  morbid
productions  as  we  now  are  considering  are  very  rare.  There  is
no  well-described  case  of  the  kind  on  record:  but  I  apprehend
those  scirrhous  masses  mentioned  by  authors  as  filling  one  of  the
thoracic  cavities  must  be  of  the  kind  in  question.  Boerhaave
appears  to  have  found  the  medullary  tumour,  or  soft  cancer,  in
this  situation  in  the  person  of  the  Marquis  of  St.  Aubin.*  Cor-
visart  met  with  a  case  of  the  same  kind  ;  and  M.  Recamier  found
in  the  body  of  a  patient,  whom  he  considered  as  affected  with
empyema,  the  whole  of  one  of  the  cavities  of  the  chest  filled  with
a  mass  of  tuberculous  matter.  Haller,  as  I  formerly  observed,
seems  to  have  met  with  a  large  quantity  of  the  matter  of  mela-
nosis in  the  same  cavity.-f-  In  two  instances  I  have  myself  dis-
covered a  considerable  quantity  of  tuberculous  matter  in  this
situation.  In  both  these,  the  matter  was  in  different  degrees  of
consistence.  It  was  most  solid  at  the  bottom  of  the  cavity,  and
over  the  whole  of  the  surface  of  the  pleura,  on  which  it  formed
a  layer  of  more  than  an  inch  thick :  the  remainder  of  the  matter
was  quite  soft,  and  was  contained  in  the  centre  of  this  sort  of  sac.
The  following  case,  communicated  to  me  by  M.  Cayol,  is  a  third
instance  of  the  same  kind.

Case  XLIV. — Tuberculous  mass  developed  in  the  pleura. —
A  negro  child,  six  years  of  age,  entered  the  children's  hospital
in  J  807.  Nothing  respecting  his  previous  history  could  be  as-
certained. At  the  time  of  his  admission,  he  had  a  deep  and
painful  ulcer  on  the  temple,  constant  diarrhcea,  frequent  dry
cough  unaccompanied  by  dyspnoea,  and  irregular  fever.  He
died,  gradually  exhausted,  in  less  than  a  mon  th.

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death. — The  bones  in  the
vicinity  of  the  ulcer  were  found  extensively  diseased,  and  partly
removed  by  caries. On  the  outside  of  the  cranium  there  were

•  See  Zimmerman,  Trnite  de  l'Exp6rience.

t  This  is  the  variety  of  soft  melanosis,  formerly  referred  to  in  the  notes  to  the
chapter  on  melanosis,  and  constituting  the  fourth  form  of  this  affection  noticed  by
Laennec.  We  must  remark,  however,  that  the  black  stria:  observed  in  such  cases,
on  the  pleura  or  other  serous  membranes,  are  rather  the  result  of  black  matter  im-
pregnating an  accidental  tissue,  than  of  the  matter  of  melanosis  deposited  on  the
surface  of  the  membranes. — (  Ai.  I..)


ACCIDENTAL l'KOUUCTIONS IN THE PLEUH  A.


4<)1


two  tubercles,  one  of  the  size  of  a  large  nut,  and  the  other  less
by  one-half.  They  were  not  encysted,  and  were  entirely  com-
posed of  tuberculous  matter  in  the  first  degree  of  softness.  One
of  them  was  contained  in  a  hollow  on  the  surface  of  the  cranium.
On  opening  the  thorax  the  right  lung  seemed  completely  trans-
formed into  one  tuberculous  mass;  but  a  more  close  inspection
showed  it  to  be  compressed  by  this  tuberculous  growth,  which
was  contained  in,  and  completely  filled,  the  cavity  of  the  pleura.
This  matter  was  of  the  consistence  of  cheese,  and  exhibited  no
distinct  tubercles.  It  was  about  the  thickness  of  two  fingers  on
the  anterior  and  posterior  parts  of  the  lung,  and  somewhat  thinner
on  the  side.  A  portion  of  it,  of  the  size  of  a  walnut,  had  formed
a  passage  outwards  between  the  seventh  and  eighth  ribs,  (which
were  carious,)  and  adhered  to  the  skin.  This  portion  was  as
fluid  as  pus  in  its  centre.  Another  portion  united  the  diaphragm
to  the  base  of  the  lung,  and  also  to  the  ninth  and  tenth  ribs.  On
detaching  this  layer  from  the  surface  of  the  pleura,  this,  in  place
of  being  smooth,  was  found  uneven,  like  the  surface  of  the  cysts
of  tubercles ;  and  some  very  short  fibres,  like  a  fine  cellular  tissue,
extended  from  it  into  the  morbid  production.  In  the  midst  of
this  mass,  the  lung,  compressed  to  one-fifth  of  its  natural  size,
was  found,  in  other  respects,  sound,  and  did  not  contain  the
slightest  trace  of  tubercles.  There  was  a  small  quantity  of
serum  in  the  left  pleura,  and  also  in  the  cavity  of  the  peritoneum,
and  the  liver  Mas  not  quite  sound.  The  mesentery,  and  other
viscera,  were  in  their  natural  condition.

In  considering  the  means  of  discovering  a  case  of  this  kind
during  life,  it  would  seem,  at  first,  that  the  stethoscope  could
only  indicate  the  total  absence  of  respiration,  and  could  not,
therefore,  enable  us  to  distinguish  such  an  affection  from  pleuritic
effusion,  hydrothorax,  or  even  from  peripneumony  arrived  at  the
stage  of  hepatization.  I  am  however  of  opinion,  that  a  careful
and  repeated  exploration  might  lead  us  nearer  to  the  knowledge
of  the  truth,  if  it  did  not  quite  discover  it.  The  case  in  question
might  be  distinguished  from  pleurisy  and  hydrothorax  by  the
circumstance,  that  in  these,  the  loss  of  the  respiratory  sound  is
sudden,  whereas  in  the  case  of  the  tumour  it  must  begin  almost
insensibly,  and  gradually  and  slowly  arrive  at  its  height.  The
want  of  aegophony  in  the  latter  case  would  also  aid  the  diagnosis.
In  the  case  of  pneumonia  we  have  the  crepitous  rhonchus  in  the
earlier  stages ;  and  in  the  latter  stages  we  should  not  have  the
respiratory  sound  at  the  roots  of  the  lungs,  which  would  be  found
in  the  case  of  the  tumour,  even  after  this  had  reached  a  great  size.
It  must  be  admitted,  however,  to  be  impossible  to  distinguish  the
cases  in  question,  if  we  only  see  the  patient  in  the  advanced  stage
of  the  affection.


492


ACCIDENTAL PRODUCTION'S  IN  THE  PLKUKA.


Sect.  III. — Of  Accidental  Productions  developed  on  the
adherent  or  outer  surface  of  the  pleura.

Tumours  of  different  kinds  are  sometimes  found  developed
between  the  pleura  of  the  ribs  and  thoracic  parietes. I  have  mpt
with,  in  this  situation,  only  the  medullary  tumour,  tubercles  of
small  size,  and  cartilaginous  incrustations;  which  latter  bodies
are  flattened  and  frequently  imperfectly  ossified. These  arc
commonly  considered  as  thickenings  of  the  pleura;  but  I  am  well
assured  that  this  is  a  mistake ;  as  is  also  the  supposed  thickening
of  other  membranes,  such  as  those  of  the  spleen,  the  albuginea,
the  inner  membrane  of  the  arteries,  &c* I  have  met  with  carti-
laginous incrustations  of  the  pleura,  as  large  as  the  hand,  and
more  than  half  an  inch  thick  in  the  centre,  which  seemed  to  have
produced  hardly  any  symptoms  of  disease. Haller  found,  in  this
situation,  an  immense  cyst,  containing  a  serous  fluid,  and  com-
pressing the  lung  to  the  size  of  the  hand.f M.  Dupuytren
found  two  enormous  cysts  of  the  same  kind,  in  the  body  of  a
young  man,  who  died  of  suffocation,  after  having  long  laboured
under  a  progressively  increasing  dyspnoea. Each  of  these  nearly
filled  one  of  the  cavities  of  the  chest,  and  compressed  the  lungs
into  a  small  compass  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  cavity. "  These
cysts  were  eleven  inches  long ;  their  walls  were  lined  with  a  great
many  albuminous  layers,  having  on  them,  in  some  places,  very  fine
granules,  and  in  others  small  vesicles."  £ From  these  expres-
sions, it  is  probable  that  these  cysts  may  have  contained  acepha-
locyst-hydatids. In  cases  of  this  kind,  I  think  the  attentive  con-
sideration of  the  progress  of  the  disease  and  the  signs  furnished
by  percussion  and  auscultation,  might  lead  to  a  sufficiently  cor-
rect knowledge  of  the  affection  to  prompt  and  justify  the  opera-
tion of  empyema. And  this  would  probably  be  frequently
successful,  particularly  if  followed  by  injections  to  produce  the
inflammation  and  adhesion  of  the  cyst. I  am  aware  that  this
latter  practice  might  probably  be  sometimes  dangerous;  but  in  a
disease  necessarily  fatal — melius  est  anceps  experiri  atuvUiwu,
quam  nullum.

Sect.  IV. — Of  Diaphragmatic  Hernia.

In  cases  of  wound,  some  part  of  the  abdominal  viscera  has
passed  into  the  thorax. § The  same  thing  has  followed  a  rupture

»  Diet,  dea  Sc.  Med.  Art.  Cartil.  Accident,
t  Opusc.  Pathol,  obs  xiv.

*  Essai  sur  lAnat.  Path.  par.  J.  Cruveilhiur. Paris,  1816.

§  Ainbioise  Parr,  liv.  ix.  ch.  xxx. — Leblrfiic,  Traite  d'Oper.  t.  ii.  p.  11<». —
Fabric,  de  Hild.,  Cent.  ii.  obs  xxxii  —  1'anton,  Obs.  Med.  j>.  107.


I)  I  .A  I'll  K  Ac:  M  A  TIC IIEK  \'IA.


493


of  the  diaphragm,  occasioned  by  a  fall,  by  great  exertion,*  or
by  an  enormous  distension  of  the  stomach. -f*  The  same  derange-
ment has  taken  place  from  original  malformation  of  the  dia-
phragm ;  I  and  even  by  the  natural  openings  in  that  muscle.  §
Instances  have  occurred  in  which  the  stomach  and  the  intestines
have  been  found  in  the  left  cavity  of  the  chest. — A  case  of  this
sort  would  be  easily  recognized  by  the  stethoscope,  from  the
absence  of  respiration  in  the  chest,  and  the  presence  of  bor-
borygmi  there.  In  a  case  of  this  kind,  discovered  shortly  after
its  occurrence,  would  it  be  justifiable  to  make  an  incision  into
the  abdomen  and  draw  back  the  intestines? — There  is  another
species  of  hernia,  quite  as  rare  as  that  just  mentioned,  and  which
might  also  be  discovered  by  means  of  the  stethoscope, — I  mean  a
hernia  formed  by  the  lungs  through  the  intercostal  muscles.
Grateloup  has  published  a  case  of  this  kind,  which  was  produced
by  violent  coughing. ||  Boerhaave  records  a  similar  instance
arising  from  the  exertions  during  labour  %  ;  and  Sabatier  men-
tions another  supervening  to  the  cicatrization  of  a  bayonet-wound
between  the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs.**  A  fourth  example  is  given  in
the  third  volume  of  Richter1  s  Journal.  In  a  case  of  this  kind,
the  stethoscope  would  at  once  detect  the  respiratory  sound  in  the
tumour,  and  thus  discover  its  true  character.

*  Journ.  de  Desault,  torn.  iii. — Richter  on  Herniae.
f  Haller,  Disput.  Chir.  torn.  iii.

t  Hist,  de  l'Acad.  Roy  de  Sc.  1722.  Ibid.  1772. §  Richter,  Op.  Cit.
||  Journ.  de  Med.  t.  liii.  p.  416'.

If  De  Haen  Prelect  in  Boerh.  Ins.  path.  t.  i. **  Mid.  Oper.  t.  ii.  p.  167.


494


PART  THIRD.

DISEASES  OF  THE  HEART  AND  ITS  APPENDAGES.


BOOK  FIRST.


OF  THE EXPLORATION  OF  THE  ORGANS  OF  CIRCULATION.

So  late  as  the  close  of  the  last  century,  affections  of  the  heart
might  still  be  classed  among  those  diseases  which  are  the  most
imperfectly  known.  They  were  considered  as  uncommon  ;  and
notwithstanding  the  labours  of  Lancisi,  Morgagni,  and  Senac,
the  common  run  of  practitioners  knew  of  no  other  cases  than  that
of  polypus  of  the  heart  (an  imaginary  disease  in  their  acceptation
of  the  term)  and  palpitation,  which  they  considered  as  a  nervous
affection.  The  researches  of  the  authors  just  mentioned,  and
those  of  Corvisart,  made  us  acquainted  with  many  organic  lesions
of  the  heart,  but  threw  little  light  on  the  signs  of  these ;  inso-
much that,  in  the  state  in  which  the  science  was  left  by  them,  it
was  perhaps  impossible  to  distinguish,  with  any  certainty,  one
disease  from  another.

The  positive  signs  of  the  organic  diseases  of  the  heart  are
derived  partly  from  percussion,  but  chiefly  from  auscultation  ;
and  by  means  of  them  also  many  of  the  common  symptoms  pro-
duced by  disorder  of  the  functions,  and  in  themselves  extremely
vague,  acquire  occasionally  a  much  greater  degree  of  certainty.
The  application  of  the  hand,  the  only  method  in  use  before  the
time  of  Avenbrugger,  furnishes  us,  in  most  cases,  with  no  result
whatever,  and  frequently  deceives  us  in  respect  of  the  actual  force
of  the  heart's  impulse  or  shock.  It  indicates  less  accurately  than
the  pulse  at  the  wrist,  the  regularity  or  irregularity  of  its  con-
tractions ;  it  is,  in  fact,  useful  in  one  particular  case  only,  that  of
the  existence  of  the  peculiar  vibration  or  thrilling  (analogous  to
the  purring  of  a  cat)  which  will  be  hereafter  described.  Even
percussion  supplies  us  with  only  accessory  or  corroborative
signs,  which  may  frequently  be  wanting.

In  reference  to  exploration,  we  must  notice  two  cardiac  regions,
the  right  and  left ;  the  first  comprising  the  space  covered  by  the


KXPI.OUATIOV OF THK  HKAKT.


lower  third  of  the  sternum;  the  second,  that  which  corresponds
to  the  cartilages  of  the  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  sternal
ribs. — The  right  cardiac  region  naturally  yields  a  very  clear
sound.  Hypertrophy  of  the  ventricles,  the  dilatation  of  these  or
of  the  auricles,  a  vast  accumulation  of  blood  in  all  the  cavities  of
the  heart,  the  growth  of  much  fat  around  this  organ,  and  effusions
into  the  pericardium,  may  render  the  sound  dull  or  dead.  The
same  causes  may  produce  the  same  effect  in  the  left  cardiac
region :  but  in  this  case  the  sign  would  be  less  conclusive,  inas-
much as  this  region  naturally  yields  but  little  sound  in  most  per-
sons, and  hardly  any  in  fat  or  cedematous  subjects,  or  even  in
such  as  are  very  muscular.  It  is  very  uncommon  for  the  sound
to  be  wanting  in  either  region,  as  high  as  tl/e  site  of  the  auricles :
and  if  it  is  so,  it  indicates  an  enormous  dilatation,  such  as  exists
only  in  the  case  of  contraction  of  the  mitral  orifice.

The  alternate  contractions  of  the  auricles  and  ventricles  of  the
heart  give  rise  to  sounds  very  distinct,  and  of  different  kinds,*  so
as  to  enable  us  to  study  the  actions  of  that  organ  even  more  ex-
actly than  by  the  dissection  of  living  bodies.  The  truth  of  this
seemingly  paradoxical  assertion  rests  on  the  fact,  of  the  ear
judging  much  more  correctly  of  the  intervals  of  sound,  than  the
eye  of  the  intervals  of  motions  corresponding  to  these.  And  yet
notwithstanding  this  advantage,  we  must  still  admit  with  Haller,
that  the  analysis  of  the  movements  of  the  heart  is  difficult,  and
requires  great  attention.  Certain  of  the  phenomena  of  the  sound
organ,  are  especially  difficult  to  be  accurately  ascertained.  It  is
fortunate,  however,  that  the  results  which  lead  to  practical  con-
sequences are  more  easily  obtained,  and  require  no  extraordinary
attention ;  and,  indeed,  the  most  important  of  all,  in  this  respect,
are  such  as  can  hardly  escape  the  notice  of  the  least  attentive  and
least  experienced  observer.  The  movements  of  the  heart  must
be  studied  under  four  principal  heads;  viz.  1st,  the  extent  over
which  they  can  be  heard  by  means  of  the  stethoscope ;  2nd,  the
shock  or  impulse  communicated  by  them  ;  3rd,  the  nature  and
intensity  of  the  sound ;  and  4th,  their  order  or  rythm.  Before
commencing  this  analysis  of  the  heart's  actions,  I  must  make  one
observation,  on  which  I  shall  have  occcasion  to  return  again  and
again  :  it  is  this — that  of  all  the  organs  in  the  body,  the  heart  is
perhaps  that  which  is  the  least  frequently  in  the  most  favourable

•  It  will  be  seen  hereafter  that  Laennec's  opinion  of  the  two  sounds  of  the  heart
being  produced  by  "  the  alternate  contractions  of  the  auricles  and  ventricles,"  is  far
from  being  confirmed  by  the  observations  of  his  successors  :  indeed  there  can  be  little
doubt  now  in  the  mind  of  any  one,  that  our  author's  views  on  this  point  are  incorrect.
Feeling  it  my  duty,  however,  to  render  the  text  faithfully,  and  yet  being  anxious  to
guard  against  mistake,  I  would  recommend  that,  in  the  perusal  of  the  present  Part,
the  reader  should  endeavour  mentally  to  substitute  the  words  Jirst  sound  for  our
author's  expression  contraction  of  the  ventricles,  and  second  sound  for  contraction  of
the  auricles.  He  will  thus  retain  the  facts — all  that  is  necessary  for  practical  purposes
—whatever  explanation  of  them  he  may  hereafter  be  led  to  adopt.— Transl.


496


EXPLORATION OF  THK  HEAKT.


condition  for  exercising  its  functions  in  their  eomplete  integrity.
Its  severest  diseases  consist  in  defects  of  proportion ;  and  yet  a
slight  disproportion  between  it  and  other  organs,  or  between  "some
of  its  own  constituent  parts,  is  compatible  with  a  state  of  health.


CHAPTER  I.

OF  THE  EXTENT  OF  THE HEAItT's  PULSATIONS.

This  may  be  considered  in  two  points  of  view : — first,  the  sen-
sation conveyed  by  the  instrument  when  applied  to  the  region  of
the  heart  ;  and,  secondly,  the  parts  of  the  chest  (beside  this
region)  in  which  its  action  can  be  felt  or  heard.  In  the  natural
condition  of  the  organ,  the  heart,  examined  between  the  carti-
lages of  the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs,  and  at  the  lower  end  of  the
sternum,  communicates,  by  its  motions,  a  sensation  as  if  it  corre-
sponded evidently  with  a  small  point  of  the  thoracic  parietes,  not
larger  than  that  occupied  by  the  end  of  the  stethoscope.  Some-
times, it  appears  as  if  it  were  placed  deep  in  the  mediastinal
cavity,  leaving  a  vacant  space  between  it  and  the  sternum :  in
this  case  its  movements,  even  when  pretty  energetic,  appear  to
communicate  no  vibratory  impulse  to  the  neighbouring  parts.
In  other  cases,  again,  the  heart  seems  entirely  to  fill  the  cavity
of  the  mediastinum,  and  to  extend  much  beyond  the  point  on
which  the  instrument  rests ;  and  then  its  contractions,  even  when
slow  and  noiseless,  seem  to  elevate,  to  a  considerable  extent,  the
walls  of  the  chest  before  them,  or  to  displace  the  adjacent  viscera
within.  This  difference  of  sensation  seems,  in  a  word,  to  convey
the  impression  of  the  action  of  a  smaller  or  larger  heart ;  and,
generally  speaking,  this  indication  is  sufficiently  correct,  when
the  organ  is  examined  in  the  state  of  quietude  which  results
simply  from  repose  of  body.  In  the  state  of  calm,  produced  by
a  previous  bloodletting,  long-continued  quiescence,  fasting,  or
exhaustion  from  disease,  the  extent  of  the  heart's  pulsations  will
be  less  than  natural ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  in  a  state  of  agita-
tion and  palpitation,  they  seem  more  extended  than  they  are  in
reality.

The  examination  of  the  different  points  of  the  chest  in  which
we  can  perceive  the  heart's  pulsations  supplies  us  with  practical
results  much  more  numerous  and  important.  In  a  healthy  per-
son, moderately  stout,  and  whose  heart  is  well-proportioned,  the
pulsations  of  this  organ  are  only  heard  in  the  cardiac  region,
that  is,  in  the  space  comprised  between  the  cartilages  of  the
fourth  and  seventh  ribs,  and  under  the  lower  end  of  the  sternum.
The  motions  of  the  left  cavities  are  chiefly  perceptible  in  the


EXTENT  OF  PULSATIONS.


497


former  place,  those  of  the  right  cavities  in  the  latter.  This  is
so  much  the  case,  that,  in  disease  of  one  side  of  the  heart  only,
the  pulsations  in  these  two  situations  give  quite  different  results.
When  the  sternum  is  short,  the  pulsations  are  perceived  in  the
epigastrium.  In  very  fat  subjects,  the  pulsations  of  whose  hearts
are  quite  imperceptible  to  the  mere  touch,  the  space  in  which
they  can  be  detected  by  the  stethoscope  is  sometimes  not  more
than  an  inch  square.  In  thin  persons,  in  the  narrow-chested,
and,  also,  in  children,  the  pulsations  are  more  extended ;  being
perceptible  over  the  third,  or  even  three-fourths,  of  the  inferior
part  of  the  sternum,  and  sometimes  even  over  the  whole  of  this
bone ;  also  at  the  superior  part  of  the  left  side,  as  high  as  the
clavicle,  and  sometimes,  though  feebly,  under  the  right  clavicle.
When  the  pulsations  are  confined  to  the  places  above  mentioned,
in  subjects  of  the  kind  noticed,  and  when  they  are  much  weaker
below  the  clavicles  than  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  we  may  con-
elude  that  this  organ  is  well  proportioned.

When  the  pulsations  of  the  heart  become  more  extended,
they  are  heard  successively  in  the  following  places: — 1.  the
whole  left  side  of  the  chest,  from  the  axilla  to  the  stomach  ;
2.  the  right  side  over  the  same  extent;  3.  the  posterior  part
of  the  left  side  of  the  chest ;  and,  4.  the  posterior  part  of  the
right  side.  This  last  is  rare.  In  these  cases  the  intensity  of
the  sound  is  progressively  less  in  the  succession  mentioned  :
for  instance,  it  is  less  under  the  right  clavicle  than  under  the
left :  it  is  somewhat  less  on  the  lateral  parts  of  the  left  side,  than
under  the  clavicle ;  it  is  still  less  perceptible  on  the  right  side
laterally;  and  much  attention  is  requisite  to  enable  us  to  hear
the  pulsations  at  all  on  the  back,  particularly  the  right  side.
This  succession  has  appeared  to  be  constant,  and  may  be  taken
as  an  index  of  the  extent  of  pulsation.  For  instance,  if  this  be
perceptible  on  the  right  side,  we  may  be  assured  that  it  will  be
equally  so  over  the  whole  sternum,  under  both  clavicles,  and
over  the  left  side ;  but  we  are  not  sure  that  it  will  be  so  on  the
back.  But  if  it  be  perceptible  on  the  back  on  the  right  side,
we  may  calculate  on  its  being  still  more  audible  in  every  other
part  of  the  chest.

Several  circumstances  unconnected  with  the  state  of  the  heart
may  derange  the  order  above  mentioned,  and  augment  the  extent
of  the  pulsations.  I  have  already  noticed  the  effect  of  emaciation
and  narrowness  of  chest.  In  young  children,  and  in  persons  of
all  ages,  whose  bones  are  small  and  whose  chest  is  narrow  and
little  covered  with  flesh,  the  pulsations  are  heard  over  the  whole
thorax.*  A  hepatized  lung,  or  one  strongly  compressed  by  an
effusion  in  the  chest,  transmits  the  pulsations  better  than  a

•  In  infancy  the  heart  is  proportionally  larger  than  in  adults;  and  its  cavities
larger  in  relation,  to  the  thickness  of  their  walls. — Author.

K  K


4S8


EXP.L  ORATION OF THE  1IEAUT.


healthy  lung  permeable  to  air.  This  result  accords  with  the
general  principle  of  solid  bodies  being  the  best  conductors  of
sound.  But  it  has  also  appeared  to  me  that  the  anfractuous
excavations  in  the  lungs,  produced  by  the  softening  of  tubercles,
have  constantly  the  same  effect ;  a  circumstance  not  so  easily  ex-
plained, unless  we  suppose  that,  in  this  case,  the  sound  is  trans-
mitted, not  through  the  cavities,  but  along  their  indurated  and
condensed  boundaries.  It  is  thus,  that,  in  the  case  of  tuberculous
excavations  in  the  summit  of  the  right  lung,  we  shall  hear  the
pulsation  of  the  heart  better  under  the  right  clavicle  and  axilla,
than  on  the  left  side,  and  sometimes  even  better  than  in  the  very
region  of  the  heart.*  When  the  sound  of  respiration  or  the
rhonchus  is  very  great,  the  pulsation  of  the  heart  is  sometimes
perceptible  on  the  sides  and  even  on  the  back,  although  it  is
inaudible  under  the  clavicles,  being  there  completely  masked  by
the  other  sounds.

It  may  be  imagined  that  in  our  explorations  we  may  confound
the  pulsation  of  the  aorta  and  subclavian  arteries  with  that  of
the  heart.  This  mistake,  however,  is  not  possible,  as  will  be
shown  more  particularly  afterwards.  It  is  sufficient  to  know
that  under  all  circumstances  the  heart  gives  two  distinct  beats
for  every  stroke  of  the  pulse.  Besides,  I  can  state  that  out  of
the  thousands  of  persons  whom  I  have  examined,  in  a  state  of
health  or  disease,  I  have  only  met  with  three  or  four  instances
in  which  the  subclavian  arteries  could  be  heard  (except  in  the
case  of  the  bellows-sound.)  And  it  is  only  in  the  case  of  aneu-
rism, of  the  bellows-sound^  or  of  increased  impulse,  that  we  can
perceive  the  pulsation  of  the  aorta  and  arteria  inominata :  and
we  recognize  them  also  from  their  simple  pulsations.

When  the  pulsation  of  the  heart  is  heard  over  a  greater  extent
than  what  is  above  stated  to  be  the  range  of  a  well-proportioned
organ,  the  individual  rarely  enjoys  good  health.  In  examining
him  attentively  we  shall  discover  indications  of  that  cachexy
peculiar  to  some  diseases  of  the  heart;  and  we  shall  find  that  if
he  has  not  formal  dyspnoea,  his  respiration  is,  at  least,  shorter
than  usual,  and  he  is  put  more  easily  out  of  breath,  and  is  more
subject  to  palpitation.  This  state,  however,  which  is  that  of
many  asthmatics,  may  remain  stationary  many  years,  and  does
not  always  prevent  the  attainment  of  an  advanced  age.  With
regard  to  the  relation  between  the  state  of  the  heart  and  the  ex-
tent of  its  pulsatious,  I  think  it  may  be  taken  as  a  general  fact,
that  the  extent  of  pulsation  is  in  the  direct  ratio  of  the  thinness
and  weakness  of  the  heart,  and,  consequently,  inversely  as  its
thickness  and  strength.  The  size  of  the  organ  must  also  be  con-
sidered as  favouring  extent  of  pulsation,  except  in  the  case  where

*  It  has  appeared  to  me  generally  true,  that  tuberculous  excavations  nnd  pneumo-
thorax transmit  the  sound  of  the  heart  rather  than  its  impulse  ;  while  hepatization  of
the  lung  and  compression  from  effusion,  occasion  results  the  reverse  of  these. — Author.


EXTENT  OK  PULSATIONS.


490


the  augmentation  of  size  depends  entirely  on  thickening  of  the
walls  of  the  ventricles.

The  above  results  are  derived  from  the  whole  of  the  dissections
made  by  me  during  the  last  ten  years;  as  I  have  not  met  with  a
single  fact  calculated  to  throw  any  doubt  on  their  accuracy.
Thus,  if  the  pulsations  extend  over  almost  all  the  places  above
mentioned,  we  may  presume  that  the  heart  is  increased  beyond
the  natural  size,  and  that  this  increase  is  owing  to  the  dilatation
of  one  or  both  ventricles.  This  presumption  will  be  strengthened,
if  the  pulsations  are  as  great  (or  greater)  under  the  clavicles  or
in  the  axilla,  as  in  the  region  of  the  heart.  The  consideration
of  other  signs  to  be  hereafter  mentioned,  will  render  our  diag-
nosis more  certain,  and  point  out  more  precisely  the  site,  the
extent,  and  the  nature  of  the  organic  disease.  I  am  far  from
wishing  to  assert  that  we  ought  to  form  our  judgment  from  one
sign.  I  wish  to  give  to  each  its  true  value;  and  think  it  hardly
necessary  to  state,  that  their  value  is  greatly  enhanced  when  they
co-exist.  Besides,  when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  peculiar  signs
of  each  particular  disease,  we  shall  be  able  to  correct  what  may
appear  in  this  analysis  to  be  stated  in  a  manner  too  absolute.

If  the  pulsations  are  perceived  neither  in  the  back  nor  right
side,  but  only  in  the  other  points  mentioned,  and  if  their  inten-
sity is  nearly  equal  in  all  these,  we  may  conclude  that  the  ven-
tricles are  moderately  dilated,  and  that  the  walls  of  the  heart
are  naturally  thin.  On  the  contrary,  when  the  pulsations  are  felt
very  strong  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  and  are  not  perceived  at
all  or  only  very  slightly  under  the  clavicle,  we  may  be  assured
(if  the  patient  has  other  general  symptoms  of  diseased  heart)  that
the  disease  is  hypertrophy  of  the  ventricles.  The  special  signs
will  point  out  which  ventricle  is  affected.  If  the  patient  has
never  experienced  any  marked  disorder  of  the  circulatory  organs,
we  may  be  certain  that  the  walls  of  the  left  ventricle  are  both
firm  and  thick,  though  still  not  sufficiently  so  to  constitute  dis-
ease. Generally  speaking,  then,  it  may  be  taken  for  granted  that
a  great  extent  of  sound  is  a  mark  of  thin  parietes  of  the  heart,
more  particularly  of  the  ventricles ;  and  that  a  confined  range
of  sound  coincides  with  an  increased  thickness  of  these.  Some
accidental  causes  may  augment  for  a  time  the  extent  of  the
heart's  pulsation,  such  as  nervous  agitation,  fever,  palpitation,
haemoptysis,  and,  in  general,  whatever  increases  the  frequency
of  the  pulse.

This  mode  of  appreciating  the  extent  of  the  heart's  pulsations
by  the  number  and  site  of  the  places  in  which  they  can  be  per-
ceived, appears  to  be  of  great  certainty  and  practical  utility :
the  gradation  just  mentioned  is  constant,  with  the  exceptions  for-
merly noticed.  Once  or  twice  only  have  I  had  occasion  to  hear
the  pulsations  more  distinctly  on  the  left  back  than  on  the  right
side  anteriorly,  in  cases  wherein  I  could  not  attribute  the  anomaly

k  k  2


500


EXPLORATION OF  THE  HEART.


to  the  probable  presence  of  pulmonary  excavations  ■  and  the
rareness  of  this  fact  ought,  in  my  opinion,  to  cause  it  to  be  re-
garded as  an  exception  occasioned  by  some  analogous  circum-
stances,— perhaps  by  a  variety  in  the  capacity  or  position  of  the
great  bronchial  trunks.  In  certain  cases,  in  which  the  sound  of
the  auricles  is  little  perceptible  in  the  cardiac  region,  it  is  usually
heard  better  a  little  higher  up,  or  even  under  the  clavicles;  and
sometimes  even  on  the  back.

In  examining  the  extent  of  pulsation,  the  stethoscope  has  a
decided  advantage  over  the  naked  ear,  which  cannot  be  applied
to  the  axilla,  nor  beneath  the  clavicles,  nor  between  the  scapula?
in  very  lean  subjects.


CHAPTER  II.

OF THE SHOCK  OR IMPULSE COMMUNICATED TO THE EAR  BY
THE ACTION OF THE  HEART.

I  understand  by  shock  or  impulse,  the  sensation  of  upward
pressure  or  percussion  communicated  to  the  ear  of  the  auscultator
by  the  action  of  the  heart.  This  pressure  is  perceived  by  means
of  the  stethoscope  in  the  cases  where  the  hand  applied  to  the  re-
gion of  the  heart  communicates  no  sensation  :  and,  on  the  con-
trary, the  impulse  appears  very  great  to  the  hand,  in  lean  sub-
jects, and  particularly  during  flurry,  when  the  stethoscope  proves
the  real  impulse  to  be  small.

We  must  be  careful  not  to  confound  with  the  impulse  of  the
heart,  the  rise  of  the  thoracic  parieties  during  inspiration.  This
caution  is  more  particularly  necessary  when  the  respiration  is
very  short  and  frequent,  and  is  performed  with  great  labour,  as
in  the  agony  of  most  diseases,  and  in  paroxysms  of  dyspnoea.
The  degree  of  impulse  communicated  by  the  stethoscope  to  the
ear,  is,  in  general,  inversely  as  the  extent  of  the  pulsation  of  the
heart,  and  directly  as  the  thickness  of  the  walls  of  the  ventricles.
In  a  person  whose  organs  of  circulation  are  well-proportioned,
this  impulse  is  very  little  perceptible,  often  quite  imperceptible,
especially  if  the  individual  is  rather  fat.  Quick  walking  or
running,  or  the  act  of  ascending  a  height,  nervous  flurry,  palpi-
tation, and  fever,  commonly  augment  the  impulse  in  subjects  the
walls  of  whose  hearts  are  rather  thick,  and  still  more  when  they
are  so  much  so  as  to  constitute  actual  hypertrophy.  In  this  case,
the  impulse  is  usually  so  great  as  very  sensibly  to  elevate  the
head  of  the  observer,  and  sometimes  to  give  a  disagreeable  shock
to  the  ear.  The  more  intense  the  hypertrophy,  the  longer  time
the  impulse  is  perceptible. When  the  disease  exists  in  a  high


IMPULSE OR  SHOCK.


501


degree,  we  feel  as  if  the  heart,  in  dilating,  first  comes  in  contact
with  the  walls  of  the  chest  in  one  point  only,  and  then  with  its
whole  surface,  and  that  it  contracts  and  falls  back  all  at  once.
When  the  heart  is  thin,  the  same  causes  produce  a  different  re-
sult, as  we  shall  see  hereafter.

The  impulse  of  the  heart  is  only  felt  during  the  systole  of  the
ventricles;  or  if,  in  some  rare  cases,  an  analogous  phenomenon
accompanies  the  contraction  of  the  auricles,  this  is  easily  dis-
tinguished from  the  former.  In  fact,  when  the  systole  of  the
auricles  is  attended  by  any  sensible  action,  this  is  perceived  to
have  its  seat  much  deeper;  and  the  heart  even  seems  to  be  re-
ceding from  the  ear.  Most  commonly  the  motion  consists  merely
of  a  sort  of  trembling,  felt  deep  within  the  mediastinum.  In
any  case,  it  is  very  little  marked  as  compared  with  the  sensation
produced  by  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles,  when  these  are  of
a  good  degree  of  thickness.  When  the  walls  of  the  heart  are
thinner  than  usual,  no  impulse  is  communicated,  even  when  the
pulsation  is  the  greatest:  and,  in  this  case,  the  alternate  con-
traction of  its  cavities  is  only  distinguished  by  the  sound  these
produce.  A  strong  impulse,  therefore,  must  be  regarded  as  the
chief  sign  of  hypertrophy  ;  and  the  absence  of  all  impulse,  (con-
jointly with  other  general  and  local  signs,)  as  characteristic  of
dilatation  of  the  heart.  This  result  appears  to  me  quite  con-
stant ;  at  least  I  have  not  hitherto  met  with  one  exception  to  it ;
and  it  is  now  supported  by  a  very  considerable  number  of  facts.
Since  the  beginning  of  my  researches  on  auscultation,  I  have
made  a  point  of  ascertaining  the  character  of  the  heart's  pulsa-
tions in  all  my  hospital  patients,  and  in  no  case  has  examination
after  death  invalidated  the  rule  above  laid  down.

The  impulse  of  the  heart's  action  is  usually  perceptible  only
over  the  region  of  the  heart,  or,  at  most,  over  the  inferior  half
of  the  sternum.  When  very  great,  it  extends  to  the  epigastrium
in  cases  where  the  sternum  is  short.  In  simple  hypertrophy  it
is  usually  perceived  in  no  other  part,  even  when  the  pulsations
are  heard  in  other  points  of  the  chest ;  but  when  this  is  conjoined
with  a  certain  degree  of  dilatation,  it  is  sometimes  distinctly  per-
ceived under  the  clavicles,  and  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest ;  and
sometimes  even  on  the  back,  in  a  slight  degree.

There  is  one  case  in  which  we  are  able  in  some  degree  to  dis-
tinguish the  shock  communicated  to  the  walls  of  the  chest,  from
that  conveyed  to  the  ear.  This  is  the  complex  case  of  hyper-
trophy and  dilatation  of  the  ventricles,  but  with  the  latter  affec-
tion more  marked  than  the  former.  In  cases  of  this  kind  the
impulse  is  usually  not  great,  except  during  the  existence  of  pal-
pitation ;  and  it  has  a  very  different  character  from  that  produced
by  simple  hypertrophy :  the  beat  of  the  heart  is  hard,  with  a
sound  like  that  produced  by  the  blow  of*  a  mallet;  but  the  blow
WPH  conlincd  to  a  small  space;  it  is  expended  on  the  walls  of


502


EXPLORATION OF THE  HEART.


the  chest,  and  does  not  communicate  to  the  ear  an  elevation  or
upward  pressure  proportioned  to  its  force:  it  differs  from  the
impulse  occasioned  by  a  strong  hypertrophy  in  this,  that,  in  the
latter  case,  the  distended  ventricles  appear  to  come  in  contact,
in  their  whole  length,  with  the  walls  of  the  chest,  which  yield
before  their  pressure ;  whilst,  in  the  other  case,  the  mere  point
of  the  heart  seems  to  strike  the  thoracic  parietes,  with  a  sharp
definite  blow,  which  produces  in  these  rather  a  vibration,  than
an  actual  elevation.  The  same  result  is  observed,  but  in  a  less
degree,  in  purely  nervous  palpitations.

Bloodletting,  diarrhoea,  severe  and  long  continued  abstinence,
and,  in  general,  every  thing  capable  of  weakening  the  system,
diminish,  in  a  marked  degree,  the  impulse  of  the  heart.  For
this  reason,  when  we  see  a  patient  for  the  first  time,  in  the  course
of  a  disease  which  has  already  produced  a  great  diminution  of
strength,  it  may  happen  that  the  stethoscope  shall  not  discover
hypertrophy  of  the  ventricles,  if  existing  in  only  a  middling  de-
gree. The  heart's  impulse,  in  like  manner,  frequently  ceases
altogether,  even  in  cases  where  the  hypertrophy  is  considerable,
upon  the  supervention  of  very  intense  dyspnoea,  in  cases  of  pneu-
monia, pleurisy,  oedema  of  the  lungs,  asthma,  or  in  the  conges-
tions immediately  preceding  death.  The  clear  sound  which,  as
we  shall  see,  accompanies  dilatation  of  the  heart,  in  like  manner
diminishes  or  entirely  disappears  under  similar  circumstances.
We  must  not,  therefore,  deduce  any  conclusions  from  explorations
made  at  such  times.


CHAPTER  III.

OF  THE  SOUND  PRODUCED  BY  THE  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEART.

The  alternate  contraction  of  the  different  parts  of  the  heart  pro-
duces a  peculiar  sound,  of  which  the  individual  is  himself  sensible
during  palpitation  and  in  nervous  or  febrile  excitement:  more
especially  if  lying  on  the  side,  with  the  ear  compressed  against  a
cushion.  This  sound,  however,  is  perceived  by  the  patient  only,
except  in  one  rare  instance  to  be  afterwards  noticed.  The  appli-
cation of  the  hand,  in  some  cases,  communicates  sensations  diffe-
rent from  those  of  mere  impulse,  and  suggests  to  us,  rather  than
enables  us  actually  to  perceive,  the  existence  of  sound  within  the
chest ;  but  this  confused  perception  cannot  bear  a  comparison
with  that  supplied  by  the  stethoscope.

In  ordinary  circumstances,  the  stethoscope,  applied  between
the  cartilages  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs,  at  the  end  of  the  sternum,
or,  indeed,  in  any  point  where  the  pulsations  of  the  heart  are


OF THE  SOUND.


503


perceptible,  conveys  to  the  ear  a  distinct  sound  ;  even  in  cases
where  the  heart  is  very  small  and  weak,  and  when  the  pulse  is  no
longer  to  be  perceived.  This,  in  the  healthy  body,  is  double;
and  each  beat  of  the  arterial  pulse  corresponds  to  this  double
sound,  in  other  words,  to  two  sounds.  One  of  these  is  clear  and
rapid,  and  somewhat  resembles  the  sound  produced  by  the  valve
of  a  pair  of  bellows :  this  corresponds  to  the  systole  of  the  auricles.
The  other  is  more  dull  and  prolonged,  coinciding  with  the  beat
of  the  pulse,  and  with  the  shock  or  impulse  communicated  to  the
walls  of  the  chest  by  the  motion  of  the  heart : — it  indicates  the
contraction  of  the  ventricles.  The  sounds  heard  at  the  end  of
the  sternum  are  produced  by  the  action  of  the  right  side  of  the
heart ;  those  between  the  cartilages  of  the  ribs  by  the  left  cavi-
ties. In  the  state  of  health  the  sound  produced  by  the  contrac-
tions of  each  side  is  the  same;  in  certain  states  of  disease,  on  the
contrary,  the  sound  of  the  two  sides  becomes  quite  dissimilar.

The  sound  is  the  only  phenomenon  usually  observable  in  any
other  part  of  the  chest  beside  the  cardiac  region  ;  the  impulse  of
its  action  being  confined,  as  already  observed,  to  the  space  com-
prised between  the  cartilages  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs,  the  end
of  the  sternum,  or  (in  some  cases)  the  epigastrium.  The  sound
produced  by  the  action  of  the  heart  is  great  in  proportion  as  the
walls  of  the  ventricles  are  thin  and  their  impulse  feeble:  con-
sequently, it  cannot  be  attributed  to  the  percussion  of  this  organ
against  the  side.*  In  a  moderate  degree  of  hypertrophy,  the
contraction  of  the  ventricles  yields  only  a  dull  sound,  like  the
murmur  of  inspiration,  and  the  auricle,  in  like  manner,  much  less
sound  than  in  the  natural  state.  In  a  high  degree  of  hypertrophy,
the  contraction  of  the  ventricles  produces  merely  a  shock  without
any  sound,  and  the  sound  of  the  auricles  becomes  very  dull  and
is  scarcely  audible.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  ventricular
parietes  are  thin,  the  sound  produced  by  their  contraction  is  clear
and  loud,  approaching  to  that  of  the  auricles ;  and  if  there  be  a
marked  dilatation  of  the  ventricles,  the  sound  becomes  nearly
similar,  and  almost  as  strong  as  that  of  the  auricles.  In  the  case
of  considerable  dilatation,  the  two  sounds  can  be  distinguished,
neither  by  their  character  nor  their  degree,  but  solely  by  their
isochronism  or  anachronism  with  the  arterial  pulse.  In  a  state
of  health  the  sound  of  the  contractions  of  the  heart  is  nowhere
heard  so  strongly  as  in  the  cardiac  region  ;  and  it  becomes  feebler
in  the  other  points  of  the  chest  according  to  the  progression  for-
merly mentioned.  But  in  certain  cases  of  disease  it  may  be  heard
more  distinctly  in  other  places.  In  dilatation  of  the  ventricles
the  sound  of  the  heart's  contractions  is  commonly  as  loud  under
the  clavicles  as  in  the  cardiac  region.

*  It  will  be  seen  hereafter  that  one  of  the  most  distinguished  physiologists  of  the
age,  M.  Majendie,  nevertheless,  still  adheres  to  this  most  ancient  and  popular  expla-
nation of  the  phenomenon. — Transl.


504


EXPLORATION OF THE 11  FART.


In  certain  healthy  subjects,  in  whom  the  walls  of  the  heart  are
somewhat  thinner  than  common,  the  sound  of  the  contraction  of
the  auricles  is  sometimes  much  louder  than  that  of  the  ventricles
below  the  clavicles,  although  the  same  disproportion  is  not
observed  in  the  cardiac  region. In  cases  of  hypertrophy,  also,
it  frequently  happens  that  while,  in  the  cardiac  region,  we  are
sensible  only  of  a  strong  impulse  with  hardly  any  sound,  even  of
the  auricles,  the  latter  is  perceptible  (and  this  only)  under  the
clavicles,  and  even  on  the  back. Indeed,  even  in  slighter  cases
of  hypertrophy,  the  sound  of  the  auricles  is  always  more  distinct
in  these  places  than  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  particularly  in  lean
and  narrow-chested  subjects. In  certain  cases  both  the  sounds,
although  sufficiently  distinct,  become  extremely  dull  in  the  region
of  the  heart. Sometimes  this  dulness  depends  on  the  natural
prolongation  of  the  lungs  and  pleura,  over  and  before  the  heart.
•In  this  case,  the  sound  of  the  respiration  sometimes  prevents  us
from  distinguishing  clearly  the  sound  of  the  heart ;  and  the  con-
traction of  the  ventricles,  in  pressing  out  the  air  from  the  portions
of  lung  situated  between  them  and  the  sternum,  always  produces
a  particular  sound,  which  will  be  noticed  below,  and  which  occa-
sionally altogether  masks  the  natural  sound.
-  It  may  be  well  to  remark  in  this  place,  that  the  disposition  of
lung  just  mentioned,  and  which  is  by  no  means  uncommon,  may
sometimes  render  null  one  of  the  signs  considered  as  indicating
enlargement  of  the  heart, — I  mean  the  dead  sound  on  percussion.
In  such  cases,  the  cardiac  region  will  yield  a  good  sound,  although
the  heart  may  be  double  the  natural  size :  this  is  chiefly  observed
in  the  instance  of  pulmonary  emphysema  complicated  with  dis-
eased heart, — a  complication  not  very  unusual. Softening  of  the
substance  of  the  heart,  an  affection  which,  although  very  frequent,
has  hitherto  been  little  attended  to  by  practitioners,  appears  also
to  render  the  sound  of  the  heart  much  duller  than  natural.  And,
lastly,  the  obstruction  of  the  natural  flow  of  blood  through  the
heart,  whether  produced  by  too  much  blood,  or  by  disease  of  the
lungs,  not  only  diminishes  but  modifies  the  sound. Other  and
very  remarkable  modifications  of  sound  presented  by  the  heart  in
its  different  pathological  states,  will  be  noticed  in  a  subsequent
chapter.


CHAPTER  IV.

OF THE RYTHM OF  THE PULSATION'S  OF THE  HEART.


By  rt/thm  I  understand  the  order  of  the  contractions  of  different
parts  of  the  heart,  and  their  relative  duration  and  succession,  as


OF THE  BYTHM.


505


detected  by  the  stethoscope.  I  shall  describe  in  order  the  dif-
ferent sounds  produced  by  a  heart  in  a  perfectly  healthy  state,
and  in  the  best  proportions  for  executing  its  functions  with  free-
dom and  integrity.  It  is  not  possible  to  state  these  proportions
with  geometrical  accuracy ;  but  I  am  led  by  the  result  of  all  my
dissections  since  the  year  1801,  to  fix  them  as  follows: — The
heart,  including  the  auricles,  ought  to  be  of  a  si«e  equal  to  the
closed  hand  of  the  subject,  or  only  a  little  less  or  greater  than  it.
The  walls  of  the  left  ventricle  ought  to  be  of  a  thickness  some-
what more  than  double  that  of  the  right.  The  texture  of  the  left
ventricle,  firmer  and  more  compact  than  that  of  the  muscles,
ought  to  keep  it  from  collapsing  when  laid  open.  The  right  ven-
tricle ought  to  be  a  little  larger  than  the  left,  with  columnar  carnae
of  greater  size,  and  ought  to  collapse  on  being  cut  into.

In  a  heart  so  proportioned,  the  alternate  contractions  of  the
ventricles  and  auricles,  as  examined  by  the  stethoscope,  and  the
pulse  as  examined  by  the  finger,  afford  the  following  results:  —
At  the  moment  of  the  arterial  pulse,  the  ear  is  slightly  elevated
by  an  isochronous  motion  of  the  heart,  which  is  accompanied  by
a  somewhat  dull,  though  distinct  sound.  This  is  the  contraction
of  the  ventricles.  Immediately  after,  and  without  any  interval,
a  louder  sound  resembling  that  of  a  valve,  or  a  whip,  or  the  lap-
ping of  a  dog,  announces  the  contraction  of  the  auricles.  (I  make
use  of  these  trivial  expressions  because  they  appear  to  me  to  con-
vey better  than  any  description,  an  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  sound
in  question.)  This  sound  is  accompanied  by  no  motion  percep-
tible by  the  ear,  and  is  separated  by  no  interval  of  repose  from
the  duller  sound  and  motion  indicative  of  the  contraction  of  the
ventricles,  which  it  seems,  as  it  were,  to  terminate  and  interrupt
abruptly.  The  duration  of  this  sound,  and  consequently  the
period  of  contraction  of  the  auricles,  is  less  than  that  of  the  ven-
tricles—an incontestible  fact  of  which  Haller  entertained  doubts.
Immediately  after  the  systole  of  the  auricles,  there  is  a  very  short,
yet  well-marked  interval  of  repose,  subsequently  to  which  we  feel
the  ventricles  swell  anew,  with  the  dull  sound  and  gradual  pro-
gression which  characterize  their  action ;  then  follows  the  quick
and  sonorous  contraction  of  the  auricles,  and  again  the  renewed
but  momentary  quiescence  of  the  heart.  This  state  of  quietude
after  the  contraction  of  the  auricles  does  not  appear  to  have  been
known  to  Haller  as  a  natural  condition.* The  relative  duration

*  This  explanation  of  the  progressive  movements  or  rythm  of  the  heart  is,  as  stated
in  a  former  note,  at  variance  with  the  observations  and  opinions  of  nearly  all  pre-
ceding and  succeeding  physiologists,  and  cannot  be  entertained  in  the  present  state  of
our  knowledge.  The  precedence  of  the  auricular  to  the  ventricular  contraction,  Ions?
since  observed  by  Harvey  and  Haller,  has  been  satisfactorily  established  by  the  recent
experiments  of  Dr.  Hope  :  and  I  would  give  the  following  statement,  from  the  article
Auscultation  in  the  Cyclopaedia,  as  an  accurate  representation  of  the  phenomena,  in
opposition  to  that  in  the  text :— The  first  motion  of  the  heart  which  interrupts  the
interval  of  repose,  is  the  auricular  systole. It  is  a  very  slight  and  brief  contractile


506


EXPLORATION OF THE  HEART.


of  the  contractions  of  the  auricles  and  ventricles,  appears  to  me
to  be  as  follows:— a  third  (at  most)  or  a  fourth  is  occupied  by
the  systole  of  the  auricles ;  a  fourth,  or  a  little  less,  by  the  state
of  quiescence,  and  the  half,  or  nearly  so,  by  the  systole  of  the
ventricles.

These  remarks  may  seem  minute ;  but  I  am  assured  they  will
be  found  exact  and  easily  verified  by  any  one  who  will  attend  to
the  action  of  the  heart,  in  a  healthy  subject,  for  only  a  few  minutes;
and  such  trial  will  be  made  with  most  advantage  when  the  pulse
is  slow.  When  the  pulse  is  at  the  same  time  slow  and  infrequent,
the  contraction  of  the  ventricles  is  prolonged,  the  sound  duller,
and  the  shock  less:  the  systole  of  the  auricles,  however,  still
retains  its  wonted  brevity  and  sound, — or  even  appears  shorter
than  usual,  on  account  of  the  lengthened  systole  of  the  ventricles.
In  this  case,  the  interval  of  repose  after  the  contraction  of  the
auricle  is  not  sensibly  shorter.  The  period  of  quiescence  alter
the  contraction  of  the  auricle,  is  hot  sensibly  less.  When,
however,  the  pulse  is  infrequent  and  at  the  same  time  quick,  the
interval  of  repose  is  then  longer  and  more  marked  than  usual.  In
the  case  of  a  person  labouring  under  apoplexy,  whose  pulse,
though  quick,  was  only  fifty-eight  in  a  minute,  I  found  it  equal
to  the  period  of  the  systole  of  the  ventricles;  and  in  another,
with  symptoms  of  the  same  disease  impending,  with  a  pulse  also
quick  and  only  forty  in  the  minute,  the  period  of  quiescence  was
equal  to  that  of  the  systole  of  both  the  auricle  and  ventricle.

From  the  foregoing  observations  it  appears  that  the  heart,  far
from  being  in  a  state  of  constant  action,  as  is  usually  supposed,
presents  alternations  of  action  and  repose,  the  sum  of  which  does
not  differ  from  those  of  manv  other  muscles,  more  especially  the
diaphragm  and  intercostal  muscles.  From  the  proportions  above
stated  it  follows,  that  in  twenty-four  hours  the  ventricles  have
twelve  and  the  auricles  eighteen  hours  of  quiescence.  In  persons
whose  pulse  is  habitually  below  fifty^  the  repose  of  the  ventricles

movement,  more  considerable  in  tbe  auricular  appendix  than  elsewhere,  and  propa-
gated with  a  rapid  vermicular  motion  towards  the  ventricle,  in  the  systole  of  which
it  terminates  rather  by  continuity  of  action  than  by  the  succession  of  a  new  move-
ment. The  ventricular  systole  commences  suddenly,  and  is  accompanied  with  a  con-
siderable diminution  of  the  volume  of  the  organ.  Synchronous  with  the  systole  are
the  first  sound,  the  impulse  of  the  apex  against  the  ribs,  and  the  pulse  in  vessels  near
the  heart:  in  the  radials  tbe  pulse  follows  at  a  barely  appreciable  interval.  The  systole
of  tbe  ventricles  is  followed  by  their  diastole,  during  which  they  return,  by  an  instan-
taneous expansive  movement  sensible  to  the  touch  and  sight,  to  the  same  state  (with
respect  to  size,  shape,  position,  &c.)as  during  the  previous  interval  of  repose.  This
movement,  or  diastole,  is  accompanied  by  the  second  sound,  by  an  influx  of  blood
from  the  auricle,  by  a  retractile  motion  of  this  cavity  most  observable  at  its  sinus,  and
by  a  retrocession  of  the  apex  of  the  heart  from  the  walls  of  the  chest.  Next  suc-
ceeds the  interval  of  repose,  during  which  the  ventricles  remain  at  rest,  in  a  state  of
fulness,  though  not  of  distension,  tbrough  the  whole  period  intervening  between  the
second  and  the  first  sounds ;  but  the  auricle  remains  at  rest  during  the  first  portion
only  of  that  period,  the  remainder  being  occupied  by  its  next  contraction,  with  which
recommences  the  series  of  actions  described. — Trand.


OF THE  RYTHM.


507


is  more  than  sixteen  hours  in  the  four-and-twenty.  Even  the
muscles  of  voluntary  motion  have  often  not  more  rest  than  this,
in  persons  subject  to  bodily  labour;  and  some  of  the  muscles
which  keep  the  head  and  trunk  erect  have  even  less,  especially
such  as  have  not  their  action  completely  interrupted  by  sleep.*
The  preceding  calculation  is  equally  exact,  whether  we  suppose
the  dilatation  of  the  heart  to  be  passive,  or  consider  it,  as  I  am
disposed  to  do,  with  Pechlin,  as  active :  on  the  latter  hypothesis,
we  cannot  suppose  that  the  same  muscular  fibres  produce  both
the  dilatation  and  contraction  of  the  cavities.

The  isochronism  of  the  ventricular  contraction  and  the  arterial
pulse,  is  best  perceived  when  the  pulse  is  slow.1*  Indeed,  when
the  pulse  is  at  all  more  frequent  than  natural,  (say  about  72,)  it
is  not  easy  to  distinguish  this  isochronism.  In  this  case,  also,  the
interval  of  repose  after  the  contraction  of  the  auricles,  is  not  dis-
tinguishable ;  the  period  of  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles,  but
not  of  the  auricles,  is  shortened  ;  while  there  is  commonly  diminu-
tion of  the  impulse,  but  increase  of  the  sound,  attending  the  sys-
tole of  the  ventricles.  It  results  from  these  observations  and
others  in  a  preceding  page,  that  when  the  contraction  of  the  ven-
tricles becomes  slower  than  usual,  this  prolongation  of  their  action,
is,  in  general,  taken  neither  from  the  period  of  the  auricular  con-
traction nor  from  the  period  of  repose,  but  is  a  direct  addition  to
the  time  occupied  by  the  contractions  of  the  heart :  hence  the
pulse  becomes  always  slower  in  such  cases.

Hypertrophy  of  the  ventricles,  when  in  a  moderate  degree,
presents,  in  some  respects,  an  exaggeration  of  the  natural  rythm
of  the  heart's  actions.  The  contraction  of  the  ventricles  becomes
less  noisy,  and  more  readily  distinguishable  from  that  of  the
auricles.  After  the  latter,  the  interval  of  quiescence  is  well
marked,  and  contrasts  very  sensibly  with  the  sound  that  precedes,

*  It  ought  to  be  remarked,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  muscles  subject  to  the  in-
fluence of  the  will,  as  those  of  the  limbs,  and  which  are  liable  to  great  temporary
increase  of  action,  enjoy  the  longest  repose.  Thus,  in  a  person  that  has  walked
twelve  hours  out  of  the  twenty-four,  the  muscles  of  the  legs  and  thighs  will  have,
in  reality,  only  acted  during  six,  inasmuch  as  the  extensors  and  flexors  act  alter-
nately ;  but  the  muscles  of  the  trunk  will  have  been,  during  the  whole  journey,  in
a  state  of  almost  continued  contraction,  although  in  a  much  less  degree  and  in  some
sort  automatic  From  this  it  may  be  concluded  that,  in  the  case  of  a  person  in
health,  who  takes  a  degree  of  exercise  proportioned  to  his  strength,  the  sum  of
action  is  nearly  equal  in  every  order  of  muscles,  including  the  heart.  And  from  the
same  facts  we  may  deduce  this  further  conclusion,  which  is  moreover  in  accordance
with  experience,  that  those  occupations  which,  like  that  of  the  labourer,  lead  to  a
nearly  equal  exercise  of  the  different  parts  of  the  muscular  system,  are  the  most
conducive  to  health. — Author.

t  The  isochronism  of  the  ventricular  systole  and  the  arterial  pulse,  only  exists  in
vessels  near  the  heart :  in  the  arteries  of  the  extremities  the  beat  of  the  pulse  suc-
ceeds the  beat  of  the  heart  after  a  well-marked  interval ;  and  the  length  of  this  in-
terval progressively  decreases  in  the  vessels  as  we  approach  the  heart,  showing  that
the  impulse  communicated  to  the  column  of  blood  in  the  arterial  tree  is  strictly  pro-
gressive.—  TransL


508


EXPLORATION' OK THE  UEAHT.


and  the  motion  which  follows  it.  Rut  in  hypertrophy  carried  to
a  very  high  degree,  the  rythm  of  the  heart  is  singularly  changed.
In  this  case,  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles  is  greatly  prolonged.
This  at  first  is  perceived  as  a  profound  and  obscure  motion,  which
gradually  augments,  elevates  the  applied  ear,  and  then  termi-
nates in  producing  the  impulse  or  shock.  This  contraction  is
unaccompanied  by  any  sound,  or,  if  this  exists,  it  is  merely  a
sort  of  murmur  like  that  of  respiration.  The  contraction  of  the
auricles  is  extremely  short,  and  almost,  or  altogether,  without
sound :  and  in  some  cases  the  systole  of  the  ventricles  seems
scarcely  over  before  they  begin  to  swell  afresh.  The  interval  of
repose  no  longer  exists,  or  is  confounded  with  the  almost  imper-
ceptible commencement  of  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles.  In
extreme  cases,  there  is  no  sound  distinguishable  but  the  murmur
above  mentioned,  and  we  merely  recognize  an  elevation  of  the
heart  corresponding  to  each  beat  of  the  pulse.

In  these  cases  the  increased  brevity  of  the  auricular  contrac-
tion, or  its  apparent  absence,  is  not  the  consequence  of  their  di-
minished contractibility  merely,  but,  also,  of  their  contraction
commencing  before  that  of  the  ventricles  has  entirely  ceased.
This  becomes  particularly  evident  in  certain  cases  in  which  the
auricles  are  found  to  contract  very  forcibly  and  in  a  convulsive
manner,  with  a  loud  sound,  apparently  anticipating  the  contrac-
tion of  the  ventricles  and  interrupting  it  in  its  mid-course.  This
kind  of  anticipation,  which  is  frequently  observed  in  the  case  of
palpitation,  produces  an  effect  very  difficult  to  be  described,
though  easily  recognized  when  it  has  been  once  heard :  it  is  a
sort  of  subsultus  like  what  would  be  produced  by  a  spring  placed
under  the  heart,  which,  on  being  let  go,  should  suddenly  strike
this  organ,  and  stop  its  motion.  It  seems,  in  short,  as  if  the
movement  in  question  did  not  proceed  from  the  heart  itself,  but
from  a  contractile  organ,  of  greater  power,  placed  beneath  it.
This  convulsive  contraction  is  sometimes  double,  that  is,  we  per-
ceive two  successive  contractions  without  any  interval ;  but  im-
mediately after,  the  heart  regains  its  usual  rythm.

When  the  walls  of  the  left  ventricle  are  naturally  thin,  or  have
become  so  from  dilatation,  even  in  a  slight  degree,  the  rythm  of
the  heart's  actions  is  quite  different.  In  this  case,  the  interval
of  repose  after  the  contraction  of  the  auricle  is  no  longer  per-
ceptible. The  contraction  of  the  ventricles  is  more  sonorous,
more  resembling  that  of  the  auricles,  and  more  approaching  the
latter  in  duration.  From  these  circumstances  it  necessarily  fol-
lows that,  in  such  subjects,  the  pulse  must  be  habitually  frequent,
and  the  synchronism  of  the  systole  of  the  ventricles  and  the
diastole  of  the  arteries,  of  more  difficult  recognition.  Such  per-
sons are,  therefore,  very  unfit  subjects  on  which  to  study  the
mechanism  of  the  heart's  action  ;  and  ought  not  to  be  explored


OF THE  KYT11M.


509


by  the  young  niiscultator,  until  after  he  has  acquired  the  know-
ledge of  the  natural  rythm  on  individuals  more  favourably  con-
stituted.

To  the  phenomena  enumerated  are  conjoined,  as  already  men-
tioned, a  lesser  impulse,  and  a  more  extensive  range  of  the  sound
of  the  heart's  pulsation.  Together,  these  signs  uniformly  indi-
cate a  heart  disposed  to  dilatation, — that  is  to  say,  (to  assume  a
standard  of  comparison  in  a  case  where  there  cannot  be  a  fixed
standard)  a  heart  in  which  the  walls  of  the  left  ventricles  have,
at  most,  a  thickness  double  that  of  the  right.  This  condition  of
the  organ  of  circulation  is  congenial  in  many  cases.  It  does  not
necessarily  abridge  life,  but  is  usually  conjoined  with  a  delicate
constitution,  a  small  stature  and  puny  muscles.  Persons  so  con-
stituted are  narrow  chested,  and  have  the  respiration  habitually
short.  In  the  case  of  fever  and  disease  of  the  organs  of  respira-
tion, they  experience,  ceteris  paribus,  a  greater  dyspnoea  than
other  persons.  Should  the  condition  in  question  increase  only
in  a  slight  degree,  a  dilatation  of  the  heart  is  the  necessary  con-
sequence.

When  dilatation  actually  exists,  it  produces  merely  an  in-
crease of  all  the  characters  which  indicate  a  heart  with  thin  pa-
rietes.  The  contraction  of  the  ventricles  becomes  as  short  and
noisy  as  that  of  the  auricles  ;  the  pulse,  consequently,  becomes
very  frequent :  and  the  isochronism  of  the  arterial  pulse  and  the
contraction  of  the  ventricles  become  quite  undistinguishable.  It
even  sometimes  appears,  by  the  reverse  of  the  natural  order,  as
if  the  arterial  pulse  coincided  with  the  contraction  of  the  auri-
cles. This  result  frequently  depends  on  a  mere  illusion  of  hear-
ing, occasioned  by  the  frequency  of  the  heart's  contractions ;
but  there  certainly  are  some  subjects,  in  whom,  even  in  the  state
of  health,  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles  and  the  beat  of  the
pulse  do  not  perfectly  accord, — the  diastole  of  the  artery  being
always  a  little  later.  To  these  signs  we  must  add — the  absence
of  any  sensible  impulse ;  the  extension  of  the  heart's  pulsation
over  the  whole  or  greater  part  of  the  chest ;  and  sometimes  the
existence  of  this  in  as  great  force  under  the  clavicles  and  the
axilla  as  in  the  region  of  the  heart  itself.  This  last  character,  in
particular,  may  be  regarded  as  pathognomonic,  if  the  patient  is
not  phthisical  and  pectoriloquous  in  the  places  mentioned  ;  and,
like  all  the  others  mentioned,  it  is  more  marked  in  proportion  as
the  dilatation  is  more  extensive.

Such  are  the  phenomena  presented  by  the  regular  rythm  of
the  heart,  as  well  in  a  sound  state  of  the  organ,  as  when  its  walls
are  either  thicker  or  thinner  than  natural.  But  in  many  circum-
stances, which  do  not  at  all  amount  to  disease  or  even  serious  in-
disposition, this  rythm  exhibits  various  anomalies.  These  are
commonly  classed  under  three  principal  heads— palpitations,
irregularities  and  intermissions ;  and  I  shall  notice  them,  in


510


EXPLORATION  OF  THE  HKART.


order,  after  having  given  an  account  of  certain  anomalies  in  the
sound  of  the  heart. — In  the  whole  of  the  present  chapter  I  have
supposed  the  heart  to  be  either  quite  sound,  or  affected  similarly
and  equally  in  both  sides  ;  but  when  only  one  of  the  sides  of  the
heart  is  affected,  and  more  particularly  in  the  case  of  contraction  of
the  orifices,  the  rythm,  the  sound,  and  the  impulse  of  the  sides,
may  differ  so  much  as  to  occasion  results  that  might  be  attributed
to  two  different  hearts.

As  in  the  preceding  discussion  I  have  constantly  used  the  ex-
pression of  contraction  of  the  auricles,  I  think  it  necessary  to
remark  that  I  do  not  by  this  intend  to  prejudge  the  question
lately  agitated  by  my  friend,  Dr.  Barry,  a  distinguished  physician
of  the  English  army.  This  gentleman  has  endeavoured  to  prove,
by  direct  experiment,  that  atmospheric  pressure  is  the  chief  cause
of  the  circulation  in  the  veins.*  He  remarks,  in  the  first  place,
that  the  dilatation  of  the  chest  in  inspiration,  produces  a  tendency
to  a  vacuum  in  the  whole  thoracic  cavity ;  that  the  walls  of  the
pericardium  and  heart  follow  the  motion  of  the  chest ;  that,  con-
sequently, at  the  very  time  the  air  rushes  into  the  bronchi,  the
blood  is  rapidly  sucked  up  by  the  right  auricle,  and  is  precipi-
tated into  the  left  auricle,  as  well  from  the  same  cause  as  from
the  pressure  exerted  on  the  pulmonary  vessels.  The  chief  expe-
riments on  which  Dr.  Barry  founds  his  doctrines,  are  the  fol-
lowing: 1.  if  we  introduce  into  the  internal  jugular  vein  of  a
horse,  a  bent  glass  tube,  and  place  the  other  extremity  of  it  in  a
vessel  containing  a  coloured  fluid,  we  find  this  drawn  into  the
vein  at  each  inspiration,  until  it  is  all  exhausted ;  2.  the  same
experiment  made  by  adapting  the  glass  tube  to  a  metallic  one  in-
troduced into  the  pericardium  gives  precisely  the  same  results ;
3.  having  laid  open  the  abdomen  of  a  horse.,  and  separated  the
vena  cava,  if  we  lay  hold  of  the  latter,  we  find  the  vein  become
emptier  and  flaccid  during  each  inspiration.  Having  myself
witnessed  several  of  Dr.  Barry's  experiments,  I  am  convinced  of
the  correctness  of  his  opinion  respecting  the  influence  of  atmos-
pheric pressure  on  the  circulation  in  the  veins ;  and  I  consider  his
discovery  as  the  most  remarkable  addition  that  has  been  made  to
that  of  his  illustrious  countryman,  Harvey.  Wherefore,  if  we
admit,  as  I  think  we  must,  the  truth  of  Dr.  Barry's  proposition,
we  must  at  the  same  time  admit,  with  him,  that  the  auricles  are
merely  reservoirs  which  are  constantly  full,  and  on  which  the
ventricles  draw  at  each  diastole;  so  that  what  I  have  termed  con-
traction of  the  auricles,  must  be  understood  only  of  their  sinuses
or  appendixes. If  this  were  not  the  case,  and  the  auricle  con-

*  Recherches  experimentales  sur  la  cause  du  mouvement  du  Sang:,  &c.  par  David
Barry,  M.  D.  &c.  Paris,  18X5« — Dr.  Barry  lias  since  published  bis  work  in  English,
under  the  title  of  "  Experimental  Researches  on  the  Influence  exercised  by  Atmo-
spheric Pressure,"  &c.  Lond.  10"(>.  This  work  is  highly  deserving-  the  attention  of
physiologists  and  practitioners. — Trnml.


OF  THE  RYTHM.


511


tracted  completely,  inspiration  ought  continually  to  derange  the
reopulftrity  of*  the  heart's  action, — which  is  not  the  fact.  I  agree
with  Dr.  B.  that  the  auricles  habitually  contain  much  more  blood
than  the  ventricles  draw  off'  at  each  diastole,  and  that  the  sinus
contracts  with  much  greater  force  than  the  auricle  itself;  at  the
same  time,  I  by  no  means  consider  the  latter  as  entirely  passive ;
on  the  contrary,  I  think  it  is  proved  by  the  inspection  of  the
heart  in  a  living  animal,  that  the  whole  of  the  auricle  does  con-
tract, but  that  the  contraction  is  much  stronger  and  more  evident
in  the  sinus.  If  inspiration  does  not  occasion  any  habitual  alter-
ation in  the  rythm  of  the  heart's  actions,  this  arises,  no  doubt,  on
account  of  the  eminently  elastic  and  extensile  texture  of  the  au-
ricle, whereby  it  is  enabled  still  to  be  in  a  state  of  considerable
distension  at  the  very  time  at  which  the  contractile  movement
takes  place,  if  its  contraction  coincides  with  the  motion  of  inspi-
ration. — If  we  compare  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Barry  with  the
observations  of  Pechlin  on  the  active  dilatation  of  the  heart  of
vigorous  animals,  at  the  moment  of  separation  from  the  body,
(which  he  states  to  be  sufficient  to  press  open  the  compressing
hand)  the  mechanism  of  the  circulation  in  the  veins  seems  easily
understood.  The  blood  flows  copiously  into  the  auricles  at  each
inspiration,  and  the  ventricles  draw  on  these  reservoirs  at  each
diastole :  the  contraction  of  the  auricles  is  a  necessary  consequence
of  the  dilatation  of  the  ventricle:  it  is  contemporaneous  with  the
ventricular  diastole,  and  is  requisite  to  prevent  a  vacuum.  Many
phenomena,  as  Dr.  Barry  observes,  are  explained  by  the  mecha-
nism just  described,  and,  among  others,  the  descent  of  the  brain
during  inspiration,  and  its  rise,  or  rather  dilatation,  during  expi-
ration ;  the  reflux  of  blood  into  the  jugular  veins  from  couo-hino-
or  a  prolonged  expiration ;  and  the  sudden  death  occasioned  by
the  introduction  of  air  into  the  internal  jugular  vein,  a  case  which
has  occurred  two  or  three  times  within  these  few  years,  during
surgical  operations.*

*  In  attempting  to  lay  before  the  reader  the  various  opinions  promulgated  by  nu-
merous writers  on  the  subject  of  the  motions  and  sounds  of  the  heart,  1  gladly  avail
myself  of  my  friend  Dr.  Williams's  permission  to  introduce  the  chief  part  of  the
condensed  and  accurate  outline  of  the  subject  given  in  the  appendix  to  the  second
edition  of  his  excellent  work  on  Auscultation,  entitled  A  Rational  Exposition  of  the
Physical  Signs  of  the  Diseases  of  the  Lungs,  <3fc.  Lond.  1833.  And  while  1  accord  with
him  as  to  the  inadequacy  of  any  one  of  the  numerous  theories  fully  to  explain  the
phenomena,  he  will,  I  know,  forgive  me  for  classing  his  own  explanation  of  the  causes
of  the  sounds,  in  the  same  category.  It  is  fortunate,  in  a  practical  point  of  view,
that,  whatever  be  the  rationale  of  the  phenomena,  the  facts,  now  I  think  established,
of  the  first  sound  being  coincident  with  the  systole,  and  the  second  sound  with  the
diastole  of  the  ventricles,  suffices  for  our  guidance,  in  regard  to  diagnosis,  in  the
great  majority  of  cases. I  now  transcribe  Dr.  Williams's  critical  outline :

On  the  Motions  and  Sounds  of  the  Heart. — It  is  of  considerable  utility  in  the  exami-
nation of  a  controverted  point,  to  review  fairly  the  various  opinions  respecting  it,
and  by  collating  them  with  available  facts,  to  determine  the  comparative  probability
of  these  views:  if  this  had  been  done  with  regard  to  the  present  subject,  much
useless  speculation  might  have  been  saved,  and  some  animal  life  spared ;  for  any
attentive  reader  of  the  periodical-medical  literature,  must  have  perceived  that  the  same


512 ON THE MOTIONS AND SOUNDS OF THE  HEART.


opinions  have  been  broached,  refuted,  and  revived  by  successive  writers,  and  the
same  experiments  performed  and  reiterated  in  apparent  ignorance  of  preceding  in-
quiries.

On  this  account,  I  am  induced  to  give  a  summary  sketch  of  the  leading  features
in  the  views  which  have  been  advanced  respecting  the  motions  and  sounds  of  the
heart,  and  bring  them  successively  lo  the  test  of  some  well-established  pathological
or  physiological  facts.  Others,  besides  the  names  quoted,  may  have  supported  the
views  in  question,  but  it  is  only  the  views  which  I  wish  to  deal  with,  and  I  cite  the
writers  with  a  wish  to  show  that  the  arguments  which  each  has  advanced  have  been
carefully  studied.

1.  M.  Laennec.  a.  1st  sound,  impulse,  and  pulse,  caused  by  the  ventricular  svs-
tole.  b.  2nd  sound  by  the  systole  of  the  auricles. —  Remarks,  a  Generally  admitted,
and  proved  by  various  facts  and  experiments,  b.  Disproved  by  the  fact  noticed  by
Harvey  and  Haller,  and  confirmed  by  modern  experiments,  that  the  auricular  con-
traction immediately  precedes  that  of  the  ventricles ;  also  by  this  fact,  that  both
sounds  sometimes  continue  after  the  auricles  have  ceased  to  contract.  (Dr.  Hope's
Experiments  on  Asses.  See  his  work,  p.  36.)  [And  yet  more  completely  disproved
by  the  fact,  that  for  the  production  of  the  two  sounds  the  division  of  the  heart  into
auricle  and  ventricle  is  not  necessary.  See  Dr.  Stokes's  paper  on  Aneurism  in  the
Dublin  Journal. J.  F.]  .

2.  Mr.  Turner.  (Med  Chir.  Trans.  Edin.  vol.  iii.)  2nd  sound  produced  by  the
falling  back  of  the  heart  on  the  pericardium  after  the  systole  of  the  ventricles. —
Remark.  Disproved  by  the  fact,  that  the  sound  continues  when  the  heart  pulsates
out  of  the  pericardium.

3.  Dr.  Corrigan.  (Trans,  of  King's  and  Queen's  Coll.  of  Phys.  Ireland.)  a.  Im-
pulse and  1st  sound  caused  by  the  rush  of  blood  into  the  ventricles  during  the  auri-
cular systole,  b.  2nd  sound  by  the  ventricular  systole,  which  be  considers  to  be
instantaneous. — Remarks,  a.  Disproved  by  the  clearly  ascertained  facts,  that  the
1st  sound  and  impulse  accompany  the  systole  of  the  ventricles  when  the  auricles
have  ceased  to  contract,  b.  Disproved  clearly  in  large  animals  by  the  ventricular
systole,  (which  is  not  instantaneous,)  and  the  pulse  of  arteries  near  the  heart,  evi-
dently preceding  the  2d  sound  ;  (Dr.  Hope's  Experiments,  p.  31,  of  his  wors  ;  and
those  of  Mr.  Carlile,  Dublin  Journal"  of  Medic.  Sci.  vol.  iv.)  and  further  disproved
by  several  pathological  phenomena.

4.  Dr.  David  Williams.  (Edin.  Med.  &  Surg.  Journ.  Oct.  1829.)  2nd  sound
caused  by  the  flapping  open  of  the  auriculo-ventricular  valves  against  the  sides  of
the  ventricles;  these  valves  he  supposes  to  be  opened  by  the  musculi  papillares. —
Remark.  This  is  contrary  to  the  received  opinion  of  anatomists  with  respect  to  the
functions  of  the  auricular  valves  and  musculi  papillares,  and  there  is  no  collateral
argument  to  maintain  so  gratuitous  an  assumption.

5.  M.  Pigeaux.  (Arch.  Generates  de  Medecine,  Juillet  et  Novembre,  1832.)
a.  1st  sound  produced  by  the  blood  rushing  into  the  ventricles  at  the  moment  of  their
diastole,  b.  2nd  sound  by  the  collision  of  the  blood  against  the  walls  of  the  aorta
and  pulmonary  artery,  c.  The  ventricles  contract  in  a  moment  of  silence  before  the
2nd  sound,  d.  The  intensity  of  the  sounds  proportioned  to  the  force  by  which  the
blood  is  impelled. — Remarks,  a.  Opposed  by  the  facts  stated  against  3  a  ;  opposed
also  bv  many  pathological  facts,  such  as  the  occurrence  of  a  murmur  with  the  1st
sound  in  case  of  diseased  semi-lunar  valves,  b.  Disproved  by  the  fact  that  the  2nd
sound  occurs  distinctly  after  the  pulse  in  the  carotids,  and  therefore  after  that  in  the
larger  arteries,  c.  Opposed  by  the  observation,  that  the  1st  sound  and  ventricular
systole  occur  together  and  correspond  in  duration,  d.  This  is  opposed  by  the  morbid
phenomena  of  dilatation  of  the  ventricles,  which  always  increases  the  first  sound,
and  of  hypertrophy,  which  diminishes  both  sounds.

6.  M.  Majendie.  (In  a  Lecture  read  at  the  College  of  France,  quoted  by  M.
lVeaux.)  1st  sound  and  impulse  produced  by  the  ventricular  diastole  impelling
the  apex;  the  2nd  sound  by  the  systole  impelling  the  base  of  the  heart  agaiust  the
walls  of  the  chest. Remark. Disproved  by  the  fact  opposed  to  2.

7.  M.  Houanet.  (Journ.  Ilebdom,  No.  97  ;  also  Mr.  Bryan,  Lancet,  Sept.  1833.)
a.  1st  sound  caused  bv  the  closing  of  the  mitral  and  the  tricuspid  valves  against  the
auriculo-ventricular  orifices  during  the  ventricular  systole,  b.  2nd  sound  by  the  re-
action of  the  blood  in  the  arteries  on  the  semilunar  valves  at  the  moment  of  the
ventricular  diastole.

8  Mr.  II.  Carlile.  (Dublin  Journal  of  Medical  Science,  vol.  i v.  The  essay  was
likewise  read  at  the  Cambridge  Meeting  of  the  British  Association.)  a.  1st  sound


ON THE MOTIONS AND SOUNDS OF THE  HEART.


513


produced  by  the  rush  of  blood  into  the  arteries  during  the  ventricular  systole,  b
2nd  sound  bv  the  reaction  on  the  semilunar  valves  as  stated  in  b.  7.

9.  Dr.  Hope.  a.  1st  sound  and  impulse,  caused  by  the  ventricular  systole;  b.
2nd  sound  and  back  stroke,  or  2nd  impulse,  by  the  ventricular  diastole.  The  natural
as  well  as  morbid  sounds  produced  by  the  motions  of  the  contained  fluid.

Before  we  sift  the  questionable  points  in  these  three  last  views,  it  will  be  proper
to  review  the  principal  grounds  on  which  we  adopt  their  description  of  the  sounds
and  motions,  in  defiance  of  many  preceding  authorities.  Having  been  present  at
some  of  Ur.  Hope's  experiments  on  the  ass,  I  had  ample  opportunity  of  convincing
myself  that  the  sounds  were  connected  with  the  motions  of  the  ventricles  only.  When
the  pericardium  was  laid  open,  and  the  large  heart  exposed,  vigorously  pulsating  ;
the  eye  watching  it,  the  hand  grasping  it,  and  the  stethoscope  applied  to  it,  gave
perfectly  corresponding  impressions,  insomuch  that  on  substituting  touch  for  hear-
ing, it  was  difficult  to  banish  the  impression  that  one  still  heard  the  double  sound
which  was  so  exactly  represented  in  quality  and  duration  by  the  motions  of  the
ventricles,  as  felt  and  seen  ;  and  on  combining  touch  and  hearing,  by  applying  the
hand  and  the  stethoscope  at  the  same  time,  these  impressions,  which  corresponded
in  nature  and  duration,  were  found  also  to  be  perfectly  simultaneous.  The  apex  of
the  heart  was  observed  and  felt  to  strike  against  the  ribs  at  each  systole,  and  thus
was  explained  the  impulse.  The  motions  of  the  auricles,  when  regular,  preceded
the  ventricular  motions  and  sounds  ;  they  were  slight  and  undulatory,  increasing
from  the  sinus  to  the  appendix,  where  they  terminated  suddenly,  and  were  imme-
diately followed  by  the  ventricular  systole.  Tbey  afterwards  became  irregular,
sometimes  failing  and  sometimes  occurring  twice  slightly  during  the  period  of  ven-
tricular repose,  and  in  one  experiment  entirely  ceased  some  minutes  before  the
movements  and  sounds  of  the  ventricles.  In  no  instance  were  they  attended  with
any  perceptible  sound.  This  account  is  confirmed  by  the  experiments  of  Mr.  Car-
lile,  which  satisfactorily  explain  the  succession  of  the  motions  of  the  auricles  and
ventricles  ;  but  they  were  performed  on  animals  too  small  to  illustrate  the  sounds.
He  very  justly  shows  that  the  pulse  cannot  be  simultaneous  in  all  the  arteries  at
once,  but  must  be  successive,  transmitted  in  a  wave  from  the  heart  to  the  end  of
these  elastic  tubes.

Although  it  seems  fairly  established  that  the  first,  or  dull  sound,  is  produced  by
the  systole  of  the  ventricles  ;  and  the  second,  or  quick  one,  by  their  diastole,  it  is  by
no  means  clearly  explained  in  what  way  these  actions  generate  these  sounds.  The
following  causes  have  been  severally  assigned  as  physically  capable  of  generating
the  first  sounds  during  the  systole  of  the  ventricles.  1.  The  collision  of  the  parti-
cles of  fluid  in  the  ventricles.  (Dr.  Hope.) — 2.  The  rush  of  blood  into  the  great
arteries.  (Mr.  Carlile. )— 3.  The  closing  of  the  mitral  and  tricuspid  valves.  (M.
Kouauet,  Mr.  Bryan.) — 4.  The  muscular  contraction  itself.

1.  The  first  of  these  explanations  is  ingeniously  proposed  by  Dr.  Hope,  but  he  ad-
vances no  facte  in  direct  proof  of  the  hypothesis.  In  a  number  of  experiments
which  1  have  made  on  the  generation  of  sound,  I  have  found  liquids,  of  all  bodies,
the  most  difficult  to  excite  to  sonorous  vibration  ;  and  although  they  readily  trans-
mit vibrations  already  produced  in  solids,  it  requires  a  combination  of  circumstances
to  make  them  originate  sound.  This  is  consistent  with  the  explanation  given  of  the
production  of  sound,  for  impulses  which  throw  solids  into  sonorous  vibration,  are
expended  in  liquids  in  causing  a  displacement  of  their  particles.  On  making  an
experiment  with  a  gum  elastic  bottle,  by  tilling  it  with  water,  and  then  forcibly
compressing  it  under  water  by  the  end  of  the  stethoscope,  (avoiding  the  use  of  the
band,  for  that  produces  its  own  muscular  sound,)  I  have  failed  in  procuring  any
sound  at  all  approaching  to  that  of  the  heart's  contraction.  The  blood  yields  rea-
dily to  the  contracting  ventricle,  and  there  being  no  obstacle  to  the  escape  of  blood
from  it,  further  than  the  weight  of  the  arterial  column,  which  the  normal  action  of
the  heart  can  quietly  and  steadily  overcome,  it  passes  into  the  arteries  without  vi-
bration. But  if  there  be  an  obstacle  to  the  current  of  the  blood  from  the  ventricle,
whether  that  obstacle  be  a  narrowing  or  a  projection  in  the  orifice,  the  current  will
act  on  it  just  as  the  bow  does  on  the  string  of  a  violin ;  a  sound  will  be  excited,
and  thus  are  produced  valvular  murmyrs.  Again,  if  instead  of  the  orifices  being
narrowed,  the  heart  contracts  with  unnatural  briskness,  expelling  its  contents  with
convulsive  energy,  the  natural  outlets  then  become  relatively  narrow,  and  are
thrown  into  vibrations  :  this  is  the  rationale  of  tbe  bellows  murmur  which  accompa-
nies the  jerking  pulse  of  pericarditis  and  the  irritation  of  inanition.  But  the  dif-
ference of  these  sounds,  and  of  the  circumstances  that  excite  them,  from  those  of  the


L  L


514


EXPLORATION OF  THE  HEART.


normal  action  of  the  heart,  makes  me  hesitate  to  refer  the  latter  to  the  same  prin-
ciple ;  and  tbe  fact  that  the  morbid  are  often  superadded  to  the  natural  sounds,  also
inclines  me  to  think  that  they  have  a  distinct  cause.

'2.  The  second  explanation  of  the  first  sound,  the  rush  of  blood  into  tbe  larger
arteries,  is  perhaps  less  liable  to  tbe  acoustic  objection  before  urged  than  the  pre-
ceding opinion,  for  the  blood  has  acquired  an  impulse  when  it  enters  the  arteries,  and
if  its  course  there  is  not  free,  it  might  readily  produce  a  sound.  But  in  their  natural
state,  the  arteries  give  passage  to  tbe  blood  as  smoothly  as  the  heart  parts  with  it,
and  it  would  prove  an  imperfection  in  nature  were  it  otherwise.  Moreover,  if  the
explanation  were  true,  the  large  arteries  rather  than  the  heart  would  be  the  prin-
cipal seat  of  the  sound;  and  the  sound  should  be  increased  by  an  hypertrophied
heart,  witb  a  strong  pulse,  and  diminished  by  a  dilated  heart  and  a  weak  pulse  ;  yet
the  reverse  of  these  is  presented  in  nature.

3.  The  closing  of  the  auricular  valves.  The  principal  objection  to  this  as  the  only
cause  of  the  first  sound,  is,  that  it  must  be  instantaneous,  and  confined  to  the  first  part
of  tbe  ventricular  systole,  whereas  we  know  that  the  first  sound  is  prolonged  during
the  whole  period  of  this  action.

4.  Although  Laennec  referred  the  first  sound  to  the  systole  of  the  ventricles,  he
did  not  attempt  to  define  the  physical  cause  of  its  production.  I  have  ventured  to
class  it  among  the  muscular  sounds  which  Dr.  Wollaston  first  noticed  to  occur  in  all
cases  of  rapid  muscular  contraction.  This  sound  may  be  exemplified  by  applying
the  fleshy  part  of  the  thumb  to  tbe  stethoscope  or  naked  ear,  and  bending  and
straightening  the  thumb.  It  is  louder  in  muscles  that  are  thin,  and  in  a  state  of  con-
siderable tension  ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  it  does  not  cease  with  tbe  apparent  move-
ment, but  continues  as  long  as  the  muscle  remains  contracted  and  tense :  it  then
takes  on  an  intermitting  character  like  tbe  noise  of  the  rolling  of  a  carriage  over
rough  pavement,  whence  Dr.  Wollaston  was  led  to  infer  that  muscular  action  is  not
perfectly  continued,  but  consists  of  a  series  of  minute  contractions  and  relaxations.
A  good  example  of  it  may  be  obtained  on  applying  the  stethoscope  to  the  neck  of  a
person  who  holds  his  head  back  towards  the  opposite  side,  and  then  throws  the  pla-
tysma  myoides  into  contraction.  It  still  appears  to  me,  that  the  most  simple  and
satisfactory  way  of  accounting  for  the  first  or  systolic  sound  of  the  heart,  is  to  refer
it  to  this  class  of  sounds.  Their  physical  production  seems  to  depend  on  the  tension
into  which  the  fibres  of  muscles  are  thrown  when  they  contract ;  and  the  self-acting
power  of  these  fibres  constitutes  them  the  motors  as  well  as  the  subjects  of  sonorous
vibrations.  Here  we  have  to  remark  the  extreme  facility  with  which  the  motions  of
solids  produce  sounds,  compared  with  those  of  fluids :  for  it  is  almost  impossible  to
touch,  stretch,  bend,  or  compress  solids,  without  throwing  them  into  sonorous  vibra-
tions. The  varieties  observed  in  the  contraction  of  the  heart  seem  to  me  to  be  per-
fectly explicable  on  this  principle.  The  sound  begins  the  moment  the  fibres  arrive
at  a  state  of  tension ;  it  continues  until  the  contraction  is  completed  and  the  blood
expelled  from  the  ventricle,  and  ceases  the  instant  of  tbe  diastole.  M.  Pigeaux  is
in  error  when  be  maintains  that  muscular  sounds  cannot  be  produced  under  water :  I
find  them  more  distinct  and  free  from  adventitious  sounds  of  the  surface,  and  I  have
been  able  to  imitate  the  sounds  of  the  heart  very  exactly  by  muscular  movements  of
the  hand  under  water.

We  now  come  to  the  subject  of  the  second  sound,  which,  although  certainly  occur-
ring at  the  moment  of  the  diastole  of  the  ventricles,  has  received  several  different
explanations  as  to  its  physical  cause.  The  only  two  which  appear  tenable  in  the  pre-
sent state  of  our  knowledge  are — 1.  tbe  reaction  of  the  arterial  columns  of  blood
against  the  semilunar  valves.  2.  The  impulse  of  the  blood  from  the  auricles  refilling
the  ventricle  at  its  diastole.

1.  The  first  of  these  bears  a  very  inviting  aspect,  for  the  second  sound  is  just  of
that  abrupt  flapping  character  that  might  be  supposed  to  result  from  the  action  of  a
thin  valve.  But  it  may  be  objected  to  this  view,  that  the  arteries,  more  than  the
heart,  should  be  tbe  seat  of  this  sound.  The  tense  column  which  throws  these  valves
into  play,  should  receive  their  shock  more  forcibly  than  the  heart,  which  at  that  mo-
ment has  become  flaccid,  and  ill  adapted  to  transmit  sound  or  impulse  (backstroke)
through  the  whole  of  its  substance.  There  are  some  cases  of  disease  which  seem  also
to  militate  against  it.  In  a  case  described  by  Dr.  Hope,  the  second  sound  on  the  left
side  was  quite  distinct,  yet  the  aortic  valves  were  found  in  a  state  of  complete  rigidity.
(Case  20.)  In  another  case,  the  second  sound  was  remarkably  loud  on  the  left  side,
with  a  weak  pulse  ;  yet,  after  death  there  was  found  disease  of  the  mitral  valve  per-
mitting free  regurgitation,  and  contraction  of  the  aorta:  this  combination  of  disease


ON THE MOTIONS AND SOUNDS OK T II K  HEART.


515


must  have  diminished  the  action  of  the  aortic  valves.  (Case  15.)  The  action  of
these  valves  will  be  strong,  in  proportion  as  the  arteries  are  well  filled,  and  the  pulse
strong,  and  the  second  sound  should  in  this  view  be  proportionally  loud.  On  con-
sulting the  records  of  some  cases  of  this  description,  I  have  not  found  this  corres-
pondence. Still  I  do  not  consider  this  view  entirely  disproved,  and  it  should  claim
attention  in  future  investigations.

2.  This  is  Dr.  Hope's  explanation  of  the  second  sound  :  when  the  diastole  takes
place,  the  blood  impelled  by  a  number  of  concurrent  circumstances,  shoots  with  in-
stantaneous velocity  from  the  auricles  into  the  ventricles ;  and  the  reaction  of  the
ventricular  walls  on  its  particles,  when  their  course  is  abruptly  arrested  by  the  com-
pletion of  the  diastole,  is,  he  conceives,  the  cause  of  the  loud,  brief,  and  clear  sound.
The  concurrent  circumstances  which  impelled  the  blood  into  the  ventricles  at  the  mo-
ment of  their  diastole,  are  the  distension  of  the  auricles  in  which  the  blood  has  been
accumulating  during  the  ventricular  contraction  ;  the  weight  of  the  ventricles  col-
lapsing on  the  auricles  thus  distended  ;  the  width  of  the  auriculo-ventricular  orifices  ;
and  lastly,  the  sucking  power  of  the  ventricle  in  its  diastole.  With  respect  to  this
last,  Dr.  Hope  does  not  assume  that  the  ventricles  have  an  actively  dilating  power
further  than  what  proceeds  from  the  physical  elasticity  of  their  parietes,  but  such  a
power  has  been  ascribed  to  them  by  Bichat,  Pechlin,  Carson,  and  others,  and  even  by
Laennec ;  and  although  opposed  to  what  we  at  present  know  of  animal  dynamics,  it
would  be  rash  to  absolutely  deny  the  possibility  of  its  existence.  The  injection  of
the  coronary  arteries,  which  occurs  the  instant  the  systolic  action  ceases,  may  some-
what contribute  to  the  dilatation  of  the  ventricles.  Whatever  be  the  cause,  the  dia-
stole in  large  animals  is  sufficient  to  force  open  the  hand  of  a  person  grasping  the
ventricles,  and  it  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  this  should  have  been  ascribed  to
an  actively  dilating  power.  It  is  in  favour  of  Dr.  Hope's  explanation  of  the  second
sound,  that  it  does  not  falsify  Laennec's  signs  of  disease  of  the  auricular  valves  ;  and
although  for  acoustic  reasons  before  stated,  I  should  he  inclined  to  place  the  seat  of
the  sound  in  the  parietes  of  the  ventricles,  rendered  momentarily  tense  by  the  sud-
den influx  of  blood,  rather  than  in  the  motions  of  the  fluid,  I  incline  to  this  explana-
tion of  the  cause  of  the  second  sound.

Since  the  first  announcement  of  M.  Majendie's  views  respecting  the  causes  of  the
sounds  of  the  heart,  two  years  since  by  M.  Pigeaux,  as  quoted  in  the  preceding  part
of  this  note  by  Dr.  Williams,  this  distinguished  physiologist  has  himself  published
his  opinions  on  the  subject,  and  which,  if  they  were  formerly  and  are  again  correctly
reported,  seem  to  have  undergone  a  very  important  change.  (See  a  translation  of
M.  Majendie's  memoir  in  the  Medical  Gazette,  June  28,  1834.)  He  now  attributes
the  first  sound  to  the  shock  of  the  apex  of  the  heart  against  the  walls  of  the  chest
during  the  systole  of  the  ventricles,  and  the  second  sound  to  a  similar  impulse  of  the
anterior  surface  of  the  right  ventricle  during  the  diastole  of  the  ventricles.  The
principle  of  the  generation  of  the  sound  is  indeed  still  the  same,  but  the  causes  of
the  individual  sounds  are  in  some  degree  reversed.  Against  the  truth  of  M.  Ma-
jendie's principle  many  arguments  may  be  adduced,  and  even,  it  would  appear,
some  well-ascertained  facts.  I  shall  here  state  a  few  of  these,  for  the  substance  of
which  I  am  indebted  to  my  friend,  the  ingenious  author  of  the  first  portion  of  the
present  note.

1.  In  the  experiments  by  Dr.  Hope  the  impression  on  Dr.  Williams's  mind  is,  that
he  distinctly  heard  the  two  sounds  of  the  heart  when  this  organ  was  removed  from
all  contact  with  the  thoracic  parietes  and  the  pericardium,  and  when  the  constant  and
close  apposition  of  the  stethoscope  precluded  the  possibility  of  any  sound  being  pro-
duced by  any  shock  against  it:  and  it  will  be  seen  hereafter  that  M.  BouilTaud's
conviction  is  similar.

2.  To  say  nothing  of  the  inconclusiveness  of  any  arguments  deduced  from  pheno-
mena elicited  under  such  an  unnatural  condition  of  things  as  existed  in  these  experi-
ments, it  may  be  remarked,  that  the  third  and  fourth  are  subject  to  fallacy,  inasmuch
as  "  the  sonorous  bodies ''  and  "  the  sternum  of  the  goose  "  might  have  given  rise  to
sounds  in  consequence  of  the  existence  of  an  interval  between  them  and  the  heart;  a
state  of  parts  very  different  from  the  natural,  in  which  the  heart  and  the  walls  of  the
chest  are  in  apposition,  and  which  unnatural  state  of  parts  might  have  permitted  the
organ  to  communicate  a  shock  to  the  bodies,  utterly  impossible  in  the  natural  state.

3.  The  facts  adduced  in  the  memoir  after  Exper.  4,  and  the  5th  and  6th  experi-
ments, merely  indicate  that  the  sounds  of  the  heart  cannot  be  heard  through  a  consi-
derable layer  of  air,  water,  or  healthy  lung,  facts  long  known  ;  but  M.  Majendie  has

L  I.  2


51G


EXPLORATION OF THli  UtAKT.


yet  to  prove  that  any  injection  of  air  or  water,  separating  the  heart  from  the  walls  of
4°  H  WlU  preven*  these  souncls  from  being  audible  over  the  left  clavicle.
4.  How  will  M.  Majendie  explain,  in  accordance  with  his  views,  the  incontestible
tacts  of  the  increased  loudness  and  diminished  impulse  in  dilatation,  and  the  con-
verse in  hypertrophy?  or  the  intensity  of  the  sounds  in  the  carotids,  and  at  tbe  top
of  the  chest,  in  aneurisms  of  the  arch  of  the  aorta  and  innominata,  in  which  cases
they  are  often  heard  more  distinctly  than  in  the  region  of  the  heart  itself?

It  would  further  appear  that  since  M.  Majendie's  paper  was  read  before  the
Institute,  M.  Bouillaud  has  performed  a  series  of  experiments,  with  the  same  ob-
ject, but  with  results  the  reverse  of  those  announced  by  Majendie.  The  results  of
M.  Bouillaud's  experiments  was,  that  he  could  always  hear  the  two  sounds  of  the
heart  although  there  was  no  point  of  contact  between  the  organ  and  any  portion  of
the  walls  of  the  chest.  He  indeed  found  that  the  friction  of  the  heart  against  the
end  of  the  stethoscope  gave  rise  to  a  particular  sound  ;  but  this  (merely  a  sound  of
rubbing)  was  so  very  different  from  the  natural  sound  of  the  heart  that  the  two  could
never  be  confounded.  It  was,  moreover,  ascertained,  that  the  momentary  pulsation
of  tbe  empty  organ,  after  it  was  separated  from  the  body  of  the  animal,  was  accompa-
nied by  no  perceptible  sound.  M.  Bouillaud's  own  opinion  respecting  the  cause  of
both  the  sounds  is,  that  they  are  owing  to  the  play  of  the  valves  of  the  heart.  (Journ.
Hebdom.  quoted  in  Med.  Chir.  Rev.  July,  1834.)  In  reference  to  this  opinion  of
M.  Bouillaud,  as  also  to  that  of  Dr.  Hope,  1  would  observe  that  they  both  possess  a
degree  of  probability  in  my  mind  over  all  those  which  attribute  the  two  sounds  to
two  different  causes.  Although  certainly  characteristically  different,  yet  the  two
sounds  have  so  great  a  similarity  and  are  so  allied  in  time  and  place,  that  I  cannot
readily  bring  my  mind  to  believe  that  they  do  not  both  depend  upon  one  and  tbe
same  cause  slightly  modified,  or,  at  least,  on  the  different  play  of  tbe  same  parts.
But  the  whole  subject  wants  fresh  investigation  and  the  institution  of  a  new  set  of
experiments  on  large  animals, — an  investigation  which  cannot  be  entrusted  to  better
hands  than  those  of  Dr.  Hope  and  Dr.  Williams.— Transl.


CHAPTER  V.

OF CERTAIN ANOMALIES  IN THE SOUND  OF  THE  HEART  AND

ARTERIES.

These  phenomena  are  the  more  remarkable,  inasmuch  as  they
are  the  only  ones  discovered  by  immediate  auscultation,  which
do  not  depend  on  structural  lesion  of  the  organs  in  which  they
are  produced.

Sect.  1.— Of  the  Bellows-sound  of  the  heart  and  arteries.

The  heart  and  arteries,  under  certain  circumstances,  in  place
of  the  sound  which  naturally  attends  their  dilatation,  produce
what  I  have  denominated  the  bellows-sound,  from  the  circum-
stance of  its  exactly  resembling,  in  the  greater  number  of  cases
at  least,  the  noise  produced  by  this  instrument  when  used  to
blow  the  fire.  This  comparison  is  exact ;  and  the  cardiac  sound
is  even  frequently  as  louci  as  that  of  the  machine. It  however


OF  THE  BELLOWS-SOUND.


517


presents  many  varieties,  some  of  which  are  so  different  from  the
others,  that  we  should  have  difficulty  in  believing  them  to  be  of
the  same  kind,  were  it  not  from  the  rapidity  with  which  they
succeed,  and  the  insensible  manner  in  which  they  shade  into  each
other. These  varieties  are  of  three  kinds.

1.  The  bellows-sound,  properly  so  called. — This  may  accom-
pany the  diastole  of  the  heart  and  arteries,  and  when  present,  it
entirely  replaces  the  natural  sound  of  the  ventricle,  auricle,  or
artery  :  it  ceases  during  the  systole.  In  some  very  rare  instances,
indeed,  the  sound,  more  particularly  in  the  carotids,  but  also  in
the  heart,  is  changed  into  a  continuous  murmur,  like  that  of  the
sea,  or  that  which  is  produced  by  the  application  of  a  large  shell
to  the  ear.  In  cases  of  this  kind,  we  can  no  longer  distinguish,
or  we  distinguish  very  imperfectly,  the  jerking  action  of  the  dia-
stole. Sometimes  we  perceive  this  continuous  murmur  in  one  of
the  carotid  or  subclavian  arteries,  while  that  of  the  opposite  side
yields  the  common  bellows-sound,  answering  to  the  arterial  dia-
stole. Most  commonly  the  bellows-sound  is  acurately  confined
within  the  limits  of  the  artery  or  ventricle  :  sometimes,  however,
it  is  diffused  over  a  space  much  larger.

2.  Sound  of  the  saw  or  rasp. — This  sound  is  exactly  like  that
of  one  or  other  of  the  instruments  named,  heard  more  or  less  re-
motely, and  is  accompanied  by  the  perception  of  roughness,  con-
veyed by  the  action  of  these  instruments.

3.  Musical  or  hissing  bellows-sound. — This  variety  is  only
met  with  in  the  arteries ;  at  least  I  never  observed  it  in  the
heart.*  The  common  bellows-sound  of  the  arteries  frequently
degenerates  into  this,  particularly  when  the  patient  is  unusually
agitated  from  any  cause,  becoming  like  the  sighing  of  wind
through  a  key-hole,  or  the  sound  of  a  metallic  cord  which  still
vibrates  long  after  being  struck.  These  sounds  are  very  distinct
although  never  very  loud  ;  and  occasionally  they  compose  a  cer-
tain succession  of  musical  tones,  as  if  the  artery  were  become  a
vibrating  string,  from  which  two  or  three  notes  were  drawn  out
in  succession,  by  advancing  and  drawing  back  the  finger  upon
it.  In  four  cases  I  have  met  with  this  sound  (which  is  literally
musical)  in  the  carotid  arteries.f  In  one  of  these  cases,  I  at  first
conceived  the  sound  to  arise  from  an  instrument  in  the  apart-
ment below. On  a  close  examination  it  was  found,  that  the  mu-

*  I  have,  at  the  moment  of  writing  this  note,  (July  26,  1834,)  a  man  under  my
care,  in  the  Chichester  Infirmary,  in  whom  the  musical  be  I  lows- sound  exists  in  the
heart,  in  the  most  striking  manner,  being  so  loud  as  to  be  distinctly  audible  without
the  stethoscope,  at  a  short  distance  from  the  person's  body.  It  is  isochronous  with
the  contraction  of  the  ventricles,  terminating  in  the  shock  of  the  heart.  It  resembles
exactly  the  rather  loud  and  shrill  moan  of  an  infant  or  puppy,  which  is  kept  up  un-
interruptedly with  every  expiration.  Dr.  Hope  mentions  a  similar  case  (Treatise,
p.  338,)  and  refers  to  one  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  in  which  there  was  a  very  large  and
long  vegetation  in  the  mitral  valve. — Transl

t  The  author  records  the  exact  melody  in  these  cases,  in  musical  notes,  which  I
have  omitted,  aa  being  matter  of  mere  curiosity. — Transl.


,518


EXPLORATION OF THE  HEART.


sical  notes  were  associated  with  a  slight  vibration  of  the  artery,
which,  during  its  diastole,  seemed  to  brush  the  end  of  the  stetho-
scope. From  time  to  time  the  melody  ceased  all  at  once,  and
was  replaced  by  a  very  strong  sound  of  the  rasp.  This  alterna-
tion of  sound  produced  an  effect,  of  which  I  may  give  some  idea,
at  the  risk  of  making  a  ridiculous  comparison  : — it  was  like  the
sound  of  military  music,  on  a  march,  every  now  and  then  inter-
rupted by  the  hoarse  roll  of  the  drum.

The  hissing  bellows-sound  of  the  subclavian  artery  might  some-
times be  confounded,  by  an  inexperienced  observer,  with  sounds
of  quite  a  different  kind.  This  is  when  the  violent  pulsation  of
this  artery,  by  compressing  the  summit  of  the  lung,  gives  rise  to
a  sibilous  or  mucous  rhonchus  in  some  of  the  bronchial  tubes :
the  cause  of  this  kind  of  rhonchus  is  readily  ascertained  from  its
isochronism  with  the  pulse.  I  even  think  that  I  have  heard  the
metallic  tinkling  produced  in  the  same  manner  in  a  tuberculous
excavation. — The  bellows-sound  of  the  heart  becomes  rarely  si-
bilous, and  never  in  a  very  marked  degree.

The  bellows-sound,  as  well  in  the  heart  as  arteries,  may  exist
without  any  increase  of  the  impulse.  It  may  exist  at  the  same
time  in  the  four  cavities  of  the  heart,  and  over  the  whole  extent
of  the  arterial  system.  I  do  not  believe  it  ever  exists  in  the  veins.
Sometimes,  however,  I  have  been  led  to  suspect  its  presence  in
the  jugulars  ;  but,  as  after  a  few  hours,  the  sound  became  syn-
chronous with  the  carotid  pulse,  1  concluded  that  it  had  its  site
in  this  vessel.  It  much  more  frequently  occupies  the  ventricles
than  the  auricles ;  sometimes,  however,  it  is  confined  to  the  lat-
ter ;  and  very  often  it  exists  in  one  ventricle  only.  It  frequently
is  perceived  in  a  high  degree  in  the  heart,  without  there  being
any  similar  sound  in  the  arteries ;  more  rarely  the  reverse  is  the
case.  It  is  usual  for  the  sound  to  be  perceived  in  a  small  num-
ber of  arteries  at  the  same  time,  and  over  a  certain  part  of  their
course,  without  any  thing  of  the  same  kind  being  found  in  their
trunks  or  branches.  The  carotid  and  subclavian  arteries  are
those  which  exhibit  it  most  commonly,  and,  next  in  order  of  fre-
quency, the  abdominal  aorta,  the  crural  and  brachial  arteries.
The  arteries  of  the  right  side  give  the  sound  more  frequently
and  in  greater  degree  than  those  of  the  left  side.

Cause  of  the  bellows-sound. — I  have  known  a  considerable
number  of  persons  die  of  different  diseases,  acute  or  chronic,
who  had  presented  this  phenomenon  very  distinctly,  during  the
latter  part  of  their  life,  sometimes  during  several  months,  as  well
in  the  heart  as  in  different  arteries  ;  and  upon  the  examination  of
whose  bodies  I  could  discover  no  organic  lesion  coinciding  con-
stantly with  these  phenomena,  and  which  are  not  frequently  met
with  in  subjects  who  had  never  exhibited  any  thing  of  the  kind
during  life.  In  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  I  considered  the
bellows-sound  of  the  heart  as  a  sign  of  the  contraction  of  the  ori-


OF THE  BELLOWS-SOUND.


519


fices.  No  doubt  it  exists  almost  always  in  tin's  case;  but  since
the  first  publication  of  my  treatise,  I  have  very  frequently  met
with  it  in  individuals  who  had  no  lesion  of  the  sort ;  while,  on
the  other  hand,  I  have  seen  ossifications  of  the  valves  which  were
not  attended  by  this  sound.  I  have  likewise  frequently  observed
it  in  the  last  agony,  and  in  other  circumstances  when  the  heart
is  too  full  of  blood,  in  which  latter  case  it  sometimes  quickly
yielded  to  bloodletting.  I  formerly  also  was  inclined  to  consider
this  phenomenon  as  connected  with  the  redness  of  the  inner  coat
of  the  arteries,  considered  by  some  modern  writers  as  an  inflam-
matory affection  ;  but  I  have  since  then  found  the  arteries  quite
pale  and  perfectly  sound,  in  every  case  which  I  have  had  occa-
sion to  examine.  In  like  manner,  I  can  state  with  certainty,
that  the  bellows-sound  of  the  heart  is  very  often  met  with  when
this  organ  is  perfectly  healthy.  From  these  data  it  results  that
this  phenomenon  is  attributable  either  to  an  organic  or  vital  con-
dition of  the  artery — a  sort  of  spasm  or  tension — or  else  to  a  par-
ticular condition  of  the  blood  itself,  or  to  the  manner  in  which
it  is  moved.  The  last  supposition  is  inadmissible,  inasmuch  as
the  phenomenon  exists  sometimes  in  one  artery  only.*  For  vari-
ous reasons  I  consider  this  particular  sound  as  owing  to  a  real
spasmodic  contraction  of  the  heart  or  arteries.  On  many  occa-
sions I  have  been  struck  with  the  complete  resemblance  of  the
sound  produced  by  muscular  contraction  and  that  of  the  bellows-
sound.f  In  resting  the  ear  upon  a  pillow,  if  we  contract  the
masseter  muscles,  or  rather  if  we  contract  and  relax  them  alter-
nately, we  give  rise  to  sounds  precisely  like  the  bellows-sound  of
the  arteries.  In  the  following  experiment  the  resemblance  is
more  perfect  still :  if  we  place  the  stethoscope  upon  one  of  the
condyles  of  the  humerus  of  a  person  whose  arm  is  supported
by  an  assistant,  and  then  cause  the  individual  alternately  to  bend
and  to  extend  the  fore-arm  gently,  we  perceive  a  sound  exactly
similar  to  that  produced  by  the  blast  of  a  pair  of  bellows.

In  applying  these  remarks  to  the  case  in  question,  we  can  have
no  difficulty  in  admitting  the  possibility  of  spasm  in  an  organ  so

*  Dr.  Williams  inclines  to  the  opinion  here  renounced  by  Laennec.  "  I  am  my-
self disposed,"  he  says,  "to  think,  that  were  we  better  acquainted  with  the  laws  of
the  production  of  sound,  we  might  find  that  it  may  be  excited  by  the  motion  of
liquids,  as  well  as  by  that  of  air,  in  or  against  solids  of  a  particular  form  ;  and  that
we  might  find  a  more  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  phenomena  in  question  in  the
moving  mass  of  blood  being  thrown  into  sonorous  vibration  by  some  modification  in
its  course.  Such  a  modification  might  be  produced  by  thickening  or  irregularity  in
one  of  the  valves  of  the  heart,  or  by  spasmodic  action  of  some  of  the  columnar  car-
nae,  by  an  obstacle  in  the  calibre  of  an  artery,  &c. :  and  these  causes  might,  as  in
the  analogous  case  of  air,  render  the  passage  of  the  blood  sonorous,  instead  of,  as  it
usually  is,  silent." Rat.  Exp.  50. — Transl.

t  Here  the  author  enters  into  a  long  dissertation  on  the  sounds  produced  by  mus-
cular contraction,  referring  to  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Wollaston,  published  in  the
Philosophical  Transactions,  for  1810,  and  to  some  similar  ones  by  M.  Erman,  of  Ber-
lin, recorded  in  Gilbert's  Annulcn  fur  Physik,  1812.  I  omit  this  discussion  as  of  no
practical  value. — Transl.


520


EXPLORATION OF THE  HEART.


completely  muscular  as  the  heart.  In  respect  of  the  arteries,  it
may  be  said  that  the  circular  fibres,  of  which  their  middle  or
fibrinous  coat  is  composed,  seem  to  announce  the  existence  of
contractile  power.  But,  besides,  nothing  seems  to  prove  that
the  muscular  is  the  only  tissue  susceptible  of  contraction  and
spasm  ;  or,  rather,  a  multitude  of  facts  prove  the  contrary.  We
find  the  biliary  ducts  contracted  in  certain  cases  of  icterus;  the
urethra  and  lachrymal  ducts  contract  manifestly  upon  the  sound  :
and  even  the  skin  contracts,  in  consequence  of  mental  impressions,
exhibiting  the  appearance  commonly  called  goose-skin.*  On  the
other  hand,  the  circumstances  under  which  the  bellows-sound
arises,  and  the  rapidity  with  which  it  appears  and  disappears  in
some  cases,  seem  to  point  it  out,  as  being  under  the  immediate
influence  of  the  nervous  power.

It  almost  constantly  exists  in  the  heart  in  the  case  of  contrac-
tion of  the  orifices  of  this  organ  ;  it  very  frequently  occurs  in  hy-
pertrophy or  dilatation  :  but  it  is  still  more  frequently  met  with,
both  in  the  heart  and  arteries,  in  persons  who  have  no  organic
lesion  of  these  parts,  and  who  labour  under  various  affections.
The  sole  disorder  which  has  appeared  to  me  constantly,  or  al-
most constantly  to  accompany  the  bellows-sound,  is  a  state  of
nervous  agitation  more  or  less  marked ;  and  which  is  always
proportioned  to  the  extent  of  the  sound,  that  is,  to  the  number
and  size  of  the  arteries  which  yield  it.  On  the  other  hand,  we
never  meet  with  this  sound  in  direct  febrile  excitement,  unless
the  individual  is  at  the  same  time  very  nervous.

When  the  bellows-sound  exists  at  once  in  the  aorta,  the  ca-
rotids, and  the  arteries  of  the  extremities,  the  patient  is  in
a  state  of  extreme  anxiety  and  distress;  if  it  is  present  in  the
heart,  and  greater  number  of  the  arteries,  life  is  in  danger;
although  it  is  seldom  that  death  actually  ensues,  unless  there
beat  the  same  time  organic  disease  of  the  heart. When,  on  the
other  hand,  one  or  two  arteries  only  are  affected,  for  instance,
the  carotid  and  subclavian,  we  cannot  always  consider  this  as
indicating  a  state  of  disease. The  sound  is  very  common  in  a
slight  degree,  in  hypochondriasis  and  hysteria. In  persons  af-
fected with  these  diseases,  it  is  most  commonly  met  with  in  the
subclavians  and  carotids,  and  sometimes  in  the  abdominal  aorta.
Young  persons,  of  a  delicate  and  irritable  habit,  and  subject  to
haemorrhage,  are  especially  susceptible  of  this  affection ;  but  1
have  also  met  with  it  in  hypochondriacs  in  the  decline  of  life,
and  who  were  very  cachectic. I  have  frequently  observed  it  in
various  kinds  of  haemorrhage,  for  instance,  haemoptysis,  menor-
rhagia,  and  apoplexy. On  the  other  hand,  it  is  very  uncommon
in  cases  of  well-marked  and  pure  inflammation. Once  only,  in

•  See  a  valuable  paper  by  Dr.  Monro,  "  On  tbo  Spasmodic  Contractions  of  Mus-
cular Tubes,"  in  a  late  number  of  tbe  Ed.  Journ.  of  Med.  Sc. — Transl.


OK THE UK  I. LOWS-SOUND.


521


the  case  of  a  delicate  and  irritable  child,  affected  with  croup,  I
observed  it  over  the  whole  extent  of  the  aorta;  and  it  continued
more  than  two  years  afterwards.  It  is  in  the  case  of  young  per-
sons affected  with  hypochondriasis,  that  we  can  assure  ourselves
that  the  bellows-sound  is  a  nervous  affection.  Most  of  these
subjects  present  it  only  momentarily  and  in  one  or  two  arteries.
When  they  are  in  a  state  of  calmness  and  repose,  if  we  apply  the
stethoscope  over  the  carotids  or  subclavians,  we  perceive  merely
the  natural  sound  of  the  arteries ;  but  if  the  patient  becomes  in
any  way  agitated, — if  he  walks  quick,  or  coughs,  or  breathes
deep,  or  experiences  an  emotion  of  pleasure  or  pain,  hope  or  fear,
the  sound  of  the  arterial  pulse  changes  at  once  to  the  bellows-
sound  (which  becomes  sometimes  hissing),  and  this  progressively
disappears  as  the  individual  becomes  more  composed.  In  these
cases,  after  the  complete  disappearance  of  the  bellows-sound,  we
can  re-produce  it  by  pressing  lightly  with  the  finger  upon  the
artery,  above  or  below  the  place  where  the  stethoscope  rests ;
and  particularly  by  alternately  increasing  and  diminishing  the
pressure.  Sometimes  it  is  sufficient  to  rest  the  ear  rather  strongly
upon  the  instrument.  When  the  sound  is  perceived  in  the  heart,
or  in  an  artery,  we  can  often  excite  it  by  the  same  means  in  other
arteries,  particularly  in  the  brachial  and  crural.  All  these  posi-
tive and  negative  facts  tend,  I  think,  to  prove,  that  the  bellows-
sound  is  the  consequence  of  spasm,  and  does  not  indicate  any
organic  lesion  of  the  heart  or  arteries.  What  will  hereafter  be
stated  respecting  the  purring  vibration,  and  certain  phenomena
attending  pregnancy,  will  confirm  this  proposition.*

Before  terminating  this  section  I  think  it  proper  to  say  a  few
words  respecting  certain  phenomena,  which  an  inexperienced
observer  might  sometimes  mistake  for  the  bellows-sound.  1.  I
formerly  noticed  the  metallic  clicking  or  jingle  produced  in  cer-
tain cases,  during  percussion  of  the  chest.  Sometimes  we  observe

*  M.  Andral  regards  the  bellows-sound,  in  certain  circumstances,  as  owing  to  an
increase  in  the  quantity  of  blood.  In  this  I  quite  agree  with  him  ;  as  also  in  refer-
ring the  bellows-sound  which  we  occasionally  observe  in  plethoric  subjects,  in  per-
sons threatened  with  an  impending  haemorrhage,  and  in  the  majority  of  females  at  the
approach  of  the  catamenia,  (confined,  be  it  observed,  in  these  latter  cases,  to  the  ves-
sels in  the  vicinity  of  the  spot  where  the  hemorrhage  is  to  take  place,)  rather  to  the
same  cause  than  to  any  modification  of  the  innervation.  I  have  at  present  under
my  care  a  young  man  whose  heart  is  too  voluminous  and  vet  can  hardly  be  termed
hypertrophous,  who  frequently  requires  venesection.  In  "this  case  there  is  a  bel-
lows-sound habitually  present  in  the  heart,  aorta,  subclavian,  carotid,  and  even  the
brachial  arteries  ;  and  the  sound  is  always  strouger  when  the  necessity  for  losing
blood  is  the  greatest.  This  fact  is,  however,  an  exception  to  the  general  rule,  as  it  is
more  common  to  find  the  bellows-sound  increase  after  bloodletting.  In  chlorotic
females  I  have  sometimes  found  the  sound  diminish  and  gradually  disappear  after
the  use,  for  some  weeks,  of  steel  and  a  better  diet.— that  is,  when  the  quantity  of
blood  was  increased  or  its  quality  changed,  or  both.  (AT.  L.)

The  bellows-sound,  sometimes  alone  but  more  frequently  accompanied  by  the
jarring  tremor,  is  very  constantly  present  in  the  external  thyroid  arteries  in  cases  of
brouchocele  of  considerable  size;  and  I  have  observed  it  gradually  to  disappear  as
the  tumour  was  absorbed  under  the  use  of  iodine.  Traust.


522


EXPLORATION  OF THE  HEART.


a  slight  jingle  of  the  same  kind  in  the  cardiac  region,  in  persons
affected  with  nervous  palpitations,  when  the  heart  beating  with
quickness  and  violence,  but  with  little  real  impulse,  the  point  of
it  only  comes  in  contact  with  the  walls.  At  each  pulsation  of
the  ventricles,  in  this  case,  a  slight  clicking,  or  jingle  is  heard,
as  if  originating  within  the  tube  of  the  stethoscope  and  traversing
it.  2.  In  other  cases,  I  have  perceived  in  the  same  place,  but
more  profoundly,  a  sound  like  the  creaking  of  a  new  saddle.
I  for  some  time  imagined  that  this  sound  might  be  a  sign  of
pericarditis,  but  I  afterwards  convinced  myself  that  this  was  a
mistake.  I  have  since  thought  that  it  occurred  in  cases  where
the  heart,  of  large  size,  or  distended  with  blood,  is  rather  con-
fined in  the  lower  mediastinum,  and  when  there  is  some  air  in
the  pericardium ;  and  also  in  another  case,  to  be  noticed  pre-
sently.* 3.  In  some  persons  the  pleura  and  anterior  edge  of
the  lungs  extend  before  the  heart  so  as  to  cover  it  almost  entirely.
If  we  examine  a  subject  of  this  kind  during  strong  action  of  the
heart,  we  find  that  the  ventricles,  during  dilatation,  compress
these  portions  of  lung,  and  thereby  modify  the  respiratory  sound
so  as  to  make  it  more  or  less  resemble  the  bellows-sound.  4.
Lastly,  a  mistake  may  originate  from  the  sound  of  muscular  con-
traction in  the  vicinity  of  the  artery  we  are  exploring,  as  from
the  action  of  the  mastoid  muscles  in  the  vicinity  of  the  carotids :
but  this  error  cannot  be  committed,  without  great  inattention.-}-


*  We  shall  hereafter  find,  when  treating  of  pericarditis,  that  this  sound  of  the  saddle,
or  leather-creak,  is  in  reality  what  Laennec  first  supposed  it  to  be,  a  sign  of  pericarditis,
and  a  very  important  one. — Transl.

t  In  the  preceding  section  I  do  not  think  that  Laennec  has  sufficiently  separated
what  is  of  practical  utility  from  what  is  merely  curious.  It  is  impossible,  in  my
opinion,  to  refer  the  bellows-sound,  the  rasji-sound,  and  the  leather-sound,  to  the  same
cause,  much  less  to  make  them  out  to  be  of  equal  value  as  signs.  The  pure  bellows-
sound  appears  to  be  a  merely  vital  phenomenon,  either  dependent  on  the  state  of  the
innervation  or  on  some  modification  in  the  quantity  or  quality  of  the  blood  :  while  the
rasp-sound  and  leather-sound  are  invariably  connected  with  well-marked  organic
lesions.  The  first  when  heard  in  the  region  of  the  heart  (and  notwithstanding  the
opposite  authority  of  my  revered  master,  I  must  deny  that  it  has  ever  been  heard
elsewhere)  is  a  certain  index  of  a  mechanical  obstacle  to  the  course  of  the  blood,  being
indeed,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  the  pathognomonic  sign  of  the  cartilaginous  or
bony  induration  of  the  valves, — that  is  to  say,  provided  it  be  constantly  present  after
it  is  once  produced.  The  leather-creak  is  equally  pathognomonic  of  pericarditis  with
very  slight  or  with  no  effusion — that  is,  of  a  pericardium  having  its  free  surface  be-
come rough  and  unequal. (jtf.  L.)

In  reference  to  these  adventitious  sounds,  collectively  and  individually,  1  think
the  following  conclusions  may  be  deduced  from  the  consideration  of  them : —

1.  The  source  of  the  sounds  is  some  impediment  to  the  usual  current  of  the  blood,
from  some  physical  alteration  in  the  channel  through  which  it  passes,  whereby  such
vibrations  are  excited  in  the  column  of  fluid  as  to  give  rise  to  audible  sound.

2.  The  alteration  in  the  channel  may  be  merely  temporary,  and  produced  in  parts
possessing  a  healthy  structure,  from  nervous  causes,  from  want  of  the  natural  har-
monv  of  proportion  between  the  size  of  the  channel  and  its  contents,  and  probably
from*  other  unknown  causes.  The  more  common  cause,  however,  is  some  fixed  phy-
sical alteration  in  the  channels  conveying  the  blood  ;  either  a  contraction  or  enlarge-
ment of  caliber,  or  some  other  deviation  from  the  natural  structure,  whereby  the
current  is  more  or  less  impeded  or  disturbed.


THE PUKllIKG VI Bit ATION.


523


Sect.  II. — Of  the  Purring  or  Whirring  Vibration,  Tremor  or
Thrill,  of  the  Heart  and  Arteries.

I  noticed  under  this  name,  in  the  first  edition  of  the  present
work,  a  particular  sensation  perceived  by  the  hand  in  the  cardiac
region,  and  which  I  considered  with  Corvisart,  who  I  believe
first  observed  it,  as  a  sign  of  ossification  of  the  valves,  and  par-
ticularly of  the  mitral.  This  phenomenon,  no  doubt,  is  met
with  in  almost  every  case  of  considerable  contraction  of  the  ori-
fices ;  but  since  the  first  publication  of  my  treatise,  I  have  fre-
quently met  with  it  in  cases  where  no  organic  lesion  existed.
I  have,  moreover,  observed  in  the  arteries  a  phenomenon  which
I  consider  as  quite  identical,  although  presenting  occasionally
some  slight  and  variable  differences.  The  purring  vibration  of
the  heart  may  be  very  exactly  compared  with  the  thrill  which
attends  the  murmur  of  satisfaction  expressed  by  the  cat  when
stroked  by  the  hand.  We  may  also  convey  some  idea  of  it  by
passing  a  rather  rough  brush  along  the  palm  of  the  hand  covered

3.  We  are  not  justified,  by  the  mere  presence  of  any  of  these  sounds,  in  conclud-
ing that  organic  disease  of  the  valves  or  valvular  orifices  exists.

4.  If  the  morbid  sounds  disappear  after  repose,  bloodletting,  or  other  form  of
depletion,  or  without  any  evident  cause,  we  may  suspect  that  they  originate  in  mere
functional  disorder;  and  the  probability  of  this  opinion  will  be  increased  in  propor-
tion to  the  period  of  their  absence.

5.  If  they  are  not  removed  by  these  or  any  other  causes,  or  if  they  are  removed
for  a  very  short  period  only,  or  are  merely  lessened  in  degree,  we  may  conclude  that
they  originate  in  disease  of  the  valvular  orifices ;  and  this  conclusion  will  be  still
further  strengthened  if  there  exist  other  symptoms  of  diseased  heart.

6.  The  probability  of  organic  disease  is  increased  in  proportion  as  the  character  of
the  sounds  approaches  that  of  the  sound  of  the  saw  or  rasp.

7.  The  sounds  produced  by  valvular  disease  become  much  weaker  when  tbe  con-
traction of  the  orifice  is  extreme  than  when  it  is  moderate,  a  certain  extent  and  force
of  current  being  requisite  to  produce  them  in  the  highest  degree.  Dr.  Hope  says,
that  he  has  often  found  that  when  the  orifice  was  reduced  to  a  crevice  of  two  or  three
lines  in  width,  no  sound  whatever  was  produced.

8.  The  following  is  a  brief  sketch  of  the  rationale  of  the  morbid  or  anormal  sounds
resulting  from  valvular  disease,  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  the  able  physician  just
named.

a.  When  the  aortic  orifice  is  contracted,  an  adventitious  sound,  or  morbid  murmur,
accompanies  the  ventricular  systole  and  first  sound ;  and  when  the  valves,  not
closing  accurately,  permit  regurgitation  from  the  aorta,  a  morbid  murmur  accompanies
the  diastole  and  second  sound  also  ;  but  this  last,  when  it  occurs,  is  extremely  slight
and  brief,  as  the  influx  of  blood  from  the  auricle,  during  the  diastole,  almost  instantly
puts  an  end  to  any  regurgitation  capable  of  producing  sound.

b.  When  the  pulmonic  orifice  is  contracted,  the  effects  are  the  same ;  but  disease
of  the  valves  on  this  side  of  the  heart,  as  will  be  shown  in  another  place,  is  com-
paratively very  rare.

c.  When  the  mitral  orifice  is  contracted,  a  morbid  murmur  accompanies  and  some-
times entirely  supersedes  the  second  sound,  being  occasioned  by  the  passage  of  the
blood  from  the  auricle  into  the  ventricle  during  the  diastole  of  the  latter.  When
the  valve,  not  closing  accurately,  admits  of  regurgitation,  a  murmur  accompanies  the
first  sound,  and  this  is  sometimes  excited  by  a  degree  of  disease  insufficient  to  pro-
duce it  during  the  second.

d.  When  the  tricuspid  orifice  is  contracted,  the  results  are  the  same  as  in  the  last
case. (Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  i.  Art.  Auscultation.')— Transl '.


524


EXPLORATION  OF THE  HEART.


with  a  glove.  This  thrill  becomes  frequently  more  perceptible
when  the  patient  speaks ;  no  doubt,  because  it  is  then  blended
with  the  analogous  sensation  produced  by  the  resonance  of  the
voice  within  the  chest.  This  tremor  or  vibration  is  almost
always  confined  to  the  left  cardiac  region,  (and  the  hand  must  be
applied  with  some  force  in  order  to  feel  it ;)  but  I  have  sometimes
perceived  it  nearly  over  the  whole  anterior  part  of  the  chest,  and
even  at  the  upper  part  of  the  sternum.

The  thrill  of  the  arteries  presents  several  varieties.  Most
commonly  it  is  very  like  that  just  described,  and  is  exactly  con-
fined within  the  caliber  of  the  vessel. In  this  case  the  thrill  is
successively  renewed  like  the  pulse;  it  is  more  perceptible  by
means  of  a  moderate  than  a  very  slight  pressure,  but  diminishes
under  a  strong  pressure. Sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  and
particularly  when  seated  in  the  carotids,  the  thrill  is  much  more
extended  than  the  diameter  of  the  artery,  and  seems  more  super-
ficial ;  it  is  occasionally  perceptible  over  a  space  of  two  inches  in
breadth  on  the  side  of  the  neck. In  this  case  the  thrill  is  con-
tinuous and  without  any  pulsative  momentum  ;  and  its  sphere
seems  more  extended,  the  lighter  the  pressure  is  made  with  the
finger. The  arteries  in  which  this  phenomenon  is  most  com-
monly observed,  are,  in  the  first  place,  the  carotids,  and  then
the  subclavian,  brachial,  and  crural ;  it  is  sometimes,  but  rarely,
met  with  in  the  ascending  aorta  (that  is,  under  the  top  of  the
sternum,)  and  even  in  the  abdominal  aorta. It  is  not  found  very
distinct  in  the  smaller  arteries,  for  instance,  the  radial.  How-
ever, when  it  exists  in  the  heart  or  larger  arteries,  or  even  when
the  simple  bellows  sound  merely  exists  in  these,  the  pulse  fre-
quently presents  a  sort  of  epitome  of  the  purring  vibration,  a
slight  thrill  which,  although  accompanying  the  diastole  of  the
artery,  seems  independent  of  this.

Corvisart  was  acquainted  with  this  character  of  the  pulse  (al-
though he  has  not  noticed  the  thrill  of  the  larger  arteries,)  and
considered  it  as  pointing  out  the  existence  of  the  same  phenome-
non in  the  heart  in  a  greater  degree,  and  as  a  sign  of  ossification
of  the  valves*  This  state  of  the  pulse,  however,  is  by  no  means
constant :  it  is  frequently  met  with,  as  I  have  said,  when  the
purring  thrill  exists  no  where  else,  and  it  is  sometimes  wanting
when  this  exists  in  the  cardiac  region.  In  every  case  where  I
perceive  this  state  of  pulse,  I  remark  that  a  great  many  of  my
pupils  cannot  distinguish  it;  and  I  did  not  myself  perceive  ii
until  after  I  had  noticed  the  phenomenon  in  the  larger  arteries.
It  is  extremely  uncommon  to  find  the  purring  thrill  in  the  heart
or  in  an  artery,  unaccompanied  with  the  bellows-sound;  I  am
even  doubtful  if  the  former  ever  existed  without  some  trace  of
the  latter. In  two  cases  only  I  have  observed  a  very  evident

*  Trnit6  des  Mai.  du  Co?ur,  Se  ed.  p.  240.


THE PURRING VI  H  RATION.


525


tin  ill  in  the  carotid,  with  a  bellows-sound  so  obscure  as  to  be
doubtful ;  but  in  almost  every  case,  the  latter  phenomenon  exists
at  the  same  time,  and  in  a  much  more  definite  and  striking  de-
gree than  the  latter.  On  the  other  hand,  we  are  certain  that  the
purring  thrill  is  not  identical  with  the  bellows-sound,  and  owing
to  the  same  cause,  since  we  find  that  the  latter,  when  most  strik-
ingly marked,  is  not  always  accompanied  by  the  former.  Very
often  when  the  bellows-sound  is  diffused,  the  purring  thrill  is
quite  confined  within  the  limits  of  the  artery,  and  vice  versa.
Both  these  phenomena  are  frequently  attended  with  a  greater
pulsation  than  usual ;  at  other  times,  the  reverse  obtains.  I  have
often  found  the  pulsation  of  the  left  carotid  stronger  than  that
of  the  right,  although  the  latter  alone  presented  the  phenomenon
in  question. — Bloodletting,  which  commonly  diminishes  the  in-
tensity of  these  sounds,  at  other  times  modifies  them  in  a  singular
manner.  I  have  thus  seen,  in  a  case  of  hemiplegia  unaccom-
panied by  any  disease  of  the  heart,  inflammation  or  plethora,  the
bellows-sound  become,  after  bloodletting,  much  less  in  the  cardiac
region,  the  aorta,  and  left  carotid,  but  stronger  in  the  right  ca-
rotid, as  did  also  the  purring  thrill.

It  might  be  supposed  that  the  immediate  cause  of  a  pheno-
menon so  well  marked  as  the  purring  vibrations  of  the  heart  and
arteries,  would  be  easily  discovered.  I  must,  however,  confess,
that  all  my  endeavours  to  do  so  have  hitherto  failed.  Of  this
much  I  am  well  assured,  that  it  does  not  depend  on  any  fixed
organic  affection ;  and  that  in  the  arteries,  more  especially,  it
exists  in  a  striking  degree,  when  the  whole  of  their  tunics  are  in
the  soundest  condition  as  to  colour,  consistence,  thickness,  &c.  It
seems  to  me  extremely  probable,  that  the  phenomenon  in  question
depends  upon  a  peculiar  modification  of  the  nervous  influence.*

*  The  purring  thrill  of  the  arteries  may,  like  the  bellows-sound,  be  merely  a  vital
phenomenon,  or  dependent  on  some  modification  of  the  innervation  ;  but  the  purring
thrill  of  the  heart  is,  like  the  sound  of  the  rasp,  with  which  it  constantly  coincides,
the  effect  of  a  mechanical  obstacle  to  the  course  of  the  blood.  At  least,  I  have  my-
self never  observed  it,  except  in  persons  in  whom  a  post-mortem  examination  dis-
covered either  indurated  valves,  or  a  manifest  disproportion  between  the  size  of  the
heart  and  the  caliber  of  the  large  arteries.  Neither  do  1  recollect  to  have  found  this
phenomenon  intermittent,  a  thing  which  ought  to  be  common,  if  it  were  merely
a  nervous  affection. — (M.  L.)

1  agree  with  Dr.  Mer.  Laennec  in  believing,  that  when  "  the  thrill  exists  in  the
region  of  the  heart,  it  is  identical  with  the  sound  of  the  saw,  rasp,  or  bellows  :  the
difference  being  in  the  sense  which  perceives,  not  in  the  thing  perceived.  If  we
could  always  say,  from  the  character  of  the  thrill,  with  which  of  the  two  sounds  of
the  heart  it  is  identical,  it  would  be  more  valuable  as  a  sign  than  it  is.  It  is  proper
to  observe  that  we  do  not  always  hear  any  of  the  sounds  when  we  feel  the  vibration ;
nor,  conversely,  do  we  always  feel  the  vibration  when  we  hear  the  sound.  This,
however,  is  not  any  proof  that  both  do  not  spring  from  the  same  physical  cause.  The
cause  may  exist  in  a  degree  sufficient  to  excite  one  sensation  and  not  the  other;  just
as  we  may  feel  or  see  the  vibration  of  a  musical  string  after  the  ear  has  ceased  to  hear
any  sound  from  it.  It  is,  therefore,  we  conceive,  without  good  grounds,  that  our
author  considers  the  separate  existence  of  these  phenomena  as  proofs  of  their  non-
identity.  Dr.  Hope  says  that,  although  resulting  from  the  same  causes  as  the  morbid


526


EXPLORATION OF  THE  HEART.


A  man  debilitated  by  syphilis,  had  no  thrill  or  bellows-sound  in
the  heart  or  arteries,  when  lying  down,  or  sitting  up  in  the  usual
manner;  but  if  he  raised  himself  in  bed,  supporting  himself  on
his  elbow,  a  slight  but  very  distinct  purring  thrill  and  also  bel-
lows-sound became  perceptible  over  the  extent  of  an  inch  square,
a  little  above  the  right  clavicle ;  and  both  these  disappeared  upon
the  patient  assuming  the  sitting  posture.


Sect.  III. — Of  the  Pulsation  of  the  Heart  perceived  at  some
distance  from  the  Chest.

It  had  long  been  believed,  but  rather  on  the  faith  of  traditional
report  than  from  actual  observation,  that  the  pulsations  of  the
heart  may  be  sometimes  heard  at  a  certain  distance  from  the
patient.  Corvisart  informs  us,  that  he  had  observed  this  fact  but
once,  and  only  then  on  placing  the  ear  very  near  the  chest.  Many
years  since,  I  was  informed  by  several  patients,  that  they  were
subject  to  palpitations  of  such  severity,  that  they  could  be  heard
at  the  distance  of  several  paces :  and  one  of  these  patients,  as  well
as  persons  of  credibility,  witnesses  of  the  fact,  assured  me  that,
in  his  case,  the  palpitations  could  be  heard  in  the  chamber  ad-
joining that  in  which  he  slept.  I  observed  this  phenomenon  for
the  first  time  in  the  year  1823,  in  the  case  of  a  young  woman  ;
and  having  since  then  paid  particular  attention  to  the  circum-
stance, I  am  convinced  that  although  it  is  very  uncommon  to
meet  with  it  in  so  great  a  degree  as  that  just  mentioned,  it  is  very
common  to  find  it  in  a  less  degree,  such,  namely,  as  to  be  heard
at  a  distance  of  from  two  to  ten  inches  from  the  chest.  Several
of  my  colleagues,  to  whom  I  had  mentioned  the  fact,  had  likewise
noticed  it  several  times  since ;  and  M.  Lerminier,  among  others,
was  kind  enough  to  send  to  my  Clinic,  in  1824,  two  patients  in
whom  it  was  perceptible  in  a  very  considerable  degree.  In  no
case  have  I  myself  heard  the  pulsation  at  a  greater  distance  than
a  foot  and  a  half  or  two  feet ;  but  we  can  readily  admit  the  pos-
sibility of  this.  I  have  several  times  ascertained  from  the  perfect
accordance  of  the  sound  with  the  pulse,  that  it  was  owing  to  the
contraction  of  the  ventricles.  I  do  not  recollect  to  have  ever
heard  it  produced  by  the  auricles.  Out  of  more  than  twenty
subjects  in  whom  I  have  heard  the  pulsation  at  a  distance  of  from
two  inches  to  two  feet, — three  or  four,  at  most,  were  affected  with

sounds,  the  purring  tremor  or  thrill  requires,  cateris  paribus,  a  stronger  current  for  its
production  ;  for  which  reason  it  less  frequenUy  accompanies  the  passage  of  the  blood
from  the  auricles  into  the  ventricles,  than  from  the  latter  into  their  respective  arteries,
or  into  the  auricles  by  a  retrograde  movement.  Even  in  the  latter  cases,  Dr.  Hope
adds,  it  is  seldom  strong  unless  the  ventricle  be  hypertrophous,  or  the  circulation
hurried.  In  no  case  have  I  had  occasion  to  observe  the  thrill  more  constantly  nnd
distinctly  than  in  the  thvroid  arteries  in  cases  of  large  bronchocele. — Trantl.


PALPITATION OF THE  HEART.


527


organic  disease  of  the  heart.  All  the  rest  laboured  under  palpi-
tation of  a  purely  nervous  kind  :  and  several  were  only  so  affected
after  quick  walking,  or  ascending  a  staircase.  In  all  of  them  the
effect  was  temporary,  and  several,  after  a  certain  time,  regained
perfect  health.  The  bellows-sound  and  purring  thrill,  frequently
exist,  in  a  slight  degree,  particularly  in  the  arteries,  in  such
cases.  Never  having  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  the  body
of  any  one  who  had  presented  this  phenomenon,  I  cannot  speak
with  any  certainty  as  to  the  organic  cause  of  it ;  but  I  am  in-
duced to  consider  it  as  owing  to  the  presence  of  a  greater  or  less
quantity  of  air  in  the  pericardium.*  The  ossification  of  some
external  part  of  the  heart,  may  also  give  rise  to  the  phenomenon  ;
but  I  have  met  with  no  example  of  the  kind.


CHAPTER  VI.

OF PALPITATION OF THE  HEART.

By  palpitation  of  the  heart  is  meant,  in  the  common  language  of
medicine,  every  beating  of  the  heart  which  is  sensible  and  unplea-
sant to  the  individual,  and  at  the  same  time,  more  frequent  than
natural,  and  sometimes  unequal,  both  as  to  force  and  extent.
When  this  affection  is  studied  by  the  aid  of  the  stethoscope,  we
find  that  there  are  many  varieties  of  it,  all  of  which  appear  to
have  merely  this  character  in  common,  that  the  individual  is  sen-
sible of  the  heart's  action.  Frequently,  also,  the  patient  hears
the  pulsations,  especially  when  in  the  horizontal  posture.  In  the
upright  position,  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles  only  is  heard ;
while,  when  lying  on  the  side,  the  individual  is  sensible  of  a  pul-
sation in  his  ear  double  that  of  the  pulse,  namely,  the  alternate
contraction  of  both  the  ventricles  and  auricles.  I  have  often
repeated  this  observation  on  myself,  in  states  of  wakefulness
attended  by  slight  palpitation.  In  many  cases  there  is  merely
an  increased  frequency  of  pulsation,  although  the  patient  ima-
gines, from  his  sensations,  that  there  is  also  great  increase  of  force.
This  species  of  palpitation  is  most  common  in  dilatation  of  the
ventricles,  and  lasts  the  longest  of  any. I  have  known  it  con-

*  This  seems  a  very  gratuitous,  and  to  me  a  most  untenable  explanation  ;  and  the
assertion  that  follows  it,  and  which  I  have  not  translated,  viz.  "  that  all  sounds  pro-
duced in  the  animal  body  and  audible  by  the  naked  ear,  are  owing  to  the  motion  of
substances  in  contact  with  air,"  is  still  more  extraordinary.  I  have  myself  wit-
nessed the  fact  mentioned,  but  have  never  thought  of  attributing  it  to  any  other
causes  than  to  a  modification  of  those  by  which  we  are  enabled  to  hear  the  sound,  in
all  cases,  by  means  of  the  stethoscope.  A  slight  sound  is  perceived  through  a  good
conductor  (the  instrument) ;  a  more  intense  one  may  be  heard  through  a  bad  conductor
(the  air.) — Transl.


528


EXPLORATION OF  THE  HEART.


tinue  eight  days;  the  pulse  remaining,  through  the  whole  of  this
time,  extremely  small  and  weak,  and  between  160  and  180.

Another  variety  consists  in  an  increase  both  of  the  frequency
and  force  of  pulsation.  This  is  what  arises  in  healthy  persons
from  great  exertion  or  from  moral  causes.  It  also  accompanies
slight  degrees  of  hypertrophy  ;  in  which  case,  the  impulse  of  the
ventricles  becomes  greater  than  natural.  These  two  kinds  of
palpitation  cannot  be  distinguished  except  by  the  statements  of
the  patient,  and  the  acceleration  of  the  circulation.  The  sound
and  sphere  of  the  heart's  pulsations  are  almost  always  increased
during  palpitation:  on  which  account,  we  must  never  draw  any
conclusions  from  the  exploration  of  the  circulation  by  the  stetho-
scope, unless  this  has  been  made  during  a  state  of  the  most  perfect
quietude  : — that  is  to  say, — not  till  after  a  sufficient  rest,  if  the
person  has  been  exercising  himself ;  or  during  the  most  perfect
quietude,  if  there  already  exists  disease  of  the  heart.

In  simple  hypertrophy  in  a  high  degree,  during  palpitation  the
ventricles  are  found  to  contract  with  great  force,  and  seem  to
elevate  the  thoracic  parietes  in  an  extent  and  to  a  height  much
greater  than  natural.  The  sound,  however,  produced  by  their
contraction  is  much  duller  and  more  indistinct  than  usual ;  and
this  circumstance,  together  with  the  increased  frequency  of  pul-
sation, frequently  prevents  the  contractions  of  the  auricle  from
being  distinguished.  The  extent  of  the  thorax  over  which  the
pulsation  is  perceptible  is  not  increased ;  and,  notwithstanding
the  increase  of  the  heart's  power  to  double  or  triple  its  ordinary
force,  the  pulse  is,  almost  always,  two  or  three  times  more  feeble
and  smaller  than  in  the  natural  condition  of  the  circulation.
When  the  palpitation  lasts  several  successive  days,  and  there
supervenes  much  oppression  on  the  chest,  with  livid  countenance
and  cold  extremities,  the  pulse  becomes  almost  imperceptible,
the  action  of  the  heart,  excessively  frequent,  loses  its  impulse,
becomes  sometimes  more  sonorous,  and  at  length  indistinct  or
undistinguishable  for  some  days  before  death.  In  hypertrophy
with  dilatation,  the  impulse,  sound,  and  extent  of  the  heart's  ac-
tion, are  usually  equally  increased,  during  palpitation  ;  and  it  is
more  especially  in  this  case,  and  when  both  affections  exist  in  a
moderate  degree,  that  we  find  the  pulsations  of  the  heart  resem-
bling, as  formerly  mentioned,  the  blow  of  the  mallet.


529


CHAPTER  VII.

OF  IRREGULARITIES  IN  THE PULSATIONS OF THE  HEART.

Irregularity  in  the  pulsations  of  the  heart  may  exist  without
palpitation.  In  old  persons  this  is  often  met  with  without  any
perceptible  alteration  of  the  general  health.  The  irregularity
which  occurs  in  palpitation  consists  usually  in  mere  variations  in
the  frequency  of  the  heart's  pulsation.  Sometimes  this  variation
is  almost  constantly  recurring;  at  other  times  it  is  at  long  in-
tervals, and  consists  only  of  a  few  contractions  longer  or  shorter
than  the  rest.  Sometimes,  amid  a  series  of  pulsations,  very  un-
equal among  themselves,  a  single  one  will  occur  one-half  shorter
than  the  rest.  This  gives  rise  to  something  like  an  intermission  ;
and  it  completely  resembles  this,  if  the  pulsation  is  weaker  as  well
as  shorter  than  the  others.  The  variations  of  frequency  most
commonly  implicate,  as  in  this  case,  complete  pulsations;  but
they  sometimes  are  owing  to  the  mere  increase  or  diminution  of
the  period  of  contraction  of  the  ventricles.  These  irregularities
as  to  frequency,  take  place  most  usually  in  persons  affected  with
dilatation  of  the  heart.  It  is  during  the  existence  of  palpitation
more  especially,  in  the  case  of  hypertrophy,  that  we  observe  those
prolonged  contractions  of  the  ventricles,  which  completely  mask
the  sound  of  the  auricles.  No  doubt  these  contract ;  but  owing
to  the  want  of  any  visible  interval  between  the  contractions  of  the
ventricles,  they  are  not  perceived.  It  sometimes,  though  very
rarely,  happens  during  palpitation,  that  each  contraction  of  the
ventricles  is  followed  by  several  successive  contractions  of  the
auricles,  so  quick  as  only  to  equal  in  point  of  time  one  ordinary
contraction.  In  this  sort  of  palpitation,  I  have  sometimes  rec-
koned two  pulsations  of  the  auricles  for  one  of  the  ventricles;
sometimes  four ;  but  most  commonly  three.  In  one  case  of
hypertrophy  of  the  left  ventricle,  I  saw  this  species  of  irregula-
rity continue  for  several  days  without  any  variation.  Sometimes
after  a  long  succession  of  regular  contractions  we  observe  only
one  or  two  of  the  kind  just  mentioned.  Neither  this  nor  the  pre-
ceding variety  occasions  any  sensible  alteration  in  the  pulse;  I
have  only  observed  them  in  cases  of  hypertrophy.

The  above  are  the  principal  kinds  of  palpitation  with  irregular
action  of  the  heart ;  but  there  are  many  others,  although  I  have
not  yet  examined  them  with  the  stethoscope.  Of  this  kind,  in
particular,  is  one  which  sometimes  is  observed  during  palpitation
from  hypertrophy ;  in  this  there  is  a  suspension  of  the  pulse,
during  which  the  artery  remains  full  and  tense,  and  resists
strongly  the  compressing  finger.  This  variety  is  observed  most
frequently,  or  almost  constantly  during  fits  of  coughing  ;  at  which

M  M


530


EXPLORATION  OF  THE  HEART.


times  the  heart  cannot  be  examined  on  account  of  the  agitation
of  the  walls  of  the  chest.


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF INTERMISSIONS  IN  THE  PULSATIONS  OF  THE  HEART.

By  intermission  we  usually  understand  a  sudden  and  momentary
suspension  of  the  pulse,  during  which  the  artery  is  no  longer
perceptible  beneath  the  finger.  The  duration  of  the  intermission
is  very  variable,  and  may  serve  to  divide  this  affection  into  well-
marked  varieties.  Sometimes  the  intermission  is  shorter  than
one  arterial  pulsation  ;  sometimes  it  is  equal;  and  sometimes  it  is
longer.  We  can  distinguish  two  kinds  of  intermission, — the  one
real,  consisting  in  an  actual  suspension  of  the  heart's  contrac-
tions ;  the  other  false,  depending  on  contractions  so  feeble  as  to
be  imperceptible,  or  almost  imperceptible,  to  the  touch,  in  the
arteries.  Intermissions  of  the  first  kind  are  most  common  :  they
are  frequent  in  old  age,  even  during  health  ;  and  they  show  them-
selves in  such  as  are  not  usually  subject  to  them,  during  very
slight  indispositions.  In  middle  age  they  are  only  observed  in
certain  diseased  states  of  the  heart,  particularly  hypertrophy  of
the  ventricles,  and  during  palpitation :  they  would  perhaps  be
more  properly  named  retardations  or  stoppages  of  the  pulse.  By
means  of  the  stethoscope  we  ascertain  that  this  species  of  inter-
mission always  succeeds  the  contraction  of  the  auricles.  It,
therefore,  only  differs  from  the  natural  quiescence  after  this  con-
traction, in  the  irregularity  of  its  recurrence.

The  duration  and  recurrence  of  this  species  of  suspension  of
the  heart's  action  are  very  variable.  Frequently  during  a  close
succession  of  similar  intermissions,  some  are  equal  to  a  complete
contraction  of  the  heart,  others  are  only  one-half,  a  third,  or  fourth
as  long,  and  some  are  barely  perceptible.  Their  recurrence  is
equally  uncertain ; — they  being  sometimes  perceived  after  each
pulsation,  or  nearly  so,  and  then  not  until  after  ten,  twenty,  or
even  one  hundred  pulsations.  If,  in  our  examinations,  we  con-
tent ourselves  with  feeling  the  pulse,  without  applying  the  ste-
thoscope, we  shall,  of  necessity,  confound  this  true  intermission  with
the  false  one  formerly  mentioned,  produced  by  variations  in  the
duration  and  force  of  the  heart's  pulsations.  By  the  stethoscope,
however,  we  cart  very  readily  distinguish  it  from  the  retarda-
tions. It  is  not  so  easy  to  draw  the  line  between  this  and  the
repeated  contractions  of  the  auricles  also  mentioned  before.  The
feebler,  shorter,  and  quicker  pulsations  completely  resemble  the
auricular  contractions ;  and  if,  after  a  distinct  contraction  of  the


INTERMISSION.


531


ventricles,  distinguished  by  its  impulse  and  its  dull  and  pro-
longed sound,  there  supervene  three  feebler  contractions  attended
by  a  much  clearer  sound,  we  cannot  be  certain  whether  these  are
owing  to  a  threefold  contraction  of  the  auricle,  or  whether  the
first  is  the  contraction  of  the  auricle,  and  the  two  last  are  a  re-
gular ventricular  and  auricular  contraction.  Should  there  exist
two  or  four  of  these  contractions,  there  will  be  no  uncertainty.

The  last  species  of  intermission  is  that  which  consists  in  the
absence  of  one  complete  pulsation,  recurring  sometimes  with  an
exact  periodicity,  after  longer  or  shorter  intervals,  the  pulse  being
in  other  respects  regular.  This  pulse  constitutes,  according  to
Solano,  the  precursor  of  a  critical  diarrhoea.  This  peculiarity
of  the  circulation  is  by  no  means  rare ;  I  have  observed  it  fre-
quently in  some  epidemics,  but  not  at  all  in  others,  owing  no
doubt  to  the  particular  constitution  that  prevailed.  This  kind
of  intermission  corresponds  more  frequently  to  a  contraction  of
the  ventricles,  much  weaker  than  the  rest,  than  to  a  real  inter-
ruption of  their  action ;  and,  indeed,  in  such  cases,  we  often
perceive  an  extremely  feeble  pulsation  in  place  of  a  total  inter-
mission.* I  have  not  hitherto  had  an  opportunity  of  examining
the  state  of  the  heart  in  that  species  of  intermission,  which  is  at-
tended by  a  continued  state  of  fulness  of  the  artery.  We  ought
to  consider  it,  from  analogy,  as  taking  place  immediately  after
the  contraction  of  the  ventricles ;  and  that  their  contraction  con-
tinues during  the  period  of  their  intermission.

Many  of  the  facts  adduced  in  the  foregoing  analysis  of  the
pulsation  of  the  heart,  suffice  to  prove,  that  the  application  of
the  hand  to  the  cardiac  region,  and  feeling  the  pulse,  are  very
inadequate  guides  to  the  real  state  of  the  circulation.  The  exa-
mination of  the  pulse,  in  particular,  at  least  as  it  has  been  hi-
therto done  without  any  corresponding  exploration  of  the  heart,
is  as  often  calculated  to  mislead  as  to  supply  us  with  useful  indi-
cations ;  and  notwithstanding  the  ingenious  and  subtile  researches
of  Galen,  Solano,  Bordeu,  and  Fouquet,  and  the  physicians  of
China,  I  conceive  that  every  candid  practitioner  must  have  often

said  with  Celsus — "  Venis  maxime  credimus  fallacissemae  rei."

I  am  far  from  wishing  to  call  in  question  the  accuracy  of  all  the
observations  of  the  above-named  authors ;  on  the  contrary,  I
admit  that  some  of  the  most  curious  are,  in  a  general  point  of
view,  well  founded ;  for  instance,  I  think  we  often  observe  the
dicrote  pulse  precede  or  accompany  epistaxis,  the  undulating

*  In  certain  cases  of  diseased  heart  I  have  observed  this  species  of  intermission
under  a  form  which  was  sometimes  productive  of  curious  results.  Every  second
pulsation  was  so  feeble  as  to  be  altogether  or  almost  entirely  imperceptible.  In  the'
former  case,  the  pulse  appeared  to  be  quite  regular  and  slow  ;  but,  while  in  the  act
of  feeling  it,  the  intermediate  or  latent  pulsation  (if  I  may  use  the  expression)  became
suddenly  distinct,  and  the  pulse  was  instantly  doubled.  In  this  manner  I  have  known
the  same  patient  with  a  regular  pulse  at  fifty  or  sixty,  and  a  regular  pulse  at  one  hun-
dred or  one  hundred  und  twenty,  within  the  space  of  three  minutes. — Trand.

M  M  2


532


EXPLORATION  OF  THE  HEART.


pulse  attend  sweating,  the  intermitting  pulse  accompanying  di-
arrhoea, and  believe  that  we  may  admit  (with  pretty  numerous
exceptions  however)  the  distinction  of  pulses  into  superior  and
inferior.  But  admitting  the  utility  of  the  pulse  in  these  respects,
it  is  yet  more  evident,  that  it  frequently  supplies  us  with  no  in-
dications at  all,  or  with  such  as  are  deceitful  in  still  more  impor-
tant respects, — for  instance,  in  relation  to  bloodletting,  to  the
prognosis  in  all  diseases,  and  to  the  diagnosis  in  several.  What
Celsus  says  of  it  in  regard  to  fevers,  is  still  more  applicable  in
diseases  of  the  lungs  and  heart.  We  have  seen,  that,  in  pneu-
monia and  pleurisy,  the  absence  of  fever  and  a  perfectly  natural
state  of  the  pulse,  frequently  accompany  a  severe,  extensive,  and
incurable  disease.  In  phthisis,  the  hectic  fever  is  sometimes
suspended  during  whole  months.  In  diseases  of  the  heart,  the
pulse  is  often  feeble,  sometimes  even  almost  imperceptible,  al-
though the  heart's  contraction,  that  especially  of  the  left  ven-
tricle, is  much  more  energetic  than  natural.  In  apoplexy,  on
the  contrary,  we  often  meet  with  a  very  strong  pulse  in  persons
in  whom  the  impulse  of  the  heart  is  scarcely  observable.  These
two  opposite  facts  may  easily  be  verified  by  the  use  of  the  ste-
thoscope ;  I  have  myself  done  so,  daily,  during  the  last  ten  years.
They  appear  quite  inexplicable,  unless  we  admit  the  arteries  to
possess  a  power  of  action  independent  of  that  of  the  heart.

It  would  seem  to  be  proved,  also,  by  many  other  facts,  that  the
different  systems  subservient  to  the  circulation,  although  neces-
sarily and  reciprocally  dependent,  have  still,  in  other  respects,  a
particular  or  individual  existence,  which,  in  certain  states  of  dis-
ease, and  in  certain  individuals,  is  more  marked  and  isolated
than  in  ordinary  cases  and  circumstances.  This  view  of  the  case
is  supported  by  the  observations  of  practitioners,  in  all  ages,  of
the  different  effects  of  bleeding,  according  as  it  is  general  or  local,
venous  or  arterial,  depletive  or  derivative.  The  same  is  shown
by  the  great  benefit  of  a  natural  haemorrhage  of  a  few  ounces
only,  and  the  inefficacy  of  copious  venesection  in  the  same  case ;
and  by  the  trifling  degree  of  exhaustion  produced  sometimes  by
very  profuse  haemorrhage,  compared  with  the  great  collapse  oc-
casioned by  the  bleeding  of  a  few  leeches  in  the  same  person.  I
am  acquainted  with  a  man,  who  has  been  repeatedly  bled  to  the
extent  of  eight  or  twelve  ounces,  without  being  thereby  at  all  de-
bilitated, but  in  whom  the  application  of  only  two  leeches  to  the
anus,  has,  on  two  different  occasions,  produced  an  extreme  de-
gree of  muscular  debility.  These  facts  prove,  I  think,  that  the
capillary  circulation  is  in  some  sort  independent  of  the  general.
.The  influence  of  the  latter  on  the  former  seems  very  inconsider-
able indeed  in  certain  haemorrhages  from  the  uterus,  bowels,  nose
or  lungs,  which  are  found  to  be  very  little  affected  by  the  most
copious  venesection.  The  mere  state  of  the  pulse,  then,  is  far
from  indicating  the  state  of  the  circulation  in  general:  it  does


INTERMISSION.


533


not  even  certainly  indicate  its  condition  in  the  whole  heart,  as  it
merely  corresponds  with  the  contraction  of  the  left  ventricle,
which  may  be  regular  at  the  time  when  that  of  the  auricles  and
right  ventricle  is  irregular.  In  like  manner,  the  state  of  the
pulse  fails  to  be  a  sure  guide  as  to  the  expediency  of  bloodlet-
ting. Every  one  knows  that  in  certain  cases,  for  instance,  in  apo-
plexy, pneumonia,  pleurisy,  and  inflammatory  affections  of  the
abdomen,  the  weakness  and  smallness  of  the  pulse  do  not  always
contra-indicate  venesection  ;  on  the  contrary,  that  the  artery,  in
such  cases,  frequently  recovers  its  force  and  fulness  after  the  loss
of  blood.  The  recognition  of  this  kind  of  pulse  ( fictitie  debilis )
is  one  of  the  most  important  and  difficult  points  in  the  treatment
of  acute  diseases,  as  an  error  in  respect  of  it  may  be  fatal.  In
cases  of  this  sort  the  stethoscope  affords  a  rule  much  surer  than
the  pulse.  Whenever  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles  is  energetic,
we  may  bleed  without  fear, — the  pulse  will  rise;  but  if  the  con-
tractions of  the  heart  are  feeble,  although  the  pulse  still  retain  a
certain  degree  of  strength,  we  must  be  cautious  respecting  the  em-
ployment of  venesection.  When  the  pulse  is  very  strong,  and  the
contraction  of  the  heart  moderately  strong,  (as  is  frequently  the
case  in  apoplexy,)  we  may  still  bleed  with  advantage  as  long  as
there  is  not  a  marked  diminution  in  the  sound  and  impulse  of  the
heart.  But  when  both  the  pulse  and  the  heart  are  feeble,  we  must
not  open  a  vein,  whatever  be  the  name  or  seat  of  the  disease,  as
such  practice  must  infallibly  destroy  the  few  resources  still  left  to
nature.  The  most  we  can  do  in  such  a  case,  if  there  be  any  local
congestion,  is,  by  the  application  of  a  few  leeches,  to  try  if  the
patient  can  bear  the  subtraction  of  blood  from  the  capillaries.
The  certainty  and  facility  with  which  the  cylinder  indicates  the
propriety  of  bloodletting  in  such  cases  as  those  above  men  tioned,
(which  have  hitherto  been  considered  among  the  most  difficult
in  practical  medicine,)  appears  to  me  to  be  one  of  the  greatest
advantages  to  be  derived  from  the  employment  of  this  instru-
ment. It  is  certainly  of  the  most  general  application,  as  it  refers
to  the  employment  of  one  of  our  therapeutic  measures,  which  is
the  most  useful  or  the  most  injurious  of  any,  and  which  may  be
had  recourse  to  in  almost  all  diseases.

After  what  has  been  said,  and  after  its  general  uncertainty
avowed  by  the  most  experienced  practitioners,  it  may  seem  sur-
prising that  the  practice  of  feeling  the  pulse  has  been  so  gene-
rally followed  in  all  ages.  The  reason  of  the  practice  is,  how-
ever, sufficiently  obvious :  it  is  of  easy  performance,  and  gives
little  inconvenience  either  to  the  physician  or  patient  ;  the  cle-
verest, it  is  true,  can  derive  from  it  but  a  few  indications  and
uncertain  conjectures ;  but  the  most  ignorant  can,  without  ex-
posing themselves,  deduce  from  it  all  sorts  of  indications.  Its
very  uncertainty  gives  it  a  preference  with  persons  of  inferior
qualifications,  over  means  quite  certain  in  their  nature,  and


53  4


EXPLORATION  OF  THE  HEART.


which  enable  the  non-professional  observer  to  judge  of  the  skill
of  the  physician  by  the  correctness  of  his  diagnosis  and  prog-
nosis. This  last  reason,  more  than  any  other,  leads  one  to  be-
lieve, that  long  after  the  utility  of  mediate  auscultation  shall
have  been  unanimously  admitted  by  the  better  informed  mem-
bers of  the  profession,  many  practitioners  will  still  be  found  to
neglect  or  even  to  disdain  it,  (as  they  now  do  percussion,)  who
will,  nevertheless,  think  their  time  not  at  all  mispent  in  feeling
the  pulse  of  an  hypochondriac,  or  in  examining,  day  after  day,
the  fecal  excretions  of  a  peripneumonic  patient.

The  facts  above  stated  relative  to  the  discordance  (often  very
great)  existing  between  the  pulsation  of  the  heart  and  of  the
arteries, — more  especially  as  to  strength,  are  contrary  to  the  more
general  opinion  of  modern  physiologists,  who  consider  the  action
of  the  arteries  as  entirely  dependent  on  that  of  the  heart.  Bichat
himself  has  fallen  into  this  error.  "  To  every  species  of  action
of  the  heart  (he  says)  there  corresponds  a  particular  kind  of
pulse.  I  am  astonished  that  the  authors  who  have  so  much  dif-
fered on  this  point,  have  never  thought  of  having  recourse  to
experiments  to  settle  the  question.  No  doubt  there  are  many
modifications  of  the  pulse  which  would  not  be  found  to  corres-
pond with  any  visible  modification  of  the  movements  of  the
heart ;  but  the  frequent  and  slow  pulse,  the  strong  and  weak,
the  intermitting,  undulating,  &c.  are  at  once  understood  in  laying
bare  the  heart  and  placing  the  finger  on  the  artery  at  the  same
time.  In  this  case  we  constantly  observe  that  for  every  modi-
fication of  the  arterial  pulsation  there  is  a  corresponding  modi-
fication of  the  pulsation  of  the  heart ;— which  would  not  be  the
case,  if  the  pulse  depended  on  a  vital  contraction  of  the  arteries.-"*
I  am  not  prepared  to  say  how  far  we  can  compare  the  visible
pulsations  of  the  heart  to  the  felt  pulsations  of  the  arteries, — a
comparison  the  less  to  be  depended  on,  seeing  it  can  only  be  made
on  an  animal  expiring  in  torture;  but  I  am  well  assured  that
we  shall  soon  be  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  opposite  opinion,
on  examining,  comparatively,  the  pulse  and  the  heart  in  certain
diseases,  particularly  apoplexy  and  affections  of  the  heart.
What  was  said  of  the  bellows-sound  and  purring  thrill  of  the
heart  and  arteries,  goes  also  to  the  corroboration  of  the  same
opinion.'!*

In  bringing  to  a  conclusion  this  analysis  of  the  heart's  con-
tractions, in  health  and  disease,  I  ought  to  state,  that  the  explo-


*  Anat.  G6n.  t.  ii.  p.  136.  Ed.  de  Beclard.

t  The  argument  here  derived  from  auscultation,  in  favour  of  the  independent
powers  of  the  capillaries,  is  an  important  addition  to  those  formerly  advanced  ou
this  side  of  the  question.  For  a  complete  view  of  the  evidence  on  both  sides,  1  refer
the  reader  to  Dr.  Bostock's  admirable  St/stem  of  Physiology,  vol.  i.  p.  381,  and  to  the
works  of  Drs.  Parry  (sen.  and  jun.),  Philip.  Hastings,  Thomson,  Young,  Kerr,  Car-
son, Hunter,  C.  Dell,  &c—  Transl.


INTERMISSION.


535


ration  of  this  organ  is  the  case  in  which  immediate,  compared
with  mediate  auscultation,  would  be  least  defective ;  were  it  not,
for  reasons  formerly  mentioned,  nearly  impracticable  in  many
cases.  Its  principal  inconveniences  are, — the  impossibility  of
closely  applying  the  ear  at  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum  in  many
cases :  the  perception  of  the  action  of  both  sides  of  the  heart  at
the  same  time;  the  conjunction  of  the  sound  of  respiration  or  of
those  depending  on  the  presence  of  gas  in  the  stomach,  with  the
sound  of  the  heart ;  and,  sometimes,  the  much  too  great  intensity
of  the  impulse  and  sound  of  the  heart,  when  perceived  over  too
large  a  surface, — a  circumstance  which  prevents  our  being  able
to  analyze  readily  the  motion  of  its  several  parts.


r>36


BOOK  SECOND.


OF  DISEASES  OF  THE  HEART.


CHAPTER  I.

OF DISEASES  OF THE HEART IN  GENERAL.

Sect.  I . — Of  the  Symptoms  common  to  all  Diseases  of  the  Heart.

It  will  appear  from  the  analysis  in  the  preceding  Book,  that  the
employment  of  the  stethoscope  supplies  us  with  signs  more  pre-
cise and  more  fitted  for  enabling  us  to  distinguish  the  principal
diseases  of  the  heart,  than  those  which  had  been  previously
known.  On  this  account  we  need  insist  the  less  upon  the  general
and  local  symptoms,  by  which  it  had  been  previously  sought  to
recognize  these  diseases.  In  the  present  section  I  shall  confine
myself  to  the  notice  of  such  only  as  accompany  the  greater  num-
ber of  these  affections  when  they  have  reached  a  certain  degree
of  severity.

The  severest  and  most  common  diseases  of  the  heart  are —
dilatation  of  the  ventricles,  thickening  of  the  walls  of  these,  or
the  reunion  of  both  affections.  Most  frequently  a  single  ven-
tricle is  affected ;  sometimes  both  are  so  in  a  similar,  or  in  an
opposite  manner,  as  in  the  common  case  of  dilatation  of  the  right
ventricle  with  hypertrophy  of  the  left,  and  vice  versa.  The
persistence  of  the  foramen  ovale,  the  perforation  of  the  septum
between  the  ventricles,  the  ossification  of  the  sigmoid  valves  of
the  aorta  or  of  the  mitral  valve,  excresceuces  on  the  same  parts,
and  accidental  productions  formed  in  the  heart,  are  of  much  rarer
occurrence,  and  do  not,  generally  speaking,  impair  the  health,
until  they  have  reached  such  a  degree  as  to  give  rise  to  hyper-
trophy, or  dilatation  of  the  ventricles.  The  dilatation  and  hy-
pertrophy of  the  auricles  are  rarer  still,  and  are,  perhaps,  always
consecutive  affections  depending  on  previous  disease  of  the  valves
or  ventricles.

The  general  symptoms  of  all  these  affections  are  almost  the

same:  They  are,  an  habitually  short  and  difficult  respiration;

palpitations  and  oppressions  constantly  produced  by  the  action
of  ascending,  by  quick  walking,  by  emotions  of  mind,— or  with-
out any  perceptible  cause ;  frightful  dreams,  and  sleep  frequently


sv.M  PTOMS.


537


disturbed  by  sudden  starts;  a  cachectic  paleness  and  a  tendency
to  anasarca,  which  disease,  indeed,  comes  on  after  the  disease  h;is
persisted  some  time.  To  these  symptoms  is  frequently  added
the  Angina  Pectoris, — a  nervous  affection,  which  will  be  de-
scribed hereafter.  When  the  disease  has  reached  a  high  degree,
it  is  recognized  at  a  single  glance.  The  patient,  unable  to  bear
the  horizontal  posture,  remains  night  and  day  sitting  rather  than
lying  in  his  bed,  with  the  face  more  or  less  swollen,  sometimes
very  pale,  but  more  commonly  of  a  deep  violet  blue  tint,  either
over  the  whole  or  only  on  the  cheeks.  The  lips  are  swollen  and
prominent  like  a  negro's,  more  livid  than  the  rest  of  the  face,  or
of  this  hue  when  it  is  quite  pale.  The  lower  extremities  are
cedematous ;  and  the  scrotum  or  labia,  the  trunk  of  the  body,
the  arms,  and  even  the  face,  are  successively  affected  in  the
same  manner.  The  same  state  exists  in  the  serous  membranes,
whence  arise  ascites,  hydrothorax,  and  hydropericardium,  which
accompany  organic  affections  of  the  heart  more  frequently  than
any  other  disease.  The  congestion  and  lentor  of  the  capillary
circulation  are  further  shown  by  affections  of  the  internal  organs;
for  instance  —  haemoptysis,  pains  of  the  stomach,  vomiting,  apo-
plexy (which  frequently  terminates  such  affections,)  and  most  of
all,  dyspnoea,  which  last  symptom  has  been  the  cause  of  con-
founding such  diseases  (with  many  others)  under  the  name  of
Asthma.  These  symptoms,  however,  as  they  show  themselves
in  the  diseases  of  the  heart,  have  peculiar  characters  which  tend
to  distinguish  them  from  such  as  occur  in  the  affections  most
likely  to  be  confounded  with  them,  more  particularly  cases  of
asthma,  which  depend,  for  the  most  part,  either  on  a  dry  catarrh
or  a  morbid  condition  of  the  nervous  system.

In  the  diseases  of  the  heart  the  general  circulation  is  not  al-
ways so  much  affected  as  the  capillary.  Sometimes  the  pulse  is
irregular,  but  sometimes  it  is  almost  natural ;  and  the  hand  ap-
plied to  the  cardiac  region,  discovers  only  a  regular  and  moderate
pulsation.  At  other  times  the  pulse  is  very  strong,  or  altogether
imperceptible;  the  heart  yields  a  very  great  impulse,  or  none  at
all,  its  contractions  are  evidently  irregular,  and  palpitation  is
constantly  present.* So  severe  a  state  of  disease  as  this,  is  not

*  The  epitome  of  the  general  symptoms  given  by  our  author  is  excellent,  as  far  as
it  goes  ;  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  paramount  importance  of  the  auscultatory
diagnostics,  in  his  mind,  has  rendered  this  epitome  too  brief.  1  would,  therefore,  re-
commend to  the  reader's  attention  the  ampler  details  on  this  subject  in  the  classical
works  of  Corvisart,  Testa,  Kreysig,  Bertin  and  Hope.  In  the  latter  stages  of  organic
affections  of  the  heart,  the  diagnosis  is  always  easy ;  generally  even  without  the  aid
of  the  stethoscope,— almost  certainly  with  it.  In  the  very  earliest  stages,  however,
(the  only  period,  be  it  remembered,  in  which  medical  treatment  can  be  of  much  use,)
the  practitioner  often  finds  every  means  of  diagnosis,  whether  general  or  local,  in-
sufficient to  enable  him  to  come  to  a  positive  conclusion.  It  is,  therefore,  of  the
greatest  consequence  to  attend  to  the  symptoms  as  well  as  the  signs  of  these  diseases  ;
and  on  this  subject  much  valuable  information  will  be  obtained  from  the  works  already
referred  to, Corvisart  lays  much  stress  on  the  appearance  of  the  countenance,  con-


538


DISEASES  OF THE  HEART.


always  beyond  relief:  we  sometimes  see  the  judicious  combination
of  bloodletting,  diuretics  and  tonics,  remove  the  impending  suf-
focation, the  palpitations  and  dropsy,  and  restore  to  the  patient,
frequently  for  a  long  period,  a  tolerable  degree  of  health  :  and
it  is  commonly  only  after  a  great  many  similar  attacks,  recurring
after  considerable  intervals,  that  the  disease  at  length  proves  fatal*

sidering  it,  in  many  cases,  as  of  itself  sufficient  to  point  out  the  nature  of  the  disease
(p.  385.)  This  author  also,  as  well  as  Kreysig  and  Testa,  pays  much  attention  to
the  state  of  the  mind  and  temper,  as  a  symptom  of  heart  affections ;  irritability,  me-
lancholy and  despair,  being  stated  as  the  habitual  or  frequent  accompaniments  of  the
bodily  sufferings  of  tbese  unhappy  persons.  Testa,  in  particular,  who,  as  well  as
Kreysig,  devotes  a  whole  chapter  to  this  subject,  considers  suicide  as  by  no  means
a  rare  result  of  the  intolerable  misery  entailed  by  organic  lesions  of  the  heart.  Every
one  must  have  witnessed  the  frequent  coexistence  of  this  state  of  mind  with  cardiac
affections ;  but  in  many  cases,  I  am  well  assured  that  it  is  not  essentially  dependent
upon  these,  but  upon  a  state  of  bodily  disorder  which  frequently  exists  without  any
accompanying  disease  of  the  heart; — I  mean,  that  complex  and  ill  understood  dis-
order, commonly  termed  hypochondriasis.  And,  indeed,  I  am  convinced  by  expe-
rience that  the  disease  of  the  heart  itself  is  often  the  consequence  of  tins  affection.
This  is  also  the  opinion  of  Testa  ;  who  even  goes  so  far  as  to  consider  most  of  the
incurable  cases  of  hysteria  and  hypochondriasis,  as  conjoined  with  incurable  diseases
of  the  heart,  (vol.  ii.  p.  69.)  Another  class  of  symptoms,  hardly  noticed  by  M.
Laennec,  but  highly  deserving  the  attention  of  practitioners,  are  those  referrible  to
disordered  or  diseased  stomach.  Corvisart,  Kreysig,  and  particularly  Testa,  notice
this  state  of  the  stomach  at  some  length  ;  but  none  of  these  authors  consider  it  in  its
highly  important  etiological  relations,  and  its  still  more  important  bearings  on  the
treatment  of  the  cases  in  which  it  occurs.  Gastric  irritation — cerebral  irritation —
cardiac  irritation,  constitute,  in  many  cases,  such  a  strong  chain  of  disease,  every  part
of  which  influences  and  strengthens  every  other  part,  that  no  plan  of  treatment  that
does  not  embrace  the  whole,  can  be  attended  with  success. — Haemorrhage  is  also  a
very  common,  and  a  very  important  symptom  in  diseases  of  the  heart.  It  is  highly
deserving  the  attention  of  practitioners,  as  at  once  a  sign  of  the  disease,  a  sign  of
danger  to  other  organs,  and  a  natural  indication  of  the  proper  treatment.  Burns,
and  after  him  Kreysig,  considers  pains  in  other  parts  of  the  body  remote  from  the
heart,  as  a  symptom  of  disease  in  this  organ,  especially  of  chronic  inflammation  of
it.  Such  pains  no  doubt  exist ;  but  I  do  not  consider  them  as  at  all  peculiar  to  such
affections. — The  position  assumed  by  patients  in  bed  is  an  important  symptom  of
diseased  heart,  although  no  one  position  is  invariably  associated  either  with  the  dis-
eases in  the  organ  in  general,  or  with  any  of  the  forms  of  these.  I  have  frequently
verified  the  truth  of  a  remark  of  Kreysig's,  (Sect.  III.  chap,  vii.)  that  the  assump-
tion of  a  posture  previously  intolerable,  is  a  sign  of  extremely  bad  omen.  Syncope,
epilepsy  and  apoplexy,  are  not  unusual  in  diseases  of  the  heart ;  and  sudden  death
is  too  frequently  their  closing  symptom.  The  character  of  the  syncope  occurring  in
diseases  of  the  heart,  is  well  described  by  Kreysig,  Sect.  III.  chap.  iv. ;  and  also  in
Dr.  Parry's  work  on  Angina;  and  its  frequency  is  sufficiently  illustrated  by  the  fact
of  its  having  been  adopted  by  the  last-mentioned  author  as  the  name  of  what  he
considered  to  be  a  particular  disease,  but  which  is  now  known  to  be  a  symptom  of
various  diseases  of  the  heart. — I  have  myself  met  with  several  cases  of  convulsions
apparently  depending  on  disease  of  the  heart,  and  numerous  cases  of  the  same  kind
are  recorded  by  authors.  Among  others,  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  works  of  Bonetus,
Lancisi,  Morgagni,  Greding,  Testa,  &c.  and  particularly  to  an  inaugural  dissertation
by  J.  J.  C.  Moll,  '*  De  arcto  inter  cordis  morbos  convulsivosque  connexu."  Bonn,
1823.  Several  cases  of  the  same  kind  are  noticed  by  Dr.  Farre  in  bis  work  on
Malformations  of  the  Heart. — Transl.

•  LITERATURE  OF  DISEASES  OF  THE  HEART  IN  GENERAL.

1564.  Vega  (C.A.)  De  cordis  et  thoracis  affectibus  (De  Arte  medendi.)  L.Bat.  Fol.
1580.  Bruno  (C.)  De  corde  et  ejus  vitiis. Basil.  4to.
1584.  Ryff  (N.)  D.  do  affectibus  cordis.  Basil.

1600.  Rudius  (Eustach.)  De  naturali  atque  raorbosa  Cordis  constitutione  l'e«e(.4to.


(  IIANGES OF OTHER  ORGANS.


539


Sect.  II. — Of  the  Changes  produced  by  Diseases  of  the  Heart  in
the  texture  of  other  organs.

On  examining  the  bodies  of  persons  who  have  fallen  victims  to
organic  affections  of  the  heart,  besides  the  structural  lesions  and
the  serous  effusions  which  almost  always  accompany  these,  we
find  all  the  marks  of  congestion  of  blood  in  the  internal  capilla-
ries. The  mucous  membranes,  especially  those  of  the  stomach
and  intestines,  are  of  a  red  or  purplish  tint ;  and  the  liver,

1604.  Montagnana  (Barth.)  Consilia  de  aagritudinibus  cordis  (Opp.  select.)  Franc.
1618.  Albertini  (Annibal)  De  affectionibus  cordis  Libri  tres. Venet.  4to.
1628.  Harvey  (W.,  M.D.)  De  motu  cordis  et  sanguinis  circulatione. Franc.  4to.

1656.  Tardy  (C.) Traite  de  la  Monarcbie  du  Cceur  en  1' Homme. Par.  4to.

1657.  Bulgetius  (Attil.  De  affectionibus  cordis. Patav.  4to.

1666.  Smith  (John,  M.D.)  King  Solomon's  Portraiture  of  Old  Age.J  Lond.  8vo.

(Makes  Sol.  Discoverer  of  Circulation.)
1669.  Lower  (Rich.,  M.D.)  Tractatus  de  Corde,  item  de  motu  et  calore  sanguinis.

Lond.  8vo.

1698.  Cbirac  (Pet.)  De  Motu  Cordis.  Montpel.  12mo.

1706.  Vieussens  (R.  de)  Nouvelles  decouvertes  sur  le  cocur. Toulouse.  12mo.

1715.  Vieussens  (R.  de)  Traite  nouveau  dela  structure  du  coeur,  &c.  Toulouse.  4to.

1716.  Kremer  (A.)  Diss,  de  morbis  qui  cor  et  respirationis  organa  infestant.  Vienn.
1723.  Martinez  (Mart.)  Obervatio  rara  de  corde. Madriti.  4to.

1728.  Soumain  (le  Sieur.) Relation  de  l'ouverture  du  corps  d'une  Femme  trouvee
presque  sans  cceur :  avec  l'histoire  de  la  maladie. Par.  12mo.

1728.  Lancisi  (J.  M.)  De  motu  cordis  et  aneurismatibus. Rom.  Fol.

1729.  Wood  (Wm.,  M.D.)  A  Mechanical  essay  upon  the  Heart. Lond.  4to.
1741.  Barbeyrac  (M.,  M.D.)  Nouvelles  Diss,  sur  les  maladies  de  la  Poitrine,  du

cceur,  &c. Amst.  l2mo.
1744.  Cbirac  (Pet.)  De  motu  cordis  adversaria  analytica.  Par.  12mo.
1749.  Senac  (Jo.) Trait6  de  la  structure  du  cceur,  et  de  ses  maladies.  2  vol.  Par.  4to.
1755—6 — 9.  Meckel  (J.  F.)  Obs.  sur  les  maladies  du  cceur  (Mem.  de  1' Acad,  de  Berlin.)
1761.  Matanus  (Ant.)  De  aneurysmaticis  Praecordioruni  morbis. Liburn.  4to.
1763.  Mason  (H.) Lectures  upon  tbe  Heart,  the  Pleura,  Lungs,  &c.  Reading.  8vo.
1763.  Juncker  (C.  F.)  Diss,  cordis  morbos  proprios  in  tabula  exhibens. Hal.  4to.
1765.  Cruewell,  Diss,  de  cordis  et  vasorum  osteogenesi. Hal.  4to.

1772.  Spaventi,  Diss,  de  frequentioribus  cordis  morbis. Vienn.  4to.

1773.  Neifeld  (J.  J.)  Ratio  medendi  morbos  circuli  sanguinei.  Bresl.  8vo.

1778.  Petraglia  ( Fr.)  De  cordis  affectionibus  syntagma. Rome.  8vo.

1779.  Vandendale  (Lib.) De  Morbis  Cordis  (Diss.  Lovan.  I.)  4to.

1785.  Michaelis  C.  F.)  Aneurismatum  cordis  disquisitio. Hal.  4to.  (Doering,  I.)
1785.  Walther  (J.  G.)  Sur  les  maladies  du  coeur  (Nouv.  Mem.  de  l'Acad.  Sc.  a
Berlin) Berl.  4to.

1790.  Reil(J.C.)  Diss.  Analecta  ad  bistoriam  cordis  patbologicam. Hal.  4to.
1792—5.  Ferriar  (J.,  M.D.)  On  Dilatation  of  the  Heart  (Med.  His.  and  Reflect,
vol.  i.  ii.)  Lond.  8vo.

1803.  Lesage  (L.  A.)  Diss,  sur  les  aneurismes  du  coeur.  4to.

1804.  Portal  (Ant.,  M.D.)  Sur  les  maladies  du  cceur  (Anat.  Med.  t.  iii.)  Par.  8vo.

1805.  Zuliani  Gibellini  (Franc,  M.D.) De  quibusdam  cordis  affectionibus  acprae-

sertim  de  ejus  Prolapsu. Brixia.  4to.

1805.  Cabirau-Cabannes  (J.  F.  M.)  Apercu  sur  quelques  affections  organiques  du

cceur,  &c. Par.  8vo.

1806.  Herisse  (M.  le)  Propositions  sur  les  affections  organiques  du  cceur.  Par.  4to.
1806.  Corvisart  (J.  N.,  M.D.)  Essai  sur  les  Mai.  du  cceur  etdes  gros  Vaiss.  Par.  8vo.
1806,  Petit  (M.  A.) Essai  sur  la  M6dicine  du  Cceur. Lyon,  8vo.

1808.  Contelle  ( )  D.  Essais  sur  quelques  causes  de  maladies  du  cceur.  Par.  8vo.

1809.  Harnier  (F.)  Die>s.  de  Morborum  cordis  diagnosi.  Goett.


540


DISEASES  OF  THE  HEART.


lungs,  and  capillaries  situated  beneath  the  serous,  mucous  and
cutaneous  tissues,  are  gorged  with  blood.  The  augmented  co-
lour of  the  mucous  membranes  varies  much  in  degree  and  ex-
tent. Sometimes  it  is  observed  only  here  and  there,  under  the
form  of  small  points  or  specks,  disseminated  over  the  surface  of
the  membrane  :  at  other  times  it  occupies  the  whole  extent  of  the
surface,  and  has  the  appearance  of  being  attended  with  some
swelling  of  the  part.  These  two  appearances  are  sometimes  so
considerable,  that,  if  we  looked  to  them  merely,  without  examin-
ing the  condition  of  the  heart,  and  without  reference  to  the  his-

1809.  Warren  (J.C.,  M.D.)  Cases  of  Organic  Dis.  of  the  Heart.  Boston  {Am.)  8vo.
1809.  Burns  (A.)  Obs.  on  some  of  the  most  frequent  Dis.  of  the  Heart.  Edin.  8vo.

1809.  Dundas  (D.)  An  account  of  a  peculiar  disease  of  the  Heart  (Med.  Chir.  Trans

vol.  i.) Lond.  8vo.

1810.  Pelletan  (P.  J.)  Mem.  sur  quelques  maladies  du  coeur,  (Clin.  Chir.)  Par.
1810—11.  Testa  (A.,  M.D.) Delle  Malattie  del  Cuore.  3  vol. Botog.  8vo.
1812.  Wells  (W.  C,  M.D.)  On  Rheumatism  of  the  Heart  (Trans,  cf  a  Soc.  for  the

improvement,  &c.  vol.  iii.) Lond.  8vo.

1812.  Gates  (Jacob)  On  Diseases  of  the  Heart. Philadelph,  8vo.

1813.  Le  Gallois  and  Merat.  Diet,  des  Sc.  M6d.  (Art.  Cozur.)  t.  v.  Par.

1813.  Corvisart  (J.  N.)  A  Treatise  on  the  diseases  of  the  Heart,  &c.  Trans,  by  Hebb.

Lond.  8vo.

1814.  Farre  (J.  R.,  M.D.) Pathol.  Researches  :  Essay  I. On  Malcon formations  of

the  Human  Heart. Lond.  8vo.

1814.  Gorgham  (J.)  On  organic  dis.  of  the  Heart,  (New  Eng.  Journ.  vol.  iii  )  Boston.
1814—17.  Kreysig  (D.  Fr.  Lud.)  Die  Krankheiten  des  Herzens,  &c. Berlin.  8vo.

1815.  Lukomski  (L.  P.)  De  statu  militum  morbis  cordis  gignendis  idonea.  Wien.
1817.  Meckel  (J.  F.)  Tab.  Anat.  Pathol.  (Fasc.  I.  Cor.)  Lips.  Fol.

1817.  James  (J.  H.)  Cases  of  Disease  of  the  Heart,  &c.  (Med.  Chir.  Trans.

vol.  viii.) Lond.  8vo.

1818.  Boeck  (A.  G.  L.) De  statu  quod  am  Cordis  abnormi. Berol.  12mo.

1819.  Theinhardt  (F.  J.)  Diss,  de  Paralysi  et  paresi  cordis. Halle.  8vo.

1819.  Mayer  ( ) Berichte  ueber  organische  fehler  des  herzens,  &c.  (Oestr.

Med.jahrb.  vol.  v.) Wien.  8vo.
1819—22.  Kreysig  (D.  F.  L.)  Le  Malattie  del  Cuore,  &c.  (Traduzione  di  Giu.  Balla-
rini.  vol.  vii.) Pavia.  12mo.

1820.  Wetzler  (J.  C.)  Ueber  krankheiten  des  herzens,  (Beitrage  zur  medicin,

vol.  i.)  Mainz.  8vo.

1821.  Reeder  (H.,  M.D.)  A  Pract.  Treat,  on  Diseases  of  the  Heart. Lond.  8vo.

1821.  Bartcky  (C.  F.  E.)  Observ.  singul.  fungi  medullaris  in  corde. Halle.  8vo.

1822.  Beclard  &  Chomel.  Diet,  de  M6d.  (Art.  Occur.)  t.  v.  Par.
1824.  Bertin  (R.  S.) Trait6  des  Maladies  du  Cceur. Par.  8vo.

1824.  Cox  (Th.,  M.D.)  Obs.  on  Acute  Rheum,  and  its  Metastasis  to  the  Heart.  Lond.
1824^  Abercrombie  (J.,  M.D.)  Contributions  to  the  Pathology  of  the  Heart  (Tr.

of  Med.  Chir.  Soc.  of  Ed.  vol.  i.) Edin.  8vo.

1825.  Parry  (C.  H.)  Collections  from  the  unpublished  writings  of  (vol.  ii.)  Lond.  8vo.

1825.  Burger  (H.)  Diaguostik  der  hertzkrankhciten.  Berl.  8vo.

1826.  Andral  (G.)  Maladies  du  coeur  et  de  ses  dependances  (Clin.  Med.  torn,  iii.)

Par.  8vo.

1826.  Bernhnrdi  ( )  Obs.  circa  ingentem  cordis  tumorem. Begiom.  8vo.
1826^  Hawkins  (Fr.,  M.D.)  Rheum,  and  some  diseases  of  the  Heart  considered.  Lond.
1827!  Adams  (R.)  Cases  of  Dis.  of  the  Heart,  &c.  (Dub.  Hosp.  Rep.  vol.  iv.)  Dubl.
1Q2Q.  Brown  (J.,M.D.)  Med.  Ess.  on  Fever,  Diseases  of  the  Heart,  &c.  Lond.  8vo.
1829*  Andral  (G.)  Precis.  d'Annt.  Pathol,  vol.  ii. Par.  8vo.

1829.  Latham  (P.  M.,  M.D.)  Pathological  Essays  on  some  diseases  of  the  Heart.

(Lond.  Med.  Gazette,  vol.  iii.) Lond.  8vo.

1830.  Bouillaud.  Diet,  de  Med.  et  Chir.  Pr.  (Art.  CW.)  t.  v.  Par.

1830.  Elliotson,  (John,  M.D)  On  the  recent  improvements  in  distinguishing  diseases

of  the  Heart. Lond.  Fol.  10
1832.  Hope  (Jas.,M.D.) Treatise  on  diseases  of  the  Heart,  &c. Lond.  Ovo.


CHANGES OF OTHER  ORGANS.


541


tory  of  the  patient,  (wlio  had  perhaps  been  found  capable  of
taking  into  his  stomach  wine  and  other  stimulant  matters  without
experiencing  any  pain,  even  up  to  the  period  of  his  death,)  we
might  be  tempted  to  believe  that  the  fatal  disease  had  been  a
violent  inflammation  of  the  stomach  and  bowels.  In  fact,  the
degree  of  redness  of  these  membranes  observed  after  diseases  of
the  heart,  is  often  much  more  intense  and  extensive  than  is  found
after  true  inflammation  of  these  parts,  as,  for  example,  in  dysen-
tery ;  a  fact,  among  many  others,  sufficiently  proving  the  insuffi-
ciency of  mere  redness  to  characterize  inflammation  of  the  mu-
cous membrane  of  the  intestines,  any  more  than  the  purple  colour
of  the  face  in  asthmatic  patients  is  an  erysipelas.  In  persons
who  have  died  of  disease  of  the  heart,  particularly  dilatation  of
the  ventricles,  we  find  more  frequently  than  in  other  cases,  that
intense  redness  of  the  inner  membrane  of  the  heart  and  large
vessels,  which  I  shall  hereafter  notice  when  treating  of  the  dis-
eases of  the  aorta.

Lancisi  and  Senac,  after  Hildanus,  consider  gangrene  of  the
limbs  as  a  consequence  of  disease  of  the  heart  and  large  vessels.
The  late  M.  Giraud  was  of  the  same  opinion  ;  and,  since  his  time,
many  practitioners  have  considered  the  gangrene  of  old  persons
as  usually  caused  by  ossification  of  the  arteries.  M.  Corvisart
justly  doubts  whether,  in  such  cases,  there  is  any  thing  else  but
mere  coincidence  of  independent  diseases ;  and  I  think  that  the
single  circumstance  of  the  rareness  of  the  spontaneous  gangrene
of  the  limbs,  compared  with  the  frequency  of  disease  of  the
heart  and  ossification  of  the  arteries,  is  sufficient  to  render  the
thing  quite  improbable.*  This  is  equally  the  case  with  the  no-
tion of  Testa,  that  ophthalmia,  and  sometimes  the  loss  of  the
eye,  may  be  ranged  among  the  consequences  of  diseases  of  the
heart.

None  of  the  symptoms  or  effects  mentioned,  suffice  to  charac-
terize or  indicate  disease  of  the  heart,  since  they  are  common  to
many  other  affections,  and  particularly  to  almost  every  chronic

*  Testa  (torn.  iii.  p.  333)  and  Kreysig  (sect.  iii.  chap,  vii.)  are  of  the  same  opi-
nion as  Laennec  j  yet  the  following  extract  from  Dr.  Carswell's  admirable  Treatise
on  Mortification,  published  in  the  third  vol.  of  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Practical  Medi-
cine, sufficiently  proves  that  the  ancient  opinion,  as  far,  at  least,  as  it  regards  disease
of  the  Arteries,  is  the  true  one.  In  every  case  of  gangrena  senilis  which  1  have
examined  after  death,"  says  Dr.  Carswell,  "  I  have  found  the  arteries  of  the  diseased
limb  obliterated  in  such  a  degree  as  to  interrupt  the  circulation  of  the  blood.  The
obstructing  cause  consisted,  in  five  or  six  cases,  of  a  fibrous  tissue  formed  either
in  the  walls  or  cavities  of  the  arteries,  whereby  these  vessels  were  converted  into
nearly  solid  cords  of  ligamentous  consistence.  This  state  we  have  traced  from  the
toes  more  than  half  way  up  the  leg  :  it  was  always  connected  with  ossification  of  the
larger  branches  and  trunks  of  the  thigh  and  other  parts  of  the  body.  In  the  other
two  cases,  the  obstruction  depended  on  extensive  ossification  of  the  principal  arteries
of  the  limb ;  and  in  several  others  it  was  produced  by  solid  fibrine  formed  around
spiculi  of  bone  projecting  from  the  internal  surface  of  the  arteries." — It  is  equally
clear  from  the  above  extract,  that  the  local  gangrene  cannot  be  regarded  as  any  sign
or  proof  of  disease  of  the  heart. — Transl.


542


DISEASES  OF  THE  HEART.


disease  of  the  lungs.  We  have  already  shown,  in  like  manner,
that  neither  the  pulse  nor  the  action  of  the  heart,  as  ascertained
by  the  touch,  supply  us  with  any  information  to  be  depended  on.
To  mediate  auscultation,  therefore,  we  must  turn  as  affording  the
only  means  of  recognizing  the  diseases  of  this  organ ;  and  it  is
proper  to  observe,  that  even  it  more  frequently  fails  in  this  case,
than  in  any  of  the  other  diseases,  which  it  is  calculated  to  discover.
I  have  already  shown,  that  the  study  of  the  heart's  actions  in
health,  requires  much  more  time  and  application,  than  does  either
the  voice,  respiration,  or  rhonchus.  Moreover,  when  we  are  igno-
rant of  the  previous  state  of  the  patient's  health,  as  is  almost
always  the  case  in  hospital  practice,  we  may  sometimes  mistake
mere  nervous  palpitations  for  hypertrophy  or  dilatation  of  the
heart.  I  have  myself  never  fallen  into  this  error  without  dis-
covering it  after  a  certain  time ;  but  it  may  be  of  long  continuance
if  we  only  examine  our  patients  after  long  intervals,  and  still
more,  if  we  do  not  do  so  during  a  state  of  repose.  Another  and
much  more  insidious  cause  of  error,  is  supplied  by  those  diseases
of  the  lungs  which  lessen  the  extent  of  respiration  ;  such  as  pneu-
monia, emphysema  in  a  high  degree,  and,  most  of  all,  chronic
pleurisy,  In  cases  of  this  kind,  I  have  sometimes  found  the  heart
enormously  dilated  or  thickened  on  examining  the  body  after
death,  although  during  life,  the  contractions  of  this  organ  had
been  perfectly  natural  in  respect  of  sound,  impulse  and  ry  thm.  It
would  appear  as  if  the  diminished  action  of  the  lungs  obliges  the
heart  to  modify  its  action.  I  have  alreadv  related  some  examples
of  this  fact,  (see  Cases  V.  VJ.  VIII.  XXIV.)  These,  however,
are  by  no  means  common,  and  cannot  be  estimated,  even  in  an
hospital,  at  more  than  one  in  twenty.  In  private  practice  the
mistake  in  question  must  be  much  more  rare,  since  in  this  case
we  almost  always  obtain  more  information  respecting  the  previous
health  of  the  patients  even  than  we  require.

Sect.  III. — Of  the  Causes  of  Diseases  of  the  Heart.

The  causes  of  diseases  of  the  heart,  are,  like  the  diseases  them-
selves, various  in  their  nature.  Ossifications  are  the  result  of
some  abberration  of  the  process  of  assimilation  which  is  not  easily
understood.  Corvisart  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  the  excres-
cences on  the  valves  originate  in  a  syphilitic  taint.  I  shall  after-
wards state  another  opinion,  founded  on  the  mode  of  their  forma-
tion. The  dilatation  and  thickening  of  the  ventricles,  diseases  of
much  greater  frequency,  also  may  arise  from  various  causes;  but
these  are  in  general  more  easily  traced  to  their  sources  than  the
former.  All  diseases  which  give  rise  to  severe  and  long-continued
dyspnoea  produce,  almost  necessarily,  hypertrophy  or  dilatation
of  the  heart,  through  the  constant  efforts  the  organ  is  called  on


CAUSES.


543


to  perform,  in  order  to  propel  the  blood  into  the  lungs  against
the  resistance  opposed  to  it  by  the  cause  of  the  dyspnoea.  It  is  in
this  manner  that  phthisis  pulmonalis,  empyema,  chronic  pneu-
monia, and  emphysema  of  the  lungs,  act  in  producing  disease  of
the  heart ;  and  that  those  kinds  of  exercise  which  require  great
exertion,  and  thereby  impede  respiration,  come  to  be  the  most
common  remote  causes  of  these  complaints.  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  found  that  diseases  of  the  heart,  on  the  same  principle  of
mutual  influence,  give  rise  to  several  diseases  of  the  lungs.  They
are  thus  amongst  the  most  frequent  causes  of  cedema  of  the  lungs,
haemoptysis,  and  pulmonary  apoplexy.  When,  however,  diseases
of  the  heart  are  found  to  co-exist  with  chronic  pleurisy,  phthisis,
emphysema,  and,  in  general,  with  chronic  disease  of  the  lungs,  it
will  usually  be  found,  on  close  examination,  that  the  latter  are
the  primary  diseases.  It  follows  from  these,  and  other  facts
noticed  under  the  head  of  emphysema  and  pulmonary  catarrh,
that  a  neglected  cold  is  frequently  the  original  cause  of  the  most
severe  diseases  of  the  heart.  To  all  these  causes  must  be  added
the  congenital  disproportion  between  the  size  of  the  heart  and
the  diameter  of  the  aorta.  M.  Corvisart  has,  perhaps,  gone  too
far  in  asserting  that  there  can  be  no  dilatation  of  the  heart  with-
out the  previous  existence  of  a  disproportion  of  this  kind,  or  of  a
contraction,  or  some  similar  obstruction  to  the  circulation,  at
a  greater  or  less  distance  from  the  heart ;  it  is,  however,  true,
that  it  is  very  common  to  find  an  aorta  of  small  diameter  in  cases
of  hypertrophy  or  dilatation.  Still,  this  is  not  always  the  case,
and  however  rational  such  a  cause  may  be,  we  can  readily  con-
ceive many  others.  We  know  that  the  energetic  and  reiterated
action  of  all  muscles  materially  increases  their  size,  as  in  the  case
of  those  of  the  right  arm  of  the  fencer,  the  shoulder  of  the  porter,
and  the  hands  of  most  artizans.  On  the  same  principle  we  must
admit  that  even  nervous  palpitations,  or  such  as  originate  from
moral  causes,  may,  by  frequent  recurrence,  produce  a  true  en-
largement of  the  heart.

There  is  yet  another  congenital  cause  of  disease  of  the  heart,
which  appears  to  me  to  be  of  greater  frequency  than  the  small
calibre  of  the  aorta,  above  mentioned, — I  allude  to  a  dispropor-
tionate thickness  of  one  or  both  sides  of  that  organ.  I  am  satisfied
that  in  a  great  many  persons  the  parietes  of  one  or  both  sides  of
the  heart  are  either  too  thick  or  too  thin  from  birth.  In  such
cases  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  usual  exciting  causes,  moral
and  physical,  will  be  more  apt  to  produce  formal  disease  of  the
heart  than  in  individuals  in  whom  this  disproportion  does  not
exist.*

*  M.  Laennec's  account  of  the  causes  of  diseases  of  the  heart,  is  as  meagre  as  his
detail  of  the  general  symptoms.  On  this  subject  also,  some  of  the  authors  already
quoted,  and  particularly  Testa  and  Kreysig,  have  written  much  at  length,  and  are


544


CHAPTER  II.


OF  HYPERTROPHY OF  THE  HEART.

By  hypertrophy,  I  mean  simple  increase  of  the  muscular  sub-
stance of  the  heart,  without  a  proportionate  dilatation  of  its

well  deserving  the  student's  attention.  I  shall  here  briefly  advert  to  some  of  the
principal  causes  overlooked  or  not  sufficiently  noticed  by  our  author.

Moral  causes. — These  are  considered  by  Corvisart,  Testa  and  Kreysig,  as,  either
immediately  or  remotely,  the  most  powerful  and  frequent  causes  of  diseases  of  the
heart.  Many  well-known  instances  of  sudden  death  from  mental  emotion — more
particularly  from  excessive  joy — through  rupture,  spasm,  or  palsy  of  the  heart,  are
on  record.  Permanent  lesions  arise  from  similar  causes.  I  had  lately  under  my  care
a  poor  woman  with  organic  disease  of  the  heart,  of  many  months' standing,  suddenly
produced  by  horror  at  seeing  her  infant  scalded  to  death.  Both  Corvisart  (p.  384)
and  Testa  (t.  i.  p.  10)  assert  that  diseases  of  the  heart  have  been  more  frequent  in
consequence  of  the  tremendous  agitation  produced  by  the  French  Revolution  and  its
consequences.  This,  however,  is  doubted  by  Bertin,  (p.  350,)  who  thinks  the  seem-
ing increase  of  such  cases  is  rather  owing  to  their  being  better  understood  and  more
certainly  recognized.  A  long  continuance  of  the  depressing  passions  may  act  in
various  ways  in  giving  rise  to  these  diseases, — e.  g.  in  directly  exciting  palpitation,
or  debilitating  the  muscles  of  the  heart,  in  producing  disorder  and  disease  in  other
organs,  which  may  act  indirectly  or  directly  on  the  heart,  &c.  However  they  act,
their  influence  must  be  admitted  by  every  practitioner  of  experience.  See,  for  ex-
ample, Case  IX.  in  my  work  entitled  "  Original  Cases,"  p.  138.

The  strumous  habit. — This  is  considered  by  Testa  as  affording  a  strong  predisposi-
tion to  disease  of  the  heart ;  my  own  experience  leads  me  to  the  same  conclusion.
In  this  case  I  have  thought  that  the  disease  is  developed  at  a  more  early  age  than
under  other  circumstances.  Perhaps  in  this  case  an  original  disproportion  of  parts
usually  exists.

Disease  of  otfher  organs.— Besides  diseases  of  the  lungs,  noticed  by  our  author,
diseases  of  other  organs  are  justly  considered  as  a  cause  of  affections  of  the  heart.
Enlargement  of  the  liver,  so  commonly  observed  in  such  cases,  is  considered  by
Corvisart,  as  always  the  effect  of  the  disease  of  the  heart.  Testa  considers  it  as
occasionally  a  cause.  Most  probably  it  may  be  merely  a  concomitant,  and  the  con-
sequence of  those  chronic  disorders  of  the  stomach  and  upper  bowels,  which  are  too
frequent  in  all  classes  of  persons,  to  be  safely  admitted  as  either  a  common  cause  or
effect  of  affections  of  the  heart.  This  and  other  obstructions  of  the  abdominal  vis-
cera and  other  parts  remote  from  the  heart,  have  been  moreover  supposed  to  act
directly  in  producing  disease  of  the  heart,  partly  by  compressing  the  large  vessels  in
their  vicinity,  and  partly  by  blocking  up  the  capillaries  within  their  substance.  See
on  this  subject  Kreysig  (sect.  ii.  cap.  iii.)  and  also  the  paper  of  Mr.  James  in  the
Med.  Chir.  Trans,  vol.  viii.

Hereditary  causes. — There  can  be  no  doubt  that  diseases  of  the  heart  are  very  fre-
quently hereditary,  although  the  character  in  which  the  predisposition  consists  may
be  very  various  in  different  cases.  Some  striking  instances  of  this  fact  are  recorded
by  Lancisi,  Albertrai,  Morgagni,  Portal,  &c. ;  and  Corvisart,  (p.  370,)  and  Testa,
(t.  i.  p.  17,)  are  strong  supporters  of  the  same  opinion.  A  striking  instance  of  this
kind  is  recorded  in  the  Med.  Comment,  vol.  ix.  p.  307  ;  and  my  own  practice,  as  well
as  that  of  most  practitioners  of  experience,  would  enable  me  to  add  many  to  the  cata-
logue.

Cutaneous  diseases. — We  are  too  little  in  the  habit,  in  this  country,  of  adverting  to
the  ancient  doctrines  of  repulsion  as  a  cause  of  internal  disease.  There  can,  how-
ever, be  no  doubt  of  their  truth  ;  and  this,  I  believe,  is  as  conspicuous  in  the  case  of
diseases  of  the  heart,  as  in  any  other.  The  foreign  writers  are  perhaps  as  much  dis-
posed to  overrate  as  we  are  to  underrate  the  influence  of  this  class  of  causes.  For


HVPERT  ItOIMIY"  OF  THE  HEART.


5t5


cavities  :  on  the  contrary,  these  are  most  commonly  considerably
diminished  in  size. This  affection  is  by  no  means  common,  and

many  cases  of  cardiac  disease  supposed  to  originate  in  the  repulsion  of  cutaneous
eruptions  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  works  of  Testa,  (t.  i.  p.  119,)  and  Kreysig,
(sect.  ii.  cap.  iii.)  The  last-named  author  considers  the  membranes  of  the  heart,
both  external  and  internal,  to  be  the  parts  chiefly  affected  in  such  cases,  a  circum-
stance which  he  attributes  to  similarity  of  texture  ;  and  he  states,  moreover,  that  in
certain  febrile  eruptive  diseases,  particularly  measles  and  scarlatina,  he  has  found
these  membranes  simultaneously  inflamed  with  the  skin.

Syphilis. — The  opinion  of  Corvisart  alluded  to  in  the  text,  and  which  is  that  of
many  other  writers,  particularly  foreign,  respecting  the  syphilitic  origin  of  certain
affections  of  the  valves,  seems  extremely  doubtful,  if  not  improbable.  M.  Bertin
states  that  an  experience  of  twenty  years,  at  the  venereal  hospital,  has  led  him  to
consider  the  influence  of  this  cause  as  greatly  exaggerated,  (p.  232.)

Gout. — It  hardly  admits  of  doubt,  that  gout  is  not  unfrequently  an  exciting  cause
of  organic  lesions  of  the  heart ;  and  it  is  probable  that  it  may  occasionally  affect  this
organ  directly,  and  thereby  produce  death,  or  symptoms  resembling  those  of  angina
pectoris.  Kreysig  is  a  strong  advocate  of  this  opinion,  (sect.  i.  c.  3,)  which  is,  more-
over, corroborated  not  merely  by  the  peculiar  characters  and  origin  of  gout,  but  by
the  testimony  of  most  writers,  and,  indeed,  by  the  experience  of  most  practitioners.
Dr.  Scudamore  in  his  work  on  Gout,  (4th  ed.)  gives  a  remarkable  case  (p.  44)  of
palpitation  of  the  heart  which  had  lasted  three  years,  and  which  disappeared  the  very
day  on  which  an  attack  of  articular  gout  came  on ;  and  the  same  author  quotes  a
similar  case  from  Dr.  Baillie,  (p.  16,)  which  had  continued  six  months,  unrelieved
by  medicine,  but  was  instantly  removed  on  the  supervention  of  gout.  Many
similar  cases  might  be  mentioned.  I  consider  gout,  or  rather  that  modification  of
the  general  system  usually  termed  the  gouty  habit,  as  by  much  the  most  frequent
cause  of  disease  of  the  heart  in  advanced  life  ;  and  we  need  look  no  further  than  to
the  plethora,  the  altered  condition  of  the  blood,  and  the  tendency  to  morbid  secretion,
which  characterise  this  state,  to  see  a  ready  and  rational  explanation  of  the  fact.

Rheumatism. — The  effect  of  rheumatism  in  occasioning  disease  of  the  heart  is  still
more  evident  than  that  of  gout,  and  is  universally  admitted  in  this  country.  It  is
singular,  however,  that  this  cause  is  very  little  noticed  by  the  best  foreign  writers  on
diseases  of  this  organ.  In  this  country  we  possess  several  excellent  memoirs  on  the
subject,  particularly  those  of  Sir  David  Dundas,  Dr.  Wells,  Dr.  Cox,  and  Dr.  Haw-
kins, besides  numerous  cases  scattered  through  our  periodical  journals.  Indeed
every  practitioner  of  experience  must  have  met  with  instances  of  the  kind.  I  have
myself  had  occasion  to  see  many  besides  those  recorded  in  my  "  Original  Cases."
(See  Case  VI.  p.  112,  and  Case  XII.  p.  165,  in  that  work.)  It  would  appear  from
the  result  of  the  dissections  that  have  been  made,  that  the  most  common  effect  of  the
metastasis  of  rheumatism  to  the  heart  is  pericarditis,  presenting  all  the  ordinary
symptoms  of  that  disease.  This  affection  frequently  proves  fatal  in  the  acute  stage  :
sometimes  it  is  cured  ;  but  commonly,  when  not  proving  fatal,  it  is  found  to  produce
enlargement  of  the  heart ;  and  in  this  case  the  original  character  of  the  disease  is
discovered  after  death,  by  the  presence  of  adhesions  between  the  heart  and  peri-
cardium. Sometimes,  however,  it  would  seem  that  the  muscular  substance  of  the
organ  is  alone  affected,  and  the  consequence  of  the  attack  is  one  or  other  of  the
forms  of  hypertrophy  or  dilatation.  For  instances  of  acute  pericarditis  succeeding
rheumatism,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  fifth  case  of  Dr.  Wells,  Dr.  Davis's  cases
of  Carditis,  some  of  Dr.  Gox's  cases,  and  two  referred  to  by  Dr.  Hawkins,  at  p.  100
of  his  work.

Although  rheumatism,  strictly  so  called,  is  no  doubt  the  frequent  source  of  organic
diseases  of  the  heart,  I  have  been  led  by  my  own  observation  to  consider  these  dis-
eases as  frequently  originating  in  common  idiopathic  inflammation  of  some  part  of  this
organ.  At  least  I  have  met  with  many  cases  of  organic  disease  of  the  heart,  which
supervened  to  acute  attacks  of  what  I  considered  inflammatory  affections  of  the  heart
or  its  membranes,  unpreceded  and  unaccompanied  by  any  symptom  of  rheumatism.
See,  for  instance,  Cases  II.  p.  92,  and  III.  p.  96,  in  "  Original  Cases."  I  observe
that  the  same  opinion  is  entertained  by  Andral  inhis  recent  work — see  torn.  iii.  p.  459.
This  author  lias  some  excellent  observations  on  this  subject.  He  considers  the
inflammations  which  precede  hypertrophy,  to  be  commonly  situated  either  in  the
pericardium,  or  in  the  inner  membrane  of  the  heart  or  aorta,  and  explains,  or  at  least

N  N


54G


HYl'lilUillOPIIY OF  THE  IIEAIIT.


appears  to  have  escaped  the  notice  of  M.  Corvisart,  as,  through
his  whole  work,  he  seems  to  consider  increased  thickness  of  the
walls,  as  being  uniformly  accompanied  by  a  proportionate  dilata-
tion of  the  cavities  of  that  organ.*  This  thickening  of  the  heart
is  always  attended  by  a  considerable  increase  of  its  consistence,
except  when  conjoined  with  another  affection  of  this  organ,  to  be
noticed  presently,  viz.  softening  of  the  heart.  Hypertrophy  may
exist  in  one  or  both  ventricles,  with  or  without  a  similar  affection
of  the  auricles.  Most  commonly  the  auricles  are  not  affected,
but  occasionally  they  are  so,  while  the  ventricles  are  sound.  In
some  few  cases  the  auricles  are  alone  affected  with  the  hyper-
trophy.

When  affecting  the  left  ventricle,  I  have  seen  its  walls  more
than  an  inch,  or  even  eighteen  lines  thick  at  the  base,  that
is,  double  or  triple  their  size  in  the  sound  state.  Commonly,
this  morbid  thickening  diminishes  insensibly  from  the  base  to  the
apex  of  the  ventricle,  where  it  is  scarcely  perceptible ;  sometimes,
however,  the  apex  partakes  in  the  enlargement ;  as  I  have  seen  it
from  two  to  four  lines  thick,  which  is  double  or  quadruple  the
natural  size.  The  columnar  carneae  of  the  ventricles  and  the
pillars  of  the  valves,  acquire  a  proportionate  enlargement.  The
septum  between  the  two  ventricles  becomes  also  considerably
thickened  in  the  disease  of  the  left  ventricle,  (which  fact  seems  to
mark  it  as  belonging  to  this  rather  than  the  other  ventricle,)  but
in  general  not  so  much  so  as  the  other  parts.  There  are,  how-
ever, exceptions,  as  we  find,  (and  this  has  been  well  remarked  by
M.  Bertin)  that  the  hypertrophy  is  sometimes  unequal  in  each
part  of  the  ventricles,  or  occupies  only  a  single  point,  as  the  base,
apex  or  middle,  the  septum  or  loose  part,  the  external  surface  or
fleshy  columns.  The  muscular  substance  in  these  cases  is  of  a
decree  of  consistence  sometimes  double  the  natural,  and  is  of


illustrates  their  modus  operandi,  in  a  very  ingenious  manner.  (Op.  Cit.  460,  etseq.)
Burns  appears  to  consider  inflammation  of  the  heart  or  pericardium  as  the  conse-
quence, rather  than  the  cause,  of  the  enlargement  of  the  organ.  (Op.  Cit.  p.  58.)  It
is  more  than  probable,  that  in  some  of  his  cases,  at  least,  he  mistook  the  effect  for
the  cause  ;  although  it  certainly  seems  reasonable  to  believe  that  hypertrophy  of  the
heart  may  give  rise  to  inflammation  of  the  pericardium.

Congenital  disproportion  of  parts  of  the  heart. — This  I  consider  with  our  author  as
the  most  frequent  cause  of  all,  at  least,  in  early  life,  and  as  the  source  of  many  other
diseases,  even  before  it  can  be  said  to  amount  to  formal  disease  of  the  heart.  See  a
valuable  chapter  on  this  subject  in  Testa  (torn.  ii.  cap.  ii.)  to  which  reference  ought
to  have  been  made  by  our  author. — Transl.

*  M.  Bertin,  in  his  Traits'  des  Maladies  du  Coeur  et  des  gros  Vaisseaux,  published  in
1824  has  taken  pains  to  prove  the  separate  existence  of  hypertrophy  and  dilatation
of  the  heart,  and  lias  very  accurately  described  the  different  varieties  of  these  affec-
tions :  and  it  appears  from  a  Report  made  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  that  he  had
communicated  to  this  learned  body  a  memoir  containing  these  distinctions,  so  early  as
1811.  I  never  conceived  myself  to  be  the  first  who  noticed  the  distinction  in  ques-
tion although  I  certainly  was  not  aware  that  M.  Oertiu  had  made  such  extensive
researches  on  the  eubject,  else  I  would  have  cited  them.  The  thing  had  been  noticed
in  particular  cases  by  others  before  the  time  of  M.  Bertin,  for  instance  by  Morgagni,
Corvisart,  Burserius,  and  more  largely  by  Burns  and  Kreysig.— Author.


HYrKRTROPHY  OF THE  HEART.


547


a  redder  colour.  The  cavity  of  the  ventricle  appears  frequently
to  have  lost  in  capacity  what  its  walls  have  gained  in  thickness.
Sometimes  I  have  found  this  so  small,  in  hearts  twice  the  size  of
the  fist  of  the  individual,  as  scarcely  to  be  capable  of  containing
an  almond  in  its  shell.  The  right  ventricle  in  such  cases,  being
proportionally  smaller  as  the  hypertrophy  of  the  other  is  great,
lies  flattened  along  the  septum,  and  does  not  extend  to  the  apex
of  the  heart.  In  extreme  cases,  it  seems  as  if  it  were  merely  in-
cluded within  the  walls  of  the  left  ventricle.

In  hypertrophy  of  the  right  ventricle  the  appearances  are  some-
what different.  The  thickening  is  here  more  uniform,  and  never
so  great  as  in  the  other :  I  have  never  found  this  greater  than
four  or  five  lines;  M.  Bertin,  however,  (Op.  Cit.  Obs.  lxvii.)
found  it  from  eleven  to  sixteen  lines,  in  a  case  where  the  foramen
ovale  was  still  open  ;  and  M.  Louis  has  described  a  similar  case
in  the  Archives  de  Medecine  for  December,  1823.  It  is  always  a
little  greater  in  the  vicinity  of  the  tricuspid  valves,  and  at  the
origin  of  the  pulmonary  artery.  The  columnae  carneae  are  much
enlarged,  considerably  more  so,  in  proportion,  than  those  of  the
left,  in  disease  of  that  side;  and  this  circumstance,  together  with
the  increased  firmness  of  the  texture,  is  what  seems,  at  first  sight,
most  remarkable  in  the  appearance  of  the  parts.*

Signs  of  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ventricle. — It  is  to  this  variety
of  the  disease,  especially,  that  the  symptoms  attributed  by  M.
Corvisart  to  active  aneurism  of  the  heart,  must  be  referred ;  and,
indeed,  in  a  general  point  of  view,  and  speaking  with  a  degree  of
accuracy  which  would  suffice  in  a  book  of  nosology,  like  that  of
Sauvages  or  Cullen,  we  may  state  that,  besides  those  common  to
all  diseases  of  the  heart,t  the  symptoms  of  the  hypertrophy  of  the
left  ventricle  are  the  following : — a  strong  full  pulse,  strong  and
obvious  pulsation  of  the  heart,  perceived  as  well  by  the  patient,
as  by  applying  the  hand,  absence  or  diminution  of  the  sound
afforded  by  percussion  on  the  region  of  the  heart,  and  a  tint  of

*  Bertin's  account  of  hypertrophy,  and,  I  may  add,  of  all  the  other  affections  of  the
heart,  is  excellent.  He  divides  hypertrophy  into  three  species,  according  as  the  na-
tural capacity  of  the  cavity  is  augmented,  diminished,  or  remains  unaltered,  and  terms
them,  respectively,  eccentric,  concentric,  or  simple  hypertrophy.  I  give  the  preference,
however,  with  Dr.  Hope,  to  the  old  nomenclature,  and  regard  the  classification  of
this  gentleman  as  the  hest.  It  will  he  seen  that  he  notices  one  variety  of  the  disease
not  named  hy  Laennec. The  following  is  Dr.  Hope's  arrangement : —

1.  Simple  hypertrophy. — The  walls  thickened,  the  cavity  retaining  its  natural
dimensions.

2.  Hypertrophy  with  dilatation. — The  walls  either  thickened  or  not  diminished,  the
cavity  enlarged.

a.  The  walls  thickened,  the  cavity  dilated*

b.  The  walls  of  natural  thickness,  the  cavity  dilated.

3.  Hypertrophy  with  contraction. — The  walls  thickened,  the  cavity  diminished. —
Transl.

t  Bertin  (Op.  Cit.  p.  359)  very  justly  insists  upon  a  striking  difference  in  the
symptoms  of  simple  hypertrophy,  in  a  moderate  degree,  and  those  of  other  diseases
of  the  heart.  In  this  case  he  truly  states,  that  there  is  often  rather  an  increased
energy  of  the  functions  of  health,  than  any  marked  derangement  of  these. — Transl.

U  N  2


£48


HYPERTROPHY  OF  THE  HEART.


complexion  rather  red  than  purple.  None  of  these  symptoms,
however,  are  constant;  and  it  is  not  uncommon  to  find  the  dis-
ease in  persons  who  have  none  of  them.  The  pulse,  in  particular,
is  very  deceptive,  being  almost  as  frequently  weak  as  strong,
even  in  the  worst  cases.*

Inspection  of  the  chest  does  not  discover  the  pulsation  of  the
heart,  except  in  thin  delicate  subjects,  and  indicates  nothing  more
than  the  agitation  of  the  organ.  I  cannot,  in  this  respect,  agree
with  M.  Bertin,  who  seems  to  attach  some  importance  to  the
visible  degree  of  motion  impressed  upon  the  walls  of  the  chest  by
the  action  of  the  heart.  Percussion  and  manual  examination  are
certainly  preferable  means  of  exploration,  but  even  these  become
inapplicable  in  many  cases,  particularly  in  cases  of  considerable
obesity  or  anasarca.  Mediate  auscultation  furnishes  signs  which
are  much  more  constant  and  positive.  The  contraction  of  the
left  ventricle,  examined  between  the  cartilages  of  the  fifth  and
sixth  ribs,  gives  a  very  strong  impulse,  sufficient  to  elevate  the
observer's  head,  and  is  accompanied  by  a  duller  sound  than
natural ;  it  is  more  prolonged  in  proportion  as  the  thickening  is
more  considerable.  The  contraction  of  the  auricle  is  very  short,
productive  of  little  sound,  and,  consequently,  scarcely  perceptible
in  extreme  cases.  The  sound  of  the  pulsation  of  the  heart  is  con-
fined to  a  small  extent,  being,  in  general,  scarcely  perceptible
under  the  left  clavicle,  or  at  the  top  of  the  sternum  ;  t  sometimes
it  is  confined  to  the  point  between  the  cartilages  of  the  fifth  and
seventh  ribs.  The  impulse  of  the  heart  is  rarely  perceived  be-
yond the  same  limits,  except  during  palpitation.

In  this  disease  the  patient  experiences,  more  constantly  than
in  any  other,  the  sensation  of  the  action  of  the  heart ;  but  he  is
less  subject  to  violent  attacks  of  palpitation,  except  from  acci-
dental causes,  such  as  moral  affections  and  violent  bodily  exertion.
In  this  case,  during  the  palpitations,  irregularity  and  intermission

*  This  view  of  the  state  of  the  pulse  in  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ventricle  is  too  in-
definite. The  following  observations  by  Dr.  Hope  are  deserving  the  attention  of  the
reader.  "  The  pulse  in  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ventricle  undergoes,  from  valvular
and  other  lesions,  a  variety  of  modifications  which  disguise  its  real  nature.  It  must,
therefore,  be  studied  in  cases  totally  exempt  from  complication.  In  such  it  is  almost
invariably  regular  and  bears  strict  relation,  in  strength  and  size,  to  the  thickness  and
capacity  of  the  left  ventricle.  Thus,  in  simple  hypertrophy,  it  is  stronger,  fuller,  and
more  tense  than  natural;  it  swells  gradually  and  powerfully,  expands  largely,  dwells
long  under  the  finger,  and  is  sometimes  accompanied  with  a  thrill  or  vibration.
These  characters  are  still  more  marked  in  hypertrophy  with  dilatation,  so  long  as  the
hypertrophy  is  predominant ;  but  when  the  dilatation  has  proceeded  so  far  as  to
diminish  the  contractile  power  of  the  muscular  fibres,  the  pulse,  though  still  full  and
sustained,  is  soft  and  compressible.  In  hypertrophy  with  contraction  of  the  cavity,  it  is
strono-,  hard  and  tense,  but  small  and  cord-like,  expanding  little  under  the  finger."
(Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  ii.  Art.  Hypertrophy.) — Traml.

t  The  pulsations  of  the  heart  heard  in  these,  and  in  points  still  more  remote,  such
as  the  fore-part  of  the  right  side,  the  right  axillary  aspect,  or  the  back, — are  almost
alwavs  owing  to  the  united  sounds  of  both  sides  of  the  heart :  sometimes,  however,
we  hear  the  sound  of  one  side  only,  even  in  the  most  distant  points,— a  fact  which
becomes  quite  evident  when  the  sounds  of  the  two  sides  are  very  dissimilar. — Author.


SIGNS.


549


of  the  pulse  are  uncommon  :  there  is  rather  increase  of  the  power
of  the  ventricles  than  of  the  noise  produced  by  their  action.
Sometimes,  however,  I  have  thought  that  certain  habitual  irre-
gularities of  the  pulse  and  heart,  in  subjects  who,  in  other  re-
spects, had  only  slight  marks  of  hypertrophy,  were  owing  to  the
partial  thickenings  already  mentioned,  and  which  have  received
particular  attention  from  M.  Bertin.  Simple  hypertrophy  of
the  left  ventricle  is,  of  all  the  affections  of  the  heart,  that  which
most  frequently  gives  occasion  to  apoplexy.  In  M.  Benin's
work,  several  remarkable  instances  of  this  result  are  recorded
(Obs.  lxxiv.— lxxx.)  ;  and  the  attention  of  practitioners  has  been
more  particularly  called  to  it  by  MM.  Legallois  and  Richerand.
Corvisart  considered  this  result  as  rarer  than  it  really  is.#

Signs  of  hypertrophy  of  the  right  ventricle. — In  this  case,  ac-
cording to  M.  Corvisart,  the  symptoms  are  the  same  as  when  the
disease  is  on  the  other  side,  only  that  the  respiration  is  more
oppressed,  and  the  colour  of  the  face  is  deeper.f  He  adds  that,
"  the  pulsations  of  the  heart,  which  are  most  evident  on  the  right
side,  may  also  be  considered  as  signs  of  the  dilatation  of  the  right
ventricle ;  but  ....  this  sign,  taken  by  itself,  is  of  little  value.11
(Op.  Cit.  p.  149.) He  might  have  added,  that  we  cannot,  by

*  For  some  ingenious  arguments  against  the  doctrine,  of  apoplexy  being  a  conse-
quence of  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ventricle,  I  refer  the  reader  to  a  very  valuable  and
interesting  paper  by  Dr.  Kellie  in  vol.  i.  of  the  Edin.  Med.  Chir.  Trans,  p.  123.  No
argument,  however,  can  rebut  the  evidence  of  such  facts  as  have  been  adduced  in
support  of  the  doctrine  by  Bertin  and  many  others.  I  have  myself  seen  a  good  many
instances  of  the  kind.  See  "  Original  Cases"  III.  and  VII. — The  following  remarks
of  Dr.  Hope  are  in  accordance  with  my  own  observation.  "  The  patient  complains
of  a  rushing  of  blood  to  the  head  on  making  any  corporeal  effort  or  stooping  ;  of  intense
throbbing  and  lancinating  head-aches,  aggravated  by  the  recumbent  position,  and
especially  by  the  act  either  of  suddenly  lying  down  or  rising  up  ;  he  complains  also
of  vertigo,  tinnitus  aurium,  scintillations  and  other  visual  illusions;  and  sometimes
of  a  lethargic  somnolency  which  so  completely  subdues  the  faculties  both  of  the  mind
and  the  body,  as  utterly  to  incapacitate  him  for  every  species  of  exertion.  These
symptoms,  if  not  relieved,  terminate  in  palsy  or  apoplexy.  From  this  catastrophe
the  patient  is  often  preserved  by  epistaxis  to  which,  happily,  he  is  peculiarly  liable."
(Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  Ibid.') — Travsl.

t  The  following  remarks  of  Dr.  Hope  respecting  the  state  of  the  complexion  in
hypertrophy  are  ingenious,  and  on  the  whole  accord  with  my  own  observation.
"  The  effect  of  hypertrophy  is  to  heighten  the  colour  so  long  as  the  capillary  circu-
lation continues  unembarrassed,  but  afterwards  to  diminish  and  change  it.  Every
individual,  however,  does  not  acquire  a  florid  colour.  Whether  he  acquire  it  or  not,
depends,  in  truth,  upon  the  original  complexion,  the  series  of  changes  being  different
in  those  who  are  naturally  florid  and  those  who  are  pale.  In  the  former,  the  colour
becomes  remarkably  vivid,  and  being  generally  accompanied  with  plethoric  tumes-
cence, it  gives  the  aspect  of  health  and  good  condition.  But  when  the  capillary
circulation  begins  to  labour,  the  red  changes  into  a  purplish  patch  on  the  cheeks,  the
nose  and  lips  become  more  or  less  purple,  violet,  or  livid,  and  the  intermediate  skin'
becomes  sallow  and  cachetic. In  great  hypertrophy  with  dilatation,  the  purple  and

violet  colours  are  sometimes  of  the  deepest  dye In  those  who  are  naturally

devoid  of  colour,  hypertrophy  either  does  not  excite  it  at  all,  or  merely  increases,  in
a  slight  degree,  the  general  vascularity  of  the  face.  This  vanishes  entirely  when  the
capillaries  become  obstructed,  and  is  superseded  by  universal  cadaverous  paleness,
extending  sometimes  even  to  the  lips.  They,  however,  are  generally  somewhat
livid." (Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  Ibid.)—Transl.


550


HYPE  It  T  It  0  P  IT  Y  OF  THE  HEART.


means  of  the  hand,  perceive  the  action  of  the  heart  on  the  right
side,  except  in  cases  where  this  organ  is  displaced  by  an  effusion
or  tumour  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest.  Lancisi  has  mentioned
the  swelling  of  the  external  jugular  veins,  with  a  pulsation  ana-
logous to  that  of  an  artery,  as  a  sign  of  the  aneurism  of  the  right
ventricle.  M.  Corvisart  has  rejected  this  symptom,  because  he
says,  "  it  has  been  found  in  cases  where  the  left  side  of  the  heart
was  dilated,  and  because  the  pulsation  may  be  confounded  with
that  of  the  carotids."  In  this  opinion  I  differ  from  M.  Corvisart.
I  have  uniformly  found  this  symptom  in  every  case  of  this  kind,
of  any  degree  of  severity ;  and  I  have  never  met  with  it  in  hy-
pertrophy of  the  left  ventricle,  unless  there  existed,  at  the  same
time,  a  similar  affection  of  the  right.  One  must  be  very  inat-
tentive, or  have  never  witnessed  these  pulsations  of  the  jugulars,
to  confound  them  with  movements  occasioned  by  the  pulsation  of
the  carotids.  It  is  likewise  worthy  of  notice,  that  this  pulsation
of  the  jugulars  is  commonly  confined  to  their  inferior  portion,
where  the  vein  and  artery  lie  much  further  asunder  than  in  the
middle  of  the  throat.  Sometimes,  however,  this  reflux  of  the
blood  extends  wider,  and  even  beyond  the  jugulars.  Hunauld
has  seen  it  very  perceptible  in  the  superficial  veins  of  the  arm.*
I  myself  saw  a  similar  case  last  year ;  and  in  a  large  vein  of  the
size  of  a  goose-quill,  which  joined  the  jugular,  I  also  observed
very  distinctly  a  pulsation  isochronous  with  the  pulse.  I  would,
therefore,  be  disposed  to  regard  this  symptom  as  one  which  ought
to  lead  us  to  suspect  the  existence  of  the  thickening  of  the  right
ventricle.-f*

The  contractions  of  the  heart,  as  explored  by  the  stethoscope,
give  the  same  results  precisely,  whether  the  hypertrophy  be  on
the  right  or  left  side ;  only,  in  the  former  case,  the  shock  of  the
heart's  action  is  greater  at  the  bottom  of  the  sternum  than  be-
tween the  cartilages  of  the  fifth  and  seventh  ribs,  which  is  the
reverse  of  what  happens  when  the  disease  is  in  the  left  side  of
the  organ.  In  most  men,  in  health,  the  heart  is  heard  equally
in  both  these  places. In  those  who  have  no  mark  of  diseased

*  Mem.  de  l'Acad.  des  Sc.

t  Bertin  (p.  364.)  says  this  state  of  the  jugulars  is  not  observed  except  in  the  case
where  the  ventricle  is  dilated  as  well  as  hypertropbied,  and  when  the  auriculo-ven-
tricular  orifice  is  unusually  large.  Testa  (t.  iii.  p.  S21)  disbelieves  the  frequency
of  this  sign  ;  but  Dr.  Hope  regards  it  as  one  of  the  best  general  signs  of  hypertrophy
of  the  right  ventricle,  more  especially  when  accompanied  with  dilatation.  The  fol-
lowing remarks  by  Dr.  Hope,  on  the  differences  between  this  condition  of  the  jugu-
lars and  pulsation  of  the  carotids  are  worthy  of  notice.  "  The  jugular  pulsation  is
double — a  weaker  pulsation,  occasioned  by  the  auricular  systole,  preceding  that  occa-
sioned by  the  ventricular  systole. .  . .  The  jugular  pulsation  is  confined  to  the  lower
part  of  the  neck,  and  is  far  in  the  humeral  side  of  the  carotid.  The  pulsations  of  the
artery,  on  the  contrary,  extend  as  high  as  the  angle  of  the  jaw,  and  in  the  direction
of  the  anterior  margin  of  the  mastoid  muscle.  The  jugular  turgescence,  again,  dis-
appears, in  some  degree,  during  inspiration,  and  re-appears  in  expiration,  which
movements,  therefore,  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  pulsations  answering  to  the
systole  of  the  ventricle"  ( Ibid.) — Transl.


DILATATION OF  THE  HEART.


551


heart,  however,  we  sometimes  hear  the  sounds  better  under  the
sternum  than  the  cartilages;  and  I  am  disposed  to  consider  this
as  constantly  indicating  a  marked  predisposition  to  hypertrophy
or  dilatation  of  the  right  ventricle.

I  consider  this  sign  drawn  from  the  place  where  the  heart  is
heard  and  felt  beating  with  the  most  force,  as  altogether  certain.
I  have  proved  its  truth  so  often  by  dissection,  that  I  look  upon
it  as  infallible  when  well-marked.  A  very  interesting  case  will
be  detailed  under  the  head  of  ossification  of  the  valves,  which,
although  devoid  of  the  absolute  certainty  supplied  by  dissection,
will,  I  conceive,  afford  incontestible  proofs  of  this  fact.  Never-
theless, there  is  still  one  exception  to  this  rule.  When  the  left
ventricle  has  acquired  an  enormous  size  from  hypertrophy  and
dilatation,  and  the  right  still  remains  small,  the  former  becomes
quite  anterior  and  the  last  posterior :  in  this  case,  the  pulsations
of  the  left,  ventricle  are  perceived  much  better  under  the  sternum,
than  in  the  left  precordial  region,  while  those  of  the  right  are
not  perceived  at  all.  We  may,  however,  ascertain  the  truth  in
this  case,  by  observing  that  there  is  no  reflux  of  blood  in  the
veins.  Simple  hypertrophy  without  dilatation  is  much  more  rare
in  the  right  than  in  the  left  ventricle.*

In  Hypertrophy  of  both  ventricles  at  the  same  time,  the  en-
largement extends  on  both  sides  to  the  apex  of  the  heart,  and  the
anatomical  characters  already  mentioned  co-exist.  The  signs  of
this  affection  consist  in  the  re-union  of  those  that  belong  to  hy-
pertrophy of  each  side;  only  those  of  the  right  side  are  almost
always  more  marked.


CHAPTER  III.

OF  DILATATION  OF THE  VENTRICLES.

Anatomical  characters. — This  disease  of  the  heart,  which  has
been  named  passive  aneurism  by  M.  Corvisart,  consists  in  dila-
tation of  the  cavities  of  the  ventricles,  with  decreased  thickness
of  their  walls.  With  these  conditions  there  are  commonly  con-
joined a  marked  degree  of  softening  of  the  muscular  substance,
and  a  colour  more  purple  or  paler  than  natural.  Sometimes  the
softness  is  so  considerable,  especially  in  the  left  ventricle,  that

*  Hypertrophy  of  the  right  ventricle  appears  to  exert  the  same  influence  over  the
lungs  as  the  left  does  over  the  brain,  predisposing  to  pulmonary  apoplexy  and  hae-
moptysis. Bertin  and  Bouillaud  notice  several  cases  of  this  sort,  and  wish  to  sepa-
rate these  active  arterial  haemorrhages  from  the  venous  hemorrhages,  pulmonary  or
others,  so  common  in  the  latter  stage  of  all  diseases  of  the  heart.  But  I  am  of  opinion
that  there  is  more  theory  than  actual  observation  in  these  distinctions. — (ilf.L.)


DILATATION OK  THE  HEART.


the  muscular  substance  can  be  destroyed  by  mere  pressure  be-
tween the  fingers ;  and  the  walls  of  the  same  ventricle  may  be  so
much  diminished  in  thickness,  as  to  be  only  two  lines  in  the
thickest  point,  and  scarcely  half  a  line  at  the  apex,  while  the
right  ventricle  is  sometimes  so  completely  extenuated,  as  to  ap-
pear merely  composed  of  a  little  fat  and  its  investing  membrane.
The  columnas  carnese,  particularly  of  the  left  ventricle,  are  more
apart  than  in  the  natural  condition  of  the  parts.  The  septum
between  the  ventricles  loses  less  of  its  thickness  and  of  its  con-
sistence than  the  rest  of  the  parietes.

Dilatation  may  be  confined  to  one  ventricle,  although  it  more
commonly  affects  both  at  the  same  time ;  and  this  is  the  more
remarkable  as  being  the  reverse  of  what  takes  place  in  hyper-
trophy of  the  same  parts.  When  one  only  is  affected,  the  apex
of  it  extends  below  the  other,  but  not  in  so  remarkable  a  degree
as  in  the  case  of  hypertrophy.  The  augmentation  of  the  cavity
seems  to  be  more  in  its  breadth  than  length.  This  is  particularly
observable  when  both  the  ventricles  are  dilated  at  the  same  time  ;
as,  in  this  case,  the  heart  assumes  a  rounded  shape,  being  nearly
as  wide  at  the  apex  as  at  the  base.

Burns  is  of  opinion  that  dilatation  may  be  carried  so  far  as  to
occasion  rupture  of  the  cavities.  This  seems  possible;  and  the
more  so  from  the  almost  constant  co-existence  of  softening  of  the
parts ;  but  I  know  of  no  example  of  the  kind.  We  must  not
confound  with  dilatation,  the  distension  of  the  cavities,  depending
on  their  infarction  with  blood,  during  the  last  moments  of  life.
But  it  is  sufficient  to  know  the  circumstance,  to  prevent  such  a
mistake.  Many  hearts  which  seem  voluminous  upon  cutting  into
the  pericardium,  lose  this  appearance  when  the  cavities  are  laid
open.

M.  Bertin  is  of  opinion  that  dilatation  of  the  heart  is  always
occasioned  by  some  obstacle  to  the  course  of  the  blood,  such  as
ossification  of  the  valves,  congenital  narrowness  of  the  aorta  and
pulmonary  artery,  the  influence  of  certain  employments  which
induce  laborious  efforts,  and  diseases  of  the  lungs.  The  effects
of  these  causes  must  be  admitted;  but  I  am  of  opinion  that  the
most  powerful  cause  of  all  is  the  congenital  disproportion  of  the
parts  of  the  heart.  Dilatation  is  most  common  in  women,  who,
generally  speaking,  have  the  walls  of  the  ventricles  thinner  than
those  of  men.#

*  The  following  remarks  by  Dr.  Hope  on  the  causes  of  dilatation,  and  particularly
with  reference  to  hypertrophy,  are  deserving  of  notice.  "  The  exciting  causes  of
dilatation  are,  1st,  deficient  power  of  the  heart,  whether  congenital  or  acquired,  in
proportion  to  the  system ;  2nd,  in  general  terms,  all  obstructions  to  the  circulation,
whether  situated  in  the  orifices  of  the  heart  or  in  the  aortic  or  pulmonary  system.
The  latter  class  of  causes  are,  in  fact,  essentially  the  same  as  the  exciting  causes  of
hypertrophy;  for  it  depends  on  the  proportion  which  the  resistance  of  the  muscle
hears  to  the  distending  force,  whether  the  one  affection  or  the  other  is  produced.
When,  therefore,  dilatation  occurs  in  one  of  the  cavities  with  naturally  thick  walls,
in  which  we  should  more  properly  expect  hypertrophy,  it  must  be  ascrihed  either  to


SIGNS AND  SYMPTOMS.


553


Sig?is  of  the  dilatation  of  the  left  ventricle. — The  symptoms
of  this  affection,  according  to  Corvisart,  are — "  a  soft  and  weak
pulse,  and  feeble  and  indistinct  palpitations  : — the  hand  applied
to  the  region  of  the  heart  feels  as  if  a  soft  body  elevated  the  ribs,
and  did  not  strike  these  with  a  sharp  and  distinct  stroke.  It  ap-
pears as  if  we  could  diminish  the  palpitation  by  strong  pressure.'"
(Op.  Cit.  p.  147.)  I  formerly  stated  my  opinion  respecting  the
pulse  as  a  sign  of  disease  of  the  heart ;  and  in  respect  to  the  in-
formation to  be  obtained  by  the  application  of  the  hand,  I  must
say  that  in  most  cases  I  have  not  found  the  action  of  the  heart  at
all  perceptible  in  this  way.  In  like  manner  I  have  frequently
found  the  sound  on  percussion  pretty  good  in  cases  of  consider-
able dilatation.  The  only  certain  sign  of  the  existence  of  this
disease  is  that  given  by  the  stethoscope,  viz.  the  clear  and  sono-
rous contractions  of  the  heart  between  the  cartilages  of  the  fifth
and  seventh  ribs.  The  degree  of  distinctness  of  the  sound,  and
its  extent  over  the  chest,  are  the  measure  of  the  dilatation  :  thus,
— when  the  sound  of  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles  is  as  clear
as  that  of  the  contraction  of  the  auricle,  and  if  it  is,  at  the  same
time,  perceptible  on  the  right  side  of  the  back,  the  dilatation  is
extreme.

Signs  of  the  dilatation  of  the  right  ventricle. — According  to
M.  Corvisart  the  state  of  the  pulse,  and  the  pulsation  of  the
heart,  are  very  nearly  the  same  as  in  dilatation  of  the  left  ven-
tricle, only  that  the  action  of  the  heart  is  heard  somewhat  better
towards  the  bottom  of  the  sternum  and  epigastrium,  than  in  the

a  congenital  disproportion  of  the  heart,  in  consequence  of  which  the  cavity  in  ques-
tion is  thinner  and  therefore  more  disposed  to  dilatation  than  natural;  or  it  must  be
attributed  to  the  obstruction,  from  its  nature  or  situation,  hearing  more  in  proportion
on  that  particular  cavity  than  on  any  other.  It  is  from  having  overlooked  these  con-
siderations respecting  the  relations  of  the  resisting  and  distending  forces  to  each
other,  that  some  have  excluded  dilatation  from  the  catalogue  of  mechanical  diseases,
and  supposed  that  it  takes  its  rise  in  any  cavity  of  the  heart  either  by  chance  or  by
some  vital  predilection — some  vague,  unintelligible  predisposition."  (Cyc.  of  Pract.
Med.  Art.  Dilatation,  vol.  i.)

M.  Bertin  divides  dilatation  as  well  as  hypertrophy  into  three  species — viz.  ac-
cording as  the  walls  of  the  dilated  cavity  are  thicker  or  thinner  than  natural,  or  still
retain  their  natural  thickness.  The  first  of  these  is  that  noticed  by  him  under  the
former  head,  and  termed  excentric  hypertrophy.  He  says  a  fourth  variety  may  be
added,  namely,  where  the  walls  of  the  affected  cavity  are  thickened  in  some  parts,
extenuated  in  some,  and  of  the  natural  thickness  in  others.  This  author  admits  that
the  muscular  substance  may  be  softened  and  discoloured  in  dilatation,  hut  he  con-
siders these  states  as  mere  complications,  and  not  essential  to  constitute  the  disease.
Of  the  two  classes  of  enlargement  of  the  heart,  he  wishes  the  first  to  be  exclusively
distinguished  by  an  increased  thickness  of  the  walls,  and  the  second  by  an  increased
capacity  of  the  cavities.  One  of  the  species  of  dilatation,  that,  namely,  in  which  the
walls  of  the  enlarged  cavity  retain  their  natural  thickness,  is  supposed  by  M.  Bertin,
not  to  have  been  formerly  noticed  before  the  publication  of  his  work,  in  this  he  is
mistaken,  however,  as  it  was  noticed  both  by  Burns  and  Kreysig.  M.  Bertin  terms
it  simple  dilatation  ;  and  states  it  to  be  of  almost  as  frequent  occurrence  as  the  excen-
tric hypertrophy,  or  hypertrophy  with  dilatation.  It  is  well  observed  by  this  author,
that  the  orifices  of  the  heart  frequently  partake  in  the  dilatation  of  the  cavities,  inso-
much that  the  valves  become  insufficient  to  close  them. — Transl.


554


DILATATION  OF  THE  HEART.


region  of  the  heart.  He  attaches,  hpwever,  but  little  importance
to  this  sign,  as  well  as  to  that  first  noticed  by  Lancisi, — the
swollen  state  of  the  jugulars.  More  certain  symptoms  he  con-
siders to  be — a  greater  degree  of  oppression,  more  marked  serous
diathesis,  more  frequent  haemoptysis,  and  a  more  livid  state  of
the  countenance, — than  in  the  affection  of  the  left  ventricle.
This  detail  of  symptoms  is  generally  accurate;  but  I  must  differ
from  my  celebrated  master  respecting  the  importance  of  two  of
them,  I  mean  the  state  of  the  jugulars,  and  the  extent  of  space
in  the  cardiac  region,  whence  percussion  elicits  a  dull  sound.  An
habitually  swelled  state  of  these  veins  without  sensible  pulsation,
has  appeared  to  me  the  most  constant  and  characteristic  of  the
equivocal  signs  of  this  affection.  This  condition  of  the  jugulars
is  not  removed  by  compression  of  the  veins  at  the  upper  part  of
the  neck.  In  respect  of  the  signs  furnished  by  percussion,  I  have
frequently  found  the  right  cavities  very  much  dilated  in  subjects
whose  chests  sounded  very  well  in  the  cardiac  region  and  under
the  sternum  ;  and,  generally  speaking,  it  has  appeared  to  me
that  the  disease  which  most  frequently  gives  occasion  to  this  want
of  sound,  is  not  that  now  under  consideration,  but  hypertrophy
with  dilatation.  Corvisart's  observation  respecting  the  greater
degree  of  lividity  of  the  face  in  dilatation  of  the  heart,  is,  in  like
manner,  perhaps,  not  quite  correct.  It  is,  no  doubt  true,  as  he
observes,  that  this  colour  is  deeper  in  dilatation  of  the  right
than  of  the  left  cavities,  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  colour
of  the  extremities  :  nevertheless,  I  have  frequently  seen  the  coun-
tenance very  pale  and  of  a  dirty  yellow,  and  the  lips  even  devoid
of  the  natural  degree  of  colour,  in  dilatation  of  the  heart;  while,
on  the  other  hand,  hypertrophy  with  dilatation  of  the  right  side,
has  appeared  to  me  to  be  the  affection  most  frequently  attended
with  intense  lividity  of  the  face  and  extremities,  great  oppression,
frequent  or  severe  haemoptysis,  and  extensive  anasarca.*

The  only  constant  and  truly  pathognomonic  sign  of  dilatation
of  the  right  ventricle,  is  the  loud  sound  of  the  heart  perceived
under  the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,  and  between  the  cartilages
of  the  fifth  and  seventh  ribs  of  the  right  side.  The  degree  of
dilatation  is  measured  by  the  extent  of  the  sound  of  the  heart
over  the  chest,  and  according  to  the  scale  of  progression  formerly
mentioned.-f- The  palpitations  which  accompany  this  affection

*  With  the  more  important  general  signs  or  effects  of  dilatation  of  the  heart,  viz.
serous  infiltration,  discolouration  of  the  face,  congestion  of  the  brain,  injection  of  the
mucous  membranes  and  passive  haemorrhage,  Dr.  Hope  has,  in  his  treatise,  very  pro-
perly noticed  congestion  and  enlargement  of  the  liver.  This,  he  trVily  says,  is  so
common  a  consequence  of  retardation  of  the  circulation  on  the  right  side  of  the  heart,
that  few  persons  so  affected  in  any  considerable  degree,  are  exempt  from  it.  By
the  obstruction  which  it  occasions  in  the  system  of  the  vena  porta  it  leads  to  ascites.

—Traml.  .  *  j

t  I  have  mat  with  some  cases  in  which  the  heart,  though  much  dilated,  yielded
only  an  impulse  without  sound  or  with  a  very  dull  sound,  for  some  days  before  death.
In  these  cases,  hypertrophy  was  combined  with  the  dilatation,  and  the  enlarged  heart


DILATATION  WITH  HYPERTROPHY.


555


consist,  principally,  in  an  increase  of  the  frequency  and  sound
of  the  contractions,  while,  at  the  time,  the  impulse  of  the  heart's
action  is  frequently  feebler  than  in  the  ordinary  state  of  the  pa-
tient. Irregularity  of  the  action  of  the  heart  as  to  force  and  fre-
quency, and  the  intermission  of  pulse  attending  these,  are  un-
usual, although  more  common  than  in  hypertrophy.*


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  DILATATION WITH  HYPERTROPHY  OF THE  VENTRICLES.

The  re-union  of  these  two  states,  which  constitutes  the  active
aneurism  of  M.  Corvisart,  is  extremely  common ;  much  more
common  than  simple  dilatation,  and  still  more  so  than  hyper-
trophy without  dilatation.  This  complication  may  exist  in  one
or  both  ventricles.  In  the  latter  case,  the  heart  acquires  a  pro-
digious size,  sometimes  more  than  triple  that  of  the  hand  of  the
individual.  The  augmentation  of  volume  is  here  the  effect  of
thickening  of  the  walls  of  the  ventricles  and  proportional  en-
largement of  their  cavities.  Their  muscular  substance  also  usu-
ally acquires  a  greater  degree  of  solidity.  The  apex  of  the
heart  becomes  blunter,  but  this  is  rarely  so  great  as  to  give  to
the  organ _xthe  rounded  form  noticed  in  the  case  of  simple  dilata-
tion. In  a  middling  degree  of  the  affection,  the  ventricles  are
dilated,  and  their  walls  seem  only  not  to  be  thinner  than  natural,
or  there  is  evident  hypertrophy  of  the  walls  without  diminution
of  the  cavities.  In  some  rare  examples,  different  portions  of  the
parietes  of  the  same  ventricle,  exhibit  the  character  of  hyper-
seemed  confined  within  the  mediastinal  cavity.  The  sound  was  further  obscured  from
the  co-existence  of  softening  of  the  heart,  and  diseases  of  the  lungs. — Author.

*  Bertin  makes  an  important  observation  respecting  the  symptoms  attending  dilata-
tion of  the  heart,  and  which  should  always  be  kept  in  view.  As  this  affection  usually,
if  not  always,  results  from  some  obstruction  to  the  course  of  the  blood,  many  of  the
symptoms  attending  the  disease  are  the  consequence  of  the  primary  obstruction  ra-
ther than  of  the  dilatation. — My  own  observation  leads  me  to  agree  with  M.  Laen-
nec  in  regarding  the  swollen  state  of  the  jugulars  without  pulsation,  as  a  very  fre-
quent sign  in  dilatation  of  the  right  ventricle  ;  and  in  this  opinion  I  am  joined  by
I)r.  Hope  (Loc.  Cit.  p.  602.) — Among  many  other  equivocal  symptoms  of  dilata-
tion, I  think  that  of  pain  or  rather  a  feeling  of  distress  in  the  region  of  the  heart,
and  pain  extending  sometimes  to  the  top  of  the  sternum,  between  the  shoulders,  or
left  arm,  deserve  notice.  These  symptoms,  when  they  recur  in  paroxysms,  con-
stitute a  variety  of  angina  pectoris.  Among  the  many  disorders  of  structure  and  func-
tion occasioned  by  dilatation  of  the  heart,  even  when  existing  only  in  so  slight  a  degree
as  not  materially  to  interfere  with  the  business  of  life,  my  attention  has  been  parti-
cularly called  to  head-ache  ;  a  disease  which  I  think  I  can  trace  in  a  great  number  of
cases  to  this  condition  of  the  heart,  as  its  exciting  cause.  In  instances  of  this  kind,
the  impulse  of  the  organ  is  feeble,  but  its  sound  is  loud  and  audible  over  the  greater
part  of  the  chest.  This  observation,  if  found  generally  correct,  is  of  great  practical
importance. The  rationale  of  the  case  is  sufficiently  obvious. — Transh


556


DILATATION WITH  HYPERTROPHY


trophy,  and  others  that  of  dilatation,  as  has  been  truly  observed
by  M.  Bertin.

Signs. — The  signs  of  this  affection  are  a  compound  of  those  of
hypertrophy  and  dilatation.  The  contractions  of  the  ventricles
yield,  at  the  same  time,  a  strong  impulse  and  a  very  marked
sound.  Those  of  the  auricles  are  also  sonorous.  The  sound  of
the  heart's  action  is  heard  over  a  great  extent ;  and  sometimes,
particularly  in  thin  subjects  and  children,  even  the  shock  is  per-
ceptible below  the  clavicles,  on  the  sides,  and  even  a  little  on  the
left  side  of  the  back.  In  the  case  of  a  woman,  who  laboured
under  this  affection,  I  heard  and  felt  the  contraction  of  the  ven-
tricles at  the  lower  part  of  the  right  back ;  and  although  this
patient  was  of  a  small  stature  and  middling  strength,  the  impulse
and  sound,  in  the  places  mentioned,  were  greater  than  in  the  re-
gion of  the  heart  in  the  case  of  a  strong  man  in  perfect  health.*

In  this  affection,  the  contractions  of  the  ventricles  are  very
easily  perceived  by  the  hand ;  which  (particularly  during  palpi-
tation) is  moreover  forcibly  raised  by  the  sharp,  definite,  and
violent  pulsations.  Even  in  the  absence  of  palpitation,  if  we  at-
tentively observe  the  patient,  we  frequently  perceive  the  head,
limbs,  and  even  the  bed-clothes,  strongly  shaken  at  each  contrac-
tion of  the  heart.  The  pulsations  of  the  carotid,  radial,  and
other  superficial  arteries  are  frequently  visible.  If  we  press  on
the  region  of  the  heart,  this  organ,  according  to  the  expression  of
Corvisart,  "  seems  to  be  irritated  by  the  pressure  and  beats
more  forcibly  still."  To  these  energetic  contractions  of  the
heart,  according  to  this  author,  corresponds  (when  the  disease
affects  the  left  ventricle)  a  pulse  which  is  frequent,  strong,  hard,
vibrating,  and  difficultly  compressed.  This  state  of  pulse  is,  no
doubt,  frequently  met  with  in  hypertrophy  with  dilatation,  as
well  as  in  simple  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ventricle  :  I  cannot,
however,  consider  it  with  Corvisart,  as  a  sign  of  the  active  aneu-
rism of  the  left  ventricle,  inasmuch  as  we  very  frequently  observe
a  small  and  feeble,  although  regular  pulse,  in  subjects  whose  hearts
are  much  enlarged  and  habitually  violent  in  their  action.

The  palpitations  which  take  place  in  this  affection,  present
under  the  stethoscope  the  same  characters  as  the  habitual  con-
tractions in  the  same  case,  only  in  a  more  intense  degree :  they
are  seldom  attended  with  irregularities,  except  on  the  approach
of  death.  Sometimes,  during  these  palpitations,  besides  the
impulse  of  the  heart,  which  seems  communicated  by  a  large  sur-

*  A  singular  ense  of  pulsation  in  the  right  hypochondre,  in  n  case  of  diseased
heart,  is  recorded  by  Mr.  Ward,  in  the  Med.  and  Phys.  Jonrn.  No.  291  ;  in  which
the  pulsation  was  owing  to  the  right  lobe  of  the  liver,  enormously  enlarged,  extend-
ing into  the  chest,  and  coming  in  contact  with  the  heart.  Many  of  the  cases  of
pulsation  felt  very  remote  from  the  heart,  may  be  explained  by  the  intervention  of  a
conducting  medium  superior  to  that  which  naturally  exists  in  these  situations;  al-
though this  result  arises  also  from  many  other  causes.  See  "  Original  Cases,  p.  137
—lbO.-Traml.


OF  THE  VENTRICLES.


557


tare,  we  can  distinguish  another  which  is  sharper,  clearer,  and
shorter,  although  occurring  at  the  same  time,  and  which  seems
to  strike  the  walls  of  the  chest  with  a  much  smaller  surface.  This
blow  seems  evidently  occasioned  by  the  apex  of  the  heart.

The  examination  of  the  actions  of  the  heart  first  on  the  one
side  then  on  the  other, — that  is,  under  the  lower  part  of  the  ster-
num and  between  the  cartilages  of  the  fifth  and  seventh  ribs  of
the  left  side,  enables  us  to  ascertain  precisely  which  of  the  ven-
tricles is  affected,  if  there  is  only  one  ;  or  if  they  both  are  so,
which  is  more  commonly  the  case.  Dilatation  with  hypertrophy,
being  of  all  the  affections  of  the  heart,  that  in  which  this  organ
attains  the  largest  size,  it  is  in  this,  accordingly,  in  which  the
absence  of  the  natural  sound  on  percussion  of  the  cardiac  region,
is  observed  most  frequently  and  most  extensively.


CHAPTER  V.

OF DILATATION  OF  ONE  OF  THE  VENTRICLES  WITH
HYPERTROPHY  OF  THE  OTHER.

This  species  of  complication  is  by  no  means  very  rare,  although
it  is  more  so  than  the  preceding.  Its  signs  are  likewise  a  mix-
ture of  those  of  hypertrophy  and  dilatation,  with  predominance
of  the  one  or  other,  according  to  whichever  exists  in  the  greatest
degree.  The  comparative  exploration  of  the  two  sides  of  the
heart  is  a  certain  means  of  ascertaining  every  complication  of
this  kind  that  can  take  place.  I  have  frequently  met  with  the
following  varieties  :  1.  hypertrophy  with  dilatation  of  the  left
ventricle,  and  simple  dilatation  of  the  right ;  2.  hypertrophy
with  dilatation  of  the  left  ventricle,  and  simple  hypertrophy  of
the  right;  3.  hypertrophy  with  dilatation  of  the  right,  and  simple
dilatation  of  the  left ;  4.  simple  hypertrophy  of  the  right,  with
dilatation  of  the  left :  this  last  is  the  rarest.  I  do  not  remember
to  have  met  with  dilatation  of  the  right  ventricle  coinciding  with
simple  hypertrophy  (to  a  considerable  degree)  of  the  left;  and
I  am  even  inclined  to  consider  this  complication  as  almost  impos-
sible, inasmuch  as,  in  the  case  of  great  hypertrophy  of  the  left
ventricle,  the  right  seems,  as  formerly  observed,  as  if  hollowed
out  of  the  walls  of  the  other.*

*  The  following  synopsis  extracted  from  Dr.  Hope's  work  exhibits  the  various
forms  and  combinations  of  hypertrophy  and  dilatation  of  the  ventricles,  and  in  the
order  of  frequency  of  their  occurrence  : — 1.  Hypertrophy  with  dilatation  of  the  left
ventricle,  and  a  less  degree  of  the  same  on  the  right ;  2.  hypertrophy  with  dilatation
of  one  ventricle,  especially  the  left,  with  simple  dilatation  of  the  other  ;  3.  simple
dilatation  of  both  ventricles ;  4.  simple  hypertrophy  of  the  left,  and  hypertrophy


558


DILATATION  WITH  HYPERTROPHY


Notwithstanding  what  has  been  above  stated  of  the  certainty
of  the  evidence  supplied  by  mediate  auscultation  in  diseases  of
the  heart,  it  must  be  admitted  that  it  will  always  be  those  dis-
eases respecting  which  we  shall  be  most  liable  to  commit  grievous
errors  in  diagnosis  ; — more  especially  if  we  restrict  our  explora-
tion to  a  few  minutes,  and  fail  to  take  into  account  the  general
symptoms  and  diseases  that  may  complicate  those  of  the  heart.
For  example,  trusting  to  the  stethoscope  alone,  if  applied  during
a  moment  of  nervous  excitement,  we  might  be  led  to  conceive  the
existence  of  dilatation  or  hypertrophy,  when  the  heart  was  per-
fectly sound ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  we  might,  under  certain
circumstances,  fail  to  discover  actual  disease  of  the  organ,  al-
though existing  in  a  very  high  degree.  I  formerly  took  some
notice  of  the  cases  in  which  such  errors  are  possible;  but  I  deem
it  proper  to  renew  the  consideration  of  the  subject  in  this  place,
as  such  errors  are  at  once  of  high  importance  and  very  easily
fallen  into.

Dilatation  and  hypertrophy  of  the  heart,  are  in  their  essence
mere  defects  of  proportion  between  this  organ  and  others,  or  be-
tween some  of  its  own  constituent  parts  ;  and  a  heart  which,
from  its  great  size  alone,  is  a  cause  of  perpetual  distress  and
eventually  of  death,  would  be  productive  of  no  inconvenience  if
it  happened  to  be  lodged  in  a  thorax  of  somewhat  larger  capa-
city, and  belonged  to  an  individual  whose  lungs  and  capillaries
were  of  a  somewhat  stronger  texture.  And,  indeed,  very  few
persons  have  the  heart  in  exact  and  perfect  proportion,  either  as
to  its  individual  parts  relatively  to  one  another,  or  in  its  relation
to  the  size  and  strength  of  other  organs.  It  is  well  known,  that
in  this  respect,  there  are  few  organs  possessed  of  such  variable
proportions.  Generally  speaking,  it  is  better  that  the  heart
should  be  rather  small  than  large ;  but  all  those  whose  hearts
are  rather  voluminous  do  not,  on  this  account,  always  suffer  from
those  symptoms  which  constitute  what  is  called  disease  of  the
heart,  more  especially  if  they  are,  in  other  respects,  strong  and
robust.

In  children,  more  particularly,  the  heart  is  perhaps  always  a
little  larger  in  proportion,  than  in  the  adult ;  and  many  of  them
exhibit,  in  a  marked  degree,  the  stethoscopic  signs  of  hypertro-
phy or  dilatation,  or  more  commonly  of  both, — without  being  at
all  diseased.  In  these  persons  the  equilibrium  is  restored  about
the  period  of  puberty.  A  person  in  youth  or  manhood,  who  is
otherwise  of  a  good  constitution,  may  be  affected  with  consider-
able hypertrophy  or  dilatation,  without  experiencing  much  in-
convenience ; — occasional  palpitations  of  little  severity  and  short

with  dilatation  of  the  right ;  5.  dilatation  with  attenuation  of  the  left ;  6.  hyper-
trophy with  contraction  of  the  left ;  7.  hypertrophy  with  contraction  of  the  right.
— Transl.


OF  THE  VENTRICLES.


559


duration,  and  a  slight  shortness  of  breath,  being  the  only  general
indications  of  the  disease.  Among  the  lower  class  of  people,
more  particularly,  the  individual  is  frequently  so  little  incom-
moded by  the  affection,  that  he  pays  little  attention  to  it  and
never  mentions  it  unless  questioned  on  the  subject.*  I  have  ob-
served a  like  condition  of  the  organ  in  persons  affected  with  dis-
eases of  other  parts  ;  and  when  these  last  have  proved  fatal,  I
have  always  been  able  to  verify  by  dissection  the  accuracy  of  the
stethoscopic  indications  respecting  the  state  of  the  heart.  In
cases  of  this  kind,  if,  from  the  effect  of  disease,  or  the  progress
of  years,  there  happen  to  supervene  a  great  degree  of  emaciation
and  loss  of  strength,  the  disproportion  between  the  heart  and
other  organs  becoming  thereby  more  marked  (emaciation  being
much  less  rapid  in  the  viscera  than  in  the  external  parts),  the
general  symptoms  of  diseased  heart  supervene.  A  delicate
woman,  or  a  man  of  sedentary  habits  with  a  constitution  weak-
ened by  want  of  exercise,  would  experience  in  a  much  shorter
period,  serious  symptoms  from  a  like  degree  of  disproportion.

For  these  reasons,  it  is  obvious  that  we  should  sometimes  fall
into  error,  if  we  decided  from  the  stethoscopic  signs  alone,  that  a
patient  laboured  under  disease  of  the  heart.  But  the  knowledge
thus  acquired  of  the  existence  of  a  large-sized  heart,  is  highly
valuable,  even  although  the  individual  at  the  time  experiences
no  inconvenience  from  it.  We  are  thereby  enabled  to  direct
measures  for  diminishing  the  too  active  energy  and  nutrition  of
the  organ,  and  thus  to  prevent  the  establishment  of  actual  dis-
ease. This  is  a  matter  of  the  greatest  consequence,  as  it  is  a
vast  deal  easier,  more  particularly  in  young  subjects,  to  effect
this  object,  than  afterwards,  when  the  disease  is  formed,  to  inter-
rupt its  progress  or  even  to  relieve  its  more  distressing  symptoms.
And,  in  truth,  one  of  the  greatest  advantages  of  mediate  auscul-
tation, is  the  facility  which  it  gives  of  recognizing,  not  merely
the  slightest  degree  of  hypertrophy  or  dilatation  of  the  heart,
but  even  the  simple  pre-disposition  to  these  diseases  ;  a  thing  al-
together impossible,  as  Corvisart  has  confessed,  by  the  sole  re-
sults supplied  by  the  pulse,  percussion,  and  the  state  of  the
functions.

I  formerly  observed  that,  in  certain  cases,  the  contractions  of
the  heart  entirely  lose  the  characters  which  announce  dilatation
or  hypertrophy,  although  existing  in  a  very  great  degree.  These
cases  are,— 1.  the  last  agony,  and  the  orthopncea  which  usually
precedes  this,  for  some  days  or  even  weeks:— 2.  the  co-existence
of  another  affection,  capable,  in  itself,  of  occasioning  great  dvsp-
ncea,  as  pneumonia,  oedema  of  the  lungs,  hydrothorax,  pleurisy

*  I  daily  meet  with  cases  of  this  kind,  which,  but  for  the  stethoscope,  would  de-
ceive any  practitioner.  Such  persons,  however,  are  marked  for  destruction.  After
a  certain  time,  the  disease  obtains  the  mastery,  and  "  cuts  the  strong  man  down  •"
and  the  sooner,  alas  !  for  the  bold  resistance  made  to  its  dominion. — Transl.


5G0


DILATATION  AND  HYPERTROPHY


with  considerable  effusion,  &c.  In  the  first  of  these  cases,  the
impulse  and  sound  of  the  heart's  contractions  cease  almost  en-
tirely, whatever  be  the  size  of  the  heart,  and  the  frequency  of  the
contractions  become  so  great  that  these  cannot  be  counted.  Cor-
visart  had  taken  notice  of  this  almost  complete  disappearance  of
the  perceptible  action  of  the  heart,  to  wards  the  close  of  its  dis-
eases :  "  They  change  at  this  period  (he  says)  into  an  extended
bruissement  and  an  obscure  and  profound  agitation  impossible
to  be  described."  (Op.  Cit.  p.  141.)  In  the  second  case  above
mentioned,  the  impulse  and  sound  of  the  heart  are  frequently  re-
duced to  what  they  are  in  the  state  of  health  ;  and  if  then  exa-
mined for  the  first  time,  they  give  no  clue  to  the  existence  of
the  hypertrophy  or  dilatation,  although  perhaps  existing  in  a
very  eminent  degree.


CHAPTER  VI.

OF DILATATION  AND  HYPERTROPHY  OF THE  AURICLES.

Dilatation  of  the  auricles  is  a  rare  disease,  and  it  appears  still
more  so,  when  compared  with  the  frequency  of  the  same  affection
of  the  ventricles.  Sometimes  we  find  in  subjects  affected  with
hypertrophy  or  dilatation  of  the  ventricles,  the  auricles  also  pro-
portionally enlarged  ;  it  is,  however,  much  more  common  to  find
these  retaining  their  natural  size  even  in  cases  where  the  ventri-
cles  are  enormously  enlarged  ;  sometimes  also,  but  more  rarely
still,  the  auricles  are  dilated  when  the  ventricles  are  of  the  na-
tural size.

Before  we  can  judge  of  the  extent  of  this  affection  we  must
have  precise  ideas  respecting  the  natural  proportion  of  the  va-
rious cavities  of  the  heart.  As  far  as  the  cavities  are  concerned,
we  must  admit  that  they  are  very  nearly  of  equal  size ;  but  as
the  walls  of  the  auricles  are  much  thinner  than  those  of  the  ven-
tricles, the  former,  when  simply  full  and  not  distended,  compose
only  about  one-third  of  the  whole  organ, — in  other  words,  the
size  of  the  auricles  is  about  one-half  that  of  the  ventricles.  Both
the  auricles  have  the  same  capacity,  although  some  anatomists
have  considered  the  right  as  larger ;  no  doubt  misled  by  its  flat-
ter shape,  the  greater  length  of  its  sinus,  and,  more  especially,
by  the  distended  condition  in  which  it  is  commonly  found  after
death.  A  similar  distension,  though  more  rarely,  takes  place
also  in  the  left  auricle ;  and  this  accidental  and  temporary  en-
largement is  sometimes  so  considerable,  owing  to  the  great  exten-
sibility of  the  auricular  structure,  as  almost  to  equal  the  size  of
the  ventricles. In  order  to  distinguish  the  real  from  the  factitious


OF THK  AURTCLKS.


561


dilatation,  we  have  only  to  empty  the  auricles  through  the  ves-
sels that  enter  into  them,  when,  in  the  latter  case,  these  cavities
will  immediately  resume  almost  their  natural  size,  and,  in  the
former,  they  will  still  nearly  retain  their  acquired  volume.  There
is  likewise  another  mark  by  which  we  can  at  once  discriminate
the  enlargement  produced  by  the  accumulation  of  blood  during
the  few  last  hours  of  life,  from  the  permanent  increase  of  capa-
city of  the  auricles.  In  the  first  case,  the  walls  of  the  auricle
are  greatly  distended  by  the  contained  blood,  and  the  colour  of
this  appears  through  the  thinnest  portions  ;  while,  in  the  latter,
the  auricles,  although  very  voluminous,  are  still  capable  of  con-
taining more  blood,  and  their  parietes  remain  opaque.

I  have  never  met  with  decided  dilatation  of  the  auricles  with-
out some  thickening  of  their  walls ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  I
have  never  seen  thickening  of  their  walls  without  an  augmenta-
tion  of  their  capacity.*  I  may  here  remark,  that  it  requires
much  experience  to  judge  correctly  of  hypertrophy  of  the  auri-
cles, as,  owing  to  their  being  naturally  very  thin,  a  considerable
increase  (say  double  the  natural  thickness,  and  the  increase  is
rarely  so  much)  is  not  obvious  to  a  person  little  accustomed  to
such  examinations.  Bertin  (Op.  Cit.  p.  334)  met  with  a  case
where  the  left  auricle  was  three  lines  thick.

The  most  common  cause  of  dilatation  of  the  left  auricle  is  the
contraction  of  the  orifice  between  it  and  the  ventricle,  in  conse-
quence of  cartilaginous  or  bony  induration  of  the  mitral  valve,
or  of  caruncles  on  its  surface.  The  same  causes  sometimes  oc-
casion the  retraction  of  this  valve,  and  consequently  the  perma-
nent patency  of  the  auriculo-ventricular  orifice.  In  this  case,
dilatation  and  thickening  may  arise  from  the  mere  action  of  the
ventricle  on  the  auricle.  Although  such  may  exist,  I  have  never
seen  any  change  in  the  auricles  without  some  alteration  in  the
valves.  Dilatation  of  the  right  auricle  is  most  commonly  the
consequence  of  thickening  of  the  right  ventricle.  The  diseases
of  the  lungs  which  M.  Corvisai  t  reckons  among  the  ordinary
causes  of  this  dilatation,  seem  to  me  to  produce,  in  general,  merely
the  accidental  distension  above  mentioned.

Corvisart  does  not  make  any  distinction  between  the  signs  of
dilatation  of  the  auricles  and  that  of  their  corresponding  ventri-
cles. And,  in  truth,  such  affections  are  too  rare,  and  I  have
had,  consequently,  too  few  opportunities  of  seeing  them  since  I
practised  auscultation,  to  be  able  positively  to  assert,  that  the
signs  by  which  I  have  sometimes  been  enabled  to  recognize  them,

*  M.  Bertin  says  (p.  336)  that  lie  has  seen  hypertrophy  of  the  auricles  under  the
three  forms  observed  in  disease  of  the  ventricles;  but  that  that  with  dilatation  of  the
cavity,  is  incomparably  more  frequent  than  the  others.  Dr.  Hope  gives  the  following
as  the  order  of  frequency  of  the  different  forms  of  enlargement  of  the  auricles:  —

1.  Distension,  particularly  of  the  right,  from  congestiou  during  the  last  agony  ;

2.  dilatation  with  hypertrophy;  3.  simple  hypertrophy;  4.  hypertrophy  with  con-
traction.— Traml,

o  o


562


PARTIAL DILATATION  OF THE  HEART.


are  quite  certain  and  constant.  I  think,  however,  there  can  be
little  doubt  that  the  signs  afforded  by  dilatation  of  the  auricles,
must  be  confounded  with  those  arising  from  the  disease  of  the
ventricles,  or  of  the  valves,  of  which  the  auricular  affection  is  the
consequence  ;  and  that  thus  the  dilatation  of  the  left  auricle  will
be  confounded  with  ossification  of  the  mitral  valve,  and  that  of
the  right  auricle  with  hypertrophy  of  the  ventricle  of  the  same
side.  It  has,  moreover,  appeared  to  me,  that,  in  dilatation  of
the  auricles,  whether  real  or  factitious,  their  contractions,  in
place  of  the  clear  sound  which  they  have  in  the  healthy  state,
and  which  I  have  compared  to  the  sound  of  a  valve,  yield  only
the  bellows-sound,  more  or  less  strong,  or  at  least  a  sound  that
is  dull.  I  have  never  perceived  any  distinct  impulse  from  the
auricles,  even  when  decidedly  hypertrophied.  I  ought  here,
also,  to  notice  a  negative  sign,  formerly  mentioned  in  the  analysis
of  the  heart's  pulsation.  It  is  this : — In  many  cases  of  hyper-
trophy of  the  ventricles,  we  scarcely  perceive  the  sound  of  thte
contraction  of  the  auricles,  while  exploring  the  region  of  the
heart.  If,  however,  we  apply  the  stethoscope  to  the  top  of  the
sternum,  below  the  clavicles,  or  on  the  sides,  we  hear  the  sound
of  their  contraction  very  distinctly,  and  often  very  loudly.  This
sign,  as  I  formerly  mentioned,  appears  to  me  to  indicate  posi-
tively that  the  auricles  do  not  in  any  respect  participate  in  the
affection  of  the  ventricles.


CHAPTER  VII.

OF PARTIAL DILATATION  OF THE  HEART.


In  certain  cases,  the  heart  may  be  affected  with  a  partial  and
truly  aneurismatic  dilatation.  M.  Corvisart  found,  in  the  per-
son of  a  young  negro  who  died  from  suffocation,  an  example  of
this  affection.  "  On  the  superior  and  lateral  part  of  this  ventricle
(the  left)  there  was  a  tumour  almost  as  large  as  the  heart  itself.
The  interior  of  this  tumour  contained  several  layers  of  coagulated
blood,  very  dense,  and  exactly  like  those  found  in  aneurisms  of
the  limbs. — The  cavity  of  this  tumour  communicated  with  the
ventricle  by  a  small  opening,  smooth  and  polished."  (Op.  Cit.
p.  283.)  A  similar  case  is  cited  by  M.  Corvisart  from  the  Mis-
cell.  Nat.  Curios.  I  have  only  had  occasion  to  see  a  single
case  of  this  kind,  and  this  I  owe  to  M.  Berard.  Since  that
time,  this  gentleman  has  met  with  a  second,  and  he  has  given
an  account  of  both  of  them  in  his  Inaugural  Dissertation.*  In


*  Dissert,  sur  Plusieurs  points  d'Anat.  Pntliol,  &c. Paris,  1826.


PAKTTAL 1)1 1,  AT  AT  ION OF THE HEART.  *


©63


both  of  these  cases,  the  dilatation  was  in  the  inferior  portion  of
the  left  ventricle,  was  of  a  globular  shape,  and  nearly  the  size
of  a  duck's  egg. A  sort  of  neck,  or  circular  depression,  dis-
tinguished it  externally  from  the  upper  part  of  the  ventricles.
In  the  first  case,  of  which  I  saw  the  preparation,  the  channel  of
communication  between  the  left  ventricle  and  the  tumour  was
more  than  an  inch  in  diameter. The  interior  of  the  swelling  was
lined  by  half-dried  fibrinous  concretions,  of  a  yellowish  colour*
disposed  in  concentric  layers,  some  of  which  were  firm  and  others
slightly  friable  ; — in  a  word,  exactly  resembling  those  found  in
the  sacs  of  aneurisms. The  most  exterior  of  these  layers  were
the  most  solid ;  and  these  adhered  so  firmly  to  the  walls  of  the
aneurism*  that  it  was  impossible  to  separate  them  from  it,  without
lvmoving,  at  the  same  time,  a  portion  of  the  muscular  substance
of  the  heart. This  intimate  adhesion  existed  even  in  the  point
of  communication,  the  borders  of  which  were  somewhat  rough.
On  the  left  side  of  the  sac,  the  continuity  of  the  fleshy  fibres  of
the  heart  was  very  distinct  ;  but  on  the  right  or  inner  side,
in  which  place  the  tumour  projected  beyond  the  point  of  the
right  ventricle  and  septum  more  than  the  thickness  of  the  finger,
the  walls  of  the  sac  seemed  merely  composed  of  the  two  mem-
branes of  the  pericardium  united  together  by  cellular  substance,
and  by  the  fibrinous  layers  within. M.  Berard's  second  case  dif-
fered only  from  the  first  in  the  following  particulars :  the  two
layers  of  the  pericardium  were  here  united  over  the  surface  of  the
tumour  only,  whereas,  in  the  first  case,  they  were  adherent  over
their  whole  extent ;  the  fibrinous  concretions  were  softer,  conse-
quently of  more  recent  formation  ;  and  there  co-existed  hyper-
trophy with  dilatation  of  the  ventricle.* The  general  aspect  of
the  preparation  shown  me  by  M.  Berard,  leads  me  to  consider
these  partial  dilatations  as  originating  in  ulcerations  of  the  in-
ternal face  of  the  ventricles. I  form  this  opinion  on  the  follow-
ing grounds  : — the  decreased  thickness  of  the  muscular  substance,
—  the  intimate  union  between  it  and  the  layers  of  fibrin e, — the
complete  disappearance  of  all  fleshy  columns, — the  analogy  of  the
case  with  the  false  consecutive  aneurism  of  the  arteries.  As
hardly  any  information  could  be  obtained  respecting  the  history
of  these  cases,  I  cannot  say  whether  the  stethoscope  is  likely  to
give  any  sign  of  a  lesion  of  this  kind.f The  same  may  be  said

*  In  the  celebrated  tragedian,  Talma,  who  died  of  a  disease  of  the  rectum,  there
was  found  a  partial  dilatation  of  the  heart  precisely  like  those  described  in  the  text.
"  In  the  left  ventricle  (says  M.  Biett)  there  was  an  aneurismal  sac  of  the  size  of  a
small  egg,  (filled  with  hard  fibrinous  layers,)  and  of  which  the  parietes  seemed  formed,
by  the  double  thickness  of  the  two  serous  membranes  of  the  heart.  ( lievite  Med.  Jan
1827.)  (M.Z.)

t  Laennec's  opinion  of  the  origin  of  these  partial  dilatations  from  ulceration  is
corroborated  by  a  case  mentioned  by  Dr.  Hope,  "  in  which  steatomatous  degeneration
had  caused  the  formation  of  a  canal  from  the  aorta  underneath  one  of  the  sigmoid
valves  and  the  internal  membrane  of  the  left  ventricle,  lending  to  an  aneurism,  as
large  as  a  nut,  in  the  substance  of  the  auriculo- ventricular  septum."  In  this  case  the

()  O  2


5G4


INDURATION  OF THE  HEART.


of  another  rare  species  of  dilatation  described  by  Morand,*  a
second  case  of  which  was  communicated  by  me  to  the  Soc.  de  la
Faculte  de  Med.f  This  is  a  dilatation  formed  in  the  middle  of
one  of  the  lips  of  the  mitral  valve,  resembling  a  thimble  or  glove-
finger  projecting  into  the  auricle.  In  the  case  seen  by  me,  the
little  pouch  projecting  from  the  upper  side  of  the  valve  was
about  half  an  inch  long,  more  than  four  lines  wide,  and  was
pierced  at  its  extremities  by  two  openings,  of  which  the  lowest
was  the  largest.  This  last  was  irregular  and  fringed,  and  had
the  appearance  as  if  the  lower  lamina  of  the  mitral  valve  had
been  ruptured  in  this  point,  and  the  little  aneurismal  sac  hail
been  formed  by  the  dilatation  of  the  upper  lamina.

There  is  still  one  other  variety  of  partial  dilatation  of  the  heart,
which  I  have  several  times  met  with,  and  which  is  probably,  in  a
great  measure,  the  result  of  original  malformation.  In  the  natural
conformation  of  the  heart,  the  right  ventricle  seems  to  consist  of
two  distinct  parts  united  together,  the  one  of  which  descends
towards  the  apex,  while  the  other,  almost  at  right  angles  to  the
former,  is  directed  to  the  left  side,  and  forwards  towards  the  pul-
monary artery.  The  dilatation  to  which  I  now  allude,  seemed  to
exist  in  both  these  divisions,  while  the  point  of  union  of  the  two
retained  its  natural  dimensions.  It  is,  however,  more  common  to
find  the  anterior  or  pulmonary  division  of  the  ventricle  dilated
without  the  other  portion  ;  and  in  most  cases  of  dilatation  of  this
ventricle,  the  former  portion  is  more  dilated  than  the  other.  This
difference  becomes  still  more  evident  when  the  dilatation  is  con-
joined with  a  certain  degree  of  thickening,  as,  in  this  case,  the
pulmonary  portion  of  the  ventricle  frequently  acquires  such  a
degree  of  firmness  that  its  walls  do  not  collapse  when  laid  open,
a  thing  which  hardly  ever  happens  to  the  lower  portion  of  the
ventricle.


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF  INDURATION  OF  THE  MUSCULAR  SUBSTANCE  OF  THE

HEART.

I  have  already  observed,  that,  in  hypertrophy  of  the  heart,  the
muscular  substance  possesses  an  unusual  degree  of  firmness  and
consistence. Corvisart  has  seen  this  so  great,  that  the  heart

physical  signs  were  not  noticed,  but  Dr.  Hope  adds,  that  a  similar  case  occurred  sub-
sequently in  St.  George's  Hospital,  in  which  the  second  sound  was  accompanied  with
a  bellows-murmur.— Treatise  on  the  Heart,  p.  286.— 7Y«n?i.

*  Hi<*t.  del'Acad.  des  Sc.  1729.

f  Bulletin  de  la  Facult6  de  Med.  No.  14,  p.  207.


SOFTENING OF THE  HEART.


565


sounded  like  a  dice-box  when  struck,  and  the  scalpel  experienced
great  resistance  in  cutting  it,  and  produced  a  peculiar  creaking
sound. However,  the  muscular  substance  of  the  heart  "  retained
its  natural  colour,  and  did  not  appear  to  be  converted  cither  into
the  bony  or  cartilaginous  tissue." I  had  been  long  of  opinion  that
this  species  of  induration  is  extremely  rare,  having  never  met  with
a  case  of  it,  although  Corvisart  says  that  he  had  seen  several.
However,  in  the  year  1821,  while  examining  the  body  of  a  man
who  had  died  of  simple  but  very  extensive  hypertrophy  of  the
right  ventricle,  I  purposely  struck  this  ventricle  with  the  scalpel,
and  found  that  it  produced  a  sound  exactly  resembling  what
would  arise  from  striking  a  leathern  dice-box.* I  have  since
frequently  repeated  this  experiment,  and  have  ascertained  that
the  ventricles  in  a  state  of  hypertrophy  always  yield  this  box-
sound,  and  in  a  degree  proportioned  to  the  degree  of  the  hyper-
trophy. I  have  never  observed  the  creaking  sound  mentioned  by
Corvisart :  but  only  that  such  hearts  were  cut  with  greater  diffi-
culty, although  the  muscular  substance  appeared  in  no  other
respect  altered. M.  Bertin  gives  three  cases  (Obs.  93,  94,  95)
of  hypertrophy  with  strongly  marked  induration  of  the  heart.
Corvisart  imagined  that  this  state  of  induration  would  render  the
contraction  of  the  ventricles  more  difficult  and  would  impede  their
motions.  I  cannot  assent  to  this  opinion,  since  I  have  always  found
the  most  solid  hearts  to  be  those  which  gave  the  greatest  impulse.
Neither  can  I  admit  with  M.  Bertin,  that  the  induration  of  the
heart  may  be  considered  as  the  first  stage  of  the  ossification,
since  there  exist  none  of  the  anatomical  characters  of  the  tran-
sition of  one  of  these  states  into  the  other. Induration  usually
occupies  the  whole  of  one  ventricle,  while  ossification  affects  only
a  small  portion  of  its  walls,  and,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  rarely
attacks  the  muscular  substance. If  to  these  reasons,  deduced
from  simple  observation,  we  wish  to  add  any  arguments  drawn
from  theory,  it  may  be  stated,  that  induration  supposes  an  in-
crease of  nutrition,  and  ossification  a  perversion  of  the  nutritive
action,  f


CHAPTER  IX.

OF SOFTENING  OF  THE  MUSCULAR  SUBSTANCE  OF  THE  HEART.

1  save  already  noticed  this  condition  of  the  heart.  It  is  recog-
nized by  the  flaecidity  of  the  organ,  which,  at  first  sight,  looks

*  Tt  is  proper  to  observe  that  the  ventricle  had  been  emptied  of  its  blood. — Author.
f  Otto  (Compend.  of  Pathol.  Anat.  Part.  11.  Sect.  xix.  p.  '286.  South's  Transl.)
says,  that  he  has  several  times  found  "  general  inflammatory  hardening  of  the  heart "


SOFTENING OF THE  HEART.


as  if  withered;  and  it  is  found  to  be  easily  torn.  The  softening
is  sometimes  carried  so  far  that  the  muscular  fibre  is  almost
friable,  the  compressing  fingers  passing  easily  through  the  parietes
of  the  ventricles.  In  this  case,  whatever  may  have  been  the
patient's  disease,  the  heart  appears  only  half  filled  with  blood,  and
flattened,  and  the  ventricles  equally  collapse  whatsoever  may  be
their  varying  thickness.  This  affection  of  the  heart  is  almost
always  attended  by  some  change  of  colour  in  the  organ.  Some-
times this  is  deeper,  and  even  quite  violet ;  and  this  is  particularly
the  case  in  severe  continued  fevers.  More  commonly,  however,
the  softening  of  the  heart  is  attended  by  a  striking  loss  of  colour,
so  as  to  resemble  the  palest  dead  leaf.  This  pale  or  yellowish
tint  does  not  always  occupy  the  whole  thickness  of  the  heart ;
sometimes  it  is  strongly  marked  in  the  central  portions,  and  very
little  on  the  exterior  or  inferior  surfaces.  Frequently  the  left
ventricle  and  the  interventricular  septum  exhibit  this  appearance
in  a  marked  degree,  while  the  right  ventricle  retains  its  natural
colour,  and  even  a  degree  of  firmness  greater  than  natural.  Again,
we  sometimes  find  here  and  there  spots  of  the  natural  colour  and
consistence  in  hearts  which  are,  every  where  else,  much  softened
and  quite  yellowish.  This  variety  of  yellowish  softening  is  par-
ticularly observable  in  hearts  of  good  proportion,  and  in  those
cases  where  dilatation  is  conjoined  with  a  slight  degree  of  hyper-
trophy. It  is  also  found  in  simple  dilatation,  although  it  is  more
common  to  find  this  state  accompanied  by  that  species  of  softening
which  is  marked  by  an  augmentation  of  the  natural  colour  of  the
organ.  There  is  a  third  variety  of  softening  of  the  heart,  which
will  be  noted  in  another  place,  and  which  is  attended  by  a  pale
white  colour  of  the  muscular  substance.  In  this,  the  degree  of
softening  never  reaches  that  of  friableness ;  often  it  is  scarcely
perceptible;  but  the  parts  are  flabby,  and  the  walls  of  the  ven-
tricles quite  fall  together  on  being  opened.  This  species  of
softening  usually  accompanies  pericarditis,  and  is  observed  only
in  it.

Softening  of  the  heart  not  having  hitherto  engaged  the  atten-
tion of  practitioners,  and  being  almost  always  found  in  conjunc-
tion with  other  diseases  of  this  organ,  it  becomes  very  difficult  to
determine  its  degree  of  danger,  as  well  as  its  distinctive  signs.  I
formerly  stated,  that  softening  of  the  heart  is  one  of  the  causes
which  appear  to  me  to  render  the  sound  of  the  auricles,  and  even
of  the  ventricles,  more  obtuse  than  natural ;  yet  never  so  much
so  as  to  render  it  like  the  sound  of  the  file,  or  even  of  the  bellows.
We  mav  likewise  expect  to  meet  with  this  condition  of  the  heart,
when,  in  cases  of  dilatation,  with  or  without  hypertrophy,  there
have  been  long  and  frequent  attacks  of  suffocative  dyspnoea,  a

carried  to  so  high  a  degree,  that,  the  muscular  suhstance  was  quite  firm  and  elastic.
He  says,  he  likewise  observed  the  same  in  the  case  of  a  cow  which  had  a  needle  in  her
heart,  and  in  a  dog  that  died  of  carditis. — Truml.


SOFTENING OF THE  HEART.


long  and  painful  agony,  or  that  purple  condition  of  the  face  and
extremities  for  a  long  period  before  death,  which  bespeaks  great
congestion  of  blood  in  the  capillaries.  It  would  seem  that  that
species  of  softening  met  with  in  the  case  of  a  protracted  agony
is  to  be  considered  as  an  acute  affection  :  it  is  rarely  general,  and
commonly  affects  only  different  points  of  the  substance  of  the
heart.

On  the  contrary,  in  cases  where  the  heart  is  softened  and  yel-
lowish throughout,  it  is  probable  that  the  affection  has  existed  for
a  longer  time.  This  general  softening  of  the  heart  is  usually,
perhaps  always,  accompanied  with  a  certain  degree  of  cachexy,
even  when  it  exists  in  persons  otherwise  in  good  health,  and  even
in  such  a  state  of  vigour  as  to  be  able  to  undergo  severe  bodily
labour,  as  we  see  sometimes.  These  persons  have  a  pale  and
yellowish  complexion  and  a  withered  skin ;  and  even  when
they  become  affected  with  dilatation  or  hypertrophy,  which  is
almost  always  the  case,  they  do  not  exhibit  that  swollen  and  livid
state  of  the  face,  which  is  considered  as  one  of  the  most  constant
of  the  general  signs  of  diseased  heart.  Their  lips  are  seldom
purple,  and  still  more  rarely  swollen  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,
almost  always  colourless.  When  the  heart  yields  only  a  slight
impulse  and  sound,  and  when  this  last  is  obtuse  and  dull,  during
both  contractions,  we  are  led  to  presume  that  the  organ  is  softened,
but  well  proportioned.

When  softening  exists  along  with  dilatation  of  the  ventricles,
the  sound  produced  by  the  contraction  of  these  cavities,  although
loud,  is  yet  dull,  and  without  the  clearness  which  attends  common
dilatation.  When  it  is  complicated  with  hypertrophy,  the  sound
of  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles  is  so  obtuse  as  to  be  nearly  in-
audible ;  and  in  extreme  cases,  the  impulse  of  the  heart  is  attended
by  no  noise  whatever.  It  has  moreover  appeared  to  me,  that
softening  of  the  heart  contributes  much  to  render  the  contraction
of  the  ventricles  slower.  Sometimes,  however,  in  attacks  of  pal-
pitation, a  heart  in  this  state,  and  which  had  habitually  only  a
slight  shock  and  a  very  dull  sound,  all  at  once  will  resume  great
energy,  and  for  several  days  continue  to  give  those  sharp  short
contractions  which  have  been  compared  to  the  blows  of  a  mallet.

In  respect  of  the  danger  attending  softening  of  the  heart,  I
presume  that  it  will  vary  according  to  the  nature  and  degree  of
the  accompanying  affection.  The  variety  of  softening  which
accompanies  idiopathic  fevers,  does  not,  in  general,  present  any
change  of  colour  in  the  heart,  or  it  is  attended  with  a  deeper
colour  than  natural,  approaching  purple;  sometimes,  however,
it  is  yellowish.  I  think  it  may  be  compared  to  that  adhesive
softness  of  the  other  muscles,  often  observed  in  these  cases,  and
which  is  also  accompanied  by  a  degree  of  redness  greater  than
natural.  This  softening  of  the  heart,  as  well  as  the  analogous
glitey  or  fishy  state  of  the  muscles,  is  particularly  observable  in


568


SOFTENING  OF  THE  HEART.


putrid  fevers,  more  especially  when  these  exhibit  the  phenomena
formerly  considered  as  marks  of  putridity;  viz.  livid  intumes-
scence  of  the  face,  softening  of  the  lips,  gums,  and  internal  mem-
brane of  the  mouth,  black  coating  on  the  tongue  and  gums,
earthy  aspect  of  the  skin,  distended  abdomen,  and  very  fetid  de-
jections. I  cannot  assert  that  this  softening  of  the  heart  exists
in  all  kinds  of  continued  fevers,  but  I  have  met  with  it  constantly
in  such  cases  as  I  have  attended  to  ;  and  I  have  always  thought
it  more  marked  in  proportion  as  the  signs  of  an  alteration  in  the
fluids  were  more  evident.  Could  it  account  for  that  frequency
of  pulse  which  exists,  sometimes  for  several  weeks,  in  convales-
cence from  fevers,  although  the  patient  continues  to  regain  flesh
and  vigour  ?

M.  Bouillaud,  in  the  work  which  he  has  composed  in  conjunc-
tion with  M.  Bertin,#  considers  softening  of  the  heart  as  a  con-
sequence of  inflammation  ;  and  looks  upon  the  induration,  as
well  as  the  increase  or  diminution  of  colouring  of  the  heart,  in
the  same  point  of  view.  The  only  proof  brought  in  support  of
this  opinion  is  this — that  the  muscles,  the  brain,  liver,  lungs,
kidneys  and  spleen,  become  soft  when  affected  with  inflammation.
In  respect  of  this.  I  would  remark,  that  the  reasoning  is  here  in
a  circle ;  since  it  ought  to  be  previously  proved  that  the  softening
of  these  organs,  when  existing  alone  and  without  pus,  is  the  con-
sequence of  inflammation.  On  the  other  hand,  if  softening  of
the  heart  is  the  consequence  of  inflammation,  this  inflammation
must  be  either  some  degree  of  that  which  produces  pus,  or  one
of  quite  a  different  kind,  and  having  no  tendency  to  produce  this.
On  the  first  hypothesis,  softening  of  the  heart  is  so  common  an
affection,  that  we  should,  sometimes  at  least,  find  it  arrived  at
the  stage  of  purulent  infiltration :  but  this  state  I  have  never
seen,  even  in  the  case  of  softening  that  has  reached  so  far  that
the  muscular  substance  yields  between  the  fingers  like  paste ;  the
muscular  fibres  still  retain  their  form,  and  present  no  trace  of
pus  in  their  interstices ;  and  I  am  not  aware  that  pus  has  been
found  by  any  one  in  such  cases. -f*  If,  on  the  second  supposition,
softening  of  the  heart  is  an  affection  of  such  a  nature,  that  it  tends
neither  to  the  formation  of  pus,  nor  is  attended  by  local  pains,
nor  any  of  the  local  and  general  symptoms  which  constitute  in-
flammation ; — if  the  therapeutic  measures  found  beneficial  in  in-
flammation, are  directly  the  reverse  of  those  which  the  state  of


*  I  nttrihute  this  opinion  to  M.  Bouillaud,  on  the  authority  of  M.  Bertin,  who  in-
forms me,  that  every  thing  in  this  work  relative  to  the  influence  of  inflammation  in
the  development  of  the  organic  affections  of  the  heart  and  large  vessels,  is  exclusively
M.  Bouillaud's.  This  gentleman  has  since  professed  the  same  opinions  in  his  Traitt
tle'l'Encephalite. Paris,  IQ«5.— Author.

t  In  a  striking  case  of  true  carditis  recorded  hy  Dr.  Latham  (Loud.  Med.  Gaz.
vol.  iii.  p.  HB)  the  muscular  suhstance  of  the  heart  was  found  softened,  and  "  in-
nunierahle  small  points  of  pus  oozed  from  among  the  muscular  fihres"  of  hoth  ven-
tricles.— T rnnsl.


SOKT  KNI  NO  OF THE UK  A 11 T.


569


the  individuals  usually  affected  with  softening  of  the  heart  seems
to  demand, — why  give  the  same  name  to  affections  so  different?

Softening  of  the  heart  appears  to  me  to  be  a  disease  sui  generis,
produced  by  some  aberration  of  assimilation,  whereby  the  solid
elements  of  the  tissue  diminish  in  proportion  as  those  which  are
fluid  or  semi-fluid  increase. All  the  muscles  become  soft,  in  a
slight  degree,  in  many  acute  and  chronic  diseases  even  in  the
course  of  a  few  days  ;  a  fact  which  we  can  prove  not  only  by
dissection,  but  even  by  feeling  the  muscles  of  our  patients:  and
this  change,  we  know,  ensues  without  any  sign  of  inflammation.
In  the  case  of  convalescence,  the  firmness  of  the  muscles  fre-
quently returns  very  speedily,  and  before  the  emaciation  is  quite
gone  off. In  the  inflammation  of  the  muscles,  on  the  other  hand,
(a  very  rare  case,  except  in  surgical  affections,)  softening  is  not
observed,  except  where  the  muscle  is  destroyed  by  suppuration :
one  or  two  lines  from  the  abscess,  the  muscular  substance,  more
or  less  coloured  according  to  its  degree  of  impregnation  with
blood  or  with  liquid  or  concrete  pus,  is  more  or  less  solid,  and
frequently  even  more  solid  than  natural. If  the  muscular  sub-
stance appears  softer  than  natural,  it  is  only  where  the  concrete
pus  begins  to  soften ;  and  it  is,  no  doubt,  owing  to  the  softening
of  this  pus,  which,  in  the  muscles,  the  cellular  substance,  the
parenchyma  of  the  lungs  and  other  organs,  as  well  as  the  surface
of  membranes,  is  frequently  effused  in  a  concrete  form,  that  we
are  to  attribute  the  dissolution  of  the  various  tissues  with  which
it  is  combined. I  consider  even,  that  we  ought  to  regard  it  as  a
general  law  of  the  animal  economy,  that  all  soft  tissues  become
indurated  in  consequence  of  true  inflammation,  that  is,  an  in-
flammation tending  to  the  formation  of  pus :  and  I  know  no
other  way  in  which  we  can  define  inflammation  without  making-
it  synonymous  with  affection. It  is  only  the  hard  tissues,  such
as  bone,  cartilage,  and  the  fibrous  bodies,  which  become  softer
during  inflammation,  in  consequence  of  the  presence  of  an  in-
creased quantity  of  plastic  lymph  of  a  less  consistent  quality  than
that  of  bone. The  softening  of  the  heart  and  muscles,  is,  more-
over, not  without  analogies  in  all^  the  different  tissues  of  the
system,  as  in  the  case  of  rickets,  the  white  softening  of  the  brain,
the  softening  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach  and  in-
testines, which  is  frequently  transparent,  colourless  and  jellv-like  ;
which  last  Hunter  considered  as  the  effect  of  the  action 'of  the
gastric  juice,  and  of  which  Jaeger*  and  Cruveilhierf  have  re-
cently published  instances. These  various  cases  of  softening
may,  it  is  true,  sometimes,  like  gangrene,  be  surrounded  by  a
circle  of  inflammation;  but  most  commonly  the  softening  exists
by  itself:  when  combined  with  inflammation,  there  is  no  reason


*  Hufeland's  Journ.  May,  1811.

t  Mccl.  Eclairee  par  l'Anat.  Path. Limoges,  1821.


570


ATROPHY  OF THE  HEART.


why  the  two  affections  should  be  confounded,  since  they  may
exist  separately.

Softening  of  the  heart  subsequent  to  severe  continued  fevers
appears  to  me  to  be  an  affection  of  little  consequence,  and  is
easily  removed  by  a  tonic  regimen.  The  softening  which  accom-
panies chronic  affections,  particularly  of  the  heart,  indicates,  in
a  particular  manner,  the  use  of  bitters,  steel,  and  anti-scorbutics,
unless,  indeed,  these  are  contra-indicated  by  the  principal  affec-
tion. I  have  often  thought  that  this  softening  of  the  heart,  was
an  analogous  disposition  to  that  of  hypertrophy  or  atrophy  :  so
far,  at  least,  it  agrees  with  these,  in  being  the  product  or  a  simple
alteration  of  the  nutrition  of  this  organ.  In  this  case  there  is
no  evident  perversion  of  the  assimilative  process,  since  there  is
no  accidental  formation.  For  this  reason,  it  seems  probable,  that
when  the  heart  is  in  a  state  of  softening  and  hypertrophy  at  the
same  time,  we  are  to  expect  most  benefit  from  the  debilitating
mode  of  treatment ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  heart  retains
*  its  healthy  proportions,  we  ought  to  apprehend,  for  the  same
reason,  and  more  than  in  any  other  circumstances,  the  superven-
tion of  hypertrophy  and  dilatation,  in  consequence  of  the  de-
creased resistance  afforded  by  the  walls  of  the  heart.*


CHAPTER  X.

OF  ATROPHY  OF  THE  HEART.

The  heart,  like  the  muscles  of  voluntary  motion,  is  clearly  sus-
ceptible of  diminution  of  size,  and  loss  of  power,  from  the  in-
fluence of  all  those  causes  which  produce  emaciation.  This  effect,
however,  is  less  remarkable  in  the  heart  than  in  other  muscles,
and  does  not  become  perceptible  till  after  a  considerable  time.
It  may  be  remarked  as  generally  true,  that  the  heart  of  indi-
viduals who  have  died  of  diseases  productive  of  great  emaciation,
such  as  cancer  and  chronic  phthisis,  are  commonly  small :  and
in  examining  such  cases,  I  have  thought  that  I  could  recognize
a  sort  of  withering  of  the  organ  indicative  of  its  loss  of  volume.

*  Preternatural  softness  of  the  heart  is  a  state  frequently  met  with  on  dissection,
and  the  precise  nature  and  causes  of  which  are,  1  think,  extremely  doubtful,  and
probably  very  various.  For  instance  :  in  a  case  lately  under  my  care,  in  which  the
principal  symptoms  were — extremely  quick  but  not  impeded  respiration,  great  anxiety,
strong  action  of  the  heart,  strong  and  rapid  pulse,  very  slight  increase  of  the  natural
temperature,  and  no  pain, — the  only  diseased  appearance  that  could  be  found  after
death,  was  this  softening  of  the  muscular  substance  of  the  heart.  The  only  thing
that  gave  relief  was  bloodletting ;  and  the  blood  was  extremely  huffy.  1  have  great
doubts  if  this  was  a  case  of  carditis ;  1  have  seen  precisely  "the  same  appearances
after  death  without  any  of  the  same  symptoms  during  life.— Traml.


DISPLACEMENT  OF THE  HEART.


571


From  this  circumstance,  I  am  led  to  consider  the  softening  of  the
heart  (which  I  have  stated  to  exhibit  a  similar  appearance)  as  an
approach  towards  atrophy, — unless,  indeed,  the  over-activity  of
the  nutritive  process,  or  the  determination  of  too  much  blood  to
the  organ,  lead  to  dilatation.  The  facts  just  mentioned  furnish
the  most  rational  indication  for  treating  hypertrophy  of  the
heart,  as  they,  at  once,  afford  grounds  for  admitting  the  possi-
bility of  a  cure,  and  point  out  the  best  means  of  effecting  it.  In
certain  cases  of  chronic  pericarditis,  the  heart  seems  to  become
smaller  in  consequence  of  the  long-continued  pressure  of  a  copious
extravasation  into  the  pericardium.  M.  Bertin  reports  a  case  of
this  kind  (Op.  Cit.  obs.  66.)

I  do  not  think  that  diminution  of  the  size  of  the  heart,  can,
in  any  case,  be  considered  as  a  disease.  I  have  never  observed
any  symptom  which  'could  be  attributed  to  this  cause ;  or  rather,
all  those  persons  in  whom  it  was  found,  appeared  to  me  less  sub-
ject than  usual  to  inflammatory  affections  and  disorder  of  the
circulation.  I  may  remark,  however,  that  several  hypochon-
driacs, who  were  liable  to  faintings  from  very  slight  cause,  gave,
under  the  stethoscope,  signs  of  a  very  small  heart ;  and  we  know,
moreover,  that  women,  who  are  much  more  liable  to  these  attacks
than  men,  have  in  general  smaller  hearts.*


CHAPTER  XI.

OF DISPLACEMENT  OF THE  HEART.

The  heart,  although  retained  in  its  place  by  the  diaphragm,
large  vessels,  and  peculiar  structure  of  the  mediastinum,  and,
still  more,  by  the  constant  state  of  plenitude  of  the  chest,  may,
nevertheless,  in  certain  cases,  be  thrown  to  the  right  or  left  by  a
solid,  liquid,  or  aeriform  effusion  into  either  sac  of  the  pleura,
by  extensive  tumours  in  the  lungs,  and,  as  we  have  already  seen,
by  emphysema  of  this  organ.  In  like  manner,  a  tumour  in  the
superior  mediastinum,  or  a  large  aneurism  of  the  arch  of  the
aorta,  may  press  it  downwards,  so  that  that  part  of  the  diaphragm
on  which  it  reposes  shall  project  into  the  abdomen.  Sometimes
even  this  depression  has  taken  place  without  any  visible  cause,
in  which  case  the  affection  has  been  named  by  some  authors  pro-
lapsus of  the  heart.

When  the  heart  is  enlarged,  its  point  is  carried  to  the  left,  and
the  auricles  to  the  right  side,  in  such  manner  that  it  comes  to

*  Diminution  of  the  size  of  the  heart  is  noticed  hy  most  writers  on  diseases  of  this
organ,  and  a  good  many  cases  of  it  are  given  by  Hums,  Testa,  Kreysig,  Bertin,  &c.
Sec,  in  particular,  Burns,  p.  109;  Testa,  vol.  iii.  p.  348  J  and  Bertin,  p.  387.— Transl.


572


DISl'LACEMENT  OF  THE  HEART.


lie  almost  transversely  across  the  chest.  This  observation  has
been  made  by  M.  Bertin ;  (Op.  Cit.  p.  44 ;)  and  I  have  myself
often  proved  its  accuracy.

These  various  kinds  of  displacement  produce  no  perceptible
inconvenience  when  they  exist  in  a  slight  degree;  when  more
marked,  they  may  produce  bad  effects  ;  but  in  this  case,  they  are
themselves  consequences  of  lesions  much  more  serious.  Corvisart
imagines  that  this  prolapsus  of  the  heart  is  always  the  effect  of
considerable  dilatation  of  this  organ  ;  and  that  it  occasions  acute
and  continued  pains  in  the  oesophagus,  particularly  towards  the
cardiac  extremity,  with  difficulty  of  deglutition,  pains  in  the
stomach,  constant  disorder  of  the  digestive  functions,  and  nausea
and  vomiting.  He  thinks,  moreover,  that  in  this  case  the  action
of  the  heart  is  perceived  much  lower  than  natural,  and  he  con-
siders this  circumstance  as  one  of  the  chief  diagnostic  signs  of
this  affection.  I  am,  however,  of  opinion  that  this  sign  is,  at
best,  very  equivocal.  We  perceive  the  heart's  pulsation  in  the
epigastrium  in  a  great  many  persons,  particularly  when  the  ster-
num is  short,  although  the  heart  is  in  its  usual  position.  It  can
be  only,  therefore,  in  subjects  whose  sternum  is  long,  that  we  can
lay  any  stress  on  such  a  sign.  In  the  case  of  lateral  displace-
ments, if  at  all  considerable,  they  will  be  readily  detected  by  the
stethoscope :  and  the  same  will  be  true  in  those  rare  cases  of
transposition  of  the  viscera,  in  which  the  liver  is  on  the  left,  and
the  heart  on  the  right  side.#  In  the  Ephem.  Nat.  Cur.  (vol.  x.
obs.  xxxix.),  there  is  a  case  in  which  the  heart  was  situated  per-
pendicularly to  the  vertebral  column,  as  in  quadrupeds,  and
without  any  trace  of  a  right  lung.  From  the  last-named  cir-
cumstance it  seems  probable  that  the  case  has  been  inaccurately
d  escribed. -f*

*  A  case  under  my  observation  some  time  since  strikingly  demonstrated  the  ac-
curacy of  this  statement.  A  patient,  in  the  clinical  wards  of  La  Charite,  had  the
heart  pushed  towards  the  right  side  by  an  aneurismal  tumour  of  the  descending  aorta,
which  eventually  burst  into  the  left  sac  of  the  pleura.  In  this  case  we  were  enabled,
by  means  of  the  stethoscope,  to  trace  accurately  the  progressive  advance  of  the  heart
towards  the  right  side.  The  aneurism  lay  saddle-wise  right  across  the  spine,  and
was  recognized  by  its  simple  pulsations  from  the  period  of  the  patient's  admission,
viz.  three  mouths  nearly  before  death. — (M.  L.)

t  LITERATURE  OF  DISPLACEMENT  OF  THE  HEART.
Innumerable  cases  of  displaced  heart  are  on  record.  On  this  subject  I  particularly
refer  to  the  learned  memoirs  on  this  subject  in  Testa,  (vol.  iii.  cap.  xviii.)  and  Kreysig
(sect.  iv.  art.  ii.);  to  the  short  chapters  on  the  same  subject  in  Bertin,  p.  441  ;  Hope,
p.  513,  and  to  the  following  dissertations  on  this  particular  displacement.

1671.  Hoffman,  (Fr.) Cardianastrophe  admirandn. Diss. Lips.  4to.
17S!3.  Martinez. Obs.  rara  de  corde,  &c. Madrit.  4to.

1810  Fleiscbmann. De  vitiis  congenitis  circa  thoracem,  &c. Erlnvg.  4to.

1814*  Chaus8ier.Notesuruneherniecongenitaleducreur(Bull.delar7ac.deM^d.)Pnr.

1817*.  Zedler,  (J.  A.) De  situ  cordis  abnormi. Vratisl.  4to.

1818!  VVeese,  (K.) De  cordis  ectopia. Rerl.  (with  engr.)

|82  >  llaan  (II.  J.) De  ectopia  cordis  casu  illustrata. Bonn.  4to.  (plates.)

18'26  Breschet. Meinoire  sur  1'ectopie  du  creur,  fine.  Par.  4(o.  (with  plates.)


.573


CHAPTER  XII.

OF  MALFORMATION  OF THE  HEART.

Deviations  from  the  natural  form  of  the  heart,  exclusively  of
those  resulting  from  dilatation  or  hypertrophy  of  its  different
parts,  must  almost  all  be  considered  as  monstrosities,  depending
on  an  incomplete,  anomalous,  or  superabundant  development  of
parts.  Many  varieties  of  these  have  been  taken  notice  of,  par-
ticularly during  the  last  few  years ;  and  I  shall  here  mention  such
as  have  been  well  authenticated  :  1.  The  foramen  ovale  unclosed
after  birth.  This  is  a  case  so  common,  as  to  have  been  seen  by
almost  all  pathological  anatomists.  2.  The  perforation  of  the
septum  between  the  ventricles.  There  only  exist  a  few  cases  of
this ;  and  in  all  those  which  have  been  published,  as  far  as  I
know,  the  opening  was  evidently  very  ancient,  and  appeared  to
be  congenital.  It  is,  however,  possible  that  such  a  perforation
may  be  produced  by  an  ulcer.  I  was  lately  presented  with  a
heart  by  M.  Fouilhoux,  which  exhibited  an  opening  between  the
ventricles,  capable  of  admitting  a  goose-quill,  and  extending  from
beneath  one  of  the  laminae  of  the  tricuspid  valve  to  beneath  the
origin  of  the  sigmoid  valves  of  the  aorta.  At  the  extremity
which  opened  into  the  left  ventricle  it  was  smooth,  but  at  its  other
extremity,  and  within  the  septum,  its  surface  was  rough,  evi-
dently ulcerated,  and  covered  with  fibrinous  crusts.  The  ulce-
rated portion  had  a  diameter  at  least  double  that  of  the  opening
into  the  left  ventricle,  and  extended  about  three  lines  into  the
septum,  forming  a  small  cul-de-sac  filled  with  fibrinous  concre-
tions. This  heart  had  yielded  the  bellows-sound  in  the  latter
days  of  the  disease.  Dr.  Thibert,  some  years  since,  met  with  a
similar  perforation,  near  the  junction  of  the  septum  of  the  au-
ricles and  ventricles,  disposed  in  such  manner  that  the  four
cavities  of  the  heart  communicated  together  by  means  of  it.
3.  The  foramen  ovale  and  ductus  arteriosus  have  been  found
patent  at  the  same  time  by  Deschamps,  Fouquier,  Thibert,
Monro,  and  Burns.  4.  Hunter  found  the  pulmonary  artery
obliterated  at  its  origin,  so  as  to  receive  blood  only  by  the
ductus  arteriosus.  5.  In  a  child  which  lived  seven  days,  the
heart,  like  that  of  fishes,  had  only  one  auricle  and  one  ventricle,
from  the  latter  of  which  the  aorta  and  pulmonary  artery  arose  by
a  common  trunk*  6.  The  aorta  originating  in  the  right,  and
the  pulmonary  artery  in  the  left  ventricle. 7.  Wolff  and  Bivs-

*  Burns  on  the  Heart,  p.  27. Tbe  Ephem.  Nat.  Cur.  contains  two  similar  obser-
vations. Dec.  i.  ann.  iv.  and  v.  obs.  40  ;  et  Dec.  ii.  ann.  x.  obs.  4.4,
t  Kroysig,  vol.  iii.  p.  200.


574


MALFORMATION  OK  THE II K  ART.


diet  have  seen  respectively  a  ease  in  which  there  was  only  one
ventricle,  although  with  two  auricles.  The  subject  of  Wolff's
case  lived  to  the  age  of  twenty-two  years.  8.  Bertin  the  elder
found  the  arch  of  the  aorta  double  in  a  child  twelve  or  thirteen
years  old  :  "  the  aorta  arose  single  from  the  left  ventricle,  then
divided  into  two  branches,  and  then  reunited  to  form  the  de-
scending aorta,  like  the  two  arms  of  a  river,  after  having  formed
an  islet.-'1  9-  The  aorta  originating  in  both  ventricles  at  the
same  time.  This  malformation  has  been  seen  by  Sandifort,
Scander,  Tielman,  and  Nevins.  10.  Dr.  Holmes  of  Canada*  has
lately  related  a  case  in  which  the  right  auricle,  of  the  size  of  a
full  grown  foetus,  communicated  with  the  left  ventricle  in  place
of  the  right.  The  ventricles  also  communicated  by  a  tendmom
opening. This  person  lived  to  the  age  of  twenty-one.

The  valves  of  the  heart  may  likewise  exhibit  various  kinds  of
malformation. I  have  already  noticed  a  species  of  aneurismatic
dilatation  of  the  mitral. We  sometimes  also  meet  with  small
oblong  smooth  openings  on  the  different  valves  of  the  heart :  of
this  I  have  seen  an  extensive  instance  on  the  tricuspid  valve,
constituting  a  kind  of  net-work. The  following  seems  to  me  also
a  case  of  malformation,  which  I  observed  in  a  heart  affected  with
hypertrophy  in  the  year  1823. In  this  the  three  laminae  of  the
tricuspid  valve  were  united  together  near  their  extremities,  but
in  such  manner  as  to  leave  these  points  sufficiently  free  to  admit
the  end  of  the  finger  between  them. The  mitral  was  precisely
in  the  same  state  ;  and  contained,  moreover,  within  its  substance,
some  small  cartilaginous  incrustations. The  sigmoid  valves  of
the  aorta  and  pulmonary  artery  were  in  like  manner  adherent
to  one  another,  for  the  space  of  about  one  or  two  lines,  at  the
point  of  their  meeting. The  valves  seemed  in  no  other  way  dis-
eased, and  the  union  of  the  parts  was  so  intimate,  that  the  limits
of  the  different  valves  could  not  be  distinguished. The  bellows-
sound  had  existed  very  distinctly  in  this  case,  on  both  sides  of
the  heart. We  may  fancy  that  the  appearances  noticed  in  this
case  may  be  the  consequence  of  inflammation  in  the  foetus;  and
yet  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  coagulable  lymph  could  be
so  accurately  confined  to  the  edges  of  the  valves,  as  that  no  other
adhesion  or  thickening  should  have  been  produced  on  the  adjoining
parts.-f"

In  a  practical  point  of  view,  these  various  kinds  of  malforma-
tion may  be  reduced  to  one — the  unnatural  communication  be-
tween the  cavities  of  the  heart ;  and  of  these,  by  far  the  most
common  is  the  persistence  of  the  foramen  ovale.  Sometimes  this
is  produced  by  the  imperfect  union  of  the  two  plates  of  the  foetal
valve,  so  that  a  probe,  or  even  a  goose-quill,  can  be  passed  ob-

*  Trans,  of  Med.  Chir.  Soc.  of  Edin.  vol.  i.

t  A  case  exactly  like  this,  will  be  noticed  in  a  subsequent  note,  chap.  six. — Ttansl.


Iff  ALTO  MIXTION  OF  Till'.  HEART.


575


liquely  from  one  auricle  to  the  otlier.  This  condition  of  parts
is  not  very  rare,  and  does  not  appear  to  be  productive  of  any
kind  of  inconvenience.  In  other  cases  we  find  the  foramen  con-
tinue constantly  open,  so  as  to  admit  the  finger.  I  have  myself
seen  it,  in  a  subject  forty  years  old,  sufficiently  large  to  receive
the  thumb.  It  is  commonly  believed  that  this  species  of  malfor-
mation is  always  congenital  ;  but  from  some  cases  which  I  have
met  with,  I  am  disposed  to  believe  that  such  a  perforation  may
be  produced  by  an  accident;  or,  at  least,  when  such  a  condition
of  parts  exists  as  above  described,  that  a  blow,  fall,  or  violent  ex-
ertion, may  cause  the  dilatation  of  the  oblique  opening,  and  its
progressive  enlargement.  The  history  of  several  cases  on  re-
cord, especially  of  some  of  M.  Corvisart's,  would  seem  to  con-
firm this  opinion;  since,  in  several  of  these,  the  individuals  had
enjoyed  good  health,  without  any  symptom  of  diseased  heart,
until  they  had  experienced  some  of  the  accidental  causes  above
mentioned.

I  do  not  know  that  anv  of  these  unnatural  communications  have
existed  without  consequent  thickening  and  dilatation  of  either  the
whole,  or  part  of  the  heart,  especially  the  right  side.  This  may  be
the  consequence,  either  of  the  too  >timulant  qualities  of  the  arte-
rial blood,  or  rather  of  the  necessity  imposed  on  the  right  cavities
(naturally  the  weakest)  of  a  more  energetic  action,  in  order  to
resist  the  impulse  of  the  blood  flowing  from  the  left  side.  The
symptoms  of  the  latter  affection  are,  consequently,  combined
with  those  of  the  former.  These  are  principally  the  four  follow  -
ing l  1.  a  great  sensibility  to  the  impression  of  cold  ;  2.  frequent
faintings  ;  3.  the  respiration  more  constantly  impeded  than  in
most  other  diseases  of  the  heart  :  ami  4.  a  violet  or  blueish  co-
lour of  the  skin,  much  more  extensive  than  in  any  other  disease,
and,  sometimes,  even  general.  This  last  symptom  has  been
named  bv  several  authors  the  blue  jaundice,  the  hlue  disease,
or  ryanose.  It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  in  certain  dis-
eases of  the  lungs,  particularly  emphysema,  the  blue  colour  of
the  skin  is  sometimes  as  considerable  and  as  general  as  in  this
affection.  On  the  other  hand,  the  foramen  of  Hotallus  has  been
found  dilated  very  considerably,  without  there  being  present  any
degree  of  lividity  except  in  the  face  and  extremities.  The  case
of  extensive  dilatation  noticed  by  myself,  alxjvc  mentioned,  was
of  this  sort.

1  have  not  had  an  opportunity  of  studying  by  means  of  the
stethoscope  the  peculiarities  presented  by  the  circulation  in  the
case  of  malformation  of  the  heart.  I  presume,  howe  ver,  that
such  exploration  would  not  supply  us  with  any  useful  diagnostic
si«ms.  In  these  cases  the  two  sides  of  the  heart  contracting  at
the  same  time,  and  being  both  full,  the  two  masses  of  blood  when
coming  in  contact  will  not  give  rise  to  any  distinct  sound.  Cor-
visart,  however,  says,  that  in  such  cases  the  hand  applied  to  the


570 OF CARDITIS,  OR INFLAMMATION OF THE  HEART

cardiac  region  perceives  a  kind  of  bruissement,  and  an  indescri-
bable agitation.  In  the  case  above  mentioned,  witnessed  by  my-
self, I  perceived  nothing  of  this  kind*


CHAPTER  XIII.

OF CARDITIS,  OR  INFLAMMATION  OF  THE  HEART.

Inflammation  of  the  heart  is  a  rare  affection,  and  is,  conse-
quently, very  imperfectly  known,  both  in  a  practical  and  patho-
logical point  of  view.  I  shall  here  notice  only  inflammation  of
the  mascular  substance  of  the  organ.  There  are  two  varieties
of  it;  the  general,  or  that  affecting  the  whole  heart;  and  the
partial,  or  that  confined  to  a  small  extent  of  it.  There  perhaps
does  not  exist  on  record  a  satisfactory  case  of  general  inflamma-
tion of  the  heart,  either  acute  or  chronic.  The  greater  number
of  cases  so  called,  and  particularly  those  given  by  M.  Corvisart,
are  evidently  instances  of  pericarditis,  attended  by  that  degree
of  discoloration  of  the  heart  which  we  shall  find  frequently  to
accompany  that  affection.  Nothing  proves  that  the  paleness  of
the  heart  in  such  cases  is  the  consequence  of  inflammation,  unless,
indeed,  we  choose  to  consider  the  word  inflammation  as  synony-
mous with  alteration  or  disease.  Inflammation  generally  increases
both  the  redness  and  density  of  the  parts  which  it  occupies; —
but  the  discoloration  in  the  cases  alluded  to  is  conjoined,  in  ge-
neral, with  a  perceptible  softening  of  the  heart. It  is  further

*  LITERATURE  OF  MALFORMATION  OF  THE  HEART.

1802.  Meckel,  (J.  F.)  De  cordis  conditionibus  abnormis.  Halaz.  4to.

1814.  Farre,  (J.  R.,  M.T).)  Patbological  researches. Essay  I.  On  malformation  of

the  heart. Lond.  8vo.
1R16.  Hein,  (J.  C.)  De  istis  cordis  deformationibus,  &c.  Goett.  4to.
1824.  Gintrac,  (El.)  Obs.  et  rech.  sur  la  Cyanose. Par.  8vo.

1824.  Ramberg,  De  corde  vasisque  majoribus  eorundum  ratione  abnormi  in  honiine.

Berol,  8vo.  (with  eng.)

1825.  Beckhaus,  (F.)  De  deformationibus  cordis  congenitis.  Besol.

1826.  Louis  (P.  C,  A.)  De  la  communication  des  cavites  droites  avec  les  cavit£s

gauches  du  cocur.  (M6moires  ou  Recherches,  6cc.) Par.  8vo.
1831.  Paget,  (J.,  M.D.)  On  the  congenital  malformations  of  the  heart.  Edin.  8vo.

Burns,  p.  11  ;  Kreysig,  Bi-nd.  iii.  s.  100  ;  Bertin,  p.  431  ;  Hope,  p.  4.76  ;  Andral,
(Precis,)  t.  ii.  p.  309  ;  Otto,  Part  II.  sect.  xix.  p.  267  ;  Meckel,  Handbuch,  vol.  i.

Besides  the  above,  we  have  numerous  inaugural  dissertations  on  the  disease

(Cyanosis,  the  blue  disease)  produced  by  the  intermixture  of  the  arterial  and  venous
blood  one  of  the  consequences  of  the  most  common  form  of  malformation.  The  fol-
lowing are  the  most  recent,  and  all  entitled  either  De  inorbo  caruleo  or  De  Cyanosi :

Seiler,  Niterb.  1805;  Schulor,  (Enip.  1810;  Kaemmerer,  Halo;  1811;  Tobler,

Goett.  1812;  Haase,  Lips.  1813;  Hartmann,  Vienna,  1817;  Marx,  Besol,  1820;
Zimmermann,  Besol.  1822;  Peters,  Ai/i<r,  1822  ;  Horner,  Monach.  1823;  D'Alton,
Bonner,  1824;  Meinecke,  Besol.  1825;  Lewes,  Berol.  1824;  Ermel, .Lips.  1827.


OF  CARDITIS, OH INFLAMMATION OF THK HEART.  577


observable  that,  in  these  cases,  the  pericardium  was  filled  with
pus,  while  not  a  particle  was  found  in  the  substance  of  the  heart
itself:  now,  pus  must  be  considered  as  the  most  unequivocal
indication  of  inflammation.  The  redness  and  injection  of  the
capillaries  are  equivocal  signs,  inasmuch  as  they  may  be  pro-
duced, even  in  the  dead  body,  by  gravitation,  and  as  they  com-
monly appear  to  be  the  consequence  rather  of  the  state  of  things
immediately  preceding  death,  than  of  any  actual  previous  disease.
The  only  case  which  I  have  met  with  of  general  inflammation  of
the  heart  possessing  this  unequivocal  mark,  is  noticed  by  Meckel
in  the  Mem.  de  TAcad.  de  Berlin,  for  1756  *  But  this  case  is
described  with  so  little  precision,  as  merely  to  prove  the  possi-
bility of  the  fact,  and  affords  no  help  towards  a  general  descrip-
tion of  the  disease.  I  am  not  acquainted  with  any  undoubted
example  of  gangrene  of  the  heart.

Instances  of  partial  inflammation  of  the  heart,  characterized
by  the  presence  of  an  abscess  or  ulcer  in  its  parietes,  are  much
more  common.  Benevenius  appears  to  have  been  the  first  that
observed  an  abscess  in  the  walls  of  the  heart.  Bonetus  has  re-
corded a  good  many  such  cases  in  his  Sepulchretum.  I  have
only  met  with  one  instance  of  the  kind.  In  this  (in  a  child
twelve  years  old)  the  abscess  was  situated  in  the  parietes  of  the
left  ventricle,  and  might  have  contained  a  filbert :  it  was  compli-
cated with  pericarditis.  In  another  case,  of  a  man  sixty  years
old,  I  found  an  albuminous  exudation,  of  the  consistence  of

*  Since  the  publication  of  our  author's  Treatise  two  unequivocal  cases,  at  least,  of
general  carditis  have  been  published  in  this  country,  one  by  Mr.  Stanley,  (Med.  Chir.
Trans,  vol.  vii.)  the  other  by  Dr.  Latham  (Lond.  Med.  Gazette,  vol.  iii.).  Mr.  Stan-
ley's case  was  a  complication  of  pericarditis  and  carditis,  but  the  inflammation  of  the
muscular  substance  was  as  well  marked  as  that  of  the  serous  membrane.  "  Upon  cutting
through  its  parietes,"  says  Mr.  Stanley,  "  the  fibres  were  exceedingly  dark  coloured,
almost  of  a  black  appearance.  The  fibres  were  also  very  soft  and  loose  in  their  tex-
ture, being  easily  separable  and  with  facility  compressed  between  the  fingers.  Upon
looking  closely  to  the  cut  surface  exposed  in  the  section  of  either  ventricle,  nume-
rous small  collections  of  dark-coloured  pus  were  visible  in  distinct  situations  among
the  muscular  fasciculi.  Some  of  these  depositions  were  situated  deeply,  near  to
the  cavity  of  the  ventricle,  while  others  were  superficial  and  had  elevated  the  re-
flected pericardium  from  the  heart."  In  Dr.  Latham's  case  "the  whole  heart  was
deeply  tinged  with  dark-coloured  blood  and  its  substance  softened ;  and  here  and
there,  upon  the  section  of  both  ventricles,  innumerable  small  points  of  pus  oozed
from  among  the  muscular  fibres.  This  was  the  result  of  a  most  rapid  and  acute  in-
flammation, in  which  death  took  place  after  an  illness  of  only  two  days."  Even,  on
Laennec's  own  principles,  the  above  must  be  received  as  cases  of  general  carditis  ;
but  there  can,  I  tliink.be  little  doubt  that  he  is  too  rigid  in  excluding  from  the  list
of  inflammatory  affections  of  the  muscular  substance  of  the  heart,  several  other  cases
which  do  not  possess  the  same  decisive  test  of  pus.  It  is  well  remarked  by  Dr.
Hope  that  few  will  concur  with  our  author  in  excluding  softening  and  induration
with  increased  or  diminished  colour,  from  the  signs  of  inflammation  of  the  muscular
substance  of  the  heart.  "  These,"  says  Dr.  Hope,  "  are  results  of  inflammation  in  other
muscles,  and  analogy  points  out  that  they  have  the  same  origin  in  the  heart.  Further
evidence,"  he  continues,  "  is  derived  from  tho  fact  that,  in  cases  of  pericarditis,  the
characters  in  question  sometimes  occupy  only  a  certain  depth  of  the  exterior  surface
of  the  organ,  whence  the  presumption  is  almost  positive  that  they  originate  in  an
extension  of  the  inflammation  from  the  pericardium."  CCvc.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  iii.
p.  239.)—  Traml.


570 OK  CARDITIS,  Oil  INFLAMMATION  OF THE  HEART.


boiled  white  of  egg,  and  of  the  colour  of  pus,  deposited  among
the  muscular  fibres  of  the  left  ventricle.  The  patient  had  pre-
sented symptoms  of  an  acute  inflammation  of  some  of  the  tho-
racic viscera,  not  however  sufficiently  precise  to  indicate  its  par-
ticular site.*  Orthopncea,  and  a  feeling  of  inexpressible  anguish,
had  been  the  chief  symptoms.  In  the  actual  state  of  our  know-
ledge, it  seems  impossible  to  point  out  the  signs  of  abscess  of  the
heart.  It  appears  that,  in  certain  cases,  this  may  exist  without
any  marked  disorder  of  the  health.  The  subject  of  Benevenius's
case,  was  a  person  who  had  been  hanged,  and  who  seemed  previ-
ously in  good  health.

Ulcers  of  the  heart  have  been  still  more  frequently  observed
than  abscess ;  they  have  been  met  with  in  its  external  and  in-
ternal surfaccf-  All  the  cases,  however,  recorded  under  this
name  are  not  quite  correctly  designated.  In  the  Sepulchretum
we  frequently  find  a  case  of  pericarditis,  attended  with  a  rough
and  uneven  pseudo-membraneous  exudation,  mistaken  for  an
ulcer  of  the  exterior  surface  of  the  heart.  This  has  been  no-
ticed by  Morgagni.  (Epist.  21  and  25.)  That  true  ulcers  of  this
surface,  however,  have  been  observed,  is  beyond  doubt.  A  case
of  this  kind  is  described  by  Olaus-Borriehius  in  the  following
words :  "  Cordis  exterior  caro,  profundi  exesa,  in  lacinias,  et
villos  cameos  putrescentes  abierat  and  similar  cases  are  re-
corded by  PeyerS}  and  Graetz.||  Ulcers  on  the  internal  surfaces
of  the  heart  are  perhaps  more  common  than  on  the  external ;  or,
at  least,  there  are  on  record  a  greater  number  of  incontestiblc
examples  of  the  former.  Bonetus.,  Morgagni,  and  Senac,  have
collected  a  great  many  of  these.

The  signs  of  ulcers  of  the  heart  are  as  obscure  as  those  of  ab-
scess. Morgagni,  in  comparing  the  cases  of  this  kind,  published
before  his  time,  remarks  that  the  symptoms  varied  in  every  in-
stance, and  concludes  that  none  are  characteristic  I  know  not
that  auscultation  will  supply  us  with  any  that  arc  more  certain:
and  1  confess  that  I  do  not  expect  that  it  will.  I  have  myself
only  met  with  one  case  of  this  kind.  The  ulcer  was  on  the  in-
ternal surface  of  the  left  ventricle,  and  was  an  inch  long  by  half
an  inch  wide,  and  was  more  than  four  lines  deep  in  its  centre.
This  patient  had  laboured  under  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ven-
tricle, which  had  been  recognised  before  death  :  but  the  stetho-
scope gave  us  no  indication  of  the  ulcer,  nor  even  of  the  rupture
of  the  ventricles  which,  judging  from  the  other  symptoms,  took
place  two  days  before  death,  and  was  the  cause  of  this.^j

*  Atulrnl  mentions*  0086  of  partial  abscess  of  the  heart,  very  like  f.nenncc's,  oc-
curring in  n  ense  of  pericarditis.  (tV-cis  d'Annt.  Path.  t.  ii.  p.  824.) — Traml.

t  Morgagni,  Epist.  xxv.  No.  17,  et  soq. t  Sepuhhri-t.  lib.  ii.  obs.  86.

§  Sepulchret.  sect.  ii.  obs.  21.  ||  Disput.  do  llydr.  pericanl.  sect.  9,

%  Carditis,  properly  so  called,  has  been,  until  very  recently,  con:onnded  with
pericarditis  ;  and  indeed  the  two  diseases  have  been  intentionally  so  confounded  by
ninny  authors  :  it  is  for  this  reason  I  unite  thoir  bibliography.


RUPTURE OF THE  HEART.


57!)


LITERATURE  OF  CARDITIS  AND  PERICARDITIS*

1717.  Berger,  Diss,  de  inflammatione  cordis Witteb.  4to.

1729.  Heimann,  (A.  13.)  Diss,  de  pericardio  sano  et  morboso.  Le'ul.  4to.

1742.  Ililscher,  (S.  P.)  De  exulceratione  pericardii  et  cordis  (JIaller,  Disp.  11.)

1758.  Gloger,  Diss,  de  inflammatione  cordis  vera.  Jence.

1775.  Pohl,  Pr.  de  pericardio  cordi  adharente.  Lips.

1778.  Nebel,  Pr.  de  pericardio  cum  corde  concrete  Liep.

1788.  Nunn,  (M.)  Diss,  de  carditide  spontanea  (Doering  I.)  Erford.

1789.  Metzger,  Diss,  de  carditide  (Doering  I.)  Regiom.
1789.  Metzger,  Diss,  de  carditide.  Regiom.

1807.  Gaulay,  (U.)  M6moire  sur  la  gangrene  du  coeur. Par.  8vo.

1808.  Davis,  (J.  F.,  M.D.)  An  Inquiry  into  the  symp.  and  treat,  of  carditis.  Bath.
1810.  Lemazurier,  (M.  J.)  Diss,  sur  la  pericardite. Par.  4to.

1812.  Bouillier,  (J.  C.)  Diss,  sur  la  difficulty  du  diagnostic  de  la  pericardite.  Pur.

1813—1819.  Merat.  Dict.desSc.  M.(Art.  Cardite)  t.iv.  (Art.  Pericardite)  t.  xl.  Par.

1817.  Hertzberg,  (G.  L.)  De  carditide,  Pt.  I.  and  II.  Hale.

1819.  Roux,  Collectanea  quaidam  de  carditide  exudativa.  Lips.  4to.

1819.  Huber,  (C.  U.  J.)  D.  de  carditide  qua;  epideraice"  grassavit  Sec.  Grouing.  8vo.

1819.  Heim.Vonder  idiopathischen  herzentzundung.  (Rustz.  Mag.  B.  vi.)  Berl.8vo.

1819.  Gittermann,  Geschicbte  einer  epid.  berzentzundung' (Rbein  Jabrb.  B.  vi.)

1820.  Roux,  (F.  L.)  Comment,  de  carditode  exsudat.  (witn  col.  engr.)  Lips.  4to.
1821 — 1826.  Cbomel.  Diet.  deM£d.  (Art.  Cardite)  t.  iv. ;  (Art.  Pericardite)  t.  xvi.
1822.  Dorn,  Beytrag  zur  diagnostik  der  herzentzundung  (Hufeland's  Journ.)  Jan.

1822.  Petrenz,  Diss,  de  pericarditidis  patbologia. Lips.  4to.

1823.  Tacheron,  (C.  F.)  Recberches  anat.  path.  (t.  iii.  Pericardite.) Par.  8vo.

1824.  Puchelt,  (F.  A.  B.)  De  carditide  infantum.  Lips.  8vo.

1824.  Hope,  Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  (Art  Pericarditis  and  Carditis)  vol.  iii.  Land.

1826.  Glas,  Ueber  Hertzentzundung. Wurtzb.  8vo.

1826.  Krause,  ( )  D.  de  carditide  idiopathica  acuta.  Berol.  8vo.

1828.  Stiebel,  Monographia  carditidis  et  pericarditidis  acuta;. Franco/.  4to.

1831.  Horn,  Encycl.  Wbrterb.  (Art.  Carditis)  B.  vii.  Berl.

1832.  Davis,  (J.  F.,  M.D.)  A  second  inquiry  respecting  pericarditis  or  rheumatism

of  the  heart. Bath.  12mo.
See  also Morgagni, ep. 24. 45;  Lieutaud,  Anat.  Med.;  Portal,  Cours d' Anat.  Med. ;
Frank,  Prax.  Med.  Univ. ;  Baillie,  Morb.  Anat. ;  and  the  treatises  of  Corvisart,
Testa,  Burns,  Bertin,  and  Hope  on  diseases  of  the  heart.— Transl.


CHAPTER  XIV.


OF  RUPTURE  OF  THE  HEART.

This  terrible  and,  fortunately,  very  rare  accident,  is  almost
always  the  result  of  ulceration  of  the  ventricular  parietes.  Mo-
rand  has  collected  several  cases  of  this  kind  in  the  Mem.  de
rAcad.  des  Sciences  for  the  year  1732  ;  and  Morgagni  has  de-
scribed a  similar  instance.  (Epist.  27.)  Rupture  of  the  heart
from  violent  exertion,  without  previous  ulceration,  is  much  rarer
still;  and  the  number  of  incontestiblc  examples  of  this  is  very
small.  Several  cases,  recorded  as  such,  are  so  imperfectly  de-
scribed, as  to  leave  a  doubt  whether  the  alleged  rupture  might

p  i'  2


580


RUPTURE  OF  THE  HEART.


not  have  been  rather  the  consequence  of  the  incisions  of  an  in-
expert dissector.*  And  more  frequently  still,  even  in  the  most
recent  cases,  the  affection  is  too  imperfectly  described  to  make  us
certain  that  the  rupture  was  not  the  consequence  of  ulceration.
The  best  authenticated  examples  of  this  Kind  of  rupture  are
those  given  by  Haller  (Elem.  Physiol.)  and  Morgagni.  (Epist.27.)

It  is  surprising  that  the  extreme  thinness  of  the  parietes  of  the
ventricles,  in  the  cases  of  accumulation  of  fat,  does  not  give  rise
to  rupture,  more  especially  towards  the  apex  and  posterior  part
of  the  right  ventricle.  This  is,  however,  so  far  from  being  the
case,  that  ruptures  of  the  right  ventricle  are  much  rarer  than
those  of  the  left;  and  that,  in  this  last,  the  rupture,  when  it
occurs,  is  very  rarely  towards  the  apex,  which  is,  nevertheless,
the  point  where  its  walls  have  the  smallest  degree  of  strength  and
consistence.  The  rupture  of  the  auricles  in  consequence  of  violent
efforts,  and  without  previous  ulceration,  has  been  observed  still
more  rarely  than  that  of  the  ventricles.  Two  instances,  however,
are  recorded  in  the  work  of  M.  Bertin,  p.  50.  In  one  of  these
cases  the  rupture  was  produced  by  a  fall ;  in  the  other  it  occurred
without  any  perceptible  cause:  the  heart  was  enormously  loaded
with  fat.  Portal  knew  an  instance  of  rupture  of  the  vena  cava
superior  where  it  joins  the  auricle,  in  a  young  woman  who  died
suddenly  in  a  cold  bath ;  (Anat.  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  355 ;)  aud  in  the
Ephem.  Cur.  Nat.  (Dec.  iii  Ann.  iii.  obs  82,)  there  is  a  case  of
rupture  of  the  right  auricle  and  vena  cava  in  consequence  of
external  violence.

M.  Corvisart  has  given,  for  the  first  time,  examples  of  another
species  of  rupture  of  the  heart,  of  a  less  certainly  dangerous
nature ;— that,  namely,  of  the  tendons  and  fleshy  pillars  of  the
valves.  (Obs.  33.  40,  41.)  In  the  three  cases  related  by  him
the  rupture  appears  to  have  been  the  consequence  of  violent
efforts.  A  sudden  and  very  intense  feeling  of  suffocation  was
the  immediate  result  of  this  accident,  which  terminated  in  exhi-
biting all  the  usual  symptoms  of  diseases  of  the  heart.  In  a  sub-
sequent chapter  (on  Excrescences  on  the  Valves)  a  case  will  be
detailed  in  which  the  rupture  of  the  tendons  of  the  pillars  appears
to  have  been  the  consequence  of  ulceration.  Bertin  (Obs.  31)
has  seen  rupture  of  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  mitral  valve,  occa-
sioned by  violent  fits  of  coughing.

Rupture  of  the  auricles,  ventricles,N  and  large  vessels  within
the  pericardium,  is  not  always  followed  by  sudden  death.  In
several  cases  the  blood  accumulated  in  the  pericardium  formed  a
solid  coagulum,  which  checked  for  a  time  the  haemorrhage.  Such
a  result  would  especially  obtain,  if  the  relative  size  of  the  heart

*  Mistakes  of  this  kind  may  be  easily  avoided,  since  no  incision  made  after  death
will  fill  the  pericardium  with  coagulated  blood,  as  is  always  the  case  in  true  rupture
of  the  heart. —  Author.


RUl'TUHE 01-' THE I  IK  ART.


681


and  pericardium  were  such  as  to  render  a  great  effusion  of  blood
impracticable.  M.  Cullerier  saw  an  instance  of  rupture  of  the
left  ventricle,  in  which  the  wound  was  blocked  up  by  a  fibrinous
concretion.  (Journ.  de  Med.  Sept.  1806.) — These  various  kinds
of  rupture  can,  at  most,  be  suspected  in  some  cases,  but  cannot  be
certainly  recognized  by  positive  signs.  It  would  seem  possible
i  hat  the  morbid  action  of  the  mitral  valve,  after  the  rupture  of
its  pillars,  might  afford  some  signs  by  the  stethoscope.  The
severity  of  the  symptoms,  in  such  cases,  must  be  very  variable,
according  to  the  extent  and  place  of  the  lesion.  The  rupture
of  all  the  tendons  of  a  pillar  must  occasion  much  disturbance  in
the  circulation.  The  complete  rupture  of  a  pillar,  or  its  sepa-
ration at  its  root,  must  occasion  still  more  serious  effects,  in  con-
sequence of  its  floating  about  in  the  ventricles  almost  like  a  foreign
body.  But  the  rupture  of  one  or  two  tendons  only  ought  not  to
occasion  very  severe  or  permanent  symptoms.*"

*  Apo]>lexy  of  the  heart,  an  affection  which  I  am  surprised  has  not  been  mentioned
by  Laennec,  and  of  which  several  examples  have  been  recently  published  by  M.  Cru-
veilhier,  (Anat.  Path.  3.  Liv.  Par.  1829,)  appears  to  be,  much  more  frequently  than
inflammation,  the  cause  of  rupture  of  the  heart. This  lesion  has  hitherto  been
observed  only  in  the  walls  of  the  left  ventricle  when  in  a  state  of  hypertrophy.  Here,
as  in  the  case  of  other  muscles,  the  boundaries  of  the  apoplectic  deposit  are  formed
partly  by  the  muscular  fibres  ruptured  and  partly  by  their  simple  displacement.
When  quite  recent,  these  deposits  contain  merely  coagulated  black  blood  ;  when
they  have  existed  some  days,  their  walls  are  of  a  blackish  red  which  penetrates  to  a
greater  or  less  depth,  and  we  can  distinguish  some  shreds  of  muscular  fibres  amid
the  blood ;  still  later,  the  contained  fluid  assumes  the  colour  of  wine-lees,  and  appears
as  if  formed  of  an  admixture  of  blood  and  pus ;  and,  at  last,  it  becomes  entirely
purulent,  and  the  walls  of  the  abscess  are  lined  by  false  membranes. M.  Rousset,
whose  thesis  I  had  occasion  to  notice  in  the  chapter  on  Pulmonary  Apoplexy,  (Rech.
Anat.  sur  les  hernorrhagies,  Par.  1827,)  has  recorded  a  very  fine  case  of  muscular
apoplexy,  nearly  universal,  in  which  the  heart  was  the  site  of  three  deposits,  in  the
various  stages  just  enumerated.  These  sanguineous  or  puro-sanguineous  depositions
in  the  walls  of  the  heart,  usually  terminate  in  perforation  either  inwards  into  the
cavity  of  the  ventricle,  or  outwards  into  the  pericardium. In  the  latter  case  their
rupture  is  almost  always  immediately  fatal. In  the  former  case,  the  cavity  becomes
filled  with  the  ventricular  blood,  and  eventually  the  remaining  exterior  wall  of  the
abscess  being  distended,  gives  rise,inall  probability,  according  to  the  ingenious  ex-
planation of  M.  Cruveilhier  {Diet,  de  Med.  Pract.  t.  iii.  Art.  Apoplexie)  to  those
partial  dilatations  of  the  heart,  described  by  M.  Breschet  under  the  name  ot'J'aUe  con-
secutive aneurisms  of  the  heart,  and  of  which  two  cases  by  M.  Berard  were  noticed  in
Chap.  VII.  of  the  present  Book. M.  Reynaud,  however,  in  a  notice  of  a  particular
kind  of  aneurism  of  the  heart,  (Journ.  Hehd.  de  Med.  t.  ii.  p.  363,)  has  attempted  to  show
that  these  excavations  in  the  walls  of  the  left  ventricle  are  sometimes,  in  reality  >  the
result  of  a  partial  dilatation,  they  having  been  observed  to  be  lined  (according  to
him)  witli  a  membrane  continuous  with  that  of  the  natural  lining  of  the  ventricle.
But  in  the  cases  adduced  in  support  of  this  opinion  by  M.  Reynaud,  it  is  observable
that  the  lining  membrane  of  the  aneurismal  sac  was  thickened  around  the  orifice  of
communication  between  it  and  the  cavity  of  the  ventricle  ;  a  circumstance  which
alone  suffices,  in  my  judgment,  to  prove,  that  the  membrane  lining  the  aneurismal  sac
was  not  a  continuation  of  that  of  the  ventricles,  but  an  old  adventitious  membrane
analogous  to  those  which  line  fistula;  in  ano,  and  are  continuous  with  the  mucous
membrane  of  the  rectum. In  this  point  of  view, then,  the  case  of  M.  Reynaud  differs
in  no  essential  respect  from  those  of  MM.  Cruveilhier  and  Rousset,  being  merely  an
example  of  the  manner  in  which  the  apoplectic  abscess  of  the  heart  became  cicatrized.
All  the  cases  of  rupture  of  the  heart  hitherto  published,  appear  to  me  to  confirm  the
opinion  that  cardiac  apoplexy  is  the  most  common  cause  of  them. It  is  proper  to


582


ltUl'TURE OF  THE  HEART.


state,  however,  that  M.  Rachoux,  who  appears  to  have  carefully  examined  the  same
facts,  gives  a  preference  to  the  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  by  means  of  a  softening
of  the  heart ;  (Did.  de  Med.  t.  xvii.  Art.  Rupture;)  and  yet  when  we  consider  that  in
the  opinion  of  this  gentleman,  every  apoplexy  is  preceded  by  softening,  we  ma)',
after  till,  consider  his  opinion  as  not  being  essentially  different  from  that  of  M.  Cru-
veilhier.  Respecting  the  opinion  of  M.  Cruveilhier,  that  apoplexy  never  affects  the
walls  of  the  right  ventricle,  and  that  when  rupture  of  them  takes  place,  it  depends  on
an  atrophy,  a  fatty  degeneration,  or  a  gelatinous  softening  of  the  heart,  1  am  not
prepared  to  say  how  far  it  is  well  or  ill  founded.  The  recorded  facts  appear  to  jus-
tify it  no  farther  than  by  this  consideration — that  the  rupture  of  this  ventricle  being
infinitely  mere  rare  than  that  of  the  left,  it  seems  to  indicate  a  different  cause. —

Rupture  of  the  heart  occurs  much  more  frequently  in  old  than  in  young  persons.
Out  of  nineteen  cases  collected  by  Dr.  Townsend,  (Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  Art.  Rupture
of  the  Heart,)  all  the  patients  were  above  sixty  years  of  age,  except  one  of  fifty-eight.
It  would  likewise  appear  to  be  much  more  prevalent  in  the  male  than  in  the  female
sex,  as  out  of  twenty -five  cases  noticed  by  the  same  author,  sixteen  were  men.  The
experience  of  all  pathologists  confirms  the  assertion  of  Laennec,  that  rupture  of  the
heart  occurs  much  more  frequently  in  the  left  ventricle  than  in  any  other  situation.

TJie  following  synopsis,  which  I  have  drawn  from  the  writings  of  Morgagni,  Plouc-
quet,  Testa,  Bertin,  Rostan,  Blaud,  Otto,  and  from  cases  published  by  Adams,
Townsend,  &c.  &c,  gives  a  view  of  the  seat  of  the  lesions  in  fifty-seven  cases  :

Left  Vent. Right  Vent. Both  Vent. Right  Aur. Left.  Aur.
32.  13.  3.  7.  2.

All  these  cases  occurred  spontaneously,  or  after  slight  exertion,  except  ten,  of
which  number  six  were  the  immediate  consequence  of  blows  on  the  chest,  two
occurred  during  coitus,  one  in  a  fit  of  epilepsy,  and  one  in  an  epileptic  paroxysm.
Of  the  cases  from  blows,  three  had  the  rupture  in  the  right  ventricle,  two  in  the  left
ventricle,  and  one  in  the  right  auricle ;  of  the  two  cases  from  coitus,  one  was  in  the
right,  the  other  in  the  left  ventricle,  and  this  was  also  the  result  in  the  two  other
cases.

LITERATURE  OF  RUPTURE  OF  THE  HEART.
1689.  Bohn,  (J.)  De  renunciatione  vulnerum. Lips.  8vo.

1731.  Salzmann,  (J.)  De  subitanea  morte  a  sanguine  in  pericardium  effuso.  Argent.
1733.  Morand, Mem.  de  l'Acad.  Roy.  des.  Sc.  1732.  Par.
1764.  Mummpen,  Diss,  de  corde  rupto  (with  eng.)  Lips.

1769.  Ludwig,  (C.  G.)  De  dextra  cordis  auricula  rupta.  (Ad. Med.  Pr.  I.)  Lips.  8vo.
1788.  Murray, Diss,  de  corde  rupto. Upsal.  4to.

1803.  Olmi,  (A.)  Mem.  di  una  morte  repentina  cagionata  dalla  rottura  del  cuore.  Fir.
1801.  Pohl,  De  ruptura  cordis  (with  eng.) Lips.  4to.
1808.  Brera, Di  una  straordinaria  rottura  di  cuore. Verona.  8vo.
1820.  Rostan,(L.)  Mem.  surles  ruptures  ducamr.  (Nouv.  Journ.  deMed.)  i'a»-.8vo.
1820.  Blaud,  M6moire  sur  les  ruptures  du  coeur.  (Bibliotheque  Med.  A  out.)  Par.
1820.  Patissier,  Diet,  des  Sc.  Med.  (Art.  Rupture  du  Caaur.)  t.  49.  Par.
1823.  Rochoux,  (L.)  Diss,  sur  les  ruptures  du  cocur.  Par.
1827.  Desormeaux, Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Rupture.)  U  17.  P«r.
1834.  Townsend,  Cyc.  ofPrnct.  Med.  (Art.  Rupture  of  the  Heart.)  vol.  iv.  Lond.
Morgagni,  De  caus.  et  sed.  morb.  Ep.  26,  27.  64.
A  very  great  number  of  single  cases  of  rupture  of  the  heart  are  recorded  by
authors,  a  considerable  part  of  which  are  noticed  in  the  memoirs  above  quoted,  or
referred  to  in  the  Ribliotheca  of  Ploucquot  (Corruptuw)  and  in  tho  elaborate  notes  to
Otto's  Pathological  Anatomy,  Part  II.  Sect.  xix. — Transl.


58i


CHAPTER  XV.

OF  THE  ACCUMULATION OF  FAT ABOUT THE HEART, AND  OF
FATTY  DEGENERATION OF THIS  ORGAN.

In  medical  writings  we  find  many  examples  of  the  heart  being
overloaded  with  fat  in  a  surprising  manner,  to  which  condition  of
the  organ  various  symptoms,  and  even  the  sudden  death  of  the
individuals,  were  attributed.  M.  Corvisart  thinks  that  an  enor-
mous accumulation  of  fat  around  the  heart  may,  in  fact,  produce
such  effects,  although  he  has  met  with  no  permanent  derange-
ment of  any  kind,  in  persons  whose  hearts  were  found  to  be  much
loaded  in  this  manner.  I  have  also  met  with  a  great  many  cases
of  hearts,  similarly  overloaded,  in  subjects  who  had  died  of  various
diseases.  In  these,  the  fat  was  deposited  between  the  muscular
substance  of  the  heart  and  the  investing  pericardium,  and  chiefly
at  the  union  of  the  auricles  and  ventricles,  at  the  origin  of  the
great  vessels,  and  along  the  tract  of  the  coronary  arteries,  also
along  the  two  edges  and  at  the  apex  of  the  heart.  Sometimes  the
posterior  face  of  the  right  ventricle  is  covered  by  this  deposition
in  its  whole  extent ;  a  circumstance  which  rarely  has  place  on  the
surface  of  the  left  ventricle.

The  fatter  the  heart  is,  the  thinner,  in  general,  are  its  walls.
Sometimes  these  are  extremely  thin,  being  reduced  almost  to
nothing,  especially  at  the  apex  of  the  heart  and  the  posterior  side
of  the  right  ventricle.  On  examining  ventricles  affected  in  this
manner,  they  present  the  usual  appearance  internally ;  but  on
cutting  into  them  from  without,  the  scalpel  seems  to  reach  the
cavity  without  encountering  almost  any  muscular  substance,  the
columnae  carneaa  appearing  merely  as  if  bound  together  by  the
internal  lining  membrane.  In  these  cases  the  fat  does  not  appear
to  be  the  product  of  degeneration  of  the  muscular  fibres,  as  these
can  be  separated  by  dissection.  Sometimes,  indeed,  portions  of
fat  penetrate  deeply  between  the  muscular  fibres;  but,  even  in
this  case,  the  distinction  between  the  two  tissues  is  still  very
marked,  and  they  are  confounded  by  no  mutual  gradation  of
colour  and  consistence.  It  would  seem  probable  from  this,  that,
from  pressure  or  some  unknown  aberration  of  the  powers  of  nutri-
tion, the  muscular  substance  has  wasted  in  proportion  as  the
investing  fat  has  increased.  It  might  be  reasonable  to  expect
rupture  of  the  heart  from  an  affection  of  this  kind  ;  such  an  in-
stance, however,  has  never  occurred  to  me.*  Very  commonly  we
find,  in  such  subjects,  a  large  quantity  of  fat  in  the  lower  part  of

*  In  several  of  the  cases  of  rupture  recorded  by  authors,  the  heart  was  prodi-
giously fat.  See,  for  instance,  one  of  AJorgagni's  cases,  Ep.  xxvii. ;  one  of  M. Berlin's
cases,  p.  50 ;  and  two  cases  by  Adams,  in  the  Dub.  Ilosp.  Rep.  vol.  iv. — Trau^l.


584


INDURATION OF THE  HEART.


the  mediastinum,  particularly  between  the  pericardium  and
pleura.  This  fat,  much  reddened  by  its  small  vessels,  and  covered
by  its  pleura,  assumes  a  gross  resemblance  to  the  figure  of  a  cock's
comb,  and  is  firm.  The  fat  surrounding  the  heart,  on  the  con-
trary, is  almost  always  of  a  pale  yellow  colour,  and  is  only
of  moderate  consistence.  I  have  not  observed,  nor  yet  has
M.  Corvisart,  any  symptoms  that  could  directly  denote  the
existence  of  an  accumulation  of  this  sort.  I  apprehend  it  must
exist  in  a  very  great  degree  before  it  gives  rise  to  any  serious
complaint.  This  is  not,  therefore,  the  condition  I  wish  to  denote
by  the  name  of  Fatty  degeneration  of  the  Heart.

Fatty  degeneration  of  the  heart  is  an  actual  transformation  of
the  muscular  substance  into  a  substance  possessing  all  the
chemical  and  physical  properties  of  fat.  It  is  precisely  similar
to  the  fatty  degeneration  of  the  muscles  observed  by  Haller,*  and
Vicq-d'Azyr.-f-  I  have  only  met  with  it  in  a  small  portion  of  the
heart  at  one  time,  and  only  towards  the  apex.  In  these  portions
the  natural  red  colour  is  superseded  by  a  pale  yellow,  like  that
of  a  dead  leaf,  and  is,  consequently,  nearly  the  same  as  that
of  certain  states  of  softening  of  the  heart.  This  change  of  struc-
ture appears  to  proceed  from  without  inwards.  Near  the  internal
surface  of  the  ventricles,  the  muscular  texture  is  still  very  distin-
guishable ;  more  externally,  it  is  less  so ;  and  still  nearer  the
surface  it  becomes  gradually  confounded,  both  in  colour  and  con-
sistence, with  the  natural  fat  of  the  apex  of  the  heart.  In  such
cases,  however,  even  the  portions  that  still  retain  most  of  the
muscular  character,  when  compressed  between  two  pieces  of
paper,  still  grease  these  very  much.  This  character  distinguishes
this  species  of  degeneration  from  simple  softening  of  the  organ.
I  have  never  found  rupture  of  the  heart  attributable  to  this
change,  any  more  than  to  the  morbid  accumulation  of  fat.  It  is
denoted  by  no  symptoms  with  which  I  am  acquainted. %


CHAPTER  XVI.

OF CARTILAGINOUS  OR  BONY  INDURATIONS  OF  THE  MUSCULAR
SUBSTANCE OF THE  HEART.

I  have  never  met  with  ossification  of  the  muscular  substance  of
the  heart,  and  only  a  small  number  of  examples  of  this  arc

*  Opusc.  Tatliol.  t  Tom.  v.  Edit,  de  Moreau.

\  I  stated  in  the  last  note  (p.  r>Q2)  M.  Cruveilhier's  opinion  that  rupture  of  the
right  ventricle  may  ho  owing  to  the  fatty  degeneration  of  the  muscular  suhstann- ;  il
is  proper,  however,  to  ohserve  that  he  has  adduced  no  example  of  the  sort,  and  of  the
facts  formerly  noticed,  there  is  not  one  calculated  to  hear  out  this  opinion,  except,
perhaps,  that  of  M.  Giatoloup. — (Mi  L.)


INDURATION OK THE  HEART.


585


on  record.  M.  Corvisart  found,  in  the  case  of  a  man  who  died
of  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ventricle,  the  whole  apex  of  the  heart,
and,  more  partially,  the  columnae  carneae  of  the  left  ventricle
converted  into  cartilage.  (Op.  Cit.  p.  171.)

Haller  (Opusc.  Pathol.)  found,  in  a  child,  whose  heart  was  of
the  natural  size,  the  inferior  part  of  the  right  ventricle,  the  most
muscular  parts  of  the  left  auricle,  and  the  sigmoid  valves  of  the
aorta  and  pulmonary  artery,  in  a  state  of  ossification.  Filling,
in  the  case  of  an  asthmatic  subject,  met  with  ossification  of  one
of  the  fleshy  columns  of  the  left  ventricle.*  M.  Renauldin  has
published,  in  the  Journal  de  Med.  for  January,  1816,  a  very
interesting  case  of  the  same  kind.  The  patient  was  a  man  thirty-
three  years  of  age,  much  addicted  to  study,  and  subject  to  violent
palpitations  on  the  slightest  motion.  "  On  applying  the  hand  to
the  region  of  the  heart  a  sort  of  motion  of  the  ribs  was  felt,  and
even  the  slightest  pressure  produced  very  acute  pain,  which  lasted
long  after  the  pressure  was  discontinued.  On  examining  the  body
after  death  the  heart  was  found  extremely  hard  and  heavy.  On
attempting  to  cut  the  left  ventricle,  great  resistance  was  found,
owing  to  the  total  conversion  of  the  muscular  fibre  into  a  sort  of
petrifaction ,  having  in  some  places  a  sandy  character,  in  others
a  resemblance  to  saline  crystallization.  The  grains  of  this  species
of  sand  were  very  contiguous  to  each  other,  and  became  larger
towards  the  interior  of  the  ventricle.  They  were  continuous  with
the  columnae  carneae,  which  were  themselves  converted  into  a
similar  substance,  but  still  retained  their  original  form,  only  much
enlarged.  Some  of  these  sabulous  concretions  were  of  the  size  of
the  point  of  the  little  finger,  and  resembled  small  stalactites
shooting  in  different  directions.  The  ventricle  was  thickened.
The  right  ventricle  and  great  arterial  trunks  were  sound.  The
temporal  and  maxillary  arteries,  and  also  a  part  of  both  the  radial
arteries,  were  ossified."  In  the  case  of  a  subject  with  ossification
of  the  pericardium,  Burns  found  some  of  the  fleshy  columns  trans-
formed into  bone.-f-

I  am  persuaded  that  a  bony  or  cartilaginous  induration,  as  ex-
tensive as  that  in  the  three  cases  above  mentioned,  might  be
recognized  by  the  stethoscope  by  means  of  a  considerable  increase
and  likewise  a  particular  modification  of  the  sound  of  the  heart.
I  believe  cases  of  this  kind  are  among  those  in  which  the  sound
of  the  heart  may  be  heard  at  some  distance  from  the  patient.
We  frequently  find  on  the  interior  surface  of  the  ventricles,  espe-
cially the  left,  cartilaginous  scales  continuous  with  the  lining

*  Hufeland's  Journ.  B.  xv.  p.  155.

t  This  is  not  only  an  imperfect  but  an  incorrect  account  of  the  case  of  Margaret
Henderson  described  by  Burns,  (p.  129,)  and  which  is  one  of  the  most  extraordinary
on  record.  In  this,  "  the  whole  extent  of  the  pericardium  covering  the  ventricles,
and  the  ventricles  themselves,  except  about  a  cubic  inch  at  the  apex  of  tho  heart,
were  ossified,  and  firm  as  the  skull."  Many  cases  of  partial  ossification  are  on  record!
—  Trausl.


580


ACCIDENTAL  PRODUCTIONS.


membrane,  and  apparently  deposited  between  it  and  the  muscular
substance  of  the  heart.  These  plates  were  exactly  of  the  same
kind  as  those  described  by  me  in  another  place,*  and  are  gene-
rally of  small  extent.  We  ought  to  consider  as  a  variety  of  these
incrustations,  that  evident  thickening  and  milk-white  colour  of
the  inner  membrane  of  the  left  ventricle,  which  are  frequently
met  with,  over  a  great  extent,  in  the  case  of  hypertrophy.  I  have
never  seen  this  after  it  had  reached  the  point  of  ossification :  but
an  example  of  this  kind  is  described  in  Kreysig's  work,  vol.  iii.
p.  43.  The  ossification  of  the  auricle,  some  examples  of  which
we  find  in  the  works  of  Burns,  Kreysig,  and  Bertin,  ought  also,
in  my  opinion,  to  be  considered  as  the  result  of  these  incrustations
— at  least  in  the  majority  of  cases.  I  have  met  with  several  cases
of  this,  over  a  small  extent;  but  have  never  seen  ossification
of  the  muscular  substance  of  the  auricles.


CHAPTER  XVII.

OF  OTHER  ACCIDENTAL PRODUCTIONS FOUND  IN  THE  HEART,

Of  all  the  organs  of  the  body  the  heart  is  perhaps  the  least  liable
to  these  productions,  if  we  except  ossifications.  Three  or  four
times  only  have  I  met  with  tubercles  in  the  muscular  substance
of  the  heart.  In  the  Sepulchretum  we  meet  with  only  a  small
number  of  instances  of  tumours  in  this  organ,  which  seem  to  be-
long to  the  class  of  cancers  or  of  tubercles.'!"  Columbus  (De  re
Anat.  1.  xv.),  in  examining  the  dead  body  of  Cardinal  Gambara,
met  with  two  hard  tumours  of  the  size  of  an  egg  in  the  substance
of  the  left  ventricle.  Marianus,  in  the  case  of  a  young  man,  com-
municated by  him  to  Morgagni,  found  numerous  small  tubercles
implanted  on  the  outer  surface  of  the  right  auricle;  (Epist  lxxviii.
13;)  and  similar  tubercles,  but  much  larger,  were  found  in  the
mediastinum,  at  the  roots  of  the  lungs,  in  the  lymphatic  glands
and  cellular  substance  of  the  abdominal  and  thoracic  parietes.
M.  Recamier  informs  me  that  he  found  the  heart  partly  converted
into  a  scirrhous  substance,  like  lard,  in  a  case  in  which  there  were,
moreover,  cancerous  tumours  in  the  lungs.  Within  these  last
four  years,  I  have  met  with  two  cases  of  the  encephaloid  cancer
of  the  heart.  In  one  of  these,  the  cancerous  matter  formed  small
masses,  of  the  size  of  filberts,  or  less,  in  the  muscular  substance
of  the  ventricles ;  in  the  other  it  was  deposited  in  layers  of  one
to  four  lines  thick,  along  the  coronary  vessels,  between  the  pcri-

*  Diet,  tic  Sc.  Mt'il.  Art.  Curt.  Accident.

f  Lib.  ii.  sect.  vii.  obs.  cxii. ;  sect.  i.  obs.  ii. ;  lib.  iii.  sect.  xxi.  obs.  xxxiii.


ACCIDENTAL  PRODUCTIONS.


587


cardium  and  heart.  MM.  Andral  and  Baylc  have  lately  pub-
liahed  three  similar  observations  in  the  Revue  Med.  for  May,
1824,  and  some  others  have  been  published  more  recently  still.
From  these  facts  it  may  be  concluded,  that  cancerous  productions
may  be  developed  in  the  heart,  as  in  other  organs,  under  two
principal  forms, — that  of  isolated  tumours,  and  that  of  inter-
stitial deposition,  which  last  constitutes  what  is  commonly  termed
transformation  of  the  organ  into  a  cancerous  substance.  This
affection  rarely  exists  without  there  being  similar  productions  in
other  organs,  particularly  the  lungs.

Serous  cysts  occur  very  seldom  in  the  heart.  When  met  with,
they  are  most  commonly  found  between  the  muscular  substance
and  the  investing  serous  tunic.  Examples  of  this  kind  are  re-
lated by  Ballonius,  Houlier,  Cordceus,  Rolfinckius,*  Thebesius,+
Fan  ton,;};  Valsalva  and  Morgagni.§  Dupuytren  met  with  serous
cysts  in  the  walls  of  the  right  auricle,  and  projecting  into  its
cavity  so  as  to  augment  it  to  the  size  of  the  whole  remaining
portion  of  the  heart.  ||  Morgagni  relates  a  case  from  which  it
appears  that  vesicular  worms  may  be  developed  in  the  heart,  in
the  body  of  an  old  man,  who  had  died  of  an  acute  disease,  and
who  had  never  exhibited  symptoms  of  cardiac  disorder,  he  found
a  cyst  of  the  size  of  a  small  cherry,  half-buried  in  the  walls  of
the  left  ventricle,  and  when  cut  into,  discharged  "  a  small  mem-
brane, containing  whitish  mucus,  amid  which  one  particle  was
observed  as  hard  as  tendon."  (Epist.  xxi.  4.)  It  is  impossible  to
mistake,  in  this  description,  the  characters  of  the  genus  cysticercus.
The  small  membrane  full  of  mucus  was  the  caudal  vesicle,  and
the  hard  particle,  was  the  body  doubled  upon  itself.  From  the
size  we  may  presume  that  it  was  the  cysticercus  Jinnus  of
Rudolphi ;  a  presumption  the  more  probable  that  it  is  almost
the  only  species  that  has  hitherto  been  found  in  the  human
body.^[

*  Sepulchret.  lib.  iii.  sect.  36.;  Ibid.  De  Morb.  Intern,  lib.  ii.  cap.  xxix. ;  Ibid,
sect.  xxi.  obs.  xxi. ;  Ibid.  sect.  viii.  obs.  vi.

t  Ephem.  Nat.  Cur.  cent.  iv.  obs.  cxv.  J  Obs.  Anat.  Med.  xi.  and  xv.

$  De  Sed.  et  Caus.  Epist.  iii.  26  ;  Epist.  xxv.  15.
j|  Journ.  de  Med.  t.  v.  p.  139.

f  Respecting  the  various  morbid  productions  and  degenerations  mentioned  in  the
present  chapter,  much  more  ample  information  is  to  be  found  scattered  through  the
writings  of  the  older  and  modern  pathologists,  in  the  systematic  collections  of  cases
of  morbid  anatomy,  and  in  the  periodical  journals  and  transactions  of  societies.  For
the  fullest  and  most  accurate  collection  of  references  to  the  individual  cases,  1  refer
the  reader  to  the  elaborate  and  very  valuable  Compendium  of  Pathological  Anatomy,
by  professor  Otto,  for  an  excellent  translation  of  which  the  profession  in  this  countrv
are  much  indebted  to  Mr.  South.  In  this  work,  in  the  annotations  to  §  183,  p.  208,
are  pointed  out  the  sources  whence  ample  information  may  be  procured  on  all  the'
subjects  referred  to  by  our  author,  viz.  Indurated  Tumours,  Steatomes,  Hydatids,

Serous  Cysts,  Calcareous  Tuiuours,  Tubercles,  Encephaloid  Cancer,  and  Carcinoma.

TransL


688


CHAPTER  XVUI.

OF  CARTILAGINOUS  AND  BONY  INDURATION  OF  THE  VALVES  AND
LINING  MEMBRANE  OF  THE  HEART.

Sect.  I. — Anatomical  Characters  of  Induration  of  the  Valves.

The  mitral  and  aortal  valves  are  subject  to  the  growth  of  carti-
laginous or  bony  productions,  which  increase  their  thickness,
alter  their  shape,  and  obstruct,  sometimes  almost  totally,  the  ori-
fices in  which,  they  are  placed. The  tricuspid  and  sigmoid
valves  of  the  pulmonary  artery  tire  much  less  subject  to  these
alterations,  although  they  are  not  quite  exempt  from  them,  as
Bichart  thought. Morgagni  found  (Epist.  37)  in  the  case  of  an
old  woman,  both  these  partially  indurated. He  likewise  found,
in  a  young  woman,  the  sigmoid  valves  of  the  pulmonary  artery
agglutinated  by  means  of  a  cartilaginous  induration,  partly  os-
sified, so  as  considerably  to  diminish  the  diameter  of  the  artery.
In  this  patient  the  foramen  ovale  was  likewise  open,  and  the
symptoms  of  the  blue  disease  were  present. Vieusens,  Hunauld,
Bertin  senior,  and  Horn,  have  met  with  instances  of  bony  or  car-
tilaginous indurations  on  the  valves  of  the  cavities  of  the  right
side.  (See  Kreysig  and  Bertin.)  But  of  all  the  cases  of  this  kind,
none  is  more  extraordinary  than  one  observed  by  Criiwell.*  In
this,  the  tricuspid  and  mitral  valves  were  cartilaginous  in  several
places  ;  small  bony  concretions  existed  in  the  vena  cava ;  laminae
of  bone  extended  from  the  base  of  the  right  auricle  under  the  in-
ternal membrane  of  the  ventricle,  some  of  the  columnar  carneas  of
which  were  ossified  ;  and,  finally,  laminae  still  thinner  and  nar-
rower, bony  or  cartilaginous,  penetrated  the  muscular  substance
of  the  two  ventricles. A  small  hollow  globular  body,  perforated
by  two  openings  of  a  partly  cartilaginous  and  partly  bony  tex-
ture, was  fixed  between  the  valves  of  the  pulmonary  artery.  This
body  seemed  to  have  been  recently  detached  from  the  interven-
tricular septum,  and  still  retained  at  one  end  some  marks  of  its
adhesion. The  pericardium  was  attached  to  the  heart  and  con-
tained some  ossified  points. Corvisart  twice  observed  the  carti-
laginous induration  of  the  base  of  the  tricuspid  valve,  and  an-
other is  recorded  in  his  journal,  which  occurred  in  the  person  of
an  English  general.t Burns  likewise  gives  a  case  of  partial  os-
sification of  the  tricuspid  valves,  (Op.  Cit.  p.  31,)  and  Bertin
informs  us,  that,  in  the  course  of  twenty  years,  lie  has  four  times
met  with  a  cartilaginous  induration  of  the  same  parts. He  has

*  De  Cord,  ot  Vasor.  OBtoogenosi  iu  quudragcnaiiu  obsei  v. Halt,  176.5.
t  .Totirn.  de  Med.  t.  xix.  p.  4613.


OSSIFICATION OK THE  VALVES.


580


published  one  of  these  cases  (Obs.  LIV.)  "in  which  the  laminae  of
the  tricuspid  valve,  hard,  thickened,  and  united  together  by  their
edges,  formed  a  sort  of  cartilaginous  septum,  perforated  in  its
centre  by  an  opening,  scarcely  capable  of  admitting  the  point  of
the  little  finger."  I  have  myself  sometimes  met  with  slight  car-
tilaginous incrustations  both  at  the  base  and  point  of  the  tricus-
pid valves,  and  also  of  the  sigmoid  of  the  pulmonary  artery.
Once  only  have  I  seen  these  advanced  to  the  stage  of  ossification  ;
and  it  ought  to  be  observed  that  in  almost  all  the  cases  alluded
to,  the  induration  of  the  valves  on  the  right  side  was  only  carti-
laginous. It  is  especially  in  cases  of  preternatural  communica-
tion between  the  cavities  of  the  heart,  that  the  valves  of  the  right
side  have  been  found  affected.  Bertin  relates  a  case  of  this  kind
communicated  to  him  by  M.  Louis  (Obs.  LVII.)  in  which  the
tricuspid  valve  was  partly  ossified,  and  the  sigmoid  valves  of  the
pulmonary  artery  formed  a  sort  of  fibrous  ring  hardly  two  lines
and  a  half  in  width.  In  this  case  there  was  a  small  opening,  two
lines  wide,  between  the  right  ventricle  and  the  origin  of  the  aorta.
In  another  case  observed  by  M.  Bertin  himself  (Obs.  LVI.)  the
foramen  ovale  was  unclosed,  and  the  mouth  of  the  pulmonary
artery  was  "  closed  by  a  horizontal  septum,  pierced  by  an  open-
ing two  and  a  half  lines  in  width."  From  these  facts  it  appears
probable  that  the  action  of  the  arterial  blood  has  a  great  influ-
ence over  the  production  of  bone  in  the  heart,  an  opinion  ren-
dered still  more  probable,  by  the  consideration  of  the  great
frequency  of  these  in  the  valves  of  the  left  side  of  the  heart.  I
have  sometimes  noticed  small  cartilaginous  incrustations  both  on
the  base  and  at  the  extremities  of  these  valves.*

The  cartilaginous  induration  of  the  mitral  valve  is  some-
times confined  to  the  fibrous  bands  found  in  its  base.  In  this
case  it  has  the  appearance  of  a  very  smooth,  though  unequal
ring,  lessening  the  orifice  in  which  it  is  situated.  This  some-
times has  the  consistence  of  perfect  cartilage,  sometimes  only
that  of  imperfect  cartilage.  Similar  incrustations  sometimes
are  met  with  in  other  parts  of  these  valves ;  but  those  at  the
basis  or  points  are  commonly  thickest.  The  bony  indurations
present  the  same  characters  as  to  situation,  and  are  still  more
unequal  as  to  thickness.  Though  formed  in  the  interior  of  the
valve,  they  often  project  from  it  quite  uncovered ;  and  are  so
rough  as  to  have  led  some  authors  to  consider  them  as  carious.
These  ossifications  are  never  perfect  bone;  they  are  whiter  and
more  opaque,  more  fragile,  and  evidently  contain  a  greater  pro-
portion of  phosphate  of  lime.  On  this  account  they  have  been
frequently  named  stones  or  calculi.  In  fact,  they  frequently
bear  a  striking  resemblance  to  small  pieces  of  stone,  of  very  ir-

*  Dr.  Latham  has  found  the  right  valves  affected  in  one-third  of  the  cases  in
which  the  left  were;  Dr.  Hope  has  found  the  proportion  smaller,  one  in  four  or
five.— Transl.


500


OSSIFICATION  OF THE  VALVES.


regular  surface,  recently  broken ;  more  especially  when  they  are
very  rough,  and  have  pierced  and  destroyed,  over  a  great  extent,
the  membrane  which  originally  invested  them.  When  they  are
situated  in  the  floating  extremities  of  the  valve,  these  are  occa-
sionally united  together,  so  as  to  reduce  the  orifice  to  a  mere  slit,
which  will,  sometimes,  scarcely  admit  the  blade  of  a  knife  or  a
goose-quill.  M.  Corvisart  found  the  orifice  between  the  auricle
and  ventricle  reduced  to  a  channel  three  lines  wide,  and  bent  like
the  canalis  caroticus,  from  the  thickening  of  the  ossified  mitral
valve.  Sometimes,  though  rarely,  the  tendinous  cords  of  the
mitral  valve  are  affected  in  the  same  manner;  and  M.  Corvisart
in  one  case  found  the  whole  of  one  of  its  pillars  ossified.  (Op.
Cit.  p.  212.*)

The  ossification  of  the  sigmoid  valves  of  the  aorta  may  com-
mence, like  that  of  the  mitral,  in  their  base  or  their  loose  edges ;
at  least  the  greater  frequency  of  occurrence,  and  the  greater
thickness  of  these  two  parts,  and  the  comparative  rarity  of  ossi-
fication in  the  intermediate  portions,  seem  to  indicate  the  ossifi-
cation as  beginning  in  these  points.  When  in  the  loose  extremity,
the  ossification  seems  most  frequently  to  originate  in  the  small
tubercles  known  by  the  name  of  the  corpora  sesamoidea.

When  the  ossification  is  confined  to  the  floating  edge  of  the
valves,  or  when  the  base,  though  ossified,  is  little  thickened,  the
valve  may  still  perform  its  functions,  provided  the  middle  portion
of  it  be  still  sound.  But  when  the  ossification  is  extensive,  the
valves  grow  together,  and  get  incurvated,  either  towards  their
concave  or  convex  side,  so  as  to  acquire  the  appearance  of  certain
shells.  In  this  state  they  are  immovable,  being  either  fixed  on
the  side  of  the  aorta,  or  in  the  orifice  of  the  ventricle.  Very
frequently,  of  the  three  valves  one  is  bent  in  a  direction  opposite
that  of  the  two  others.  In  one  case,  M.  Corvisart  found  all  the
three  valves  ossified  in  their  closed  position  so  as  to  leave  merely
an  extremely  small  slit  for  the  passage  of  the  blood.  The  evil
of  this  was  partly  obviated  by  one  of  the  valves,  although  ossified
and  very  thick,  still  retaining,  at  its  base,  sufficient  mobility  to
allow  an  increase  of  one  or  two  lines  to  the  orifice  during  the
action  of  the  heart.  (Op.  Cit.  p.  220.)  In  one  case  (Obs.  LIII.)
M.  Bertin  found  the  three  sigmoid  valves  ossified,  and  one  of
them  enlarged  to  the  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg.-{-

*  In  ono  of  my  cases  of  diseased  heart,  (Original  Cases,  p.  133,)  three  of  the  pillars
of  the  mitral  valve  were  completely  ossified  through  their  whole  extent,  with  the  ex-
ception of  a  minute  portion  at  each  extremity,  which  was  semi-cartilaginous  or  fibrous,
and  flexible;  an  arrangement  which  seemed  absolutely  necessary  to  admit  the  natural
contraction  of  the  ventricle.—  Traml.

t  One  of  the  roost  remarkable  cases  of  valvular  disease  of  the  heart  that  I  have  met
with,  is  that  of  Mary  Horn,  recorded  in  ray  Original  Cases,  p.  178  ;  and  the  diagnosis
of  which  (as  fur  as  the  valves  were  concerned)  was  very  accurately  established  by
means  of  the  stethoscope.  This  girl  died  shortly  after  the  last  report  given  in  the
published  case.  The  organic  lesions  found  on  dissection  were  the  following: — the
right  nuriculo- ventricular  opening  wj>8  converted  into  a  circular  foramen  (capable  of


OSSIFICATION OF THE  VALVES.


591


Sect.  II. — Signs  of  Induration  of  the  Valves.

The  symptoms  of  ossification  of  the  mitral  valve  are  little  dif-
ferent from  those  attending  the  same  affection  of  the  sigmoid.

admitting  the  thumb)  with  smooth  rounded  cartilaginous  edges  ;  the  left  auriculo-
ventricular  opening  had  undergone  precisely  the  same  changa,  only  the  orifice  on  this
side  admitted  the  point  of  the  finger  with  difficulty;  the  sigmoid  valves  of  the  aorta
were  cartilaginous  and  united  together,  so  as  to  leave  a  mere  slit  just  capable  of  ad-
mitting a  large  goose-quill.  Both  auricles  were  dilated;  the  right  in  an  extreme
degree;  the  left  ventricle  was  enormously  hypertrophied,  with  diminution  of  its
cavity;  the  right  very  slightly  hypertrophied  but  dilated.  The  whole  heart  was  of
an  immense  size. — Transl.

*  Our  author  here,  as  elsewhere,  in  his  zeal  for  physical  diagnosis,  overlooks  the
ordinary  or  general  symptoms  of  the  disease.  In  the  present  case  of  disease  of  the
valves,  the  symptoms  are  certainly,  at  best,  only  equivocal  indications  of  the  patho-
logical state  of  the  heart;  still  they  are  far  from  being  valueless  as  signs,  whether
taken  singly  or  in  conjunction  with  those  afforded  by  the  stethoscope.  In  briefly
noticing  these  in  this  place,  I  am  almost  compelled  to  avail  myself  of  the  observations
of  Dr.  Hope,  as  they  are  so  strictly  in  accordance  with  my  own,  that  if  I  did  not
formally  quote  his  work  I  should  have  the  appearance  of  borrowing,  without  acknow-
ledgment. (See  his  Treatise  on  Diseases  of  the  Heart,  and  the  article  on  Diseases  of
the  Vulies  of  the  Heart,  in  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Pract.  Med.)

"  Whether  the  disease  of  the  valves  be  cartilaginous,  osseous,  or  consist  of  vege-
tations, the  general  symptoms  are  the  same,  if  the  degree  of  contraction  be  equal.
These  are,  cough,  copious  watery  expectoration,  dyspnoea,  orthopnoea,  frightful
dreams  and  starting  from  sleep,  turgescence  of  the  jugular  veins,  lividity  of  the  face,
anasarca,  injection  of  almost  all  the  mucous  membranes,  passive  hemorrhages,  espe-
cially of  the  mucous  membranes,  engorgement  of  the  liver,  spleen,  &c.  and  congestion
of  the  brain,  with  symptoms  of  oppression  sometimes  amounting  to  apoplexy.

"  The  peculiar  and  distinctive  symptoms  of  valvular  disease  are  the  following: —
When  the  disease  is  combined  with  hypertrophy  or  dilatation,  as  is  commonly  the
case,  the  symptoms  are  more  severo  than  those  of  hypertrophy  or  of  dilatation  alone,
the  paroxysms  of  palpitation  and  dyspnoea  in  particular,  being  more  violent,  more
obstinate,  and  more  easily  excited. The  action  of  the  heart  is  irregular. This,  it  is
true,  may  sometimes  be  the  case  in  hypertrophy  and'in  dilatation,  but  here  it  is  an
accidental,  not  an  essential  character. The  pulse  may  in  valvular  disease  be  small,
weak,  intermittent,  irregular,  and  unequal ;  and  it  may  even  be  small  and  weak  while
the  heart  is  giving  a  violent  impulse — a  contrast  which  affords  one  of  the  strongest
presumptions  of  valvular  disease. The  characters  of  the  pulse  just  described,  are
most  marked  in  contraction  of  the  mitral  valve;  and,  if  its  contraction  be  great,  they
are  all  invariably  present ;  for  as,  in  this  case,  the  left  ventricle  is  not  freely  supplied
with  blood,  it  is  not  stimulated  to  contract  at  the  natural  intervals  and  with  suitable
energy. A  slight  contraction  of  the  mitral,  (when,  for  instance,  the  diameter  of  the
aperture  is  not  diminished  more  than  a  quarter  of  an  inch,)  does  not  necessarily  pro-
duce an  unsteady  pulse,  as  it  still  allows  of  an  adequate  supply  of  blood  to  the  ven-
tricle. When,  however,  the  circulation  is  hurried,  the  pulse  generally  becomes  un-
steady. Contraction  of  the  aortic  valves  must  be  very  great  to  render  the  pulse
small,  weak,  intermittent,  and  irregular. I  have  never  seen  it  possess  these  cha-
racters in  any  marked  degree  unless  the  valves  were  either  soldered  together  by  car-
tilaginous degeneration,  or  more  or  less  fixed  by  ossification  in  the  closed  position,
so  that  the  aperture  was  only  a  limited  chink. An  induration  the  size  of  an  ordinary
pea,  has  little  effect  on  the  fulness,  firmness,  and  regularity  of  the  pulse,  and  slighter
degrees  of  contraction  appear  to  have  no  effect  on  it  whatever. The  pulse  is  less
irregular  when  the  valvular  contraction  is  on  the  right  side,  than  when  it  is  on  the
left :  it  is  not  so  small  and  weak  from  a  contraction  on  the  right  side  as  on  the  left,
and  contraction  of  the  tricuspid  valve  causes  more  irregularity  than  contraction  of
the  valves  of  the  pulmonary  artery. — Pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart  is  another  symp-
tom of  disease  of  the  valves. It  is  true  that  palpitation  may  occasion  pain  though
there  be  no  disease  of  the  valves,  and  I  have  frequently  met  with  it  from  this  cause
in  hypertrophy  and  dilatation. It  is  likewise  true  that  palpitation  may  occasion  pain


592


OSSIFICATION  OF  THE  VALVES.


According  to  M.  Corvisart  the  principalsign  of  the  former  lesion
is  "  a  peculiar  rustling  sensation  (bruissement)  perceived  on  the
application  of  the  hand  to  the  region  of  the  heart."  This  pe-
culiar sensation  is  nothing  else  than  the  purring-thrill  already
described.  It  is  assuredly  very  frequently  observed  in  the  case
of  ossification  of  the  mitral  or  sigmoid  valves  when  this  exists  in
a  high  degree ;  but,  as  I  formerly  stated,  it  may  exist  when  these
valves  are  perfectly  sound,  and  it  is  almost  always  absent  when
the  induration  is  not  so  extensive  as  materially  to  obstruct  the
orifices.  The  bellows-sound  is  a  much  more  constant  sign:  it
accompanies  the  contraction  of  the  left  auricle  wrhen  the  mitral
valve  is  affected,  and  that  of  the  ventricle,  when  the  induration
is  in  the  sigmoid.  But  even  this  is  wanting  when  the  alteration
is  not  extensive,  and  as  it  is,  moreover,  very  common  when  the
heart  is  perfectly  sound,  we  must  lay  no  stress  on  it  as  a  sign,
unless  it  be  combined  with  other  circumstances  calculated  to
confirm  the  diagnosis.  Accordingly,  when  the  sound  of  the  bel-
lows, rasp,  or  file,  persists  in  the  left  auricle,  either  continuously
or  interruptedly,  for  several  months; — when  it  is  found  only
there,  and  exists  even  in  the  greatest  quietude;  when  it  is
scarcely  lessened  by  venesection,  or,  when  lessened,  if  it  still
leaves  behind  it  a  degree  of  roughness  in  the  sound  of  the  auricle,
— or,  yet  more,  when  the  purring-thrill  co-exists  with  this; — we
may  be  assured  that  the  left  auriculo-ventricular  orifice  is  con-
tracted.* If  the  same  phenomena  occur,  under  similar  circum-
stances, in  the  left  ventricle,  we  may  be  equally  certain  that  the
aortal  orifice  is  contracted.

Three  or  four  times,  during  the  last  four  years,  I  have  dis-
covered this  lesion,  by  means  of  these  signs.  Three  similar  ex-
amples, equally  verified  by  dissection,  are  recorded  in  M.  Ber-
ries work  (Obs.  49,  50,  51 ;)  and  a  fourth  is  given  in  the  collec-
tion of 'cases  published  by  Dr.  Forbes.  (Case  VII.)  But  if  these
phenomena  exist  only  for  a  time,  although  as  much  as  two  or
three  months, — if  they  accompany  the  increase  of  any  other  ner-
vous or  organic  disease  of  the  heart,  we  must  not  depend  upon
them  as  indications  of  the  lesions  now  in  question  ;  since  all  the
facts  formerly  recounted  prove  that  these  sounds  are  not  pro-
duced (as  might  be  imagined  at  first)  by  the  passage  of  the  blood

though  there  be  no  disease  of  the  heart  whatever ;  I  have  often  found  it  in  hysterical
females,  and  in  nervous  men.  But  it  is  when  the  valves,  the  coronary  arteries,  or  ^
the  commencement  of  the  aorta,  are  indurated  and  inelastic,  that  pain  occurs  most
frequently  and  with  the  greatest  severity.  Sometimes  it  is  little  more  than  an  in-
describable sense  of  obstruction  or  oppression  in  the  precordial  region  ;  but,  in  other
cases  it  is  an  intense  lancinating  or  tearing  pain,  felt  across  the  pnvcordia  or  scro-
biculus  cordis,  (where  it  might  be  mistaken  for  inflammation  of  the  stomach,)  and
occasionally  extending,  with  a  sense  of  numbness,  down  the  left  arm  to  the  elbow
and  sometimes  to  the  fingers.  Tain  of  this  description  has  acquired  the  name  of
angina  yectirrh" — Transl.

*  This  contraction  is  more  frequently  owing  to  ossification  of  the  mitral  valve  than
to  any  other  cause. — Author.


OSSIFICATION  OF THE  VALVES.


503


over  a  rough  or  rugged  surface,  but  to  the  spasmodic  energy
requisite  in  the  muscular  contraction  to  overcome  the  obstacles
opposed  to  it.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  any  other  cause  besides
diminution  of  the  size  of  the  orifices,  which  occasions  contraction
of  the  heart,  is  equally  capable  of  giving  occasion  to  the  bellows-
sound  and  purring-thrill :  and  it  is  fair  to  admit  that,  in  the  first
edition  of  this  work,  I  laid  too  much  stress  on  these  two  pheno-
mena as  signs  of  valvular  disease.*

*  It  is  true  that  we  must  not  attach  too  mucli  importance  to  the  bellows-sound  as
a  sign  of  disease  ;  but  I  am  of  opinion  (as  I  formerly  stated,  p.  522.)  that  we  ought  to
have  more  confidence  in  the  sound  of  the  rasp  accompanied  by  the  put  ring-thrill.  1
am  surprised  that  Laennec  did  not  make  a  distinction,  in  this  respect,  between  the
two.  The  bellows-sound  very  rarely,  and  only  at  intervals,  assumes  the  sound  of
the  rasp.  When  the  latter  exists,  we  maybe  sure  that  there  is  an  obstruction  to  tha
course  of  the  blood  from  disease  of  the  valves.  It  is  proper  to  remark,  however,  that
the  converse  is  not  always  true  :  there  may  be  obstruction  without  any  sound  of  the
rasp.  In  several  instances  I  have  found  the  aortal  valves  ossified  in  subjects  in
whom  the  auscultation  of  the  heart  produced  no  anomaly,  except  perhaps  increased
impulse.  I  do  not,  however,  recollect  having  found  the  mitral  valve  ossified,  with-
out a  change  in  the  character  of  the  second  sound. — (M.  L.)

The  following  observations  by  Dr.  Hope,  on  the  important  points  noticed  in  the
above  note,  merit  the  greatest  attention  : —

"  Bellows -murmur  sometimes  exists  in  the  heart  though  there  be  no  disease  of
the  valves ;  namely,  in  nervous  persons,  in  cases  of  reaction  from  excessive  loss  of
blood,  of  pericarditis  and  adhesion  of  the  pericardium,  and  of  hypertrophy  with  dila-
tation. Murmur  from  these  causes  may  easily  be  distinguished  from  that  of  valvular
disease,  by  the  following  criteria: — When,  from  nervous  excitement,  very  common
in  hysterical  females,  it  may  be  known  by  its  being  intermittent,  ceasing  when  the
nervous  exacerbation  subsides  and  the  action  of  the  heart  becomes  calm.  When
from  reaction,  it  subsides  with  the  cessation  of  that  phenomenon. When  from  peri-
carditis or  adhesion  of  the  pericardium,  it  may  be  known  by  the  presence  of  signs  of
those  affections. When  from  hypertrophy  with  dilatation,  it  may  be  known  by  its
diminishing  or  ceasing  when  the  action  of  the  heart  is  calmed,  as  by  repose,  vene-
section, abstinence,  &c.  &c. Contrasted  with  the  above,  the  distinctive  characters
of  valvular  murmur  are,  that  it  is  not  universal  over  the  heart,  but  confined  in  a
great  measure  to  the  part  corresponding  to  the  valve  affected  ;  that  it  persists  with-
out intermission  for  an  indefinite  length  of  time,  even  though  the  heart  be  kept  in  a
state  of  perfect  calm ;  and  that  it  is  often  of  the  filing,  rasping,  or  sawing  kind  ;
whereas  murmurs  from  other  causes  have  almost  always  the  softuess  of  the  bellows-
sound. This  murmur  has  a  soft  character,  like  that  of  bellows,  when  the  contraction
has  a  smooth  surface  which  does  not  greatly  break  the  stream  of  blood,  as  when  the
morbid  deposition  consists  of  cartilage,  fibro-cartilage,  or  vegetations.  But  the  mur-
mur is  rougher  or  more  grating,  like  that  of  a  file  or  rasp,  when  the  deposition  has  a
rugged,  hard  surface,  as  when  it  is  osseous.  Murmurs  are  more  hollow  wheu  they  are
deep  seated,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  auriculo-ventricular  orifices  ;  and  more  hissing  or
whizzing  when  they  are  superficial,  as  in  the  aortic  orifice,  more  especially  in  the  pul-
monary orifice,  and  the  ascending  aorta.  The  hollowness  of  the  sound  is  referable  to
its  remoteness  and  its  reverberation  through  the  chest.  The  sawing  murmur  is  almost
identical  with  the  filing  or  rasping ;  it  is  only  less  grating,  and  on  a  higher  key.
The  musical  bellows-murmur  is  a  perfect  note  like  whistling  or  cooing. In  the  case
of  a  patient  who  applied  to  me  for  '  a  noise  in  the  chest,'  I  heard  it  at  the  distance
of  two  feet. In  a  case  precisely  similar,  which  occurred  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  there  was
a  very  large  and  long  vegetation  in  the  mitral  valve.  As  purring  tremor  has  the  same
origin  as  bellows  and  other  murmurs,  it  often  accompanies  them  ;  though,  as  it  re-
quires a  greater  degree  of  disease  for  its  production,  this  is  not  always  the  case.  It
may  be  occasioned  by  obstruction,  not  only  of  the  semilunar,  but  also  of  the  mitral
and  tricuspid  valves,  and  in  the  latter  cases  it  may  accompany  either  the  first  or  the
second  sound.  When  accompanying  the  first,  it  proceeds  from  regurgitation  through
the  valve  ;  and  when  accompanying  the  second,  it  results  from  the  impeded  passage
of  the  blood  from  the  auricle  into  the  ventricle  during  the  ventricular  diastole.  It

<l  Q


594


OSSIFICATION  OF THE  VALVES.


A  slight  degree  of  cartilaginous  or  bony  induration  of  the
valves  may  exist  for  a  long  time  without  any  visible  alteration
of  the  health,  or  even  of  the  action  of  the  heart ;  and  even  by
proper  measures  of  precaution  and  by  seasonable  bleedings,  we
may  frequently  preserve  for  a  long  time  the  life  of  individuals,
who  present  every  sign  of  considerable  contraction  of  the  orifices.
The  following  case  is  a  proof  of  this.

Case  XLV. — A  very  muscular  young  man,  aged  sixteen,
came  into  the  Necker  Hospital  in  February,  1819,  complaining
of  oppression  on  the  chest  and  palpitation  ;  symptoms  which  had
seized  him  suddenly,  together  with  haemoptysis  and  epistaxis,
two  years  before.  These  symptoms  were  relieved  at  the  time,
by  rest;  but  returned  as  often  as  he  made  any  considerable  de-
gree of  exertion.  He  presented  the  following  symptoms  on
coming  into  the  hospital :  respiration  and  resonance  good  over
the  whole  chest ;  the  hand  applied  to  the  region  of  the  heart  feels
the  pulsation  strongly,  and  accompanied  with  the  purring  vibra-
tion. This  vibratory  sensation  is  not  continuous,  but  returns  at
regular  intervals.  The  stethoscope,  applied  between  the  carti-
lages of  the  fifth  and  seventh  ribs,  gives  the  following  results: —
contraction  of  the  auricle  extremely  prolonged,  accompanied  with

rarely  accompanies  the  second  sound  ;  because,  as  we  conceive,  the  diastolic  current
is  seldom  strong  enough  to  produce  it.  When  from  disease  of  the  mitral  valve,  it
is  not  perceptible  in  the  pulse." — (Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  iy.)

For  by  far  the  completest  and  most  accurate  account  of  the  physical  diagnostics  of
diseases  of  the  valves,  I  refer  the  reader  to  Dr.  Hope's  Treatise  on  Diseases  of  the
Heart,  and  to  his  very  valuable  article  just  quoted  (Valves  of  the  heart,  diseases  of,)  in
the  fourth  vol.  of  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Practical  Medicine.  It  is  very  satisfactory  to  leant
from  so  experienced  an  auscultator  as  Dr.  Hope,  not  only  that  Laennec's  mistake  (for
such  I  think  we  must  now  admit  it  to  be)  respecting  the  cause  of  the  second  sound,
scarcely  vitiates  the  conclusions  deduced  by  him  as  to  the  particular  parts  affected,
but  that  the  signs  discovered  by  him  are  of  more  value  than  he  himself  believed.
"  The  accession  of  auscultation  (says  Dr.  Hope)  to  the  other  means  of  diagnosis,  has
rendered  it  possible  to  distinguish  valvular  disease  with  almost  complete  certainty  :
a  certainty,  it  may  be  remarked,  much  greater  than  was  supposed  by  the  illustrious
author  of  auscultation  himself ;  for  he  did  not  give  their  full  value  to  preternatural
murmurs  as  signs  of  disease  of  the  valves,  in  consequence  of  supposing  that  similar
murmurs  were  produced  by  a  spasmodic  contraction  of  the  muscular  fibre  of  the

heart,  and  even  of  the  arteries  Laennec  laboured  under  another  disadvantage  :

he  attributed  the  second  sound  of  the  heart  to  the  auricular  contraction ;  whereas,
according  to  the  experiments  of  the  writer,  it  is  referable  to  the  ventricular  diastole.
The  substitution  of  this  view  of  the  heart's  action  for  that  of  Laennec,  fortunately
does  not  falsify  any  of  his  physical  signs,  except  one,  viz.  that  '  loudness  of  the
second  sound  indicates  dilatation  of  the  auricles : '  it  does  not,  to  adduce  a  single  in-
stance, invalidate  the  fact  that  murmur  of  the  second  sound  indicates  disease  of  the
auriculo-ventricular  valve  ;  but  it  affords  a  rational  explanation  of  all  the  phenomena
noticed  by  Laennec,  and  renders  various  others  available  as  signs,  which  to  him  were
inexplicable  and  therefore  useless.'' — (Loc.  Cit.)

The  following  brief  extracts  from  the  same  work  of  Dr.  Hope,  give  an  accurate  but
incomplete  view  of  the  diagnostics  of  the  particular  affections :  for  a  fuller  account  1
must  refer  to  the  original  article  and  to  his  treatise.  "  Signs  of  disease  of  the  aortic
valves.  One  of  the  murmurs  above  described  is  heard  during  the  ventricular  con-
traction about  the  middle  of  the  sternum,  and  is  louder  here  than  elsewhere.  It  is
more  or  less  hissing  or  whizzing,  from  being  superficial,  and  it  accordingly  conveys
the  idea  of  being  near  to  the  oar.  When  a  murmur  of  this  kind  is  louder  along  the
tract  of  the  ascending  aorta  than  opposite  to  the  valves,  and  is,  at  the  same  time.


OSSIFICATION Ol-' UHE  VALVES.


a  dull  but  strong  sound  exactly  like  that  produced  by  a  file  on
wood.  This  sound  is  attended  by  a  vibration  sensible  to  the  ear,
and  which  is  evidently  the  same  as  that  felt  by  the  hand.  Suc-
ceeding this,  a  louder  sound  and  a  shock  synchronous  with  the
pulse  point  out  the  contraction  of  the  ventricle,  which  occupies
only  one  fourth  the  time,  and  has  something  harsh  in  its  sound.
Under  the  lower  end  of  the  sternum  the  contractions  of  the  heart
are  quite  different.  Here  the  impulse  of  the  right  ventricle  is
very  great,  its  contraction  accompanied  by  a  very  distinct  sound,
and  being  of  the  ordinary  duration  ;  viz.  twice  as  long  as  that  of
the  auricle.  The  sound  of  the  auricle  is  somewhat  obtuse,  but
without  any  thing  analogous  to  the  vibratory  character  of  the  left.
The  action  of  the  heart  is  audible  below  both  clavicles,  on  both
sides,  but  feebly,  especially  on  the  right.  Over  the  whole  ster-
num, on  the  right  side  and  below  the  left  clavicle,  the  contractions
of  the  heart  have  the  same  rythm  as  at  the  end  of  the  sternum.
On  the  left  side,  on  the  contrary,  the  whizzing  sound  of  the  left
auricle  already  described  is  much  feebler  than  in  the  left  pre-
cordial region.  From  these  signs  the  following  diagnostic  was
given — Ossification  of  the  mitral  valve,  slight  hypertrophy  of
the  left  ventricle ;  perhaps  slight  ossification  of  the  sigmoid

peculiarly  superficial  and  hissing,  it  proceeds  from  disease  of  the  aorta  itself.  As  a
murmur  from  this  source  often  extends  to  the  situation  of  the  valves,  it  might  easily
lead  to  the  supposition  that  they  also  were  diseased,  and  it  is  sometimes  very  difficult
to  ascertain  positively  that  they  are  not.  A  murmur  may  accompany  the  second
sound  when  there  is  regurgitation  through  the  aortic  valves,  and  its  source  may  be
known  by  its  being  louder  and  more  superficial  opposite  to  those  valves  than  else-
where. Signs  of  disease  of  the  mitral  valve. — When  this  valve  is  contracted,  the
second  sound  loses,  on  the  left  side,  its  short,  flat,  and  clear  character,  and  becomes
a  more  or  less  prolonged  bellows-murmur.  When  the  valve  is  permanently  pates-
cent,  admitting  of  regurgitation,  the  first  sound  likewise  is  attended  with  a  murmur.
These  murmurs  are  louder  opposite  to  the  mitral  valve,  (viz.  at  the  left  margin  of  the
sternum,  between  the  third  and  fourth  ribs,  i.  e.  about  three  or  four  inches  above  the
point  where  the  apex  of  the  heart  beats,)  than  elsewhere.  They  are  also  more  hol-
low than  murmurs  of  the  aortic  valves.  Signs  of  disease  of  the  aortic  and  mitral
valve  conjointly. — The  murmurs  above  described  as  characteristic  of  each,  exist  simul-
taneously in  the  situation  of  each.  If  the  murmurs  of  the  first  sound  be  of  a  different
species  in  the  two  situations — if,  for  instance,  the  murmur  of  the  aortic  valves  be  of
the  bellows  kind,  and  that  of  the  mitral  resemble  filing  or  rasping,  it  is  still  easier  to
determine  that  both  valves  are  diseased.  Signs  of  regurgitation  through  the  mitral
valve.— These  signs  are  a  murmur  with  the  first  sound,  louder  in  the  situation  of  this
valve  than  of  the  aortic ;  and  a  weak  pulse,  even  though  the  impulse  of  the  heart  be
violent.  It  is  generally  unsteady  also.  Signs  of  disease  of  the  pulmonic  valves. — The
signs  are  the  same  as  those  of  disease  of  the  aortic  valves,  with  this  difference,  that
the  murmur  seems  close  to  the  ear,  and  is  equally  hissing  as  in  disease  of  the  ascending
aorta.  Disease  of  the  pulmonic  valves  is  so  rare  that  it  ought  never  to  be  suspected
unless  the  signs  described  are  extremely  well  marked,  or  unless  there  be  patescence
of  the  foramen  ovale,  or  some  other  preternatural  communication  between  the  two  sides
of  the  heart — states,  which  experience  has  proved  to  be  in  general  accompanied  with
contraction  of  the  pulmonic  orifice.  Signs  of  disease  of  the  tricuspid  valve.  —They  are
the  same  as  those  of  disease  of  the  mitral,  except  that  the  murmurs  are  loudest  oppo-
site to  the  valve  :  viz.  at  the  middle  part  of  the  sternum,  opposite  to  the  inter-space
between  the  third  and  fourth  ribs,  and  a  little  to  the  right  of  the  mesial  line.  As  this
valve  is  very  seldom  affected,  the  practitioner  must  be  very  cautious  in  pronouncing
it  diseased,  especially  as  the  pulse  does  not  afford  the  same  evidence  as  in  contraction
of  the  mitral  orifice." — (Loc.  Cit.) — Trunsl.

(in  2


596


OSSIFICATION  OF THE  VALVES.


valves  of  the  aorta ;  great  hypertrophy  of  the  right  ventricle.
The  pulse,  in  this  case,  was  pretty  strong  and  very  regular,  and
all  the  functions  natural,  only  the  sleep  was  habitually  disturbed
by  frightful  dreams,  and  the  lad  could  not  use  any  severe  exer-
cise, nor  even  walk  rather  fast,  without  being  attacked  by  strong
palpitations  and  a  feeling  of  suffocation.  Four  venesections,
after  intervals  of  a  few  days,  gave  much  relief.  After  the  first,
the  pulse  became  weak  ;  and  immediately  after  each  bleeding  the
purring  vibration  became  imperceptible  to  the  hand,  and  the
whizzing  of  the  auricle  changed  from  the  sound  of  a  file  to  that
of  a  bellows,  the  valve  of  which  we  keep  open  by  the  hand ;  the
shock  of  the  right  ventricle  continued  to  be  very  strong.  This
patient  left  the  hospital  after  a  month,  being,  in  his  own  opinion,
pretty  well.  He  came  afterwards  several  times  to  consult  me,
and  was  bled  occasionally.  I  saw  him  once  more  in  1822.  I
found  that  he  had  abandoned  his  laborious  occupation  of  gar-
dener, and  had  an  easy  place  as  the  servant  of  a  priest.  Since
his  change  of  situation  he  has  been  much  easier  :  but  his  former
symptoms  still  exist,  although  in  a  slighter  degree.

Ossification,  and  yet  more  cartilaginous  induration  of  the
valves  of  the  left  side  of  the  heart,  is  by  no  means  uncommon  in
a  slight  degree ;  but  it  is  extremely  rare  in  such  a  degree  as  mate-
rially to  impede  the  circulation,  and  thereby  to  give  indication  of
its  existence.  This  may  seem  contradictory  of  the  assertion  of
Corvisart,  who  considers  the  cartilaginous  or  bony  induration  of
the  valves,  especially  the  aortal,  as  the  most  common  organic  affec-
tion of  the  heart.  The  difference  of  opinion,  in  this  case  is,  how-
ever, only  apparent.  I  by  no  means  consider  ossification  of  the
valves  as  uncommon.  I  can  even  give  my  own  testimony  to
the  correctness  of  Corvisart's  opinion,  at  the  time  he  wrote,
having  been  his  pupil  during  the  period  in  which  the  greater
number  of  his  cases  were  collected.  At  that  period,  in  the  space
of  about  three  years,  I  observed,  in  his  clinic,  more  cases  of  exten-
sive ossification  of  the  valves,  than  I  have  done  in  the  whole
twenty  years  that  have  succeeded.*

*  It  is  chiefly  in  the  cnse  of  diseased  valves,  although  by  no  means  exclusively  in  this
case,  that  those  severe  paroxysms  of  dyspnoea  occur,  which  have  been  denominated
cardiac  asthma.  The  exciting  cause  of  these  paroxysms  may  be  either  an  excess  or
a  deficiency  of  blood  in  the  vessels  of  the  lungs  arising  from  the  morbid  condition  of
the  heart :  either  of  these  states  may,  no  doubt,  give  rise  to  the  spasmodic  stricture  of
the  bronchial  muscles  in  which  an  asthmatic  paroxysm  most  frequently  consists  :  and
the  former,  at  least,  may  readily  produce  analogous  results,  through  the  influence  of
mere  congestion,  without  any  muscular  spasm.  This  form  of  asthma,  or,  to  speak
more  properly,  of  dyspnoea,  has  been  much  more  fully  treated  by  Dr.  Hope  than  by
any  preceding  author ;  and  for  ample  details  respecting  it,  1  reter  the  reader  to  his
Treatise  on  Diseases  of  the  Heart,  and  to  the  article  on  Disease  of  the  Valves  in  the
4th.  vol.  of  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Pract.  Med.  The  following  extracts  from  this  article,
give  the  more  distinctive  characteristics  of  the  cardiac  asthma  in  its  milder  and
severer  forms.  "  The  time  of  the  accession  is  less  regular  than  in  ordinary  asthma,
heing  more  dependent  on  the  state  of  the  heart,  which  is  liable  to  accidental  excite-
ment, from  a  variety  of  causes,  at  any  moment. The  fit,  however,  in  ordinary


OSSIFIGxVTlON  OF  THE  VALVES.


597


This  is  not  the  only  organic  disease,  of  a  chronic  kind,  which
exhibits  such  irregularity  of  occurrence  at  different  times.  Among
others,  cancer  of  the  stomach  has  appeared  to  me  much  less  fre-

asthma,  is,  on  the  whole,  more  apt  to  supervene  during  the  evening,  or  early  part  of

the  night  The  patient  awakes,  generally  with  a  start,  in  a  fit  of  dyspnoea,

accompanied  either  with  violent  palpitation,  or  a  distressing  sense  of  anxiety  in  the
praicordia  and  great  constriction  of  the  chest,  as  if  it  wero  tightly  bound.  He  is  com-
pelled to  assume  a  more  erect  posture,  and  intensely  desires  fresh,  cool  air  ;  the  respi-
ration is  wheezing  and  performed  with  violent  efforts  of  all  the  muscles  of  respiration
both  ordinary  and  auxiliary.  The  inspirations  are  high  and  accompanied  with  appa-
rently little  descent  of  the  diaphragm,  and  the  expirations  are  short  and  imperfect.
The  surface  is  chilly,  the  extremities  are  cold,  and  the  face  is  pale  and  sometimes
livid.  In  cases  in  which  the  pulmonary  congestion  is  only  temporary,  as  in  hyper-
trophy, either  simple  or  with  dilatation,  there  is  no  cough  beyond  a  few  slight  and
ineffectual  efforts,  producing  little  or  no  expectoration  ;  and  in  such  cases  the  fit  sub-
sides as  soon  as  the  engorgement  of  the  heart  and  great  vessels  is  relieved,  which
nature  generally  effects  in  two  or  three  hours  or  less,  by  determining  the  blood  to  the
surface  and  creating  diaphoresis.  In  some  instances  we  have  known  this  termination
to  be  regularly  accompanied  with  a  copious  secretion  of  pale  urine  and  a  purging
alvine  evacuation.  The  pulse,  though  at  first  full,  strong,  and  bounding,  may,
during  the  worst  of  the  paroxysm,  become  feeble  and  small,  and  the  sound  and  im-
pulse of  the  heart  may  be  diminished  ;  and  this  in  cases  even  of  hypertrophy ;  for  the
organ,  being  gorged  to  excess,  is  incapable  of  adequately  contracting  on  its  contents.

"  Such  is  the  nature  of  an  asthmatic  fit  when  the  pulmonary  congestion  is  only  tem-
porary :  the  case  is  different  when  it  is  permanent,  as  in  valvular  disease  and  in  some
extreme  cases  of  dilatation.  For  then,  there  is  often  violent  cough  in  suffocative
paroxysms,  accompanied,  at  first,  with  difficult  and  scanty  expectoration  of  viscid
mucus,  but  ending  gradually  in  a  copious  and  free  discharge  of  thin,  transparent,
frothy  fluid,  occasionally  intermixed  with  blood.  This  evacuation,  by  disgorging
the  pulmonary  capillaries,  affords  great  relief  to  the  cough  and  dyspnoea.  As,  how-
ever, the  transudation  of  the  matter  to  be  expectorated  into  the  air-passages,  and  its
final  elimination,  are  slow  processes,  paroxysms  of  this  description  are  much  more
protracted  than  those  of  dry  asthma  from  hypertrophy.  They  frequently  last  five  or
six  hours,  and  I  have  known  them  persist,  with  only  occasional  remissions,  for  two,
three,  or  more  days.  During  the  attack,  the  pulse  is  quick,  small,  and  weak,  often
irregular  and  intermittent.  In  other  forms  of  asthma  the  circulation  through  the
heart  is  sometimes  little  disturbed."

In  the  severer  form  of  what  has  been  termed  cardiac  asthma,  the  dyspnoea  is
greatly  more  urgent  and  the  sufferings  are  more  extreme.  It  will  be  seen,  how-
over,  from  the  following  excellent  description  of  this  state  by  Dr.  Hope,  that  it  is  to
confound  the  legitimate  boundaries  of  disease  to  denominate  the  case  one  of  asthma.

"  Incapable  of  lying  down,  lie  is  seen  for  weeks,  and  even  for  months  together,
either  reclining  in  the  semi-erect  posture  supported  by  pillows,  or  sitting  with  the
trunk  bent  forwards  and  the  elbows  or  fore-arms  resting  on  the  drawn-up  knees.
The  latter  position  he  assumes  when  attacked  by  a  paroxysm  of  dyspnoea — sometimes,
however,  extending  the  arms  against  the  bed  on  either  side,  to  afford  a  firmer  fulcrum
for  the  muscles  of  respiration.  With  eyes  widely  expanded  and  starting,  eye-brows
raised,  nostrils  dilated,  a  ghastly  and  haggard  countenance,  and  the  head  thrown
back  at  every  inspiration,  he  casts  round  a  hurried,  distracted  look,  expressive  at
once  of  fright,  agony,  and  supplication  ;  now  imploring,  in  plaintive  moans,  or  quick,
broken  accents  and  half-stifled  voice,  the  assistance  already  often  lavished  in  vain  ;
now  upbraiding  the  impotency  of  medicine;  and  now,  in  a  fit  of  despair,  drooping  his
head  on  his  chest,  and  muttering  a  fervent  invocation,  for  death  to  put  a  period  to
his  sufferings.  For  a  few  hours — perhaps  only  a  few  minutes — he  tastes  an  interval
of  delicious  respite,  which  cheers  him  with  the  hope  that  the  worst  is  over,  and  that
his  recovery  is  at  hand.  Soon  that  hope  vanishes.  From  a  slumber  fraught  with  the
horrors  of  a  hideous  dream,  he  starts  up  with  a  wild  exclamation  that  '  it  is  return-
ing.' At  length,  after  reiterated  recurrences  of  the  same  attacks,  the  muscles  of  respi-
ration, subdued  by  efforts  of  which  the  instinct  of  self-preservation  alone  renders  them
capable,  participate  in  the  general  exhaustion  and  refuse  to  perform  their  function.
The  patient  gasps,  sinks,  and  oxpires." — (Loc.  Cit.) — Travsl.


598


OSSIFICATION OF THE  VALVES.


quent,  of  late  years.  The  same  is  true  of  different  species  of
accidental  productions,  usually  denominated  cancer,  a  single  case
of  which  I  have  not  seen  for  the  last  nine  years,  although  I  had
done  so  several  times  during  each  of  the  preceding  years.  In
like  manner  during  the  last  nine  years  I  have  only  met  with  one
case  of  that  variety  of  incipient  tubercles,  called  miliary  granu-
lations by  Bayle,  but  which  he  mentions  as  of  common  occurrence.
The  same  remark  applies  to  many  kinds  of  nervous  diseases,  such
as  mania,  epilepsy,  common  colic,  and  even  the  painter's  colic.  I
am  aware  that  the  variations  mentioned  may  sometimes  depend
on  other  circumstances,  unconnected  with  the  actual  relative  fre-
quency of  occurrence  of  the  diseases  in  question, — as  in  the  case
when  either  accident  or  superior  reputation  brings  more  cases  of
one  kind  to  any  particular  physician ;  yet  I  am  convinced  that
the  inequality  alluded  to  is  found  too  constant  and  too  striking
in  hospital  practice,  not  to  depend  on  causes  of  a  more  general
kind.


Sect.  III. — Bony  and  cartilaginous  Induration  of  the  internal

membrane  of  the  Heart.

The  membrane  which  lines  the  interior  of  the  ventricles  is  so
very  thin,  that  its  very  existence  has  been  denied  by  some  ana-
tomists. In  the  state  of  disease,  however,  it  becomes  distinctly
evident,  and  is  easily  demonstrated  by  dissection.  It  is  common
enough  to  find  this  membrane  slightly  and  irregularly  thickened
on  a  part  of  the  walls  of  the  left  ventricle,  particularly  around  the
orifices.  In  these  places  it  acquires  a  certain  degree  of  opacity,
and  such  a  milky-white  or  slightly  yellow  colour,  as  renders  it
very  perceptible.  The  texture  of  the  diseased  portions  is  like  that
of  cartilage,  but  less  consistent.  In  these  cases  I  am  of  opinion
that  the  indurations  are  not  owing  to  an  actual  thickening  of  the
membrane,  but  to  the  formation  of  an  imperfect  accidental  carti-
lage of  a  flattened  form,  between  the  adherent  surface  of  the
membrane  of  the  muscular  fibres  of  the  heart.  This  position  of
the  accidental  productions  of  this  kind,  whether  cartilaginous
or  bony,  which  I  have  termed  incrustations,  appears  to  be
the  result  of  a  general  law  applicable  to  the  development  of
all  the  bodies  of  this  kind  met  with  on  the  surface  of  other  mem-
branes and  the  organs  they  invest,  such  as  the  pleura,  peritoneum,
lun^s,  spleen,  the  arteries,  &c.  Even  the  incrustations  of  the
valves  of  the  heart  seem  to  originate  in  the  duplicaturcs  of  these ;
and  in  their  earlier  stage,  we  can  separate,  in  some  places,  the
inner  membrane  from  their  surface.  This  I  have  also  sometimes
effected  in  the  case  of  thickening  of  the  lining  membrane  of  the
left  ventricle.  I  have  never  found  the  indurated  portions  of  this
membrane  arrived  at  the  state  of  bone ;  but  Crii  well's  case,  already


rOLYPl Ol THE  HEART.


599


mentioned,  appears  to  furnish  an  instance  of  the  kind,  and  some
others  have  been  recorded,  but  not  very  accurately.  Kreysig
gives  one  unquestionable  instance  (Vol.  iii.  p.  43.)  When  we
come  to  consider  the  similar  case  of  incrustations  of  the  aorta,  we
shall  state  what  is  known  relative  to  their  production.


CHAPTER  XIX.

OF CONCRETIONS  OF BLOOD,  COMMONLY  TERMED  POLYPI,  OF
THE  HEART  AND  BLOOD-VESSELS.

It  was  formerly  customary  to  attribute  to  the  polypous  con-
cretions of  the  heart  observed  after  death,  the  symptoms  which
truly  depend  on  the  enlargement  of  that  organ.  The  incorrect-
ness of  this  opinion  is  proved  by  the  fact,  that  these  concretions
are  very  frequently  found  in  persons  who  have  never  exhibited
any  symptoms  of  disease  of  the  heart :  in  truth,  they  are  met  with
in  three-fourths  of  dead  bodies.  Perhaps  even  the  existing
epidemic  constitution  contributes  as  much  to  their  production  as
the  particular  condition  of  the  individual ;  at  least  I  have  met
with  them  much  more  frequently,  and  much  larger,  at  certain
times  than  at  others.  It  is  equally  erroneous  to  believe,  with
some  modern  authors,  that  polypi  never  begin  to  form  until  after
death,  or,  as  Pasta  or  Morgagni  thought,  that  they  may  begin  to
form  merely  in  the  last  struggle.  Many  facts  prove  that  these
concretions  can  be  formed  during  life.  The  phenomena  of  aneu-
risms alone  prove  this ;  and,  besides,  we  sometimes  find  veins  and
even  arteries  of  considerable  size  completely  obstructed  by  con-
crete fi  brine.

Haller  found  the  carotid  artery  and  internal  jugular  vein  quite
obstructed  by  very  firm  concrete  fibrine  in  one  case,  and  the
inferior  vena  cava  in  another.*  Vinckler,f  Stancari  and  Bona-
roli,  have  met  with  similar  cases  in  the  vena  cava,  the  emulgent,
epigastric,  and  iliac  veins.J  I  have  myself  observed,  in  a  con-
sumptive subject,  an  obliteration  of  the  inferior  cava  for  the  space
of  four  fingers'  breadth.  This  obstruction  was  produced  by
a  whitish  fibrinous  concretion  which  filled  the  whole  caliber  of
the  vein.  The  exterior  layers  of  this  concretion  were  like  the
buffy  coat  of  the  blood,  only  much  firmer,  and  adhered  strongly
to  the  inner  coat  of  the  vein  :  the  inner  portions  were,  on  the  con-
trary, of  a  Yellowish  colour,  more  completely  opaque,  and  of
a  friable  character,  like  certain  kinds  of  cheese;  and  exactly


*  Opusc.  Pathol,  obs.  23,  'Jl.
t  Morgagni,  Epist.  64.


t  Dissert,  do  Vasor.  Uthias.


POLYl'I OF  THE  HEART.


resembling  the  decomposed  fibrine  frequently  met  with  in  aneu-
nsmal  sacs.  I  have  since  met  with  two  cases  precisely  similar,
except  that  in  these,  the  concretions  were  more  or  less  coloured
by  recently  coagulated  blood  :  this  appearing  to  have  still  circu-
lated, although  imperfectly,  around  the  coagula,  which  adhered
to  the  interior  of  the  vein  in  some  points  only.  In  another  case
I  found  a  similar  obstruction  in  the  carotid  artery;  and,  in  a
third,  I  observed  the  whole  of  the  vessels  of  the  pia  mater,  in  a
circumscribed  space  about  the  size  of  the  palm  of  the  hand,  in-
jected with  a  similar  concretion.  None  of  these  individuals  had
exhibited  symptoms  indicative  of  the  presence  of  such  concretions,
nor  did  there  exist  any  obstacles  to  the  course  of  the  blood  which
might  account  for  them :  wre  must,  therefore,  attribute  them  to
spontaneous  coagulation  of  the  blood,  and  reasoning,  a  priori,
therefore,  nothing  is  more  probable  than  that  the  blood  mav
coagulate  during  life,  in  the  heart  also;  more  particularly  at  the
very  close  of  life,  when  the  circulation  is  performed  only  in  an
irregular  and  imperfect  manner.  Many  similar  cases  have  been
recently  recorded,  particularly  by  Hodgson,  Burns,  Kreysig  and
Bertin.  M.  Bouillaud  has  published  a  memoir  in  which  he
proves  that  many  partial  dropsies  are  owing  to  similar  concretions
in  the  veins;*  and  M.  Velpeau  has  recently  presented  to  the
Academy  of  Medicine  two  remarkable  instances  of  the  same
kind.  In  one  of  these  the  vena  cava,  and  several  veins  opening
into  it,  were  filled  with  a  concretion  only  slightly  attached  to
their  sides,  yet  partially  organized,  and  containing  small  encc-
phaloid  tumours,  which  were  likewise  found  in  other  parts  of  the
body.t

Most  of  the  authors  above  mentioned  attribute  the  formation
of  these  venous  concretions  to  inflammation  ;  and  Burns  and
Kreysig  seem  even  to  lean  to  the  opinion,  that  the  polypi  of  the
heart  may  have  the  same  origin.  I  shall  afterwards  examine  the
grounds  of  this  opinion ;  at  present  I  shall  content  myself  with
the  fact,  that  the  blood  may  coagulate  in  the  vessels  during  life.
M.  Corvisart  was,  therefore,  correct  in  distinguishing  polypi  into
such  as  are  of  a  formation  posterior  to  death,  and  such  as  have
been  produced  while  the  individual  was  still  alive.  These  two
kinds  are  easily  distinguished  from  each  other.  The  former,  or
those  of  recent  formation,  exhibit  merely  a  slight  layer  of  whitish
opaque  fibrine,  partially  enveloping  the  coagula  of  blood  contained
in  the  heart  and  large  vessels.  This  fibrinous  or  buffy  layer
never  completely  surrounds  the  coagula,  and  docs  not  adhere  to
the  parictes  of  the  heart  or  vessel  in  which  it  is  contained.  Some-
times this  layer  is  thicker;  and  in  this  case,  especially  if  the  sub-

*  Arcliiv.  gen.  tie  Med.  t.  ii.  and  v.

t  Revue  Med.  Mni,  Juin  et  Juill.  11326.  Since  then  my  brother  hns  published  in
the  same  journal  (Oct.  18'28)  a  case  still  more  striking  than  that  of  M.  Velpeau. —
(M.L.)


POLYPI  OF THE II K  ART.


(;<>i


jeet  is  dropsical,  it  is  semi-transparent  and  tremulous  like  jelly.
On  the  other  hand,  the  polypi  of  more  ancient  formation  are  of  a
much  firmer  consistence  (being  nearly  equal  to  that  of  muscle,
but  with  less  force  of  cohesion)  and  adhere  more  or  less  strongly
to  the  walls  of  the  heart.  In  the  ventricles  and  auricular  sinuses,
this  adhesion  is  partly  caused,  no  doubt,  by  the  intertexture  of
the  concretion  with  the  columnae  carneae ;  but,  even  here,  the
principal  part  of  the  attachment  is  independent  of  any  mechanical
structure  of  the  parts.  These  concretions  are  of  a  more  dis-
tinctly fibrinous  texture  than  are  the  recent  formations  or  the  buffy
coat  of  the  blood,  and  they  are,  further,  of  a  pale  flesh  or  slight
violet  colour  ;  while  the  more  recent  are,  as  already  mentioned,
of  a  white  or  yellowish  colour.  Sometimes,  amid  a  mass  of  in-
spissated fibrine,  we  meet  with  a  small  clot  of  blood  quite  isolated.
The  surface  of  the  concretions  is  dotted  with  specks  of  blood,
which  cannot  be  removed  by  washing :  sometimes  these  penetrate
only  a  quarter  of  a  line  into  the  polypus,  and  appear  as  if
destined  to  form  the  vessels  afterwards  to  be  developed  in  them  :
sometimes  they  penetrate  deeper,  and  already  assume  the
aspect  of  vessels.  Occasionally,  even,  I  have  found  in  these
polypi  small  coagula  of  blood  of  a  rounded  shape,  and  already
enveloped  by  a  distinct  membranous  layer,  evidently  the  rudi-
ments of  the  coats  of  a  vessel.  I  have  not  met  with  large  poly-
pous concretions  in  a  more  advanced  state  of  organization  than
this ;  a  circumstance  which  is,  no  doubt,  owing  to  their  speedily
proving  fatal  from  their  size.  We  shall  see,  however,  in  the
chapter  on  excrescences  in  the  heart,  that  concretions  of  a  smaller
size  may  attain  a  perfect  organization.

These  ancient  concretions  are  found  most  frequently  in  the
sinns  of  the  right  auricle,  and  in  the  right  ventricle.  When  in
the  former,  they  completely  obstruct  its  cavity,  but  in  the  ven-
tricle they  only  double  in  thickness  its  walls,  (thereby  lessening-
its  cavity,)  and  obstruct  the  descent  of  the  tricuspid  valve.  In
this  case,  one  may  remove  all  the  loose  coagulated  blood  without
injuring  the  concretion;  it  is  even  possible  that  this  might  be
mistaken  for  the  natural  boundaries  of  the  cavity.  The  columnae
carneae  to  which  these  concretions  are  attached,  are  commonly
perceptibly  flattened ;  a  circumstance  which,  of  itself,  would
prove  their  formation  to  be  anterior  to  death  ;  as  a  considerable
length  of  time  must  necessarily  be  requisite  to  produce  this
effect.  M.  Corvisart  was  the  first,  as  far  as  I  know,  to  observe
this  flattening  of  the  columnar :  in  the  case  noticed  by  him  they
were  quite  effaced.*  I  have  not  met  with  any  case  so  strongly
marked  as  this;  but  it  is  by  no  means  rare  to  find  cases  wherein
the  thing  is  very  perceptible.  The  two  kinds  of  concretions  j  ust
described,  are  clearly  formed  before  death. The  circumstance


*  I  have  seen  the  columna;  quite  effaced  where  there  was  no  polvpus. — Tninsl.


602


POLYPI OF  THE  HEART.


related  from  Corvisart,  seems  conclusive  on  this  point,  in  respect
of  the  second  species.  And  in  regard  to  the  first,  we  may
observe,  that  the  softest  and  most  recent  concretions  are  never
exactly  like  the  buffy  coat  of  blood  abstracted  from  the  vessels.

There  is  still  a  third  species  of  concretion,  evidently  more
ancient  than  those  just  described, — of  a  formation,  perhaps,
several  months  anterior  to  the  patient's  death.  These  are  found
adhering  to  the  walls  of  the  heart,  sometimes  so  firmly,  as
only  to  be  detached  by  scraping  Avith  the  scalpel.  Their  consis-
tence is  less  than  that  of  those  just  noticed ;  being  not  at  all
fibrinous,  and  resembling  rather  a  dry  friable  paste,  or  a  fat  and
somewhat  soft  cheese.  They  have  lost  the  slight  semi-trans-
parency of  recently  concreted  fibrine,  and  resemble  in  every
respect  those  layers  of  decomposed  fibrine  met  with  in  false
aneurisms.  I  have  only  met  with  concretions  of  this  kind  on  the
walls  of  the  auricles,  and  their  sinuses.

When  the  polypi  of  the  heart  are  of  a  large  size,  I  conceive
they  may  be  recognized  by  the  stethoscope.  In  several  cases  I
have  prognosticated  their  existence  from  the  following  signs ;
which,  nevertheless,  I  dare  not  propound  as  certain,  as  they  are
not  founded  on  a  great  many  facts : — In  the  case  of  a  patient,
whose  heart  had  been  acting  regularly,  if  the  pulsations  suddenly
become  anomalous,  obscure,  and  confused,  so  as  not  to  be  ana-
lyzed, we  may  suspect  the  formation  of  a  polypus.  If  the  dis-
ordered action  exists  on  one  side  of  the  heart  only,  we  may  con-
sider the  thing  as  almost  certain.  For  instance,  if  we  find  the
pulsations  of  the  heart,  under  the  sternum,  confused  and  tumul-
tuous, although  the  day  before  they  had  been  regular,  we  may
look  upon  the  formation  of  a  polypus  in  the  right  cavities  as  very
probable ;  and  the  more  so,  if  the  contractions  of  the  left  ventricle,
explored  between  the  cartilages  of  the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs,  are
more  distinct.*

•  LITERATURE  OF  POLYPUS  OF  THE  HEART.

1639.  Mav,  (Ed.)  A  most  certaine  and  true  relation  of  a  strange  monster  or  serpent

found  in  the  heart  of  John  Pennant,  gent.  Lond.  4to.
16.54.  Pissini,  (Seb.)  Epist.  de  cordis  polypo  (App.  ad  lib.  de  diabete.)  Mediol.  4lo.
1669.  Malpighi,  (Marc.)  De  viscerum  structura.  de  polypo  cordis.  Lond.  8vo.
1710.  Gold,  De  cordis  polypis  ex  neglectis  haunorrhoidibus.  Berl.  4to.
1724.  Alberti,  (Mich.)  Diss,  de  polypo  cordis.  Hal.  4to.

1726.  Goetz,(G.)De polyposis  concretionibus inpectore.(Hall.B.M.Pr.  II.).d/«.4to.

1736.  Hoffmann, (F.)Depraicavendapolyporumgeneratione  (Opp. Sup. ii.)  HaUAXa.

1737.  Pasta,  (And.)  Epist.  de  motu  sanguinis  et  de  cordis  polypo.  Berg.  4to.
1742.  Huxham,  (J.,  M.D.)  Concerning  polypi  taken  out  of  the  hearts  of  sailors.

(Phil.  Trans,  vol.  xlii.)  Lond.  4to.
1764.  Goetzke,  (J.)  Casus  Med  Pract.  de  polypo  cordis.  Spire-.  4to.
1776.  Negri,  ( )  Theses  de  polypis  praicordiorum.  Ticini.  8vo.
1786.  Pasta,  (Jos.)  De  sanguine  et  sanguinis  concretionibus.  Berg.
1789.  Maincourt,  De  sanguinis  concretionibus  in  corde.  (Doering  I.)  Par.  8vo.
1800.  Chisholm,  (Col.,  M.D.)  Account  of  the  epidemic  polypus  at  Grenada  in  1790.

(Ann.  ot  Med.  vol.  v.)  Edin.
1804.  Tiedemann,  Diss  de  cordis  polypis.  Mmb.  8vo.


603


CHAPTER  XX.

OF  INFLAMMATION  OF  THE  INTERNAL  MEMBRANE OF  THE
HEART AND LARGE  VESSELS.

Inflammation  of  the  inner  membrane  of  the  heart  and  large
vessels  appears  to  me  to  be  very  rare,  notwithstanding  the  con-
trary opinion  of  some  modern  observers.  The  correctness  of  my
opinion  will  appear,  I  think,  from  an  examination  of  the  different
morbid  appearances,  which  have  been  considered  as  proofs  of  the
inflammation  in  question.  These  appearances  I  shall  now  notice
in  order.

1.  Redness  of  the  membrane. — In  examining  dead  bodies  we
frequently  find  the  inside  of  the  aorta  and  pulmonary  artery
uniformly  reddened,  as  if  stained  by  the  blood  they  contained.
This  colouring  is  of  two  kinds, — either  bordering  on  scarlet,  or
of  a  brown  or  violet  hue.  Frequently  the  scarlet  colour  has  its
seat  exclusively  in  the  inner  membrane,  as,  when  this  is  removed,
the  tunic  beneath  is  found  of  the  natural  colour:  at  other  times,
however,  the  redness  penetrates,  more  or  less  deeply,  the  fibrinous
coat,  and  occasionally  even  reaches  the  cellular.  This  colour  is
quite  uniform,  as  if  painted,  without  any  trace  of  vascularity,
only  sometimes  more  intense  in  one  place  than  another.  Some-
times this  stain  diminishes  progressively  from  the  origin  of  the
aorta,  but  frequently  it  terminates  quite  abruptly  with  irregular
edges.  Sometimes,  in  the  middle  of  a  very  red  portion,  we  find
a  circumscribed  spot,  retaining  the  natural  white  colour,  like  the
whiteness  produced  by  pressure  with  the  finger  on  an  erysipela-
tous skin.  When  the  aorta  contains  very  little  blood,  the  redness
only  exists  in  the  part  in  contact  with  this,  forming  a  streak  like
a  ribband.  The  origin  and  arch  of  the  aorta  are  the  situations
most  commonly  reddened,  and,  with  them,  the  sigmoid  and  mitral
valves.  Sometimes  nearly  the  whole  arterial  system  presents  the
same  colour. When  the  pulmonary  artery  is  affected,  its  valves,

1810.  Giirtner,  Diss,  de  polypo  cordis  in  specie  infantum  (with  engr.)  Wiirceh.

1817.  Hormnnn,  Bemerkungenueberpolypeninherzen  (Svenskaltandlingar,  vol.iv.)

Stockh.  8vo.

181 8.  Nasse,  Zur  kenntniss  der  herzpolypen  (Horn.  Archi v.  tuL  Aug.  1818)  Berl.  8vo.
1818.  Meckel,  (A.)  Beitriig  zur  lehre  der  herzpolypen  (Meckel's  Archiv.  No.  2.)

Berl.  8vo.

1820.  Meissner,(F.  L.)Ueber  diepolypen  in  der  verschiedenenhbhlen,  &:c.  Leipi.  8vo.
1820.  Monfalcon,  Diet.  des.  Sc.  M.  (Art.  Polype)  t.  xliv.  Par.
1827.  Breschet,  Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Polype,)  t.  xvii.  Par.  8vo.
1830.  Harty,(W.,M.D.)  On  the  polypi  of  the  heart.  (Dub.  Med.  Trans. N.S.  vol.i.)
Dub.  8vo.

1832.  Hope,  Treatise  on  diseases  of  the  heart.  Loud.  Qvo.  Transl.


G04 INFLAMMATION  01''  THE INTERNAL  MEMBRANE.


as  well  as  the  tricuspid,  are  commonly  in  the  same  state.  The
lining  membrane  of  the  ventricles  and  auricles  is  frequently
colourless,  when  the  valves  are  deeply  stained  ;  not  unfrequently,
however,  the  auricle  participates  in  the  affection,  and  approaches
the  colour  of  the  valves:  more  rarely  the  ventricle  exhibits  a
similar  colour,  or  rather  browner  or  violet.  Sometimes  the
auricles  and  ventricles  are  alone  coloured ;  and  it  is  worthy  of
notice  that,  in  this  case,  the  heart  is  found  full  of  blood,  and  the
arteries  are  nearly  empty.  This  redness  is  attended  by  no  sen-
sible thickening  of  the  part,  and  it  entirely  disappears  after  a  few
hours'  maceration.

Corvisart  has  slightly  noticed  this  affection  ;  and  has  avowed
his  ignorance  of  its  nature  and  cause.  Frank,  who  observed  it
through  the  whole  tract  of  the  arteries,  considered  it  as  the  cause
of  a  particular  and  uniformly  fatal  fever ;  and  this  opinion  has
been  adopted  by  Kreysig,  Bertin  and  Bouillaud.  The  first  and
most  natural  idea  respecting  the  redness  of  any  part  naturally
white,  is,  that  it  is  the  result  of  inflammation.  But  mere  redness,
without  thickening  of  parts,  does  not  sufficiently  characterize
this  state;  while  the  abrupt  termination  and  exact  circumscrip-
tion presented  by  the  redness  in  certain  cases,  seem  not  easily  to
accord  with  the  nature  of  inflammation ;  and  give  rather  the
idea  of  impregnation  by  a  coloured  liquid,  which  had  been  pound
irregularly  over  the  membranes,  or  which  had  only  touched  it
partially,  on  account  of  its  small  amount.

I  am  extremely  doubtful  whether  this  kind  of  redness  gives
rise  to  general  symptoms  sufficiently  constant  or  severe  to  indi-
cate its  presence.  I  have  found  it  in  subjects  who  died  of  very
different  affections,  and  have  never  been  able  to  foretell  its  ex-
istence by  any  constant  signs.  A  rather  prolonged  agony,  in
subjects  still  vigorous  yet  cachectic,  from  diseased  heart  or
otherwise,  has  appeared  to  me  frequently  to  accompany  this
affection.  In  cases  of  this  kind,  the  blood  is  never  strongly
coagulated,  and  the  body  most  commonly  affords  marks  of  de-
composition.

The  second  species  of  redness  of  the  large  vessels  lias  a  quite
different  appearance,  being,  in  place  of  a  bright  red,  of  a  violet
or  brownish  hue.  It  is  also  usually  extended  at  the  same  time
to  the  aorta,  pulmonary  artery,  valves,  auricles,  and  ventricles.
This  variety  is  not  so  exactly  confined  to  the  lining  membrane ;
as  we  find  the  muscular  substance  of  the  auricles  and  ven-
tricles, and  even  the  fibrinous  coat  of  the  aorta  and  pulmonary
artery,  participating  in  it,  at  least  partially.  I  have  more  par-
ticularly found  this  variety  of  colouring  in  subjects  who  died  of
putrid  fevers,  emphysema  of  the  lungs,  and  disease  of  the  heart.
All  these  individuals  had  remained  long  in  a  moribund  condi-
tion, with  great  dyspnoea :  in  all,  the  blood  was  very  fluid,  evi-
dently altered,  with  signs  of  premature  decomposition  in  the


INFLAMMATION  OF  THE I  NT  Kit  NAT- ME  MR  RANK.


00/5


body.  It  is  accordingly,  most  frequently  in  summer  that  we
meet  with  this  condition  of  parts,  and  in  subjects  that  have  been
dead  upwards  of  twenty-four  hours.  Both  kinds  of  redness,
particularly  the  last,  are  accompanied  with  a  greater  or  less  de-
gree of  softening  of  the  heart,  and  an  increased  humidity  of  the
arterial  tunics, — the  consequence,  most  commonly,  of  incipient
putrefaction.

Bouillaud  and  Bertin  have  adopted  the  opinion  of  Frank  re-
specting the  inflammatory  character  of  the  arterial  redness  ;  and
yet,  if  we  examine  the  numerous  cases  adduced  by  them  in  sup-
port of  this  opinion,  we  shall  find  them  very  conformable  with
the  observations  made  above.  Of  twenty-four  cases,  eleven  were
severe  continued  fevers,  or  other  affections,  in  which  there  ex-
isted a  manifest  putridity  of  the  fluids;  and  the  other  thirteen
were  almost  all  consumptive  patients.  In  the  latter  cases,  the
condition  of  the  blood  is  most  commonly  not  noticed  ;  but  it  has
been  generally  remarked,  that  the  redness  in  question  has  seemed
coincident  with  a  remarkable  degree  of  fluidity  of  the  blood.  It
is  also  worthy  of  notice,  that  most  of  these  dissections  were  per-
formed in  summer,  and  upwards  of  thirty  hours  after  death.

Having  been  struck  with  this  coincidence  of  redness  of  the
membrane,  and  alteration  of  the  fluids,  and  incipient  decomposi-
tion of  the  body,  I  began  to  doubt  (four  years  since)  whether
the  former  were  not  merely  the  result  of  imbibition  of  blood  after
death.  With  the  view  of  determining  this  point  I  made  the
following  experiment,  which  I  have  since  repeated  a  great  many
times.  In  a  subject,  which  exhibited  at  the  time  no  mark  of
decomposition,  and  in  which  the  aorta  was  healthy  and  white
throughout,  I  removed  this  vessel,  filled  it  with  blood  from  the
body,  and  having  passed  a  ligature  round  its  two  extremities,
deposited  it  in  the  stomach  of  the  subject.  At  the  expiration  of
twenty-four  hours  I  laid  the  artery  open,  and  found  its  internal
tunic  precisely  of  the  scarlet  colour  above  described,  and  which
was  not  lessened  by  repeated  washings.  This  experiment  does
not  always  succeed  so  completely.  If  the  blood  employed  is  too
much  coagulated,  the  imbibition  is  obtained  with  much  difficulty,
feebly  and  slowly.  If  we  employ  blood  but  half-coagulated,  and
particularly  such  as  we  express  from  the  lungs,  we  produce  the
scarlet  colour.  If  we  employ  blood  which  is  very  fluid,  especi-
ally if  mixed  with  serum,  we  obtain  a  more  or  less  deep  purple
or  pale  colour.  If  we  fill  the  artery  only  one-half  or  one-quar-
ter, the  part  in  contact  with  the  blood  alone  exhibits  the  disco-
loration. If  the  coats  of  the  artery  are  firm  and  elastic,  the  ex-
periment succeeds  with  difficulty,  and  after  a  long  time,  (72 —
80  hours,)  and  the  tinge  is  never  deep.  On  the  other  hand,  if
the  tunics  are  soft,  supple  and  humid,  the  colouring  is  speedily
diffused  through  their  whole  depth.  The  experiment  succeeds
much  better  in  summer  than  winter,  and  the  more  readily,  as  the


COG INFLAMMATION OF  THE INTERNAL  MEMBRANE


decomposition  is  rapid ;  the  colorization,  however,  is  complete,
long  before  the  aorta  yields  any  disagreeable  smell.

Boerhaave  and  Morgagni  (Ep.  xxvi.  36)  were  acquainted  with
these  kinds  of  redness,  and  attributed  them  to  the  congestion  of
blood  in  the  last  stage  of  diseases,  accompanied  with  much  dys-
pnoea. Hodgson  has  remarked,  that  the  redness  of  the  arteries
seems,  in  many  cases,  to  be  the  result  of  a  simple  tincture,  as  we
frequently  find  spots  of  a  deep  red  colour  in  the  parts  corre-
sponding to  a  coagulum  of  blood.  He  adds,  that  the  same  ap-
pearance is  observed  in  arteries  that  have  been  long  exposed  to
the  air  in  the  dissecting  room.  This  last  observation  is  perfectly
correct,  but  applies  to  a  quite  different  circumstance.  Every
white  tissue  exposed  in  a  humid  place  assumes  a  red  colour,  al-
though never  of  the  depth  above  described.  This  will  happen,
in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours,  to  the  mucous  membrane  of
the  stomach  and  intestines,  the  peritoneum,  pleura,  &c.  But  in
this  case  the  phenomenon  depends  evidently  on  the  transudation
of  the  blood  contained  in  the  capillaries ;  and  the  effect  can  be
promoted  by  gently  scraping  the  surface  of  the  membrane  with
the  scalpel.

From  what  goes  before,  I  think  we  must  conclude,  that  the
redness  of  the  lining  membrane  of  the  heart  and  large  vessels,
cannot,  in  any  case,  be  considered  as  proving  the  existence  of
inflammation  ;  on  the  contrary,  that  we  may  consider  it  as  beino-
the  result  of  a  process  taking  place  in  the  dead  body,  or  in  the
last  agony,  in  every  case  wherein  we  find  it  coinciding  with  a
prolonged  and  suffocative  agony — a  manifest  change  in  the  fluids,
— and  a  more  or  less  marked  state  of  decomposition.  This  is  a
state  of  parts  to  which  I  wish  particularly  to  call  the  attention  of
pathologists,  so  that  they  may  avoid  confounding  the  causes
with  the  effects  of  diseases.  The  discrimination  of  the  congestion
of  the  capillaries  from  inflammation  is  often  difficult,  but  it  is  of
the  utmost  importance  that  it  should  be  made.  In  the  case  now
in  question,  we  may  be  justified  in  suspecting  inflammation,
when  the  redness  is  accompanied  with  swelling  and  thickenino-  of
the  part,  and  with  an  extraordinary  development  of  capillaries
in  the  middle  coat  of  the  vessel ;  but  I  am  not  sure  that  even
these  characters  united  would  prove  the  existence  of  inflamma-
tion, in  the  case  of  a  body  that  was  considerably  oedematous.*

2.  Pseudo-membranous  exudation. — The  formation  of  a  layer
of  coagulable  lymph  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  heart  and  vessels,
is  the  most  unequivocal  sign  of  inflammation  of  this  membrane;
and,  indeed,  with  the  exception  of  ulceration,  is  the  only  certain
one. Several  instances  of  this  kind  have  been  observed  of  late

*  For  some  valuable  observations  and  experiments  on  the  subject  of  redness  of  the
inner  coat  of  the  blood  vessels,  I  refer  to  a  Memoir  of  MM.  Higot  and  Trousseau,  in
the  Archives  g(n.  de  M4d.  t.  xii.  The  result  of  the  researches  of  these  gentlemen
corroborates  the  views  of  M.  Laennec. — Trnvsl.


INFLAMMATION  OF THK  INTERNAL  MEMBRANE.  607

years.  Baillie  found  the  tricuspid  valve  affected  in  this  manner.
Farre  met  with  a  similar  affection  in  the  aorta  of  a  person  who
had  died  of  pleurisy  and  pericarditis.  Burns  observed  a  layer  of
lymph  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  right  auricle  in  one  instance,
and  in  the  left  auricle  in  another.  In  a  third  case,  this  author
observed,  a  little  above  the  mitral  valve,  "  a  tendinous  septum,
partially  ossified  and  perforated  in  its  middle  by  an  opening  with
wrinkled  edges,  capable  of  admitting  the  little  finger."  This
partition  was  parallel  with  the  mitral  valve,  divided  the  auricle
in  two  portions,  and  could  only  be  considered  as  the  product  of
inflammation.  Bertin,  in  the  case  of  a  man  affected  with  hyper-
trophy and  pericarditis,  found  the  lining  membrane  of  the  aorta
reddened  and  covered  with  a  half  coagulated  and  reddish  pellicle
of  albumen  (obs.  ii.).  I  have  myself,  in  like  manner,  occasionally
observed  false  membranes  of  small  extent,  strongly  attached  to
the  walls  of  the  auricles,  in  subjects  affected  with  other  diseases
of  these  organs,  particularly  excrescences.  Liquid  pus  has  never
been  found  in  the  heart  and  arteries,  except  in  the  case  of  ulcera-
tion, and  then  only  in  very  small  quantity.  And  indeed  it  is  not
easy  to  conceive  how  this  could  be  otherwise,  considering  the  ra-
pidity of  the  circulation,  which  must  carry  off  the  pus  as  soon  as
it  is  formed.

3.  Ulceration. — The  lining  membrane  of  the  heart  is  so  thin,
that  we  can  hardly  admit  its  ulceration,  independently  of  that
of  the  subjacent  tissue.  Several  cases  of  undoubted  ulcera-
tion of  the  interior  of  both  arteries  and  veins  are  recorded
by  authors,  and  particularly  by  Hodgson  and  Kreysig ;  and
such  examples  would  be  much  more  numerous  if  we  admitted
all  those  which  have  been  given  as  such,  both  by  ancient  and
modern  observers.  But  the  majority  of  these  cases  were  evi-
dently nothing  else  but  the  separation  of  the  bony  incrusta-
tions of  the  aorta,  which  will  be  noticed  hereafter.  Small
pustules  full  of  pus  have  been  sometimes  met  with  beneath
the  inner  membrane  of  the  aorta,  and  which  have  discharged
their  contents  into  its  cavity ;  and  it  is  probably  in  this  man-
ner that  the  real  ulcers  of  the  aorta  are  formed,  being  the
consequence  of  inflammation  of  the  middle  coat  of  the  arteries,
or  of  the  fine  cellular  substance  which  unites  this  to  the  inner
coat.  This  seems  the  more  probable  from  the  fact,  that  in  the
inflammation  of  all  membranes,  pus  is  formed  on  their  external,
and  not  their  adherent  surface,  as  in  the  case  of  peritonitis,  pleu-
risy, croup,  &c.  With  these  pustular  eruptions  (which  are  very
rare)  the  bony  spiculse  of  the  inner  membrane  of  the  aorta,  or
rather  the  detachment  of  these,  have  been  sometimes  confounded ;
the  hollow  left  by  their  removal  being  filled  up  by  lymph,  fre-
quently intermixed  with  phosphate  of  lime.  Frequently  the  edges
of  these  morbid  spots  are  reddened  to  a  small  distance  round ;
an  appearance  which  T  am  disposed  to  attribute  rather  to  the


INFLAMMATION  OF  THE  INTFTtNAL  MEMBRANE.


imbibition  of  blood  than  to  inflammation;  a  state  which  is  indi-
cated neither  by  the  presence  of  pus,  nor  by  any  local  or  general
symptoms.

4.  Polypous  concretions. — Are  these  the  product,  and,  conse-
quently, a  proof  of  the  existence  of  inflammation  of  the  inner
membrane  of  the  heart  and  arteries  ?  Kreysig  has  answered  this
question  in  the  affirmative;  and  Burns  seems  sometimes  inclined
to  the  same  opinion.  If  this  opinion  is  well  founded,  we  must
admit  the  gratuitous  hypothesis  that  the  inflamed  membrane  acts
upon  the  blood,  and  produces  its  coagulation.  We  may  indeed
conceive  that  the  blood  itself  performs  an  active  part  in  inflam-
mation ;  that  it  is,  in  fact,  as  the  ancient  pathologists  imagined,
susceptible  of  inflammation  ;  and,  to  say  the  truth,  I  am  far  from
rejecting  this  view  of  the  subject,  however  old  and  obsolete,  as
it  is  much  more  reconcilable  with  many  established  facts,  than
are  the  modern  theories.  But  these  are  not  the  views  of  Kreysig,
Burns,  and  others  who  have  adopted  their  opinions.  Their
theory  seems  to  rest  chiefly  on  the  cases,  in  which  there  is  close
adhesion  and  continuity  of  substance  between  the  polypous  con-
cretions and  the  lining  membrane  of  the  heart  and  vessels.  But
there  are  many  objections  to  their  mode  of  explaining  the  fact : —
for  instance;  the  intimate  adhesion  mentioned  is  but  seldom  met
with,  and  only  in  the  most  perfectly  organized  polypi ; — the  very
great  majority  of  concretions  found  on  dissection,  are  either  quite
loose  in  the  heart  and  vessels,  or  are  simply  in  contact  with  the
inner  membrane,  or  interlaced  with  the  columnar  carnea? ;  the
history  of  the  cases  proves  that  all  the  polypi  were,  in  the  first
instance,  unattached ; — on  removing  a  small  coagulum  from  the
orifice  of  a  vein,  which  had  been  recently  opened,  a  small  poly-
pous concretion  has  followed  it,  and  this  in  the  case  where  no  sign
of  inflammation  existed ; — it  is  not  in  young  plethoric  subjects,
full  of  life,  and  eminently  disposed  to  inflammation,  that  these
concretions  are  especially  found,  but,  on  the  contrary,  in  the  last
agony  of  different  diseases,  particularly  those  of  a  chronic  kind,
and  such  as  have  produced  cachexy,  marasmus,  and  great  debi-
lity, and  which  have  been  accompanied  by  local  or  general  ob-
stacles to  the  circulation :  that  the  actions  of  the  animal  organs
are  not  necessary  to  produce  coagulation  of  the  blood,  or  to  sepa-
rate its  fibrine,  is  proved  by  the  production  of  the  inflammatory
crust  on  that  evacuated  by  the  lancet;  and,  lastly,  these  very
polypi  are  often  found  in  the  heart  and  large  vessels  of  men  and
animals,  which  have  been  suddenly  destroyed  in  perfect  health.
On  the  other  hand,  we  can  conceive  two  ways  in  wrhich  an  orga-
nized polypus  may  become  attached  to  the  parts  with  which  it  is
in  contact.  In  the  first  place,  it  may  occasion  an  effusion  of
coagulablc  lymph  by  its  own  local  irritation.  It  may  be  re-
marked, in  corroboration  of  this  hypothesis,  that,  in  the  case  of
obstruction  of  the  veins,  the  more  recent  concretions  are  not  ad-


INFLAMMATION OF THE INTERNAL MEM  BRAN  F.  Cl'09


herent,  but  only  those  which  are  proved  by  their  firmness  and
comparative  dryness,  and  otherwise  changed  condition,  (and  also
sometimes  by  the  contraction  of  the  vein,)  to  be  of  ancient  for-
mation. In  the  second  place,  polypous  concretions  formed  before
death,  are  evidently  possessed  of  life  as  well  as  the  blood,  and
retain  it  for  some  time  after  extravasation,  a  remarkable  proof  of
which  I  formerly  noticed  in  the  organization  of  fibrine  in  the
bronchi  in  a  case  of  haemoptysis.

Other  examples  of  the  same  kind  are  furnished  in  the  case  of
effusions  of  blood  on  the  serous  membranes,  all  of  which  prove
that  fibrine  separated  from  the  blood  and  coagulated,  is  in  the
living  body  equally  susceptible  of  organization  with  the  coagu-
lable  lymph  effused  in  inflammation.  And  it  may  be  here  re-
marked that  it  is  not  perhaps  satisfactorily  demonstrated,  that
the  production  of  a  plastic  lymph,  susceptible  of  organization  and
of  conversion  into  a  tissue  similar  to  that  in  which  it  is  formed,
necessarily  pre-supposes  the  presence  of  inflammation.  The  re-
union of  wounds  made  by  a  fine  cutting  instrument,  sometimes
takes  place  without  any  obvious  signs  of  inflammation.  In  these
cases,  as  soon  as  the  haemorrhage  has  ceased,  there  supervenes  a
discharge  of  a  viscid  transparent  lymph,  which  is  evidently  the
medium  of  union  employed  by  nature ;  and  it  is  worthy  of  notice,
that,  in  cases  where  inflammation  exists,  the  flow  of  this  lymph
precedes  it  by  several  hours.  The  greater  number  of  tumours
of  considerable  size,  which  form  slowly  in  the  lungs,  ovaries,  or
other  parts  of  the  abdomen,  are  attached  to  the  neighbouring-
parts  by  serous  or  cellular  lamina?  of  greater  or  less  extent.
These  laminae,  unquestionably,  in  some  cases  originate  in  local
pleurisies  or  peritonitis,  but  in  others,  the  closest  and  most  accu-
rate observation  can  detect  no  symptom  of  previous  inflammation.
The  filaments  and  flocculi  of  albumen,  more  or  less  concrete,
occasionally  found  in  the  water  of  the  most  atonic  dropsies,  and
the  deciduous  membrane  formed  in  the  early  period  of  pregnancy,
admit,  in  my  opinion,  of  a  similar  explanation.  It  would  be  to
fall  into  a  strange  abuse  of  words  and  to  adopt  an  unpardonable
laxity  of  reasoning,  to  find  inflammation  in  every  case  in  which
we  observe  only  one  of  its  anatomical  characters, — viz.  plastic
lymph  susceptible  of  organization.  Future  observation  may,
probably,  hereafter  ascertain  the  physical  and  perhaps  chemical
characters  which  distinguish  the  lymphatic  concretions  produced
by  inflammation,  from  those  which  are  formed  without  it.  In
the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  I  think  it  may  be  remarked,
that  those  formed  under  the  influence  of  evident  inflammation
have  a  considerable  degree  of  firmness  and  nearly  complete
opacity  from  their  very  origin,  and  also  a  yellow  colour  like  that
of*  pus;  and  it  is  from  these  characters,  as  well  as  from  their
disposition  to  become  softened  to  the  consistence  of  pus,  when
they  are  not  converted  into  an  organized  tissue,  that  I  have

u  R


610 INFLAMMATION  OF  THE INTERNAL  MEMBRANE.


thought  proper  to  designate  them,  in  this  work,  by  the  term
concrete  pus.

From  all  that  precedes  I  think  we  may  deduce  the  following
conclusions: — 1.  The  remora  of  the  blood,  in  consequence  of
obstruction  to  its  course,  suffices  in  itself  to  produce  coagulation,
and  to  determine  the  formation  of  a  coagulum  of  organizable
fibrine.  Every  cause  capable  of  occasioning  this  remora,  par-
ticularly mechanical  obstruction  to  the  circulation  and  repeated
and  prolonged  fain  tings,  appears  to  me  sufficient  to  produce  this
effect.  2.  The  coagulation  of  blood  in  the  vessels  seems  to  pro-
duce in  some  cases,  particularly  in  the  veins,  a  true  inflammation,
accompanied  by  the  formation  of  a  false  membrane.  3.  It  ap-
pears certain  that  occasionally,  and  especially  in  the  veins  where
the  circulation  is  slow,  an  inflammation  of  the  inner  coat  of  these
may  occasion  coagulation  of  the  blood,  in  the  vicinity  of  the
lymph  effused  by  the  inflammation.  4.  Pus  absorbed  in  great
quantity  by  a  vein,  may  in  several  ways  affect  the  concretion  of
blood — by  rendering  it  less  liquid  from  simple  admixture, — by
coagulating  it  by  a  chemico-vital  action, — and  by  exciting  in-
flammation of  the  containing  vessel.  It  is  well  known  that
nothing  is  more  common  than  to  find  the  veins  in  the  vicinity  of
a  cancerous  breast,  or  in  inflammation  of  the  uterus  after  par-
turition, filled  with  pus,  either  pure  or  mixed  with  blood,  some-
times fluid,  at  other  times  more  or  less  inspissated,  and  occa-
sionally of  the  degree  of  consistence  of  the  contents  of  an  athe-
romatous tumour.*

I  conceive  that  we  may,  in  many  cases,  distinguish  during  life,
the  simple  coagulation  of  blood  in  the  vessels  from  that  which  is
the  consequence  of  inflammation.  I  on  one  occasion  met  with
two  cases,  at  the  same  time,  which  led  me  to  entertain  this  opi-
nion. One  of  these  was  the  case  of  a  woman  affected  with  in-
flammation of  the  median  vein,  accompanied  by  erysipelatous
swelling  of  the  fore-arm,  excessive  pain  of  the  part,  high  fever,
and  other  very  threatening  symptoms.  The  second  occurred  in
the  person  of  a  magistrate,  who  came  to  consult  me  for  a  slight
lameness  which  he  had  felt  in  the  left  thigh  and  leg  for  three  or
four  days.  I  found  the  internal  saphena  hard  as  a  chord,  over
its  whole  extent,  and  as  large  as  the  little  finger  over  its  superior
half.  Pressure  produced  hardly  any  uneasiness ;  and  indeed  he
had  come  to  see  me  on  foot,  being  desirous  of  trying  the  effect

*  Hodgson  and  Travers  have  published  some  cases  of  this  kind,  which  are,  indeed,
f  by  no  means  rare.  An  additional  consequence  of  the  presence  of  too  much  pus  in
the  blood,  from  venous  absorption,  is  the  production  of  inflammation  in  different
organs,  and  especially  the  lungs,  which  run  rapidly  into  suppuration.  It  is  from  this
circumstance  that  the  subjects  of  surgical  operations  and  those  labouring  under  ex-
tensive suppurations,  are  frequently  cut  off  by  peripneumonies,  which,  according  to
the  observation  of  M.  Cruveilhier,  are  usually  lobular,  that  is,  commencing  in  several
points  at  once.  This,  in  my  opinion,  is  the  mode  in  which  we  must  explain  the  oc-
currence of  metastasis  of  pus,  at  least  in  the  majority  of  cases. — Auihor.


EXCRESCENCES OX THE  VALVES.


(ill


of  exercise  on  his  complaint.  Looking  upon  tlie  case  as  an  e  x-
ample of  coagulation  of  blood  without  inflammation,  I  recom-
mended one  bloodletting,  rest,  and  friction  of  the  part,  and  I
found  the  vein  returned  to  its  natural  suppleness  in  the  course  of
eight  days.  The  woman,  whose  case  I  formerly  mentioned  when
treating  of  pneumonia,  was  cured  in  like  manner,  in  the  space  of
a  very  few  days,  by  means  of  tartar  emetic  in  large  doses.  Facts
of  this  kind  seem  further  to  lead  us  to  believe,  that  blood  coagu-
lated from  any  cause  whatever,  may  be  returned  in  the  course  of
the  circulation,  by  the  absorption  of  the  veins,  and  thence  be
expelled  the  system  ;  as  there  seems  to  me  no  other  mode  of
accounting  for  the  restoration  of  the  circulation  in  the  affected
vessel.


CHAPTER  XXI.

OF EXCRESCENCES ON THE  VALVES AND INTERNAL  WALLS  OF

THE  HEART.

There  are  two  very  distinct  varieties  of  this  affection.  The
one,  first  noticed  by  Riverius*  has  been  described  by  M.  Corvi-
sart  under  the  name  of  excrescence  of  the  valves ;  the  other,
which  does  not  appear  to  have  been  hitherto  described,  I  shall
notice  under  the  name  of  (/lobular  excrescence.

1.  Warty  Rtvcrescence. — The  first  might  be  very  well  named
warty  excrescences,  inasmuch  as  they  are  extremely  like  warts,  es-
pecially those  of  venereal  origin  on  the  parts  of  generation.  Like
these,  the  excrescences  in  the  heart  sometimes  resemble  small  straw.,
berries,  in  their  form  and  tuberous  surface ;  at  other  times  they  are
elongated  into  the  form  of  a  small  cylinder  or  cord,  and,  occa-
sionally, they  are  so  short  and  so  crowded  together,  as  merely  to
give  to  the  parts  on  which  they  are  situated  a  rough  or  rugged
surface  ;  more  frequently,  however,  they  are  either  isolated  or
ranged  in  a  single  line  along  the  loose,  or  the  attached  border  of
the  valves.  I  have  never  observed  any,  longer  than  three  or  four
lines.  Hut  we  occasionally  meet  with  them  sufficiently  numerous
and  voluminous  to  present  a  rough  resemblance  to  the  comb  of  a
cock.

The  colour  of  these  excrescences  is  sometimes  whitish  like  that
of  the  valves,  and  hardly  so  opaque  ;  more  commonly  they  arc
either  wholly  or  in  part  tinged  with  a  reddish  or  light  violet
colour.  Their  texture  is  fleshy,  like  venereal  warts,  only  of
somewhat  less  firm  consistence  ;  although  this  is  variable.  They


*  Bonet,  Sopulch.  1.  ii.  sect.  viii.  obs.  24.

R  E  2


012


EXCRESCENCES  ON  THE  VALVES.


adhere  immediately  to  the  subjacent  parts ;  sometimes  so  strongly
as  to  be  only  separable  by  incision ;  more  commonly  they  are  re-
movable by  scraping  with  the  blade,  or  even  the  handle  of  the
scalpel.  In  the  latter  case,  the  excrescences  are  soft,  of  a  yel-
lowish-white colour,  very  humid,  and  somewhat  resembling  fat.
The  venereal  origin  of  these  excrescences,  entertained  by  Corvi-
sart,  appears  to  me  very  improbable,  when  we  consider  their
rarity  and  the  frequency  of  venereal  complaints,  and  when  we
meet  with  them,  as  we  do,  in  individuals  who,  in  all  probability,
never  had  this  disease.

Whatever  may  be  the  remote  cause  of  these  bodies,  the  manner
of  their  formation  seems  to  be  more  explicable.  In  dissecting
the  more  voluminous  excrescences,  it  has  always  appeared  to
me  that  their  texture  was  exactly  like  that  of  the  more  compact
polypous  concretions,  only  firmer.  Frequently  we  observe  in
their  centre  a  purple  or  sanguineous  tint ;  and  sometimes  I  have
even  found  a  very  small  but  distinct  coagulum  of  blood.  From
these  circumstances  I  am  led  to  consider  such  excrescences  as
merely  small  polypi,  organized  by  the  same  process  which  trans-
forms the  false  albuminous  membranes  into  true  adventitious
membranes,  or  into  cellular  substance.*  In  like  manner  as  Cor-
visart,  I  have  only  met  with  these  excrescences  in  the  following
situations,  viz.  the  mitral,  tricuspid,  and  sigmoid  valves,  and
(much  more  rarely)  the  interior  of  the  auricles,  especially  the
left.  In  general  they  are  more  common  in  the  left  than  the  right
side  of  the  heart.

Krevsig;  attributes  the  formation  of  these  excrescences  to  in-
flammation,  an  opinion  in  which  he  has  been  followed  by  Bertin
and  Bouillaud.  Besides  the  reasons  adduced  in  the  preceding
chapter  against  this  opinion,  it  may  be  further  remarked,  that  if
it  were  well-founded,  the  excrescences  in  question  ought  to  have
for  matrix  and  medium  of  union,  a  continuous  layer  of  false
membrane;  a  circumstance  which  is  never  observed ;  the  inner
membrane  of  the  heart  being  found  without  any  covering  in
the  intervals  between  them.  Nevertheless  I  am  far  from  de-
nying that  a  false  membrane  from  inflammation  may  sometimes

•  We  entirely  agree  with  Dr.  Hope  in  considering  this  opinion  of  Laennec,  as  to
the  origin  of  these  excrescences,  as  altogether  unsatisfactory  ;  and  we  cannot  state
our  reasons  with  more  effect  than  in  the  words  of  Dr.  Hope.  On  Laennec 's  prin-
ciple, "  as  polypi  are  most  common  in  the  right  cavities  of  the  heart,  vegetations
ought  to  be  so  likewise, — the  reverse  of  which  is  the  fact.  The  valves,  moreover,
being  perpetually  in  motion,  would  be  the  last  parts  to  which  albuminous  concre-
tions would  adhere,  as  it  is  a  stagnant  state  of  the  blood  which  is  most  favourable
to  their  formation  ;  yet  the  valves  are  the  parts  most  subject  to  them.  It  is  amidst
the  intricacies  of  the  columnaj  carnefe,  where  the  blood  is  more  stagnant  than  else-
where, that  we  most  commonly  find  real  albuminous  concretions  of  small  size,  fi-
nally, if  vegetations  were  merely  fibrinous  concretions,  instead  of  being  rare,  they
ought  to  be  frequent ;  for  as  the  circumstances  which,  on  this  view,  lead  to  their
formation,  are  common  to  all  persons  labouring  under  an  obstructed  circulation,  all,
or  to  say  the  least,  manv,  should  be  affected  with  them." — (Loc.  Cit.) — Transl.


KXCllESCENCES ON THE  VALVES.


613


become  the  depository  of  concretions  of  blood.  Indeed,  the  facts
formerly  mentioned,  respecting  the  obstruction  of  vessels  from
inflammation  may  prove  this;  and  I  have  moreover  witnessed  an
instance  of  the  kind  in  the  left  auricle  in  a  case  of  contraction  of
the  mitral  valve.  About  an  inch  square  of  the  auricle  was  here
covered  by  a  false  membrane  of  the  consistence  of  a  firm  polypus,
and  which  was  throughout  deeply  tinged  with  blood.  But  for
the  very  reason  that  such  a  membrane  is  very  perceptible  when  it
exists,  we  ought  to  disbelieve  the  presence  when  it  is  not  visible.
I  cannot  help  thinking  that  there  is  some  analogy  between  the
formation  of  these  warty  vegetations,  on  the  edges  of  the  valves
and  along  the  tendons  of  the  pillars,  and  the  crystallizations  that
take  place  upon  threads  or  other  minute  solid  bodies  placed  in  a
saline  solution.  At  any  rate,  it  has  been  already  sufficiently  proved,
in  the  preceding  chapter,  that  the  blood  may  concrete  partially,
independently  of  all  inflammation,  and  that  the  coagulum  may
become  organized  and  adhere  to  the  neighbouring  parts.

Corvisart  has  observed  no  particular  sign  characteristic  of
these  excrescences,  different  from  those  of  contraction  of  the
orifice  from  other  causes.  In  none  of  his  cases  has  he  ever  no-
ticed the  purring-thrill,  although  considered  by  him  as  the  only
pathognomonic  sign  of  such  affections.  I  conceive  that,  unless
the  excrescences  are  extremely  numerous,  they  ought  very  slightly
to  affect  the  motion  of  the  valves,  and,  consequently,  that  they
ought  to  afford  no  sign  of  their  presence.  Moreover,  from  the
circumstance  of  these  bodies  being  usually  complicated  with  a
severe  disease  of  the  heart  or  lungs,  their  symptoms  are  some-
times masked  by  those  of  the  former,  or  the  attention  diverted
from  them.  But  when  sufficiently  numerous  materially  to  affect
the  play  of  the  valves  or  obstruct  the  orifices  of  the  heart,  they
then  become  distinguishable  by  the  signs  which  indicate  ossifica-
tion of  the  same  parts  ;  except  that  in  the  former  case,  the  pur-
ring-thrill is  less  distinct,  and  the  sound  of  the  heart's  contrac-
tions is  more  analogous  to  that  of  the  bellows  than  the  file.  The
following  cases  will  illustrate  and  confirm  most  of  the  preceding
statements.

Case  XLVI. —  Warty  excrescences  of  the  mitral  valve  and
left  auricle ;  rupture  of  one  of  the  tendons  of  the  mitral  valve  ;
hypertrophy  and  dilatation  of  the  ventricles. — A  man,  aged
about  thirty-five,  came  into  the  Necker  Hospital  in  April  1819.
He  had  been  affected  for  five  months  with  great  dyspnoea  and
violent  palpitations  on  making  any  considerable  exertion,  start-
ings  from  sleep,  and  occasional  spitting  of  blood.  For  a  few
days  he  had  laboured  under  a  severe  diarrhoea.  At  the  time  of
his  admission  the  countenance  was  tranquil,  with  some  colour,
the  pulse  small,  hard,  and  tolerably  regular,  and  the  respiration
oppressed.  The  heart  yielded  a  very  dull  sound,  but  a  strong
impulse  on  both  sides.  The  sound  was  slightly  audible  on  the
back. The  contraction  of  the  auricle  was  almost  as  lono;  as  that


614


EXCRESCENCES OX  THE  VALVES.


of  the  ventricle,  and  yielded  the  bellows-sound.  The  purring-
thrill  was  felt  extremely  distinct  by  the  hand,  over  the  cartilages
of  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  ribs  of  the  left  side.  The  bel-
lows-sound was  also  perceptible  in  a  slight  degree  during  the
contraction  of  the  right  auricle,  but  much  less  so  than  on  the  left
side.  The  action  of  the  heart  was  somewhat  irregular.  The
jugular  veins  were  not  swollen.  The  respiration  was  everywhere
perceptible,  but  with  a  slight  mucous  rattle  in  some  points. —
Diagnosis  :  Hypertrophy  of  both  ventricles  ;  contraction  of  the
mitral  valve  from  excrescence  or  cartilaginous  degeneration.
This  man  died  on  the  third  clay  after  admission.

Dissection  thirty-two  hours  after  death. — 'The  pericardium
contained  a  pint  of  serum,  of  a  deep  yellow  colour,  and  inter-
mixed with  a  great  many  opaque  white  flakes.  The  heart  was
double  the  size  of  the  patient's  fist.  The  right  ventricle  was  very
large,  its  parietes  being  at  least  four  lines  thick,  and  its  columnar
very  large.  The  tricuspid  valves,  and  the  sigmoid  of  the  pulmo-
nary artery,  were  of  a  deep  violet-red  colour.  The  right  auricle
was  sound.  The  left  ventricle  was  one-third  larger  than  natural,
and  its  walls  were  six  lines  thick,  and  its  columnar  very  thick.
One  of  the  tendons  affixed  to  the  edge  of  the  mitral  valve  was
ruptured  about  its  middle.  This  rupture  appeared  to  have  been
the  consequence  of  progressive  wasting  of  its  middle  part ;  and
one  of  the  other  tendons  of  the  same  valve  was  unequally  ex-
tenuated, but  still  unbroken.  The  whole  floating  border  of  the
mitral  valve  was  covered  with  small  excrescences  such  as  I  have
described,  varying  in  size,  form  and  consistence.  Altogether
they  gave  to  the  valve  a  thickened  and  fringed  appearance.  The
sigmoid  valves  of  the  aorta,  and  the  lining  membrane  of  this  ar-
tery, were  extremely  red,  and  exhibited  in  this  respect  a  striking
contrast  with  the  inner  membrane  of  the  ventricle.  The  whole
inner  surface,  and  indeed  the  whole  parietes,  of  the  left  auricle,
were  of  the  same  red  colour;  and  below  the  opening  of  the  left
pulmonary  veins,  and  about  two  lines  from  the  auriculo-ventri-
cular  opening,  there  was  about  an  inch  square  coated  with  a  con-
geries of  excrescences  similar  to  those  on  the  mitral  valve,  and
very  firmly  attached.  The  muscular  substance  of  the  heart  was
generally  yellowish  (except  the  left  auricle)  and  of  moderate  firm-
ness. The  pleura  contained  about  a  pint  of  serum  on  each  side.
The  lungs  were  sound.

Case  XL VI I.*  Warty  vegetations  of  the  mitral  and  aortal
valves;  hypertrophy  of  the  heart;  pulmonary  apoplexy. — A  wo-
man between  fifty  and  sixty  years  of  age  came  into  the  Nccker  Hos-
pital in  April,  181 7, affected  with  haemoptysis,  extreme  exhaustion,
emaciation,  orthopneca,  and  general  anasarca. No  account  of  her

*  Tliis  case,  originally  published  in  the  first  edition,  in  the  chapter  on  pulmonary
apoplexy,  was  omitted  in  the  second  :  it  is  now  restored,  and  inserted  here  as  an  ex-
ample oi'  excrescences  in  tho  heart,  and  also  as  a  good  case  of  pulmonary  apoplexy.-—
Trunsl-


EXCHESCENCES ON THE  VALVES.


015


previous  state  could  be  obtained.  The  expectoration  consisted
partly  of  yellowish  or  chocolate  coloured  mucus,  and  partly  of
blood.  The  pulse  could  hardly  be  felt  on  account,  of  the  oedema,
but  it  was  ascertained  to  be  irregular  and  small,  yet  somewhat
hard.  Percussion  elicited  no  results  on  account  of  the  flaccidity
of  the  integuments;  no  pulsation  was  felt  in  the  region  of  the
heart :  the  jugulars  were  slightly  swollen.  The  disease  was
entered  as  follows :  Slight  pleuro-pneumonia  with  hypertrophy  of
the  right  ventricle.  She  was  bled  and  took  diuretics,  with  the
temporary  effect  of  lessening  the  dyspnoea  and  anasarca.  The
diagnosis  was  afterwards  modified  as  follows :  Hypertrophy  of
the  left  ventricle :  ossification  or  contraction  of  the  mitral  or
aortal  valves  ?  tubercles  f  *

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death. — Both  cavities  of  the
chest  contained  about  a  pint  of  bloody  serum,  each  with  flakes
of  coagulable  lymph.  The  left  lung  contained  in  different  parts
of  its  parenchyma  portions  of  a  reddish-brown  colour,  firm,
granular  when  incised,  exactly  circumscribed,  and  surrounded  by
a  perfectly  crepitous  tissue.  These  indurated  masses  were  not
at  all  like  those  of  pneumonia,  but  seemed  to  be  the  consequence
of  a  peculiar  combination  of  the  blood  (strongly  coagulated,  and
as  if  partially  dried)  with  the  pulmonary  tissue.  In  the  inferior
lobe  there  was  a  similar  mass,  more  than  a  cubic  inch  in  extent,
formed  by  three  concentric  layers,  separated  from  each  other  by
thinner  layers  of  a  tissue  still  retaining  its  original  soft  and  crepi-
tous character,  but  only  much  redder  than  natural.  The  larger
layers,  obviously  the  product  of  effusedjblood,  were  of  a  dark-red
colour,  granular  when  incised,  very  firm,  fragile,  and  so  dry  that
it  was  with  difficulty  that  even  a  small  portion  of  clotted  blood
could  be  expressed  from  them.  One  of  these  layers  was  so  soft  in
one  point  as  to  resemble  a  clot  of  blood.  The  portions  of  lung
thus  indurated  yielded,  when  cut  into,  no  moisture,  except  when
compressed  or  scraped  ;  while  the  other  parts  of  the  lungs  were
more  than  ordinarily  imbued  with  a  yellowish  frothy  serum,
which  escaped  from  them  when  incised.  There  were  a  few
tubercles.  In  the  right  lung  there  was  one  mass  like  that  in  the
left ;  and  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  bronchi  was  of  a  deep  red
colour,  in  different  points,  in  both  lungs.  The  heart  was  twice
the  size  of  the  subject's  hand.  The  walls  of  the  auricles  were
slightly  thickened,  and  their  lining  membrane  was  easily  sepa-
rated. The  left  ventricle  could  have  scarcely  held  an  almond  in
its  shell.  The  fleshy  columns  were  separated  from  each  other
like  those  of  the  right  ventricle,  and  at  their  origin  the  ventricular
wall  was  an  inch  and  a  half  in  thickness.  The  edges  of  the
mitral  valve  were  shrivelled  and  slightly  cartilaginous,  and  con-

*  The  notes  of  this  case  having  been  in  part  lost,  I  can  only  give  the  diagnosis
recorded,  without  the  ground  on  which  it  was  founded. — Author.


GIG


EXCKESCENCKS  ON  THE  VALVES.


tained  three  excrescences  about  a  line  in  length,  firm  and  not
readily  separated  by  the  handle  of  the  scalpel.  The  right  ven-
tricle was  somewhat  thicker  than  natural,  and  its  fleshy  columns
more  conspicuous.  The  aorta  was  so  small  as  hardly  to  admit
the  little  finger.  Two  of  its  valves  presented  excrescences  similar
to  those  on  the  mitral,  very  like  certain  syphilitic  warts.

2.  Globular  excrescence. — The  globular  excrescences  have  an
appearance  quite  different  from  those  just  described,  resembling
little  balls  or  cysts,  of  a  spherical  or  oval  shape,  and  of  a  size
from  that  of  a  pea  to  that  of  a  pigeon's  egg.  Their  exterior  sur-
face is  even,  smooth,  and  of  a  yellowish-white  colour ;  and  the
thickness  of  their  walls  is  very  uniform,  being  never  more  than
half  a  line.  The  substance  composing  these  is  opaque  and  very
similar  to  that  of  old  polypi,  its  consistence  being  firmer  than
boiled  white  of  egg.  Their  inner  surface  is  not  so  smooth  as  the
exterior,  and  it  appears  to  be  composed  of  a  softer  substance,
which  occasionally  has  the  appearance  of  passing  gradually  into
the  matter  contained  within  it.  This  matter  may  exist  in  three
different  states,  all  of  which  may  be  found  in  the  same  subject,
but  in  different  cysts.  These  are,  1st,  a  liquid  resembling  half-
coagulated  blood,  only  turbid  as  if  intermixed  with  some  insoluble
powder,  and  sometimes  containing  a  few  clots  of  perfectly  coagu-
lated blood  ;  2nd,  a  more  opaque  matter,  of  a  pale  violet  colour,  of
a  pultaceous  consistence,  and  very  like  the  lees  of  wine ;  and  3rd,  a
yellowish,  opaque  fluid,  like  thick  pus  or  thin  paste,  and  evidently
consisting  of  decomposed  fibrine  like  that  found  in  aneurismal  sacs.

I  have  only  met  with  cysts  of  this  kind  in  the  ventricles  and
auricular  sinuses.  They  are  found  as  frequently  in  the  right  as
the  left  side  of  the  heart,  generally  near  the  apex  of  the  ventricles,
and  always  adherent  to  the  walls  of  the  cavity.  They  are
attached  by  means  of  a  pedicle,  which  is  often  so  slightly  con-
nected with  the  columnar  carneae  as  to  be  detached  from  them
without  being  ruptured.  This  pedicle,  although  forming  part  of
the  excrescence,  resembles  the  common  polypi  more  than  the
other  portions,  and  seems  as  if  it  were  of  more  recent  formation
and  less  perfectly  organized.  I  have  never  found  these  bodies
more  organized  than  I  have  described,  and  I  have  considered
those  containing  clots  of  blood  as  the  newest  ;  those  con-
taining a  fluid  like  the  lees  of  wine  as  next  in  order,  and
those  containing  a  puriform  matter  as  the  most  ancient.  I  sus-
pect that  Cruwell's  case,  formerly  mentioned,  was  an  example  of
this  kind  of  excrescence,  completely  organized  and  arrived  at  the
state  of  cartilage  or  bone.  I  have  met  with  these  excrescences  in
subjects  who  had  died  of  different  diseases,  but  all  of  whom  had
remained  in  a  dying  state  for  several  days  or  even  weeks.  Upon
examining  the  heart  with  the  stethoscope,  in  these  cases,  I  have
been  able  to  detect  no  constant  disorder  of  the  circulation ;  and
in  some  the  action  of  the  heart  has  continued  regular  to  the  last.


EXCRESCENCES ON THE  VALVES.


017


In  the  Misccll.  Nat.  Cur.  we  find  a  case  of  tumour  of  the  heart
which  seems  to  have  been  an  example  of  the  excrescences  we  are
now  considering;  and  this,  and  the  case  of  Crliwell,  are  the  only
ones  I  have  met  with  in  the  older  authors.  The  work  of  Burns
eontains  three  examples  of  this  affection,  in  two  of  which  "  a  mem-
braneous-looking capsule  encircled  the  polypus,  which  was  com-
posed of  firm  concentric  layers,  and  the  roots  of  which  were  inter-
woven among  the  musculi  pectinate"  (p.  194.)  In  a  third  case,
this  author  met  with  a  similar  vesicle  containing  a  teaspoonful  of
perfect  pus.  An  instance  of  the  same  kind  is  cited  from  Baillie
(Morb.  Anatomy;)  and  perhaps  we  ought  to  add  a  fourth  case
by  Burns  (p.  202,)  of  a  polypus  attached  to  the  left  auricle,  of
the  size  of  a  pullet's  egg,  and  partially  ossified.

The  formation  of  these  globular  excrescences  is  not  easily
accounted  for. The  first  time  I  observed  them  I  was  reminded
of  a  remarkable  case  which  I  met  with  during  my  studies,  and
which  is  recorded  by  M.  Tonnelier  in  the  Journ.  de  Med.  t.  iv.
A  young  woman  swallowed  an  ounce  of  arsenic,  and  recovered.
A  year  afterwards  she  did  the  same  and  died. On  examining
the  stomach,  there  was  found  (beside  the  traces  of  the  arsenic)  a
cyst  of  the  size  of  a  goose's  egg  which  appeared  to  have  been
recently  separated  from  the  vicinity  of  the  pylorus. In  this
cyst,  which  was  precisely  like  the  false  membranes  of  an  old
pleurisy,  and  about  a  line  in  thickness,  there  was  an  ounce  of
crystallized  arsenic  ;  which  must  have  occasioned  an  instantaneous
inflammation,  and  such  a  secretion  of  coagulable  lymph  as  suf-
ficed to  envelope  it. The  globular  excrescences  have  the  same
form  and  consistence  as  the  cyst  in  question  ;  but  they  contain  no
substance  sufficiently  irritating  to  have  occasioned  inflammation.
We  have  already  seen,  that  the  more  recent  contain  only  blood
or  concrete  fibrine ;  and  the  more  ancient,  what  seems  to  be  pus.
If  pus  were  always  contained  in  these  vesicles,  we  might  imagine
that  this  might  occasion  inflammation  ;  but  the  contrary  is  the
case,  and  it  seems  much  more  probable  that  the  pus  is  secreted
by  the  containing  membrane. On  the  other  hand,  the  pedicle
by  which  these  bodies  are  attached  to  the  pectinate  muscles,  is
almost  always  less  organized  than  the  other  parts,  and  its  very
extremity  looks  as  if  it  were  only  just  recently  coagulated.  It
would  therefore  seem,  that  the  formation  of  the  vesicle  were  long
anterior  to  the  period  of  its  attachment  to  the  walls  of  the  heart.

These  globular  excrescences  not  being  as  yet  well  known,  I  will
here  give  two  examples  of  them,  in  addition  to  one  reported  in
a  former  chapter.

Case  XLVIII. — Globular  excrescences  in  the  right  ventricle,
in  a  'phthisical  subject. — A  woman,  aged  forty,  came  into  the  hos-
pital on  the  30th  October  1817,  affected  with  phthisical  symptoms,
which,  together  with  occasional  faintings  and  palpitations,  had
existed  for  a  year.  At  the  time  of  her  admission,  there  was  con-
siderable emaciation,  hectic  fever,  frequent  cough  with  copious


618


EXCRESCENCES  ON  THE  VALVES.


expectoration  of  opaque  yellow  sputa.  On  the  18th  of  November,
at  which  time  the  symptoms  remained  nearly  the  same,  percussion
of  the  chest  gave  a  pretty  good  sound,  everywhere  except  in  the
region  of  the  heart,  where  the  sound  was  somewhat  dull.  The
action  of  the  heart,  under  the  stethoscope,  was  not  healthy,  the
pulsations  were  too  frequent  and  often  irregular—  two  or  three
regular  beats  being  followed  by  others  very  quick  and  attended
with  a  sort  of  convulsive  bound.  The  sound  of  the  ventricular
systole  was  dull,  and  the  impulse  either  feeble  or  so  confounded
with  the  respiratory  movements  as  to  be  appreciated  with  diffi-
culty. There  was  also  distinguishable,  a  sound  resembling  that
produced  by  a  bubble  of  air  escaping  from  a  fluid,  or  like  the
dash  of  water  shaken  in  a  thin  glass  flask.  Respiration  was  every
where  weak,  but  less  distinct  on  the  left  than  on  the  right  side.
Pectoriloquy  was  not  perceived.  There  was  a  sense  of  constric-
tion in  the  cardiac  region  and  a  slight  pain  in  the  back  imme-
diately opposite.  Diagnosis:  Ttibercles  in  the  lungs;  disease,
of  the  heart,  not  yet  discriminated.  November  29.  Dyspnoea
somewhat  less.  The  peculiar  sound  above  mentioned,  no  longer
perceptible.  Contraction  of  the  auricles  and  ventricles  nearly
equal,  and  the  sound  more  obtuse  than  natural — but  perceptible
under  the  clavicles: — hypertrophy  with  dilatation  of  the  heart.
She  died  on  the  5th  December.

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death.  The  lungs  were
adherent  to  the  pleura  and  full  of  tubercles  in  different  stages.
The  heart  was  larger  than  the  hand  of  the  individual.  The
interior  of  the  right  ventricle  contained  several  small  vesicles
somewhat  larger  than  a  pea  generally,  and  were  of  the  size  of  a
small  cherry.  Their  external  surface  was  smooth  and  whitish,
but  with  a  tint  of  red  here  and  there :  they  were  all  pediculated
and  attached  to  the  walls  of  the  ventricles  by  radicles,  (inter-
woven with  the  columnar  carnea?,)  the  extremities  of  which  ter-
minated in  clots  of  blood  and  had  all  the  characters  of  polypous
concretions.  The  parietes  of  these  vesicles  were  opaque,  yellow-
ish, of  a  consistence  somewhat  greater  than  that  of  boiled  white
of  egg  and  yet  somewhat  friable,  and  nearly  twice  as  thick  as  the
nail.  Their  internal  surface  was  not  quite  so  smooth  as  the
outer,  and  was  deeply  tinted  with  the  contained  matter:  this
varied  in  different  vesicles,  being  in  some  half-fluid  and  of  the
colour  and  appearance  of  wine-lees,  in  others  of  a  yellowish-
white,  puriform,  and  of  the  consistence  of  paste;  in  others,  again,
it  was  a  mere  clot  of  blood  mixed  with  a  small  quantity  of  fibrine.
The  cavity  of  the  right  ventricle  was  a  little  larger  than  natural;
its  walls  of  the  proper  thickness. The  other  organs  were  sound.*

*  In  the  above  case,  every  thing  leads  to  the  belief  that  the  excrescences  originated
at  tbe  time  the  faintings  and  palpitations  came  on,  that  is,  about  a  year  before  death.
It.  is  evident  that  the  excrescences  in  the  heart  were  the  causo  of  death  ;  die  phthisis
being  in  too  early  a  stage  to  produce  this  effect.— -Author.


EXCRESCENCES  ON THE  VALVES.


019


Cask  XXIX I — Globular  excrescences,  with  hypertrophy  and
dilatation  of  the  heart  and  pulmonary  apoplexy.  A  man,  aged
forty-five,  came  into  the  Necker  Hospital,  in  the  end  of  August
1818,  having  been  for  several  years  subject  to  great  dyspnoea  on
using  violent  exercise,  and  this  having  become  permanent  since
about  a  fortnight  previously  to  his  admission.  At  this  time,  the
legs  were  cedematous,  the  face  pale,  the  pulse  hardly  perceptible,
decubitus  on  the  back,  and  the  sleep  short  and  suddenly  inter-
rupted. The  respiration,  although  short,  was  distinct  under  the
stethoscope,  and  percussion  elicited  a  good  sound  except  in  the
cardiac  region.  The  left  ventricle  gave  a  very  great  impulse,  and
the  sound  was  loud  ;  the  sound  and  impulse  of  the  right  were
middling;  the  sound  of  the  auricles  imperceptible.  In  conse-
quence, the  diagnosis  was  given — Hypertrophy  of  the  heart.
Being  better,  he  went  out  of  the  hospital  in  a  month,  but  returned
about  six  weeks  afterwards,  with  the  same  symptoms  and  signs
as  before.  The  use  of  the  same  means  (bloodletting,  aperients
and  diuretics)  again  relieved  him,  and  he  was  discharged  after
six  weeks.  He  returned  once  more  on  the  16th  January,  worse
than  on  former  occasions.  He  could  not  now  lie  down,  and  if  he
attempted  to  lie  on  his  face,  he  complained  of  a  pulsation  in  the
throat  opposite  the  sternum.  The  anasarca  was  increased,  and
there  were  now  cough  and  diarrhoea,  and  also  pain  in  the  prae-
cordia.  The  impulse  of  the  heart  was  very  great.  The  means
formerly  used  afforded  no  relief,  and  he  remained  nearly  in  the
same  state  until  the  3rd  of  February,  when  he  was  seized  with
fits  of  extreme  dyspnoea,  with  cough  &c.  which  were  followed,  on
the  4th,  with  severe  haemoptysis.  At  this  time  the  chest  sounded
well,  but  the  respiration  was  indistinct  over  the  lower  part  of  the
lung,  and  there  was  a  large  mucous  rhonchus  over  nearly  the
whole  chest.  The  words  "  HcBtnoptysical  engorgemenf  were
now  added  to  the  diagnosis,  and  the  patient  died  four  days  after.

Dissection  sixty  hours  after  death. — The  heart  was  three  times
as  large  as  the  fist  of  the  individual.  The  right  ventricle  was
partially  filled  by  a  polypous  concretion  which  extended  into  and
completely  filled  the  right  auricle.  This  concretion  was  firm  and
fibrinous,  in  parts  reddish,  and  here  and  there  striated  as  if  by
the  rudiments  of  small  vessels.  This  ventricle  was  somewhat
dilated.  Near  its  apex  there  were  two  or  three  cysts  of  the  size
aad  nearly  of  the  shape  of  beans,  of  a  yellowish-red  colour,  at-
tached between  the  columnar  carnea?.  Their  walls  were  strong
but  thin,  and  they  contained  a  fluid  like  wine-lees.  They  adhered
to  the  columnar  carneas  by  means  of  pedicles  exactly  like  the
firmer  portions  of  the  polypus,  and  interlacing  with  the  columnar.
The  walls  of  the  left  ventricle  were  from  nine  to  eleven  lines  in
thickness,  and  remarkably  solid.  The  mitral  valve  contained
several  very  hard  cartilaginous  plates,  but  was  not  altered  in
shape. The  valves  of  the  aorta  were  sound;  and  this  artery


(i-20


PERICARDITIS.


was  covered,  from  its  origin  to  its  second  curvature,  with  innu-
merable cartilaginous  and  bony  plates,  and  its  arch  was  dilated.
The  right  lung,  in  its  upper  three-fourths,  was  reddened  rather
than  impregnated  with  fresh  blood,  and  was  crepitous.  At
its  base,  there  was  a  zone  of  two  or  three  fingers'1  breadth,  and
including  the  whole  thickness  of  the  lung,  of  a  dark-reddish
colour,  as  solid  as  liver  and  of  a  granular  aspect  when  incised :
it  was  exactly  circumscribed,  and  terminated  abruptly  in  the
crepitous  tissue  above  it.  There  were  three  or  four  circumscribed
patches  of  the  same  kind  higher  up  in  the  same  lung,  not  larger
than  almonds  or  walnuts.  The  left  lung  was  much  less  affected  ;
but  in  the  posterior  part  of  the  inferior  lobe,  it  contained  two  or
three  circumscribed  masses  exactly  like  those  in  the  right  lung.


CHAPTER  XXII.

OF  PERICARDITIS.

Pericarditis  is  inflammation  of  the  serous  membrane,  which
lines  the  fibrous  sac  of  the  pericardium,  the  heart  and  origin  of
the  large  vessels. It  may  be  either  acute  or  chronic.

Sect.  I. — Anatomical  characters  of  Pericarditis.

1.  Acute  Pericarditis. — This  inflammation,  like  that  of  all
membranes  of  the  same  kind,  is  marked  by  redness,  more  or  less
deep,  a  concrete  albuminous  exudation,  and  a  sero-purulent  ef-
fusion. The  redness  is  almost  always  but  slight  in  the  acute
disease.  When  it  exists,  it  is  for  the  most  part  only  partially.
It  is  most  commonly  punctuated,  and  looks  as  if  the  surface  of
the  membrane  was  covered,  here  and  there,  with  little  specks  of
blood,  very  close  to  each  other.  I  have  never  perceived  that  this
redness  was  accompanied  by  any  thickening  of  the  part.  In
some  cases,  wherein,  to  judge  by  the  thickness  of  the  false  mem-
branes, the  inflammation  appears  to  have  been  very  great,  no
redness  whatever  can  be  discovered  on  the  serous  membrane,  on
removal  of  the  fibrinous  exudation.  This  concrete  albuminous
exudation  commonly  invests  the  whole  surface  of  the  pericardium,
as  well  on  the  heart  and  large  vessels,  as  on  the  loose  sac.  It
rarely  presents  the  appearance  of  an  equable  membranous  layer,
like  the  false  membranes  of  pleurisy  ;  on  the  contrary,  its  surface
is  most  frequently  marked  by  a  great  number  of  rough  and  ir-
regular prominences.  Sometimes  the  knobbed  appearance  of  this
exudation  is  very  like  what  would  result  from  the  sudden  sepa-


PERICARDITIS.


621


ration  of  two  pieces  of  slab,  joined  by  a  pretty  thick  layer  of
butter ;  at  other  times,  it  is  more  like  the  internal  surface  of  the
second  stomach  of  the  calf,  an  observation  made,  in  one  case,  by
M.  Corvisart.  In  certain  cases  this  aspect  of  the  false  membrane
has  given  rise  to  a  singular  error,  it  having  been  mistaken  for  a
variolus  eruption  in  subjects  who  have  died  of  the  small  pox.
The  consistence  of  the  lymph  is  usually  greater  than  that  of  the
false  membranes  of  pleurisy  ;  it  is  also  thicker,  and  more  firmly
adherent  to  the  subjacent  parts  ;  its  colour  is,  however,  the  same,
being  of  a  pale  yellow  analogous  to  that  of  pus.

The  serum  effused  in  inflammation  of  the  pericardium  is  limpid,
of  a  pale  yellow  colour,  or  slightly  brownish. It  contains  few
fragments  of  semi-concrete  albumen  ;  at  least,  it  very  rarely  con-
tains enough  of  these,  to  give  it  a  milky  and  turbid  character.
The  quantity  of  this  effusion  is  usually  considerable  in  the  com-
mencement of  the  disease,  often  as  much  as  a  pound. M.  Cor-
visart found  it,  in  one  case,  to  amount  to  four  pounds.  It  would
seem  that  the  quantity  of  effused  serum  diminishes  quickly,  as
soon  as  the  violence  of  the  inflammation  begins  to  subside ;  as
we  usually  find  the  proportion  of  serum  and  of  albumen  nearly
equal,  while  in  pleurisy  and  peritonitis,  the  serum  is  commonly
from  twenty  to  fifty  times  greater  than  that  of  the  extravasated
lymph. Frequently,  even,  in  very  violent  cases,  we  find  no  ef-
fusion of  serum,  and  only  a  thick  and  highly  concrete  albumen
filling  the  whole  cavity  of  the  pericardium,  and  uniting  the  heart
and  large  vessels  to  the  exterior  or  loose  portion  of  this  mem-
brane. In  this  case  we  may  suppose  that  the  effused  serum  has
been  quickly  absorbed,  and  the  two  layers  of  false  membrane
cemented  together;  although  it  is  not  impossible  that,  in  some
cases,  the  more  solid  exudation  may  be  the  only  one. We  have
seen  that  the  same  thing  occasionally  takes  place  in  certain  partial
and  sub-acute  inflammations  of  the  pleura;  and  several  obser-
vations have  led  me  to  believe,  that  the  cartilaginous  patches  that
sometimes  are  met  with  on  the  exterior  of  the  lungs,  are  pro-
duced in  the  same  manner.  Sometimes  pericarditis,  like  pleurisy,
is  hcemorrhagiC)  in  which  case  the  serum  is  sanguineous,  and  the
surface  of  the  false  membranes  is  of  a  red  colour. When  the
disease  terminates  favourably,  the  pseudo-membranous  exudation,
after  a  certain  time,  is  converted  into  cellular  substance,  or  rather
into  lamina?  of  the  same  nature  as  the  serous  membranes ;  that  is
to  say,  the  laminae  are  double,  the  exterior  surface  being  exhalent,
and  the  interior  cellular  or  adherent,  and  containing  the  vessels
distributed  to  the  part. Sometimes  these  lamina?  are  long,  some-
times so  short,  that  the  pericardium  seems  intimately  adherent
to  the  heart.

Sometimes,  though  rarely,  the  inflammation  is  confined  to  a
part  only— sometimes  a  very  small  part— of  the  pericardium.
These  partial  inflammations  are  in  proportion  to  the  general,  in


622


PERICARDITIS.


point  of  frequency,  hardly  as  one  to  ten.  Their  anatomical
characters  are  precisely  the  same,  only  that  the  albuminous  exu-
dation is  in  them  confined  to  the  inflamed  part.  The  serous
effusion  is  sometimes  as  abundant  as  in  the  general  disease;  more
commonly,  however,  it  is  less.  The  inflammation  in  this  case
almost  always  terminates  in  being  cured,  by  the  transformation
of  the  pseudo-membranous  exudation  into  long  serous  laminae:
scarcely  ever  are  the  partial  inflammations  followed  by  the  inti-
mate adhesion  of  the  parts.

We  often  find  on  the  surface  of  the  heart,  opaque  white
patches,  sometimes  as  large  as  the  palm  of  the  hand,  more  com-
monly one-half  or  one-third  this  size,  and  often  very  small.  They
are  nearly  of  the  thickness  of  the  nail,  and  have  a  degree  of  con-
sistence equal  to  that  of  the  membranes  composed  of  condensed
cellular  substance, — such,  for  instance,  as  the  exterior  membrane
of  the  lymphatic  glands.  They  adhere  so  closely  to  the  parts
on  which  they  lie,  that  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain,  even  by  dis-
section, whether  they  are  situated  above  or  beneath  the  fine
membrane  covering  the  heart  and  great  vessels.  M.  Corvisart
is  of  opinion  that  they  are  beneath  it.  I  have,  however,  ascer-
tained the  incorrectness  of  this  opinion,  as  I  have  several  times
been  able  to  remove  the  patches,  leaving  the  serous  membrane  of
the  pericardium  still  untouched.  Are  these  patches  the  effect
of  partial  pericarditis,  and  the  consequent  conversion  of  the
effused  lymph  into  a  condensed  membranous  cellular  tissue?
Analogy  leads  us  to  answer  in  the  affirmative,  since  no  production
of  this  kind  takes  place  in  the  system  without  previous  exudation
of  coagulable  lymph.  M.  Corvisart  considers  them  as  produced
without  previous  inflammation,  and  seated,  as  I  have  already
said,  beneath  the  serous  surface  of  the  pericardium.  Both  these
notions  are,  I  think,  inadmissible,  inasmuch  as  there  exists  no
example  of  an  albuminous  exudation  on  the  adherent  surface  of
a  serous  membrane,  and  as  facts  without  number  prove  that
pseudo-membranous  exudations  are  almost  always  the  produce
of  inflammation.  I  have  lately  met  with  a  case  which  appears
to  me  to  throw  some  light  on  the  question  of  the  origin  of  these
spots.  In  a  man  who  died  of  peripneumony,  I  found  a  thin  false
membrane,  very  firm,  and  of  a  yellowish  colour,  investing  the
right  auricle  and  a  portion  of  the  ventricle  of  the  same  side,  all
the  rest  of  the  pericardium  being  quite  free,  only  containing  in
its  cavity  two  or  three  ounces  of  a  transparent  and  slightly  yellow
serum.  Some  parts  of  the  false  membrane,  particularly  on  the
auricle,  were  of  a  whiter  colour  and  firmer  than  the  rest,  and
exhibited  an  appearance  almost  the  same  as  the  white  patches
above  described.

2.  Chronic  Pericarditis. — Chronic  pericarditis  is  always  ge-
neral, occupying  the  whole  internal  surface  of  the  serous  mem-
brane. This  is  commonly  much  redder  than  in  the  acute  disease.


PERICARDITIS.


623


The  redness  is  formed  by  the  close  approximation  of  minute
points,  which  look  as  if  applied  with  a  pencil.  Rarely  the
chronic  disease  is  accompanied  by  a  pseudo-membranous  exu-
dation ;  and  when  this  exists,  it  is  thin,  soft,  friable,  and  entirely
resembling  a  layer  of  very  thick  pus.  In  every  case  there  exists
a  more  or  less  copious  effusion  of  a  turbid  milky  fluid,  sometimes
having  quite  a  puriform  character.  I  am  led  to  believe  that  the
close  adhesion  of  the  pericardium  to  the  heart,  is  commonly  the
consequence  of  the  absorption  of  this  fluid,  and  that  the  adhesion
by  the  long  laminae  is  the  product  of  the  acute  disease.  In  one
case  I  found  a  close  and  general  adhesion  of  the  pericardium  to
the  heart  and  large  vessels,  by  means  of  a  false  fibro-cartilaginous
membrane,  in  every  respect  like  that  of  the  pleura:  this  was,
probably,  the  consequence  of  a  hsemorrhagic  inflammation.  A
tuberculous  eruption  may  sometimes  be  developed  in  the  false
membrane,  and  thereby  convert  the  acute  into  the  chronic  dis-
ease, as  frequently  happens  in  the  case  of  pleurisy  and  peritonitis.
I  have  seen  two  cases  of  this  kind ;  and  a  third  is  noticed  in
Corvisart's  work  (obs.  vii.)  as  far  as  we  can  judge  from  the  brevity
of  the  description  of  it  there  given.

In  many  cases  of  pericarditis,  especially  in  the  chronic  dis-
ease, the  muscular  substance  of  the  heart  has  lost  its  colour
and  become  whitish,  as  if  it  had  been  macerated  for  several
days  in  water.  This  loss  of  colour  is  sometimes  attended  by
a  considerable  degree  of  softening;  and,  at  other  times,  the
consistence  is  natural.  Most  writers  have  regarded  this  loss
of  colour  as  a  mark  of  the  inflammation  of  the  heart  itself,  and
most  of  the  examples  recorded  of  carditis  are  merely  cases  of  in-
flammation of  the  pericardium,  accompanied  by  this  loss  of  co-
lour. A  great  number  of  those  collected, by  M.  Corvisart  are  of
this  kind.  For  my  own  part  I  am  disposed  to  doubt  the  correct-
ness of  the  opinion  that  refers  this  loss  of  colour  to  inflammation.
We  can  never  be  sure  of  the  existence  of  inflammation  in  a  mus-
cular organ  unless  we  find  a  deposition  of  pus  among  its  fibres.


Sect.  II. — Signs  of  Pericarditis.

Signs  of  Acute  Pericarditis. — There  are  few  diseases  attended
by  more  variable  symptoms  or  of  more  difficult  diagnosis,  than
this.  Sometimes  it  appears  with  all  the  symptoms  of  a  very  vio-
lent disease  of  the  chest,  obviously  calculated  to  carry  off  the
patient  in  a  few  days.  At  other  times  it  proves  fatal  without
leading  us,  in  the  least,  to  suspect  its  existence.  Again,  we  find
cases  marked  by  all  the  symptoms  usually  attributed  by  nosolo-
gists  to  this  disease,  and  in  the  subjects  of  which,  after  death,  we
discover  no  traces  of  its  existence.  I  have  myself  frequently
fallen  into  both  errors,  and  I  have  seen  the  same  thing  happen


G24


P  KUICAUD1TIS.


to  the  most  skilful  practitioners.  On  the  other  hand,  I  have
sometimes  known  these  cases  detected,  or  rather  divined,  by
others  as  well  as  myself.  The  fact,  however,  is,  that  the  disease
is  as  frequently  mistaken  as  recognized.  This  is  the  result  of
my  own  experience,  up  to  the  present  time  ;  and  to  mine  I  may
add  that  of  many  of  my  medical  brethren,  and  among  others  M.
Recamier.

Corvisart  attributes  the  difficulty  of  diagnosis  to  the  circum-
stance of  pericarditis  being  almost  always  complicated  with  pleu-
risy, pneumonia,  or  some  other  disease  of  the  chest,  which  masks
its  peculiar  symptoms.  These  complications,  which  are  very
common,  must,  unquestionably,  have  this  effect  where  they  exist ;
I  must,  however,  confess,  that  the  most  completely  latent  affec-
tions of  this  kind  that  I  have  met  with,  were  in  subjects  whose
thoracic  viscera  were,  in  other  respects,  quite  sound,  and  who  had
died  of  disease  of  the  abdomen.  These  facts  seem  to  prove  that
inflammation  of  the  pericardium  is  sometimes  a  local  affection  of
little  violence,  and  of  very  inconsiderable  influence  on  the  general
system,  or  even  on  the  circulation  ;  while,  in  other  cases,  it  is
accompanied  by  an  acute  fever,  and  by  such  violent  disorder  of
almost  all  the  functions,  as  to  compromise  the  life  of  the  patient.
M.  Corvisart  is  likewise  of  opinion,  that  it  is  when  the  disease  is
very  acute,  that  the  symptoms  are  very  obscure.  Its  invasion,
he  says,  is  then  sudden,  its  progress  rapid,  its  termination  almost
instantaneous.  When  it  exists  in  a  less  violent  degree,  but  still
acute,  he  thinks  it  can  be  recognized  by  the  followiug  symptoms :
viz.  sense  of  heat  in  the  region  of  the  heart ;  great  difficulty  of
respiration  ;  greater  colour  of  the  left  cheek  than  the  right  ;
pulse,  at  first,  frequent,  hard,  and  rarely  irregular,  becoming,
about  the  third  or  fourth  day,  small,  hard,  contracted,  and  often
irregular;  great  anxiety,  slight  palpitations ;  partial  faintings;
peculiar  change  of  features  ;  and  (towards  the  fatal  close  of  the
disease)  total  or  partial  cessation  of  the  local  pain  ;  intermitting,
very  irregular,  almost  imperceptible  pulse  ;  fits  of  suffocation,
insupportable  anxiety,  and  general  anasarca.

These  symptoms  are,  certainly,  sometimes  present  in  pericar-
ditis ;  but  each,  or  all  of  them,  may  be  absent,  and  some  of  them
are  very  rare.  I  have  never  observed  the  increased  colour  of  the
cheek,  have  rarely  heard  complaints  of  local  heat  or  pain ;  and,
in  place  of  the  progressive  increase  of  irregularity  in  the  pulse,
(as  described  by  M.  Corvisart,)  I  have  uniformly  found  this  ir-
regularity intermitting,  wiry,  and  almost  imperceptible,  from  the
very  commencement  of  the  disease.

I  must  admit  that  the  stethoscope  scarcely  furnishes  us  with
any  more  certain  signs  of  this  disease.  The  following  appear  to
me  to  be  the  most  common  symptoms  of  the  inflammation  of  the
pericardium,  when  not  latent :  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles
yields  a  oreater  shock,  and  sometimes  a  more  marked  sound  than


PKUICAltmTTS.


usual,  and,  at  intervals,  feebler  and  shorter  pulsations  are  per-
ceived, which  correspond  with  intermissions  of  the  pulse,  the
smaliness  of  which  contrasts  remarkably  with  the  strength  of  the
heart's  pulsation  :  sometimes  the  pulse  can  scarcely  be  felt,  at  all.
When  these  symptoms  come  on  suddenly  in  a  person  who  had
never  been  affected  with  disease  of  the  heart,  there  is  great  pro-
bability of  their  being  the  consequence  of  this  disease.  It  is  fur-
ther common  for  the  patient  to  have  more  or  less  dyspnoea,  great
distress  in  the  cardiac  region,  and  extreme  anxiety ;  and  to  suffer
syncope  on  taking  a  few  steps,  or  on  moving  suddenly  in  his  bed.
The  feeling  of  pain,  heat  or  weight  in  the  region  of  the  heart,
is  a  much  rarer  symptom,  yet  it  is  sometimes  met  with.  In
some  cases,  the  cardiac  region  yields  the  dead  sound  ;  but  most
frequently  this  sign  is  far  from  being  distinct.  I  must  repeat,
however,  that  we  must  not  accord  too  implicit  confidence  to  these
signs,  even  when  they  co-exist ;  for  pericarditis  may  assuredly
exist  without  them,  and  they  without  pericarditis.  The  accu-
mulation of  blood  in  the  heart,  and  polypous  concretions,  the
consequence  of  this,  give  rise  to  precisely  the  same  symptoms.*

*  Laennec  lias  bere  taken  no  notice  of  the  leather-creak  which  lie  had  at  one  time
regarded  as  a  probable  sign  of  pericarditis,  (see  p.  522.)  1  am  nevertheless,  still  of
opinion  that  this  phenomenon  ought  to  he  observed  in  every  case  of  this  disease,
at  least  at  one  particular  period  of  its  progress.  Two  old  pupils  of  the  Necker
Hospital,  M.  M.  Collin  and  Devillier,  are  positive  in  having  proved  the  existence
of  this  sign  in  two  cases, — the  former,  in  a  man  who  died  of  chronic  pericarditis,
and  in  whom  the  pulsations  of  the  heart  were  accompanied  for  six  days  with  this
leather-creak,  and  which  only  ceased  when  the  local  symptoms  indicated  the  super-
vention of  a  copious  effusion  into  the  pericardium  ; — the  latter,  in  a  man  who  also
died  of  chronic  pericarditis,  and  in  whom  the  sound  was  present  during  the  whole
period  of  his  stay  in  the  hospital:  on  examination  after  death  there  was  found
no  liquid  effusion  in  the  pericardium,  but  the  whole  surface  of  the  sac  was
covered  with  thick  false  membranes,  like  vegetations.  M.  Collin,  who  lias,  I  know
not  wherefore,  assumed  the  honour  of  having  first  observed  the  leather- creak,  con-
siders it  to  he  produced  by  that  particular  dryness  which  the  pericardium,  in  common
with  all  other  serous  membranes,  presents  at  the  commencement  of  inflammation,
and  ingeniously  assimilates  it  with  the  sound  produced  by  the  friction  of  the  patella
on  the  condyles  of  the  knee  bones,  in  cases  of  chronic  rheumatism  without  effusion.
(  Diverses  Methodes  (V exploration,  §c.  Par.  1 823.)  We  have  had  already  occasion  to  con-
sider (see  chap,  on  Pleurisy)  the  value  of  this  pretended  dryness  of  serous  membranes
in  a  state  of  inflammation ;  and  we  cannot,  therefore,  regard  M.  Collin's  explanation
as  further  admissible  than  that  the  sound  is  clearly  the  result  of  friction.  It  is  indeed
a  parallel  case  to  the  sound  of  friction  observed  in  pleurisy,  and  from  the  two  cases
above  quoted,  it  is  evident  that  it  depends,  like  that,  on  the  presence  of  a  pseudo-
membranous exudation  of  unequal  thickness,  or,  in  other  words,  on  the  absence  of
the  natural  smoothness  of  the  membrane. — (M.  L.)

Since  the  publication  of  the  present  edition  of  our  author's  treatise,  the  profession
in  this  country  have  been  supplied,  by  a  distinguished  auscultator  and  pathologist,
Dr.  Stokes  of  Dublin,  with  two  most  valuable  and  interesting  memoirs  on  the  subject
of  pericarditis,  (  Dublin  Joum.  March  and  Sept.  1833.)  from  which  it  results  that  the
original  opinion  of  Laennec,  and  the  actual  belief  of  his  cousin  and  of  M.  Collin,
respecting  the  value  of  the  leather-creak  from  friction  of  the  pericardium,  ns  a  sign
of  this  disease,  is  irrefragably  confirmed.  The  important  fact  discovered  by  Dr.
Stokes,  of  the  occasional  great  similarity  of  this  sound  to  that  of  the  common  bellows-
sound  from  affection  of  the  valves,  reconciles  his  conclusions,  in  a  most  satisfactory
manner,  with  the  preceding  remarks  of  Dr.  Hope,  Dr.  Latham,  and  my  own.  Dr.
Williams,  a  great  authority,  informs  mo  that  his  recent  experience  leads  him  likewise


6-26


I'K  III  CARDITIS.


Before  the  conversion  of  false  membranes  into  cellular  tissue
was  well  understood,  the  adhesion  of  the  pericardium  to  the  heart
was  regarded  by  divers  authors  as  a  cause  of  various  and  serious
complaints.  Lancisi  and  Vieussens  considered  it  as  constantly
causing  palpitation ;  Meckel,  as  rendering  the  pulse  habitually
small ;  and  Senac,  as  productive  of  frequent  faintings.  Even  M.
Corvisart  himself  has  fallen  into  some  mistakes  on  this  head.
He  admits  three  species  of  adhesions, — all  of  which  I  have  just
described  as  mere  varieties  or  stages  of  the  same  affection.  These
are,  1st,  a  demi-concrete  albuminous  adhesion,  which  is  the  onlv
one  recognized  by  him  as  the  consequence  of  pericarditis  ;  2nd,
the  very  intimate  or  close  cellular  adhesion,  deemed  an  effect  of
gouty  or  rheumatic  affections ;  and  3rd,  the  extended  or  long  cel-
lular adhesion,  the  cause  of  which  is  not  assigned  by  him.  M.
Corvisart  is  further  of  opinion,  that  no  person  can  live,  and  pre-
serve a  good  state  of  health,  who  is  affected  with  a  complete
and  close  adhesion  of  the  pericardium  to  the  heart,  or  of  the
lungs  to  the  pleura.  I  have,  however,  met  with  many  cases
where  this  condition  of  parts  was  found  after  death,  in  which  no
disorder  of  the  respiration  or  circulation  existed  during  life.  It
has  only  appeared  to  me  that  the  contraction  of  the  auricles  has
become  much  duller  when  they  are  adherent  to  the  pericardium.
A  case  adduced  by  M.  Corvisart  in  support  of  his  opinion  (Op.
Cit.  p.  34)  appears  to  me  rather  conclusive  against  it,  inasmuch

to  admit  the  value  of  this  sign  in  pericarditis.  The  following  propositions  are  given
by  Dr.  Stokes  as  containing;  the  general  results  of  his  researches :  for  more  complete
information  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  original  memoirs  : — "  1.  That  in  cases  of  peri-
carditis with  effusion  of  lymph,  the  rubbing  of  the  two  roughened  surfaces  causes
sounds  perceptible  to  the  ear,  and  vibrations  communicable  to  the  hand,  by  which
the  disease  can  be  easily  and  securely  recognized,  even  when  all  other  symptoms
are  absent.  2.  That  the  more  rough  is  the  state  of  the  serous  membrane,  the  more
distinct  will  these  signs  be.  3.  That  the  sounds  accompany  the  two  sounds  of
the  heart  in  almost  all  cases.  4.  That  they  are  audible  generally  only  over  the  re-
gion of  the  heart.  5.  That  they  present  themselves  with  various  modifications  of
character,  but  often  resemble  the  sounds  produced  by  extensive  valvular  disease.
6.  That  they  are  most  distinct  when  the  region  of  the  heart  continues  with  its  na-
tural sound  on  percussion,  but  that  the  existence  of  fluid  does  not  necessarily  imply
their  complete  subsidence.  7.  That  they  may  re-appear  after  the  absorption  of
fluid  from  the  bag  of  the  pericardium,  or  the  new  supervention  of  inflammation.
8.  That  the  sounds  may  continue  when  the  sensation  of  rubbing  is  no  longer  per-
ceptible by  the  hand.  9.  That  they  are  singularly  and  rapidly  modified  by  direct
antiphlogistic  treatment  to  the  heart.  10.  That  by  observing  the  progress  and  mu-
tations of  those  signs,  we  can  trace  the  progress  of  organization  or  obliteration  of
the  pericardial  cavity,  judge  of  the  effect  of  treatment,  and  accurately  ascertain  the
exact  state  of  the  pericardium.  1 1 .  That,  hence,  it  must  be  admitted  that  auscultation
is  of  direct  utility  in  pericarditis,  and  that  the  diagnosis  no  longer  rests  on  negative
signs."  Dub.  Journ.  vol.  iv.  p.  60.  The  facts  so  concisely  announced  in  the  pre-
ceding propositions  are  of  such  practical  importance,  that  1  must  recommend  thu,
attentive  consideration  of  every  one  of  them  to  the  reader.  It  is  most  gratifying  to
those  who  were  the  earlv,  and  by  some  the  suspected  advocates  of  auscultation,
to  find  it  gradually  working  its  way  to  the  high  places  of  the  profession,  and  vindi-
cating its  true  philosophical  character  and  practical  value  by  successive  improve-
ments and  discoveries,  among  the  most  valuable  of  which  1  do  not  hesitate  to  regard
those  of  Dr.  Stokes  detailed  in  the  present  note. — Traual.


l'KKinAKDITIS


G27


as  the  appearances  on  dissection  showed  sufficient  lesions  in  other
organs  to  account  for  the  symptoms  referred  by  him  to  the  adhe-
sions between  the  heart  and  pericardium.

I  have  understood  that  an  English  physician,  Dr.  Sanders,  has
announced  as  an  infallible  sign  of  the  adhesion  of  the  pericardium
to  the  heart,  the  existence  of  a  hollow,  during  each  systole  of  the
organ,  in  the  epigastrium,  immediately  below  the  left  false  ribs.
Kreysig  attributes  the  same  remark  (vol.  ii.  p.  623)  to  Dr.  Heim
of  Berlin.  During  the  last  two  years,  I  have  sought  in  vain  to
verify  this  observation  among  all  my  patients  who  presented  any
disorder  of  the  circulation  ;  and  in  none  of  them  have  I  found  the
epigastric  depression,  although  several  had  this  very  adhesion  of
the  pericardium.

The  signs  of  chronic  pericarditis  are  still  more  uncertain  than
those  of  the  acute  disease.  This  uncertainty  arises  not  merely
from  the  variability  of  the  signs,  but  also  from  the  greater  rarity
of  the  disease  in  an  essentially  chronic  state.  I  have  attended
several  cases  which  I  considered,  throughout  their  whole  course,
as  chronic  inflammations  of  the  pericardium,  but  which  were
almost  all  cured.  In  two  or  three  cases  only,  have  I  been  able
to  verify  the  correctness  of  my  diagnosis  by  examination  after
death  ;  whilst  frequently  I  have  found  the  pericardium  full  of
pus,  and  in  a  true  state  of  chronic  inflammation,  without  having
been  at  all  led  to  suspect  such  an  affection.  In  the  cases  which
have  occurred  within  the  last  few  years,  I  have  found  the  symp-
toms to  be  precisely  the  same  as  in  the  acute  disease,  only  less
violent.  Percussion  alone  may  afford  some  assistance,  but  only
in  the  case  where  effusion  is  considerable.  From  one  to  two  years
has  elapsed  before  a  cure  has  taken  place.  This  has  been  almost
insensible  in  its  progress ;  and  when  it  has  been  effected,  the  ac-
tion of  the  heart  and  pulse  has  become  natural  and  regular.*

*  Inflammation  of  the  pericardium  is  of  much  more  frequent  occurrence,  both  in
the  acute  and  chronic  form,  than  is  generally  supposed.  It  is  no  wonder  that  it  is  so
constantly  mistaken  or  overlooked  by  common  practitioners,  after  the  confession  of
inability  to  detect  it,  made  by  our  author  in  the  text.  It  is  of  great  importance,  how-
ever, that  it  should  be  distinguished  ;  and  it  need  hardly  be  said,  after  the  statements
made  in  the  last  note,  that  its  diagnosis  is  now  in  a  very  different  state  from  that  in
which  our  author  left  it.  Dr.  Stokes's  observations  apply  chiefly  to  the  dry  pericarditis ;
and  M.  Louis's  memoir,  which  applies  more  particularly  to  that  with  copious  liquid
effusion,  leaves  little  to  be  desired  as  to  its  verification.  This  distinguished  patho-
logist is  of  opinion  that  the  dull  sound  on  percussion,  when  percussion  is  properly  con-
ducted and  due  regard  is  had  to  the  history  of  the  case,  may  alone  be  considered  as
almost  an  infallible  sign  of  the  disease.  Our  documents  respecting  the  history  of
this  disease  are  now  very  ample ;  and  I  earnestly  recommend  the  careful  study  of
them  to  the  young  practitioner.  Want  of  space,  from  the  already  too  great  size  of
this  volume,  prevents  me  from  doing  more  in  this  place  than  indicating  some  of  the
best  sources  of  information,  and  a  good  deal  that  is  not  noticed  by  M.  Laennec.
The  different  varieties  of  this  affection  are  treated  of  by  Testa  in  several  chapters,
and  also  by  Kreysig  in  different  parts  of  his  elaborately  misarranged  book.  The
most  recent  and  best  accounts  are  those  by  Bertin,  (Malacl.  du  Cccur,  p.  39,)  Andrnl,
(Clin.  Med.  t.  iii.  p.  415,)  Louis,  (Memoires  ou  Recherches,  p.  253,)  Hope,  (Dis!
of  the  Heart,  p.  84,  and  Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  iv.,)  Latham.,  (Med.  Gazette,  vol.  iii.

S  S  2


G28


CHAPTER  XXIII.

OF  HYDRO-PERICARDIUM.

It  is  extremely  common  to  find  a  greater  or  less  quantity  of
serum  in  the  pericardium ;  most  frequently  this  does  not  exceed
a  few  ounces,  and  can  rarely  be  considered  as  idiopathic  in  its
origin.  Most  commonly  it  can  only  be  regarded  as  taking  place
in  articulo  mortis,  or  immediately  after  death.  When  there
exists  a  general  dropsical  diathesis,  we  occasionally  find  some

p.  213,)  Stokes,  (Dub.  Journ.  vol.  iii.  p.  63;  vol.  iv.  p.  29.)  For  the  Literature
of  Pericarditis,  see  end  of  chap,  on  Carditis.  A  vast  number  of  separate  cases  of  this
affection  are  scattered  through  the  works  of  practical  writers,  and  the  periodical
literature  of  this  and  foreign  countries.  Several  are  contained  in  my  work  on  the
Stethoscope.

The  treatment  of  pericarditis  has  been  entirely  overlooked  by  our  author, — an  im-
portant subject,  which  I  can  merely  allude  to  in  this  place.  The  general  principle
of  treatment  must  be  the  same  as  that  of  pleurisy,  only  that  the  depletory  measures
ought  to  be  still  more  active  in  pericarditis,  as  well  on  account  of  the  more  important
character  of  the  part  affected,  as  because  the  omission  of  them  will  be  productive  of
greater  local  mischief  than  in  the  case  of  pleurisy.  Two  modes  of  restoration  are
possible;  the  one  complete,  by  the  resolution  of  the  inflammation  and  the  absorption
of  the  whole  of  the  effused  fluid ;  the  other  incomplete,  by  the  resolution  of  the  in-
flammation, the  absorption  of  the  serous  portion  of  the  effusion,  and  the  more  or  less
extensive  agglutination  of  the  loose  to  the  adherent  pericardium,  by  means  of  the
extravasated  lymph:  if  neither  of  these  terminations  ensues,  but  the  pericardium
remains  distended  with  fluid,  death  may  be  said  to  be  almost  inevitable.  Hence  the
extreme  importance  of  prompt  and  active  measures  in  the  very  commencement  of
this  disease,  by  which,  if  we  fail  in  producing  the  first  and  most  desirable  result,  we
may  entertain  a  confident  hope  of  effecting  the  second  ;  for  although  adhesion  of  the
pericardium  to  the  heart,  especially  if  of  considerable  extent,  is  a  serious  evil  and
almost  always  productive  of  yet  greater  organic  disease  of  the  organ,  and  eventually
of  death,  still  it  is  a  great  object  to  attain  even  this  termination,  in  the  severer  cases.
Immediately  after  the  employment  of  copious  venesection  and  cupping  or  leeching,
or  rather  contemporaneously  with  the  latter,  the  system  should  be  brought  under  the
influence  of  mercury  as  speedily  as  possible  by  the  free  administration  of  calomel,  or
of  calomel  and  opium  on  the  plan  of  Dr.  Hamilton.  This  plan  of  treatment  origi-
nally introduced  by  Dr.  Fane  has  been  more  recently  advocated  by  Dr.  P.  M.  La-
tham, (see  his  excellent  essays  on  diseases  of  the  heart  in  the  third  volume  of  the
Medical  Gazette,)  and  enforced  by  the  evidence  of  numerous  facts  and  by  the  most  con-
clusive reasoning.  From  acute  pericarditis  which  has  proceeded  to  the  deposition
of  lymph,  nothing  I  believe  (says  Dr.  L.)  can  ensure  a  perfect  recovery  but  mercury
so  employed  as  to  produce  its  peculiar  and  specific  influence  upon  the  constitution,
— mercury  producing  salivation.  I  would  not  hazard  this  assertion  unless  I  firmly
believed  that  the  fact  was  brought  ;is  near  to  demonstration  as  the  nature  of  tilings
allows."  p.  215.  Dr.  Latham  is  convinced  that  mercury  has  the  power  of  even
arresting  the  deposition  of  lymph  as  well  as  of  promoting  its  absorption,  in  acute
inflammations  in  general,  a  fact,  indeed,  visibly  proved  in  cases  of  iritis  not  of  a
syphilitic  nature  ;  and  as  he  maintains  that  "  after  an  inflammation  of  the  pericar-
dium has  absolutely  ceased,  and  the  patient's  life  is  saved  for  the  present,  if  adhesion
remain,  death  will  nevertheless  be  its  consequence  in  the  end,"  the  paramount  im-
portance of  this  mode  of  treatment  cannot  be  placed  in  a  stronger  light.  1  will  only
further  add,  that,  as  it  is  only  in  the  acute  stage  of  the  disease,  that  much  benefit  can
be  I'Xpected  from  this  or  any  other  measure,  no  means  ought  to  be  neglected  of  es-
tablishing a  correct  diagnosis, — the  only  basis  on  which  successful  practice,  in  this  or
any  other  disease,  can  be  established. — Transl.


HYDRO-PERICARDIUM.


water  in  the  pericardium ;  but,  in  general,  it  contains  less  than
the  other  serous  cavities.  In  the  idiopathic  hydro-pericardium,
on  the  contrary,  the  pericardium  is  commonly  the  only  membrane
which  contains  serous  effusion.  The  effused  serum  is  sometimes
colourless,  ut  more  commonly  it  is  yellowish,  brownish  or  red-
dish, although  still  perfectly  limpid,  and  without  any  admixture
of  flakes  of  lymph :  rarely  it  is  sanguineous  It  is  variable  in
amount.  Most  frequently  it  does  not  exceed  one  or  two  pounds,
but  it  has  been  found  in  much  greater  quantity  than  this.  M.
Corvisart  (Op.  Cit.  p  53)  records  an  instance  wherein  eight
pounds  were  found.  This  effusion  is  attended  by  no  change  in
the  heart,  or  its  coverings.  Some  authors  have,  indeed,  stated
the  heart  to  have  appeared  as  if  macerated  in  such  cases ;  but  1
am  disposed  to  consider  such  statements  as  the  result  of  imperfect
observation  and  incorrect  description.

Signs. — Authors  vary  respecting  the  symptoms  of  this  affec-
tion. Lancisi  states  the  principal  to  be,  a sation  of  an  enor-
mous weight  in  the  region  of  the  heart. Reimahn  and  Saxonia
assure  us,  that  the  patient  feels  his  heart  swimming  in  water.
Senac  says,  he  has  seen  the  fluctuation  of  the  fluid  between  the
third,  fourth,  and  fifth  ribs.  M.  Corvisart  says,  he  has  perceived
this  fluctuation  by  the  touch,  and  adds  the  following  marks  of
the  affection : — sense  of  weight  in  the  region  of  the  heart;  di-
minished resonance  on  percussion ;  pulsation  of  the  heart  irre-
gular and  obscure,  and  felt  over  a  large  space,  and  with  variable
intensity,  in  the  same  and  different  points  of  this  space ;  pulse
small,  frequent  and  irregular;  threatened  suffocation  on  lying
in  the  horizontal  posture;  frequent  syncope,  but  rarely  palpita-
tion ;  oedema. To  these  symptoms  I  may  apply  the  same  re-
marks as  to  those  of  pericarditis ;  they  may  exist,  in  greater  or
less  number,  and  with  or  without  hydro-pericardium.  The
stethoscope  will,  no  doubt,  assist  us  in  the  diagnosis ;  but  from
having  had  few  opportunities  of  witnessing  the  idiopathic  affec-
tion, I  am  unable  to  say  what  precise  signs  it  wiTl  supply.  When
the  effusion  is  in  small  quantity,  (less  than  a  pint,  for  instance,)
I  am  of  opinion  that  it  will  be  indicated  by  no  certain  sign,  but
that  when  it  exceeds  two  or  three  pints,  it  may  sometimes  be
recognized  by  means  of  percussion,  auscultation,  and  inspection
of  the  chest.*

In  this  case  a  precise  diagnosis  is  the  less  to  be  regretted,
firstly,  because  the  disease  is  so  extremely  rare;  and,  secondly,
because  it  is  so  little  under  the  controul  of  medicine.  It  may,
however,  be  possibly  removed  by  a  surgical  operation.  And
were  this  to  be  had  recourse  to,  I  would  not  recommend  a  punc-
ture between  the  cartilages  of  the  ribs,  as  advised  by  Senac  and

•  The  experience  of  Louis,  given  in  the  last  chapter  on  pericarditis,  proves  our
author  to  be  under  a  mistake  as  to  the  maximum  quantity  of  fluid  that  can  he  detected,
hy  means  of  percussion,  in  the  pericardium. — Transl.


630


PNEUMOPERICARDIUM.


practised  by  Desault ;  but  that  the  sternum  should  be  trepanned.
This  operation  is  not,  in  itself,  at  all  dangerous,  and  is  of  easy
performance.  By  means  of  it  we  are  enabled  to  see  and  touch
the  pericardium  ;  and  may  thus  verify  our  diagnosis,  before  pro-
ceeding to  lay  open  the  membrane.  This  is  the  only  part  of  the
operation  attended  with  danger,  from  inflammation  produced  by
the  admission  of  air ;  and  yet  it  might  be,  perhaps,  advisable  to
excite  this  very  state  by  means  of  slightly  stimulant  injections,
in  order  to  effect  a  cure  of  the  disease.*


CHAPTER  XXIV.

OF  PNEUMOPERICARDIUM.

By  this  expression  I  shall  designate  those  collections  of  air,  how-
soever produced,  which  are  met  with  in  the  pericardium.  They
are  very  often  observed  in  the  examination  of  dead  bodies,  par-
ticularly such  as  have  been  kept  some  time.  In  the  latter  case,
the  effusion  is,  no  doubt,  the  effect  of  decomposition,  but  in  many
others  the  complete  absence  of  all  signs  of  putrescence  proves  it
to  have  existed  previously  to  death.  Sometimes  the  air  is  com-
bined with  a  liquid,  and  this  is  by  much  the  most  frequent  case;
at  other  times,  the  pericardium  is  distended  by  air  alone.  The
effusion  of  air  and  serum  into  the  pericardium,  may  occur  in  the
agony  of  all  diseases.  I  have  sometimes  been  enabled  to  announce
its  presence,  from  the  supervention  of  an  increased  resonance  over
the  lower  part  of  the  sternum,  and  from  the  existence  of  the  sound
of  fluctuation  produced  by  the  action  of  the  heart  and  by  deep
inspirations.

As  these  observations  were  anterior  to  those  made  respecting
the  sound  of  the  heart's  action  heard  at  a  distance  from  the  body
(See  Sect.  III.  Chap.  V.  of  the  present  book.)  I  did  not  ascertain
whether  this  last-mentioned  phenomenon  was  present  or  not :  but
I  am  convinced  that  in  almost  all  the  cases  where  the  sound  is
heard  at  a  distance,  the  cause  of  the  phenomenon  is  a  temporary
development  of  gas  in  the  pericardium  :  this  gas  being,  most  fre-
quently, speedily  reabsorbed,  and  while  present  occasioning  no
serious  inconvenience.  A  physical  phenomenon  of  this  kind
must  acknowledge  a  cause  analogous  to  those  which  produce
similar  effects ;  and  in  reference  to  this  particular  phenomenon,
I  can  conceive  only  four  capable  of  giving  rise  to  it :  1.  that  just
mentioned  ;  2.  the  development  of  gas  in  the  cavities  of  the  heart

*  For  some  curious  coses  of  tins  affection,  in  which  tapping  was  successfully  per-
formed by  Dr.  Romero,  a  Spanish  physician,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Dr.  Johnson'b
Review  for  Dec.  1820,  p.  4?7.—  Trantl.


ACCIDENTIA PRODUCTIONS IN THE PERICARDIUM. C' J 1

themselves — a  proposition  altogether  inadmissible,  since  death
must  instantly  be  the  consequence  of  such  a  state ;  3.  the  ossifi-
cation of  a  portion  of  the  heart's  surface  corresponding  to  the
sternum  or  cartilages  of  the  ribs— a  condition  of  parts  incom-
parably more  rare  than  the  phenomenon  in  question  ;  lastly,  the
co-existence  of  such  a  degree  of  induration  of  the  muscular  sub-
stance of  the  heart  with  such  violent  action  of  it,  as  to  render  its
impulse  against  the  thoracic  parietes  (that  is,  the  contact  of  two
surfaces  comparatively  soft  and  moist)  productive  of  a  sufficient
degree  of  resonance.  This  last  hypothesis  becomes  the  more
improbable  from  this  consideration,  that  when  the  heart  is  in-
durated it  is  also  hypertrophied ;  and  we  know  that  the  persons
in  whom  the  sound  of  the  heart  is  heard  at  a  distance,  are  almost
always  nervous  subjects,  with  a  soft  muscular  fibre,  and  a  heart
possessing  very  little  real  force  of  contraction.


CHAPTER  XXV.

OF ACCIDENTAL PRODUCTIONS IN  THE  PERICARDIUM.

Various  species  of  accidental  productions  have  been  found  be-
tween the  pericardium  properly  so  called,  and  the  pleura;  also,
between  it  and  the  internal  and  serous  membrane;  and,  lastly,
between  the  serous  membrane  and  the  heart.  In  the  Sepulchretum
of  Bonetus,  and  other  collections  of  cases,  we  find  examples  of
what  appear  to  be  tubercles,  cancerous  tumours,  or  cysts,  in  the
different  situations  just  mentioned.  But  the  imperfect  knowledge
of  membranes  before  the  time  of  Bichat,  and  the  general  con-
fusion of  all  accidental  productions  under  the  names  of  scirrhus,
carcinoma,  atheroma,  &c.  renders  it  impossible  to  ascertain  pre-
cisely either  the  nature  or  site  of  such  morbid  growths.  I  have
already  noticed  the  fatty  productions,  in  the  form  of  a  cock's
comb,  developed  occasionally  between  the  pleura  and  fibrous
membrane  of  the  pericardium.  Twice  or  thrice  I  have  found
tubercles  in  the  same  situation,  in  subjects  which  exhibited  a
great  number  of  these  bodies  in  the  lungs  and  elsewhere.  I
have  also  seen  a  tubercle  situated  at  the  point  of  the  origin  of
the  pulmonary  artery  and  beneath  the  serous  membrane  of  the
pericardium.

Once  only  have  I  met  with  an  instance  of  ossification  between
the  layers  of  the  pericardium.  As  this  case  was  remarkable  both
for  its  extent  and  the  effects  produced  by  it,  I  shall  here  briefly
detail  it.

Case  XLVI. — A  man  aged  sixty-five  years,  had  led  an  intem-
perate life,  but  had,  nevertheless,  enjoyed  good  health  until  his


632


DISEASES  OF  THE  VESSELS.


fiftieth  year.  At  this  time  he  appears  to  have  had  an  attaek  of
pleurisy  of  short  duration,  but  which  was  followed  by  oedema
of  the  lower  extremities,  and  subsequently  by  anasarca  of  other
parts,  and  by  dyspnoea  and  breathlessness  on  ascending  a  height,
or  using  any  degree  of  exercise.  When  he  came  into  the  hos-
pital, in  the  end  of  spring,  the  dropsical  symptoms  continued
and  the  lips  were  swollen  and  blue.  The  pulsations  of  the  heart
were  unequal,  irregular,  and  very  distinct,  though  perceptible
over  a  very  small  extent  of  the  chest.  The  pulse  was  feeble,
small,  soft,  unequal,  intermittent,  and  irregular.  There  was  no
cough,  but  copious  expectoration.  The  thorax  sounded  well  su-
periorly, but  badly  on  the  lower  parts.  The  patient  could  He
in  any  posture;  slept  well,  even  without  having  his  head  raised,
and  had  no  sudden  startings  from  sleep.  He  died  in  the  course
of  a  few  months,  the  dropsical  swellings  and  dyspnoea  having
much  increased.

Dissection  twenty-four  hours  after  death. — The  brain,  lungs,
and  abdominal  viscera  were  found  in  a  sound  state.  The  heart
was  enlarged,  and  adhered  throughout  to  the  pericardium,  by
means  of  very  close  cellular  attachments.  On  first  touching  it,
it  seemed  to  be  quite  enclosed  in  a  bony  case,  situated  beneath
the  fibrous  membrane  of  the  pericardium ;  but  on  further  exa-
mination this  incrustation  was  found  to  be  incomplete.  Around
the  base  of  the  ventricles  there  was  a  zone  or  band,  partly  bony
and  partly  cartilaginous,  of  from  one  or  two  fingers'  breadth,  of
unequal  thickness,  flattened,  yet  somewhat  rough  on  its  surface.
This  band  projected  into  the  angle  between  the  ventricles  and
auricles,  and  extended  along  the  interventricular  septum  on  both
sides,  to  near  the  apex  of  the  heart.  The  whole  of  this  produc-
tion was  contained  between  the  fibrous  membrane  of  the  pericar-
dium and  the  serous  membrane  which  lines  it  internally.  The
auricles  were  enlarged  so  that  each  might  have  contained  a  large
egg.  One  of  the  mitral  valves  contained  an  ossified  point  of  the
size  and  shape  of  a  French  bean.

In  1823  I  met  with  a  similar  case,  only  that  the  incrustation
was  less  extensive.  Criiwell,  Pasta,  and  Burns,  seem  to  have
observed  analogous  instances.*


CHAPTER  XXVI.

OF  ORGANIC AFFECTIONS  OF  THE  VESSELS  OF  THE  HEART.

The  Coronary  Vessels. — The  most  common  disease  of  the  co-
ronary arteries  is  ossification. It  presents  precisely  the  same

*  Sou  also  Baillio's  Morb.  Anat.  p.  13. — YVuhW.


DISEASES  OF THE  VESSELS.


033


characters  as  the  same  morbid  condition  in  other  vessels.  Bertin
(p.  514)  has  found  one  of  the  arteries  entirely  obliterated  from
this  cause.  In  the  case  of  simple  dilatation  of  the  heart,  or  of
dilatation  with  hypertrophy,  we  very  frequently  find  the  coro-
nary arteries  dilated  through  their  whole  extent.  In  an  example
of  hypertrophy  of  the  left  ventricle,  Bertin  found  the  left  coro-
nary artery  of  double  the  diameter  of  the  right.  The  only  mor-
bid change  of  the  coronary  veins  that  I  have  met  with  is  their
general  dilatation.  In  rare  instances  they  present,  like  the  vari-
cose veins  of  the  extremities,  some  points  much  more  distended
than  others.  The  circumstance  that  strikes  us  most,  at  first
sight,  in  this  case,  is  the  prolongation  of  the  natural  flexions  of
the  vessels,  their  length  as  well  as  diameter  being  increased.
This  appearance  is  particularly  observable  in  subjects  who  have
long  laboured  under  dilatation  or  hypertrophy  of  the  heart.
The  ossification  of  the  coronary  arteries  has  been  regarded  by
Heberden  and  Parry  as  the  cause  of  angina  pectoris ;  and  this
opinion  has  been  adopted  by  almost  all  the  English  and  German
physicians :  I  shall  investigate  its  correctness  when  treating  of
the  disease  in  question.

The  Pulmonary  Artery. — The  affections  of  the  pulmonary
artery  are  few  in  number.  Those  which  have  been  hitherto  ob-
served are  only  the  dilatation  and  bony  incrustation  of  this  vessel.
Of  this  latter  affection  there  are  not  more  than  three  or  four  cases
on  record,  if  we  except  those  in  which  there  existed  a  preterna-
tural communication  between  the  right  and  left  cavities  of  the
heart.*  It  is  by  no  means  very  rare  to  find  the  pulmonary  artery
dilated  beyond  the  usual  size.  I  have  found  its  diameter  greater
than  that  of  the  aorta ;  and  sometimes  I  have  observed  it  suffi-
ciently wide  at  its  origin  to  admit  three  fingers.  Morgagni  relates
several  instances  of  this  affection,  (Epist.  23,  24,  25.  27.)  Most
of  the  cases  of  dilatation  observed  by  myself  occurred  in  chronic
affections  of  the  lungs.  Ambrose  Pare  informs  us  that  he  found
the  arteria  venosa  (which  I  presume,  with  Morgagni,  to  mean  the
pulmonary  artery)  so  much  dilated  as  to  admit  the  hand,  and
ossified  on  its  internal  surface.  A  case  is  recorded  in  the  Ephem.
Cur.  Nat.  (Dec.  iii.  ann.  vi.  obs.  207)  which  would  seem  to
prove  the  possibility  of  aneurism  taking  place  in  the  pulmonary
artery.  "  Arteria  pulmonalis  tarn  copioso  sanguine  turgescebat,
ut,  quasi  aneurismate  aff'ecta,  praster  propriam  magnitudinem
praeternaturalem,  hinc  inde  sacculos  cruore  coaeulato  turgidos
habuent  appensos.

I  have  never  witnessed  any  symptom  which  could  be  referred
to  the  dilatation  of  the  pulmonary  artery.  And,  indeed,  the
affection  is  almost  always  combined  with  some  more  serious  dis-

•  For  two  singular  cases  of  contraction  of  the  pulmonary  iirterv,  see  the  Medical
Guzelte,  vol.  ii.  p.  220,  July,  1828.— Transl.


Oo*  DISEASES  OF  THE  AORTA.

ease  of  the  lungs  or  heart.  A  similar  conclusion  may  be  drawn
from  the  cases  noticed  by  Morgagni.

The  Pulmonary  Fern*.— Sometimes  we  find  the  pulmonary
veins  dilated  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  ;  but  only  in  the  case  of
organic  disease  of  the  heart,  particularly  of  the  left  cavities.  In
the  case  of  a  young  woman  who  died  suddenly,  after  having  ex-
hibited all  the  symptoms  of  diseased  heart,  Chaussier  (Mem.  de
TAcad.  1748)  found  the  pulmonary  veins  dilated  (as  were  also
the  left  ventricle  and  auricle)  and  one  of  them  ruptured  just  as  it
leaves  the  lungs.  The  original  cause  of  all  this  mischief  was
ossification  of  the  sigmoid  valves  of  the  aorta.


CHAPTER  XXVII.

OF  THE  ORGANIC  DISEASES  OF  THE  AORTA.

I  formerly  took  notice  of  inflammation  of  the  inner  mem-
brane of  the  aorta,  and  of  the  small  suppurating  pustules  which
sometimes  form  in  its  coats  and  open  on  its  internal  surface.  I
have  also  mentioned  the  bony  incrustations  that  occur  in  it ;  but
these  as  well  as  some  of  its  other  affections  merit  further  detail
in  this  place.

Sect.  I. — Bony,  Cartilaginous,  and  Calcareous  Incrustations

of  the  Aorta.

These  formations  belong  to  the  class  of  imperfect  ossifications.
They  are  of  an  irregularly  flattened  form  ;  and  when  they  are  of
unequal  thickness  they  project  rather  towards  the  outside  than
the  inside  of  the  vessel.  They  are  situated  between  the  internal
and  middle  coat,  and  being  as  it  were  encased  in  this  latter,  they
sometimes  retain  the  impression  of  its  circular  fibres  on  their
outer  surface.  Their  inner  surface  is  sometimes  smooth,  and
evidently  covered  by  the  internal  coat  of  the  vessel ;  in  other
cases,  it  is  rough,  and  seems  to  have  partially  destroyed  this
tunic  by  its  asperities.  In  examining  cases  of  this  kind  minutely,
we  can  perceive  many  different  points  of  ossification,  which  ex-
tending themselves  in  their  superficial  diameter,  reunite  and
form  incrustations  of  a  larger  size.  In  some  instances  these  in-
volve nearly  the  whole  circumference  of  the  vessel,  and  thus  form
a  fourth  tunic  of  a  bony  character.  The  cartilaginous  incrusta-
tions are  the  rudiments  of  the  bony  ;  their  situation  and  mode  of
growth  are  the  same.  They  are  much  softer  than  natural  carti-
lages, and  are  transformed  into  bone  without  even  acquiring  this


MALFORMATION OF THE  AORTA.


635


degree  of  consistence.  In  becoming  ossified,  small  specks  of  cal-
careous phosphate  are  first  deposited,  and  these  by  their  gradual
extension  and  union  finally  convert  the  whole  into  a  homogene-
ous mass.  Sometimes  these  incrustations  seem  to  be  produced
without  any  previous  formation  of  cartilage,  being  deposited  in
the  form  of  an  impalpable  and  very  humid  powder  between  the
inner  and  middle  coats ;  and  we  frequently  find  a  layer  of  this
sort  beneath  the  cartilaginous  plates.

These  bony  incrustations  are  found  frequently  loose  at  their
circumference,  in  consequence  of  rupture  of  the  internal  coat  of
the  artery.  This  separation  (which  seems  to  be  one  of  the  most
common  causes  of  false  aneurisms)  leaves  a  little  cavity,  which
becomes  filled  with  lymph,  sometimes  intermixed  with  phosphate
of  lime.  This  matter  has  been  denominated  atheromatous,  and
the  parts  containing  it  ulcers,  by  many  observers.  And,  indeed,
it  is  probable  that  in  extensive  separations  of  long  standing,  the
parts  in  question  may  assume  an  ulcerated  character.  Very  fre-
quently, however,  these  characters  do  not  exist ;  in  every  case,
the  affection  in  the  first  instance,  is  the  consequence  of  the  mecha-
nical separation  of  the  scale  as  formerly  mentioned ;  and  if  inflam-
mation even  occurs,  it  is  the  effect  and  not  the  cause  of  the  solution
of  continuity.  We  can  at  any  time  produce  similar  exfoliations
by  pressing  gently  between  the  fingers,  an  aorta  containing  similar
incrustations.  And  yet  these  very  lesions  are  the  only  grounds
on  which  many  authors  build  their  opinion  of  ossification  of  the
arteries  being  the  result  of  the  inflammation  of  these.  Kreysig
imagines  that  these  scales  are  produced  by  the  gouty  inflam-
mation alone.  Others,  and  particularly  Bouillaud,  consider  them
as  the  consequence  of  common  inflammation,  an  opinion  which
was  formerly  the  general  one  regarding  all  accidental  productions.
It  must,  however,  be  admitted,  that  these  bodies  are  almost
always  formed  without  any  general  or  local  symptom  of  their  ex-
istence, and  indeed  very  frequently  in  persons  who  enjoy  the  most
perfect  health.

Tuberculous  and  cancerous  productions  of  the  aorta  are  very
rare :  I  have  met  with  some  of  a  small  size,  however,  in  the  cel-
lular coat.


Sect.  II. — Malformation  of  the  Aorta.

I  have  already  noticed  the  congenital  smallness  of  the  aorta,
considered  by  Corvisart  as  one  of  the  most  frequent  causes  of
aneurism  of  the  heart.  I  have  seen  cases  of  this  kind  in  which
the  diameter  of  the  vessel  was  hardly  eight  lines.  This  contracted
state  is  commonly  equal  throughout,  or,  at  least,  varies  only
according  to  the  natural  size  of  the  vessel  in  different  parts.  In
three  or  four  cases,  however,  I  have  observed  a  singular  deviation


ANEURISM OF  THE  AOHTA.


from  this  rule.  In  these,  the  aorta  immediately  below  its  arch
became  suddenly  contracted  to  the  size  of  the  finger,  and  gradually
diminishing  from  this  point,  it  retained  only  the  size  of  a  swan's
or  even  a  goose's  quill  by  the  time  it  had  given  off  the  coeliac
artery.  In  these  cases  the  arch  of  the  aorta  was  dilated,  and
there  existed  hypertrophy  of  the  heart.  In  some  few  cases  the
aorta  has  been  found  completely  obliterated.  A  case  of  this  kind
is  related  in  the  Jourii.  de  Med.  t.  xxxiii.  bull.  4 ;  another  by
Dr.  Graham,  in  the  Medico-Chirurgical  Transactions;  and  a
third  by  Mr.  John  Bell.  Sir  A.  Cooper,  in  the  same  work,  no-
tices a  partial  deformity  of  the  same  kind ;  and  one  was  lately
observed  by  myself,  in  which  there  existed  a  depression,  of  the
size  of  an  almond,  at  the  point  of  junction  of  the  ductus  arteriosus.


Sect.  III. — Aneurism  of  the  Aorta.*

Anatomical  characters. — In  the  following  observations  I  shall
adhere  to  the  ancient  distinction  of  true  and  false  aneurisms, —
the  former  comprehending  dilatation  without  rupture  of  any
of  the  arterial  coats,  the  latter  dilatation  with  rupture  of  some  of
the  coats.  True  aneurism  of  the  ascending  portion  and  arch  of  the
aorta  is  very  common.  The  dilatation  usually  extends  from
the  origin  of  the  artery  to  the  point  where  it  begins  to  descend.
This  dilatation  rarely  proceeds  so  far  as  to  produce  very  serious
symptoms,  the  extreme  point  of  dilatation  of  the  artery  not  being
wider  than  from  two  to  three  fingers'  breadth.  The  convexity
of  the  arch  and  anterior  part  of  the  artery  appear  to  yield  more
than  the  other  parts  of  the  vessel.  When  the  dilatation  exists  in
the  descending  aorta,  it  assumes  the  form  of  an  ovoid  tumour,
gradually  terminating,  at  each  extremity,  in  the  undilated  artery.
It  is  not  uncommon  to  find  several  dilatations  of  this  kind  in  the
same  artery.  Sometimes  we  find  the  whole  tract  of  the  aorta
dilated  to  double  its  natural  size.  Dilatation  in  the  arch  of  the
aorta,  in  the  degree  above  described,  is  very  common  ;  but  this
is  not  usually  named  aneurism,  unless  it  arrives  at  a  considerably
greater  extent.  These  aneurisms  are  sometimes  very  large.  M.
Corvisart  records  one  double  the  size  of  the  heart,  and  I  have
seen  them  as  large  as  the  head  of  a  full-grown  foetus.  When  the
true  aneurism  acquires  a  certain  size,  the  inner  coat  is  often  rup-
tured, and  false  aneurism  ensues. The  true  aneurism  is  com-

*  This  section  is  considerably  abridged,  because  it  is  presumed  most  English
readers  already  possess  superior  information  on  the  subject  of  it,  in  tho classical  works
of  Scarpa  and  Hodgson.  See  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Anatomy,  Physiology,  &c.  of
Aneurism,"  by  Ant.  Scarpa,  translated  by  .1.  H.  Wishart,  and  "A  Treatise  on  the
Diseases  of  the  Arteries  and  Veins,"  by  J.  Hodgson,  Lond.  1815.  See  also  Burns,
Op.  Cit.  p.  203,  and  Freer's  work  on  Aneurism,  Birmingham,  1797.  To  these  works
I  may  now  add  the  very  valuable  work  of  Dr.  Hopo  on  tho  diseases  of  tho  heart  and
great  vessels. — TrunU.


ANEUUISM OF THE  AORTA.


rnonly  accompanied  with  a  morbid  degeneration  of  the  internal
tunic"  of  the  artery.  It  exhibits  spots  of  a  bright  red,  slight
cracks,  and  a  great  number  of  small  ossified  points.  These  latter
are  usually  considered  as  existing  in  the  substance  of  the  inner
coat,  but  they  are,  in  truth,  situated  between  it  and  the  middle
coat.  The  false  aneurism  of  the  aorta,  consequent  to  the  true,
is  rarer  than  the  simple  dilatation  of  that  artery ;  but  it  is  much
more  common  than  that  greater  degree  of  simple  dilatation  which
alone  usually  claims  the  name  of  aneurism.  The  false  aneurism
is  most  common  in  the  ascending,  and  the  true  in  the  descending
aorta.  I  have  never  met  with  any  other  species  of  false  aneurism
in  the  ascending  aorta  or  its  arch,  but  that  consequent  to  the
true,  or  simple  dilatation  of  the  part.  In  the  descending  aorta,
however,  false  aneurism  often  takes  place  without  any  previous
dilatation.  The  opinion  at  present  current  in  the  Parisian  schools,
viz.  that  in  aneurism  the  internal  coat  remains  entire,  and  pro-
trudes, in  the  form  of  a  hernia,  through  the  ruptured  fibrinous
tunic,  is  more  untenable,  as  a  general  position,  than  that  of
Scarpa,  who  maintains  the  rupture  of  the  two  internal  tunics  in
every  case  of  the  disease.  Both  these  opinions  are  true  in  certain
cases,  but  not  in  all.

Aneurisms  of  the  aorta  produce  various  effects  on  the  adjacent
organs,  according  to  their  volume  and  position. Simple  dilata-
tion, when  in  a  moderate  degree,  hardly  produces  any  effect,  but
the  most  inconsiderable  false  aneurisms  may  give  rise  to  very
serious  disorder. The  first  and  most  common  of  these  effects  is
compression  of  the  heart  and  lungs. When  the  aneurism  is  in
contact  with  the  lungs,  it  most  commonly  merely  compresses
them  ;  sometimes,  however,  the  substance  of  these  organs  gives
way,  and  the  aneurism,  when  it  bursts,  pours  its  blood  directly
into  the  air-cells. Frequently  the  aneurism  compresses  the
trachea,  or  one  of  the  two  bronchial  trunks,  flattens,  and  even-
tually destroys  a  part  of  them,  and  death  ensues  by  a  species  of
haemoptysis  from  the  rupture  of  the  tumour.  The  same  thing  oc-
casionally happens  with  the  oesophagus,  but  not  so  frequently.  I
have  only  met  with  three  instances  of  death  from  this  cause.  The
ordinary  effect  of  these  aneurisms  on  the  heart,  is  to  displace  it
more  or  less,  downwards  or  to  one  side. Sometimes  the  aneurism
bursts  into  the  pericardium  ;  (See  Morgagni  and  Scarpa ;)  but  I
have  never  met  with  an  example  of  this. A  case  is  on  record  of
an  aneurism  of  this  kind  bursting  into  the  pulmonary  artery.*
The  left  cavity  of  the  pleura  is,  by  far,  the  most  frequent  situa-
tion for  the  rupture  of  these  aneurisms. I  have  met  with  one
case  where  the  aneurism  compressed  and  destroyed  the  thoracic
duct;  and  M.  Corvisart  notices  a  fatal  case  of  compression  of  the
superior  vena  cava  from  the  same  cause. The  most  remarkable


*•  Bulletin  dela  Fncultf  de  M6d.  1819.


638


ANEURISM OF  THE  AOHTA.


local  effects  of  aneurisms  of  the  aorta,  are  those  on  the  vertebral
column.  They  often  destroy  this  to  a  very  great  depth.  This
destruction  is  entirely  the  work  of  interstitial  absorption,  there
never  being  any  mark  of  caries.  On  the  side  next  the  vertebrae
the  sac  is  completely  destroyed,  and  the  circulating  blood  is
bounded  by  the  naked  bone.  Aneurisms  of  the  ascending  aorta
destroy,  in  like  manner,  the  sternum  by  their  pressure,  so  that
they  come  at  length  to  be  covered  merely  by  the  skin.  I  have
met  with  two  or  three  tumours  of  this  sort  so  large  that  they
could  not  be  completely  covered  by  both  hands.  The  aneurisms
of  the  arch  of  the  aorta,  and  of  the  arteria  innominata,  sometimes
project,  in  like  manner,  at  the  top  of  the  sternum  or  above  it,  or
under  the  cartilages  of  the  first  false  ribs  of  the  right  side.  It  is
not  always  the  largest  aneurisms  that  most  readily  make  their
way  externally.  Sometimes  those  of  the  size  of  an  egg  produce
this  effect,  whilst,  occasionally,  those  of  the  size  of  the  head  of  a
full-grown  foetus  remain  quite  covered,  and  are  even  compressed
by  the  sternum.

Signs.  There  are  few  diseases  so  insidious  as  this.  It  cannot
certainly  be  known  till  it  shows  itself  externally.  It  can  hardly
be  suspected,  even  when  it  compresses  some  important  organ  and
greatly  deranges  its  functions.  When  it  produces  neither  of
these  effects,  the  first  indication  of  its  existence  is  often  the  death
of  the  individual  as  instantaneously  as  if  by  a  pistol-bullet.  I
have  known  persons  cut  off  in  this  manner,  who  were  believed  to  be
in  the  most  perfect  health,  and  who  had  not  complained  of  the
slightest  indisposition.  We  must,  therefore,  admit  that  aneurism
of  the  aorta  has  no  symptoms  peculiar  to  it;  all  those  noticed  by
authors,  and  especially  by  M.  Corvisart,  being  indicative  merely
of  the  change  or  compression  of  adjoining  organs.  This  will  be
evident  by  the  enumeration  of  the  principal  of  these;  viz.  oppres-
sion on  the  chest, — dissimilarity  of  the  pulse  in  both  arms, —
a  whizzing  or  rushing  at  the  top  of  the  sternum,  perceptible  by  the
hand, — obscure  sound  on  percussion, — rattling  in  the  throat,  and
dragging  downwards  of  the  larynx,  when  the  tumour  compresses
the  trachea,  &c.  After  what  has  been  said  of  the  symptoms  of
other  diseases  of  the  chest,  I  need  not  remark  how  very  equivocal
all  these  are.  In  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  there  as-
suredly exists  no  certain  means  of  ascertaining  the  existence  of
this  disease  until  it  shows  itself  externally.  Even  when  the  aneu-
rismal  tumour  has  made  its  way  through  the  parietes  of  the  chest,
it  is  not  always  distinguishable  from  tumours  of  a  different  kind.

Percussion  will  certainly,  in  some  cases,  enable  us  to  detect  a
tumour  of  a  large  size,  existing  within  the  mediastinum,  or  even
in  the  back  ;  but  not  to  discriminate  the  nature  of  the  swelling.
Hitherto,  my  experience  has  been  insufficient  to  enable  me  to  say
how  far  the  difficulty  of  diagnosis  is  likely  to  be  removed  by  the
use  of  the  stethoscope. Since  my  employment  of  this  instrument


ANEU1USM OF THE  AOKTA.


039


I  have  met  with  about  thirty  cases  of  what  I  conceived  to  be
aneurisms  of  the  aorta. Most  of  these  left  the  hospital  after
obtaining  relief  by  blood-letting  and  proper  diet. In  some  in-
stances of  moderate  dilatation  of  the  arch,  I  was  enabled  to  verify
by  dissection  my  previous  diagnosis  afforded  by  the  stethoscope ;
and  in  two  which  showed  themselves  externally,  I  have  had  an
opportunity  of  testing  still  further  the  stethoscopic  signs. In  the
last  cases  I  found  the  pulsations  of  the  tumour  perfectly  isochro-
nous with  the  pulse  at  the  wrist;  they  gave,  at  the  same  time,  a
much  greater  impulse  and  louder  sound  than  the  mere  contrac-
tion of  the  ventricles ;  and  the  contraction  of  the  auricles  was
not  at  all  perceptible. This  pulsation,  which  I  shall  call  simple,
in  opposition  to  that  of  the  heart,  which  is  double,  (including
the  alternate  contraction  of  auricles  and  ventricles,)  was  dis-
tinctly perceptible  between  the  light  scapula  and  the  spine.
— the  purring-thrill  and  bellows-sound frequently  exist  in
aneurisms  of  the  aorta  and  other  arteries;  but  it  will  be  under-
stood from  previous  remarks  on  these  phenomena,  that  they  can-
not be  any  signs  of  this  disease. In  some  cases,  the  simple  pul-
sation and  greater  impulse  may  indicate  the  disease,  but  even
this  sign  will  be  often  wanting. In  fact,  in  the  case  of  enlarge-
ment of  the  heart,  even  in  a  slight  degree,  the  contractions  of  its
cavities  will  be  audible  over  the  whole  sternum,  and  under  the
clavicles  ;  and  as  the  contraction  of  the  ventricles  is  isochronous
with  the  pulsation  of  the  aneurism,  these  will  necessarily  be  con-
founded together ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  contraction  of  the  au-
ricles being  heard  through  the  tumour,  we  shall  thus  have  two
sounds  answering  to  those  of  the  heart,  and  which  will  be  mis-
taken for  them.

Another  sign,  however,  still  remains,  and  although  less  marked
than  the  simple  pulsation  above  mentioned,  is,  at  least,  as  satis-
factory ;  it  is  this:  if  we  find  under  the  sternum  or  below  the
right  clavicle,  the  impulse  of  the  circulatory  organ  isochronous
with  the  pulse,  and  perceptibly  greater  than  that  of  the  ventri-
cles examined  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  we  have  reason  to  suspect
dilatation  of  the  ascending  aorta,  or  arch, — the  more  so,  as  it  is
extremely  rare  to  feel  the  impulse  of  the  organ  of  circulation
beyond  the  region  of  the  heart,  even  in  cases  of  the  most  marked
hypertrophy.  If  this  phenomenon  is  found  constant,  after  re-
peated examinations,  we  may  consider  the  diagnosis  ascertain.

Aneurisms  of  the  descending  aorta,  particularly  those  which
destroy  the  spinal  column,  may  sometimes  be  recognized  by
means  of  simple  pulsations-  opposite  the  tumour.  Aneurisms  of
the  abdominal  aorta  are  recognized  with  the  utmost  facility  by
means  of  the  stethoscope.  In  this  case  we  are  sensible  of  tremen-
dous pulsations,  which  painfully  affect  the  ear,  and  the  intensity
of  which  is  not  at  all  recognized  by  the  hand,  even  when  they
are  sufficiently  perceptible  to  the  touch. These  pulsations  are


640  AXKUKISM OK  THE  AORTA.

simple ;  and  even  when  the  tumour  is  as  high  up  as  the  origin
of  the  cceliac  artery,  the  contractions  of  the  auricles  are  not  at
all  perceptible.  The  sound  which  attends  the  pulsations  of  the
tumour,  is  commonly  clear  and  loud,  like  that  of  the  auricles,  but
louder.*

Of  all  the  severer  organic  lesions  of  the  thoracic  organs,  three

•  Bet-tin  considers  our  author  as  undervaluing  the  powers  of  the  stethoscope,  in
detecting  aneurisms  of  the  aorta.  He  says  his  own  experience,  in  this  particular,
obliges  him — "  to  take  the  part  of  auscultation  against  its  very  discoverer;'' — and
adds,  that  by  means  of  it  "  the  diagnosis  of  aneurisms  of  the  aorta  is  not  more  diffi-
cult than  that  of  diseases  of  the  heart  or  lungs." — Op.  Cit.  p.  143.  In  two  of  M.
Benin's  cases  (obs.  37,  38)  he  formed  a  correct  diagnosis  of  the  disease  in  its  earlier
stages,  that  is,  before  it  had  shown  itself  externally.

My  brother-annotator,  Dr.  M.  Laennec,  agrees  with  Bertin  and  Bouillaud  in  think  -
inganeurismof  theaortamore  easily  detected  thanourauthor  is  willing  to  allow.  Indeed
he  goes  so  far  as  to  say,  that  "  it  is  so  uncommon  that  there  is  not  perceptible  in  these
cases  (at  least  when  the  aneurism  has  reached  a  certain  size)  either  a  dull  sound  or
single  pulsation,  or  both  conjoined,  that  it  must  be  for  want  of  looking  for  them  that
they  are  not  found."  Dr.  Hope  is  equally  confident  of  the  powers  of  auscultation  to
detect  aneurisms  of  the  aorta  ;  and  we  particularly  recommend  to  the  reader's  atten-
tion his  observations  on  this  subject  in  his  Treatise  of  Diseases  of  the  Heart,  and  in
his  excellent  article  on  Aneurism  of  the  Aorta  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Cyclopaedia  of
Pract.  Med.  "  It  is  unimportant"  says  Dr.  Hope,  "  whether  the  pulsations  be  '  simple'
or  '  double  i'  for  though  double,  they  maybe  distinguished  from  the  beating  of  the
heart  by  unequivocal  criteria."  I  can  only  find  room  for  a  brief  notice  of  these
criteria,  and  of  some  of  the  principal  signs,  which  1  shall  give  in  the  author"s  own
words : — 1.  The  first  aneurismal  sound,  coinciding  with  the  pulse,  is  invariably
louder  than  the  healthy  ventricular  sound,  and  generally  louder  than  the  most  con-
siderable bellows-murmur  of  the  ventricles.  2.  On  exploring  the  aneurismal  sound
from  its  source  towards  the  region  of  the  heart,  it  is  found  progressively  to  decrease,
until  it  either  becomes  totally  inaudible  or  is  lost  in  the  predominance  of  the  ventri-
cular sound.  Now  if  the  sound  emanated  from  the  heart  alone,  instead  of  decreasing
it  would  increase  on  approximating  towards  the  precordial  region.  3.  The  second
sound  actually  does  sustain  this  progressive  augmentation  on  advancing  towards  the
heart ;  and  as  its  nature  and  rythm  are  found  to  be  precisely  similar  to  those  of  the
ventricular  diastole  heard  in  the  precordial  region,  it  is  distinctly  identified  as  the
diastolic  sound.  The  second  sound,  therefore,  corroborates  rather  than  invali-
dates the  evidence  of  aneurism  afforded  by  the  first ;  for  if  both  sounds  proceeded
from  the  heart,  both  would,  on  approximating  towards  it  or  on  receding  from  it,  sus-
tain the  same  progressive  changes  of  intensity.  4.  Another  distinctive  characteristic
of  the  aneurismal  pulsation  is  the  peculiar  nature  of  its  sound.  It  is  a  deep  hoarse  tone,
of  short  duration,  with  an  abrupt  commencement  and  termination,  and  generally  louder
than  the  most  considerable  bellows-murmur  of  the  heart.  It  accurately  resembles  the
rasping  of  a  sounding  board  heard  from  a  distance;  whereas  the  sound  occasioned  by
valvular  disease  of  the  heart  has  more  analogy  to  the  bellows-murmur,  being  somewhat
soft  and  prolonged,  with  a  gradual  swell  and  fall.  When  the  dilatation  is  confined  to
the  ascending  aorta,  the  sound,  impulse,  and  purring  tremor,  are  stronger  on  the  right
than  on  the  left  side  of  the  neck  ;  and  the  sound  along  the  sternum  is  superficial  and
of  a  whizzing  or  hissing  character.  The  loudest  aneurismal  sound  is  that  occasioned
by  dilatation,  and  it  has  more  of  the  grating  or  rasping  character  in  proportion  as
the  interior  of  the  vessel  is  more  overspread  with  hard  and  especially  osseous  aspe-
rities. Old  aneurisms,  the  parietes  of  which  are  thickened  by  fibrinous  depositions,
yield  only  a  dull  and  remote  sound.  In  all  cases  of  dilatation  and  in  the  majority  of
sacculated  aneurisms,  the  sound  is  loudest  above  the  clavicles,  even  though  the  im-
pulse be  stronger  below.  The  sound  is  in  most  instances  audible  on  the  back  ;  and
when  the  tumour  occupies  the  descending  aorta  and  is  extended  along  the  spine,  it
is  often  louder  behind  than  on  the  breast  If  it  possesses  in  the  back  the  abrupt
rasping  character,  the  evidence  which  it  affords  is  almost  positive  ;  for  the  loudest
sounds  of  the  heart,  when  heard  on  the  back,  are  so  softened  and  subdued  by  distance
as  totally  to  lose  their  harshness. — f'yc.  of  l'ract.  Med.  vol.  i.  p.  tl4. —  Traml.


TREATMENT OF DISEASES OF THE  HEART.


G41


only  remain  without  pathognomonic  signs  to  those  who  are  versed
in  the  practice  of  percussion  and  auscultation.  These  are —
aneurism  of  the  aorta, — pericarditis — and  polypi  of  the  heart ;  —
all  of  which,  it  may  be  remarked,  are  very  liable  to  be  confounded
together.  I  will  here  detail  a  remarkable  mistake  of  this  kind.
In  1819  I  was  consulted  in  the  case  of  a  young  woman,  who  had
exhibited  for  eight  months  the  general  symptoms  of  diseased
heart.  I  found  the  action  of  this  organ  regular,  and  accompanietl
by  a  natural  degree  of  impulse  and  sound.  The  right  and  left
precordial  regions  sounded  well  on  percussion;  but  immediately
above  these,  the  sternum  as  high  up  as  the  second  rib,  and  the
whole  surface  of  the  chest  corresponding  with  the  cartilages  of
the  second,  third,  fourth  and  fifth  ribs  on  the  left  side,  yielded  a
completely  dead  sound.  Over  the  same  space,  the  pulsations  of
the  heart  were  much  louder  than  in  the  cardiac  regions,  and  were
not  simple.  Notwithstanding  this  last  circumstance,  I  imagined
that  there  existed  an  enormous  aneurism  of  the  ascending  aorta.
I  did  not  see  the  patient  again ;  and  she  died  a  few  months  after
my  examination.  Upon  dissection,  the  aorta  was  found  perfectly
sound.  The  tumour  which  had  destroyed  the  natural  resonance
of  the  chest,  was  the  pericardium,  enormously  distended  by  sero-
purulent  fluid,  and  which  extended  to  the  top  of  the  chest.  The
heart  was  invested  by  false  membranes  of  a  yellowish  colour,
somewhat  friable,  and  hardly  more  consistent  than  thick  pus,  and
was  separated  from  the  pericardium  only  by  a  very  small  quan-
tity of  serum.  This  pericarditis  had  never  presented  the  cha-
racter of  an  acute  disease;  and  the  treatment  of  Valsalva,  perse-
vered in  for  several  months,  in  the  intention  of  combating  the
supposed  aneurism,  had  no  effect  in  retarding  its  progress.


CHAPTER  XXVIII.

OF  THE TREATMENT  OF THE  ORGANIC  DISEASES  OF  THE

HEART.

The  frequent  co-existence,  in  the  same  subject,  of  several  of  the
organic  affections  of  the  heart,  and  the  absolute  incurability  of
the  greater  number  of  them,  have  induced  me  to  bring  under
one  head,  in  the  present  chapter,  all  that  I  have  to  say  relative
to  their  treatment.

Of  all  these  organic  lesions,  hypertrophy,  either  simple  or
combined  with  dilatation,  appears  to  me  most  susceptible  of  cure.
The  greater  number  of  practitioners  are  too  much  in  the  habit
of  despairing  of  success  in  cases  of  this  kind,  and,  therefore,  con-
tent themselves  with  attacking  such  urgent  symptoms  as  may

T  T


042


TREATMENT  OF DISEASES OF  THE  HEART.


arise  in  their  progress.  And  yet,  I  believe,  there  is  no  one  who
has  not  succeeded,  every  now  and  then,  even  by  this  sympto-
matising  treatment,  in  prolonging  for  fifteen  or  twenty  years,  the
lives  of  individuals  affected  with  organic  disease  of  this  important
organ.  In  courageously  and  perseveringly  applying  to  the  treat-
ment of  hypertrophy,  the  method  recommended  by  Valsalva  and
Albertini  against  aneurism  of  the  arteries,  we  may  look  for  much
more  frequent  and  complete  success;  more  especially  if  we  begin
the  use  of  these  means  at  a  period  when  the  disease  has  not  as
yet  produced  any  severe  disorder  of  the  general  system.  But
to  obtain  success  in  this  way,  it  is  necessary  that  the  physician
and  patient  should  be  armed  with  great  and  almost  equal  courage ;
for  it  is  hardly  more  difficult  for  the  latter  to  support  continued
starvation  and  repeated  bleedings,  than  it  is  for  the  former  to
hold  out  against  the  daily  opposition  of  friends  and  relations,
and  the  discouragement  which  cannot  fail  to  affect  the  patient  in
the  course  of  a  treatment,  which  must,  at  the  least,  continue  for
some  months,  and  which  it  is  sometimes  necessary  to  persevere
in  for  several  successive  years.

This  plan  must  be  carried  into  effect  with  activity,  especially
at  the  beginning ;  and  there  is  much  more  fear  that,  in  our  en-
deavours to  reduce  the  patient,  we  should  stop  short  of  the  mark,
than  that  we  should  go  beyond  it.  ,  Accordingly,  we  begin  the
treatment  by  as  large  a  bloodletting  as  the  patient  can  bear  with-
out fainting,  and  repeat  this  every  second,  fourth,  or  eighth  day,
at  most,  until  the  palpitations  have  ceased,  and  the  heart  only
yields  a  moderate  impulse  under  the  stethoscope.  At  the  same
time  we  diminish,  by  one  half,  the  ordinary  quantity  of  food
used  by  the  patient ;  and  we  even  make  still  greater  reduction,  if
he  retains  more  muscular  strength  than  is  barely  sufficient  to
enable  him  to  take  a  few  minutes'  walk  in  the  garden.  In  the
case  of  an  adult  in  full  strength,  I  usually  reduce  the  quantity  of
food  to  fourteen  ounces  per  day,  in  which  allowance  only  two
ounces  of  white  meat  are  permitted.  If  the  patient  prefers  brotli
or  milk,  I  reckon  four  ounces  of  these  liquids  for  one  of  meat.
Wine  is  entirely  forbidden.*  When  the  patient  has  been  two
months  without  experiencing  palpitations  and  without  increased
impulse  of  the  heart,  we  may  lessen  the  frequency  of  the  bleed-
ings, and  diminish,  in  some  degree,  the  severity  of  the  regimen,
if  the  patient  is  not  at  all  habituated  to  or  satisfied  with  his
allowance.  But  wc  must  return  to  the  same  means,  and  with  the
same  vigour,  if  the  augmented  impulse  of  the  heart  should  re-
turn. We  ought  not  to  have  any  confidence  in  the  cure,  until  all
the  symptoms,  and  particularly  all  the  physical  signs  of  hyper-
trophy, have  been  completely  absent  for  a  whole  year. We  must

*  Our  author  only  mentions  wine  among  the  forbidden  liquors,  but  he  of  course
means  to  exclude  equally  every  other  fermented  and  spirituous  liquor.— Transl.


T  It  HAT ME NT  OF  DISEASES  OF THE  IIEAHT.


643


take  care  not  to  be  deceived  by  the  complete  calm  which  the
bloodletting  and  abstinence  sometimes  induce  very  speedily,
especially  if  the  disease  had  so  far  advanced,  before  we  began
our  treatment,  as  to  have  induced  extreme  dyspnoea,  anasarca,
and  other  symptoms  threatening  a  fatal  issue  at  no  distant  date
In  cases  of  this  kind,  even  when  anasarca,  ascites,  oedema  of  the
lungs  and  a  general  cachectic  state  of  the  system  are  present,  wc
must  nevertheless  fearlessly  prosecute  the  plan  of  bleeding  and
starvation.*  Indeed,  it  is  certain  that,  under  such  circumstances,
diuretics  never  act  so  well  as  after  venesection.  We  must  have
recourse,  in  their  turn,  to  all  the  more  powerful  diuretics,  and  in
rather  large  doses.  Medicines  of  this  class  are  very  uncertain  in
their  effects;  and  when  we  do  not  find  one  to  answer,  we  must
try  another.  Accordingly,  we  may  give  a  trial,  in  succession,  to
nitre,  acetate  of  potass,  squills,  various  plants  of  diuretic  pro-
perties, and  among  others,  digitalis. This  last  medicine  is  at

*  For  the  original  account  of  this  macerating  treatment  the  reader  is  referred  to
tlie  memoir  of  Albertini  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Commentarii  de  Soc.  Bononiem.
Scient.  et  Art.  1748,  entitled  "  Animadversiones  super  quibusdam  difficilis  respira-
tionis  vitiis  a  la:sa  cordis  et  prajcordiorum  structura  pendentibus."  I  shall  here  ex-
tract a  single  sentence :  "  Et  ideo  nos  et  amicissimus  vir  studiorum  nostrorum  socius
dum  viveret,  A.M.  Valsalva,  cum  in  cadaveribus  offenderemus  hate  vitia  sajpius  quam
augurabamur,  cepimus  inter  nos,  expensa  laisionis  organica?.  natura,  existimare  con-
sentaneum  pro  illius  curatione  tutum,  efficax,  quinetiam  fortasse  unicum  auxilium
futurum,  si  regrotans  non  deploratus,  quadraginta  circiter  dies  in  lecto  decumhens,
prasmissa  una  vel  altera  vena}  sectione  prajscriptisque  clysleriis,  et  vini  abstinentia,
tantum  cibi  et  potus  ad  trutinam  dimensi  quotidie  assumeret,  quantum  vitae  susti-
nenda;  satis  esset ;  illudque  non  bipartito  tantum  indies  distributum,  sed  tripartite,
et  quadripartito  etiam,  sic  ut  exigua  dosi  sanguifera  vasa  ingressum,  ea  turn  ne  mini-
num  quidem  distenderet."  Valsalva  having  been  the  first  who  put  this  method  into
actual  practice,  it  is  usually  called  by  his  name.  For  further  accounts  of  it  I  refer  to
Morgagni  (Epist.  XVII.  30,)  who,  as  well  as  Lancisi,  Guattani,  Sabatier,  Pelletan,
Corvisart,  Hodgson,  Bertin,  &c.  recommend  its  employment,  and  adduce  many  facts
illustrating  its  utility.  I  have  made  trial  of  it  in  a  modified  degree,  in  hypertrophy
of  the  heart,  and,  as  I  thought,  with  much  temporary  benefit ;  but  I  have  found  very
few  of  my  patients  possessed  of  sufficient  courage  or  faith  to  submit  to  it,  even  in  a
modified  degree,  for  any  considerable  length  of  time.  The  principle  of  this  practice,
simple  as  it  is,  would  seem  to  be  strangely  misunderstood  by  some  practitioners.
Some  time  since  a  patient  affected  with  hypertrophy  came  to  me  here  for  advice :  he
had  been  recently  under  the  care  of  a  physician  in  London,  who  had  him  largely  bled
at  every  visit,  but  did  not  restrict  him  in  any  respect  as  to  his  diet  or  bodily  exercise  !

Some  practical  physicians,  however,  are  led  by  experience  to  regard  the  macerating
practice  of  Albertini  and  Laennec  as  positively  injurious,  even  in  the  cases  wherein
it  has  been  most  strenuously  recommended.  See,  for  instance,  an  observation  of
Dr.  Stokes  to  this  effect  in  an  excellent  memoir  by  him  on  the  subject  of  aneurism,
in  the  15th  No.  of  the  Dublin  Medical  Journ.  Dr.  Charles  Williams  likewise  in-
forms me  that  he  has  repeatedly  observed  many  diseases  of  the  heart  and  large  ves-
sels to  be  aggravated,  and  their  progress  hastened,  by  the  system  of  starvation.  "  I
have  now,"  he  says,  "  several  patients  with  valvular  disease,  who  are  at  this  time
tolerably  comfortable  with  a  dry  nutritious  diet  and  a  moderate  but  regular  action  on
the  bowels ;  whereas,  some  time  since,  under  the  starving  system,  the  circulation  lost
its  balance,  the  iiritution  of  inanition  was  added  to  the  distress  from  the  organic  dis-
ease, and  their  life  was  a  continued  scene  of  misery."  These  observations,  to  the
correctness  of  which  my  own  more  recent  experience  induces  me  willingly  to  assent,
although  I  cannot  adduce  any  very  positive  evidence  in  corroboration,  are  deserving
the  greatest  attention  ;  and,  from  the  eininenco  of  the  observers,  they  will,  no  doubt,
command  this. —  Transl.

T  T  2


G44.


TREATMENT  OF  DISEASES  OF  THE  HEART.


present  much  used  in  diseases  of  the  heart,  from  a  general  opinion
that,  besides  its  diuretic  effects,  it  possesses  a  sedative  influence
over  the  heart.  I  must  confess  that  this  influence  has  never  ap-
peared very  clear  to  me,  certainly  not  constant,  even  when  the
dose  was  carried  to  the  extent  of  producing  vomiting  and  vertigo.
I  have  only  remarked,  with  some  others,  that  in  the  first  days  of
its  administration,  it  frequently  accelerates  the  pulsations  of  the
heart,  and  seems  subsequently,  in  some  cases,  to  render  them
slower:  but  I  can  by  no  means  consider  it  as  a  powerful  remedy
in  hypertrophy  of  this  organ.  I  may  give  a  like  report  of  hy-
drocyanic acid  and  the  cherry-laurel  water.  It  cannot  be  denied
that  hydrocyanic  acid  possesses  a  very  considerable  action  on  the
spinal  marrow,  and  through  it  on  the  heart ;  but  its  very  activity
prevents  our  employing  it  in  a  concentrated  state;  and  when  di-
luted it  is  very  uncertain  in  its  action.*

When  diuretics  give  no  relief  in  dropsical  affections,  the  con-
sequence of  diseased  heart,  purgatives  are  frequently  found  useful :
and  we  ought  to  have  the  less  scruple  in  having  recourse  to  them,
since  their  frequent  repetition  is  sometimes  as  effectual  as  blood-
letting, in  reducing  the  action  of  the  heart.  On  this  account,
even  where  there  exists  no  signs  of  dropsy,  if  the  first  bleedings
are  ineffectual,  one  or  two  purgatives  will  often  render  the  sub-
sequent one  more  so.  All  sorts  of  purgatives  may  be  useful  in
the  serous  diathesis  produced  by  disease  of  the  heart,  but  the
more  potent  drastics,  which  act  in  a  small  compass,  are  in  general
to  be  preferred.  In  this  case,  likewise,  physicians  are  accustomed
to  despair  too  soon  of  their  patients,  and  sometimes  abandon
them  to  certain  death  when  they  might  preserve  their  life,  and
even  render  it  supportable,  for  several  more  years.  Corvisart,
who  was  by  no  means  a  timid  practitioner,  committed  an  error
of  this  kind  in  the  case  of  one  of  his  friends.  This  gentleman
had  been  for  several  years  affected  with  disease  of  the  heart,
and  for  some  time  had  laboured  under  ascites  and  general

*  French  practioners,  although  in  general  so  fond  of  new  remedies  of  the  poison-
ous class,  and  the  first  to  employ  the  hydrocyanic  acid,  seem  now  much  afraid  of  this
remedy.  Dr.  M.  Laennec,  in  his  note  on  this  passage,  says,  that  so  man)'  fatal  re-
sults have  of  late  years  heen  experienced  from  its  use,  that  no  prudent  practitioner
now  gives  it  in  diseases  of  the  heart.  I  have  myself  found  the  hydrocyanic  acid
altogether  inefficient  in  organic  diseases  of  the  heart.  From  its  undoubted  efficacy,
however,  in  relieving  certain  states  of  disordered  stomach,  it  is  occasionally  found
a  valuable  remedy  in  those  sympathetic  affections  of  the  heart  depending  on  this
cause  ;  and  it  has  even  been  proposed  as  a  sort  of  diagnostic  test,  in  doubtful  cases,
as  to  whether  the  disturbance  of  the  circulation  is  primary  or  secondary.  See  Dr.
Klliotson's  "  Cases  illustrative  of  the  efficacy  of  Hydrocyanic  Acid  in  Affections  of
the  Stomach. I  ond.  1820." — See  also  Dr.  Johnson's  Review  for  May,  1821,  p.  658.

M.  Hroussais  has  recently  recommended  a  new  sedative  remedv  in  diseases  of  the

heart,  viz.  the  syrup  of  the  common  asparagus;  (Annates  de  la  Mkd.  Physiol.  Juill.
1829;)  a  medicine  which,  according  to  him,  possesses  the  power  of  quieting  the
action  of  the  heait  and  rendering  the  pulse  slower,  without  at  all  irritating  the  sto-
mach. The  plant  eaten  in  the  usual  manner  is  said  to  have  the  same  effect.  This
statement,  of  M.  Broussais,  in  reference  to  the  asparagus  as  a  remedy  of  power  ge-
nerally, in  affections  of  the  heart,  requires  confirmation. — Trand.


TREATMENT  OF DISEASES  OF THE  HEART.


645


anasarca,  for  the  removal  of  which,  bloodletting,  diuretics,
and  some  purgatives,  had  been  unsuccessfully  employed.
Corvisart  considered  his  death  as  certain,  and  made  the  pa-
tient's friends  acquainted  with  his  opinion.  A  few  days  after-
wards a  quack  was  consulted,  famous  at  that  time  for  his  cures
of  dropsy.  He  administered  to  the  patient  a  powerfully  drastic
powder  in  two  ounces  of  brandy,  with  the  immediate  effect  of
producing  twenty  alvine  evacuations.  From  this  time  the  urine
became  somewhat  more  copious;  and  the  same  remedy  being
repeated  with  similar  effect,  every  day  for  upwards  of  a  week,
the  dropsical  symptoms  completely  disappeared,  and  the  patient
afterwards  lived  ten  years  in  a  very  tolerable  state  of  health.
When  we  have  once  succeeded,  by  means  of  purgatives,  in  aug-
menting the  flow  of  urine,  it  is  not  always  requisite  to  continue
them  for  a  long  period;  as  very  often  the  stimulus  conveyed  to
the  absorbents  by  two  or  three  doses,  will  last  more  than  a  fort-
night.*

The  treatment  of  simple  dilatation  of  the  heart  is  much  more
difficult  and  more  rarely  successful,  even  in  improving  the  con-
dition of  the  patient,  than  that  of  the  simple  or  even  complicated
hypertrophy.  When  dilatation  exists  singly,  or  with  very  mark-
ed preponderance  over  the  accompanying  hypertrophy,  we  must
be  more  guarded  in  our  bleedings,  and  have  recourse  to  them
only  after  long  intervals,  and  to  relieve  urgent  symptoms.  In
this  case  bitters  and  steel  must  be  considered  the  chief  remedies.
Aromatics  are  also  exceedingly  useful,  and  particularly  the  infu-
sion of  cat-mint,  ( nepeta  cataria,)  valerian,  balm,  and  orange-
flower.  The  steel  and  bitter  preparations  must  be  varied  accord-
ing to  the  state  of  the  stomach ;  and  at  the  same  time  digitalis
and  infusion  of  the  flowers  of  the  cherry-laurel,  may  be  given  to
quiet  the  pulse.  The  existence  of  signs  of  valvular  disease,  or
of  any  other  obstacle  to  the  circulation,  must  not  prevent  us
from  attacking  with  vigour,  the  accompanying  hypertrophy,  or
dilatation.  No  doubt,  we  do  not  always  succeed  in  our  endea-
vours, but,  with  perseverance,  we  do  so  frequently  ;  and  even  in
the  cases  just  mentioned,  we  occasionally  are  fortunate  enough  to
prolong  for  an  indefinite  period  the  life  of  our  patient,  and  even,
in  more  favourable  circumstances,  to  obtain  a  perfect  cure.  I
could  here  cite  a  dozen  instances  of  cures  of  hypertrophy,

*  In  symptomatic  dropsy,  the  consequence  of  diseased  heart,  more  especially  in
the  form  of  hydrothorax,  1  have  found  the  infusion  of  digitalis,  in  large  doses,  in  the
manner  recommended  by  Dr.  Maclean,  almost  a  specific  in  carrying  oft*  the  water;
and  have  thereby,  to  every  appearance,  prolonged  life  for  several  years,  when  things
looked  the  most  unpromising.  In  these  cases,  I  have  generally  commenced  the  treat-
ment by  venesection  and  the  application  of  a  large  blister  to  the  chest,  over  the  site
of  the  effusion,  as  indicated  by  the  stethoscope.  My  experience  entirely  accords
with  Laennec's  respecting  the  inefficiency  of  digitalis,  as  a  direct  remedy  in  hy-
pertrophy :  indeed,  I  may  say,  that  I  have  in  no  case  derived  benefit  from  its  employ^
ment  in  any  organic  affection  of  the  heart  or  lungs. —  Transl.


C4G


TREATMENT  OE DISEASES  OF  THE  HEART.


cither  simple  or  combined  with  dilatation,  which  have  now  stood
the  test  of  several  years.  I  shall  here  content  myself  with  no-
ticing one  of  these,  which  is  the  more  conclusive,  inasmuch  as  I
was  here  enabled  to  verify  the  cure  by  dissection,  the  patient
having  afterwards  died  of  another  disease.

A  nun,  fifty  years  of  age,  had  been  affected  for  twelve  years
with  all  the  symptoms  of  disease  of  the  heart,  in  a  very  high  de-
gree, viz.  strong  and  frequent  palpitations,  habitual  dyspnoea,
breathlessness  on  using  the  least  exercise,  sudden  startings  from
sleep,  almost  constant  oedema  of  the  lower  extremities,  and  livi-
dity  of  the  cheek,  nose  and  lips.  These  symptoms  had  increased
during  the  last  year,  so  that  she  could  scarcely  move  from  her
chair  without  the  feeling  of  suffocation.  In  this  state  I  recom-
mended the  treatment  of  Valsalva,  which  she  agreed  to.  I  im-
mediately reduced  her  food  to  one-fourth  of  her  former  allow-
ance,- and  bled  her  once  a  fortnight,  either  from  the  arm  or  by
leeches.  This  mode  of  treatment  gave  immediate  relief,  and  in
the  course  of  six  months  all  the  symptoms  had  disappeared ;
and,  with  the  exception  of  debility,  (which,  however,  was  not
greater  than  it  had  been  previously,)  she  enjoyed  a  better  state
of  health  than  for  many  years  before.  The  respiration  was  now
free,  and  the  palpitations,  oedema,  startings,  and  lividity  of  face
had  quite  disappeared.  After  this  I  recommended  the  bleedings
to  be  decreased  in  frequency,  and  I  dispensed  with  them  altoge-
ther at  the  end  of  a  year.  She  also  returned  gradually  to  her
old  regimen,  only  that  now  a  much  smaller  quantity  of  food  sa-
tisfied her  appetite.  She  lived  two  years  in  a  state  of  perfect
health,  and  was  then  suddenly  carried  off  by  an  epidemic  cholera.
Upon  examining  the  body  after  death,  I  found  the  heart  consi-
derably less  than  the  closed  hand  of  the  individual,  being  only
about  the  usual  size  of  that  of  a  child  twelve  years  old,  although
this  woman  was  five  feet  three  inches  in  height.  The  exterior  of
the  heart  resembled,  in  appearance,  a  withered  apple,  the  wrinkles
running  longitudinally.  The  ventricular  parietes  were  flaccid,
but  without  any  obvious  softening,  and  of  the  natural  thickness.
I  am  well  aware  that  nothing  can  be  deduced  from  a  single  case,
but  I  have  thought  the  above  relation  might  be  useful  in  stimu-
lating others  to  prosecute  this  subject  more  at  length.

Softening  of  the  heart  clearly  indicates  the  employment  of
bitters,  tonics  and  steel.  Wine  is  also  indicated  in  this  case,
particularly  if  the  affection  supervenes  to  a  severe  fever,  and  if
the  patient  bears  it  well.

Inflammation  of  the  pericardium  presents  the  same  indications
as  pleurisy,  to  which  I  refer  the  reader;  as  does  likewise  the
inflammation  of  the  inner  membrane  of  the  heart  and  vessels.
Acute  inflammation  of  the  substance  of  the  heart,  if  it  can  be  re-
cognized, will  furnish  the  same  indications  as  pneumonia;  and
in  regard  to  partial  inflammations  and  ulcerations,  if  they  could


TREATMENT  OF  DISEASES  OF THE  HEART.


647


be  ascertained,  it  is  evident  that  all  that  we  can  do  is  to  lessen
the  action  of  the  heart  by  rest,  bloodletting,  and  abstinence.*

The  experience  of  both  Corvisart  and  Hodgson  proves  that  we
ought  not  to  consider  aneurism  of  the  aorta  as  absolutely  incu-
rable; and  we  know  that  the  circulation  may  even  be  carried
on  after  the  obliteration  of  this  artery.  As  soon,  therefore,  as
we  have  recognized,  or  even  suspected  the  existence  of  this  ter-
rible disease,  we  ought  fearlessly  to  have  recourse  to  the  treat-
ment of  Valsalva.  Only  we  must  be  careful  not  to  induce  syncope,
particularly  after  the  first  bleedings,  as  this  might  prove  fatal.
Where  the  tumour  shows  itself  externally,  the  application  of  ice
to  it  may  be  beneficial,  as  in  aneurisms  of  the  limbs.  The  acetate
of  lead  has  been  employed  in  Germany  for  some  years  past  in
cases  of  aneurism  ;  and  with  alleged  success.  I  am  not  aware  on
what  principle  tin's  remedy  was  administered ;  but  1  had  myself
made  previous  use  of  it  in  diseases  of  the  heart,  and  in  obstinate
haemorrhages,  owing  to  some  observations  I  had  made  of  the

*  One  great  principle  always  to  be  kept  in  view  in  the  treatment  of  diseases  of  the
heart,  is  entirely  overlooked  by  our  author,  and  can  merely  be  glanced  at  by  me  in
this  place,  although  I  am  fully  aware  of  its  paramount  importance  :  it  is  the  removal
of  all  disorder  in  other  organs  which  can  act  as  a  source  of  irritation  to  the  heart.  In
a  former  note,  I  briefly  alluded  to  gastric  irritation  as  a  frequent  concomitant  (and
indeed  cause)  of  disease  of  the  heart ;  and  I  would  here  add,  that,  from  its  power-
ful influence  in  stimulating  the  organs  of  circulation  to  increased  action,  its  previous
cure  becomes  essential  to  the  success  of  our  measures  for  remedying  the  disease  of
the  heart.  The  same  is  true  in  diseases  in  other  organs  ;  but  their  influence  is  tri-
fling, compared  with  that  of  disease  of  the  digestive  organs.  I  would,  therefore,
lay  it  down  as  a  general  rule  in  chronic  affections  of  the  heart,  that,  previously  to
having  recourse  to  any  remedies  intended  to  act  directly  on  it,  we  ought  to  be  assured
that  the  digestive  organs  are  in  a  healthy  state, — that  their  mucous  surfaces  are  free
from  irritation, — their  vascular  system  not  morbidly  distended,  and  that  the  liver  is
performing  its  secretory  function  freely  and  regularly.  When  derangements  cf  this
kind  are  present, — a  few  leeches  to  the  praecordia  or  anus,  some  small  doses  of  oxide
of  mercury  and  castor  oil,  a  mild  and  spare  diet,  and  bodily  and  mental  repose,  will
often  do  more  to  tranquillize  the  circulation  than  more  active  and  rougher  treatment.
And,  indeed,  in  many  cases,  more  especially  in  the  earlier  stages,  when  the  stetho-
scope gives  us  but  little  information,  it  is  not  until  we  have  restored  the  parts  just
mentioned  to  a  comparatively  healthy  condition,  that  we  can  know  how  far  the  dis-
ordered action  of  the  heart  depends  on  sympathy  with  these,  or  is  the  consequence
of  incipient  organic  lesion  of  the  heart  itself.  For  valuable  information  on  this  sub-
ject the  reader  need  hardly  be  referred  to  the  popular  writings  of  Mr.  Abernethy,
Drs.  Wilson  Philip,  Johnson,  Hall,  Paris,  Ayre,  &c.  as  they  are  in  every  body's
hands.

The  young  reader  will  do  well  also  to  study  the  works  of  M.  Broussais,  which,
however  disfigured  by  false  theory  and  strained  conclusions,  are  calculated  to  convey
more  valuable  practical  information  to  a  certain  class  of  English  practitioners,  than
the  writings  of  any  other  modern  author.  If  he  has  not.  introduced,  he  has  at  least
forwarded,  in  a  most  material  degree,  the  vast  improvement  that  has  taken  place,  of
late  years,  in  the  dietetic  treatment  of  diseases ;  an  improvement,  a  thousand  times
more  valuable,  than  would  be  the  addition  to  our  materia  medica  of  a  thousand  new
remedies  equal  in  powers  to  our  best.  From  the  manner  in  which  the  most  powerful
agents,  remedial  and  dietetic,  were  formerly  thrown  into  the  stomach  without  any
seeming  reference  to  their  primary  action  on  the  first  passages,  one  would  almost  he
disposed  to  think  that  themembersof  the  profession  still  shared  the  opinion  of  its  great
founder  respecting  the  nature  and  powers  of  these  organs  :  "  At  vero  venter  a  medi-
camento  non  exulceratur.  Nam  res  est  valida  ac  robustn,  nimirum  velut  pellis  et
corium." De  JVJorb.  (Edit.  Vanderlind.)  p.  I;"i7.— Trnnd.


NERVOUS  AFFECTIONS  OF  THE  HEART.


state  of  the  bodies  of  subjects  who  had  died  while  affected  with
colica  pictorum.  The  only  constant  alteration  I  had  found  in
these  cases,  were  a  great  paleness  of  all  the  tissues,  and  a  lesser
quantity  of  blood  than  is  usually  met  with.  From  these  circum-
stances I  suspected  that  one  of  the  effects  of  lead  on  the  system
was  to  affect  the  formation  of  blood  and  thereby  lessen  its  quan-
tity. In  giving  this  medicine  I  begin  with  a  dose  of  three  or
four  grains  a  day, — and  I  have  not  yet  carried  it  beyond  six-
teen grains.  I  have  continued  its  employment  for  several  months,
without  producing  colic,  or  any  other  symptoms  of  the  saturnine
disease.  This  remedy  has  frequently  seemed  useful,  but  I  have
never  found  it  of  very  decided  power.


CHAPTER  XXIX.

OF NERVOUS  AFFECTIONS OF  THE HEART  AND  VESSELS.

The  study  of  pathological  anatomy,  in  making  us  acquainted
with  the  existence  of  important  organic  lesions  in  many  cases,  in
which  practitioners,  too  much  addicted  to  the  exclusive  observa-
tion of  symptoms,  saw  only  cachexies,  or  alterations  of  the  fluids,
or  at  least  nervous  affections,  has  made  us  fall  gradually  into  an
error  of  an  opposite  kind  :  and  among  the  present  race  of  our
pupils,  many  are  as  little  disposed  to  acknowledge  any  nervous
diseases  besides  the  organic  affections  of  the  nerves,  brain,  and
spinal  marrow,  as  to  admit  any  primary  morbid  changes  in  the
fluids  of  the  animal  body.  Nevertheless,  we  are  bound  to  admit,
that  every  disease  in  which  we  can  discover  no  constant  lesion  of
the  solids  nor  evident  alteration  in  the  fluids,  must  consist  in  some
disorder  of  the  nervous  influence.  Of  this  class  are  several  of
the  affections  of  the  heart  and  arteries  which  I  shall  now  notice.


Sect.  I. — Neuralgia  of  the  Heart. — Angina  Pectoris.

It  is  by  no  means  unusual  to  meet  with  persons  who  suffer,
either  constantly  or  by  fits,  from  pains  like  those  of  rheumatism,
or  neuralgia,  in  the  region  of  the  heart,  and  which  are  improperly
considered  both  by  the  patients  and  their  medical  attendants,  as
signs  of  organic  disease  in  this  organ.  Sometimes  these  pains
are  confined  to  this  spot,  but  frequently  they  extend  at  the  same
time,  or  vicariously,  over  a  greater  or  less  portion  of  the  lungs
and  stomach.  Sometimes  they  exist  simultaneously  in  the  super-
ficial cervical  plexus,  and  extend  along  the  tract  of  the  branches
supplied  by  this  to  the  anterior  parts  of  the  thorax  ;  still  more


ANGINA  PECTORIS.


(;h)


frequently,  at  the  very  time  they  are  felt  most  severely  in  the
heart,  they  shoot  with  corresponding  violence  along  the  nerves  of
the  axillary  plexus,  and  more  particularly  along  the  brachial
nerve  to  the  elbow,  and  sometimes  as  far  as  the  fingers.  Win  n
this  is  the  case,  the  affection  is  confounded  with  a  nervous  dis-
ease which,  during  the  last  twenty  years,  has  been  the  object  of
much  discussion,  and  seems  to  me  only  a  variety  of  the  neuralgia
in  question.  This  disease  is  the  angina  pectoris,  which  is  very
remarkable,  and  very  distressing,  when  it  exists  in  a  high  degree,
but  which  is  far  from  possessing  the  degree  of  severity  attributed
to  it  by  many  authors.  It  was  taken  notice  of,  as  a  separate  dis-
order, for  the  first  time,  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century  ;  and
has  since  been  much  noticed  by  physicians,  especially  the  English,
who  have  considered  it  as  essentially  dependent  on  an  organic
affection  of  the  heart.  I  shall  discuss  the  correctness  of  this
opinion  after  I  have  given  an  account  of  the  symptoms  charac-
terising this  disorder.

The  Angina  Pectoris  is  a  spasmodic  affection  which  returns  in
paroxysms,  after  longer  or  shorter  intervals.  The  attack  com-
mences with  a  sense  of  pain,  pressure,  or  constriction  in  the  car-
diac region  or  at  the  end  of  the  sternum.  There  is  at  the  same
time  a  numbness,  occasionally  attended  with  pain  in  the  left  arm  ;
rarely  in  both  arms  or  in  one  half  the  body ;  more  rarely  still  in
the  right  arm  only  ;  and  sometimes  in  all  the  limbs.  The  painful
sensation  is  particularly  felt  on  the  inner  side  of  the  arm,  as  low
as  the  elbow  ;  and  sometimes,  as  already  mentioned,  it  shoots  still
further  down.  It  is  not  unusual  for  the  patient  to  suffer,  at  the
same  time,  from  pains  over  the  fore  part  of  the  left  chest ;  and  in
the  female,  these  sometimes  so  affect  the  mamma  that  the  slightest
pressure  becomes  painful.  Sometimes,  particularly  when  the
paroxysm  is  severe  but  short,  the  patient  feels  as  if  the  same
parts  were  pierced  by  iron  nails  or  the  claws  of  an  animal.  There
are  also  pains  in  different  points  of  the  chest,  dyspnoea,  (in  ex-
treme cases  suffocative  orthopncea,)  violent  palpitations,  conges-
tion of  blood  in  the  head,  and  sometimes  syncope  or  convulsions.
When  the  attack  is  over,  the  patient  merely  retains  a  slight  feeling
of  these  various  symptoms,  particularly  the  numbness  of  the  limbs,
the  left  more  especially.  Drs.  Heberden  and  Parry  concluded
from  some  cases  witnessed  by  themselves  that  angina  pectoris
depended  on  ossification  of  the  coronary  arteries  of  the  heart ;  *
an  opinion  in  which  they  have  been  followed  by  Burns  and
Kreysig.  This  opinion  has  not  been  confirmed  by  subsequent
observation;  nevertheless  the  greater  number  of  physicians,  par-
ticularly in  England,  Germany,  and  Italy,  have  still  retained

*  Medical  Trans.  Vol.  II.  p.  59.  Vol.  III.  p.  1.  Inquiry  into  the  Symptoms  and
Cause  of  the  Syncope  Anginosa.  Bath,  1800. — Author.  This  is  a  mistake :  Dr.
Heberden  did  not  so  consider  it. — Transl.


650


ANGINA  PECTORIS.


the  belief  that  the  disease  in  question  is  always  the  effect  of  some
organic  affection  of  the  heart,  that  this  affection  is  one  of  great
severity — and  that  most  of  the  patients  that  are  attacked  with  it,
die  suddenly. These  notions  are  far  from  being  correct.

Angina  pectoris,  in  a  slight  or  middling  degree,  is  extremely
common,  and  exists  very  frequently  in  persons  who  have  no
organic  affection  of  the  heart  or  large  vessels.  I  have  known
many  individuals  who  had  suffered  a  few  very  severe  but  short
attacks  of  it,  and  had  no  further  return  of  it.  I  am  even  of
opinion  that  the  prevalent  type  of  disease  influences  its  develop-
ment, as  I  have  some  years  met  with  it  feequently,  and  hardly  at
all  in  others.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  certainly  true  that  this
affection  frequently  coincides  with  organic  diseases  of  the  heart ;
but  nothing  proves  even  then  that  it  depends  upon  such  diseases,
inasmuch  as  they  are  of  various  kinds,  and  as  the  angina  exists
without  any  of  them.  I  have  examined  several  subjects  who  had
laboured  under  this  disease,  and  in  whom  there  co-existed  either
hypertrophy  or  dilatation  of  the  heart ;  and  in  none  of  these  did
I  find  the  coronary  arteries  ossified.  One  of  these  died  suddenly
during  an  attack  of  angina ;  and  such  a  result  need  not  surprise
us,  when  so  severe  a  nervous  affection  co-exists  (as  in  this  case)
with  extensive  hypertrophy.  Dr.  Desportes,  in  a  dissertation
published  some  years  since,*  has  stated  opinions  very  analogous
to  mine,  respecting  the  nature  and  seat  of  this  affection  :  he  con-
siders its  site  to  be  in  the  pneumo-gastric  nerve.  I  conceive  that
the  site  of  the  disorder  may  vary,  according  to  circumstances.
For  instance,  when  there  exists,  at  the  same  time,  pain  in  the
heart  and  lungs,  we  may  presume  that  the  affection  is  principally
seated  in  the  pneumo-gastric ;  on  the  other  hand,  when  there  is
simply  a  sense  of  stricture  of  the  heart,  without  pulmonary  pain
or  much  difficulty  of  breathing,  we  may  consider  its  site  to  be  in
the  nervous  filaments  which  the  heart  receives  from  the  grand
sympathetic.  Other  nerves  are  also  simultaneously  affected,
cither  by  sympathy  or  from  direct  anastomosis;  for  example,  the
branches  of  the  brachial  plexus,  particularly  the  cubital,  are
almost  always  so;  the  anterior  thoracic  originating  in  the  super-
ficial cervical  plexus,  are  also  frequently  affected  ;  and  this  is  also
sometimes  the  case  with  the  branches  derived  from  the  lumbar
and  sacral  plexuses,  as  we  find  the  thigh  and  leg  now  and  then
participating  in  the  pain  and  numbness.  I  have  even  seen  the
affection  confined  to  the  right  side  of  the  thorax.  In  this  case  the
pain  and  numbness  extended  to  the  arm,  thigh,  and  spermatic
cord  of  the  same  side,  and  the  testicle  became  swollen  during  the
paroxysms.  There  was  scarcely  any  pain  in  the  region  of  the
heart ;  but  the  attacks  were  attended  by  severe  palpitation,  with-
out any  sign  of  organic  lesion  of  the  heart.  The  general  character

*  De  TAnginc  de  poitrine,  8vo.  Paris,  1813.


ANGINA  PECTORIS.


of  the  symptoms  of  the  angina  pectoris  further  confirms,  by
analogy,  the  correctness  of  the  opinion  here  advocated  ;  since  we
know  the  neuralgias  of  the  most  unequivocal  kind,  for  example
the  sciatica  and  tic  douloureux,  give  rise  to  the  same  kind  and
variety  of  effects  as  it  does, — namely,  acute  pain,  painful  torpor,
simple  numbness  along  the  tract  of  the  nerve,  and,  sometimes,
spasm  or  sub-inflammatory  swelling  of  the  parts  to  which  it
is  distributed.*

*  In  another  place  (Cyclopcedia  of  Pract.  Med.  vol.  i.)  I  have  entered  fully  into  the
consideration  of  the  history  of  the  various  congenerous  affections  which  have  been
long  classed  under  the  name  of  Angina  Pectoris.  Referring  to  this,  then,  for  more
precise  information,  I  must  content  myself  with  giving  here  a  few  observations  whicli
bear  most  closely  on  the  more  important  statements  in  the  text.  Some  of  the  most
remarkable  differences  observed  in  cases  of  angina  pectoris  have  reference  to  the
physical  condition  of  the  parts  immediately  affected  in  the  paroxysm  ;  others  to  the
state  of  the  general  system  with  which  the  local  affection  is  connected.  In  one  class
of  cases  there  exists  great  structural  disease  of  the  heart  and  aorta  ;  in  another  class
there  exists  either  no  structural  disease,  or  none  that  can  be  detected.  The  former
class  of  cases  may  therefore  be  termed  organic  angina;  the  latter,  functional  angina.
Each  of  these  classes  may  be  subdivided  according  as  the  affection  of  the  heart  and
aorta  exists  uncomplicated  with  other  diseases  of  a  general  or  local  kind,  or  co-exists
with  some  such  disease  or  diseases  on  which  it  is  more  or  less  dependent.  1.  The
cases  that  come  under  the  first  subdivision  of  organic  angina  are  few  in  number.
They  are  those  in  which  the  anginous  paroxysms  seem  to  be  the  direct  consequence
of  organic  disease  of  the  heart  occurring  in  persons  otherwise  healthy.  Cases  of  this
kind  are  seldom  very  well  marked,  the  anginous  symptoms  being  either  feebly  mani-
fested, or  overpowered  by  the  greater  intensity  of  the  more  ordinary  symptoms  of
heart-disease.  These  may  be  considered,  in  one  respect,  as  the  worst  cases  of  angina,
inasmuch  as  they  hold  out  little  prospect  of  cure  or  even  of  alleviation.  2.  Under
the  next  subdivision  of  organic  angina,  I  would  include  the  greater  number  of  the
best  marked  and  more  severe  cases  of  this  disease.  In  these,  along  with  the  organic
affection  of  the  heart  or  vessels,  or  both,  (probably  not  very  great,  or,  at  least,  marked
rather  by  the  paroxysm  of  angina  than  by  the  general  symptoms  of  diseased  heart,)
we  have  some  obvious  general  disorder  of  the  system.  In  cases  of  this  kind,  the
organic  disease  of  the  heart  and  aorta  seems  often  to  be  a  consequence  of  the  co-
existing disorder;  if  not  a  consequence,  it  is  always  greatly  aggravated  by  its  pre-
sence ;  and  hence  the  most  successful  medical  treatment  of  the  angina  is  that  which
has  direct  reference  to  the  concomitant  disorder.  3.  I  consider  cases  in  which  the
organic  deviation  is  so  slight  as  to  be  hardly  discoverable,  as  constituting  the  greater
number  of  those  usually  viewed  by  practitioners  as  examples  of  pure  functional  or
nervous  aligiua.  It  is  obvious  that  in  extreme  strictness  of  language  they  are  not
entitled  to  this  name ;  yet  if  the  deviation  is  only  so  slight  as  to  constitute  mere
feebleness,  (and  it  is  often  nothing  more,')  they  are  probably  as  well  entitled  to  the
name  as  most  other  diseases  commonly  denominated  nervous.  But  it  must  be  ad-
mitted that  in  persons  possessing  the  best  proportioned  hearts,  and  in  which  no  de-
viation whatever  from  the  normal  structure  can  be  detected  either  during  life  or  after
death,  there  may  and  do  occur  paroxysms  of  angina.  The  proportion  of  such  cases
is  however  very  small  under  any  circumstances  in  a  state  of  uncomplication  with
other  diseases ;  and  1  look  upon  them  rather  as  of  possible  occurrence  than  as  having
certainly  met  with  them  in  practice.  Conjoined,  however,  with  some  other  disorder,
as  in  the  next  class  of  cases,  we  conceive  they  are  by  no  means  rare.  4.  Under  the
head  of  complex  or  sympathetic  functional  angina,  I  must  comprehend  a  large  class  of
cases;  and,  for  the  reasons  stated  in  the  last  paragraph,  although  not  strictly  philo-
sophical, I  would,  for  practical  purposes,  include  under  the  present  division  all  the
cases  of  nervous  angina  complicated  with  other  diseases,  whether  the  organs  of  the
circulation  are  perfectly  sound  and  well  proportioned,  or  only  deviating  in  a  very
slight  degree  from  this  state  of  integrity.  Under  this  head  are  comprehended  a  very
considerable  proportion  of  the  cases  met  with  in  practice,  and  not  a  few  of  those
which  present  symptoms  of  the  greatest  severity  in  the  paroxysm.

The  following  tables  of  the  statistical  and  other  results  derived  from  the  exami-


652


ANGINA  PKCTOltlS.


Treatment. — The  means  which  I  have  found  most  successful
in  relieving  neuralgia  of  the  heart,  whether  existing  in  so  violent
a  degree  as  to  be  named  angina  pectoris,  or  only  under  the  form
of  slight  pains  confined  to  the  heart,  are  those  formerly  men-
tioned in  the  case  of  neuralgia  of  the  lungs,  and  especially  the
magnet.  This  1  use  in  the  following  manner :  I  apply  two
strongly  magnetized  steel  plates,  of  a  line  in  thickness,  of  an  oval
shape,  and  bent  so  as  to  fit  the  part, — one  to  the  left  cardiac
region,  and  the  other  exactly  opposite  on  the  back,  in  such  a
manner  that  the  magnetic  current  shall  traverse  the  affected
part.  This  method  is  not  infallible,  any  more  than  others  em-
ployed in  nervous  cases;  but  I  must  say  that  it  has  succeeded
better  in  my  hands  in  the  case  of  angina  than  any  other,  as  well
in  relieving  the  paroxysm,  as  in  keeping  it  off.

nation  of  the  more  authentic  published  records  of  angina,  are  deserving  the  rea-
der's attention. They  are  extracted  from  the  same  article.

Results  relative  to  the  sex  of  the  patients.

Total  number  of  cases  examined 88

Of  these  were,  men 80

women 8

Results  relative  to  the  age  of  the  patients.

Total  number  whose  ages  are  recorded 84

Of  these  were,  above  fifty 72

under  fifty 1~

Results  relative  to  the  event  of  the  cases  generally.

Total  number  of  patients,  the  event  of  whose  cases  is  recorded 64

Of  these  there  died  (almost  all  suddenly)  . .. 49

Were  relieved  or  recovered  -  •  •  15

Results  relative  to  the  event  of  the  cases  as  regards  sex.

Total  number  of  fatal  cases 49

Of  these  were,  men 47

women 2

Total  number  of  cases  cured  or  relieved 15

Of  these  were,  men 11


women


4


liesults  relative  to  the  existence  of  organic  disease  in  general.

Total  number  of  cases  of  which  dissections  are  given  . 45

Of  this  number  there  was  no  organic  disease  (except  obesity)  in. .  4

Organic  disease  of  the  liver  only,  in 2

Organic  disease  of  the  heart  or  great  vessels,  in 59

Results  relative  to  the  nature  of  the  organic  affections  of  the  heart  and  great  vessels.
Total  number  of  cases  in  which  there  was  organic  disease  in  the  heart  or

vessels  • °9

Of  this  number  there  was  organic  disease  of  the  heart  alone,  in  ..  10

■  ■ Organic  disease  of  the  aorta  alone,  in 3

,  Organic  disease  of  the  coronary  arteries  alone,  in 1

Ossification  or  cartilaginous  degeneration  of  the  coronary

arteries  in 16

Ossification  or  other  disease  of  the  valves  in  ..  16

Disease  of  the  aorta  (ossification,  or  dilatation,  or  both)  in  24

.  Preternatural  softness  of  the  heart,  in 12

Of  the  intimate  nature  of  the  pain  in  the  paroxysm  of  angina  we  know  nothing ;  but
we  know  no  more  of  the  nature  of  anv  pain.  All  that  we  can  propound  concerning
it  is  a  relation  of  the  events  which  seem  to  lead  to  it,  and  the  condition  of  the  parte  in
which  it  occurs,  at  the  time  of  its  occurrence.  We  know  that  the  pain  is  not  of  that
kind  which  arises  from  inflammation,  or  ulceration,  or  any  other  fixed  physical  alter-
ation of  a  part. All  the  circumstances  attending  it  prove  it  to  be  of  that  kind  which


AN'GINA  PKCT0RIS.


653


Magnetism  was,  perhaps,  too  much  cried  up  by  some  medical
men  in  the  last  century;  but  I  am  of  opinion  that  it  is  too  much
neglected  at  present.  That  it  acts  on  the  animal  system,  is  suf-
ficiently proved  by  the  fact  of  its  giving  rise  not  only  to  very
obvious  general  effects,  but  even  to  local  ones.  In  the  case  in
question,  after  a  certain  time  it  most  commonly  produces  an
eruption  of  small  pimples,  which  are  sometimes  so  painful  as  to
oblige  us  to  interrupt  the  process  for  some  days.  This  effect
cannot  be  attributed  to  the  action  of  the  oxidized  plates  on  the
skin,  as  the  eruption  almost  always  takes  place  under  the  anterior
one:  and  I  have  observed  similar  results  from  plates  applied  over
the  abdomen  and  loins.  By  means  of  these  plates  (applied  to
the  epigastrium  and  spine)  I  stopped,  at  once,  a  hiccup  which
had  lasted  three  years.  At  the  end  of  six  months,  the  patient
having  one  morning  neglected  to  put  on  the  plates,  the  hiccup
returned,  but  was  removed  upon  their  being  replaced.  In  an-
other case,  in  a  patient  affected  with  imperfect  paraplegia^  without
any  sign  of  structural  lesion  of  the  spine,  and  for  which  moxa
had  been  used  without  success,  I  inserted,  to  the  depth  of  half  an
inch,  a  needle  near  the  vertebral  column  and  another  into  the
thigh,  near  the  external  popliteal  nerve,  and  connected  these  by
means  of  magnetized  rods ;  and  at  the  very  instant  of  contact,
there  occurred  an  involuntary  dejection,  which  had  never  pre-
viously happened  to  the  patient.  In  the  angina  when  the  magnet
gives  but  little  relief  simply,  this  is  sometimes  found  to  be  in-
creased on  applying  a  small  blister  under  the  anterior  plate.

During  the  paroxysm,  if  the  oppression  is  considerable,  we
must  bleed  the  patient,  if  he  is  at  all  plethoric.  Leeches  applied
to  the  epigastrium  or  cardiac  region  sometimes  give  more  relief
than  venesection  ;  but  sometimes  their  application  is  imprac-
ticable from  the  extreme  agitation  of  the  patient.  Derivatives

occurs  in  cramp  or  spasm,  or  from  pressure,  or  iD  the  class  of  cases  termed  neuralgic,
in  which  the  painful  sensation  is  the  result  of  some  unknown  temporary  condition  of
the  nerves  of  the  part,  not  manifested  by  any  physical  alteration  of  them  discoverable
by  our  senses.  We  have  sufficient  evidence  that  such  a  morbid  condition  of  the
nerves  may  be  produced  in  a  heart  in  all  other  respects  sound ;  and  when  it  takes
place  in  a  heart  manifestly  diseased  in  its  structure,  we  must  consider  the  structural
lesions  merely  as  predisposing  and  exciting  causes  of  tli9  pain.  That  the  structural
lesions  are  not  the  immediate  and  necessary  source  of  the  pain  is  sufficiently  proved
by  its  intermitting  character,  and  the  perfect  ease  in  the  intervals,  when  the  structural
lesion  is  precisely  the  same  as  during  the  paroxysm.  The  anatomical  structure,  the
peculiar  action  and  functions  of  the  heart  and  annexed  great  vessels,  will  sufficiently
explain  all  the  modifications  of  the  pain  and  other  phenomena  observed  in  the  angi-
nous  paroxysm.  The  radiation  of  the  pain  to  a  distance  from  the  primary  and  prin-
cipal site  of  it  is  only  in  conformity  with  what  is  observed  in  all  other  painful  affec-
tions. Stone  in  the  bladder  produces  pain  in  the  glans  penis  ;  calculus  in  the  ureter,
pain  in  the  abdominal  walls;  inflammation  of  the  cartilages  of  the  hip-joint,  pain  in
the  knee  ;  and  what  is  perhaps  a  still  more  appropriate  illustration,  irritation  at  the
origin  of  nerves  in  general  frequently  manifests  itself  only  by  pain  at  their  extre-
mities. In  a  word,  the  pain,  in  the  paroxysm  of  angina,  may  arise  from  neuralgia,
from  spasm,  from  over-distonsion  ;  and  the  other  principal  phenomena  may  all,  1
think,  he  explained  by  the  derangements  of  the  functions  of  the  heart,  considered  as
a  muscular  organ  charged  with  the  office  of  circulating  the  mass  of  blood, — Transit


654


ANGINA  PECTOKIS.


arc  also  beneficial,  particularly  sinapisms  to  the  lower  extremities
and  blisters  to  tlm  fore-part  of  the  chest;  as  are  also  antispas-
modic medicines,  with  the  infusion  of  cherry  laurel  or  digitalis,
and  also  the  fetid  gums.  A  mild  regimen,  with  the  use  of  the
tepid  or  cold  bath,  according  to  the  season,  are  among  the  best
means  for  preventing  a  return  of  the  paroxysm.*

*  As  in  the  cases  of  many  other  of  the  diseases  described  in  this  work,  the  treat-
ment recommended  in  angina  is  meager  and  indiscriminating.  My  space  will  not  here
allow  me  to  supply  the  deficiency,  and  I  must  content  myself  with  one  or  two  general
observations  on  tbe  principles  which  ought  to  regulate  our  practice,  referring  for
details  to  tbe  article  quoted  in  tbe  last  note.  Like  that  of  all  diseases  of  an  inter-
mitting or  paroxysmal  character,  tbe  treatment  of  angina  requires  to  be  considered  in
two  very  distinct  points  of  view, — in  the  paroxysm,  and  in  tbe  interval. — I.  As  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  paroxysms  of  angina  arise  under  very  different  conditions  of
tbe  system,  and  as  they  differ  very  materially  in  their  immediate  causes,  or  in  the
condition  of  the  organs  immediately  affected,  all  rational  treatment  must  have  regard
to  these  circumstances  in  individual  cases,  as  far  as  they  are  known  or  can  be  ascer-
tained. Painful  muscular  spasm,  or  simple  neuralgia  of  tbe  heart  and  aorta,  whether
ultimately  depending  on  organic  disease  of  the  parts  or  not,  may  recognize  very
opposite  exciting  causes,  and  may,  therefore,  be  best  relieved  by  different  means.
In  one  case,  for  instance,  tbe  patient  may  be  strong  and  robust,  and  his  whole  vas-
cular system  overloaded  ;  in  another,  he  may  be  the  victim  of  long  previous  disease,
with  a  deficiency  both  of  blood  and  constitutional  power ;  while,  in  a  third,  the  system
may  be  comparatively  healthy,  with  or  without  local  disease  of  tbe  organs  of  circu-
lation, and  with  or  without  great  nervousness  of  temperament.  In  all  these  varieties,
the  treatment  will  require  modification  to  suit  it  to  the  individual  case.  When  pre-
viously known,  such  circumstances  must,  therefore,  be  kept  in  mind  bv  the  practi-
tioner ;  when  not  known,  an  attempt  must  be  made  to  ascertain  tbem  before  be  pre-
scribes for  the  patient.  Inattention  to  circumstances  of  this  kind  has  often  rendered
tbe  treatment  much  less  effective  than  it  might  have  been,  or  has  rendered  it
decidedly  injurious.  It  must  be  confessed,  however,  that  in  many  cases  it  is  ex-
tremely difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  come  to  any  certain  judgment  as  to  the  actual
pathological  condition  of  tbe  affected  parts,  or  even  of  tbe  system  generally,  during
the  paroxysm.  A  previous  knowledge  of  the  patient,  and,  yet  more,  the  having  had
opportunities  of  studying  the  case  in  former  attacks,  will  here  be  of  the  greatest
importance. — II.  If  it  is  of  consequence  for  the  practitioner  to  be  acquainted  with
the  precise  nature  of  the  case  before  him,  to  enable  him  to  prescribe  successfully  or
even  safely  in  the  paroxysm  of  angina ;  it  is  much  more  important  that  he  should
have  this  knowledge  to  direct  his  treatment  in  the  interval.  In  many  cases,  no
doubt,  it  is  quite  impossible  to  ascertain  tbe  intimate  character  of  the  affection
during  the  paroxysm  ;  and  in  a  certain  proportion  of  these,  tbe  knowledge,  if  attain-
able, would  be  of  little  use.  We  should  still  be  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  applying
the  same  limited  stock  of  means  without  any  very  inspiring  confidence  of  a  beneficial
retult.  Circumstances,  however,  are  very  different  in  the  interval.  Here,  an  accu-
rate acquaintance  with  tbe  nature  of  the  individual  case  is  indispensably  necessary
to  enable  us  to  institute  treatment  that  holds  out  any  prospect  of  success;  while  a
practice  adopted  at  hazard,  or  on  merely  empirical  principles,  may  not  only  be  use-
less, but  may  lead  to  the  most  disastrous  results.  The  first  and  great  object  of  the
practitioner,  therefore,  on  being  called  on  to  treat  a  case  of  angina,  will  be  to  make
himself  acquainted  with  its  individual  character.  Beginning  with  the  early  history
of  the  disease  he  will  trace  it  to  its  presont  stage,  and  will  endeavour,  from  tbe  nar-
rative of  the  patient,  and  from  tbe  observation  of  the  whole  phenomena  presented  to
him,  to  form  a  clear  judgment  respecting  the  local  condition  of  the  organs  in  which
the  characteristic  symptoms  have  their  site  ;  and  the  state  of  all  the  other  parts  of
tbe  system,  which  can  in  any  way  influence  these:  in  other  words,  he  must  endea-
vour to  ascertain  the  species  or  variety  of  angina,  according  to  the  distinction  for-
merly pointed  out.  Are  the  paroxysms  dependent  on  some  structural  lesion  of  the
heart  and  great  vessels,  or  are  these  organs  in  their  original  soundness?  If  there  is
any  deviation  from  the  sound  condition  of  these  organs,  what  is  the  nature  of  this
deviation?  Does  structural  lesion  exist  or  not?  or,  if  existing,  can  it  be  detected  or


PALPITATION  ov  TUB  HEAliT.


G55


Sect.  II. — 0/  Palpitation  of  the  Heart.

In  a  former  part  of  this  work  I  took  some  notice  of  palpita-
tions in  general;  I  shall  here  consider  those  of  a  purely  nervous
kind,  that  is,  such  as  exist  without  any  organic  lesion.  These
are  frequently  much  more  troublesome  than  the  others.  Far
from  being  removed  by  the  most  complete  repose,  they  are  in
general  felt  to  be  most  distressing  during  the  first  part  of  the
night.  It  frequently  happens  that  they  prevent  sleep  for  several
hours,  while  a  moderate  degree  of  exercise,  proportioned  to  the
patient's  strength,  removes  or  at  least  alleviates  the  distressing
feeling  of  them.  The  purely  nervous  palpitations  consist  in  an
increase  of  the  impulse,  sound,  and  particularly  of  the  frequency
of  the  heart's  pulsations.  A  feeling  of  internal  agitation,  par-
ticularly in  the  head  and  abdomen,  always  accompanies  them  ;
also  a  limpid  watery  condition  of  the  urine. The  duration  of

not  ?  What  is  the  actual  physical  condition  of  the  heart  ?  Are  its  walls  thick  or  thin  ?
Are  its  cavities  large  or  small  1  What  is  the  state  of  the  general  health  ?  Is  it  such
as  injuriously  to  influence  the  recurrence  of  the  paroxysms  in  any  way,  or  to  aggra-
vate their  severity?  If  thus  injuriously  influencing-  the  local  disease  of  the  heart  and
great  vessels,  is  it  of  a  kind  to  be  remedied  or  mitigated  by  medical  treatment?
These  queries  comprehend  most  of  the  subjects  of  inquiry  which  the  practitioner
who  proceeds  to  treat  a  case  of  angina,  must  keep  in  view  ;  and  although  it  will
sometimes  be  impossible  to  obtain  precise  information  on  every  point,  yet  this  will
be  practicable,  in  the  greater  number  of  cases,  by  care  and  attention  and  by  the  em-
ployment of  the  improved  methods  of  investigating  thoracic  diseases  furnished  by
auscultation.  This  latter  method  of  exploration  will,  in  a  more  particular  manner,
aid  our  recognition  of  the  physical  condition  of  the  heart ;  and  enable  us,  in  a  great
number  of  cases,  to  determine  the  presence  or  absence  of  organic  disease  in  that
organ.  This  precise  knowledge  is,  no  doubt,  important  in  assisting  us  to  regulate
our  practice  with  the  best  advantage  to  the  patient :  but  it  is  infinitely  more  so  in
enabling  us  to  form  an  accurate  prognosis  respecting  the  event  of  the  case.  If  the
attacks  recognize  great  structural  lesion  of  the  heart  or  aorta  for  their  cause,  we  can
only  expect  to  mitigate  the  severity  of  the  paroxysms,  or  to  effect  their  temporary
removal.  If  there  exists  no  structural  lesion  of  a  fatal  kind,  although  the  organs
may  not  be  of  the  soundest  proportions,  it  is  often  practicable,  not  merely  to  mitigato
or  remove  the  paroxysms,  but  by  great  and  constant  vigilance  on  the  part  of  the  pa-
tient in  avoiding  the  exciting  causes,  to  prevent  their  recurrence  altogether.  When
the  disease  is  purely  one  of  functional  disorder,  a  much  more  perfect  and  permanent
cure  may  be  expected.  In  all  these  cases,  however,  the  general  character  of  the
treatment  will  not  greatly  vary.  An  organic  lesion  of  the  heart,  even  of  an  incu-
rable kind,  can  only  be  viewed,  in  relation  to  the  treatment,  as  a  predisposing  cause
of  the  attacks,  just  as  a  heart  that  is  naturally  feeble  or  morbidly  irritable  is  so  :  and
it  is  only  in  rare  cases  that  the  organic  lesion  induces  the  paroxysm  without  the  aid
of  obvious  exciting  causes.  No  doubt,  exciting  causes  of  a  much  feebler  kind  will
suffice  ;  but  the  very  necessity  of  such  causes  at  all  to  produce  the  effect,  brings  the
case,  as  far  as  concerns  the  prevention  of  the  paroxysms,  under  the  same  category
as  to  treatment  as  the  purely  sympathetic  or  nervous  angina.  In  the  case  of  organic
disease,  however,  our  expectations  of  benefit  from  treatment,  and  the  actual  results,
become  wonderfully  less.  Now,  indeed,  we  fight,  not  for  victory,  but  merely  to  keep
the  enemy  at  bay.  We,  however,  use  the  same  weapons;  and  if  we  do  not  strive
with  the  same  enthusiasm,  we  must,  at  least,  be  vigilant  and  active  ;  and  we  shall
often  be  rewarded  with  a  degree  of  success  that  we  scarcely  dared  to  hope  for  at  the
commencement  of  our  treatment.


656


PALPITATION OF THE  HEART.


palpitations  of  this  kind  is  very  variable:  they  may  be  mo-
mentarily excited  by  mental  emotion  ;  while,  at  other  times,  they
seem  to  originate  without  any  obvious  cause,  and  continue  for
several  years,  especially  in  young  persons  who  are  at  the  same
time  both  nervous  and  plethoric. — It  is  commonly  imagined  that
such  an  habitual  over-action  of  the  heart  as  such  palpitations
imply,  must  at  length  give  rise  to  hypertrophy  of  this  organ.
This  is  possible;  but  I  must  say  that  I  have  never  seen  any
proof  of  the  accuracy  of  this  opinion.  On  the  other  hand,  I  am
acquainted  with  individuals  who  have  been  habitually  subject  to
affections  of  this  kind,  and  who  nevertheless  exhibit  no  positive
sign  either  of  hypertrophy  or  dilatation.*

LITERATURE  OF  ANGINA  PECTORIS.

1740.  Crellius  (J.  F.)  De  arteria  coronaria  iiistar  ossis  indurata  observatio  (Haller

Diss,  ad  Morb.  ii.  563.)  Wittemb.
1768.  Rougnon  (N.  F.)  Lettre  a  M.  Lorry  sur  une  maladie  nouyelle.  Besancon.  Qvo.
1778.  Eisner  ( C.  F.)  Abhandlung  ueber  die  Brustbraune. Konigs.  8vo.
1782.  Gruner  (C  G.)  Spicilegiuni  ad  Angin.  Pect.  (Diss.  Doering  I.)  Gen.

1787.  Schaeffer.  Diss,  de  Angina  Pectoris.  (Doering  1.)  Goett.

1788.  Tode  (J.  C.)  De  Inflamm.  Pect.  Cbron.  Angina  Pectoris. Havn.  Qvo.
1791.  Butter  (W.,  M.D.)  Treat,  on  the  dis.  commonly  called  Angina  Pectoris.  Land.
1791.  Hartmann. Diss,  de  Angina  Pectoris.  Franc.

1793.  Scbmidt.  Diss,  de  Angina  Pectoris.  Goett.

1799.  Parry  (C.H..M.D.)  An  Inq.  into  the  symp.  and  caus  of  Syncope  Anginosa.  Bath.

1800.  Hesse.  Specimen  de  Angina  Pectoris.  Halte.
1802.  Sluis.  Diss,  de  Sternodynia  Syncopali.  Groen.

1804.  Hume  (Gustavus)  Obs.  on  Angina  Pectoris,  Gout,  &c. Dull.  Qvo.
1806.  Jahn  (F.)  Ueber  die  Syncope  Anginosa  (Hufeland's  Journ.)  Berl.  Qvo.
1806.  Baumes  (J.  B.  T.)  Traill  Element,  de  Nosol. Par.  Qvo.

1810.  Brera  (L.  V.)  Delia  Stenocardia. Verona  4to.

181 1.  Desportes  (E.  H.)  Trait6  de  l'Angine  de  Poitrine. Par.  8vo.

1812.  Millot.  Diss,  sur  l'Angine  de  Poitrine.  Par.

1812.  Renauldin.  Diet,  des  Sc.  Med.  (Art.  Angine,  t.  ii.)  Par.

1812.  Cbrzczonowicz. Diss,  de  Angore  Pectoris.  Vilnee.

1813.  Zecbinelli  (G.  M.)  Sull'  Angina  di  Petto  et  sulle  morte  repentine  consi-

derazioni.  Padova.  Qvo.
1813.  Bogart  (Henry)  An  inaug.  Dissert,  on  Angina  Pectoris. New  York.  8vo.
1815.  Jurine  (L.,  M.D.)  Memoire  sur  l'Angine  de  Poitrine. Par.  8vo.

1817.  Zecbinelli,  (G.  M.)  Sopra  una  malattia  di  Seneca  il  filosofo. Pad.  Qvo.

1818.  Blackall  (John,  M.D.)  Observations  on  Dropsies:  with  an  Appendix  contain-

ing cases  of  Angina  Pectoris. Loud.  8vo.  3d  edit.

1819.  Black,  (S.,  M.D.)  Clinical  and  Patbological  Reports. Newry.  8vo.
1821.  Raige-Delorme.  Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Angine  de  Poitrine.)  t.  2. Par.  8vo.

1821.  Pinel  et  Bricheteau.  Diet,  des  Sc.  Med.  (Art.  Sternalgie,)  t.  52. Par.  8vo.

1822.  Schramm. Diss,  de  Angina  Pectoris,  (cum  Tab.  aen.) Lips.  Qvo.

1824.  Hosack  (D.,  M.D.)  Essays  on  various  subjects  of  Med. New  York.  8vo.

1825.  Frank  (Jos.)  Prax.  Med.  Univ.  P.  11.  vol.8. Taurin.  8vo.

1829.  Walker  (F.  K.,  M.D.)  Remarks  on  Angina  Pect.  (Midi.  Journ.  I.)  Wore.
1829.  Jolly.  Diet,  de  Med.  &  de  Cbir.  Pr.  (Art.  Angine  de  Poitrine)  t.  2.  Par.  8vo.
1832.  Forbes. Cyc.  of  Pract.  Med.  (Art.  Angina  Pect.)  vol.  I.  Land.
1832.  Copland. Diet,  of  Pract.  Med.  (Art.  Angina  Pectoris.) Land.  Qvo.

Also  Sauvages,  Darwin,  Johnstone  E.and  J.,  Fothergill,  Heberden,  Latham,  Per-
cival,  Wall,  Good,  and  the  various  systematic  writers  on  medicine  ;  the  various  Trea-
tises on  Diseases  of  the  Heart,  and  innumerable  individual  cases  in  journals  and
transactions  of  societies. —  Transl.

*  This  seems  in  opposition  to  a  statement  formerly  made  in  the  chapter  on  the  causes
of  diseases  of  the  heart ;  it  may  be,  nevertbeless,  and  no  doubt  is,  quite  true.— (Af.  L.)


SPASM OF THE  HEART.


651


I  formerly  took  some  notice  of  the  signs  which  distinguish
nervous  palpitation  from  hypertrophy  or  dilatation  of  the  heart  :
I  shall  here  state  them  somewhat  more  precisely.  In  nervous
palpitation,  the  first  impression  conveyed  by  the  stethoscope  is
that  the  heart  is  not  enlarged.  The  sound,  though  clear,  is  not
heard  loudly  over  a  great  extent  of  chest ;  and  the  impulse,  al-
though appearing  considerable  at  first,  is  really  not  great,  as  it
never  sensibly  elevates  the  head  of  the  observer.  This  last  sign
seems  to  me  the  most  important  and  certain  of  any,  when  taken
in  conjunction  with  the  frequency  of  the  pulsations.  These  are
always  quicker  than  natural, — being,  most  frequently,  from
eighty-four  to  ninety-six  in  the  minute.  Nervous  palpitations
are  rarely  accompanied  by  any  sign  of  determination  of  blood  to
the  head  or  chest,  except  in  old  persons.

The  treatment  of  nervous  palpitations  consists  principally  in
the  employment  of  bathing — tepid  or  cool  according  to  the  season
— the  infusion  of  cherry-laurel  and  digitalis.  Bloodletting  ought
to  be  employed  with  caution,  and  never  unless  the  patient  be
young  and  plethoric:  it  is  almost  always  injurious  in  such  as
occur  in  hypochondriacal  and  hysterical  subjects.  The  same
observation  applies  to  a  too  rigid  deit,  which,  like  bloodletting,
frequently  increases  the  nervous  agitation.

Sect.  III. — Of  Spasm  of  the  Heart,  with  the  bellows-sound

and  purring  thrill.

I  formerly  showed  that  the  bellows-sound  of  the  heart,  al-
though frequently  accompanying  an  organic  affection  of  this
organ,  may  exist  without  this,  and  be  dependent  on  a  simple
modification  of  the  nervous  influence.  But  even  in  this  case,  it
is  always  attended  by  symptoms  which  constitute  a  real  state  of
disease.  It  is,  generally  speaking,  in  hypochondriacs,  particularly
such  as  are  of  a  sanguine  temperament  and  plethoric,  that  we
most  frequently  observe  the  bellows-sound.  And,  in  this  case,
it  almost  always  exists  in  some  of  the  arteries  at  the  same  time  :
frequently  it  passes  from  one  to  the  other.  It  is  sometimes  con-
tinuous, sometimes  intermittent :  in  the  latter  case,  it  recurs  on
the  slightest  agitation  of  body  or  mind  experienced  by  the  patient:
even  the  act  of  breathing  deeply  or  coughing  suffices  to  induce  it.
The  symptoms  which  accompany  it,  are  the  more  severe  in  pro-
portion as  the  sound  is  greater,  more  continuous,  and  extending
to  a  greater  number  of  arteries.  When  it  is  very  constant  and
distinct,  but  confined  to  the  heart,  there  is  almost  always  more  or
less  dyspnoea,  with  a  feeling  of  greater  or  less  debility,  so  that
the  patient  can,  in  many  cases,  hardly  walk.  These  symptoms
are  still  more  marked,  if  the  purring-thrill  accompanies  the  bel-
lows-sound. There  is  commonly  but  slight  nervous  agitation,

u  u


058


NERVOUS AFFECTIONS OF THE  ARTERIES.


particularly  when  the  patient  is  quiet ;  but  on  attempting  to  walk
rather  quick,  or  for  any  length  of  time,  he  is  soon  out  of  breath,
and,  in  the  severer  cases,  the  head  becomes  confused.  When  this
affection  is  not  connected  with  organic  lesion  of  the  heart,  the
treatment  ought  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  nervous  disorders
of  the  arteries,  which  I  now  proceed  to  notice.

Sect.  IV. — Of  Nervous  Affections  of  the  Arteries.

Neuralgia  of  the  arteries. — Pains  more  or  less  acute,  continued
or  intermittent,  sometimes  follow  the  course  of  the  arteries,  and
appear  to  have  their  site  in  the  nervous  filaments  supplied  to
these  vessels  by  the  ganglionic  system.  These  pains  are,  in  ge-
neral, less  acute  than  those  situated  in  the  nerves  derived  from
the  brain  or  spinal  marrow.  They  are  particularly  prevalent  in
hypochondriacs  and  hysterical  women. — The  means  formerly  re-
commended in  the  same  affection  of  the  heart  and  lungs,  are  the
only  ones  applicable  to  the  present  case.  The  most  efficacious
is  a  blister  over  the  affected  part,  when  such  an  application  is
practicable.

Increased  'pulsation  of  the  arteries. — This  phenomena  fur-
nishes the  best  proof  that  the  arteries  have  an  action  of  their
own,  independent  of  that  of  the  heart.  It  is  thus  by  no  means
very  rare  to  find  the  pulsation  of  one  of  the  carotid  or  temporal
arteries  vastly  greater  than  that  of  the  other.  A  like  difference
is  still  more  common  in  the  radial  arteries :  it  even  exists  in  the
state  of  health,  in  most  men,  the  right  pulse  being  almost  always
stronger  than  the  left.  Does  this  depend  on  the  right  arm  being
more  exercised  than  the  left  ?  I  have  sometimes  observed,  during
the  course  of  a  disease,  the  radial  arteries  become  alternately
stronger  and  weaker ;  or  the  left  become  the  stronger  of  the  two,
although  the  contrary  had  been  the  case  in  health.  This  morbid
degree  of  impulse  is  not  at  all  unusual  in  the  aorta,  particularly
in  the  ventral  portion  of  it.  A  sense  of  fulness  always  attends
this  augmentation  of  impulse,  the  affected  artery  seeming  to  be
always  as  full  as  possible,  and  more  than  the  other  parts  of  the
arterial  system.

When  this  phenomenon  exists  only  in  a  single  artery  of  a  small
or  middling  size,  it  is  attended  by  no  obvious  alteration  of  the
health, — except  in  the  case  where  it  is  occasioned  by  inflamma-
tion of  the  part  on  which  the  vessel  is  distributed ;  as  when  the
arteries  of  the  arm  are  excited  by  a  whitlow.  Augmented  im-
pulse of  the  carotids  usually  accompanies  nervous  affections,  but
does  not  always  exist  in  subjects  cither  threatened  or  affected
with  apoplexy.  Nervous  palpitations  of  the  heart  are  some-
times accompanied  by  a  similar  agitation  of  the  whole  arterial
system,  the  patient  being  sensible  of  the  arterial  action  over  the


SPASM  OF  THE  ARTERITES.


659


whole  body;  and  sometimes  this  is  visible,  even  in  the  smaller
vessels.

In  the  case  of  the  aorta,  these  nervous  phenomena  are  always
conjoined  with  a  more  or  less  painful  affection  of  the  general
system, — even  when  they  are  confined  to  one  portion  of  this  artery.
When  seated  in  the  ascending  aorta  they  are  accompanied  with
some  degree  of  oppression  in  the  breathing,  and  yet  more  with  a
sense  of  anxiety  and  tendency  to  syncope. — We  recognize  this
affection  by  the  pulsations  heard  above  the  middle  of  the  sternum,
being  stronger  and  more  sonorous  than  those  heard  in  the  cardiac
region, — the  sternum  at  the  same  time  yielding  the  natural  reso-
nance on  percussion.  The  symptoms  are  nearly  the  same  when
the  descending  aorta  is  the  part  affected  ;  and  the  affection  is  dis-
tinguished by  the  pulsations  of  the  heart  appearing  more  audible
in  the  back,  especially  the  left  side,  near  the  spine,  than  in  the
region  of  the  heart  itself.  In  this  situation,  indeed,  they  are
most  commonly  quite  natural,  both  in  respect  of  sound  and  im-
pulse ;  whilst  in  the  back,  the  sound  of  the  diastole  of  the  arte-
ries being  confounded  with  that  of  the  ventricles,  makes  this  seem
much  stronger, — the  sound  of  the  auricles  being  at  the  same  time
less  than  on  the  fore-part  of  the  chest.

In  the  ventral  aorta,  the  phenomenon  is  much  more  frequent
still,  and  may  often  induce  the  belief  of  aneurism.  I  have  several
times  seen  this  error  committed  ;  and  it,  in  truth,  is  easily  fallen
into,  when  the  accumulation  of  gas  in  the  duodenum  or  colon
simultates  the  aneurismal  tumour.  I  made  the  mistake  myself
in  one  case;  but  I  have  since  been  enabled  to  distinguish  several
others  of  the  same  kind  chiefly  by  this  circumstance — that,  in
the  case  of  aneurism,  we  cannot  by  examination  ascertain  the
natural  calibre  of  the  artery,  which  we  can  do  in  the  nervous
affection,  with  the  greatest  ease,  more  especially  by  means  of  the
stethoscope.  There  is  no  other  way  of  accounting  for  the  for-
mation and  disappearance  of  swellings  of  this,  kind,  but  by  the
supposition  of  air  confined  in  some  manner  within  one  of  the  cells
of  the  colon.  And  yet  it  is  singular  that  such  swellings  will,  as
I  have  myself  observed,  last  for  months,  and  then  disappear.
These  are  the  cases  in  which  practitioners  boast  of  resolving  pal-
pable obstructio?is ;  or  else  they  are  tumours  containing  vesicular
worms,  which,  on  dying,  contract  into  so  small  a  space  as  to  be
no  longer  perceptible.

Spasm  of  the  arteries,  with  the  bellows-sound  and  purring-
thrill. — When  the  bellows-sound  of  the  arteries  exists  only  in
one  vessel  of  a  small  or  middling  size,  more  particularly  if  it  is
intermittent,  it  is  connected  merely  with  a  degree  of  nervous  agi-
tation, often  very  slight,  and  with  a  frequency  of  pulse,  either
habitual  or  produced  by  the  slightest  exertion.  It  is  especially
in  young  plethoric  hypochondriacs  that  it  exists  in  this  degree.
In  this  case  it  is  usually  seated  in  the  subclavians,  more  rarely

u  u  2


660


SI' ASM  OF  THE  ARTERIES.


in  the  carotids,  and  more  frequently  in  the  right  than  in  the  left.
In  rare  cases  it  is  met  with  in  fevers;  it.  is  by  no  means  unusual
in  disease  of  the  heart ;  and  it  is  still  more  common  in  nervous
palpitations.  When  the  bellows-sound  exists  in  the  aorta,  par-
ticularly the  ventral  portion  of  it,  there  is  always  a  marked  state
of  disorder  in  the  nervous  system,  viz.  agitation  and  anxiety,
faintings  more  or  less  complete,  and  produced  by  the  slightest
causes,  or  even  without  any  obvious  cause ;  and  an  habitually
quick  pulse.  When  both  carotids  are  affected  at  the  same  time,
and  there  co-exists  the  purring  thrill,  the  same  symptoms  are
present,  but  in  a  somewhat  less  degree.  In  both  cases,  we  can
almost  always  excite  the  bellows-sound  artificially  in  the  crural
and  brachial  arteries,  in  the  manner  formerly  pointed  out.  When
the  phenomenon  is  present  at  the  same  time  in  the  heart  and
aorta,  and  in  the  carotid,  subclavian,  brachial,  and  crural  ar-
teries, there  is  extreme  anxiety,  oppressed  breathing,  frequent
pulse,  and  sometimes  a  feeling  of  internal  heat,  without  any
other  sign  of  formal  fever.  This  condition  of  the  system  is  al-
ways important,  and  may,  I  conceive,  of  itself  produce  death.
When  the  bellows-sound  is  very  intense  and  exists  in  a  great
many  arteries  at  the  same  time,  the  purring-thrill  is  commonly
perceptible  in  some.  This  phenomenon,  however,  appears  to
have  no  fixed  relation  either  to  the  intensity  or  extent  of  the
bellows-sound,  nor  to  the  severity  of  the  disease.  I  have  some-
times observed  it  very  distinct  in  one  of  the  carotids,  although
the  bellows-sound  in  it  was  very  feeble ;  on  the  other  hand,  I
have  never  met  with  it  in  the  heart,  without  the  other  being  very
intense.

In  a  great  number  of  cases  in  which  the  bellows-sound  exists
in  some  of  the  arteries,  the  pulse  at  the  wrist  has  a  particular
sort  of  trembling,  exactly  analogous  to  that  of  a  vibrating  cord.
This  character  of  the  pulse  is  probably  that  observed  by  Corvi-
sart  in  ossification  of  the  mitral  valves,  when  the  purring-
thrill  exists  in  the  cardiac  region ;  and  indeed  it  would  seem  to
be  merely  a  sort  of  diminutive  of  the  latter  phenomenon.  I
have,  however,  most  frequently  met  with  it  in  cases  in  which  the
bellows-sound  existed  in  some  of  the  arteries,  without  the  pur-
ring-thrill ;  but  I  have  met  with  it,  when  this  latter  was  also
present,  either  in  the  heart  or  arteries.  I  have  sometimes  also
found  it  when  neither  of  these  phenomena  was  perceived  ;  but
in  this  case  the  purring-thrill  could  always  be  excited  in  the
brachial  and  cural  arteries  by  means  of  the  interrupted  pressure
formerly  mentioned,  and  in  the  subclavian  and  carotids,  by
making  the  patient  walk  quickly,  cough,  or  breathe  deeply.  For
these  reasons  1  am  induced  to  consider  these  three  phenomena,
as  different  modifications  of  each  other.

Treatment. — In  augmented  impulse  of  the  arteries,  bleeding
is  decidedly  indicated,  and  we  frequently  can  only  obtain  relief


SPASM OI<'  THE  ARTERIES.


C()l


by  having  recourse  to  this  repeatedly  and  extensively.  There
is  not  so  much  cause  for  this  treatment  when  there  exists  only
the  bellows-sound  without  increased  impulse.  In  both  cases
tepid  bathing,  especially  in  the  form  of  the  shower-bath,  is  very
beneficial.  I  have  also  derived  advantage  from  the  magnet,
when  the  affection  was  confined  to  the  heart,  but  less  frequently
than  in  angina.  The  infusion  of  digitalis  and  lauro-cerasus  have
not  been  found  of  much  benefit.  In  the  simple  bellows-sound
uncomplicated  with  increased  impulse,  more  particularly  in  pallid
cachectic  subjects,  steel,  the  fetid  gums,  and  castor,  have  occa-
sionally proved  useful.  A  moderate  diet  and  abstinence  from
all  kinds  of  stimulants,  ought,  in  every  case,  to  be  enforced.


END OK THE  TREATISE.


APPENDIX.


OF THE  APPLICATION  OF  AUSCULTATION  TO  OTHER  CASES
BESIDES  DISEASES  OF  THE  CHEST.


Sect.  I. — Of  the  Diagnosis  of  Pregnancy.

It  had  never  occurred  to  me  to  apply  auscultation  to  the  study
of  the  phenomena  of  gestation.  For  this  happy  idea  we  are
indebted  to  Dr.  Kergaradec,  who  hit  upon  it  while  verifying
the  facts  contained  in  the  first  edition  of  this  work.  His  first
researches  were  made  on  a  woman  very  near  her  confinement.
He  obtained  two  results,  which  may  now  be  considered  as  the
most  certain  signs  of  pregnancy.  These  are — 1.  The  pulsation
of  the  heart  of  the  foetus ;  and  2.  a  sound  denominated  by  its
discoverer,  simple  blowing  pulsation  (battement  simple  avec
soufHe)  or  placental  sound,  from  a  belief  that  its  site  is  in  the
placenta  or  in  the  part  of  the  womb  to  which  this  is  attached  :  it
is  evidently  an  arterial  pulsation  accompanied  with  the  bellows-
sound.*

The  action  of  the  foetal  heart  is  marked  by  double  pulsations
like  those  of  the  adult,  only  much  more  rapid,  being  usually  twice
as  quick  as  that  of  the  pulse  of  the  mother.  These  pulsations
are  distinctly  audible  in  the  sixth  month,  and  sometimes  even  a
little  earlier.  The  place  over  which  they  are  perceptible  varies
with  the  position  of  the  foetus:  commonly  it  is  pretty  extensive.
The  space  of  pulsation  is  frequently  near  a  foot  in  length  and
three  or  four  inches  in  width  ;  but  it  is  always  easy  to  determine
the  precise  point  of  pulsation,  from  the  increased  or  diminished
intensity  of  the  sound  as  we  approach  or  recede  from  it.  It  is
probable  that  the  space  over  which  we  hear  the  sound  is  greater
in  proportion  as  the  foetus  is  near  the  membranes,  in  other  words,
as  the  liquor  amnii  is  small  in  quantity.  Sometimes  the  sound
becomes  inaudible  for  hours,  or  even  whole  days :  perhaps,
sometimes,  on  account  of  the  temporary  feebleness  of  the  action
of  the  foetal  heart,  but  still  more  frequently,  in  all  probability,
owing  to  the  recession  of  the  foetus  from  all  contact  with  the

•  Mcmoire  sur  l'Auscultatiorj  appliqu6e  a  l'6tude  de  la  grossesse,  par  M.  Le  Jumeau
de  Kergaradec,  D.M.  I*. Paris,  18'2'2.


APPENDIX.


membranes.  It  is  evident  that,  in  order  to  render  the  sound
fully  audible,  the  body  of  the  foetus,  the  membranes,  the  uterus,
and  the  abdominal  parietes  of  the  mother  must  be  in  immediate
contact.  A  turn  of  intestine  placed  between  the  walls  of  the  ab-
domen and  the  uterus,  is  sufficient  to  prevent  the  sound  from
being  heard ;  and  the  waters  of  the  ovum  being  a  worse  con-
ductor than  the  solids,  must  also  be  an  impediment,  when  they
exist  in  too  great  a  quantity  between  the  membranes  and  foetus.

This  sign  is  of  a  kind  the  certainty  of  which  cannot  be  doubted,
and  which  cannot  be  simulated  by  any  thing  else  ;  for  although
we  certainly  can  sometimes  hear  the  sound  of  the  mother's  heart,
on  applying  the  stethoscope  to  the  epigastrium,  the  lateral  parts
of  the  abdomen  or  loins,  the  extreme  difference  of  frequency  be-
tween the  pulsations  of  the  mother  and  foetus,  renders  the  mis-
taking the  one  for  the  other  quite  impossible.*

The  excitement  of  the  mother's  circulation  has  no  effect,  at
least  not  a  constant  one,  on  the  action  of  the  foetal  heart.  On
one  occasion  while  M,  Kergaradec  was  exploring  the  foetal  heart,
the  pulsations  of  this  became  suddenly  too  quick  to  be  counted,
while  the  pulse  of  the  mother  continued  of  the  usual  degree  of
frequency.  After  a  short  time,  the  foetal  pulse  recovered  its
usual  frequency,  which  varies  from  one  hundred  and  twenty  to
one  hundred  and  sixty.  I  had  occasion  to  witness  something
similar.  All  at  once  the  sound  became  extremely  loud,  almost
equal  to  that  of  the  heart  of  an  adult,  but  without  any  impulse
or  change  in  the  frequency  or  rythm.  This  state  lasted  only  a
few  seconds ;  and  was  not  accompanied  by  any  particular  emo-
tion in  the  mother.

The  second  phenomenon  discovered  by  M.  Kergaradec  is  evi-
dently an  arterial  pulsation,  isochronous  with  the  pulse  of  the
mother,  and  accompanied  with  the  bellows-sound.  It  is  unat-
tended by  any  impulse.  The  point  where  it  is  heard,  is  always
fixed  in  the  same  individual,  but  varies  in  each  person  :  and  the
abdominal  space  over  which  it  can  be  heard  is  usually  less  than
in  the  case  of  the  foetal  sound.  Most  commonly  this  space  is
only  three  or  four  inches  square;  but  sometimes  it  is  consider-
ably larger.

These  pulsations  have  presented  to  me  nearly  all  the  varieties
of  the  bellows-sound. It  usually  becomes  perceptible  about  the

*  M.  Mayor,  of  Geneva,  had  heard  (lie  pulsation  of  the  unborn  frrtus,  previously
to  M.  Kergaradec,  as  appears  from  the  following  note  in  the  Bibliothique  Universelle
for  November,  1818,  Genera.  "  M.  Mayor  has  discovered  that  we  can  ascertain  with
certainty  if  the  fu-tus  lias  nearly  arrived  at  its  full  time,  or  if  it  is  living  or  dead,  by
applying  the  ear  to  the  abdomen  of  the  mother;  if  the  child  is  alive,  we  can  hear
distinctly  the  pulsations  of  its  heart,  nnd  can  readilv  distinguish  them  from  those  of
the  mother."  (This  note  is  by  the  Editor,  in  the  notice  given  of  the  Report  of  M.
Percy  on  "  Mediate  Auscultation." )  It  does  not  appear  that  M.  Mayor  has  prose-
cuted his  researches  further,  since  nothing  has  appeared  from  him  since  the  publica-
tion of  M.  Kergaradec. —  Anther.


DIAGNOSIS OF  PREGNANCY.


GG5


fourth  month.  As  soon  as  the  uterus  has  risen  above  the  pelvis,
and  can  be  brought  in  contact  with  the  walls  of  the  abdomen  by
pressure  on  them  with  the  stethoscope,  we  hear  the  sound  very
distinctly — perhaps  even  better  than  at  the  end  of  the  period  of
gestation.  At  the  earlier  period  the  sound  is  somewhat  peculiar.
It  seems  as  if  a  blast  from  the  bellows  were  discharged  into  an
empty  bottle.  Later  in  pregnancy,  the  bellows-sound  is  almost
always  dull,  much  diffused,  and  conveying  no  impression  of  being
limited  to  the  calibre  of  an  artery.  From  the  observations  of
Dr.  Kergaradec  and  others,  the  sound  would  appear  to  originate
from  the  point  of  insertion  of  the  placenta.  It  is  highly  impor-
tant, in  a  practical  point  of  view,  that  this  fact  should  be  fully
verified.  The  bellows-sound  is  usually  heard  on  the  side  oppo-
site to  that  in  which  the  fcetal  pulsation  is  perceived  ;  but  this  is
by  no  means  constant.

I  am  of  opinion  that  the  sound  in  question  does  not  originate
in  the  placenta  itself.  The  only  arteries  in  which  it  can  be  sup-
posed to  be  produced  are  the  hypogastric,  iliac,  and  uterine.  If
the  two  first  were  the  site  of  it,  we  ought  to  hear  it  on  both  sides
of  the  uterus  at  once,  or  alternately  in  the  same  individual,  which
is  not  the  case.  If  all  the  uterine  arteries  yielded  it,  we  ought  to
hear  it  in  different  points,  and  in  several  at  the  same  time.  What
seems  to  me  most  probable  is,  that  it  exists  in  the  chief  artery
distributed  to  the  placenta.  The  following  statement  was  com-
municated to  me  by  Dr.  Ollivry,  an  experienced  accoucheur,  to
whom  I  had  sent  an  account  of  Dr.  Kergaradec's  discovery.  "  I
have  proved  on  four  women  the  accuracy  of  the  observations
you  communicated  to  me.  And  I  have  further  ascertained,
by  the  introduction  of  the  hand  into  the  uterus,  immediately
after  parturition,  that  the  point  where  I  had  previously  heard
the  blowing  'pulsations,  corresponded  exactly  with  the  point  in
which  the  placenta  was  implanted.  I  am  so  satisfied  of  the  truth
of  this  observation,  that  I  do  not  intend  to  repeat  the  experiment,
which,  by  the  way,  is  rather  painful  to  the  patient.  If  a  fresh
proof  were  wanting  that  the  cause  is  what  you  have  stated,  it  is
found  in  the  fact,  that  the  sound  ceases  the  very  moment  the
unbilical  cord  is  cut."  I  agree  with  Dr.  Ollivry  in  considering
this  last  fact  as  quite  conclusive ;  and  even  if  it  should  happen
that  we  are  not  able  hereafter  to  determine  more  positively  the
precise  seat  of  this  variety  of  the  bellows-sound,  it  is  at  least
certain  that  it  originates  in  the  place  to  which  the  placenta  is
attached,  and  that  it  is  connected  with  the  action  of  its  vessels:
it  will  still,  therefore,  be  justly  named  the  'placental  sound.  This
sound  is  not  constant;  it  being  at  times  scarcely  perceptible  for
days  together.  No  doubt  the  interposition  of  a  portion  of  intes-
tine between  the  arteries  and  the  abdominal  parietes  may  some-
times render  the  sound  imperceptible ;  but  we  often  hear  it  cease
and  return  again  while  the  instrument  remains  fixed  in  the  same
spot.


6:16


APPENDIX.


In  the  case  of  two  or  more  foetuses,  it  is  evident  that  we  shall
hear  an  equal  number  of  fcetal  hearts.  After  the  birth  of  one
foetus,  we  can,  by  the  same  means,  ascertain  if  there  is  one  behind.
Since  the  publication  of  Dr.  Kergaradec's  memoir,  I  know  an
instance  in  which  the  existence  of  two  foetuses  was  ascertained
some  days  before  parturition.

Besides  the  advantage  of  being  able  to  ascertain  the  attach-
ment of  the  placenta,  it  is  very  probable,  as  M.  Kergaradec  has
remarked,  that  auscultation  may  enable  us  to  form  some  judg-
ment of  the  position  of  the  foetus  previously  to  the  dilatation  of
the  os  uteri.  This  judgment  will  be  founded  on  the  fact  that
owing  to  the  bent  position  of  the  foetus  in  utero,  the  sound  of
the  heart  must  be  much  more  distinct  over  the  back  than  over
any  other  part  that  comes  in  contact  with  the  uterine  walls.  It
may  also  be  expected  that  some  light  may  be  thrown  by  this
means  on  cases  of  extra-uterine  conception  :  but  I  know  of  no  fact
in  support  of  this  opinion.

The  study  of  the  phenomena  we  have  been  discussing,  demands
infinitely  more  attention  than  that  of  those  which  indicate  disease
within  the  chest.  The  sounds  being  very  feeble,  the  utmost
silence  is  necessary  during  the  time  of  observation,  and  the
utmost  care  must  be  taken  to  discriminate  the  sounds  in  question
from  several  others,  which  are  likely  to  exist  at  the  same  time, —
for  instance,  the  sound  of  the  mother's  heart, — the  sound  of  the
intestinal  contents,  and  the  sound  of  muscular  contraction,  pro-
duced by  the  force  necessarily  used  to  compress  the  abdominal
parietes  with  the  stethoscope.  It  is  sometimes  requisite  to  bestow
much  time  on  our  observations,  and  to  repeat  them,  on  account
of  the  intermittent  character  of  the  phenomena  we  are  investi-
gating.*

*  No  one  who  is  aware  of  the  frequent  and  great  difficulties  experienced  by  prac-
titioners in  detecting  pregnancy,  and  of  the  vast  importance  of  doing  so  in  some
cases,  will  have  any  doubt  of  the  great  value  of  the  auscultatory  signs  noticed  in  the
text.  They  are  almost  as  certain  as  the  perception  of  the  fcetal  movements,  and
more  certain  than  the  touch  ;  and  they  possess  a  very  great  superiority,  in  point  of
convenience  and  delicacy  over  tbe  latter.  It  is  true,  tbey  have  not  been  detected
in  some  cases  of  pregnancy  ;  it  is  probable  that,  owing  to  some  peculiar  idinsyn-
cracy,  tbey  may  never  manifest  themselves  in  certain  cases  ;  but  ample  experience
proves  that  their  absence  is  a  circumstance  of  extreme  rarity.  Their  absence,
therefore,  must  not  be  considered  as  an  absolute  test  of  the  non-existence  of  preg-
nancy ;  although  their  presence  may  be  looked  upon  as  the  reverse.  Here,  as  in
every  other  case  in  which  auscultation  is  applied,  we  have  all  the  other  signs  to
guide  our  judgment  in  the  instances  where  the  fcetal  and  placental  sounds  are  not
detected  ;  while  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  we  have  an  additional  sign,  of  almost
infallible  accuracy.  It  cannot,  therefore,  be  denied  that  this  form  of  physical  diag-
nosis has  conferred  even  on  puerperal  medicine  a  boon  of  immense  value.  For  much
more  complete  and  precise  information  on  the  subject  of  this  section,  see  Dr.  Fer-
guson's Memoir  in  the  Dublin  Med.  Trans,  vol.  i.  New  Series,  entitled  •'  Ausculta-
tion the  only  unequivocal  evidence  of  Pregnancy  ;"  and  Dr.  Kenedy's  excellent  trea-
liso  on  Obstetric  Auscultation.  (Dublin,  1835,  8vo.)  See  also  Dr.  C.  Haus's  little
work.  "Die  Auscultation  in  13ezug  auf  Schwnngerschnft  n  Wurtzburg,  1823;  and
Dr.  Montgomery's  article,  "  Signs  of  Pregnancy, "  in  the  Cyclopaedia  of  Pract.  Med.
vol.  iii. — T rantlt


DIAGNOSIS  OF FK  ACTUM  KS.


GG7


Sect.  II. — Of  the  diagnosis  of  other  diseases  besides  those  of  the

chest.

I  had  been  long  of  opinion  that  auscultation  might  be  usefully
applied  to  different  surgical  cases,  and  particularly  to  the  diag-
nosis of  urinary  calculi  and  doubtful  fractures ;  but  I  had  no
leisure  or  opportunity  of  putting  my  ideas  in  practice.  This
defect,  however,  has  been  admirably  supplied  by  M.  Lisfranc,
who  has  lately  published  a  series  of  observations  and  experiments,
which  leave  no  doubt  on  the  subject,  and  fix,  in  a  precise  manner,
the  signs  by  which  doubtful  cases  of  the  kind  may  be  recognized.*
I  shall  here  give  a  brief  account  of  these.

1 .  Fractures.

The  stethoscope  applied  over  the  place  of  fracture,  on  the
slightest  motion  of  the  part,  conveys  a  much  more  decided  cre-
pitus, than  is  perceived  by  the  naked  ear  during  the  most
extended  movements  of  the  parts. In  many  cases,  even  the
slight  pressure  of  the  ear  on  the  stethoscope  suffices  to  produce
the  crepitation  ;  a  circumstance  of  no  small  importance,  as  freeing
the  patient  from  the  pain  necessarily  excited  by  the  motion
requisite  in  the  manual  examinations. The  crepitus  yielded  by
the  more  solid  bones  is  sonorous,  and  resembles  the  sound  pro-
duced by  breaking  a  piece  of  wood  across  the  knee  ;  it  is  accom-
panied with  a  sensation  of  roughness  unpleasant  to  the  ear.  The
sound  yielded  by  the  spongy  bones  is  duller,  and  resembles  the
effect  of  a  rasp  on  wood  ;  except  that,  now  and  then,  this  noise  is
broken  by  sounds  of  a  clearer  kind,  like  those  afforded  by  the
compacter  bones,  only  not  so  loud. The  crepitous  is  loudest
over  the  place  of  fracture,  and  gradually  diminishes  as  we  recede
from  this;  but  it  may  be  heard  at  a  great  distance  from  the
fracture,  when  this  is  in  the  compact  part  of  a  long  bone. In  the
case  of  fracture  of  the  femur,  the  crepitation  may  be  heard  even
on  the  skull. From  this  it  will  appear,  that  the  precise  place  of
the  fracture  is  easily  ascertained. The  sound  from  oblique
fractures  is  stronger  than  from  those  which  are  transverse ;  but
when  one  end  of  the  fractured  bone  rides  the  other,  the  sound  is
then  obscured,  and  in  some  cases  may  not  be  perceiyed  without
slight  extension  or  counter-extension  of  the  limb. If  the  fracture
is  comminuted,  the  sensation,  as  of  distinct  portions  of  bone,  is
conveyed  by  the  stethoscope.

*  Metnoire  sur  de  nouvelles  applications  du  Stethoscope,  pur  J.  Lisfranc. —  Now
translated  into  English,  with  notes,  by  Mr.  Alcock. — Truiist.


APPENDIX.


The  more  that  auscultation  is  applied  to  different  objects,  we
shall  find,  in  general,  that  the  more  is  the  tact  of  the  ear  improved,
so  that  it  reaches  a  degree  of  delicacy  that  is  quite  surprising.
"We  formerly  saw  that,  in  several  diseases  of  the  chest,  it  conveys
the  sensation  of  humidity  and  dryness,  of  form  and  extent :  in
the  case  of  fractures  of  the  bones  of  rabbits,  I  have  been  able  to
distinguish  whether  the  bones  were  sharp  or  blunt,  or  com-
minuted ;  when  the  hand,  on  account  of  the  thickness  of  the  soft
parts,  could  only  do  so  in  an  obscure  and  doubtful  manner.
When  fluids  are  effused  around  the  fracture,  a  guggling  is  com-
bined with  the  crepitation ;  and  which  is  compared  by  M.
Lisfranc  to  the  sound  produced  by  a  shoe  full  of  water.  When
the  fracture  is  compound,  there  is  conjoined  with  the  crepitation,
a  sound  of  blowing,  something  like  the  sound  of  forced  respi-
ration, made  with  the  mouth  open.  It  is  impossible  to  confound
the  sound  of  fracture  with  that  of  luxation  :  in  the  latter  case,  the
sound  is  dull  and  obscure,  and  conveys  precisely  the  impression
of  two  moist  and  polished  surfaces  sliding  over  one  another.

From  the  preceding  observations  it  results,  that,  by  means  of
the  stethoscope,  we  may  readily,  and  without  giving  pain,  distin-
guish every  species  of  fracture,  even  those  of  the  most  doubtful
kind — for  instance :  those  of  the  neck  and  condyles  of  the  femur,
— of  the  fibula,  particularly  at  its  lower  end,— of  the  internal
malleolus, — of  the  rotula,  longitudinal  and  oblique, — of  the
radius  and  ulna,  when  only  one  of  these  is  fractured, — of  the
neck  and  condyles  of  the  humerus, — of  the  acromion  process  of
the  scapula, — of  the  outer  end  of  the  clavicle, — of  the  scapula
and  ribs, — of  the  vertebrae, — and  finally,  all  fractures  accom-
panied with  considerable  swelling  of  the  surrounding  soft  parts,
which  is  especially  the  character  of  those  in  the  vicinity  of  the
joints.  In  all  these  cases,  the  stethoscope  applied  over  the  frac-
tured part,  will  convey  the  crepitus,  on  the  slightest  movement
of  the  part,  or  even,  as  already  stated,  by  the  simple  pressure  of
the  instrument.  When  from  the  great  thickness  of  the  sur-
rounding soft  parts  (augmented,  perhaps,  still  further  by  inflam-
mation) the  sound  is  obscured,  it  becomes  more  perceptible  upon
applying  the  instrument  on  the  point  of  the  bone  that  lies  nearest
the  skin,  on  the  principle  of  solid  bodies  being  better  conductors
of  sound  than  soft  ones;  thus  in  fracture  of  the  neck  of  the
femur,  we  apply  the  instrument  upon  the  trochanter  or  crest  of
the  ilium.

2.  Urinary  calculi-

The  introduction  of  the  catheter  or  sound  is,  unquestionably,
an  excellent  means  of  ascertaining  the  presence  of  calculi  in  the
bladder;  nevertheless  the  sensation  produced  by  its  contact  with


DTAfiNOSIS OF  CALCULI.


the  stone  is  sometimes  indistinct ;  and  it  lias  certainly  happened
to  the  most  expert  surgeons  to  perform  the  operation,  when  there
existed  no  stone  to  be  extracted.  This  circumstance  need  never
again  occur  if  the  stethoscope  is  employed  in  all  doubtful  cases.
— When  the  stethoscope  is  applied  to  the  os  pubis  or^sacrum
while  the  catheter  is  introduced,  we  hear  the  sound  occasioned  by
this  coming  in  contact  with  the  stone,  much  more  distinctly  and
loudly  than  we  can  do  with  the  naked  ear ;  and,  indeed,  even  in
the  obscurest  cases,  the  sensation  communicated  will  be  quite  as
distinct  as  would  be  that  produced  in  the  open  air  by  striking
the  instrument,  even  much  more  forcibly,  against  a  stone. — When
the  bladder  contains  no  stone,  after  the  urine  has  nearly  all
escaped,  we  perceive  a  guggling  sound  like  that  produced  by
churning  saliva  between  the  teeth  when  the  mouth  is  closed.
Wrhen  the  bladder  is  completely  empty,  the  motion  of  the
catheter  backwards  and  forwards,  gives  rise  to  a  noise  like  that
of  the  working  of  a  pump. — It  is  well  known  that  the  celebrated
Desault  mistook  a  fungous  tumour  of  the  bladder  for  a  calculus.
M.  Lisfranc,  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  this  mistake  could
occur  with  the  stethoscope,  introduced  pieces  of  flesh  into  the
bladder,  and  found  that  no  other  sound  was  produced  than  arises
when  the  bladder  is  empty.

3.  Abscess  of  the  liver.

In  the  case  of  abscesses  or  hydatid  cysts  in  the  liver,  when
opened  into  the  stomach  or  intestines,  or  into  the  lungs,  I  conceive
the  stethoscope  may  tend  to  supply  us  with  diagnostic  marks.
In  the  two  cases  first  mentioned,  pressure  on  the  right  hypo-
chondre  will  probably  occasion  a  guggling  sound  from  the  intro-
duction of  the  intestinal  gases  into  the  excavation  in  the  liver.  In
the  latter  cases,  if  the  abscess  communicates  with  the  bronchia,
we  ought  to  have  the  cavernous  rhoncus,  cough  and  respiration,
perhaps  even  pectoriloquy,  and  the  metallic  tinkling.

4.  Diseases  of  the  tympanum  and  Eustachian  tube.

If  we  apply  the  stethoscope  upon  the  mastoid  process  of  the
temporal  bone,  while  the  patient  inspires  forcibly  with  the  nostril
of  the  same  side,  (the  other  being  closed  with  the  finger,)  we  per-
ceive a  blowing  sound  indicating  the  penetration  of  air  into  the
mastoid  cells.  If  there  is  any  moisture  in  the  Eustachian  tube
or  tympanum,  we  perceive  a  guggling  very  like  that  of  the  mu-
cous rhoncus,  and  if  the  mucus  happens  to  obstruct  the  tube,  all
sound  ceases.  From  this  and  other  analogous  facts,  we  may
ascertain  the  patency  or  obliteration  of  the  Eustachian  tube,  and


G70


Al'I'KXDIX.


may  thus  be  enabled  to  determine  more  particularly  the  eases  in
which  it  is  proper  to  attempt  curing  deafness  by  throwing  injec-
tions into  this,  or  by  perforating  the  membrane  of  the  tympanum.*

5.  Use  of  auscultation  in  veterinary  medicine.

Although  I  think  auscultation  may  be  found  of  use  in  the  dis-
eases of  animals,  I  do  not  expect  that  it  will  ever  be  so  in  the
same  degree  as  in  man.  In  the  first  place,  in  them  we  lose  at
once  all  the  signs  supplied  by  the  voice.  But  there  are  likewise
many  other  obstacles  to  the  use  of  the  stethoscope  in  animals.  In
the  larger  quadrupeds,  such  as  the  horse  or  bullock,  the  explo-
ration of  the  heart  becomes  extremely  difficult,  on  account  of  the
inconvenient  posture  necessary  to  attain  it,  and  on  account  of
the  form  of  the  sternum.  In  the  horse,  and  probably  in  all  her-
bivorous animals,  the  respiration  is  very  indistinct,  being  indeed
hardly  audible,  even  when  the  animal  has  just  ceased  running.  I
am,  however,  of  opinion,  that  in  the  state  of  disease  it  would  be
more  perceptible  in  the  sound  portions  of  the  lung,  the  action  of
which  is,  in  such  case,  doubled  or  tripled ;  and  accordingly,  I  found,
in  one  case,  that  it  was  as  easy  to  recognize  peripneumonv  in  a
cow,  as  in  the  human  subject.  I  ought  to  add,  that  my  researches
on  auscultation  in  the  diseases  of  animals  have  been  very  limited,
but  I  am  still  of  opinion,  that  it  will  be  found  very  useful  in
such  cases,  more  especially  when  conjoined  with  percussion. -f-

*  The  author  further  suggests  the  probable  utility  of  the  stethoscope  in  the  instruc-
tion of  the  deaf  and  dumb,  by  applying  one  end  of  it  to  the  trachea  of  the  speaker,
and  the  other  to  the  ear  of  the  pupil ; — but  surety  this  must  be  fanciful, — or  at  least
of  inferior  value  to  other  means. — Transl.

+  The  two  following  bibliographical  articles,  having  reference  to  the  whole  of  the
two  great  subjects  to  which  this  treatise  is  devoted,  are  inserted  together,  in  this  place.

LITERATURE  OF  AUSCULTATION.

1728.  Lancisi  (G.  M.)  De  motu  cordis,  &c. Roma.  fol.

1748.  Brendel  (J.  G.)  De  motu  cordis  Lancisiano. Goett.  4to.

1761.  Auenbrugger,  (Leop.  M.D.)  Inventum  novum  ex  percussione  thoracis  hunmni
ut  signo  abstrusos  interni  pectoris  morbos  detegendi.  Vindob.  8vo.

1770.  Roziere  (De  la  Chassagne,  M.D.)  Manuel  des  Pulmoniques,  ou  traite  com-
plete des  Maladies  de  la  poitrine:  il  y  a  joint  une  nouvelle  methode,  Sec.
traduite  du  Latin  d'Avenbrugger. Paris.  8vo.

1808.  Corvisart  (J.N.)  Nouvelle  m6thodepour  reconnaitre  les  maladies  internes  de
la  poitrine,  par  Avenbrugger  (  Transl.) Par.  8vo.

1813.  Dessans,  Essai  sur  la  percussion  de  la  poitrine  (Diss.  Inaug.)  Par.

1817.  Double  (F.  J.)  Semeiologie  Generate,  (t.  ii.  p.  31.)  Par.

1819.  Merat.  Diet,  des  Sc.  Med.  (Art.  Percussion.)  t.  xl.  Par.

1819.  Laennec  (R.  T.  II.)  De  l'Auscultation  mediate.  Ed.  1. 1819. Ed.  II.  1826.

Ed.  III.  par  Mer.  Laennec,  3  vols.  Pur.  1831.  8vo.  Jd.  Translated  by
Dr.  Forbes. 1st  Ed.  I.nnd.  1821.  2nd,  1827.  3rd,  1829.  4th,  1834.

1821.  Rostan.  Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Auscultation)  t.  iii.  Par.

1822.  Kergaradec  (L.  J.) Memoire  sur  I' Auscultation  appliquee  a  l'etude  de  la

grossesse. Par.  8vo.

1823.  Lisfranc,  (J.)  Memoire  sur  de  nouvelles  applications  du  stethoscope.  Par.  8vo.
1823.  Hall  (H.  C.  Van)  Diss,  de  Stethoscopii  in  inorbis  pectoris  usu.  Tragi,  ad  Hen.


LITERATURE  OK  AUSCULTATION.


671


13-24.  Forbes,  (John,  M.D.)  Original  cases  with  dissections,  &c.and  a  translation  of
Avenbrugger.  Lond.  8vo.

1824.  Collin,  (  V., M.D.)  Des  diverses  metlmdes  d'exploration  de  lapoitrine,&c.  Par.

1825.  Stokes,  (W.,  M.D.)  An  introduction  to  the  use  of  the  stethoscope.  Ed.  12mo.

1826.  Scudamore,  (C,  M.D.)  Obs.  on  Laennec's  method  of  forming  a  diagnosis  of

diseases  of  the  chest.  Land.  8vo.
1826.  Andral.  .Diet,  de  Med.  (Art.  Percussion.)  t.  xvi.  Par.

1826.  Hofacker,  (D.,  M.D.)  Ueber  das  Stethoscop  ein  treffliches  mittel  zurcrken-
nung  der  krankheiten  des  herzens  und  der  lungen.  Tubing.

1826.  Gintrac,  (Elie,  M.D.)  Memoire  sur  le  diagnostic  des  affections  des  organos

thoraciques.  Louvain.

1827.  Graves,  (R.  J.,  M.D.)  Stokes,  (W.,  M.D.)  A  selection  of  cases  to  prove

the  utility  of  the  stethoscope.  (Dub.  Hosp.  Reports,  vol.  iv.)  Dubl.  8vo.
1827.  Stack  (W.,  M.D.)  Report  of  an  inquiry  into  the  value  of  mediate  aus-
cultation.  (Dub.  Hosp.  Reports,  vol.  iv.)  Dubl.  8vo.

1827.  Alcock  (J.  C.)  A  memoir  on  the  use  of  the  stethoscope  in  fractures,  &c.

Translated  from  the  French  of  Lisfranc. Lond.  l8mo.

1828.  Ryland  (W.N.)  A  short  treatise  on  the  different  methods  of  investigating

the  diseases  of  the  chest.  (Trans,  of  Collin.) Lond.  12mo.

1828.  Piorry,  (P.  A.,  M.D.)  De  la  percussion  mediate.  Par.  8vo.

1823.  Williams  (C.  J.  B.,  M.D.)  Rational  exposition  of  the  physical  signs  of  dis-
eases of  the  lungs. Lond.  8vo.

1828.  Townsend,  (R,  M.D.)  Cases  to  illustrate  the  utility  of  the  stethoscope.  (Dub.

Trans,  vol.  v.)  Dublin.  8vo.

1829.  Comvell,  (W.  E.  E.,  M.D.)  Observations  chieflv  on  pulmonary  diseases  in

India  and  on  the  use  of  the  stethoscope. Malacca,  4to.
1829.  Turner  (J.) Obs.  on  the  causes  of  the  sounds  of  the  heart. (Ed.  Med.  Chir.

Trans,  vol.  iii.) Edin.  8vo.  .
1829.  Andral.  Diet,  de  Med.  et  de  Chir.  (Art.  Auscultation)  t.  iii.  Par.

1829.  Williams,  (D.,  M.D.)  On  the  sounds  produced  by  the  action  of  the  heart.

(Edin.  Journ.  vol.  xxxiii.)  Edin.  8vo.

1830.  Piorry  (P.  A.,  M.D.)  Du  procede  operatoire  a  suivre  dans  les  explorations

des  organes. Par.  8vo.
1830.  Spittal  (R.)  A  treatise  on  auscultation. Ed.  8vo.

1830.  Corrigan  (D.  J.,  M.D.)  On  the  motions  and  sounds  of  the  heart.  (Dub.  Med.
Trans.  N.  S.  vol.  i.)  Dub.  8vo.

1830.  Gunther  and  Lau,  Encyc.  Worterbuch.  (Art.  Auscultation)  B.  iv.  Berl.

1830.  Elliotson,  (J.,  M.D.)  On  the  recent  improvements  in  the  art  of  distinguish-
ing the  various  diseases  of  the  heart. Lond.  fol.

1830—1831.  Haycraft,  (W.  T.,  M.D.)  Illustrations  of  Dr.  Corrigan's  theory  of  the
motions  and  sounds  of  the  heart.  (Med.  Gaz.  vol.  vii.  &  viii.)  Lond.  8vo.

1830.  Kennedy  (E.,  M.D.)  Obs.  on  the  utero-placental  circulation  and  the  pla-
cental souffle.  (Dub.  Hosp.  Reports,  vol.  v.)  Dub.  8vo.

1830.  Ferguson,  (J.  C,  M.D.)  Auscultation  the  only  unequivocal  evidence  of
pregnancy.  Cases  of  pulmonary  apoplexy  illustrative  of  the  value  of  aus-
cultation.  (Dub.  Med.  Trans.  N.  S.  vol.  i.) Dubl.  8vo.

1830.  Hope,  (J .,  M.D.)  Strictures  on  Dr.  Corrigan's  Essay  on  the  motions  and
sounds  of  the  heart.  (Med.  Gazette,  vol.  vi.  p.  680) ;  and  Clin,  researches
on  the  physiology  of  the  heart's  action  (Ibid.  p.  782.)  Refutation  of  the
various  objections  to  Dr.  Hope's  theory  of  the  heart.  (Ibid.  vol.  vii.  p.  390.)
Lond.  1830-1.  Experimental  researches  on  the  action  of  the  heart.  (Trea-
tise on  the  dis.  of  the  heart,  p.  10.)  Lond.  1832.  8vo.
1830.  Pigeaux,  New  analysis  of  the  heart's  action  (Journ.  Hebdom.  Avr.)  Par.  1830.
—Id.  (Archiv.  Gen.  de  Med.  Juill,  Nov.  1832.) Par.  1832.

1830.  Stokes  ( W.,  M.D.)  and  Hart  (J.)  Obs.  on  the  actions  of  the  heart.  (Edin.

Journ.  vol.  xxxiv.)  Edin.

1831.  Bond,  (H.  J.  H.,  M.D.)  Remarks  on  the  second  sound  of  the  heart.  (Med.

Gazette,  vol.  viii.  p.  11.) Lond.  8vo.

1832.  Sharpe(J.  B.)  Manual  of  percussion  and  auscultation,  from  the  French  of

Meriad.  Laennec. Lond.  12mo.
1832.  Forbes,  Cyclopaed.  of  Pract.  Med.  (Art.  Auscultation,)  Parti.
1832.  Townsend  (R.,  M.D.)  A  chart  of  auscultation. Dub.  12mo.
1832.  Copland,  Diet,  of  Pract.  Med.  (Art.  Arucultation.)  /..md.8vo.
1832.  Bouanet.  On  the  sounds  of  the  heart. (Journ.  Hebdom.  No.  97.)  Par.


G72


APPENDIX.


1832.  Haus  (C,  M.D.)  Die  auscultation  in  bezug  auf  Schwangerschaft.  Wurtib.

1833.  Kennedy,  (  E.,  M.D.)  Observations  on  obstetric  auscultation.  Dub.  8vo.

1833.  Carlile,  (H.)  Exper.  and  obs.  on  tbe  motions  and  sounds  of  the  heart.  (Dub.

Journ.  of  Med.  Sc.  vol.  iv.)  Dub.  8vo.

1834.  Williams.  Cyclopaedia  of  Pr.  Med.  (Art.  Stethoscope,)  vol.  iv.

1834.  Magendie  (F.)  On  the  mechanism  of  the  sounds  of  the  heart  (L'Institut.

Journ.  Gen.  Feb.  1834 ;  Lond.  Med.  Gaz.  June  28,  Sept.  20, 1834.")  Par.
1834.

LITERATURE  OF  DISEASES  OF  THE  CHEST  IN  GENERAL.

1497.  Montagnana,  (B.)  Consilia,  &c.  (De  aigritudinibus  pectoris.)  Ven.  fol.
1572.  Joubert,  (Laur.)  De  affectibus  pilorunv&c.  De  afFectibus  internarum  partium

thoracis.  Genev.  12mo.
1588.  Dunus  (Thad.)  De  respiratione  Liber. Tigur.  8vo.
1608.  Heurnius,  (Jo.)  De  morbis  pectoris  liber.  Antv.  4to.

1616.  Castellos  (Pet.  Vas.)  Exercitationes  medicinales  ad  omnes  thoracis  affectus.
Tolos.  4to.

1628.  Grossius,  (Tb.)  Lectiones  de  morbis  capitis  et  thoracis.  Ferrar.  4to.

1664.  Diemerbroeck,  ( Js.  de)  Disputationum  practicarum  pars  prima  et  secunda  de

morbis  capitis  et  thoracis.  Utrecht.  12mo.
1683.  Bellini, (Laur.)  De  urinisetpulsibus,de  morbis  capitis  et  pectoris, &c.  Bonon.  4to.
1688.  Anon.  Traite"  de  medecine  sur  les  maladies  de  la  poitrine.  Lion.  12mo.
1692.  Camerarius  (E.  R.)  Pleuritis  et  abscessus  pectoris. Tubing.  4to.
1704.  La  Salle,  (J.  P.  de)  Trait6  des  maladies  de  la  poitrine.  Bordeaux,  12mo.
1724.  Blackmore,  (Sir  R.,  M.D.)  A  treatise  on  consumptions  and  other  distempers

belonging  to  the  breast  and  lungs.  Lond.  8vo.

1739.  Crendel,  (M.)  Traite  de  quelques  maladies  de  la  poitrine.  Par.  8vo.

1740.  Hoadly,  (Benj.)  Lectures  on  tbe  organs  of  respiration.  Lond.  4to.

1741.  Barbeyrac,  (M.,  M.D.)  Nouvelles  dissertations  sur  les  maladies  de  la  poitrine,

du  ccEur,  &c.  Amsterdam,  12mo.
1767.  Bordeu  (Th.  de)  Recherches  sur  le  tissu  muqueux  et  sur  quelques  maladies  de

la  poitrine.  Par.  12mo.
1770.  Roziere,  (De  La  Chassagne,  M.D.)  Manuel  des  pulmoniques.  Par.  l2mo.
1772.  Ullholm,  (J.)  Respiratio  diabetica.  {Linn.  Amcen.  Ac.  VIII.)  Upsal.

1778.  Hoffmann  (C.  L.)  Geschicbte  einer  brustkrankheit,  &c. Mnnster.  8vo.

1779.  Orlandi,  (P.)  Tractatus  de  morbis  pectoris.  Romaz.  4to.

1784 — 6.  Eschenbach,  (C.  G.)  Bemerkungen  ueber  krankheiten  der  brust,  &c  3  vol.
Lips.  8vo.

1788.  Boehme,  (C.  G.)  Curmethode  der  wichtigsten  brustkrankheiten.Le/p;.  8vo.
1793.  Corbella  y  Fondevilla  (Ant.)  Tratado  de  las  enfermedades  agudas  y  cronicas
del  pecho.  Madr.  8vo.

1801.  Bosch,  (J.  J.  van  den)  Commentatio  exhibensanatomiam  systematis  respirationi

inservientis  pathologicam.  Haarl.  4to.

1802.  Coleman,  (E.)  A  diss,  on  natural  and  suspended  respiration.  Lond.  8vo.
1814.  Herholdt,  (J.  D.)  Ueber  die  lungenkrankheiten.  Numb.  8vo.

1813.  Grateloup,(F.)  Tableaux  synoptiques,  &c.  des  affections  thoraciques.  Par.  fol.

1819.  Anon.  Letters  on  disorders  of  the  chest.  Lond.

1823.  Lorinser,  (C.  J  )  Die  lehre  vou  den  lungenkrankheiten.  Berl.  8vo.

1823.  Mayer,  (C,  M.D.)  Tractatus  de  vulneribus  pectoris  penetrantibus.  Petrop.

1823.  Westphal,(C.)  Was  batman  zu  thun  umeineschwache brust  zu  stnrken.  Quedl.

1824.  Forbes,  (J.,  M.D.)  Original  cases,  illustrating  the  use  of  the  stethoscope,  &c.

in  diseases  of  tbe  chest.  Lond.  8vo.
1824 — 6.  Andral,  (G.)  Clinique  medicale  (torn.  ii.  iii.  Mai.  de  Poit.)  Par.  8vo.

1828.  Arum.  Die  Briistkrankheiten ;  oder  guter  rath  und  sichere  huelfe  dagegen,  &c.

Pest.  8vo.

1829.  Mills,  (Thos.,  M.D.)  Of  the  morbid  appearances  in  disorders  of  the  trachea,

lungs,  and  heart.  Dub,  8vo.


I


EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PLATES.


PLATE  I.

Fig.  1.  (A.  B.  C.) — The  Stethoscope  as  delineated  in  the  Jirst  edition  of
Laennec's  treatise,  published  in  1819.

A.  Longitudinal  section  of  the  stethoscope  reduced  to  one-third  its

actual  dimensions.

a.  The  plug  or  stopper  in  its  place, b.  The  point  of  union  of  the  two
parts, c.  The  upper  or  auricular  half.

B.  The  plug  or  stopper  removed, d.  The  body  of  it  formed  of  the  same

wood  as  the  rest  of  the  instrument,  e.  Small  brass  tube  traversing
the  stopper  for  fixing  it  in  the  tube  of  the  stethoscope.

C.  The  upper  portion  of  the  stethoscope, f  The  body  of  it. g.  Screw,

cut  in  the  wood,  for  uniting  the  two  parts  together.

Fig.  2.  (D.  E.  F.)  —  The  Stethoscope,  as  altered  by  Laennec,  and  deli-
neated in  the  seeond  edition,  published  in  1826.

D.  Longitudinal  section  of  all  the  parts  united,  one-third  of  the  actual

dimensions,  a.  Stopper  in  its  place.  Point  of  junction  of  the
two  parts, c.  Upper  or  auricular  half.

E.  The  stopper  removed, d.  Tts  body,  made  of  the  same  wood. e.  Brass

tube  for  fixing  it  into  the  base  of  the  stethoscope.

F.  Pectoral  or  lower  half  of  the  stethoscope,  f.  Its  body. g.  Its  upper

extremity  reduced  so  as  to  fit  the  cavity  in  the  other  half;  directed
to  be  covered  with  thread  or  leather,  in  order  to  make  it  fit  accu-
rately.

Fig.  3.  Actual  diameter  of  the  stethoscope  (both  varieties),  a.  Diameter
of  the  bore.


PLATE  II.

Fig.  1.  (A.  B.) — The  Stethoscope  as  now  in  most  common  use,  being  a
modification  o  f  the  two  forms  proposed  by  Laennec.

In  this  modification,  the  extremity  only  of  the  plug  (B,  c),  and  con-
secpicntly  its  containing  cavity,  are  made  conical,  according  to  the  first
form  of  Laennec,  while  a  portion  is  left  of  equal  diameter  (B.  b.)  to  enable
it  to  retain  its  hold,  without  the  brass  tube

x  x


674


EXPLANATION OF THE  PLATES.


A.  The  whole  instrument  with  the  two  portions  adjusted  and  the  plug

infixed,  drawn  so  as  to  exhihit  hoth  its  exterior  and  interior  con-
figuration. (The  figure  in  the  plate  is  not  drawn  of  the  exact  pro-
portions of  the  instrument,  heing  only  about  one-fourth  of  its
length,  while  it  is  one-third  of  its  diameter.)  a.  The  plug  in  its
place,  b.  The  upper  half  of  the  instrument,  c.  c.  Rims  of  ivory
or  horn  surrounding  the  pectoral  extremities  of  either  half.  d.  A
cap  of  the  same  material  surrounding  and  covering  the  whole
auricular  extremity  of  the  instrument, e.  The  central  bone.

B.  The  stopper  (constructed  to  fit  either  the  upper  or  lower  half  of  the

instrument)  removed,  a.  Portion  exterior  to  the  funnelled  cavity
when  the  plug  is  in  its  place,  of  the  same  diameter  as  the  ste-
thoscope, b.  Outer  portion  of  the  plug,  of  efpial  diameter  through-
out, c.  Conical  portion  of  the  plug.

Fig.  2.  (A.  B.  C.  D.  E.) — Piorry's  Stethoscope  and  Pleximeter.

This  stethoscope  is  constructed  exactly  on  the  same  principles  as  that
of  Laennec,  but  with  several  modifications,  intended  to  render  it  lighter,
smaller,  and  more  portable.  In  it  the  central  bore  and  conical  cavity  of
the  pectoral  extremity,  are  preserved  of  the  original  dimensions,  but  the
body  of  the  instrument  is  greatly  reduced  in  size,  and  the  proper  width
is  given  to  the  auricular  extremity  by  screwing  a  thin  ivory  cap  to  the
slender  body  of  the  instrument.  The  pleximeter  is  attached  to  the  stetho-
scope merely  with  a  view  to  render  the  former  conveniently  portable.

A.  The  whole  stethoscope  with  the  plug  included,  and  the  pleximeter

attached,  as  carried  in  the  pocket.

a.  The  body  of  the  instrument,  of  one-fourth  the  actual  size.

b.  Its  auricular  extremity  of  ivory,  and  with  a  screw  for  attaching  it  to

the  auricular  cap  D.

c.  Its  pectoral  extremity.

d.  The  pleximeter,  of  ivory,  screwed  upon  the  body  of  the  stethoscope,

and  shutting  in  the  plug  E.

e.  The  auricular  cap  D.  screwed  upon  the  pleximeter.

B.  An  additional  portion  of  cylinder  fitted  to  screw  on  A.  at  b.,  for  the

purpose  of  lengthening  the  instrument,  when  one  of  a  greater
length  is  preferred.

C.  The  stethoscope  fitted  for  use,  the  pleximeter  being  removed  and  the

auricular  cap  (D.)  applied,  a.  Auricular  cap  screwed  upon  the
cylinder,  b.  The  pectoral  extremity  freed  from  pleximeter  and
cap.

D.  The  auricular  cap  removed,  interior  view.

E.  The  plug  or  stopper  removed.

Fig.  3. — Piom/'s  Pleximeter  {connected  with  the  Stethoscope.)

a.  Internal  screw  for  attaching  it  to  the  end  of  the  .stethoscope.
External  screw,  in  which  the  auricular  cap  is  fixed.


ADDITIONAL  NOTES.


675


Fig.  4. — Piorry's  Ple.ri  meter  {not  connected  with  the  Stethoscope.)
a.  Handles  turned  in  the  ivory.

This  little  instrument  is  made  of  ivory,  from  an  inch  and  a  half  to  two
inches  in  diameter,  and  ahout  one-sixth  of  an  inch  in  thickness.  It  may
be  made  either  circular  or  ovoid.

N.B.  All  the  instruments  can  be  accurately  constructed  by  any  good
turner  'from  the  foregoing  descriptions.  Dr.  Williams  recommends
Grumbridge,  turner,  42,  Poland-street,  Oxford-street,  London,  as  the  best
manufacturer  of  stethoscopes.  The  best  kind  of  wood  for  the  purpose  is
fine  pencil  cedar.  The  principal  nicety  consists  in  making  the  bore  por-
fectly  even  and  smooth.


ADDITIONAL  NOTES.

The  following-  notes  were,  by  an  unfortunate  oversight,  omitted  in  their  proper
places  ;  and  1  deem  it  but  a  simple  act  of  justice,  due  to  the  distinguished  physician
from  whose  work  on  the  diseases  of  the  heart  they  are  extracted,  to  give  them  a
place  here.  There  is  no  British  pathologist  to  whom  auscultation,  and  more  espe-
cially that  part  of  it  which  refers  to  diseases  of  the  heart,  is  more  indebted  than  to
professor  Elliotson.  In  recommending  his  work  to  the  particular  notice  of  the  prac-
titioner, I  must  be  allowed  to  express  a  wish  that  it  were  presented  to  the  profession
in  a  more  convenient  and  less  expensive  form  than  that  in  which  it  now  exists.

P.  172.  A  very  striking  and  accurately  described  case  of  the  disease  termed
Pulmonary  Apoplexy,  by  Laennec,  was  published  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  in  the  Annals  of
Medicine  and  Surgery,  in  the  year  1816,  i.  e.  three  years  before  the  appearance  of  the
Treatise  on  Mediate  Auscultation.  See  a  reprint  of  this  case  in  Dr.  Elliotson's
Lectures  on  Diseases  of  the  Heart,  delivered  before  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians,
p.  32.  Lond.  1830,  fol.

P.  500.  The  following  remark  by  Dr.  Elliotson  is  in  accordance  with  our  own
experience,  and  should  be  attended  to  in  practice  :  we  believe  Dr.  E.  was  the  first
who  publicly  announced  the  fact : — "  Laennec  employed  the  stethoscope  in  its  en-
tire state,  to  examine  the  heart;  and  the  presence  of  the  plug  is  certainly  advan-
tageous in  ascertaining  the  impulse.  But  tor  observing  the  sounds  of  the  heart,  the
instrument  is  much  better  without  the  plug.  The  excavation  renders  the  sounds  far
more  audible."  Op.  Cit.  p.  16,  note.

P.  517.  Dr.  Elliotson  mentions  no  less  than  four  cases  of  the  "  musical  bellows
sound,"  termed  by  him  "  the  cooing  sound,"  and  this  physician  was,  1  believe,  the
first  who  noticed  this  singular  modification  of  the  valvular  murmur. — Op.  Cit.  p.  15.

P.  521.  Dr.  Elliotson  notices  a  fact  of  considerable  practical  importance,  respect-
ing the  manifestation  of  the  bellows-sound,  namely,  that  it  is  very  much  affected  by
the  posture  of  the  patient,  and  very  properly  recommends  the  examination  to  be
made  both  in  the  upright  and  horizontal  position.  He  cites  several  cases  in  which
the  bellows  sound  existed  only  when  the  patient  was  in  the  recumbent  posture,  and
gives  it  as  the  result  of  his  experience  that  the  morbid  murmur  which  is  coincident
with  the  ventricular  systole  is  increased,  and  that  which  accompanies  the  ventricular
diastole  is  diminished  by  the  recumb  ent  position.  He  also  notices  a  very  curious
case  of  disease  of  the  heart  complicated  with  ascites,  in  which  the  valvular  sound
immediately  ceased  on  the  removal  of  the  fluid  by  tapping,  and  returned  with  the  re-
accumulation  of  the  dropsical  fluid. Op.  Cit.  p.  18.

P.  522.  Another  curious  and  important  fact,  first  noticed  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  is
recorded  in  the  same  lecture,  (p.  15,)  viz.  the  alteration  of  character  in  the  same
sound  according  to  the  part  of  the  chest  in  which  it  is  observed.  "  In  one  case
(he  says)  the  sound  was  small  and  shrill  (bruit  de  rdpe)  at  the  centre  of  the  sternum,
but  full  and  bass  at  the  cartilages  to  the  left,  and  of  this  nature,  though  fainter,  all
over  the  rest  of  the  front  of  the  chest,  and  all  over  the  left  half  of  the  back.  The


676


ADDITIONAL  NOTES.


same  variety  of  the  sound  in  different  situations  has  occurred  to  me  in  another  case
— file  sound  at  the  sternum,  and  bellows  sound  every  where  else."

P.  523.  Dr.  Elliotson  was  the  first  to  announce  that  arelative  narrowness  of  one  of
the  cardiac  orifices,  as  well  as  an  absolute  narrowness,  gives  rise  to  the  morbid  valvular
sounds  :  "  the  size  of  the  opening  remaining  the  same,  but  the  cavity  behind  it  be-
coming dilated,  and  its  walls  perhaps  thickened,  the  natural  proportion  between  the
two  is  lost,  and  the  effects  of  real  and  absolute  contraction  are  produced."  Op.  Cit.
p.  20,  22.. — In  the  same  work  Dr.  E.  notices  the  fact,  since  observed  by  others,  that
extreme  contraction  of  an  orifice  is  sometimes  unattended  by  any  morbid  sound  ;  and
combats  the  opinion  maintained  by  some,  that  the  bellows  sound  is  referable  to  the
smooth  cartilaginous  degeneration  of  an  orifice,  and  the  rasp  or  saw  sound  to  the
rough  osseous  alteration  :  he  considers  the  degree  of  obstruction,  not  its  nature,  to  be
the  principal  source  of  the  variety  of  sound,  p.  15.

P.  562.  A  very  remarkable,  and,  I  believe,  unique  case  of  aneurism  of  an
auricle  is  recorded  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  in  his  work,  p.  29.  In  this  case  "  the  sinus
of  the  left  auricle  formed  an  aneurism  of  large  size,  with  very  dense  and  thick  layers
of  fibrine  for  its  walls,  and  these  had  reduced  its  cavity  to  a  very  small  capacity. '

P.  584.  Dr.  Elliotson  has  recorded  a  case  in  which  the  fatty  degeneration  of  the
heart  was  much  greater  than  in  any  of  the  examples  cited  by  Laennec.  In  Dr.  E.'s
case  "  a  mere  layer  of  red  muscular  structure  covered  the  internal  and  external  parts
of  the  heart,  and  the  columns  carneae  :  within,  every  spot  was  fatty  matter."  Op.
Cit.  p.  32.

P.  590.  In  Dr.  Elliotson's  work,  so  often  quoted,  will  be  found  some  interesting
observations  on  the  nature  and  consequences  of  a  permanent  patency  of  the  orifices
of  the  heart,  from  valvular  disease.  See  p.  21.  Indeed  the  whole  account  of  the
diseases  of  the  valves  given  in  Lecture  III.  is  characterized  by  important  and  ori-
ginal observation.

P.  616.  Dr.  Elliotson  had  observed  and  described  the  globular  excrescence  of  the
vulves,  some  years  before  the  publication  of  Laennec's  work,  in  the  Annals  of  Med.
and  Surg,  for  1816. See  his  work  on  the  heart,  p.  32.

Transl.


LONDON:

II]  OTB  ON AND I'AL.MEIl, FIUNTERS,  SAVOY STREET,  81  WAND.
