The Story of Gösta Berling (Selma Lagerlöf, 1891)
==========================================================
The debut of the first woman Nobel laureate in literature (1909) — Swedish Romanticism's rebirth. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (storyofgstaber00lageuoft).

"C\J

-o

LO


;  STORY  OF
TA  BERLING


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  SWEDISH

OF  SELMA  LAGER  LOF  BY

3ANCROFT  FLACH


The  Story  of  Gosta  Berling


The

Story  of  Gbsta  Berling

Translated  from  the  Swedish  of

Sclma  Lagcrl  •:
by

Pauline  Bancroft  Flach


Boston

Little,  Brown,  and  Company
1898


pr

9767



AU  rifkU  rturvtd.


Hntbrrsito  $)rrss:
JOHN  WILSON  AND  SON,  CAMBRIDGE,  U.S.A.


TRANSLATOR'S    PREFACE

"1  ;y  of  Gosta  Bcrling"  was  published  in

Sweden  in  1894  and  immediately  brought  its  author
prominence.

The  talcs  are  founded  on  actual  occurrences  and
depict  the  life  in  the  province  of  Varmland  at  the
beginning  of  this  century.  Varmland  is  a  lonely  tract
in  the  southern  part  of  Sweden,  and  has  retained
many  of  its  old  customs,  while  mining  is  the  prin-
cipal industry  of  its  sparse  population.  It  consists  of
great  stretches  of  forest,  sloping  down  to  long,  narrow
lakes,  connected  by  rivers.

Miss  Lagcrlof  has  grown  up  in  the  midst  of  the
wiUl  legends  of  her  country,  and,  deeply  imbued  with
their  spirit,  interprets  them  with  a  living  force  all
her  u

Her  efforts  have  been  materially  encouraged  by
Crown  Prince  of  Sweden,  and  there  is  every
reason  to  expect  that  her  genius  has  not  reached  its
fullest  develop ni

STOCKHOLM,  May,  1898.


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION:

CHATTER  t  •  .1

1     THK  I'KIKST  .         i

11    TUB  BEGGAR     ,  .12

PART    I

1    THE  LANDSCAPE 29

II                             Kvr. .                .            34

III  49

IV  C.OSTA  HER  LI  so,  POET   .    .  63
V    LA  CACHUCHA   .    .             .  79

VI    THE  BALL  AT  EKEBV  84

VII    THE  OLD  VEHICLES    ...  106

VIII    THE  GREAT  BEAR  IN  GURLITTA  CLIPP    .    .    .     122

IX    THE  AUCTION  AT  BJORNE 138

X    THE  YOUNG  COUNTESS  .  170

\  I    GHOST-STORIES      ...  199

XII     EBBA  DOHNA'S  STOK \  214

XIII    MAMSELLE  MARIE  .     .     .    236

PART    II

I    COUSIN  CHRISTOPHER  247

II     THE  PATHS  OP  LIPE  .                  253

III     PFNITBNCE

i\"    THE  IRON  PROM  EKEBY  280


viii  CONTENTS.


PAGE

\  1  IIUECRONA'S  HOUR  .........

vi  THB  Wrrcn  OF  DOVKE    ........

VII  MIDSUMMKR  304

viii  v                                ........  309

IX  I  HI   BRORY  CLERGYMAN  ........  315

X  I'ATROM  Juuus    .  321

XI  THE  PLASTER  SAI                  .......  329

XII  GOD'S  WAYFARER    .    .                  .....  337

XIII  THE  CHURCHYARD  ..........  350

XIV  oi.n  SONGS      .  .......  355

THE  DELIVERER  ........  367

XVI  lin    DROUGHT     ...........  374

II  Tin    <  HILL'S  MMIHIK  .........  386

XVIII  AMOR  VINCIT  OMNIA    .    .                      ...  396

XIX  THE  BROOM-GIRL    ..........  403

\  KEVENIIULLER      ...........  417

.  I  THE  BROBY  FAIR    ..........  429

1  1  THE  FOREST  COTTAGE      ........  438

XXIII  MARGARET  A  CELSING  .........  456


The  Story  of  Gosta  Bcrling


INTRODUCTION

I

THE    PRIEST

AT  last  the  minister  stood  in  the  pulpit     The  heads
-c  congregation  were  lifted     \\V11 .  there  he  finally
There  would  be  no  default  this  Sunday,  as  on
the  last  and  on  many  other  Sundays  before.

The  minister  was  young,  tall,  slender,  and  strik-
adsome.    With  a  helmet  on  his  head,  and  girt
sword  and  shirt  of  mail,  he  could  have  been  cut
in  marble  and  taken  for  an  ideal  of  Grecian  beau

He  had  a  poet's  deep  eyes,  and  a  general's  firm,
rounded  chin;  everything  about  him  was  beautiful.
noble,  full  of  feeling,  glowing  with  genius  and  spirit-
ual li

c  people  in  the  church  felt  themselves  strangely

subdued  to  see  him  so.     They  icre  used  to

sec  him  come  reeling  out  of  the  public  house  with

;ood  friends.  Bcerencrcutz,  the  Colonel  with  the

chcs,  and  the

lie  had  drunk  so  deeply  that  he  had  not  been  able
to  attend  to  his  duties  for  many  week-,  and  the  con-

i


2  INTRODUCTION

gregation  had  been  obliged  to  complain,  first  to  the
dean,  and  then  to  the  bishop  and  the-  Now

the  bishop  had  come  to  tin    p.m-h  trict

inquiry.  He  sat  in  the  choir  with  the  gold  cross  on
his  breast ;  the  clergymen  of  the  neighboring  parishes
sat  round  about  him.

There  was  no  doubt  that  the  mi;  onduct  h.ul

gone  beyond  the  permissible  limit.  At  that  tinu-.  in
tin-  twenties,  much  in  the  matter  of  drinking  was  over-
looked, but  this  man  had  deserted  his  post  for  tin-
sake  of  drink,  and  now  must  lose  it.

He  stood  in  the  pulpit  and  waited  while  the  last
verse  of  the  psalm  was  sung.

A  feeling  came  over  him  as  he  stood  there,  that  he
had  only  enemies  in  the  church,  enemies  in  all  the
seats.  Among  the  gentry  in  the  pews,  among  th
peasants  in  the  farther  seats,  among  the  little  boys
in  the  choir,  he  had  enemies,  none  but  enemies.  It
was  an  enemy  who  worked  the  organ-bellows,  an
enemy  who  played.  In  the  churchwardens'  pews  he
had  enemies.  They  all  hated  him,  every  one,  —  from
the  children  in  arms,  who  were  carried  into  the
church,  to  the  sexton,  a  formal  and  stiff  old  sol
who  had  been  at  Leipsic.

He  longed  to  throw  himself  on  his  knees  and  to
beg  for  mercy.

But  a  moment  after,  a  dull  rage  came  over  him.
He  remembered  well  what  he  had  been  when,  a  year
ago,  he  first  stood  in  this  pulpit.  He  was  then  a
blameless  man,  and  now  he  stood  there  and  looked
down  on  the  man  with  the  gold  cross  on  his  breast,
who  had  come  to  pass  sentence  on  him.

While  he  read  the  introduction,  wave  after  wave  of
blood  surged  up  in  his  face,  —  it  was  rage.


INTRODUCTION  3

It  was  true  enough  tliat  he  had  drunk,  but  who

had  a  right  to  bl.m.  r  that/     Mad  they  seen

•  icaragc  where  h  live?     i  as  grew

k   and   gloomy  close    up   t<»   his  windows.    The

dampness  dripped  fn>m  I'M    black  roofs  and  ran  down

.My  walls.     Was  not  brandy  needed  to  keep

;  snow  stream^)

HI  throt!  broken  panes,  when  the   n

earth  would  n.»t  give  bread  enough  to  keep  hunger
away?

He  thought    that   he  was  just  such  a  minister  as

deserve  :ik.     Why  should  he

-'•   control   himself?    The  man   who  had  buried

his   wife  got  drunk  at  the  funeral  feast;    the  father

had  hapti/ed  his  child  had  a  carouse  aft
The  congregation  drank  on  the  way  back  from  church,
so  that  most  of  them  were  drunk  when  they  reached
home.  A  drunken  priest  was  good  enough  for  them.
It  was  on  his  pastoral  visits,  when  he  drove  in  his
thin  cloak  over  miles  of  frozen  seas,  where  all  the  icy
is  met,  it  was  when  his  boat  was  tossed  about  on
these  same  seas  in  storm  and  pouring  rain,  it  was
when  he  must  climb  out  of  his  sledge  in  blinding
snow  to  clear  the  way  for  his  horse  through  drifts
high  as  houses,  or  when  he  waded  through  the  forest
swamps,  —  it  was  then  that  he  learned  to  love  brandy.
The  year  had  dragged  itself  out  in  heavy  gloom.
Peasant  and  master  had  passed  their  days  with  t
thoughts  on  the  soil,  but  at  evening  their  spirits  cast
off  their  yokes,  freed  by  brandy.  Inspiration  came,
the  heart  grew  warm,  life  became  glowing,  the  song
rang  out,  roses  shed  their  perfume.  The  public-house
bar-room  seemed  to  him  a  tropical  garden:  grapes
and  olives  hung  down  over  his  head,  marble  statues


4  INTRODUCTION

shone  among  dark  leaves,  songsters  and  poets  wan-
dered under  the  palms  and  plane

No,  he,  the  priest,  up    there  in   the    pulpit,  knew
th.it  without  brandy  life  could  not  be  borm  in  tin
of  the  world;  all  his  congregation  knew  that,  and  yet
they  wished  to  judge  him.

They  wished  to  tear  his  vestments  from  him.
cause  he  had  come  drunken  into  God's  house.     Oh,
all  these  people,  had  they  believed,  did  they   want
to    believe,    that    they    had    any    other    God    than
brandy?

He  had  finished  the  exordium,  and  he  kneeled  to
say  the  Lord's  Prayer.

There  was  a  breathless  silence  in  the  church  during
the  prayer.  But  suddenly  the  minister  with  both
hands  caught  hold  of  the  ribbons  which  held  his  sur-
plice. It  seemed  to  him  as  if  the  whole  congregation,
with  the  bishop  at  the  head,  were  stealing  up  the  pul-
pit steps  to  take  his  bands  from  him.  He  was  kneel-
ing and  his  head  was  turned  away,  but  he  could  feel
how  they  were  dragging,  and  he  saw  them  so  plainly,
the  bishop  and  the  deans,  the  clergymen,  the  church-
wardens, the  sexton,  and  the  whole  assemblage  in  a
long  line,  tearing  and  straining  to  get  his  surplice  off.
And  he  could  picture  to  himself  how  all  these  people
who  were  dragging  so  eagerly  would  fall  over  one
another  down  the  steps  when  the  bands  gave  way,
and  the  whole  row  of  them  below,  who  had  not  got
up  as  far  as  his  cape,  but  only  to  the  skirts  of  his  coat,
would  also  fall.

He  saw  it  all  so  plainly  that  he  had  to  smile  as  h<
knelt,  but  at  the  same  time  a  cold  sweat  broke  out  on
his  forehead.     The  whole  thing  was  too  horrible.

That  he  should  now  become  a  dishonored  man  for


INTRODUCTION  $

the  sake  of  brandy.    A  clergyman,  dismissed !    Was
e  anything  on  God's  earth  m«.ie  wretched?

He  should

edge  of  a  ditch,  go  dressed  in  rags,
with  vagrants  for  companions.

11.  ;  was  ended.    He  should  read  his  sent:

llu  n  .t  thoti  1  checked  th«  words

i»n  lu>»  lip        IK  last  tun.

in  the  pulpit  and  proclaim  the  ylory  of

God

i  the  last  time  —  that  took  hold  of  him.     i  I
got  the  brandy  and  the  bishop.     He  thought  that  he
hancc,  and   testify    tu    the    glory  of

He  thought  that  the  floor  of  the  church  with  all

hearers  sank  deep,  deep  down,  and  the  roof  was

I  off,  so  that  he  saw  far  into  tin-  sky.     He  stood

alone,  quite  alone  in  his  pulpit;   his  spirit  took  its

t  to  the  heavens  opened  above  him ;  his  voice  be-

c   strong  and  powerful,  and  he  proclaimed  the

glory  of  God.

lie   was   inspired.     He  left  what  he  had  writ!
thoughts  came  to  him  like  a  flock  of  tame  doves.    He
felt,  as  if  it  were  not  he  who  spoke,  but  he  felt  too
that   it   *M  the  best  earth  had  to  give,  ami  that  no
one  could  reach  a  greater   height  of  brillia:
splendor  than  he  who  stood   there  and  proclaimed
the  glory  of  God.

l*>ng  as  the  flame  of  inspiration  burned  in  him
he  continued  to  speak,  but  when  it  died  out,  and  the
roof  sank  down  over  the  church,  and  the  floor  came
up  again  from  far,  far  below,  he  bowed  his  head  and
wept,  for  he  thought  that  the  best  of  life,  for  him,
now  over.


6  INTRODUCTION

After  the  service  came  the  inspection  and  the  ves-
try nun  ;  1  iu  bishop  asked  if  the  .ition
had  any  complaints  to  make  against  tin. -ir  clergyman.

The  minister  was  no  1  and  defiant  as

before  the  sermon.     Now  he  was  ashamed  and  hun^
his  head.     Oh,  all  the  miserable  brandy  ston
\\ere  coming  now!

Hut  none  came.  There  was  a  deep  silence  about
the  long  table  in  the  parish-hall.

The  minister  looked  first  at  the  sexton,  — no,  he  was
silent;  then  at  the  churchwardens,  then  at  the  power-
ful peasants  and  mine-owners;  they  were  all  silent.
They  sat  with  their  lips  pressed  close  together  and
looked  embarrassed  down  on  the  table.

"They  arc  waiting  for  somebody  to  begin,"  thought
the  minister.

One  of  the  churchwardens  cleared  his  throat.

"  I  think  we  've  got  a  fine  minister,"  he  said.

"Your  Reverence  has  heard  how  he  preaches,"  in-
terrupted the  sexton.

The  bishop  spoke  of  repeated  absences.

"The  minister  has  the  right  to  be  ill,  as  well  as
another,"  was  the  peasants'  opinion.

The  bishop  hinted  at  their  dissatisfaction  with  the
minister's  mode  of  life.

They  defended  him  with  one  voice.  He  was  so
young,  their  minister;  there  was  nothing  wrong
with  him.  No ;  if  he  would  only  always  preach  as  he
had  done  to-day  they  would  not  exchange  him  for
the  bishop  himself.

There  were  no  accusers ;  there  could  be  no  judge.

The  minister  felt  how  his  heart  swelled  and  how
swiftly  the  blood  flew  through  his  veins.  Could  it
be  that  he  was  no  longer  among  enemies;  that  he


I\TRODUCTION  7

had  won  them  ov<  t  \\lic  \\   h<    had  least  thought  •  i  it ,
that  .Id  still  be  th  ^t?

After  the  inspection  the  bishop  and  the  clerg)  •

iborhood  and  the  deans  ami  t!
men  of  t  l

of  »  hbors  had  taken  charge   of  the

ilmmr;   lor  the  •  was  not  MM  ^hc  had

arranged  it  all  so  \\.-ll  that  it  made  him  open  his  eyes,
for  the  vicarage  was  not  so  dreadful.  The  long
ilium.;  table  was  spread  out  under  the  pines  and
shone  with  its  white  cloth,  with  its  blue  and  white
i,  its  glittering  glass  and  folded  napkins.  Two
birches  bent  over  the  door,  the  floor  of  the  entry  was
strewn  \\ith  rushes,  a  wreath  of  flowers  hung  from
the  :  here  were  flowers  in  all  the  rooms;  the

mouldy  smell  was  gone,  and  the  green  window-panes
shone  bravely  in  the  sunshin

Hi  u.i-  ;.;l.ul  t«»  the  bottom  of  his  heart,  the  min-
;   he  thought  that  he  would  never  drink  again.

There  was  not  one  who  was  not  glad  at  that  dinner-
table.  Those  who  had  been  generous  and  had  for-
given were  glad,  and  the  priests  in  authority  were
glad  because  they  had  escaped  a  scandal.

The  good  bishop  raised  his  glass  and  said  that  he
h.ul  started  on  this  journey  with  a  heavy  heart
he  had  heard  many  evil  rumors.  He  had  gone  forth
leet  Saul,  but  lo,  Saul  was  already  changed  to  a
Paul,  who  should  accomplish  more  than  any  of  them.
And  the  worthy  man  spoke  of  the  rich  gifts  which
their  young  brother  possessed,  and  praised  them.
Not  th.it  li«-  should  be  proud,  but  that  he  should
strain  every  nerve  and  keep  a  close  watch  over  him-
self, as  he  must  do  who  bears  an  exceedingly  heavy
and  costly  burden  on  his  shoulders.


8  INTRODUCTION

The  minister  was  not  drunk  at  that  dinner,  but  he
was  intoxicated.     All  this  great  unlooked-for  happi-
ness went  to  his  head.     Heaven  had  let  tin-  ll.m
inspiration  burn  in  him,  and  these  people  had  given
him  their  love.     His  blood  was  at  fever  heat,  and  at
raging  speed  rushed  through  his  veins  still  when  the
evening  came  and  his  guests  departed.     I  ar  im»»  th<
night  he  sat  awake  in  his  room,  and  let  the  night  air

iin  in  through  the  open  window  to  cool  this  t
of  happiness,  this  pleasant  restlessness  which  would
not  let  him  sleep.

He  heard  a  voice.

"  Are  you  awake  ?  "

A  man  came  over  the  lawn  up  to  the  window.  The
minister  looked  out  and  recognized  Captain  Christian
h,  one  of  his  trusty  boon-companions.  He  was
a  wayfarer  without  house  or  land,  this  Captain  Bcrgh,
and  a  giant  in  stature  and  strength ;  big  was  he  as
Goliath,  malicious  and  stupid  as  a  mountain  goblin.

44  Of  course  I  am  up,  Captain  Christian,"  answered
the  minister.  "  Do  you  think  I  could  sleep  to-night?  "

And  hear  now  what  this  Captain  Bergh  says  to
him !  The  giant  had  guessed,  he  had  understood,
that  the  minister  would  now  be  afraid  to  drink.  I  It-
would  never  have  any  peace,  thought  Captain  Chris-
tian ;  for  those  priests  from  Karlstad,  who  had  been
here  once,  could  come  again  and  take  his  surplice
from  him  if  he  drank.

But  now  Captain  Christian  had  put  his  heavy  hand
to  the  good  work ;  now  he  had  arranged  that  those
priests  never  should  come  again,  neither  they  nor
the  bishop.  Henceforth  the  minister  and  his  friends
could  drink  as  much  as  they  liked  at  the  vicarage.

Hear   what   a   deed   he   had   done,    he,    Christian


iNTROIWCTION  9

Bcrgh,  the  mighty  C.ipt.un.     \\h-n  th.    bt>hop  and

tii«   i..,.,  deans  had  climb  cd  carriage.

•.!>'•  doors  had  been  shut  ti^ht  on  \\.  \\  he

had  •  the  box  and  driven  them  ten  miles

Or  S«  .:^ht  sun  ;ht.

nd  thm  li.nl  Chi  :cnd

ii  how  loose  life  sits  in   the    human  body.

lit  h.ui  let  the  horses  run  at  the  maddest  pace.    That

was  because  they  would  not  let  an  honorable  man  get

drunk  in  peace.

Do  you  suppose  he  followed  the  road  with  them ;
do  you  believe  he  saved  them  from  jolts  ?  He  drove
over  ditches  and  ploughed  fields ;  he  drove  in  a  dizzy
gallop  down  the  hills  ;  he  drove  along  the  water's  edge,
till  the  u.ivi-s  covered  th  .  he  alim.st  stuck  in

a  bog;  he  drove  down  over  bare  rocks,  where  the
horses  slid  with  Id  stiff.

And  all   the  ti  bishop  and  the  priests  sat

with  blanched  faces  behind  :  her  curtains  and

murmured  prayers.     It  was  the  worst  journey  they

idc.

And  think  how  they  must  have  looked  when  they
1C  to  Rissatcr's  inn,  living,  but  shaken  like  shot  in
a  leather  pouch.

"What  docs  this  mean,  Captain  Christian?"  says
the  bishop,  as  he  opens  the  door  for  them.

"  It  means  that  you  shall  think  twice,  bishop,  before

you  make  a  new  journey  of  inspection  to  Gosta  Bcr-

'  says  Captain  Christian;  and  he  had  thought

sentence  well  out  beforehand,  so  as  not  to  get  it

wron

Tell  Gosta  Boding,"  says  the  bishop,  "  that  to
him  neither  I  nor  any  other  bishop  will  ever  come


10  INTRODUCTION

This  exploit  tin    mighty  Captain  Christ!, n:
and  relates  at  the  open  window  in  the  summer  \\
I-'<>r  Captain  Christian  has  onlyju-t  KTt  tin-  Imr.s,
the  inn,  and  has  come  directly  to  the  minister  with
his  news.

"  Now  you  can  be  at  rest,  comrade,"  he  says.

Ah,  Captain  Christian,  tin-  clergymen  sat  with  pale
faces  behind  the  leather  curtains,  but  tin  priest  at
the  window  looks  in  tin  bright  summer  ni^ht  far,  far
paler.  Ah,  Captain  Christian  !

The  minister  raised  his  arm  and  measured  a  terrible
blow  at  the  giant's  coarse,  stupid  face,  but  checked
himself.  He  shut  the  window  with  a  bang,  and  stood
in  the  middle  of  the  room,  shaking  his  clenched  fist
on  high.

He  in  whom  the  fire  of  inspiration  had  flamed,  he
who  had  been  able  to  proclaim  the  glory  of  God,
stood  there  and  thought  that  God  had  made  a  fool
of  him.

Would  not  the  bishop  believe  that  Captain  Chris-
tian had  been  sent  by  the  minister?  Would  he  not
believe  that  he  had  dissembled  and  lied  the  whole
day?  Now  he  would  investigate  everything  about
him  in  earnest;  now  he  would  suspend  him  and
dismiss  him.

When  the  dawn  broke  the  minister  was  far  from
his  home.  He  did  not  care  to  stay  and  defend  him-
self. God  had  mocked  at  him.  God  would  not  help
him.  He  knew  that  he  would  be  dismissed.  God
would  have  it.  He  might  as  well  go  at  once.

All  this  happened  in  the  beginning  of  the  twenties
in  a  far-a-way  parish  in  Western  Varmland.

It  was  the  first  misfortune  which  befell  Gosta  Ber-
ling;  it  was  not  the  last.


INTRODUCTION  \  i

For  colts  who  cannot  bear  spur  or  whips  find  life
hard.  For  every  pain  which  comes  to  them  they
bolt  down  uil-i  u.ivs  to  yawning  chasms.  As  soon
as  the  road  is  stony  and  the  way  haul  they  know  no
other  remedy  than  to  cast  off  their  load  and  rush
away  in  frenzy.


12  INTRODUCTION


II
THE   BEGGAR

ONE  cold  December  day  a  beggar  came  wandering
up  the  slopes  of  Broby.  He  was  dressed  in  tin-
most  miserable  rags,  and  his  shoes  were  so  worn  that
the  cold  snow  wet  his  feet.

Lofven  is  a  long,  narrow  lake  in  Varmland,  inter-
sected in  several  places  by  long  narrow  sounds.  In  the
north  it  stretches  up  to  the  Finn  forests,  in  the  south
down  to  the  lake  Vancr.  There  are  many  pari
along  its  shores,  but  the  parish  of  Bro  is  the  largest
and  richest.  It  takes  up  a  large  part  of  the  lake's
shores  both  on  the  east  and  west  sides,  but  on  the
west  side  are  the  largest  estates,  such  as  Ekcby  and
Bjorne,  known  far  and  wide  for  wealth  and  beauty,
and  Broby,  with  its  large  village  and  inn,  court-
house, sheriff-quarters,  vicarage,  and  market-place.

Broby  lies  on  a  steep  slope.  The  beggar  had
come  past  the  inn,  which  lies  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,
and  was  struggling  up  towards  the  parsonage,  which
lies  at  the  top.

A  little  girl  went  in  front  of  him  up  the  hill ;  she
dragged  a  sledge  laden  with  a  bag  of  meal.  The
beggar  caught  up  with  the  child  and  began  to  talk
to  her.

"A  little  horse  for  such  a  heavy  load,"  he  said.

The  child  turned  and  looked  at  him.     She  was  a


INTRODUCTION  1 3

little   creature  about  twelve   years  old,  with  sharp,
suspicious  eyes,  and  lips  pressed  togeth

Would  to  God  the  horse  was  smaller  and  the
load   larger;    it   might   last   longer/'  answered    the

I     it   then    your  own   food    you   are  dragging
horn-

By  God's  grace  it  ^ .  1  have  to  get  my  own  food,
although  I  am  so  little."
The  beggar  seized  the  sled  rope  to  drag  it  up.
The  girl  turned  and  looked  at  him

You   needn't   think  that  you  will  get  anything
for  this,"  she  s.»
The  beggar  laughed.

t  be  the  daughter  of  the  Broby  clergy-
man."

n  indeed.  Many  have  poorer  fathers,
but  none  have  worse.  That 's  the  Lord's  truth,  al-
though it 's  a  shame  that  his  own  child  should  have
to  sa\

"  1  hear  he  is  mean  and  ill-natured,  your  father."
"  Mean  he  is,  and  ill-natured  he  is,  but  they  say
his  daughter  will  be  worse  if  she  lives  so  long ;  that 's

people

11  1  >cople  are  right.     What  I  would  like  to

know  is,  where  you  found  this  meal-bag."

"  It  makes  no  difference  if  I  tell  you.  I  took  tin-
grain  out  of  father's  store-house  this  morning,  and
now  I  have  been  to  the  mill."

*'  May  he  not  see  you  \\lu-n  you  come  dragging  it

ou?"

You  h.ive  left  school  too  early.     Father  is  away
on  his  p.i:  '    .  c.in't  you  see?"

"Somebody  is  driving   up   the  hill   behind  u


14  INTRODUCTION

hear  the  creaking  of  the  runners.     Think  if  it  were
he  who  is  coming!  "

The  girl  listened  and  peered  down,  then  she  hurst
into  tears.

"  It  is  father,"  she  sobbed.  "  I  !.•  will  kill  me  !  He
will  kill  me

Yes,    good  advice  is  now  precious,  .md    prompt
advice  better  than  silver  and  gold,"  said  the  beggar.

"  Look  here,"  said  the  child,  "you  can  help  me.
Take  the  rope  and  drag  the  sledge;  then  father  will
believe  it  is  yours."

'  What  shall  I  do  with  it  afterwards?"  asked  the
beggar,  and  put  the  rope  round  his  shoulders.

11  Take  it  where  you  like  for  the  moment,  but
come  up  to  the  parsonage  with  it  when  it  is  dark.
I  shall  be  looking  out  for  you.  You  are  to  come
with  the  bag  and  the  sledge,  you  understand."

"  I  shall  try."

11  God  help  you  if  you  don't  come ! "  called  the
girl,  while  she  ran,  hurrying  to  get  home  before  her
father.

The  beggar  turned  the  sledge  with  a  heavy  heart
and  dragged  it  down  to  the  inn.

The  poor  fellow  had  had  his  dream,  as  he  went  in
the  snow  with  half-naked  feet.  He  had  thought  of
the  great  woods  north  of  lake  Lofven,  of  the  great
Finn  forests.

Here  in  the  parish  of  Bro,  where  he  was  now
wandering  along  the  sound  which  connects  the  upper
and  lower  Lofven, —  in  this  rich  and  smiling  country,
where  one  estate  joins  another,  factory  lies  near
tory,  —  here  all  the  roads  seemed  to  him  too  heavy,
rooms  too  small,  the  beds  too  hard.  Here  he
longed  for  the  peace  of  the  great,  eternal  forests.


INTRODUCTION  1$

!I<  r-  he  heard  ill  the  bams

as  tli  bed  out  the  grain.     Loads  of  timber  and

is  kept  coming  ti

iblc  forests.     Endless  loads  of  metal   followed   the

deep  ruts  which  the  hundreds  gone  before  had  cut.

e  he  saw  sleighs  filled  with  traveller*  speed  I

c  to  house,  and  it  seemed  to  him  as  if  pleasure

held   th'  'M<1  beauty  and  love  stood  on   the

runners.     Oh.  h<>\v   he  longed  for  the  peace  of  the

There  the  trees  rise  straight  and    pillarlikc  from

•vcn  ground,  there  the  snow  y  layers

on  the  11:  is  powerless

and  only  plays  softly  in  the  topmost  leaves,  there  he

I  wander  deeper  and  still  farther  in,  until  at  last

his  strength  would  fail  him,  and  he  would  drop  under

the  great  trees,  dying  of  hunger  and  cold.

He  longed  for  the  great  murmuring  grave  above

the   LSfven.   where   he  would  be  overcome  by  the

powers  of  annihilation,  where  at  last  hunger,  cold,

ue.  and  brandy  should  succeed  in  destroying  his

poor  body,  which  had  endured  everything.

He  came  down  to  the  inn  to  au.iit  the  evening.

into  the  bar-room  and  threw  himself  down

on  a  bench  by  the  door,  dreaming  of  the  eternal

The  innkeeper's  wife  felt  sorry  for  him  and  gave
him  a  glass  of  brandy.     She  even  gave  him  another,

her  so  eagerly.

Hut  more  she  would  not  jjive  him.  and  the  beggar
was  in  despair.     He  m-.:  more  of  the  strong,

sweet  brandy.     He  must  once  again  feel    his   heart
dance  in  his  body  and  his  thoughts  flame  up  in  in
:i.     Oh,  that  sweet  spirit  <»f  the  corn !


1 6  INTRODUCTION

The  summer  sun,  the  song  of  the  birds,  perfume
and  beauty  floated  in  its  \\lute  wave.     Once   more,
before  he  disappears  into  the  ni^ht  and  the  dark:
let  him  drink  sun-lime  and   happin«

So  he  bartered  first  the  meal,  then  the  meal-s
and  last  the  sledge,  for  brandy.     On  it  he  got  thor-
oughly drunk,  and  slept  the  greater  part  of  the  after-
noon on  a  bench  in  the  bar-room.

When  he  awoke  he  understood  that  there  was  left
for  him  only  one  thing  to  do.  Since  his  miserable
body  had  taken  possession  of  his  soul,  since  he  had
been  capable  of  drinking  up  what  a  child  had  con-
fided to  him,  since  he  was  a  disgrace  to  the  earth,  he
must  free  it  of  the  burden  of  such  wretchedness.  He
must  give  his  soul  its  liberty,  let  it  go  to  its  God.

He  lay  on  the  bench  in  the  bar-room  and  passed
sentence  on  himself:  "  Gosta  Bcrling,  dismissed  pi
accused  of  having  drunk  up   the  food  of  a  hungry
child,  is  condemned  to  death.     What  death?     D
in  the  snow-drifts."

He  seized  his  cap  and  reeled  out.     He  was  neither
quite  awake  nor  quite  sober.     He  wept  in   pity  for
himself,  for  his  poor,  soiled  soul,  which  he  mus:
free.

He  did  not  go  far,  and  did  not  turn  from  the  mad.
At  the  very  roadside  lay  a  deep  drift,  and  there  he-
threw  himself  down  to  die.  He  closed  his  eyes  and
tried  to  sleep.

No  one  knows  how  long  he  lay  there ;  but  there
was  still  life  in  him  when  the  daughter  of  the  minister
of  Broby  came  running  along  the  road  with  a  lantern
in  her  hand,  and  found  him  in  the  drift  by  the  road-
side. She  had  stood  for  hours  and  waited  P>r  him;
now  she  had  run  down  Broby  hill  to  look  for  him.


INTRODUCTION  17

She  recognized  him  instantly,  and  she  began  to
shake  him  and  to  scream  with  all  her  might  to  get
him  awake.

She  mu  .t  know  what  he  had  done  with  her  mcaJ-


>hc  must  call  him  back  to  life,  at  least  for  so  long  a

time  that  he  could  tell  her  what  had  become  of  her

;e  and   :  bt  ;       i  >uld  kill  her

id  lost  his  sledge.     She  bit  the  beggar's  fin-

::<  i  and  scratched  his  (ace,  and  at  the  same  time  she

screamed  ma

n  some  one  came  driving  along  the  road.
\\  h*.  the  devil  is  scr<  so?"  asked  a  harsh

voice.

1  I  want  to  know  what  this  fellow  has  done  with  my
v  sledge,"  sobbed  the  child,  and  beat
clenched  fists  on  the  beggar's  breast.
\re  you  clawing  a  frozen  man?     Away  with  you,
wild-cat

.vellcr  was  a  large  and  coarse  woman.     She
got  out  of  the  sl<  i  came  over  to  the  drift.    She

took  the  child  by  the  back  of  the  neck  and  threw  her
on  one  side.  Then  she  leaned  over,  thrust  her  arms
under  the  beggar's  body,  and  lifted  him  up.  Then
she  carried  him  to  the  si  '  laid  him  in  it.

"  Come  with  me  to  the  inn,  wild-cat."  she  called  to
the  child.  "  that  we  may  hear  what  you  know  of  all
•

An  hour  later  the  beggar  sat  on  a  chair  by  the
door  in  the  best  room  of  the  inn.  and  in  front  of  him
stood  the  powerful  woman  who  had  rescued  him
the  drift.

Just   as  Gbsta  Berling  now  saw  her.  on   her  way


1 8  INTRODUCTION

home  from  the  charcoal  kilns,  with  sooty  hands,  an,!
a  clay-pipe  in  her  mouth,  dressed  in  a  shm-t.  unlimd
pskin  jacket  and  striped  homespun  skirt,  with
tarred  shoes  on  her  feet  and  a  sheath-knife  in  her
bosom,  as  he  saw  her  with  j^ray  hair  combed  back
from  an  old,  beautiful  face,  so  had  he  heard  her  de-
scribed a  thousand  times,  and  he  knew  that  he  had
come  across  the  far-fanu-d  major's  wife  of  Kkcby.

She  was  the  most  influential  woman  in  all  Viirm-
land,  mistress  of  seven  iron-works,  accustomed  t«>
command  and  to  be  obeyed  ;  and  lie  was  only  a  poor,
condemned  man,  stripped  of  everything,  knowing  that
every  road  was  too  heavy  for  him,  every  room  too
crowded.  His  body  shook  with  terror,  while  her
glance  rested  on  him.

She  stood  silent  and  looked  at  the  human  wretch-
edness before  her,  the  red,  swollen  hands,  the  ema-
ciated form,  and  the  splendid  head,  which  even  in  its
ruin  and  neglect  shone  in  wild  beauty.

"  You  are  Gosta  Berling,  the  mad  priest?  "  she  said,
peering  at  him.

The  beggar  sat  motionless.

"  I  am  the  mistress  of  Ekcby."

A  shudder   passed   over  the  beggar's  body.     1  It-
clasped  his  hands  and  raised  his  eyes  with  a  longing
glance.     What  would  she  do  with  him?     Would
force  him  to  live?     He   shook   before  her
And  yet  he  had  so  nearly  reached  the  peace  of  t he-
eternal  forests.

She  began  the  struggle  by  telling  him  the  minis!
daughter  had  got  her  sledge  and  her  meal-sack  a^ain,
and  that  she,  the  major's  wife,  had  a  shelter  for  him
as  for  so  many  other  ,s  wretches  in  the  bach-

elor's wing  at  Ekeby.


INTRODUCTION  19

She  offered  him  .1  life  of  idleness  and  pleasure,  but
answered  he  m-..

1  hen  she  struck  the  table  with  her  clenched  fist
and  let  him  hr.u  what  she  thought  of  him.

HJ  you  want  to  die,  that 's  what  you  want.    That
would  not  si; :  Look,  such

a  wasted  body  and  such  powerless  limbs  and  such
dull  eyes,  and  you  think  that  there  i^  -<>nu  thing  left
of  you  to  die.  Do  you  think  that  \--.i  have  to  lie
stiff  and  stark  with  a  coffin-lid  n..
to  be  dead?  Don't  you  believe  that  I  stand  here  and
sec  how  dead  you  ^ta  Berl.

*   1   -  e  that  \<>u  have  a  skull  for  a  head,  and  it  seems
to  me   as  if  the   worms   were   cfecping  out  of  tin-
sockets  of  your  eyes.      Do  you  not  feel  that
mouth  is  full  of  dust?     Do  you  not  hear  how  \
bones  rattle  when  you  move?

Vou  have  dr<  -urself  in  brandy,  Gosta  Bcr-

1  you  arc  dead.

1  bat    which    now   moves   in   you    is   only  death
spas:  you  will  not  allow  them  to  live,  if  you  call

that  life.     It  is  ju^t  as  if  you  grudged  the  dead  a  dance

the  graves  in  the  star-light.

44  Arc  you  ashamed  that  you  were  dismissed,  since
you  lie  nou  .  ,,uld  have  been  more  to

your  honor  had  you  made  use  of  your  gifts  and  been
•me  use  on  God's  green  earth,  I  tell  you.  Why
did  you  not  come  directly  to  me?  I  should  1
arranged  everything  for  you.  Yes,  now  you  ex-
pect much  glory  from  being  wrapped  in  a  winding-
sheet  and  laid  on  saw-dtM  ami  called  :tiful
corpse."

The   beggar   sat  calm,  almost   smiling,  while   she
thundered  out  her  angry  words.     Tlu  'danger,


20  INTRODUCTION

he  rejoiced,  no  d  rnal  forests  wait,  and

she  has  no  power  to  turn  thy  soul  from  tin  in

Hut  the  major's  wife  was  .silent  and  walked  a  couple
of  times  up  and  down  the  room;  then  she  took  a
before  the  fire,  put  her  feet  on  the  fender,  and  K
her  elbows  on  her  kn

"Thousand  devils!"  she  said,  and  laughed  softly  to

If.      "  It  is  truer,  what  I  am  saying,  than  I  in
thought.     Don't  you  believe,  Gust  a  Herling.  that
of  the  people  in  this    world  are  dead  or  half-dead?
Do  you  think  that  I  am  alive?     No !     No,  indeed  !

"  Yes,  look  at  me  !  I  am  the  mistress  of  Ekcby,  and
I  am  the  most  powerful  in  Viirmland.  If  I  wave  one
finger  the  governor  comes,  if  I  wave  with  two  the
bishop  comes,  and  if  I  wave  with  three  all  the  chapter
and  the  aldermen  and  mine-owners  in  Viirmland  dance
to  my  music  in  Karlstad's  market-place.  A  thousand
devils !  Boy,  I  tell  you  that  I  am  only  a  dressed-up
corpse.  God  knows  how  little  life  there  is  in  me.'1

The  beggar  leaned  forward  on  his  chair  and  listened
with  strained  attention.  The  old  woman  sat  and
rocked  before  the  fire.  She  did  not  look  at  him  while
she  talked.

"Don't  you  know,"  she  continued,  ''that  if  I  were
a  living  being,  and  saw  you  sitting  there,  wretched  and
deplorable  with  suicidal  thoughts,  don't  you  believe
that  I  should  take  them  out  of  you  in  a  second?  I
should  have  tears  for  you  and  prayers,  which  would
turn  you  upside  down,  and  I  should  save  your  soul ;
but  now  I  am  dead.

"  Have  you  heard  that  I  once  was  the  beautiful
Margareta  Celsing?  That  was  not  yesterday,  but  I
can  still  sit  and  weep  my  old  eyes  red  for  her.  Why
shall  Margareta  Celsing  be  dead,  and  Margareta


INTRODUCTION

Samzclii:  Why    hall  the  major's  wife  at  Kkcby

}       Ull  me  that,  lio-,1.1  Itcrling.
Do  you  know  what  Margarcta  CcUing  won  like?
She  was  ate  and  modest  and  inno-

i    Herling.      She    was  one    over   whose    grave

"S  .  nothing  of  evil,  no  one  had  ever  given

.  she  was  good  to  all.     And  she  was  beautiful,

ml.

'    1  lu  re  was  a  nun.  his  name  was  Altringcr.     God
N  h«»u  he  happened  to  be  travelling  up  there  in
il  wildernesses,  where  her  parents  had  their  iron-
.s.     Margarcta  Cclsing  saw  him  .   lie  was  a  hand-
son  :«»ved  him.

But  he  was  poor,  and  they  agreed  to  wait  for  one
another  five  years,  as  it  is  in  the  legend.  When  three
years  had  passed  another  suitor  came.  He  was  ugly
and  bad,  but  her  parents  believed  that  he  was  rich,
and  they  forced  Margarcta  Celsing,  by  fair  means  and
foul,  by  blows  and  hard  words,  to  take  him  for  her  hus-
1.  And  that  day,  you  see,  Margarcta  Celsing  died.
"  After  that  there  was  no  Margarcta  Cclsing,  only
Major  Samzclius's  wife,  and  she  was  not  good  nor
modest ;  she  believed  in  much  evil  and  never  thought
of  the  good.

You  know  well  enough  what  happened  afterwards.
We  1  :>y  the  Lake  Lofven,  the  major  and  I

But  he  was  not  rich,  as  people  had  said.     I  often  had
1  days.

Then  Altringcr  came  again,  and  now  he  was  rich.
He  became  master  of  Ekeby,  which  lies  next  to

udc  himself  master  of  six  other  estates  by  Lake
Lofven.  He  was  able,  thrifty;  he  was  a  man  of
mark.


INTRODUCTION

"  He  helped  us  in  our  poverty;  we  drove   in  hi
carriages;   he  sent  food  to  our  kitchen,  wine  to  our
cellar.     He  filled   my  life  with   feasting  and  \
The  major  went  off  to  the  wars,  but  what  did  we  care
for  that?     One  day  I  was  a  guest  at  Ekcby,  tin   next
he  came  to  Sjo.     Oh,  it  was  like   a  long  dance  of
delight  on  Lofvcn's  shoi  <

"But  there  was  evil  talk  of  Altringer  and  me.  If
Margarcta  Celsing  had  been  living,  it  would  have
given  her  much  pain,  but  it  made  no  difference  to  me.
But  as  yet  I  did  not  understand  that  it  was  because  I
was  dead  that  I  had  no  feeling.

"  At  last  the  tales  of  us  reached  my  father  and
mother,  as  they  went  among  the  charcoal  kilns  up  in
Alfdal's  forest.  My  mother  did  not  stop  to  think ;
she  travelled  hither  to  talk  to  me.

"  One  day,  when  the  major  was  away  and  I  sat  dining
with  Altringer  and  several  others,  she  arrived.  I  saw
her  come  into  the  room,  but  I  could  not  feel  that  she-
was  my  mother,  Gosta  Berling.  I  greeted  her  as  a
stranger,  and  invited  her  to  sit  down  at  my  table  and
take  part  in  the  meal.

"  She  wished  to  talk  with  me,  as  if  I  had  been  her
daughter,  but  I  said  to  her  that  she  was  mistaken,
that  my  parents  were  dead,  they  had  both  died  on  my
wedding  day.

"  Then  she  agreed  to  the  comedy.  She  was  sixty
years  old  ;  a  hundred  and  twenty  miles  had  she  driven
in  three  days.  Now  she  sat  without  ceremony  at  the
dinner-table  and  ate  her  food ;  she  was  a  strong  and
capable  woman.

"  She  said  that  it  was  very  sad  that  I  had  had  such  a
loss  just  on  that  day.

"  '  The  saddest  thing  was,'  I  said,  '  that  my  parents


/  \TRODUCTION  23


not  die  a  day  soon<  .-.  •  -'.i.n^  would

.  »u->  l.idv  pleased  with  her  mar-
riage?' she  t

Oh,  yes,'  said  1,  '  I  am  pleased.     I  shall  always
be  pleased  to  obey  my  «  :

it  had  been  my

should  heap  shame  upon  myself  and  tin  m  and  deceive
1  diil  my  parents  little  honor  by  mak-
k  byword  in  <  n«>uth.

bed,'  i

answered  her.     And   morever  1  \\Uhed  her  t»»  in.
stand,  th.it  1  did  net  intend  to  allow  any  one  tocalum-

my  parents'  dau^lr

\\     .it  ,  we  two.  ii  about  us  sat  silent  and

could  not  lift  knife  nor  fork.

<1  a  day  to  re  -st.  tin  -n  she  went     But  all
ivv  her,  I  could  not  understand  that
was  my  mother.     I  only  knew  that  my  mother  was

"  When  she  was  ready  to  leave,  Gosta  Berling,  and  I
stood  beside  her  on  the  steps,  and  i  iagc  was

before  the  door,  she  said  to  i

four  hours  h.u  c  I  been  here,  without  your
greeting  me  as  your  mother.  By  lonely  roads  I  came
twenty  \\\\V^  in  tli  rre  days.  And
for  shame  for  you  my  body  is  trembling,  as  if  it  had
been  beaten  with  rods.  May  you  be  disowned,  as  I
have  bee  :  repudiated  as  I  have  been  repu-

diated)    May  the  highway  be  your  home,  the
stack  your  bed,  the  charcoal-kiln  your  stove!     May
shame  and  dishonor  be  your  reward  ,  may  others  strike
you,  as  I  strike  you  !  '

u  And  she  gave  -avy  blow  on  the  ch<


24  INTRODUCTION

"  But  I  lifted  her  up,  carried  her  down  the  steps,  and
put  her  in  her  cani.i

Who  arc  you,  that  you  curse  m<  ?  I  ilked  ;  '  who
arc  you  that  you  strike  me?  That  I  will  suffer  from
no  one.'

"  And  I  gave  her  the  blow  again.

"The  carriage  drove  away,  but  then,  at  that  moment,
Gosta  Bcrling,  I  knew  that  Margarcta  Cclsing  was

"  She  was  good  and  innocent;  she  knew  no  evil.
Angels  had  wept  at  her  grave.  If  she  had  lived,  she
would  not  have  struck  her  mother."

The  beggar  by  the  door  had  listened,  and  the  words
for  a  moment  had  drowned  the  sound  of  the  ct<
forests'  alluring  murmur.  For  see,  this  great  lady,
she  made  herself  his  equal  in  sin,  his  sister  in  perdi-
tion, to  give  him  courage  to  live.  For  he  should  learn
that  sorrow  and  wrong-doing  weighed  down  other
heads  than  his.  He  rose  and  went  over  to  the  major's
wife.

"  Will  you  live  now?  Gosta  Berling?  "  she  asked  with
a  voice  which  broke  with  tears.  "  Why  should  you
die?  You  could  have  been  such  a  good  priest,  but
it  was  never  Gosta  Berling  whom  you  drowned  in
brandy,  he  as  gleamingly  innocent-white  as  that  Mar-
gareta  Celsing  I  suffocated  in  hate.  Will  you  live?"

Gosta  fell  on  his  knees  before  her.

"  Forgive  me,"  he  said,  "  I  cannot."

"  I  am  an  old  woman,  hardened  by  much  sorrow,"
answered  the  major's  wife,  "  and  I  sit  here  and  give
myself  as  a  prize  to  a  beggar,  whom  I  have  found
half-frozen  in  a  snow-drift  by  the  roadside.  It  serves
me  right  Let  him  go  and  kill  himself;  then  at  least
he  won't  be  able  to  tell  of  my  folly."


I  \TRODUCTION  2$

I  m  no  suicide,  I  am  Do  not

o  hard  for  me !     I  may  not
body  has  taken  possession  of  my  soul,  therefore
I  m  .md  go  to  God."

\iui  so  you  believe  you  will  get  thei
•  FarewelJ,  and  thank  you  '

GostaBcrli:

The  beggar  rose  and  walked  with  hanging  head  and
dragging  step  to  the  door.     Tim  woman  made  the

great  forests  heavy  for  him.

When  he  came  to  the  door,  he  had  to  look  back.
Then  he  met  her  glance,  as  she  sat  still  and  looked
after  him.     He  had  never  seen  such  a  change  in  any
face,  and  he  stood  and  stared  at  her.     She,  who  had
been  angry  and  threatening,  sat  transfigured,  and
eyes  shone  with  a  pitying,  compassionate  love.
There  was  something  in  him,  in  his  own  wild  heart,
uhich  burst  before  that  glance;  he  leaned  his  fore-
head against  the  door-post,  stretched  his  arms  up  over

head,  and  wept  as  if  his  heart  would  break.
The  major's  wife  tossed  her  clay  pipe  into  the  fire
and  came  over  to  Gosta.     Her  movements  were  as  ten-

as  a  mother's.
"  There,  there,  my  boy

And  she  got  him  down  beside  her  on  the  bench  by
the  door,  so  that  he  wept  with  his  head  on  her  knees.

.die?"

Then  he  wished  to  rush  away.     She  had  to  hold
him  back  by  force.

"  Now  I  tell  you  that  you  may  do  as  you  please.

Hut  I  promise  you  that,  if  you  will  live,  I  will  take  to

me  the  daughter  of  the  Broby  minister  and  make  a

human  being  of  her,  so  that  she  can  thank  her  God

you  btule  her  meal.     Now  will  you?  "


26  INTRODUCTION

He  raised  his  head  and  looked  her  right  in  the  eyes.

"Do  you  mean  it?"

"I  do,  Gosta  Herling."

Then  he  wrung  his  hands  in  anguish.  He  saw
before  him  the  JK  c  ring  eyes,  the  compressed  lips,
the  wasted  little  hamU.  This  young  creature  would
get  protection  and  care,  and  the  marks  of  degradation
be  effaced  from  her  body,  anger  from  her  soul.  Now
the  way  up  to  the  eternal  forests  was  closed  to  him.

"  I   shall   not  kill   myself  as  long   as  she  is  ur
your  care,"  he  said.     "  I  knew  well  enough  that  you
would  force  me  to  live.    I  felt  that  you  were  stro;
than  I."

"  Gosta  Berling,"  she  said  solemnly,  "  I  have  fought
for  you  as  for  myself.  I  said  to  God:  'If  there  is
anything  of  Margarcta  Celsing  living  in  me,  let  her
come  forward  and  show  herself,  so  that  this  man  may
not  go  and  kill  himself.'  And  He  granted  it,  and  you
saw  her,  and  therefore  you  could  not  go.  And  she
whispered  to  me  that  for  that  poor  child's  sake  you
would  give  up  your  plan  of  dying.  Ah,  you  fly,  you
wild  birds,  but  our  Lord  knows  the  net  which  will
catch  you."

"  He  is  a  great  and  wonderful  God,"  said  Gosta
Berling.  "  He  has  mocked  me  and  cast  me  out,  but
lie  will  not  let  me  die.  May  His  will  be  done !  "

From  that  day  Gosta  Berling  became  a  guest  at
Ekeby.  Twice  he  tried  to  leave  and  make  himself  a
way  to  live  by  his  own  work.  The  first  time  the
major's  wife  gave  him  a  cottage  near  Ekeby;  he
moved  thither  and  meant  to  live  as  a  laborer.  This
succeeded  for  a  while,  but  he  soon  wearied  of  the
loneliness  and  the  daily  labor,  and  again  returned  as
a  guest.  There  was  another  time,  when  he  became


INTRODUCTION  27

tutor  at  Borg  for  Count  Henry  Donna.     Dur
time  he  fell  in  love  with  the  young  Kbba  Dohna,  the
count's  sister  ;  but  when  she  died,  just  as  he  thought
he  had  nearly  won  her,  he  gave  up  every  thougl
being  anything  but  guest  at  Ekcby.     It  seemed  to
him  that    for  a  dismissed   priest  all  ways   to    make
amends  were  closed.


PART    I

CHATllK    I
TH  'SCAPE

I  MUST  now  describe  the  long  lake,  the  rich  plains
and  the  blue  momr.  :ice  they  were  the  scene

where  Gosta  Bcrling  and  the  other  knights  «.f  Kkcby
passed  their  joyous  existence.

The  lake  has  its  sources  far  up  in  the  north,  and
a  perfect  country  for  a  lake.     The  forest  and
the  mountains  never  cease  to  collect  water  for  it ;
rivulets  and  brooks  stream   into  it  the  whole  year
round.      It  has  fine  white  sand  to  stretch  itself  over,
headlands  and  islands  to  mirror  and  to  look  at,  river
nymphs  have  free  play  room  there,
and  it  quickly  grows  large  and  beautiful.     There,
in  t!  ,  it   is  smiling  and  friendly;  one  needs

but  to  see  it  on  a  summer  morning,  when  it  lies  half
awake  under  a  veil  <>t  mist,  to  perceive  how  gay  it
is.  It  plays  first  for  a  while,  creeps  softly,  softly,
out  of  its  light  covering,  so  magically  beautiful  that
one  can  hardly  recognize  it ;  but  then  it  casts  from
the  whole  covering,  and  lies  there  bare
and  uncovered  and  rosy,  shining  in  the  morning
light.


30  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

Hut  the  lake  is  not  content  with  this  life  of  play;
it  draws  itself  together  to  a  narrow  strait,  breaks  its
way  out  through  the  sand-hills  to  the  south,  and
seeks  out  a  new  kingdom  for  itself.  And  such  a
one  it  also  finds;  it  gets  larger  and  more  powerful,
has  bottomless  depths  to  fill,  and  a  busy  landscape
to  adorn.  And  now  its  water  is  darker,  its  shores
less  varying,  its  winds  sharper,  its  whole  character
more  severe.  It  has  become  a  stately  and  magnifi-
cent lake.  Many  are  the  ships  and  the  rafts  of  tim-
ber which  pass  there;  late  in  the  year  it  finds  time
to  take  its  winter  rest,  rarely  before  Christmas.
Often  is  it  in  peevish  mood,  when  it  grows  white
with  wrath  and  drags  down  sailing-boats;  but  it  can
also  lie  in  a  dreamy  calm  and  reflect  the  heavens.

But  still  farther  out  into  the  world  will  the  lake
go,  although  the  mountains  become  bolder  and  space
narrower;  still  farther  down  it  comes,  so  that  it  once
again  must  creep  as  a  narrow  strait  between  sand-
bound  shores.  Then  it  broadens  out  for  the  third
time,  but  no  longer  with  the  same  beauty  and
might.

The  shores  sink  down  and  become  tame,  gentler
winds  blow,  the  lake  takes  its  winter  rest  early.  It
is  still  beautiful,  but  it  has  lost  youth's  giddiness
and  manhood's  strength  —  it  is  now  a  lake  like  any
other.  With  two  arms  it  gropes  after  a  way  to  Lake
Vanern,  and  when  that  is  found  it  throws  itself  with
the  feebleness  of  old  age  over  the  slopes  and  goes
with  a  last  thundering  leap  to  rest.

The  plain  is  as  long  as  the  lake;  but  it  has  no
easy  time  to  find  a  place  between  sea  and  mountain,
all  the  way  from  the  valley  of  the  basin  at  the  lake's
northern  end,  where  it  first  dares  to  spread  i


THE  LANDSCAPE  3»

out,  till  it  lays  itself  to  easy  rest  by  the  Vanern's

shore.      1  s   no   doubt    that    the   plain    would

rather  follow  the  shore  of  the  lake,  long  as  it  is,  but

Mountains  j;ive  it  no  peace.     The  mountains  are

.vails,   covered   with   woods,   hi.
difficult  to  cross,  rich  in  moss  and  lichen, —
in  those  old  days  the  home  <>t  many  wild  things.

stretching  ridges  01.  comes  upon

t  swamp  or  a  pool  with  dark  water.      1
e  is  a  charcoal  kiln  or  an  open  patch  where  tim-
ber and  wood  have  been  cut,  or  a  burnt  clearing,  and
these  all  beai  •  that  then-  is  \\«.rk  going  on  on

mountains;    but   as  a  rule  they  lie   in   careless
.il  amuse  themselves  with  watching  the  lights
and  shadows  play  over  their  slopes.

Ami   with    these   mom  he   plain,    which    is

peaceful  and  rich,  and  loves  work,  wages  a  perpet-
ual  war,  in  ily  spirit,  however.

"  It   is  quite  enough,*'  says  the  plain  to  the  moun-

DU  set  up  your  walls  about  me,  tl.
safci  ^h  for  n

lountains  will  not  listen.  They  send
out  long  rows  of  hills  and  barren  table  lands  way
down  to  the  lak  *  look-OUt  to

on  every   promontory,  and   leave  the  shores  of  the

so  seldom  that  the  plain  can  but  rare'
If  out  by  the  soft,  broad  sands.     But  it  does  not
help  to  complain.

You  ought  to  be  glad  that  we  stand  hen-,"  the
mountains  say.      "Think  of  that  time  before  Christ-

he  icy  fogs,  day  after  day,  rolled  up
the  !  We  do  you  good  servi

The   plain  complains  that    it    has   no  space  and
an  ugly  view.


32  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

"YOU   are  so  stup:  \ver  the  mountains;  "if

you  could  only  feel  how  it  is  blowing  down  here  by
the  lake.  One  needs  at  least  a  granite  back  and  a
fir-tree  jacket  to  withstand  it.  And,  besides,  you
can  be  glad  to  have  us  to  look

Yes,  looking  at  the  mountains,  that  is  just  what
the  plain  is  doing.  It  knows  so  well  all  the  won-
derful shiftings  of  light  and  shade,  which  pass  over
them.  It  knows  how  they  sink  down  in  the  noon-
day heat  towards  the  horizon,  low  and  a  dim  light-
blue,  and  in  the  morning  or  evening  light  raise  their
venerable  heights,  clear  blue  as  the  sky  at  noon.

Sometimes  the  light  falls  so  sharply  over  them
that  they  look  green  or  dark-blue,  and  every  sepa-
rate fir-tree,  each  path  and  cleft,  is  visible  miles
away.

There  are  places  where  the  mountains  draw  back
and  allow  the  plain  to  come  forward  and  gaze  at  the
lake.  But  when  it  sees  the  lake  in  its  anger,  hiss-
ing and  spitting  like  a  wildcat,  or  sees  it  covered
with  that  cold  mist  which  happens  when  the  sea-
sprite  is  busy  with  brewing  or  washing,  then  it
agrees  that  the  mountains  were  right,  and  draws
back  to  its  narrow  prison  again.

Men  have  cultivated  the  beautiful  plain  time  out
of  mind,  and  have  built  much  there.  Wherever  a
stream  in  white  foaming  falls  throws  itself  down  the
slope,  rose  up  factories  and  mills.  On  the  bright,
open  places,  where  the  plain  came  down  to  the  1
churches  and  vicarages  were  built;  but  on  the  edges
of  the  valley,  half-way  up  the  slope,  on  stony
grounds,  where  grain  would  not  grow,  lie  farm-
houses and  officers'  quarters,  and  here  and  there  a
manor.


JNDSC.-i  33

Still,  in  the  twenties,  this  district  was  not  nearly
so  much  cultivated  as  now.  Many  were  the  woods
and  lakes  and  swamps  which  now  can  be  tilled
There  were  not  so  many  people  cither,  and  they
earned  their  li\;.>  .  partly  by  carting  and  day  labor
at  the  many  factories,  partly  by  working  at  neigh-
s;  agriculture  could  not  feed  them.  At
that  time  they  •  --ssed  in  homespun,  ate  oat-

cakes, and  were  satisfied  with  a  wage  of  ten  cents  a
day.     Many  were  in  gn  i  life  was  often

for  them  by  a  light  and  glad  ten.
and  by  an  inborn  hand i ness  and  capability.

And  all  those  three,  the  long  lake,  the  rich  plain,
the  blue  mountains,   made  the  most  beautiful
scenery,  and  still  do,  just  as  the  people  are  still  to
day,  strong,  brave  and  intelligent.     Great  prog-
ress has  been    made,    however,   in   prosperity  and
cult-

May  everything  go  well  with  those  who  live  far
away  by  the  long  lake  and  the  blue  mountains '  I
shall  now  recall  some  of  their  memories.


34  THE  STORY  OF  COST  A   BER1.IXG


CHAPTER    II

CHRI.M'MAs    EVE

SlNTRAM  is  the  name  of  the  wicked  master  of  tin-
works  at   Fors,  with   his  clumsy  ape-body,  and  his
long  arms,  with  his  bald  head  and  ugly,
face,  — he  whose  delight  is  to  make  mi

Sintram  it  is  who  takes  only  vagrants  and  bullies
for  workmen,  and  has  only  quarrelsome,  lyin-
maids  in  his  service;  he  who  excites  dogs  to  mad-
ness by  sticking  pins  in  their  noses,  and  lives  hap-
piest among  evil  people  and  fierce  beasts.

It  is  Sintram  whose  greatest  pleasure  is  to  dress
himself  up  in  the  foul  fiend's  likeness,  with  horns,
and  tail,  and  cloven  hoof,  and  hairy  body,  and  sud-
denly appearing  from  dark  corners,  from  behind  the
stove  or  the  wood-pile,  to  frighten  timid  children
and  superstitious  women.

It  is  Sintram  who  delights  to  change  old  friend-
ship to  new  hate,  and  to  poison  the  heart  with  lies.

Sintram  is  his  name  —  and  one  day  he  came  to
Ekeby.

Drag  the  great  wood-sledge  into  the  smithy,  j.ut
it  in  the  middle  of  the  floor,  and  lay  a  cart-bottom
on  the  frame!  There  we  have  a  table.  Hurrah  for
the  table;  the  table  is  ready!

Come  now  with  chairs,  with  everything  which  will
serve  for  a  seat!  Come  with  three-legged  stools


CHRISTMAS  /.  3$

•y  boxes!    Come  with  ragged  old  arm-chairs
wit!.  ks,  and  push  up  the  runiu-rlcss  ft]

old  coa  i        ii  :,.i,   up  with  the  old

coach;  it  shall  be  the  speaker's  ch

Just  look;  one  wheel  gone,  and  the  whole  bottom
out!  Only  the  coach-box  is  left.  The  cushion  is
thin  ami  worn,  its  moss  stuffing  coming  through,
th  age.  High  as  a  house  is  the
old  wreck.  Prop  it  up,  prop  it  up,  or  down  it  will
come!

11  *t  mas  eve  at  Ekeby.

Behind  the  broad  bed's  silken  curtains  sleep  the

;i«l  the  major's  wife,  sleep  and  believe  that

the  bachcloi  sleeps.     The  men-servants  and

maids  can  sleep,  heavy  with  feasting  and  the  bitter

Christmas  ale;  but  not  their  masters  in  the  bach-

elors'   win-        How   can    any  one   think   that    the

bachelors'  wing  sleeps?

Sleeps,  sleeps  (oh,  child  of  man,  sleeps!),  when

the  pensioners  are  awake.     The  long  tongs  stand

_;ht  on  the  floor,  with  tallow  candles  in  their

m  the  mammoth  kettle  of  shining  copper

flames  the  blue  fire  of  the  burning  brandy,  high  up

to  the  dark  roof.     Beerencreutz's  horn-lantern  hangs

on  the  forge-hammer.     The  yellow  punch  glows  in

the  bowl   like  a  bright   sun.     The  pensioners  are

celebrating  Christmas  eve  in  the  smithy.

There  is  mirth  and  bustle.      Fancy,  if  the  major's

should  see  them  !

What  then?     Probably  she  would  sit  down  with

i  and  empty  a  bumper.     She  is  a  doughty  woman  ;

s  not  afraid  of  a  thundering  drinking-song  or  to

take  a  hand  at  killf.1    The  richest  woman  in  Varnv


A  Swedish  game  of  card*.


36  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

land,  as  bold  as  :i  man,  proud  as  a  queen.     Songs
she  loves,  and  sounding  fiddles,  and  the  hunting-
horn.     She  likes  wine  and  games  of  -  il  tables
surrounded  by  merry  gi                   her  delight.     She
likes  to  sec  tlu-                  ;ni>tied,  to  have  duncim,
merry-making  in  chamber  and  hall,  and  the  1>
lors'  wing  full  of  pension

See  them  round  about  the  bowl !     Twelve  are  t !
twelve  men.     Not  butterflies  nor  cl  -idles,  but  men
whose  fame  will  not  soon  die  out  in  Varmland;  brave
men  and  strong.

Not  dricd-up  parchment,   nor  close-fisted   mm.
bags;  poor  men,  without  a  care,  gentlemen  the  whole
day  long.

No  mother's  darlings,  no  sleepy  masters  on  their
own  estates.  Wayfaring  men,  cheerful  men,  knights
of  a  hundred  adventures.

Now  for  many  years  the  bachelors'  wing  has  stood
empty.  Ekeby  is  no  longer  the  chosen  refuge  of
homeless  gentlemen.  Pensioned  officers  and  impov-
erished noblemen  no  longer  drive  about  Varmland
in  shaky  one-horse  vehicles.  But  let  the  dead  live,
let  them  rise  up  in  their  glad,  careless,  eternal
youth !

All  these  notorious  men  could  play  on  one  or
several  instruments.  All  were  as  full  of  wit  and
humor  and  conceits  and  songs  as  an  ant-hill  is  full
of  ants;  but  each  one  had  his  particular  great  qual-
ity, his  much  esteemed  merit  which  distinguished
him  from  the  others.

First  of  all  who  sit  about  the  bowl  will  I  name
Rccrencreutz,  the  colonel  with  the  great  white  mous-
taches, player  of  cards,  singer  of  songs;  and  next
to  him,  his  friend  and  brother  in  arms,  the  silent


37

-Crcat   bear  hunter,    An  i-         i       hs;  and,
an  ti.      •        i    in  ordvi,  httl

had  be-  years  the  t  *crvant.

hut  had  won  the  rank  <>(  pmsionei  through  his  skill
in  i  .  punch  and  hi*  1  --i-.u-h-

bafts.       !       i    may  be   i  old  en-

von  Orncclou,  lady-killer,  dressed  in  s-
and  wig  and  ruffles,  ami  woman,  -

•he  most  imjx>rtant  pensioners;  also

in    Bergh,  the  mighty  captain,   who  was  a

stalwart  hero,  but  as  easy  to  outwit  as  a  giant  in  the

.  story.      In  these  two  men's  company  one  often

saw  the   little,    round   Master  Julius,  witty,  merry,

and   pitted,    speaker  .  and   st

had  his  joke  with  the  gout-crippled
:i  and  the  dull  ^

ere  was  also  the  big  German  Kevenhullcr,
inventor  of  the  automatic  carriage  and  the  flying-
mad  whose  name  still  echoes  in  the  mur-
muring forests,  —  a  nobleman  by  birth  and  in
apjx-  :i  great  curled  moustaches,  a  pointed
beard,  aquiline  nose,  and  narrow,  squinting  ey*
a  net  of  intersecting  wrinkles.  There  sat  the  great
warrior  cousin,  Christopher,  who  never  went  out
the  walls  of  the  bachelors'  wing  unless  there  was  to
be  a  bear-hunt  or  some  foolhardy  adventure;  and
beside  him  Uncle  1  i,  the  philosopher,  who
had  not  come  to  Ekeby  for  pleasure  and  play,  but  in
order  to  be  able,  undisturbed  by  concern  for  t.

.d,  to  complete  his  great  work  in  the  science  of
sciences.

Last  of  all,  and  the  best,  enborg,

who  sought  the  good  in  the  world,  and  understood
little  of  its  ways,  and  Lilliecrona,  the  great  musician,


38  THE  STORY  OF  CQSTA   BERLING

who  had  a  good  home,  and  was  always  longing  to
he  theie,  but  still  remained  at  Kkeby,  1m-  hi.s  soul
needed  riches  and  variety  to  be  able  to  bear  lite.

These  eleven  men  had  all  left  youth  behind  them,
and  several  weie  in  old  age;  but  in  the  midst  of
them  was  one  who  was  not  more  than  thirty  years
old.  and  still  pos^  ihe  full,  undiminished

strength  of  his  mind  and  body.  ItwasGu>ta  Px-iling,
the  Knight  of  Knights,  who  alone  in  himself  was  a
better  speaker,  singer,  musician,  hunter,  drinking
companion  and  card-player  than  all  of  the  others
together.  He  possessed  all  gifts.  What  a  man
the  major's  wife  had  made  of  him  !

Look  at  him  now  in  the  speaker's  chair!  The
darkness  sinks  from  the  black  roof  in  great  festoons
over  him.  His  blond  head  shines  through  it  like  a
young  god's.  Slender,  beautiful,  eager  for  adven-
ture, he  stands  there.

But  he  is  speaking  very  seriously.

"Gentlemen  and  brothers,  the  time  passes,  the
feast  is  far  advanced,  it  is  time  to  drink  a  toast  to
the  thirteenth  at  the  table!  "

"  Little  brother  Gosta, "  cries  Master  Julius,  "  there
is  no  thirteenth;  we  are  only  twelve."

"At  Kkeby  a  man  dies  every  year,"  continues
Gosta  with  a  more  and  more  gloomy  voice.  "  One
of  the  guests  of  the  bachelors'  wing  dies,  one  of  the
glad,  the  careless,  the  eternal  youth  dies.  What  of
that  ?  Gentlemen  should  never  be  old.  Could  our
trembling  hands  not  lift  a  glass,  could  our  quenched
eyes  not  distinguish  the  cards,  what  has  life  for  us,
and  what  are  we  for  life?  One  must  die  of  the  thir-
teen who  celebrate  Christmas  eve  in  the  smithy  at
Ekeby ;  but  every  year  a  new  one  comes  to  complete


39

mimlx-i  ,  n   pleasure,   one

who  can  ha:,  u  and  card,  must  come  and  make

Old  lni-  hould  know

how  uinmci  sun  is  shining.     A

toast  .tli!"

I'.Ut,    lit",

•!-•  not  touch  then  glasses,
•sta  Beil  1  tlic  poet,  alth

In-  ncvi  •  .efSCS,  continues  with  unaltered  c

nets  :  T^ottcn

who  you  ho  hold  pleasure  by

*  land.      You  .ire  they  who  set  the  fiddle-
bows  go;  song  and  n

resound  thiou-h  the  land.      You  know  how  to  keep
youi  <  the  love  of  gold,  your

work  at   did    not    exist    the  dance   would

.    card-playing   die,   song

die.  and   in  this  whole  hl«  sscd  land  there  would  be
nothing  hut  iron  and  owners  of  iron-works.      Plea

>r  six  years  have  I  celebrated
•.i-hysmi1  cr  before

ised  to  drink  to  the  thirteenth."
'•  Hut,   Gosta,"cry   they  all,  "when   we  are  only

irink  to  the  thirteenth?  "
\vc  only  twelve  ?  "  he  says.     *4  Why  must  we
die  out  from  the  earth  1  we  be  but  ch

year,  but  ten  the  year  alter.     Shall  our  name
bec<-:  id,  our  company  destroyed?     I  call

upon  him,  the  thirteenth,    for    1  stood   up  to

drink  his  toast.     From  the  ocean's  depths,  from  the
bowels  of  the  earth,  from  1  from  hell  I  call

him  i  ',1  complete  our  number."

Then  it  rattled  in  the  chimney,  then  the  furnace-
door  opened,  then  the  thirteenth  came.


40  illE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

He  was  hairy,  with  tail  ami  cloven-hoot,  with
horns  and  a  pointed  beard,  and  at  the  si^ht  of  him
the  pensioners  start  up  with  a  cry.

Hut  in  uncontrollable  joy  Gosta  Berling  cries,
"The  thirteenth  has  come  —  a  toast  to  the  thir-
teenth!"

be   has  come,   the  old   enemy  of  mankind,
come  to  these  foolhardy  men  who  trouble  the  j-
of  the  Holy  Night.     The  friend  of  witches  on  thru
way  to  hell,  who  signs  his  bargains  in  blood  on  coal-
black  paper,  he  who  danced  with  the  countes
harsnas  for  seven  days,  and  could  not  be  cxorc
by  seven  priests,  —  he  has  come.

In  stormy  haste  thoughts  fly  through  the  heads  of
the  old  adventurers  at  the  sight  of  him.  They  won-
der for  whose  sake  he  is  out  this  night.

Many  of  them  were  ready  to  hurry  away  in  terror,
but  they  soon  saw  that  the  horned  one  had  not  come
to  carry  them  down  to  his  dark  kingdom,  but  that
the  ring  of  the  cups  and  their  songs  had  attracted
him.  He  wished  to  enjoy  a  little  human  pleasure
in  this  holy  night,  and  cast  aside  his  burden  during
this  glad  time.

Oh,  pensioners,  pensioners,  who  of  you  now  re-
members it  is  the  night  before  Christmas ;  that  even
now  angels  are  singing  for  the  shepherds  in  the
fields?  Children  are  lying  anxious  lest  they  sleep
too  soundly,  that  they  may  not  wake  in  time  for  the
beautiful  morning  worship.  Soon  it  will  be  time  to
light  the  Christmas  candles  in  the  church  at  Bro,
and  far  away  in  the  forest  homes  the  young  man  in
the  evening  has  prepared  a  resin  torch  to  light  his
girl  to  church.  In  all  the  houses  the  mistress  has
placed  dip-lights  in  the  windows,  ready  to  light  as


K1STMAS  /.  4I

the  people  go  by  to  church.     The  sexton  takes  up
the  •  is  psalrn  sleep,  and  the  old  min

lies  ami  tries  if  he  has  enough  \
sing:  "Glory  be  to  God  on  high,  on  earth  peace,
good-will  towards  m<

Oh,  pensioners,  better  had  it  been  for  you  if  you
spent  this  peaceful  night  quietly  in  your  beds
th.m  to  trouble  the  company   with   the    i'rince  of
Darkness.

Hut  they  greet   him  with  cries  of  welcome,  as

Gosta  had   done.     A    goblet    filled    with    burning

brandy  is  placed  in  his  hand.     They  give  him  the

•  •  of  honor  at  the  table,  and  they  look  upon  him

with  gladness,  as  if  his  ugly  satyr  face  wore   the

of  their  youth's  first  love.

Beercncrcutz  invites  him  to  a  game  of  cards,  Mas-
ter Julius  sings  his  best  songs  for  him,  and  Orneclou
talks  to  him  of  lovely  women,  those  beautiful  creat-
ures who  make  life  sweet.

He  enjoys  everything,  the  devil,  as  with  princely
bearing  he  leans  back  on  the  old  coach-box,  and
with  clawed  hand  lifts  the  brimming  goblet  to  his
smiling  mouth.

But  Gosta  Berling  of  course  must  make  a  speech
in  his  honor.

Your  Grace,"  he  says,  "we  have  long  awaited
you  here  at  Ekeby,  for  you  have  little  access,  we
suppose,  to  any  other  paradise.  Here  one  can
without  toiling  or  spinning,  as  your  Grace  perhaps
knows.  Here  roasted  ortolans  fly  into  one's  mouth,
the  bitter  ale  and  the  sweet  brandy  flow  in
brooks  and  rivulets.  This  is  a  good  place,  your
Grace!  We  pensioners  have  waited  for  you,  I  tell
you,  for  we  have  never  been  complete  before.  See,


42  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUNG

.ire   someth;  r   than  \\  <  the

hty  twelve  oi  the  pOCt,  win-  are  of  all  time.       We

were  twelve  when  w<  »rld,  up  the:

Olympus's  cloud-veiled  top,   and  twelve   when    we
lived  like  birds  in  Ygdrasil's  green  crown.     Wher-
there  has  been  poetry  there  have  we  followed.
Did    we    not     sit     twelve    men    strong    ahoiit     I
Arthur's   Round   T;d>le,  and  were   there  not  t\\
paladins  at  Charlemagne's  court?     One  of  us  has
been  a  Thor,  a  Jupiter;  any  one  can  see  that  in  us
now.     They  can  perceive  the  divine  splendor  under
our   rags,   the    lion's   mane   under   the   ass's   head.
Times  are  bad  with  us,  but  if  we  are  th  >ithy

becomes  Olympus  and  the  bachelors'  wing  Valhalla.

"  But,  your  Grace,  our  number  has  not  been  com-
plete. Every  one  knows  that  in  the  poet's  twelve
there  must  always  be  a  Loki,  a  Prometheus.  Him
have  we  been  without.

"  Your  Grace,  I  wish  you  welcome  !  "

"Hear,  hear,  hear!"  says  the  evil  one;  "such  a
fine  speech,  a  fine  speech  indeed !  And  I,  who  have
no  time  to  answer.  Business,  boys,  business.  I
must  be  off,  otherwise  I  should  so  gladly  be  at  your
service  in  any  r61e  you  like.  Thanks  for  a  pleasant
evening,  old  gossips.  We  shall  meet  again."

Then  the  pensioners  demand  where  he  is  going;
and  he  answers  that  the  noble  major's  wife,  mist
of  Ekeby,  is  waiting  for  him  to  get  her  contract
renewed.

Great  wonder  seizes  upon  the  pensioners.

A  harsh  and  capable  woman  is  she,  the  major's
wife  at  Ekeby.  She  can  lift  a  barrel  of  flour  on  her
broad  shoulders.  She  follows  the  loads  of  ore  from
the  Bergslagen  mines,  on  the  long  road  to  Ekeby.


43

She  sleeps  like  a  waggoner  on  the  stable  floor,  with
al-bag  under  her  head.  In  the  winter  she  will
watch  by  a  charcoal  kiln,  in  the  summer  follow  a
timber-raft  down  to  the  Lofvcn.  She  is  a  powerful
woman.  She  swears  like  a  trooper,  and  rules  <

^even  cs  kc  a  king;  rules  her  own  parish

and  all  the  neighboring  parishes;  yes,  the  whole  of
lovely  Varml.md.     Hut  lor  the  homeless  gentle.-
she  had  been  like  a  and  th  they  had

closed   their  ears  when  slander  had  whispered  to

i  that  she  was  in  league  with  the  devil
So  they  ask  him  with  wonder  what  kind  of  a  con-
she  has  made  with  him.

And  he  answers  them,  the  black  one,  that  he  had
given  the  major  her  seven  estates  on  the  con-

dition that  she  should  send  him  every  year  a  human
soul.

Oh,  the  horror  which  compresses  the  pensioners'

Of  course  they  knew  it,  but  they  had  not  under-
stood

At  Ekeby  every  year,  a  man  dies,  one  of  the  gu
in  the  bachelors'  wing  dies,  one  of  the  ^lad,  the  care-
less, the  ever  young  dies.     What  of  that?  —  gentle-
men may  not  be  old !     If  their  trembling  fingers  can-
not lift  the  L  their  dulled  eyes  cannot  see  the
cards,  what  has  life  for  them,  and  what  arc  they  to
rflies  should  know  how  to  die  while  the
is  shining.

But  now,  now  for  the  first  time,  they  grasp  its  real
meaning.

Woe  to  that  woman !  That  is  why  she  had  given
them  so  many  good  meals,  why  she  had  let  them
drink  her  bitter  ale  and  her  sweet  brandy,  that  they


44  •'/£•  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

might    reel    from    the   drinking -halls   and    the   card-
tables  at   Kkeby  down  to  li  I   lu-11, — one  a

Woe  to  the  woman,  the  witch !     Strong  men  had
come   to    this    Kkeby,    had    come    hither   to    perish,
she  had   destroyed   them   here.     Their   brains
were  as  sponges,  dry  ashes  their  lungs,  and  dark
their  spirit,  as  they  sank  back  on  their  death -beds
and   were    ready  for  their  long   journey,    hope:
soulless,  virtueless.

Woe  to  the  woman!  So  had  those  died  who  had
been  better  men  than  they,  and  so  should  they  die.

Hut  not  long  are  they  paralyzed  by  weight  of
terror.

"You  king  of  perdition!"  they  cry,  "never  again
shall  you  make  a  blood-signed  contract  with  that
witch;  she  shall  die!  Christian  Hergh,  the  mighty
captain,  has  thrown  over  his  shoulder  the  heaviest
sledge-hammer  in  the  smithy.  He  will  bury  it  to
the  handle  in  the  hag's  head.  No  more  souls  shall
she  sacrifice  to  you.

"And  you,  you  horned  thing,  we  shall  lay  you
on  the  anvil  and  let  the  forge-hammer  loose.  We
shall  hold  you  quiet  with  tongs  under  the  hammer's
blows  and  teach  you  to  go  a-hunting  for  gentlemen's
souls."

He  is  a  coward,  the  devil,  as  every  one  knows  of
old,  and  all  this  talk  of  the  forge-hammer  does  not
please  him  at  all.  He  calls  Christian  Bergh  back
and  begins  to  bargain  with  the  pensioners.

"Take  the  seven  estates;  take  them  yourselves,
gentlemen,  and  give  me  the  major's  wife  ! "

"Do  you  think  we  are  as  base  as  she?"  cries
Master  Julius.  "We  will  have  Ekeby  and  all  the


CHRISTMAS  /  45

rest,    hut    you   must    look  after    the  major's  wife
^elf."

What  does  Gusta  say?  what  does  Gosta  sa.
asks  the  gentle  l.<»wenborg.     "Gov  ng  must

•peak.  We  must  hear  what  he  thinks  of  this  impor-
tant

I  illness,"  says  Gosta  Berling.     "Gentle-

men, don't  U-t  him  make  fools  of  you!  What  arc
you  all  against  the  major's  wife?  It  may  fare  as  it
will  with  our  souls,  but  with  my  consent  we  will  not
be  such  ungrateful  s  as  to  act  like  rascals

and  traitors.  I  have  eaten  her  food  for  too  many
years  to  deceive  her  now."

Ves,  you  can  go  t  i,  if  you  wish !     We

would  rather  rule  at  Ekeby. "

1  Hut  are  you  all  raving,  or  have  you  drunk  away
your  wits  ?  Do  you  believe  it  is  true  ?  Do  you  bcl

that   thin^  is  the  devil?     Don't  you  see  that
ill  a  confounded  lie

i'ut.  tut,  tut,"  says  the  black  one;  "he  docs  not
see  that  he  will  soon  be  ready,  and  yet  he  has  been
seven  years  at  Ekeby.  He  does  not  see  how  far

.iced  he  is."

"Begone,  man!  I  myself  have  helped  to  shove
you  into  the  oven  the

"As  if  that  made  any  difference;  as  if  I  were  not
as  good  a  devil  as  another.     Yes,  yes,  Gosta  Berl
you  are  in  for  it.     You  have  improved,  indeed,  under

t."

It  was  she  who  saved  me,"  says  Gosta.  "What
had  I  been  without  her

"As  if  she  did  not  know  what  she  was  about  when
she  kept  you  here  at  Kkehy.  You  can  lure  others
to  the  trap;  you  have  great  gifts.  Once  you  tried


46  THE  STORY  OF  COST  A  BE  RUNG

to  get  away  from  her;  you  let  her  ^ive  you  a  cot-
tage, and  you  1><  laborer;  you  wished  to  earn
your  bread.  Every  day  she  passed  your  cottage,
and  she  had  lovely  young  girls  with  her.  Om
was  Marianne  Sinclair;  then  you  threw  aside  your
spade  and  apron,  Gosta  Berling,  and  came  back  as
pension^

"  It  lay  on  the  highway,  you  fool."

'  Yes,  yes,  of  course;  it  lay  on  the  highway.
Then  you  came  to  Borg,  were  tutor  there  to  Henrik
Dohna,  and  might  have  been  Countess  Malta's  son-
in-law.  Who  was  it  who  managed  that  the  young
Ebba  Dohna  should  hear  that  you  were  only  a  dis-
missed priest,  so  that  she  refused  you?  It  was  the
major's  wife,  Gosta  Berling.  She  wanted  you  back
again."

"  Great  matter ! "  says  Gosta.  "  Ebba  Dohna  died
soon  afterwards.  I  would  never  have  got  her  any-
way. "

Then  the  devil  came  close  up  .to  him  and  hissed
right  in  his  face:  "Died!  yes,  of  course  she  died.
Killed  herself  for  your  sake,  did  she?  But  they
never  told  you  that."

"  You  are  not  such  a  bad  devil,"  says  Gosta.

"  It  was  the  major's  wife  who  arranged  it  all,  I
tell  you.  She  wanted  to  have  you  back  in  the
bachelors'  wing."

Gosta  burst  out  laughing.

"You  are  not  such  a  bad  devil,"  he  cried  wildly.
"  Why  should  we  not  make  a  contract  with  you  ?
I  'm  sure  you  can  get  us  the  seven  estates  if  you
like."

"It  is  well  that  you  do  not  longer  withstand  your
fate."


K/STMAS  J  47

The  pensioners  drew  a  sigh  of  relief.     It  had  gone

so  far  with  them  that  they  could  do  nothing  without

M.     If  he  had  not  agreed  to  the  arrangement  it

could  m  e  come  to  anyth:  it  was  no

Jtc  gentlemen  to  get  seven
s  fur  their  own.

Remember,  now,"  says  Costa,  "that  we  take  the
seve.  order  to  save  our  souls,  but  not  to

be  iron- work  owners  who  count  their  money  and
weigh  their  iron.  No  clried-up  parchments,  no
purse-proud  money-bags  will  we  become,  but  gentle-

.1  we  be  I

in    very  words  of  wisdom,"  murmurs  the  black
one.

If  you,  therefore,  will  give  us  the  seven  estates  for

one  year  we  will  accept  them ;  but  remember  that  if

>  anything  during  that  time  which  is  not  worthy

of  a  gentleman,  if  we  do  anything  which  is  sensible,

or  useful,   or   effeminate,    then   you   may  take  the

when  the  year  is  out,  and  give

the  estates  to  whom  you  will. "

•  devil  rubbed  his  hands  with  delight.
"  Hut  if  we  always  behave  like  true  gentlem<
continues  Gosta,  "then  you  may  never  again  make
any  contract  about  Kkeby,  and  no  pay  do  you  get  for

cither  from  us  or  from  the  major's  wife."
Th.it  is  hard,"  says  the  d  Oh,  dear  Gosta,

I   must   have  one  soul,   just  one  little,   poor  soul.
id  n't  I  have  the  major's  wife?    Why  should  you
•o  the  major's  wi:

"  I  do  not  drive  any  bargains  with  such  wares,"
roars  (iosta;  "but   if  you  must  have  someone,  you
•  old  Sintram  at   Furs;  he  is  ready,   I  can
answer  for  that


48  THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLL\

Well,  well,  that  will  do,"  says  the  ck'vil,  with-
out blinking.  "  The  pensioners  or  Sintram,  they  can
balance  one  another.  This  will  be  a  goo*

And  so  the  contract  was  written,  with  blood  from
little  finger,  on  the  devil's  black  paper  and
with  his  quill-pen.

And  when   it  was  done  the  pensioners  rejoiced.
Now  the  world  should  belong  to  them  for  a  whole-
year,  and  afterwards  there  would  always  be  s
way.

They  push  aside  the  chairs,  make  a  ring  about
the  kettle,  which  stands  in  the  middle  of  the  black
floor,  and  whirl  in  a  wild  dance.  Innermost  in  the
circle  dances  the  devil,  with  wild  bounds;  and  at
last  he  falls  flat  beside  the  kettle,  rolls  it  over,  and
drinks.

Then  Beerencreutz  throws  himself  down  beside
him,  and  also  Gosta  Berling;  and  after  them  all  the
others  lay  themselves  in  a  circle  round  the  kettle,
which  is  rolled  from  mouth  to  mouth.  At  last  it
is  tipped  over  by  a  push,  and  the  hot,  sticky  drink
pours  over  them.

When  they  rise  up,  swearing,  the  devil  is  gone ;
but  his  golden  promises  float  like  shining  crowns
over  the  pensioners'  heads.


DAY


CHAPTER    III

CHRISTMAS

ON  Christmas  day  the  major's  wife  gives  a  great
dinner  >y.

.c  sits  as  hostess  at  a  table  laid  for  fifty  guests.
sits  th.  !«>r  and  magnit  here

short  sheepskin  jacket,  her  striped  woollen  skirt,
and  clay-pipe  do  not  follow  her.     She  rustles   in
silk,  gold  weighs  on  her  bare  arms,  pearls  cool
white  neck.

Where  are  the  pensioners?  Where  are  they  who
on  the  black  floor  of  the  smithy,  out  of  the  polished
copper  kettle,  drank  a  toast  to  the  new  masters  of

In  the  corner  by  the  stove  the  pensioners  are  sit

ting  at  a  separate  table;  to-day  t  no  room  for

big  table.     To  them  the  food  comes

-vine  sparingly;  to  them  arc  sent  no  glances

from   beautiful  women,   no   one   listens  to  Gosta's


Hut  the  pensioners  are  like  tamed  birds,  like  sa-

ild  beasts.     They  had  had  scarcely  an  hi
sleep  that  night;  then  they  had  driven  to  morning
worship,    lighted  by  torches  and   the  stars.     'I
saw  the  Christmas  candles,  they  heard  the  Christ-
mas hymns,  their  faces  were  like  smiling  children's,
v  forgot  the  night  in  the  smithy  as  one  forgets
an  evil  dream.

4


50  THE  STORY  OF  G&S  ..I./VG

Great  and  powerful  is  the  major's  Kkcby.

Who  dares  lift  his  arm  to  strik.  rho  his  \

to  give  evidence  again  nly  not  poor

gentlemen  who  for  many  years  have  eaten  her  b
and  slept  under  her  roof.     She  can  put  them  \v
she  will,  she  can  shut  her  door  to  them  when  she
will,  and  they  have   not   th<  ;    to  fly  from

illicit.      God  he  merciful  to  their  souls!      I
Kkeby  they  cannot  li

At  the  big  table  there  was  rejoicing:  there  sli
Marianne  Sinclair's  beautiful  eyes;  there  rang  the
gay  Countess  Dohna's  low  laugh.

But  the  pensioners  are  gloomy.  Was  it  not  just
as  easy  to  have  put  them  at  the  same  table  with  the
other  guests?  What  a  lowering  position  there  in
the  corner  by  the  .stove.  As  if  pensioners  were  not
fit  to  associate  with  fine  people !

The  major's  wife  is  proud  to  sit  between  the  Count

•org  and  the  Bro  clergyman.     The  pe,
hang  their  heads  like  shame-faced  children,  and  by
degrees  awake  in  them  thoughts  of  the  night.

Like  shy  guests  the  gay  sallies,  the  merry  sto
come  to  the  table  in  the  corner  by  the  stove.     There
the   rage  of  the   night  and   its  promises  enter  into
their  minds.      Master  Julius  makes  the  mighty  i  ap-
t  i in,    Christian    Bergh,    believe    that    the
grouse,  which  are  being  served  at  the  big  table,  will
not  go  round  for  all  the  guests;  but  it  amuses  no  one.

"They  won't  go  round,"  he  s  I  know  how

many  there  are.  But  they  '11  manage  in  spite  of  it,
Captain  Christian;  they  have  some  roasted  crows  for
us  here  at  the  little  table."

Hut  Colonel  Bccrencreutz's  lips  are  curved  by
only  a  very  feeble  smile,  under  the  fierce  m


Si

s,  and  Gosta  has  looked  the  whole  day  as  if  he
was  me  somebody's  death

\  n  y  food  is  good  enough  for  pensioners/'  he  says.
At  last  the  dish  heaped  up  with  m.igmiuvnt  grouse

Hi:  insti  in  is  angry.     Has  he  not  had

i  liie  Kong  hate  of  crows, — those  odious,  cawing.
oil  tilings?

.1  them  so  bitterly  that  last  autumn  he  had

ng  dress,  and  had  fastened  a

ul  made  him-  •: piling-stock

.  only  to  get  in  range  when  they  ate  the

grain  in  the  tie  Ids.

He  son  •   their  •  on  the  1

ng  and  killed  them.      H  1  for

>ts  in  the  summer,  and  threw  out  the  scream-
fcatherlcss  young  ones,   or  smashed  the  half-
hed  eggs.

Now  he  sci/es  the  dish  of  grouse.
D     .        think   I  il.m't  know  them?"  he  cries  to
int        Do  I  net  ir  them  caw  to  recog-

them?     Shame  on  you,  to  offer  Christian  Bergh

tmc  on  \

Thereupon  he  takes  the  grouse,  one  by  one,  and
throws  them  against  the  wall.

"Shame,  shame!  "   he:  it  the  whole

room    rings,— "to   offer   Christian    Hcrgh    crows!
Shair,

And  just  as  he  used  to  hurl  the  helpless  young
crows  against  the  cliffs,  so  now  he  sends  grouse  after
grouse  whizzing  against  the  wall.

and  grease  spatter  about  him,  the  crushed
birds  rebound  to  the  fl<

And  the  bachelors'  wing  rejoic


52  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  RE  RUNG

Then  the  angry  voice  of  the  major's  wife  pene-
trates to  the  pensio:  an,

:;rn  him  out !  "  she  calls  to  t!  Qtft,

Hut  they  do  not  dare  to  touch  him.  He  is  still
Christian  Bergh,  the  mighty  captain.

"Turn  him  out

He  hears  the  command,  and,  terrible  in  his  i

MOW  turns  upon  the  major's  wife  as  a  hear  turns
from  a  fallen  enemy  to  meet  a  new  attack.     He
marches   up   to   the   horse-shoe   table.      His    heavy
i   resounds  through  the  hall.      He  stands  oppo-
site her,  with  the  table  between  them.

"Turn  him  out!  "  cries  the  major's  wife  again.

Hut  he  is  raging;  none  dare  to  face  his  frowning
brow  and  great  clenched  hand.  He  is  big  as  a  giant,
and  as  strong.  The  guests  and  servants  tremble,
and  dare  not  approach  him.  Who  would  dare  to
touch  him  now,  when  rage  has  taken  away  his
reason  ?

He  stands  opposite  the  major's  wife  and  threatens
her.

"I  took  the  crow  and  threw  it  against  the  wall.
And  I  did  right."

"  Out  with  you,  captain  !  "

"  Shame,  woman  !  Offer  Christian  Bergh  crows  !
If  I  did  right  I  would  take  you  and  your  seven
hell's  —  "

"Thousand  devils,  Christian  Bergh!  don't  swear.
Nobody  but  I  swears  he;

"Do  you  think  I  am  afraid  of  you,  hag?  Don't
you  think  I  know  how  you  got  your  seven  estate

"Silence,  captain!"

"When  Altringcr  died  he  gave  them  to  your  hus-
band because  you  had  been  his  mistress."


S3

"Will  you  be  silent?"
'  Because  you  had  been  such  a  faithful  wu
gareta  Samzclius.     And  the  major  took   the  s

estates   and    let    you    manage    them    ai.

And  the  devil   arranged   it  all;    but
comes  the  end  for  you  "
H  >  pale  and  trem-

in  a  strange,  low  vo:
"  Yes,  n«>w   it    is   the   end  .  and   it   is  your

Bergh."

At  in  trembles,  his  face

works,  and  1.  ire  tilled  with  tears  of  anguish.

"I  am  drunk,"  he  cries.      "I   don't  know  what    I
am    saying;    I    haven't  Dog  and

e,  dog  and  slave,  and  nothing  more  have  I  been
her  for  fort>  Margai  ing,

:n  I  have  served  my  whole  life.     I  say  nothing
against  her.     What  should  I  have  to  say  ag..
beautiful  Margarcta  Celsin  i  the  dog  which

iier  door,  the  slave  who  bears  her  burd
v   strike   me,    she   may  kick  me!     You  see
how  I  hold  my  tongue  and  bear  it.     I  have  loved  her
tis.     How  could  I  say  anything  against
her

wonderful  sight  it  is  to  see  how  he  kneels
and  begs  for  foi  ft.     And  as  she  is  sitting  on

the  other  side  of  the  table.  lie  goes  on  h
round  the  table  till  he  comes  to  her;  then  he  b
down  and  kisses  the  hem  of  her  dress,  and  the  floor

But  not   far  from  the  major's  wife  sits  a  small,
strong  man.     He  has  shaggy  hair,  small,  squinting
eyes,  and  a  protruding  under- jaw.     He  looks  li
bear.     He  is  a  man  of  few  words,  who  likes  to  go


54  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUNG

own   quiet   way  and   let   the  world  take  can    ..{
itself.     He  is  Major  Samzelius.

He  rises  when  he  hears  Captain  Christian's  accus-
ing words,  and  the  major's  wii  all  the
fifty  guests.  The  women  arc  weeping  in  tenor  of
what  is  coming,  the  men  stand  dejected,  and  at  the
of  the  major  lies  Captain  Christian,  kiss-
ing the  hem  of  her  dress,  wetting  the  floor  with  his
•

The  major  slowly  clenches  his  broad,  hairy  hands,
and  lifts  his  arm.

Hut  the  woman  speaks  first.  Her  voice  sounds
hollow  and  unfamiliar.

"You  stole  me,"  she  cried.     "You  came  like  a
thief  and  took  me.      They  forced  me,  in  my  home,  by
blows,  by  hunger,  and  hard  words  to  be  your  v.
I  have  treated  you  as  you  deserved."

The  major's  broad  fist  is  clenched.  His  wife
L^ives  way  a  couple  of  steps.  Then  she  speaks
again.

"  Living  eels  twist  under  the  knife;  an  unwilling
wife  takes  a  lover.  Will  you  strike  me  now  for
what  happened  twenty  years  ago?  Do  you  not  re-
member how  he  lived  at  Ekeby,  we  at  Sjo?  Do  you
not  remember  how  he  helped  us  in  our  poverty  ?
We  drove  in  his  carriages,  we  drank  his  wine.  Did
we  hide  anything  from  you?  Were  not  his  servants
your  servants?  Did  not  his  gold  weigh  heavy  in
your  pocket?  Did  you  not  accept  the  seven  esta
You  held  your  tongue  and  took  them ;  then  you
should  have  struck,  Berndt  Samzelius, — then  you
should  have  struck."

The  man  turns  from  her  and  looks  on  all  those
present.  He  reads  in  their  faces  that  they  think


•Ay  S5

she  i  they  all  believe  he  took  the  estates

•  mil  for  his

1  knew   it!"  he  says,  and  stamps  on  the

floor.

It  is  well  that  you  know  it  now!  "  she  cries,  in  a

shrill,  :i:-....:  ..    .  'Was  I  not  afraid  lest  you

should  d  -lit  knowing  it?     It  is  well  that  you

now,  so  that  I  can  speak  out  to  you  who

have  been  my  master  and  jailer.     You  know  now

1,  was  his  from  whom  you  stole

I   tell   )ou  all  now,  you  who  have  slandered

It   is  the  old  love  which  r  M  her  voice  and

shines  from  her  eyes.     Her  husband  stands  before

vith  lilted  hand.     She   reads  horror  and  scorn

on  the  titty  faees  about  her.     She  feels  that  it  is  the

mm  of  her  power.      Hut  she  cannot  help  rcjoic-

speak  openly  of  the   tenderest

memory  of  h«-r   1

"He  was  |  i  man  indeed.     Who  were  you,

to  come  between  us?     1   have  never  seen  his  equal.
He  happiness,  he  gave  me  riches.     Blessed

Then  the  major   lets  his   lifted  arm  fall  without

>ws  how  he  shall  punish
.  "out  of  my  ho;
Shi  motionless.

Hut  tin  cs  and  s(

;ie  anoti.  hing  was  going  as  the  devil

prophes  now  saw  the  consequences

of  the  non-r  >f  the  contract.     If  that  is  t

so  is  it  also  true  that  she  for  more  than  twenty  years
t  pensioners  to  perdition,  and  that  they  too
were  destined  for  the  journey.      Oh,  the


56  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

"Out   with   you!"   continues   the   majoi        'Beg

your  bread   on  the   highway!     You  shall   have  no
sure  of   his   nmncy,  you   shall   not   live  on  his

lands.      There    is   no  more  a  mistress   of    I  ktl>\.

The  day  you  set  your  foot  in  my  house  I  will  kill

you."

"Do  you  drive  me  from  my  home?  "

"You  have  no  home.     Ekeby  is  mine."

A  feeling  of  despair  comes  over  the  major's  wife.

She  retreats  to  the  door,  he  following  close  .

"  You  who  have  been  my  life's  curse,"  she  laments,
"shall  you  also  now  have  power  to  do  this  to  me ?  "

"  Out,  out !  "

She  leans  against  the  door-post,  clasps  her  hands,
and  holds  them  before  her  face.  She  thinks  of  her
mother  and  murmurs  to  herself :  —

"  '  May  you  be  disowned,  as  I  have  been  disowned  ;
may  the  highway  be  your  home,  the  hay-stack  your
bed  ! '  It  is  all  coming  true."

The  good  old  clergyman  from  Bro  and  the  judge
from  Munkerud  came  forward  now  to  Major  Samzelius
and  tried  to  calm  him.  They  said  to  him  that  it
would  be  best  to  let  all  those  old  stories  rest,  to  let
everything  be  as  it  was,  to  forget  and  forgive.

He  shakes  the  mild  old  hands  from  his  shoul-
der. He  is  terrible  to  approach,  just  as  Christian
Bergh  had  been.

"It  is  no  old  story,"  he  cries.  "I  never  knew
anything  till  to-day.  I  have  never  been  able  before
to  punish  the  adulteress."

At  that  word  the  major's  wife  lifts  her  head  and
regains  her  old  courage.

"You  shall  go  out  before  I  do.     Do  you  think


CHfi/STMAS  DAY  $7

th.it  I  shall  give  in  to  you?"  she  says.  And  she
comes  forward  from  the  door.

I  he  major  does  not  answer,  but  he  watches  her

v  movement,  ready  to  strike  if  he  finds  no  l>
way  to  revenge  hinv

Help  me,  good  gentlemen,"  she  cries,  "to  get
man  bound  and  carried  out,  until  he  gets  back
the  use  of  his  senses.     Remember  who  I  am  and
he  isl     Think  of  it,  before  I   must  give  in  to
him  !     I  arrange  all  the  work  at  Kkcby,  and  he  sits
the  whole  day  long  and  feeds  his  bears.     Help
good  fricnd.s  ighbors!    There  will  be  a  bound-

less misery  if  I  am  no  longer  here.  The  peasant
gets  mg  by  cutting  my  wood  and  carting  my

iron.  The  charcoal  burner  lives  by  getting  me
charcoal,  the  lumber  man  by  bringing  down  my
timber.  It  is  I  who  give  out  the  work  which  brings
prosperity.  Smiths,  mechanics,  and  carpenters  live
by  serving  me.  Do  you  think  that  man  can  keep
my  work  goin.;'  I  tell  you  that  if  you  drive  me
away  you  let  famine  in."

Again  are  many  hands  lifted  to  help  the  major's
wife;  again  mild,  persuading  hands  are  laid  on  the

<>r's  shoulders.

"No,"  he  says,  "away  with  you.  Who  will  de-
fend an  adulteress?  I  tell  you  that  if  she  does  not
goof  her  own  will  I  shall  take  her  in  my  arms  and
carry  her  down  to  my  bears. "

At  these  words  the  raised  hands  are  lowered.
Then,  as  a  last  resource,  she   turns  to  the  pen-
sioners.

Will  you  also  allow  me  to  be  driven  from  my

home?     i  let  you  freeze  out  in  the  snow  in

r  >     Have   I  denied  you   bitter  ale  and  sweet


$8  1  HE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  \'G

brandy?  Did  I  take  any  pay  or  any  work  from  you
because  I  gave  you  food  and  clothes  ?  I  lave  you  not
played  at  my  feet,  safe  as  children  at  their  moll

not  the  dance  gone  through  my  halls?
I  live  not  merriment  and  laughter  been  your  daily
bread?  Do  not  let  this  man,  who  has  been  my  1

:>>rtune,    drive    me   from   my   home,   gentlemen!
Do  not  let  me  become  a  beggar  on  the  highway ! "

At  these  words  Gbsta  Bcrling  had  stolen  away  to
a  beautiful  dark-haired  girl  who  sat  at  the  big
table.

"You  were  much  at  Borg  five  years  ago,  Anna,"
he  says.     "Do  you  know  if  it  was  the  major's  wile
who    told    Ebba    Dohna    that    I    was   a    dism
priest  ? "

"Help  her,  Gbsta!  "  is  the  girl's  only  ansv,

"You  must  know  that  I  will  first  hear  if  she  has
made  me  a  murch

"Oh,  Gosta,  what  a  thought!     IK  lp  her,  Gust

"You  won't  answer,  I  see.  Then  Sintram  told
the  truth."  And  Gosta  goes  back  to  the  other  pen-
sioners. He  does  not  lift  a  finger  to  help  the
major's  wife.

Oh,  if  only  she  had  not  put  the  pensioners  at  a
separate  table  off  there  in  the  corner  by  the  stove!
Now  the  thoughts  of  the  night  awake  in  their  minds,
and  a  rage  burns  in  their  faces  which  is  not  less  than
the  major's  own.

In  pitiless  hardness  they  stand,  unmoved  by  her
prayers.

Did  not  everything  they  saw  confirm  the  events
of  the  night?

"One  can  see  that  she  did  not  get  her  contract
renewed,"  murmurs  one.


•/t/STMAS  DAY  50

11,  hag!"  screams  another.     "  By  ri,
we  o  umi  you  it- 'in  the  door."

Kools,"  cries  the  gentle   old    Uncle   Ebcrhard
to  the  pensioners.     "Don't  you  understand  it  was

>f  course  we  understand;  of  course  we  know
it, "  answers  Julius;  "but  what  of  that  •  May  it  not
be  i  any  rate?  Does  not  n  go  on

the  devil's  errands?     Don't    they   understand  one

•

"Go  yourself,  Kbcrhard;  go  and  help  hey

moo  ou    don't    believe    in    hell.      You    can

And  Gbsta  Berling  stands,  without  a  word,  motion-
No,  from  the  threatening,  murmuring,  struggling

:ng  she  will  -ct  no  help.

Then  once  again  she  retreats  to  the  door  and  raises
her  clasped  hands  to  her  eyes.

114 May  you  be  disowned,  as  I  have  been  disowned, ' '
she  cries  to  herself  in  her  bitter  sorrow.     " '  May  the

\vay  be  your  home,  the  hay-stack  your  bed ! '
Then  she  lays  one  haiul  «>n  the  door  latch,  but  the
other  she  stretches  on  hi

"Kn<>w  you  all,  who  now  let  me  fall,   know  that
your  hour  is  soon  coming!     You  shall  be  s<.
and  your  place  shall  stand  empty.     How  can  you
1  when  I  do  not  hold  you  up?     You,  Mclchim

.  who  have  a  heavy  hand  and  let  your
it,  beware!     You,  minister  at  Broby,  your  pun-
is  coming!     Madame  Uggla,  look  after  your
house;  poverty   is   coming!     You  young,   beautiful
women  —  Elizabeth  Dohna,  Marianne  Sinclair,  Anna
k  — do  not  thiru.  im  the  only  one  who


60  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

must  flee  from  her  home.      An«!  sioners,

a  storm  is  coming  over  the  l;uul.     You  will  be  swept
away  from  the  earth;  your  <  it  is  verily

over!     I  do  not  lament  for  myself,  but  for  you;
the  storm  shall  pass  over  your  heads,  and  who  shall
stand  when  I  have  fallen?     And  my  heart  bleeds  for
my  poor  people.     Who  will  give  them  work  when  I
am  goiu-

She  opens  the  door;  but  then  Captain  Christian
lifts  his  head  and  says:  —

"  I  low  long  must  I  lie  here  at  your  feet,  Margarcta
Celsing?  Will  you  not  forgive  me,  so  that  I  may
stand  up  and  fight  for  you  ? "

Then  the  major's  wife  fights  a  hard  battle  with
herself;  but  she  sees  that  if  she  forgives  him  he-
will  rise  up  and  attack  her  husband;  and  this  man,
who  has  loved  her  faithfully  for  forty  years  will
become  a  murderer.

"  Must  I  forgive,  too  ?  "  she  says.  "  Are  you  not
the  cause  of  all  my  misfortune,  Christian  Bergh?
Go  to  the  pensioners  and  rejoice  over  your  work."

So  she  went.  She  went  calmly,  leaving  terror
and  dismay  behind  her.  She  fell,  but  she  was  not
without  greatness  in  her  fall.

She  did  not  lower  herself  to  grieving  weakly,  but
in  her  old  age  she  still  exulted  over  the  love  of  her
youth.  She  did  not  lower  herself  to  lamenting  and
pitiable  weeping  when  she  left  everything;  she  did
not  shrink  from  wandering  about  the  land  with  beg-
gar's bag  and  crutch.  She  pitied  only  the  poor
peasants  and  the  happy,  careless  people  on  the  shores
of  the  Lofven,  the  penniless  pensioners,  — all  those
whom  she  had  taken  in  and  cared  for.

She  was  abandoned  by  all,  and  yet  she  had  strength


C//K/STMAS  DAY  6 1

irn  away  her  It  should  not  be  a

nurd

She  was  a  woman  great  in  strength  and  love  of
»n.     We  shall  not  soon  see  her  like  a-..

1  he  next  day  Major  Somzeltus  moved  t  --by

to  his  own  farm  of  Sjo,  which  lies  next  to  the  large
estate.

In  Altringcr's  will,  by  which  the  major  had  got
tin-  estates,  it  was  clearly  stated  that  none  of  them
should  be  sold  or  give:  .  but  that  after  the

death  of  the  major  his  wife  and  her  heirs  should
inherit  them  all.  So,  as  he  could  not  dissipate  the
hated  inheritance,  he  placed  the  pensioners  to  reign
thinking  that  he,  by  so  doing,  most  injured
Ekeby  and  the  other  six  estates.

As  no  one  in  all  the  country  round  now  doubted
that  the  wicked  Sintram  went  on  the  devil's  erru:
and  as  everything  he  had  promised  had  been  so  bril-
liantly fulfilled  the  pensioners  were  quite  sure  that
the  contract  would  be  carried  out  in  every  point,  and
they  were  entirely  decided  not  to  do,  during  the
year.  siblc,  or  useful,  or  effcmi:

convinced  t'  major's  wife  was  an  abominable

h  who  sought  their  ruin.

The  old  philosopher,  Eberhard,  ridiculed  their
belief.  Hut  who  paid  any  attention  to  such  a  man,
who  was  so  obstinate  in  his  unbelief  that  if  he  had
lain  in  the  midst  of  the  fires  of  hell  and  had  seen
all  the  devils  standing  and  grinning  at  him,  would
still  have  insisted  that  they  did  not  exist,  because
they  could  not  exist?  —  for  Uncle  Eberhard  was  a
great  philosopher.

told  no  one  what  he  thought
certain  that  he  CODI  he  owed  the  major's  wife


62  /•///:  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

little  thanks  because  she  had  made  him  a  pensioner
at  Ekeby;  it  seemed  better  to  him  to  In- dead  than
to  have  on  his  conscience  the  guilt  of  Ebba  Dohna's
suicide.

He  did  not  lift  his  hand  to  be  revenged  on  the
major's  wife,  hut  neither  did  he  to  help  h<  i.      H<
could  not.     But  the  pensioners  had  attained  great
power  and   magnificence.      Christmas  was  at  hand,
with    its  feasts  and  pleasures.     The  hearts  of  the
pensioners  were  filled  with  rejoicing;  and  what
sorrow  weighed  on  Gosta  Berl ing's  heart  he  did  not
show  in  face  or  speech.


COSTA   UEKUXG,  POET  63


(  HA1TKR    IV
GSSTA  .,    POET


.strn.is,  .ind  there  was  to  be  a  ball  at
Borg.

At   that   time,  and    it    is  soon  sixty  years  a£
young  Count    Uohna  lived  at  Bor^;  he  w.»

and  he  h.i-1  a  young,  beaut  ilul  countess.      It
was  sure  to  be  gay  at  the  old  castle.

come  to  Kkcby,  but  it  so  1

pened  that  of  them  all  who  were  there  that  year,
Gosta  Berling,  whom  they  called  "the  poet,"  was
the  only  one  who  wished  to  go.

Borg  and   Kkeby  both  lie  by  the  hut   <>n

>rg  is  in  Svartsjn  parish,  Kkeby

in  Hro.     When  the  lake  is  imp..  a  ten  or

I1  journey  from  Kkcby  to  Borg.
The  pauper,  Gosta  Berling,  was  fitted  out  for

by  the  old  men,  as  if  he  had  been  a  king's
son,  and  had  the  honor  of  a  kingdom  to  keep  up.

His  coat  with  the  glittering  buttons  was  new,  his
ruffles  were  stiff,   and    his  buckled  shoes  shi:
Me  ..  the  finest  beaver,  and  a  cap  of

sable  on  his  yellow,  curling  hair.  They  spread  a
bear-skin  with  silver  claws  over  his  sledge,  and  gave
him  1)1.  irk  Don  Juan,  the  pride  of  the  stabl<


64  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

He  whistled  to  his  white  Tain-red,  an<  ;  the

braided  reins.  He  started  rejoicing,  surrounded  by
the  glitter  of  riches  and  splendor,  he  who  shone  so
by  his  own  beauty  and  by  the  playful  brilliancy  of
his  genius.

He  left  early  in  the  forenoon.      It  was  Sunday,
and  he  heard  the  organ  in  the  church  at  Bro  a
drove  by.     He  followed  the  lonely  forest  road  which
led    to    Berga,    where   Captain    Uggla    then    lived.
There  he  meant  to  stop  for  dinner.

Berga  was  no  rich  man's  home.  Hunger  knew
the  way  to  that  turf-roofed  house ;  but  he  was  met
with  jests,  charmed  with  song  and  games  like  other
guests,  and  went  as  unwillingly  as  they.

The  old  Mamselle  Ulrika  Dillner,  who  looked
after  everything  at  Berga,  stood  on  the  steps  and
wished  Gosta  Berling  welcome.  She  courtesied  to
him,  and  the  false  curls,  which  hung  down  over  her
brown  face  with  its  thousand  wrinkles,  danced  with
joy.  She  led  him  into  the  dining-room,  and  then
she  began  to  tell  him  about  the  family,  and  their
changing  fortunes.

Distress  stood  at  the  door,  she  said ;  it  was  hard
times  at  Berga.  They  would  not  even  have  had  any
horse-radish  for  dinner,  with  their  corned  beef,  if
Ferdinand  and  the  girls  had  not  put  Disa  before  a
sledge  and  driven  down  to  Munkerud  to  borrow  some.

The  captain  was  off  in  the  woods  again,  and  would
of  course  come  home  with  a  tough  old  hare,  on
which  one  had  to  use  more  butter  in  cooking  it  than
it  was  worth  itself.  That 's  what  he  called  getting
food  for  the  house.  Still,  it  would  do,  if  only  he
did  not  come  with  a  miserable  fox,  the  worst  beast
our  Lord  ever  made;  no  use,  whether  dead  or  alive.


COSTA  Bl  POET  6$

And  the  captain1!  wife,  yes,  she  was  not  up  yet.
She  lay  abed  and   read    novels,   just  as  she  hail
iys  done.     She  was  not   made  for  work,    that
s  angel.

No,  that  could  be  done  by  some  one  who  was  old

;ray  like  Ulrika  Dillncr,  working  night  and  day

to  keep  the  whole  miserable  affair  together.     Ami

vays  so  easy;  for  it  was  the  truth  that

for  one  whole  winter  they  had  not  had  in  that  house

any  other  meat   than  bear-hams.     And   big  wages

she  did  not  expect;  so  far  she  had  never  seen  any;

but   they  would   not   turn   her  out  on  the  roadside

either,  when  she  could  n't  work  any  longer  in  return

for  her   food      They  treated  a  house-maid   like  a

human  being  in  that  house,  and  they  would  one  of

these  days  give  old  Ulrika  a  good  burial  if  they  had

hing  to  buy  the  coffin  with.

i  or  who  knows  how  it  will  be?"  she  bursts  out,

wipes  her  eyes,  which  arc  always  so  quick  to

tears.     "We  have  debts  to  the  wicked  Sintram,  and

he  can  take  everything  from  us.    Of  course  Fercl  inand

is  engaged  to  the  rich  Anna  Stjarnhuk;  but  she  is

tired,  — she  is  tired  of  him.     And  what  will  become

of  us,  of  our  three  cows,  and  our  nine  horses,  of  our

gay  young  ladies  who  want  to  go  from  one  ball  to

another,  of  our  dry  fields  where  nothing  grows,  of

our  mild  Ferdinand,  who  will  never  be  a  rea!  i:

.1  will  become  of  the  whole  blessed  house,  where
everything  thrives  except  work?  "

But  dinner  time  came,  and  the  family  gathered.
The  good  Ferdinand,  the  gentle  son  of  the  house,
ami  the  lively  d.  I  came  home  with  the  bor-

rowed horse-radish.     The  captain  came,  fortified  by
a  bath  in  a  hole  in  the  ice  and  a  tramp  through  the

5


66  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERI 1

woods.     He  threw  up  the  window  to  get  more
and  shook  Gosta's  hand  with  a  strong  grip.     And  his
wife  came,  dressed  in  silk,  with  wide  laces  hanging
over  her  white  hands,  which  Gosta  was  allowed  to  kiss.

They  all  greeted  Gosta  with  joy ;  jests  flew  about
the  circle;  gayly  th  1  him:  -

"How  are  you  all  at  Ekcby;  how  is  it  in  that
promised  land?  "

"  Milk  and  honey  flow  there,"  he  answered.    "  We
empty  the  mountains  of  iron  and  fill  our  cellar  with
wine.     The  fields  bear  gold,  with  which  we  gild
misery,  and  we  cut  down  our  woods  to  build  bowl
alleys  and  summer  houses."

The  captain's  wife  sighed  and  smiled  at  his  ans\
and  her  lips  murmured  the  word,  —

"  Poet !  "

"  Many  sins  have  I  on  my  conscience,"  answered
Gosta,  "but  I  have  never  written  a  line  of  poetry."

"  You  are  nevertheless  a  poet,  Gosta;  that  name
you  must  put  up  with.  You  have  lived  through
more  poems  than  all  our  poets  have  written."

Then  she  spoke,  tenderly  as  a  mother,  of  his  wasted
life.  "  I  shall  live  to  see  you  become  a  man,"  she
said.  And  he  felt  it  sweet  to  be  urged  on  by  this
gentle  woman,  who  was  such  a  faithful  friend,  and
whose  romantic  heart  burned  with  the  love  of  great
deeds.

But  just  as  they  had  finished  the  gay  meal  and
had  enjoyed  the  corned  beef  and  horse-radish
and  cabbage  and  apple  fritters  and  Chiv-tmas  ale,
and  Gosta  had  made  them  laugh  and  cry  by  telling
them  of  the  major  and  his  wife  and  the  Broby  clergy-
man, they  heard  sleigh-bells  outside,  and  immedi-
ately afterward  the  wicked  Sintram  walked  in.


COSTA   BEKUNC,  PO  67

He  beamed  with  satisfaction,  from  the  top  of  his
bald  head  down  to  his  long,  flat  fei-t.     lie  swung  his
long  arms,  aiul  h:    face  was  twisted.     It  was  easy  to
;.it  he  brought  bad  news.

Have  you  h<  asked,  —  "  have  you  heard

cd  to-day  for  Anna

•.    .ui.l    the    rich    Dahlbcrg   in   the    Svartsjd
church?     SI)  li.ivc    forgotten    that    she    was

.igcd  to  Fcrdinan

1  hey   had   not  heard   a  word  of  it.     They  were
amazed  and  grit-.

Already  they  t  -he  home  pillaged  to  pay  t la-

in this  wicked  man;  the  beloved  horses  sold,  as
as  the  worn  furniture  which  had  come  from  the
home  of  the  captain's  wife*.     They  saw  an  end   to
the  gay  life  with  feasts  and  journcymgs  from  ball  to
would  ai;ain  adorn  the  board,  and
young  people  must  go  out  into  the  world  and
work  for  strangers.

The  captai;  caressed  her  son,  and  let  him

the  comfort  of  a  never-failing  love.
But  —  there   sat   Gbsta  Berling  in    the   midst   of
them,  and,  unconquerable,  turned  over  a  thousand
plan-  in  his  head.

Listen,"  he  cried  not  yet  time   to  think

of  grieving.      It    is    the   mil  wife   at   Sva

who   has  arranged   all   this.      She   has   got   a   hold

on   Ann.'  has   been   living   with    her  at

the    vicarage.      It    is   she  who   has    persuaded    her

to   forsal  nand  and  take  old  Dahlberg;    but

're  not  ul  will  never  be  cither.

11   on   nr  to   Borg,  and  shall   meet  Anna

I   shall   talk   to  her;    I  shall  get  her   .1
the    clcrgx  from   her   fiance*,  —  I    shall


68  THE  STOKY  OF  GOSTA  BERLING

bring  her  with  me  here  to-night.  And  afterwards
old  Dahlberg  shall  never  of  her.*1

And  SO  it  WAfl  arraiuyd.  (i»^U  si.irtnl  I".  >r  Horg
alone,  without  taking  any  of  the  gay  young  ladies
but  with  warm  gom!  wishes  for  his  re-turn.  Ami
Sintram,  who  rejoiced  that  old  Dahlberg  should  be
cheated,  decided  to  stop  at  Berga  to  see  Gosta  come
back  with  the  faithless  girl.  In  a  burst  of  good-will
he  even  wrapt  round  him  his  green  plaid,  a  present
from  Mamselle  Ulrika.

The  captain's  wife  came  out  on  the  steps  with
three  little  books,  bound  in  red  leather,  in  her
hand.

"  Take  them,"  she  said  to  Gosta,  who  already  sat
in  the  sledge ;  "  take  them,  if  you  fail !  It  is  '  Corinm  ,'
Madame  de  StaeTs  '  Corinne.'  I  do  not  want  tin  in
to  go  by  auction."

"  I  shall  not  fail."

"  Ah,  Gosta,  Gosta,"  she  said,  and  passed  her  hand
over  his  bared  head,  "  strongest  and  weakest  of  men  !
How  long  will  you  remember  that  a  few  poor  people's
happiness  lies  in  your  hand?  "

Once  more  Gosta  flew  along  the  road,  drawn  by
the  black  Don  Juan,  followed  by  the  white  Tancrcd,
and  the  joy  of  adventure  filled  his  soul.  He  felt  like
a  young  conqueror,  the  spirit  was  in  him.

His  way  took  him  past  the  vicarage  at  Svartsjo.
He  turned  in  there  and  asked  if  he  might  drive  Anna
Stjarnhok  to  the  ball.  And  that  he  was  perm  in-

A  beautiful,  self-willed  girl  it  was  who  sat  in  his
sledge.  Who  would  not  want  to  drive  behind  the
black  Don  Juan?

The  young  people  were  silent  at  first,  but  then  she
began  the  conversation,  audaciousness  itself.


COSTA  BEKLINC,  «j

yi.u  heard  wlu  read  out  in

t«.  d
*  1  M  1  he  say  that  you  ..-$t  girl  be-

!i  the  I.  ,i  tiu-  K

"  i .  -Hi  you  are!  but  every  one  knows  t

tiled  the  l>.i:;  :d  Dahlbcrg."

44  Never  would  I  have  let  you  sit  in  my  sledge  i\«r
sat  here  myself,  if  I  had  knoun  ih.it.  Never  would  I
have  Jrivc  you  at  all  "

1  the  proud  heiress  answered :  —
'  I  con Ul  have  got  there  well  enough  without  you,

It  i    a  pit)  for  you,  Anna,"  said  Gosta,  thou

full),  "that  y«»ur  lather    and    mother   are  not  a
You  arc  your  <>\\n  mistress,  and  no  one  can  hold  you
to  account."

'   I  pity  that  you  had  not  said

that  In-fore,  so  that   I   ini^ht  have  driven  with  some
one  e

"The  mini  te  thinks  as  I  do,  that  you  need

some  one  to  take  your  father's  plat  she  had

never  put  you  to  pull  in  harness  with  such  an  old
nag."

(>t  she  who  has  decided  it"

"  Ah,  Heaven  preserve  us !  —  have  you  yourself
chosen  such  a  fine

"  !  K-  does  not  t.  for  my  money."

**  No,  the  old  ones,  they  only  run  after  blue  eyes
and  red  checks ;  and  awfully  nice  they  arc,  when  they

« )h,  Gosta,  are  you  not  ashamed  ?  "
"  But  remember  that  you   are   not  to   play  with
young   men   any   longer.      No   more    dancing  and
games.    Your  place  is  in  the  corner  of  the  sofa  —


70  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

or   perhaps   you    mean   to   play   cribbage   with   old
Dahlbcrg?"

They  were  silent,  till  they  drove  up  the  steep  hill
to  Borg.

Thanks  for  the  drive!     It  will  be  long  before  I
drive  again  with  you,  Gosta  Berlin^."

"Thanks  for  the  promise  !  I  know  many  who  will
be  sorry  to-day  they  ever  drove  you  to  a  party."

Little  pleased  was  the   haughty  beauty  when
entered   the  ball-room  and   looked   over   the  guests
gathered  there.

First  of  all  she  saw  the  little,  bald  Dahlberg  beside
the  tall,  slender,  golden-haired  Gosta  Berling.  She
wished  she  could  have  driven  them  both  out  of  the
room.

Her  fiance*  came  to  ask  her  to  dance,  but  she  re-
ceived him  with  crushing  astonishment.

"  Arc  you  going  to  dance?     You  never  do  !  "

And  the  girls  came  to  wish  her  joy.

"  Don't  give  yourselves  the  trouble,  girls.  You
don't  suppose  that  any  one  could  be  in  love  with  old
Dahlberg.  But  he  is  rich,  and  I  am  rich,  therefore
we  go  well  together."

The  old  ladies  went  up  to  her,  pressed  her  white
hand,  and  spoke  of  life's  greatest  happiness.

"  Congratulate  the  minister's  wife,"  she  said.  "  She
is  gladder  about  it  than  I."

But  there  stood  Gosta  Berling,  the  gay  cavalier,
greeted  with  joy  for  his  cheerful  smile  and  his  pleas-
ant words,  which  sifted  gold-dust  over  life's  gray  web.
Never  before  had  she  seen  him  as  he  was  that  night.
He  was  no  outcast,  no  homeless  jester;  no,  a  king
among  men,  a  born  king.

He   and   the  other  young  men  conspired  against


COSTA  BERL1NG,  Pu  7'

be  sin  mill  think  over  h«»w  badly  she  had  be-
haved when  she  gave  her  \\  her  lu  and

man.    And  they  let  her
sit  out  ten  dances.

She  was  boiling  with  rage.

At  th<  h  dance  came  a  man.  •

ut  of  all,  a  poor  thin-.  wln.in  nobody  would

iskcd  her  for  a  turn.

1  bring  on  the  crusts,"  she

said.

Ihry  played  a  game  of  forfeits.  The  fair-haired
girls  ir  heads  to^<  mned  ii

one  she  loved  best.     And  with  smiling

to    sec    the    proud     beauty    kiss   old

she  ros  in  her  anger,  and  said  :

"  May  I  not  just  as  well  give  a  blow  to  the  one  I
like  the  lea

The  moment  after  Gosta's  check  burned  under  her
firm  hand.  He  flushed  a  flaming  red,  but  he  con-
quered him-  1  her  hand,  held  it  fast  a  second,
and  whispered :  —

41  Meet  me  in  half  an  hour  in  the  red  drawing-
room  on  the  lower  floor !  "

His  hhu  ryes  flashed  on  her,  and  encompassed  her
with  magical  waves.  She  felt  that  she  must  obey.

i  him  with  proud  and  angry  words.
"  How  docs  it  concern  you  whom  I  marry?"
I  Ie  was  not  ready  to  speak  gently  to  her,  nor  did  it

.  to  him  best  to  speak  yet  of  Ferdinand.
"  I  thought  it  was  not  too  severe  a  punishment  for
you   to  sit  out  ten   dances.     But  you  want  to   be
allowed  unpunished  to  break  vows  and  promises.     If


72  THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERUXG

a  better  man  than  1  had  taken  your  sentence  in  his
hand,  he  could  have  made  it  liar.:

"  What  have  I  done  to  you  and  all  the  others,  that
I  may  not  be  in  peace?  It  is  for  my  money's  sake
you  persecute  me.  I  shall  throw  it  into  the  Lofvcn,
and  any  one  who  wants  it  can  fish  it  up."

She  put  her  hands  before  her  eyes  and  wept  from
anger.

That  moved  the  poet's  heart.  He  was  ashamed  of
his  harshness.  He  spoke  in  caressing  tones.

"Ah,  child,  child,  forgive  me!  Forgive  poor
Gosta  Bcrling!  Nobody  cares  what  such  a  poor
wretch  says  or  does,  you  know  that.  Nobody  weeps
for  his  anger,  one  might  just  as  well  weep  over  a
mosquito's  bite.  It  was  madness  in  me  to  hope  that
I  could  prevent  our  loveliest  and  richest  girl  marry-
ing that  old  man.  And  now  I  have  only  distressed
you."

He  sat  down  on  the  sofa  beside  her.  Gently  he
put  his  arm  about  her  waist,  with  caressing  tender-
ness, to  support  and  raise  her.

She  did  not  move  away.  She  pressed  closer  to
him,  threw  her  arms  round  his  neck,  and  wept  with
her  beautiful  head  on  his  shoulder.

O  poet,  strongest  and  weakest  of  men,  it  was  not
about  your  neck  those  white  arms  should  rest.

"  If  I  had  known  that,"  she  whispered,  "  never
would  I  have  taken  the  old  man.  I  have  watched
you  this  evening ;  there  is  no  one  like  you."

From  between  pale  lips  Gosta  forced  out,  —

"Ferdinand."

She  silenced  him  with  a  kiss.

"  He  is  nothing;  no  one  but  you  is  anything.  To
you  will  I  be  faithful."


COSTA  Bl  POET  73

l.miO  he  said  gloomily ;  "youcan-

um  I  low-,  the  noblest  of  me;
i   do   nothing,  be    r.  You   arc    bora  a

kin-,

•he  poet's  blood  seethed.    She  was  beautiful
and  u-ndrr  in  her  love.      He  took  her  in  his  arms.
Ii  \.'u  will  be  mine,  you  cannot  remain  at  the
a^e.      Let   me   drive  you   to   Kkcby   to-ni

!     hall  know  how  to  defend  you  till  we  can  be
married."

That  was  a  wild  drive  through  the  night  Ab-
sorbed in  their  love,  n  Juan  take  his  own
pace.  The  noise  of  the  runn  like  the  lamcnta-
of  those  they  had  deceived.  What  did  they
care  for  that?  She  hung  on  his  neck,  and  he  leaned
forward  and  whispered  in  her  car.

"  Can  any  happiness  be  compared  in  sweetness  to
stolen  pleasures?"

What  did  the  banns  matter?    They  had  love.    And
the  anger  of  men!     Gusta  Herling  believed  in  t
!ud  mastered  them:   no  one  can  resist  fa

If  the  stars  had  been  the  candles  which  had  been
lighted  for  her  wedding,  if  Don  Juan's  bells  had  been
the  church  chimes,  calling  the  people  to  witness  her
marriage  to  old  Dahlberg,  still  she  must  have  fled
with  Gosta  Bcrling.  So  powerful  is  fate.

They   had   passed    th  ^c   and    Munkerud.

They  had  three  miles  to  Berga  and  three  miles  more

>•.     The  road  skirted  the  edge  of  the  wood ;

on  their    ri^ht   lay  dark  hills,  on   their  left  a   long,

valley.

Tancrcd  came   rushing.      He   ran  so  fast  that  he


74  'I' HE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUNG

seemed  to  He  along  the  ground.  Howling  with
fright,  he  sprang  up  in  the  sledge  and  crept  under
Anna's  feet.

Don  Juan  shu-d  aiul  bolted.

"Wolves!  "  5ai<  Uerling.

They  saw  a  long,  gray  line  running  by  the  fence.
Tin-re  were  at  least  a  dozen  of  them.

Anna  was  not  afraid.     The  day  1  n  richly

blessed  with  adventure,  and  the  night  promised  to  be
equally  so.  It  was  life,  —  to  speed  over  the  sparkling
snow,  defying  wild  beasts  and  men.

Gosta  uttered  an  oath,  leaned  forward,  and  struck
Don  Juan  a  heavy  blow  with  the  whip.

"Are  you  afraid?"  he  asked.  "They  mean  to
cut  us  off  there,  where  the  road  tin

Don  Juan  ran,  racing  with  the  wild  beasts  of  tin-
forest,  and  Tancrcd  howled  in  rage  and  terror.     '1
reached  the  turn  of  the  road  at  the  same  time  as  the
wolves,  and  Gosta  drove  back  the  foremost  with  the
whip.

"  Ah,  Don  Juan,  my  boy,  how  easily  you  could  get
away  from  twelve  wolves,  if  you  did  not  have  us  to
drag."

They  tied  the  green  plaid  behind  them.  The
wolves  were  afraid  of  it,  and  fell  back  for  a  while.
But  when  they  had  overcome  their  fright,  one  of
them  ran,  panting,  with  hanging  tongue  and  open
mouth  up  to  the  sledge.  Then  Gosta  took  Mad
dc  Steel's  "  Corinne  "  and  threw  it  into  his  mouth.

Once  more  they  had  breathing-space  for  a  time,
while  the  brutes  tore  their  booty  to  pieces,  and  then
again  they  felt  the  dragging  as  the  wolves  seized  the
green  plaid,  and  heard  their  panting  breath.  They
knew  that  they  should  not  pass  any  human  dwelling


GQSTA  Bl  75

before   Berga,  but  worse  than   death   it  seemed  to
a  to  sec  those  he  had  d  .      Hut  he  knew

that  the  horse  would  tire,  and  what  should  bccom

They  .IA  the  house  at  Bcrga  at  the  edge  of  the
forest  Candles  burned  in  th  .vs.  Gosta  k

Hut  now  the  wolves  drew  back,  fearing  the  nc;
borhood  of  man,  and  Gosta  drove  past  Bcrga.
came  no  further  than  t<>  the  place  wh<  road

once  again  1  df  in  the  wood;  there  he  saw  a

dark  group  befoi  -  the  wolves  were  waiting  fur

him

Let  us  turn  back  to  the  vicarage  and  say  that  we
took  a  little  pleasure  trip  in  the  starlight.     We  can't

They  turned,  but  in  the  next  moment  the  sledge
was  surrounded  by  wolves.     Gray  forms  brushed  by
them,  their  \\hitc  teeth  glittered  in  gaping  mouths,
ng  eyes  shone.     They  howled  with
hunger   and    thirst   for  blood.     The  glittering  t
were  ready  to  seize  the  soft  human  flesh.     The  wolves
leaped  up  on  Don  Juan,  and   hung  on  the  saddle-
cloth.    Anna  sat  and  wondered  if  they  would   eat
D  entirely  up,  or  if  there  would  be  something  left,
so  that  people  t:  morning  would   fiml    their

mangled  limbs  on  the  trampled,  bloody  snow.

It's  a  question  of  our  live  .aid,  and  leaned

and  seized  Tancrcd  by  the  nape  of  the  n
"  Don't,  —  that  will   not  help!     It  for  the

dog's  sake  the  wolves  arc  out  to-nipl

Thereupon  Gosta  drove  into  the  yard  at  Berga,  but
the  wolves  hunted  him  up  to  the  very  steps.  He
had  to  beat  them  off  with  the  whip.


76  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   /  V  A  / V.VC

44  Ann.i."  lie  said,  as  they  drew  up,  *4  God  would  not
have  it.  a  good  countenance;  if  \<>u  are  the

woman  I  take  you  for,  keep  a  good  countenance !  "

They  had  heard  the  sleigh-bells  in  the  house,  and
came  out

'    He    hai    her!"  they  cried,  "he   has  her!      Long
live  Gosta  Hcrlini^ !  "  and   the   new-coiners  were
d  by  one  after  another.

\v   questions    \vi  d.      The  night   was    t.n

advanced, the  travellers  were  agitated  by  their  terrible
drive  and  needed  rest.  It  was  enough  that  Anna
had  come.

All  was  well.      Only  "Corinne"   and  the   gi
plaid,  Mamselle  Ulrika's  prized  gift,  were  destroyed.

The  whole  house  slept.  But  Gosta  rose,  dressed
himself,  and  stole  out.  Unnoticed  he  led  Don  Juan
out  of  the  stable,  harnessed  him  to  the  sledge,  and
meant  to  set  out.  But  Anna  Stjarnhok  came  out
from  the  house.

"  I  heard  you  go  out,"  she  said.  "  So  I  got  up,
too.  I  am  ready  to  go  with  you."

He  went  up  to  her  and  took  her  hand.

11  Don't  you  understand  it  yet?  It  cannot  be.  God
does  not  wish  it.  Listen  now  and  try  to  understand.
I  was  here  to  dinner  and  saw  their  grief  over  your
faithlessness.  I  went  to  Borg  to  bring  you  back  to
Ferdinand.  But  I  have  always  been  a  good-for-
nothing,  and  will  never  be  anything  else.  I  betrayed
him,  and  kept  you  for  myself.  There  is  an  old
woman  here  who  believes  that  I  shall  become  a  man.
I  betrayed  her.  And  another  poor  old  thing  will
freeze  and  starve  here  for  the  sake  of  dying  among
friends,  but  I  was  ready  to  let  the  wicked  Sintram


COSTA  BE  RUNG,  /V  77

take  her  home.     You  were  beautiful  .and  sin  is  sweet
.  so  easy  t<  Gosta  Bc-ilm  ;      •  •!».  -.-. .

I  kn«»\v  h«.\v  they  love  •
:r,  all  th«)sc  in  there,  but  I  was  ready  ju

to  be  pillage  rgot  everything  for  your

sake,  you  were  so  swc  >ur  love.     But   now,

Anna,  now  sincr  1  have  seen  tlu-ir  joy,  I  will  n..t  keep
you ;  no,  I  w  ill  not.    You  could  have  made  a  man  of
but  I   may  not  keep  you.     Oh,  my  beloved  !   II  ••
re  above  mocks  at  our  desires.     We  must  bow
umlcr  His  chastising  hand.     Tell  me  that  you  from
lay  will  take  up  your  burden  !     All  of  them  rely
upon  you.     Say  that  you  will  stay  with  them  and  be
their  prop  and  help!     If  you  love  me.  if  you   will
liglr  lecp  sorrow,  promise  me  this!     My  be-

loved, is  your  heart  so  great  that  you  can  conquer
yourself,  and  smile  in  doing  it  ?  "

She  accepted  the  renunciation  in  a  sort  of  ecstasy.
"  I   shall  do  as   you  wish,  —  sacrifice  myself  and
smi

id  not  hate  my  poor  friends?"
She  smiled  sadly.

44  As  long  as  I  love  you,  I  shall  love  them."
"Now  for  the  first  time  I  know  what  you  are.     It

nl  to  leave  you."

"Farewell,   <i»sta!     Go,  and  God  be  with  you!
My  love  shall  not  tempt  you  to  -
She  turned  to  go  in.     He  followed  her.
"  Will  you  soon  forget  me?"
44  Go,  G»  Ml '     We  arc  only  hun
He  threw  himself  down  in  the  sledge,  but  then  she

back  ai;

Do  you  not  think  of  the  wolv<
44  Just  of  them  I  am  thinking,  but  they  have  done


78  /•///•;  STOKY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

their  work.     From  me  they  have  nothing   mor
get  this  night."

Once  more  he  stretched  his  arms  towards  her,  but
Don  Juan  became  impatient  and  set  off.     He  did  not
take  the  reins.     He  sat  backwards  and  looked
her.     Then    he    leaned    against    the   seat   and    wept
despairingly.

"  I  have  possessed  happiness  and  driven  her  from
me;  I  myself  drove  her  from  me.  Why  did  I  not
keep  her?"

Ah,  Gosta  Berling,  strongest  and  weakest  of  men !


LA  CACHUCHA  79


CHAPTER    V
LA    CACHUCHA

WAR-HORSE  i  war-horse !    Old  friend,  who  now  stand

tethered    in    the   pasture,   do  you    remember   your
you:

you   remember  the  day  of  the  battle?     You

sprang  forward,  as  if  you  had  been  borne  on  wings,

red  about  you  like  u  imcs,  on

r  black  haunches  shone  drops  of  blood  and  frothy

foam.     In  harness  of  gold  you  bounded  forward  ;  the

ground  thundered  under  you.     You  trembled  with

Ah,  how  beautiful  you  were!
It  is  the  gray  hour  oi  i  in  the  pensioners'

wing.     In  the  big  room  the  pensioners'  ro:

ts   stand   against   the   walls,   and    their   holiday

ics  hang  on  hooks  in  the  corner.     The  firelight

plays  on  th  A  ashed  walls  and  on  the  yellow-

ns  which  conceal  the  beds.     The  pen-

<-rs'  wing  is  not  a  kingly  dwelling,  —  no  seraglio

with  cushioned  d  nd  soft  pill«

Hut  there  I.illiecrona's  violin  is  heard.     He  is  play-
the  cachucha  in  the  dusk  of  the  evening.     And
he  plays  it  over  and  over  again.

Cut  the  strings,  break  his  bow!  Why  does  he
play  that  cursed  dance?  Why  does  he  play  it,  when
Ornccloti,  the  ensign,  is  lying  sick  with  the  pains  of
gout,  so  severe  tli.it  he  cannot  move  in  his  bed?  No;


80  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

h  the  violin  away  and  throw  it  against  the  wall
if  he  will  not  stop.

La  cachucha,   is   it  for  u  ;°     Shall   it   IK

danced   over   the   shaking  floor   of  Uu
wing,  between  the   narrow  walls,  black  with   smoke
and  greasy  with  dirt,  under  that  low  ceiling?     Woe
to  you,  to  play  so.

La  cachucha,  is  it  for  us,  —  for  us  pensioners  ?  With-
out the  snow-storm  howls.  Do  you  think  to  teach
the  snow-flakes  to  dance  in  time?  Are  you  playing
for  the  light-footed  children  of  the  storm?

Maiden  forms,  which  tremble  with  the  throbbing
of  hot  blood,  small  sooty  hands,  which  have  thrown
aside  the  pot  to  seize  the  castanets,  bare  feet  under
tucked-up  skirts,  courts  paved  with  marble  slabs,
crouching  gypsies  with  bagpipe  and  tambourine,
Moorish  arcades,  moonlight,  and  black  eyes,  —  have
you  these,  master?  If  not,  let  the  violin  rest.

The  pensioners  are  drying  their  wet  clothes  by  the
fire.  Shall  they  swing  in  high  boots  with  iron-shod
heels  and  inch-thick  soles?  Through  snow  yards
deep  they  have  waded  the  whole  day  to  reach  the
bear's  lair.  Do  you  think  they  will  dance  in  wet,
reeking  homespun  clothes,  with  shaggy  bruin  as  a
partner?

An  evening  sky  glittering  with  stars,  red  roses  in
dark  hair,  troublous  tenderness  in  the  air,  untutored
grace  in  their  movements,  love  rising  from  the
ground,  raining  from  the  sky,  floating  in  the  air,  —
have  you  all  that,  master?  If  not,  why  do  you  force
us  to  long  for  such  things?

Most  cruel  of  men,  are  you  summoning  the  tethered
war-horse  to  the  combat?  Rutgcr  von  Orneclou  is
lying  in  his  bed,  a  prisoner  to  the  gout.  Spare  him


LA  CA(  8l

the  pain  of  tender  memories,  master !     I  ic  too  has

ii  sombrero  and  bright-colored  hair-net ;  he  too

has  owned  velvt  and  belt  ard.     Spare

Orncclou,  mastt

Hut    Lilliecrona  plays  the  cachucha,  always  the
cachucha,  and  Orncclou  is   tortured  li!
when  he  sees  the  swallow  i'  to  his  beloved's

.lit  ilu-i-lling,  like  the  hart  when  he  is  driven  by
the  hurt  \m.;  chase  past  the  cooling  spr

I.-.  M  takes  the  violin  for  a  second  from  his

chin.

"  Ensign,  do  you  remember  Rosalie  von  Bergcr? "

clou  swears  a  solemn  oath.

"She  was  light  as  a  candle-flame.  She  sparkled
and  danced  like  the  diamond  in  the  end  of  the  fiddle-
bow.  You  must  remember  her  in  the  theatre  at
Karlstad.  We  saw  her  when  we  were  young;  do
you  remember?"

••.*!  the  ensign  remembered.  She  was  small  and
ardent.  She  was  like  a  sparkling  flame.  She  could
dance  la  cachucha.  She  taught  all  the  young  men
in  Karlstad  to  dance  cachucha  and  to  play  the  casta-
nets. At  the  governor's  ball  a  pas  d*  dntx  was  danced
by  the  ensign  and  Mile,  von  Bergcr,  dressed  as
Spaniards.

1  lu  had  danced  as  one  dances  under  fig-trees
and  magnolias,  like  a  S[  —a  real  Spaniard.

No  one  in  the  whole  of  Varmland  could  dance
cachucha  like  him.  No  one  could  dance  it  so  that

.s  worth  speaking  of  it,  but  he.

What   a   cavalier   Varmland   lost   when   the   gout

stiffened  his  legs  and  great  lumps  grew  out  on   his

!     What  a  cavalier  he  had  been,  so  slender,  so

handsome,  so  courtly!     "The  handsome  Orncclou"

'•


82  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

he  was  called  by  those  young  girls  who  were  ready
to  come  to  blows  over  a  dance  with  him.

Then  Lilliecrona  begins  the  cachucha  again,  always
the  cachucha,  and  Orneclou  is  taken  back  to  old
times.

There  he  stands,  and  there  she  stands,  Rosalie  von
Berger.     Just  now  they  were  alone  in  the  dress
room.     She  was  a  Spaniard,  he  too.    He  was  allowed
to  kiss  her,  but  carefully,  for  she  was  afraid  of  his
blackened  moustache.    Now  they  dance.    Ah,  as  one
dances  under  fig-trees  and  magnolias!     She  di
away,  he  follows ;  he  is  bold,  she  proud  ;  he  wounded,
she  conciliatory.     When  he  at  the  end  falls  on  his
knees  and   receives  her  in  his  outstretched  arms,  a
sigh  goes  through  the  ball-room,  a  sigh  of  rapture.

He  had  been  like  a  Spaniard,  a  real  Spaniard.

Just  at  that  stroke  had  he  bent  so,  stretched  his
arms  so,  and  put  out  his  foot  to  glide  forward.  What
grace !  He  might  have  been  hewn  in  marble.

He  does  not  know  how  it  happened,  but  he  has
got  his  foot  over  the  edge  of  the  bed,  he  stands
upright,  he  bends,  he  raises  his  arms,  snaps  his
fingers,  and  wishes  to  glide  forward  over  the  floor  in
the  same  way  as  long  ago,  when  he  wore  so  ti^ln
patent  leather  shoes  the  stocking  feet  had  to  be  cut
away.

"Bravo,  Orneclou!  Bravo,  Lilliecrona,  play  life
into  him  !  "

His  foot  gives  way;  he  cannot  rise  on  his  toe.  He
kicks  a  couple  of  times  with  one  leg;  he  can  do  no
more,  he  falls  back  on  the  bed.

Handsome  seftor,  you  have  grown  old.

Perhaps  the  seftorita  has  too.

It  is  only  under  the  plane-trees  of  Granada  that


LA   CACHUCHA  83

..i  is  danced  by  eternally  young  gitanas.
•i.illy  > 'uniitf,  because,  like  tin-  roses,  each  spring
.s  new  ones.

So  now  th  uis  come  to  cut  the  strings.

No,  play  on,  Lilliccruna,  play  the  cachucha,  always
the  cachuch

Teach  us  that,  although  we  have  got  slow  bodies
and  stilt  in  our  feelings  we  arc  always  the

same,  always  Spani .;
War-horse,  war-horse !

Say  that  you  love  the  trumpet-blast,  which  decoys
you  into  a  gallop,  even  if  you  also  cut  your  foot  to
the  bone  on  the  steel-link  of  the  tether.


84  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING


CHAPTER  VI

Till.   BALI     AT  EKEBY

AH,  women  of  the  olden  times  !

To  speak  of  you  is  to  speak  of  the  kingdom  of
heaven;  you  were  all  beauties,  ever  bright,
young,  ever  lovely  and  gentle  as  a  mother's  eyes
when  she  looks  down  on  her  child.  Soft  as  young
squirrels  you  hung  on  your  husband's  neck.  Your
voice  never  trembled  with  anger,  no  frowns  ruffled
your  brow,  your  white  hand  was  never  harsh  and
hard.  You,  sweet  saints,  like  adored  images  stood
in  the  temple  of  home.  Incense  and  prayers  were
offered  you,  through  you  love  worked  its  won<
and  round  your  temples  poetry  wreathed  its  gold,
gleaming  glory.

Ah,  women  of  the  past,  this  is  the  story  of  how
one  of  you  gave  Gosta  Bcrling  her  love.

Two  weeks  after  the  ball  at  Borg  there  was  one  at
Ekeby.

What  a  feast  it  was!  Old  men  and  women  be-
come young  again,  smile  and  rejoice,  only  in  speaking
of  it.

The  pensioners  were  masters  at  Ekcby  at  that
time.  The  major's  wife  went  about  the  country
with  beggar's  wallet  and  crutch,  and  the  major  lived
at  Sjo.  He  could  not  even  be  present  at  the  ball,
for  at  Sjo  small-pox  had  broken  out,  and  he  was
afraid  to  spread  the  infection.


/'///.    HALL  AT  I  85

U'h.it  pk-. i  !rom

the  IM.J,  first  cork  at  table  to  the

last  wail  of  the  violins,  long  after  muln

Hi  ic  background  of  time,  those

iirs,   made  magical    by  the   most   fiery
s  by  the  m»  t«>od,  by  the  most  in

,  by  tlu  \Mtti«--t  of  theatricals,  by  the  most

beautiful  y  have  sunk  away,  dizzy  with

dance.    Where  are  to  be  found   such

polished   floors,  such  courtly   knights,  such  lovely

en?

Ah,  women  of  the  olden  days,  you  knew  well  how
to  adorn  a  ball.  Streams  of  fire,  of  genius,  and
youthful  vigor  thrilled  each  and  all  who  approached
you.  It  was  worth  wasting  one's  gold  on  wax-candles
to  light  up  your  loveliness,  <  1  gaycty

your  hearts ;  it  was  worth  dancing  soles  to  dust
and  rubbing  stiff  arms  which  had  drawn  the  fiddle-
bow,  for  your  sakcs.

Ah,  women  of  the  olden  days,  it  was  you   who

1  the  key  to  the  door  of  Paradise.
The  halls  of  Kkcby  are  crowded  with  the  love
of  your  lovely  throng.     There  is  the  young  Countess
Dohna,   sparklingly  gay  and   eager    for   game  and
dance,  as  befits  her  twenty  years ;  there  are  the  lovely
daughters  of  the  judge  of  Munkcrud,  and  the  lively
young   ladies  from   Bcrga;    there   is  Anna    St

thousand  times  more  beautiful  than  ever
before,  with  that  gentle  dreaminess  which  had  come
over  her  ever  since  the  night  she  had  been  hunted
by  wolves;  there  arc  many  more,  who  arc  not

•n  will  be;  and  there  is  the  beautiful
Mar  ;r.

She,  the  tamed  queen  of  beauty,  who  had  shone


86  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

at  royal  courts,  who  had  travelled  the  land  over  and
received  homage  everywhere,  she  who  lighted  the
spark  of  love  wherever  she  showed  herself,  —  she  had
.;ned  to  come  to  the  pensioners'  ball.

At  that  time  Varmland's  glory  was  at  its  height,
borne  up  by  many  proud  names.  Much  had  the
beautiful  land's  happy  children  to  be  proud  of,  but
when  they  named  their  glories  they  never  neglected
to  speak  of  Marianne  Sinclair.

The  tales  of  her  conquests  filled  the  land.

They  spoke  of  the  coronets  which  had  floated
over  her  head,  of  the  millions  which  had  been  laid
at  her  feet,  of  the  warriors'  swords  and  poets'  wreaths
whose  splendor  had  tempted  her.

And  she  possessed  not  only  beauty.  She  was
witty  and  learned.  The  cleverest  men  of  the  day
were  glad  to  talk  with  her.  She  was  not  an  author
herself,  but  many  of  her  ideas,  which  she  had  put
into  the  souls  of  her  poet-friends,  lived  again  in  song.

In  Varmland,  in  the  land  of  the  bear,  she  seldom
stayed.  Her  life  was  spent  in  perpetual  journeyings.
Her  father,  the  rich  Melchior  Sinclair,  remained
at  home  at  Bjorne  and  let  Marianne  go  to  her
noble  friends  in  the  large  towns  or  at  the  great
country-seats.  He  had  his  pleasure  in  telling  of
all  the  money  she  wasted,  and  both  the  old  people
lived  happy  in  the  splendor  of  Marianne's  glowing
existence.

Her  life  was  a  life  of  pleasures  and  homage.  The
air  about  her  was  love  —  love  her  light  and  lamp,
love  her  daily  bread.

She,  too,  had  often  loved,  often,  often ;  but  never
had  that  fire  lasted  long  enough  to  forge  the  chains
which  bind  for  life.


HALL  AT  KKKBY  87

I  uaH  foi  l»  ^hc  used  to  say

of  love.     "  Hitherto  he  has  not  climbed  over  several
ramparts,  nor  swum  through  several  trenches.     ii<
has  come  tamely,  without  wiMncss  in   his  eye  and
»css  in  his  heart.     I  wait  for  the  conqueror,  who
shall   take  me  out  of  myself.     I    will  fed   love  so
•\£  within  me   that   I    must  tremble  before  him;
now  1  know  only  the  love  at  which  my  good  sense
laughs."

Her  presence  gave  fire  to  talk,  life  to  the  w
Her  glowing  spirit  set  the  fiddle-bows  going,  and  the
dance  floated  in  sweeter  giddiness  than  before  over
the  floor  which  she  had  touched  with  her  teet  She
was  radiant  in  the  tableaux,  she  gave  genius  to  the
comedy,  her  lov

Ah,  hush,  it  was  not  her  fault,  she  never  meant
to  do  it !  1 1  \\a,  the  balcony,  it  was  the  moonlight,
the  1  knightly  dress,  the  song,  which  were

to  blame.    The  poor  young  creatures  were  innocent.

that  which  led   to  so  much  unhappincss
i   the  best  intentions.     Master  Julius,  who  could
do  anytl:  <-d  a  tableau  especially  that

i  full  ^lory.

In  the  theatre,  which  was  set  up  in  the  great
drawing-room  .v  y,  sat  the  hundred  guests

.UK!    looked    at   the    picture,   Spain's    yellow   moon
wandering  through  a  dark  night  sky.     A  Don  Juan
>ng  Sevilla's  street  and  stopped  under
vy-clad   balcony.     He  was  disguised  as  a  monk,
but  one  could   see  an  embroidered  cuff  under  tin-
sleeve,  and  a  gleaming  sword-point  under  the  mantle's
hem.
He  raised  his  voice  in  song :  —


88  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BERLIKG

'  I  kiss  the  lips  of  no  fair  maul,
Nor  wet  mine  with  the  foaming  wine

Within  the  beaker's  gold.
A  check  upon  whose  rose-leaf  shade
Mine  eyes  have  lit  a  glow  divine,
A  look  which  shyly  sccketh  mine,  —
These  leave  me  still  and  cold.

"  Ah,  come  not  in  thy  beauty's  glow,
Seflora,  through  yon  terrace-door ;

I  fear  when  thou  art  nigh!
Cope  and  stole  my  shoulders  know,
The  Virgin  only  I  adore,
And  water-jugs  hold  comfort's  store  ;

For  ease  to  them  I  fly."

As  he  finished,  Marianne  came  out  on  the  balcony,
dressed  in  black  velvet  and  lace  veil.  She  leaned
over  the  balustrade  and  sang  slowly  and  ironically:

«'  Why  tarry  thus,  thou  holy  man
Beneath  my  window  late  or  long?
Dost  pray  for  my  soul's  weal  ?  "

Then  suddenly,  warmly  and  eagerly :  —

"  Ah,  flee,  begone  while  yet  you  can !
Your  gleaming  sword  sticks  forth  so  long.
And  plainly,  spite  your  holy  song,
The  spurs  clank  on  your  heel."

At  these  words  the  monk  cast  off  his  disguise,  and
Gosta  Berling  stood  under  the  balcony  in  a  knight's
dress  of  silk  and  gold.  He  heeded  not  the  beauty's
warning,  but  climbed  up  one  of  the  balcony  supports,
swung  himself  over  the  balustrade,  and,  just  as  Master
Julius  had  arranged  it,  fell  on  his  knees  at  the  lovely
Marianne's  feet


THE  BALL  A  T  £  A  /  A)  89

Graciously  she  smiU-d  on  him,  and  gave  him  her

hand  t"  ki  .-,  and  \\liili-  tin-   i

at  one  another,  absorbed  in  ti.  rtain

And  before  her  knelt  Gotta  Bcrling,  with  a  face
tender  as  a  poet's  and  bold  as  a  soldier's,  with  deep
eyes,  which  glowed  wit:.  1  genius,  which  im-

plored and  constrained.     Supple  and  full  of  strength
was  he,  fiery  and  captivat

While  the  curtain  went  up  and  down,  the  two  stood
always  in  the  same  position.    Gosta's  eyes  held  the
lovely   Marianne    fast;    they  implored;    they  con-
Then  the  applause  ceased ;  the  curtain  hung  quiet;
no  one  saw  them.

Then  the  beautiful  Marianne  bent  down  and  kissed
Gosta  Bcrling.  She  did  not  know  why,  —  she  had  to.
He  stretched  up  his  arms  about  her  head  and  held
her  fast.  She  kissed  him  again  and  again.

But  it  was  the  balcony,  it  was  the  moonlight,  it
was  the  lace  veil,  the  knightly  dress,  the  song,  the
applause,  which  were  to  blame.  They  had  not  wished
She  had  not  thrust  aside  the  crowns  which  had
hovered  over  her  head,  and  spurned  the  millions
which  lay  at  her  feet,  out  of  love  for  Gosta  Bcrling ;
nor  had  he  already  forgotten  Anna  Stjarnhok.  No ;
they  were  blameless ;  neither  of  them  had  wished  it.

It  was  the  gen:'  nborg,—  he  with  the  fear  in

his  eye  and  the  smile  on  his  lips,  —  who  that  day  was

r.     Distracted  by  the  memory  of  many

sorrows,  he  noticed  little  of  the  things  of  this  world,

had   never  learned  to  look  after  them  rightly.

When   he   now  saw  that   Gosta   and    Marianne   had

taken  a  new  position,  he   thought  that   it  also  be-


90  THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLING

longed  to  the  tableau,  and  so  he  began  to  drag  on
the  curtain  string.

The  two  on  the  balcony  observed  nothing  until  a
thunder  of  applause  greeted  them

Marianne  started  back  and  wished  to  ilee,  but  Gosta
held  her  fast,  whispering:  —

"Stand  still ;   they  think  it  belongs  to  the  tableau."

He  felt  how  her  body  shook  with  shuddering,  and
how  the  fire  of  her  kisses  died  out  on  her  lips.

Do  not  be  afraid,"  he  whispered ;  "  lovely  lips  have
a  right  to  kiss."

They  had  to  stand  while  the  curtain  went  up  and
went  down,  and  each  time  the  hundreds  of  eyes  saw
them,  hundreds  of  hands  thundered  out  a  stormy
applause.

For  it  was  beautiful  to  see  two  fair  young  people
represent  love's  happiness.  No  one  could  think  that
those  kisses  were  anything  but  stage  delusion.  No
one  guessed  that  the  sefiora  shook  with  embarrass-
ment and  the  knight  with  uneasiness.  No  one  could
think  that  it  did  not  all  belong  to  the  tableau.

At  last  Marianne  and  Gosta  stood  behind  the
scenes.

She  pushed  her  hair  back  from  her  forehead.

•'  I  don't  understand  myself,"  she  said.

"Fie!  for  shame,  Miss  Marianne,"  said  he,  grimac-
ing, and  stretched  out  his  hands.  "To  kiss  Gosta
Berling;  shame  on  you!"

Marianne  had  to  laugh.

"  Every  one  knows  that  Gosta  Berling  is  irresistible.
My  fault  is  no  greater  than  others'."

And  they  agreed  to  put  a  good  face  on  it,  so  that
no  one  should  suspect  the  truth.

"  Can  I  be  sure  that  the  truth  will  never  come  out,


THE  BALL  AT  /  AV.tf  X  91

ta  ?  "  she  asked,  before  they  went  out  among
guests,

ii.it  you  can.    Gentlemen  can  hold  their  tongues.
>misc  you  tl.

She  dropped  her  eyes.  A  strange  smile  curved
her  1

"If  the  truth  should  come  out,  what  would  people
think  of  me,  Hcrr  Gosta?"

"They  would  not  think  anything.  They  would
know  that  »t  meant  nothing.  They  would  think  that
we  entered  into  our  parts  and  were  going  on  with  the
play."

Yet  another  question,  with  lowered  lids  and  with
the  same  forced  smile, —

'  Hut  you  yourself?  What  do  you  think  about
it.  Km  <;  ,ta?"

1  think  that  you  arc  in  love  with  me,"  he  jested.
"  Think   no  such  thing,"  she  smiled,  "  for  then   1
must  run  you  through  with  my  stiletto  to  show  you
you  arc  wrong."

Women's    kisses     are     precious,"     said    Gosta.
"  Does  it  cost  one's  life  to  be  kissed  by  Marianne

lair?"

A  glance  flashed  on  him  from  Marianne's  eyes,  so
sharp  that  it  felt  like  a  blow.

"I  could  wish  to  see  you  dead,  Gosta  Bcrling!
dead!  dead

These  words  revived  the  old  longing  in  the  poet's
blood.

"  Ah,"  he  said,  "  would  that  those  words  were  more

\   words! — that  they  were  arrows  which  came

tling  from  some  dark  ambush;  that  they  were

daggers  or  poison,  and  had  the  power  to  destroy

this  wretched  body  and  set  my  soul  free !  "


92  IE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

She  was  calm  and  smiling  now.

hildishness  !  "  she  said,  and  took  his  arm  to  join
the  guests.

They  kept  their  costumes,  and  their  triumphs  v,

\ved  when  they  showed  themselves  in  front  of
the  scenes.  Every  one  complimented  them.  No
one  suspected  anything.

The  ball  began  again,  but  Gosta  escaped  from  the
ballroom.

His  heart  ached  from  Marianne's  glance,  as  if  it
had  been  wounded  by  sharp  steel.  He  understood
too  well  the  meaning  of  her  words.

It  was  a  disgrace  to  love  him ;  it  was  a  disgrace  to
be  loved  by  him,  a  shame  worse  than  death.

He  would  never  dance  again.  He  wished  never  to
see  them  again,  those  lovely  women.

He  knew  it  too  well.  Those  beautiful  eyes,  those
red  cheeks  burned  not  for  him.  Not  for  him  floated
those  light  feet,  nor  rung  that  low  laugh.

Yes,  dance  with  him,  flirt  with  him,  that  they  could
do,  but  not  one  of  them  would  be  his  in  earnest.

The  poet  went  into  the  smoking-room  to  the  old
men,  and  sat  down  by  one  of  the  card-tables.  He
happened  to  throw  himself  down  by  the  same  table
where  the  powerful  master  of  Bjorne  sat  and  played
"  baccarat "  holding  the  bank  with  a  great  pile  of  sil-
ver in  front  of  him.

The  play  was  already  high.  Gosta  gave  it  an  even
greater  impulse.  Green  bank-notes  appeared,  and
always  the  pile  of  money  grew  in  front  of  the  power-
ful Melchior  Sinclair.

But  before  Gosta  also  gathered  both  coins  and
notes,  and  soon  he  was  the  only  one  who  held  out
in  the  struggle  against  the  great  land-owner  at  Bjorne.


93

Soon  the  g<  of  money  changed  over  fr«.in

Mclchifi  •  Gosta  Bet:

"Gosta,  my  b  I  the  l.md-ownrr.  laughing,

;i  he  had  played  away  everything  he  ha
pocket-book   ami    purse,  "uti.it   shall  we  do  now?
I    am    bankrupt,   ami    I  ;>lay   with    borrowed

money.     I  premised  my  wii

1  Ic  discovered  a  way.  1  It:  played  away  his  watch
and  his  beaver  coat.  -t  going  to  stake  his

c  and  sledge  when  Smtr.un  checked  In  in.

hing   to  win    on,"  he  advised   him.
"Stake  son;  to  turn  the  hid.

••  Wh.it  the  deril  have  I  got?"
'  I'lay  your  reddest  blood, brother  Melchior.

Stake  your  dau^!

\  ild  never  venture  that,"  said  Gosta,  laugh-

ing.     "That   prize    I   would    never   get    under    my
roof."

Melchior  could  not  help  laughing  also.     He  could
not  endure  that  Marianne's  name  should   be  i
tioncd  at  the  card-tables,  but  this  was  so   insanely
he  could   not  be  angry.    To  play
me  to  Gosta,  yes,  that  he  certainly  could
venture.

"That  is  to  say,"  he  explained,  " that  if  you  can
her  consent.  ;11  stake  my  blessing  to

the  marriage  on  this  card."

Gosta  staked  .ill  his  winnings  and  the  play  began.
He  won,  and  Sinclair  stopped  playing.  He  could
not  fight  against  such  bad  luck ;  he  saw  th

Th  -lipped  by;   it  was  past  midnight.     The

lovely  women's  checks  began   to  grow  pale;   c
huni  t,  ruffles  nmplcd.     The  old  ladies

rose  up  from  the  sofa-corners  and  said  that  as  they


94  ////•-'  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLIN!

had  been  there  twelve  hours,  it  was  about  time  for
them  to  be  thinking  of  home.

And  the  beautiful  ball  should  be  over,  but  then
Lilliccrona  himself  seized  the  fiddle  and  struck  up
the  last  polka.  The  horses  stood  at  the  door;  the
old  ladies  were  dressed  in  their  cloaks  and  shawls;
tin-  <>ld  men  wound  their  plaids  about  them  and
buckled  their  galoshes.

But  the  young  people  could  not  tear  thcmsc  1
from  the  dance.    They  danced  in  their  out-door  wraps,
and  a  mad  dance  it  was.     As  soon  as  a  girl  stopped
dancing  with  one  partner,  another  came  and  dragged
her  away  with  him.

And  even  the  sorrowful  Gosta  was  dragged  into
the  whirl.  He  hoped  to  dance  away  grief  and  hu-
miliation; he  wished  to  have  the  love  of  lift  in  his
blood  again ;  he  longed  to  be  gay,  he  as  well  as  the
others.  And  he  danced  till  the  walls  went  round,
and  he  no  longer  knew  what  he  was  doing.

Who  was  it  he  had  got  hold  of  in  the  crowd  ?  She
was  light  and  supple,  and  he  felt  that  streams  of  fire
went  from  one  to  the  other.  Ah,  Marianne  !

While  Gosta  danced  with  Marianne,  Sintram  sat  in
his  sledge  before  the  door,  and  beside  him  stood
Melchior  Sinclair.

The  great  land-owner  was  impatient  at  being  forced
to  wait  for  Marianne.  He  stamped  in  the  snow  with
his  great  snow-boots  and  beat  with  his  arms,  for  it
was  bitter  cold.

1  Perhaps  you  ought  not  to  have  played  Marianne
away  to  Gosta,"  said  Sintram.

"What  do  you  mean?"

Sintram  arranged  his  reins  and  lifted  his  whip,
before  he  answered :  —


////    BALL  AT  1  95

1   It       1  not  belong  to  the  tableau,  that  kissing."

The  powerful  land-owner  raised  his  arm  for  a  death-

itram  was  already  gone      1  Ic  drove  away,

\\  hipping  the  horse  to  a  wild  gallop  without  daring  to

look  >r  Melchior  Sin  1  a  heavy  hand

short  patience.

1  Ic  went  now  into  the  dancing-room  to  look  for  his
daughter,  and  saw  how  Gosta  and  Marianne   •

1  and  giddy  was  that  last  polka.
S-  couples  others  glowing

dust    lay   like    smoke   over   tin-    lull,  the   wax-
candles  gleamed,  burned  down  to  the  sockets,  and  in
t  of  all  the  ghostly  ruin,  they  flew  on,  Gosta
and    Marianne,    royal    in    their    tireless   strength,  no
blemish  on  their  beau  »y  in  the  glorious  motion.

Melchior  Sinclair  them  for  a  while;  but

then    he   went    and   left    Marianne   to  dance.      He
slammed   the  door,  tramped   down   the   stairs,  and
d  himself  in  the  sledge,  where  his  wife  already
waited,  and  drove  home.

When  Marianne  stopped  dancing  and  asked  after

•arcnts,  they  were  gone.

When  she  was  certain  of  this  she  showed  no  sur-
prise.    She  dressed  herself  quietly  and  went  out  in
I.     The  ladies  in  the  dressing-room  thought
that  she  drove  in  her  own  sledge.

She  hurried  in  her  thin  satin  shoes  along  the  road
without  telling  any  one  of  h  ss.

I  n  the  darkness  no  one  recognized  her,  as  she  went

by  the  edge  of  the  road ;  no  one  could  think  that  this

late  wanderer,  who  was  driven  up  into  the  high  drifts

by  the  passing  sledges,  was  the  beautiful  Marianne.

When  she  could  go  in  the  middle  of  the  road  she


96  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

began  to  run.  She  ran  as  long  as  she  was  able,  then
walked  for  a  while,  then  ran  again.  A  hideous,  tortur-
ing fear  drove  her  on.

>m  Ekeby  to  Bjornc  it  cannot  be  farther  than  at
most  two  miles.  Marianne  was  soon  at  home,  but  she
thought  almost  that  she  had  come  th<-  A  ay.

When  she  reached  the  house  all  the  doors  were  closed,
all  the  lights  out;  she  wondered  if  her  parents  had
not  come  home.

She  went  forward  and  twice  knocked  loudly  on  the
front  door.  She  seized  the  door-handle  and  shook  it
till  the  noise  resounded  through  the  whole  house.
No  one  came  and  opened,  but  when  she  let  the  iron
go,  which  she  had  grasped  with  her  bare  hands,  the
fast-frozen  skin  was  torn  from  them.

Melchior  Sinclair  had  driven  home  in  order  to  shut
his  door  on  his  only  child.

He  was  drunk  with  much  drinking,  wild  with  rage.
He  hated  his  daughter,  because  she  liked  Gosta  Ber-
ling.  He  had  shut  the  servants  into  the  kitchen,  and
his  wife  in  the  bedroom.  With  solemn  oaths  he  told
them  that  the  one  who  let  Marianne  in,  he  would  beat
to  a  jelly.  And  they  knew  that  he  would  keep  his
word.

No  one  had  ever  seen  him  so  angry.  Such  a  grief
had  never  come  to  him  before.  Had  his  daughter
come  into  his  presence,  he  would  perhaps  have  killed
her.

Golden  ornaments,  silken  dresses  had  he  given  her,
wit  and  learning  had  been  instilled  in  her.  She  had
been  his  pride,  his  glory.  He  had  been  as  proud  of
her  as  if  she  had  worn  a  crown.  Oh,  his  queen,  his
goddess,  his  honored,  beautiful,  proud  Marianne !
Had  he  ever  denied  her  anything?  Had  he  not  always


////.    HALL  At    I  A/  l!Y  97

considered   himself  too  common   to  be  her?

Oh,  Marianne,  Maria;

Ou^ht  h«-  not  to  h  -  is  in  love  with

Gosta  Berling  and  kisses  him?     Should  he  not  cast
her  out,  shut  his  door  against  her,  when  she  will  dis-
grace h<  jess  by  loving  such  a  man?     Let  In  r
stay  at  Ekcb  ;  run  to  the  neighbors  for  sh<
let  her  sleep  in  the  snow-drifts;  it's  all  the  same,  she
already  been  dragged  in  the  dirt,  the  lovely  Mari-
anne.    The  bloom  is  gone.     The  lustre  of  her  1.
gone.

He  lies  there  in  his  bed,  and  hears  how  she  beats  on
the  door.  What  does  that  matter  to  him?  He  is
asleep.  Outside  stands  one  who  will  marry  a
missed  priest;  he  has  no  home  for  such  a  one.  If  he
had  loved  her  less,  if  he  had  been  less  proud  of  her,
ould  have  let  her  come  in.

Yes,  his  blessing  he  could  not  refuse  them.     He  had
t  to  open  the  door  for  her,  that
he  would  not  do.     Ah,  Marianne  !

The  beautiful  young  woman  still  stood  outside  the

door  of  her  home.     One  minute  she  shook  the  lock

in   powerless   rage,  the  next   she  fell  on  her  knees,

>ed  her  mangled  hands,  and  begged  for  forgiveness.

But  no  one  heard  her,  no  one  answered,  no  one
opened  to  her.

Oh !  was  it  not  terrible?  I  am  filled  with  horror  as
I  tell  of  it.  She  came  from  a  ball  whose  queen
h.ul  been  !  She  had  been  proud,  rich,  happy;  and  in
one  minute  she  was  cast  into  such  an  endless  misery.
Shut  out  from  her  home,  exposed  to  the  cold,  —  not
scorned,  not  beaten,  not  cursed,  but  shut  out  with
cold,  immovable  lovelessness.

Think  of  the  cold,  starlit  night,  which  spread  its

7


98  /•///•/   .v/OAT  Or  GOSTA   REKl.l.\(',

arch  above  I.  ii^rlH  with  the  empty,

desolate  snow-fields,  with  the  silent  woods.     K\
thing  slept,  everything  was  sunk  in  painless  sleep;
only  one  living  point  in  all  that  sl<  hitencss.

All  sorrow  and  pain  and  horror,  which  otlu  rwi  r  had
been  spread  over  the  world,  crept  forward  towards
that  one  lonely  point.  O  God,  to  suffer  alone  in  the
midst  of  this  sleeping,  ice-bound  world  !

For  the  first  tim<  in  her  life-  she  met  with  unmerci-
fulness  and  hardness.  I  ler  mother  would  not  take  tin-
trouble  to  leave  her  bed  to  save  her.  The  old  servant  .
who  had  guided  her  first  steps,  heard  her  and  did  not
move  a  finger  for  her  sake.  For  what  .crime  was  she
punished?

Where  should  she  find  compassion,  if  not  at  this
door?  If  she  had  been  a  murderess,  she  would  still
have  knocked  on  it,  knowing  that  they  would  for
her.  If  she  had  sunk  to  being  the  most  miserable
of  creatures,  come  wasted  and  in  rags,  she  would  still
confidently  have  gone  up  to  that  door,  and  expected
a  loving  welcome.  That  door  was  the  entrance  to
her  home;  behind  it  she  could  only  meet  with  1«

Had  not  her  father  tried  her  enough?     Would  t
not  soon  open  to  her?

"  Father,  father !  "  she  called.  "  Let  me  come  in  !  I
freeze,  I  tremble.  It  is  terrible  out  here !

"  Mother,  mother !  You  who  have  gone  so  many
steps  to  serve  me,  you  who  have  watched  so  many
nights  over  me,  why  do  you  sleep  now?  Mother,
mother,  wake  just  this  one  night,  and  I  will  never  give
you  pain  again  !  "

She  calls,  and  falls  into  breathless  silence  to  listen
for  an  answer.  Hut  no  one  heard  her,  no  one  obeyed
her,  no  one  answr


////    HALL  AT  EKEBY  99

Then  she  wrings  her  hands  in  despair,  but  there  are
no  tears  in  her  eyes.

•:  long,  dark  house  with  its  closed  doors  and
darkened  windows  lay  awful  and  motionless  in  the
What  would  become  of  her,  who  was  home-
less? Branded  I  was  she,  as  long  as
she  encumbered  the  earth.  And  her  father  himself
pressed  the  red-hot  iron  deeper  into  her  shoulders.

^hc  called  once  more,  "  \\  li.it  will  become

A  ill  believe  tin:  worst  of  u
SIu    u<pt  .m<l  suffered;    her  body   was   stiff  with

Alas,    that  such  misery  can  reach   one,  who  but
y  stood  so  hi^h  !     It  is  so  easy  to  be  plunged  into
deepest  suffering!    Should  we  not  fear  life?    Who
i  safe  craft?     Round  about  us  swell  son

i ;  sec  how  the  hungry  waves  lick

the  ship's  sides,  sec  how  they  rage  up  over  her.     Ah,

no  safe  anchorage,  no  solid  ground,  no  steady  ship,  as

li  the  eye  can  see;   only  an  unknown  sky  over  an

ocean  of  son

Hut  hu-h!     At  A  light  step  comes

igh  the  hall.
"  Is  it  mother?"  asked  Marianne.

my  child."
May  I  come  in  no

.it  her  will  not  let  you  come  in."
'   I  have  run  in  the  sno  in  my  thin  shoes  all

the  w.iy  from  Kkcby.     I  have  stood  here  an  hour  and
knocked  ami  called.    I  am  freezing  to  death  out  h
Why  did  you  drive  a  :ic?"

"  My  child,   my  child,    why  did  you  kiss  Gosta

ng?"
"  But  father  must  have  seen  that  I  do  not  like  him


100         THE  STORY  OP  COSTA  BERLING

for  that.      I:    W9M   in  fun.     Does  he  think  that  I   will
marry  Gosta?"

"Go  to  th  Marianne,  and

that  you  pass  the  night  there.     Your  father  is  drunk.
He  will  not  listen   to  reason.     He   has    kept   me  a
prisoner  up  there.     I  crept  out  when   I  thought  he
ideep.      He  will  kill  IIH-,  if  you  come  in."

"  Mother,  mother,  shall  I  go  to  strangers  when  I
have  a  home?  Arc  you  as  hard  r?  How  <  an

you  allow  me  to  be  shut  out?    I  will  lay  myself  in  the
drift  out  here,  if  you  do  not  let  me  in."

Then  Marianne's  mother  laid  her  hand  on  the  lock
to  open  the  door,  but  at  the  same  moment  a  heavy
step  was  heard  on  the  stair,  and  a  harsh  voice  called
her.

Marianne  listened:  her  mother  hurried  away,  the
harsh  voice  cursed  her  and  then  —

Marianne  heard  something  terrible,  —  she  could
hear  every  sound  in  the  silent  house.

She  heard  the  thud  of  a  blow,  a  blow  with  a  stick
or  a  box  on  the  ear ;  then  she  heard  a  faint  noise,  and
then  again  a  blow.

He  struck  her  mother,  the  terrible  brutal  Melchior
Sinclair  struck  his  wife  !

And  in  pale  horror  Marianne  threw  herself  down
on  the  threshold  and  writhed  in  anguish.  Now  she
wept,  and  her  tears  froze  to  ice  on  the  threshold  of
her  home.

Grace!  pity!  Open,  open,  that  she  might  bend
her  own  back  under  the  blows !  Oh,  that  he  could
strike  her  mother,  strike  her,  because  she  did  not
wish  to  see  her  daughter  the  next  day  lying  dead  in
the  snow-drift,  because  she  had  wished  to  comfort  her
child !


HY  101

.unmliatmn  had  come  to  Mari.m:  jhL

She  l».i.l  I. in  :sclf  a  queen,  and  si.

an  a  wh  .ivc.

Hut  ^hr   r».«,c  up  in  cold   rage.    Once  more  the
ic  door  with  IK r  bloody  hand  and  called :  —
••Hi-. u    uh.it   I  say  to  you,  —  you.   who   beat  my
mother.     You  shall  weep  for  this,  Mclcl
wet;

Then  she  u  laid  herself  to  rest  in  the  snow-

ircw  off  her  cloak  and  lay  in  her  black  vel-
vet dress,  easily  distinguishable  against  the  wh

.ind  thought  how  her  father  would  come  out
the  next  day  on  his  early  morning  tour  of  inspe-
and  find  her  there.     She  only  hoped  that  he  himself
it  find  h

O  Death,  pale  friend,  is  it  as  true  as  it  is  consoling,
that  I  never  can  escape  meeting  you?  Even  to  me,
owlicst  of  earth's  workers,  will  you  come,  to  loosen
the  torn  leather  shoes  from  my  feet,  to  take  the  spade
and  the  barrow  from  my  hand,  to  take  the  working-
dress  from  my  body.  With  gentle  force  you  lay  me
out  on  a  lace-trimmed  bed ;  you  adorn  me  with
draped  linen  sheets.  My  feet  need  no  more  shoes,
my  hands  arc  clad  in  snow-white  gloves,  which  no
more  work  shall  soil.  Consecrated  by  thce  to  the
sweetness  of  rest,  I  shall  sleep  a  sleep  of  a  thousand
years.  Oh  i!  '  The  lowliest  of  earth's  laborers

am  I.  and  I  dream  with  a  thrill  of  pleasure  of  the  hour
hall  be  received  into  your  kingdom.

Pale  friend,  on  me  you  can  easily  try  your  strength,
but  I  tell  you  that  the  fight  was  harder  against  those
women  of  the  olden  days.  I ,  ngth  was  mighty

in  their  slender  bodies,  no  cold  could  cool  their  hot


102          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

blood.  You  had  laid  Marianne  on  your  bed,  O
h,  and  you  sat  by  her  side,  as  an  old  nurse  sits
by  the  cradle  to  lull  the  child  to  sleep.  You  faithful
old  nurse,  who  know  what  is  good  for  the  children
of  men,  how  angry  you  must  be  when  playn
come,  who  with  noise  and  romping  wake  your  slerp-
ing  child.  How  vexed  you  must  have  been  when
the  pensioners  lifted  the  lovely  Marianne  out  of  the
bed,  when  a  man  laid  her  against  his  breast,  and
warm  tears  fell  from  his  eyes  on  to  her  face.

At  Ekeby  all  lights  were  out,  and  all  the  guests  had
gone.  The  pensioners  stood  alone  in  the  bachelors'
wing,  about  the  last  half-emptied  punch  bowl.

Then  Gosta  rung  on  the  edge  of  the  bowl  and  made
a  speech  for  you,  women  of  the  olden  days.  To
speak  of  you,  he  said,  was  to  speak  of  the  kingdom
of  heaven :  you  were  all  beauties,  ever  bright,  ever
young,  ever  lovely  and  gentle  as  a  mother's  eyes
when  she  looks  down  on  her  child.  Soft  as  young
squirrels  you  hung  on  your  husband's  neck,  your
voice  never  trembled  with  anger,  no  frowns  ruffled
your  brow,  your  white  hands  were  never  harsh  and
hard.  Sweet  saints,  you  were  adored  images  in  the
temple  of  home.  Men  lay  at  your  feet,  offering  you
incense  and  prayers.  Through  you  love  worked  its
wonders,  and  round  your  temples  poetry  wreathed  its
gold,  gleaming  glory.

And  the  pensioners  sprang  up,  wild  with  wine,
wild  with  his  words,  with  their  blood  raging.  Old
Kbcrhard  and  the  lazy  Christopher  drew  back  from
the  sport.  In  the  wildest  haste  the  pensioners  har-
nessed horses  to  sledges  and  hurried  out  in  the  cold
night  jto  pay  homage  to  those  who  never  could  be


////     HALL  A  ItY  103

honored  enough,  to  sing  a  serenade  to  each  and  a
i  who  possessed  the  rosy  checks  and  bright  eyes

kcby  halls.

the  pensioners  did  not  go  far  on  their  happy  way,
they  came  to  1  i«.und  M

it,  just  by  the  door  of  hi
bled  and  raged   to  sec   her   there.     It
was  like  finding  a  worshipped  saint  lyin-;  mangled  and
stripped  outside  the  church-door.

sta  shook  his  clenched  hand  at  the  dark  house.
a  children  of  ha  d,  "you  hail-st<

you  ravagcrs  of  God's  pleasure-hou

Bccrencrcutz   lighted  his   horn  lantern  and  let  it

shine  down  on  the  livid  face.     Then  the  pensioners

Marianne's  mangled  hands,  and  the  tears  which

frozen  to  ice  on  her  eyelashes,  and  they  wailed

women,  for  she  was  not  merely  a  saintly  image,

but  a  beautiful  woman,  who  had  been  a  joy  to  their

old  hearts.

n^  threw  himself  on  his  knees  beside  her.

"  She  is  lying  here,  my  bride,"  he  said.    "  She  gave

betrothal   kiss  a    few   hours  ago,   and   her

is  promised  me  his  blessing.     She  lies  and

waits  for  me  to  come  and  sli  white  bed."

And  Gosta  lifted  up  the  lifeless  form  in  his  strong

•Home  to  Ekeby  with  her!"  he  cried.  "Now
she  is  mine.  In  the  snow-drift  I  have  found  her;  no
one  shall  take  her  from  me.  We  will  not  wake  them
in  there.  What  has  she  to  do  behind  those  doors,
against  which  she  has  b<  hand  into  blood?"

He   was   allowed  to   do  as   he   wished.     He    laid
.nine  in  the  foremost  sledge  and  sat  down  at  her
icreutz  sat  b  d  took  the  reins


104         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  BE  RUNG

"  Take  snow  and  rub  her,  Costa  !  "  he  commanded.

The  cold  had  paralyzed  her  limbs,  nothing  more.
The  wildly  agitated  heart  still  beat.  She  had  not
even  lost  consciousness;  she  knew  all  about  the  pen-
sioners, and  how  they  had  found  her,  but  she  could
not  move.  So  she  lay  stiff  and  stark  in  the  sledge,
while  Gosta  Berling  rubbed  her  with  snow  and  alter-
nately wept  and  kissed,  and  she  felt  an  infinite  long-
ing to  be  able  only  to  lift  a  hand,  that  she  might  give
a  caress  in  return.

She  remembered  everything.  She  lay  there  stiff
and  motionless  and  thought  more  clearly  than  ever
before.  Was  she  in  love  with  Gosta  Berling?  Yes,
she  was.  Was  it  merely  a  whim  of  the  moment?
No,  it  had  been  for  many  years.  She  compared
herself  with  him  and  the  other  people  in  Varmland.
They  were  all  just  like  children.  They  followed
whatever  impulse  came  to  them.  They  only  lived
the  outer  life,  had  never  looked  deep  into  their  souls.
But  she  had  become  what  one  grows  to  be  by  living  in
the  world ;  she  could  never  really  lose  herself  in  any-
thing. If  she  loved,  yes,  whatever  she  did,  one  half
of  her  stood  and  looked  on  with  a  cold  scorn.  She
had  longed  for  a  passion  which  should  carry  her
away  in  wild  heedlessness,  and  now  it  had  come.
When  she  kissed  Gosta  Berling  on  the  balcony,  for
the  first  time  she  had  forgotten  herself.

And  now  the  passion  came  over  her  again,  her
heart  throbbed  so  that  she  heard  it  beat.  Should
she  not  soon  be  mistress  of  her  limbs?  She  felt  a
wild  joy  that  she  had  been  thrust  out  from  her  home.
Now  she  could  be  Gosta's  without  hesitation.  How
stupid  she  had  been,  to  have  subdued  her  love  so
many  years.  Ah,  it  is  so  sweet  to  yield  to  love.


THE  BALL  Al    /  Kt  BY  IO$

Hut  shall  she  never,  never  be  free  fn.m  these  icy
chains?  She  has  been  ice  within  and  fire  on  the  sur-
face .  he  opposite,  a  soul  of  fire  in  a  body
of  ice.

Then  Gosta  feels  how  two  arms  gently  arc  raised
about  his  neck  in  a  weak,  feeble  pressure.

I  Ie  could  only  ju->t  feel  them,  but  Marianne  thought
that  she  gave  cxprcv  'lie  suppressed  passion  in

by  a  suffocating  embrace.

Hut  when  Heereiicreut/  saw  it  he  let  the  horse  go
as  it  would  along  the  familiar  road.  He  raised  his
eyes  and  looked  obstinately  and  unceasingly  at  the


106  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BERUNG


CHAPTER  VII

THE  OLD   VEHICLES

1 1  it  should  happen  to  you  that  you  arc  sitting  or
\  and  reading  this  at  night,  as  I  am  writing  it
during  the  silent  hours,  then  do  not  draw  a  sigh  of
relief  In  iv  and  think  that  the  good  pensioners  were
allowed  to  have  an  undisturbed  sleep,  after  they  had
come  back  with  Marianne  and  made  her  a  good  bed
in  the  best  guest-room  beyond  the  big  drawing-
room.

They  went  to  bed,  and  went  to  sleep,  but  it  was  not
their  lot  to  sleep  in  peace  and  quiet  till  noon,  as  you
and  I,  dear  reader,  might  have  done,  if  we  had  been
awake  till  four  in  the  morning  and  our  limbs  ached
with  fatigue.

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  old  major's  \\itV
went  about  the  country  with  beggar's  wallet  and  stick,
and  that  it  never  was  her  way,  when  she  had  anything
to  do,  to  think  of  a  poor  tired  sinner's  convenience.
And  now  she  would  do  it  even  less,  as  she  had  de-
cided to  drive  the  pensioners  that  very  night  from
Ekeby.

Gone  was  the  day  when  she  sat  in  splendor  and
magnificence  at  Ekeby  and  sowed  happiness  over  the
earth,  as  God  sows  stars  over  the  skies.  And  while
she  wandered  homeless  about  the  land,  the  authority
and  honor  of  the  great  estate  was  left  in  the  pension-


01.1)    /7.7//LV  107

crs'  hands  to  be  gnat  ilu-m,  a  1  guards

ashes,  as  the  spring  si.  .    the  snow-drift.

It  N-III.  t;:::      i.  .1  that  the  pensioners  drove

six  or  ci-ht  of  tlu-in.  in  a  long  sledge  drawn  by

cs,  \\ith  chiming  bells  ami  i  .  ins.      If

ijor's  wife,  as  sh  .is  a  bcj.

.!-..!   M-.t   turn  .1  r  heads.

c  stretched  against  her.     By  a
violent  swing  of  the  sledge,  she  was  forced  up

roadside,  and  Major  Fuchs,  the  bear-
! ,  always  took  pains  to  spit  three  times  to  take
away  the  evil  eiiect  of  meeting  the  old  woman.

» ad  no  pity  on  her.     She  was  as  odious  as  a

i  to  them  as  >h  along  the  road.     If  any

ij>  had  befallen  her,  they  would  no  more  i

grieved  than  he  who  shoots  off  his  gun  on  Easter  Eve,

loaded  with  brass  hooks,  grieves  that   he  has  hit  a

Hying  by.

It  was  to  secure  their  salvation  that  these  unhappy
pensioners  persecuted  the  major's  wife.  People  have
often  been  cruel  and  tortured  one  another  with  tin-
greatest  hard  ...  n  they  have  trembled  for  their
souls.

When  the  pensioners  late  at  night  reeled  from  the

drinking-t.il>'  \\indow  to  see  if  the  night  was

<l  clear,  they  often  noticed  a  dark  shadow,

h   glided   over    the   grass,   and    knew   that   the

had  come  to  see  her  beloved  home ;  then

the  bachelors'  wing  rani;  with  the  pensioners'  scornful

1  gibes  flew  from  the  open  windows  down

to  ':.

Verily,  lovelessness  and  arrogance  began  to  t
possession  of  the  penniless  advent ur<  :s.     Sin-

1  planted  hate.    Their  souls  could  not  have


1 08          n/E  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG

been  in  greater  danger  if  the  majn:  had  re-

mained at  Ekeby.     More  die  in  flight  than  in  battle.

The  major's  wife  cherished  m>  great  anger  against
the  pensioners.

If  she  had  had  the  power,  she  would  have  whipped
them  like  naughty  boys  and  then  granted  them  her
grace  and  favor  again.

But  now  she  feared  for  her  beloved  lands,  which
were  in  the  pensioners' hands  to  be  guarded  by  the:.
wolves  guard  the  sheep,  as  crows  guard  the  spring  grain.

There  are  many  who  have  suffered  the  same  sor-
row. She  is  not  the  only  one  who  has  seen  ruin  come
to  a  beloved  home  and  well-kept  fields  fall  into  decay.
They  have  seen  their  childhood's  home  look  at  them
like  a  wounded  animal.  Many  feel  like  culprits  when
they  see  the  trees  there  wither  away,  and  the  paths
covered  with  tufts  of  grass.  They  wish  to  throw
themselves  on  their  knees  in  those  fields,  which  once
boasted  of  rich  harvests,  and  beg  them  not  to  blame
them  for  the  disgrace  which  befalls  them.  And  they
turn  away  from  the  poor  old  horses ;  they  have  not
courage  to  meet  their  glance.  And  they  dare  not
stand  by  the  gate  and  see  the  cattle  come  home  from
pasture.  There  is  no  spot  on  earth  so  sad  to  visit  as
an  old  home  in  ruin.

When  I  think  what  that  proud  Ekeby  must  have
suffered  under  the  pensioners'  rule,  I  wish  that  the
plan  of  the  major's  wife  had  been  fulfilled,  and  that
Ekeby  had  been  taken  from  them.

It  was  not  her  thought  to  take  back  her  dominion
again.

She  had  only  one  object,  —  to  rid  her  home  of  these
madmen,  these  locusts,  these  wild  brigands,  in  whose
path  no  grass  grew.


////.  c  ICQ

\\'hilc  she  went  begging  about  the  land  and  1
on  alms,  she  continually  thought  of  1.  and

the  thought  bit  deep  into  ht-r  heart,  that  there  could
be  no  bettering  till    her    mother    lifted   the

shoulders.

No  one  had  cv.  <>ncd  the  old  woman's  d<

so  she  must  be  still  living  up  there  by  the  iron-works
ie   forest.     Ninety   years  old,  she  still  lived   in
unceasing  labor,  watching  over  her  milk-pans  in  the
summer,  her   charcoal-kilns    in    the  win1  ,.intf

nging  for  the  day  when  she  would  have
completed  her  life's  duties.

And  the  major's  wife  thought  that  her  mother  had

i  so  long  in  order  to  be  able  to  lift  the  curse  from

her  life.     That  mother  could  not  die  who  had  called

n  such  misery  on  her  child.
So  the  major's  wife  wanted  to  go  to  the  old  won
that  they  might  both  get  rest.   She  wished  to  struggle
up  through  the  dark  woods  by  the  long  river  to  the
home  of  her  childhood.

Till  then  she  could   not  rest    There  were  many
who  offered  her  a  warm  home  and  all  the  comforts
of  a  faithful  friendship,  but  she  would  not  stop  any-
:n  and   fierce,  she  went  from   house   to
,  for  she  was  weighed  down  by  the  curse.
She  was  going  to  struggle  up  to  her  mother,  but
she  wanted  to  provide  for  her  beloved  home,
would  not  go  and  leave  it  in  the  hands  of  light-
minded  spendthrifts,  of  worthless  drunkards,  of  good-

lispersers  of  God's  gifts.

Should  she  go  to  find  on  her  return  her  inheritance
gone  to  waste,  her  hammers  silent,  her  horses  s?

her  servants  scattered  ?    Ah,  no,  once  more  she
will  rUe  in  her  might  and  drive  out  the  pensioners.


110         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA

She  well  understood  th.it  her  husband  saw  with  joy
how  her  inheritance  was  squandered.  Hut  she  knew
him  enough  to  understand,  also,  that  if  she  drove
.y  his  devouring  locusts,  he  would  be  too  lazy  to
get  new  ones.  Were  the  pen  loners  removed,  then
her  old  bailiff  and  overseer  could  carry  on  the  work
at  Kkeby  in  the  old  grooves.

And  so,  man\-  nights  her  dark  shadow  had  glided
along  the  black  lanes.  She  had  stolen  in  and  out  of
the  cottagers'  h»>u-;es,  she  had  whispered  with  the
miller  and  the  mill-hands  in  the  lower  floor  of  the
t  mill,  she  had  conferred  with  the  smith  in  the
dark  coal-house.

And  they  had  all  sworn  to  help  her.  The  hon-.r
of  the  great  estate  should  no  longer  be  left  in  the
hands  of  careless  pensioners,  to  be  guarded  as  the
wind  guards  the  ashes,  as  the  wolf  guards  the  flock
of  sheep.

And  this  night,  when  the  merry  gentlemen  had
danced,  played,  and  drunk  until  they  had  sunk  down
on  their  beds  in  a  dead  sleep,  this  very  night  they
must  go.  She  has  let  them  have  their  good  time.
She  has  sat  in  the  smithy  and  awaited  the  end  of  the
ball.  She  has  waited  still  longer,  until  the  pensioners
should  return  from  their  nocturnal  drive.  She  has
sat  in  silent  waiting,  until  the  message  was  brought
her  that  the  last  light  was  out  in  the  bachelors'  wing
and  that  the  great  house  slept.  Then  she  rose  and
went  out.

The  major's  wife  ordered  that  all  the  workmen  on

the  estate  should  be  gathered  together  up   by  the

bachelors'    wing;    she   herself  went   to    the    h<

There  she  went  to  the  main  building,  knocked,   and

let  in.     The  young  daughter  of  the  minister  at


////.  ,>/./>  i- ii nc  ,,,

Broby,  whom  she  had  trained  to  be  a  capable  r.
servant,  was  there  to  meet  her.

•  You  arc  so  welcome-.  :nc,"  said  the  m

and  kissed  her  hand.

1  Put  ..ut  said  the  major's  wife.     "Do

you  think  I  can:  without  a  candle?"

^hcbcgnr  ^hthcsi

,e.     She  rom  the  ri-llar   t«»  the  attic,  and

said  With    stealthy  step  they  went   from

n  to  r«"»m.

led  with  old  memories.   The
:  nor  sobbed,  hut  tear  after
:nchecked  from  her  eyes,  while  she  followed
:rcss.     'I  he    major's  wife    had   her  open  the
i-closct  and  silver-chest,  and  passed  her  hand  over
iask  table-cloths  and  the  magnificent  sil-
ver service.     She  felt  caressingly  the  mighty  pile  of
pillows  in  the  store-closet     She  touched  all  the  im-
plements, the  looms,  the  spinning-wheels,  and  wind-
She  tli  hand  into  the  spice-box,
felt  the  rows  of  tallow  candles  which  hung  from

the  ;

candles  arc  dry,"  she  said.     "They  can  be
\\  d..wn  and  put  away."
She  was  down  in  the  cellar,  carefully  lifted  the  beer-

:opcd  over  tin-  rows  of  wine  bottles.
Sir  the    pantry  and  kitchen  ;  she  felt

everything,  examined  everything.     She  stretched  out
hand    and    said    farewell   to   everything   in    her
house.

cnt  through  the  rooms.     She  found  the
long  broad  sofas  in  th  ^hc  laid  her  hand  on

the  cool  slabs  of  the  marble  tables,  and  on  the  mirrors
with  their  frames  of  gilded  dancing  nymphs.


THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLING

11  This  is  a  rich  house,"  she  said.  "  A  noble  man
was  he  who  gave  me  all  this  for  my  own.'

In  the  great  drawing-room,  where  the  dance  had
lately  whirled,  the  stiff-backed  arm  chairs  already
stood  in  prim  order  against  the  walls.

She  went  over  to  the  piano,  and  very  gently  struck
a  chord.

"Joy  and  gladness  were  no  strangers  here  in  my
time,  either,"  she  said.

She  went  also  to  the  guest-room  beyond.  It  was
pitch-dark.  The  major's  wife  groped  with  her  hands
and  came  against  the  maid's  face.

"Are  you  weeping?"  she  said,  for  she  felt  her
hands  were  wet  with  tears.

Then  the  young  girl  burst  out  sobbing.

"  Madame,"  she  cried,  "  madame,  they  will  destroy
everything.  Why  do  you  leave  us  and  let  the  pen-
sioners ruin  your  house?"

The  major's  wife  drew  back  the  curtain  and  pointed
out  into  the  yard.

"  Is  it  I  who  have  taught  you  to  weep  and  lament?  "
she  cried.  "  Look  out !  the  place  is  full  of  people ;
to-morrow  there  will  not  be  one  pensioner  left  at
Ekeby."

"  Are  you  coming  back?  "  asked  the  maid.

"My  time  has  not  yet  come,"  said  the  major's
wife.  "  The  highway  is  my  home,  and  the  haystack
my  bed.  But  you  shall  watch  over  Ekeby  for  me,
child,  while  I  am  away."

And  they  went  on.  Neither  of  them  knew  or
thought  that  Marianne  slept  in  that  very  room,  lint
she  did  not  sleep.  She  was  wide  awake,  heard  every-
thing, and  understood  it  all.  She  had  lain  there  in
bed  and  sung  a  hymn  to  Love.


THE  ou>  r /•:/// i7.es  113

1  You  conqueror,  who  have  taken  me  out  of  my-

:»  fathomless  misery  and  you

have  changed  it  to  a  paradise.     My  hands  stuck  fast

!ic  iron  latch  of  the  closed  door  and  were
and  wounded  ;  on  th  >ld  of  my  home  my  tcari

'.rozen  to  pearls  of  ice.  Anger  froze  my  heart
when  I  heard  the  blows  on  my  mother's  back.  In  the
cold  snow-drift  I  hoped  to  sleep  away  my  anger,
but  you  came.  O  Love,  child  of  fire,  to  one  who  was
frozen  by  much  cold  you  came.  When  I  compare
uflfcrings  to  the  glory  won  by  them,  they  seem  to
me  as  nothing.  I  am  free  of  all  tics.  I  have  no
father  nor  mother,  no  home.  People  will  believe  all
evil  of  me  and  turn  away  from  me.  It  has  pleased
you  to  do  this,  O  Love,  for  why  should  I  stand
higher  than  my  beloved?  Hand  in  hand  we  will
nto  the  world.  Gosta  Berling's  bride  is
penniless;  he  found  her  in  a  snow-drift.  We  shall
not  live  in  lofty  halls,  but  in  a  cottage  at  the  edge
of  the  wood.  I  shall  help  him  to  watch  the  kiln,  I
shall  help  him  to  set  snares  for  partridges  and  hares,
I  ill  cook  his  food  and  mcml  his  clothes.  Oh,  my
bclov  I  shall  long  and  mourn,  while  I  sit  there

alone  by  the  edge  of  the  wood  and  wait  for  you  !    Hut
not  for  the  days  of  riches,  only  for  you ;  only  you

-yourfootstip  on  tin-  !
.  your  joyous  song,  as  you  come  with  your
on  your  shoulder.    Oh,  my  beloved,  my  beloved  !   As
long  as  my  life  lasts,  I  could  sit  and  wait  for  you."

So  she  lay  and  sang  hymns  to  the  heart-conquering
god,  and  never  once  had  closed  her  eyes  in  sleep
when  the  major's  wife  came  in.

When  she  h.i.l  gone,  Marianne  got  up  and  dressed
M.rr  must  -Ix-  put  on  tlu*  black  velvet
I


114         THE  STORY  Or  UdSTA    />'/ -'A'/./.VG

dress  and  the  thin  satin  slippers.  She  wrapped  a
blanket  about  her  like  a  shawl,  and  hurried  out  once
again  into  the  terrible  ni^ht.

Calm,  starlit,  and  bitingly  cold  the  February  night
lay  over  the  earth;  it  was  as  if  it  would  never  end
And  the  darkness  and  the  cold  of  that  loi

•d  on  the  earth  long,  long  after  the  sun  had  risen,
long  after  the  snow-drift-;  through  which  Marianne
wandered  had  been  i  lian  ;•  1  t<>  water.

Marianne  hurried  away  from  Ekcby  to  get  help.
She  could  not  let  those  men  who  had  her

from  the  snow-drift  and  opened  their  hearts  and  home
to  her  be  hunted  away.     She  went  down  to  S
Major  Samzclius.     It  would   be  an  hour  before  she
could  be  back.

When  the  major's  wife  had  said  farewell  to  her
home,  she  went  out  into  the  yard,  where  her  people
were  waiting,  and  the  struggle  began.

She  placed  them  round  about  the  high,  narrow
house,  the  upper  story  of  which  was  the  pensioners'
far-famed  home,  —  the  great  room  with  the  white-
washed walls,  the  red-painted  chests,  and  the  great
folding-table,  where  playing-cards  swim  in  the  spilled
brandy,  where  the  broad  beds  are  hidden  by  yellow
striped  curtains  where  the  pensioners  sleep.

And  in  the  stable  before  full  mangers  the  pension-
ers' horses  sleep  and  dream  of  the  journeys  of  their
youth.  It  is  sweet  to  dream  when  they  know  that
they  never  again  shall  leave  the  filled  cribs,  the  \\arm
stalls  of  Ekeby.

In    a    musty   old    carriage-house,   where    all    the
broken-down    coaches    and   worn-out    sledges    were
stored,  was  a  wonderful  collection  of  old  vehicles.
Many  are  the  pensioners  who  have  lived  and  died


niR  OLD  /'/:///( /  us

kcby.     Their  names  arc  for  -he  earth.

and  they  have  no  longer  a  place  in  men's  hearts;

but  the  major's  wife  has  kept  the  vehicles  in  which

came  to  Kkcby,  she  has  collected  them  all  in

old  carriage-house.

••I  tlu T<-  they  stand  and  sleep,  and  dust  falls  thick,

•

Hut   n«>w  in  this  February  night  tin-  maj-
has  the  door    opened   to    the  carriage-house,   and
\\ith  lanterns  and  torches  she  seeks  out  the  vehicles
which  belong  to  Ekeby's  present  pensioners,  —  1
rcncrcutz's  old  gig,  and  Orncclou's  co.
with  c.>at  of  .inns,  and  the  narrow  cutter  which  had
brought  Cousin  Christopher.

She  does  not  care  if  the  vehicles  are  for  summer  or
winter,  she  only  sees  that  each  one  gets  his  own.

And  in  the  stable  they  arc  now  awake,  all  the  pen-
sioners' old  horses,  who  had  so  lately  been  dreaming
before  Cull  mangers.  The  dream  shall  be  true.

You  shall  again  try  the  steep  hills,  and  the  musty
hay  in  the  sheds  of  wayside  inns,  and  drunken  horse-
dealers'  sharp  whips,  and  the  mad  races  on  ice  so  slip-
that  you  tremble  only  to  walk  on  it.
The  old  beasts  mouth  and  snort  when  the  bit  is
put  int<>  their  toothless  jaws;  the  old  vehicles  creak
and  crack.     Pitiful  infirmity,  which  should  have  been
allowed  to  sleep  in  peace  till  the  end  of  the  world,
was  now  dragged  out  before  all  eyes;  stiff  joints,  halt-
forelegs,  spavin,  and  broken-wind  arc  shown  up.
The  stable  grooms  succeed,  however,  in  getting  the
horses  harnessed ;  then  they  go  and  ask  the  major's
n  what  Gosta  Berlin^  shall  be  put.  for,  as  every
one  knows,  he  came  to  Ekeby  in  the  coal-sledge  of
the  major's  w


Ii6         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUNG

"  Tut  Don  Juan  in  our  best  sledge,"  she  says,  "  and
spread  over  it  the  bear-skin  with  tin    >il\\ -r  d.i
And    when     the    grooms    grtimblr,    she    continues:
14  There  is  not  a  horse  in  my  stable  which  I  would
not  give  to  be  rid  of  that  man,  remember  that !

Well,  now  the  vein  waked  and  the  horses

too,  but  the  pensioners  still  sleep.  It  is  now  their
time  to  be  brought  out  in  the  winter  night;  but  it  is
a  more  perilous  deed  to  seize  them  in  their  beds  than
to  lead  out  stiff-legged  horses  and  shaky  old  carriages.
They  are  bold,  strong  men,  tried  in  a  hundred  adven-
tures; they  are  ready  to  defend  themselves  till  death  ;
it  is  no  easy  thing  to  take  them  against  their  will  from
out  their  beds  and  down  to  the  carriages  which  shall
carry  them  away.

The  major's  wife  has  them  set  fire  to  a  hay-stack,
which  stands  so  near  the  house  that  the  flames  must
shine  in  to  where  the  pensioners  are  sleeping.

"The  hay-stack  is  mine,  all  Ekeby  is  mine,"  she
says.

And  when  the  stack  is  in  flames,  she  cries :  "  Wake
them  now ! "

But  the  pensioners  sleep  behind  well-closed  doors.
The  whole  mass  of  people  begin  to  cry  out  that
terrible  "  Fire,  fire  !  "  but  the  pensioners  sleep  on.

The  master-smith's  heavy  sledge-hammer  thunders
against  the  door,  but  the  pensioners  sleep.

A  hard  snowball  breaks  the  window-pane  and  flies
into  the  room,  rebounding  against  the  bed-curtains,
but  the  pensioners  sleep.

They  dream  that  a  lovely  girl  throws  a  handkerchief
at  them,  they  dream  of  applause  from  behind  fallen
curtains,  they  dream  of  gay  laughter  and  the  deafen-
ing noise  of  midnight  feasts.


HIK  OLD   I'EHICl  117

The  noise  of  cannon  at  their  cars,  an  ocean  of  ice-
cold  needed  to  awake  tin  m.

1  hry  h.i'. «   I...-.M  -l.  damrd,  played,  acted, and  sung.
y  arc  heavy  with  wiiu .  exhausted,  and  sleep  a

1  his  blessed  sleep  almost  saves  tin  m.

c  people  begin  to  think  that  this  <jim -t  conceals
a  danger.  What  if  it  means  that  the  pensioners  are
already  out  to  get  help?  What  if  it  means  that  they
stand  awake,  with  finger  on  the  trigger,  on  guard  be-
hind windows  or  door,  ready  to  fall  upon  the  first  who
enters?

These  men  arc  crafty,  ready  to  fighj;   they  mu^t
mean  something  by  their  silence.     Who  can  think  it
in,  that  they  would  let  themselves  be  surprised
in  then  lairs  like  bears?

The  people  bawl  th  time  after  time,

but  nothing  avails.

Then  when  all  arc  trembling,  the  major's  wife  her-
self takes  an  axe  and  bursts  open  the  outer  door.

Thru  sin-  rushes  alone  up  the  stairs,  throws  open
the  door  to  the  bachelors'  wing,  and  calls  into  the
room

Hers  is  a  voice  which  finds  a  better  echo  in  the
pensioners*  cars  than  the  people's  outcry.  Accus-
tomed to  obey  that  voice,  twelve  men  at  t  mo-
ment spring  from  their  beds,  see  the  flames,  throw  on
their  dothes,  and  rush  down  the  stairs  out  into  the  \

But  at  the  door  stands  the  great  master- smith  and
two  stout  mill-hands,  and  deep  disgrace  then  befalls
(>cnsioners.     Each,  as  he  comes  down,  is  seized,
thrown   t«»   tin    ground,  ami    his    feet   bound;   I'M
upon  carried  without  ceremony  to  the  vehicle

prepared  for  him.


Il8         THE  STORY  OF  GdSTA   BE  RUNG

None  escaped  ;  tlu-v  were  all  caught.  Bccrcncrcutz,
;riin  colonel,  was  bound  and  carried  away;  also
Uiristian  Bergh,  the  mighty  captain,  and  Kberhard,
tin  philosopher.

Even  the  invincible,  the  terrible  Gosta  Berling  was
caught.  The  major's  wife  had  succeeded.

She  was  still  greater  than  the  pensioners.

They  are  pitiful  to  sec,  as  they  sit  with  bound  limbs
in  the  mouldy  old  vehicles.  There  arc  hanging  IK  ,i«l-
and  angry  glances,  and  the  yard  rings  with  oaths  and
wild  bursts  of  powerless  rage.

The  major's  wife  goes  from  one  to  the  other.

"  You  shall  swear,"  she  says,  "  never  to  come  back
to  Kkeby."

"Begone,  hag!"

"  You  shall  swear,"  she  says,  "  otherwise  I  will  throw
you  into  the  bachelors'  wing,  bound  as  you  are,  and
you  shall  burn  up  in  there,  for  to-night  I  am  going  to
burn  down  the  bachelors'  wing."

"  You  dare  not  do  that."

"  Dare  not !  Is  not  Ekeby  mine?  Ah,  you  villain  !
Do  you  think  I  do  not  remember  how  you  spit  at  me
on  the  highway?  Did  I  not  long  to  set  fire  here  just
now  and  let  you  all  burn  up?  Did  you  lift  a  finger  to
defend  me  when  I  was  driven  from  my  home?  No,
swear  now !  "

And  she  stands  there  so  terrible,  although  she  pre-
tends perhaps  to  be  more  angry  than  she  is,  and  so
many  men  armed  with  axes  stand  about  her,  that
they  are  obliged  to  swear,  that  no  worse  misfortune
may  happen.

The  major's  wife  has  their  clothes  and  boxes  brought
down  and  has  their  hand-fetters  loosened ;  then  the
reins  are  laid  in  their  hands.


1HR  OLD  119

But  much  time  has  been  consumed,  and  Marianne

has  ir.u  In-.!    .S|

Tin-  major  was  riser;  he  was  dressed  u

ie.    Shei  ii  the  yard;  be  had  bee i

iu->  bears'  breakfast

tliil  not  say  anything  when  In-  heard  her  story.
•  in  to  the  hears,  put  muzzles  on  t
ami  hurried  away  to  Ekcby.

Marianne    followed    hi:  distance.     She  was

drop  it  then  she  saw  a  bright  lij.;ht

of  fire  in  tlie  sky  and  was  frightened  nearly  to  death.

What  a  iii-jht  it  was!     A  man  beats  his  wife  and

leaves  his  child  •  e  to  death  outside  his  door.

Did  a  woman  to  burn  up  her  enemies;  did

'..1  major  in<  an  to  let  loose  the  bears  on  his  own

people  ?

She  conquered    her   weariness,    hurried   past   the

•id   ran  madly  up  to  Ekcby.
She  had  a  good  >tart.    When  she  reached  the  yard,
r   way    through    the    crowd.     When  she
Stood  in  the  middle  of  the  rin^,  face  to  face  with  the

cried  as  loud  as  she  could,  —
he  major,  the  major  is  comiiv;  with  the  bear
There  was  con  n   am<m-   the   people;    all

turned   to  the   major's

•u  have  i;one  for  him."  she  said  to  Marianne.
••Run!"*  latter,  n:  :«  >tly.     "Away,

(iod's  sake!     I  do  not  know  what  the  major  is
thinking  of,  but  lie  lias  the  bears  with  him."
stood  still  and  looked  at  the  major's  wife.
1   thank  you  for  your  help,  children,"  she  said
quietly  to  the  people.     "  Everything  which  has  hap-
d  to-night  has  been  so  arranged  that  no  one  of
you  can  be  prosecuted  by  the  law  or  get  into  trouble


120         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

for  it.     Go  home  now !     I  do  not  want  to  sec  any  of
my  people  murder  or  be  murdered.     Go  now !  "

Still  the  people  waiu  d.

The  m.ijor's  ^'ill-  turned  to  Marianne.

1  know  that  you  are  in  love,"  she  said.  "You
act  in  love's  madness.  May  the  day  never  come
when  you  must  look  on  powerless  at  the  ruin  of
your  home!  May  you  always  be  mistress  over  your
tongue  and  your  hand  when  anger  fills  the  soul !  "

"  Dear  children,  come  now,  come  !  "  she  continued,
turning  to  the  people.  "  May  God  protect  Ekeby !
I  must  go  to  my  mother.  Oh,  Marianne,  when  you
have  got  back  your  senses,  when  Ekeby  is  rava
and  the  land  sighs  in  want,  think  on  what  you  have
done  this  night,  and  look  after  the  people !  "

Thereupon  she  went,  followed  by  her  people.

When  the  major  reached  the  yard,  he  found  there
no  living  thing  but  Marianne  and  a  long  line  of
horses  with  sledges  and  carriages,  —  a  long  dismal  line,
where  the  horses  were  not  worse  than  the  vehicles,
nor  the  vehicles  worse  than  their  owners.  Ill-used
in  the  struggle  of  life  were  they  all.

Marianne  went  forward  and  freed  them.

She  noticed  how  they  bit  their  lips  and  looked
away.  They  were  ashamed  as  never  before.  A
great  disgrace  had  befallen  them.

"  I  was  not  better  off  when  I  lay  on  my  knees  on
the  steps  at  Bjorne  a  couple  of  hours  ago,"  said
Marianne.

And  so,  dear  reader,  what  happened  afterwards
that  night  —  how  the  old  vehicles  were  put  into  the
carriage-house,  the  horses  in  the  stable,  and  the  pen-
sioners in  their  house  —  I  shall  not  try  to  relate.  The
dawn  began  to  appear  over  the  eastern  hills,  and


////     ol.lt    \  I  ///(  /  121

the  day  came  clear  and  calm.     How  much  .juicier
i»t,  sunny  days  arc   than   the  dark   nights,
muli  I    whose   protecting   \\mgs  beasts  of  prey  hunt
and  owls  hoot!

.ill  only  say  that  when  the  pensioners  had  gone
ain  ami  had  f«und  a  lew  drops  in  the  last  punch-
bowl to  fill  their  glasses,  a  sudden  ecstasy  came  over

"  A  toast  for  the  major's  wife !  "  they  cried.

Ah,  she  is  a  matchless  woman !  What  better  could
h  for  than  to  serve  her,  to  worship  her?

Was  it  not  sad  that  tl.  had  got  her  in  his

power,  and  that  all  her  endeavors  were  to  send  poor
gentlemen's  souls  to  hell?


122          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA    AAA


CHAPTER  VIII

THi:  GREAT  BEAR  IN  GURLITTA  CLIFF

IN  the  darkness  of  the  forests  dwell  unholy  creat-
ures, whose  jaws  are  armed  with  horrible,  glittering
teeth  or  sharp  beaks,  whose  feet  have  pointed  claws,
which  long  to  sink  thi  mselvea  in  a  blood-filled  throat,
and  whose  eyes  shine  with  murderous  desires.

There  the  wolves  live,  who  come  out  at  night  and
hunt  the  peasant's  sledge  until  the  wife  must  lake
her  little  child,  which  sits  upon  her  knee,  and  throw
it  to  them,  to  save  her  own  and  her  husband's  life.

There  the  lynx  lives,  which  the  people  call  "gopa,"
for  in  the  woods  at  least  it  is  dangerous  to  call  it  by
its  right  name.  He  who  speaks  of  it  during  the  day
had  best  see  that  the  doors  and  windows  of  the
sheep-house  are  well  closed  towards  night,  for  other-
wise it  will  come.  It  climbs  right  up  the  walls,  for
its  claws  are  strong  as  steel  nails,  glides  in  thr<
the  smallest  hole,  and  throws  itself  on  th<
And  "gopa"  hangs  on  their  throats,  and  drinks  tlu-ir
blood,  and  kills  and  tears,  till  every  sheep  is  clr.ul.
He  does  not  cease  his  wild  death-dance  among  the
terrified  animals  as  long  as  any  of  them  show  a  sign
of  life.

And  in  the  morning  the  peasant  finds  all  the  sheep
lying  dead  with  torn  throats,  for  "  gopa "  leaves
nothing  living  where  he  ravages.


//  IT  BEAK  IN  GUKLITTA  CUFF    i

There  the  great  owl  lives,  \\  ..^  .it  dusk.     If

one  innnu  ^  luin,  he  come*  whizzing  down  with  out-
spread wings  and  strikes  out  one's  eyes,  for  he  i*  no
real  '•

Ami  t  the-  iiu.Nt   terrible  of  them  all.  the

bear,  who  has  the  strength  of  twelve  men,  ami  .
:i  he  becomes  a  devil,  can  be  killed  only  with  a

.let.

•ul  if  one  should  chance  to  meet  him  in  the  wood,
big  and  high  as  a  wandering  cliff,  one  must  not  run,
nor  defend  one's  self;  one  must  throw  one's  self  d
on  the  ground  and  pretend  to  be  dead.     Many  small
children    h.ive    imagined     lli  ing    on    the

ground  with  the  bear  over  them.  He  has  rolled
them  over  with  his  paw,  and  they  have  felt  his  hot

ah  on  their  faces,  but  they  have  lain  quiet,  until
he  has  gone  away  to  dig  a  hole  to  bury  them  in.

D    they   have    softly   raised   themselves   up   and
stolen  away,  slowly  at  first,  then  in  mad

But  think,  think  if  the  bear  had  not  thought  t:
re. illy  dead,  but  had  taken  a  bite,  or  if  he  had  !
very  hungry  and  wanted  to  cat  them  right  up,  or  if
id   >een  them   when  they  moved  and  had    run
hem      OGod!

Terror  is  a  witch.     She  sits  in  the  dimness  of  the
forest,  sings  magic  songs  to  people,  and  fills  t
hearts   with    frightful    thought*.       From     her    o
that  deadly  fear  which  weighs  down  life  and  darl

beauty  of  smiling  landscapes.     Nature  is  malig-
nant, treacherous  as  a  sleeping  snake;  one  can  be-
lieve nothing.    There  lies  Lbfvcn's  lake  in  brill
beauty;    but   trust    it   not,    it   lures    to   destruct

i  must  gather  its  tribute  of  the  drowned
There  lies  the  wood  temptingly  peaceful ;  but  trust  it


124         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

not!     The  wood  is  full  of  unholy  things,  beset  with
evil  spirits  and  bloodthii  mis'  souls.

Trust  not  the  brook  with  its  gliding  waters.  It  is
sudden  sickness  and  death  to  wade  in  it  after  nil
Trust  not  the  cuckoo,  who  sings  so  gayly  in  tin-
spring.  In  the  autumn  he  becomes  a  hawk  with
fierce  eyes  and  terrible  claws.  Trust  not  the  moss,
nor  the  heather,  nor  the  rock.  Nature  is  evil,  full  of
invisible  powers,  who  hate  man.  There  is  no  spot
where  you  can  set  your  foot  in  safety ;  it  is  wonderful
that  your  weak  race  can  escape  so  much  persecution.

Terror  is  a  witch.  Does  she  still  sit  in  the  dark-
ness of  the  woods  of  Varmland?  Does  she  still
darken  the  beauty  of  smiling  places,  does  she  still
dampen  the  joy  of  living?  Great  her  power  has
been.  I  know  it  well,  who  have  put  steel  in  the
cradle  and  a  red-hot  coal  in  the  bath ;  I  know  it,  who
have  felt  her  iron  hand  around  my  heart.

But  no  one  shall  think  that  I  now  am  going  to
relate  anything  terrible  or  dreadful.  It  is  only  an
old  story  of  the  great  bear  in  Gurlitta  Cliff  which  I
must  tell;  and  any  one  can  believe  it  or  not,  as  it
always  is  with  hunting  stories.

The  great  bear  has  its  home  on  the  beautiful
mountain  summit  which  is  called  Gurlitta  Cliff,  and
which  raises  itself  precipitously  from  the  shores  of
the  Lofvcn.

The  roots  of  a  fallen  pine  between  which  tufts  of
moss  are  hanging  make  the  walls  and  roof  of  his
dwelling,  branches  and  twigs  protect  it,  the  snow
makes  it  warm.  He  can  lie  there  and  sleep  a  good
quiet  sleep  from  summer  to  summer.

Is  he,  then,  a  poet,  a  dreamer,  this  hairy  monarch


tR  AV  GURUTTA   CUFF    125

of  the  forest?     Will  he  sleep  away  the  cold  wir
chill  nights  and  colorless  days  to  be  waked  by  purling
brooks  and  the  song  of  birds  ?    Will  he  !  and

tn  of  blushing  cranberry  bogs,  and  of  ant-hills
filled  with  bi  cious  creatures,  and  of  the  v.

:>«$  which  graze  on  the  green  slopes?  Does  he
want,  happy  one !  to  escape  the  winter  of  life?

Outside  the  snow-storm  rages;   wolves  and  foxes
wander   about,    mad   with    hunger.     Why  shall    the
alone  sleep?    Let  him  get  up  and  feel  how  the
cold  bites,  how  heavy  it  is  to  wade  in  deep  snow.

He  has  bedded  himself  in  so  well.  He  is  like  the
sleeping  princess  in  the  fairy  tale  ;  and  as  she  was
waked  by  love,  so  will  he  be  waked  by  the  spring.
By  a  ray  of  sunlight  which  penetrates  through  the
twigs  and  warms  his  nose,  by  the  drops  of  melting
snow  which  wet  his  fur,  will  he  be  waked.  Woe  to
him  who  untimely  disturbs  him  !

1 1  e  hears,  suddenly,  shouts,  noise,  and  shots.  He
shakes  the  sleep  out  of  his  joints,  and  pushes  aside  the
branches  to  see  what  it  is.  It  is  not  spring,  which
rattles  and  roars  outside  his  lair,  nor  the  wind,  which

•throws  pine-trees  and  casts  up  the  driving  snow,
but  it  is  the  pensioners,  the  pensioners  from  Ekeby,
old  acquaintances  of  the  forest  monarch.  He  re-

ibered  well   the  night  when    l-'uehs   and   Beercn-

:  /  sat  ami  dozed  in  a  Nygard  peasant's  barn,  where
they  awaited  a  visit  from  him.  They  had  just  fallen
asleep  over  their  brandy-bottle,  when  he  swung  him-
self in  through  the  peat-roof;  but  they  awoke,  when
he  was  trying  to  lift  the  cow  he  had  killed  out  of  the
stall,  ami  fell  upon  him  with  gun  and  knife.  They
took  the  cow  from  him  and  one  of  his  eyes,  but  he
saved  his  life.


126         THE  STORY  OF  G&STA   HE  RUNG

Yes,  verily  the  pensioiu-rs  and  he  are  old  acquaint-
ances. He  remembered  how  they  had  come  on  him
another  time,  when  he  and  his  queen  consort  had
just  laid  themselves  down  for  their  winter  sleep  in  the
old  lair  here  on  Gurlitta  Cliff  and  had  young  ones  in
the  hole.  He  remembered  well  how  they  came  on
them  unawares.  He  got  away  all  right,  throwing  to
either  side  everything  that  stood  in  his  path;  but  he
must  limp  for  life  from  a  bullet  in  his  thigh,  and
when  he  came  back  at  night  to  the  royal  lair,  the
snow  was  reel  with  his  queen  consort's  blood,  and  the
royal  children  had  been  carried  away  to  the  plain,  to
grow  up  there  and  be  man's  servants  and  friends.

Yes,  now  the  ground  trembles;  now  the  snow-drift
which  hides  his  lair  shakes ;  now  he  bursts  out,  the
great  bear,  the  pensioners'  old  enemy.  Look  out,
Fuchs,  old  bear-killer;  look  out  now,  Beercncrcutx ;
look  out,  Gosta  Berling,  hero  of  a  hundred  ad-
ventures !

Woe  to  all  poets,  all  dreamers,  all  heroes  of
romance  !  There  stands  Gosta  Berling  with  finger  on
;cr,  and  the  bear  comes  straight  towards  him.
Why  does  he  not  shoot?  What  is  he  thinking  of?

Why  does  he  not  send  a  bullet  straight  into  the
broad  breast?  He  stands  in  just  the  place  to  do  it.
The  others  arc  not  placed  right  to  shoot.  Does  he
think  he  is  on  parade  before  the  forest  monarch?

Gosta  of  course  stood  and  dreamed  of  the  lovely
Marianne,  who  is  lying  at  Ekeby  dangerously  ill,  from
the  chill  of  that  night  when  she  slept  in  the  snow-drift.

He  thinks  of  her,  who  also  is  a  sacrifice  to  the
curse  of  hatred  which  overlies  the  earth,  and  he
shudders  at  himself,  who  has  come  out  to  pursue  and
to  kill.


IK  iN  GURl.IT*TA   CUFF    '

And  th.-i ,-  comes  the  great  bear  right  towards  )>

l  in  one  eye  from  the  blow  of  a  pensi  nifc,

lame  in  I'M-    i<  .;  IK 'in  a  bullet  from  a  pensioner's  gun,

fierce  and  shaggy,  alone,  since  they  h.ul   killed  his

.mil  carried  away  his  children.     And  Costa  sees

.is  he  is,  —  a  poor,  persecuted  beast,  whom  he  will

>ll  he  has  left,  since  people  have

;ii  him  ng  else.

Let   him   kill   mr,"  thinks  Gosta,  "  but   I  will  not

Ami  while  the  bear  breaks  his  way  towards  him,  he
•till  as  it  ule,  .tiul  \\heii  the  forest

monarch  stands  directly  in  front  of  him,  he  presents
arms  and  takes  a  step  to  one  side.

The  bear  continues  on  his  way,  knowing  too  well

that  he  has  no  time  to  waste,  breaks  into  the  wood,

ploughs  his  way  through  drifts  the  height  of  a  man.

rolls  down  the  steep  slopes,  and  escapes,  while  all  of

-.1,  who  had  stood  with  cocked  guns  and  waited  for

u's  shot,  shoot  off  their  guns  after  him.

But  it  is  of  no  avail ;  the  ring  is  broken,  and  the  bear

gone.     Fuchs  scolds,  and  Heercncrcutz  swears,  but

'.i  only  laur

How  could  they  ask  that  any  one  so  happy  as  he
should  harm  one  of  God's  creatures?

The  great  bear  of  Gurlitta  Cliff  got  away  thus  with
.md  he  is  waked  from  his  winter  sleep,  as  the
peasants  will  find.     No  bear  has  greater  skill  than  he
to  tear  apart  the  roofs  of  their  low,  cellar-like  cow-
none  can  better  avoid  a  concealed  ambush.
The  people  about  the  upper  Lofvcn  soon  were  at
their  wits'  end  about   him.     Message  after  message
was  sent  down  to  the  pensioners,  that  they  should
come  and  kill  the  1»


128         THE  STORY  OF  GtiSTA   BE  RUNG

Day  after  day,  night  after  ni^ht,  during  the  whole  of
February,  the  pensioners  scour  the  upper  Lofvcn  to
find  the  bear,  but  he  always  escapes  them.  Has  he
learned  cunning  from  the  fox,  and  swiftness  from  the
wolf?  If  they  lie  in  wait  at  one  place,  he  is  rava
the  neighboring  farmyard;  if  they  seek  him  in  the
wood,  he  is  pursuing  the  peasant,  who  comes  driving
over  the  ice.  He  has  become  the  boldest  of  maraud-
ers :  he  creeps  into  the  garret  and  empties  the  house-
wife's honey-jar;  he  kills  the  horse  in  the  peasant's
sledge.

But  gradually  they  begin  to  understand  what  kind
of  a  bear  he  is  and  why  Gosta  could  not  shoot  him.
Terrible  to  say,  dreadful  to  believe,  this  is  no  ordinary
bear.  No  one  can  hope  to  kill  him  if  he  does  not
have  a  silver  bullet  in  his  gun.  A  bullet  of  silver  and
bell-metal  cast  on  a  Thursday  evening  at  new  moon
in  the  church-tower  without  the  priest  or  the  sexton
or  anybody  knowing  it  would  certainly  kill  him,  but
such  a  one  is  not  so  easy  to  get.

There  is  one  man  at  Ekeby  who,  more  than  all  the
rest,  would  grieve  over  all  this.  It  is,  as  one  can
easily  guess,  Anders  Fuchs,  the  bear-killer.  He  loses
both  his  appetite  and  his  sleep  in  his  anger  at  not  be-
ing able  to  kill  the  great  bear  in  Gurlitta  Cliff.  Ai
even  he  understands  that  the  bear  can  only  be  killed
with  a  silver  bullet.

The  grim  Major  Anders  Fuchs  was  not  handsome.
He  had  a  heavy,  clumsy  body,  and  a  broad,  red  1
with  hanging  bags  under  his  cheeks  and  several
double  chins.  His  small  black  moustache  sat  stiff  as
a  brush  above  his  thick  lips,  and  his  black  hair  stood
out  rough  and  thick  from  his  head.  Moreover,  he  was


t/t  IN  GUKUTTA  139

a  roan  of  few  words  and  a  glutton.  He  was  not  a
person  whom  women  th  sunny  sin  open

arms,  nor  »1;  r  glances  back  a;

One  coiiM    ii"t  that   h  .vould  see  a

woman  whom  he  couM  tolerate,  and  everything
which  concerned  love  and  enthusiasm  was  foreign  to
him

One  Thursday  evening,  when  the  moon,  just  two
lingers  above  the  horizon  an  hour  or  two
Mm  lias  gone  down,  Major  Fuchs  betakes
himself  from  Ekcby  without  telling  any  one  where  he
•is  to  go.     He  has  flint  and  steel  and  a  bullet-
mould  in  his  hunting-bag,  and  his  gun  on  his  back,  and
goes  up  towards  the  church  at  Bro  to  see  what  luck
re  may  be  for  an  honest  man.

The  church  lies  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  narrow
sound  between  the  upper  and  lower  Ix>fven,  and
Major  Fuchs  must  go  over  a  bridge  to  get  there.  He
is  his  way  towards  it,  deep  in  his  thoughts,  with-
out looking  up  towards  Broby  hill,  where  the  houses
cut  sharply  against  the  clear  evening  sky;  he  only
looks  on  the  ground,  and  wonders  how  he  shall  get
hold  of  the  key  of  the  church  without  anybody's
knowing  it.

When  he  comes  down  to  the  bridge,  he  hears  some
one  screaming  so  despairingly  that  he  has  to  look
up.

At  that  time  the  little  German,  Fabcr,  was  orga
at  Bro.     He  was  a  slender  man.  small  in  body  and
mind.     And  the  sexton  was  Jan  Larsson,  an  encr.
peasant,   but   poor,   for  the   Broby  clergyman   ha<l
him  out  of  his  patrimony,  five  humlreil  ri.x-
dollars.

The  sexton  wanted  to  marry  the  organist's  si
9


130         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

the  little,  delicate   maiden    Faber,   but    tin    organist
would   not  let  him  have  her.  and  t!  fiu    two

not  good  friends.  That  evening  tlu  sexton  has
nu-t  the  organist  as  he  crossed  the  bridge  and  has
fallen  upon  him.  He  seizes  him  by  the  shouldn ,  and
holding  him  at  arm's  length  out  over  the  railing  t<  IN
him  solemnly  that  he  shall  drop  him  into  the  sound
if  he  does  not  give  him  the  little  maiden.  The  little
German  will  not  give  in ;  he  struggles  and  screams,
and  reiterates  "No,"  although  far  below  him  h<
sees  the  black  water  rushing  between  the  white
banks.

"  No,  no,"  he  screams ;  "  no,  no !  "

And  it  is  uncertain  if  the  sexton  in  his  rage  would
have  let  him  down  into  the  cold  black  water  if
Major  Fuchs  had  not  just  then  come  over  the  bridge.
The  sexton  is  afraid,  puts  Faberdown  on  solid  ground,
and  runs  away  as  fast  as  he  can.

Little  Faber  falls  on  the  major's  neck  to  thank  him
for  his  life,  but  the  major  pushes  him  away,  and  says
that  there  is  nothing  to  thank  him  for.  The  major
has  no  love  for  Germans,  ever  since  he  had  his
quarters  at  Putbus  on  the  Riigen  during  the  Pome-
ranian war.  He  had  never  so  nearly  starved  to  death
as  in  those  days.

Then  little  Faber  wants  to  run  tip  to  the  bailiflf
Scharling  and  accuse  the  sexton  of  an  attempt  at
murder,  but  the  major  lets  him  know  that  it  is  of  no
use  here  in  the  country,  for  it  does  not  count  for
anything  to  kill  a  German.

Little  Faber  grows  calmer  and  asks  the  major  to
come  home  with  him  to  eat  a  bit  of  sausage  and  to
taste  his  home-brewed  ale.

The    major    follows    him,   for   he   thinks   that   the


77/A   GREAT  BEAK  IN  CUKLITTA   CUFF    1 31

organist  must  have  a  key  to  the  church-door;  and  so
go  up  the  hill,  where  the  Bro  church  stands,
\\ith   tin-   vicarage,  the    sexton's   cottage   and    the
organist's  house  round  about  it.

Vou  must  excuse  us,"  says  little  Faber,  as  he  and
the  major  enter  the  house.     "  It  is  not  really  in  <
to-day.    We  have  had  a  little  to  do,  my  sister  and  I.

bave  killed  a  cock."
M  The  devil !  "  cries  the  major.
The  little  maid  Faber  has  just  come  in  with  the  ale
in  great  earthen  mugs.    Now,  every  one  knows  that
the  major  did  not  look  upon  women  with  a  tender
glance,  but  this   little  maiden  he  had  to  gaze  upon.
with  ilc!:;.;ht,  as  she  came  in  so  neat  in  lace  and  cap.
Her  light  hair  lay  combed  so  smooth  above  her  fore-
head, the  home- woven  dress  was  so  pretty  and  so
dazzlingly  clean,  her  little  hands  were  so  b
eager,  and  her  little  face  so  rosy  and  round,  that  he
could  not  help  thinking  that  if  he  had  seen  such  a
little  woman  twenty-five  years   ago,  he   must   have
come  forward  and  offered  himself.

She  is  so  pretty  and  rosy  and  nimble,  but  her  eyes
arc  quite  red  with  weeping.  It  is  that  which  suggests
such  tender  thoughts.

While  the  men  eat  and  drink,  she  goes  in  and  out
of  the  room.  Once  she  comes  to  her  brother,  cour-
tesies, and  says,  —

How  do  you  wish  me  to  place  the  cows  in  the

?"

Tut  twelve  on  the  left  and  eleven  on  the  right,
then  tlu-y  can't  gore  one  another."

'  Have  you  so  many  cows.  Faber? "  bursts  out  the

>r.
The  fact  was  that  the  organist  had  only  two  cows,


132          THE  STORY  OF  G&STA  BERLING

but  he  called  one  eleven  and  the  other  twelve,  that  it
mii^ht  sound  fun-,  when  he  spoke  of  tin  in.

And  then  the  major  hears  that  Kilu-r's  barn  is
being  altered,  so  that  the  cows  are  out  all  day  and
at  night  are  put  into  the  woodshed.

The  little  maiden  comes  again  to  her  broth*  r,
courtesies  to  him,  and  says  that  the  carpenter  had
asked  how  high  the  barn  should  be  made.

"  Measure  by  the  cows,"  says  the  organist, "  meas-
ure by  the  cows !  "

Major  Fuchs  thinks  that  is  such  a  good  answer.
However  it  comes  to  pass,  the  major  asks  the  organist
why  his  sister's  eyes  are  so  red,  and  learns  that  she
weeps  because  he  will  not  let  her  marry  the  penniless
sexton,  in  debt  and  without  inheritance  as  he  is.

Major  Fuchs  grows  more  and  more  thoughtful.
He  empties  tankard  after  tankard,  and  eats  sausage
after  sausage,  without  noticing  it.  Little  Faber  is
appalled  at  such  an  appetite  and  thirst ;  but  the  more
the  major  eats  and  drinks,  the  clearer  and  more  de-
termined his  mind  grows.  The  more  decided  becomes
his  resolution  to  do  something  for  the  little  maiden
Faber.

He  has  kept  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  great  key  which
hangs  on  a  knob  by  the  door,  and  as  soon  as  little
Faber,  who  has  had  to  keep  up  with  the  major  in
drinking  the  home-brewed  ale,  lays  lii^  IK  ad  on  the
table  and  snores,  Major  Fuchs  has  seized  the  key,
put  on  his  cap,  and  hurried  away.

A  minute  later  he  is  groping  his  way  up  the  tower
stairs,  lighted  by  his  little  horn  lantern,  and  comes  at
last  to  the  bell-room,  where  the  bells  open  their  wide
throats  over  him.  He  scrapes  off  a  little  of  the  bell-
metal  with  a  file,  and  is  just  going  to  take  the  bullet-


\T  BEAR  IN  CUKUTTA   CUFF    133

mould  and  u .  out  of  his  hunting-bag,  when

he  finds  that  he  has  for^<  uport.mi

of  all:  he  has  no  silver  with  him.  If  there  shall  be
any  power  in  the  bullet,  it  must  be  cast  there  in  the
tower.  Kveryth  -  hursday  evening

and  a  new  moon,  and  no  one  has  any
and  now  he  cannot  do  anything       II     sends  forth
the  Mlem-e  of  the  night  an  oath  with  such  a  ring
in  it  thai  the  bells  hum.

Then  he  hears  a  slight  noise  down  in  the  church
and  thinks  he  hears  steps  on  the  stairs.     Yes,  it  is

heavy  steps  are  coming  up  the  st.
Major  Fuchs,  who  stands  there  and  swears  so  that
the  bells  vibrate,  is  a  little  thoughtful  at  that.     He
wonders  who  it  can  be  who  is  coming  to  help  him
with  the  bullet-casting.     The  steps  come  nearer  and
•  T.     Whoever  it  is,  is  coming  all  the  way  up  to
bell-room.

The  major  creeps  far  in  among  the  beams  and
rafters,  and  puts  out  his  lantern.  He  is  not  exactly
afraid,  but  the  whole  thing  would  be  spoiled  if  any
one  should  sec  him  there.  He  has  scarcely  had  time
to  hide  before  the  new-comer's  head  appears  above
the  floor.

The  major  knows  him  well ;  it  is  the  miserly  Broby

I  le,  who  is  nearly  mad  with  greed,  has  the

t  of  hiding  his  treasures  in  the  strangest  places.

He  comes  now  with  a  roll  of  bank-notes  which  he  is

going  to  hide  in  the  tower-room.     He  docs  not  know

any  one  sees  him.     He  lifts  up  a  board  in  the

floor  and  puts  in  the  money  and  takes  himself  off

again.

The  major  is  not  slow ;  he  lifts  up  the  same  board.
Oh,  so  much  money!  Package  after  package  of


134         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLL\

bank-notes,  and  amon^r  them  brown  leather  bai;s,  full
of  silver.  The  major  takoju-t  enough  silver  to  make
a  bullet;  the  re>t  he  led

When  he  comes  down  to  the  earth  again,  he  has
the  silver  bullet  in  his  gun.  He  wonder*  what  luck
has  in  store  for  him  that  night.  It  is  marvellous  on
Thursday  nights,  as  every  one  knows.  He  goes  up
towards  the  organist's  house.  Fancy  if  the  bear
knew  that  Faber's  cows  are  in  a  miserable  shed,  no
better  than  under  the  bare  sky.

What!  surely  he  sees  something  black  and  big
coming  over  the  field  towards  the  woodshed ;  it  must
be  the  bear.  He  puts  the  gun  to  his  cheek  and  is
just  going  to  shoot,  but  then  he  changes  his  mind.

The  little  maid's  red  eyes  come  before  him  in  the
darkness;  he  thinks  that  he  will  help  her  and  the
sexton  a  little,  but  it  is  hard  not  to  kill  the  great  bear
himself.  He  said  afterwards  that  nothing  in  the  world
had  ever  been  so  hard,  but  as  the  little  maiden  was
so  dear  and  sweet,  it  had  to  be  done.

He  goes  up  to  the  sexton's  house,  wakes  him,  drags
him  out,  half  dressed  and  half  naked,  and  says  that
he  shall  shoot  the  bear  which  is  creeping  about  out-
side of  Faber's  woodshed.

"  If  you  shoot  the  bear,  he  will  surely  give  you  his
sister,"  he  says,  "  for  then  you  will  be  a  famous  man.
That  is  no  ordinary  bear,  and  the  best  men  in  the
country  would  consider  it  an  honor  to  kill  it."

And  he  puts  into  his  hand  his  own  gun,  loaded  with
a  bullet  of  silver  and  bell-metal  cast  in  a  church
tower  on  a  Thursday  evening  at  the  new  moon,  and
he  cannot  help  trembling  with  envy  that  another
than  he  shall  shoot  the  great  forest  monarch,  the  old
bear  of  Gurlitta  Cliff.


////•.      L/A  C.


RUTl  A    (////


The  sexton  aims,  —  God  lull-  us,  as  if

meant  t«.  hit  th«   •  h  high  up  in  ili-

wanders  about  i  ..  Star,  and  not  a  bear  wan-

dering on  i.  —  and  the  -un  goes  off  with  a

bang  which  can  i  .ill  the  way  to  Gurlitta  Cliff.

-r  he  has  aiiiu  d.  the  bear  falls.  So  it  is
\  one  shoots  with  a  silver  bullet.  One  shoots
>ear  through  the  heart,  even  if  one  aims  at  the

»plc  come  rushing  out  from  all  the  neighboring
farmyards  and  wonder  what  i-,  ^oing  on,  for  never
hail  a  i:-.;  .suunded  so  loud  nor  waked  so  many
sleeping  echoes  as  th  ;ul  the  sexton  wins  much

praise,  for  the  bear  had  been  a  real  pest

Little    Fabcr   comes  out  too,   but  now  is  Major

lis  sadly  disappointed.     There  stands  the  sexton

covered  u  ith  glory,  besides  having  saved  Fabcr's  cows,

but  the  little  organist  is  neither  touched  nor  grateful.

He  does  not  open  his  an  in  and  greet  him  as

ier-in-law  and  h

The  major  stands  and  frowns  and  stamps  his  foot  in

rage  over  such  smallness.     He  wants  to  explain  to

the  covetous,  narrow-minded  little  fellow  what  a  deed

but  he  begins  to  stammer,  so  that  he  cannot  get

out  a  word.     And  he  gets  angry  and  more  angry  at

thought  that  he  has  given  up  the  glory  of  killing

!*rcat  bear  in  vain.

Oh,  it  is  quite  impossible  for  him  to  comprehend
he  who  had  done  such  a  deed  should  not  be
worthy  to  win  the  proudest  of  brides.

The  sexton  and  some  of  the  young  men  are  going
to  skin  the  bear;  they   go   to  the   grindstone   and
;>cn  the  knives.     Others  go  in  and  go  to  bed.
Major  Fuchs  stands  alone  by  the  dead  bear.


136          /•//£•  STOfiy  OF  COSTA   BEKL/XG

1  lien  he  goes  to  the  church  once  more,  puts  the
key  again  in  the  lock,  climbs  up  the  narrow  stairs  and
the  twisud  ladder,  wake*  the  .ski-ping  pigeons,  and
once  more  comes  up  to  the  tower-room.

Aftn  \\.u\ls,  when  the  bear  is  skinned  under  the
major's  inspection,  they  find  between  his  jaws  a
package  of  notes  of  live  hundred  rix-dollars.  It  is
impossible  to  say  how  it  came  there,  but  of  course  it
was  a  marvellous  bear;  and  as  the  sexton  had  killed
him,  the  money  is  his,  that  is  very  plain.

When  it  is  made  known,  little  Faber  too  under-
stands what  a  glorious  deed  the  sexton  has  done,  and
he  declares  that  he  would  be  proud  to  be  his  brother-
in-law.

On  Friday  evening  Major  Anders  Fuchs  returns  to
Ekeby,  after  having  been  at  a  feast,  in  honor  of  the
lucky  shot,  at  the  sexton's  and  an  engagement  dinner
at  the  organist's.  He  follows  the  road  with  a  heavy
heart ;  he  feels  no  joy  that  his  enemy  is  dead,  and
no  pleasure  in  the  magnificent  bear-skin  which  the
sexton  has  given  him.

Many  perhaps  will  believe  that  he  is  grieving  that
the  sweet  little  maiden  shall  be  another's.  Oh  no,
that  causes  him  no  sorrow.  But  what  goes  to  his  very
heart  is  that  the  old,  one-eyed  forest  king  is  dead,
and  it  was  not  he  who  shot  the  silver  bullet  at  him.

So  he  comes  into  the  pensioners'  wing,  where  the
pensioners  are  sitting  round  the  fire,  and  without  a
word  throws  the  bear-skin  down  among  them.  Let
no  one  think  that  he  told  about  that  expedition ;  it
was  not  until  long,  long  after  that  any  one  could  get
out  of  him  the  truth  of  it.  Nor  did  he  betray  the
Broby  clergyman's  hiding-place,  who  perhaps  never
noticed  the  theft.


////.    i,AV:'.*r  BEAK  IN  CURUTTA  137

'1  IK  JM  .     skin.

••  h  i,  a  fine  skin,"  says  Bccrcncrcut/      ••  I  would
like  to  know  why  this  fellow   has  come  out  of  his

•  >r  perhaps  you  shot  him  in  hi*  \\
"  lie  was  shot  at  1.

Yes,  as  big  as  the  Gurlitta  bear  he  never  was/'
says  Gosta,  "  but  lie  has  been  a  fine  beast."

•It  he  had  had  one  eye/'  says  Kcvenhullcr, "  I  would
have  thought  that  you  had  killed  the  old  one  himself,
so  big ;  but  this  one  has  no  wound  or  inflamma-
tion about  his  eyes,  so  it  cannot  be  the  same."

ichs  swears  over  his  stupidity,  but  then  his  face
lights  up  so  that  he  is  really  h.uuU>mc.  The  great
bear  has  not  been  killed  by  anotl.  I  bullet.

"  Lord  God,  how  good  thou  art !  "  he  say*,  and
folds  his  hands.


138          THE  STORY  Of-    c,(V>/./    HURLING


CHAPTER   IX

THE  AUCTION   AT  BJORNE

WE  young  people  oU<  n  had  to  wonder  at  the  old
people's  tales.  "  Was  there  a  ball  every  day,  as  long
as  your  radiant  youth  lasted?"  we  asked  tin m.
"Was  life  then  one  long  adventure?"

44  Were  all  young  women  beautiful  and  lovely  in
those  days,  and  did  every  feast  end  by  Gn.^u  Herling
carrying  off  one  of  them?  "

Then  the  old  people  shook  their  worthy  heads,  and
began  to  tell  of  the  whirring  of  the  spinning-wheel  and
the  clatter  of  the  loom,  of  work  in  the  kitchen,  of
the  thud  of  the  flail  and  the  path  of  the  axe  through
the  forest;  but  it  was  not  long  before  they  harked
back  to  the  old  theme.  Then  sledges  drove  up  to
the  door,  horses  speeded  away  through  the  dark
woods  with  the  joyous  young  people ;  then  the  dance
whirled  and  the  violin-strings  snapped.  Adventure's
wild  chase  roared  about  Lofven's  long  lake  with  thun-
der and  crash.  Far  away  could  its  noise  be  heard.
The  forest  tottered  and  fell,  all  the  powers  of  destruc-
tion were  let  loose ;  fire  flamed  out,  floods  laid
waste  the  land,  wild  beasts  roamed  starving  about  the
farmyards.  Under  the  light-footed  horses'  hoofs  all
quiet  happiness  was  trampled  to  dust.  Wherever
the  hunt  rushed  by,  men's  hearts  flamed  up  in  mad-
ness, and  the  women  in  pale  terror  had  to  flee  from
their  homes.


////.    A  \   AT  BJOKNE  139

And  we  young  ones  sat  wo

\vii.it  po.p:  •  We

sha!

•   1  -.  .  •  .    ;  >sc  days  never  think  of  what

"Of  course  they  thought,  clui  nswcrcd  the

old  people.

it  not  as  we  think,"  we  insisted.

But  the  old  people  did  nut   understand  what  we
meant.

Hut  we  thought  of  the  strange  spirit  of  self-con-
sciousness which  had  already  taken  possession  of  us.
We  thought  of  him,  with  his  eyes  of  ice  and  his  long,
bent  fingers, —  he  who  sits  there  in  the  soul's  darkest
r  ami  pick-,  to  pieces  our  being,  just  as  old
women  pick  to  pieces  bits  of  silk  and  wool.

Bit  by  bit    li.nl    tiie    Km;;,    hard,  crooked   fingers
d,  until  our  whole  self  lay  there  like  a  pile  of
rags,   and   our    best    impulses,   our    most    original .
thoughts,  everything  which  we  had  done  and  said,
had  been  examined,  in\  1,  picked  to  pieces,

and  the  icy  eyes  had  looked  on,  and  the  toothless
mouth  had  laughed  in  derision  and  whispered, —

"  Sec,  it  is  rags,  only  rags."

There  was  also  one  of  the  people  of  that  time  who
had  opened  her  soul  to  the  spirit  with  the  icy  eyes.
In  one  of  them  he  sat,  watching  the  causes  of  all
actions,  sneering  at  both  evil  and  good,  understand-
ing everything,  condemning  nothing,  examining,  seek-
ing out,  picking  to  pieces,  paralyzing  the  emotions  of
heart  and  the  power  of  the  mind  by  sneering
unceasingly.

The  beautiful  Marianne   bore  the   spirit  of  intro-
spection within  her.     She  felt  his  icy  eyes  and  sneers


140         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

follow  every  step,  every  \vord.  Her  life  had  become
a  drama  where  she  was  the  only  spectator.  She  had
ceased  to  be  a  human  being,  she  did  not  suffer,
was  not  glad,  nor  did  she  love  ;  she  carried  out  the
beautiful  Marianne  Sinclair's  r61c,  and  self-conscious-
ness sat  with  staring,  icy  eyes  and  busy,  pick  in-
fingers,  and  watched  her  performance.

She  was  divided  into  two  halve-  I'.iK  ,  unsympa-
thetic, and  sneering,  one  half  sat  and  watched  what
the  other  half  was  doing;  and  the  strange  spirit  who
picked  to  pieces  her  being  never  had  a  word  of  feel-
ing or  sympathy.

But  where  had  he  been,  the  pale  watcher  of  the
source  of  deeds,  that  night,  when  she  had  learned  to
know  the  fulness  of  life?  Where  was  he  when  she,
the  sensible  Marianne,  kissed  Gosta  Bcrling  before  a
hundred  pairs  of  eyes,  and  when  in  a  gust  of  passion
she  threw  herself  down  in  the  snow-drift  to  die?
Then  the  icy  eyes  were  blinded,  then  the  sneer  was
weakened,  for  passion  had  raged  through  her  soul.
The  roar  of  adventure's  wild  hunt  had  thundered  in
her  ears.  She  had  been  a  whole  person  during  that
one  terrible  night.

Oh,  you  god  of  self-mockery,  when  Marianne  with
infinite  difficulty  succeeded  in  lifting  her  stiffened
arms  and  putting  them  about  Gosta's  neck,  you  too,
like  old  Beerencreutz,  had  to  turn  away  your  eyes
from  the  earth  and  look  at  the  stars.

That  night  you  had  no  power.  You  were  dead
while  she  sang  her  love-song,  dead  while  she  hurried
down  to  Sjo  after  the  major,  dead  when  she  saw  the
flames  redden  the  sky  over  the  tops  of  the  trees.

For  they  had  come,  the  mighty  storm-birds,  the
griffins  of  demoniac  passions.  With  wings  of  fire  and


n/K  AUCTION  AT  BJORNE  U«

claws  of  steel  they  had  come  swooping  down  over
you,  you  icy-eyed  spirit;  they  had  stnuk  their  claws
k  and  flung  you  far  into  the  unknown.
have  been  dead  and  crush    I
Hut  now  they  had  rushed  on,  —  they  whose  course
no  sage  can  predict,  no  observer  can  follow;   and
out  of  the  depths  of  the  unknown  had  the  strange
spirit  of  self-consciousness  again  raised  itself  and  had
once  again  taken  possession  of  Marianne's  soul.

;  the  whole  of  February  Marianne  lay  ill  at
Ekcby.  When  she  sought  out  the  major  at  Sjo  she
had  been  infected  with  small-pox.  The  terrible  ill-
ness had  taken  a  great  hold  on  her,  who  had  been  so
chilled  and  exhausted.  Death  had  come  very  near
to  her,  but  at  the  end  of  the  month  she  had  recov-
ered. She  was  still  very  weak  and  much  disfig-
ured. She  would  never  again  be  called  the  beautiful
Marianne.

it,  however,  was  as  yet  only  known  to  Marianne
and  her  nurse.  The  pensioners  themselves  did  not
know  it.  The  sick-room  where  small-pox  raged  was
not  open  to  any  one.

But  when  is  the  introspective  power  greater  than
during  the  long  hours  of  convalescence?    Then  the
1  stares  and  stares  with  his  icy  ryes,  and
ks   with  his  bony,  hard  fingers.     And
ic  looks  carefully,  behind  him   sits  a  still   paler
creature,  who  stares  and  sneers,  and  behind  him  an-
other and  still  another,  sneering  at  one  another  and
at  the  whole  world.

And    while   Marianne   lay  and   looked   at   herself
with  all  these  staring  icy  eyes,  all  natural  feelings

within    :
She  lay  there  and  played  she  was  ill ;  she  lay  there


142          THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLING

ami   played   she  was   unhappy,  in   love,  longing   for
re  vcn

She  was  it  all,  and  still  it  was  only  a  play.     Ev<
thing  became  a  play  and  unreality  under  those  icy
eyes,  which  watched  her  while  they  were  watched  by  a
pair  behind  them,  which  were  watched  by  other  p
in  infinite  perspective.

All  the  energy  of  life  had  died  within  her.  She
had  found  strength  for  glowing  hate  and  tender  love
for  one  single  night,  not  more.

She  did  not  even  know  if  she  loved  Gosta  Berling.
She  longed  to  see  him  to  know  if  he  could  take  her
out  of  herself.

While  under  the  dominion  of  her  illness,  she  had
had  only  one  clear  thought :  she  had  worried  lest  her
illness  should  be  known.  She  did  not  wish  to  sec
her  parents;  she  wished  no  reconciliation  with  her
father,  and  she  knew  that  he  would  repent  if  he
should  know  how  ill  she  was.  Therefore  she  ordered
that  her  parents  and  every  one  else  should  only
know  that  the  troublesome  irritation  of  the  eyes,
which  she  always  had  when  she  visited  her  native
country,  forced  her  to  sit  in  a  darkened  room.  She
forbade  her  nurse  to  say  how  ill  she  was ;  she  forbade
the  pensioners  to  go  after  the  doctor  at  Karlstad.
She  had  of  course  small-pox,  but  only  very  lightly;
in  the  medicine-chest  at  Ekeby  there  were  remedies
enough  to  save  her  life.

She  never  thought  of  death;  she  only  lay  and
waited  for  health,  to  be  able  to  go  to  the  clergyman
with  Gosta  and  have  the  banns  published.

But  now  the  sickness  and  the  fever  were  gone.
She  was  once  more  cold  and  sensible.  It  seemed  to
her  as  if  she  alone  was  sensible  in  this  world  of  fools.


THE  AUCTION  AT  BJ&RNE  143

She  neither  hated  nor  loved.     She  understood  her

lie  understood  them   all.     He  who  ui
stands  does  not  h

She   had  ;.  i.it  Melchior  Sinclair   meant  to

have  an  auction  at  Hjornc  and  make  way  with  all  his
wealth,  th.it  she  might  inherit  nothing  after  him.
People  said  that  he  would  make  the  devastation  as
thorough  as  possible;  first  he  would  sell  the  furniture
and  utensils,  then  the  cattle  and  implements,  and  then
house  itself  with  all  its  lands,  and  would  put  the
money  in  a  bag  and  sink  it  to  the  bottom  of  the
Dissipation,  confusion,  and  devastation
should  be  her  inheritance.  Marianne  smiled  approv-
ingly when  she  heard  it:  such  was  his  character,  and
so  he  must  act.

It  seemed  strange  to  her  that  she  had  sung  that
great    hymn  to   love.      She   had    dreamed   of  love
cottage,  as  others  have  done.     Now  it  seemed
odd  to  her  that  she  had  ever  had  a  dream.

She  sighed  for  naturalness.  She  was  tired  of  this
continual  play.  She  never  had  a  strong  emotion.
She  only  grieved  for  her  beauty,  but  she  shuddered
at  the  compassion  of  strange

Oh,  one  second  of  forgetfulness  of  herself!  One
gesture,  one  word,  one  act  which  was  not  calcul

One  day,  when  the  rooms  had  been  disinfected  and
she  lay  dressed  on  a  sofa,  she  had  G  ling

called.     They  answered  her  that  he  had  gone  to  t he-
auction  at  Hjornc.


At  Bjorne  there  was  in  truth  a  big  auction.     It
an  old,  rich  home.     People  had  come  long  distances
to  be  pr«  lie  sale.

Melchior  Sinclair  had  flung  all  the  property  in  the


144         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   REELING

house  together  in  the  great  drawing-room.  There
lay  thousands  of  articles,  collected  in  piles,  which
reached  from  floor  to  ceiling.

He  had  himself  gone  about  the  house  like  an  angel
of  destruction  on  the  day  of  judgment,  and  dragged
together  what  he  wanted  to  sell.  Everything  in  the
kitchen,  —  the  black  pots,  the  wooden  chairs,  the  pew-
ter dishes,  the  copper  kettles,  all  were  left  in  peace,
for  among  them  there  was  nothing  which  recalled
Marianne;  but  they  were  the  only  things  which
escaped  his  anger.

He  burst  into  Marianne's  room,  turning  everything
out.  Her  doll-house  stood  there,  and  her  book-case,
the  little  chair  he  had  had  made  for  her,  her  trink-
ets and  clothes,  her  sofa  and  bed,  everything  must
go.

And  then  he  went  from  room  to  room.  He  tore
down  everything  he  found  unpleasant,  and  carried  great
loads  down  to  the  auction-room.  He  panted  under
the  weight  of  sofas  and  marble  slabs ;  but  he  went  on.
He  had  thrown  open  the  sideboards  and  taken  out  the
magnificent  family  silver.  Away  with  it !  Marianne
had  touched  it.  He  filled  his  arms  with  snow-white
damask  and  with  shining  linen  sheets  with  hem-
stitching as  wide  as  one's  hand,  —  honest  home-made
work,  the  fruit  of  many  years  of  labor,  —  and  flun^
them  down  together  on  the  piles.  Away  with  them  !
Marianne  was  not  worthy  to  own  them.  He  stormed
through  the  rooms  with  piles  of  china,  not  caring  if  he
broke  the  plates  by  the  dozen,  and  he  seized  the  hand-
painted  cups  on  which  the  family  arms  were  burned.
Away  with  them  !  Let  any  one  who  will  use  them  !
He  staggered  under  mountains  of  bedding  from  thr
attic :  bolsters  and  pillows  so  soft  that  one  sunk  down


/•////  ArCT/OX  AT  BJVK  145

in  them  as  in  a  wave.     Away  with  them !  Marianne
had  slept  on  them.

es  on  the  old,  well-known  furni-

\Vas  there  a  chair  where  she  had  not  sat.  or

a  sofa  which  she  had  not  used,  or  a  picture  which

she   had   not  looked   at.  tick    which

not  lighted   her.  a   mirror  which  had   not  reflected

ires?    Gloomily   he  shook   his  this

world  of  memories.     He  would  have  liked  to  have

rushed   on   thrm  with   swinging  club   and   to   have

icd  everything  to  small  l>  plintcrs.

Hut  it  seemed  a  more  famous  revenge  to

sell  them  all  at  auction.    They  should  go  to  strangers  f

Away  to  be  soiled  in  the  cottagers'  huts,  to  be  in  the

of  indifferent  strangers.     Did  he  not  know  them,

the  dented  pieces  of  auction  furniture  in  the  peasants'

houses,  fallen  into  dishonor  like  his  beautiful  daughter?

Away   with   them  !      May  they   stand  with  torn-out

stuffing  and  worn-ofT  gilding,  with  cracked  legs  and

and   long   for   their   former   home!

:th  them  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  so  that  no

eye  can  find  them,  no  hand  gather  them  together!

When  ion  began,  he  had  filled  half  the  hall

with  .in  incredible  confusion  of  piled-up  articles.

,;ht  across  the  room  he  had  placed  a  long  coun-
Hchind  it  stood  th<  -u-er  ami  put  up  the

things;   there  the  clerks  sat  and  kept  the  record,  and
•  Melchior  Sinclair  had  a  keg  of  bran-'

In  the  otlv  f  the  room,  in  the  hall.

in   the   yard   were   the   buyers.     There  wcr
people,  and  much  noise  and  gaycty.     The  bids  fol-
lowed close  on  one  another,   and  the  auction  was
But  by  the  keg  of  brandy,  with  all  his  pos-
sessions in  endless  confusion  behind  him,  sat  Melchior

to


146         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

Sinclair,  half  drunk  and  half  mad.  His  hair  stood
up  in  rough  tufts  above  his  red  face ;  his  eyes  \
rolling,  fierce,  and  bloodshot.  He  shouted  and
laughed,  as  if  he  had  been  in  the  best  of  moods;
and  every  one  who  had  made  a  good  bid  he  called
ti  j>  to  him  and  offered  a  dram.

Among  those  who  saw  him  there  was  Gosta  Bcr-
ling,  who  had  stolen  in  with   tin-  crowd  of  bu\
hut  who  avoided  coming   under  Melchior  Sinclair's
eyes.     He  became  thoughtful  at  the  sight,  and   his
heart  stood  still,  as  at  a  presentiment  of  a  misfortum -.

He  wondered  much  where  Marianne's  mother  could
be  during  all  this.  And  he  went  out,  against  his
will,  but  driven  by  fate,  to  find  Madame  Gustava
Sinclair.

He  had  to  go  through  many  doors  before  he  found
her.  Her  husband  had  short  patience  and  little
fondness  for  wailing  and  women's  complaints.  He
had  wearied  of  seeing  her  tears  flow  over  the  fate
which  had  befallen  her  household  treasures.  He
was  furious  that  she  could  weep  over  table  and  bed
linen,  when,  what  was  worse,  his  beautiful  daughter
was  lost;  and  so  he  had  hunted  her,  with  clen<
fists,  before  him,  through  the  house,  out  into  the
kitchen,  and  all  the  way  to  the  pantry.

She  could  not  go  any  farther,  and  he  had  rejoiced
at  seeing  her  there,  cowering  behind  the  step-ladder,
awaiting  heavy  blows,  perhaps  death.  He  let  her
stay  there,  but  he  locked  the  door  and  stuffed  the
key  in  his  pocket.  She  could  sit  there  as  long  as
the  auction  lasted.  She  did  not  need  to  starve,  and
his  cars  had  rest  from  her  laments.

There  she  still  sat,  imprisoned  in  her  own  pnntry,
when  Gosta  came  through  the  corridor  between  the


THE  AUCTION  AT  BjOlt  147

kitchen  and  the  dining-room.     He  saw  her  face  at

;i  the  wall.   She  had  climbed
up  on  the  step-ladder,  .m<l  stood  staring  out  of  her

>n.

"  What  are  you  doing  up  there?  "  asked  Cost*.
He  has  shut  •  she  whispered.

fotM  husband?"

\.s      I  th(,u.;ht  he  was  going  to  kill  me.     Hut
!i.  Gosta.  >c  key  of  the  dining-room  door,

•h<-  kitchen  and  unlock  the  pantry  door
»  that  I  can  come  out     That  key  fits  here."
sta  obeyed,  and  in   a   couple   of  minutes  the
little  woman  stood  in  the  kitchen,  which  was  quite
deserted.

Vou  should  have  let  one  of  the  maids  open  the
door  with  the  dining-room  key,"  said  Gosta.

Do  you  think  I  want  to  teach  them  that  trick?
Then  I  should  never  have  any  peace  in  the  pantry.
And,  besides,  I  took  this  cfiance  to  put  the  upper
shelves  in  order.  They  needed  it,  indeed.  I  cannot
understand  how  I  could  have  let  so  much  rubbish
collect  there."

Vou  have  so  much  to  attend  \  ta.

\V*.  that  you  may  believe.  If  I  were  not  every-
where, neither  the  loom  nor  the  spinning-wheel  would
be  going  ri^ht.  An

I  Irre  she  stopped  and  wiped  away  a  tear  from  the
corner  of  her  eye.

41  God  help  me.  how  I  do  talk  !  "  she  said  ;    "  they
on't  have  anything  more  to  look  after.
I  selling  everything  we  h

i  wretched  b  1  Gosta.

Vou  know  that  big  mirror  in  the  drawing-room,
Gosta.  It  was  such  a  beauty,  for  the  glass  was  whole


148          THE  STORY  OF  GtiSTA    7-7 -:/i7 /.W

in  it,  without  a  flaw,  and  there  was  no  blemish  at  all
on  the  gilding.  I  got  it  from  my  mother,  and  now
he  wants  to  sell  it."

'   He  is  mad."

'  You  may  well  lay  so.  He  is  not  much  better.
He  won't  stop  until  we  shall  have  to  go  and  beg  on
the  highway,  we  as  well  as  the  major's  wife."

"  It  will  never  be  so  bad  as  that,"  answered  G<

"  Yes,  Gosta.  When  the  major's  wife  went  away
from  Kkeby,  she  foretold  misfortune  for  us,  and  now
it  is  coming.  She  would  never  have  allowed  him  to
sell  Bjornc.  And  think,  his  own  china,  the  old  Can-
ton cups  from  his  own  home,  are  to  be  sold.  The
major's  wife  would  never  have  let  it  happen."

"But  what  is  the  matter  with  him?  "  asked  Gosta.

"  Oh,  it  is  only  because  Marianne  has  not  come
back  again.  He  has  waited  and  waited.  He  has
gone  up  and  down  the  avenue  the  whole  day  and
waited  for  her.  He  is  longing  himself  mad,  but  I  do
not  dare  to  say  anything."

"  Marianne  believes  that  he  is  angry  with  her."

"  She  does  not  believe  that.  She  knows  him  well
enough ;  but  she  is  proud  and  will  not  take  the  first
step.  They  are  stiff  and  hard,  both  of  them,  and  I
have  to  stand  between  them."

"  You  must  know  that  Marianne  is  going  to  marry
me?  "

"  Alas,  Gosta,  she  will  never  do  that.  She  says
that  only  to  make  him  angry.  She  is  too  spoiled  to
marry  a  poor  man,  and  too  proud,  too.  Go  home
and  tell  her  that  if  she  does  not  come  home  soon,
all  her  inheritance  will  have  gone  to  destruction.
Oh,  he  will  throw  everything  away,  I  know,  without
getting  anything  for  it."


Tin-    AUCTION  AT  BJORNE  LJQ

sta  was  really  angry  wit.  I  here  she  sat

a  big  kitchen  table,  and  had  no  thought  for  anything
but  her  mirrors  and  her  china.

"  You  ought  to  be  ashamed !  "  he  burst  out.  ••  You
.v  your  daughter  out  into  a  snow-drift,  and  then
you  think  that  it  is  only  temper  that  she  does  not
come   back.    And  you   think   that  she  is  no  b
:  to  forsake   him  whom  she  cares  for,  lest  she
!d  lose  her  inheritance."

Dear  Costa,  don't  be  angry,  you  too.  I  don't
know  what  I  am  saying.  I  tru-.l  my  best  to  open  the
door  for  nc,  but  he  took  me  and  dragged  me

away.     They   all   say  here  that   I  don't  understand

.;::;.     I  shall  not  grudge  you  Marianne,  '
you  can  make  her  happy.     It  is  not  so  easy  to  make
a  woman  happy,  Go

Gosta  looked   at  her.     How  could  he   too   have
raised  his  voice  in  anger  against  such  a  person  as
—  terrified  and  cowed,  but  with  such  a  good  heart !

You  do  not  ask  how  Marianne  is,"  he  said  gently.
She  burst  into  tears.

"  Will  you  not  be  angry  with  me  if  I  ask  you?  "she

said.     "  I  have  longed  to  ask  you  the  whole  time.

Think  that  I  know  no  more  of  her  than  that  she  is

-...;.     Not  one  greeting  have  I  had  from  her  the

whole  time,  not  once  when  I  sent  clothes  to  her,  and

so  I  thought  that  you  and  she  did  not  want  to  have

now  anything  about  '.

sta  could  bear  it  no  longer.     He  was  wild,  he

was  out  of  his  head,  —  sometimes  God  had  to  send

volvcs  after  him  to  force  him  to  obedience,  —  but

<>ld  woman's  tears,  this  old  woman's  laments  were

harder  for  him  to  bear  than  the  howling  of  the  wolves

•he  truth.


i5"       mi-:  sroxr  or  cOss'.i  /,v  AY./

41  Marianne  has  been  ill  the  whole  time,"  he  said.
"  She  has  had  small-pox.  She  was  to  get  up  to-day
and  lie  on  the  sofa.  I  have  not  seen  her  siiu  c  the
first  night."

Madame  Gustava  leaped  with  one  bound  to  tin
ground.  She  left  Gosta  standing  there,  and  rushed
away  without  another  word  to  her  husband.

The  people  in  the  auction-room  saw  her  come  up
to  him  and  eagerly  whisper  something  in  his  ear.
They  saw  how  his  face  grew  still  more  flushed,  and  his
hand,  which  rested  on  the  cock,  turned  it  round  so
that  the  brandy  streamed  over  the  floor.
•  It  seemed  to  all  as  if  Madame  Gustava  had  come
with  such  important  news  that  the  auction  must  t  ml
immediately.  The  auctioneer's  hammer  no  longer
fell,  the  clerks'  pens  stopped,  there  were  no  new  bids.

Melchior  Sinclair  roused  himself  from  his  thoughts.

"  Well,"  he  cried,  "  what  is  the  matter?  "

And  the  auction  was  in  full  swing  once  mor<  .

Gosta  still  sat  in  the  kitchen,  and  Madame  Gustava
came  weeping  out  to  him.

"  It 's  no  use,"  she  said.  "  I  thought  he  would
stop  when  he  heard  that  Marianne  had  been  ill ;  but
he  is  letting  them  go  on.  He  would  like  to,  but  now
he  is  ashamed."

Gosta  shrugged  his  shoulders  and  bade  her  fare-
well.

In  the  hall  he  met  Sintram.

"  This  is  a  funny  show,"  exclaimed  Sintram,  and
rubbed  his  hands.  "  You  are  a  masjter,  Gosta.  Lord,
what  you  have  brought  to  pass  !  "

"  It  will  be  funnier  in  a  little  while,"  whispered
Gosta.  "  The  Broby  clergyman  is  here  with  a  sledge
full  of  money.  They  say  that  he  wants  to  buy  the


///£•  AUCTION  AT  BJOKNE  151

whole  of  and  pay  in  cash.     '1 1  uld  like

to  see  Mclchior  Sim

cad  down  between  his  shoulders
and  laughed  internally  a  long  time.  And  then  he
made  his  w.i  >om  and  up  to  Mel-

"If  you  want  a  drink,  Sintram,  you  must  make  a

.1  came  close  up  to  him.

.11  luck  to-day  as  always,"  he  said.     "A

v  has  come  to  the  house  with  a  sledge  full  of

money.     He  is  going  to  buy  Bjorne  and  cvcry-thing

both  and  out.     He  has  told  a  lot  of  people

to  bid  for  in  in      He  docs  not  wont  to  show  himself

You  might  say  who  he  is ;  then  I  suppose  I  must
give  you  a  drink  for  your  pa;

.train   t<>ok    the    drain    and    moved    a   couple  of
backwards,  bcf«  answered, —

1  hi-y  lay  it  H  the  Broby  clergyman,  Mclchior."
Mclchior  Sinclair  had  many  b<  •  -.d*  than  the

Broby  clergyman.     It  had  been  a  life-long  feud  be-
tween them.     There  were  legends  of  how  he  had  lain

tit  on  dark  nights  on  the  roads  where  the  min
should  pass,  and  how  he  had  given  him   many  an
honest  drubbing,  the  old  fawning  oppressor  of  the
peasants.

It  was  well  for  Sintram  that  he  had  drawn  back  a
step  or  two,  but  he  did  not  entirely  escape  the  big
man's  anger.    He  got  a  brandy  glass  bctu
eyes  and  the  whole  brandy  keg  on  his  feet.    But  then
followed  a  scene  which  for  a  long  time  rejoiced

Does   the   Broby  clergyman  wont   my  house?"


1 52          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA

roared  Mclchior  Sinclair.  "  Do  you  stand  there  and
bid  on  my  things  for  the  Broby  clergyman?  Oh,  you
ought  to  be  ashamed  !  You  ought  to  know  better !  "

I  Ie  seized  a  candlestick,  and  an  inkstand,  and  sluni;
tli em  into  the  crowd  of  people.

All  the  bitterness  of  his  poor  heart  at  last  found  «C-
^ion.  Roaring  like  a  wild  beast,  he  clenched  his
fist  at  those  standing  about,  and  slung  at  them  what-
ever missile  he  could  lay  his  hand  on.  Brandy
glasses  and  bottles  flew  across  the  room.  He  did  not
know  what  he  was  doing  in  his  rage.

'  It's  the  end  of  the  auction,"  he  cried.  "  Out  with
you  !  Never  while  I  live  shall  the  Broby  clergyman
have  Bjorne.  Out !  I  will  teach  you  to  bid  for  the
Broby  clergyman ! "

He  rushed  on  the  auctioneer  and  the  clerks.  They
hurried  away.  In  the  confusion  they  overturned  the
desk,  and  Sinclair  with  unspeakable  fury  burst  into  the
crowd  of  peaceful  people.

There  was  a  flight  and  wildest  confusion.  A  couple
of  hundred  people  were  crowding  towards  the  door,
fleeing  before  a  single  man.  And  he  stood,  roaring
his  "  Out  with  you!"  He  sent  curses  after  tin  -in,
and  now  and  again  he  swept  about  him  with  a  chair,
which  he  brandished  like  a  club.

He  pursued  them  out  into  the  hall,  but  no  farther.
When  the  last  stranger  had  left  the  house,  he  went
back  into  the  drawing-room  and  bolted  the  door  after
him.  Then  he  dragged  together  a  mattress  and  a
couple  of  pillows,  laid  himself  down  on  them,  went  to
sleep  in  the  midst  of  all  the  havoc,  and  never  woke  till
the  next  day.

When  Gosta  got  home,  he  heard  that  Marianne
wished  to  speak  to  him.  That  was  just  what  he  wanted.


/  UCTION  A T  BJORNB  I  $3

>ad  been  wondering  how  he  could  get  a  word  with

When  he  came  into  the  dim  room  where  she  lay,
he  had  to  stand  a  moment  at  the  door.  He  could  not
see  where  she  was.

May  where  you  are,  Gosta,"  Marianne  said  to

him.     "  It  may  be  dangerous  to  come  near  \\

•sta  had  come  up  the  stairs  in  two  bounds,
trembling  with  eagerness  and  longing.  What  did
he  care  for  the  contagion?  He  wished  to  have  the
bliss  of  seeing  her.

For  she  was  so  beautiful,  his  beloved !  No  one  had
such  soft  hair,  such  an  open,  radiant  brow.  Her  whole
face  was  a  symphony  of  exquisite  lir.

lie  thought  of  her  eyebrows,  sharply  and  clearly
drawn  like  the  honey  markings  on  a  lily,  and  of  the
bold  curve  of  her  nose,  and  of  her  lips,  as  softly
turned  as  rolling  waves,  and  of  her  cheek's  long  oval

:icr  chin's  perfect  shape.

And  he  thought  of  the  rosy  hue  of  her  skin,  of  the
ct  of  her  coal-black  eyebrows  with  her
:ul  of  her  b!  s  swimming  in  clear

,  and  of  the  light  in  h

She  was  beautiful,  his  beloved  !     lie  thought  of  the

hid  under  a  proud  exterior.    She

for  devotion  and  self-sacrifice  concealed

r  tli.it  fine  skin  and  her  proud  words     It  was  bliss

<-c  her.

He  had  rushed  up  the  stairs  in  two  bounds,  and  she
thought  that  lu  would  stop  at  the  door.     He  stormed
..;h  the  room  and  fell  on  his  knees  at  the  head
of  her  bed.

Hut  he  meant  to  see  her,  to  kiss  her,  and  to  bid
Mrcwcll.


154          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

He  loved  her.  He  would  certainly  never  cease  to
love  her,  but  his  '  u  used  to  being  trampled  on.

Oh,  where    should    he    find    her,  that   rose   without
support  or  roots,  which  he  could  take  and  call   his
own?     He  might  not  keep  even  her  whom  In-
found  disowned  and  half  dead  at  the  roadside.

When  should  his  love  raise  its  voice  in  a  song  so
loud  and  clear  that  he  should  hear  no  dissonance
through   it?     When  should  his  palace  of  happi:
be  built  on  a  ground  for  which  no  other  heart  lui.
restlessly  and  with  regret?

He  thought  how  he  would  bid  her  farewell.

"  There  is  great  sorrow  in  your  home,"  he  would
say.  "  My  heart  is  torn  at  the  thought  of  it.  You
must  go  home  and  give  your  father  his  reason  a^.tin.
Your  mother  lives  in  continual  danger  of  death.  You
must  go  home,  my  beloved."

These  were  the  words  he  had  on  his  lips,  but  they
were  never  spoken.

He  fell  on  his  knees  at  the  head  of  her  bed,  and  he
took  her  face  between  his  hands  and  kissed  her;  but
then  he  could  not  speak.  His  heart  began  to  beat
so  fiercely,  as  if  it  would  burst  his  breast.

Small-pox  had  passed  over  that  lovely  face.  Her
skin  had  become  coarse  and  scarred.  Never  again
should  the  red  blood  glow  in  her  cheeks,  or  the  fine
blue  veins  show  on  her  temples.  Her  eyebrows  had
fallen  out,  and  the  shining  white  of  her  eyes  had
changed  to  yellow.

Everything  was  laid  waste.  The  bold  lines  had
become  coarse  and  heavy.

They  were  not  few  who  mourned  over  Marianne
Sinclair's  lost  beauty.  In  the  whole  of  Varmland,
people  lamented  the  change  in  her  bright  color,  her


I'HK  AUCTION  AT  BJOK.  l$$


sparkling  eyes,  and  blond  hair.     There  beauty

•d  as  nowhere  else.  The  joyous  people  grieved,
as  if  the  country  had  lost  a  precious  stone  from  the
crown  of  its  honor,  as  if  their  life  had  received  a  blot

s  glory.
Hut  the  first  man  who  saw  her  after  &he  had  lost

beauty  did  nut  indulge  in  sorrow.
Unutterable  emotion   filled  his   soul.    The  more
he  looked  at   her,  the  him.

and  grew,  like  a  river  in  the  spring.  In
waves  of  fire  it  welled  up  in  his  heart,  it  tilled  his
whole  being,  it  rose  to  his  eyes  as  tea  d  on

hi>  lips,  trembled  in  !.  hir>  \\holc  body.

Oh,  to  love  IK  otect   her,  to  keep  her  from

all  harm  !

To  be  her  slave,  her  guide !

Love  is  strong  when  it  lias  gone  through  the  bap-
tismal fire  of  pain.  He  coul  .mne
of  parting  and  renunciation.  He  could  not  leave  her
—  he  owed  her  his  life.  He  could  commit  the  un-
pardonable sin  for  her  sake.

1  Ie  could  not  speak  a  coherent  word,  he  only  wept
and  kissed,  until  at  last  the  old  nurse  thought  it  was
time  to  lead  him  out.

When  he  had  gone,  Marianne  lay  and  thought  oi
him  ami  hU  emotion,  "  It  is  good  to  be  so  loved,"
she  thought.

Yes,  it  was  good  to  be  loved,  but  how  was  it  with
It?     What  did  she  feel?     Oh,  nothing,  less  than
ing  I

is  it  dead,  her  love,  or  where  had  it  taken  flight?
re  had  it  hidden  itself,  her  heart's  child?

1   live?     Had   it  crept  into  her  heart's
darkest  corner  and   sat  there  freezing  under  the  icy


156          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

eyes,  frightened  by  the  pal  r,  half  suffocated

under  the  bony  fingers?

44  Ah,  my  love,"  she  sighed,  "  child  of  my  heart!
Are  you  alive,  or  arc  you  dead,  dead  as  my
beauty?"

The  next  day  Melchior  Sinclair  went  in  early  to
his  wife.

41  See  to  it  that  there  is  order  in  the  house  again,
Gustava !  "  he  said.  "  I  am  going  to  bring  Marianne
home."

44  Yes,  dear  Melchior,  here  there  will  of  course  be
order,"  she  answered.

Thereupon  there  was  peace  between  them.

An  hour  afterwards  he  was  on  his  way  to  Ekcby.

It  was  impossible  to  find  a  more  noble  and  kindly
old  gentleman  than  Melchior  Sinclair,  as  he  sat  in
the  open  sledge  in  his  best  fur  cloak  and  his  best
rug.  His  hair  lay  smooth  on  his  head,  but  his  face
was  pale  and  his  eyes  were  sunken  in  their  sockets.

There  was  no  limit  to  the  brilliancy  of  the  clear
sky  on  that  February  day.  The  snow  sparkled  like
a  young  girl's  eyes  when  she  hears  the  music  of  the
first  waltz.  The  birches  stretched  the  fine  lace-work
of  their  reddish-brown  twigs  against  the  sky,  and  on
some  of  them  hung  a  fringe  of  little  icicles.

There  was  a  splendor  and  a  festive  glow  in  the
day.  The  horses  prancing  threw  up  their  forelegs,
and  the  coachman  cracked  his  whip  in  sheer  pleasure
of  living.

After  a  short  drive  the  sledge  drew  up  before  the
great  steps  at  Ekcby.

The  footman  came  out.

44  Where  arc  your  masters?  "  asked  Melchior.


/'  A UCTIOK  A  T  BJO*  I  57

re    hunting  the   great   bear   in   Gut
Cliff."

"  All  of  them?"

\11  <•!  them,  sir.    Those  who  do  not  go  for
sake  of  r  go  for  the  sake  of  the  luncheon."

Mclchior  laughed  so  that  it  echoed  through  the
trd.      He  gave   the   man   a  crown   for   his
answer.

"Go  v  liter  that  I  am  here  to  take

her  home.  She  need  not  be  afraid  of  the  cold.  I
have  the  big  sledge  and  a  wolfskin  cloak  to  wrap

11  Will  you  not  come  in.

"1  :t  very  well  where  I  am."

The   man   disappeared,  and   Mclchior  began   his

fig-
He  was  in  such  a  genial  mood  that  day  that
nothing  could  irritate  him.  He  had  expected  to
have  to  wait  a  little  for  Marianne;  perhaps  she  was
not  even  up.  He  would  have  to  amuse  himself  by
looking  about  him  for  a  while.

>m  the  cornice  hung  a  long  icicle,  with  which
nn  had  terrible  trouble.     It  began  at  the  upper
end,  melted  a  drop,  and  wanted  to  have  it  run  down
along  the  icicle  and  fall  to  the  earth.     Hut  before  it
had  gone  half  tin  •  had  frozen  again.     And  the

Min  madecontimi.il  new  attempts,  which  .ilw.iys  failed.
Hut  at  last  a  regular  freebooter  of  a  ray  hun^  itself
on  the  icicle's  point,  a  little  one,  which  shone

i<l   however  it  was,  it  accomplished  its
t,  —  a  drop  fell  tinkling  to  the  ground.
Melchior  looked  on  and  laughr<!          You  were  not
such  a  fool,"  he  said  to  the  ray  of  sunlight.

The  yard  was  quiet  and  deserted.     Not  a  sound


158         THE  STORY  OF  G&STA  BE  RUNG

was  heard  in  the  big  house.  But  lu  was  not  impa-
tient. He  knew  that  women  needed  plenty  of  time
to  make  themselves  ready.

He  sat  and  looked  at  the  dovc-cotc.  The  birds  had
a  grating  before  the  door.  They  were  shut  in,  as
long  as  the  winter  lasted,  K-st  hawks  should  extermi-
nate them.  Time  after  time  a  pigeon  came  and  stuck
out  its  white  head  through  the  meshes.

"She  is  waiting  for  the  spring,"  said  Melchior
Sinclair,  "  but  she  must  have  patience  for  a  whil

The  pigeon  came  so  regularly  that  he  took  out  his
watch  and  followed  her,  with  it  in  his  hand.  Exactly
every  third  minute  she  stuck  out  her  head.

"  No,  my  little  friend,"  he  said,  "  do  you  think
spring  will  be  ready  in  three  minutes?  You  must
learn  to  wait."

And  he  had  to  wait  himself;  but  he  had  plenty  of
time.

The  horses  first  pawed  impatiently  in  the  snow,  but
then  they  grew  sleepy  from  standing  and  blinking  in
the  sun.  They  laid  their  heads  together  and  slept.

The  coachman  sat  straight  on  his  box,  with  whip
and  reins  in  his  hand  and  his  face  turned  directly
towards  the  sun,  and  slept,  slept  so  that  he  snored.

But  Melchior  did  not  sleep.  He  had  never  felt  less
like  sleeping.  He  had  seldom  passed  pleasanter
hours  than  during  this  glad  waiting.  Marianne  had
been  ill.  She  had  not  been  able  to  come  before,  but
now  she  would  come.  Oh,  of  course  she  would.
And  everything  would  be  well  again.

She  must  understand  that  he  was  not  angry  with
her.  He  had  come  himself  with  two  horses  and  the
big  sledge.

It  is  nothing  to  have  to  wait  when  one  is  sure  of


THE  AUCTION  AT  BJO*  I $9

one's  self,  and  when  there  is  so  much  to  distract  one's
innul.

There  comes  the  great  watch-dog.  He  creeps  for-
ward on  the  tips  of  his  toes,  keeps  his  eyes  on  the
ground,  and  wag*  In--  tail  gently,  as  if  he  meant  to  set

errand.      All  at  once  he

begins  to  burrow  eagerly  in  the  snow.  The  old
rascal  must  have  hidden  there  some  stolen  goods.
Hut  just  .»N  hr  lifts  his  head  to  sec  if  he  CM  now

undisturbed,  he  is  quite  out  of  countenance  to  see
two  magpies  ri;^ht  in  front  of  him.

You  old  thirl"!  say  the  magpie*,  and  look  like
conscience  itself.  "  We  are  police  officers.  Give  up
your  stolrn  IMK.,

>h,  be  quiet  with  your  noise!       I  am  the  stew-
ard—"

t  the  rkjht  one,"  they  sneer.

The  dog  throws  himself  on  them,  and  they  fly  away

with  slow  flaps.     The  dog  rushes  after  them,  jumps.

Hut  while  he  is  chasing  one.  the  other  is

idy  back.     She  flics  d  >wn  into  the  hole,  tears  at

the    piece   of   meat,   but   cannot   lift   it.      The   dog

away  th<-   meat,  h-.lds  it  between  his  paws,

it.     The  magpies  place  themselves  close

in  front  of  him,  and  make  disagreeable  remarks.     He

glares  fiercely  at  them,  while  he  eats,  and  when  they

get  too  impertinent,  he  jumps  up  and  drives  them

The  sun  began  to  sink  down  towards  the  western
Mclcl,  -i-h.     It    is   three

o'clock.  And  his  wife,  who  had  had  dinner  ready  at
twelve !

nc  moment  the  footman  came  out  and
announced  that  M  iss  shed  to  speak  to  him.


160         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG

Melchior  laid  the  wolfskin  cloak  over  his  arm  and
went  beaming  up  the  steps.

When  Marianne  heard  his  heavy  tread  on  the  stairs,
she  did  not  even  then  know  if  she  should  go  home
with  him  or  not.  She  only  knew  tliat  >lu  must  put
an  end  to  this  long  waiting.

She  had  hoped  that  the  pensioners  would  come
home;  but  they  did  not  come.  So  she  had  to  do
something  to  put  an  end  to  it  all.  She  could  bear  it
no  longer.

She  had  thought  that  he  in  a  burst  of  anger  would
have  driven  away  after  he  had  waited  five  minutes,
or  that  he  would  break  the  door  in  or  try  to  set  the
house  on  fire.

But  there  he  sat  calm  and  smiling,  and  only  waited.
She  cherished  neither  hatred  nor  love  for  him.  But
there  was  a  voice  in  her  which  seemed  to  warn  her
against  putting  herself  in  his  power  again,  and
moreover  she  wished  to  keep  her  promise  to  Gosta.

If  he  had  slept,  if  he  had  spoken,  if  he  had  been
restless,  if  he  had  shown  any  sign  of  doubt,  if  he  had
had  the  carriage  driven  into  the  shade !  But  he  was
only  patience  and  certainty.

Certain,  so  infectiously  certain,  that  she  would
come  if  he  only  waited !

Her  head  ached.  Every  nerve  quivered.  She
could  get  no  rest  as  long  as  she  knew  that  he  sat
there.  It  was  as  if  his  will  dragged  her  bound
down  the  stairs.

So  she  thought  she  would  at  least  talk  with  him.

Before  he  came,  she  had  all  the  curtains  drawn  up,
and  she  placed  herself  so  that  her  face  came  in  the
full  light.

For  it  was  her  intention  to  put  him  to  a  sort  of


1HE  AUCTION  AT  BO*


but  Mclchior  Sinclair  was  a  wonderful  man

When  he  saw  her,  he  did  not  make  a  sign,  nor  did
he  exclaim.  It  was  as  if  he  had  not  seen  any  change

She  knew  how  highly  he  prized  her  be:.
Hut  he  showed  no  sorrow.    He  controlled   himself
not  to  wound  her.    That  touched  her.    She  began
to  understand  why  her  mother  had  loved  him  through
everything.

He  showed  no  hesitation.  He  r.ime  with  n<  ither
reproaches  nor  excuses.

i    will  wrap  the  wolfskin  about  you,  Marianne;
not  cold.     It  has  been  on  my  knees  the  whole
time."

To  make  sure,  he  went  up  to  the  fire  and  warmed  it

Then  he  helped  her  to  raise  herself  from  the  sofa.
wrapped  the  cloak  about  her,  put  a  shawl  over  her
head,  drew  it  down  under  her  arms,  and  knotted  it
behind  her  back.

She  let  him  do  it  She  was  helpless.  It  was  good
to  have  everything  arranged,  it  was  good  not  to  have
to  decide  anything,  especially  good  for  one  who  was
so  picked  to  pieces  as  she,  for  one  who  did  not  pos-
sess one  thought  or  one  feeling  which  was  her  o\

Mclchior  lifted  her  up,  carried  her  down  to  the
h,  closed  the  top,  tucked  the  furs  in  about  her,
and  drove  away  from  Kkcby.

She  shut  her  eyes  and  sighed,  partly  from  pleas-
ure, partly  from  regret.  She  was  leaving  life,  the
real  life;  but  it  did  not  make  so  much  difference  to
her,  —  she  who  could  not  live  but  only  act.

A  few  days  later  her  mother  arranged  that  she
should  meet  Gosta.  She  sent  for  him  while  her

ii


1 62          THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLL\(,

husband  was  off  on  his  long  walk  to  see  after  hi-
timber,  and  took  him  in  to  Marianne.

Gosta  came  in;  but  he  in  itlicr  bowed  nor  spoke.
He  stood  at  the  door  and  looked  on  the  ground  likr
an  obstinate  boy.

"  But,  Gosta !  "  cried  Marianne.  She  sat  in  her  arm-
chair and  looked  at  him  half  amused.

"  Yes,  that  is  my  nam<  "

"  Come  here,  come  to  me,  Gosta !  "

He  went  slowly  forward  to  her,  but  did  not  raise
his  eyes.

"  Come  nearer !     Kneel  down  here  !  "

"  Lord  God,  what  is  the  use  of  all  that?"  he  cried;
but  he  obeyed.

"  Gosta,  I  want  to  tell  you  that  I  think  it  was  best
that  I  came  home."

"  Let  us  hope  that  they  will  not  throw  you  out  in
the  snow-drift  again."

"Oh,  Gosta,  do  you  not  care  for  me  any  longer?
Do  you  think  that  I  am  too  ugly?  "

He  drew  her  head  down  and  kissed  her,  but  he
looked  as  cold  as  ever.

She  was  almost  amused.  If  he  was  pleased  to  be
jealous  of  her  parents,  what  then  ?  It  would  pass.  It
amused  her  to  try  and  win  him  back.  She  did  not
know  why  she  wished  to  keep  him,  but  she  did.  She
thought  that  it  was  he  who  had  succeeded  for  once
in  freeing  her  from  herself.  He  was  the  only  one
who  would  be  able  to  do  it  again.

And  now  she  began  to  speak,  eager  to  win  him
back.  She  said  that  it  had  not  been  her  meaning  to
desert  him  for  good,  but  for  a  time  they  must  for
appearance's  sake  break  off  their  connection.  He
must  have  seen,  himself,  that  her  father  was  on  the


///A*  AUCTION  AT  *7<V

verge  of  going  mad,  that  her  mother  was  in  contin-
ual danger  of  her  life  He  must  understand  that
the  had  been  forced  to  come  home.

Then  his  anger  burst  out  in  words.  She  need  not
give  herself  so  much  trouble.  He  would  be  her
plaything  no  longer.  She  had  given  him  up  when
she  had  gone  home,  and  he  could  not  love  her  any
more.  When  he  came  home  the  day  before  yester-
day from  his  hunting-trip  and  found  her  gone  with-
out a  message,  without  a  word,  his  blood  ran  cold  in
his  veins,  he  had  nearly  died  of  grief.  He  could  not
love  any  one  who  had  given  him  such  pain.  She  had,
besides,  never  loved  him.  She  was  a  coquette,  who
cd  to  have  some  one  to  kiss  her  and  caress  her
wlu-n  she  was  here  in  the  country,  that  was  all.

Did  he  think  that  she  was  in  the  habit  of  allowing
young  men  to  caress  her?

Oh  yes,  he  was  sure  of  it.  Women  were  not  so
saintly  as  they  seemed.  Selfishness  and  coquetry
from  beginning  to  end !  No,  if  she  could  know  how
he  had  felt  when  he  came  home  from  the  hunt.  It
was  as  though  he  had  waded  in  ice-water.  He
should  never  get  over  that  pain.  It  would  follow
him  through  the  whole  of  his  life.  He  would  never
be  the  same  person  again.

She  tried  to  explain  to  him  how  it  had  all  hap-
pened. She  tried  to  convince  him  that  she  was  still
faithful.  Well,  it  did  not  matter,  for  now  he  did  not
love  her  any  more.  He  had  seen  through  her.  She
was  selfish.  She  did  not  love  him.  She  had  gone
•ut  leaving  him  a  message.

une  continually  back  to  that.  She  really
enjoyed  the  performance.  She  could  not  be  angry,
she  understood  his  wrath  so  well.  She  did  not


164         THE  STORY  OF  GtiSTA  BERUNG

fear  any  real  break  between  them.  But  at  last  she
became  uneasy.  Had  there  really  been  such  a  change
in  him  that  he  could  no  longer  care  for  h

44  Gosta,"  she  said,  M  was  I  selfish  wlu-n  I  u  nit  to
Sjo  after  the  major;  I  knew  tli.it  they  had  small-pox
there.  Nor  is  it  pleasant  to  go  out  in  satin  slippers
in  the  cold  and  snow."

44  Love  lives  on  love,  and  not  on  services  and
deeds,"  said  Gosta.

"  You  wish,  then,  that  we  shall  be  as  strangers  from
now  on,  Gosta?  "

44  That  is  what  I  wish."

44  You  are  very  changeable,  Gosta  Berling."

44  People  often  charge  me  with  it."

He  was  cold,  impossible  to  warm,  and  she  was  still
colder.  Self-consciousness  sat  and  sneered  at  her
attempt  to  act  love.

44  Gosta,"  she  said,  making  a  last  effort,  44  I  have
never  intentionally  wronged  you,  even  if  it  may  seem
so.  I  beg  of  you,  forgive  me  !  "

44  I  cannot  forgive  you."

She  knew  that  if  she  had  possessed  a  real  feeling
she  could  have  won  him  back.  And  she  tried  to  play
the  impassioned.  The  icy  eyes  sneered  at  her,  but
she  tried  nevertheless.  She  did  not  want  to  lose  him.

44  Do  not  go,  Gosta  !  Do  not  go  in  anger !  Think
how  ugly  I  have  become !  No  one  will  ever  love  me
again."

44  Nor  I,  either,"  he  said.  44  You  must  accustom
yourself  to  see  your  heart  trampled  upon  as  well  as
another."

44  Gosta,  I  have  never  loved  any  one  but  you.  For-
give me.  Do  not  forsake  me !  You  are  the  only
one  who  can  save  me  from  myself."


THE  AUCTION  AT  BJOKNB  165

ihrust  her  from  him.

\     .         Ml  speak  the  truth,"  he  said  with
calmnes  lo  not  know  what  you  want  of  me,  but

I  sec  that  you  arc  lying.    Why  do  you  want  to  \
me?    You  are  so  rich  that  you  will  never  lack  *uit

And  so  he  went

And  not  until  he  had  closed  the  door,  did  regret
and  pain  in  all  their  strength  take  possession  of
Marianne's  heart

It  was  love,  her  heart's  own  child,  who  came  out
.<:  corner  where  the  cold  eyes  had  banished  him.
He  came,  he  for  whom  she  had  so  longed  when  it
was  too  1

When  Marianne  could  with  real  certainty  say  to
herself  that  Gosta  Bcrling  had  forsaken  her,  *he  felt
a  purely  physical  pain  so  terrible  that  she  almost
d.  She  pressed  her  hands  against  her  heart,
and  sat  for  hours  in  the  same  place,  struggling  with
a  tearless  grief.

And  it  was  she  herself  who  was  suffering,  not  a
stranger,  nor  an  actress.  It  was  she  herself.  Why
had  her  father  come  and  separated  them  ?  Her  love
had  never  been  dead.  It  was  only  that  in  her  weak
condition  after  her  illness  she  could  not  appreciate
!>ower.

O  God,  O  God,  that  she  had  lost  him !  O  God,
tli at  she  had  waked  so  late !

Ah,  he  was  the  only  one,  he  was  her  heart's  con-
queror !  From  him  she  could  bear  anything.  Hard-
ness and  angry  words  from  him  bent  her  only  to
humble  love.  If  he  had  beaten  her,  she  would  have
crept  like  a  dog  to  him  and  kissed  his  hand.

She  did  not  know  what  she  would  do  to  get  relief
from  this  dull  pain.


166          THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BEK1.I.\C,

She  seized  pen  and  paper  and  wrote  with  terrible
eagerness.     First  she  wrote  of  her  love  and  ret
Then  she  begged,  if  not  for  his  love,  only  for  his  pity.
It  was  a  kind  of  poem  she  wrote.

When  she  had  finished  she  thought  that  if  he
should  sec  it  he  must  believe  that  she  had  loved
him.  Well,  why  should  she  not  send  what  she  had
written  to  him?  She  would  send  it  the  next  day,
and  she  was  sure  that  it  would  bring  him  back  to
her.

The  next  day  she  spent  in  agony  and  in  struggling
with  herself.  What  she  had  written  seemed  to  her
paltry  and  so  stupid.  It  had  neither  rhyme  nor
metre.  It  was  only  prose.  He  would  only  laugh  at
such  verses.

Her  pride  was  roused  too.  If  he  no  longer  cared
for  her,  it  was  such  a  terrible  humiliation  to  beg  for
his  love.

Sometimes  her  good  sense  told  her  that  she  ought
to  be  glad  to  escape  from  the  connection  with  Gosta,
and  all  the  deplorable  circumstances  which  it  had
brought  with  it.

Her  heart's  pain  was  still  so  terrible  that  her
emotions  finally  conquered.  Three  days  after  she
had  become  conscious  of  her  love,  she  enclosed  the
verses  and  wrote  Gosta  Berling's  name  on  the  cover.
But  they  were  never  sent.  Before  she  could  find  a
suitable  messenger  she  heard  such  things  of  Gosta
Bcrling  that  she  understood  it  was  too  late  to  win
him  back.

But  it  was  the  sorrow  of  her  life  that  she  had  not
sent  the  verses  in  time,  while  she  could  have  won
him.

All  her  pain  fastened  itself  on  that  point:   "If  I


/'//.  I'lON  AT  BJOKNE  167

only  had  not  waited  so  long,  if  I  had  not  waited  so
many  .1

The  happiness  of  life,  or  at  any  rate  the  reality  of

would  have  been  won  to  her  through  tho^
words.     She  was  sure  they  would  have  brought  him
back  to  her.

Grief,  however,  did  her  the  same  service  as  love.
It  made  her  a  whole  being,  potent  to  devote  herself
to  good  as  well  as  evil.  Passionate  feelings  filled
her  soul,  unrestrained  by  sclf-consciousncss's  icy
chill.  And  she  was,  in  spite  of  her  plainness,  much

But  they  say  tli.it  she  never  forgot  Costa  Berling.
She  mourned  for  him  as  one  mourns  for  a  wasted

And  her  poor  verses,  which  at  one  time  were  much

,  arc  forgotten  long  ago.     I  beg  of  you  to  read

tlu  in  and  to  think  of  them.     Who  knows  what  power

might  have  had,  if  they  had  been  sent?    They

arc  impassioned  enough  to  bear  witness  of  a  real

feeling.     Perhaps  they  could  have  brought  him  back

to  her.

They  arc  touching  enough,  tender  enough  in  their
awkward  formlessness.  No  one  can  wish  them  differ-
ent. No  one  can  want  to  see  them  imprisoned  in  the
;is  of  rhyme  and  metre,  and  yet  it  is  so  sad  to
think  that  it  was  perhaps  just  this  imperfection  which
prevented  her  from  scndii  in  time.

I  beg  you  to  read  them  and  to  love  them.  It  is  a
person  in  great  trouble  who  has  written  them.

•'  Child,  thou  hast  loved  once,  but  nevermore


Shalt  thou  taste  of  the  joys  of  love !
A  passionate  storm  has  raged  through  thy  soul
c  thou  hast  gone  to  thy  rest !


1 68         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

No  more  in  wild  joy  shall  tliou  soar  up  on  high
Rejoice,  thou  hast  gone  to  thy  rest !
No  more  shalt  thou  sink  in  abysses  of  pain,
Oh,  nevermore.

44  Child,  thou  hast  loved  once,  but  nevermore
Shall  your  soul  burn  and  scorch  in  the  flames.
Thou  wert  as  a  field  of  brown,  sun-dried  grass
Flaming  with  lire  for  a  moment's  space  ;
From  the  whirling  smoke-clouds  the  fiery  sparks
Drove  the  birds  of  heaven  with  piercing  cries.
Let  them  return  !    Thou  burnest  no  more !  —
Wilt  burn  nevermore.

44  Child,  thou  hast  loved,  but  now  nevermore

Shalt  thou  hear  love's  murmuring  voice.

Thy  young  heart's  strength,  like  a  weary  child

That  sits  still  and  tired  on  the  hard  school-bench,

Yearns  for  freedom  and  pleasure.

But  no  man  calleth  it  more  like  a  forgotten  song;

No  one  sings  it  more,  —  nevermore.

"  Child,  the  end  has  now  come !

And  with  it  gone  love  and  love's  joy.

He  whom  thou  lovedst  as  if  he  had  taught  thee

With  wings  to  hover  through  space,

He  whom  thou  lovedst  as  if  he  had  given  thee

Safety  and  home  when  the  village  was  flooded,

Is  gone,  who  alone  understood

The  key  to  the  door  of  thy  heart.

"  I  ask  but  one  thing  of  thee,  O  my  beloved:
1  Lay  not  upon  me  the  load  of  thy  hate ! '
That  weakest  of  all  things,  the  poor  human  heart,
How  can  it  live  with  the  pang  and  the  thought
That  it  gave  pain  to  another?

"  O  my  beloved,  if  thou  wilt  kill  me,

Use  neither  dagger  nor  poison  nor  rope !

Say  only  you  wish  me  to  vanish

From  the  green  earth  and  the  kingdom  of  life,

And  I  shall  sink  to  my  grave.


THE  AUCTION  AT  BJOK  169

.  thou  gave»t  me  lovt,
And  now  thou  readiest  thy  gilt,  1  know  it  too  well.

lo  not  give  me  thy  hate!

!  Mill  have  love  of  living !    Oh,  remember  that ;
But  under  a  load  of  bate  1  have  but  to  die."


1 70          THE  STORY  OF  G&STA   BERLING


CHAPTER  X

HIE  YOUNG  COUNTESS

THE  young  countess  sleeps  till  ten  o'clock  in  the
morning,  and  wants  fresh  bread  on  the  breakfast-table
y  day.  The  young  countess  embroiders,  and
reads  poetry.  She  knows  nothing  of  weaving  and
cooking.  The  young  countess  is  spoiled.

But  the  young  countess  is  gay,  and  lets  her  joyous-
ness  shine  on  all  and  everything.  One  is  so  glad
to  forgive  her  the  long  morning  sleep  and  the  fresh
bread,  for  she  squanders  kindness  on  the  poor  and
is  friendly  to  every  one.

The  young  countess's  father  is  a  Swedish  noble-
man, who  has  lived  in  Italy  all  his  life,  retained
there  by  the  loveliness  of  the  land  and  by  one  of
that  lovely  land's  beautiful  daughters.  When  Count
Henrik  Dohna  travelled  in  Italy  he  had  been  re-
ceived in  this  nobleman's  house,  made  the  acquaint-
ance of  his  daughters,  married  one  of  them,  and
brought  her  with  him  to  Sweden.

She,  who  had  always  spoken  Swedish  and  had
been  brought  up  to  love  everything  Swedish,  is
happy  in  the  land  of  the  bear.  She  whirls  so  mer-
rily in  the  long  dance  of  pleasure,  on  Lofven's  shores,
that  one  could  well  believe  she  had  always  lived
there.  Little  she  understands  what  it  means  to  be
a  countess.  There  is  no  state,  no  stiffness,  no  con-
descending dignity  in  that  young,  joyous  creature.


/•///•:    YOUNG  COUNTESS  171

was  the  old  men  who  liked  the  young  countess
best.  It  wu-s  wonderful,  what  a  success  she  had  \\ith
old  men.  When  they  had  seen  her  .it  a  ball,  one
could  be  sure  that  all  of  them,  the  judge  at  Munkerud
and  the  clergyman  at  Bro  and  Mclchior  Sinclair  and
the  c.ipt.un  at  Bcrga,  would  tell  their  wives  in  the
^re.itest  i..niidciuv  th.it  il"  th«-y  h.nl  nut  th<  fOOB|
countess  thirty  or  forty  years  ago  —

"  Yes,  then  she  was  not  born,"  say  the  old  ladies.

And   the   next   time    they  meet,  they  joke  with  the

young  countess,  because  she  wins  the  old    men's
hearts  from  them.

The  old  ladies  look  at  her  with  a  certain  anxiety.
They  remember  so  well  Countess  Marta.  She  had
been  just  as  joyous  and  good  and  beloved  when  she
first  came  to  Borg.  And  she  had  become  a  vain  and
pleasure-seeking  coquette,  who  never  could  think  of
anything  but  her  amusements.  "  If  she  only  had
a  husband  who  could  keep  her  at  work !  "  say  the
old  ladies.  "If  she  only  could  learn  to  weave ! "
For  weaving  was  a  consolation  for  everything;  it
swallowed  up  all  other  interests,  and  had  been  the
saving  of  many  a  woman.

The  young  countess  wants  to  be  a  good   house-
keeper.    She  knows  nothing  better  than  as  a  happy
to  live  in  a  comfortable  home,  and  she  often
comes    at    balls,    and    sits    down    beside    the    old
people.

I  I.-nrik  wants  me  to  learn  to  be  a  capable  house-
keeper," she  says,  "  just  as  his  mother  is.  Teach  me
how  to  weave !  "

Then  the  old  people  heave  a  sigh :  first,  over  Count
Hcnrik.  who  can  think  that  his  mother  was  a  good
house-keeper ;  and  then  over  the  difficulty  of  initi.it-


THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BEMJ.\u

ing  this  young,  ignorant  creature  in  such  a  compli-
cated thing.  It  was  enough  to  speak  to  her  of
he  tidies,  and  harnesses,  and  warps,  and  woofs,1  to
make  her  head  spin.

No  one  who  sees  the  young  countess  can  hrlp
wondering  why  she  married  stupid  Count  Hcnrik.
It  is  a  pity  for  him  who  is  stupid,  wherever  In
may  be.  And  it  is  tlu  greatest  pity  for  him  who
is  stupid  and  lives  in  Varmland.

There  are  already  many  stories  of  Count  Hcnrik's
stupidity,  and  he  is  only  a  little  over  twenty  years
old.  They  tell  how  he  entertained  Anna  Stjiirnhuk
on  a  sleighing  party  a  few  years  ago.

"  You  are  very  pretty,  Anna,"  he  said.

"  How  you  talk,  Henrik  !  "

"  You  are  the  prettiest  girl  in  the  whole  of  Varm-
land."

"  That  I  certainly  am  not."

"  The  prettiest  in  this  sleighing  party  at  any
rate."

"  Alas,  Henrik,  I  am  not  that  either."

"  Well,  you  are  the  prettiest  in  this  sledge,  that
you  can't  deny."

No,  that  she  could  not.

For  Count  Henrik  is  no  beauty.  He  is  as  ugly
as  he  is  stupid.  They  say  of  him  that  that  head
on  the  top  of  his  thin  neck  has  descended  in  the
family  for  a  couple  of  hundred  years.  That  is  why
the  brain  is  so  worn  out  in  the  last  heir.

"  It  is  perfectly  plain  that  he  has  no  head  of  his
own,"  they  say.  "  He  has  borrowed  his  father's.
He  does  not  dare  to  bend  it ;  he  is  afraid  of  losing  it,
—  he  is  already  yellow  and  wrinkled.  The  head  has

1  Terms  used  in  weaving.


THE    yOVA'G  COUNT*  173

been  in  use  with  both  his   futlu-r  and   grandfa1
Why  should  the  ha  \vise  be  so  thin  and  the

HO  bloodless  and  the  chin  so  pointed?"
1  Ic  always  has  scoffers  about  him,  who  encourage
him  to  say  stupid  things,  which  they  s.t
late,  and  add

It  is  lucky  for  him  that  he  does  not  notice  it.     I  !••
b  solemn  and  dignified  in  everything  he  docs.     il<
moves  formally,  In-  holds  himself  straight,  he  never
turns  his  h,  ,i,l  \\ithout  turning  his  whole  body.

He  had  been  at  Munkcrud  on  a  visit  to  the  judge
a  few  years  ago.  He  had  come  riding  with  high
yellow  breeches,  and  polished  boots,  and  had  sat
stiff  and  proud  in  the  saddle.  When  he  arrived
everything  went  well,  but  when  he  was  to  ride  away
again  it  so  happened  that  one  of  the  low-hanging
branches  of  a  birch-tree  knocked  off  his  hat  He
got  off,  put  on  his  hat,  and  rode  again  under  the
same  branch.  His  hat  was  again  knocked  off;  this
was  repeated  four  times.

The  judge  at  last  went  out  to  him  and  said:  "  If
you  should  ride  on  one  side  of  the  branch  the  next

?"

The  fifth  time  he  got  safely  by.

But  still  the  young  countess  cared  for  him  in  spite

of  his  old-man's  head.     She  of  course  did  not  know

he  was  crowned  with  such  a  halo  of  stupidity  in

his  own  country,  when  she  saw  him  in  Rome.     There,

1  been  something  of  the  glory  of  youth  about

him.  ami  they  had  come  together  under  such  romantic

circumstances.     You  ought  to  hear  the  countess  tell

how  Count  Henrik  had  to  cany  her  off.     The  priests

and  the  cardinals  had  been  wild  with  rage  that  she

cd  to  give  up  her  mother's  religion  and  become  a


174         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUNG

Protestant.  The  whole  people  had  been  in  uproar.
Her  father's  palace  was  besieged.  Ilcnrik  was
pursued  by  bandits.  Her  mother  and  sisters  implored
her  to  give  up  the  marriage.  But  her  father  was
furious  that  that  Italian  rabble  should  prevent  him
from  giving  his  daughter  to  whomsoever  he  might
wish.  He  commanded  Count  Henrik  to  carry  her  off.
And  so,  as  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  be  marru •<!
at  home  without  its  being  discovered,  Henrik  and  slu-
stole  out  by  side  streets  and  all  sorts  of  dark  alleys
to  the  Swedish  consulate.  And  when  she  had  abjured
the  Catholic  faith  and  become  a  Protestant,  they  were
immediately  married  and  sent  north  in  a  swift  travel-
ling-carriage. "  There  was  no  time  for  banns,  you
see.  It  was  quite  impossible,"  the  young  countess
used  to  say.  "  And  of  course  it  was  gloomy  to  be
married  at  a  consulate,  and  not  in  one  of  the  beautiful
churches,  but  if  we  had  not  Henrik  would  have  had
to  do  without  me.  Every  one  is  so  impetuous  down
there,  both  papa  and  mamma  and  the  cardinals  and
the  priests,  all  are  so  impetuous.  That  was  why
everything  had  to  be  done  so  secretly,  and  if  the
people  had  seen  us  steal  out  of  the  house,  they  would
certainly  have  killed  us  both  —  only  to  save  my  soul ;
Henrik  was  of  course  already  lost."

The  young  countess  loves  her  husband,  ever  since
they  have  come  home  to  Borg  and  live  a  quieter  life.
She  loves  in  him  the  glory  of  the  old  name  and  the
famous  ancestors.  She  likes  to  see  how  her  presence
softens  the  stiffness  of  his  manner,  and  to  hear  how
his  voice  grows  tender  when  he  speaks  to  her.  And
besides,  he  cares  for  her  and  spoils  her,  and  she  is
married  to  him.  The  young  countess  cannot  imagine
that  a  married  woman  should  not  care  for  her  husband.


HIE   YOUNG  COUXTESS  1 7$

a  certain  u.iy  he  corresponds   :  ideal  of

manliness.     He  is  honest  and  loves   the  truth      Ji-
had never   broken  his   word.     She  considers  him  a

nobleman.

On  the  1 8th  of  March  Bailiff  Scharling  celebrates

•  nthday,  and  many  then   drive  up  Hroby  Hill.

People  from  the  cast  and  the  west,  known  and  un-

iMtr.l  and  uninvited,  come  to  the  bailiffs  on

th.it  day.     All  arc  welcome,  all  find  plenty  of  food

and   tin nk,  and  in  the    ballroom   there  is   room  for

dancers  from  seven  parishes.

1  he  young  countess  is  coming  too,  as  she  always

docs  where  there  is  to  be  dancing  and  im  rry-making.

But  six   if  not  happy  as  she  comes.     It  is  as  if  she

has  a  presentiment   that  it    is  now   her  turn   to  be

dragged -in  in  adventure's   wild  chase.

On  the  way  she  sat  and  watched  the  sinking  sun.
It  set  in  a  cloudless  sky  and  left  no  gold  edges  on  the
light  clouds.  A  pale,  gray,  twilight,  swept  by  cold
squalls,  settled  down  over  the  country.

The  young  countess  saw  how  day  and  night
struggled,  and  how  fear  seized  all  living  things  at  tiu
mighty  contest.  The  horses  quickened  their  pace
thr  last  load  to  come  under  shelter.  The  wood-
cutters hurried  home  from  the  woods,  the  maids
from  the  farmyard.  Wild  creatures  howled  at  the
edge  of  the  wood.  The  day,  beloved  of  man,  was
conquered.

The  light  grew  dim,  the  colors  faded.     She  only

saw  dullness  and  ugliness.      What  she  had  hoped,

uh.it  -lie  had  loved,  what  she  had  done,  seemed  to

to  be  also  wrapped  in  the  twilight's  gray  light

It  was  the  hour  of  weariness,  of  depression,  of  impo-

for  her  as  for  all  nature.


176         T//E  STORY  OF  COSTA  BERU.\<;

She  thought  that  her  own  heart,  which  now  in
its  playful  gladness  clothed  existence  with  purpk-
and  gold,  she  thought  that  this  heart  perhaps
sometime  would  lose  its  power  to  light  up  her
world.

"Oh,  impotence,  my  own  heart's  impotence! "
said  to  herself.     "  Goddess  of  the  stifling,  gray  twi-
light.     You    will    one  day  be  mistress  of  my  soul.
Then  I  shall  sec  life  ugly  and  gray,  as  it  pi-rhap
then  my  hair  will  grow  white,  my  back  be  bent,  my
brain  be  paralyzed."

At  the  same  moment  the  sledge  turned  in  at  the
bailiff's  gate,  and  as  the  young  countess  looked  up,
her  eyes  fell  on  a  grated  window  in  the  wing,  and  on  a
fierce,  staring  face  behind.

That  face  belonged  to  the  major's  wife  at  Kkcby,
and  the  young  woman  knew  that  her  pleasure  for  the
evening  was  now  spoiled.

One  can  be  glad  when  one  does  not  see  sorrow,
only  hears  it  spoken  of.  But  it  is  harder  to  keep  a
joyous  heart  when  one  stands  face  to  face  with  black,
fierce,  staring  trouble.

The  countess  knows  of  course  that  Bailiff  Scharling
had  put  the  major's  wife  in  prison,  and  that  she  shall
be  tried  for  the  assault  she  made  on  Ekeby  the  night
of  the  great  ball.  But  she  never  thought  that
should  be  kept  in  custody  there  at  the  bailiff's  house,
so  near  the  ballroom  that  one  could  look  into  her
room,  so  near  that  she  must  hear  the  dance  music  and
the  noise  of  merry-making.  And  the  thought  takes
away  all  her  pleasure.

The  young  countess  dances  both  waltz  and  quadrille.
She  takes  part  in  both  minuet  and  contra-dance;  but
after  each  dance  she  steals  to  the  window  in  the


////     VOUNG  COUNTESS  177

There  is  a  li;;!it  there  and  she  can  see  hov
major's  wife  walks  up  and  down  in  her  room.    She
never  seems  to  rest,  but  walks  and  walks.

The  countess  takes  no  pleasure  in  the  dance.     She

only  thinks  of  the  major's  wife  going  backwards  and

forwards  in  her  prison  like  a  caged  wild  beast.    She

lers  how  all  the  others  can  dance.    She  is

e  are  many  tin  n-  \vho  arc  as  much  moved  as  she

to  know  th.it  the  major's  wife  is  so  near,  and  still  there

•  one  who  shows  it.

Hut  every  time  she  has  looked  out  her  feet  grow
heavier  in  the  dance,  and  tlu-   l.ui^h   sticks   in
throat.

The  bailiffs  wife  notices  her  as  she  wipes  the
moisture  from  the  window-pane  to  see  out,  and
comes  to  her.

Such   misery!     Oh,   it  is  such   suffering!"  she

the  countess.
"  I  think  it  is  almost  impossible  to  dance  to-night,"

ITS  the  countess  back  again.

It   i     not  \\ith  my  consent  that  we  dance  here,

while  she  is  sitting  shut  up  there,"  answers  Madame

Scharling.     "She  has  been  in  Karlstad  since  she  was

arrested.     But  there  is  soon  to  be  a  trial  now,  and

\\\  siu-  was  brought  here  to-day.     We  could

n<»t  put  her  in  th  able  cell  in  th»-  court-h<

so  she  was  allowed  to  stay  in  the  weaving-room  in

th«-  wing.     She  should  have  had  my  drawing-room,

.   if  all  these  people  had  not  come  to-day.

You  hardly  know  her,  but  she  has  been  like  a  mother

and  queen  to  us  all.     What  will  she  think  of  us,  who

are  dancing  here,  while  she  is  in  such  gn-.it  trouble.

is  wi-11  that  most  of  them  do  not  know  that
is  sitting  the  t

12


1 78          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BEKLfNG

"  She  ought  never  to  have  been  arrested,"  says  the
young  countess,  sternly.

"No,  that  is  a  true  word,  countess,  but  thru  was
nothing  else  to  do,  if  there  should  not  bcawor^  mi-
fortune.  No  one  blamed  her  for  setting  fire  to  her
own  hay-stack  and  driving  out  the  pensioners,  hut
the  major  was  scouring  the  country  for  her.  God
knows  what  he  would  have  done  if  she  had  not  been
put  in  prison.  Scharling  li  n  much  offence

because  he  arrested  the  major's  wife,  countess.    1
in   Karlstad  they  were  much  displeased    with    him,
because  he  did  not  shut  his  eyes  to  everything  which
happened  at  Ekeby ;  but  he  did  what  he  thought  was

"  But  now  I  suppose  she  will  be  sentenced  ?  "  says
the  countess.

"  Oh,  no,  countess,  she  will  not  be  sentenced.  She
will  be  acquitted,  but  all  that  she  has  to  bear  these
days  is  being  too  much  for  her.  She  is  going  mad.
You  can  understand,  such  a  proud  woman,  how  can
she  bear  to  be  treated  like  a  criminal!  I  think  that
it  would  have  been  best  if  she  had  been  allowed  to
go  free.  She  might  have  been  able  to  escape  by
herself.

"  Let  her  go,"  says  the  countess.

"  Any  one  can  do  that  but  the  bailiff  and  his  wife,"
whispers  Madame  Scharling.  "  We  have  to  guard
her.  Especially  to-night,  when  so  many  of  her
friends  are  here,  two  men  sit  on  guard  outside  her
door,  and  it  is  locked  and  barred  so  that  no  one  can
come  in.  But  if  any  one  got  her  out,  countess,  we
should  be  so  glad,  both  Scharling  and  I."

"Can  I  not  go  to  her?"  says  the  young  count
Madame  Scharling  seizes  her  eagerly  by  the  wrist


A///-.    YOUNG   COUNTESS

and  leads  her  out  with  her.  In  the  hall  they  throw  a
couple  of  shawls  about  them,  ami  hurry  across  the
y.ud.

"It   i,  not  certain  th.it  she  will  even  speak  to
•ays  the-    l>.iililf •»    wife.      "  Hut    she   will    see    that   WC
have  not  forgotten  her."

They  come  into  the  first  room  in  the  wing,  where
the  t\\<>  m.  n  sit  .mil  guard  the  barred  door,  and  go
in  without  being  stopped  to  the  major's  ut:
was  in  a  large  room  crowded  with  looms  and  other
implements      It  was  used  mostly  for  a  weaving-room,
but  it  had  bars  in  the  window  and  a  strong  lock  on
the  door,  so  that  it  could  be  used,  in  case  of  need
a  cell.

The  major's  wife  continues  to  walk  without  paying
any  attention  to  them.

She  is  on  a  long  wandering  these  days.    She  can-
not remember  anything  except  that  she  is  going  the
hundred  and  twenty  miles  to  her  mother,  who  is  up
in  the   Alfdal   woods,   and  is  waiting  for  her.     She
never  has  time  to  rest   She  must  go.   A  never-resting
te  is  on  her.     Her  mother  is  over  ninety  years
She  would  soon  be  dead.

She  has  measured  off  the  floor  by  yards,  and  she
is  now  adding  up  the  yards  to  furlongs  and  the  fur-
longs to  half-miles  and  miles.

Her  way  seems  heavy  and  long,  but  she  dares  not
rest  .ides  through  deep  drifts.  She  hears  the

forests  murmur  over  her  as  she  goes.     She  rest
Finn  huts  and   in  the  charcoal-burner's   log  cabin.
Sometimes,  when  there  is  nobody  for  many  miles,
she  has  to  break  branches  for  a  bed  and  rest  under
the  roots  of  a  fallen  pine.

And  at  last  she  has  reached  her  journey's  end.  the


ISO          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

hundred  and  twenty  miles  are  over,  the  wood  opens
out,  and  the  red  house  st.uuls  in  a  snow-coveic  d
yard.  The  Klar  River  rushes  foaming  by  in  a  succes-
sion of  little  waterfalls,  and  by  that  well-known  sound
she  hears  that  she  is  at  home.  And  her  mother.  \\  ho
must  have  seen  her  coming  begging,  just  as  she  had
wished,  comes  to  meet  her.

When  the  major's  wife  has  got  so  far  she  always
looks  up,  glances  about  her,  sees  the  closed  d<»«>r,
and  knows  where  sh

Then  she  wonders  if  she  is  going  mad,  and
down  to  think  and  to  rest.  But  after  a  time  she  sets
out  again,  calculates  the  yards  and  the  furlongs,  the
half-miles  and  the  miles,  rests  for  a  short  time  in
Finn  huts,  and  sleeps  neither  night  nor  day  until  she
has  again  accomplished  the  hundred  and  twenty
miles.

During  all  the  time  she  has  been  in  prison  she  has
almost  never  slept.

And  the  two  women  who  had  come  to  see  her
looked  at  her  with  anguish.

The  young  countess  will  ever  afterwards  remember
her,  as  she  walked  there.  She  sees  her  often  in  her
dreams,  and  wakes  with  eyes  full  of  tears  and  a  moan
on  her  lips.

The  old  woman  is  so  pitifully  changed,  her  hair  is
so  thin,  and  loose  ends  stick  out  from  the  narrow
braid.  Her  face  is  relaxed  and  sunken,  her  dre
disordered  and  ragged.  But  with  it  all  she  has  so
much  still  of  her  lofty  bearing  that  she  inspires  not
only  sympathy,  but  also  respect.

But  what  the  countess  remembered  most  distinctly
were  her  eyes,  sunken,  turned  inward,  not  yet  deprived
of  all  the  light  of  reason,  but  almost  ready  to  be  ex-


////      YOUNG  COUATTJ  l8l

lishcd,  ami   with  a  :   wildness  lurking  in

.!i  j.ths.  ->..  that  one  hail  to  shudder  and  fe.
have  the  old  woman  in  t  moment  upon  one,

h  ready  to  bite,  fingers  to  tear.
They   have   been    there    quite    *    while    when    the
•  uddenly  stops  before  the  young  woman
looks  at  her  \\ith  a  stern  glance.    The  countess
takes  a  step  backwards  and  seizes  Madame  Schar ling's
arm

The  features  of  the  major's  wife  have  life  and  cx-
lu-r  eyes  look  out  into  the  world  with  full

"  Oh,  no ;  oh,  no,"  she  says  and  smiles ;  "  as  yet  it  is
not  so  bad,  my  dear  young  lady."

She  .1- ;. .  them  to  sit  down,  and  sits  down  herself.
She  has  an  air  of  old-time  statclincss,  known  since  days
of  feasting  at  Kkeby  and  at  the  royal  balls  at  the
governor's  house  at  Karlstad.  They  forget  the  rags
and  the  prison  and  only  see  the  proudest  and  richest

an  in  Varmland.

"  My  dear  countess,"  she  says,  "  what  possessed  you
we  i lii-  dance  to  visit  a  lonely  old  woman?  You
t  be  very  good."

Countess  Elizabeth  cannot  answer.     Her  vok
chok  i  emotion      Madame  Scharling  answers

for  her,  that  ?»he  hail  not  been  able  to  dance  for  think-
of  the  major's  \M

Dear  Madame   Scharling,"   answers   the  major's
"  has  it  gone  so  far  with  me  that  I  disturb  the
young  people  in  their  pleasure?    You  must  not  weep
Icar  young  countess,"  she  continued.     "  I
am  .1  1  old  woman,  who  deserves  all  I  get.    You

do  not  think  it  right  to  strike  one's  mother?"
"No,  but  —  "


1 82         THE  STORY  OF  GtiSTA  BE  RUNG

The  major's  wife  interrupts  her  and  strokes  the  curly,
light  hair  back  from  her  foreh

"  Child,  child,"  she  says,  "  how  could  you  marry
that  stupid  Henrik  Uohna?"

11  Hut  I  love  him.

I  see  how  it  is,  I  see  how  it  is,"  says  the  major's
wife.  "  A  kind  child  and  nothing  more;  weeps  with
those  in  sorrow,  and  laughs  with  those  who  arc  -lad.
And  obliged  to  say  '  yes '  to  the  first  man  who  says,
1 1  love  you.'  Yes,  of  course.  Go  back  now  and
dance,  my  dear  young  countess.  Dance  and  be
happy!  There  is  nothing  bad  in  you."

"  But  I  want  to  do  something  for  you."

"  Child,"  says  the  major's  wife,  solemnly,  "  an  old
woman  lived  at  Ekeby  who  held  the  winds  of  heaven
prisoners.  Now  she  is  caught  and  the  winds  are  free.
Is  it  strange  that  a  storm  goes  over  the  land  ?

"  I,  who  am  old,  have  seen  it  before,  countess.  I
know  it.  I  know  that  the  storm  of  the  thundering
God  is  coming.  Sometimes  it  rushes  over  great  king-
doms, sometimes  over  small  out-of-the-way  communi-
ties. God's  storm  forgets  no  one.  It  comes  over  the
great  as  well  as  the  small.  It  is  grand  to  see  God's
storm  coming.

"Anguish  shall  spread  itself  over  the  land.  The
small  birds'  nests  shall  fall  from  the  branches.  The
hawk's  nest  in  the  pine-tree's  top  shall  be  shaken  down
to  the  earth  with  a  great  noise,  and  even  the  eagle's
nest  in  the  mountain  cleft  shall  the  wind  drag  out  with
its  dragon  tongue.

"  We  thought  that  all  was  well  with  us;  but  it  was
not  so.  God's  storm  is  needed.  I  understand  that,
and  I  do  not  complain.  I  only  wish  that  I  might  go
to  my  mother."


///  183

.  back.

ton/'  she  says.    "  1  have

^o.     Go  nd   look  oui

.1  who  rule  on  th

Ih  ember  wandering.  Her  features

relax,  her  glance  turns  inward,  liu  countess  and
Madame  Scharling  have  to  leave  her.

As  soon  as  they  are  back  again  among  the
dancers  the  young  countess  goes  straight  to  Gosta

!1H-
1  can  greet  >  ilic  major's  wife/'  she  says.

waiting  for  you  to  get  her  out  of  prison."
"  Then  she  must  go  on  waiting,  countess."
••  Oh,  help  her,  Hcrr  Hcrling!  "

sta  stares  gloomily  before  him.     "  No,"  he  says,
"  why  should  I  help  her?     What  thanks  do  I  owe
.cry thin-  she  has  done  for  me  has  been  to
my  ruin."
"But  Hcrr  Bcrling  — "

If  she  had  not  existed,"  he  says  angrily,  "  I  would

now  be  sleeping  up  there  in  the  forest.    Is  it  my  duty

k  my  life  for  her,  because  she  has  made  me  a

pension*  by?    Do  you  think  much  credit  goes

with  that  profession?"

The  young  countess  turns  away  from  him  without
answering.  She  is  angry.

She  goes  back  to  her  place  thinking  bitter  thoughts
he  pensioners.  They  have  come  to-night  with
horns  and  fiddles,  and  mean  to  let  the  bows  scrape  the
strings  until  the  horse-hair  is  worn  through,  without
thinking  that  the  merry  tunes  ring  in  the  prisoner's
miserable  room.  They  come  here  to  dance  until  their
shot  pieces,  and  do  not  remember  that  •

old    benefactress    can    sec    their    shadows  whirling


184          THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLING

by  the  misty  window-panes.  Alas,  how  gray  and
ugly  the  world  was!  Alas,  what  a  shadow  trouble
and  hardness  had  cast  over  the  young  countess's
soul !

After  a  while  Gosta  comes  to  ask  her  to  dance.

She  refuses  shortly.

"  Will  you  not  dance  with  me,  countess?"  he  asks,
and  grows  very  red.

"  Neither  with  you  nor  with  any  other  of  the  Ekcby
pensioners,"  she  says.

"  We  are  not  worthy  of  such  an  honor."

"  It  is  no  honor,  Herr  Berling.  But  it  gives  me
no  pleasure  to  dance  with  those  who  forget  t lie-
precepts  of  gratitude."

Gosta  has  already  turned  on  his  heel.

This  scene  is  heard  and  seen  by  many.  All  think
the  countess  is  right.  The  pensioners'  ingratitude
and  heartlessness  had  waked  general  indignation.

But  in  these  days  Gosta  Berling  is  more  dangerous
than  a  wild  beast  in  the  forest.  Ever  since  he  came
home  from  the  hunt  and  found  Marianne  gone,  his
heart  has  been  like  an  aching  wound.  He  longs  to
do  some  one  a  bloody  wrong  and  to  spread  sorr<»w
and  pain  far  around.

If  she  wishes  it  so,  he  says  to  himself,  it  shall  be  as
she  wishes.  But  she  shall  not  save  her  own  skin.
The  young  countess  likes  abductions.  She  shall  get
her  fill.  He  has  nothing  against  adventure.  For
eight  days  he  has  mourned  for  a  woman's  sake.  It
is  long  enough.  He  calls  Beerencreutz  the  colonel,
and  Christian  Bergh  the  great  captain,  and  the  slow
Cousin  Christopher,  who  never  hesitates  at  any  mad
adventure,  and  consults  with  them  how  he  shall
avenge  the  pensioners'  injured  honor.


1HE    YOUNG  COUNTESS  185

It  is  the  end  of  the  party.  A  long  line  of  sledges
up  into  the  yard.  The  men  arc  putting  on
their  fur  cloaks.  The  ladies  look  for  their  wraps  in
the  dreadful  confusion  of  the  dressing-room.

The  young  countess  has  been  in  great  haste  to
leave  this  hateful  ball.  She  is  ready  first  of  all  the
ladies.  She  stands  smiling  in  the  middle  of  the  room
and  looks  at  the  confusion,  when  the  door  is  thrown
open,  and  Costa  Berling  shows  himself  on  the
threshold.

No  man  has  a  right  to  enter  this  room.    The  old

ladies  stand  there  with   their   thin   h.iir   no  longer

adorned  with  becoming  caps;    and  the  young  ones

have  turned  up  their  skirts  under  their  cloaks,  that

tiff  ruffles  may  not  be  crushed  on  the  way  home.

But  without  paying  any  attention  to  the  warning
sta  Berling  rushes  up  to  the  countess  and
seizes  her.

He  lifts  her  in  his  arms  and  rushes  from  the  room
out  into  the  hall  and  then  on  to  the  steps  with

The  astonished  women's  screams  could  not  check

him.     When  they  hurry  after,  they  only  see  how  he

m  him-  a  sledge  with  the  countess  in  his

They  hear  the  driver  crack  his  whip  and  sec  the

horse  set  off.     They  know  the  driver :   it  is  Bcercn-

y  know  the  horv  Don  Juan.     And

cp  distro-s  over  the  countess's  fate  they  call  their

husbu

1  these  waste  no  time  in  questions,  but  hasten
to  their  sledges.  And  with  the  count  at  their  head
they  chase  after  the  ravUh

Hut  he  lies  in  the  sledge,  holding  the  young  coun-


1 86         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERUNG

less  fast.  He  has  forgotten  all  grief,  and  mad  with
adventure's  intoxicating  joy,  he  sings  at  the  top  of
his  voice  a  song  of  love  and  ru-

Close  to  him  he  j  her;  but  she  makes  no

attempt  to  escape.  I  ler  la*  6  lies,  white  and  stiiiened.
against  his  breast

Ah,  what  shall  a  man  do  when  he  has  a  pale,  help-
less face  so  near  his  own,  when  he  sees  the  fair  hair
which  usually  shades  the  white,  gleaming  forehead,
pushed  to  one  side,  and  when  the  eyelids  have
closed  heavily  over  the  gray  eyes'  roguish  glance?

What  shall  a  man  do  when  red  lips  grow  pale
beneath  his  eyes?

Kiss,  of  course,  kiss  the  fading  lips,  the  closed  eyes,
the  white  forehead.

But  then  the  young  woman  awakes.  She  throws
herself  back.  She  is  like  a  bent  spring.  And  he
has  to  struggle  with  her  with  his  whole  strength  to
keep  her  from  throwing  herself  from  the  sledge,  until
finally  he  forces  her,  subdued  and  trembling,  down
in  the  corner  of  the  sledge.

"See,"  says  Gosta  quite  calmly  to  Beerencrcut/.,
"  the  countess  is  the  third  whom  Don  Juan  and  I
have  carried  off  this  winter.  But  the  others  hung
about  my  neck  with  kisses,  and  she  will  neither  be
kissed  by  me  nor  dance  with  me.  Can  you  under-
stand these  women,  Beerencreutz?"

But  when  Gosta  drove  away  from  the  house,  when
the  women  screamed  and  the  men  swore,  when  the
sleigh-bells  rang  and  the  whips  cracked,  and  there
was  nothing  but  cries  and  confusion,  the  men  who
guarded  the  major's  wife  were  wondering.

"What  is  going  on?"  they  thought.  "Why  are
they  screaming?"


•I HI-.     XT.U,    COUNTESS  187

Suddenly  the  door  is  thrown  open,  and  a  v«
calls  to  limn

"  She  is  gone.     He  is  driving  away  with  hi

They  rush  out,  running  like  mad,  \\ithout  waiting
to  sec  il  it  \\an  the  :  .\  ho  it  wa.s  uho

was  gone.  Luck  was  with  them,  and  they  came
up  \\ith  .1  lain \ii»v;  sledge,  and  they  drove  both  far
and  fast,  before  they  discovered  whom  they  were
pursuing.

Hut  Berg  and  Con  stophcr  went  quietly  to

the  door,  burst  the  lock,  and  opened  it  for  the  major's

You  are  free/'  they  said.

She  came  out.    They  stood  straight  as  ramrods
i  her  side  of  the  door  and  did  not  look  at  her.
>  ou  have  a  horse  and  sledge  outside."

She  went  out,  placed  herself  in  the  sledge,  and
drove  away.  No  one  followed  her.  No  one  knew
whither  she  \\enL

Down  Broby  hill  Don  Juan  speeds  towards  the
Lbfvcn's  ice-covered  surface.  The  proud  courser
flies  on.  Strong,  ice-cold  breezes  whistle  by  their
checks.  The  bells  jingle.  The  stars  and  the  moon
are  shining.  The  snow  lies  blue-white  and  glitters
from  its  own  brightness.

Gosta  feels  poetical  thoughts  wake  in  him.

"  Keerencrcutz,"  he  says,  "this  is  life.  Just  as
Don  Juan  hurries  away  with  this  young  woman,  so
time  hurries  away  with  man.  You  are  necc-
who  steers  the  journey.  I  am  desire,  who  fetters
the  will,  and  she  is  dragged  helpless,  always  deeper
and  deeper  dov.

Don't  talk!"  cries    Beerencreutz,     "They  arc
coming  after  us."


1 88         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  BE  RUNG

And  with  a  whistling  cut  of  the  whip  he  urges  Don
Juan  to  still  wilder  speed.

)nce  it  was  wolves,  now  it  is  spoils,"  cries
Gosta.  "  Don  Juan,  my  boy,  fancy  that  you  are  a
young  elk.  Rush  through  the  brushwood,  wade
through  the  swamps,  leap  from  the  mountain  top
down  into  the  clear  lake,  swim  across  it  with  bravely
lifted  head,  and  vanish,  vanish  in  the  thick  pine-
woods'  rescuing  darkness!  Spring,  Don  Juan!
Spring  like  a  young  ell

Joy  fills  his  wild  heart  at  the  mad  race.  The  cries
of  the  pursuers  are  to  him  a  song  of  victory.  Joy
fills  his  wild  heart  when  he  feels  the  countess's  body
shake  with  fright,  when  he  hears  her  teeth  chatter.

Suddenly  he  loosens  the  grip  of  iron  with  which
he  has  held  her.  He  stands  up  in  the  sledge  and
waves  his  cap.

"  I  am  Gosta  Berling,"  he  cries,  "  lord  of  ten
thousand  kisses  and  thirteen  thousand  love-letters!
Hurra  for  Gosta  Berling !  Take  him  who  can  !  "

And  in  the  next  minute  he  whispers  in  the  count-
ess's ear :  —

Is  not  the  pace  good?  Is  not  the  course
kingly?  Beyond  Lofven  lies  Lake  Vancr.  Beyond
Vancr  lies  the  sea,  everywhere  endless  stretches  of
clear  blue-black  ice,  and  beyond  all  a  glowing  world.
Rolling  thunders  in  the  freezing  ice,  shrill  cries
behind  us,  shooting  stars  above  us,  and  jingling  bells
before  us  !  Forward  !  Always  forward  !  Have  you
a  mind  to  try  the  journey,  young,  beautiful  lady?  "

He  had  let  her  go.  She  pushes  him  roughly  away.
The  next  instant  finds  him  on  his  knees  at  her  feet.

"I  am  a  wretch,  a  wretch.  You  ought  not  to
have  angered  me,  countess.  You  stood  there  so


/•///•:    YOUNG  COUXTESS  189

prou  md  never  thought  that  a  pensioner's

haml  could  reach  you.     i  and  earth  love  you.

You  ought  not  to  add  to  the  burden  of  those  whom

en  and  earth  scorn."

I  ic  draws  her  hands  to  him  and  lifts  them  to  his  face.
"  H  y<>u  only  knew/'  he  says,  "  what  it  means  to  be
an  outcast.    One  does  not  stop  to  think  what  one
does.    No,  one  does  not"

At  the  same  moment  he  notices  that  she  has  noth-
ing on  )in    h.m.i        llr  (haws  a  pair  of  great   fur

s  from  his  pocket  and  puts  them  on  her.
And  he  has  become  all  at  once  quite  quiet.     He
places  himself  in  the  sledge,  as  far  from  the  young
countess  as  possible.

Vou  need  not  be  afraid,"  he  says.  "  Do  you  not
see  where  we  are  driving?  You  must  understand
th.it  we  do  not  dare  to  do  you  any  harm."

She,  who  has  been  almost  out  of  her  mind  with

it,  sees  that  they  have  driven  across  the  lake  and

Don  Juan  H  ^niggling  up  the  steep  hill  to  Borg.

They  stop  the  horse  before  the  f  the  castle.

and  let  the  young  countess  get  out  of  the  sledge  at

tin-  door  of  her  own  home.

When  she  is  surrounded  by  attentive  servants,  she
regains  her  courage  and  presence  of  mind.

"  Take  care  of  the  horse,  Andcrsson !  "  she  says  to
tin-  i  o.irhman.     "These  gentlemen  who  have  dt
me  home  will  be  kind  enough  to  come  in  for  a  while.
The  count  will  soon  be  h<

countess,"  says  Gosta,  and  instantly
gets  out  sledge.      Beercncrcutz   throws  the

to  the  groom  without  a  moment's  hesita:
And  the  young  countess  goes  before  them  and  ushers
.\  into  the  hall  with  ill  concealed  malicious  joy.


190          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

The  countess  had  expected  that  the  pensioners
would  hesitate  at  the  proposition  to  await  IK T
husband.

They  did  not  know  perhaps  what  a  stern  and
upright  man  he  was.  They  were  not  afraid  of  tlu-
Inquiry  he  should  make  of  them,  who  had  seized  her
by  force  and  compelled  her  to  drive  with  tlu  in.
She  longed  to  hear  him  forbid  them  ever  again  to
set  their  foot  in  her  house.

She  wished  to  see  him  call  in  the  servants  to  point
out  the  pensioners  to  them  as  men  who  thereafter
never  should  be  admitted  within  the  doors  of  Borg.
She  wished  to  hear  him  express  his  scorn  not  only  of
what  they  had  done  to  her,  but  also  of  their  conduct
toward  the  old  major's  wife,  their  benefactress.

He,  who  showed  her  only  tenderness  and  considera-
tion, would  rise  in  just  wrath  against  her  perse-
cutors. Love  would  give  fire  to  his  speech.  He,
who  guarded  and  looked  after  her  as  a  creature  of
finer  stuff  than  any  other,  would  not  bear  that  rough
men  had  fallen  upon  her  like  birds  of  prey  upon  a
sparrow.  She  glowed  with  thirst  of  revenge.

Beerencreutz,  however,  walked  undaunted  into  the
dining-room,  and  up  to  the  fire,  which  was  al
lighted  when  the  countess  came  home  from  a  ball.

Gosta  remained  in  the  darkness  by  the  door  and
silently  watched  the  countess,  while  the  servant  re-
moved her  outer  wraps.  As  he  sat  and  looked  at
the  young  woman,  he  rejoiced  as  he  had  not  done
for  many  years.  He  saw  so  clearly  it  was  like  a
revelation,  although  he  did  not  understand  how  he
had  discovered  it,  that  she  had  in  her  one  of  the
most  beautiful  of  souls.

As  yet  it  lay  bound  and  sleeping;   but  it  would


THE    YOUNG  COUNTESS  \<)\

some  day  show  itsclC     He  rejoiced  at  having  discov-
all    tin-    purity  and  gentleness  and   innocence
•i  \\.i-,  hidden  in  IKT.     He  was  almost  ready  to
.  because  she  looked  so  angry  and  stood
ilushrd  checks  am!  (Yawning  brows.
You  do  not  know  how  gentle  and  good  you  a;
he  thought.

The  side  of  her  being  which  was  turned  towards
•  titsidc  world  would  never  do  her  inner  person-
he  thought.     Hut  Gusta  Bcrling   from
hour  must  be  her  servant,  as  one  must  serve
everything  beautiful  and   godlike.      Yes,  there   was
MI;  to  be  sorry  for  that  he  had  just  been  so
violent  with  her.     If  -In    h.ul  not  been  so  afraid,  if
she  had  not  thrust  him  from  her  so  angrily,  if  he  had
not   felt  how  her  whole  being  was  shaken  by  his
rou^l  ic  would  never  have  known  what  a  fine

noble  soul  dwelt  within  her.

He  had  not  thought  it  before.  She  had  only  cared
for  pleasure-seeking  and  amusement.  And  she  had

.  that  stupid  Count  Hcnrik.

Yes,  now  he  would  be  her  slave  till  death ;  dog  and
slave  as  Captain  Bcrgh  used  to  say,  and  nothing
more.

He  sat  by  the  door,  Gosta  Berlin^,  and  held  with

>cd  hands  a  sort  of  service.  Since  the  day  v
he  for  the  first  time  felt  the  flame  of  inspiration  burn
in  him,  he  had  not  known  such  a  holiness  in  his  soul.
1 1<  did  not  move,  even  when  Count  Dohna  came  in
with  a  crowd  of  people,  who  swore  and  lamented  over
the  pensioners'  mad  performance.

He  let  Bcercncrcutz  receive  the  storm.  With  indo-
lent calm,  tried  by  many  adventures,  the  latter  stood
by  the  fireplace.  He  had  put  one  foot  up  on  the


192          THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLL\C,

fender,  rested  his  elbow  on  his  knee,  and  his  chin  on
his  hand,  and  looked  at  tl  nipany.

"  What  is  the  meaning  of  all  this?  "  roared  the  lit-
tle count  at  him.

"The  meaning  is,"  he  said,  "  that  as  long  as  there
are  women  on  earth,  there  will  be  fools  to  dance
after  their  piping."

The  young  count's  face  grew  red.

"  I  ask  what  th.it  means '  "  he  repeated.

"  I  ask  that  too,"  sneered  Beerencreutz.  "  I  ask
what  it  means  when  Ilenrik  Uohnu's  countess  will
not  dance  with  Gosta  Berling."

The  count  turned  questioning  to  his  wife.

"  I  could  not,  Hcnrik,"  she  cried.  "  I  could  not
dance  with  him  or  any  of  them.  I  thought  of  the
major's  wife,  whom  they  allowed  to  languish  in
prison."

The  little  count  straightened  his  stiff  body  and
stretched  up  his  old-man's  head.

"  We  pensioners,"  said  Beerencreutz,  "  permit  no
one  to  insult  us.  She  who  will  not  dance  with  us
must  drive  with  us.  No  harm  has  come  to  the
countess,  and  there  can  be  an  end  of  the  matter."

"No,"  said  the  count.  "It  cannot  be  the  end.  It
is  I  who  am  responsible  for  my  wife's  acts.  Now  I
ask  why  Gosta  Berling  did  not  turn  to  me  to  get
satisfaction  when  my  wife  had  insulted  him."

Beerencreutz  smiled.

"  I  ask  that,"  repeated  the  count.

"  One  does  not  ask  leave  of  the  fox  to  take  his
skin  from  him,"  said  Beerencreutz.

The  count  laid  his  hand  on  his  narrow  chest.

"  1  am  known  to  be  a  just  man,"  he  cried.  "  I  can
pass  sentence  on  my  servants.  Why  should  I  not  be


COUNTESS  193

able  to  pass  sentence  on  my  wife?  The  pensioners
have  no  right  to  jud^c  li  i  1  he  punishment  they
have  given  her.  I  wipe  out  It  has  never  been,  do
you  understand,  gentlemen.  It  has  never  cxistc.

The  count  screamed  out  the  words  in  a  hi^h
falsetto.  Beercncreutz  cast  a  swift  glance  about  the
isacmbly.  There  was  not  one  of  those  present  -
Sm tram  and  Daniel  Bcndix  and  Dahlberg  and  all  the
others  who  had  followed  in  —  who  did  not  stand
and  smile  at  the  way  he  outwitted  stupid  Henrik

c  young  countess  did  not  understand  at  first.
What  was  it  which  should  not  be  considered?     i
anguish,  the  pensioner's  hard  grip  on  her  tender  body,
the  wild  song,  the  wild  words,  the  wild  kisses,  did
st?     Had  that  evening  never  been,  over
ii  the  goddess  of  the  gray  twilight  had  reigned?

rik  —  "

44  Silence ! "  he  said.  And  he  drew  himself  up  to
chide  her.  "Woe  to  you,  that  you,  who  are  a
woman,  have  wished  to  set  yourself  up  as  a  judge  of
men,"  he  says.  4<  Woe  to  you,  that  you,  who  are  my
dare  to  insult  one  whose  hand  I  gladly  press.
What  is  it  to  you  if  the  pensioners  have  put  the
major's  wife  in  prison?  Were  they  not  right?  You
can  never  know  how  angry  a  man  is  to  the  bottom  of
his  soul  when  he  hears  of  a  woman's  infidelity.  Do
you  also  mean  to  go  that  evil  way,  that  you  take
such  a  woman's  par
rik  —  "

She  wailed  like  a  child,  and  stretched  out  her  arms

to  ward  off  the  angry  words.     She  had  never  before

1  such  hard  words  addressed  to  her.     She  was

so  helpless  among  these  hard  men.  and  now  her  only

•3


194         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  BERUNG

defender  turned  against  her.     Never  again  would  her
heart  have  power  to  light  up  the  world.

1  Hut,  Henrik,  it  is  you  who  ought  to  protect  me."

Gosta  Bcrling  was  observant  now,  when  it  was  too
late.     He  did  not  know  what  to  do.     He  wished  IK  i
so  well.     But   he  did    not   dare   to   thrust    himself
between  man  and  wif<

'  Where  is  Gosta  Bi-rling?  "  asked  the  count.

"  Here,"  said  Gosta.  And  he  made  a  pitiable
attempt  to  make  a  jest  of  the  matter.  "  You  were
making  a  speech,  I  think,  count,  and  I  fell  asleep.
What  do  you  say  to  letting  us  go  home  and  letting
you  all  go  to  bed  ?  "

"  Gosta  Berling,  since  my  countess  has  refused  to
dance  with  you,  I  command  her  to  kiss  your  hand
and  to  ask  you  for  forgiveness."

"  My  dear  Count  Henrik,"  says  Gosta,  smiling,  "  it
is  not  a  fit  hand  for  a  young  woman  to  kiss.  Yester-
day it  was  red  with  blood  from  killing  an  elk,  to-day
black  with  soot  from  a  fight  with  a  charcoal-burner.
You  have  given  a  noble  and  high-minded  sentence.
That  is  satisfaction  enough.  Come,  Beerencreutz  !  "

The  count  placed  himself  in  his  way.

"  Do  not  go,"  he  said.  "  My  wife  must  obey  m«  -.
I  wish  that  my  countess  shall  know  whither  it  leads
to  be  self-willed."

Gosta  stood  helpless.  The  countess  was  quite
white;  but  she  did  not  move.

"  Go,"  said  the  count.

"  Henrik,  I  cannot."

"  You  can,"  said  the  count,  harshly.  "  You  can.
But  I  know  what  you  want.  You  will  force  me  to
fight  with  this  man,  because  your  whim  is  not  to  like
him.  Well,  if  you  will  not  make  him  amends,  I  shall


/•///•     YOUNG  COUNTESS  195

do  so.    You  women  love  to  have  a  man  killed  for

your  sake.     You  have  done  wrong,  but  will  not  atone

:.     Therefore  I  must  do  it.    I  shall  fi^ht  the  duel.

i less.    In  a  few  hours  I  shall  be  a  bloody  corpse."

She  gave  him  a  long  look.    And  she  saw  him  as

he  was,  — stupid,  cowardly,  puffed  up  with  pride  and

vanity,  the  most  pitiful  of  men.

1  said.     And  she  became  as  cold  as

ice.     "  I  uill  d<»

But  now  Gosta  Bcrling  became  quite  beside  himself.
Vou  shall   not,  countess!     No,  you   shall   not!
You  are  only  a  child,  a  poor,  innocent  child,  and  you
would  kiss  my  hand.    You  have  such  a  white,  beauti-
ful soul.     I    uill   never  again  come  near  you.     Oh,
never  again  !    I  bring  death  and  destruction  to  every-
thing good  and  blameless.     You  shall  not  touch  me.
I  shudder  for  you  like  fire  for  water.     You  shall  not !  "
He  put  his  hands  behind  his  back.
44  It  is  all  the  same  to  me,  Herr  Berling.     Nothing
makes  any  difference  to  me  any  more.     I  ask  you  for
forgiveness.     I  ask  you  to  let  me  kiss  your  hand  !  "

Gosta  kept  his  hands  behind   his  back.     He  ap-
proached the  door.

44  If  you  do  not  accept  the  amends  my  wife  offers,
I  must  fight  with  you,  Gosta  Berling,  and  moreover
pose  upon  her  another,  severer,  punishment."
The  countess  shrugged   her   shoulders.     "  Ht
mad  from  cowardice,"  she  whispered.     "  Let  me  do
it !     It  does  not  matter  if  I  am  humbled.     It  is  after
all  \N  hat  you  wanted  the  whole  time."

nt  that?     Do  you  think  I  wanted  that>
ive  no  hands  to  kiss,  you  must  see  that  I
»t  want  it,"  he  cried.
He  ran  to  the  fire  and  stretched  out  his  hands  Into


i</i          THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG

it.  The  flames  closed  over  them,  the  skin  shrivtlU d
up,  the  nails  crackled.  Hut  in  the  same  second  Beeren-
creutz  seized  him  by  the  neck  and  threw  him  across
the  floor.  He  tripped  against  a  chair  and  sat  down.
He  sat  and  almost  blushed  for  such  a  foolish  perform-
ance. Would  she  think  that  he  only  did  it  by  way  of
boast?  To  do  such  a  thing  in  the  crowded  room
must  seem  like  a  foolish  vaunt.  There  had  not  hi  < -n
a  vestige  of  danger.

Before  he  could  raise  himself,  the  countess  was
kneeling  beside  him.  She  seized  his  red,  sooty  hands
and  looked  at  them.

"  I  will  kiss  them,  kiss  them,"  she  cried,  "  as  soon
as  they  are  not  too  painful  and  sore  !  "  And  the  tears
streamed  from  her  eyes  as  she  saw  the  blisters  rising
under  the  scorched  skin.

For  he  had  been  like  a  revelation  to  her  of  an  un-
known glory.  That  such  things  could  happen  lu  iv
on  earth,  that  they  could  be  done  for  her !  What  a
man  this  was,  ready  for  everything,  mighty  in  good  as
in  evil,  a  man  of  great  deeds,  of  strong  words,  of
splendid  actions!  A  hero,  a  hero,  made  of  different
stuff  from  others  !  Slave  of  a  whim,  of  the  desire  of
the  moment,  wild  and  terrible,  but  possessor  of  a  tre-
mendous power,  fearless  of  everything.

She  had  been  so  depressed  the  whole  evening  she
had  not  seen  anything  but  pain  and  cruelty  and
cowardice.  Now  everything  was  forgotten.  The
young  countess  was  glad  once  more  to  be  alive.  The
goddess  of  the  twilight  was  conquered.  The  young
countess  saw  light  and  color  brighten  the  world.

It  was  the  same  night  in  the  pensioners'  wing.
There  they  scolded  and  swore  at  Gosta  Berling.


OUNC  COUNT/  197

The  old  men  wanted  to  sleep;  but  it  was  impos

>t  them  get  no  rest.     It  was  in  vam  that  they
the  bed  curtains  and  put  out  the  h-ht.    He  only

He  let  them  know  what  an  angel  the  young  coun-

tess   \\.ls,   .mil     ll"U     he     Uil.  .led     h(  I  .         II-      POOU        '  I  ve

her,  worship  her      He  was  glad  th  «me  had

forsaken  him.    He  could  devote  his  life  to  her  scr
She  despised  him  of  course.     But  he  would  be  M
ficd  to  lie  at  her  feet  like  a  dog.

Had  they  ever  noticed  an  island  out  in  the  I -of.
Had  they  seen  it  from  the  south  side,  where  the
rugged  cliff  rises  precipitously  from  the  water?  Had
they  seen  it  from  the  north,  where  it  sinks  down  to
the  sea  in  a  gentle  slope,  and  where  the  narrow  shoals,
covered  with  great  pines  wind  out  Into  the  water,  and
make  the  most  wonderful  little  lakes?  There  on  the
steep  cliff,  where  the  ruins  of  an  old  viking  fortress

remain,  he  would  build  a  palace  for  the  young
countess,  a  palace  of  marble.     Broad  steps,  at  which
boats  decked  with  flags  should  land,  should  be  h
in  the  cliff  down  to  the  sea.     There  should  be  glow-

::.ills  and  lofty  towers  with  gilded  pinnacles.  It
should  be  a  suitable  dwelling  for  the  young  countess.
lh.it  old  wooden  house  at  Borg  was  not  worthy  for

:••  enter.

When  he  had  gone  on  so  for  a  while,  first  one
snore  and  then  another  began  to  sound  behind  the
yellow-striped  curtains.  But  most  of  them  swore  and
bewailed  themselves  over  him  and  his  foolishness.

ricnds,"  he  then  says  solemnly,  "  I  sec  the  green
earth  covered  with  the  works  of  man  or  with  the
ruins  of  men's  work.  The  p  h  down  the

earth,  the  tower  of  Babel  has  bored  through  the  sky,


198          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

the  beautiful  temples  and  the  gray  castles  have  fallen
into  ruins.  But  of  all  which  hands  have  built,  what  is
it  which  has  not  fallen,  nor  shall  fall?  Ah,  friends,
throw  away  the  trowel  and  the  mortar !  Spread  your
mason's  aprons  over  your  heads  and  lay  you  down  to
build  bright  palaces  of  dreams !  What  has  the  soul
to  do  with  temples  of  stone  and  clay?  Learn  to
build  everlasting  palaces  of  dreams  and  visions  !  "

Thereupon  he  went  laughing  to  bed.

When,  shortly  after,  the  countess  heard  that  the
major's  wife  had  been  set  free,  she  gave  a  dinner  for
the  pensioners.

And  then  began  hers  and  Gosta  Berling's  long
friendship.


JST-S7t


CHAPTER  XI

•ST-STORIES

<  MI    children  of  the  present  day!

I  have  nothing  new  to  tell  you,  only  what  is  old
and  almost  forgotten.  I  have  legends  from  the
nursery,  where  the  little  ones  sat  on  low  stools  about
old  nurse  with  her  white  hair,  or  from  the  log-
in the  cottage,  where  the  laborers  sat  and
chatted,  while  the  steam  reeked  from  their  wet
clothes,  and  they  drew  knives  from  leather  sheaths
at  their  necks  to  spread  the  butter  on  thick,  soft
bread,  or  from  the  hall  where  old  men  sat  in  their
rocking-chairs,  and,  cheered  by  the  steaming  toddy,
talked  of  old  times.

When  a  child,  who  had  listened  to  the  old  nurse,
to  the  laborers,  to  the  old  men,  stood  at  the  window
on  a  winter's  evening,  it  saw  no  clouds  on  the  hori-
zon without  their  being  the  pensioners;  the  stars
were  wax-candles,  which  were  lighted  at  the  old
house  at  Borg;  and  the  spinning-wheel  which
hummed  in  the  next  room  was  driven  by  old  Ulrika
Dillncr.  For  the  child's  head  was  filled  with  the
people  of  those  old  days;  it  lived  for  and  adored
•

But  if  such  a  child,  whose  whole  soul  was  filled
with  stories,  should  be  sent  through  the  dark  attic
to  the  store-room  for  flax  or  biscuits,  then  the  small
feet  scurried ;  then  it  came  flying  down  the  stairs,


200         TV/  )    OF  COSTA  BERLING.

through  the  passage  to  the  kitchen.  For  up  there  in
the  dark  it  could  not  help  thinking  of  the  wicked
mill-owner  at  Fors,  —  of  him  who  was  in  league  with
the  devil.

Sint  ram 'sashes  have  been  resting  long  in  Svartsjo
churchyard,  but  no  one  believes  that  his  soul  has
been  called  to  God,  as  it  reads  on  his  tombstone.

While  he  was  alive  he  was  one  of  those  to  whose
home,  on  long,  rainy  Sunday  afternoons,  a  heavy
coach,  drawn  by  black  horses,  used  to  come.  A
gentleman  richly  but  plainly  dressed  gets  out  of  the
carriage,  and  helps  with  cards  and  dice  to  while
away  the  long  hours  which  with  their  monotony  have
driven  the  master  of  the  house  to  despair.  The
game  is  carried  on  far  into  the  night;  and  when  the
stranger  departs  at  dawn  he  always  leaves  behind
some  baleful  parting-gift.

As  long  as  Sintram  was  here  on  earth  he  was  one
of  those  whose  coming  is  made  known  by  spirits.
They  are  heralded  by  visions.  Their  carriages  roll
into  the  yard,  their  whip  cracks,  their  voices  sound
on  the  stairs,  the  door  of  the  entry  is  opened  and
shut.  The  dogs  and  people  are  awakened  by  the
noise,  it  is  so  loud;  but  there  is  no  one  who  has
come,  it  is  only  an  hallucination  which  goes  before
them.

Ugh,  those  horrible  people,  whom  evil  spirits  seek
out!  What  kind  of  a  big  black  dog  was  it  which
showed  itself  at  Fors  in  Sintram's  time?  He  had
terrible,  shining  eyes,  and  a  long  tongue  which
dripped  blood  and  hung  far  out  of  his  panting  throat.
One  day,  when  the  men-servants  had  been  in  the
kitchen  and  eaten  their  dinner,  he  had  scratched  at
the  kitchen  door,  and  all  the  maids  had  screamed


(.//OST-STOK/ES.  •  i

with  •   the  biggest  and  strongest  of  the

men  had  taken  a  burning  log  from  the  lire,  thrown
the  door,  and  hurled  it  into  the  dog's  gaping
mouth.

Then  he  had  fled  with  terrible  howls,  flames  and
•moke  had  burst  from  his  throat,  sparks  whirled
about  him,  ami  hi*  foot -prints  on  the  path  shone  like

And  was  it  not  dreadful  that  every  time  Sintram
came  home  from  a  journey  he  had  changed  the  ani-
mals which  drew  him*  He  left  with  horses,  but
when  he  came  home  at  night  he  had  always  black
bulls  be  it  carriage.  The  people  who  lived

near  the  road  saw  their  great  black  horns  against
,ky  when  he  drove  by,  and  heard  the  creatures'
bellowing,  and  were  terrified  by  the  line  of  sparks
which  the  hoofs  and  wheels  drew  out  of  the  dry
gravel.

Yes,  the  little  feet  needed  to  hurry,  indeed,  to
come  across  the  big,  dark  attic.  Think  if  some-
thing awful,  if  he,  whose  name  one  may  not  say,
should  come  out  of  a  dark  corner!  Who  can  be
sure?  It  was  not  only  to  wicked  people  that  he
showed  himself.  Had  not  UlrikaDillner  seen  him?
b  she  and  Anna  Stjarnhok  could  say  that  they
had  seen  him.

.••nils,  children,  you  who  dance,  you  who  laugh!
1  beg  you  so  earnestly  to  dance  carefully,  laugh
gently,  for  there  can  be  so  much  unhappiness  if  your
thin  slippers  tread  on  sensitive  hearts  instead  of
on  hard  boards ;  and  your  glad,  silvery  laughter  can
drive  a  soul  to  despair.

It  was  surely  so;  the  young  people's  feet  had


202          THE  STORY  OF  GQSTA   BE  RUNG.

trodden  too  hard  on  old  Ulrika  Dillncr,  and  the
young  people's  laughter  had  rung  too  arrogantly  in
her  ears;  for  there  came  over  her  suddenly  an
irresistible  longing  for  a  married  woman's  titles
and  dignities.  At  last  she  said  "yes"  to  the  evil
Sintram's  long  courtship,  followed  him  to  Fors  as
his  wife,  and  was  parted  from  the  old  friends  at
Berga,  the  dear  old  work,  and  the  old  cares  for  daily
bread.

It  was  a  match  which  went  quickly  and  gayly.
Sintram  offered  himself  at  Christmas,  and  in  Feb-
ruary they  were  married.  That  year  Anna  Stjarnhok
was  living  in  Captain  Uggla's  home.  She  was  a
good  substitute  for  old  Ulrika,  and  the  latter  could
draw  back  without  compunction,  and  take  to  herself
married  honors.

Without  compunction,  but  not  without  regret.  It
was  not  a  pleasant  place  she  had  come  to;  the  big,
empty  rooms  were  filled  with  dreadful  terrors.  As
soon  as  it  was  dark  she  began  to  tremble  and  to  be
afraid.  She  almost  died  of  homesickness.

The  long  Sunday  afternoons  were  the  hardest  of
all.  They  never  came  to  an  end,  neither  they  nor
the  long  succession  of  torturing  thoughts  which
travelled  through  her  brain.

So  it  happened  one  day  in  March,  when  Sintram
had  not  come  home  from  church  to  dinner,  that  she
went  into  the  drawing-room,  on  the  second  floor,  and
placed  herself  at  the  piano.  It  was  her  last  consola-
tion. The  old  piano,  with  a  flute-player  and  shep-
herdess painted  on  the  white  cover,  was  her  own,
come  to  her  from  her  parents'  home.  To  it  she
could  tell  her  troubles;  it  understood  her.

But  is  it  not  both  pitiful  and  ridiculous?     Do  you


GHOST-STO#/ES.  2OJ

know  what  she  is  playing?  Only  a  polka,  and  she
who  is  so  heart-broken !

She  does  not  know  anything  else.  Before  her
fingers  stiffened  round  broom  and  carving-knife  she
had  learned  this  one  polka.  It  sticks  in  her  fingers;
but  she  does  not  know  any  other  piece,  —  no  funeral
h,  no  impassioned  sonata,  not  even  a  wailing
ballad,— only  the  polka.

She  plays  it  whenever  she  has  anything  to  confide
t»  the  old  piano.  She  plays  it  both  when  she  feels
like  weeping  and  like  smiling.  When  she  was  mar-
ried she  played  it,  and  when  for  the  first  time  she
had  come  to  her  own  home,  and  also  now.

The  old  strings  understand  her:  she  is  unhappy,
unhappy.

A  traveller  passing  by  and  hearing  the  polka  ring
could  well  believe  that  Sintram  was  having  a  ball
for  neighbors  and  friends,  it  sounds  so  gay.  It  is
such  a  brave  and  glad  melody.  With  it,  in  the  old
days,  she  has  played  carelessness  in  and  hunger
out  at  Bcrga ;  when  they  heard  it  every  one  must  up
and  dance.  It  burst  the  fetters  of  rheumatism  about
the  joints,  and  lured  pensioners  of  eighty  years  on
to  the  floor.  The  whole  world  would  gladly  dance
to  that  polka,  it  sounds  so  gay  —  but  old  Ulrika
weeps.  Sintram  has  sulky,  morose  servants  about
him,  and  savage  animals.  She  longs  for  friendly
s  and  smiling  mouths.  It  is  this  despairing
longing  which  the  lively  polka  shall  interpret.

People  find  it  hard  to  remember  that  she  is
Madame  Sintram.  Everybody  calls  her  Mamsellc
Dillner.  She  wants  the  polka  tune  to  express  her
sorrow  for  the  vanity  which  tempted  her  to  seek  for
married  honors.


204         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING.

Old  Ulrika  plays  as  if  she  would  break  the  sti  n
There  is  so  much  to  drown:  the  lamentations  of  the
poor  peasants,  the  curses  of  over-worked  cotta-
the  sneers  of  insolent  sen-ants,  and,  first  ami  l.isi,
the  shame,  —  the  shame  of  being  the  wife  of  a  bad
num.

To  those  notes  Gbsta  Berling  has  led  young
Countess  Dohna  to  the  dance.  Marianne  Sinclair
and  her  many  admirers  have  danced  to  them,  and  the
major's  wife  at  Ekeby  has  moved  to  their  measure
when  Altringer  was  still  alive.  She  can  see  them,
couple  after  couple,  in  their  youth  and  beauty,  whirl
by.  There  was  a  stream  of  gayetyfrom  them  to  her,
from  her  to  them.  It  was  her  polka  which  made
their  cheeks  glow,  their  eyes  shine.  She  is  parted
from  all  that  now.  Let  the  polka  resound,  —  so
many  memories,  so  many  tender  memories  to  drown !

She  plays  to  deaden  her  anguish.  Her  heart  is
ready  to  burst  with  terror  when  she  sees  the  black
dog,  when  she  hears  the  servants  whispering  of  the
black  bulls.  She  plays  the  polka  over  and  over
again  to  deaden  her  anguish.

Then  she  perceives  that  her  husband  has  come
home.  She  hears  that  he  comes  into  the  room  and
sits  down  in  the  rocking-chair.  She  knows  so  well
the  sound  as  the  rockers  creak  on  the  deal  floor  that
she  does  not  even  look  round.

All  the  time  she  is  playing  the  rocking  con-
tinues; she  soon  hears  the  music  no  longer,  only
the  rocking.

Poor  old  Ulrika,  so  tortured,  so  lonely,  so  help-
less, astray  in  a  hostile  country,  without  a  friend  to
complain  to,  without  any  consoler  but  a  cracked
piano,  which  answers  her  with  a  polka.


GHOST-STORIES.

It  is  like  loud  laughter  at  a  funeral,  a  drinking
song  in  a  chut

While  the  rocking-chair  is  still  rocking  she  bean
suddenly  how  the  piano  is  laughing  at  her  sorrows,
and  she  stops  in  the  middle  of  a  bar.  She  rises  and
turns  to  the  rocking-chair.

Hut  the  next  instant  she  is  lying  in  a  swoon  on
the  Hour.  It  was  not  her  husband  who  sat  in  the
rocking-chair,  but  another,  — he  to  whom  little  chil-
ilien  do  not  dare  to  give  a  name,  he  who  would
:n  to  death  if  they  should  meet  him  in
the  deserted  attic

Can  any  one  whose  soul  has  been  filled  with
legends  ever  free  himself  from  their  dominion  ?  The
night  wind  howls  outside,  the  trees  whip  the  pillars
he  balcony  with  their  stiff  branches,  the  sky
arches  darkly  over  the  far-stretching  hills,  and  I,
who  sit  alone  in  the  night  and  write,  with  the  lamp
lighted  and  the  curtain  drawn,  I,  who  am  old  and
ought  to  be  sensible,  feel  the  same  shudder  creeping
up  my  back  as  when  I  first  heard  this  story,  and  I
have  to  keep  lifting  my  eyes  from  my  work  to  be
certain  that  no  one  has  come  in  and  hidden  himself
in  that  further  corner;  I  have  to  look  out  on  the
balcony  to  see  if  there  is  not  a  black  head  looking
over  the  railing.  This  fright  never  leaves  me  when
the  night  is  dark  and  solitude  deep;  and  it  becomes
at  last  so  dreadful  that  I  must  throw  aside  my  pen,
creep  down  in  my  bed  and  draw  the  blanket  up  over
my  eyes.

It  was  the  great,  secret  wonder  of  my  childhood
that  Ulrika  Dillner  survived  that  afternoon.  1
should  never  have  done  so.


206         THE  STORY  OF  G&STA   BERLWG.

I  hope,  dear  friends,  that  you  may  never  see  the
tears  of  old  eyes.  And  that  you  may  not  have  to
stand  helpless  when  a  gray  head  leans  against  your
breast  for  support,  or  when  old  hands  are  clasped
about  yours  in  a  silent  prayer.  May  you  never  see
the  old  sunk  in  a  sorrow  which  you  cannot  comfort.

What  is  the  grief  of  the  young?  They  have
strength,  they  have  hope.  But  what  suffering  it  is
when  the  old  weep;  what  despair  when  they,  who
have  always  been  the  support  of  your  young  days,
sink  into  helpless  wailing.

There  sat  Anna  Stjarnhok  and  listened  to  old
Ulrika,  and  she  saw  no  way  out  for  her.

The  old  woman  wept  and  trembled.  Her  eyes
were  wild.  She  talked  and  talked,  sometimes  quite
incoherently,  as  if  she  did  not  know  where  she  was.
The  thousand  wrinkles  which  crossed  her  face  \vcn:
twice  as  deep  as  usual,  the  false  curls,  which  hung
down  over  her  eyes,  were  straightened  by  her  tears,
and  her  whole  long,  thin  body  was  shaken  with
sobs.

At  last  Anna  had  to  put  an  end  to  the  wail  ings.
She  had  made  up  her  mind.  She  was  going  to  take
her  back  with  her  to  Berga.  Of  course,  she  was
Sintram's  wife,  but  she  could  not  remain  at  Fors.
He  would  drive  her  mad  if  she  stayed  with  him.
Anna  Stjarnhok  had  decided  to  take  old  Ulrika
away.

Ah,  how  the  poor  thing  rejoiced,  and  yet  trembled
at  this  decision  !  But  she  never  would  dare  to  leave
her  husband  and  her  home.  He  would  perhaps  send
the  big  black  dog  after  her.

But  Anna  Stjarnhok  conquered  her  resistance,
partly  by  jests,  partly  by  threats,  and  in  half  an


GHOST-STORH

hour  she  had  her  bcsitl  •»  the  sledge.     Anna

was  driving  herself,  and  old  Dlsa  was  in  the  shafts.
The  road  was  wretched,  for  it  was  Lite  in  March;
but  it  did  old  Ulrika  good  to  drive  once  more  in  the
•known  sledge,  behind  the  old  horse  who  had
been  a  faithful  servant  at  Berga  almost  as  long  as  she,

At  she  had  naturally  a  cheerful  spirit,  she  stopped
crying  by  the  time  they  passed  Arvidstorp;  at  Hog-
berg  she  was  already  laughing,  and  when  they
passed  Munkeby  she  was  telling  how  it  used  to  be
in  her  youth,  when  she  lived  with  the  countess  at
Svaneholm.

They  drove  up  a  steep  and  stony  road  in  the  lonely
and  deserted  region  north  of  Munkeby.  The  road
sought  out  all  the  hills  it  possibly  could  find;  it
crept  up  to  their  tops  by  slow  windings,  rushed  down
them  in  a  steep  descent,  hurried  across  the  even
valley  to  find  a  new  hill  to  climb  over.

They  were  just  driving  down  Vestratorp's  hill,
when  old  Ulrika  stopped  short  in  what  she  was
saying,  and  seized  Anna  by  the  arm.  She  was  star-
ing at  a  big  black  dog  at  the  roadside.

44  Look !  "  she  s

The  dog  set  off  into  the  wood.  Anna  did  not  see
much  of  him.

"Drive  on,"  said  Ulrika;  "drive  as  fast  as  you
can!  Now  Sintram  will  hear  that  I  have  go

Anna  tried  to  laugh  at  her  terror,  but  she  insisted.
A'c  shall  soon  hear  his  sleigh-bells,  you  will  see.
We  shall  hear  them  before  we  reach  the  top  of  the
hill."

And  when  Disa  drew  breath  for  a  second  at  the
top  of  Elofs  hill  sleigh-bells  could  be  heard  behind
them.


THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   flERLIKG.

Old  Ulrika  became  quite  mad  with  fright.  She
trembled,  sobbed,  and  \\  I  she  had  done  in  the

drawing-room  at  Anna  tried  to  urge  Disa  on,

but  she  only  turned  her  head  and  «;;i\v  her  a  <;!
of  unspeakable  surprise.  Did  she  think  that  Disa
had  forgotten  when  it  was  time  to  trot  and  when  it
was  time  to  walk?  Did  she  want  to  teach  her  how
to  drag  a  sledge,  to  teach  her  who  had  known  every
stone,  every  bridge,  every  gate,  every  hill  for  more
than  twenty  years  ?

All  this  while  the  sleigh-bells  were  coming
nearer.

"It  is  he,  it  is  he!  I  know  his  bells,"  wails  old
Ulrika.

The  sound  comes  ever  nearer.  Sometimes  it
seems  so  unnaturally  loud  that  Anna  turns  to  see  if
Sintram's  horse  has  not  got  his  head  in  her  sledge;
sometimes  it  dies  away.  They  hear  it  now  on  the
right,  now  on  the  left  of  the  road,  but  they  see  no
one.  It  is  as  if  the  jingling  of  the  bells  alone
pursues  them.

Just  as  it  is  at  night,  on  the  way  home  from  a
party,  is  it  also  now.  These  bells  ring  out  a  tune;
they  sing,  speak,  answer.  .  The  woods  echo  with
their  sound.

Anna  Stjarnhok  almost  wishes  that  their  pursuer
would  come  near  enough  for  her  to  see  Sintram  him-
self and  his  red  horse.  The  dreadful  sleigh-bells
anger  her.

"Those  bells  torture  me,"  she  says.

The  word  is  taken  up  by  the  bells.  "Torture
me,"  they  ring.  "Torture  me,  torture,  torture,  tor-
ture me,"  they  sing  to  all  possible  tunes.

It  was  not  so  long  ago  that  she  had  driven  this


(,/fOST-STOX/ES.  20Q

same  way,  hunted  by  wolves.  She  had  seen  their
white  teeth,  in  the  darkness,  gleam  in  their  gaping
mouths;  she  had  thought  that  her  body  would  soon
be  torn  to  pieces  by  the  wild  beasts  of  the  forest;
but  then  she  had  not  been  afraid.  She  had  never
lived  through  a  more  glorious  night.  Strong  and
beautiful  had  the  horse  been  which  drew  her,  strong
and  beautiful  was  the  man  who  had  shared  the  joy
of  the  adventure  with  her.

Ah,  this  old  horse,  this  old,  helpless,  trembling
;>an  ion.     She  feels  so  helpless  that  she  longs  to
cry.     She  cannot  escape  from  those  terrible,  irritat-
ing bells.

So  she  stops  and  gets  out  of  the  sledge.  There
must  be  an  end  to  it  all.  Why  should  she  run  away
as  if  she  were  afraid  of  that  wicked,  contemptible
wretch  ?

At  last  she  sees  a  horse's  head  come  out  of  the
advancing  twilight,  and  after  the  head  a  whole  horse,
a   whole  sledge,    and   in   the   sledge  sits   Sin:
himself.

She  notices,  however,  that  it  is  not  as  if  they  had
come  along  the  road  —  this  sledge,  and  this  horse,
and  their  driver  —  but  more  as  if  they  had  been
created  just  there  before  her  eyes,  and  had  come  for-
ward out  of  the  twilight  as  soon  as  they  were  made
ready.

na  threw  the  reins  to  Ulrika  and  went  to  meet
Sintram.

He  stops  the  horse.

"\\V11,  well,"  he  says;  "what  a  piece  of  luck!
Dear  Miss  Stjarnh«»k,   let  me  move  my  companion
to  your  sledge.     He  is  going  to  Berga to-night,
and  I  am  in  a  hurry  to  get  home."


210         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLING.

"  Where  is  your  companion  ?  "

Sintram  lifts  his  blanket,  and  shows  Anna  a  man
who  is  lying  asleep  on  the  bottom  of  the  sledge.
"He  is  a  little  drunk,"  he  says;  "but  what  does
that  matter?  He  will  sleep.  It 's  an  old  acquaint-
ance, moreover;  it  is  Gosta  Berling."

Anna  shudders.

"  Well,  I  will  tell  you,"  continues  Sintram,  "  that
slu-  who  forsakes  the  man  she  loves  sells  him  to  the
devil.  That  was  the  way  I  got  into  his  claws.
People  think  they  do  so  well,  of  course;  to  renounce
is  good,  and  to  love  is  evil."

"What  do  you  mean?  What  are  you  talking
about  ?  "  asks  Anna,  quite  disturbed.

"  I  mean  that  you  should  not  have  let  Gosta
Berling  go  from  you,  Miss  Anna."

" It  was  God's  will."

"Yes,  yes,  that's  the  way  it  is;  to  renounce  is
good,  and  to  love  is  evil.  The  good  God  does  not
like  to  see  people  happy.  He  sends  wolves  after
them.  But  if  it  was  not  God  who  did  it,  Miss
Anna?  Could  it  not  just  as  well  have  been  I  who
called  my  little  gray  lambs  from  the  Dovre  moun-
tains to  hunt  the  young  man  and  the  young  girl?
Think,  if  it  was  I  who  sent  the  wolves,  because  I
did  not  wish  to  lose  one  of  my  own !  Think,  if  it
was  not  God  who  did  it !  "

"You  must  not  tempt  me  to  doubt  that,"  says
Anna,  in  a  weak  voice,  "for  then  I  am  lost."

"Look  here,"  says  Sintram,  and  bends  down  over
the  sleeping  Gosta  Berling;  "look  at  his  little
finger.  That  little  sore  never  heals.  We  took  the
blood  there  when  he  signed  the  contract.  Hi  is
mine.  There  is  a  peculiar  power  in  blood.  He


GHOST-STOK/ES.  211

is  mine,  and    it  is  only  love  which  can  free  i.
but  i  allowed  to  keep  him  he  will  be  a  fine

thing."

Anna  St  jarnhok  struggles  and  struggles  to  shake

off  the  fascination  which  has  seized  her.     It  is  all

madness,  madness.     No  one  can  swear  away  his  soul

to  the  odious  tempter.     Hut  she  has  no  power  over

thoughts;  the  twilight  lies  so  heavy  over  her.

woods   stand  so  dark  and  silent.     She  cannot

escape  the  dreadful  terror  of  the  moment.

i  ou  think,  perhaps,"  continues  Sintram,  "that
there  is  not  much  left  in  him  to  ruin.  But  don't
think  that!  Has  he  ground  down  the  peasants,  has
he  deceived  poor  friends,  has  he  cheated  at  cards?
Has  he,  Miss  Anna,  has  he  been  a  married  woman's
lovei

I  think  you  are  the  devil  himself

1  Let  us  exchange.  You  take  Gosta  Berling,  take
him  and  marry  him.  Keep  him,  and  give  them  at
Berga  the  money.  I  yield  him  up  to  you,  and  you
know  that  he  is  mine.  Think  that  it  was  not  God
who  sent  the  wolves  after  you  the  other  night,  and
^  exchange ! "

•  \Vhat  do  you  want  as  compensation  ? "

Sintram  grinned.

I  —what  do  I  want?  Oh,  I  am  satisfied  with
little.  I  only  want  that  old  woman  there  in  your
sledge,  Miss  Anna."

"Satan,  tempter,"  cries  Anna,  "leave  me!  Shall
I  betray  an  old  friend  who  relies  on  me?  Shall  I
leave  her  to  you,  that  you  may  torture  her  to

"  There,  there,  there ;  quietly,  Miss  Anna !  Think
what  you  are  doing)  Here  is  a  fine  young  man,  and


212          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG.

there  an  old,  worn-out  woman.  One  of  them  I  must
have.  Which  of  them  will  you  let  me  keep?  "

Anna  Stjiirnhok  laughed  wildly.

"Do  you  think  that  we  can  stand  here  and  ex-
change souls  as  they  exchange  horses  at  the  market
at  Broby?"

"Just  so,  yes.  But  if  you  will,  we  shall  put  it
on  another  basis.  We  shall  think  of  the  honor  of
the  Stjarnhoks. "

Thereupon  he  begins  to  call  in  a  loud  voice  to  his
wife,  who  is  sitting  in  Anna's  sledge;  and,  to  the
girl's  unspeakable  horror,  she  obeys  the  summons
instantly,  gets  out  of  the  sledge,  and  comes,  trem-
bling and  shaking,  to  them.

"See,  see,  see!  — such  an  obedient  wife,"  says
Sintram.  "You  cannot  prevent  her  coming  when
her  husband  calls.  Now,  I  shall  lift  Gosta  out  of
my  sledge  and  leave  him  here,  —  leave  him  for  good,
Miss  Anna.  Whoever  may  want  to  can  pick  him
up."

He  bends  down  to  lift  Gosta  up;  but  Anna  leans
forward,  fixes  him  with  her  eyes,  and  hisses  like  an
angry  animal :  —

"In  God's  name,  go  home!  Do  you  not  know
who  is  sitting  in  the  rocking-chair  in  the  drawing-
room  and  waiting  for  you?  Do  you  dare  to  let  him
wait  ?  "

It  was  for  Anna  almost  the  climax  of  the  horrors
of  the  day  to  see  how  these  words  affect  him.  He
drags  on  the  reins,  turns,  and  drives  homewards,
urging  the  horse  to  a  gallop  with  blows  and  wild
cries  down  the  dreadful  hill,  while  a  long  line  of
sparks  crackle  under  the  runners  and  hoofs  in  the
thin  March  snow.


GHOST-STO/t/ES.

Anna  Stjarnhok  and  Ulrika  Dillner  stand  alone
in  the  road,  but  they  do  not  say  a  word.  Ulrika
trembles  before  Anna's  wild  eyes,  and  Anna  has
nothing  to  say  to  the  poor  old  thing,  for  whose  sake
she  has  sacriticcd  her  beloved.

She  would  have  liked  to  weep,  to  rave,  to  roll  on
the  ground  and  strew  snow  and  sand  on  her  head.

Before,  she  had  known  the  sweetness  of  renuncia-
.  now  she  knew  its  bitterness.  What  was  it  to
sacrifice  her  love  compared  to  sacrificing  her  beloved's
soul ?  They  drove  on  to  Berga  in  the  same  silence;
but  when  they  arrived,  and  the  hall-door  was  opened,
Anna  Stjarnhuk  fainted  for  the  first  and  only  time
in  her  hie.  There  sat  both  Sintram  and  Gbsta
Berling,  and  chatted  quietly.  The  tray  with  toddy
had  been  brought  in ;  they  had  been  there  at  least
an  hour.

Anna  Stjarnhok  fainted,  but  old  Ulrika  stood
calm.  She  had  noticed  that  everything  was  not
right  with  him  who  had  followed  them  on  the  road.

Afterwards  the  captain  and  his  wife  arranged  the
•or  so  with  Sintram  that  old  Ulrika  was  allowed
Berga.  He  agreed  good-naturedly.

"  He  did  not  want  to  drive  her  mad,"  he  said.

I  do  not  ask  any  one  to  believe  these  old  stories.

They  cannot  be  anything  but  lies  and  fiction.     But

the  anguish  which  passes  over  the  heart,  until   it

s  as  the  floor  boards  in  Sintram 's  room  wailed

under  the  swaying  rockers;  but  the  questions  which

ring  in  the  ears,  as  the  sleigh-bells  rang  for  Anna

nhok  in  the  lonely  forest,  —when  will  they  be

as  lies  and  fiction  ?

Oh,  that  they  could  be!


214         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   A/.A7.AU;.


CHAPTER   XII

EBBA  DOHNA'S   STORY

THE  beautiful  point  on  Lofven's  eastern  shore,  about
which  the  bay  glides  with  lapping  waves,  the  proud
point  where  the  manor  of  Borg  lies,  beware  of
approaching.

Lbfven  never  looks  more  glorious  than  from  its
summit.

No  one  can  know  how  lovely  it  is,  the  lake  of  my
dreams,  until  he  has  seen  from  Borg's  point  the
morning  mist  glide  away  from  its  smooth  surface;
until  he,  from  the  windows  of  the  little  blue  cabinet,
where  so  many  memories  dwell,  has  seen  it  reflect  a
pink  sunset.

But  I  still  say,  go  not  thither!

For  perhaps  you  will  be  seized  with  a  desire  to
remain  in  that  old  manor's  sorrowful  halls;  perhaps
you  will  make  yourself  the  owner  of  those  fair  lands;
and  if  you  are  young,  rich,  and  happy,  you  will  make
your  home  there  with  a  young  wife.

No,  it  is  better  never  to  see  the  beautiful  point,
for  at  Borg  no  one  can  live  and  be  happy.  No
matter  how  rich,  how  happy  you  may  be,  who  move
in  there,  those  old  tear-drenched  floors  would  soon
drink  your  tears  as  well,  and  those  walls,  which  could
give  back  so  many  moans,  would  also  glean  your
sighs.


ERR  A   DOHNA'S  STU<  21$

An  implacable  fate  is  on  thi*  lovely  spot  It  is
as  it  0  buried  there,  but  found  no  rest

,  and  perpetually  rose  from  it  to  terrify
the  Imn-      It   1  wcic  lord  of  Borg  I  would  search
i-h  the  ground,  both  in  the  park  and  under  the
ir  floor  in  the  house,  and  in  the  fertile  mould
out  in  the  meadows,  until  I  had  found  the  witch's
corpse,  and  then  I  would  give  her  a
grave  in  consecrated  earth  in  the  Svartsjo  church-
yard    And  at  the  burial  1  would  not  spare  on  the
er's  pay,  but  let  the  bells  sound  long  and  loud
•ul  to  the  clergyman  and  sexton  I  should
send   ric  that  they  with  redoubled  strength

might  with  speech  and  song  consecrate  her  to  c

ug  rest

Or,    if  that  d:  ,   some  stormy  night   I

would  set  fire  to  the  wooden  walls,  and  let  it  destroy
\  thing,  so  that  no  one  more  might  be  tempted
t«>  live  in  the  home  of  misfortune.  Afterwards  no
one  should  be  allowed  to  approach  that  doomed
spot;  only  the  church-tower's  black  jackdaws  should
build  in  the  great  chimney,  which,  blackened  and
dreadful,  would  :  the  deserted  founda-

tions.

Still,  I  should  certainly  mourn  when  I  saw  the
flames  close  over  the  roof,  when  thick  smoke,  red-
dened by  the  tin.-  .m  :  with  sparks,  should  roll
out  from  the  old  manor-house.  In  the  crackling
and  the  roaring  I  should  fancy  I  heard  the  wails  of
homeless  memories;  on  the  blue  points  of  the  flames
I  should  see  disturbed  spirits  floating.  I  should
think  how  sorrow  beautifk-s,  how  misfortune  adorns,
and  weep  as  if  a  temple  to  the  old  gods  had  been
condemned  to  destruction.


2l6         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BERUNG.

But  why  croak  of  unhappincss?  As  yet  Borg  lies
and  shines  on  its  point,  shaded  by  its  park  of  mighty
pines,  and  the  snow-covered  fields  glitter  in  March's
burning  sun;  as  yet  is  heard  within  those  walls  the
young  Countess  Elizabeth's  gay  laughter.

Every  Sunday  she  goes  to  church  at  Svartsjo,
which  lies  near  Borg,  and  gathers  together  a  lew
friends  for  dinner.  The  judge  and  his  family  from
Munkerud  used  to  come,  and  the  Ugglas  from
Berga,  and  even  Sintram.  If  Gosta  Berling  hap-
pens to  be  in  Svartsjo,  wandering  over  Lofven's  ice,
she  invites  him  too.  Why  should  she  not  invite
Gbsta  Berling?

She  probably  does  not  know  that  the  gossips  are
beginning  to  whisper  that  Gosta  comes  very  often
over  to  the  east  shore  to  see  her.  Perhaps  he  also
comes  to  drink  and  play  cards  with  Sintram ;  but  no
one  thinks  so  much  of  that ;  every  one  knows  that
his  body  is  of  steel;  but  it  is  another  matter  with
his  heart.  No  one  believes  that  he  can  see  a  pair
of  shining  eyes,  and  fair  hair  which  curls  about  a
white  brow,  without  love.

The  young  countess  is  good  to  him.  But  there
is  nothing  strange  in  that;  she  is  good  to  all.  She
takes  ragged  beggar  children  on  her  knee,  and  when
she  drives  by  some  poor  old  creature  on  the  high-
road she  has  the  coachman  stop,  and  takes  the  poor
wanderer  up  into  her  sledge.

Gosta  used  to  sit  in  the  little  blue  cabinet,  where
there  is  such  a  glorious  view  over  the  lake,  and  read
poetry  to  her.  There  can  be  no  harm  in  that.  He
does  not  forget  that  she  is  a  countess,  and  he  a  home-
less adventurer;  and  it  is  good  for  him  to  be  with
some  one  whom  he  holds  high  and  holy.  He  could


EBB  A  DOHNA*S  STORY.  2i;

just  as  well  be  in  love  with  the  Queen  of  Shcba  as
with  her.

He  only  asks  to  be  allowed  to  wait  on  bcr  as  a
page  waits  on  his  noble  mistress:  to  fasten  her
skates,  to  hold  ber  skeins,  to  steer  her  sled.  There
cannot  be  any  question  of  love  between  them;  he  is
just  the  man  to  find  his  happiness  in  a  romantic,
innocent  adoration.

The  young  count  is  silent  and  serious,  and  Costa

is  playfully  gay.     He  is  just  such  a  companion  as

the  young  countess  likes.     No  one   who  sees  her

ics  that  she  is  hiding  a  forbidden  love.     She

thinks  of  dancing,  —  of  dancing  and  merrymaking.

She  would  like  the  earth  to  be  quite  flat,  without

stones,  without  hills  or  seas,  so  that  she  could  dance

everywhere.     From  the  cradle  to  the  grave  she  would

to  dance  in  her  small,  thin-soled,  satin  slippers.

Hut  rumor  is  not  very  merciful  to  young  women.

When  the  guests  come  to  dinner  at  Borg,  the  men

generally,  after  the  meal,  go  into  the  count's  room

to  sleep  and  smoke;  the  old  ladies  sink  down  in  the

easy-chairs   in  the  drawing-room,    and    lean    their

rable  heads  against  the  high  backs;   but  the

countess  and  Anna  Stjarnhok  go  into  the  blue  cab-

and  exchange  endless  confidences.

The  Sunday  after  the  one  when  Anna  Stjarnhnk
took  Ulrika  Dillner  back  to  Berga  they  are  sitting
there  again.

No  one  on  earth  is  so  unhappy  as  the  young  girl.
All  her  gayety  is  departed,  and  gone  is  the  glad
defiance  whu  bowed  to  everything  and  every-

body who  wished  to  come  too  near  1.

Everything  which  had  happened  to  her  that  day
has  sunk  back  into  the  twilight  from  which  it  was


2l8         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG.

charmed;  she  has  only  one  distinct  impression  left,
—  yes,  one,  which  is  poisoning  her  soul.

"  If  it  really  was  not  God  who  did  it,"  she  used
to  whisper  to  herself.  "  If  it  was  not  God,  who  sent
the  wolves  ? "

She  asks  for  a  sign,  she  longs  for  a  miracle.  She
searches  heaven  and  earth.  But  she  sees  no  finger
stretched  from  the  sky  to  point  out  her  way.

As  she  sits  now  opposite  the  countess  in  the  blue
cabinet,  her  eyes  fall  on  a  little  bunch  of  hepaticas
which  the  countess  holds  in  her  white  hand.  Like
a  bolt  it  strikes  her  that  she  knows  where  the  flowers
have  grown,  that  she  knows  who  has  picked  them.

She  does  not  need  to  ask.      Where  else  in   the
whole  countryside  do  hepaticas  bloom  in  the  begin-
ning of  April,  except  in  the  birch  grove  which
on  the  slopes  of  Ekeby  ?

She  stares  and  stares  at  the  little  blue  stars;  those
happy  ones  who  possess  all  hearts;  those  little
prophets  who,  beautiful  in  themselves,  are  also
glorified  by  the  splendor  of  all  the  beauty  which
they  herald,  of  all  the  beauty  which  is  coming.  And
as  she  watches  them  a  storm  of  wrath  rises  in  her
soul,  rumbling  like  the  thunder,  deadening  like  the
lightning.  "By  what  right,"  she  thinks,  "does
Countess  Dohna  hold  this  bunch  of  hepaticas,  picked
by  the  shore  at  Ekeby  ?  "

They  were  all  tempters:  Sintram,  the  countess,
everybody  wanted  to  allure  Gosta  Berling  to  what
was  evil.  But  she  would  protect  him;  against  all
would  she  protect  him.  Even  if  it  should  cost  her
heart's  blood,  she  would  do  it.

She  thinks  that  she  must  see  those  flowers  torn
out  of  the  countess's  hand,  and  thrown  aside,


EBBA   DOJ  vr0*K  219

tram;  ashed,  before  the  leaves  the  little  blue

She  thinks  that,  and  she  begins  a  struggle  with
the  little  blue  stars.  Out  in  the  drawing-room  the
old  ladies  lean  tlu  able  heads  against  the

r-backs  and  suspect  nothing;    the  men  smoke
:   pipes  in  calm  and  quiet  in  the  count's  r<
peace  is  everywhere;  only  in  the  little  blue  cabinet
rages  a  terrible  struggle.

Ah,  how  well  they  do  who  keep  their  hands  from

the  sword,  who  understand  how  to  wait  quietly,  to

lay  their  hearts  to  rest  and  let  God  direct!    The

1  ess  bean  al ways  goes  astray.     Ill-will  makes  the

pain  worse.

But  Anna  Stjarnhok  believes  that  at  last  she  has
seen  a  finger  in  the  sky.

vniia,"  says  the  countess,  "tell  me  a  story!"

"About  what? "

"Oh,"  says  the  countess,  and  caresses  the  flowers
with  her  white  hand.  "  Do  not  you  know  something
about  love,  something  about  loving?  "

"  No,  I  know  nothing  of  love. "

"  How  you  talk  !  I.s  there  not  a  place  here  which
is  called  Ekeby,  — a  place  full  of  pensioner

Yes,"  says  Anna,    "there  is  a   place  which   is
called  Ekeby,  and  there  are  men  there  who  suck  the
marrow  of  the  land,  who  make  us  incapable  of  seri-
ous work,  who  ruin  growing  youth,  and  lead  a-
our  geniuses.     Do  you  want  to  hear  of  them  ?     Do
you  want  to  hear  love-stories  of  them  ? "
os.     I  like  the  pensioners."

So  Anna  Stjarnhok  speaks,  —  speaks  in  short
sentences,  like  an  old  hymn-book,  for  she  is  nearly
choking  with  stormy  emotions.  Suppressed  suffer-


220         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERUNG.

ing  trembles  in  each  word,   and  the  countess  was
both  frightened  and  interested  to  hear  her.

"  What  is  a  pensioner's  love,  what  is  a  pensioner's
faith?  —  one  sweetheart  to-day,  another  to-morrow,
one  in  the  cast,  another  in  the  west.  Nothing  is
too  high  for  him,  nothing  too  low;  one  day  a  count's
daughter,  the  next  day  a  beggar  girl.  Nothing  on
earth  is  so  capacious  as  his  heart.  But  alas,  alas
for  her  who  loves  a  pensioner.  She  must  seek  him
out  where  he  lies  drunk  at  the  wayside.  She  must
silently  look  on  while  he  at  the  card-table  plays
away  the  home  of  her  childhood.  She  must  bear  to
have  him  hang  about  other  women.  Oh,  Elizabeth,
if  a  pensioner  asks  an  honorable  woman  for  a  dance
she  ought  to  refuse  it  to  him;  if  he  gives  her  a
bunch  of  flowers  she  ought  to  throw  the  flowers  on
the  ground  and  trample  on  them;  if  she  loves  him
she  ought  rather  to  die  than  to  marry  him.  There
was  one  among  the  pensioners  who  was  a  dismissed
priest;  he  had  lost  his  vestments  for  drunkenness.
He  was  drunk  in  the  church.  He  drank  up  the
communion  wine.  Have  you  ever  heard  of  him? "

"No."

"  After  he  had  been  dismissed  he  wandered  about
the  country  as  a  beggar.  He  drank  like  a  madman.
He  would  steal  to  get  brandy. "

"What  is  his  name?"

"He  is  no  longer  at  Ekeby.  The  major's  wife
got  hold  of  him,  gave  him  clothes,  and  persuaded
your  mother-in-law,  Countess  Dohna,  to  make  him
tutor  to  your  husband,  young  Count  Henrik. "

"A  dismissed  priest !  "

"Oh,  he  was  a  young,  powerful  man,  of  good
intelligence.  There  was  no  harm  in  him,  if  he  only


EBB  A   DOHNA'S  STORY.  221

not  drink.     Countess  Mart  a  was  not  particular.
r  to  quarrel  with  the  neighboring  clergy-
men.    Still,  she  ordered  him  to  say  nothing  ot
past  life  to  her  children.     For  then  her  son  u
have  lost  respect  for  him,  and  her  daughter  would

••  endured  him,  for  she  was  a  saint.
M>  he  came  here  to  Borg.     He  always  sat  just
inside  the  door,  on  the  very  edge  of  his  chair,  never
said  a  wot.l  .it  the  table,  and  fled  out  into  the  park
when  any  visitors  came.

"But  there  in  the  lonely  walks  he  used  to  meet
young  Ebba  Dohna.  She  was  not  one  who  loved
the  noisy  feasts  which  resounded  in  the  halls  at
Bori;  he  countess  became  a  widow.  She

so  gentle,  so  shy.  She  was  still,  although  she
seventeen,  nothing  but  a  tender  child;  but  she
was  very  lovely,  with  her  brown  eyes,  and  the  faint,
delicate  color  in  her  cheeks.  Her  thin,  slender
body  bent  forward.  Her  little  hand  would  creep
into  yours  with  a  shy  pressure.  Her  little  mouth
was  the  most  silent  of  mouths  and  the  most  serious.
Ah,  her  voice,  her  sweet  little  voice,  which  pro-
nounced the  words  so  slowly  and  so  well,  but  never
rang  with  the  freshness  and  warmth  of  youth,  —  its
feeble  tones  were  like  aweary  musician's  last  chord.

"She  was  not  as  others.     Her  foot  trod  so  lightly,

so  softly,  as  if  she  were  a  frightened  fugitive.     She

kept  her  eyelids  lowered  in  order  not  to  be  disturbed

in  her  contemplation  of  the  visions  of  her  soul.     It

had  turned  from  the  earth  when  she  was  but  a  child

When  she  was  little  her  grandmother  used  to  tell

her  stories;  and  one  evening  they  both  sat  by  the

but  the  sto:  I  come  to  an  end.     But  still

the  little  girl's  hand  lay  on  the  old  woman's  dress.


222          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUKG.

and  she  gently  stroked  the  silk, — that  funny  stuff
which  sounded  like  a  little  bird.  And  this  stroking
was  her  prayer,  for  she  was  one  of  those  children
who  never  beg  in  words.

"Then  the  old  lady  began  to  tell  her  of  a  little
child  in  the  land  of  Judah;  of  a  little  child  who
was  born  to  become  a  great  King.  The  angels  had
filled  the  earth  with  songs  of  praise  when  he  was
born.  The  kings  of  the  East  came,  guided  by  the
star  of  heaven,  and  gave  him  gold  and  incense;  and
old  men  and  women  foretold  his  glory.  This  child
grew  up  to  greater  beauty  and  wisdom  than  all  other
children.  Already,  when  he  was  twelve  years  old,
his  wisdom  was  greater  than  that  of  the  chief -priests
and  the  scribes.

"Then  the  old  woman  told  her  of  the  most  beauti-
ful thing  the  earth  has  ever  seen:  of  that  child's
life  while  he  remained  among  men, —  those  wicked
men  who  would  not  acknowledge  him  their  King.

"  She  told  her  how  the  child  became  a  man,  but
that  the  glory  surrounded  him  still.

"Everything  on  the  earth  served  him  and  loved
him,  except  mankind.  The  fishes  let  themselves  be
caught  in  his  net,  bread  filled  his  baskets,  water
changed  itself  to  wine  when  he  wished  it.

"But  the  people  gave  the  great  King  no  golden
crown,  no  shining  throne.  He  had  no  bowing  court-
iers about  him.  They  let  him  go  among  them  like
a  beggar.

"Still,  he  was  so  good  to  them,  the  great  King!
He  cured  their  sicknesses,  gave  back  to  the  blind
their  sight,  and  waked  the  dead.

" '  But,'  said  the  grandmother,  '  the  people  would
not  have  the  great  King  for  their  lord.


EBBA   DO/  vTWtK  22$

They  sent  their  soldiers  against  him,  and  took
htm  prisoner;  they  dressed  him,  by  way  of  mockery,
in  crown  and  sceptre,  and  in  a  silken  cloak,  and
made  him  go  out  to  the  place  of  execution,  bearing
a  heavy  cross.  Oh,  my  child,  the  good  King  loved

high  mountains.     At  night   he  used   to  climb
talk  with  those  who  dwelt  in  heaven,  and
lu  likrd  by  day  to  sit  on  the  mountain-side  and  talk
to  the  1  people.     But  now  they  led  him  up

on  a  mountain  to  crucify  him.  They  drove  nails
through  his  hands  and  feet,  and  hung  the  good  King
on  a  cross,  as  if  he  had  been  a  robber  or  a  malefactor.

And  the  people  mocked  at  htm.  Only  his  mother
and  his  tricnds  wept,  that  he  should  die  before  he
had  been  a  King.

>h,  how  the  dead  things  mourned  his  death !

The  sun  lost  its  light,  and  the  mountains  trem-
bled; the  curtain  in  the  temple  was  rent  asunder,
and  the  graves  opened,  that  the  dead  might  rise  up
and  show  their  gi

"The  little  one  lay  with  her  head  on  her  grand-
mother's knee,  and  sobbed  as  if  her  heart  would
break.

Do  not  weep,  little  one;  the  good  King  rose
from  his  grave  and  went  up  to  his  Father  in  heaven. '

Grandmother,'  sobbed  the  poor  little  thing, '  did
he  ever  get  any  kingdom  ? '

He  sits  on  God's  right  hand  in  heaven.'
''•ut  that  did  not  comfort  her.     She  wept  help-
lessly and  unrestrainedly,  as  only  a  child  can  weep.

Why  were  they  so  cruel  to  him  ?  Why  were
they  allowed  to  be  so  cruel  to  him  ? '

Her  grandmother  was  almost  frightened  at  her
overwhelming  sorrou


224         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUNG

Say,  grandmother,  say  that  you  have  not  told  it
right!  Say  that  it  did  not  end  so!  Say  that  tluy
were  not  so  cruel  to  the  good  King!  Say  that  lie-
got  a  kingdom  on  earth ! '

"She  threw  her  arms  around  the  old  woman  and
beseeched  her  with  streaming  tears.

"'  Child,  child,'  said  her  grandmother,  to  console
her.  '  There  are  are  some  who  believe  that  he  will
come  again.  Then  he  will  put  the  earth  under  his
power  and  direct  it.  The  beautiful  earth  will  be  a
glorious  kingdom.  It  shall  last  a  thousand  y<
Then  the  fierce  animals  will  be  gentle;  little  chil-
dren will  play  by  the  viper's  nest,  and  bears  and
cows  will  eat  together.  No  one  shall  injure  or
destroy  the  other;  the  lance  shall  be  bent  into
scythes,  and  the  sword  forged  into  ploughs.  And
everything  shall  be  play  and  happiness,  for  the  good
will  possess  the  earth.'

"Then  the  little  one's  face  brightened  behind  her
tears.

" '  Will  the  good  King  then  get  a  throne,  grand-
mother ? '

" '  A  throne  of  gold. '

" '  And    servants,    and    courtiers,    and    a   golden
crown  ? '

" '  Yes. '

"  '  Will  he  come  soon,  grandmother?  *

" '  No  one  knows  when  he  will  come/

"'  May  I  sit  on  a  stool  at  his  feet? '

" '  You  may. '

"'Grandmother,  I  am  so  happy/  says  the  little
one.

"Evening  after  evening,  through  many  winters,
they  both  sat  by  the  fire  and  talked  of  the  good


:BA   Z>0//.V.-r.s    .V/cM'J'

King  and  his  kingdom.     The  little  one  dreamed  of

Id  last  a  thousand  yean,  both
by  n  1  by  day.     She  never  wearied  of  ad

ing  it  with  everything  beautiful  which  she  could

Kbba  Dohna  never  dared  to  speak  of  it  to  any
one;  but  from  that  evening  she  only  lived  for  the
s  kingdom,  and  to  await  his  coming.

"  When  the  evening  sun  crimsoned  the  western
sky,  she  wondered  if  he  would  ever  appear  there,
glowing  with  a  mild  splendor,  followed  by  a  host  of
millions  of  angels,  and  march  by  her,  allowing  her
to  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment.

"She  often  thought,  too,  of  those  pious  women
who  had  hung  a  veil  over  their  heads,  and  never  lifted
their  eyes  from  the  ground,  but  shut  themselvi
in  the  gray  cloister's  calm,  in  the  darkness  of  little
cells,  to  always  contemplate  the  glowing  visions
which  appear  from  the  night  of  the  soul.

"  Such  had  she  grown  up ;  such  she  was  when  she
and  the  new  tutor  met  in  the  lonely  paths  of  the

I  will  not  speak  more  harshly  of  him  than  I  must.

11  believe  that  he  loved  that  child,  who  soon
chose  him  for  companion  in  her  lonely  wanderings.
I  think  that  his  soul  got  back  its  wings  when  he
walked  by  the  side  of  that  quiet  girl,  who  had  r.
confided  in  any  other.  I  think  that  he  felt  himself
a  rli  i Ul  ;u;ain,  good,  gentle,  virtuous,

Hut  if  he  really  loved  her,  why  did  he  not  remem-
ber that  he  could  not  give  her  a  worse  gift  than  his
love'  1 1<  .  one  of  the  world's  outcasts,  what  did  he
want,  what  did  he  think  of  when  he  walked  at  the
side  of  the  count's  daughter?  What  did  the  dis-


22f>          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BEKLING

missed  clergyman  think  when  she  confided  to  him
her  gentle  dreams?     What  did  he  want,  who
been  a  drunkard,  and  would  be  again  \vlu-n  h<
the  chance,  at  the  side  of  her  who  dreamed  of  a
bridegroom  in  heaven?     Why  did  he  not  fly  far
away  from  her?     Would  it  not  have  been  better  for
him  to  wander  begging  and  stealing  about  the  land
than  to  walk  under  the  silent  pines  and  again  be
good,   gentle,   virtuous,  when   it  could  not  change
the  life  he  had  led,  nor  make  it  right  that  Ebba
Dohna  should  love  him?

"Do  not  think  that  he  looked  like  a  drunkard,
with  livid  cheeks  and  red  eyes.  He  was  always  a
splendid  man,  handsome  and  unbroken  in  soul  and
body.  He  had  the  bearing  of  a  king  and  a  body  of
steel,  which  was  not  hurt  by  the  wildest  life."

"  Is  he  still  living?  "  asks  the  countess.

"  Oh,  no,  he  must  be  dead  now.  All  that  happened
so  long  ago. "

There  is  something  in  Anna  Stjarnhok  which
begins  to  tremble  at  what  she  is  doing.  She  begins
to  think  that  she  will  never  tell  the  countess  who
the  man  is  of  whom  she  speaks;  that  she  will  let
her  believe  that  he  is  dead.

"  At  that  time  he  was  still  young ; "  and  she  begins
her  story  again.  "The  joy  of  living  was  kindled  in
him.  He  had  the  gift  of  eloquence,  and  a  fiery,
impulsive  heart.

"  One  evening  he  spoke  to  Ebba  Dohna  of  love.
She  did  not  answer;  she  only  told  him  what  lu-r
grandmother  had  told  her  that  winter  evening,  and
described  to  him  the  land  of  her  dreams.  Then  she
exacted  a  promise  from  him.  She  made  him  s
that  he  would  be  a  proclaimer  of  the  word  of  God ;


EBB  A  DOHNA'S  STORY  22;

one  of  those  who  would  prepare  the  way  for  the  Lord,
so  that  his  coming  might  be  hastened.

"  \Vhat  could  he  do?    He  was  a  dismissed  clergy-
man, .n».l  no  way  was  so  closed  to  him  as  that  on
intcd  him  to  enter.     But  he  did  not  dare
ell  her  the  truth.     He  did  not  have  the  1
to  grieve  that  gentle  child  whom   he  loved     lie
promised  everything  she  wished.

"After  that  few  words  were  needed.  It  went
without  saying  that  some  day  she  should  be  his
wife.  It  was  not  a  love  of  kisses  and  caresses.
He  hardly  dared  come  near  her.  She  was  as  sensi-
as  a  fragile  flower.  But  her  brown  eyes  were
sometimes  raised  from  the  ground  to  seek  his.  On
moonlit  evenings,  when  they  sat  on  the  veranda,  she
would  creep  close  to  him,  and  then  he  would  kiss
her  hair  without  her  noticing  it.

"  Hut  you  understand  that  his  sin  was  in  his  for-
getting both  the  past  and  the  future.  That  he  was
poor  and  humble  he  could  forget;  but  he  ought
always  to  have  remembered  that  a  day  must  come
i  in  her  soul  love  would  rise  against  love,  earth
against  heav  n  she  would  be  obliged  to  choose

between  him  and  the  glorious  Lord  of  the  kingdom
of  the  thousand  years.  And  she  was  not  one  who
could  endure  such  a  struggle.

"  A  summer  went  by,  an  autumn,  a  winter.     When

the  spring  came,  and  the  ice  nu-lt<  i   Dohna

ill.     It  was  thawing  in  the  valleys;  there  were

streams  down  all  the  hills,  the  ice  was  unsafe,  the

roads  almost  impassable  both  for  sledge  and  cart.

"Countess  Dohna  wanted  to  get  a  doctor  from
'.stad;   there  was  none  nearer.     But   she  com-
manded in  vain.     She  could  not,  either  with  prayers


228       ////:  .v/vwr  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

or  threats,  induce  a  servant  to  go.  She  threw  her-
•n  her  knees  before  the  coachman,  but  he  re-
fused. She  went  into  hysterics  of  gn  her
daughter  —  she  was  always  immoderate,  in  sorrow  u
in  joy,  Countess  Marta.

"  Kbba  Dohna  lay  ill  with  pneumonia,  and  her  life
was  in  danger;  but  no  doctor  could  be  get

"Then  the  tutor  drove  to  Karlstad.  To  take  that
journey  in  the  condition  the  roads  were  in  was  to
play  with  his  life;  but  he  did  it.  It  took  him  over
bending  ice  and  break-neck  freshets.  Sometimes
he  had  to  cut  steps  for  the  horse  in  the  ice,  some-
times drag  him  out  of  the  deep  clay  in  the  road.  It
was  said  that  the  doctor  refused  to  go  with  him,  and
that  he,  with  pistol  in  hand,  forced  him  to  set
out.

"  When  he  came  back  the  countess  was  ready  to
throw  herself  at  his  feet.  '  Take  everything! '  she
said.  '  Say  what  you  want,  what  you  desire,  —  my
daughter,  my  lands,  my  money ! '

" '  Your  daughter, '  answered  the  tutor. "

Anna  Stjarhhok  suddenly  stops.

"  Well,  what  then,  what  then  ?  "  asks  Countess
Elizabeth.

"That  can  be  enough  for  now,"  answers  Anna,  for
she  is  one  of  those  unhappy  people  who  live  in  the
anguish  of  doubt.  She  has  felt  it  a  whole  week.
She  does  not  know  what  she  wants.  What  one
moment  seems  right  to  her  the  next  is  wrong.  Now
she  wishes  that  she  had  never  begun  this  story.

"I  begin  to  think  that  you  want  to  deceive  me,
Anna.  Do  you  not  understand  that  I  must  hear  the
end  of  this  story?"

"  There  is  not  much  more  to  tell.  —  The  hour  of


RA  DOHNA'S  STORY  I    >

strife  was  o  Kbba  Donna,     Love  raited  iUelf

against  love,  earth  against  heaven.

iicss  Marta  told  the  wonderful  jour-

>g  man  had  made  for  her  sake,
and  she  said  that  she,  as  a  reward,  had  ^

him  her  hand.

"  Kbba  was  so  much  better  that  she  lay  dressed  on
a  sofa.  She  was  weak  and  pale,  and  even  more  silent
than  usual.

When   she   heard   those  words   she    lifted   her
brown  eyes  reproachfully  to  her  mother,  and  sai

:  —

Mamma,  have  you  given  me  to  a  dismissed
priest,  to  one  who  has  forfeited  his  right  to  serve
God,  to  a  man  who  has  been  a  thief,  a  bcgga

But,  child,  who  has  told  you  that?  I  thought
you  knew  nothing  of  it. '

I  heard  your  guests  speaking  of  him  the  day  I
was  taken  ill.'

But,  child,  remember  that  he  has  saved  your
life!'

I  remember  that  he  has  deceived  me.  He
should  have  told  me  who  he  was.'

lie  says  that  you  love  him.'

I  have  done  so.     I  cannot  love  one  who  has

ived  me.1

How  has  he  deceived  you  ? '

Vou  would  not  understand,  mamma. '
"She  did  not  wish  to  speak  to  her  mother  of  the
kingdom  of  her  dreams,  which  her  beloved  should
have  helped  her  to  realize.

:>a, '  said  the  countess,  '  if  you  love  him  you
shall  not  ask  what  he  has  been,  but  marry  him.  The
husband  of  a  Countess  Dohna  will  be  rich  enough,


230         THE  STORY  OF  GQSTA   BERLING

powerful   enough,  to  excuse  all   the  follies   of   his
youth. '

I  care  nothing  for  his  youthful  follies,  mamm.i ;
it  is  because  he  can  never  be  what  I  want  him  tu  be-
that  I  cannot  marry  him. '

41 '  Kbba,  remember  that  I  have  given  him  my
promise! '

"  The  girl  became  as  pale  as  death.

" '  Mamma,  I  tell  you  that  if  you  marry  me  to  him
you  part  me  from  God. '

'  I  have  decided  to  act  for  your  happiness/  says
the  countess.  '  I  am  certain  that  you  will  be  happy
with  this  man.  You  have  already  succeeded  in  mak-
ing a  saint  of  him.  I  have  decided  to  overlook  the
claims  of  birth  and  to  forget  that  he  is  poor  and
despised,  in  order  to  give  you  a  chance  to  raise  him.
I  feel  that  I  am  doing  right.  You  know  that  I  scorn
all  old  prejudices.'

"The  young  girl  lay  quiet  on  her  sofa  for  a  while
after  the  countess  had  left  her.  She  was  fighting
her  battle.  Earth  raised  itself  against  heaven,  love
against  love;  but  her  childhood's  love  won  the  vic-
tory. As  she  lay  there  on  the  sofa,  she  saw  the
western  sky  glow  in  a  magnificent  sunset.  She
thought  that  it  was  a  greeting  from  the  good  King;
and  as  she  could  not  be  faithful  to  him  if  she  lived,
she  decided  to  die.  There  was  nothing  else  for  her
to  do,  since  her  mother  wished  her  to  belong  to  one
who  never  could  be  the  good  King's  servant.

"  She  went  over  to  the  window,  opened  it,  and  let
the  twilight's  cold,  damp  air  chill  her  poor,  weak  body.

"  It  was  easily  done.  The  illness  was  certain  to
begin  again,  and  it  did.

"No  one   but   I   knows  that    she   sought  death,


RA  DO l  *TORY  231

ibeth.      i  I  heard  her

delirium.      She  hkoi  lu  h.ivc  me  at  her  .side  those
last  days.

"  It  was  I  who  saw  her  die;  who  saw  how  she  one

even  it  her  arms  towards  the  glowing

west,  and  died,  smiling,  as  if  she  had  seen  some  one

advance  from  the  sunset's  glory  to  meet  her.     It  was

also  I  who  had  to  take  her  last  gre«  the  man

I   was  to  ask  him  to  iorgivc  her,  that

she  could  not  be  hi  ^  would

permit

I '.ut  I  h.ive  never  dared  to  say  to  that  man  that
he  was  her  murderer.     I  have  not  dared  to  lay  the
weight  of  such  pain  on  his  shoulders.     And  yet  he,
who  won  her  love  by  lies,  was  he  not  her  murdc
Was  he  not,  Kli/.abcth? "

Countess  Dohna  long  ago  had  stopped  caressing
blue  flowers.     Now  she  rises,  and    the  bouquet
falls  to  the  floor.

"  Anna,  you  arc  deceiving  me.  You  say  that  the
story  is  old,  and  that  the  man  has  been  dead  a  long
time.  But  I  know  that  it  is  scarcely  five  years  since
Ebba  Dohna  died,  and  you  say  that  you  yourself
were  there  through  it  all.  You  are  not  old.  Tell

A- h«>  i  he  man  is  '
Anna  Stjarnhok  begins  to  laugh.

You  wanted  a  love-story.     Now  you  have  had
one  which  has  cost  you  both  tears  and  pain."
"  Do  you  mean  that  you  have  lied  ?  "

iiitf  but  romance  and  lies,  the  whole  thing  I n
You  arc  too  bad,  Anna."

"  Maybe.     I  am  not  so  happy,  either.  —  Hut  the
ladies  are  awake,  and  the  men  are  coming  into  the
ng-room.      I .<-t  us  join  them!"


232          THE  STORY  OF  COS/'.l    /  /  A//

On  the  threshold  she  is  stopped  by  Gosta  lulling,
who  is  looking  for  tl.

"You  must  have-  patience  with  me,"  he  says,
laughing.  "I  shall  only  torment  you  for  ten  min-
utes; but  you  must  hear  my  \ci

He  tells  them  that  in  the  night  he  had  had  a
dream  more  vivid  than  ever  before;  he  had  dreamt
that  he  had  written  verse.  He,  whom  the  world
called  "poet,  "although  he  had  always  been  uncle
in^  of  the  title,  had  got  up  in  the  middle  of  the
night,  and,  half  asleep,  half  awake,  had  begun  to
write.  It  was  a  whole  poem,  which  he  had  found
the  next  morning  on  his  writing-table.  He  could
never  have  believed  it  of  himself.  Now  the  ladies
should  hear  it.

And  he  reads :  —

11  The  moon  rose,  and  with  her  came  the  sweetest  hour  of  the

day.

From  the  clear,  pale-blue,  lofty  vault
She  flooded  the  leafy  veranda  with  her  light.
On  the  broad  steps  we  were  sitting,  both  old  and  young,
Silent  at  first  to  let  the  emotions  sing
The  heart's  old  song  in  that  tender  hour.

44  From  the  mignonette  rose  a  sweet  perfume,
And  from  dark  thickets  shadows  crept  over  the  dewy  grass.
Oh,  who  can  be  safe  from  emotion

When  the  night's  shadows  play,  when  the  mignonette  sheds
its  heavy  perfume?

44  The  last  faded  petal  dropped  from  the  rose,
Although  the  offering  was  not  sought  by  the  wind.
So  —  we  thought  —  will  we  give  up  our  life,
Vanish  into  space  like  a  sound,
Like  autumn's  yellowed  leaf  go  without  a  moan.
Death  is  the  reward  of  life ;  may  we  meet  it  quietly,
Just  as  a  rose  lets  its  last  faded  petal  fall.


EBB  A  DVi  233

.  fluttering  wing  a  bat  Hew  by  us,
Flew  and  was  Men,  wherever  the  moon  shone ;
Then  the  question  arose  In  our  oppressed  hearts,  —


'The  question  which
The  question,  heavy  as  sorrow,  old  as  pain :

whither  go  we,  what  paths  shall  we  wander
we  no  longer  walk  on  earth1*  green  pastures  ? '
la  there  no  one  to  show  our  spirits  the  way  ?
Easier  were  it  to  show  a  way  to  the  bat  who  fluttered  by  u

id  on  my  shoulder,  her  soft  J.
who  loved  me,  and  whispered  soft

-  >t  that  souls  fly  to  far-distant  places ;
When  I  am  dead,  think  not  that  I  am  far  away.
Into  my  beloved's  soul  my  homeless  spirit  will  creep
And  1  will  come  and  live  in  thcc.'

1  Oh  what  anguish !     With  sorrow  my  heart  will  break.
Was  she  to  die,  die  soon  ?    Was  this  night  to  be  her  last  ?
Did  I  press  my  last  kiss  on  my  beloved's  waving  hair?


M  Years  have  gone  by  since  then.     I  still  sit  many  tii
I  n  the  old  place,  when  the  night  is  dark  and  silent
But  I  tremble  when  the  moon  shines  on  the  leafy  veranda,
For  her  who  alone  knows  how  often  I  kissed  my  darling  there,
For  her  who  blended  her  quivering  light  with  my  tears,
Which  fell  on  my  darling's  hair.
Alas,  for  memory's  pain !    Oh,  *t  is  the  grief  of  my  poor,  sinful

soul
That  it  should  be  her  home !    What  punishment  may  he  not

await

.o  has  bound  to  himself  a  soul  so  pure,  so  innocent."

"Gosta,"  says  Anna,  jestingly,  while  her  throat
contracts  with  pain,  "people  say  of  you  that  you
have  lived  through  more  poems  than  others  have
written,  who  have  not  done  anything  else  all  their
lives;  but  do  you  know,  you  will  do  best  to  compose
poems  your  own  way.  That  was  night  work


234         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

"You  arc  not  kind."

"To  come   and   read  such  a  thin-,  on  death  and
suffering  —  you  ought  to  be  ashanu-d  !  "

>ta  is  not  listening  to  In  i.  lli.s  ryes  are  fixed
on  the  young  countess.  She  sits  quite  stiff,  motion-
less as  a  statue.  He  ihinks  she  is  going  to  faint.

But  with  infinite  difficulty  her  lips  form  one  word,
(io!"  she  says.

"  Who  shall  go  ?     Shall  /  go  ?  "

"  The  priest  shall  go,"  she  stammers  out.

"Elizabeth,  be  silent !"

"The  drunken  priest  shall  leave  my  house!"

"Anna,  Anna,"  Gosta  asks,  "what  does  she
mean  ?  "

"  You  had  better  go,  Gosta. "

"  Why  shall  I  go?     What  does  all  this  mean  ?  "

"Anna,"  says  Countess  Elizabeth,  "tell  him,  tell
him!"

"  No,  countess,  tell  him  yourself!  "

The  countess  sets  her  teeth,  and  masters  her
emotion.

"Herr  Berling,"  she  says,  and  goes  up  to  him,
"  you  have  a  wonderful  power  of  making  people  for-
get who  you  are.  I  did  not  know  it  till  to-day.  I
have  just  heard  the  story  of  Ebba  Dohna's  death,
and  that  it  was  the  discovery  that  she  loved  one  who
was  unworthy  which  killed  her.  Your  poem  has
made  me  understand  that  you  are  that  man.  I
cannot  understand  how  any  one  with  your  antece-
dents can  show  himself  in  the  presence  of  an  honor-
able woman.  I  cannot  understand  it,  Herr  Berling.
Do  I  speak  plainly  enough  ?  "

"  You  do,  Countess.  I  will  only  say  one  word  in
my  defence.  I  was  convinced,  I  thought  the  whole


t  BBA

time  that  you  knew  cvr  about   me.     I   have

:  mod  to  hide  an>  thin-  ,  hut  it  is  not  to  pleasant
ic  N  hie'*  hi tt crest  sorrow  on  the  high-
ways."
He  goes.

And  in  the  same  instant  Countess  Dohna  sets  her
little  foot  on  the  bunch  of  blue  stars.

"  You  have  now  dune  what   1   wished,"  says  A
mhok  sternly  to  the  countess;  "but  it  is  also

You  need  not  think  that

I  cai;  e  your  having  been  cruel  to  him.     You

have  turned  him  away,  scorned,  and  wounded  him,
and  I  —  I  will  follow  him  into  captivity;  to  the
scaffold  if  need  be,  I  will  watch  over  him,  protect
him.  You  have  done  what  I  wished,  but  I  shall
never  forgive  you."
•at,  Anna,  Anna

Because  I  told  you  all  that  do  you  think  that  I
did  it  with  a  glad  spirit;1  I  Live  I  not  sat  here  and
bit  by  bit  torn  my  heart  out  of  my  breast  ? "

Why  did  you  do  it  >

"  Why?     Because  I  did  not  wish  —  that  he  should
be  a  married  woman's  lo\


236          /'//A'  STOKY  OF  GOSTA   BERLING


CHAPTER    XIII

MAMSELLE   MARIE

I  HI  RE  is  a  buzzing  over  my  head.  It  must  be  a
bumblebee.  And  such  a  perfume!  As  true  as  I
live,  it  is  sweet  marjoram  and  lavender  and  hawthorn
and  lilacs  and  Easter  lilies.  It  is  glorious  to  feel  it  on
a  gray  autumn  evening  in  the  midst  of  the  town.  I
only  have  to  think  of  that  little  blessed  corner  of  the
earth  to  have  it  immediately  begin  to  hum  and  smell
fragrant  about  me,  and  I  am  transported  to  a  little
square  rose-garden,  filled  with  flowers  and  protected
by  a  privet  hedge.  In  the  corners  are  lilac  arbors
with  small  wooden  benches,  and  round  about  the
flower-beds,  which  are  in  the  shapes  of  hearts  and
stars,  wind  narrow  paths  strewed  with  white  sea-sand.
On  three  sides  of  the  rose-garden  stands  the  forest,
silent  and  dark.

On  the  fourth  side  lies  a  little  gray  cottage.

The  rose-garden  of  which  I  am  thinking  was
owned  sixty  years  ago  by  an  old  Madame  Moreus  in
Svartsjo,  who  made  her  living  by  knitting  blankets  for
the  peasants  and  cooking  their  feasts.

Old  Madame  Moreus  was  in  her  day  the  possessor
of  many  things.  She  had  three  lively  and  industrious
daughters  and  a  little  cottage  by  the  roadside.  She
had  a  store  of  pennies  at  the  bottom  of  a  chest,  stiff
silk  shawls,  straight-backed  chairs,  and  could  turn
her  hand  to  everything,  which  is  useful  for  one  who


MAMSELLE  MAK  237

must  earn  her  bread  Rut  the  best  that  she  had  was
the  rose-garden,  which  gave  her  joy  as  long  as  the
summer  last

In  Madame  Morcus'  little  cottage  there  was  a
boarder,  a  little  dry  old  maid,  about  forty  years  of
age,  who  lived  in  a  gable-room  in  the  attic.  Mamselle
Marie,  as  she  was  always  called,  had  her  own  ideas
on  many  things,  as  one  always  docs  who  sits  much
alone  and  lets  her  thoughts  dwell  on  what  her  eyes
have  seen.

Mamselle  Marie  thought  that  love  was  the  root  and
origin  of  all  evil  in  this  sorrowful  world.

Every  evening,  before  she  fell  asleep,  she  used  to

clasp  her  hands  and  say  her  evening  prayers.     After

she  had  said  "Our  Father"  and  "The  Lord  bless

she  always  ended  by  praying  that  God  would

preserve  her  from  love.

It  causes  only  misery,"  she  said.    "  I  am  old  and
ugly  and  poor.    No,  may  I  never  be  in  love !  "

She  sat  day  after  day  in  her  attic  room  in  Madame
Morcus'  little  cottage,  and  knitted  curtains  and  table-
covers.  All  these  she  afterwards  sold  to  the  peasants
and  the  gentry.  She  had  almost  knitted  together  a
little  cottage  of  her  own.

For  a  little  cottage  on  the  side  of  the  hill  opposite
Svartsjo  church  was  what  she  wanted  to  have.  But
love  she  would  never  hear  of.

When  on  summer  evenings  she  heard  the  violin

Jed  from  the  cross  roads,  where  the  fiddler  sat

ic  stile,  and  the  young  people  swung  in  the  polka

till   the   dust  whirled,  she  went  a  long  way  round

:h  the  wood  to  avoid  hearing  and  seeing.

The  day  after  Christmas,  when  the  peasant  brides
came,  five  or  six  of  them,  to  be  dressed  by  Madame


238         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BERLING

Moreus  and  her  daughters,  when  they  were  adorned
with  wreaths  of  myrtle,  and  high  crowns  of  silk,  and
glass  beads,  with  gorgeous  silk  sashes  and  bunches  of
artificial  roses,  and  skirts  edged  with  garlands  of
taffeta  flowers,  she  stayed  up  in  her  room  to  avoid  see-
ing how  they  were  being  decked  out  in  Love's  honor.

But  she  knew  Love's  misdeeds,  and  of  them  she
could  tell.  She  wondered  that  he  dared  to  show  him-
self on  earth,  that  he  was  not  frightened  away  by
the  moans  of  the  forsaken,  by  the  curses  of  those  of
whom  he  had  made  criminals,  by  the  lamentations  of
those  whom  he  had  thrown  into  hateful  chains.  She
wondered  that  his  wings  could  bear  him  so  easily
and  lightly,  that  he  did  not,  weighed  down  by  pain
and  shame,  sink  into  nameless  depths.

No,  of  course  she  had  been  young,  she  like  others,
but  she  had  never  loved.  She  had  never  let  her-
self be  tempted  by  dancing  and  caresses.  Her
mother's  guitar  hung  dusty  and  unstrung  in  the  attic  ;
she  never  struck  it  to  sentimental  love-ditties.

Her  mother's  rose  bushes  stood  in  her  window.
She  gave  them  scarcely  any  water.  She  did  not  love
flowers,  those  children  of  love.  Spiders  played
among  the  branches,  and  the  buds  never  opened.

There  came  a  time  when  the  Svartsjo  congrega-
tion had  an  organ  put  into  their  church.  It  was  the
summer  before  the  year  when  the  pensioners  reigned.
A  young  organ-builder  came  there.  He  too  became
a  boarder  at  Madame  Moreus'.

That  the  young  organ-builder  was  a  master  of  his
profession  may  be  a  matter  of  doubt.  But  he  was  a
gay  young  blade,  with  sunshine  in  his  eyes.  He  had
a  friendly  word  for  every  one,  for  rich  and  poor,  for
old  and  young.


MAMSELLE  MAI  239

When  he  came  home  from  his  work  in  the  evening,
he  held  Madame  Morcus'  skeins,  and  worked  at

of  young  girls  in  the  rosc-guulcn.     Then  h<

vcl"  and  sang  "  I  He  picked  up

Mamselle  Marie's  bail  of   thread  as  often  as  she
dropped  it,  and  put  her  clock  to  rights.

,  ball  until  he  had  danced  with
everybody,  from  the  oldest  woman  to  the  youngest
girl,  and  if  an  adversity  befell  him,  he  sat  himself

i  by  the  side  of  the  first  woman  he  met  and  made
her  his  confident*.  He  was  such  a  man  as  women
create  in  their  dreams  I  It  could  not  be  said  of  him

he  spoke  of  love  to  any  one.  But  when  he  had
lived  a  few  weeks  in  Madame  Morcus'  gable-room,  all
the  girls  were  in  love  with  him.  and  poor  Mamselle
Marie  knew  that  she  had  prayed  her  prayers  in  vain.
That  was  a  time  of  sorrow  and  a  time  of  joy.  In
the  evening  a  pale  dreamer  often  sat  in  the  lilac
arbor,  and  up  in  Mamselle  Marie's  little  room  the

y  strung  guitar  twanged  to  old  love-songs,  which
she  had  learned  from  her  mother.

The  young  organ-builder  was  just  as  careless  and
gay  as  ever,  and  doled  out  smiles  and  services  to  all

••  languishing  women,  who  quarrelled  over  him
when  he  \\.is  .way  at  his  work.  And  at  last  the  day

•  when  he  had  to  leave.

Tlu  c.irri.ige  stood  before  the  door.  His  bag  had
been  tied  on  behind,  and  the  young  man  said  farewell
He  kissed  Madame  Moreus*  hand  and  took  the  weep-
ing girls  in  his  arms  and  kissed  them  on  the  cheek.
He  wept  himself  at  being  obliged  to  go,  for  he  had
had  a  pleasant  summer  in  the  little  gray  cottage.  At

last  he  looked  around  for  M.unselle  Marie.

be  came  down  the  narrow  attic-stairs  in  her  best


240  !E  STORY  OF  GtiSTA   3ERUNG

array.  The  guitar  hung  about  her  neck  on  a  broad,
green-silk  ribbon,  and  in  her  hand  she  held  a  bunch
of  damask  roses,  for  tl.  her  mothr.

bushes  had  blossomed.  She  stood  before  the  young
mafl,  struck  the  guitar  and  sang:  -

"  Thou  goest  far  from  us.     Ah !  welcome  again  !
Hear  the  voice  of  my  friendship,  which  greets  thec.
Be  happy :  forget  not  a  true,  loving  friend
Who  in  Varmland's  forests  awaits  thee  !  "

Thereupon  she  put  the  flowers  in  his  button-
hole and  kissed  him  square  on  the  mouth.  Yes,  and
then  she  vanished  up  the  attic  stairs  again,  the  old
apparition.

Love  had  revenged  himself  on  her  and  made  her
a  spectacle  for  all  men.  But  she  never  again  com-
plained of  him.  She  never  laid  away  the  guitar,  and
never  forgot  to  water  her  mother's  rose-bushes.

She  had  learned  to  cherish  Love  with  all  his  pain,
his  tears,  his  longing.

"  Better  to  be  sorrowful  with  him  than  happy  with-
out him,"  she  said.

The  time  passed.  The  major's  wife  at  Ekeby  was
driven  out,  the  pensioners  came  to  power,  and  it  so
happened,  as  has  been  described,  that  Gosta  Berling
one  Sunday  evening  read  a  poem  aloud  to  the
countess  at  Borg,  and  afterwards  was  forbidden  by
her  to  show  himself  in  her  house.

It  is  said  that  when  Gosta  shut  the  hall-door  after
him  he  saw  several  sledges  driving  up  to  Borg.  M<
cast  a  glance  on  the  little  lady  who  sat  in  the  first
sledge.  Gloomy  as  the  hour  was  for  him,  it  became
still  more  gloomy  at  the  sight.  He  hurried  away
not  to  be  recognized,  but  forebodings  of  disaster  filled


.MAM  ./'///     .1/.//.7/  .'.;l

•  til      Had  the  conversation  in  there  conjured  up
woman?    One  misfortune  always  brings  anct
But  the  servants  hurried  out,  the  shawls  and  •
were  thrown  one  side.    Who  had  come?    Who  was
little  lady  who  stood  up  in  the  sledge?     Ah,
y    she   herself,     Marta    Dohn.i,   the     far-famed
countess  I

She  was  the  gayest  and  most  foolish  of  women.
Joy  had  lifted  her  on  high  on  his  throne  and  made
her  his  queen.  Games  and  laughter  were  her  subjects.
Music  and  dancing  and  adventure  had  been  her  share
when  the  lottery  of  life  was  drav.

She  was  not  far  now  from  her  fiftieth  year,  but  she
was  one  of  the  wise,  who  do  not  count  the  years.  "  He
whose  foot  is  not  ready  to  dance,  or  mouth  to  laugh,"
she  said,  "  he  is  old.  He  knows  the  terrible  weight
of  years,  not

Pleasure  had  no  undisturbed  throne  in  the  days  of

her  youth,  but  change  and  uncertainty  only  increased

the  delight  of  his  glad  presence.     His  Majesty  of  the

butterfly  wings  one  day   had   afternoon   tea  in  the

court  ladies'  rooms  at  the  palace  in  Stockholm,  and

cd  the  next    in  Paris.      He  visited  Napoleon's

pa,  he  went  on  board  Nelson's  fleet  in  the  blue

Mediterranean,  he  looked  in  on  a  congress  at  Vienna,

he   risked  his   life  at  Brussels  at  a  ball  the   night

bef<  .ous  battle.

:•!  wherever  Pleasure  was,  there  too  was  Marta
Doh:  hosen  queen.     Dancing,  playing,  jesting,

Countess  Marta  hurried  the  whole  world  round.
What  had  she  not  seen,  what  had  she  not  lived
thro  id  danced  over  thrones,  played  ecarte*

on  the  fate  of  princes,  caused  devastating  wars  by  her
jests  1  Gaycty  anil  folly  had  filled  her  life  and  would


THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  BERLING

always  do  so.  Her  body  was  not  too  old  for  dancing,
nor  her  heart  for  love.  When  did  she  weary  of  mas-
quorades  and  comedies,  of  merry  stories  and  plaintive
ballads?

When  Pleasure  sometimes  could  find  no  home  out
in  the  struggling  world,  she  used  to  drive  up  to  the
old  manor  by  Lofvcn's  shores,  — just  as  she  had  come
there  when  the  princes  and  their  court  had  become
too  gloomy  for  her  in  the  time  of  the  Holy  Alliance.
It  was  then  she  had  thought  best  to  make  Gosta  Ber-
ling  her  son's  tutor.  She  always  enjoyed  it  there.
Never  had  Pleasure  a  plcasanter  kingdom.  Th<  n-
song  was  to  be  found  and  card-playing,  men  who
loved  adventure,  and  gay,  lovely  women.  She  did
not  lack  for  dances  and  balls,  nor  boating-parties
over  moonlit  seas,  nor  sledging  through  dark  forests,
nor  appalling  adventures  and  love's  sorrow  and  pain.

But  after  her  daughter's  death  she  had  ceased  to
come  to  Borg.  She  had  not  been  there  for  five  years.
Now  she  had  come  to  see  how  her  daughter-in-law
bore  the  life  up  among  the  pine  forests,  the  bears,
and  the  snow-drifts.  She  thought  it  her  duty  to
come  and  see  if  the  stupid  Henrik  had  not  bored
her  to  death  with  his  tediousness.  She  meant  to  be
the  gentle  angel  of  domestic  peace.  Sunshine  and
happiness  were  packed  in  her  forty  leather  trunks,
Gayety  was  her  waiting-maid,  Jest  her  coachman,
Play  her  companion.

And  when  she  ran  up  the  steps  she  was  met  with
open  arms.  Her  old  rooms  on  the  lower  floor  were
in  order  for  her.  Her  man-servant,  her  lady  com-
panion, and  maid,  her  forty  leather  trunks,  her  thirty
hat-boxes,  her  bags  and  shawls  and  furs,  everything
was  brought  by  degrees  into  the  house.  There  was


MAMSKU.K  MAK1I

bustle  and  noise  everywhere.  There  was  a  flamming
of  doors  and  a  running  on  the  stairs.  It  was  plain
enough  that  Countess  Marta  had  come.

It  was  a  spring  evening,  a  really  beautiful  spring
evening,  although  it  was  only  April  and  the  ice  had
not  broken  up.  Mamscllc  Marie  had  opened  her

low.    She  sat  in  her  room,  played  on  the  gu
and  sang.

She  was  so  engrossed  in  her  guitar  and  her  mem-
ories that  she  did  not  hear  that  a  carriage  came
driving  up  the  road  and  stopped  at  the  cottage.  In
the  carriage  Countess  Marta  sat,  and  it  amused  her
to  see  Mamselle  Marie,  who  sat  at  the  window  with
her  guitar  on  her  lap,  and  with  eyes  turned  towards
heaven  sang  old  forgotten  love-songs.

At  last  the  countess  got  out  of  the  carriage  and

into  the  cottage,  where  the  girls  were  sitting  at

their  work.     She  was  never  haughty;    the  wind  of

revolution  had  whistled  over  her  and  blown  fresh  air

into  her  lungs.

It  was  not  her  fault  that  she  was  a  countess,  she

used  to  say ;  but  she  wanted  at  all  events  to  live  the

life  she  liked  best.     She  enjoyed  herself  just  as  much

at  peasant  weddings  as  at  court  balls.     She  acted

for  her  maids  when  there  was  no  other  spectator  to  be

and  she  brought  joy  with  her  in  all  the  places

where  she  showed  herself,  with  her  beautiful  little  face

her  overflowing  love  of  life.

She  ordered  a  blanket  of  Madame  Moreus  and

cd  the  girls.     She  looked  about  the  rose-garden

and  told  of  her  adventures  on  the  journey.      She

always  was  having  adventures.     And  at  the  last  she

ventured  up  the  attic  stairs,  which  were  dreadfully


244         THE  STORY  OF  COST  A   BERLIN

steep  and  narrow,  and  sought  out  Mamselle  Mam-
in  her  gable- room.

She  bought  curtains  of  her.     She  could  not  livr
without  having  knitted  curtains  for  all  her  wind,
and  on  every  table  should  she  have  Mamselle  Ma
table-covers.

She  borrowed  her  guitar  and  sang  to  her  of
pleasure  and  love.  And  she  told  her  stories,  so  that
Mamselle  Marie  found  herself  transported  out  into
the  gay,  rushing  world.  And  the  countess's  laiu;htrr
made  such  music  that  the  frozen  birds  in  the  rose-
garden  began  to  sing  when  they  heard  it,  and  her
face,  which  was  hardly  pretty  now,  —  for  her  com-
plexion was  ruined  by  paint,  and  there  was  such  an
expression  of  sensuality  about  the  mouth,  —  seemed
to  Mamselle  Marie  so  lovely  that  she  wondered  how
the  little  mirror  could  let  it  vanish  when  it  had  once
caught  it  on  its  shining  surface.

When  she  left,  she  kissed  Mamselle  Marie  and
asked  her  to  come  to  Borg.

Mamselle  Marie's  heart  was  as  empty  as  the  swal-
low's-nest  at  Christmas.  She  was  free,  but  she  sighed
for  chains  like  a  slave  freed  in  his  old  age.

Now  there  began  again  for  Mamselle  Marie  a  time
of  joy  and  a  time  of  sorrow;  but  it  did  not  last  long,
—  only  one  short  week.

The  countess  sent  for  her  continually  to  come  to
Borg.  She  played  her  comedy  for  her  and  told
about  all  her  lovers,  and  Mamselle  Marie  laughed  as
she  had  never  laughed  before.  They  became  the
best  of  friends.  The  countess  soon  knew  all  about
the  young  organ-builder  and  about  the  parting.
And  in  the  twilight  she  made  Mamselle  Marie  sit  on
the  window-seat  in  the  little  blue  cabinet.  Then  she


MAMSKLLE  MAI  245

hung  the  guitar  ribb  k  and  got  h<

sing  .  :!,;>      Ami  tin-  countess  sat  and  wat>

how  the  old  ma.  ^urc  and  hi  tic  plain

bead  were  outlined  a^am-.t  the  i  ,ky,  and

she  said  that  the  poor  old  Manisellc  was  like  a  lan-
guishing ma.  'in  Middle  Ages.  All  the  songs
c-phcrds  and  cruel  shepherdesses,  and
Manisellc  Marie's  voice  was  the  thinnest  voice  in
the  world,  and  it  is  easy  to  understand  how  the
countess  was  amused  at  such  a  comedy.

There  was  a  party  at  Borg,  as  was  natural,  when
:i«>thcr  had  come  home.     And  it  was  gay
as  always.    There  were  not  so  many  ihcre,  only  the
bers  of  the  parish  being  invited.

The  dining-room  was  on  the  lower  floor,  and  after
supper  it  so  happened  that  the  guests  did  not  go  up-
a-;.im,  but  sat  in  Countess  Malta's  room,  which
lay  beyond.  The  countess  got  hold  of  Mamsclle
Marie's  guitar  and  began  to  sing  for  the  company.
She  was  a  merry  person,  Countess  Marta,  and  she
could  mimic  any  one.  She  now  had  the  idea  to
mimic  Mamsclle  Marie.  She  turned  up  her  eyes  to
heaven  and  sang  in  a  thin,  -hrill.  child's  voice.

1  >h  no,  oh  no,  countess !  "  begged  Mamsellc  Marie.

But  the  countess  was  enjoying  herself,  and  no  one
could  help  laughing,  although  they  all  thought  that
it  was  hard  on  Mamsclle  Marie.

The  countess  took  a  handful  of  dried  rose-leaves
out  of  a  pot-pourri  jar,  went  with  tragic  gestures  up
to  Mamsclle  Marie,  and  sang  with  deep  emotion :  —

"  Thou  goe*t  far  from  us.    Ah  !    welcome  again !

ir  the  voice  of  my  friendship,  which  greets  thoo
Be  happy  :  forget  not  a  true,  loving  friend
Who  in  Varmland's  forests  awaits  thcc


246         THE  STORY  OF  COST  A   BE  RUNG

Then  she  strewed  the  rose-leaves  over  her  head.
Everybody  laughed;  but  Mamscllc  Marie  was  wild
with  rage.  She  looked  as  if  she  could  have  torn  out
the  countess's  eyes.

"  You  arc  a  bad  woman,  Marta  Dohna,"  she  said.
"  No  decent  woman  ought  to  speak  to  you."

Countess  Marta  lost  her  temper  too.

"  Out  with  you,  mamscllc !  "  she  said.  "  I  have
had  enough  of  your  folly."

"  Yes,  I  shall  go,"  said  Mamselle  Marie;  4<  but  first
I  will  be  paid  for  my  covers  and  curtains  which  you
have  put  up  here."

"  The  old  rags !  "  cried  the  countess.  "  Do  you
want  to  be  paid  for  such  rags?  Take  them  away
with  you  !  I  never  want  to  see  them  again !  Take
them  away  immediately !  "

Thereupon  the  countess  threw  the  table-covers  at  her
and  tore  down  the  curtains,  for  she  was  beside  herself.

The  next  day  the  young  countess  begged  her
mother-in-law  to  make  her  peace  with  Mamselle
Marie ;  but  the  countess  would  not  She  was  tired
of  her.

Countess  Elizabeth  then  bought  of  Mamselle  Marie
the  whole  set  of  curtains  and  put  them  up  in  the
upper  floor.  Whereupon  Mamselle  Marie  felt  her-
self redressed.

Countess  Marta  made  fun  of  her  daughter-in-law
for  her  love  of  knitted  curtains.  She  too  could  con-
ceal her  anger — preserve  it  fresh  and  new  for  years.
She  was  a  richly  gifted  person.


PART    II

CHAP II  K    I
COUSIN  CHRIST'     Hi  I

id  an  old  bird  of  prey  up  in  the  pensioners'
wing.  He  always  sat  in  the  corner  by  the  fire  and
saw  that  it  did  not  go  out.  He  was  rough  and  gray.
His  little  head  with  the  big  nose  and  tin  sunken  eyes
hung  sorrowfully  on  the  long,  thin  neck  which  stuck
up  out  of  a  fluffy  fur  collar.  For  the  bird  of  prey
furs  both  winter  and  suinn

Once  he  had  belonged  to  the  swdrm  who  in  the
great  Kmperor's  train  swept  over  Europe;  but  what
<  and  titlr  he  bore  no  one  now  can  say.  In  Varm-
land  they  only  knew  that  he  had  taken  part  in  the
great  wars,  that  he  had  risen  to  might  and  power  in
the  thundering  struggle,  and  that  after  1815  he  had
taken  flight  from  an  ungrateful  fatherland.  He  found
a  refuge  with  the  Swedish  Crown  Prince,  and  the
latter  advised  him  to  disappear  in  far  away  Varmland.

And  so  it  happened  that  one  whose  name  had
caused  the  world  to  tremble  was  now  glad  that  no
one  even  knew  that  once  dreaded  name.

He  had  '^ivcn  the  Crown  Prince  his  word  of  honor
not  to  leave  Varmland  and  not  to  make  known  who


248         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

he  was.  And  he  had  been  sent  to  Kkeby  with  a  pri-
vate* letter  to  the  major  from  the  Cioun  1'rince,  who
had  given  him  the  best  of  recommendations.  It  was
then  the  pensioners'  wing  opened  its  doors  to  him.

In  the  beginning  people  wondered  much  who  he  was
who  concealed  his  identity  under  an  assumed  name.
Hut  gradually  he  was  transformed  into  a  pensioner.
Everybody  called  him  Cousin  Christopher,  without
knowing  exactly  how  he  had  acquired  the  name.

Hut  it  is  not  good  for  a  bird  of  prey  to  live  in  a
cage.  One  can  understand  that  he  is  accustomed  to
something  different  than  hopping  from  perch  to  perch
and  taking  food  from  his  keeper's  hand.  The  excite-
ment of  the  battle  and  of  the  danger  of  death  had  set
his  pulse  on  fire.  Drowsy  peace  disgusts  him.

It  is  true  that  none  of  the  pensioners  were  exactly
tame  birds;  but  in  none  of  them  the  blood  burned  so
hot  as  in  Cousin  Christopher.  A  bear  hunt  was  the  only
thing  which  could  put  life  into  him,  a  bear  hunt  or  a
woman,  one  single  woman.

He  had  come  to  life  when  he,  ten  years  ago,  for  the
first  time  saw  Countess  Marta,  who  was  already  then
a  widow, —  a  woman  as  changeable  as  war,  as  inciting
as  danger,  a  startling,  audacious  creature ;  he  loved  her.

And  now  he  sat  there  and  grew  old  and  gray  with-
out being  able  to  ask  her  to  be  his  wife.  He  had  not
seen  her  for  five  years.  He  was  withering  and  dying  by
degrees,  as  caged  eagles  do.  Every  year  he  became
more  dried  and  frozen.  He  had  to  creep  down
deeper  into  his  furs  and  move  nearer  the  fire.

So  there  he  is  sitting,  shivering,  shaggy,  and  gray,
the  morning  of  the  day,  on  the  evening  of  which  the
Easter  bullets  should  be  shot  off  and  the  Easter  witch


COUSIN  CHRISTOPHER  -•  -;  t

burned.     Th  . -.  have  all  gone  out ;  but  he

:i  the  corner  by  the  :

Oh,   Cousin    (  tophcr,  do

you  not  know?

tiling  she  has  come,  the  enchanting  spring.
Nature  up  starts   from  drowsy  sleep,  and  in  the

sky  but'  tumble  in  wild  ;,

Close  as  roses  on  the  sweet  brier,  their  faces  shine
between  tin-  clouds

Earth,  the  great  mother,  begins  to  live.     Romping
.i  child  she  rises  from  her  bath  in  the  spring  floods,
i  her  douche  in  the  spring  rain.
But  Cousin  Christopher  sits  quiet   and  does  not
understand.    He  leans  his  head  on  his  stiffened  fingers
and  dreams  of  showers  of  bullets  and  of  honors  won
on  the  field  of  battle.

One  pities  the  lonely  old  warrior  who  sits  there  by
the  fire,  without  a  people,  without  a  country,  he  who
never  hears  the  sound  of  his  native  language,  he  who
will  have  a  nameless  grave  in  the  Hro  churchyard.
his  fault  that  he  is  an  eagle,  and  was  born  to  per-
secute and  to  kill?

Oh,  Cousin  Christopher,  you  have  sat  and  dreamed

long  enough  in  the  pensioners'  wing!     Up  and  drink

the  sparkling  wine  of  life.     You  must  know,  G-

Christopher,  that  a  letter  has  come  to  the  major  this

.  a  royal  letter  adorned  with  the  seal  of  Sweden.

addressed  to  the  major,  but  the  contents  concern

you.     It  ngc  to  see  you,  when  you  read  the

r,  old  eagle.    Your  eye  regains  its  brightness,  and

you  lift  your  head.     You  see  the  cage  door  open  and

ice  for  your  lon^  ^s.

Cousin  Christopher  is  burrowing  deep  down  to  the
bottom  of  his  chest.     I  le  drags  out  the  carefully  laid


250        THE  STORY  OF  G&STA   BERUNG

away  gold-laced  uniform  and  dresses  himself  in  it.
He  presses  the  plumed  hat  on  his  head  ami  lie  is  soon
hastening  away  from  Kkeby,  riding  his  excellent
white  hi>:

This  is  another  life  than  to  sit  shivering  by  the  fire  ;
he  too  now  sees  that  spring  has  come.

He  straightens  himself  up  in  his  saddle  and  sets  off
at  a  gallop.  The  fur-lined  dolman  flutters.  The
plumes  on  his  hat  wave.  The  man  has  grown  young
like  the  earth  itself.  He  has  awaked  from  a  1
winter.  The  old  gold  can  still  shine.  The  bold  war-
rior face  under  the  cocked  hat  is  a  proud  sight.

It  is  a  wonderful  ride.  Brooks  gush  from  the
ground,  and  flowers  shoot  forth,  as  he  rides  by.  The
birds  sing  and  warble  about  the  freed  prisoner.  All
nature  shares  in  his  joy.

He  is  like  a  victor.  Spring  rides  before  on  a  float-
ing cloud.  And  round  about  Cousin  Christopher
rides  a  staff  of  old  brothers-in-arms:  there  is  Happi-
ness, who  stands  on  tiptoe  in  the  saddle,  and  Honor
on  his  stately  charger,  and  Love  on  his  fiery  Arab.  The
ride  is  wonderful ;  wonderful  is  the  rider.  The  thrush
calls  to  him :  —

"Cousin  Christopher,  Cousin  Christopher,  whither
are  you  riding?  Whither  are  you  riding?"

"  To  Borg  to  offer  myself,  to  Borg  to  offer  myself,"
answers  Cousin  Christopher.

"  Do  not  go  to  Borg,  do  not  go  to  Borg!  An  un-
married man  has  no  sorrow,"  screams  the  thrush
after  him.

But  he  does  not  listen  to  the  warning.  Up  the
hills  and  down  the  hills  he  rides,  until  at  last  he  is
there.  He  leaps  from  the  saddle  and  is  shown  in  to
the  countess.


COUSIN  CHRISTOPHER  2$ I

Everything  goes  well.  The  countess  is  gracious  to
him.  Cousin  Christopher  feels  sure  that  she  will  not
refuse  to  bear  his  glorious  name  or  to  r«-i/n  in  his
palace.  He  sits  and  puts  off  the  moment  of  rapture,
•\  he  shall  show  her  the  royal  letter.  He  enjoys
the  waiting.

She  talks  and  entertains  him  with  a  thousand
stories.  He  laughs  at  everything  enjoys  everything.
Hut  as  they  are  sitting  in  one  of  the  rooms  where
Countess  Elizabeth  has  hung  up  Mamscllc  Marie's
.in-,  the  countess  begins  to  tell  the  story  of
them.  And  she  makes  it  as  funny  as  she  can.

"  See/'  she  says  at  last,  "  see  how  bad  I  am.  Here
hang  the  curtains  now,  that  I  may  think  daily  and
hourly  of  my  sin.  It  is  a  penance  without  equal.
Oh,  those  dreadful  knitted  curtains !  "

The  great  warrior,  Cousin  Christopher,  looks  at
her  with  burning  eyes.

I,  too,  am  old  and  poor,"  he  says,  "  and  I  have
sat  for  ten  years  by  the  fire  and  longed  for  my  :
tress.     Do  you  laugh  at  that  too,  countess? "

"  Oh,  that  is  another  matter,"  cries  the  countess.

"  God  has  taken  from  me  happiness  and  my  father-
land, and  forced  me  to  cat  the  bread  of  others/'  says
Cousin  Christopher,  earnestly.  "  I  have  learned  to
have  respect  for  poverty."

You,  too,"  cries  the  countess,  and  holds  up  her
hands.     "  How  virtuous  every  one  is  getting

Yes,"  he  says,  "  and  know,  countess,  that  if  God
some  day  in  the  future  should  give  me  back  riches
and  power,  I  would  make  a  better  use  of  them  than  to
share  them  with  such  a  worldly  woman,  such  a  painted,
heartless  monkey,  who  makes  fun  of  poverty."
You  would  do  quite  right,  Cousin  Christophe:


252         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

And  then  Cousin  Christopher  marches  out  of  the
room  and  rides  home  to  Ekcby  again;  but  the
spirits  do  not  follow  him,  the  thrush  docs  not  call  to
him,  and  he  no  longer  sees  the  smiling  spring.

He  came  to  Ekcby  just  as  the  Easter  witch  was  to
be  burned.  She  is  a  big  doll  of  straw,  with  a
face,  on  which  eyes,  nose,  and  mouth  arc  drawn  with
charcoal.  She  is  dressed  in  old  cast-off  clothes.  The
long-handled  oven-rake  and  broom  are  placed  beside
her,  and  she  has  a  horn  of  oil  hung  round  her  neck.
She  is  quite  ready  for  the  journey  to  hell.

Major  Fuchs  loads  his  gun  and  shoots  it  off  into
the  air  time  after  time.  A  pile  of  dried  branches  is
lighted,  the  witch  is  thrown  on  it  and  is  soon  burning
gayly.  The  pensioners  do  all  they  can,  according  to
the  old,  tried  customs,  to  destroy  the  power  of  the
evil  one.

Cousin  Christopher  stands  and  looks  on  with  gloomy
mien.  Suddenly  he  drags  the  great  royal  letter  from
his  cuff  and  throws  it  on  the  fire.  God  alone  knows
what  he  thought.  Perhaps  he  imagined  that  it  was
Countess  Marta  herself  who  was  burning  there  on  the
pile.  Perhaps  he  thought  that,  as  that  woman,  when
all  was  said,  consisted  only  of  rags  and  straw,  there
was  nothing  worth  anything  any  more  on  earth.

He  goes  once  more  into  the  pensioners'  wing,
lights  the  fire,  and  puts  away  his  uniform.  Again  he
sits  down  at  the  fire,  and  every  day  he  gets  more
rough  and  more  gray.  He  is  dying  by  degrees,  as
old  eagles  do  in  captivity.

He  is  no  longer  a  prisoner ;  but  he  does  not  care
to  make  use  of  his  freedom.  The  world  stands  open
to  him.  The  battle-field,  honor,  life,  await  him.  But
he  has  not  the  strength  to  spread  his  wings  in  flight.


PATHS  Of  253


CHAITKR    II

Tin    PAIM

WEARY  arc  the  ways  which  men  have  to  follow  here
on  earth.

hrough  the  desert,  paths  through  the  marshes,
paths  over  the  mountains.

Why  is  so  much  sorrow  allowed  to  go  undisturbed,
until  it  loses  itself  in  the  desert  or  sinks  in  the  bog.
or  falls  on  the  mountain?  Where  are  the  little
flower-pickers,  where  are  the  little  princesses  of  the
fairy  talc  about  whose  feet  roses  grow,  where  are
they  who  should  strew  flowers  on  the  weary  ways?

Gosta  Bert  ing  has  decided  to  get  married.  He  is
searching  for  a  bride  who  is  poor  enough,  humble
enough  for  a  mad  priest

Beautiful  and  high-born  women  have  loved  him,
but  they  may  not  compete  for  his  hand.  The  out-
cast chooses  from  among  outcasts.

Whom  shall  he  choose,  whom  shall  he  seek  out?

To  Kkcby  a  poor  girl  sometimes  comes  from  a
lonely  forest  hamlet  far  away  among  the  mount  .
and  sells  brooms.     In  t  nlct,  where   poverty

and  great  misery  exist,  there  arc  many  who  arc  not
•^session  of  their  full  intellect,  and  the  girl  with
is  one  of  them.

But  beautiful.     Her  masses  of  black  hair

make  such  thick  braids  that  they  scarcely  find  room


254         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  BERUNG

on  her  head,  her  checks  are  delicately  rounded,  her
nose  straight  and  not  too  large,  her  eyes  blue.     She
is  of  a  melancholy,  Madonna-like  type,  such  a
still  found  among  the  lovely  girls  by  the  shores  of
Lofven's  long  lake.

Well,  Gosta  has  found  his  sweetheart;  a  half-
crazy  broom-girl  is  just  the  wife  for  a  mad  priest.
Nothing  can  be  more  suitable.

All  he  needs  to  do  is  to  go  to  Karlstad  for  the
rings,  and  then  they  can  once  more  have  a  merry
day  by  Lofven's  shore.  Let  them  laugh  at  Gosta
Berling  when  he  betroths  himself  to  the  broom-girl,
when  he  celebrates  his  wedding  with  her !  Let  them
laugh !  Has  he  ever  had  a  merrier  idea?

Must  not  the  outcast  go  the  way  of  the  outcasts,
—  the  way  of  anger,  the  way  of  sorrow,  the  way  of
unhappiness?  What  does  it  matter  if  he  falls,  if  he
is  ruined?  Is  there  any  one  to  stop  him?  Is  there
any  one  who  would  reach  him  a  helping  hand  or
offer  him  a  cooling  drink?  Where  are  the  little
flower-pickers,  where  are  the  little  princesses  of  the
fairy-tale,  where  are  they  who  should  strew  roses  on
the  stony  ways?

No,  no,  the  gentle  young  countess  at  Borg  will  not
interfere  with  Gosta  Berling's  plans.  She  must  think
of  her  reputation,  she  must  think  of  her  husband's
anger  and  her  mother-in-law's  hate,  she  must  not  do
anything  to  keep  him  back.

All  through  the  long  service  in  the  Svartsjo  church,
she  must  bend  her  head,  fold  her  hands,  and  only
pray  for  him.  During  sleepless  nights  she  can  weep
and  grieve  over  him,  but  she  has  no  flowers  to  strew
on  the  way  of  the  outcast,  not  a  drop  of  water  to
give  one  who  is  thirsting.  She  does  not  stretch  out


THE  PATHS  OF  /  255

her  hand  to  lead  him  back   from  the  edge  of  the
precipice.

sta  Beriing  docs  not  care  to  clothe  his  chosen
bride  in  silk  and  jewels.  He  lets  her  go  from  farm
to  farm  with  brooms,  as  her  habit  is,  but  when  he
has  gathered  together  all  the  chief  men  and  women
of  the  place  at  a  great  feast  at  Ekcby,  he  will  make
his  betrothal  known.  He  will  call  her  in  from  the
kitchen,  just  as  she  has  come  from  her  long  wan
ings,  with  the  dust  and  dirt  of  the  road  on  her  clothes,
perhaps  ragged,  perhaps  with  dishevelled  hair,  with
.  eyes,  with  an  incoherent  stream  of  words  on
)ur  lips.  And  he  will  ask  the  guests  if  he  has  not
chosen  a  suitable  bride,  if  the  mad  priest  ought
not  to  be  proud  of  such  a  lovely  sweetheart,  of
that  gentle  Madonna  face,  of  those  blue,  dreamy
eyes.

He  intended  that  no  one  should  know  anything
beforehand,  but  he  did  not  succeed  in  keeping  the
secret,  and  one  of  those  who  heard  it  was  the  young
Countess  Dohna.

Hut  what  can  she  do  to  stop  him  ?  It  is  the  engage-
ment day,  the  eleventh  hour  has  come.  The  count-
ess stands  at  the  window  in  the  blue  cabinet  and
looks  out  towards  the  north.  She  almost  thinks  that
she  can  sec  Kkeby.  although  her  eyes  are  dim  with
tears.  She  can  sec  how  the  great  three-storied  house
shines  with  three  rows  of  lighted  windows ;  she  thinks
how  the  champagne  flows  in  the  glasses,  how  the
toast  resounds  and  how  Gosta  Beriing  proclaim
engagement  to  the  broom-girl.

If  she  were  only  near  him  and  quite  gently  could
her  hand  on  his  arm,  or  only  give  him  a  friendly  look,
would  he  not  turn  back  from  th«    evil  way?     If  a


256         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUNG

word  from  her  had  driven  him  to  such  a  dcsp
deed,  would  not  also  a  word  from  her  check  him  ?  "

She  shudders  at  the  sin  he  is  going  to  commit
against  that  poor,  half-witted  child.  She  shucldc  ts
at  his  sin  against  the  unfortunate  creature,  who  shall
be  won  to  love  him,  perhaps  only  for  the  jest  of  a
single  day.  Perhaps  too  —  and  then  she  shin!
even  more  at  the  sin  he  is  committing  against  him-
self—  to  chain  fast  to  his  life  such  a  galling  bunlm,
which  would  always  take  from  his  spirit  the  strength
to  reach  the  highest.

And  the  fault  was  chiefly  hers.  She  had  with  a
word  of  condemnation  driven  him  on  the  evil  way.
She,  who  had  come  to  bless,  to  alleviate,  why  had
she  twisted  one  more  thorn  into  the  sinner's  crown?

Yes,  now  she  knows  what  she  will  do.  She  will
have  the  black  horses  harnessed  into  the  sledge,
hasten  over  the  Lofven  and  to  Ekeby,  place  hers  r  It
opposite  to  Gosta  Berling,  and  tell  him  that  she  does
not  despise  him,  that  she  did  not  know  what  she  was
saying  when  she  drove  him  from  her  house.  No,
she  could  never  do  such  a  thing;  she  would  be
ashamed  and  would  not  dare  to  say  a  word.  Now
that  she  was  married,  she  must  take  care.  There
would  be  such  a  scandal  if  she  did  such  a  thing.
Hut  if  she  did  not  do  it,  how  would  it  go  with  him?

She  must  go.

Then  she  remembers  that  such  a  plan  is  impossible.
No  horse  can  go  again  this  year  over  the  ice.  The
ice  is  melting,  it  has  already  broken  away  from  the
land.  It  is  broken,  cracked,  terrible  to  sec.  Water
bubbles  up  through  it,  in  some  places  it  has  gathered
in  black  pools,  in  other  places  the  ice  is  dazzlingly
white.  It  is  mostly  gray,  dirty  with  melting  snow,


////    rATHS  (>•  257

and  the  roads  look  like  long,  black  streaks  on  its

iCC.

How  can  she  think  of  going?  Old  Countess

•it Id  never  permit  such  a

tlnii'f:.  beside  her  the  whole  evening  in

drawing-room  and  listen  to  those  old  stories
which  are  the  older  woman's  delight.

At  last  :it  comes,  and  her  husband  is  away;

she  is  free.

She  cannot  drive,  she  does  not  dare  to  call  the
servants,  but  her  anxiety  drives  her  out  of  her  home,
re  is  nothing  else  for  her  to  do.

Weary  are  the  ways  men  wander  on  earth  ;  but  that
way  by  night  over  melting  ice,  to  what  shall  I  com-
pare it?  Is  it  not  the  way  which  the  little  flower-
pickers  have  to  go,  an  uncertain,  shaking,  slippery
the  way  of  those  who  wish  to  make  amends,  the
way  of  the  light  foot,  the  quick  eye,  and  the  brave,
loving  heart?

It  was  past  midnight  when  the  countess  reached
the  shores  of  Ekeby.  She  had  fallen  on  the  ice.
she  had  leaped  over  wide  fissures,  she  had  hurried
across  places  where  her  footprints  were  filled  with
bubbling  water,  she  had  slipped,  she  had  crept  on  all

It  had  been  a  weary  wandering;  she  had  wept  as
she  had  walked.  She  was  wet  and  tired,  and  out
there  on  the  ice,  the  darkness  and  the  loneliness  had
given  her  terrible  thoughts.

At  the  last  she  had  had  to  wade  in  water  over

her  ankles  to  reach  land.     And  when  she  had  come

to  the  shore,  she   had   not  had    the  courage  to  do

on  a  rock  and  weep  from  fatigue

and  helplessness.

17


2$8          THE  STORY  OF  G&STA   BERLING

This  young,  high-born  lady  was,  however,  a  bi
little  heroine.  She  had  never  gone  such  ways  in  lu  i
bright  mother  country.  She  may  well  sit  by  the
edge  of  that  terrible  lake,  wet,  tired,  unhappy  as  she
is,  and  think  of  the  fair,  flowery  paths  of  her  South-
ern fatherland.

Ah,  for  her  it  is  not  a  question  of  South  or  North.
She  is  not  weeping  from  homesickness.  She  is
weeping  because  she  is  so  tired,  because  she  will  not
come  in  time.  She  thinks  that  she  has  come  too
late.

Then  people  come  running  along  the  shore.  They
hurry  by  her  without  seeing  her,  but  she  hears  what
they  say.

"  If  the  dam  gives  way,  the  smithy  goes,"  one
says.  "  And  the  mill  and  the  work-shops  and  the
smith's  house,"  adds  another.

Then  she  gets  new  courage,  rises,  and  follows
them.

Ekeby  mill  and  smithy  lay  on  a  narrow  point  past
which  the  Bjorksjo  River  rushes.  It  comes  roaring
down  towards  the  point,  whipped  white  in  the
mighty  falls  above,  and  to  protect  the  land  a  great
break-water  was  built  before  the  point.  But  the  dam
was  old  now,  and  the  pensioners  were  in  power.  In
their  day  the  dance  filled  all  their  thoughts,  and  no
one  took  the  trouble  to  see  how  the  current  and
the  cold  and  time  had  worn  the  old  stone-dam.

Now  with  the  spring-floods  the  dam  begins  to
yield.

The  falls  at  Ekeby  are  like  mighty  granite  stairs,
down  which  the  waves  come  rushing.  Giddy  with
the  speed,  they  tumble  over  one  another  and  rush


77/7.    r  All  IS  •  259

together.    They  rise  up  in  anger  and  clash  in  spray
over  one  ai  'ill   again,  over   a  rock,  over  a

log,  and  rise  up  again,  again  to  fall,  again  and  again,
foaming,  hissing,  roaring.

:id  now  these  wild,  raging  waves,  drunken  •.
the  spring  air,  dizzy  with  their  newly  won  freedom,
n  against  the  old  stone- wall.  They  come,  hissing
and  tearing,  high  up  on  to  it  and  then  fall  back  a;
as  if  they  had  hit  their  white  heads.  They  use  logs
as  battering-rams,  they  strain,  they  beat,  they  \\v\\
against  that  poor  wall,  until  suddenly,  just  as  if  some
one  had  called  to  them,  "  Look  out !  "  they  rush
backwards,  and  after  them  comes  a  big  stone,  which
has  broken  away  from  the  dam  and  sinks  thundering
in  the  stream.

But  why  arc  these  wild  waves  allowed  to  rage
without  meeting  any  resistance?  Is  every  one  dead
at  Ekeby?

No,  there  arc  people  enough  there,  —  a  wild,  pcr-
cd,  helpless  crowd  of  people.     The  night  is  dark,
they  cannot  see  one  another,  nor  see  where  they  are
going.     Loud  roars  the  falls,  terrible  is  the  din  of  the
breaking  ice  and  the  pounding  logs;  they  cannot  hear
:  own  voices.     They  have  not  a  thought  nor  an
idea.     They  feel  that  the  end  is  coming.     The  <
is  trembling,  the  smithy  is  in  danger,  the  mill  :
danger,  and   their  own  poor  houses  beloved  in  all
their  lowliness.

Message  after  message  is  sent  up  to  the  house  to
the  pensioners.

c  they  in  a  mood  to  think  of  smithy  or  mill?
The  hundred  guests  arc  gathered  in  the  wide  walls.
The  broom-girl  is  w:r  the  kitchen.  The  hour

has  come.    The  champagne  bubbles  in  the  glasses.


260         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   RE  RUNG

Julius  rises  to  make  the  speech.  All  the  old  adven-
turers at  Ekcbyare  rejoicing  at  the  petrifying  amu/c-
ment  which  will  fall  upon  the  assembly.

Out  on  the  ice  the  young  CounU  -s  1  )ohna  is  wan-
dering a  terrible,  perilous  way  in  order  to  whisper  a
word  of  warning  to  Gosta  Berling.  Down  at  the
waterfall  the  waves  are  storming  the  honor  and
might  of  Ekeby,  but  in  the  wide  halls  only  joy  and
eager  expectation  reign,  wax-candles  are  shining,
wine  is  flowing;  no  one  thinks  of  what  is  happening
in  the  dark,  stormy  spring  night.

Now  has  the  moment  come.  Gosta  rises  and  goes
out  to  bring  in  his  sweetheart.  He  has  to  go
through  the  hall,  and  its  great  doors  are  standing
open;  he  stops,  he  looks  out  into  the  pitch  dark
night — and  he  hears,  he  hears!

He  hears  the  bells  ringing,  the  falls  roaring.  He
hears  the  thunder  of  the  breaking  ice,  the  noise  of
the  pounding  logs,  the  rebellious  waves'  rushing  and
threatening  voice.

He  hastens  out  into  the  night,  forgetting  every-
thing. Let  them  inside  stand  with  lifted  glasses  till
the  world's  last  day  ;  he  cares  nothing  for  them.
The  broom-girl  can  wait,  Julius's  speech  may  die  on
his  lips.  There  would  be  no  rings  exchanged  that
night,  no  paralyzing  amazement  would  fall  upon  the
shining  assembly.

Now  the  waves  must  in  truth  fight  for  their  free-
dom, for  Gosta  Berling  has  come,  the  people  have
found  a  leader.  Terrified  hearts  take  courage,  a
terrible  struggle  begins.

Hear  how  he  calls  to  the  people ;  he  commands,
he  sets  all  to  work.

"  We  must  have  light,  light  first  of  all ;  the  miller's


////    /'.4T//S  U.  .    i

horn-lantern  is  not  enough.    See  all  those  piles  of
bran  my  them  up  on  the  cliff  and  set  fire  to

them.     That  k   for  the   women    and  clul.lrc  u.

be  tjuick;  build  up  a  great  flaming  brush-pile
and  set  i  A  ill  li-ht  up  our  work;  that

will  be  seen  far  and  wide  and  bring  more  to  help  us.
Ami  vcr  go  out !    llring  straw,  bring  branches,

he  flames  stream  up  to  the  sky !  "
Look,   look,  you   men,  here   is  work   for  you.
Here  Ki  timber,  here  arc  planks;   make  a  tempo.
il.un,   which  we  can  Miik   in   front  of  tl.  king

wall.     Quick,  quick  to  work ;  make  it  firm  and  solid  !
ready  stones  and  sand-bags  to  sink   it  with  !
Quick !    Swing  your  axes !   To  work !  to  work

"  And  where  arc  the  boys  ?  Get  poles,  get  boat-
hooks,  and  come  out  here  in  the  midst  of  the  struggle.
Out  on  the  dam  with  you,  boys,  right  in  the  waves.
Keep  off,  weaken,  drive  back  their  attacks,  before
which  the  walls  are  cracking.  Push  aside  the  logs
and  pieces  of  ice ;  throw  yourselves  down,  if  nothing
else  helps,  and  hold  the  loosening  stones  with  your
hands ;  bite  into  them,  seize  them  with  claws  of  iron.
Out  on  the  wall,  boys !  We  shall  fight  for  every  inch
of  la:

^ta  himself  takes  his  stand  farthest  out  on  the
dam  and  stands  there  covered  with  spray ;  the  ground
shakes  under  him,  the  waves  thunder  and  rage,  but
his  wild  heart  rejoices  at  the  danger,  the  anxiety,  the
struggle.  He  laughs.  He  jokes  with  the  boys  about
him  on  the  dam ;  he  has  never  had  a  merrier  night.

The  work  of  rescue  goes  quickly  forward,  the  fire
flames,  the  axes  resound,  and  the  dam  stands.

The  other  pensioners  and  the  hundred  guests  have
come  down  to  the  waterfall.  People  come  running


262          /7/E  STOKY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

from  near  and  far;  all  arc  working,  at  the  lues,  at
UK-  temporary  dam,  at  the  sand-bags,  out  on  the
tottering,  trembling  stone-wall.

Now  the  temporary  dam  i>  ready,  and  shall  be
sunk  in  front  of  the  yielding  break-water.  Have  tin-
stones and  sand-bags  ready,  and  boat-hooks  and  rope,
that  it  may  not  be  carried  away,  that  the  victory
may  be  for  the  people,  and  the  cowed  waves  return
to  their  bondage.

It  so  happens  that  just  before  the  decisive  moment
Gosta  catches  sight  of  a  woman  who  is  sitting  on
a  stone  at  the  water's  edge.  The  flames  from  the
bonfire  light  her  up  where  she  sits  staring  out  over
the  waves;  he  cannot  see  her  clearly  and  distinctly
through  the  mist  and  spray,  but  his  eyes  are  con-
tinually drawn  to  her.  Again  and  again  he  has  to
look  at  her.  He  feels  as  if  that  woman  had  a  special
errand  to  him.

Among  all  these  hundreds  who  are  working  and
busy,  she  is  the  only  one  who  sits  still,  and  to  her
his  eyes  keep  turning,  he  can  see  nothing  else.

She  is  sitting  so  far  out  that  the  waves  break  at
her  feet,  and  the  spray  dashes  over  her.  She  must
be  dripping  wet.  Her  dress  is  dark,  she  has  a  black
shawl  over  her  head,  she  sits  shrunk  together,  her
chin  on  her  hand,  and  stares  persistently  at  him  out
on  the  dam.  He  feels  as  if  those  staring  eyes  were
drawing  and  calling,  although  he  cannot  even  dis-
tinguish her  face;  he  thinks  of  nothing  but  the
woman  who  sits  on  the  shore  by  the  white  waves.

"  It  is  the  sea-nymph  from  the  Lofven,  who  has
come  up  the  river  to  lure  me  to  destruction,"  he
thinks.  "  She  sits  there  and  calls  and  calls.  I  must
go  and  drive  her  away."


THE  PATHS  <  l6j

All  these  waves  with  their  white  heads  seem  to
him  the  black  woman's  hair;  it   was  she  who  set

who  led  the  attack  again- 1  hint.
"  I  n-.iily  mutt  ilrivc  her  away,"  he  says.
He  seizes  a  boat-hook,  runs  to  the  shore,  and
hurries  away  to  the  woman.

lie  leaves  his  place  on  the  end  of  the  dam  to  drive
•h  away.     1  in  that  moment  of

tit.  as  if  the  evil  powers  of  the  deep  were
him.  Me  <li.l  n«»t  know  what  he
thought,  uh.it  he  believed,  but  he  must  drive  that
black  thing  away  from  the  stone  by  the  river's  edge.
Alas,  Gosta,  why  is  your  place  empty  in  the
decisive  moment  ?  They  arc  coming  with  the  tem-
porary dam.  a  long  row  of  men  station  themselves
on  the  break-water ;  they  have  ropes  and  stones  and
sand-bags  ready  to  weight  it  down  and  hold  it  in
place ;  they  stand  ready,  they  wait,  they  listen.  Where
is  their  leader?  Is  there  no  voice  to  command?

No,  Gosta  Berling  is  chasing  the  sea-nymph,  his
voice  is  silent,  his  commands  lead  no  one.

So  the  temporary  dam  has  to  be  sunk  without  him.
The  waves   rush   back,  it  sinks  into  the  water  and
it   the  stones  and  sand-bags.     But  how  is  the
work  carried  out  without  a  leader?  No  care,  no  order.
\vavcs  dash  up  again,  they  break  with  renewed
rage  against  this  new  obstacle,  they  begin  to  roll  the
sand-bags  over,  tear  the  ropes,  loosen  the  stones ;
they  succeed,  they  succeed.     Threatening,  rejoic

lift  the  whole  dam  on  their  strong  shoulders,
tear  and  drag  on  it,  and  then  they  have  it  in  their
power.  Away  with  the  miserable  defence,  down  to
the  I.ofvcn  with  it.  And  then  on  once  more  against
the  tottering,  helpless  stone-wall.


264         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  BERLING

But  Gosta  is  chasing   the  sea-nymph.     She   saw
him    as   he  came   towards   her   swinging   the   boat-
hook.      She   was    frightened.     It   looked   as    if
was  going  to  throw  herself  into  the  water,  but  she
changed  her  mind  and  ran  to  the  land.

"  Sea-nymph ! "  cries  Gosta,  and  brandishes  the  boat-
hook.     She  runs  in   among  the   alder-bushes,
entangled  in  their  thick  branches,  and  stops.

Then  Gosta  throws  away  the  boat-hook,  goes  for-
ward, and  lays  his  hand  on  her  shoulder.

11  You  are  out  late  to-night,  Countess  Elizabeth,"
he  says.

"  Let  me  alone,  Herr  Bcrling,  let  me  go  home !  "

He  obeys  instantly  and  turns  away  from  her.

But  since  she  is  not  only  a  high-born  lady,  but  a
really  kind  little  woman,  who  cannot  bear  the  thought
that  she  has  driven  any  one  to  despair;  since  she
is  a  little  flower-picker,  who  always  has  roses  enough
in  her  basket  to  adorn  the  barrcnest  way,  she  re-
pents, goes  after  him  and  seizes  his  hand.

"  I  came,"  she  says,  and  stammers,  "  I  came
to —  Oh,  Herr  Berling,  you  have  not  done  it?  Say
that  you  have  not  done  it !  I  was  so  frightened
when  you  came  running  after  me,  but  it  was  you
I  wanted  to  meet  I  wanted  to  ask  you  not  to  think
of  what  I  said  the  other  day,  and  to  come  to  sec  me
as  usual."

"  How  have  you  come  here,  countess?  "

She  laughs  nervously.  "  I  knew  that  I  should
come  too  late,  but  I  did  not  like  to  tell  any  one
that  I  was  going;  and  besides,  you  know,  it  is  im-
possible to  drive  over  the  ice  now."

"  Have  you  walked  across  the  lake,  countess?"

"  Yes,  yes,  of  course ;  but,  Herr  Berling,  tell  me.


IT/IS  t>.  265

Arc  you  engaged?    You  understand;  I  wish  so  you
;ig,  you  sec,  and  I  felt  as  if

the  uh..U  tliin;.;  \\.is  my  fault.     You  should  not  have
•rom  me  so  much.     I  am  a  stranger,
who  does  not  know  the   customs  of  the  cou

.  so  dull  at  Borg  since  you  do   not  come  any
more,  Hcrr  Bcrling."

It  seems  to  Gosta  Bcrling,  as  he  stands  among  the
wet  alder-bushes  on  the  marshy  ground,  as  if  some
one  were  throwing  over  him  armfuls  of  roses.  He
wades  in  roses  up  to  his  knees,  they  shine  before  his
eyes  in  the  darkness,  he  eagerly  drinks  in  their
fragrance.

"  Have  you  done  that?  "  she  repeats.

He  must  make  up  his  mind  to  answer  her  and  to
put  an  end  to  her  anxiety,  although  his  joy  is  so
great  over  it.  It  grows  so  warm  in  him  and  so  bright
when  he  thinks  what  a  way  she  has  wandered,  how
wet  she  is,  how  frozen,  how  frightened  she  must  have
been,  how  broken  with  weeping  her  voice  sounds.

"  No,"  he  says,  ••  I  am  not  engaged."

Then  she  takes  his  hand  again  and  strokes  it  "  I
am  so  glad,  I  am  so  glad,"  she  says,  and  her  voice  is
shaken  with  sobs.

There  arc  flowers  enough  now  on  the  poet's  way,
everything  dark,  evil,  and  hateful  melts  from  hi>
heart.

"How  good  you  are,  how  good  you   arc!"  he

says

At  their  side  the  waves  are  rushing  against  all
Kkcby's  honor  and  glory.  The  people  have  no
leader,  no  one  to  instil  courage  and  hope  into  their
hearts;  the  dam  gives  way,  the  waves  close  over  it.
and  then  rush  triumphant  forward  to  the  point  w!


266          THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERUA<

the  mill  and  smithy  stand.  No  one  tries  any  In:
to  resist  the  waves;  no  one  think.  «>i  anything  IK.
saving  life  and  property.

It  seems  quite  natural  to  both  the  young  people
that  Gosta  should  escort  the  countess  hoim  ;  IK  can-
not leave  her  alone  in  this  dark  night,  nor  let  her  a
wander  alone  over  the  melting  ice.  They  never  think
that  he  is  needed  up  at  the  smithy,  they  are  so  happy
that  they  arc  friends  again.

One  might  easily  believe  that  these  young  people
cherish  a  warm  love  for  one  another,  but  who  can  be
sure?  In  broken  fragments  the  glowing  adventures
of  their  lives  have  come  to  me.  I  know  nothing,
or  next  to  nothing,  of  what  was  in  their  innermost
souls.  What  can  I  say  of  the  motives  of  their  actions.
I  only  know  that  that  night  a  beautiful  young  woman
risked  her  life,  her  honor,  her  reputation,  her  health,
to  bring  back  a  poor  wretch  to  the  right  way.  I
only  know  that  that  night  Gosta  Berling  left  the
beloved  Ekeby  fall  to  follow  her  who  for  his  sake
had  conquered  the  fear  of  death,  the  fear  of  shame,
the  fear  of  punishment.

Often  in  my  thoughts  I  have  followed  them  over
the  ice  that  terrible  night,  which  ended  so  well  for
them.  I  do  not  think  that  there  was  anything  hidden
or  forbidden  in  their  hearts,  as  they  wandered  over
the  ice,  gay  and  chatting  of  everything  which  had
happened  during  their  separation.

He  is  once  more  her  slave,  her  page,  who  lies  at
her  feet,  and  she  is  his  lady.

They  are  only  happy,  only  joyous.  Neither  of
them  speaks  a  word  which  can  denote  love.

Laughing  they  splash  through  the  water,  they
laugh  when  they  find  the  path,  when  they  lose  it,


////•:   IATHS  V.

when  they  slip,  \\\\  fall,   when  they  arc  up

again,  t  Ut^h.

1  his  blessed  life  is  once  more  a  merry  play,  and
they  arc  chiMu  n  uho  have  been  cross  and  have  «,
how  good  it  is  to  make  up  and  bcgi
play  again.

nnor  came,  and  rumor  went.     In  time  the  story
of  the  countess's  wanderings  reached  Anna  Stjiin:

I  see,"  she  said,  "that  God  has  not  mic  string
only  to  his  bow.     I  can  rest  and  stay  where  I  am
needed.     Me  can  make  a  man  of  Gosta  Berling  v.
out  my  help."


268         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG


CHAPTER   III
PENITENCE

DEAR  friends,  if  it  should  ever  happen  that  you
meet  a  pitiful  wretch  on  your  way,  a  little  distressed
creature,  who  lets  his  hat  hang  on  his  back  and  holds
his  shoes  in  his  hand,  so  as  not  to  have  any  protec-
tion from  the  heat  of  the  sun  and  the  stones  of  the
road,  one  without  defence,  who  of  his  own  free  will
calls  down  destruction  on  his  head,  —  well,  pass  him
by  in  silent  fear !  It  is  a  penitent,  do  you  understand  ?
—  a  penitent  on  his  way  to  the  holy  sepulchre.

The  penitent  must  wear  a  coarse  cloak  and  live
on  water  and  dry  bread,  even  if  he  were  a  king.  He
must  walk  and  not  ride.  He  must  beg.  He  must
sleep  among  thistles.  He  must  wear  the  hard  grave-
stones with  kneeling.  He  must  swing  the  thorny
scourge  over  his  back.  He  can  know  no  sweetness
except  in  suffering,  no  tenderness  except  in  grief.

The  young  Countess  Elizabeth  was  once  one  who
wore  the  heavy  cloak  and  trod  the  thorny  paths.
Her  heart  accused  her  of  sin.  It  longed  for  pain  as
one  wearied  longs  for  a  warm  bath.  Dire  disaster
she  brought  down  on  herself  while  she  descended
rejoicing  into  the  night  of  suffering.

Her  husband,  the  young  count  with  the  old-man's
head,  came  home  to  Borg  the  morning  after  the
night  when  the  mill  and  smithy  at  Ekeby  were  de-


PENITENCE

stroyed  by  the  spring  flood.      He  had  hardly  arrived
befi"  test  Mart*  had  him  summoned  in  t<

and  told  him  wonderful  things.

Your  .'.ilc  was  out  last  ni-ht.  Hcnrik.  She  was
gone  many  hours.  She  came  home  with  a  man.  1
heard  how  he  said  good-night  to  her.  I  know  too
who  he  is.  I  heard  both  when  she  went  and  when
she  came.  She  is  deceiving  you,  Hcnrik.  She  is
deceiving  you,  the  hypocritical  creature,  who  hangs
knitted  curtains  in  all  the  windows  only  to  cause  me
discomfort.  She  has  never  loved  you,  my  poor  boy.
:icr  only  wanted  to  have  her  well  married.
She  took  you  to  be  provided  for."

She  managed  her  affair  so  well  that  Count  Hcnrik
became  furious.     He  wished  to  get  a  divorce.     He
icd  to  send  his  wife  home  to  her  father.

•'  No,  my  friend,"  said  Countess  Marta,  "  in  that
way  she  would  be  quite  given  over  to  evil.     She  is
spoiled   and  badly  brought  up.     But   let   me  take
.  let  me  lead  her  to  the  path  of  duty."

And  the  count  called  in  his  countess  to  tell  her
she  now  was  to  obey  his  mother  in  everything.

Many  angry  words  the  young  man  let  the  young
woman  hear.  He  stretched  his  hands  to  heaven  and
accused  it  of  having  let  his  name  be  dragged  in  the
dirt  by  a  shameless  woman.  He  shook  his  clenched
fist  before  her  face  and  asked  her  what  punishment
she  thought  great  enough  for  such  a  crime  as  hers.

She  was  not  at  all  afraid.  She  thought  that  she
had  done  right.  She  said  that  she  had  already
caught  a  serious  cold,  and  that  might  be  punish-
ment enough.

Klizabeth,"  says  Countess  Marta,  "this  is  not  a
matter  to  joke  about."


2;0         THE  STORY  OF  GiiSTA   BE  RUNG

"  \Vc  two,"  answers  the  young  woman,  "  have  never
been  able  to  agree  about  the  right  time  to  joke  and
to  be  serious."

"  But  you  ought  to  understand,  Elizabeth,  that  no
honorable  woman  leaves  her  home  to  roam  about  in
the  middle  of  the  night  with  a  known  adventurer."

Then  Elizabeth  Dohna  saw  that  her  mother-in-law
meant  her  ruin.  She  saw  that  she  must  fight  to  the
last  gasp,  lest  Countess  Marta  should  succeed  in  draw-
ing down  upon  her  a  terrible  misfortune.

"  Henrik,"  she  begs,  "  do  not  let  your  mother
come  between  us !  Let  me  tell  you  how  it  all  hap-
pened. You  are  just,  you  will  not  condemn  me  un-
heard. Let  me  tell  you  all,  and  you  will  see  that  I
only  acted  as  you  have  taught  me."

The  count  nodded  a  silent  consent,  and  Countess
Elizabeth  told  how  she  had  come  to  drive  Gosta  Ber-
ling  into  the  evil  way.  She  told  of  everything  which
had  happened  in  the  little  blue  cabinet,  and  how  she
had  felt  herself  driven  by  her  conscience  to  go  and
save  him  she  had  wronged.  "  I  had  no  right  to  judge
him,"  she  said, "  and  my  husband  has  himself  taught
me  that  no  sacrifice  is  too  great  when  one  will  make
amends  for  a  wrong.  Is  it  not  so,  Henrik?  "

The  count  turned  to  his  mother.

"What  has  my  mother  to  say  about  this?"  he
asked.  His  little  body  was  now  quite  stiff  with  dig-
nity, and  his  high,  narrow  forehead  lay  in  majestic
folds.

"I,"  answered  the  countess,  —  "I  say  that  Anna
Stjarnhok  is  a  clever  girl,  and  she  knew  what  she  was
doing  when  she  told  Elizabeth  that  story."

"  You  are  pleased  to  misunderstand  me,"  said  the
count.  "  I  ask  what  you  think  of  this  story.  Has


/•/.v/.  271

Countess  Mart  a  Dohija  tried  to  persuade  her  daugh-
my  sister,  to  marry  a  dismissed  priest?  "
unless  Miirta  was  silent  an  instant     Alas,  tli.n
o  stupid,  so  stupid )     Now  he  was  quite  on
tin  wrong  track.    Her  hound  was  pursuing  the  hi:
elf  and  letting  the  hare  get  away.     Hut  if  M
Dohna  was  without  an  answer  for  an  instant,  it  was
not  lont

Dear  friend,"  she  said  with  a  shrug,  ••  there  is  a
reason  for  letting  all  those  old  stories  about  that  un-
happy man  rest,  —  the  same  reason  which  makes  me
beg  you  to  suppress  all  public  scandal.  It  is  most
probable  that  he  has  perished  in  the  night."

She  spoke  in  a  gentle,  commiserating  tone,   but
there  was  not  a  word  of  truth  in  what  she  said.

1  li  abcth  has  slept  late  to-day  and  therefore  has
not  heard  that  people  have  already  been  sent  out
on  to  the  lake  to  look  for  Herr  Berling.  Me  has  not
rned  to  Ekeby,  and  they  fear  that  he  has  drowned.
The  ice  broke  up  this  morning.  See,  the  storm  has
split  it  into  a  thousand  pieces."

Countess  Elizabeth  looked  out.     The  lake  was  al-
most open.

Then  in   despair  she  threw  herself  on  her  knees
before  her  husband  and  confession  rushed  from  her
She  had  wished  to  escape  God's  justice.     She
had  lied  and  dissembled.     She  had  thrown  the  whitt-
le of  innocence  over  her.

ondemn  me.  turn  me  out!     I  have  loved  him.
Be  in  no  doubt  but  that  I  have  loved  him !     I  tear
my  hair.  I  rend  my  clothes  with  grief.     I  do  not  care
for  anything  when  he  is  dead.    I  do  not  care  to  si
my  »u   shall    know   the   whole   truth.      My

heart's  love  I  h.r.     taken  from  my  husband  and  ^


2/2          THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BEKLING

to  a  stranger.     Oh,  I  am  one  of  them  whom  a  for-
bidden love  has  tempted."

You  desperate  young  tiling,  lie  there  at  your  judges'
feet  and  tell  them  all !    Welcome,  martyrdom  !    V
come,  disgrace !   Welcome !    Oh,  how  shall  you  bring
the  bolt  of  heaven  down  on  your  young  head !

Tell  your  husband  how  frightened  you  were  when
the  pain  came  over  you,  mighty  and  irresistible,  how
you  shuddered  for  your  heart's  wretchedness.  You
would  rather  have  met  the  ghosts  of  the  graveyard
than  the  demons  in  your  own  soul.

Tell  them  how  you  felt  yourself  unworthy  to
tread  the  earth.  With  prayers  and  tears  you  have
struggled.

11  O  God,  save  me !  O  Son  of  God,  caster  out  of
devils,  save  me !  "  you  have  prayed.

Tell  them  how  you  thought  it  best  to  conceal  it
all.  No  one  should  know  your  wretchedness.  You
thought  that  it  was  God's  pleasure  to  have  it  so.
You  thought,  too,  that  you  went  in  God's  ways  when
you  wished  to  save  the  man  you  loved.  He  knew
nothing  of  your  love.  He  must  not  be  lost  for  your
sake.  Did  you  know  what  was  right?  Did  you  kn<>\\
what  was  wrong?  God  alone  knew  it,  and  he  had
passed  sentence  upon  you.  He  had  struck  down  your
heart's  idol.  He  had  led  you  on  to  the  great,  healing
way  of  penitence.

Tell  them  that  you  know  that  salvation  is  not  to  be
found  in  concealment.  Devils  love  darkness.  I^t
your  judges'  hands  close  on  the  scourge  !  The  pun-
ishment shall  fall  like  soothing  balm  on  the  wounds  of
sin.  Your  heart  longs  for  suffering.

Tell  them  all  that,  while  you  kneel  on  the  floor  and
wring  your  hands  in  fierce  sorrow,  speaking  in  the


PENITENCE  373

accents  of  despair,  with  a  shrill  laugh  greeting
the  thought  of  punishment  and  dishonor,  until  at  last
band  seizes  you  and  drags  you  up  from  the
floor.

onduct  yourself  as  it  behooves  a  Countess  Dohna,
or  I  must  ask  my  mother  to  chastise  you  like  a  child."
)o  with  me  what  you  will
a  the  count  pronounced  his  sentence:  —
"  My  mother  has   interceded  for  you.     Therefore
you  may  stay  in  my  house.     Hut  hereafter  it  is  she
who  commands,  and  you  who  obey."

Sec  the  way  of  the  penitent !  The  young  countess
has  become  the  most  humble  of  servants.  How  long?
Oh,  how  long?

How  long  shall  a  proud  heart  be  able  to  bend?
How  long  can  impatient  lips  keep  silent ;  how  long
a  passionate  hand  be  held  back?

Sweet  is  the  misery  of  humiliation.  When  the
back  aches  from  the  heavy  work  the  heart  is  at
peace.  To  one  who  sleeps  a  few  short  hours  on  a
.  bed  of  straw,  sleep  comes  uncalled.

Let  the  older  woman  change  herself  into  an  evil
spirit  to  torture  the  younger.  She  thanks  her  bene-
factress. As  yet  the  evil  is  not  dead  in  her.  Hunt
her  up  at  four  o'clock  every  morning !  Impose  on
pcricnced  workwoman  an  unreasonable  day's
worl  heavy  weaving-loom!  It  is  well.  The

penitent  has  perhaps  not  strength  enough  to  swing
the  scourge  with  the  required  force.

When  the  time  for  the  great  spring  washing  comes,1
Countess  Malta  has  her  stand  at  the  tub  in  the  wash-
house.  She  comes  herself  to  oversee  her  \

1  In  the  country,  in  Sweden,  they  wash  twke  a  year,  in  tpriaf  and
autumn.  18


274         THE  STORY  OF  G&STA   BE  RUNG

"  The  water  is  too  cold  in  your  tub,"  she  says,  and
s  boiling  water  from  a  kettle  and  pours  it  over
her  bare  arms.

1  he  day  is  cold,  the  washerwomen  have  to  stand
by  the  lake  and  rinse  out  the  clothes.  Squalls  rush
by  and  drench  them  with  sleet.  Dripping  wet  and
heavy  as  lead  are  the  washerwomen's  skirts.

Hard  is  the  work  with  the  wooden  clapper.  The
blood  bursts  from  the  delicate  nails.

Hut  Countess  Elizabeth  does  not  complain.  Praised
be  the  goodness  of  God  !  The  scourge's  thorny  knots
fall  softly,  as  if  they  were  rose-leaves,  on  the  penitent's
back.

The  young  woman  soon  hears  that  Gosta  Bcrling
is  alive.  Her  mother-in-law  had  only  wanted  to
cheat  her  into  a  confession.  Well,  what  of  that?
See  the  hand  of  God  !  He  had  won  over  the  sinner
to  the  path  of  atonement.

She  grieves  for  only  one  thing.  How  shall  it  be
with  her  mother-in-law,  whose  heart  God  for  her
sake  has  hardened?  Ah,  he  will  judge  her  mildly.
She  must  show  anger  to  help  the  sinner  to  win  back
God's  love.

She  did  not  know  that  often  a  soul  that  has  tried  all
other  pleasures  turns  to  delight  in  cruelty.  In  the
suffering  of  animals  and  men,  weakened  emotions  find
a  source  of  joy.

The  older  woman  is  not  conscious  of  any  malice.
She  thinks  she  is  only  correcting  a  wanton  wife.  So
she  lies  awake  sometimes  at  night  and  broods  over
new  methods  of  torture.

One  evening  she  goes  through  the  house  and  has
the  countess  light  her  with  a  candle.  She  carries  it
in  her  hand  without  a  candle-stick.


PENITENCE  *7S

The  candle  is  burned  out,"  says  the  young  woman.
•*  When  there  is  an  end  to  the  candle,  the  candle-
stick must  burn,"  answers  Countess  Marta.

1  they  go  on,  until  the  reeking  wick  goes  out  in
scorched  ha:

But  that  is  childishness.    There  arc  tortures  for

the  soul  which  arc  greater  than  any  suffering  of  the

body.    Countess  Marta  invites  guests  and  makes  the

•rcss  of  the  house  herself  wait  on  them  at  her

own  table.

That  is  the  penitent's  great  day.    Strangers  shall
see  her  in  her  humiliation.    They  shall  see  that  she
is  no  longer  worthy  to  sit  at  her  husband's  table.
Oh,  with  what  scorn  their  cold  eyes  will  rest  on  her!
Worse,  much  worse  it  is.     Not  an  eye  meets  hers.
ybody  at  the  table  sits  silent  and   depressed,
men  and  women  equally  out  of  spirits.

But  she  gathers  it  all  to  lay  it  like  coals  of  fire  on
her  head.  Is  her  sin  so  dreadful?  Is  it  a  disgrace
to  be  near  her?

Then   temptation   comes.     Anna   Stjarnhok,   who

has  been  her  friend,  and   the  judge  at   Munkerud,

Anna's  neighbor  at  the  table,  take  hold  of  her  when

she  comes,  snatch  the  dish  from  her,  push  up  a  chair,

will  not  let  her  escape.

it   there,   child,   sit  there!"    says    the    judge.
"  You  have  done  no  wrong."

And  with  one  voice  all  the  guests  declare  that  if
she  docs  not  sit  down  at  the  table,  they  must  all  go.
They  arc  no  executioners.  They  will  not  do  Malta
Dohna's  bidding.  They  arc  not  so  easily  deceived
as  that  sheep-like  count.

•  >h,  good  gentlemen !    Oh,  beloved  friends !    Do
not  be  so  charitable.     You  force  me  to  cry  out  my


THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG

sin.  There  is  some  one  whom  I  have  loved  too
dear

"  Child,  you  do  not  know  what  sin  is.  You  do
not  understand  how  guiltless  you  are.  Gosta  Berling
did  not  even  know  that  you  liked  him.  Take  your
proper  place  in  your  home!  You  have  done  no
wrong."

They  keep  up  her  courage  for  a  while  and  arc
themselves  suddenly  gay  as  children.  Laughter  and
jests  ring  about  the  board.

These  impetuous,  emotional  people,  they  are  so
good ;  but  still  they  are  sent  by  the  tempter.  They
want  to  make  her  think  that  she  is  a  martyr,  and
openly  scoff  at  Countess  Marta  as  if  she  were  a
witch.  But  they  do  not  understand.  They  do  not
know  how  the  soul  longs  for  purity,  nor  how  the  peni-
tent is  driven  by  his  own  heart  to  expose  himself  to
the  stones  of  the  way  and  the  heat  of  the  sun.

Sometimes  Countess  Marta  forces  her  to  sit  the
whole  day  long  quietly  in  the  bay  window,  and  then
she  tells  her  endless  stories  of  Gosta  Berling,  priest
and  adventurer.  If  her  memory  does  not  hold  out,
she  romances,  only  to  contrive  that  his  name  the
whole  day  shall  sound  in  the  young  woman's  ears.
That  is  what  she  fears  most.  On  those  days  she
feels  that  her  penance  will  never  end.  Her  love  will
not  die.  She  thinks  that  she  herself  will  die  before  it.
Her  strength  begins  to  give  way.  She  is  often  very  ill.

"But  where  is  your  hero  tarrying?"  asks  tin-
countess,  spitefully.  "  From  day  to  day  I  have  ex-
pected him  at  the  head  of  the  pensioners.  Why  does
he  not  take  Borg  by  storm,  set  you  up  on  a  throne,
and  throw  me  and  your  husband,  bound,  into  a  dun-
geon cell?  Are  you  already  forgotten?"


PENITENCE  277

She  is  almost  read)  mi  him  and  say  that  she

:  him  to  give  her  any  help.     Hut
is  best  to  be  silent,  to  be  silent  ami  to  suffer.
Day  by  day  she  is  more  ami  m«.ie  >    :    amcd  by
the  ;  She  has  incessant  fever  ami  i  -

so  weak  that  she  can  scarcely  hold  herself  up.    She
Life's  strongest  forces  are  subdued.
Love  and  joy  do  not  dare  to  move.    She  no  longer
paia.

It  is  as  if  her  husband  no  longer  knew  that  she
•s   shut  up   in    his    room  almost  the
whole  day  and  studies   indcciplu  table   manuscripts
and  essays  in  old,  stained  print.

He   leads  charters  of  nobility  on  parchment,  from
which  the  seal  of  Sweden  hangs,  large  and  potent,
stamped  in  red  wax  and  kept  in  a  turned  wooden  box.
He  examines  old  coats  of  arms  with  lilies  on  a  while
field  and  griffins  on  a  blue.     Such  things  he  under-
stands, and  such  he  interprets  with  ease.     And  he
reads  over  and   over   again   speeches  and   obituary
-es  of  the  noble  counts  Donna,  where  their  ex-
ploits are  compared  to  those  of  the  heroes  of  I
Ljods  of  Greece.

Those  old  things  have  always  given  him  pleasure.
But  he  does  not  trouble  himself  to  think  a  second
time  of  his  young  wife.

Countess  Marta  has  said  a  word  which  killed  the
love  in  him  :  "  She  took  you  for  your  money."  No
man  can  bear  to  hear  such  a  thing.  It  quenches  all
love.  Now  it  was  quite  one  to  him  what  happened
to  the  young  woman.  It  hi-,  mother  could  bring  her
to  the  path  of  duty,  so  much  the  better.  Count  1 1  en-
rik  had  much  admiration  for  his  mother.


2?8  THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BEKl.l.\C,

This  misery  went  on  for  a  muntli.  Still  it  was  not
such  a  stormy  and  agitated  time  as  it  may  sound
when  it  is  all  compressed  into  a  few  written  pages.
Countess  Elizabeth  was  always  outwardly  calm.  Once
only,  when  she  heard  that  Gosta  Berling  mi^ht  be
dead,  emotion  overcame  her.

But  her  grief  was  so  great  that  she  had  not  been
able  to  preserve  her  love  for  her  husband  that  she
would  probably  have  let  Countess  Marta  torture  her
to  death,  if  her  old  housekeeper  had  not  spoken  tu
her  one  evening.

"  You  must  speak  to  the  count,  countess,"  she
said.  "  Good  heavens,  you  are  such  a  child  !  You
do  not  perhaps  know  yourself,  countess,  what  you
have  to  expect;  but  I  see  well  enough  what  the
matter  is."

But  that  was  just  what  she  could  not  say  to  her  hus-
band, while  he  cherished  such  a  black  suspicion  of  her.

That  night  she  dressed  herself  quietly,  and  went  out.
She  wore  an  ordinary  peasant-girl's  dress,  and  had  a
bundle  in  her  hand.  She  meant  to  run  away  from
her  home  and  never  come  back.

She  did  not  go  to  escape  pain  and  suffering.  But
now  she  believed  that  God  had  given  her  a  sign  that
she  might  go,  that  she  must  preserve  her  body's
health  and  strength.

She  did  not  turn  to  the  west  across  the  lake,  for
there  lived  one  whom  she  loved  very  dearly;  nor  did
she  go  to  the  north,  for  there  many  of  her  friends
lived ;  nor  towards  the  south,  for,  far,  far  to  the  south
lay  her  father's  home,  and  she  did  not  wish  to  come  a
step  nearer ;  but  to  the  east  she  went,  for  there  she
knew  she  had  no  home,  no  beloved  friend,  no  acquaint-
ance, no  help  nor  comfort


TV  179

She  did  not  go  with  alight  step,  for  she  thought
that  she  had  not  yet  appeased  God  Hut  still  she
was  glad  that  sh<  '  In-.ir  the  burden  of

among  strangers.  Their  indifferent  glances
should  rest  on  her,  soothing  as  cold  steel  laid  on  a
swollen  limb.

She   meant  to  continue   her  wandering  until  she
1  .1  l«»\vly  cottage  at  the  edge  of  the  wood,  where
no  one  should  know  her.     "  You  can  sec  what  has
happened  to  me.  ami  my  p. in -nt^  have  turned  me  <
she  nu-.mt  to  say.     "  Let  me  have  food  and  a  roof
1  here,  until  I  can  earn  my  bread.     I  am
not  without  mon

So  she  went  <*n  in  the  bright  June  night,  for  the
m<>nth  of  May  had  passed  during  her  suffering.  Alas,
month  oi  May.  lh.it  fair  time  uhm  the  birches
mingle  their  pale  green  with  the  darkness  of  the  pine
forest,  and  when  the  south-wind  comes  again  satiated
uith  \\armth.

Ah,  May,  you  dear,  bright  month,  have  you  ever
seen  a  child  who  is  sitting  on  its  mother's  knee
tenin-  to  fairy  stories?  As  long  as  the  child  is  told  of
and  of  the  bitter  suffering  of  beautiful
princesses,  it  holds  its  head  up  and  its  eyes  open;
but  if  the  mother  begins  to  speak  of  happiness  and
sunshine,  the  little  one  closes  its  eyes  and  falls  asleep
with  its  head  against  her  breast.

And  sec,  fair  month  of  May,  such  a  child  am  I  too.
Others  may  listen  to  talcs  of  flowers  and  sunsh
but  for  myself  I  choose  the  dark  nights,  full  of  visions
and  adventures,  bitter  destinies,  sorrowful  sufferings
of  wild  hearts.


280         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING


CHAPTER  IV

THE  IRON   FROM   EKEBY

SPRING  had  come,  and  the  iron  from  all  the  mines  in
Varmland  was  to  be  sent  to  Gothenburg.

But  at  Ekeby  they  had  no  iron  to  send.  In  the
autumn  there  had  been  a  scarcity  of  water,  in  the
spring  the  pensioners  had  been  in  power.

In  their  time  strong,  bitter  ale  foamed  down  the
broad  granite  slope  of  Bjorksjo  falls,  and  Lofvcn's
long  lake  was  filled  not  with  water,  but  with  brandy.
In  their  time  no  iron  was  brought  to  the  forge,  the
smiths  stood  in  shirt-sleeves  and  clogs  by  the  hearth
and  turned  enormous  roasts  on  long  spits,  while  the
boys  on  long  tongs  held  larded  capons  over  the  coals.
In  those  days  they  slept  on  the  carpenter's  bench  and
played  cards  on  the  anvil.  In  those  days  no  iron
was  forged.

But  the  spring  came  and  in  the  wholesale  office  in
Gothenburg  they  began  to  expect  the  iron  from
Ekeby.  They  looked  up  the  contract  made  with  the
major  and  his  wife,  where  there  were  promises  of  the
delivery  of  many  hundreds  of  tons.

But  what  did  the  pensioners  care  for  the  contract?
They  thought  of  pleasure  and  fiddling  and  feasting.

Iron  came  from  Stomne,  iron  from  Solje.  From
Uddeholm  it  came,  and  from  Munkfors,  and  from  all  of
the  many  mines.  But  where  is  the  iron  from  Ekeby?


Is  Ekeby  no  longer  the  chief  of  Varmland'i  iron
works?  Docs  no  one  watch  over  the  honor  of  the
old  estate?  Like  ashes  f*>r  the  wind  it  is  left  in  the
hands  of  shiftless  pensioners.

Well,  but  if  the  Kkeby  hammers  have  rested,  they
t  have  worked  at  our  six  other  estates.    There
must  be  there  enough  and  more  than  enough  iron.

So  Gotta  Berling  sets  out  to  talk  with  the  managers
of  the  six  mines.

He  travelled  ten  miles  or  so  to  the  north,  till  he
came  to  Lotafors.  It  is  a  pretty  place,  there  can  be
no  doubt  of  that  The  upper  Lofven  lies  spread  out
bcfo:  1  close  behind  it  has  Gurlitta  cliff,  with

steeply  rising  top  and  a  look  of  wild  ness  and  romance
which  well  suits  an  old  mountain.  Hut  the  smithy,
that  is  not  as  it  ought  to  be:  the  ^wing-wheel  is
broken,  and  has  been  so  a  whole  year.

"  Well,  why  has  it  not  been  mended?"

41  The  carpenter,  my  dear  friend,  the  carpenter,  the
only  one  in  the  whole  district  who  could  im  ml  it,
has  been  busy  somewhere  else.  We  have  not  been
able  to  forge  a  single  ton."

Why  did  you  not  send  after  the  carpenter?"

As  if  we  had  not  sent  after  him

every  day,  but  he  has  not  been  able  to  come.     He

busy  building  bowling-alleys  and  summer-houses

y-"

He  goes  further  to  the  north  to  Bjornidet  Also  a
beautiful  spot,  but  iron,  is  there  any  iron?

No,  of  course  not.  They  had  had  no  coal,  and
they  had  not  been  able  to  get  any  money  from  Ekcby
to  pay  charcoal-burners  and  teamsters.  There  had
been  no  work  all  winter.

Then  Gosta  turns  to  the  south.    He  comes  to  H4n,


282         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BEK/J.\u

and  to  Lofstafors,  far  in  in  the  woods,  but  he  fares
no  better  there.  Nowhere  have  they  iron,  and  every-
where it  seems  to  be  the  pensioners'  own  fault  that
such  is  the  case.

So  Gosta  turns  back  to  Ekeby,  and  the  pensioners
with  gloomy  looks  take  into  consideration  the  fifty
tons  or  so,  which  are  in  stock,  and  their  heads  are
weighed  down  with  grief,  for  they  hear  how  all  nature
sneers  at  Ekeby,  and  they  think  that  the  ground
shakes  with  sobs,  that  the  trees  threaten  them  with
angry  gestures,  and  that  the  grass  and  weeds  lament
that  the  honor  of  Ekeby  is  gone.

But  why  so  many  words  and  so  much  perplexity?
There  is  the  iron  from  Ekeby.

There  it  is,  loaded  on  barges  on  the  Klar  River,
ready  to  sail  down  the  stream,  ready  to  be  weighed
at  Karlstad,  ready  to  be  conveyed  to  Gothenburg.
So  it  is  saved,  the  honor  of  Ekeby.

But  how  is  it  possible?  At  Ekeby  there  was  not
more  than  fifty  tons  of  iron,  at  the  six  other  mines
there  was  no  iron  at  all.  How  is  it  possible  that  full-
loaded  barges  shall  now  carry  such  an  enormous
amount  of  iron  to  the  scales  at  Karlstad?  Yes,  one
may  well  ask  the  pensioners.

The  pensioners  are  themselves  on  board  the  heavy,
ugly  vessels ;  they  mean  to  escort  the  iron  from  Ekeby
to  Gothenburg.  They  are  going  to  do  everything
for  their  dear  iron  and  not  forsake  it  until  it  is  un-
loaded on  the  wharf  in  Gothenburg.  They  are  going
to  load  and  unload,  manage  sails  and  rudder.  They
are  the  very  ones  for  such  an  undertaking.  Is  there
a  shoal  in  the  Klar  River  or  a  reef  in  the  Vaner  which
they  do  not  know?


/'///.    /A'0.\    MOM  283

If  they  love  an>  n  the  wurM,  iron  on

those  barges.    They  treat  it  like  ti.
glass,  they  spread  cloths  over  it.     Not  a  bit  may  lie
bare,     k       those  heavy,  gray  bars  which  arc  going
•i»e  honor  ot  No  stranger  may

cast  indifferent  glances  on  them.

N<>  .ic  pensioners  have  remained  at  home.

Uncle  Kbcrhard  has  desk,  and  Cousin  Chris-

t'.j.lu  :  has  come  out  of  his  corner.     No  one  can  h<  Kl
back  wl  a  question  of  the  honor  of  Ekcby.

cry  one  knows  that  often  in  life  occur  such
cidcnccs  as  that  which  now  followed.  He  who
still  can  be  surprised  may  wonder  that  the  pensioners
should  be  lying  with  their  barges  at  the  ferry  over
the  Klar  River  just  on  the  morning  after  when
Countess  Elizabeth  had  started  on  her  wanderings
towards  the  east.  Hut  it  would  certainly  have  been
more  wonderful  if  the  young  woman  had  found  no
lu  lp  in  her  need.  It  now  happened  that  she,  who
had  walked  the  whole  i.  .is  coming  along  the

highway  which  led  down  to  the  ferry,  just  as  the
pensioners  intended  to  push  off,  and  they  stood  and
looked  at  her  while  she  talked  to  the  ferryman  and
he  untied  his  boat.  She  was  dressed  like  a  peasant
and  they  never  guessed  who  she  was.  Hut  still
tlu  v  stood  and  stared  at  her,  because  there  was  some-
thing familiar  about  her.  As  she  stood  and  talked  to
the  ferryman,  a  cloud  of  dust  appeared  on  the  high-
.  and  in  that  cloud  of  dust  they  could  catch  a
glimpse  of  a  big  yellow  coach.  She  knew  that  it
was  from  Horg,  that  they  were  out  to  look  for  her,
and  that  she  would  now  be  discovered.  She  could
no  longer  hope  to  escape  in  the  ferryman's  boat,  and
the  only  hiding-place  she  saw  was  the  pensioners'


284         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

barges.  She  rushed  down  to  them  without  seeing
who  it  was  on  board.  And  \\vll  it  was  that  she  did
not  see,  for  otherwise  she  would  rather  have  thrown
herself  under  the  horses'  feet  than  have  taken  IKT
flight  thither.

When  she  came  on  board  she  only  scn-.i;:
"  Hide  me,  hide  me !  "  And  then  she  tripped  ami  fell
on  the  pile  of  iron.  But  the  pensioners  bade  her  be
calm.  They  pushed  off  hurriedly  from  the  land,  so  that
the  barge  came  out  into  the  current  and  bore  down
towards  Karlstad,  just  as  the  coach  reached  the  ferry.

In  the  carnage  sat  Count  Hcnrik  and  Countess
Marta.  The  count  ran  forward  to  ask  the  ferry  in. in
if  he  had  seen  his  countess.  But  as  Count  Henrik
was  a  little  embarrassed  to  have  to  ask  about  a  run-
away wife,  he  only  said :  —

"  Something  has  been  lost !  "

"Really?"  said  the  ferryman.

"  Something  has  been  lost.  I  ask  if  you  have  seen
anything?  "

"  What  are  you  asking  about?  "

"Yes,  it  makes  no  difference,  but  something  has
been  lost.  I  ask  if  you  have  ferried  anything  over
the  river  to-day?"

By  these  means  he  could  find  out  nothing,  and
Countess  Marta  had  to  go  and  speak  to  the  man.
She  knew  in  a  minute,  that  she  whom  they  sought
was  on  board  one  of  the  heavily  gliding  barges.

"  Who  are  the  people  on  those  barges?  "

"  Oh,  they  are  the  pensioners,  as  we  call  them."

"  Ah,"  says  the  countess.  "  Yes,  then  your  wife
is  in  good  keeping,  Henrik.  We  might  as  well  go
straight  home."

On   the   barge  there  was   no  such  great    joy  as


7//A-  IRON  FROM  EKEBY  28$

Countess  Mart  a  believed.     As  long  as  the  yellow
coach    was   in   sight,  tl.  ncd   young  woman

shrank   together  on  the  load  motionless  and  silent,
staring  at  the  shore.

•bably  she  first  recognized  the  pensioners  when
she  had  seen  the    yellow  coach  drive  away.     She
started  up.     It  was  as  if  she  wanted  to  escape  a;;
but  she  was  stopped  by  the  one  standing  nearest,  and
she  sank  back  on  the  load  with  a  faint  moan.

The  pensioners  dared  not  speak  to  her  nor  ask  her
any  questions.  She  looked  as  if  on  the  verge  of  madness.

Their  careless  heads  began  verily  to  be  heavy  with
responsibility.  This  iron  was  already  a  heavy  load  for
unaccustomed  shoulders,  and  now  they  had  to  watch
over  a  young,  high-born  lady,  who  had  run  away
from  her  husband.

When  they  had  met  this  young  woman  at  the  balls
of  the  winter,  one  and  another  of  them  had  thought
of  a  little  sister  whom  he  had  once  loved.  When  he
played  and  romped  with  that  sister  he  needed  to
handle  her  carefully,  and  when  he  talked  with  her  he
learned  to  be  careful  not  to  use  bad  words.  If
a  strange  boy  had  chased  her  too  wildly  in  their  play
or  had  sung  coarse  songs  for  her,  he  had  thrown
elf  on  him  with  boundless  fury  and  almost
pounded  the  life  out  of  him,  for  his  little  sister  should
never  hear  anything  bad  nor  suffer  any  pain  nor  ever
be  met  with  anger  and  hate.

Countess  Elizabeth  had  been  like  a  joyous  sister
to  them  all.  When  she  had  laid  her  little  ham!

hard  fists,  it  had  been  as  if  she  had  said :  "  Feel
how  fragile  I  am,  but  you  are  my  big  brother;  you
shall  protect  me  both  from  others  and  from  your-
self." And  they  had  been  courtly  knights  as  long
as  they  had  been  with  her.


236         THE  STORY  OF  GtiSTA   BE  RUNG

Now  the  pensioners  looked  upon  her  with  terror,
and  did  not  quite  recogni/c  her.  She  was  worn  and
thin,  her  neck  was  without  roundness,  her  face  trans-
parent. She  must  have  struck  herself  during  her
wanderings,  for  from  a  little  wound  on  her  temple
blood  was  trickling,  and  her  curly,  light  hair,  which
shaded  her  brow,  was  sticky  with  it.  Her  dress  was
soiled  from  her  long  walk  on  the  wet  paths,  and  her
shoes  were  muddy.  The  pensioners  had  a  dreadful
feeling  that  this  was  a  stranger.  The  Countess
Elizabeth  they  knew  never  had  such  wild,  glittering
eyes.  Their  poor  little  sister  had  been  hunted  nearly
to  madness.  It  was  as  if  a  soul  come  down  from
other  spaces  was  struggling  with  the  right  soul  for
the  mastery  of  her  tortured  body.

Hut  there  was  no  need  for  them  to  worry  over  what
they  should  do  with  her.  The  old  thought  soon
waked  in  her.  Temptation  had  come  to  her  again.
God  wished  to  try  her  once  more.  See,  she  is
among  friends ;  does  she  intend  to  leave  the  path  of
the  penitent?

She  rises  and  cries  that  she  must  go.

The  pensioners  try  to  calm  her.  They  told  her
that  she  was  safe.  They  would  protect  her  from  all
persecution.

She  only  begged  to  be  allowed  to  get  into  the  little
boat,  which  was  towed  after  the  barge,  and  row  to
the  land,  to  continue  her  wandering.

But  they  could  not  let  her  go.  What  would
become  of  her?  It  was  better  to  remain  with  them.
They  were  only  poor  old  men,  but  they  would  surely
find  some  way  to  help  her.

Then  she  wrung  her  hands  and  begged  them  to  let
her  go.  But  they  could  not  grant  her  prayer.  She


THE  IRON  FROM  EKEBY  287

was  so  exhausted  and   weak  that  they  thought  that
she  would  die  by  the  roadside.

sta  Berling  stood  a  short  distance  away  and
looked  down  into  the  water  iVrhaps  the  young
woman  would  not  wish  to  sec  him.  He  did  not
kn.*u  it.  hut  his  thoughts  played  and  smiled.  "No-
body knows  where  she  is,"  he  thought ;  "  we  can  take
lur  u  ith  us  to  Ekeby.  We  will  keep  her  hidden  there,
we  pensioners,  and  we  will  be  good  to  her.  She  shall
be  our  queen,  our  mistress,  but  no  one  shall  know
she  is  there.  We  will  guard  her  so  well,  so  well.
She  perhaps  would  be  happy  with  us ;  she  would  be
hed  like  a  daughter  by  all  the  old  men."

Hi-  had  never  dared  to  ask  himself  if  he  loved  her.
She  could  not  be  his  without  sin,  and  he  would  not
;  down  to  anything  low  and  wretched,  that
he  knew.  Hut  to  have  her  concealed  at  Ekeby  and
to  be  good  to  her  after  others  had  been  cruel,  and  to
let  her  enjoy  everything  pleasant  in  life,  ah,  what  a
dream,  what  a  blissful  drear

But  he  wakened  out  of  it,  for  the  young  countess
was  in  dire  distress,  and  her  words  had  the  piercing
accents  of  despair.  She  had  thrown  herself  upon  her
knees  in  the  midst  of  the  pensioners  and  begged  them
to  be  allowed  to  go.

"  God  has  not  yet  pardoned  me,"  she  cried.  "  Let
me  go  1 "

Gosta  saw  that  none  of  the  others  meant  to  obey
her,  and  understood  that  he  must  do  it.  He,  who
loved  her,  must  do  it

He  felt  a  difficulty  in  walking,  as  if  his  every  limb
resisted  his  will,  but  he  dragged  himself  to  her  and
said  that  he  would  take  her  on  shore.

She  rose  instantly.     He  lifted   her  down  into  the


THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

boat  and  rowed  her  to  the  east  shore.     He  landed  at
a  little  pathway  and  helped  her  out  of  the  boat

"  What  is  to  become  of  you,  countess?*'  he  said.

She  lifted  her  finger  solemnly  and  pointed  towards
heaven.

"  If  you  are  in  need,  countess  —  "

He  could  not  speak,  his  voice  failed  him,  but  she
understood  him  and  answered :  —

"  I  will  send  you  word  when  I  need  you."

"  I  would  have  liked  to  protect  you  from  all  evil, "
he  said.

She  gave  him  her  hand  in  farewell,  and  he  was  not
able  to  say  anything  more.  Her  hand  lay  cold  and
limp  in  his.

She  was  not  conscious  of  anything  but  those  inward
voices  which  forced  her  to  go  among  strangers.  She
hardly  knew  that  it  was  the  man  she  loved  whom  she
now  left.

So  he  let  her  go  and  rowed  out  to  the  pensioners
again.  When  he  came  up  on  the  barge  he  was  trem-
bling with  fatigue  and  seemed  exhausted  and  faint.  He
had  done  the  hardest  work  of  his  life,  it  seemed  to
him.

For  the  few  days  he  kept  up  his  courage,  until  the
honor  of  Ekeby  was  saved.  He  brought  the  iron  to
the  weighing-office  on  Kanike  point ;  then  for  a  long
time  he  lost  all  strength  and  love  of  life.

The  pensioners  noticed  no  change  in  him  as  long
as  they  were  on  board.  He  strained  every  nerve  to
keep  his  hold  on  gayety  and  carelessness,  for  it  was  by
gayety  and  carelessness  that  the  honor  of  Ekeby  was
to  be  saved.  How  should  their  venture  at  the  \v<
ing-office  succeed  if  they  came  with  anxious  faces
and  drjected  hearts?


Till-:   1KO.\  I-KOM   1  KERY  289

If  what  rumor  says  •  the  pensioners  that

had  more  sand  than  iron  on  their  barges,  if  it

is  true  that  they  kept  brin^in  1  down  the  same

bars  to  the  weighing-office  at  Kanikc  point,  until  the

.  hundred  tons  were  weighed ;  if  it  is  true  that

all    that  could   happen    because  the  keeper  of  the

public  scales  and  his  men  were  so  well  entertained

out  of  the    hampers  and  wine  cases   brought    from

:>y,  one  must  know  that  they  had  to  be  gay  on

the  iron  barges.

Who  can  know  the  truth  now?  Hut  if  it  was  so,  it  is
certain  that  Gosta  Bcrling  had  no  time  to  grieve.  Of
the  joy  of  adventure  and  danger  he  felt  nothing.  As
soon  as  he  dared,  he  sank  into  a  condition  of  despair.

As  soon  as  the  pensioners  had  got  their  certificate
of  weighing,  they  loaded  their  iron  on  a  bark.  It
was  generally  the  custom  that  the  captain  of  the
vessel  took  charge  of  the  load  to  Gothenburg,  and
the  Varmland  mines  had  no  more  responsibility  for
tluir  iron  when  they  had  got  their  certificate  that  the
consignment  was  filled.  But  the  pensioners  would
do  nothing  by  halves,  they  were  going  to  take  the
iron  all  the  way  to  Gothenburg.

On  the  way  they  met  with  misfortune.  A  storm
broke  out  in  the  night,  the  vessel  was  disabled,  drove
on  a  reef,  and  sank  with  all  her  precious  load.  But  if
one  saw  the  matter  rightly,  what  did  it  matter  if  the
iron  was  lost  ?  The  honor  of  Ekeby  was  saved.  The
iron  had  been  weighed  at  the  weighing-office  at  Kanikc
point.  And  even  if  the  major  had  to  sit  down  and
in  a  curt  letter  inform  the  merchants  in  the  big  town
that  he  would  not  have  their  money,  as  they  had  not
got  his  iron,  that  made  no  difference  cither.  Ekcby
was  so  rich,  and  its  honor  was  saved.

"9


290         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE K I.I

But  if  the  harbors  and  locks,  if  the  mines  and
charcoal-kilns,  if  the  schooners  and  barges  begin  t<>
whisper  of  strange  things?  If  a  gentle  murmur  goes
through  the  forests  that  the  journey  was  a  fraud?  If
it  is  asserted  through  the  whole  of  Varmland  that
there  were  never  more  than  fifty  miserable  tons  on
the  barges  and  that  the  shipwreck  was  arranged  in-
tentionally? A  bold  exploit  had  been  carried  out,
and  a  real  pensioner  prank  accomplished.  By  such
things  the  honor  of  the  old  estate  is  not  blemished.

But  it  happened  so  long  ago  now.  It  is  quite  pos-
sible that  the  pensioners  bought  the  iron  or  that  they
found  it  in  some  hitherto  unknown  storehouse.  The
truth  will  never  be  made  clear  in  the  matter.  The
keeper  of  the  scales  will  never  listen  to  any  talcs  of
fraud,  and  he  ought  to  know.

When  the  pensioners  reached  home  they  heard
news.  Count  Dohna's  marriage  was  to  be  annulled.
The  count  had  sent  his  steward  to  Italy  to  get  proofs
that  the  marriage  had  not  been  legal.  He  had  come
back  late  in  the  summer  with  satisfactory  reports.
What  these  were,  —  well,  that  I  do  not  know  with  cer-
tainty. One  must  treat  old  tales  with  care  ;  they  are
like  faded  roses.  They  easily  drop  their  petals  if
one  comes  too  near  to  them.  People  say  that  the
ceremony  in  Italy  had  not  been  performed  by  a  real
priest.  I  do  not  know,  but  it  certainly  is  true  that
the  marriage  between  Count  Dohna  and  Elizabeth
von  Thurn  was  declared  at  the  court  at  Borg  never
to  have  been  any  marriage.

Of  this  the  young  woman  knew  nothing.  She
lived  among  peasants  in  some  out-of-the-way  place,
if  she  was  living.


ULLJECROMS  HOME  191


CHAPTER    V
ULLIECRONA'S  HOME

AMONG  the  pensioners  was  one  whom  I  have  often

mentioned   as   a   great    musician.     He   was  a  tall,

heavily  built  man,  with  a  big  head  and  bushy,  black

I  Ic  was  certainly  not  more  than  forty  years  old

i  .it  time,  but  he  had  an  ugly,  large-featured  face

and  a  pompous   manner.     This   made   many  think

him  old.     He  was  a  good  man,  but  low-spirited.

One  afternoon  he  took  his  violin  under  his  arm
and  went  away  from  Ekcby.  He  said  no  farewell
to  any  one,  although  he  never  meant  to  return.  He
loathed  the  life  there  ever  since  he  had  seen  Coun-
tess Elizabeth  in  her  trouble.  He  walked  without
ng  the  whole  evening  and  the  whole  night,  until
at  early  sunrise  he  came  to  a  little  farm,  called
Lbfdala,  which  belonged  to  him.

It  was  so  early  that  nobody  was  as  yet  awake.
I.illiccrnna  sat  down  on  the  green  bench  outside  the
main  building  and  looked  at  his  estate.  A  more
beautiful  place  did  not  exist  The  lawn  in  front  of
the  house  lay  in  a  gentle  slope  and  was  covered  with
fine,  light-green  grass.  There  never  was  such  a  1.
The  sheep  were  allowed  to  graze  there  and  the
children  to  romp  there  in  their  games,  but  it  was
always  just  as  even  and  green.  The  scythe  never
passed  over  it.  but  at  least  once  a  week  the  mistress


292          THE  STORY  OF  GtiSTA   BERL1.\

of  the  house  had  all  sticks  and  straws  and  dry  leaves
swept  from  the  fresh  grass.  He  looked  at  the  gravel
walk  in  front  of  the  house  and  suddenly  drew  his  feet
back.  The  children  had  late  in  the  evening  raked
it,  and  his  big  feet  had  done  terrible  harm  to  the  fine
work.  Think  how  everything  grew  there.  The  six
mountain-ashes  which  guarded  the  place  were  hiijli
as  beeches  and  wide-spreading  as  oaks.  Such  trees
had  never  been  seen  before.  They  were  beauti-
ful with  their  thick  trunks  covered  with  yellow
lichens,  and  with  big,  white  flower-clusters  sticking
out  from  the  dark  foliage.  It  made  him  think  of
th<-  sky  and  its  stars.  It  was  indeed  wonderful  how
the  trees  grew  there.  There  stood  an  old  willow,  so
thick  that  the  arms  of  two  men  could  not  meet  about
it.  It  was  now  rotten  and  hollow,  and  the  lightning
had  taken  the  top  off  it,  but  it  would  not  die.  Every
spring  a  cluster  of  green  shoots  came  up  out  of  the
shattered  trunk  to  show  that  it  was  alive.  That  haw-
thorn by  the  east  gable  had  become  such  a  big  tree
that  it  overshadowed  the  whole  house.  The  roof
was  white  with  its  dropping  petals,  for  the  hawthorn
had  already  blossomed.  And  the  birches  which
stood  in  small  clumps  here  and  there  in  the  pastures,
they  certainly  had  found  their  paradise  on  his  farm.
They  developed  there  in  so  many  different  growths,
as  if  they  had  meant  to  imitate  all  other  trees.  One
was  like  a  linden,  thick  and  leafy  with  a  wide-spread-
ing arch,  another  stood  close  and  tall  like  a  poplar,
and  a  third  drooped  its  branches  like  a  weeping-
willow.  No  one  was  like  another,  and  they  were  all
beautiful.

Then  he  rose  and  went  round  the  house.     There
lay  the  garden,  so  wonderfully  beautiful  that  he  had


ULUECRONA'S  HOME  293

to  stop  and  draw  a  long  breath.    The  apple-tree*

bloom.    Yes,  of  course  he  kn<
had  seen  it  on  all  the  other  farms;  but  in  no  other
place  did  they   bloom   as  they  did   in  that  gar

bad  seen  them  blossom  bince  he  was  a
chiUl.  11.  walked  with  clasped  hands  and  ca
step  up  and  down  the  gravel  path.  The  ground
was  white,  and  the  trees  were  white,  here  and  there
uith  a  touch  of  pink.  He  had  never  seen  anything
so  beautiful,  lie  knew  every  tree,  as  one  knows
one's  brothers  and  sisters  and  playmates.  The  astra-
chan  trees  were  quite  white,  also  the  winter  fruit-
trees.  Hut  th«  riiNsct  blossoms  were  pink,  and  the
crab-apple  almost  red.  The  most  beautiful  was  the
.si Id  apple- tree,  whose  little,  bitter  apples  nobody
could  eat.  It  was  not  stingy  with  its  blossoms ;  it
looked  like  a  great  snow-drift  in  the  morning  light.

For  remember  that  it  was  early  in  the  morning !

i  made  every  leaf  shine,  all  dust  was  washed

away.     Behind    the    forest-clad    hills,   close   under

which  the  farm  lay,  came  the  first  rays  of  the  sun.

is  as  if  the  tops  of  the  pines  had  been  set  on

fire  by  them.     Over  the  clover  meadows,  over  rye

and  corn  fields,  and  over  the  sprouting  oat-shoots,  lay

tin  lightest  of  mists,  like  a  thin  veil,  and  the  shadows

fell  sharp  as  in  moonlight.

He  stood  and  looked  at  the  big  vegetable  beds
between  the  paths.  He  knows  that  mistress  and
maids  have  been  at  work  here.  They  have  dug,
raked,  pulled  up  weeds  and  turned  the  earth,  until  it
has  become  fine  and  light.  After  they  have  made
the  beds  even  and  the  edges  straight  they  have  taken
tapes  and  pegs  and  marked  out  rows  and  squares
Then  they  have  sowed  and  set  out,  until  all  the  rows


294         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BERLL\\,

and  squares  have  been  filled.  And  the  children  have
been  with  them  and  have  been  so  happy  and  eager
to  be  allowed  to  help,  although  it  has  been  hard
work  for  them  to  stand  bent  and  stretch  their  arms
out  over  the  broad  beds.  And  of  great  assistance
have  they  been,  as  any  one  can  understand.

Now  what  they  had  sown  began  to  come  up.

God  bless  them  !  they  stood  there  so  bravely,  both
peas  and  beans  with  their  two  thick  cotyledons ;  and
how  thick  and  nice  had  both  carrots  and  beets  come
up  !  The  funniest  of  all  were  the  little  crinkled  parsley
leaves,  which  lifted  a  little  earth  above  them  and
played  bopeep  with  life  as  yet

And  here  was  a  little  bed  where  the  lines  did  not
go  so  evenly  and  where  the  small  squares  seemed  to
be  an  experiment  map  of  everything  which  could  be
set  or  sowed.  That  was  the  children's  garden.

And  Lilliecrona  put  his  violin  hastily  up  to  his
chin  and  began  to  play.  The  birds  began  to  sing  in
the  big  shrubbery  which  protected  the  garden  from
the  north  wind.  It  was  not  possible  for  anything
gifted  with  voice  to  be  silent,  so  glorious  was  the
morning.  The  fiddle-bow  moved  quite  of  itself.

Lilliecrona  walked  up  and  down  the  paths  and
played.  "  No,"  he  thought,  "  there  is  no  more  beauti-
ful place."  What  was  Ekcby  compared  to  Lofdala.
His  home  had  a  thatched  roof  and  was  only  one  story
high.  It  lay  at  the  edge  of  the  wood,  with  the  moun-
tain above  it  and  the  long  valley  below  it.  There
was  nothing  wonderful  about  it ;  there  was  no  lake
there,  no  water-fall,  no  park,  but  it  was  beautiful  just
the  same.  It  was  beautiful  because  it  was  a  good,
peaceful  home.  Life  was  easy  to  live  there.  Every-
thing which  in  other  places  caused  bitterness  and


LfLUSCXOMS  HOM  193

bate  was  there  smoothed  away  with  gentleness.    So
bhall

Within,  in  the  house,  the  mistress  lies  and  sleeps  in
a  room  which  opens  on  the  garden.     She  wakes  sud-
and  listens,  but  she  docs  not  move.     She  lies
smiling    and  ag.     Then    the    inu -u  i.m   comes

nearer  and  nearer,  and  at  last  it  sounds  as  if  he  had
stopped  under  her  window.  It  is  indet-il  not  the  first
she  has  luaid  the  violin  under  her  window.  Ik-
was  in  the  habit  of  coming  so.  her  husband,  when  they
had  done  something  unusually  wild  there  at  Kkeby.

1  ie  stands  there  and  confesses  and  begs  for  forgive-
ness.    He  describes  to  her  the  dark  powers  which
t  him  away  from  what  he  loves  best,  —  from  her
and  the  children.     But  he  loves  them.     Oh,  of  course
he  loves  them  !

While  he  plays  she  gets  up  and  puts  on  her  clothes
without  quite  knowing  what  she  is  doing.  She  is  so
taken  up  with  his  playing.

1 1  j|  not  luxury  and  good  cheer,  which  tempt  me

he  plays  "  not  love   for  other  women,  nor

glory,  but  life's  seductive  changes :  its  sweetness,  its

riches,  I  must  feel  about  me.     But  now

I  h.ive  had  enough  of  it,  now  I  am  tired  and  satisfied.

I  aijain  leave  my  home.    Forgive  me  ;  have

mercy  upon  me! "

Then  she  draws  aside  the  curtain  and  opens  the
window,  and  he  sees  her  beautiful,  kind  face.

She  is  good,  and  she  is  wise.  Her  glances  bring
blessings  like  the  sun's,  on  everything  they  meet
She  directs  and  tends.  Where  she  is,  everything
grows  and  flourishes.  She  bears  happiness  within  her.

Me  swings  himself  up  on  to  the  window-sill  to  her,
and  v  as  a  youiv.


296         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA    HEKUXG

Then   he  liv  >ut  into  tlu-  garden  and

her  down  under  the  apple-trees.  There  he  explains
for  her  how  beautiful  everything  is,  and  shows  her  the
vegetable  beds  and  the  children's  garden  and  the
funny  little  parsley  leaves.

When  the  children  awake,  there  is  joy  and  rapture
that  father  has  come.  They  take  possession  of  him.
He  must  sec  all  that  is  new  and  wonderful:  the  little
nail-manufactory  which  pounds  away  in  the  brook,  the
bird's-nest  in  the  willow,  and  the  lit'lc  minnows  in  the
pond,  which  swim  in  thousands  near  the  surface  of
the  water.

Then  father,  mother,  and  children  take  a  long  walk
in  the  fields.  He  wants  to  see  how  close  the  rye
stands,  how  the  clover  is  growing,  and  how  the  pota-
toes are  beginning  to  poke  up  their  crumpled  leaves.

He  must  see  the  cows  when  they  come  in  from  the
pasture,  visit  the  new-comers  in  the  barn  and  sheep-
house,  look  for  eggs,  and  give  all  the  horses  sugar.

The  children  hang  at  his  heels  the  whole  day.  No
lessons,  no  work;  only  to  wander  about  with  their
father !

In  the  evening  he  plays  polkas  for  them,  and  all
day  he  has  been  such  a  good  comrade  and  playfellow
that  they  fall  asleep  with  a  pious  prayer  that  father
may  always  stay  with  them.

He  stays  eight  long  days,  and  is  joyous  as  a  boy
the  whole  time.  He  could  stand  it  no  longer,  it  was
too  much  happiness  for  him.  Ekeby  was  a  thousand
times  worse,  but  Ekeby  lay  in  the  midst  of  the  whirl
of  events.  Oh,  how  much  there  was  there  to  dream
of  and  to  play  of!  How  could  he  live  separated  from
the  pensioners'  deeds,  and  from  Lofven's  long  lake,
about  which  adventure's  wild  chase  rushed  onward?


ULUECROXA  :/£•  297

On  his  own  estate  everything  xvmt  on  in  its  calm,
wonted  ,  tiling  floinishcd  and  grew  under

the  ,;•  .ale  i Distress's  care.    E very  one  was  happy  th

>  tlun^  which  anywhere  else  could  have  caused
discord   and   bitterness    passed  over   tl.  'liout

complaints  or  pain,     i  A .  i>  •.:,.:;-  was  as  it  should  be.
It  MOW  the  master  of  the  house  longed  to  live  as  pen-
r  at   Kkeby,  wh.it  then?     Does  it   help  to  com-
plain   ot    ! leaven's  sun  because   it  disappears  every
in  the  west,  and  leaves  the  earth  in  darkness?
What  is  so  unconquerable  as  submission?    What
is  so  certain  of  victory  as  patience?


THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUNG


CHAPTER   VI

THE  WITCH   OF  DOVRE

THE  witch  of  Dovrc  walks  on  Lofven's  shores.
People  have  seen  her  there,  little  and  bent,  in  a
leather  skirt  and  a  belt  of  silver  plates.  Why  has  she
come  out  of  the  wolf-holes  to  a  human  world  ?  What
does  the  old  creature  of  the  mountains  want  in  the
green  of  the  valley  ?

She  comes  begging.  She  is  mean,  greedy  for  gifts,
although  she  is  so  rich.  In  the  clefts  of  the  mountain
she  hides  heavy  bars  of  white  silver ;  and  in  the  rich
meadows  far  away  on  the  heights  feed  her  great
flocks  of  black  cattle  with  golden  horns.  Still
she  wanders  about  in  birch-bark  shoes  and  greasy
leather  skirt  soiled  with  the  dirt  of  a  hundred  years.
She  smokes  moss  in  her  pipe  and  begs  of  the  poorest.
Shame  on  one  who  is  never  grateful,  never  gets
enough !

She  is  old.  When  did  the  rosy  glory  of  youth  dwell
in  that  broad  face  with  its  brown  greasy  skin,  in  the
flat  nose  and  the  small  eyes,  which  gleam  in  the
surrounding  dirt  like  coals  of  fire  in  gray  ashes?
When  did  she  sit  as  a  young  girl  on  the  mountain-
side and  answer  with  her  horn  the  shepherd-boy's
love-songs?  She  has  lived  several  hundred  years.
The  oldest  do  not  remember  the  time  when  she  did


WITCH  OF  DOVRE  -  A,

not   wander  through  the   land.     Their   fathers  had
seen  her  old  wh<  were  young.     Nur  is  sh<

dead.     I  who  \\nu-.  myself  have  seen  \

She  is  powerful.     She  docs  not  bend  for  any  one.
She  can  summon  the  hail,  she  can  gui<
ning.     She  can  lead  the  herds  astray  and  set  wolves
hccp.     Little  good  can  she  do,  but   much
It  is  best  to  be  on  good  terms  with  her!     If
she  should  beg  for  your  only  goat  and  a  whole  pound
of  wool,  give  it  to  her ;  if  you  don't  the  horse  will  fall,
or  the  cottage  will  burn,  or  the  cow  will  sicken,  or  the
child  will  die.

A  welcome  guest  she  never  is.  Hut  it  is  best  to
meet  her  with  smiling  lips !  Who  knows  for  whose
sake  the  bearer  of  disaster  is  roaming  through  the
valley  ?  She  docs  not  come  only  to  fill  her  beggar's-
pouch.  Kvil  omens  go  with  her;  the  army  worm
shows  itself,  foxes  and  owls  howl  and  hoot  in
the  twilight,  red  and  black  serpents,  which  spit
venom,  crawl  out  of  the  wood  up  to  the  very
threshold.

Charms  can  she  chant,  philters  can  she  brew.  She
knows  all  herbs.  Everybody  trembles  with  fear
when  they  see  her;  but  the  strong  daughter  of  the
wilderness  goes  calmly  on  her  way  among  them,
protected  by  their  dread.  The  exploits  of  her  race
arc  not  forgotten,  nor  are  her  own.  As  the  cat
•s  in  its  claws,  so  does  she  trust  in  her  wisdom
and  in  the  strength  of  her  divinely  inspired  prophe-
cies. No  king  is  more  sure  of  his  might  than  she  of
the  kingdom  of  fear  in  which  she  rules.

The  witch  of  Dovrc  has  wandered  through  many

:es.     Now  she  has  come  to  Borg,  and  does  not

fear  to  wander  up  to  the  castle.     She  seldom  goes  to


300         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

the  kitchen  door.  Right  up  the  terrace  steps  she
comes.  She  plants  her  broad  birch-bark  shoi.-.s  «>n  the
flower-bordered  gravel-walks  as  calmly  a  it  she  were
tramping  up  mountain  paths.

Countess  Marta  has  just  come  out  on  the  steps  to
admire  the  beauty  of  the  June  day.  Below  her  two
maids  have  stopped  on  their  way  to  the  store-house.
They  have  come  from  the  smoke-house,  where  the
bacon  is  being  smoked,  and  arc  carrying  newly  cured
hams  on  a  pole  between  them.  "  Will  our  gracious
Countess  feel  and  smell  ?  "  say  the  maids.  "  Arc  tin
hams  smoked  enough?  "

Countess  Marta,  mistress  at  Borg  at  that  time,  leans
over  the  railing  and  looks  at  the  hams,  but  in  the
same  instant  the  old  Finn  woman  lays  her  hand  on
one  of  them.

The  daughter  of  the  mountains  is  not  accustomed
to  beg  and  pray !  Is  it  not  by  her  grace  that  flowers
thrive  and  people  live  ?  Frost  and  storm  and  floods
are  all  in  her  power  to  send.  Therefore  she  does
not  need  to  pray  and  beg.  She  lays  her  hand  on
what  she  wants,  and  it  is  hers.

Countess  Marta,  however,  knows  nothing  of  the  old
woman's  power.

"  Away  with  you,  beggar-woman  !  "  she  says.

"  Give  me  the  ham,"  says  the  witch.

"  She  is  mad,"  cries  the  countess.  And  she  orders
the  maids  to  go  to  the  store-house  with  their  burden.

The  eyes  of  the  old  woman  flame  with  rage  and
greed.

"  Give  me  the  brown  ham,"  she  repeats,  "  or  it  will
go  ill  with  you."

"  I  would  rather  give  it  to  the  magpies  than  to
such  as  you."


THE    WITCH  OF  *  JO  I

Then  the  old  woman  is  shaken  by  a  storm  of  rage.

s   towards    heaven   her   runic-staff
waves  u  wiMly.     Her  lips  utter  strange  words,     i

stands  on   <  ml,    her    eyes  shine,    her   face   is
distorted.

.ou  shall  be  eaten  by  magpies  yourself,"   she

KTMOH   -it   l.^t-

1  hen  she  goes,  mumbling  curses,  brandishing  her

She  turns  towards   home.     Farther  towards

the  south  does  she  not  go.    She  has  accomplished  her

errand,  for  which  she  had  travelled  down  from  the

mountains.

Countess  Marta  remains  standing  on  the  steps  and
laughs  at  her  extravagant  anger  ;  but  on  her  lips  the
laugh  will  soon  die  away,  for  there  they  come.  She
cannot  believe  her  eyes.  She  thinks  that  she  is
dreaming,  but  there  they  come,  the  magpies  who  are
going  to  eat  her.

>m  the  park  and  the  garden  they  swoop  down
on  her,  magpies  by  scores,  with  claws  ready  to  seize
and  bills  stretched  out  to  strike.  They  come  with
wild  screams.  Black  and  white  wings  gleam  before
her  eyes.  She  sees  as  in  delirium  behind  this
m  the  magpies  of  the  whole  neighborhood
approaching ;  the  whole  heaven  is  full  of  black  and
white  wings.  In  the  bright  morning  sun  the  metallic
colors  of  the  feathers  glisten.  In  smaller  and
smaller  circles  the  monsters  fly  about  the  countess,
aiming  with  beaks  and  claws  at  her  face  and  hands.
She  has  to  escape  into  the  hall  and  shut  the  door.
She  leans  against  it,  panting  with  terror,  while  the
screaming  magpies  circle  about  outside.

•m  that  time  on  she  is  shut  in  from  the  sweet-
ness and  green  of  the  summer  and  from  the  joy  of


302         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  BERLING

life.  For  her  were  only  closed  rooms  and  drawn
curtains,  for  her,  despair;  for  her,  terror;  for  lui,
confusion,  bordering  on  madness.

Mad  this  story  too  may  seem,  but  it  must  also  be
true.  Hundreds  will  recognize  it  and  bear  witness
that  such  is  the  old  tale.

The  birds  settled  down  on  the  railing  and  the  roof.
They  sat  as  if  they  only  waited  till  the  countess
should  show  herself,  to  throw  themselves  upon  her.
They  took  up  their  abode  in  the  park  and  there  they
remained.  It  was  impossible  to  drive  them  away.
It  was  only  worse  if  they  shot  them.  For  one  that
fell,  ten  came  flying.  Sometimes  great  flocks  flew
away  to  get  food,  but  faithful  sentries  always  re-
mained behind.  And  if  Countess  Marta  showed  her-
self, if  she  looked  out  of  a  window  or  only  drew  aside
the  curtain  for  an  instant,  if  she  tried  to  go  out  on
the  steps,  —  they  came  directly.  The  whole  terrible
swarm  whirled  up  to  the  house  on  thundering  wings,
and  the  countess  fled  into  her  inner  room.

She  lived  in  the  bedroom  beyond  the  red  drawing-
room.  I  have  often  heard  the  room  described,  as  it
was  during  that  time  of  terror,  when  Borg  was  be-
sieged by  magpies.  Heavy  quilts  before  the  doors
and  windows,  thick  carpets  on  the  floor,  softly  tread-
ing, whispering  people.

In  the  countess's  heart  dwelt  wild  terror.  Her  hair
turned  gray.  Her  face  became  wrinkled.  She  grew
old  in  a  month.  She  could  not  steel  her  heart  to
doubt  of  hateful  magic.  She  started  up  from  her
dreams  with  wild  cries  that  the  magpies  were  eating
her.  She  wept  for  days  over  this  fate,  which  she
could  not  escape.  Shunning  people,  afraid  that  the
swarm  of  birds  should  follow  on  the  heels  of  any  one


•/•///•:  WITCH  OF  ;  303

coming  in,  she  sat  mostly  silent  with  her  hands  be
her  face,  rocking  backwards  and  forwards  in  her  ci
low-spirited  and  depressed  in  the  close  air,  sometimes
i\g  up  with  cries  of  lamentation.

No  one's  life  could  be  more  bitter.  Can  any  one
help  pitying  her?

1  have  n<>t  much  more  to  tell  of  her  now,  and  what
I  have  said  has  not  been  good.  It  is  as  if  my  con-
science smote  me.  She  was  good-hearted  and  cheer-
ful when  she  was  young,  and  many  merry  stories
about  her  have  gladdened  my  heart,  although  there
has  been  no  space  to  tell  them  here.

Hut  it  is  so,  although  that  poor  wayfarer  did
know  it,  that  the  soul  is  ever  hungry.     On  frivolity
play  it  cannot  live.     If  it  gets  no  other  food,  it
will  like  a  wild  beast  first  tear  others  to  pieces  and
then  itself.

That  is  the  meaning  of  the  story.


304         THE  STORY  OF  COST  A  BE  RUNG


CHAPTER  VII

MIDSUMMER

MIDSUMMER  was  hot  then  as  now  when  I  am  writing.
It  was  the  most  beautiful  season  of  the  year.  It
was  the  season  when  Sintram,  the  wicked  ironmaster
at  Fors,  fretted  and  grieved.  He  resented  the  sun's
triumphal  march  through  the  hours  of  the  day,  and
the  overthrow  of  darkness.  He  raged  at  the  leafy
dress  which  clothed  the  trees,  and  at  the  many-colored
carpet  which  covered  the  ground.

Everything  arrayed  itself  in  beauty.  The  road,
gray  and  dusty  as  it  was,  had  its  border  of  flowers :
yellow  and  purple  midsummer  blossoms,  wild  parsley,
and  asters.

When  the  glory  of  midsummer  lay  on  the  moun-
tains and  the  sound  of  the  bells  from  the  church  at
Bro  was  borne  on  the  quivering  air  even  as  far  as
Fors,  when  the  unspeakable  stillness  of  the  Sabbath
day  reigned  in  the  land,  then  he  rose  in  wrath.  It
seemed  to  him  as  if  God  and  men  dared  to  forget
that  he  existed,  and  he  decided  to  go  to  church,  In-
too.  Those  who  rejoiced  at  the  summer  should  see
him,  Sintram,  lover  of  darkness  without  morning,  of
death  without  resurrection,  of  winter  without  spring.

He  put  on  his  wolfskin  coat  and  shaggy  fur  gloves.
He  had  the  red  horse  harnessed  in  a  sledge,  and  fas-
tened bells  to  the  shining  horse-collar.  Equipped
as  if  it  were  thirty  degrees  below  zero,  he  drove  to


M1DSUMM  305

church,  lie  believed  that  the  grinding  under  the
runners  was  from  the  severe  cold.  He  believed  that
vhitc  foam  on  the  horse's  back  was  hoarfrost
1 1 .-  felt  no  heat  Cold  streamed  from  him  as  warmth
from  the  sun.

He  drove  over  the  wide  plain  north  of  the  Bro
church.  Large,  rich  villages  lay  near  his  way,  and
fields  of  grain,  over  which  singing  larks  fluttered.
Never  have  I  heard  larks  sing  as  in  those  fields.
Often  have  I  wondered  how  he  could  shut  his  ears  to
those  hundreds  of  songsters.

He  had  to  drive  by  many  things  on  the  way  which
would  have  enraged  him  if  he  had  given  them  a
glance.  He  would  have  seen  two  bending  birches  at
the  door  of  every  house,  and  through  open  windows
he  would  have  looked  into  rooms  whose  ceilings  and
walls  were  covered  with  flowers  and  green  branches.
The  smallest  beggar  child  went  on  the  road  with  a
bunch  of  lilacs  in  her  hand,  and  every  peasant  woman
had  a  little  nosegay  stuck  in  her  neckerchief.

Maypoles  with  faded  flowers  and  drooping  wreaths
stood  in  every  yard.  Round  about  them  the  grass
was  trodden  down,  for  the  merry  dance  had  whirled
there  through  the  summer  ni

Below  on  the  Lofvcn  crowded  the  floats  of  timber.
The  little  white  sails  were  hoisted  in  honor  of  the
day,  although  no  wind  filled  them,  and  every  mast-
head bore  a  green  wreath.

On  the  many  roads  which  lead  to  Bro  the  congre-

>n  came  walking.     The  women  were  especially

magnificent  in  the  light  summer-dresses,  which  had

been    made    ready   just   for    that    day.      All   were

dressed  in  their  best

And  the   people  could   not  help  rejoicing  at  the


306         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

peace  of  the  day  and  the  rest  from  daily  work,  at  the
delicious  warmth,  the  promising  harvest,  and  the  wild
strawberries  which  were  beginning  to  redden  at  the
edge  of  the  road.  They  noticed  the  stillness  of  tin
air  and  the  song  of  the  larks,  and  said:  "It  is  plain
that  this  is  the  Lord's  day."

Then  Sintram  drove  up.  He  swore  and  swung  his
whip  over  the  straining  horse.  The  sand  grated
horribly  under  tin-  runners,  the  sleigh-bells'  shrill
clang  drowned  the  sound  of  the  church  bells.  Mis
brow  lay  in  angry  wrinkles  under  his  fur  cap.

The  church-goers  shuddered  and  thought  they  had
seen  the  evil  one  himself.  Not  even  to-day  on  the
summer's  festival  might  they  forget  evil  and  cold.
Bitter  is  the  lot  of  those  who  wander  upon  earth.

The  people  who  stood  in  the  shadow  of  the  church
or  sat  on  the  churchyard  wall  and  waited  for  tin-
beginning  of  the  service,  saw  him  with  calm  wonder
when  he  came  up  to  the  church  door.  The  glorious
day  had  filled  their  hearts  with  joy  that  they  were
walking  the  paths  of  earth  and  enjoying  the  sweet-
ness of  existence.  Now,  when  they  saw  Sintram,
forebodings  of  strange  disaster  came  over  them.

Sintram  entered  the  church  and  sat  down  in  his
seat,  throwing  his  gloves  on  the  bench,  so  that  the
rattle  of  the  wolves'  claws  which  were  sewed  into  the
skin  was  heard  through  the  church.  And  several
women  who  had  already  taken  their  places  on  the
front  benches  fainted  when  they  saw  the  shaggy  form,
and  had  to  be  carried  out.

But  no  one  dared  to  drive  out  Sintram.  He  dis-
turbed the  people's  devotions,  but  he  was  too  much
feared  for  any  one  to  venture  to  order  him  to  leave
the  church.


MIDSUMMER  307

In  vain  the  old  clergyman  spoke  of  the  summer's
it  Nobody  listened  to  him.  The  peo-
ple only  thought  of  evil  and  cold  and  of  the  strange
disaster  which  the  wicked  ironmaster  announced  to

tlH'tll.

When  it  was  over,  they  saw  him  walk  out  on  to  the
slope  of  the  hill  where  the  Bro  church  stands.  He
looked  down  on  the  Broby  Sound  and  followed  it
with  his  eyes  past  the  deanery  and  the  three  points
of  the  west  shore  out  into  the  Lofvcn.  And  they
saw  how  he  clenched  his  fist  and  shook  it  over  the
sound  and  its  green  banks.  Then  his  glance  turned
further  south  over  the  lower  Lofvcn  to  the  misty
shores  which  seemed  to  shut  in  the  lake,  and  north-
ward it  flew  miles  beyond  Gurlitta  Cliff  up  to  Bjornidet.
where  the  lake  began.  He  looked  to  the  west  and
east,  where  the  long  mountains  border  the  valley,  and
he  clenched  his  fist  again.  And  every  one  felt  that
if  he  had  held  a  bundle  of  thunderbolts  in  his  right
hand,  he  would  have  hurled  them  in  wild  joy  out
over  the  peaceful  country  and  spread  sorrow  and
death  as  far  as  he  could.  For  now  he  had  so  accus-
tomed his  heart  to  evil  that  he  knew  no  pleasure
except  in  suffering.  By  degrees  he  had  taught  him-
self to  love  everything  ugly  and  wretched.  He  was
more  insane  than  the  most  violent  madman,  but  that
no  one  understood.

c  stories  went  about  the  land  after  that  <'
It  was  said  th.it  when  the  sexton  came  to  shut  up  the
church,  the  bit  of  the  key  broke,  because  a  tightly
folded  paper  had  been  stuck  in  the  keyhole,
gave  it  to  the  dean.     It  was,  as  was  to  be  expected,  a
letter  meant  for  a  being  in  the  other  world.

People  whispered  of  what  had  stood  there.     The


308         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLIXG

dean  had  burnt  the  paper,  but  the  sexton  had  looked
on  while  the  devil's  trash  burned.  The  letters  had
shone  bright  red  on  a  black  ground.  He  could  not
help  reading.  He  read,  people  said,  that  Sintr.mi
wished  to  lay  the  country  waste  as  far  as  the  l-i"
church  tower  was  visible.  He  wished  to  see  the
forest  grow  up  about  the  church.  He  wished  to  see
bear  and  fox  living  in  men's  dwellings.  The  fields
should  lie  uncultivated,  and  neither  dog  nor  cock
should  be  heard  in  the  neighborhood.  He  wished
to  serve  his  master  by  causing  every  man's  ruin.
That  was  what  he  promised.

And  the  people  looked  to  the  future  in  silent
despair,  for  they  knew  that  his  power  was  great,  that
he  hated  everything  living,  that  he  wished  to  see
the  wilderness  spread  through  the  valley,  and  that
he  would  gladly  take  pestilence  or  famine  or  war
into  his  service  to  drive  away  every  one  who  loved
good,  joy-bringing  work.


MADAME  MUSICA  3  •>


CHAPTER  VIII

MADAME  MUSICA

WHKN  nothing  could  make  Gosta  Bcrling  glad,  after
IK  had  helped  the  young  countess  to  escape,  the
pensioners  decided  to  seek  help  of  the  good  Madame

;ca,  who  is  a  powerful  fairy  and  consoles  many
who  are  unhappy.

So  one  evening  in  July  they  had  the  doors  of  the
big  drawing-room  at  Ekcby  opened  and  the  shutters

\\  down.     The  sun  and  air  were  let  in,  the  late

ling's  big,  red  sun,  the  cool,  mild,  steaming  air.
The  striped  covers  were  taken  off  the  furniture,  the
i  M.I  no  was  opened,  and  the  net  about  the  Venetian

ulclicr  taken  away.  The  golden  griffins  under
the  white-marble  table-tops  again  reflected  the  light
The  white  goddesses  danced  above  the  mirror.  The
variegated  flowers  on  the  silk  damask  glistened  in  the
evening  glow.  Roses  were  picked  and  brought  in.

whole  room  was  filled  with  their  fragrance.  1  i
were  wonderful  roses  with  unknown  names,  which  had
been  brought  to  Ekcby  from  foreign  lands.  There
were  yellow  ones  in  whose  veins  the  blood  shone  red
as  in  a  human  being's,  and  cream-white  roses  with
curled  edges,  and  pink  roses  with  broad  petals,  which
on  their  outside  edge  were  as  colorless  as  water,  and
dark  red  with  black  shadows.  They  carried  in  all

ngcr's  roses  which  had  come  from  far  distant
lands  to  rejoice  the  eyes  of  lovely  women.


310         THE  STORY  OF  COST  A   BE  RUNG

The  music  and  music-stands  were  brought  in,  and
the  brass  instruments  and  bows  and  violins  of  all  ll
for  good  Madame  Musica  shall  now  reign  at  Kkeby
and  try  to  console  Gosta  Bcrling.

Madame  Musica  has  chosen  the  Oxford  Symphony
of  Hayden,  and  has  had  the  pensioners  practise  it.
Julius  conducts,  and  each  of  the  others  attends  to  his
own  instrument.  All  the  pensioners  can  play  —  they
would  not  otherwise  be  pensioners.

When  everything  is  ready  Gosta  is  sent  for.  He
is  still  weak  and  low-spirited,  but  he  rejoices  in  the
beautiful  room  and  in  the  music  he  soon  shall  1
For  every  one  knows  that  for  him  who  suffers  and
is  in  pain  good  Madame  Musica  is  the  best  company.
She  is  gay  and  playful  like  a  child.  She  is  fiery  and
captivating  like  a  young  woman.  She  is  good  and
wise  like  the  old  who  have  lived  a  good  life.

And  then  the  pensioners  began  to  play,  so  gently,
so  murmuringly  soft.

It  goes  well,  it  goes  brilliantly  well.  From  the  dead
notes  they  charm  Madame  Musica  herself.  Spread
out  your  magic  cloak,  dear  Madame  Musica,  and  take
Gosta  Berling  to  the  land  of  gladness,  where  he  used
to  live.

Alas  that  it  is  Gosta  Berling  who  sits  there  pale
and  depressed,  and  whom  the  old  men  must  amuse  as
if  he  were  a  child.  There  will  be  no  more  joy  now  in
Varmland.

I  know  why  the  old  people  loved  him.  I  know
how  long  a  winter  evening  can  be,  and  how  gloom  can
creep  over  the  spirit  in  those  lonely  farm-houses.  I
understand  how  it  felt  when  he  came.

Ah,  fancy  a  Sunday  afternoon,  when  work  is  laid
aside  and  the  thoughts  are  dull !  Fancy  an  obstinate


MADAME  MUSIC  A  3"

north  wind,  whipping  i  room,  —  a  cold

!i  no  In  cythc  single  tallow-

llc,  which  has  to  be  continually  snuii  mcy

monotonous  sound  of  psalms  from  the  kitch<

Well,  and  then  bells  come  ringing,  eager  feet  stamp

off  the  snow  in  the  hall,  and  Gosta  Bcrling  comes

the  room      He  laughs  and  jokes.     He  is  lifi

is  warmth.     He  opens  the  piano,  and  he  plays  so  that

arc  surprised  at  the  old  strings.     He  can  sing

all  songs,  play  any  tune.     He  makes  all  the  inmates

of  the   house  happy.      He  was   never  cold,  he  was

iorgot  his  sorrows  when

u\  him.  Ali,  what  a  good  heart  he  had!  How
compassionate  he  was  to  the  weak  and  poor !  And
\\  h.n  .1  genius  he  was !  Yes,  you  ought  to  have  heard
tlu  old  people  talk  of  him.

But  now,  just  as  they  were  playing,  he  burst  into
tears.  He  thinks  life  is  so  sad.  11  :  :•>  his  head  in
hi*,  hands  and  weeps.  Tlu  pensioner*  are  dismayed.
.0  arc  not  mild,  healing  tears,  such  as  Madame
Musica  generally  calls  forth.  He  is  sobbing  like  one
in  despair.  At  their  wits'  end  they  put  their  instru-
ments away.

And  the  good  Madame  Musica,  who  loves  Gosta
ing,  she  too  almost  loses  courage;  but  then  she
embers  that  she   has  still  a  mighty  champion
among  the  pensioner

It  is  the  gentle  Lowcnborg,  he  who  had  lost  his
fiancee  in  the  muddy  river,  and  who  is  more  Gosta
ing's  slave  than  any  of  the   others.     He  steals
away  to  the  piano.

In  the  pensioners'  wing  Lowcnborg  has  a  great
wooden  table,  on  which  he  has  painted  a  keyboard
and  set  up  a  music-stand.  There  he  can  sit  for  hours


312         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  BERLING

at  a  time  and  let  lii^  lingers  fly  over  the  black  and
white  keys.  There  he  practises  both  scales  and
studies,  and  there  he  plays  hi>  r.ivthovm.  He  never
plays  anything  but  Beethoven.

Hut  the  old  man  never  ventures  on  any  other  in-
strument than  the  wooden  table.  For  the  piano  he
has  a  respectful  awe.  It  tempts  him,  but  it  frightens
him  even  more.  The  clashing  instrument,  on  which
so  many  polkas  have  been  drummed,  is  a  sacred  tiling
to  him.  He  has  never  dared  to  touch  it.  Think  of
that  wonderful  thing  with  its  many  strings,  which
could  give  life  to  the  great  master's  works !  He  only
needs  to  put  his  ear  to  it,  to  hear  andantes  and
scherzos  murmuring  there.  But  he  has  never  played
on  such  a  thing.  He  will  never  be  rich  enough  to  buy
one  of  his  own,  and  on  this  he  has  never  dared  to
play.  The  major's  wife  was  not  so  willing  either  to
open  it  for  him.

He  has  heard  how  polkas  and  waltzes  have  been
played  on  it.  But  in  such  profane  music  the  noble
instrument  could  only  clash  and  complain.  No,  if
Beethoven  should  come,  then  it  would  let  its  true,
clear  sound  be  heard.

Now  he  thinks  that  the  moment  is  come  for  him
and  Beethoven.  He  will  take  courage  and  touch  the
holy  thing,  and  let  his  young  lord  and  master  be  glad-
dened by  the  sleeping  harmonies.

He  sits  down  and  begins  to  play.  He  is  uncertain
and  nervous,  but  he  gropes  through  a  couple  of  bars,
tries  to  bring  out  the  right  ring,  frowns,  tries  again,
and  puts  his  hands  before  his  face  and  begins  to  \v.

Yes,  it  is  a  bitter  thing.  The  sacred  thing  is  not
sacred.  There  arc  no  clear,  pure  tones  hidden  and
dreaming  in  it;  there  are  no  mighty  thunders,  no


MADAME  MUSICA

rushing  hurricanes.     None  of  the  endless  harm*

in  heaven  had  rcm.i  n       It  is  an  old,

worn-out  piano,  and  nothing  mo:

i  then  Madame  Musica  gives  the  colonel  a  hint
lit    Kill  md  they  go  to  the  pen-

sioners' wing  and  get  Lowcnborg's  table,  where  the

.vcnborg,"  says  BccrcncrcuU,  u
come  back, "  here  is  your  piano.   Play  for  Go
Then    Lowcnborg  stops  crying  and  sits  down  to
play  Beethoven  for  his  sorrowful  young  friend.    Now

ould  certainly  be  glad  ajv

In  the  old  man's  head  sound  the  most  heavenly
s.  He  cannot  think  but  that  Gosta  hears  how
beautifully  he  is  playing.  He  meets  with  no  more
difficulties.  He  plays  his  runs  and  trills  with  the
greatest  case.  He  would  have  liked  that  the  master
himself  could  have  heard  him.

The  longer  he  plays,  the  more  he  is  carried  away.
He  hears  every  note  with  unearthly  clearness.  He
sits  there  glowing  with  enthusiasm  and  cmoti  n.
hearing  the  most  wonderful  tones,  certain  that  Gosta

hem  too  and  be  comforted,
sta  sat  and   looked   at   him.     At  first  he  was
y   at   this   foolery,  but  gradually  he   became  of
milder  mood.     He  was  irresistible,  the  old  man,  as  he
sat  and  enjoyed  his  Beet  ho  v<

id  Gosta  began  to  think  how  this  man  too,  who

was  so  gentle  and  so  careless,  had  been  sunk  in

suffering,  how  he  too  had  lost  her  whom  he  loved.

now  he  sat  beamingly  happy  at  his  wooden  table.

Nothing  more  was  needed  to  add  to  his  bliss.

He  felt  humbled.  "  What.  Gosta."  he  said  to  him-
self, 'ii  no  longer  bear  and  suffer?  You  who


.,  14         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  BE  RUNG

have  been  hardened  by  poverty  all  your  life,  you  who
have  heard  every  tree  in  the  forest,  every  tuft  in  t lie-
meadow  preach  of  resignation  and  patience,  you  who

been  brought  up  in  a  land  where  the  \\int
severe  and  the  summer  short,  —  have  you  forgotten
how  to  endure?"

Ah  Gosta,  a  man  must  bear  all  that  life  offers  with
a  brave  heart  and  smiling  lip,  or  he  is  no  man.  Re-
gret as  much  as  you  like  if  you  have  lost  what  you
hold  dearest,  let  remorse  tear  at  your  vitals,  but  show
yourself  a  man.  Let  your  glance  shine  with  gladness,
and  meet  your  friends  with  cheerful  words!

Life  is  hard,  nature  is  hard.  But  they  both  give
courage  and  cheerfulness  as  compensations  for  their
hardness,  or  no  one  could  hold  out.

Courage  and  cheerfulness !  It  is  as  if  they  were
the  first  duties  of  life.  You  have  never  failed  in  them
before,  and  shall  not  now.

Are  you  worse  than  Lowenborg,  who  sits  there  at
his  wooden  piano,  than  all  the  other  pensioners?  You
know  well  enough  that  none  of  them  have  escaped
suffering !

And  then  Gosta  looks  at  them.  Oh,  such  a  per-
formance !  They  all  are  sitting  there  so  seriously  and
listening  to  this  music  which  nobody  hears.

Suddenly  Lowenborg  is  waked  from  his  dreams  by
a  merry  laugh.  He  lifts  his  hands  from  the  keys  and
listens  as  if  in  rapture.  It  is  Gosta  Bcrling's  old
laugh,  his  good,  kind,  infectious  laugh.  It  is  the
sweetest  music  the  old  man  has  heard  in  all  his  life.

"  Did  I  not  say  that  Beethoven  would  help  you,
Gosta,"  he  cries.  "  Now  you  are  yourself  again."

So  did  the  good  Madame  Musica  cure  Gosta  Ber-
ing's hypochondria.


BXOB)  YUAN  3«S


CHAPTER  IX

THE    BROBY  CLERGYMAN

EROS,  all-powerful  god,  you  know  well  that  it  often

seems  as  if  a  man  should  1.  d  himself  from

you i  All   the   tender   feelings  which    unite

m.tnkind  sec  .cart.     Madness  stretches

r  the  unhappy  one,  but  then  you  come

in  all  your  power,  and  like  the  great  saint's  staff  the

up  heart  bursts  into  bloom.

No  one  is  so  mean  as  the  Broby  clergyman,  no  one
more  divided  by  malice  and  uncharitablencssfrom  his
fellow-men.  His  rooms  are  unheated  in  the  winter,
he  sits  on  an  unpainted  wooden  scat,  he  dresses  in
rags,  lives  on  dry  bread,  and  is  furious  if  a  beggar
enters  his  door.  He  lets  the  horse  starve  in  the  stable
and  sells  the  hay,  his  cows  nibble  the  dry  grass  at  the
roadside  and  the  moss  on  the  wall.  The  bleating
of  the  hungry  sheep  can  be  heard  far  along  the
highway.  The  peasants  throw  him  presents  of  food
•  logs  will  not  cat,  of  clothes  which  their
poor  disdain.  His  hand  i-  rtretched  out  to  beg,
back  bent  to  thank.  He  begs  of  the  rich,  lends  to  the
poor.  If  he  sees  a  piece  of  money  his  heart  aches
with  longing  till  he  gets  it  into  his  pocket  Unhappy
is  he  who  has  not  his  affairs  in  order  on  the  day  of
payment !

I  lc  was  married  late  in  life,  but  it  had  been  better
if  he  had  never  been.  Exhausted  and  overworked,  his
wife  died.  His  daughter  serves  with  strangers.  He


316         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

is  old,  but  age  grants  him  no  relief  in  his  struggling.
The  madness  of  avark  leaves  him.

But  one  fine  day  in  the  beginning  of  August  a  heavy
coach,  drawn  by  four  horses,  drives  up  Broby  hill.
A  delicate  old  lady  comes  driving  in  great  state,  with
coachman  and  footman  and  lady's-maid.  She  c<
to  meet  the  Broby  clergyman.  She  had  loved  him  in
the  days  of  her  youth.

He  had  been  tutor  at  her  father's  house,  and  they
had  loved  one  another,  although  her  proud  family
had  separated  them.  And  now  she  is  journeying
up  Broby  hill  to  sec  him  before  she  dies.  All  that
is  left  to  her  in  life  is  to  see  once  again  the  beloved
of  her  youth.

She  sits  in  the  great  carriage  and  dreams.  She  is
not  driving  up  Broby  hill  to  a  poor  little  pastoragc.
She  is  on  her  way  to  the  cool  leafy  arbor  down  in  the
park,  where  her  lover  is  waiting.  She  sees  him  ;  he  is
young,  he  can  kiss,  he  can  love.  Now,  when  she  knows
that  she  soon  shall  meet  him  his  image  rises  before
her  with  singular  clearness.  He  is  so  handsome,  so
handsome !  He  can  adore,  he  can  burn,  he  fills  her
whole  being  with  rapture.

Now  she  is  sallow,  withered,  and  old.  Perhaps  he
will  not  recognize  her  with  her  sixty  years,  but  she
has  not  come  to  be  seen,  but  to  see,  to  sec  the  beloved
of  her  youth,  who  has  gone  through  life  untouched
by  time,  who  is  ever  young,  beautiful,  glowing.

She  has  come  from  so  far  away  that  she  has  not
heard  a  word  of  the  Broby  clergyman.

The  coach  clatters  up  the  hill,  and  at  the  summit
the  pastorage  is  visible.

44  For  the  love  of  God,"  whines  a  beggar  at  the
wayside,  "  a  copper  for  a  poor  man !  "


BKOB  Y  CLKKC  YHAN  3 1 7

The  noble  lady  gives  him  a  piece  of  silver  and
asks  where  the  Hroby  pastorage  is.

"  The  pastorage  is  in  front  of  you,"  he  says,  "  but
th<-  clergyman  is  not  at  home,  there  is  no  one  at
pastorage."

The  little  lady  seems  to  fade  away.  The  cool
arbor  vanishes,  her  lover  is  not  there.  How  could
she  expect,  after  forty  years,  to  find  him  there?

What  had  the  gracious  lady  to  do  at  the  vicarage?

She  had  come  to  meet  tlu  minister.  She  had
known  him  in  the  old  days.

Forty  years  and  four  hundred  miles  have  separated
them.  And  for  each  ten  miles  she  has  come  nearer
she  has  left  behind  her  a  year  with  its  burden  of
sorrows  and  memories,  so  that  when  she  now  comes
to  the  vicarage  she  is  a  girl  of  twenty  again,  without
a  care  or  a  regret.

The  beggar  stands  and  looks  at  her,  sees  her
•ige  under  his  eyes  from  twenty  to  sixty,  and  from
>•  back  again  to  twenty.

"  The  minister  is  coming  home  this  afternoon,"  he
says.     The  gracious  lady  would  do  best  to  drive  down
to  the  Broby  inn  and  come  again  later.     In  the  a
noon,  the  beggar  can  answer  for  it,  the  minister  will
be  at  home.

A  moment  after,  the  heavy  coach  with  the  little
faded  lady  rolls  down  the  hill  to  the  inn.  but  the
beggar  stands  trembling  and  looks  after  her.  He
feels  that  he  ought  to  fall  on  his  knees  and  kiss  the
wheel  tracks.

•gant,  newly  shaven,  and  washed,  in  shoes  with
shining  buckles,  with  silk  stockings,  with  ruffles  and
frills,  the  Hroby  clergyman  stands  at  noon  that  same
day  before  the  dean's  wife  at  Bro.


318         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG

"  A  fine  lady,"  he  says,  "  a  count's  daughter.  Do
you  think  that  I,  poor  man,  can  ask  her  to  come  into
my  house?  My  floors  arc  black,  my  drawing-room
without  furniture,  the  dining-room  ceiling  is  given
with  mildew  and  damp.  Help  me  !  Remember  that
she  is  a  noble  count's  daughter !  "

"  Say  that  you  have  gone  away !  "

"  My  dear  lady,  she  has  come  four  hundred  miles
to  see  me,  poor  man.  She  does  not  know  how  it  is.
I  have  not  a  bed  to  offer  her.  I  have  not  a  bed  for
her  servants !  "

"  Well,  let  her  go  again."

"  Dear  heart !  Do  you  not  understand  what  I
mean?  I  would  rather  give  everything  I  possess,
everything  that  I  have  gathered  together  by  industry
and  striving,  than  that  she  should  go  without  my  having
received  her  under  my  roof.  She  was  twenty  when
I  saw  her  last,  and  it  is  now  forty  years  ago  !  Help
me,  that  I  may  see  her  in  my  house !  Here  is
money,  if  money  can  help,  but  here  more  than  money
is  needed."

Oh,  Eros,  women  love  you.  They  would  rather
go  a  hundred  steps  for  you  than  one  for  other  gods.

In  the  deanery  at  Bro  the  rooms  are  emptied,  the
kitchen  is  emptied,  the  larder  is  emptied.  Wagons
are  piled  up  and  driven  to  the  vicarage.  When  the
dean  comes  home  from  the  communion  service,  he
will  find  empty  rooms,  look  in  through  the  kitchen
door  to  ask  after  his  dinner  and  find  no  one  there.
No  dinner,  no  wife,  no  maids!  What  was  to  be
done?

Eros  has  so  wished  it.

A  little  later  in  the  afternoon  the  heavy  coach
comes  clattering  up  Broby  hill.  And  the  little  lady


TV//:  BROBY  CLERGYMAN  3*9

sits  and  wonders  if  any  new  mischance  shall  happen.
if  it  is  really  true  that  she  is  now  going  to  meet  her
s  only  joy.

Then  the  coach  swings  into  the  vicarage,  there
comes  some  one,  there  he  comes.  He  lifts  her  out  of
the  carriage,  he  takes  her  on  his  arm.  strong  as  ever,
she  is  clasped  in  an  embrace  as  warm  as  of  old,  forty
years  ago.  She  looks  into  his  eyes ;  which  glow  as
did  when  they  had  only  seen  five  and  twenty
summers.

A  storm  of  emotion  comes  over  her  —  warmer

than  ever.     She  remembers  that  he  once  carried  her

he  steps  to  tin  terrace.     She,  who  believed  that

her  love  had  lived  all  these  years,  had  forgotten  what

as  to  be   clasped   in  strong  arms,  to  look  into

young,  glowing  eyes.

She  does  not  see  that  he  is  old.  She  only  sees
yes.

She  does  not  sec  the  black  floors,  the  mildewed
ceilings,  she  only  sees  his  glowing  eyes*  The  Broby
clergyman  is  a  stately  man,  a  handsome  man  in  that
hour.  He  grows  handsome  when  he  looks  at  her.

She  hears  his  voice,  his  clear,  strong  voice ;  caress-
ingly it  sounds.  He  only  speaks  so  to  her.  Why
did  he  need  furniture  from  the  deanery  for  his  empty
rooms ;  why  food,  why  servants?  The  old  lady  would
never  have  missed  anything.  She  hears  his  voice
and  sees  his  eyes.

Never,  never  before  has  she  been  so  happy.

She  knows  that  he  has  been  married,  but  she  does
not  remember  it.  How  could  she  remember  such  a
thing?  She  is  twenty,  he  twenty-five.  Shall  he  be-
come the  mean  Broby  clergyman,  that  smiling  youth  ?
The  wailing  of  the  poor,  the  curses  of  the  defrauded.


320          ///A    STOKY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG

the  scornful  gibes,  the  caricatures,  the  sneers,  all  that
as  yet  does  not  exist  for  him.  His  heart  burns  only
with  a  pure  and  innocent  love.  Never  shall  that
proud  youth  love  gold  so  that  he  will  creep  after  it
in  the  dirt,  beg  it  from  the  wayfarer,  suffer  humilia-
tion, suffer  disgrace,  suffer  cold,  suffer  hunger  to  get
it.  Shall  he  starve  his  child,  torture  his  wife,  for  that
same  miserable  gold?  It  is  impossible.  Such  he
can  never  be.  He  is  a  good  man  like  all  others.
->  not  a  monster.

The  beloved  of  his  youth  does  not  walk  by  the
side  of  a  despised  wretch,  unworthy  of  the  profession
he  has  dared  to  undertake !

Oh,  Eros,  not  that  evening  !  That  evening  he  is
not  the  Broby  clergyman,  nor  the  next  day  either,
nor  the  day  after.

The  day  after  that  she  goes.

What  a  dream,  what  a  beautiful  dream  !  For  these
three  days  not  a  cloud !

She  journeyed  smiling  home  to  her  castle  and  her
memories.  She  never  heard  his  name  again,  she
never  asked  after  him.  She  wanted  to  dream  that
dream  as  long  as  she  lived.

The  Broby  clergyman  sat  in  his  lonely  home  and
wept  She  had  made  him  young.  Must  he  now  be
old  again?  Should  the  evil  spirit  return  and  he  be
despicable,  contemptible,  as  he  had  been?


PATRON  JUU US  321


CHAPTER    X
PATRON  JULIUS

PATRON  Julius  carried  down  his  red  painted  wooden
chest  from  the  pensioners'  wing.  He  filled  with
fragrant  brandy  a  green  keg,  which  had  followed
on  many  journeys,  and  in  the  big  carved  luncheon-
box  he  put  butter,  bread,  and  seasoned  cheese,  dcli-
ciously  shading  in  green  and  brown,  fat  ham,  and
pan-cakes  swimming  in  raspberry  jam.

Then  Patron  Julius  went  about  and  said  farewell,

with  tears  in  his  eyes,  to  all  the  glory  of  Ekeby.

aressed  for  the  last  time  the  worn  balls  in  the

bowling-alley  and  the  round-cheeked  youngsters  on

the  estate.     He  went  about  to  the  arbors  in  the

garden  and  the  grottos   in  the  park.     He  was   in

'.o  and  cow-house,  patted  the  horses'  necks,  shook

tlu*  angry  bull's  horns,  and  let  the  calves  lick  his

bare  hand.     Finally  he  went  with  weeping  eyes  to

the   main   building,    where    the   farewell   breakfast

vd  him.

Woe  to  our  existence!  How  can  it  be  full  of  so
much  darkness?  There  was  poison  in  the  food,  gall
in  the  wine.

The  pensioners'  throats  were  compressed  by  emo-

as  well  as  his  own.     A  mist  of  tears  dimmed

•ryes.     The  farewell  speech  was  broken  by  sobs.

Woe  to  our  >  1 1  IN  life  would  be,  from  now

on,  one  long  desire.     He  would  never  smile  again;

the  ballads  should  die  from  his  memory  as  flowers


322         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BEKI.i:.

die  in  the  autumn  ground.  He  should  grow  pair
and  thin,  wither  like  a  frost-bitten  rose,  like  a  thirst-
ing lily.  Never  more  should  the  pensioners
poor  Julius.  Heavy  forebodings  traversed  his  soul,
just  as  shadows  of  wind-swept  clouds  traverse  our
m-wly  tilled  fields.  He  would  go  home  to  die.

Blooming  with  health  and  well-being,  he  now
stood  before  them.  Never  again  should  they  see
him  so.  Never  more  should  they  jestingly  ask  him
when  he  last  saw  his  feet ;  never  more  should  they
wish  for  his  cheeks  for  bowls.  In  liver  and  lungs
the  disease  had  already  settled.  It  was  gnawing
and  consuming.  He  had  felt  it  long.  His  days
were  numbered.

Oh,  will  the  Ekeby  pensioners  but  remember
death  ?  Oh,  may  they  never  forget  him !

Duty  called  him.  There  in  his  home  sat  bis
mother  and  waited  for  him.  For  seventeen  years
she  had  waited  for  him  to  come  home  from  Ekeby.
Now  she  had  written  a  summoning  letter,  and  he
would  obey.  He  knew  that  it  would  be  his  death ;
but  he  would  obey  like  a  good  son.

Oh,  the  glorious  feasts !  Oh,  the  fair  shores,  the
proud  falls!  Oh,  the  wild  adventures,  the  white,
smooth  floors,  the  beloved  pensioners'  wing!  Oh,
violins  and  horns,  oh,  life  of  happiness  and  pleasure  !
It  was  death  to  be  parted  from  all  that.

Then  Patron  Julius  went  out  into  the  kitchen  and
said  farewell  to  the  servants  of  the  house.  Each
and  all,  from  the  housekeeper  to  kitchen-girl,  he
embraced  and  kissed  in  overflowing  emotion.  The
maids  wept  and  lamented  over  his  fate:  that  such  a
kind  and  merry  gentleman  should  die,  that  they
should  never  see  him  again.


PA  TRON  JUUUS  3  ^  3

Patron  Julius  gave  command  that  his  chaise  should
be  dragged  out  of  the  carriage- house  and  his  horse
taken  out  of  the  stal

His  v.»irc  almost  failed  him  when  he  gave  that
order.  So  the  chaise  might  not  mould  in  peace  at
Ekcby,  so  old  Kajsa  must  be  parted  from  the  well-
known  manner.  He  did  not  wish  to  say  anything
hard  about  his  mother;  but  she  ought  to  have
thought  of  the  chaise  and  Kajsa,  if  she  did  not  think
of  him.  How  would  they  bear  the  long  journey?

The  most  bitter  of  all  was  to  take  leave  of  the
pensioners.

ttle,   round   Patron  Julius,   more   built  to  roll
than  to  walk,  felt  himself  tragic  to  his  very  finger-
He  felt   himself  the  great   Athenian,    who
calmly  emptied  the  poison  cup  in  the  circle  of  weep-
students.     He  felt  himself  the  old  King  Gosta,
who  prophesied  to  Sweden's  people  that  they  some
day  should  wish  to  tear  him  up  from  the  dust.

nally  he  sang  his  best  ballad  for  them.  He
thought  of  the  swan,  who  dies  in  singing.  It  was
so,  he  hoped,  that  they  would  remember  him,  — a
kingly  spirit,  which  does  not  lower  itself  to  com-
plaining, but  goes  its  way,  borne  on  melody.

At  last  the  last  cup  was  emptied,  the  last  song

sung,  the  last  embrace  given.     He  had  his  coat  on,

and  he  held  the  whip  in  his  hand.     There  was  not  a

dry  eye  about  him ;  his  own  were  so  filled  by  sorrow's

ng  mist  that  he  could  not  see  anything.

Then  the  pensioners  seized  him  and  lifted  him
up.  Cheers  thundered  about  him.  They  put  him
down  somewhere,  he  did  not  see  where.  A  whip
cracked,  the  carriage  seemed  to  move  under  him.
He  was  carried  away.  When  he  recovered  the  use
of  his  eyes  he  was  out  on  the  highway.


324          THE  STORY  OF  GtiSTA  BERUNG

The  pensioners  had  really  wept  and  been  over
come  by  deep  regret;  still  their  grief  had  not  stilK d
all  the  heart's  glad  emotions.     One  of  them  —  was
it   Gosta    Her] ing,    the   poet,    or   Becrcncreutz,   the
card-playing  old  warrior,   or  the  life- weary  Cousin
Christopher?  —  had  arranged  it  so  that  old   K
did   not   have  to  be  taken  from  her  stall,  nor  the
mouldering  chaise  from  the  coach-house.     Inst
a  big  spotted  ox  had  been  harnessed  to  a  hay-wagon,
and  after  the  red  chest,  the  green  keg,  and  the  carved
luncheon-box  had  been  put  in  there,   Patron  Julius
himself,  whose  eyes  were  dim  with  tears,  was  lifted
up,  not  on  to  the  luncheon-box,  nor  on  to  the  chest,
but  on  to  the  spotted  ox's  back.

For  so  is  man,  too  weak  to  meet  sorrow  in  all  its
bitterness!  The  pensioners  honestly  mourned  for
their  friend,  who  was  going  away  to  die,  —  that
withered  lily,  that  mortally  wounded  singing  swan ;
yet  the  oppression  of  their  hearts  was  relieved  when
they  saw  him  depart  riding  on  the  big  ox's  back,
while  his  fat  body  was  shaken  with  sobs,  his  arms,
outspread  for  the  last  embrace,  sank  down  in  despair,
and  his  eyes  sought  sympathy  in  an  unkind  heaven.

Out  on  the  highway  the  mists  began  to  clear  for
Patron  Julius,  and  he  perceived  that  he  was  sitting
on  the  shaking  back  of  an  animal.  And  then  people
say  that  he  began  to  ponder  on  what  can  happen
in  seventeen  long  years.  Old  Kajsa  was  visibly
changed.  Could  the  oats  and  clover  of  Ekeby  cause
so  much  ?  And  he  cried  —  I  do  not  know  if  the
stones  in  the  road  or  the  birds  in  the  bushes  heard
it,  but  true  it  is  that  he  cried  —  "The  devil  may  tor-
ture me,  if  you  have  not  got  horns,  Kajsa ! "

After  another  period  of  consideration  he  let  him-


PATROL  JUUUS  325

self  slide  gently  ti  »c  back

••cd  uj>  into  t lie  wagon,  v  .11  the  luncheon-

box,  and  drove  on,  deep  in  his  thought*.

After  a  while,  when  he  has  almost  reached  Broby,
he  hears  singing.

It  was  the  merry  young  ladies  from  Herga,  and
some  of  the  judge's  \  v.hters,  who  were  walk-

<  the  road.  They  had  fastened  their  lunch-
baskets  on  long  sticks,  which  rested  on  their  shoulders
like  ,,uns,  and  they  were  marching  bravely  on  in  the
.summer's  he./.  :ig  in  good  ti

Whither  away,  I'atron  Julius?  "  they  cried,  when
t   him,  without  noticing  the  cloud  of  grief
h  obscured  his  brow.

"  I  am  departing  from  the  home  of  sin  and  vanity,"

answered  Patron  Julius.     "I  will  dwell  no  longer

among  idlers  and  malefactors.     I  am  going  home  to

my  mother."

"Oh,  "they  cried,  "it  is  not  true;  you  do  not  want

<>n  Julius!"

'  Yes,"  he  said,  and  struck  his  wooden  chest  with

tist.     "  As  Lot  fled  from  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,

so  do  I  flee  from  Ekeby.     There  is  not  a  righteous

there.     Hut  when  the  earth  crumbles  away  under

ul  the  sulphur  rain  patters  down  from  the

sky,  I  shall  rejoice  in  God's  just  judgment.     Fare-

1,  girls;  beware  of  Ekeby!"

Whereupon  he  wished  to  continue  on  his  way;  but

that  was  not  at  all  their  plan.     They  meant  to  walk

up  to  Dunder  Cliff,  to  climb  it;  but  the  road  was

long,  and  they  felt  inclined  to  ride  in  Julius*  wagon

to  the  foot  of  the  mountain.     Inside  of  two  minutes

the  girls  had  got  their  way.     Patron  Julius  turned

back  and  directed  his  course  towards  Dunder  Cliff.


326          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

Smiling,  he  sat  on  his  chest,  while  the  wagon  was
filled  with  girls.  Along  the  road  grew  daisies  and
buttercups.  The  ox  had  to  rest  every  now  and  tlan
for  a  while.  Then  the  girls  climbed  out  and  picked
flowers.  Soon  gaudy  wreaths  hung  on  Julius'  head
and  the  ox's  horns.

Further  on  they  came  upon  bright  young  birches
and  dark  alder-bushes.  They  got  out  and  broke
branches  to  adorn  the  wagon.  It  looked,  soon,  like
a  moving  grove.  It  was  fun  and  play  the  whole
day.

Patron  Julius  became  milder  and  brighter  as  the
day  went  on.  He  divided  his  provisions  among  the
girls,  and  sang  ballads  for  them.  When  they  stood
on  the  top  of  Dunder  Cliff,  with  the  wide  panorama
lying  below,  so  proud  and  beautiful  that  tears  came
into  their  eyes  at  its  loveliness,  Julius  felt  his  heart
beat  violently;  words  poured  from  his  lips,  and  he
spoke  of  his  beloved  land.

"Ah,  Varmland,"  he  said,  "ever  beautiful,  ever
glorious !  Often,  when  I  have  seen  thee  before  me
on  a  map,  I  have  wondered  what  thou  might  repre-
sent; but  now  I  understand  what  thou  art.  Thou
art  an  old,  pious  hermit,  who  sits  quiet  and  dreams,
with  crossed  legs  and  hands  resting  in  his  lap.
Thou  hast  a  pointed  cap  drawn  down  over  thy  half-
shut  eyes.  Thou  art  a  muser,  a  holy  dreamer,  and
thou  art  very  beautiful.  Wide  forests  are  thy  dress.
Long  bands  of  blue  water  and  parallel  chains  of  blue
hills  border  it.  Thou  art  so  simple  that  strangers
do  not  see  how  beautiful  thou  art.  Thou  art  poor,
as  the  devout  desire  to  be.  Thou  sittest  still,  while
Vanern's  waves  wash  thy  feet  and  thy  crossed  legs.
To  the  left  thou  hast  thy  fields  of  ore  and  thy  iron-


PATRON  JUUUS  3*7

works.     There  i*  thy  I*  <*art.     To  the  n

thou   ha?»l   the  dark,  beautiful   ic-imi',  ul    the  wilder-

i        c  is  thy  dreaming  bead.
"  v.  >ee  thcc,  gigantic,  serious,  my  eyes  are

I  with  tears,      1  t   stern   in  thy  beauty.

Thou  art  meditation,  poverty,  resi^;:
I  tee  in  thy  sternness  tin-  eatures  of  k

ness,     I  see  tbee  an  If  I  only  look

peat,    it   "nly  the    hem  ••!    thy  garment

^  healed.     Hour  after  hour,

year  after  year,  I  have  gazed  into  thy  holy  con

nance.     What  mystery  are  you  hiding  under  lowered

eyelids,  thou  1  last  thou  solved

ma  of  life  and  death,  or  art  thou  wondering

still,  thou  holy,  thou  giant-like ?     l-Oi   me  thou  art

tin-  keeper  of  great,  serious  thoughts.     But  I  see

people  crawl  on  thee  and  about  thee,  creatures  who

neve:  o  see  the  majesty  of  earnestness  on  thy

They  only  see  the  beauty  of  thy  face  and  thy

limbs,  and  are  so  charmed  by  it  that  they  forget  all

"  Woe  is  me,  woe  to  us  all,  children  of  Varmland !
Beauty,  beauty  and  nothing  else,  we  demand  of  life.
We,  children  of  renunciation,  of  seriousness,  of  pov-
erty, raise  our  hands  in  one  long  prayer,  and  ask  the
good:  beauty.     May  life  be  like  a  rose-bush,
with  blossoms  of  love,  wine,  and  pleasure,  and  may
oses  be  within  every  man'.s  reach!    Yes,  that  is
what  sh,  and  our  land  wears  the  features  of

sternness,   earnestness,    renunciation.     Our  Ian
the  eternal  symbol  of  meditation,  but  we  have  no
thou

t4Oh,  Varmland,  beautiful  and  glorious!"

So  he  spoke,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  with  voice


328         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

vibrating  with  inspiration.  The  young  girls  In  aid
him  with  wonder  and  not  without  emotion.  They
had  little  guessed  the  depth  of  feeling  which  was
hidden  under  that  surface,  glittering  with  jests  and
laughter.

When  it  drew  towards  evening,  and  they  once
more  climbed  into  the  hay-wagon,  the  girls  hardly
knew  whither  Patron  Julius  drove  them,  until  they
stopped  before  the  steps  at  Ekeby.

"  Now  we  will  go  in  here  and  have  a  dance,  girls,"
said  Patron  Julius.

What  did  the  pensioners  say  when  they  saw  Patron
Julius  come  with  a  withered  wreath  round  his  hat,
and  the  hay-cart  full  of  girls?

"We  might  have  known  that  the  girls  had  carried
him  off,"  they  said;  "otherwise  we  should  have  had
him  back  here  several  hours  earlier."  For  the  pen-
sioners remembered  that  this  was  exactly  the  seven-
teenth time  Patron  Julius  had  tried  to  leave  Ekeby,
once  for  every  departing  year.  Now  Patron  Julius
had  already  forgotten  both  this  attempt  and  all  the
others.  His  conscience  slept  once  more  its  year-
long sleep.

He  was  a  doughty  man,  Patron  Julius.  He  was
light  in  the  dance,  gay  at  the  card-table.  Pen,
pencil,  and  fiddle-bow  lay  equally  well  in  his  hand.
He  had  an  easily  moved  heart,  fair  words  on  his
tongue,  a  throat  full  of  songs.  But  what  would  have
been  the  good  of  all  that  if  he  had  not  possessed  a
conscience,  which  made  itself  be  felt  only  once  a
year,  like  the  dragon-flies,  which  free  themselves
from  the  gloomy  depths  and  take  wings  to  live  only
a  few  hours  in  the  light  of  day  and  in  the  glory  of
the  sun?


////.    PLASTER  SA/NTS  §JQ


CHAPTER    XI

THE  PLASTER  SAINTS

SVARTSJO  church  is  white  both  outside  and  in :  the
walls  are  white,  the  pulpit,  the  seats,  the  galleries,
the  roof,  the  window-sashes,  the  altar-cloth, —
>  thing  is  white.  In  Svartsjo  church  are  no
decorations,  no  pictures,  no  coats  of  arms.  Over
the  altar  stands  only  a  wooden  cross  with  a  white
linen  cloth.  Hut  it  was  not  always  so  «  •  e  the
roof  was  covered  with  paintings,  and  many  colored
images  of  stone  and  plaster  stood  in  that  house  of
God.

Once,  many  years  ago,  an  artist  in  Svartsjo  had
stood  and  watched  the  summer  sky  and  the  path  of

louds  across  the  sun.  He  had  seen  those  wi
shining  clouds,  which  in  the  morning  float  low  on
the  horizon,  pile  themselves  up  higher  and  higher
and  raise  themselves  to  storm  the  heavens.  They
set  up  sails  like  ships.  They  raised  standards  like
warriors.  They  encroached  on  the  whole  sky.
y  placed  themselves  before  the  sun,  those  grow-
ing monsters,  and  took  on  wonderful  shapes.  There
was  a  devouring  lion;  it  changed  into  a  powdered
lady.  There  was  a  giant  with  outstretched  arms;
he  laid  himself  down  as  a  dreaming  sphinx.  Some
adorned  their  white  nakedness  with  gold-bordered
mantles;  others  spread  rouge  over  snowy  cheeks.


330          THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BEK1 1.>

There  were  plains.      There   were    forests.     Tl

walled  castles  with  high  tnwci  I  In  \\hiu-
clouds  were  lords  of  the  summer  sky.  They  filled
the  whole  blue  arch.  They  reached  up  to  the  sun
and  hid  it.

"Oh,  how  beautiful/'  thought  the  gentle  artist,
"  if  the  longing  spirits  could  climb  up  on  those  tow-
ering mountains  and  be  carried  on  those  rocking
ships  ever  hi -her  and  higher  upwai

And  all  at  once  he  understood  that  the  white
clouds  were  the  vessels  on  which  the  souls  of  the
blessed  were  carried.

He  saw  them  there.  They  stood  on  the  gliding
masses  with  lilies  in  their  hands  and  golden  crowns
on  their  heads.  Space  echoed  with  their  song.
Angels  circled  down  on  broad,  strong  wings  to  meet
them.  Oh,  what  a  host  there  were !  As  the  clouds
spread  out,  more  and  more  were  visible.  They  lay
on  the  cloud-beds  like  water-lilies  on  a  pond;  they
adorned  them,  as  lilies  adorn  the  meadow.  Cloud
after  cloud  rolled  up.  And  all  were  filled  with
heavenly  hosts  in  armor  of  silver,  of  immortal  singers
in  purple-bordered  mantles.

That  artist  had  afterwards  painted  the  roof  in  the
Svartsjo  church.  He  had  wished  to  reproduce  there
the  mounting  clouds  of  the  summer  day,  which  bore
the  blessed  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  hand
which  had  guided  the  pencil  had  been  strong,  but
also  rather  stiff,  so  that  the  clouds  resembled  more
the  curling  locks  of  a  full-bottomed  wig  than  moun-
tains of  soft  mist.  And  the  form  the  holy  ones  had
taken  for  the  painter's  fancy  he  was  not  able  to  give
them  again,  but  instead  clothed  them  in  long,  red
cloaks,  and  stiff  bishops'  mitres,  or  in  black  robes


////     PLASTER  SAINTS  33 1

with  stiff  ruffles.  He  had  given  them  big  heads  and
small  bodies,  and  he  h.ul  provided  them  with  hand-
inefs  and  prayer-books.  Latin  sentences  flew  out
of  their  mouths;  and  for  them  wlmm  he  meant  to  be
the  greatest,  he  had  constructed  solid  wooden  chairs
on  the  backs  of  the  clouds,  so  that  they  could  be
carried  sitting  comfortably  to  the  everlasting  life.

But  every  one  knew  that  spirits  and  angels  had
never  shown  themselves  to  the  poor  artist,  and  so
they  were  not  much  surprised  that  he  had  not
been  able  to  give  them  celestial  beauty.  The  good
master's  pious  work  had  seemed  to  many  wonder-
fully fine,  and  much  holy  emotion  had  it  wakened
It  would  have  been  worthy  to  have  been  looked  at
by  our  eyes  as  well.

Hut  during  the  pensioners'  year,  Count  Dohna  had
tlu-  whole  church  whitewashed.  Then  the  paintings
on  the  roof  were  destroyed.  And  all  the  plaster
saints  were  also  taken  away.

Alas !  the  plaster  saints !

There  was  a  Saint  Olof  with  crown  on  helm,  an
axe  in  his  hand,  and  a  kneeling  giant  under  his  feet;
on  the  pulpit  was  a  Judith  in  a  red  jacket  and  blue
skirt,  with  a  sword  in  one  hand  and  an  hour-glass  in
the  other,  —  instead  of  the  Assyrian  general's  head;
there  was  a  mysterious  Queen  of  Sheba  in  a  blue
jacket  and  red  skirt,  with  a  web-foot  on  one  leg  and
her  hands  full  of  Sibylline  books;  there  was  a  gray
Saint  Goran  lying  alone  on  a  bench  in  the  choir,  for
both  horse  and  dragon  had  been  broken  away;  there
was  Saint  Christopher  with  the  flowering  staff,  and
Saint  Erik  with  sceptre  and  axe,  dressed  in  a  flow-
brocaded  cloak.

These  saints  were  always  losing  their  sceptres  or


332          ///A    STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING.

their  cars  or  hands  and  had  to  be  mended  and
cleaned.  The  congregation  wearied  <»f  it,  ;ind
longed  to  be  rid  of  them.  But  the  peasants  would
never  have  done  the  saints  any  injury  if  Count
Henrik  Dohna  had  not  existed.  It  was  he  who  had
t  lie  in  taken  away.

When  Count  Dohna  had  caused  his  marriage  to
be  declared  null  and  void,  instead  of  seeking  out  his
wife  and  having  it  made  legal,  much  indignation  had
arisen;  for  every  one  knew  that  his  wife  had  left  his
house  only  not  to  be  tortured  to  death.  It
now  as  if  he  wanted  to  win  back  God's  grace  and
men's  respect  by  a  good  work,  and  so  he  had  Svartsjo
church  repaired.  He  had  the  whole  church  white-
washed and  the  paintings  torn  down.  He  and  his
men  carried  the  images  out  in  a  boat  and  sank  them
in  the  depths  of  the  Lofven.

How  could  he  dare  to  lay  his  hand  on  those  mighty
ones  of  the  Lord  ?

Did  the  hand  which  struck  off  Holofernes'  head
no  longer  hold  a  sword?  Had  Sheba's  queen  for-
gotten all  secret  knowledge,  which  wounds  more
deeply  than  a  poisoned  arrow?  Saint  Olof,  Saint
Olof,  old  viking,  Saint  Goran,  old  dragon-killer,  the
noise  of  your  deeds  is,  then,  dead !  But  it  was  best
that  the  saints  did  not  wish  to  use  force  against  their
destroyers.  Since  the  Svartsjo  peasants  would  not
pay  for  paint  for  their  robes  and  gilding  for  their
crowns,  they  allowed  Count  Dohna  to  carry  them
out  and  sink  them  in  Lofven's  bottomless  depths.
They  would  not  stand  there  and  disfigure  God's
house.

I  thought  of  that  boat  with  its  load  of  saints  glid-
ing over  Lofven's  surface  on  a  quiet  summer  even-


Tin:  PLASTER  SAIXTS  333

in  August  The  man  who  rowed  took  flow
strokes,  and  threw  timorous  glances  at  the  strange
passengers  which  lay  in  the  bow  and  stem;  but
Count  Dohna,  who  was  also  there,  was  not  afraid.
<x)k  them  one  by  one  and  threw  them  into  the
water.  His  brow  was  clear  and  he  breathed  deep.
He  felt  like  a  defender  of  the  pure  Evangelical
religion.  And  no  miracle  was  performed  in  the  old
saints'  honor.  Silent  ;md  dejected  they  sank  down
into  annihilation.

Hut  the  next  Sunday  morning  Svartsjo  church
stood  gleamingly  white.  No  images  disturbed  the
peace  of  meditation.  Only  with  the  eyes  of  the
soul  could  the  virtuous  contemplate  the  glory  of
heaven  and  the  faces  of  the  blessed.

But  the  earth,  men's  beloved  dwelling,  is  green,
the  sky  is  blue.  The  world  glows  with  colors.  Why
should  the  church  be  white?  White  as  winter,
cl  as  poverty,  pale  as  grief !  It  does  not  glitter
with  hoar-frost  like  a  wintry  wood;  it  does  not  shine
in  pearls  and  lace  like  a  white  bride.  The  church
stands  in  white,  cold  whitewash,  without  an  image,
without  a  picture.

That  Sunday  Count  Dohna  sat  in  a  flower-trimmed
arm-chair  in  the  choir,  to  be  seen  and  to  be  praised
by  all  men.  He  who  had  had  the  old  benches
mended,  destroyed  the  disfiguring  images,  had  set
new  glass  in  all  the  broken  windows,  and  had  the
whole  church  whitewashed,  should  now  be  honored.
If  he  wished  to  soften  the  Almighty's  anger,  it  was
right  that  he  had  adorned  His  temple  as  well  as  he
knew  how.  But  why  did  he  take  praise  for  it  ?

He,  who  came  with  implacable  sternness  on  his
cons  ought  to  have  fallen  on  his  knees  and


334         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

begged  his  brothers  and  sisters  in  the  church  to
implore  God  to  suffer  him  to  come  into  his  sanctu-
ary. It  would  have  been  better  for  him  if  he  had
stood  there  like  a  miserable  culprit  than  that  he
should  sit  honored  and  blessed  in  the  choir,  and
receive  praise  because  he  had  wished  to  make  his
peace  with  God.

When  the  service  was  over  and  the  last  psalm
sung,  no  one  left  the  church,  for  the  clergyman  was
to  make  a  speech  of  thanks  to  the  count.  But  it
never  went  so  far.

For  the  doors  were  thrown  open,  back  into  the
church  came  the  old  saints,  dripping  with  Lofven's
water,  stained  with  green  slime  and  brown  mud.
They  must  have  heard  that  here  the  praise  of  him
who  had  destroyed  them,  who  had  driven  them  out
of  God's  holy  house  and  sunk  them  in  the  cold,
dissolving  waves,  should  be  sung.  The  old  saints
wanted  to  have  their  share  in  the  entertainment.

They  do  not  love  the  waves'  monotonous  ripple.
They  are  used  to  psalms  and  prayers.  They  held
their  peace  and  let  it  all  happen,  as  long  as  they
believed  that  it  would  be  to  the  honor  of  God.  But
it  was  not  so.  Here  sits  Count  Dohna  in  honor
and  glory  in  the  choir  and  wishes  to  be  worshipped
and  praised  in  the  house  of  God.  They  cannot  suffer
such  a  thing.  Therefore  they  have  risen  from  their
watery  grave  and  march  into  the  church,  easily
recognizable  to  all.  There  is  Saint  Olof,  with
crown  on  hat,  and  Saint  Erik,  with  gold-brocaded
cloak,  and  the  gray  Saint  Goran  and  Saint  Chris-
topher; no  more;  the  Queen  of  Sheba  and  Judith
had  not  come.

But  when  the  people  have  recovered  a  little  from


//  itt*  SALVTS  33$

their  amazement,  an  audible  whisper  goes  through
the  church,  —

oners!"

Yes,  of  course  it  is  the  pensioners.  And  they
go  up  to  the  count  without  a  word,  and  lift  his  c

u  ir  shoulders  and  carry  him  from  the  church
and  set  him  down  on  the  slope  outside.

They  say  nothing,  and  look  neither  to  the  right
nor  to  the  left.  They  merely  carry  Count  Dohna
out  of  the  house  of  God,  and  when  that  is  done,  they
go  away  again,  the  nearest  way  to  the  lake.

They  used  no  violence,  nor  did  they  waste  much

in  explanations.     It  was  plain   enough:  "We

Kkeby  pensioners  have  our  own  opinion.     Count

Dohna  is  not  worthy  to  be  praised  in  God's  house.

Therefore  we  carry  him  out.     Let  him  who  will

carry  him  in  again."

But   he  was  not  carried    in.     The    clergyman's
speech  of    thanks  was  never  made.      The  people
imcd  out  of  the  church.     There  was  no  one  who
did  not  think  the  pensioners  had  acted  rightly.

They  thought  of  the  fair  young  countess  who  had
been  so  cruelly  tortured  at  Borg.  They  remembered
her  who  had  been  so  kind  to  the  poor,  who  had  been
so  sweet  to  look  upon  that  it  had  been  a  consolation

hem  to  sec  her.

It  was  a  pity  to  come  with  wild  pranks  into  the
oh ;  but  both  the  clergyman  and  the  congrega-
tion knew  that  they  had  been  about  to  play  a  greater
trick  on  the  Omniscient.     And  they  stood  ashamed
before  the  misguided  old  madmen.

"When  man  is  silent,  the  stones  must  speak, "
they  s.i

But  after  that  day  Count  Henrik  was  not  happy


336          -u  IE  STORY  OF  COST  A    BERLfA

at    Horg.     One    dark    night    in    the    beginning    of
August  a  closed  carriage  drove  close  up  to  th«

All  the  servants  stationed  them  .Unit

it,  and  Countess  Marta  came  out  wrapped  in  shawls
with  a  thick  veil  over  her  face.  The  count  K d  In  i ,
but  she  trembled  and  shuddered.  It  was  with  the
test  difficulty  that  they  could  persuade  her  to  go
through  the  hall  and  down  the  steps.

At  last  she  reached  the  carriage,  the  count  sprang
in  after  her,  the  doors  were  slammed  to,  and  the
coachman  started  the  horses  off  at  a  gallop.  The
next  morning,  when  the  magpies  awoke,  she  was
gone.

The  count  lived  from  that  time  on  far  away  in  the
South  of  Sweden.  Borg  was  sold  and  has  changed
owners  many  times.  No  one  can  help  loving  it.
But  few  have  been  happy  in  its  possession.


G00S  WAYFARER  337


CHAPTER    XII
GOD'S  WAYFARER

GOD'S  wayfarer,  Captain  Ltnnart,  came  one  after-
in  August  wandering  up  to  the  Hroby  inn  and
walked  into  the  kitchen  there.  He  was  on  his  way
to  his  home,  Hclgcsatcr,  which  lies  a  couple  of
miles  northwest  of  Broby,  close  to  the  edge  of  the
wood.

Captain  I  .ennart  did  not  then  know  that  he  was  to
be  one  of  God's  wanderers  on  the  earth.  Mis  heart
was  full  of  joy  that  he  should  see  his  home  again.
He  had  suffered  a  hard  fate;  but  now  he  was  at
home,  and  all  would  be  well.  He  did  not  know  that
he  was  to  be  one  of  those  who  may  not  rest  under
their  own  roof,  nor  warm  themselves  at  their  own
fires.

God's  wayfarer,  Captain  Lennart,  had  a  cheerful
spirit.  As  he  found  no  one  in  the  kitchen,  he  poked
about  like  a  wild  boy.  He  threw  the  cat  at  the
dog's  head,  and  laughed  till  it  rang  through  the
house  when  the  two  comrades  let  the  heat  of  the
moment  break  through  old  friendship,  and  fought
tooth  and  nail  and  fiery  eyes.

The  innkeeper's  wife  came  in,   attracted  by  the
noise.     She  stopped  on  the  threshold  and  looked  at
the  man,  who  was  laughing  at  the  struggling
Is.     She  knew  him  well;  but  when  she  saw  him


338          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUNG

last,  he  had  been  sitting  in  the  prison -van  with
handcuffs  on  his  wrists.  She  rcmcmbuol  it  \\vll.
Five  years  and  a  half  ago,  during  the  winter  fair  in
Karlstad,  thieves  had  stolen  the  jewels  of  the  gov-
ernor's wife.  Many  rings,  bracelets,  and  buckles,
much  prized  by  the  noble  lady,  —  for  most  of  them
were  heirlooms  and  presents,  —  had  then  been  lost.
They  had  never  lound.  But  a  rumor  spread

through  the  land  that  Captain  Lennart  at  Helge
w.is  the  thief.

She  had  never  been  able  to  understand  how  such
a  rumor  had  started.  He  was  such  a  good  and  hon-
orable man.  He  lived  happily  with  his  wife,  whom
he  had  only  a  few  years  before  brought  home,  for  he
had  not  been  able  to  afford  to  marry  before.  Had
he  not  a  good  income  from  his  pay  and  hi
What  could  tempt  such  a  man  to  steal  old  bracelets
and  rings?  And  still  more  strange  it  seemed  to  her
that  such  a  rumor  could  be  so  believed,  so  proven,
that  Captain  Lennart  was  discharged  from  the  army,
lost  his  order  of  the  Sword,  and  was  condemned  to
five  years'  hard  labor.

He  himself  had  said  that  he  had  been  at  the
market,  but  had  left  before  he  heard  anything  of  the
theft.  On  the  highway  he  had  found  an  ugly  old
buckle,  which  he  had  taken  home  and  given  to  the
children.  The  buckle,  however,  was  of  gold,  and
belonged  to  the  stolen  things;  that  was  the  cause
of  his  misfortune.  It  had  all  been  Sintram's
work.  He  had  accused  him,  and  given  the  con-
demning testimony.  It  seemed  as  if  he  wanted  to
get  rid  of  Captain  Lennart,  for  a  short  time  after
a  law-suit  was  opened  against  himself,  because  it
had  been  discovered  that  he  had  sold  powder  to  the


GO&S  WAYFARER  339

Norwegians  during  the  war  of  1814.    People  believed
he  was  afraid  of  Captain  Lcnnart's  testimony.
As  it  was,  he  was  acquitted  on  the  ground  of  not
proven.

She  could  not  stare  at  him  enough.  His  hair  bad
grown  gray  and  his  back  bent ;  he  must  have  suffered.
Hut  he  still  had  his  friendly  face  and  his  cheerful
spirit.  He  was  still  the  same  Captain  Lcnnart  who
had  led  her  forward  to  the  altar,  as  a  bride,  and
danced  at  her  wedding.  She  felt  sure  he  would  still
stop  and  chat  with  everybody  he  met  on  the  road
and  throw  a  copper  to  every  child ;  he  would  still
say  to  every  wrinkled  old  woman  that  she  grew
younger  and  prettier  ever  day;  and  he  would  still
sometimes  place  himself  on  a  barrel  and  play  the
fiddle  for  those  who  danced  about  the  Maypole.

Well,  Mother  Karin,"  he  began,  "arc  you  afraid
to  look  at  me?"

!  Ic  had  come  especially  to  hear  how  it  was  in  his
home,  and  whether  they  expected  him.  They  must
know  that  he  had  worked  out  his  time.

The  innkeeper's  wife  gave  him  the  best  of  news.

had  worked  like  a  man.     She  had  leased

state  from  the  new  owner,  and  everything  h.ul

succeeded  for  her.     The  children  were  healthy,  and

it  was  a  pleasure  to  sec  them.     And  of  course  they

expected   him.     His  wife  was  a   hard   woman,  who

never  spoke  of  what  she  thought,  but  she  knew  that

no  one  was  allowed  to  eat  with  Captain   I^ennart's

spoon  or  to   sit   in  his   chair  while   he  was  a

no  day  had  passed  without  her  coming

out  to  the  stone  at  the  top  of  Hroby  hill  and  looking

down   the   road.     And  she   had   put   in   order  new

lies  for  him,  home-woven  clothes,  on  which  she


340         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

herself  had  done  nearly  all  the  work.  By  that  one
could  sec  that  he  was  expected,  even  if  she  said
nothing.

"They  don't  believe  it,  then?"  said  Captain  Len-
nart.

"  No,  captain,"  answered  the  peasant  woman.  "  No-
body believes  it."

Then  Captain  Lennart  would  stop  no  longer ;  then
lu  wished  to  go  home.

It  happened  that  outside  the  door  he  met  some
dear  old  friends.  The  pensioners  at  Kkcby  had  just
come  to  the  inn.  Sintram  had  invited  them  thither
to  celebrate  his  birthday.  And  the  pensioners  did
not  hesitate  a  minute  before  shaking  the  convict's
hand  and  welcoming  him  home.  Even  Sintram  did
it.

"  Dear  Lennart,"  he  said,  "  were  you  certain  that
God  had  any  meaning  in  it  all?  "

"  Do  you  not  think  I  know,"  cried  Captain  Lennart,
"  that  it  was  not  our  Lord  who  saved  you  from  the
block?"

The  others  laughed.  But  Sintram  was  not  at  all
angry.  He  was  pleased  when  people  spoke  of  his
compact  with  the  devil.

Yes,  then  they  took  Captain  Lennart  in  with  them
again  to  empty  a  glass  of  welcome ;  after,  he  could
go  his  way.  But  it  went  badly  for  him.  He  had  not
drunk  such  treacherous  things  for  five  years.  IVr-
haps  he  had  eaten  nothing  the  whole  day,  and  was
exhausted  by  his  long  journey  on  foot.  The  result
was  that  he  was  quite  confused  after  a  couple  of
glasses.

When  the  pensioners  had  got  him  into  a  state
when  he  no  longer  knew  what  he  was  doing,  they


GO&S  WAYFAKEK  341

forced  on  him  glass  after  glass,  and  they  meant  no

it  was  with  t;«>od  intention  towards  him,
who  h.ul  n«»t  tasted  anything  good  for  five  years.
Otherwise  he  was  one  of  the  most  sober  of  men.

also  easy  to  understand  that  he  had  no  inter
to  get  drunk ;  he  was  to  have  gone  home  to  wife  and
.:rn.     Hut  instead  he  was  lying  on  the  bench  in

1  was  sleeping  there.

While  he  lay  there,  temptingly  unconscious,  Gosta

took  a  piece  of  charcoal  and  a  little  cranberry-juice

and  painted  him.     He  gave  him  the  face  of  a  crim-

hc  thought    that  most  suitable   for  one  who

came  direct  from  jail.     He  painted  a  black  eye,  drew

a  red  scar  across  his  nose,  plastered  his  hair  down  on

orehead  in  matted  tangles,  and  smeared  his  whole

face.

They  laughed  at  it  for  a  while,  then  Gosta  wished
to  wash  it  off.

I-ct  it  be,"  said  Sintram,  "so  that  he  can  see  it
\  he  wakes.     It  will  amuse  him."
So  they  left  it  as  it  was,  and  thought  no  more  of
The  feasting  lasted   the  whole  night
They  broke  up  at  daybreak.     There  was  more  wine-
sense  in  their  heads.

The  question  was  what  they  should  do  with  Captain
Lent  \Ve  will  go  home  with  him,"  said  Sintram.

"  Think  how  glad   his  wife  will  be !     It  will   be  a
pleasure  to  sec  her  joy.     I  am  moved  when  I  think

Let  us  go  home  with  him !  "

They  were  all  moved  at  the  thought  Heavens,
how  glad  she  would  be !

They  shook  life  into  Captain  Lcnnart  and  lifted
him  into  one  of  the  carriages  which  the  sleepy
grooms  had  long  since  driven  up.  And  so  the  whole


342         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUXG

mob  drove  up  to  Hclgcsatcr;  some  of  them,  h.ilf-
aslecp,  nearly  fell  out  of  the  carriage,  others  sang  to
keep  awake.  They  looked  little  better  than  a  com-
pany of  tramps,  with  dull  eyes  and  swollen  faces.

They  arrived  at  last,  left  the  horses  in  the  back-
yard and  marched  with  a  certain  solemnity  up  to  the
steps.  Beerencreutz  and  Julius  supported  Captain
Lcnnart  between  them.

"  Pull  yourself  together,  Lcnnart,"  they  said  to
him,  "  you  are  at  home.  Don't  you  sec  that  you  're
at  home?"

He  got  his  eyes  open  and  was  almost  sober.  He
was  touched  that  they  had  accompanied  him  home.

"  Friends,"  he  said,  and  stopped  to  speak  to  them
all,  "  have  asked  God,  friends,  why  so  much  evil  has
passed  over  me."

"  Shut  up,  Lennart,  don't  preach !  "  cries  Beeren-
creutz.

"  Let  him  go  on,"  says  Sintram.  "  He  speaks
well."

"  Have  asked  Him  and  not  understood ;  understand
now.  He  wanted  to  show  me  what  friends  I  had ;
friends  who  follow  me  home  to  see  mine  and  my
wife's  joy.  For  my  wife  is  expecting  me.  What
are  five  years  of  misery  compared  to  that?  "

Now  hard  fists  pounded  on  the  door.  The  pen-
sioners had  no  time  to  hear  more.

Within  there  was  commotion.  The  maids  awoke
and  looked  out.  They  threw  on  their  clothes,  but
did  not  dare  to  open  for  that  crowd  of  men.  At  last
the  bolt  was  drawn.  The  captain's  wife  herself  came
out

"  What  do  you  want?  "  she  asked.

It  was  Beerencreutz  who  answered :  —


COITS  WAYFARER  343


••  We  Aith  your  husb.i:

They  ;•;:  hed  forward  Captain  Lcnnart,  and  she
saw  him  irds  her,  drunk,  with  a  pr  i/e-fighter's

1  behind  him  she  saw  the  crowd  of  drunken,
:>g  men.

She    took  a  step  back;    he    followed   with   out-

me  as  a  thief."  she  cried,
••  .  i  tul  come  home  as  a  vagabond."    Whereupon  she

•  ^o  iii.
1  1,  -did  in»t  mi.:  He  \\i  -!»,.!  t,.  follow  her,

•in.  k  him  a  blow  on  the  bn

"  Do  you  think  that  I  \\ill  receive  such  a  man  as

you  as  master  in  my  house  and  over  my  children?"

1  he  door  slammed  and  the  key  turned  in  the  lock.

Captain  Lcnn.irt  threw  himself  I  'he  door  and

began  to  shake  it.

The  pensioners  could  not  help  it,  they  began  to
laugh.  He  had  been  so  sure  of  his  wife,  and  now
she  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  him.  It  was
absurd,  they  thought.

When  Captain  Lennart  heard  them  laughing,  he
rushed  after  them  and  wished  to  beat  them.  They
away  and  leaped  into  their  carriages,  he  after
them  ;  but  in  his  eagerness  he  stumbled  over  a  stone
and  fell.  He  got  up  again,  but  pursued  them  no
faither.  A  thought  struck  him  in  his  confusion.
In  this  world  nothing  happens  without  God's  will,
noth  :

••  Where  wilt  th««u  lead  me?"  he  said  :n  a

feather,  driven  by  thy  breath.     I  am  thy  playtl
Whither  wilt  thou  send   me?     Why  dost  thou  shut

doors  of  my  home  to  me  ?  "

He  turned  away  from  his  home,  believing  that  it
was  God's  will.


344         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BEKLING

When  the  sun  rose  he  stood  at  the  top  of  Broby
hill  and  looked  out  over  the  valley.  Ah,  little  did
the  poor  people  in  the  valley  know  that  their  res-
cuer was  near.  No  mothers  as  yet  lifted  their  chil-
dren on  their  arms  that  they  might  see  him  as  he
came.  The  cottages  were  not  clean  and  in  order,
with  the  black  hearth  hidden  by  fragrant  juniper.
As  yet  the  men  did  not  work  with  eager  industry
in  the  fields  that  his  eyes  might  be  gladdened  by
the  sight  of  cared-for  crops  and  well-dug  ditches.

Alas,  where  he  stood  his  sorrowful  eyes  saw  the  rav-
ages of  the  drought,  how  the  crops  were  burned  up,
and  how  the  people  scarcely  seemed  to  trouble  them-
selves to  prepare  the  earth  for  the  coming  year.  He
looked  up  at  the  blue  mountains,  and  the  sharp
morning  sun  showed  him  the  blackened  stretches
where  the  forest-fires  had  passed.  He  understood
by  many  small  signs,  by  the  tumble-down  fences,  by
the  small  amount  of  wood  which  had  been  cartel
home  and  sawed,  that  the  people  were  not  looking
after  their  affairs,  that  want  had  come,  and  that  they
sought  consolation  in  indifference  and  brandy.

Captain  Lennart  stood  there  on  Broby  hill  and
began  to  think  that  God  perhaps  needed  him.  He
was  not  called  home  by  his  wife.

The  pensioners  could  not  at  all  understand  what
their  fault  had  been;  Sintram  held  his  tongue.  His
wife  was  much  blamed  through  all  the  neighborhood,
because  she  had  been  too  proud  to  receive  such  a
good  husband.  People  said  that  any  one  who  tried
to  talk  to  her  of  him  was  instantly  interrupted.  She
could  not  bear  to  hear  his  name  spoken.  Captain
Lennart  did  nothing  to  give  her  other  thoughts.

It  was  a  day  later.


COITS  WAYFARER  34$

An  old  peasant  is  lying  on  his  death-bed.     He  has
taken  the  sacrament,  and  his  strength  is  gone  ;  he

die.

Restless  as  one  who  is  to  set  off  on  a  long  journey,
he  has  his  bed  moved  from  the  kitchen  to  the  bed-
room and  from  the  bedroom  back  to  the  kitchen,
they  understand,  more  than  by  the  heavy
rattling  and  the  failing  eyes,  that  his  time  has  come.
Round  about  him  stand  his  wife,  his  children,  and
servants.  He  has  been  fortunate,  rich,  esteemed.
He  is  not  forsaken  on  his  death-bed.  The  old  man
speaks  of  himself  as  if  he  stood  in  the  presence  of
God,  and  with  sighs  and  confirming  words  those
about  him  bear  witness  that  he  speaks  the  truth.

I  have  been  an  industrious  worker  and  a  kind

master,"  he  says.     "  I  have  loved  my  wife  like  my

i   hand.     I  have  not  let  my  children  grow  up

without  discipline  and  care.     I  have  not  drunk.     I

have   not   moved   my   boundary   line.      I   have   not

icd  my  horse  up  the  hills.     I  have  not  let  the

cows  starve  in  winter.     I  have  not  let  the  sheep  be

ircd  by  their  wool  in  sumn

And  round  about  him  the  weeping  servants  repeat
an  echo:  "  He  has  been  a  kind  master.     He  has
not  hurried  the  horse  up  the  hills,  nor  let  the  sheep
sweat  in  their  wool  in  summer."

:t  through  the  door  unnoticed  a  poor  man  has
come  in  to  ask  for  a  little  food.  He  also  hears  the
words  of  the  dying  man  from  where  he  stands  silent
by  the  door.

ul  the  sick  man  resumes:  "  I  have  opened  up

have  drained  the  meadows.     I  drove  the

plough   in  straight    furrows.     I  built  three  times  as

big  a  barn  for  three  times  as  big  a  harvest  as  in  my


346         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BEK/./.\\;

r's  time.  Of  shining  money  I  had  three  silver
goblets  made;  my  father  only  made  one.  God  shall
give  me  a  good  place  in  his  heaven."

)ur  Lord  will  receive  our  master  well,"  say  tin
servants.

The  man  by  the  door  hears  the  words,  and  terror
fills  him  who  for  five  long  years  has  been  God's
plaything.

He  goes  up  to  the  sick  man  and  takes  his  hand.

"Friend,  friend,"  he  says,  and  his  voice  trembles,
"  have  you  considered  who  the  Lord  is  before  whose
face  you  soon  must  appear?  He  is  a  great  God,  a
terrible  God.  The  earth  is  his  pasture.  The  storm
his  horse.  Wide  heavens  shake  under  the  weight  of
his  foot.  And  you  stand  before  him  and  say  :  '  I
have  ploughed  straight  furrows,  I  have  sowed  rye,  I
have  chopped  wood.'  Will  you  praise  yourself  to
him  and  compare  yourself  to  him  ?  You  do  not  know
how  mighty  the  Lord  is  to  whose  kingdom  you  are
going.

"  Do  not  come  before  your  God  with  big  words!"
continues  the  wayfarer.  "  The  mighty  on  the  earth
are  like  threshed-out  straw  in  his  barn.  His  day's
work  is  to  make  suns.  He  has  dug  out  oceans  and
raised  up  mountains.  Bend  before  him !  Lie  low  in
the  dust  before  your  Lord,  your  God !  Catch  like  a
child  at  the  hem  of  his  garment  and  beg  for  protec-
tion !  Humble  yourself  before  your  Creator!  "

The  sick  man's  eyes  stand  wide-open,  his  hands  are
clasped,  but  his  face  lights  up  and  the  rattling  cea

"  Soul,  soul,"  cries  the  man,  "  as  surely  as  you
now  in  your  last  hour  humble  yourself  before  your
God,  will  he  take  you  like  a  child  on  his  arm  and
carry  you  into  the  glory  of  his  heaven."


WAYFAKt  347

The  old  man  gives  a  last  sigh,  and  all   is   o
Capt  MI  t  bends  his  head  and  prays.     Every

one  in  the  room  prays  with  heavy  M

When  tluy  look  up  the  old  peasant  lies  in  <]
peace.     His  eyes  seem  still  to  shine  with  the  rcficc-
visions,  his  mouth  smiles,  his  (ace  is
beautiful.     IK  has  seen  God.

••  He  IMS  ieen  God,"  says  the  son,  and  closes  the
dead  man's  eyes.

He  saw  heaven  open;  -b  the  children  and

servants.

The  old  wife  lays  her  shaking  hand  on  Captain
Lcnnart

You  helped  him  over  the  worst,  captain/'

It  was  that  hour  which  drove  Captain  Lcnnart  out
among  the  people.  Else  he  would  have  gone  home
and  let  his  wife  see  his  real  face,  but  from  that  time
he  believed  that  Goil  him.  He  became  God's

larer,  who  came  with  help  to  the  poor.  Distress
was  great,  and  there  was  much  suffering  which  good
sense  and  kindness  could  help  better  than  gold  and
power.

Captain  Lcnnart  came  one  day  to  the  poor  peas-

who  lived  in  the  neighborhood  of  Gurlitta  Cliff.

Among  them  there  was  great  want;  there  were  no

more  potatoes,  and  the   rye  could  not  be  sown,  as

they  had  no  seed.

n  Captain  Lcnnart  took  a  little  boat  and  rowed
across  the  lake  to  Fors  and  asked  Sintram  to  give
them  rye  and  potatoes.  Sintram  received  him  well :
he  took  him  to  the  big,  well-stocked  grain-houses  and
down  into  the  cellar,  where  the  potatoes  of  last  year's
crop  were,  and  let  him  fill  all  the  bags  and  sacks  he
had  with  him.


348         THE  STORY  OF  COST  A   BE  RUNG

But  when  Sintram  saw  the  little  boat,  he  thought
that  it  was  too  small  for  such  a  load.  He  had  tin
sacks  carried  to  one  of  his  big  boats,  and  his  servant,
big  Mons,  row  it  across  the  lake.  Captain  Lcnnui  t
had  only  his  empty  boat  to  attend  to.

He  came  however  after  Mons,  for  the  latter  was  a
master  of  rowing  and  a  giant  in  strength.  Captain
Lcnnart  sits  and  dreams,  while  he  rows  across  th<
beautiful  lake,  and  thinks  of  the  little  seed-corns'
wonderful  fate.  They  were  to  be  thrown  out  on  the
black  earth  among  stones  and  stubble,  but  they
would  sprout  and  take  root  in  the  wilderness.  lie-
thinks  how  the  soft,  light-green  shoots  will  cover  the
earth,  and  how,  finally,  when  the  ears  are  filled  with
soft,  sweet  kernels,  the  scythe  will  pass,  and  the  straws
fall,  and  the  flail  thunder  over  them,  and  the  mill
crush  the  kernels  to  meal,  and  the  meal  be  baked
into  bread,  —  ah,  how  much  hunger  will  be  satisfied
by  the  grain  in  the  boat  in  front  of  him !

Sintram's  servant  landed  at  the  pier  of  the  Gurlitta
people,  and  many  hungry  men  came  down  to  the  boat.

Then  the  man  said,  as  his  master  had  ordered :  -

"  The  master  sends  you  malt  and  grain,  peasants.
He  has  heard  that  you  have  no  brandy."

Then  the  people  became  as  mad.  They  rushed
down  to  the  boat  and  ran  out  into  the  water  to  seize
on  bags  and  sacks,  but  that  had  never  been  Captain
Lennart's  meaning.  He  had  now  come,  and  he  was
furious  when  he  saw  what  they  were  doing.  He
wanted  to  have  the  potatoes  for  food,  and  the  rye  for
seed;  he  had  never  asked  for  malt

He  called  to  the  people  to  leave  the  sacks  alone,
but  they  did  not  obey.

rye  turn  to  sand  in  your  mouths,  and  the


GOJ7S  WA  YFAKER  ;

potatoes  to  stone  in  your  throats!  "  he  cried,  for  he
was  very  angry  because  they  had  taken  the  grain.

It   looked   as  if  Captain   Lennart  had  worked   a

Two  women,  who  were  fighting  for  a  bag,

tore  a  hole  in  it  and  found  only  sand ;  tin  men  who

potato-sacks,  felt  how  heavy  they  were,

as  if  filled  with  stones.

It  was  all  sand  and  stones,  only  sand  and  stones.
The  people  stood  in  silent  terror  of  God's  mir
\\.»rkrr  who   had   come  to  them.     Captain    I*ennart
was  himself  for  a  moment  seized  with  astonishment.
Only  Mons  laughed.

"  Go  home,  fellow,"  said  Captain  Lennart,  "  before
tlu-  peasants  understand  that  there  has  never  been
anything  but  sand  in  these  sacks;  otherwise  I   am
:  they  will  sink  your  boat."
traid,"  said  the  man.

"  Go."  said  Captain  Lennart,  with  such  an  imperious
voice  that  he  went.

Then  Captain  Lcnnart  let  the  people  know  that
Sintram  had  fooled  them,  but  they  would  not  believe
anything  but  that  a  miracle  had  happened.  The
story  of  it  spread  soon,  and  as  the  people's  love  of
the  supernatural  is  great,  it  was  generally  believed
that  Captain  Lcnnart  could  work  wonders.  He  won
great  power  among  the  peasants,  and  they  called
him  God's  wayfarer.


3  $0         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG


CHAPTER  XIII

THE  CHURCHYARD

IT  was  a  beautiful  evening  in  August.  The  Lofven
lay  like  a  mirror,  haze  veiled  the  mountains,  it  was
the  cool  of  the  evening.

There  came  Beerencrcutz,  the  colonel  with  the
white  moustaches,  short,  strong  as  a  wrestler,  and
with  a  pack  of  cards  in  his  coat  pocket,  to  the  shore
of  the  lake,  and  sat  down  in  a  flat-bottomed  boat.
With  him  were  Major  Anders  Fuchs,  his  old  brotlu-r-
at-arms,  and  little  Ruster,  the  flute-player,  who  had
been  drummer  in  the  Varmland  chasseurs,  and  during
many  years  had  followed  the  colonel  as  his  friend
and  servant.

On  the  other  shore  of  the  lake  lies  the  churchyard,
the  neglected  churchyard,  of  the  Svartsjo  pari  h,
sparsely  set  with  crooked,  rattling  iron  crosses,  full
of  hillocks  like  an  unploughed  meadow,  overgrown
with  sedges  and  striped  grasses,  which  had  been
sowed  there  as  a  reminder  that  no  man's  life  is  like
another's,  but  changes  like  the  leaf  of  the  grass.
There  are  no  gravel  walks  there,  no  shading  trees
except  the  big  linden  on  the  forgotten  grave  of  some
old  priest.  A  stone  wall,  rough  and  high,  encloses
the  miserable  field.  Miserable  and  desolate  is  the
churchyard,  ugly  as  the  face  of  a  miser,  which  has
withered  at  the  laments  of  those  whose  happines  lu


THE  CHURCHYARD  351

has  stolen.    And  yet  they  who  rest  there  are  blessed,
they  who    have  been   sunk   into  consecrated   earth
to  the  sound  of  psalms  and  prayers.    Acquilon,  the
gambler,  he  who  died  last  year  at  Kkcby,  had  had
to  be  buried  outside  the  wall.     Th.it  man,  who  once
had   been  so  proud  and  courtly,  th<    brave  war
the  hold  hunter,  the  gambler  who  held  fortune  in  his
:.  he  had  ended  by  squandering   his  children's
e.  all  that  he  had  gained  himself,  all  that
had  saved.     Wife  and  children  he  had  for-
years  before,  to  lead  the  life  of  a  pen-
sioner at  Kkcby.     One  evening  in  the  past  summer
rd  away  the  farm  which  gave  them  their
means  of  subsistence.     Rather  than  to  pay  his  debt
i. id   shot   himself.     But   the  suicide's  body  was
buried  outside  the  moss-grown  wall  of  the  miserable
churchyard.

Since  he  died  the  pensioners  had  only  been  twelve ;
died  no  one  had  come  to  take  the  place  of
the  thirteenth,  —  no  one  but  the  devil,  who  on  Ch
mas  Eve  had  crept  out  of  the  furnace.

The  pension-  i     h.ul  found  his  fate  more  bitter  than
of  his  predecessors.     Of  course  they  knew  that
one  of  them  must  die  each  year.     What  harm  was
in   that?     Pensioners   may  not   be   old.     Can
dim  eyes  no  long<  !i  the  cards,  can

hands  no  longer  lift  the  glass,  uh.it
for  them,  and  what  are  they  for  life?     But  to
lie  like  a  dog  by   the  churchyard  wall,  where  the
ig  sods   may   not   rest    in    peace,   but    are
trodden  by  grazing  sheep,  wounded  by  spade  and
plough,  where  the  wanderer  goes  by  without  slacken-
pace,  and   \\here   the  children   play   without
subdtiin  laughter  and   jests,  —  to  rest   there.


352          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

where  the  stone  wall  prevents  the  sound  from  com-
ing when  the  angel  of  the  day  of  doom  wakes  with
his  trumpet  the  dead  within,  —  oh,  to  lie  there!

Bccrencrcutz  rows  his  boat  over  the  Lofvcn.  He
passes  in  the  evening  over  the  lake  of  my  dreams
about  whose  shores  I  have  seen  gods  wander,  and
from  whose  depths  my  magic  palace  rises.  He  rows
by  Lagon's  lagoons,  where  the  pines  stand  right
up  from  the  water,  growing  on  low,  circular  shoals,
and  where  the  ruin  of  the  tumble-down  Viking
castle  still  remains  on  the  steep  summit  of  the  island;
he  rows  under  the  pine  grove  on  Borg's  point,  where
one  old  tree  still  hangs  on  thick  roots  over  the
cleft,  where  a  mighty  bear  had  been  caught  and  where
old  mounds  and  graves  bear  witness  of  the  age
of  the  place.

He  rows  to  the  other  side  of  the  point,  gets  out
below  the  churchyard,  and  then  walks  over  mowed
fields,  which  belong  to  the  count  at  Borg,  to  Acqui-
lon's  grave.

Arrived  there,  he  bends  down  and  pats  the  turf,
as  one  lightly  caresses  the  blanket  under  which  a
sick  friend  is  lying.  Then  he  takes  out  a  pack  of
cards  and  sits  down  beside  the  grave.

"  He  is  so  lonely  outside  here,  Johan  Fredrik.  He
must  long  sometimes  for  a  game."

It  is  a  sin  and  a  shame  that  such  a  man  shall
lie  here,"  says  the  great  bear-hunter,  Anders  Fuchs,
and  sits  down  at  his  side.

But  little  Ruster,  the  flute-player,  speaks  with
broken  voice,  while  the  tears  run  from  his  small  red
eyes.

"  Next  to  you,  colonel,  next  to  you  he  was  the
finest  man  I  have  ever  known."


THE   (  V.'IKD  353

These  three  worthy  men  sit  round  the  grave  and

ards  seriously  and  with  zeal.

1    look  out  over  the  world,  I  sec   many  graves.

There  rest  the  mighty  ones  of  the  earth,  weighed

down  by   marble.     Funeral   marches  thunder  over

them.    Standards  are  sunk  over  those  graves.    I  see

tin    graves  of  those  who  have  been   much   loved.

Flowers,  wet  with   tears,  caressed   with   kisses,  rest

lightly  on  their  green  sods.     I  sec  forgotten  graves,

arrogant    graves,    lying    resting-places,   and   others

iy  nothing,  but  never  before  did  I  see  the

right-bower  and  the  joker  with  the  bells  in  his  cap

offered  as  entertainment  to  a  grave's  occupant

"  Jnh.m  1  rcdrik  has  won,"  says  the  colonel,  proudly.

d  I  not  know  it?     I  taught  him  to  play.     Yes,

now  we  arc  dead,  we  three,  and  he  alone  alive."

Thereupon  he  gathers  together  the  cards,  rises,  and
goes,  followed  by  the  others,  back  to  Ekcby.

May  the  dead  man  have  known  and  felt  that  not
every  one  has  forgotten  him  or  his  forsaken  grave.

Strange  homage  wild   hearts   bring  to  them  they

love;    but    he  who  lies  outside  the  wall,  he  whose

1  body  was  not  allowed  to  rest  in  consecrated

ground,  he  ought  to  be  glad  that  not  every  one  has

•  (I  him.

Friends,  children  of  men,  when  I  die  I  shall  surely
rest  in  the  middle  of  the  churchyard,  in  the  tomb  of
my  ancestors.  I  shall  not  have  robbed  my  family
of  their  means  of  subsistence,  nor  lifted  my  hand
against  my  own  life,  but  certainly  I  have  not  won  such
re,  Min-ly  will  no  one  do  as  much  for  me  as  the
pensioners  did  for  that  culprit.  It  is  certain  that  no
one  will  come  in  the  evening,  when  the  sun  sets

lonely  and  dreary  in  the  gardens  of  the  dead,
23


354         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLING

to  place  between  my  bony  fingers  the  many-colored
cards.

Not  even  will  any  one  come,  which  would  please
me  more,  —  for  cards  tempt  me  little,  —  with  fiddle
and  bow  to  the  grave,  that  my  spirit,  which  wanders
about  the  mouldering  dust,  may  rock  in  the  flow  of
melody  like  a  swan  on  glittering  waves.


OLD  SONGS  355


CHAPTER   XIV
OLD  SONGS

MARIANNE  SINCLAIR  sat  one  quiet  afternoon  at  the
end  of  August  in  her  room  and  arranged  her  old
letters  and  other  papers.

Round  about  her  was  disorder.  Great  leather
trunks  and  iron  bound  boxes  had  been  dragged  into
:  oom.  Her  clothes  covered  the  chairs  and  sofas.
From  attics  and  wardrobes  and  from  the  stained
chests  of  drawers  everything  had  been  taken  out,
glistening  silk  and  linen,  jewels  spread  out  to  be  pol-
ished, shawls  and  furs  to  be  selected  and  inspected.

Marianne  was  making  herself  ready  for  a  long  jour-
She  was  not  certain  if  she  should  ever  return
to  her  home.  She  was  at  a  turning-point  in  her  life
and  therefore  burned  a  mass  of  old  letters  and  diaries.
She  did  not  wish  to  be  weighed  down  with  records  of
the  past

As  she  sits  there,  she  finds  a  bundle  of  old  verses.
They  were  copies  of  old  ballads,  which  her  mother
used  to  sing  to  her  when  she  was  little.  She  untied
the  string  which  held  them  together,  and  began  to
read.

She  smiled  sadly  when  she  had  read  for  a  while;
the  old  songs  spoke  strange  wisdom.

Have  no  faith  in  happiness,  have  no  faith  in  the
appearance  of  happiness,  have  no  faith  in  roses.


356         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   RE  RUNG


Trust  not  laughter,"  tlu-v  ^aid.  "Sec.  tin  lovely
maiden  Valborg  drives  in  a  golden  coach,  and  IK  T
lips  smile,  but  she  is  as  sorrowful  as  if  hoofs  and
ulucls  were  passing  over  her  life's  happiness."

"Trust  not  the  dance,"  they  said.  "  Many  a  foot
whirls  lightly  over  polished  floor,  while  the  heart  is
heavy  as  lead."

"  Trust  not  the  jest,"  they  said.  "  Many  a  one  goes
to  the  feast  with  jesting  lips,  while  she  longs  to  die  for
pain."

In  what  shall  one  believe?     In  tears  and  sorrow!

He  who  is  sorrowful  can  force  himself  to  smile,
but  he  who  is  glad  cannot  weep.

But  joy  is  only  sorrow  disguised.  There  is  nothing
real  on  earth  but  sorrow.

She  went  to  the  window  and  looked  out  into  the
garden,  where  her  parents  were  walking.  They  went
up  and  down  the  broad  paths  and  talked  of  everything
which  met  their  eyes,  of  the  grass  and  the  birds.

"  See,"  said  Marianne,  "  there  goes  a  heart  which
sighs  with  sorrow,  because  it  has  never  been  so  happy
before."

And  she  thought  suddenly  that  perhaps  everything
really  depended  on  the  person  himself,  that  sorrow
and  joy  depended  upon  the  different  ways  of  looking
at  things.  She  asked  herself  if  it  were  joy  or  sorrow
which  had  passed  over  her  that  year.  She  hardly
knew  herself.

She  had  lived  through  a  bitter  time.  Her  soul  had
been  sick.  She  had  been  bowed  down  to  the  earth
by  her  deep  humiliation.  For  when  she  returned  to
her  home  she  had  said  to  herself,  "  I  will  remember
no  evil  of  my  father."  But  her  heart  did  not  agree.
"  He  has  caused  me  such  mortal  pain,"  it  said  ;  "  he


OLD  SONGS  357

has  parted  me  from  him  1  1-..  nadc  me  desper-

ate when  lu-  1  n in  no  harm,

but  I  am  And  then  she  noticed  how

she  had  to  force  herself  to  sit  still  when  her  ft
sat  down  beside   her;   she  longed   t«>   llee   from   him.
1  to  control  herself;  she  talked  with  him  as
usual  and  was  almost  always  with  i.  »uld

conquer  herself,  but  she  suffered  beyond  endurance.
She  ended  by  detesting  everything  about  him:  his
coarse   loud   voice,  his  heavy  tread,  his  big   hands.
She  wished  him  no  harm,  but  she  could  no  longer  be
him   without  a  feeling  of  fear   and   repul
repressed  heart  revenged  itself          •    u  would
not  let  me  h  "  but  I  am  nevertheless  your

master;  you  shall  end  by  hating."

Accustomed  as  she  was  to  observe  everything
which  stirred  within  her,  she  saw  too  well  how
repulsion  became  stronger,  how  it  grew  each  day.
At  the  same  time  she  seemed  to  be  tied  forever  to
home.  She  knew  that  it  would  be  best  for  her
to  go  away  among  people,  but  she  could  not  bring
herself  to  it  since  her  illness.  It  would  never  be  any
better.  She  would  only  be  more  and  more  tortured,
and  some  day  her  self-control  would  give  way,  and
she  would  burst  out  before  her  father  and  show  him
^s  of  her  heart,  and  then  there  would  be
strife  and  unhappiness.

So  had  the  spring  and  early  summer  passed.  In
July  she  had  become  engaged  to  Baron  Adrian,  in
order  to  have  her  own  home.

One  fine  forenoon  Baron  Adrian  had  galloped  up

to  the  hoi^e.  riding  a  magnificent  horse.     His  hussar

t  had  shone  in  •  -purs  and  sword  and

belt  had  glittered  and  flashed,  to  say  nothing  of  his

own  fresh  face  and  smiling  eyes.


358         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

Melchior  Sinclair  had  stood  on  the  steps  aiul
corned  him  when  he  came.     Marianne  had  sat  at  the
window  and  sewed.     She  had  seen  him  come,  and  now
heard  every  word  he  said  to  her  fath

"  Good-day,  Sir  Sunshine  !  "  cried  Melchior.  "  How
fine  you  arc !  You  arc  not  out  to  woo?  "

"Yes,  yes,  uncle,  that  is  just  what  I  am,"  he
answered,  and  laughed.

44  Is  there  no  shame  in  you,  boy?  What  have  you
to  maintain  a  wife  with? "

44  Nothing,  uncle.  Had  I  anything,  I  would  never
get  married."

44  Do  you  say  that,  do  you  say  that,  Sir  Sunshine?
But  that  fine  jacket,  —  you  have  had  money  enough
to  get  you  that?"

"  On  credit,  uncle."

41  And  the  horse  you  are  riding,  that  is  worth  a  lot
of  money,  I  can  tell  you.  Where  did  you  get  that?"

41  The  horse  is  not  mine,  uncle."

This  was  more  than  Melchior  could  withstand.

44  God  be  with  you,  boy,  "  he  said.  "  You  do
indeed  need  a  wife  who  has  something.  If  you  can
win  Marianne,  take  her."

So  everything  had  been  made  clear  between  them
before  Baron  Adrian  had  even  dismounted.  But
Melchior  Sinclair  knew  very  well  what  he  was  about,
for  Baron  Adrian  was  a  fine  fellow.

Then  the  suitor  had  come  in  to  Marianne  and  im-
mediately burst  out  with  his  errand.

44  Oh,  Marianne,  dear  Marianne.  I  have  already
spoken  to  uncle.  I  would  like  so  much  to  have  you
for  my  wife.  Say  that  you  will,  Marianne.  "

She  had  got  at  the  truth.  The  old  baron,  his  father,
had  let  himself  be  cheated  into  buying  some  used-up


OLD  SONGS  3S9

a-. mi.    The  old  baron  had  been  b-  nines

all  ii  ii.it I  an\  thin/,  been  t»und  in  them.

II     m  •  :»•  i  u-i  iumsclf  was  in  debt,  and

h<  was  proposing  to  her  in  ordc:  rby  save

th    h-  -in.-  .  i  ii.  <  ancestors  and  his  hussar jacl

His  home  was  Hcdcby ;  it  lay  on  the  other  side  of
th<  lake,  almost  opposite  Hjornc.  She  knew  him
u<  11 ,  the  v  •--..  i'-  of  the  same  age  and  playmates.

Vou  might  marry  me,  Marianne.     I   lead  such  a
hoi  hit       I   have  t"  rule  on  borrowed  horses
an.!  «  annul  pay  my  tailor's  bills.     Ii  can't  go  on.     I
shall  have-  t«»  resign,  and  then  I  shall  shoot  myself."

•  Inil,  Ailrian,  \\hal  kind  of  a  mamage  would  it
be?  We  are  not  in  the  least  in  love  with  one

1  )h,  as  for  love,  I  care  nothing  for  all  that  non-
sense," he  had  then  explar  1  like  to  ride  a
good  horse  and  to  hunt,  but  I  am  no  pensioner,  I  am
a  worker.  If  I  only  could  get  some  money,  so  that  I
could  take  charge  of  the  estate  at  home  and  give  my
mother  some  peace  in  her  old  age,  I  should  be  happy.

iould  both  plough  and  sow,  for  I  like  work."
Then  he  had  looked  at  her  with  his  honest  eyes,
and  she  knew  that  he  spoke  the  truth  and  that  he
was  a  man  to  depend  upon.  She  engaged  herself  to
him.  chiefly  to  get  away  from  her  home,  but  also
because  she  had  always  liked  him.

But  never  would  she  forget  that  month  which  fol-
lowed the  August  evening  when  her  engagement
was  announced,  —  all  that  time  of  madness.

Adrian  became  each  day  sadder  and  more

•it.  He  came  very  often  to  Hjorne,  sometimes
several  times  a  day,  but  she  could  not  help  noticing
how  depressed  he  was.  With  others  he  could  still


360         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  BE  RUNG


jest,  but  with  IUT  he  wafl  impossible,  silent  and  bored.
She  understood  what  was  the  matter:  it  wa.s  n<
easy  as  he  had  believed  to  marry  an  ugly  woman.
No  one  knew  better  than  she  how  ugly  she  was.  She-
had  shown  him  that  she  did  not  want  any  caresses  or
love-making,  but  he  was  nevertheless  tortured  by  the
thought  of  her  as  his  wife,  and  it  seemed  u<>r
him  day  by  day.  Why  did  he  care?  Why  did  he
not  break  it  off>  She  had  given  hints  which  were
plain  enough.  She  could  do  nothing.  Her  father
had  told  her  that  her  reputation  would  not  bear  any
more  ventures  in  being  engaged.  Then  she  had  de-
spised them  both,  and  any  way  seemed  good  enough
to  get  away  from  them.  But  only  a  couple  of  days
after  the  great  engagement  feast  a  sudden  and  won-
derful change  had  come.

In  the  path  in  front  of  the  steps  at  Bjorne  lay  a  big
stone,  which  caused  much  trouble  and  vexation.
Carriages  rolled  over  it,  horses  and  people  tripped
on  it,  the  maids  who  came  with  heavy  milk  cans  ran
against  it  and  spilled  the  milk;  but  the  stone  remained,
because  it  had  already  lain  there  so  many  years.  It
had  been  there  in  the  time  of  Sinclair's  parents,  long
before  any  one  had  thought  of  building  at  Bjornc.
He  did  not  see  why  he  should  take  it  up.

But  one  day  at  the  end  of  August,  two  maids,  who
were  carrying  a  heavy  tub,  tripped  over  the  stone  ;
they  fell,  hurt  themselves  badly,  and  the  feeling
against  the  stone  grew  strong.

It  was  early  in  the  morning.  Melchior  was  out  on
his  morning  walk,  but  as  the  workmen  were  about  the
house  between  eight  and  nine,  Madame  Gustava  had
several  of  them  come  and  dig  up  the  big  stone.


Of          <;s  361

They  came  \\itli  iron  levers  and  spades,  dug  and
•trail  I  at  last  got  the  old  distil  :hc  peace

hole,  in  away  to

the  back  yard.     It  was

The  stone  was  hardly  e  Mclchior

cam-  >u  can  believe  th.a  he  was  an^ry.     It

was  no  longer  the  same  place,  he  thought.     Who  had
dared  to   move   the   stone?     Madame   Gustava  had

;i  the  old  lose  women  had  no  heart  in

bodies.     Did  not  his  wife  know  that  he  loved  that
stone  ?

Anil  tlun  he  w  ct  to  the  stone,  lifted  it,  and

.t  across  the  yard  to  the  place  where   it   h.ul
Kim.  .mil  there  IK  ih:iu;  it  down.     And  it  was  a  stone
could  scarcely  lift.     That  deed  was
uly  admired  through  the  whole  of  Varmland.
While  he  carried  the  stone  across  the  yard,  M

1  stood  at  the  dining-room  window  and  looked
at  him.  He  was  her  master,  that  terrible  man  with
his  boundless  strength,  —  an  unreasonable,  capricious
master,  who  thought  of  nothing  but  his  own  pleasure.
They  were  in  the  midst  of  breakfast,  and  she  had  a
carving-knife  in  her  hand.  Involuntarily  she  lifted
the  knife.

Madame  Gustava  seized  her  by  the  wrist.
"Marian*
'  Wii.it  i    the  matter,  mother?"

>h,  Marianne,  you    looked   so  strange!     I  was

cd."

Marianne  looked  at  her.  She  was  a  little,  dry
woman,  gray  and  wrinkled  already  at  fifty.  She
loved  like  a  dog,  without  remembering  knocks  and
blows.  She  was  generally  good-humored,  and  yet
she  made  a  melancholy  impres-  I  .is  like  a


362          I//E  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

storm-whipprd  tree   l>y  tlu-  sea;   -lu-  lj, id  never  h.ul
quiet  to  grow.     She  li.nl  learned  to  use  mean  si
to  lie  when  mxcli<l,  .mi  I  «>lu-n  made  herself  out  more
stupid  than  she  was  to  escape  taunts.     In  every tlmu;
she  was  the  tool  of  her  husband.

"  Would  you  grieve  much  if  father  died?"  asked
Marianne.

"  Marianne,  you  arc  angry  with  your  father.  You
arc  always  angry  with  him.  Why  cannot  everything
be  forgotten,  since  you  have  got  a  new  fiance*?"

"  Oh,  mother,  it  is  not  my  fault.  Can  I  help  shud-
dering at  him?  Do  you  not  see  what  he  is?  Why
should  I  care  for  him?  He  is  violent,  he  is  uncouth,
he  has  tortured  you  till  you  are  prematurely  old.
Why  is  he  our  master?  He  behaves  like  a  madman.
Why  shall  I  honor  and  respect  him?  He  is  not
good,  he  is  not  charitable.  I  know  that  he  is  strong.
He  is  capable  of  beating  us  to  death  at  any  moment.
He  can  turn  us  out  of  the  house  when  he  will.  Is
that  why  I  should  love  him  ?  "

But  then  Madame  Gustava  had  been  as  never  before.
She  had  found  strength  and  courage  and  had  spoken
weighty  words.

"You  must  take  care,  Marianne.  It  almost  seems
to  me  as  if  your  father  was  right  when  he  shut  you
out  last  winter.  You  shall  see  that  you  will  be
punished  for  this.  You  must  teach  yourself  to  bear
without  hating,  Marianne,  to  suffer  without  revenge."

"  Oh,  mother,  I  am  so  unhappy."

Immediately  after,  they  heard  in  the  hall  the  sound
of  a  heavy  fall.

They  never  knew  if  Melchior  Sinclair  had  stood  on
the  steps  and  through  the  open  dining-room  door  had
heard  Marianne's  words,  or  if  it  was  only  over-exertion


OLD  SONGS  363

which  had  been  the  cause  of  the  stroke.  When  they
came  out  he  lay  unconscious.  They  never  dared  to
ask  him  the  cause.  He  himself  m-ier  made  any  sign
th.it  he  had  heard  anything.  Marianne  never  dared
to  think  tlu  thought  out  that  she  had  involuntarily
ngcd  herself.  Hut  the  M-ht  of  her  father  lying  on
the  very  steps  where  she  had  learnt  to  hate  him  took
all  l>iUenuss  from  h«

Ik  so. .11  i<  timed  to  consciousness,  and  when  he
had  kept  quiet  a  few  days,  he  was  like  himself — and
yet  not  at  all  like.

Marianne  saw  her  parents  walking  together  in  the
garden.  It  was  always  so  now.  He  never  went  out
alone,  grumbled  at  guests  and  at  everything  which
separated  him  from  1.  Old  age  had  come  upon

him.     He  could  not  bring  himself  to  write  a  lei

had  to  do  it  He  never  decided  anything  by
himself,  but  asked  her  about  everything  and  let  it  be
as  she  decided.  And  he  was  always  gentle  and  kind.
He  noticed  the  change  which  had  come  over  him,  and
how  happy  his  wife  was.  "  She  is  well  off  now,"  he
said  one  day  to  Marianne,  and  pointed  to  Madame
iva.

"  Oh,  dear  Melchior,"  she  cried,  "  you  know  very
well  that  I  would  rather  have  you  strong  again."

And  she  really  meant  it.  It  was  her  joy  to  speak
of  him  as  he  was  in  the  days  of  his  strength.  She  told
how  he  held  his  own  in  riot  and  revel  as  well  as  any
he  Ekeby  pensioners,  how  he  had  done  good
business  and  earned  much  money,  just  when  she
thought  that  he  in  his  madness  would  lose  house  and
lands.  But  Marianne  knew  that  she  was  happy  in  spite
of  all  her  complaints.  To  be  everything  to  her  husband
was  enough  for  her.  They  both  looked  old,  pre-


364         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

maturely  broken.  Marianne  thought  that  she  eould
see  their  future  life.  Hi-  would  -et  gradually  weake*
and  weaker;  other  strokes  would  make-  him  more
helpless,  and  she  would  watch  over  him  until  death
parted  them.  But  the  end  mi^ht  be  far  distant.
Madame  Gustava  could  enjoy  her  happiness  in  peace
still  for  a  time.  It  must  be  so,  Marianne  thoi
Life  owed  her  some  compensation.

For  her  too  it  was  better.  No  fretting  despair  forced
her  to  marry  to  get  another  master.  Her  wounded
heart  had  found  peace.  She  had  to  acknowledge  that
she  was  a  truer,  richer,  nobler  person  than  before;
what  could  she  wish  undone  of  what  had  happened  .-*
Was  it  true  that  all  suffering  was  good?  Could  every-
thing be  turned  to  happiness?  She  had  begun  to
consider  everything  good  which  could  help  to  dcvel.  p
her  to  a  higher  degree  of  humanity.  The  old  songs
were  not  right.  Sorrow  was  not  the  only  lasting
thing.  She  would  now  go  out  into  the  world  and  look
about  for  some  place  where  she  was  needed.  If  her
father  had  been  in  his  old  mood,  he  would  never  have
allowed  her  to  break  her  engagement.  Now  Madame
Gustava  had  arranged  the  matter.  Marianne  had  even
been  allowed  to  give  Baron  Adrian  the  money  he
needed.

She  could  think  of  him  too  with  pleasure,  she  would
be  free  from  him.  With  his  bravery  and  love  of  life
he  had  always  reminded  her  of  Gosta ;  now  she  should
see  him  glad  again.  He  would  again  be  that  sunny
knight  who  had  come  in  his  glory  to  her  father's
house.  She  would  get  him  lands  where  he  could
plough  and  dig  as  much  as  his  heart  desired,  and
she  would  see  him  lead  a  beautiful  bride  to  the  altar.

With  such   thoughts  she  sits  down  and  writes  to


OLD  SONGS  36$

give  him  back  his  freedom.  She  writes  gentle,  pur-
suasive  words,  sense  wrapped  up  in  jests,  and  yet  so
that  In  must  understand  how  seriously  she  means  it

While  she  writes  she  hears  hoof-beats  on  the  road.

"  My  dear  Sir  Sun  he  thinks,  "  it  is  the  last

time."

Baron  Adrian  immediately  after  comes  into  her
room.

1  Wh.it,  Adrian,  arc  you  coming  in  here?"  and  she
looks  dismayed  at  all  her  packing.

He  is  shy  and  embarrassed  and  stammers  out  an
excuse.

I  was  just  writing  to  you,"  she  says.     "  Look,  you
might  as  well  read  it  now."

takes  the  letter  and  she  sits  and  watches  him
while  he  reads.  She  longs  to  see  his  face  light  up
with  joy.

But  he  has  not  read  far  before  he  grows  fiery  red,
throws  the  letter  on  the  floor,  stamps  on  it,  and  swears
terrible  oaths.

Marianne  trembles  slightly.     She  is  no  novice  in
the  study  of  love ;  still  she  has  not  before  understood
ncxpcricnccd  boy,  this  great  child.

"  Adrian,  dear  Adrian/'  she  says,  "  what  kind  of  a
comedy  have  you  played  with  me?  Come  and  tell
me  the  truth."

He  came  and  almost  suffocated  her  with  caresses.
Poor  boy,  so  he  had  cared  and  longed.

After  a  while  she  looked  out  There  walked
Madame  Gustava  and  talked  with  her  husband  of
flowers  and  birds,  and  here  she  sat  and  chatted  of
love.  "  Life  has  let  us  both  feel  its  serious  side,"  she
thought,  and  smiled  sadly.  "  It  wants  to  comfort  us;
we  have  each  got  her  big  child  to  play  with."


366         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BERUNG

However,  it  was  good  to  be  loved.  It  was  sweet
to  hear  him  whisper  of  the  magical  power  which  she
possessed,  of  how  he  had  been  ashamed  of  what  lie-
had  said  at  their  first  conversation.  He  had  not
then  known  what  charm  she  had.  Oh,  no  man
could  be  near  her  without  loving  her,  but  she  had
frightened  him  ;  he  had  felt  so  strangely  subdued.

It  was  not  happiness,  nor  unhappiness,  but  she
would  try  to  live  with  this  man.

She  began  to  understand  herself,  and  thought  of  the
words  of  the  old  songs  about  the  turtle-dove.  It  never
drinks  clear  water,  but  first  muddies  it  with  its  foot
so  that  it  may  better  suit  its  sorrowful  spirit.  So  too
should  she  never  go  to  the  spring  of  life  and  drink
pure,  unmixed  happiness.  Troubled  with  sorrow,  life
pleased  her  best


//,    I  HE  DELIVERER  3<>7


CHAPTER   XV

DEATH  i:R

MY  pale  friend,  Death  the  deliverer,  came  in  August,
when  the  nights  were  white  with  moonlight,  to  the
house  of  Captain  Uggla.  But  he  did  not  dare  to  go
direct  into  that  hospitable  home,  for  they  are  few
who  love  him.  and  he  does  not  wish  to  be  greeted
with  weeping,  rather  with  quiet  joy,  —  he  who  comes  to
set  free  the  soul  from  the  fetters  of  pain,  he  who
delivers  the  soul  from  the  burden  of  the  body  and  lets
it  enjoy  the  beautiful  life  of  the  spheres.

Into  the  old  grove  behind  the  house,  crept  Death.

In  the  grove,  which  then  was  young  and  full  of  green,

:>alc  friend  hid  himself  by  day,  but  at  night  he

stood  at  the  edge  of  the  wood,  white  and  pale,  with

his  scythe  glittering  in  the  moonlight.

Death  stood  there,  and  the  creatures  of  the  night
saw  him.  Evening  after  evening  the  people  at  Berga
heard  how  the  fox  howled  to  foretell  his  coming.
The  snake  crawled  up  the  sandy  path  to  the  very
house.  He  could  not  speak,  but  they  well  under-
stood that  he  came  as  a  presage.  And  in  the  apple-
tree  outside  the  window  of  the  captain's  wife  the  owl
hooted.  For  everything  in  nature  feels  Death  and
trembles.

It  happened  that  the  judge  from  Munkerud,  who
had  been  at  .1  at  the  Bro  deanery,  drove  by


368         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

Berga  at  two  o'clock  in  the  night  and  saw  a  candle
burning  in  the  window  of  the  guest-room.  He  plainly
saw  the  yellow  flame  and  the  white  candle,  and,  won-
dering, he  afterwards  told  of  the  candle  which  had
burned  in  the  summer  night.

The  gay  daughters  at  Berga  laughed  and  said  that
the  judge  had  the  gift  of  second  sight,  for  th
no  candles  in  the  house,  they  were  already  burned  up
in  March ;  and  the  captain  swore  that  no  one  had
slept  in  the  guest-room  for  days  and  weeks;  but  hi-;
wife  was  silent  and  grew  pale,  for  that  white  candle
with  the  clear  flame  used  to  show  itself  when  one  of
her  family  should  be  set  free  by  Death.

A  short  time  after,  Ferdinand  came  home  from  a
surveying  journey  in  the  northern  forests.  He  came,
pale  and  ill  with  an  incurable  disease  of  the  lungs,
and  as  soon  as  his  mother  saw  him,  she  knew  that  lu  r
son  must  die.

He  must  go,  that  good  son  who  had  never  given
his  parents  a  sorrow.  He  must  leave  earth's  pleas-
ures and  happiness,  and  the  beautiful,  beloved  bride
who  awaited  him,  and  the  rich  estates  which  should
have  been  his.

At  last,  when  my  pale  friend  had  waited  a  month,
he  took  heart  and  went  one  night  up  to  the  house.
He  thought  how  hunger  and  privation  had  there  been
met  by  glad  faces,  so  why  should  not  he  too  be
received  with  joy?

That  night  the  captain's  wife,  who  lay  awake,  heard
a  knocking  on  the  window-pane,  and  she  sat  up  in
bed  and  asked:  "Who  is  it  who  knocks?"

And  the  old  people  tell  that  Death  answered  her :

"  It  is  Death  who  knocks."

Then  she  rose  up,  opened  her  window,  and  saw  bats


DEATH,   nil-:  in  /•:*

MK  in  the  moonlight,  but  Death  she
did  not  sec.

omc,"  she  said  half  aloud,  "  friend  and  d.
Why  have  you  lingered  so  long?    I  have  been  wait-
I  have  called.    Come  and  set  my  son  free  I  "

The  n  she  sat  by  her  son's  sick-bed  and

spoke  to  him  of  the  blissfulncss  of  the  liberated  spirit
.uul  ••!"  its  glorious  life.

So  I'Yrdmand  died,  cnch.u  bright  visions,

smilinj;  at  the  glory  to  come.

Death  had  never  seen  anything  so  beautiful.     For

of  course  there  were  some  who  wept  by  I-Yrdinand

Uggla's  deathbed ;  but  the  sick  man  himself  smiled  at

the  man  \\ith  the  scythe,  when  he  took  his  place  on

tlu-  edge  of  the  bed,  and  his  mother  listened  to  the

i  rattle  as  if  to  sweet  music.     She  trembled  lest

Death  should  not  finish  his  work ;  and  when  the  end

te,  tears  fell  from  her  eyes,  but  they  were  tears  of

joy  which  wet  her  son's  stiffened  face.

Never  had  Death  been  so  feted  as  at  Ferdinand
Uggla's  burial.

was  a  wonderful  funeral  procession  which  passed
under  the  lindens.  In  front  of  the  flower-decked
coffin  beautiful  children  walked  and  strewed  flowers.
There  was  no  mourning-dress,  no  crape ;  for  his  mother
had  wished  that  he  who  died  with  joy  should  not  be
followed  to  the  good  refuge  by  a  gloomy  funeral  pro-
cession, but  by  a  shining  wedding  train.

Following  the  coffin,  went  Anna  StjarnliMk.  the
dead  man's  beautiful,  glowing  bride.  She  had  set  a
bridal  wreath  on  her  head,  hung  a  bridal  veil  over  her,
and  arrayed  herself  in  *  bridal  dress  of  white,  shim-
mering satin.  So  adorned,  she  went  to  be  wedded  at
the  grave  to  a  mouldering  bridegroom.


370         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

hind  her  they  came,  two  by  two,  d  i  old

ladies  and  stately  men.  The  ladies  came  in  shining
buckles  and  brooches,  with  strings  of  milk-white
pearls  and  bracelets  of  gold.  Ostrich  feathers  nodded
in  their  bonnets  of  silk  and  lace,  and  from  their  shoul-
ders floated  thin  silken  shawls  over  dresses  of  many-
colored  satin.  And  tlu-ir  husbands cann  in  tlu-ir  best
array,  in  high-collared  coats  with  gilded  buttons,  with
swelling  ruffles,  and  in  vests  of  stiff  brocade  or  richlv-
embroidercd  velvet.  It  was  a  wedding  procession;
the  captain's  wife  had  wished  it  so.

She  herself  walked  next  after  Anna  Stjiirnhok,  led
by  her  husband.  If  she  had  possessed  a  dress  of
shining  brocade,  she  would  have  worn  it ;  if  she  had
possessed  jewels  and  a  gay  bonnet,  she  would  have
worn  them  too  to  do  honor  to  her  son  on  his  festival
day.  But  she  only  had  the  black  silk  dress  and  the
yellowed  laces  which  had  adorned  so  many  feasts,
and  she  wore  them  here  too.

Although  all  the  guests  came  in  their  best  array,
there  was  not  a  dry  eye  when  they  walked  forward  to
the  grave.  Men  and  women  wept,  not  so  much  for
the  dead,  as  for  themselves.  There  walked  the  bride ;
there  the  bridegroom  was  carried ;  there  they  them-
selves wandered,  decked  out  for  a  feast,  and  yet  —
who  is  there  who  walks  earth's  green  pathways  and
does  not  know  that  his  lot  is  affliction,  sorrow,  un-
happiness,  and  death.  They  wept  at  the  thought  that
nothing  on  earth  could  save  them.

The  captain's  wife  did  not  weep ;  but  she  was  the
only  one  whose  eyes  were  dry.

When  the  prayers  were  read,  and  the  grave  filled  in,
all  went  away  to  the  carriages.  Only  the  mother  and
Anna  Stjarnhok  lingered  by  the  grave  to  bid  their


DEATH,  KR  371

dead  a  last  good-bye.    The  older  woman  sat  down  on

th<    •  ;j.i-.r -jn..tin.!.  and  Anna  placed   herself  at  her

\mia,"  said  the  captain's  wife,  "  I  have  sai«
God  :     1    •    Death  come  and  take  away  my  son,  let
hun  take  .iway  him  I  love  most,  and  only  tears  of  joy
shall  come  to  my  eyes;  with  nuptial  pomp  I  wil:

his  grave,  and  my  red  rose-bush,  which

stands  outside  my  chamber- window,  will   I  move  to

him  in  the  ^;  And  now  it  has  come  to  past

my  son  is  dead.     I  have  greeted  Death  like  a  friend,

I  him  by  the  tcndcrcst  names;   I  have  wept  tears

of  joy  over  my  son's  dead  face,  and  in  the  autumn,

i  the  leaves  arc  fallen,  I  shall  plant  my  red  rosc-

i  here.     Hut  do  you  know,  you  who  sit  here  at

iile,  why  I  have  sent  such  prayers  to  God?"

She  looked  questioningly  at  Anna  Stjurnhok ;  but

the  girl  sat  silent  and  pale  beside  her.     Perhaps  she

was  struggling  to  silence  inward  voices  which  already

there,  on  the  grave  of  the  dead,  began  to  whisper  to

hat  now  at  last  she  was  free.
"  The  fault  is  yours,"  said  the  captain's  wife.
The  girl  sank  down  as  from  a  blow.     She  did  not
answer  a  word.

"  Anna  Stjarnhok,  you  were  once  proud  and  self-
willed:  you  played  with  my  son,  took  him  and  cast
him  off.  But  what  of  that?  He  had  to  accept  it,  as
well  as  another.  Perhaps  too  he  and  we  all  loved
your  money  as  much  as  you.  Hut  you  came  back,
you  came  with  a  blessing  to  our  home;  you
gentle  and  miK!  and  kind,  when  you  came

again.  You  cherished  us  with  love;  you  made  us  so
happy,  Anna  Stjarnlmk ;  and  we  poor  people  lay  at
your  feet


372         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BEKLI.\\,

"  And  yet,  and  yet  I  have  wished  that  you  had
not  come.  Tlu  n  had  I  not  m-rdcd  to  pray  to  God
to  shorten  my  son's  life.  At  Christmas  he  could  have
borne  to  lose  you,  but  after  he  had  learnt  to  know  you,
such  as  you  now  arc,  he  would  not  have  had  t  lu-
stre ngth.

"  You  know,  Anna  Stjarnhok,  who  to-day  have  put
on  your  bridal  dress  to  follow  my  son,  that  if  he  had
lived  you  would  never  have  followed  him  in  that
attire  to  the  Bro  church,  for  you  did  not  love  him.

11  I  saw  that  you  only  came  out  of  pity,  for  you
wanted  to  relieve  our  hard  lot.  You  did  not  love
him.  Do  you  not  think  that  I  know  love,  that  I  see
it,  when  it  is  there,  and  understand  when  it  is  lack-
ing. Then  I  thought :  '  May  God  take  my  son's
life  before  he  has  his  eyes  opened  ! '

"  Oh,  if  you  had  loved  him  !  Oh,  if  you  had  never
come  to  us  and  sweetened  our  lives,  when  you  did
not  love  him  !  I  knew  my  duty:  if  he  had  not  died,
I  should  have  been  forced  to  tell  him  that  you  did
not  love  him,  that  you  were  marrying  him  out  of  pity.
I  must  have  made  him  set  you  free,  and  then  his  life's
happiness  would  have  been  gone.  That  is  why  I
prayed  to  God  that  he  might  die,  that  I  should  not
need  to  disturb  the  peace  of  his  heart.  And  I  have
rejoiced  over  his  sunken  cheeks,  exulted  over  his
rattling  breath,  trembled  lest  Death  should  not
complete  his  work."

She  stopped  speaking,  and  waited  for  an  answer;
but  Anna  Stjarnhok  could  not  speak,  she  was  still
listening  to  the  many  voices  in  her  soul.

Then  the  mother  cried  out  in  despair :  —

"  Oh,  how  happy  are  they  who  may  mourn  for
their  dead,  they  who  may  weep  streams  of  tears  !  I


DEATH,   ////    n.'  /•:*  373

must  stand  with  dry  eyes  by  my  son's  grave    I
rejoice.  death!     I  Itiw  unhappy  I  .in.

Then  Anna  Stj.mihnk  pressed  her  hands  ag.t

breast.     She  remembered  that  winter  night
she  had  sworn  by  her  love  to  be  these  poor  people's
support  and  con  d  she  trembled.     Had

been  in  vain;  was  not  her  sacrifice  one  of  those
which  God  accepts?  Should  it  all  be  turned  to  a
curse?

Hut  if  *hc  sacrificed  everything  would  not  God
then  give  His  blessing  t«»  the  work,  and  let  her  bring
happiness,  be  a  support,  a  help,  to  these  people?

"  What  is  required  for  you  to  be  able  to  mourn
for  your  son?  "  she  asla

0  That  I  shall  not  believe  the  testimony  of  my  old
eyes.  If  I  believed  that  you  loved  my  son,  then  I
would  grieve  for  his  death."

The  girl  rose  up,  her  eyes  burning.     She  tore  off
.ind  spread  it  over  the  grave,  she  tore  oft  her
wreath  and  laid  it  beside  it.

>cc  how  I  love  him !  "  she  cried.  "  I  give  him
my  wreath  and  veil.  I  consecrate  myself  to  him.  I
will  never  belong  to  another."

Th  aptain's  wife  rose  too.     She  stood  silent

for  a  while ;   her  whole  body  was  shaking,  and  her

twitched,  but  at  last  the  tears  came,  —  tears  of


374          1'HE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERI./\i;


CHAPTER  XVI

THE  DROUGHT

IF  dead  things  love,  if  earth  and  water  distinguish
friends  from  enemies,  I  should  like  to  possess  their
love.  I  should  like  the  green  earth  not  to  feel  my
step  as  a  heavy  burden.  I  should  like  her  to  for-
give that  she  for  my  sake  is  wounded  by  plough  and
harrow,  and  willingly  to  open  for  my  dead  body.
And  I  should  like  the  waves,  whose  shining  mirror
is  broken  by  my  oars,  to  have  the  same  patience
with  me  as  a  mother  has  with  an  eager  child  when
it  climbs  up  on  her  knee,  careless  of  the  uncrumplcd
silk  of  her  dress.

The  spirit  of  life  still  dwells  in  dead  things.  Have
you  not  seen  it?  When  strife  and  hate  fill  the  earth,
dead  things  must  suffer  too.  Then  the  waves  are
wild  and  ravenous;  then  the  fields  are  niggardly  as  a
miser.  Hut  woe  to  him  for  whose  sake  the  woods
sigh  and  the  mountains  weep.

Memorable  was  the  year  when  the  pensioners
were  in  power.  If  one  could  tell  of  everything
which  happened  that  year  to  the  people  by  Lofven's
shores  a  world  would  be  surprised.  For  then  old  love
wakened,  then  new  was  kindled.  Old  hate  blazed
up,  and  long  cherished  revenge  seized  its  prey.

From  Ekeby  this  restless  infection  went  forth ;  it
spread  first  through  the  manors  and  estates,  and
drove  men  to  ruin  and  to  crime.  It  ran  from  village


THE  V ROUGH 1  375

to   \  i  cottage  to  cottage.     Everywhere

hearts  became  wild,  ami  -nfuscd.     Never  did

the  i  !y  at  the  cross-road-

was  i  barrel  so  quick  1  never  was  so

ii  i;rain  turned  into  brandy.     Never  were  there  so
many   balls,    never    was   the    way    si  ::om    the

angry  word  to  the  knife-thrust.  Hut  the  uneasiness
was  not  only  among  men.  It  spread  through  all  liv-
:  lungs.  Never  had  wolf  and  bear  ravaged  so
fiercely;  never  had  fox  am!  owl  howled  so  terribly,
and  plundered  so  boldly ;  never  did  the  sheep  go  so
often  astray  in  the  wood ;  never  did  so  much  sickness
rage  among  the  cattle.

He  who  will  sec  how  everything  hangs  together
must  leave  the  towns  and  live  in  a  lonely  hut  at  the
edge  of  the  forest;  then  he  will  learn  to  notice
re's  every  sign  and  to  understand  how  the  dead
things  depend  on  the  living.  He  will  see  that  when
-  is  restlessness  on  the  earth,  the  peace  of  the  dead
things  is  disturbed.  The  people  know  it.  It
such  times  that  the  wood-nymph  puts  out  the  char-
coal-kiln, the  sea-nymph  breaks  the  boat  to  pieces,
the  river-sprite  sends  illness,  the  goblin  starves  the
cow.  And  it  was  so  that  year.  Never  had  the
spring  freshets  done  so  much  damage.  The  mill  and
smithy  at  Ekeby  were  not  the  only  offerings.  Never
had  the  lightning  laid  waste  so  much  already  before
midsummer —  after  midsummer  came  the  drought.

As  long  as  the  long  days  lasted,  no  rain  came,
i  the  middle  of  June  till  the  beginning  of  Sep-
tember, the  country  was  bathed  in  continual  sunshine.

The  rain  refused  to  fall,  the  earth  to  nourish,  the
winds  to  blow.  Sunshine  only  streamed  down  on
the  earth.  The  grass  was  not  yet  high  and  could


3/6  ///A    STOK)  >STA   BER1 .

not  grow;  the  rye  was  without  nourishment,  just
when  it  should  have  coi  food  in  It  the

wheat,  from  which  most  of  the  bread  was  baked,
never  came  up  more  than  a  few  inches;  the  late
sowed  turnips  never  sprouted  ;  not  even  the  potatoes
could  draw  sustenance  from  that  petrified  earth.

At  such  times  they  begin  to  be  frightened  far  a
in  the  forest  huts,  and  from  the  mountains  the  terror
comes  down  to  the  calmer  people  on  the  plain.

"  There  is  some  one  whom  God's  hand  is  seeking ! "
say  the  people.

And  each  one  beats  his  breast  and  says :  "  Is  it  I  ?
Is  it  from  horror  of  me  that  the  rain  holds  back?
Is  it  in  wrath  against  me  that  the  stern  earth  dries
up  and  hardens?  —  and  the  perpetual  sunshine,  —  is  it
to  heap  coals  of  fire  on  my  head?  Or  if  it  is  not  I,
who  is  it  whom  God's  hand  is  seeking?"

It  was  a  Sunday  in  August.  The  service  was  over.
The  people  wandered  in  groups  along  the  sunny
roads.  On  all  sides  they  saw  burned  woods  and
ruined  crops.  There  had  been  many  forest  fires;
and  what  they  had  spared,  insects  had  taken.

The  gloomy  people  did  not  lack  for  subjects  of
conversation.  There  were  many  who  could  tell  how
hard  it  had  been  in  the  years  of  famine  of  eighteen
hundred  and  eight  and  nine,  and  in  the  cold  winter
of  eighteen  hundred  and  twelve,  when  the  sparrows
froze  to  death.  They  knew  how  to  make  bread  out
of  bark,  and  how  the  cows  could  be  taught  to  eat
moss.

There  was  one  woman  who  had  tried  a  new  kind
of  bread  of  cranberries  and  corn-meal.  She  had  a
sample  with  her,  and  let  the  people  taste  it.  She
was  proud  of  her  invention.


THE  DROUGHT  377

Hut  c>.  ,  all  floated  the  same  question.     It

every  eye,  was  whispered  by  every  lip :
••  Who  is  it,  O  Lord,  whom  Thy  hand  seeks?"

A  man  in  the  gloomy  crowd  which  had  gone  west-
ward, and  struggled  up  Broby  hill,  stopped  a  minute
before  the  path  which  led  up  to  the  house  of  the
.n  Broby  clergyman.     He  picked  up  a  dry  stick
i   the  Around  and  threw  it   upon  the  path.
Dry  as  that  stick  have  the  prayers  been  which  he
has  given  our  Lord,"  said  the  man.

He  who  walked  next  to  him  also  stopped,
took  up  a  dry  branch  and  threw  it  where  the  stick

ic  proper  offering  to  that  priest,"  he  said.
The    third    in    the    crowd    followed    the    oth
example.

He  ha^  lu-rn  like  the  drought;  sticks  and  straw
arc  all  that  he  has  let  us  keep."

The  fourth  said  :  "  We  give  him  back  what  he  has
given  us."

And  the  fifth :  "  For  a  perpetual  disgrace  I  throw
to  him.  May  he  dry  up  and  wither  away  like
branch  !  "

ry  food  to  the  dry  priest,"  said  the  sixth.
The  people  who  came  after  see  what  they  are  do-
.r  what    they  say.      Now  they  get  the
answer  to  their  long  questioning.

"  Give  him  what  belongs  to  him  !  He  has  brought
the  drought  on  us."

And  each  one  stops,  each  one  says  his  word  and
throws  his  branch  before  he  goes  on.

In  the  corner  by  the  path  there  soon  lies  a  pile  of
sticks  and  straw,  —  a  pile  of  shame  for  the  Broby
clergyman.


378          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BEKUNG

That  was  their  only  revenge.  No  one  lifted  his
hand  against  the  clergyman  or  said  an  angry  word  to
him.  Desperate  hearts  cast  off  part  of  their  burden
by  throwing  a  dry  branch  on  the  pile.  They  did
not  revenge  themselves.  They  only  pointed  out  the
guilty  one  to  the  God  of  retribution.

"  If  we  have  not  worshipped  you  rightly,  it  is  that
man's  fault.  Be  pitiful,  Lord,  and  let  him  alone
suffer!  We  mark  him  with  shame  and  dishonor.
We  are  not  with  him."

It  soon  became  the  custom  for  every  one  who
passed  the  vicarage  to  throw  a  dry  branch  on  the
pile  of  shame.

The  old  miser  soon  noticed  the  pile  by  the  road-
side. He  had  it  carried  away,  —  some  said  that  he
heated  his  stove  with  it  The  next  day  a  new  pile
had  collected  on  the  same  spot,  and  as  soon  as  he
had  that  taken  away  a  new  one  was  begun.

The  dry  branches  lay  there  and  said :  "  Shame,
shame  to  the  Broby  clergyman !  "

Soon  the  people's  meaning  became  clear  to  him.
He  understood  that  they  pointed  to  him  as  the  ori-
gin of  their  misfortune.  It  was  in  wrath  at  him  God
let  the  earth  languish.  He  tried  to  laugh  at  them
and  their  branches ;  but  when  it  had  gone  on  a  week,
he  laughed  no  more.  Oh,  what  childishness !  How
can  those  dry  sticks  injure  him?  He  understood
that  the  hate  of  years  sought  an  opportunity  of  ex-
pressing itself.  What  of  that? — he  was  not  used  to
love.

For  all  this  he  did  not  become  more  gentle.  He
had  perhaps  wished  to  improve  after  the  old  lady
had  visited  him ;  now  he  could  not  He  would  not
be  forced  to  it.


/•///.    DROUGHT  379

But  gradually  the  pile  grew  too  strong  for  him.
He  thought  of  it  continually,  and  the  feeling  which

v  one  cherished   took  root  also   in   him.
watched  the  pile,  counted  the  branches  which
been  added  each  day.    The  thought  of  it  cncroat
upon  all  other  thoughts.     The  pile  was  destro

cry  day  he  felt  more  and  more  the  people  were
rij.;ht.  lie  grew  thin  and  very  old  in  a  couple  of
weeks.  He  suffered  from  remorse  ami  indisposi*
Hut  a  was  as  if  everything  depended  on  that  pile.
It  was  as  if  his  remorse  would  grow  silent,  and  the
weight  of  years  be  lifted  off  him,  if  only  the  pile
would  stop  growing.

Finally  he  sat  there  the  whole  day  and  watched;
but  the  people  were  without  mercy.  At  night  there
were  always  new  branches  thrown  on.

One  day  Gosta  Bcrling  passed  along  the  road.
The  Broby  clergyman  sat  at  the  roadside,  old  and
h.igg.inl.  He  *.U  -mil  puknl  out  llu-  dry  -ticks  ami
laid  them  together  in  rows  and  piles,  playing  with
them  as  if  he  were  a  child  again.  Gosta  was  grieved
at  his  misery.

What  arc  you  doing,  pastor?"  he  says,  and  leaps
out  of  the  carriage.

"Oh,  I  am  sitting  here  and  picking.  I  am  not
doing  anything."

Vou  had  better  go  home,  and  not  sit  here  in  the


'   It  is  best  th.r.

Then  Gosta  Berling  sits  down  beside  him.
"  It  is  not  so  easy  to  be  a  priest,"  he  says  after  a
while.


380        THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

"  It  is  all  very  well  down  here  \\  here  there  are
people,"  answers  the  clergyman.  "  It  IN  \\orse  up
there."

Gosta  understands  what  he  means.  He  knows
those  parishes  in  Northern  Varmland  where  some-
times there  is  not  even  a  house  for  the  clergyman,
where  there  are  not  more  than  a  couple  of  people  in
ten  miles  of  country,  where  the  clergyman  is  the
only  educated  man.  The  Broby  minister  had  been
in  such  a  parish  for  over  twenty  years.

41  That  is  where  we  arc  sent  when  we  are  young,"
says  Gosta.     "  It  is  impossible  to  hold  out  with
a   life;    and   so   one  is   ruined    forever.     There   are
many  who  have  gone  under  up  there."

"  Yes,"  says  the  Broby  clergyman ;  "  a  man  is
destroyed  by  loneliness."

"  A  man  comes,"  says  Gosta,  "  eager  and  ardent,
exhorts  and  admonishes,  and  thinks  that  all  will  be
well,  that  the  people  will  soon  turn  to  better  ways."

"  Yes,  yes."

"  But  soon  he  sees  that  words  do  not  help.
Poverty  stands  in  the  way.  Poverty  prevents  all
improvement."

"  Poverty,"  repeats  the  clergyman,  —  "  poverty  has
ruined  my  life."

"  The  young  minister  comes  up  there,"  continues
Gosta,  "poor  as  all  the  others.  He  says  to  the
drunkard:  Stop  drinking!"

"  Then  the  drunkard  answers,"  interrupts  the  clergy-
man :  "  Give  me  something  which  is  better  than
brandy !  Brandy  is  furs  in  winter,  coolness  in  sum-
mer. Brandy  is  a  warm  house  and  a  soft  bed.  Give
me  those,  and  I  will  drink  no  more."

"  And  then,"  resumes  Gosta,  "  the  minister  says


THE  DROUGHT

to  the  thief:  You  shall  not  steal;  and  to  the  •

!     Vou  shall  not  <>urwife;  and  to  the

superstitious:  You  shall  believe  in  God  and  n

Is  and  goblins.  Hut  t he  thief  answers:  Give  me
bread;  and  the  cruel  husband  says:  Make  us  rich,
and  we  will  not  quarrel ;  and  the  superstitious  say :
Teach  us  better.  But  who  can  help  them  without

icy?"

1  It  i  true,  true  every  word,"  cried  the  clergyman.
"  They  believed  in  God,  but  more  in  the  devil,  and
most  in  the  mountain  goblin.  The  crops  were  all
turned  into  the  still.  There  seemed  to  be  no  end  to
the  misery.  In  most  of  the  gray  cottages  there  was
want.  Hidden  sorrow  made  the  women's  tongues
bitter.  Discomfort  drove  their  husbands  to  drink.

y  could  not  look  after  their  fields  or  their  cattle.
They  made  a  fool  of  their  minister.  What  could  a
man  do  with  them?  They  did  not  understand  what
I  said  to  them  from  the  pulpit.  They  did  not  believe
what  I  wanted  to  teach  them.  And  no  one  to  con-
sult, no  one  who  could  help  me  to  keep  up  my
courage."

There  are  those  who  have  stood  out,"  says  Gosta.

"God's  grace  has  been  so  great  to  some  that  they

not   returned  from   such   a   life   broken   men.

y  have  had  strength ;  they  have  borne  the  loneli-
ness, the  poverty,  the  hopelessness.  They  have  done

1  little  good  they  could  and  have  not  despaired.

i  men  have  always  been  and  still  arc.  I  greet
them  as  heroes.  I  will  honor  them  as  long  as  I  live.
I  was  not  able  to  stand  <>

"  I  could  not,"  added  the  clergyman.
••  I'hr  miniver  up   |  :nks,"  says  Gosta.  mus-

ingly, "  that  he  will  be  a  rich  man,  an  exceedingly


TlfE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERUNG

rich  man.  No  one  who  is  poor  can  struggle  against
evil.  And  so  he  begins  to  hoard."

"  If  he  had  not  hoarded  he  would  have  drunk,"
answers  the  old  man ;  "  lu  sees  so  much  misery."

"  Or  he  would  become  dull  and  lazy,  and  lose  all
strength.  It  is  dangerous  for  him  who  is  not  born
there  to  come  thither."

1  He  has  to  harden  himself  to  hoard.  He  pretends
at  first;  then  it  become  a  habit."

"  He  has  to  be  hard  both  to  himself  and  to  others,"
continues  Gosta ;  "  it  is  hard  to  amass.  He  must
endure  hate  and  scorn ;  he  must  go  cold  and  hungry
and  harden  his  heart:  it  almost  seems  as  if  he  had
forgotten  why  he  began  to  hoard."

The  Broby  clergyman  looked  startled  at  him.  He
wondered  if  Gosta  sat  there  and  made  a  fool  of  him.
But  Gosta  was  only  eager  and  earnest  It  was  as  if
he  was  speaking  of  his  own  life.

"  It  was  so  with  me,"  says  the  old  man  quietly.

"  But  God  watches  over  him,"  interrupts  Gosta.
"  He  wakes  in  him  the  thoughts  of  his  youth  when
he  has  amassed  enough.  He  gives  the  minister  a  sign
when  His  people  need  him."

"  But  if  the  minister  does  not  obey  the  sign,  Gosta
Berling?"

"  He  cannot  withstand  it,"  says  Gosta,  and  smiles.
"  He  is  so  moved  by  the  thought  of  the  warm
cottages  which  he  will  help  the  poor  to  build."

The  clergyman  looks  down  on  the  little  heaps  he
had  raised  from  the  sticks  of  the  pile  of  shame.  The
longer  he  talks  with  Gosta,  the  more  he  is  convinced
that  the  latter  is  right.  He  had  always  had  the
thought  of  doing  good  some  day,  when  he  had
enough,  —  of  course  he  had  had  that  thought.


THK  DROUGHT

"  Why  does  hi  milii  the  » •  ttages?"  be  asks

shyly.

^  ashamed.     Many  would  think  that  he
wh.it  he  always  had  meant  to  do  through  fear  of  the
people."

ic  cannot  bear  to  be  forced,  is  that  it  >  "
He  can  however  do  much  good  secretly.     Much
is  needed  this  year.     He  can  find  some  one  who
will    dispense   his   gifts.     I    understand    what   it   all
s  Gosta,  and  his  eyes  shin  iiousands

shall  get  bread  this  year  from  one  whom  they  load
with  curses."
"It  shall  be  so,  Gosta."

A  feeling  of  transport  came  over  the  two  who  had
so  failed  in  the  vocation  they  had  chosen.  The  desire
of  their  youthful  days  to  serve  God  and  man  filled
tli mi.  They  gloated  over  the  good  deeds  they  would
do.  Gosta  would  help  the  minister.

\Ve  will  get  bread  to  begin  with,"  says  thcclergy-

\Vc  will  get  teachers.  We  will  have  a  surveyor
come,  and  divide  up  the  land.  Then  the  people  shall
learn  how  to  till  their  fields  and  tend  their  cattle."
will  build  roads  and  open  new  districts."

We  will  make  locks  at  th  it  Berg,  so  that

11  be  an  open  way  between  Lofven  and
Y.tn

Ml  the  riches  of  the  forest  will  be  of  double
blessing  when  the  way  to  the  sea  is  opened."

Vour  head  shall  be  weighed  down  by  blessings,"

•  •  clergyman  looks  up.  They  read  in  one  an-
other's eyes  the  same  burning  enthusiasm.

Hut  at  t!u-  same  moment  the  eyes  of  both  (all  on
the  pile  of  shame.


384         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG

"  Gosta,"  says  the  old   man,   "all   that    need
young  man's  strength,   but  I  am   dying.     You
what  is  killing  in.  .

"  Get  rid  of  it !  "

"How,  Gosta  Berling?"

Gosta  moves  close  up  to  him  and   looks  sharply
into  his  eyes.     "Pray   to    God   f<>r    rain,"    In
"You  are  going  to  preach  next  Sunday.     1'iav  t<>i
rain."

The  old  clergyman  sinks  down  in  terror.

"  If  you  arc  in  earnest,  if  you  are  not  he  who  has
brought  the  drought  to  the  land,  if  you  had  nu-ant
to  serve  the  Most  High  with  your  hardness,  pray
God  for  rain.  That  shall  be  the  token ;  by  that  we
shall  know  if  God  wishes  what  we  wish."

When  Gosta  drove  down  Broby  hill,  he  was  as-
tonished at  himself  and  at  the  enthusiasm  which  had
taken  hold  of  him.  But  it  could  be  a  beautiful  life  —
yes,  but  not  for  him.  Up  there  they  would  have
none  of  his  services.

In  the  Broby  church  the  sermon  was  over  and  the
usual  prayers  read.  The  minister  was  just  going
to  step  down  from  the  pulpit,  but  he  hesitated,  finally
he  fell  on  his  knees  and  prayed  for  rain.

He  prayed  as  a  desperate  man  prays,  with  few
words,  without  coherency.

"  If  it  is  my  sin  which  has  called  down  Thy  wrath,
let  me  alone  suffer !  If  there  is  any  pity  in  Thcc,
Thou  God  of  mercy,  let  it  rain !  Take  the  shame
from  me  !  Let  it  rain  in  answer  to  my  prayer !  Let
the.  rain  fall  on  the  fields  of  the  poor !  Give  Thy
people  bread !  "

The  day  was  hot;   the  sultriness  was  intolerable.


THE  DROUGHT

The  congregation  sat  as  if  in  a  torpor ;  but  at  these
broken  words,  this  hoarse  despair,  every  one  had
awakened.

"  Inhere  is  a  way  of  expiation  for  me,  give  rain  —

He  stopped    speaking.     The  doors  stood   open.

Th«  :  .1  violent  gust  of  wind.     It  rushed  along

the  ;;I..UM«!.  whirled   into  the  church,  in  a  cloud  of

ticks  and  straw.    The  clergyman  could

ontinm- ;   he  staggered  down  from  the  pulpit

The  people  trembled.     Could  that  be  an  answer?

Hut  the  gust  was  only  the  forerunner  of  the  thunder-
storm. It  came  rushing  with  an  unheard-of  violence.
When  the  psalm  was  sung,  and  the  clergyman  stood
by  the  altar,  the  lightning  was  already  flashing,  and
the  thunder  crashing,  drowning  the  sound  of  his
voice.  As  the  sexton  struck  up  the  final  march,  the
first  drops  were  already  pattering  against  the  green
window-panes,  and  the  people  hurried  out  to  see  the
Hut  they  were  not  content  with  that:  some
wept,  others  laughed,  while  they  let  the  torrents
stream  over  them.  Ah,  how  great  had  been  their
need  !  How  unhappy  they  had  been  !  But  God  is
good!  God  let  it  rain.  What  joy,  what  joy!

The  Broby  clergyman  was  the  only  one  who  did
not  come  out  into  the  rain.  He  lay  on  his  knees
before  ti.  md  did  not  rise.  The  joy  had  been

too  violent  for  him.  He  died  of  happiness.


386         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BERLING


CHAPTER   XVII
THE  CHILD'S   MOTHER

THE  child  was  born  in  a  peasant's  house  east  of  the
Klar  river.  The  child's  mother  had  come  seeking
employment  one  day  in  early  June.

She  had  been  unfortunate,  she  had  said  to  the  master
and  mistress,  and  her  mother  had  been  so  hard  to  her
that  she  had  had  to  run  away  from  home.  She  called
herself  Elizabeth  Karlsdotter;  but  she  would  not
say  from  whence  she  came,  for  then  perhaps  they
would  tell  her  parents  that  she  was  there,  and  if  they
should  find  her,  she  would  be  tortured  to  death,  she
knew  it.  She  asked  for  no  pay,  only  food  and  a
roof  over  her  head.  She  could  work,  weave  or
spin,  and  take  care  of  the  cows,  —  whatever  they
wanted.  If  they  wished,  she  could  also  pay  for
herself.

She  had  been  clever  enough  to  come  to  the  farm-
house bare-foot,  with  her  shoes  under  her  arm ;  she
had  coarse  hands;  she  spoke  the  country  dialect;
and  she  wore  a  peasant  woman's  clothes.  She  was
believed.

The  master  thought  she  looked  sickly,  and  did  not
count  much  on  her  fitness  for  work.  But  somewhere
the  poor  thing  must  be.  And  so  she  was  allowed
to  stop.

There  was  something  about  her  which  made  every
one  on  the  farm  kind  to  her.  She  had  come  to


A///:   t  /////'  V  MOTHRR  387

a  good  place.    The  people  were  serious  and
Her  mistress  liked  lu-r ;   \\hui  slu  discovered  that  she
could  weave,  they  borrowed  a  loom  from  the  vicar-
age, and  the  child's  mother  wot  hole
summer.

never  occurred  to  any  one  that  she  needed  to

be  spared ;  she  had  to  work  like  a  peasant  girl  the

whole  time.    She   liked   too  to   have  much   work.

She  was  not  unhappy.     Lift-  among  the  peasants

pleased  her,  although  sh  !  all  her  accustomed

conveniences.     But  everything  was  taken  so  simply

quietly  there.  one's  thoughts  were  on

his  or  her  work;  the  days  passed  so  uniform  and

monotonous  that  one  mistook  the  day  and  thought

u  the  middle  of  the  week  when  Sunday  came.

One  day  at  the  end  of  August  there  had  been
haste  with  the  oat  crop,  and  the  child's  mother  had
gone  out  with  the  others  to  bind  the  sheaves.  She
had  strained  herself,  and  the  child  had  been  born,
but  too  soon.  She  had  expected  it  in  October.

Now  the  farmer's  wife  stood  with  the  child  in
the  living  room  to  warm  it  by  the  fire,  for  the  poor
little  thing  was  shivering  in  the  August  heat.  The
child's  mother  lay  in  a  room  beyond  and  listened
to  what  they  ^.ml  of  the  little  one.  She  could
imagine  how  the  men  and  maids  came  up  and
looked  at  him.

"Such  a  poor  littl  '  they  all  said,  and  then

followed  always,  without  fail :  —

•or  little  thing,  with  no  fathc:

They  did  not  complain  of  the  child's  crying :  they
thought  a  child  needed  to  cry ;  and,  when  everything
was  considered,  the  «  >ng  for  its  age;  had

it  but  a  (either,  all  would  have  been  well.


388          THE  STORY  OF  GttSTA    / '/  V,V  /.VG

The  mother  lay  and  listened  and  wondered.  Tin-
matter  suddenly  seemed  to  her  incredibly  important.
How  would  he  get  through  life,  the  poor  little  thing?

She  had  made  her  plans  before.  She  would
main  at  the  farm-house  the  first  year.  Then  she
would  hire  a  room  and  earn  her  bread  at  the  loom.
She  meant  to  earn  enough  to  feed  and  clothe  the
child.  Her  husband  could  continue  to  believe  that
sin-  was  unworthy.  She  had  thought  that  the  child
perhaps  would  be  a  better  man  if  she  alone  brought
it  up,  than  if  a  stupid  and  conceited  father  should
guide  it.

But  now,  since  the  child  was  born,  she  could  not
sec  the  matter  in  the  same  way.  Now  she  thought
that  she  had  been  selfish.  "The  child  must  have
a  father,"  she  said  to  herself.

If  he  had  not  been  such  a  pitiful  little  thing,  if  he
had  been  able  to  eat  and  sleep  like  other  children,  if
his  head  had  not  always  sunk  down  on  one  shoulder,
and  if  he  had  not  so  nearly  died  when  the  attack  of
cramp  came,  it  would  not  have  been  so  important.

It  was  not  so  easy  to  decide,  but  decide  she  must
immediately.  The  child  was  three  days  old,  and  the
peasants  in  Varmland  seldom  wait  longer  to  have  the
child  baptized.  Under  what  name  should  the  baby
be  entered  in  the  church-register,  and  what  would  the
clergyman  want  to  know  about  the  child's  mother?

It  was  an  injustice  to  the  child  to  let  him  be  en-
tered as  fatherless.  If  he  should  be  a  weak  and
sickly  man,  how  could  she  take  the  responsibility  of
depriving  him  of  the  advantages  of  birth  and  riches?

The  child's  mother  had  noticed  that  there  is  gen-
erally great  joy  and  excitement  when  a  child  comes
into  the  world.  Now  it  seemed  to  her  that  it  must


////     (  U/L&S  MOTHE R  3*9

be  hard  i  baby  to  live,  whom  c-vrry  m.

to  sec  him  sleeping  on  silk  and  lace,  as
n  behoves  a  count's  son.  She  wanted  to  see  him
encompassed  with  j«>y  and  \>-

Tlu-  chilli's  mother  bi  think  that  she   had

done  its  father  too  great  an  injustice.  Had  she  the
right  to  keep  him  for  herself?  That  she  could  not
h.iv.  -us  little  tiling,  whose  worth

ii  the  power  of  man  to  calculate,  should  she  take
th.it  !"i  1  I'h.it  would  not  be  honest

But  she  did  not  wish  to  go  back  to  her  husband.
She  feared  that   it  would  be   her  death.      Hut   the
!  uas  in  greater  danger  than  she.     He  might  die
: Minute,  and  he  was  not  baptized.
That  which  had  driven  her  from  her  home,  the
grievous  sin  which  had  dwelt  in  her  heart,  was  gone.
had  now  no  love  for  any  other  than  the  child.
1 1  was  not  too  heavy  a  duty  to  try  to  get  him  his
right  place  in  life.

'1  he  child's  mother  had  the  farmer  and  his  wife
called  and  told  them  everything.  The  husband  jour-
neyed to  Borg  to  tell  Count  Dohna  that  his  countess
was  alive,  and  that  there  was  a  child.

The  peasant  came  home  late  in  the  evening ;  he  had
not  met  the  count,  for  he  had  gone  away,  but  he  had
been  to  the  minister  at  Svartsjo,  and  talked  with  him

Then  the  countess  heard  that  her  marriage  had
been  declared  invalid,  and  that  she  no  longer  had  a
husband.

The  minister  wrote  a  friendly  letter  to  her,  and
offered  her  a  home  in  his  house.

A  letter  from  her  own  father  to  Count  Henrik,
which  must  have  reached  Borg  a  few  days  after  her


390         THE  STORY  OF  COST  A   BE  RUNG

flight,  was  also  sent  to  her.  It  was  just  tli.it  letter  in
which  the  old  man  li.ul  the  count  to  hasten

to  make  his  marriage  legal,  which  had  indicated  to
the  count  the  easiest  way  to  be  rid  of  his  wife.

It  is  easy  to  imagine  that  the  child's  mother  was
seized  with  anger  more  than  sorrow,  when  she  heard
the  peasant's  story.

She  lay  awake  the  whole  night.  The  child  must
have  a  father,  she  thought  over  and  over  again.

The  next  morning  the  peasant  had  to  drive  to
Ekeby  for  her,  and  go  for  Gosta  Berling.

Gosta  asked  the  silent  man  many  questions,  but
could  find  out  nothing.  Yes,  the  countess  had  been
in  his  house  the  whole  summer.  She  had  been  well
and  had  worked.  Now  a  child  was  born.  The  child
was  weak;  but  the  mother  would  soon  be  strong
again.

Gosta  asked  if  the  countess  knew  that  the  mar-
riage had  been  annulled.

Yes,  she  knew  it  now.     She  had  heard  it  yesterday.

And  as  long  as  the  drive  lasted  Gosta  had  alter-
nately fever  and  chills.

What  did  she  want  of  him?  Why  did  she  send  for
him?

He  thought  of  the  life  that  summer  on  Lofven's
shores.  They  had  let  the  days  go  by  with  jests  and
laughter  and  pleasure  parties,  while  she  had  worked
and  suffered.

He  had  never  thought  of  the  possibility  of  ever
seeing  her  again.  Ah,  if  he  had  dared  to  hope !  He
would  have  then  come  into  her  presence  a  better
man.  What  had  he  now  to  look  back  on  but  the
usual  follies !

About  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  he  arrived,  and


/  LHIL&S  MOTHER  391

was  immediately   taken   to   ih<  mother      1'

was  dark  in   the  room.     He  could  scarcely  se<

lie  farmer  and    hi*  wife  came   in

aba

Now  you  must  know  that  she  whose  white  (ace
shorn-  in  the  dimness  was  always  tin  noblest  and  the
purest  he  k:  most  beautiful  soul  which  had

ever  arrayci!  irthly  dust.     When  he  once

again  felt  the  bliss  of  b  tr  her,  he  longed  to

knees  and  thank  her  for  having
again  appeared  to  him ;  but  he  was  so  overpowered
by  emotion  that  he  coukl  neither  speak  nor  act

"  Dear  Countes*  Kli/abeth  !  "  he  on!

"Good-evening,  G<»

She  gave  him  her  luml,  which  seemed  once  more  to
have  become  soft  and  transparent.  She  lay  silent,
while  he  struggled  with  his  emotion.

Tlu-  child's  mother  was  not  shaken  by  any  violently
raging  feelings  when  she  saw  Gosta.  It  surprised  her
only  that  he  seemed  to  consider  her  of  chief  impor-
tance, when  he  ought  to  understand  that  it  now  only
concerned  the  child.

"  Gosta,"  she  said  gently,  "  you  must  help  me  now,
as  you  once  promised.  You  know  that  my  husband
has  abandoned  me,  so  that  my  child  has  no  father."

Yes,  countess;  but  that  can  certainly  be  changed.
Now  that  there  is  a  child,  the  count  can  be  forced  to
the  marriage  legal.     You  may  be  certain  that  I
1  help  you  !  "

The  countess  smiled.  "  Do  you  think  that  I  will
force  myself  upon  Count  Dol;

The  blood  surged  up  to  Gosta's  head.  What  did  she
wish  then  ?  What  did  she  want  of  him  ?

"  Come  here,  Gosta,"  she  said,  and  again  stretched


392          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

out  her  hand.  "  You  must  not  be  angry  with  me  for
what  I  am  going  to  say ;  but  I  thought  that  you  who
arc  —  who  are  -

"A  dismissed  priest,  a  drunkard,  a  pensioner,  Ebba
Dohna's  murderer ;  I  know  the  whole  list  —  "

"Arc  you  already  angry,  Gosta?"

41 1  would  rather  that  you  did  not  say  anything
more."

But  the  child's  mother  continued :  —

"  There  arc  many,  Gosta,  who  would  have  liked  to
be  your  wife  out  of  love ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  me.  If
I  loved  you  I  should  not  dare  to  speak  as  I  am  speak-
ing now.  For  myself  I  would  never  ask  such  a  thing,
Gosta;  but  do  you  see,  I  can  do  it  for  the  sake  of  the
child.  You  must  understand  what  I  mean  to  beg  of
you.  Of  course  it  is  a  great  degradation  for  you,
since  I  am  an  unmarried  woman  who  has  a  child.  I  did
not  think  that  you  would  be  willing  to  do  it  because
you  are  worse  than  others ;  although,  yes,  I  did  think
of  that  too.  But  first  I  thought  that  you  could  be
willing,  because  you  are  kind,  Gosta,  because  you  are
a  hero  and  can  sacrifice  yourself.  But  it  is  perhaps
too  much  to  ask.  Perhaps  such  a  thing  would  be  im-
possible for  a  man.  If  you  despise  me  too  much,  if
it  is  too  loathsome  for  you  to  give  your  name  to
another  man's  child,  say  so !  I  shall  not  be  angry.
I  understand  that  it  is  too  much  to  ask;  but  the
child  is  sick,  Gosta.  It  is  cruel  at  his  baptism  not
to  be  able  to  give  the  name  of  his  mother's  husband."

He,  hearing  her,  experienced  the  same  feeling  as
when  that  spring  day  he  had  put  her  on  land  and  left
her  to  her  fate.  Now  he  had  to  help  her  to  ruin  her
life,  her  whole  future  life.  He  who  loved  her  ^ad  to
do  it.


/    CHIL&S  MOTHER  393

'  will  do  everything  you  wish,  countess,"  he  said.

The  next  day  he  spoke  to  the  dean  at  1.  ierc

the  banns  were  to  be  call

The  good  old  dean  was  much  moved  by  his  story,
and  promised  to  take  all  the  responsibility  of  giving
\vay.

N  ."  he  said,  "you  must  help  her,  Gosta,  other-
wise she  illicit  become  insane.  She  thinks  that  she
has  injured  the  child  by  depriving  it  of  its  position
in  1  has  a  most  s<  conscience,  that

wom

Init  I  know  that  I  shall  make  her  unhappy,"  cried
Gosta.

"That  you  must  not  do,  Gosta.  You  must  be  a
sensible  man  now,  with  wife  and  child  to  care  for."

The  dean  had  to  journey  down   to   Svartsjo  and
speak   to   both    the    minister    there   and   the  judge.
The  end  of  it  all  was  that  the  next  Sunday,  the  first
of  September,    the   banns    were    called   in   Sva
between  Gosta  Bcrling  and  Elizabeth  von  Thurn.

Then  the  child's  mother  was  carried  with  the  great-
est care  to  Ekcby,  and  there  the  child  was  baptized.

The  dean  talked  to  her,  and  told  her  that  she
could  still  recall  her  decision  to  marry  such  a  man
as  Gosta  Bcrling.  She  ought  to  first  write  to  her
lath

I  cannot  repent,"  she  said;  "think  if  my  child
should  die  before  it  had  a  fat!

When  the  banns  had  been  thrice  asked,  the  child's
mother  had  been  well  and  up  several  days.  In  the
afternoon  the  dean  came  to  Ekeby  and  married  her  to
Gosta  Bcrling.  But  no  one  thought  of  it  as  a  wedding.
No  guests  were  invited.  They  only  gave  the  child  a
father,  nothing  more.


394         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERU.\\;

The  child's  mother  shone  with  a  quiet  joy,  as  if   IK
had  attained  a  great  end  in  life.     I  iu  bride-room  was
in  despair.     He  thought  how  slu    had   thrown   away
her  life  by  a  marriage  with  him.     He  saw  with  dismay
how  he  scarcely  existed  for  her.     All   her  thou
with  her  child.

A  few  days  after  the  father  and  mother  were  mourn-
ing. The  child  had  died.

Many  thought  that  the  child's  mother  did  not  mourn
so  violently  nor  so  deeply  as  they  had  expected ;
had  a  look  of  triumph.  It  was  as  if  she  rejoiced  that
she  had  thrown  away  her  life  for  the  sake  of  the
child.  When  he  joined  the  angels,  he  would  still
remember  that  a  mother  on  earth  had  loved  him.

All  this  happened  quietly  and  unnoticed.  When
the  banns  were  published  for  Gosta  Berling  and
Elizabeth  von  Thurn  in  the  Svartsjo  church,  most  of
the  congregation  did  not  even  know  who  the  bride
was.  The  clergyman  and  the  gentry  who  knew  the
story  said  little  about  it.  It  was  as  if  they  were  afraid
that  some  one  who  had  lost  faith  in  the  power  of  con-
science should  wrongly  interpret  the  young  woman's
action.  They  were  so  afraid,  so  afraid  lest  some  one
should  come  and  say :  "  See  now,  she  could  not  con-
quer her  love  for  Gosta ;  she  has  married  him  under
a  plausible  pretext."  Ah,  the  old  people  were  always
so  careful  of  that  young  woman !  Never  could  they
bear  to  hear  anything  evil  of  her.  They  would
scarcely  acknowledge  that  she  had  sinned.  They
would  not  agree  that  any  fault  stained  that  soul  which
was  so  afraid  of  evil.

Another  great  event  happened  just  then,  which  also
caused  Gosta's  marriage  to  be  little  discussed.


THE  CH/LPS  MOTHER  395

Major  Samzclius   had  nut  \sith  .m  accident,
had  become  more  and  more  strange  and  misanthropic.
<>ursc  was  with  animals,  and  he  had
ctcd  a  small  mcna^<

He  was  dangerous  to<  he  always  carried  a

loaded  gun,  and  shot  it  off  time  after  time  without
paying   much  attention   to  u     One  day   he

was  bitten  by  a  tame  bear  which  he  had  shot  with-
1  iu    wounded  animal  threw  itself
on  him,  and  succeeded  in  giving  him  a  terrible  bite  in
the  arm.    The  beast  broke  away  and  took  refuge  in

forest

The  major  was  put  to  bed  and  died  of  the  wound,

but  not  till  just  before  Christmas.    1  lad  his  wife  known

he  lay  ill,  she  could  have  resumed  her  sway  over

Ekcby.     But  the  pensioners  knew  that  she  would  not

come  before  their  year  was  out


/;  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLING


CHAPTER  XVIII

AMOR   VINCIT  OMNIA

UNDER  the  stairs  to  the  gallery  in  the  Svartsjo  church
is  a  lumber-room  filled  with  the  grave-diggers'  worn-
out  shovels,  with  broken  benches,  with  rejected  tin
labels  and  other  rubbish.

There,  where  the  dust  lies  thickest  and  seems  to
hide  it  from  every  human  eye,  stands  a  chest,  inlaid
with  mother-of-pearl  in  the  most  perfect  mosaic.  If
one  scrapes  the  dust  away,  it  seems  to  shine  and
glitter  like  a  mountain-wall  in  a  fairy-tale.  The  c
is  locked,  and  the  key  is  in  good  keeping;  it  may
not  be  used.  No  mortal  man  may  cast  a  glance  into
that  chest.  No  one  knows  what  is  in  it.  First,  when
the  nineteenth  century  has  reached  its  close,  may  the
key  be  placed  in  the  lock,  the  cover  be  lifted,  and  the
treasures  which  it  guarded  be  seen  by  men.

So  has  he  who  owned  the  chest  ordained.

On  the  brass-plate  of  the  cover  stands  an  inscrip-
tion:  "Labor  vincit  omnia."  But  another  inscrip-
tion would  be  more  appropriate.  "  Amor  vincit
omnia  "  ought  to  stand  there.  For  the  chest  in  the
rubbish  room  under  the  gallery  stairs  is  a  testimony
of  the  omnipotence  of  love.

O  Eros,  all-conquering  god  !

Thou,  O  Love,  art  indeed  eternal !  Old  are  people
on  the  earth,  but  thou  hast  followed  them  through
the  ages.


AMOR  V1NCIT  OMMA  397

Where  are  the  gods  of  the  East,  the  strong  heroes
who  carried  weapons  of  thunder-bolts,  —  they  who  on
the  shores  of  holy  rivers  took  offering*  of  honey  and
milk  >  are  dead.  Dead  is  Bel,  the  mighty

warrior,  and  Thot,  the  hawk-headed  champion.  The
glorious  ones  are  dead  who  rested  on  the  cloud
banks  ol  us;  so  too  the  mighty  who  dwelt  in

the  t  Valhalla.  All  the  old  gods  are  dead  ex-

;  os,  the  all-powerful !

II  is  work  is  in  everything  you  sec.     He  supports

the  race.     Sec  him  everywhere !     Whither  can  you

go  without  finding  the  print  of  his  foot?    What  has

your  ear  perceived,  where  the  humming  of  his  wings

has  not  been  the  key-note?    He  lives  in  the  hearts  of

and  in  the  sleeping  germ.     See  with  trembling

presence  in  inanimate  things!

What  is  there  which  does  not  long  and  desire?
What  is  there  which  escapes  his  dominion?  All  the
gods  of  revenge  will  fall,  all  the  powers  of  strength
and  might.  Thou,  O  Love,  art  eternal!

Old  Uncle  Ebcrhard  is  sitting  at  his  writing-desk, —
a  splendid  piece  of  furniture  with  a  hundred  drawers,
with  marble  top  and  ornaments  of  blackened  brass.
He  works  with  eagerness  and  diligence,  alone  in  the
pensioners'  wing.

Oh,  Eberhnrd.  why  do  you  not  wander  about  wood
in-Ill  in  tlu -^c  last  days  of  the  departing  summer
like  the  other  pensioners?  No  one,  you  know,  wor-
unpunishcd  the  goddess  of  wisdom.  Your  back
is  bent  with  sixty  and  some  years;  the  hair  which
covers  your  head  is  not  your  own ;  the  wrinkles  crowd
one  another  on  your  brow,  which  arches  over  hollow
eyes;  and  the  decay  of  old  age  is  drawn  in  the  thou-
sand lines  about  your  empty  mouth.


398         /'//A'  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLING

Oh,  Eberharcl,  why  do  you  not  wander  about  wood
and  field?  Death  parts  you  just  so  much  the  sooner
from  your  desk,  because  you  have  not  let  life  tempt
you  from  it.

Uncle  Eberhard  draws  a  thick  stroke  under  hi-
line.     From  the  desk's  innumerable  drawers  he  d
out  yellowed,  closely  scribbled  manuscripts,  all  the
different  parts  of  his  great  work,  —  that  work  which  is
to  carry  on  Eberhard  Hcrggren's  name  through   all
time.     But  just   as   he  has   piled  up  manuscript  on
manuscript,  and  is  staring  at  them  in  silent  rapture,
the  door  opens,  and  in  walks  the  young  countess.

There  she  is,  the  old  men's  young  mistress,  —  she
whom  they  wait  on  and  adore  more  than  grandparents
wait  on  and  adore  the  first  grandson.  There  she  is
whom  they  had  found  in  poverty  and  in  sickness,
and  to  whom  they  had  now  given  all  the  glory  of  the
world,  just  as  the  king  in  the  fairy  tale  did  to  the
beautiful  beggar  girl  he  found  in  the  forest.  It  is  for
her  that  the  horn  and  violin  now  sound  at  Ekeby,  —
for  her  everything  moves,  breathes,  works  on  the
great  estate.

She  is  well  again,  although  still  very  weak.  Time
goes  slowly  for  her  alone  in  the  big  house,  and,  as  she
knows  that  the  pensioners  are  away,  she  wishes  to
see  what  it  looks  like  in  the  pensioners'  wing,  that
notorious  room.

So  she  comes  softly  in  and  looks  up  at  the  white-
washed walls  and  the  yellow  striped  bed-curtains,  but
she  is  embarrassed  when  she  sees  that  the  room  is
not  empty.

Uncle  Eberhard  goes  solemnly  towards  her,  and
leads  her  forward  to  the  great  pile  of  paper.

"  Look,  countess,"  he  says ;  "  now  my  work  is  ready.


AMOK   VINCIT  OMNIA  399

Now  shall  wliat  I   have  written  go  out  into  the  world.
Now  great  things  arc  go

••  u  h.it  : .  going  to  happen,  Un

>h,  countess,  it  is  going  to  strike  like  a  thunder-
bolt, a  bolt  which  enlightens  and  kills.  Kvcr  since
Moses  dragged  him  out  of  Sinai's  thunder-cloud  and
put  him  on  the  throne  of  grace  in  the  innermost
sanctuary  ol  nee  then  he  has  sat

secure,  the  old  Jehovah ;  but  now  men  shall  sec  what
•  :  Imagination,  emptiness,  exhalation,  the  still-
born  child   of  our   own  brain.     He  shall  sink   into
nothingness,"  said  the  old  man,  and  laid  his  wrinkled
i  on  the  pile  of  manuscript.     "It  stands   here;
and  when  people  re.ul  this,  they  will  have  to  believe.
will  rise  up  and  acknowledge  their  own  stupid-
they  will  use  crosses  for  kindling- wood,  churches
for  storehouses,  and  clergymen  will  plough  the  earth."
"  Oh,  Uncle  Kberhard,"  says  the  countess,  with  a
slight  shudder,  "  are  you  such  a  dreadful  person?    Do
such  dreadful  things  stand  there?"

Dreadful !  "  repeated  the  old  man.  "  it  is  only
truth.  But  we  are  like  little  boys  who  hide  their
faces  in  a  woman's  skirt  as  soon  as  they  meet  a
stranger :  we  have  accustomed  ourselves  to  hide  from
the  truth,  from  the  eternal  stranger.  But  now  he
shall  come  and  dwell  among  us,  now  he  shall  be

\n  by  all."
" By  all?"

"  Not  only  by  philosophers,  but  by  everybody ;  do
you  understand,  countess,  by  everybody."

so  Jehovah  shall

"  1  Ie  and  all  angels,  all  saints,  all  devils,  all  lies."
"Who  ^hall  tlu-n  rule  the  world  ?"
i  >o  you  believe  that  any  one  has  ruled  it  before?


400         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERI./.\

Do  you  believe  in  that  Providence  which  looks  a  ft  IT
sparrows  and  the  hair  of  your  head?  No  one  lu>
ruled  it,  no  one  shall  rule  it."

"  But  we,  we  people,  what  will  we  become  —

"  The   same   which   we    have   been  —  dust.     That
which  is  burned  out  can  burn  no  longer;  it  is  chid
We  about  whom  the  fire  of  life  flickers  arc  only  fuel.
Life's   sparks   fly   from    one   to    another.      We   are
lighted,  flame  up,  and  die  out.     That  is  li:

"  Oh,  Eberhard,  is  there  no  life  of  the  spirit?  "

"  None."

41  No  life  beyond  the  grave?  "

"  None."

"  No  good,  no  evil,  no  aim,  no  hope?  "

"  None."

The  young  woman  walks  over  to  the  window.  She
looks  out  at  the  autumn's  yellowed  leaves,  at  dahlias
and  asters  which  hang  their  heavy  heads  on  broken
stalks.  She  sees  the  Lofven's  black  waves,  the  au-
tumn's dark  storm-clouds,  and  for  a  moment  she
inclines  towards  repudiation.

"  Uncle  Eberhard,"  she  says,  "  how  ugly  and  gray
the  world  is ;  how  profitless  everything  is !  I  should
like  to  lie  down  and  die."

But  then  she  hears  a  murmur  in  her  soul.  The
vigor  of  life  and  its  strong  emotions  cry  out  for  the
happiness  of  living.

"  Is  there  nothing,"  she  breaks  out,  "  which  can
give  life  beauty,  since  you  have  taken  from  me  God
and  immortality?"

"  Work,"  answers  the  old  man.

But  she  looks  out  again,  and  a  feeling  of  scorn  for
that  poor  wisdom  creeps  over  her.  The  unfathomable
rises  before  her;  she  feels  the  spirit  dwelling  in  every-


AMOR   VINCIT  OMMA  4OI

thing ;  she  is  sensible  of  the  power  which  lie*  bound

in  seemingly  dead  material,  but  which  can  develop

a  thousand  forms  of  shifting  life.     Dizzily  the

seeks  for  a  name  for  the  presence  of  God's  spirit  in

ire.

>h,  Eberh.u.l."  she  say*,  "what  is  work?  Is
it  .1  god?  Has  it  any  meaning  in  itself?  Name
another ! "

I  know  no  other,"  answered  the  old  man.
Then  she  finds  the  name  which  she  is  seeking,  —a
poor,  often  sullied  nann  .

LJiM      I  bcrhard,  why  do  you  not  speak  of  love?"
A  smile  glides  over  the  empty  mouth  where  t he-
thousand  wrinkles  cross.

•  Here,"  says  the  philosopher,  and  strikes  the  heavy
packet  \\  ith  his  clenched  hand,  "  here  all  the  gods
are  slain,  and  I  have  not  forgotten  Eros.  What  is
love  but  a  longing  of  the  flesh?  In  what  does  he
stand  higher  than  the  other  requirements  of  the
body?  Make  hunger  a  god  !  Make  fatigue  a  god!
>•  arc  just  as  worthy.  Let  there  be  an  end  to
such  absurdities !  Let  the  truth  !

The  young  countess  sinks  her  head.     It  is  not  so,
all  that  is  not  true ;  but  she  cannot  contest  it.

Vour  words  have  wounded  my  soul,"  she  says ;
"  but  still  I  do  not  believe  you.  The  gods  of  revenge
and  violence  you  may  be  able  to  kill,  no  others.**

But  the  old  man  takes  her  hand,  lays  it  on  the
book,  and  swears  in  the  fanaticism  of  unbelief.

When  you  have  read  this,  you  must  believe.'*
"  May  it  never  come  before  my  eyes,"  she  says,

i   if  I  believe  that,  I  cannot  live."
And  she  goes  sadly  from  the  philosopher.     But  he
sits  for  a  lot  thinks,  when  she  has  gone.


402          THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG.

Those  old  manuscripts,  scribbled  over  with  heath-
enish confessions,  have  not  yet  been  tested  before  tin
world.  Uncle  Ebcrhard's  name  has  not  yet  reached
the  heights  of  fame.

His  great  work  lies  hidden  in  a  chest  in  the  lumber-
room  under  the  gallery  stairs  in  the  Svartsjo  church ;
it  shall  first  see  the  light  of  day  at  the  end  of  the
century.

But  why  has  he  done  this?  Was  he  afraid  not  to
have  proved  his  point?  Did  he  fear  persecutions?
You  little  know  Uncle  Kbcrhard.

Understand  it  now;  he  has  loved  the  truth,  not  his
own  glory.  So  he  has  sacrificed  the  latter,  not  the
former,  in  order  that  a  deeply  loved  child  might  die
in  the  belief  in  that  she  has  most  cared  for.

O  Love,  thou  art  indeed  eternal !


IHK  BROOM -GIRL  4OJ


CHAPTER  XIX

THE  BROOM-GIRL

No  one  knows  the  place  in  the  Ice  of  the  mountain

where  the  pines  grow  thickest  and  deep  layers  of

moss  cover  the  ground.     How  should  any  one  know

No  man's  foot  has  ever  trodden  it  before;  no

man's  tongue  has  given  it  a  name.     No  path  leads

it  hidden  spot.     It  is  the  most  solitary  tract  in

the  forest,  and  now  thousands  of  people  are  looking

for  it

What  an  endless  procession  of  seekers!  They
would  fill  the  Bro  church,  —  not  only  Bro,  but  Lbf-
viks  and  Svarts

All  who  live  near  the  road  rush  out  and  ask,  "  Has
hing  happciu  1 '     N  th«  ninny  upon  us?    Where
are  you  going?    Tell  us  wh<

\Ve  are  searching,*'  they  answer.  "We  have
been  searching  for  two  days.  We  shall  go  on  to-
day; but  afterwards  we  can  do  no  more.  We  are
going  to  look  through  the  Bjorne  wood  and  the
firclad  heights  west  of  Ekeby.

It   was  from   Nygard,   a  poor  district   far  away

among  the  eastern  mountains,  the   procession  had

rtcd.     The  beautiful    -irl  with  the  heavy,

black  hair  ami  the  red  cheeks  had   disappeared  a

week  before.     The  broom-girl,  to  whom  Gosta  Bcr-

i  wished  to  engage  h  had  been  lost  in

^reat  forests.     No  one  had  seen  her  for  a  week.


404         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

So  the  people  started  from  Nygard  to  search
through  the  wood.  And  everybody  they  met  joined
in  the  search.

Sometimes  one  of  the  new-comers  asks,  —

"  You  men  from  Nygard,  how  has  it  all  happened  ?
Why  do  you  let  that  beautiful  girl  go  alone  in
strange  paths?  The  forest  is  deep,  and  God  has
taken  away  her  reason."

"No  one  disturbs  her,"  they  answer;  "she  dis-
turbs no  one.  She  goes  as  safely  as  a  child.  Who
is  safer  than  one  God  himself  must  care  for?  She
has  always  come  back  before."

So  have  the  searching  crowd  gone  through  the
eastern  woods,  which  shut  in  Nygard  from  the  plain.
Now  on  the  third  day  it  passes  by  the  Bro  church
towards  the  woods  west  of  Ekeby.

But  wherever  they  go,  a  storm  of  wondering  rages ;
constantly  a  man  from  the  crowd  has  to  stop  to
answer  questions :  "What  do  you  want?  What  are
you  looking  for? "

"  We  are  looking  for  the  blue-eyed,  dark-haired
girl.  She  has  laid  herself  down  to  die  in  the  forest.
She  has  been  gone  a  week. "

"  Why  has  she  laid  herself  down  to  die  in  the
forest?  Was  she  hungry?  Was  she  unhappy?"

"She  has  not  suffered  want,  but  she  had  a  misfor-
tune last  spring.  She  has  seen  that  mad  priest,
Gosta  Berling,  and  loved  him  for  many  years.  She
knew  no  better.  God  had  taken  away  her  wits."

"Last  spring  the  misfortune  happened, — before
that,  he  had  never  looked  at  her.  Then  he  said  to
her  that  she  should  be  his  sweetheart.  It  was  only
in  jest ;  he  let  her  go  again,  but  she  could  not  be
consoled.  She  kept  coming  to  Ekeby.  She  went


/•///••    HROOM-GIKI.  405

after  him  wherever  he  went.  He  wearied  of  her.
When  she  was  there  last,  they  set  their  dogs  on  her.
Since  then  no  one  has  seen  1

To  the  rescue,  to  the  rescue  '     A  human  life   is

concerned '     A  human  being  lias  laid  herself  down

.11  the  wood!     Perhaps  she  is  already  dead

aps,  too,  she  is  still  wandering  there  without

it  way.     The  forest  is  wide,  and  her

reason  is  with  God

Come  everybody,  men  and  women  and  children!
Who  can  dare  to  stay  at  home?  Who  knows  if  God
does  not  intend  to  use  just  him?  Come  all  of  you,
that  your  soul  may  not  some  day  wander  helpless  in
dry  places,  seek  rest  and  find  none!  Come!  God
has  taken  her  reason,  and  the  forest  is  wide.

It  is  wonderful  to  see  people  unite  for  some  great
object.  Hut  it  is  not  hunger,  nor  the  fear  of  God,
nor  war  which  has  driven  these  out.  Their  trouble
ithout  profit,  their  striving  without  reward;  they
are  only  going  to  find  a  fool.  So  many  steps,  so
much  anxiety,  so  many  prayers  it  all  costs,  and  yet
it  will  only  be  rewarded  b\  overy  of  a  poor,

misguided  girl,  whose  reason  is  with  God.

Those  anxious  searchers  fill  the  highway.  With
earnest  eyes  they  gauge  the  forest .  they  go  forward
sadly,  for  they  know  that  they  are  more  probably
searching  for  the  dead  than  the  liv

Ah,  that  black  thing  at  the  foot  of  the  cliff,  it  is
not  an  ant-hill  after  all,  but  a  fallen  tree.  Praised
be  Heaven,  only  a  fallen  tree!  But  they  cannot
see  distinctly,  the  pines  grow  so  thick.

It  is  the  third  day  of  the  search;  they  are  used  to
the  work.     They  search  under  the  sl..ping  rock
which  the  foot  can  slide,  under  fallen  trees,  where


406         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

arm  or  leg  easily  could  1  n,  under  the

thick  growing  pines'  branches,  trailing  over  soft
moss,  inviting  to  i.

The  bear's  den,  the  fox's  hole,  the  badger's  cKcp
home,  the  red  cranberry  slope,  the  silver  fir,  the
mountain,  which  the  forest  fire  laid  waste  a  month
ago,  the  stone  which  the  giant  threw,  —  all  that  have
they  found,  but  not  the  place  under  the  rock  where
the  black  thing  is  lying.  No  one  has  been  there  to
see  if  it  is  an  ant-hill,  or  a  tree-trunk,  or  a  human
being.  Alas!  it  is  indeed  a  human  being,  but  no
one  has  been  there  to  see  her.

The  evening  sun  is  shining  on  the  other  side  of
the  wood,  but  the  young  woman  is  not  found.  What
should  they  do  now?  Should  they  search  through
the  wood  once  more?  The  wood  is  dangerous  in  the
dark;  there  are  bottomless  bogs  and  deep  clefts.
And  what  could  they,  who  had  found  nothing  when
the  sun  was  shining,  find  when  it  was  gone?

"  Let  us  go  to  Ekeby ! "  cries  one  in  the  crowd.

"  Let  us  go  to  Ekeby ! "  they  all  cry  together.

"  Let  us  ask  those  pensioners  why  they  let  loose
the  dogs  on  one  whose  reason  God  had  taken,  why
they  drove  a  fool  to  despair.  Our  poor,  hungry
children  weep;  our  clothes  are  torn;  the  potatoes
rot  in  the  ground;  our  horses  are  running  loose;  our
cows  get  no  care;  we  are  nearly  dead  with  fatigue
—  and  the  fault  is  theirs.  Let  us  go  to  Ekeby  and
ask  about  this.

"  During  this  cursed  year  we  have  had  to  suffer
everything.  The  winter  will  bring  us  starvation.
Whom  does  God's  hand  seek?  It  was  not  the  Broby
clergyman.  His  prayers  could  reach  God's  ear.
Who,  then,  if  not  these  pensioners  ?  Let  us  go  to
Ekeby!


I  HE  BROOM-G1HL  4P7

They  ha\  ivcn

the  inaj.  to  beg  on  the  highway.     It  is  t

work.     The  famine  is  their
doin  us  go  to  Kkct

So  the    dark,   embittered   men  crowd    down  to
'•»>•;  hungry  women   with   weeping  childim    in
tlu-ir  arms  follow  tl.  >1  last  come  the  cripples

and  the  old  men  And  the  bitterness  spreads  like
an  ever- increasing  storm  from  the  old  men  to  the
worn  i  the  women  to  the  strong  men  at  the

head  of  the  train.

It  is  the  autumn-flood  which  is  coming.  Pen-
sioners, do  you  remember  the  spring-flood?

A  cottager  who  is  ploughing  in  a  pasture  at  the
edge  of  the  wood  hears  the  people's  mad  cries.     He
AS   hi  DISC  It   on  one  of  his   horses  and   gallops
down  to  Ekeby.

"Ihsasur  is  coming!"  he  cries;  "the  bears  are
coming,  the  wolves  are  coming,  the  goblins  are
coming  to  take  Ekei

He    rides    about    the  whole    estate,    wild    with

>r.

"All  the  devils  in  the  forest  are  let  loose!"  he
"They  are  coming  to  take  Ekeby!    Save
yourselves  who  can !    The  devils  are  coming  to  burn
the  house  and  to  kill  the  pension <

And  behind  him  can  be  heard  the  din  and  c:
of  the  rushing  horde.     Does  it  know  what  it  wants,
that  storming  stream  of  bitterness?     Does  it  want
fire,  or  murder,   or  plunder?
They  are  not  human  beings ;  they  are  wild  beasts.

\  to  Ekcby,  death  to  the  pensioners!
Here  brandy  flows  in  streams.     Here  gold  lies
piled  in  the  vaults.     Here  the  storehouses  are  filled


408          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

with  grain  and  meat.     Why  should  the  honest  starve,
and  the  guilty  have  plenty  ?

But  now  your  time  is  out,  the  measure  is  over-
flowing, pensioners.  In  the  wood  lies  one  who
condemns  you;  we  arc  her  deputies.

The  pensioners  stand  in  the  big  building  and  see
the  people  coming.  They  know  already  why  tluy
are  denounced.  For  once  they  are  innocent.  If
that  poor  girl  has  lain  down  to  die  in  the  wood,  it  is
not  because  they  have  set  the  dogs  on  her,  —  that
they  have  never  done,  —  but  because  Gosta  Bcrling,
a  week  ago,  was  married  to  Countess  Elizabeth.

But  what  good  is  it  to  speak  to  that  mob  ?  They
are  tired,  they  are  hungry;  revenge  drives  them  on,
plunder  tempts  them.  They  rush  down  with  wild
cries,  and  before  them  rides  the  cottager,  whom  iear
has  driven  mad.

The  pensioners  have  hidden  the  young  count
in  their  innermost  room.  Lowenborg  and  Eberhard
are  to  sit  there  and  guard  her ;  the  others  go  out  to
meet  the  people.  They  are  standing  on  the  steps
before  the  main  building,  unarmed,  smiling,  as  the
first  of  the  noisy  crowd  reach  the  house.

And  the  people  stop  before  that  little  group  of
quiet  men.  They  had  wanted  to  throw  them  down
on  the  ground  and  trample  them  under  their  iron-
shod  heels,  as  the  people  at  the  Lund  ironworks
used  to  do  with  the  manager  and  overseer  fifty  years
ago;  but  they  had  expected  closed  doors,  raised
weapons;  they  had  expected  resistance  and  fighting.

"  Dear  friends,"  say  the  pensioners ;  " dear  friends,
you  are  tired  and  hungry;  let  us  give  you  a  little
food  and  first  a  glass  of  Ekeby's  own  home-brewed
brandy."


THE  BKOOM-GIKI  409

The  people  will    not    listen;  they  scream    and
threaten      Hut  the  pensioners  arc  not  discouraged
they  say;    "only  wait  a  second
See,  Ekeby  stands  open.     The  cellar  doors  are  open ;
store-rooms  are  open ;  the  dairy  is  open.     Your
women  are  dropping  with  fatigue;  the  children  arc
•ig.     Let  us  get  them  food  fn  tl     I  hen  you  can
us.     We  will  not  run  away.     The  attic  is  full
of  apples.     Let  us  go  after  apples  for  the  child: '

i  hour  later  the  feasting  is  in  full  swing  at
Ekeby.  The  biggest  feast  the  big  house  has  ever
seen  is  celebrated  there  that  autumn  night  under  the
shining  full  moon.

Woodpiles  have   been  lighted;  the  whole  estate

flames  with   bonfires.      The    people    sit    about    in

groups,   enjoying  warmth  and  rest,   while  all   the

good  things  of  the  earth  arc  scattered  over  them.

Resolute  men   have   gone   to  the   farmyard  and

D    what   was  needed     Calves  and  sheep  have

been  killed,  and  even  one  or  two  oxen.     The  animals

cut   up  and  roasted  in  a  trice.     Those

ing  hundreds  are  devouring  the  food     Animal

after  animal  is  led  out  and  slaughtered     It  looks  as

whole  barn  would  be  emptied  in  one  night.
They  had  just  baked  that  day.     Since  the  young
Cour  /.ahcth  had  come,  there  had  once  more

been  industry  in-doors.  It  seemed  as  if  the  young
woman  never  for  an  instant  remembered  that  she
was  Gbsta  Berl ing's  wife.  Neither  he  nor  she  acted
:  it  were  so;  but  on  the  other  hand  she  made
herself  the  mistress  of  Ekeby.  As  a  good  and  capa-
ble woman  always  must  do,  she  tried  with  burning
zeal  to  remedy  the  waste  and  the  shiftlessncss  which


410          THE  STORY  OF  G&STA   BE  RUNG

reigned  in  the  house.  And  she  was  obeyed.  The
servants  felt  a  certain  pleasure  in  again  having  a
mistress  over  them.

But  what  did  it  matter  that  she  had  filled  the
rafters  with  bread,  that  she  had  made  cheeses  and
churned  and  brewed  during  the  month  of  September  ?

Out  to  the  people  with  everything  there  is,  so
that  they  may  not  burn  down  Kkeby  and  kill  the
pensioners!  Out  with  bread,  butter,  ei  Out

with  the  beer-barrels,  out  with  the  hams  from  t he-
storehouse,  out  with  the  brandy-kegs,  out  with  the
apples !

How  can  all  the  riches  of  Ekeby  suffice  to  diminish
the  people's  anger?  If  we  get  them  away  before
any  dark  deed  is  done,  we  may  be  glad.

It  is  all  done  for  the  sake  of  her  who  is  now
mistress  at  Ekeby.  The  pensioners  are  brave  men  ;
they  would  have  defended  themselves  if  they  had
followed  their  own  will.  They  would  rather  have
driven  away  the  marauders  with  a  few  sharp  shots,
but  for  her,  who  is  gentle  and  mild  and  begs  for  the
people.

As  the  night  advances,  the  crowds  become  gentler.
The  warmth  and  the  rest  and  the  food  and  the  brandy
assuage  their  terrible  madness.  They  begin  to  jest
and  laugh.

As  it  draws  towards  midnight,  it  looks  as  if  they
were  preparing  to  leave.  The  pensioners  stop  bring-
ing food  and  wine,  drawing  corks  and  pouring  ale.
They  draw  a  sigh  of  relief,  in  the  feeling  that  the
danger  is  over.

But  just  then  a  light  is  seen  in  one  of  the  windows
of  the  big  house.  All  who  see  it  utter  a  cry.  It  is
a  young  woman  who  is  carrying  the  light.


THE  BROOM- GIRL  4M

It  had  only  b*  .1  second.     The  (its-

appeared;  but  the  people  think  they  have  recognized
woman.

had  thick  black  hair  and  red  cheeks!"  they
cry.     "She  is  here!    They  have  hidden  her  hcr«

"Oh,  pensioners,  have  you  her  here*  Have  you
got  our  A  hose  reason  God  has  taken,  here  at

>>y?    What  arc  you  doing  with  her?     You  1
grieve  for  her  a  whole  week,  search  for  three  whole
days.     Away  with  wine  and  food!    Shame  to  us,
tiiat  we  accepted  anything  from  your  hands !     i
uut  with  her!    Then  we  shall  know  what  we  have  to
do  to  >•

The  people  are  quick;  quicker  still  are  the  pen-
sioners.  They  rush  in  and  bar  the  door.  Hut  how
could  they  resist  such  a  mass  ?  Door  after  door  is
broken  down.  The  pensioners  arc  thrown  one  side;
they  are  unarmed.  They  are  wedged  in  the  crowd,
so  that  they  cannot  move.  The  people  will  come  in
to  find  the  broom-girl.

In  the  innermost  room  they  find  her.  No  one  has
time  to  see  whether  she  is  light  or  dark.  They  lift
her  up  and  carry  her  out.  She  must  not  be  afraid,
they  say.  They  are  here  to  save  her.

it  they  who  now  stream  from  the  building  are
by  another  procession.

In  the  most  lonely  spot  in  the  forest  the  body  of  a

woman,  who  had  fallen  over  a  high  cliff  and  died  in

tall,   no  longer  rests.     A  child  had  found  her.

Searchers  who  had  remained  in  the  wood  had  lifted

her  on  their  shoulders.     Here  they  c«

In  death  she  is  more  beautiful  than  in  life,     Lo\
she  lies,  with  her  long,  black  hair.     Fair  is  the  form
since  the  eternal  peace  rests  upon  it.


412          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLIXG

Lifted  high  on  the  men's  shoulders,  she  is  carried
through  the  crowd.     With  bent  heads  all  do  hon
to  the  majesty  of  death.

"She  has  not  been  dead  long,"  the  men  whisper.
"She  must  have  wandered  in  the  woods  till  to -<
We  think  that  she  wanted  to  escape  fmm   us  who
were  looking  for  her,  and  so  fell  over  the  clili .  "

Hut  if  this  is  the  broom-girl,  who  is  the  one  who
has  been  carried  out  of  Kkcby  ?

The  procession  from  the  wood  meets  the  pro<
sion  from  the  house.     Bonfires  are  burning  all  over
the  yard.     The  people  can  sec  both  the  women  and
recognize  them.     The  other  is  the  young  countess
at  Borg.

"  Oh  !  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  Is  this  a  new
crime?  Why  is  the  young  countess  here  at  Kkehy  ?
Why  have  they  told  us  that  she  was  far  away  or
dead?  In  the  name  of  justice,  ought  we  not  to
throw  ourselves  on  the  pensioners  and  trample  them
to  dust  under  iron-shod  heels?  "

Then  a  ringing  voice  is  heard.  Gosta  Berling
has  climbed  up  on  the  balustrade  and  is  speaking.
"Listen  to  me,  you  monsters,  you  devils!  Do  you
think  there  are  no  guns  and  powder  at  Ekeby,  you
madmen  ?  Do  you  think  that  I  have  not  wanted  to
shoot  you  like  mad  dogs,  if  she  had  not  begged  for
you?  Oh,  if  I  had  known  that  you  would  have
touched  her,  not  one  of  you  should  have  been  left
alive !

"Why  are  you  raging  here  to-night  and  threaten-
ing us  with  murder  and  fire  ?  What  have  I  to  do  with
your  crazy  girls?  Do  I  know  where  they  run?  I
have  been  too  kind  to  that  one;  that  is  tlic  matter.
J  ought  to  have  set  the  dogs  on  her,  —  it  would  have


THE  BROOM-C1K!  413

been  better  for  us  both,  —  but  I  did  not.     Nor  have
i unused  to  many  her,  that  I  have  never
done      Remember  that!

"Hut  now  I  tell  you  that  you  must  let  her  whom
you  have  dragged  out  of  the  house  go.  Let  her  go,
I  say;  and  may  the  hands  who  have  touched  her
lasting  fire!  Do  you  not  understand  that
she  is  as  much  above  you  as  heaven  is  above  the
earth  ?  She  is  as  delicate  as  you  arc  coarse ;  as  good

a.s  fOtl  aie  hail.

"  Now  I  will  tell  you  who  she  is.  Pint,  she  is
an  angel  from  heaven,  —  secondly,  she  has  been
married  to  the  count  at  Borg.  But  her  mother-in-
law  tortured  her  night  and  day ;  she  had  to  stand  at
the  lake  and  wash  clothes  like  an  ordinary  m
she  was  beaten  and  tormented  as  none  of  your
women  have  ever  been.  Yes,  she  was  almost  ready
to  throw  herself  into  the  river,  as  we  all  know,
because  they  were  torturing  the  life  out  of  her.  I
wonder  which  one  of  you  was  there  then  to  save  her
life.  Not  one  of  you  was  there;  but  we  pensioners,
i  it.

"And  when  she  afterwards  gave  birth  to  a  child
off  in  a  farm-house,  and  the  count  sent  her  the
\Vewere  married  in  a  foreign  land;  we
did  not  follow  law  and  order.  You  are  not  my  v,
I  am  not  your  husband.  I  care  nothing  for  your
child!'  —  yes,  when  that  was  so,  and  she  did  not
want  the  child  to  stand  fatherless  in  the  church
regi-  11  you  would  have  been  proud  enough  if

she  had  said  to  one  of  you :  '  Come  and  marry  me !
I  must  have  a  father  for  the  child! '  But  she  chose
none  of  you.  She  took  <  tg,  the  penniless

priest,  who  may  never  speak  the  word  of  God.     Yes,


414          THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG

I  tell  you,  peasants,  that  I  have  never  done  anything
harder;  for  I  was  so  unworthy  of  her  that  I  did  not
dare  to  look  her  in  the  eyes,  nor  did  I  dare  say  no,
for  she  was  in  despair.

"And  now  you  may  believe  what  evil  you  like  of
us  pensioners ;  but  to  her  we  have  done  what  good
we  could.  And  it  is  thanks  to  her  that  you  have  not
all  been  killed  to-night.  But  now  I  tell  you:  let
her  go,  and  go  yourselves,  or  I  think  the  earth  will
open  and  swallow  you  up.  And  as  you  go,  pray
God  to  forgive  you  for  having  frightened  and  grieved
one  who  is  so  good  and  innocent.  And  now  be  off!
We  have  had  enough  of  you  ! "

Long  before  he  had  finished  speaking,  those  who
had  carried  out  the  countess  had  put  her  down  on
one  of  the  stone  steps ;  and  now  a  big  peasant  came
thoughtfully  up  to  her  and  stretched  out  his  great
hand.

"  Thank  you,  and  good-night,"  he  said.  "  We  wish
you  no  harm,  countess. "

After  him  came  another  and  shook  her  hand.
"Thanks,  and  good-night.  You  must  not  be  angry
with  us!"

Gosta  sprang  down  and  placed  himself  beside  her.
Then  they  took  his  hand  too.

So  they  came  forward  slowly,  one  after  another,
to  bid  them  good -night  before  they  went.  They
were  once  more  subdued;  again  were  they  human
beings,  as  they  were  when  they  left  their  homes  that
morning,  before  hunger  and  revenge  had  made  them
wild  beasts.

They  looked  in  the  countess's  face,  and  Gosta  saw
that  the  innocence  and  gentleness  they  saw  there
brought  tears  into  the  eyes  of  many.  There  was  in


THE  B/tOOAf-G/A7  41$

them  all  a  silent  adoration  of  the  noblest  they  had
ever  set

They  could  not  all  shake  her  hand.  There  were
so  many,  and  the  young  woman  was  tired  and  weak.
But  they  all  came  and  looked  at  her,  and  could  take
Gostu's  hand,  —  his  arm  could  stand  a  shaking.

Gosta  stood  as  if  in  a  dream.  That  evening  a
new  love  sprang  up  in  his  heart

"Oh,  my  people,"  he  thought,  "oh,  my  people,
how  I  love  you!"  He  felt  how  he  loved  all  that
crowd  \vh<>  were  disappearing  into  the  darkness  with
the  dead  girl  at  the  head  of  the  procession,  with
:  coarse  clothes  and  evil -smell  ing  shoes;  those
who  lived  in  the  gray  huts  at  the  edge  of  the  wood;
those  who  could  not  write  and  often  not  read ;  those
who  had  never  known  the  fulness  and  richness  of
life,  only  the  struggle  for  their  daily  bread.

He  loved  them  with  a  painful,  burning  tenderness
which  forced  the  tears  from  his  eyes.  He  did  not
know  what  he  wanted  to  do  for  them,  but  he  loved
them,  each  and  all,  with  their  faults,  their  vices  and
their  weaknesses.  Oh,  Lord  God,  if  the  day  could
come  when  he  too  should  be  loved  by  them!

1  U  moke  from  his  dream;  his  wife  laid  her  hand
on  his  arm.  The  people  were  gone.  They  were
alone  on  the  steps.

"Oh,  Gosta,  Gosta,  how  could  you

put  her  hands  before  her  face  and  wept.
It  is  true  what  I  said,"  he  cried.     "  I  have  never
promised  the  broom-girl  to  marry  her.     '  Come  here
.  and  you  shall  see  something  funny ! '
was  all  I  ever  said  to  her.     It  is  not  my  fault  that
she  cared  for  n

"  Oh,  it  was  not  that ;  but  how  could  you  say  to


416         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLING

the  people  that  I  was  good  and  pure?  Gosta,  Gosta !
Do  you  not  know  that  I  loved  you  when  I  had  no
right  to  do  it?  I  was  ashamed,  Gosta!  I  was  ready
to  die  of  shame ! "

And  she  was  shaken  by  sobs.

He  stood  and  looked  at  her.

"Oh,  my  friend,  my  beloved!"  he  said  quietly.
"  How  happy  you  are,  who  are  so  good  I  How  happy
to  have  such  a  beautiful  soul ! "


417


CHAPTER   XX

KEVENHlJLLER

IN  the  year  1770,  in  Germany,  the  afterwards  learned

accomplished  Kcvcnhuller  was  born.     He  was

son  of  a  count,  and  could  have  lived  in  I«»lty

palaces  and  ridden  at  the  Emperor's  side  if  he  had

so  wished;  but  he  had  not.

He  could  have  liked  to  fasten  windmill  sails
on  the  castle's  highest  tower,  turn  the  hall  into
a  locksmith's  workshop,  and  the  boudoir  into  a
watch-maker's.  He  would  have  liked  to  fill  the
castle  with  whirling  wheels  and  working  levers.
But  when  he  could  not  do  it  he  left  all  the  pomp
and  apprenticed  himself  to  a  watch-maker.  There-
he  learned  everything  there  was  to  learn  about  cog-
wheels, springs,  and  pendulums.  He  learned  to  make
sun-dials  and  star-dials,  clocks  with  singing  canary-
birds  and  horn-blowing  shepherds,  chimes  which
filled  a  whole  church-tower  with  their  wonderful
machinery,  and  watch-works  so  small  that  they  could
be  set  in  a  locket.

When  he  had  got  his  patent  of  mastership,   he

bound  his  knapsack  on  his  back,  took  his  stick  in

his   hand,   and   wandered   from   place  to  place  to

it  went  with  rollers  and  wheels.

nhu  Her  was  no  ordinary  watch-maker;  he  wished

to  be  a  great  inventor  and  to  improve  the  world.


418         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

When  he  had  so  wandered  through  many  lands,  he
turned  his  steps  towards  Varmland,  to  there  study
mill-wheels  and  mining.  One  beautiful  summer
morning  it  so  happened  that  he  was  crossing  the
market-place  of  Karlstad.  Hut  that  same  beautiful
summer  morning  it  had  pleased  the  wood-nymph  to
extend  her  walk  as  far  as  the  town.  The  noble  lady
came  also  across  the  market-place  from  the  opposite
direction,  and  so  met  Kevenhiiller.

That  was  a  meeting  for  a  watch-maker's  appren-
tice. She  had  shining,  green  eyes,  and  a  mass  of
light  hair,  which  almost  reached  the  ground,  and
she  was  dressed  in  green,  changeable  silk.  She
was  the  most  beautiful  woman  Kevenhiiller  had  ever
seen.

He  stood  as  if  he  had  lost  his  wits,  and  stared  at
her  as  she  came  towards  him.

She  came  direct  from  the  deepest  thicket  of  the
wood,  where  the  ferns  are  as  high  as  trees,  where
the  giant  firs  shut  out  the  sun,  so  that  it  can  only
fall  in  golden  drops  on  the  yellow  moss.

I  should  like  to  have  been  in  Kevenhiiller's  place,
to  see  her  as  she  came  with  ferns  and  pine-needles
tangled  in  her  yellow  hair  and  a  little  black  snake
about  her  neck.

How  the  people  must  have  stared  at  her !  Horses
bolted,  frightened  by  her  long,  floating  hair.  The
street  boys  ran  after  her.  The  men  dropped  their
meat-axes  to  gape  at  her.

She  herself  went  calm  and  majestic,  only  smiling
a  little  at  the  excitement,  so  that  Kevenhiiller  saw
her  small,  pointed  teeth  shine  between  her  red  lips.

She  had  hung  a  cloak  over  her  shoulders  so  that
none  should  see  who  she  was;  but  as  ill-luck  would


k'El'K. \IHU.ER  419

have  it,  she  had  forgotten  to  cover  her  tail.     It
dragged  along  the  paving -stones.

Kcvcnhullcr  saw  the  tail,  he  was  sorry  that  a
noble  lady  should  make  herself  the  laughing-stock
of  the  town ;  so  he  bowed  and  said  courteously :  —

'  Would  it  not  please  your  Grace  to  hti  your
train

The  wood-nymph  was  touched,   not  only  by
kindness,  but  by  his  politeness.     She  stopped  bd
him  and  looked  at  him,   so  that   he  thought   that
shining  sparks  passed  from  her  eyes  into  his  hi

venhuller,"  she  said,  "hereafter  you  shall  be
able  with  your  two  hands  to  execute  whatever  work
you  will,  but  only  one  of  each  kind."

She  said  it  and  she  could  keep  her  word.  For
who  does  not  know  that  the  wood-nymph  has  the
power  to  give  genius  and  wonderful  powers  to  those
who  win  her  favor?

Kevenhullcr  remained  in  Karlstad  and  hired  a
workshop  there.  He  hammered  and  worked  night
and  day.  In  a  week  he  had  made  a  wonder.  It  was
a  carriage,  which  went  by  itself.  It  went  up  hill
and  down  hill,  went  fast  or  slow,  could  be  steered
turned,  be  stopped  and  started,  as  one  wished.

Kcvcnhuller  became  famous.     He  was  so  proud  of

his  carriage  that  he  journeyed  up  to  Stockholm  to

show  it  to  the  king.     He  did  not  need  to  wait  for

post-horses  nor  to  scold  ostlers.    He  proudly  rode  in

«>wn  carriage  and  was  there  in  a  few  hours.

He  rode  right  up  to  the  palace,  and  the  king  came
out  with  his  court  ladies  and  gentlemen  and  looked
at  him.  They  could  not  praise  him  enough.

The  king  then  "  You   might   give  me  that

carriage,  Kevenhuller.  "     And  although  he  answered


420         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

no,    the    king    persisted   and   wished   to   have   the
carriage.

Then  Kevenhiiller  saw  that  in  the  king's  tniin
stood  a  court  lady  with  light  hair  and  a  green  dress.
He  recognized  her,  and  he  understood  that  it  was
she  who  had  advised  the  king  to  ask  him  for  his
carriage.  He  was  in  despair.  He  could  not  In-ar
that  another  should  have  his  carriage,  nor  did  he
dare  to  say  no  to  the  king.  Therefore  he  drove  it
with  such  speed  against  the  palace  wall  that  it  was
broken  into  a  thousand  pieces.

When  he  came  home  to  Karlstad  he  tried  to  make
another  carriage.  But  he  could  not.  Then  he  was
dismayed  at  the  gift  the  wood-nymph  had  given  him.
He  had  left  the  life  of  ease  at  his  father's  castle  to
be  a  benefactor  to  many,  not  to  make  wonders  which
only  one  could  use.  What  good  was  it  to  him  to  be
a  great  master,  yes,  the  greatest  of  all  masters,  if  he
could  not  duplicate  his  marvels  so  that  they  were  of
use  to  thousands.

And  he  so  longed  for  quiet,  sensible  work  that  he
became  a  stone-cutter  and  mason.  It  was  then  he
built  the  great  stone  tower  down  by  the  west  bridge,
and  he  meant  to  build  walls  and  portals  and  court-
yards, ramparts  and  turrets,  so  that  a  veritable  castle
should  stand  by  the  Klar  River.

And  there  he  should  realize  his  childhood's  dream.
Everything  which  had  to  do  with  industry  and  handi-
craft should  have  a  place  in  the  castle  halls.  White
millers  and  blacksmiths,  watchmakers  with  green
shades  before  their  strained  eyes,  dyers  with  dark
hands,  weavers,  turners,  filers,  —  all  should  have
their  workshops  in  his  castle.

And   everything   went   well.     Of  the   stones   he


KKl'ENHOLLEX  4*1

elf  had  hewn  he  had  with  his  own  hand  built
had  fastened  windmill  sails  on  it,
—  for  t;  :  was  to  be  a  mill,  — and  now  he-

wanted  to  begin  on  the  smithy.

But  one  day  he  stood  and  watched  how  the  light,
strong  wings  turned  before  the  wind.  Then  his  old
longing  came  over  h .

He  shut  hun.selt  m  m  his  workshop,  tasted  no
food,  took  no  rest,  and  worked  unceasingly.  At  the
end  of  a  week  he  had  made  a  new  marvel.

One  day  he  climbed  up  on  the  roof  of  his  tower
and  began  to  fasten  wings  to  his  shoulders.

Two  street  boys  saw  him,  and  they  gave  a  cry
which  was  heard  through  the  whole  town.  They
started  off;  panting,  they  ran  up  the  streets  and
down  the  streets,  knocking  on  all  the  doors,  and
screaming  as  they  ran:  —

• '  Kcvenhullcr  is  going  to  fly!  Kevenhuller  is
going  to  fly

He  stood  calmly  on  the  tower-roof  and  fastened  on

his  wings,  and   in  the  meantime  crowds  of  people

came  running  through   the   narrow  streets  of  old

Karlstad.     Soon  the  bridge  was  black  with  them.

market-place  was  packed,  and  the  banks  of  the

swarmed  with  people.

Kevenhuller  at  last  got  his  wings  on  and  set  out.
IK  gave  a  couple  of  flaps  with  them,  and  then  he
was  out  in  the  air.  He  lay  and  floated  high  above
the  earth.

He  drew   in   the   air  with    long  breaths;  it  was

;ig  and  pure.     His  breast  expanded,  and  the  old

knights'  blood  began  to  seethe  in  him.     He  tumbled

like  a  pigeon,  he  hovered  like  a  hawk,  his  flight  was

as  swift  as  the  swallow's,  as  sure  as  the  falcon's.     If


422         THE  STORY  OF  G&STA  BERLING

he  had  only  been  able  to  make  such  a  pair  of  wings
for  every  one  of  them !  If  he  had  only  been  able  to
give  them  all  the  power  to  raise  themselves  in  this
pure  air!  He  could  not  enjoy  it  alone.  Ah,  that
wood-nymph,  —  if  he  could  only  meet  1

Then  he  saw,  with  eyes  which  were  almost  blinded
by  the  dazzling  sunlight,  how  some  one  came  flying
towards  him.  Great  wings  like  his  own,  and  between
the  wings  floated  a  human  body.  He  saw  floating
yellow  hair,  billowy  green  silk,  wild  shining  eyes.
It  was  she,  it  was  she!

Kevenhuller  did  not  stop  to  consider.  With  furi-
ous speed  he  threw  himself  upon  her  to  kiss  her  or
to  strike  her,  —  he  was  not  sure  which,  — but  at  any
rate  to  force  her  to  remove  the  curse  from  his  exist-
ence. He  did  not  look  where  he  was  going ;  he  saw
only  the  flying  hair  and  the  wild  eyes.  He  came
close  up  to  her  and  stretched  out  his  arms  to  seize
her.  But  his  wings  caught  in  hers,  and  hers  were
the  stronger.  His  wings  were  torn  and  destroyed;
he  himself  was  swung  round  and  hurled  down,  he
knew  not  whither.

When  he  returned  to  consciousness  he  lay  on  the
roof  of  his  own  tower,  with  the  broken  flying-machine
by  his  side.  He  had  flown  right  against  his  own
mill;  the  sails  had  caught  him,  whirled  him  round
a  couple  of  times,  and  then  thrown  him  down  on  the
tower  roof.

So  that  was  the  end.

Kevenhuller  was  again  a  desperate  man.  He  could
not  bear  the  thought  of  honest  work,  and  he  did  not
dare  to  use  his  magic  power.  If  he  should  make
another  wonder  and  should  then  destroy  it,  his  heart
would  break  with  sorrow.  And  if  he  did  not  destroy


AV

it,  he  would  certainly  go  mad  at  the  thought  that  he
coul  crs»  with  it.

He  looked  up  his  knapsack  and  stick,  let  the  mill
stand  as  it  was,  and  decided  to  go  out  and  scare  i
the  wutKl-nyi.

li\  the  course  of  his  journey  ings  he  came  to  Ekcby,

w  years  before  the  major's  wife  was  driven  out.

e  i»e  was  well  received,  and  there  he  remained.

The  memories  of  his  childhood  came  back  to  kirn,

and  he  allowed  them  to  call  him  count     His

grew  gray  and  his  brain  slept.     lie  was  so  old  that

•uKl  n«-  longer  believe  in  the  feats  of  his  youth.

He  was  not  the  man  who  could  work  wonders.     It

was  not  he  who  had  made  th>  itic  carriage  and

the  flying-machine.     Oh,  no, — tales,  tales!

But  then  it  happened  that  the  major's  wife  was
Kkeby,  and  the  pensioners  were  masters
of  the  great  estate.  Then  a  life  began  there  which
had  never  been  worse.  A  storm  passed  over  the
land;  men  warred  on  earth,  and  souls  in  he;r
Wolves  came  from  Dovre  with  witches  on  their
backs,  and  the  wood-nymph  came  to  Ekcby.

The  pensioners  did  not  recognize  her.  They
thought  that  she  was  a  poor  and  distressed  woman
whom  a  cruel  mother-in-law  had  hunted  to  despair.
So  they  gave  her  shelter,  revered  her  like  a  queen,
and  lovcxl  her  like  a  child.

Kcvenhuller  alone  saw  who  she  was.     At  first  he
was  dazzled  like  the  others.     But  one  day  she  wore
a  dress  of  green,  shimmering  silk,  and  when  she  had
>n,  Kevcnhuller  recognized  her.

There  she  sat  on  silken  cushions,  and  all  the  old
men  made  themselves  ridiculous  to  serve  her.  One
was  cook  and  another  footman;  one  reader,  one


424         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA

court-musician,  one  shoemaker;   they  all  IKK!  their
occupation^

They  .said  she  was  ill,  the  odious  witch;  luit
Kevenhiillcr  knew  what  that  illness  meant.  She
was  laughing  at  them  all.

He  warned  the  pensioners  against  her.  "Look  at
her  small,  pointed  teeth,"  he  said,  "and  her  wild,
shining  eyes.  She  is  the  wood-nymph,  — all  evil  is
about  in  these  terrible  times.  I  tell  you  she  is  the
wood-nymph,  come  hither  for  our  ruin.  I  have
her  before."

But  when  Kevcnhuller  saw  the  wood-nymph  and
had  recognized  her,  the  desire  for  work  came  OVCT
him.  It  began  to  burn  and  seethe  in  his  brain;  his
fingers  ached  with  longing  to  bend  themselves  about
hammer  and  file ;  he  could  hold  out  no  longer.  With
a  bitter  heart  he  put  on  his  working-blouse  and  shut
himself  in  in  an  old  smithy,  which  was  to  be  his
workshop.

A  cry  went  out  from  Ekeby  over  the  whole  of
Varmland:  —

"  Kevenhuller  has  begun  to  work ! "

A  new  wonder  was  to  see  the  light.  What  should
it  be?  Will  he  teach  us  to  walk  on  the  water,  or  to
raise  a  ladder  to  the  stars?

One  night,  the  first  or  second  of  October,  he  had
the  wonder  ready.  He  came  out  of  the  workshop
and  had  it  in  his  hand.  It  was  a  wheel  which  turned
incessantly;  as  it  turned,  the  spokes  glowed  like
fire,  and  it  gave  out  warmth  and  light.  Kevenhuller
had  made  a  sun.  When  he  came  out  of  the  work-
shop with  it,  the  night  grew  so  light  that  the
sparrows  began  to  chirp  and  the  clouds  to  burn  as  if
at  dawn.


There  should  never  again  be  darkness  or  cold  on

earth.      His   hc.ul   whiilcil   when   he  thought  o:

ild  continue  to  rise  and  set,  but  when  it
disappeared,  thousands  and  thousands  <»t  his

i- Is  should  flame  through  the  land,  and  the  air

:  with  warmth,  as  on  the  hottest  sum:
Harvests   should  .idwmtei,    wild

strawberries  should  cover  the  hillsides  the  whole
year  round ;  the  ice  should  never  bind  the  wat

Ihs    ;  1   should  create  a  new   world.     It

should  be  furs  to  the  poor  and  a  sun  to  the  miners,
inuld  give  power  to  the  mills,  life  to  nature,  a
new,  rich,  and  happy  existence  to  mankind.     Hut  at
same  time  he  knew  that  it  was  all  a  dream  and
that  the  wood-nymph  would  never  let  him  duplicate
his   wheel.     And    in   his  anger    and    longing
revenge,   he  thought  that  he  would  kill  her,  and
:i  he  no  longer  knew  what  he  was  doing.
He  went  to  the  main  building,   and  in  the  hall
under  the  stairs  he  put  down  his  fire-wheel.     It  was
his  intention  to  set  fire  to  the  house  and  burn  up  the
witch  in  it.

Then  he  went  back  to  his  workshop  and  sat  there
silently  listening.

There  was  shouting  and  crying  outside.  Now
they  could  see  that  a  great  deed  was  done.

Yes,  run,  scream,  ring  the  alarm!  But  she  is
burning  in  there,  the  wood-nymph  whom  you  laid
on  silken  cushions.

M  iv  she  writhe  in  torment,  may  she  flee  before
the  il. unes  from  room  to  room!  Ah,  how  the  green
silk  will  blaze,  and  how  the  flames  will  play  in  her
torrents  of  hair!  Courage,  flames!  courage!  Catch
her,  set  fire  to  her!  Witches  bum!  Fear  not  her


426         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLL\\,

magic,   flam<  t   her  burn!     There  is  one  who

for  her  sake  must  burn  his  whole  life  through.

Bells  rang,  wagons  came  rattling,  pumj
brought  out,  water  was  carried  up  from  the  lake,
people  came  running  from  all  the  neighboring  vil-
lages. There  were  cries  and  waitings  and  com-
mands; that  was  the  roof,  which  had  fallen  in;  tin-re
was  the  terrible  crackling  and  roaring  of  a  fire.  But
nothing  disturbed  Kevenhiiller.  He  sat  on  the
chopping-block  and  rubbed  his  hands.

Then  he  heard  a  crash,  as  if  the  heavens  had
fallen,  and  he  started  up  in  triumph.  "Now  it  is
done!"  he  cried.  "Now  she  cannot  escape;  now
she  is  crushed  by  the  beams  or  burned  up  by  the
flames.  Now  it  is  done."

And  he  thought  of  the  honor  and  glory  of  Ekeby
which  had  had  to  be  sacrificed  to  get  her  out  of  the
world,  — the  magnificent  halls,  where  so  much  hap-
piness had  dwelt,  the  tables  which  had  groaned
under  dainty  dishes,  the  precious  old  furniture,  silver
and  china,  which  could  never  be  replaced  —

And  then  he  sprang  up  with  a  cry.  His  fire-
wheel,  his  sun,  the  model  on  which  everything
depended,  had  he  not  put  it  under  the  stairs  to  cause
the  fire?

Kevenhiiller  looked  down  on  himself,  paralyzed
with  dismay.

"  Am  I  going  mad  ? "  he  said.  "  How  could  I  do
such  a  thing? "

At  the  same  moment  the  door  of  the  workshop
opened  and  the  wood-nymph  walked  in.

She  stood  on  the  threshold,  smiling  and  fair.
Her  green  dress  had  neither  hole  nor  stain,  no  smoke
darkened  her  yellow  hair.  She  was  just  as  he  had


A'/.r/:.w/<

seen  her  m  the  market-place  at  Karlstad  in  bis  young
days,  her  tail  bun,.  ct,  and  she  had

all  the  wildncss  and  fragrance  of  the  wood  about

.cby  is  burning,"  she  said,  and  laughed.
Kcvcnhullcr   had   the  sledge-hammer   lifted  and
meant  t<>  throw  it  at  her  head,  but  then  he  saw  that
she  had  his  fire-wheel  in  her  hand.

I  have  saved  for  you/'  she  said.
Kcvenhuller  threw  himself  on   his  knees  before

You  have  broken  my  carriage,  you  have  rent  my
wings,  and  you  have  ruined  my  life.  Have  grace,
have  pity  on  me!"

She  climbed  up  on  the  bench  and  sat  there,  just
as  young  and  mischievous  as  when  he  saw  her  first
I  see  that  you  know  who  I  am,"  she  said.

"  1  know  you,  I  have  always  known  you,"  said
the  unfortunate  man;  "you  are  genius.  But  set  me
free!  Take  back  your  gift !  Let  me  be  an  ordinary
person !  Why  do  you  persecute  me  ?  Why  do  you
destroy  me?"

"Madman,"  said  the  wood-nymph,  "I  have  never
wished  you  any  harm.  I  gave  you  a  great  reward ;
but  I  can  also  take  it  from  you  if  you  wish.  But
consider  well.  You  will  rei>ent  it."

"  No,  no ! "  he  cried ;  "  take  from  me  the  power  of
working  wonders!"

"First,  you  must  destroy  this,"  she  said,  and
threw  the  fire-wheel  on  the  ground  in  front  of  him.

He  did  not  hesitate.  He  swung  the  sledge-
hammer over  the  shining  sun;  sparks  flew  about  the
room,  splinters  and  flames  danced  about  him,  and
then  his  last  wonder  lay  in  fragments.


428         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

"  Yes,  so  I  i.iU-  my  -itt  horn  you,"  said  the  wood-
nymph.  As  she  stood  in  the  door  and  the  glare
from  the  fire  streamed  over  her,  he  looked  at  her  for
the  last  time.  More  beautiful  than  ever  before,  she
seemed  to  him,  and  no  longer  malicious,  only  it
and  proud.

"  Madman,"  she  said,  "  did  I  ever  forbid  you  to  K  t
others  copy  your  works?  I  only  wished  to  protect
the  man  of  genius  from  a  mechanic's  labor."

Whereupon  she  went.  Kevenhiiller  was  insane
for  a  couple  of  days.  Then  he  was  as  usual  again.

But  in  his  madness  he  had  burned  down  Ekeby.
No  one  was  hurt.  Still,  it  was  a  great  sorrow  to  the
pensioners  that  the  hospitable  home,  where  they  had
enjoyed  so  many  good  things,  should  suffer  such
injury  in  their  time.


BKOBY  FA1K  4-vy


CHAPTER  XXI

BROBY  PAIR

ON  the  first  Friday  in  October  the  big  Broby  1
begins,  and  lasts  one  week.  It  is  the  festival  of  the
autumn.  There  is  slaughtering  and  baking  in  every
house;  the  new  winter  clothes  are  then  worn  for  the
first  time;  the  brandy  rations  are  doubled;  work
rests.  There  is  feasting  on  all  the  estates.  The
servants  and  laborers  draw  their  pay  and  hold  long
conferences  over  what  they  shall  buy  at  the  I
People  from  a  distance  come  in  small  companies
with  knapsacks  on  their  backs  and  staffs  in  their
hands.  Many  are  driving  their  cattle  before  them
to  the  market.  Small,  obstinate  young  bulls  and
goats  stand  still  and  plant  their  forefeet,  causing
much  vexation  to  their  owners  and  much  amusement
t"  the  by -slanders.  The  guest-rooms  at  the  manors
are  filled  with  guests,  bits  of  news  are  exchanged,
and  the  prices  of  cattle  discussed.

And  on  the  first  Fair  day  what  crowds  swarm  up
Broby  hill  and  over  the  wide  market-place!  Booths
are  set  up,  where  the  tradespeople  spread  out  their
wares.  Rope-dancers,  organ-grinders,  and  blind
n-players  are  everywhere,  as  well  as  fortune-
tellers, sellers  of  sweetmeats  and  of  brandy.  Beyond
the  rows  of  booths,  vegetables  and  fruit  are  offered
for  sale  by  the  gardeners  from  the  big  estates.  Wide
stretches  are  taken  up  by  ruddy  copper-kettles.  It


430         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

is  phin,  however,  by  the  movement  in  the  Fair,  that
there  is  want  in  Svartsjo  ami  Bro  and  Lofvik  and
the  other  provinces  about  the  Lofven :  trade  is  poor
at  the  booths.  There  is  most  bustle  in  the  cattle-
market,  for  many  have  to  sell  both  cow  and  horse  tu
be  able  to  live  through  the  winter.

It  is  a  gay  scene.  If  one  only  has  money  for  a
glass  or  two,  one  can  keep  up  one's  courage.  And
it  is  not  only  the  brandy  which  is  the  cause  of  the
merriment ;  when  the  people  from  the  lonely  wood-
huts  come  down  to  the  market-place  with  its  seeth-
ing masses,  and  hear  the  din  of  the  screaming,
laughing  crowd,  they  become  as  if  delirious  with
excitement.

Kverybody  who  does  not  have  to  stay  at  home  to
look  after  the  house  and  cattle  has  come  to  this
Broby  Fair.  There  are  the  pensioners  from  Ekeby
and  the  peasants  from  Nygird,  horse-dealers  from
Norway,  Finns  from  the  Northern  forests,  vagrants
from  the  highways.

Sometimes  the  roaring  sea  gathers  in  a  whirlpool,
which  turns  about  a  middle  point.  No  one  knows
what  is  at  the  centre,  until  a  couple  of  policemen
break  a  way  through  the  crowd  to  put  an  end  to  a
fight  or  to  lift  up  an  overturned  cart.

Towards  noon  the  great  fight  began.  The  peasants
had  got  it  into  their  heads  that  the  tradespeople  were
using  too  short  yardsticks,  and  it  began  with  quar-
relling and  disturbance  about  the  booths;  then  it
turned  to  violence.

Every  one  knows  that  for  many  of  those  who  for
days  had  not  seen  anything  but  want  and  suffering,
it  was  a  pleasure  to  strike,  it  made  no  difference
whom  or  what.  And  as  soon  as  they  see  that  a  fight


BKOBY  FAIR  43 «

Is  going  on  they  come  rushing  from  ail  sides.  The
pensioners  mean  to  break  through  to  make  peace
after  their  fashion,  and  the  tradesmen  run  to  help

;   Mons  from  Fors  is  the  most  eager  in  the

-.11111-       II <•  is  ili  unk.  .iiul  h«-  is  .iii-i  \  ,   In-  h.t>  thfOWfl

down  a  tradesman  and  has  begun  to  beat  him,  l<
his  calls  f*>r  he  lp  his  comrades  hurry  to  him  and  try
iake  Mons  let  him  go.     Then  Mons  sweeps  the
rolls  of  cloth  from  one  of  the  counters,  and  seizes  the
which  is  a  yard  broad  and  five  yards  long  and
made  of  thick  planks,  and  begins  to  brandish  it  as  a
weapon.

He  is  a  terrible  man,  big  Mons.  It  was  he  who
kicked  out  a  wall  in  the  Filipstad-jail,  he  who  could
lift  a  boat  out  of  the  water  and  carry  it  on  his
shoulders.  When  he  begins  to  strike  about  him
the  heavy  counter,  every  one  flies  before  him.
But  he  follows,  striking  right  and  1<  r  him  it

is  no  longer  a  question  of  friends  or  enemies:  he
only  wants  some  one  to  hit,  since  he  has  got  a
weapon.

o  people  scatter  in  terror.  Men  and  women
scream  and  run.  But  how  can  the  women  escape
when  many  of  th<  e  their  children  by  the  hand  ?

Booths  and  carts  stand  in  their  way;  oxen  and  cows,
maddened  by  the  noise,  prevent  their  escape.

In  a  corner  between  the  booths  a  group  of  women
are  wedged,  and  towards  them  the  giant  rages.
Does  he  not  see  a  tradesman  in  the  i.  :  the

crowd?  He  raises  the  plank  and  lets  it  fall.  In
pale,  shuddering  terror  the  women  receive  the  attack,
sinking  under  the  deadly  bl

But  as  the  board  falls  whistling  down  over  them,


432          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA    B&RUN&

its  force  is  broken  against  a  man's  upstretchcd  arms.
One  man  has  not  sunk  down,   but  hi  HIM- It

above  the  crowd,  one  man  has  voluntarily  taken  the
blow  to  save  the  many.      The  women  and  children
are  uninjured.      One   man   has  broken   the  tui\
the    blow,    but   he    lies    now    unconscious  on   the
ground.

Big  Mons  does  not  lift  up  his  board.  He  has  nut
the  man's  eye,  just  as  the  counter  struck  his  lu-ad,
and  it  has  paralyzed  him.  lie  lets  himself  be  bound
and  taken  away  without  resistance.

But  the  report  flies  about  the  Fair  that  big  Mons
has  killed  Captain  Lcnnart.  They  say  that  he  who
had  been  the  people's  friend  died  to  save  the  women
and  defenceless  children.

And  a  silence  falls  on  the  great  square,  where  life
had  lately  roared  at  fever  pitch:  trade  ceases,  the
fighting  stops,  the  people  leave  their  dinners.

Their  friend  is  dead.  The  silent  throngs  stream
towards  the  place  where  he  has  fallen.  He  lies
stretched  out  on  the  ground  quite  unconscious;  no
wound  is  visible,  but  his  skull  seems  to  be  flattened.

Some  of  the  men  lift  him  carefully  up  on  to  the
counter  which  the  giant  has  let  fall.  They  think
they  perceive  that  he  still  lives.

"Where  shall  we  carry  him?"  they  ask  one
another.

"  Home,"  answers  a  harsh  voice  in  the  crowd.

Yes,  good  men,  carry  him  home!  Lift  him  up
on  your  shoulders  and  carry  him  home!  He  has
been  God's  plaything,  he  has  been  driven  like  a
feather  before  his  breath.  Carry  him  home!

That  wounded  head  has  rested  on  the  hard  barrack-
bed  in  the  prison,  on  sheaves  of  straw  in  the  barn.


BROBY  FAIR  433

Let  it  now  come  home  and  rest  on  a  soft  pillow!

has  suffered  undeserved  shame  and  tori:
has  been  hunted  from  his  own  door.     I  i<  i..is  been  a
wandering    i  ing    the  paths  of    God

where  he  could  find  them;  but  his  promised  land  was
th.it  huinc  whose  gates  God  had  closed  to  bin
haps  his  house  stands  open  for  one  who  ha
women  and  children.

Now  he  docs  not  come  as  a  malefactor,  escorted
by  reeling  boon-companions;  he  is  followed   by  a
sorrowing  people,   in  whose  cottages   he  has   1
while  he  heli>ed  the:  ngs.     Carry  him  hoi

And  so  they  do.  Six  men  lift  the  board  on  which
he  lies  on  their  shoulders  and  carry  him  away  from
the  fair-grounds.  Wherever  they  pass,  the  people
move  to  one  and  quiet,  the  men  uncover

their  heads,  the  women  courtesy  as  they  do  in  church
when  God's  name  is  spoken.  Many  weep  and  dry
their  eyes;  others  begin  to  tell  what  a  man  he  had
been,  — so  kind,  so  gay,  so  full  of  counsel  and  so
religiou-  wonderful  to  see,  too,  how,  as  soon

as  one  of  his  bearers  gives  out,  another  quietly
comes  and  puts  bis  shoulder  under  the  board

So  Captain  Lcnnart  comes  by  the  place  where
tin-  pensioners  are  standing.

'  I  must  go  and  see  that  he  comes  home  safely,"
says  Becrencrcutz,  and  leaves  h  at  the  road-

side to  follow  the  procession  to  Hclgcsatcr.  Many
follow  his  example.

Th  are  deserted.     Everybody  has

to  follow  to  see  that  Captain  Lcnnart  comes  home.

When    the    procession    reaches    Helgesatcr,    the

house  i  Again  the  colonel's

beats  on  the  closed  door.     All  the  servants  are

.-s


434         THE  STORY  OF  COST  A   BE  RUNG

at  the  Fair;  the  captain's  wife  is  alone  at  home.      It
is  she  again  who  opens  the  door.

And  she  asks,  as  she  asked  once  before,  —

"  What  do  you  want  ?  "

Whereupon  the  colonel  answers,  as  he  answered
once  before,  —

"  We  are  here  with  your  husband. "

She  looks  at  him,  where  hi-  stands  stiff  and  <
as  usual.  She  looks  at  the  bearers  behind  him,  who
are  weeping,  and  at  all  that  mass  of  people-.  She
stands  there  on  the  sU-ps  and  looks  into  hundreds  of
weeping  eyes,  who  stare  sadly  up  at  her.  Last  she
looks  at  her  husband,  who  lies  stretched  out  on  the
bier,  and  she  presses  her  hand  to  her  heart.  "  That
is  his  right  face,"  she  murmurs.

Without  asking  more,  she  bends  down,  draws
back  a  bolt,  opens  the  hall-doors  wide,  and  then  goes
before  the  others  into  the  bedroom.

The  colonel  helps  her  to  drag  out  the  big  bed  and
shake  up  the  pillows,  and  so  Captain  Lennart  is  once
more  laid  on  soft  down  and  white  linen.

"Is  he  alive?"  she  asks.

"Yes,"  answers  the  colonel.

'Is  there  any  hope?"

"No.     Nothing  can  be  done."

There  was  silence  for  a  while;  then  a  sudden
thought  comes  over  her.

"Are  they  weeping  for  his  sake,  all  those  peo-
ple?"

"Yes."

"What  has  he  done?"

"The  last  thing  he  did  was  to  let  big  Mons  kill
him  to  save  women  and  children  from  death."

Again  she  sits  silent  for  a  while  and  thinks.


BROBY  FAIR  435

"What  kind  of  a  face  did  he  hive,  colonel,  when
he  came  home  two  months  ago?  "

The  colonel  started  Now  he  understands;  now  at
last  he  understands.

"GSstahad  painted  him. "

"  So  it  was  on  account  of  one  of  your  pranks  that
I  shut  him  out  fr  home?  How  will  you

answer  for  that.  o.lom-P"

Beerencrcutz  shrugged  his  broad  shoulders.

"  I  have  much  to  an^

"  Hut  I  think  that  this  must  be  the  worst  thing
you  have  d<

"Nor  have  I  ever  gone  a  he-ivier  way  than  that
to-day  up  to  Hclgcsater.  Moreover,  there  arc  two
others  who  are  guilty  in  this  matt

"Who?*1

"  Sintram  is  one,  you  yourself  arc  the  other.     You
are  a  hard  woman.     I  know  that  many  have  tried  to
speak  to  you  of  your  husband. "
ie  answ<

Then  she  begs  him  to  tell  her  all  about  that  even-
•  Hroby.

1  If  tells  her  all  he  can  remember,  and  she  listens
silently.  Captain  Lennart  lies  still  unconscious  on
the  bed.  The  room  is  full  of  weeping  people;  no
one  thinks  of  shutting  out  that  mourning  crowd.  All
thf  doors  stand  open,  the  stairs  and  the  halls  are
filled  with  silent,  grieving  people;  far  out  in  the
1  they  stand  in  close  masses.

\Vh<-:i  the  colonel  has  finished,  she  raises  her
voice  and  says,  -

If  there  arc  any  pensioners  here.  I  ask  them  to
go.     It  is  hard  :  see  them  when  I  am  sitting

by  my  husband's  death-bed."


43$  THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG

Without  another  word  the  colonel  rises  and  goes
out.  So  do  Gosta  Herlin^  and  several  of  the  other
pensioners  who  had  followed  Captain  I.ennart.  The
people  move  aside  for  the  little  group  of  humiliated
men.

When  they  are  gone  the  captain's  wife  says:
"Will  some  of  them  who  have  seen  my  husband  dur-
ing this  time  tell  me  where  he  has  lived,  and  what
he  has  done?  "  Then  they  begin  to  give  testimony
of  Captain  Lennart  to  his  wife,  who  has  misjudged
him  and  sternly  hardened  her  heart  against  him.

It  lasted  a  long  time  before  they  all  were  done.
All  through  the  twilight  and  the  evening  they  stand
and  speak ;  one  after  another  steps  forward  and  tells
of  him  to  his  wife,  who  would  not  hear  his  name
mentioned.

Some  tell  how  he  found  them  on  a  sick-bed  and
cured  them.  There  are  wild  brawlers  whom  he  has
tamed.  There  are  mourners  whom  he  has  cheered,
drunkards  whom  he  had  led  to  sobriety.  Every  one
who  had  been  in  unbearable  distress  had  sent  a  mes-
sage to  God's  wayfarer,  and  he  had  helped  them,  or
at  least  he  had  waked  hope  and  faith.

Out  in  the  yard  the  crowd  stands  and  waits.  They
know  what  is  going  on  inside:  that  which  is  said
aloud  by  the  death-bed  is  whispered  from  man  to
man  outside.  He  who  has  something  to  say  pushes
gently  forward.  "  Here  is  one  who  can  bear  wit-
ness," they  say,  and  let  him  pass.  And  they  step
forward  out  of  the  darkness,  give  their  testimony,
and  disappear  again  into  the  darkness.

"What  does  she  say  now?"  those  standing  out-
side ask  when  some  one  comes  out.  "What  does
she  say?"


BROBY  FAIR  437

"She  shines  like  a  <  She  smile*  like  a

bride.  She  has  moved  his  arm-chair  i.  bed

and  laid  on  it  the  clothes  which  she  herself  had  woven
for  hi

Hut  then  a  silence  falls  on  the  people.  No  one
says  it,  all  know  it  at  the  same  time:  "He  is

«.-

Captain  Lcnnart  opens  his  eyes  and  sees  cvcryt  I

He  sees  his  home,  the  people,  hi  .is  chil-

,  the  clothes;  and  he  smiles.  Hut  he  has  only
waked  to  die.  He  draws  a  rattling  breath  and  gives
up  the  ghost.

Then  tin-  stories  cease,  but  a  voice  takes  up  a
death-hymn.  All  join  in,  and,  borne  on  hundreds
of  strong  voices,  the  song  rises  on  high.

It  is  earth's  farewell  greeting  to  the  departing
soul.


THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  AUNG


CHAPTER   XXII

THE  FOREST  COTTAGE

IT  was  many  years  before  the  pensioners'  reign  at
Ekeby.

The  shepherd's  boy  and  girl  played  together  in
the  wood,  built  houses  with  flat  stones,  and  picked
cloud-berries.  They  were  both  born  in  the  wood.
The  wood  was  their  home  and  mansion.  They  lived
in  peace  with  everything  there.

The  children  looked  upon  the  lynx  and  the  fox  as
their  watch-dogs,  the  weasel  was  their  cat,  hares  and
squirrels  their  cattle,  owls  and  grouse  sat  in  tlu-ir
bird-cage,  the  pines  were  their  servants,  and  the
young  birch-trees  guests  at  their  feasts.  They  knew
the  hole  where  the  viper  lay  curled  up  in  his  winter
rest;  and  when  they  had  bathed  they  had  seen  the
water-snake  come  swimming  through  the  clear  water ;
but  they  feared  neither  snake  nor  wild  creature ;  they
belonged  to  the  wood  and  it  was  their  home.  There
nothing  could  frighten  them.

Deep  in  the  wood  lay  the  cottage  where  the  boy
lived.  A  hilly  wood-path  led  to  it;  mountains  closed
it  in  and  shut  out  the  sun ;  a  bottomless  swamp  lay
near  by  and  gave  out  the  whole  year  round  an  icy
mist  Such  a  dwelling  seemed  far  from  attractive  to
the  people  on  the  plain.

The  shepherd's  boy  and  girl  were  some  day  to  be
married,  live  there  in  the  forest  cottage,  and  support


////     /OXEST  COTTAGE  439

themselves  by  the  work  of  their  hands.     But  before

arricd.  war  passed  over  the  land,  and  the

boy  ute  again  without  wound

or  injured  hmh ,   hut  he  had  been  changed  fur  life  by

mipaign.     Hi-  had  MM  feOO  much  of  the  w<-:

H  and  m.tn's  cruel  activity  against  man.    He
» .-II M  no  longer  see  the  good.

'.»>   one  saw  any  change  in  him.     With

love  of  his  childhood  he  went  t<>  tin    <  lergyman

and   had  the  banns  published.    The  forest  cottage

above  Ekcby  was  their  home,  as  they  had  planned

hut  it  was  not  a  happy  home.
The  wife  looked  at  her  husband  as  at  a  stranger,
ill  come  from   the  wars,  she   could   not
recognize  him.      His  laugh  was  hard,  and  he  spoke
but  littK-.     Slu-  was  afraid  «>t  him.

He  did  no  harm,  and  work.  .1  hard.     Still  he  was

not  liked,  for  he  thought  evil  of  everybody.     He  felt

himM  It    lik.-    a    hated    stranger.      Now  the    forest

ials  were  his  enemies.    The  mountain,  which  shut

out  t  and  the  swamp,  which  sent  up  the  i

foes.     The  forest  is  a  terrible  place  for  one
who  has  evil  thoughts.

He  who  will  live  in  the  wilderness  should  have
bright  memories.  Otherwise  he  sees  only  murder
and  oppression  among  plants  and  animals,  just  as  he
had  seen  it  before  among  men.  He  expects  evil
from  cverytl  meets.

The  soldier,  Jan  11.. k.  could  not  explain  what  was

'.ith  him;  but  he  felt  that  nothing  \
with  him      Then    was  little  peace  in  his  home.
His  sons  who  grew  up  there  were  strong,  but  \\
They  wi  v  and  brave  men,  but  they  too  lived

at  emnitv  with  all  men.


440         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BERLING

His  wife  was  tempted  by  her  sorrow  to  seek  out
the  secrets  of  the  wilderness.  In  swamp  and  thicket
she  gathered  healing  herbs.  She  could  cure  sickness,
and  give  advice  to  those  who  were  crossed  in  love.
She  won  fame  as  a  witch,  and  was  shunned,  although
slu  did  much  good.

One  day  the  wife  tried  to  speak  to  her  husband  of
his  trouble.

"  Ever  since  you  went  to  the  war,"  she  said,  "  you
have  been  so  changed.  What  did  they  do  to  you
there?"

Then  he  rose  up,  and  was  ready  to  strike  her ;  and
so  it  was  every  time  she  spoke  of  the  war,  he  be-
came mad  with  rage.  From  no  one  could  he  bear
to  hear  the  word  war,  and  it  soon  became  known.
So  people  were  careful  of  that  subject.

But  none  of  his  brothers  in  arms  could  say  that
he  had  done  more  harm  than  others.  He  had  fought
like  a  good  soldier.  It  was  only  all  the  dreadful
things  he  had  seen  which  had  frightened  him  so
that  since  then  he  saw  nothing  but  evil.  All  his
trouble  came  from  the  war.  He  thought  that  all
nature  hated  him,  because  he  had  had  a  share  in
such  things.  They  who  knew  more  could  console
themselves  that  they  had  fought  for  fatherland  and
honor.  What  did  he  know  of  such  things?  He  only
felt  that  everything  hated  him  because  he  had  shed
blood  and  done  much  injury.

When  the  major's  wife  was  driven  from  Ekeby,
he  lived  alone  in  his  cottage.  His  wife  was  dead  and
his  sons  away.  During  the  fairs  his  house  was  al-
ways full*  of  guests.  Black-haired,  swarthy  gypsies
put  up  there.  They  like  those  best  whom  others
avoid.  Small,  long-haired  horses  climbed  up  the


HIE  FOREST  COTTAGE  -\\\

wood  path,  dragging  carts  loaded  with  children  and

bundles  of  rags.      Women,   prematurely   old,   with

ires  swollen  by  smoking  and  drinking,  and  men

.  pale,  sharp  faces  and  sinewy  bodies  followed  the

carts.    When  the  gypsies  came  to  the  forest  cottage,

-  was  a  merry  life  there.     Brandy  and  cards  and

loud  talking  followed  with  them.    They  had  much

!ts  .mil  horse-dealing  and  bloody  fights.

The  Broby  Fair  began  on  a  Friday,  and  then  Cap-
mart  was  killed.  Big  Mons,  who  gave  the
death-blow,  was  son  to  the  old  man  in  the  forest
cottage.  When  the  gypsies  on  Sunday  afternoon
sat  together  there,  they  handed  old  Jan  Hbk  the
brandy  bottle  oftcner  than  usual,  and  talked  to  him  of
prison  life  and  prison  fare  and  trials;  for  they  had
often  tried  such  things.

The  old  man  sat  on  the  chopping-block  in  the
corner  and  said  little.  His  big  lack-lustre  eyes  stared
at  the  crowd  which  filled  the  room.  It  was  dusk,
but  the  wood-fire  lighted  the  room.

The  door  was  softly  opened  and  two  women  en-
i  It  was  the  young  Countess  Elizabeth  followed
by  the  daughter  of  the  Broby  clergyman.  Lovely
.uul  glowing,  she  came  into  the  circle  of  light  She
told  them  that  Gosta  Bcrling  had  not  been  seen  at
Kkcby  since  Captain  Lcnnart  died.  She  and  her
servant  had  searched  for  him  in  the  wood  the  whole
afternoon.  Now  she  saw  that  there  were  men  here
who  had  much  wandered,  and  knew  all  the  paths.
Had  they  seen  him  ?  She  had  come  in  to  rest,  and
to  ask  if  they  had  seen  him.

It  was  a  useless  question.  None  of  them  had  seen
him.

They  gave  her  a  chair.     She  sank  down  on  it  and


442         THE  STORY  OF  COST  A  BE  RUNG

sat  silent  for  a  while.  There  was  no  sound  in  tin
room.  All  looked  at  her  and  wondered  at  her.  At
last  she  grew  fn  I  at  the  silence,  started,  and

tried  to  speak  of  indifferent  things.  She  turned  to
the  old  man  in  the  corner,  "  I  think  I  have  beard
that  you  have  been  a  soldier,"  she  said.  "  Tell  me
something  of  the  war !  "

The  silence  grew  still  deeper.  The  old  man  sat  as
if  he  had  not  heard.

'  It  would  be  very  interesting  to  hear  about  the
war  from  some  one  who  had  been  there  him  sell","
continued  the  countess;  but  she  stopped  short,  for
the  Broby  clergyman's  daughter  shook  her  head  at
her.  She  must  have  said  something  forbidden.
Everybody  was  looking  at  her  as  if  she  had  offended
against  the  simplest  rule  of  propriety.  Suddenly
a  gypsy  woman  raised  her  sharp  voice  and  asked :
"  Are  you  not  she  who  has  been  countess  at  Borg?"

"  Yes,  I  am."

"  That  was  another  thing  than  running  about  the
wood  after  a  mad  priest."

The  countess  rose  and  said  farewell.  She  was  quite-
rested.  The  woman  who  had  spoken  followed  her
out  through  the  door.

"  You  understand,  countess,"  she  said,  "  I  had  to  say
something;  for  it  does  not  do  to  speak  to  the  old
man  of  war.  He  can't  bear  to  hear  the  word.  I
meant  well."

Countess  Elizabeth  hurried  away,  but  she  soon
stopped.  She  saw  the  threatening  wood,  the  dark
mountain,  and  the  reeking  swamp.  It  must  be  terrible
to  live  here  for  one  whose  soul  is  filled  with  evil  mem-
ories. She  felt  compassion  for  the  old  man  who  had
sat  there  with  the  dark  gypsies  for  company.


THE  FOREST  COTTAGE  -\-\

44  Anna  Lisa,"  she  said,      U  t  t^  turn  back!     '1
were  kind  to  us,  but  I  bchav<  1  want  to  talk

to  the  old  man  about  pleasanter  tilings."

And  happy  to  have  found  some  one  to  conn
she  went  back  to  the  cottage.

I  she  said,     i  hn  Gotta  Her  ling  is  wan

m-  lu-rr  in  the  wood,  and  means  to  take  his  own
It  is  therefore  important  that  he  be  soon  found  and
prevented.     I  and  my  in  na  Lisa,  thought  we

saw  him  sometimes,  but  then  he  disappeared.  He
keeps  to  that  pan  of  the  mountain  where  the
broom-girl  was  killed  I  happened  to  think  that  I
do  not  need  to  go  way  down  to  Ekcby  to  get  help.
line  sit  many  active  nun  who  easily  could  catch

"  Go  along,  boys!"  cried  the  gypsy  woman.
"  When  the  countess  does  not  hold  herself  too  good
to  ask  a  service  of  the  forest  people,  you  must  go  at


The  men  rose  immediately  and  went  out  to  search.

Old  Jan  H.'k  sut  ^till  and  stared  before  him  with
lustreless  eyes.  Tcrrifyingly  gloomy  and  hard,  he  sat
there.  The  young  woman  could  think  of  nothing  to
say  U>  him.  Then  she  saw  that  a  child  lay  sick  on  a
sheaf  of  straw,  and  noticed  that  a  woman  had  hurt  her
hand.  Instantly  she  began  to  care  for  the  sick.  She
was  soon  friends  with  the  gossiping  women,  and  had
show  her  the  smallest  children.

In  an  hour  the  men  came  back.  They  carried
Gosta  Berling  bound  into  the  room.  They  laid  him
down  on  the  floor  before  the  fire.  His  clothes  were
torn  and  dirty,  his  cheeks  sunken,  and  his  eyes  wild.
Terrible  had  been  his  ways  during  those  days;  he
had  lain  on  the  damp  ground;  he  had  burrowed  with


444         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA  BERLING


his  hands  and  face  in  bo^s,  dr.i^in  d  himself  over
rocks,  forced  his  way  through  the  thickest  under-
brush. Of  his  own  will  he  had  never  conic  with  the
men;  but  they  had  overpowered  and  bound  him.

When  his  wife  saw  him  so,  she  was  angry.  She  did
not  free  his  bound  limbs;  she  let  him  lie  where  he-
was  on  the  floor.  With  scorn  she  turned  from  him.

14  How  you  look  !  "  she  said.

41  I  had  never  meant  to  come  again  before  your
eyes,"  he  answered.

44  Am  I  not  your  wife?  Is  it  not  my  right  to  ex-
pect you  to  come  to  me  with  your  troubles?  In
bitter  sorrow  I  have  waited  for  you  these  two  days."

44  1  was  the  cause  of  Captain  Lennart's  misfortunes.
How  could  I  dare  to  show  myself  to  you  ?  "

44  You  are  not  often  afraid,  Gosta."

41  The  only  service  I  can  do  you,  Elizabeth,  is  to
rid  you  of  myself."

Unspeakable  contempt  flashed  from  under  her
frowning  brows  at  him.

"  You  wish  to  make  me  a  suicide's  wife  !  "

His  face  was  distorted.

"  Elizabeth,  let  us  go  out  into  the  silent  forest  and
talk."

"  Why  should  not  these  people  hear  us?  "  she  cried,
speaking  in  a  shrill  voice.  44  Are  we  better  than  any
of  them  ?  Has  any  one  of  them  caused  more  sorrow
and  injury  than  we?  They  are  the  children  of  the
forest,  and  of  the  highway  ;  they  are  hated  by  every
man.  Let  them  hear  how  sin  and  sorrow  also  follows
the  lord  of  Ekeby,  the  beloved  of  all,  Gosta  Berlin^  !
Do  you  think  your  wife  considers  herself  better  than
any  one  of  them  —  or  do  you  ?  "

He  raised  himself  with  difficulty  onto  his   elbow,


COTTAGE  44$

and  looked  at  h<  r  with  sudden  defiance.  "  I  am  not
such  a  wretch  as  you  think."

Then  she  heard  the  story  of  those  two  days.  The
first  day  Costa  wandered  about  in  the  wood,  driven
by  remorse.  He  could  not  bear  to  meet  any  one's
eye.  But  he  diil  not  think  of  dyin^.  He  meant  to
journey  '  istant  lamU.  <  >n  Sunday,  however,

he  came  down  from  the  hills  and  went  t<>  th«-  Hro
church.  Once  more  he  wished  to  see  the  people :  the
poor,  hungry  people  whom  he  had  dreamed  of  scrv-
h.itl  sat  by  the  Hroby  clergyman's  pile
i.imr,  .uul  whom  he  had  learned  to  love  when
he  saw  them  disappear  into  the  night  with  the  dead
broom-girl.

The  service  had  begun  when  he  came  to  the  church.
He  crept  up  to  the  gallery,  and  looked  down  on  the
people.  II-  iiad  felt  bitter  agony.  He  had  wanted
to  speak  to  them,  to  comfort  them  in  their  poverty
and  hopelessness.  If  he  had  only  been  allowed  to
speak  in  God's  house,  hopeless  as  he  was,  he  would
have  found  words  of  hope  and  salvation  for  them  all.

Then  he  left  the  church,  went  into  the  sacristy,  and
wrote  the  message  which  his  wife  already  knew.  He
had  promised  that  work  should  be  renewed  at  Ekeby,
and  grain  distributed  to  those  in  greatest  need.  He
had  hoped  that  his  wife  and  the  pensioners  would
fulfil  his  promises  when  he  was  gone.

As  he  came  out,  he  saw  a  coffin  st ami  ing  before  the

h -hall.     It  was  plain,  put  together  in  haste,  but

covered  with  black  crape  and  He  knew

that    it   was   Captain    I.c-nnart's.      The    people   had

begged  the  captain's  wife-  t«>  hasten   the  funeral,  so

all  those  who  had  come  to  the  Fair  could  be  at

tin-  but


446         THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

He  was  standing  and  looking  at  the  coffin,  when
a  heavy  hand  was  laid  on  his  shoulder.  Sintram  had
come  up  to  him.

"  Gosta,"  he  said,  "  if  you  want  to  play  a  regular
trick  on  a  person,  lie  down  and  die.  There  is  noth-
ing more  clever  than  to  die,  nothing  which  so
deceives  an  honest  man  who  suspects  no  harm.
Lie  you  down  and  die,  I  tell  you !  "

< . >sta  listened  with  horror  to  what  he  said.  Sin-
tram  complained  of  the  failure  of  well-laid  plans.
He  had  wanted  to  see  a  waste  about  the  shores  of
the  Lofven.  He  had  made  the  pensioners  lords  of
the  place ;  he  had  let  the  Hroby  clergyman  impov-
erish the  people;  he  had  called  forth  the  drought  ami
the  famine.  At  the  Broby  Fair  the  decisive  blow
was  to  have  fallen.  Excited  by  their  misfortu
the  people  should  have  turned  to  murder  and  rob-
bery. Then  there  should  have  been  lawsuits  to
beggar  them.  Famine,  riot,  and  every  kind  of  mis-
fortune should  have  ravaged  them.  Finally,  the
country  would  have  become  so  odious  and  detestable
that  no  one  could  have  lived  there,  and  it  would  all
have  been  Sintram's  doing.  It  would  have  been  his
joy  and  pride,  for  he  was  evil-minded.  He  loved
desert  wastes  and  uncultivated  fields.  But  this  man
who  had  known  how  to  die  at  the  right  moment  had
spoiled  it  all  for  him.

Then  Gosta  asked  him  what  would  have  been  the
good  of  it  all.

"  It  would  have  pleased  me,  Gosta,  for  I  am  bad.
I  am  the  grizzly  bear  on  the  mountain  ;  I  am  the  snow-
storm on  the  plain ;  I  like  to  kill  and  to  persecute.
Away,  I  say,  with  people  and  their  works !  I  don't
like  them.  I  can  let  them  slip  from  between  my


JHE  FOREST  COTTA  447

claws  and  cut  their  capers,  —  that  is  amusing  too  for
a  while  ;  but  now  I  am  tired  of  play,  Gotta,  now  I
I  want  to  kill  .uul  to  destroy."

1 1  c  was  mad,  quite  mad.    He  began  a  long  time  ago
as  a  joke  with  those  devilish  tricks,  and  now  his  i.
ciousncss  had  taken  the  upper  hand ;  now  he  thought
he  really  was  a  spirit  from  the  lower  regions.    He  had
fedandfosU  \il  in  him  until  it  had  taken  pos-

session of  his  soul.     For  wickedness  can  drive  people
sn.ul,  as  well  as  love  and  brooding.

lie  was  furious,  and  in  his  anger  he  began  to  tear
from  off  the  coffin ;   but  then  Costa  Ber-
ling  cried :    "  I^t  the  coffin  be  !  "

••  \\V11.  well,  well,  so  I  shall  not  touch  it !  Yes;
I  shall  throw  my  friend  Lcnnart  out  on  the  ground
and  trample  on  his  wreaths.  Do  you  not  see  what
he  has  done  to  me?  Do  you  not  sec  in  what  a  fine
gray  coach  I  am  riding?"

And  Gdsta  th<  'hat  a  couple  of  prison-vans

with  the  sheriff  and  constables  of  the  district  stood
ami  waited  ..utside  the  church-yard  wall.

"  I   «.t|.;lit   to  send  Ca;  nnart's  wife  thanks

that  she  yesterday  sat  herself  down  to  read  through

old  papers  in  order  to  find  proof  against  me  in  that

r  of  the  powder,  you  know?    Shall  I  not  let  her

v  that  she  would    have  done  better  to  occupy

herself  with  brewing  and  baking,  than  in  sending  the

tT  and  his  n  me?     Shall  I  have  nothing

for  the  tear-*   I   have-  wept  to  induce  Scharling  to  let

me  come  IKK  and  read  a  prayer  by  my  good  friend's

coffin

And  he  began  again  to  drag  on  the  crape.

i  Berling  came  close  up  to    him  and
seized  his  arms.


448         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG

"  I  will  give  anything  to  make  you  let  the  coffin
alone,"  he  said.

"  Do  what  you  like,"  said  the  madman.     "  Call  if
you   like.      I  can  always  do  something    before  the
sheriff  gets  hen-,     l-'ight  with  me,  if  you  like.     That
will  be  a  pleasing  sight  here  by  the  church.     Let  u
fight  among  the  wreaths  and  palls."

"  I  will  buy  rest  for  the  dead  at  any  price.  Take
my  life,  take  everything!  "

"  You  promise  much."

"  You  can  prove  it."

"Well,  then,  kill  yourself!"

"  I  will  do  it;  but  first  the  coffin  shall  be  safely
under  earth."

And  so  it  was.  Sintram  took  Gosta's  oath  that
he  would  not  be  alive  twelve  hours  after  Captain
Lennart  was  buried.  "  Then  I  know  that  you  can
never  be  good  for  anything,"  he  said.

It  was  easy  for  Gosta  Berling  to  promise.  He  was
glad  to  be  able  to  give  his  wife  her  liberty.  Remorse
had  made  him  long  for  death.  The  only  thing  which
troubled  him  was,  that  he  had  promised  the  major's
wife  not  to  die  as  long  as  the  Broby  clergyman's
daughter  was  a  servant  at  Ekeby.  But  Sintram  said
that  she  could  no  longer  be  considered  as  servant,
since  she  had  inherited  her  father's  fortune,  (i
objected  that  the  Broby  clergyman  had  hidden  his
treasures  so  well  that  no  one  had  been  able  to  find
them.  Then  Sintram  laughed  and  said  that  they
were  hidden  up  among  the  pigeons'  nests  in  the
church  tower.  Thereupon  he  went  away.  And  Gosta
went  back  to  the  wood  again.  It  seemed  best  to
him  to  die  at  the  place  where  the  broom-girl  had
been  killed.  He  had  wandered  there  the  whole  after-


////    /0/tEST  COTTAGE  ;v>

noon.     lie  had  seen  his  wife  in  tin  wood;  and  then

..ul  not  hail  igth  to  kill  himself.

All  this  he  told  hi*  wife,  while  he  lay  bound  on  the
floor  of  the  cottage.

>h,"  she  said  sadly,  when  he  had  finished,  ••  how

familiar  it  all  is!     Always  ready  t<>  thrust  your  hands

,  Gosta,  always  ready  to  throw  yourself

awa\  »  noble  such  things  seemed  to  me  once !

How  I  now  value  calmness  and  good  sense  I     What

good    did   you  do    the   dead    by  such  a   promise?

Wh.it  iliil  it   matter  if  Sintram  had  overturned  the

coffin  and  torn  off  the  crape?     It  would  have  been

picked  up  again  ;   there  would  have  been  found  new

c,  new  wreath-.     If  you  had  laid  your  hand  on

LMKH!  man's  coffin,  there  before  Sintram's  eyes,

and  sworn  to  live  to  help  those  poor  people  whom

he  wished  to  ruin,  that  I  should  have  commended.

If  you  had  thought,  when  you  saw  the  people  in  the

church  :   '  I  will  help  them  ;  I  will  make  use  of  all  my

strength  to  help  them,'  and  not  laid  that  burden  on

your  weak  wife,  and  on  old  men  with  failing  strength,

I  should  also  have  commended  that."

ta  Hcrling  lay  silent  for  a  while.

\Ve  pensioners  arc  not  free  men,"  he  said  at  last

e  have  promised  one  another  to  live  for  pleasure,

and  only  for  pleasure.     Woe  to  us  all  if  one  breaks

<>rd!"

"  Woe  to  you,"  said  the  countess,  indignantly,  "  if
you  shall  be  the  most  cowardly  of  the  pensioners,
ami  slower  to  improve  than  any  of  them.  Yesterday

noon  the  whole  eleven  sat  in  the  pensioners'  v
and  they  were  very  sad.     You  were  gone ;  Captain
Lcnnart  was  gone.     The  glory  and  honor  of  Ekcby
were  gone.     They  left  the  toddy  tray   untouched;


450          WE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLING

they  would  not  let  me  see  them.  Then  the  maid,
Anna  Lisa,  who  stands  here,  went  up  to  them.  \  ou
know  she  is  an  energetic  little  woman  who  for  years
has  struggled  despairingly  against  neglect  and  waste.
'  To-day  I  have  again  been  at  home  and  looked
for  father's  money/  she  said  to  the  pensioners;  '  l>ut
I  have  not  found  anything.  All  the  debts  are  paid,
and  the  drawers  and  closets  are  empty.'

We  are  sorry  for  you,  Anna  Lisa/  said  Beci
creutz.

" '  When  the  major's  wife  left  Ekeby/  continued
Anna  Lisa,  '  she  told  me  to  see  after  her  house.
And  if  I  had  found  father's  money,  I  would  have
built  up  Kkcby.  But  as  I  did  not  find  anything  else
to  take  away  with  me,  I  took  father's  shame  heap ;  for
great  shame  awaits  me  when  my  mistress  comes
again  and  asks  me  what  I  have  done  with  Ekeby.'

" '  Don't  take  so  much  to  heart  what  is  not  your
fault,  Anna  Lisa/  said  Beerencreutz  again.

"  '  But  I  did  not  take  the  shame  heap  for  myself
alone/  said  Anna  Lisa.  *  I  took  it  also  for  your
reckoning,  good  gentlemen.  Father  is  not  the  only
one  who  has  been  the  cause  of  shame  and  injury  in
this  world.'

"  And  she  went  from  one  to  the  other  of  them,  and
laid  down  some  of  the  dry  sticks  before  each.  Some
of  them  swore,  but  most  of  them  let  her  go  on.  At
last  Beerencreutz  said,  calmly  :-

"  '  It  is  well.  We  thank  you.  You  may  go  now.'
When  she  had  gone,  he  struck  the  table  with  his
clenched  hand  till  the  glasses  rang.

" '  From  this  hour/  he  said,  '  absolutely  sober.
Brandy  shall  never  again  cause  me  such  shame.'
Thereupon  he  rose  and  went  out.


THE  FOREST  COTTAGE  451

"They  followed   him  by  degrees,  all  the  others.
Do  you  know  where  they  went,  Gotta?     Well,  down
.e  point  where  the  mill  and  the  forge
had  stood,  and  tin  re  they  began  to  work.    They  be-
gan to  drag  away  the  logs  and  stones  and  clear  the
The  old  men  have  had  a  hard  time.     Many
m  have  had  sorrow.     Now  they  can  no  longer
bear  the  disgrace  of  having  ruined  Kkcby.     I  know
too  well  that  you  pensioners  are  ashamed  to  work ;
Imt  now  the  others  have  taken  that  shame  on  them.
Moreover,  Gosta,  they  mean  to  send  Anna  Lisa  up
to  the  major's  wife  to  bring  her  home.      But  you,
arc  you  doing?"
•on ml  still  an  answer  to  give  her.
A'hat  do  you  want  of  me,  of  a  dismissed  priest?
Cast  off  by  men,  hateful  to  God?"

•  I  t«M>  li.ivc  been  in  the  Hro  church  to-day,  Gosta.
I  have  a  message  to  you  from  two  women.  'Tell
Gosta,'  said  Marianne  Sinclair,  '  that  a  woman  does
not  like  to  be  ashamed  of  him  she  has  loved.'  'Tell
M,'  said  Anna  Stjiirnh<»k.  'that  all  is  now  well
with  me.  I  manage  my  own  estates.  I  do  not  think
of  love,  only  of  work.  At  Berga  too  they  have  con-
quered the  first  bitterness  of  their  sorrow.  But  we
all  grieve  for  Gosta.  We  believe  in  him  and  pray
for  him;  but  when,  when  will  he  be  a  man?'

"Do  you  hear?  Are  you  cast  off  by  men?"  con-
tinued the  countess.  "  Your  misfortune  is  that  you
have  been  met  with  too  much  love.  Women  and
men  have  loved  you.  If  you  only  jested  and  laughed,
if  you  only  sang  and  played,  they  have  forgiven
you  everything.  Whatever  it  has  pleased  you  to
do  has  seemed  right  to  them.  And  you  dare  to  call
yourself  an  outcast!  Or  are  you  hateful  to  God?


452          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA  BE  RUNG

Why  did  you  not  stay  and  sec  Captain   Lcnn
burial?

"  As  he  had  died  on  a  Fair  day,  his  fame  had  gone
far  and  wide.  After  the  service,  thousands  of  pcoplr
came  up  to  the  church.  The  funeral  procession  was
formed  by  the  town  hall.  They  were  only  waiting
for  the  old  dean.  He  was  ill  and  had  not  pic  u  lu  <1 ;
but  he  had  promised  to  come  to  Captain  Lrm
funeral.  And  at  last  he  came,  with  head  sunk  on  his
breast,  and  dreaming  his  dreams,  as  he  is  wont  to  do
now  in  his  old  age,  and  placed  himself  at  the  head  of
the  procession.  He  noticed  nothing  unusual.  He
walked  on  the  familiar  path  and  did  not  look  up.
He  read  the  prayers,  and  threw  the  earth  on  the
coffin,  and  still  noticed  nothing.  But  then  the  sex-
ton began  a  hymn.  Hundreds  and  hundreds  of
voices  joined  in.  Men,  women,  and  children  sang.
Then  the  dean  awoke  from  his  dreams.  He  passed
his  hand  over  his  eyes  and  stepped  up  on  the  mound
of  earth  to  look.  Never  had  he  seen  such  a  crowd
of  mourners.  All  were  singing;  all  had  tears  in
their  eyes,  —  all  were  mourning.

"Then  the  old  dean  began  to  tremble.  What
should  he  say  to  these  people?  He  must  say  a  word
to  comfort  them.

"When  the  song  ceased,  he  stretched  out  his  arms
over  the  people.

"  '  I  see  that  you  are  mourning,'  he  said  ;  '  and  sor-
row is  heavier  to  bear  for  one  who  has  long  to  live
than  for  me  who  will  soon  be  gone.'

"  He  stopped  dismayed.  His  voice  was  too  weak,
and  words  failed  him.

"  But  he  soon  began  again.  His  voice  had  regained
its  youthful  strength,  and  his  eyes  glowed.


THE  FOREST  COTTAGE  453

"  First,  he  told  all  he  knew  of  God's  wayfarer.  Then
he  reminded  us  that  no  outward  polish  nor  great
ability  had  made  that  man  so  honored  as  he  now
was,  but  only  that  he  had  always  followed  God's
And  now  he  asked  us  to  do  the  same.  Each
should  love  the  other,  and  help  him.  Each  should
think  well  of  the  other.  And  he  explained  every  -

;  which  had  happened  this  year.  He  said  it
was  a  preparation  for  the  time  of  love  and  happiness
which  now  was  to  be  expected.

And  we  all  felt  as  if  we  had  heard  a  prophet  speak.
All  wished  to  love  one  another ;  all  wished  to  be
good.

i  Ie  lifted  his  eyes  and  hands  and  proclaimed  peace
in  the  neighborhood.  Then  he  called  on  a  helper
for  the  people.  '  Some  one  will  come/  he  said.  '  It
is  not  God's  will  that  you  shall  perish.  God  will  find
some  one  who  will  feed  the  hungry  and  lead  you  in
His  ways.'

"  Then  we  all  thought  of  you,  Gosta.  We  knew
that  the  dean  spoke  of  you.  The  people  who  had
heard  your  message  went  home  talking  of  you.
And  you  wandered  here  in  the  wood  and  wanted
to  die !  The  people  arc  waiting  for  you,  Gosta.  In
all  the  cottages  they  arc  sitting  and  saying  that,  as
the  mad  priest  at  Ekcby  is  going  to  help  them,  all
will  be  well.  You  arc  their  hero,  Gosta.

Ves,  Gosta,  it  is  certain  that  the  old  man  meant
you,  and  that  ought  to  make  you  want  to  live.
Hut  I,  Gosta,  who  am  your  wife,  I  say  to  you  that
you  shall  go  and  do  your  duty.  You  shall  not
dream  of  being  sent  by  God,  —  any  one  can  be  t
You  shall  work  without  any  heroics ;  you  shall  not
shine  and  astonish ;  you  shall  so  manage  that  your


454         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BERLL\\,

n.iinc  is  not  too  often  heard  on  the  people's  lips,
luil  think  well  before  you  take  back  your  promise
to  Sintram.  You  have  now  got  a  certain  n;;ht  to
die,  and  life  ought  not  to  offer  you  many  attractions.
There  was  a  time  when  my  wish  was  to  go  home  to
Italy,  Gosta.  It  seemed  too  much  happiness  for  me,
a  sinner,  to  be  your  wife,  and  be  with  you  thr«
life.  But  now  I  shall  stay.  If  you  dare  to  live.  I
shall  stop;  but  do  not  await  any  joy  from  that.  I
shall  force  you  to  follow  the  weary  path  of  duty.
You  need  never  expect  words  of  joy  or  hope  from
me.  Can  a  heart  which  has  suffered  like  mine  love
again?  Tearless  and  joyless  I  shall  walk  beside  you.
Think  well,  Gosta,  before  you  choose  to  live.  We
shall  go  the  way  of  penance."

She  did  not  wait  for  his  answer.  She  nodded  to
Anna  Lisa  and  went.  When  she  came  out  into  the
wood,  she  began  to  weep  bitterly,  and  wept  until  she
reached  Ekeby.  Arrived  there,  she  remembered
that  she  had  forgotten  to  talk  of  gladder  things  than
war  to  Jan  Hok,  the  soldier.

In  the  cottage  there  was  silence  when  she  was
gone.

"  Glory  and  honor  be  to  the  Lord  God  !  "  said  the
old  soldier,  suddenly.

They  looked  at  him.  He  had  risen  and  was  look-
ing eagerly  about  him.

"  Wicked,  wicked  has  everything  been,"  he  said.
"  Everything  I  have  seen  since  I  got  my  eyes
opened  has  been  wicked.  Bad  men,  bad  women  !
Hate  and  anger  in  forest  and  plain !  But  she  is
good.  A  good  woman  has  stood  in  my  house.
When  I  am  sitting  here  alone,  I  shall  remember  her.
She  shall  be  with  me  in  the  wood."


/'//A'   /(M'A.s/    COTTAGE  4SS

He  bent  down  over  Gosta,  mr.  •<  r*,  and

,1  inin   .  :i   he   tolemnly  :  hand.

:ul  to  <  ;...!,••  lie  said  and  wxKU  .it  is

just  it.     lujt  now  you  are  not  an .

:i  my  houv  .      Sli

Tl»  l.i>-    «»M   Jan     II.-l.    CftOM    t-»    the    b..

Scharling.    "I  \sill  cairy   my  cross,"  he  said,
have   been  a  bad   n  .    liavc   had   bad

sons."    And  he  askt  allowed  to  ^o  to  prison

instead  of  his  son ;  but  that  could  not  be.

The  best  of  «>U1  stories  U  the  one  which  tells  of
how  he  followed  his  son,  walking  beside  the  prison
\  .in  ;  how  he  sl«  <ie  his  cell ;  how  he  did  not

forsake  him  until  he  had  suri«


.|y>  HIE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   J>1  .A7.AU,


CHAPTER  XXIII

MARGARETA  CELSING

A  FEW  days  before  Christmas  the  major's  wife  staru-d
on  her  journey  down  to  the  Lofsjo  district;  but  it
was  not  till  Christmas  Eve  that  she  came  to  Ekcby.
During  the  whole  journey  she  was  ill.  Yet,  in  spite
of  cold  and  fever,  people  had  never  seen  her  in  better
spirits  nor  heard  her  speak  more  friendly  words.

The  Broby  clergyman's  daughter,  who  had  been
with  her  in  the  Alfdal  forests  ever  since  October,  sat
by  her  side  in  the  sledge  and  wished  to  hasten  the
journey ;  but  she  could  not  prevent  the  old  woman
from  stopping  the  horses  and  calling  every  wayfarer
up  to  her  to  ask  for  news.

"How  is  it  with  you  all  here  in  Lofsjo?"  she
asked.

"  All  is  well,"  was  the  answer.  "  Better  times  are
coming.  The  mad  priest  there  at  Ekeby  and  his
wife  help  us  all."

"  A  good  time  has  come,"  answered  another.
"  Sintram  is  gone.  The  Ekeby  pensioners  are  work-
ing. The  Broby  clergyman's  money  is  found  in  the
Bro  church-tower.  There  is  so  much  that  the  glory
and  power  of  Ekeby  can  be  restored  with  it.  There
is  enough  too  to  get  bread  for  the  hungry."

"  Our  old  dean  has  waked  to  new  life  and  strength,"
said  a  third.  "  Every  Sunday  he  speaks  to  us  of  the
coming  of  the  Kingdom  of  God."


MARGARETA  457

Ami  t!  ;  s  wife  drove  slowly  on,  asking  every

one  she  met:    '  How  i>,  it  here?     Uo  you  not  suffer
from  want  h

And  t.  Cubbing  pain  in  her  breast

were  assuag<  \\   they  answeu-d    1.  here

arc  two  good  and  rich  women  here,  Marianne  Sinclair
and  Anna  Stjarnhok      i  lp  Gosta  Bcrling  to

go  from  house  to  house  and  sec  that  no  one  is  starv-
ing.   And  no  more  brandy  is  made  now."

1 1  was  as  if  the  major's  wife  had  sat  in  the  sledge
and  listened  to  a  long  divine  service.  She  had  come
to  a  blessed  land.  She  saw  old,  furrowed  faces
brighten,  when  they  spoke  of  the  time  which  had
come.  The  sick  forgot  their  pains  to  tell  of  the  day
of  joy.

We  all  want  to  be  like  the  good  Captain  I-cnnart,"
they  said.  "  We  all  want  to  be  good.  We  want  to
believe  good  of  every  one.  We  will  not  injure  any
one.  It  shall  hasten  the  coming  of  God's  Kingdom."

She  found  them  all  filled  with  the  same  spirit     On
larger  estates  free  dinners  were  given  to  those
who  were  in  greatest  need.     All  who  had  work  to  be
done  had  it  done  now .

She  had  never  felt  in  better  health  than  when  she
sat  there  and  let  the  cold  air  stream  into  her  aching
breast.  She  could  not  drive  by  a  single  house  with-
out stopping  and  asking.

I  .  :>  lung  is  well,"  they  all  said.  "There  was
great  distress,  but  the  good  gentlemen  from  Ekeby
help  us.  You  will  be  surprised  at  everything  which
has  been  done  there.  The  mill  is  almost  ready,  and
the  smithy  is  at  work,  and  the  burned-down  house
ready  for  the  roof."

Ah,  it  would  only  last  a  short  time !     But  still  it


THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BERLING

was  good  to  return  to  a  land  where  they  all  hclju-d
one  another  and  all  wislu d  to  do  good.     The  m.i
wife  felt  that  she  could  now  forgive  the  pension
and  she  thanked  God  for  it.

"Anna  Lisa, "  >he  said,  I  feel  as  if  I  had  already
come  into  the  heaven  of  the  blessed."

When  she  at  last  reached  Ekcby,  and  the  pension
hurried  to  help  her  out  of  the  sledge,  they  could
hardly  recognize  her,  for  she  was  as  kind  and  gentle
as  their  own  young  countess.  The  older  oiu  s,  \\ho
had  seen  her  as  a  young  girl,  whispered  to  one
another:  "  It  is  not  the  major's  wife  at  Ekeby ;  it  is
Margareta  Cclsing  who  has  come  back."

Great  was  the  pensioners'  joy  to  see  her  come  so
kind  and  so  free  from  all  thoughts  of  revenge ;  but  it
was  soon  changed  to  grief  when  they  found  hou  ill
she  was.  She  had  to  be  carried  immediately  into
the  guest-room  in  the  wing,  and  put  to  bed.  But  on
the  threshold  she  turned  and  spoke  to  them.

44  It  has  been  God's  storm,"  she  said,  —  "God's
storm.  I  know  now  that  it  has  all  been  for  the
best !  "

Then  the  door  to  the  sick-room  closed,  and  they
never  saw  her  again.

There  is  so  much  to  say  to  one  who  is  dyin;;.
The  words  throng  to  the  lips  when  one  knows  that
in  the  next  room  lies  one  whose  ears  will  soon  be
closed  for  always.  "  Ah,  my  friend,  my  friend,"  one
wants  to  say,  "can  you  forgive?  Can  you  believe-
that  I  have  loved  you  in  spite  of  everything!  Ah,
my  friend,  thanks  for  all  the  joy  you  have  given
me!"

That  will  one  say  and  so  much,  much  more.

But  the  major's  wife  lay  in  a  burning  fever,  and


MARGAKETA   C/-

voices  of  the  pensioners  could  not  reach  her.
Would  il  r  know  how  they  had  worked,  bow

they  had  taken  up  k?

After  a  little  uhil<    the  pensioners  went  down  to
the  Miuthy      There  all  work  was  stopped ;   but

v  new  coal  and  new  ore  int..   the    lurnace,   ami

made  ready  to  smelt.     They  did  not  call  the  smith,

had    gone   home   to   celeb:  nas,   but

:i selves  at  the  forge.     If  the  major's
could  only  live  until  the  hammer  got  going,  it  would
tell  her  their  story.

i^  came  and  then  night,  while  they  worked.
Several  of  them  thought,  how   strange   it  was  that

should  again  celebrate  the   ni^ht  before
mas  in  the  smithy.

Kevenhuller,  who  had  been  the  architect   of  the
mill  and  the  smithy,  and  Christ  ^h  stood  by

the  forge  and  attended  to  the  melting  iron.  Gosta
.nul  Julius  were  the  stokers.  Some  of  the  others  sat
on  the  anvil  under  the  raised  hammer,  and  others  sat
on  coal-carts  and  piles  of  pig-iron.  Lowcnborg  was
talking  to  Eberhard,  the  philosopher,  who  sat  beside
<>n  the  anvil.

dies  to-night,"  he  said.
"  Why  just  to-night?"  asked  Eberhard.

You  know  that  we  made  an  agreement  last  year.
Now  we  have  done  nothing  which  has  been  ungentle-
manly,  and  therefore  he  has  lost."

"  You  who  believe  in  such  things  know   very  well

that  we  have  done  a  great  deal  which  has  been  un-

gentlemanly.     First,  we  did  not   help    the    major's

second,  we  began  to  work;   third,  it  was  not

quite  right  that  Gosta  Bcrling  did  not  kill   himself,

:i  he  had  promised."


460         rilE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BE  RUNG

"I  have  thought  of  that  too,"  answered  L. -wm-
borg;  "but  my  opinion  is,  that  you  do  not  rightly
comprehend  the  matter.  To  act  with  the  thought  of
our  own  mean  advantage  was  forbidden  us ;  but  not  to
act  as  love  or  honor  or  our  own  salvation  demanded.
I  think  that  Sintram  has  lost."

"  Perhaps  you  are  right"

"  I  tell  you  that  I  know  it.  I  have  heard  his  sleigh-
bells  the  whole  evening,  but  they  are  not  real  bells.
We  shall  soon  have  him  here."

And  the  little  old  man  sat  and  stareftf  through  the
smithy  door,  which  stood  open,  out  at  the  bit  of  blue
sky  studded  with  stars  which  showed  through  it.

After  a  little  while  he  started  up.

"Do  you  see  him?"  he  whispered.  "There  he
comes  creeping.  Do  you  not  see  him  in  the  door-
way?"

"  I  see  nothing,"  replied  Eberhard.  "  You  are
sleepy,  that  is  the  whole  story."

"  I  saw  him  so  distinctly  against  the  sky.  He  had
on  his  long  wolfskin  coat  and  fur  cap.  Now  he  is
over  there  in  the  dark,  and  I  cannot  see  him.  Look,
now  he  is  up  by  the  furnace.  He  is  standing  close
to  Christian  Bergh ;  but  Christian  seems  not  to  see
him.  Now  he  is  bending  down  and  is  throwing
something  into  the  fire.  Oh,  how  wicked  he  looks  !
Take  care,  friends,  take  care !  "

As  he  spoke,  a  tongue  of  flame  burst  out  of  the
furnace,  and  covered  the  smiths  and  their  assistants
with  cinders  and  sparks.  No  one,  however,  was
injured.

"  He  wants  to  be  revenged,"  whispered  Lowenborg.

"  You  too  are  mad  ! "  cried  Eberhard.  "  You
ought  to  have  had  enough  of  such  things."


MAKCARETA   CELSI.  .;<  I

"  Do  you  not  sec  how  he  is  standing  there  by  the
prop  and  grinning  at  us?  1  .eve  that

lie  has  unfastened  the  hamn

started  up  and  dragged  Kberhard  with  him.
The  second  after  the  hammer  fell  thundering  down
onto  the  anvil.     It  was  only  a  clamp  which  had  ;
way;  but  Kberhard  and  Luwcnborg  bad  narrowly
escaped  death

Vou  see  that  he  has  no  power  over  us."  said
Lowenborg,  toumphantl) .  "  Hut  it  is  plain  that  he
wants  to  be  revenged."

And  he  called  Costa  Berling  to  him.

"Go  up  to  the  women,  (iosta.  Perhaps  he  will
show  himself  to  them  too.  They  are  not  so  used  as
I  to  seeing  such  things.  They  may  be  frightened.
And  take  care  of  yourself,  Gosta,  for  he  has  a  special
grudge  against  you,  and  perhaps  he  has  power  over
you  on  account  of  that  promise."

Afterwards  they  heard  that  Lowenborg  had  been
right,  and  that  Sintram  had  died  that  night.  Some
said  that  he  had  hanged  himself  in  his  cell.  Others
believed  that  the  servants  of  justice  secretly  had  him
killed,  for  the  trial  seemed  to  be  going  well  for  him.
and  it  would  never  do  to  let  him  out  again  among
the  people  in  1  Still  others  thought  that  a

dark  visitor  had  driven  up  in  a  black  carriage,  dr
by  black  horses,  and  had  taken  him  out  of  prison.
And  Lowenborg  was  not  the  only  one  who  saw  him
night.     He  was  also  seen  at  Fors  and  in  Ulrika
Dillncr's  dreams.     Many  told   how  he  had   shown
himself  to  them,  until  Ulrika  Dillncr  moved  his  body
to  the  Bro  churchyard.     She  also  had  the  evil  scr-
scnt  away  from  Fors  and  introduced  there  good
order.     After  that  it  was  no  longer  haunted.


462         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BEXLING

It  is  said  that  before  Gosta  Bcrling  reached  the
house,  a  stranger  had  come  to  the  wing  and  had  left
a  letter  for  the  major's  wife.  No  one  knew  tin  mes-
senger, but  the  letter  was  carried  in  and  laid  on  t lie-
table  beside  the  sick  woman.  Soon  after  she  became
unexpectedly  better;  the  fever  decreased,  the  pain
abated,  and  she  was  able  to  read  the  letter.

The  old  people  believe  that  her  improvement  de-
pended on  the  influence  of  the  powers  of  darkness.
Sintram  and  his  friends  would  profit  by  the  reading
of  that  letter.

It  was  a  contract  written  in  blood  on  black  paper.
The  pensioners  would  have  recognized  it.  It  was
composed  on  the  last  Christmas  Eve  in  the  smithy  at
Ekeby.

And  the  major's  wife  lay  there  now  and  read  that
since  she  had  been  a  witch,  and  had  sent  pensioners'
souls  to  hell,  she  was  condemned  to  lose  Ekeby.
That  and  other  similar  absurdities  she  read.  She
examined  the  date  and  signatures,  and  found  the
following  note  beside  Gosta's  name :  "  Because  the
major's  wife  has  taken  advantage  of  my  weakness  to
tempt  me  away  from  honest  work,  and  to  keep  me  as
pensioner  at  Ekeby,  because  she  has  made  me  Ebba
Dohna's  murderer  by  betraying  to  her  that  I  am  a
dismissed  priest,  I  sign  my  name."

The  major's  wife  slowly  folded  the  paper  and  put
it  in  its  envelope.  Then  she  lay  still  and  thought
over  what  she  had  learned.  She  understood  with
bitter  pain  that  such  was  the  people's  thought  of  her.
She  was  a  witch  and  a  sorceress  to  all  those  whom
she  had  served,  to  whom  she  had  given  work  and
bread.  This  was  her  reward.  They  could  not  be-
lieve anything  better  of  an  adulteress.


it  A  RCA  RET  A   CELS1NG  463

!  Irr  thoughts  flew.    Wild  anger  and  a  longing  for

revenge  flamed  up  in  her  fever-burning  brain.     She

had  isa.  who  with  Countess  Klizabeth  tended

her,  send  a  message  to  Hogfors  to  the  manager  and

seer.     She  wished  to  make  her.  will.

Again  she  lay  thinking.  Her  eyebrows  were  drawn
together,  her  features  were  terribly  distorted  by
suffer

•u  arc  very  ill,"  said  the  countess,  softly.
*,  more  ill  than  ever  before."

There  was  silence  again,  but  then  the  major's  •.
spoke  in  a  hard,  harsh  voice :  —

It   is  strange  to  think   that  you,  too,  countess,
you  whom  every  one  loves,  are  an  adulteress."

The  young  woman  start

Yes,  if  not  in  deed,  yet  in  thoughts  and  desire,
and  that  makes  no  difference.     I  who  lie  here  feel
it  makes  no  difference."

'•  I  know  it

"  And  yet  you  are  happy  now.  You  may  possess
him  you  loved  without  sin.  That  black  spectre  does
not  stand  between  you  when  you  meet.  You  may
belong  to  one  another  before  the  world,  love  one
another,  go  side  by  side  through  life."

"Oh,  m.ithmr,  in.i.l.i::

"  How  can  you  dare  to  stay  with  him?"  cried  the
old  woman,  with  increasing  violence.  "  Repent,  re-
pent in  time !  Go  home  to  your  father  and  mother,
befo!  come  and  curse  you.  Do  you  dare  to

consider  Gosta  Berling  your  husband  ?  Leave  him  !
I  shall  give  him  Ekeby.  I  shall  give  him  power  and
glory.  Do  you  dare  to  share  that  with  him?  Do
you  dare  to  accept  happiness  and  honor?  I  did  not
dare  to.  Do  you  remember  what  happened  to


THE  STORY  OF  GQSTA    HI-KUXG

Do  you   remember  the  Christmas  dinner  at  Kkeby?
Do  you  remember  the  cell  in  the  bailiff's  hou

)h,  madame,  we  sinners  go  here  side  by
without  happiness.  I  am  here  to  sec  that  no  joy
shall  find  a  home  by  our  hearth.  Do  you  think
I  do  not  long  for  my  home?  Oh,  bitterly  do  I  long
for  the  protection  and  support  of  home;  but  I  shall
never  again  enjoy  them.  Here  I  shall  live  in  tear
and  trembling,  knowing  that  everything  I  do  leads
to  sin  and  sorrow,  knowing  that  if  I  help  one,  I  ruin
another.  Too  weak  and  foolish  for  the  life  here,  and
yet  forced  to  live  it,  bound  by  an  everlasting  penance."

"  With  such  thoughts  we  deceive  our  hearts,"  cried
the  major's  wife ;  "  but  it  is  weakness.  You  will  not
leave  him,  that  is  the  only  reason."

Before  the  countess  could  answer,  Gosta  Berling
came  into  the  room.

"  Come  here,  Gosta,"  said  the  major's  wife  instantly,
and  her  voice  grew  still  sharper  and  harder.  "  Come
here,  you  whom  everybody  praises.  You  shall  now
hear  what  has  happened  to  your  old  friend  whom  you
allowed  to  wander  about  the  country,  despised  and
forsaken.

"I  will  first  tell  you  what  happened  vist  spr
when  I  came  home  to  my  mother,  for  you  ought  to
know  the  end  of  that  story.

"In  March  I  reached  the  iron-works  in  the  Alfdal
forest,  Gosta.  Little  better  than  a  beggar  I  looked.
They  told  me  that  my  mother  was  in  the  dairy.  So  I
went  there,  and  stood  for  a  long  while  silent  at  the  door.
There  were  long  shelves  round  about  the  room,  and
on  them  stood  shining  copper  pans  filled  with  milk.
And  my  mother,  who  was  over  ninety  years  old,  took
down  pan  after  pan  and  skimmed  off  the  cream.  She


MARGARET  A   CELS1NG  .j'-5

was  active  enough,  the  old  woman ;  but  I  saw  well
enough  how  hard  it  was  for  her  to  a  up  her

back  to  reach  the  pans.     I  did  not  know  if  she  had
seen  me ;   but  after  a  while  she  spoke  to   me   in  a
'us,  shrill  voice.

.thing  has  happened  to  you  as  I  wished/

she  said.   I  wanted  to  speak  and  to  ask  her  to  forgive

is  a  waste  of  trouble.     She  did  not  hear

a  word  of  it,  —  she  was  stone-deaf.     Hut  after  a  while

she  spoke  again :  '  You  can  come  and  help  me/  she

nt  in  and  skimmed  the  milk.  I  took  the
pans  in  order,  and  put  everything  in  its  place,  and
skimmed  just  deep  enough,  and  she  was  pleased.  She
had  never  been  able  to  trust  any  of  the  maids  to  skim
the  milk ;  but  I  knew  of  old  how  she  liked  to  have  it.
Now  you  can  take  charge  of  this  work/  she  said.
And  then  I  knew  that  she  had  forgiven  me.

"  And  afterwards  all  at  once   it  seemed  as  if  she

could  not  work  any  more.     She  sat  in  her  arm-chair

and  slept  almost  all  day.     She  died  two  weeks  before

>tmas.    I  should  have  liked  to  have  come  before,

i.  but  I  could  not  leave  her."

She  stoj  ied.  She  began  to  find  breathing  difficult ;
but  she  made  an  effort  and  went  on :  —

'  It  is  true,  Gosta,  that  I  wished  to  keep  you  near
me  at  Kkeby.  There  is  something  about  you  which
makes  every  one  rejoice  to  be  with  you.  If  you  had
shown  a  wish  to  be  a  settled  man,  I  would  have  given
you  much  pow<  .vays  hoped  that  you  would

find  a  good  wife.  First,  I  thought  that  it  would  be
Marianne  Sinclair,  for  I  saw  that  she  loved  you  al-
ready, when  you  lived  as  wood-cutter  in  the  wood.
Then  I  thought  that  it  would  be  Ebba  Dohna.  and


466         THE  STORY  OF  G&STA   BERLING

one  day  I  drove  over  to  Borg  and  told  her  that  if  she
would  have  you  for  husband,  I  would  leave  you
Ekeby  in  my  will.  If  I  did  wrong  in  that,  you  must
forgive  me."

Gbsta  was  kneeling  by  the  bed  with  his  face  hidden
in  the  blankets,  and  was  moaning  bitterly.

44  Tell  me,  Gbsta,  how  you  mean  to  live?  How  shall
you  support  your  wife?  Tell  me  that  You  know  that
I  have  always  wished  you  well."  And  Gbsta  answered
her  smiling,  while  his  heart  almost  burst  with  pain.

41  In  the  old  days,  when  I  tried  to  be  a  laborer  here
at  Ekeby,  you  gave  me  a  cottage  to  live  in,  and  it  is
still  mine.  This  autumn  I  have  put  it  quite  in  order.
Lbwenborg  has  helped  me,  and  we  have  whitewashed
the  ceilings  and  hung  the  walls  with  paper  and
painted  them.  The  inner  little  room  Lbwenborg  calls
the  countess's  boudoir,  and  he  has  gone  through  all  the
farm-houses  round  about  for  furniture,  which  has  come
there  from  manor-house  auctions.  He  has  bought
them,  so  that  there  we  have  now  high-backed  arm-
chairs and  chests  of  drawers  with  shining  mountings.
But  in  the  outer  big  room  stands  the  young  wife's
weaving-loom  and  my  lathe.  Household  utensils  and
all  kinds  of  things  are  there,  and  there  Lbwenborg
and  I  have  already  sat  many  evenings  and  talked  of
how  the  young  countess  and  I  will  have  it  in  the
cottage.  But  my  wife  did  not  know  it  till  now.
We  wanted  to  tell  her  when  we  should  leave  Ekeby."

"  Go  on,  Gbsta."

"  Lbwenborg  was  always  saying  that  a  maid  was
needed  in  the  house.  '  In  the  summer  it  is  lovely
here  in  the  birch  grove/  he  used  to  say ;  '  but  in  winter
it  will  be  too  lonely  for  the  young  wife.  You  will
have  to  have  a  maid,  Gbsta'


MARGARET*  \'C  467

"  And  I  agreed  with  him.  hut  I  .h<l  not  know  how  I
could  afford  to  keep  one.  Then  he  came  one  day
and  carried  down  his  music,  and  his  table  with  t he-
painted  keyboard,  and  put  it  in  the  cottage.  *  It  is
you,  Lowenborg,  who  arc  going  to  b<  I  said

to  him.  Hi-  answered  that  lie  would  be  needed.  Did  I
mean  the  young  countess  to  cook  the  food,  and  to
carry  wood  and  water?  No,  I  had  not  meant  her
to  do  anything  at  all,  as  long  as  I  had  a  pair  of  anus
••ut  he  still  thought  that  it  would  be
best  If  there  were  two  of  us,  so  that  she  might  sit  the
whole  day  on  her  sofa  and  embroider.  I  could  never
know  how  much  waiting  upon  such  a  little  woman
needed,  he  s

"  Go  on,"  said  the  major's  wife.  "  It  eases  my
pain.  Did  you  think  that  your  young  countess
would  be  willing  to  live  in  a  cottn

He  wondered  at  her  scornful  tone,  but  continued :

"  No,  I  did  not  dare  to  think  it  ;  but  it  would  have
been  so  perfect  if  she  had  been  willing.     It  is  thirty
miles  from  any  doctor.     She,  who  has  a  light  I;
and  a  tender  heart,  would  have  had  work  enough  to
tend  wounds  and  allay  fevers.     And  I  thought  that
everybody  in  trouble  would  find  the  way  to  the  lady
mistress   in    the    forest    cottage.      There    is    so    much
ess  among  the  poor  which  kind   words  and  a
help."

11  But  you  yourself,  Gosta  Berling?  "

"  I   shall  have  my  work  at  the  carpenter's  bench
and  lathe.     I  shall  hereafter  live  my  own  life.     If  my
will  not  follow  me,  I  cannot  help  it.     If  some
one  should  offer  me  all  the  riches  of  the  universe,
it  would  ipt  me.     I  want  to  live  my  own  life.

Now  I  shall  be  and  remain  a  poor  man  among  the


468         THE  STORY  OF  COST  A   BE  RUNG

peasants,  and  help  them  with  whatever  I  can.     They
need  some  one  to  play  the  polka  for  them  at
dings  and   at   Christmas;    they   need   some   on<
write  letters  to  their  distant  sons,  —  and  that  some  one
I  will  be.     But  I  must  be  poor."

"  It  will  be  a  gloomy  life  for  you,  Gosta."

"  Oh,  no,  it  would  not  be  if  we  were  but  two  who
kept  together.  The  rich  and  happy  would  come  to
us  as  well  as  the  poor.  It  would  be  gay  enougli  in
our  cottage.  Our  guests  would  not  care  if  the  food
was  cooked  right  before  their  eyes,  or  be  shocked
that  two  must  eat  from  the  same  pi

"And  what  would  be  the  good  of  it  all,  Gosta?
What  praise  would  you  win  ? "

"Great  would  be  my  reward  if  the  poor  would
remember  me  for  a  year  or  two  after  my  death.  I
should  have  done  some  good  if  I  had  planted  a
couple  of  apple-trees  at  the  house-corners,  if  I  had
taught  the  country  fiddlers  some  of  the  old  tunes,  and
if  the  shepherd  children  could  have  learnt  a  few  good
songs  to  sing  in  the  wood-paths.

"  You  can  believe  me,  I  am  the  same  mad  Gosta
Berling  that  I  was  before.  A  country  fiddler  is  all
I  can  be,  but  that  is  enough.  I  have  many  sins  to
atone  for.  To  weep  and  to  repent  is  not  for  me.  I
shall  give  the  poor  pleasure,  that  is  my  penance."

"  Gosta,"  said  the  major's  wife,  "  it  is  too  humble
a  life  for  a  man  with  your  powers.  I  will  give  you
Ekeby."

"  Oh,"  he  cried  in  terror,  "  do  not  make  me  rich  !
Do  not  put  such  duties  upon  me !  Do  not  part  me
from  the  poor !  "

"  I  will  give  Ekeby  to  you  and  the  pensioners,"
repeated  the  major's  wife.  "  You  are  a  capable  man,


MARCARETA   CELSING  469

bless.      I    say   like    my
'  You  shall  take  charge  of  this  u
"  No,  we  could  not  accept  it,  —  we  who  have  rais-

you  and  caused  you  such  pai
•vill  -iv«  ,  do  you  hear?"

She  spoke  bitterly  and  harshly,  without  kindness.

ty.

i  >  •  'It  would  only  make

ui'l  dn.  .igain.     God  in  Heaven,

pensioners !     What  would  become  of  us
I  \        I  .kcby,  Gosta  ;  but  then  you  must

promise  to  set  your  wife  free.     Such  a  delicate  little
woman  is  not  for  you.   She  has  had  to  suffer  too  much
in  tin   land  of  the  bear.     She  is  longing  for  her
it  native  country.     You  shall    let  her  go.     That
is  why  I  give  you  Kkcby."

Hut  then  (\mntcss  Kli/a!>eth  came  forward  to  the
major's  wife  and  knelt  by  the  bed.

I  do  not  long  any  more.  He  who  is  my  husband
has  solved  the  problem,  and  found  the  life  I  can  live.
No  longer  sh.ill  I  need  to  go  stern  and  cold  beside
him,  and  remind  htm  of  repentance  and  atonement.
Povi  d  hard  work  will  do  that.  The

paths  which  lead  to  the  poor  and  sick  I  can  follow
without  MIL  I  am  no  longer  afraid  of  the  life  here
in  the  north.  But  do  not  make  him  rich;  then  I  do
not  dare  to  stay. "

The  major's  wife  raised  herself  in  the  bed.
Y         :  ippiness    for    yourselves,"    she

nd  threatened  them  with  clenched  fists,  —
44  happiness  and  blessing.  No,  let  Ekcby  be  the
pensioners',  that  they  may  be  ruined.  Let  man  and
wife  be  parted,  that  they  may  be  ruined!  I  am  a
witch,  I  am  a  sorceress,  I  shall  incite  you  to  evil-
doing.  I  shall  be  what  my  reputation  is."


470         THE  STORY  OF  GOSTA   BEKLL\\J

She  seized  the  letter  and  thing  it  in  Gosta's  face.
The  black  paper  fluttered  out  and  fell  on  the  floor.
Gosta  knew  it  too  well.

"  You  have  sinned  against  me,  Gosta.  You  h
misjudged  one  who  has  been  a  second  mother  to  you.
Do  you  dare  to  refuse  your  punishment?  You  shall
accept  Ekeby,  and  it  shall  ruin  you,  for  you  are
weak.  You  shall  send  home  your  wife,  so  that
there  will  be  no  one  to  save  you.  You  shall  die
with  a  name  as  hated  as  mine.  Margareta  Celsius's
obituary  is  that  of  a  witch.  Yours  shall  be  that  of
a  spendthrift  and  an  oppressor  of  the  poor."

She  sank  back  on  the  pillows,  and  all  was  still.
Through  the  silence  rang  a  muffled  blow,  now  one
and  then  another.  The  sledge-hammer  had  begun
its  far-echoing  work.

"  Listen,"  said  Gosta  Berling, "  so  sounds  Margareta
Celsing's  obituary !  That  is  not  a  prank  of  drunken
pensioners ;  that  is  the  song  of  the  victory  of  labor,
raised  in  honor  of  a  good,  old  worker.  Do  you  hear
what  the  hammer  says  ?  '  Thanks, '  it  says ;  '  thanks
for  good  work;  thanks  for  bread,  which  you  have
L,riven  the  poor;  thanks  for  roads,  which  you  have
opened;  thanks  for  districts,  which  you  have  culti-
vated !  Thanks  for  pleasure,  with  which  you  have
filled  your  halls! '— '  Thanks,'  it  says,  'and  sleep
in  peace!  Your  work  shall  live  and  continue.
Your  house  shall  always  be  a  home  for  happy  labor. '
—  '  Thanks,'  it  says,  '  and  do  not  judge  us  who  have
sinned!  You  who  are  now  starting  on  the  journey
to  the  regions  of  peace,  think  gentle  thoughts  of  us
who  still  live.'"

Gosta  ceased,  but  the  sledge-hammer  went  on
speaking.  All  the  voices  which  had  ever  spoken


MARGARETA   CELSING  471

kindly  to  the  major's  wife  were  mingled  with  the  ring
<>i  the  hammer.     Gradually  IK i  features  relaxed,  as
.idow  of  death  had  fallen  over  her.

Anna  Lisa  came  in  and  announced  that  the  gentle-
men  tn>m  Hogfors  had  come.  The  major's  wife  let
tiu m  go.  She  would  not  make  any  will.

Gosta  lierling,  man  of  many  deeds,"  she
said,  "so  you  have  conquered  once  more.     Bend
and  let  me  bless  you!"

The  fever  returned  with  redoubled  strength.  The
death-rattle  began.  The  body  toiled  through  dreary
suffering;  but  the  spirit  soon  knew  nothing  of  it.
It  began  to  gaze  into  the  heaven  which  is  opened
for  the  dying.

So  an  hour  passed,  and  the  short  death-struggle
was  over.     She  lay  there  so  peaceful  and  beautiful
those  about  her  were  deeply  moved.

"My  dear  old  mistress,"  said  Gosta,  "so  have  I
seen  you  once  before.  Now  has  Margareta  Cclsing
come  back  to  life.  Now  she  will  never  again  yield
to  the  major's  wife  at  Kkeby."

When  the  pensioners  came  in  from  the  forge,  they
were  met  by  the  news  of  Margareta  Celsing's  death.

*  1  >id  she  hear  the  ham:  they  asked.

She  had   done  so,   and  they  could  be  satisfied.

They  heard,  too,  that  she  had  meant  to  give  Ekeby

iem;  but  that  the  will  had  never  been  drawn.

That  they  considered  a  great  honor,  and  rejoiced  over

it  as  long  as  they  lived.     But  no  one  ever  heard

them  lament  over  the  riches  they  had  lost.

is  also  said  that  on  that  Christmas  night  Gosta
Berling  stood  by  his  young  wife's  side  and  made  his
last  speech  to  the  pensioners.  He  was  grieved  at


472          THE  STORY  OF  COSTA   BE  RUNG

tluir  fate  when  they  now  must  all  leave  Ekeby.
The  ailments  of  old  age  awaited  them.  The  old  and
worn-out  find  a  cold  welcome

And  so  he  spoke  to  them.  Once  more  he  called
them  old  gods  and  knights  who  had  risen  up  to
bring  pleasure  into  the  land  of  iron.  1  Jut  he  lamented
that  the  pleasure  garden  where  the  butterfly-winged
pleasure  roves  is  filled  with  destructive  caterpillars,
and  that  its  fruits  arc  withered.

Well  he  knew  that  pleasure  was  a  good  to  the
children  of  the  earth,  and  it  must  exist.  But,  like  a
heavy  riddle,  the  question  always  lay  upon  the  world,
how  a  man  could  be  both  gay  and  good.  The  easiest
thing  and  yet  the  hardest,  he  called  it.  Hitherto
they  had  not  been  able  to  solve  the  problem.  Now
he  wanted  to  believe  that  they  had  learned  it,  that
they  had  all  learned  it  during  that  year  of  joy  and
sorrow,  of  happiness  and  despair.

You  dear  old  people !  In  the  old  days  you  gave
me  precious  gifts.  But  what  have  I  given  you  ?

Perhaps  it  may  gladden  you  that  your  names  sound
again  in  connection  with  the  dear  old  places  ?  May
all  the  brightness  which  belonged  to  your  life  fall
again  over  the  tracts  where  you  have  lived !  Borg
still  stands;  Bjorne  still  stands;  Ekeby  still  lies  by
lake  Lofven,  surrounded  by  falls  and  lake,  by  park
and  smiling  meadows;  and  when  one  stands  on  the
broad  terraces,  legends  swarm  about  one  like  the
bees  of  summer.

But,  speaking  of  bees,  let  me  tell  one  more  old
story.  The  little  Ruster,  who  went  as  a  drummer
at  the  head  of  the  Swedish  army,  when  in  1813  it
marched  into  Germany,  could  never  weary  of  telling


MAKCAKETA  CELSING  473

stories  of  that  wonderful  land  in  the  south.  The
people  there  were  as  tall  as  church  towers,  the
swallows  were  as  big  as  eagles,  the  bees  as  geese.

"Well,  butthcbcc-hivcs?"

"The  bee-hives  were  like  our  ordinary  bee-hives."

•wdid  the  bees  get  in?"

Well,  that  they  had  to  look  out  for/'  said  the
little   K

Dear  reader,  must  I  say  the  same?  The  giant
bees  of  fancy  have  now  swarmed  about  us  for  a  year
and  a  day;  but  how  they  are  going  to  come  into  the
bee-hive  of  fact,  that  they  really  must  find  out  for
themselves.


THE  END


ftyotoncal  Romanrrs.

999999999

THE  KINO'S  HENCHMAN.  A  Chronicle  of  the  9*
teen1  • .  Brought  to  light  and  edited  by  WILLIAM

HKNRV  JOHNSON.  lamo.  Cloth,  extra,  gilt  top,  $1.50.
A  story  of  pure  love  and  stirring  action.  11  purports  to  be

told  by  an  inseparable  attendant  of  Henry  of  Navarre,  and  that

hero  of  a  hundred  fights  and  as  many  gallant  adventures  is

made  to  live  again  for  us.

Wt  do*  the  book  rdumnUr.    The  hoar*

-*- M ..'...     i         I  '    .     /*.


MfV_B     i        ,         _- *j *^«-    A  ••     AsV^    i^t^M^t    ,*M  •  W*    *.««MW    IftA^ftf     L*      VI*

Wut  w  mow  ttoucoADM  1MB  a*  laumi  ac  IM  Mary  itMa         >ir.
MiniTi'r  lnt«W»«  buig ht  MM!  thorough  uade
Iht  book  b  Wcymaa  !•  riconwt  actMty,  it  b


Mr.  lotuMon  bu  cauffht  the  tpiiit  of  the  period,  and  tu»  plated  te
H«ryol>i«rmrr«»  tmthlul  aad  OMtmormbk  hbtorkal  portrait.  -  71*  Jfe/

«W£v,  York.

THE  COUNTS  SNUFF-BOX.  A  Romance  of  Wash-
ington and  Buzzard's  Bay  in  the  War  of  1812.  By
GEORGE  R.  R.  RIVERS,  author  of  "The  Governor's
Garden,"  "Captain  Shays,  a  Populist  of  1786.
Illustrated  by  Clyde  O.  DC  Land.  12  mo.  Cloth,  gilt
top,  $1.50.

The  story  of  "The  Count's  Snuff- Box"  is  founded  on  an
iont  of  the  War  of  1812.  In  January  of  that  year  an  adven-
turer, calling  himself  Count  de  Crillon,  appeared  in  Washington,
and  for  some  weeks  was  the  central  social  attraction  of  the  capi-
tal. He  bore  letters  from  prominent  members  of  Napoleon's
government  to  M.  Scrui  Minister  from  France.  His

motive  was  ostensibly  to  help  France,  and  injure  Great  Britain
and  the  Federalists,  but  his  real  object  was  to  secure  money  for
John  Henry's  letters.  In  this  he  finally  succeeded,  the  United
States  government  purchasing  them  for  fifty  thousand  dollars.

CAPTAIN  SHAYS.     A  Populist  of  1786.     By  GEOMI
R.  R.  RIVERS,   author  of  "The  Count's
1 6 mo.     Cloth,  extra,  gilt  top,  $1.25.


HISTORICAL  ROMANCES.


THE  GOVERNOR'S  GARDEN.  A  Relation  of  some
Passages  in  the  Life  of  His  Excellency,  Thomas  Hut<  h-
inson,  sometime  Captain-General  and  Governor- in- Chu-f
of  His  Majesty's  Province  of  Massachusetts  Bay.  By
GEORGE  R.  K.  RIVKRS.  With  frontispiece.  i2mo.
Cloth,  $1.50.

IN  BUFF  AND  BLUE.  Being  Certain  Portions  from
the  Diary  of  Richard  Hilton,  Gentleman  of  Haslet's
Regiment  of  Delaware  Foot,  in  our  Ever  Glorious
War  of  Independence.  By  GEORGE  BRYDGES  RODNKV.
i6mo.  Cloth,  extra,  gilt  top,  $1.25.

HASSAN,  A   FELLAH.     A  Romance  of  Palestine.     By

HENRY  GILLMAN.     Crown  8vo.     Cloth,  $2.00.

The  author  of  this  powerful  romance  lived  in  Palestine  for
over  five  years,  and  during  his  residence  there  had  unusual  and
peculiar  advantages  for  seeing  and  knowing  the  people  and  the
country.  He  has  selected  the  present  time  for  the  story.  Init
has  drawn  freely  from  all  the  rich  treasures  of  the  past  for  orna-
ment The  portions  connected  with  the  "Thar,"  or  blood-feud
between  the  Syrian  villages,  and  the  insurrection  in  Crete  are
not  only  of  uncommon  interest  and  power,  but  are  also  intensely
dramatic.

A  biblical,  patriarchal,  pastoral  spirit  pervades  it.  Indeed,  the  whole  book
is  saturated  with  the  author's  reverence  for  the  Holy  Land,  its  legends,  tradi-
tions, glory  misery.  —  its  romance,  in  a  word,  and  its  one  supreme  glory,  the
impress  of  the  Chosen  of  God  and  of  the  Master  who  walked  among  them.  -
The  Independent.

Mr.  Gillman  has  certainly  opened  up  a  new  field  of  fiction.  The  book
is  a  marvel  of  power,  acute  insight,  and  clever  manipulation  of  thoroughly
grounded  truths.  The  story  is  as  much  of  a  giant  in  fiction  as  its  hero  is
among  men. — Boston  Herald.

The  book  is  one  that  seems  destined  to  take  hold  of  the  popular  heart
as  strongly  as  did  "  Ben  Hur  "  .  r  "  Quo  Vadis,"  nor  is  it  less  worthy  of  such
popularity  than  either  of  those  named.  —  Art  Interchange.

It  is  romance  of  the  strongest  type.  Many  pages  fairly  glow  with  color,
as  the  author  in  his  enthusiasm  portrays  the  natural  beauties  of  the  Holy
I  jmd.  —  Publu  Opinion,

The  hero  of  "  Hassan,  a  Fellah."  will  be  a  revelation  even  to  those  who
carry  their  ethnological  studies  beyond  the  realm  of  fiction.  —  N.  Y.  Times.


HISTOKICAL  ROMANCES.


QUO  VAI  A   Narrative  of  the  Time  of

Nnnutwicz.     Translated  from  the  Polish
••>.     i  •:••  .  map  and

photogravure  plates.    Crown  8vo,    Cloth,  1 2.00.
ion.     i2mo.     Cloth,  75  cents.


<         .  .        i  M^-l        ff  m^  m        ———  —  -I *      A^^M!       i^      ^M»    l^»t      tlh«MAK

w  lln  nun  w*  vww,  •pfMiMOt  KOHM^  y  ••*!  •no  •WIWL  m  nti  MM  w
Tnt  |4itui4  ol  the  glut  L  rut*  ktmgfling  with  the  wild  anttnnl  »  °n*  mH  "•

"Uctt  Hut  '         IL>H0*C»»>

urtte'tRariUibnlbMkl  and  fluent  that  ont  In*  it  dMimlt  to
mHM  thmt  he  i.  rrndtnc  a  toMMbttM.  -  /»4f YW«//fc«  O«r<A  Aft. W.

>  O  VADIS."  lujusnuTCi)  HOLIDAY  EomoN.  With
maps  and  plans  of  Ancient  Rome,  and  twenty-seven
photogravure  plates  from  pictures  by  Howard  Pyle,

lyden,  and  other  artists.
2  vote.     8vo.     Cloth,  extra,  g  box,  $6.00.

ished  Ixrvant  morocco,  extra,  gilt  top,  1 12.00.
\\irh    HRE    AND   SWORD.     An  Historical  Novel  of
Poland  and  Russia.     By  HENRYK  SIENKIEWKZ.    Trans-
lated from  the  Polish  by  Jeremiah  C'urtin.     With  por-

of  the  author,  plates,  and  map.     Library  E*i
Crown  8vo.     Cloth,  $2.00.

Popular  i2mo.     Cloth.     $1.00.

7"4v*    wWw/Jf    ssfA//F"SJ     fW4t Mi*^   W m    tMwVst4     •»    rf'^H    ^f    <*^ssfA(f f ^»/   <^***  J*^t%

f  MrfM,  nrr/T   tkamgn.  and  **t*r(img  imtfrttt  if
of  Dumai.  —  New  York  Tribune.

h  Fire  and  Sword"  is  the  first  of  a  trilogy  o
romances  of  Poland,  Russia,  and  Sweden.    Their  public
has  been  received  throughout  the  United  States  by  readers  and

re.     Action  in  the  field  has  never

•  been  described  in  any  language  so  briefly,  so  vividly,

and  v.  .1  marvellous  expression  of  energy.    The  famous

character  of  Zagloba  has  been  described  as  "a  curious  and

fascinating  combination   of    F.ilstaft  and    Ulysses.*     Charles

in     Hirper's  Magazine,"  affirms  that  the  Polish

author  has  in  Zagtoba/fom  a  *tw  crtatie*  to  liUrmturt.


WICAL  ROMANCES.


THE  DELUGE.    An  Historical  Novel  of  Poland,  5*

and  Russia.      By  HI.NK\K  SIKNKIEWICZ.     Translated  from
the  Polish  by  Jeremiah  Oirtin.     A  sojm-1  to  "  With  !
and  Sword."     With  a  map  of  the  country  at  the  period
in  which  the  events  of  ••  1  he   I  )elu^e  "  and  "  With  l-'irc
and    Sword"    take    place.     Library  Edition.     2    \
«      \vn  8vo.     Cloth,  $3.00.

Popular  Kdition.     2  vols.     i2mo.     Cloth,  $1.50.

//  even  surtassrs  in  interest  and  power  the  same  author's  rom,i
whole  sto


"  With  Fire  and  Sword."  .  .  .    The  whole  story  swarms  with  brilliin
tures  of  war,  and  with  personal  episodes  of  battle  and  adventure.  —  New
York  Tribune.

Marvellous  in  its  grand  descriptions.  —  Chicago  Inter-Ocean.

<  >nc  of  the  direct  anointed  line  of  the  kings  of  itory-telling.  —  Literary

A  really  great  novelist.  .  .  .  To  match  this  story  one  must  turn  to  the
masterpieces  of  Scott  and  Dumas.  —  Philadelphia  Press.

PAN  MICHAEL.    An  Historical  Novel  of  Poland,  K

and  the  Ukraine.  By  HKNRYK  SIKNKIKWK  •/.  Trans-
Jated  from  the  Polish  by  Jeremiah  Curtin.  A  sequel  to
"With  Fire  and  Sword"  and  "The  Deluge."  Library
Edition.  Crown  8vo.  Cloth,  $2.00.

Popular  Edition.      i2mo.     Cloth,  75  cents.

This  work  completes  the  great  Polish  trilogy.  The  period
of  the  story  is  1668-1674,  and  the  principal  historical  event  is
the  Turkish  invasion  of  1672.  Pan  Michael,  a  favorite  charac-
ter in  the  preceding  stories,  and  the  incomparable  Zagloba  figure
throughout  the  novel.  The  most  important  historical  character
introduced  is  Sobieski,  who  was  elected  king  in  1674.

No  word  less  than  "  Excelsior  "  will  justly  describe  the  achievement  of
the  trilogy  of  novels  of  which  "  Pan  Michael  "  is  the  last.  —  Baltimore
American.

There  is  no  falling  off  in  interest  in  this  third  and  last  book  of  the  series  ;
again  Sienkiewicz  looms  as  one  of  the  great  novel  writers  of  the  world.  —
Tkt  Nation.


From  the  artistic  standpoint,  to  have  created  the  character  of
was  a  feat  comparable  with  Shakespeare's  creation  of   Falstaff  and  Goethe's
creation  of  Mephistopheles.  —  The  Dial.


tNMOMKB.    The  H  of  the  Greek

Translated  from  •  ic  of  STEPHANOS  THEDOUBUS

XEMOB  by  Edwin  A.  Grosvcnor,  Professor  of
History  in  Amber*  College,  tod  author  of  "
nople."  tamo.  Cloth,  11.50.

Modem  Greece  may  be  proud  of  having  given  the  world  an
historical  ronu  wed  merely  as  a  story,  it  b  a

work  of  absorbing  interest  in  its  plot  and  execution.  At  the
same  time,  no  other  book,  whether  description,  travels,  or  pure
romance,  offers  so  faithful  and  complete  a  picture  of  <  .rerk  life
today.  The  reader  follows  the  vicissitudes  of  hero  and  heroine
rapt  attention,  and  all  the  time  seems  breathing  Greek  air
under  a  Greek  sky  and  living  among  the  Greeks.

4


AbookwhU'
•I  fstdaris*  work.  -  Nc*  Y~k  Htmt  J,*


I   AM  THE   KINO.     Being  the  Account  of  some  Hap-

>KS  in  *  •<•*  Bersac,  Crusader

MIEPPARD  STEVENS.     i6mo.  M.*S.

is  a  romantic  story  of  the  days  of  Saladin  and  Richard
Ccrur  dc  Leon.     Its  author  has  wrou.  t  much  of   the

color  of   the  home  lift-  of  the  period  and  many  of  the  quaint

The  scene  of  the  story  is  in  part
-land  and  in  part  in  the  Holy  Land.

I  Ml     HliAD   OF  A  HUNDRED.     Being  an  Account  of
in   Passages  in  the  I  imphrcy  Huntoon,

.  somctymc  an  Officer  in  the  Colony  of  Virginia,
-d  by  MAUD  WILDER  GOODWIN,  author  of  "  The  Col-
onial Cavalier."     i6mo.     Ckxh,  extra,  gilt  top,  $1.25.


It  b  M  MM!  a»d  pm  a  plm  of  fiction  n  we  IMVC  rwd  for  mmj  a  «ky,

«,  the  Mme  noble  ak.  the  lofty  tot*
UMM  of  -  LOOM  DOOM."  -  Tkt  ~


HISTORICAL  ROMANCES.


WHITE  APRONS.  A  Romance  of  K.mn's  Rebellion,
Virginia,  1676.  By  MAUD  WILDER  GOODWIN.  i6mo.
Cloth,  extra,  gilt  top,  $1.25.

A  beautiful  little  story,  sweet  and  inspiring,  not  less  clever  than
New  York  Times.

A  charming  story.  ...  Its  fidelity  to  the  conditions  prevailing  in  the
Virginia  colony  at  the  time  is  carefully  sustained.  —  Tkt  Review  of  AV:

A   WOMAN  OF  SHAWMUT.     A  Romance  of  Colonial
'limes.     Boston,  1640.     By  EDMUND  JANES  CARPI
With  twelve  charming  full-page  illustrations  and  IUIUHT-
ous   chapter  headings  from   pen-and-ink  drawings   by

1  .  1 .  Merrill.     i6mo.    Cloth,  extra,  gilt  top,  with  cameo
design,  11.25.

CINQ-MARS;  or,  A  Conspiracy  under  Ixnris  XIII.  By
Count  ALFRED  DE  VIGNY.  Translated  by  William
Hazlitt.  With  thirteen  exquisite  full-page  etchings  by
Gaujean  from  designs  by  A.  Dawant,  and  numerous
smaller  illustrations  (head  and  tail  pieces)  in  the  text.

2  vols.     8vo.     Cloth,  gilt  top,  $6.00.

It  is  one  of  the  masterpieces  of  French  romantic  fiction,  .  .  .  and  a  book
to  be  always  read  and  remembered.  —  New  York  Mail  and  Express.

THE  PRINCESS  OF  CLEVES.  An  Historical  Ro-
mance of  the  Court  of  Henry  II.  By  MADAME  m  I.A
FAYETTE.  With  preface  by  Anatole  France.  Trans-
lated by  Thomas  Sergeant  Perry.  Most  exquisitely  illus-
trated with  four  full-  page  etchings  and  eight  etched
vignettes  by  Jules  Gamier,  also  a  portrait  of  the  author
engraved  by  Lamotte.  The  letterpress  choicely  printed
on  handmade  paper  at  the  University  Press,  Cambridge.
2  vols.  i6mo.  Cloth,  extra,  gilt  top,  $3.75.

Madame  de  la  Fayette  was  the  first  to  introduce  naturalness  into  fiction,
—  the  first  to  draw  human  beings  and  real  feelings  ;  and  thereby  she  earned  a
place  among  the  true  classics.  —  Preface  by  Anatole  Prance.


//    HOUANCKS.


TME   MASTER    MOSAIC   WORKERS    (Lit  M«
Mwhtts).    TnniUtctl  from  the  French  of  GKMGB
by  Charlotte  C.  Johnston.      With  a  portrait  of
I    W.  BkknclL     i6roo.    Cloth,

:  .1,  gilt  tO|),  5l.a5.

A  story  o>  >  the  time  of  Titian  and  Tintoretto,  who

figure  prominently  in  the  work.     The  mosaic  work  executed  in

ttion  of  the  basilica  of  St.  Mark  i>  fully  destr
and  George  Sand  has  followed  very  clo»ely  the  facts  as  given
by  Vasari  regarding  the    brothers    Zuccati  and   liartolomco
Boua.    The  ttory  is  one  of  exquisite  beauty  and  great  power.


-TIM  M*»t*r  Motak  Wufkm"  b  •«<  •/ tk<  m*rt  Mtfktfml ,/

*  -.<:    mf  ,..,-,  .....  pfctvtd  tv  m  bj  ?•      ,•  S  £•  ifai

I  ..'..'.       I.      A  '  :          '.  '  :

^4,1-1,  .•111  aiLum  <lt      VI  >rb'>  W«M>  linia  •    mm«L>  >    Li

WMCn  NUI  mtmmm  S\.  MW  »  WW  QCla|  •HOBi  ^  LJIfTmfJ  ww


TME    PRINCE    OF  THE   MOUSE   OF   DAVID;    or,

Three  Years  in  th  ng  a  Series  of  Let-

ters ..  a  Jewess  of  Alexandria,  supposed  to  be

sojourning  in  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  Hcitx),  ;ul«lrcssed
r  father,  a  wealthy  Jew  in  Egypt,  and  relating,  as
s«,  all  the  scenes  and  wonderful
t  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  from  his  Baptism
•rdan  to  his  Crucifixion  on  Calvary.     By  Rev.  J.  H.
KAHAM.     tamo.     Cloth.  ^ i. oo.
New  111  MX  engravings

by  Searies.  $2.00.

Popular  I-Mitioru     i6rao.     Cloth,  50  cents.

These  editions  contain  the  author's  latest  revisions,  he
ig  availed  himself  of  hints  and  suggestions  contained  in
numerous  private  letters  from  eminent  and  learned  men  of  vari-
ous denominations,  who  have  pointed  out  errors  and
•ions  and  improvements.


8  HISTORICAL  ROMAN*

THE  PILLAR  OF  FIRE;  or,  Israel  in  Bondage.    Being

an  Account  of  the  Wonderful  Scenes  in  the  Life  of
the  Son  of  Pharaoh's  Daughter  (Moses),  together  with
Picturesque  Sketches  of  the  Hebrews  under  their
masters.  By  Rev.  J.  H.  INGKAHAM.  1 2010.  Cloth,  £1.00.
New  Illustrated  Edition.  With  twenty-one  engrav-
ings by  Victor  A.  Searles.  i2mo.  $2.00.

THE   THRONE  OF    DAVID,  from  the  Consecration  of
the  Shepherd  of  Bethlehem  to  the  Rebellion  of  I'rinrc
Absalom.    Being  an  Illustration  of  the  Splendor,  1
and   Dominion  of  the   Reign  of  the  Shepherd.
Warrior,    King,   and    Prophet,   Ancestor   and     l\
Jesus;  in  a  Series  of  Letters  addressed  by  an  As
Ambassador  to  his  Lord  and  King  on  the  Throne  of
Nineveh.     By  Rev.  J.  H.  INGRAHAM.     i2mo.     Cloth,
£1.00.

New  Illustrated  Edition.  With  twenty-one  engrav-
ings by  Victor  A.  Searles.  i2mo.  £2.00.

BULWER'S    HISTORICAL    ROMANCES.

Comprising :  —

Devereux.     2  vols.

The  Last  Days  of  Pompeii      i  \-«.l.

Rienzi,  the  Last  of  the  Roman  Tribunes.     2  vols.

The  Last  of  the  Barons.     2  vols.

Leila  and  Calderon,  Pausanias  the  Spartan,     r  vol.

Harold,  the  Last  of  the  Saxon  Kings.     2  v«.U.

i2mo.  With  frontispiece  by  Edmund  II.  C.nrn-tt.
Per  volume,  plain  cloth,  $1.25;  decorated  cloth,  gilt
top,  $1.50.

Any  story  can  hf  supplied  sffnrattty.

The  new  library  edition  of  Bulwer's  works  is  one  of  exceeding  beauty,
the  size,  type,  paper,  and  binding  of  the  volumes  making  them  "a  delight  to
the  eye  and  to  the  touch."  —  The  Watchman.


fbtotoural  Romances  of

fllrranfcrc  Dumas.
*********

,  Brown,  &  Company's   New  Ubrary  Edition  of
these  important  historical  novels  comprises  the  only  com-
•ttlations  into  English,  and  has  been  accepted  as
.umUril  edition  of  this  famous  novelist  in  both  the

.ites  and  England.    Much  matter  hitherto  orn
will  1  n  tiu-.  .-,  he  books  are  illustrated

Huh  ;-rt  rails  of  notable  historical   personages,  and  are

!  m  handsome,  clear  type.

The  set  comprises  sixty  volumes,  i  amo,  with  nearly  one
hundred    etchings,   photogravures,  ich    and

American   artists.      Decorated   cloth,  gilt   top,  11.50   per

>p,  $1.25  per  volui
If  calf,  extra,  or  half  morocco,  $3.00  per  volume.


HISTORICAL  AND  REGENCY   ROMANCES.     T«


Tte  ?»§•  of  ta«  Dak*  of  MTOJ     a  vob. jxx>          :.y>

TW  Gh«rali«r  d'HarmoiUl  1.90

X*M|M» cdUd  "TlM  CoM^inlwiL'*

Th«  Itgint'i  Daufhter      i  vol  1.50

TW  BUek  Tulip     i  \  1.90         i  j$

Oljmp*  de  CUrvt     3  voU.    .  340          2.50

THE  VALOIS   ROMANCES     T    "Timn

KarfV*rit«  de  Taloii     i  rob. .  340          2.50

La  Dtme  «t  Moatorwra.    a  vole.  3.00          ;  50

«  k^rnti  watr  ih.  iume  ol  M  Cfcieol  *•  J«Mr."

Tlw  Forty-FiTe      ?  v..U.  .  3410         a.co
«nd,»i«  carM  -  Tto  F«tT-Fi»»  r.ir^,.,.."

THE   DARTAONAN    ROMANCES)     Ten  VokmMa

TlM  ThrM  HukttMra.    a  vob.  3.00          •  ;  \

Twwty  T«mn  After.     3  vnU 300          .»  co

YtooaU  de  Br*f*lona«.    6  voU.  ox»          7.90


•••n^*;  *b  v^is^;"«id -TfcTi^TM«fc.


10  HISTORICAL  ROMANCES.


THE  MARIE  ANTOINETTE  ROMANCES.    Twelve  Volume*.

,i  .!h

Memoirs  of  a  Physician.    3  vols 4.50         3.75

The  Queen's  Necklace.    2  vols 3.00         2.50

Ange  Pitou.     2  vols. 3.00          2.50

mctimes  called  "Taking  the  Buttle."

Comtesse  de  Charny.    4  vols 6.00          5.00

•••  Published  according  to  the  author's  own  arrangement.  It
baa  been  iwued  aa  two  separate  stories,—  "  Comtcsae  de  Charny  "
and  "  Andrei  de  Taverney."

Chevalier  de  Maison  Bouge.     i  vol 1.50  1.25

THE  NAPOLEON    ROMANCES.     Six  Volumes.

The  Companions  of  Jehu.     2  vols 3.00  2.50

The  Whites  and  the  Blues.     2  \<A* 3.00  2.50

I  his  story  has  also  been  issued  under  the  title  <>f  "  The
First  Republic."

The    She-Wolves    of    Machecoul    and    The    Corsican

Brothers.     2  vols 3.00          2.50

•»•  "The  She-Wolves  of  Machecoul"  has  also  been  issued
the  title  of  "The  Last  Vendee."


DUMAS   ROMANCES,  NEW   SERIES      I.     Six  Volumes.
Ascanio.     A  Romance  of  Francois  I.  and  Benvenuto

<  Yllini.     2  vols 3.00  2.50

The  War  of  Women.     A  Romance  of  the   Fronde.

2  vols 3-°°          2-5o

Black.    The  Story  of  a  Dog.     i  vol 1.50          1.25

Tales   of   the   Caucasus.     Comprising  "The  Hall  of

Snow  "  and  "  Sultanetta."     i  vol 1.5°          i-25

DUMAS  ROMANCES.  NEW   SERIES.     II.     Six  Volume*.

Agenor  de  Mauleon.     2  vols .>•«>

The  Brigand.    A  Romance  of  the  Reign  of  Don  ('a

To  which  is  addi-d  Blanche  de  Beaulieu.     i  vol.    .     1.50
The  Horoscope.     A   Romance  of  the  Reign  of  Fran-

II.     i  vol '-50          1-25

Sylvandire.     A  Romance  of  the  Reign  of  Ix>uis  XIV.

i  vol.      .  '-5°          '  25

Monsieur  de  Chauvelin's  Will  and  The  Woman  with  the

Velvet  Necklace,     i  vol l-S°


The  Count  of  Monte  Cristo.    4  vols 6.00

LITTLE,  BROWN,  &  CO.,  Publishers,

254  Washington  Street,  Boston.


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SUPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


LagerlBf ,  Selma  Ottiliana  Lovisa
9767  The  story  of  CSsta  Berlin*

G6E38
1898
