THE SECRET OF LIFE: Cosmic Rays and Radiations of Living Beings
by Georges Lakhovsky
Translated from the French by Mark Clement
London: William Heinemann (Medical Books) Ltd., 1939

Source: 1939 Heinemann edition scan (via GitHub bibliography mirror).
Public domain: 1939 English translation, copyright not renewed.

================================================================

I |ill
     Il
tine ohCRET   OF LIFE
   Secret of Life
COSMIC RAYS AND RADIATIONS
      OF LIVING BEINGS
                  *

     Georges Lakhovsky

   TRANSLATED    FROM    THE   FRENCH

       by Mark Clement

                LONDON               :

    WILLIAM      HEINEMANN
      (MEDICAL    BOOKS)       LTD
                  *939                   sae aa
COPYRIGHT          RESERVED
No part of this book can be
reproduced in any form without
permission from the Publishers.

   WELLCOME INSTITUTE
  |__|      LIBRA Ry poise

      Printed in Great Britaan
                                                 f

                                                 ec:
                                                  3
                                                 Py

                       PREFACE
                By   PROFESSOR      D’ARSONVAL

Wuat are you thinking about, Faraday ? If I were to tell
you, my dear Deville, you might think I was suffering from
hallucinations.
   Such is the legend.
   More confiding than Faraday, Lakhovsky has told me
the gist of his ideas on radiations and their effects on living
beings. He thought, and rightly, that his ideas could not
shock an experimenter who, for the past thirty-five years,
had studied the effects of the full range of Hertzian waves
on animals and microbes.
   In scientific research it is advisable to encourage what
appears to be the most daring ideas. I have lived in the
intimacy of two great men: Claude Bernard and Brown-
Séquard, who revelled in new ideas. And it did not pay
them too badly !
   The phenomena of resonance have long been familiar to
physiologists. We all know the acoustic resonators of the
organ of Corti, the optic resonators of the retina since the
famous researches of Helmholtz. And still more familiar
to us, the biological resonators of Charles Henry. Lapicque,
Latzareff and myself have invoked on several occasions the
phenomena of cellular resonance in order to explain the
action of nervous influences or other physical agents in
living beings.
   That space is full of forces which are unknown to us, and
that living beings emit radiations or effluvia of which we
are not aware, but whose significance has attracted the
attention of certain observers, are facts that I have long
since accepted. Anything is possible. But one must not
accept anything except that which can be experimentally
proved. The ideas of an insane person differ from the
                               Vv
vi                      PREFACE

conceptions of a genius mainly because experiment invali-
dates the former and confirms the latter.
   Lakhovsky, encouraged by his own researches and the
practical results he has obtained, is particularly anxious
that his theories should rouse interest and stimulate experi-
mental work among independent investigators. Lakhovsky’s
theories constitute what Claude Bernard called ‘“‘working
hypotheses.”
   In the “ Secret of Life’? Lakhovsky confines himself to
the study of electromagnetic waves, deeply penetrating
waves and unknown waves.
   There are certainly many more processes of energy
transmission besides those revealed to us by Newton and
Fresnel. It is in the study of human beings that the
chances of discovering such processes are most promising.
Therefore, let us experiment by using the methods of
physicists and chemists, and let us aim at discovering the
special detector mentioned in the conclusion of this work.

                                             D’ ARSONVAL.
                          CONTENTS
CHAP.                                                                   PAGE

          PREFACE    BY    PROFESSOR          D’ ARSONVAL

          INTRODUCTION       BY    THE    AUTHOR

          TRANSLATOR’S       INTRODUCTION

          THE PROBLEM       OF INSTINCT         OR SPECIAL      SENSE
            IN ANIMALS                                                   31

    1ab   AUTO-ELECTRIFICATION           IN    LivING    BEINGS          43

   III.   UNIVERSAL       NATURE    OF RADIATION          IN LIVING
            BEINGS                                                       48

    V4    On RADIATIONS IN GENERAL AND ON ELECTRO-
            MAGNETIC WAVES IN PARTICULAR

          OSCILLATION      AND     RADIATION         OF CELLS

   ae     MODIFICATIONS IN          CELLS      AND      OSCILLATORY
            DISEQUILIBRIUM

  VII.    NATURE    OF    RADIANT        ENERGY

 VITr.    SUNSPOTS AND Cosmic RADIATION                 IN RELATION
            To HEALTH AND LIFE

   IX.    INFLUENCE OF NATURE OF SOIL ON FIELD OF
            Cosmic   WavES—CONTRIBUTION    TO  THE
            CAUSATION OF CANCER—GEOLOGICAL AND
            GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF CANCER—
            THE ROLE OF WATER      IN RELATION TO
            CANCER                                                      123

          THERAPEUTICS       OF    CELLULAR       OSCILLATION           140

          ORIGIN    OF    LIFE.                                         149
Vili                              CONTENTS
                                                             PAGE

APPENDIX            sy   THE   TRANSLATOR

         1B   Note       on Rapium      .     b     :    *   165

        II.   THe    MuntTirpLE    WAVE     OSCILLATOR   ,   176

       If.    CLINICAL      REPORTS    .      A     :    e   181

       1c     EFFECTS   OF         OSCILLATING    CIRCUITS
                ANIMALS                                      196

              INDEX OF NAMES                                 197

              SuBJECT      INDEX                             199
                   INTRODUCTION
 I sHOULD like to indicate in some way in this introduction
the philosophy of my new theory which forms the theme of
the present work.
   What is the use of propounding a new theory of life ?
From the beginning of the world have not philosophy and
science professed to enlighten us in that respect ? What
remains of these well-meaning efforts? To the philosopher,
and particularly to the metaphysician, I will not attempt to
prove the use of a new conception. They know better than
I do with what avidity we all welcome the hope of a clearer
explanation, the hope of progress in knowledge of the
absolute. The craving of the human desire is enough to
justify the novelty of a hypothesis. It is the average man,
and especially the man of science, that I want to convince.
Human knowledge of a positive character is not solely made
up, as some would have us believe, of a mass of experimental
facts.   These   facts,   by   themselves,   are   worth   nothing
without the idea which consolidates, arranges and classifies
them. The future of science lies essentially, in its dynamic
sense, in the expansion of its fundamental concepts, that is
to say in scientific hypothesis. Every science is an experi-
mental field whose inter-relations with neighbouring fields,
that is to say with other sciences, are more or less unusual
and difficult to interpret. Medicine, biology, the natural
sciences, are intimately related and their ramifications
extend to the domain of chemistry.      On the other hand,
they seem to be still separated, sometimes by watertight
compartments, from the physical sciences, notably from
electricity and radio-electricity.
   Every progress in the evolution of knowledge shows a
new point of view and enables us to explore further the
whole field of different sciences, to know their various states
of advancement, to observe their mutual relations and the
assistance they can render one another.
 8.L.                            1                           B
2                    INTRODUCTION

   The most recent discoveries in physics have enabled us
to reduce to unity the various phenomena susceptible of
analysis through the study of all known radiations.       This
new field is singularly fertile if one bears in mind that all
the most recent discoveries in physics, and consequently
in the applied sciences, belong to the domain of radiations :
ionic, electronic and atomic; the usual electromagnetic
radiations,    radio-electricity,   wireless telegraphy    and
telephony.
   Up till now this original conception of radiation, which
seemsto be the basis of all positive knowledge, has been
confined to the realm of the physical sciences and, apart
from an incursion into industry, it has not made any impor-
tant contribution to the natural sciences whose development
appears to be limited to that of organic chemistry.
   I believe that the time has come to extend the field and
the resources of biology by utilising new instruments based
on the latest advance of the physical sciences. My theory
of the origin of life, which forms the theme of the present
work, stands for this new concept uniting two domains of
science hitherto kept apart.
   Numerous hypotheses, on which I shall not insist, have
been advanced to explain the origin of life and various
biological phenomena.        Let us point out that the most
recent of such hypotheses attempt to simplify the problem
by reducing these complex phenomena to purely chemical
or mechanical phenomena. In view of the unprecedented
development of the new discoxeries in physics, the latest
biological hypotheses appear to be somewhat too simple.
Moreover, from the point of view of a higher criterion, they
do not give a satisfactory explanation of certain fundamental
phenomena which my theory succeeds in doing.
   Let us glance at some of those obscure points in biology
which we wish to elucidate. Among the most carefully
studied facts by naturalists and entomologists, we find all
those which are related to the problem of instinct or special
sense of animals; in spite of the accumulation of experi-
mental data, accurate and indisputable, no clear explanation
has yet been given of instinct. My theory of radiation of
living beings, confirmed by conclusive experiments, is in
                       INTRODUCTION                                      3
perfect harmony with the facts in question whose hidden
significance is also made clear. Similarly, the rdéle of
orientation in the flight of birds, the problem of migration,
are explicable by the phenomena of auto-electrification in
living beings.
   What then is this universal radiation in living beings ?
My theory expounds in simple terms its fundamental
principles and discloses its nature. In deriving support
from the most recent discoveries in the domain of radiations,
my theory demonstrates, with the aid of elementary
analogies, that the cell, essential organic unit in all living
beings, is nothing but an electromagnetic resonator, capable
of emitting and absorbing radiations of very high frequency.
   These fundamental principles cover the whole field of
biology.
   What is life ? It is the dynamic equilibrium of all cells,
the harmony of multiple radiations which react upon one
another.
  What is disease ? It is the oscillatory disequilibrium of
cells, originating from external causes.       It is, more especially,
the struggle between microbic radiation and cellular radia-
tion. For the microbe, unicellular organism, acts also by
virtue of its radiation. If microbic radiation is predominant,
disease is the result, and when vital resistance is completely
overcome,   death occurs.     If cellular radiation gains the
ascendant, restoration of health follows.
  The importance of my theory becomes more apparent in
view of the confirmation of its validity as shown by recent
experiments on cancerous plants. The recorded cures would
seem to give new hope in the treatment of cancer, that
terrible disease against which we appear to be struggling
in vain. The practical application of my theory, which
enables the cells to regain the full vital activity of their
radiations, will, in my opinion, give rise to a specific treat-
ment of cancer, in particular, and be equally applicable to
diseases due to old age in general.
   Apart from its immediate practical applications, my
theory may be said to explain, thanks to the rdle played by
penetrating radiations, the process of the origin of life, the
differentiation of cells and of living species, the phenomenon
                                           ;                   B 2
4                     INTRODUCTION

of heredity, in a word all the great problems whose totality
constitutes the biological sciences. I have quite inten-
tionally given a very simple form to the account of my
theory, so that it may be understood by all those who have
the desire to probe further into the mysteries of science.
I have excluded from it any unnecessary phraseology as
well as most of the technical terms that cumber the
vocabulary of biology and electricity.
   The technical terms used in the text of the present work
are familiar to all radio listeners. Of such I may single out
self-inductance which characterises the electromagnetic
induction of a circuit ; capacity characterising its electro-
static induction ; electric resistance which signifies opposition
of the circuit to the passage of current; wavelength and
frequency   which    characterise   the   nature   of radiation.
Mathematical formule have likewise been omitted.     All
relevant scientific explanations are given in footnotes
which, however, are not indispensable for understanding the
main facts.
  My only wish is that my work may be understood by all,
even by those who are not familiar with scientific literature.
I shall be more than gratified if I have succeeded in my
attempt.
                                   GEORGES LAKHOVSKY.
                                                                                         eas

  TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION
                                                                                                   PAGE
  I.   PRELIMINARY      REMARKS      .            c          ;       F           P         :          5
 II.   GENERAL      PRINCIPLES
           (a) Definitions .     ‘     :     :                       S           :                    6
           (6) Diagrams of Oscillating Circuits                       .           ;         ;         it
           (c) Mechanism of Cellular Oscillation                      .           ‘        :         10
           (d) Radiations of Living Beings .                         :           :         :         11
III.   Cosmic RADIATION AND SUNSPOTS         .                       :           :         .         13
 IV.   THE PROBLEM OF CANCER
           (a) Lack of Public Support in Cancer Campaign        .                                   17
           (6) Limitations of Orthodox Methods of Research.                                         21
           (c) Lakhovsky’s Theories on Causation of Cancer ;
                 ‘* Multiple Wave Oscillator ” in the Treatment
                     of Cancer           é            ,          :       :           :         >    24
           (d) Cancer in Relation to Soil                    .       :           ;         :         25
 V.    Srwimarity     oF LAKHOVSKY’S             AND       CRILE’S           THEORIES          .    28
       CONCLUSION       .        :   :            ;          ;       ;           :         :        29

                 I. PRELIMINARY                       REMARKS
A BOOK,     sponsored       by Professor                  d’Arsonval,            one      of the
greatest scientists of our age, must possess exceptional
merits and therefore commands attention.         On several
occasions this world-famous scientist has presented commu-
nications to the Académie des Sciences on behalf of
Lakhovsky, a talented and independent investigator.
   Georges Lakhovsky is a Russian-born engineer who
established himself in France, became a naturalised French
citizen and was awarded the red ribbon of the Legion of
Honour for his technical services during the war.
   The ‘Secret of Life’ was originally written in French
more than ten years ago. It has been translated into
German, Italian and Spanish. An English translation has
been overdue for some time and though it is the last in
chronological order yet it is the most up-to-date version of
                                             5
6           TRANSLATOR’S        INTRODUCTION

all for it contains a great deal of new material which has
necessitated the addition of an appendix.            The English
version is also the only one containing the remarkable
photographs of cases treated by means of Lakhovsky’s
famous apparatus, the Multiple Wave Oscillator.
   On the Continent Lakhovsky’s work has attracted a great
deal of attention in scientific circles, particularly in Germany
and in Italy. Italian investigators were among the first
to study Lakhovsky’s theories and to put them to the test
in laboratories and clinics. They were prompt in obtaining         ©
a number of significant results.
    It was, of course, to be expected that the new science of
Radiobiology should make a special appeal to the          intel-
lectual heirs of Galvani, Volta and Marconi.    It is somewhat
depressing to observe that in the country of Faraday and
Clerk Maxwell, the theories of Lakhovsky have not yet
received the attention they deserve. We may possibly find
comfort in the reflection that though the tempo of progress
among us in this field of knowledge has been extraordinarily
slow, yet in the long run we may bring off achievements
transcending the feats of our more alert rivals. At the
present time, however, there is no indication of such a
trend, and the main purpose of this work is to stimulate
interest in experimental research even at the risk of shatter-
ing the foundations of established theories which time has
often proved to be but working hypotheses.
   Lakhovsky’s work has not escaped criticism. In accord-
ance with the traditions of orthodox medicine Lakhovsky
has been subjected to obstructionism and tyranny on the
part of those who invest themselves with the prerogatives of
inquisitors. The story of their machinations has been told
by Lakhovsky in his work “ La Cabale,’’ whose title is
sufficiently explicit to leave no doubt as to the nature of its
 contents. As he himself expressed it: “I have been
attacked by physicists ignorant of biology and by biologists
ignorant of physics who consequently can neither understand
 my theories nor judge my experiments.”’
    These self-appointed censors of knowledge soon found
 that they were confronted with a redoubtable opponent who
 realised the value of experimental evidence, whose publica-
                TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION                                   :
tion made them irate, but not speechless. Lakhovsky
retorted by renewed counter-attacks with his oscillating
circuits supported by astonishing photographs of regenerated
living tissues. This incensed the custodians of infallible
doctrines    who      made   up with   carping| verbiage what           they
‘lacked in clarity of vision. But achievements cannot be
 exploded by verbal fireworks and as evidence accumulates
 the force of academic petards must needs disperse itself
 into oblivion. Meanwhile the indisputable fact remains that
 Lakhovsky was the first to make use of high-frequency
 electromagnetic waves in the domain of biology. Thus, out
 of the application of radio-electricity to biology his work
 developed and gradually established the foundations of the
 new science of Radiobiology.}

            *          2        *          2         *           2

                      II. GENERAL      PRINCIPLES

   Physicists and biologists are in the habit of pursuing their
researches without encroaching upon one another’s domains.
As an independent investigator Lakhovsky was not confined
to any particular field, and having formulated his theory of
cellular oscillation, the fusion of Rass and biology was the
natural consequence.
   Lakhovsky’s original experiments on cancerous plants are
of great scientific importance and constitute a landmark in
the history of radio-electrical methods of treatment.     This
has been fully acknowledged by leading electro-therapists
on the Continent and in this country. In his excellent work
 on Diathermy,? Cumberbatch states:                  “‘ Although it had
 frequently been observed that the short Hertzian waves
 could produce heat at a distance from the transmitter, the
 first scientific investigation on the subject from a biological
 point of view was made by Gosset, Gutmann and Lakhovsky.
 In 1924 they published a paper on the effects of very short

    1 The First International Congress of Electro-Radiobiology was held in
 Venice in 1934.
   2 “ Diathermy,’’   E. P. Cumberbatch,   M.A.,   M.B.,   F.R.C.P.   (Heine-
 mann (Medical Books) Ltd., 3rd edition, 1937.)
8             TRANSLATOR’S       INTRODUCTION

waves on cancer in plants. The wavelength was about
two metres, corresponding to a frequency of oscillation of
150,000,000 per second.”

          *        *       *        *       *        *

   (a) Before considering the subject of cellular oscillation,
which forms the basis of Lakhovsky’s work, it is of the
utmost importance that the reader should understand the
principles underlying the mechanism of an oscillating
circuit. Indeed, Lakhovsky’s ‘Secret of Life’ pre-
supposes a certain amount of knowledge of electricity,
wireless phenomena and biology. Nowadays most people
are familiar with technical terms used by radio engineers,
such as Hertzian waves, frequency, transmitter, inductance,
triode valve, etc. These terms are not jargon; they do
not make science more complicated for the average man;
on the contrary they simplify it by introducing order and
precision. But a certain mental effort is required to under-
stand what these terms really denote, and for the sake of
those who have little biology and less physics, and who
are yet desirous of knowing something about wireless
phenomena, cosmic rays and radiations emitted by living
beings, a clear explanation of the standard technical terms
used in this work is imperative, or else the “‘ Secret of Life ”
will not be revealed to them.
   The technical term most frequently used in the course of
this work is oscillating circwit. It occurs again and again
throughout the text and therefore demands special attention.
A formal definition of this term is thus required at the
outset.
  An oscillating circuit is a circuit containing inductance
and capacity, which, when supplied with energy from an
external source, is set in electrical vibration and oscillates
at its natural frequency.
   As the terms inductance and capacity are not self-
explanatory they must be further defined.
   A conductor is said to possess inductance if a current
flowing through it causes a magnetic field to be set up round
it. A straight wire has inductance; if a conductor is
            TRANSLATOR’S             INTRODUCTION              9
wound up in the form of a coil the value will be greatly
increased.
   The capacity of a condenser or isolated body is a measure
of the charge or quantity of electricity it is capable of
storing.                                  |
   (6) A diagram of an oscillating circuit will now make
things clearer. C, and C, represent the plates of a condenser
placed in a circuit containing an inductance coil I. There
is a gap in the circuit at 8.G. known as the spark-gap.

                                     S.G.

             Ci.
             C2

                                      I
                    Diagram of Oscillating Circuit.

   Now when the condenser is charged and the difference of
potential between the two plates is sufficiently high, a spark
will appear at the gap and the condenser will be discharged.
While the spark appears at the gap a current will oscillate
in the circuit.
  The inductance      coil I is called the oscillator,   and the
circuit containing the condenser, oscillator and spark gap
is called the oscillating circuit.
   If the condenser plates are opened out so that the induction
coil lies between them, we have an “open”’ oscillating
circuit.
   From such a circuit energy is readily given off in the form
of waves. By taking a suitable condenser and inductance
10           TRANSLATOR’S       INTRODUCTION

coil, the frequency   of oscillation may    be raised to any
required value.

         *        *        *       *        *        *

   (c) We are now in a position to discuss the subject of
cellular oscillation on’ which Lakhovsky’s theories are
based.
   From a physical point of view the essential difference
between the various kinds of electrical oscillations and
                      kindred radiations      consists in their
                      different frequencies or wavelengths.
            Ct,       The biological effects of the different
                      frequencies vary within a wide range.
                      In this connexion it must be pointed
                      out that a fundamental difference exists
                      between the thermal effects of high-
                      frequency waves (diathermy) and their
            I         electrical effects which modify cellular
                      oscillation.
                         Until fairly recently the use of elec-
                      tricity in medicine was confined to
                      diathermy and certain forms of darson-
                      valisation.   As early as 1923 Lakhovsky
                      conceived the idea of constructing an
             Ge:2: electrical apparatus capable of emitting
                      continuous waves of very short length
                      (2 to 10 metres). His intention was to
                      demonstrate that the living cell was
Diagram of ‘‘Open”’   like a wireless apparatus, having the dual
 Oscillating Circuit.
                      power of transmitting and _ receiving
waves.       This apparatus, known as the Radio-cellulo-
oscillator, was first used for the treatment of experi-
mental cancer in plants at the Surgical Clinic of the Salpé-
triére in Paris. The results were so conclusive that a special
communication was addressed to a leading scientific society
drawing attention to the remarkable cures obtained by this
new mode of electrical treatment.
   The Radio-cellulo-oscillator was the prototype of various
electrical generators of short waves that finally led to the
              TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION                       il
invention of the Multiple Wave       Oscillator, fully described
in the Appendix.
          *          *      *        *k        *      *

  The fundamental principle of Lakhovsky’s scientific
system may be summed up in the axiom “ Every living
being emits radiations.”      Inspired by this principle
Lakhovsky has been able to explain such diverse phenomena
as instinct in animals, migration of birds, health, disease,
and in general, all the manifestations of organic life.
  According to Lakhovsky, the nucleus of a living cell may
be compared to an electrical oscillating circuit. This
nucleus   consists   of tubular   filaments,   chromosomes   and
mitochondria, made up of insulating material and filled with
a conducting fluid containing all the mineral salts found in
sea-water. These filaments are thus comparable to oscil-
lating circuits endowed with capacity and self-inductance
and therefore capable of oscillating according to a specific
frequency.
   In the light of Lakhovsky’s theories, the fight between
the living organism and microbes is fundamentally a “‘ war
of radiations.”   If radiations of the microbe win, the cell
ceases to oscillate and death is the ultimate result.      If,
on the other hand, radiations of the cell gain the ascendant,
the microbe is killed and health is preserved. Broadly
speaking, health is equivalent to oscillatory equilibrium of
living cells while disease is characterised by oscillatory
disequilibrium. This general principle has given rise to
a vast number of experiments covering the whole field of
biology.
          *          *      *        *         *      *

   (d) During recent years observations on the part of several
investigators appear to have established the fact that most
animals, including insects and birds, emit radiations while
they are also sensitive to the influence of external electro-
magnetic waves. These radiations, emitted by living beings,
cover an indefinite range and are characterised by a multitude
of different wavelengths. The luminescence of the glow-
worm is an example of vital radiation perceptible to our
12           TRANSLATOR’S             INTRODUCTION

visual sense. In the immense range of existing vibrations
we can only perceive the luminous octave, but we know that
whole gamuts of radiations exist beyond the narrow limits
of the visible spectrum. In the face of a mass of cumulative
evidence it is perfectly rational to conclude, as Lakhovsky
does, that the phenomenon of radiation is a universal
property of living matter even as radioactivity appears to
be a universal property of inanimate matter. The limita-
tions of our senses prevent us from perceiving radiations of
living beings while this sensory incapacity also excludes
from the field of direct awareness the vast gamut of
electromagnetic waves traversing our atmosphere.        Yet all
these radiations and waves exist and affect all forms of
life in various ways.
   These views can no longer be regarded as speculative, for
radiations of living beings have actually been apprehended by
means of the spectroscope and the photographic plate. The
mitogenetic radiation given off by rootlets of growing plants
and vegetables has been identified by Gurwitsch and Frank
as belonging to the ultra-violet region of the spectrum. The
original experiments of these two investigators established
the fact that the stimulus to growth was oscillatory in
character and that it was associated with a specific wave-
length, thus confirming the fundamental principles of
Lakhovsky’s theories. Further experiments by Reiter and
Gabor have shown that embryonic tissues and malignant
tumours possessed a high radiation potential varying in
intensity according to the rate of growth. These experi-
menters succeeded in measuring the wavelength of radiating
tissues and in modifying the development of selected
organisms by subjecting them to the influence of a certain
range of ultra-violet rays.
   As all these vital radiations appeared to be akin to
ultra-violet rays in regard to frequency, the problem of
photographing them came under consideration. In spite
of great technical difficulties, Professor Guido Cremonese
succeeded in making photographic records of radiations
given off by living substances which were duly reproduced
in a valuable monograph.! With regard to human radiations,
     1 Guido Cremonese, I Raggi della vita fotografati.   Rome, 1930.
               TRANSLATOR’S      INTRODUCTION              13

 Professor Cremonese devised means of making direct
 photographic records, or failing that, he made use of speci-
 mens of saliva or blood which were shown to be active
 sources of radiations.
   Professor Cremonese’s investigations have opened up a
 new field of scientific research whose future developments
-may have a most important bearing on the problems of
 biology and medicine.
           *       *       *       *       *       *

                   III. COSMIC   RADIATION
    The subject of cosmic radiation is given such a prominent
 place in Lakhovsky’s theories that it calls for a few intro-
 ductory remarks.     Only the briefest outline of this aspect
 of cosmography can be given here, but its importance in
 the universal scheme in relation to living processes should
 always be borne in mind.
    The study of cosmic rays is of recent origin, the first
 significant observations having been published in 1900.
 Since then this subject has attracted a host of famous
 investigators in Kurope and in America.
    In the study of cosmic radiation American physicists
 have played a pre-eminent part. It is largely due to the
 labours of Professor Millikan and his associates that the
 knowledge of cosmic rays has made such rapid progress
 during the past decade.
    Cosmic rays is the name given to a highly penetrating
 radiation travelling through our atmosphere and emanating
 from a far distant source. This radiation is much more
 penetrating than X-rays and is correspondingly shorter in
 wavelength. According to Millikan, cosmic rays are of the
 nature of electromagnetic radiations similar to light but of
 extremely short wavelengths.     He has suggested that they
 might be the result of aggregations of Hydrogen atoms into
 Helium, a process constantly going on in the universe. In
 Millikan’s picturesque phrase, cosmic rays are the “ birth
 cries of atoms.” He estimated that the “total radiant
 energy in the universe existing in the form of cosmic rays is
 from 30 to 300 times greater than that existing in all other
 forms of radiant energy combined.”
                                                   SOA 4c
 14            TRANSLATOR’S             INTRODUCTION

    The amount of this radiation must obviously be very
 great. Sir James Jeans? states that “it must break up
 millions of atoms in each of our bodies every second—and
 we do not know what its physiological effects may be.”’ In
 a recent discussion at the Royal Society of Medicine,” it
 was admitted that not enough notice had been taken of
electrical conditions of the atmosphere as affecting the
human organism. Investigations had been made on the
effect of cosmic radiations in influencing the mutation of
insect species and the available experimental evidence
furnished a basis for correlating the periodicity of epidemics
with cosmic radiations.
    The consensus of opinion among astrophysicists favours
the view that cosmic rays are high-speed charged particles
(electrons, protons, positrons, a-particles, etc.), and it is
thought that these particles are associated with some kind
of radiation of extremely ‘high frequency.
   Cosmic radiation is the most penetrating form of radiation
known to us. Many expeditions have been organised to
study the geographical distribution of cosmic rays which
appears to vary according to latitude and altitude.
   The relative penetrating powers of different cosmic rays
were ascertained by sending automatic recording electro-
scopes up to 29,000 feet in airplanes and up to 60,000 feet
in balloons, while under-water experiments showed traces
of the most penetrating cosmic rays at depths as low as
770 feet (Regener, 1931).
   The foremost investigator of cosmic rays in this country,
Professor Blackett, has devised an apparatus whereby cosmic
rays take photographs of themselves or of their own tracks.
The researches of Blackett and Occhialini have definitely
confirmed the existence of the positive electron or positron,
originally discovered by Anderson.
   The particular importance of cosmic rays in science,
apart from their very high energy, is their practical use for
the investigation of atomic structure.
  According to Lakhovsky, the geological nature                      of the

  1 Sir   James Jeans, ‘“‘ The Universe around Us,” 3rd edition.   University
Press, Cambridge, 1933.
   2 British Medical Journal, March   7th, 1936.
              TRANSLATOR’S          INTRODUCTION                  15

soil modifies the field of cosmic radiation at the earth’s
surface and this gives rise to secondary radiations which
must be taken into account in biological phenomena.            It
would appear that cosmic radiations have a direct effect on
all living cells, their function being to maintain, by resonance
and interference, the natural oscillation of healthy cells,
and to re-establish the vibrations of diseased cells by
neutralising antagonistic radiations such as those given off
by microbes.       Moreover, an excessive amount of cosmic
radiation may prove detrimental to living organisms. In
order to remedy this contingency Lakhovsky devised a
special type of oscillating circuit which, by creating an
auxiliary electromagnetic field, acts as a “ filter ”’ of cosmic
waves and protects the organism against the harmful effects
resulting from excessive radiation.
   Variations in the field of cosmic radiation bring about a
state of disequilibrium in living cells which can no longer
oscillate according to their natural frequency. The ultimate
result of this sequence of events may manifest itself in the
distressing phenomenon of cancer.
          *          %        *         *         *         *

                             SUNSPOTS
   Galileo was the first to study sunspots in a scientific
manner, and by measuring their motion he proved that the
sun was rotating.
   In one of the most fascinating works of Sir James Jeans
we are told that “ sunspots are of the nature of vent holes
from which masses of hot gas are shot out at terrific speeds.
The matter which they eject is probably a mixture of com-
plete atoms and fragments of atoms which may include
electrified particles of various kinds. They are shot out
and travel in all directions,      some     of them   will reach the
earth, and, penetrating its atmosphere, may produce a
display of the Aurora Borealis. Later they may ionise the
air and so form the layers which reflect our wireless waves
back earthward and enable us to hear distant wireless
stations. . . . Sunspots do not come in a steady stream but
         1 Sir   James Jeans, ‘‘ Through Space and Time.”
16          TRANSLATOR’S            INTRODUCTION

 rather in gusts or waves, their numbers fluctuating up and
 down every eleven years or so. Sunspots were especially
 numerous in 1906, 1917 and 1928 and will be so again in
  19397
    At the beginning of the nineteenth century Sir William
 Herschel noted that during the period 1650 to 1713 a scarcity
 of vegetation, judging by the normal wheat yield, had
 occurred whenever the activity of sunspots was lowest.
    Lakhovsky looks upon sunspots as an important. source
 of cosmic radiation. He has shown that the curves repre-
 senting activity of sunspots, frequency of magnetic pertur-
 bations and aurora borealis, are strikingly parallel. He
 has also established a correlation between sunspots and good
 vintage years which appear to synchronise with maximal
 solar activity.
    Some years ago Dr. Meldrum, Director of the Observatory
at Mauritius, established the fact that the number of cyclones
in the Indian Ocean and the West Indies varied with the
sunspot area.      It also appeared that the occurrence of
 maximum rainfall coincided with the occurrence              of
maximum sunspots.         This relation was so definite that it
could not be regarded as accidental.       These observations
were confirmed by Sir Norman Lockyer, who realised that
not only the rainfall but also many other features of the
earth’s physical condition were connected with the sunspot
cycle.
    Since then astrophysicists have correlated the frequency
and intensity of sunspots with a certain number of physical
phenomena, while recent research has extended this corre-
lation to biological phenomena, particularly those pertaining
to human pathology.
   Colonel C. A. Gill! recently pointed out that pandemics
of malaria from 1800 onwards had occurred at a period of
minimal sunspot activity. Every pandemic of malaria
since sunspot records were taken had occurred at a time
when sunspot numbers were lowest. The same phenomenon
had been observed in connexion with yellow fever; the
epidemics in East Africa since 1800 had also occurred at a
time of minimum sunspot numbers.
           1 British Medical Journal, March 7th, 1936.
             TRANSLATOR’S            INTRODUCTION                     —        17
   Further evidence is given by Dr. Conyers Morrell,! who
states that waves of epidemic disease covering considerable
periods exhibit a very close correspondence with the phases
of sunspot periods. He points out that close correlations
over long periods have been found to occur in several
diseases, notably diphtheria, typhus and dysentery in
Russia and Denmark, and plague in India.
   Tchijevsky has shown a close correspondence between
mortality from diseases of the nervous system and the sun-
spot curve, while an equally close connexion between the
frequency of epileptic fits and the incidence of solar storms
has been reported by other investigators.
   Many phenomena such as abundance of harvests, growth
of trees, migration of birds, lake levels, blizzards and radio
reception show a well-marked relationship with meteoro-
logical periodicities conditioned by the solar cycle which
may well play an important role in influencing health and
disease in human beings.
   Dr. Conyers Morrell deplores the fact that ‘‘ while in
other countries considerable advance has already been made
in the institution of enquiries into the causal relationship
between solar activity and terrestrial phenomena, in this
country this very important and interesting subject has
received as yet but very scant attention, and has, in fact,
like other revolutionary but now accepted hypotheses, met
with a marked quantum of the scepticism so inseparable
from the conservatism of English scientific enquiry.”’
   We shall see in the next chapter dealing with the cancer
problem, to what extent this conservatism obscures vision
and cripples research to the detriment of the whole
community.
         *           *        *         *              **         *

              IV. THE      PROBLEM          OF CANCER
   (a) In the “ Secret of Life ” the subject of cancer occurs
at frequent intervals like the Leitmotiv in a musical com-
position. The theme is developed from a biophysical point
of view and the malignant cell becomes a centre of activity
             1 British Medical Journal, March       14th, 1936.
 8.1L.                                          -                         CG
18           TRANSLATOR’S        INTRODUCTION

where electromagnetic waves, cosmic rays and cellular
radiations play a predominant part. For many years
Lakhovsky has concentrated his attention on cancer and
has evolved original theories which should be judged by the
practical results he has obtained. As cancer is the main
objective in Lakhovsky’s work, it demands a correspondingly
extensive treatment on our part so that the reader may realise
the full significance and the complexity of the factors
involved in the causation of that dreaded disease.
   Many cancer research workers, including the present
writer, have found that the vast majority of people show a
profound aversion to discussing the subject of cancer and
treat it as vf it did not exist. This general flight from reality
renders the solution of the cancer problem even more
difficult than it actually is, for fear and ignorance on the
part of the public are not in the least helpful to those who
strive to save their fellow-beings from the tentacles of cancer.
   A rational and constructive attitude is incumbent upon
everyone.     Cancer must be faced as a stark reality, a con-
stant threat to all, ignored only at the peril of our own
lives.
   If the problem of cancer is ever to be solved, the public,
that is to say, everyone of us, must take an intelligent
interest in it and not rely on Providence to do our own
salvaging work.
   Cancer is a plague as deadly as any plague that has
ravaged mankind in the past. Indeed, its insidious onset
and absence of symptoms in the early stages make it a far
more treacherous disease than tuberculosis and less respon-
sive to treatment, since it is often far advanced before the
victim becomes aware of his hopeless condition.
     It is of the utmost importance that the public should ©
realise the magnitude of the cancer problem, for the medical
profession is in urgent need of psychological as well as of
financial co-operation in this respect, neither of which has
been forthcoming in anything like an adequate measure.
A leading London surgeon, and one of the foremost cancer
investigators in this country, has put it on record that “‘ the
sum yearly available for cancer research does not amount
to one penny per annum for each individual composing the
                TRANSLATOR’S            INTRODUCTION                             19

 population of Great Britain.”? + This contribution becomes
 still more preposterous when it is realised that one person
 in six, over the age of 40, is doomed to die of cancer.                    When
 we consider the colossal sums of money spent on protecting
 ourselves against the possibility of foreign aggression, it
 seems incredible that so little is given to fight against cancer,
 the ruthless enemy in our midst, inflicting a death-roll that
 goes on increasing without respite. It is clear that the
 policy of voluntary contributions for the maintenance of
 hospitals and associated services is now obsolete and that
 its survival is nothing but a sentimental tradition incom-
 patible with actual exigencies. At last there are signs of
 realisation that adequate financial assistance on the part of
 the authorities is an imperative necessity in order to deal
 with the social problem of cancer which decimates the
 community and causes incalculable suffering. In this con-
 nexion a glance at official statistics will show the actual state
 of affairs.
    The certified deaths from cancer for England and Wales
 during the quinquennium 1932-1936 were as follows :2—
          ee)             ea    :               ;         .       60,716
          1933*..         a                               .       61,572
          (onde                  WSs.                       es    6S288
          1935.                 Pl    es                  .       64,507
          1936.                       '                   .       66,354
                                                                 316,412
     In addition to this soaring mortality it should be borne in
  mind that for every death from cancer there are at least
‘ three living cases of the disease. Thus, at any given time,
  there are in our midst 200,000 people of all ages suffering
  from cancer.
     We are not here concerned with the ever-recurring
  question whether cancer is on the increase, nor are we
  particularly impressed by the official statement that the
   1 “* Cancer Research at the Middlesex Hospital (1900—1924).”
   2 Annual Reports of the Chief Medical Officer of the Ministry of Health.
   3 The latest figures for Great Britain (1937) show a total cancer
 mortality of 74,000.   (Times, December   13th, 1938.)
                                                                           q 2
20                 TRANSLATOR’S              INTRODUCTION

increase is More apparent than real, a dialectical balm
dispensed by bureaucrats to allay fears while evading main
issues. Among those best qualified to express an authorita-
tive opinion, the late Lord Moynihan, President of the Royal
College of Surgeons, called attention to the fact that statistics
will prove anything, even the truth ! Lord Moynihan stated
“There is little doubt that cancer is definitely on the
increase especially in certain organs. In the last seventy
years the mortality from cancer has increased fivefold.” +
The vital fact confronting us now is that in the last five years
over a quarter of a million people have died of cancer in this
country and that they go on dying at the rate of nearly
70,000 per annum.       This means that every eight minutes,
day after day throughout the year, someone dies of cancer in
England.
   Such a disastrous toll of life calls for an intensive campaign,
organised with sustained efficiency, in which the public
must co-operate to the limits of their powers.       At the present
time the Government is contemplating a Bill for the estab-
lishment of a National Cancer Service, making available
modern facilities for diagnosis and treatment over the whole
of England and Wales. This belated measure must be
acclaimed as a practical contribution to the cancer campaign,
but it cannot possibly succeed in checking the overwhelming
stream of new cases of cancer which constitutes the crux of
the problem.
   How this is to be achieved is a matter beyond the scope
of this introduction, the writer having elaborated an appro-
priate policy in another work. Suffice it to say that research
is seriously hampered by financial considerations and by
adherence to laboratory ideologies as outworn as they are
barren. Though pyramids of data are unceasingly erected
by a host of servants of the dominant methodology, yet their
labour, in the words of Bacon, has been rather in circle than
in progression. Its effect on reducing the cancer death-rate
remains negligible.
   The solution of the cancer problem in its manifold aspects
demands a mood of stern realism unsullied by any trace
     1 Addresses    on   Surgical Subjects   by Sir   Berkeley   ee   ee   Bart.
London,     1928.
               TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION                                21
of professional complacency. Too much stress is laid on
treatment while methods of preventing cancer remain pious
aspirations. So long as this attitude predominates there
can be no hope of achieving the conquest of cancer. The
example of tuberculosis should serve as a timely reminder
that the mortality of the “‘ white plague ’’ has been halved
within the past fifty years by preventive hygienic measures
and not by specific remedies. Moreover, the system of
institutional research, like that of any institutional organisa-
tion, is threatened by the perils of authoritarianism and
ultimate sterility.
   The supreme need in cancer research at the present time
is the multiplication of individual initiative, unfettered by
the cramping influence of official domination, and remu-
nerated at least as adequately as the services of Civil
Servants.!
   The history of Medicine is a long record of discoveries and
advances made by men who worked on independent lines
and who emancipated themselves from the shackles of
conventional doctrines. This is a truth that the public
seldom realise and committees always ignore.
  Science, like art, is not the outcome of corporate move-
ments, but the result of individual travail in the midst of
collective apathy.
           *          *           *      *        **        *

   (b) The present position of the cancer problem has been
admirably summed up by an eminent British surgeon who
has spent thirty years studying this question.? “ Present
methods of treatment are purely local and ignore the deadly
fact that though they may at best account for some 30 per
cent. of cancers, such triumphs of modern science are often
accomplished by means of nerve-shattering operations while
   1 We have seen that the annual contribution of the British public
towards the fight against cancer was assessed at less than one penny per
head of the population.   In the course of a recent B.B.C. discussion, we
were informed that every season this same public willingly spent
£50,000,000 on football pools !
   This contrast in expenditure is a striking example of the false values
that vitiate our national life and permit every individual to enjoy the
freedom of ignorance.
  2 “ Tumours   and Cancers,” Hastings Gilford, F.R.C.S.   London,   1925.
 99           TRANSLATOR’S               INTRODUCTION
cancer in general continues to flourish. In spite of further
improvements in operative technique, we are beginning to
see that surgery has its limitations and that we are coming
to a point whence we can no longer advance.”
   This indictment is reinforced by a statement made by
the Vice-President of the Royal College of Surgeons who
said that:     ‘‘ In a series of 5,500 cases of cancer the total
 survivorship from all cases was 30 per cent. . . . less than
 1 in 3. That is all our vaunted surgery can do for our
 patients! If we can only save 30 per cent. of our cancer
 patients, something more ought to be done. There is room
for both individual and organised effort. Surgery, advanced
 as it is, cannot be expected to do more than it has done.
 The end results of radium treatment are not much better
 than those of surgery.’’ 1 (See Note on Radium in Appendix.)
    This frank admission of failure on the part of a leading
 member of the medical profession clears the way for
 further comments by independent investigators who are
 profoundly dissatisfied with the prevailing methods of cancer
research.
    Hastings Gilford, formerly Hunterian Professor at the
 Royal College of Surgeons, and one of the most learned
 writers on the subject of cancer, expressed his views with
 characteristic vigour: ‘‘ That the research into the cause
 and nature of cancer is making no headway is obvious to
 everyone who has followed its drift since the movement
 began . . . all it has to show is a prodigious heap of facts
      . useless to man. . . . Laboratory cancer research has
 gone on for so many years contentedly grinding out data
 and spinning inductions without attention being drawn to
 the fact that it never produces any useful results. And
now,   after a quarter of a century of research, we can see
to what a deplorable waste of energy, ability and money
this academic aimless toil may lead. One useful, if negative
induction emerges, which is that the problem of causation
of human cancer is not to be solved by experiments in lower
animals in laboratories.”’ ?

  1 Proceedings of Royal     Society   of Medicine,   vol.   27, part 2;   1934,
Section of Surgery, p. 69.
  2 Lancet, October 25th, 1930.
            TRANSLATOR’S             INTRODUCTION                 23
    In view of the appalling cancer mortality it behoves us
to enquire whether the prevalent methods of cancer research
are likely to result in curative and preventive measures that
will reduce the incidence of the disease to an appreciable
 degree, for that is the most urgent desideratum.
    It is important to observe that in this particular sphere
 of scientific activity, namely cancer research, where a
 strictly objective attitude of mind should be enforced, all
 kinds of subjective considerations are allowed to gain
 dominance, thus sidetracking main issues and actually
 impeding progress. This deplorable tendency has been
 indicted by John Cope in his stimulating work on “ Cancer,
 Civilisation and Degeneration,’ recently published. He
states that: “‘ Experimental cancer research has become
 so isolated and so entrenched that, without being aware of
 it, the researcher now almost instinctively regards those
 who criticise his opinion, question his authority or adopt
 other methods of working, not as fellow-workers, but as
amateurs,   as   ‘outsiders,’   or   even   as   positive   enemies.
The suggestion that the causes and nature of human cancer
are far more likely to be revealed by a study of the habits
and customs of human beings in all parts of the earth comes
almost as a shock.”
   It need hardly be added that Lakhovsky, as an indepen-
dent investigator, was duly treated as an outsider by the
medical fraternity in Paris, who, in regard to obstructionism,
have little to learn from any professional organisation in the
world. The classical example of Pasteur’s conflict with the
Paris Faculty of Medicine is still vivid in our memories.
   Thus it is clear, as the Vice-President of the Royal College
of Surgeons boldly affirmed it, that individual efforts are
worthy of encouragement in view of the failure of
institutional research.
   Sir Ronald Ross, whose great work on malaria was carried
out on strictly individualistic lines, expressed his own
convictions on the subject of research in a very decisive
manner.     ‘I believe that institutional research has never
yet solved one of the great problems of nature, including
those of medicine. J will venture to predict that it never will
solve any of the problems connected with cancer. The dis-
24           TRANSLATOR’S      INTRODUCTION

coverer, like the poet, is an individualist. He must not be
controlled by any committee and he must choose his own
time and place.”
   It is highly significant that Lakhovsky achieved his
remarkable results in the field of cancer research, working
alone in his laboratory and ignored when not attacked by
exponents of orthodox cults.
   Lakhovsky has repeatedly emphasised the necessity of
approaching the cancer problem without preconceived ideas
or bias of any kind. As an engineer-physicist he is guided
only by experimental evidence and not by medical dogmas
masquerading as certitudes in a domain of doubts.
   Official medicine is so deeply indebted to physicists for
its own progress in the past that it can hardly afford to
disregard new theories on the constitution of living cells
such as those formulated by Lakhovsky in his “ Secret of
Life.”” Both X-rays and radium, without which modern
medicine is inconceivable, are the gifts of physicists who
were not primarily concerned with the problems of disease.
And yet Réntgen and Madame Curie have done more for
medical science than a host of academic professors of the
healing art.
         %          *     *       *        *       *

   (c) Many hypotheses have been advanced to explain the
formation of cancerous tumours.         Heredity, contagion,
local irritation, traumatism, etc. Having formulated his
theory of cellular oscillation, Lakhovsky applied it to eluci-
date the question of cancerous tumours which he attributed
to oscillatory disequilibrium. His first experiments bearing
on this subject were carried out on cancerous plants as far
back as 1924,   |
   According to Lakhovsky the essential cause of cancer
formation is to be sought in the oscillatory disequilibrium of
bodily cells. But the problem of attempting to establish
the equilibrium of the cells composing:     the human body
would appear to be insoluble. Our bodies contain approxi-
mately two hundred quintillion cells and in this fabulous
number there are not two cells vibrating with the same
frequency, this being due partly to the incessant activity
             TRANSLATOR’S                  INTRODUCTION                 25

 taking place within the cells and partly to the specific
 characteristics of different tissues, not to mention many
 other factors.     Moreover,        from a biological point of view,
 it would be impossible to find at any given time two
 individual cells exactly alike in every respect. Every cell
 of every individual tissue of any particular species is charac-
 terised by its own oscillation.         In order to produce,
 artificially, an oscillatory shock in disequilibrated cells it
 would be necessary to generate as many wavelengths as
 there are different cells in any given body. The problem
 would thus seem to be insoluble. With remarkable imagina-
 tive insight, Lakhovsky finally evolved a solution. To
 that end he designed a new type of radio-electrical apparatus,
 his famous Multiple Wave Oscillator, generating a field in
 which every cell could find its own frequency and vibrate
 in resonance.     The practical results he obtained in various
 hospitals soon confirmed his theoretical views. Clinical
 reports and photographs of cases treated with the Multiple
 Wave Oscillator are included in the Appendix, to which the
 reader is referred.                                    |
    Lakhovsky does not claim that his Multiple Wave Oscil-
 lator will cure all cases of cancer, for that is obviously
 impossible by any method of treatment, including surgery
 and radium.      He claims, however, that a number of cases
 have been definitely cured and that a marked improvement
 in the general condition of all patients treated with the
 Multiple Wave Oscillator has frequently been observed even
~ in the most     advanced        cases.   Furthermore,   alleviation   of
 the distressing symptoms associated with such cases is by
 no means a minor achievement.

                CANCER       IN     RELATION     TO   SOIL
    Lakhovsky postulates that in cancerous patients a certain
 degree of oscillatory disequilibrium in the cells must occur,
 and this would account for the abnormal development
 characteristic of neoplastic tissues. Lakhovsky also sought
 to determine the underlying causes of cancer formation in
 the light of his theory of cellular oscillation. Among the
 possible causes he stressed the role of external radiations of
26         TRANSLATOR’S         INTRODUCTION

all kinds susceptible of affecting the human organism, more
especially cosmic radiations which, in striking solid bodies,
give rise to secondary radiations of longer wavelengths and
variable intensity.
   In studying the geographical distribution of cancer from
official statistics, Lakhovsky was able to establish the fact
that the density of cancer incidence was closely connected
with the geological nature of the soil. He has shown the
relationship between cause and effect and the part played by
cosmic radiation whose field at the earth’s surface is modified
by the nature of the soil according as the latter is an insulator
or a conductor of electricity.
   Lakhovsky finally came to the conclusion, confirmed by
other workers, that soils that are specially permeable to
rays, that is to say “‘ dielectric,’ such as sand, sandstone,
gravel, etc., absorb external radiations to a great depth
without giving any reaction on the surface, while soils that
are impermeable to rays, that is to say conductors of elec-
tricity, such as clay, marl, alluvial deposits, carboniferous
strata, mineral ores, etc., are resistant to penetration by
rays and give rise to secondary radiations which modify the
field of external radiations. It is these impermeable soils
which are associated with the highest incidence of cancer.
   Lakhovsky is quite aware that the causation of cancer
is an extremely complex problem and that his theories deal
only with certain fundamental aspects of it.
   In the development of cancer the human “terrain ”’ is of
greater importance than the geological nature of the soil,
but that is not to say that the latter may be dismissed as
being altogether insignificant, a tendency only too prevalent
among laboratory workers who specialise in any particular
line of research.
   It may be pointed out that Lakhovsky is by no means an
isolated exponent of the geological factor in the causation
of cancer. Several German investigators have made a
special study of this question, notably Behla, Kolb and von
Pohl, and their systematic observations still await translation.
The only English study at all comparable with that of the
German workers is that of Dr. Alfred Haviland, published
as far back as 1875 and re-issued in 1892 under the
              CORRIGENDUM          (page 27)
  In the second edition of his major work, Dr. Haviland
modified his first statement as follows :
   (1) That the districts which had the lowest mortality
from cancer were characterised geologically by the older (a)
(Paleozoic) and most elevated rocks, such as the Lower
and Upper Silurian, and the Carboniferous Limestone series;
by the secondary (Mesozoic) Limestones of the Oolite (b)
and chalk formations (c).
   According to expert opinion, even this statement is not
sufficiently explicit and should be further clarified as
follows :
  (a) Older, 7.e., primary.
  (b) Oolitic Limestones of the Jurassic.
  (c) Chalk formations of the Cretaceous.
3
           TRANSLATOR’S          INTRODUCTION                 27

title of “‘ The Geographical Distribution of Disease in Great
Britain.”
   The main facts which Haviland brought to the notice of
the medical profession were summarised by him as follows :
    (1) That the districts which had the lowest mortality from
cancer were characterised geologically by the older and most
elevated rocks, such as the Lower and Upper Silurian and
the carboniferous limestones of the oolite and chalk
formation.
    (2) That the districts which had the highest mortality
were characterised geologically by clays, such as the London
clay of the Eocene, the Boulder clay of the Pleistocene or
Glacial period and the brick earths and alluvial deposits of
recent origin.
    The high mortality districts were found to be traversed
by fully formed rivers that seasonally flooded their banks.
Haviland added that “‘this coincidence of low mortality
from cancer in localities characterised by limestones would
not perhaps have been so much dwelt upon had not the
same fact occurred throughout England and Wales wherever
limestones occur, whilst on the other hand wherever clays
and floods are associated, high mortality from cancer at once
prevails.”
    At the request of the Editor of the Lancet, Dr. Haviland
wrote a series of articles on the geographical distribution
of cancerous diseases in the British Isles, which appeared
in that journal in the course of 1888 and 1889.
    He concluded that ‘‘ those who have reason to dread
 cancer should live in high dry districts characterised by either
limestone or chalk formations.”
    The geological nature of the soil is clearly not the only
factor in the causation of cancer. Civilisation has brought
in its train many habits and customs whose final results are
 manifested in physical degeneration forming a, suitable
terrain for the development of cancer.
    People tainted with alcoholism, tuberculosis or syphilis,
not to mention the toxic effects of excessive smoking and
adulterated foods, constitute a degenerate stock whose
 cellular oscillations, to use Lakhovsky’s expression, are not
in a state of equilibrium. This oscillatory anarchy in the
28         TRANSLATOR’S             INTRODUCTION

human organism has far-reaching repercussions in every
organ and living tissue, ultimately causing, under certain
conditions, the fatal proliferation of cells characteristic of
cancer.
           *       *          *f        *         *           *

     V. SIMILARITY     OF    LAKHOVSKY’S              AND    CRILE’S
                            THEORIES
   The theories of Lakhovsky bear a striking similarity to
those of Dr. George Crile, the eminent American surgeon,
whose great work on surgical shock has earned him an
international reputation.   In his admirable book entitled
“The Phenomena of Life,’ + Dr. Crile points out that
electrical energy plays a fundamental part in the organisa-
tion, growth and function of protoplasm.         Lakhovsky and
Crile, pursuing their investigations independently, have come
to identical conclusions.     While the engineer-physicist was
experimenting with his oscillating circuits, the surgeon was
testing in the clinic the principles of radio-electricity.
   The foundations of Lakhovsky’s theories rest on the
principle that life is created by radiation and maintained by
radiation. Crile states that man is a_ radio-electrical
mechanism and stresses the significant fact that when life
ends, radiation ends. He writes: “ It is clear that radiation
produces the electric current which operates adaptively the
organism as a whole, producing memory, reason, imagination,
emotion, the special senses, secretions, muscular action, the
response to infection, normal growth, and the growth of
benign tumours and cancers, all of which are governed
adaptively by the electric charges that are generated by
the short wave or ionising radiation in protoplasm.”
   Like Lakhovsky, Crile holds that living cells are electric
cells functioning as a system of generators, inductance lines
and insulators, and that the role played by radiation and
electricity in living processes is no more mysterious in man
than in batteries and dynamos.
   In formulating new concepts it is often necessary to coin
  1 “The Phenomena of       Life.” A radio-electric     interpretation   by
George Crile. Heinemann.    Printed in U.S.A., 1936.
              TRANSLATOR’S       INTRODUCTION                  29

new terms and Crile has used the term radiogen to denote
the theoretical units of protoplasm in which oxidation
occurs and from which radiation is emitted.             Crile’s
radiogens correspond fundamentally to Lakhovsky’s biomag-
nomobile units that characterise all living organisms.
   With an impressive array of experimental data Crile
makes it clear that all activities of the living organism,
including those of the brain, nerves, muscles and glands,
are dependent upon the specific radiant properties of the
visible spectrum. According to this brilliant investigator,
ultra-violet radiation plays the most prominent role in the
body, for it has the greatest power of generating electricity
and of ionising atoms essential for building up organic
compounds which constitute cellular protoplasm. Further-
more, the control of the special senses is effected through
environmental energy, mainly solar radiation. In fact, the
entire energy system of living beings is controlled by radiant
and electrical forces in the environment.     Thus it becomes
evident that the “spectrum of the living ” reflects innu-
merable environmental changes and is itself changing
continually in consciousness,    in sleep, in emotion    and in
every adaptive reaction.
   Both Crile and Lakhovsky have been remarkably successful
in the practical application of their theories, which have
extended our knowledge of biological processes and revealed
a new vista of scientific exploration that may ultimately
lead to the solution of the cancer problem.
          %        *       *        *%       *       *

                         CONCLUSION
   We began by considering the elementary laws of electricity
which we found to be applicable to all living things. The
study of radiations of the individual cell led us to contemplate
analogous phenomena throughout the universe. This cosmic
harmony of vibrations has given birth to the concept of
Universion which Lakhovsky defines as the synthesis of the
infinitely great and the infinitely small.    Universion consists
of the entire plexus of cosmic radiations emanating from
interplanetary space. Its nature is indestructible and all-
30         TRANSLATOR’S        INTRODUCTION

 pervading. It is the ultimate reservoir of all matter under-
going the cyclical phases of destruction and reconstruction.
    The validity of such speculations may be claimed to have
 been established by Lakhovsky’s experiments extending over
the whole range of organic life. The practical application
 of radio-electrical theories has had the most remarkable
results. Cancerous plants have been cured, human tissues
regenerated and animals restored to vigorous health. Such
are the outstanding achievements due to a solitary researcher
working in the face of formidable handicaps aggravated by
the opposition of witless reactionaries.
    Lakhovsky has accomplished his task and his brilliant
work deserves the highest praise. His life and his fortune
have been generously devoted to research, but he claims no
reward for himself. He merely ventures to hope that his
work has widened our intellectual horizon and that it will
benefit suffermg humanity.      Both ends have already been
attained in an appreciable measure and there is every reason
to anticipate that Lakhovsky’s theories will give rise to
still more significant developments in the future.
           THE SECRET OF LIFE
                         CHAPTER        I

     THE    PROBLEM       OF    INSTINCT        OR   SPECIAL
                    SENSE      IN ANIMALS

General Considerations—Instinct of Orientation—Carrier Pigeons—
Nocturnal Birds—Bats—Lemmings—Functions          of Semi-circular
Canals and of Antenne in Insects—Nocturnal Experiments with the
Great Peacock-Butterfly—Diurnal     Experiments with the Oak
Bombyx—Activities of Burying Beetles (Necrophorus).

                    General    Considerations

THE nature of instinct or special sense which naturalists
have studied in animals is, without doubt, one of the most
puzzling and complex problems confronting the modern
physiologist.
   It reflects, under its most strange and least explored
aspect, the whole problem of life. Yet, in spite of great
difficulties in the field of observation, accurate data on this
subject have been recorded from time to time. In this
matter, the experimental method is practically restricted to
direct observation, and more often than not laboratory
experiments are out of the question.
   Various hypotheses have been advanced to explain the
observed and controlled results, but it would seem that up
to the present no general theory has yet been enunciated
which would cover all the available data and at the same
time give a logical and comprehensive explanation.
   In this connexion the uninterrupted progress of science
is suggestive of certain new ideas which have enabled me to
elaborate my theory of the origin of life and of radiation
in relation to living beings, forming the subject of the
present work which began to appear from 1923 onwards in
various periodicals.
                              31
32               THE    SECRET        OF   LIFE

                 The   Instinct   of Orientation

   At the outset I devoted my attention to investigating the
causes of the ease with which certain animals succeeded in
finding their bearings so unerringly during the longest
voyages.   Such are carrier pigeons, which return to their
dove-cot after having flown a few hundred miles. Another
example is migrating birds, which fly in a straight line day
and night, speeding across the seas towards a definite
destination that they cannot possibly perceive, partly
because of their limited visual powers and partly because
of the curvature of the earth’s surface. They emigrate to
feed on insects that they can no longer find in our latitudes
at the approach of winter.
   Some say that this is sheer instinct, while others prefer
to call it special sense, but neither term explains the riddle.
I hold that in science nothing should be mysterious. Such
terms as instinct and special sense merely mask our ignorance
and it should be possible to account for everything.
   It seems more and more evident, as the following obser-
vations make it clear, that the sense of direction originates
from special radiations of ultra-short wavelength, emitted
by the birds and insects themselves.
   Carrier Pigeons. We have all heard of the truly wonderful
powers of orientation possessed by carrier pigeons. Although
this faculty is innate it nevertheless requires a certain
training before it is fully developed.
   After the bird has risen in the air and circled round a few
times, this faculty of orientation enables it without hesita-
tion, even at night, to fly towards its dove-cot,     which is
sometimes far away.
  I have noticed the prevalence of this phenomenon and
have ventured to give an explanation of it in the present
work : all birds about to undertake long migration voyages
(wild ducks, wild water-fowls, swallows, etc.) invariably
describe, like carrier pigeons, a series of orbits in the air
before starting on their final flight.
   A most interesting observation made on July 2nd, 1924,
at the radio station of Paterna, near Valencia (Spain), came
to my notice. A flock of pigeons had just been released
             THE     PROBLEM         OF    INSTINCT           33

 near an aerial of this station at the time of transmission.
 It was then observed that these birds could not manage to
 find their bearings and kept on flying in a circular fashion,
 as if completely disorientated.      This experiment was
 repeated several times and always produced the same result,
 that is to say the disappearance, or rather a very marked
perturbation of the sense of direction in carrier pigeons under
 the influence of electromagnetic waves.
    These experiments were taken up again at Paterna, at
 the radio station of Valencia, under the control of the
 Spanish military authorities} and also at Kreuznach
 (Germany). These fresh experiments fully confirmed my
 views concerning the influence of Hertzian waves on the
 instinct of orientation.
    A Spanish scientist, M. J. Casamajor, wrote a detailed
 report on the Paterna experiments. The Spanish carrier
 pigeon service installed a military carrier pigeon station at
Valencia, at a distance of about 8 kilometres from the radio
station of Paterna. At the time of the experiment in
 question pigeons were released one by one at regular intervals
of three minutes near the station while transmission was
taking place continuously. It was observed that all the
pigeons began to fly by circling round for some time, but
without succeeding in finding their bearings as they usually
do after having flown round a few times. In spite of a
change of wavelength in the course of transmission, no
return to the normal condition was observed, and so long as
transmission occurred, and it lasted more than half an hour,
no pigeons succeeded in flying in a definite direction. It is
important to note that barely a few minutes after the
transmission was over the released pigeons flew towards
their dove-cot without the least hesitation, even those which
had taken part in the first experiment.
   Another series of experiments which took place on
November 7th, 1926, in the same locality produced the same
result.
   The original experiments at Paterna put investigators on
their mettle, for they could not understand the relation
existing between the instinct of pigeons and the transmission
            1 This was written in 1925.   (Translator.)
 $.L.                                                     D
34               THE    SECRET       OF     LIFE

of electromagnetic waves. The German technicians hastened
to verify and control Casamajor’s observations.    In March,
1926, they initiated a series of experiments similar to those
carried out at Kreuznach.      The conditions, however, were
different and more rigorous. A site was chosen so that the
dove-cot and the radio station were diametrically opposed.
Consequently this station was situated exactly as the crow
flies on the course that the pigeons were bound to take.
On arriving near the radio station it was noticed that the
pigeons changed their flight, were losing their bearings and
appeared to be definitely disorientated. They did not
succeed in resuming their course towards the dove-cot until
their flying had brought them outside the intense electro-
magnetic field surrounding the aerial of the radio station.
   It is noteworthy that the simplest explanation of this
phenomenon does not seem to have occurred to any of the
Spanish, French and German experimenters, namely that of
electromagnetic induction on the pigeons’ directive organs.
They were all baffled by the significance of the phenomenon
which they attributed to a curious anomaly that they could
not explain.
                        Nocturnal   Birds

  The Bat.   The observations made on carrier pigeons
appear to hold good for nocturnal birds also. It seems
obvious, a priort, that the sensibility of these birds to electro-
magnetic waves in general is different from that of diurnal
birds by virtue of their special adaptation to light or dark-
ness.   These two species of birds, however, show a common
feature, they feed on the same insects.
   We are led to believe, as we shall see later, that they
are attracted to their prey by radiations emitted by these
insects. ‘There is little doubt that daylight has an influence
on the propagation of these radiations. If sunlight absorbs
them, as it does in the case of wireless waves, nocturnal birds
(various species of owls) should go hunting at night because
their sensibility to reception, so far as these radiations are
concerned, is less developed than that of diurnal birds.
Conversely, if sunlight increases the amplitude of radiations,
as seems to be the case for waves measuring several metres,
             THE    PROBLEM         OF   INSTINCT                35

then it is the excess of intensity of the radiations which
would prevent nocturnal birds to go hunting during the day.
   In this matter of sensibility of reception to special radia-
tions, one is justified in assuming the existence of correlative
differences in the organs of sight, as observed in diurnal and
nocturnal birds. Among nocturnal birds, let us take the
bat as an example. It is commonly believed that it is to
the acuity of the senses of hearing and smell that the bat
owes its ability of approaching its prey whose least move-
ments   it can   detect, thanks   to the vibrations     of the air
reaching its ears. This hypothesis may be admissible under
certain conditions such as the calm atmosphere of the
countryside. In Paris I have often watched bats from my
balcony, on racing days, amid the uproar of a great crowd
and the noise of thousands of cars setting up vibrations in
the air, saturated with the products of petrol combustion.
Amid this deafening din and vitiated atmosphere it is neither
the sense of smell nor that of hearing that guides the bat
straight towards    insects   (cockchafers,   moths,   etc.) which
they catch as easily as in the undisturbed silence of the
countryside.
   The bat is thus most probably attracted to these insects
by the radiations they emit, which are not influenced by
noise nor by petrol fumes.
   Lemmings.     This is another extraordinary example, the
lemming, a kind of field-mouse whose habitat is in Scandi-
navian regions. The famous Swedish naturalist, Linneus,
gave an account of their peculiar expeditions.
   ‘* At the approach of severe cold weather and sometimes
without any apparent reason, lemmings leave their natural
habitat in the high mountains of Norway in order to make a
long voyage towards the sea. The emigrating throng,
consisting of myriads of individuals, trots in a straight line
across all obstacles without ever letting itself be diverted
from its goal. While proceeding in Indian file they trace
rectilinear parallel furrows, two fingers deep and several
yards apart. They devour anything obstructing their
passage, such as herbs and roots. Nothing diverts them
from their route. Ifa man should come across their path
they run between his legs. If they meet a haystack, they
                                                            D2
36                     THE    SECRET        OF     LIFE

gnaw their way through ; if it should be a rock, they go
round it in a semicircle and resume their straight course.
Should a lake impede their progress they swim across it in
a straight line, whatever its size may be. Is a boat in the
way ? They climb over it and dive into the water on the
other side. A strong current in a river does not stop them,
even at the risk of annihilation.” 1
   Is it possible that these animals are guided in their
straight course by their sense of smell or hearing ? They
perceive smells and noises coming from all directions. Is it
not simpler to suggest that these lemmings, although feeding
on roots and seeds, and needing an occasional addition of
small fishes, travel towards the sea, guided by the radiations
emanating from the shoals of fishes upon which they feed ?
Furthermore, glow-worms, micro-organisms in decomposing
meat,    fire-flies,   etc., emit    luminous      radiations.      And     so,
too, with certain animalculze whose presence in innumerable
masses makes the sea phosphorescent. It is also common
knowledge that certain fishes known as torpedo-fishes, give
off electricity.
   Thus an elementary intuitive generalisation would seem
to establish the fact that certain animals emit radiations
which we cannot perceive, but whose effects are far-reaching.

Role    of Semi-circular      Canals    in Birds     and   of Antennz        in
                                  Insects

   Some naturalists have stated that the semi-circular canals
of the ear, in many species, are endowed with special directing
properties. If these organs are removed, the operated birds
invariably lose their sense of equilibrium and turn round
and round, as though stupefied and incapable of taking a
definite direction. Assuredly here is an interesting observa-
tion. But another observation of the highest importance
has been made by scientists. The fluid contained in the
semi-circular canals would appear to be particularly sensitive
to the influence of an electromagnetic field while the walls
    1 In his text-book on Zoology, Sedgwick wrote ‘‘ The Scandinavian
lemming migrates in a straight line in enormous herds, crossing all obstacles
till it reaches the sea into which it plunges in the continuance of its wander-
ing and is drowned.”’      (‘Translator.)
              THE      PROBLEM       OF     INSTINCT                  37

 of the canals consist of insulating material. Now, any wireless
 transmitter creates a variable electromagnetic field whose
 action makes itself felt at considerable distances. In view of
 this fact we may well ask ourselves whether a great number of
 living creatures do not obtain their bearings through the
 agency of waves similar to those transmitted by radio stations.
_ The semi-circular canals are susceptible of playing the
 role of a radiogoniometric
 receiver.      The very con-
 formation of the semi-
 circular canals appears to
 support     this hypothesis.
 They are arranged in three
 planes, each of which is at
 right angles to the other
 two so that in the semi-
 circular canals the three
 planes of space are repre-
 sented.     Such a scheme
 constitutes a system of co-
 ordinates,? necessary and
 adequate to determine the
position of a point in space,
or, in the case under con-
sideration, the position of a     Fia. 1.   Schematic diagram of semi-
bird in the atmosphere, or                   circular canals.
yet   the   position    of   an   A, plane of anterior canal;   P, plane

insect  in relation to the ffpostevor, canal; 1plane of
bird (Fig. 1).
  ‘Animals in general, and birds in particular, do not move
in a horizontal plane but in a three-dimensional space and
the semi-circular canals have been devised accordingly.
   The conducting fluid contained in these canals constitutes
a directional receiving circuit completed by an accessory
circuit in the form of a pliable spiral (self-inductance and
tuning capacity).
  In the strange world of insects many             of them possess
   1 In wireless, a radiogoniometer is a kind of directional receiving
apparatus.    (Translator.)
  2 A system of lines by means of which the position of a point is
determined.    (Translator.)
38                  THE     SECRET        OF    LIFE

minute antennz enabling them to follow their course in a
straight line towards relatively distant points. Nature does
nothing in vain; these antennze would seem to exist only
for the purpose of receiving radiations (Fig. 2).
   The similarity between the antenne of insects and the
aerials of radio stations is striking, but this similarity, how-
                                                         2

        Fic. 2. Four species of insects with characteristic antenne.
   1. Nemoptera lusitanica.  2. Hulyes melanoptera.     3. Chlorion lobatum.
4. Huchreus purpuratus.

ever, is not as simple as it would appear at first sight.
Owing to their relatively considerable dimensions in relation
to the emitted radiations, the antennz of insects function
in the manner of complex oscillators vibrating with the
frequency of harmonics of a far higher scale than their
fundamental wavelength.
  Nocturnal Experiments with the Great Peacock-butterfly.
Let us consider, by way of example, the bombyx, in the
             THE     PROBLEM       OF   INSTINCT              39

 light of observations made by Fabre in his work entitled
 “ Maurs des insectes.’’ In the laboratory, soon after the
 emergence of a female from the chrysalis, Fabre observed
 that, at night,   a whole swarm   of males invaded the place,
 which leads us to suppose that this female was endowed with
 a certain “nocturnal capacity.” Fabre also pointed out
 the difficulties of access to his laboratory surrounded by a
 multitude of trees. In spite of these obstacles the males
 always succeeded in reaching the female. The following
 day the same phenomenon was observed ; it all seemed as
 if the sense of smell had been guiding the moths. Fabre
 then gives an account of experiments which shatter this
 hypothesis.
    In the first place, the moths of this species, known as the
 Great Peacock, are well-nigh impossible to be found under
 normal circumstances. Thus the males must have come
 from a very distant site. Sound, light and the sense of
 smell are out of the question, for the moth makes straight
 for the cage in spite of a variety of scents intentionally
 diffused by the experimenter in order to lead the insects
 astray. The factor of place-memory may be ruled out as
 irrelevant.
    Fabre also remarked that the moths were travelling in
 the same direction as the wind. It follows that if they had
 been guided by the sense of smell they would have had to
 soar with the wind in order to catch the scented air.
    Diurnal Experiments with the Oak-bombyx.        In order to
 ascertain the influence of sunlight Fabre experimented in
 full daylight by studying the habits of the oak-bombyx,
 whose diurnal activities are more pronounced. But this
~ insect, like the Great Peacock, is not to be found in the
  region where Fabre was working. How are we to account
 for the fact that it was able to come from its distant habitat ?
 The males hurried along and found the female locked up
 in a drawer or under a framework covered by a cloth, in
 spite of nauseating effluvia emanating from all sorts of
 odoriferous substances placed there by the experimenter.
    According to Fabre, the following experiment would seem
 to confirm the olfactory sense hypothesis.
    “T placed the female in a bell-glass and gave her a slender
40               THE    SECRET      OF    LIFE

oak twig with withered leaves as a support. The glass was
set upon a table facing the open window.   On entering the
room the moths could not fail but see the prisoner, as she
was placed directly in their way. The tray, containing a
layer of sand, where the female had passed the preceding
morning and night, covered with a piece of wire gauze, was
in my way. Without premeditation I placed it at the other
end of the room, on the floor, in a corner where but little
light could penetrate, about ten steps away from the window.
   The outcome of these preparations completely upset my
notions. None of the arriving insects stopped at the bell-
glass where the female was plainly to be seen in full daylight.
They passed on as though indifferent. Not a glance,
nothing to put one on the track. They all flew to the
further end of the room into the dark corner where I had
placed the tray and the bell-glass. They alighted on the
wire dome. . . . All the afternoon, until sunset, the moths
danced about the empty cage a saraband which the real
presence of the female would normally evoke. . . . Finally
they departed, but not all. There were some who would
not go, as if held there by some magical force. Truly a
strange result. The moths collected where there was
apparently nothing.    . . What had deceived them? All
the preceding night and all the morning the female had
remained under the wire-gauze cover, sometimes clinging to
the wirework, sometimes resting on the sand in the tray.
Whatever she touched, above all, apparently, with her
distended abdomen, was impregnated, following a long
contact, with certain emanations.        This was her lure, her
love-philtre.   This it was   that revolutionised    the insect
world.   The sand retained these emanations for some time
and diffused the effluvia in turn. Thus it is the olfactory
sense that guides the moths and warns them far off. . . .
The irresistible philtre requires time for its elaboration. I
imagine it as an exhalation which is gradually given off
and saturates whatever is in contact with the motionless
body of the female. . . . With these data in hand and
unexpected information resulting from them, I varied the
experiments, but all pointed in the same direction.      In the
morning I placed the female under the wire-gauze cover;
            THE    PROBLEM        OF   INSTINCT              41

for support an oak twig was provided.       There, motionless,
as if dead, she lay for hours, buried under a cluster of leaves
which would thus become impregnated with her emanations.
When the hour of the daily inspection drew near, I removed
the twig and put it on a chair not far from the open window.
I Jeft the female under the bell-glass, plainly exposed on the
table in the middle of the room. The moths arrived as
usual . ... they hesitated . . . they were still searching.
Finally they found something, and what did they find?
Just the twig. . . . With their wings rapidly fluttering they
alighted on the foliage exploring it all over, probing, raising
and displacing it until at last the twig fell on the ground.
Nevertheless, they continued probing between the leaves.”
   From his experiments Fabre concluded that these moths
were endowed with a sense of smell very different from ours
and characteristic of their species.
   Fabre’s conclusion fails to satisfy me.
   The act of smelling is dependent on material particles
which excite the olfactory sense, but the diffusion of these
particles is limited to a short radius in the atmosphere.
Thus it is not due to these particles that the moths were
enabled to fly long distances.
   I thought it fit, therefore, to repeat these experiments.
   In my view, what attracts the males towards the female
in the case of the Great Peacock and the Bombyx, is not the
splendour of her coloured mantle and her velvet wings, nor
is it the odoriferous particles. It is rather the infinitesimal
particles given off by her ovaries, micro-organic cells radiat-
ing according to a scale of determined wavelengths and
exciting in the males the desire of procreation.
   This hypothesis is confirmed by the following experiment
which I carried out myself.
   New Experiments with the Oak-bombyx.              After the
emergence of the female from the chrysalis, a host, of males
rushed from all directions. After having left during the
night this female lying on a leaf of cotton wool, I removed
her the following day at noon. Then I placed, at a distance
of about 5 metres from the female, the cotton-wool leaf on
which the males came to rest again.
  I repeated this experiment after having this time dipped
42                THE   SECRET     OF   LIFE

the cotton wool in a solution of pure alcohol, and I observed
that the males stopped coming. The same result was
obtained when corrosive sublimate was used instead of
alcohol. Now, neither pure alcohol nor corrosive sublimate
could have had the least effect on the odoriferous effluvia.
On the other hand, these solutions had destroyed by sterili-
sation the living cells which gave off the radiations that
attracted the moths.
   Burying-beetles (Necrophorus).      ‘The activities of these
beetles on the decomposing bodies of dead rats and birds
also appear to confirm my theory.
   As some naturalists have remarked, these insects play a
hygienic part in the economy of nature, in fields and woods ;
they scavenge upon death for the benefit of life. They
belong to a certain species of insects which attack dead
bodies and devour them until they have restored into the
cycle of life this inanimate organic matter. The burying-
beetle is essentially a grave-digger, sometimes travelling long
distances to reach the dead bodies of rats and birds which it
buries by degrees into the earth so that they may ultimately
serve as food for its offspring destined to be born on the
same site.
   The extraordinary social life of these beetles might be
described at length. Let us confine ourselves to a charac-
teristic which is relevant to our theory, the fact that they
know how to direct themselves across great distances towards
the dead bodies of rats and birds.
   Is it likely that they are guided by the sense of smell ?
If dead bodies give off odours, the odoriferous particles
cannot be diffused beyond a range of a few metres. This
hypothesis is inadmissible, in the case of burying-beetles,
as in other cases, in view of the great distances that have to
be covered.
   It is also important to observe that the beetles do not
appear until eight to ten days after the death of birds or
rats, when their bodies are in a state of decomposition.
     It would seem, therefore, that it is the micro-organisms
arising out of this decomposition and oscillating according
to a determined scale of wavelengths, which direct the
burying-beetles or their offspring towards their food.
                         CHAPTER           II

     AUTO-ELECTRIFICATION             IN        LIVING   BEINGS

Electrification by Friction of Wings in the Atmosphere—Influence
of Electrical Capacity in Birds—The Role of Orientation in the Flight
of Birds—Explanation of Migration—Extension of Principle to
Wingless Animals.

  Electrification   by Friction   of Wings        in the Atmosphere.
Simple experiments have confirmed the following hypothesis
that I had previously formulated ; living beings moving in
the atmosphere, notably insects and birds, are capable of
taking electrical charges, often at a very high potential.
   In imitating the flight of a bird in order to study the
effects produced by the friction of its wings against the air,
as, for example, by shaking a duck’s wing before a radium
electrometer after having taken care to insulate myself
from the earth by means of two ebonite discs of 2 cm.
thickness, I have been able to measure a charge of static
electricity of an approximate tension of 600 volts. This
tension increases as the earth level becomes further distant
from the experimenter.
   These experiments put an end to all the controversies
that have raged for the past, fifty years among investi-
gators (naturalists, entomologists, ornithologists, hunters,
etc.) on the subject of the migration of birds in general,
and of their direction in relation to that of the wind in
particular. It is only fair to state that the majority of
observers have admitted that their conclusions were, after
all, but approximations, the solution of the problem thus
remaining to be found.
   As I have already stated, all living beings emit radiations.
But, as far as the reception of these waves is concerned,
birds which feed while flying have a far greater capacity
and sensibility than animals that are restricted to moving
on the earth’s surface.
                               43
44               THE     SECRET     OF     LIFE

   We know that the electric potential of the terrestrial
atmosphere increases with height at the rate of 1 volt per
cm. Thus at a height of 1,000 metres there is a potential
difference of 100,000 volts in relation to the earth’s surface.
This increase of potential with height accounts for the
formidable charges observed in certain aerial metallic tracks
situated in mountainous regions. It also accounts for those
luminous   brushlights   which,   in the   calmest   atmosphere,
alpinists have observed being shot off their ice-axes at a
high altitude such as the summit of the Wetterhorn in the
Bernese Oberland (3,703 metres).
   Moreover, it has been observed that all birds about to
undertake a long migration voyage (wild ducks, pigeons,
swallows, etc.) start by rising in the air, then describe a
series of numerous orbits before taking their final departure.
   Why do they fly in this manner ?
   Judging by what we have just learned about the instinct
of orientation, we may assume that in describing such orbits
the birds avail themselves of a useful process to ascertain
the various directions of atmospheric waves by means of
their natural radiogoniometer (radio-direction finder), con-
sisting of the semi-circular canals.
   It is highly probable that the purpose of these preliminary
manceuvres lies essentially in the necessity, imposed on the
birds, to obtain the indispensable electric tension in order to
detect insects or other prey they are searching for, which
are actually thousands of miles away.
   As a case in point let us suppose that if, to the atmospheric
potential generated by altitude, say 50,000 volts for an
ordinary flight at a height of 500 metres, we add the potential
developed by friction of the bird’s wings against the wind,
say 25,000 volts, we arrive at a total of 75,000 volts.
   Influence of Electrical Capacity in Birds. It is worthy of
note that electric tension during a bird’s flight varies in
direct ratio to the resistance of the wind. The stronger the
wind, the greater the electric tension acquired by the bird.
The weaker the wind, the more this tension diminishes.
   Again, when the bird flies in a straight line, it encounters
on its path winds of variable intensity coming from all
directions. This electric tension may thus be regulated by
AUTO-ELECTRIFICATION                     IN LIVING          BEINGS          45

the bird which simply flies high or low according to the
strength and direction of the wind. If, in the course of a
flight against the wind, the electric tension should rise from
75,000 volts to 100,000 volts, the bird must come down a
distance of 250 metres in order to bring the tension back
to the former figure. At this new altitude the bird will find
in the atmosphere an electric tension which, added to that
generated by the friction of its wings against the wind, will
give it the tension of 75,000 volts which is both sufficient
and necessary for continuing its flight. On the other hand,
a higher tension would prove detrimental.
   Thanks to this means of regulating its electric tension
by varying the flying level from the earth’s surface, the
bird, together with the underlying soil, constitute an actual
air condenser.
   The bird thus possesses a kind of complete wireless
apparatus since the semi-circular canals, in communication
with his brain, and under the influence of electricity, play
the part of receiver.
   Just as for picking up wireless waves emitted in America
the operator regulates the mechanism of his receiving
apparatus by modifying with a variable condenser the
capacity of his aerial in relation to the earth, so the migrating
bird regulates his own electrical capacity by flying either
high or low.
   The Role of Orientation in the Flight of Birds.                A Belgian
entomologist,      Dr. Quinet, after having made               observations
for thirty years, states that he has invariably “ seen ”’ birds
flying against the wind. The theory that has been put
forward in this work provides a simple explanation of this
phenomenon.      When they fly against the wind, birds are
compelled, in order to lower their electric tension, to come
down to low altitudes which enables the observer to see them
clearly. But when birds fly with the wind they rise to a
considerable altitude so as to obtain the charge of atmo-

  1 It is known that the electric tension of the atmosphere is proportional
to the altitude ; on the other hand, the electrical capacity of the bird in
relation to the soil is, in the first approximation, inversely proportional to
the altitude,    The result is that the product of these two quantities, which
is the electric charge of the bird (Q = CV) is constant.   This electric charge
appears to be a constant for any given bird.
AG       ot        THE   SECRET     OF   LIFE

spheric electricity which is indispensable to them. In this
case the birds remain invisible to the naked eye.
   This theory also furnishes an explanation of the observa-
tions made     by Ternier and Masse,     Cathelin   and Aubert,
when they stated having “ heard ” and “ seen ”’ migratory
birds flying at great heights with the wind or against a light
breeze.
   All these different observations, far from excluding one
another, combine to confirm my theory.
     Explanation of Migration.   On the subject of migration of
birds and the means employed by them to that end,
naturalists have advanced a great variety of hypotheses.
Some have attributed the migratory instinct to an excep-
tionally acute sense of sight, while others have imagined
the existence of an extremely sensitive hearing thanks to a
kind of microphonic apparatus. There are yet others
who have supposed that the birds were endowed with a
highly developed olfactory sense enabling them to detect
effluvia which escape us. There are also those who have
invoked an electromagnetic action, localised in the atmo-
sphere ; and lastly there is the hypothesis of place-memory.
   The majority of observers appear to have preferred the
instinct or special sense hypothesis.
   All these theories do not explain why, for example, the
falcon rises facing the wind before pouncing on its prey,
which it does not seem to perceive standing close by ; nor
why sterns and seagulls perform a series of circular
manceuvres in the air, while facing the wind, before alighting
to fish in the waves. Nor yet do these theories explain a
host of analogous facts.
   The theory of auto-electrification alone, stating that the
bird is able to detect radiations emitted by the living things
upon which it feeds, may be said to explain these phenomena
that have hitherto remained so mysterious.
   Extension of the Principle to Wingless Animals.  Although
animals that live in close contact with the earth’s surface
electrify themselves less easily than birds and insects, it is
nevertheless a fact that they are endowed with a certain
degree of receptivity which enables them to detect radiations
but only within a very restricted radius. Thus the horse
AUTO-ELECTRIFICATION             IN    LIVING     BEINGS     47

is capable of finding his way to the stable within a radius of
10 kilometres.     The dog “detects” his master within
reasonable distance. Lemmings travel towards the sea from
the far distant mountains of Norway. And the same
principle applies to all animals possessing a tail, for they all
 electrify themselves by waving their tail in the air. It
should also be noted that the tail of animals producing auto-
 electrification serves both as an antenna and an aerial.
Moreover, the tail is in direct       connexion   with the most
important nervous centres.
                               CHAPTER         III

UNIVERSAL NATURE OF RADIATION IN LIVING BEINGS
Fundamental Principles—Nature              of Radiation in Living Beings—
The Glow-worm.
                       Fundamental          Principles
As a result of numerous observations and experiments I
have formulated the following four principles :
   1. Every living being emits radiations.1
   2. The great majority of living beings—with very few
exceptions—are capable of receiving and of detecting waves.”
   3. Any flying creature, that is to say, capable of leaving the
earth’s surface (bird, winged insect) possesses a high capacity
of wave-emission and reception, while animals that are unable
to fly have a far lesser capacity in the same direction.®
   4, The influence of sunlight on the propagation of waves
is the determining factor in causing certain birds and insects,
whose receptivity is specific, to fly and to feed at night,
whereas others whose receptivity is normal, function, so to
speak, in the daytime.*
   1 This first principle is the keystone of the theory. Evidence of its
validity is given in the following chapters.
   2 The second proposition is a natural corollary of the first. The work
of physicists on wave propagation has shown that any transmitting system
is susceptible of receiving waves and of transmitting them.   Indeed, every
radiating system can both emit and transmit.
  % The third proposition is of a somewhat intuitive order and is based
upon what everyone knows on the propagation of radiations. Absorption
of waves is greater in the soil than in the atmosphere.  High aerials are
better than low ones for emitting and picking up waves.        It follows,
therefore, that flying creatures are better equipped than non-flying ones
for emitting and receiving radiations.
   * The fourth proposition accounts for the differences observed as much
in the organs as in the habits of diurnal and nocturnal animals respectively.
All observations on Hertzian waves show the undesirable influence of solar
radiation on the propagation of waves.      But we are not yet in a position
to know definitely to what extent and in what way this influence is exerted
on ultra-short waves.     As far as waves of several hundred metres are
concerned and also longer waves, sunlight has a very marked weakening
effect.   As for waves under   100 metres, the reverse effect occurs, compli-
cated by the phenomenon of scintillation.
   We may now adapt these conclusions to living beings whose radiations
are equally influenced by sunlight.
                                      48
 NATURE      OF   RADIATION       IN   LIVING    BEINGS       49

    As the modern tendency is to reduce all physical pheno-
 mena to unity by bringing into play the full range of waves,
 it is perfectly logical to assume that certain animals act as
 transmitters and receptors of radiations. It seems almost
 certain that the majority of insects and birds give off
 radiations, and are also sensitive to the! influence of waves
-which enable them to find their bearings. In any case,
 these creatures find their way under the influence of waves,
 and this orientation is automatic.
    When, in 1923, I conceived my theory, these principles
 could only be considered as a possible hypothesis. But as
 a result of all the observations and experiments I have made
 since then this hypothesis seems to me to have gained a
 greater measure of clearness and validity.

            Nature of Radiation in Living Beings
    In order to understand fully the réle and nature of
 radiations emitted by living beings, it may be instructive
 to look back and recall the history of the discovery of
 electromagnetic waves.   The existence of these waves was
 not generally known until an apparatus had been devised
 to render them perceptible to our senses. The greatest
 claim to fame on the part of Hertz, Branly, Marconi, and
 many other technicians and amateurs, lies essentially in
 having invented an apparatus which, independently of all
 theories on the nature of radiation, makes these waves easily
 perceptible, even across great distances.
    The recent discoveries of certain kinds of radiations—
 wireless waves, X-rays, radio-activity, cosmic rays—have
 but slightly lifted the veil of mystery concealing from our
 senses whole gamuts of waves which elude direct perception.
    Is it not possible that we are surrounded by other radia-
 tions, imperceptible to us, because we do not possess the
 necessary apparatus capable of revealing them to our senses ?
    If we admit that birds emit and detect radiations imper-
 ceptible to us, the terms instinct and special sense employed
 to explain certain characteristics become clear immediately,
 and assume a precise significance. The sense of orientation
 in birds, and in animals generally, explains itself at once.
  8.1L.                                                   E
 50                 THE   SECRET     OF    LIFE

 Just as a ship lost in the fog tries to ascertain by means of
 a radiogoniometric apparatus the direction of the Hertzian
 beacon   sending    off electromagnetic   waves,   so, too,   the
 animals and insects in question try to pick up radiations
 emitted by living beings and plants which have a definite
 interest for them. Their orientation is subsequently
 determined by the bearings obtained.
    But it may be objected that space would then be riddled
 with innumerable radiations. How would it be possible for
 these creatures to detect them ?
    The answer is simple. Discrimination is easily effected
thanks to the diversity of frequencies which characterises
these radiations. We shall see how this is accomplished
presently.
    What is the organ which enables an animal to pick up
these waves and to detect them while also rendering them
perceptible to their senses ? My firm conviction is that this
organ is the semi-circular canals of the ear whose fluid is
sensitive to electromagnetic fields, thus enabling animals to
be aware of the vibrations they are searching for.
   We may now examine more closely the functions of the
semi-circular canals by studying the modalities of their
configuration in different living species.
   The invertebrates do not possess any semi-circular canals,
but only membranous vesicles which take their place and
have similar functions. Yves Delage mentions the case of
the octopus which is still able to swim after being blinded,
but turns round its longitudinal axis or plane of symmetry
when the vesicles which control its faculty of orientation
have been destroyed.
   After the destruction of both labyrinths aquatic animals
and notably frogs, can no longer swim nor jump in a straight
line. It should also be noted that lampreys, which have
only two pairs of canals, can only move in space in two
directions ; that Japanese mice (dancing mice) which only
possess the superior vertical canals, can move only in one
 direction, right or left, and are moreover incapable of
 moving straight ahead or in a vertical direction. These
 rodents, as E. de Cyon has shown, know only one space of
one dimension.
NATURE           OF RADIATION IN LIVING BEINGS                                       51
   The majority of the vertebrates possess semi-circular canals
arranged in three planes in space. This assemblage of three
canals, each of which is at right angles to the other two,
constitutes the labyrinth which is completed by more or less
developed organs:           the vestibule and the cochlea.!

Fic. 3.   Diagram of semi-circular canals in different species of vertebrates’
  A, fishes;    B, birds   and   reptiles;      C, mammals      (after Waldeyer).
  It should be noted that apart from the three semi-circular canals being
disposed at right angles to one another, these organs are differentiated by
features corresponding to the particular needs of each species.       Fishes
obtain the necessary electric tension by friction resulting from the impact
of their bodies against water and by swimming nearer to or further from
the earth’s level.  Similarly birds acquire auto-electrification by friction
of wings against the air and by varying the altitude in the course of their
flight.   Mammals which cannot avail themselves of either of these auto-
electrification processes are in need, in order to pick up waves, of a special
directing apparatus represented by the accessory spiral, m.

   Now, whereas the cochlea is highly developed in mammals
it is practically absent in fishes, reptiles and birds (Fig. 3).
   How may we account for this difference ? Is the presence
   1 In physiology the labyrinth is a name        given to the series of cavities of
the internal   ear.   It comprises   the     vestibule,   cochlea   and   semi-circular
canals. The vestibule is an oval cavity of the internal ear which forms the
entrance of the cochlea. The cochlea is a cavity of the internal ear resem-
bling a snail-shell.   Helmholtz was of the opinion that it served the
purpose of analysing sound waves. (Translator.)
                                                                               E 2
52                THE      SECRET     OF   LIFE

of the cochlea in mammals related to a special sense which
is absent in birds and fishes ? I believe that, from the point
of view of my theory, the question is susceptible of a very
simple and general explanation. We have already seen
that the semi-circular canals function as a radiogoniometric
system whose orientation depends on the direction of the
particular waves picked up. As far as fishes and birds
which move in a three-dimensional space are concerned, this
picking up process is facilitated, as we have pointed out
before, by auto-electrification effected either by means of
variations   of altitude   within   the terrestrial   electric field,
regulated by the birds themselves, or else by means of
friction of living bodies resulting from contact with air or
water.
   Mammals, not endowed with such powers, and confined to
moving in a two-dimensional space represented by the
earth’s surface, need an auxiliary organ to pick up the
particular waves that sensitise their radiogoniometric canals.
This is where the cochlea plays an important part, as a kind
of aerial, left open and wound up in the form of a more or
less flattened tube filled with a conducting fluid.
   The question now arises ‘‘ What about the reptiles ?”
In spite of their incapacity to scale heights or fathom depths
why are they not brought in the same category as mammals
and why are they devoid of a cochlea ?
   The answer will be apparent to anyone who has observed
the movements of reptiles. If, by chance, on a warm
summer’s day, you have the opportunity of seeing an adder,
for example, you may observe that while resting, its long
articulated body is arranged somewhat in the form of a
flattened coil. This apparent state of repose or sleep which
the snake seems to have assumed, is in reality a state of
subconscious watching. The adder watches; the harmo-
nious winding of its body is a small receiving apparatus
which to a great extent makes up for the absence of a diminu-
tive cochlea in the labyrinth containing the semi-circular
canals. If an owl, or any other diurnal bird of prey should
venture to approach the snake or if a harmless green frog,
an easy prey, should go near it, this improvised receiving
apparatus, formed by the adder’s body, will immediately
NATURE      OF   RADIATION        IN   LIVING    BEINGS      53

warn the snake, which will be prepared either for attack or
for escape. This would seem to prove the needlessness of
a specific spiral apparatus for picking up waves.
  Thus, once again, we have a confirmation of the ancient
dictum: ‘‘ Nature does nothing in vain’; and there is no
reason why a useless organ should be preserved when Nature
finds a better substitute for it.
   What then are these radiations emitted by living beings ?
Like all other known radiations, they are characterised by
their wavelength.      Our present task is to consider the range
of wavelengths that comprises these radiations.
   The Glow-worm.       At the outset, let us show by a concrete
example that it would be absurd to deny the principle that
living beings emit radiations. This negation is obviously
futile, as all available data formally contradict it.
   No great mental effort is required to think of an insect
which emits luminous radiations, I mean the glow-worm.
   What is the glow-worm ? An insect that remains more or
less constantly in a luminous state.          Experiments have
shown, by direct observation, that the eggs of the glow-worm
are spontaneously luminous and that this characteristic
light is transmitted without a break from generation to
generation.                                         |
   What then is this radiation of the glow-worm ? Nothing
but radiations of ordinary light, but filtered and giving a
special luminous spectrum that may be observed with the
spectroscope. Hence if we perceive the luminescence of the
glow-worm, it is primarily because it is due to a luminous
radiation, emanating from cells, certain molecules of which
vibrate with the same frequency as light which we can
perceive immediately because it affects our visual sense.
   Why then should we admit the possibility of the glow-
worm emitting luminous radiations while refusing to admit
the possibility of other insects emitting different types of
radiations beyond the range of luminous ones, and conse-
quently imperceptible to our senses ?
  Such an attitude is reminiscent      of St. Thomas,   for we
insist on seeing the radiations before believing in their
existence.   But we know that in the incommensurable range
of vibrations, only the luminous octave is visible to us.
54              THE    SECRET     OF   LIFE

There is no gainsaying this, and the mystery of the cases
under consideration vanishes if we admit that the fact of
emitting radiations is a universal property of living matter,
just as it is becoming more and more evident that radio-
activity is a universal property of inanimate matter.     We
may ask ourselves whence comes the energy necessary for
radiation. We shall see later how this question may be
answered in its generalised form and also in regard to all
living beings. In any case, it seems inconsistent not to
concede to other living beings what is conceded in the
particular case of the glow-worm.
   The full range of radiating properties of living beings
does not manifest itself to our senses any more than the
complete gamut of electromagnetic waves.
   Let us humbly remind ourselves that the human body
has but very small windows looking out upon the incom-
mensurable range of an ocean of radiations.   Our senses can
reveal to us but a few octaves. The scanty knowledge we
have concerning radiations of living beings must suffice to
guide us in the study of the whole range.
   We have drawn attention to the luminescence of the
glow-worm which emits a cold light, or nearly so. It is
hardly necessary to add that all animals with a constant
normal temperature or a temperature higher than that of
the ambient atmosphere, emit calorific radiations, 7.e., warm
radiations.
   Before formulating a general theory and dealing with the
problem of energy, let us say a few words on radiations in
general, and especially on electromagnetic radiations with
which modern science has made us familiar. These radia-
tions constitute the basis of the most important phenomena
in physics. The propagation of sound waves through
matter is effected against a certain amount of resistance
while electromagnetic waves traverse the most tenuous
space filled only by the all-pervading ether. Among such
waves we find wireless waves, calorific waves, luminous
waves, actinic waves, X-rays and penetrating waves (cosmic
rays).
                            CHAPTER        IV
  ON    RADIATIONS IN GENERAL AND ON ELECTRO-
           MAGNETIC WAVES IN PARTICULAR

Nature and Characteristics of known Radiations—Table of Radia-
tions—Electromagnetic Waves—Rdle of Self-induction and Capacity
—The Oscillating Circuit—Natural Period and Resonance—Expla-
natory Analogies concerning Electrical Oscillations—Ultra-short
Waves.

       Nature    and   Characteristics   of Known    Radiations

It is generally known that a radiation is a disturbance of
the ether travelling at the velocity of light, that is to say
186,326 miles per second. The range of known radiations
comprises       wireless   waves,   calorific,   luminous,   chemical
radiations, X-rays, gamma-rays of radium and cosmic rays.
These various radiations differ from one another only by
their frequency, that is to say by the number of oscillations
per second which characterises them. The wavelength is
the distance covered by the wave per second in the course
of its propagation. The higher the frequency of radiation
the shorter is its wavelength. The process of radiation does
not involve transport of matter or emission of particles;
it is essentially the propagation of a disturbance occurring
in the ether.
   Such are the main principles of the theory of radiations
governing modern physics.
   The table on p. 56 represents the complete scale of
electromagnetic waves with their respective wavelength and
frequency.
   According to Clerk Maxwell who conceived a famous
theory of light, luminous radiation is of a purely electro-
magnetic nature.        As electromagnetic waves are now
familiar to all, we propose considering them at some length.
This apparent digression is necessary in order to get a clear
grasp of the technical details that will be given later in
                               55
56                          THE       SECRET          OF     LIFE

                TABLE         OF ELECTROMAGNETIC                    WAVES

                                                                           Frequency
        Type of Wave.                        Wave-length.            (Vibrations per second).

WIRELESS      WAVES            . | 80,000       metres      to a!   10,000—50         milliards
                                       few millimetres.
INFRA-RED      WAVES.                     314u—0-8p.                   1-375     trillions
  (Calorific rays).
LUMINOUS WAVES                 ;          0-8u-0°4                  375-750 trillions
  (1 octave).
ULTRA-VIOLET WAVES.                      0-4u-0-015u.               750 trillions—20
                                                                      quatrillions
D5 :9-'4-               :      - | 0-015u—0-0000057p.               20 quatrillions—60
  (12 octaves).                                                       quintillions
RADIO-ACTIVITY.       . | 0-0001y—0-000002u.                        3-150 quintillions
CosMIc WAVES (Pene- | 0:0002 A.U.                                            =
  trating radiation).

       Greek letter . (micron) = a thousandth part of a millimetre.
       A.U. (Angstrém unit)     = a ten-millionth part of a millimetre.
   This table covers about 60 octaves out of which the human eye can
detect only 1 octave.    All these rays are believed to have certain common
characteristics.    They are generated by moving electric charges and
propagated without any material medium.           They are also supposed to
travel with the same velocity of about 186,000 miles per second.

connexion with my theory of radiation of cells and of living
beings. Moreover, anyone should be able to follow easily
the explanations and analogies given in this chapter con-
cerning oscillating circuits and high-frequency currents.
Readers capable of understanding technical accounts of
electromagnetic waves may find useful information in the
footnotes on self-induction and capacity in the oscillating
circuit.?
     1 Electromagnetic       Waves.    The     phenomena      associated       with    electrical
oscillations cannot         be fully understood until a certain number                   of pre-
liminary facts have been grasped of which only a brief summary can be
given here. For further information the reader is referred to the various
text-books on wireless.
     At the outset let us bear in mind that the basis of all these phenomena
is induction, discovered by Faraday and universally applied in electricity
at the present time. The following is a brief summary of the main features
of this phenomenon :
   An instantaneous electric current is generated in a conducting circuit
whenever the magnetic flux which flows through it varies.                        The electro-
motive force of this induced current is all the greater, other things being
equal, as the variation of the flux is more rapid. The phenomenon of
induction has given rise to the theory of alternating current and to all the
applications derived from it, notably to the use of self-inductance coils,
                                                   /

               ON     RADIATIONS            IN         GENERAL                 57

    The Oscillating Circuit. What is an oscillating circuit ?
 We know that before a circuit can be the centre of electrical
 oscillations it is essential it should possess self-inductance
 (spiral or coil) and capacity (condenser). When these con-
 ditions are fulfilled an electric or magnetic shock acting on
 the circuit so constituted gives rise to a series of oscillations.
    According to the circumstances in which this phenomenon
 occurs, and to the way in which the source of energy manifests
 itself, for there necessarily must be in the circuit or in its
 vicinity some source of energy, the resulting succession of
 oscillations thus generated may be repeated and maintained.
    Explanatory      Analogies      concerning         Electrical   Oscillations.
 For readers        who   are     not   familiar       with   the phenomena
 involved in the production              of oscillations in an electric
 circuit, we propose explaining, in a very elementary manner,
 how this occurs.
 capacity, circuits of harmonic    resonance,   etc.    We know that the pheno-
 menon of resonance forms the basis of all electrical oscillations. A second
 point deserves attention: electrical oscillations are propagated through
 insulators better than through conductors because the former do not
 absorb them. An interrupted circuit, that is to say ‘‘ open” from an
 electrical point of view, may thus be the centre of radio-electrical oscilla-
 tions which are radiated through space in the form of electromagnetic
 waves.     A radio-electrical wave propagating itself consists essentially of an
 electric field and a magnetic field which follow the variations of the
 particular wave both in time and space. The circulation of high-frequency
 oscillatory currents originates from insulating materials mainly by virtue of
 the extremely rapid vibration of these electrical movements and also owing
 to the phenomena of self-induction and capacity.
    Réle of Self Induction and Capacity.     The phenomenon of self-induction
 is, as its name indicates, only a particular case of induction which manifests
 itself in the circuit that gives rise to it, creating a kind of auto-reaction.
     Self-inductance or, more simply, inductance, is the part of an electric
  circuit in which the phenomenon of self-induction manifests itself. This
- latter is produced by a variable magnetic field. Self-induction comes into
  consideration when this circuit is traversed by a variable electric current
  or by an equally variable magnetic fiux.
     Self-inductance or, more simply, inductance, consists practically of one
  or several conducting spirals generally arranged in the form of coils. The
  induction flux formed by the spirals is axial.
     A rectilinear conducting wire possesses self-inductance, due to a magnetic
  field created in its vicinity by any current flowing through it. The wire
  may be considered as a spiral of infinite diameter.
     Capacity.    When two conductors close to each other and separated by
  an insulator are raised to a certain potential difference, continuous or
  alternating, an accumulation of local electricity results on these two
  metallic armatures, due to the electric capacity of this system.     Owing to
  the accumulation of electricity resulting under these conditions, the name
  of condenser has been given to the apparatus capable of producing this
  phenomenon.
     We also know that an insulator, placed between two armatures, which
58                     THE     SECRET        OF    LIFE

     For the sake of the uninitiated let us first take two
comparisons.
   Let us imagine the pendulum ofa clock. This is a system
which may be started in two different ways according as
the conditions are those associated with either one or the
other of the following two cases.
   1. Suppose that the mass of the pendulum, immersed in
water, possesses a paddle to slow down its motion. If the
pendulum is deviated from the vertical position and then
released, it will slowly return, owing to the resistance
of the water against the paddle, to the vertical position
(Fig. 4).     |
   2. Suppose now that the pendulum is suspended in the air
and deprived of the paddle. It is expected that under the
influence of an impulsion the pendulum will oscillate to and
from the vertical position. Its motion thus becomes oscilla-
tory and the frequency of oscillations is equal to the number
of times that the pendulum passes through the vertical line
in one second (Fig. 5).
   If an, external cause acts upon the pendulum with the
same rhythm and in the same direction, its oscillations will
continue without a stop. Thus we see that when there is

cannot be the centre of any conduction current similar to those flowing
through the two conductors is, nevertheless, traversed by electric currents
called convection currents.
     The laws of electricity state that the current flowing through a condenser
varies in intensity as the capacity of the condenser becomes greater, as the
electric tension is raised, and as the frequency of this tension itself becomes
more marked.
   But it is important to observe that even if the tension and the capacity are
very low, it 1s nevertheless possible to obtain a current of great intensity
provided the frequency be very great.
   For greater frequencies than a milliard, for example, the capacities
brought into play are sometimes so weak that they may appear non-
existent or negligible.   They are capable, however, of letting high-frequency
oscillations pass through the air between two armatures separated by
several inches and forming a condenser.
   For still higher frequencies a distance of several metres between the two
conductors, always constitutes an appreciable capacity, and it is thus
possible, thanks to high-frequency phenomena, to make a current flow
through an “‘ open ”’ circuit.   This is rendered possible because conduction
currents, passing through electric conductors, close up again owing to
aerial capacity in the form of convection currents.
   Generally speaking, two single wires, placed close together, form capacity
as they may be raised to different potentials.       For the same reason the
two ends of a single wire have capacity in relation to their extremities and
to the external medium.
             ON RADIATIONS IN GENERAL                                     59
no resistance to displacement such a system produces
mechanical oscillations.
   Let us now consider two water vessels joined at the base
by a long tube of small diameter, and let us raise one of the
vessels. The level of the water in the first will fall while

  Fic. 4. Motion of Pendulum in Water.       The pendulum being deviated
from its position of equilibrium gradually resumes its original position
without giving rise to any oscillations owing to the resistance of the liquid
which damps down the motion.

in the other vessel it will gradually rise until the same level
is reached in both vessels (Fig. 6). In this case, owing to
the resistance of the tube due to its small diameter and great
length, the final level is reached only by degrees in conse-
quence of continuous displacement of water in the tube
flowing in only one direction.:
   Let us now take a tube of short length and large diameter
with a stopcock in the middle (Fig. 7). The stopcock being
closed, let us raise one of the vessels to a certain height and
60                     THE      SECRET       OF     LIFE

then open the stopcock suddenly. We know that the final
common level in the two vessels will be reached only after

                                                                    2
     Fie. 5.   Oscillations of Pendulum.   The pendulum being deviated from
the vertical to position 1, swings,    by virtue   of its own   inertia, to a sym-
metrical position 2, and then swings back to the other side.             It thus
performs a series of oscillations whose motion is gradually damped down
owing to friction of the axis of suspension and resistance of the air. It
will ultimately stop and resume the vertical position.
   The oscillations of the pendulum give a mechanical representation of
electrical oscillations in a circuit consisting of self-inductance (inertia) and
capacity (elasticity).
               ON RADIATIONS               IN GENERAL                       61
a few seconds, following a series of oscillations of the liquid
contained in the respective vessels. This phenomenon of
oscillation is due to the inertia of water as the result
of the velocity acquired by the liquid and the sudden

   Fic. 6. Oscillations of water between two vessels connected together by a
long tube of small diameter.      In this case oscillations take place more
slowly owing to the tube offering a high resistance to the displacement
of water and also because more time is required by the water to travel
from one vessel to the other.
   If the resistance of the tube is sufficiently great the motion of the water
will cease when equilibrium between the two levels is attained, and no
oscillations occur.
62                  THE      SECRET        OF   LIFE

motion it is subjected to in order to regain its position of
equilibrium.
   This state of equilibrium is reached only after a series of
oscillations have taken place whose amplitude diminishes
by degrees.
   The occurrence of the phenomenon may be brought about

               ig                               A
                                                er    =

   Fic. 7. Oscillations of water between two vessels connected together by a
Short tube of large diameter.      Oscillations  occur when the stopcock
closing the full vessel is opened suddenly.       The result is a to-and-fro
motion of the water in the tube.      The number of oscillations per second
or frequency is all the greater as the tube is shorter and wider.

simply by an initial difference of level. And if it is desired
that the oscillations should last indefinitely, it is merely
necessary to raise or lower alternately one of the two vessels
while following accurately, with the same speed, the rhythm
caused by the motion of the water.
   Thus we shall have produced, under the influence of
an external cause, a permanent oscillatory motion of the
water.
  This simple and suggestive experiment is so familiar that
we need not insist any further.
                 ON     RADIATIONS                IN ‘GENERAL                         63
  Let us note, however, three important points. The
motion of the water is all the more rapid as :
  1. The quantity of water is smaller.
  2. The initial difference of level in the two vessels is
greater.                                                  |
   3. The tube is less resistant, that is to say, bigger and
shorter.
   And now the same applies to electrical oscillations in an
                 oud             a=           —
                                                ‘
                                 aa            ete
                                                ‘

                   1                  y,             y/

                          Ye                 /f,                 f3

   Fic. 8. Theoretical explanation of Oscillatory Discharge of a condenser
through self-inductance.   Above, the condenser is seen whose armatures
are charged with positive (+) and negative (—) electricity respectively.
Arrow 1 indicates the direction of the first discharge current.    Arrow 2
indicates the direction of the instantaneous magnetic field H produced by
this first current.
   The production of this magnetic field H gives rise in the spirals, as the
result   of self-induction,   to an    instantaneous   current    whose   direction   is
indicated by arrow 2.
  It will be noticed that the direction is the same as that shown by arrow 1
and this current will duly charge the condenser.       The condenser is thus
charged with inverse polarities and is then discharged again, and so on.
This is known as oscillatory discharge.

oscillating circuit formed, as we know, by self-inductance
and capacity. The induction coil plays the role of the water
vessel (Fig. 8).                             |
   The capacity of an electrical apparatus lies in its property
of storing a quantity of electricity. The greater the capacity
the greater its power of accumulating electricity. It is only
64               THE     SECRET      OF   LIFE

required that the two metallic armatures of the capacity,
separated by an insulator, should be raised to different
electric tensions so that a charge may result. This capacity
thus corresponds in every respect to the water vessel. But,
instead of water charging the vessel, it is electricity that
charges the capacity (condenser). Self-inductance corre-
sponds to the volume of water contained in the tube joining
the two vessels. The greater its action, the more it impedes
the rapid oscillatory motion of electricity. An insignificant
inductance, a circuit consisting of a single spiral, for example,
would correspond to the thick and short tube mentioned
before, and could only offer a weak resistance to the passage
of current.   On the other hand, a coil, consisting of several
windings, would correspond to a tube of great length
offering strong resistance to the passage of water.
   Again, we know that an electric current flowing through
a coil system creates a magnetic field whose intensity and
direction correspond exactly to the intensity and direction
of the current. We also know that a variation of intensity
in the magnetic field of a circuit creates in this circuit an
electric current. The circuit in question may be the
circuit of the coil itself or of the spiral generating the field
(self-induction). The induction current thus produced lasts
as long as the variations of the field which created it.
   To summarise: a current creates a magnetic field and
the variation in a magnetic field gives rise to a variable
electric current.
   Let us further consider an oscillating circuit consisting
of a spiral and a capacity formed by two metallic armatures
separated by an insulator. Let us suppose that the circuit
is open and the capacity charged. If the interrupter is
closed, the capacity is discharged immediately into the spiral,
giving rise to a current, even, aS we observed before, in
opening the stopcock, the water rushed into the tube. At
the beginning the spiral is not affected by any current.
Suddenly a current flows, rising from zero to a certain value.
There is thus variation of current and creation of a variable
magnetic field in the spiral, representing a certain variation
of energy brought into play. But the current does not flow
indefinitely and tends to fade out. ‘The field created by the
            ON RADIATIONS IN GENERAL                            63
current will disappear and thus variation in the field will
give rise, by induction in the coil system and the spiral,
to an instantaneous electric current (see direction No. 3,
Fig. 8).
   Now, it is found, and it is a remarkable fact, that the
direction of this induced current is the same as the direction
of the first current of discharge, and that it tends to prolong
its action.
   It is the laws of induction which determine the direction
of this current, and we shall not insist any further. But a
new fact becomes already apparent. This current, supple-
mentary to the primary current, charges in its turn the
capacity which has just been discharged, only with an
inverse polarity. All the energy of the discharge, which was
transformed into electromagnetic energy, that is to say
energy of motion, has been transformed again into electro-
static energy, that is to say potential energy, in order to
charge the capacity in the inverse direction. But owing to
various losses, notably through friction, which appears in
the form of heat, this charge is smaller than the primary
charge.
   We now have a set of conditions similar to those at the
beginning of the experiment: the condenser will be dis-
charged afresh into the spiral, then recharged a third time
with the identical polarity as the primary polarity.
  The phenomenon will proceed on these lines until the
complete exhaustion of the electric energy brought into
play.
   It will thus be seen that there will be a series of very rapid
charges and discharges, that is what is termed an oscillatory
discharge. This phenomenon comes to an end when all the
energy is dissipated in the form of heat and radiation.
   The rapidity of the succession of oscillations, that is to
say their number per second, is known as the frequency.
It is all the greater as the capacity takes less time to charge
itself, that is to say as this capacity is weaker and also as
the spiral is smaller.
   It is easy to understand, therefore, the necessity of
reducing as much as possible the spiral and the capacity in
order to obtain very high frequencies. It is precisely what
 SL.                                      :                 F
66                     THE       SECRET         OF    LIFE

takes place within the living cells, as we shall see later.
Moreover, we know that if the capacity and the spiral of an
oscillating circuit diminish more and more, the wavelength
may become as short as desired, but there is another thing
which is reduced at the same time and very rapidly too,
that is the energy brought into play. If the wavelength
becomes extremely short the capacity will necessarily be
very small and the energy almost negligible unless the

               a                 Cr                   a            EE

               +                                                     —
     Fie. 9.   Oscillating Circuits of Heriz.   Above, the circuit of the oscillator
of Hertz is seen.    The secondary circuit consisting of an induction coil is
connected with two balls or two metallic plates forming capacity by means
of two wires, a and b, constituting self-inductance.     An open oscillating
circuit is thus obtained.    The capacity formed by the two plates is dis-
charged and gives rise to a spark between the two small balls.
   The diagram in the middle shows a rectilinear oscillator consisting of a
single wire (self-inductance) and terminating in two metallic plates or balls
(capacity).
   In the lower diagram the plates are reduced to the extremities of the
metallic wire. The capacity is still existent, but it is very small.     The
frequency of oscillations is increased.

electric tensions employed are themselves considerable.
But one is soon limited in this direction by the dielectric
resistance of insulators and even by the air itself.
   Let us recall to mind the experiments carried out by
            ON    RADIATIONS        IN | GENERAL                    67
Hertz with two metallic plates separated by a distance of
1 to 2 metres and raised to an alternating potential difference
by means of a Ruhmkorff coil; the self-inductance was
constituted simply by connecting wires and the condenser,
by the capacity formed by the two plates suspended in the
insulating air (Fig. 9).
   This apparatus gives off wireless waves of short length.
When the length of the con-
necting wires is diminished, as
well as the diameter of the
plates, the self-inductance and
the    capacity     are  equally
diminished, but persist none
the less.
   The apparatus may become
microscopic, yet the oscillating
circuit will always have a
typical wavelength, but this
wavelength     will be _ corre-
                                       Fie. 10. Schematic diagram
Spondingly smaller and this also    of Electrical Oscillating Circuit
applies to the energy brought       showing similarity to Cellular
                                    Filaments.    This oscillating cir-
into play.                          cuit may become microscopic.
   Let us consider the particular   In the case of this diagram the
                                    extremities of the circuit are
case of a long rectilinear          close together ; they form capa-
conducting wire whose two           city and take electrical charges,
                                    positive   and negative.       The
extremities are raised to any       small condenser thus formed is
given potential difference. In      discharged into the wire forming
                                    self-inductance, in the same way
relation to the material            as in an ordinary oscillating
medium surrounding it, this         circuit. But the self-inductance
                                    is localised    here   along    the
wire is endowed with but a          filament.
small     degree      of    capacity
and _ self-inductance. It can, therefore, be a source of
electromagnetic oscillations of short wavelength, that is to
say of high frequency.
   The following three cases may be met with :
   1. The circuit is subjected to any kind of electric or
magnetic shock: it is then said that it vibrates according
to its natural period.
   2. The circuit is placed in a variable electromagnetic
field or else it is subjected to the influence of electromagnetic
                                                              F2
68                THE    SECRET    OF   LIFE

waves having the same frequency as its own frequency.
It then vibrates, so to speak, in sympathy, or to put it more
accurately, in resonance.
     3. Under the influence of an external cause, the circuit
may also be the centre of forced oscillations of a different
kind of frequency.     It is then said that it vibrates
apervodically.                   7
   A glance at the scale of electromagnetic waves will show
that, generally speaking, the oscillations of which we know
least are those which have the shortest wavelength.   Oscilla-
tions of low frequency from alternating currents and the
long wireless waves belong to the domain of industry, as
well as the luminous radiations and X-rays. But there still
exist in the infra-red and ultra-violet regions, and in the
region of penetrating radiations, whole gamuts of frequencies
having but a theoretical interest, the study of which has not
progressed very far.
   In the present state of our knowledge we may say that
there is no definite break between the so-called electro-
magnetic waves, the calorific waves or infra-red waves, the
luminous waves and the cosmic waves.
                         CHAPTER       V

      OSCILLATION       AND    RADIATION       OF   CELLS

Comparison of Cell to Oscillating Circuit—Constitution of Cellular
Oscillating Circuit—Characteristics and Wavelengths of Cellular
Radiation—Nature of Cellular Radiation.

  Comparison    of Living Cell to an Oscillating Circuit.       In
the light of experimental facts, both physical and biological,
that have been discussed in the preceding chapters, we are
now in a position to consider the basis of my theory con-
cerning the radiation of living cells.
   In the third chapter this first principle was enunciated :
Every living being emits radiations.
   From what we have just learned in connexion with our
physical studies of electromagnetic waves, it follows that
emission of radiations necessarily implies an oscillatory
phenomenon.      Furthermore, the most rudimentary living
organism being constituted by a single cell, it seems evident
that the simplest biological oscillation must be that which
manifests itself within the cell.
   We can thus enunciate this second principle, being more
definite and proceeding naturally from the first :
   Every living cell is essentially dependent on its nucleus
which is the centre of oscillations and gives off radiations.
   What are these radiations and whence comes the energy
involved ? Here are two questions I propose answering in
the following pages.
   Let us suppose that the geometrical dimensions of an
oscillating circuit diminish gradually until they become
invisible and microscopic. The spiral and the capacity of
the circuit, which will also become microscopic, will still
exist none the less. Thanks to these two indispensable
factors, the circuit will continue to oscillate under the
influence of causes which we shall examine later, and with
a wavelength more      and more    reduced.    This is precisely
70                        THE       SECRET         OF   LIFE

what takes place within the cells. Microscopic analysis
reveals the presence of nuclei as shown in Figs. 10 and 11.
   These nuclei are, as we shall demonstrate presently, actual
electric circuits endowed with self-inductance and capacity
and consequently capable of oscillating. These circuits
oscillate according to a range of wavelengths whose
magnitude depends essentially on the values of spirals and
capacities. The waves given off are thus of electromagnetic
origin, by virtue of the nature of the circuits, and are also

                Vacuole

                                                                     Nuclear membrane
     Plasma membrane -

                                                                     Nuclear fluid
      Twisted filament

                                                                   ft Plastid
                                                               j
                                                               *    Cuticle

           Cytoplasm                                               Nucleolus

                             Attraction-spheres
                          containing centrosomes

   Fia. 11. Microscopic view of various Elements entering into the compo-
sition of a Cell. In the centre is the twisted filament which, possessing
self-inductance and capacity, constitutes an oscillating circuit.
   The similarity to a short-wave circuit is manifest: the filament shown
here oscillates like a coil having a very small number of spirals.

of very high frequency owing to the minute dimensions of
the organisms in question.
   Constitution of Cellular Oscillating Circuit. Let us first
call to mind what morphology teaches us on the subject of
the constitution of cells. The details of cellular structure
are made clear in Fig. 12.
   A cell consists essentially of a nucleus or central system,
immersed in protoplasm which is itself surrounded by a
Ssemi-permeable membrane.        Examination of the nucleus
reveals the existence of small twisted filaments constituting
actual electric circuits. Fig. 12 shows a fragment of one
of these filaments. They are composed of organic materials
      OSCILLATION           AND     RADIATION              OF        CELLS   71

 or mineral conductors, covered by a tubular membrane of
 insulating material consisting of cholesterol, plastin and
 other dielectric substances. Thus these organic structures,
 assuming the form of conducting filaments, constitute an
 electric circuit endowed by construction with self-inductance
 and capacity, which may well be compared to an oscillating
 circuit.        |
    These circuits, characterised by extremely low values
 in regard to spiral and capacity, may under certain influences
 oscillate with a very high frequency and give off radiations
 of various wavelengths, just as the cells of the glow-worm
 give off visible radiations. The capacity and the spiral of

         Ha
         \ L} t
                                                s= tbir."s
                                                        ete     cy
                                                      Ow

    Fie. 12. Filaments of Nucleus of a Cell. On the left, fragments of
  filaments of cellular nucleus are seen.  Their tubular structure should be
  noted.   On the right is depicted a nucleus of salivary gland of the larva
- of Chironomus plumosus (after Balbiani).

 these elementary circuits are, however, of a complex nature ;
 they depend chiefly on the form and the length of filaments,
 with their rings and sinuosities, together with the relative
 dimensions of the cell in regard to the filament. After a
 certain time and under the influence of a specific cause two
 mutually attractive poles arise in the protoplasm, the
 filaments are broken up, separated and orientated, to be
 finally united round each pole when the cell is then ready to
 divide (Fig. 13).
    Characteristics and Wavelengths of Cellular Radiation. It
 is now clear, from the constitution of cells as revealed by
 the microscope and morphological studies, that each cell
 is capable of being the centre of oscillations of very high
 frequency, giving off invisible radiations belonging to a
 gamut close to that associated with light.
  Fie. 13.   Different Phases of Indirect Division of a ‘Cell :
  1. Cell in the resting state with its nucleus and centrosome accompanied
by attraction-sphere.
  2. Isolated nucleus showing formation of filament; division of attrac-
tion-sphere and outline of chromatin spindle.
  3. Longitudinal division of filament.
  4, Splitting of filament into four sets of chromosomes and depression of
nucleus at the poles under the influence of asters.
   5. The rays of asters penetrate into the nucleus and the membrane
disappears at the poles.
   6. Stage of “‘ equatorial phase ”’ ; the chromosomes are orientated along
a plane perpendicular to the spindle axis.
   7. Separation of chromosomes which gravitate towards each attraction-
sphere.
   8. Cell whose cytoplasm begins to develop a “‘ waist’ in the middle,
each half containing a nucleus in process of reconstitution.
   9. Two daughter-cells resulting from division of original cell (after
Henneguy).
      OSCILLATION AND RADIATION OF CELLS                                73
  Let us take, for example, the
Corynactis viridis, magnified 1,000
times.    From its actual size I
calculated     approximately     the
probable self-inductance of these
intermingled circuits (Fig. 14).
The capacity, however, is very
difficult to determine.      Taking
certain average values, I found a
radiation localised in the infra-red
region.    It is also possible to
obtain a range of wavelengths—
admittedly a rough approxima-
tion—by measuring the length
of the filament and multiplying
it by two. It is highly probable
that the cells whose filaments are
insulated    at both extremities
vibrate on the half-wave principle,
that is to say have a wavelength
nearly double the length of the
filament, as the electric dipoles of
Hertz. But these methods are
not   accurate   and   give but    one
type of wavelength.        We     shall
see later why cells oscillate and
under what influence.     For the            Fie. 14. Drawing of Cory-
time being I hope I have con-             nactis viridis (magnification
                                          1,000). In this marine organ-
vinced the reader that living             ism, measuring but 0-1 mm.,
cells are, according to their con-        a number of internal circuits
                                          forming self-inductance, by
stitution, capable of oscillating         virtue of the structural spirals,
and of emitting radiations.               are clearly shown.     Here the
                                          similarity to a self-induction
   It is this phenomenon          of      coil is striking.
radiation which lies at the root             In the living organism the
                                          spirals may be seen drawing
of the famous mysterious sense            closer together or separating
in birds and insects, that special        from     one   another.     This
                                          results in modifications of
instinct postulated by naturalists.       wavelength while altering at
   It is by means of this internal        the same time both the capa-
                                          city and self-inductance of
cellular radiation that the glow-         this     remarkable     variable
worm produces its own light               circuit.
74                  THE     SECRET         OF   LIFE

which is never extinguished. It is a similar radiation,
with a different frequency, which endows insects with an
occult faculty, not arising from the olfactory sense, but
from a radiation in the ether. It is the same radiations
which     create   and   maintain   life, or, at least, which show
themselves to be a direct and inseparable manifestation of it.
     It is these radiations that are emitted by the ovaries of
the female of the Bombyx and that attract the males. It is
these radiations emitted by the micro-organisms of decom-
posing meat that attract blue flies and burying-beetles.
It is these radiations that direct, across great distances,
owls, lemmings and bats towards their prey and enable
carrier pigeons to find their course.
   All the apparent mysteries involved in the instincts and
social habits      of insects,   birds    and   other   creatures,   now
become explicable.
     Naturalists   who    have   studied    these   phenomena        have
nevertheless failed to solve the problem that Nature has
put before us under such a baffling aspect.
   This theory throws a new light on the riddles associated
with radiation and with life itself; it is susceptible of many
useful applications and appears to be the keystone of the
great problem of animal intelligence.

                   Nature   of Cellular    Radiation

   It is gratifying to record that the investigations I have
carried out in this field, largely inspired by the researches
of Professor d’Arsonval and by the late Daniel Berthelot,
have been confirmed by the recent experiments of Gurwitsch
and Franck, as well as by those of Albert Nodon, President
of the Société Astronomique of Bordeaux, who has been
engaged for some years in the study of “ actino-electric ”
phenomena produced in the living organism by ultra-short
waves. These researches are particularly concerned with
the radio-activity of plants and animals.
   A. Nodon has carried out many experiments, with the
aid of appropriate electrometers, with a view to comparing
the radio-activity of plants and animals with that of mineral
radio-active substances such as salts of radium and uranium.
      OSCILLATION           AND     RADIATION          OF   CELLS       75

     The measurements recorded by Nodon were derived from
  many sources: leaves of hydrangea, pelargonium, leek,
  dahlia, ivy ; grains of pollen, cloves of garlic, onion, potatoes
  freshly dug up.
     It follows from these experiments) that the so-called
  ‘‘ radio-activity ’’ is comparable to that of uranium, or to
_ put it differently, that it causes the electrometer to discharge
  in 25-500 seconds, according to the nature and the mass
  of organic tissue. Extending his field of observations to
  animals, Nodon has shown that golden, black and green
  beetles, flies, spiders and other living insects, give off an
  amount of radio-activity equivalent to three to fifteen
  times the uranium value for an equal mass.
     In passing, let us observe the fact, clearly confirming my
  theory of cellular oscillation, that dead plants and animals
  do not give any evidence of detectable radio-activity, for
  it appears that natural radiation is essential—and seems
  sufficient—for the maintenance of life. Indeed this radio-
  activity is but a manifestation of cellular oscillation. If
  the nucleus is destroyed oscillation ceases and the cell dies.
     These observations, in addition to experiments on the
  human subject, have enabled Nodon to come to the following
  conclusion: “It appears from the recorded facts that the
  vital cells of the human body emit electrons generated by
  an actual radio-activity whose intensity would seem to be
  much more considerable than that observed in insects and
  plants.” }
     The fact that there should be a certain emission of energy
  in living beings, or a re-emission implying a previous activity,
  can hardly be doubted. The question is whether there is
  transport of energy by means of electrons or transmission
  of energy by means of waves.       For my part I find it difficult
  to imagine that electrons may be transported over such
  considerable distances as those brought into play in certain
  biological phenomena, namely, instinct in animals and their
  powers of orientation, and the ways and means whereby
  their existence is maintained. There is every reason to
  believe that electrons are produced only locally as a result
    1 A, Nodon, “ Les nouvelles radiations ultra-pénétrantes et la cellule
  vivante ” (Revue Scientifique, October 22nd, 1927, t. lxv, p. 609).
76               THE    SECRET      OF   LIFE

of electric polarisation of organic tissues, but we must also
bear in mind the actual phenomena of induction and detec-
tion in which waves play a leading part in the human
organism, as the result of oscillation of an organic circuit
consisting of the cellular nucleus.
   Moreover, Nodon has obtained what may be called
‘spontaneous radiographs”? by placing living things
(plants, insects) directly on photographic plates. Clear
pictures were duly registered after an exposure of several
hours. Nodon’s conclusion was as follows: “It seems
probable that matter, under the influence of radiations
whose wavelength is less than that of the diameter of the
electron, may be subjected to certain modifications of
unknown nature (?) which may confer new properties on
matter, different from those conferred by radiations of much
greater wavelength, and not connected with electrons.”
   The interpretation of these results appears to me to be
much simpler. We are actually living in the midst of fields
of cosmic radiations, comprising the whole range of waves,
from the longest to the shortest. It must be obvious, as I
have shown in the preceding chapters, that cosmic radiation
induces in the cellular nuclei of the organism certain electrical
phenomena, and, conversely, that the internal phenomena of
the organism, notably nutrition, bring into play a series of
electrical oscillations within the cells.
   The theory which I have formulated on the oscillation
of living beings accounts for these phenomena.        ‘The living
cell is an actual oscillator and an electric resonator. Its
“constants ’’ are fixed by the form and the nature of
substances entering into its composition. The renewal of
these substances by means of nutrition gives rise to local
electronic effects, due to electrons liberated by chemical
reactions of the living organism, which modify the electric
constants of the cellular nucleus,    On the other hand,
radiations emitted by living beings do not entirely consist
of radio-active radiations, for there are also calorific, infra-
red and luminous radiations (glow-worm, mushrooms,
micro-organisms and animalcule).
   In this connexion let us mention the discovery made by
Gurwitsch and Franck of the “‘ mitogenetic rays ”’ which are
     OSCILLATION        AND     RADIATION       OF   CELLS     77

 given off the stalks and roots of freshly cut vegetables, so
 long as the cellular nucleus is not destroyed. These rays
 have been identified as being similar in nature to ultra-violet
 radiations and their discovery constitutes an important
 confirmation of my theory of cellular oscillation.
    At a time when the adherents of the emission theory of
light are again confronted with the opponents supporting
 the undulation theory, it may not seem inopportune to
 reconcile the Newtonians with the followers of Huyghens by
 showing, as de Broglie has done, that the electron is, after
 all, but a system of waves.     Therefore it is conceivable that
 cosmic radiations may integrate or disintegrate electrons
 within the atom.     Again, the existence of more and more
 penetrating cosmic rays is being demonstrated frequently,
 and, at the present time, there is no justification for antici-
 pating a minimal limit to the magnitude of ultra-short
 waves.    Up till now the study of the highest frequencies
 has been handicapped by instrumental imperfection. Hence
 there seems to be no valid reason for postulating a “ living
 atom,’ as conceived by Nodon.         Indeed it seems simpler to
 conclude that all living organisms, whether plants or animals,
 consist of electromagnetic systems normally in equilibrium
 under the influence of a field of cosmic radiations combined
 with internal radiations such as those conditioned by
 nutritional processes. Excessive or deficient amplitude of
 this radiation must involve oscillatory disequilibrium which
 is fatal to the organism. This state of affairs may be
 brought about simply by variations in the characteristics
 of radiations which modify the functional activity of the
 transmitter or cellular resonator.
    Certain physicists and radio-electricians have objected
 that my theory contradicts the facts, because cosmic rays
 are so penetrating that they can go through a mass of lead
 7 metres thick or more, and therefore cannot make the
 nucleus of the living cell oscillate, which constitutes in itself
 an oscillating circuit of far greater magnitude than is
 commensurate with the action of cosmic waves.
    To this objection I may say that cosmic waves cover the
 whole range of wavelengths, even those measuring several
 thousand metres, a fact observed by radio-electricians in the
78              THE   SECRET     OF   LIFE

reception of all frequencies resulting in “ atmospherics.”
Furthermore, each group of cells possesses its own frequency
with its characteristic vibrations, and each individual
frequency may be identified in the vast gamut of cosmic
waves.
   Finally we shall ascertain later the consequences of my
theory of cellular oscillation by observing the effects of
modifications in cosmic radiation following interference
resulting from
   1. activity of sunspots.
   2. secondary radiation of waves absorbed by the soil.
   3. therapeutic application of oscillating circuits.
                         CHAPTER      VI >

    MODIFICATIONS        IN CELLS AND         OSCILLATORY
                        DISEQUILIBRIUM

Oscillatory    Action    of  Microbes—Experiment     demonstrating
Electrical Properties of Microbes—Effect of Radiations—The Radio-
cellulo-oscillator—Therapeutic Tests on ‘‘ Experimental Cancer in
Plants ’’—Lakhovsky’s Theory in Relation to Pathology of Cancer—
Significance   of Temperature   of Human     Body—Fever   and _ its
Function.

  Oscillatory Action of Microbes. The knowledge we have
acquired concerning cellular radiation enables us to consider,
under a new aspect, the problem of the pathological condi-
tion of cells which, as we have seen, function as minute living
resonators.
   I have pointed out that life—a phenomenon of oscillation
in the cellular nucleus—is the outcome of radiation and is
dependent upon it for its maintenance.     We can easily
understand that life, considered as a harmony of vibrations,
may be modified or destroyed by any condition causing
oscillatory disequilibrium, particularly by the radiations of
certain microbes which overcome the radiations of weaker
or less resistant cells.
   It is essential that the amplitude of oscillation should have
an adequate value so that the organism may be in a sound
defensive state against the harmful radiations of certain
microbes.      The microbe, as a living organism, vibrating
with a frequency lower or higher than that of the organic
cell, causes, in the living being, an oscillatory disequilibrium.
The sound cell which can no longer oscillate normally is then
forced to modify the amplitude or the frequency of its own
vibration which the microbe overcomes more or less com-
pletely by induction. Asa result of being forced to vibrate
under abnormal conditions the cell can no longer function
normally ; it is, in fact, a diseased cell. In order that it
may be restored to health it must be treated by means of a
                                  79
80                   THE       SECRET        OF     LIFE

radiation of appropriate frequency which, in recharging the
cell with the required energy, achieves the dual purpose of ©
restoring it to health and to its original normal state.
   The action of this auxiliary radiation neutralises and
overcomes the detrimental action of the microbe.1
   It cannot reasonably be held that what is valid in the
case of organic cells in living beings is not also valid in the
case of microbes which likewise consist of individual cells.
The microbes, constituted by a cell with a nucleus, also emit
radiations. Whenever these elementary forms of life come
in contact with highly organised beings, the result is what
may be termed a ‘‘ war of radiations ” between the microbes
and the healthy cells.
   The problem confronting us is somewhat analogous to the
dilemma in which a rescuing individual finds himself when
rushing to succour a friend in danger. He sees him faced by
powerful aggressors but he dare not make use of his weapons
for fear of injuring his friend struggling with his assailants
in an inextricable scuffle.
   Similarly, harmful microbes and healthy cells would be
equally exposed to any electrical or radio-active agency that
might be employed to counteract certain detrimental
radiations.   It is difficult to destroy the microbes without
injuring the host. Indeed, since the time of Pasteur, the
main object has always been to kill the microbes. This
method has a great disadvantage for it destroys, besides the
oscillation of the       bacillus,     the   oscillation    of the     cell in
contact with it.
   Experience in the treatment of cancer and tuberculosis
with radium, X-rays and ultra-violet rays, has shown the
great difficulties involved in this form of therapy.
     Experiments      Demonstrating          Electrical      Properties       of
Microbes.       Itis perhaps to be expected that some people may
express astonishment that an electrical theory of life and of
   1 The action of the microbe on the living cell may be reduced to the
action of an oscillation on another oscillation. It is essentially comparable
to the forced   vibration,   induced   by a small   heterodyne   generator   in a
resonating circuit tuned up with the incoming oscillation.        The action of
this local generator falls into line with that of the radiation which is ‘‘ in
resonance.”     According to the value of its frequency and amplitude, this
auxiliary vibration modifies and modulates, to a greater or lesser extent,
the initial vibration which may be reinforced or more or less eliminated.
                   MODIFICATIONS              IN’ CELLS                     81

 the living cell should be extended to microbes, for until now
 microbes have not been studied from an electrical point of
 view.
    Let us refer to an experiment, carried out by biologists,
 which demonstrates that microbes are endowed with
 peculiar electrical properties that have remained hitherto
 unexplained.
   The     microbe      of typhoid       (Bacillus    typhosus)   and    the
Bacillus    coli are extraordinarily alike (Figs. 15 and 16).

                  Fic. 15.   Microscopic view of Bacillus colt.

 The typhoid bacillus causes typhoid fever in man; it is
 found in the organs of typhoid patients and it can be culti-
 vated. It is shaped in the form of a rod and measures
 2t03 X 0-7 microns. This form of the bacillus may undergo
  modification.       It is very motile,        possesses    vibratile cilia,
  and travels swiftly across the microscopic field.
     As regards the Bacillus coli, it is invariably present in the
  intestine, in man as well as in animals. It is generally
  harmless, but it may become pathogenic. This latter
  variation resembles the typhoid bacillus, but it is less
  motile and shows but few cilia. It is also susceptible of
  cultivation.
                                                                        G
   8.L.
82                     THE    SECRET       OF    LIFE

     These two micro-organisms were selected for the following
experiment. A mixture of these two bacilli (B. coli and
B. typhosus) was put in a liquid of slight electrical conducti-
vity into which two electrodes were introduced and con-
nected respectively with the positive and negative poles of
an electric battery. It was then observed that the typhoid
bacilli were attracted to one of the poles while the coli
bacilli were attracted to the other pole. Thus the strict

            Fia. 16.    Microscopic view of Bacillus Typhosus.

separation of the two types of bacilli was accomplished, the
pathogenic and the non-pathogenic.
  This experiment has even been filmed, and it is interesting
to watch, as soon        as the current      operates, these microbes
rushing, some to the right while others proceed to the left.
This phenomenon, hitherto inexplicable, shows that microbes
possess electrical properties of which we were not previously
cognisant. Moreover, we know that in highly diluted
solutions certain chemical compounds are dissociated, with
the result that electrical charges appear, equal, but of
opposite signs. For instance, sodium chloride, NaCl, is
dissociated as sodium, Na, positively charged, and chlorine,
Cl, negatively charged. Thus we may explain by analogy
                MODIFICATIONS          IN   CELLS                  83

that the typhoid and the coli bacilli may undergo differentia-
tion, from an electrical point of view, according to their
chemical composition, just as sodium and chlorine are
differentiated under suitable conditions.
   In my opinion the coli bacillus becomes harmful only
because it is capable of modifying, in general, the charac-
teristics of the cell: capacity, self-inductance and conducti-
vity. It follows that the coli bacillus, vibrating with the
same frequency as the living cells, has no harmful effect on
them, as it does not modify the wavelength of the cells. . On
the   other   hand,   the   typhoid   bacillus,   whose   electrical
properties are different, as the result of the differentiation —
of its chemical components, vibrates with another frequency,
and modifies, by forced induction, the oscillatory equilibrium
of the cell.
   Effects of Radiations. With regard to the modifications
effected by microbes in tissues and cells, let us endeavour, in
the light of our theory, to find an appropriate remedy.
   The problem is, not to aim at killing the microbes in the
living organism, but-to activate normal cellular oscillation
by bringing a direct action to bear upon the cells by means of
appropriate radiations.
   My experiments have shown that with ultra-short wireless
waves or with oscillating circuits in the form of collars and
belts, it is possible to establish equilibrium of cellular
oscillations and to overcome the effect of microbic oscillations.
   The type of radiations produced by the waves in question
is harmless, thus differing in that respect from X-rays and
radium. Hence it should be borne in mind that their
application is devoid of any risk. Furthermore, medical
science makes use of high-frequency currents advocated by
Professor d’Arsonval long before the discovery of the triode
valve. This method has given excellent results.
   The Radio-cellulo-oscillator.   Having evolved a trans-
mitting apparatus I experimented with a certain number of
bacterial cultures which I subjected to the field of its
influence for many hours. The result was that the cultures
continued to grow normally. Moreover, I have never felt
any malaise myself from these experiments although I was
occupied for several days in manipulating this wave-
                                                             @ 2
84                   THE SECRET OF LIFE
generating apparatus to which I gave the name of Radto-
cellulo-oscillator.
   We are dealing here with an apparatus generating wireless
waves, whose construction is immaterial, provided it
produces the required radiation. The fundamental wave-
length of this radiation is subject to variation. Its actual
magnitude is conditioned by the nature of the cells under-
going treatment, but up to the present time I have used
waves varying from 2 to 10 metres. It is only when living
entities, such as the cell and the microbe, are in contact,
that the rays given off by the radio-cellulo-oscillator are
brought into action so that the oscillatory equilibrium of
the cell may be re-established. It is the cell itself which,
by recovering its vitality, thanks to the radiation of the
auxiliary oscillator, succeeds in destroying the microbe.
  The experiments which I carried out at the Salpétriere
Hospital with Professor Gosset, Dr. Gutmann and M.
Magrou, were concerned with cancerous plants, inoculated
according to the method of Erwin Smith. These experi-
ments were the subject of a communication addressed to the
Société de Biologie, on July 26th, 1924.
     The text of this communication is given below.

Therapeutic      Tests    on   ‘‘ Experimental       Cancer    in Plants ’’ 4

   Experiments have shown that it is possible to produce,
in various plants, tumours comparable to cancer in animals
by inoculation with Bacterium tumefaciens (Erwin F.
Smith).2 One of us * has obtained experimentally by this
method a large number of tumours.        These tumours con-
tinue to develop indefinitely ; under certain conditions they
may undergo partial necrosis, but they do not perish entirely
until the whole plant, or at least the branch bearing the
tumour, succumbs to cachexia. Even when surgically
removed these tumours invariably recur.
   We propose to describe in this note the action of high
frequency electromagnetic waves, generated by an apparatus
     1 By A. Gosset, A. Gutmann, G. Lakhovsky and J. Magrou.
     2 Erwin F. Smith,   ‘‘ An Introduction   to Bacterial Diseases of Plants.”’
Philadelphia and London, 1920.
  3 J. Magrou, Revue de Pathologie comparée, Mars, 1924.
                 MODIFICATIONS                  IN CELLS                85

                                PLATE       I

            PHOTOGRAPH     SHOWING   SCAR       OF   TREATED   PLANT.
   Pelargonium zonatum (Geranium) inoculated with Bacteriwm tumefaciens
on April 10th, 1924, and treated from May 24th to June 14th, 1924, in
eleven séances of three hours’ duration, by means of Lakhovsky’s oscillator
fitted with antenne.
   Plant photographed after cure, July 21st, 1924.      (Surgical Clinic of
Salpétriére, Paris.)
  86                 THE      SECRET          OF    LIFE

 designed by Lakhovsky for therapeutic purposes, in accord-
 ance with his theories.1_ This apparatus has been named the
 Radio-cellulo-oscillator and gives off oscillations whose
 wavelength (A = 2 metres approx.) corresponds to 150 million
 vibrations per second.
    The first experiment began with a plant (Pelargonium
 zonatum) or Geranium taken a month after inoculation with
 Bacterium tumefaciens.      It was affected at that time by
 small white tumours of the size of a cherry stone. The
 plant was exposed to radiation on two occasions at twenty-
 four hours’ interval, and during three hours each time
 (Plate I).               :
    For a few days following treatment the tumour continued
 to grow rapidly, like the control tumours, forming a great
 multilobar mass.     About sixteen days after the first treat-
 ment the tumour suddenly began to undergo necrosis. Some
 time later (about fifteen days) the necrosis was complete ;
 the lobes of the tumour, shrunk and desiccated, were separated
  by furrows of elimination from the stalk that bore them, and
  the tumour itself offered no resistance to the slightest
  traction. The necrosing action of the radiations was
  rigorously selective and strictly limited to the cancerous
  tissues which were attacked as far as the deepest site from
  which the tumours originated. The healthy parts, stalk and
  leaves, were left intact and the plant retained all its vigour.
     A second geranium was similarly treated. In this case
  the duration of the exposure to radiation was prolonged
  (eleven séances of three hours each). Sixteen days after
  the first séance the tumour that the plant bore began to
  undergo necrosis and a few days later it was completely
  dried up. As in the first experiment, the healthy parts
  remained intact.
_    In a third geranium subjected to radiation during nine
 hours (in three séances of three hours each), necrosis of the
 lobes of the tumour followed the same course.
    Sixteen geraniums were set aside as controls and were
 not treated. All of them bore tumours in full activity, often
 enormous (Plate II).
   1 Georges   Lakhovsky,   Radio   Revue,   Novembre,   1923, et Conférence   &
 l’Ecole Supérieure des P.T.T, 2 Juin, 1924,
                 MODIFICATIONS                  IN CELLS                87

                                 PLATE     II

           PHOTOGRAPH     OF   TUMOUR    IN UNTREATED   PLANT.
  Pelargonium zonatum (Geranium) inoculated with Bacterium tumefaciens
on April 10th, 1924, and photographed June 6th, 1924.
   It will be observed that the stem of the plant bears a massive tumour.
(Surgical Clinic of Salpétriere, Paris.)
88                  THE     SECRET    OF   LIFE

   In conclusion, we are justified in stating that the geraniums
that became cancerous after inoculation with Bacterium
tumefaciens, a condition for which surgical intervention
failed to prevent recurrence, appeared to be cured under
the influence of certain electromagnetic waves previously
mentioned in this communication.          (Surgical Clinic of the
Salpétriére.)
   The outcome of these experiments seems to be perfectly
clear. On the one hand, a great number of plants inoculated
with Bacterium tumefaciens and left untreated, have shown
the development of tumours of considerable size that sapped
their vital energy, ultimately causing their destruction.
On the other hand, the plants treated by means of oscilla-
tions, and selected at random among the inoculated gera-
niums, were not only rapidly cured but were still flourishing,
even in winter, while the geraniums not inoculated, duly
produced flowers, but less conspicuously developed.
  The remarkable photograph of a cured geranium on
p. 89 (Plate III) should be of great interest to flower
gardeners.

      My Theory in Relation to the Pathology         of Cancer
     Statistics   show   that, in the majority    of cases,    cancer
attacks middle-aged people, from fifty onwards, as well as a
great number of old people, that is to say, cancer occurs in
old tissues.
   Our task therefore is to find out what chemical changes
take place in the blood or in the cells of elderly people, for,
according to my theory, cancer occurs as a result of varia-
tions of cellular oscillations caused by modifications in the
electrical capacity of cells.
   By way of example let us consider the formation of
globulins.+
   Analysis of the blood of elderly people has shown the
presence of globulins rich in iron and phosphorus, built up
from débris of fibrin, leucocytes (white corpuscles) and
erythrocytes (red corpuscles). According to the investiga-
  1 A general name for various proteins, including globulin,   vitellin,
serum-albumin, fibrinogen, myosin and globin. (Translator.)
                 MODIFICATIONS              IN CELLS                     89

                                PLATE     III

             PHOTOGRAPH    OF   TREATED   PLANT   AFTER   CURE.
  This geranium is the same as that in Plate I, treated by means of Lak-
hovsky’s oscillator on May 24th,   1924, and cured on June 4th, 1924.    It
was photographed in July, 1925.
  As will be seen, this plant is in excellent condition and in full bloom.
  On the other hand, the sixteen inoculated control plants, which were left
untreated, perished long ago.
90                    THE        SECRET       OF     LIFE

tions of several workers such as Achard, Aynaud, Bizzozero,
Eberth, Hayem and others, there appears in the blood, from
the age of 40 to 50, a number of flat corpuscles in the form of
pellets, named globulins. Professor Aynaud has shown that
globulins contain various mineral substances, representing
one-sixth of the dry weight. The ashes of globulins show, on
analysis, constant proportions of phosphorus, iron, sulphur
and calcium.!    In addition to mineral substances, globulins
contain organic compounds such as lecithin whose chemical
composition is akin to that of cholesterol which is found in
all tumours of the skin,
     Professor Roffo,          the eminent     cancerologist,       has shown
that cholesterol is found in all malignant tumours of the
skin, Now cholesterol, according to Roffo’s experiments,
is susceptible to the influence of solar radiations, parti-
cularly those in the ultra-violet region. In a recent study ”
Roffo has established the fact that when the food of experi-
mental rats is mixed with irradiated cholesterol (produced
by sunlight or ultra-violet rays) malignant tumours (sarcoma)
develop in 55 per cent. of cases, while in rats fed on non-
irradiated cholesterol no tumours were observed at all.
   The transformation of cholesterol involves the production
of hydrocarbons which, by virtue of their radio-activity, act
on the chromosomes of the cell which are destroyed, owing
to ‘interference radiation,’ with the result that only
mitochondria are left. These organic units being consider-
ably smaller and having a far greater frequency than the
chromosomes, continue to oscillate and to develop while also
acquiring a cellular membrane.      Hence the formation of the
neoplastic cell.
   The action of globulins in the causation of cancer now
becomes more apparent. They contain, on the one hand,
phosphorus (phosphorescent radiation in the presence of
hydrocarbons found in globulins), and, on the other hand,
mineral substances such as iron, calcium, sulphur, which
increase the conductivity of the cells.
  As in Roffo’s experiments in which hydrocarbons caused
  1 Aynaud,    “Sur   la composition     chimique    des   globulins.”   Comptes-
rendus de la Société de Biologie.    Paris, lxxvi, p. 480-481.
   2 Bulletin de lVInstituta    experimental para   el estudio y tratamienta   del
cancer.   Buenos Ayres, December,       1937, No. 47.
               MODIFICATIONS            IN    CELLS                91

cancer   in mice     fed with    irradiated   cholesterol,   so, too,
an excess of globulins in the organism from the age of
40 onwards, which introduces in the tissues the same
hydrocarbons as in irradiated cholesterol, plays a part in the
causation of human cancer.        Furthermore, the researches of
several investigators have shown that globulins agglutinate
very rapidly and have a tendency to unite with organic
particles, forming a covering which by its presence disturbs
the oscillation of normal cells, finally giving rise to cancer.
   It has also been observed that the number of white and
red corpuscles is markedly smaller in old people than in
adults, and according to certain investigators, both types
of corpuscles, red and white, are transformed into globulins.
Hence in old people the chemical composition of the blood
is not the same as in adults.
   Thus my theory provides a basis for the explanation of
the phenomenon of cancer whose primary cause is still
unknown,   whether it be microbic        or not.      We also know
that cancer may be grafted into a healthy organism but that
the graft does not always “take.” In such a case the
normal oscillation of healthy cells overcomes the oscillation
of the neoplasm (cancer) which fails to develop.           On the
other hand, if the graft is implanted into a group of abnormal
cells such as ‘‘ beauty spots,’’ it often “‘ takes ’’ because the
abnormal cell has a different rate of oscillation from that of
the normal cell.
   From these experiments it was finally concluded that
cancer was not contagious and therefore that it was not due
to a microbe.
   From my standpoint I compare the cancerous cell to a
micro-organism, having a nucleus just like ordinary cells,
but whose frequency of oscillation is different from that of
healthy cells. The only harmful microbes are those that
destroy or modify the normal oscillation by altering the
electrical capacity of cells ; and as for harmless microbes, it
may be assumed that they vibrate with the same frequency
as healthy cells, or that their chemical composition corre-
sponds to the electrical capacity and resistance of the cellular
environment.       It is known    that the lactic acid bacillus,
yeast, etc., are not harmful any more than the coli bacillus
92                THE     SECRET     OF    LIFE

under normal     conditions, for, having the same       oscillation
as the healthy cells, they do not modify their frequency
and therefore the cells do not undergo any alteration in spite
of the presence of these bacilli.
   Thus, in ageing tissues, an increase in the quantity of
molecules containing metals (iron, etc.), due to globulins
or other substances capable of modifying the electric con-
stants of the cells and the blood, affects the internal capacity
and electric resistance of every nuclear circuit. The circuit
formed by the organic filament no longer possesses the same
electrical capacity, indispensable for its equilibrium, for its
specific wavelength has been altered. It follows that the
frequency of oscillation is no longer the same. It has been
definitely modified and differs from the specific frequency
of healthy cells.                            |
    On the other hand, the division of cells which takes place
as a result of the increase of the metal-containing molecules
derived from the accretion of globulins or other carcinogenic
substances, serves to increase the electrical capacity of
other cells which causes a disturbance of their oscillatory
 equilibrium. As soon as the natural frequency is modified
 and the oscillatory equilibrium disturbed, the healthy cells,
 instead of dividing normally by karyokinesis [indirect cell
 division, the common mode of reproduction of cells] divide
 into neoplastic (cancerous) cells which vibrate with a different
 frequency. These new cells then act by direct induction
 and forced vibration upon the other neighbouring cells,
 which they force to oscillate with the frequency charac-
teristic   of cancerous   tumours,   and   thus   transform   them
into cancerous cells. The alteration of the tissues spreads
by degrees and results in the appearance of a cancerous
tumour.             :
   Thus the primary cause of this alteration would seem to
be a change of frequency on the part of healthy cells owing
to an increase of globulins too rich in iron and phosphorus in
cells already weakened.
   At the age of about 50 certain organs undergo chemical
modifications. The capacity and wavelength of the cells
are also modified and they begin to vibrate with a different
frequency, as stated before, forcing cellular division to
               MODIFICATIONS         IN CELLS                93
become neoplastic (cancerous).      The increase of globulins
and other carcinogenic substances occurring at a certain age,
in modifying the frequency of healthy cells whose electrical
 capacity is altered in consequence, or even in abolishing
 completely their normal oscillation, causes not only cancer,
 but also most of the diseases of old age. For cancer is but
 one of the diseases of old age ; it proclaims the degeneration
 of the organism.
    I am convinced that ultimately we shall succeed in finding
 ways and means of regulating the capacity and the wave-
 length of cells. When this object is achieved there is no
 reason why human life should not be prolonged far beyond
 its present span. We observe, however, that in spite of
 modern hygiene, the mortality from cancer remains enormous.
 In my opinion this is due to a reason which should be rather
 reassuring, | mean the progress of science, paradoxical as
 it may seem. As a matter of fact, the average expectation
 of life (7.e., mean duration of life) which was about thirty-
"nine years in the last decade of the past century, has risen to
 the figure of fifty or even higher in certain countries, thanks
 to the progress of surgery and hygiene, which has prevented
 a large number of deaths formerly due to contagious or
 organic diseases.
    Cancer, so often incurable, attacks people who have
 reached the early fifties. The increase in the average
 expectation of life affects all classes of the community so
 that more and more people reach the “ cancer age’ and
 succumb to the disease.
    In view of the rapid progress made in medical science
 and biology, and as some of the causes of cancer have already
 been definitely established, we are justified in hoping that
 this terrible disease will soon be conquered.

        Significance   of Temperature   of Human    Body
    Fever and its Function. In the light of my theory it is
 possible to explain the phenomenon of maintenance of
 constant temperature in the human body.
    Let us first consider how temperature is kept constant.
 Food, absorbed and chemically transformed by digestion and
94               THE    SECRET     OF   LIFE

other internal processes, reaches every cell after having been
assimilated partly by the blood and the protoplasm respec-
tively. Food materials thus give rise to biomagnomobile
entities which constitute the elementary units of living
organisms, as molecules and atoms make up chemical
substances. Foodstuffs convey to these units all the
chemical elements, metals, metalloids, besides conducting
and insulating compounds necessary for building up the
organic filament, its nucleus and membrane.   The nucleus
is made up of two distinct parts.
    1. Inside the filament, a mineral substance capable of
maintaining to a certain degree the conductivity of the
filament.
   2. Covering the filament, a membrane consisting of a
dielectric substance intended to insulate the filament
itself.
   We know that any oscillation in an electric circuit, open
or closed, gives off heat produced by the passage of current
through the conducting or insulating parts of the circuit.
In other words, it is the friction of current against the
resistance of the circuit which causes this production of
heat.
   In every cell the filament, consisting of conducting
materials more or less electrically resistant, becomes over-
heated by the passage of current. Thus the fact that the
cells oscillate implies that they give off heat, produced by
the degradation of electric energy arising from the chemical
energy of foodstuffs, and also from the atmosphere (cosmic
rays) as we shall see later.
   Let us suppose now that owing to any pathogenic agent
the electric resistance of the filament of the nucleus and
that of its membrane are different ; the result is an abnormal
liberation of heat with repercussions on neighbouring cells.
This emission of heat reaches the membranes of these cells
so that the temperature of the body gradually rises and
causes fever.
   It is perhaps possible to correlate these facts with the
death of certain patients suffering from high fever.
   We have seen that the circuit constituted by the organic
filament can oscillate only—that is to say, the cell can live
                 MODIFICATIONS                IN    CELLS                     95

only if this circuit, as any other electric circuit, is insulated
from the liquid in which it is immersed.     In fact the mem-
brane of the filament serves a similar function as the silk or
gutta-percha covering electric wires.
   What happens, then, if the temperature reaches 41°C. ?
Simply this : the insulating and resinous membrane consist-
ing of plastin+ or such-like substance, surrounding the
conducting filament, fuses at this high temperature owing to
its extreme thinness and its general physical nature. The
circuit is no longer insulated; it is destroyed. The cells,
therefore, can no longer be the sources of electrical oscilla-
tions, they can no longer live, and they die.
   The resistance, more or less prolonged, of certain patients
to this high temperature is due to the particular chemical
constant of the membrane            of the nuclear filament, and to
its degree of fusibility.
   Acting on this principle it is clear that many diseases
could be cured by means of fever, maintained at a suitable
temperature, so that fusion of the nucleus of the microbe
might be effected and the microbe consequently destroyed.
  Thus we know that the gonococcus does not resist a
temperature of 40° C. and that it is destroyed by the fusion
of its nucleus following a fever exceeding this temperature.
Moreover, for some time past fever has ceased to be consi-
dered solely as a pathological manifestation, harmful and
inevitable.    Indeed, remarkable cures have been attributed
to fever which would seem to belong to the domain of
empiricism, but will doubtless form part of the science of
to-morrow.2 Hence it is not useless to study closely the
causes and effects of fever, for its artificial induction and
adequate regulation depend upon such knowledge. We shall
see presently to what extent my theory of cellular oscillation
makes it possible to attain this end.

  1 A phosphorised   protein   constituting   one   of the   chief proteins   of
protoplasm.   (Translator.)
   2 Since Lakhovsky wrote this, therapeutic fever has developed into an
accepted method of treatment known as Pyretotherapy.       Application of
heat by this method or Pyrothermy consists in a general heating of the
patient with waves of about 30 metres.      Pyrothermy has been applied
by many workers in cases of rheumatic and other diseases, including
general paralysis of the insane.   Its aim is the production       of artificial
fever.  (Translator.)
96              THE    SECRET      OF   LIFE

   In this connexion it is interesting to note the occurrence
of fever provoked by vaccination, and we may also recall
that as early as 1885 Professor Wagner von Jauregg, of
Vienna, indicated the possibility of treating general paralysis
of the insane by inoculation with malaria, the same method
apparently having been used to cure Louis XI of epilepsy.
   At a time when microbes had not yet been discovered,
the curative effects of fever had already been observed.
Dr. Auguste Marie, an eminent French psychiatrist, men-
tions in a recent study the following observations made by
EKsquirol in his first treatise, dated 1818.
    ‘There are few chronic diseases that have not been cured
by the occurrence of an unexpected fever. All our practi-
tioners invariably bewail their inability to produce fever.
. . . Several have tried to induce it... .”
    Generally speaking, cures in mental cases following fever
have been observed on several occasions, especially when
caused by malaria or erysipelas.
    It is, of course, a purely empirical procedure to inoculate
a patient with a disease and risk the consequences with the
intention of effecting a cure by means of the resulting fever.
    In my view the mechanism of the cure in question is quite
simple. I have already stated that the nucleus of every cell
consists of a certain number of substances whose nature and
proportions are variable. Some of these substances act as
conductors (mineral salts), while others act as insulators
 (resins, fats, cholesterol, etc.). They are arranged in such a
way that the nucleus is generally found in the form of a tube
made up of insulating matter (filament) filled with conducting
fluid. Such are the elements of a cellular oscillating circuit.
    Now these insulating substances are all fusible at various
specific temperatures depending upon their nature. The
membrane of the nuclear filament is thus an insulating com-
pound which fuses at a certain temperature varying for each
particular microbe, this temperature depending essentially
 on the nature and the proportion of the constituent elements.
    The maximum temperature that a cell can withstand,
 without being destroyed, is naturally related to the consti-
 tution of the nucleus since the cell dies when its nucleus has
 been fused. Moreover, each species of microbe is resistant

                                                                  ea
                                                                  Ge
                                                                  -
                                                                  2a3)
                MODIFICATIONS          IN’ CELLS                97
until a certain degree of temperature is reached. Observas
tions made by various workers prove that a certain number
of microbic diseases may be satisfactorily treated by means
of fever provided the resulting temperature and its duration
are adequately assessed.
   But how is this to be done? By Pouoning to malarial
inoculation or colloidal substances which may cause grave
organic disturbances that give rise to fever by reaction ?
But fever may be excessive and cause fusion of the patient’s
healthy cells and thereby death may ensue.
   I have also shown that fever originated from a rise of
body temperature normally kept constant by the electric
resistance, in the cellular-oscillating circuit, to the passage
of high frequency induction currents. A rise of temperature
in the cellular oscillating circuit may be brought about in
two ways :—
   1. Externally, by excess of induction current, arising,
for example, from excess of cosmic radiation.
   2. Internally, by diminution of electric resistance of the
cellular filament ; for example, from excess of conducting
mineral substances.
   This is confirmed by many observations made on feverish
patients.
   In cases of fever, a rise ee temperature is invariably
 observed in the evening, at sunset, when the sudden reduc-
tion of atmospheric ionisation due to sunlight causes a great
influx of cosmic waves as well as short wireless waves.        On
the other hand, a decrease of temperature in fever is observed
in the morning, at sunrise, owing to the diurnal attenuation
of cosmic waves consequent upon atmospheric ionisation
through luminous rays which interfere with cosmic waves.
   In the light of these observations I believe it is a perfectly
sound procedure to induce attacks of curative fever, not by
inoculating patients with dangerous diseases or by destroying
a microbe through introducing another in the organism, but
by resorting to rational electrical methods, for example,
by making use of an ultra-short wave generator, such as the
apparatus I have already described, in addition to using oscil-
lating circuits and appropriate resonators. The relatively
long waves used in diathermy have a frequency which is far to
 S.L.                                                       H
98               THE     SECRET       OF      LIFE
low to generate a sufficiently high temperature, nor do they
enable us to gauge accurately the localisation of the thermal
effect produced. With much shorter waves, however, rang-
ing from 1-50 to 3 metres, it is possible to bring about far
more intensive heating effects.
   The construction of a type of ultra-short wave apparatus
of high energy potential has already been achieved to such
a point that operators manipulating it have shown symptoms
of high fever. An apparatus of this kind might enable us to
regulate the intensity of an appropriate fever by generating
the necessary heat in adequate quantity so as to fuse the
 nucleus of the pathogenic microbe.
    I am of opinion that such a method of treatment might
 free mankind from many diseases, especially syphilis, which
 is one of the gravest, for we know that the spirochete, its
 causative organism, is fused at a temperature of 40°C.
 Unfortunately, certain other microbes are fused at a higher
 temperature than our cells could tolerate, notably in the
 case of the bacillus of tuberculosis. In such circumstances
 artificial induction of fever would be impracticable and
 therefore, attention must be concentrated on increasing by
 chemical means the fusibility of the nucleus of the microbes
in question, or diminishing the fusibility of our own       cells,
which would then enable us to use the ultra-short wave
generator with a certain measure of success.

              Further   Proof   of Cellular   Oscillation
     Sterilisation of Water by Direct Contact of Microbes with
 Metals. In order to prove the validity of my theory of
 cellular oscillation, I recently carried out a series of investi-
 gations at the Pasteur Institute. As microbes or cells can
 live only by virtue of their high frequency oscillation, and.
 bearingin mind the bactericidal action of metals, I con-
 cluded that, according to my theory, the following facts
 provided a basis for a rational explanation.
    It is known that the frequency of an oscillating circuit
 is modified by contact with a metallic substance which, in
 some way, short-circuits it. From this I deduced that
 the same phenomenon should occur in the cellular oscillating
 circuit, that is to say by contact of metal with microbe.
                MODIFICATIONS                    IN   CELLS                 99

The experiments carried out at the Pasteur Institute con-
firmed once more my theoretical views, and formed the
subject of the following communication presented by
Professor d’Arsonval to the ‘‘ Académie des Sciences ”’ on
April 15th, 1929.
  Microbiology. Sterilisation of Water and other Liquids
by Means of Metallic Circuits in Direct Contact therewith.
Note of Georges Lakhovsky, presented by Professor
d’Arsonval.    (Abridged.)
   The bactericidal power of silver has been known for some
considerable time. Desiring to test the action of metals
on microbes, according to my theory of cellular oscillation,
which states that the nucleus of every cell or microbe is
comparable to a high frequency oscillating circuit, and
knowing that the frequency of oscillation of any circuit is
modified by contact with a metallic substance, I concluded
that the bactericidal action of the metal was purely physical
and due to alteration of oscillation of the nucleus in direct
contact with the metal.
   In collaboration with M. Sesari, of the Pasteur Institute,
I began these experiments with silver.
   I. Bacillus Coli. An emulsion of B. coli, containing
11,280 colonies       =     1,128,000 per cubic cm., was used as a
standard. The emulsion was then distributed as follows
into three separate vessels.
   A—Used as control.
  B—Circuit 7 flat spirals (surface area = 119 cm.?).
  C—Circuit 9 round spirals (surface area = 72 cm.?).
  After a certain lapse of time the results were as follows :

                                         Number of Colonies found

                                   After 18 hours.            After 25 hours.

                            Circuit A.                —        43,680,000
   Bacillus cov per
      cubic cm.
                          | Circuit
                              ‘   :
                                         B   .   171,200
                                                     ;
                                                                     0
                            Circtit'C,       . - 73,600              0
100              THE    SECRET      OF    LIFE

   II. The same results were obtained with the typhoid
bacillus. In this case the sterilisation process was slightly
more prolonged.
   III. In order to verify that the results obtained were not
due to a chemical, but to a physical action of the metal, we
carried out the following experiment.
   After having mixed the water sterilised in the previous
experiment with the silver circuits (Circuits B and C), we
placed this mixed sterilised fluid into three glasses, a, b, c,
as follows :
            a—Without further treatment.
            b—Heated between 101°-115° C.
            c—Filtered wtih Chamberland F.

  These three liquids were then contaminated afresh with
B. coli, but in the absence of the silver circuits.
  The titration, 10-1: cm, at the end of twenty-four hours,
gave the following results :
            Control glass 10-1       .   ~— 946 colonies.
            Glass a     Serta!       :        12    :
            Glass b     A    eo               13    -
            Glass ¢     . 10-1       a    heere!    /
   It will be observed that the liquids a and b, containing
the B. coli destroyed by the previous treatment, had an
immunising effect on the newly introduced emulsion of
B. coli, while in the filtered water (Glass c) the microbes
developed normally.
   We repeated these experiments with a white metal known
as platonix with the same results.
   From a hygienic point of view the conclusion is that a
new process is available for the sterilisation of water without
boiling (which renders it unpalatable and deprives it of
certain mineral salts) and without adding chemical substances
which affect its purity to a certain degree, and, lastly, without
using filters which are not always effective.
   I also wish to draw attention to the fact that the metal
loses its bactericidal power when its surface becomes covered.
with a thin layer, consisting of calcareous deposits and organic
matter derived from the water, which separates it from the
               MODIFICATIONS        IN CELLS               101

 microbes.   The same phenomenon occurs in batteries and
 accumulators by polarisation when the electrodes have to
 be cleaned and depolarised.
    The importance of this method of destroying microbes
 lies in the fact that without resorting to heat or chemical
agents, it is possible to preserve the chemical constant of the
 microbe unimpaired, and this may conceivably extend the
 field of vaccination, especially in regard to the oral mode of
 treatment.
                             CHAPTER      VII

                NATURE        OF   RADIANT      ENERGY

What   is Radiant      Energy ?—TIonisation   and   Conductivity—Deep
Radiation     and   Cosmic   Waves—Universion—Solar     Radiation   and
Photolysis.

In the preceding chapters I have shown how the sense of
orientation in animals could be accounted for and how living
cells were centres of radiation. I now propose to consider
the origin of these radiations.
   Bearing in mind the relationship existing between radia-
tion of healthy cells and oscillatory disequilibrium occurring
in diseased conditions, I set out to reinforce this cellular
oscillation by means of my high frequency oscillator, thus
producing an extensive range of ultra-short waves suscep-
tible of interfering with cosmic waves and of absorbing any
excess in their output.
   The existence of these interference waves is of the utmost
importance for it seems clear that only certain waves of a
frequency comparable to that of waves emitted by the
cells can have an influence on the radiations of the latter.
   In developing my theory I was faced with the problem
of the origin of the energy necessary for the production and
maintenance of cellular oscillations. Is it a question of
chemical energy produced in living beings by internal
radiations ? Or is it an internal energy of physical, thermal
or luminous nature ? It does not seem probable, a priori,
that it is a question of internal energy, any more than the
electric battery, the steam engine or the dynamo, possess
an energy of their own. Is it then a question of energy of
external origin ? In point of fact it is actually a question
of external cosmic radiation which astrophysicists have
described as penetrating rays or cosmic rays which we shall
consider in due course.
   In order to ascertain the origin of this energy, I devised
                               102
                                                                                                        ‘sque[d [013U00 oY} SBoTOYM
             ‘poystiod [Te oaey “quetd poyeer} oY} OpIsed e104 UMOYS pu oyEpP OUTBS OY} UO poyeTnooul
                                                                                                          ey} SMoOYs ‘ez6l ‘Arenuee
           qt Aq poqooyze oq 07 avadde qou seop yoryM yuetd oy} ITM JeYyyeS0} Surdofeasp InouIny
                                                                                                    “por oytuoge ue Aq uoryisod ut
          ‘

                                                                                             oy,
          jo puo oy} ye Aes 04 ST yey} “UOIZeTNOOUI 109FeB SYPUOUT OZ UBF ‘ydeasojoyd
                                                                                                         UO peye[NooUL ‘queyd siuy
          qdoy sojourerp “Wo (Eg JO yINoITO oNfeyout uedo uv Aq po[ortoUe SBA FZ6L ‘y}P Iequis.eqT
103

                                                   NV   JO   SNVAW   AG   GAULVEUL      WOINVEEY)   AHHLONV   dO   HdVUYVOLOHG
                     “LIQOUID   OITIVIa W   NadO
ENERGY
RADIANT
OF
NATURE

                                                                                WTVId
                                                                                AT
 104                THE     SECRET        OF   LIFE

the following experiment, similar to former experiments
when plants artificially inoculated with cancer were treated
by means of high frequency electromagnetic radiations
which absorbed any excess in the output of cosmic waves at
their maximum intensity. In this experiment I purposely
dispensed with the local source of energy, that is to say, the
 Oscillator.
    I took a series of geraniums previously inoculated with
cancer, and placed them in separate pots. A month later,
when the tumours had developed, I took one of the plants ©
at random which I surrounded with a circular spiral
consisting of copper and measuring 30 cm. in diameter, its
two extremities, not joined together, being fixed into an
ebonite support.! I then let the experiment follow its natural
course during several weeks (Plate IV). After a fortnight
I examined the plants. JI was astonished to find that all
my geraniums or the stalks bearing the tumours, were dead
and dried up with the exception of the geranium surrounded
by the copper spiral, which has since grown to twice the
height of the untreated healthy plants (Plates V and VI).
   What conclusion may we deduce from these results ?
That the copper spiral must have picked up external radia-
tions, atmospheric radiations, and that it created an electro-
magnetic field which absorbed any excess of cosmic waves
in the same manner as the Oscillator in my previous experi-
ments. The corollary of this conclusion is that the atmo-
sphere must be permeated with radiations of all frequencies.
Indeed, we know that the terrestrial atmosphere contains a
vast number of electromagnetic oscillations of all wave-
lengths and intensities, owing to constant and innumerable
electrical discharges. Furthermore, we know that all types
of electromotors and most electrical appliances create in
the atmosphere a whole field of permanent auxiliary
waves.
   Again, during the past few years wireless stations have
sprung up to such an extent that there is no detectable gap
in the gamut of these waves.      In such circumstances it

   1 An oscillator of this kind has a fundamental wavelength of about
2 metres and picks up the oscillating energy of innumerable radiations in
the atmosphere,
            NATURE        OF      RADIANT       ENERGY                   105

                                 PLATE    V

   PHOTOGRAPH    OF   GERANIUM    SHOWN   IN PLATE   IV, AFTER   CURE.

   The plant is still flourishing and shows considerable development.
The tumour has been shed and it may be seen in the foreground of the
flower vase. On the stem the scar is clearly visible.
                                                 ALVWId
                                                     IA

                                                                                                             106
                                                                                                             THE
                                                                                                             SECRET
                                                                                                             OF
                                                                                                             LIFE

        HdVUNOLOHG
             ZO  AHL   ANVS          WOINVEED
                                         SY NI     ALVIg
                                                       ‘A       NENVEL
                                                                   V     MA       SHINOW UALVI “ANO) (C361
oy,    guetd
          st    Mou         AyJoyeTduI0D
                                    *poano4Z        SenUT}ZUOD
                                                        07     MoOId pUe    UTOCTG      ‘Al[eULIOU
                                                                                               SY JO} oy}
 [o1QUOD syuR{d uMOYsS opisoq
                          “41    Ay} ore [[e   ‘peop
          NATURE       OF   RADIANT       ENERGY            107

follows that any oscillating circuit of any dimension and
of any shape may find, in this vast field of waves, its own
particular wave which will enable it to oscillate normally.
It is now clear that in order to attain this end it is
unnecessary to have recourse to a generator emitting local
waves, such as the Radio-cellulo-oscillator, with which I
treated the inoculated geraniums in the course of my first
experiments.
   The question that naturally thrusts itself before us now
is how do the oscillating circuit and the Radio-cellulo-
oscillator act on the cosmic waves ? As we shall see in due
course, it is the cosmic waves    which   create and maintain
life by making the cellular circuit oscillate. Similarly, all
electromagnetic waves, light, heat, electrical discharges,
X-rays, ultra-violet rays, radio-active rays, etc., possess
the property of reacting upon one another and upon cosmic
waves.    Experience has taught us that the intensity of
cosmic waves is not constant, but is maximal at night
towards midnight and minimal towards mid-day, as the
diurnal radiation of light diminishes their intensity. These
variations are detrimental to the maintenance of the
oscillatory equilibrium of cells and may give rise to disease
and death.
   Owing to the action of the Radio-cellulo-oscillator or
simply of the oscillating circuit which picks up the radiating
energy in the atmosphere, and owing to the electro-
magnetic field thus created, excess of cosmic waves is
absorbed.
   In the following pages we shall discuss the nature of
cosmic waves and how they affect the conditions of living
beings.
   Ionisation and Conductivity.    Let us first remark that the
subject of cosmic radiation will be made clearer if we bear
in mind the following well-known fact. Ifa gold leaf electro-
scope, thoroughly insulated and placed under an airtight
glass container, is charged, it will be noticed, after a certain
time, that a progressive discharge takes place. If the
experimental conditions are kept constant this discharge is
stabilised and the wastage stops. (In certain experiments
at the end of four days.) On the other hand, if the air is
108                  THE      SECRET        OF    LIFE

charged or if a fresh supply of air is introduced, the wastage
continues.
   It has also been observed that this wastage increases in
proportion as the pressure increases.
   Many scientists have studied this phenomenon, notably
Geitel, Wilson and Campbell. Their observations have
led them to conclude that the air was rendered conductive
owing to a special cause, this is what is known as the
phenomenon of spontaneous ionisation.
   In order to ascertain the causes of this ionisation scientists
have investigated the influence of radio-active radiation
emanating from the walls of the container and depending
on the nature of these walls. In short, they have deter-
mined the nature and manifestations of all the influences
involved and have observed the following phenomena.
   The spontaneous ionisation of air placed in an airtight
container (washed and polished) is not constant. It varies
with the time of day and attains a maximum towards
midnight. This ionisation often shows sudden variations
which seem inexplicable, and it takes place equally well
during the day or night, in cities or in the country. Further-
more, spontaneous ionisation varies according to the electro-
static potential of the air.
   Lastly, and this is still more remarkable, after diminishing
slightly in intensity up to a height of about 500-700 metres
above sea-level, the intensity increases more and more with
the altitude. Spontaneous ionisation increases rapidly
with altitude, thus at 5,000 metres it is seven times greater
than at the earth’s surface.
   Penetrating Radiation. We are thus brought naturally to
the point of conceiving the existence of an extra-terrestrial
radiation, coming from the sun, for example, or else from
   1 It seems fairly obvious that the enclosed air in the field of the electro-
scope should become electrified.     If the air is renewed the new atmosphere
must become electrified in its turn to the detriment of the electric charge
of the apparatus, which explains the observed wastage.
   2 It is clear that the insulating powers of the atmosphere must decrease
as pressure increases.    The mass of conducting material and the number
of molecules enclosed in a given volume function in direct relation to the
pressure.
   3 Variations of ionisation show a marked similarity to variations of
intensity observed in the propagation of waves, and, conversely, to varia-
tions of natural electromagnetic phenomena, known as “ atmospherics.”
            NATURE         OF    RADIANT         ENERGY                 109

other sources. This radiation has been given the name of
penetrating radiation.
   Such a radiation plays a part in the progressive ionisation
of the atmosphere.          As we      have     already    learned,     the
intensity of a cosmic field increases with the altitude. It
is natural to assume that these two phenomena are intimately
related and are due to the same cause. This hypothesis is
confirmed by the existence of a conducting atmospheric
layer, known as the Heaviside layer, and situated at a height
of 80-100 kilometres above the earth’s surface. This zone
is familiar to all radio engineers.
   Whence comes this radiation, this energy ? Does it come
from the sun, the immediate source of all energy on earth ?
It seems probable. Does it come from other stars more or
less distant ? It is quite possible. But, in any case, one
fact is certain, this radiation exists.
  Solar Radiation and Photolysis. We may go even further
and say that the atmosphere in which we live is permeated
with a multitude       of vibrations, electrical oscillations, etc.,
of known or unknown origin, and essentially characterised
by different frequencies.
We     have already pointed out that sunlight forms but a
very small part of the whole range of vibrations originating
partly from the sun and partly from the stars and even the
Milky Way. It is impossible to deny the influence of the
stars in this connexion.   The tides, occurring twice a day,
by the combined action of the moon and the sun, show that
the most extensive mechanical work taking place on the
earth is of astral origin. Why then should not the earth
receive, from distant stars and from the Milky Way in
particular, radiations of very small amplitude, susceptible
of producing infinitesimal effects ?
   Nature is the scene of a host of phenomena, alleged to be
inexistent or inexplicable owing to our limited powers of
perception, but whose effects manifest themselves never-
theless. Thus I postulate the existence of a multitude of
radiations of all frequencies emanating from interplanetary

   1 The Heaviside layer is now generally known as the Kennelly-Heaviside
layer, and is said to be ionised by the sun’s rays.      It has been held to
account for ‘‘ fading ’’ of wireless signals. (Translator.)
110               THE   SECRET    OF   LIFE

space and traversing our atmosphere unceasingly.        To this
conception I have given the name of Universion.
  Some   of these radiations,   the luminous   ones,   transmit
through their rays a certain amount of solar energy and give
rise to a process of synthesis in plants in connexion with
assimilation of chlorophyll. This phenomenon, which holds
good for the whole vegetable kingdom, was termed photolysis
by the eminent French scientist, Daniel Berthelot. Thus
light would seem to play an important part in the lives of
plants and animals alike. In the vegetable kingdom
synthesis of organic matter is accomplished with simple
elements and with the intervention of energy directly
transmitted by solar radiations (light, heat, infra-red,
ultra-violet and cosmic radiations) which bring about this
metamorphosis.                             |
  Penetrating Radiation (Cosmic Rays) in Relation to Life.
It is actually these radiations, of very high frequency,
invisible and imperceptible to our senses, which were
supposed to act, according to a modus operandi we shall
discuss presently, on the metallic circuit mentioned in my
experiments with cancerous geraniums. It is these radia-
tions which were responsible, in the inoculated plants, for
re-establishing oscillatory equilibrium between healthy and
diseased cells.   These radiations, which were instrumental
in curing diseased plants, emanated in my first experiments
from my Radio-cellulo-oscillator. In the course of subse-
quent experiments carried out with a metallic spiral, the
process was simpler in so far as it was the cosmic rays,
filtered by the spiral, which were brought into action,
finally restoring the degenerating cells of the diseased
geranium to healthy activity.
   Thus. the purpose of these radiations is to maintain, by
resonance and interference, the natural vibration of healthy
cells, and to re-establish the vibrations of unhealthy cells
by eliminating the radiations of microbes, differing as they
do in amplitude and frequency.
   It is these radiations which maintain the vital activities
of plants and animals.
   Cosmic Rays and Universion. The hypothesis of pene-
trating radiation has been fully confirmed by many astro-
          NATURE       OF     RADIANT | ENERGY                111

physicists, principally in America.   Penetrating radiation
is now identified with ‘‘ cosmic rays,’’ these natural rays
which reach us across immense distances and consisting of a
vast gamut of frequencies.
   The discovery of gamma rays in the atmosphere some
years ago led to the assumption that they were due to an
emanation of radium contained in the terrestrial crust.
But since then, experiments carried out in a balloon by
Gockel showed that this radiation was at least as intense at
a height of 4,000 metres as at the earth’s surface, instead of
diminishing with increase of altitude. It has been estab-
lished that this radiation is approximately eight times
greater at a height of 9 kilometres than at ground level.
In America, Millikan and Bowen obtained significant results
at a height of 15 kilometres and also at a depth of 30 metres
in Muir Lake below Mount Whitney, at an altitude of
3,540 metres. These investigators discovered that at a
depth of 30 metres of water the intensity of radiation was
still sufficient to discharge an electroscope to an appreciable
degree. In estimating, at a depth of 7 metres of water, the
resistance of atmospheric absorption above the lake, it was
found that cosmic rays could penetrate more than 37 metres
of water, equivalent to a thickness of 1-80 metres of lead
relatively to the absorbing power of this metal. Thus these
cosmic rays appeared to be 100 times more penetrating than
the hardest X-rays. The American astrophysicists repeated
their experiments at Arrowhead Lake, deeper than Muir
Lake, and also at great heights. They found that cosmic
rays did not come from any particular direction, but seemed
to come from all parts of space.
  These   rays   constitute   a spectrum   extending   over    an
octave and their highest frequencies are nearly 2,000 times
ereater than those of X-rays. These radiations range, in
the scale of electromagnetic waves, as far from X-rays as
these are distant from luminous waves.       But in striking the
earth these rays are partially transformed into softer
secondary rays which are less penetrating.
   The researches carried out by Professor Millikan and
Dr. Cameron, among others, have enabled them to measure
the intensity of cosmic radiation in ions per square centimetre
112              THE    SECRET     OF   LIFE

and per second at sea-level. The frequencies of cosmic
radiations have so far been extended to 2 octaves of the
electromagnetic spectrum. Astrophysicists have shown
that these rays were still detectable after having penetrated
through 53 metres of water and 4 metres of lead.
 According to Professor Millikan the origin of ultra-
penetrating radiation is due to the most varied molecular
 and atomic changes occurring throughout space. It is the
reason why he has made use of the general term “‘ cosmic
 radiation.”” Thus the interplanetary vacuum is but a
 fiction since it appears to be filled throughout by cosmic
waves radiated by all the stars and asteroids, by nebule and
even by the Milky Way.
    From the numerous researches of astrophysicists it
appears that the existence of a range of cosmic rays per-
meating all regions of space and even intersidereal regions,
is positively established.
    The inter-astral vacuum is an obsolete notion as we know
that this vacuum shows evidence of considerable radiating
energy, all the more intense as it is more distant from the
atmosphere, and propagated in all directions throughout
space. Moreover, this radiation traversing the ether of
the physicists permeates all material bodies, even those of
the greatest density, as we have just had occasion to observe.
All the manifestations of energy on earth of which we have
knowledge, directly or indirectly, are but emanations of
these cosmic rays which constitute the only possible inter-
sidereal vehicles. Let us also bear in mind that the presence
of terrestrial elements, the concentration of matter and the
appearance of life, both animate and inanimate, are but
manifestations of these rays. Finally, the motion of the
stars is maintained by the energy transmitted by these
cosmic rays.
   In view of all these facts the suggestion of universal power
derived from this conception of cosmic rays, should not be
associated with the notion of absolute vacuum as implied
by the ether of physicists. I believe that this ether is not
the negation of all matter but rather the synthesis of all
radiating forces, and therefore I have given the name
Universion to the universal plexus of all cosmic rays.
           NATURE        OF RADIANT           ENERGY                 113
   Universion is a conception of the infinitely great, symbo-
lised by the boundless wniverse ; and of the infinitely small,
the granule of electrified matter, symbolised by the ton
which is a world in itself. The infinitely great of the
universe is, in fact, nothing but the integration of infinitely
small ions.
   I have elaborated this conception of Universion in another
work to which readers are referred.!
   Universion is ubiquitous and all pervading. Every
moment we have evidence of its presence, as effective as it is
silent. The material universe and life itself are but unstable
phenomena.      A certain variation of the body’s temperature
is enough to put an end to life and dissociate matter, thus
restoring ions and electrons into the flux of universion
whence they are mobilised by cosmic rays for the creation of
new material combinations and living organisms.
   Dissociation under the influence of temperature, pressure,
electrolysis, photolysis, chemical reactions, electromagnetic
and radio-active, electrical and photo-electrical reactions,
such are the proofs of the existence and ubiquity of
universion.
   Let us not lose sight of the fact that Universion is a
medium that revolutionises established conceptions, a
medium where disintegrated elements are consigned and
transformed into electrical particles. These conceptions
need not astonish us for they reveal nothing more, in the
continuity of the universe, but degrees of condensation.
   The study of electromagnetic phenomena has upset the
old mechanistic conceptions on the constitution of matter.
And now, the study of Universion and cosmic rays will
extend the bounds of science and enable us to solve the
most absorbing problems of life—including telepathy and
transmission of thought.
  1 Georges Lakhovsky, “ L’Universion.”   Gauthier-Villars.   Paris, 1927.

  8.1.                                                               I
                        CHAPTER          VIII

SUNSPOTS    AND     COSMIC RADIATION IN RELATION               TO
                     HEALTH AND LIFE

FRom the earliest times the influence of the stars on human
life has been recognised. When science was undeveloped
these notions, essentially intuitive and empirical, gave birth
to astrology. At the present time, in view of our scientific
knowledge, it need hardly be stressed that all these beliefs
and observations should be rigorously examined.
   In the preceding chapter a new concept, which we named
Universion, was discussed. This may be regarded as a kind
of substratum in which cosmic waves of all frequencies are
propagated in all directions. The cosmic waves emanate
directly or indirectly from the stars and it is clear that since
they come from multitudinous sources and penetrate every-
where, they must have a spontaneous influence on our living
conditions as they have already been shown to have an
effect in the domain of physical phenomena.
   We must now proceed to investigate scientifically to
what extent these cosmic waves affect our existence and the
scope of their influence.
   Before considering the general problem attention should
be focussed on particular cases of cosmic radiations, such as
those emanating from the sun and the moon which play a
singular and preponderant part in relation to the earth.
   It has been shown by a Belgian engineer, M. P. Vincent,
that lunar radiation was responsible for interference pheno-
mena in the course of transmission from wireless stations.
It appears that every week the recurrence of the phases of
the moon corresponds with maxima and minima of intensity
in the reception of electromagnetic waves.+
   We are apt to forget that the sun, besides giving off
luminous, calorific and actinic rays, also gives off electric
            1 Georges Lakhovsky, ‘“* L’Universion,”’ p. 127.
                                   114
         SUNSPOTS        AND COSMIC RADIATION                  115
 and magnetic waves, especially during the eruptive periods
 of its protuberances or sunspots. Let us bear in mind that
 these sunspots are nothing but volcanoes and that the crater
 of a single one of them may measure as much as 200,000 kilo-
  metres in diameter, or more than fifteen) times the diameter
_ of the earth.
    In addition to light and heat, the sun sends us electro-
  magnetic waves whose magnetic force affects the magnetism
 of the earth and causes deflections of the compass.           The
 electric force of these waves also gives rise to terrestrial
 currents whose intensity is sometimes such that it becomes
 impossible to telegraph or to telephone. Magnetic storms
 and terrestrial currents cause grave perturbations in the
 field of electrical communications, wireless or otherwise.
 Furthermore, the phenomena of ionisation caused by cosmic
 radiations emanating from the sun have, as a direct conse-
 quence, a marked effect in impeding the propagation of
 waves round the earth’s surface. This results in ionisation
 of the upper layers of the atmosphere which renders it
 conductive, refractive and reflective, giving rise to ‘‘ atmo-
 spherics ’’ so familiar to radio listeners.
    Another important proof that the sun and stars give off
 radiations besides those associated with heat and light, is
 given by the phenomenon of aurora borealis which often
 accompanies magnetic:storms.      It is known that this is due
 to the fluorescence of the atmospheric upper strata brought
 about by cathode and X-rays which form part of the stream
 of cosmic rays emanating from sunspots.
    Some astrophysicists have correlated the occurrence and
 intensity of sunspots with certain concomitant physical
 phenomena. They have observed that terrestrial cataclysms,
 tidal waves, and especially earthquakes, seem to be associated
 with sunspots, and that the presence of these sunspots,
 considered in relation to the earth in a periodic cycle of
 twenty-seven days or so, may be held to account for the
 occurrence of “ lunations ”’ of the sun.
    The cause of these perturbations is attributable to
 interference of these solar waves with the normal field of
 cosmic waves which play the chief part in the scheme
 of interastral   mechanics.
                                                        tee,
116                 THE      SECRET        OF      LIFE

   A graphic representation covering a period of years and
indicating the variations of intensity in geophysical pheno-
mena, in electrical phenomena (ionisation, conductivity of
gases, aurora borealis), of magnetic phenomena (perturba-
tions in the terrestrial magnetic field, electromagnetic
phenomena, etc.) shows that the different curves exhibit a
remarkable degree of parallelism and that these phenomena
follow closely the variations affecting sunspots. According
to these curves it is clear that the variations of these pheno-
mena are periodical and that the cycle of their manifestations
occurs about every eleven years.1 Without enquiring into
the cause of this periodicity we are led to the conclusion that
cosmic radiations emanating from the sun cannot be con-
fined in their effects to physical phenomena, such as electri-
city and electromagnetism.        They must necessarily play
a part in biological phenomena also which are intimately
connected with physical phenomena.
   The study of this question has resulted in many observa-
tions which have seldom been adequately interpreted. In
the wake of physicists, meteorologists have made a certain
contribution to our knowledge of sunspots. In 1651,
Riccioli announced that a relation existed between the
appearance of sunspots and the state of the sky. In 1801,
Sir William Herschel confirmed this observation. The
astrophysicist, Baxendall, showed, in 1887, how the average
temperature on the earth’s surface was connected with the
number of sunspots per annum, a fact which                      was confirmed
by other observers.
   In Mauritius, Dr. Meldrum showed, in 1871, that in
tropical regions the number of sunspots determines the
number of cyclones. This observation, however, has only
been confirmed in the tropics, where the maxima and minima
of storms accompany with striking regularity the maxima
and minima of sunspots.
  1 This is in striking agreement with a statement by Sir James Jeans
in his work, “‘ Through Space and Time.”     Writing on the subject of
sunspots, Sir   James Jeans said “ A careful study of cross-sections of trees
frequently shows that the rings change gradually in thickness in a cycle
of eleven years which coincides exactly with the sunspot period. The
thickest rings were formed in those years when sunspots were most plentiful
and we see at once that abundance of sunspots goes with abundance of
tree-growth and so with moist summers.”         (Translator.)
         SUNSPOTS AND COSMIC RADIATION                      117
  Tropical rains also appear to be associated with sunspots.
Rainy years appear to coincide with maximal sunspot
activities while drought years reflect activities of minimal
order.
   In tropical regions where, owing to the absence of clouds,
the effects of the sun are more direct and easier to determine,
W. Koppen, in 1873, showed that during the year preceding
a minimum of sunspots, the thermometer was 0-41° C. above
the average temperature while during the year preceding a
maximum of sunspots, the thermometer was 0:32° C. under
the average temperature.      Blandford explained this by
pointing out that the excess of thermal energy transmitted
by the sun, causes excessive evaporation of the seas, hence
the lowering of temperature. Moreux observed that this -
did not apply to great continental surfaces where the eleva-
tion of temperature invariably follows the appearance of
sunspots. But all these meteorological laws are, owing to
their nature, far less accurate than physical laws. Never-
theless, they constitute, in so far as.the effects of solar
radiation are concerned, a valuable indication.   Moreover,
the problem of sunspots is less concerned with the qualitative
and morphological aspects of the spots than with the total
solar activity which brings cosmic waves into play. Again,
the periodicity of solar activity is not so simple as it might
appear and cannot be expressed in the form of a pure sine-
wave.   A vast number of harmonics superimposed upon the
fundamental wave indicate that the actual periodicity of
the sun is affected by that of other stars generating cosmic
waves. Numerous observations made in Madras and
Washington in more than one hundred different observa-
tories, have shown that outside the tropics, solar radiation
causes two alternating periods of rain and drought in the
course of about thirty-five years. Such examples could be
multiplied indefinitely. A similar periodicity has been
observed in the drift of icebergs and in the variation of level
inlakes. In particular, the period of eleven and a half years »
is very apparent in the case of the Victoria and Albert Lakes
in Equatorial Africa while a period of thirty-three years
seems to apply to European lakes. Generally speaking,
direct solar activity is shown in all these natural phenomena.
118               THE    SECRET      OF   LIFE

   The domain of meteorology serves as a natural transitional
link between physics and biology. It would seem rational,
therefore, to investigate in what measure cosmic rays, which
condition physical and meteorological phenomena, affect
physiological phenomena.       This idea seems to have occurred
to certain scientists at a time when the tendency was to
attribute all solar activity to sunspots and when cosmic rays
were unknown.
   Sir William Herschel wrote in 1801: ‘‘ It seems probable,
in analysing the period between 1650 and 1713, and judging
by the normal yields of wheat, that a scarcity of vegetation
occurred whenever the sun appeared to be free from spots.”’
  In 1901 Moreux observed that the yield of wheat in France
and throughout the world generally followed roughly the
variations of solar activity. He then proceeded to investi-
gate the influence of this activity on human organisms. He
expressed himself on this subject as follows :
   “In my capacity of Professor in a college I had excep-
tional opportunities for making observations. Although
not being a medical man, I could not help observing a
recrudescence of rheumatic affections and neuralgia, coin-
ciding not with sunspots but with the strongest magnetic
deviations due to solar activity. Furthermore, the total
number of punishments appeared to be a function of devia-
tions of the magnetic needle which seemed to indicate a kind
of abnormal nervous excitement on the part of students
     . and possibly of professors too, at times of solar activity.
I deduced from this that a relation could conceivably exist
between wars and the sun, and I published this curve of
correlation on several occasions before and after the Great:
War.”
   For my part, I conceived the idea of establishing from my
personal observations and those of astrophysicists, the laws
to which the biological effects due to cosmic rays are subject,
and particularly those effects resulting from solar activity.
   In comparing the charts of solar activity from the
Observatory of Meudon with the statistics of wine-growing
districts in Burgundy and Beaujolais, I have been able to
show a parallelism existing between these statistics and the
charts in question, and I concluded that the remarkable
          SUNSPOTS           AND   COSMIC RADIATION             119
 vintage years coincided with the years of recrudescence in
 sunspots.
     These observations formed the subject of an original
  paper entitled “‘ The influence of astral waves on oscillation
  of living cells,” which Professor d’Arsonval was kind enough
_ to present on my behalf to the Académie des Sciences. This
  paper is reproduced below.
    Influence of Astral Waves       on Oscillation of Living Cells.
 (Communication by Georges Lakhovsky presented on
 March 28th, 1927, at the Académie des Sciences by Professor
 d’Arsonval.)
    “In my work, ‘ L’Origine de la Vie,’ which Professor
 d’Arsonval has done me the honour of presenting to the
 Académie des Sciences, I formulated my theory of the
 influence of penetrating rays (cosmic rays) on living beings.
 I showed, in fact, that the nucleus of every living cell,
 manifesting itself in the form of a tubular filament consisting
 of dielectric matter and filled with a conducting substance,
 is comparable to an oscillating circuit having self-inductance,
 capacity and electric resistance. Living cells can thus
 oscillate with very high frequencies under the influence of
 cosmic rays emitted by the stars.
    I have attempted to prove the validity of my theory by
 studying the influence of astral radiation (sunspots, comets,
 interference of astral radiations, etc.) on living matter.
    My observations were based on the curves of graphs drawn
 by the astrophysicists of the Meudon Observatory ; these
 curves   showing,   since    1845, the activity of sunspots,   the
 incidence of magnetic perturbations and of polar aurore.
   These three curves are remarkably parallel.   I set myself
 the task of studying the correlation existing between these
 astral radiations on the one hand, and the development of
 vital activity in plants and animals on the other hand.
 As in the case of any given individual, periods of fatigue
 and disease alternate with periods of good health, so, too,
 with fruits and crops in general, there are, for every kind of
 product, years of good quality and years of poor quality.
    With regard to wine, according to the documentation
 established by the Chambers of Commerce of Bordeaux and
 Burgundy, I have noted that the remarkable years
120                       THE   SECRET          OF   LIFE

                                         |
                                        ae)
                                        »
                                         oS
                                        =
                                 aoS    4a
                                  pee on
                                  2
                                  @     5
                                  a      a                    Red wines of
                                  =|     2 a                    Bordeaux
                                  <     am
                                  |      Pa

                                                            1847, 1848.
                                                            Remarkable years

      1851, 52, 54, 55, 56.
             Ordinary and
          indifferent years
                                                            1857, 1858.
                                                            Remarkable years

                                                            1869, 1870.
                                                            Remarkable years

      S725 (o5 04, 605 hile
             Ordinary and
         indifferent years

                                                            Phylloxera period

                                                            1890, 91, 92, 93 and 96.
                                                            Fairly good years.
  1894.    Indifferent year                                 Wines of strong and
 1895.    Wines of distinc-                                 rich character
             tive character

                                                            1905, 1907.   Good years.
                                                            Fine wines of excep-
                                                            tional character

1908; 09, 10, 11,12, 13,14
and 15. indifferent, bad
      and very bad years

   Fie. 17.      Graph showing correlation between remarkable vintage years
and intensity of solar radiations corresponding with variations of intensity
in: (1) Sunspots, (3) Magnetic perturbations, (3) Aurorze boreales.
   This graph refers to Bordeaux       wines;    maximal   intensities correspond
with good vintage years, while minimal intensities are associated with poor
vintage years.
   It is, of course, possible to draw up a similar graph for other wines, such
as those of Burgundy, etc.
        SUNSPOTS            AND   COSMIC     RADIATION            121

correspond exactly with a maximum of activity in sunspots,
as the curves in Fig. 17 plainly indicate.
   The results for red wines of Bordeaux are as follows :

Maximum, 1848           .    Remarkable years of 1847 and 1848
Maximum,     1858                   rf          -     1857 and 1858
Maximum,     1869                   -           ,     1869 and 1870
Period 1880-1889        .    Period of phylloxera.
Maximum, 1893           .    Fairly good years of 1890 to 1893.
Maximum, 1906           .    Good years of 1906 and 1907.

    In this connexion special mention should be made of the
 famous wine of 1811 known as the ‘ wine of the comet ’—
 whose excellent quality may be attributed to the radiation
 of this comet.
    The same results apply to the white wines of Bordeaux
 and Burgundy.”’
    On somewhat similar lines a communication was addressed
 to the Académie de Médecine by Dr. Maurice Faure and
 Dr. G. Sardou.! These two physicians observed day by day
 and month by month the number of cases of sudden death
 and plotted a curve representing this phenomenon as a
 function of the weather.    In comparing this curve with that
 representing the activity of solar energy they noted that
 these two curves showed a remarkable parallelism. Professor
 d’Arsonval remarked, in this connexion, that this appeared
 to be a particular case of my theory of oscillation in living
beings.
  - It is not irrational to assume that interference brought
 about by sunspots may cause, if not disease, at least fatigue
 or transient disturbances.    I have pointed out that periods
 of lassitude of the organism and of illness, and generally of
 disorders of sanitation might be attributable to interference
 phenomena which break up the oscillatory equilibrium
 of living cells. It has also occurred to me that these inter-
 ference phenomena due to astral radiations, could provide
 an explanation of the modalities observed in the growth
 and development of living things in both the vegetable
 and animal kingdoms. It is possible that the flavour of a
          1 Académie de Medécine, session of March Ist, 1927.
122                   THE     SECRET     OF    LIFE

certain fruit, for example, may be affected as a result
of these interference phenomena.         And if succeeding
years differ from one another, from the point of view of
agriculture, it is most probably due to variations of cosmic
radiation. Thus we may account for good years, both in
regard to quality and quantity, in the case of apples, plums,
grapes, etc.
   If I have stressed with some insistence the foregoing facts
it is to show that although the question of the influence of
solar radiation on the development of living organisms is
not    new,   since   the first observations        were   made     over   a
century ago, yet it is only recently that the theory of cellular
oscillation has enabled us to give an adequate explanation
of it, thanks to our knowledge of interference phenomena.
   It may be objected that the action of light and heat on
plants and animals has been known for some considerable
time. This is undoubtedly true, but light and heat are
nothing but particular radiations of a restricted range in
the whole scale of cosmic waves.
   Evidence to the effect that light and heat do not constitute
the whole output of solar activity may be found in the
character of temperature curves, recorded in different
observatories. These curves indicate that a multitude of
local factors are involved, differing widely from one another,
and,    moreover,     these   curves   are   very    unlike   the   curves
representing solar activity in general. Furthermore, as we
shall see in the next chapter, cosmic radiation is strongly
influenced by the geological nature of the soil which, in its
turn, may also give rise to interference phenomena.
   In spite of their evident manifestations, light and heat
have, at times, but secondary effects as compared with
cosmic rays that remain imperceptible to our senses. It is
possibly due to its elusive nature that cosmic radiation has
hitherto passed unobserved, even though its effects are
preponderant.
                          CHAPTER          IX

INFLUENCE      OF NATURE        OF SOIL ON FIELD OF COSMIC
                               WAVES

  CONTRIBUTION         TO     THE     CAUSATION        OF    CANCER

GEOLOGICAL      AND     GEOGRAPHICAL               DISTRIBUTION       OF
                           CANCER

 THE   ROLE     OF    WATER         IN    RELATION      TO   CANCER

                     Nature   of the Problem

TuE studies in which I have been engaged for many years
 concerning the development and treatment of cancer have
led me to investigate the causation of this disease which, at
the present time, is the most mysterious and incurable
affliction plaguing mankind.
   I propose showing how my researches in this direction
have led me to establish that the nature of the soil modifies
the field of cosmic waves on the earth’s surface. This
 condition may be sufficient to cause in living organisms a
cellular disequilibrium susceptible of giving rise to cancer.
   As no satisfactory evidence has yet been adduced in
support of the contagious or hereditary nature of cancer,
it seemed to me desirable to investigate the role played in
the development of cancer by purely physical factors. Let
it be clearly understood that by cancer or cancerosis, we
mean the total number of cancerous affections, including
carcinoma,    epithelioma,     sarcoma       and     other   malignant
tumours.
  According to all medical accounts cancer is found in every
part of the world, but the forms under which it appears
vary in different regions. For some time past certain
observers have assigned a particular role to different geogra-
phical factors such as orography and hydrography.            In
                                    123
124               THE    SECRET      OF   LIFE

1869, Haviland stated that ‘‘ The Thames and its tributaries
cover a vast cancer field.”” From the earliest times it has
been observed that the morphology of living beings is closely
connected with the nature of the soil upon which they live.
The existence of different races adds support to this observa-
tion. Race is typified by marked physiological charac-
teristics transmitted in a certain measure by heredity. But
if living conditions are changed the characteristics of the
race undergo transformation while still remaining bound to
the nature of the soil and the climate. Several investigators
have stressed the important role of the geological nature of
the soil in the differentiation of racial types. The term
‘terroir’? (smacking of the soil) which is used to describe
the flavour of a certain wine, fruit or any product of the soil,
implies clearly the preponderating influence of the soil in
the elaboration of these products. Observations made in
this connexion are very numerous and need not be mentioned
here. Suffice it to say that plants grow indiscriminately on
sandy soils as in the forest of Fontainebleau, but a strict
selection occurs on clay and limestone.
  As early as     1832   a pioneer   naturalist,   Nérée   Boubée,
informed the Académie des Sciences that the cholera
epidemic which was then ravaging the country, was found
to have a close relationship with the geological nature of the
soil. Here is a characteristic passage from his communica-
tion: “In my annual geological travels I have often
observed that in the countries where various endemic
diseases occur,   these diseases are most     often confined, in
every region, to the geological limits of the predominant
formations, and I had already come to the conclusion that
each geological region constitutes a natural stratum for
certain morbid affections ; in other words, that the medical
constitution of every country depends in some way on its
geological and topographical constitution.”’
   A few years later de Fourcault came to the same con-
clusions as Boubée in regard to other than endemic diseases.
   Certain elementary considerations enable us to realise
the influence of the geological nature of the soil and of its
constituents.   Water running through a certain region
reflects exactly the chemical composition of the substances
          INFLUENCE        OF NATURE OF SOIL                      125
 that constitute that region. In water are found the same
 mineral salts as in the soil. Again, the nature of water
 conditions the development of living organisms. In regions
 where calcium salts are deficient in the water the results are
 seen in deficient dentition and fragile bones. Let us also
call to mind the influence of the nature of the soil in the
 causation of goitre, and generally, of hypertrophy or atrophy
 of glands resulting from excess or deficiency of a certain
mineral substance in the soil of the habitat.        It is, of course,
well known that goitre which is a hypertrophy of the thyroid
gland, occurs in regions deficient in iodine. Although the
influence of the soil is indirect, it is none the less clearly
evident. Nor can it be ignored that certain diseases exist
in an endemic and latent state on certain soils where they
remain localised. It is specially noticeable in the case of
cholera, malaria and typhoid. Objections have been raised
on the ground that these highly infectious diseases are trans-
mitted only through microbes. It remains to explain,
however, the reasons why certain microbes prefer certain
soils, such as mosquitoes living on these soils. It is quite
correct to state that cholera breaks out preferably on alluvial
tracts while intermittent fevers are more commonly found
on impermeable soils (clay or marl).
   The influence of the soil is not only important in relation
to pathological problems, but also in relation to hygiene
and demography.       Some time ago an Army doctor, M.
 Russo, sought to establish the influence of the soil on the
 health of the race. He showed that the most favourable
 conditions, from a hygienic point of view, occurred on soils
 of recent formation, tertiary or quaternary, followed by
 primary soils, granite and gneiss, jurassic, and cretaceous
 limestone.                                                |
    In connexion with the cancer problem, M. Stélys, in a
 communication presented by Professor d’Arsonval to the
 Académie des Sciences 1 brought evidence in favour of
 carcinogenic soils, that is to say soils susceptible of giving
 rise to cancer in living organisms.
    As the documentation concerning these various hypo-
 theses and the co-ordination of the results obtained in this
                    1 Session of April 25th, 1927.
126                  THE    SECRET      OF   LIFE

field of investigation appeared to be sufficiently significant,
I embodied the recorded data in a monograph entitled
“Contribution to the Etiology of Cancer,’ which was
presented by Professor d’Arsonval to the Académie des
Sciences on July 4th, 1927. In this monograph I discussed
the question of cosmic radiation in relation to the nature
of the soil. Our present knowledge concerning cosmic
waves and the propagation of ultra-short waves through
different soils has proved an adequate basis to co-ordinate
the various observations and statistical data. The object
of this work was to show to what extent the distribution
of cancer may be conditioned by the physical nature of the
soil on which people live.
   The problem of the etiology of cancer, considered from
this point of view, has been conveniently reduced to the
following three studies :
    1. Demographical study of statistics on distribution of
cancer, shown by the density of cancerosis or cancer mor-
tality, calculated in number of cases per 1,000 inhabitants.
   2. Geological study showing the soils on which cancerous
tumours develop most freely.
   3. Physical study, especially from the electrical Pit of
view, of mineral substances constituting the soils in question
and of the reactions of the latter to the penetration of
cosmic waves.

      Geological     and Geographical   Distribution   of Cancer
  The value of statistics in medicine has often been disputed,
and it has been said that no reliance can be placed upon them.
But    statistics,    however   imperfect,   constitute   data     that
cannot be ignored. It is, at any rate, a definite indication
that is preferable to the absence of any data at all.
   Although the necessary ways and means of compiling
statistics in villages and the country generally are lacking,
this does not apply to urban areas, where exact information
and abundance of data are available. Moreover, during the
past decades it has been possible to diagnose cancer with a
great deal of accuracy by means of microscopic and radio-
graphic examinations which have made the classification of
                                                                          we
          INFLUENCE        OF NATURE OF SOIL                    127
cancerous diseases possible. The number of actual errors
inevitably involved in such statistics are thus reduced to
a@ minimum and cannot invalidate the general tenor of the
conclusions. Besides, all the investigations I have under-
taken are based on statistics relating to cities and larger
urban centres.
   If the various districts of Paris are considered from the
point of view of cancer density it will be seen at the first
glance that the figures, far from being distributed in a
haphazard manner, seem to vary in a continuous manner,
in the algebraical sense of the term, that is to say without
sudden solution of continuity. The same result appears
clearly on the maps of parishes and towns. In these
circumstances it is perfectly natural to think of a geological
or geographical distribution of cancer.
   The geographical distribution may be set aside without
further consideration, for it would reduce itself to a mere
survey of the land. ‘The map of Paris, however, does not
in any way establish the fact that the neighbourhood of the
Seine or the factor of altitude play an important role in this
connexion.    On the other hand, the geological distribution
gives suggestive results at the outset.
   The problem we have to solve is why a relatively high
cancer density affects the south-west and eastern districts
of Paris, while the centre and north-west        districts have a
relatively low density.
   Analysis shows that low cancer densities (0:5, 0-6, 0-8 per
1,000 inhabitants) coincide with a vast area of sand and
sandstone of Beauchamp in proximity to limestone of the
Paris basin.    Medium, but still low figures, are observed in
the districts of Chaussée d’Antin (0-8) and Gaillon (0-3),
which correspond to an area of sand of Beauchamp.        Higher
figures, but still relatively low, are observed in Clignancourt
(1-1) and Saint-Fargeau (1:04) where the only two outcrops
of sand of Fontainebleau in Paris appear.
  On the other hand, we observe that the districts where
cancer density is high, such as Auteuil (1-76), Javel (1-61),
Grenelle (2:08) and Saint-Lambert (1-57) rest on plastic clay.
Other districts, such as Saint-Vincent-de-Paul            (1:97),
Hopital    Saint   Louis   (1:44),   Pére   Lachaise   (1:58)   and
128              THE    SECRET      OF   LIFE

                                                                                                                                                   sdequinu
                                                                  auozsaus7

                                                                                                                                                      Jo
                                                              91980/qAnjo
                                                                      £0
                                                            "38    “ang

                                                                                                                                                   possoidxe
                                                            Bol

                                                                                               it WHR

                                                                                                                                                      ul
                                                  :   Y , SJ08 pog hiay

                                                                                                                                                          ‘sliwq
                                                                                                                                                      ‘SIUVG
                                                                                                                                               9soUepIoUr
                                                                                                                                                   UI
                                                                                                                                 IVOIDOIONY
                                                                                                                                         dVJ{JO
                                                                                                                                 JeoouUvo
                                                                                                      AaDMYSad; au028alu!7

                                                                                                                                                AyIsuep
                                                                                                                                                   Jo
                                                             UNSAADJadu

                                                                                           8 ES M 8214 H1DY9

                                                                                                                                       ‘DIT “ST
                                                                                                                                 JIOS UO
                                                                                             BZ
                                                            9eB
                                                                            £0 S]ADg UISDG

                                                                                                                                                 oInyeU
                                                         S}108 unipay

                                                                                                                                                    Jo
                                                                        u9ed9 pug
                                                                          BU0ISAUIT
                                                               dqunyanvag {0 puvp #4 Zz

                                                                                                                                                 soUENPUT
                                                                                                                                                    Jo
                                                                        P Be
                                                                        B >)

                                                         £0
                                                         nvnajgauinzuoy
                                                         Pung
                                                         yt
                                                           SIJOS poep                                                        |

Charonne (1-41) are situated on marly soils (Upper Oligocene
of the Paris basin and Oligocene marls of the N. of the
Paris basin).
   The relationship observed between cancer density and
the nature of the soil cannot be accepted as being mathe-
matically correct as the geological distribution of the sub-soil
presents a complexity as great as that of meteorological
              INFLUENCE OF NATURE OF SOIL                                   129
phenomena.           Various perturbation factors must be taken
into account, notably the disposition, the surface, the depth
of strata and rocks, as well as variations in most sediments.
  The district of Maison-Blanche, for example, with a
medium density (1:17) contains in its sub-soil a mixture of
 clay, marl, limestone of Paris basin, sand of Beauchamp,
and recent alluvial deposits. Similarly with Clignancourt
(1-1) and Amérique (1-34), where we find sand of Fontaine-
bleau, limestone of Brie and Saint-Ouen, marly and recent
alluvial deposits.
   With regard to the districts along the Seine, covered
superficially by recent alluvial deposits, their cancer density
reflects the composition of the deeper sedimentary layers.
The same results are observed in the Département of the
Seine in spite of the greater diversity in the nature of rocks.
   Let us note that the localities with a low or medium cancer
density, such as Sceaux (0-8), Chatenay (0-6), Bagneux (1),
Fresnes (0-39), Suresnes (1:1), are built on sand of Fontaine-
bleau while other localities, such as Garenne-Colombes (0-78),
Vanves (1:18), Malakoff (0-98), Arcueil (1:27), Maisons-
Alfort (1-29) are built on the limestone of the Paris basin or
the sandstone of Beauchamp ; other localities, notably in the
north-east of Paris are built on recent alluvial deposits and
gypsum.
   On the other hand, localities showing a high cancer
density, such as Issy (2), Ivry (3-26), are built on plastic
clay ; others, such as Les Lilas (1-63), Bagnolet (1-47),
Pavillons-sous-les-Bois (1:91), Nogent (1-8), Romainville
(1-85), Thiais (3-36) are built on limestone of Brie and marl ;
finally, others, such as Neuilly (2-25), L’Ile-Saint-Denis
(2:16), Le Perreux (1-87), Bonneuil (3-33), are built on
muddy and clayey alluvial-tracts.
   I have applied the same method of analysis to the principal
cities of France and those of neighbouring countries. The
results have been grouped so as to indicate the density: of
cancer as a function of the geological nature of the soil.4
   These investigations have clearly established the fact that

   1 For full particulars concerning this question, including charts, maps,
etc., the reader is referred to Lakhovsky’s special monograph on the
subject,   “ Contribution & l’étiologie du cancer.”’   Paris,   1927.
 S.L.                                                                   K
130              THE     SECRET       OF   LIFE

a low cancer density is found in localities built on sand,
limestone, gypsum, sandstone, certain primitive rocks and
recent alluvial deposits rich in gravel and sand. On the
other hand, a high cancer density is associated with localities
built on plastic clay, Jurassic marl, chalk, iron ores, carboni-
ferous beds and slate.
   It will also be seen that the cancer density in France is
not distributed at random, but is related to natural regions
corresponding to the geological nature of the soil.
  Thus it appears      that Geneva,    Bern, Brussels, Antwerp
and Toulouse are built in regions of medium or low cancer
density, formed by sand and alluvial gravel, sand and
sandstone of Fontainebleau and Beauchamp, limestone in
proximity to marl.
   On the other hand, the upper cretaceous formation
covering the whole of Normandy, the Pays de Caux and
Picardy, is noted for five localities having a high cancer
density,   Le   Havre,   Rouen,   Amiens,     Arras   and   Lille.
Similarly, the east of France shows several regions with a
high cancer density, characterised by iron ores (oolites,
clay, ferruginous sandstone and marl) at Nancy and Metz,
as well as carboniferous beds at Strassburg. The cancerous
area of the Lyons region is also built on a Jurassic and
carboniferous soil.

Nature of Soil in Relation to Cosmic Radiation and Causation
                           of Cancer
  .The relation between the geological nature of the soil
and the cancer density having been established by observa-
tions and statistics given in the preceding section, it remains
to show by what particular mechanism a variation in the
nature of the soil may bring about contributory factors in
the causation of cancer.
   I have already indicated, in a general manner, with regard
to cellular oscillation, that cancer occurs as a reaction of the
organism to a modification of its oscillatory equilibrium
through the influence of cosmic radiations. Furthermore,
the terrestrial field of cosmic waves is constantly affected by
variations caused by interference phenomena due to various
astral radiations, in consequence of the rotation of the earth
         INFLUENCE        OF NATURE OF SOIL             -- 131
either on its own axis (diurnal effect) or round the sun
(annual effect) while the phases of the moon also affect
the cosmic field.
   Thus it is justifiable to establish a connexion between
cancer and variations in the field of cosmic waves due to
absorption by the soil.
   We have seen that the oscillatory equilibrium of the cell
is modified and sometimes broken up when cosmic radiations
vary either in intensity or in frequency.
  I have shown, however, that it was possible to re-establish
this oscillatory equilibrium by reinforcing or diminishing,
more accurately by “ filtering’ cosmic radiations by means
of appropriate contrivances. Evidence of this was given by
my first experiments on geraniums affected by cancer and
successfully treated.
   With regard to the absorption of cosmic waves by the
soil and the resulting effects of these waves on the field,
we have accurate data based on the labours of radio-
electricians and astrophysicists who, like Millikan, have
studied the problem of penetration.     In this connexion, it
is important to consider not only ultra-penetrating waves,
but also the whole range of cosmic waves, from the longest
to the shortest.
   It has been questioned whether cosmic waves, in view of
their great penetrability, have any effect whatever on the
human organism. It should be borne in mind, however, that
cosmic waves have such a universal field of action that it
seems obvious, even a priori, that nothing can escape their
influence. We also know that it is not necessary to stop the
motion of a wave completely in order to detect its effects. At
this rate, the detection of wireless waves would be possible
only provided immense metallic walls of great thickness were
available in order to capture the waves in toto. But all that is
required to attain this end is a simple wire stretched out in
the open space, which retains from the passage of the waves
an unappreciable and yet sufficient amount of energy. ~
Similarly, the living organism has no need to be like a mass
of lead of 10 metres thickness in order to be sensitive to
the induction of cosmic waves, to which it will respond
most readily as the waves are of shortest length and the
                                        4                K 2
132                THE    SECRET         OF    LIFE

living cells of smallest dimensions.    It is also clear that
owing to the excessively high frequency of these cosmic
waves, the cells must be subjected to a formidable electro-
magnetic induction.
    Since we are able to detect, as Millikan has shown,
cosmic waves at a depth of more than 50 metres, it is
evidently not the total absorption that is of primary import-
ance for, from a practical point of view, this is insignificant
and must always depend on the sensitiveness of the apparatus
employed. It is almost beyond doubt that certain cosmic
waves exist which are sufficiently penetrating to traverse
the whole earth, an hypothesis which seems to be essential
to explain the phenomena of celestial mechanics.t_                   What is
of great importance, however, in investigating the influence
of a certain phenomenon on the conditions of life, is to pay
special attention to variations of the cosmic field at the
earth’s surface, which involves absorption by sedimentary
layers and the resulting secondary radiation, as well as
the interference field. This secondary radiation is no more
negligible in the case of cosmic radiation than in that of
radiological and ionisation tubes, which give off cathode rays
and X-rays. In cities, the influence of building materials
such as stone, bricks, masonry, tar, asphalt, paving-stones,
need not be considered for these eminently dielectric
materials do not impede the propagation of waves.            We
know that waves penetrate into the soil all the better as the
insulating properties of the soil are more marked, which is
in accordance with our knowledge of the propagation of
waves.     With a wavelength of 16,000 metres penetration
is effected to a depth of 80 metres in an insulating soil (sand,
limestone, etc.), whereas penetration reaches only a depth of
2 metres in sea-water which is a very good conductor ; and
a few dozen metres in plastic clay and various ores, which
are also very good conductors.       The depth to which the
wave penetrates into the soil is inversely proportional to the
square root of the product of its vibration and the conduc-
tivity of the soil. Variations of penetration are thus much
more marked in the case of short waves than long waves.
The conducting soils act almost like metallic screens and
       1 Georges   Lakhovsky,   ‘‘ L’Universion.”   Paris,   1927.
           INFLUENCE                  OF   NATURE        OF   SOIL               133

absorb waves to a maximum degree. On the other hand,
the dielectric (insulating) soils facilitate the penetration of
waves to a great depth. Thus it follows that these soils,
permeable to waves, such as sand, sandstone and gravel,
which absorb radiation to a great depth, do not show any
appreciable reaction on the cosmic field at the earth’s surface,
as is the case whenever a wave penetrates a medium that
is practically homogeneous and unlimited.    But when the
radiation is only superficially absorbed as in the case of

                      e       e            A                             e
            e             e       °            YA   oe   M     °             ®

                K,                Sk                SiAna          Rey
         0 / RRR                                         ERR

   Fig. 19. Conducting Soil Impermeable to Waves. Cosmic radiations are
reflected and diffused superficially, giving rise at the surface of the soil to
a new field of interference radiations.

conducting soils impermeable to waves such as clay, marl,
carboniferous beds, iron ores, this rapid absorption gives
rise, at the surface of the conducting stratum, to intense
currents which react on the superficial cosmic field.
   It is possible that this absorption may give rise to refrac-
tion as is the rule in physics generally when the constants
of the medium of propagation vary, for example, when
luminous rays pass from air to water.      Or else it may be
that we are confronted with a more complex phenomenon
in which absorption of cosmic radiation by the soil is
134                  THE      SECRET          OF    LIFE

followed by a secondary radiation or re-radiation. Be that
as it may, it cannot be doubted that the secondary radiation,
reflected, refracted or diffused by the conducting layer,
interferes   with the incident           radiation,     which    results in a
field of complex radiation different from the initial field
(Fig. 19). On the other hand, in insulating soils cosmic
radiation is not affected by the absence of secondary fields
(Fig. 20).
   As the development of cancer is supposed to be connected

  Fic. 20.   Insulating Soil permeable to Waves.         The superficial field of
radiations is not modified.      In this case there is no reflection of waves, no
diffusion and no re-radiation.

with oscillatory disequilibrium caused by variations in the
field of cosmic      radiation,       it follows that the incidence            of
cancer is low on insulating soils and high on conducting
soils which modify the field.
   The question of the influence of the soil on the incidence
of cancer may thus be reduced to determining its degree of
conductivity.
   We have seen that a low incidence is found on the sand
of Fontainebleau and on the sand of Beauchamp, which
consist of pure silicates, and as such, are highly insulating ; a
                                                                                                                                     ;

         INFLUENCE                                                           OF                                 NATURE                        OF           SOIL                 135

low incidence is also observed on the sandstone of Beauchamp
and on the sand of the Brussels basin, the gravel of Geneva
and the friable sandstone of Bern; the slate, gneiss and
granite of Nantes ; the gypsum of the|\north-east of Paris.
                                       Sh              ast                       V1debey                              fant re                      gOae
                                               ee            ea
                                                                                                                                                   am      ioe

                                               aces                              TRIE                                     \              caer esAber
                                             vanes
                                             .               .
                                                                                         a        CW
                                                                                                           ey
                                                                                                           iu
                                                                                                                                         |         Sep o   a

                                            pias: Hlyt ‘ \ | Bs 7 Bee
                                            el                                       ‘                                                                 -   oO       Koons

                                            pee        acs               a       ™                     .                            | LSS]                 men
                                            Peis er              .       Bie .                                                     |         [SS   ee           aes

                                        pos                  FH                          IA                                          |ASS          Sg           8     3

                                            es                           vf.                                                             h                      oO

                                        fai ane                              y                                                           SY        DH
                                       x a                   |                                                                    | SSS            ‘s aS              ES
                                       snare                     .                                                                  KSO<¥          is)      ag        o
                                        .         "|     .           ‘                                                                  oe         Sa)          ©

                                       Eee: IN
                                       TH                            NW AY                                                                         SEE
                                                                                                                          \ ss                     Rods

                               Re AIDS NVAWyss=
                                  ha              ae                 \)                                          ‘                OSF              Sry               M
                                 ace                                 \)                                                   | £59                    =                  oO
                                 bata                                                                                      LSCSY                   8        a9

                               SANE
                              HN                                                                                 JESSSSS                           ere
                                                                                                                                                   S8u8
                       aed<e    Ae                                                                                SSoSSCY                          eo
             Yor                                                                                                 SSS                               reSb
                   °                        |          IA                                                        PSSOsSo¥                          Pie}              fav}

              eis! Jase." i                                                                                      BSOSSSS                           Ng
                   yp   2°
                                               IAS                                           |! | PSSSSY         KD           ;
                                                                                                                                                   ‘> 28 5 Nn         |

          eof
         Tey                   [              TLAY
                                            ‘AY                                              |!                 PSSoSSA
                                                                                                                 BSS                               2
                                                                                                                                                   Sow
         AL NW | BS
         7 TON ES
         .     A       Os re       ‘                                                                       1          :                            EE
                                                                                                                                                   oe
                                                                                                                                                   r            @-

         Fh    |B?       Pl

                                                                                                                                                   aE
                                                                                                                                                   H

               AX                                                | AS                                                                              a:
               =        re                                                   |                    {sf}                                             sees

                   <                               (AS                                                                                             er
                                              || RSS
                                                  Assy                                                                                             ae
              y                                                          ASS                                                                       SS                5

                                                                                                                                                   SH SO
                                       |                USSSSY                                                                                     See diie
                   \                          | ESSSY                                                                                              £5 wes
                   \
                       Alcs                 |ESS
                                                                                                                                                   Sag
                                                                                                                                                   Sa
                                                                                                                                                         Fs
                                                                                                                                                         Soa
                                 KSSSV
                                ASOSSO
                                                                                                                                                   2 ote pe
                                                                                                                                                         aH                 »
                                SOY                                                                                                                Siento, &
                               Loot                                                                                                                                  Bet fe
                          SosyeS OS)
                                                                                                                                                   Ae Fad  mn         O     @

                          PSs                                                                                                                      eee au
                          SSS
                           Sos
                                                                                                                                                   Fee  feo
                                                                                                                                                     MBOnek

   A medium and high incidence of cancer is found on soils
which are fairly good conductors, such as recent alluvial
deposits containing muddy beds of conducting soil, and
especially plastic clay, by virtue of its chemical composition,
including water and mineral substances,
 136              THE   SECRET      OF   LIFE

   The degree of cancer incidence increases on such soils
as gypsum, marl (Upper Oligocene of the Paris basin) and
Jurassic marl, impermeable clay, ferruginous limestone, ferru-
ginous chalk. The incidence is highest on the soils containing
ores and collieries, as at Saint-Etienne, Metz and Nancy.
   I have indicated the mechanism of absorption of waves
through the different layers of a soil (Fig. 21). Cosmic
radiations penetrate fairly easily through the superficial
layer A formed by alluvial deposits ; then they reach the
insulating layer B, made up of sand and sandstone ; radia-
tions are slightly absorbed by layers C and D, consisting of
limestone and marl, and completely absorbed by the
sediments or highly conducting layers, E and G.
         The   Roéle of Water   in Relation   to Cancer
  From   an electrical point of view, pure water, 7.e., H,O
containing nothing but hydrogen and oxygen, is a very good
insulator, and the same applies to soft water found in sandy
soils. On the other hand, waters containing salts, such as
sea-water and mineral waters, act more or less as conductors,
and at times they may prove to be very good conductors. Itis
this ‘ polymorphism ’ of water which may account for the fact
that certain waters seem to be associated with the incidence
of cancer while others have apparently no influence at all.
   Many districts and cities built on the banks of rivers do
not necessarily have a high incidence of cancer. In Paris,
near the Seine, both a high and a low incidence of cancer
have been observed, which seems to prove the absence of
correlation. A city, such as Antwerp, with a low incidence
of cancer, is built on the banks of a great river, near a vast
estuary, while Geneva, which also has a low cancer incidence,
is built in close proximity to a large lake on an alluvial bed.
But, on the other hand, cities like Nancy, Saint-Etienne and
Strassburg, which are built on the banks of small rivers,
have a high incidence of cancer.
   These observations seem to show that water does not play
a part in the incidence of cancer except when its electric
constants and the form of its volume (water-beds, etc.) are
of such a nature as to affect the field of cosmic radiation
which may break up the equilibrium of cellular oscillation,
                INFLUENCE OF NATURE OF SOIL                                   137
  In the light of these facts we are in a position to realise
why many reputable writers have often drawn attention
 to the     existence    of ‘‘ cancer      houses,’     ‘‘ cancer     streets,”’
“cancer villages,” and “cancer districts.”           We have
indicated the preponderant part played by the nature of the
soil in the localisation of cancer. It may easily be shown
that the soil of such localities contains at a variable depth
certain layers acting as particularly good conductors:
plastic clay, ferruginous and arsenical ores, carboniferous
and other layers.
   An eminent       cancer research worker, Dr. Hartmann,                    has
drawn attention to the fact that a medical observer had been
impressed by the high incidence of cancer in the Ognon
Valley.2 Now this river flows in a bed of Jurassic formation
where conducting plastic clay abounds.
   In the matter of the specific influence of water on the
incidence of cancer, I have suggested the following explana-
tion based on the laws of electricity.
   Water, which is neutral in a state of purity, takes on the
conducting properties of substances with which it comes
into contact, even as, from a chemical point of view, aqueous
solutions show the properties, either acid or alkaline, of
dissolved substances.
  Again, mineral waters contain in solution mineral
substances such as sulphur, carbonates and bicarbonates,
iron and arsenical salts, etc., which are derived from
various geological formations.   Such waters possess, at
their exit from the soil, the same chemical and electrical
constants as the soil from which they emerge. If further
evidence is required it may suffice to point out that
oscillations characteristic of mineral waters are shown
by the radio-activity of these waters in the immediate
neighbourhood of the springs. Radio-activity results from
the oscillatory disequilibrium of certain mineral substances
   1 Orthodox medical writers usually dismiss the question of ‘‘ cancer
houses’? as being unworthy of serious attention but recent statistics in
Budapest have shown that there actually are so-called “‘ cancer streets ”’
and ‘‘ cancer houses ”? where the number of cancer cases is strikingly large.
[Foreign Letters—Journal     of American    Medical   Association,   July   13th,
1935 (Translator). ]
  2 H. Hartmann,    ‘‘ Rapport sur la contribution 4 l’étude étiologique du
cancer par M. Chaton,”’ Bulletin del’ Académie de Médecine, vol. 11, Mars Sth,
1927, p. 348.
138                   THE     SECRET      OF    LIFE

which, at their exit from the soil, do not oscillate in harmony
with cosmic waves.       From the earliest times physicians
have observed that the efficacy of mineral waters was
particularly noticeable near the springs owing to the
harmony which is then attained between the cellular
oscillation of the individual, the radio-activity of the spring
and cosmic radiation.
   Moreover, my views on this point have been confirmed by
many observations.        Hoffman observed that while the
cancer mortality reached an average of 0-85 per 1,000 and
even 1-199 at Boston in 1915, the corresponding figure for
Memphis was only 0-467.
   In his monograph on “ Cancer and Water ” 2 Dr. Shannon
has shown that the city of Memphis is supplied with water
from artesian wells situated in the soil of the city itself.
Dr. Shannon attributes the low incidence of cancer in
Memphis to the water of these artesian wells which, according
to him, is free from protozoal organisms. But no one has
yet succeeded in proving that cancer is caused by the
presence of protozoa in water.
   In the light of our theory, the water of these artesian
wells is a mineral water possessing the same characteristics
as the soil on which the inhabitants of Memphis live. As
they use this water for both external and internal purposes,
these people are thus automatically placed under such
conditions that their cells have the same electrical and
chemical constants as the soil of their habitat, and conse-
quently they may be said to be “in resonance” with the
local field of cosmic radiation.
   In France, similar observations appear to corroborate
these facts. At Luxeuil, Dr. Thomas observed an almost
total absence of cancer. It seems that, owing to the
scarcity of potable water the inhabitants of this locality
drink only the mineral water of the Spa establishment,
obtained from the depths of the local soil.
   Recently the same observation concerning the relative
absence of cancer was made at Chatel-Guyon.      A Com-
  1 F, L. Hoffman, “‘ The Mortality from Cancer throughout the World.”
Newark, N.J., 1915.
  2 J. W. Shannon, “‘ Cancer and Water : a Study of the Nature, Causation
and Prevention of Cancer.’’   San Diego, California, 1917.
         INFLUENCE          OF    NATURE        OF     SOIL         139

mission of French and foreign cancerologists paid a visit to
this famous resort known for its water, in order to investigate
 the causes of the reported low incidence of cancer.     Now
 it is known that the water supply of this town does not come
 from a distant source, but is derived from a local site,
Mont Chaluset.     The explanation suggested for the pheno-
 menon observed at Memphis and Luxeuil is also valid for
Chatel-Guyon.     Furthermore, we may remark that the
 water supply of Geneva is drawn from the depths of the Lake
 of Geneva and therefore possesses the same electrical
 constants as the lake and the soil themselves. The cancer
density in Geneva is said to be distinctly low (0-50 per 1,000)
which would seem to confirm our original explanation.
   In this connexion another significant observation was
made by Dr. Simeray,’ who reported that the population
of an entire village was free from cancer as long as they
made exclusive use of water drawn from wells sunk for this
purpose. But when the local authorities decided to obtain
their water supply from a source outside the locality and to
give up the use of the wells, a series of cases of cancer
occurred in the village. In this case the appearance of
cancer seemed to coincide with the utilisation of a distant
water supply which did not possess the same electrical
constants as the soil of the locality and consequently caused
in the villagers’ bodily cells a state of oscillatory disequi-
librium in relation to cosmic radiation.
   I was able to verify Dr. Simeray’s observation personally
in the case of two neighbouring localities, Thiais and Orly
(Seine-et-Oise). Both are situated on the same kind of soil
—fresh-water limestone of Brie—which is a fairly good
conductor and therefore characteristic of a high cancer
density. But the density of cancer for Thiais is 3-36 per
 1,000 and only 0-36 for Orly. As this case did not appear
to be in accord with my theory on the subject, I decided to
investigate the conditions myself with the assistance of the
local authorities.  I found that at Thiais the water supply
came from the Seine, drawn at Alfortville, whereas at Orly,
the inhabitants drew their water from their own wells
situated in the centre of the locality.
       1 Session of the Académie de Médecine, March   15th, 1927.
                         CHAPTER        X

     THERAPEUTICS         OF   CELLULAR      OSCILLATION

In the preceding chapters I have shown that a living
organism, whether animal or plant, is comparable to a
system of high frequency oscillating circuits consisting of
cells which are themselves elementary oscillators.
   I have indicated the nature of radiation in living beings
and how different rays influence them. I have particularly
stressed the role of cosmic radiation and how it is influenced
by various physical factors such as the conductivity of the
soil and the effect of astral radiation, resulting in interference
phenomena.
   All the investigations I have undertaken appear to
confirm the fact that diseases are the outcome of oscillatory
disequilibrium resulting from (1) certain modifications in
the field of cosmic waves in consequence of interference
through a secondary field at the surface of the soil, (2) from
an   astral radiation   (solar, lunar) or else, which   comes to
the same thing, (3) from modifications of the electrical
constants of the living cell.
   Thus I have been led to evolve a new therapy whose
object was to re-establish the cellular oscillatory equilibrium
that had been disturbed by disease. According to the
nature of the case, it may be advisable to act directly on the
diseased organism by means of biomagnomobile substances
or substances capable of restoring to the cell its appropriate
electromagnetic constants (capacity, self-inductance and
resistance of nuclear oscillating circuit) ; or it may be more
expedient to act indirectly by modifying the field of cosmic
waves around the patient by means of some suitable radio-
electrical apparatus.
   The object of this method is to regulate the electromagnetic
field within organic tissues, chiefly by reconstituting the
positive and negative fragments of every cellular nucleus, a
process   involving     the _ utilisation   of   biomagnomobile
                                140
                                           ;

THERAPEUTICS          OF CELLULAR         OSCILLATION          141

substances.    And lastly, we know that the magnetic field
is due to a rotatory motion of electrons which is a particular
kind of oscillation.
   My researches on cancer have led me to the conclusion
that this terrible disease is least prevalent iin localities where
living organisms are in harmony, that is to say in oscillatory
equilibrium with the soil of their habitat, as I have indicated
before.
   It seems that we have here a universal principle which
may prove useful in therapeutics, and it is even more a
principle of general hygiene than a therapeutic principle.
   In my monograph on the “ Contribution to the Etiology
of Cancer,” I showed that certain favourable conditions were
established when the inhabitants made use of water drawn
from the depths of the soil upon which they lived. JI am
convinced that if people could subsist exclusively on fruits
and vegetables grown in gardens attached to their houses,
and made use of water drawn from wells sunk close by,
cancer and most other diseases would become far less
prevalent. Do we not often hear of country people reaching
an advanced age in spite of deplorable hygienic conditions
under which they live ? This longevity may be accounted
for by the fact that these country people are compelled to
make use of their local water supply and to live on their
own. produce.
   The disadvantages of modern water supplies might be
overcome in cities by sinking artesian wells, such as those
existing in Paris in the Place Lamartine, the Avenue de
Breteuil and the Bois de Boulogne. As for the new artesian
well of the Rue Blomet, it would be infinitely better if this
water were used for eae       purposes rather than for a
swimming pool.
  When local living conditions are exceptionally bad or
variable, it is possible, as   I have shown, to re-establish, or
rather    ‘‘tune up” the electric constants of the cell by
means     of appropriate substances in harmony with the
physical and chemical nature        of the soil of the habitat.
These substances could be administered by hypodermic
injection or, preferably, by the oral route. At night time
the sleeper might be connected with the soil by means of an
142                 THE   SECRET    OF    LIFE

appropriate earth connection, and in the daytime, footwear
might be used to hold a metallic plate in the sole or heel,
thus establishing electrical contact between the foot and the
soil. In the majority of cases it seems more rational and
more efficacious to resort to electrical methods such as
filtration of the field of cosmic waves in the immediate
vicinity of the individual.
   I have also recommended the use of special radio-electrical
contrivances such as metallic antenne fixed up in flats or
outside   houses,    earth-connections,   metallic   grids   and,
preferably, appropriate oscillating circuits.
   The filtration of cosmic radiations systematically carried
out by these oscillating circuits is, in point of fact, accom-
plished naturally by radiations of longer wavelength, such
as luminous rays, ultra-violet rays, X-rays and radium
emanations.      This accounts for cases successfully treated
by heliotherapy, actinotherapy, radiotherapy and radio-
active substances.
   My experimental work has confirmed the soundness of the
foregoing principles. Let us recall to mind the experiments
with geraniums inoculated with Bacterium tumefaciens and
treated by the radiations of my Radio-cellulo-oscillator, with
the result that the plants were cured after a few applications.
Since then I have shown that disease occurs owing to
oscillatory disequilibrium brought about by excess of cosmic
waves.    The ultra-short waves emitted by the Radio-
cellulo-oscillator reconstitute, by interference, the field of
cosmic radiation which thus acquires an appropriate value,
the same result being achieved by the intervention of
luminous rays, ultra-violet and radio-active rays.
   In a preceding chapter I indicated, in regard to the nature
of radiant energy, how I obtained the same curative result
with geraniums by eliminating the Radio-cellulo-oscillator
and substituting for it the simple device of a copper spiral
encircling the plants. This spiral is the simplest and most
general form of an oscillating circuit which I advocate for
the filtration of cosmic waves in connexion with the treat-
ment of various diseases, including cancer.
   The results I obtained in treating these plants by means
of an oscillating circuit were far beyond my expectations.
THERAPEUTICS          OF CELLULAR           OSCILLATION          148

Professor d’Arsonval, who presented my communication to
the Académie des Sciences, drew attention to the fact that
at the beginning of January, 1925, I had set up an oscillating
circuit consisting of a copper spiral suspended in the air
and kept in position by means of an ebonite support intro-
duced into one of the flower pots containing the geraniums
inoculated with cancer on December 4th, 1924. On January
30th, 1925, the tumour was developing normally, but the
plant continued to grow without showing signs of decay,
whereas all the control plants had perished as a result of
the tumour they bore. At the end of February, 1925, the
treated plant was cured and the necrosed tumour had fallen
off. On March 23rd, 1928, the same plant, still encircled
by its oscillating circuit, was photographed (Plate VII).
Comparison of the photographs of January 30th, 1925
(page 103), and of March 23rd, 1928 (page 144), reduced
to the same scale, gives an idea of the extraordinary
development of the plant which, in three years, reached a
height of 1-40 metres, 7.e., about 44 feet. This geranium is
still flourishing, even in winter, and appears to be in excellent
condition. It should be borne in mind that tumours due to
Bacterium tumefaciens usually cause cachexia and death,
even after surgical removal.
   Since this first experiment, many investigations in the
same field, in conformity with my methods, have been
carried out in France, Italy and America.        I, myself, have
extended my researches on plants to animals and human
beings, and it has given me great encouragement to know
that my methods have been successfully applied by eminent
workers in laboratories and clinics. Among the numerous
reports published concerning these experiments, special
mention must be made of the report presented at the
Congress of Radiology in Florence (May, 1928) by the
eminent authority on cancer, Professor Sordello Attilj, of
the Hospital San Spirito in Sassia, Rome.           Only a brief
summary of this report can be given here.!_ Professor Attilj
made extensive use of my open oscillating circuits

   1 A complete account of this report was published in my article on
‘“The Theory of Cancer based on the Geological Nature of the Soil.”
(Revue générale des Sciences, Octobre 15th, 1928.)
144                  THE      SECRET        OF    LIFE
                                PLATE     VII

   Photograph of Geranium three years after treatment with oscillating
circuit showing remarkable development of plant.         Two untreated control
plants are shown beside it. This is the same geranium as in Plate IV,
on page 108.    (Surgical Clinic of Salpétriére, Paris.)
THERAPEUTICS OF CELLULAR OSCILLATION                          145
 which I recommended in the form of collars, bracelets,
 belts, etc.
    The most important observations of Professor Attilj,
 appearing in the report in question, concern six patients—
 five of whom were suffering from cancer |and the sixth from
 polysarcia (excessive corpulence). All these cases of cancer
exhibit marked individual differences.
    1, Patient, aged 78, suffering from epithelioma (ulcerated)
 of the floor of the mouth, with sub-maxillary metastases.
    2. Patient, aged 25, suffering from recurrent sarcoma of
 left hand.
    3. Patient, aged 28, suffering from recurrent sarcoma of
 right breast.
    4. Patient, aged 60, suffering from epithelioma (ulcerated)
 of genital organs.
    5. Patient, aged 40, suffering from severe post-operative
 pains with small metastases in scar on breast.
    It will be noticed at the outset that three cases of cancer
 are complicated by recurrence or secondary manifestations
 (metastases) which constitute aggravating conditions.
 Nevertheless, a few weeks after application of oscillating
 circuits, Professor Attilj noted a diminution of pain, a
 progressive resorption of lesions and disappearance of
 induration of tumours.    In the majority of cases the painful
 formication (“‘ pins and needles ’’) accompanying the deve-
 lopment of tumours ceased when the oscillating circuit was
 applied. The sixth case concerning the patient suffering
 from polysarcia is perhaps the most interesting of the series.
 Weighing 120 kilograms, the patient was suffering from
 lancinating pains in the lumbar region and moved with such
 difficulty that it took her three to four minutes to rise from
 the sitting position. Three days after the application of the
 oscillating circuit (a belt in this case) the pains disappeared,
 the patient regained her appetite, so much so that at the end
 of three months’ treatment she was able to move with ease
 and resume her normal activities.
    Professor Attilj summed up as follows :
     ‘“‘ The small number of cases treated which represents only
 the beginning of a method of treatment awaiting further
 development, shows that the use of Lakhovsky’s oscillating
   8.1.                                     ;              ae
146             THE    SECRET     OF   LIFE

circuit is really effective. When we bear in mind the tragic
fate of cancer patients doomed to die, often in great pain,
while at the same time their organs are gravely affected by
the disease, it must be admitted that anything that can
relieve such distressing symptoms is a great blessing to the
suffering patients.”
   Professor Attilj admits the efficacy of open oscillating
circuits for re-establishing cellular oscillating equilibrium,
not only in cancerous patients, but also in patients suffering
from cardio-vascular and nutritional affections.
   For some time past I have made similar observations
myself and have collected a great number of reports from
practitioners who have cast aside their preconceived ideas
in the interest of science, and have experimented with my
methods of treatment.        [For particulars and photographs
of cases treated, see Appendix.]
   Generally speaking, the following conditions have been
most often dealt with by practitioners :
   Insomnia, due to overwork or following an illness, is
successfully treated.
   Pain associated with various affections is generally
reduced, sometimes eliminated, even in cases of cancer.
   Patients have noticed a sensation of warmth due to
activation of the circulation. Blood analysis shows an
increase of red corpuscles. Anzmia and cold extremities
are thus amenable to our methods of treatment.
   The gastro-intestinal functions are stimulated and gastric
acidity is reduced while intestinal atony and pains accom-
panying digestion also show a favourable response.
   In deaf patients, an improvement has been observed.
   Other signs of improvement include better appetite,
increase in weight and an appearance of rejuvenation, often
distinctly marked.
   Lastly, attention must be drawn to the interesting
observations made by a distinguished French professor who
experimented with my methods in one of the great Paris
hospitals. The patients under treatment were subjected to
strict examination.    Once a week the weight was noted, the
blood analysed and blood pressure recorded. While these
experiments were in progress the professor noticed that
 THERAPEUTICS          OF CELLULAR         OSCILLATION             147

 during a period of about eight days the improvement
 previously observed came to a definite standstill in all the
 patients. He deduced from this general phenomenon that
 an external cause was operating. Inlooking at the calendar
 he observed that this abnormal period coincided with the
 full phase of the moon.
    From the point of view of my theory this phenomenon
 may be explained as follows.    We know that the moon, in
 common with all sources of radiation, has the power of
 causing considerable variations in the field of cosmic waves,
 a subject fully dealt with in my work “ L’Universion.”’
 Moreover, the effect of the oscillating circuit is to absorb
 any excess of cosmic waves which are responsible for the
 oscillatory disequilibrium of the cells. As the moon, modifies
the field of these waves, this interference has repercussions
 on the absorption of the oscillating circuit whose action is
 diminished.      ‘Thus we observe that the effect of an oscillating
 circuit worn by a patient is in close relationship with the
 field of cosmic waves.        In cases in which this effect is
 inadequate, the desired result may be obtained by making
 use of several circuits (collars, bracelets, belts).
    As a general rule, I have observed that in all the patients
 wearing oscillating circuits and living on highly conducting
 soils, that is to say naturally carcinogenic (cancer-producing)
 such as Grenelle, Javel, Auteuil, Neuilly, the action of the
 circuit is immediate and rapid, whereas in patients living on
 insulating soils, such as Dauphine,        the Champs-Elysées,
 Gaillon, Monceau, this action is much slower, and its effects
 are not manifested until a certain time has elapsed.
     Thus the action of an oscillating circuit, being closely
- connected with the intensity of the field of cosmic waves,
  gives rise to the paradoxical conclusion that thanks to the
  use of this circuit, the worst soils, from the point of view of
  health, finally turn out to be the best. The oscillating
  circuit (collar, belt, etc.) acts by regulating the incidence of
  cosmic waves, thus re-establishing, automatically and
  naturally, the oscillatory equilibrium.
     We are justified in concluding, therefore, that the applica-
  tion of open oscillating circuits succeeds in arresting the
  development of cancer, even in the most advanced stages,
                                                             L 2
148              THE    SECRET     OF   LIFE

while pain is eliminated and the dreaded disease sometimes
conquered.
   Finally, similar gratifying results have been obtained in
the treatment of many other diseases which apparently
have no connexion with cancer.        Thus it may be claimed,
a fortiori, that oscillating circuits, in absorbing excess of
cosmic waves, may prove to be a means of preventing
disease worthy of consideration.
   Tam hopeful that, in future, all diseases afflicting mankind
may be prevented and successfully treated.
                        CHAPTER          XI
                      ORIGIN      OF LIFE
Condensation of Water Vapour and Mineral Elements—Influence
of Cosmic Radiations on Orientation of Cellular Elements—Constitu-
tion of Electric Oscillating Circuit of the Cell—Characteristic
Elements of Living Species—Problem of Heredity—Infinitesimal
Value of Radiant Energy—Induction in Fixed and Oscillating Fields
—Induction in Electromagnetic Fields within the Cell.

  Condensation of Water Vapour and Mineral Elements.            In
the geological epochs, when life had not yet appeared on
the surface of the earth, our world which had stored, at a
certain time, the condensation of all the water vapour in
the atmosphere, was partially or totally covered with
oceans.
   The elements and various chemical compounds, dissociated
under the action of heat, then subsequently condensed, were
found scattered everywhere. They are still found, almost
without exception, in sea-water, whose analysis reveals a
great complexity: chlorides, bromides, iodides, sulphates
and most salts of the principal metals : sodium, potassium,
magnesium and many others. It is entirely owing to
humidity in the neighbourhood of the sea or in the sea itself,
that life emerged and that the first protozoon appeared.
   As biological science has established the fact that the
first phase of life is the cell, I propose showing how the
primordial cell was formed by referring to my theory of
cellular oscillation.
   It is important to bear in mind that salts, simple bodies
and other chemical compounds which existed in a state of
great dilution in the midst of vast masses of water and
saturated vapours, were, in consequence, strongly dissociated
and ionised, in the form of atoms and molecules, more or less
electrified. Thus every droplet of water formed a tiny
microcosm containing, in a state of extreme dilution, a great
variety of chemical elements.         Hence it must never be lost
                                149      fe
150                 THE    SECRET       OF      LIFE

sight of that humidity is essential to life; it was the first
condition for the appearance of life on earth.
   Influence of Cosmic Radiations on Orientation of Cellular
Elements. The causes determining the generation of cosmic
waves were already existing when the earth appeared in the
universe. The radiations which generate cosmic waves,
whether from the sun or from other stars, have remained
unaltered. But our earth, at that time, as even now, must                       |
have been charged with negative electricity.
  The process of the appearance of life may conceivably
have been as follows: under the action of electromagnetic
radiations     of cosmic   origin, certain molecules         of chemical
compounds and certain atoms of simple elements, contained
in globules of water, were orientated along lines of force of
an electric field generated by some astral body, charged
‘“ positively ’’ while the earth was charged “ negatively.”’
   Let us note that owing to the multiplicity of astral
electric’   fields, orientation   of molecules      could        have   been
effected just as well along lines of force coming from the
sun as from the moon, Mars, Jupiter, or any other planet or
astral body.
  Again, these molecules of conducting substances, contain-
ing iron, potassium, iodine, chlorine, and various chemical
combinations, were automatically grouped under the
influence of chemical affinity or electrostatic forces. They
began to form along a certain line of force a small agglomera-
tion of electrified molecules to which other molecules were
attracted.      These unions, however, occurred according to a
determined direction, that of the line of electromagnetic
force which, arising out of celestial space, reached the earth,
negatively charged, as modern science has shown.
   These groups of conducting molecules were thus orientated
and joined together in the form of an extremely short curved
rod.
   Around this “ bait,’’ a certain number of molecules from
insulating substances came to be fixed, possibly owing to the
force of gravity, and formed, as it were, a sheath enveloping
the original agglomeration of conducting molecules.
   Constitution    of Electric    Oscillating    Circuit    of    the   Cell.
Owing       to the rotation   of the earth, the orientation                of
                                                                                          ;

                                                               ORIGIN            OF    LIFE                151
agglomerated molecules was subjected to deviation and as a
result of its rotatory motion the earth thus played a part,
at the end of twenty-four hours, or even after a few days,

                                                                           Midnight

            .. ‘
                                                .
                                           <s
                                  ba
                                  Bh
                                 3
                                 ih,
                                wa
                                                           .
                            ‘

                    N \“N
                         Ny,
                          .
                                                          “>
                   AN                                oN             “<>,
                                                    ~ »
                                                                   a“2s
                                                sls                        ee
                                                                            oe
                                                                   -~
                                       .
                                           ~.%5
                        S
                        ‘                                          teute

                                                               a           ee
                                                                           Ee
                                                                           we
                                                                            te
                                                                            a

                                                     ~:                    --J

                                                                      ‘ae

                                                                           Mid-day

                        Fic.                22.                ForRMATION        OF   PRIMORDIAL   CELL.

  Starting from A at the top of the figure and going clockwise round the
sun, it will be observed how the filament, developing along a line of force
emanating from the sun, has acquired its incurved shape in consequence
of the rotation of the earth.    The filament thus had its circuit completed
in twenty-four hours.     The cell at B shows a phase of its formation.
   This diagram is purely schematic.     Actually the cellular nuclei are much
more irregular than they are depicted here. The reason for this is clear.
In the course of the rotation of the earth on its own axis in twenty-four
hours, astronomical conditions are bound to vary and the line of force
emanating from the sun will clash with other lines of force originating from
various stellar bodies.    This results in a momentary stop or a deviation
in the original line of force during the formation of the filament-nucleus
whose disposition is thus rendered irregular.

in the formation of a filament no longer rectilinear but
curved, and at times, having the shape of a tangled cluster
(Fig. 22). The new parts of this filament were consequently
152              THE    SECRET      OF   LIFE

formed along the line of magnetic force, invariable in direc-
tion, while the parts already formed were swept along by the
motion of the earth. As this conducting filament was being
formed, the insulating sheath or membrane enveloping it
continued to grow and to consolidate itself at the same time
as the filament. This kind of phenomenon took place in a
microscopic globule of vapour measuring 3 microns in
diameter. It is this insulating membrane which, once the
circuit was completed, finally prevented the extremities of
the filament from being joined together, and even from
coming into contact with the internal conducting medium.
The filament, that is to say, the nucleus of the cell, was thus
finally formed.
   The formation of this cellular circuit was due, in short,
to the presence of lines of force arising out of celestial space,
and its configuration to the rotation of the earth.
   The circuit thus formed was endowed, by construction,
with capacity and self-inductance. It then immediately
began to vibrate under the influence of electromagnetic
radiations and penetrating rays, among which a certain
frequency equivalent to the frequency of the circuit was
found with which it could vibrate in resonance.              This
microscopic globule of mineralised water, already showing
signs of organisation, was then completed chemically by its
other organic structures, such as protoplasm, cytoplasm,
micelle, vacuoles, etc., always by aggregation of molecules.
And as it was vibrating and radiating, this globule was living
and the cell was born.
  Characteristic Elements of Living Species.      As a result of
this formation every cell, or at least, every species charac-
terised by cells possessing nucleus and protoplasm, began
to oscillate with a frequency and wavelength determined
by the dimensions of its filament. Thus by virtue of the
form and dimensions of the filament, every cell, like every
microbe, possesses its own wavelength which is charac-
teristic of its species. But all these cellular wavelengths,
although widely different, are of the same order of magnitude
and approximate to one another within a narrow zone of the
whole range of vibrations.
  According to my theory, this definition of cellular species
                         ORIGIN       OF    LIFE                        153

involves one of the following consequences. If, by any
process, we succeed in modifying the duration of the forma-
tion of a cell, which implies modifying the constitution of
its filament or of its conductive capacity, either by means
of chemical elements or by electromagnetic methods, we
modify at the same time its frequency of vibration, and
consequently, the species of the cell as well as its particular
characteristics.
   This sequence of events probably occurs in cases of cancer,
diseases of old age, etc. Transmutation of cells would thus
be accomplished.
   Experimental evidence gives support to this view.
Furthermore, a similar state of affairs may occur in the
action of certain medicaments of mineral, vegetable or
animal origin, which are intended to cure certain conditions
by reinforcing the conductivity of the nucleus, or modifying
its chemical nature, the nucleus being of primary importance
in the process of oscillatory disequilibrium.
  Cell Differentiation and Heredity. The most diverse
hypotheses have been enunciated on the constitution of
protoplasm.
  According to Naegeli, matter is composed of units to
which he gave the name of micellz. Other scientists, such
as Darwin,     Haeckel,    Spencer, Hertwig, de Vries, Wiesner,
have been led to postulate the existence of a physiological
unit of a higher grade than micelle, i.e., the cdioblast. The
sum of idioblasts constitute the idioplasm. Hertwig states
that the hereditary substance is not located in the proto-
plasm but rather in the nucleus and has adopted Pfliiger’s
concept of the isotropy of the ovum, that is to say, that the
ovum is homogeneous and none of its parts corresponds
beforehand to any part of the future animal. Weismann
propounded the theory of “ancestral plasma.’’!            ‘The
problem of the specific differentiation of cellular elements
has given rise to a great number of hypothetical solutions
including the theories of His, Hansemann, Hertwig, Naegeli,
de Vries, etc.
  According      to my      views,    the   hereditary      substance    is
  1 Weismann was the author of the germ-plasm theory of heredity which
denied the transmission of acquired characteristics.   (Translator.)
  154              THE     SECRET      OF   LIFE

  located neither in the protoplasm, idioplasm nor in the
  micelle, but actually in the nucleus; and the specific
  differentiation of the nucleus is due to its power of vibrating in
  accordance with a wavelength determined by the diameter of
  the circuits which constitute it and the value of the nuclear
  electrical capacity. In procreation, the male or female cell
  which proves to be dominant is that whose wavelength
  approximates most closely to the normal standard typical of
  its sex. This may account for hereditary phenomena brought
  about by nuclei whose diameter does not vary for generations,
  their wavelengths and the chemical composition of proto-
  plasm that form capacity remaining consequently unchanged.
  This may also account for the recurrence of qualities, defects,
  resemblances,   etc.,   through   many    generations,   in short,
  what is known as atavism.
     Infinitesimal Value of Oscillating Cellular Energy. In the
  course of this work I have already raised the question:
  “Whence comes the energy of cellular radiation?”         It is
  this question which I propose answering now by way of
  concluding the formal statement of my theory.
    Owing to the microscopic dimensions of cells and their
  filaments, dimensions    measuring only fractions of microns,
  it follows that the oscillation of such a circuit requires
  but an extremely small amount of energy. It is difficult to
- imagine the infinitesimal quantity of this energy, but the
  imponderable amount of force brought into play in the
  course of these oscillations does not precludethe far-reaching
  effects of these ultra-short waves, owing to the considerable
  amount of induction attainable with such high frequencies.
  Let us call to mind, for instance, the vast range available to
  wireless stations making use of so-called short waves which
  are actually long waves in comparison with cellular oscilla-
  tions. For such broadcasting a power of a few dozen watts
  is sufficient, and it has even been possible to reduce this to
  1 watt or less while operating in a radius of more than
  2,000 kilometres.
     Some physicists have experimented with high frequency
  waves of the order of a hundredth, and even a thousandth,
  watt. In the experiments of Nichols and Tear, for the
  generation of electromagnetic waves of 300 microns, the
                                         /

                       ORIGIN    OF   LIFE                   155

 energy of these radiations was so attenuated that their
 measurement necessitated a special optical method.
    Thus a certain imaginative effort is required to appreciate
 the greatly attenuated energy that makes the circuits of our
 cells oscillate, whose structure is perceptible only under the
 microscope at a magnification of 300 to 500.
    We shall not attempt to calculate this energy ; suffice
 it to say that it is infinitely small for each circuit. We
 have seen that the wavelength of cosmic waves is extremely
 small and that atmospheric radiant energy is sufficient to
 cause cells to oscillate.   When a Hertzian wave emitted in
 Australia, for instance, with a power of a few dozen watts,
 is transmitted in all directions and ultimately received in
 Europe by a small aerial, the high frequency energy picked
 up by the receiving aerial is infinitesimal. It is all the more
 so as the energy decreases theoretically in inverse ratio to
 the square of the distance, and practically with far greater
 rapidity.
    Induction in Fixed Oscillating Fields. How is it possible
 that such a receiving aerial, picking up so little energy, can
 yet oscillate in its turn sufficiently to activate another far
 distant aerial ? This is largely due to the very high frequency
 of these short waves, whose attenuated length approximates
 more closely to the wavelength of cosmic radiations than to
 that of long waves.
    We know that the process of wave reception is as follows :
 the receiving aerial is situated in a variable electromagnetic
 field created by the waves which are propagated from the
 transmitter. It is this variable high frequency electro-
 magnetic field which, by induction, generates oscillating
 electric currents of the same frequency in that aerial.
It is also owing to this same mechanism that our cells
 oscillate, and I shall show whence the necessary energy is
 derived.
    At this stage it may be useful to draw attention to two
 essential conditions relative to induction phenomena bearing
 on sustained oscillations.
    In order to bring about generation of oscillating electric
 currents in a circuit, it is necessary that the following
 conditions should be fulfilled.
156              THE       SECRET     OF    LIFE

   1. Existence of an electric circuit capable of oscillating
(circuit possessing self-inductance and capacity).
   2. Existence of an external cause capable of making the
circuit oscillate.
   We have seen that the first condition was fulfilled in every
cell. With regard to the second condition, the phenomenon
of oscillation may be due to a great variety of causes. In
any case it is sufficient that the self-inductance of the circuit
in question should be influenced by an oscillating magnetic
field or that the capacity should be situated in an oscillating
electric field.
   Each of these two induction phenomena, electric or
magnetic, may itself be brought about in two ways.
   In the first case, the self-inductance of the circuit is fixed
and the external magnetic field (or the electric field in the
case of a condenser) is variable. This variation of the field
then produces, by induction in the circuit, currents whose
frequency corresponds exactly with its own wavelength.
The effect may actually be determined by a multitude of
fields, each having its own frequency, induction being
produced only by the field whose wavelength coincides with
that of the circuit.
   In the second case,       self-inductance     is mobile,   and    is
displaced with very great speed in the magnetic field. The
action of an electric field on the capacity of the circuit would
take place on similar lines.
   The electric or magnetic field in question may be variable
in regard to time and show exactly the same frequency as
the induced currents in the circuit. Or else this field may
be variable in regard to space, for instance, an undulating
field having a fixed value on which discontinuities or
interruptions are superimposed.       Or yet the field may be
fixed though the oscillating circuit itself is mobile.
It is upon these phenomena that the construction of
industrial   alternators    is   based;    in   certain   cases     the
revolving part is constituted by the continuous current
induction circuit whose magnetic poles acquire a high
velocity in the presence of the fixed coils of the induced
circuit. The induced alternating currents then arise from
the circuits of the fixed part which, by the rotation of
                                         /

                     ORIGIN     OF   LIFE                    157

 the revolving inductor, are subjected to variable magnetic
 fields.
    The same principles apply to a frame aerial ; the spirals
 of the frame act by induction, like the secondary circuit of
 a transformer, whose primary circuit’ corresponds to a
_transmitting aerial. Induction is produced by the variable
 magnetic field propagated by the waves issued from the
 transmitter.  It is owing to the same process that the
 radiant energy of cosmic waves activates our own cells.
   Induction of Electromagnetic Fields within the Cell.      We
have seen that living cells possess oscillating circuits consti-
tuted by filaments. Now all these cells are set in motion in
space, impelled by the motion of the earth, at a velocity of
27 kilometres per minute at the Equator. The question is
in what particular field do these cells revolve? Evidently
not in the terrestrial electromagnetic fields, since these fields
are swept along at the same time as the cells by the same
rotatory motion. The cells revolve in variable electromagnetic
fields generated by a source external to the earth, that is to
say within the field of atmospheric radiations comprising a
complete range of frequencies as typified by cosmic radia-
tions emanating from the sun, the Milky Way and the
immensity of celestial space.
   Finally, the existence of variable electric and magnetic
fields of multiple frequencies arising out of space shows
that all the energy of radiation at the earth’s surface comes,
in the last analysis, from electromagnetic induction brought
about by the rotation of the earth in space.
   Let us now consider the relations existing between the
chemical composition of the cell and its radiation. We
know that living beings, animals and plants, in a word
every living cell, contain all the chemical atoms in their
great complexity. As I stated before on the subject of
cell differentiation and heredity, various names have been
 given to the elementary units of the cell and protoplasm,
 such as micelle, idioplasm, mitochondria, etc. From my
 point of view I prefer to describe them as biomagnomobile
 units so as to stress their biological origin, their essential
 mobility and the electromagnetic element which charges
 them with vital energy.
158             THE    SECRET.     OF   LIFE

   Let us take, for example, the process of electro-plating
in which two metallic electrodes are immersed in a conducting
liquid. The metallic atoms are swept along by the current ;
they leave one electrode to be deposited on the other elec-
trode, this being due to elementary electrostatic charges,
each atom being directed by electrons moving from one pole
to the other.   When the current fails the motion of atoms
ceases.
   In the case of living cells the number of these particles
constituting a single cell is incalculable. Thus, according
to Raphael Dubois, it would take 250 million years, provided
it were possible to count at the rate of one million per
second, to estimate the sum total of units contained in the
egg of a silk-worm.   Whatever the number may be, these
units are incessantly moving in our organism ; thus a cell
in the brain may ask a cell in the stomach, for example, to
supply it with a few hundred trillions of those biomagno-
mobile units (derived from phosphorus, chlorine, iron, etc.)
which circulate in all parts of our bodies. Molecules are
first brought into the blood by foodstuffs or formed within
the organism from simple elements. And all these molecules
are set in motion, attracted or repulsed, by the play of
cellular oscillations, as in the motion of charged electrical
particles in the process of electro-plating. Moreover, the
organism consists only of living biomagnomobile units, in a
state of incessant chemical and electromagnetic activity.
All functional activities can only be carried out as a result
of the harmony and general organisation of the cells and of
their oscillations originating from cellular nuclei. It is
this general harmony which determines the particular
position of every molecule. With regard to the necessary
energy, this comes from the electrical vibration of the cells,
energised in their turn by cosmic waves.
   At this stage the question may be asked: ‘“‘ What about
toxins ? ”’
   Toxins are the waste products of cells and of dead microbes.
As they are no longer living, and thus constitute         inert
matter, these waste products neutralise the oscillatory
movement of neighbouring cells and weaken them or cause
their destruction. These inert particles attract living
                       ORIGIN       OF      LIFE                    159

particles ; in any case, their proximity modifies the electrical
capacity of living cells which           can no longer oscillate in
accordance with their specific frequency ; hence disease or
death.                                    |
   In this connexion let us consider the'action of the microbe
on the cell from a biological point of view. First let us point
out that the microbe does not attack living cells directly,
but only indirectly by induction, as we shall show later.
Chemical analysis of microbes and cells shows them to be
remarkably similar in composition.        It seems, therefore,
a priori, that it is difficult, from a chemical point of view,
to account for the action of the microbe.    But if we investi-
gate the chemical composition of microbes and cells respec-
tively, the distribution of the different substances enables
us to solve the problem of this ‘‘ war of radiations ”’ which I
mentioned in an earlier chapter.
   We know that the constituents of living cells and microbes
may be classified into three categories: nitrogenous sub-
stances, ternary substances,! and mineral substances.             Thus,
for instance, analysis of a cell of the fruit-bearing part of
Aithalium septicum shows the following proportions :
          Nitrogenous substances.               ;     eal
          Ternary substances      :                   e  4,
          Mineral substances      ;                   pe hae

                           Total                ;     se   OL)

   According to Henneguy, in nitrogenous substances are
found : plastin, vitellin, myosin, peptones, pepsins, lecithin,
guanine, xanthin and ammonium carbonate.            In ternary
substances : paracholesterol, a special resin, a yellow pig-
ment, amylodextrin, a non-reducing sugar, fatty acids and
neutral fats. In mineral substances: lime combined with
fatty acids and other organic acids, such as lactic acid,
acetic   acid,   formic   acid,    oxalic    acid,   phosphoric    acid,
carbonic acid, sulphuric acid; phosphates of potassium and
magnesium, chloride of sodium and iron salts.
   1 Ternary is a term indicating that chemical compounds    are made up
of three elements or radicals.  (Translator.)
160              THE    SECRET      OF   LIFE

   Generally speaking, all chemical substances present in
sea-water are found in the human organism.
   From the point of view of my theory of cellular oscillation,
all the substances enumerated above may be divided into
two categories :
               1. Conducting substances.
               2. Insulating substances.
   As a general rule, insulating substances are found in
nitrogenous and ternary compounds and conducting sub-
stances in compounds containing mineral salts. Thus, for
instance, plastin, paracholesterol, resin and certain fats are
insulating, while most minerals, and particularly the salts
(sulphates, phosphates, chlorides, of sodium, magnesium,
iron, etc.) are more or less conducting.
   In the light of this classification we shall see how the
microbe may, by induction, modify cellular oscillation.
Let us recall that oscillation in a circuit depends on its
conductivity (electrical resistance) and on its permeability
to waves (specific inductive power and capacity). Returning
to the cell of Athalium septicum, we have seen that its
chemical composition was as follows : nitrogenous substances
30; ternary substances 41 (most of these being insulating) ;
mineral substances 29 (most of these being conducting).
   Let us suppose that this cell is attacked by a microbe
whose mineral ratio is 40 instead of 29. Its oscillating
power and consequently its frequency, are not the same as
those of the cell. Thus, by induction, the microbe modifies
the oscillation of the cell, which results in its destruction and
death. Again, the cell, instead of dividing normally by
karyokinesis into daughter cells, divides according to the
frequency of the microbe, that is to say into cells typical of
the microbe.    In the absence of a microbe, if the nucleus of
the cell is too powerful a conductor (excess of iron and
phosphorus derived from globulins), and if the external agent
(excess of cosmic waves) causes a too rapid division of cells,
we may find that the healthy cell will be transformed into a
neoplastic cell (cancer).
   The foregoing facts show that in a healthy organism
every tissue must contain, in constant proportions, con-
                     ORIGIN      OF   LIFE                      161

ducting and insulating constituents which I have named
biomagnomobile units.
   The question now arises how the distribution of these
units in the organism is effected so as to bring to the mem-
 brane of the nucleus the insulating substances, and to the
 filament the conducting substances.
    It is essentially due to the energy of its own oscillation
 that the cell is able to summon for its needs all these insulat-
 ing and conducting substances which are distributed to the
 locations where they are required for the maintenance of
 the life of the cell itself. Similarly, in the electro-plating
 process the substances and the strength of the current are
 adjusted so as to obtain the desired effect, according to the
 nature of the metal employed.
    Such is the final remark with which I conclude the
 formulation of my theory.
    My experiments in the field of radiobiology are now
 established facts which cannot be accounted for by the
 classical theories of science, whereas my new theory provides
 the necessary explanation.
    In conclusion, my theory may be summarised in the form
 of this threefold principle :
         Life is created by radiation,
         Maintained by radiation,
         Destroyed by oscillatory disequilibrium.
    Be that as it may, I believe I have opened up a new
 field of research which should prove particularly fruitful to
biologists. . No one can predict what the future has in store
 for us in this field; in any case, I hope that the ultimate
 result will benefit suffering humanity.

  Site                                                      M
                        CONCLUSION

In concluding the presentation of my theory and of its
practical applications, I wish to appeal to physicists,
research workers, to all men of science in general, for in
them lies the source of all progress. It is they, in particular,
who have achieved the modern marvel of wireless. If
anyone had predicted, forty years ago, that we should be
able to hear speech and music from all parts of the earth,
not to mention television, he would have been regarded as
a madman.     And yet to-day these inventions are accom-
plished facts which we accept as being perfectly natural.
Such is the power of science that it invariably surpasses the
most daring speculations.
  I appeal to these research workers to devise, as I shall
 attempt to do myself, a mechanical eye, an objective, in a
word an apparatus which is lacking, to detect the unknown
radiations discussed in this work.
   What are we able to perceive with our sense of sight in
the immense gamut of radiations ? Nothing but a small zone
extending from 375 to 700 trillion vibrations per second.
And yet what a social upheaval lies in store for us pending
the discovery of this apparatus susceptible of detecting the
complete range of waves, known and unknown, which escape
our control.
   In speaking of man, Descartes said: ‘‘ I think, therefore
Tam.” This somewhat laconic dictum should not blind us
to the fact that man, although superior to animals in many
respects, notably in the power of thought, is nevertheless
inferior to them, for the time being, in regard to the narrow
range of vibrations that he is able to detect. Indeed, man
can only see and hear within a very restricted range, and he
can only transmit his thought by means of speech. On the
other hand, certain animals can travel in a straight line
towards a far distant goal, invisible to us, thanks to the
vibrations they detect and that our senses cannot perceive.
                              162
                        CONCLUSION                               163

  One of the ways we have of exploring the external world
is by means    of our visual sense.    The eye is the physio-
logical objective which has been admirably copied and which
has revealed to us the infinitely small and the infinitely great.
   Thanks to a very small gamut in the scale of luminous
radiations, we are able to discern the most delicate shades
of colours. It is actually the wavelength of each of these
colours, of each of these notes of this visual harmony, which
excites the cells of our brain, and by the play of multitu-
dinous oscillations, makes them vibrate in unison.        So,
too, the appearance of certain human beings evokes our
sympathy, our love or our contempt. May not these diverse
feelings be caused by certain variations in the radiations
emitted by these persons ?
   This biological eye, admirable creation, has been physi-
cally copied and turned into an instrument which captures the
luminous rays so as to reproduce through photographs and
films, all the sensations experienced directly by the human
eye.
   Thus for many centuries our unaided vision revealed to
us but a small domain of Nature. Man once believed that
apart from light and darkness there was nothing to be
perceived.    In the course of time he became aware of the
immensity of the scale of radiations: invisible chemical
rays, electromagnetic waves, X-rays, radium emanations
and cosmic rays which may still prove to be the most
important of all to future researchers.       And more par-
ticularly, man possessed no sense that could apprehend
electric waves, and this realm would have remained for ever
closed to him if scientists of genius had not brought into
being an “electric eye ’’ which revealed a new world to us
all, the world of wireless.
   And now, what significance do we discern in the stream
of life and in cellular oscillations, and who will invent that
eye, that detector of vital oscillations ? When this comes to
pass, we shall achieve the mastery of these oscillations.
Not only from a biological point of view will these radiations
enable us to obtain results of great value to mankind, but
also from a social point of view, their practical application
may bring about changes of great significance. We shall
                                                           M 2
164                THE      SECRET       OF    LIFE

utilise them for our needs and we shall achieve the trans-
mission of thought and communication with the blind ; we
shall know what other people think and we shall com-
municate with one another, and possibly with animals too,
by means of our own radiations. We shall also be able to
trace the whereabouts of criminals by the wavelengths of
their radiations.
   And, indeed, we live in the midst of a mystery, for do
we not see birds, insects, and animals of all kinds, devoid
of the faculty of speech, yet manifesting powers as marvellous
as they are inexplicable ? May we not postulate the existence
of thought transmission among all sentient beings ? The
instinct of self-preservation in animals is but a verbal
expression concealing a reality which is the primary cause
of their existence : the whole gamut of radiations, imper-
ceptible to us, is apprehended on their plane for they are
capable of emitting and receiving them.
   Let us wait hopefully for the day when this superlative
eye, this wonderful apparatus that we dream of, will finally
appear and reveal in all its complexity and majestic grandeur
a new world that science has begun to unveil.
   1 These predictions made by Lakhovsky over a decade ago bear a singular
resemblance to the recent speculations on the future of science by one of
the most talented members of the Royal Society, Professor J. D. Bernal.
In his fascinating work, ‘“‘ The Social Function of Science ’’ (Routledge,
London, 1939), Professor Bernal states that language and writing may be
superseded by the application of knowledge of the electro-neurology of the
brain. People may be able to communicate with one another through an
electrical apparatus activated by electrical currents produced in the brain
by thinking.    (Translator.)
                              APPENDIX
       NoTE     ON   RADIUM
                                                                                PAGE
           . Preliminary Remarks          :             :                       165
           . Professional Criticisms of Radium Therapy :
           . The Tragic Experience of a London Surgeon                          170
        bo. Symposium
        Co
        Hm                of Medical Views on Final Results of
               Radium Treatment.                                                ed
        5. Conclusions                                                          174
 a8    THE  MULTIPLE WAVE OSCILLATOR
         Description of Apparatus                                               178
         Photograph of Apparatus   :                                            192
         Special Note on the Pope’s Recovery                                    181
ITI.   CLINICAL REPORTS
         Selection of Cases treated withSeen                   Wave   Oscil-
              lator           :    :                                        :   181
              (a) Cancer      :                                                 182
              (6) Exophthalmic Goitre
              (c) Enlarged Prostate.             ;                              192
              (d) Gastro-duodenal       Ulcers       and ‘other Conditions      195
TV     EFFECTS       OF   OSCILLATING    CIRCUITS       ON ANIMALS
              (a) Horses      ,                                                 196
              (6) Dogs and Cats                                                 196

                           I. NOTE      ON    RADIUM

                           1. Preliminary        Remarks
To the public radium is a magic word, to the Press it has
news value, and to the Government it appears to be a
powerful weapon indispensable for the fight against cancer.
   The Minister of Health has recently been empowered by
Parliament to “ lend money to the National Radium Trust
up to a maximum of £500,000 to enable it to purchase radium
and other radio-active substances and apparatus required
for radio-therapeutic treatment.” } This sum of public
money should at least ensure the material welfare of certain
                 1 The Times report, December          13th, 1938.
                                        165
166               3     APPENDIX

company directors for some appreciable time though it may
not prove adequate to provide sufficient radium for the
cancer campaign.
   Among those who are heretical enough to deny the
divinity of monopolies it is well known that the radium
traffic is hardly conducted on principles inspired by humani-
tarian feelings. Contrary to the universal rule in medical
practice of withholding         no information      concerning
remedies, the process of extracting radium is kept a secret
by its exploiters.
   A few years ago an attempt to investigate the radium
mystery was made by Dr. Haden Guest, M.P., on behalf of a
leading London newspaper.          When Dr. Haden Guest
arrived at the Chinkolobwe mine in the Belgian Congo he
was not permitted to visit the galleries, and the manager
would not answer a single question. According to its
published statements the Union Miniére had made 210
erammes of radium between 1923 and 1929 inclusive, which
had been sold at varying prices, working out at an average
of £10,000 per gramme, thus amounting to £2,100,000 for
seven years’ work—a fairly profitable enterprise.
   Dr. Haden Guest pointed out that the expenses of the
Chinkolobwe mine with its 150 labourers costing about £1
a week and its four or five European officials could not-
represent a very large part of this sum. He concluded that
the public had a right to demand that the Union Miniére
should abandon its policy of secrecy and publish the figures
of the costs of production.
   The fantastic price of radium throws an interesting side-
light on the machinations of financial speculators. Accord-
ing to Dr. Haden Guest, shortly after its discovery by
Madame Curie, radium could be bought in small quantities
at a price of £500 per gramme.     In 1910, small quantities of
radium were produced from the ore deposits at Joachimsthal
in Bohemia, and sold at prices running up to £36,000 per
eramme.      Until the discovery of radium in Canada in 1932,
practically all the world’s supplies came from the Belgian
Congo and the price was kept up at a very high level, in the
region of £15,000 a gramme, but when the Canadian mines
began their operations the price fell immediately, sinking
                         APPENDIX                            167

as low as £4,000 per gramme.        According to the latest
reports the National Radium Trust has secured an option to
buy radium for the next five years at £4,500 a gramme,
excluding containers.
   At the present time there are no indications that the
radium traffickers will suffer an exposure of their contemp-
tible racket by administrators with a modicum of ethical
vision and economic common sense. But there are indica-
tions, however, that in the near future radium, as a means
of curing cancer, will be ultimately replaced by other methods
of treatment, more effective, less dangerous and infinitely
less costly than those associated with radium therapy.
Meanwhile it should be clearly realised that radium in the
treatment of cancer has definite limitations and that its
extensive use, even if it were possible, would inevitably result
in raising false hopes and in causing much needless suffering.

       2. Professional   Criticisms of Radium   Therapy
    The use of radium in the treatment of cancer has become
an established part of orthodox medical practice. It is a
double-edged weapon capable of destroying cancer cells and
also of damaging normal cells. The effects of radium on
the human organism are not well understood. Its handling
requires special precautions; both patients and medical
personnel must be carefully protected at all times or else
severe injuries may result, sometimes long after treatment.
    It cannot be sufficiently stressed that radium is not, as
some enthusiasts would seem to believe, the remedy for
cancer “‘ par excellence.”’
    In a recent work on Radium and Cancer, H. 8S. Souttar,
surgeon at the London Hospital, states: ‘“‘ T’hose who have
studied the subject most would be the first to admit that we are
still working entirely in the dark, that we really know nothing
of the mechanism by which radium produces its effects and
that the success we have achieved is the purely empirical
result of almost blind trial and error. Moreover, after years
of labour and of the most painstaking research, there is no
general agreement on the best methods of application or even
as to the period over which the treatment should extend. Paris
regards as inadequate any period under fourteen days ; Stock-
168                            APPENDIX

holm is satisfied that four hours 1s ample, whilst America, as
might be expected, uses a stop-watch.” +
   Souttar also emphasises that “it cannot be too widely
recognised that the use of radium is attended by very definite
dangers.’’ While admitting that these dangers are usually
avoided by taking every possible precaution, Souttar
remarks that “‘ even the most experienced operator will occa-
sionally be surprised by excessive sensitiveness of the patient's
tissues and by a reaction altogether out of proportion to that
which experience has taught him to expect. . . . Delayed
radium necrosis may appear several years after treatment. . . .”
   The disadvantages of irradiation treatment are frankly
admitted by one of its leading exponents, Dr. Geoffrey
Keynes. He points out “the possibility of there being a
residual tumour after treatment by radium alone (of cancer of
the breast) and the difficulty of knowing whether this contains
active cancer or not. ... In addition to ths there is the
post-irradiation fibrosis which is apt to appear as long as two
years after treatment in the positions where the irradiation has
been most intense. Another disadvantage of the conservative
method is the increased liability to neuralgia or * rheumatic ’
pains in the treated area... and it must be remembered
that radium needles are dangerous weapons if used with
insufficient skill.’’ *
   Further evidence of the dangers of irradiation treatment
was recently given in an analysis of 259 cases of radio-
dermatitis seen in the period 1930-34 inclusive at one of
the most       famous      medical   institutions      in the world,     the
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, U.S.A.      The report states that
“14 per cent. of the patients received their injuries while
undergoing radiotherapy for cancer while approximately
10 per cent. of the patients developed cancer at the site of
the X-ray or radium dermatitis.”” The report goes on, stating
“This percentage would undoubtedly have been higher if a
group of patients whose injuries were of longer duration
had been taken.”’ 3
  1 “* Radium and Cancer,” H. 8. Souttar.      London,    1934.
  2 Brit. Med. Jour., October 2nd, 1937.
  3 “Chronic    Roentgen    and Radium   Dermatitis.     An Analysis   of 259
Cases.”’ T. 8. Saunders, M.D., and Hamilton Montgomery, M.D. (Journal
of American Medical Association, January Ist, 1938, vol. 110, p. 23).
                                 APPENDIX                                       169

    Among physicians, scepticism as to the value of radium
 in cancer is not uncommon though it may not receive any
 publicity. In a recent monograph on cancer Dr. Mitchell
Stevens, Fellow of University College, London, and con-
 sulting physician of the Cardiff Royal Infirmary, condemns
 irradiation treatment in an emphatic manner.     He states:
 “I do not think that irradiation              treatment       is rational, and
 believe that in the long run it may do more harm than good.
 Local treatment by surgery, radium and X-rays, even when the
 local condition is accessible, is only attacking the ‘ outworks ’
 of the disease, and how long radium and X-rays will be
 fashionable remains to be seen.”’ +
     In order that medical students, at any rate, may not be
 misled on the subject of radium therapy in relation to
  cancer, a standard text-book warns them in the following
 terms:      “ Radium has recently been extensively used in
 inoperable cases (and also in operable growths) with the modern
 technique of small doses for prolonged periods, and remarkable
 results have been reported in that the primary growth has
 disappeared.     It is, however, too early to be sure that the
 patient's life is really prolonged, as secondary growths will
 still form, and many recurrences have occurred.        We do not
 consider that radium treatment alone is justifiable in operable
 growths (of the breast).’’ ?
     Finally, another important fact must be stressed con-
  cerning the scope of radium in the treatment of cancerous
 tumours. While radium may have its uses in certain selected
  cases and under strictly specified conditions, it cannot be
  successfully employed in cases of cancer of the lungs which
  is admitted to be increasing, and it is utterly useless in cases
 of cancer of the stomach ? which               accounts         for over 12,000
 deaths in this country annually.                 Hence the necessity of
   1 ** Cancer—Its Causation, Prevention        and    Treatment,’     W.   Mitchell
 Stevens, M.D.    London, 1935.
   2 “The    Science    and Practice   of Surgery,”    W.   H.    C. Romanis    and
 P. H. Mitchiner.      London.   2 vols., 6th edition, 1937.
   3 Hutchinson, in his ‘‘ Index of Treatment ”’ (11th edition, 1936), states :
 ‘“* The radical treatment of cancer of the stomach is undoubtedly surgical.”
    Romanis and Mitchiner concur with this widely accepted rule and add :
 ‘* In inoperable cases (of cancer of the stomach) any recognised method of
 treatment   such   as radium,   X-rays,   etc., may   be considered    justifiable,
 though they are not in the least likely to do any good ”’ (‘‘ Science and
 Practice of Surgery,” 6th edition, 1937).
170                       APPENDIX

intensive research into the causation of cancer with a view
to preventing the occurrence of the disease, for prevention,
though an indirect method of attack, is invariably more
effective and more scientific, not to say less alarming,
than belated attempts at eradicating growing tumours in
cancerous patients.

      3. The Tragic Experience of a London              Surgeon
    One of the most significant indictments of radium as a
remedy for cancer was recently expressed by the late
 Dr. Percy Furnivall, consulting surgeon to the London
 Hospital. In the beginning of 1937 Dr. Furnivall discovered
 that he had a small tumour on the left tonsillar lingual fold
 which he diagnosed as cancer. This was duly confirmed by
 microscopical examination.     He immediately consulted an
 expert and received X-ray treatment supplemented by
radium therapy, radon seeds being implanted. Describing
his personal experience, Dr. Furnivall wrote: “ I doubt if
the results of the modern treatment of malignant disease by the
combined methods of X-rays, radium and the surgeon’s knife
are as well known as they should be.’’ He then proceeded to
give an account of his own case, and concluded by remarking :
“I would not wish my worst enemy the prolonged hell I have
been through with radium neuritis and myalgia for over sia
months.     . . This account of my own case is a plea for a
very careful consideration of all the factors before deciding
which is the most suitable method of treatment... . The
resistance of tissues to radium emanations is still a doubtful
quantity, and the intensive research on this subject which is
being carried out should be generously supported. This, to
my mind, 1s even more wmportant than buying more radium
and using it in cases for which rt may not be the most suitable
form of treatment.” +
   Judging by the professional comments in the medical
Press that appeared after Dr. Furnivall’s account of his own
case, it became clear that there was no generally accepted
method of applying radium, that selection of the best
method of treatment for each individual case depended

             1 Brit. Med. Jour., February 26th, 1938.
                           APPENDIX                               Lie

purely on the surgeon’s predilection and that the miseries
of radium necrosis, neuritis and myalgia were still of frequent
occurrence. In his final communication Dr. Furnivall
wrote: “J am surprised at the number of letters I have
received from strangers about radium treatment following the
publication of my own case. These letters show that disastrous
results occur more frequently than I had any idea of, and that
patients are not told beforehand of the possibility of such results.
I am now more than ever convinced of the necessity of further
research on the effects of radium emanations, and care in
selecting cases for radium treatment ; also the inadvisability
of handing out radium for indiscriminate treatment.” 1
   Soon after writing this Dr. Furnivall died, the victim of
cancer, deeply lamented by his colleagues. In the words
of the writer of an obituary notice: ‘‘ He only wished that
the members of the profession he had served so well would
be careful in the use of a remedy powerful in benefit, but
equally powerful to make the remedy worse than the
disease.”’
    4. Symposium    of Medical Views on Final Results        of
                       Radium Treatment
   The tragic account of Dr. Furnivall’s case evoked many
communications from practitioners in all parts of the
country. From the North of England a medical man wrote :
“TI consider that Dr. Furnivall has done good service in
drawing attention to the untoward results of radium and X-ray
treatment of malignant disease. . . . For three years all my
cases of faucial cancer were sent for radiation treatment by
recognised experts. The results were distressing. Though
in some there was initial notable improvement in the malignant
condition, all relapsed, all suffered severely with pain—some
intensely, requiring large and frequent doses of morphine—all
had necrosis of soft and bony tissue, and all died within a
year, except two. Of these two, one patient, a very early case,
died within fifteen months from the date of starting the radiation
treatment, with extensive necrosis and with a large fistula;
the other died at the end of a little over two years from the time
when first seen, with widespread ulceration showing no tendency
                1 Brit. Med. Jour., March 12th, 1938.
172                        APPENDIX

to heal, and with necrosis of about a third of the inner surface
 of one side of the lower jaw.” 1
    A long polemical correspondence in the columns of the
British Medical Journal followed as a result of Dr. Furnivall’s
strictures onradium therapy. Undaunted by the lamentable
experience of this eminent surgeon, some stalwarts in the
radium citadel found little difficulty in vindicating their
position by facile arguments and rationalisations, thus
asserting their will to believe what they wished to believe,
an affliction as old as sin and as incurable. One of these
incorrigible doctrinaires with a touch of omniscience con-
fidently predicted that “‘ his (Dr. Furnivall’s) ultimate and
 complete recovery is assured.”
    A more chastened tone prevailed in the judicial summing-
up by a leading Scottish authority on cancer, who observed :
 “ The original account of Dr. Furnivall served to show from
his own experience that the results of radiotherapeutic treatment,
 like those of other forms of treatment, cannot be stated simply
as success or failure according to the survival or death of the
indiwidual treated. By his own case-history he demonstrated
that the elumination of cancer from certain situations by radio-
therapeutic treatment may be associated with such a degree of
persistent pain that survival may scarcely be desirable. Surgery
likewise, although successful in the sense that the disease has
been eradicated, may also demand a heavy price, in disablement,
from the survivor. Few radiotherapists of experience would
seek to deny that considerable room for wmprovement exists
both in technique and in the assessment of cases in their com-
paratively young branch of medical science.” ?
    At this juncture a team of surgeons entered the forum and
boldly proclaimed that the probing knife was more potent
than the radium needle. These disputants, possibly feeling
that the prestige of surgery had suffered a partial eclipse
in the warfare against cancer, seized this unparalleled
opportunity to launch an attack against the so-called
 “modern method ”’ of treating cancer known as irradiation.
Although certain subjective demands not altogether free
from the taint of self-interest may have motivated
                1 Brit. Med. Jour., April 2nd, 1938.
                * Brit. Med. Jour., April 16th, 1938.
                             APPENDIX                                173

their onslaughts, it must be admitted that the surgeons
established their claims with forceful directness. What
could be more effective than this marshalling of ineluctable
facts by a London surgeon: “ The treatment of cancer by
erradivation is receiving an ever-increasing amount of notice
in the medical press. Constant references to the subject are
also occurring in the lay Press, and the cry is always for radium
and yet more radium.       The general public is given the impres-
sion that all that is necessary to combat the ravages of malignant
diseases is a sufficient supply of radium. Brilliant results
which have been obtained by other methods are apt to be forgotten
and surgery has been driven into the background. Is this fair
to the surgeon, or, what is more important, to the patient ?”
  Drawing attention to the annual reports of the National
Radium    Trust     and   Radium      Commission        for   1936-1937,
whose statistics reveal retrogression rather than advance
so far as immunity from recurrence of cancer is concerned,
when compared with radical surgery, the writer continues :
“ Surgery, in all but inoperable cases, should be the main
weapon of attack. The pendulum has swung too far in the
direction of irradiation.”’ And very pertinently, he con-
cludes: “It may be said of surgery that no new disease is
introduced.    Radiwm, however, may cause edema, burns,
necrosis of soft and bony structures, even osteomyelitis.” +
   This variety of disasters caused by radium may well
make upholders of irradiation pause awhile, and gullible
laymen realise that behind the glamour of radium there are
wounds that cannot heal and bones that are dead.
   It is also sad to reflect that one of the greatest women of
our age, Madame Curie, died of aplastic anemia due to the
effects of radium.          |
   In this question of treatment of malignant disease,
eradication of the local tumour is clearly not the only objec-
tive. Exponents of various methods of treatment appear
to have ignored the axiom that the patient is more important
than the disease, and, therefore, as another London surgeon
pointed out, our aim should be the cure of the patient with
the least possible disturbance to his future well-being.
In that respect the application of radium in the treatment
                  1 Brit. Med. Jour., June 4th, 1938.
174                      APPENDIX

of cancer cannot be said to be immune from certain disastrous
consequences inherent in the nature of the substance itself.

                        5. Conclusions
   The foregoing facts have made it abundantly clear that
the use of radium, in spite of all possible precautions, is
attended by serious risks in a considerable number of cases
which cannot be identified beforehand.       In view of the
controversy on the value of radium that occurred in the
medical press recently as the result of a surgeon’s tragic
experience, the whole position of radium in the treatment
of cancer calls for a critical enquiry devoid of any bias or
personal predilection.
   The fact that the Government has deemed it advisable to
give a sum of £500,000 for the purchase of radium makes a
dispassionate enquiry still more imperative for, in the long
run, such an expenditure may prove to be not only a waste
of public money but what is far worse, a sacrifice of human
lives.
   The necessity of a well-planned strategy in the conduct
of the cancer campaign has been urged by a host of medical
men in the past, and when at last an effort is made to apply
empirical knowledge on an extensive scale, it is important
that those in authority should not mistake hypothetical
postulates for scientific revelations.
   Experienced surgeons of high standing with unimpeach-
able records of operative cures of many years’ duration have
condemned irradiation treatment outright and have insisted
that surgery should be the main method of eliminating
cancer. Assuredly the treatment of choice must be deter-
mined by a consideration of final results and not by the
dictates of a dominant methodology prone to error and
doomed to extinction.
   With regard to final results of treatment, the nit sound
criterion is the survival-rate estimated in periods of five and
ten years. Thus, in a series of 172 cases of cancer of the
breast of all grades, only 33 cases (or 19 per cent.), survived
operation by ten years.1 This attenuated survivorship is
                  1 Lancet, September   3rd, 1938.
                          APPENDIX                            175

mainly due to the fact that the great majority of these
cases came for treatment at a late stage of the disease, when
prospects of cure had been wrecked by procrastination.
    In the absence of a non-injurious specific remedy for
 cancer the claims of surgery cannot be lightly set aside in
 favour of radium, whose effects on living cells are incalculable
 in any given individual. Let it be understood, however,
 that surgical operations for cancer do not constitute an
 ideal method of treatment, for the shock and mutilation they
 entail may have far-reaching effects which are apt to be
 minimised by advocates of the scalpel. But, unlike radium,
 surgery does not invest itself with a halo of dubious glamour.
It performs its function with great skill and achieves its
results with commendable rapidity.
    In this connexion it may be said that the Press has played
a neutral role in publishing the facts concerning radium as
far as they can be communicated to the public by lay writers.
It is hardly an editor’s duty to guide public opinion in
matters relating to the treatment of cancer and yet sound
advice on this tragically urgent question must be given
through channels easily accessible to the people. It is
deplorable that there should be no permanent liaison
officials between the medical profession and the Press to
impart knowledge in a spirit of probity and scientific
accuracy.     The appointment of such experts should be
seriously considered by the organisers of the new National
Cancer Service which should aim at enlightening the public
in a systematic manner as well as providing adequate
facilities for treatment.
   It has already been pointed out that radium cannot be
used for all forms of cancer; indeed, it is worthless for one
of the most prevalent manifestations of the disease, namely,
cancer of the stomach.      It is, therefore, of the utmost
importance that the public should not be given the impres-
sion that the solution of the cancer problem is essentially a
matter of purchasing a sufficient supply of radium.
   The dangers of radium in the treatment of cancer have
been repeatedly indicated by many responsible workers,
and it is clear that the scope of radium has definite limitations
which necessitate the use of other forms of treatment.
176                            APPENDIX

Moreover, there are suspicions amounting to convictions,
that the exploitation of radium provides a unique oppor-
tunity for gross profiteering, a revolting example of human
greed which may soon be faced by a well-merited nemesis.
Indeed, there are signs that the artificial production of
radio-activity such as Neutron rays may put an end to the
spectacular evolution of radium both as a weapon against
cancer and as an abominable “ramp.”              Already the
National Cancer Advisory Council in Washington have
announced that good progress had been made in the experi-
mental treatment of cancer with Neutron rays. ‘The
apparatus generating these rays is known as the cyclotron
and is actually in use in America and in Denmark.         The
fact that it is not yet used for treating cancer in London
is symptomatic of the lethargy afflicting those whose official
duty is to display mental alertness.
   The incessant advance of physical science will gradually
give us a deeper understanding of the structure of matter,
and, incidentally, of the living cell, so that unimagined
developments in the treatment of disease will take place.
Among such future events, none would be more welcome
than the discovery of a substitute for radium, and it may be
prophesied that when this comes to pass radium will be
swiftly removed from its position of undesirable pre-eminence
and consigned to the museum of medical relics like a charm
that has lost its power.
                                                      M. C.

             II. THE    MULTIPLE     WAVE      OSCILLATOR

In his capacity of engineer-physicist Lakhovsky has always
taken a keen interest in the construction of electrical
appliances. In 1923 he brought out his Radio-cellulo-
oscillator    with     which   readers   of this work      are   already
  1 At the annual meeting of the British Empire Cancer Campaign it was
stated that a cyclotron had been installed at Cambridge and another at
Liverpool, but “‘ it was of urgent importance that at least one should be
available in London so that clinical trial could eventually be made of the
therapeutic value of neutron rays” (Brit. Med. Jour., December 10th,
1938).
                        APPENDIX                               Ay fr

familiar. Subsequently the success of short-wave therapy,
like all new therapeutic methods, led to a vogue in which
enthusiasm soon outstripped judgment. Contra-indications
were gradually discovered, and unexpected effects, injurious
to the patient, warned experimenters that the fundamental
rule of any medical treatment, Primum non nocere, could not
be ignored. Indeed, it is now recognised that the indis-
criminate application of short waves is not devoid of risks
which may have serious consequences. Lakhovsky was
prompt to realise the possibility of harmful effects lurking
in the midst of encouraging results. He then decided to
give up using ultra-short waves capable of causing thermal
effects. It occurred to him that better results might be
obtained by giving an oscillatory shock to all the cells of the
body simultaneously.       Such a very brief shock, produced
 by damped electrostatic waves, does not cause a prolonged
thermal effect and therefore cannot injure the cells.
 Lakhovsky’s aim was to produce an oscillatory shock that
would cause the diseased cells to oscillate aperiodically, that
is to say, not at aspecificrate. At first sight, from a physical
 point of view, the problem seemed insoluble since the human
 body is made up of something like 200 quintillion cells, each
 oscillating at a specific rate, typical of its own cellular
 wavelength.     Theoretically this implies the necessity of
taking into account as many different wavelengths as there
 are cells in order that each cell may oscillate in accordance
 with its own physico-chemical constants.
    After many experiments Lakhovsky succeeded in con-
 structing an apparatus generating an electrostatic field in
 which all frequencies, from 3 metres to the infra-red region,
 could be produced. Hence, in this field, every cell could
 find its own frequency and vibrate in resonance. Moreover,
 it is known that a circuit supplied by damped high frequency
 currents gives rise to numerous harmonics.          ‘These con-
 siderations led Lakhovsky to invent an oscillator of multiple
 wavelengths in the field of which every cell, every organ,
 every nerve, every tissue, could find its own frequency.
 To this end he devised a diffuser consisting of a series of
 separated concentric oscillating circuits connected with one
 another by silk threads. Thus a type of oscillator was
  8.L.                                                     N
178                     APPENDIX

obtained giving all fundamental wavelengths from 10 cm.
to 400 metres, corresponding to frequencies of 750,000 to
three milliards per second. In addition to this, each circuit
emits numerous harmonics which, together with their
fundamental waves, interference waves and effluvia, may
extend as far as the infra-red and visible light regions
(1-300 trillion vibrations per second).
   As all cells and even their mitochondria are believed to
oscillate within that range of frequencies, they are thus
provided, in the field of such an oscillator, with the
characteristic individual frequencies enabling them to
vibrate in resonance.
   In 1931 Lakhovsky brought out his first Multiple Wave
Oscillator representing a greatly improved type of his former
apparatus,   the Radio-cellulo-oscillator,
                                        with which geraniums,
bearing cancerous tumours, were successfully treated.
From 1931 onwards Lakhovsky’s new Multiple Wave
Oscillator has been used in various Paris hospitals, notably
Hopital Saint Louis, Val-de-Grace, Calvaire, Hopital
Necker, Dispensaire Franco-Britannique, etc.
   The Multiple Wave Oscillator has also been used in most
European countries and in America for the treatment of
various organic diseases, including cancer.    Since its incep-
tion in 1931, the Multiple Wave Oscillator has been applied
by many workers and no contra-indications nor any harmful
effects on patients or medical personnel have ever been
reported. This is in striking contrast with short-wave
therapy in general, X-rays and radium, whose application,
particularly in the case of the latter, has not infrequently
been followed by the most serious consequences.         Every-
where the results appear to have been most gratifying. A
selection of cases treated with this apparatus, together
with photographs, is given in the third part of the
Appendix.
   Photographs of the latest model of the Multiple Wave
Oscillator appear on pages 192 and 193.
   The apparatus consists of a transmitter and a receiving
resonator, both arranged so as to set up an electromagnetic
field in their immediate vicinity.
   The patient is placed between the two oscillators separated
                        APPENDIX                          179

from each other by a distance of about 4 or 5 feet. The
current is then switched on and the apparatus functions
instantly.
   The duration of treatment and number of applications
depend on the state of the patient and the nature of the
disease. Generally speaking, a quarter of an hour is
sufficient for each application. Excellent results have been
obtained by giving a séance of five to seven minutes every
other day, but some practitioners advise a longer application,
from ten to fifteen minutes.
   It should be particularly noted that, unlike the average
type of short-wave generator in use in medical practice, the
Multiple Wave Oscillator cannot cause any injurious effects.
As all the radiations generated by this apparatus are of an
electrostatic nature, they cannot overheat or burn the
tissues.
   The action of the Multiple Wave Oscillator is purely
electrical.
    ated
®
    Par
a8:
           2

    ee
    ae
    op

               ip te   Son
                       ba’
               Tod wR
                        APPENDIX                              181

 SPECIAL     NOTE      ON    THE    POPE’S     RECOVERY

   Information has recently reached this country, and
has since been confirmed, to the effect that the
miraculous recovery of the Pope in January, 1937, was
due to Lakhovsky’s Multiple Wave Oscillator, which
was applied as a last resort.      The treatment was
continued for several weeks, and His Holiness was       finally
able to resume his important duties.
   Moreover, the Multiple Wave Oscillator has been in
use during the last five years in the Hospital of Vatican
City (Bambino Jesu) where many patients have been
successfully treated with it.

                  III. CLINICAL    REPORTS

   Selection of Cases Treated with Multiple Wave Oscillator

         (a ) Cancer.
         (b)
          b Exophthalmic Goitre.
         (c)
          Cc Enlarged Prostate.
         (d) Gastro-duodenal Ulcers and Other Affections.
At the outset it is important to note that all the following
cases were treated with the Multiple Wave Oscillator several
years ago, some of them as far back as 1931 when the
apparatus was first introduced by Lakhovsky to the medical
profession. Without exception, all the patients whose
clinical history is given here have remained well, and no
182                             APPENDIX

recurrence of the original affection has been reported. In
the case of cancer this is of such great significance that it is
worthy of the most serious consideration.
  (a) One of the first cases to be treated with the Multiple
Wave Oscillator was a case of cancer of the face.

I. Case of Madame C.
  Age, 68.

               Fic.   1.   Case of Madame C.—Before Treatment.
      Rodent   ulcer in inner angle of left eye and sub-orbital region.

  Diagnosis.  Rodent ulcer (Basal-celled carcinoma) situated in
                inner angle of left eye, affecting root of nose ;
              Diameter, about $ inch.
              Duration, three years.
  The diagnosis was confirmed by biopsy (microscopic examination. )
                           APPENDIX                                183
  This patient was    treated for a facial lesion twenty-three   years
previously with X-rays. An improvement resulted, but subse-
quently a suspicious crust developed in the site mentioned above.
Treatment with Lakhovsky’s Multiple Wave Oscillator began on
September   8th, 1931, at the Hépital Saint Louis.     After the third
séance, lasting fifteen minutes, there was an improvement in the
EO teral state of the patient and a diminution in the size of the
 esion.
   On November 19th, 1931, the cancerous ulcer had completely
disappeared.    There was only a scar left without any trace of

            Fig. 2.   Case of Madame   C.—After treatment.

induration.    The general appearance of the patient showed a
remarkable improvement.     She stated that she felt rejuvenated and
that she had not enjoyed such good health for thirty years.
   (Figs. 1 and 2.)
184                            APPENDIX

II. Case of Mr. M. M.
  Age, 80.
  Diagnosis.       Neevo-carcinoma on left arm.
                   Axillary glands enlarged.
                   Diagnosis confirmed by biopsy.
                   Duration, seven years. No previous treatment.

      Fic.   3.   Case of Mr. M. M.—Before treatment.    Naevo-carcinoma
                                   of left arm.

      Fig. 4..    Same   case—After seven applications    of the Multiple
                                 Wave Oscillator.

  Treatment with Multiple Wave Oscillator began on October 9th,
1931, at the Hépital Saint Louis.
  After seven séances, the ulceration was reduced by half.
  Six months        after   commencement     of treatment,    the   lesion   had
completely disappeared, leaving a clean scar.
  (Figs. 3, 4, 5.)
                                   APPENDIX                                   185
III. Case of Madame S. This case is the most striking example
of a cancerous tumour cured by means of Lakhovsky’s Multiple
Wave Oscillator, after operation and radium had both failed
to eradicate the disease.  When it is realised that this case
was    cured    within   a   few   weeks,   the   result   becomes   still   more
significant.
   This old lady, aged 82, had been treated three years previously
in an anti-cancerous centre.     After an operation performed there
in 1929, an ulcerated lesion of neoplastic nature developed.   In the
course of 1929 and 1930, radium was applied.    A temporary improve-
ment followed, but the tumour persisted and began to grow
rapidly.    Another small tumour was also observed in the sub-orbital
region.

      Fig.    5. Same case—Three months after treatment.   After six
             months’   treatment this highly malignant tumour had
             completely disappeared leaving a smooth scar.

  Diagnosis.       Epithelioma of upper part of left cheek.
                   Size, 24 x 14 inch.

  As the general condition of the patient was gradually becom-
ing worse, she was sent to the Calvaire Clinic, known in Paris
under the more      gruesome name      of ‘‘ante-chamber    of the
cemetery.”
   Treatment with the Multiple Wave Oscillator began on April 26th,
1932, and lasted fifteen minutes.   After only two applications an
improvement was observed.     With further treatment the improve-
ment was maintained, and on May 12th, 1932, a final application of
twenty minutes’ duration was given. The enlarged sub-maxillary
glands and cedema, noticed at the time of examination before treat-
ment began, were no longer present.
   The patient was photographed on May 30th, 1932.
186                          APPENDIX

      Fic. 6. Case of Madame S.—Before treatment.       Epithelioma
           of upper part of left cheek. Radium was applied but no
           benefit resulted. Photograph taken April 25th, 1932.

   It will be observed that not only has the tumour completely
disappeared but that the skin shows distinct signs of rejuvenation
as evidenced by the smoothed-out wrinkles in the face and neck.
   (Figs. 6, 7.)
                           APPENDIX                                   187

Fic.    7. Case of Madame 8.—After treatment.     Photograph taken
       May 30th, 1932, showing final result after only three weeks’
       treatment.
          It will be noticed that not only has the cancerous tumour
       disappeared, but that the skin of this old lady of 82 shows
       distinct signs of rejuvenation.
188                             APPENDIX

IV. Case of Mr. J.S.

  Age, 61.

  Diagnosis.      Baso-cellular carcinoma in inner angle of left eye.
                  Diagnosis confirmed by biopsy.

  Duration.        Fifteen years.   No previous treatment.

      Fic.   8.   Case of Mr. J. S.—Before treatment.   Rodent   ulcer in
                           inner angle of left eye.

   Treatment with Multiple Wave Oscillator began on October 13th,
1931, at the Hopital Saint Louis.   On December 29th, 1931, the
lesion was covered with a scar. Subsequently the patient received
further treatment, and in the course of 1932 a complete cure
resulted.
                                             :

                                APPENDIX                          185
   The patient stated that he felt greatly rejuvenated and that he
could undertake heavy manual labour without experiencing
fatigue.
  (Figs. 8, 9.)

                  Fic. 9.   Case of Mr. J. S.—After treatment.

V. Case of Radium Burn.

   From a medical point of view this case is of great importance, for
it demonstrates both the dangers of radium and the regenerating
effects of Lakhovsky’s Multiple Wave Oscillator.
   The diagnosis of this case was radium dermatitis.
   The lesion originated from an ordinary wart on the middle finger.
Radium was applied with the result that a severe burn appeared
which resisted all forms of treatment for a long period.  The tendon
was partially necrosed and the patient complained of local pain and
rigidity.
   After treatment with the Multiple Wave Oscillator for some months
the radium burn was healed and mobility of the finger largely
restored.
190                               APPENDIX

               Fic.   10.   Case of Radium burn—Before treatment.

      Fie.    11. Case of Radium burn—After Treatment. Lakhovsky’s
             Multiple Wave Oscillator succeeded in healing this notoriously
             incurable lesion after all methods of treatment had failed.
             (Case of Professor Sven Johansson, Goeteborg, Sweden.)

   This case was treated by Professor Sven Johansson in a Hospital
Clinic at Goeteborg (Sweden).
   (Bigs. hO ets)

  (b) Case of Exophthalmic Goitre.
   The patient, a middle-aged woman, was first examined at the
Institut de Physique Biologique in Paris, in January, 1938, where
she was treated with the Multiple Wave Oscillator.
   Diagnosis. Exophthalmic goitre.
   Duration.   Eleven years.
   Operation having been refused, radio-electrical treatment was
decided upon.
   The first application was given on January llth, 1938. After
a few applications the general condition of the patient was greatly
improved and the size of the goitre considerably reduced.
   Treatment with the Multiple Wave Oscillator was continued
throughout February.     The patient was photographed on March 4th,
1938.
                                               ;

                                APPENDIX                                 ToL

           Fic. 12.   Case of exophthalmic goitre—Before treatment.

    Fie.    13. Case of exophthalmic goitre—A fter treatment.   Photo-
           graph taken on March 4th, 1938. This remarkable result
           with Lakhovsky’s Multiple Wave Oscillator was achieved
           after only seven weeks’ treatment. It will be observed that
           the goitre has completely disappeared and the general
           condition of the patient seems to be excellent.

  It will be observed that the goitre has completely disappeared
and the general condition of the patient seems to be excellent.
  (Figs. 12, 13.)
192                         APPENDIX

    (c) Enlarged Prostate. Hypertrophy or enlargement of
the prostate gland is one of the most serious conditions
afflicting elderly and aged men. An enlarged prostate
invariably necessitates surgical intervention.       ‘So far no
medical treatment has been found to be curative, and in the
vast majority of cases the only hope of saving the patient’s
life lies in an operation entailing certain risks and complica-
tions. In view of the grave prognosis associated with cases

           Fie.   14,   Lakhovsky’s Multiple Wave   Oscillator.

of enlarged prostate, reports of cures achieved by means of
Lakhovsky’s Multiple Wave Oscillator acquire a significance
of exceptional import.
   The following clinical reports by reputable medical men
have established the fact that prostatic enlargement has
been cured by the systematic application of Lakhovsky’s
Multiple Wave Oscillator and the patients restored to health.
   Only a selection of cases can be given here.  The results,
however, are so impressive that this method of treatment
should receive immediate attention in this country.
Case I.
          Under the care of Professor de Cigna, of Genoa
Patient aged 64.
  The diagnosis was made by an eminent specialist.           The prostate
                                   APPENDIX              _                       193

        Fie.    15. Lakhovsky’s Multiple Wave Oscillator.       Close-up   of
               Transmitter in action, showing effluve (electric brush).

was found to be the size of a small orange.      The patient refused
operation and was compelled to lead a “‘ catheter life.’ After ten
applications of the Multiple Wave Oscillator spread over two months,
 8.L.                                                :                     ft)
194                        APPENDIX
the patient declared himself cured, being no longer obliged to resort
to the catheter.    Examination by the same specialist six weeks
after the last application showed, to his astonishment, that the
prostatic enlargement had disappeared.

Case II.

  Under the care     of Dr.   Rigaux, of the   Institut   de Physique
Biologique, Paris.
Patient aged 62.
   Diagnosis made by a urologist who advised immediate operation.
Prostate greatly enlarged, size of a small orange.    Patient had to
resort to a catheter.
   Treatment with Multiple Wave Oscillator began on July 16th,
1932.   Two applications were given daily of five minutes’ duration.
   The volume of urine began to increase after a few applications.
At the end of three weeks’ treatment the patient appeared to mic-
turate normally.     On re-examination by the urologist the prostate
was found to be normal in size. Being somewhat incredulous
about the permanence of the result, the urologist suggested another
examination six months later.
   The improvement was duly maintained, and up to the present
time, that is to say six years after the commencement of treat-
ment, there has been no recurrence and the patient is in excellent
health.

Case III.
                 Under the care of Dr. Rigaux, Paris.
Patient aged 60.
   Diagnosis was made by three eminent specialists who all advised
an immediate operation. Catheterisation had been necessary for
sometime.     The patient decided to give the Multiple Wave Oscillator
atrial.   Treatment began in October, 1934, in séances of ten minutes’
duration.    At the end of three weeks the patient was able to resume
his occupation and the improvement was maintained.        For the past
four years there has been no recurrence and the patient’s health
continues to be excellent.

   Dr. Rigaux’s experience with the Multiple Wave Oscillator
in cases of enlarged prostate extends over a period of several
years. He has treated many patients suffering from
disturbances of micturition due to prostatic enlargement,
and has noted an improvement in many cases while normal
function with marked diminution of the gland has often
resulted.                      ,
   For the past five years another medical practitioner,
                             APPENDIX                             195
Dr. Henry, of Brussels, has treated many cases of enlarged
prostate with Lakhovsky’s Multiple Wave         Oscillator,
and has achieved a remarkable measure of success.        In
some cases, frequency has been considerably alleviated,
while in others, the prostate,      which   on examination        was
found to be greatly enlarged, was gradually reduced to
normal proportions after treatment, and the patients
restored to health and enabled to resume their former
activities.
   (d) Gastro-duodenal Ulcers and other Affections treated with
the Multiple Wave Oscillator. Since 1934 Professor de Cigna
of Genoa has treated several hundred patients with
Lakhovsky’s Multiple Wave Oscillator, and has become a
keen advocate of this method of treatment.
   Recently he has reported a series of cases to the Royal
Academy of Medicine of Genoa which formed the subject of a
special communication at the International Short-Wave
Congress in Vienna in 1937.
   All these patients were subjected to strict clinical
examination supplemented by biopsy and radiograms.
   The cases treated by Professor de Cigna cover a great
variety of different conditions, including basal-celled carci-
noma, lupus erythematosus, otitis media, gynecological
affections and prostatic enlargement.     A number of cases
were photographed before and after treatment, and full
accounts duly appeared in the Italian medical Press.
Furthermore, functional and psychological conditions, such
as asthma, insomnia, neuralgia, etc., were also treated with
pronounced success.
   In addition to this, Professor de Cigna has drawn attention
to the beneficial effects of the Multiple Wave Oscillator in
patients suffering from gastro-duodenal ulcers.
  The   results   he   has   obtained   in a series   of cases,    all
radiologically    controlled,  were   so    remarkable   that
they were reported to the Royal Academy of Medicine
of Genoa.
   The full clinical reports of Professor de Cigna’s cases,
referred to in these pages, appeared in his communication to
the International Short Wave Congress held in Vienna,
July 12th-17th, 1937.
196                       APPENDIX

 IV. EFFECTS    OF OSCILLATING       CIRCUITS    ON ANIMALS
          (a) Horses.
          (b) Dogs and Cats.
   (a) The following observations, based on experiments
carried out at the Institut physiologique de la Croix-Blanche
at Vaucresson (France), were reported by P. Fournier-
Ormonde.
  Having noticed an access of vigour as a result of the
application of one of Lakhovsky’s oscillating circuits on
himself, Fournier-Ormonde, in his capacity of horse-breeder,
decided to experiment on horses.
   For the first experiment, seven horses were chosen and
fitted with oscillating circuits in the form of collars measuring
about 30 inches in circumference.        In all cases a distinctly
invigorating effect on the horses became apparent and a
favourable influence on the fertility of certain mares was
also observed.       The most interesting case was one of
rejuvenation of a 24-year-old stallion by means of an
oscillating circuit.
   Application of the circuits round the horses’ necks and
pasterns was followed, after a variable period of time
depending on the condition of the animals, by unmistakable
signs of improvement in their general condition.         The eyes
became brighter, the coat more glossy, and the skin more
supple ; in fact the horses appeared to be “ full of beans,”
as manifested by their spontaneous galloping.
   Analysis of the horses’ blood after treatment provided
more evidence in favour of using oscillating circuits for
ailing animals.
   (6) From a veterinary point of view the application of
Lakhovsky’s oscillating circuits appears to have been as
successful as in the case of human beings. Sick, injured
and ageing animals have been reported much improved or
cured, and the list of treated animals includes horses, dogs,
cats, and even an old parrot.
   It would seem, therefore, that this eminently humane
form of treatment should commend itself to all animal
lovers.
                                                 M. C.
                         INDEX OF NAMES
ANDERSON, 14                                Gill, C. A., Colonel, 16
Attilj, Sordello, Professor,    143, 145,   Gockel, 111
  146                                       Gosset, 84
Aubert, 46                                  Guest, Haden, Dr., 166
                                            Gurwitsch, 12, 76
                                            Gutmann, 84
Bacon, 20
Baxendall, 116
Behla, 26                                   HAECKEL, 153
Bernal, T. D., Professor,      164          Hansemann, 153
Berthelot, 74, 110                   ‘      Hartmann, Dr., 137
Blackett, Professor, 14                     Haviland, Alfred, Dr., 26, 27
Blandford, 117                              Heaviside, 109
Boubée, Nérée, 124                          Helmholtz, 51
Bowen, 111                                  Henneguy, 159
Broglie, de, 77                             Henry, Dr., 195
                                            Herschel, William, Sir, 16, 116, 118
                                            Hertwig, 153
CAMERON,      Dr., 111                      Hertz, 66
Campbell,     108                           His, 153
Casamajor, M. J., 33
Cathelin, 46
Cigna, de, Professor, 192, 195              JEANS, JAMES, Sir, 14, 15, 116
Clerk Maxwell, 6, 55                        Johansson, Sven, Professor, 190
Cope, John, 23
Cremonese, Guido, Professor, 12, 13
Crile, George, Dr., 28, 29                  KEYNES, GEOFFREY,         DRr., 168
Cumberbatch, E. P., 7                       Kolb, 26
Curie, Madame, 24, 273                      Koppen,     117
Cyon, de, 50

                                            LAKHOVESY,        1 et seg. ; 28, 29; 41,
D’ARSONVAL, 99, 119, 126, 143                 84 et seq. ; 88 et seq.;    99 et seq. ;
Darwin, 153                                    119 e¢ seg. ; 113, 132; 126, 141;
Descartes, 162                                 176 et seq. ; 192, 193
Dubois, Raphael, 158                        Linnezus, 35
                                            Lockyer, Norman, Sir, 16

Fasre,   39, 41
Faraday, 6                                  Macrov, 84
Faure, Maurice, Dr., 121                    Marconi, 6
Franck, 12, 76                              Marie, Auguste, Dr., 96
Furnivall, Percy, Dr., 170, 171, 172        Masse, 46
                                            Maxwell, Clerk, 6, 55
                                            Meldrum, Dr., 16, 116
GABOR, 12                                   Millikan, 13, 111, 112, 132
Galileo, 15                                 Mitchiner, 169
Galvani, 6                                  Moreux, 117, 118
Geitel, 108                                 Morrell, Conyers, Dr., 17
Gilford, Hastings, 21, 22                   Moynihan, Lord, 20
198                       INDEX   OF NAMES
NAEGELTI, 153                      SAaRDoU, G., Dr., 121
Nichols, 154                       Sesari, M., 99
Nodon, Albert, 74, 75, 76          Shannon, W. J., Dr., 138
                                   Simeray, Dr., 139
                                   Smith, Erwin F., 84
OcCHIALINI, 14                     Souttar, H. S., 167, 168
Ormonde, Fournier-,     P., 196    Spencer, 153
                                   Stélys, M., 125
                                   Stevens, Mitchell, Dr., 169
POHL, VON, 26

                                   TCHIJEVSKY,   17
QUINET, DR., 45                    Tear, 154
                                   Ternier, 46
                                   Thomas, Dr., 154
REGENER, 14
Reiter, 12
Riccioli, 116                      Vincent, M. P., 114
Rigaux, Dr., 194                   Vries, de, 153
Roffo, Professor, 90
Romanis, 169
Rontgen, 24                        WEISMANN, 153
Ross, Ronald, Sir, 23              Wiesner, 153
Russo, M., Dr., 125                Wilson, 108
                                SUBJECT INDEX
Animals,     effects of oscillating      cir-         Cell, differentiation, and heredity,
     cuits on, 196                                          153
  problem of instinct in, 31 e¢ seq.                     formation of primordial, 151
Antenne, in insects, 36, 38                              phases of indirect division of, 72
Artesian wells, 138                                   Cellular energy, infinitesimal value
Aurora borealis, 15, 16, 116                               of oscillating, 154
Auto-electrification, in living beings,                 oscillation,     therapeutics      of,   140
  43 et seq.                      :                        et seq.
                                                        radiation,       characteristics         and
Bat, effects of radiations on, 34, 35                        wavelengths, 71 et seq.
Biomagnomobile, units, 29, 94, 140,                        nature of, 74 et seq.
  157, 158, 161                                       Cholesterol,     irradiated,   and cancer,
Birds, nocturnal,     34                                 91
     réle of orientation in flight of,                Circuits,   oscillating.       See     Oscil-
     45                                                  lating circuits.
Bombyx, Oak-, diurnal experiments                     Conducting soil, 133
   with, 39, 41                                         substances,      160
Burying-beetles, activities of, 42                    Conductivity,      107
Butterfly, great-peacock-, nocturnal                  Cosmic radiation, 13 et seq.
  experiments with, 38                                     in relation to nature of soil, and
                                                              cancer, 130 et seq.
Cancer, and hydrocarbons, 91                            rays, 110 et seq.
   and Neutron rays, 176                              Cyclotron, 176
   and oscillatory disequilibrium, 24
   and soil, 25 et seq.                               Differentiation of cell, and heredity,
   and water, 136 et seq.                                153
 _ etiology of, 126
   experimental, in plants, 84 e¢ seq.
                                                      Electrical capacity, in birds, 44
   final results of surgical treat-
                                                           role of, 57
    ment,      174
                                                      Electrification by friction of wings,
  geological and       geographical      dis-
     tribution of, 126 et seq.
                                                      Electromagnetic fields, induction of,
  Lakhovsky’s        theories    on   causa-
                                                           in cells, 157
            tion of, 24, 25
                                                        waves,       phenomena        associated
        pathology of, 88 e¢ seq.
                                                              with, 56
  limitations of orthodox methods
                                                           table of, 56
     of research, 21 et seq.
                                                      Electro-Radiobiology, First Inter-
  mortality in England and Wales,
                                                        national Congress, 7
 eto                                                  Elements, characteristics of living
  National Cancer Service, 20, 175
                                                         species, 152
  the problem of, 17 et seq.
                                                      Energy, nature of radiant, 102 et seq.
  research, criticism of methods, 22,
     23
Cancerous       diseases,     geographical            Fever, and its function, 93 ef seq.
  distribution in British Isles, 27
Capacity, electrical, definition, 9                   Geographical distribution of can-
     in birds, 44, 45                                   cerous diseases in the British
     role of, 57                                        Isles, 27
Carrier pigeons, powers         of orienta-           Geological and geographical distri-
  tion, 32 et seq.                                      bution of cancer, 126 et seq.
                                                199
200                          SUBJECT          INDEX
Geological map of Paris, 128                  Necrophorus (Burying-beetles), acti-
  nature of soil, and cancer, 27                vities of, 42
Geraniums, inoculated with cancer,            Neutron rays, 176
     104
  treated with Radio-cellulo-oscil-           Oak-bombyx,           experiments with,          39,
        lator, 86 et seq.                       41
     with oscillating circuits, 104, 144      Orientation, instinct of, 32
Globulins, chemical composition of,             role of, in flight of birds, 45
                                              Oscillating circuit, comparison                   of
  formation of, 88 e¢ seq.
                                                      living cells to, 69
Glow-worm,      radiations of, 53
                                                   constitution of cellular, 70, 150
                                                   definition, 8
Heredity, and cell differentiation,                diagrams, 9, 10
  153 et seq.
                                                circuits, effects on animals, 196
                                                     experiments on human beings,
Inductance, definition, 8                                   145 et seq.
Induction, in fixed oscillating fields,                 on plants, 104 et seq.
     155                                              of Hertz, diagram, 66
  of electromagnetic fields in cells,           fields, induction in fixed, 155 et
     157                                             seq.
  self-, rdle of, 57
                                              Oscillation,        mechanism         of cellular,
Instinct, general considerations, 31               10, 11
   of orientation, 32
                                                of living cells, influence of astral
Institutional research, criticisms, 21,
                                                     waves,       119
   23                                           therapeutics            of cellular,     140    et
Insulating soil, 134                              seq.
   substances, 160
                                              Oscillations,        electrical,      explanatory
Interference phenomena,          121, 122
                                                 analogies, 57 et seq.
Tonisation, 107
                                              Oscillator, Multiple Wave.                       See
                                                    Multiple Wave Oscillator.
Lemmings, activities of, 35                     Radio-cellulo,          10, 83, 84, 86
Life, origin of, 149 e¢ seq.                  Oscillatory action of microbes, 79
                                                 disequilibrium and cancer, 24
Meteorology, as link between physics
  and biology, 118
Microbes,    action of, on living cells,      Peacock-butterfly, experiments with,
     159, 160                                    38
  electrical properties of, 79                Pigeons, carrier, powers of orienta-
  oscillatory action of, 79                     tion, 32 et seq.
Microbiology, 99                              Pyretotherapy, 95
Migration, explanation of, 46
Mitogenetic rays, 12, 76                      Radiant energy, nature of, 102
Moon, influence of, on hospital               Radiation,          cellular,   characteristics
  patients, 147                                         and wavelengths, 71 et seq.
Multiple Wave      Oscillator,     11, 192,       nature of, 74 et seq.
          193                                   cosmic, 13 et seq.
        and Pope’s recovery, 181                  nature of soil in relation to, 130
        and treatment of cancer,        25,             et seq.
           181 et seq.                             and physiological effects, 14
        description  of apparatus,              mitogenetic, 12, 76
           177-179                              nature of, in living beings, 49 eé
        selection of cases treated                 seq.
               with,                            penetrating, 108, 110
            (a) cancer, 181-190                 solar, and photolysis, 109
            (b) enlarged prostate, 192—       Radiations, nature              and    character-
               195                                 istics of, 55
            (c) exophthalmic      goitre,       of living beings, 11, 12, 49, 102
               190-191                          solar, and remarkable vintage
            (d) gastro-duodenal ulcers            years, 120
              and other affections, 195         war of, 11
                                                            /

                                  SUBJECT               INDEX                                    201
Radio-cellulo-oscillator,            10, 83, 84,        Soils, carcinogenic,    125
                                                        Spectrum of the living, 29
Radiogen, 29                                            Sunspots, 15 et seq.
Radiogoniometer, 37                                       and biological phenomena,           118
Radiographs, of living beings, 76                         and cosmic radiation, 114 et seq.
Radium                                                    and pandemics of malaria, 16
  (a) Analysis          of     259    cases        of     and physical phenomena, 116
           radium dermatititis,            168            and waves     of epidemic         diseases,
  (b) Note on Radium, 165 et seq.                            uh)
  (c) Prices of Radium, 166, 167
  (d) Symposium of medical views,
         171 et seq.                                    Temperature, in human body, signifi-
  (e) Tragic experience of London                         cance of, 93 et seq.
         surgeon, 170, 171                              Toxins,   158
  therapy, professional criticisms
     of, 167 et seq.
Rays, cosmic, in relation to life, 110                  Ultra-violet   radiation,      in    human
          et seq.
                                                           body, role of, 29
        penetrating powers of, 14
                                                        Universion, and cosmic         rays,     110,
                                                              ri
Self-induction, réle of, 57                                definitions, 29, 112
Semi-circular        canals,     in birds,       réle
          of, 36 et seq.
        in different species          of verte-         Vintage years, correlated with sun-
        brates, 51                                        spots, 120, 121
Soil, and cancer, 25 et seq.
  conducting, 133
  influence of nature of, and cancer,                   Water, in relation to cancer, réle of,
     123 et seq.                                             136 et seq.
  insulating, 134                                         sterilisation by metals, 98 et seq.
  nature of, in relation to cosmic                      Waves, astral, influence of, 119
     radiation   and     causation  of                    cosmic,   influence    of soil on      field
     cancer, 130 et seq.                                     of, 123 et seq.

                    PRINTED    IN GREAT    BRITAIN BY THE WHITEFRIARS   PRESS   LTD.
