================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: Lalla-Vakyani
Creator: Lalleshwari (Lal Ded) (George Grierson & Lionel Barnett, eds./trans.)
Edition: 1920 (London: Royal Asiatic Society)
Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/lallavakyani014969mbp)
Public domain: First published 1920; public domain.
Artifact ID: lalla-vakyani-grierson-barnett-1920
================================================================================

CONTENTS

PAGE

PREPACK v

WORKS QUOTED vii

SYSTEM OF TRANSLITERATION viii

INTRODUCTION 1

PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA 8

TEXT AND TRANSLATION 23

APPENDIX I. VERSES BY LALLA IN KSOWLES'S DICTIONARY

o? KASHMIRI PROVERBS 120

APPENDIX II. ON LALLA'S LANGUAGE . . ,128

APPENDIX III. Ox LALLA s METRES .... 144

APPENDIX IV. CONCORDANCE OF THE VERSES IN MS.

STEIN B AND IN THE PRESENT EDITION , . 149

VOCABULARY 150

PREFACE

THE collection of songs edited in the present
volume possesses a twofold interest. Composed so
long ago as the fourteenth century A. D M it claims
the attention not only of the philologist as the
oldest known specimen of the Kashmiri language,
but also, and still more, that of the student of
religions.

In ancient times, the religious system based on
aiva Yoga was the object of much study amongst
the learned men of Kashmir. From that remote
corner of North-Western India their teaching in-
fluenced the whole peninsula,- so much so that we
even read that Eamtouja, the leader of a rival
Vaisnava belief, felt compelled to travel from
distant Madras to Kashmir, with the special object
of combating the hostile creed at its fountain head.
There is an imposing mass of Kashmir &aiva
literature still extant. Mijch of it has been pub-
lished in the original Sanskrit, and more than one
English.work has been devoted to it.

Lalla> or Lai D6d, the authoress of the following
verses, was a wandering ^ascetic, and a devoted
follower of this cult. The importance of lier songs
consists in the fact tiat they are not a systematic
expose of ^aivism oa the lines laid down by the
theologiafis who prfeced^ her, but iEusfcrate the
religion? on its poplar side, Wltst we

vi PREFACE

Is not a mere book-religion as evolved in the minds
of great thinkers and idealists, but a picture of the
actual hopes and fears of the common folk that
nominally followed the teaching of these wise men
whom they had accepted as their guides. The
book, in short, gives an account, often in vivid
and picturesque language, of the actual working
out in practice of a religion previously worked out
in theory. As such, it is a unique contribution to
the body of evidence that must necessarily form
the basis of a future history of one of the most
important religious systems of India.

A word may be added as to the respective shares
of those responsible for the preparation of this
edition. While each has considered and has dis-
cussed what the other has written, it may be
roughly assumed that, while the account of the
Ydga system and the many notes referring to it
are directly, or indirectly, from ..the pen of
Dr. Barnett, the preparation of the text, its trans-
lation, the various appendixes, and the vocabulary
are the work of Sir George Grierson.

WORKS QUOTED IN THE FOLLOWING
PAGES

WALTER, H,~The E^yo^-p^dlpiM of Sv&fa^rSma, translated
into German, Munich, 1893,

DEUSSEK, PAUL, jU^w/w Mmhte far Phikwphk Leipzig,
1899,1906,

SHRINIVAS IYENGAR, R T,-The Siwutrnmrtin! of Ksemaraja,
translated into English, Reprinted from 'Indian Thought',

SKIS CHANDKA Visu.-Ife YOJ& faim, $iw-$mUti In Sacred
Books of the Hindus \ vol, xv, Part I. Allahabad, 1913,

An InMuction to logo, Pkflwfty; SmMt to, with
JfajKA Tmmktm of (1) tk &wwtikti&, ori of (2) Tht
(Mmfamliil Ibid,, Parts II and IV, Allahabad, 1914-15.

CHATTEBJI, I C, Mjwtr SWmm, voL ii, Fasciculus I, The
Research Department, Kashmir State, Srinagar, 1914,

PANCHAM Sim-The H^tk^prdipM of Svltmilriuna, Sanskrit
Text and English Translation, In ' Sacred Books of the Hindus ',
voL xv, Part III Allahabad, 1915,

PfiRNANANDA, - &f-ftnwiri^a)ifl, Text often printed in India,

BABNETT, L D -Translation of the Bhogm&CM. In the Temple
Classics. London, 1905,

SYSTEM OP TRANSLITERATION USED

THE system of transliteration is the same as that employed by
Sir George Grierson in his Kfishmm Dictionary.

*,

The ordinary vowels are represented as follows:
% fta, m ka, fii fci, ^ H, J i. | H, ^ M, % ie,
? HI, It tt, ^ to,

^g is no longer a vowel, and is represented by ru. ^g is similarly
represented by re. Anunasika is represented by "". Thu ^ it
The Kashmiri consonants are :

1 fa, ^[ Ua, ^ fffl, ?) yfa, (?) ia.

^T ftfl, if feiff, ^f ^,

Z fff, 7 f Ja, ? cfff, (5) (ffifl,

r| ta *f rto, Ja, \i( dAa, 1 no,

XI ];a,

Letters enclosed in brackets are found only in borrowed words, ftnd
do not belong to the language.

For further particulars Sir George Grierson's Kashmiri Dictionary,
in course of publication by the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and his
Manual of the Kashmiri Language, published by the Clarendon Press,
may be consulted.

For Sanskrit, the ordinary system of the Royal Asiatic Society
is followed,

INTRODUCTION

THE verses in the following collection are attributed to
a woman of Kashmir, named, in Sanskrit, Lalla Yogf^warL
There are few countries in which so many wise saws and
proverbial sayings are current as in Kashmir, 1 and none of
these have greater repute than those attributed by universal
consent to Lai Ded, or 'Granny Lai', as she is called
nowadays. There is not a Kashmiri, Hindu or Musalman,
who has not some of these ready on the tip of his tongue, and
who does not reverence her memory.

Little is known about her. All traditions agree that she
was a contemporary of Sayyid 'All HamadSni, the famous
saint who exercised a great influence iu converting Kashmir
to Islam. He arrived in Kashmir in A,D. 1380, and remained
there six years, the reigning sovereign being Qutbu'd-Dln
(A,D. 1377-93), 2 As we shall see from her songs, Lalla was
a Yogini, i.e. a follower of the Kashmir branch of the Saiva
religion, but she was, no bigot, and, to her, all religions were
at one in their essential elements. 3 There is hence no inherent
difficulty in accepting the tradition of her association with
Sayyid 'All, Hindus, in their admiration for their coreligionist,
go, it is true, too far when CEey assert that he received his
inspiration from her, but the Musalmans of the Valley, who
naturally deny this, and who consider him to be the great
local apostle of their faith, nevertheless look upon her with
the utmost jespect. 4

Numerous stories are current about Lalla in the Valley, but
none of them is deserving of literal credence. She is said

1 See, for instance, the Dictionary ofK&slwMri Promts and Sayings,
compiled by Mr. I Hinton Knowlea (Bombay aad London, 1885).
4 fwjah N<fo$ wd Qumes> ii. 482.
8 Compare verse 8 in the following collection.
* Of. Lawrence, f<*% of Kwhmir, p, 292,

B

t INTRODUCTION

to have been originally a married woman of respectable family.
She was cruelly treated by her mother-in-law, who nearly
starved her. 1 The wicked woman tried to persuade Lalla's
husband that she was unfaithful to him, but when he followed
her to what he believed was an assignation, he found her at
prayer. The mother-in-law tried other devices, which were
all conquered by Lalla's virtue and patience, but at length she
succeeded in getting her turned out of the house. 2 Lalla
wandered forth in rags and adopted a famous Kashmiri Saiva
saint named Sed B6y u as her Guru or spiritual preceptor.
The result of his teaching was that she herself toot the status
of a mendicant devotee, and wandered about the country
singing and dancing in a half-nude condition. When
remonstrated with for such disregard for decency, she is said
to have replied that they only were men who feared God, and
that there were very few of such about, 3 During this time
Sayyid e Ali Hamadani arrived in Kashmir, and one day she
saw him in the distance. Crying out ' I have seen a man ',
she turned and fled. Seeing a baker's shop close by, she
leaped into the blazing- oven and disappeared, being apparently
consumed to ashes. The saint followed her and inquired if
any woman had come that way, but the baker's wife, out of
fear, denied that she had seen any one. Sayyid 'Alt continued

1 Compare the Kashmiri saying:

kowj? mdran kina kath,

Lali nalwuW kali na zah.

1 Whether they killed a big sheep or a small one, it was all the same ;
Lai had always a stone for her dinner,* For, when she dined In the
presence of other people, the mother-in-law used to put a lumpy
stone on her platter and thinly cover it with rice, so that it looked
like quite a big heap. Still she never murmured. Of. K. Pr., p. 82,
and Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. 748.

2 For these, and other stories, see Panjab Nates and Queries, Lc.

8 See K. Pr. 20, quoted in full on p. 122, below. PNQ. makes
another saint, a contemporary of Sayyid *AJS named Ifota'dnJm, the
hero of the story ; but every version that we have seen or heard
elsewhere gives it as afrove. PHQ: adds that Jfffrtf d-d!% ' not to be
outdone in miracles, then disappeared on, the spot, arid affcer much
searching she found him between two platto in the form of a
diamond '. A story very similar to that given above will b$ found i&
Merutunga's Prabaitdkacintamni> where the herd is a Ksatriya
named JUgaddeva, and the traeiotked lady a dauoit
edition (1888), p> 296, and Tawaey's farans^tian, $> 18

INTRODUCTION 3

his search, and suddenly Lalla reappeared from the oven clad
in the green garments of Paradise.

The above stories will give some idea of the legends that
cluster round the name of Lalla. All that we can affirm with
some assurance is that she certainly existed, and that she
probably lived in the fourteenth century of our era, being
a contemporary of Sayyid 'All Hamadam at the time of his
visit to Kashmir. We know from her own verses 1 that she
was in the habit of wandering about in a semi-nude state,
dancing and singing in ecstatic frenzy as did the Hebrew
naMs of old and the more modern Dervishes.

No authentic manuscript of her compositions has come
down to us. Collections made by private individuals have
occasionally been put together, 3 but none is complete, and
no two agree in contents or text. While there is thus a
complete dearth of ordinary manuscripts, there are, on the
other hand, sources from which an approximately correct text
can be secured.

The ancient Indian system by which literature is recorded
not on paper but on the memory, and carried down from
generation to generation of teachers and pupils, is still in
complete survival in Kashmir. Such fleshy tables* of the
heart are often more trustworthy than birch-bark or paper
manuscripts. The reciters, even when learned Pandits, take
every care to deliver the messages word for word as they have
received them, whether they nndeistand them or not. In
such cases we not infrequently come across words of which the
meaning given is purely traditional or is even kst* A typical
instance of this has occurred in the experience of Sir George
Qtierson. In the summer ql 189 Siu Aurel Stein took down
in writing from the mouth of a professional story-teller a
collection ,'of folk-tales, which he subsequently made over to
Sir George *fbr editing and translation. In the course of
dictation,, the nam-tor, according to custom, conscientiously
words of which he did not know the sense. They

$ee> f &r instoe$ p, $ of ,i&e late Professor Bfibler'a Detailed
M*H* MftS^made, in Kabmr> %c.
collections are mentioned,

4 INTRODUCTION

were 'old words', the signification of which had been lost,
and which had been passed down to him through generations
of ustade, or teachers. That they were not inventions of the
moment, or corruptions of the speaker, is shown by the facts
that not only were they recorded simultaneously by a well-
known Kashmiri Pandit, who was equally ignorant of their
meanings, and who accepted them without hesitation on
the authority of the reciter, but that, long afterwards, at
Sir George's request, Sir Aurel Stein got the man to repeat
the passages in which the words occurred. They were
repeated by him verbatim, literatim, et pwictatim, as they had
been recited by him to Sir Aurel fifteen years before.

The present collection of verses was recorded under very
similar conditions. In the year 1914 Sir George Grierson
asked his friend and former assistant, Mahamahopadhyaya
Pandit Mukunda Rama Sastrl, to obtain for him a good copy
of the LaUd-v&kydni) as these verses of Lalla's are commonly
called by Pandits. After much search he was unable to find
a satisfactory manuscript. But finally he came into touch
with a very old Brahman named Dharma-dasa Darwesh of
the village of Gush. 1 Just as the professional story-teller
mentioned above recited folk-tales, so he made it his business,
for the benefit of the piously disposed, to recite Lalla's songs as
he had received them by family tradition (faila-paranipardcara-
irama). The MahamahSp&dhyaya recorded the text from his
dictation, and added a commentary, partly in Hindi and
partly in Sanskrit, all of which he forwarded to Sir George
Grierson. These materials formed the basis of the present
edition. It cannot claim to be founded on a collation of
various manuscripts, but we can at least say that it is an
accurate reproduction of one recension of the songs, as they
are current at the present day. As in the case of Sir Aurel
Stein's folk-tales, this text contains words and passages which
the reciter did not profess to understand. He had every
inducement to make the verses intelligible, and any conjectural

1 The Goosh of the maps. It is about thirty miles from Baramula,
and is not far from the famous shrine of Sarada. See Stein's
Translation of the Mjatarangim, ii. 280 and 288.

INTRODUCTION 5

emendation would at once have been accepted on his authority ;
but, following the traditions of his calling, he had the honesty
to refrain from this, and said simply that this was what he
had received, and that he did not know its meaning. Such
a record is in some respects more valuable than any written
manuscript.

Besides this collection, we have also consulted two manu-
scripts belonging to the Stein Collection housed in the Oxford
Indian Institute. 1 Both were written in the Sarada character.
Of these, one (No. cccxlvi of the catalogue, and referred to as
* Stein A ' in the following pages) is but a fragment, the first
two leaves and all those after the seventeenth being missing.
It is nevertheless of considerable value ; for, besides giving
the test of the original, it also gives a translation into
Sanskrit verse, by a Pandit named Rajanaka, Bhaskara, of
songs Nos. 7-49. The Kashmiri text, if we allow for the
customary eccentricities of spelling, presents no variant read-
ings of importance and is in places corrupt. We have,
therefore, not taken account of it ; but, so far as it is available,
we reproduce the Sanskrit translation under each verse of our
edition. 2

The other manuscript (No. cccxlv referred to herein as^
' Stein B ') demands more particular consideration. It contains
the Kashmiri text of forty-nine of the songs in the present
collection. The spelling is in the usual inconsequent style of
all Kashmiri manuscripts written before Isvara-kaula gave
a fixed orthography to the language in the concluding decades
of the nineteenth century, 3 and there are also, as usual, a good
many mistakes of the copyist. It is, however, valuable as
giving a number of variant readings, and because the scribe
has marked the metrical accentuation of most of the verses,
by putting the mark (I after each accented word, 4 For this
reason, and also because it gives a good example of the

1 SeeJRAS.,1912,pp.587ff.

2 Since the above was written, a complete edition of Rajanaka
Bhaskara's translation has been printed in Kashmir. It covers
altogether sixty of Lalla's verses. From this edition, tke verses miss-
ing in Stein A have been supplied.

3 Isvara-kaula's spelling is that followed in our printed text.

4 Regarding the accentual nature of Lalla's metre, see Appendix III.

6 INTRODUCTION

spelling of Kashmiri before Isvara-kaula's time, under each
verse of our text we reproduce, in the Nagarl character the
corresponding versfe, if available, of this manuscript. Except
that we have divided the words a matter which rarely gives
rise to any doubt we print these exactly as they stand in
the manuscript with all their mistakes and inconsistencies of
spelling.

The order of verses in this manuscript is different from that
of Dharma-dasa's text, and we have therefore, in Appendix IV,
given a Concordance, showing the correspondence between
the two.

Although there is not much consistency in old Kfishmlii
spelling, the following general remarks may facilitate the
reading of the text of Stein B. No attempt is made in it to
indicate the existence of mdtrd- vowels or the consequent
epenthetic changes of vowels caused by them. 1 For instance,
the word toff* (<T<j) is spelt cJcFf. and the termination -700V* (3ftj)
is spelt ^TRt As a rule, long vowels arc written in the place
of these 2^ra-vowels, the spelling of the old Prakrit from
which Kashmiri is derived being thus perpetuated. Thus, we
have just seen that u-matrd is represented by 0. Similarly,
i-matr& is represented by 5. For instance, tarn* (cjtfir) is spclt
cflfft, and totffan (cfTftcT^) is spelt ^fpfta^. Again, il-mtra
is represented by , as in foov* faff}, written ^fT^.

Kashmiri possesses a series of affricatives f fa, If *i, and
3[ za. In Isvara-kaula's system these are indicated, as shown
here, by dots put under the corresponding palatal letters.
In Stein B, on the contrary, they are indicated by the palatals
without any distinguishing mark thus ^, ^, 3f . The true
palatals are then distinguished by adding to each the letter ya.
Thus "^Ef <M, *f cte 9 and sir /a.

It is a universal rule in Kashmiri that every final surd
consonant is aspirated. Thus, rM, night, is pronounced rait,

1 In our printed text in the Roman character, these are indicated
by small letters above the line. Kvara-kaula indicates them with the
help of the sign for virama. Thus, ^, "T, ^.

INTRODUCTION 7

and in Isvara-kaulas spelling is written ^, Before his
time it was not customary to indicate this aspiration in writing,
and accordingly Stein B spells this word as ^cf x) and so on
in other cases,

Lalla's songs were composed in an old form of the Kashmiri
language/ hut it is not probable that we have them in the
exact form in which she uttered them, The fact that they
have been transmitted by word of mouth prohibits such a
supposition. As the language changed insensibly from
generation to generation, so must the outward form of
the verses have changed in recitation, But, nevertheless,
respect for the authoress and the metrical form of the songs
have preserved a great many archaic forms of expression. 2

As already said, Lalla was a devout follower of the Kashmir
school of Yoga Saivism, Very little is yet known in Europe
concerning the tenets of this form of Hinduism, and we have
therefore done our best to explain the many allusions by
notes appended to each verse. In addition to these, the
following general account of the tenets of this religion has
been prepared by Dr, Barnett, which will, we hope, throw
light on what is a somewhat obscure subject,

1 Kashmiri, as a distinct language, is much older than Lalla's time,
A still more ancient form is preserved by Kalhana (twelfth century A.D.)
in RajQ,tarangim t v, 398. See Stein's note to his translation of the
passage*

2 This matter of Lalla's language is considered at length in
Appendix II.

PBELIMINABY NOTE ON YOGA
I

1. The object of the discipline called Yoga is to emancipate
the individual soul (fwusa) from its bondage to the material
universe (prafoti). In the temprafyti is included the mental
organism, commonly styled in the Yoga-satra citta. The
emancipation is effected by a mental and bodily discipline
culminating in a spiritual transformation; in which there
comes into existence a permanent intuition revealing the
essential distinction (meka) between purvsa and prakrti
This is the state of taivalya, isolation, which is salvation.

2. The citta has five intellectual functions, rrttis. They
are: (1) pramay&i right judgement of real things; (2) vipar-
yaya, false judgement of real things ; (3) vifalpa, imagination
without corresponding reality, based on mere words ; (4) nidrd,
' sleep ', i.e. the negative action that occurs in sleep, based on
no conception of reality ; (5) mrti } memory, continuance of
connexion with an object that has been perceived. Citta, has
also five moral functions, the ktefa*, or Afflictions', viz,
(1) avidyd, primal ignorance, by which pwusa imagines itself
to be identical with the material citta; (2) amit& 9 the con-
ception of an ' I am ', egoism identifying the powers otpurufa
and matter; (3) taga^ material desire; (4) dw$a t hate;
(5) alliniveta, clinging to embodied life. The tte&u move
the subject of thought constantly to works, tarma t from
which arise samsMm and mands, mental predispositions
moving him to corresponding future works; <and so the
vicious cycle goes on in birth after birth for ever, until
salvation can be found. To gain salvation the Yogi attempts
to paralyse the five iritis of citta and wear down the Iktefas
by the various ascetic exercises included under the term atfdfya,
'eight members'. These are: (1) yama, moral discipline in

PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA 9

relation to others; (2) niyawt, moral discipline in relation to
oneself; (3) asana, suitable modes of sitting during medita-
tion ; (4) prdndydma, regulation of breathing ; (5) pratyaJiara,
retracting the sense : organs from objects of sense ; (6) d/idram,
negative fixation of citta by pinning it to an object ; (7) dhy&m,
meditation, positive fixation of citta ; (8) samddki, perfect
stillness of thought, in which all sense of individuality is
extinguished. In the course of these the Yogi is supposed to
win various miraculous powers (vibMti), in addition to the
'light of intuition 3 , prajndtika. The last three atyas col-
lectively make the stage of training called samyawa, and
culminate in the condition styled satija mnddhi, ' the stillness
of spirit with the seed', namely, the seed of future activity of
citta and consequent karma ; or what is nearly the same thing.
sampmjnata samdd/ii, stillness of spirit in which, however, the
trttb of citta are not yet paralysed. To attain the final stage,
this kind of samdd/ti has to be converted into nirteja, ' seedless ',
or asawprajndta ' unconscious ', wm&dhi. This takes place in
three phases, called nirddha-parinama, samadhi-parinama, and
eJcdgratd-parinama. In the first of these the activity of the
waking state of citta is arrested, and its rrttis are temporarily
paralysed ; in the second, the power of citta to relate itself to
manifold objects is destroyed, and its cognitions are restricted
to a single object of inward or outward perception; in the
third, the two previous conditions are combined in equal
proportion. These are permanent transformations, as a result
of which all sense of objectivity disappears from the matter of
thought, leaving only the intuition of the distinction between
purusa and pratyti, wherein the purusa shines for ever in its
perfectly pure still radiance.

II

3. From the first the method of gnosis which we have
outlined presupposed certain mystic conceptions of the natural
and spiritual world. These in course of time have become
more and more important in the Yogic systems, and have
tended to obscure the philosophical and ethical elements in

10 PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA

the primitive Yoga, They may be classified broadly under two
heads : (1) the theory of Nature and of salvation by means
thereof; (2) the practice of physical means supposed to be
efficacious in attaining the latter object. We shall now
endeavour to give a general outline of the Yogic theory of
nature in its developed form, noting in advance that it
represents only one of the various aspects which have been
assumed by Yoga, though perhaps the most important aspect.
Our exposition is based upon the following works: Siva-
samiUdy an anonymous work of some antiquity (quoted as SS.) ;
Sat-ca/cra-Mr&pana, by PurnCtnanda (quoted as SON.); and
Hatha-yoga-pracllpikd) by Svatmarama (quoted as HYP., in
the German translation by H. Walter, Munich, 1893). The
references to SS. are according to the text as published in
Sacred Boo fa of the Hindus^ Allahabad, 1914.

4. In Yogic theory the human body is conceived as a
miniature copy or replica of the world without it ; the forces
by which this microcosm is controlled at the same time
operate upon the macrocosm outside, and thus by certain
physical and mental processes the Yogi can win for himself
not only supernatural powers over his own body and mind
but also a miraculous control over the universe, culminating
in the complete translation of his soul into the highest j>hase
of Being, the Absolute (usually conceived as Supreme Siva)
for ever and ever,

5. In the human body the vertebral column is conceived as
Mount Moru, the central mountain of Hindu cosmology. As
the macrocosmic sun and moon are imagined to turn round
Meru, so we have a microeosmic sun and moon in the human
body : the moon at the top of the vertebral column and the
sun at its base (SS. II. 6-12). Among the numerous naflu
(veins or arteries: see HYP. p. iv) there are three of supreme
importance, Sutumnd, I(U> and Pityald, which descend from
the brain into the pit of the abdomen ; and HYP, (p. iii, and
text III. 113) says that between the pudendum and navel is
a'bulb' (JianAa), into which the nadfo debouch, Susumnil
is identified with Agni, fire. At the upper end of Ida ia the
moon, and they are identified ; at the lower end of Pingalii is

PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA !l

the sun, and they too are identified (SS. II. 13-20). These three
ndfju are in immediate conjunction, Ida being on the left
hand of Susumna, and Pingala on the right. Susumna rises
vertically from the pelvic region along the vertebral column
as far as the Brahma-randhra (on which see below) ; there it
bends round to the right of the Ajna circle (see below, 18)
and passes up into the left nostril. In the centre of Susumna
is a nadi called Citrd, which is said to be of five colours, and
to be the upddhi of the body, and to have the Brahma-randhra
at its upper end (SS. II. 18-19, V. 124). The Brahma-
randhra is the upper extremity of Susumna, and of the inner
nadi enclosed in Susumna.

6. SON. refines somewhat upon this theory by asserting
that inside Susumna there is a bright nddl called Vajra, and
that inside Vajia is another nadl called Citrim, which passes
through all the six circles attached to the spine, to which we
shall come presently ( 9 ff.). In the centre of Citrini is the
Brahma-nadi, a subtile duct representing pure knowledge and
bliss. At the lower mouth of Susumna is the Brahma-chara^
or 'Door of Brahma ', where are the * knots' (grantU: see
HYP. p. xvii T ). C also HYP. pp. v, vii.

7. Sometimes, to continue the analogy of microcosm to
macrocosm, Ida is identified with the Ganges, Pingala with
the Jamna, and Susumna with the Saraswatl, and the point
where they meet, at the mouth of the Brabma-randhra, is
called Trivem (Tribeni, the meeting place of the Hugfi or
Ganges, Jamna, and Saraswatl, in Hooghly District); by
daily spiritual contemplation of this union, corresponding to
the physical act of bathing at the real Tribeni, the Yogi may
win salvation for his ancestors and himself (SS. V. 103 ff.,
130 ff.). Sometimes the sacred city of Benares (Vdrdnasl) is
localized in the microcosm by styling Ida Vdrand and Pingala
Arit so tht their place of union at the Brahma-randhra is
VSranasl, the residence of Vi^vanatha, the Lord of the Universe
(SS. V. 100-1).

1 Some writers speak of three knots: the Brahma-grantU in the
Anahata-circle,_the Visnu-granthi in the Visuddha, and the Rudra-
grantU in the

12 PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA

8. The mierocosmic moon at the top of the vertebral column,
which is said to consist of eight and sometimes of sixteen
digits, is alwa}S exuding nectar, which flows downwards.
Half of this nectar passes through Ida, on the left side, and
there becomes water for the nourishment of the body. The
other half goes through Susumna into the vertebral column,
and thence down to the base of the latter, where it meets the
mierocosmic sun. This sun, which has twelve digits, casts
its rays upwards through Piiigala along the right side of the
body, and thence through the system (SS. II, 6-12, V. 145).

9. In the abdomen, in the middle of the sphere of the sun,
is the Vaisvanara fire, which effects the process of digestion
in the body (SS. II. 32-34). In the same region is situated
the first of the caJcras or circles, which are conceived as being*
of the form of lotuses, attached at intervals to Susumna (cf.
HYP. p. xiv). The first circle is the MulddMra, or simply
Adhdra, and is imagined to be a lotus of four digits in width,
situated two digits above the anus and two digits below the
penis. In the pericarp of this lotas is a triangular space
representing the yoni or female organ. On this space dwells
the Kuh-KuncMinl (or simply Kmddm\ who is the akti or
Cic-chakti, the powder of spirit, the creative force of the
phenomenal universe (cf. HYP. p. xiii). She is golden of hue,
like a streak of lightning ; when at rest, she sleeps rolled up
in three and a half coils, like a serpent, with her tail in her
mouth, inside the lower orifice of Susumna. On her left is
Ida, which coils round Susumnti and finally enters the right
nostril; on her right is Pingala, proceeding in the reverse
way upwards and debouching into the left nostril (SS. II.
21-31, V. 56 ff., 124). SCN. 5 ff. adds to these details the
information that Muladhara represents earth, and is the seat
of Brahma, and it locates the yoni (which is called Traipura ;
c below, 21) at the mouth of Vajra ( 6).

10. Kundalinl is sometimes termed Vdg-ctivl or Goddess of
Speech, the SaMi of Visnu, the mother of the three Gunas,
the Seed of Being (%'#). Over her sleeping form broods the
JLa.ma.-by a or 'seed of Love*, a bright spiritual radiance
endowed with the powers of knowledge and action, which

PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA 13

circulates through the body. This Kama-bija is also styled
Swyambhu-ttiiga, the phallic symbol of the Self-created Being
Siva (SS. V. 57-62).

11. SCN. 9-12 has a very similar account: it adds that
around the yoni there blows a red wind called Kandarpa (the
same as Kama, Love) ; in the ybni is the Svayambhu-linga,
having the hne of molten gold, and facing downwards ; above
this is Kundalinl. who is like a lotus-fibre and lightning, and
covers with her face the orifice of Susumna. It also states
that in the midst of Kundalini is Paramd Kald or Paramffivan,
or MaMprakrti) the super-subtile principle of Bliss which is
like lightning, and illuminates the universe (SON. 13).

12. The yoni and the lingo* upon it are known as the Knla
or Home, the site of the Power of Phenomenal Being : we
shall return to this anon ( 19).

13. A little distance above Multidhara, at the base of the
penis, is the second circle, Svddhisthana, conceived as a red
lotus with six petals (SS. V. 75 if.). It represents Varuna,
and is the seat of Visnu (SON. 15 ff.).

14. The third circle is Manipura, a golden lotus of ten
petals by the navel (SS. V. 79 ff.). SCN. holds that it is
blue, and that it represents Agni, and that Rudra dwells on
the inverted triangle (yoni) at its centre (SCN. 20 ff.).

15. The fourth circle is AnaJiata, a red lotus of twelve petals
situate in the heart ; in it is a flame styled Bdna-Unga (SS.
V. 83 ff.). It represents Vayu or Wind; in the double
triangle within it dwells Isana ; in the middle of this double
triangle is a yoni or triangle known as Trikond Sakt^ within
which is the golden Bana-linga, on the head of which is a
lotus of eight petals, the seat of Laksmi (SCN. 23 ff.).

16. In this lotus dwells the Pram or breath of life, 1
together with the rdsands or influences of former works upon
the soul, tfae karma thereof, and its aJiamkara or principle of
egoity (SS. III. 1-8).

1 Besides Prdna or outward breath Yoga recognizes also Apdna,
breath going downwards in the anus ; Samana^ in the navel ; Uddna
in the throat; Vyana, circulating through the body, besides some
others: SS. III. 1-8, Gh&atida-samhita, V. 60 ff. ftc.

14 PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA

17. Above Anahata, and situate in the throat, is the circle
rUufldha, a golden lotus of sixteen petals (SS. V. 90 ff.).
SCN. adds that it represents Akasa or ether, and is the
residence of Sadasiva, and ascribes to it the colour of smoke
(SCN. 29 ff.).

18. The sixth circle is AjM, a lotus of two petals between
the eyebrows, which contains the mystic force called aksara-Uja
(SS. V. 96 ff., 145 ff.). It is of the colour of the moon. In
its pericarp is the seat of Siva called Itam> in the form of a
litya, like a series of lightnings ; it is parama-hda-path, the
highest stage of the Kula, in which Siva and his consort
Sakti are half and half, anlMhg\ in mutual fusion. In it is
envisaged Paramatman, the Supreme Self, as creator of origin,
maintenance, and dissolution of the cosmos, like a halo of the
light of fire, sun, and moon. After death the Yogi who has
fixed his breaths on this seat of Visnu enters here into Param
Brahma (SCN. 34-40).

19. Above all these circles is the highest of all, Sahasrdra^
conceived as a lotus with a thousand petals, situated at the
base of the palate. On its pericarp is a reversed triangular
space or yoni, in the centre of which is the Brahma-randhra
or upper extremity of Susumna, On this yoni (or below it,
according to SS. V. 145) is the Moon, whose nectar flows
downwards through the system (SS. V. 103 ff., 122 ff.) ; its
place is within the sinus of the forehead (SS, V. 148).
Sahasrara is conceived as Mount Kailasa, the home of Siva ;
and as representing the sphere of the Absolute orTranscendental
Being, Parama-Siva or Paramsvara, as opposed to the sphere
of cosmic action or Kula, it is styled A-kula or Na-kuk.
It is thus the physical as well as the spiritual antithesis of
the Kula at the lower end of Susumna (SS. V. 151 ff.).

20. As usual, SCN. refines on this. It describes Sahasiara
as having a thousand red petals facing downward*, and con-
taining fifty letters of the alphabet from a to ha. It contains
the full moon without the hare (our e man in the moon '), and
in its central yoni the Yogi should contemplate the Void
(SCN. 42 ff.). In the void of tinayOni is the sixteenth digit
of the Moon ; it is called Ama or And ; it is like lightning,

PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA 15

and is thin as one-hundredth part of a lotus-fibre ; it conveys
the nectar flowing from Sahasrara. Inside Ama is the digit
Nirvana, which is fine as a thousandth part of a hair, curved
like the new moon, bright as twelve suns, the tutelary deity
(adhidaivata] of living creatures. In the middle of Nirvana
is Apurvcniirvdna-fakti, which is thin as the ten-millionth part
of a hair and bright as ten million suns, the creator of the
threefold world and dispenser of the knowledge of Brahma,

the life of all creatures. Inside this Apurva-nirvana is the

/ * *

Siva-pada or seat of Siva, or Pararh Brahma, also called
Hamsa-stlidna, the Swan's Home, the revelation of salvation
and state of eternal bliss (SON. 48-51).

21. As the object of metaphysical contemplation is to merge
the individual soul into the absolute All-Spirit, so the object
of Yogic contemplation is to absorb the Kundalini in the
microcosm, representing the macrocosmic Energy, into Saha-
srara, typifying the Absolute, whereby the Cosmos is merged
into the infinite bliss of Paramesvara. In order to effect this
transit of Kundalini through Snsumna and the Brahma-randhra
into Sahasrara, the ndtjls must, by the exercise of prfinAyHma,
be blocked up with air introduced into them by inspiration
(p&raka) and retained in them (kumbJiaka) \ l the normal
circulation of the air through the system, which causes the
continuance of the soul's imprisonment in the body, is arrested
by this stoppage of the air. Then Kundalini, when she has
been aroused to sufficient energy by mystic exercises, passes
up through Susumna", bursting the eight knots ( 6) that bind
the naclu, and enters through the Brahma-randhra into
Sahasrara, the realm of the Absolute (SS. V. 127 ). But
long training is needed before Kundalini can be stimulated to
this supreme effort. An earlier stage of the training is passed
in MuIMhara. The Yogi after taking a deep inspiration fixes
his thought, upon the lotus of Muladhara and compresses the
yoni in it, meditating upon Kama, the Spirit of Love, who
dwells in the yoni, and conceiving in the flame above it a
union as Siva and Sakti. Then Kundalini, styled Tripura

1 The final expiration of this retained air is called recaJca.

16 PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA

as comprising the three principles fire, sun, and moon, begins
to rise in Susnmna, and after drinking the nectar streaming
down it returns to the Kula (SS. IV. 1-5, V. 61 ft). Mudras,
or various postures of the body, are practised in order to
increase mechanically the activity of Kundalinl. These
methods, with further contemplation of the higher circles up
to Ajna, stimulate Kundalinl to such a degree that in the
last stage the Yogi is able to bring her up into Sahasrdra.
By long practice his citta-vrktis (activities of the material
organ of thought) become absorbed in the Akula, the Absolute ;
his sawdcUii becomes one of perfect stillness. Drinking the
lunar nectar of Sahasrtira, he overcomes Death (cosmic, con-
ditioned being) and the Kula (SS. V, 151 ff.),

22. SON. 52 instructs the Yogi, after due practice of the
yamas and niyamas (above, 2) and spiritual purification, to
stimulate Kundalinl to burst the Svnyambhu-lihga, and
to bring her with the sound of the mystic syllable Inm to the
Brahma-dvara ( 6), in the centre of Muladhara. She then
bursts the liiigas in Anilhata and Ajna, and at the Brahrna-
randhra unites with Parama-Siva, shining like a bright
thread of lightning. The Yogi should bring her together
with his soul (jlvdtwan) into Sahasrara, and there contemplate
her as supreme and as Caitanya, spirit. When she has there
drunk the red nectar from Siva, she returns to Mulficllwra by
the way whereby she came. Then he should make a libation
of this nectar to the deities of the cosmos, whereby he obtains
immunity from future birth and assurance of absorption into
the Infinite.

23. Yoglc writers often dwell upon the phenomena of the
Nada. Of the cosmological significance of this term we shall
speak below ( 24) ; here we need only notice its physical
aspect, in which it signifies the mystic sound,or anaJiata-dhvani)
heard by the Yogi in the Susumnil in the interior tf his body.
Several varieties of this Nada are mentioned in HYP. IV. 69 if.
The first of them is the sound caused in the ether of the
heart when the exercise of prdndydma ( 2) has loosened the
Irahma-granlJti or knot of Brahma in the Anahata- circle.
Sometimes the sound is identified with the mystic syllable Ow,

PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA 17

Probably the idea was suggested by the noise heard on closing
the ears with the hands, to which HYP. IV. 82 refers.

24. Yogic works, in common with the Tantras, often refer
to a theory of cosmogony of which the leading idea is as
follows. The Purusa,, Absolute Spirit, Para Siva, or Brahma,
and the Prakrti, identified with the Supreme Sakti, are
eternally coexistent. Like Purusa, Prakrti is to be conceived
as both unqualified and qualified; through Her universal
presence as the principle of cosmic Bliss, Purusa reveals
Himself in all finite being. Essentially they are two in one
and one in two. Creation begins when from Him as affected
by Her, i.e. as nwkala, there issues the primal Bindu or f drop '
(the dot representing the final nasal sound at the end of the
mystic syllable Orh). The same idea is sometimes expressed
more fully by the statement that Prakrti by contact with
Purusa becomes spiritualized (cin-mdtra), and in an effort
towards creation She becomes solidified and changes into the
primal Bindu. In the latter Siva and Sakti exist together in
an as yet undissolved union, shrouded in the bonds of Maya,
bearing the potentialities of cosmic creation, continuance, and
dissolution. It is imagined as existing in the form of a grain
of gram or pulse in the Sahasrara of the microcosm (see
above, 19), where it composes the Void ( 20) or Brahma-
pada there. This primal Bindu under the influence of
Time, according to some divides itself into three, a gross or
seminal Bindu, the germ of the material universe, a subtle
Bindu which contains the gums or modes of matter (the
well-known Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas), which is termed Nada,
and a supreme Bindu. Nada literally means 'sound', and
denotes or is denoted by the semicircle under the binclu or dot
on the syllable Om ffir). From the Bindu as it thus
divides itself arises an inarticulate sound styled Sabda-
Brahma-n, ' Speech-Brahman ', from which emerge, according
to some, the three cosmic Powers of Knowledge, Will, and
Action: others derive from it the genesis of the material
principle of the finite universe, Mahat or Buddhi, and its
evolutes. The theories of cosmic evolution that are connected
with all this are extremely complicated and obscure, and

o

18 PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA

hardly repay study. But it may be well to call attention to
the similar theory of the ^aiva Siddhanta, one school of which
teaches that from Pure Maya emanates Nada (Vak), the
elemental sound or Logos, and from Nada the Bindu or
cosmic germ, from which are successively evolved the principles
of the finite universe ; in this theory Siva includes the Trinity
consisting of Pati, Pah, and Pa$a, or ' Lord ', ' Herd ', and
'Bond', i.e. Supreme Being, souls bound in the fetters of
finitude, and the three forces binding them, which are Maya,
Anaia or Avidyti, the power of darkness obscuring the native
light of the soul, and Karma, the mechanical influence of
former works upon present experience. Pure Maya is almost
the same conception as that of Sakti as explained above,

25. So far we have dealt with Nada and Bindu in their
general macrocosmical aspects, but they also play a prominent
role in the microcosm of the individual. The following account
is taken from the tiiva-wtra-wmrvini 1 of Ksemaraja, "WV
have seen ( 9) that Kundaliiu, or Sakti, resides within the
Muladhara, ordinarily sleeping rolled up in coils like a
serpent. This serpent-like Kundalini surrounds the micro-
cosmic Supreme, who is in the shape of a minute dot of
light. The first stage towards enlightenment occurs when
a man obtains glimpses of this dot of light. By this
the dot is set in motion, and rouses the Kundalini, or
Sakti, from her sleep. She wakes with a great sound
(nada) and becomes conscious. The soul is thus illuminated
by a flash of the supreme light of consciousness. The Sakti,
being merely the immanent aspect of the Supreme, is identical
with Him. It is this flash of light, or Undu, and this sound
of Sakti, or ndtk, that are mystically represented by tho
mlda-binclu of the syllable dm, written ^, with anmmika (*),
of which the dot represents the Mtulu, and the semicircle the
ndda. By a further extension of the metaphor, this nuda-biwtu
is thus considered to be a representation of the Ultimate
Supreme.
26. Inasmuch as the divine Sakti reveals herself in sound,

3 A translation of this work by P. T. Shrinivas lyetigar Las been
published in the Indian Thought Series, Allahabad, 1912.

PRELIMINARY NOTE ON YOGA 19

Word or Logos, tlie elements of speech, namely the syllables
and their combinations, have a profound mystic significance
in Saiva doctrine. Hence there has arisen a copious literature
on the mysteries of the letters of the alphabet and their
groupings in spells (mantras), of which some idea may be
gathered from the paper * On the Sarada Alphabet * in Journ.
Royal Asiatic Society, October, 1916.

27. Appendix. In the preface to the translation of SS. in
the Sacred JBoofa of the Hindus it is suggested that the catrux
and other terms of Yogic anatomy correspond more or less to
real parts of the human body, and the following identifications
are proposed :

dim : the grey matter of the spinal cord.

Brahma-randhm : the central canal of the spinal cord (but
by modern Hindus identified with the anterior fontanelle).

Mulddha/ra : the sacral plexus.

Haniptim : the epigastric plexus.

Ana/iata : the cardiac plexus.

Fifadd&a : the laryngeal or pharyngeal plexus.

Ajm : the cavernous plexus.

Sakawdm : the medulla oblongata.

Susumnd : the spinal cord.

Ida : the left sympathetic cord.

Pingata : the right sympathetic cord.

INDEX TO THE NOTE ON YOGA

[References are to paragraph. If a word occurs more than once, tlw
more important references (if any) are in italics, and precede the
others,]

abhinive^a, 2.

caitanya, 22.

Absolute, The, 21.

cakra, 9; 27. Cf. circle.

Absolute Being, The, 19.

cic-chakti, 9.

Absolute Spirit, The, 24.
adhara, 9.

cin-matra, 24.
circle, 9; 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19.

adhidaivata, 20.

Cf. cakra.

Agni,5, 14, Cf-fire,

citra, 5 ; anatomical identifi catio n ,

ahanakara, 16.

27.

ajna (circle), 18; anatomical

citrinJ, 6.

identification, 27; 5, 7 note,

citta,' 1, 2,

21, 22.

citta-vrtti, 2; 21.

akasa, 17. Cf. ether.

aksara-bija, 18.

dharana, 2.

akula,^; 21.

dhyiina, 2.

ama, 20.

digit of the moon, 8, 20.

ana, 20.

dvesa, 2.

anahata (circle), 15; anatomical

identification, 27 ; 7 note, 17,

ekagratti-pariniima, 2.

22, 23.

ether, 23. CUkak

anahata-dhvani, 23.

anga, 2.

fire, 21. Cf.Agni.

anava, 24.

apana, 16 note.

Ganges, 7.

apurva-nirvana-sakti, 20.

gi-anthi, 6, 7 note, 23. Cf. knot.

ardhatigi, 18.'

guna, 10, 24.

asamprajnata samadhi, 2.

asana, 2.

harhsa-sthana, 20.

asi, 7.

asmita, 2.

ida (nadi), 5; 7, 8, 9 ; anatomical

astanga, 2.

__ identification, 27,

avidya, 2, 24.

I^ana, 15.

itara, 18.

bana-linga, 15.

blja, 10, 18.

Jamna, 7.

bindu, 24, 25.

jivatman, 22.

Brahma t 9, 23, 24.

brahma-dvara, 6, 22.

Eailasa, 19.

brahma-granthi, 7 note, 23.

kaivalya, 1.

brahma-nadi, 6.

kama, 11, 21.

brahma-pada, 24.

kama-bija, 10.

brahma-randhra, 5; anatomical

kanda, 5.

identification, 27 ; 7, 19, 21.

Kandarpa, 11,

buddhi, 24.

karma, \ 24 ; 16.

INDEX TO THE NOTE ON YOGA

21

klesa, 2.

knots, 6, 21 5 23. Of. granthi.

kula, 12-, 18,19,21.

kula-kundalim, 9.

kumbhaka, 21.

kundalini, 9\ 11,21,22,25.

Laksmi, 15.

linga, 12, 15, 18, 22.

Logos, 24, 26.

mahaprakrti, 11.

mahat, 24.

manipura (circle), 14 ; anatomical

identification, 27.
maya, 24.
Meru, 5.

moon, 5, 8, 19, 20,21.
mudra, 21.
muladhara (circle), 5, 21 ; ana-

tomical identification. 27; 13,

22, 25.

nada, (physical aspect) 23, (cosino-

logical aspect) 24 ; 25.
nada-bindu, 25.
nadi, 5; 6,21.
na-kula, 19.
nectar (from moon), 8, 19, 21,

22

nidra, 2.

nirbija samadhi, 2.
nirodha-parinania, 2.
nirvana (digit), 20.
nirvana-sakti, 20.
niskala, 24.
niyama, 2, 22.

6m, 23, 24.

parama kala, 11.
parama-kula-pada, 18.
FaramaSiva, 19,22.'
Paramatman, 18.
Param Brahma, 18, 20.
Paramesvara, 19, 21.

Para Siva, 24.

parinama, 2.

pasa, 24.

pasu, 24.

pati, 24.

pingala (nadi), 5; 7, 8, 9; ana-

tomical identification, 27.
prajnaloka, 2.

prakrti, 1 ; 24.
pramana, 2.
prana, 16.

pranayama, 2 ; 21, 2S.
pratyahara, 2.
puraka, 21.
purusa, 1 ; 2, 24.

raga, 2.
rajas, 24.
recaka, 21 note.
Rudra, 14.
rudra-granthi, 7 note.

sabda-brahman, 24.

sablja samadhi, 2.

Sadasiva, 17.

sahasrara (circle), 19, 20; ana-
tomical identification. 27; 21,

, 22, 24.

Sakti, 9- 10, 15, 18,20, 21, 24,
25.

samadhi, 2; 21.

samadhi-parinarna, 2.

samana, 16 note.

samprajnata samadhi, 2.

sarhskara, 2.

samyama, 2.

Saraswati, 7.

sattwa. 24.

feva, 4, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24.

siva-pada, 20.

srnrti, 2.

soul, 22.

sun, 5, 8, 9, 21.

Supreme Sakti, 24.

Supreme Self, 18.

Supreme Siva, 4.

susumna (na<Ji), 5; 7, 8, 9, 11, 19,
21; anatomical identification,
27.

svayarnbhu-liaga, 10, 11, 22.

svadhisthana (circle), 13.

tamas, 24.
traipura, 9.

Transcendental Being, 19.
Trikona ^akti, 15.
Tripura, 21.
Triveni, 7.

udana, 16 note,
upadhi, 5.

Vag-devi, 10.

22 INDEX TO THE NOTE ON YOGA

vaisvanara, 9.
vajra (nadi), 6, 9.
vak, 24.
Varana, 7.
Varanasi, 7.
Yarana, 13.
vasana, 2; 16.
Vayu, 15.

vertebral column, 5.
vibhuti, 2.
vikalpa, 2,
vlparyaya, 2.
Yismi, 13, 18.

vIsnu-grantM, 7 note*

Tisnu-Sakti, 10.

vi^uddha (circle), 17 ; anatomical

Identification, 27 ; 7 note,
Visvanatha, 7,
viveka, 1.
void, 20, 24.
yrttl, 2.
vyana, 16 note a

yama, 2 ; 22.

yoni, 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 19, 20,

21.

ERRATUM.

Page 131, 1. 3 from bottom, after eorebrals add and dental*

LALLA-VAKYANI

i.

alliyotf savikds laye wot/tti
gagana* sagm myul u $ami tratd

$Mn gol* ta andmay motti
yuhuy wSpadesb ekuy, bat A !

2.

w&kh mam* kol-ak&l no, ate
&A$pi mudri ati mpravesli

rozan ihworih&Pth nd ate
mgf^yey ku& fa my wopadesh

[Eajanaka Bliaskara's Sanskrit translation of 1 and 2.

abJiyasena layam mte dnye Sunyatvam agate
sdhirupam Sisyate tac chdnte Smye *py andmayam
van mdnasaffl, ca tanmudre Swaxaktl kuldhile
yatra sarvam idam Imam upadeSan param t% tat

(Fw)'m the printed edition.)

The following is the test of 1 and 2 in Stein B :

. L

HT

|T II ^M II
fT srf^T II

ff^^r irfir irf?r

8 rwrr ^ ^ n
ii

24 LALLA-VAKYANI [1, 2.

1. When by repeated practice (of yoga) tlie whole
expanse (of the visible universe) hath ascended to
absorption ;

When the qualified (universe) hath become
merged within the Ether ;

When the ethereal Void itself hath become
dissolved, then naught but the Weal hath remained.

The true doctrine, Brahmana, is but this
alone.

2, There is there no word or (thought of) mind.
There is there no non-transcendent or transcendent.

Not by vow of silence, not by mystic attitudes,
is there entry there.

Not there dwell Siva and his Sakti.

If there remaineth somewhat, that is what the
doctrine teacheth.

1. The universe is here called ' that which has wide
expanse', i.e. the wide expanse of creation. In the
consciousness of the devotee who has attained to en-
lightenment it is recognized as being really an illusive
emanation from the Supreme, and this recognition causes,
to the consciousness of the devotee s its reabsorption in
Him. Before the absorption of the universe, it has
qualities.

Gagan, the sky, means the wide expanse of empty
space, and, hence, the principle of dMfa, ethereality, or
of vacuity, with which it is identified in the third line.
UratJi is the splash of water upon water, and, just as
water falling with a splash into water is utterly united
with that into which it falls, so the perception of the
visible world is, as it were, at one splash, lost in and
becomes one with the Void, This Void is not the
ultimate Supreme, but is the first stage in His apparent
evolution, in which he associates Himself with Mdyd, or
cosmic illusion, and thereby becomes subjected to limited
individual experience. For further particulars, see the
Note on Yoga, 24 and Vocabulary, s. v. shun.

Transcending this stage, the soul loses all consciousness
of limited individuality, and becomes absorbed in the

3, 4.] LALLAA r AKYANI 25

Supreme as unlimited pure consciousness and nothing-
else. This it is that is the aim of the devotee.

2. 'There', i.e. in the Supreme. The kol> or family
(Sanskrit kula), is the group consisting of the jwa
(individual soul), prakrtl (primal matter), space, time,
ether, earth, water, fire, and air. The akol is that which
transcends these. Hence, kol-akol means the totality of
all creation, or the visible creation and that which
transcends it. For the transcendental meaning of these
words, see Note on Yoga, 12, 19.

Vows of silence and the like do not lead directly to
Him. The utmost they can do is to lead the mind to
that knowledge of the Supreme which brings it into
union with Him.

The, c somewhat', i.e. the ineffable Supreme, is not
even Siva and his Sakti, or energic power, for these
have form and name, while the Supreme has neither.

3.

Lai loli drdyes lola re

&M(ldn Itibtum dfri kyoli rath
wuchum pawl it Ji panani gare

suy me rot u ma$ uec/tatur tu> &dth

4.

damah dam kor u mas daman Ji ale

prazalyom dlpli to, nanyeyetn zath
and a rjt/'um u prakdsh mbar bliolum

gati rotnm to, kur'^mas thaph

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation of E and 4.

lalldhau nirgata dumm anrestttm Mikaram v'Mum
Ih'rantw labdho mayd svasmin delte dew grfo st/iitak
tataJi pi dnddirodhem $rajvdtya jndnacMpikdm
sphutati drsto mayd tatra citisvartipo nirdmayah

(From the, printed edition.)]

8. With passionate longing did I, Lalla, go forth.
Seeking and searching did I pass the day and
night.

26 LALLA-VAKYANI [5.

Then, lo, saw I in mine own house a learned
man,

And that was my lucky star and my lucky
moment when I laid hold of him.

4. Slowly, slowly, did I stop my breath in the

bellows-pipe (of my throat).

Thereby did the lamp (of knowledge) blaze up

within me, and then was my true nature revealed

unto me.

I winnowed forth abroad my inner light,

So that, in the darkness itself, I could seize (the

truth) and hold it tight

In these two verses Lalla relates her own spiritual
experiences.

3. She had wandered fruitlessly far and wide in search
of the truth. In other words, she had made pilgrimages
to holy places, and sought for salvation through formal
rifces, but all in vain. Then suddenly she found it in
her own home, i.e. in her own soul. There she found
her own Self, which became to her the equivalent of
a gmU) or spiritual preceptor, and she learned that it and
the Supreme Self were one.

4. Suppression of breath is one of the most necessary
yoga exercises. See Note on Yoga, 21, and Vocabulary
s. vv. nodi and joraw, 2. Lalla compares the air-passages
to the pipe of a bellows, by gently compressing which the
feeble light of a lamp is allowed to blaze up. Otherwise
it would be blown out.

It was the light, not the lamp, which she winnowed
forth abroad. That is to say, the light which had at
first burnt dimly in the inmost recesses of her soul, now
suffused her whole being.

5.

par toy pan yew! 1 torn* mftP

yfytf fiyuv u w6n u flen kytfi rath
yemittay advy* man tSpoto*

tamiy clytithuy mra-gwu-imth

8.] LALLA-VAKYANI 27

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation,

dtmd paro dinam rdtrir yasya sarvam idam samam
bkdtam advaitamanasas tena c/nto 'mar&varak

(From the printed edition,)
The following is the text of Stein B :

err

The MS. numbers this 20 by error.]

He who hath deemed another and himself as
the same,

He who hath deemed the day (of joy) and the
night (of sorrow) to be alike,

He whose mind hath become free from duality,

He, and he alone, hath seen the Lord of the
Chiefest of gods.

Duality is the considering God and nature to be
distinct. The true believer, who c sees God ', is one who
recognizes that God is all in all, and that all creation,
and all experiences, are but modes of Him. For the
curious expression sura-guru-nath for 'the Supreme', see
Vocab, s. v. guru.

6.

yimav kyun u tlm zlwanfi \
wkemis samsdranis pdnhes
" atof ganjdt *kith-*Atfi Ai$

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit transktion.

ciddnando jndnarupah prakdsdMyo nwdmayah
yaw labdJio dekavanto 9 pi muktas te *nye 'nyatkd stkltdk
(From the printed edition.)

28 LALLA-VAKYANI [7.

The following is tlie text of Stein B :

II cf .

ii

spfjl

They who have gained experience of the Know-
ledge-light, of that Self which is compact of pure
spirit and of bliss,

They, while yet alive, have gained release (from
earthly births).

But, to the tangled net of continual rebirth,

Have ignorant fools added knot by knot in
hundreds.

Parama Siva, the Supreme Self, has two aspects, as
the Siva-fattwa and the Sukti-taUwa. The former is
pure Spirit, the pure light of Intelligence, without
anything to shine upon. The latter is perfect Bliss, th<-
supremest Self-satisfaction, absolute Rest. The ideas of
pure Spirit and Bliss therefore comprise the whole idea
of the Supreme Deity. The object of the devotee is to
gain a perfect knowledge of Him, and to recognize that
He is the Absolute Self of all things. The ' ignorant
fools' are those who have not acquired this knowledge,
and who are therefore born and reborn again. Set>
Kashmir SJiaivkm, pp. 62, 64.

7.

natha, I napau na par zdnnm*

saddy* 1 I6dum yih kodeh f
% l k Lo/i lok Wi myul u na zomm
&h km lok kvssa chuh sand eh
* V.I. na parzouum
f V. 1. saddy* gtirum yekity deh

[RajSnaka Bhaiskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A. 1
1 See p. 5.

7.J LALLA-VAKYANI 29

natha na tvam w cdtmdpljmto
svasyalkyam ca tmya t&ia ka, dvdm itl
(MS. has svasyaikath,)
The following is the text of Stein B :

7. Lord, I have not known myself or other than
myself.

Continually have I mortified this vile body.

That Thou art I, that I am Thou, that these are
joined in one I knew not.

It is doubt to say, 'Who am I?' and 'Who art
Thou?'

Or, if we adopt the alternative readings :

Lord, I have not recognized myself (as one with
Thee).

Continually have I shown affection for this
single body.

That Thou art I, &e., as above.

An impassioned declaration of the oneness of the Self
with the Supreme Sel Lalla declares that in her
ignorance she has not known the true relation of herself
to others. In other words, she has clung to the con-
ception of her personal identity, and been ignorant of the
real nature of her Self, as only one manifestation of
the Supreme. She has worn her body out by attempting
to gain salvation by good works, not recognizing that
these lead only to further transmigrations and are all in
vain. The only hope of salvation is the recognition of
the identity of her Self with the Supreme. To wonder
who I am, and who He is, i.e. to doubt this identity,
is indeed the fatal doubt of doubts.

In the alternative text, the meaning is much the same,
though couched in somewhat different language

30 LALLA-VAKYANI [8, 9.

8.

Skiv wd KesJiev wd Zin wd

Kamalaza-ndtk ndm dorm yuk
ml abali ko&tan Ikaioa-rnz
i wa mil wd sufi

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

m m o vd Icexavo vdpijino vd druhino 'pi vd

m math cikitsatu,

The following is the text of Stein B :

ftf

Let Him bear the name of Siva, or of Ke6ava ?
or of the Jina, or of the Lotus-born Lord, whatever
name he bear,

May he take from me, sick woman that I am,
the disease of the world,

Whether He be he, or he, or he, or he.

By whatever name the worshipper may call the
Supreme, He is still the Supreme, and He alone can
give release. Kesava means Visnu; by the name of
f Jina' is indicated both a * Jina', the Saviour of the
Jains, and also the Buddha. I suspect that here it is
confused with the Arabic Jinn, the 'genius' of the
Arabian nights. The Lotus-born Lord is Brahma.

9.

idn gol u toy prakd$h dv zune
tender gol* toy motuy Uth
iWi gol* toy l$k-ti nd kune

gay lliur Ihuwak mar vemrzith-L, .
* V. L swar mlitk ta

9,] LALLA-VAKYANI 31

[Rajanaka Bha,skara's Sanskrit translation from Stein A.

Ikanau naste kdsate candraUmtam

tasmia nade kafale cittam eva
elite naste drtyajatau ksanena

jQrtkvgdMda'ih g&cchati kvdpi sarwm

The following is the text of Stein B :

TH

<n

X

f^^^f^ll ^ ll]

When the sun disappeared, then came the
moonlight ;

When the moon disappeared then only mind
remained ;

When (absorbed in the Infinite) mind disap-
peared, then naught anywhere was left ;

Earth, ether, and sky all took their departure.

Or, if we take the variant reading, the last line would
run :

Then whither did earth, ether, and sky go off
(absorbed) together (in vacuity) ?

Regarding this verse, see Vocab. s.v. wm. The moon
and the sun represent, respectively, the uppermost and
lowest seats of action, or cobras. When, by intense
mental absorption, or yoga, these disappear, or cease to
be present to consciousness, the devotee is conscious of
the existence of nothing except his thinking faculty or
mind. 7 When this is finally absorbed in the Supreme,
all sense of difference between the individual spirit and
the Universal Being is sunk in the all-consuming con-
sciousness of All-Being, All-Light. See Note on Yoga,
5,21.

32 LALLA-VAKYANI [10.

10.
tooth rainyfc! arkm saMar

atJie al-pal wakhur
yod^wanay zanakh parama-pad akher
JiuJn kJwstf-khor kMa

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation from Stein A.
uUidlia xdktikastri tvam pujay&am surdclibldh
yadijndtam aksamm tat twyd iendpl kd ksatih
(MS. has jnanctm, corrected tojfiatam.)

The following is the text of Stein B :

TfT W^ II fffTJ

The last line has been corrected in the MS., and this is what seems
to be intended. But the reading is unintelligible, and very doubtful.
A better reading will be found in verse 77.]

Arise, Lady, set out to make thine offering,

Bearing in thy hand wine, flesh, and cates.

If thou know the syllable that is itself the
Supreme Place,

Thou (wilt also know that) if thou violate the
custom it is all the same. What loss is there
therein ?

The lady is a diligent worshipper of Siva, with all
the necessary rites, and is apparently a follower of the
left-handed sect, that consumes wine and flesh, and
performs less reputable acts as a part of worship, which
are not consonant with regular Hindu dcdra^ or custom.

Lalla points out that the violation of her Hindu
custom, by the performance of these Kaula sacraments,
is unobjectionable, or, indeed, praiseworthy, provided she
knows the mystic syllable om, regaroling which, see
verse 15. The 'lady' is probably the Sakti abiding in
the speaker's own body; see Note on Yoga, 9. Cf.
verse 77.

11. J LALLA-VAKYANI 33

11.

tantfPr gali toy manth a r mo&e

wjanM a r gd u toy motuy keth
feeth gol u toy Iceli-ti nd kune

slimes shmdk mlith gauv

[Rdjanafca Bliaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

tantram sarvaw llyate mantra eva

mantras citle Uy&te nddanmlah
citte line llyate sarvam eva

drfyam drastd sisyate citsvarupaJi

(MS. mantrali citte and citsuruyali.)

The following is the text of Stein B :
ffT TT^^pft

err ^f% ^gprr n

cTT

(This is a mixture of Nos, 1 and 11.)

Holy books will disappeai*, and then only the
mystic formula will remain.

When the mystic formula departed, naught but
mind was left.

When the mind disappeared naught was left
anywhere,

And a void became merged within the Void.

In its general lines, this closely agrees with, verse 9.
The void is the apparent material world, which is really
empty nothingness, and, when tinal release is attained,
its apparent existence disappears in the Great Transcen-
dental Void, regarding which, see Note on Yoga, 24,
verse 1, and the Vocabulary s.v. Mn. Lalla is fond of
the expression in the last line, and repeats it in verses 30
and 69.

34 LALLA-VAKYANI [12,13.

12.

IWi karith rdjy plieri no,

clitk karitk tmpti no, man
luba vend zw man nd

znvont u man toy suy cJiuy jndn

{Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.
datur maim trpyati nazva rajyaih

dattva grakUm ca fad eva labdhvd
jlw '$i lobhena na mrfyum eti
mrtasya naivdsfi kijatu mrtyuh

The following is the text of Stein B :

TT

ii ^ u]

If thou take and rule a kingdom, even then is
there no respite.

And if thou give it to another, still in thy heart
is no content.

But the soul that is free from desire will
never die.

If, while it is yet alive, it die, then that alone
is the true knowledge.

Praise of freedom from desire. The gain or the
abandonment of power gives no true respite from care.
Only freedom from desire brings content. A man does
not grasp the true knowledge till he understand that,
even while alive, he should be as one dead (i. e. free from
all desire). Cf. verse 87.

13.

yimay sM ie timay sheh me

Shyama-galti ! toye v&n, tofts
yuhuy len abeda M ta me

Wi zhwi moml boh sliey*

13.] LALLA-VAKYANI 35

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.
yad eva sat&am U clem tad eva ca mama prab/io
niyoktd tu niyojydham tasydstity dvayor IMdd

The following is the text of Stein B :

ftr

11

eTT fall

^ 11]

God of the dark blue throat ! As Thou hast
the six, so the same six have I.

And yet, estranged from Thee, into misery have
I fallen.

Only this discord was there, that, though betwixt
Thee and me there was no difference,

Thou wast the Lord of six, while I by six was
led astray.

Siva is said to have a dark blue throat from the legend
of the churning by which the gods extracted immor-
tality-giving nectar from the ocean. The first to come
up in the churning was the deadly Kalakuta poison, which
was swallowed by Siva to prevent its doing any further
harm. The poison dyed his neck dark blue.

Hindu philosophy has numerous groups of six. The
Supreme Deity has six attributes, viz. omniscience, con-
tentment, knowledge of the past from eternity, absolute
self-sufficiency, irreducible potency, and omnipotence.
Lalla exclaims that, though she knew it not, she, as
really one with Him, also had these six. But, in her
ignorance, while the Supreme was ever master of these
six, she was misled by another six. This other six is
capable of various interpretations. They may be the six
* enemies', viz. sexual desire, wrath, desire, arrogance,
delusion, and jealousy ; or they may be the six human
infirmities, or the six periods of human life, or the six
changes in life, for all of which see the Vocabulary,
s. v. sheh>

D2

36 LALLA-VAKYANI [14, 15.

14.

Skw gur u toy Keskfa paldnas

Brahma pdyirin icolases
yogi yoga-kali parzdnes

his clev as&wawdr f$(7i cedes*

* V.I. <#&

15.

andJiaili kha-swaruph shumhy
ye% nav na lo&^n na guth a r ta rupJi

a7iam-vimar$/ie ndda-linduy yes won*
Miy (lev ashmwarpeth cedes*

* V. I. ceres

[Rajanaia Bhaskara'a Sanskrit translation of 14 and 15 in Stein A,

wro 'foali kexav&s tasya, paryanam dtmab/iMS tailm
pddayantram tatra yoyyah mil ka iti me vada
andliatal khasvarupah sunyast&o mgat&mayali
awdmartipavarnQ 'jo nadavindmtmako 'pi saJi

(MS. has anam&mmojb rupo. We follow the printed edition.)
The following is the text of 14 and 15 in Stein B :

II fT^t^ II
^\^ II ftg ^K II ^0 II]

14. Siva is the horse. Zealously employed upon
the saddle is Visnu, and, upon the stirrup, Brahma.
The Yogi, by the art of his y5ga, will recognize
who is the god that will mount upon him as the
rider.

15.] LALLA-VAKYANI 37

15. The ever-unobstructed sound, the principle of
absolute vacuity, whose abode is the Void,

Which hath no name, nor colour, nor lineage,
nor form,

Which they declare to be (successively trans-
formed into) the Sound and the Dot by its own
reflection on itself,

That alone is the god that will mount upon him.

Siva here is not, like Visnu and Brahma, the personal
deity. He is the ' Siva-tattva', the first phase of the
Supreme in the universe. The Yogi understands that
this is but a manifestation of a deeper Reality of the
Absolute Spirit. He is, as it were, hut the horse upon
which the Supreme rides. The Supreme is described
under various mystical names in verse 15. He is the
unobstructed sound, the sacred syllable QM, which,
once uttered, vibrates in perpetuity (see Vocabulary, s.v.
anahath). His essence is the kha t or sky, i.e. ethereality
(cf. verse 1), whose home is in the Void conceived to
exist in the Sahasmra, in the sinus of the forehead of the
microcosm (cf. again verse 1, and also note on Yoga,
20, 24) ; nothing whatever can be predicated concerning
Him. The ' Sound and the Dot' refer to the theory
regarding the first stage of enlightenment. The Supreme
resides in a man's siibtile body in the form of a minute
dot of light, surrounded by coils of His Para SaM, or the
Supreme Energy. When by yoga, or intense abstract
meditation on the Ego, the man gets his first glimpse of
this dot, the Litter is set in motion, and the Paid Bakti
is roused, and awakes with a loud cry. For further par-
ticulars, see note on Yoga, 23, 24, 25,

The commentator quotes the following lines on the
sacred syllable dm, which illustrates what is said above;
iikto ya esa ucedras tatra yd '*a& sphuran Mitah \
avyaktdnulcrti-praijd dhwanir varnah $a katfyate \\
ndsyofadr&yitd kaxcit pratihantd na vidyate \
swayam uccarabe (Uvah prdmndm urasi sthitak \\
eko wddtmako varnah sarva-varndvibhdga-vm \
so 'n-astam-ita-rtipatwad andhata iJi$ditah \\
That spoken utterance which continues vibrating there
(i.e. at the point of utterance), a sound that mostly has
the semblance of inarticulateness, is the syllable (vn)>

38 LALLA-VAKYANI [16.

There is no one who causes it to be uttered, and no
one who checks it. The God dwelling in the human
breast utters it Himself.

This one syllable consisting of the Nada and containing
all syllables without distinction, is here called * unob-
structed ' because its nature is imperishable.

16.

titri sdil kJwt u toy ture

Mmi tr a h gay ben al&i vimarsM
feaUavye-rav Mti sab same

Shiwa-may faird&ar

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

mayajdAyavh taj jadam lodfiamycwh
satiif.rty&kJiyau tad glianaimm Ji imam ca

cifsiiryo 'minpSdilo tnni sadyo
jdtlyan muktam nlram ddyam t

(The printed edition has bodha-mram )
The following is the text of Stein B :

I) ^ ]

When cold liath obtained the mastery over
water, the water becometh ice ;

Or, again, it may be turned to snow. Thus
there are three different things ; but, oiv reflection,
we see that they are not different.

When the sun of the Supreme Consciousness
shineth forth, the three will become the same.

Lo ! By it all things, whether with life or with-
out it, the universe itself, are seen as only &iva.

17.] LALLA-VAKYANI 39

Just as the sun reduces ice and snow to identity with
water, so the sun of true knowlege makes the soul
recognize not only its identity with the Supreme, but
also that the whole universe is one, conjured forth out
of the Absolute by the divine Maya, See Note on Yoga,
24.

17.

(lev watd diwor u watd

p$tha lona, ckuy yeka, wdth
ptiz kas karakh) hotd laid !

Tear manaB ta pawanas sangath

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.
caityam devo nirmitau tlvau tvayd yau

ptijdhetos taw hldto na bUmau
clevd 'meyam citsvartipam vidheyam

tadvydpfyartham prdnaeittatkyam eva
(MS. lias devah, and tadvaptyartha. Printed edition has dM '

The following is the text of Stein B :

An idol is but a lump of stone, a temple is but
a lump of stone.

From crown to sole each is of but the one stuff.

learned Pandit ! what is this to which thou
offerest worship ?

Bring thou together a determined mind and thy
vital airs.

Idol-worship is vain. In lieu of worshipping stocks
and stones, thou shouldst perform the Yogwyrandgnihotra,
a spiritual offering of the vital breaths ; ire. practise yoga
by bringing thy vital airs under control. See Vocabulary,
s.vv. nddi wAprdn, 2, and note on Yoga, 5, 21.

40 LALLA-VAKYANI [18.

18.

osd lol p&Aiem* sdsd

me mml wdsd klvtil m Jieye
lok yid sakaza SMntara-bukb" d$d

7

makaris sdsd mal kydhpeye
* V, 1. patfnem
[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A,

mdlinyam ety uddslnam rajobhir maknro yathu,
The following is the text of Stein B :
WIT

ii

Let him utter a thousand abuses at me.

But, if I be innately devoted to $iva (or if I be
devoted to iva the Eeal and the True) disquiet will
find no abode within my heart.

Is a mirror fouled if a few ashes fall upon it?

On the contrary, the ashes serve only to polish the
mirror. A reply to her critics.

19.

Men* ay ta ga&kun ga&fie
pakm ga&M den kydwu rath

keJi na-tct, ]&h na-ta keh na-ta kgdh
*V.L.

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A,
jardgata, k&nataro y d>y& deho

jdto 'vasdyo gamandya kdryah
samdgatdh mo yata, eva tatra

20,] LALLA-VAKYANI 41

They came and came, and then they have to go.
Ever must they, night and day, move on and on.
Whence they came, thither must they go.
What is anything? It is nothing, nothing,
nothing.

Or, if we read a&han, the first line means, they
came becoming emaciated (i.e. came wearily), and
then they have to go.

The weary round of perpetual birth and rebirth. Of.
Koheleth, sii. 8, 'Vanities of vanities, saith the Preacher.
all is vanity'.

20.

mud zonitli pasldth ta kor u

kol u shmta-u'oit" 1 zada-rtii? as
yu* u yih dapiy tas tiy lol*

/ t7 L tj i/

yuhuy tattwa-ridk chuh abfiyas
*V.l. log

[Rajanaka Bkaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

jhdtva sarvam m&d/iavat iutha svasthah
mitva, sarvam frotrahlnem IJiavyan

drstvd sarvam turnam andhatmm eld
tattvdbJiyasah klrtito 'yam

(MS. has ludMndmih Cf. verse 26.)
The following is the text of Stein B :

8^> H]

Though thou hast knowledge, be thou as a fool;
though thou canst see, be thou as he that is one-eyed ;

Though thou canst hear, be thou as one dumb ;
in all things be thou as a non-sentient block.

4:2 LALLA-VAKYANI [21.

Whatever any one may say to thee, say thou the
same to him (or, if we read boz, whatever any one may
say to thee, listen thou and agree).

It is this that is the true practice for obtaining
the knowledge of the basal truths.

For the basal truths, or fundamental and ^ general
factors of which the apparent universe consists, see
Vocabulary, s. v. tattw^ We may compare Kabir's famous
advice :

sdb-se hiliye $al-e miliye

l\ sab-se kahiye
basiye apne gam

Meet every one in a friendly way,
Greet every one by name.

Say c yes Sir', 'yes Sir ', to each one who addresses you.
But Hve in your own village (i.e. stick to your own
opinions).

21.

gal gantfriem hoi pafne
tiy yex yih

tiz
amalon u ta kas Icyah

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.
nindantu va mam athavd stuvantu

kurvantn rdrcdm mmclliaih svapuspaih
no, fianam ciydmy atJiam visdrhm
visiutdhabodMmrtapdnasvaxtka,
(Printed edition has supuspaih.)

The following is the text of Stein B :

ii ^ji v&ft ii

11
wr vffi 11 ^q i]

22.] LALLA-VAKYANI 43

Let him bind abuse upon me, let him orate
blame against me,

Let each one say to me what pleaseth each.

Yea, let him worship me with the offering of
his own soul for the flowers.

Still keep I myself untouched and undefiled
by all these ; so who getteth what therefrom?

She is callous to the blame or praise of the world. The
rendering 1 oisahaza in the third line is doubtful. Perhaps
we should translate 'let him worship me with flowers of
reality, i.e. with real flowers'.

22.

tttn &Jiezi ta mzan dse

bhu-tal gaganas-kun vikdse

te^/V Rah gros u mdwa&e

S/iiwa-puzan gwuh kitla dtmdse

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

ndfau gate ^rke khalu wdnasawjiie

meyaksaydkhyd rajanl vibMii
jwdkJiyacandrah sivad/tamm Imah
ca,

The following is the text of Stein B :

. o sgftf^r err

n]

The day will be extinguished, and night will
come ;

The surface of the earth will become extended
to the sky ;

44 LALLA-VAKYANI [22.

On the day of the new moon, the moon swal-
lowed up the demon of eclipse.

The illumination of the Self in the organ of
thought is the true worship of Siva.

Once the mind realizes the true nature of the Self, as
one with the Supreme Self, here given the name of Siva,
all things fade into nothingness. There is no distinction
between day and night, and the boundaries of the appar-
ently solid earth merge into those of the sky, so that earth
and sky become one. Nay, the demon of eclipse is
eclipsed himself.

According to Hindu tradition, the moon contains
sixteen digits, each containing* a certain amount of
nectar. Each day the gods drink the nectar in one
digit, so that on the sixteenth day only one digit
remains. This accounts for the waning of the moon.
The nectar of the sixteenth day is that which remains
over on the day of the new moon. On the occasion of
a solar eclipse, the moon and the sun are together, and
the nectar of the sixteenth digit, becoming heated and
caused to evaporate by the proximity of the sun, ascends
into that luminary. Rahu, the demon of eclipse, then
swallows the sun in order to drink the nectar. So much
for the tradition explanatory of the natural phenomenon.
Here Lalla describes the process of absorption in the
Sahasr&ra (see note on Yoga, 21). To the fully en-
lightened soul, the day of earthly illusion disappears, and
all is night ; the apparently solid earth loses its bounds,
and becomes merged in the sky ; in the illumination of
the Self, so far from Eahu swallowing (the nectar of)
the moon, it is the moon in the Sahasrara that swallows
the dark demon of ignorance.

There is also a more mystical side to this verse.
Normally there is a distinction between the subject of
cognition (pramatar), the object of cognition {pramya),
and the instrument of cognition (pramdna). The pra-
matar is here typified by Rahu, the demon of lunar eclipse,
the jprameya by the moon, and the gramma by the sun. 1
The thinker is able to ' swallow the moon ', i. e. to think

1 ArhaK pramanam, somas tu meyam, jnana-kriydtmalca u \

Rahur mayapramata syat tad-acchadana-kovidah \\
Verse quoted in the Commentary,

23.] LALLA-VAKYANI 45

away the phenomenal world into a blank ; but he cannot
completely dissolve it, for there still exists the triad of
praviatar, praweya, and pramdna, until the Para Samvifl,
or Higher Consciousness, is attained, by which all three
are fused together and sublimated into a void of infinite
Unity. Lalla here refers to the presence of Para Samvid.
Whereas in ordinary meditation c Eahu swallows the
moon ', i. e. the thinker effaces the phenomenal world,
the Higher Consciousness (typified by the moon residing
in Sahasrara ; see note on Yoga, 19, 20) absorbs the
consciousness of the thinker into itself, entirely sub-
limating its contents into Void.

23.

manasay man Miawa-saras

ndruc tt clivkk
d u tuld-koti
iull i%l u fa tul na kth

|R5janaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.
kmddham mano vaJinisamanartipfn'ii

fira&fytam LMranatau vibkati
vicarataJi sarvav'rfcdrah Inau

era

The following is the text of Stein B :

c!T g^f T ^ II <^ ll]

Look upon thy mind alone as the ocean of
existence,.

If thou restrain it not, but let it loose, from its
rage will issue angry words, like wounds caused
by fire.

Yet, if thou weigh them in the scales of truth,
their weight is naught.

46 LALLA-VAKYANI 24, 25 ]

According to legend, a terribly destructive fire, named
vadavagni) is imprisoned at the bottom of the ocean. If
it were to burst forth, the whole world would be destroyed.
Similarly, if the fire of wrath burst forth from the ocean
of the mind, it would leave deadly scars, and yet, to the
wise man, it is nothing.

If, instead of aur&c* clokh, we read ndrafafi-cfw&Ii, which
could be spelt in Nagari with identically the same letters }
we must substitute s wounds caused by a fishing-spear '
for ' wounds caused by fire '. Otherwise the meaning of
the verse would be the same.

24.

sJtll ta man chug jpon, u kranje

moche yew? rot n mdll^ yud 11 wdv
Iwst u i/us* mast-wala, gancle

tih yes tagl toy snh ado, nffidl

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.
tilasya wdnasga, ca rahanam bJiatau

tair em Gakyaw nipnnam vidMtwU
vayuw karSndtha gajam ca tantund

yaih sakyate timribhayltum sud/iwaiK\

Integrity and liigh repute are but water carried
in a basket.

If some mighty man can grasp the wind within
his fist,

Or if he can tether an elephant with a hair of
his head,

Only if one be skilled in such feats as these,
will he be successful (in retaining integrity and high
repute).

The vanity of earthly repute.
25.

prakreth Jioz^m pawana-sotiy
lolaki ndra wolinj*

26.] LALLA-VAKYANI 47

[Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

kdmddikam kdnanasatkam etac
chittvdmrfam lotilmmyau maydptam

prdmdhirddJidt prakrtlm ca bhakiya
manas ca dagdhvd sivadMma labMam]

By (controlling) my vital airs I cut my way
through the six forests, till the digit of the moon
awoke for me, and the material world dried up
within me.

With the fire of love I parched my heart as a
man parcheth grain,

And at that moment did I obtain Siva.

In the spiritual body of a man there are six ca&ras, or
seats of a Sakti, impelling him to experience the objective
universe and to look upon it as real. These must be
mastered before true enlightenment is reached, and Lalla
compares the 'process to cutting a way through six
forests. A mystical moon, the abode of the Supreme
Siva, is supposed to exist under the frontal sinus, and,
once he has mastered the six ca/cras, the devotee becomes
cognisant of this moon and is absorbed in the Siva.

The mastery is effected by control and suppression of
the vital airs (see Vocab., s. v. prdn 2), and the exciting
cause is ardent love, or desire, for Siva. For further
particulars, see Vocab., s. vv. sheh and som, and Note on
Yoga,9ff.and21.

26.

Utta-turog gayan* brama-wonP

nimesJte akl kliancU yozana-hck
\etani-wagi lod* ratith zon u

prdn apdn sandorith pak?i a ck*

*V.l.

na wagi yih ratify zoti u
prdn apdn pJiut&fiias pdkh a ch

48 LALLA-VAKYANI [27.

[Bajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

cittdbhitUak sarvagatis tmahgak

handntare yojanalafoagami
dhdryo Mhenckena vivekavalga-

nodena myndvayapafoaroilhat

(MS. has iuranga instead of turafigah.)]

The steed of my thoughts speedeth over the
sky (of my heart).

A hundred thousand leagues traverseth he in
the twinkling of an eye. .

The wise man knew how to block the wheels
(of the chariot) of his outward and inward vital airs,
as he seized the horse by the bridle of self-
realization.

O, if we adopt the alternative reading of the last two
lines, tve must translate them :

If a man hath not known how to seize the
horse by the bridle, the wheels (of the chariot) of
his outward and inward vital airs have burst in
pieces.

As explained in the notes on the preceding verse,
self-realization is obtained by mastering the vital airs.
The two principal airs are the outward and the inward,
known as prdna and ajpana. See Vocabulary, s. v. yrau, 2,
and Note on Yoga, 2, 16, 23.

27,

klieth ganfllth shemi nd manas*
brdntkyimav trw 4 timqy gay khaW

shastra btizitli ekuh yv
sok u najpoW' to, daiiiy

* V. 1. khena ganflana-nielie man tJiomtli dur^

28.] LALLA-VAKYANI 49

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.
khddandd 6Msandd vdpi mano yu>sy& gatabhramam
90, mtiktO) nottamarndd yo grkndty arf/iam Id so 'nrnak

The following is the text of Stein B :

n ift wif n

r ^IT wt n n]

By eating and apparelling the mind will not
become at peace.

They only have ascended who have abandoned
false hopes.

When they have learnt from the scriptures
that the fear of Yama is terrible (to him who is in
debt to Desire),

And when the lender hath trusted them not
(with a loan), then indeed live they blessed and at
peace.

Or, if we adopt the alternative reading, the first two
tines must be translated :

They only who have kept their minds from
eating and apparel, and who have abandoned false
hopes, will ascend.

Yama is the judge of the soul after death. Desire is
compared to a money-lender, who gives a loan of fruition,
but demands a hard repayment of principal and interest.
Happy indeed is the contented soul to whom he refuses
to make the loan.

28.

yewa tur Mi tim amlar Jietd

JcsJiod yewa gall tim dhdr ann
Mttd! swa-para-ve&aras petd

50 LALLA-VAKYANI [20.

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

ntdrthatii msanam grdJiyaia ksudhdrth&m bhojanaiii taUta
mano vive/titdm neyam alath Ihogdnucintan&ik

The following is the text of Stein B :

^35 ; 3rflf ^ W^ II fffTT ti

?C ft ^n

Don but such apparel as will cause the cold
to flee.

Eat but so much food as will cause hunger to
cease.

Mind ! devote thyself to discernment of tin*
Self and of the Supreme,

And recognize thy body as but food for forest
crows.

29,

ta dam no ga&ki
no prdwakh mokti-dwtir
ilas lawan-zan mllith go&hi
td-ti chug durlah mhaza-ubar

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.
tivabMv&ldbdhaii, na samo 3 $ti kdranam
tathti, damah kimtu param v

tathfakatdptdv api nmsa lMiyaK\

Quietism and self-command are not required
for (the knowledge of) the Self,

Nor by the mere wish wilt thou reach the door
of final release.

30,31.]' LALLA-VAKYANI 51

E'en though a man become absorbed (in his
contemplations) as salt is absorbed in water,

Still rarely doth he attain to the discernment
of the nature of his Self.

Ordinary aseetism, and even ardent desire, are common
enough, but without the knowledge of the true nature
of Self, they are of no avail for ultimate release.

30.

mdrun, sahaz ve&arun
drog u zdnun kdpan tray
ehuy ta dur u mo gamn

[Rujanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

IdlJiam tyaktvd vaimanasyaf/i. ca tadvat
kdryo nit-yam svasvaMdvdvamarsa/i

sMiyd&iinyam naiva bkinnam yat/icuvam
tamdt tvam tadbJiedabuddkw vrt?taiva~\

(Printed edition has unyac cMnyam.)

Slay thou desire ; meditate thou on the nature
of the Self.

Abandon thou thy vain imaginings ; for know
thou that that knowledge is rare and of great price."

Yet is it near by thee ; search for it not afar.

(It is naught but a void); and a void has
become merged within the Void.

C verses 11 and 69.

81.

adfrflie lUb^m zanas
suli yeli (jyutkum
soruy my ta M no

E2

52 LALLA-VAKYANI [32.

[ Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

cittdclane mrmalatvam prayate
prodbMta me $ve jane pmtyabhijna

drsto devah wasvarilpo maj/dsau
ndhan na foam nalva cdyam prapancaJi]

The foulness of my mind fled from me as
foulness from a mirror,

And then among the people did I gain repute
(as a devotee).

When I beheld Him, that He was near me,

I saw that all was He, and that I am nothing.

32.

keh cliy nendri-hatiy wudiy

kvJi chiy man karith aputiy

7 I U

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

kascit prasupto 'pi vibudcllia eva
kamt praluddho 'pi ca suptatulyah

snato 'pi kascid asmir mato me
Wmktva striyavi cdpy aparah supwtah

(MS. baa svapnatulydh and priyam. We follow the printed edition.
The i of bedrid is apparently lengthened before the caesura ;
cf. verses 50 and 56.)]

Some, though they be sound asleep, are yet
awake;

On others, though they be awake, haih slumber
fallen.

Some, though they bathe in sacred pools, are
yet unclean ;

Others, though they be full of household cares,
are yet free from action,

33.] LALLA-VAKYANI 58

* Sleep* is the sleep of illusion. ' Uncleanness ' is
impurity of soul. All action is defilement, and hinders
the soul from obtaining* final release. But, says Lalla,
the real freedom from action is that of the soul. The
body may be a slave to duty, and yet the soul may
be free.

33.

dwddasMwta-manelal yes clewas
ndsika-pawana- dor 1 andhata-rav

pdnay &uk d#v ta ar&un to

[Rajaiaaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

yd dvddatdnfe way am eva Jcalpite

mdodite devagrhe svayam ttkifaA
mmprerayan prdwravim $a xafakaro

\ so, kam arcayed ludJiak

The following is the text of Stein B :

W ll]

He who hath recognized the BralMWrrandhra as
the shrine of the Self-God,

He who hath known the Unobstructed Sound
borne upon the breath (that riseth from the heart)
unto the nase,

His vain imaginings of themselves have fled
far away,

And he himself (recognizeth) himself as the
God. To whom else, therefore, should, he offer
worship ?

54 LALLA-VAKYANI [34.

The * Unobstructed Sound' is the mystic syllable Mi,
for a full account of which, and for the meaning of this
allusion, see the notes on verse 15. Dwadashdnta-
mandal, or, in Sanskrit dwadaxdiita-mandala, is the
Hmhwa-randhrd (see Note on Yoga, 5, 7, 19, 21, 26).
As a technical term it is said at the present day to be
a spot or cavity in the anterior fontanelle of the brain,
under the frontal sinus. Other authorities identify it
with the central canal of the spinal cord. It is closely
connected with the Sakasrara, which, in each man, is
the abode of the Supreme Siva, who is to be recognized
as one with the Self, i.e. as the Supreme Self. Hence,
if a man recognize this, he knows that he himself is the
Supreme Self within himself, and that it is unnecessary
to worship any other deity.

34

okity $m-kar yes ndli dare

Icumfaiy brahmdndas sum gau*
akh suif mantfflr kitten kare

tas $d# manth a r kytift kare

* V.I. soma-gare

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

a lrahmdn(]an nabkito yew nit-yam
omkdmMyo mantra eko Mr/o 'yarn

krtm citt&m tadvimarsSikasdram
kim tawjdnyair wantravrndair mdJieyam]

He from whose navel steadfastly proceedeth
in its upward course the syllable 6m, and naught
but it,

And for whom the JcumlhaJca exercise formeth
a bridge to the Brahma-randJim,

He beareth in his mind the one and only
mystic spell,

And of what benefit to him are a thousand
spells ?

35.] LALLA-VAKYANI 55

Or, if we take the alternative reading of the
second line, that line must be translated :

And whom the JcumbJiaJca exercise leadeth into
the abode of the moon by the Bmhma-randhm.

This verse, like the preceding, is in praise of the
mystic syllable o>h s which is here stated to possess all
the virtues of all other mystic syllables, or spells, put
together. By the ( navel' is meant the ktnda, or
mysterious bulb supposed to exist in the region of the
navel and the pudendum. It is the focal centre of all
bodily thought and action, and from it radiate the
various tubes through which circulate the vital airs.
In the true devotee, the syllable is fixed here, and
perpetually rises upwards (as stated in the preceding
verse) from the heart.

The knmbhaka or 'jar J exercise consists in meditation
accompanied by 'bottling up* or retaining the breath
after inspiration (ptiraka). The devotee by this sup-
pression blocks up the vital airs circulating through the
tubes radiating from the kanda, and thereby causes
the organ of thought to become absorbed into Siva
represented by the mystical moon supposed to exist in
his brain. For further explanation of this extremely
recondite theory, see Note on Yoga, 5, 21, and
Vocabulary, s.v. som.

Regarding the rahma-randhra> see the note on the
preceding verse. It is situated close to the Sa&asrara,
which is the abode of the moon (see Note on Yoga, 8, 19).

35.

samaras aye* tapasiy

bodha-praka&h lobum sahaz
maren na kuh ta mara na kam

mara necJi ta lasa neck

[Rajanaka ShSskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.,
dsadya samsdram aham vardfo

mriye na kasyapi na ko 'pi me va

mrtdmrte mark prati tulyar&pe

(MS.

56 LALLA-VAKYANI [36.

I came into this universe of birth and rebirth,
and through asceticism gained I the self-illuminating
light of knowledge.

If any man die, it is naught to me; and if
I die it is naught to him.

Good is it if I die, and good is it if I live long.

Praise of perfect contentment. The idiom of marew
na Kh is worth noting. Literally it is ' no one will die
for me ', or, as we should say in Ireland ' no one will die
on me', i.e. if any one die it will not be my business.
The commentary here quotes the following verse of
Utpala Deva [tiwa-ttdtrJvafo, xiii. 3] as to the point :
tavake vapusi

tisthatah satatam arcatah Prabhum
jlvifam mrtam MdmyaA astu me
As I stand in thy imperishable body, which is composed
of the cosmos, and is of the nectar of pure spirit, and as
I everlastingly worship the Lord, let me have life or lot
me have death (for it matters not).

36.

pmthuy twthan ga&han sannyas

Utta ! parith mm nishpath as
(teshekh dure dramun nyul u

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.
yatnetia mohaikadkiya saddml

mmnydsinas twthavaran $raya,nt%
ciUaikasadikyo na $a labfiyate taw

(Printed edition has nwksjfokadJui/ali.)
The following is the test of Stein B :

37.] LALLA-VAKYANI 57

An ascetic wandereth from holy place to holy
place,

To seek the union brought about by (visiting
a god, and yet he is but) visiting himself.

my soul I study thou (the .mystery that God
is thy Self) and be not unbelieving.

The farther thou wilt look (from thy Self), the
more green will seem the heap of grass.

The uselessness of seeking God by long pilgrimages,
when He is really the Self of the seeker. Dramun is the
dub grass of India. Here, a pile of this grass is used
metaphorically to indicate worldly pursuits. The further
a man's thoughts wander from the consideration of the
identity of the Supreme and the Self, the more tempting
will these worldly pursuits appear.

37.

paivan puritJi yu$ u aid wagi

tas bom spars/ii na bocJia, ta tres/t
till yes kanm antil? tagi

samsdras $uy zeyi nech

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

yah purakena cittan svam rodfiayet fautfrdddikm
na pldayati samsdre saphalam cdsyafimtam

(MS. has ksuttrdacikam.)]

He who rightly inhaleth his vital airs, and
bringeth them under the bridle,

Him, verily, nor hunger nor thirst will touch.
He who is skilled in doing this unto the end,
Fortunate in this universe will he be born.

or inhalation of the breath, is one of the
methods employed to encompass prdnayama, or restraint
of the vital airs, a necessary process for the obtainment
of complete yoga, or union with the Supreme. See Note
on Yoga, 2, 21, 23, and Vocabulary, & vv. nd/H

58 LALLA-VAKYANI [38.

and pran 2. By these ^0-processes, when a man is
reborn into the world, he will be able in it to effect
this union. With the second line the commentary
compares BJiagavad Gfata, ii. 14, 15 :

mdtrd-sparxds in, K&unteya, titotna-wkha-duhklia-ddh \
dyamdpdyino 'nityds tas titiksaswa^ B/idrata II
yan hi na vyatkayanty ete pumsam^ purwarsdbha \
sama-diMha-sukham dJilram so *wrtatwdya kalpate It
It is the touchings of the senses' instruments, Kuntf s
son, that beget cold and heat, pleasure and pain; it is
they that come and go, that abide not ; bear with them,
O thou of Bharata's race.

Verily the man whom these disturb not, indifferent
alike to pain and pleasure, and wise, is meet for immor-
tality, chief of men. (Barnetfs Translation.)

38.

zal tfiamawnn JmfawaJi i^randwun
wftrdJiwa-gaman pairiv fearith

kdtJut-clJieni dod shramdwun

antifr sakofa kapata-fearith
[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

pddais tadvad vuomaydnam

L <?,?*

dolo dhenoh Mst/iamayyds tatkJiiva,

sarvau caitaj jrmbhitam kaitavasya
{MS. has Shew kasfha and caita. The printed edition omits &y.}]

To stop a flowing stream, to cool a raging fire,
To walk on one's feet in the sky,
To labour at milking a wooden cow,
All these, in the end, are but base jugglery.

/ By means of intense yoga, or concentration of the
mind, it is quite possible to achieve magical powers
(mllMi . see note on Yoga, 2), and to perform apparently
impossible actions; but this is nothing but the art of
a conjurer. The true yogi disdains such* miraculous
powers. The^# to which he devotes himself is union
with the Supreme Self, by acquiring the knowledge of
his own Self.

39, 40.] LALLA-VAKYANI 59

39.

kus^ pmh u ta kossa pushom

kam kusnm lofaes puze
kawa ffod u dizits zalaci dbfil

kawa-sana mantra Slienkar-swatma wuse

40.

mm puk u

bdwdk* kitsnm Idg^zes puze

dizes zalaci dom
m SJieiikar-swdtna wuze

[Rajanaka Bhaskam's Sanskrit translation of 39 and 40 in Stein A.

hah pauspikah kdpi ca tasyapahti

puxpai$ ca kair devavarasya puja,
karya, tatha kim gadukam vidheyam

mantras ca kas tatra vada prayojyah

icchamanolJiyam nanu pauspikalfiyani
addya puspam drdhabJiamndkhyam

svdnandapurair gadukam ca dattrd
maundkJiyamantrena samarcay&m

The following is the text of 39 and 40 in Stein B :
flf f^i Tf fOT ^Pft

i!

(I Q. il

<?T

60 LALLA-VAKYANI [41.

89. Who is the man, and who the woman, that
bringeth wreaths ?

What flowers shouldst thou offer in His
worship ?

What stream of water wilt thou pour over
His image ?

By what mystic formula will the Siva-Self
become manifest ?

40. The mind is the man, and pure desire is the
woman, that bringeth wreaths.

Offer thou the flowers of devotion in His
worship.

Nectar of the moon, for ritual, shalt thou make
to stream over Him.

By the mystic formula of silence will the
Siva-Self become manifest.

A plea for spiritual, as against formal worship. The
nectar from the moon refers to the mystic moon in the
sahasrdra, (cf. verse 33) said to abide under the frontal
sinus. From this moon a mystic nectar passes into the
spiritual frame of the devotee, and enables him to become
master of himself. For further particulars, see Note on
Yoga, 5, 8, 19, 20, 21, and Vocabulary, EL v. torn.

The mystic formula, or mantra^ of silence is the so-called
ajapa mantra, in which the devotee utters no sound, but
simply performs various exhalations and inhalations.
It is also called kamah (cf. verse 65), in which word
the anmvdra or bmdu represents Purusa, and the visarga
Prakrti. The Tdntrika-abkidhdna, (s.v.) defines ajapa as
/tama t or inspiration 4- expiration (fydsa-prafodsa), saying
that 60 vasas = 1 prdna> 60 prdna = 1 iiddt, 60 nodi*
= 1 ahoratra (day and night). Thus in one day-night
there are 21,600 wdsa-praxvasaS) or hamsa-japas.

41.

CLJJQS kami diski to, kami wate

ga&ha kami di&hi kawa tana wath
antifc day lagimay tate

chenis phoka* ka&h-ti no sath

42.] LALLA-VAKYANI 61

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.
kayd dtia, kena pathdgatdJiam

ittJiam gatiw, veclmi nijdm na tamdcl

(Printed edition has pathdtha kena.)
The following is the text of Stein B :

From what quarter did I come, and by what
road?

To what quarter shall I go? and how shall
I know the road ?

In the end, if I gain the good counsel (it is
well),

For there is no substance in an empty breath.

'Reason thus with life> a breath thou art.' Lalla
knows not whence she came or whither she will go.
Life is but an empty breath. The one thing thafe is
worth grasping is the teaching of the identity of the
Self with the Supreme Self.

42.

gagtm b a y Ihti-tal &y

&y chukh denpawan ta rath
a/rg bandan posh pofi? & a y

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A*
didSo bMr vdyur dpo 'nilas ca
rdtrix cdhas ceti sarvam tvam eva

62 LALLA-VAKYANI [43.

Thou alone art the heavens, and Thou alone
art the earth.

Thou alone art the day, the air, the night.

Thou alone art the meal-offering, the sandal
inunction, the flowers, the water of aspersion.

Thou alone art all that is. What, therefore,
can I offer thee?

Another plea for spiritual, as against formal worship.
The whole creation is but an emanation from the Supreme.
Any offering made by man can only be an offering of
Himself to Himself.

43.

gem* IvJb manmatJi wad Mr
wata-nosl? month ta Ugun das

tamiy saJiaz YfaJtwar gornn
tdmiy wruy ryondnn

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.
kamo lobho 'hamkrtis ceti yma

sarvaw tyaUvti bhasmavad Ihdvajdtam
(MS. has canrah and bhuvajdnum. Printed edition calm yena.)]

He who liath slain the thieves desire, lust,
and pride

When he hath slain these highway robbers,
he hath thereby made himself the servant (of all).

He hath searched -out Him who is the real and
true Lord.

He hath meditated and found that all that is
is ashes.

The true saint is the servant of all, by his humility
and loving kindliness.

44.] LALLA-VAOANI 63

44.

pdnas logitJi ridukh me Wi
me &e Marian lustum dok

um

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

deMdisatkoxapidhdnatas tvdm
aprdpya Jkhinndsmi dram

jndtvMya vifrantim updg&tcl faam
(MS. has deMpi , upAgatatvat.)]

(This verse lias throughout a double meaning.
The first meaning is : )

Absorbed within Thyself, Thou remainedst
hidden from me.

The livelong day I passed seeking for 'me'
and 'Thee'.

When I beheld Thee in my Self,

I gave to Thee and to my Self the unrestrained
rapture of '(our union).

(In the second meaning, the two words me and &?,
4 1 Thee', are taken as one word me&e, which means
1 earth', and we get the following translation : )

My body befouled I with mud, and Thou
remainedst hidden from me.

The livelong day I passed seeking for mud.

Wheji I beheld the mud upon my body,

I gave my body the unrestrained rapture (of
union) with the mud.

In the first version, Lalla tells us how, in the days of
her ignorance, she imagined that she could distinguish
between her Self and the Supreme Self, aad then, how,

64 LALLA-VAKYANI [45.

when sbe had discovered their identity, she was filled
with the rapture of union. Moreover, as the Supreme
Self was identical with her Self, He also was filled with
the same rapture.

In the second version she sarcastically compares earthly
possessions and desires to the mud with which an ascetic
daubs his hody. He who cares for these has all the joys
of possession, ignorant of the truth that they are worthless
as mud.

45.

kusk posh til dlpJi zal nd ga&U
sadlkawa gora-hath ym u mani Hyt

.
soda peze sakaza afoiy no, zfye

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

puspddikam clravyam idam na tasya

pujasn, prajiia., upayogi hmcit
guntpad&ml drflhaya, ca bJiaktya,

swrtydrcyate yena visufldJia atwd

(By poetic licence the u ofpujasu is shortened before pr. Printed
edition lias ptijasu sarwm upayogi in which the second a of
sawam is lengthened before the cassava ; cf. verse 32.)]

Kuforgraaa, flowers, sesame-seed, water, all
the paraphernalia of worship are wanted not

By him who taketh into heart with honest
faith his teacher's word.

In his own loving longing he will ever meditate
upon Sambhu.

He will sink into the true joyance ; and so,
becoming in his nature free from action, he will not
be born again.

$ Action worts, desire is the great enemy of absorp-
tion into the Supreme, and causes perpetual rebirth.
By recognizing the identity of the Self with the Supreme,
as taught by the guru, or spiritual teacher, a man becomes
free from the bond of action,
Sambhu is a name of Siva,

46.] LALLA-VAKYANI 65

46.

asl poncU zosi zami

nethqy sndn kari llrtkan

nisie cAuy to, parzantan

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

snatafii Jiasantam vivid haw vidheyau

kurvant&m etatparajdtam ant&m
pafydtmatattvaw nijadeha era

kriapradesdntctramarganena

(Printed edition has Uatpura eva santam, pagyatmadevam, and Mam.)
The following is the text of Stein B :

n

f%fil Wt^t ffT ^^rfT't, I) $ ll]

He it is who laugheth, who sneezeth, who
cougheth, who yawneth.

He it is who ceaselessly batheth in holy
pools.

He it is who is an ascetic, naked from year's
end to year's end.

Recognize thou that verily He is nigh to
thee.

* The Kingdom of heaven is within you. 5
The ascetic wanders about to holy places and torments
Ms hody in his search for God. He knows not that all
the time He is the ascetic's Self, and is hence ever close
at hand. When the ascetic performs the most trivial
action, it is really not he who does it, but the Supreme,
Who is identical with his Self.

LALLA-VAKYANI [47.

47.

yeth saras sdr*-pkol u nd ve&y

tail sari mkaliy pdn" cen
mrag srugal gan$ zala-hastiy

zen nd ten ta totuy pen

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation in Stein A.

sarovare yatra na sarmpasya

kano } pi maty eva vidtram etat
mvanlliate tatpayasa, samastam

bMtam stJiiiam Mdvi ca dehijdtam

(Printed edition has the last line yavat pramanam Tckalu dehijdtam.)
The following is the text of Sfcein B :

ll]

It is a lake so tiny that in it a mustard seed
findeth no room.

Yet from that lake doth every one drink water.

And into it do deer, jackals, rhinoceroses, and
sea-elephants

Keep falling, falling, almost before they have
time to become born.

^The real insignificance of the universe. As compared
with the Universal Self it is of no account ; yet foolish
mortals look upon it as something wonderful, and enjoy it.
Life, too, is but a momentary breath, as compared with
eternity; and, in reality, an unsaved soul, in whatever
form it may be born, has no time to live, but, from the
point of view of Eternity, lives for but an instant, and
dies and dies, and is born and reborn, again and again.

48,49.] LALLA-VAKYANI 67

48.

Lai loh IMfis tfiadan ta gwdran

wuchnn hyot^mas to$* rfttfcmas bar an
me-ti kalganeye zi z^mos tat*

mal wondi zSlum

feli Lai ndv dram
yeli dal* trotfinas taf

[Eajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation of 48 and 49 in Stein A.
drastum vibhuw, tlrtJiavaran gatdham

tato 'jpi Minndsmi ca mwasena
wdntar nivwtd khalu

(MS. has khinnd ca manasena.)

tato 'tra tfwtvavarandni IMyo

jndtaik maydtrdlva b/iavisyatiti
Ihaktya gadd tani ca \samprd\mM

lalleti loke prathita taddhcwn,

(MS. drstawtruncP. For the emendation, compare Terse 63. The
MS. is partly defaced in the third line. Judging from the remains of
the characters, the missing syllables seem to have been those put
between brackets. Printed edition bears out the above emendations.
It also has Ihaiiktva for lliaktyd.)}

48. I, Lalla, wearied myself seeking for Him and
searching.

I laboured and strove even beyond my strength.

I began to look for Him, and, lo, I saw that
bolts were on His door,

And even in me, as I was, did longing for
Him become fixed ; and there, where I was, I gazed
upon Him.

68 LALLA-VAKYANI [50.

49. Foulness burnt I from my soul.
My heart (with its desires) did I slay.
And then did my name of Lalla spread abroad,
When I sat, just there, with bended knee.

48. Ineffectual human efforts. In her unregenerate
days Lalla had striven to find God. Then, by God's
grace, she was permitted to see that the door of approach
to Him was barred to all human effort, and that no
strivings of hers were of avail. So she stood there,
outside the door, full of naught but longing love, and
He revealed Himself to her, for she found Him in her
Self.

49. A continuation of the preceding verse. When
she had given up effort, and, having cleansed her mind
from earthly passions, waited in patience with humility ;
then, and not till then, did she gain the true wisdom,
and her reputation as a prophetess became widely spread.

50.

trayi nengi saraJi, sar^ saw.

ah nengi saras anlifajay
EammokJia Kausam akh sum saras

sati nengi saras skundkdr

[Raijanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation.
wratrayaiii nlratnayau swardwi

dlcdsam ani/dwy api
mardwi Sunyam Main saptavdram

(From the printed edition. The last syllable of tathw'kadtikam is
lengthened before the caesura; cf. verses 32 and 56.)]

Three times do I remember a lake overflowing,
Once do I remember seeing in the firmament
the only existing place.

50.] LALLA-VAKYANI 69

Once do I remember seeing a bridge from
Haramukh to Kausar.

Seven times do I remember seeing the whole
world a void.

As a result of her having achieved the perfect know-
ledge, not only, as told in the preceding verse, has she
gained a great reputation, but she has become endued
with the power of remembering the occurrences of her
former lives.

At intervals of a kalpa (i.e. a day of Brahma, or
432 million years) the universe incurs a partial dissolution
(kJianfla-pralaya). A hundred years of Brahmii each
) ear being made up of these ka/pas, or days of Brahma
constitutes a mahd-Mpa, or great kalpa. At the end of
this vast period of time there is a ' great dissolution'
(maha-pralaya) in which not only is our universe
destroyed, but all the worlds of the gods with their
inhabitants, and even Brahma himself.

The lake mentioned by Lalla is, as in verse 47, the
universe. By its overflow is meant a partial dissolution,
three of which she remembers experiencing. "When the
only place that exists is the firmament, it is a great
dissolution, and she remembers seeing one of these.

Between the peak of Haramukh to the North and the
mountain lake of Kausar to the South, lies the Valley of
Kashmir. At the beginning of the kalpa now current
this Valley is said to have been a lake called Satlsaras,
and across this lake, from Haramukh to Kausar, she
remembers a bridge. 1

Seven times altogether she remembers seeing the
world becoming absorbed into the Void (cf. Note to
Verse 1).

Lalla's object in mentioning these experiences over
such enormous periods of time is to emphasize the eternal
pre-existence of the soul, and its perpetual birth and
rebirth unless released by the true knowledge.

Cf. Verses 93 and 95.

1 Cf. Bqja-tarahgint, i. 25. ' Formerly, since the beginning of the
Kalpa, the land in the womb of the Himalaya was filled with water
during the periods of the [first] six Manus [and formed] the ' Lake of
Sati 1 (S&fisaras). Afterwards . . . Kasyapa . . . created the land
known by the name of Kitbnir in the space [previous?y occupied by]
the lake.' Stein'* Translation.

70 LALLA-VAKYANI [51-4.

51.

karith wodaras lahu klesh
phmth dw&r lazani wot 1 tdtiy
Sfiiv chug krutli* ta ten wopadesh

52.

yosay sftelfiit/ris tapatas

oy s/iel cUy pndfii-won u desk

soy s/iel shiba-wonis gratas
SJdv ckuy &rtitk u ta fan wopactisk,

53.

rav w&ta thali-tJiali topHan
topHan wottom u wottom u desk

Warun mata litka-garu atftan
Shiv elmy faM" toy Un u

54.

yilay matru-rwp* 1 pay
yihay Widrye-ri&p* kari vishesh

yikay mdi/H-riip* ani* zuv heye
Shit? clmy JtrtitJiP ta %en wopadesJi

[Hajanaka Bliaskara's Sanskrit translation of 51-54.

prasudaram kle&ayutam mnlya
jaio maldkto *py anuydti samtatam

yatpreritak saukhyatlhiya narali stnm
kastma labkyan $rm tarn guwli hvam

yatlia &lMlva svajdtMeddt
pltfiddmdndvidharupalh&gini

tathfava yo 'nantatayd vibhdti
kastena, labhyam $rm tarn giwoh umm

Mate Male $vaih, kiranair yMd ravih

jalam tathd sarvajagadgr/ifcu

51-4.] LALLA-VAKYANI 71

Wtdrydsvartipena vildsajkdrinl
gac chaklir ante wrtirupam eti ca
kastena hlliyam frnu, tarn guroh Svam
(From the printed edition.)

The following is the text of 52, 53, and 54 in Stein B :-^

it

II $3 II

51. Comely and full of sap were they born from
the mother,

After causing many a pang to her womb.

Again and again thither did they come, and
waited at that door.

Hardly, in sooth, is iva to be found, Meditate
therefore on the doctrine.

52. The same rock that serveth for a pedestal or
for a pavement

Eeally is but (part of) a district of the earth.

Or the same rock may become (a millstone)
for a handsome mill.

Hardly, in sooth, is Siva to be found. Meditate
therefore on the doctrine.

72 LALLA-VAKYANI [51-4.

53. Doth not the sun cause (everything) to glow in
every region ?

Doth it cause only each good land to glow ?
Doth not Varuna enter into every house ?
Hardly, in sooth, is Siva to be found. Meditate
therefore on the doctrine.

54. The same woman is a mother, and giveth milk
unto her babe.

The same woman, as a wife, hath her special
character.

The same woman, as a deceiver, endeth by
taking thy life.

Hardly, in sooth, is Siva to be found. Meditate
therefore on the doctrine.

A group of verses linked together by their fourth lines,
which are identical in each. Verse 80 belongs also to
this group.

51. The soul, while still in the womb of its mother,
remembers its former births, and determines to seek
release from future transmigration as soon as it is born.
But directly it is born it forgets all this, and, becoming-
entangled in worldly desires, is condemned to visit
wombs again and again, and to wait a,t their doors for
admission again into the world. Cf. Verse 87.

As the attainment of Siva is thus hard for a mortal
once he is born, Lalla entreats him to heed her doctrine,
and thus to obtain release.

52. All things are but forms of tbe Supreme. She
uses as a parable the fact that though a pedestal, a
pavement, a tract of land, or a millstone, may all differ
widely in appearance, at bottom they are all the same
only stone.

53. Another parable showing the universality of the
Supreme. He is everywhere without exception, just as
the sun shines impartially on every spot in the earth,
and just as Varana, the god of water, is found in every
house, and not only in the houses of the good. The facts
described are those mentioned in Matt, v. 45, but the
application is different.

55.] LALLA-VAKYANI 73

54. Another parable to the same effect. The infinite
variety of a woman, as a mother, as a wife, or as a Delilah.
Yet she is, throughout all, the same a woman. The
Sanskrit translation makes the Delilah to be the faifi,
which misleads people from the truth, appearing at one
time as a mother, and at another as a wife, but always
a misleader.

55.

kanflev geli 1eJ kanctec wan-wds

vepJiol** 1 man nd ratith ta was
ittu rath ganz^nth pamtn li xhwds

yniliuy cliukh ta tyitthuy as

[Kajanaka Bliaskara's Sanskrit translation.

yrJie nivd&o na vimohahetur

vaiiB 'tkavdyogivaraiJi pradistah
divdiiuam svdtmaviwarsaudilliyd

yathd stliitas tvaw paramo 'sty npayah

(From the printed edition.)]

Some have abandoned home, some have aban-
doned hermitage ;

But fruitless is every abiding-place, if thou
hast not thy mind under subjection,

Day and night counting each breath,

As thou art, so there abide.

Some, in the hope of salvation, have abandoned house
and home for a hermit's life, and others, in a like hope,
have given up such a life, and have become ordinary
householders. But it matters not where one lives, so
long as one applies oneself to learning the mysteries of
Self. The devotee should practise restraining his breath
one of the chief means of securing emancipation. See
Verses 37 and 40 and Vocabulary s. vv. mAi and prdn 2.

'Caelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt.'

74 LALLA-VAKIANI [56,57.

56.

ye gord Parameshwara, !

Ldvtam be chuy autar vyod u
dosheway woyaddn Jcandd-purd

h a h kawa t a nm u to, hah kawa M u

57.

ndbi-sfMna, chey prakreth zalawam
hidis tarn yeti jjrdn w&ta-goV*'

bm/imdnda pet ha sufi nadi wahawani
h a k tawa i^nin^ to, hah tawa tot*

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation of 56 and 57.

guro I mamtutam iipadesam ekam

kumsva bodhdptikaram daydtah
hdh-huh imau $tah samam dsyajdtdv
'sti Mh Aim atfia, huh su&tah

ndlhyutthito hdh jathardgnitapto

huh dvddasdntdc c/iuirdt sar
hdh $rdnab?ititd 'sty atha huh apdnah

Mdhdnta evam munibhih pradistah

(From the printed edition. The a of mamfatam and i of kirn are
lengthened before the caesura ; cf. verses 32 and 50.)

The following is the text of 56 and 57 in Stein B :~

gasft (sic) frf ii wi cnft ii 88 11

tg^ *Jcft il

(sic) fT? II <W cfcft II gq II]

56, 57.J LALLA-VAKYANI 75

56. my Teacher ! Thou who art as God to me !
Explain thou to me the inner meaning ; for it

is known to thee.

Two breathings are there, both taking their
rise in the City of the Bulb.

Why then is h a h cold, and JiaJi hot ?

57. The region of the navel is by nature fiery hot.
Thence proceedeth thy vital air, rising to thy

throat, (and issueth from thy mouth as Mh).

When it meeteth the river flowing from the
BraJimcHrmdhra (it issueth from thy mouth as h a h),

And therefore Jfli is cold, and JiaJi is hot.

These two verses refer to the practice of yjdndyama,
or suppressing the breath in order to obtain yoga, or
union with the Supreme. Expiration and inhalation are
carefully watched and controlled by the yogi. Lallfi
notices that some of her expirations, which she names
l a h y are cool, while others, which she calls hah, are hot.
She addresses her guru, or spiritual teacher, whom she
has been taught, like all devotees, to recognize as the
representative to her of God.

In order to understand the reply, it must be explained
that, according to Saiva teaching, situated within the
body, between the pudendum and the navel, is a kanda>
or bulb, the focus of all bodily action, from which radiate
the various nddit, or tubes, through which circulate the
prdna*, or vital airs. This kanda is called kaiula-purd, or
' City of the Bulb ', in verse 56, and nabi-Mdn, or that
which has its position near the navel, in verse 57. One
of the vital airs called the prdna /car* lo)(rjv rises
directly from the kanda through the windpipe, and is
expired through the mouth. Hence it is hot. For
further particulars, see the Note on Yoga, 5, and the
Vocabulary, s. vv. kandd-pitrd, nddi t and pran> 2. So
much for the hot air.

The Bralna-randhra is the anterior fontanelle in the
upper part of the head ( 5, 27). Near this is the
sahawdra, ( 19, 20, 21, 27), a spot which is the upper
extremity of the tube called the twxumnd nadi, the other
extremity of which is the kanda already mentioned.

76 LALLA-VAKYANI [58.

This saJiasrdra, is considered to be the abode of that
emanation of the Supreme Siva which is the man's Self,
and which is mystically spoken of as the moon. The
moon is universally looked upon as the source of coldness,
and hence the vital air passing 1 down the susnnmd nddi is
cold. When this meets the hot air, pwna, coming
upwards from the kanda (close to which is the microcosmic
sun, 5, 8, 9, 21), tia&prdw is deprived of its heat by
contact with the down-flowing stream, and hence, in this
case, the expired air is cold. For further particulars, see
the Vocabulary, s. v. torn.

H^k is a short abrupt expiration, and kali is a prolonged
one ; and at the bottom of the teacher's explanation lies
the idea that in the short expiration the hot upward
current of air suddenly meets the downward current of
cold air, and is checked by it. Hence it is cooled. On
the other hand, a prolonged expiration has time to
recover itself and to regain its heat. The sun is located
in the pelvis, and so the upward breath is hot ; and the
moon is at the brain, and its currents are downwards and
cold.

58.

yili rasani wo^orun tly manthfir
yuhuy log u Md ihJias par&un

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation.

Jcaromi ytii karma tad eva ptijd
vadami yac cdpl tad eva matitrah

yad eva, cdyati taflifiiva yogdd

dravyain tad evdsti mamafca tantram

(From the printed edition.)
The following is the text of Stein B :

59.] LALLA-YAKYANI 77

Whate'er work I did, that was worship.

Whate'er I uttered with my tongue, that was
a mystic formula.

This recognition, and this alone, became one
with my body,

That this alone is the essence of the scriptures
of the Supreme Siva.

Laborare est orare ; but the labour, it is understood, must
be dedicated to the Supreme. When all that one does,
and all that one says is dedicated to Him, this is equal
to all burnt offerings and sacrifices.

59.

Wi nd J)6k nd dJiy'iy nd

gaiiv ptinay Sarwa-kriy maMth
anya,u clytitJmkh ke&k nd mway

gay sath lay* pwr pashlth

[RajSnaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation.

ndham na ca tvau na ca kdpi cared

dhydnasya yogydtra pade 'ttiante
ko 'py anvayas cdtra na Vhati tamdfl

vismdrya Imam svam ivdtra $a,dbhih

(From the printed edition.)]

There is no * Thou ', no * I ', no object of con-
templation, not even contemplation.

It is only the All-Creator, who Himself became
lost in forgetfulness.

The blind folk saw not any meaning in this,

But when they saw the Supreme, the seven
worlds became lost in nothingness.

All that exists is but the Supreme in one or other of
His manifestations. When, therefore, an untaught man
knows not the unity of Self and all creation with the

78 LALLA-VAKYANI [60

Supreme Self, and imagines that there is a difference
between 'I* and 'thou', or between contemplation and
its object, ifc is really the Supreme, temporarily blinded
by His own illusive power, Who is lost in this ignorance.
This paradox, and the logical inference to be derived
from it cannot be understood by the blind, i, e. those who
are sunk in ignorance of the nature of things. But
when a man has once grasped the facts, the whole
universe disappears for him, and he gains release.

The last line may also be translated, ' but good men
become absorbed in Him, when once they gain sight of
the Supreme/ So interpreted by Rajanaka Bhaskara.

60.

tfiddan lM*g pdm-pdnas
khcpitk gydnas wfitum na kfi&k

lay Jcit,r h m ia wo^s al-fkanas
Mr* Mr* liana ta cSwdn na ktih

[Rajanaka Bhaskara's Sanskrit translation.
svdtmanvesanayatnaffldtraniratd wdntd tato Viam stJtitd

laMhvdmndasurdgrham ca, tad emu (tntvdtra Ikdwldny alat'n
purndny eva tatkapi tatra mmukhah pr&pto janah socitak

(From the printed edition. The third half-line does not scan, the
metre being Sardulavikridita. The u of anu should be long. As it
falls on the csesura, possibly the author intended it to be long by
metrical licence. There are similar cases in his translations of
verses 32, 50, and 56 ; cf. also verse 45.)]

I searched for myself, and wearied myself in
vain,

For no bne hath, I ween, e'er by such efforts
reached the hidden knowledge.

Then absorbed I myself in It, and straightway
reached the abode of nectar,

Where there are many filled jars, but no one
drinketh from them.

61.] LALLA-VAKYANI 79

No hi&nan efforts can gain the perfect knowledge.
This is obtained only by quietism and the grace of the
Supreme. ' It ' in which Lalla became absorbed is the tat of
the famous Upanisadic formula tat tvam asi, ' thou art It ',
the essence of the Saiva doctrines. Once she had grasped
the identity of her Self with the Supreme Self, she
reached the Al-thdn. This word means literally 'the
abode of wine ', i. e. nectar. The abode of nectar is
the moon, in which nectar is produced month by month.
As explained under verses 56, 57, and in the Note on
Yoga, 19, a mystic moon, representing fche Supreme,
exists in the spot in the brain called the sakasmra. By
practising yoga, a devotee is finally absorbed microeosmic-
ally into the sakasrdra, and maerocosnrically into the
Supreme. Lalla laments that so few avail themselves of
this means of salvation. The wine of salvation is there,
but few there be that drink of it.

The pronominal suffix m in wotum is a kind of dativw
conmorliy and mea.ns ' in my opinion '.

Al-thdn is also explained as a contraction of alam-stkana,
the place of 'enough', where everything is exactly
balanced, and which can only be described by negation
of all qualifications, 'nSli, n$ti\ i.e. the Supreme. In
either interpretation the resultant meaning is the same.

61.

yih karm kara petartm pdna$
arzun larzun biyis kyut u
antih* layi-ro$t u pusMrun swdtmas
ada yur* ga&ha to, im^ chum hyot*

[The following is the text of Stein B :

Rf
f%

"P85

Whatever work I may do, the burden of the
completion thereof lieth on myself,

But the earnings and the collecting of the
fruits thereof are another's.

80 LALLA-VAKYANI [62

If in the end, without thought for their fruits,
I lay these works as an offering before the Supreme
Self,

Then, where'er I may go, there is it well
for me.

The vanity of human wishes. The ordinary worldling
performs actions for the sake of what he may gain by
them; but these gains cannot follow him to another
world. They are left behind to his l laughing heirs '.

The true believer, without thought of reward, does his
duty, and offers all that he does to God ; and it is he
who after death reaps the full fruit of his actions in the
shape of final release. This is one of the fundamental
doctrines of the Bhagavail Gttd. If a man engages in
worldly affairs for the lusts of the flesh, he damns his
soul ; if he takes them up without regard to their fruits,
solely from the sense of duty (karma-yoga) and the love of
God (Wiakti-yGga\ he saves his soul.

62.

rape* iffi yem^ kartal tyoj* 1

sivargas boy 1 chuy faph toy dan
sahazas bey* yem* gtira-kath fty*

e-tqj* chug panunuy pan

He who gaineth a kingdom is he who hath
wielded a sword.

He who gaineth paradise is he who mortifieth
himself and who giveth in charity,

He who hath knowledge of the nature of the
Self, is he who followeth the Guru's teaching.

That which reapeth the fruit of virtue and of
vice is a man's own Self.

Every action has its fruit. The exercise of worldly
activity produces worldly prosperity. If a man pursues
a formal religion, he reaps the fruit in paradise, which

63.] LALLA-VAKYANI 81

is transient, and from which, when the fruits of his
pious actions have been exhausted, he will be subject to
rebirth.

The one hope of ultimate release is the acquirement of
the true knowledge of the Self,, and this can only be
acquired from the teaching of a Saiva Guru, or spiritual
preceptor.

63.

jnana-marg cfwy hdka-wor*

ldma-feakra-po$h u profi u Jcriy dor*

The way of knowledge is a garden of herbs.

Thou must enclose it with the hedge of quietism
and self-restraint and pious deeds.

Thus will thy former deeds be offered like
beasts at the Mothers' sacrifice,

And, by steady eating of its crop, the garden
will become empty and bare.

Deeds are of two kinds, the deeds of former lives, of
which the accumulated results still persist, and the deeds
done in the present life. Both kinds have results,
through the action of the endless chain of cause and
effect, and so long as these results continue to, exist,
ultimate release is impossible.

In the garden of knowledge, the herbs are the deeds of
the present life. It must be carefully guarded from
outside temptations by the performance of the daily
obligatory religious rites and the practice of quietism and
self-restraint. In this garden are allowed to browse the
goats destined to sacrifice, typifying the works of former
lives, the fruits of which are the existing crop the deeds
of the present life. Hemmed in by the hedge of holy
works, the goats are compelled to eat this crop, or, in
other words, the works of former lives are compelled to
render themselves unfruitful. This unfruitfulness is
consummated by the sacrifice of the goats, and when

82 LALLA-VAKYANI [64, 65.

that is accomplished^he soul becomes assimilated to the
Supreme Void, the Smya. See Vocabulary, s. T. 9hufL

A Lama" is one of the divine Mothers, to whom animals
are offered in sacrifice. See Vocabulary, s.v. lama, for
further particulars.

64

kalan, kdla-zofi yid a way &e gol a
vendiv giJi wd veudiv wan-wds
zonith sarwa-gath Probh u amol u

[The following is the text of Stein B :

II

l IT^II ^R II

II cWt^^TO II ^ II

This is a mixture of Nos. 55 and 64.]

If, in flux of time, thou hast destroyed the
whole body of thy desires,

Choose ye a home-life, or choose ye a hermitage.

If thou wilt come to know that the Lord is
all-pervading and without taint,

Then, as thou wilt know, so wilt thou be.

Freedom from desire and knowledge of the nature of
the Self #ive ultimate release, whether a man lead the
life of a householder or bury himself in a hermitage.
The mode of life is immaterial With this knowledge,
his own soul becomes assimilated to his 'conception of
the nature of the Supreme ; and he becomes spiritually
one with Him.

65.

Shiwa SMwa karan Jiamsa-gatk soritk

ruzith vewalid) 4 den kyoh rath
?dgi~ro$fP aduf 1 yutf* man karith

Ids* u

66.] LALLA-VAKYANI 83

[The following is the text of Stein B :

fin* Ki'fl

This is a mixture of Nos. 5 and 65.]

He who ever calleth on the name of Siva and
who beareth in mind the Way of the Swan,

Even if night and day he remain busy with
his worldly calling,

And who without thought for fruits maketh
his mind non-dualist,

On him alone is ever gracious the Lord of the
Chiefest of gods.

The Way of the Swan is a mystic name for the
celebrated formula so 'ham, I am He (cf. the tat tvam asi 9
thou art It, of verse 60). In Sanskrit letters, if the
words so 'bam be reversed, they become hamsak) a word
which means 'swan'. Hence the origin of the term.
The devout believer must perform his necessary religious
duties, but, as explained under verse 61, without thought
of the reward that they may bring. Hamw is a term
often applied to the Supreme Siva dwelling in the
Sahasr&ra and identical with the individual soul (see
Note on Yoga, 20). The full title, in this sense, is
Parama-hamsa. The word is also used to indicate the
Ajapa mantra. See verse 40.

The non-dualist mind is that which fully recognizes
the identity of the Self with the Supreme Self, that all
is one, not two, or manifold.

tarmwi katitli dititk pan? panas

tyuth* ky&k wavyoth ta pJialiUy sdw u
mwja* wop&flesk gay* nnz* dumatas
da&a$ gor dparith row 1 *
G2

84 LALLA-VAKYANI [67.

Thou hast cut up the hide and pegged it down,
all for thyself.

Hast thou sown such seed that it will bear
abounding fruit ?

Fool! teaching proffered to thee is but balls
flung at a boundary-pillar.

It is all lost, as though sweet stuff were fed
unto a tawny bullock.

Just as a degraded Camr, whose whole occupation is
with that which is dead and foul, cares for a hide by
cutting it into its intended shape and pegging it out to
dry, so the worldly man cherishes his body, which itself
is but a hide, and stretches it out over the world of
enjoyment with the pegs of desire. On the other hand,
the wise man is like a decent husbandman. He sows
the living seed that shall spring up and bear the harvest
of spiritual blessing.

Instruction given to the foolish worldly man returns
to the giver, as a ball in the game of hockey bounds
back from one of the goal-pillars.

To give instruction to such a person is as much lost
labour as it is to feed a lusty bullock with sweetmeats in
the hope of increasing its milk. 'Bullock's milk* is
a common phrase used to indicate a hoped-for but
impossible result. Here the fool not only believes in its
existence but tries to increase its yield. Gr, molasses,
is often given to a cow to increase her milk. The fool
tries it on a bullock.

67.

laliik lalitfi waday lo-ddy

Utta I muhuft yeyiy nay
rozly wpaia tth-fangaiiic* May

niza-swarupk kyak motkuy hay

Good Sir, for thee will I keep weeping with
gentle sound and gentle words.

My Soul! love for the world, begotten of
illusion, hath befallen thee.

68.] LALLA-VAKYANI 85

Not even the shadow of thine iron anchor will
survive for thee.

Alas ! why hast thou forgotten the nature of
thy Self?

Lalla addresses herself as c Good Sir '.

The iron anchor a common object in Kashmir navig-
able riversis worldly possessions that tie a man's soul
down to this world. None of these will he carry with
him after death.

68.

Lai loll bayes soman-btiga-baras
wucJium Shiwas SJiek a th tmlith ta wdh

tat 1 lay kur^m amreta-saras
zinday marax ta me kari kydh

I, Lalla, passed in through the door of the
jasmine-garden of my soul.

And there, Joy ! saw I Siva seated united
with His Sakti.

There became I absorbed in the lake of
neetar.

Now, what can (existence) do unto me ? For,
even though alive, I shall in it be dead.

The first line contains a paronomasia. The word
$ma may be the Persian word meaning ' jasmine \ or
may be the Indian word meaning 'my own mind' or
f soul '. We have attempted to indicate this in the
translation.

Siva united in one with His Sakti, or energic power,
is the highest form of the Supreme Self. The lake of
nectar is a metaphor for the bliss of union with the
Supreme. Drowned in this, though alive, Lalla is as it
were dead, and is certain of release from future biitb,
liie, or death.

86 LALLA-VAKYANI [69, 70.

fatta-turog wagi keth rotum
belith milavith dasJie-nddi-wdv

shunes shunali mllitk gatw

"With a rein did I hold back the steed of my
thought.

By ardent practice did I bring together the
vital airs of my ten nadis.

Therefore did the digit of the moon melt and
descend unto me,

And a void became merged within the Void.

The rein by which she holds back the steed of her
thought is the absence of desire.

The ndflu are the tubes in the body through which
the vital airs are believed to circulate, and it is the
devotee's object to bring these airs under subjection.
See the Vocabulary s. vv. ndfa and prdn } 2, and Note oa
Yoga, 5, 21.

The mystic moon in the sakasrwra has been explained
above under verses 40 and 56, 57. When the devotee
has completely blocked the circulation of his vital airs,
this moon distils nectar, as there explained. See also
Note on Yoga, 8, 19, 21, 22.

For the empty void of matter merging into the great
Void, see verse 11.

70.

&& amara-patM tltov*zi
tih tromtli lagi zude*

iati tf-h no sfutfzi midor*zi
ddda,-$hw u ta koche no mwle^

fV.LiW

71.] LALLA-VAKYANI 87

[The following is the text of Stein B :

cfT

^ft sfteBt cfT <ff$I <TT TT $35 il ^ tl

The MS. numbers this 19 by error.]

Put thou thy thoughts upon the path of
immortality.

If thou leave them without guidance, into evil
state will they fall.

There, be thou not fearful, but be thou very
courageous.

For they are like unto a suckling child, that
tosseth restless on its mother's bosom.

For the literal meaning of the last line, see the
Vocabulary, s. v. mumn.

71.

m&rukk mara-butfi Mm Tcmd lul
na-ta Mn barith mariney pan

visKey Mond u kyah kyutk'"' druw u zdn
[The following is the text in Stein B (in which it has no number) :

In the fourth line, the MS. is worm-eaten, and one word is
destroyed. The whole is corrupt, and is unintelligible as it stands.]

88 LALLA-VAKYANI [72.

Murder thou the murderous demons, lust,
anger, and desire.

Otherwise they will aim their arrows, and
destroy thy Self.

With careful thought, by meditation on thy
Self, give to them quietism as their only food.

Then wilt thou know what, and how little
firm, is their realm of power.

The arrows are temptations to worldliness.

72.

itta ! wondas Wiayu mo lar
cyon* Unlit kardn pdna Andcl
it kd-zanaiii hhod bari, kar
kewal tasonduy taruk u nod

Ah restless mind! have no fear within th;
heart.

The Beginningless One Himself taketh though
for thee,

(And considereth) how hunger may fall from
thee.

Utter, therefore, to Him alone the cry of
salvation.

Trust in God for the things of this life, and He will
provide. No formal rites are required in order to secure
his protection. All that is necessary is unceasingly to
utter the 'unobstructed cry* (see verses 14, 15), i. e. the
mystic syllable dm> which properly uttered, and with
faith, will secure the presence of the Supreme, Who its
everything that man can need.

73-6.] LALLA-VAKYANI 89

73.

Mmar cJiatk a r rafJtu simJiasan
Mad mte-ras tula-paryblck

\ womtJi yiti Mir dsamin" 1
ko-zana kasiy mamnuft 1

74.

ky&h lo(]uk

*t)tti u ltiritJi peyiy tama-pS&h
yema-bath kamiey kofi c/iora-ddre

ko-zana tasty mara?mfi u> sJtokh

75.

karm z a fi karati fa a h komhifJt
yewa labakJt paralokas Skit

woth khas surya-mawhl WmlHJi
taway fealiy mamnwi* shvkh

76.

jfidndt* ambar pairith tane

yim pad Lali clap* tim Jiredi bkh

Mrd?^ pranawak* lay kor u Lale
Wth-jyoti kb^n maraniin* shokh

[The following is the text of 73-76 in Stein B :

II $<i II

" ii 80 (

90 L LLA-VAKYANI [7 3 ~ 6

II

73. A royal chowiy, sunshade, chariot, throne,

Happy revels, the pleasures of the theatre,
a bed of cotton down,

Bethink thee which of these is lasting in
this world,

And how can it take from thee the fear of
death.

71. In thy illusion why didst thou sink in the
stream of the ocean of existence?

When thou hadst destroyed the high-banked
road, there came before thee the slough of spiritual
darkness.

At the appointed time will Yama's apparitors
drag thee off in woful plight.

Who can take from thee the fear of death ?

75. Works two are there, and causes three. On
them practise thou the JcwnlhaJca-yoga.

Then ; in another world, wilt thou gain the
mark of honour.

Arise, mount, pierce through the sun's disk.
Then will flee from thee the fear of death.

76. Clothe thou thy body in the garb of knowledge.
Brand thou on thy heart the verses that Lalla

spake.

73-6.] LALLA-VAKYANI 91

With the help of the pranava Lalla absorbed
herself

In union with the Soul-light, and so expelled
the fear of death.

These four verses form, a group.

73. The chowry, or fly-whisk, and the sunshade are
emblems of royalty. So strong is this feeling about the
sunshade, or, in plain English, the umbrella, that some
years ago a serious riot took place in southern India, due
to the fact that some low-caste people had taken, to
going about with cheap cotton umbrellas imported from
England. People of such castes had no right to protect
themselves from the sun or rain !

74. The high-banked road is the way of truth, by
which the Self is enabled to approach the Supreme
Self. These high embanked roads across marshy country
are common features of a Kashmiri landscape.

Yam a is the god who rules the land of shades. His
apparitors carry oiT the soul after death for judgement by
him, cruelly treating it on the way. Chora-dare karun
is the name of a punishment, in which the criminal is
dragged along the ground till the blood flows from his
body in streams.

75. Works are of two kinds, good and bad. There
are three causes of the apparent existence of the material
world, which are technically known as mala* or impurities.
These are (1) dnara-mala^ or the impurity due to the
soul deeming itself to be finite ; (2) mayiya-mala> or the
impurity due to the cognition that one thing is different
from another ; and (3) k&rma-mala, resulting in action
the producer of pleasure and pain.

It is the devotee's business to destroy the fruits of all
works, whether good or bad, and to destroy these malas.
This he does by practising yoga. One important form of
yoga is the tumbJiaka-ydga, in which the breath is entirely
suspended, Kombith literally means * bottling up (the
breath) '. Cf. verse 34, and see the Vocabulary, s. vv.
Mr an and kuml u . The disembodied soul, on its way to
emancipation, is said to pass through the sun's orb on its
way to union with the Supreme.

76. The jpranava is one of the names of the mystic
syllable dm, for which see verses 14, 15,

92 LALLA-VAKYANI

77.

wdrifl poitfe luih tim phal-Jianfi
keiana-ddna-wa&hur klieth

tad ay zamkli paramu pad feanfa
luslny ttfo/t*-MSr koh-ti na kJitlh

[The following is the text of Stein B :

See remarks on verse 10,]

Ah! tliou hasty one, feed thou those fatted
rams the five principles of experience on the
grain and cates of spiritual meditation, and then
slay them.

Not till then wilt thou gain the knowledge of
the place of the Supreme, and (thou wilt also know
that) if thou violate custom it is all the same, and
causeth thee no loss.

Lai la is said to have made a practice of going about
in a nude condition, ' for \ said she, ' he only is a man
who fears God, and there are few such about'. See
verse 94 and the note to K. Pr. } p. 20, below. This
verse appears to be an answer of hers to some woman
who remonstrated with her for not following the usual
customs in regard to female dress.

The five Wiutas, or maJiaMutas, are the five factors
constituting the principles of experience of the sensible
universe. They are solidity, liquidity, formativity,
aeriality, and vacuity. For further particulars, see the
Vocabulary, s. v. W&h, 2.

Just as a ram fattened on fruits and such like has bnt
the smallest beginning in his mother's womb, and grows
to great size and vigour before he is ready for sacrifice,
so these principles are developed from earlier, subtil e a
capacities (tanmatms), and under the influence of the

78, 79.] LALLA-VAKYANI 93

chain of cause and effect, which result in illusion
(mayo), become powerful and conceal from the soul its
knowledge of its real Self.

In order to attain to true knowledge, the seeker must
first certify to himself the essential nothingness of these
iive Ihukas^ and cause them to disappear one by one from
his experience, by meditating on, and realizing, the
nature of Self. Just as a fatted ram is prepared for
sacrifice and death by feeding it on grain and cakes,
so these mast be prepared for disappearance by this
meditation and realization.

The { violation of custom J is literally e the left-handed
conduct* and there is probably a suggestion of the
vdma-mdrga, or left-handed, Kauia, ritual. Cf. the last
line of verse 10.

78.

his dingi ta kus zdgi

kus sar watari teliy
kus haras yuzi lugi

tins pamma-pad mliy

79.

man clingi ta akol zdgi

doffi sar panca-yuid'*' watari telly
swa-vff&lra-pofi; haras pUzi Idgi

parama-pad betaua-Shiv weliy

[The following is the text of 78 and 79 in Stein B (in which they
have no number :

In this verse the MS. is worm-eaten, and four aksaras are destroyed
in the third line. These I havs supplied from verse 79. They are
enclosed in brackets.

94 LALLA-VAKYANI [78, 79

(sic)

(sic)

78. Who is he that is wrapped in sleep, and who
is he that is awake ?

What lake is that which continually oozeth
away ?

What is that which a man may offer in worship
toHara?

What is that supreme station to which thou
wilt attain ?

79. The mind is he who is wrapped in sleep, and
when it hath transcended the Jcula it is he who is
awake.

The five organs are the lake that continually
oozeth away.

That holy thing which a man may offer in
worship to Hara is the discrimination of the Self.

That supreme station to which thou wilt attain
is the Spirit-Siva.

78. Hara is a name of Siva, the personal form of the
impersonal Supreme,

79. The manas, or mind, is, roughly speaking, the
thinking faculty. For a more accurate description, see
the Vocabulary, s. v. man.

The kula, or family, is a group of the following
essentials for the experience of the existence of the Self,
as distinct from the Supreme Self :(!) the individual
soul ; (2) Prakrti, or primal matter, that on which the
individual soul acts, and which reacts on it ; (3) space
i.e. the conception of limitation in space; (4) time i.e.
the conception of limitation in time; and (5-9) the five
IMtas, or principles of experience, as described under
verse 77. When the mind transcends these, and recog-

80.] LALLA-VAKYANI 95

nizes its Self as one with the limitless Supreme Self, it
is in a state of grace, or, as here said, it is awake. The
commentary quotes here the following lines ; the first is
anonymous, and the rest = Bhagavad GUa, ii. 69 :
mana eva manusyandm Mramm, landJia-mdhaydJi \\
yd nitd saroa-bhtitdndm ta$i/dm jdgarti sathyami I
ya^ydmjdgrati btiutani sd ntid pafyald mum eh II
It is the mind alone that is the cause of men's

entanglement and of their release.
In that which to all embodied beings is night, doth

the ascetic remain awake,

And that in which they wake, is the night for the
saint who hath eyes to see.

The five organs, or principles, of action are those of
generation, excretion, locomotion, handling, and ex-
pression by voice. The continual exercise of these
takes away the power of Self-realization.

80.

zanaJio nddi-dal mana ratitJi
tiatit/i w&tith) TmtitJi klesh

zdnaJio ada asta rasdy&i gatitli
Sliiv chuy kruth u ta %en wopadesJi

[The following is the text of Stein B :

If I had known how by my mind to bring into
subjection my nGdis,

How to cut, how to bind up ; then should I
have known how to crush sorrow,

And gradually to compound the Great Elixir.

Hardly, in sooth, is iva to be found. Meditate
therefore on the doctrine.

96 LALLA-VAKYANI [81.

As previously explained (see Note on Yoga, 5, 21,
and verse 69), the ncul'm are the tubes through which the
vital airs circulate. It, is the devotee's business to bring-
the latter under control. Isatwi watun^ cutting and
binding up, is the Kashmiri term for operative surgery.
Lalla implies that this must be performed upon the
mind, which must be cut away from the organs of action
(see the preceding Verse), and bound up by self-restraint
and quietism.

The Elixir of Life is, of course, the knowledge of the
Self.

For the final line, compare verses 51-54.

81.

-z
rangan lllaiifl kiyem kaifea

mawts/ie-mdmsafci' nail
Lai ta (/auv me

[The following is the text of Stein B :
(This verse is given twice in the MS. with slightly differing readings.)

II TOf

<%\y*{ H

^fi en ^t

However oft I quaffed that wine the water of

the Sindhu,

However many parts I played upon the stage,
However many lumps of human flesh I ate,
Still I am the same Lalla, and what profit was

it all to me ?

82.] LALLA-VAKYIBI 97

She had been born again and again, but in former
births she had not known the Self. The Sindhu is one
of the chief rivers of Kashmir, famous for its excellent
water. She had been born in various forms, divine,
human, bestial, as a worm, or what not, and each time
had drunk the water of the Sindhu, playing many parts
on the stage of human existence. She had been born
over and over again as a human being, so to speak
eating, i.e. experiencing, human flesh, and now at length
she has recognized that it has been the one Self all the
time, and that all these existences in ignorance had been
profitless.

82.

dut-fair ylli lui/c omwi
^Qu?i^ komm pamm u pan

$$?0ot u twvitk fa satJi mdrg rot urn
ieli Lai boh

When by concentration of my thoughts I
brought the pranava under my control,

I made my body like a blazing coal.

The six paths I traversed and gained the
seventh,

And then did I, Lalla, reach the place of
illumination.

The pranava is the mystic syllable OM } and here may
be taken as indicating any vital formula, such, for
instance, as tat iwm axi (see verse 60). She brought this
under control, i.e. she mastered it, and thus became
imbued with the truth. She then became able to
suppress her vital airs (see Note on Yoga, 21 and
Vocabulary s. vv. ndfli and pmn, 2), and thereby entered
into a state of grace. By this suppression her frame
became suffused with a holy fire.

The six ways are the six ca&ras, or seats of the six
subordinate Saktw that urge a man to action. They are
supposed to be located along what corresponds to the
spinal cord of a man's subtile body. The devotee has
to master these one by one, and then attains to the
seventh and highest station, or takasrara cakra, by

98 LALLA-VAKYANI [83, 84, 85.

meditating 1 on which he obtains final release. The whole
process is explained in greater detail in the Note on
Yoga, 9-21, and Vocabulary, s. vv. dek and wm.

The word sath-mdrg may mean either the seventh
path or the true path, in either case indicating the
sahasrara cakra.

83.

gdtulwdJb Mi wucJinm loelia-suty mardn

pan zaii liar an puliani wdwa lafi
nes$6o(l u akk wuchum wdzas mardn

tana Lai boh prdrdn Menem-nd jwak

A wise man saw I a-dying of hunger,

As the leaves fall with even a gentle wind in
the wintry month of Pausa.

And saw I also a fool beating his cook.

Since then have I, Lalla, been waiting for the
day when love for the world will be cut from me.

She has seen the injustice of this world, and longs for
freedom from the desire for existence. A man's wisdom
will not save him from starvation, or from liability to
death from even the slightest cause ; and a fool may be
rich and prosperous, whose only sorrow is that his cook
now and then does not sufficiently spice his food, and
who securely acts as a tyrant to him in consequence.

84.

\ onw yik kyutnP rang gom
cang gom featitk Jiucla-hudaney dagay
sdreniy padan kunuy wakJiunpyoni
Lali me trdg gom laga kami shdthay

85.

yiJi kydJi ositli yiJi kyuth u rang gom

lerong u karitfi gom laga kami shdtkay
tdlav-rdzaddne abakh clidn pyom

84, 85] LALLA-VAKYANI 99

84. What is this that hath happened? What
kind hath bechanced me?

*********

In all these, verses but one tale hath fallen to
my lot.

I, Lalla, have happened on a lake, and know
not on what sand-bank I shall run aground.

85. What is this that hath happened? What
kind hath bechanced me?

I made all things out of order, on what sand-
bank shall I run aground ?

#*####*#*

It turned out well for me, for I myself will
learn to know (my Self).

These are two of Lalla's hard sayings which are
unintelligible at the present day, although there is no
dispute as to the text.

84. The meaning of the word hucU-lnidaney injthe
second line of this verse is unknown to modern Kashmiris,
and without knowing their meaning, there is no clue to
the sense of the rest of the line. The remaining words
of the line in the modern language might mean, 'my
claw has heen cut (?) by a blow ', but whether they bore
this meaning in Lalla's time is doubtful.

The latter half of the verse is fairly plain. The one
plaint of all her verses is the miserable uncertainty of
human existence in this world, till a man has known the
Supreme.

85. In this verse it is the third line that is devoid of
meaning to Kashmiris of the present day. ^ The actual
words might mean { for plastering my ceiling I got a
clumsy carpenter 1 , but it is not likely that this is what
Lalla originally intended, or wrote. The word aba&Aia
not used nowadays, and there is no tradition as to its
meaning, but there is a word abakkwarm which means
'clumsy 3 .

_ I ~

100 LALLA-VAKYANI [86, 87.

86.

vazd-lam mill sapochikJi kolny

ku$-tdm feoliiy kyah-fum Jieth
grata, gauv land' toy yratan liyotP gohy

grata-wol u tolvy phal-pJiofi 1 heth

Once wast thou a swan, and now thou hast
become mute.

Some one, I know not who, hath run off with
something of thine.

As soon as the mill became stopped, the grain
channel became choked,

And away ran the miller with the grain.

This is another of Lai la's hard sayings, the true
interpretation of which is unknown. The swan is fabled
to have a very melodious voice, and (LalLa is addressing
herself) she whose voice was once like that of a swan has
now hecome dumh.

"When a mill-stone stops revolving, the orifice in the
upper stone, through which the grain is fed on its way
to being ground, becomes blocked up and hidden under
a pile of grain. The meaning of the metaphor, and who
is represented by the miller, is uncertain. The verse has
a curious echo of Ecclesiastes xii. 3-4. Perhaps Lalla
means that she has now found salvation, and is in a state
of silent rapture. Formerly she had preached volubly
(cf. verse 89) ; but now that she sees God she is silent.
God is the miller, who turns the mill of worldly ex-
perience in order to grind out the giain of the chastened
soul. Now He has finished His work. The mill is still,
the channel blocked by the husks, and the Miller has
taken to Himself the grain. But it must be understood
that this is entirely our own attempted interpretation,
and has no Kashmiri authority.

87.

niyhi karyoth garla

&ta kar-la, yeyiy
maram brotJiqy mar-Id

manth ta martaba h a riy

88.] LALLA-VAKYANI 101

88.
atka wa-bd trdwun Mar-Id !

tail ku,s-ba dtiriy

mil nanis k&rtal pei/iy

/ J. J &

87. Even while in thy mother's womb thou niadest
a vow.

When, Sir, will that vow come to thy remem-
brance ?

Die, Sir, even before thy death,

Then, when thy death cometh, great honour
will increase for thee.

88. Let not the ass loose to stray from thy guiding
hand,

Or, of a surety, will it devour thy neighbour's
saffron-garden.

Who then will there be there to offer his back
to thee to mount,

Where the sword will fall upon thy naked
form?

87. It is believed that while a child is in its mother's
womb it remembers all its former births, and resolves in
its coming life to act so as to acquire release from farther
transmigration. But directly it is born, recollection
of these previous existences disappears and it loses all
.memory of its resolution. The same idea is developed in
verse 51.

Here Lalla repi caches an unbeliever with this act of
forgetfulness. She advises him, while yet alive, to
become as one dead (cf. verse 12), by destroying the six-
enemies lust, wrath, desire, arrogance,, delusion, and
jealousy (see Vocabulary s. v. lub) and thus acquiring;
complete indifference to worldly temptations. The
resultant honour is, of course s absorption into the Supreme
'Self contrasted with the objects of the worldly ambition
practised by her auditor.

10.2 LALLA-VAKYANI [88.

The commentator here quotes the following apposite
lines from the Shagavad Gitd (v. 23) :

faknotiJtitiva yah wdlimipmk xanra-vimoksandt \
kama-krMMdbhavaw vegam sa yuktah sa suk/il narah II

He who has strength to bear here ere release from the
"body the passion born of love and wrath, is of the Rule,
he is a happy man. (Barnetfs Translation.)

88. The ass is the mind. Keep it under control, or it
will wander forth into strange heresies, and will suffer in
consequence.

The saffron-gardens are the most valuable cultivated
land in Kashmir. An ass loose in one might do in-
calculable damage, and would suffer accordingly. Appai-
ently, in Lalla's metaphor, the ass's owner, in such a case,
would be liable to the extreme penalty of the law.

In the second half of the verse, if the mind is not
controlled, and does not recognize the nature of Self, it
can give no help when its owner is at the point of death,
under the sword of Yama.

The commentator quotes as apposite the following
lines from the BJiagavad Gltd (ii. 60-63) :

yoiatb liy api Kdiintei/a pnrusasya vipamtah \
indriydni pramdfMni hamnti prasalham manah II
tani sarvdni samyawya yiiUa dslta mat-par aJi \
vase lii ya&y&iftnyani tasi/a prajM pr atuthiia it
cttyayato vuayan pnwsah samgas tes4pqjdi/ate \
sawgat samjayate kamali kdmat krodho 'bhijdyate \\
krotlJtdd Ihavati samnoliah sammofidt SMrti-mbJirawah I
mrti-bhram*dd luddhi-naw luddM-ndsdt pranafyati Ii

For though the prudent man strive, son of KuntI,
his fioward instruments of sense carry away his mind
perforce.

Let him hold all these in constraint and sit under the
Rule, given over to Me; for he who has his sense-
instruments under his sway has wisdom abidingly set.

In the man whose thoughts dwell on the ranges of
sense arises attachment to them ; from attachment is
born love ; from love springs wrath.

Prom wrath is confusion born ; from confusion wander-
ing of memory ; from breaking of memory wreck ot
understanding ; from wreck of understanding a man is
lost. (Earnelfs Translation.)

89, 90.] LALLA-VAKYANI 103

89.

laedri licdri prawdd konim

nador u ckmoa ta lieyiv md
pJmitli cfabdrajdn kydJi wonum

prdn ta riihun lieyw md

90.

prdn ta ruhun kunuy zomim

prdn bazith labi na sad
prdn lazith ke!i-ti no k1te:e

taway lobum '3d-/iam* sad

[In these verses a number of words have double
meanings, so that the whole has two different in-
terpretations. Compare verse 101. The first inter-
pretation is : ]

89. Helpless and wretched made I my cry in the
market,

'Here for you be lotus-stalks. Will ye not
buy?'

Then again I returned, and, behold, how well
I cried,

* Onions and garlic will ye not buy ? '

90. I came to know that onion and garlic are the
same.

If a man fry onion he will have no tasty dish.
If a man fry onion, let him not eat a scrap
thereof.

Therefore found I the flavour of fi I am He '.

89. Lotus-stalks stewed with meat are freely eaten in
Kashmir, and are sold in the markets.

90. Onions fried by themselves make only an evil-
smelling mess, of no use as food. The above is the
exoteric interpretation of the two verses. The sense is
not very great, and, unless there is some double meaning
in the words $d-Jiam> which we have not discovered, the
double entente breaks down in the last line of the
second verse.

104 LALLA-VAKYANI [89, 90.

[Thfc second, esoteric interpretation is : ]

89. Helpless and wretched made I my cry in the
"world,

4 Here be a thing of no worth. Will ye not
therefore take it? 3

Then again returning (to my senses), behold,
how well I cried,

' The breathing body and the soul will ye not
take (under your control) ? '

90. I came to know that the breathing body and
the soul are one.

That if a man cherish his body, the flavour
(of true bliss) he will not gain.

That if he cherish his body, therefrom will he
reap no true joy,

And so I gained for myself the flavour of
l l am He'.

89. In her early days, before she had reached a
knowledge of her Self, she had been offering 1 worthless
teaching to the people, and had urged them to accept it.
Then, again, when she had learnt the truth, she came
and urged them to practise yoga, by controlling their
vital breaths (see Vocabulary, s. vv. nd(U and pran^ 2)
and by mastering a knowledge of the nature of the soul.
The word prdn, vital breath, is here used to indicate the
body, which exists by breathing.

90. Cherishing the body and devoting oneself to
worldly enjoyments give no profit. The word ' to eat '
also means c to eat the good things of this life ', ( to enjoy
oneself, and this gives the double meaning to the third
line. Cherishing the body may give apparent temporary
pleasure, but even this is mixed with pain, and in the
end there is no profit only ceaseless soul-wandering.
Lalla grasps the fact, and thereby discovers the rapture
of the gieat truth contained in the formula * I am He ',
or tat Ivaw asi, 'thou art It', for which see verse 60.

91, 92.] LALLA-VAKYANI 03

91.

Sidflka-Ifali ! Siddho ! secla kathan kan tfuiv

Wi doll path-kali soran hjdh
Idlako! toti Mth'o <lvi rath tariv

kdl dv kuttidn ta kariv kydli

92.

IrotJi-kofi a san tit My keran

tang kfitlfi papan fawn -surf*
muje-kdrt atka-wd karith ta iteran

doh-den laran parade n-Mt?

91. Honoured Saint! Saint! Heedfully lend
thou ear unto my words.

Dost thou remember the days of yore ?

Children ! How will ye pass the days and
nights ?

Harder and harder becometh the age, and
what will ye do ?

92. In the coming days so malformed will be
natures,

That pears and apples will ripen with the
apricots.

Hand in hand, from the house will go forth
mother and daughter.

And with strange men will they consort day
after day.

91. A wail over the evil times in store. Even holy
men have no memory of past times and of past existences,
to profit by it. So then what chance have the children,
the coming generation, in this evil Kali age?

92. Times will become more and more evil, and there
is none to warn or to guide to the true knowledge.

106 LALLA-VAKYANI [93,

Human nature itself will change for the worse, as if
pears and apples, whose ripening time is the late autumn,
were to change and ripen with the apricots in the height
of the rainy season. All women will be unchaste. Mother
and daughter, hand in band, i.e. pimping for each
other, will go abroad in search of strange men.

The main idea of this verse has survived in a familiar
Kashmiri proverb, fell, M mail, dsan hyamatak* keran^
yvh kuth* 1 papan ^eran-snt^. When apples ripen at the
same time as apricots, then, father, will come the day
of resurrection, i.e. it will come on a day and at an
hour when men look not for it. Cf. K. Pr. 214.

iWi nowuy faind a rama nowuy

zalamay clyutkum nawam-nowwj
ytnapetha Lali me tan man <n6io%n

tana Lai loh nawam-uuio" 1 !/ cJifa

The soul is ever new and new ; the moon is
ever new and new.

So saw I the waste of waters ever new and new.

But since I, Lalla, scoured my body and my
mind,

I, Lalla, am ever new and new.

The human soul, subject to illusion and worldly desires,
is ever changing in its outward appearance, from birth to
birth, although it is always the same ; just as the moon
is always the same moon, though perpetually waxing and
waning.

The universe itself, though the same throughout, at
stated intervals undergoes dissolution into a waste of
waters, and is afterwards re-formed again; and Lalla
herself remembers seeing this in former births (cf.
verses 50 and 96).

Then at length Lalla scours illusion from her mind,
and she becomes a new creature, for now she knows
her Self.

94, 95.] LALLA-VAKYANI 107

94.

goran ioon u nam kumiy wa&wi

nel a m (lo^mm ctncl a r(ty a&un
suy gam Lall we lodkk fa wa&un

tawny m hyotum mngay na&ttn

My teacher spake to me but one precept.
He said unto me, ' from without enter thou the
inmost part '.

That to me became a rule and a precept,
And therefore naked began I to dance.

The Guru, or spiritual preceptor, COD fides to his
disciple the mysteries of religion. Lalla's account is
that he taught her to recognize the external world as
naught but an illusion, and to restrict her thoughts to
meditation on her inner Self. When she had grasped
the identity of her Self with the Supreme Self, she
learnt to appreciate all externals at their true value.
So she abandoned even her dress, and took to going
about naked.

With this may be compared the concluding lines of
verse 77, and the note to K. Pr. 20. The wandering
of Lalla in a nude condition is the subject of more than
one story in Kashmir. Here she says that she danced
in this state. Filled with the supreme rapture, she
behaved like a madwoman.

The dance, called tdnrfava, of the / naked devotee is
supposed to be a copy of the dance of Siva, typifying the
course of the cosmos under the god's rule. It implies
that the devotee has, wholly surrendered the world, and
become united with Siva.

95.

kgak kara poi&an dalim ta kaftan
wvkhrshun yith leje karit/i yim gaiy

soriy tarnation yitli nm lama/wn
atfa kyazi ravihe kdhan gav

108 LALLA-VAKYANI [96.

What shall I do to the five, to the ten, to the
eleven,

Who scraped out this pot and departed ?

Had they all united and pulled upon this
rope,

Then how should the cow of the eleven owners
have been lost ?

The 'five' are the five l//&tas, or principles of ex-
perience of the material world (see verse 77 and
Vocabulary, a, v. lukh, 2). The ' ten ' are the ten principal
and secondary vital airs (see Vocabulary, s.v. pwn 9 2).
The 'eleven 1 are the five organs (indtiya) of sense
(jMnetidriya), and the five organs of action (kam&idriya)
(see Vocabulary s. v. puttd*), together with the thinking-
faculty or mauas (see Vocabulary, s. v. man) which rules
them, as the eleventh.

If all these could be controlled, and were all united in
the one endeavour to compass Self-realization, there
would have been a chance of success ; but they all pull
in different directions, one misdirecting the soul hither,
and another thither, to the soul's ruin. It is like a cow
owned by eleven masters, each of whom holds it by a
separate rope, and each of whom pulls it in a different
direction. The result is the loss, L e. the destruction,
of the cow.

The 'pot 3 which they have scraped out is the soul.
Just as people take a pot of food, and ladle out its
contents, scraping out the last dregs; so these have
taken the last dregs of worldly enjoyment out of the
soul for their own purposes, and have then gone away
and left it helpless. They themselves have gained oiilv
temporary joys, while the soul has lost its opportunity ii
union with the Supreme.

96.

damiy f]itk' d m nacl waliawtiffiy
daniiy dy&tinm sum na ta tar

(I&mly fhtk^m tfar* pJiolawurty
dauiiy (li/tithtm gid na ta Mar

97] LALLA-YAKYANI 109

97.

flamy r]itJi h m ffuj u dazawu&y

damiy d$t/i*m pdndawan-Jiunz^ moji
dawiy fathom krojiy mas

96. For a moment saw I a river flowing.

For a moment saw I no bridge or means of
crossing.

For a moment saw I a bush all flowers.
For a moment saw I nor rose nor thorn.

97. For a moment saw I a cooking-hearth ablaze.
For a moment saw I nor fire nor smoke.

For a moment saw I the mother of the
Parnlavas,

For a moment saw I an aunt of a potter's wife.

These two verses form one of Lalla's best known
sayings. Another version will be found in K. Pr. 47.
The subject is the impermanence of everything material.
c But pleasures are like poppies spread,
You seize the flower, its bloom is shed ;
Or, like the snow-fall in the river,
A moment white, then melts for ever. 1

96. The river is a stream confined within bounds.
The next thing seen is the infinite waste of waters at
a general dissolution of the' universe. Cf, verses 50
and 93.

97. The Pan<Javas, the famous heroes of the Maha-
bharata, were kings, and their mother, KuntI, was A
queen. Yet, through treachery, they were all at one
time reduced to the direst misery, and wandered hungry
and thirsty till they came to the city of King Drupada.
Here, with their mother, the Pandavas, disguised as
mendicant Brahmanas, found refuge in the hut of a
potter, and supported themselves by begging. Lalla
adds that, the potter's wife, or her children, called Kuntl
their aunt. This is contrary to the Mahabharata story,

110 LALLA-VAKYANI [98

for it would make out that the Pandavas and their
mother posed as potters, not as Brahmanas. It is a
carious fact that the stories of the great Indian epics,
as told in Kashmir, sometimes differ widely from the
Sanskrit texts current in India proper. For instance,
in a Kashmiri Ramayana, Slta is represented as the
daughter of MandodarT, the wife of Havana.

98.

dyes wate gayes na wade

$nmau-$d/Jii-manz* lustum
candas wuchnm to, Mr na

ntiwa-taras (lima kyUJi lolt
* V.I. swa-mana-sotJii-manz
f V. 1. Har-nHv na ahe. Also ate

By a way I came, but I went not by the way.

While I was yet on the midst of the embank-
ment with its crazy bridges, the day failed for me.

I looked within my poke, and not a cowry
came to hand (or, ate, was there).

What shall I give for the ferry-fee ?

Or, if we adopt the alternative readings, we must
translate :

By a way I came, but I went not by the way.

While I was yet on the midst of the embank-
ment of my own mind, the day failed for me.

I looked within my poke, and found not Hara's
name.

What shall I give for a ferry-fee ?

Another of Lallans most popular sayings, current in
many forms besides the two quoted ahove. Another
version will he found in K. Pr. 18. Both the readings
given above are probably correct, and the verse has thus
a double meaning.

99.] LALLA-VAKYANI 111

By ( way s is meant a highway, as distinct from an
uncertain track. This highway is birth as a human
being capable of gaining salvation, and it was Lallft's
good fortune to come into the world by it. But she did
not avail herself of the opportunity ; and so, when she
died, she left the highway of salvation, and was com-
pelled to be bora and reborn,

If, in the third line, we take the reading ' liar ', or
' cowry ', the allusion is to the belief that when a person
dies his soul has to cross the river Vaitaram, and passes
through many dangers in the course of its traverse.
If a small piece of money is placed in his mouth at the
time of death, he can use it to pay for a ferry-boat to
bring him across. For further particulars see the note
to K. Pr. 18. A sum is a crazy bridge of one or two
planks or sticks thrown across a gap in an embankment.

If, however, we take the other reading ' Har\ i.e.
Kara or Siva, instead of liar, we get Lalla's esoteric
meaning. It is not the literal cowry that she missed,
but the name of Siva, which she found not in the pocket
of her mind. The pronunciation of sitman (plural dative
of turn) is, in Kashmiri, practically the same as that of
ma-man or soman> one's own mind ; so that, as read out
or recited without regard to spelling, the verse has a
double meaning. When she died, she found that in her
lifetime she had not stored up a knowledge of the Supreme
Siva, i.e. of the Supreme Self, in her intellect; and
therefore on her deathbed found no saving grace, or, as
she expresses it, she found herself in the dark on some
crazy bridge over a fathomless abyss, and had nothing
available to pay for the boat of salvation to ferry her
across.

The moral is that, inasmuch as birth in a human body
is the only chance that a soul has of being saved, when
it is fortunate enough to obtain such a birth it should
spend its lifetime in gaining a knowledge of the Supreme
Self.

99.

gopJiilo! Ma, kadam tnl
wum chfy sul ta tkMun your

par kar paidaparwdz tul
ic line chey sul ta <

LALLA-VAKYANI [100, 101.

100.

daman-basfi tfifo dam
titJiay yitJia clawan-kMr

sJiesfiras son ga&liiy
wune cliey sul ta kJiaflwi ywr

99. Heedless One! speedily lift up thy foot
(and set forth upon thy journey).

Now is it dawn. Seek thou for the Friend.

Make to thyself wings. Lift thou up the
winged (feet).

Now is it dawn. Seek thou for the Friend.

100. Give thou breath to the bellows,
Even as doth the blacksmith.
Then will thine iron turn to gold.
Now is it dawn. Seek thou for the Friend.

Two more very popular verses of Lai la's. Another
version will be found in K. Pr. 46. Lalla is addressing
herself.

99, She has begun to receive instruction, and urges
herself to go forward. The desire of knowledge has
come to her, and she must seek for the Friend the
Supreme Self,

100. Just as a blacksmith controls the pipe of his
bellows, and with the air thus controlled, turns his rough.
iron into what he desires ; so must she control the vital
airs circulating through her pipes or (//*, and thus
convert the crude iron of her soul into the gold of the
Supreme Self. See Note on Yoga, 5, 21, and
Vocabulary, s. vv. nd(K and prdn, 2.

As for the meaning of dam dywi u see the next verse.

101.

cleJiace Ian dare bar trpp^rim
jprdna-^&r rotnm ta dyut^mas dan

hrMayece tutA a re-andar gondum
omaki cobaka tul u mas lam

102.] LALLA-VAKYANI 113

[This verse is capable of a double interpretation,
depending on the two meanings of the word pran,
as 'onion', and as l vital air'. Of. verses 89, 90.
The first interpretation is : ]

I locked the doors and windows of my body.

I seized the thief of my onions, and called for
help.

I bound him tightly in the closet of my heart,

And with the whip of the pranava did I flay
him.

[The second, esoteric, interpretation is as fol-
lows : ]

I locked the doors and windows of my body.

I seized the thief of my vital airs, and con-
trolled my breath.

I bound him tightly in the closet of my heart,

And with the whip of the pranava did I flay
him.

It is necessary to explain that the expression dam
to give breath, is used in three senses. It may mean
'to give breath' (e.g. to a bellows), as in the preceding
verse. Or it may mean 'to give forth breath', i.e.
* to cry out ', Or it may mean also as in the preceding
verse ( to control the breath ' by the yoga exercise called
prdndyama (see Note on Yoga, 2, 23, and Vocabulary,
s.v. nddi). The thief of the vital airs is the worldly
temptations that interfere with their proper control.

The pranava is the mystic syllable dm, regarding which
see verses 15, 33, and 34

102.

Lai loli druyes kapasi-poskece sU&y
hod* ta dun* kuAiam yu&y lath
t a ye yeli kkarewam zoyije t a ye

*~wdna gay em along* lath
i

114 LALLA-VAKYANI [103.

103.

dob 1 yell ckov^iia** dotf-kaiie-petkay

mz ta sdban mufeJfinam yu
4*tf yeli p/rir*MJtm hmi-fiani

add Loll me prov u m parama-gatk

* V. 1. ell

102, I, Lalla, went forth in the hope of (blooming
like) a cotton-flower.

Many a kick did the cleaner and the carder
give me.

Gossamer made from me did the spinning
woman lift from the wheel,

And a hanging kick did I receive in the
weaver's work-room.

103. When the washerman dashed me (or turned
me over) on the washing-stone,

He rubbed me much with fuller's earth and
soap.

When the tailor worked his scissors on me,
piece by piece,

Then did I, Lalla, obtain the way of the
Supreme.

These two verses form another of Lalla' s hard sayings
which Kashmiris of the present day do not profess to be
able to explain. The general meaning is clear enough.
Lalla describes her progress to true knowledge through
the metaphor of a cotton-pod. The cotton is first roughly
treated by the cleaner and the carder. It is next spun
into fine thread, and then hung up in misery as the warp
on a weaver's loom. The finished cloth is then dashed
by the washerman on his stone, and otherwise severely
treated in order to whiten it; and, finally, the tailor
cuts it up and makes out of it a finished garment. The
various stages towards the attainment of knowledge are
thus metaphorically indicated, but the explanation of
each separate metaphor is unknown. Very possibly, each

104,] LALLA-VAKYANI 115

stage in the manufacture of the cloth represents, not
a stage in a single life, but a separate existence in Lalla's
progress from birth to birth.

The word lath, occurring twice in verse 102, means
{ a kick', and is used in the sense of general violent
treatment once under the cotton-carder's bow, and again
when the threads are hung up and strained tight in the
loom. The word Wy has two meanings. In the first
place, it indicates a woman whose profession it is to spin
a particular kind of gossamer thread ; and in the second
place, it indicates the particular thread itself. The being
drawn out to this extreme fineness is one of the hardships
to which the cotton is subjected.

The procedure of an Indian washerman is well known.
He has, half submerged on the bank of a pond or river,
a large flat stone. On this he dashes with great force
the garment to be washed, which has been previously
soaked in soap and water. It is a most effective method
of driving out all dirt, and also, incidentally, of ruining
the texture of the cloth.

104.

na $ata$ pti&sas na rum a*
$uk mas we Lali cyauv p&nuwiiy wdkh
and a rim* gatakah ratith 1a wolum
katith ta fyut u ma$ Miy cakh

I hoped not in it for a moment, I trusted it
not by a hair.

Still I, Lalla, drank the wine of mine own
sayings.

Yet, then did I seize an inner darkness and
bring it down,

And tear it, and cut it to pieces.

Another hard saying, the full meaning of which is
doubtful. Apparently it means that when Lalla first
began to utter her sayings, as she calls her verses and as

12

116 LALLA-VAKYANI [105.

they are still called (Lalla-vatydnfy, though they in-
toxicated her like wine, she had no conception that they
would have any permanent effect upon her. Yet she
found that hy theiv help she became enabled to dissipate
the inner darkness of her souL Or perhaps 'it' is the
vanities of the world. Feeling 1 distrustful and fearful of
the dark mysterious world of phenomena, she drank the
wine of her verses to give herself courage to fight
against it, and thus was emboldened to knock down its
phantasmagoria.

105.

jpot u ztini wothith mot u lohnowum

(lag lalanoi^m daye-sanze pmle
Laft-Ldfi karan Ldla imizanowum

mfiliih tas man sJiro&yom dahe

At the end of moonlight to the mad one did
I call,

And soothe his pain with the Love of God.

Crying It is I, Lalla it is I, Lalla', the
Beloved I awakened.

I became one with Him, and my mind lost
the defilement of the ten.

The end of moonlight is the early dawn, hence the
conclusion of the night of ignorance referred to in the
preceding verse. The mad one is the mind intoxicated
and maddened by worldly illusion. The Beloved whom
Lalla awoke was her own Self, which she roused to the
knowledge of its identity with the Supreme Self. The
ten are the five organs of sense and the five organs of
action the chief impediments to the acceptance of the
Great Truth. See Vocabulary, s. v. yuncl u . Dah, ten,
also means 'a lake'. Thus, by a paronomasia, the last
line may also be translated, * I became one with him, and
my mind lost its defilement, as in a lake (of crystal-clear
water).'

106, 107,] LALLA-VAKYANI 117

106.

ami pana $pd a ras ndvi ches lamdn,
kati lozi Bay myon u me-ti diyi tar

amen taken pon* zan sMmdn
zuv cliwn bramdn gara go&lialid

With a rope of untwisted thread am I towing
a boat upon the ocean.

Where will my God hear? Will He carry
even me over ?

Like water in goblets of unbaked clay, do
I slowly waste away.

My soul is in a dizzy whirl. Fain would I
reach my home.

The cry of the helpless to God. She has tried formal
religion, but found it as little helpful as if she had tried
to tow the ship of her soul across the ocean of existence
with a rope of untwisted thread.

107.

ta manaslw ! kytizi chukk wntMn seki-lawar
ami r a k&i*, hamdli! pakiy m ndv

IgtikJwy yifi Ndro^ karmane iPkhi
till, &idli / I&kiy na phirith kah

* V. 1. ami rati

To the Unbeliever.

Man ! why dost thou twist a rope of sand ?

With such a line, Burden-bearer! the ship
will not progress for thee.

That which Narayana wrote for thee in the
line of fate,

That, Good Sir ! none can reverse for thee.

118 LALLA-VAKYANI [108.

The rope of sand is the belief in formal religion and
the desire for worldly joys. The accomplishment of such
desires is beyond the reach of any man. He can only
attain to that which is written by Narayana, i.e. God,
as his fate. No effort of his will can alter that.

The conclusion of the whole matter is that the only
method of escaping fctte is to effect the union of the Self
with the Supreme.

There are various interpretations of some of the words
in this verse. Ami r a khi, by means of this (weak) line,
i.e. the rope of sand, may also be translated 'on this
(thin) line ', i. e. along the narrow track, or towing-path,
on the bank of a river. Another reading is ami rail, by
grasping it, so. the rope of sand. The word /lawdli,
Biirden-bearer, may also be read as Jia mall, Father,
here a polite form of address, equivalent to * Good Sir *.
A s burden-bearer ' is a labouring man accustomed to
lifting heavy weights, and, as such, would be employed
on the heavy work of pulling a tow-rope. This method
of taking a ship up-stream is a common sight on Kashmir
rivers.

108.

deu-kdr hoi 1 * gom Mka kahyu
gora-sond u wanmi mwan-tyol* pyom
pa&dli-rMJP khyol* gom Mka kahyu

The sling of the load of candy hath become
loose upon my (shoulder).

Crooked for me hath become my day's work.
How can I succeed ?

The words of my teacher have fallen upo|| me
like a blister of loss.

My flock hath lost its shepherd. How can I
succeed ?

Another of Lalla's hard sayings. Its meaning is
apparently as follows :

Like Christian in The Pilgrim's Progress^ she has been
bearing on her back a burden of worldly illusions and

109.] LALLA-VAKYANI 119

pleasures, compared to a load of sugar-candy, and the
knot of the porter's sling- that supports it has become
loose and galls her. In other words, she has found that
such a burden produces only toil and pain. Her wasted
life in this workaday world has become a weariness, and
she is in despair.

She has recourse to her Guru, or spiritual teacher.
His words cause her intolerable pain a pain such as that
experienced by the loss of some loved object (the worldly
illusion which she must abandon), and she learns that
the whole flock of factors that make up her sentient
existence have lost their proper ruler, the mind ; for it is
steeped in ignorance of Self.

109.

and a riy dyes tandPriy gdrdn

gdrdn dySs Idlieii falfi
tyy, he Ndrdn ! & a y, U Ndrdn !

tPi/) he Ndrdn ! ylm kam vi/tf

Searching and seeking came I from my inner
soul into the moonlight.

Searching and seeking came I to know that
like are joined to like.

This All is only Thou, Narayana, only Thou.

Only Thou. What are all these Thy sports ?

For the comparison of the moonlight to true knowledge,
see the Vocabulary, s. v. sm.

6 Like joined to like * : L e. the Self is the same as the
Supreme Self, and must become absorbed in it.

Narayana is generally the name for the Supreme
employed by Vaisnavas. Here it is employed by the
Saiva Lalla. The expression * sport 1 is a well-known
technical term for the changes apparently undergone by
the Deity, by which He manifests Himself in creation.

Lalla asks, What are these manifestations? The
answer, of course, being that they are all unreal illusion.

APPENDIX I

VERSES BY LALLA IN KNOWLES'S
DICTIONARY OF KASHMIRI PROVERBS

MR. HINTON KNOWLES'S valuable Dictionary of Kashmiri
Proverbs and Sayings (Bombay, 1885) contains a number of
verses attributed to Lalla. With Mr. Knowles's kind per-
mission, I have excerpted them and give them in the following
appendix. The spelling of the Kashmiri quotations has
necessarily been changed to agree with the system of trans-
literation adopted for the preceding pages, and here and there
I have had occasion to modify the translations. But, save for
a few verbal alterations, Mr. Knowles's valuable notes have
been left untouched.

These verses are quoted by the abbreviation K. Pr. with
the number of the page of the original work. [G. A. G,]

K. Pr. 18.

Swamna l -Uhi iMnm dohj

Wnchum c&ndas ta har na atfie.

Ndwa-tdm kyah (lima loll ?

(Cf. No. 98 above.)

I came by a way (i. e. I was born) and I also
went by a way (i, e. I died).

When I was on the embankment of (the illusions
of) my own mind (i. e. when my spirit was between
the two worlds), the day failed.

I looked in my pocket, but not a cowry came
to hand.

What shall I give for crossing the ferry ?

1 Original has semanz. Cf, L T. 98.

LALLA'S VERSES IN KNOWLES'S DICTIONARY 121

A saying of Lai Ded, who was a very holy Hindu
woman.

The Kashmiri Hindu belief is that during 1 the sixth
month after death the spirit of the deceased has to cross
the waters of the Vaitaram ; but it is impossible to get
to the other side of the river except by special means, as
the waters are so deep and stormy and the opposing
powers, preta> yamaclut, mafoya, and kurma are so strong.
Accordingly about this time the bereaved relations call the
family Brahman, who repeats to them the portions ap-
pointed to be read on this occasion. Among other things
the departed spirit is represented as standing on the brink
of the river and crying * Where is my father ? Where is
my mother ? Where are my relations and my friends ?
Is there no one to help me over this river? 3 This is
sometimes recited with much feeling, and great are the
lamentations of the bereaved, who now with sobs and
tears present a little boat and paddle, made of gold, or
silver, or copper, according to their position, to the
Brahman ; and in the boat they place gh\ milk, butter,
and rice. The boat is for the conveyance of the spirit
across Vaitarani, and the provisions are for the appease-
ment of the contrary powers, 'preta, mat$ya> and others,
who will try to turn back the boat, but who on having
these, glil and rice, &c., thrown to them, will at once
depart their own way.

The Hindus believe that if this ceremony is performed
in a right manner, a boat will be at once present upon
the waters, close to that portion of the bank of the river,
where the spirit is waiting and praying for it, and that
the spirit getting into it will be safely conveyed to the
opposite side. The gift-boat, however, is taken home by
the Brahman, and generally turned into money as soon
as possible.

At the moment of death amongst other things &jpaim
is placed within the mouth of the corpse, wherewith to
pay the ferry.

K. Pr. 20.

A lie wonis gave Jcadris.

7 J v

She came to the baniya's but arrived at the
oaker's.

122 APPENDIX I

To miss the mark.

This saying has its original in a story well known in
Kashmir. Lai Ded, whose name has been mentioned
before, used to peregrinate in an almost nude condition,
and was constantly saying that c He only was a man,
who feared God, and there were very few such men
about/

One day, Shah Hamadan, after whom the famous
mosque in Srlnagar is called, met her, and she at once
ran away. This was a strange thing for Lai Ded to do ;
but it was soon explained. *I have seen a man', she
said, to the astonished baniya, into whose shop she had
fled for refuge. The baniya, however, turned her out.
Then Lai Ded rushed to the baker's house and jumped
into the oven, which at that time was fully heated for
baking the bread. When the baker saw this he fell
down in a swoon, thinking that, for certain, the king
would hear of this and punish him. However, there was
no need to fear, as Lai Ded presently appeared from the
mouth of the oven clad in clothes of gold, and hastened
after Shah Hamadan. Cf. Pom jab Notes and Queries,
ii. 743.

K. Pr. 46.

Daman-lasti dito dil t damanas yitJia claman-kMr.
Skest a ras son gafehiy hosil ; wiine cMy &ul ta kadunydr*
Spd a ra$ no labiy sohil, na tath sum ta no, tath tar.
Par kar paida parwdz tul ; wune chey sul ta iadun ydr.
Gofilo h a ka ta kadam tul; Jimliydr roz trdv pyodil.
Trdwakh nay ta cMkhjohil; wum clwy sid ta Wiachm ydr.

(Cf. Nos. 99 and 100 above.)

Give the heart to the bellows, like as the
blacksmith gives breath to the bellows,

And your iron will become gold. Now it is
early morning, seek out your friend (i.e. God).

(A man) will not find a shore to the sea,
neither is there a bridge over it, nor any other
means of crossing.

Make to yourself wings and fly. Now it is
early morning, seek out your friend.

LALLA'S VERSES IN KNOWLES'S DICTIONARY 123

negligent man, speedily step out, take care,
and leave off wickedness.

If you will not, then you are a fool. Now while
it is early morning, seek out your friend.

A few lines from Lai Ded constantly quoted by the
Kashmiri.

ltbe work of a ehaprabi, a Lad lot, as he
generally makes his money by oppression, lying, and
cheating.

K. Pr. 47.

Danny fathom mdpahmurfiy, clammy (lyMum sum m ta tar.
Damiy (IliK^m thur" pJiolaucuWy, ddmiy (lyMumgidna bt khdr.
I)amiy fathom jidn&aa Pdnrlawan Mnz* moj^, damiy titlPm
kftijiy mas.

(Cf. Nos. 96, 97 above.)

One moment I saw a little stream flowing,
another moment I saw neither a bridge, nor any
other means of crossing.

At one time I saw a bush blooming, at another
time I saw neither a flower nor a thorn.

At one moment I saw the mother of the five
Pandavas, at another moment I saw a potter's
wife's aunt

' Nothing in this world can last.'

The history of the Pandavas, and how their mother
was reduced by misfortune to profess herself a potter's
wife's aunt s are fully explained in the Ma/idbMrafa.

K. Pr. 56.

Dilakis Mgas dufi kar gosiL
Afla dewa pholiy y^ml^rzal lag.
Marith manganay wumri-Mnz* JioiiL
Maut chuy jpata pata tahstl-ddr.

124 APPENDIX I

Keep away dirt from the garden of thy
heart.

Then perhaps the Narcissus-garden will blossom
for thee.

After death thou wilt be asked for the results
of thy life.

Death is after thee like a tahslldar (a tax-
collector).

K. Pr. 57.

khura-kknra me 9 Mali, kdstam^ manakl kotar-mare.
Jfare losam luka-lianzay tare lad MI.
Yeli pdna mgdmiv kaclith ninana,y panani gare^
Pata pata neri luka-sdsa, nare alawan.
Trovith yin&my manz-maiddnas sdvltJi dachmi lari.

Make far from me longing for the unobtainable,
Father from the pigeon-hole of my heart.

My arm is wearied from making other
people's houses (i,e. from helping others, giving
alms, &c.).

When, my body, they will carry you forth
(ninanay for ninay) from your house,

Afterwards, afterwards, a thousand people will
come waving their arms.

They will come and set you in a field, laying
you to sleep on your right side.

A verse of Lai Bed's constantly quoted in part, or
in toto, in time of trouble.

Hindus burn the bodies laying them upon the right
side, with their head towards the south, because the gods
and good spirits live in that direction, and Yama, the
angel of death, also resides there.

LALLA'S VERSES IN KNOWLES'S DICTIONARY 125
K. Pr. 102.

Kenyan zon u tham no, dews war ;

Bagawdna cyaneguti* natmddr.

To some you gave many poppies (i.e. sons) ;

For some you did not know the fortunate hour
of the day (for giving a child), (i. e. have left them
childless) ;

And some you haltered (with a daughter) for
murdering a Brahman (in some former existence),

Bhagawan, (the Deity, the Most High),
I adore Thy greatness.

Ken&an dyut^tkam dray dlav t ken&av racyeye ndla Veth,
Kenyan ache laje mas ceth tdlav, keh gay wdmn phdlav dith.

Some Thou (0 God) calledst from Thy heaven
(lit. from there) ; some snatched the river Jihlam by
the neck of its coat, (i.e. grasped prosperity).

Some have drunk wine and lifted their eyes
upwards ; some have gone and closed their shops.

Whom God will, God blesses.

Kenim dyut u tham yut* Klio tot u , Unban yut* na U toV*
mil?

God has given to some (blessing) here and there
(i.e. in both worlds), and He has given to some
nothing either here or there,

Kenyan rane okey thekUj* ltifi, u , nerav nebar sUhoft 1 Jcarav.
K$n&an ran$ ekey "bar peth hyffi, nerav ri$lar ta zang kheyiwo.
Kenyan rane ofily adal ta wadal; ktoi'&an rane chey modal

Some have wives like a shady plane-tree, let
us go out under it and cool ourselves.

126 APPENDIX I

Some have wives like the bitch at the door,
let us go out and get our legs bitten.

Some have wives always in confusion, and
some have wives like shade full of holes,
[' Shade full of holes ', such as that cast by a worn-out thatch.]

K. Pr. 150.

Naphs*!/ wyon* cJivy ho&tuy, dm* hasp mong u nam gari gari lal;
Laclw-manza sdsa-manza akhdJi lustuy, na-ta hePnam sony taL

My soul is like an elephant, and that elephant
asked me every hour for food ;

Out of a lakh and out of a thousand but one is
saved ; if it hadn't been so, the elephant had crushed
all under his feet for me (i, e. in my presence).

One's craving lusts.

K. Pr. 201.

Sires hynh* naprakdsh kune ;
Gangl JiyuJt* na tM a th kali ;
So i/is Intuit na Mwlav kune:

U tj '

Earn fiyu&P na sulch kah ;

Aclhi Jiyuh^ na prakdsh kmie ;
Rotten lyut* na tlMJi kah ;
Ca?ifla$ JiyuIiP na bdndav ku,nt ;
Khani hyuh u na sukk kah ;

Ndyi Jiyuh u na prakash kune ;
Layl JiyuliP na foiPtli kali ;
Dayes hyuh* na bdndav kune ;
Bam lundi* na sukli kah;

>/ 7 *

Sed Bayu was one day. sitting down with his
famous female disciple, Lal Ded, when the following-
questions cropped up :

4 Which was the greatest of all lights ? ' ' Which
was the most famous of all pilgrimages ? ' t Which

LALLA'S VERSES INKNOWLES'S DICTIONARY 127

was the best of all relations ? ' ' Which was the best
of all manner of ease ? ' Lai was the first to reply :
' There is no light like that of the sun ;

There is no pilgrimage like Ganga ;

There is no relation like a brother ;

There is no ease like that of a wife/

But Sed did not quite agree. 4 No ', said he
* There is no light like that of the eyes ;
There is no pilgrimage like that of the knees ;
There is no relation like one s pocket ;
There is no ease like that of a blanket.'

Then Lai Ded, determining not to be outwitted
by her master, again replied :

'There is no light like that of the knowledge
of God ;

There is no pilgrimage like that of an ardent
love;

There is no relation to be compared with the
Deity ;

There is no ease like that got from the fear
of God/

I have seen something like a part of the above lines
in the Rev. C. S wynnerton's Adventures of Edjd Basdlu,
but not having the book at hand I cannot say in what
connexion they occur there. 1

Ganga or Gangabal is one of the great Hindu places of
pilgrimage. Hither go all those Pandits, who have had
relations die during the year, carrying some small bones 5
which they had picked from the ashes at the time of the
burning 1 of the dead bodies. These bones are thrown
into the sacred waters of Gangabal with money and
sweetmeats. The pilgrimage takes place about the
8th day of the Hindu month Badarpet (August 20th dr.).
Cf. Vigne's Travels in Kashmir, &c. 3 vol. ii, pp. 151, 152.

f 1 See Swynnerton, Romantic Tales from the Panjfib, pp. 198 ff.]

APPENDIX II

ON LALLA'S LANGUAGE

[By SIR GEORGE GKIERSON,]

L lived in the fourteenth century. These songs have
been handed down by word of mouth, and it has been
pointed out in the Introduction how in the course of centuries,
as the colloquial language changed, the language in which
they were originally composed insensibly changed too. 1 We
cannot therefore be surprised at finding that the verses as
here published are, on the whole, in the Kashmiri spoken at
the present day. A certain number of archaic forms have,
however, survived ; some, on account of their very strangeness,
which marked them as old-fashioned, and others, because the
language of poetry, with its unvarying laws of metre, always
changes more slowly than does that of colloquial speech.
In this latter respect the compositions of Lalla are not alone
in Kashmir, and all the poetry of her country, even that
written in the last century, contains many archaic forms.
We therefore find scattered through these verses several
examples of words and of idioms which throw light on the
history of the Kashmiri language, and no apology is needed
for drawing attention to the more important. It should be
understood that these examples as quoted do not illustrate the
general language of the songs, which is much, more modern
than would be gathered from the mere perusal of this
Appendix. Throughout it is assumed that the reader has an
elementary acquaintance with modern Kashmiri.
Metrical' requirements often demand a long syllable at the

1 So also the Yedic hymns were for centuries handed down by word
of mouth, and Lalla's songs give a valuable example of the manner
in which their language must have changed from generation to
generation before their text was finally established.

ON LALLA'S LANGUAGE 129

end of a line, and we frequently find in this position a long,
where the modern language would employ a short, vowel.
I have noted all these instances because a number of cases of
apparent lengthening also occurs when the vowel is not final
in a line, and is not required by the metre to be long. We
are therefore not justified in assuming that such long 1 vowels
at the end of a line have been lengthened merely for the sake
of metre.

Vocabulary. There are a few words of which the meaning
is doubtful, and two or three of which the meaning is altogether
unknown at the present day. Such are Hlam* (81) and (all in
84-5) hucla-lmdaney, raza-fldfie, and ahakh. The first is said
to mean c spoits s (cf. Skr. llld\ but I have found no tradition
as to the meaning of the others. I may note here that in
other Kashmir! literature which, like Lalla's songs, is preserved
by memory and not in writing, such words are not uncommon,
and that the reciters, and, when consulted, even Pandits, are
never ashamed to confess ignorance of their meaning. As to
the genuineness of these unknown words, and as to the
general correctness of texts so preserved, the reader is referred
to the remarks on pp. 3 fF. of the Introduction.

In this connexion we may note a termination -#&'*,
forming nouns of agency or possession, which I have not
noted in the modern language. It occurs in the words
shrufa-u'&F't a hearer; Irama-woii*) a wanderer; prnt/ii-won u ,
of, or belonging to, the earth ; and $itb<i-w6}p, beautiful.
It runs parallel with the modern termination -wtil* (= Hindi
~wala\ but I am inclined to look upon it rather as directly
derived from the Sanskrit termination -van, perhaps influenced
as to its form by the analogy of -wol u . Cf. Skr. fruta-vdn,
bhrama-vdn^ prthri-wdn, and db/id-vdn.

Occasionally we find tatsama, forms employed where the
modem language employs semi-fatsamas. Thus, we have
*ndn (mod. tfirdu), bathing ; surya (mod. $ir&), the sun ; sarwa
(mod. so) u \ all. We may note that, for this last word, the
Hindi form sab also occurs. So, we hswepyuwum (forpiwnm),
compared with. Hindi piyd, but Modem Kashmiri cyan,
I drank ; (ly^khnTch (for dekhukh), compared with H. deMd,

K

130 APPENDIX II

but Mod. K. dywtJiukh (for flefkM). saw thee; kiyem, com-
pared with H. tiy$ 9 but Mod. K. fazrem, I made (f. pi.
object).

The ordinary word for the numeral 'one ' is M or ok n , but
Lalla also has y<jff* 9 which may be compared with the
Hindi 9k.

Other miscellaneous instances of unusual vocabulary are
vt/ufi u (Mod. vifi), appearance; yunrf> u , an organ (iwlriya);
frontJ u 9 some one, any one (in pi. ag. kaml$&) ; kyoh or kydwit
(Mod. kyak), or, as well as; ko-zana or ko-zanaiii, by what
means ? ; pu&Jierm (Mod. jpus/tSnm), to make over ; nd, no
(Mod. #fl), not; and man or 5 (Mod. ma), prohibitive
particle.

Phonetics. Towels, As in Modern Kashmiri, ci following
6', c/i 9 or sJi becomes e, though as often as not written a. No
examples have been found of the written change after <?, but
for ch we have lache, for faeJia } the oblique form singular of
lacJi, a hundred thousand, and there are numerous examples
of the change after s&, of which s/wtikar, for s&ankar, Sankara,
will suffice. It is, of course, a commonplace of Kashmiri that
i and e are interchangeable, and that the ordinary speaker is
unable to distinguish between the two sounds. It thus
follows that after eh, , ?, and i are all written interchangeably
for the same sound e. Thus, bticM-sity, (dying) of hunger,
is indifferently written with bocha^ lochi, or bocM. In verse
83, we have lWw. % although the sound of lochi is certainly
intended.

Similarly in the modern language interchange of e and i is
equally universal, Lalla goes further, in that she has both
geh and gift, a house ; and deli and difi, the body. We may
judge from this that she pronounced geh as geh, and deA
as deh,

In the modern language ai (which is interchangeable
with 0) generally becomes u when followed by w-matra s and
becomes u when followed by i-matra or ^-matra. Thus, the
base yait- 9 or got-, as much (as), has its nominative singular
masculine yiiF* 9 its nominative plural masculine y&P, and its
nominative singular feminine yu&\ Similarly, there is a

ON LALLA'S LANGUAGE 131

modern Kashmiri word ptir u t a foot, for which Lallu gives the
plural ablative %$pairii\ showing that the base of the word i
pair-. No instance occurs of the form which she would give
to the nominative singular of this word, but she would
probably have used pairu, for, in the place of the modern
Kashmiri yut 1 ^ she uses yaltv^ and, in the place of modern kid' 1
(nom. pi, masc.), how many ?, she has half}. In other word*,
in Lalla's time, ai preserved its sound before ?/-matra and
/-mate, and probably also before ^-matrfi, and the epenthetic*
change to u and H seems to have come into the language
since her days. This is borne out by the very fluctuating
methods employed in indicating these changes in writing at
the present time.

Consonants. As in the modern language, there are no
sonant aspirates. They are occasionally written in tatsamax*
but even here there is no consistency, and when a sonant
aspirate is written we may be sure that the fact is of no
importance. On the other hand, we must not reject the
possibility that the customary omission of the aspiration of
sonant aspirates is not original, but has been introduced
during the process of handing down the text by word of
mouth. In other words, we can judge nothing from the
presence or the omission of the aspiration.

We are, however, on surer ground when we approach
the second great law of Kashmiri pronunciation that a
final surd is always aspirated. These are regularly aspirated
throughout the whole text, and this is original, and i*
not due to modem pronunciation. Thus in verse 5, rdtfi*
night, rhymes with natJi, a lord. Now, the th of ndth is
original, and owes nothing to the special Kashmiri rule s but
the original form of rath, is rat, and the t has been aspirated
under the special rule. The fact that rat would not rhyme
with n&tli shows that Lalla pronounced the word as rdt& 9 and
that consequently she did aspirate her final surds.

Modern Kashmiri has a very weak feeling of the difference
between cerebrals and often interchanges them, and also
commonly, in village dialect, interchanges a cerebral t or d
with a dental r. So, Lalla has do$ 9 for modern

K2

132 APPENDIX II

thoroughly, continually (compare Sanskrit ddrfl/iya-) ; dhlnm
or fleshun, to see f*drfyati) ; ceflun or cerun, to mount ; gatun
i) to form; liym]P (mod. Hyitr u ), the gullet.; mwjun or
i, to triturate; pad MI or pawn to recite; zM tt or w w ,
bad habits.

Here also we may draw attention to the well-known fact
that Kashmiri has no cerebral . A dental n is always
substituted for it. Thus, Skr. kdna-, one-eyed, is represented
by Ksh. M)t u . This n 3 representing- an original n, Lalla has
changed to a dental r in the form tor*. Finally, in this
connexion, we have a modern dental / represented by Lalla's
dental r in her c/wr, for c&iil, a waterfall.

The modern language shows a tendency to insert a w before
a long a in the first syllable of a word. So, Lallti has gwdh
(modern gali), illumination ; garun or gwdrnn^ to search ; and
MS or swds, ashes.

We have interchange of d and z in wudmi or wusun, to
awake from sleep.-'

Declension. Substantive* and Adjectives. Kashmiri has
four declensions, viz. (1) a masculine a-declension ; (2) a
masculine i-declension ; (3) a feminine /-declension ; and
(4) a feminine ^/-declension* This is the general explanation
of the forms involved, and is a good representation of the
present state of affairs, but from the point of view of origin it
is not quite accurate. The true grouping would be to class
the second and third declensions as Afl-suffix-declensions, and
the first and fourth as non-^-suffix declensions. All nouns
in the first and second declensions are masculine, and all those
in the third and fourth are feminine. Some of the nouns of
the fourth declension have really i-bases, and what distin-
guishes them from nouns of the third declension is not that
they follow an ^-declension which they do not but that they
had no original ^-suffix.

For the sake of simplicity, I take the non-/fo-snffix nouns
first, and begin with the first, or masculine, declension. This

1 The letter dli becomes z before y. Wuzi probably < budhyate, while
losi, he hears, < budhyate.

ON LALLA'S LANGUAGE 133

is quite correctly described as an a-declension. Even the
few surviving i- and z^-bases follow it. Thus, the word #0V*,
a grass-seller, follows this declension, although it must be
referred to a Sanskrit z'-base *ffM*in-. The typical declension
in the modern language is as follows :

Singular. Plural.

Norn. $/, a thief. M/\

Dat. biiras. titiran.

Instr. and Ag. (4y<), Mran. Mrav.

Abl. (&Hri\ Mm. tmv.

It will be observed that, as in Prakrit, the dative is
represented by the old genitive (corasya^ corasw, cordndut,
edrfma). The forms in brackets given for the instr. and abh
singular are nowadays described as f old forms ' and occur only
in special words and idioms. The ^'-termination is to be
referred to the Prakrit -hi. The instrumental and agent case
is everywhere only a special form of the case which I call the
ablative. The latter is used in many senses, and its use
closely corresponds to that of the Latin ablative. Like that,
it is frequently governed by a postposition corresponding to
the Latin preposition. In such circumstances it corresponds
to the general oblique case of Hindi nouns, and may, itself,
also be called the ' oblique case ', as is occasionally done in
these pages.

In the old Apabhramsa dialect current in Kashmir before
the birth of Kashmiri the nominative and accusative singular
of # -bases, masculine and neuter, ended in -n. Thus, in the
first two verses of the ancient Kashmir Apabhramsa work
entitled the MaMrtJia-piakdfa, we have pant for param\
g&atmaru for gkamarah ; 6/tairu for bJtairavak ; and cukku for
cakram. This termination survived into Lalla's time, for she
\iv&paramu for parama/i in v. 77.

We have interesting survivals of the oldest form of the
modern dative singular. In v. 22, Lalla treats the word
aim, self, as an tf-base, and gives it a genitive dtmCtse (m. e.
for dtmd$i)i which I explain as a contraction of *atmassa^ with
a survival of the original y of *dtma$ya y Kashmiri pro-
nunciation *dlmn$ t iiL the final i\ or possibly she may

134 APPENDIX II

have unconsciously endeavoured to reproduce a quasi-Sanskrit
*dtmasya. So, again, she has d&ca* for Prakrit devam,
of a god, in 33, in which, according to the rule in all
the Dardic languages, a vowel is not lengthened in compen-
sation for the simplification of a consonantal group.

In the modern language the ablative generally ends in a
bliort -a a shortening* of one of the Prakrit terminations
-tid, a, or of the Apabhrarhsa -aim. Lalla occasionally has
ablatives ending in long #, as in dad and saw- in 18. Other
examples are braid (1) and mmanlid (16), but these occur at
the end of a line, and the vowel may have been lengthened
for the sake of rhyme.

The instrumental-agent in * and the ablative in i may
be considered together. They are used in various senses.
A locative is very common. For the pure instrumental, we
have aWtyo^ in verse 1. Locatives sxsgagan\ in the sky (26) ;
Mani, in the mind (18, 45) ; and ant 1 (54) or fahtf (33, 37, &c.),
in the end. In the last example, the original /^"-termination
lias survived. Lalla sometimes substitutes e for the final i, as
in attte, in the hand (10). In other cases the words occur at
the end of a line, so that it is possible that the e is here only
/ lengthened for the sake of metre. They are athe (98) ; gare,
in the house (3, 34) ; mdwdse, on the day of the new moon (22).
This termination i of the ablative occurs in all declinations,
and we shall see that Lallii's change of the i to e is very
common.

In the modern language the instrumental-ablative plural
ends in -av, also written -#//. Perhaps -an would be the best
representation of the true sound. We are at once reminded
of the Prakrit termination -ad, -du, Apabhramsa -a-hu, of the
ablative plural. In one place (53) f Lalla has garu, which
is to be translated as the locative plural of gam, a house.
Its origin is evidently the same as that of the form
with -av.

The other non- /^-declension is the fourth, and includes all
the feminine nouns of this class. It has two divisions, viz.
it -bases and i-bases. As an example of the modern declension
of an fl-base, we will take mdl (Skr. mdld), a garland.

ON LALLA'S LANGUAGE 135

Singular. Plural.

Nom. mat. mala.

Dat. mall. walan.

Instr.-Abl. mail. wdlav

Which may be compared with the following Prakrit
forms :

Singular. Plural.

Nom. mala. mdldo.

Gen. wdlcti, mdldL mdldna.

Abl. mdldi, Ap. malahe. mdldu^ Ap. malaJiu.

It will be observed that Kashmiri has throughout; lost the
distinguishing termination -d of the feminine. So also in
Apabhramsa (He. iv, 330. Cf. Pisehel, 100).

Besides the above, Lalla has other forms. For the dative
singular, she has cldie (74), in the flood, and icate (98), on
a road. Numerous other instances of datives or agents
singular in -e occur at the end of a line, such as kale (4),
from Adi, a bellows-pipe ; Late (76), by Lalla ; praJie (105),
by love ; tune (76), to the body (Pr. taniiS] ; watt (98), on the
road ; y'Me (45), with a wish (iccha) ; zmv (9), to the moon-
light (ji/dtwidyah, jonMe).

The second division, consisting of nouns with Abases, is the
so-called irregular fourth declension. In the nominative
singular the termination -i of the bases is dropped, and the
word is otherwise unchanged. But in the other cases, before
the old vowel terminations, the -- with the following vowel
becomes w-matra. This w-matra, according to the usual
Kashmiri phonetic rules, has certain epenthetic e Sects on the
preceding vowel and consonant, for which see the usual
grammars. The word Mn (Skr. Mni-) 9 loss, is therefore thus
declined :

Singular. Plural.

Nom. hdn. Iioffi.

Dat. Aoff*. tioWn.

Instr.-Abl. io&. koffiv.

136 APPENDIX II

The corresponding Prakrit declension would be:

Singular. Plural.

Norn. Mm. &dmo } Ap. lianin.

Gen. Mm!. Mnlna.

Abl. /idmi Mmu, Ap. JiCmiku.

As modern Kashmiri -matra represents an original ?, it is
not surprising that lulls, should use the older form flofii,
as the agent case of Jan, a stream (39 3 40), instead of the
modern dou*.

Turning now to the ^-declensions, these are the second and
the third. The second declension consists only of masculine
nouns, and the third only of feminine.

In the case of an fl-base, the original termination of the
base, together with the ^-suffix, becomes -#/&*-, and in the case
of an i-base it becomes -fifl-. I have not yet noted any
instance in Kashmiri of the /^-suffix added to a zt-base.

In the second declension, an 0-base is thus declined in
the modern language. The noun selected is nadur", a
monkey :

Singular. Plural.

Nom. ic5dur u 9 wachr. wadar.

Bat. wadartui. uadaran.

Abl. wadara. icadarav.

The corresponding Prakrit forms would be :
Singular. Plural.

Nom. mnarao. ranarau.

Gen. vanaraassa. ' rdnaradna.

Abl. vdnar&ad) mnama. idnarado.

It will be observed that, except in the nominative singular,
the Kashmiri declension has become exactly the same as in
the first non-# declension. The nominative singular is
really v&hr\ but, as usual, the final -matra epenthetically
affects the preceding a, and the word becomes wador u or
wadw u . As -matra is not itself sounded, this is commonly
written wadur, and words of this group are treated by
Kashmiri grammarians as exceptional words of the first
declension.

ON LALLA'S LANGUAGE 137

For a &i-noun with an a'-base, we have as an example the
word fw*t u , an elephant. The modern base of this word is
hast-) but, in the nominative singular, the a has become v
under the influence of the following tt-matra. It is thus
declined :

Singular. Plural.

Norn. kv9t\ Jiast\

Dat. /tastis. JiasleiL (for Jiastyan\

\ / /

Instr.-Ag. kdxp. } . .

A , , 7 J . > toto (for naiswaii).

Abl. jfatfc. J v ^ rt '

The word ^0^ M represents an earlier hoitikdk, and this?
would be declined as follows in Prakrit :

Singular. Plural.

Nom. JiattJuo, Ap. JiattMu. JiaUhid.

Gen. liatlh'mta. lialt.faana.

Abl. Jiattkidhi) Ap. Jiattltialie* Jiatthidu, Ap. ItattJiialtu.

The Kashmir! word io^ u is not a tatsama. In Kashmiri
a Prakrit Uh is not uncommonly represented by # E. g. Skr.
sdrttakah, Pr, saUhadi Magadhl Pr. $a$tae t Ksh. w^ M , pos-
sessed of.

It is a notewoithy fact that while some Kashmiri 0-bases
with the ia-suffix are declined like wadur u t the great majority
have changed their base-forms, and are treated as if they
were i-bases. For instance, the word gur u , a horse (sg. dat.
yum> abl. gwi t and so on) follows kost w ) an i-base^ although
the Sanskrit original is ghotatah, Pr. gkodad, which is an
fl-base. This peculiarity certainly goes back as far as Lalla's
time. She gives us lafi (32) as the plural nominative of
hot u (JiafakaJt), struck, and wokkH* (6), the plui-al nominative
of MokktP (muktakah), released, and so many others. In one
case she hesitates between the two forms. She takes the
word makor u or wakur*, a mirror, and gives its dative singular
as makuras (tf-base) in 31, and as makari* (i-base) in 18.

I suggest that the origin of the treatment of a-bases as if
they were i-bases is of a complex character. In the first
place, when the intervocalic k of the Ao-suffix is elided, a y
may or may not be substituted for it. If no y is inserted,

138 APPENDIX II

the word remains an fl-base, and there is an end of the matter.
But if a y is inserted, a word such as gliotakah becomes gfioduyo,
from which the transition to ^gimit, gur u is easy. Then,
again, the fact of the analogy of feminine jfaz-bases must be
taken into account. Practically all these end in -ika-> and in
Kashmiri must be treated as /-bases. Finally, we know that
in dialectic Prakrit -ita- was sometimes substituted for -aka-
(Pifeehel, 598). I believe that all these three causes con-
tributed to the change of fl-bases to /-bases in Kashmiri.

We have seen that in modern Kashmiri the sg, abl. of an
y-base in this declension ends in -a, as in /fasti. Lalla
occasionally makes it end in -#, and this is quite in accordance
u ith the Prakrit form. Thus, from <ltir u , far, she has ilure (36) }
for modern dtii i ; and from mor u , a hut, she has mare (K. Pr.
57), for mod. man. The latter word occurs at the end
of a line, and the termination may be due to metrical
exigencies.

The pi. nom. ends in *, as in Jtastf. Lalla on three occasions
lengthens this *', when at the end of a line, to * or viz. in
J/aufy rams (77) ; nail, cowiy-shells (81) ; and same, alike (16).

She makes the plural ablative end in -iv in jpairiv, from
pft/ u 9 a foot (38). This, however, is little more than a matter
of spelling.

The third, or feminine ^-declension appears in the follow-
ing form in the modern language. The word taken as an
example is gar* a mare.

Singular. Plural.

Nona. ffur^. (jure (for guryd).

Dat. gure (for gurga). gvrfa, (for gnryan).

Instr.-Abl. guri. gnrev (for ffurya%).

The corresponding Prakrit forms would be :

Singular. Plural.

Nom. ghodid.
Gen. gloiilae, gJiOfUcd.

Abl. gJidflide : Ap. gJwclialie. g/todidu, Ap.

As S and i are interchangeable in Kashmlii, the difference
between the singular dative and ablative is only one of

ON LALLi'S LANGUAGE 139

spelling, and as a matter of custom the two forms are often
interchanged even by the most careful writers. The spelling
given here is that of Isvara-kaula.

It should be remembered that S-mStra in Kashmiri repre-
sents an original ?, so that the older form of gut* would be
(jun. So Lalla has hxlii for /M", like, in 10 and 77 ; mojl
(97, end of line) 3 for woj 11 , a mother ; pnshbifa (39, 49, end of line),
for pu*/ion* t a florist ; tJiafi (33, end of line), for f/iiij", a shrine.

So, for the singular dative, we have wa/iawafil, for wa/uncan,
flowing (57, end of line).

The Genitive Case. Lalla's use of the genitive differs some-
what from that customary in modern Kashmiri. Nowadays
there are three suffixes of the genitive, uith sharply distin-
guished functions. These are -uk u t -uu u , and -7iond u . The suffix
-it k u is used with all singular masculine nouns without life.
In this case Lalla. follows the modern custom.

The suffix -uu u (fern, -;?') is used only with singular male
proper names, as in rdmitri*, of Rama. Lalla uses it with
other nouns also, as in saitisdruii 1 *, of the universe (6) ; waramiV*
(fern.), of dying (73-6); ptttw u 9 of the month of Pausa (83) ;
Jnida-hitflwi" (84) (fern.), of unknown meaning ; and kanhmi" 1
(fern.), of fate (107).

In the modern language -homl* is used :

(1) With all feminine nouns, singular or plural.

(2) With all masculine plural nouns.

(3) With all animate masculine singular nouns, except
proper names.

It governs the dative case, and as the dative singular of all
masculine nouns ends in $, we get forms such as bums-hond*,
of the thief; 1mtis-hond u , of the elephant. In such cases,
the li of -hand* is dropped after the *, and the form for animate
masculine singular nouns becomes as in &&ra-sQHd u , hatfi-sond*.
In two passages (88, K. Pr. 57) Lalla makes -fiontl* govern the
ablative, in l&ka-hond* \ not Bka-sond" 1 , of people. Possibly
this is for lakan-hond* , in the plural, with the n elided. The
word l&ic- is employed both in the singular and in the plural
to mean J people '.

Adjectives. Only the numerals call for remarks. The word

140 APPENDIX II

for c three ' is tr a ?i, instead of the modern trek or trill. It is
treated as a singular, with an ablative toayi, in verse 50 3 as
compared with the modern ablative plural treyav. For ; five ',
besides the modern pants, we have the tatsama panca (79).
Other numerals, e.g. dwh, six, are treated as plurals. Cf. pi.
dat. dtn, (13).

Pronouns. The pronoun of the first person calls for no
remarks. For the second person, the singular dative is not
only the modern &?, but also (13) %, a form not used in
modern Kashmiri. In the modern language, whenever the
pronoun of the second person appears in a sentence, it must
always also appear attached to the verb, as a pronominal
suffix. For instance, we must say &* golu-th, not &? gol\
destroyed by thee. i.e. thou destroyedst. But in one case (64),
Lalla omits the suffix and has $& got*.

The modern word for this ' is yili. Lalla also has an older
forrn^?/^ (for^7/ w ) (1, 20, 58), with a feminine ytha (54).

The modern nominative masculine of the relative pronoun
yji is gits, who. That this is derived from an older -i/is" 1 is
shown by Lallu's y# M (i.e. gi**) (20, 24, &c.). The feminine
is yifoa (52), mod. ytiwa.

In addition to the usual indefinite pronoun kU 3 some one,
any one, Lalla has (55) a plural agent kandHv, from which we
can deduce a 'nominative singular /cond u , unknown to the
modern language.

Under the head of phonetics, attention has been called to
the form gaitu, for modern yfit tt , as much as.

Conjugation. In the modern language the conjunctive
participle ends in 4t(h\ derived from the Sanskrit -tya> as in
inoril{k)i having killed, corresponding to a quasi-Sanskrit
*itidrityct. In Kashmiri poetry and in village talk this form
is sometimes used as a past participle. Thus, in the Siva-
parinaya, 1630, we have cJius boh JcJta*iih, I am ascended, lit.
I am having ascended. In two passages Lalla gives this
participle an older form, more nearly approaching the original.
In 27, she has Md^t\ having ascended, and in the same verse
she has IdxH* (in the sense of the past participle), they lived
long. In the modern Ianguage 3 the word keth is often

ON LALLA'S LANGUAGE 141

pleonastically added, as in dit/t ket-h, having given ; Iteth Ivf/t,
having taken. In the 12th verse, Ldla gives instead of
these forms (Ut& kantli and i$f.& kantJi, which show the origin
of this ketii. In these Dardic languages the elision of a medial
single r is common. Karitli is itself the conjunctive participle
of karuu, to do, and its use is exactly paralleled by the Hindi
use of kar-ke added pleonastically to a conjunctive participle
in that language.

The present participle in the modern langunge ends in -a,
as in kardn, doing; but in poetry and in village-speech it
often ends in -an, as in karan. So, Lalla has (48) that] an,
seeking, and gicdraiij searching.

The verb loswi, to become weary, is irregular in the modern
language, making its past participle ftw w , with a feminine
lus 11 or 7W'*. Lalla (3. 44, &c.) gives the past participle
masculine as IM U , of which the feminine form would be,
quite regularly, the modern #&//'*, which she also employs.

The Sanskrit present has become a future in modern
Kashmiri. Besides this customary sense it is also used where
we should employ a present subjunctive, and, occasionally, in its
original sense of a present indicative. For our present purposes
we can call this Kashmiri tense with its threefold meanings
the 'Old Present'. It is thus conjugated in the modern
language, taking Aaluu, to flee, as our sample verb :

Sirfgular. Plural

L &ala. fealav.

2. SalakL taliv.

3. &ali. &alan.
Corresponding to the Prakrit :

Singular, Plural.

1. calami y calau. caldmo, calatu.

2. catasi, ealaJu. calaba, calahu.

3. calat. calanti) calahi.

It may be added that the terminations of the Kashmiri
second person are evidently modern pronominal suffixes,
which, as explained under the head of pronouns, must, in the
case of this person, always be added to the verb.

Lalla more nearly approaches the original form of the first

148 APPENDIX II

person singular ia #&Z, I may "be (18), which, however, conies
at the end of a line. "We see traces of the original i of the
second person singular in zdnekk (64), for zanakh, thou wilt
know. In the third person singular she has, over and over
again, a final e instead of the final *. A few examples are
mm (11), tire (16), $ye (18), gaVti (19, 45), rote (21), dse (22),
and so many others. In the modern language, this i usually
becomes e before pronominal suffixes.

When pronominal suffixes are added to this tense, Lalla
now and then does not follow the usual modern practice.
Thus, she has lagi-m y mod. lage-m, it will be attached to me
(41) ; &fifyi-wo, mod. khet/i-wa^ he will eat for you (K. Pr.
102); nhian-cty, mod. nin-ag, they will carry thee (K. Pr.57) ;
karin-fy 9 mod. karan-ay, they will make for thee (74) ; mdrin-ei/ 9
mod. maran^ty^ they will kill for thee (71). In the last two
cases, the forms of the 3rd person plural would, in the modern
language, belong to the present imperative, and not to this tense.

The past tense is formed from the past participle, \\hich, in
the masculine singular, ends in -matra. Lalla lengthens
this to u at the end of a line in mtitu, for mM* (1). It will be
observed that, unlike w-matra, the long ft does not epentheti-
cally affect the preceding vowel. The feminine singular of
this participle ends in w-matra, but, in tydj* and pof 1 (both in
62), Lalla makes it end in 2-matra. As already stated, w-matra
always represents an older ?.

A second form of the past tense, in the case of some verbs,
ends in an(v) or 0(0), as in gan(v), (m. pi. gay) 9 gone ; pyau(v)
(f. sg. pey$)t fallen. For the masculine plural of ganv, Lalla
once has an older form gay* (66), written gaiy in 95 ; and, for
the feminine of pyauv, she has, with the suffix of the second
person singular, $eyi-# 9 for modern j9#ye-y, fell to thee.

The past tenses of two verbs require special notice. In the
modern language, the past tense of tarvn 9 to do, to make,
runs as follows: m. sg. korn-m 9 pi. tdri-m ; fern. sg. MT^-M^
pi. kare-m. I made, and so on for the other persons. In 81,
Lalla has tiye-m instead of kare-m> a form quite unknown to
the modern language, but reminding us of the Hindi kiyu.
The other verb is f]e*Jwn 9 to see 3 modern past participle flyuth^.
In the modern language, this verb always has a cerebral (] 3

ON LALLA'S LANGUAGE 143

but Lalla has it, as has been pointed out under the head of
phonetics, both cerebral and dental. Moreover, not only does
she use the modern past participle (lyM^ but she also uses
another past participle (]ytikh u (for clekk 1 * 1 } (44), which may be
compared with the Hindi dekhw.

The third person (singular or plural) of the imperative ends
in -in, as in karin, let him or them do or make. With the
suffix of the first person singular it becomes ka^n-am, let him
or them make me. Lalla changes the a of the suffix to e in
dap^n-tim, let him or them say to me (21) ; gawfin-tim, let him
or them bind on me (21) ; ka^n-em, let him or them make for
me (21); pad^i-em, let him or them recite for me (18, 21).
It will be remembered that there was a similar change of a
to in the second person singular of the old present. There
was also a similar change in the case of suffixes added to the
third person plural of the same tense, in which the same
person also took the form of the imperative.

The polite imperative is formed by adding to, to the simple
imperative. At the end of a line Lalla lengthens this in Reid,
and jy&d, both in 28. The second person plural is tfifo, modern
(HyHcw, please give ye (100).

The future imperative is made by adding td to the simple
imperative. Lalla changes this to ze mpete, he must fall (45).
A similar change occurs in Mezti, he must eat (90), but here
it is at the end of a line.

Indeclinables. These call for but few remarks. A final I
becomes e at the end of a line in ate, there (2, 98) ; tote, there
(41) ; and fane, anywhere (9, 11 ; K. Pr. 201).

The adverb and conjunction ta appears in a strengthened
form as toy in several places ; and similarly na, not, is
strengthened to nd or no t and the prohibitive particle ma to
mo or mau. For all these see the Vocabulary.

The emphatic suffix -y is added in scores of instances
without giving any emphasis at all, and apparently merely
for the sake of metre. It is hence often difficult to say
whether emphasis is intended or not. It often appears as an
a-matra, and then seems to be always emphatic, as in ids' 1 , to
him only (65) ; ldl\ it is I, even I, Lalla (105) ; tur\ there
verily (19, 61) ; yvr*, in the very place where (61) ;
(from *ada) t always (7).

APPENDIX III

ON LALLA'S METRES

[By Sin GEORGE GRTKRSON]

THE subject of Kashmir! prosody has never been investigated,
and hardly anything is known about it. The following-
remarks may therefore be found of interest.

We may say that, in Kashmir, two distinct metrical systems
are known and cultivated. The first is that used for formal
works, such as epic poems and the like. Here Persian
metres, with many irregularities and licences, are employed.
Numerous examples will be found in the edition of Mahmud
Ciamfs TwnfZMkM published by the late K. F. Burkhard
in the 'Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlindischen Gesell-
<?chaft', vols. xlix and liii. In that case we have a poem
written by a Muslim in the Persian character, and the use of
Persian metres is to be expected, but we find the same system
in epics written by Hindus. For instance, a great portion of
the Sm-parinaya of Krsna Razdan is in the well-known laztij
metre, and the same is employed in the narrative portions of
the Silrdmdratdra-carila of Dev&kara-prasada JBhatta, a writer
of the eighteenth century. As an example of the latter,
I may quote a couple of lines :

fjSfar om-na &aiM o^ tami* wan
tit/iay yitJia sure poms manz c/tuh kopan

He had no son, and his mind was agitated,
Just as (the reflection of) the sun trembles in
the water.

If, with the customary licence, we read the words 6s u and
yitfia each as one long syllable, we have at once a complete
iasaj:

ON LALLA'S METRES 145

The other metrical system is used in songs, and is by no
means so simple a matter. I regret that, daring my own
stay in Kashmir, I neglected to study it, and when, after my
return to this country, I endeavoured to ascertain from native
sources what rules were followed in such compositions, I failed
to obtain any definite information. All that I could gather
was that a poet scanned his verses by ear. A long and
minute examination of scores of songs led me to no certain
conclusion beyond the fact that a stress-accent seemed to play
an important part. Here and there I came across traces of
well-known metres, but nowhere, even allowing for the fullest
licence, did they extend over more than a few lines at a time.
In the year 1917, Sir Aurel Stein had occasion to visit
Kashmir, and with his ever inexhaustible kindness, undertook
to investigate the question. With the help of Pandit
Nityananda Sastii and a SrdvaM, or professional reciter, he
ascertained definitely that in songs the metre depends solely
on the stress-accent. In Lalla's verses, four stresses go to
each pdda, or line. Thus, if we mark the stressed syllables
each with a perpendicular stroke, the first two songs would be
read as follows :

1.

abliyotf 1 saviMs laye wotM

i i 1.

gaganas mgwi rnyul^ 1 satm

( I l i

sMn gol* ta andmay motti

II! I.

yuliiiy wopadesh chuy laid

wakli mdnas kol-akol nd ate
i .1.1 i

Mopi mudn ati nd pravem

rozan $hiwa-$hek a tk nd ate

L, X 7^7 , * " 7 ! I

mot u yey mh ta my wopaaesh

So far as I am aware, this is not paralleled by any similar
metric system in Persia or Northern India ; but it is interesting

146 APPENDIX III

to note that, although stress is the sole criterion of the metre,
some of the songs give forth distant echoes of well-known
Indian methods of scansion. Take, for instance, the second
verse quoted ahove. It will not scan according to Indian
rules, but nevertheless its lilt is strongly suggestive of the
Indian doha. The doha is a metre based on instants, each of
which is the time occupied in uttering one short syllable, one
long syllable counting as two instants. Each half-verse is
divided into the following groups of instants: 6+4 + 3,
6 + 4 + 1. The group of 3 is generally an iambus (u -), and
the second half-line generally ends in a trochee ( w). The
opening verse of the Sat-saiyti of Vihun is a good Hindi
example :

64 3

wen Utava\-badkd \ fiarau,

6 41

ROclhCi tttyari so\i

6 4^ 3

jd tarn kl \jhi \jpadai

6 4 1

Sydma harita \ duti ho\i

It will be noticed that in Lallans second verse, as in a doha,
the first and third lines end in a strongly marked iambus.
So, again, the second and fourth lines end in a heavy long
closed syllable, which, with the inherent vowel, not pronounced,
of the final consonant, is really a trochee, as in the above doha.
But this is not all. In Lalla's verse, if we read the unstressed
9iw of mwlri) and the word ud as short, thus :

6 41

Wtopi mudri ati na $rave\8h(a)

it would scan, like the second section of a doha in instants :
6 + 4 + 1.

In the same way, other songs that I have examined show
traces of other well-known metres, Persian or Indian, and it
is evident that the rude village compositions which developed
into the verses of Lalla were originally intended to be based
on some standard metre, but that in the mouths of the rustics
stress became substituted for quantity.

ON LALLA'S METRES 147

So far as my experience goes, no such development has
taken place in Hindostan or the Panjab. Here the rules of
prosody depending on the quantity of each syllable are
everywhere followed, although, of course, in the ruder songs,
great metrical licence prevails. We observe a similar state of
affairs in Southern India. A series of Kanarese Ballads was
published in the Indian Antiquary by the late Dr. Fleet, and
regarding them he observes 1 that they follow the principle of
Kauarese metre consisting of feet of four instants each,
* But no absolute metrical precision is aimed at ; and though
the principle of construction is distinctly recognizable in
carrying it out by scanning or in adapting the words to the
airs, short syllables have been drawn oat long and long
syllables clipped short, ad libitum. . . . The rhythm of the
songs can only be learned by actually hearing them sung.'

I believe that the only Indo- Aryan language that shows
a tendency to substitute, as in Kashmir!, stress for quantity
is Bengali. It will have been observed that in Lalla's verses
quoted above there is a stress on the first syllable of every
line. Similarly, Mr. J. D. Anderson 2 has shown that in
Bengali verse, although quantity is sometimes nominally
observed, the metre is conditioned by a strong phrasal stress-
accent falling on the beginning of each line and on the first
syllable after each caesura. Usually the verse consists of a,
fixed number of syllables, wholly independent of quantity ;
and this number, regulated and controlled by the stress-
accents, constitutes the metre. Mr. Anderson and I am
entirely of his opinion is inclined to see Tibeto-Burman
influence in this metrical system of Bengal. Could we be
justified in suggesting a similar foreign influence in Kashmir ?
The population of the Happy Valley is far from being
homogeneous. Local tradition compels us to consider it as
very probable that, although the upper classes are probably of
the same stock as that of North- Western India, a substratum
of the inhabitants is connected with non-Indian tribes whose
original home was Central Asia, and this is borne out by the

1 Yol. xiv (1883), p 294

2 JRAS, 1914, pp. 1046 ff.

L2

148 APPENDIX III

results of philological inquiries. It was in this substratum,
not amongst the learned Pandits of Kashmir, that the rude
songs which developed into Lalla's verses and into the songs
of modern Kashmir took their rise.

A well-known parallel to Lalla's abandonment of quantity
in exchange for stress-accent is to be found in mediaeval
Greek and Latin poetry. Here, of course, there can be no
question of mutual influence, although we find just the same
state of affairs. The accentual poems of Gregory of Nazianzen
bear much the same relation to the other poems composed by
him and by the writers of classical times that the verses of
Lalla bear to the amiam pduakavvam of Hala and of the older
Indian poets whose quatrains are preserved in his anthology.

G. A, G.

G, A, G.

APPENDIX IV

CONCORDANCE OF THE VERSES IN MS. STEIN B
AND IN THE PRESENT EDITION

s

s ri

.

' H

5j

""" o

S3

iS

8m

82

1

ft

Remaiks.

'

,1

Remarks.

tt

sg

o5

ol

6 rj

(ft

6 3

. W

&"-

i

fc-

1>

1

13

80

65

A mixture of 5 and 65

2

8

in MS.

3

46

31

6

4

47

32

54

5

7

33

52

(i

36

i

84

80

7

17

35

53

H

27

i

3G

11

A mixture of 11 and I

9

no

in MS.

10

40

27

75

11

>3

38

C4

With borrowing fVoiu

12

as

55.

13

IB

39

73

14

2

40

74

15

1

41

76

16

10

\ i

Stein B 42 and 43 aiv

17

77

42

81

variants of the gunc

18

22

43

1 i

verse,

li)

14

44

56

20

15

45

57

21

M

46

41

22

61

47

20

23

18

24

58

These VWBW do not

25
26

27

21

28
12

71

form part of the
collection in Stan
B, but arc scribbled

28

70

Wrongly numbered
19 in MS,

79

in at the end as ;i.
kind of appendix,

29

5

Wrongly numbered

and are not num-

20 in MS.

\ bored,

VOCABULARY

THIS vocabulary contains every word in tlie foregoing*
verses of Lalla, with a reference to each place in which it occurs.
The order of words is that adopted by Sir George Grierson in
other works on Kashmiri, the arrangement being based on the
English alphabetical order of the consonants, without regard
to the vowels. The latter come into consideration only in
cases in which the same consonant is followed, or the same
consonants are separated by different vowels. Thus, the
different words containing the consonants tr will be found in
the succession tar, tor, tor u , ttir*, a.nd tur 1 '. All words
beginning with vowels are arranged together at the com-
mencement, their mutual order being determined by the
consonants. Long and nasalized vowels are not differentiated
from short ones, except in cases where the difference between
two words depends only on such variations, A similar
principle has been followed in the case of diacritical marks.
For instance, fit Ms precedes petamn, because h precedes r, the
difference between t and t being ignored. The letter 6 follows
/ (and /). As the consonants v and w merely represent different
phases of the same sound, they are treated, for the purposes of
alphabetical order, as the same letter.

In Kashmiri the sonant aspirates gJi, d/t, (Ui, and Ik l lose
their aspiration, although, in the case of totsams, the
aspiration is sometimes retained in writing. Even in this
latter respect there is no uniform custom, the same word being
written indiscriminately with or without the aspiration. At
one time a man will write abhyas, and at another time he will
write atyfy. Similarly, Lalla writes bkarya, a wife, with #//,
but lut(l) (Sanskrit Mvta) 9 a principle of creation, with L
The latter is a Saiva technical term, and, of all words, we
should have expected it to be spelt in the Sanskrit fashion.
To avoid confusion, I have therefore, for the purposes of
alphabetical order, treated each of these sonant aspirates as
identical with its corresponding unaspirated letter. That is
to say, gk will be found in the place allotted to g } <tt in
that allotted to (J } ctt in that allotted to d, and Vk in that
allotted to i.

G.A.G.

1 The sonant aspirate jh doss not occur.

VOCABULARY 151

WORDS BEGINNING WITH VOWELS

a, interj. added topatii (swpasJmn) m. e., and with it forming"

pastya> 16.
abed, m. absence of difference, identity ; sg. abl. ahefla, while,

or although, there is identity (of the soul with the

Supreme), 13.
abSd tt t adj. one who has no knowledge, a fool, i. e. one who has

no knowledge of himself ; pi. nom. a,lod\ 6.
abukh, a word of doubtful meaning ; perhaps = clumsy, stupid,

85,q.y.
abal, adj. c. g. without strength, weak, weak from sickness;

sg. abl. abali) used as subst., 8.
alen, adj. c, g. not different, identical ; alen, vimarshd, (they

are) identical, (as one can see) on reflection, 16.
abhyds, m. repeated practice, esp. t&ydga or of meditation on

the identity of the Self with the Supreme, 1 ; habitual

practice of a course of conduct, 20 ; sg. ag. abhyoJ, 1.
ach\ f. the eye ; ache lagafie talav, the eyes to be turned

upwards, K. Pr. 102 ; achU Jiyuh\ like the eyes, K. Pr.

201.
ada, adv. then, at that time, 24, 31, 61, 80, 95, 103,

K. Pr. 56.

adal ta wadal, m. interchange, confusion, K. Pr. 10.2.
adnyu^ adj. non-dual ; (of the mind) convinced of the non-
duality or identity of the Self with the Supreme, 5, 65.
aliaw, I, the ego ; aham-wmarM, by reflection on the nature

of the ego, 15.

aMnin, to eat food ; impve. sg. 2, altar, 28.
ok*, card, one ; with emph. ^, okuy^ one only, the only one,

the unique, 34 ; m. sg. abl. aki itSaffi, at one time, on one

occasion, 50 ; nimwlte ah, in a single twinkle of the eye, 26.

Cf. yeta.
akh, card, one, 34 ; as indefinite article, a, 50, 83 (bis) ; akhdJ^.

one, a single one, K. Pr. 150. CLyeka.
bkh y m. a mark, a sign impressed upon anything ; esp. a mark

indicating eminence or excellence, 75. Cf. the next.
Skhun, to make a mark : to impress a mark upon anything, to

brand anything ; impve. sg. 2, okli, 76.
akJier, m. a syllable, such as the syllable ofa, or the like, 10.
tttol, m. that which transcends the kula^ i.e, the sphere of the

Absolute, or of Transcendental Being, 79 ; kol-akol, the

totality of all creation, 2. See tSl, and Note on Yoga, 19.

152 VOCABULARY [atriy

alcriy, adj. c. g. not acting 1 , free from work ; hence, in a religious
sense, free from the bond of works as an impediment to
salvation, in a state of salvation, 32, 45.

al, m. wine (offered to a god), 10 (d. pal) ; the wine of bliss
or nectar of bliss, said to flow from the digits of the moon
(see *om) ; a!-tMtt, the place of this nectar, the abode of
bliss, i. e. union with the Supreme, 60. Al-thdn, however,
may also be explained as equivalent to the Sanskrit alam-
stliana, i.e. the place regarding which only 'neti neki* can
"be said, or which can be described by no epithet, the
highest place (anuttam pada), i. e. also, union with the
Supreme.

aldnd*, adj. (f. alonz^ pendant, hanging, 102 (f. sg. nom.).

d/av } m. a call, a cry ; dpitn u 9 to summon, K. Pr. 102.

d!awun^ to wave, move up and down; pres. part, dlawdn,
K. Pr. 57,

aw\ ami) see atL

oih, the mystic syllable dm, the pranava ; sg. gen. omaJcl cdbqka,
with the whip of the pranava, 101 ; om-kdr^ the syllable
dm, 34, 82.

It is believed that the syllable om contains altogether
five elements, viz. a, u, m, and the Hindu and Ndda, on
which see Note on Yoga, 23, 24, and andhatL

6ni n , adj. raw, uncooked ; (of an earthen vessel) unbaked, 106 ;
(of a string) not twisted, and hence without strength, 106 ;
m. sg. abl. ami, 106 ; m. pi. dat. dm$/i, 106.

awbar, m, clothing, clothes, garments, 28, 76.

amol u , adj. undefiled, pure, free from all defilement (of the
Supreme), 64.

amalfa tt 9 adj. (f, amaloffi), undefiled, 21 (f. sg. nom.).

amar, m. immortality ; amara-pat/ti, on the path (leading) to
immortality, i.e. in the path of reflection on the Self
or ego, 70.

amretft, m. the water of immortality, nectar, amrta ; sg. abl.
amreta-*ar, the lake of nectar, i.e. of the nectar of bliss
(dnanda) of union with the Supreme, 68. Regarding the
nectar distilled from the microcosmic moon, see Note on
Yoga, , 8, 19, 21, 22.

on l \ adj. blind; m. pi. ag. anyau t 59.

anad, adj. c. g. without beginning, existing from eternity, an
epithet of the Supreme, 72.

andar, postpos. in, within ; Mtk a re-andar, in the closet, 101 ;
qnd a r(ty a&un, one must enter into the very inmost part, 94 ;
qnd a riy, from the inmost recesses, 109.

andPrywiP) adj. (f. qniPrim*, 104), belonging to the interior,
inner, 4, 104.

VOCABULARY 153

anahath, adj. c. g. unobstructed, whose progress is perpetual;
(often) that of which the sound is everlasting, the mystic
syllable dm (15), also called the andJiath sJitbcl, or (33)
andhata-mv. In Sanskrit it is called the analiaUt-dhmni
(Note on Yoga, 23). It is described as having the
semblance of inarticulateness (<wyaktdnutotipruya\ to be
uttered only by the deity dwelling within the breast of
living creatures, and therefore to have no human utterer or
obstructor of its sound. It is composed of a portion of all
the vowels nasalized, and is called anahath (Skr. andhata),
i.e. perpetual, because it never comes to a close but vibrates
perpetually (an-astam-ita-rupatiodt). Another explanation
of the name is that it is ' sound caused without any per-
cussion', i.e. self-created. It is said (33) to take its rise
from the heart and to issue through the nose. In 15, it is
described as identical with, or as equivalent to, the Supreme
Himself. e

As a Saiva technical term andkata sometimes does not
designate om, but is applied to other things. For instance,
it is used as the name of the fourth of the mystic eakras> or
circles. See Note on Yoga, 15, 17, 23, 25, 27.

audmay^ adj. c. g. not bad ; hence, perfect ; that which is perfect
and free from all qualities, pure consciousness, the Supreme, 1.

ann, pi. m. food, victuals, 28.

anun, to bring ; wagi anun, to bring under the rein, to bring
into subjection, 37 ; laye anvn, to bring under subjection by
concentration of the mind and breath, 82.

Fut. sg. 3 3 ani, 37 ; past. part. m. sg. with suff, 1st pera.
sg. ag. onum, 82.

anlli, m. an end ; Ant* (54) or fatti* (33, 37, 38, 41, 61), adv.
in the end, finally, ultimately.

anfar, m. the inner meaning, the hidden meaning, mystery
(of anything), 56.

anway, m. logical connexion; tenor, drift, purport; the real
truth (concerning anything), 59.

ajpdn, m. one of the five vital airs (1, prdna, 2, apana, 3, samdna,
4, iidana, 5, vydua). Of these, two (prana and apdm) are
referred to by L. D. See Note on Yoga, 16 note,

The apdna (Ksh. apdn) is the vital air that goes down-
wards and out at the anus. The prana is that which goes
upwards and is exhaled through the mouth and nose. For
perfect union with the Supreme, it is necessary to bring
these two into absolute control, 26. Cf. Deussen, Allgemeinti
Geschichte fhr PMo&op/rie, i. 2, p. 248, 3, p. 70. See Note
on Yoga, 2, 16, 21 3 23, and Articles ndcli and^rara, 2, for
fall particulars.

154 VOCABULARY [apann

dparun, to put food into another's mouth, to feed from the
hand. Conj. part, dpaiiit., 66.

apuiP, adj. unclean, impure, ceremonially unclean ; rn. pi. nom.,
with emph. y 9 aptitig* 32.

or, adv. there, in that place ; om-y, even from there, K. Pr.
102.

arg, m. an offering of unhusked grain made in worshipping a
god (Skr. arghai in a slightly different sense}, 42.

arsk, m. the sky, the firmament ; sg. dat. (in sense of loc,),
ars/te$, 50.

ar&un 1, m. the act of worshipping, worship, 58.

arkun 2, to worship ; inf. arising 10 ; fut. pass. part. a^?m,
worship is to be done (with dat of obj.), 33.

arznn, m. the result of labour, earnings, 61.

b$ } m. the mouth ; sg. abl. om (a form not found in modern
Ksh.), 18.

askwawdr^ m. a rider (on a horse), 14, 15.

a$nn 3 to laugh ; fut. (in sense of pres*) sg. 3, asi, 46.
&w, to be, 18, 20, 36, 86, 92 ; to become, 64; to come into
existence, 22 ; to happen, 84, 85 ; to he, to remain, to
continue, 46, 55; onth } having been, i.e. whereas thou
wast formerly (so and so, now thou hast become such and
such), 86.

Conj. part, ositfi, 84-6. Fut. ind. and pres. subj. sg. 1,
dsa (m. c. for dsa), 18 ; 3, dsi (in sense of pres.), 46 ; d*& (m. c.)
(fut), 22 ; pi. 3, awn, 92 ; impve. sg. 2, as, 20, 36, 55, 64.
adv. slowly, gradually, 80.

asawittiP, n. ag. one who is or continues ; stliir dawun u , that
which is permanent, 73.

ata> f. the shoulders; the rope for tying a burden on the
shoulders ; ata-gaiid, the knot by which this rope is tied, 108.

aU, adv. there, in that place, 2 ; afci, m. c. for ati, 2 (bis), 98.

atJi, pron,, that (within sight) ; adj. sg. ag. m. dm\ K. Pr.
150 ; abi. ami, 107.

'afJia, m. the hand ; atta-wds karnn, (of two persons) to join
hand in hand, to hold each other's hand (for mutual con-
fidence), 92 ; sg. abl. atha trdwnn, to dismiss from the hand,
to let loose, to set free, 88 ; loc. afJie, in the hand ; '(to be)
in a person's possession, (to come) to hand, 98, K. Pr. 18 ;
at/te tyon u , to carry in the hand, 10.

atma,) m. the Self; esp. the Self as identical with the Supreme ;
old. sg. gen. dtmd&e (probably m. c. for atmdsi, quasi- Sanskrit
*atma*ya), 22 (see p. 133).

a&ien, adv. not torn ; hence, uninterruptedly, continuously, 19.
afcte, to become weak, feeble, emaciated ; pres. part.
becoming feeble, hence, wearily, 19.

VOCABULARY 155

a&mi, to enter. Put. pass, part, m. sg. a&itn, it is to be entered,
i.e. you should (or -may) enter='come in', 94; impve. pol.
sg. 3, wata a$tan, lit. let him not enter (as a question),
i.e. he certainly does enter, 53; past sg. 1, fri^efe, I (f.)
entered, 68.

fir, ay> aye^ ayes, see yuri*.

M, interj. Sir! 87 (bis), 88 (qiiater).

bftu, in bhu-tal, the surface of the earth, the whole earth as

opposed to the sky, 22, 42 ; b/t&r, id., bhur bhmoah szvar, the

earth, the atmosphere, and heaven, i.e. the whole visible

universe, 9.
bocha, f. hunger, 37 ; abl. boclia* (for bvcfd-) suty marun, to die

of hunger, 83,

adj. (f. foe0V tt ), without means, without resources,

destitute, unfortunate, wretched ; f. sg. ag. bicuri, 89.

Aj perfect intelligence, knowledge of the Self, svcttma-jnaua ;

bdd/M-praka&h, the enlightenment or illumination of this

knowledge, 35.

tt , adj. wise, a wise man, one who is intelligent ; m. sg. ag.

bU\ 26.
bfidwi, to afflict, cause pain to ; p. p. m. sg. with suff. 1st pel's.

sg. ag, IfOflum, 7.
boflun, to sink, be immersed in, be drowned in ; past m. sg. 2,

bpdiM, 74.
bag, m. a garden, K. Pr. 56 ; swaman-baga-bar, the door of the

garden of one's soul, or sonicM-baya-bar^ the door of the

jasmine-garden, 68, see art. awa ; sg. dat. bagas^ K. Pr. 56.
bagawun, m. God ; sg. voc. bagawdna,, K. Pr. 102.
(tabu, adj. much, many, 51.
M, pron. 1st pers. } I, 3, 7 (ter), 13, 18, 21, 31, 48, 59, 68,

81-3, 93, 98, 102 ; K. Pr. 18 ; with interjection %, <5o-%,

I, good Sir !
me, me, 44; to me, 68, 81, 84, 94; to me, in my

possession (dat. of possession), 13 ; for me, as regards me

(dat. commodi), 8, 18, 44; K. Pr. 57; by me (ag.) 3, 31,

44 (bis), 48, 93-4, 103-4 ; me-ti, me also, 106 ; to me

also, 48.
myfa u y my, 106 ; K. Pr. 150 ; m. sg. voc. mydMir,

K. Pr. 57.
btij\ one who has a share (%') in anything ; hence, one who

gets such and such as his allotted share of fate, one who

gains possession (of) (the thing obtained being put j in the

dat., as three times in 62, or compounded with bbj\ as in

papa-$6l$-boj\ he who obtains (the fruit) of his sins and

virtuous acts of a former life, also in 62).

156 VOCABULARY

k>tf 9 adj. (f. luk&\ full of devotional faith (Wiakti)., SJienkara-

bokt u > full of devotional faith to Sankara (i.e. Siva) ; sg.

nora. 18.
lot, m. a religious offering of food to gods, animals, &c. ;

hence, food generally given to an animal, K. Pr. 150.
bol, 1, m. speech ; lol$adwi, to recite speech ; hence, to abuse,

blame with abusive language, 18, 21.
l/oly 2, see lohn.

IdliikJi, a male child, a boy ; pi. voc. Idlako, 91.
lolim, to say ; impve. sg. 2, bol, 20.
lolandwun, to cause to converse, to address, summon, call to ;

p. p. m. sg. with sufF. 1st pers. sg. ag. lolawwum^ 105.
lam, m. the skin ; bam tulwi, to raise the skin, to raise weals

(with a whip), 101.
Ian, m. the sun, 9.

land) m. a vessel, dish, jar ; pi. nom. Mna, 60.
htn, adj., c. g. different, distinct, 13 ; a different fornx, a manner

of difference, 16 ; pi. nom. ben^ 16.
6tin t adj, and adv. low, below; jpet&a lona, from top to

bottom, 17.
lona, 2, (for 1, see ffifa), adv. as it were; used almost as an

expletive, 37.

land gaMwi, to become stopped (of a mill at work), 86.
bindu, m. a dot or spot; esp. the dot indicating the sign

anusvdra, forming the final nasal sound of the syllable oth^

or, similarly, the dot over the semicircle of anundiika (^) 3 of

which the semicircle indicates the nasal sound. Ndda-Unduy

(with emph. y\ 15. For the meaning of this compound,

see Note on Yoga. 25.

lanflav, m. a relation, a person related, K. Pr. 201 (ter).
lun?, f. the * Chinar ', or Oriental Plane-tree, Platanus

orientahs, K. Pr. 102. It is a fine tree, common in Kashmir.
lar, m. a door ; sg. dat. Myes laqa-laras, I entered the garden

door, 68 ; bar- (for laras-) pWi MM*, a bitch at the door,

K. Pr. 102 ; pi. nom. bar trpp d rhn, I shut the doors, 101 ;

pi. dat. toil 1 <]ltJi l ma baran, I saw (that there were) bolts on

His doors, 48.
Mr, m. a load ; sg. dat. bdras, (the knot) of (i. e. that tied) the

load, 108.
lor*, adj. full; m. pi. nom. bar* lar* lana, (innumerable)

dishes all filled (with nectar), 60.
llur, see IM.
brahm, a Brahman, in lrahma-]iu&, murder of a Brahman,

with emph. y, K. Pr. 102.
IraAmd, name, of the first person of the three gods, Brahma,

Visnu, and Sira, 14

VOCABULARY 157

brahmdnd, m. Brahma's egg, the universe, the world; used to
mean the Brakma-randhra, or Brahma's crevice, one of the
sutures in the crown of the head, the anterior fontanelle,
34, 57. It is the upper extremity of the Snsumnd Nddl ;
see Note on Yoga, 5, 7, 19, 21, 27. Sg. dat. brahmantjas,
34 ; abl. brahmdnda, 57.

bmmwi) to wander ; hence, to he confused; to be filled with an
agitated desire, 106 ; pres. part, bramdn, 106.

brama<-w6n, lt> , m. a wanderer, one who roams about, 26.

barwi) to fill ; used in various idioms ; bhay$ barm, to ex-
perien.ce fear, to fear (at heart), 72; doh-deti bardti 1 , to
pass each day, spend each day, 92 ; den-rath bardn\ to pass
day and night, 91 ; km barnn, to aim an arrow, 71.

Conj. part, barith, 71; impve. sg. 2, bar, 72; fut. pi.
2, iariv, 91 ; 3, barau, 92.

fj$roug u , adj. out of order, deranged, disarranged, 85.

brantt, f. error ; hence, false hopes, hope in material things, 27.

hrotkt postpos. governing abl, before ; with emph. y } marana
brvtjwy, even before (the time appointed for) death, 87 ;
bro'tfi-kofi, in future times, 92.

bhdryd, f. a wife : bharye-rnp 1 , f. possessing the form of a wife,
in the character of a wife, 54.

hirsnn, a jingle of arznn ; arzun barzun, earnings, the result
of labour, the savings gained from one's life-work, 61.

basta, f. a sheepskin, goatskin, or the like ; daman-basfa, f. a
smith's bellows; sg. dat. -barti, 100 = K. Pr. 46.

hata, m. a Brahman, a Kashmiri Brahman; hence, a true
Brahman, a Brahman who seeks salvation, 1, 17; sg. voc.
batd, 1, 17.

bath, m. a warrior, a soldier; a servant, a messenger, 74;
}/ema-bath, (pi. nom.), the messengers of Yama, the god of
the nether world, who drag the souls of dying men to hell
to be judged by Yama, 74.

) 1, m. a demon ; mdra-b&th (pl.nom.), murderous demons, 71.
) 2, m. a technical name in Saiva philosophy for the
group of the five taUoas, or factors, of which the apparent
universe consists, called in Sanskrit the bMtas or maAM&ta*.
They are the five factors, or principles, which constitute
the materiality of the sensible universe. They are (1) the
principle of solidity, technically called frlhfa, or earth ;

(2) the principle of liquidity, technically dp, or water;

(3) the principle of formativity, technically agni, or fire ;

(4) the principle of aeriality, technically vdfv, or the
atmosphere; and (5) the principle of vacuity, technically
dkdxa or the sky. See J. C. Chatterji, Kashmir S&aivism,
p. 48. PL nom. KM, 77 (cf. 95).

158 VOCABULAEY \bJiu4al

bhu-tal, see bM.

bairn, (of the sun), to shine forth ; fut. sg. 3, lati, 16. ^

Mav, m. existence, esp. existence in this world of illusion, m

contradistinction to union with the Supreme, lhawa-mz,

the disease of existence, existence compared to a disease, 8 ;

&tewa~*$d a ri-ddr3, in the current of the ocean of existence,

74 ; bhawa-sar, the ocean of existence, 23.
lav, m. devotional love (to a deity) ; sg. gen. (m. pi nom.)

bdwdk\ 40.
Ikuwah, the air, atmosphere ; l/wr llmwali swar, the earth, the

atmosphere, and heaven, i.e. the whole visible universe, 9.
Idiom, to show, explain ; pol. impve. sg. 2, with suff. 1st pers.

sg. dat., Mvtam, please explain to me, 56, t (

lowur*, m. (in modern Kbh. wiwiif*), a weaver ; ldw a r l -wdtt,

a weaver's workshop ; sg. abl. -wana, 102.

2 (27, K. Pr. 201) or bhat/e (72), m. fear ; esp. (K. Pr. 201)

the fear of God ; y$ma-6ay$, the fear of Yama (the^god of

death), the fear of death and what follows, 27 ; bhafi barm,

to experience fear, to feel fear, 72 ; ssr. dat. %& tyui 11 ,

(there is no bliss) like the fear of God, K. Pr. 201.
16 f, m. a brother ; sg. dat. bdyu hyuW, (there is no relation)

like a brother, K. Pr. 201.
bydt&t pron. another; sg. dat. biyis tyut u , for another (i.e, not

for oneself), 61,
biyis, see lydkh.
bazun, 1, to cook (vegetables or the like) in hot oil, to fry

(vegetables) ; conj. paj-t. bazith, 90 (bis) (with pun on the

meaning of baeu 9 2).
bazuu, 2, to reverence, serve ; hence, dwwr baznn, to serve a

door^ to wait at a door, 51 ; geh laznn, to serve a house, to

be occupied with household affairs. 32 ; prim lawn, to serve

one's life, to be devoted to one's own life s to be attached to

one's bodily welfare rather than to spiritual things, 90 (bis)

(with pun on p-rdn lazun, to fry an onion, cf. bazun^ 1).

Inf., dat. of purpose, bazani, 51 ; conj, part, bazttl, 32,

90 (bis).
lozun, to hear; to listen to, 106; to hear (from), to learn

(from), 27 ; to attend to, heed, 20.
Conj. part, tfitetik, 27 ; impve. sg. 2, bos, 20 ; fut. sg. 3,

Idisi, 106.
buznn, to parch or roast (grain, &c.) ; met. to parch (the heart),

to purify it, to destroy all evil thoughts from the heart ;

p. p. sg. f. with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag. buz u m, 25.

, m. a whip ; sg. abl. cobqka, 101.
cedun or cerun, to mount (e.g. a horse) ; ptth ceditn, to mount

VOCABULARY 159

and ride on the back (of a horse, &c.), peth being an adv.,

not a postposition, 14, 15 ; fut. sg. 3, with suff. 3rd pers.

dat. sg., cedes (ceres), he will mount on it, 14, 15.

b, is (m. sg.), ?> 20, 27 ; chukh, thou art (m.), 42 (bis), 55,

107 (aux.) 3 K. Pr. 46 ; chum, is (m.) to or for me, 61, 106 ;

ckeS) I (f.) am, 93, 106 (aux.) ; c&uwa, is (m.) for you, 89 ;

c%, is (f.) for thee, 99 (bis), 100, K. Pr. 46 (qnater) ; it (f.)

is verily, 52, 57, 63, K. Pr. 102 (quater) ; <%, they (m.)

are verily, 32 (ter) ; c%, it (m.) is to thee, 30, 56, K. Pr.

56; is (m.) verily, 1, 12, 17, 24, 29, 46, 51-4, 62 (bis),

80, K. Pr. 150.
iokh^ m. a wound ; ndrd&-cMM, the wound caused by a barbed

fish-spear, 23 (eomm.).

i^ m. (?) a carpenter, 85, q.v.
chon u , adj. empty, 63 ; empty, vain, unsubstantial, having

no substance, 41 ; m. sg. dat. c/ittiu. 41 ; f. sg. nom.

ekfa*, 63.
cJior, in cfwra-ddre, 74, a waterfall (in modern Kashmiri Ml) ;

chora-fldr^ the stream of a waterfall, a torrent; hence, cJiota-

dare karun^ to make (a person) in a torrent, to make him

stream (with blood), the name of a certain punishment, in

which a person is dragged along the ground till his body

streams with blood.
cfioruKi to release, let go; let loose, set free; p, p. m. sg.

chfir", 23.

chatJPr, m. an umbrella (one of the insignia of royalty), 73.
chdwun, to iiing at or to ; to dash down (on), 103 ; p. p. f. sg.

with suff. 3rd pers, sg. ag. and 1st pers. sg. nom. cMv^natS)

103.

ctyur u 9 see ckorwn.
cakh> m. a tear or rent (in cloth or the like) ; cakh dyuu u , to

tear or rend, 104 (dat. of obj.).
eauda, m. a pocket, esp. a pocket for carrying money, a purse ;

sg. dat. canda*, 98 (= K. Pr. 18), K. Pr. 201,
cang, m. a claw, talon, 84.
cerm 9 see cedwi*
cyon u , to drink ; conj. part, ceth, K. Pr. 102 ; pres. part. c$wdn 9

60 ; fut. pi. 3, A, 47 ; p. p. m. sg. cyauv, 104.
9 cyon*, see tPh.

L u > m. a washerman ; sg. ag. dSd^ 103 ; ddlt*-ivffi, a washer-
man's stone (on which he beats the clothes he washes), 103.

) adv. a second time, again, 89.

c&ywiP, adj. right, not left ; f. sg. abl. dachini lari, on the
right side (corpses are placed oa the funeral pyre lying on.
the right side) K. Pr. 57.

160 VOCABULARY

dad, m. a bullock ; sg. dat. dados, 66.

dod, m. milk, 38 ; dodarshiir" 1 , a milk-child, a suckling 1 , 70.

flod\ adv. continually, always, 79. In modern Kashmiri clbfj 1 .

dag> f. a blow, 84 ; pain of a blow, hence, pain generally ; the
pangs of love, 105 ; sg. dat. or pi. nom. with emph. j/ 5
<tyay, ? for dagiy, 84.

//"tf , m. smoke, 97.

M, card, ten ; pi. dat. clakan, 95 ; dok u , m. a group of ten, sg.
abl. (Mii m. "c. ffa^, 105. There are ten organs (five of
sense, and five of action), see ymid^ ; and ten vital airs,
of which five are principal, and five are secondary, seeprdn, 2.

tWi or (58) dill, m. a body, the human body (of flesh and
blood, as opposed to the spirit), 28, 58, 101 ; koclek, a vile
body, 7 ; sg. dat. dikas, 58 ; gen. (f. sg. dat.) (Mace, 101.

dot, m. a day, daytime, 44, 98 ; K. Pr. 18 ; pi. the days (as in
' the days of yore '), 91 ; doh Iwtum, the day came to an end
for me, the day expired and night fell, 44, 98 ; K. Pr. 18 ;
flok-den baron, they will pass the daytime of each day, 92 ;
pi nom. doh, 91.

dikhy see dyiin^.

dal, m. a group, a collection, in nddi-dal, the collection (i. e.
totality) of the tubes in the body that convey the vital airs,
80. See*<7$.

dil, the heart, K. Pr. 56, 57; dil dyiinP, to give heart,
encourage, K. Pr. 46 (the corresponding L. V. 100 has dam,
breath) ; sg. gen. dUuk u ^ K. Pr. 57, (m. sg. dat.) dilakis,
K. Pr. 56.

l* t m. the front skirt of a garment ; pi. nom. dafi trov^ma^^
I spread out my skirts before him, i.e. I knelt before him
and meditated on him, 49.

1, m. vital air, breath of life, breath ; suppression of the
breath as a religious exercise ; the time occupied in taking
a breath, a very short time, a moment; dam karun, to
practise suppression of the breath, 4 ; dam dyun 1 ^ to give
breath (to a bellows ; the corresponding K. Pr. 46 has dil,
heart), 100; to suppress breath, and also to give forth
breath, to shout, threaten, 101 (a double meaning) ; damdk,
a single breath, hence, as adv. for a moment, for a short
time ; gradually, 4 (both meanings are applicable) ; dandy
. . . damiy, at (or for) one moment ... at (or for) another
moment, 96, 97 ; K. Pr. 47.
dam, 2, m. self-restraint, in the phrase shtm t& dam, quietude

and self-restraint, 29 ; sg. abl. Mma dama, 63.
dima, see dym\

damun, m. a pair of bellows ; sg. dat. damaiias, K. Pr. 46 ;
daman-lasta,) f, the leathern bag that forms the body of

/] VOCABULARY 161

a bellows, sg. dat. -batti 100 = K. Pr. 46 ; daman-Mi, f. the
pipe of a bellows, hence (4) used metaphorically for the
windpipe ; sg. dat. -It ale (for Mli), 4 ; daman-Mar, a black-
smith (who uses bellows), 100 = K. Pr. 46.

(Umathy m. a vaulted building, a dome ; a boundary-pillar
(usually made of brick and whitewashed), 66; sg. dat.
dumalas, 66.

fldn t 1, m. a gift, a present ; esp. a gift given in charity or for
pious purposes, 62.

dan, 2, f. a stream (of water or the like) ; sg. ag. cloni (m. c.
for don*), 39, 40.

dana, m. corn, grain, 77.

rf&a, m. a day, K. Pr. 102 ; the day-time, as opposed to nigKt,
22, 42 ; sg. dat. denas, K. Pr. 102 ; dob-den, see doh ; dttn-kar,
the day's work, all one's duties, 108 ; den-rat Ji, day and
night, 91 ; as adv. by day and by night, continually,
perpetually, without cessation, 55 ; cieiwatJt barduf, to pass
day and night, to pass all one's time, 91 ; den kyoh rath,
day and night, 3 ; met. joy and sorrow, 5 ; as adv. day and
night, perpetually, 65 ; iMwn den hjoli rath, day and night
set for me, vanished for me, passed for me, 3 ; den kydwu
rath, i. q. dm kyvh rdth ; as adv. perpetually, 19. *

fUen, f. a milch cow ; sg. abl, dMni, 38.

dm u , m. a man who cards cotton, a cotton-carder ; sg. ag. dm 1 ,
102.

(}mgu)i, to be wrapped in sleep ; fut. sg. 3, d'mgi, 78 (used as
present).

<1on u , adj. fortunate, happy, rich, opulent ; m. pi. nom., with
empL y, ddniy, 27.

doni, see dan, 2.

dipt, m. a lamp, 4 ; esp. the small lamp used in worship, 45.

dapun, to say ; fut. sg. 3, with sufF. 2nd pers. sg. dat. dapiy,
he will (may) say to thee, 20 ; impve. pres. pi. 3, with suff.
1st pers. sg. dat. dap*"nem, let them say to me, 21 (modern
Ksh. would be ddp^nam) ; p. p. m. sg. with suff. 3rd pers.
sg. ag. and 1st pers. sg. dat. dop^nam, he said to me, 94 ;
pi. dap\ (Lai) said (verses, m.), 76.

ddr, a stream, a current ; spd a n-ddr, the current (or tide) of
the ocean, 74; sg. dat. dare (for ddri), 74; cAtira-ddr,
see cMr.

dor*, adj. holding, supporting; ndsika-pawana-dor* 1 , holding
(i. e. borne upon) the vital airs that issue through the nose
(sc. from the heart) (of the syllable dm), 33 ; see andhatfi.

ddr", f. a side-door, a small door, a window; pi. nom.
dare, 101. '

dur u } adj. far, distant, 27 ; adv. afar, 30 ; dm, adv. afar, at

162 VOCABULARY \drof

a distance, 36 ; dtir u harm, to make distant, to put far oil',

to put away, K. Pr. 56 (f. Mr*).

drog u , adj, dear, high-priced ; hence, rare, hard to obtain, 30.
ditrlab, adj. hard to obtain, rare, 29.
dram, see nerun.
drarnun, m. a kind of grass, the d^-grass of India, cynodon

dacfyloti; hence, metaphorically, the luxuriant weeds of

worldly pursuits, 36.
damn, to be firm, steadfast ; fut. sg. 3, dare (for dari) 9 34 (in

sense of pres. subj.).
ddrun, to put, to place; to lay, or offer, (an animal in

sacrifice), 63; mm ddrm^ to bear a name, to be called

(so and so), 8 ; thar dawn*, to offer the back, to place the

back at one's disposal (of a riding- animal), 88.

Put. sg. 3, with suff. 2nd pers. sg. dat. &ariy> 88 ; p. p.

m. pi. with suff. 3rd pers. sg. ag. (form, 8 ; f. sg. dor' d , 63.
dars/wji, m. seeing esp. seeing, visiting, (a holy place or a

god) ; abl. darsJiena-myul 1 ^ union (brought about) by visiting ;

siGa-darshena-wyufl'^ union with the Self (i. e. God) brought

about by visiting a holy place, 36 , but see art. swa.
d)-uw u , adj. firm, steady, immovable, 71.
druye*> see nerun.
das, m, a servant, 43.

card, ten, in da$7ie-nadi-wav, the air (which passes

along) the ten (chief) nadis, 69; see nodi. This word is

borrowed from the Sanskrit date*. The regular Kashmiri

word is dak. *

) m. a country, a tract of country, 52, 53.
, f. a point of the compass, quarter, direction; sg. abl. kami

dishi, from what direction? whence ?, 41.
deshun or d&hm, to see ; fut. sg. 2, deshtikk, 36 : p. p. m. sg.

with emph. y, (ly&thuy, 5 ; with suff. 1st pers. sg.?ag. dyuthum,

31, 93, 96 (bis), 97 = K. Pr. 47 ; with suff. 2nd pers. nom.

dytikhukh, 44 ; with suff. 3rd pers. pi. ag. dy&t&ukA, 59 ;

f. sg. with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag.rMX 96 (bis) = K. Pr. 47,

97 (ter) = K. Pr. 47 ; m. pi. with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag. and

3rd pers. sg. dat. dlttfmas, I saw (bolts) on His (doors), 48.
way^ card, the two, both, 56.

, dito, dM, see dynri*.

dev, m. a god, 14, 15, 33 (bis) ; the image of a god, an idol,
17 ; sg. dat. dewas (in sense of gen. = Prakrit devassa), 33.
wa, adv. perhaps, K, Pr. 56.

w&daxMtith, m. N. of a certain ventricle in the brain (? the
fourth, see JSiwuvfaa-vimarSnl, iii. 16; trans, p. 48).

VOCABULARY 163

The commentary to L. V. 33 describes it as the centre of
the brain, or, alternatively, as the tip of the nose ; dwdda-
$Mnta-mandal 9 m. the locality of the dwddashdtitk^ i.e. the
Brahma-randhra (see Note on Yoga, 5, 27), 33.

dwdr, m. a door, a gate, 29 ; dwdr bazun, to resort to a door
to approach, or wait at, a door, 51.

diwor u s m. a lofty, stone-built, shrine for receiving the image
of a god, a masonry temple, 17.

<%, m. God, the Supreme Being, 106 ; sg. dat. daye$ 9 K. Pr.
201 ; gen. faglwdP, 105. f

day, m. advice, counsel ; esp. instruction as to God, right
teaching as to the nature of the Supreme, 41.

dfyS 9 diyij see dyim u .

doy 9 interj. in bo-ddy, I, good Sir ! 67.

dytikhuM,, old form for dytithukh, see deshun.

(fyol u , adj. loose, slack ; (of a parcel) untied, 108.

dhym^ m. contemplation, profound religious meditation, 59.

*, to give, 12, 44, 54, 63, 71, 98; K. Pr. 18, 102 (tor) ;
cdJck dym u , to cut to pieces, 104 ; Ail dyun u > to give heart
(to), to encourage, K. Pr. 46 ; dam dym u (see dam 1), 100,
101 ; god u dyun^-, to asperge (an idol, as an act of worship),
39, 40 ; ganddk dit\ put knots (on a net), 6 ; pMlav dyun,
to close the door and shutters of a shop, to shut up shop,
K. Pr. 102 ; pant din\ to thrust in pegs, 66 ; tar dynn u 9 to
cross (a person) over, to ferry across, 106.

Conj. part. dtfk 9 K. Pr. 102 ; ditk karith (modern (Lith
KUA), 12.

Fut. sg. 1, dima, 98, K. Pr. 18; 3, dyi, 106; diy& (at
end of line), 54.

Impve. sg. 2, with suff. 3rd pers. sg. dat. dKh 9 give to
them, 71; pol. sg. 2, dito, 100, K. Pr. 46; fat with suff.
3rd pers. sg. dat. diz^ thou shouldst give to him or to it,
39, 40, 63.

Past part. m. sg, with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag. dywfam,
I gave, 44 ; and also with suff. 3rd pers. sg. dat. dyut u max,
I gave to him or to it, 101, 104 ; with suff. 2nd pers. sg.
ag. and 1st pers. sg. dat. (a dativus commodi), d^u^tkam^
thou gavest for me (i. e. in my presence), K. Pr. 102 (bis) ;
pi. dit\ 6 ; with suff. 2nd pers. sg. ag. ditith, thou gavest
(them), 66 ; and also with' suff. 1st pers. sg, dat, (a dativus
commodi), ditHham^ thou gavest (them) for me (i. e. in my
presence), K. Pr. 102.
iy&thukh 9 dgtifhum, (lyuthuy, see deshm.

dyutum 9 dyut u ma$, dynnltam, see dyun u .
dfyly. m. the object of dhyan, q.v*, the object of religious
meditation, that which is meditated upon, 59.

M2

164 VOCABULARY [dish

dizes, see dyun u .

dazawun u , n. ag. that which burns, burning, blazing; f.
, 97 (with emph. y\

godP^ m. aspersion, ceremonial sprinkling 4 (of an idol or the

like) with water. god* dym u , to asperge, 39, 40.
gojil, see gopkil.

gagan, m. the sky, firmament (in,contrast to the earth), 22, 42.
Used as an equivalent to the Saiva technical term akciia or
the wide expanse of empty space ; hence, ethereality or the
principle of vacuity (in 1 used as synonymous with liuh\
one of the five physical factors, or Uiutas, viz. the principles
of the experience of (1) solidity, (2) liquidity, (3) forma-
tivity, (4) aeriality, (5) ethereality or vacuity (see Kashmir
tiainm, 48, 181, 133, 140, 141, 145). It is also conceived
as sound as such, i e. sound conceived, not as a sensation.
within the brain, but as an objective entity. It is supposed
to fill the inside of the body, its centre being the heart
(cf. Note on Yoga, S3). But by the word 'heart ' is not
meant the physiological organ, but the centre of the body,
imagined as a hollow, and filled with this atitfa (translation
of Sivatwtra-vimarsinl, p. 29). Qagan is used in this sense
of the principle of vaeuity in 1 and 26.

Sg. dat. gagana$-kun, (the earth spreads out) to the sky,
22 ; gagams, in the vacuity, 1 ; old sg. loc. gagdn\ 26.
gei, m. a house, house and home, a house and all that it
connotes, 55. geli basun, to serve a house, to be occupied in
household affairs, to be a householder as distinct from an
ascetic, 32. ef. gili.
gih) m. i. q. geh^ a house, household affairs, life as a householder

as opposed to an ascetic life, 64.

g&j 11 , the opening of a native cooking-range through which
the fuel is fed ; hence, a cooking-hearth (as a part for the
whole), 97.

gal, f. the throat, neck;, sg, voc. sJiyama-gala, thou with the
blue throat, i.e. Siva, whose throat was dyed blue by
drinking the deadly Mla-kuta poison, 13.
gal, f. abuse, foul language, contumelious language; gdlgandiin 11 ,

to bind abuse (to a person), to abuse, 21.
gol u , 1, m. the inner corner of the mouth ; yd* hyon u , to take
the mouth, hence, to conceal one's mouth ; the mouth, or
orifice, of the upper receptacle, through which grain is
gradually delivered to the stones of a mill to be ground.
When the stones cease to revolve, this orifice becomes
blocked up ; so gratan hyot u goluy (emph. y), (when the mill
stopped revolving, then) the mill concealed its orifice;

>] VOCABULARY 165

i.e. the orifice was hidden by the accumulating grain that
should have issued from it, and hecame blocked up (86).
n > 2, see gafan.

gul, m. a rose-flower, a flower generally, 96 = K. Pr. 47.

goldla, m. the red poppy ; pi. nom. gollla, K. Pr. 102.

galuu, to melt away, disappear, be destroyed ; in 64 (kalan &e
gol u ), </ol u , in the past, is used impersonally, and kalan is in
the dative plural, the whole being an instance of the Wiave
praydga, with regard to, or as to, thy longings disappearance
was done for thee, i. e. thy longings disappeared.
Fut. sg. 3, gall, 11, 28 ; past m. sg. 3, got*, 1, 9, 11, 64.

gamaii) m. the act of going ; wurdhwa-gaman^ the act of going
upwards, ascending into the sky, 38.
df m. a knot ; ganddk dyun u (with suffi of indef. art.), to
make a knot, to add a knot to something already knotted ;
i&gandd/i shetk sheW dip ($\g<MxWi is pi. although with the
indef. art., he added knots (one by one) by hundreds ;
ata-gand^ a shoulder-knot, a knot by which the rope support-
ing a burden on the shoulders is tightened, 108.
i u , m. a rhinoceros; pi. nom. gand\ 47.

gandnn, to knot, tie up ; to bind, fasten, tie up, 24, 101 ; to
tie on, or put on, clothes, to dress oneself, 27 (bis) ; gal
gawhW, to bind abuse (on a person), to abuse, 21 ; inf. sg.
abl. gandana-nishe, from (i.e. by) dressing oneself, 27 ;
conj. part. ^flwari&W, 27 ; fut. sg. 3, (in meaning of pres. subj.),
gant/e, 24 ; impve. pi. 3, with suf 1st pers. sg. dat. gdncftnem
(modern Kashmiri would be gdnf}hiaw) t 21 ; p. p. in. sg.
with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag. gondum, 101.

gang, f. the Ganges ; sg. dat. gangi-Jiyuh u , like the Ganges,
K. Pr. 201.

ganitn, to hecome established, firmly fixed ; II past, f. sg. 3,
ganeye, 48.

gawPntn, to count ; hence, to think about, meditate upon, 55 ;
conj. part. gttnsPrit/i, 55.

tjopJiil, adj. negligent, heedless 5 unmindful ; sg. voc. gopkiffi, 99 ;
go/Uo, K. Pr. 46.

gara, m. a house, 3, K. Pr. 57 ; a home, 106 ; gar* gMm, to
go home, 106 ; soma-gara, the home of the moon, 34, see
som ; sg. abl. gare> in the house, 34 ; panani gare, (I saw
a learned man) in my own house, 3 ; (expelled) from my
own house, K. Pr. 57. Note the old loc. pl.^OT, in Kka-
garu, 53, (enters) people's houses.

gare, see gara and garun.

gor, m. a spiritual teacher, a guru; sg. voc. ye gdrd, 56; ag.
gomn, 94 ; g9ra-ka&t 9 the word, or teaching, of a guru, 45, 62 ;
g$ra-&ond u wanm, id. 108. Cf. guru.

166 VOCABULARY [gor

gor, m. molasses, 66. It is given to a cow to increase her milL

gur u , m. a horse, 14.

guru, m. a spiritual teacher or preceptor, i.q. gor, q.v. ; sum-
guru, usually means ' the preceptor of the gods ', i. e.
Brhaspati. He is a deity who is the chief offerer of prayers
and sacrifices, and who is also the purohita of the gods,
with whom he intercedes for men. He is the god of wisdom
and eloquence. In 5 and 65, sura-guru-nath would therefore
be expected to mean * the lord of Brhaspati 5 . It is, however,
not so interpreted, hut sura-guru is said to be equivalent to
the Sanskrit deva-ftiva, the chief of the gods, and suTa-guwt-
ndtk f i& said to mean 'Lord of the chiefest of the gods',
i.e. Siva. Cf. MalMtirata, i. 1628.

for*, f. a gkan or space of time of about 24 minutes, hence,
indefinitely, any short space of time ; abl. sg. gari gari, at
every ghan> frequently, again and again, K. Pr. 150.

garb, m. the womb ; hence, a foetus ; with suff. of indef, art.
garlti, a foetus, (even whilst thou wast) yet in thy mother's
womb, 87.

garun, to frame, to build ; fut. sg. 3 (with meaning of present),
gare, 34. Cf. gatun.

garun,, to search eagerly for, 30, 43, 109 (bis) ; to remember
affectionately, long for, and hence, to cherish affectionately, 7 ;
pres. part, gdran, 109 (bis) ; impve. sg. 2, with suff. of 3rd
pers. sg. ace. garun, search thou for it, 30 ; past part. m. sg.
with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag, gorum, I cherished, 7 ; with suff.
3rd pers. sg. ag. gorm, he sought for, 43. Cf. gwtirnn.

grd&un, to swallow down, to devour in one mouthful; past
part. m. sg. grfo*, 22.

grata, m. a corn-mill, 86 ; sg. dat. grata*, 52 ; ag, gratan, 86 ;
grata-w6l u , m. a miller, 86.

ffosil, f. the condition of being littered with dirty straw, grass,
weeds, &c., K. Pr. 56.

gate, f. darkness, sg. dat. gati, in the darkness, 4.

got u t in wata-got*, m. one who goes along a road, a way-
farer, 57.

gatk, 1, f. going, gait, progress, movement, course; way,
conduct, works; kamsa-gath, the way, or course, of the
Jiatiisa mantra, 65. Like the syllable m, the course of this
mantra is said to be unobstructed (andh&ta or avydhata).
It is one of the mystic sounds heard by the Yogi (Note on
Yoga, 23). See /tarns and andhatk. jparama-gath, the way
of the Supreme, final beatitude, 103, sg. dat. gitti* ; eydne
g&tP namasMr, reverence to Thy (mighty) works ! JL Pr, 102.

gath, 2, in sarwa-gath, adj. going everywhere, omnipresent,
universally immanent (of the Deity), 64.

VOCABULARY 167

giitk a r 9 m. family, race, lineage, 15.

gatakk, f. darkness, spiritual darkness ; with suff. of indef. art.
gatakdk, 104.

gdtul u , adj. wise, skilful, learned ; with suff. of indef. art.
gdiulwdh) a learned man, a scholar, 83.

gatun, to put together, make, manufacture, compound (e, g. an
elixir) ; cf. garun, of which it is an older form.

Conj. part, gatith ; zdnun, gatit/i> to know how to com-
pound, 80.

(7r6**, see.?^//, 1.

gaWmn^ 1, to be wanted, to be required, to be necessary.
This verb uses the future in the sense of the present, 29, 45 ;
fja&/inn gaWie^ going (ga&hwi, 2) is necessary, one must go,
one has to go, 19 ; so pakun ga&he, one has to progress, 19.
Put. sg. 3, gMi, 29 ; ga&he, 19, 45.

gaMnn, 2, to go, 19 (see gMun, 1), 36 (to = dat), 41, 61, 8
(= K. Pr. 18), K. Pr. 20; (gara gatiiun, to go home, 106) ;
to go away, depart, 95, K. Pr. 102; to go away, to
disappear, be annihilated, 9 ; to become, 16, 59, 66, 86, 94,
108 ; ga&hiy tdsil, there will become a product for thee,
it will be turned into (dat.) for thee, 100 (= K. Pr. 46) ;
kyah gom, what became to me? what happened to me?
84, 85 ; gayem> it (fern.) happened to me, 102 ; gauv me kydh,
what happened to me ? i. e. what benefit was it to me? 81.
With the conjunctive participle of another verb, go&hun
forms intensive compounds, as in kha^P (for khusith) gMun,
to ascend, 27 ; mllith ga&hun, to become united (in), absorbed
in (dat.), 11, 29, 30, 69 ; maslntli gaWmn^ to become forgetful,
to become ignorant, to become full of ignorance, 59 ; Gatith
ga&kun, (?) to become exit, 84.

Put. pass, part, m. sg. ga&hun, 19; pres. pait. used in
sense of 3rd pi. pres. gatfidn, 36.

Put. sg. l,gaUa, 41, 61 ; 3, galli, 29 ; with suff. 2nd pers.
sg. dat. ffalAiy, 100 = K. Pr. 46.
Past. Cond. sg. 1, gatfiaho, 106.

Past. m. sg. 3, yaw, 11, 30, 59, 69, 81, 86, 94 ; with suffi
1st pers. sg. dat, gow, 84, 85, 108 (ter) ; pL 3, gay, 9, 16,
27, 59, K. Pr. 102 ; gaiy, 95 ; gay*, 66 ; f, sg. 1, gayh, 98 =
K. Pr. 18 ; 3, ffayi, K. Pr. 20; with suff. 1st pers. sg. dat.

gay*** 102.
gdv, f. a cow, 95.
gwaht m. illumination, becoming illumined, 22, In modern

Kashmiri this word is usually gash. For the insertion of w,

cf. gdmn and gwarun.

gwarnn, to search eagerly for, i, g. ffaim, q. v. ; pres. part
48 ; inf. dat, (= inf. of purpose), gw&mni, 36.

168 VOCABULARY

gyan^ m, i,q. jfidn, q.v., knowledge, esp. knowledge of the
divine, ultimate wisdom ; sg. dat. gyanas, 60.

Jta, interj. ; la mail, father (i.e. Sir!), 107. This may als

be read as one word, kamdti ; see kamdl.
fid, interj. ; fid manashe, man! 107.
Jie t interj. ; he ndran, Narayana (the god) ! 109 (ter).
hucla-hiida, a word of unknown meaning. In modern Kashmiri
And means a c tunnel ' or c mine '. sg. gen. (f. sg. dat. or pi.
nom.) with emph. y, ?iuda-/mfknfy, 84.
Mefan to become dry, withered ; 1 p. p. f. sg. with suff. 1st

pers. sg. gen. kSsftm, 25.
/lifjis, see tyutjP.
Wi, m. cold breath, as it issues from the mouth, said to take

its rise from the rakma-randhra, 56, 57.
"halt, m. warm breath, as it issues from the mouth said to

take its rise from the navel, 56, 57.
?ti?i\ MMn, see iywh u .

h a ka, adv. speedily, quickly, with energy, 99, K. Pr. 46.
Jidkh, m. a vegetable ; hdka-wor u , f. a vegetable-garden, 63.
leiun, to carry out successfully some difficult task, 108 ; with
the eonj. part, of another verb, to be able, to can, jphmt/i
liiiun, to be able to reverse, 107.

Put sg. 1, Ma, 108 (bis) ; 3, with suff. of pron. of 2nd
pers, sg. dat. K8dy> he will be able (to reverse) for
triee, 107.
M, m. striving, straining, making great efforts ;karun> to

strive, strain oneself, 48.
tal, f. in daman- Mil, the main pipe of a blacksmith's bellows ;

sg. dat. -hdle (for -Mh), 4.

hoF* 9 crooked, awry, 108 (metaphorically, of labour).
hlad, m. rejoicing, joy, happiness, 73.
'hamdl, m. a burden-bearer, a porter; voc. Jiamdli^ 107, also

capable of being read as la wall, father!
himnn, to become snow, to be turned into snow; fut. sg. 3,

Mmi, 16 (in sense of pies.).
Jiams, 1, m. in rdm-ham$, a swan, q.v., 86.
hams, 2, a reverse representation in Kashmiri of w 'Jiam > or
ahatii tat, c that is I ', or ' I am that ', i. e. * the Supreme is
one with me ', or ' I am one with the Supreme ', It is used
as the title of a mantra, or mystic formula, and is an andhalA
sMM (see anahath), o* unobstructed sound ; hamsa-gath, the
unobstructed course of this sound uttered by the deity
dwelling within the body, as explained r under anaJtatl^ 65.
The mantra 'so 'ham' leads to union with Siva, and lams leads
to union with manifested universes. See

tot tt ] VOCABULARY 169

ii. 1 (trans, p. 25). For further particulars, see notes to

verses 40 and 65,
han, f. a small piece, a fragment ; sg. dat. hani ham, in small

pieces, in fragments, 103.
Jiond 11 (L lmnz^\ suffix of the genitive (a) of all plural nouns,

and (b) of all feminine singular nouns.

(a) pavclawan-Mnzu moj". the mother of the Pandavas, 97,
K. Pr. 47.'

(b) wwnri-huiiz* hosil, the results of life, K. Pr. 56,

The word fakh, a person other than oneself, is masculine,
but it takes hand 11 in the genitive singular (being treated as
if it were plural), as in Itika-hunz* kwig-wor^, the saffron-
plot of some one else, 88 ; luka-hanzay fare, houses of other
people, K. Pr. 57. Cf. tond*.

hone] 11 , m. a large fat ram; pi. nom. handl (m. c. for
land 1 ), 77.

JiMi*, f. a female dog, a, bitch, K. Pr. 102.

/tar, m. N. of the god Siva in his capacity of destroyer (of sin,
sorrow, misfortune, and stumbling-blocks against salvation) ;
sg. dat. haras, 78, 79 ; har-nav, the name of Siva, 98.

Mr, f. a cowry, 98 = K. Pr. 18.

lirld, f. the heart ; sg. dat. in sense of loc. JwSdi, 76.

hr&lay, TL\. the heart ; sg. gen. (f. sg. dat.) hrUaywe kuth a> re-
andar, in the closet of my heart, 101.

harawdlch, m. N. of a celebrated mountain in Kashmir; sg.
abl. harmnokJia, 50.

h a rtm, to increase, grow greater; fut. sg. 3, with suff. 2nd
pers. sg. dat. TPny, 87.

Jmrnn, to fall (as leaves from a tree), 83; to waste away,
disappear, be destroyed, 72 ; pres. part. Aardn, 83 ; fat. sg. 3,
hari, 72.

Jitohiy, sec hyuh 11 .

htwhydr, adj. mindful, cautious, alert, on one's guard: rozun,
to be on the alert, K. Pr. 46.

hosil, f. product, produce, outcome, K. Pr. 56 ; sMst a ras $on
gafeliiy lionl, for iron, gold will become a product for thee,
i.e. thine iron will be turned into gold, 100 = K. Pr. 46.

Aotf> tt 9 m. an elephant, 24 ; K. Pr. 150 ; zala-ho*t u , a sea-
elephant (a fabulous monster), 47 ; sg. nom. with emph. y,
Imtmy, K. Pr. 150 ; sg. ag. liM\ K. Pr. 150 ; pi. nom. with
emph. y, hMiy, 47.

///#, see keth, 1, and hyon u .

Jtotft, interj. indicating respect, 17.

hot*, adj. smitten ; frequent , as in nendri-hot u , smitten by
sleep, sunk in sleep; m. pi. nom. with emph. y, nendri-
" "fo>, 32.

170 VOCABULARY [**

} 1, adj. pleasant, agreeable. This adj. is immutable, and
its m. pi. nom. is also hWi^ but in 28, with d added m. c.,
it takes the form //$, which here may also be translated as
equivalent to heta, pol. impve. of fiyon u , q.v. Cf. hyot u , 1.
^ 2, see &yon u .
, see fiyon u .

m. that which conveys oblations (to heaven) ; hence,
a furiously burning- fire, 38.

, f. murder, in brakma-l&tP) murder of a Brahman, with
emph. y, -tu&y, K. Pr. 102.
My, interj. alas, 67.
~ , see l/on u .

l u 9 m. the gullet, esp. the ^ top of the gullet near Adam's
apple, which is properly 1ii$-gdgu1P) the lump in the gullet ;
sg. dat. JndiS) 57. In modern language this word is
usually Jiyur u .

, adj. like, alike, 10, 77 ; Mfien Uh\ like (are united) to
like, 109 ; (governing dat.) like, as in sires hyuh*, like the
sun, and so on for other similitudes, K. Pr. 201.
M. sg. nom. JiyuJi^, K. Pr. 201 (twelve times); pi. nom.
, 109 ; dat. Iiihen, 109 ; f. sg. nom., with emph. y,

or lW*y\ 10, 77. Cf. lyuv u .

, to take, 12, 45 ; to buy, 89 ; with inf. of another verb,
to begin ; wuchnn hyot u mas, I began to look at it, 48 ;
hyotum na&un, I began to dance, 94.

ambar Ayon u 9 to take clothes, to wear clothes, to dress
oneself, 28 ; at/ii (or m. c. atJie) /iyon u y to carry in the hand,
10; gol u Jiyon u } 86, see gol u \ id hyon u , to take below
(oneself); to put beneath one's feet, (of an elephant) to
crush beneath the feet, K. Pr. 150; zuv hyon u , to take
(a person's) life, to kill, 54.

hWi ratun, to take and hold, to keep hold of, 69 ; keth
kafan, to take and flee, to run away with (as a thief),
86 (bis).

Conj. part. $&, 10, 69, 86; Ktl taritl (modern Kill
keth), 12 ; fut. sg. 3, hfye (m. c. for ^%z), 45 } 54 ; impve.
pi. 2, Myiv, 89 ; pol. impve. sg. 2, beta (m. c. for A$ta) t 28
(in this passage, the word may also be translated as equivalent

Past. part. m. sg. hyoV*, 86 ; with suff. 1st pevs. sg. ag.,
hyotum , 94 ; and also with suff. 3rd pers. sg. dat., Ay off* MM,
48 ; pi. with suff. 3rd pers. sg. ag. and also suff. 1st pers.
sg. dat. (a dativus cowmodi), h&^nam^ K. Pr. 150.

hyot u , 1, adj. beneficial, advantageous, salutary, 61; i.q
Utk, 1, q.v.

hyot u , 2, hyotum^ fiyot u ma&, see Ayon*.

kdh} VOCABULARY 171

, i.q. AyvJi*, q.v., like, alike, 5.
/ifyiv, see &yon u .
A6z*m 9 see kodun.

jotil, adj. ignorant, illiterate; as subst., an ignorant fool,
K. Pr. 46.

jdn, adj. good, excellent, first-rate; jdn goklmn^ to turn out
well, to have a happy result, 85 ; jdn kydh, how well ! how
excellently! 89.

jfidn, m. knowledge ; esp. the true knowledge (of the Saiva
religion), 12 ; jmna-marg, the path of knowledge, the way
to the knowledge of the Supreme, 63 ; jndna-prakdsh, the
light of knowledge, illumination consisting in the trne
knowledge, 6 ; sg. gen. (in m. pi. nom.) jndnak* amlar
pairith, having put on the garments of knowledge, 76.
Of. gydn and zdn.

jay, f. the position, or place, of anything ; anhesjcly, a position
in the sky (the whole world, being flooded, is represented as
merely a waste of waters bounded by the sky), 50.

jyotiy brilliance, illumination, bright light ; &$ti-jyoti, the
illumination of the intelligence, the pure light of Intelligence,
pure Intelligence, i.e. the Supreme, or &w&-tattoa> the first
stage in the process of the universal manifestation of the
Supreme Siva, looked upon as pure light, without anything
to shine upon, or as the pure 'I *, without even the thought
or feeling of * I am ', i. e. of being. See Kashmir Shaivim,
fasc. i., p. 63. Sg. dat. ti&th-jyoti, (absorbed) in this Siva-
tattva, 76.

to, in ko-zana, see ko-zana.

koeh, f. the lap, the lower part of the bosom ; dat. (for ace.)

kocM, 70.
to$*, m. one who extracts seeds from raw cotton, a cotton-

cleaner ; sg. ag. to& 9 102.
tti-deb, m. an evil body, a vile body, (this) vile body (of

mine), 7.
hxdam, m. the foot ; tulm, to raise the foot, to walk quickly

or vigorously, to step out, 99 ; K. Pr. 46.
tadun. to extract ; conj. part, kafrith uym*, to carry out, bring

forth (from a house), carry forth, K. Pr. 57.
iSduf", m. a baker ; sg. dat. kUris, K. Pr. 20.
klia, m. the sky, firmament ; the ether, the principle of vacuity

(i.q. shm, q.v.); kha-swarufih, he who consists of absolute

vacuity, the impersonal Supreme Deity, 15.
iaH, card, eleven ; pi. dat. (for gen.) kdkan, 95 ; tahan ffav> the

cow of eleven owners, i. e. a cow owned by eleven different

172 VOCABULARY

persons (each of whom pulls her in a different direction),
95. The ' cow s is the body. Its eleven owners are the five
jwnendriya* or faculties of perception [i.e. the senses of
(1) smell (ghrdna), (2) taste (rasand), (3) sight (darsana)^
(4) touch (sjparsa), and (5) hearing (fravana)], plus the five
kdrmSudnya* or organs of action [i.e. the organs of
(1) voice (vac), (2) handling (Aasta), (3) locomotion (pdda),
(4) excretion (payu)> and (5) generation (upastha^ plus
the mind (manali), which is the regulating organ of the
other ten.

&$A 9 indef. pron. Subst. sg. nom. an. m. ASA, 35, 60; USA,
107 ; 8tt, 60 ; inan. com. gend. K/>, 2 ; &S/t, 9, 11, 19, 23,
31, 90 ; dat. (for gen.) an. m. &?#/, 35 ; pi. nom. an. in.
m, 32; i$A t K. Pr. 102; dat. lfoan> 32; teuton, K. Pr.
102 (many times) i ; ag. k&itow, K. Pr. 102.

Adj. sg. nom. inan. m. ka/i 9 K. Pr. 201 ; ASM, 41 ; A3&A 9
59 ; inan. f. koJi (in koh-li), 77,

Subst. any one, 35, 60 ; anything, 2, 31.
Adj. any, K. Pr. 201.

iSA . . . Kk, some . . . others, 32 ; K. Pr. 102 (t$h . . . A?/).
na AaA 9 no one, 107 ; w HA, no one, 35 ; nd ASA, nothing,
23 ; AS&A nd, no (adj.), 59 ; na kufeh, no one, 60 ; ASA
na-ta kyaJi, nothing at all, 19 ; tSA-ti na, nothing at all,
9, 11 ; iA-ti no, nothing at all, 90; k$h-ti na kliWi, no
harm at all, 77 ; Aa&A-ti no sat A, no substance at all, 41.

kUo, conj. or, K. Pr. 102.

Mid, m. distress, pain, feeling of trouble, 18.

khen, m. food, 71.

Mun u , f. a kind of warm woollen blanket worn as a cloak in
cold weather ; sg. dat. kkaTi^ K. Pr. 201.

AAar 9 m. an ass, 88.

AAdr 9 1, m. a blacksmith ; dawafrAAdr, a blacksmith who uses
bellows, 100 = K. Pr. 46.

kJidr, 2, m. a thorn, 96 = K. Pr. 47.

Mtr, see ttfri*.

Mura-AAwa, m. longing for something difficult to obtain or
unobtainable, K. Pr. 57 (translated in original 'proudness
of heart ').

AAdrw, to raise, lift ; to lift off (spun thread from a spinning-
wheel), 102; khdrenam, she raised fern, things of me, 102.

M8*t u , left-handed; Ufotf-tMr, f. acting in a left-handed
way, acting contrary to custom, 10, 77.

tta*Hn, to ascend, go up, 27, 75 ; impve. sg. 2, l&a*, 75 ;
conj. part, irreg. khfaty for AAatiM, 27.

khWt, 1, f. loss, harm, injury, 10, 77.

k/tU/i 9 2, see khyotP,

VOCABULARY" 173

kJiatun, to conceal ; to cause to disappear, overwhelm, get the
mastery over, 16 ; I. p. p. m. sg. Mot tt , 16.
n, interrog. adv, how ? by what means ? 108.
tt , m. a flock, a herd, 108.

^ to eat, 27, 63, 77, 81, 88 ; to bite, K. Pr. 102 ; esp. to
eat the good things of this life, to enjoy oneself, 27, 90
(with double meaning, also simply 'to eat').

Inf. sg. abl. i&ilna-niM, (abstain) from enjoyment, 27 ;
JMna khena, by continued eating, 63 ; conj. part. kheth, 27,
77 ; impve. fut. no khtze (m. c. for kMzi), thoa shouldst not
eat, 90; fut. sg. 3, WAyi\ kMyiy, it will eat for thee, i.e.
thy (ass) will eat, 88; zang kheyiwo (m. c. for kh$i/iwa),
it will eat (bifce) your leg, K. Pr. 102 ; 1 p. p. kkyauv ;
m. pi. with suff. 1st pers. sg. sg. kliyem, I ate (masc.
things), 81.

tat, 1, f. longing, yearning. gmtin^^ longing to increase 5
48 ; pi. dat. kalan, 64

M, 2, an art, a skill ; sg. abl. yoga-kali, by the art of yoga, by
practising yoga, 14.

kal, 3, f. a digit of the moon ; %h$shi-kal, id. 25, 69. Cf. sow.

Ml, m. time, a time, period of time, age ; the present, or iron,
age, the tali-kdl, 91 ; kala-zofi, by efflux of time, 64.

kol, m. race, tribe, family; as a Saiva technical term

( = Sanskrit hda\ the sphere of cosmic action, as opposed
to the akdl (Skr. akula), the sphere of the Absolute or of
Transcendental Being. It is supposed to be situate at the
lower end of the Susumna nadl (see Note on Yoga, 12, 19).
It is said to consist of the jlva (individual soul), prakrti
(primal matter), space, time, ether, earth, water, fire, and
air. When the mind transcends these it is in a state of
grace. Hence, ktil-akol, the visible creation and that which
transcends it, the totality of all creation, 2.

Jkol", adj. dumb, 20 ; with emph. y, kolny, 86.

M w , adj. of or belonging to (a certain) time, used ;
path-tali, in former times, 91 ; kofi, at the (destined) time,
74 ; broth-kofi, in the future, in future times, 92.

&alan, see /W, 1.

kalpan, f. imagination, vain imaginings, vain desires, desire,
30, 33.

Mesh, m. pain, torment, affliction, 80 ; karun, to cause
affliction (to), 51.

kam, see kyak.

Mm, m. sexual love, carnal appetite, 71. One of the six
enemies, see Itib.

kami, see kydh.

P) m. a jar ; hence, a particular religious exercise consist-

174 VOCABULARY [Jcombm

ing of profound meditation accompanied by ' bottling up '

of inhaled breath. (Skr. knmlkakot,); cf. Note on Yoga, 21.

With emph. y, kumluy> only the kumbhaka exercise, 34,

See ndcH.
komlun, to practise the kumbhaka upon some impediment to

religious welfare, to suppress by means of the kuwbhaka

meditation ; conj. part, kombith^ 75.
kamalaza-nath, m. the lord who was bora in a lotus, N. of the

god Brahma, 8.
kan, m. the ear; kan, thawun, to offer the ear, to attend (to),

give heed (to), 91.
Mn, m. an arrow ; kan larw, to aim an arrow, 71.

postpos. governing dat., to, towards ; gaganas-kun viMw*

(the surface of the earth) will become extended to the

sky, 22.
kune, m. c. for imi, adv. anywhere ; nd fane, nowhere, 9, 11 ;

na fane; id. K. Pr. 201.
kun u , card, one, only one ; with emph. y^ kmuy, only one,

84, 94 ; (of several apparently different things) one and the

same, 90.
ftandd-pvrd, m. the ' city of the kanch ', i.e. the kanda or c bulb J

which is supposed to be the root of the nodi* (q. v.), or tubes,

through which the prana, or life-wind, circulates. It is said

to be situated between the pudendum and the navel, 56.

See Note on Yoga, 5. Cf. ndd, nddi, and /jraw, 2.
kondP, occurring only in the pi. ag. kandfo . . . kanclev^ by

several ... by several, by some ... by others, 55.
, m. saffron, the saffron crocus; kong-wor*, f. a saffron

garden, 88.

fi*) adj. tawny-coloured ; Aon* dad, a tawny ox. In 66

the sg. dat. is kaffi dados. In modern Kashmiri it would

be kanu dadas.
f* t f. a stone ; ddtf-iiin 11 , a washerman's stone, on which

he washes clothes; sg. dat. dob^kane-pethayt on a washer-
man's stone, 103.

kuph, m. anger, wrath ; sg. abl. Mpa, 23.
/kapas 9 f. the cotton-plant ; kapoAi-posh, the blossom of the

cotton-plant, 102.
kapafa m. deceit ; kapatfr-farith, m. actions of deceit, jugglery,

false and quack methods for obtaining salvation, 38.
bar, adv. when? tar-bd, when, Sir? 87.
kar y 1, m. in om-kdr^ the mystic syllable dm, the pranava, 34.
tar, 2, m. work, business ; dfaJkar, the day's work, all that

one does each day, 108.
kor u (= *&), one-eyed, 20.
kur u , tadaughter ; pL nom. m$e-kdre> mother and daughter, 92.

karun] VOCABULARY 175

dy m. anger, 71. One of the six enemies. See tub.

krbj*, f. a potter's wife ; kfdj^-mas, the aunt of a potter's wife,
with emph. y, krojiy-mtix, 97 = K. Pr. 47. (The Pandavas
and their mother Kuntr, during Dranpadl's wayamvara had
their home in a potter's house. See MaMb/mrata, i. 6950,
but there does not here appear to be any mention of the
potter's children calling Kunti their mother's aunt.)

harm, 1, m. an action, act, 58, 61 ; pi. nom. karm y 75. Actions
are of two kinds, good or evil (75).

karm, 2, m. Fate ; sg. gen. f. karmtin* r a hk, the line of Pate
written on the forehead byNarayana; karmane i a khi, (what
Narayana wrote) on the line of Pate, 107.

kdran, m, a cause ; a means ;,sg. ag. kdrarfipranawak'*', hy means
of the pranava, 76. In Saiva philosophy, there are three
causes of the material world, viz. the impurities (mala) that
affect the soul. These are (1) dnava-mala, or the impurity
due to the soul, which in reality is identical with Siva,
deeming itself to he finite ; (2) maylya-mala^ or impurity
due to cognition of the differentiation of things, i.e. that
one thing is different from another; and (3) kdrma-mala,
or the impurity due to action, resulting in pleasure or
pain, 75.

karm, to do, 34, 37, 58, 61, 68, 74, 91, 95 ; to make, 17, 65,
81, 82, 85, 87, 89, 99 =K. Pr. 46 ; K.Pr. 102 ; lafi lal* kardn,
making the sound 'Lai* Ldfi ', i.e. crying out, ( It is I, Lai ;
it is I, Lai ', 105 ; sMwa f sMwa kardn, uttering (or calling to
mind) the words ' Siva, Siva', 65.

klesk karun, to give trouble, to cause pangs, 51 ; ndcl
karun, to utter a cry, 72 ; mxketh Aarun, to do a speciality,
to act in a special character, 54 ; betas karun^ to impress
upon the mind, 34.

karitk ga&hun, to make completely, 95; in hUJi karith
and ditJi kanti, both in 12, karitk^ like the modern t&k,
and like the Hind! kar> has little more than the force of
a suffix of the conjunctive participle.

This verb makes many nominal compounds. Thus,
atkawd* karith) holding each other's hand, = encouraging
each other, 92; cyon* bintJt karati^ he takes thought for
thee, 72 ; dam karun, to suppress the breath (as an ascetic
exercise), 4 ; (far karun^ to drive away, K. Pr. 56 ; kal karun^
to exert oneself, strive hard, 48 ; lath karn\ to kick, 102 ;
lay karun*) to devote oneself ardently to any object, 60, 68 ;
lay karun, to cause to be absorbed, 76; p&z kaTun?, to
worship (dat. of obj.), 17, 21 ; man karun, to bathe oneself,
32, 46 ; thaph kartin", to grasp (dat. of obj.), 4.
The following forms occur ; in karwi> 37 ; conj. part.

176 VOCABULARY [keran

karifh, 12, 32, 51, 65, 85, 92, 95 ; pres. part, taran, 65,
72, 105 ;

impve. sg. 2, bar, 17, 72, 99 = K. Pr. 46; K. Pr. 56 ;
pi. 3, with suff. 1st pers.sg. dat. kafinem (mod. M^mm), 21 ;

fut. and pres. subj. eg. 1, kara, 61, 95 ; 2, karakh, 17 ;
3, tari, 46, 54, 68 ; tare, 34 (bis) ; pi. 1, karav, K. Pr. 102 ;
2, kariv, 91 ; 3, with suff. 2nd pers. sg. dat. kaririey (mod.
karinay}) 74 ;

1 past part. m. sg. Teor u 9 76 ; with saff. 1st pers. sg. ag.,
korum, 58, 82, 89 ; with the same, and also with suff. 3rd
pers. sg. dat. tor u Mas 9 4, 48 ;

f. sg., with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag. Mr d m, 68; with the
same, and also with suff. 3rd pers. sg. dat. k&r^mas^ 4, 60 ;
with suff. 3rd pers. sg. ag. and also with suff. 1st pers. sg.
dat. teiPnam, 102 ;

f. pi., with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag. kiyem (mod. fcarem), 81 ;

2 past part. m. S., with suff. 2nd pers. sg. ag., karyotfi, 87.
keran, m. pi. the various natures of men and women (kindly,

crooked, good, evil, tender, cruel, and so on), 92.

kr&MJ u , f. a kind of large open basket ; sg. dat. kra^e, 24.

kr&r*, adj. terrible, fierce, pitiless, 27.

k-ruth 1 ^ adj. hard, severe, difficult to conquer (of a disease) ;
hence, to be obtained with great difficulty, hard to find,
51-54, 80.

hartal^ f. a sword, 62, 88.

kriy^ 1, adj. doing, maker, used , as in m'wa-hriy> the
maker of all things, the Creator, 59.

kriy> 2, f. an action, 63 ; esp. a good work, an act of devotion,
act of worship, a holy action, in kriye-pun* 9 a hedge of good
works, 63.

/to, to, bus 1 *, see kydL

kush, m. >b&:-grass, Poa cynoswoides, the sacred grass used at
various religious ceremonies, 45.

Mod, hunger, 28, 72 (mod. eMty.

keshev, m. N. of Visnu, Eesava, 8, 14.

Xwsttm, m. a flower; pi. nom. kmum, 39, 40 ; abl. kusnmav, 21.

kdsim, to remove, put away, dispel ; pol. impve. sg. 2, with
suff. 1st pers. sg. dat., kdstam, K.Pr. 57; 3, with same suff.,
kd$Ham> 8 ; fut. sg. 3, with suff. 2nd pers. sg. dat., k<Liy> 73,
74 ; past part. f. sg., with suff. 3rd pers. sg. ag. ko$ u n y 76.

kau&ar, m. N. of a sacred lake in Kashmir, the ancient
Kramasarah, and the Kom a r of Sir Aurel Stein's translation
of the Rdja-tara<h<jin% II, 393. The name is also given to
the peak at the foot of which it lies, 50. This peak forms
a part of the Pir Pantsal Eange. Sg. abl, kausara> 50, ,

tydt] VOCABULARY 177

kati) adv. whence?, where? ; in 106 employed, like the Hindi

ky(L) merely to indicate that the sentence is interrogative.
kt w , adj. damp, moist, full of juice, juicy, 51 ; m. pi. nom.

tPtiy (with emph. y), 51.
kot l \ adv. to what direction ?, whither ?, 9.
/te M , ])ron. adj. how much ? ; pi. how many ? ; m. pi. nom.

Jcait\ 81 ; f. pi. nom, taita, 81.
k&V\ m. a beam (of wood) ; sg. abl. koti, 23.
to/*, f. a word, a statement, 91 ; gdra-kath^ the word of a ffuru,

the spiritual teaching of a guru^ 45, 62 ; pi. dat. kathan^ 91.
katfi, m. wood ; Mt/ia-ctten, a cow made of wood, a wooden

cow, 38.
/M, termination of the conj. part., as in vemrzith IcUli, having

taken leave, having departed, 9. Cf. karifJi^ s. v. harm.
ketJia, adv. how ?, 10 ; kUlio^ id., 91 (used in addressing a person

at some distance).
kutji { \ m. a knee; pi. dat. kothen liywli 11 ^ like the knees,

K. Pr. 201.
fatt/tun, to be in distress, to become hard up, to have one's

income diminished ; hence, to become more and more con-
tracted, (of times) to become harder and harder, 91 ; pres.

part. kitthdn, 91.
/toAV*, f. a small dark room, a closet, a cupboard ; sg. dat.

kutttW-andar, 101.

Mm, to pound, crush, reduce to powder ; conj. part, kutitk, 80.
Adtur, m. a pigeon ; Adtar-mor u 9 a pigeon-house, a dove-cote,

K. Pr. 57.
kal&a, see k^.
kofe*, L a pair of scissors for cutting cloth or the like ; with

emph. y, ko^y y 103.

kav, m. a crow ; pi. dat. w<m-kdwan t for the forest-crows, 28.
taw a 9 see kijah) 1.
ftetral, adv. only, nothing but, 72.
Icya/i, 1, pron. interrog. who ?, which ?, what ?

animate singular. Nom. m. subst. kn$ } who?, 7, 78;

htst-Mmt some one or other, 86 ; ku&-bd) who, Sir?, 88 ; adj.

tits* pusJt u 9 what florist ?, 39 ; kns ftev, what god ?, 14 ;

f. subst. loli- ko$m, who am I? 3 7; adj. &osa jpRsJiowi,

what florist (f.)?, 39; dat. c. g. to, to whom?, 17,

21,33.
inanimate singular. Nom. subst. his, in third line of 78,

what? This is really an adjective with the substantive

underKtood, what (thing) ? ; kydh, what? 21, 34, 42, 68, 71,

73, 81, 84, 85, 91 (bis), 95, 98 = K. Pr. 18; K. Pr. 102;

kyfih-ttim, something or other, 86 ; keh na ta kyaJi, there is

nothing, so what (is there?), = all is vanity, 19; jm kydk,

N

178 VOCABULARY [kydh

what a good thing!, how well!, 89; adj. km #ar, what
lake?, 78; kus parama-pad, what supreme state?, 78.

Abl. subst. kawa, by what?, used adverbially to mean
1 how?', 41, 'why?', 56 (bis); adj. kami disU, from what
direction ?, by what direction ?, 41 (bis) ; kami waf^ by
what road ?, 41 ; kaml sMtha, on what bank ?, 84, 85 ; Jrawa
(lorn, with what stream ?, 39 ; kawa~ana mantra, with what
kind of wantral) 39.

Plural nom. adj. ham tutum, what flowers ?, 39 ; kam vitf,
what sports ?, 109.

2, adv. interrog. why?, 67, 74. Used as a mere
interrogative particle, indicating a question, 18, 66.
h) conj. as well as, and, in the adverbial phrase den kyok
rath, day and night, i.e. continually, always, 3, 5, 65.
A variant form is cttn kydwu rdth> 19.

kiyem, see kantn.

kyiit 11 ) postpos. of dat. ; liyu kyufP) for some one else, 61.

h/vf% u , pron. adj. intevrog-. what sort of?, of wha,t kind?,
84, 85; with another adj., kyuth u druw u , how firm ?, 71.

ki/dwu, see kyoh.

tffdri, adv. why?, 95, 107.

ko-zana, adv. or interj. who knows ? ; used in anxiety or the
like, as in ko-zatia kydh lani tas, who knows what will
happen to him, i.e. some calamity will probably occur to
him. But Lai seems to nse it as a mere adv. meaning
; by what means ', quasi ' who knows what means (will effect
so and so)', 73, 74. In 72, she has kd-zanani, i.e. in the
ablative feminine of the genitive, and uses it as a relative
adverb meaning 'how', s by what means' (God takes
thought as to the means by which hunger will depart
from thee).

fab, desire, greed, cupidity, the chief of the six * enemies ', or
sins which impede union with the Supreme. The six are
kama, sexual desire; krodha, wrath; Zob/ia, desire; mada,
arrogance ; moha^ delusion of mind ; and matsara, jealousy.
In Monier Williatns's Sanskrit Dictionary \ s.v. md^varga^
fa?M 9 joy, and mdna^ pride, are substituted for mofia and
matsara ; but the above is the list given in Kiratdrjuntya,
i. 9, viz. :

kdwah krodlas tatM lobho maria-mohau, ca matsaraL

In L. V. 12 and 30, lobha, or Ksh. luh> is mentioned alone,
to indicate all six. In 43, three, loblia^ manmatJia (= kama),
and mada, and in 71, tama, krodJta (Ksh. krud), and lohha,
are in each case mentioned to indicate all six. Cf. 13.

faba-vtind, without desire, free from desire, 12.

VOCABULARY 179

lalnn> to get, obtain, acquire, find ; fut. sg. 2, labakh, 75 ;
3, lali, 90, with emph. y, tabiy t K. Pr. 46 ; past part. m. sg.
with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag. lobum, 35, 90; f. sg. with same
suit m h m, 31.

lach) card, a hundred thousand; yogana-tacft, a hundred
thousand leagues, 26 ; sg. abl. lade (for lacha)-Manza y (but
one) out of a hundred thousand, K. Pr. 150.

lacdr, adj. helpless, without resource; as subst., a helpless
person, f. sg. ag. Idedri, 89.

laditn, to build (a house or the like) ; pres. part, laddn.
K.Pr. 57.

%, f. aim, object, that which is aimed at, the result for which
a person works; sg. abl. Iaffi-ro8t u t one who is devoid of
aim, one who works without considering the resultant
reward, disinterested, 61, 65.

lagrn, to be joined (to), connected (with) ; to come to anchor,
to run aground, 84, 85; to come into close contact or
connexion (with), to be absorbed (in), to be incorporated
(in), to become one (with), 58 ; to become joined (to a
condition), to experience, 70; to happen, befall, be met
with, be obtained, 41 ; ache lagane talav, the eyes to be
attached to the ceiling, i.e. to be turned upwards, K. Pr.
102.

Fut. sg. 1, laqa, 84, 85 ; 3, lagi, 70 ; with suff. 1st pers. sg.
dat. and emph. y, lagimay (for lagemay\ 41 ; past. m. sg. 3,
with suff, 1st pers. sg. dat. and interj. 0, % u /0, 58 ; f. pi. 3,
l<yl, K. Pr. 102.

Idgun^ to join, unite, apply (panas logith me&e, having applied
earth to the body, 44, see below) j to employ (an article for
a certain use), to apply (something to a certain purpose),
esp. to employ (a thing in worship), to make an offering
(of something), 39, 40, 42, 78, 79 ; to act the part of (so
and so), to perform the office (of so and so), to act in (such
and such) a capacity, 43 ; in 44 (see above) j)dnas logith also
(by a pun) means ' having become hidden in thyself, i e.
of God, c having become indiscrete '.

Conj. part, logitli, 44 ; fut. sg. 3, Ugi, 78, 79 ; impve.
fut., with suff. 2nd pers. sg. dat. %%, 42; with suff. 3rd
pers. sg. dat.,.%^, 39, 40; past part. m. sg. with suff.
3rd pers. sg. ag., logun, 43.

lah, adv. lightly, gently ; wdwa M, (leaves Ml) gently witn
the wind, ie. in a gentle wind, 83.

Kb-langa?) m. an iron anchor, an anchor ; met. that which, ties
one down to this world, the things of this world (as opposed
to spiritual things), worldly possessions and business, 67 ;
sg. gen. (f. sg. nom.) I6l4angaru(^ } 67.

180 VOCABULARY [/'*

tej*) f. a cooking-pot ; sg. dat. Kj$> 95.

#H, f. abusive language (usually indecent) ; ttkd-Ukk, mutual
abuse, 23.

lukh> m. people, persons, K. Pr. 57 ; people in general, 53 ;
a stranger, one who is not related by blood, marriage or
other connexion, other people than oneself, 88 ; K. Pr. 57.
Note that the genitive of this word is twice luka-Jiond u , 88 ;
K. Pr. 57.

luka-garu, into other people's houses (see gara), 53 ; luka-
aasa, a thousand people, K. Pr. 57 ; faka-hanzay tare, houses
of other people, K. Pr. 57 ; see bond*.

lelhun> to write ; past part. m. sg. with suff, 2nd pers. sg. dat.
lyukJiw/t (what) was written for thee (by Narayanaj, i.e.
what Narayana wrote (on) thy (forehead), an allusion to
the lines of Fate written on the forehead of a person's skull
on the sixth night after birth, 107.

lal, f. N. P., N. of Lai Ded, known in Sanskrit as Lalla, the
authoress of the poems edited in this volume, 3, 48, 49, 68,
81, 82, 83, 93, 102; with emph. \ lal\ even Lai; Idfl Idl*
kctran, making (the cry) (i.e. crying ont) *(it is) even (I)
Lai, (it is) even (I) Lal, s 105 ; sg. dat. lah, 84, 94 ; ag. lali,
76, 93, 103, 104 ; (m. c.) hie, 76.

/*?&, m. a darling, a beloved one, 105 (alluding to a specially
loved god).

lot, m. passionate love, eager and loving longing; sg. abl.
tola, 3 ; sg. gen. (m. sg. abl.) lolaki ndra, (parched) with the
fire of love, 25.

ftldm\ f. pi. actings, taking parts in a theatrical performance,
81. The word has not been noted elsewhere, and its form,
as a feminine plural, is unexpected. It is a question whether
we should not read Ilia me, hla being the f. nom. pi. of ill
or Ilia (Skr. llld)^ and me being the agent case of Mb, I.

falandiGun, to dandle a child to quiet it ; hence, to fondle, to
soothe (a pain) ; past part. f. sg. with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag.
/alaudv*m 9 105.

laUtk, adv. artlessly, gently, 67 (bis).

tama, f. one of the divine mothers or personified energies
(sakli) of the principal deities, in Sanskrit malrkU, variously
reckoned as 7, 8, 9, or 16 in number. They are closely
connected with the worship of Siva ; lama-batF'^ the circle
or assemblage of these mothers (Skr. watrkd-mwlala) ;
Idrnd-tiakm-posh" 1 , a beast devoted for sacrifice in the joint
worship of all these mothers, used met. to signify anything
devoted, or destined, to destruction, 63.

lamun, to pull (razi, a rope), 95 ; to tow (mri, a boat), 106 ; pres.
f. sg. 1, c/i&t lamm> 106 ; cond. past, pi. 3, lamahon> 95.

w] VOCABULARY 181

lar, f. the side or flank of the body ; dachim lari, (lying) on
the right side, K. Pr. 57.

lur u , f. a house ; sg. dat. farlt, 101 ; pi. nom. lare, K. Pr. 57.

farm, to pull down or destroy (a house, wall, or the like) ;
conj. part, l&ritk, 74.

lasnn, to live long, to live in good health and prosperously,
27, 35 ; to live, to be a survivor amongst a number of mortals,
K. Pr. 150 ; fut. sg. 1, fata, 35 ; past m. sg. 3, with emph. y,
Iwttity, K. Pr. 150; pi. 3 (really conj. part., see App. II,
p. 140) ld$, 27.

lo*m, to become weary, 48, 60, K. Pr., 57 ; (of the day), to fail,
to become evening, (or of the night) to fade away, to become
morning, 3, 44, 98 ; K. Pr. 18. The past part, of this verb
is lite* or Imp ; fern. sg. lm u or luW^, pL torn.

Past m. sg. 3, with suff. 1st pers. sg'. dat., lustnm, (the
day) passed away for me, 3, 44, 98; K. Pr. 18; f. sg. 1
&**, 48, 60 ; f. pi. 3, with suffi 1st pers. sg. gen. narg
losam, my arms grew weary, EL Pr. 57.

&, see lamn and lo&m.

fa///, a kick, 102 (bis).

lu&&*& t see losun.

lawan, m. salt ; lawan-zan, like salt, 29.

tawar, ? gend., a rope ; se&i-lawar, a rope of sand, 107. The
word does not occur in vocabularies of modern Kashmiri,
but cf. mod. Ksh. lai\ f. the strand of a rope.

lay, 1, m. absorption ; (with dat.) lay karun, to make absorption
(in anything), to become absorbed in, 76. This word is
generally feminine. See lay, 2.

lay, 2, f. absorption ; ardent affection or desire, K. Pr. 201 ;
destruction ; lay Jcaru&, (with dat.) to practise (anything)
steadfastly and with ardent devotion, to devote oneself (to
any particular practice), 60, 68; lag$ anm, to bring
(anything) to absorption, to bring (anything) under one's
own power by concentration of mind, 82 ; laye wdtlm, to
rise to destruction, to become dissolved into nothingness, 1.
Cf. lay, 1. Sg. dat. 1, 82; layirfyu/iP, like ardent love,
K. Pr. 201.

lyukhuy, see lekkun.

lay MI, to become absorbed (in the Supreme), to reach final
beatitude ; to become dissolved into nothingness ; past m.
pL 3 la/' (in both meanings), 59.

ma, prohibitive particle, used with the imperative. With the
interj. 6a, ma-bd tmwun, do not. Sir, let it go, 88. With
the pol. impve. wata, q. v., is used. Other forms of ma are
mau and mo, see md.

182 VOCABULARY [md

tnti, the interrogative form of ma. Used with the imperative

it gives practically the force of a negative interrogative

future, as in ileyiv ma, will ye not huy ? i.e. why do ye not

buy?, 89.
M&K, see mo.
m$, see loL
wo or man, i. q. ma, q. v. mo gtirun, do not seek it, 30 ; man as,

be not, 36 ; bhayi mo bar, to not feel fear, 72.
mocha, see moth*,
wad, m. intoxication; hence, arrogance (one of the six

1 enemies', see lub], 43 ; intoxicating liquor, wine, 81.
'M/7, m. a fool, a lout, an ignorant person, 20, 66 ; sg. dat.

tmdas, 66.
maiddn, m. a field ; sg. dat. mane maiddnas, in a field,

K. Pr. 57.
witijun, see murun.
mudra, f. name of particular positions or intertwinings of the

fingers, commonly practised in religious worship. They

have an occult meaning, and are believed to have magical

efficacy ; sg. ag. mudri, 2.
wmh, m. illusion (in a religious sense) ; sg. ahl. mulia, by

means of, under the influence of, illusion, 74 ; sg. gen. f.

muMo u may, the desire of (i.e, begotten by) illusion, 67.
wnhun, to suffer illusion, to be deceived ; past f. sg. 1, mwh*8,

I was deceived, 13.
mop*, f. a mother, K. Pr. 47; sg. nom. mojl (m. c.), 97;

pi. nom. mdj%-kdr$, mothers and daughters, 92.
mokht u , adj. released ; esp, released from transmigration, saved

(in a religious sense), finally emancipated, united with the

Supreme ; m. pi. nom. zuvant 1 mokffifi, released, or saved,

while yet alive, 6.
moffit\ f. release from transmigration, .final emancipation ;

sg. abl. mokti-dwar, the gate (or door) of final emanci-
pation, 29.
maiur or makor u , m. a mirror ; sg. dat. makam, 18 ; makuras,

31.
mal, m. dirt, foulness, 18, 31, 49 ; maZjpyon u , dirt to fall (on

anything, dat.), 18.
mfffi*, m. a father; voc. noli, father, used as a title of

respect, equivalent to 'Good Sir!' or 'Sir! 1 , 91, 107;

K. Pr. 57 ; ha mdli, id. 107, also capable of being read as

hamali, burden-bearer 1
mall, m. a hero, a strong man ; sg. ag. mdlfi, 24.
melun, to be united (with), to become one with, to be absorbed

(in, dat.), 1, 68, 105 ; to be joined (to a person), to be got

(by, dat.), to be attained to (by, dat.), 78, 79; mllM gabhun,

ma*a*\ VOCABULARY 183

having become united to go ; to go away together, or in
a body, 9 ; (as intensive compound) to become united (to),
mingled (with, dat.), absorbed (in, dat.), 11, 29, 30, 69.

^Conj. part, vnhth, 1, 9, 11, 29, 30, 68, 69, 105 ; fat. sg. 3,
with suff, 2nd pers. sg. dat. melty, 78, 79 ; past m. sg. 3,
m>/til u , 1 (cf. also myul u and myul n , 2, s. vv.).

mlawtm, caus. of melun, to join, unite ; conj. part, milavitk, 69.

warns, m. flesh ; sg. gen. (m. pi. nom.) mdmsatf, 81.

wan, m, the mind, the thinking faculty (Skr. manas), 5, 12,
17, 18, 45, 65, 93 ; K. Pr. 57. This is roughly the meaning
of the word, and will suit for the translation of the above
passages, but, as a term of Saiva philosophy, it is not
sufficiently accurate. According to Deussen (Allgememe
GescMche (lev Hibsoptiie, I, 3, p. 490 ; cf. ib., pp. 58 ff.,
352, 374, 604 ff., 648), the functions of the manas are that
' on the one hand, it forms the impressions delivered by the
organ of cognition (buddkl) into conceptions, which are then

S-eserved as finished products of cognition in the lucldhi.
n the other hand, it executes the decisions derived from

the luddhi by influencing the organs of action'. This

technical meaning of manas (Ksh. man) can be traced in its

use in 23, 27, 31, 40, 79, 80, 105.

In L. V. 71, the meaning of man is further extended to

indicate the exercise of the thinking faculty, careful thought.

Man 'ratlin, to seize the mind, to bring it under subjection,

55 ; ma-man, one's own mind, 68, 98. In 68, there is

a play upon words, swawan being also used as equivalent to

soman or- suman, the jasmine.

Sg. dat. manas, 17, 31 ; with 'emph. y, manasny, 23 ; loc.

mani, 18, 45 ; abl. mana, 80, 98 ; with emph. y, manay, 71 ;

gen. (m. sg. abl.) manaki, K. Pr. 57.

wan, m. the possession of a good reputation, respectability, 24.
mqndal) m. a circular disk, 75 (cf. stirya) ; a district, locality,

33 (cf. AuwhuMnth).
mangun, to ask for, demand ; fut. pi. 3, with suff. 2nd pers. sg.

dat., mawganayt they will demand from thee, K. Pr. 56;

past part. m. sg., mong u , with suff. 3rd pers. sg. ag. and

1st pers. sg. dat., mong^nam, he demanded from me, K. Pr.

150.
manmath, m. carnal desire, sexual appetite, 43 ; i. q, kdm,

see lu&.
manun, to heed, to look upon as, consider (a thing to be so

and so) ; conj. part, monith, 73 ; impve. sg. 2, man, 23 ;

past part, (used as past tense), m. sg. mon u , 5 (bis),
manas, m. i.q. man, q.v., the mind, the thinking faculty, 2;

the faculty of imagination (see man), 27.

184 VOCABULARY

inanwk, m. a man, a human being ; voc. ha, manu$/ie, man !,
107 ; manuske-mamS) human flesh, 81.

mantJi a r, m. a religious mystic formula (Skr. wantm), 11,
34 (bis), 39, 40, 58. A mantra is an aggregation of
apparently unmeaning sounds. It has no efficacy unless
the utterer is aware of the mystic meaning of each sound,
which has to be taught by a gum, or spiritual preceptor,
By meditating on a mantra, with full knowledge, unity
with the Supreme is attained.

Sg. abl. mantra, 39, 40 ; pi. nom. mantk a r, 34.

manz, postpos. governing dat., in ; pwas-manz, in myself, 44.
In 98, it means having reached the middle ', and exception-
ally governs the abl. (wamana-stiM manz, having reached
the middle of the embankment of (the illusions of) my own
mind, or tuman-sdtM wants, having reached the middle of an
embankment (furnished) with small bridges). In K. Pr. 57,
manz precedes the word it governs.- mains maidanas, in a
field.

wanza, postpos governing abl., from among, out of (so many) ;
laghe-mansa sasa-manza, out of a hundred thousand (or) out
of a thousand (only one is saved), K. Pr. 150.

Mar, m. killing, slaughter ; mdra-buth (pi. nom.), m. murderous
demons, 71.

mor", m. a cote (for pigeons or the like) ; sg. abl. mare (m. c.
for man), K. Pr. 57.

mag, m. a deer ; pi. nom. mrag, 47.

mdrg, m. a way, a path ; jwna-marg, the path of knowledge,
the way to the knowledge of the Supreme, 63 ; sath-mdrg,
the good way, the path of Wisdom, or (alternatively) the
seventh road, 82,

warun, to die ; inf. sg. abl. warana brotJiay, even before dying,
even before thy death, 87; gen. (f. sg. nom.) maranm*
skokk, the fear of death, 73-76 ; conj. part, mritt, having
died, i.e. after death, 87; K, Pr. 56; pres. part, maran,
dying, 83 ; impve. sg. 2, war bd, die, Sir!, 87 ; fut. sg. 1,
mara, 35 ; with suff. 3rd pers. sg, dat., maras, I shall die in
it, 68; 3, man, 12; with suff. Ibt pers. sg. gen., marSm m
huh, no one belonging to me will die, 35.

mdrun, to kill, destroy ; met. to reduce to absolute quietism,
49 ; to beat, smite, 83 ; conj. part, month, 43, 77 ; pres.
part, wamn, 83 ; impve, sg. 2, with suff. 3rd pers. sg, aec.
marun, destroy it, 30; with suff. 3rd pers. pi. ace. mdrutt,
destroy them, 71 ; fut. pi. 3, with suff. 2nd pers. sg. gen.
m&rinty (for modern maranay) j)dn, they will kill thy Self,
71 ; pist part. m. sg., with suff. 1st pers. sg. a-g., tofwm,
I pacified, 49 ; with suff. 3rd pers. sg. ag., mtirvn, he killed, 43.

VOCABULARY 185

murun or mudun> to husk grain by trituration in the hand ;
hence, met. kocJie murun, to husk the bosom by rubbing,
(of a suckling child) to snuggle or nestle in the bosom, to
be at rest in the bosom ; fut. sg. 3, mure or mwle (m. c. for
muri, mudi), 70.

martala, ? m. honour, dignity, 87.

mas, m. wine, 104 ; K. Pr. 102.

MX, an aunt (mother's sister), 97 = K. Pr. 47.

mas/tun, to be forgetful, to forget (in this sense, the verb in
the past participial tenses takes the subject in the dative
case), 67 ; to be forgetful, to be deluded, to become subject
to delusion ; waxhith ga&hun, to become subject to delusion,
as ab., 59.

Conj. part. masJtitJi, 59 ; past part. m. sg, with suffl
2nd pers. sg. dat. mothuy, it was forgotten for thee, thou
forgottest, 67.

wnn& u #, see mufatn.

mast) m. the hair of the head ; mast-wal, a single hair, 24.

mafa, prohibitive particle, used only with the polite imperative,
do not, 53 (bis), where it has practically the force of a
negative interrogative, ' does it nob ? '

want, m. death, K. Pr. 56.

wol&t see mobun.

wotP, m. a madman, 105.

Motft u , f. the closed fist ; sg. dat. (in sense of loc.) mocke, 24,

mathim^ to rub, knead, work, squeeze ; past part. f. sg., with
suff. 3rd pers. sg. ag., and 1st pers. sg. dat., muM*nam, he
rubbed (a fern, object) into me, 103.

motJtuy^ see m&sfiun.

matru-rup\ f. (a woman) in the character of a mother, perform-
ing the duty of a mother, 54.

motvy, mot u yey^ see mo&un.

metP, f. earth, clay ; met. earthly things, non-spiritual things,
44 ; sg. dat. w8W, 44, where the word is repeatedly used in
a double sense, viz. in the above meaning, and also
in the sense of me &%, me (and) thee, or me 6 a >5, me (and)
thou.

<?, see wo&un.
iam> see wathun.

to remain over and above, to be left remaining ; fut.
sg. 3, wti&i, with emph. y, mti&iy, 63 ; m. c. wote, 11, or
mo&e, 21 ; past m. sg. 3, with emph. y, motuy, 9, 11, and
also with conditional suffix ay, mot^i/ty, 2 ; also motu for
mti/P (m. c.), past m. sg. 3, in 1.

mfatts, ? f. the day of the new moon ; old loc. mdwdse, 22.

may = Skr. maya, in B&iva-may, consisting only of Siva, 16.

186 VOCABULARY

way, f. love, affection, love for earthly things, delusion, mdyd,

67 ; the love of God, K, Pr. 201 ; mdyi-AyuA*, like the love

of God, K. Pr. 201.
mdye-i-i/j^ f. (a woman) acting in the character of a deceiver,

a Delilah, 54.
myufr, m. union, identity with ; hence, the knowledge of the

feet .of such identity, 7. Of. y*W M , 2,
tify/\ 1, m. see melun.
wy&l*, 2, i. q. wyul u , union, identity ; esp. union, or identity,

with God, 36 ; see art. swa.
mi/on 1 * 1 , wydmiv, see M.

na, negative, not, 26, 35 (bis), 37, 60 (bis), 77, 90, 98 (bis, and
in v. 1.), 104, 107 (bis) ; K. Pr. 18, 102, 201 (many times).
na . . . na, neither . . . nor, K. Pr. 46 ; na fa, and not, nor,
96 (bis), 97 ; K. Pr. 47 (bis), 102 ; na . . . na . . . ta, not ...
nor . . . nor, 15 ; na-ta, otherwise, or else, 19 (ter), 71 ;
K. Pr. 150; nay (na + ay), if not, see s. v. Cf. nd, 1, and
no. The negative used with the present impve. is ma, and
with the pol. -impve. mata, qq. v. With the fut. impve. na
is generally used, but cf. no.

nd, 1, negative, i. q. na, 2 (ter), 9, 11, 12 (ter), 18, 23, 27 (bis), 45
(bis), 47, 55, 59 (quater) ; nd . . . na, neither . . . nor, 7 ; zm nd
zen,, they are being born (and) they are not being born, i. e.
when they are hardly born, immediately on being born, 47.

nd, 2, verbal suffix indicating a negative interrogative ;
khenem-na, will it not be cut for me ?, 83.

no, negative, i.q. na and nd, 1 ; 29 (bis), 31, 41, 67, 70 (bis),
90 (bis) ; K. Pr. 46. In 70 and 90, no is used with the future
impve. Cf. 0.

nab, f, the navel ; a focus, or central point, hence the focus of
the body, the kanda, or bulb, between the pudendum and
the navel, which is the root of the uadw, or tubes, through
which the prana, or life-wind, circulates. See Note on
Yoga, 5. Sg. abl. ndbi, 34 ; nabi-sthdua, of the region of the
katida, 57. Regarding the heat in the navel, seeprdn, 2.

ndbarl, m. sugar-candy; ndlacfi-bdr, a load of sugar-candy, 108.

nSoar, adv. outside, abroad, 4 ; K. Pr. 102 (bib) ; nefira, from
outside, 94.

neck, adj. good, 35 (bis) ; as adv. well, successfully, fortunately,
37. The more usual form of this word is nekh, cf. Prs. nek,

nechatur, m. a lunar asterism ; the season during which the
sun, or the moon, is passing through a lunar asterism ;
hence, a time or moment fixed by astrology, 3.

nad, f. a river, 57, 96 ; K. Pr. 47 ; sg. dat. *& nadi, (contact)
with the river, 57.

non u ] VOCABULARY 187

wtfrf, m. a cry, call, loud sound,72. ^wndda-Undn (15),see Univ.

nddi, f. a tube, artery, vein ; esp. the tubes through which the
vdyu, or life-winds, circulate. See Note on Yoga, 5, 6,
21. There are fourteen of these, rising from the kantia^
or region between the pudendum and the navel (cf. nab).
Of these fourteen, ten (named idd t pinga/d, snsuwna, gdwlhdri,
fatijikvd,pu8d,yafamnl 9 alamfaqd,ht7tu 9 and fan&kwl) are
the principal (hence the da*he-nadi-wdv of L. V. 69). The
principal vital airs are five in number, viz. pram, or upward
flowing air, which has its seat in the lungs; apetna, or
downward flowing air; udana 9 which rises in the throat,
and enters the head; samdna, which has its seat in the
cavity of the navel, and is essential to digestion ; and vytin^
that which is diffused through the whole body. These
course through the various naflis, and the object of the
Saiva ascetic is to restrain them by jmndyama. For this
exercise, see Note on Yoga, 21. By it, the prdna and
apdna are united to the uddna. The fire of uddna then rises
in the central ndfli, which causes the dissolution of prdna
and ajodua, thus leading to wwddti, or consciousness
independent of objects (see Translation of Sivasut.ra-viwartim, '
pp. x and 41). Hence, L. V. 69 mentions the uniting of
the winds of the ten nddis. In L. V. 80, ndcli-dal is ' the
collection of uMi*\ 'the whole group of nddw 9 . The
authoress wishes that she had been able to bring the ten
nfiflis under her mental control (by prdndyaiw, &c.), and
thus been able to obtain ttawddhi.

nador u , 1, m. the stalk of the lotus, which is eaten when
cooked with oil and condiments, 89, with play on the
meaning of nador^ 2.

nador*) 2, adj. not firm ; hence, worthless, of no value, 89,
with play on the meaning of nadw u , 1.

nehdl, adj. prosperous, favoured, successful, 24.

ndf, m. the collar, or neckpiece, of a garment ; nala, rafun, to
seize by the neck of the coat, hence, to seize forcibly and
retain, K. Pr. 102; not* Munm, to cast on the neck (e.g.
a garland, or a heavy chain), K, Pr. 102.

nol u , m. an unbroken cowry-shell ; hence, & small piece of
anything, 81 ; pi. nom. naK, m. c. for d/*, 81.

ndm, m. a name ; pi. nom, ndw, 8. Cf. ndv, 1.

niwfoi, m. the twinkling of the eye ; sg. abl. nimettil aki, in
a single twinkling of the eye, 26.

nawaskdr, m. reverence, adoration, K. Pr. 102.

tf , adj. naked ; as subst. a naked ascetic, 46 ; the naked, or
bare, body, 88 ; m. sg. nom. with emph. y, nonuy, 46 ; dat,
nanif, 88. Cf. nanga.

188 VOCABULARY

ntnd a r, f. sleep; n<jn(lri-kot u , smitten by sleep, sunk in

' sleep, 32.
nauffa, adj. naked; f. sg. nom. with emph. y, nangay, 94.

Cf. non u .
netiffa, m. a time, an occasion ; sg. abl. aki nlngi, on one

occasion, once, 50 ; tmyl ri&ngi, three times, 50 ; sati nengi,

seven times, 50.
nanun, to become naked ; hence, to become manifest, 4 ; past

f. sg. 3, with suff. 1st pers. sg. dat, nanyeyem> became

manifest to me, 4.
napli8 } m. the breath ; hence, the soul, K. Pr. 150, with emph. y,

napfa^y.
9idr, m. fire, 97 ; sg. abl. lolaki nara^ by the fire of love, 25 ;

sg. gen. (f. sg. nom,), nam<^^ 23.
nur u , f. the arm ; pi. nom. nare losam^ my arms grew weary,

K. Pr. 57; ace. natS dlawane, to wave the arms (in grief),

K. Pr. 57.
nardn, m. Narayana, God, the Supreme Being ; sg. ag, ndron 1 .

107 ; voe. he ndntn, 109 (fcer).
nerun^ to go forth, to go out (of the house), 3, 92, 102 ; K. Pr.

57, 102 (bis) ; to issue (as a result), 23 ; hi ndv dram,

the name 'Lai 5 issued for me, i.e. I became known as

Lai, 49.
impve. pi. 1, nerav, K. Pr. 102 (bis) ; fut. sg. 3, neri,

K. Pr. 57; with suff. 3rd pers. sg. dat., nerh^ will issue

from it, 23 ; pi. 3, ueran, 92.

past m. sg. 3, dmv, with suff. 1st pers. sg. dat., dram, 49 ;

f. sg. 1, drdy&, 3, 102.
ndru&t m. a barbed fishing-spear; nara& i ~cli6kfi) the (very

painful) wound caused by such a spear, 23.
nisAS, 1, adv. near, close by, 30, 46.
nu/it!, 2, postpos. governing dat., near; nisM pdnas, near

myself, 31.
nMe, 3, postpos. governing abl., from ; gan(]ana-niske> from

(i.e. by means of) dressing oneself, 27 ; msa-nishe ti, (efforts)

even from (i. e. beyond) my strength, 48.
no$& u , m. a destroyer, in wata-nos?i u , a way-destroyer, a highway

robber ; pi. nom. -918*%*, 43.
n&tAfygd u 9 m. one who has no wits, a fool, 83.
yiisfipati, adj. without trust, unbelieving, 36.
ndsikh, f. the nose; wdsika-jpawam-dfa*, holding (i.e. borne

upon) the vital air that issues through the nose (sc. from

the heart) (of the syllable dm), 33. See aw&atL
nemr, f. deep sleep, 32.

) m. a lord, a chief; sg. voc. ndtha, Lord !, 7 ; kamalaza-
h, the lord who was born in a lotus, i.e. Brahma, 8;

VOCABULARY 189

xura-guru-nalh, the lord of the chief of the gods, i.e. the

Supreme Siva, 5, 65 (cf. gimi).
, adv. perpetually, continually, 65 ; with emph. y, riethqy,

46. Cf, nityt.
mty, m. dancing ; ndthras, the pleasure of watching dances,

73.

vitye, adv. i. q. nUk, q. v., 45,

na&un, to dance ; inf. hyotum nafam, I began to dance, 94.
ndv, 1, m. a name, 15, 49 ; bar-ndv, the name of Hara, 98.

Cf. mm.
ndv, 2, f. a boat, a ship, 107; sg. dat. ndvi lamun, to tow

a boat, 106 ; ndwa-tdr, the act of ferrying a person in a boat,

98 = K. Pr. 18.

HOW*, adj. new ; with emph. y, continually new, ever new and

new, 93 (bis) ; so nawam-nowuy (fern, nawam-nili^y), ever

new and new, 93 (m. and f.).
ndwtm, to scrub, scour, clean ; past part, m. sg. with emph. y,

nowuy, 93.

nat/, a compound of na, not., and ay, if; if not, K. Pr. 46.
nyul l \ adj. dark blue: (also) green; hence, (of vegetation)

green and luxuriant, 36.
nit/em, m. a fixed rule 'or law. kanm, to make a vow as to

a future rule of conduct, 87.
nynn u , to take ; kachth nyun u , to take out, to take forth, K. Pr.

57 ; fut. pi. 3, nin, with suff. 2nd pers. sg. dat. ninanay

(apparently for ninay), they will carry thee (forth), K. Pr.

57.
niz, adj. own, one's own ; mza-swarupfi, the nature of what is

one's own, the nature of Self, 67.

pad, 1, m. a position, site; parama-pad, or (77) paramnpad,
the Supreme Siva, 10, 77, 78, 79. See param.

pad, 2, m. a verse of poetry, such as Lalla's own verses;
pi. nom. pad, 76 ; dat. (for loe.) padan, 84.

paid a, adj. created, produced ; karun, to make (for oneself),

99 = K. Pr. 46.

patlun or parun, to read ; to study, 36 ; to recite, give forth
(e.g. a stream of abuse), 18, 21.

Conj. part, parith, 36 ; impve. sg, 3, with suff. 1st pers.
sg. dat., pacfinem or par*n$m (modern Ksh. would be -nam),
18 ; pi. 3, with same sufll, and with identical form, 21.

puh, m. the month Pausa (Dec.- Jan.). It is the month in
which the leaves fall. Sg. gen. (m. sg. abl.) puhani wdwa,
(leaves falling) with the wind of Pausa, 83.

phokh, m. expelling breath from the mouth with the lips con-
tracted, blowing a long puff; sg. dat. phokas, 41.

190 VOCABULARY [pM

jpkal, m. fruit, a crop or harvest of grain, 86 (see
phal-hond*) a fruit-ram, a large ram fattened on fruit, 7.

p/iol u , m, a single grain, or a small quantity of any kind of
grain or seed ; used . sar^pM^, a single mustard-seed,
47 ; in phal-phol u > 86, pkol u means simply ' grain ', and
defines pkal. Phal means any fruit, and pJwl u defines it as
grain.

$aMl u t m. a shepherd ; pahali-rost u > shepherdless, 108.

phalun, to bear fruit; cond. past sg. 3, with snfF. 2nd pers.
sing, dat., phalihiy (mod. Ksh. would be -^%), 66.

p/iolun* to blossom, to bloom ; fut. sg. 3, with suff. 2nd pers.
sg. dat., pMKy, K. Pr. 46.

pMlav, m. the set of shutters used for shutting up a shop ;
pMlav dyun* t to shut up (shop, dat.), K. Pr. 102.

pk6laioun u t n. a,g. that which blossoms, flowering ; f. sg. nom.,
with emph. y^phohwuf^y, 96 = K. Pr. 47.

pJierun, to return, come back (to a place, or to one's senses),
51, 89; to rest from work, take a holiday, 12. In 89, the
'returning* is in two senses, either 'coming back (to the
market) J , or * coming (to my senses) '. Conj. part, plinth,
51,89; fut. sg. 3,/rfari, 1&

phirun, to cause to revolve or to cause to come back; to turn
over (of a washerman turning over clothes in the wash),
103 ; to reverse, cancel, 107 ; to ply (scissors), 103 ; conj.
part. pUritk, 107 ; past part. sg., with suff. 3rd pers. sg.
ag. and 1st pers. sg. nom., phir^nas, 103 ; with suff. 3rd
pers. sg. ag. and 1st pers. sg. dat., pMr*nam> 103.

phut a run, to break (trans.); past part. m. pi,, with suff.
3rd pers. sg. ag. and 3rd pers. sg. dat., phu^na^ 26.

poj\ see pahn.

pdkk, m. mud, a slough^ 74.

pak a chi m. the wheel (of a vehicle), pi. nom. paM a ct, 26.

pakun> to move forward, progress ; inf. palwn ffa&he, one has to
progress, 19; fut. sg. 3, with suff. 2nd pers, sg. dat.
pakiy, 107.

pakawnn*, n. ag. one who progresses ; (of a river) flowing on,
K. Pr. 47 ; f. sg. nom., with emph. ^, pak&wuffiy, K. Pr. 47.

pal, m. flesh, used in offering to a god, 10 ; al-pal> wine and
flesh for a Kaula offering. In modern Ksh. the compound
air-pal is used to mean ' wine, flesh, &c.', i.e. the five things
commencing, with m used in the kaula (not Lalla's sect)
worship of Siva. The five e ^V are madya, wine ; mama,
flesh; matsya, fish; mudrd^ special attitudes; maithuna,
sexual intercourse. Hence, in modern language, al-pal
commonly means any vile or utterly impure food.

patent m. a saddle (of a horse) ; sg. &&t. yaldnas, 14.

poti] VOCABULARY 191

palm, to protect; hence, (of instruction or directions) to keep,
to follow faithfully; past part. f. sg. poj* (mod. Ksh.
pdj*)> 62.

pan, 1, m. a leaf; pi. nom. pan, 83.

pan, 2, m. thread, sewing-thread; sg. M.pana, 108.

pan, 1, the human body ; voe.pdna, K. Pr. 57. In 44, the sg.
dat. pdnas is used with a double meaning, as the dat. of this
word, and also as the dat. of pdna, self. See pdna.

pan, 2, m. i. q. pdna, the self, oneself, 5, 7, 71 ; panun u pdti,
one's own self, one's own personality, 62, 82, 85.

pdna, self, oneself; myself, 31, 44 (bis), 60, 61 ; thyself, 44,
66 ; himself, he himself, 33, 59, 72 ; with emph. y, pamy,
he himself, 33, 59 ; sg. dat. pdnas, to myself, 61 ; for thyself,
for thine own benefit, 66 ; nisJie pdnas, near myself, 31.
In 44, pdnas has three times a double meaning. It may
here be the sg. dat. either of pan, the body, or of pdna, self.
Thus, pdnas Ibgith, having applied (earth) to my body, or
having become absorbed in thyself; pdnas-manz, (I saw
earth) on my body, or (I saw thee) in myself ; pdnas dyutum,
I gave to my body, or gave to myself.

pom, for/j0>4*, in pbn^pdnas, for myself, 60.

pon u , m, a wedge, a peg ; pi. nom. pdn\ 66.

panca, card, five, in panca-yind\ the five indriyas, or organs of
sense, 79. The Skr. form of pdn&, q.v.

pondun, to sneeze ; fut. sg. 3 (in sense of pres.), pondi, 46.

pandit Ji, m, a learned man ; esp. a guru or spiritual preceptor, 3.

pdndav, m. pi. the Pandavas, the five heroes of the Nahdbhdrata.
Their mother was Queen Kuntl. At one time, being
reduced to great distress, she is said to have taken refuge in
a potter's house, and to have passed as the maternal aunt
of his children. PL gen. (f. sg. nom.) pdnflawan-hmz"' mdj*
(or moji, m. c.), the mother of the Pandavas, 97 =K. Pr. 47.
See krty*.

panim u , pron. adj. one's own, 55, 62 ; my own, 3, 82, 85, 104 ;
thy own, K. Pr. 57 ; his own, 45 ; with emph. y, panunuy,
62, 85, 104 ; m. sg. abl. panani, 3 ; K. Pr. 57 ; f. sg. dat.
panane, 45 ; panun^pm, one's own self, one's own personality,
62, 82, 85.

or ponk, card, five, 77 (ponfy ; pi. dat. ponban, 95 ;
pdn&an, K. Pr. 47. There are five Ihutax (77, 95, see IM, 2) ;
fiwpmnas, or vital airs (95, see jww, 2) ; five jnanfadriyas,
or organs of sense, and five karmetidriyas, or organs of action
(95, see yund u ). Cf. panca.

pan, m. a virtuous action (the opposite of pdph, sin), 62, 79 ;

192 VOCABULARY [pdfi*

jwfi", m. water, 24, 4.2, 47, 106 ; pi. nom. pofi\ 42.

pm*) f. a hedge (round a garden), 63.

piiph, m. a sin, a sinful act (opposite of pofi) ; sg. abl. papa-
pon$-loj\ lie who obtains the fruit of his sins and virtuous
acts of a former life, 62. See %'*'.

papun, to ripen, to become ripe ; fufc. pi. 3, papan, 92.

par^ 1, adj. another than oneself, 5, 7.

'par, 2, m. He Who is Supreme, the Supreme Deity, 59 ;
swa-para-ve&ar, meditation on oneself and on the Supreme,
or on the Supreme Self, 59, but see art. swa*

par, 3, a wing ; pi. nom. par> 99 = K. Pr. 46.

pairiv, see pm M .

/mm, see kamld-pwd.

pur 11 , m. a foot; pi. abl. jwwn't?, on one's feet, 38.

jtrob/i u 9 m. a lord ; hence, the Supreme Deity, 64.

parud*> m, a stranger, some one else, a person with whom one
has no connexion; pi. dat. paradeii, 92.

prah, f. adoring love, (to God) 105, (or for the world) 83 ;
sg. dat. (in sense of instr.), prahe (m. c. for prafo), 105.

prakrtiii.& (in Saivism) primal matter (as opposed
to spirit), primitive non-intelligent being, the root of all
feeling, affection in the widest sense of the term, as
experienced by the purum, or individual soul (see Kashmir
S&awim, fasc. i. 5 pp. 50, 89), 25 ; the nature of anything, 57.
See Note on Yoga, 1.

m. light, illumination, 4, 6, 9, 35, 82 ; K. Pr.
201 (ter) ; bwlharprakcwh (35) or jndna-prakdsh (6), the
illumination of knowledge ; prakd*h$-MdUi the place of
illumination, i.e. the stage of attainment of true wisdom,
82 ; sg. dat. prakfahts, 6.

paralokh) m. the future world, the life after death ; sg. dat.
paraldkas (in sense of loc.), 75.

param or (77) paramt^ adj. Supreme ; parama-gath, the way of
the Supreme, final beatitude, 103 ; paramor-pacl (10, 78, 79),
the position of the Supreme, or paramu pad (77), the
supreme position, hence, final beatitude ; hence, also x the
Supreme Siva (10, 77, 79) ; parama-Sfiiv, the supreme Siva
(gen. -ShiwMiP)) 58.

paramBhwar, m. the Supreme Lord, God ; sg. voc. parawezk*
ward) 56.

prdn, 1, m. an onion, 89, 90, in both cases with a double
meaning, referring also to prdn, 2. So, with similar double
meaning, prana-^ur^ a thief of onions, or the thief of my
vital breath, 101.

prdn, 2, m. the vital breath (in 89, 90, 101, this word is used
with a double meaning, in the sense of l vital breath } 3 and

VOCABULARY 193

also in the sense of /jrara, 1, an onion) ; hence, life, the body
as a living entity, 90 (ter).

According to Hindu scriptures there are five principal
vital airs (vayu) in the body, viz. prdna, apdna, samdna^
udtina, and vydna. See Note on Yoga, 2, 16. Of these,
two (prdna and apana) are referred to by Lalla. There are
also five secondary vital airs, or upiprdna^ named ndga,
fcurma, krkala, rfevadatta, and &hanamjaya< respectively.

According to the MahdbMrata (xii, 6844 ff.) prdna resides
within the head, and, with the heat that is there, causes all
kinds of exertion. The prdna is the living creature, the
universal soul, the Eternal Being, the Mind, Intellect, and
Consciousness of all living creatures, &c. Thus, the living
being is, in every respect, caused byprdtia to move about and
exert himself. . . . The heat, residing between apana and prdna
in the region of the navel (cf. L. V. 57). operates, with the
aid of these two breaths, in digesting all food that is taken
by a living creature. There is a tube beginning from the
mouth and ending in the anal canal. From this main tube
numerous subsidiary tubes branch out in the bodies of all
living creatures (see art. nacti). In consequence of the rush
of the several breaths (the ten just mentioned, see also
below), these breaths mingle together. The heat that
dwells in prdna causes digestion, . . . The prdna, bearing
a current of heat, descends from the head downwards to the
extremity of the anal canal, and thence is pushed upwards
again. Coming back to its seat in the head, it once more
sends back the heat that it bears. . . . The main tube
leading from the mouth to the anus is the path by which
Jogin* succeed in attaining to the Supreme by holding the
soul within the brain (Sorensen's Inde to the MaMbMrata,
s. v. prdna).

The above is the account given in the MaMMrata.
Later accounts describe the five principal airs as follows :
prdna is the upward flowing air which has its seat in the
lungs, and is exhaled through the mouth and nose (L. V.
57 accounts for its heat by stating that it rises from the
region of the navel : see nab) ; apd&a is the downward flowing
air, which is expelled from the anus ; uddna is that which
rises in the throat, and enters the head ; tamdna is that
which has its seat in the cavity of the navel, and is essential
to digestion ; and vydna that which is diffused through the
whole body. These course through the various tubes, or
nddisy and the object of the Saiva ascetic is to restrain
them, the process being called prdndyama. For the methods
by which this process is carried out, see Note on Yoga, 21,

194 VOCABULARY

The main object is to bring prana and apdna under complete
control, as stated in L. V. 26. Cipawan, which Lalla uses
as equivalent toprdn. On the whole subject, see Deussen,
Allgememe GeackiMe (kr Philosophie, I 2, p. 248; 3, p. 70.
Reference has already been made to L. V. 26 and 57.
In 89 (in one meaning) people are invited to take, or grasp,
the vital breath (so as to bring it under control). In the
other meaning, they are invited to buy onions (prdn^ 1).
In 90, the word pran has, perhaps, the more general sense
of the ordinary breath of life, or one's own body as a living
being. In 101, prdna-feur may be translated e a thief of
onions 5 , and also ' the thief of vital breath ', i.e, the worldly
temptations which prevent the proper control of the prdna.
In 69, wdv, wind s is used, as a synonym of prdn, for the
vital airs.

pron u , adj. old, of olden time ; f. sg. nom. profit*, 63.

pairwi, to put on (clothes) ; conj. -peak, pairitt, 76.

purnn, to fill ; hence, to inhale breath (37) in the process of
prdndydma\ seeprdn, 2; conj. part. jozfrflSi, 37.

In Sanskrit, the process of inhalation is called puraka,,
while the retention, or ' bottling up' of the inhaled breath
is called kumbJiaka. See Note on Yoga, 21, and kuml**

par^nem, see padm.

pranav, m. the name of the mystic syllable owi, see dm and
anahath ; sg. gen, (m,. sg. ag.) pranawdk 1 * 1 , 76.

praarui^ to wait for, await ; pres. part, prdrdu, 83.

pra$on u , adj. pleased, gratified ; ta$ pra#on u , pleased with
him, 65.
^ see padun.

, adj. of or belonging to the earth, 52.
ify adv. implying distribution ; prathuy twthan, (going)
to every holy place, going from one holy place to another, 36.

paT&un, m. recognition, 58.

pairiv, see pwr u .

prawati, m. a proclamation, a crying out ; fauwi, to cry out,
make proclamation, 89.

prdw?M, to obtain ; fut. sg. 2, prawakh, 29 ; past part, sg, ,
with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag., prdv"m t I obtained (f. obj.), 103.

pravesA, m. entering, entrance. 2.

parwdz, ? f. flying, jflight ; parmz tul, take wings and fly,
99^= K. Pr. 46.

parySkJi, m. a bed ; tula-pary$kh, a bed (stuffed) with cotton,
i.e. a luxurious bed, 73.

prazalun, to become lighted, to be set alight (of a lamp) ;
2 past, m. sg. 3, prazalyov\ with suff. 1st pers. sg. dat.,
prazalym, became lighted for me, 4.

p*fta\ VOCABULARY 195

pananm, to recognize ; pol. impve. sg. 2, with suff. 3rd pers.
sg. ace., parzdntan, recognize him, 46 ; fut. sg. 3, with suff.
3rd pers. sg. dat. (for ace.), parzdnes, he will recognize him,
14 ; past part. m. sg., with suffi 1st pers. sg. ag. 3 parzJntuw,
I recognized, 7.

pdsh, m. a net ; sg. dat. pasties, 6.

posh, m. a flower; sg. gen. (f. sg. abl.) kapasi-poshecZ, 102:
pi. nom.jw/fc, 42, 45.

posh u , m. a beast, an animal (as distinct from man), esp.
a beast offered in sacrifice (see lama), 63.

push u , m. a florist, a professional garland maker, 39, 40. The
fern, of this word ispus/ion*.

pashun, to see, 20, 59, in passive sense, to be seen, to be
recognized (as so-and-so), 16; conj. part. pashith, 20, 59;
fut. (or old present), sg. 3, paski, or, with interjection H
added, pashyd, 16.

pwhof?, f. a female florist, see push* ; m. z.pushom, 39, 40.

pusherun, to make over (anything to anybody) ; inf. or verbal
noun, pmherun, 61. In mod. Ksh. this verb is pusffrun.

pata, adv. afterwards, behind ; pata rosun, to remain behind,
to survive, 67 ; pata pata^ behind behind, i. e. t continually
behind ; i.e. following after a person, dogging his footsteps,
K. Pr. 56, 57.

petd, $eepyon u .

pot u , adj. of or belonging to the back, rear, back; although
an adj., this word does not change for gender when in
agreement with a fern, noun, as in the phrases pot u kail
back-word, i.e. backbiting, pot u tiamoy*, secret income, and
so on. Similarly in L. V. 105 we have polP zwn> (f.), the
end of the moonlight, i.e. the last hours of the night.

jpatk, 1, ? m. a path, a way ; sg. abl. amara-pathi, on the path
(leading to) immortality, i.e. on the path of reflection on
the Self or Ego, 70.

path, 2, adv. behind ; in path-Mi*, of or belonging to the time
behind, i.e. of or belonging to former times; sg. abl. path-
kali, in former times, 91.

path, m. a pavement, the floor of a flagged area; sg. dat.
patas, 52.

pith, 1, adv. on the back, upon, 14, 15.

pfyh, 2, postpos. governing dat., on, upon; with empky, #$'-
kan$-peth(ty, on a washerman's stone, 103. Sometimes, in
frequently used phrases, peth does not govern, the dat., but
is simply compounded with the governed word, as in
tar-p%&, on (i.e. at) the door, K. Pr. 102.

petha, 1, adv. from above ; pet/ia bow, from above (and) from
below, from top to bottom, 17.
o 2

196 VOCABULAKY

i 2, postpos. governing 1 abl., from above, from ; Irahmdnfla-
petha, (down) from the Brahma-rauclkra (see foahmdnd), 57 ;
yena-petha, from which (time), i.e. since, 93.

pltMs, see pyuth*.

pftarun, m. the burden, or responsibility, of carrying out any
duty, 61.

pa&un, to be trusting, to trust (a person, dat.), to show trust
in, 104; esp. to show trust in a person by lending him
money, to give a person credit, 27 ; past m. sg. 3, po&\ 27 ;
f. sg. 1, with suff. 3rd pers. sg. dat., p&$a, 104 Note
that this verb is intransitive.

pawan, m. air, the vital breath (see prdn, 2), 37, 42 ; sg. dat.
pawanas, 17 ; abl. nd*ika-pawmia~dor* t holding (i. e. borne
upon) the vital air that (starting from the heart) issues
through the nose, 33 ; pawam-sotiy, by means of the vital
air (i.e. by means of suppressing the vital air), 25.

piwun, to drink ; past part. m. sg., with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag.,
pymvum, I drank, 81.

pay, m, milk, 54.

il) m. the conduct, or behaviour, of a pydda (lit. footman),
or government messenger, who is looked upon as making
his money by oppression, lying, and cheating; hence,
wickedness generally, K. Pr. 46.

pyom, see pyonP

*, to fall, 18, 32 (sleep fell), 47, 88 (the sword will fall) ;
to fall (to, dat.), to apply oneself (to anything), to become
engaged (in anything), 28, 45 ; to befall, happen, 67, 74, 84,
85,87,K)8.

pol. impve. sg. 2, p$ta (m. c. for peta), 28 ; fat. impve.
peze (m. c. for jftri), 45 ;

fut. sg. 3, pfye (m. c. for peyi\ 18 ; with suff. 2nd pers.
sg. dat., titas pfyiy, it will happen (i.e. come) to thy
memory, 87; jptfyty, (the sword) will fall (on) thy (body),
88 ; pL 3 (old present), pen, they fall, 47;

past. m. sg. 3, with suff. 1st pers. sg. dat., pyom, 84, 85,
108 ; f. sg. 3, p%$ t 32 ; with suff. 2nd pers. sg. dat., pfyiy
(forpfyfy), happened to thee, 67, 74.
pdyir*, f. a stirrup ; pi, dat. paywin, 14.

", m. a pedestal, a throne; sg. dat,^^e>, 52.

pfyiy, seepyon*.

Z) f. worship, ceremonial adoration ; sg. dat. ptizi, 78, 79 ;
pjfce (m. c.), 39, 40 ; pug kariin", to offer worship (to, dat.),
to worship, 17, 21.

rasan] VOCABULARY 197

puzan, m. the performance of ceremonial worship, worship,
22.

re, interj. !, 3 (here pleonastic).

racyei/e, see ratun.

rudukh, see rozun.

ml, m. Rahu, the demon of eclipse, 22.

ruhun, m. garlic, 89, 90, in both cases with a pun on the word

rut, soul or spirit (Ar. r&K).
rajy, m. a kingdom, the ruling of a kingdom ; r&jy KyonP, to

take ruling, to undertake the rule of a kingdom, 12 ; sg.

dat. rajes &oj\ one who gains a kingdom, 62.
r a M, f. a line; met. a path or way as narrow as a line, 107 ;

sg. dat. karmane rHU (written) in the line of fate, an

allusion to the lines of fate supposed to be inscribed on

a person's forehead on the 6th night after birth, 107.
ruw, m. a hair of the down of the body ; used met. to indicate

a very small quantity or an instant of time ; pu^sas na

rumas (sg. dat.), I did not trust in him by a single hair, or

for a single instant, 104.
rainl or ronl, f. a queen; hence, in voc. rainyd, (politely)

Lady!, 10.
rang, 1, m. the stage of a theatrical performance; hence,

a theatrical performance ; pi. dat. (in sense of gen.),

mngan, 81.
fang, 2, m. mode, manner, fashion ; kyiith w rang, of what kind

of fashion?, 84, 85.
nnz i i see rymz Ut t
rm A , f. a wife, a man's wife (from the point of view of the

husband) ; sg. dat. rane fyuh\ like a wife, K. Pr. 201 ;

pi. nom. rane, K. Pr. 102 (quater).
rup\ adj. used , possessing the appearance of, acting in the

character of, in lhary$-rtip\ acting in the character of a wife,

54 ; mafou-iJip*> in the character of a mother, 54 ; may^-r^,

in the character of earthly love, 54 ; zada^Ajf, acting in

the character of inanimate nature, stolid like aa insentient

block, 20.

rtiph, m. shape, bodily form, 15,
rat, m. juice, sap, liquor, essence, distillate, 40; a person's

essence, his power, energy, 48 ; charm, pleasure, delight ;

nate-ras, the delights of (watching) dancing, 73.

Sg. abL slMi-rasa, (water it) with the essence of the

moon, i.e. with nectar, 40 ; rasa-niM-ti, (I exerted myself)

even beyond my natural power, 48.
rcuan, f- the tongue; sg. abl. ratani, (uttered) by tha

tongue, 58.

198 VOCABULARY [rod*

u , adj. suff. signifying 'devoid of; ldgi-ro*1P, one who is
without (selfish) aim, disinterested, 61, 65; $aMli-rost u ,
shepherdless, 108.

ratdyfa, m. an elixir, a magic potion, 80.

?^, adj. good, beautiful, excellent ; m. pi. nom. fV, 51.

rath, f. night, 42; dfa rath (55, 91), den kgoh rath (3, 5, 65),
or din kydwu rath (19), day and night, always, continually,
without surcease.

mthu, m. a chariot, 73.

ratun, to seize, grasp, take hold of, 3, 4, 24, 26, 101, 104, 107 ;
K. Pr. 102; to seize, to bring infco subjection, 55, 80;
(of a road) to seize, to enter (a road) and follow (it)
diligently, 82; Kith ratun, having taken to seize, i.e. to
hold, 69.

Conj. part, ratith^ 55, 104 ; ratith zanun, to know how to
seize, &c., 26, 80.

Past part. 1, m. sg. rot 1 ', 24; with suff. 1st pers, sg. ag.
rotum, I seized, &c., 4, 69, 82, 101 ; also with suff. 3rd pers.
sg. dat. rot u ma*, I grasped it, 3 : abl. ami rati, by this
which had been grasped, i.e. by grasping this, 107.
Past part. 2, sg. racyjyt, K. Pr. 102.

rufaun, to be preferred, to be liked; fut. (pres. subj.), sg. 3,
ro&e (m. e for ro&i), 21.

rav> 1, m. a sound, an utterance, 33. See andhatL

ra\\ 2, m. the sun, 16, 53.

rdwun, to be destroyed, be lost ; inf. obi. rdwan-tyoft, lit. the
blister caused by the destruction (of something desired),
hence, an intolerable pain, 108 ; past, m. sg. 3, row u , 66 ;
past conditional, sg. 3, rdvihe> 95.

rywsP, a ball (the toy made of lac) ; pi. nom, nns\ 66.

raz, f. a rope ; sg. dat. (for ace.) razi, 95.

mz, ? f. a disease, 8. See Ihav.

rdza-don u , f. ?the work of a rdz (plasterer), ? plastering; sg.
dat. rdza-ddnt) 85. The meaning of this word is. now
unknown, and that given here is a mere suggestion.

rdza-ham> m. a swan (said to have a beautiful voice), 86.

rasm, ? f. the night, 22.

rozm, to remain (in one place), abide, stay, 65 ; to remain, to
remain concealed, to keep oneself hidden, 44 ; to remain
over and above, to be left over, to survive, 2, 67 ; Awtltydr
rozun, to remain careful, to take care, K. Pr. 46.

Conj. part, rtizith, 65 ; impve. sg. 2, roz, K. Pr. 46 ; fut.
sg. 3, with suff. 2nd pers. sg. dat., roziy, it will remain for
thee (after death), 67 ; pi. 3, rozan, 2 (old present) ; past.
m. sg. 2, rudM me } thou remainedst hidden from me, 44.

VOCABULAEY 199

sali, adj. all (a Hindi word, the Kashmiri word being
q.v.), 16.

saban, f. soap, 103.

*ad, m. eating with relish, tasting, enjoying, 90 ; hence, met.,
the true enjoyment, the pure happiness (begotten by the
discrimination between that which is transient and that
which is eternal), 45, 90 (with double meaning, i.e. both
lit. and met.) ; sg. abl. sdda, 45.

*add, adv. always, continually ; with emph. y, #K%*', 7.

xeda, adv. straightly ; hence, with straight mind, attentively,
needfully, carefully, 91.

tadb&dv, m. pure devotional love, loving trust ; sg. abl. -bkawa,
45. CLbdv.

sicldh, c. g. a holy person who has attnined to one of the stages
of beatitude ; voc. $iddhamdli #idd/io : respected Saint !
(see m<IP), 91.

#5(l a r 9 m. the sea, the ocean ; sg. dat. sod a ra$, of (or to) the
sea, K. Pr. 46 ; in the ocean, 106 ; abl. b&awa-sod a n-ddr 9
the current (or tide) of the ocean of existence, 74.

sado^j see sadd.

sagun, that which has properties, the material (as opposed to
pure spirit), the material universe, I.

^, see *h$h.

$oh u > m. a money-lender, 27.

*wA, see tih.

xMla-won*, adj. possessing beauty, adorned ; m. sg. dat.
-wonis, 52.

sKih (13) or M (25), card, six; ag. sg. *^*, by (a group
of) six, 13 ; pi. dat. (for gen.) $Mn, (a lord) of six, 13.

The number six has various mystic meanings. Thus,
there are six attributes of the Deity, viz. (1) $arv<tjnatd>,
omniscience, (2) irpti^ contentment, (3) anddibod&a, having
perception from eternity, (4) svatantratti, absolute inde-
pendence, or absolute self-sufficiency, (5) nityam-aluptaxaktit
having potency that is incapable of being diminished, and
(6) anantasakti, omnipotence. There are six enemies, or
sins which impede union with the Supreme. For a list of
these, see tub. There are six urmis, or human infirmities,
viz. (1) zoka,) grief, (2) woha, delusion, (3) jam, old age,
(4) marana, death, (5) ksudh, hunger, and (6) pip&sa> thirst.
There are six avasthoA, or periods of human life, (1) ti&tva,
babyhood, (2) lalya^ childhood, (3) kaumara, youth, (4)
gaumna, puberty, (5) tdrunya^ young manhood, and (6) vdr-
dhakya, old age. Some omit numbers 1 and 5, and have
only four periods, translating yamana by ( manhood '. All
these sextets are referred to in 13. There are, "furtner, six

200 VOCABULAEY

vikaras, or changes of condition, in a man's life, indicated
by the six verbs, asti, he exists ; jay ate, he is horn ; vardhate,
he grows up ; viparinamate, he is developed ; apafalyate, he
declines ; and nasyati, he is destroyed (82).

In 25 and 82, reference is made to the six cahas, or circles,
regarding which, see Note on Yoga, 9, 13 ff.

M/icl u , 1, m. coolness; Mhol* kantn^ to make coolness, to
cool oneself, K. Pr. 102.

MM U , 2, adj. cool; sg. nom. Mtep, K. Pr. 102.

shSkh, f. fear, apprehension, 73-6.

shtkun, to fear, to be afraid ; impve. fat. sKtk^zl, 70.

diW'th) f. the fakti, or energic power of a deity, conceived as
the female consort of the latter ; esp. in these poems, the
Sakti of Siva. She is the immanent aspect of Siva, i.e.
the aspect in which he pervades the universe. She is not
in any way different from, or independent of, the Supreme
Siva, but is one and the same with him. She is immanent
in, every human being, and has herself an infinite number
of aspects or modes. In order to obtain final emancipation,
it is necessary to grasp the fact of her essential ,oneness
with the Supreme, 68 ; ShwDa-sffitP'th,, Siva and his Sakti, 2.

%hel> f. a large stone, a rock, 52 (ter).

<?M, m. good behaviour, right conduct, 24.

*0&7, ? m. the seashore, K. Pr. 46.

Mm, tranquillity, quietism, quietude, absence of passion, 71 ;
Mm-dam, quietude and self-restraint ; sg. abl. s/iema-dama-
kriye-piin 1 *', the hedge of holy acts joined to quietism and
self-restraint, 63.

so'ham (90), a Sanskrit formula meaning ' I am He ', or c I am
That ', and expressing the identity of the soul with the
Supreme. With the letters reversed, it becomes hama,
which is used as a mantra, or mystic formula. See

j f f

shemlhn, Sambhu, a name of Siva ; sg. dat. shembhw, 45.

shemun, to be quiet, to be at peace, 27 ; (of water) to be at
rest (and gradually soak away), 106; pres. part, shetnan^
106 ; fut. sg. 3, Mm, 27.

shenkar, m. Sankara, a name of Siva, 25 ; shenkar-swalma)
Siva (recognized as) one with Self, 39, 40 ; shetikam-boJcV 1 ',
one who is full of devotional faith to Siva, f. -Mtt* 18.

rfitifi, m. the transcendental Void, emptiness (Skr. wwya);
iu Saiva philosophy, the imaginary body in which one feels
oneself in dreams, a vague, indistinct, and undefined some-
thing which is practically J Nothing 3 , not unlike the
' nothing ' of the experience of the really dreamless deep-
jdeep state in our waking life (see

*krvtaic6**} VOCABULARY 201

trans, p, 18, and Kashmir SMvim, pp, 77, 82). When
a Universe comes into apparent existence, the Supreme
Being', after a course of development through various phases
(K. Bhaimsm, pp, 62 fF.), associates Himself with Maya
(illusion), and thereby becomes subjected to limited individual
experience. In the first stage of this association, He, as the
experiencer, loses the realization of Himself as the Self of
the experience ; and, as this happens. He becomes sleepy.
In this sleep His perception of Himself as 'All This'

becomes dim, as the vague, undefined, something,
already mentioned. Swya may therefore be looked upon as
the first stage in limited consciousness, and in the reverse
order (of the soul becoming united with the Supreme) it is
therefore the last stage of limited consciousness before the
soul becomes conscious of universal experience as one ^ with
the Supreme in one of the five phases or conditions prior to
this association with Maya. In the microcosm of the body,
Yogis locate this xunya in the tahatrdra. See Note on
Yoga, 20, 24

Hence Lalla, in 1, says that, when the di& (i.e. f&xya)
became dissolved (in the course of union with the Deity)
only pure (i.e. universal) consciousness remained.

Lalla is fond of the expression Mnes shmdk nlliili gauv
(11, 30, 69). Here MSfa is the dative singular, and AvMk
is the nominative singular with the suffix of the indefinite
article, and the whole means literally ' a void became merged
in the Void' that is to say, a thing which is really nothing,
or mere emptiness, became merged in the Great Smya
explained above. The thing which is really nothing is the
apparent material existence, the material world^or the
consciousness of the material world. With the acquirement
of true knowledge, its unreality is recognized, and the
apparent reality disappears in the transcendental Void.
Cf. the remarks on L. V. 69 in art. MM.

Sg. nom. Mn, 1 ; with suff. indef. art. itifial, 11, 30,
69; dat^M^, 11, 30, 69.
Mndkaft m. having the form of the Void, reduced to becoming

nothing but the Great Void (see *km}> 50.
tlufidlay, m. he whose abode is the Great Void (see s/M), i.e.

the Supreme, 15.

dur u , m. an infant; doda-$hw u , a milk-infant, a sucking

child, 70. , v *

dramdwun, to labour at; hence, (IU sJiramawun, to labour at

milk, to milk, 38.

tlrutawfa*, m. one who hears well, one who is the reverse ot
being deaf, 20.

202 VOCABULARY

tkro&wi, to become pure; 2 past, m. sg. 3, with suff. 1st pers,
sg. gen. shrdfyom, 105.

Mufti, m, the moon ; sJicsU-kal, a digit of the moon, 25, 69 ;
*he*hi-ra*i moon-juice, the water of immortality, nectar,
amrfat sg. abl. -rota, 40. F<^r the mystic terminology in
connexion with the moon in Saiva theology, see art. *om.

hdf> a l a }\ m. a holy book, the general body of sacred writings ;
sg. abl, sMstra.) 27.

*//&Vr, m. iron ; sg. dak d&Pras, 100 = K. Pr. 46.

sJidth, m. a sand-bank (hidden under water) in a stream,
a shoal; sg. abl. with emph.y,^a/^, 84, 85.

shetJi) card, a hundred ; tMth-theP, hundreds, 6.

s/iiv, m. Siva, the Supreme Deity, absorption in whom is final
emancipation, 8, 14, 51-54, 80; sg. gen. *7iiwwi u , 58; dat.
s&iicas, 68; voc. Mwa shiwa Jcamn, uttering the cry of
Siva! Siva!', i.e. meditating on the fact that all that
exists is one with Him, 65 ; shiwa-may, made up of Siva,
consisting of Siva, ,16 ; sUwa-puzan, the worship of Siva,
22 ; thiwa-sltittPth) Siva and his a&ti : or energic power, 2,
cf. 68, and art. &K8liPth ; parawa-sJiw, the Supreme Siva
(gen. -shiwun u )> 58 ; ftetana-shiV) Siva in his quality of
Supreme Spirit, as opposed to his more material manifesta-
tions, 79.

9hwdt, m. a breathing, a complete breath, inspiration and
expiration ; sg. ace. *Awdt 9 55.

siPwoff*, m. the six-staged road, i.e. either the six wktivas or
the six cobra* (see art. sheJi), 82.

dyama-gal) m. dark-blue-necked, a name of Siva, whose
neck was dyed a dark blue by drinking the kdlakuta poison
at the churning of the ocean ; sg. voc. thyama-galji, 13,

sakaz, adj. inborn, natural, innate; as subst. m. natural
character, true nature, reality; hence, obi. sg. saJiaza, as
adv. naturally, innately, 18 (according to one interpretation),
45 ; as an epithet of the Supreme Siva, sahaz means
' He who is real and true ',18 (according to another inter-
pretation), 43 ; ^aliaza-'kumn, a flower of the true nature,
i.e. a flower born from one's inner soul, a flower which is
a true offering of love ; or (?) a flower of reality, a real
flower, 21 (see note to the verse).

In Sanskrit, the compound sahaja~vidyd means * the
knowledge, or state of experience, in which the true
relation of things is realized '. It is the consciousness
of the identity of the Self with Siva. Lalla frequently
uses the word tahaz, by itself, with this meaning of c the
nature of Self. Thus, in 29, she has taAaza-vifadr, dis-
crimination as to the nature of Self, and in 30 she has

VOCABULARY 203

aJiaz ve&dwn, exercise this discrimination as to the nature
of Self. Prom the idea of 'the nature of Self, it comes
to mean * knowledge of the nature of Self. Thus, in 29,
we are told that quietude and self-command are not neces-
sary causes sahazas, i f e. of a knowledge of the nature of Self.
Similarly, sahaz has the same meaning in 35 and 62.

Sg. nom. taltte, 30, 35, 43 ; dat. saliazas, 29, 63 ; abl
and obi. sahaza, 18, 21, 29, 45.

h, f. sand ; sg. obi. seki-lawar, a rope of sand, a rope made
by twisting sand, an impossibility, 107.

w&h, m. happiness, ease, K. Pr. 201 (ter).

sakharun, to prepare for a journey, to set out ; to set oneself
to any task, busy oneself with, 10 ; impve. sg. 2, sakhar.

wtol*, adj. all, the whole, everything, 38 ; m. pi. nom. with
emph. ^, sakaliy^ 1, all men, 47 (according to another
interpretation, this is sakaliy, 2, below, q. v.).

sakaliy, 2, adv. without having eaten food, hungry and athirst,
47 (see the preceding).

*ul, f. the early time, the time before any fixed time ; hence,
the propitious time (for doing anything), 99 (= K. Pr. 46),
100. The word often means 'early dawn', and perhaps
also has this meaning in these passages.

*atil> m. water, 16, 29 ; sg. dat. jufi/o*, 29..

*<M, m. the moon. The moon plays a considerable part on
the mystic side of Saivism, and is frequently mentioned in
this connexion in the Latta-vaky&ni. In these verses it
appears under four different names, viz. sheshi (25, 40, 69),
$om (34), toiuPr (9, 22, 109), and Und a rama (93), correspond-
ing, respectively, to the Sanskrit &&'-, soma-, candra-, and
candramas-. It will be convenient to bring together the
various mentions of the moon, and to explain the mystic
references thereto.

As explained in the Note on Yoga ( 9, 13 ff.), starting
from the base of the abdomen, the mtilddhdra, or sacral
plexus, upwards along the spinal cord there are in the
body six cakras, or circles. Over these is the seventh, the
whasrdra, or medulla oblongata ( 19, 27). In this
sahasrara, in mystic parlance, is the moon, and also the
abode of the Parama Siva, or Supreme Siva, the trans-
cendental realm named Kailasa or Akula ( 19). By
blocking up the breath in the nddis, while meditating upon
this sahasr&ra cakra, the Yogi tries to enter into the
highest samadhi) or mental absorption, in which the' ctita>
or organ of thought, is absorbed, microcosmically, into
sahasr,ra, and, macrocosmically, into Parama Siva ( 21).

204 VOCABULARY

This is mitkti) or final release, what we should call
salvation.

The above explains the reference in L. V. 25, in which
the authoress says that by continual suppression of her
vital breaths she had cut her way through the six forests
(i.e. the ca&ras), so that the digit of the moon awoke and
appeared to her.

Similarly, in 34, she refers to a Yogi, in whose katida or
bulb ( 5) the mystic syllable dm is firmly fixed ( 23, 24),
and whom the kumbkaka exercise ( 21) leads to the home
of the moon, or sahasr&ra. He thus obtains tamdtl/ii.

In 69 she says, i I held the steed of my citta, or thought,
by the rein of absence of desire, after much practice having
joined together the vital breaths of the ten nadis. Thereupon
the digit of the moon (in the sahasrara) melted and descended
upon me, and the nothingness of the transient world became
merged in the Nothing/ In the sahasrara is the Void
( 20, 24), in, which the empty world of matter becomes
merged. The ' melting ' of the moon means that the lunar
nectar descends, as explained in the following remarks on
No. 40.

In 40, the authoress advocates spiritual worship, ,in which
the flowers offered to the object of worship (Siva) are
devotion, while over his (mental) image is to stream, not
material water, but the juice of the digit of the moon
(lunar nectar) abiding in the sahasrara at the top of the
vertebral column ( 8, 19 ff.). The nectar passes down
through the susumnd and icld nddis ( 8). The Yogi who is
becoming absorbed into sahasrara drinks this nectar, and
becomes master over himself and the Ma (see M) ( 21).
Thus the expression means that he is to devote himself to
samddhi by absorption into sahasmra.

The same ideas are found in No. 9. She states, f when
the sun disappeared, there came the moonlight ; when the
moon disappeared only cilta, or thought, remained. When
eitfa disappeared nothing was left anywhere '. Just as the
moon is in the highest cakra, so the sun is in the lowest,
the nmlddhdra,) near the perineum ( 5, 9). ' Disappeared'
means ' ceased to be present in consciousness '. That is to
say, the Yogi raises his consciousness from the mul&dhara,
to the sahasrara ( 21), the sphere of absolute being. Here
the sense of difference between his individual spirit and the
Universal Being is sunk in the all-consuming consciousness
of All-Being, All-Light.

In 93, there does not appear to be any reference to the
moon of mysticism. It is stated that the eit, or pure

mcleh] VOCABULARY 205

spirit, is ever new and new, i.e. is ever full of ne^
just as the natural moon is ever new and new, i. e. ]
changes as it waxes and wanes. ^

Similarly, No. 109 presents no difficulty. Lalla states*
that after much searching she came from the inmost recesses
of her soul into the moonlight, meaning either that she
came into the light of true knowledge, or that her citta,
or organ of though t, became absorbed into sahasrara, as
explained above.

There remains No. 22. This is dealt with in the note
on the verse, and what is there said need not be repeated.

Sg. obi. soma-gare, in the home of the moon, or the
'sahasrara (see above), 34

som", adj. equal, alike, 5, 16, Sg. abl sami krata, by equal,
i.e. by thorough, union, 1 ; m. pi. nom. same (m. c. for
4*), 16.

*, f. a bridge, 34, 50, 96 (= K. Pr. 47), 98 ; K. Pr. 46, 47.
PL dat. suman-soth u , an embankment with bridges, i.e. an
embankment broken here and there, the gaps being covered
each by a crazy foot-bridge of only two or three planks
(v. 1. swamana-sgtJ^)^ 98.

nmhasan> m. a throne, 73.

samun> to assemble, come together, unite for some purpose ;
cond. past, pi. 3, samahon^ 95.

soman^ m. jasmine ; ^man^dg^ a jasmine-garden, 68 ; see swa.

suman^ see sum.

semanz, K. Pr. 18 (= L, V. 98), semanz sot&i being translated
'in the middle of the way'. The correct reading is
apparently wman-ttitM or swamana-sot&i, as in L. V, 98.
See &nm and swa.

samsdr, m. the material universe, 35, 37; transmigration,
the weary round of birth and rebirth, which must be
endured by a soul till it obtains salvation, 6. Sg. gen.
$amsdruii u , of which the m. sg, dat. is tamj&dranis, 6. In
modern Ksh. this form of the genitive is reserved for
masculine proper names ; sg. dat. samsdras, 35, 37.

sana, a suffix added to interrogative words to indicate in-
definiteness, as in. kydh-sana, sg. abl. kawa-^ana^ what
kind of, 39.

son, m. gold, 100 = K. Pr. 46.

sond u (f. mnzu), suffix of the genitive of all singular masculine
animate nouns, except proper names. Cf. bond" 1 * M. sg. nom.
gom-sondP wanun^ the word (i.e. instruction) of the teacher,
108 ; sg. dat. (in sense of instr.) daye-wnze prahe, with
the love of God, 105.

sandeh, m. doubt, 7.

206 VOCABULAET? [sanddrun

n^ to make steady, to put the brake on, to block (the
wheels of a carriage), 26 ; to make (oneself) steady, to come
to one's senses after a faint, to become cool and courageous
after being subject to mental agitation, to take courage, 70 ;
conj. part, mndontl^ 26 ; impve. fut. sandorizi, 70.

mngdth, m, collection, bringing together into one place;
sangdth barun, to bring together in this way (used especially
of collecting appliances, materials, &c., before setting to at
any work), 17.

$mn> m. bathing, esp. bathing as a religious exercise (borrowed
froni Sanskrit) ; sndn karun, to bathe as ab., 32, 46. The
Ksh. form of this word is sJirdn.

saiwyd y m. an ascetic, a wandering devotee, 36.

sapadun, conj. 2, to become ; past m. sg. 2, sapoditkA, thou
beeamest, i.e. thou hast become, 86.

sSpanun, conj. 2, to become ; past m. sg. 3, $$jwn u , 5.

spanfain, to touch ; fut. sg. 3, spanhi, 37.

&JT, m. a lake, an ocean, 47 (bis), 50, 78, 79 ; awrlta-mr^
the lake of nectar, i. e. blissful union with the Supreme,
68 ; lhawa-sar> the ocean of existence, 23 ; with sufF. of
indef. art. sarah, a certain lake, 50; sg. dat. saras, 23,
47, 68 ; sg. abl. sari, 47.

$dr\ adj. inundated, flooded, (of a lake) overflowing, 50.

$ire> m. the sun ; sg. dat. *ir&, K. Pr. 201.

*or\ m, in sdr^hol*, a mustard-seed (as an example of
minuteness), 47.

sor u , adj. all. This word almost invariably takes emph. y,
and becomes s6rug\ m. sg. nom. soruy, all that exists,
everything, the totality of creation, 31, 42-3 ; m. pi. nom.
soriy^ all, every one, 95, K. Pr. 150; dat. sdrSmy j&adan, in
all the verses, 84.

Mir, m. a god; zivra-gurui the chief of the gods (see art.
guru} ; sura-guru-ndth) the lord of the chief of the gods.
the Supreme Deity, 5, 65.

wugdl, m. a jackal ; pi. nom. srugdl, 47.

sarun or wrun^ to remember, 50, 91; to call to mind, to
remember affectionately, meditate upon, 45, 65 ; conj. part.
soritli) 65 ; pres. part, with force of pres. sg. 2, sfoan, dost
thou remember?, 91 ; old pres, and fut. sg. 1, with suff. 3rd
]>ers. sg. dat., &zra$, I remember it, 50 (quater) ; 3, sori, 45.

see sar and

, adj. all (borrowed from Sanskrit), in *arwa-gatk> going
to all places, hence, as an epithet of the Deity, All-pervading,
Omnipresent, 64 ; mrwa-foiy, he who made all things, the
All-Creator, 59. The Ksh. word is sSr\

VOCABULARY 207

^ the sun (borrowed from Sanskrit), in stirya-munfM, the
orb, or disk, of the sun, used metaphorically to indicate
the Supreme Deity, 75. The Ksh. word is riri

$ds, 1, or swds (q. v.) m. ashes; sg. abl iota, or (m. c.)
sdsd, 18.

aw, 2, card, a thousand, 34 ; with suff. a, indicating the indef.
art., **, a thousand, i. e. any indefinite great number, 18,
K. Pr. 57 ; sg. abl. sasa-manza^ out of a thousand, K. Pr. 150.

sup, sfatyi or (with emph. y) sotiy, postpos. governing dat.,
with, together with, 57, 92 (bis) ; governing abl., with,
by means of, owing to, 25, 83 ; &*, 57, 92 (bis) ; *ty, 83 ;
wtiy, 25. In 57 it is a preposition, not a postposition.

satl, 1, m. substance, body ; hence, ground for reliance, 41.

9at&, 2, adj. good, 82 ; subst. m. a good man, a virtuous man ;
pi. nom. *at.h, 59, in both cases with alternative rendering
of e seven ' (tath> 3).

$ath> 3, card, seven ; nom. sat A, 59 (see mil, 2), 82 ; abl. *ati,
50 ; saf'i nengi, seven times, on seven occasions, 50. The
seven worlds (lota) are the earth, sky, heaven, middle region,
place of rebirths, mansion of the blest, and abode of truth.
There are also seven lower regions, called, respective!} 7 ,
Atala, Fitala, Sufala, Ratatala, Taldtala^ MaMtala, and
Patdla (see 59). In 82, Lalla states that after going
through six paths (i.e. the six cakras, or the six m&dra*,
see art. tkeh)) she arrived at the tath-m&rg, which means
either the good road* or else * the seventh bfiumi 9 . There
are s&VGnjndna-bhUmi'^oi planes of knowledge; viz.xMSee&a,
or the plane of auspicious desire (for knowledge) ; viedrana 9
or the plane of consideration; tanu~mdna$a> or the plane
of the subtile mind ; saUvdpatti, the plane of acquirement
of good sense ; mms&kti, the plane of intimate acquaintance ;
paddrtha-bhamul) the plane of possession of the (true)
meanings of words ; and, seventhly, turya-gd> or that which
conducts to the turya state, or condition leading to -final
emancipation.

9&&, 4, f. hope ; sg. dat., with emph. y, wtPy, 102, C tatun.

tttti, m. a particular moment of time, an instant, 25; an
instanb of time, a very short time, a moment, 104;
a moment of time, (in astrology) a particular fortunate,
or unfortunate, moment, 3 ; sg. dat. satas, for a moment,
for an instant, 104; sg. abl., with emph. y, t&miy soiiy,
at that very moment, 25.

*W M , m. an embankment, e.g. along a river bank to confine
the channel, and used as a road, 74, 98 = K, Pr. 18 ; sg.
abl. &tki manz (for dat. sothis manz, see maw), 98, K. Pr. 18.
Cf. sum.

208 VOCABULARY

stJidn, m. a place, position, region, 57, 82 ; sg. all. sthdm, 57.
Mir, adj. fixed, firm, permanent, 73.

tatm, conj. 2, to hope; past f. sg. 1, with suff. 3rd pers.
sg. dat. wtPaaSi I hoped in it., 104 Cf. 8atJi> 4.
see *u$ and sotth.

i see su.

a &, m. a tailor; sg. ag. ***'', 103.
s, see satnn.-
, see &*M 4.

#, adj. and pron. own ; self. This is a Sanskrit word, and
occurs only in borrowed Sanskrit compounds. Owing to
the fact that wa following a consonant, and u in borrowed
words, are both, in Kashmiri, pronounced as 0, Lallfi
frequently makes use of this to effect double meaning.
Thus: (28) M&a-para-vt&dr, discrimination on the Self and
on the Supreme, or on the Supreme, who is the Self.
One of these two is here certainly the correct translation ;
but the words are also capable of being taken as so-para-
re&ar (i.e. u-pam-vicara\ discrimination on Him who is
excellently Supreme; (36) wa-darskem-myfiP*) union with
the Self (i.e. God) (brought about by) visiting (holy places),
or so-dars&iSna-wyiU 1 *, union brought about by the excellent
visiting (of holy places) ; (68) swa-man-Ug, the garden of
one's own heart, or, taking soman as equivalent to the
Persian suman, soman-ldg means a jasmine-garden ' ; (98
= K. Pr. 18); swa-mam-otli u , the embankment of (the
illusions of) one's own mind, or sumcM-sot/t^ an embank-
ment with crazy bridges (see sum) ; (71, 79) $wa-v%tir,
discrimination exercised as regards the Self, or so-ve&dr,
the good discrimination. Swa-riipfi, m. own form, i.e. the
nature of anything, identity with ; thus, (15) kha-swarupJt ,
He who is identical with, or consists of, absolute vacuity,
the impersonal Supreme Deity; (67) niza-swaruph, the
nature of what is one's own, the nature of Self.

#ow u , adj. plenteous, abounding (of a crop), 66.

savilcas, m. that which has wide expansion, the total expanse
of creation, the visible creation, 1.

mom\ m. a lord, one who is master or owner ; shen swom\ the
owner of the six (attributes of the Deity), 13, see stieL

mwun, to cause to sleep, to put to sleep, to lay to sleep ; conj.
part, wvtik) K. Pr. 57.

swar, m. heaven ; M$r 9 Ihuwah, mar, the earth, the atmosphere,
and heaven, i.e. the whole visible universe, 9.

*warg 9 m. heaven ; sg. dat, warga* 80)"*, a possessor of heaven,
62.

h, see swa*

VOCABULARY 209

two* or sas, 1 (q.v.), m. ashes, 43.

. one's owu self; hence, the Self, recognized as

^. , ,

identical with the Supreme ; sg. dat. matmas, to the
Supreme Self, 61; dSntar-tmfma, Sankara (i.e. &va)
recognized as one with Self, 39, 40.

*myam, oneself (borrowed from Sanskrit), 33.

soy, suy> see tiL

yvndP, m. the river Sindh, one of the three principal rivers of
Kashmir. Its waters are sacred. mnd u -zal, pi. the waters
of the Sindh, 81.

WE*, fuller's earth, 103,

ta, 1, conj. and, 3, 4, 13, 17, 20, 22, 24, 29, 31, 35 (bis), 37,
39, 41, 44, 48, 52, 56-7, 78-9, 89, 90-1, 94-5, 101-2-3;
K. ft. 18 (bis), 102 (bis) ; na ta, and not, nor, 96-7 ; K. Pr.
47, 102 ; cf. na ta under to, 2 ; na . . . na . . . to, not . . .
nor . . . nor, 15. A strengthened form of this word is
%1, q.v.

to, 2, conj. then, and then, and next, thereupon (= Hindi to)
(in this sense often scarcely distinguishable from ta, 1),
1, 4, 19, 23, 43, 47, 68, 82, 104 ; then, and then, thereafter,
but, 98 ; then, so, accordingly, therefore, 21, 30, 33, 42, 46,
51-2, 54, 70, 80-1, 89, 99 (bis), 100; K. Pr. 46 (quater);
then, so that, 66; then, and yet, nevertheless, 60; then,
used to indicate the apodosis of a conditional or quasi-
conditional, sentence, 2, 27, 55, 87, or the antecedent clause
of a relative clause, 61 ; often (like the Hindi to) colouring
a whole sentence, but itself hardly translatable, I wonder if,
well then, verily, &c., according to the context, 9, 19, 92 ;
na ta (= Hindi naJii to), otherwise, or else,' 19, 71 ; K. Pr.
150 ; cf. na to under ta, 1. A strengthened form of this
word is toy, 2, q.v.

ti, conj. (= Hindi Wn) also, 48, 106 ; K. Pr. 18 ; even, 32, 48 ;
keh ti nd, nothing at all, 9, 11 ; keh ti no, nothing at all, 90 ;
ka&h ti no satJf, no substance at all, 41 ; kSh ti na JcMth, no
harm at all, 77 ; to ti (Hindi tau b/n), even then, 29.

to, = ta, 2, in to ti (Hindi tau bhl), even then, 29.

1M\ see t6r u .

tadqy, adv. then only, then and not till then, 77.

tagun, conj. 2, to be known how to be done, to be possible.
This verb is used as a potential verb, the ability always
being mental, not physical (cf. the Sanskrit tajjnana-, by
which pandits translate this word) ; tik y&$ tagi, to whom
that is possible, i.e. he who knows how to do that, 24;
tih yes karun tagi, to whom the doing that is possible, he
who knows how to do that, 37. If it is desired to
p

210 VOCABULARY [*

indicate physical possibility the verb Jiekm (q.v.) must be
used.

tih, pronoun of the third person, he, 5, 6, 8, 20, 24, 27,
31 (his), 33-4, 37 (bis), 43 (bis), 65, 71-2, 76, 105; she;
it, 70 ; K. Pr.46 (bis) ; substantival demonstrative pronoun
that, 20-1, 37, 57 (bis), 69, 75, 90, 94, 107 ; adjectival
demonstrative pronoun, 3, 15, 25, 28 (bis), 34, 47, 52 (bis),
77, 81, 104; sometimes used substantively, but treated
as an adjective (see below), 2, 12-13, 58 (bis), 94.

This pronoun is either animate or inanimate, and the
animate forms may be either masculine or feminine. The
inanimate forms are of common gender. Moreover, as seen
above, there is a cross-division, according as it is used
substantively or adjectivally. "We shall consider the sub-
btantival forms first.

As an animate substantival pronoun, the following forms
occur :

masc. sg. nom. suit, he, 8, 24, 31, 33; with emph. y,
*ay, he only, he verily, 31, 34, 37.

dat. ta* 9 to him, 20, 34, 37, 105 ; with emph. *, ids*,
to him only, 65.

gen. (m. sg. nom.) ta&onft* ; with emph. y^ tasonduy, his
only, 72. t

ag. tarn*) Ly him ; with emph. y, tamiy, by him alone, by
him verily, 5, 43 (bis).

pi. nom. and ace. tim, they, 6 ; them, 76 : with emph. y,
timay, they alone, 27.

gen.'(m. sg. nom.) tikond*, their, 71.

There is no occurrence of the feminine pronoun used
substantively in the songs.

As an inanimate substantival pronoun, we have the
following :

sg. nom. and ace. ti\ it, that, 24, 37, 70, 107 ; with
emph. y t tiy, 20, 21.

dat. tatk, to it, K. Pr. 46 (bis).

abl. tawfy by that; used adverbially to mean 'for that
reason*, 'on that account ; , f therefore*, 57 (bis) ; with
emph. y, taway, therefore, 69, 90, 94 ; by that means, 75.

pi. nom, ; with emph. y, tima^ those very, 13.

Used as an animate pronominal adjective, the following
forms occur. They are the same as the corresponding
substantival forms :

m. sg. nom,, with emph. y, my, that very (god), 15.

pi. nom. tim, those (rams), 77.

sg. noin. wh ; with emph. y t soy s (I am) only that
(Lai), 81.

ti&tmfr] VOCABULARY 211

When used as an inanimate pronominal adjective, the
substantival forms tih and tiy of the nominative are not
used, the animate substantival forms (m. -snh, $uy; f. soh<
soy) being used instead. On the other hand, the inanimate
substantival form of the dative, tath, is also used as an
adjective. Thus:

m. sg. nom. *nh, that (wine), 104 ; with emph. y, suy,
that very (time) 3, (spell) 34.

dat. tath, in that (lake), 47.

abl, tami\ with emph. y, tamiy, at that very (time),
25.

pi. ace. tim, those (foods), 28 ; those (garments), 28.

f. sg. nom. %, that very (stone), 52 (bis).

As regards the use of the substantival forms of this
pronoun, as semi-adjectives, this consists in the use of
suh, sny, s$Ji, or soy, instead of till or tiy, when referring
to something inanimate. This occurs :

(1) When the substantival pronoun is the antecedent
to an adjectival relative pronoun. The antecedent, although
a substantive, is then treated also as an adjective. Thus :
yih yih karm koruwi, $uh ar&m, whatever act I performed,
that was worshipping (God), 58. Here the relative yih yih,
whatever, is an adjective, and therefore suh (the adjectival
form of the antecedent) is used, and not tih, the sub-
stantival form. On the other hand, if the relative is
inanimate and substantival, the inanimate substantival
form, tih, is used for the antecedent. Thus, in the next
line of the same verse, we have yih wftbbonm, tiy manth a r,
what I uttered, that verily was a mystic invocation.

(2) In a copulative sentence, when the subject is a
pronoun, this, although substantival, is treated as an
adjective in agreement with the complement. Thus, (2) suy
(not tiy) wopadesli) that alone is the instruction ; (12) &uy (not
tiy) ehtiyjrtmi, that alone is (true) knowledge ; (58) my yih
tanth a r, that alone is this scripture ; (94) wy gam wdkh,
that became the (mystic) word.

tMj* 1 , f. (this word is a feminine diminutive of thai), a small
place; esp. a small sacred cella or small wooden temple,
in which an image of a god and other appurtenances of
worship are kept ; sg. nom. (m. c.) thajl, 33.

thai, m. a place *, sg. abl. thali thali, in every place, in every
land, 53.

thamawun, to cause to stop, to stop, to prevent going on ;
inf. sg, nom. thamawun, 38.

than, m. a place; al-thtin, 60, see al\ sg. dat. -thanas, 60.

'tthondP, see tiL

p 2

212 VOCABULARY \ihapk

Ji) f. the act of grasping or taking hold of ; karuffi, to
grasp, 4.
fftar, f. the back ; ddrufiP, to offer the back, to place the

back at one's disposal (of a riding animal), 88.
tMi*> f. a bush, a shrub, 96 = K. Pr. 47.
taA&Mar, m. a revenue collector, a tax-gatherer (looked upon

as inevitable and merciless), K. Pr. 56.
tJtdwun, to put, to place, 70 ; dur u thdwwi> to put far off,
to put away, 27 ; km t&dww, to place the ear, to give heed,
attend, listen (to), 91; conj. part, fhomtl^ 27; impve. sg. 2,
tMv, 91 ; impve. fut thov^ 70.
t&k u , m. an earthen drinking vessel, an earthen goblet; pi.

dat, taken, 106,

id, m. the lowest part or bottom of anything; bM-tal, the
surface of the earth, the whole earth as opposed to the
sky, 22, 42 ; lit/on 11 id, to take below (oneself), to put
beneath one's feet, (of an elephant) to crush beneath the
feet, K. Pr. 150.

fel, m. sesame seed (used in offerings to a god), 45.
Mli, adv. then, 49, 82 (in both cases the correlative of yili,

when).

fvl, m. weight, the weight of anything, 23 ; sg. abl. tuli tolm,
_ to weigh by weight, to weigh in the balance, 23.
//, m. cotton-wool ; nla-pwyokl^ a bed (the pillows of which

are stuffed) with cotton, a luxurious bed, 73.
fula, in tnU-kuf, m, the beam or standard of a large weigh-
ing balance ; hence, such a balance ; sg. abl. -koti, (weighing)
in a scales, 23.
/#, (of water in a receptacle) to leak or ooze away ; old

pres., sg. 3, with emph. y, tehy, 78-9.
tohn, to weigh ; past part. m. sg. t&/ u , 23.
tntun, to raise, lift; bam tulm> to raise the skin, to raise
weals (with a whip), 101 ; kadam Saluu, to raise the step,
to step out, walk alertly, 99 = K. Pr. 46; parwdz tulun,
to raise flight, to take to oneself wings and fly, 99 =
K. Pr. 46. J

^Impve. sg. 2, tul, 99 (bis) = K. Pr. 46 (bis) ; past part.,
with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag. and 3rd pers. sg. dat., tiiPmat,
Braised his (skin), 101.

tdlaV) m. the ceiling of a room or house; tcSav*rdza<Jon tt t
? the plastering of the ceiling of a room or house, 85 ;
but^ the meaning of razaddft* (q. v.) is very doubtful.
ache lagane tdlav, to attach the eyes to the ceiling, to turn
up the eyes (in death), K. Pr. 102.

tarn, m. darkness, spiritual darkness; sg. abl. tama-#3M } the
morass of spiritual darkness, 74.

VeCABULARY 213

fdm, 1, suffix, converting an interrogative into an indefinite
pronoun, as in km-tam^ some one or other, kydk-tdm^ some-
thing or other, both in 86.
tdm, 2, postpos. up to, as far as, governing dat. ; hiflis-tdm.

(from the navel) up to Adam's apple, 57.
1ami) tdm\ tin, famiy, famiy> timqy, see tiL
tan, f, the body, 93 ; sg. dat. iane (m. c. for tani\ 76.
fana, adv. since then, from that moment, 83, 93.
htitg, m. a pear (the fruit) ; pi. nom. fang^ 92.
tanth a i\ m. the sacred books of the Saiva religion, the tantra,

11, 58.

tqph, m. austerities, esp. religious austerities, 62.
tdpun, to heat, cause to be hot, (of the sun) to shine upon ;
pol. impve. sg. 3, topHan^ let him shine, i. e. does he not
shine?, 53 (bis).

tapaty, m. asceticism; sg. abl, with emph, y, tapariy, 35.
tar, m. a means for leading a person across (a river or the
like), 96, 106 ; K. Pr. 46, 47 : a fee paid to a ferryman,
ndwa-tar, a ferry -fee, 98 =K. Pr. 18 ; a name for the sacred
syllable dm (see andhath), as that which crosses the soul
over the sea of existence, 72 ; sg. dat. tarns, 98 =K. Pr. 18 ;
sg. gen. tandP, 72 ; tar dyuu,*, to* pass a person across
(a river, &c.) 3 106.

for, adv. there ; with emph. *, for y, /*, there only, 19, 61.
toi* or tod u , m, the bolt (of a door) ; pi nom. Mr* or tod\ 48.
1ur\ see tdr,

tap, f. cold, coldness, 16, 28; sg. ag. t$ri, 16.
^ m. a pond, a lake, 84.
g*, m. a horse, 26, 69.

&"&, card, three, 16, 75 ; trayi nengi, adv. three times, 50.
The modern form of this word is trek or trtt. There are
three imparities (mala) of the soul, which impede its final
release (75). These are called dnava, maylya, and karma.
The first, dnaea, is the state or character of the soul deeming
itself to be finite (the soul being looked upon as a very
minute entity, anu\ the second, wdflya, is that born of cosmic
illusion, or the belief that one thing is different from ano-
ther, and the third, karwa, is the impurity that results from
action or < works ' (which may be good or bad). See Note
on Yoga, 24.
t a run u , adj. cool, cold, 56, 57.
t&wn, to become cold, (of water) to freeze; old pres. sg. 5,

tire (for rffin), 16.

l a randwun,to make cold, to extinguish (a fire) ; inf. Pranwwn,**.
trofrun, to shut (a door) ; past part. m. pi., with suff, 1st pers.
'sg. ag. 5 trojfirim, I closed (the doors), 101.

214 VOCABULARY

trnpti, f. contentment, satisfaction, 12.

fresh, i thirst, 37.

tl) a th, m. a sacred bafching-plaee, a place of pilgrimage, 36, 46 ;

K. Pr. 201 (ter) ; pi. dat. twthan, 46 ; prathuy ftrihan, (going)

to every holy place, going from one holy place to another, 36.
f rawing to abandon, leave behind, K. Pr. 57; to abandon,

discard, give up (sin, &c.), 27, 30; K. Pr. 46 (bis); to

abandon, let loose, lose control of, 70, 88 ; (of a road) to leave

(it, after passing along it), hence, to traverse completely, 82 ;

ddl* trdwdn\ to throw oat the skirt from the body, i.e. to sit

with bended knees, 49.

Conj. part, tromtli, 70, 82 ; K. Pr. 57 ; impve. sg. 2, trdv,

30 ; K. Pr. 46 ; with suff. 3rd pers. sg. ace., frawun, 88 ;

fut. sg. 2, trawakh, EL Pr. 46 ; past part. m. pi., with sufT.

1st pers. sg. ag. and 3rd pers. sg. dat., tro^mas, 49 ; f. sg.

tow*, 27.
tray i, see ti a h<
to, tasonduy, see tiL
tati, adv. there, 70, 88 ; m. c. fate, there, in those circumstances,

41 ; with ernph. y> tally, even there, there and then, 104 ;

1at\ even there, at that very place, 48, 49, 68 j with emph. y,

tally, at that very place, at the same place, 51.
to1, 1, adj. hot, 56, 57.

totv, 2, adv. there, K. Pr. 102 (bis) ; with emph. y, totuy, 47.
1aih, see HI.
tiffui, adv. so, in that manner ; with emph. y, tithay . . . yltJia^

so ... as, 100.

/#!?#, to be reduced to misery ; past, f. sg. 1, tot^ 13.
1attwa> m. (in Saiva philosophy) (in the plural) the fundamental

and general factors of which the universe consists, see

Kashmir SJiamm> p. 47; tattwa-vyod^ one who knows and

understands the taUwas, 20.
tawa, taway, see tiL
1 a y^ 1, a woman who spins a very fine kind of thread,

a delicate spinner ; sg. ag. i a ^e, 102.
i a y, 2, f. very fine thread ; pi. nom. t*yt> 102.
%, see tih.
toy, 1, conj. and, 5, 14, 40, 51, 62, 86. This is a strengthened

form of fa, 1, q.v.
/<?/, 2, conj. then, and then, thereafter, thereupon, 9 (ter),

11 (ter), 16; then, therefore, 'accordingly, 24, 53; then,

introducing the apodosis of a conditional sentence, 12.

This is a strengthened form of fa, 2, q.v.
fytigvn, to let go, let loose; hence, (of a sword), to wield, to

draw ; past part. f. sg. tyqp (for tyof\ 62,
, m. a blister, 108. See rdwun.

! VOCABULARY 215

pron. adj. and adv. of that kind, such, 66; with
emph. y, tyuthuy (as correl. x>f yuUiuy\ such, 55 (adj.) ; so,
64 (adv.) ; m. pi. nom., with emph.^, titty, 92 (adj.).
tezun, to abandon ; past part. m. pi. *&*, 55.

ticlanand, m. pure spirit (4Si, 1, = Skr. c^) and joy

sg. dat. tiddnandat, 6,,

4^, pron. of the second person, thou, 7 (ter), 13, 44 (bis), 59, 70,

91 ; with emph. y, 4^, thou alone, 42 (quinquies), 109 (ter).

Sg. dat. 42, 18 (to thee, belonging to thee), 44 (bis), 56,
72; abed 43 & w3, no distinction between thee and me, 13.
Obsolete form of sg. dat. fdye-ven, distinct (different) from
thee, 13.

sg. ag. 42 gol u (modern Ksh. would have 62 goluth), thou
destroyedst, 64.

sg. gen. (f. sg. nom.) cyoffi iinfb, thought (care) for thee
(objective genitive), 72; (f. sg. dat.) cyafU, K. Pr. 102.

pi. nom. M\ ye, 91.

Madm or tkadim, to search, to wander about searching, 3, 48 ;
to search for, seek, 44, 60, 99, 100; K. Pr. 46 ; pres. part.
AUddati, 3, 44, 60 ; Mtddan, 48 ; impve. sg. 2, with sufT. 3rd
pers. sg, ace. Wiachn, 99, 100 ; K. Pr. 46.

, m. unrestrained conduct (in modern language used with
reference to a person who, having obtained some post of
authority, acts without self-restraint, and without fear of the
consequences). In L. V. 44 it means the experiencing of
unrestrained rapture ; &wh dyutum, I gave (to thee and to
myself) the unrestrained rapture (of perfect union).
anclun^ to pass over, traverse ; fut. sg. 3, &ter/e, 26.

conj. 2, to become cut; hence, to be cut away from
a person, to be torn away from; fut. sg. 3, with suff.
1st pers. sg. dat., and negative interrogative, &/ienem-nd
prahi will not love (of the world) be cut away from me
(i.e. be torn from my heart), 83.

unm, to throw, but used in many idiomatic phrases. Thus,
in K. Pr, 102, nofi khumW) to throw (a halter) on to the
neck. Past part. f. sg., with suif, 2nd pers. sg. ag. and
1st pers. sg. dat. 'kJivnHham^ thou castedst for me (Le. in
my presence) (a feminine thing), K. Pr. 102.
op&) f. silence, esp. silent meditation ; sg. ag. (instr.) 4^o/?/,
by silent meditation, 2 ; tk&pi-mantra, by the mystic formula
of silence, i.e. the azapa (Skr. ajapa) mantra, which is not
uttered, but which consists only in a number of exhalations
and inhalations, 40. CLprda, 2.
, adj. hidden, concealed, secret, 60.
) to winnow (in a sieve) ; hence, met., to throw up into

216 VOCABULARY [*%

the air, to cast abroad, to make public, 4; past part. m. sg.,

with sufF. 1st pers. sg. ag., tfiotum, 4.
&%, f. shade, K. Pr. 102; a shadow, the shadow cast by

anything, 67.
fehezun, to become extinguished, (of daylight) to fade away,

become extinct ; fut. sg. 3, khezi, 22.
&akh a r, m. a circle; hence, a circle of individuals, a specific

group of individuals, see lama, ; sg. abL (in composition),

tefca, 63.

&fo, in kala-kitia, restless mind ! 72.
&aluti 9 conj. 2, to flee, to run away, to depart to a distance ;

Jieth tialun, having taken to run away, to run away with

(as a thief), 86 (bis).
Fut. sg. 3, tali, 28 ; with suff. 3rd pers. sg. dat, tally,

will flee from thee, 75 ; past m. sg, 3, with suff. 1st pers.

sg. dat., tohm, fled from me, 31 ; with suff. 2nd pers. sg.

dat, kohiy kttJi, ran away with from thee, 86 (bis) ; f. sg. 3,

tajl (for %'), 33.
telw, to force into, to cause forcibly to enter ; hence, to train

with much practice, to exercise thoroughly, to train with

vigorous practice ; conj. part. &&IM, 69.
tombun, to pierce, bore ; conj. part, tombitk, 75.
tumor, m. a fly-whisk, the tail of the Bos gmnniens, one of

the insignia of royalty, 73.
tawll, adj. voc. f. hasty woman, 77.
tandan, m. sandal, 42.
tqnd a r, m. the moon, 9 ; sg. ag, tand d r\ 22 ; loc., with emph.^,

tand a riy, (I came) into the moonlight, 109. Regarding the

mystic references to the moon in these poems, see art. sow.
t(tnd a rama, m. the moon, 93. See som for the meaning of this

, to recognize ; to recognize as such-and-such, to under-
stand a thing to be (such-and-such), 28 ; hence, to accept
when seen, to experience, gain the experience of anything, 6 ;
to recognize as authoritative, to meditate upon (instruction
given), 51-4, 80 ; impve. sg. 2 ten, 51-4, 80 ; pol. impve.
sg. 2, with suff. 3rd pers. sg. ace., imtan, recognize it, 28 ;
past part. m. sg. tyun u 3 6.

tenth) f. care, B anxiety ; cyoftf* Unth taran, he cares for thee, 72.

tir, f. an apricot ; pi. dat. tiran-*S&, together with apricots, 92.

**/, m. a thief, 101 ; pi. nom. id., 43.

tarmun, m. that which is made of leather, the human skin ;
used met. for the human body, 66.

tarm, to go forward, progress, walk ; conj. part, taritl (1), 38.

tratf, m. the noise caused by falling from a height on to the
earth or into water, crash, flop 5 hence, compared to the fall

VOCABULARY 217

itself, close union ; sg. abl. mm fratd (m. c. for irata)> in
intimate union, 1.

tomtit, 2, (for 1, see &WH), m. a mode of action, conduct, 38.^
fora&zr, m. that which is movable and that which is
immovable, the animate and the inanimate, i.e. the whole
universe, 16.

ttrt, 1, m. the pure spirit, the soul (the Skr. rit, to be carefully
distinguished from &&//, 2, or bitt, the organ of thought),
76, 93.

tttf, 2, m. i.q. &U, the organ of thought, the mind, intellect
(the Skr. atta), 9,' 11 (bis), 34, 70, 87 ; sg. dat. tUa* kmn> to
impress upon the mind, 34 ; tXta* peyiy, it will fall into thy
mind, it will come to thy memory, 87.
kfitJi u > m. an apple ; pi. nom. butti 1 , 92.
&ttun, to cut, to tear, 66; to cut down, to cut one's way
(through a forest), 25 ; to cut away, or tear away anything
from anything, 80; tatiik dyun\ to cut to pieces, to cut up,
104 ; batith zdnun, to know how to cut, 80 ; in 84,^ eaug
gom toititk appears to mean i my claw has become cut , but
the passage is verv obscure ; conj. part. &utit/i : 25, 66, 80,
84,104.

4$tt, 1, m. remembering, calling to mind ; esp., in a religious
sense, calling to mind and realizing (the nature of the
Supreme and the Self)'; sg. obi. (in composition) tetana-
dana-wakkur, (feeding with) the grain and cates of this
realization, 77 ; titani wagi, with the bridle of this realiza-
tion, 26. .
tikun, 2, m., i. q. &ztay, q. v. ; sg. obi. (in composition) Mana-
div, Siva in his quality of Supreme Spirit, as opposed to
his more material manifestations, 79.
toiitany, m. consciousness ; (in Saiva mysticism) the Supreme
Consciousness, the Supreme Experiencing Principle, a name
of the Supreme (see Kashmir Bhaivmi, p. 42) ; sg. obi.
(in composition), &aitanye-rav y the sun of the Supreme
Consciousness, 16. ^
Mt, m. the organ of thought, mind, intellect, i. q. &w, 2 3 q.v.
To be carefully distinguished from MM, 1, the pure spirit ;
gff. obi. 4fe, 22 ; titfolurog*, the steed of the intellect, 26,
69; voc. titt&t mind!, 28, 36, 67; tafaiOla, restless
mind!, 72.
tyunP, see i
^ see <

m. conj. or, 64 ; m . . . m, either ... or, whether . . . or, 8.
wudun, to see, 3, 48, 68, 83 (bis); to see, look at, inspect,
look into, search, 98; fut. pass. part, melt*

218 VOCABULARY

I began to look for him, 48 ; past part. m. sg., with suffi

1st pers. sg. ag., rnduw, I saw, &e,, 3, 68, 83 (bis), 98

(=K. Pr. 18).
wudP) adj. awake, not asleep; m. pi. nom,, with emph. ^,

wudiy, 32 ; pi. dat. wuelen> 32.

wadal, interchange ; adal fa wadal, confusion, K. Pr. 102.
wadwn, to weep, lament; fut. sg. 1, with sutf. 2nd pers. sg.

dat. waday, I will weep for thee, 67.
wuchn, conj. 2, to awake from sleep ; met. to come forth from

obscurity, to become actively manifest ; past f. sg. 3, with

suff. 1st pers. sg. dat., wits u i t it (fern.) became manifest to

me, 25. Cf. wuwn.

wodnr, m. the womb; sg. dat. wochras, 51.
vidts, see v$od u .
wag, f. a horse's bridle ; sg. abl. wagi annn, to bring by the

bridle or to the bridle, to bring under subjection, 37 ; vagi

tyon l \ to take (a horse) by the bridle, 69 ; wagi ratun> to

hold (a horse) by the bridle, 26.
regafotn, to melt, deliquesce ; conj. part. vegalUJi^ 69.
wat, interj. of astonishment and admiration, 68.
?'/*, see vywh*.
wuhl, f. coal that has been set alight, burning coal, red-hot

coal, 82.
wdkPr*-wafi a ras 9 adv. throughout the whole year, from year's

eod to year's end, 46.
waftawitn u y nom. ag. (of a river) flowing, in full flood ; f, sg.

nom., with emph. y, waJiawtiffiy, 96 ; dat. waJiawam (m. c.

for -wanfy, 57.
wakh, m, voice, the power of expression by word, in Saiva

philosophy one of the five karw&udriyaS) or faculties, or

powers, of action, 2 ; a word, wa&h ta wa&un, a word and

a sentence, esp. the mystic formula confided to a disciple by

his preceptor, a guiding principle, 94 ; in 104, wakk is the

equivalent of the Skr. vakya, i.e. Lalla's sayings (Lalld-

vdlyaw), or the verses composed and recited by her.
wakhnn^ m. a story, a tale, 84.

wakhuf) m. a cake offered in sacrifice, a sacrificial cake, 10, 77.
tcftkh-thun, m. scraping out and emptying a pot with a ladle or

spoon, taking out the food to the last scraps, 95.
rika*> m. expansion, wide extent; *a-vika*t that which has

wide expanse, the total expanse of creation, the visible

creation, 1.
nkamn y to become widely expanded, to widen out and extend

to some distant limit ; fut. sg. 3, vikdse (m. e. for mkan\ 22.
wdl, m. a hair of the head ; sg. abl. mast-wdla, (to bind) with

a single hair of the head, 24.

*8pati*X\ VOCABULARY 219

m. a suffix forming nouns of agency or possession, as in

grata-wol u , a miller, from grata, a mil], 86. Cf. won*, 2.

htn (causal of wasun, q.v.), to cause to descend, to bring

down ; past part. m. sg., with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag., woluw,

I brought down, 104.

whig*, f. the heart (as the seat of the affections), 25.
uolasun, to rejoice; henee, to rejoice in any business, to be

zealously engaged in it; old pres. sg. 3, with suff. 3rd pers.

sg. dat, wolases, he is zealously engaged in it, 14.
fflwww, f. age, a man's life ; sg. gen. (f. sg. nom.) wumri-fciinz",

K. Pr. 56.
vimarsfi, m. consideration, reflection, examination, discussion ;

sg. abl. mmartK&t 15, or (m. c. vimars&d), 16.
wan, m. a forest ; pi. nom. w&n^ 25 ; wan-Mv, a forest-crow,

28 ; wan-was, abode in a forest, the life of a hermit, 55, 64.
irdn, m. a shop; pi. dat. mww, K. ,Pr. 102; IduW-wdn,

a weaver's workshop (sg. abl. -warn), 102.
un (13) or vend (12), postpos. without, free from, 12 ; apart

from, distinct from, 13.

it'dn u , 1, m. a shopkeeper ; sg. dat. wonis, JL Pr. 20.
w&i u , 2, m. a suffix forming nouns of agency or possession,

i. q. wtfl u , q. v. ; as in shnda-wott^^ a hearer, a person who

can hear, ie. who is not at all deaf, 20; brama-w6n U )

a wanderer, one who roams about, 26 ; prutAi-w6H, u 9 of or

belonging to the earth, 52 ; sg, dat. sMba-wonis^ to (a mill)

which possesses beauty, i.e. which is adorned, 52.
wonda, m. a man's inner feelings and thoughts, (as the seat of

the feelings and thoughts) the heart or soul; sg. dat.

wondas, 72 ; loc. wfadi, 49.
rSndm, to get; hence, to take to, have recourse to (some

course of conduct or the like), 64 ; to look upon as, consider

as, 43; impve. pi. 2, vfadiv, 64 (bis); past part. m. sg.,

with suff. 3rd pers. sg. ag., vyondun, 43.
wanm, 1, to say, 89, 94; to say a thing is so-and-so, to

call a thing by such-and-such a name, 15 ; past. part. m. sg.

00tt tt 3 15 ; with suff. bt pers. sg. ag., womm, 89 ; with sufF.

3rd pers. sg. ag. and 1st pers. sg. dat,, woH u uam t he said

to me, 94.

^ 2, m, a speech, a thing said, a saying, 108 ; (properly

inf. or verbal noun of wanun^ 1).

&) adv. now, even now, at this very time, 99 (bis),

(= K. Pr. 46).

paduU) conj. 2, to come into being, be produced ; pres. part.

in sense of pres. pi. 3, wopaddn, 56.

jpadesh) m. instruction ; esp. true instruction, right teaching,

1, 2, 51-4, 66, 80.

220 VOCABULARY \vtpkoP

vephol u > adj. fruitless, bearing no, or imperfect, fruit, 55.
war, m. the right, or propitious, time (for anything); dew*

war, the propitious moment of the day (for giving a child) ;

(Thou, i.e. God, didst not know) this moment (in respect to

some people), i.e. hast given them no children, K, Pr. 102.
uor u , f. a garden ; hdka-wor u , a vegetable-garden, 63 ; with

emph. y> wor^y, only a garden, nothing but a garden, i.e.

the bare ground with no produce on it, 63.
wur<Uwa~gaman 9 m. the act of going upwards, ascending into

the sky, 38.

war a n, m. colour, hue, 15.
warm, m. Name of the god of the waters, Varuna ; hence.

met., water generally, 53.
was, m. an abode, 55 ; was fiyon u 9 to take up an abode ; with

suff. of indef. art., warn hyon u > 18; loan-wd^ abode in a

forest, the life of a hermit, 55, 64 ; atka-wds, hand-grasping,

92 ; see atka.
m#&om u 9 adj. uneven; hence, (of a net) tangled, complicated;

m. sg. dat. vis ft em is, 6.
vixfi&f&j m. a special kind, a speciality; hence, vuhesk Jcarwk

to perform a speciality, to act perfectly in some particular

character, 54.

vU/tfy, m. the scene of action, ground of action, basis, 71.
waswi 9 conj. 2, to descend ; past f. sg. 3, with suff. Iht pers.

sg. dat., im&APm, it descended to me, 69. The causal of

this verb is wdlim 9 q. v.
v&mr2un 9 to take one's leave, to depart; conj. part, vesarzith

kefk, having departed, 9.
wot*, for wath, in sJfwot*, q. v.
walk, f. a road, way, path, 41 ; sg. abl. wate (or watt),

(going, &c.) by a road, 41, 98 (bis) (= K. Pr. 18) ; wata-got\

adj. going along a road, going by way of, 57 ; wata-nSth*

(pi. nom. -no&$) 9 a road-destroyer, a highway robber, 43.
watk 9 m. a round stone ; with indef. art., watd 9 17 (bis).
wdtk 9 m. joining together, construction ; hence, the material

of which a thing is constructed, 17.
vM 9 f. the river Jihlam (in Skr. Titastd), the principal river

of Kashmir, K. Pr. 102 (where it is used as a symbol of

prosperity, owing to the fruitful crops produced by its

waters).
w$tkun 9 conj. 2, to rise, arise; impve. sg. 2, w8t& 9 10, 75;

conj. part, wothith^ 105; past m. sg. 3 wotku (m. c. for

woth u \ 1; fayi wotkun, to rise to absorption, to become

dissolved into nothingness, 1.

itwtAun 9 to twist (rope) ; pres. m. sg. 2, ckukk wtitMn 9 107.
watun 9 to unite; tatun watun, to cut and unite, to separate

VOCABULARY 221

and bind together ; conj. part, batith watitJi zdnm, to know

now to separate and to unite, 80.
watun, conj. 2, to arrive, come (to) ; past m. sg, 3, with suff.

1st pers. sg. gen., wftum, arrived to my (understanding),

60 ; pi. 3, toot*, 51 ; f. sg. 1, wo&s, 60, 82.
wafari, adv. continually, without cessation, 78, 79.
wottom U ) adj. excellent, first-rate ; wtittom* wottom* des^ various

lands, each of which is excellent, 53,
wU&APm, see wasun.

iva&un, m, a saying, a sentence of instruction, 94 (bis).
rUun, conj. 2, to fit into ; fut. sg. 3, with emph. /, vti&iy, 47.
vS&dr, m. judging, meditating upon and deciding about

anything, discriminating about anything, 28-9, 71, 79;

sg. dat. ve&dras, 28; abl. ve&dra, 71, 79.
vtibdruu, to meditate upon, discriminate concerning anything ;

impve. sg. 2, with suff. 3rd pers. sg. ace., vekdrun, meditate

on it, 30.
wtit&arun, to utter, pronounce ; past part, m. sg., with suff.

1st pers. sg. ag., wofaorum, 58.
fodv, m. the wind, 24, 83; the vital airs circulating in the

nddis (see nadi), a synonym of jprd t 2, q. v., 69; sg. abl.

wdwa, 83 ; pi. nom. wav, 69.
vewafiori, adj. occupied, busy, 65 (where it may mean either

' occupied in worldly pursuits ', or else c occupied in religious

practices ').
wawm, to sow ; 2 past part. m. sg., with suff. 2nd pers. sg. ag.,

wcwyoth, 66.
r>yod u , adj. known, 56 ; , one who knows, as in tattwa-vyod*,

one who knows and understands the fatfaoa* (see taUwa), 20 ;

m. sg. dat. -vidis, 20.
tf , m. sudden change from one condition to another ; hence,

the sudden ' sport ' (Md) of the Divinity, by; which He

manifests Himself in creation; pi. nom. vitf, 109. In

modern Ksh. this word is M.
vi/onffan, see vendm.
was, m. a cook ; sg. dat. wdzat, 83.
wiuPm, see wuchm.
wmun, conj. 2, i.q. rndw, q. v., to awake from sleep; to come

forth from obscurity, to become actively manifest ; fut. sg. 3,

wuze (m. c. for wuzi), 39, 40.
wuzawyW) to awaken (another) from sleep ; past part. m. sg.,

with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag., wwanowm, 105.

ye, interj. Q\,yegord, teacher!, 56.
yid (18), ywP (23, 24), yod^wamy (10) or yHHoay (64),
conj. if.

222 VOCABULARY [fog

yog, m. intense abstraction, religious ascetic abstraction and
meditation ; yoga-fail, the ait, or practice, of such abstraction,
14

yogi, a yogi, one who practises yog (q. v.), 14.
t/th, 1, proximate demonstrative pronoun, this, he; (as a
pronoun) 20, 26, 54, 58 (bis), 84 (bis), 85 (bis), 109 ; (as
a pronominal adjective) 7, 13, 28, 95 ; combined with til,
that, svy yih, that very, 58.

This pronoun is either animate or inanimate, and the
animate forms may be either masculine or feminine. The
inanimate forms are of common gender. Moreover, there
is a cross-division, according as it is used as a pure pronoun,
or as a pronominal adjective. We shall consider the purely
pronominal forms first.

As an animate pronoun, the following forms occur :
Masc. sg. nom. yift, 26.

Pern. sg. nom., with emph. y, yiliay, she verily, this very
woman, 54 (ter).

As an inanimate pronoun, we have :
Sg. nom. yik, 84 (bis), 85 (bis) ; with empb. y, yukuy, this
very, this alone, 1, 20, 58 ; suy yi&, that very, 58.
PL nom. yiw, 109.

As a pronominal adjective, it occurs, in these poems,
only as referring to inanimate things ; viz. :
M. sg. nom. yih, 7, 28 ; with emph. y, yuhuy, 13.
Dat yM, 95.

ytk, 2, relative pronoun, who, which, what. It is either
animate or inanimate, and the animate forms may be either
masculine or feminine, while the substantival inanimate
forms are of common gender. There is also the cross-divi-
sion into its forms as a pronominal substantive and into
its forms as a pronominal adjective.

As an animate pronominal substantive, or pure pronoun,
the following forms occur :
m. sg. nom. yus u , 20, 24, 37, 45, 65.
m. sg. dat. yfe, 15 (bis), 21, 33, 34, 37 ; yemu, or, with
emph. y, yemisay^ 5.
m. sg. ag. fan*, 5 (bis), 26, 43, 62 (bis).
m. pi. nom. yim, 95 ; ag. yimav, 6, 27.

As an inanimate pronominal substantive, we have :
sg. nom. yit, 20, 21, 107.

sg. abL ytwtt by which ; hence, in order that, so that
28 (bis), 75.

As a pronominal adjective, we have :
m. sg. nom. (inan.) yuh\ 61 ; yul, 8; ytt, 58 (Ms), 61.
f. sg. nom, (inan.), with emph, y, yfoay, 52,

VOCABULARY 223

m. sg. dat. (inan.) y$&- 9 47.
m. sg. ag. (an.) yem\ 24.

m. pi. nom. (man.) yim, 76 ; with emph. y, yimqy, 13.
This pronoun is often repeated in various idiomatic
senses. Thus, yus u yilt, dapiy> who will say what to thee,
i e. whoever will say anything to thee, 20 ; yes yih rote,
to whom what is pleasing, to whom anything is pleasing,
i.e. whatever is pleasing to each, 21; yili yi/i farm, what-
ever work, 58 ; yuh* yi/i karm^ whatever act, 61.

ye& u , card, one; yefay, only one, nothing hut, .7 ; yeka-wdth^
of one construction, of the same material, 17 (see wdfJt).
Of. ok* and akh.

yeli, adv. at what time, when, 31, 44, 49, 82, 102, 103 (bis) :
K. Pr. 57.

yVma, m. Yama, the god of death, and judge of souls after
death ; yema-lay$ 9 the fear of Yama, the fear of death, 27 ;
y$ma-batk, Yama's apparitors, who drag away the soul of
a dying person to judgement, 74.

y$m& a rzal t f. the narcissus, K. Pr. 56.

y$na, adv. from what time, since ; yena-petha, id. 93.

ym u s to come ; fat. pi. 3, gin, which with suff. 2nd pers. ?g.
dat. appears in K. Pr. 57 as ylnanay, they will come (i. e.
return home) (after having abandoned) thee ; past m. sg. 3,
<w, 9, 91 ; pi. 3, ay, 19 ; f. sg. 1, dy&, 35, 41, 98, 109 (bis) ;
K. Pr. 18; 3, aye, K. Pr. 20.

yund w , m. an organ of sense or action, in Skr. indriya. There
are five organs of sense (buMMndviya or jfian&driya), viz.
the organ of smell (gJirdnendriya), of taste (rasanendriya),
of sigfit (darfan&idriya), of touch (sparfindriya), and of
hearing (wavanendriya) ; there are also five organs of action
(karmendriya), viz. the organ of generation (upastJiendriya),
of excretion (payvindriya), of locomotion (pcklendriya), of
handling (hastendriya), and of voice (vdgindriya). There are
thus two pentads of sense and action, respectively. In 79,
it is probably the latter pentad that is referred to. PL nom.
yind\ 79.

ydr } m. a friend, a beloved; the Beloved, i.e. God, 99 (bis),
100; K. fe. 46 (to). *

yorj relative adv. of place, where ; with emph.*, foiy,yur*, where
even, in the exact place where, 61 ; yora, whence, from
where ; with emph. y, yoray, from the very place whence, 19.

yisfiwar, m. the Lord (Skr. isvwa), a title of the Supreme
Siva, connoting His power and lordliness, 43.

yaitu, reL pron. adj. as much (mod. Ksh. yut^ 81.

yeti, rel. adv. of place, where, 88 ; from where, whence, 57.

yiti, adv. of place, here, in this place; hence, here, in this
world, 73,

224 VOCABULARY

yut u (or yit u \ adv. of place, here, in this place ; hence, here, in
this world, K. Pr. 102 (bis).

yitha, rel. pron. adv. of manner, as K. Pr. 46 ; titkay . . . yitka,

so ... as, exactly like, 100.

$uth u 9 rel. pron. adj. of manner, of what kind, as ; with emph. y,
yutliny, 55 ; used adverbially, exactly as, 64.
u&, adj. many, much, 102; K. Pr. 102; as adv., very much,
--. In all f

103. In all these cases with einph. y, yu&i/.
yfaliy f. wish, desire, loving longing, 29, 40, 45 ; sg. abl. yiihi,

29, or (m. c.) y&hs, 45.
yozan, m, a league ; yozam-lach, a hundred thousand leagues,

26.

zi, conj. that, so that (consecutive), 48.

zad> 9 adj. non-sentient, inert 5 zada-rup*, like an insentient thing,

stolid, 20.
zwle 9 see zur u .
zadal 9 adj. pierced with holes (as in a sieve); zadal Midy, a

shade full of holes, like that thrown by a broken thatch,

K. Pr. 102.
zag 9 f. the world, 16.
zagw 9 to watch a person (dat.), 48; to be watchful, to keep

wide awake (in this sense used impersonally in the past

tenses), 78, 79 ; fat. sg. 3, ztigi, 78, 79 ; past part. m. sg.,

with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag. and 3rd pers. sg. dat., zog u ma,

I remained watching him, 48.

zigar, m. the liver (the seat of the affections and desires), 49.
z a k, card, two, 75.
zal, m. water, 38-40, 45, 47, 81 ; sg. gen. ealul* (f. sg. ag.

zalaci clotu, with a stream of water, 39, 40); pi. dat. ealan,

81 ; zala-hotf*, a water-elephant, a sea-elephant (a mythical

animal), 47.
siP, m. the joint where a branch leaves the parent stem, or

where two branches commence to fork ; hence, met. kd1a-z6IP 9

efflux, or passing, of time, 64 ; sg. ag. (or instr,) soft, 64.
zalamay, m. that which is composed of water ; hence, the waste

of waters which is all that is left at the destruction of the

universe, 93. Cf. may.
zalwi, to burn (transitive), to burn up ; past part. m. sg., with

suff. 1st pers. sg. ag. zoluw, 49.
zalawun", n. a,g. burning, fiery hot, blazing; f. sg. nom.

zalawanl (m. c. for zalawtiffi), 57.
zamm, to yawn ; fut. (in sense of pres.) sg. 3, garni, 46.
zan, 1, m. a man, a person ; hence, the world of men, people

31 ; sg. dat. (in sense of loc.), ssanas > 31,

VOCABULARY 225

w, 2, adv. as it were, as though, like, 29, 81, 83, 106.

zdn t f. knowledge ; esp. the true knowledge of the Supreme ;

Z&b*m zana zdn t I obtained (a reputation for) knowledge

among people, 31.

tana, in kd-zan (73, 74) or io-zanafti (72), see ko-zaua.
zen, see zyon*.

zin, m. a Jina, i.e. the Buddha, 8.

zm, f. moonlight ; sg. dat. z&ttti (ra. c. for z&nt), in the moon-
light, 9 ; pot* ZUH, the end of the moonlight, the last hours

of the night ; sg. dat. (for loc.) pot* swii, 105.
zinda, adj. alive ; with emph. y, ziiulay, even while alive, 68.
sang, f. the leg, K. Pr. 102.
zanvu, to know, 20, 30, 41, 64 (bis) ; K. Pr. 102 ; to get to

know, to come to know, to accept as true, 7 (his), 10, 71, 77,

85, 90 ; to know how ; rat'ith zdnun, to know how to seize,

26, 80 ; yatfth zdntin, to know how to make, 80.

Conj. part, zonith, 20, 64 : impve. sg. 2, zun> 71 ; with

suir. 3rd pers. sg. aec., zdnun, know it, 30 ; fut, sg. 1, zaua,

41 ; 2, zanakJt, 10 (pres. sub]*.), 77 ; zdneM, 64 ; 3, with suff.

1st pers. sg. gen., stinfai, it, belonging to me, will know, 85 ;

past. part. m. sg. z$n u t 26 ; with suff. 1st pers. sg. ag.

zdnum, 7 (bis), 90 ; with suff. 2nd pers. sg. ag. and 1st pers.

sg. dat. (dativus cowmoch), z6n u thaw, K. Pr. 102; cond.

past sg. 1, zdnaJto, 80 (bis).
zan&fiP, f, a mother ; sg. dat. zanafM, 51.
z&r u , or z&d*, m. a condition of bad conduct, bad habits;

sg. dat. zure (or zude) (m. c. for z&rti or z&tU) lagan, to

acquire bad habits, 70.
zosmi (impersonal in the past tenses), to cough ; fut. sg. 3

(in sense of pres.), ztisi, 46.
sdtk, f. nature, the true nature of anything, 4.
zlv, m. the life, soul ; the soul in the sense of a living soul,

a living* being, a man, 12. Cf. zuv.
znv, m. life, 54; the soul, 106; zuv hyon u t to take life, to

destroy life, 54. Cf. H.
zlwontP) adj. living, alive, 6, 12; m. pi. nom. zlwanP, in

zlwanfl-moklfitf', men who obtain final release while yet

alive, 6.
zyon*, to come into being, to be born; fut. sg. 3, zfyi, 37;

ztye (m. c.), 45 ; pi. 3 (old pres.), z3a nd zen, they are being

born, (and) they are not being born, i.e. when they are

hardly born, immediately on being born, 47; 3 (remote)

past, in. pi. 3, zayay, 51.
zoyyulP> adj. (f. zdyij*), fine, t&eawae[ (e.g. of a thread); f. pi.

nom. zoyift, 102.


