Plutarch's Lives, Vol. II (Langhorne, 1813) (Plutarch (John & William Langhorne, trans.), 1813)
===============================================================================================
Langhorne's Plutarch's Lives, Vol. 2. Completes the 6-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

— CM

1

z =

— o

O —

CO

1— ^"^^

in- —

— o


— CD

D =

D^

CO

Sf^ PLUTARCH S LIVES,

TRANSLATED FROM

THE ORIGINAL GREEK;

^VITII

NOTES CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL,

AND A

L/FE OF PLUTARCH.

BY JOHN LANGIIORNE, D.D.

AND

WILLIAM LANGHORME, AM
IN SIX VOLUMES. ^ .

% • v;

THE SECOND EDIl^rp^^



THE REV. FRANCIS WRANGHAM, M.A. I'.R.S.

WITH CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS.

VOL. II.

LONDON. '

W. Cladkb and Sons; Cahbil and Davies; F. AViNGRAre; C. Lvw; J. anu A. Aricti ;

SCATCIIEBD AND LbTTFRMAN ; B. AND R. CROSBY ; VVjUTE, CoCHnANE, AND Go. ; LoNG^lIAK,

HfRST, Rees, Orme. AND Brown; J. Booker; J. Richardson; ,7. M. IIicii\rim)V ; Bl^ck,
Parry, and Co.; J. Hatciurd; .1. Mdrray ; R. Sciioley; R. B.vi,d\vin ; Cnahock and
Joy; T. Hajiuton; .T. FALLDtR ; Gale, Cvrtis, and Fen>er ; and G. anb b. Houinson :
and Wilson amd Sons, York.

1813.

Printed by C. BaUwm, New Btidge-strett, London.

CONTENTS

OF TRB

SECOND VOLUME.

\

PAGB

IX. Pericles 1

X. Fab'ms Maxbnus 61

Pericles and Fabiiis Ma.vimns compared 106

XL Alcibiades ,. Ill

XIL Caius Marcius Coriolajms 173

Alcibiades and Caius Marcius Coriola'

nus compared^ : 225

XIIL Tmoleon 231

XIV. Paulus JEmilius 279

Timoleon and Paulus JEmilius compared SS5

XV. Pelopidas 339

XVI. Marcellus 388

Pelopidas and Marcellus compared .... 438

7' XVII. Aristides 443

XVIII. Cato the Censor 491

Aristides and Cato the Censor compared 532

THE

LIFE

OF

PERI C L E S.

SUMMARY.

MajiLind ouo;ht to have only honourable tastes and talents. Virtue
preferable to all the arts. The virtues of Pericles and ofFalius.
The high descent of Pericles, He abandons music, and studies phi-
losophy : is chiefly formed by Anaxagoras. His moderatio?i.
Anaxagoras' solution of a lusus naturse. Pcrides engages in poli-
tics, and attaches himself to the popular party. His reserved
conduct. From his eloquence he is denominated Olympius. I'he
dignity of his tvords and actions. He ccrru-pts the public manners,
and reduces the poxi^er of the Areopagus: causes Cimon to be
banished ; and soon aftcrxmrd recalled. Thucydides is opposed to
him, on the 'part of the aristocracy . Pericles gives gamTs'arul'en-
te)'taviments~fo' iKe" peopTe : embellishes the city with buildings.
His anszvsr to the reproaches, tvkich he incurred upon this occasion.
General emulation in all the arts excited; arid their perfection.
Phidias appointed to superintend all the public wori^-s. The Odeum,
and porticoes. Complaints, on the part of Thucydides' faction ,
•■^^it]i__7ji^axdJp_Uie,,je;cj3i£^^^ " Thucydides banish ed,

Pericles has the sole administration of the state. His disinterest-.
cdness in this station ; domestic economy. Poverty of Anaxagoras.
Pericles' projects to increase the porner of Athens : prudence in cn-
gagemerds: success in the Chersoncsus and Peloponnesus : expedi-
tion to the Euxine. Fie represses the popular msh of conquest.
Eubccan tvar. He bribes the ling of Sparta. Confidence reposed
in him by the people. Samian tvar, undertahen at the instit^atiort
ofAspasia. Some account of that celebrated xvormin. Pericles' at-

VOL. II. B

' PEIUCLES.

tachment tn her. Issv.c nf the Samian xvar. Tlic Athenians de-
Jcated in his absence. Invention (jf'wilitary engines for- sieges. He
takes Samos. His exultation at this event. Commencement of the
Pelvponitesian unr : siege of Potidcca. The decree against
Megnra accelerates the tvar. Different motives ascribed to Peri-
cles for engaging in it. General jealousy of Phidias. Aspasia
arraigned of atheism ; and through Pericles' injlnence acquitted.
The Laeedanwnians enter Attica. Pericles* prndence ; and stea-
diness amidst the clamours of the people : he despatches a fleet
against Peloponnesus. Athens ravaged hy a pestilence. Pericles
condemned to pay a lieavy fine. His relations and friends Jail
victims to the plague. His firmness in misfortunes: he resumes
the administration of affairs. Law u-iih regard to illegitimate
children. He is seized by the plague. His panegyric. He is
deeply regretted by his country.

a

\f HEN Cassar happened to see some strangers at
Rome carrying young dogs and monkeys in their
arms, and fondly caressing them, he asked, " V\'he-
" ther the women in tlicir country never bore
children ' ?" thus reproving with proper severity
' tliose, v.ho lavisli upon brutes the natural tenderness
due only to mankind. In tlic same manner we must
condemn those, who employ the curiosity and love
of knowledge implanted by nature in the hunian
soul upon low and worthless objects, Miiile they neg-
lect such as are excellent and useful. Our senses
indeed, by an efTcct almost mechanical, are passive

' Caesar by this bcm-niot, which Pkitarch seems to take more
seriovLsIv than it was intended, meant to blame not the principle of
Imniauity to unimal^, but it's excess. Our author indeed himself
elsewhere remarks, that tep.dcrness in children to t!ie brute creation
is a proper introduction to the liight.r duty of ' good-will toward
men;' and has recorded several instances of the grateful attach-
ment and invincible fidelity of the inicrior animals: e.g. that of
Xanthippus' dog, at the embarkation of the Athenians for yalamis
(See the Life of Tiiemistocles, Vol. I.), &c. &c.*

PERICLES. §

to the impression of outward objects, whetlier agree-
able or oi'fensive : but tlie mind, possessed of a selt-
dirccting power, may turn it*s attention to whatever
it thinks proper. It shoukl therefore be employed
in the most useful pursuits, not barely in contempla-
tion, but in such contemplation as may nourish it's
faculties '". For as that colour is best suited to the
eye, which by it's beauty and agreeableness at the
same time both refreshes and strengthens the sight ;
so the application of tlie mind should be directed to
those subjects, which through tlie channel of plea-
sure may lead to our proper happiness. Such are
the works of virtue. The very description of these
inspires us with emulation, and a strong desire to
imitate them : whereas in other things admiration
does not aiwavs lead us to imitate what we admire,
but on the contrary, while we are charmed with the
work, we often despise the workmen. Thus we are
pleased with perfumes and purple, while dyers and
perfumers appear to us as nothing more than mean
mechanics,

Autisthenes ^ therefore, when he was told that
Ismenias plaved excellentlv upon the flute, answered
very properly, '• Then he is good for nothing else ;
" otherv/ise, he would not have played so well." Such
also was Philip's saying to his son, when at a certain
entertainment he sang in a very pleasant and skilfiil
manner, " Are you not ashamed to sing so well"^r"
It is enough lor a prince to bestow a vacant hour
upon hearing others sing ; and he does the muses

'■* Tliis, as M.' Hicard well observes, is one oftlie most important
direction^ whicii piiilosopliy can fiiip})!^' ; and should extend, be-,
yond it';^ more serious apj>!ieation, even to our pleasures and our
diversions. Botli the understanding)- and the heart rocjuire daily
nourisiiment — to suppoit, in tlie lirst the desire of intorniafion, in,
the latter the love of virtue.*

^ Antisthencs was a disci!)le of Socrates, and founder of tha
sect of t!ie (lynics. lie fiourish-d about A. C. SUl.

^ Pliilip, however, himself fell into a fault similar to that, fojr
which he reproaclied his son : for, as he disputed one day with a
iiiu.^ician on the principles of music, ^ Heaven fori)id (exclaimed his
oppyu^at) tliat vou should know tliis subji'ct better than I do 1'^

B 2

4 PERICLES.

sufficient lionour, if lie attends the perfonnances of
tiiose, who excel in their arts.

If a man. ii})plies Jiimself to servile or mechanical
employments, his industry in those things is a proof
of innttention to nobler studies. No young man of
hiu'h birth or liberal sentiments, from vie\Yin<jC the
Jupiter at Pisa, would desire to be Phidias, or from
the sight of the Juno at Argos to be Polycletus ; or
Anacreon, or Philemon, or Archiloehus, though de-
liglUed with their poems ' . For though a work may
be agreeable, yet esteem of the author is not the ne-.
cessary consequence. We may therefore conclude
that things of this kind, which do not excite a spirit
of emulation, or produce any strong impulse or de-
sire to imitate them, are of little use to the beholders.
But virtue has this peculiar property that, while we
admire her conduct, vre long to copy the exnniple.
The goods of fortune we wish to enjoy, virtue we
desire to practise ; the former we are glad to receive
from others, the latter we are ambitious that others
should receive from us. The beauty of goodness
has an attractive power : it kindles in us at once an
active principle; it forms our manners and influences
our desires, not only when represented in living ex-
amples, but even in historical descriptions.

s This seems to be somewhat inconsistent with tlie respect and
esteem, in which the noble arts of poetry anil sculpture were liehl
in ancient Greece and Home, and with that admiration wliich
the proficients in those arts always obtain among the people. (L.)
The Jupiter of Phidia?, indeed, was represv.'nted as fully express!n;r
the majesty of tlie Tather of the Gods ; and a single statue oi' Poly-
cletus was sold for 100 talents. (Plin. H. N. xxxiv. 8.) What is
subjoined, on the subjtjct of the poets, seems still n\ore at variance
with the universal respect paid to poetry in all ages. Plutarch must
therefore here speak relatively of these pursuits, as compared with
that of wisdom and virtue. Socrates had an eminetit talent for
sculpture ; and the Three Graces from his ehissel, preserved in th.e
(Utadel of Athens, were the objects of general admiration. Bathe
abandoned the art, as incompatible with his higher moral pursuits.*

Tlieri.' subsisted a jealousy between the poets and the philosophers ;
and our philosophical biographer clearly shows, by the Platonic
parade of this introduction, that he wishes to magnif"y the latter at
the expense of the tbrmer.

PERICLES. 5

For this reason wc chose to proceed in writing the
Lives of great men, and have composed this tenth^
l)ook'', wTiich contains the Lives of Pericles, and of
Fabius Maximns ^\ho carried on tlie war against
Annibal ; men rescnVbhng each other in many vir-
tues, ])articularly injustice and moderation, and M'ho
effcctual'y served their respective commonwealths,
by patiently enduring injurious and capricious treat-
niicnt from their collegues and their countrymen.
Yfhethcr we are right in our judgement or not, it will
be easy to infer from t'ne work itself.

Pericles was of the tribe of Acamantis, and of the
v/ard of Cholargia. Ilis funiiy, both by the father's |[
and mother's side, v.as one of the most considerable 1)
in Athens. Kis father Xanthippus, who defeated
the kimr of Persia's o-enerals at Mycale, married
Agariste ", the descendentof Clisthenes, who expelled
the flmiily of Pisistratus ^ abolished tlie tyranny,
enacted laws, and established a form of government
tempered in such a manner as tended to unanimity
among the people, and the safety of the. state. His
jnother dreamed that she was delivered of - a lion,

^ Would it not hence appear, that the order of these Lives has
been changed ; since only four 'pair of portraitr-,' each (as may be
inferred from this passage) constituting a book, now precede the
Life ol" Pericles ? The Life of Cimon indeed, which at present
forms a part of the third volume, is referred to in a i'cw pages, as
already composed.*

" lierodotus (vi. 131.) gives the entire genealogy of Pericles.
Clisthenes, liing of Sicyon, had but one daughter Agariste, whoni
he irave in marriacre to iSIcaracler,, son of Alcmason. The issue of
this union was two sons, Clisthenes and Hippocrates : the younger
6i' whom had a son named Megacles, and u daughter Agariste, the
raotlier of Pericles.

The battle of rtlyrale in Ionia v/as fought on the fame day, and
with the s«rae glorious event, as that of }r*latK?as, A. C 4'79. .40,000
i^ersians fell in the action, a still greater number perished in the
pursuit, and th.e remainder saved themselves only by a precipitate
an.d disgraceful retreat within the walls of Sardv-s. The Greeks lilve-
wise lost more men in it, than in any other engagement during the
course of the win.*

s On the subject of Pisistratus' usurpation, the expulsion of his
son Hippias by Clisthenes, and the establishment of a pure demo- .
Ci'acy jn A thens, Ac. S:c. sec Herod, v. 66., and the Life of t?oloni*
12

e PKRICLES.

and a few days jiftcrwrird broiiglit forlli Pcriflcs.
His person in other respects Mas well-turned, but
his head was disproportionably long. For this rea-
son, almost all his statues have the head covered
\\ith a helmet ; ihe statuaries choosing, I suppose,
to hide that dei'eet. But the Athenian poets called
him Schinocephalus or ' Onion-head,' for the word
schinos is sometimes used instead of scilla (a ' sea-
onion.') Cratinus^, the comic writer, in his play
called Chirones has this passage :

Faction received old Time to her embrace :
Hence the foul spawn, on earth call'd Pericles,
In heaven ' the Ilcad-compellcr.'

And again, in his Nemesis, he thus addresses him.

Come, blessed Jove '°, the high and mighty Head,
TJie friend of hospitality 1

And Tcleclides savs.

Now in a maze of tliought he ruminates
On strange expedients, while his Head depress'd
Sinks with it's weight; now from his spacious brain
Bursts tumult.

And Eupolis in his Demi, asking news of all the
eminent orators whom he represented as ascending
from the shades below, Mhen Pericles comes up
last, cries out,

9 Cratinus (as well as Teleclides and Plato mentioned below) a
writer of the old comedy, was a thorough bon-vivani ^ and yd com-
po?ed his last piece at the age of 97 ! Eupolis was of a still remoter
date, and in crossing the Hellespont fell a victim (as it is supposed)
to the vengeance of some of the objects of his sarcastic muse.*

'" Pericles (as Plutarch subsequently observes) was called
Olympius, or Jupiter. The poet here addresses him under that
character by tlio epithet of f/jaxupn, which signifies ' blessed,' but
may also signify * great-headed.' In our language we have no
word with such a double meaning ; [For ' greeted,' qu. * great-
head,' would be too far-fetched for the occasion.*] Just above,
he is called Ccphalegerctes, or * head-compeller' (as if his head,
from it's si:^e, Avere an assemblage of many heads) instead of
Ncphelegeretes, or * cloud-compeller,' a con;;non epithet of Jupiter,

PERICLES. 7

Head of the tribes that haunt those spacious reahiis,
Does he ascend ?

Most writers agree, that tlie master who taiiglit
Iiim music was called Damon, the first syllable of
whose name (we are told) is to be pronounced short :
but Aristotle informs us, that he learned that art of
Pythoclides. As for Damon, he seems to have been
a politician, who under the pretence of teaching
music concealed his great abilities from the vulgar:
and he attended Pericles as his tutor and assistant
in politics, in the same manner as a master of the
gymnastic art attends a young man to fit him for the
ring. Damon's giving lessons upon the harp, how-
ever, v/as discovered to be a mere pretext ; and, as
a busy politician and a friend to tyranny, he was
banished by the Ostracism. Neither was he spared
by the comic poets. One of them, named Plato,
introduces a person addressing him thus ;

Inform me, Damon, first, docs fame say true ?
And wast thou really Pericles' Chiron "?

Pericles also attended the lectures of Zeno of Elea ^%
who in natural philosophy was a follower of Parme-
nides, and who by much practice in tlie art of dis-
puting had learned to confound and silence all his

" The word Chiron again is ambiguous, and may either signify,
' Wast thou preceptor to Pericles?' or, 'Wast thou more wicked
than Pericles ?' (L.) The ;>« dc mot \\o\\\i\ have been still more
complete in the original, if it could have been Ui^ix.Aiis<i x,^'^o>v*

'* This Zeno was of Elea, a town of Italy, and a Phocian
colony ; and must be carefully distinguished from Zeno, the founder
of the sect of the Stoics. The Zeno, here spoken of, was respect-
able for having attempted to rid his country of a tyrant. Tlie ty-
rant took him, and caused him to be pounded to death in a mortar.
But his death accomplished, what he could not eiiect in his life-
time ; for his fellow citizens weve so much incensed at the dreadful
manner of it, that they fell upon the tyrant, and stoned him. As
to his arguments and those of his master Parmenides, pretended to
be so invincible, one of them was to prove there can be no sucli
thing as motion; since a thing can neither move in the place
where it is, nor in the place where it is not. But this sophism is
easily refuted: for motion is the passing of a thing or person into
a new part of space.

» PERICLES.

opponents, as Timon the Phliasian declares in these

verses ;

Ha\e yon not hcaril of Zeno's mighty pov/ers.

Who could " confute, change sidey, and still cunfute '^?"

But tlie philosopher with whom he was most inti-
niately acquainted, who gave him that force and
sublimity of sentiment superior to nil the demagogues,
Mho in short formed him to his arlmirable dignity of
manners, was Anaxagoras '"* the Clazomenian. This
was he, whom the people of those times called
^^0116, or '^ Intelligence;' either in admiration of his
CTeat imderstandinG: and knowledt^e of the works
of nature, or because he was the lirst who clearly
pro\ed that the universe owed it's formation nei-
ther to chance nor necessity, but to a pure and
inimixed mind, who separated the homogeneous
parts from those with which they had previously
oeen confounded.

Charmed with the company of this plrilosopher,
and instructed by him in the sublimest sciences,
Pericles acquired not only an elevation of sentiment,
and a loftiness and purity of stile fir removed from
the low expression of the vulgar ; but likevvice a
OTavitv of countenance which relaxed not into
laughter, a firm and even tone of voice, an easy de-
portment, and a decency of dress which no vehe-

'^ It was Belial's ficnd-like character, with iilL- 'manna-drop-
ping tongue,'

■ to make tlie worse appear

The better reason.

Who has not sniilcd at the portrait of Goldsmitli's Viliage-Orbiliu?!;
v.hoso ' ;,!na!l hoad,' unlike that of Pericl'.rf, u-as so ingenious thar,
' J'>'en when vanquish'd lie could argue still?'*

'* Aniixagoras was the first, who exclusively ascribed the forni-
Vlion of the world to an intelligent cau.se. His predecessors —
Thalcs, Anaxinienes, and Anaxiniandcr — admitted other secondary
principles as joint causes ; which has led many moderns, indeed,
erroneously to coniidor them as materialists. The 'homogeneous
parfs,' mentioned below, were represented by Anasagoras as the
atoms or original elements of bodies, in their priaiary ibrms siuiiiar

to their ultimate aggregates.'^

PERICLES. 9

mence of spcakinu* ever threw iiito disorder. Tliese
things, and others of the like luUiiie, excited adiiiir-
ation in all that saw him.

Siicii was his self-command, that v.hcn a vile and
abandoned fellow loaded him a whole dav with
reproaches and abuse, he bore it with patience and
silence, and continued in public for the des])atch
of some urgent aflliirs. In the evening he walked
g\"d.wQ]y home, the blackguard following and ii>stdt-
ing him with the most scurrilous language the whole
way. And, as it was dark wiien he came to his own
door, he ordered one of his servants to take a torch
and light th.e man home. Tlie poet Ion however^
says he was pioud and supercilious in conversation, \
and that there v/as a considerable portion of vanity |
and contempt of others mixed with his dignity off
iTianiiCr: on the other hand he highly extols the.j
civility, complaisance, and politeness of Cimon. But'
to take no farther notice of Ion, who perhaps vrould
not have any great excellence appear without a
mixture of something satirical (as it vvas in the an-
cient tragedy '"), Zeno desired those, who called the
gravity of Pericles ' pride and arrogance,' to be
proud the same way; telling them, the very acting
of an excellent part might insensibly produce a love
and real imitation of it.

These were not the only advantages, which Peri-
cles gained by conversing with Anaxagoras. From
him he learned to overcome the terrors excited by
the various phasnomena of the heavens in those who

^^ Tragedy at first was only a. chorus in Ijcnoux' of Bacchus.
Persons c!ross:ed like satyrs were the perform '.'r;-;, and they ol'ten
bro!;e out iii'o the most licentious raillery. x\ftcv it took a graver
turn, something of this drollery was still retained, as in that which
we call tragi-comedy. \\\ time, serious characters and events be-
came the subject of tragedy, without that mixture ; but even then,
jifter exhibiting three graver pieces, the poets used to conclude
their contention for the prize v.ith a satirical one : Of this sort is
the Cyclops of Eurioides, and the only one remaining. (L.)

Ion u'as a tragic writer of Chios. A fcu' fragments oi" his elegies
ai'e the only part of his uorks now extant,*

10 ■ PERICLES,

.nrc igiiorant oi' tlielr causes, and who from that
ignorance entertain a tormenting fear of the gods.
Neither is there any cure for it but the study of
nature, which instead of the frightful extravagances
of superstition, implants in us a sober piety sup-
ported by a rational hope.

We are told there was brought to Pericles, from
one of his farms, a ram's head witli only one horn ;
and Lampo the soothsayer, observing that the horn
grew strong and lirm out of tlic middle of the tbrehead,
j declared tliat the two parties in tiie state, (namely,
j those of Tiiucydides '' and Pericles) would unite,
' and invest the whole pov»er in him with whom the
prodigy was found : but Anaxagoras having dis-
sected the head showed that the brain did not fill
the whole cavitv, but had contracted itself into an
oval form, and pointed directly to that part of the
*;kull, whence the horn took it's rise. This procured
Anaxagoras great honour with the spectators ; and
Lampo was not less honoured for liis ];)rcdiction,
J when soon afterward, upon the fall of Thucydides,
•' the administration was placed entirely in Pericles*
hands.

In my opinion however the philosopher and the
soothsayer may easily be reconciled, and both be
right ; the one having discovered the cause, and the
other the end. It was the business of the former
to account for the appearance, and to speculate
upon it's origin ; and of the latter to show, why it
so happened, and what it portended. Those, who
say that when the cause is found out the prodigy
ceases, do not consider that, if they reject such signs
as are preternatural, they must also deny the use of
artificial signs : the clattering of brass quoits ''', the

"'• We nuist not confound tliis statesman, wha was subsequently
oppf'sed to Policies by the ari-stocracy, witJft the historian of the
saaic najne : the father of the former was ^Nlilesias, of the latter
Olorus.^'

*' Tiie clattering of brass quoits, or places, was sometimes a
military signal iuuong tlie Grecians. Among the Romans it was a

PERICLES. H

lights of beacons, and the shadows of sun-dials,
have each their proper natural causes, and yet
each likewise another signification. But perhaps
this question might be more properly discussed in
another place.

Pericles, in his youth, stood in great dread of the
people. For in his countenance he resembled Pisis-
tratus the tyrant ; and the old men were much
struck with a farther resemblance in the sweetness
of his voice, the volubility of his tongue, and the
roundness of his periods. As he was moreover of
a noble family and opulent fortune, and his friends
were the most considerable men in the state, he
dreaded the ban of Ostracism ; and therefore inter-
meddled not with state-affairs, but behaved with the
utmost courage and intrepidity in the iield. AYhen
Aristides however was dead, Themistocles banished,
and Cimon employed in expeditions at a distance
from Greece, Pericles engaged in the administration.
He chose rather to solicit the favour of the multitude
and the poor^*, than of the few and the rich, con-
trary to his natural disposition, which was far from
inclining him to court popularity.

He was apprehensive, it seems, of falling under
the suspicion of aiming at the supreme power ; and
M-as sensible, besides, that Cimon was attached to

signal to call the wrestlers to the ring. (L.) (Cic. de Orat. iii.)
These quoits were also used in courts of justice (Pollux x. 61.),
though it is not precisely known for what purpose.*

'8 The popular party in Athens were continually making efforts
against those small remains of power, which were yet in the hands
of the nobility. As Pericles could not lead the party of the nobles,
because Cimon by the dignity of his birth, the lustre of liis actions,
and the largeness of his estate had placed himself at their head, he
had no other resource than to court the populace. And he flat-
tered their favourite passion in the most agreeable manner, by
lessening the power and privileges of the court of Areopagus,
which was the chief support of the nobility, and indeed of the
whole state. But by bringing almost all causes before the tribunal
of the people, by nuiltiplying gratuities which were only another
word for bribes, and by giving the people a taste for expensive
pleasures, he eventually caused the downfall of the commonwealth;
though Im per^ional abilitie? supported it during his time.

9

15 PERICLES.

the nobility, and extremely beloved by persons of
the highest eminence: and therefore in order to se-
cure himself, and to find resources jigainst Cinion's
power, he studied to ingratiate himself with the com-
mon people. At the same time he entirely clianged
his manner of living. He never appeared in the
streets, except when he was going to the Forum or
the senate-house. He declined the invitations of his
friends, and all social entertainments and recreations;
insomuch that throughout the v.'hole period of his
administration, which was of a considerable length,
he never went to sup with any of his friends, except
once at the marriage of his nephew Euryptolemus,
and there he staid only until the ceremony of libation
was ended. For the treedom of entertainments takes
away all distinction of office, and dignity is little
consistent with faraiHarity ^^. Real and solid virtue
indeed, the more it is observed, appears the more
glorious; and there is nothing in a good man's con-
duct, as- a magistrate, so great in the public eye, as
the general course of his private behaviour to his in-
timate friends. Pericles, hov/ever, took care not to
make his person cheap among the people, and was
seen among them only at proper intervals : neitlier
did he speak to all points that were debated before
them, but reserved himself, like the Salaminian gal-
.ley"'^" (as Critolavts remarks) for extraordinary occa-
sions ; despatching business of less consequence by
other orators, with whom he had an intimacy. One
of tliese (we arc told) was Ephialtes who, according
to Plato, overthrew the power of the council of Are-

'^ Non henc conveniuni , nee in una sede morantur
Mdjestas et amor. -•

-° Tlie Salaminian galley was a consecrated vessel, of which the
Athenians never made use except upon ' extraordinary occasions.'
J'lu'y sent it, tor instance, ibr a general whom they wished to call
to account (as we shall find in tlie I.ii'e of Alcibiades), or with sa-
crifices to Apollo, or to some other deity. (L.)

Crilolaiis, the Peripatetic, was deputed A. U. C. 598, with Dio-
genes the Stoic, and Carneades the Academician, to the sena'eof
Home. We sluiU see more o\' him, iu the Life of Cato the Cen5U)r.*

PEIIICLBS. lii

onrip-irs, bv ffiviiiff the citizens a laro^c and intempe-
rate drauglit of liberty. Upon wliicli account, tlie
con^.ic writers speak of t]\e people of Athens, as a
horse wild and unnianagcd ;

v/hicli listens to the reins no mere,

But in ills nnudcniug- couTie bears headlong down
The very iriends that. feed him '-'..

Pericles, desirous to make his language a proper
vehicle for his sublime sentiments, and to speak in
a manner that became the dii]i:nitv of his lite, success-
fullv availed himself of what he had learned from
Ana?iagoras ; adorning his eloquence with tlie rich
colours of philosophy. For adding (as the divine
Plato expresses it) the loftiness of imagination and
all-commanding energy, with which pliilosophy sup-
plied liim, to his native powers of genius, and making
use of whatever he found to his pu.rpose in the study
of nature, to dignify the art of speaking, h.e far ex-
celled all other orators --. Hence he is said to have
gained the surname of ' Olympius :* though some
will have it to have been from the edifices, with which
he adorned the city ; and others, from his high au-
thority both in peace and war. There appears indeed
no absurdity in supposing, that all these things might
contribute to tliat glorious distinction. Yet the
strokes of satire both serious and ludicrous, in thi^
comedies of those times, indicate iliat he was thus
denominated chiefiy on account of his eloquence.
For they tell us, that in his harangues he thundered

-' The former Enj^lisli translator takes no notice of il-irjuv r-.p
^.v°'y.xi KXi Tciic, fi'.a-oii isnzrnhy, ' bites Eubcca and insults the islands ;'
though the passa_s;e is pregnant with sense. Athens in tlie wanton-
ness of power insulted and oppressed Euboea, (/^oc/. I'Negropout),
which was her granary, and the ^TEgean islands, which contributed
greatly tq her commerce and her w-ealth. (L.) Even Langhorne'a
version in the text is, perhaps, still too paraphiastical.*

-^ Plato observes, upon the same occasion, that an orator, ?<.=;
\te\\ as a physician, ought to have u general knowledge of nature;
and quotes the studies of Pericles, and the opinion of Hippocrates,
ih support of his assertion.

u

PERICLES.

and lightened -^ and that his tongue was armed with
thunder. Thiicydides, the son of jMilesias, is said
to have given a pleas;aiit account of the force of his
eloquence. Thucydides was a great and res])ectab]e
man, who had for a long time opposed the measures
of Pericles ; and when Archidamus, one of the kings
of Lacedaemon, asked him, " Which was the best
" wrestler, Pericles or he?'' he replied, " '\Vhen I
*' throw him, he says he was never down, and he per-
*' suades the very spectators to believe him."

Yet such was the solicitude of Pericles, v/hen he
liad to speak in public, that he always first addressed
a prayer to the gods'-^, " That not a word might es-
" cape him unawares unsuitable to the occasion."
He left nothing in writing, except some public de-
crees ; and only a few of his sayings are recorded :
for instance, that " The isle of u3<igina should not be
^ suffered to remain an eye-sore to the Pirjeus ;" and
that " He observed a war ap])roaching from Pelo-
" ponnesus." And when Sophocles, who was joined
in command with him upon a naval expedition,
happened to praise tlic beauty of a certain boy, he
said, " A general, my friend, should not only have
*' pure hands, but pure eyes '-'." Stesimbrotuspro-

^3 This passage obviously refers to the strong line of the eld
comic writer, as quoted by Piiu. ( Ep. i. 20)

which has since with singular justness of accommodation been sub-
scribed, by the learned editor of Bcllcntlenus, to the head of Mr.
lux.*

-■• Quintilian says, he prayed that ' not a word might escape him
disagreeable to the people.' And this is the more probable account
of the matt'jr, because (according to Suidas;) Peri«los wrote down
his orations, before he pronounced them in public, and was iadeed
the first who did so.

"5 Cic. do ()!f. i. 10. Upon wliicli passap;e (as stronjrlr indicative
of the corruption of ancient poets, and of human nature) an rxcel-
k'nt writer of our own time makes a judicious comment in a La'in
note. After quotirig Virgil's Funnnsinn pnsior Cun/dati, f^c. to the
same purpose, he cites the paragraph in question; Turpe est enim,
vnldcqnc vitiosiim, S:c. — and subjoin^: Quamodo scse res habiu'^sc
nccrssc est', cnvr vir mitiqrivnnn pjo-siantissimif cuhcribonlus, jJiUo-
sophiam immo 7norci ct ojf-'cia tractaus, tcilia doceref. Qnalcjn sibi

PERICLES. 15

tluccs this passage from the oration, Vvluch Pericles
pronounced in memor_y of those Athenians who fell
m the Saaiian war; " They are become immortal,
" like the gods. For the gods th.emselves are not
" visible to us ; but from the honours which they
' receive, and the happiness v»'hieh tliey enjoy, we
conclude them to be immortal ; and such shouki
those brave men be, who die for their country."
Thucydides"-^ represents the administration of
I'ericles as favouring aristocracy ; and tells us that,
though the government was called democraticai, it
was really in the hands of one who had engrossed the
whole autliority. jMany otiier writers likewise inform
us, that by liim the people were first indulged
with a division of lands, were treated at the public
expense with theatrical diversions, and were paid for
the most common services to the state. As this new j
indulgence from the government was an impolitic
custom, which rendered the people extravagant and
luxurious, and destroyed that frugality and love of . .
labour by which they had been previously supported"-', '
it is proper that we should trace the effect to it's
cause, by a retrospect into the circumstances of the ■
republic.

At first (as we have observed) to raise himself to
some sort of equality with Cimon, who was then at
the height of gh)ry, Pericles made his court to the
})eople. And as Cimon v/as his superior in point of
i()rtune, which he employed in relieving the poor
Athenians, in, providing victuals every day for the
necessitous, and in clothing the aged; and, beside '
this, had levelled his fences with the ground, that ali
might be at liberty to gather his fruit: Pericles had

ipse virtutis normam proposuernt, satis liquet. Vide, inter aJh,
" JHsia reprehenfiionfi," &c. Sec. ct " ta^fa vis est," &c. &c, (Wil-
bcTibrce's Practical \'icw, II. i. uot.)'^'

^Vii.66.

-' The wealth from the mines of Lauri'jm, which Pericles thus
idly lavished upon public amusements, hiid been much more ad-
vantageously employed by Themi.?tocles in the building of galleys.*

16 rERlCLTiS,

recourse to the expedient of di^-'ling the piililic trea-
sure, a •rhenie which, as Aristotle intbi'ms us, was
])n)pose(i to liini by "Deiuoiiides ot'Ios"-^\ Accordiu^v-
]y by supplying the people wiihmoiiey loithe public
diversions, and for tlieir attendance in courts ofjudi-
cature""^, and by other pei^sions and prattuties, he so
inveigled theru as to avafl iu'niself of their interest
against the council of the Areopagus; of wliich he
had no ritrlit to be a member, i^avini^ nevci' had tliC

I. - ■'CD

ibrtune to be chosen Archo:), 'JTicsniothetes, Basi-
leus, or Folemarch ^\ i'or 'persons were of old ap-
pointed to these offices by lot; and such as liad dis-
cliarged them well, andsuch only, wcie admitted mem-
bers of the Areopagus. Pericles therefore by his
popularity rjiised a party against that council, and by
means of j'-p'iialtes took from them tlie cognisance
of many causes, \vhicli iiad been u.nder their juris-
diction. He likewise caused Cimon to be banislied
by the Ostracism, as an enemy to the people ^^ and
a friend to the Lacydremonians : a man who in birtli
and ibrtune had no superior, who luul gained several
glorious \'ictories over the barbarians, and as Vv'c have

^^ los was one of the isles called Sporades, in the ^^gean son,
and celebrated for the tomb of Homer. But .-■(■■■ue learned mvn
are of opinion that instead of l';3-;> we bhould read ()i/,mv, and that
Demonides was not of the island of los, but of Oia, one of the Attic
boroughs.

^'-^ There were several courts of judicature in Athens, composed
of a certain number of citizens, who received an obolus each for
every cause they tried ; and sometimes men, who ainied at poj)u]arity,
procured this fee to be increased.

'-'^ Of this Cnl)inet of nine ^Nfijusters, annually chosen as the exe-
cutive governors of Athens, see an account in the Life of Solon,
Vol. I. not. (m)*

3' Mis treason agafnst the state was pretended to consist in
receiving preseets or otiier gratiilcations from llie Macedonians,
wliieh (it was alleged) induced liim to forego the opportunity of
enlarging the Athenian conquests, after he had taken the gold-
r.iines of Thriice. Cimon answered, that he had prosecuted the
war to the utmost of his power against the Thracians, and their
other enemies ; but he had made no inroads into Macedon, because
^le did not conceive that he was to act as a public enemy to man-
kind.

PERICLES. 17

related in his Life, filled the city witli^ money and
nthcr spoils. Such was the authority of" Pericles with
the colli mon [)eoj)le.

The term of Cimon's banishment, as it Vv-as by
Ostracism, was limited by law to ten years. In the
mean time, the Laceda?mpnians with an immense
army entered the territory of Tanagra"-; and the
Athenians immediately marching out against them,
C'imon returned and placed himself in the ranks with
those of his tribe, intending by his deeds to wipe off
the aspersion of favouring the Lacedaemonians, and
to venture his life with his countrymen ; but by a
combination of the fi lends of Pericles he was repulsed,
as an exile. This seem-i to have been the cause, why
Pericles exerted himself in a particular manner in
that battle, and exposed his person to the greatest
dangers. All Cimon's friends ^^, whom Pericles had
accused as accomplices in his pretended crime, fell
lionourablv that dav toi^'ether : and the Athenians,
who were defeated upon their own borders and ex-
pected a still sharper conflict in the summer, griev-
ously repented their treatment of Cimon, and longed
for his return from exile. Pericles, sensible of the
people's inclinations, did not hesitate to gratify them,
but himself proposed a decree for recalling Cimon ;
and, through his mediation, a peace was concluded
upon his return. For tlie Lacedaemonians had a par-
ticular regard for him, as well as a dislike of Pericles
and the other demagogues. Some authorities how-
ever affirm, that Pericles did not procure an ordet
for Cimon's return, till they had entered into a pri-
vate compact, by means of his sister Eipinice, that
Cimon should have the command abroad, and with
two hundred galleys lay waste the king of Persia's
dominions, and i'ericles retain the direction of aiiairs

^* In Bfcotla, beiw-eeH the Ismcnns and the Asopus.

35 To t.!)e number of a biuulred, fv= we shall see in the Life of
Cimon. They hvCi been conjured by liieir chief, when lie was dri-
ven from the aviny. t(^ exert themselves for his viadication as wyli
as their own : and they did it nobly.* .

VOL. II. / C

18 PERICLES.

at home. It ajjpcared too, tliat Elpinice before this
had softened Pericles' resentment a2:ainst Cimon,
and procured her brother a milder sentence than that
of death. Pericles was one of those appointed by
the people to manage the impeachment ; and when
Elpinice addressed him as a si!p])liant, he smikxl and
said, " Yon are old, Elpinice ; much too old to
" solicit in so weighty an aiiair." He rose up how-
ever but once to speak, barely to acquit himself of his
trust, and bore nnich less hardly upon Cimon thau
the rest of his accusers ^^. Who then can give cre-
dit to Idomeneus '% when he savs that Pericles caused
the orator Ephialtes, his friend and assistant in the
administration, to be assassinated, through jealousy and
envy of his illustrious character ? I know^ not where
he met with this calumnv, which he thus bitterlv
vents against a man, not indeed in all respects irre-
proachable, but who certainly had such a greatness
of mind and such a high sense of honour, as were
totally incompatible with an action so savage and in-
! human. The truth of the matter (according to Aris-
' totle) is, tiiat Ephialtes being grown formidable to
' the nobles, on account of his inflexible severity
in prosecuting all who invaded the rights of the
people, his enemies caused him to be taken off in a
private and treacherous manner, by iVristodicus of
Tanagra.

About the same time died Cimon ^^^ in the expedi-
tion to Cyprus. And the nobility, perceiving thai
iPericlcs had now reached a height of authority which
set him fiu' above tiie other citizens, were desirous
of having some person to oppose him, who might give
a check to his power, and prevent his making him-

^* Yet Cimon was fined fifty talents (9687/. lOv.) and narrowly
escaped a capital sentence, liaving only a majority ot" tiiree votes to
prevent it.

35 Idomeneus of Lanipsacus, tlie autlior of this improbable story,
was a pupil of Epicurus, p.nd wrote a History of Sociates' scholars,
&:c. SeeDiog. Laert. ii. 20., and Voss. de Hist. Gr. i. 11.^

i* At thesiegeofCitir.ai, B. C. 449. ^A. 'A^

PERICLES. 19

self absolute. For this purpose they set up Tliucy-
(lides, of the ward of A]o])ece, a man of gieat pru-i
dence, and brothcr-in-Jaw to Cimon. He had liOt,.!
indeed, Cimon's taients for war, but he was superior \
to iihn in Ibrensie and poiitieal abilities; and by re- '
siding constantly in Athens, and opposing Pericles .
in the general assembly, he scon brought the govern- \
ment to an equilibrium. For he did not sutler per-" ■
sons of rank to be dispersed and confounded with the
rest of the people, because in that case their dignity
was obscured ; but collected them into a separate
body, by which means their authority was enhanced,
and sulhcient weight thrown into their scale. There
was indeed from the beginning a kind of doubtful
separation, which like the flaws in a piece of iron,
indicated that the aristocratical party and that of the
commonalty were not perfectly one, though they
were not actually divided : but the ambition of Peri-
cles and Thucvdides, and the contest between them,
had so extraordinary an effect upon the city, that it
w^as quite split in two, one of the parts being called
' the people ' and the other ' the nobility.* For this
reason, Pericles more than ever gave the people the
reins, and endeavoured to ingratiate himself with
them ; contriving to have always some show, or play^
or feast, or procession in the city, and to amuse it
with the politest pleasures.

As another mean of employing their attention, he
sent out sixty galleys every year, manned for eight
months^'' with a considerable number of the citizens,
who were both paid for their service, and improved
themselves as mariners. He likewise sent a colony of
a thousand men to the Chersonese, five hundred to
Naxos, two hundred and fifty to Andros, a thousand
into the country of the Bisaltce in Thrace, and others

" Some, instead of li^-ifvetc, read fj^^ae, ; and, according to tljis

reading, tl)e passage must be trans^latcd, ' manned with the

citizens, whost- pay was eight ininae, and who at the same tiaie im-'
proved,' &t^

c3

20 PERICLES^

into Italy, \vho settled in Sybaris ^' and changed it^^
[name to Thnrii. These things he did, to clear the
\city of a useless multitude, ^vho were very trouble-
■ some when they had nothing to do ; to make provision
5 for the most necessitous, and to kecj) the allibs ot*^
Athens in awe, by placing colonics like so many
garrisons in their neighbourhood.

But that, which was the chief delight and ornament
of Athens and the wonder of strangers, and which alone
serves to prove that the boasted po^ver and opulence
of ancient Greece is not an idle tale, was the magnifi-
cence of the temples and pubHc edifices. Yet no part
of the conduct of Pericles so effectually moved thc^
spleen of his enemies. In their accusations of him to
the people, they insisted, " That he had brought the
'' deepest disgrace upon the Athenians by removing
" the public treasures of Greece fi'om Delos ''''^, and
" taking them into his own custody : That he had
not left hinjself even the specious apology, ol
having caused the money to be brought to Athens-
for it's greater security, and to keep it from being
seized by the barbarians : That Greece must
needs considei' it as the highest insult, ami an act
of open tyranny, when she saw the money which
*' she had been obliged to contribute toward the war
*' lavished bv the Athenians in "'ildintr their citv,
" and ornamenting it with statues and temples that
" cost a thousand talents '^, as a vain woman decks
" herself with jewels." Pericles ansAvered this charge
by observing, " That they were not obliged to give

•'^ Syban's, a city of ^^agRa Grjecia, had been tlirice destroyed
(as PJutarcli elisewhere states) and was in the last instance rebuilt,
at a small distance from it's former site, under this new name.
, 3^ 'i'he anniial contributions of the (irecian states toward a ^Me-
dian war were iodgeil, with other sums, in the temple of Apollo in
Delos, under ihe care of treasurers appointed by the Greeks. These
hoards Pericles iniquitoiisry transi'errcd to Athens, and expended in
public buildings for tlie decoration of that city-*

•4-^- The Partlrnion, or temple of ' thy Mr^in Minerva,' is said ta
' have cost this sum. - •

li
«c

PERICLES. -21

a
*c

■a

a

(C

the allies any account of the sums which tliey had
received ; since they had kept the barbarians at a
distance, and effectually defended those allies, who
had not furnished either horses, ships, or men, but
only contributed money, M'hich is no lono-er the
property of the giver but of the receiver^ if he per-
forms the conditions upon which it is bestowed.
That, as the state was provided with all the ne-
cessaries of war, it's superfluous wealth should
be expended upon such works as, when executed,
would be eternal monuments of it's glory, and
" which during their execution w^ould diffuse uni-
" versal plenty ; for, as it was requisite to appro-
priate so many kinds of labour and such a variety
of instruments and materials to these undertakino's,
to exert every art and employ every hand., almost
the whole city would be in pay, and be at the
same time both adorned and supported by itself.'*
Such indeed as w^ere of a proper age and strength,
were Avanted for the wars and well xeM^arded for their
services ; and, as for the mechanics and meaner sort \
of people, they went not without their share of the ';
putjlic money, nor yet received it to maintain them '■
in idleness. By the constructing of great edifices,
Avhich required many arts and a long time to finish
them, they had equal pretensions to be rec'ompensed
out of the treasury (tliough they stirred notfiom tlus
city) with the manners^ soldiers, and garrisons. For
the different materials, such as stone, brass, ivory, gold,
ebony, and cypress, furnished employment to carpen-
ters, masons, brasiers, goldsmiths, painters, turners,
and other artificers ; the conveyance of them by sea
employed merchant's and sailors, and by land wheel-
wrights, waggoners, carriersj rope-makers, leather-
cutters, paviors, and iron-founders : and every .art
had a number of the lower people ranged in proper
subordination to execute it, like soldiers under .the
command of a general. Thus, by the exercise of
these different trades, was plenty diffused amoui^
persons of every rank and condition. Thus wf

22 PERICLES.

works raised of an astonisliing magni'inle and iiiinn-
tabJci beauty and perfection, every arcliitcct striving
to surpass the magnificence of the design by the
elegance of the execution ; and yet, after ail, the
most wonderful circumstance was the expedition,
with which they wxre com])leted. Many edifices,
each of which seems to have required the labour of
several successive ages, were finished during the
administration of a single man.

It is said that, when Agatharcluis the painter
valued himself upon the celerity and case with which
he despatched his pieces, Zcuxis re}>lied, " If I
*' boast, it sliall be of the slo\nicss with which I
*' finish mine *." For ease and speed in the execu-
tion seldom give a work any lasting, importance, or
exquisite beauty ; whereas the time, which is ex-
pended in labour, is recovered and iepaid by the
duration of the performance. Hence we have the
more reason to wonder, that the structures raised

* So do not our modern epic writers. How beautirully docs
Milton, in his 'Reason ofCluirch-Govcrnnient,' observe; ' Neither
do I think it shame to covenant with any knowing readier, that ibr
some few years yet I may go on trust with him toward the payment
of what I am now indebted, as being a work not to be raised from
the heat of youth or the vapours of wine; like that wliich flows
nt waste from the pen of some vulgar amourist, or the trencher fury
of a, rhyming parasite ; nor to be obtained by the invocation of
dame Memory and her siren daughters, but bv devout praver to
that Eternal Spirit, who can enrich witi) all utterance and know-
ledge, and sends out his seraphim, with the hallowed fire of his altar,
to touc!i and purify ti)e lips of whom he pleasts, dc. ^-c. !' And
how keenly does his adminiijie biographer, Dr. Syuimons, couunent
on ' the very different sensations with which some of our more
modern i)oets secvn to have contemplated the VLi-y arduous labour
of constructing an epic poem. But all the parties (he adds) may
be nghtjvvith reference to their own particular object. Alter inti-
mating the toils by tea and land, by opposition from earth and hea-
ven, wliich his hero was to sustain, and finally, bv the assistance of
the fates and of Jupiter, to overcome, , the poet closes the aweful
recital with tliis majestic hue — -

TantiC molis ernt RovHinam. cnndcre (tenl^m.
This was spoken of a mighty empire, whicii was to t-Ntend over the
world, and to endure for a, succession of ages: but an Arab camp
may be planted in one day, and it's vestiges mjiy be efliiccd by the
wiaid oi the dciicrt in auolher.' ^Li^e. of MiJton.)

PERICLES. 23

by Pericles should be built so quickly, and yet built
tor ages; for as each of thcui, when finished, had
the venerable air of anticjuity ; so, even now, they
Tctain the strentitli and freshness of a modern build-
ing. A bloom is diffused over them, which preserves
their aspect untarnished by time, as if they were
animated M'ith a spirit of perpetual youth and unfad-
ing elegance.

Phidias was ajipointed by Pericles superintendent
of all the public edilices, though the Athenians
had then other eminent architects and workmen.
The Parthenon (or ' temj^le of Minerva') whose
dimensions had been a hundred feet square", was
re-built by Callicrates and Ictinus. Corcjebus began
the temple of Initiation at Eleusis, but only lived
to finish the lower rank of columns with their archi-
traves. Metagenes, of the ward of Xypete, added
the rest of the entablature, and the upper rows of
columns ; and Xenocles of Cholargus built the dome
on the top^-. The Long Wall, the building of
which Socrates says he heard Pericles propose to
the people, was undertaken by Callicrates. Cratinus
ridicules this work, as proceeding very slowly ;

Stones upon stones the orator has piled

With swelling words, but words will build no walls.

The Odeum or ' mu^ic-thcatre,' which was like-
wise built by the direction of Pericles, had within it

■*' This temple which was built witliin the citadel was called
Ilecatmnpcduii, because it was oriL',iiiully a hundred feet square.
After it had been burned by the Persian,^, it was rebuilt by Peri-
cles ; and, though it was greatly enlarged, retained the same appel-
lation. (L.) See the maps of t!ie i'uj/agc dc. jcu.iie Anacharsc,
In it's ruins are still to be admired the elegance of it's proportions,
the beauty of it's basso-relievos, and the ijnowy whiteness of it's
marble. (See too Le Hoy, Ruiitcs des plus beaux monumeus de
la (hcce, I.)*

■*' This edifice is remarkable for it's two stories of columns, like
that at PiEstum or Posidonia, wliicii were constructed after .Athe-
nian models. The Lantern, or Cupola, likewise deserves particular
notice.

The Long Wall was five miles in length, and two chariots could
drive abreast upon it's top. It connected the Pirieus with the city.*

u vehicles:

many rows of seats, and of pillars ; the roof was of
a conic figure, after llie model (we are told) of the
king of Persia's p^'.vilion "^^ Cratinus, therefore,
rallies him again in his [)lay called Thrattae j

As Jove, an onion on his head lie wears ;
As Pericles, a whole orclu -tra bears;
Afraid of broils and hanisiiinent no more,
He tunes the shell he trembled at before !

Pericles at this time exerted ail his interest to
have a decree made, appointing a prize for the best
performer in music during the Paiiathciura^* ; and,
as he was himself appointed judge and distributer of
the prizes, he gave the contending artists directions
in what manner to proceed, whether their perform-
ance was vocal, or on the flute or Ijre. From that
time the contests for the music-prizes always took
place in the Odeum.

The Vestibule of the citadel vras finished in five
years by Mnesicles the architect. A wonderful
event, which happened while the work was in hand,
showed that the goddess was not hostile to the work,
but rather took it under her protection, and encou-
raged them to complete it. One of the best and
most active of the workmen, missing his step, fell
from the top to the bottom, and was bruised in such
a manner that his life was despaired of by the physi-
cians. Pericles was deeply concerned at the acci-
dent; but in the midst of his affliction the goddess
appeared to him in a dream, and informed him of a
remedy '^\ which he applied to the speedy relief of
the patient. In memory of this cure, he ])laced in
the citadel, near the altar (which is said to have

■'> In this building likewise was held the wheat market, and every
tiling relative to grain by process or otherwise transacted. It's
top, supported by pillars of stone or marble, was built from the sale
of the masts and jards of the Persian vessels. (Vitruv. v. 9.) It
was burned by Sylla, at the siege of Athens ; and soon afterward
rebuilt by Ariobatzanes, king of Cappadocia.*

*^ For an account of this great festival, see the Life of Theseus,
Vol. I. p. 29 *

■*^ The plant Parthenhim^ or * common feverfew,' of the genu?
Matricaria. It has received (observe the editors of the EncycL

PERICLES. 2

::.>

been there before) a brazen statue of the * Minerva
of Health.' The jjolclen statue of the same sroddess '^^
Avas the tvorkmansliip of Phidias, and his name is
inscribed upon the pedestal ; for through the friend-
siiip of Pericles (as we have already observed) lie
had the direction of everv thinjj^, and all the artists
received his orders. For this the one was envied,
and the other slandered ; and it was intimated, that
Phidias for Pericles* accommodation received into
his house ladies, M'ho came thither under pretence
of seeing his works. The comic poets, getting hold
of this story, represented him as a perfect libertine.
Tliey accused him of an intrigue with the wife of
Mejiippus, his friend and lieutenant in the army :
and because Pyrilampes, another intimate acquaint-
ance of his, had a collection of curious birds and
particularly of peacocks'*^, it Avas supposed that he

Brit.) a most extraordinary character in hysteric and other affec-
tions of the nerves, as well as for being a carminative, or warm
stimulating bitter. Dr. Lewis, however, thinks it inferior to camo-
mile ; with which he says it agrees in all it's sensible qualities,
being only somewhat weaker. Pliny (H. N. xxii. 17.) relates this
miraculous cure, and derives the name of the plant from it's rela-
tion to the Virgin-goddess. He mentions likewise, xxxiv. 8., the
statue ( SplanchnopiesJ of this slave, which Pericles caused to be
made by Stipas of Cyprus.*

""5 This statue was of gold and ivory. Pausanias (i. 2t.) has
given us a description of it. The goddess was represented stand-
ing, clothed in a tunic that reached down to her feet. On her
i^gis, or breast-plate, was P.Iedusa's Iiead in ivory, and Victory.
She held a spear in her hand ; and at her feet lay a buckler and a
dragon, supposed to be Erichthonius. The sphynx was repre-
sented on tlie middle of her helmet, with a griffin on each side.
This statue was thirty-nine feet high ; the "\'ictory on the breast-
plate was about four cubits ; and forty talents of gold were cm-
ployed upon it. (L.) (Thucyd. ii. 13.) Pausanias mentions like-
wise the ' Minerva of Health.' Plutarch specifies the inscribing
of Phidias' name, because it was a capital offence by the laws.
Myron, it is said, had engraved his in very small letters on the
inside of the thigli of his celebrated Heifer, which greatly enhanced
it's value.*

'♦^ Peacocks were at that time, from their rarity, in high esti-
mation ;

Q,nia veneat auro

Rara avis. Her. Sat. H. ii. 56.

26 rERICLES.

kent thcni oniv as presents for tliosc "women, "who
granted favours to Pericles. But what vvoiKler is it,
that men oC ii satirical turn should daily sacrifice
the cliaracters or' the great to that malevolent
daM"non, the envy of the multitude; when Stesim-
brotus of Thasos has dared to lodc'e a«2:ainst Pencles
the horrid and fabulous accusation of having corrupt-
ed his son's wife t So diflicult it is to come at truth,
in the pursuits of history : since, if the writers
live after the events wliicli they relate, they can
only be imperfectly informed of lacts ; and if they de-
scribe the persons and transactions of their own times,
they are tempted by envy and hatred, or by interest
and friendship, to vitiate and pervert the truth !

Tlie orators oi' Thucydides' party raised a cla-
mour against Pericles, asserting that he wasted the
public treasure, and reduced the revenue to nothing.
Pericles, in his defence, demanded of the people in
full assembly ; " Whether, or not, they thought that
*' he had expended too much ?" Upon their answer-
ing in the atiirmativc, " Then be it," cried he,
"charged to my account^", not yours: only let
" the new edifices be inscribed with my name, not
*' with that of the people of Athens." Whether it
were that they admired the greatness of his spirit,
or were ambitious to share the glory of such magni-
ficent works, they exclaimed ; " That he might
" spend as much as he pleased of the public treasure,
*' without sparing it in the least."

At last the contest came on between Thucydides

*" It appears, from a passage in Thucydides, that the public
stock of the Athenians amounted to nine thousand seven liuiulrt'd
talents (1,879,375/.) of which Pciicles had laid out, in those public
buildings, three thousand, seven hundred talents (716,875/.) It is
natural ttk-refore to inquire, how lie could tell the people that it
s!u>uld be at his own expense, especially since Plutarch informs us
in the setjuel, that l)e had not in the least improved the estate left
him by his t'aliier ? To which the true answer probably is, that
IVricltjs well knew the vanity of the Athenians would never let
them permit him to inscribe the new buildings with his name, to the
exclusion of theirs: or perhaps he might venture to say any thing,
btiiiii; secure of a majority of their votes.

\

PERICLES. 27

and lumself, wbicli of them should be exiled by
tlie Ostracism : wiicn Pericles gained the victory,
banished his adversary, and entirely defeated Ins
party. The opposition now being at an end, and
unanimity takiiig place among all ranks of peo})Ie,
Pericles became sole master of Athens and it's de-
pendences. The revenues, the army and navy, the
islands and the sea, a most extensive territory peo-
pled by barbarians as well as Greeks, fortified with
the obedience of subject nations, the friendship of
kings, and the alliance of princes, were all at his
command.

From this time he became a different man, and
was no longer so obsequious to the humour of the
populace, which is as wild and changeable as the
winds. The multitude were not indulged or court-
ed; the government, in fact, was not popular ; it*s
loose and luxuriant harmony was confined to stricter
measures, and it assumed an aristocratieal or rather
monarchical form. lie kept the public good in his
eye, and pursued the straight path of honour : for
the most part gently leading them by argument to a
sense of what was right, and soinetimes forcing them
to comply with what was for their own advantage ;
in this respect imitating a good physician, who in
the various symptoms of a long disease sometimes
administers medicines tolerably agreeable, and at
other times such as are sharp and strong, when such
alone are capable of restoring the patient. He pos-
sessed exclusively the art of carefully controlling
those many disorderly passions, which necessarily
spring up among a people possessed of such an ex-
tensive dominion. The two engines, with which he
worked, were hope and fear ; with these repressing
their violence when they were too impetuous, and
supj)orting their spirits when inclined to languor,
lie made it appear that rhetoric is (as Plato defined
it) '' the art of ruling the m.indsofmen;" and that
it's princij)al province consists in moving the passions
and afiections of the soul, which, hke so manv strings

2S PERICLES.

in a musical instrument, reaairc the touch of a
inasterly and a delicate hand. Neither were the
])o\vers of eloquence alone sufficient, but (as Thucy-
dides observes ""') the orator was a man of probity
iind unblemished reputation. Money could not
bribe liim : nav, he was so nuich above the desire of
it, that though he increased greatly the opulence of
the state, which he found not inconsiderable, and
though his power exceeded that of many kings and
tyrants, some of whom have bequeathed their sove-
reignty to their descendents, he added not a single
drachma to his paternal estate.

Thucydides, indeed, gives this candid account of
tl^e power and authority of Pericles ; but the comic
\vritcrs abuse him in a most malignant manner, nam-
ing his friends 'the new Pisistratida^ •"',' and calling
I iipon him to swear that he would never attempt
to render himself absolute, since his authority was
already much too enormous and overbearing in a
free state. Tcleclides says, the Athenians had given
up to him

] The tribute of the states, the states themselves,
/ To bind, to loose ; to build, and to destroy ;

in peace, in war to govern ; nay, to rule

Their very fate, like some superior being.

And this not only for a time, or during the prime
and flower of a short administration : but for forty
years together retaining the pre-eminence, amidst
sncli men as Ephialtcs, Leocrates, Myronides, Cimon,
Tolmides, and Thucydides ; and continuing it no
less than iifteen years after the fall and banishment
of the latter. In him the power of the magistrates,,
which to them was but annual, all centred ; yet still
he kept himself untainted by avarice. Not that he
was inattentive to his finances ; but on the contrary,

^ •'' ii. t).';.*
^° By this implyinj^, that they were intended, like the guards
assigned to P?sistratus when he counterfei*^ed fear of his enemies,
as a mean of usurping the supreme power.*

withoiit neglecting his paternal estate, or choosing
to have miicli trouble with it (Us he had not nnich
time to spare) he brought the management of it into
a method, which he considered as at once the easiest
and the most exact. For lie used to turn a whole year's
produce into money by a single sale, and with this
he bouglit from day to day all Irinds of necessaries at
the market. Cut this way of living was not agree-
able to his sons when grown up, and the allowance
which he made to the women did not appear to them
sufficiently generous. They complained of a pit-
tance daily measured out with scrupulous (economy,
which admitted none of those superfiiiities so com-
mon in lari^'C houses and wealthy families, and could
not bear to think of the expences being so niceh^
adjusted to the income.

The person, v/ho managed these concerns with so
much exactness, was a servant named Evangelus,
either remiarkably fitted for the purpose by nature,
or formed to it by Pericles. Anaxagoras, indeed,
considered tliese lower attentions as inconsistent
with his wisdom. Follovv'iug the dictates of enthu-
siasm, and wrapt up in sublin^.e enquiries, he quitted
his house, and left his lands untillcd and desolate.
But, in my opinion, there is an essential difference
between a speculative and a practical philosopher.
The former advances his ideas into the reirions of
science, without the assistance ot any thing corpo-
real or external ; t\\Q latter endeavours to apply his
great qualities to the use of mankind, and riches
atibrd him not only necessary but excellent assist-
ance. Thus it was with Pericles, who by his vv'ealth
was enabled to relieve numbers of the poor citizens.
Nay, for want of such prudential regards, this xQvy
Anaxagoras (we are tohl) lay neglected and unpro-
vided for, insomuch that the poor old man had
covered up his head, and was going to starve him-
self ^^ But an account of it being brought to Peri-

51 It was customary arjong the ancients for a per?on, whowrf
-de^ci'nuaed to, put an end to his life, to co'.'er up his head; vvhythe"

9

I

I

S3 rEKfcLE8.

cles, he was extrcjnely moved at it, ran instantly to
Ills relief, expostiiiatcd, entreated ; be^vaiIing not so
inr.eh his iHend's iate as his own, if his adminis-
tration slioidd lose so \ahiable a counsehor. Anax-
agoras, uncovering his face, replied ; " Ah Pericles!
" those, that liave need of a lamp, take care to
" snj)ply it witii oil."

By this time, the Lacedfemonians began to express
some iealousv of the Atiienian greatness; and Peri-
cles willing to advance it still higher, and to make
the people more sensible of their importance and
adequacy to higli attempts, procured an order that
all the Greeks, (wheresoever they resided, whether
in Europe or in Asia, wliether their cities were smaR
or large) should send deputies to Athens to consult
about rebuilding the (hecian temples which the
barbarians had burned, and about providing those
sacriiices, which had been vxrvved during the Persian
war for the preservation of Greece ; and likewise tO"
enter into such measures as might secure navigaiion,
and maintain the peace.

Accordingly twenty persons, each upward of
fifty years of age '-, were despatched with this pro-
posal to the different states of Greece. Five went
to tiie lonians and Dorians in Asia, and to the is-
landers as far as Lesbos and Rhodes ; five to the
cities about the Hellespont and in Thrace, as far as
Bvzantium ; h'vc to the inhabitants of Bcrotia,
Phocis, and Peloponnesus, and thence by Locri
along tiie adjoining continent, to Acarnania and
Am brae ia. i lie rest were sent through Euba^a to

he cU>voknl liinisclfto ueatli for the service of his country, or simply
to rid hiiMself of a burlhcnsome existence. (L.)

• — Male re o^esfu c?(m vellem miltere operio

Me ccpitc ill Jliimen. Hor. Siit. II. iii. 3S.

.Dicp. L;iert. in his T.ifo of this philosopher says, that he gave up his

patriilKHiy to his rehitions, -.a. rrcil^ua. 7ra.^ix/-^r.<ri roi^, nKucu*

"■- This was a critit:il age Rt Athens ; those, avIio had exceeded
it, being tlien first snnunoned to deliver their opinions in the as-
semblies of the people: Ti? cyi^ivui fiaxt-cci t&'v y^jp TnmKovl.et tr^
liyo.'iiU^ : (Aristoph. Acharn., Uemoslh. cl .^sch. Hffj Stj4>. &c.)*

12

PERICLES. SI

the Greeks tliat dwelt upon Mount Oeta and near
the Maliac Bay, to the Phthiota', the Acha^ans ''''\
and the Thessalians, inviting tliem to join in the
council and new confederacy for the preservation of
the peace of Greece. It })roduced no effect, how-
ever, neither did the cities send tlieir deputies ; the
reason of which is said to have been the opposition
of the Laceda?monians '\ for the proposal v.as first
rejected in Peloponnesus. But I have given an ac-
count of it, as a specimen of the greatness of the
orator's spirit, and of liis disposition to form mag-
nificent designs.

His chief merit in war was, the safety of his mea-
sures. He never willingly engaged in any very un-
certain or dangerous expedition: neither had he any
ambition to imitate those generals, who are admired
as great men, merely because their rash enterprises
have been attended vvith success ; he always told the
Athenians, " Tliat, as flu' as their tate "^dcpended
" upon him, they should be immortal." Perceiving
that Tolmides the son of Tolmaeus, in coniidence of
his former success and niilitary reputation ^% was
preparing to invade Bocotia at an unseasonable time;
and that, beside the regular troops, he had per-
suaded the bravest and most adventurous of the
Athenian youth, to the number of a thousand, to go
volunteers in that expedition ; he addressed him in
public, and tried to divert him from it, making use
among others of those Mell-known words, " if von

" By * Achscans' we mcson-jetiine'; to uncVorstr.rni tlie Greeks in
|2;eneral, especially in the writings of the poets, Homer, Sec. and
sometimes the inhabitants of a particular district in Peloponnesus:
but we must here understand a people of Thessaly, so called. (See
Steph. Byz. ro,-. <\>c(nx<,.)

J'^ It is no wonder that the Lacedaemonians opposed this under-
taking, since tlic giving way to it would have been ackno;vledging
the Athenians as masters 'of Greece. The Athenians, indeed;
should not have attempted it, without an order or decree of the
Amphictyons.

" lie had ravaged Peloponnesus, burnt the Carthaginian vessels,
defeated the Sicyonians, &c. He was himself, however, beaten hr
the LacedannioniaBs at Coronea, B. C. 447,*

32 PERICLES.

" 1-

iS

egard not the opinion of Pericles, wait at least for
the advice oftinie, vvlio is the best of counsellors."
This saying, for the present, gained no considerable
applause : but when, a few days afterward, intelli-
gence arrived that Tolmrdes was deteated and killed
at Coronea, together with many of the most valiant
citizens, it obtained Pericles greai^ respect and love
from the people ; who considered it as a proof not
only of his sagacity, but of his aiiection for his
countrymen.

Of his military expeditions, that to the Cher-
sonese procured him the highest honour, because it
proved very salutary to the Greeks who dwelt there.
For he not only strengthened their population with
the addition of a thousand colonists, but raised
jbrtifications across the isthmus from sea to sea ;
thus guarding against the incursions of the Thracians
who were spread about the Chersonese, and putting
an end to tliose long and grievous wars which that
district had incurred from the neighbourhood of the
barbarians, as well as to the robberies with which it
had been infested by the borderers and native in-
habitants. But the expedition, most celebrated
among strangers, was that by sea around Pelopon-
nesus. He set sail from Pegae in the territories of
Megara with a hundred ships of war, and not only
ravaged the maritime cities, as Tolmides had done
before him, but landed his forces and penetrated
far into the country. The terror of his arms drove
the inhabitants into their fortified cities, with the
exception of the Sicyonians who made head against
him at Xeniea, and were defeated in a pitched
battle ; in memory of which victory, he erected a
trophy. From Achaia, a coniederate sta'e, he took a
number of men into his galleys, and 'tailed to the
opposite side of the continent ; then passing by the
mouth of the Achelous, he made a descent in Acar-
nania, shut up tiie (EneadiL^ within their walls, and
having laid waste the country returned home. In
the Vvhole course of this aiiiiir, he .a])peared terrible

PERICLES. , 3»

to his eiicmies, and to his countryii^eu prudent and
energetic ; for no miscarriage was coaimitted, nor
did even any misfortune happen, during the whole
time.

Having sailed to Pontus with a large and well-
equipped fleet, ])e procured for the Grecian cities in
tliat quarter aJl the advantages which they desired,
and treated thcin with the highest^ regard. To
the barbarous nations that surrounded them, and to
their kings and princes, he exhibited the greatness
of Atiiens, by showing with what security her fleets
could sail, and that she M'as in eiiect mistress of the
seas. He left the people of ISinope thirteen ships
under the command of Lamachus, and a body of
men to act ap;ainst Timesileos^'^ their tvrant. And»
when the usurper and his party were driven out, he
caused a decree to be made that a colony of six hun-
dred Athenian volunteers should be placed in Si-
nope, and put in possession of those houses and
lands which had belonged to the oppressors.

Pie did not howevei give way to the wild desires
of the citizens, nor would he indulge theiu, when
elated with their strength and good fortune, they
talked of recovering Egypt"'', and of attempting the
coast of Persia. Many were likewise at this time I
possessed with that unfortunate passion for Sicily, |
Vv'hich was subsequently'^ still farther inflamed by
the orators of Alcibiades' party. Nay some even i
dreamed of Hetruria'^-^ and Carthage, and not (as

, ''' This tyrant is not plseuhere mentioned. Sinope is a city of
Paphlagonia, colonised by Milesians, on the borders of the Euxine
or Black sea.*

^" For the Athenians in Thucydidcs (ii. I09.) had been masters
of Egypt, as we find. They were driven out of it by Megabyzus,
Artaxerxes* lieutenant, 01. Ixxx. 1.; and it 'vvasonly in 01.
Ixxxi. 4., that Perieles made his successful expedition against Pelo-'
ponnesus ! It is not therefore strange that the Athenians, now in
the height of their prosperity, should talkof recovering their footing
in acflunti}', which they had so recently lost.

-^ Fifteeii or sixteen years after the death of Pericles.*
. ^9 Hetruria seems oddly joined with Carthage ; but we must'',
consider that Hetruria was on one side of Siciiy, and Carthage on
YoL. II, D

f34- PERICLES.

tliey imagined) without reasonable c^roimd of iio])e^
because of tlie innnense extent of their dominions,
and tlie successful course of their affairs.

But Pericles restrained this impetuosity of the ci-
tizens, and curbed their extravagant lust of con-
quest ; employing the greatest part of their forces
in strengthening and securing their present acquisi-
tions, and considering it as a matter of consequence
to keep the Laceda2mouians within bounds ; whom
he therefore opposed, as upon other occasions, so
particularly in tlie Sacred""* War. For when the
Lacedaemonians by dint of arms had restored to the
citizens of Delphi their temple, of which the Pho-
cians had taken possession, Pericles immediately
after the departure of the Lacedremonians marched
thither, and replaced it in the hands of the Pho-
cians. And as the Lacedaemonians had engraved
upon the forehead of tlie brazen wolf the privilege,
which the people of Delphi had granted them, of
consulting the oracle first^', Pericles caused the
Same privilege for the Athenians to be inscribed
upon the wolf's right-side.

The event proved, that he was right in confining
the Athenian forces to act within the bounds of
Greece. For, in the first place, the Euba}ans re-
volted, and he led an army against them. Soon af-
terward intelligence wasbroughtthatMegara hadcom-
liienced hostilities, and that the Lacedaemonian forces
under the command of king Plistonax were upon the

the other. The Athenians therefore, after they had in imaginatio^i
devoured Sicily, niiglit tliink of extendin;^ tlu'ir conquests to the
(tountries on tlie right and left ; in the same manner as Pyrrhus, at
a siibsequ(?nt period, indulged l)is ambitious projects of subduing
J^io-ilvji Italy, and Africa. See his Life, Vol.111.

^'^ So called, from it's relation to the temple of Delphi. There
was another, still more celebrated, of the same name, in the time
ftf IMiilip of IMaeedon.*
■^. ^' 'i'liis wolf is said to have been consecrated and pKaced by the
side of the great altar, on account of a wolf *s killing a thief who
had robbed the temple, and by repeated bowlines leading the ihliR-
bitants of Delplii to the place v.here the treasure lay. But see
I'ausan.x. Ik

PERICLES. S5

borders of Attica. The enemy offered him battle :
he (lid not choose, however, to risk an engagement
with so resolute an army. But as Flistonax was
very young, and chiefly directed by Cleandrides, a
counsellor whom the I'^phori had assigned him on
account of his tender age, he tempted the latter
with a bribe, and succeeding to his wish persuaded
him to draw oif the Peloponnesians fh)m Attica,
'he soldiers dispersing and retiring to their rcspect-
-ve homes, the Laceda^mionians were so highly in-
censed, that they laid a heavy fine upon the king ;
and, as he was unable to pay it, he withdrew from
Lacedcemon^-. Cleandrides, who had fled from jus-
tice, they condemned to death. He was the father
ofGylippus, who defeated the Athenians in Sicily,
and who seemed to have derived from him the vice
of avarice as an hereditary distemper. For he too
was led by it into criminal practices, for which (as
we have related, in the Life of Lysandcr) he v/as ba-
nished with ignominy from Sparta.

In the accounts of this campaign, Pericles stated
ten talents laid out " for a necessary service ;" and
the people allowed it, without examining the matter
closely, or prying into the secret. According to
some writers, and among others Theophrastus the
])hiIosopher, Pericles sent ten talents annually to
Sparta, with which he gained all the magistracy,
and kept them from acts of hostility ; not that he
]HU'chased peace with the money, but only gained
time, that he might have leisure to make prepara-
tions for subsequently carrying on the war with ad-
vantage.

Immediately upon the retreat of the Lacedsemo-
nians, he turned his arms against the revolters, and
passiiig over into Eiibcpa with fifty ships and five tliou-
sand men, reduced tlieir cities. He expelled the

'- Thucydidcs (ii. 21.) say?, that lie was. banislieJ bv his Vil-
jec;s, oil susjiicioa ofjiaving been bribed to retreat.*

T) 2

96 PKRICLEa

HippobotiB, persons distinguished by tlieir opulence
and autiiority among the Chaicidians, and having
exterminated all the Hestia^ans, bestowed their city
upon a colony of Athenians. The cause of this se-
verity \va« their liavin^r seized an Athenian ship, and
murthered the ciew.

Soon after this, the Athenians and Lacedicmo-
nians havini^ ajxreed ui)on a truce for thirrv years,
Pericles caused a decree to be made for an expedi-
tion against Samos. His pretence was, that the
Samians, when commanded to put an end to the war
witli the Milesians, had refused it. But as he seems
to have entered upon this war merely to gratify As-
pasia, it may not here be unreasonable to inquire
by what art or power this woman captivated the
most illustrious statesmen, and brought even philo-
sophers^ to speak of lier so much to her advantage.

It is agreed, that she was by birth a Milesian '^^,
and the daughter of Axiochus. She is reported to
have trodden in the steps of Thargelia^^ who was
descended from the ancient lonians, and to have re-
served her intimacies for the great. This Tliargelia,
who to the charms of her person added a pecdiar
politenc.-)S and poignancy of wit, had many lovers
among the Greeks, and drew over to the king of
Persia's interest all tliat approaclied her ; by meuns
of whom, as they were persons of eminence and
authority, she sowed the seeds of the Median faction
among the states of Greece.

Some, indeed, afHrm that Pericles made his court
to Aspasia, only on account of her wisdom and po-

*^ Socrates and Pluto.*

''* ^iilL•tu>, a city in Ioi>ia, eminent for proilucing persons of
extraordinary abilities, and proTcrhially dissipated. Tlie licen-
tious fictions there circulattd, of \-. Iiich one Aristides was a cele-
brated author, are called i)y I'iularch (in his I^ife of Crassus)

"> Who, by her beauty, obtained the sovereignty of Thessaly.
Slie came, however, to an untiuicly end ; for she wae murthered by
one ot her lovers.

PIIRICLF.?. 5?

litical abilities. Nay, even Socrates himself occa-
sionaJlv vi>ited her aJons; with his friends ; and her
acquaintance took their wives with them to liear her
discourse, tliouirh her vocation was neither honour-
able nor decent, for she kept a number of courte-
sans in her house. .Eschines informs us that Lysi-
cles, \\ho was a s'razier^ and of a mean umrenerous
disposition, by iiis intercourse with A^pasia afier
Pericles' death, became the most considerable man
in Athens. And though Plato's ^lenexenus in the
beginning is rather humorous than serious, yet
so much of history we may gather from it, that
many Athenians resorted to her on acci^unt of her
skill in the art of speaking'".

I should not, however, think that the attiichment
of Pericles was of so delicate a kind. For though
his wife, w ho v\as his relation and had been first mar-
ried to Hipponicus (by whom she had Callias the
rich) brougiit him two sons, Xanthippus and P^ira-
ius, yet they lived so ill together that they paited
by consent. She married another, and he took
Aspasia, for whom he had the tenderest regard : in-
somuch, that he never went out upon business, or
returned without saluting her. In the comedies she

== ^Miat the eraplo^Tnents were, to which riik Lvsic1e« \ras ad-
vanced, is no where recorded. (L.) Of the two so nanietl, who at-
tained distinction at At!iens, one died the year iUter Fericles, and
could not probably in so short a time have prohted largely bv his in-
tercourse with Aspasia: the other, who h;id been "the principrJ
cause of the dis-j;ter at Charonea (Dioti. Sic. xri. 88.) was exe-
cuted upon tluit account, 01. ex. :?., more than iK) ye-.urs after die
forir.er. It would make Aspasia a perfect Xinon de I'Enclos, if w«
suppose tlie second to have been the Lvsicles in question.*

-" It is not to be imair^ned, that .\spasia excelled in ligiit and
amoroi'is discourses. Her discourse*:, on the costrai-v, were not
niore brilliant than solid. Jt Wiis evm btLi^ved by the most intei-
liiTent Athenians, and among them by Socrates hiinself, that
-he composed the celebrated funeral oration, pronounced by Peri-
cles in honour of those who fell in tlie Saniian war. It is not im-
possible, that Pericles undtrtook that war at her siurirestion. to
.iven^re the quarrel of the Milesians: she is even said to h.ive ac-
companied him in the expediticm, and to have buiit a temple
\f> perpsluate the memory of his victorv. But see Thucvd. L 115^

36 PERICLES.

is denominated ' (lie New Om.pliale,* ' Dcianira,*
and ' Juno.' Cratiiius plainly calls her a prostitute;

She bore this Juno, this Aspasia,
Skill'd in the shameless trade and every art
or wantonness.

He seems to have had a natural son bv her ; for
he is introduced, by Eupolis, inquiring after him
thus ;

Still lives the offspring of my dalliance?

Pyronides answers.

He lives, and might have borne the name of husband.
Did he not deeply dread the harlot-mischief.

Such was the fame of Aspasia that Cyrus, who
disputed with Artaxerxes the crown of Persia, gave
her name to his favourite concubine, previously
called Milto. This woman was born in Fhocis, and
w^as the daughter of Hermotimus. A\'hcn Cyrus was
slain in the battle, she was carried to the king, and
had subsequently great influence over him. These
particulars occurring to my memory, as I wrote
this Life, I thought it would be an uncourteous af-
fectation of austerity to pass them over in silence.

I now return to the Samian war, which Pericles is
much blamed for having promoted, at As))asia's in-
stigation, in favour of the Milesians. The j\iile-
sians and Samians had been at war for the city of
Pricne, and the Samians had the advantage ; when
the Athenians interposed and ordered them to lay
down their arms, and refer to themselves the deci-
sion of the dispute. With this demand they refused
to comply. Pericles therefore sailed with a fleet to
Samos, and abolished the oligarchical form of go-
vernment. He then took fifty of the principal men,
and the same number of children, as hostages, and
sent them to Lemnos. Each of these hostages, wg

PERICLES. 59

are told, offered Inm a talent for his ransom ; and
those, who were desirous to prevent the introduction
of a democracy likewise, .would have given him
much more. Pissuthnes the Persian ^% who had the
interest of the Samians at heart, sent him ten
thousand pieces of gold, to induce him to grant
them more favourabfe terms. Pericles, however,
would receive none of their presents, but treated
the Samians in the manner which he had resolved
upon ; and, having established a popular govern-
ment in the island % returned to Athens.

But they soon revolted again, having recovered
their hostages by some private measure of Pissuthnes,
and made new preparations for war. Pericles, com-
ing with a fleet to reduce them once more, found
them not in a posture of negligence or despair, but
determined to contend with him for the dominion of
the sea. A sharp engagement ensued near the isle
of Tragia?"'', and Pericles gained a signal victory,
having w ith forty-four ships defeated seventy, twenty
of which had marines on board.

Pursuing his success, he possessed himself of the
harbour of Samos, and laid siege to the city. They
still however retained courage enough to sally out,
and give him battle before the walls. Soon after-
ward a greater fleet"' arrived from Athens, and the
Samians were entirely shut up : upon v>'hich Peri-
cles took sixty galleys, and steered for the Medi-
terranean, with a design (as it is generally supposed)
to meet the Phoenician fleet which was coming to
the relief of Samos, and to engage with it as far as
possible from the island.

Stesimbrotus indeed says, he intended to sail for

<'" Pissuthnes the son of Hystaspes was governor of Sardis, and
espoused the cause of the Samians of course, because the principal
persons among them were in the Persian interest.

^9 And a garrison, as we learn from Thucydides (i. 115-)*

?° One of the Sporades, opposite to Samos.*

7' Consisting of forty Athenian, and twenty-five Chian and Les-
bian vessels. (Thucyd. i. 116.)*

40 PERICLLS'.

Cyprus, which is very improbable. Eiit, vlmtcver
his design was, he seems to Inive committed an
error. For as soon as he was aone, IMelissus the
gon of Ithagenes, a man distinguished as a philoso-
pher and at that time commander of the Samians,
despising either the small number of ships tliat was
left behind, or the inexperience of tlieir officers,
persuaded his countrymen to attaciv tiie Atlienians.
Accordingly, a battle was fought ; and the Samians
having obtained the victory, made many prisoners
.and destroyed the chief part of the enemy's fleet,
cleared the seas, and imported whatever warlike
stores and provisions they stood in need of. Aris-
totle writes, that Pericles himself liad been beaten
by tlie same ]\iclissus in a former sea-fight.

The Samians returned upon the Athenian pri-
soners the insult which they had received'-, and
marked their foreheads with the iigure of an owl ;
as the Athenians had branded them with, a Sama:na,
Avhich is a kind of ship built low in the fbrc-part,
and wide and hollow at the sides. This form makes
it light and expeditious in sailing ; and it was called
Saniicna, from it's having been invented in Samos
by Polycrates the tyrant. Aristophanes is supposed
to have liinted at these marks, when he says.

The Samians are a letter'd race.

As soon as Pericles was informed of tlie misfor-
tune vvhich had beialien his army, he iiiimediately
returned with succours'', gave Melissus battle,
routed tlio encny, and blocked up the town by
building a wall about it; choosing to owe the con-
quest of it ratlier to time and expense, tlian to pur-

y^ Vv'e have no accoiirt of these recipvociil barharitic* ia Thucy-
diilcs, (L.) Tlr- owl, it is ahiioht supeviiuous to ()l)^:crv■l•, was the
bird of i^iincrva, the tutelary deity of Athens ; and exists (as we
have before noted) upon a great number of the medals of that
city.*

75 On luH retmn, he received a reinforcement of eighty ship?, as
Thucydid'js, or of ninety, as Diodorus informs us.

K

PERICLES. 41

chase it with the blood of liis fellow-citizens. But
when lie found the Atlienians murmured iit tlie dura-
tion of the blockade, and that it was diificult to re-
strain them fi'om the assault, he divided the arm}'^
into eiglit parts, and ordered them to draw lots.
That division, which drew a while bean"*, was to
enjoy itself in ease and pleasure while tlie others
fought. Hence (it is said) those, v.h.o spend the
day in feasting and merriment, call that ' a white
day' from the white beaTi.

Ephorus adds that Pericles in this siege made
use of battering engines, the invention of which he
much admired, it being then a new one ; and that
he had Artemon the engineer along with him, who
on account of his lameness was carried about in a
litter, when his presence was required to direct the
machines, and thence had the surixime of Pcripho-
retus. Put Heraclides of Pontus confutes this asser-
tion by some versus of Anacreon'', in which men-
tion is made of Artemon Periphoretus, several ages
before the Samian war and these transactions of Pe-
ricles. This Artemon, he states, was a person who
gave himself up to luxury, and was likewise of a
timid and elfeminate spirit : that he spent most of
his time within doors, and had a shield of brass held
over his head by a couple of slaves, lest any thing
should fall upon him : and that when he was neces-
sarily obliged to go abroad, he was carried in a litter
which hung solow as almost to touch the ground,
and was therefore called Periplioretus.

After nine months, the Samians surrendered.
Pericles rased their walls, seized their ships, and

?•* The use of the white bean, as a symbol of acquittal in criminal
causes, was long anterior to the age of Pericles.*

75 These verses are still extant in Athenieus (xii, 9.) It i« sin-
gular, !M. Ric lid observes, that there should have been two
men of this name, with the same character, and the sanie per-
sonal defect. But the engineer, who accom[)anied Pericles, had
■ nothing p,'rhaps in couuuon with the other except his name; and
I'lutarch has erroneously applied to him the parlit'ulars here uivUr
tioned.*

#2 FERICLE.S.

laid a heavy fine upon them ; part of which they im-
medialely paid down, the rest they promised at a set
time, and gave hostages for the payment. Dnris
the Sumian makes a melancholy talc of it, accusing
Pericles and the Athenians of great cruelty, of which
however no mention is madeby Thucydides, Epho-
rus, or Aristotle. What he relates concerning
the Samian officers and seamen, seems quite ficti-
tious : he tells us, that Pericles caused them to be
brought into the market-place at Miletus, and to be
bound to posts there for ten da}'s together ; at the
expiration of which he commanded them, by that
time reduced to the most wretched condition, to be
despatched with clubs, and refused their bodies the
honour of burial. Din'is indeed, in his histories,
often goes beyond the limits of truth "°, even when
not misled by any interest or passion ; and he is
therefore more likely to have exaggerated the suf-
ferings of his countrv, in order to make the Athe-
nians a])pear in an odious light.

Pericles, on his return to Athens after the re-
♦luction of Samos, celebrated in a splendid manner
tJie obsequies of his countrymen who had fallen in
that war, and delivered the funeral oration usual
upon such occasions"''. This gained him great ap-
plause ; and, when he came down fi'om the Rostrum,
the women paid their respects to him and presented
him with crowns and chaplets, like a champion just
rctTH'ned victorious from the lists. Elpinice alone
addressed him in terms quite different ; " Are these
'' actions then, Pericles, worthy of crowns and

7'' This Iiistorian however, a contomporai'V of Ptolemy PhiJa-
^elplius^ is represented by Cicero (Ep. ad. Att. vi. 1.) as homo
in historia dilrycns, * an accurate writer.' See \'oss. de Hist.
(}ra>c. i. 15.*

77 This tlnj^^e, delivered 01. Ixxxiv. 4., must not be confounded
T\ith his celebrated speech, pronounced over those who fell in the
begiiniin;; of tlie Peloponnesian war, OL Ixxxvii. 3. (Thucyd. ii.
o3 — 16.) The Areopagitcs selected the orator upon these oc-
fusions, and it was no small honour to Pericles to have been twice
choten, as the comforter of his country in her afflictions.*

PERICLES. 4S

"- garlands, which have deprived us of many brave
" citizens : not in a war with the Phoenicians and
" Mede.=!, such as my brother Cimon waged, but in
" destroying a city united to us both by blood and
" ii'iendship ?" Pericles only smiled, and answered
softly with this line of Archiiochus,

Wliy laviiili ointmeuts on a bead that's grey ?

Ion informs us, that he was highly elated with
this conquest, and scrupled not to say ; " That
" Agamemnon spent ten years in reducing one of
" the cities of the barbarians, whereas he had taken
" the richest and most powerful city of Ionia in nine
" months." And, indeed, he had reason to be
proud of this achievement ; for the war was really
a dangerous one, and the event uncertain, since
(according to Thucydides) such was the power of
the Samians, that the Athenians were in imminent
danger of losing the dominion of the sea.

Some time after this'^'^, when the Peloponnesian
war was ready to break out, Pericles persuaded the
people to send succours to the inhabitants of Corcy-
ra, who were at war with the Corinthians '' ; in order

7*^ Five years after the capture of Samos, 01. Ixxxvi. 2. The
Peloponnesian war began, 01. Ixxxvii. 2.*

79 This « ar commenced about the little territory of Epidamnus,
a city in Macedon founded by the Corcyrreaus, (L.) whose naval
force was second only to tliat of the Athenians. Both they and the
Corinthians had applied to Athens for assistance. From the comic
poets, the echoes oi' the popular voice (as quoted in the subsequent
part of this life) we niiglit infer that the currently suspected cause
of this war was Aspasia's resenting an insult offered her by some
young men of Mcgara. Others suggest that it was devised by Peri-
cles, to screen himself from giving in the account of his administra-
tion. But this, in itself unworthy of such an illustrious states-
man, is wholly confuted by the well-informed and impartial Thucy-
dides (ii. 65.) It's most probable grounds were, envy of the
Athenian renown acquired in the Median war, the haughty conduct
of tliat city, and the jealousy entertained b}' Sparta of her ascen-
dency. M. Ilicard, by an odd mistake, has transferred these con-
jectures from the Peloponnesian to the Samian v.ar; but he rectifies
it in a subsequent note.* ''

44 J:>ERICLES.

to fix in their interest an island whose naval forces
M'ere consideraljle, and miglit be of the utmost ser-
vice in case of a ru])tr.re with tlic Fcloponnesians,
an event reasonably to be regarded as at no great
distance. The succours were accordine-lv decreed,
and Pericles despatched Lacedjemonius the son of
Cimon with only ten ships, as if he de^^igned nothing
more than to disc-race him ^■^. A mutual attachment
and friendship subsisted between Cimoii's family and
the Spartans : and he now furnished his son with
but a few ships, and gave him the charge of this
affiiir against his inclination ; in order that, if no-
thing signal or striking were effected, Laceda^monius
might be still the more suspected of favouring the
Spartans. Nay, by all imaginable methods he en-
deavoured to obstruct the advancement of that
family, representing the sons of Cimon, as by their
very names not genuine Athenians, but strangers
and aliens ; one of them being called Laceda?monius,
another Thessalus, and a third Eleus. They seem
to have been all the sons of an Arcadian woman.
Pericles however findinc: himself severely blamed
about these ten galleys, an aid by no means ade-
quate to the necessity of those that requested it,
but likely enough to afford his enemies a pretence for
accusing him, sent another squadron to Corcyra^',
>vhich did not arrive till the action was over.

The Corinthians, oflended at this treatment, com-
plained of it at Laccchrmon : and the Megarensians
at the same time alleged, that the Athenians would
not let them come to any mart or port of theirs, but
drove them out ; infringing thereby the common pri-

"" There seems veiy little colour for this hard assertion. Thu-
cydides says, that the Athenians did not intend the Corcyrneans any
real assistance, but sent this small squadron to look on, while tlie
< 'oiinthians and Corcyncans weakened and wasted each other. (T>.;
Besides, Laceda^monius was not the only person employed : Diote-
jies and Proteas were joined with him in the command. (Thueyd.
i. l-o.)*

*" But this fleet, v,-hich consisted of twenty ships, prevented a
.l»econd engagement, for which they were preparing. ( Thucjd. i. 50.)

PErUCLES<; 45

vileges, and breaking the oath which they had
taken before the general assembly of Greece. Tlie
people of ^gina, likewise, privately acquainted the
Lacedaiuiorwans with many encroachments and in-
juries sustained from the Athenians, wliom they durst
not openly accuse. Andatthis very juncture Potida?a,
a Corinthian colony subject to the Atlienians, beintr
besieged in consequence of it's revolt, accelerated
the war.

As embassadors however were sent to Athens,
and Archidamus king of the Lacedaemonians en-
deavoured to give a healing turn to most of the arti-
cles in question and to pacify the allies, probably no
other point would have involved the Athenians in
hostihties, if they could have been persuaded to
rescind the decree against the Megarensians, and to
be reconciled to them. Pericles therefore in oppos-
ing this measure, in retaining his enmity against the
Megarensians, and in working np the people to the
same degree of rancour, was the sole author of the
war.

It is said that, when the embassadors from Lace-
dgemon came upon this occasion to Athens^', Peri-
cles pretended there was a law which forbade the

^* The Lacedncmonian embassadors insisted in the first place
that those Athenians should be expelled, who were stiled ' execra-
ble' on account of t!ie old business of Cylon and his associates, in-
cludin<^ Pericles, who by his molher's side was allied to the family
oF Megacles ; next, that the siege of Potidsea should be rai.^ed ;
thirdly, that the inhabitants of Aigina should be left free; and
lastly, that the decree made against the Megarensians (ly which
they were forbidden the ports and markets of Athens, on pain of
death) should be revoked, and the Grecian states under the dotni-
iiion of Ath( ns set at liberty. Pericles represented to the Athe-
nians that, whatever the Lacedaemonians might pretend, the true
gr(mnd of their resentment uas the prosperity of t'le Athenian re-
public : that, nevei'theless, they might agree to reverse their decree
against iVIegara, if the Lacedaemonians v/ould allow fiee egress and
regress in their city to the Athenians and their allies ; tliat thcv
would leave all tliose states free, which were free at the makino^ of
the last peace with Sparta, provided the Spartans would also bestow
freedom upon such as were under their domiuioi» ; and that future
disputes should be submitted to arbitratiuu. If these offers shouM

12

46 PKRICLES.

taking down of any tablet, upon which a flccree of*
the people was written : " Thc^i," said I\)]jarces,
one of the embassadors, " don't take it down, but
" turn the other side outward ; there is no lav/
" against that." Nowithstanding the pleasantry of
this answer, however, Pericles did not in the least
relent. He seems, indeed, to have had some private
pique against the I\Iegarensians ; though the pretext,
of which he availed himself in public was, that they
had applied to profane uses certain parcels of sacred
ground ^^ : and upon this he procured a decree for a
herald to be sent to Meo'ara and Lacedasmon, to
lay this charge against the Megarensians. The de-
cree was drawn up in a candid and conciliating man-
ner. But Anthemocritus, the herald sent with that
commission, losing his life by the way, through some
treachery (as was supposed) of the Megarensians"',
Charinus procured a decree, that an implacable and
eternal enmity should subsist between them and the
Athenians ; that, if any jVIegarensian should set foot
upon Attic ground, he should be put to death ; tluit
to the oath which their generals used to take this
particular sliould be added, that they would twice a-
year make an inroad in the territories of Megara ;
and that xVnthemocritus should be buried at the
Thriasian gate, now called Dipylus.

The Megarensians, however, deny their having

not be accepted, he advised tlicm to hazard a war, (See Thucj'd.
i. HO, &c. (Iv.)

The law referred to had been proposed and carried by himself.
Polyarecs was perhaps only in the suite of tiie embassadors, as he
Is not mentioned by Thucydides, who has preserved the names of
Raniphius, Melesippu?, and Ilcgct'ander. (ib. 13.)*

^•1 The ground, lying between Megara and Attica, was conse-
crated to t!ie Eleusinian deities, Ceres and Proserpine. Pericles
also accused the Megarensians of having given protection to run-
awa_v slaves.*

**■» This, it appears below, they denied, and probably imputed
to Pericles, as if by niurthering his own embassador he had wished
to throw upon them tlie odium of the deed. The reader's recol-
lection will supply him with a probable parallel to this £chen;e,
supposing it true, in a recent event at P.astadt. (1805.)*

9

PERICLES. 47

been concerned in the nnirthcr of Antlicmocritus*\
and ascribe the war entirely to xlspasia and Pericles;
alleging in ])roof those well-known verses from tht"!
Acharnenses of Aristo])hanes,

The god of wine had with his thyrsus smote
Some youths, who madly stole iVoni Megara
The prostitute .^im.THlui ; in revenge
Two females, liberal of their smiles, were stolen
From our Aspasia's train.

It is not, indeed, easy to discover what was the
real origin of the war : all however agree, it was the
fault of Pericles, that the decree against Megara was
not annulled. Some say, his firmness in that case
was the effect of his prudence and magnanimity ; as
he considered the demand only as a trial, and
thought the least concession would be interpreted
into an acknowledgement of weakness: but others
will have it, that his treating the Lacedaemonians
with so little ceremony arose from his obstinacy,
and an ambition to display his power.

But the v/orst cause of all assigned for the war,
and which notwithstanding is confirmed by most
historians, is as follows : Phidias the statuary had
imdertakcn (as wc have said) t'le statue of Mincrva-
His friendship and influence with Pericles exposed
him to envy, and procured him many enemies ; who,
wishing through him to try what judgment the peo-
ple might pass upon himself, persuaded Menon (one
of his v.'orkmen) to place himself as a suppliant in
the I'orum, and to entreat the protection of the
republic, while he lodged an information against
Phidias.

The people granting iiis request," and the affair

85 Thucydides takes no notiee of this lierald ; and yet the Mega'
rensiuns were so fully looked upon as the authors of the murther,
that they were punished for it many ages afterward : for upon tiiat
very account the emperor Hadrian denied them many favours and
privileges, which he granted to the other cities of Greece. (L.)
The tomb of Anthemocritus >vas on the sacred ro.-.d, le iding- to
Eleusis. (Pausan. i. 36.)*

4S PERICXEa

coming- to n public trial, the allegation of tlier^
%v!]ich Mfnon brought against him, was sliown to be
groundless. For Phidias, by the adviee of Pericles,
had managed the matter from the first with so nuich
art, that the gold with \vhi(h the statue was over-
laid could easily be taken off and weighed'"', and
Pericles ordered this to be done bv the accusers.
But the excellence of his work, and the envy arising
tliencc, was the thing which ruined Phidias; and it
^vas particularly urged that, in his representation ot'
the battle v,iih the Amazons upon Minerva's shield,
he had introduced his own efrigy as a bald old man
taking up a large stone with l)oth hands ^', and a
biji'hiv-nnishcd picture of Pericles fi^^htino; with an
Amazon. Tlie la>t was contrived with so much
art, that the hand which in lifting up the spear
partly covcrod the face, seemed to be intended to
conceal the likeness, though that was still on both
sides vcrv striking. Phidias therefore was cast into
prison, where he died a natural death '''' ; though some
affirm that poison was given him by his enemies,
who were desirous of tin-owing suspicion upon Peri-
cles. As for the accuser Menon, he had an exemp-
tion from taxes granted !n"m, on the motion of
Gideon, and the gencral> were ordered to provide
for his security.

About this time Asnasia was prosecuted for im-
pictv by llermippus a comic poet, who likewise
accu^d her of receivinc: into her house women above
the condition of slaves tor the pleasure of Pericles.
And Diopithes pvocured a decree, that those who
disputed the existence of the gods, or introduced

*'' Thoy ]>.!('. not tlien discc'V. red the niothod, subsequent!}- em-
ployed bv Arcliiuiedes to detocL the adulteration oi'uietals in Ilicro's
crown. Sec the Life of Marcelliis, not. f4'.'3.)*

**" Those modern tip,uieR (thev aiiet^ed) impeached the credit of
their ancient h'st:; y, which did so much honour to Atlxens and il'a
founder Thesi^ns.

s** Others sar tiiat he was bnni^lied, and that in his exile he made
the celebrated statue of Jupiter Olympiu.s , a woric, surpassed only
by thut of Minerva ubovementioned, iu which he excelled himself.

PERICLES. 49

new opinions about celestial appearances, sliould be
tried before an assembly of the people. This charge
%vas levelled primarily at Anaxagoras, and through
him at Pericles. And as tlie people admitted these
in;-.inuationSj another decree was proposed by Dra-
contides, that Pericles sliould give an account of the
public money before the Prytanes% and that the
judges should take the ballots from the altar '•'% and
try the cause in the city. But Agnon caused the
last article to be dropped, and in it's stead it was
voted, that the action should be laid before the fifteen
hundred judges, either for peculation and taking
bribes, or simply for corrupt practices.

Aspasia was acquitted by means of Pericles, who
(according to yEachincs) shed many tears, on his
application for mercy in her behalf, during the con-
tinuance of the trial. For AnaxaG;oras '-^^ he did not
expect the same indulgence ; and he therefore
caused him to quit the city, and conducted him part
of the wav. And as he himself was become obnox-
ious to the people upon Phidias' account, and was
afraid of being called in question for it, he urged on
the war which was yel doubtful, and blew up a flame
till then stifled and suppressed. He thus hoped to

•3 The Prytanes, as mentioned in a former note, were those of
the Senate of five hvmdrcd, whom rotation had placed at that time
in supreme office..*

'■^° In some extraordinary cases, where the judges were to pro-
ceed with the greatest exactness and solemnity, they were to take
ballots or hiliets from the altar (of Neptune, says flerodotus, viii.
128.), and to inscribe their judgesnent upon tiiem ; or rather to
take the black and the white bean (v^'^f'.) V/hat Plutarch means
by * trying the cause in the city,' it is not easy to determine ;
unless by ' the city' we are to understand * the full assembly of tlie
people.' By ' the fifteen hundred judges,' mentioned in the next
sentence, is probably meant the court of Helia;a, so called' because
the judges sat in the open air exposed to the sim ; for this court,
upon extraordinary occasions, consisted of that number,

'-^' Anaxiigoras held the unity of God; that it was one all-wise
Intelligence, which raised the beautiful structure of the world cut
of Ch.aws. If *uch was the opinion of the master, it was itatura-lfoi*
the people to conclude, that his scholar Pericles was hostile to the
polytheism of the times; and that such hostility was unsafe, ' was
fatally experienced not long afterward by Socrates.
VOL. IT. E

so PERICLES.

obviate the accusations tliat threatened him, and to
mitigate the rage of envy ; because such was his
dignity and power, that in all important atiliirs, and
in every great danger, the republic could place it's
confidence in him alone. These are said to have
been the causes, which induced him to persuade the
people not to grant the demands of the Laccdaiuio-
nians : but what was the real cause, is uncertain.

The Lacedaamonians, convinced that if they could
remove Pericles out of the way, thcv should be better
able to manage the Athenians, required them to
banish all ' execrable' persons from among them :
and Pericles (as Thucydides informs us'-*") was by
his mother's side related to those who, from the atfliir
of Cylon, were so denominated. The success, how-
ever, of this application proved the reverse of what
was expected by those that ordered it. Instead of
rendering Pericles suspected, or involving him in
trouble, it procured him additional confidence and
respect from the people, when they perceived that
he was above all others both hated and dreaded by
their enemies. For the same reason he forewarned
the Athenians, that if Archidamus, when he entered
Attica at the head of the Peloponnesians and ravaged
the rest of the country, should spare his estate, it
must be referred either to the rights of hospitality
Avhich subsisted between them, or to a design of
supplying his enemies with matter of slander ; and,
therefore, from that hour he presented his lands and
houses to the city of Athens. The Lacedemonians
and confederates accordingly invaded Attica with a
great army, under the conduct of Archidamus ; and
laying waste all before them proceeded as far as
Acharna?'-^^, where they encamped, expecting that
the. Athenians would not be able lo endure them so

^- i. 127. See not. (S'2).

5*^ The borough of AchamfP, the most oonriderable of tho^e at-
tached to Athens and which could of ittelf furnith tbi-ee thousand
fighting men, was only fifteen hundred paces from the city. (L.)

From this irruption of tlie Laced;cinonians into Atticu, Ol. Ixxxvii.
J., is dated the comuicuccmcnt of the rtloponnesian war,*

PERICLES. 51

near, but would meet tliem in the field f(>r the honour
and safety of their country. It appeared, however,
to Pericles too hazardous to ffive battle to an arinv
of sixty thousand men (lor such was the number of
the rdopoimesians and Boeotians, employed in the
first cxpetlition) and by that step to risk no less than
the j)rcservation of the city itself'^ As to tJiose
tliat were eager for an engagement, and uneasy at
his slow proceedings, he endeavoured to bring them
to reason by observing, " That trees, when lopped,
" will soon grow again ; but, when men are cut of}",
" the loss is not easily repaired."

In the mean time, he took care to hold no assem-
bly of the people, lest he should be forced to act
against his ovv'n opinion. But as a good pilot, when
a storm arises at sea, gives his directions, gets hi;?
tackle in order, and then uses his art, regardless of
tlie tears and entreaties of the sick and fearful pas-
sengers ; so Pericles, when he had secured the gates
and placed the guards in every quarter to the best
advantage, followed the dictates of his own under-
standing, unmoved by the clamours and complaints
that resounded in his ears. Thus firm he remained,
notwithstanding the importunity of his friends and
the threats and accucations of liis enemies : notwith-
standing the many scoffs and songs sung to vilify his
character as a general, and to represent him as one
who in the most dastardly manner betrayed his
country to the enemy. Cleon -'^ also attacked him

^'^ ' As one slnj^lc battle fouglit by the two leading armies often
decides the destiny of an empire, the result iuvolving such an
object ouglit not to be hazarded but with a great superiority of
numbers, and a superior description of troops in the highest possi-
ble discipline. In no case should an event of such magnitude be
committed to the chance of one great battle, but when it appears-
decided and c-lear, that the advantages tluit may be hope.d from,
obtaining the battle, will infinitely counterbalance the disatlvantages
to be dreaded by losing the day from a general defeat.' (Wimpffen'*
Experienced O.'Kcer by ^I'Donald.)

9> The same Cleon, whom Aristophanes satirised. By his ha-
rangues and political intrigues, he got himself appointed genera],,
and was even successful upon an occasion of no little importance.
See a farther account of him in the Life of Nicias.

E 2

V

52 PERICLES.

/with great aciimony, using tlie general resentment
against Pericles to increase his own popularity, as
Hermippus testifies in these anaptEstic verses ;

Sleeps then, tbcu monarch of satyrs, thy javelin :
A\'hile on our ears burst thy thunders of eloquence,
As if in thee very Teles were come again ?
Flash on thine eye but the bla/.c of a scimitar,
Though at thy back Cleon rage ' most invectivcly,'
Back thou retirest, shrinking, trembling, and colourless.

Pericles, however, was not moved by any thing of
this kind, but calmly and silently bore every disgrace
and virulence. And thouii-h he fitted out a hundred
ships, and despatched them against Peloponnesus ;
yet he did not sail with them, but chose to stay and
watch over the city, and keep the reins of govern-
ment in his own hands, until the Peloponnesians
,were gone. In order to satisfy the common people,
jwho were very uneasy on account of the war, he
imade a distribution of money and lands : for, having
Expelled the inhabitants of iEgina, he divided the
island by lot among the Athenians. Besides, the
sufferings of the enemy afforded them some consola-
tion. The fleet sent against Peloponnesus ravaged
U large tract of country, and sacked the small towns
and villages : and Pericles himself made a descent
upon the territories of Megara^'', the whole of wliich
he laid vv-aste. Whence it appears that, though the
Peloponnesians greatly distressed the Athenians by
land, yet as they were themselves equally distressed
by sea, they could not have protracted the war to
.such a length, but must soon have given it up ^" (as

9i

^^ He did not undertake this expodition imtil autumn, when the
I.acedtcnionians had retired. (Thncyd. ii. 31.) In the winter of
this yciir, the Athenians solouini«ed, in an extraordinary manner,
the funerals of sncli as first died in the war. li^pon that occasion
Pericles pronounced the celebrated oration preserved by Thucy-
diiles (ii. c~- — 16.)

'■''' They did in fact give it up, and went back to Sparta: but Ar-
chidanufs retumedjhe next yvivr, tliuugli Plutarch takes no notice
of this circumstance; and it was during tliis, his second incursion,
th.at the pestilence broke out.'^

PERICLES. 5S

Pericles from the beginning foretold) had not some
divine power prevented the effect of human counsels.
A pestilence at that time broke out^^ which de-
stroyed the flower of the youth and the strength of
Athens. And not only their bodies, but their very
minds were affected ; for, as persons delirious with
a fever set themselves against a physician or a father,
so they raved against Pericles and attempted his ruin ;
being persuaded by his enemies, that the sickness
was occasioned by the multitude of out-dwellers
flocking into the city, and huddled together in the
height of summer in small huts and close cabins,
where they were forced to live a lazy inactive life^
instead of breathing the pure and open air to which |
they had been accustomed. Of all this he (they af- j
firmed) was the cause, who at the commencement of (
the war admitted within the walls such Crowds of \
people from the country, and yet found no employ- \
ment for them ; but let them continue penned up \
like cattle, to infect and destroy each other ^^, with-
out affording them the least relief or refreshment.

Desirous to remedy this calamity, and at the same
time in some degree to annoy the enemy, he manned
a hundred and fifty ships ^'^j upon which he embarked
great numbers of select horse and foot, and was pre-
paring to set sail. The Athenians conceived sanguine
hopes of success, and the enemy no less dreaded this
mighty armament. The whole fleet was in readiness,
and Pericles on board his own galley, when there

'8 See this plague (pestilential vastitas, as it is emphatically called
by A. Gellius, ii. 1.) described in the most vivid and affecting man-
ner by Thucydides, who had it himself, (ii. 47, &c.) See also
Luci-et. vi. 1106 — l^S*. It is said to have come from' Ethiopia, and
to have spread desolation on it's whole way.*

^^ Upon this passage and the one above quoted from Thucydides,
whom Lucretius in his account of the plague closely follows, Bentley
founds a judicious transposition in that poet, vi. 1235.*

"•° The expedition consisted of a hundred Athenian ships man-
ned with four thousand infantry, besides barks with four hundred
horses on board, and fifty vessels from Chios and Lesbos. (Thucyd.
ii. 56.)*

54 PERICLES.

jiappened an eclipse of the sun "". Tliis sudden
darkness was regarded as an unflivourable omen,
and threw theui into the utmost consternation. Pe-
ricles, observing that tlie pilot was much astonished
and perplexed, took his cloke, and liaving covered
his eyes with it asked him, " If he found any tiling
*^ terrible in that, or considered it as an alarming
" presage?" Upon his answering in the negative,
" Where then is the difference," he said, " between
" this and the other, except that sometliing bigger
" than my cloke causes the eclipse ? " But this is a
question, which is discussed in the schools of philo-
sophy.

In this expedition, Pericles performed nothing
^vorthy of so large an equipment. He laid siege to
the sacred city of Epidaurus ^"% and at first with
some rational hopes of success ; but the distemper,
which prevailed in his army, broke all his measures.
For it not only carried off his own men, but all that
had intercourse with them. As this failure set the
Athenians against him, he endeavoured to console
tliem under their losses, and to animate them to now
attempts ^^^. But it was not in his power to mitigate
their resentment, neither could they be satisfied
until they had shown themselves his masters, by vot-
ing that he should be deprived of the command and
})ay a fine, which by the lowest account was fifteen,
while others make it fifty talents ; nay Dio'loms even
says, fourscore. The person, who managi-d the
jM-03CCUtion against him, was Cleon, as Idomeneus

'^^' Here again Plutarch has confoundiMl t-.vo fliiferent expedi-
tions. This eclip.'-e happened on the eve of rhe pvecedinj;- expedi-
tion. (Thucyd. ji 2«.)*

"^* This E[)id:iunis wtis in Argia. It was consecrated to Escu-
Jiipius: and Phitarch calls it * sacred,' to distinguisli it from another
town of tlie same naaie in I/aconia. (L.) ^ Thuoydides (lo;'s not
mention this distemper, hut says tiiat Pericles failed in hiy atten)])!?,
not only at Epidaurus, but at Troezfne, Ilerniione, &c. and only
io'ik Prusia, a small nuiritime city in Laconia.*

■' ■ Thncydidcs (ii. '.!0, 61.) has preserved hi^> harangue upoji tliis
occasion.*

PERICLES. 5

informs us ; according to Tlieophrastus, Simmias ;
or, if we may believe Heraclides of Pontus, Lacra-
tides.

The public ferment indeed soon subsided, the
people quitting their resentment against him with the
blow, as a bee leaves it's sting in the wonnd : but bis
private affairs were in a miserable condition ; for he
had lost a number of his relations in the plague, and
a misunderstanding had prevailed for some time in
his family. Xanthippus, the eldest of his legitimate
sons, was naturally profuse, and had likewise mar-
ried a young and expensive wife, the daughter of
Isander and grand-daughter of Epylicus. This young
man knew not how to brook his father's frugality,
Avlio supplied him but sparingly and with a little at
a time ; and therefore sent to one of his friends, and
took up money in Feric'cs* name. When the man
however came to demand his money, Pericles not
onlv refused to pay him, but even prosecuted him
for the demand. At lliis Xanthippus was so highly
enraged, that he began openly to abuse his father,
lie first exposed and ridiculed the companj^, which
he kept in his house, and the conversations which he
held with the philosophers. Epitimius the Pharsalian
(he said) having undesignedly killed a horse with a
javelin, which he threw at the public games, his fa-
ther spent a whole day in disputing with Protago-
ras '°\ which might be properly deemed the cause of
his death ; the javelin, or the man who threw it, or
the presidents of the games. Stesimbrotus adds that

»<?4 Protagoras of Abclera, a pupil of Deraocritus, was one of the
shrewdest sophists of liis time, aiul during a carter of forty 3'ears
amassed more by his arts than Phidias by his sculpture. He was
reputed an atheist for luiving said that ' there v\-as notliing certain
witli regard to the existence or nature of the God^.' (Cic. de Nat.
Deor. i. 't'2.) This question of causation will recall perlinps to the
reader's memory the modern doctrines of Hume and Godwin, the
latter of whom has introduced a similar question by way of illustra-
tion; as the former, partially quoted and applied with an important
limitation by Leslie (in a note to his Essay upon Heat) has lately
( 1805) given birth to an acrimonious dispute between the professors
{lud the presbyters in the metropolis of North- Britain.*

56 PERICLES.

it was Xantliippiis, who spread the vile report cOii'
earning his own wife and Pericles, and that the young
man retained this imphicable liatred against his fatlier
to his latest breath. He was carried off by the
plague. Pericles lost his sister likewise at that time,
and the chief part of his relations and friends, who
were most capable of assisting him in the business of
the state. Notwithstanding these misfortunes, how-
ever, he surrendered not his dio-nitv of sentiment
and greatness of soul. Pie neither wept, nor per-
formed any funeral rites ; neither was he seen at the
grave of any of his nearest relations, until the death
of Paralus, his remaining legitimate son. This at
length subdued him. He attempted, indeed, even
then to maintain his usual calm behaviour and sere-
nity of mind : but, in putting the garland upon the
head of the deceased, his firmness forsook him ; un-
able to bear the sad spectacle, he broke out into
loud lamentations, and shed a torrent of tears ; a
passion, to which he had never before given way.

Athens made a trial, in the course of a year, of the
' rest of her generals and orators ; and finding none of
I sufficient weight and authority for so important a
I charge, she once more turned her eyes on Pericles,
I and invited him to resume the direction of both her
military and civil affairs. He had for some time shut
liimself up at home to indulge his sorrow, when Al-
cibiades and his other friends persuaded him to make
his appearance. The people having apologised for
their ungenerous treatment of him, he reassumed the
reins of government: and being appointed general,
his first step was to procure the repeal of the law
concerning bastards, of which he had himself been
the author : for he was afraid that his name and fa-
mily would be extinct, for want of a successor. The
history of this statute is as follows : Many years before,
Pericles in the height of his power, and having seve-
ral legitimate sons (as we have already declared),
caused a law to be enacted, that none should be ac-
counted citizens of Athens, but those whose parents

9

pehicles. n

ivere both Athenians ^''\ After this, the king of
Egypt made the Athenians a present of forty thou-
■saml measures of wheat ; and, as this was to be di-
vided among the citizens, suits were instituted by
that hiw against many persons as illegitimate, whose
birth had never before been called in question, and
many were disgraced upon false accusations. Nearly
five thousand were cast, and sold for slaves ^"'', and
fourteen thousand and forty appeared to be entitled
to the privileges of citizens '""". Though it was
shocking that a law, v.hich had been carried into
execution with so much severity, should be repealed
by the man who hrst proposed it, yet the Athenians
moved at the late misfortunes in his family, by which
he seemed to have suffered the punishment of his
arrogance and pride, and thinking that he ought to
be treated with humanity after he had felt the wa-ath
of heaven, permitted him to enrol a natural son in his
owm tribe, and to give him his own name. This is he,
who subsequently defeated the Peloponnesians in a
sea-fight at ArginusEe, and was put to death by the
people together with his collegues

108

'°' According to Plutarch's account, at the beginning of the Life
of Themistocles, this law was enacted before the time of Pericles.
Pericles, however, might cause it to be more strictly enforced, from
a spirit of opposition to Cimon, whose children were only of the
half-blood.

'°^ The illegitimacy did not reduce men to a state of servitude;
it only placed them in the rank of Strangers.

'°' A small number indeed, at a time when Athens had dared td
think of sending out colonies, humbling her neighbours, subduing
foreigners, and even erecting an universal monarchy 1

'°s In the twenty-sixth yeai- of the war. The Athenians had, upon
that occasion, appointed ten commanders. After they had obtained
the victory they were tried, and eight of them were capitally con-
demned, of whom six that were on the spot (including this natural
son of Pericles) were executed. The only crime laid to their charge
was, that they had not buried the dead. Of this affair Xenophon,
in his Hellenics, has given a long account. It happened under
the Archonship of Callias, 01. xciii. 3. nearly twenty-four years
after Pericles' death. Socrates the philosopher was at that time
one of the Prytanes, and resolutely refused to do his office. And,
u little while afterward, the madness of the people turned the other
way.

58 PERICLES.

About this time Pciiclcs was seized with the
plague, but not with such acute and continued .symp-
toms as it generally exhibited. It was rather a lin-
gering distemper, which with frequent intermissions
and by slow degrees consumed his body, and impaired
the vigour of liis mind. Theophrastus has a disqui-
sition in liis Ethics, Whether or not men's characters
may be changed v.ith their fortunes, and the soul so
affected wich the disorders of the body as to lose her
virtue: and there he relates, that Pericles showed to
a friend, who came to visit liim in his sickness, an
amulet which the women had hung about his neck;
intimating tliat he must be sick indeed, since he sub-
mitted to so ridiculous a piece of superstition.

Wlicn he was at the point of death, his surviving
iriends and tlie principal citizens sitting about his bed
discoursed together concerning lus cxtraordinarv
virtue, and the great autliority which he had enjoyed,
and enumerated his various exploits i:iud the number
of his victories: for, v.-hiic he was commander-in-
chief, he had erected no fewer than nine trophies to
the honour of Athens. These thing's thev conversed
about supposing that he paid no attention to what
they said, but tliat his senses Vv'cre gone. He took
notice, liowever, of every woid which they had
spoken, and audibly observed : " I am surprised,
" while you commemorate and extol these acts of
'• mine, though, fortune had her share in tliem, and
'• many other generals have performed the like ; that
" you take no notice of the greatest and most ho-
nourable part of my character, viz. that no Athe-
nian through my means ever put on mourning."
Pericles undoubtedly deserved admiration, not only
for the candour and moderation which he ever re-
tained amidst tlie distractions of business and the rage
of his enemies, but for that noble sentiment, which
Jed him to tiiink it his most excellent attainment
never during the extent of iiis power to have given
way to envy or anger, nor to have nourislied an im-
placable hatred against his bitterest foe. In my

12

PERICLES. 50

opinion tliis one thing, I mean his mild and dispas-
sionate behaviour, his unblemished integrity and ir-
re})roachablc conduct during his whole administration,
makes his appellation of Olympius, which would be
otherwise vain and absurd, no longer exceptionable :
nay, gives it some propriety. Tiuis we deem the
divine powers, as the authors of all good and natu-
rally incapable of producing evil, worthy to rule and
preside over the universe: not according to the state-
ments of the poets, who while they endeavour to
bewilder us by their irrational opinions, stand con-
victed of inconsistency by their own wu'iting. For
they describe the place, which the gods inhabit, as
the region of security and stability, unapproached by
storms and nnsullied with clouds, where a sweet
serenity for ever reigns, and a pure aether displays
itself without interruption ; and these they think
mansions suitable to a blessed and immortal nature:
yet at the same time they represent the gods them-
selves as full of anger, malevolence, hatred, and other
passions unworthy even of a reasonable man ^^^. But
this may perhaps appear a proper subject for another
work.

The state of public affairs soon evinced the want
of Pericles '^°, and the Athenians openly expressed
their regret for his loss. Even those who in his life-
time could but ill brook his superior power as think-

'"9 Thus has Homer represented his divinities ; whence It has heen
said tliat his gods have the passions and infirmities of men, and
his men the perfection and the powers of ^ods. See Cic. Tusc. iv.
S'2. From this opinion, that all good flows from tiie gods, arose
the notion, so general in antiquity (and particularly in the east) of
t.vo opposite principles of good and evil: a notion, which often
occurs in Plutarch, and especially in his Treatise upon Isis and
Oriris.*

"° Pericles died in the third year of the Peloponnesian war, 01.
IxxKvii. !•. B. C. 1-29. (L.) Well might Athens grieve upon this oc-
Cvision, esj)eci lily if she could have foreseen the consequences of his
death ; as the ambition and animosity of both parties led them to
contmue a w.^.r, which he might have terminated, till by mutual
t xhar.stion they lay at t::c mercy of the Macedonian princes,
Phijip and Alexander, who reduced them to one common slavery.*

60 PERICLES.

ing themselves eclipsed by it, upon a trial of other
orators and demagogues after he was gone readily
acknowledged that where severity was required no
man was ever more moderate, and where mildness
was necessary, that no man better main; pined his
dignity than Pericles. And his envied authority, to
which they had given the name of ' monarchy ' and
' tyranny,' then appeared to have been the bulwark
of the state. So much corruption and such a rage
of wickedness broke out upon the commonwealth
after his death, which he by proper restraints had
palliated "^ and kept from incurable extremities !

'" Pericles did indeed palliate the distempers of the common-
wealth while he lived, but (as we have before observed) he sowed
the seeds of future ailments, by bribing the people with their own
monev..

TllK

L I F 1 :

OF

FABIUS MAXIMUS.

SHIMMARY.

FlitislnoHS 07-igi)i of iJieJanuhy nfFabius. His character and mcm-
ners. Remarkable events of his Jirst consulships.. He triinnphs
over the Ligurians. Annibal dejeats the consids Scipio and Fla-
minius at Trebia ayid Thrasipnene. Death of Flamiiiius . Alamt
at Rome. Fabliis named dictator: voivs several sacrifices to the
gods, and bj/ his prudent conduct revives the public confidence,
Arirdbul in vain attempts to bring him to an engagement. Fruit-
less sarcasms of Minucius, his general of the horse. Annibal^
misled by his guides into some defiles, is beaten bij Fahins ; but
extricates himself, by a stratagem, firsm his dangerous situation.
Fabius, thoutrh he discovers the scheme, dares not attack him by
night : sells part of his otun estate to ransom the Roman captives,
in fulfilment of his contract ; is obliged to go tO Rome, to preside
at some sacrifices ; orders Minucius not to hazard an action during
his absence: but, in contempt of his orders, he engages, and gains
a slight advantage over Annibal. The people give him an equal
share of authoritif tviih Fabius, who shows great magnanimity upon
the occasion. His conduct toward Minucius, on his return to the
army. Minucius, in opposition to his advice, attach Annibal, and
is defeated; but Fabias generously flies to his rescue, and. compeh
Annibal to retreat. Minucius makes a public acknowledgement of
his errors, leads his soldiers to the dictator, and places himself
asain under his command. Fabius retnriis to 4lome, and lai/s
dotal the dictatorship. His advice to Paidus jFlmiliris, the netc
consul, on ///> setting of for {be army zvith Varro his collegue.

62 FABIUS MAXIMUM.

I'arro's arrogance, and impatience to encrage Annihal. The battle
of CaiiniB lost by his inexperience and Icrnerity. Death of Paulus
A'^miliiis : Annibal, after hii victory, declines marching to Rome.
Many of the Italian cities declare in his favour. The consterna-
tion of the Romans. Fabius' Jirmness, and txise measures Jor re-
viving the public spirit of his countrymen. Generosity of the
senate to Varro, on his return to Rome. Fabius is again sent
xvith Marcellus against Annibal ; escape the ambuscade laid for
him by the Carthaginian general, and secures the fidelity of the
allies. Moderafion and gentleness of his behaviour. He deceives
Annibal, and gets possession of the city f Tarentmn, in xvhich he
finds immense plunder. Receives the honour of a second triumph.
The steady conduct of his souy then consul, toivard him. Scipio
sets of for Spain. Fabius opposes the tranf erring of the ivafiuto
Africa ; his motives, Scipio passes over into Africa : the measure
justified by it's brilliant success. Death of Fabius. He is deeply
regretted by I he Roman people.

oUCK vvere the memorablo actions of Pericles, as
far as we have been able to collect them : we now
proceed to the Life of Fabius Maximus.

The first Fabius was the sou of Hercules by oiie
of the Nymphs, according to some authors ; or, as
others say, by a woman of the country, near the river
Tiber. From him descended the fhniily of the Fabii,
one of th.e most numerous and illustrious in Rome '.

' One of the most numerous, for th.it family alone undertook tlic
■vvar against tho Veientes, A. U. C. 'JTH, and sent out three hundred
and six persons of their own name, who were all slain in that ex^w-
ditiou (Sec Liv. ii,,oO., A. (idl. xvi. 21.): and one of the most illus-
trious,^ as the Fabii liad borne the highest offices iu the state, and
two of them had been seven times consuls. (L.)

VVifh regard to their pretended extraction from Jlercules, this is
obviously a compliment to their acknowledged antiquity: for, if we
may believe any tlii:i- as accurate with regard to the family of that
proiitic hero, it appe^irs from Dion. Halie. (i. JO.) that hehad only
two children in Italy, Pallas by a daughter of Evander, and Latinus
by a lady whom he had brought, with him from tlie north. (Virgil

FABIUS :\IAXIMUS. fiS

Yet some authors write, that the first founders of
tJiis iiimilv were called Fodii ■, on account of their
catching wild beasts by means of pits,' for ' a pit' is
still in Latin called fovea, and the wovd/hdere sig-
nilies ' to dig:' but in time, two letters being changed,
they got the name of Fabii. This fanrily y>roduced
many eminent men, tlie most considerable of whom
was Ilullus^, by the Romans surnamed Maximus or
'■ the great;' and from him the Fabius Maximus, of
whom we are writing, was the fourth in descent.

This last had the surname of Verrucosus, from a
small ' wart' on his upper lip. He was likewise
called Ovicula (which signifies ' a little sheep') from
the mildness and gravity of his behaviour, when a
boy. Nay, his composed demean or»r and his si-
lence, his caution in engaging in the diversions of
the other boys, the slowness and difficulty with
v>hich he apprehended what was taught him, toge-
ther with the submissive manner in which he com-

indeed assigns him a tliird in Aventinus, M'hom he represents as
born, CoUis Avevtini n'va, Mv. vii. C59.) But Fabius was one of
those, to whom the uncoraphmenting Juvenal himself would have
said,

Licet a Pico nuraeres genus.

Fcstus however seems to believe this old story, though the Her-
cnleus hir was only in his opinion a humble ditch, as it is one of the
derivations which he assigns to the original name Fovii, for so he
writes the word. (See in voc. Fcvii.)*

"■ Pliny -s account of the niatter (li. N. xviii. 3.) is much more
probable, viz. that they were called Fabii, from their being the first
or the most skilful sowers of beans ffaijczj; as several other families
of note among the Romans were denominated from other branches
of husbandry: e. g. the Lcntuli, Cicerones, &c. Tiieir primitive
heroes, indeed, tilled the ground with their own hands.

3 This Fabius Hullus (or Rutilianus, Plin. H. N. viii. 4.) was five
times consul, and gained several important victories over the Sam-
nites, Tuscans, aiid other nations. It was not, however, from these
actions th.at he obtained the surname of Maximus, but from his be-
haviour in the censorship ; during which he reduced into four tribes
ths populace of Rome, who before were dispersed among all the
tribes in general, and had thus excessive pov;er in the assemblies.
(Liv. ix. 46.) These were called Tribus Urhant^, in opposition
to the Tribus Rusiic(r, or better families, who usually livotl in the
country..

64 FABIUS MAXIMUS.

plied witli the proposals of his comrades, subjected
him, with those that did not thoroughly know him, to
the suspicion of foolishness and stupidity. There
werea few, however, who perceived thathis composed-
ness was owing to the solidity of his parts, and who
discerned a niaonanimity and lion-like courao-e in his
nature. In a short time, when application to busi-
ness drew him out, it was obvious even to the many,
that his seeming inactivity was a command which he
liad of his passions, that his cautiousness was pru-
dence, and that what had passed for heaviness and
insensibility was in reality an immoveable firmness of
soul. He saw v/hat an important concern the admi-
nistration was, and in what wars the republic was
frequently involved : and therefore prepared his
body by exercise, considering it's strength as a na-
tural armour ; and improved at the same time his
powers of persuasion, as engines by which the people
are to be moved, adapting thcrn to his mamier of
life. For in his eloquence there was nothing of af-
fectation, no empty plausible elegance ; but it was
full of that good sense which was peculiar to him,
and was characterised by a sententious force and
depth, said to have resembled that of Thucydides'.
There is an oration of his still extant, which he de-
livered before the people on occasion of the funeral
of his son, who died after he had been consul.

•» The peculiar cluiracters of 'Ilmcydiclcs' stile are jrreat encrjiA
iind great concisoness. Ita creher (says C'icero, de Orat. ii. J(j.')
rerumfrequentia, ut verhonim prope mnneritm saitenlinrum numero
conseciiatur; iia porro verbis aptus ct prrsstis, ut nescias ntrum res
oratione^ an verba senleniiis illustrentur. Witli a view to the attain-
ment of this masculine strain of eloquence, Demostlienes (we are
told) copied his history of the Poloponnesian war ei<iht times! See
Lucian iJ^c? ATruirh-jTo.-, k.t.a. Thisniin^lu, indeed, be pronounced
labor wiprohis. What enhanced the merit of Thucydides was, that
he lived m an age when ' empty plausible eletiance' was affected by
those whom Plato, in his Phaidrus, calls the^/.r.vc<Ji:.J^^A., ; and a id-
hbus (Ici'iciis, vd pot ins inept iis, nbfnii. The funeral oration, men-
tioned below, is spoken of by Cicero (de Senect. iv.) in hi<rh terms:
(^:iam chnh-irimii.K, fjucn philosophinn non roiitnnnimiis?'^ He wa<^
very old, when he delivered it, as his son attained the honour of th«i
toiisul.uc Cidy ten years before his father's deatii,*

FABIUS MAXIMUS. G:1

iFabiLis Maximus was five times consul', and in his
first consulship was honoured with a triumph for a
victory over the Liguriaiis ; who being defeated by
him in a set battle, with the loss of a great number
of men, were driven behind the Alps, and restrained
from their usual inroads and ravages in the neigh-
bouring provinces.

Some years afterward, Annibal having invaded
Italv^ and chained the battle of Trebia, advanced
through Tuscany, laying waste the country, and
striking Rome itself with astonishment and dismay.
This desolation was announced by signs and prodi-
gies, some familiar to the Romans, as that of thunder
for instance, and otliers quite strange and unac-
countable. For it was said, that certain shields
sweated blood, that bloody corn was cut at Antium,
that red-hot stones fell from the air, that the Fale-
rians saw the heavens open and many billets fair,

5 Fabius was first consul A.U. C. 521, or (as it would appear
from Suppl. Liv. xx. 17.) 519; and the fifth time, in the tenth year
ofthe second Punic war, A. U. C. 5-t5. (L.) His intermediate con-
sulships were in A. U. C. 526, 5;;9, and 560, or 524, 537, and
538 respectively. The Li^urians inhabited the coast stretching
from the river of Genoa to iVIonaco.* '

* Here Plutarch leaves a void of fourteen or fifteen years. It
was not, indeed, a remarkable period of Fabius' life. Annibal en-
tered Italy A. U. C. 536, according to Livy (xxi.38.) when Corn.
Scipio and Sempr. Longus were consuls; and defeated Scipio in
the battle of Ticinus, before he beat Sempronius in that of Trebia.
(Id. ib. 46.)

7 Plutarch misunderstood Livy, and of the two prodigies which
he mentions makes but one. Livy says (xxx. 1.) ' At Falerium
the sky was seen to open, and iri the void space a great light ap-
peared. The lots at Pncneste shrunk of tiieir own accord, and one
of them dropped down, upon wliicli was v.ritten, Mars brandisheth
his sword,' (xxii.) Tliese lots were bits of oak liandsomely
wrought, with some ancient characters inscribed uj)on them. When
any came to consult them, the coffer in which they were kept was
opened, and a child having ilist shaken them together drew cut one
from the rest, which contained the answer to the querist's demand.
As to their being s!;runk, which was considered as a bad omen, no
<loubt the priests had two sets, a smaller and a greater, with whicii
I they played upon the people's superstition as they pleased. (I^)
' Cicero (de Div. ii. 41.) ushers in an account of their origin with
the observation. 'L\iri res est inventa fallacn:> aut ad fjucesium, aut
VOL. II, F

6G FABIUS MAXIMUS.

upon one of whicli these words were very legible,
* Mars brandishctb bis arms.' But Cains Fhiminius,
tben consul, was not discouraged by any of these
things. He was indeed naturally a man of much
.fire and ambition, and besides was elated by former
successes, which he had met with contrary to all
probabibty ; for, against th.e sense both of the senate
and of his collcgue, he had engaged and defeated
the Gauls*. Fabius likewise ])aid but little regard
to prodigies ^ as too absurd to be believed, notwitli-
standing the great elfect which they produced upon
the multitude. But having learned how small the
numbers of the enemy were, and how much they
were distressed by the want of money, he advised
the Romans to have patience, and not give battle
to a man who led on an army hardened by many

^d superstiUonem, aid ad crrnrnn; and concludes it with, Ccettrk
veru in locis sort cs plane refrixenint. From a passage, however, ia
Suetonius (_Tib. G3.) it would appear, that they had regained their
credit; as even that wretclied prince, in the full career of his im-
piety, was ' appalled by the majesty of the lots of Pra2neste.'
There were similar mummeries ciitablislied at Antium, Tivoli, &c.
With regard to the other prodigies here mentioned, the rains and
sweats of blood, wo have elsewhere observed that they were natural
phaenomcna, occasioned by insects or vapours of a reddish hue :
j,nd as to the ' red-hot stones,' see among otlier public record*
some recent Phil. Trans., with various comments in many contem-
porary publications. See also Vol. III. p. 2CX)., and not. (17.)

** Flaminius is represented by Potybius (iii.) as an eloquent and
very proud man, but a miserable general. He was so confident in-
deed of success, that he had more slaves, with chains for the enemy,
than soldiers in his army. This victory was gained, A. U. C. 529;
and it's improbability a priori was founded upon t^vo or three cajiital
jnistakes made by Plaminius. In the first place, he was much infe-
rior in numbers ; he had neglected the auspices, and refused to read
the despatches from the senate till after the engagement ; and he had
drawn up his forces most injudiciously. But his errors were rectified
by the skill of some other officers of his staff. (See Polyb. ii., and
Suppl. Liv. XX. 4-9.)*

9 If Fabius was not moved by those prodigies, it was not be-
cause he despised them (as his collegue did, who according to Livy
' neither feared the gods nor regarded men') but because he
hoped, by appeasing tlie anger of the gods, to render the prodigies
ineffectual. It was not Fabius however, but Cu. Servilius Gemi-
nus, who was collogue to Flaminius.

FABIIJS MAXIMUS. 67

conflicts for this very purpose ; but to send succours
to their allies, and to secure the towns that were
still in tlieir possession, until the vigour of the
eneiny, like a flame wanting fuel, expired of itself.

He could not, however, prevail upon Flaminius.
That general declared he would never suffer the war
to ap[)roach Rome, nor like Camiilus of old leave it
to be decided within the walls, who should be tlie
master of the city. He therefore ordered the trj-
buncs to draw out th.e forces, and mounted bis horst^s,
but was throwii headlong off'"^, the horse v/ithout
anv visible cause being seized with a fright and
trembling. Yet he still persisted in bis resolution
of marcliing out to meet Annibal, and drew np
bis army near the lake called Thrasymene^^ i'M
Tuscany.

While the armies were engaged, there happej:)ed
an earthquake, wliich overturned whole cities,
changed the course of rivers, and tore otf the tops
of mountains ; yet of this convulsion not one of the
combatants was in the least sensible. Flaminiag
himself, having greatly signalised his strength and.
valour, fell, and with him the bravest of his troops;
the rest being routed, a dreadful carnage ensued :
full iifteen thousand were slain, and as many taken
prisoners ^-. Annibal was very desirous of discover-

'° This fall from his horse, which was considered as an iJi] «mieu,
was followed (Li\'y inforaas us, xxii. 3.) by another as bad. Vvl.en
the en-.ign aUempted to pull his standard out of the ground, in ord-er
to ia;irch, he had not strength to do it. But where is tiie wonder,,
a>ks Cicero, to have a horae take fright, or to find a standard-bearer
feebl" endeavouring to draw up the standard, whix;h he had perhaps
purpusely ^tl•uck deep into the ground ?

" Hod. Lago di Perugia.

1^ Notvviclistanding this complete victory, Annibal, according to
Livy xxii. 6., lost only fifteen hundred men (though ma»y subse-
quently died of their wounds); for he fought at great advantage,
liaving drawn the llomans into an ambuscade between the hiUs of
Cortona and the lake Thrasymcne. Livy agrees with Plutarch in
t'lie num}>er of the slain; but both he and Valerius Maximus {i. 6.)
njake the number of prisoners only six thousand ; Pclybius however
asserts, tJ:at they were much more numerous. About ten thoa-
.-;ap.u llomaviS, most of tbem wounded, made their escape, and took

F 2

69 FABIUS MAXlMir.S^.

iup; tlic body of FJaniiniiis, that he might bury h
Avith due honour, as a tribute to his bra^'Cl•y ; but
lie could not find it, nor could any account be given
of it.

When tlie Romans lost the battle of Trebia, the
generals neither sent a true account of it '^, nor
(lid the messenger represent it as it really was : ac-
cording to the statements of both, the victory was
doubtful. But as to the last engagement, as soon as
the prnetor Pomponius vras apprised of it, he assem-
bled the people, and without in the least affecting to
disguise the matter made this declaration ; " Ko-
" mans, we have lost a great battle, our army is
" cut to pieces, and Flaminius the consul is slain :
** consult, therefore, what is to be done for your
". safety '^.'* llie same commotion, which a furious
wind causes in the ocean, did these words of the
praetor produce in this vast multitude. In the first
consternation, they could not determine upon any
thing : but at length they all agreed that affairs re-
(luired the direction of an absolute power, which
they call the dictatorship ; that some one sliould be
selected for it, w^ho would exercise it with steadi-
ness and intrepidity ; and that such a one was Fa-
bius Maximus, who had a spirit and dignity of
manners equal to so high a command, and besides

rlie route to Rome ; but the chief pwt of them died of their wounds,
before they reached tlic capital. Two mothers were so transported
with joy, one at the gate of the city, when she saw her son arrive,
and the other at home, where she found her's waiting her retunr,
that they both expired on tlie spot. (L.)

This precipitation on the part of Fhiniinius, wlio engaged the
enemy before he was joined by his colleguc, arose out of liis vain
aniI)ition of monopolising the honour of the victory. He fell (we
are told by tlie same historian', ib. 6.) by the hand of a Gaul named
Ducarius, who had previously slain his aid-de-campy as he fruit-
lessly endeavoured with his own person to protect his general.*

'^ Sempronius wrote to the senate, tliat the badness of the
weather had prevented liis gaining the victory. (Polyb. iii.)'''

'■* Livy (ib. 7.) sbates, that the generals despatch consisted only
of t()B Hrst sentence, ' Jlomans, we liave lost a great battle;' and
tiiat the rest was patched up from the r'-ports consequent upon tJic
action. ' ''

FABIUS MAXIMUS. €f»

Tvas of an age in which the vigour of the body is suf-
iicient to execute the purposes of tlie mind, and
courage is tempered with prudence.

Pursuant to these resohitions, Fabius was clioseii
dictator ^\ and he appointed Lucius Minucius his
general of the horse '". But first he desired permis-
sion of the senate to make use of a horse, when in
the field. This was forbidden by an ancient law,
either because they placed their greatest strength in
the infantry, and therefore chose that the com-
mander-in-chief should be always posted among
them ; or because they would have the dictator,
whose power in all other respects was very consider-
able and indeed arbitrary, in this case at least ap-
pear dependent upon the people '^ In the next
place Fabius, willing to display the authority and
grandeur of his office, in order to render the people
more tractable and submissive, appeared in public
with twenty-four lictors carrying the Fasces before
liim ; and when the surviving consul met him, he
-sent one of his officers to order him to dismiss his
lictors and the other ensigns of his employment, and
to join him as a private man ^^ ^

'5 A dictator could not be regularly named, but by the consuls;
Servilius therefore, the survivhig consul, being with the army, the
people appointed Fabius by their own authority with the title of
prodictator. The gratitude of Rome, however, allowed his de-
soendents to put dictator instead of pro-dictator in the list of his
titles. (Liv. xxii. 8. and 31.)

'^ According to Polybius, and Livy (ib.) his name was not Lu-
cius, but Marcus Minucius llufus ; neither was he pitched upon by
Fabius, but by the people.

'7 Dion. Hal. (v. l-i.) calls the office 'an elect!ve tyranny.*
Plutarch here seems to contradict himself, in making Fabius de-
mand of the senate a favour, which the people alone (as appears,
likewise, from Liv. xxiii. 14-.) were authorised to bestow: unless
we suppose that the senate made an application, in his name, to the
people.*

■** This display, however, of official magnificence only com-
menced upon his setting out from Rome, to take the command
of the army; and, as well as his subsequent order to Servilius, was
excellently adapted (according to Liv. xxii. 11.) to enhance in the
oves both of the citizens and the allies the importance of the dic-

9

.>m FABIUS MAXIMUS.

Then beginning with an act of religion, the best
rif all beginnings, and assuring tlie people that their
defeats were owing not to the cowardice of the sol-
diers, but to the general's neglect of the sacred rites
and auspices, he exhorted them to entertain no dread
of the enemy, but by extraordinary honours to pro-
pitiate the gods. Not that he wished to infuse into
them a spirit of superstition, but to contirm their va/-
lour by piety, and to deliver them from every other
fear by a sense of the divine protection. Upon tiiat
occasion he consulted several of those mysterious
books of the Sybils, which contained matters of im-
portance to the state : and it is said, tliat some of
the prophecies there found perfectly agreed with the
circumstances of those times; but it was not lawful
for him to divuloje them ''^. In full assemblv, how-
ever, he vowed to the gods all the young which the
next spring should produce on the mountains, the

tntorsbip, now nearly become obsolete by a suspension of it's wore
dignified i'unctions tor a whole generation, or a period oi" thirty-
three years.*

' ''> Tlie Decemvirs, appointed to the custody oftliese sacred vo-
lumes, never disclosed their pyopheciss, but only announced tiieir
directions. The supen^titious observances, enjoined at this time,
are fully detailed in Liv. xxii. P. ; of" which one was tlie ver ■sai-ritm
referred to in the text. It wns not vowed however by Fabius, "s he
was too much occupied by preparations for the war, but by Com.
Lentulus the high-prie.^t. Livy (ib. 10.) has preserved the forn) of
devotion used upon the occasion. From a subsequent passage of
that historian (x.^xiv. 44.) it appears that this « sacred spring' in-
cluded the two entire months of March and April. The human
birtlis of that period were originally included in the ceremony; but
in those parts of" Italy, vvliere that custom still {)r. vailccl, Meziriac
(one of the French translators) informs us that they did not sacri-
fice them, but after bringing them up for a few years' sent them
abroad to seek their fortunes. Of the ' Great ('.ames' im account
is given in a note upon the Life of Camillus. The sum allotted for
them, according to Livy (xxii. 10.), was much less ronsiderahle.
As to the ' perfection of the number three,' we are not to under.stand
it in the mathematical sense of the word, but in it's uiysterioiu< im-
port as as^ij^ned by Pythagoras and Plato. The Greels, having a
dual in their language appropriated to the number Uvo, might with
prtcision call three 'the first of plurals,' See Meursius (IX'-
r.ar. I'yfhag.) on the properties of the digits; and also the Life
of Nunia.^

FABIUS MAXIMUS. Tl

fields, the rivers, and the meadows of Italy, from
the goats, tlie swine, the sheep, and the cows. He,.
likewise, vowed to exhibit the Great Games in ho-
nour of the gods ; and to expend upon those games
three hundred and thirty-three thousand sestertii,
three hundred and thirty-three denarii, and one
third of a denarius ; which sum in our Greek money
is eighty-three thousand five hundred and eighty-
three drachmas and two oboli '^ What his reason
might be for fixing upon that precise number, it is
not easy to determine ; unless it were on account of
the perfection of the number three, as being the
first of odd numbers, the first of plurals, and con-
taining in itself the first difierences and the first ele-
ments of all numbers.

Fabius, having taught the people to repose their
minds upon acts of religion, made them more easy
as to future events. For his own part, he placed all
his hopes of victory in himself, believing that heaven
bestows success through the agency of virtue and
prudence : and thercf()re he watched the motions of
Annibal, not with a design to give him battle, but
by length of time to waste his vigour, and gradually
to eft'ect his destruction by his superiority in men
and money. To secure himself against the enemy's
horse, he took care to encamp al)ove them on high
and mountainous places. When they sat still, he
did the same : when they were in motion he showed
himself upon the heights, at such a distance as not
to be obliged to fight against his inclination, and
yet near enough to keep them in perpetual alarm ;
as if, amidst his arts to gain time, he intended every
moment to give them battle.

These dilatory proceedings exposed him to con-
tempt among the Romans in general, and even in
his own army. The enemy likewise, excepting

^° For the denarius (or it's equivalent, the drachma) being
equal to four sestertii, the total number of sestertii would be
Sj^.SSS-^, which reduced to druchmas would become 83,583-j,
agreeably to the text,* *

Tti FABIUS MAXIMUS. .

Annibal, tliouglit him a man of no spirit. He alone
was sensible of the keenness of Fabius, and of the
manner in which he intended to carry on the war ;
and determined therefore if possible, either by stra-
tagem or by force, to bring him to a battle, conclud-
ing that otherwise the Carthao'inians mnst be undone:
since they could not decide the matter in the field,
where they had the advantage, but must gradually
])e expended and reduced to nothing, when the dis-
pute was only who should be superior in men and
money. Hence it was, that he exhausted the whole
art of war ; like a skilful wrestler, who watches every
opportunity to lay hold of his adversary. Sometimes
Jie advanced, and alarmed him with the apprehen-
sions of an attack ; sometimes by marching and
counter-marching he led him from place to place,
hoping to draw him from his plan of caution. But
I'Vbius, fully persuaded of it's utility, kept immove-
ably to his resolution. Minucius, his general of the
horse, however, by his unseasonable courage and
heat, gave him no small trouble ; haranguing the
army, and filling them with a furious desire to come
to action, and a vain confidence of success. Thus
the soldiers were brought to despise Fabius, and by
way of derision to call him 'Annibal's pedagogue'-^;'
while they extolled Minucius as a great man, and
one that acted up to the dignity of Rome. This
led Minucius to give a wider scope to his arrogance
and foolhardiness, and to ridicule the dictator"^- for
encamping constantly upon the m.ountains ; " as if
" he did it on purpose, that his men might more
" cleaily behold Italy laid Avaste with fire and
" sword." And he inquired of Fabius' friends,

^' For the office of a pedagogue of old was (as the name implies)
to attend the children, in theiv little excursions, and conduct them
home again.

•' One part of liis character, that of endeavouring to ruin his

superiors, in order to promote his own elevation, is well given by

Livy with a manl}' parenthesis : prcmcndorumquc superiorum arte

(qu(E pessimn ars nimis prosperis multorum successibiis crcvitj sese

'(xtollcbat, (xxii. 12.)*

cc

cc
a
a
cc

FABIUS MAXIMUS. 73

" "Whetlier he intended to take his army up into
" heaven, as he had bid adieu to the world below ;
or sought to screen himself from the enemy by
clouds and fos^s ?" When the dictator's friends
brought him an account of these aspersions, and
exhorted him to wipe them off by risking a battle ;
In that case," said he, " I should be of a more
dastardly spirit than even they represent me to be,
if through fear of insults and reproaches I should
abandon my fixed resolution. But to fear for my
country is no disgraceful fear. That man is un-
Vvorthy of a command like mine, who shrinks
" under calumnies and slanders, and complies with
" the humour of those whom he ought to govern,
" and whose inconsiderate rashness it is his duty to
" restrain.'*

After this, Annibal committed an important mis-
take. For intending to lead his army farther from
Fabius, and to move into a part of the country that
would afford him forage, he ordered the guides im-
mediately after supper to conduct him to the plains
of Casinum"'^. They taking the word wrong, on
account of his barbarous pronunciation of it, led his
forces to the borders of Campania^, near the town of
Casilinum, through which runs the river Lothronus,

*' Annibal had overrun Samnium, plundered the territory of
Beneventum a Roman colony, and laid siege to Telesia a city at
the foot of the Appenines. i3ut finding that neither the ravaging
of the country, nor even the taking of some cities, could make
Fabius quit In's eminences, he resolved to use a stronger bait; which
was to enter Campania, the finest country in Italy, and lay it waste
under his eyes, hoping thus to bring him to action. Besides, by
taking possession of the plains of Casinum, he would effectually
have prevented Fabius from sending any succours to the allies.
But by the mistake here mentioned, his guides, instead of conduct-
ing him to the plains of Cassinum, led him into the narrow passes
of Casilinum, which divide Samnium from Campania. (L.) For
tliis error, Livy inibrms us (xxii. 13.) the captain of the guides
alone was scourged and crucified : and this is the more probai-le
account, as Annibal would scarcely indulge his thirst of vengeance
so absurdly, as to deprive himself of the services of the rest.*

74 FABIUS MAXmUS.

\vhich the Romans call Vulturnus-*. The adjacent
country is surroiinded with niountiiins, except only
a valley that stretches out to the sea. Near the
sliore the ground is extremely marsh}-, and full of
large banks ol" sand, from the ovcrflov/iiig of the
river. The surf is there very rough, and the coast
almost impraclicabiC.

As soon as Aniiibal had entered this valley,
Fabius avaihng himself of his knowlege of the
country seized the narrow outlet, and placed in it a
guard of four thousand men. The main body of
iiis army he posted to advantage upon the surround-
ing hills, and with the lightest and most active of
his troops fell on the enemy's rear, threw their
whole army into disorder, and killed about eight
hundred.

Annibal then wished to rescue his forces from so
disad\antageous a situation ; and, in revenge of the
dangerous mistake which the guides had m.ade, cru-
cified them all. Bat des])airing of driving the enemy
from the heights of v.hich they were in possession,
and sensible besides of the despondency and terror
pervading his v/hole army, who concluded them-
selves iallcn into an inextricable difficulty, he had
recourse to stratai^em'.

The contrivance was this : he caused two thou-
sand oxen, which he had in his camp, to have torches
and dry bavins well fastened to their horns. . These
in the night, UT)on a signal given, were to be lighted,
and the oxen driven to the mountain'^, near the
narrow pass guarded by the enemy. W'ihle those
that had it in charge were tiuis employed, he de-
camped and marched slowly forward. So long as
the lire was moderate, and burnt only the torches

"'* It may appear triflinr;^, but it is at least a classical trifle td intro-
4uci: here a charade lately circulated upon this river. (180<3.)

Totmi ponCjjluit : caput aufer^ splcndet in arviis s
Caudavi d::mc, volat : viscera talk', f*ol<ft.*

FABIUS MAXLMUS. 77

aiul bavins, the oxen moved softly onward, as they
were driven up the hills ; and the shepherds and
herdsmen on the adjacent heights gazed at them
with wonder, as an army marching in order with
lighted torches. But when their horns were burned
to the roots and tlie fire pierced to the quick, terri-
fied and mad with pain, they no longer kept any
certain route ; but ran along the hills, with their
foreheads and tails flaming, and setting on fire all
the woods in tlieir way. The Romans, who guarded
the pass, were astonished ; for they appeared to them
like an immense number of men running up and
down with torches, which scattered fire on every
side. In their fears they concluded, that they sho'dd
be attacked and surrounded by the enemy ; they
quitted the pass therefore, and fled to the main body
in the camp. Annibal's light-armed troops immedi-
ately took possession of the outlet, and the rest of
his forces marched safely through, loaded with a
rich booty.

Fabius discovered the stratas^em that same nio-ht,
for some of the oxen, as they were scattered about,
fell into his hands ; but, apprehending an ambush in
the dark, he kept his men all night under arms iu
the camp. At break of day, he pursued the enemy,
came up with their rear "', and attacked them :
several skirmishes ensued in the difficult pa'^ses of
the mountains, and Annibal's army was thrown into
some disorder ; until he detacl)cd from his van a
body of Spaniards, light and active men, who were
accustojned to climb such heights. These falling
upon the heavy-armed Romans cut off a considerable
number of them, and obliged Fabius to retire. This
brought upon him more contempt and calumny than
ever : for having renounced open f()rce, as if he
could subdue Annibal bv conduct and fbresidit, he

-' Polybius (iii.) fia)-s, it was ' the Carthaginian infantry,' which
Arvnibai liad rient to dislodge the otiemy from th',* lieigiits ; and Livy,
still mGi-e sptcificoliy, says ' the light infantry.' {xxii. 18.)*

re FABIUS MAXIMl'.S.

appeared r.ow to be worsted at his own weapons.
Annibal still farther to incense the Romans acrainst
him, when he came to his lands, ordered them to be
^I)ared *, and set a guard upon them to preserve
them from injiny and pillage ; while lie was ravaging
all the country around them, and laying it waste
with fire. An account of these things, being brought
to Rome, furnished ground for heavy complaints.
The tribunes clamorouslv adduced manv articles
of accusation against him before the people, chiefly
at the instigation oi' Metilius, who had no particular
enmity to Fabius ; but as a relation of Minucius,
his general of the horse, sought by depressing Fabius
to raise his friend. The senate likewise was offended,
particularly about the terms which he had settled
with Annibal for the ransom of prisoners. For it
was agreed between them that the prisoners should
be exchanged, man for man ; and that, if either of
them had more than the other, he should release
them for two hundred and fifty drachmas each man^'':
and upon the v.hoIe account there remained two
liundred and forty Romans unexchanged. The
senate determined not to pay this ransom, and
blamed Fabius as. having taken a step equally against
the honour and the interest of the state, in endea-
vouring to recover men whom cowardice had be-
trayed into the hands of the enemy-''.

"^ Pericles anticipated a similar ' Grecian gift' from Archidamug,
p. 50. and therefore, in order to anticipate it's effects upon the
minds of his capricious countrynricn, 'he presented bis lands and
houses to the city of Athens.'*

^<' Livy (xxii. 23.) calls this, argenti pondo bina et sclihras in
mUilem ; whence we learn that the Roman pondo, or ' pound
wciirht' of silver, was equivalent to a hundred Grecian drachmas"
•or a mina, (L.) The excess of Roman captives, that historian
informs us, vvas 21-7 : he does not however with Plutarch say, that
the senate refused, but onlj^ suspended, the payment of their ransom;
■s/rpe jactata in scnatu re, quonunn non consulidssct pntres. (ib.)*

^'i On tlie principles of the Horatian sarcasm,

Aiiro repenaus scilicet acrior
Miles rcdibit ! Flagitio additis

Damnum, &c. (Od. III. v. 25.*)

FABIUS MAXIMUS. 77

AVhen Fabius was informed of the resentment of
his fellow-citizens, he bore it with invincible pa-
tience ; but being in want of money, and not choos-
ing to deceive Annibal or to abandon his country-
men in their distress, he sent his son to Kome with
orders to sell part of his estate, and to bring him the
produce immediately to the camp. This was punc-
tually performed by his son, and P^abius redeemed
the prisoners; several of whom subsequently offered
to repay him, but his generos^ity would not permit
him to accept it.

After this he was called to Rome by the priests,
to assist at some of the solemn sacrifices, and was
therefore obliged to leave the army to Minucius;
but he both charged him as dictator, and also ear-
nestly entreated and conjured him as a friend, not to
come to any kind of action. His prayers, however,
were lost upon Minucius ; for he immediately sought
an occasion to engage the enemy. And, observing
one day that Annibal had sent out a considerable
part of his army to forage, he attacked those that
were left behind, and drove them within their en-
trenchments, killing great numbers of them, so that
they even feared he w-ould storm their camp, and,
when the rest of the Carthaguiian forces returned,
he retreated without loss'-'^ This success increased
his arrogance, and the ardour of the soldiers. An
exaggerated report of this action soon reached Rome.
When Fabius heard it, he said, " That he dreaded
*' nothing more than Minucius' success.'* But the
people, highly elated with the news, ran to the
Forum ; where the tribune Mctilius harangued them
from the Rostrum, liighly extolling Minucius, and
accusing Fabius not only of cowardice and want of
spirit, but of treachery. Fie endeavoured also to
involve the princi])al men in Rome in the same
crime, alleging, " that they had originally brought

the war upon Italy, lor the destruction of the

a

th

^8 Livy (xxii. 24-.) says, that he lost five thousand of his men, and
at the enemy's lyss did not exceed his bv more than a thousand, ,

ii

78 FABIUS MAXIMUS.

*' common people; and liad placed the common-
" wealth under the absolute direction of one man,

who by the slowness of" his proceeding ^ave An-

nibal an opporlunity of establishing^ himself in
" the country, and of drawing fresh forces from

Carthage, in order to effect a total conquest ol"

Italy."'

Against these allegations of the tribune, Fabiiis
disdain.ed to make any defence ; and only declared,
that " he would finish the sacrifice and other reii-
" gious rites as soon as pos^;Ible, in order to return
" to the army, and punish Minucius for having
'' fonaht contrary to his orders." This occasioned
a great tumult among the people, who were alarmed
at Minucius' danger. For it is in the dictator's
power to imprison, and inflict ca])ital punishment,
without form of trial: and they thought that the
wrath of Fabius now provoked, though he was natu-
rally vci'v mild and patient, would ])rove heavy
and implacable. But fear kept them all silent except
Metilins, whose ])erson, as tribune of the people,
coukl not be touched ; tlve tribunes being the only
officers of state who retain their authority after the
appointing of a dictator. Metilins entreated, in-
sisted that the peo})lc should not givenp Minucius.
to suffer perhaps what Manlius Torcpiatus iniiicted
u])on his own son, whom he beheaded when crown.ed
with larnel for his victory : but that they should
take from Fabius his pov.er to play the tyrant, and
Jf'ave tlie direction of affairs to one, who was both
able and willing to save his country. The people,
though much aficcted with this speech, did not ven-
ture to divest Fabius of the dictatorship, notwith-
standing the odium which he had incurred; but ck-
creed that Minucius should share the connnand with
him, and have equal authority in conducting the
war : a thing never before practised in Kome '^.
Ano'ther instance of it however soon afterward oc-

'y Tin's decree, we are told by T-ivy (■^'xii. 26.) was proposed l)y
C. Terentiiis Varro, subsequently rendered so notorious by his
defeat iit Cunnc*

FABIUS MAXIMUS. ^9

ourrcd, upon the unfortunate action of Canna? ; for
Marcus Junius the dictator being then in the iicld,
they created another dictator (Fabiiis Butco) to fill
up the senate, many of whose members had fallen
in that battle. There v/as tiiis difference indeed,
that Buteo had no soonc«r enrolled the new senators,
than he dismissed his lictors and the rest of his
retinue, and mixed with the crowd, stopping some
time in the Forum about his own affairs as a private
man.

When the people had thus Invested Minucius
with a power equal to that of tlie dictator, thev
thought they should find Fabius extremely humbled
and dejected ; but it soon appeared, that they knew
not the man. For he did not account their mistake
any unhappiness to him ; but as Diogenes the philo-
sopher, when one said, " They deride you," weH
replied, '" But I am not derided;" accounting
tliose only to be ridiculed, who feel the ridicule, and
are discomposed at it : so Fabius bore without emo-
tion all that hap])ened to himself, thuis confirming
the position in philosophy, which affirms that ' a wise
and good man can suffer no contempt or disgrace^".*
But he was deeply concerned for tlie public, on
account of the unadvised proceedings of the people,
who had put it in the power of a rash man to indulge
his indiscreet ambition for mihtary glory. And ap-
prehensive that Minucius, infatuated wifii empty
pride, might hastily take some fatal step, he left
Kome with the utmost privacy.

'° How beautifully has Horace expressed ill's sentiment (Od. III.
ii. 17, &c.)

Virtusy repulscB nescia sordidte,
IntaminatisJ'tdget honorihiis ;
Nee sumit aut ponit necures
Arbitrio popularis aurce.

And Fabius' reflection upon the occasion, as given by Livy (xxii.
26.) deserves to be quoted: Satis fidens hnud(fuat]nnm cum imperii
jure artem impermidi acjrcatam, invicto d oivibus hosiibusque anirrui
ad exercitum rediit.*

so FABIUS MAXIMUS.

Upon Ills arrival at tlie camp, he found the arro-
gance of i\liniiciiis grown to such a height, that it
Avas no lono-er to be endured. Fabius therefore re-
fused to comply with his demand of havnig the army
inidcr his orders every other day, and instead of tliat
divided the forces with him, choosing rather to have
the full command of a part, than the direction of
the whole by turns. He accordingly took the first
and fourth legions himself, leaving the second and
third to Minucius; the allies were likewise equally
divided between them^'.

Minucius valued himself highl}^ upon this, that
the power of the greatest and most arbitrary office
in the state was controlled and reduced for his sake.
But Fabius reminded him, " That it was not Fabius
" with whom he had to contend, but Annibal : that
" if he would notwithstanding consider his coliegue
" as his rival, he must take care lest he, who liad
" thus carried his point with the people, should one
" day appear to have had their safety and interest
^' less at heart, than the man who had incurred their
" unjust resentment." Minucius considering this
as the effect of an old man's pique, and taking the
troops that fell to his lot, marked out for them a
separate camp^\ Annibal was well informed of all
that had passed, and watched his opportunity to im-
prove it to his own advantage.

There was a hill betv.een him and the enemy,
not ditiicult to take possession of, wliich yet would
aiibrd an army a very safe and commodious post.
The ground about it at a distance seemed quite level
and plain, thougli there were in it several ditches
and hollows : and therefore, though he miglit pri-
vately have seized it with ease, yet he left it as a bait
to draw the enemy to an engagement. But, as soon

^^. Li\T In this place diiTers chieflv Aoni riutarch, b}' stating that
the first and fourth legions fell to iNIinucius, and the second and
third to Fabius : but Polybius, with less of probability in his account,
varies more widely from them both.-

'- About fifteen hundred prices from Fabivis,

FABIUS MAXIMUS. 81

as he saw Minucius parted from Fabius, he took an
opportunity in the night to place a number'^ of
men in those ditches and hollows : and earl}' in the
morning openly sent out a small party, as if with
a design to make themselves masters of the hill, but
in reality to tempt Minucius to dispute it with them.
The event answered his expectation. For Minucius
despatched his light-armed troops first, then the
cavalrv ; and at last, when he saw" Annibal send re-
inforcements to his men upon the hill, he marched
out with all his forces in order of battle, and attack-
ed the Carthaginians upon the heights with great
vigour. The fortune of the day was doubtful until
Annibal, perceiving that the enemy had fallen into
the snare, and that their rear was open to the am-
buscade, g'ave the signal. Upon this, his men rushed
out on all sides, and advancing with loud shouts,
and cutting in pieces the hindmost ranks, threw the
Romans into the utmost confusion and dismay.
Even the spirit of Minucius began to shrink, and
he looked first upon one officer and then upon ano-
ther ; not one of them, however, durst stand his
ground : they all betook themselves to flight, but
in flight found no safety. For the Numidians, now
victorious, galloped round the plain, and killed the
scattered fugitives.

Fabius was not ignorant of his countrymen's
danger. Foreseeing what would happen, he had
kept his forces under arms, and taken care to be in-
formed how the action went on : neither did he trust
to the reports of others, but himself watched it's
progress i'rom an eminence in front of his camp.
AVlien he saw the army of his collegue surrounded
and broken, and the cry reached him, not like that
of men standing the charge but of persons flying in
great dismay, he smote upon his thigh '% and with a
deep sigh said to his friends about him ; " Ye gods !

32 rive hundred liorse, and five thousand foot. (Polyb. iii.)
(L.) Five thousand horse and foot jointly. (Liv. xsii. 28.)*

^- Homer mentions tlie custom oi" sn)iting upon th? thigh in
time of trouble or surprise ;

VOL. II. G

ft'2 FABIUS MAXniUS.

^' how Diiich sooner"''^ than I expected, and yei
" later than his indiscreet proceedings re(|!iired,
" has Miiiucius ruined himself!" lie then having
connnanded the standard-bearers to advance, and
the whole army to follow, addressed them in these
words ; " Now, my biavc soldiers, if any one has
" a regard for ?Jarciis Minucius, let him exert him-
*' self; for he deserves assistance for his valour, and
" the love which he bears his co'.mtry. lU in his
" haste to drive out the enemy, he has conunitted
" any error, this is not a time to ^nd fault with
" him."

The first sight of Fabius frightened away the
Numidians, who were cutting down stragglers in the
held. He then attacked those who were charging
the Romans in the rear. Such as made resistance
he slew ; but the chief part retreated to their own
army, before the communication was intercepted,
lest they should themselves be surrounded in their
turn. Annibal observing this change of fortune,
and finding that Fabius pushed on through the hot-
test of the battle with a vigour above his years, to
reach Minucius npon the hill, put an end to the
skirmish, and having sounded a retreat retired into
his camp. The iloinans, on their part, were not
sorry when the action was over. Annibal, as he was
drawing off, is reported to have said smartly to
those tiiatwere by ; " Did 1 not oi'ten tell you, that
" this cloud '^' would one day burst upon us from the
'' mountains, v\ith all the fury of a tempest?"

iind we learn from scripture, that it was practised in the east. Com-
pare Honi. xii. 1()2. ami this passaf^e ot" Plutarch, with Jer. xxxi.
19. and lii',civ, xxi. 12, (I^.) Tlie ibrthead na^, likewise, smitten
upon some occasions. See Cic. ad. Brut. 1. 1., and IVagiii. Or-it. pro
Q. Gallio (preserved in. his Brut, 80.) Froiis 7iun percussa, no>i
J'emnr ; 'j:cilis, quod minhnv.m ed^ iinlln s'lpplosin.

" Nan celerius quamtimui, says Fahfiu-^ in Livy (xxii. 29.) de-
prehendit fortmia temenlatem. . Compare also the two speetJies of
Allnucius after his defeat, to his soldiers and to P'abius, as reported
by that historian, (ib* 2S, fiO.) and by JtMiitarch.*

■'' This will perhaps r;;call to the reader's niind the happy cosnbi-

.12

FABIUS MAXIMUS. m

After the battle, Fabius having collected the
spoils of such ('arthagiiiians, as were left dead upon
the field, returned to his post ; nor did he let fall
one haughty or angry word against his collegue.
As for IMinucins, having called his men together,
he thos expressed himself; " Friends and fellovv-sol-
^° diers, not to err at all in the management of great
" ailliirs, is above human wisdom : but it is the part
*' of a prudent and good man, to learn from his
" errors to correct himself for the future. For mv
" part, I confess that though fortune has frowned
upon me a little, I have much for v/hich to think
her. I'or what I could not be taught in so long
a time, I have learned in the small compass of a
" single day ; that I know not how' to command,
" but have need to be imder the dh'ection of an-
" other : and from this m-oment I bid adieu to the
'■ ambition of getting the better of a man, by v/hom
it is an honour to be foiled. In all other respects,
the dictator shall be your commander ; but in the
" due expressions of gratitude to him I will be youi:,
" leader still, by being the first to show an ex?.mpl&
". of obedience and submission."

He then ordered the ensigns to advance with the
eagles, and the troops to follow, himself marching
at their head to Fabius' camp. Being admitted,
he went directly to his tent. The whole army wait*
ed with impatience for the event. When Fabius
came out, Minucius fixed his standard before him,
and with a loud voice saluted him by the name of
' Father :' at the same time, his soldiers called those
of Fabius their ' Patrons ;' an appellation, which
freedmen give to those by whom they are enfran-
chised. These respects being paid, and silence
taking place, Minucius thus addressed himself to

nation, raade by the late eloquent Mr. Burke, cf two kindred
cb?..-ical nietapliors, where speaking of the apparently inccnrrruou*
qiuilifications ot" a great general, in one of his many Po-liticf)i
Tracts, he obsei'ves; * He will know when to be like jFabius the
cloud, and like Scipio the thunderbolt, of war.'*

Q %

Si FABIUS MAX'IMUS. '

tlie dictator ; " You liave this day, Fabiiis, obtaniecT
" two victories, one over tlie enemy by your valour,
" the other over yovu' collcgue by your prudence
"^ and humanity. By the former you have saved,
^' by the latter you have instructed us ; and Anni-
." bal's victory over us is not more disgraceful than
" yours is honourable and salutary. I call you
" ' Father,' not knowing a more honourable name ;
f' and I am more indebted to you, than to my real
" father. To him I owe my being, but to you the
" preservation of my life and the lives of all these
" brave men," After this he threw himself into
Fabius' arms, and the soldiers of each army embraced
one another with every expression of tenderness, and
■with tears of joy.

• Not long after this, Fabius laid down the dicta--
torship,^ and con-uls were created^''. The first of
these adhered to the plan, which Fabius had adopt-
ed. He took care not to come to a pitched battle
.with Annibal, but sent succours to the allies of
Rome, and prevented any revolt in their cities. But
when Terentius Varro ^^, a man of obscure birth, and
remarkable only for his temerity and servile com-
plaisance to the people, rose to the consulship, it soon
appeared that his boldness and inexperience would
impel him to risk the very being of the common-
wealth. For he loudlv insisted in the assemblies of
the people, tliat the war stood still while it was
under the conduct of Fabius ; but, for his part, he
would in the same dav ^et siejht of the enemy and
beat him. With these promises he so prevailed upon

5" According to Liv}^ (xxii. 32.) Fabius, after the six moiitlis
of his dictatorship were expired, resigned the army to Uic consids
ot'.tliat j'ear, Gem. Servilius and M. Atiiiiis; the latter having
been appointed in the room of Flaminius, vvlio fell at Thrasy-
nione. But Plutarch follows rulyl)ius.

^'^ Varro was the son of a butclier, and liad followed his father'*

profession in his youth: b\it, growiig rich, he forseok that meai*

calling; and through the favour of the people, which he courted by"

. sHpporting the most lurbuk^nt of thgir 'ribnues, obtaJucd the CQii-

s uliite. ( L i V. XX i i. 26. >

FABIUS MAXIMtTS. 85

the multitude, tliat he levied greater forces, than
Rome had ever raisefl before in her most dangerous
wars ; for he mustered ^^ not fewer than eighty-eight
thoiisaiul men. Upon this, Fabius and other intelli-
gent persons among the Romans were deeply alarm-
ed ; because they saw no resource for the state, if
sucli a number of their youth should be cut off.
They addressed themselves therefore to the other
consul, Paulus ^Emilius ; a man of considerable ex-
perience in war, but disagreeable to the people, and
at the same time afraid of them, for they had for-
merly imposed upon him a considerable fine ^'^. Fa-
bius however encouraged him to witlistand the teme-
rity of his collegue, telling him, " That the dispute
" w hich he had to support for his ■country was not so
" much with Annibal, as with Varro. The latter
" (said he) will hasten to an engagement, because
^' he knows not his own strength ; and the former,
*' because he knows his own weakness. But believe
" me, ^Emilius, I deserve more attention than
" Varro, with respect to AnnibaFs affairs ; and I
*' assure you that, if the Romans come to no battle
" with him this year, he will either be undone by
*' his stay in Italy, or else be obliged to quit it.
^' Even now, when he seems to be victorious and to
*' carry all before him, not one of his enemies has

39 It was usual with the Horaans to muster every year four le-
gions, which consisting in dirKcult times each of five thousand
Roman foot and three hundred horse, and a battalion of Latins of
an equal number of infantry and twice the number of cavalry,
amounted in the whole to 4v5,600. (Polyb.) But, upon this oc-
casion, instead of four legions they raised eight. (L.) Livy,
however, represents the statements of the number and kind of the
new levies as too variable to admit of ascertah-nent; and tiierefore
only says, generally, that they were vjery considerable, f xxii. 36.)*

■'° With his brother consul, ?.I. Livius Salinator, he fuid subdued
and triumphed over the Illyrii'ns ; but upon a charge of having
shown gross partiality in the division of the plunder ( bVontin. iv.
1. 15.) or, according to Aurelius Victor, of havnig embezzled the
public money, they were both found guilty arjd heivily fined:
though /Emilius escaped with the lighter punishment. (Liv. xxii.
,35.)*

il

85 FABIUS MAXIMUS.

" quitted the Roman interest, and not a third; part
" of the forces remains which he brought from home
" with him.'* To this ^mihus is said to have an-
swered ; " Were I to consider myself only, Fabius,
I should conclude it better lor me to iall by the
weapons of my enemy, than a second time by tlie
sentence of my own countrymen. Since the state
of public afiairs however is so critical, I will en-
" deavour to approve myself a good general ; and
had rather appear such to you, than to all who
oppose you, and who would draw me over willing
or unwilling to their party." With these senti-
ments, ^milius began his operations.

But Varro, having persuaded his collegue to
agree ^^ that they should command alternately each
his day, when his turn came, took post over-against
Annibal, on the banks of the Aufidus, near the vil-^
lage of Cannse"^-. As soon as it was light, he gave
the signal for battle, v^'hich is a red mantle setup
over the general's tent. The Carthaginians v.cre a-
little disheartened at first, when they saw how daring
tile consul was, and that his army was more than
double in number of their own. But"* Annibal having
ordered them to arm, rode up liimself with a few
oLliers to an eminence, to take a view of the enemy
ijow drawn up for battle. One Gisco that accom--

^'^ Here Plutarch fliUs iiito a mistake; for it was a fixed rule with
the Romans that the cddsuIs, when they went upon the sanve ser-
vice, should have the command of the army by turns. (Polyb. iii.)

■^^ Canuffi according to Livy, Appian, and Florus was only a poor
village, which subsequently became celebrated on account of- the
battle fout>Iit near it: but Folybius, who lived iie^^r the time of
the second Pimic v/ar, stiles-it a city; and adds, that it had been
rasod a year before the defeat of I lie Roman army. Siiiiis Italicus
agrees with Folybius. It was suhsequ.mtly rebuilt; for Pliny ranks
it among the cities of Apulia. It's ruins are-stiii to be seen in tli&
territory of Bari, (L.)

Plutarch has omitted mentro}iing a previous skirmish between the
Romans under Aimilius, and a party of Carthaginian fovcgers, who
lost about seventeen hundred men in the action, v.hjle not above a
hundred fell of the Romans and tlieir allies. This however was a
fatal victory, as it still more strongly iii^pelied the aiready too im-
petuous Varro.*

, FABIUS MAXIMUS. 87

panled him, a man of ins own rank, happening to
say, " The numbers of the enemy appeared to him
'' surprising ;'* Annibal, with a serious countenance,
repHed, " TJiere is another thing much more sur-
" prising, which has escaped your observation."
Upon his asking, what it was ; ^' It is,'* said he,
" that among sucli ninnbers not one of them is named
" Gisco." The whole company were diverted with
the keen humour of this observation, and on their
coming down the liill told the jest to all those they
met, so that the laugh became universal. At the
sight of tliis the Cartiiaginians took courage, think-
ing it must proceed from the contempt in w hich their
general held the Romans, that he could thus jest
and laugh in the face of danger.

In this battle, Annibal gave great proofs of gene-
ral'^hip ; first in taking advantage of the ground to
post his men with their backs to the wind'*', which
was then very violent and scorching, and dj'ove from
the dry 'plains, over the heads of the Carthaginians,
clouds of sand and dust into the eyes and nostrils
of the Romans ; so that they were obliged to turn
away their faces, and break their ranks. In the
next place, his troops were drawm up w^ith superior
art. He placed the flower of thein in the wrings,
and those upon whom he had less dependence in
tlie centre, wiiich was considerably more advanced
than the rest of the army. He tlien commanded
those in the wings that, w'hen the enemy had charged
and vigorously pushed that advanced body (which,
he knew, would give way and open a ])assagc for
them), and were thus enclosed on both sides, they
should take them in flank both on the riglit and left,
and endeavour to surround them in the rear ^^ This

43 This liot wind, blowing from between the east and the south,
and by Livy (xxii. 4r6.) called Vulturnus, is the modern Sirocco;
and, as the Ronums fronted to the .south, would affect them very
peniciously. It's ordinary effects upon the human subject are great
vteakness and lassitude.*

^^ Livy (xxii. 48,) mentions a third stratagem devised by An-

88 FADItS MAXIMUS.

was the principal cause of the dreadful carnage, that
ensued. For the enemy pressing upon Annibal's
front, which gave ground, the form of his army was
changed into a half-moon ; and the officers of the
select troops caused the two points of the wings to
join behind the Romans. They were thus exposed
to the attacks of the Carthaginians on all sides : an
incredible slaughter took place ; neitlier did any
escape, except the few who retreated before the main
body was enclosed.

An unexpected disaster is said, likewise, to have
happened to the Roman cavalry. l''or the horse
which ^Emilius rode, having received some hurt,
threw him ; and those about him alighting to defend
the dismounted consul, the rest of the cavalry seeing
this, and taking if as a signal for tliem to do the
same, all Quitted their horses and chare^ed on foot.
Upon which Annibal said, " This pleases me better,
" than if they had been delivered to me bound
" hand and toot." But the particulars may be
found at large in the historians '% who have detailed
this battle.

As to the consuls, Varro escaped with a few horse
to Venusia ; and /Emilius borne off the field bv the
overwhelming torrent of the fight, and covered with
darts which stuck in his wounds, sate down upon a
stone in anguish and despair, waiting for tlie enemy
to despatch him. His head and his face were so dis-
figured and besmeared with blood, that it was not
easy to know him ; even his friends and servants
passed by him without stopping. At last Cornelius
Lentulus a young patrician, perceiving who he was,
dismounted and entreated him to take his horse and
save himself for the commonwealth, which had then

nibal : Five liunclred Numidians, who had pretended to desert to the
Eomans, in the heat of the battle turned against them, and attacked
them in the rear.

''■5 Particularly Polybius, and Livy (xxii. 47 — 49.) whom Plutarch
here chiefly follows. They have not, however, succeded in giving
a, very distinct idea of Annibal's order ot brittle.*

FABIUS MAXIMUS. 89

more occasion than ever for so good a consul. But
nothing could prevail upon him to accept the offer,
and notwithstanding the young man's tears, he
obliged him to remount. Then rising up, and taking
}iim by the hand ; " Tell Fabius Maximus," said he,
" and do you yourself" Lentulus, bear witness, that
" Paulus yEmilius followed his directions to the last,
'' and did not deviate iiT the least from the plan con-
" certed between them, but w'as first overcome by
" Varro and then by Annibai." Having sent off
Lentulus with this commission, he rushed among the
enemy's swords, and w^as slain ■**". Fifty thousand
Romans are said to have fallen in this battle ", and
four thousand to have been taken prisoners, beside
ten thousand that were taken after the battle in both
the camps.

After this success, Annibal's friends advised him

""^ To this gallantry of spirit Horace refers, in his

Animccgne inagmv

Prodlgum, Pceno superante, Pauhnn. (Od. I. xii. 38.)

Livy's account of his dying address to Lentulus (xxii. 49.) does not
materially differ from tiiat here given by Plutarch.*

"' According to Livy (ib.) there were killed of tlie Romans and
allies jointly, in equal proportion, only forty thousand foot, and two
thousand seven hundred l^orse. (L.) Among whom were both the
quaestors, one and twenty tribunes, several persons who had dis-
charged the offices of consul, praetoi', and scdile (particularly Cn.
Servilius Geminus, and Minucius, who had been Fabius' general
of the horse) and fourscore senators actual or elect, then serving
as volunteers. Three thousand infantry, and three hundred cavalry,
were taken prisoners. This victory, he adds, cost the Carthaginians
about eight thousand of tlieir bravest vnen (ib. 52.) Polybius says,
that seventy thousand were killed, and more than ten thousand
taken prisoners; while the loss of the Carthaginians did not amount
to six thouscmd. This leads him to infer, that a superiority in
cavalry is of the utmost importance ; yet the Romans do not seem
to have been of that opinion, and they were not usually unsuc-
cessful.* When the Carthaginians were stripping the dead, among
other moving objects the}'^ found to their great surprise, a Numidian
yet alive lying under the dead body of a Roman, who had thrown
himself headlong on his enemy and beat him down ; but being no
longer able to make use of his weapons, because he had lost his
liands, had torn oft" the nose and ears o\^ the Numidian with his teeth,
and in that fit of rage expired (Liv. ib. 51.)

<>(9 FABfUS M'AXIMUS;

to piir^Vie Ills fi.)ft'j'n€,- and to enter Rome along with
tliG iLlgi^iveSi■ assuring him that in five days he might
sup ill the Caii)iio}. It m not easy to conjecture, what
his reason was tor not adODtino; this measin-e. Some
deity most .probably opposed it, and therefore in-
spired him with tliis liesitation and timidity. Hence '^^
Barca the Carthai^^iniaii is said to have tokl him with
some heat, " Aiinibal, you know how to gain a vic-
" tpry, but not Jiow to profit by it."

The battle of Cailnag however made such an alter-
ation in his afiai.rs, that though before it he had nei-
ther town nor magazine nor port in Italy, but with-
our any regular supplies for the war supported his
army by ra])ine, and for that purpose moved tliem
from })]ace to place like a numerous banditti, yet he
then became master of the greatest part of the coun-
try : its best provinces and towns ^'-^ voluntarily sub-
mitted to him, and Capu.a itself, a city second only
to Rome in respectability, threw it*s weight into his
scale.

In this case it appeared that heavy misfortunes

*8 I,ivy (ih. 51.) says it wns Maharhal, the generil of the Nu-
Tridittn horse ; but perhaps, like Aniilcar, he might be sin-named
Barea.* Zunaras iniornis us, that Annibal himself afterward acknow-
ledpied his mistake in not haviiig- pursued that day's success, and
u.<hh1 often to cry out, < O Camui*, Cannfe!' (L.) and periiaps, at-
the consternation of tiie itioment, Rome might have been carried
hy a- cottp dc mahi. iCmihus, in his last speech to Ler.tulus, as re-
poited bv I.ivy (ib. 49.) appears to have anticipated this measure;-
and tlie historian himself says (ib. 51.)- mora ejus diei scti'is crcdiiin"
salidi fuissc vrbi fitque hnperiq*

Bat, on the otiier hand, it may be pleaded in Annibal's defence,
ttiat liis victory was chiefly ov.'ing- to his cavahy, vvlio couid not act
in sie<xe : tliat the inliabitants of Rome vi'ere all bred to arms froit»
their infancy ; would' use their utmost eiforts in defence of their
wives, th.eir cliildren, and their domestic gods ; and behind their
walls and ramparts would probably be invincible, as when much
v'eaker, they had effectually resi.sted the Gauls in their citadel : that
(hey lir>d as many generals, as senators: that no one nation of Italy
had yet declared for him ; and (lastly) that, if he failed in his at-
tempt upon the capital, lie would not have been able to gain allies'
ill any other quarter.

•»'' The Apulians, Samnites, Tarentine?, &c.*

TABIUS MAXIMUS: 91

arc not ojily, ^Iiat Eunpides-'" calls them, a trial of
the fidelity of a friend, but of the capacity of a gene-
ral. For the proceedings of Fabius, wliich before
this battle were deemed cold and timid, subsecjuently
appeared to have been directed by CJ3nnsels more
than human; the dictates indeed of a divine wisdom^
which penetrated into futurity at such a distance,
and foresaw what seemed incredible, to the very
persons then sutfering agreeably to his predictions.
In him tlierefore Rome placing her last hope, and
taking refuge in his judgement as in a sanctuary,
throughi his prudence chiefly was enabled to hold up
her head, and to keep her children from being dis-
]>ersed, as when she was taken by the Gauls. For
he alone, who in times of apparent security seemed
deiicicnt in confidence and resolution, nov*- when ail
abandoned themselves . to inexhaustible sorrov; and
helpless despair, walked about the city with a calm
and easy pace, a firm countenance, and a mild and
gracious address, checking their efieminate lamenta-
tions, and preventing them from assembling in public
to bewail their common distress. Fie caused the
senate to meet; and encouraged the magistrates,
being himself the soul and spirit of their body, for
all waited his motion and were ready to obey his
orders. He placed a gu?ird at the gates, to hinder
such of the peo^ple as were inclined to fly from quit-
ting the city ^'. He fixed botii the time and- place
for mourning, allowing thirty days for tiiat purpose
in a man's own house, and no more for th.e city in
general. And as the feast of Goes fell within that
period, it was thought better entirely to omit the
solemnity, than by the small numbers and mehuicholy
looks of those Vv'ho should attend it to discover the
greatness of their loss ^'^: for the worship most accept-

■5" Ilecub. V. 12]'3, EV tsk kkx',;? yuf uyc.B-o; a-x^:^c;Tt>i (tiXoi. — *

'• Livy gives Ills spet'ch at great length (ib. 55)*
:■<'■ 'i'his w-as not tiie renl cause of deferring tho le<;tival, wliich
was usuail}' kept on the twdi'th oi" April, but th:it « hich Phitarcli
iinmt'diatel}' siibjoins, viz. tliatit-wt^ imla!^iut forepersons in mourn-

« FABIUS MAXIMUS.

ahlc to the gods is that, whicli comes from cheerful
hearts. Whatever the auc:uir. indeed ordered tor
propitiating the- divine powers, and averting maiis-
picious ornens, was carefally performed. For Fabiiis
Pictor, the near rehition of Fabiiis Maximiis, was
sent to consult tlie oracle at Delphi ; and of the two
vestals, who were then tbund fruilty of a breach of
their vow of chastity, one was l)uried alive according
to custom, and the other died by her ovvii hand ^^.

But what most deserves to be admired is the mag-
nanimity and temper of the Romans, when the con-
sul Varro returned after his defeat, in a state of deep
humiliation and melancholy, as one who had involved
the republic in the greatest calamity and disgrace.
The whole senate and people went to welcome him
at the gates ; and, when silence was commanded,
the magistrates and principal senators (with Fabius
among them) commended him for not despairing of

the commonwealth after so heavv a misfortune, but

*' ...

rcturninq; to take upon himselt the administration,

^ • 1

and to do what he could wdth the laws and the

citizens, as being yet within the reach of preserva-
tion ^'*.

ing- to celebrate it ; and at that time there was not a single matron
in Rome, who was out of mourning. (L.) In fact it was only sus-
pended till the end of the mourning, the duration of which was
limited to thirty days for the express purjx)se, that the other pub-
lic and private rites of religion might be no longer put off. (Liv. ib.
56.)*

^^ Livy adds (ib. 57.) that the paramour of one of them, C. Can-
ti^iur,, was at the same time scourged to death ; and that the decem-
virs having consulted the Sibylline books, had ordered four human
victims ( minimt Romano sacroj a male and female Gaul and (Jreek
to be buried alive in the' Beast-market. See the Life of Marcellus,
not. (9.)*

^■* Whereas, saj-s Livy (ib. Gl.) had he been a Carthaginian
general, he must have encountered the njost agonising death. Va-
lerius Maximus informs us (iii. 4., and iv. 5.) that the senate and
f)eople even went so far as to offer him the dictatorship, which
however he modestly refused: (L.) and Frontinus (H^ v. 6.)
adds, that for the rest of his life he suffered his beard and hair to
grow, and would never afterward cat like his countrymen upon a
couch; saying, when "these, dignities were offered hira, that the
Romans ought to have more fortunate magistrates,*

9

FABIUS MAXIMUS. &3

Vv'hen tlicy heard tliat Annibal after the battle,
instead of marching to iiome, had turned to another
part of Italy, they took courage and sent their armies
and generals into the field. The most eminent of
these were Fabias Maxinnis and Claudius Marcellus,
men distinguished by characters almost entirely oppo-
site. Marcellus (as we have already mentioned in
his Life) was a man of buoyant and animated valour;
remarkably well skilled in the use of v/eapons, and
naturally enterprising ; such a one, in short, as
Homer calls " high-spirited and fond of war." A
general so intrepid was very fit to be opposed to an
enemy as daring as himself, in order to restore the
courage and spirits of the Romans, by some vigorous
stroke in the first engagements. As for Fabius, he
retained his original sentiments ; and hoped by fol-
lowing Annibal close without fighting him, that he
and his army would wear themselves out and lose
their warlike vigour, as a wrestler does, who allows
himself no repose to recruit his strengtli after exces-
sive fatigues. Hence the Romans (as Posidonius in-
forms us) called Fabius their ' Shield,' and Marcellus
their ' Sword ;'* and used to sav, that the steadiness
and caution of the one, mixed with the vivacltv and
boldness of the other, made a compound extremely
salutary to Rome. Annibal therefore often meeting
Marcellus, whose motions were like those of a tor-
rent, found his forces broken and dim.inished : while
by Fabius, who moved with a silent but constant
stream, they were underriiined and insensibly weak-
ened. To such an extremity at length washe reduced,
■that he was tired of lighting Marcellus, and afraid of
Fabius for not fighting him. And with these he was
generally concerned during tlie remainder of the war,
either as praetors, consuls, or proconsuls ; for each
of them was five times consul. Marcellus indeed,
in his fifth consulate, was drawn into his snares, and
killed by means of an ambuscade: but. with all his

* See the Life of ?uarceJ'uS. below.

84. FABIUS MAXiMUS.

arts and stratagems, he never succeeded in cfFec-
tually duping I'abius. Once only he slightly de-
ceived him, and had neatly led him into a serious
mistake. He ibrged letters to him, as from the prin-
cipal inhabitants of Metapontum, oifcring to deliver
up to him their city, and assuring him that those
who had taken this resolution only waited till he apr
peared before it. Fabius, giving credit ito thes.e
letters, ordered a party to be ready, intending to
march thither in .the night : but iinding the auspices
unproinisino; he altered his desiirn, and soon after-
ward discovered that the lettcis had been fabricated
by Annibal, and that he vras lying in ambush for
him near the town ''•'. But this, perhaps, may be
ascribed to the fiiv.our and protection of the gods.

la bins was persuaded that it was better to keep the
cities from revolting, and to prevent any commotions
among the allies, by a;Tability and mildness, than to
entertahi every suspicion, or to use severity' against
those whom he did suspect. Having been iiiformed
(it is said) that a certain j\Ii:U"sian in his army '% who
was a man iiot inferior in courage or faniiiy to any
aniong the allies, had been tampering with some of
his men to induce them to desert, instead of treating
him liarshiy, he acknowledged that he had been too
much neglected : declaring at the same time, that he
now blamed his officers for havino; distributed honour$
more out of favour than from regard to merit ; but
that for the future he should blame the complainant,

^' This event Livy (xxvii. \6.) places after the recapture of Tiireiv
tiun by Fubiu.s, and adds that he twice consulted tlie sacred biidt.,
and once tlie entrails of a victim slain for the occar.ion ; both of
which concurred in dissuading him Irom the enterprise, vvliil©
tlie AruHpox. expressly warned hiui to bevvai-e of some ruse dc guerre
on the part of the enemy.

^^ Livy (xxiii. 15) tells this story of iMarcelkis, which Plutarch
here applies to Fabius (L.) ; and informs us that the name of the
other (mentioiUHl below) was L. Bantius (called Kandiuj:, in the
Life of JMarccUus), a native of Nola, who had been found half
c^ead amii'bt a heap of slain after the battle of Cannae. One of his
privileges was, thafc he should have acccvss to the general, whenever
li^ chose.

FABIUS MAXIMUS. ^5

ii'he (lid not apply to himself, wlienever he had any
request to make. This was followed by a present of
a war-horse, and other marks of honour; and tlieuce-
fbrward the man behaved with great iidelity and zeal
tor the service. Fabius thought it hard that, Vv'hiie
those who breed dogs and horses soften their stub-
born tempers and bring down their fierce spirits by
care and kindness rather than with whips and chains,
he wlio has the connnaiid of men should not endea;^
,voiu' to correct tiieir errors by lenity and goodness,
but treat them ev.en in a Iiarslier and more violent
manner than gardeners do wild fig-trees, v;ild pears,
and wild olives, whose nature they subdue by
cultivation, and tluis cause to produce agreeable
fruit.

Another time, some of his officers informed hini
that one of the soldiers, a native of Lucania, often
quitted his post and rambled out of the camp, lie
inquired, what kind of a man he was in otho' re-
spects ; and they all declared, that it was not easy to
find so good a soldier, in proof of which they men-
tioned several extraordinary instances of his valour.
On examining into the cause of this irregularity, he
found that tlie man was passionately in love ; and
that for the sake of seeing a young woman he
ventured out of the camp, and took a long and dan-
gerous journey every night. Upon this Fabius gave
orders to some of his men to find out the woman,
and convey her into his own tent, but took care that
the Lucanian should not know it. He then sent for
him, acid taking him aside, spoke to him as follows ;
I very well know that you have lain many nights
out of the camp, in breach of the Roman disci-
pline and laws ; at the same time, I am not igno-
rant of your past services. In consideration of
them, I forgive your present crimiC; but for the fu-
tui'e I will give you in charge to a person who shall
be answerable for you." While the soldier stood
jn-uch amazed, Fabius produced the woman, and

a

a

ci

96 FABIUS MAXOIUS.

putting her in liis hands, thus ex])resse(l himself:
" This is the person, who engages for you that you
" will remain in camp ; and we shall now see, whe-
" thcr there were not some traitorous design which
" drew you out, and for which the love of this wo-
*' man served merely as a pretext.'* kSuch is the ac-
count, which we liave of this affair.

By means of another love-affair, Fabius recovered
the city of Tarentum, which had been treacherously
delivered up to Annibal. A young man a native of
tliat place, serving under Fabius, had a sister there,
who loved him with the utmost tenderness. This
youth being informed that a certain Bruttian, one of
the officers of the garrison which Annibal had placed
in Tarentum, entertained a violent passion for his
sister, hoped to avail himself of this circumstance
to the, advantage of the Romans. \Vith the permis-
sion of Fabius, therefore, he returned to his sister
at Tarentum, under colour of having deserted.
Some days passed, during which the Bruttian forbore
his visits, as she supposed that her brother knew
nothing of the amour. This obliged the young
man to come to an explanation : " It has been
" currently reported," said he, " that you receive the
" addresses of a man of some distinction. Who is
*' he? If he be a man of honour and character, as I
" am told he is. Mars, who confounds all things,
" takes but little thought of what country he may
" be. Vvliat necessity imposes, is no disgrace ; but
" we may rather think ourselves fortunate, at a time
wlien justice yields to force, if that to which force
might compel us, happen not to be disagreeable
" to our own inclinations.'* Thus encouraged, the
V0un<T woman sent for tlie Bruttian, and introduced
hiim to her brother. And as she behaved to him in
a kinder and more complying manner through her
brother's means, who was very indulgent to his pas-
sion, it was not difficult to prevail with the Bruttia",
a man deeply in love and a mercenary into the bar-

1-ABIUS MAXIMUS. 9T

gain'^^ to deliver up the town, on a promise of great
rewards from Fabiiis.

This is tlie account, whicli most historians give
us : yet some say that the woman, by whom the
Briittian was gained, was not a Tarentine but a
Briittian ; that she had l)een Fabius' concubine ;
and that when she found the governor of Tarentum
was her countryman and acquaintance, she told
Fabius of it, and having approached the walls to
make him a proposal, drew him over to the Tvoman
interest.

During these transactions Fabius, in order to
make a diversion, gave directions to the garrison of
Rhegium to lay waste the Bruttian territories, and,
if possible, to get possession of Caulonia. These
were a body of eight thousand men, composed partly
of deserters, and partly of the most worthless of that
infamous band, whicli had been brought by Mar-
celhis out of Sicily'^; and therefore the loss of
them would not be much felt, nor much lamented by
the Romans. These men he threw out as a
bait for Annibal, and by sacrificing them hoped to
draw him to a distance from Tarentum. The design
succeeded : for Annibal marched with his forces to
Caulonia, and Fabius in the mean time laid siege
to Tarentum. On the sixth day of the siege, the
young man having settled the miatter wdth the
Bruttian officer by means of his sister, and having
well observed the place where he kept guard and
promised to admit the Romans, went to Fabius by

57 Av^fayra iJUKr^c(pofc-. This has been niis-translatcd, * a man of a
mercen;iry disposition.' The words only import, that he was not of
Ann:bal's own troops, but of the mercenaries. Hence all govern-
ments should learn to bev. are, how they entrust their towns to gar-

I risons of hired troops and strangers.

*8 These men were brought out of Sicily, not by Marcellus, but
by his coUegue La^vinus (L.): the former, indeed, had quitted
Sicily before the taking of Syracuse. Livy (xxvi. 40.) represents
them, to the amount of 4000, as a most profligate crew (jnisti ex

I omni coUavione, cxulcs, ohcerati, capitalia and picriqve) who 1;ad
long supported themselves at Agathyrr.a, a city yf Sicily, by ail

'kinds of robbery.*

VOL. IL H

98 FABIUS MAXIMUM

night, and gave him an account of it. The consul
moved to the appointed quarter, though not entirely
depending upon the ])romise that tlic town would
be betrayed. There he himself sat still, but at the
same time ordered an assault on every other part
both by sea and land. This was put in execution
with much noise and tumult, which drew most of the
Tarentines that way, to assist the garrison and repel
the besiegers. The Bruttian then giving Fabius the
signal, he scaled the walls, and took possession of
the town.

Upon this occasion, Tabius seems to have indulged
a criminal ambition '^ For lest it should appear
that the place had been betrayed to him, he ordered
the Bruttians to be put first to the sword. But he
failed in his design ; and incurred, in addition, the
reproach of perhdy and inhinnanity. Many of the
Tarentines also were killed : thirty thousand of them
were sold for slaves : the army had the plunder of
the town, and three thousand talents were brought
into the public treasury '^". While every thing w'as
exposed to destruction and pillage, the officer (it is
said) who took the inventory, asked, '* AMiat he
" would have them to do with the gods?" meaning
the statues and pictures : Fabius answered, " Let us
" leave the Tarentines their angry deities "^^ He

^' ' Seems' has here a soinewliat stronger signification than
usual : for Livy does not say that Inibius gave such orders. He
onlv says, ' There were many Bruttians slain, either through igno-
rance, or through the ancient hatred whicli the Romans bore
tl'.em, or because the latter were desirous that Tarentnm should
seem to have been taken sword in hand, rather than to have been
betrayed.' (xxvii. 16.)

*° Livy states it's amount to haMj been much greater (ib.) Of
the silver he says indeed only in general, argenti vis ingens fact-i
signatique ; but of gold he spcciiically mentions 87,000 Roman lbs. !*
' <5' The gods were in the attitude of combatants (a custom derived
from their mother-country, Sparta, whose Venus even was in ar-
mour); and they appeared, as he insinuated, to have fought against
the Tarentines. (L.) iMore however, according to Polybius (ix.),
was here * meant, than met the ear.' Fabius probably intended to
warn his countrymen against introducing into Rome the ornament*
of their vafiquished eneniies, both to preserve them from the cor-

12

FABIUS MAXIMUS. 99

carried away however a colossal Hercules, which
he afterward ,set up in the Capitol, and near it an
equestrian statue of himself in brass '^-. Thus he
showed himself inferior to Marccllus in his taste for the
fine arts, and still more so in mercy and humanity;
or rather set off those excellences of Marccllus, as
we have already observed in his Life, to great
advantage.

Annibal had hastened to the relief of Tarentum,
and being witiiin five miles of it when it was taken,
scrupled not to say publicly, " The Romans too
" have their Annibal ; for we have lost Tarentum
" in the same manner, in which we gained it."
And he then first privately owned to his friends.

That he had always thought it difficult, but now

saw it was impossible, with the forces he had, to

conquer Italy."

For this achievement Fabius was honoured with
a triumph, more splendid than his former one^^ ; as
bavins' ccloriously maintained the field ao^ainst Anni-
bal, and baffled all his schemes with ease, eluding
him like a spent wrestler, whose grasp no longer
retains the same vigour. For Annibal's army was
now partly enervated with opulence and luxury^
and partly impaired and worn out with continual
action.

Marcus Livius, who commanded in Tarentum
when it was betrayed to Annibal, retired into the
eitadel, and held it till the town was retaken bv the
Romans. This offlcer beheld with pain the honours
conferred upon Fabius, and one day his envy and
vanity drew from him this expression in the senate j
*' I, not Fabius, was the cause of recovering Ta-

ruption of pageantry, and to prevent the dangerous recollections cf
their former owners. Livy by his contrast of Fabius and Marceiius,
hi whicli he totally differs from Plutarch, seems to have bee» of
•*olybius' opinion (ib.) Plutarch however admits, in his Life of
Vlarcellus, that the wisest Romans preferred the conduct of
iFabius. See also Cic. in Verr. ii. 24'.*

'5- The work of Lysippus (Strabo vi.)

"^3 Over the Liguriaas. See p. 65.*

H 2

100 FABIUS MAXIMUS.

a

rentum'*.'* " True," saidFabins laiiglilng, " for
" if you had never lost the town, I had never reco-
'" vered it.'*

Among other honours, which the Romans paid to
Fabius, they elefcted his son consul"^. When he had
entered upon this office, and was settling some point
relative to the war, the father, either on accoimt of
his age and infirmities, or else to try his son, mounted
his horse to ride up to him. The young consul,
seeing him at a distance, would not suffer it ; but
sent one of the lictors to his father with orders for
him to dismount, and come on foot to the consul,
if he had any occasion to apply to him. The whole
assembly were moved at this, and cast their eyes
upon Fabius, expressing both by their silence and
their looks their resentment of the indignity offered
to a person of his character. But he instantly
alighted, and running up to his son, embraced him
with the utmost tenderness : " My son," said he,
I applaud your sentiments and your behaviour.
You know what a people you command, and have
a just sense of the dignity of your office. This was
the way that we and our forefathers took, to ad-
vance Rome to her present height of glory^ abvays
considering the honour and interest of our country
" before that of our own fathers and children'^."

a

(4

I

6^ Livy's account of this affiiir (xxvii. 25.) seems the more pro-
bable, as tlie levity here imputed to M. Livius, tlien on the point
of impeachment or of criminal prosecution, would have been very
unseemly. See also Cicero de Scnect. 4-., and de Orat. ii. 67.*

^i Plutarch is not always strictly chronological, for from the accu-
rate Livy it appears that the son, who was also called Q, or as Ci-
cero (ib.) sayc, M. Fabius Maxim us, was elected consul four years j
before the father took Tarentnni. Valerius Maximus vecord?, uprm
this occasion, a :?triking proof of the modesty and patriotism of the
old man ; who jirotested against the perpetuation of the consular
dignity in the Fabian family, as dangerous to the liberties of his
country, (iv. I.) *

*° Livy (xxiv. 44.) says, that he had passed on horseback eleven
of the lictors, when his son ordered the twelfth and last to ' do his
duty;' upon which Fabius, instantly dismounting, exclaimed; 'I
wished to try, my son, Avhether or not you knew that you were

consul

'*

I

FABIUS MAXIMUS. 101

It is reported indeed that the great grandfather ^^
of our Fabius, though he was one of the most illus-
trious men in Rome, whether we consider his repu-
tation or his authority ; though he had been five
times consul, and had been honoured with several
glorious triumphs on account of his success in wars
of the highest importance, yet condescended to
serve as lieutenant to his son then consul ^'^ in an
expedition against the Samnites : and while the con-
sul, in the triumph which was decreed him, entered
Home in a chariot and four, he with others followed
him on horseback. Thus, while he had authority
over his son considered as a private man, and while
he was both in reality and in estimation the most
considerable member of the commonwealth, he yet
gloried in showing his subjection to the laws and to
the magistrate. Nor was this the only part of his
character, that deserves to be admired. When he
had the misfortune to lose his son, he bore that loss
with great moderation, as became a wise man and a
good father : and the funeral oration, which at
the interment of illustrious men is usually pro-
nounced by some near kinsman, he delivered him-
self; and, having committed it to writing, made
it public.

When Publius Cornelius Scipio, who was sent
proconsul into Spain, had defeated the Carthagi-
nians in many engagements, and driven them out
of that province ; and had likewise gloriously re-
duced several towns and nations under the dominion
of Rome, he was received with unprecedented ac-
clamations and universal joy. Being appointed con-
sul, and finding that the people demanded and ex-
pected something extraordinary at his hands, he

*7 Fabius RuUus, mentioned in the beginning of this Life. For
his accumulated honours see Liv. viii. 38., ix. 33. 4-1., and x. 13.
22.*

^^ Q. Fabius Gurges, who had been defeated by the Samnites,
and would have been degraded from the consulship, had not his fa-
ther promised to attend him in the second expedition as his lieute-
nant. See Liv. xi. 5., and Val. Max. v. 7.
9

102 FABIUS MAXIMUS.

considered it as a superannuated method and worthy
only of the inactivity of an old man, to M'atch the
motions of Annibal in Italy. He determined there-
fore to transfer the seat of war into Africa, to fill
the enemy's country v/ith his legions, to extend his
ravages far and wide, and to attempt Carthage itself.
With this view, he exerted all his talents to bring
the people into his design. But Fabius tilled the
city with alarms, as if the commonwealth were
about to be brought into the most extreme danger
by a rash and indiscreet young man ; in short, he
scrupled not to do and say every thing, which he
thought likely to dissuade his countrymen from em-
bracing the proposal. With the senate he carried
his point ^^. But the people believed that his oppo-
sition to Scipio proceeded either from envy ot his
success, or from a secret fear that if he should
achieve some signal exploit, and either put an end
to the war or ev^en remove it out of Italy, his own
slow proceedings through the course of so many
years might be imputed to indolence or timidity.

To me, Fabius seems at first to have opposed the
measmes of Scipio from an excess of caution and
prudence, and to have really thought the danger at-
tending his project great ; but in the progress of the
opposicion 1 think he went too far, misled by ambi-
tion and a jealousy of Scipio's rising glory. For he
applied to Crassus, the collegue of Sci})io, and en-
deavoured to persuade him not to yield up to him
that province'""; but, if he thought it pro})er to ccn-

*9 See the debntes in the senate upon that ocra.-^ion in Livy
(xxviii. 40 — 41.) The speeches both of labius iuid Scipio, as there
reported, are excellent, and well deserve perusa!.*

7° This Crassus could not do ; for, being Pontifex IMaxinins, it
v;as necessary that he should remain in Italy. (See Tac. Ann, iii.
71.) It does not therefore seem probable, that Fabius could ha%c
gone to this length, upon the occasion ; though he certainly ap-
pears to have been the cause of witliholding from him the necessary
supplies. Liv. (ib. 45.) specifies the particular contributions of the
friendly cities, Casre, Popidonia, Tarquinii, \'o!aterra, Ai-ctiuiii,
cic. &c.*

. FABIUS MAXIMUS. 103

duct tlie war in that manner, to go himself against
C-arthage. Nay, he even prevented the raising of
money tor that expedition ; so that Scipio was obliged
to lind tile supplies as he could : and this he effected
through his influence with the cities of Hetruria,
which were wholly devoted to his interest ''^ As
for Crassus, he stayed at home, partly induced to it
by his natural mildness and peaceableness of dispo-
sition, and partly by tlie care of religion, which was
entrusted to him as high-priest.

Fabins, therefore, adopted another method to
traverse the design. He prevented the young
men, who offered to go volnnteers, from giving in
their names ; and loudly declared both in the senate
' and in the Forum, " That Scipio not only himself
" avoided Annibal, but intended to carry away with
"him the remaining strengtii of Italy; persuading
" the young men to abandon their parents, their
" wives, and their native city, while an imsubdued
" and potent enemy was still at their doors.'* With
these assertions he so territied the people, that
they allowed Scipio to take with him only the
legions that were in Sicily, and three hundred of
those men who had served under him with so
much fidelity in Spain. In this particular, F^abius
seems, to have followed the dictates of his own cau-
tious temper.

After Scipio was gone over into Africa, an ac»

7- Scipio was empowered to demand from the allies all things ne-
cessary for building and equipping a new fleet. And many of the
provinces and cities voluntarily taxed themselves to furnish him with
corn, iron, timber, cloth for sails, &c. so that, in forty days after
the cutting of the timber, he was in a condition to set sail with a
fleet of thirty new galleys, beside the thirty which he had before.
There went with him about seven thousand volunteers. (Liv. ib. 45,
4G.) (L.) Plutarch, therefore, in what he says below about Fabius*
discouraging the volunteers, is mistaken; having probably, as M.
iJicard suggests, misinterpreted and misapplied the Liv'ian word
tenuity (in the sentence, ut voJiuitarios ducere siln jvi/def. liccrety
icnuit) as meaning not obten'r but retenir, and spoken not of Scipio
but of Fabius,*

lU FABIUS MAXIMCS.

count was soon brought to Rome of his glorious
and wonderful achievements. This account was
followed by rich spoils, which conlirmed it. A
Numidian king'"^ was taken prisoner; two camps
were burned and destroyed, and in them a vast
number of men, arms, and horses ; and the Cartha-
ginians sent orders to Annibal to quit his fruitless
hopes in Italy, and return home to defend his own
country. While every tongue was applauding these
exploits of Scipio, Fabius proposed that his suc-
cessor should be appointed, without any shadow
of reason for it^ except that implied in the well-
known maxim ; " That it is dangerous to trust
affairs of such irnportance to the fortune of one
man, because it is not likely that he will be con-
stantly successful."

By this he offended the people, who now consi-
dered him as a captious and an envious man ; or
as one whose courage and hopes were sunk in the
dregs of years, and who therefore looked upon
Annibal as much more formidable than he really
■was. Nay, even when Annibal had embarked his
army and quitted Italy, Fabius ceased not to dis-
turb the general joy and to damp the spirits of
Rome. For he affirmed, " That the commonwealth
** was now come to her last and worst trial ; and
had still greater reason to dread the efforts of
Annibal when he should arrive in Africa, and
attack Scipio under the walls of Carthage, with
an army yet warm with the blood of so many Ro-
man generals, dictators, and consuls.'* These de-

(C

^* Called SyphaXj'who, according to Livy (xxx. 5. and 11.), was
taken after the burning of his own camp and that of Asdrubal.
Forty thousand of the enemies fell by fire or sword, and above five
thousand were taken prisoners ; among whom were many Car-
thaj:inian nobles, and eleven senators. A hundred and seventy-four
military standards, upward of two thousand seven hundred Nu-
iDidian horses, and six elephants (beside eight, that perished) with
an inuneMse quantity of arras, fell into the hands of the victor;^.
(Id.ib.6.)*

' PABIUS MAXIMUS. 105

clamatlons alarmed the city ; and, though the war
was removed into Africa, the danger seemed to ap-
proach nearer Rome tliiiiiever.

Soon afterward, however,* Scipio defeated Anni-
bal in a pitched battle, and threw him down and
trampled under foot the pride of Carthage '^. This
aflbrded the Romans a pleasure beyond all their
ho])es, and restored firmness to their empire, wliicli
had been shaken by so many tempests. But Fabius
Maximiis did not live to the end of the war, to hear
of the overthrow of Annibal, or to see the prospe-
rity of his country re-established : for, about the
time that Annibal left Italy"*, he fell sick and died.
Epaminondas died so poor, that the Thebans buried
him at the public charge ; for at his death nothing-
was found in his house, except an iron spit ^\ The
expense of Fabius' funeral was not, indeed, de-
frayed out of the Roman treasury, but every citizen
contributed a small piece of money toward it"^: not
that he died without effects, but that they might
bury him as the father of the people, and that the
honours paid to him at his death might be congruous
to the dignity of his life.

73 Plutarch here undoubtedly refers to the thirty venerable em-
bassadors, despatched to Scipio with proposals for a treaty, who
upon their arrival at the Roman genei'al's tent, after their country's
manner (as Livy suggests, ib. 16.) prostrated themselves at his feet.
A simikir instance of what the Romans accounted humiliation, oc-
curred in the ten chiefs of the city, sent after the fatal battle of
Zama to sue for peace (ib. 36.) See also Polyb. xv.*

'4 A little afterward. Annibal left Italy A. U. C. 549. Fabius
must have died very old ; exactce cetatis, to use the words of Livy
(ib. 26,), who states, on the authority of some writers, that he had
held the office of augur sixty-two years.*

75 Xylander is of opinion, that the word OfciAjo-mo? in this place
does not signify * a spit,' but * a piece of money ;' and he shows,
from a passage in the Life of Lysander, that money was anciently
made in a pyramidical form. But he did not consider, that iron
money was not in use at Thebes, and according to Plutarch this
obeliscus was of iron.

7^ The amount must have been very considerable, as Rome
in the course of the preceding year was found to contaui 214-,000
citizen*.*

106 PERICLES AND FABIUS MAX. COMPARED,

PERICLES AND FABIUS ]\IAXIMLS

COMPARED.

SUCH were the lives of these two persons, so
illustrious and worthy of imitation, both in their
civil and their military capacity. We will first com-
pare their talents for war. And here it strikes us at
once, that Pericles came into power at a time when
the Athenians were at the height of their glory,
great in themselves and respectable to their neigh-
bours : hence, in the very strength of the republic,
with only common success he was secure from any
disgraceful step. Whereas Fabius took the helm,
when Rome was in her deepest disgrace and dis-
tress ; so that he had not the well-established pros-
perity of a flourishing state to preserve, but to draw
his country from an abyss of misery and to raise it to
happiness. Besides, the successes of Cimon, the
victories of Myronides and Leocratcs, and the nume-
rous achievements of Tolmides furnished occasion to
Pericles, during his administration, rather to enter-
tain the city with feasts and games, than to make
new acquisitions or to defend the old ones by arms.
On the other hand, Fabius had the frightful objects
before his eyes of defeats and disasters of Roman
consuls and generals slain, of lakes and fields and
forests full of the dead carcasses of whole armies,
and of rivers flowing with blood down to the very
sea. In this tottering and decayed condition of the
commonwealth, he was to support it by his counsels
and his vigour, and to keep it from fulling into abso-
lute ruin, to which it had been so nearly reduced by
the errors of former commanders.

It may seem indeed a less arduous performance to
manage the tempers of a people humbled by calami-
ties and compelled by necessity to listen to^reason,
than to restrain the wildness and insolence of a ciiy

PERICLES AND FABIUS MAX. COMPARED. 107

elated with success and wanton with power "'', siicli
as Athens was when Pericles held the reigns of go-
vernment. But then, undauntedly to persevere iu
his first resohitions, and not to be discomposed by
tJie vast weight of misfortunes with which llonie was
at that lime oppressed, discovers in Eabius an admi-
rable tirmness and disrnitv of mind.

Against the taking of Samos by Pericles we may
set the retaking of Tarentum by Fabius'^, and with
Euboea we may put in balance the towns of Campa-
nia. As for Capua, it was afterward recovered by
the consuls Furius and Appius. Fabius indeed
gained but one set battle, for which he led up his
first triumph ; whereas Pericles erected nine trophies
ihv as many victories won by land and sea. But none
of Pericles' victories can be compared with that me-
morable icscue of Minucius, by which F'abius re-
deemed him and his whole armv from utter destruc-
tion : an action truly great, and exhibiting a bright
assemblage of valour, of prudence, and of huma-
nity. Neither can Pericles, on the other hand, be
said ever to have committed such an error as that of
F'abius, when he suffered himself to be duped by
Annibal's stratagem of the oxen ; let his enemy slip
in the night througli those straits, in which he had
accidentally entangled himself; and, as soon as it
was day, saw himself attacked and repulsed by the
veiT man, who so lately liad been at his mercy.

If it be the part of a good general, not only to
make a proper use of the present, but also to form
the best judgement of things to come, it must be

'7 Plutarch, In his Life of Lucullus, maintains the same opinion
(in which, it appears, he followed the high authority of Plato) with
.regard to the inhabitants of Cyrene.*

'S Plutajcli, it has been frequently said, and of late by the very
respectable author of ' Hints toward forming the Ciiaracter of
u young Princess,' inclines in his Parallels almost invariably to the
<7reek side: liere, however, he jnight have claimed for Pericles
still greater credit than he has done; as Tarentum was retaken
Ijy treachery, and it's recovery implied much more luck than

.'ourage.*

lOS PERICLES AND FABIUSMAX. COMPARED,

allowed that Pericles both foresaw and foretold what
success t!.e Athenians would have in the war ;
namely, that they would ruin themselves by grasp-
ing at too much. But it was entirely as^ainst the
opinion of Fabius, that the Romans sent Scipio into
Africa ; and yet they were victorious there, not by
the favour of fortune, but by the courage and con-
duct of their general. So that the sagacity of Peri-
cles was attested by the misfortunes of his country,
while from the glorious success of the Romans it ap-
peared that Fabius was utterly mistaken. And it is
indeed an equal fault in a commander-in-chief to fall
into danger through want of foresight, and to lose an
advanta::;e throuQ-h want of confidence. For it is
the same defect of judgement and skill '"^, which
sometimes produces too much confidence, and some-
times leaves too little. So much concerning their
abilities in war.

If we consider them in their political capacity, w^e
shall find that the chief fault laid to the charge of
Pericles was his having caused the Peloponnesian war,
through opposition to the Lacedaemonians, which
made him unwilling to give up to them the least point.
Neither do I suppose, that Fabius Maximus would
have given up any point to the Carthaginians, but
that he would generously have run the last risk to
maintain the dignity of Rome.

79 This ctViipia signifies, as well as * inexperience.' Fabius had
as much experience as Pericles, and yet was not equallj' happy in
his conjectures with regard to future events. (L.) M. Ricard how-
ever justly observes, tliat Scipio's success in Africa by no means of
itself justifies the expedition, which he did not very ably defend by
argument, Phocion (as we shall see in his Life) opposed with
equal zeal and fruitlessness a hazardous war of the Athenians, which
happened at first to turn out better than he expected: yet this did
not induce him to retract his original opinion. Plutarch himself
likewise informs us, that Pericles did not approve or atfect to copy
ihoi^e dasliing generals, who now and then made a lucky hit.
And Ovid puts into the mouth of one of his Heroines the heavy
imprecation,

Careat successibus opto,

Qrdsquis ab cvcntujada iiotanda indat. (ii. 86.)*

PERICLES A^'D FABIUS MAX. COMPARED. 109

Tlie mild and moderate behaviour of Fabius to"
Minucius sets in a verv disadvantas-eous liffht tlie
conduct of Pericles, in his implacable persecution
of Cimon and Thucydides, valuable men and friends
to the aristocracy, and yet banished by his practices
and intrigues.

Besides, the power of Pericles was much greater
than that of Fabius ; and therefore he did not suiter
any misfortune to be brou^ijlit upon Athens bv the
WTong measures of other generals. Tolraides alone
carried it against him for attacking the Boeotians ;
and, in doing so, he was defeated and slain. All the
rest adhered to his party, and submitted to his
opinion, on account of his superior authority : where-
as Fabius, whose measures were salutary and safe as
far as they depended upon him.self, appears only to
have fallen short by his inability to prevent the mis-
carriages of others. For the Romans would not have
had so many misfortunes to deplore, if the power of
Fabius had been as great in Rome, as that of Pericles
was in Athens '^".

Their liberality and public spirit were displayed,
by Pericles in refusing the sums that were offered
to him, and by Fabius in ransoming his soldiers with
his own money. This indeed was no considerable
expense, being only about six talents ^\ But it is

8° M. Dacier here very sensibly remarks, that men are not so
much to be judged abstractedly by their actions, as by the opportuni-
ties and means which they have had of acting. In public affairs espe-
cially, where so much is achieved by opinion, the very name of a
minister, a general, or an admiral is often more effective than any
addition^ of mere physical strength. It is Virgil's vinun quejn, or
rather his Neptune, who by a single look calms the ocean. At the
moment in which I write this, a French fleet of twenty-two sail of
the line, with twelve thousand troops on board, is flying before half
the number of ships of the British navy, under the command of a
Nelson! (July, 1805) flying, I add Dec. 1805, with prophetic but
fruitless dismay from the fate, which awaited them ofi'the im.mortal
Cape Trafalgar.-

*' Probably this is an error of the transcribers. For Fabius was
to pay two hundred and fifty drachmas for each prisoner, and he
ransomed (according to Livy xxii. 23.) two hundred and fortv-

110 PERICLES AND FABIUSMAX. COMPARED.

not easy to :?ay what treasure Pericles might not
have amassed from the allies, and from kings who
paid court to him on account of his authority; yet
no man ever kept himself more pure from corrup-
tion.

As for the temples, public edifices, and other
works, with which Pericles adorned Athens, all the
structures of that kind in Rome put together, until
the times of the Caesars ^'\ deserved not to be com-
pared with them, either in magnificence of design or
in excellence of execution.

seven; which would amount to 61,750 drachmas, or upward of ten
talents: a verv considerahle expense to Fabius, which he was only
enabled to defray by scUinijpart of his estate.

^' What an i.dea does this give us of the magnificence of Rome
under the Ca-sars ! well might Augustus boast marmoream se reUn-
querp, qumn laterifinm accepi^scf. (Suet. Aug. 28, 29.) This remark
however, made to h-s friends on his deathbed, Dion Cassius (Ivi. SO.)
refers not to the public buildings, but to the greatness and stabilitA-
of the empire.*

THE

L I F E

OF

A L C T B I A D E S.

SUMMARY.

llluslrious birth, and personal heauty c,f Alcihiadcs. His character,
and manners. His motive for refusing to learn to flay on the
Jlntc, The imputations cast upon his youth : his friendship tx:ith
Socrates. His treatment of a strancrer, hij whom he xvas admired.
His volatility. Socrates and he save each other'' s life. He gives
a box on the car to Hipponiciis, tvhose daughter he afterxmrd quar-
ries : he engages in political life. His eloquence. His prodigality
in horses and racing. His comjietition tvith Nicias and Phceax.
He procures the banishment of Hyperbolus ; a7id causes Nicias to
be suspected. He deceives the Lacedcrmonians : andforms a league
against them. Battle of Mantinea. His voluptuons mode of life :
and favour ixith the people. The expedition to Sicily. He is
named jointly tinth Nicias and Lamachus to the command. Dis-
couraging omens. He is chayged ivith having mutilated the statues
qf Mercury ; hut obliged to set off for Sicily before his trial. An-
drocides saves himself, by impeaching several innocent persons.
Alcibiades recalled, and condemned : "withdraws frst to Argos, and
afterward to Sparta. His accommodating adoption qf manners
the most diffej-ent. He stirs tip hostilities against Athens. Takes
refuge with the Persian satrap Tisapihernes. Disturbances in
Athens. Alcibiades detects the treason of Phryyiichus. The aris-
tocracy possess themselves of the supreme authority at Athens.
Alcibiades pdaced by the army at their head. Renders several im-
portant services to his country : defeats the Lacedcemonian feet :
is seized by Tisaphernes, but escapes and gains a second victory

>

112 ALCIBIADES.

over Mindarvs and Pharnabazus ; the latter of n-kom is again
defeated bij Akibiades and Thrasijllus. Ahibiades besieges Chalce-
don, routs P/ianiabazus, and takes Hclijbria. Capture of CJialcednn
a)id Bijzantium. Alcibiades restored. Honours heaped upon him
at Athens. He celebrates with much pomp the Greater Eleusinian
Mt/steries. Sets off" on an expedition against tlie Lacedcemonians ;
and incurs a fresh accusation. Is superseded by other generalsy
and retires into TJiracc. Lysander defeats the Athenian Jieet, and
takes Athens. Alcibiades passes into Bithynia, rvith the intodiun
of presenting himself to Artaxerxes. Lysander, in conjunction rvith
Pharnabazus y concerts his death. He is assassinated in Phrygia.

wuaBBM

UIIYSACES ^, the son of Ajax, is supposed to
have been the founder of Alcibiades' family : by his
mother's side he was descended from Alcmaeon ; for
he was the son of Dinomache, the daughter of Me-
gacles. His father Clinias gained great honour in
the sea-fight of Artemisium-, where he fought in a
galley fitted out at liis own expense, and afterward
fell in the battle of Coroufea, when the Boeotians
won the day. Pericles and Ariphron, the sons of
Xanthippus and near relations to Alcibiades, were
kis guardians. It is said, and not without reason,

' The splendour of Alcibiades' family is attested by the number
of respectable historians, who have rt corded many particulars with
some unimportant variations relative to it's founders. In this list
M. Kicard mentions Pausanias, i. 3.3., Isocrates, Demosthenes in
Mid., Lysias, Androcides, Diodorus Siculus xii. 38., Valerius Max-
imus iii. 4., A. Gellius xv. 7., and Herodotus vi. 131. His grand-
father Megacles, mentioned below, married Agariste, daughter of
Clisthenes, tyrant of Sicyon (Herod, vi. 130.) and was descended
from Alcniaion, whose ancestors were eminent in the time of The-
seus (Suidas, in voc. Alcmceonides.) Xanthippus, the father of Peri-
cles, married another Agariste, cousin of the former.*

* See Herod, viii. 17. The battle of Coronsea, in which he fell,
was fought (according to Diod. Sic. xii. 6.) 01. Ixxxiii. 2., and
proved very (h\,astrous to the Athenians ; the greatest part of whom
were either slain with their general Tolmides, or taken prisoners,
and ransomed by the surrender of noan^ cities in Boeotia.*

ALClBIADESv iia

lliat the affection and attacliment of Socrates con-
tributed much to his f:ime. For Nicias, Demosthenes,
Lamachus, Fhorniio, Thrasybulus, and Theiamenes-
his contemporaries were men of eminence, yet we
do not so much as know tlie name of the mother of
anyoftliem; whereas we know with respect even
to the nurse of Alcibiades, that she was a native of
Lacedsemon and called Amycla, as well as that
Zopyrus was his school- master'^; tlie one being re-
corded by Antisthenes, and the other by Plato.

As to the beauty of Alcibiades, it may suffice to
say, that it retained it*s sweet and lovely character
throughout the several stages of childhood, youth,
and manhood. For it is not universally true, as
Euripides says, that

The very autumn of a form once fine
Retains it's beauties ■>.

Vet this \vas the case with Alcibiades, among a few
others, on account of his natural vigour and happy
constitution.

^ Plutarch has more than once censured Pericles for hts negli-
gence in the latter particular. Zop3'rus (as Plato informs u?, in
his Alcib. i.) was an old obstinate Tliracian slave. In the former
respect he was more attentive, as from the Life of Lycurgus it atj-
pears, that the Lacedajmonian nurses were in great request from
their judicious attention to their charges. If hov/ever they were as
fond of gossiping, as nio<lern nurses are said to be, an industrious
punster in allusion to her name might graft some allusion k^]'
cry-l-cpic-cTiv to tl)e tacitis Aui/yclis of Virg. Ain. x. 56iJ-

" This passage is likewise again quoted hy Plutarch (Fp^^-. 2!..)
as having been said by Euriprdes of Agatho, a beautiful hoy. All
rhe ancients, who have spoken of Alcibiades (as Plato, Diod. Sic,
JusEm, Corn. Nepos, &'c.) agree in praising his extraordiniiryh/eaut)',
By Socrates it was admired, as the index aninii ; and hi.s innocent
attachment long pi-eserved Alcibiades from the dangers, to which
by his connections and figure, and still more by his versatility of
character, he was exposed. Flattery however, and pleasure, "and
ambition at last gained the ascendency (how si-ldom do they iarl !)
ever honesty, reason, and moderation : and Alcibiades under their
joint influence, after many years of persecution and hazard, perished
at the age of thirty-seven by assassination in the arms of a courtas<i».
l,uh)cti discanl *

VOL. II. I

U4. ALCIBIADES.

He had a lisping in his speech, wliich became
him, and gave a grace and persuasive turn to hi.*^
discourse. Aristophanes ' in those verses in wliicli
he ridicules Theorus, takes notice that xVlcibiades
hsped, calhng Theorus Cola.v (' Fhitterer') instead
of CoriLv (' Raven") ; whence the poet tai^es occa-
sion to observe that the term, so mis-pronounced,
was extremely applicable. With this agrees the
satirical description, which Archippus gives of the
son of Alcibiades ;

With sauntering step, to imitate his sire,

The vain youth moves; his louse robe wildly floats'^;

He bends the neck; he lisps.

His manners were far from being uniform : neither
indeed is it strange, that tliey varied with tlie great
events and wonderful vicissitudes of his fortune.
He was, naturally, a man of strong passions ; but
his predominant one was an ambition to contend,
and overcome. This appears from what is related of
his sayings, when a boy. When hard pressed in
wrestling, to prevent his being thrown he bit the
grasping hands of his antagonist, who let go his hold
and said ; " You bite, Alcibiades, like a woman.'*
" No," replied he, " but like a lion.''

One day he was playing at dice with other boys,
in the street ; and as it came to his turn to throw,
a loaded waggon came up. At first he called to the
driver to stop, because he was to throw in tlie way,
over whic'i the waggon was to pass. The rustic
disregarding him and driving on, the other boys
made way tor him ; but Alcibiades placed himself
upon his jace directly before the waggon, and
stretching himself out, bade the fellow drive on if
he pleased. Upon this he was so startled, that he

s Vesp. I. i.

* In tiie boti/jotrtii s^y.iiv of the original we may perhaps discern

the knntrro rcvoccuitc lacernns of the Roman satirist. (Juv, i.

^.7-) '1 hose were the dhcivxti both of Ga^eece and Rome.

Archippus reus a writer of the Old CoKiedy.*

ALCIBIADES. 115

stopped his horses, while those who saw it ran up to
hiri) with cries of terror.

In the course of his education, he willinc^lv re-
ceivcd the lessons of his other masters, but refused
to learn to play upon the ^ute, which he considered
as a mean art, and unbecoming a gentleman. " The
use of the plectrum and the lyre, he would say,
has notliinij; in it that disorders the features or
form ; but a man is hardly to be known by his
most intimate friends, when he plays upon the
flute. Besides, the lyre does not hinder the per-
former fiom speaking, or accompanying it with a
song ; wliereas the iiiite so engages the mouth and
the breath, that it leaves no possibility of speaking.
Let the Theban youth therefore pipe, who know
not how to discourse : but we Athenians, accord-
" ing to the account of our ancestors, have Minerva
" for our patroness and Apollo for our protector ;
one of whom threw avvay the flute ^, and tlie
other stripped off the skin of the man who played
" upon it ^" Thus partly by raillery, and partly
by argument, Alcibiades kept both himself and
others from learning to play upon the flute : for it
soon became the talk among the young men of con-
dition, that Alcibiades was right in detesting that
art, and ridiculing those who practised it. 'ihus it
lost it's place in the number of liberal accomplish-
ments, and was universally exploded.

In the invectives, which Antipho ^ wrote against

7 This is mentioned, among Others, by Aristotle (Polit. viii. 6.),
who tliere discusses at some length the advantages ancj disadvan-
tages of the study of music ; and attributes the anger of the goddess
to the irrationality of the flute. Mad. Dacier, in the Introduction
to her Terence, has printed some verses by her father upon this
story of Minerva, which she says are si beaux, qn^on diroit quails so7d
da Steele d* Auguste : but which certainly have none of the tolerance
of a refined age for the musical instrument in question.*

'' Marsyas. Plutarch alludes to this very severe punishment, and
assigns fartlier causes for it, in his Sympos. vii. 8. &c.*

y Antiplio was a sophist in the time of Socrates, and is intrO'
duced by Xenopliou (Memorab. i.) conversing with that philo-
::'ioher.*

6i

a
a

Alcibiades, it is recorded that when a boy, he ran
away from home to one of his friends named Demo-
crates : and that Ariphron would have liad procla-
mation made for him, had not Pericles diverted him
from it by saying, " If he is dead, we shall only
'^ find him one day the sooner for it ; if he is safe,
" it will be a reproach to him as long as he lives."
Another story is, that he killed one of his servants
with a stroke of his stick, in Sibyrtius' place of exer-
cise. But, perhaps, we ought not to give entire
credit to these things, professedly written by an
enemy to defame him.

Many persons of rank made their coml to Alci-
biades, but it is evident that they were charmed
and attracted by the beauty of his person. Socrates
was the only one, wliose regards were fixed upon his
mind, and bore witness to the young man's virtue
and iiiffcnuousness ; the ravs of which he could
distinguish through his fine form. And fearing lest
the pride of riches and high rank and the crowd
of flatterers, both Athenians and strangers, should
corrupt him, he used his best endeavours to prevent
i€; and took care that so hopeful a plant should not
lose it-'^ fmit, and perish in the very flower. If
ever fortune so' enclosed and fortified a man with
what are called her goods, as to render him '" impe-
netrabfe to the ini:ision-knife of })hilosophy, and
the probe of sharp and honest advice, it was surely
Alcibiadcsw From the very first, he was surrounded
with pleasures; and a multitude of admirers deter-
mined to say nothinjT but what they thought would
please, and to keep him from ^all instruction and
reproof: yet by his native penetration he distin-
guished the value of Socrates, and attached himself
to him, rejecting the rich and the great who sued
tor his re^:anl.

'° Plntnvoli's expression here i;'< not oxnctly tlic same with that
of the tran.'slation, but it is couohtd in {igiires which tend the same

ALCIBIADES. 117

With Socrates he soon entered into the closest
intimacy ; and finding that he did not, hke the rest
of the unmanly crew, solicit improper favours, but
that he studied to correct the errors of his heart and
to cure him of his empty and foolish arrogance,

Then his crest fell, and all his pride was gone.
He droop'd the conquer'd wing ".

"In fact, he considered the dicipline of Socrates as
a provision from heaven for the preservation and
benefit of youth. Thus despising himself and ad-
miring his friend, adoring his wisdom and revering
his virtue, he insensibly formed in his heart the imag.e
of love, or rather came under the influence ai' that
power, who (as Plato says) secures his votaries from
vicious love. It surprised all the world to see him
constantly sup wath Socrates, take with him the
exercise of wrestling, lodge in the same tent with
him ; while to his other admirers he was reserved
and rough. Nay, to some he behaved with the
utmost insolence, to Anytus, for instance, the son
of Anthemion. Anytus was very fond of him, and
happening to make an entertainment for some stran-
gers, had desired Alcil^iadcs to be of the party. Alci-
biades declined the invitation ; but, having drank
deep with some of his acquaintance at his own house,
he went thither to play off a frolic. The frolic was
this : He stood at the door of the room where the
guests were entertained, and seeing a number of
gold and silver cups upon the table, ordered his
servants to take half of them and carry them to his
own house ^'^ : after which, not vouchsafing so much
as to enter into the room himself, he went away.

^' This passage is likewise quoted by Plutarch (Epi. 18.), but
with a very difterent application.*

'^ Athenaeus (xii. 9.) says he did not keep them himself; but,
liaving taken them from this man who was rich, gave them to
Thrasyllus, who was poor. (L.) This somewhat mends the story
for Alcibiades. Anytus was subsequently one of the principal
accusers of Socrates.*

118 ALCIBTADES.

The company ref^ented the afFront, and said, " He
'* had I'jehaved to Anytus with great rudeness a'nd
" insolence." " Not at all,'* said Anytus, " but
" rather with kindness and forbearance ; since he
" has left us half, when he knew it was in his power
'' to have taken the whole."

In the same manner he behaved to his other
admirers, except only one stranger. This man, they
tell us, was but in indifferent circumstances ; for
when he had sold all, he could make up no more
than the sum of a hundred staters '^, which he car-
ried to Alcibiadcs, and entreated him to accept.
Alcibiades was pleased at the thing, and with a smile
invited him to supper. After a kind reception and
entertainment, he returned him the gold, but re-
quired him to attend the next day when the public
revenues were to be offered to farm, and to be sure
to be the hii2:hest bidder. The man endeavourins^ to
excuse himself, because the rent would be many
talents, Alcibiades, who had a pri\ate pique agninst
the old farmers, threatened to have him beaten if he
refused. Next morning therefore the stranger ap-
peared in the market-place, and offered a talent more
than the former rent. The farmers, uneasy and
angry at this, called upon him to name his security,
supposing that he could not find any. The poor
man upon this, much startled, was going to retire
with shame ; when Alcibiades, v.ho stood at some
distance, cried out to tlie magistrates, " Set down
^' my name ; he is my friend, and I will be liis
" security." When the old farmers of the revenue
heard this, they w^ere much perplexed ; for their way

'J The stater was a coin wliicli weighed four Attic drachmas, find
was either of gold or silver. T/ie silver v.'as worth about two shil-
lings and sixpence sterling. The stater daricus, a gold coin, was
worth twelve shii'ings and threLi)cncc halfpenny; but the Attic
stater of srold must have been worth much more, if we reckon the
proportion of gold to silver only as ten to one: Dacier therefore
js greatly tr.istaken, when he says the coin here mentioned by
I'lutarch was worth only forty Frer^ch sr-as; for Plutarch expressly
XTicntions, that these stuters were of gold.

ALCIBIADES. il9

was, with the profits of the current year to pay the
rent of the preceding : so tliat, perceiving no otlier
way to extricate tliemsclves out of tlie difficulty,
they humbly applied to the stranger and offered him
money. 13ut Alcibiades would not suffer him to take
h^ss than a talent, which was accordingly paid him.
Having rendered him this service, he told him he
might relinquish his bargain.

Though Socrates had many rivals, yet he kept
possession of Alcibiades' heart by the excellence of
his genius, and the pathetic turn of his conversation,
which often drew tears from his young companion.
And though sometimes he gave him the slip, and
M-as drawn away by liis flatterers, who exhausted all
the art of pleasure for that purpose ; yet the philo-
sopher took care to hunt out his fugitive, who feared
and respected none but him, regarding the rest with
sovereign contempt. Hence that saying of Clean-
thes, " Socrates holds Alcibiades by the ear, and
" leaves to his rivals the rest of him, with which he
" scorns to meddle." In fact, Alcibiades was very
capable of being led by the allurements of pleasure ;
so at least what Thucydfdes '^ says, concerning his
excesses in his way of living, gives us occasion to
believe. Those who endeavoured to corrupt him,
attacked him on a still weaker side, his vanity and
love of distinction, and led him into extravagant
and unseasonable projects ; ])ersuading him, that as
soon as he sliould ap])ly himself to the management
of public affairs, he would not only eclipse the other
generals and orators, but surj)ass even Pericles him-
self, in point of reputation as well as intejest with
the powers of Greece. But as iron, when softened
by the fire, is soon hardened again and brought to a
proper temper by cold water; so when Alcibiades
was enervated by luxury, or swoln with pride, So-
crates corrected and brought him to himself by his

'3 vi. 15.

120 ALCIBIADES.

discourses ; for from tbem he learned the number of
his defects, and ihe imperfection of his virtue.

When he ^vas past his childiiood, happening to
go into a grammar-scliooJ, he asked the master for
a volume of Homer; and upon his answering that
he had nothing of Homer's, he gave him a box on
the ear, and left him '"^. Another schoolmaster tell-
ing him, that he had a Homer corrected by himself;
*' How !'* said Alcibiades, " and do you employ
" your time in teacliing children to read? ,You,
" who are able to correct Homer, might seem to
*' be fit to instruct m.en '\'*

One day Vvishing to speak to Pericles, he went
to his house ; and being told that, " He was engaged
" in considering how to give in his accounts to the
" people;" he said, as he went away, " He had
" better consider how to avoid giving in any accounts
" at all ' V

While he was yet a youth, he made the campaign
at Potidaiu, where Socrates lodged in the same tent
with him, and was his companion in every engage-

'•* M. Dacicr, in excuse for the schoolmaster, pleads that
Homer's poems v.ere at that time in few liaiuls. And yet they
bad been collected by Lycurgus, as Phitarch informs us in his Life,
wlien he was travelling in Asia Miu»r, arranged by him in a re-
gular series, andintroduced into Greece, ^ee Vol. I. p. 115. and not.
(13.) Diogenes Laertius indeed claims the honour of this achieve-
ment for Solon, and others for Pisistratus, or his son Hipparchus.
Perhaps, they had each of them some concern in collecting them,
or combining them in their present order : at all events, they could
hardly be so scarce in the time of Alcibiades, as M. Dacier sup-
poses ; nor would Plutarch, upon that theory, liave recorded this
story. See also /Elian V. H. xiii. 38.*

'•s M. Ilicard takes this passage seriously, and thinks that this
second abecedarian njight possibly have corrected Homer! — an au-
thor, under whom Alexander the Great studied the art of war, and
Lycurgus improved himself in moral and political science I*

•^ This story is not tcld in the Life of Pericles, where one would
naturally expect to meet with it ; and is indeed rendered impra-
bahle by what Plutarch there says, of his superiority to the love of
wealth, and his general accuracy as a statesman ; which is abun-
dantly confirmed by the impartial Thucydides (ii. 65.) in hi*

ALCIBIADES. 121

nient. In the principal battle, tliey both behaved
with the utmost gallantry ; but Alcibiades at last fall-
ing down wounded, ISocrates advanced to defend
him, which he eilectually did in the sight of great
numbers, saving both him and his arms. For thi?
the ])rize of valour was certainly due to S<jcrate&,
but the generals inclined to bestow it upon Alqibiad^s
on account of his quality ; and Socrates, willing -to
encourage his thirst alter tru€ glory, was tiie first
who oave his suffrage for hitn, and urged them to
adjudge him the crown and the complete suit of
arnioiir. On the other hand, at the battle of Delium
where the Athenians were routed ^'5 and Socrates
with a few others was retreating on foot, Alcibiades
observing it did not pass him, but covered his re-
treat and brought him safe olF; though the enemy
^vere pressing furiously forward, and made a con-
siderable slaughter of the Athenians. But this hap-
pened long afterward.

To llipponicus the father of Callias, a man re-
spectable both for his birth and fortune, Alcibiades
one day gave a box on the ear ; not that he had
any quarrel with him or was heated by passion, but
simply because, in a w'anton frolic, he had agreed
with his companions to do so. The whole city being
full of the story of this insolence, and every body
(as it was natural to expect) expressing some resent-
ment, early next morning Alcibiades went to wait
upon Hipponicus, knocked at the door, and was ad-
mitted. As soon as he came into his presence, he
stripped off his garment, and presenting his naked
body desired him to beat and chastise him as he
pleased. But Hipponicus pardoned him, and dis-

'^ Laches, who was with Socrates at the time, uiforms us that,
if others had done their duty as Socrates did his, tlie Atlionians
would not have been deteatied in the battle of Delium. See Thucyd.
ii. 2., iv. 101. Plato however, from whom we have tliis account of
the affair at Potidaea, is supposed by Athenaeus (v. 15 ) to have
j fabricated the story in honour of his master: but his proofs are too
long for insertion in this place.* That battle W4i5 fought .01. Ixxxix.,
eight years after the battle of Potidaea.

132 AT.CIBIADES.

missed his resentment; nay, some time afterward
he gave him his daughter Hipparete in marriage.
Some say it was not Hipponicus, but his son Callias,
■who gave Hipparete to Alcibiadcs with ten talents
for her portion; and that, when she brought him a
child, he demanded ten talents more, as if he had
taken her on that condition : upon which Callias,
apprehensive of some ill consequence from liis art-
ful contrivances, declared to the people in full as-
sembly, that if he sliould happen to die without
children, they should be his heirs '■'^.

Tiipparele was a most prudent and affectionate
wife ; but at last, growing uneasy at her husband's
associating with sucli a number of courtesans, both
strangers and Athenians, she quitted his house and
went to her brother's. Alcibiades however con-
tinued his debaucheries, and gave himself no pain
about her ; but it was necessary for her, in order to
a legal separation, to give in a bill of divorce to the
Archon, and to appear personally with it : for the
sending of it by another hand was not sufficient.
When she came to do tliis according to law, Alci-
biadcs rushed in, caught her in his arms, and carried
her through the market-place to his own house, no
one presuming to oppose him or to take her fi'om
him. From that time she remained witli him until
her death, which happened not long afterward, when
Alcibiades was upon his voyage to Ephesus. Nei-
ther docs the violence used in this case seem to be
contrary to the laws, either of society in general,
or of that republic in particular. For the law of
Athens, in requiring her who seeks to be divorced
to appear in person, probably intended to give the
husband an opportunity of meeting with and recover-
ing her.

''"' This version i? to uncled upon a papsage in the orntion of Ando-
cides at^uinst Alcibiadcp, referred to by M. Kicard, where the fact,
as it now stands in the text, is- expressly asserted: and is indeed
much the more probable of the t«o, if resentment of ill usa2:e then
operated upon the human heart, ask usually does at present.*

ALCIBIADES. 123

Alclbiades had a dog of uncommon size and
Ijeautv, which cost him seventy minee ; and yet his
tail, which was h.is principal ornament, he caused to
be cut off'^. Some of his acquaintance severely
blamed his acting so strangely, and told him that all
Athens runsT with the story of his foolish treatment
of the dog : at which he laughed and said, " This
*' is the very thing I wished ; for I would have the
" Athenians talk of this, lest thev should find some-
" thing worse to say of me/'

The first thing which made him popular, and in-
troduced him into the administration, was his dis-
tributing of money, not designedly but by accident.
Seeing one day a great crowd of people, as he was
walking along, he asked what it meant ; and being
informed that there was a donative made to the peo-
ple, he gave money too, as he went in among them.
This meeting with loud applause, he was so much
delighted, that he forgot a quail which he had under
his robe-'^ ; and the bird, frightened with the noise,
fiew away. Upon tiiis, the people set up still louder
acclamations, and many of them assisted him to
recover the quail. The man, who caught it and
brought it back to him, was one Antiochus"' a pilot,
for whom he had ever afterward a particular regard.

From his birth, his estate, his personal valour,

*9 The valurible antique mai'ole representing- tliis animal in his
curtailed sfate, is now at Duiicotnbe P;irk, Yorkshire. But Dun-
combe-Park, much as it may owe in various respects to art, is still
niore indebted to nature.*

^° It was the fashion in those days to breed quails, as the English,
j)roh pudor ! do cock.s for fightinj; ; and, after the decision of the
English senate upon the question of buil-fighting, might it not be
added proh curia ! too.* Socrates, having brought Alclbiades to
acknowledge tliat the way to rise to distinction among the Athenians
v>'as, to study to excel the generals of their enemies, replied with
this severe irony, ' No, no, Alclbiades ; your only study is, how
to surpass Midias in the art of breeding quails.' (Plato, Aleib. 1.)

-' Th.e name of (lie nian v.ho caught the quail would hardly have
been mentionL'd, had not Alclbiades subsequently entrusted him
with the coiumand of the fleet in his absence; when he took the op-
portunity to fight, and was completely beaten,

12

124- ALCIBIADES.

ULTid the number of his friends and relations, lie de-
rived great advantages for introducing himself into
the management of public affairs ; but v^hat he chose,
above all the rest, to recommend himself by to the
people, was the charm of his eloquence. That he
was a fine speaker, the comic writers bear witness ;
as does the prince of orators likewise in his oration
against Midias ", where he says that Alcibiades was
the most eloquent man of his time. And if we may
believe Theophrastus, a curious inquirer and one
m-ore versed in history than the other philosophers,
Alcibiades had a pecuhar happiness of invention, and
a singular readiness of ideas. But as his care was
employed not only upon the matter but the expres-
sion, and he had little facility in the latter, he often
hesitated in the midst of a speech, not hitting upon
the word he wanted, and stopping until it occurred
to him.

He was flimed for his breed of horses, and the
number of his chariots. For no one beside himself,
either subject or sovereign, ever sent seven chariots
together to the Olympic games. The first, the
second, and the fourth prizes, according to Thucy-
dides -% or the third (as Euripides states), he bore
away at once, which exceeds every thing performed
by the most ambitious in that way. Euripides thus
celebrates his success ;

Great son of Clinias, I record thj'' glor}',

First on the dusty plain

The threefold prize to gain ;
What hero boasts thy praise in Grecian story ?

" It appears from the passage of Demosthenes alluded to, that
he spoke only from common fame, and consequently that there was
little of Alcibiades' then extant. (L ) We find some remains o( his
oratory in Thucydides, addy Langhorne ; but who estimates the
eloquence of ancient statesmen from the harangues of their historians,
or of modern ones from the ' Debates in the Senate of Lilliput,' a»
detailed sixty years ago in the Gentleman's Magazine J*

'^ vi. 16." '

ALCIBIADES. l^*

Twice '* does the trumpet's voice thy name
Around tlie phuisive cirque proclaim :

Twice on thy brow was seen

The peaceful olive's green.
The glorious palm of easy-purchased fame.

The emulation which several Grecian cities expressed,
in tfieir presents to him, gave a still higlicr lustre to
his victories. Ephesus provided a magnificent pa-
vilion for his use ; Chios was at the expense of keep-
ing his horses, and beasts for sacrifice ; and Lesbos
supplied him with wine, and every thing necessary
for the most elegant public table -\ Yet, amidst
this success, he did not escape without censure, oc-
casioned eitlier by the malice of his enemies, or by
his own misconduct. Tliere was at Athens (it is
said) one Diomedes, a man of good character and
a friend of Alcibiadcs, wlio Vvas very desirous of
winning a prize at the Olympic games ; and being
informed that there vv'as a chariot to be sold, v;hicli
belonged to the city of Argos, where Alcibiadcs
had a strong interest, he persuaded him to buy it
for him. lie accordingly did bay it, but he kept it
for himself; leaving Diomedes to vent his rage, and

*•* Alcibiades won th-e first, second, and third prizes in person ;»
Ibeside v.diic!!. Iris chariots won twice in his absence. The latter is
ivhat Euripides refers to, in the words w^-oji;?* and ^i-pB-itTct. (L.)-
|Atheu£eus also i. 3., and Isocrates, speak of these victories ; bat-
he first agrees with Thucydides, and Euripides is supported by the.
atter.*

^i Antisthenes, a dincijile of Socrates, vrrites that Chios fed his
!t)rBes, and Cyzicuui provided his victims, "^^he passage is remark-'
ble ; ibr v/e learn from it that this v/as done, not only when Alci-
iades went to the Olympic games, but in his warlike expeditions,
jhnd even in his travels.. ' Whenever (says he) Alcibiades travelled,
"our cities of the allies nn'nistered to him, as his handmaids. Ephe^
!«s furrtished him with tents, as sumptuous as those of the Pei"sians;
''hios found provender far his horses; Cyzicum supplied h.im v/ith
ictims and provisions for iiis table ; and Lesbos with wine and all _
>ther necessaries for his- household'.' None but opulent cities were
ible to answer such an expense : for when Alci!>iades won the three
)Tizes i« person at the Olympic games, after he had ofibred s. very
bostly sacrifice to Jupiter, he entertained at a magnificent repaint
jhe>)uiift'Rerable coinpany which had assisted at the gauics.

9

126 ALCIBIADES.

to call gods and men to bear witness of the injus-
tice. 1 or this, an action seems to have been brought
against liim ; and an oration still exists concerning
a chariot, written by Isocrates in defence of Alcibi-
ades, then a youth : but the plaintiff is there named
Tisias, not Diomedes.

Alcibiadcs was very young, when he iirst applied
himself to the business oi the republic, and yet he
soon showed himself superior to the other orators.
The persons capable of standing in some degree of
competition with iiim, were Ph{;eax the son of Era-
sistratus, and Nicias the son of Niceratus. The
latter was advanced in years, and one of the best
generals of his time. 1 lie former was but a youth
like himself, just beginning to make his way, for
which he had the advantage of high birth ; but in
other resj)ects, as well as i« the art of speaking, he
was inferior to Alcibiades. He seemed fitter for so-
liciting and persuading in private, than for stemming
the torrent of a public debate : in short, he was one
of those, of whom Eupolis says;

" True, he can tall:, and yet he is no speaker **.'*

There is extant an oration against Alcibiades and
Pha?ax, in which among other things it is alleged
of Alcibiades, tliat he used at his table many of the
gold and silver vessels -'" provided for the sacred pro-
cessions, as if they had been his own.

There was at Athens one Hyperbolus, of the ward
of Fcrithois, whom Thucydides "'^ mentions as a very

V

"^ Aulus Gellius also cites this line (i. 15.) and says that Sallust,
speaking of one M. Atilius Palicanus, had endeavoured to imitate
it in his lo.'pici.r nuigis quam facundiLS. Tjie French preserve the
same distinction in their words, jaser and parlcr.*

" Alcibiades, it seems, borrowed this consecrated plate, and alter
profaning it for secular purposes would not return it till the eve of
the festivnl, upon wldch it was to be exhibited, that strangers might
suppose he had lent it to the city. Pha^ax is mentioned by Thucy-
dides, V. 4.*

^^ viii, 7". He is also mentioned hy Cicero in his Brut. 62.^

ALCIBIADES. 127

bad man, and who was a constant subject of ridicule
tor the comic writers. But he was unconcerned iit
the worst things, which they could say of him ; and,
being regardless of honour, he was also insensible of
shame. This, though really impudence and Iblly,
is by some people called fortitude and a noble dar-
ing. But, though no one liked him, the people
nevertheless made use of him, when thcv wished to
strike at persons in authority.

Upon his instigation, the Athenians v.'cre now
ready to proceed to the ban of Oi:tracism^ by which
they depose and expel such of the citizens as are dis-
tinguished by their dignity and power, therein con-
sulting their envy rather than their fears. As it was
evident, that this sentence was levelled against one
of the three, Phaeax, Nicias, or Alcibiades, the lat-
ter took care to unite tlie contending parties, and
leaguing with Nicias caused the Ostracism to fall
upon Hyperbolus himself Some say it was not Ni-
cias, but Phaeax, with whom Alcibiades joined inte-
rest, and by whose assistance he expelled their com-
mon and unsusuectino; enemy : for no vile or obscure
person had ever undergone that punishment. So
Plato the comic poet assures us, when he says of
Hyperbolus,

Well had the caiti.Tearn'd his banishment,
But not by Ostracism, that sentence sacred
To dreaded eminence.

We have elsewhere, however, given a move detailed
account of what history has recorded upon this
subject ~'^.

md by Aristoph. Iren, iii.; the ccholkst on whom (in Ran.) say?,
that he retired to Samos upon hi- banishment; and for some crime
pr other was by the Sami:ais enclosed m a sack, and thrown info
■he sea. M. Ricard ab he, observes, he was ^ fabrkant de lan-
■ernes ;' and the Scho!. in Aristoph. S'.iSila.To tvy S'r,j/,xyc^yiaf;. The
listory of the French revoiution connects these ideas but too
;losely.*
'9 In the Lives of Aristides and Nicias.

128 ALCIBIADES.

Alclbiades was not less disturbed at the great
esteem, in which Xicias was held by the enemies of
Athens, than at the respect with which he was treated
by the Athenians themselves. The rights of hospi-
tality had Ions: subsisted between the family of Alci-
blades and the Lacedaemonians, and he kad taken
particular care of such of them as were made prison-
ers at Pylos"^'; yet when they found that through
Kicias' influence chiefly they had obtained a peace
and recovered the captives, they attached themselves
to him with increased reerard. It was a common
observation among the Greeks, that Pericles had
engaged them in a war, and Nicias had set them free
from it; nay, the peace was even called ' the Nician
peace.' This made Alcibiades very uneasy, and out
of envy to Nicias he determined to break the league.

As soon then as he perceived that the people of
Argos, from their hatred and apprehension of the
kSpartans, souglit to get rid of all connection with
them, he privately gave them hopes of assistance
from Athens ; and both by his agents and in person
encouraged the principal citizens not to entertain
any fear, or to give up any point, but to apply to
the Athenians, who were almost ready to repent of
the peace which they had made, and would soon find
occasion to break it.

But after the Laceda?moiiians had entered into al-
liance with the Boeotians, and had delivered Pan ac-
tus to the Athenians, not v/ith it's fortifications entire
(as tliey ought to have done), but quite dismantled^',
he took the opportunity, while the Athenians were

3° This is inaccurately in some reaflings of tliis passage, as \vcll
i:s; in Plutarch's Life of Nicias, ascvii)ed to that general. Thucyd.
viii. 6. informs us, that the name of Alcibiades was Laccdccmonian;
tluit 'the rights of hospitality ' mentioned in the te.vt commenced
between his father Clinias, and Alcibiades the father of Eudius one
of the Ephori, who had lodged in h.is house at Athens, and whose
name (as a pledge of their friendship) he bestowed upon his son,
Alcibiades, likewise, called one of his boys Eudius.*

i' For tile particulars of the story relative t© Panactus, a frontier,
fortress between Uteotia and Attica, see Thucyd. v. '5. 12.*

ALCIBIADES. 129

incensed at this proceeding-, to inflame them still
tiiither. At the same time he raised a clamour
against Nicias, bv some plausible allegations re-
])roacliintj; him with havinir nea:lccted, when com-
mandcr-in-chief, to take prisoners the garrison ^~ left
by the enemy iu Sphacteria, and with having released
them, when taken by others, in order to ingratiate
himself wifh the Lacedremonians. He farther
asserted, that though Nicias had a strong interest
with the Lacedipmonians, he would not make use of
it to oppose their entering into the confederacy with
the Ba^otians and Corinthians ; but that, when an
alliance was offered to the Athenians by any of the
Grecian states, he took care to prevent their accept-
ing it, if it were likely to give umbrage to the
Lacedaemonians.

By these charges, however, Nicias was much
disconcerted : at that very juncture embassadors
accidentally arrived from Lacedaemon with mode-
rate proposals, and declared that they had full powers
to treat and decide all differences in an equitable

3- After tlie Lacedaemonians had lost the fort of Pylos in Mes-
senia, they left in the isle of Sphacteria (opposite to that fort, and
commanding the approach to it by sea) a garrison of three hun-
tlred and twenty men, beside Helots, under the command of Epi-
tades, the son of JNIolobrus. The Athenians would iiave despatched
Kicias, while commander-in-chief, with a fleet against that island,
but he excused himself Cleon afterward, in conjunction with
Demosthenes, got possession of it, as he had pledged himself to
do, slew several of the garrison, and sent the rest prisoners to
Athens. (Tliucyd. vi. 28. 34-. ) Among those prisoui'vs were a liun-
dred and tvi'enty Spartans, wlio by the assistance of Nicias obtained
their release. The Lacedxmonians subsequently recovered the
fort of Pylos: for Anytus, who was sent with a squadron to support
it, finding the wind directly against him, returned to Athens ; unon
which the people, accnrdirg to their usual custom, condemned
him to die. This sentence, liowever, he commuted for a vast
sum of money, being the first who reversed a judgement in that
manner. (L.)

Cleon is represented by Cicero (Brut. 7.) as a man of some eIo->
quence, but factiously disposed. According to Plutarch (Life of
Nicias) he was remarkable for emptinejss, arrogance, and impetuositv
— qualities, which recommended him indeed to the populace, but
in the event nearly effected the ruin, of Athens.*

VOL. II. ' K

ii
ti

(6
it

130 ALCIBIADES.

way. The senate was vSatislied, and next day the
peoj)le were to be convened : but Alcibiades, dread-
ing the success of tluit audience, found an oppor-
tunity of speaking with the embassadors in the mean
time, and thus adchessed them ; " Men of Laceda;-
mon, what is it you are going to do ? Are you not
apprised, that the behaviour of the senate is always
camHd and luuiiane to those who ap})ly to it,
whereas the people are haughty and expect great
'• concessions? If you say that you are come with
" full powers, you will iind them exorbitant and
" unreasonable in their demands. Retract then
your imprujlent declaration, and if you wisli
to keep the Athenians within the bounds of mode-
ration, and not to have terms extorted from you
M'hich you cannot approve, treat with them as if
you had not a discretionary commission. I will
use my best endeavours in favour of the Laceds-
" monians^^." This promise he confirmed vvith
an oath, and thus drew them over from Nicias to
himself. In Alcibiades they now placed an entire
confidence, admiring both his understanding and
his address in business, and regarding him as a very
extraordinary man.

Ivjcxt day the people assembled, and the embas-
sadors were introduced. Alcibiades' asked them in
an obliging manner, what their commission was ;
upon which they answered, that " they did not come
*' as ])lenipotentiaries/' He then began to rave
and storm, as if he had received, not inflicted, an
injury ; calling them faithless prevaricators, who
were come neither to do nor to say any thing honour-
able. The senate was incensed, the people enraged j
and Nicias, who was ignorant of Alcibiades' impo-
sition, filled with astonishment and confusion at this
change.

The proposals of the embassadors thus rejected,

35 'J'hucydides also v. 45. relates this fact, which recurs in the
Life of Nicias, with little variation, though he does not actually
make a speech for Alcibiades upon the occasion.*

ALCIBIADES. 131

Alclbiades was declared general, and soon engaged
the Argives^^, the Eleans, and the IMantineans as
allies to the Athenians. No body commended the
manner of tliis transaction, but the eiiect was im-
portant'^^ : since it divided and embroiled almost the
wliolc of Peloponnesus, in a single day lifted so
many arms against the Lacedaemonians at Mantinea,
and removed to such a distance from Atliens the
scene of war ; by which the Lacedaemonians, if
victorious, could gain no great advantage, whereas a
miscarriage would have endangered the very being
of their state.

Soon after this battle at Mantinea^^, the prin-
cipal officers^'' of the Argive army attempted to
abolish the popular government in Argos, and to
take the administration into their own hands. The
Lacedaemonians countenanced the design, and as-
sisted them to carry it into execution. But the
people took up arms again, and defeated their new
masters : and Alcibiades, coming to their aid, ren-
dered the victory more complete. At the same time
he persuaded them to extend their walls down to
the sea, that they might always be in a condition to
receive succours from the Athenians : and sent them

^'' He concluded a league (01. Ixxxix. 4.) with these states for
a lamdred years, inserted at full length in TImcydides, from whotn
we learn that the treaties of the ancient Greeks were not less perfect
and explicit than our's. They were of as little consequence too ;
for how soon was that broken, which the Athenians had made with
the Lacedtemonians ! Thucydides enters into considerable detail
upon tiiis subject, (v. 46., &c.)

^^ Plutarch here shows himself superior to the weakness of esti-
mating a measure by it's accidental success (see p. 108., not. 79.)
for the Athenians were beaten at Mantinea. The victory however,
3s appears from Timcyd. (vi. 16.), did not give the Lacedemonians
any great confidence in their resources.*

^^ Fought Ol. xc. 3., near three years after the conclusion of
the treaty with Argos. See Thucyd. vi. GQ., &c.

" Those officers availed themselves of tlie consternation, wluch.
seized ihe people of Argos after the loss of the battle; and the
I^acedicmonians gladly supported them, from a persuasion that if
the popular government were abolished, and an aristocracy (like
that of Sparta) !=et up in Argos, they should soon be masterfj there.

" K 2

132 ALCIBIADES.

carpenters and masons from Alliens, strenuously
exerting himself upon this occasion, which tended
to increase his personal interest and power, as well
as that of his country. He advised the people of
PatriE, likewise, to join their city to the sea by long
M'alls '^'^. And some one observing to the Patrensians,
" That the Athenians would one day swallow them
*' up;" " Possibly it may be so,*' said Alcibiades,
" but thev will beain with the feet, and do it hv
*' little and little, waiereas the I.aceda'monians v.ill
^' begin with the head, and do it all at once.*' He
exhorted the Athenians to assert the em])ire of the
land, as well as of the sea ; and was ever inciting the
young warriors to show by their deeds, that they
remembered the oath, which they had taken in the
temple of Agraulos ^^. That oath is, that they will
consider wheat, barley, vine, and olives, as the
boundadcs of Attica ; bv which it is insinuated, that
they should endeavour to possess themselves of all
lands, that are cultivated and fruitful.

But these his high abilities in politics, his elo-
quence, his reach of genius, and his keenness of
apprehension, were tarnished by his luxurious living,
liis drinkino; and debaucheries, his effeminacy of
dress, and his insolent profusion. He wore a purple

^^ PatnT was a city of Achaia. The execution of tlie project
?iere suggested by Alcibiades was obstructed by the inhabitants of
Corinth, Sicyon, and other neighbouring states.*

2' Written Aglauros in Herod, viii. 53., Pausan. i. iv., and Ov.
Met. ii. 7;5'>., but mora generally as by Plutarclj. Ulpiaii, in his
scholia upon Dcmosth. de Fa/s. Lc^. relates the story of Agraulo.-^,
who devoted hc^rseli'to death for the enemies of her countr}- ; but
\vith some mistake?, as observed by Larcher in his notes to Hero-
dotus. Pollux (vili. ix. 105.) has preserved the ibrmiila of tlie very
gallant and patriotic oath taken in her temple, which does not
include the unjust clause mentioned in the text. Tlie divhiitii^s
•invoked up m the o:"casion, beside Agraulos herself, were Bellona
and 3Iars, with T!iai!o, Auxo, and Ilegemon, names anciently
given (as we are informed by Pausan. ix. '»5.) to the three (i races,
who do not however seem the most h;>i^pily adapted to the attesta-
tion of a military oath. See also Piiilostr. \1t. Apollon iv. 21.
The oath of Agraulos teems to have recently come again into iksluoa
,(1806.)

ALCIBIADES. 1S3

robe with a long train, whenever he appeared in
public. He cansed the planks of his galley to be cut
away, that he might lie the softer, his bed not being
placed upon the boards, but suspended upon girths.
And in the wars he bore a shield of gold, which had
none of the usual ^'^ ensigns of his country, but iu
their stead a Cupid bearing a thunderbolt. The
great men of Athens saw his behaviour with abhor-
rence and indignation, and even dreaded the con-
sequence. They regarded his foreign manners, his
prodigality, and his contempt of the laws, as so
many means to make himself absolute. And Aris-
tophanes *^ well expresses, how the bulk of the
people were disposed toward him ;

They love, tliey hate, but cannot live without him.

And he still more severely satirises him by the fol-
lowing allusion :

Nurse not a lion's whelp within your walls ;
But, if he is brought up there, sooth the brute.

■'° Both cities and private persons had of old their ensigns, devices,
or fu-ms. Those of the Athenians were commonly Minerva, the
owl, or the olive. None but people of figure were allowed to
bear any devices ; nor even they, until they had performed some
action to deserve them ; in the mean time, their shields were plain
white. Virgil applies the parniaque inglorius alba to the piimcrvus
i^lelcnor (i?iln, ix. SiS., where however see Heyne). Alcibiades,
in his device, referred to the beauty of his person and his martial
prowess. INIottos, too, were used. The shield of Capaneus, for
instance, exhibited a naked man with a torch in his hand, and was
inscribed ' I will burn the city.' See more in yEschyl. EtI* iiti
€);j?., and in Eurip. *c(n(r(r. (L.)

M. Ricard endeavours to account for some discrepancies in these
tragedians, by supposing that the first has assigned them their new
devices, assumed for the siege of Thebes, while the latter has left
them in possession of their old ones. On some medals of Diocle-
tian we find a lion, with a thunderbolt in his mouth ; which may
illustrate, though it docs not justify, Malherbe's line- —
Prcnds tajhudre, Louis, et va covime wi lion*

*' Ran. v. 4-. This passage, which will remind the reader of
Martial's famous

Nee possum tecum vivere, nee sine ie,
is erroneously put into the mouth of Pericles by Val. Max. vii. 2.
sect. 7.*

13* ALCIBIADES.

His prodigious liberality indeed, the games which
he exhibited, and the other extraorcHnary instances
of his munificence to the people, the glory of his
ancestors, the beauty of his person, and the force of
his eloquence, together with his heroic strength, his
valour, and experience in war, so gained upon the
Athenians, that they connived at his errors, and
spoke of them with all imaginable tenderness, calling
them sallies of youth and good-humoured frolics.
Such were his confining Agatharchus the painter*^,
until he had pain-ted his house, and then dismissuig
him with a handsome present ; his giving a box on
the ear to Taureas, who exhibited games in opposi-
tion to him, and vied with him for the preference ;
and his taking one of the captive Melian women for
his mistress, and bringing up a child which he had
by her. These were what they called, his ' good-
humoured frolics.' But surely we cannot bestow
that appellation upon the slaughtering of all the
males in the isle of Melos^^, wlio had arrived at
years of puberty, which was in consequence of a
decree that he promoted. Again, when Aristophon "*"*
had painted the courtesan Nemea with Alcibiades in
lier arms, many of the people eagerly crowded to
see it ; but the elder Athenians were highly dis-
pleased, and considered these as sights fit only for

<*- This painter had been familiar with Alcibiades' mistress. (L.)
See Deinosth. in Mid., when he Hkewise mentions the insult offered
to Taureas, and observes that there was then no law to punish
such outrages.*

^^ The isle of Melos, one of the Cyclades and a colony of Lace-
dirmon, was blockaded by Alcibiades, at the head of ;5f) ships and
3,000 men (01. xc. 4.), and, by the help of a reinforcement
under Philocrates, taken the year following. Thucydides, who has
p,iven us an account of this slaughter of the Melians, (v. 1 l-l- — 116.)
makes no mention of the decree. He might be desirous to have
the carnage thought the effect of a sudden transport in the soldiery,
jiod not of a deliberately cruel resolution of the ])eople of Athens.

■*■* Athen^^eus xii. 9. calls this artist Aglaophon, and tells the
fitory somewhat differently. M. Ricard judiciously commends the
feL-lings of the old Athenians, and quotes Plato's Utopian law on
ttic subject, that ' no painter should spend upon a picture nioro
than three days.'*

1

ALCIBIADES. 135

a tyrant's court, and as insults upon tkc laws of
Athens. Neither was it ill observed by Archestratus,
" that Greece could not bear another Alcibiadcs."
When Tinion the misanthroi)e saw Alcibiades, after
having gained his point, conducted home with
great honour from the place of assembly, he did
not shun him, as he did other men ; but went up to
him, and shaking him by the hand, said, " Go on,
" my brave boy, and pros}7er ; for your prosperity
" will bring on the ruin of all this crowd.*' This
occasioned various reflexions ; some laughed, others
railed, and others vrere extremely moved by the
saying. 80 various were the judgements formed of
Alcibiades, on account of the inconsistency of his
character.

In the time of Pericles^', the Athenians had a
iongiug for Sicily ; and, after his death, they at-
tempted it: frequently, under pretence of succour-
ing their allies, sending aids of men and money to
such of the Sicilians as were attacked by the Syra-
cusans. These were steps to greater armaments.
But Alcibiades inflamed this desire to an irresistible
degree, and persuaded them not to attempt the
island in part and by little and little, but to send a
powerful fleet entirely to subdue it. He then in-
spired the people with ho})es of lofty things, and
indulged himself in expectations still more extrava-

''^ Pericles, b}' his prudence and authorifr, had restrained tills
extravagant ambition of the Athenians. He died (01. Ixxxvii.
4.) in the third year of the I'eloponuesian war. Two years- after-
ward, the Athenians sent some ships to llhegium, which were to
proceed thence to tlie succour of the Leontines, then attacked by
tlie SyracLisans. The year following, tliey despatched a larger
itumber ; and two years after that, another fleet of a still superior
force : but the Sicilians having put an end to their division?, and
by the advice of Ilermocrates (whose speech Thucydides, in his
fourth book, gives us at large) having sent back tlie fleet, the
Athenians were so enraged at their generals for not having con-
quered Sicily, that they banished two of them, l^jthodorus and
Sophocles, and laid a heavy fine upon Eurymedun. So infatuated
were tlsey by their prosperity, that they imagined themselves irre-
.-istible 1

136 ALCIBIADES.

gant : for he did not, like the rest, consider Sicily
as the end of his wishes, but rather as an introduc-
tion to the miglity expeditions which he had con-
ceived. So tliat while Nicias was dissuading the
people from the siege of Syracuse, as a business too
difHcult to achieve, Alcibiades was dreaming of
Carthage and of Lybia : and, after these were gain-
ed, he projected the seizure of Italy and Pelopon-
nesus, regarding Sicily as little more than a maga-
zine for provisions and warlike stores.

The young men immediately entered into his
schemes, and listened with the utmost attention to
those, who under the sanction of age related won-
ders concerning expeditions to Sicily ; so that many
of them sat whole days in the places of exercise,
drawing in the dust the figure of the island, and
plans of Libya and Carthage. We are informed
however that Socrates the philosopher, and Melon
the astronomer, were far from expecting that these
w^ars would turn to the advantasre of Athens. The
former, it should seem, was inspired with some pro-
phetic notices by the Genius ^^' who attended him ;
while the latter, influenced either by reasonings
which led hira to fear what was to come, oi else by
some divination connected with his art. feigned him-
self mad, and seizing a flaming torch attempted to
set his house on fire. Others say that he counter-
feited no such thing, but burned down his house in
the night, and in the morning went and entreated
the people to excuse his son from that campaign,
that he mii ht be a comfort to him under his mistbr-
tune. By this lu'tifice he imposed upon them, and
gained his point.

Nicias, much against his inclination, was appointed
one of the generals ; for he would have declined the
command, had it been only on account of his hav-

*5 Upon the subject of this Genius, Plutarch composed a scpa-
r;iti- treatise. Of the motives imputed to Meton there can be Httle
«l()ubt, from his general train of thinking, that he himself adopted
the first.*

ALCIBIADES. 137

ing such a collegue. The Athenians, however,
thought the war avouIcI be better conducted, if they
decHned giving entire scope to the impetuosity of
Alcibiadcs, and tempered his boldness with the pru-
dence of Nicias. For as to the third general Lama-
chus, though well advanced in years, he did not
seem to fall at all sliort of Alcibiades in heat and
temerity.

When they came to deliberate about the number
of the troops, and the necessary preparations for the
armament. Nicias again opposed their measures and
endeavoured to prevent the war. But Alcibiades
replying to his arguments ^^ and carrying all before
him, the orator Demostratus proposed a decree, that
the ffenerals should have the absolute direction of
the war and of all the preparations for it. When
the people had given their assent, and every thing
was ready for setting sail, unlucky omens occurred
in the particulars of the festival, which was at that
time celebrated. It was the feast of Adonis ^^ ; the
women walked in procession with images, which re-
presented the dead carried out to burial, acting the

-•^ These speeches, preserved or constructed by Thucyd. vi. 9—
18., well deserve perusal for the beautiful manner in which they
display the wise and cautious measures of the first, and the rash and
arrogant impetuosity, the vis consili expers, of the latter.*

"♦s On the feast of Adonis (who, from a close comparison of the
circumstances connected with their festivals, seems to has'e been the
same with the Osiris or Bacclms of the ancients) all the cities put
themselves in mourning ; coffins were exposed at every door ; the
statues of Venus and Adonis were borne in procession, with' certain
vessels full of earth, in wh'ch they had raised corn, herbs, and
lettuce, and these vessels were called * the gardens of Adonis.'
After the ceremony was overj they were thrown into the sea or some
river. This festival was celebrated throughout all Greece and
iEgypt, and among the Jews too, when they degenerated into ido-
latry, as we learn from Ezi k. viii. 14<. ' And behold there sat wo-
men weeping for Tammuz,' that is, Adonis. (L.) Hence Milton's

Smooth Adonis from his native rock

Kan purple to the sea, supposed with blood

Of Tammuz yearly wounded. (P. L. i. 452.)

But see Ricard vi loc, Herod, ii. 48., &c.*

135 ALCIBIADES.

Limcntations, and singing the mournful dirges usuaT
on such occasions.

Add to this the mutilating and disfiguring of al-
most all the statues of Mercury '-^j which happened
in one night; a circumstance that alarmed even
those, who had long despised things of this nature.
It was imputed to the Corinthians, of Avhom the Sy-
racusans were a colony ^^ ; and they were reported
to have done it, witli the hope that sucli a prodigy
might induce tlie Atlienians to suspend at least, and
perhaps wholly to decline the war. But the people
paid little regard to tliis insinuation, or to the dis-
courses of those who said that tliere was no ill pre-
sage in what liad happened, and that it was merely
the wild frolic of a parcel of young fellows, flushed
with wine and bent on some extravagance. Indig-
nation and fear made them consider this event not
only as a bad omen, but as the consequence of a plot
directed to greater matters ; and therefore both se-
nate and people assembled several times within a few
days, and bestowed upon every suspicious circum-
stance the strictest examination.

In the mean time, the demagogue Androcles pro-
duced some slaves and sojourners, who accused
Alcibiades and his friends of having defaced some
other statues, and mimicked the sacred jMysteries in
one of their drunken revels : upon which occasion
(they said) one Theodorus represented the herald,
]*o]vtion the torch-bearer, and Alcibiades the hiii-h-
priest; his other companions attending as persons
initiated, and being thence denominated Mysta3.
Such was the import of the deposition of Thessalus

*'^ Tlie Athenians had statues of Mercur}' at the doors of their
Iiouses, innde like terniinrd iigurcs of stones of a cul)ical form, (L.)
and surmounted with heads of that deity. From them Pansanias
says (iv. 33.) this form was borrowed by the rest of the (ireeks.
'i'iic mutilation spoken of below was anterior to this, and is men-
tioned by Tliucyd. vi. 2S.*

^° Sent out under Archias, one of the Heraclida?. Tbucyd. vi.
:i. Srrabo v.*

ALCIBIADES. W.)

tli€ son of CImon,who accused Alcibiades of impiety
toward the goddesses Ceres and Proserpine. The
people being much provoked at Alcibiades, and
Androcles his bitterest enemy exasperating them
still more, he was at first somewhat disconcerted.
]3ut when he perceived that the seamen and sol-
diers intended for the Sicilian expedition were on his
side, and heard a body of Argives and Mantineans
consisting of a thousand men declare, that they
were willing to cross the seas and to run the risk of
a foreign war for his sake; but that if any injury
M'Cre done to him, they would immediately march
liome again, he recovered his spirits, and made his
appearance to defend himself. It was now his ene-
mies' turn to be discouraged, and to fear that the
people, on account of the need which they had of
him, would be favourable in their sentence. To pre-
vent this, they persuaded certain orators not reputed
to be his enemies, but as ill-affected to him as the
most professed ones, to suggest to the people, " The
absurdity of causing a general who was invested
with a discretionary power and a very important
command, when the troops were collected and
the allies all ready to sail, to be detained while
they were casting lots forjudges, and filling the
" Qjlasses'' with water to measure out the time of his
*• defence. In the name of the gods let him sail,
'•' and at the conclusion of the war stand account-
" able to the laws, which will still be the same."

ii

'3

•" Clepsydras, or water-clocks, were used in the public tribunals
at Athens, to limit the diribsion of their advocates. These were
stopped, during the depositions of witnesses, by an officer selected
for that purpose from tlie inferior classes of the people. See Pollux
viii. 9. sect. 113. ^■Eschines (In Ctesiph.) informs us that, in causes
relative to the infraction of the laws, the water was divided into
tin-ee parts; one for the accuser, the citation of the laws, and the
state ; anotiier for the accused, and his witnesses ; and a third, if
he was not acquitted by tlie first decision, for the judges. Upon
whicli iM. de Tourreil remarks that, in criminal prosecutions, the
judges pronounced two verdicts; the firrt on the guilt, and the
othtr on the penalty.*

<c
a

ec
<C

<e

fl-ft ALCIBIADES.

Alclbiadcs casilv saw their malicious drift in seek-
ing to put off tlie trial, and observed, " That it
would be an intolerable hardship to leave such
accusations and calumnies behind him, and to be
sent out with so important a commission, while
he was in suspense as to his own fate. That he
ought to suffer death, if he could not clear himself
of the charge; but if lie could prove his inno-
cence, justice required that he should be set free
from all fear of false accusers, before they de-
spatched him against their enemies." But he
could not obtain that favour. He was immediately
ordered to set sail ^'^ ; which he accordingly did, to-
gether with his collegues, having under them nearly
one hundred and forty galleys, five thousand one
hundred heavy-armed soldiers, and about one thou-
sand three hundred archers, slingers, and other
light-armed forces, with suitable provisions and
stores.

Arriving on the coast of Italy, he landed at
Khegium. There he gave his opinion, as to the
manner of conducting the war, in which he was op-
posed by Nicias : but Lamachus agreeing with him,
he sailed to Sicily, and made himself master of Ca-
tana". This was all that he performed, being soon
summoned by the Athenians to take his trial. At
first, as we have observed, there was nothing against
him but slight suspicions, and the depositions of
slaves and persons who sojourned in Athens. But
hi^, enemies took advantage of his absence to bring

S' 01. xci.2; the seventeenth year of the Poloponncsian war.

^* l^y surprise. Thvieyd. vi. 51. Upon this inagniticent and well-
equipped fleet, see the same historian, ib. '51. 43. He likewise
Rays, that Nieias gave his opinion first, in whieh he was opposed
by Aleibiades ; and that Laniaehus had originally a project dif-
ferent from both, but at last joined with Aleibiades. Polysenus
(i. 40. sect. 4.) relates the stratagem, by wliich he got possession of
(Jatana ; and Frontinus (iii. 2.) informs us, that he seized Agrigen-
tLun ill the same manner. As a farther proof also of his subtilty,
it appears on the authority of both these writei's, that he took by
stratagem one of the forts of Syracuse.*

ALCIBIADES. 14.1

new matter of impeachment, adding to tlie mutilat-
ing of the statues Jiis saciilegious behaviour with re-
spect to the Mysteries, and alleging tliat both these
crimes tlowed Irom the same source^*, a conspiracy
to change the govennnent. All that were accused,
of being in any way concerned in it, they connnitted
to prison unheard ; and repented exceedingly, that
they had not immediately brought Alcibiades to hi^
trial, and got him condemned uj)on so heavy a
charge. "While this fury lasted, every relation and
friend and acquaintance of his was very severely
treated by the people.

Thucydides^^ has omitted the names of the accu-
sers, but others mention Dioclides and Tcuccr. 80
Phrynichus, the comic poet.

Good Herme?, pray beware a fall ; nor break
Th)' marble nose, lest some false Dioclides
Once more his shafts in fatal poison drench.

iMeuc. I will: Nor e'er again shall that informer
Teiicer, that faithless stranger, boast from me <
Rewards for perjuiy.

No clear or strong evidence, indeed, was given
by the informers. One of them, being asked how
he could distino'uish the fiices of those who distio-ured
the statues, answered, that he discerned them by
the light of the moon ; which was an obvious false-

S-* They gave oat, that he liad entered into a conspiracy to be-
tray the city to the Laceda?monians, and that he had persuaded the
Argives to undertake something to their prejudice.

5i Yet he mentions Androcles (viii.65.) as one of Alcibiades'
most vehement foes, and with him Pythonicns is associated by An-
docides. The successive infsjrmers, as given by M. Ric u'd, were
Andromachus (one of xllcibiades' slaves), Teuccr of "vlegara, who
included himself but not Alcibiades in his accusation, Agariste,
wife of Alcmajonidcs, and Lydus, a slave of Pliereclus. Teucer
received, in return, a thousand draclimas from the people. Dio-
clides produced one of his skives, who declared that lie had seen by
n)ooulight more than three hundred men employed in mutilating the
statues, of v/hom he named forty, and among them Andocides
with his father and many ot' his family; but, having been con-
victed of falsehood by Andocides, the accuser was himself sta-
tenced to death."*

9

U'J ■ ALCIBIADKS.

hood, for it was done at the time of the mdon's
change. Every intelligent person exclaimed against
such baseness, but this detection did not in the
least pacify the people : they proceeded with the
same rage and violence with \vhich tiiey had begun,
taking informations and committing to prison all
"whose names were given in.

Among those who were then imprisoned, in order
to be brought to their trial, was the orator Ando-
cides, whom Hellanicus the historian represents a-r
one of the descendents of Ulysses. He was thougiit
to be no friend to a popular government, but a
favourer of oligarchy. Vv'hat contributed not a
little to his being suspected of having some concern
in defacing the Hermse was, that the great statue of
Mercury placed near his house, being consecrated
to that god by the tribe ^-Egeis, was almost the
only one, among the more remarkable, which was
left entire. It is therefore to this day universally
called ' the Hermes of Andocides/ though the in-
scription does not authorise that title.

It happened that among his brother-prisoners
Andocides contracted an acquaintance and friend-
s^hip with one Tima^us ^^ ; a man not equal in rank
to himself, but of uncommon parts and a daring
spirit. This person advised Andocides to accuse
himself, and a few more; because the decree pro-
mised impunity to any one who should confess and
inform, whereas the event of the trial was uncertain
to all, and much to be dreaded by such of them as
were persons of distinction. He represented to him,
that it was better to save his life by a falsity, than
to suffer an infamous death as one really guilty of
the crime ; and that, with respect to the public, it

^^ The name of this man, and the event of the accusation which
he suggestL'd, Plutarch appears to have given vith less than hh
usual correctness : as no Timaeus is mentioned by Tlmcyd. (vi,
ti7., &c.) ; and Andocides himself declares, that his adviser was his
<H)usin Charmides, and that he only accused four citizens, who
t^lnded their seuteace of banisliment by voluntary thght.*

12

ALCIBIADES. US

would be an advantage to give up a few persons of
dubious character, in order to rescue many good
men from an enraged populace.

By these arguments of Timeeus Andocides suf-
fered Inmself to be persuaded, and informing against
himself and some others, enjoyed the impunity
promised by the decree; but all those whom he
named were capitally punished, except a few that
iled. Nay, to procure the greater credit to his de-
position, he accused even his own servants.

The fury of the people, howevcj', was not yet sa-
tisfied ; but turning from the persons who had dis-
figured the Hermae, as if it had rested a while only
to recover it's strength, it fell totally upon Alci-
biades. At last they sent the Salaminian galley to
fetch him, artfully ordering their officer not to use
violence or to lay hold on his person ; but to behave
to him with civility, and to acquaint him with the
people's orders that he should go and take his trial,
and clear himself before them. For they were ap-
prehensive of some tumult and mutiny in the army,
now that it was in an enemy's country ; which
Alcibiades, had he been so disposed, might have
raised with the utmost ease. The soldiers indeed
expressed much uneasiness at his leaving them,
and expected that the wai' would be protracted to a
considerable length by the dilatory counsels of
Nicias, when the spur was taken away. For though
Lamachus was vigorous and brave^ he was deficient,
on account of his poverty''", both in weight and
dignity.

Alcibiades immediately embarked ^^ : the conse-
quence of w'hich w^as, that the Athenians could not
take Messena. There were persons in the town,
whom Alcibiades perfectly knew to be ready to foe-
s' How dilTerent from these were the Athenians in the'days of
Aristides; when poverty, far from operatijig as an objection, gave
an advantage to the character, and rendered it more respectable.*

58 He prudently embarked on a vessel of hia own, and not on
the SaliCniinian ga'lej,

141. ALCIBIADES.

tray it ; and as lie apprised some that were friends
to the SyracLisans of their intention, tlie aftair mis-
carried.

As soon as lie arrived at Thurii, lie M'ent on shore,
and concealing himself there, eluded the search
which was made after him. But some person know-
ing him, and saying, " AVill you not then trust your
" country?" he answered, " As to any thing else,
*' I will trust her ; but with my lifu I would not
" trust even my mother, lest she should mistake a
*' black bean for a white one." Being afterward
told, that the republic had condemned him to die,
he said ; " But I will show them, that I am alive."

The information ai>ainst him ran thus : " Thes-
salus the son of Cimon, of the ward Lacias, ac-
cuseth Alcibiades the son of Clinias, of the ward
Scambonis, of sacrilegiously offending the goddesses
Ceres and Proserpine, by counterfeiting their Mys-
teries, and divulging them, to his companions in his
own honse. AVearing such a robe as the high-priest
does, while he shows the hoi}' things, he called
himself high-priest, Polytion torch-bearer, and Theo-
dorus of the ward Phygea herald ; and the rest of
his companions he called Mystav'^, and ' Brethren
of tlie secret':: in this acting contrary to tlie rules
and ceremonies established bv the EumolDidcje*"^, the

59 The Myshe, or ' persons initiated,' were to remain a year
under probation, during which time they were to go no farther
than tlie vestibule of the temple, and only partooi< of the inferior
Mysteries; they were then CcxWod Epoplcr, and admitted to all the
Mysteries, except such as were reserved for the priests. (L.) The
intervening twelvemonth was a period of continued darkness,
anxiety, and terror. The third and final ceremony threw open to
the selected ^'iw the doors of the sanctuary, and showed them the
goddess in all her glory.*

"5° Eumolpus, a native of Thrar-e who settled at Eleusis, was
tl^e first mIu) instituted or arrtuiged th.ese .Alysteries of Ceres, for
which reason his desccndents had the cave of them after him ; and,
on the firilure of Iiis line, those who succeeded in the fui'ction were
likewise called iA'."U)lpid^r. (L.) See Pausan. i. 38. Of the exe-
cration, mentioned below, the form is preserved by Lysias in his
or;vtion against Andocides, who was implicated with Al4:ibiadcs ia
the accusation.*

ALCIBIADES. 145

lieralds and priests at Eleusis." As he did not make
his appearance, they condemned him, confiscated
his goods, r.nd ordered all the priests and priestesses
to denounce an execration against him ; which was
accordingly done bv all but Theano the dauoiiter of
Menon, priestess of tJie temple of Agraulos, who
excused lierself, alleging that " she was a priestess
*' for prayer, and not for execration."

While these decrees and sentences were passing
against Alcibiades, he was at Argos ; having quitted
Thurii, to take refiii^e in Peloponnesus. Still how-
ever dreading his enemies, and giving up ail hopes
of being restored to his country, he sent to Sparta ;
soliciting permission to live there under the pro-
tection of the public faith, and promir.ing to serve
them with more efiect, than he had formerly an-
noyed them wiiile he was their enemy. The Spar-
tans granting him a safe conduct, and expressing
their readiness to receive him, he went thither with
pleasure. One tiling he presently brought about,
which was to procure succours for Syracuse without
farther hesitation or delay ; having stimulated them
to send thither Gylippus'^'', to take upon him the
direction of tlie war, and to crush the Athenian
powTr in Sicily. He next persuaded them to declare
war against the Athenians at home; and the third,
and most important of his counsels w-as, to fortify
Decelea ; for this, being in the neigiibourliood of
Athens, was productive of great mischief to that
commonwealth'^-.

^^ TluicydidcR (vii. 27.) dors not introduce this celebrated gene-
ral's name in the speech, which he puts into Alcibiades' mouth
upon the occasion.*

^- Agis king of Snarta, at tlie head of a numerous army of La-
cedajmonians, Corintliians, and other nations of Peloponnesus, in-
vaded Attica, and according to the advice which Alcibiades had
given, seized and fortified Decelea (01. xci. 4-.) ; uhich stood
at an equal distance from Athens and the frontiers of Bteotia, and
by means of which the Athenians were at once deprived of the
silver-mines, of the rents of their lands, and of the succours of
their neighbours. It farther exposed their flocks to the rapacity of

VOL. ir. L

lie ALCIBIADES.

These measures procured Alcibiades the public
approbation at Sparta, and he was not less admired
for liis inanuer of living in private. By conforming
to their diet, and other austerities, he charmed and
capti\ated tiie people. When they saw him close
shaved, bathi)ig i)i cold water, feeding on their
coarse bread or eating their black broth, they could
hardly beiievc that such a man had ever kept a cook
ill his house, seen a ])erfumer, or worn a robe of
Milesian purple. It seems, that among his other
qualifications, he had the very extraorcbnary art of
engaging the affections of those, with whom he
conversed, by imitating and adopting their customs
and way of living. Nay, he turned liimself into all
manners of forms with more ease, than the chamiC-
leon changes his colour. It is not in that animal's
power, we are told, to assume a white '^^ ; but Alci-
biades could adapt himself either to good or bad,
and did not find any thing which he attemj)ted im-
practicable. Thus at Sparta he was all for e^:ercise«
frugal in his diet, and severe in his manners. In
Asia, he was as much for mirth and pleasure, luxury
and ease. In Thrace, riding and drinking were his
favourite amusements : and in the palace of Tisa-
pliernes, the Persian grandee, he outvied the Per-
sians themselves in pomp and splendour. Not that
he could with so much ease change his real man-

foragcrs, and afTorded a secure asylum to their runaway slaves, of
nhoni more than 20,000 (chit^fly useful artists) are said to have
taken ri'hice in that place. But the jirincipal misfortune which
h;n>pened to the Athenians, from the be^inninc: of the war, was
lluU which li'jfel them this year in Sicil}' ; where they not only lost
the object of their expedition, t.cyether wit!i the reputation which
they had so long maintained, but their Heet, t])eir army, and tl;eir
generals.

^i This proj)erty of the chameleon (an aniiual, by liuftbn called
• the least of the pliilosopher') is attested by modern naturaiist.s,
though it does not appear that it always adapts it's hue to that of
tlic neighbouring objects. That among other colours however it
can occasionally assume a white, or rather ' a lighlish colour,' is
attested by ^iilian ii. l^., as well as by later observation's.- See
llDrdouin's notes on Plin. H. N, viii. 33.*

12

ALCIBIADES. 14?

ners, or approve in liis lieart tlie form v»'hlcli he as-
SLimed ; but, because he knew that his native man-
ners would be unacceptable to those witli whom he
happened to live, he inmicdiatcly conformed to the
■ways and fashions of whatever place he visited.
When he was at LacedtEition, if vou reo-arded onlv
his outside, you would say (with the proverb) " This
i*^ not the son of Achilles, but Achilles himself!'*
This man has surely been brought up under the
eye of Lycurgus^^ But then, if you looked more
jiearly into his disposition and his actions, you
would exclaim

Tlie same weak woman still '^^l

For, while king Agis was employed in a distant
expedition, he corrupted his wife Tim?ea so effectu-
ally, that she was with child by him, and did not
pretend to deny it ; and when she was delivered of
a son, though in public she called him Leotychidas,
yet in her own house she whispered to her female
friends and to her servants, that his true name was
Alcibiades: to such a degree was the woman trans-
ported by her passion. And Alcibiades himself,
indulging his vein of mirth, used to say; " His
motive was not to injure the king, or to satisfy
his appetite, but that his offspring might one day
" sit upon the throne of Lacedaemon.'* Agis had
information of these matters from several hands,
and he was the more ready to give credit to them,
because they ao-reed v;ith the time. For he had
(juitted his wife's chamber, in consequence of being
terrified by an earthquake, and had not returned
thitlier for the ensuing ten months j at the end of

<5-* During the life of their legislator, the Spartans most rigidly
observed his austere code of laws, but relaxed after his death.*

"5 This is spoken by Electra of Helen, in the Orestes of Eu-
ripides, u})oii her discovering the same vanity and sohcitude about
her beauty, when advanced in years, which she had shown, when
young.

L 2

us ALCIBIADE55.

which Leotychidas being born, he declared the
chihl was not his; and, for this reason, he was never
suffered to inherit the Spartan crown.

After the miscarriage of the Athenians in Sicily,
the people of Chios, of Lesbos, and of Cyzicum sent
to treat with the Spartans about quitting the interests
of Athens, and putting themselves under the protec-
tion of Sparta. The Ba?otians upon this occasion
solicited for the Lesbians, and Pharnabazus for the
people of Cyzicum ; but at the persuasion of Alci-
biades,. succours were sent to those of Chios before
all others ^. He likewise passed over inio Ionia,
and prevailed with almost the whole of that country
to revolt ; and, attending the Lacedaemonian gene-
rals in the execution of most of their commissions,
he did considerable prejudice to the Athenians.

But Acfis, who was alreadv his enemv on account
of the injury done to his bed, could not endure his
renown ; for most of the present successes were as-
cribed to Alcibiades. The great and the ambitious
among the Spartans were indeed, in general, touched
with envy ; and had iniiuence enough with the civil
magistrates, to procure orders to be sent to their
friends in Ionia to kill him. But he calmly fore-
seeing his danger, and cautioned by his fears, in all
his steps still served the Lacedaemonians, though he
took care at the same time not to put himself into their
power. Instead of that, he sought the protection of
Tisaphernes, one of the grandees of Persia or lieuten-
ants of the king. With this Persian he soon attained
the highest credit and authority : for, being himself a
very subtile and insincere man, he admired the art and
keenness of Alcibiades. By the elegance of his con-
'versation, and indeed the charms of his politeness,
every man was gained, every heart was captivated.
Even those, who feared and envied him, were not in-
sensible to pleasure in his company ; and, while they
enjoyed it, their resentment was disarmed. Tisapher-

*<^ See Til Lie vd. viii. 5., &c.*

ALCIBIADES. 149

nes in all other instances savage in his temper, and the
bitterest enemy that Greece ever found among the
Persians, gave himself up so entirely to the attention
of Alcibiades, that he even vied with and exceeded
liim in flattery. For of all his gardens that which ex-
celled in beantv, Vvhich was remarkable tor the salu-
brity of it's streams and the freshness of it's meadows,
M'hich was set off with paviHons royally adorned ^"^ and
retirements finished in the most elegant taste, he dis-
tinguished by the name of ' Alcibiades ;' and every
one continued to give it that appellation.

Rejecting therefore the interests of Lacedgemon,
and fearing that people as treacherous to him, he
represented them and their king Agis in a disadvan-
tageous light to Tisaphernes : and advised him nei-
ther to give any effectual assistance, nor absolutely
to ruin the Atlienians, but to send his subsidies to
Sparta with a sparing hand : that so the two powers
might insensibly weaken and consume each other,
and both at last be easily subjected to the king. Ti-
saphernes readily followed his counsels, and it was
evident to all the world that he held him in the
greatest admiration and esteem ; which made him
equally considerable with the Greeks of both parties.
The Athenians repented of the sentence, which they
had passed upon him, because they had suffered for
it since : and Alcibiades on his side was under some
fear and concern lest, if their republic were destroyed,
he should fall into the hands of his Lacedaemonian
foes.

At that time, the whole strength of the Athenians
lay at Samos. With their ships sent out thence, they
recovered some of the towns which had revolted,
and others they retained in their duty ; and at sea
they were in some measure able to make head
against their enemies. But they were afraid of Tisa-

^' For the princely stile, in which these viceroys of Asia iNIinor
lived and dwelt, see Xenoph. (E;i>i^v, iv.) where he describes Phar-
nabazus' palace at Dascylus in Ionia.*

9

150 ALCIBIADES.

phcrncs;, and thePh(riucIa.nficet of aluindred and fifty
hhi})s, wJiicJi were said to be advancing against tlicm ;
for against sucli a force they couid not ho])e to
defend themselves. Alcibiades, apprised of this,
privately sent a messenger to the principal Athe-
nians at Samos, to give them hopes tliat he would
procure for them the friendship of Tisaphernes : not
to recommend himself to the people, whom he could
not trust ; but to oblige the nobilitv, if thev would
only exert their superiority, repress the insolence
of the commonalty, and taking the government
into their own hands save themselves and their
country '^^.

All the officers readily embraced his proposal,
except Phrynichus, who was of the ward Dirades.
He alone suspecting (what was really the case) that it
was a matter of very little consequence to Alcii)iades,
whether an oligarchy or a democracy prevailed in
Athens ; that it was his business, to get himself re-
called by any means whatever ; and that therefore,
by his invectives against the people, he only sought
to insinuate himelf into the good graces of the no-
bility, resisted his suggestions. Seeing that his opi-
nion however Mas disregarded, and that Alcibiades
must certainly become his enemy, he gave secret
intelligence to Astyochus, the Spartan admiral, of
the double part which Alcibiades was acting, advising
Jiim to beware of his designs and to secure his person.
JBut he knew not that, while he was thus betraying,
he was himself betrayed. For Astyochus, seeking
to make his court to Tisaphernes, infornied Alcibi-
ades, who be knew had the ear of that giandee, of
the whole affair,

Alcibiades immediately despatched proper persons
to Samos, with an accusation against Plnynichus ;
xvho seeing no other resource, as every body was

<5S The whole of this account of Alcibiades' intrigiirs, to procure
hie recal to Athens, is chiefly abridaed from Thucvdidcs, viii, 15.^
&c.* '

ALCIBIADES. 151

against liim and expressed the utmost indignation at
\m behaviour, attempted to cure one evil by a
greater. For he sent to Astyochus to complain of
Jiis having revealed his secret, and to offer to deliver
up to him the wliole Athenian fleet and army. This
treason of Phrynicinis Jiowever did no injury to the
Athenians, because it was again betrayed by Astyo-
clius; for he laid the whole matter before Alcibiacles.
Phrynichus had the sagacity to foresee, and expect
another accusation from. Alcibiadcs; and to be before-
hand with him, he himself forewarned the Athenians,
that the enemy would endeavour to surprise them :
and he therefore desired them to be upon their
guard, to keep on board their ships, and to fortify
their camp.

While the Athenians were doing this, letters came
a second time from Alcibiades, advising them to be-
ware of" Phrynichus, who had undertaken to betray
their fleet to the enemy : but they ^ave no credit to
these despatches, supposing that Alcibiades, who
perfectly knew the preparations and intention? of
the enemy, abused that knowledge to the raising
of such a caliunnv ao-ainst Phrynichus. Yet after-
ward, when Phrynichus was stabbed in full assembly
by one of Mermon's soldiers who kept guard that
day, tlie Atlienians taking cognisance of the matter
after his death, condennied Phryjiicljus as guilty of
treason, and ordered Plermon and his party to be
crowned for having killed a traitor''-'.

The friends of Alcibiades, w-ho had now the pre-
dominant interest at Samos, sent Pisander to Athens
to change the form of government, by encouraging
the nobility to assume it, and to deprive the people
of their power and privileges, as the condition upon
which Alcibiades would procure them the friendship
and alliance of" Tisaphernes, This was the pretext
adopted by those, who sought to introduce an oli-

*' See Tliiicyd. viii. 92. Lycias liowevor, and Lyf.-tirgus the
cvMtor, Give diftcrcnt account? of this aflair.*

15S ALCIBIADES.

garchy. But when that body which were called the
* Five Thousand,' but in fact were only ' Four Flun-
dred ""^V had gotten the power into their haiids, they
paid little attention to Alcibiades, and carried on
the war very slowly : partly distrusting the citizens
■who did not yet relish the new form of government,
and partly hoping that the Lacedaemonians, who were
always inclined to favour an oligarchy, would not
press them with their usual vigour.

Such of the commonalty, as were at home, M^ere
reluctantly silent through fear; for a number of
those, who had openly opposed the Four Hundred,
were put to death. But, when those that were at
Samos were informed of the affair, they were highly
incensed at it, and resolved immediatelv to set sail
for the Firasus. In the first place however they sent
for Alcibiades, and having appointed him their gene-
ral, ordered him to lead them against the tyrants,
and demolish their power. Upon such an occasion
almost any othrr man, suddenly exalted by the favour
of the multitude, would have thought that he must
comply with all their humours ; and not venture in
any respect to contradict those who, from a fugitive
and an exile, had raised him to be commander-in-chief
of such a fleet and army. But he behaved as became
a great general, and prevented their plunging into
errors throuo'h the violence of their resentment.
This care of his was, evidently, the saving of the
commonwealth. For if they had sailed home, the
enemy would have immediately seized Ionia, and

"° It was at first proposed, that only tlie dregs of* the people
should lose their authority, which was to be vested iu ' five thou-
sand ' of the most wealthy, thencetbrward to be reputed the people.
But, when Pioander and his associates discovered the strength of
their party, they carried it, that the old form of government should
be dii-:solved, and that five Prytanes should be elected; that these
five f-houid choose a hundred ; that each of the hundred should
choose three ; and that the * four hundred ' thus elected should be-
come d senate with supreme power, and should consult the five
thousand only at such time and uj)oji such matters as they thought
fit. (Thucyii, viii. 67, 68.)

ALCIBIADES. 153

gained the Hellespont and the islands without strik-
ing a stroke ; while the Athenians would have been
engaged in a civil war, of which Athens itself must
have been the seat. All this was prevented chiefly
by Alcibiades, who not only tried what arguments
would do with the army in general, and informed
them of their danger ; but applied to them one by
One, using entreaties with some and force with
others : in which he was assisted by the loud ha-
rangues "^ of Thrasybulus of the ward Stira, who at-
tended him throughout the whole, and who had the
strongest voice of any man among the Athenians.

Another signal service performed by Alcibiades
was, his undertaking that the Phoenician fleet, which
the Lacedaemonians expected from the king of Persia,
should either join the Athenians, or at least not act
upon the enemy's side. In consequence of this pro-
mise, he set out as expeditiously as possi'ole, and
prevailed upon Tisaphernes not to forward the ships,
w^hich were already come as far as Aspendus ''\ but
to disappoint the Laced;Emonians. Nevertheless both
sides, and particularly the Lacedfemonians, accused
Alcibiades of having prevented that fleet from coming
to their aid ; for they supposed, that he had in-
structed the Persians to leave the Greeks to destroy
each other. And indeed it was obvious enough that
such a force, added to either side, would entirely
Iiave deprived the other of the dominion of the sea.

After this, the Four Hundred were soon dissolv-
ed '"'j the friends of Alcibiades very readily assisting

'' See Thucyd. ib. 82. 85. M. Ricard has a grave note at this
place, upon the utility of a strong pair of lungs in an army, in jus-
tification of Homer, wlio occasionally mentions a loud voice among
the accomplishments of his heroes.*

7^ A maritime city of Pamphylia between Rhodes and Cyprus.
For Tisaphernes' probable motives, upon this occasion, see Thucyd.
ib. 87.*

'3 The same year, in which they were set up, 01. xoii. 2.
The reader must carefully diistinguish this faction of Four Hunch ed
from the senate of the same numbe • established by Solon, which
•these jturned out during the few months they were in power.

15* ALCIBIADES.

those wlio were fiivourable to a democracy. And
now tiie pcoj)le in the city not only wished, but com-
manded him to return ; yet he thonglu it best to re-
turn not with empty hands, or without having effected
j^ometliing wortliy of note, but instead of being in-
debted to the compassion and favour of the multitude,
to give some eclat to his restoration. Setting sail
therefore from 8amos with a few ships, he cruised on
the sea of Cnidus and about the isle of Coos, where
he got intelligence that Mindarus, the Spartan ad-
jniral, was come with his whole fleet toward the
Hellespont in pursuit of the Athenians. This made
him hasten to the assistance of the latter, and fortu-
nately enough he arrived^"* with his eighteen ships at
the very juncture of time, when the two fleets having
engaged near Abydos continued the flght from morn-
ing until night, one side having the advantage on
the right wing and the other on the left.

Upon the appearance of his squadron, both sides
entertained a false opinion of the end of his coming;
for the Spartans were encouraged, and the Athe-
nians struck with terror. But he soon hoisted the
Athenian flag on the admiral-galley, and bore down
directly npon the Peloponnesians, who had now the
advantage and were urging the pursuit. His vigor-
ous attack put them to flight, and following thein
close he drove them ashore, destroying their ships,
and killing such of their men as endeavoured to save
themselves by swinnning : though Pharnabazus suc-
coured them as much as he could from the shore, and
with an armed force attempted to save their vessels.
The event was that the Athenians, having taken
thirty of the enemy's ships and recovered their own^
erected a trophy.

After this glorious success Alcibiades, ambitious
to show himself as soon as possible to Tisaphernes,

^■> Thucydides does not speak of this arrival of Alcibiades : hut
probably lie did not live to receive a clear account of the action,
for he died this year. It is mentioned however by Xenophon, whc>
continued his ilistorv.

ALCIBIADES. 155

prepared presents and other proper acknowledge-
ments for his friendship and hospitality, and then
^vent to wait upon him with a princely train. But
he was not welcomed in the manner, wliich he ex-
pected ; for Tisapliejnes, who for some time had been
accused by the Lacedcemonians, and was apprehen-
sive that the charge might reach tlie king's ear,
deemed the coming of Alcibiades a verv seasonable
incident; and therefore put liiai under arrest, and
confined him at Sardis, thinking that this injurious
proceeding would be a help to clear himself.

Thirty days afterv/ard, Alcibiades having by some
means or other obtained a horse, escaped from his
keepers, and iled to Ciazomenae; arjd, b}' way of re-
venge, pretended that Tisaphernes had privately set
him at liberty"'. Thence he passed to the place,
nhere the Athenians were stationed ; and being in-
ibrmed, that Mindarus and Pharnabazus were toge-
ther at Cyzicum, he showed the troops that it was
necessary for them to fight both by sea and land,
nay perhaps even with stone-walls, in order to come
at their enemies : for, if the victory were not com-
plete and universal, they could get no money. He
then embarked the forces, and sailed to Proconesus ;
where he ordered them to take the lighter vessels
into the middle of the Reet, and to have a particular
care, that the enemy might conceive no suspicion of
his coming against them. A heavy and sudden rain,
whicli happened to fall at that time, together with
(headful thunder and darkness, was of great service
in covering his operations. For not only were the
enemy ignorant of his design, but the Athenians
themselves, v.hom he had ordered in haste on board,
did not immediately perceive that he was under sail.
Soon afterward the weather cleared up, and the Pelo-
ponnesian ships were seen riding at anchor in the

'■^ For a more particular detail of the consequences of the last
action, see Xenoj)h. (^Yam^. i.) wlsose authority is, of course, in
.every respect superior to tliat of Poljo^nus (i. 40. sect. 9.) in the
circumstances in which they differ.*

15(5 ALCIBIADES.

road of Cyzicuni. Lest the enemy therefore should
be ahirmcd at the largeness of his fleet, and save
theiiiselves by getti-ng on shore, he directed many
of the officers to slacken sail and keep out of sight,
while 'he showed himself with only forty ships, and
chaltenged the Lacedaemonians to the combat. This
stratagem had it's effect; for, despising the small
nun^her of galleys which they saw, they immediately
wci!2:hed anchor and en<?af;ed : but the rest of the
Athenian ships coming up during tlie engagement,
the Lacedaemonians were, struck with terror, and
fled. Upon \Vhich Alcib-iades, with twenty of his best
ships breaking through the midst of them, hastened
to the shore, and disembarking pursued those who
fled from the ships, and slew great nuanbersof them.
He likewise defeated Mindarus and Pharnabazus,
who came to their succour. Min(hirusraade a brave
resistance, and. was slain, but Pharnabazus saved
himself by flight.

The Athenians remained masters of the dead ^^^
and of the spoils, and took all the enemies' ships.
Having also possessed themselves of Cyzicura, which
was abandoned by Pharnabazus, and deprived of the
assistance of the Peloponnesians (now almost all cut
off), they not only secured the Hellespont, but en-
tirely cleared the sea of the Lacedaemonians. The
letter also was intercepted, which in the Laconic
stile was to give the Ephori an account of their mis-
fortune. " Our glory is faded. JVlindarus is slain.
" Our soldiers are starving ; and we know not what
" step to take."

On the other hand, Alciblades' men were so elated
and took so much upon them, because they had al-
ways been victorious, that they would not vouchsafe

7^ Ol. xcii. 3. I have preserved in the word ' dead' the viKfDtt
of the original, for the sake of remarking (with M. Ilicard) the
rehgious attention paid by tlic ancients to the bodies of the deceas-
ed ; which they accounted it so disgraceful to leave unbnricd, or in
the enemies' power, that the Athenians for a neglect of the former
kind, after the battle of Arginusac, sentenced their victorious gent-
rals to deatli.*

ALCIBL\DES. 157

even to mix with other troops wliich had been some-
times beaten. It happened not long before, that
Thrasylhis having miscarried in his attempt upon
Ephesus, the Ephesians erected a trophy ot" brass iu
reproach of the Athenians''. Alcibiades' soldiers
therefore upbraided those of Tlirasyllus with this
affair, magnifying themselves and their general, and
disdaining to join the others, either in the place of
exercise or in the camp. But soon afterward, when
Pharnabazus v/ith a strong body of horse and foot
attacked the forces of Thrasyllus who were ravaging
the country about Abydos, Alcibiades marched to
their assistance, routed the enemy, anrl together
with Thrasyllus pursued them, until night. He then
admitted Thrasyllus into his company, and with
mutual civilities and satisfaction they returned to
the camp. Next day he erected a trophy, and plun-
dered the province which was under Pharnabazus,
without the least opposition. The priests and priest-
esses he made prisoners among tiie rest, but dis-
missed them without ransom. Thence he intended
to proceed and lay siege to Chalcedon "^, which had
withdrawn it's allegiance from the Athenians, and
received a Lacedaemonian garrison and governor ;
but being informed that the Chalcedonians had col-
lected their cattle and corn, and sent it all to their
Bithynian friends, he led his army to the frontier of
the Ijithynians, and despatched a herald before him

*' Trophies liad previoufly been of wood, tliat time miglit gra-
dually efface those memorials of natioiuil hostility ; but the Ephe-
sians erected this of brass, to perpetuate the Athenian infamy : and
it was this new and mortifying circumstance, with which Alcibi-
ades'soldiers reproached those of Thrafyllus. (Diod. xiii.21.) (L.)

Plutarch elsewhere states, that the Greeks did not approve those,
who first introduced into these erections tiie more duraljle materials
of stone ar.d iron, in which he is contirmed by Cicero (De luvoit.
ii. 23.) And that the iionians agreed witii them in this sentiment,
appears from a passage of Strabo iv., and Casaub, in loc, wlto
quotes Florus, iii. 2., to the same purport.*

7* A city on the riglit of the Bosporus, in passing from tlie Pro-
pontis to the Euxine sea.*

158 ALCIBIADES.

to summon them to surrender it. Tiiey, dreadin<?
his resentment, gave up the booty, and entered into
an alhance with liim.

Aiter this he returned to the siege of Chalcedon,
and enclosed it with a wall which reached from sea
to sea. Pharnabazus advanced to raise the siege ;
and Hippocrates, the governor, salhed out with his
■whole force to attack tlie Athenians. But Alcibiades
drew up his army so as to engage them both at once,
and detiiated them both ; Pharnabazus betaking him-
self to a shameful flight, and Hippocrates, w'ith a
great part of his troops, being slain in the battle.
He then sailed into the Hellespont, to raise contri-
butions in the towns upon the coast.

In this voyage, he took Selybria "^ ; but, in the
action, unnecessarily exposed himself to considera-
ble danger. The persons, who had promised to sur-
render the town to him, agreed to give him a signal
at midnight with a lighted torch; this they were
obliged to do before the time, from apprehension of
one of their accom])lices, who suddenly altered his
mind. The torch therefore being held up before the
army was ready, Alcibiades took about thirty men
wdth liim, and ran to the walls, having ordered the
rest to follow as fast as possible. The gate was im-
mediately opened to him, and twenty of the con-
spirators lightly armed having joined his small com-
pany, he advanced with great spirit ; but he soon
perceived the Selybrians, with their w^capons in their
hands, cominn; forward to attack him. As to stand
and fight promised no sort of success, and he who to
that day had liever been defeated did not choose to
i^y, he ordered a trumpet to comniand silence, and
proclamation to be made, that " the Selybrian'*
" should not, under the pain of the republic's liigli
" displeasure, take up arms against the Athenians."
This instantly damped their inclination to the com-

''* By Xcnophon called Sc-lj'Hibrin, a city of Thrace on tlie coast
of the Propoutis.*

ALCIBIADES. 15^

bat, partly from a supposition that the whole Athe-
nian army was within the walls, and partly from the
ho})es whicli they conceived of obtaining tolerable
terms. While they were jointly arranging these mat-
ters, the Athenian army arrived ; and Alcibiades,
rightly conjecturing that the inclinations of the Sely-
brians were for peace, was afraid of giving the Tin'a-
cians (who from a particular attachment to his person
had come down in considerable numbers to serve
under him as volunteers) an opportunity of plunder-
ing the town. He therefore sent them all away ; and
upon the submission of the Selybrians preserved thcni
from being pillaged, demanding only a sum of money,
and leaving a garrison in the place.

In the mean time the other generals, who were
carrying on the siege of Chalcedon, came to an
agreement with Pharnabazus upon tlie following con-
ditions : namely, that he should pay them a sum of
money, that the Chalcedonians should return to their
allegiance under the republic of Athens, and that
no injury should be done to the province of which
Pharnabazus was governor ; he undertaking, that the
Athenian embassadors should be conducted safe to
the king. Upon tne return of Alcibiades, Pharna-
bazus desired that he too would swear to the per-
formance of the articles, but Alcibiades insisted that
Pharnabazus should swear first. When the treaty
had been reciprocally confirmed by an oath, Alci-
biades went against Byzantium v^'hich had revolted,
and drew^ a line of circumvallation about the city.
AVhile he was thus employed, Anaxilaus, Lycurgus,
and some others'^" secretly promised to deliver up
the place, on condition that he would preserve it
from being ])hnidered. Upon which he caused it to
be reported, that certain weighty and unexpected
affairs called him back to Ionia, and set sail in the
■day-time with his whole fleet ; but returning at night

^° Cydon, Aiiston, and Anaxicratcs, according to Xenophon,
whom Plutarch has ah;iost exactly followed in this part of his
narrative.*

IGO ALCIBIADES.

he disembarked with the land-forces, and posting^
tliem under the walls commanded them not to make
the least noise. The ships at the same time made
for the harbour, and the crews pressing in with loud
shouts and much tumult astonished the Byzanthies,
who expected no such matter. Thus an opportunity
was given to those within the walls, who favoured the
Athenians, to receive them with the utmost security,
while every body's attention was engaged upon the
harbour and the ships.

The affair did not pass, however, v^ithout blows.
Tor the Peloponnesians, Boeotians, and Megaren-
sians, who were at Byzantium, having driven the
ships' crews back to their vessels, and perceiving that
the Athenian land-forces had advanced into the town,
charojed them likewise witii ^reat vio'our. The dis-
pute was sharp, but victory declared for Alcibiadcs
and Theramenes ; the former of whom connnanded
the right wing, and the latter the left. About three
hundred of the enemy, who survived, were taken
prisoners. Not one of the Byzantines, after the
battle, v>-as either put to death or banished ; for the
terms, upon which the town Vv^as given upv>'ere, that
the citizens should not be deprived of any part of
their property.

Hence it was that, when Anaxilaus was tried at
LacedsBmon for treason, he made a defence which
reflected no disgrace upon his past behaviour; for
he told them, " That not being a Lacedremonian
" biit a Byzantine, and seeing not Lacedaemon but
*' Bvzantium in dan<jjer — it's connnunication with
'•' those that might have relieved it stopped, and the
" Peloponnesians and Bccotians eating up the provi-
" sions that were left, while the Bvzan tines with their
*^ wives and children were starvino- — he had not be-
" trayed the town to an enemy, but delivered it from
" calamity and war : in this imitating the worthiest
'^ men among the Lacedajmonians, whose sole rule

of justice and honour was by all possible means

to serve their country." The Lacedaemonians

ALCIBIADES. 161

were so nnicii pleased with this speech, that they
acquitted him and ail that were concerned with
him.

Alcibiades now desirous to see his native country,
and still more desirous to be seen by his countrymen
after so many glorious victories, set saiP' with tlic
Athenian fleet hung round with many shields and
other spoils of the enemy ; a great number of shi})s
that he had taken makino' up the rear, and the flajrs
of manv more which he had destroved beino: carried
in triumph ; for all of them together were not fev/er
tlian two hundred. But as to what is added by Duris
the Samian (wlio boasts of his being descended
from Alcibiades), that the oars kept tinie to the flute
of Ciirysogonus, who had been victorious in the
Pythian games ; that Callipides the tragedian attired
in his buskins, magnificent robes, and other thea-
trical ornaments, gave orders to those who laboured
at the oars ; and tiiat the admiral-galley entered the
harbour with a purple sail, as if the whole had been
a drimken frolic ; these are particidars not mentioned
either by Theopompus, Ephoriis, or Xenophon '^-.
Neither is it probable that at his return from exile,
and after sueh misfortunes as he had suffered, he
would insult the Athenians by such a flirce. On the
other hand, he approached with some fear and cau-
tion ; nor did he venture to disembark until, as he
stood upon the deck, he saw his cousin Euryptolemus,
with many others of his friends and relations, com-
iuG: to receive and invite him on shore.

When he had landed, the multitude who advanced

8' By a very circuitous course, however, as we learn from Xeno-
phon ; that he might collect some phmder, and at the same time
procure farther iiiibrmation on the subject of his returning po-
pularity.*

*- As Justin and Athenaens (xii. 9.) are equally silent upon these
particulars, ne nuist conclude with Plutarch that Duris, tl)OUi;h
commended by Cicero (Ep. ad Att. vi. 1. See p. 42. not. 76.) for
liis accuracy, and supported by Diod. Sic. (xiii. 6S.) has exag-
gerated a little, in oompUment to the memoiy of his vaunted aii»
cestor.*

VOL. II. M

I6<2 ALCIBIADES.

to meet him did not vouchsafe so much as to look
upon the other generals, but crowding up to him
Jiailed him with shouts of joy, conducted him on
the way, and crowned him with garlands ; while
those that could not come up so close viewed him at
a distance, and the old men pointed him out to the
young. Many tears were mixed with the public joy,
and the memory of past misfortunes accompanied the
sense of their present success. For they concluded
that they should not have miscarried in Sicily, nor
indeed have failed in any of their views, if they had
left the direction of aflairs and the command of the
forces to Alcibiades : since now having exerted him-
self in behalf of Athens, when it had almost lost it's
dominion of the sea, was hardlv able to defend it's
own suburbs, and was moreover harassed with intes-
tine broils, he had raised it from that low and ruin-
ous condition, so as not only to restore it's mari-
time power, but to render it victorious every where
\iy land.

The act for recalling him from banishment had
been passed at the motion of Critias the son of
Callasschrus ^^, as appears from his Elegies, in whicl};
he reminds Alcibiades of his service :

If you no more in hapless exile mourn,

The praise is mine ; I scal'd your glad return.

The people presently meeting in full assembly,
Alcibiades entered, and having pathetically bewailed

*' This Critias was uncle to Plato's mother, and tlic same whom
he introduces in his Dialogues. Though now the friend of Alci-
biades, yet (as the lust of power destroys all ties) when one of the
' Thirty Tyrants,' he became his bitter enemy, and sending to Ly-
sander assured him that Athens would never be quiet, nor Sparta
safe, until Alcibiades was destroyed. Critias was afterward slain
by Thrasybulus, v/hen he delivered Athens from that tyranny. (L.)
Among other works, he composed some elegies, of which Athe-
I1.1CUS (x. y. &c. ) has preserved several fragments. Callacschrus
in it's etymology involves an oxymoron, like the English name
Onslow, in happy al!iii.ion to which the family use as their motto,
Festina lentc.*

ALCIBTADES. 163

]n^ sufferings, very modestly complained of their
treatment, ascribing all to his own hard fortune and
the influence of some envious daemon. He then
])roceeded to discuss the hopes and designs of their
enemies, against whom he used his utmost endea-
vours to animate them. AVith this harangue they
were so highly delighted, that they placed upon his
head crowns of gold, and gave him the absolute
command of their forces both by sea and land.
They likewise decreed that his estate should be
restored to him, and that the Eumolpidse and
the heralds should take ofi' the execrations, which
by order of the people they had pronounced against
him. While the rest were employed in expiations
for this purj)ose, Theodorus tlie high-priest said,
" For my part, I never denounced any curse
" against him, if he did no injury to the common-
" wealth '\"

Amidst this glory and prosperity of Alcibiades,
j;ome people were still uneasy, looking upon the
time of his return as ominous. For on that very day
was kept the Plynteria^^, or ' purification,' of the
goddess Minerva. It was the twenty-fifth of Thar-
gelion, when the Praxiergidse perform those ceremo-
nies which are not to be revealed, disrobing the
image and covering it up. Hence it is, that the
Athenians of all days reckon this the most unlucky,
and take the greatest care not to transact business
upon it. And it seemed that the goddess did not
receive him graciously, but rather with aversion,
since she hid her face from him. Notwithstanding

«* This, at such an enthusiastic moment, was an adventurous,
but a very honourable declaration ; implying that as the original
curse was conditional, it could neither fall upon the innocent, nor
be retracted or diverted from the guilty.*

85 On that day, when the statue of Minerva was * washed *
(whence the name of the festival ), the temples were encompassed
with a cord, to denote that they were shut up, as was customary
upon all inauspicious days : and dried figs were carried in procession,
because that was the first fruit which was eaten after acorns. The
I'Ciixiergidae were the ministering priests.

M 2

\6i ALCIBIADES.

all this, every thing succeeded according to his \vish ;
three hundred jrallevs Mere inanned, and readv to
put to sea again : but a hujchible zeal detained him
until the celebration of the Mysteries'"''. For after
the LacedaMuonians had fortified Decelea, which
commanded the roads to Eleusis, the teast was not
kept with it's usual pomp, because they were obliged
to conduct the procession by sea; the sacrifices,
dances, and other ceremonies performed on the
iSacred Way, while the image of Bacchus was carried
in procession, being on that account necessarily
omitted. Alcibiadcs therefore judged it would be
. an act conducive to the honour of the gods, and to
his reputation with men ''% to restore those rites to
their due solemnity, by conducting the procession
w'ith his army and guarding it against the enemy.
Thus; either king Agis would be checked and hum-
bled, if he suffered it to pass unmolested; or if he
attacked the convoy, Alcibiades would have a tight
to maintain in the cause of piety and religion, for
the greatest and most venerable of Mysteries, in the
sight of his country, and all his fellow-citizens would
be witnesses of his valour.

• When he had determined upon this, and com-
municated his design to the Eumolpida^ and the
heralds, he placed sentinels u.pon the eminences,
and sent out his advanced guard as soon as it was
light. He next took the priests, the persons initi-
ated, and those who had the charij^e of initiatinir
others; and covering them with his forces, led them
on in regular order and profound silence ; exhibiting

, s6 T'he festival of" Ceres and Proserpine continued' nine days.

On the sixth the statue of Bacchus, or liicchus, whom they supposed

to be the son of Jupitor and Cores, was carried in procession to

Eleusis. (L.) The term lacchus was also occasionally applif^d to

the hymn sung during this procession, and even to the day upon

which it took place.*

' - 87 ^^'hieh had been -considerably sullied, in a religious respect,

• by the charges relative to the nmtilatioii of the Heruiie, ar.d the

' prormation >of tlic. ^Ivstcvics brought against him in his earlier

life.* ' . •

ALCIBIADES. iS:

*

in that march a spectacle so hallowed and august
that those who did not envy him declared, he had
performed not only the oftice of a general but of a
high-priest. Not one of the enemy dared to attack
him, and lie conducted tlie procession back in safety ;
which both exalted him in his own thoughts, and
gave the soldiery such an opinion of him, that they
considered themselves as invincible while under his
command. And he gained such an influence over
the mean and indigent part of the people, that they
were passionately desirous to see him invested with
absolute power ; insomuch that some of them ap-
plied to him in person and exhorted Inm, in order
to quash the malignity of envy at once, to abohsh
the privileges of the people and the laws, and to
quell those busy spirits who would otherwise be
the ruin of the state ; for then he might direct affairs
and proceed to action, without fear of groundless
impeachments.

What opinion he himself entertained of this pror-
posal, we know not ; but the principal citizens were
so apprehensive of his aiming at arbitrary power,
that they got him to embark as soon as possible :
and, the more to expedite the matter, they ordered
amono; other thino-s that he should have the choice
of his collegues*'^ Putting to sea therefore with
a fleet of a hundred ships, he sailed to the isle of
Andros, where he fought and defeated the Andrians,
and such of the Lacedgemonians as gave them assist-
ance. But yet he did not take the city, which
furnished his enemies with the first ground for the
charge subsequently brought against him. If ever
man indeed was ruined bv the high distinction of
his character, it was Alcibiades ''^. For his continual

«8 Aristocrates and Adimantus, as Xenophon informs us; and
those only authorised to share in the command by land.*

89 It was not altogether the universality of his success, that,
rendered Alcibiades suspected, when he fell short of public ex-
pectation. The duplicity of his character is obvious from the
whole account of his life, lie paid not the least regard to veracity.

ISG ALCIBIADES.

successes had inspired such an opinion of his courage,
integrity, and capacity, that whenever he afterward
happened to fail in what he undertook, it was sus-
pected to be from want of inclination, and no one
would believe it was from want of ability ; they
thought nothing indeed too hard for him, when he
chose to exert himself. They hoped also to hear
that Chios was taken, and all Ionia reduced ; and
grew impatient, when every thing was not despatched
as suddenly as they desired. They never considered
the smallness of his supplies, and that having to carry
on the war against people who were supported by
the treasury of a great king, he was often constrained
to quit his camp, in order to procure money and
provisions.

This it was, which gave rise to the last accusation
against him. Lysander the Lacedaemonian admiral,
out of the money which he received from Cyrus,
raised the wages of each mariner from three oboli a
day to four, whereas it was with difficulty that Alci-
biades paid his men three. The latter therefore
went into Caria to raise money, leaving the fleet in
charge with Antiochus '-"^y who was an experienced
pilot indeed, but in other respects esteemed rash and
inconsiderate. For though he had been expressly
commanded by Alcibiades to let no provocation
from the enemy induce him to hazard an engage-
ment, yet in contempt of his orders, having taken
some troops on board his own galley and one more,
he stood for Ephesus where the enemy lay, and as
he sailed by the heads af their ships insulted thorn
both by words and actions in the most insuflferablc
manner. Lysander sent out a few ships to pursue
him J but, as the whole Athenian fleet came up to

in political matters; and it is not to be wondered at, that such
principles should have rendered him continuall}' obnoxious to the
suspicion of the people.

9° This was he, who caught the quail for him. (L.) Xenophon
says, that I^ysander tooic iit'teen ships ; and retired with his fleet,
after the action, to Lesbos.*

ALCIBIADES. 167

assist Antiochus, he drew out the rest of his, and
gained a complete victory. He slew Antiochus
himself, took many ships and men, and erected a
trophy. Upon this disagreeable intelligence, Alci-
biades returned to Samos, whence he moved with the
whole fleet to offer T.ysander battle. But Lysander,
content with the advantage which he had gained, did
not think proper to accept it.

Among the enemies, which Alcibiades had In the
army, Thrasybulus the son of Thrason being the
most determined quitted the camp, and went to
Athens to impeach him. To incense the people
against him, he declared in full assembly, that Alci-
biades had been the ruin of their affairs, and the
cause of losing their ships, by his insolent behaviour
in command, and by leaving the direction of every
thing. to persons who had gained the greatest credit
withhim, through the mere merit of drinking deep
and cracking seamen's jokes ; while he was securely
ranging in quest of money, indulging his love of
liquor,\>r abandoning himself to his pleasures with
tiie courtesans of Ionia and Abydos : and this at a
time, when the enemy was stationed at a small dis-
tance from his fleet. It was also objected to him,
that he had built a castle in Thrace near the city of
Bisanthe, to be made use of as a retreat for himself,
as if he either could not or would not live any
longer in his own country. The Athenians giving
ear to these accusations, to show their resentment
and dislike to him, appointed new commanders of
their forces ^'.

Alcibiades was no sooner informed of thii^^ than,
consulting his own safety, he entirely quitted the
Athenian army^-; and, having collected a band of

5" Ton in number; Conon, Dioinedon, Leontes, Pericles, Era-
sinidcs, Aristocrntes, Arcliestratus, Protoinacluit;, Thrnsylus, and
Aristogenes. (Xenoph. i.)*

9^ Taking with him a single galley, in whicli he retired to the
torts he had built, probably with the view pf making them places of
reiuge*

168 ALCIBIADES.

strangers, made war on his own account against
those Thracians who acknowledged no king. From
the booty, which he took, lie raised immense sums ;
and, at the same time, he defended tb.e Grecian fron-
tier against tlie barbarians.

Tydeus, Menander, and Adimantus the new-made
generals, being now at zEgos-Potamos '^^^ with al] the
ships which the Athenians had left, used to stand
out early every morning and ofi'er battle to Lysan-
der, whose station was at Lampsacus, and then to
return and pass the day in a disorderly and careless
manner, as if they despised their adversary. This
seemed to Alcibiades, who was in the neighbour-
hood, a matter not to be treated negligently or with-
out notice. He tlierefore galloped over and told
the generals^*, " He thought their station by no
" means safe in a place, where there was neither
" town nor harbour ; that it was very inconvenient
" to have their provisions and stores from so distant
" a place as Sestos, and extremely dangerous to let
" their seamen so ashore and wander about at their
" pleasure ; while a fleet was watching their mo-
" tions, which was under the orders of one man and
" the strictest discipline imaginable. He advised
" them, then, to remove their- station to Sestos."
The generals, however, paid no attention to what he
said ; and Tydeus was so insolent as even to bid
him begone, for that they, not he, were now to give
orders. Alcibiades, suspecting that there was some

'' Plutarch here passes over ahnost three years ; namely, the
twenty-fifth of the Pcloponnesian war, in which Conon, after some
irruptions into tlic enemy's territory, was defeated by Callicratidas ;
the twenty-sixth, in whicli the Athenians obtained the victory at
Arginiisa?, and put six of the ten generals to death (as stated in a
former note, p. 15ti.) upon a shght accusation of their collegue
Theramenes ; and nearly the whole twenty-seventh, toward the end
of which the Athenians sailed to ^^gos-Potamos (a place on the
borders of the Ilellesjiont, ojiposite Lampsacus) as here mentioned.
y-* 'ihe officers at the head of the Grecian armies and navy are
sometimes called * generaltj,' sometimes ' admirals,' because they
commonly commanded both by sea and land.

ALCIBIADES: 1(39

treachery in the case, retired ; telling his acquaint-
ance, who conducted him out of the camp, that if he
liad not been so grossly insulted by the generals, he
would in a few days have obliged the Lacedaamo-
nians, however unwilling, either to come to an
action at sea, or else to quit their ships. This
though to some it appeared a vain boast, was by
others deemed not at all improbable, since he might
have brought down a number of Tln-acian archers.
and cavalry, to attack and harass the Lacedaemonian
camp^\

The event quickly evinced the correctness of his
judgement with regard to the errors which the Athen-
ians had committed. For Lysander falling upon
them, when they least expected it, eight galleys
only escaped '-^ along with Conon ; the rest, not
much fewev than two hundred, were taken and car-
ried away together with three thousand prisoners,
who were subsequently put to death. And within a
short time Lysander took Atiiens itself, burned the
shipping, and demolished the Long Walls ^^

Alcibiades alarmed at this success of the Lacedae-
monians, who were now masters both at sea and
land, retired into Bithynia. Thither he ordered
much treasure to be sent, and took large sums along
with him, but left still more behind in the castle
where he had resided* In Bithynia he once more
lost the chief part of his substance, being stripped
by the Thracians there ; which determined him to
go to Artaxerxes, and implore his protection,
imagining that the king upon trial would find him

^5 When a fleet remained for some time at one particular station,
there was generally a body of land-forces, and part of the mariners
likewise, encamped upon the shore.

^^ There was a ninth ship, called Paralus,' which escaped and
carried the news of their fatal defeat to Athens. Conon himself
retired to Cyprus, where Evagoras was then king. See the Life of
Lysander, in the sequel of the work.

^7 This event took place 01. xciii. ^., in the twenty-eighth year
of the war.*

\76 ALCIBIADES.

not less serviceable tliaii Tliemistoclcs^'' had been,
and that he Iiad a better pretence to his patronage.
For he was not going; to sohcit the king's aid against
his countrymen, as Themistocles had done, but for
his country against its worst enemies. PJiarnabazus,
he concluded, was likely to procure him a safe con-
duct ; and he therefore went to him in Phrygia,
M'here he stayed some time, making his court to him,
and receiving marks of respect.

It was a grief to the Athenians, to be deprived of
their power and dominion : but when Lysander
robbed them also of their liberty, and put their city
under the authority of thirty chiefs, they were still
more miserably afflicted. Now their affairs were
ruined, they perceived with regret the measures
which would have saved them, and which they had
neglected to adopt ; now they acknowledged their
blindness and errors, of which they looked upon their
second quarrel with Alcibiades as the greatest. They
had cast him off, Avithout any offence of his : their
anger had been grounded upon the ill conduct of his
lieutenant in losing a few ships, and their own con-
duct had been still w^orse in depriving the common-
wealth of the most excellent and valiant of all it's
generals. Yet amidst their present misery one slight
glimpse of hope remained, that while Alcibiades sur-
vived, Athens could not be utterly undone. For
he, who before was unwilling to lead an inactive
though peaceable life in exile, would not now, if his
own affairs were upon any tolerable footing, sit still
and see the insolence of the Lacedaemonians and
the madness of the Thirty Tyrants, without attempt-
ing some remedy. Neither was it at all unnatural
for (he multitude to dream of such relief, since tiiose
tyrants themselves were so solicitous to inquire after

"** Here Plutarch, and also in his Life of Themistocles, follow s
Thucydicles, who represents Artaxerxes as having just succeeds d
Xerxes, when Themistocles arrived at the Pcrsiarj Court. £e«" 3
former note.*

ALCIBIADES. 171

Alclbiades, and gave so much attention to what he
was doing or projecting.

At last, Critias represented to Lysander that the
LacedjEmonians could never securely enjoy the em-
pire of Greece, till the Athenian democracy was
absolutely destroyed ; and tiiat though the Athen-
ians seemed at present to bear an oligarchy with
some patience and moderation, yet Alcibiades, if he
lived, would not suffer them long to submit to it.
Lysander however could not be prevailed upon by
these arguments, until he received private orders
from the magistrates of Sparta, to get Alcibiades
despatched ; whether it was, that they dreaded his
capacity and enterprising spirit, or did it in com-
plaisance to king Agis. Lysander then sent to
I'harnabazus, to desire him to carry this order into
execution ; and he appointed his brother Magaeus,
and his uncle Susamithres, to manage the affair.

Alcibiades at that time resided, with his mistress
Timandra, in a small village in Phrygia. One night
he dreamed that he was attired in his mistress' habit,
and that as she held him in her arms, she dressed
his head and painted his face like a woman's. Others
say, he dreamed that Magjeus cut off his head and
b(irned his body ; it was but a little before his death,
we are told, that he had this vision. Be that as it
may, those who were sent to assassinate him, not
dariris: to enter his house, surrounded it and set it
on fire. As soon as he perceived it, lie got together
large quantities of clothes and hangings, and threw
them upon the fire to choke it ; then having wrapped
his robe about his left hand, and taking his sv,ord in
his right, he sallied through the fire and got safe out,
before the stuff which he had thrown upon it could
catch the flame. At sight of him the barbarians dis-
persed, not one of them daring to wait for him, or
to encounter him hand to hand ; but, standing at a
distance, they pierced him with their darts and
arrows. Thus fell Alcil)iades. The barbarians
retiring after he wuk slain, Timandra covered the

17'2 Al.CIBIADES.

body with her own robes, and buried it as decently
and honourably as her circumstances would allow ■•°.
- Timandra "^^ is said to have been mother to the
famous Lais commonly called ' the Corinthian,'
though she was brought a captive from Hyccaroe, a
little town in Sicily.

Some writers, who agree as to the manner of Al-
cibiades' death, differ about the cause. That catas-
trophe (they tell us) is not to be imputed to Pharna-
bazus, or Lysander, or the Lacedaemonians ; but
that Alcibiades having corrupted a young w^oman of
a noble family in that country, and keeping her with
him, her brothers incensed at the injury set fire in
the night to the house in which he lived, and upon
his breaking through the flames killed him in the
manner above related.

" She burled liim in a town called Melissa; and from Athenacus
(xiii. 4.) we learn, that the monument remained to his time, for he
himself saw it. The emperor Hadrian, in memory of so great a
man, caused his statue of Parian marble to be raised upon it, and
ordered a bull to be sacrificed to him annually. (L.)

Betide the two accounts here given of Alcibiades' death, of which
the latter is not at present any where else extant, though tiie first is
to be found in Corn. Nepos, Diod. Sic. xiv. 1 l.,(fv:c., the latter writer,
on the authority of the historian Ephorus, has preserved a third,
which ascribes it to the mean political jealousy of Pharnabazus. It
is singular (says M. Ricard) that Plutarch has not mentioned the
name of the village, in which he was assassinaterl. Aristotle (Hist,
Anim. vi. 29.) says, that he was slain at Elaphus, a mountain in
Phrygia.*

'°° She is called Damasandra by Athenacus (ib.) who adds that
Theodota, his other mistress (for he had always two, it seems, with
him) buried him with as much funeral pomp as was in her power.*

THE

L I F E

OF

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

SUMMARY.

His extraction and oni^in. His taste for the vnlitarj^ ^if^ ' '^"'^
^first campaign. His enmlation, and success. Afflxtiun Jbr his
mother. Dissensions hetiveen the patricians and plebeians. Seces-
sion of the latter to the Hlons Sacer. Volscian ivar. Capture of
Coricli. Coriolannsjlies to the relief of the comnls, amd contri-
butes largely to the defeat of the Volsci. His disinterestedness.
He receives the surname of ' Coriolanus.* Digression on Roman
surnames. New divisions in the commonwealth. VeiitrcB sur-
renders itself to Rome. Coriolaiius takes the part of the patricians :
Offers himself a candidate for the consuhh/p ; and is rejected. His
resentment, and that of the patricians, upon the occasion. He op-
poses himself to the public largesses: Is summoned to appear before
the people. The patricians declare in his favour. He complies
with the su7nmons. One of the tribunes pronounces upon him sen-
tence of death. Struggle between the patricians and the tribunes.
He ii accused before the people ; and banished. Deep co?icern of
the senate : hisjtrmness. He withdraws to .the Volsci: and pro-
poses to thetn to renew the ivar with the Romans. Disturbances
and prodigies at Rome. Expiation of the prodigies. Ncxv quari'el
between the Romans and the J'olsci. The latter declare war.

' Coriolanus places himself at their head : sidjdues a great Jiumber of

cities. The peaple demand of the senate his recalfrum exile ; but

in vain. He indignajitli/ encamps near Rome. An embassy is

sent to him, to whotn he proposes conditions, and allows thirty days

Jar their repljj. A second deputation meets with no better success.

17* CAIUS MARCIUS COlllOLANUS.

I

The pricats nf the different temples rcait upon him in n body, to /:*
little purpose. Hejle.tions nn the injinence exerted by the Deity over
the human mind. The Roman ladies underiaLc the office (>/ em-
bassndresses. His mother's speech to him. I lis silence, and her |(,
second address. He is moved to compUayice, and draxvs off" his
forces to Ant/um. Ejcultntions of the Romans. Tidlus, the Volsciaa
general, forms a faction against Coriolanns, and procures his as-
sassination. The Roman ladies mourn for him ten vwnlhs. The

Volsci are subdued.

li

I

\

X HE flimily of the Marcii supplied Rome "wit?j
many illustrious patricians. Of this house was
Ancus Marcius, who was grandson to Numa ^ by
his daughter j as were also Publius and Quintus
Marcius, who provided Rome with abundance of
the best water. Censorinus also, who was twice ap-
pointed censor by the Roman people, and who })ro-
cured a law that no man should ever bear that office
twice afterward, was of the same pedigree.

Caius Marcius, of whom I am now writing, was
brought up by his mother in her widowhood ; and
from him it appeared that the loss of a lather, .
though attended with other disadvantages % is no |

* Pompilia the daughter of Numa married Marcius, the son of i>
Sabine of that name, who prevailed upon Numa to accept the kinj;- |
dom, and followed him to Rome. He wished, likewise, to ha^c >
succeeded him in that station ; but, being postponed to Tullus Hos-
tilius, slew himself. From his son's marriage with Pompilia, how-
ever, wag born Ancus Marcius, who attained the dignity refused t(;
his grandfather; and of this splendid lineage sprung M. Coriolanus.
The water mentioned below, the purest in Rome, >vns brought
thither by an aqueduct sixty miles long.*

* Plutarch (says M. Dacier) has here obviously in view Homer's
pathetic lines :

Am rot THTuyt refe? x«» tcr^^t* ctjctcw

}lu.Xf e' etftpoi'.zc* *«i«9«>u»« TTxJ'tt T».^)}(r*» x. t. >.

(Il.xxii.4S8.>

I

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 175

iiiiidrance to a man's improving in virtue and at-
taining distinguished excellence ; though profligate
men sometimes allege it, as an excuse for their
corrupt lives. On the other hand, the same Marciu:^
evinced that if a generous and noble nature be not
thoroughly formed by discipline, it will shoot forth
many bad qualities along with the good ; as the
richest soil, if not cultivated, produces the rankest
weeds. His undaunted courage and firmness of
j mind excited him to many great actions, and carried
him through them with honour. But at the same
lime the violence of his passions, his spirit of con-
tention, and his excessive obstinacy rendered him
untractable and unaccommodating in conversation.
80 that the very persons who saw with admiration
his soul unshaken by pleasures and toils and riches,
and allowed him the virtues of temperance, justice,
and fortitude, were yet in the affairs of the state
unable to endure his overbearing, ungracious, and
aristocratical temper. There is no other advantage
indeed to be derived from a liberal education, equal
to that of polishing and softening our nature by
reason and discipline ; for that produces an evenness
of behaviour, and banishes from our manners all ex-
tremes. This is however to be said in his behalf,
that in those times military abilities were deemed by
the Romans the highest excellence ; insomuch that
the term, which they used for virtue in general,
they applied to valour in particular^.

There never was perhaps a more striking illustration of the truth
of our biographer's remark, than the immortal sir William Joiie?.
Much, however, as lord Teignmouth judicicaisly observes in his
Life of that illustrious man, must be referred to the uncommon
talents both of the pupil and the teacher (Mrs. Jones) ; and the
English, like the Roman son, was chiefly led to distinction by his
grateful and filial desire to give pleasure to his surviving parent.*

5 So did the Greeks ^psT-j ; and etymologists, in conformity to

this theory, have derived the Latin term from vir, and the Greek

one from A^'.^. But M. Ricard, with due deference to Plutarch,

inquires whether virtue might not deserve those appellations, with-

I out any reference to ' military abilities,' from the perpetual struggle

' which she excites between reason and the passionB.*

176 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

Marcius had a more than ordinary inclination foi*
war, and therefore fl'om a cliild began to handle his
weapons. As he thought that artificial arms avail
but little, unless those with v/hich nature has sup-
plied us be well improved and kept ready for use ;
he so prepared himself by exercise lor every kind of
combat, that while his limbs were active and nimble
for pursuing, from his force and weight in wrestling
and in grappling with the enemy, none could easily
shake him off. Those therefore who had any con-
test with him for the prize of courage and valour,
when they failed of success, flattered themselves with
imputing it to his strength, vdiich nothing could
resist or exhaust.

He made his first campaign in very early youth'' ;
when Tarquin, who had reigned in Rome, was driven
from the throne, and after many unsuccessful battles,
was venturing all upon the last throw. Most of the
people of Latium, and many other states of Italy,
were now marching toward Rome to assist in his re-
establishment ; not through any regard for that
prince, but out of fear and envy of the Romans,
whose growing greatness they were desirous to check.
A battle ensued, witli various turns of fortune. Mar-
cius distinguished himself that day, in sight of the
dictator; for seeing a Roman pushed down at a
small distance from him, he hastened to his Iielp, and
standing before him engaged his adversary and slew
him. When the dispute was decided in favour of

'■^ 4 01. Ixxi. 1., A. U. C. 258., B. C. 496. The battle in qups-
tion was Kouglit near the lake Kegillus, in t!)e dictatorship of Aulus
Posthumius. Tliis exploit, however, of Coriolanus is not recorded
either by Livy (ii. 19, '20,), or Dion. Halic. (vi. 2.), in their ac-
count of the events of that da)'. The latter mentions the report,
believed by Livy, of Tarquinius Siij)erbus having received a wound
in the course of the action ; but seems to think that his great age,
for he was now near ninct)', rendered his personal interference al-
most impossible. And yet the Nuniidian prince, Masinissa, at that
date retained much of his competency for the command of an
army ; and Lucian in one of his works states, that this very Tarquin
was remarkable for an active and vigorous old ai};c, in which how-
ever Livy disagrees with liim-: 'jam cctate ct viribus erat graiwr.'* '

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 177

the Romans, the general presented Marciiis, among
he first, with an oaken crown '. Tliis is the reward
vhich their custom assigns to tiie man who saves the
'ii'e of a citizen ; either because they honoured the
oak for the sake of the Arcadians, whom the oracle
called ' Acorn-eaters;' or because an oaken branch
is most easy to be had, be the scene of action where
i it may ; or because they think it most suitable to-
take a crown for him, who has been the instrument
of saving a citizen, from the tree v/hich is sacred to
Jupiter the protector of cities. Besides, the oak
bears more and fairer fi'uit than any tree that grows
wild, and is the strongest of those which are cultivat-
ed in plantations. It afforded the first ages both
food and drink, bv it's acorns and it's honev ; and
supplied men with birds and other creatures for
dainties, as it produced the misletoe, from which
birdlime is made *^.

Castor and Pollux are reported to have appeared
in that battle, and with their horses dropping sweat
to have been seen soon afterward in the Forum an-
nouncing the victory, near the fountain where the
temple now stands. Hence also it is said, that the

^ The Civic crown was the foundation of many privileges. He,
who had once obtained it, had a right to wear it ever afterward.
When he appeared at the public spectacles, the senators rose up to
do him honour. He v/as placed near their bench; and his father,
and grandfother by the father's side, were entitled to the same pri-
vileges. This was an encouragement to merit, which cost the
public nothing, and yet was productive of many great dlects. (L.)
See Plin. xvi. 4. for a ilne apostrophe to the simple manners of the
age, which would not allow any selfish m.otive to mingle with those,
which led to the saving of a citizen. The oracle, referred to in this
passage, is preserved by Herodotus i. Q(^:). M. Ricard concludes his
note by gravely informing his readers, that honey is not the natural
produce of the oak, but of bees which take up their residence in
some of it's hollows ; and that the misletoe * c&t dc mtme unc ex-
croissance pnrasiic ! ' ■^■'

^ It does not any where appear, that the ancients made use of the
oaJ< in ship building : how much nobler an encomium might an
English historian afford that tree, than Plutarch has been able to
give it; particularly since those memorable days, which have be-
stowed immortality upon the names of Howe, and Duncan, and
St. Vincent, and Nelson !*

VOL. II. N

178 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLAXUS^,

liftcentli of Julys being the day iipan which tha*
victory was gained, is consecrated to those sons of
Jupiter.

it g:efteraiiy Iiappcns, that when men- of small am-
bitio7i arc ^'ery early distinguished by the voice of
ilinie, their thirst of honour is speedily queached and
their desires satiated , whereas deep ami solid minds
are improved awd briGrhtened l>v marks of distinc-
tion, which serve as a brisk gale to drive them for-
ward ii.v the pursuit of glory. T h-ey do not so much
think tliat they have received a reward, as that they
have givei^ a pledge, which would make them blush
to fall short of the public expectation, and therefore
fchey endeavour by their actioDs to exceed it. Mar-
cius had a soul of this frame. He was always en-
deavouring to excel himself, and n>editating some
exploit which might set him in a new light, adding
achievement to achievement, and spoils to spoils :
hence th€ latter generals, luider whom he served,
were always striving to outdo the former in the ho-
nours which they paid him,, and in the tokens of
their esteem. The Romans at that time were en-
gaged in several wars, and fought many battles ; and
there was not one, from which ^larcius returned
without some crown or other honorary distinction.
The end, which others proposed in their acts of |
valour, was glory ; but he })ursued glory, because
the acquisition of it delighted his mother. For when
she was v^^itncss to the applauses which he recer\-ed,
when she saw him crowned, when she embraced him
with teurs of joy, then it was that he accounted him-
self at the heigiit of honour rfnd felicity. Epami-

^ B}- the ;^rcat (.llsorder of the Roman cal'jiular, the fifteenth of
July then fell upon the twenty-fourth of our October. (L.)

Plutarch, in hi.s Life ot'FauUis /Eniiiius, repeats this marvellous ^
.story ; and adds that Lucias Doniitius, to wlioni tliey annoanceil
the details of this victory, appearing (naturally) a little surprised^
they gently touched his heard, which tVoni black becr.me instantly
(iia hne bronze coioui', and gained him the surname of /Enobarbus^
Livy takes no notice of tliis ii.pparition, but Diou, Halic. takes a
ereat dt'al too nauch.*

1

a.

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 179

Dondas (they tell us) had the same feeling, and de-
clared it to be the chief happiness of his lite, that
Iiis fluher and mother lived to see him command
and conquer at Leuctra. He had the satisfaction,
indeed, to see both his parents rejoice in his success,
and partake of his good fortune : but only the mo-
<her of Marcius, Volumnia^ was living; and there-

' lore holding himself obliged to pay her all that duty
which would have belonged to his father, beside

I what was due to herself, he thought lie could never
sufficiently express his tenderness and respect. He
even married, in compliance with her desire and re-

i quest ; and, after his wife had borne him children,
continued to live in the same house with his mo-
ther.

At the time when the reputation and interest
which his virtue had procured him in Rome, stood
very high, the senate, taking the part of the richer
citizens, were at variance with the common people,
who ^ were used by their creditors with intolerable
cruelty. Those, that had any thing considerable,
were stripped of their goods, which were either de-
tained for security or sold ; and those that had no-
thing were dragged into prison, and there bound
with fetters, though their bodies were full of wounds
and worn out with fighting for their country. The
last expedition, in which they had been engaged,
was against the Sabines ; upon which occasion their
rich creditors promised to treat them with more
lenity, and in pursuance of a decree of the senate
M. "Valerius the consul '° was guarantee of that pro-

8 Called Veturia by other writers (Dion. Halic. viii. 5., Livy ;i,
40., and Val. Max. v. 4.), who as unanimously give the name of
VoKinniia to his wite, by Plutarch in tlie sequel called Vergilia.*

^ na(r;i^r(vj'6)'.»v7-« signifies the same us na-s-xo-ru.. So 1 Cor. vii. 40.
^OKOJ h Kuyw Ttuvwot, 0s» s^eu, instead of ' I think also that I have
the spirit of God,' should be translated, ' and I have the spirit of
(iod.' ^

^° Or, as others say, the dictator Max. Valerius, who (according
to Dion. Halic, vi. £.) had promised the people an act ©t' insol-
vency,*

N 2

189 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

mise. But when after having cheerfully iinder.'ronc
the fatigues of that war they returned victorious,
and vet found that the usurers made them no abate-
ment, and that the senate pretended to remember
nothing of the agreement in question, but without
any sort of concern saw th.em dragged to prison and
their goods seized as formerly, they tilled tiie city
with tumult and sedition.

The enemy, apprised of these intestine broils, in-
vaded the Roman territories, and laid theni waste
with fire and sword. And, when the consuls called
upon such as were able to bear arms to give in their
names, not a man took any notice of it. Sometliiug^
was then to be done, but the magistrates diifered in
their opinions. Some thought that the poor should
have a little indulgence, and that the extreme rigour
of the law ought to be relaxed. Others, and par-
ticularly Marcius, declared absolutely against that
proposal. Not that he thought the money a matter
of much consequence, but because he considered
this specimen of the people's insolence as an at-
tempt to Subvert the laws, and the forerunner of
farther disorders, which it became a wise govern-
ment strenuously to restrain and suppress.

The senate assembled several times within the
space of a few days, and debated this point; but as
they came to no conclusion, the commonalty sudden-
ly rose^ and encouraging each other, left the city,
and took possession of the hill now called ' Sacred,'
ncay the river Anio, but without committing any
violence or other act of sedition. Only as they went
along, they loudly complained, " That it was now a
*' c:reat while, since the rich had driven them from
" their habitations : that Italy would any where
*' supply them with air, and water, and a place of
" burial ; and that Rome,- if they stayed in it, would
" afford them no other yjrivilege, unless indeed it
" were regarded as a privilege to bleed and to die
" in .fighting for their wealthy oppressors."

Tlie senate were now; alarmed, and from the oldest

ii

a
a

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 181

of their body selected the most moderate and po-
pular to treat with the people. At their head was
Menenius Agrippa '', who after much entreaty ad-
dressed to them, and many arguments adduced in
defence of the senate, concluded his discourse witli^
the following celebrated fable : " The members of
the human body once mutinied against the belly,
and accused it of lying idle and useless, while they
" v/ere all labouring and ministering to satisfy it's
" appetites ; but the belly only laughed at their sim-
*' plicity, in not knowing that, though it received
" all the nourishment into itself, it prepared and
" distributed it again to every part of the body.
" Just so, my fellow-citizens," said he, " stands the
case between the senate and you. For their ne-
cessary counsels and acts of government are pro-
ductive of advantage to you all, and distribute
their salutary influence among the whole people.'*
After this they were reconciled to the senate,
having demanded and obtained the privilege of ap-
pointing five men '- to defend their rights upon all
occasions. These are called ' Tribunes of the people.'
The first that w^ere elected were Junius Brutus ^%

" Menenius Agvlppa, if we may trust Dion. Halic. (vi. 7.), who
has given an account of this business with much detail, was not the
first speaker upon the occasion, but Marcus Valerius. To him Lu-
cius Junius made a fine harangue in reply, and was himself answered
by Titus Lartius ; whom Sicinius, to the great satisfaction of the
people, interrupted. Menenius thtn, at the end of a tolerably long
speech, introduced this celebrated apologue ; and, as it produced
the desired effect, it has engrossed the honour of all the eloquence
previously employed.*

■^ The tribunes were at first five in number; but, a few years
afterward, five more were added. Before the people left the i\/o«^
Sacer, they enacted a law, by which the persons of the tribunes
were made sacred. Their sole function was, to interpose in all
grievances offered to the plebeians by their superiors. This was
called intercessio, and was performed by standing un and pronounc-
ing the single word Veto, ' I forbid it.' They had their seats placed
at the door of the senate, and vvere never admitted mto it, but when
the consuls summoned them to ask tlieir opinion upon some affair
that concerned the interests of the people.

'^ The name of this tribune was Lucius Junius ; and, because
Lucius Junius Brutus was celebrated for having delivered hi^

9

182 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

and Sicinius Vellutiis, tlie leaders of the secession.
When the breach was tlius repaired, the plebeians
soon offered themselves to be enrolled as soldiers,
and readily obeyed the orders of the consuls relative
to the war. As for Marcius, though he was far front
being pleased at the advantage which tlie people had
gained, as it was a lessening of the authority of the
patricians, and though he found a considerable part
of the nobility of his opinion, yet he exhorted them
not to be backward wherever the interest of their
country was concerned, but to show themselves su-
perior to the commonalty rather in virtue than in
power '\

Corioli was the capital of the country of the Volsci,
with whom the Romans were at war. And as it was
iiow besieged by the consul Cominius, the rest of
the Volsci v/ere much alarmed, and assembled to
succour it; intending to give the Romans battle
imder the walls, and to attack them on both sides.
But after Cominius had divided his forces, and taking
part to meet the Volsci without, who were marching
against him, had left Titui^Lartius, an illustrious Ro-
irjan, with the other part to carry on the siege, the
inhabitants of Corioli despised the latter body, and
sallied out to fight tliem. The Rom.ans were at first
obliged to give ground, and were driven to their
entrenchments. But Marcius with a small party
flew to their assistance, killed the foremost of the
enemy, and stopping the rest in their career with a
loud voice called his countrymen back. For he was
(v/hut Cato wished a soldier to be) not only dreadful

countn' from tlie tyranny of the kings, lie also assunjed the sur-
name of Brutus, which exposed him to a great deal of ridicule. (L.)
Dion. Halic. (ib.) represents liiui as a very turbulent, very pene-
trating, and very fluent man.*

'* M. Dacier thinks Marcius was too youny;, at this time, to give
fidvice to a body of so nnieh greater experience, especially as nei-
ther Livy nor Dion. Halic. mention his name throughuul the whole
of the disturbance: but M. Ricard sturdily supj)orts his author,
and refers to the latter historian (vi. G ) in confirmation of his
iiccuraeyo*

CAIUS MAnCiUS COIUOLANUS. 183

for tlie thunder of liis arm, but of his voice too, and
had an aspect wliicl? struck his adversaries with dis-
■jiiav. iMauy Romans then crowtling about liim, and
l)eiii,!T: ready to second liisn, the eiicmy retired in
confusion. Ncitiier was be satisfied Avith makin<:j
them retire, but y>ressed hard upon their rcrdr. and
])ursiicd them quite up to the gates. There lie per-
ceived that his troops discontinued the piu'suit, on
account of tlie shower of arrows which fell from the
walls, and that none of them had any tlioughts of
rushing along with the fugitives into the city, which
was filled with warlike people, all miderarms : never-
theless lie exhorted and encoiirnged them to press
ibrward, crying out, " That tbrtune had opened tlie
" gates rather to the victors than to the vanquished.'*
As few however were willing to follow him, he broke
through the enemy, and pushed into the town with
the crowd, no one at inst daring to oppose him or
even to look him in the face. But when he cast his
jeyes around, and pe*r.ceive.d so inconsiderable a num-
])er within the walls, of whose service he could avail
himself in that dangerous enterprise, and that friends
and foes were mixed togetl'icr; ;lie summoned all his
force and performed exploits almost incredible, both
v;ith respect to heroic strength, amazing agility, and
dauntless intrepidity of spirit : for he overpowered
ill! that were in his way, forcing some to seek refuge
ia the farthest corners of the town, and others to
surrender and tlirow down their arms, which affbrde<i
Lartius an opj)ortunity oi" bringing in the rest of the
llonians luun-olcsL-ed.

7'he city thus taken, most of the soldiers fell to
^plundering, Vvhick Marcius highly resented ; crying
out, " That it was a shame for tliem to run about
^'^ after plunder, or under pretence of collecting the
'*' .spoils to get out of the way of d&nger, while the
"' consul and the llomans u.nder his command were
'•' perhaps engaged with the enemy." But, as there
v.'ere not many who listened to what he said, he put
Jaimself at the head of such as olfered to ibilow himj,

JSt CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

and took the route which he knew w^oukl lead liim to
the consul's army ; now pressing his small party to
hasten their march, and conjuring tliem not to suffer
their ardour to cool, and now begging of the gods
that the battle might not be over before he arrived,
but that he might have his share in the glorious toils
and dangers of his countrvmen^\

It was customary with the Romans of that age,
when they were drawn up in order of battle, and
ready to take their shields and gird their garments
about them, to make a nuncupative W'iil, naming
each his heir in the presence of three or four wit-
nesses. While the soldiers were thus employed, with
the enemy in sight, Marcius came up. Some were
startled at his first appearance, covered as he was
with blood and sweat. But when he ran cheerfully
lip to the consul, took him by the hand, and told
him that Corioli was taken, the consul clasped him
to his heart ; and those who heard the intelligence
of that success, and those who did but guess at it
were greatly animated, and with shouts demanded
to be led on to the combat. Marcius inquired of
Cominius, in what manner tlie enemy's army w^as
drawn up, and where their best troops were posted.
Being told in reply, that the Antiates, who were
placed in the centre, were supposed to be the bravest
and most warlike ; " I beg it of you then," said
Marcius, " as a favour, that you will place me di-
" rectly opposite to them :" and the consul, admir-
ing his spirit, readily granted his request.

When the battle was begun with the throwing of
spears, Marcius advanced before the rest, and
charged the centre of the Volsci with so much fury,
that it was soon broken. Nevertheless, the wings
attempted to surround him ; and the consul, alarmed
for his safety, sent to his assistance a select band,
which he had near his own person. A sharp conflict

^5 Livy, very unaccountably, does not say a single word upon
this second action of Coriolanus, so much more glorious than the
first: but Dion. Halic (vi, 10.) gives it at full length,*

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. iS.':

then ensued about Marcius, and a dreadful carnage
was quickly made : but the Romans pressed the ene-
my witli so much vigour, that they put them to
flight ; and as they were engaging in the pr.rsuit,
requested Marcius, now almost weighed down with
wounds and fatigue, to retire to the camp. But he
answered, " That it was not for conquerors to be
" tired," and joined them in prosecuting the vic-
tory. The whole army of the Volsei was defeated,
immense numbers killed, and many made prisoners.

Next day, Marcius waiting upon the consul, and
the army being assembled, Cominius mounted the
Ixostrum ; and, having in the first place returned
due thanks to the gods for such extraordinary suc-
cess, addressed himself to Marcius. He began with
a detail of his gallant actions, of which he had him-
self been partly an eye-witness, and had partly re-
ceived an account from Lartius '^. Then out of
the great quantity of treasure and horses and prison-
ers which they had taken, he ordered him to take a
tenth, before any distribution was made to the rest,
beside giving him a fine horse with noble trappings,
as a reward lor his valour.

The army received this speech with loud applause ;
and Marcius, stepping forward, said, " That he ac-
cepted of the horse, and was happy in the consul's
approbation ; but as for the rest, he accounted it
rather a pecuniary reward than a mark of honour,
and therefore desired to be excused, being satis-
" tied with his single share of the booty. One favour
only in particular (continued he) I desire, and beg
I may be indulged in. I have a friend among the
Yolsci, bound with me in the sacred rites of hos-

a

"* The officer left to carry on the siege of Cotioh*. The renown
of Marcius, arising from this achievement (Livy informs us, ii. 33.)
was so brilliant, as wholly to eclipse that of the consul ; and the
name of Posthumius Covninius is only preserved by it's having been
engraved on brass, in the treaty of peace subsequently concluded
with the Latins.*

186 <^AIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

" pitality '", and a man of virtue and honour. lie
*■' is now a prisoner, and from easy and opulent
" circinnstimces reduced to servitude. Of the many
" misfortunes, under which he labours, I should be
*' glad to rescue him from one, which is that of being
" sold as a slave/*

These words of Marcius were followed with still
louder acclamations; his conquering the temptations
of money being more admired, than the valour which
he had exerted in battle. For even those, who be-
fore regarded his superior honours wdth envy and
jealousy, now thought him worthy of great things
because he had declined them ; and were more struck
■with that virtue, which led him to despise such ex-
traordinary advantages, than with the merit which
gave him a titlefto them. The right use of riches,
indeed, is more commendable than that of arms, and
not to desire them at all is more glorious than to use
them well.

When the acclamations had ceased, and the mul-
titude were again silent, Cominius subjoined; " You
" cannot, it is true, my fellow-soldiers, force these
gifts of yours upon a person so firmly resolved to
refuse them : let us then give him, what it is not
in his power to decline ; let us pass a vote that
he be called ' Coriolanus,' if his gallant behaviour
at Corioli has not already bestowctl that name upon
" him." Hence came his third name of Coriolanus.
By which it appears, that Caius was the proper name:
that the second name, Marcius, was that of che house
or family ; and that tlie third Roman appellative was
a peculiar note of distinction, subsequently bestowed

'■^ Willi the fonr.cr translator \vc Iiave thus rendered the pnssajjr
instead of introducing the term ' host,' which is indeed tlie liter;i!
sense but sounds uncouthly in English, as it conveys to the uu-
Jeained reader the idea of an innkeeper. Among the ancients, one
friend called another of a diiferent nation his ' stranger,' or his
* host ;' because on their travels, or other occasions, they entertained
■^acli other at their houses.

it,

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 137

on account of some particular act of fortnne, or sig-
nature, or virtue of him that bore it. Thus among
the Greeks additional names were given to some on
account of their achievements, as Sotcr, ' the Pre-
server,* and Call'iuicus, ' the Victorious ;' to others,
for something remarkable in their persons, as Phys-
coi?, ' the Gorcbellied,* and Gnjpus, ' the Eagle-
nosed ;' or for their good qualities, as EuergeteSy
* the Benefactor,' and Philadt'lphus, ' the Bro-
therlv ;' or their good fortune, as Eud<jcmon, ' the
Prosperous,' a name given to the second "^ prince of
the family of the Batti. Several princes also have
had satirical names bestowed upon them ; Antigonus
(for instance) was called Doso/i, ' the Man that will
i^ive to-morrow,' and Ptolemy was stiled Lamyrus^
' the Buffoon.' But appellations of this latter kind
were used v/ith arreater latitude amon<j^ the Romans.
One of the Metelli was distini^uished bv the name of
Diademc'dus^ because he for a long time wore ' a
bandage over an ulcer which he had upon his fore-
head :' and another they called CV/cr, because witli
surprising ' celerity' he exhibited a funeral show of
<iladiators, a few davs after Iris father's death. In
our tiincs also, some of the Romans receive their
names from the circumstances of their birth; as that
o£ Frocidics, if born when their flithers are ' in a dis-
tant country ;' and Posthumus, if born ' after their
death :' and when twins come into the world, and'
one of them dies at the birth, tlie survivor is called
VopiscHi-. Names are, also, appropriated on account

'^ Herodotus (iv. I'D ) says it was given to the third, and not to
the second, king of Cvrene ; see also some of his preceding sec-
tions. Of ttie names here mentioned, llicard observes Sotcr was
given to one of the Ptolemies, the eighth king of Egypt (called
likewise Lamyrus, or as some read it, Lathyrus) to Antiochus, and
to Demetrius; Calii/iicas to Selciicixs II., the fourth king of Syria;
Phij.scon to Ptolemy, the seventh king of Egypt; Grypiis to Anti-
ochus VIII., the nineteenth king of Syria; and Et^o o;ctef and
I^hilnde/jj/ius to two others of the Ptolemies, On the etymology of
several ^Roman surnames, see Plin. xviii. 3. The derivation and
classitication of English names, from analogous causes, might form
the subject of a curious diatertation.*

itJS CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

of bodily imperfections ; for among them we find
not only Si/ila, ' the lied,' and Niger, ' the Black;'
but even Ccectis, ' the Blind/ and Claudius, ' the
Lame :* such persons by this custom being wisely
taught, not to consider blindness or any other bodily
misfortune -as a reproach or disgrace, but to answer
to appellations of that kind as their proper names.
The discussion of this })oint, however, is better
adapted for a. different kind of work.

Wlien the war was over, the demagogues stirred
up another sedition. And as there was no new cause
of disquiet- or ground of accusation, they made use
of the mischiefs, which were the necessary conse-
quence of the former troubles and dissensions, as a
handle against the patricians. For the greatest part
of the ground being left uncultivated and unsown,
and the war not permitting them to import bread-
corn from other countries, there was an extreme
scarcity in Home '^. The factious orators then per-
ceiving that corn was not brought to market, and
that even if the market could be supplied, the com-
monalty had but little money to buy with, slander-
ously asserted that the rich had caused the famine
out of a spirit of revenge.

At this juncture there arrived embassadors from
the people of Velitra?, who offered to surrender their
city to the Romans, and desired to have a number
of new inhabitants to replenish it ; a pestilential
distemper having committed such ravages there, that
scarcely the tentli part of the inhabitants remained.
The sensible part of the Romans thought this press-
ing necessity of Velitrae a seasonable and advanta-
geous thing for Rome, as it would lessen the scarcity

'5 The people withdrevv to the Sacred Mount soon after the au-
tumnal equinox, and tlie reconciliation with the patricians did not
take place until the winter-solstice, so that the seed-time was lost.
(Dion. Halic. vii. 1, 2.) And the Roman factors, who were sent
to buy corn in other countries, Etruria, Campania, the territory
of the Volsci, and even Sicily, with the exception of the first, were
generally unsuccessful (ib. 3.) Sec also Livy, ii. 34.

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. I8d

of provisions. They lioped moreover that the sedi-
tion vvoukl subside, if the city were purged of the
troublesome part of tlie people, who most readily
took lire at the harangues of their orators, and might
be considered as the morbid and disordered super-
fluity of the state. Such as these therefore the con^
suls singled out for the colony, and pitched upon
others to serve in the war against the Yolsci : con-
triving it so, that employment abroad might tran-
quillise the intestine tumults ; and believing that
w'hen rich and poor, plebeians and patricians, came
to bear arms together again, to be in the same camp,
and to encounter the same dangers, they would be
disposed to treat each other with more gentleness
and candour.

But the restless tribunes, Sicinius and Brutus, op-
posed both these designs, crying out, that the con-
suls disguised a most inhuman act under the plausi-
ble term of a colony ; for inhuman it certainly v/as,-
to throw the poor citizens into a devouring gulf, by
sending them to a place where the air v/as infected,
and Vv^here noisome carcases lay above ground, to be
at the disposal of a strange and cruel deity -". And
as if it v/ere not sufficient to destroy some by famine,
and to expose others to the plague, they involved
them also in a needless war ; that no kind of cala-
mity might be wanting to complete the ruin of the
city, because it refused to continue in slavery to the
wealthy.

The people, irritated by these speeches, v/ould
neither obey the summons to be inlisted for the war,
nor approve the order to go and people Vclitne.
While the senate were in doubt what step they
should take, Marcius now not a little elated by the
honours which he had received, by the consciousness

*" As such the ancients considered the pestilence. It is not only
called, as M. Kicard ohserves, in the first clionas of MA. Tyr. v.
190. ^ii» T<» /ut^xKHcv, but in a preceding passage of that play, v. 27.
6 rff^eps? 9-jc? ; and Dion. Halic. in very vivid colours portrays it'-s
devastations in the Volscian cities, particularly in Velitra; (vii. 3.)*

190 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

of his great abilities, and by the deference that v/af?
paid liim by the principal persons in the state, stood
foremost in opposition to the tribunes. The colony
therefore was sent out, heavy fines being imposed
upon such as refused to go. But as they declared
absolutely against serving in the war, Marcius mus-
tered up his own clients, and as many volunteers as
he could procure, and with these made an inroad
into the territories of the Antiates. There he found
plenty of corn, and an inunense number of cattle
and slaves, no part of wlu'ch he reserved to himseli",
but led his troops back to Rome loaded with the rich
booty. The rest of the citizens then repenting of
their obstinacy, and envying those who had procured
such a quantity of provisions, looked upon Marcius
with an evil eye, not being able to endure the in-
crease of his power and honour, which they consi-
dered as rising upon the ruins of the people.

Soon aftervv'ard"^', Marcius stood for the consid-
ship ; upon which occasion the commonalty began
to relent, reflecting what a shame it M'ould be to dis-
grace and reject a man of his family and virtue, and
that too, after he had rendered so many signal ser-
vices to the public. It was the custom lor those
who were candidates for this high office, to solicit
and caress the people in the Forum, and at those
times to be clad in a loose gown without the tunic ;
whether that humble dress were thought more suit-
able for suppliants, or enabled those who had wounds
to show them, as so many tokens of their valour. For
it was not from any suspicion which the citizens then
had of bribery, that they required the candidates to
appear before them ungirt and without a close gar-
ment, wiien they camMo beg their votes ; since it
was much later than this, and indeed many ages af-
terward, that buyin_, and selling stole in, and money
came to be a mean of gaining an election. Corrup-
tion then reaching also the tribunals and the camps,

*' It was the next year, being 01. Ixxii. 3., B. C. ^W.

12

CAIUS MARCIUS COrvIOLAr\USi im

arms were subdued by opulence, and the common-
wealth was changed into a monarchy. It was a
shrewd saying, whoever said it, ''That the man, who
" lirst ruined the Roman people, was he who first gave
" them treats and gratuities." But this mischief
crept secretly and gradually in, and did not openly
make it's appearance in Konie for a considerable
time. For we know not who it was, that iirst bribed
it's citizens or it's judges; but it is said, that in
Athens the first man who corrupted a tribunal was
Anytus", the son of Anthemion, when he was tried
for treason in having delivered up the fort of Pylos,
at the latter end of the Peloponnesian war ; a time,
when the Golden Age reigned in the Roman courts
in all it's simplicity.

When therefore Marcius showed his wounds and
scars received in the many glorious battles, whicli
he had fousrht for seventeen successive -' years, the
people were struck with reverence for his virtue, and
agreed to choose him consul. Rut when the day of
election came, and he was conducted with great
pomp into the Campus Martins by the senate in a
body, all the patricians acting with more zeal and
vigour than had ever been known on the like occa-
sion ; the commons then altered their minds, and
their kindness was turned into envy and indignation.
The malignity of these passions was farther assisted
by their apprehension, that if a man so strongly at-

^- Subsequently notorious for his accustUion of Socrates. Forth*-:
particulars of this trial see Diod. Sic. xiii. 65. See also a note in
the Life of Alcibiades.*

'3 Here, as M. llicard justly observes, are great chronological
diihcultics, with respect to the point whence ttjcse seventeen years,
if indeed the interval be accurately expressed, are to be dated. He
quotes Dion. Halic, vii, 6 , who (as well as Livy, ii. ?'^.) by impli-
cation seems to carry back the first campaign of Coriolanus to the
year, in which Tarquin v»as exiled and Brutus slain. This indeed
gives ' ample verge and room enough.' But he must have entered
the lists, both as a combatant and a y^ndidate for the consulship^
rather prematurely. M. R. owns, at last, that ' ces commencement
ds Vhistoire Romaine sont plains dc taut d'incsrliiudcs, qu'on ne doit
jms cspcrer d^eclaiixir les obscurites qui s'lf rencontrenL'*^-

192 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLAXUS.

tached to the interests of the senate, and so much
respected by the iiobihty, should attain the consul-
ship, he might utterly deprive them of their liberty.
Influenced by these considerations, they rejected
Marcius, and appointed others to that olHce. The
senate took this extremely ill, considerinsj it as an
aifront not so much intended against Marcius as
im-ainst themselves. As for Marcius, he highly re-
t^ented their treatment of hnn, indulging his irascible
passions upon a supposition, that they have some-
thinur Gcreat and exalted in them ; and Vv'antin^ a due
mixture of gravity and mildness, which are the chief
political virtues, and the fruits of reason and educa-
tion. He did not consider, tliat the man who applies
himself to public business, and undertakes to have
intercourse vnth men, should above all thing's avoid
that ' austerity,' whicii (as Plato says) is " always
the companion of solitude -%" and cultivate in his
lieart the patience which some people so much de-
ride. Marcius then, being plain and artless, but at
the same time rigid and inflexible, was persuaded
that to vanquish opposition was the highest attain-
ment of a gallant spirit; not the eficct of the weak-
ness and effenunacy of a distempered mind, which
breaks out in violent passions like so many tumours:
and he therefore went away exasperated, and full of
rancour against the people. Such of the young no-
bility as were most distinguished by the pride of birth
and greatness of spirit, who had ahvays been strongly
attached to Marcius and then unfortunately hap-
pened to attend him, inflamed his resentment by
expressing their own grief and indignation. For he
was their leader in every expedition, and their in-
structor in the art of war : he it was, who had in-
spired them, with a truly virtuous emulation, and.

-•♦ ijos ctviahttt ib-A/Atti ^vveuoe, literallyj Haughtiness lives under the
iame roqfiaith .solitude. This' is toward the cud of Plato's fourth
Letter. It is preceded br a fine poHiical precept, viz. tliat ' tlie
complaisance^ which produces popularity, is the source of th«
greatest operations in government.'

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 193

taught tliem to rejoice in their own successes with-
out envying tliose of others.

In the mean time, a large quantity of bread-corn
was brought to Home, being partly bought up in
Italy, and partly a present from Gelon king of Sy-
racuse. The aspect of affairs appeared now to be
encouraging, and it was hoped that with the scar-
city the intestine broils would cease. ThC senate
therefore being immediately assembled, the people
stood in crowds without, waiting for the Jssue of
their deliberations. They expected, that tlm market-
rates for the corn that had been bought would be
moderate, and that a distribution of that which was
a gift would be made gratis ; for there were some
senators, who made a motion to that purport. But
Marcius stood up, and severely censured those vvho
spoke in favour of the commonalty, calling them
' demaoroffues ' and ' traitors to the nobilitv.* He
said, " They nourished to their own ultimate pre-
judice the pernicious seeds of boldness and petu-
lance, which had been sown among the populace,
when they should rather have nipped them in the
bud, and not have suffered the plebeians to
strengthen themselves with the tribunitial power,
*' That the people were nov/ become formidable, gain*
" ing whatever point they pleased, and not doing
" any one thing against their inclination; sothat, liv-
" ing in a sort of anarchy, they would no longer obey
" the consuls, nor acknowledge any superiors but
" those whom they called ' their own magistrates.*
" That the senators, who advised distributions to be
*' made in the manner of the most democratical of the
" Grecian states, were encouraging the insolence
" of the rabble to the ruin of the constitution.
" For that they would not suppose they received
" such favours for the cam.paign which they had re-
*' fused to make, or for the secessions by which
they had deserted their country, cr for the ca^
lumnies which they had countenanced against the
senate : but (continued he) they will think that
" we yield to them through fear, and grant them
VOL. II. O

(C

a

ic
It

19^ C.VIUS IMARCIUS COUIOLANUS.

cc

cc

ii
a

SLicli indulgences by ^yay of flattery ; and as they
will expect to find us always eciually complaisant,
there will be no end to their disobedience, no pe-
riod to their turbulent and seditious ])ractices. It
would, therefore, be perfect madness to take such
a step. Nay, if Me are wise, we shall entirely
abolish the tribunes' oiiice-% which has aiuiihilated
the ])ower of the consulship, and divided the city
" in such a manner, that it is no lon<>;er as formerly
" one, but broken into two parts ; which will never
" kjiit again, or cease to vex and harass each other
" with all tlic evils of discord"'."

Marcius, haranguing to this purpose, inspired the
young senators an4 ahnost all the men of fortune
with his own enthusiasm, and they cried out that he
was the only man in Rome, who had a spirit above
the meanness of flattery and submission ; yet some
of the more aged foresaw the consequence, and op-
posed his measures. In fact, the issue was unfortu-
nate. For the tribunes who were present "^ when
they saw that Marcius woidd have a majority of
voices^ ran out to the people, loudly calling upon
them to stand by their own magistrates, and give
their best assistance. Aii assembly was then held
in a tumultuary manner, in which the speeches of
Marcius were recited, and the plebeians in their fury
had nearly broken in upon the senate. The tribunes
pointed their rage against Marcius in particular, by
im})caching him in form, and sent for him to make
his defence. But as he spurned the messengers,
they went themselves, attended by the .Ediles, to
bring him by force, and began to lay hands on him.

-•' The triliunes had lately procured a law, which made it penal
to intcrnii)t theiii, wncn they v.erc haranguing the people.

-^ Plutarclj has omitted the most aggravating ])as:age in Corio-
lanus' speech, iu which he proposed holding up the price of bread-
corn as high as ever, in order to keep the people in dej)endence
and suhjeetion. (Dion. Halic. vii. G.)

-■' They had bgen invited to the deliberation by tlie consul, for
they had otherwise no right to attend. See not, (I'i.) and als(-
Dion. Halic. ib. ; who makes some very sensible reuiaiks on the t( •
meritv oi" Coriolanus' speech.;--

a

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLAXtTS. 19.1

Upon tills tlie patricians stood up in liis dcfoicc,
dro\c off tlie tribunes, and beat the vEdiles ; till"''
night coming on interrupted the (quarrel. Early ndxt
morning the consuls, observing that the people no\^
extremely incensed flocked from all ([uarters into
the Forum, and dreading what might be .the conse-
quence to the city, hastily convened the senate and
moved, " That they should consider how with kind
" words and favourable resolutions thev mj'ght bring;
the conmions to temper ; for that this was not 3/'
time to dis])lay their ambition, neither w^ould it be-
prudent to pursue disputes about the point of ho-
nour at a critical and dangerous juncture, which
required the greatest moderation and delicacy of
conduct." As the majority agreed to the motion,
they went out to confer with the people, and uscfl"
their best endeavours to pacify them ; coolly refuting'
calumnies, and modestly, though not vvitliout some
degree of sharpness, complaining of their behaviour.
As to the price of bread-corn and other provisions^
they declared, there should l>c no difference between
them.

A considerable part of the people being moved'
with "this application, and clearly appearing by therr
candid attention ready to close with it, the tribunes
stood up and said ; " That since the senate acted
" with such moderation, the people were not un-
" willing to make concessions in their turn: but
" they insisted, that Marcius should come and
" answer to these articles ; Whether he had not
'^ stirred up the senate to the confounding of all
" government, and to the destroying of the people's
" privileges ? Whether he had not refused to obey
^' their siunmons ? A\'hether he had not beaten and
" otherwise mal-treated the ^^diles in the Forum 5
" and by these means (so far as in him lay) levied
'' war, and incited the citizens to take up arms

-^ Not nighf, says Dion. Halic, but the remonstrances of tlxi
consuls, v, iio prevailed upon the people to adjourn the matter till
«he next d;iy.* ^

O 2

196 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

'* asralnst each other?" The^e tliini^s thev said
with a design, either to humble Marcius by con-
straining him to submit to imph)re the people's
clemencv, which was much ag-aijist his haug^htv tern-
per; or; if he followed his native bent, to impel him
to make the breach incurable. Of the latter they
were in hopes, and the rather because they knew
the man well. He stood, as if he would have made
his defence, and the people waited in silence for
what he had to say. But when, instead of the sub-
missive language that was expected, he began with
an. aggravating boldness, and rather accused the
commons than defended himself; when with the
tone of his voice and the fierceness of his looks he
expressed an intrepidity bordering upon insolence
and contempt, they lost ail patience ; and Sicinius
the boldest of the tribunes, after a short consultation
with his collegues, pronounced openly, that the tri-
bunes condemned M-fircius to die. He then ordered
the ^diles to take him immediately up to the top
of the Tarpeian rock, and throw him down the pre-
cipice._ AVhen they came to lay hands upon him,
howev^er, the action appeared horrible even to many
of the plebeians. The patricians, deeply shocked
and alarmed, ran with great outcries to his assistance,
and got Marcius in the midst of them, some inter-
posing to keep off the arrest, and others stretching-
out their hands in supplication to the multitude.
But, amidst such disorder and confusion, no regard
was paid to words and entreaties ; until the fiends
and relations of the tribunes, perceiving that it
would be impossible to carry oif Marcius and punish
liim capitally, without hrst spillijig much patrician
blood, persuaded them to alter the cruel and unpre-
cedented part of the sentence ; not to use violence
in the aftair, or put him to death without form of
trial, but to refer every thing to the people's deter-
mination* in full assembly.

Sicinius then, a little mollified, asked the patri-
cians ; " What they meant by taking Marcius out

9

i

ii

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 197

*' of the hands of the people, who were resolved to
" punish him?" To which they replied by another
question, " What do you mean by thus dragging
*' one of the worthiest men in Rome, without trial,
*' to a barbarous and illegal execution?" " If that
" be all," said Sicinius, " you shall no longer have a
" pretence for your quarrels and factious behaviour
" to the peo})le : for they grant you what you desire ;
" the man shall have his trial. And as for you,
Marcius, we cite you to appear the third market-
day, and satisfy the citizens of your innocence, if
you can ; for then, by their suffrages, your alfair
will be decided." The patricians were content
with this compromise, and thinking themselves
ha])py in carrying Marcius off, retired.

In the mean while before the third market-day,
which was a considerable space (for the Romans
hold their markets every ninth day^% and thence
call them Nundina) war broke out with the An-
tiates -^ : which, because it was likely to be of some
continuance, gave them hopes of evading the trial ;
since there would be time for the people to become
more tractable, to moderate their anger, or perhaps
to let it entirely evaporate in the business of that
expedition. But they soon made peace with the
Antiates, and returned : upon which the fears of
the senate were renewed, and they often met to
consider how things might be so managed that
they should ' neither give up Marcius, nor leave

** Macrob. Sat. i. 16. mtndince, qu. novendiales. Dion. Halic.
however (vii 8.) says there were only seven days' interval between
the market-days. M. Ricard reconciles the diiference by referring
the first to the Roman, and the latter to the Julian calendar. The
institution of markets has likewise been variously explained; some
ascribing it to Romulus, some to Servius TuUius, and some with
Varro to the times posterior to the kings, as a tribute of respect
on the part of the people to Tullius' memory.*

^^ Advice was suddenly brought to Rome, that the people of
Antium had seized and confiscated the ships belonging to Gelon's
embassadors in their return to Sicily, and had even imprisoned the
embassadors themselves. Upon which, the Romans took up arm*
to chastise the Antiates ; but they submitted, and made satisfaction.

im GAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANIJS.

room for the tribunes to throw the peoj)le into new
disorders. On this occasion Appins Clandius, who
was considered as one of the most violent adversaries
the commons had, declared ; " That the senate
^^ would ruin themselves, and absolutely destroy
" the constitution, if they should once suffer the
" plebeians to assume a power of suifragc against
*' the patricians ''°." But the oldest and most po-
pular of the senators'" were of opinion, " That the
" people, instead of behaving with more harshness
"^ and severity, wovdd become mild and gentle, if
" that power were indulged to them : since they
" did not despise the senate, but rather thought
" themselves despised by it ; and the prerogative
" of iudcnnp: would be such an honour and satis-
" faction to them, that they would immediately lay
" aside all resentment."

Marcius then, seeing the senate perplexed be-
tween their regard for him and their fear of the
people, asked the tribunes ; " Of what they accused
hiiu, and upon what charge he was to be tried
before the people?" Being told, " That he was to
be tried for treason against the commonwealth, in
designing to set himself up as a tyrant^- ;" " Let
me go then (said he) to the people, and make my

cC

(C
ii

" defence : I refuse no form of trial, nor any kind

<(

of punishment, if I be found guilty. Only bring
no other charge against me, and do not impose

^° Dion. Halic. vii. 8. gives Appius' speech much more at length;
and a fine speech, according to his representation, it is.*

3' At the head of these was Max. Valerius. (Dion. Halic. ib.)
He insisted also at large upon the horrible consequences of a
civil war.

'' it was never known that any person, who affected to set him-
self up as a tjrant, joined with the nobilitj' against the people;
such, on the contrary, always conspire with the people against the
nobility. ' Besides,' said he, in his defence, ' it was to save these
citizens, that I have received the wounds you sec : let t!ie tribunes
show, if they can, how such actions are consistent with the trea-
chcr-ous designs whicli they lay to my charge.' (L.) Dion. Halic.
ib. does not say, however, that the tribunes agreed to tlie ecu-
ditionsj as Jjelow stated.'^

J

CAIUS MAIICIUS COIUOLAXrS. 19!)

" u])on the senate.'* The tribunes agreed to thiese
conditions ; and the cause was to turn upon this
sinii'le ])oint.

i^ut the first tiling they di(i, ailer tlie people were
assembled, was to compel them to give their voices
by tribes '% and not by centuries; thus contriving
that tlie meanest and most seditious ])art of tlie po-
pulace, and those who liad no regard to justice or
Jionour, might out-vote such as had borne arms, or
were of some fortune and character. In the next
place, they })assed by the charge of his affecting the
sovereignty, because they could not prove it ; and in
it's stead repeated what' Mai'cius some time before
had said in the senate, ag-ainst lowering the price of
corn and for abolishing the tribunitial power. And
they added to the impeachment a new article,
namely,' his not having brought into the public trea-
sury the spoils which he had taken in the country of
the Antiates, but divided them among his soldiers ^^
This last accusation is said to have discomposed

5* From the reign of Servius TuUius,tlie voices had been always
g;itliered by Cciituries. Tlie consuls Mere for adhering' to the
ancient custom : being well apprised that they could save Co'riolanus,
ir' the voices were reckoned by centqries, of which the knights and
the wealthiest of the citizens made the. majority ; the first class, of
people of the highest dislinction, containing ninety-cigiit out of a
hundred and ninety-three, th« amount of all' th6 six. tkit the artful
tribunes alleging tliat, in an affair relating to the rights of .the citi-
zens, everv citizen's vote ought to liave it's due weight, would not
by aiiy means' consent to let the voices be collected otherwise than
by tribe'^s. (L.) BeV^ide th^,se comitia cetihmata and iribuUt, there
were also the (v/jw/vy, established by Ilomulus, who divided the
oiiginannhabitants of Uome into three tribes, and each tribe into
ten cnrhe (Dion. Halicii. 3— o.)_ /r)iis arrangement .subsisted till
the time of Servius Tullius;', w'ho introduced the two other modes of
collecting the sense of the pe(^p!e.*

^^ ' This,' said the tribune Uecius, *l§a;plain proof of his evil
designs : with the public rponey he secured to himself creatures and
guards, as supporters of his intended usurpation. Let him make
it appear, that he had i)ovver to dispose of this booty without violat-
ing the laws. Let him answer directly to this one article, without
dazzling us with the splendid show of his crowns and his scar^, or
using any other arts to l)lind the assembly,' (L.) It is surprising,
as M. Ricard observes, that neither Coriolanus nor his frientls
adduced any of those , reasons in his justification, which Dion,
Halic. has accumulated, vii. 9. 13ut the tumult of u mob is not ui"

200 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

Marcius more than all the rest ; for it ^vas M'hat
he did not expect, and he could not immediately
think of a plausible answer that would satisfy the
commonalty ; liis praises of those who made that
campaign with him, ser\"ing only to raise an outcry
against him from the majority, who were not con-
cerned in it. At last, when they came to vote, he
was condemned by a majority of three tribes, and
the penalty to be inflicted upon him was perpetual
banishment.

After the sentence w?s pronounced, the people
were more elated, and went off in greater transports,
than they had ever felt, on account of a victory in
the field; the senate on the other hand were in the
greatest distress, and grievously repented that they
had not done and sufJbred every thing, rather than
have allowed the people to acquire and abuse
such an enormous power. There was no need at
that time to look upon their dress, or any other
mark of distinction, to know which was a plebeian
and which a patrician ; the man who exulted was a
plebeian, and the man who was dejected a patrician.

Marcius alone remained unmoved, and nnhnmbled.
Still lofty in his port and firm in his countenance,
he alone amidst the afflicted nobility appeared not
to be sorry for himself. This air of fortitude was
not, however, the effect of reason or mildness or
resignation, but arose from the buoyancy of indig-
nation and resentment. And this, though^ the
vulgar know it not, has it's rise from grief, which
when it catches flame, is turned to anger, and then
bids adieu to all feebleness and dejection. Hence
the angry man is courageous, just as he who has a
fever is hot, the mind being upon the stretch and
in a violent agitation. His subsequent behaviour

the reasoning kind. M. Ricard has a long note upon the number
of tribes, which voted on this occasion ; and it was pretty well
agreed, that they were twenty-one, divided into twely# and nine :
but the difficulty is, to settle whether tliese were all the tribes then
created, or part only of the thirty-five, to which they certainly at a
later period amouuted. See Liv. ii. 21.*

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 201

soon showed, that he was thus affected. For having
returned to his own house and embraced his mother
and his wife, who lamented their fate with shrieks
:jnd tears ^\ he exhorted them to bear it with pa-
tience, and then conducted by the patricians in a
body, hastened to one of the city-gates. Thus lie
quitted Rome, without asking or receiving aught at
any man's hand ; and took with him only three or
lour clients. He spent a few days in a solitary
manner at some of his farms near the city, agitated
with a thousand different thoughts, such as his anger
suggested ; in which he did not propose any honour
or advantage to himself, but considered only how
he might satisfy his revenge upon the Romans.
At last he determined to excite a cruel w^ar against
them from some neighbouring nation ; and for this
purpose to apply first to the Volsci, whom he knew
to be yet strong both in men and mioney, and likely
to have derived more in exasperation and hostility,
than to have lost in strength from their previous
defeats.

There was then at Antium a man, Tullus Aufidius
byname'^, highly distinguished among the Volsci
by his wealth, his valour, and his noble birth. Mar-
cius was very sensible, that of all the Romans he
himself was the person, whom Tullus most hated.
For excited by ambition and emulation, as young
warriors usually are, they had in several engagements
encountered each other with menaces and bold defi-
ances, and thus had added personal enmity to the

35 Dion. Halic. (vii. 11.) adds a circumstance of an affecting
nature, which Plutarch ought not to have omitted; namely, tliat
Coriolanus, before his departure, commended to his mother and his
wife the care of his two children, of whom the elder was not more
than ten years old, and the younger an infant. The trait of
Astyanax, in Hector's interview with Andromache, is not the least
beautiful one of that interesting picture *

3^ In Bryan's text, it is Ap<p<Jie?. The Bodleian has it, without
the M-, A(pi^V. But Livy ii. 35., and Dion. HalJc. viii. 1., call him
* Tullus Attius;' and with them an anonymous MS. agrees. Au-
fidms however, which is very near the Bodleian reading, has a Latin
sound, and probably was what Plutarch meant to write.

?02 CAIUS MARCIUS COUIOLANX'S.

hatred wliicli reigned between the two nations. But
notwithstanding all this, considering the great gene-
rosity of Tulhis, and knowing that he was more
desirons than any of the Volsci of an op])ortunity to
retaliate upon the Romans part of the evils, which
his countiy had suffered, he took a method strongly
illustrative of that saying of the poet j

How hard to figlit with wrath ! though life's the price.
He puys it for iiis end.

For dressing himself in such clothes and liabiliments,
as were most likely to })revcnt his being known,
like Ulvsses"',

He stole into the hostile town.

It -was evening, when he entered ; and, though
many people met him in the streets, not one of
them knew him. He passed on therefore to the
house of Tullus, where he got in undiscovered; and,
having directly made up to the iire-place '^, he seated
himself without savin>2; a word, coverinix his fice and
remaining in a composed posture. The people of
the house were much surprised ; yet they did not
venture to disturb him, for there was something of
dignity both in his person and his silence ; but they
M-ent and related the strange adventure to Tuilus,
who was then at supper. Tullus upon this arose
from table, and coming to Coriolanus, asked him,
'* Who he was, and upon what business he was
" come ?" Coriolanus uncovering his face paused
a while and then said: " If thou dost not yet know
me, Tullus, but distrustcst thine eyes, 1 must of
necessity be my own accuser. I am Caius Mar-
cius, who have brought so many calamities upon

•^7 Qdyss. iv. 216., cither (as the scholiast on the pas.sa<Te observes)
to nieasure the wall of Troy, or to persuade Helen to co-operate
•ivith her countrymen the Greeks.*

3*^ The fire-place, having; tlis domestic gods in it, was esteemed
sacred ; and therefore all suppliants resortetl to it;^ as to an iusyluui.

CAIUS MAllCIUS COlilOT.ANUS. 205

the VolscI ; and I bear the additional name of
Coriolanus, ^vhicli would not suffer me, were I so
inclined, to deny tluit imputation. For all the
labours and dangers, wliich I have undergone, I
liave no other reward left but that appellation,
" which distin<Tuishes my enmity to vour nation,
and of which indeed I cannot be deprived. Of
every thing else I have been stripped by the envy
and outrage of the people on the one hand, and
by the cowardice and treachery of tlie magistrates
and those of my own order on the other. Thus
driven out an exile, I am come a suppliant to
your household-gods ; not for shelter and pro-
tection (for why should I come hither, if I were
afraid of death ?) but for vengeance against those
who have expelled me, v^^liich 1 already seem to
begin to take, by putting myself mto your hands.
If therefore you are disposed to attack the enemy,
come on, brave Tullus, avail yourself of my mis-
fortunes ; let my personal distress be the conunon
ha)i]Mness of the Volsci. You may be assured, I
" shall light much better for you, than I have
fought against you ; because they, who know
perfectly the state of the enemy's atfiirs, arc
much more capable of annoying them, than such
" as do not know them. But if you have siven
u\) all thoughts of war, I neither desire to live,
nor is it proper for you to preserve a person wlio
" of old has been your enemy in the field, and ia
" in that case incapable of rendering you any kind
*' of service."

Tullus, highly delighted with this address, gave
him his hand ; and said " Rise, Marcius, and take
courage. The present, which you thus make of
yourself, is inestimable ; and you may assure
yourself^ that the Volsci will not be uno-rateful."
He then entertained him at his table with preat
kindness ; and on the following days they consulted
together about the war.

At tljiat tune Uome \yas in the i[tmost confusion

a

a

cc

?0t CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

on account of the animosity of the nobility against
the commons, which was considerably heightened
by the late condemnation of Marcius. Many inter-
esting prodigies also were announced by private
persons, as well as by the priests and soothsayers.
One of which was as follows : Titus Latinus ^% a
man of no high rank but of remarkable modesty and
candour, free from superstition and much more from
vain pretences to what was extraordinary, had this
dreaui. Jupiter, he tliought, appeared to him, and
ordered him to tell the senate, " That they had
" provided him a very bad and disagreeable leader
" of the dance in the sacred procession." Upon
seeing this vision, he said, he paid at first but little
regard to it. It was presented a second and a third
time, and he neglected it : upon which he lost a
son of the highest promise, and M'as himself sud-
denly struck in such a manner, as to be deprived of
the use of all his limbs. These particulars he related
in the senate-house, being carried thither on his
couch for tliat purpose. And he had no sooner
made an end, than he perceived (as they tell us)
his strength return, and rose up and walked home
witliout assistance.

The senate were much surprised, and made a
strict in(piiryinto the affair; from which it appeared,
that a certain householder had delivered up one of
his slaves, who had been guilty of some offence, to
Iiis other servants, with an order to whip him through
the market-place, and then put him to death. While
they were executing this order and scourging the
wretch, who writhed himself through the violence of
pain into various postures ''^j the procession happened

»9 Livy calls liiin ' T. Latinius,' or 'Tib. Atlnius;' Lactant,
Div. Inst. ii. 8., and Val. Max. i. 7., * T. Atinius ;' and Macrob. Sat.
i. 11. * Au-onius ' or * Acronius' Maxiinus. Cicero, De Div. i. 26.,
gives liini no name at all.*

4° According to Dion. Halic, the master had given orders that
tlie slave should be punished at the head of the procession, to
render the ignonuny the more notorious ; which was a still greater
ail'font to tlie deity, in wliose honour the piocessiou was made.

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 205

to come up. Many of the people avIio composed it
were iired with indignation, for the sight was exces-
I sively disagreeable and shocking to humanity, yet
nobody gave him the least assistance ; only curses
and execrations were vented against the man, who
punished with so much cruelty. For, in those times,
they treated their slaves with great mildness and
moderation ; and this was natural, because they
worked, and even ate with them, it was deemed a
heavy punishment for a slave who had committed a
fault to take up the piece of wood, used to support
the thill of a waggon, and carry it round the neigh-
bourhood. For he, who was thus exposed to the
derision of the family and other inhabitants of the
place, entirely lost his credit, and w^as stiled Furci-
jer ; the Romans calling by the name of //^rc;?, what
the Greeks term hijpostates^ that is, ' a supporter.*

When Latinus had given the senate an account of
his dream, and they were doubting who ' this bad and
disaijreeable leader of the dance' mioht be, the ex-
cessive severity of the punishment reminded some of
them of the slave, who had been whipped through
the market-place, and subsequently put to death.
All the priests agreeing, that he must be the per-
son meant, his master had a severe punishment im-
posed, and t\\Q. procession and games w'ere exhibited
anew in honour of Jupiter'*'. Hence it appears,
that Numa's religious institutions in general are
very wise, and that this in particular is highly con-
ducive to the purposes of piety ; namely, that when
the m.agistrates or priests are employed in any
sacred ceiemony, a herald should go before and
proclaim aloud. Hoc age^ i.e. " Be attentive to this:'*
thus commanding every body to regard the solemn
acts of religion, and not to snifer any business or
avocation to intervene and disturb them ; as well
knowing, that men's attention is seldom fixed, ex-
cept by a sort of violence and constraint.

*■ ' \Vith increasecl niagnificence, Dion. Halic. vii. 13., Liv. ii. S7.*^

$06 CAiUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

Btit" it is not only in so important a case, that
the Romans begin anew tlieir sacrifices, their pro-
cessions, and their games : they do it for very small
matters. If one of the horses that draw the chariots
Galled Tlitnsa' !\ in which are placed the images
of the g'ods, happened to stumble, or if the cha-
rioteer took the reins in his left hand, the whole
procession was to be repeated. And in later ages
they have set about one sacrifice thirty several
times, on account of Some defect or inauspiciou?
appearance in it. Such reverence have the Romans
ever paid to the Supreme Beii'ig.

In the mean time Marcius ^^ and Tulhis held
secret conferences with the principal Volsei, in
which thev exhorted them to benin the war, while
Kome- was torn in pieces with lactious disputes ;
but a sense of hono'ur restrained some of them from
breaking the truce, which had been concluded for
two years. The Romans however furnished them
•with a pretence lor it, having through some sus-
picion or false suggestion caused proclamation to be
made at one of the public shows or games, that all
the Volsei should quit the town before sun-set»
Some"** say that this was a strata 2:em contrived bv
Marcius^ who suborned a })erson to go to the con-
sTuls, and accuse the Volsei of a design to attack
tlie Romans during the games, and to set fire to th(i
city. This proclamation exasperated the whole
Volscian nation against the Romans ; and Tnlhis,
greatly aggravating the affront ' ', at last persuaded

'»* Liv. V. 41. These Thensce were a kind of sacred vehicle
(' den espccrs de /) railcards,' 11.) used fbr the purpose of coiiveying
to the ("irciis t!ie ima^^cs of tlie gods.'-"

•*^ See l)i(ii). Ilalic. viii. 1., who assigns to Coriolanus a« af-
fectatidu, at least, of seeking some plausible pretext for coiinncncing
the war. With his disposition he would not, probably, be very
scriipulous upon the subject.*

••■• Ut ddtni C(>nij)(>sitn7n cum Marcin fitertit. Liv. ii. 37. Dion,
Italic, still more expressly states, what Livy liere strongly insinu-
ates. But Plutarch's tenderness for his hero induces him to slur
^lese authoritative names vmder an l i-io* ^t (pue-tK*"

*^ * We alone,' said he, ♦ of all tlie different nations now in
12

CAIUS MARCIUS COllIOLAXUS. 207

them to send to Komc, to demand that the lands
and cities which had been taken from tliem in the
\yar should be restored. The senate having heard
Avhat the embassadors had to say, answered with
indignation, " That the A^olsci might be the first to
take up arms, but the Romans would be the last
to lay them down." Upon this, Tullus sum-
moned a o'cneral assemblv of his countrymen,
whom he ad\'ised to send for Marcius ; and fox-
getting all past injuries, to rest satisiied tlmt the
service which he would render them, as now their
ally, would far exceed all the damage which they had
received from him, while he had been their enemy.

Marcius accordingly was called in, and made an
oration '^^ to the people ; who finding that he knew
how to speak as well as to fight, and that he ex-
celled in capacity as well as courage, joined him in
commission with Tullus, and invested both with ab-
solute powci'. As he was afraid that the Volsci
would spend nnich time m preparation, and thus
lose a favourable opportunity for action, he left it
to the magistrates and other principal persons in
Antium to provide troops, and whatever else was
necessary; while he himself^', without making any
set levies, took a number of volunteers, and with,
them over-ran the Roman territories before any one
in Rome expected it. There he collected so much
booty, that the Volsci found it difficult to carry it:
off, and consume it in the camp. But the immense
quantity of provisions which he. seized, and. the.

Rome, are not tliougbt wortliy to see the gairies. We alone, like
the prof'anesi; wretches antt outlaws, are driven from a puhiic tes- -
tlval. Gq, aixd aqi,K)unce in all your cities uiul vilhiges the dis-
tinguishing mark, which the Romans have put upon us.' (L.)

The re-(lemauding of the lands and cities, however, was suggested
by Coriolanus.*

■*'' This oration is given by Dion. Halic. at great length, and de-
•jex'vevS tlx; character here bestowed upon it.*

*' Tullus at the same time, by way of diversian, made a similar-
incursion into the Liitia territoxy, and with equal succe^.. Dion).
JlJic, vlii. 2,*

208 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

damage which he did the enemy by committing:
snch spoil, was the least part of his service in this
expedition. The chief point, which he liad in view-
in the whole matter, was to increase the people's
snspicions of the nobility. For while he ravaged
the whole country, he scrupulously spared the
lands of the patricians, and did not suiTer them to
be ravaged or plundered in any respect. Hence
the ill opinion, which the two parties entertained of
each other, and consequently the troubles, grew
greater than ever : the patricians accusing the ple-
beians of having unjustly driven out one of the
bravest men in Rome ; and the plebeians reproach-
ing them with having brought Marcius upon them
to indulge their revenge, and with sitting secure
spectators of what others suffered by the war, while
the war itself was a guard to their lands and sub-
sistence. Marcius having thus effected his purpose,
and inspired the Volsci with courage not only to
meet, but even to despise the enemy, drew off his
party without having sustained any injury.

The Volscian forces, in the mean time, having
assembled with maich expedition and alacrity, ap-
peared so considerable, that it was thought proper
to leave part to garrison their towns, while tiie rest
marched against the Romans. Coriolanus giving it
to the option of Tullus which corps he would com-
mand, Tullus observed that as his colleguc was not
at all inferior to himself in valour, and had hitherto
fought with better success, he thought it most ad-
visable for him to lead the army into the field ;
while he himself stayed behind, to provide for the
defence of the towns, and to supply tlie troops
which were engaged in the campaign with every
thing necessary ~

48

-IS It would have been very imprudent in Tullus to have left
Coriolanus, who hud been an enemy, and might now possibly bo
only a pretended friend, at the head of an army in the bowels of
his country, while he himself was marching at the hcxid of anotlier
against Rome.

CAIUS MAllCIUS CORIOLANUS. 209

Marclus, streinitliciied still more bv this division
of the comnuuid, marched first against Circcii ■^'•', a
Roman colon}' ; and, as it surrendered without re-
sistance, he would not suft'er it to be plundered.
After tins, he laid waste the territories of the Latins ;
expecting tliat the liomans would hazard a battle
lor the Latins, who were their allies, and by :li"e-
cjuent messengers called upon them for assistance.
}]ut the commons of Rome showed no alacrity in
the aiiair ; and the consuls, whose office was now
nearly expired, were not willing to incur such a risk,
and therefore rejected their request. Marcius then
turned his arms against Tolerium, Labici, Pedum,
and Bola, cities of Latium, which he took by as-
sault : and because they made resistance, he sold
the inhabitants as slaves, and plundered their houses.
At the same time, he was particularly careful of*
such, as yoluntarily came over to him ; and, that
they might not sustain any damage against his wish,
he always encamped and kept himself at the greatest
distance from them he ct)uld.

He afterward took Bollic, which is little more
than twelve miles from Rome, where he put to the
sword almost all that w^re of age to bear arms, and
got much plunder. The rest of the A'olsci, Avho
were left as a safeguard to the towns, had now- no
patience to remain at home any longer ; but ran
with their weapons in their hands to Marcius, de-
claring that they would acknowledge no other leader

'^'J For tlic right terminations of this, and other towns soon after
vard mentioned, see Liv. ii. [VJ. Plutarch calls t!ie town ' Cir-
cacuni.' His error is much greater, when a little below he ^vrites
* Cloeliae' instead of ' Cluiliac.' (L.) ^^'itll regard to tiie doubtful
readings, and indeed somewhat obscure geography of this passage,
I shall preserve no more of what M. Ricard has collected from
Dion. Italic, viii. 3., and various parts of Livy, &c., than what re-
lates to ' Jjollac ;' and that only for the sake of stating that it should
probably be read li«iA/i«(, and be thus made to correspond more
closely with Bovillac on the Via Appia, ut wearly the assigned
distance from Rome-

VOL. II. P

210 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

or general. His name, and Ins valour, were re-
nowned through Italv: and all were astonished that
one single person's changing sides could effect so
prodigious an alteration in afr'airs.

At Rome, every thing v^as in disorder. The
Komans refused to fight, and passed their time in
cabals, seditious speeches, and nnitual complaints ;
until intellia'ence was brouij^ht that Coriolanns had
laid siege to Lavinium, v.hcre tlic holy symbols of
the gods of their lathers "^ were placed, and \\ hence
they derived their original, that l)eing the first city
which ^neas had built. A wonderful and universal
change of opinion then appeared among the people,
and a very strange and absurd one among the })a-
tricians. The })eople were desirous to annul the
sentence against Marcius, and to recal him to
Rome ; but the senate, being assembled to deli-
berate on that point, finally rejected the proposi-
tion: either out of a perverse humour of opposing
whatever measure the people espoused ; or perliaps
unwilling, that Coriolanus should owe his return to
the favour of the people; or linally having conceited
some resentment against him for harassing and dis-
tressing all the Romans, when he had been injured
only by a part, and tor showing himself an enemy
to his country, of which he knew the most respect-
able class of inhabitants had both sympathised with
him and shared in his iil-treatment. This resolution
being announced to the commons'', it was not in
their power to vote or to pass a bill ; as, to such a })ro-
cedure, a decree of the senate was an indispensable
preliminary.

s° Originallv brought from Tro}'. See the Life of Roniuhis,
Vol. I. p. Sy. not. ({54^)*

5« Perhaps the senate now refused to comply with the demands of
the people, either to clear themselves from the suspicion of having
maintained a correspondence with Coriohinus, or possibly out of
that magnanimity wiiicli made the Romans averse frg^u peace,
whenever they were attended with ill success in war.

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 21 J

Upon this, Coriolanns was still more exasperated ;
so that, quitting the siei^e of Lavinium "-, he march-
ed in great fury toward Rome, and encamped only
five miles from it, at the Fossae Ciuilia?. The sight
of him caused extreme terror and confusion ; bat,
for the present, it appeased the sedition; for neither
magistrate nor senator durst any longer oppose the
people's desire to recal him. When they saw the
women running up and down the streets, and. the
supplications and tears of the aged men at the altars
of the gods ; when all spirit was gone, and salutary
councils were no m.ore ; they acknowledged that the
people were right in endeavouring to be reconciled
to Coriolanus, and that tiie senate were under a
great mistake, in beginning to indulge the passions
of anger and revenge, at a time when they ought to
have renounced them. They ail therefore airreed to
send embassadors to Coriolanus to offer him liberty
to return, aiui to implore him to put an end to the
war. Those that went on tlfe part of the senate,
being all either relations or friends of Coriolanus ^'\
expected at tlie first interview much kindness from
a man, who vvas thus connected with them. But
it happened ({uite otherwise ; for, being conducted
through the Volscian ranks, they found him seated
in council with a number of high officers, and with
an insufferable appearance of austerity. He then
bade them declare their business, which they did. in
a very modest and humble manner, as became the
state of their aifliirs.

When they had finished, he answered them with
much bitterness and high resentment of the injuries
done him ; and, as general of the Volsci, insisted
" That the Romans should restore all the cities and

s- He left a body of troops to continue the blockade. Dion.
Halic. viii. 4.

^'5 Their names were IMarciis Minucius, Postliumius Cominiuii,
Spurius Largius, Publius Pinarius, and Quintus Sulpicins. Dion.
Halic. has giv^n ns a fine speech made by Minucius upon the oc-
casioii, as well as Coriolanus" reply.*

P 2

TL^l CAIUS JNIARCirS CORIOLANUS.

*' lands, which they had taken in the former wa'r?,
" and slionld grant by decree the freedom of the
" city to the Volsci, as they had done to the
" Latins : for that no lasting peace could be made
" between the two nations, but upon these fair
" and equal conditions." lie gave them thirty
days, to consider of them : and, having dismissed
the embassadors, immediately retired from the Ho-
rn an territories.

Several of the Volsci, who for a long time had
envied his renutation, and been uneasy at the iu-
terest which lie had with the people, availed them-
selves of this circumstance to calumniate and re-
proach him. Tullus himself was of the number.
Not that lie had received any particular injury
from Coriolanus ; but he was led away by a passion
too natural to man. It caused him pain to tind his
own glory obscured, and himself entirely neglected
by the Volsci, who looked upon Coriolanus as their
supreme head, and thought that others might well
be satisfied with that portion of power and autho-
rity, Avhich he thought jiroper to allow them.
Hence, secret hints were first whispered, and in
their private cabals his enemies expressed their dis-
satisfaction, giving the name of treason to his re-
treat. For though he had not betrayed their cities
or armies, yet (they said) he had traitorously
given up time, by which these and all other tilings
are both won and lost. He had allowed them a
respite of no less than thirty days "', knowing their

fjji^u'.oXuc, ami I'.is paraphrase seems nearest the sound of the-
Greek. But the text is nianifestly corrupted, and it is not easy Ui
restore the true reading. Perhaps^ the I^tiu translation, as ])uh-
lished by Bryan, has tlie sense intended hy Plutarch. It is to this
eflect, * when {greater changes (than were necessary in this case)
might hrrppeii in a less space of time.' But, to justify that transla-
tion, the Greek should run as follows : on fjjn'Coyu.<i n iXc<.Trcv; ^love*
i(Ju/«T8 {^sc. 7r6Aiu.o<i) X:iyjZu\uv [/fjiTUziXac, 31. llicard has adopted
the sense assigned in the text.

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 2iS

affairs to be so embarrassed, tliat tliey required
micli a space to their re-establislimeiit.

Coriolanus, however, did not spend those thirty
■days in idleness. Witliin that interval he harassed
the enemy's allies", laid waste their hinds, and took
seven great and popuk:)us cities. The Romans did
not venture to send them anv succours. Thev were
as spiritless, and as little disposed to the war, as if
their bodies had been relaxed and benumbed with
the palsy.

When the term was expired, and Coriohmus re-
turned with all his forces, they sent a second em-
bassy ; " To implore him to lay aside his resent-
ment, to draw off the Volsci from their territories,
and then to proceed as should seem most conducive
" to the advantacre of both nations. For that the Ro-
" mans would not give up any thing through fear:
but, if he thought it reasonable that the Volsci
should be indulged in some particular points, those
" should be dulv considered, M'hen thev had laid
" down their arms." Coriolanus replied, " That as
*' general of the Volsci, he would give them no an-
" swer ; but, us one who was still a citizen of Rome,
" he would advise and exhort them to entertaii*
humble thoughts, and to come within three day^
with a ratification of the just conditions which he
had proposed. At the same time, he assured
■' them that, if their resolutions should be of a differ-
" ent nature, it would not be safe for them to ven-
" ture any more into his camp with empty words.'*

The senate, having received the report of the em-
bassadors, considered the commonwealth as ready
to sink in the waves of a dreadful tempest, and
therefore cast the last, the ' sacred anchor '^,' as it is

'' Bv tins he prevented the allies of the Romans from assisting
them, and guarded against the charge of treachery, nliidi some of
the Volsci were ready to bring against him. (Dion. Halic.)

''■'' This, I believe, our sailors would call ' the sheet-anchor,' and
the French {wh», voca/jn/is trnus, are skilful sailors) ' /r/ waityr)>;P
a>icrc .-' the subordinate ones with us are thebest-hower, the small-
bowser, Sec. yt. Chrysostom, in his fourth Homily ou Ivazarui-^
12

ti

214 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

called. They ordered all the priests of the gods,
the ministers and gimrdiaiis of the mysteries, and ail
who accordino; to the ancient usage of their country
practised divination by tiie flight of birds, to pro-
ceed to Coriolanus in their robes, with the ensigns
which they bore in the duties of their office, and
exert their utm.ost endeavours to persuade him to
desist from the war, and then to treat with his
countrymen upon articles of peace for the Volsci.
When they came, he did indeed vouchsafe to ad-
mit them into the camp ; but he shov,ed them no
other favour, nor gave them any milder answer than
what the others had received : " He bade them,*'
in short, " either accept his former proposals, or
" prepare for war/*

When the priests returned, the Romans resolved
to keep close within the city, and to defend the
walls ; intending only to repulse the enemy, should
they attack them, and placing their chief hopes on
the accidents of time and fortune, as they knev/ of
no resource within themselves. The city was full
of confusion, and terror, and unhappy presages.
At last, something happened similar, to what is often
mentioned by Homer, but which men in general are
little inclined to beheve. For, when on occasion of
any great and uncommon event he says,

Pallas inspired that counsel^";
And again,

But soma immortal power, who rules the mind,
Changed their resolves;

And elsewhere,

The thought spontaneous sprung,

Or by some god inspired ^'s ;

they despise the poet, as if, for the sake of absurd

finely calls conscience * the sacred anchor of man,' intended to pre-
serve him amidst the storms of passion.*

" Odyss. xviii. 157. ^s lb. ix. 339.

CAIUS MARCIUS COltlOLANUS. 215

notions and inc-redible fables, lie endeavoured to take
away our liberty of will. A thing, of which Homer
never dreamed : for ^vhatever happens in the ordi-
nary course of things, and is the usual effect of deli-
beration, he often ascribes to our own powers j as,

!>!}' own great mind

I then consulted ^^ ;

And in another place,

Achilles heard with grief, and various thoughts
Perplex'd his mighty mind''°;

Once more,

-But she in vain

Tempted Bellerophon : the noble youth
With wisdom's shield was arm'd.

And in extraordinary and wonderful actions, which
require some supernatural impulse and enthusiastic
movement, he never introduces the Deity as taking
ijlway, but as rousing into action the freedom of the
^kiU. He does not represent the heavenly Power as
producing the resolution, but ideas which lead to
the resolution ; thereby rendering the act in no re-
spect involuntary, but giving occasion to such as
are voluntary, and superadding confidence and good
hope of accomi)lishment. For either the Supreme
Being must be excluded from all causality and in-
fluence upon our actions, or it must be confessed
that this is the only way in which he assists and
co-operates with man : since it is not to be supposed
that he fashions our corporeal organs, or directs the
motions of our hands and feet to the puiposes which
he designs ; but that by certain motives and ideas,
which he suggests, he either excites or on the other

55 Odyss. xviii. 299. '° II. i. 188.

2U5 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLAXUS.

hand checks and restrains the active powers of the

The Roman women were then dispersed in the
several temples, but the chief and most illustrious
pfirt of the matrons were making their supplications
at the altar of Jupiter Capitolinus. Among the last
was A^aleria the sister of the great Publicola, a per-
son wIk) had rendered the Romans the most con-
siderable services both in peace and war. Publicola,
as we have related in his Life, died some time be-
fore ; but Valeria still survived in the highest esteem,
for her conduct did honour to her high birth. This
Avoman discerning, by some divine impulse, what
would be the best expedient, rose and called
upon the other matrons to attend licr to the house
of A'olumnia, the mother of Coriolanus. M'lien she
entered, and found her sitting with her daughter-in-
law, and with the children of Coriolanus on her lap,
she approached her with licr female companions, and
gpoke to the following etfect : " V^q address our-
*' selves to vou, Volunmia and Ver2:ilia, as women
" to women, without any decree of the senate or
" order of the consuls. But our god, we believe,
" lending a merciful ear to our })rayers, put it in
" our minds to apply to you ; and to entreat you to
" do what will not onlv be salutarv to us and the
" other citizens, but more jrlorious lor vou, if vou
"' hearken to us, than the reducing of tlieir fathers
^' and husbands from mortal enmity to peace and
" friendship was to the daughters of the Sabines.
" ('ome then, go along witii us to Coriohuuis : join
vour instances to ours ; and bear a true and ho-
nourable testimonv to vour countrv, that thous:li
she has received the deepest injuiies from In'm,
she has yet neither done nor meditated any thing
against you in her anger, but restores you safe

'•' Plutarch represents the divine a'^sistance as ' a rnoral influ-
ence,' pifvailinfj: (if it doo°* prevail) by rational motives. And the
best (.'hrifctiaii divines do$cr»bc it in rho same nuuiner.

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. ^17

" into Ills liaiids, though perhaps she may not ob.
" tain any better terms for herself on that account.'*

When Valeria had thus spoken, the rest of the
^vomen joined her request. Volumnia gave them
this answer : " Beside the share which we have in

the general calamity, wc, my friends, have our

particular infelicity ; since Marcius' glory and
" virtue are lost to us, and we behold his person
" guarded rather than protected by the arms of our
" enemies. But it is a still greater misfortune to
" us, if our country is become so weak, as to have
" need to repose her hopes upon us. For I know
" not whether he will have any regard for us, since
" he has had none for his country, which he used
" to prefer to his mother, his wife, and his children.
*' Take us, however, and make what use of us you
" please. Lead us to him. If we can do nothing
" else, we can expire at his feet in supplicating for
« Kome"-'." ...

She then took the children and Vergilia with lier%
and went with the other matrons to the Volscian
camp. The sight of them produced, even in the
eneniv, compassion and a reverential silence. Co-
riolanus, who at that time happened to be seated
upon the tribunal with his priucipal officers, seeing
tiie women approach, was greatly surprised. Never-
theless, he endeavoured to retain his purposed in-
flexibility of temper, though he perceived that his
wife was at their head. Unable however to resist
the emotions of affection, he could not suffer them
to approach him as he sat : but descended from the

*- These speeches are given by Dion. Malic, as usual, in a more
tletailed manner. The mother of Coriolanus indeed, according to
this historian, docs not inunediately comply, but yields at lengtii to
the reiterated entreaties of her patriotic countrywomen.*

^^ Valeria first gave advice of this design to the consuls ; and ther
proposed it in the senate, where after long debates it was sanction-
ed by the fathers. Upon which, A'eturia and the most illustrious
of the Iloman matrons, in chariots provided by the consuls and
amidst the acclamations of the senators and the whole people, took
their way to the enemy's camp.

21S CAIUS MARCIUS COUIOLAXUS.

tribunal, and running to meet them, embraced first
his mother for a considerable time*", and afterward
his wile and his ciiildren ; neither reiiaining from
tears, nor any other proofof natrn^al tendernesvS,' but
^vliolly surrendering hiniseU" to the impetuous tor-
rent ofhis feehngs.

When he had sufficiently indulged his passion, and
perceived tiiat his mother wished to speak, he called
the Volscian counsellors to him, and \^olLnnnia ex-
pressed herseif to the following purpose : " You see,
'^ my son, by our attire and our miserable looks,
'*■ and therefore I may spare myself the trouble of
" declaring, to what condition youi' banishment has
*' reduced us. Think within yourself, whether we
are not the most unhappy of women, when for-
tune has changed the spectacle, that should have
been the most pleasing in the world, into the
*' most dreadful ; when Voiumnia beholds her
" son, and Vergiha her husband, encamped in a
hostile manner before the walls of his native city.
And what to others is a principal consolation un-
der misfortune and adversity, 1 mean prayer to
the gods, to us is rendered impracticable : for we
cannot at the same time implore victory for our
country, and your preservation ; but what our
worst enemies would imprecate upon us as a curse,
must of necessity be interwoven with our prayers.
" Your wife and children nuist either behold their
" country, or you, perish. As to my own part, I
" will not live to see this war decided by fortune.

'* This and other marks of filial affection and respect, shown bj
Coriolanus to his mother, which constitute amidst all his military
glories the finest part of iiis character, are recorded by Dion. Malic,
viii. G., and by Livy ii, 40. Both these historians agree with Plu-
tarch, in making his mother the speaker upon this occasion : and
the speeclics v.liich they have drawn u|i, and which are well worth
perusing, accurately characterise their respective authors ; exhibit-
inq; the concise vehemence of Livy, the more aH'ecting but some-
what tedious and tautological difiiision of Dion. Halic, and the
intermediate eloquence of Plutarcii, which j)reserves the softness of
the latter without his prolixity, and by it's deviations from the former
gains more in pathos tiian it loses in energy.*

ti
a

ti

a

(C

cc,
ii

CAIUS MARCIUS COllIOLANUS. 219

" If I cannot persuade yon to prefer friendship and
" nnion to enmity and it's ruinous consequences,
" and so to become a benefactor to botli sides, ra-
*' tlier than the destruction of one of them ; reflect
upon this, and prepare to expect it, that you shall
not advance against your country, without tramp-
ling upon the dead body of her who bore yon.
For it does not become n)e to wait for that day,
when my son shall be either led captiye by his
fellow-citizens, or triumph oyer Rome. If indeed
I desired you to save your country by ruining the
Volsci, 1 confess the case Vv'ould be hard, and the
"^ choice difficult: for it would neither be honour-
" able to destroy your countrymen, nor just to be-
" tray those, who have placed their confidence in
" you. But what do we desire of you, more than
" deliverance from our own calamities ? A deliver-
ance which will be equally salutary to both
parties ''^ but most to the honour of the Volsci;
since it will appear that their superiority em-
povv'cred them to grant us the greatest of blessings,
peace and friendship, while they themselves re-
" ceive the same. If these take place, you will be
" acknowledged to be the chief cause of them ; if
" they do not, you alone must expect to bear the
" blame from both nations. And though the chance
" of war is uncertain, yet the certain eyent of this
" will be that, if you conquer, you will be a destroy-
" ing dffimon to your country ; if you are beaten,
" it will be obvious that by indulging your resent-
" ment, you have plunged your friends and bene-
*' factors into the deepest misfortunes."

Coriolanus listened to his motlier, while she went
on with her speech, without saying the least word
to her ; and Volumnia, seeing him stand a long time
nuite after she had ceased speaking, proceeded again
in this manner, " Why are you silent, my son ? Is
** it an honour to yield every thing to anger and re-

<i5 She begged a truce for a year, that within that time measures
might be taken for settling a solid ajnd lasting peace.

9

ii
cc
cc

a
a

(C

t:

220 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLAXl'S,

*' scnUiicnt, and would it be a disgrace to yield to
" your mother in so important a petition ? Or does
*' it become a great man to remember the injuries
done to him ; and would it not equally become a
great and good man, M'ith the highest regard and
" reverence to keep in mind the benefits, which he
has received from his parents? Surely you, of all
men, sliould take care to be grateful, who have
suffered so extremely by ingratitude. And yet,
though you have already severely punished your
country, you have not made your mother the least
" return for lier kindness. The most sacred ties
*' both of nature and religion, without any other
constraint, require that you slioukl indulge me in
this just and reasonable request ; but, if v/ords
cannot prevail, this only resource is left.'* Say-
ing this, slie threw herself at his feet, together with
his wife and children ; upon which Coriolanus cry-
ing out, " O mother ! Avhat is it you have done r'*
raised her from the ground, and tenderly pressing
her hand, continued, " You have gained a victory
" fortunate for your country, but ruinous to me^.
" I go, vanquislied by you alone." Then, after a
short private conference with his mother and wife,
he sent them back to Rome, agreeably to their de-
sire. Next morning he drew off the Volsci, wlio en-
tertained different sentiments upon what had passed.
wSoiue blamed him : others, whose inclinations were
for peace, found no fault : others again, thougli tliey
disliked what was done, did not look upon Corio-
lanus as a bad man, but thouii'ht him excusable in
yielding to such irresistible solicitations. None how-
ever presumed to contradict his orders, tliough they
followed him rather out of veneration lor his virtue,
than regard to his authority.

The sense of the dreadful and dangerous circum-
stances, in which the Roman peoi)lc had been in-
volved by the war, never appeared so strong as when

''■'^ He well foresaw, tliat the Volsci would rievcr forgive liiin the
favour, which he «'ap about to show to their enemies.

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS. 221

they were delivered from it. For no sooner did they
perceive from the walls, that the Volsci were drawinj^
off, than all the temples were opened and filled with
persons crowned with garlands, and offering sacri-
fice as for some great victory. But in nothing was
the public joy more evident, than in the affectionate
regard and honour which both the senate and people
paid to the vromen, w^hom they considered and an-
nounced as the certain instruments of their preserva-
tion. Nevertheless, when the senate decreed '^'^ that,
Y^'hatevcr they thought would contribute most to
their glory and gratification, the consuls should take
care to see it done, they only desired that a temple
might be built to ' the Fortune of Women :* the ex-
pense of which they offered to defray themselves,
requiring the commonwealth to be at no other
charge than that of sacrifices, and such a solemn
service as was suitable to the majesty of the gods-
The senate, though they commended their genero-
sity, ordered the temple and shrine to be erected at
the public charge ^^ : but the women contributed
their money notwithstanding, and with it provided
another image of the goddess, which on being set
up in the temple, as the Romans report, uttered
tliese words ; " C) women ! acceptable to the gods
" is this your gift ^^."

This voice, they fabulously affirm, was repeated
twice, thus offering to our faith things, which ap-
pear impossible. We will not deny indeed that
images may have sweated, shed abundant tears, and

'" It was decreed, that an encomium of those matrons should be
engraven on a public monument. Dion. Halic.

'"* It was erected on the Via Latino, about tour miles from Rome,
on the very place where \ eturia had overcome the obstinacy of her
sou. (Val. Max. i. 6.) Valeria, who had proposed so successful a
deputation, was the first priestess of this temple, which was much
frequented by the Roman women. (Id., and Liv. ii. ^O.)

'^'J Dion. Halic. viii. 7., not satisfied with relating this prodigy,
demands credit for it, as being recorded in the Commentaries of
the High-Priests, the only historianii of the early ages of Rome,
(fit, de Oral;, ii. 12.)*

222 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS.

emitted drops like blood. For wood and stone often
contract a mouldiness, which produces moisture ;
and not only exhibit manv different colours them-
selves, but receive variety of tinctures from the am-
bient air: at the same time there ij no reason, why
the Deity may not make use of these signs to an-
nounce things to come. It is also very possible,
that a sound like that of a sigli or a groan may pro-
ceed from a statue, by the rupture or violent sepa-
ration of some of the interior parts : but that an
articulate voice and expression so clear, full, and per-
fect, shoukl issue from a thing inanim.ate,is altogether
inconceivable. For neither the soul of man, nor
even God himself, can utter vocal sounds and pro-
noiuice words, without an organised body and parts
fitted for utterance. Wherever then history asserts
such things, and bears us down with the testimony
of many credible witnesses, we must conclude that
some impression not unlike that of sense influenced
the imagination, and produced the belief of a real
sensation ; as in sleep we seem to hear when v/e
do not hear, and to see w-hen we do not see. As
for those persons, who are possessed with such a
strong sense of religion that they cannot reject any
thins: of this kind, tiiev found their faith on the won-
derful and incomprehensi'ole power of God« For
there is no kind of resemblance between hiin and a
human being, either in his nature, his operations,
his wisdom, or his power. If therefore he performs
something wliicli we cannot eit'eci, and executes
M'hat with us is impossible, there is nothing in this
contradictory to reason ; since, though he differs
greatly from us in every thing, yet the dissimilitude
and distance between him and ourselves appears
much the oreatest in the works which he has
wrought. But " the knowledge of many things di-
vine," as Heraclitus affirms, " escapes us through
want of faith "°."

'° Surely this passage should induce us to acquit Plutarch of the
charge of superstition. When be reports these prodigies, he does

CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS, 223

"\V1ien Coriolanus returned after this expedition to
Autiiim, Tullus, who both hated and feared him,
resolved to have him immediately assassinated; bein^jj
persuaded that, if he missed this, he should not find
such anotlicr opportunity. He first therefore col-
lected and prepared a number of accompHces, and
then summoned Coriohuuis to divest liimself of his
authority, and give an account of his conduct to the
Volsci. Dreading the conse({uence of being re-
duced to a private station, while Tullus, who had
so great an interest with his countrymen, remained
in power, he answered that if the Volsci required it
he would resign his commission, and not otherwise,
since he had accepted it at their common request;
but that he was ready even then to give an account
of his behaviour, if the citizens of Antiurn would
liave it so. Upon this, they met in full assembly ;
and some of the orators, wiio were prepared for it,
endeavoured to exasperate the populace against him.
But when Coriolanus stood up, the violence of tha
tum(dt abated, and he had liberty to speak ; the
best part of the people of Antiurn, and those who
were most inclined to peace, appearing ready to
hear him with candour, and to pass sentence upon
liim with equity. Tullus was then afraid, that
he would make but too good a dei^tnce : for he was
an eloquent man, and the former advantages, which
he had procured for the nation, outweighed his pre-
sent offence. Nay, the very im])eachment was a
clear proof of the magnitude of the benefits, which
he had conferred u.pon thesn. For they would never
have thought themselves injured, in not conquering
Rome, if they had not been near taking it througli
his means. The conspirators, therefore, judged it
prudent not to wait any longer, or to try the multi-
tude ; and the boldest of their faction, crying out
•that a traitor ought not to be heard, or suffered by

it in deference to the manners of the times, of which he writes ; ami.
if he does not alu'ays accompany hi;^ narrative with reflexions in
tliis kind, it is most probably to avoid the imputation of tautology.)*

224 CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLAKUS.

the Volsci to act tlie tyrant and refuse to lay down
his authority, rushed upon him in a body, and
killed him on the spot"' ; not one, that was present,
lifting a hand to defend him. It was soon evident,
however, that this was not done with the general
approbation : for they assembled from several cities
to give his body an honourable burial'', and adorned
his monument with arms and spoils, as became a
distinguished warrior and general.

When the Romans were inform.ed of his death,
they showed no sign either of favour or of resent-
ment ^^ Only they permitted the women, at their

''^ Dion. Halic. says, they stoned hiui to death. (L.) His ac-
count of this whole affair agrees with that of Phatarch, except that
he savs the skirmishinfi^ hetween TuUus and Coriolanus continued
several days. Cicero (de Clar. Orat. x.) favours the opinion, that
he died by his ov/n hand; he subjoins, however, cid alitcr est apud
ie, Atticc, f^c*

7- They dressed him in his general's robes, and laid his corpse o»
a magnificent bier, which vvas carried by such young officers, as
had been most distinguished for their martial exploits. Before him
were borne tlie spoils which he had seized from the enemy, the
crowns wliich he had gained, and the plans and models of the cities
which he had taken, hi this order his body was laid upon the pile,
while several victims were slain in honour to his memory. When
the pile was consumed, they gathered up his ashes, which they in-
terred on the spot, and erected there a magnificent monument.
According to this story, Coriolanus was slain 01. Ixxiii. 1., A. U. C.
26(3., and eight years after his first campaign ; but Livy, after stat-
ing that accounts difiertxl, ii. 4-0., informs us (from Fabius Pictor,
a very ancient author) that he lived, till he was extremely old ;
.and that in the decline of life he was wont to say, ' A state of exile
is more uncomfortable to an old man, than to any other.' We
cannot, however, think that Coriolanus grew old among the Volsci.
Had he done so, his counsels would have preserved them from
ruin; and, after Tullus was slain, he would most probably have
restored their affairs and have procured their admission to the
rights and privileges of Roman citizens, in tiie same manner as the
Latins.

"5 This is surely a more probable account, than that of the usu-
ally accurate Dion. Halic, who says that the Romans went into
general mourning upon the occasion, and that for the five ensuing
centuries he was the universal theme cf praise : an exception at
least must be allowed toward the close of that period, in the in-
stance of Cicero, who says Jmiiil Coiiolanw^f (^ui aiuilium jpetiit k
YqIsc'is. (Ep. ad AtU ix. 10.)'^

ALCIBLiDES & CORIOLANUS COMPARED. 22^

request, to go into inoiiniing for ten months, as tliey
used to do for a father, a son, or a brother ; tliis
being the longest term for mourning allowed by
Numa Pompilius, as v;e have stated in his Life.

The Vclscihad quickly occasion to regret the loss
of Marcius. For tirst in a dispute with the ^qui,
their friends and allies, whether of the two nations
should furnish a general to their armies, they pro-
ceeded to blows, and a number were killed and
wounded ; and afterward coming to a battle with the
Romans, in which they were defeated, and Tullus
with the flower of their army perished, they were
compelled to accept very disgraceful conditions of
peace, by which they were reduced to the obedi-
ence of Rome, and obliged to receive such terms as
the conquerors chose to allow.

ALCIBIADES AND CORIOLANUS

COMPARED.

HAVING now given a detail of all the actions
of these two great men, which we thought worthy
to be known and remembered, we may perceive at
one glance that as to their military exploits the ba-
lance is nearlv even. For both ffave extraordinary
proofs of courage as soldiers, and of prudence and
capacity as commanders-in-chief: though perhaps
some may think Alcibiades the ' more complete ge-
neral, on account of his many successful expeditions
by sea as w^ell as by land. But this is common to
both, that when they had the command and fought
in person, the affairs of their country infillibly pros-
pered, and as infallibly declined when tliey wxnt
over to the enemy.

As to their behaviour in point of government, if
the licentiousness of Alcibiades, and his compliances
with the humour of the populace, wxre abhorved by

VOL. II. Q

i^O ALCIBIADES AND

the wise and sober part of the AthcnicTiii? ; the
proud and forbidding manner of Coriolanus, and his
excessive attachment to tlie patricians, were equally
detested by the Roman people. In this respect,
therefore, neither of them is to be commended ;
though he who avails himself of popular arts, and
shows too m[ich indulgence, is less biameable than
he who, to avoid the imputation of obsequiousness,
treats the people with severity. It is, indeed, dis-
graceful to attain power by flattering them ; but, on
the other hand, to pursue it by terrifying and injiu'-
ing and oppressing them, is not only disg^raccful but
luijust.

That Coriolanus had an openness and simplicity
of manners, is a point beyond disj)ute, whilst Avlci-
biades in the proceedings of his administration was
craftv and deceitful. The latter has been most
blamed for the trick by which, as Thucydidcs in-
ibrms us, he imposed upon the Lacedremonian em-
bassadors, and renewed the contest. Yet this Stroke
of policy, though it plunged Athens again in war,
rendered the alliance with the Mantineans and Ar-
gives, which was brought about by Alcibiades, much
stronger and more respectable. x\.nd was not Corio-
lanus likewise charu'cable with a falsity, in stirring?
iq) the Ron^^ans (as Dionysius states) against the
\'olsci, bv loadinn- the latter with an infamous ca-
kunny, when they went to see the public games ?
'] lie cause, too, makes this action the more crimi-
nal : tor it was not by ambition, or a rival spirit in
politics, tliat he was influenced, as Alcibiades liad
been ; but he did it to gratify his anger, " a ])assioii
which," as IJion'"^ observes, " is ever ungrateful to
it's votaries."- lie thus disturbed the greatest })art of
Italy, and in liis quarrel with his country destroyed
many cities, which had never done him any injury.

'* Or, as Ileisike (witliout just reason, however) would read,
* Ton ' fl'.c lr.;_;i'- pnct, wlio I.^ ollen quoted Ijv Plutarcli. No suci*
'<;vvinir indf"-<!, "A. lici^kc renmrks, is clrewliere recorded ol' the
X^ion of Syracuse, cither by oui' uull:::;r oi: by uti)cr v.ritt'rs.*

CORIOLAXUS COMPARED. 227

Alcibiades, it must be confessed, was the author
of many evils to t!ie Athenians ; but he was easily
reconciled to them, when he found that they re-
l)ented. Naj, when he was driven a second time into
exile, he could not bear with patience the blunders
comjnitted by the new generals, nor behold with in-
difference the dangers to which they were exposed ;
but pursued the same conduct, for which Aristides is
so highly extolled with respect to Themistocles. He
went in person to those generals who, he knew, were
not his friends, and pointed out and explained to
them W'hat steps it was proper for tliem to take.
Whereas Coriolanus directed his revenge against the
whole commonwealth, though he had not been in-
jured by the whole, but the best and most respect-
able part both suffered a)id sympathised with him.
And subsequently, when the llomans endeavoured
to make satisfaction for that single grievance by
many embassies and with much submission, he was
not in the least pacified or conciliated ; but appear-
ed determined to prosecute a cruel war, not in order
to procure his recal or return to his native countrv,
but to conquer and to ruin it. It may indeed be
granted, that there was this difference in the case :
Alcibiades returned to the Athenians, when the
Spartans, who both feared and hated him., intended
privately to despatch him. But it would not have
been so honourable in Coriolanus to desert the
Volsci, who had showed him the utmost kindness,
appointed him general with fidl authority, and re-
posed in him the highest confidence : very differ-
ently treated in this respect from Alcibiades, who
was abused to their own purposes, rather than used
by the Lacediemonians ; and who, after having been
tossed about in their city and their camp, was at last
obliged to put himself into the hands of Tisaphernes.
But perhaps he made his court to the Persian '% in

'* For lie prevented Tisaphernes from assisting- the Spartans with.
all lii.s forces. He thus, at once, served tiie Athenians and th«
Peisians. For it was undoubtedly the interest of the Fcrsians to

Q. 2

225 ALCIBIADES AKD

order to prevent the utter ruin of his countrr, to
which he was desirous to return.

History intbrms us, that Alcihitides often took
bribes, wliich lie lavislicd again with equal discredit
u.pon his vicious pleasures ; while Coriolanus refused
to receive even vv^hat the generals, under whom he
served, would have bestowed upon him with honour.
Hence the beliaviour of the latter was tlie more de-
tested by the people, in the disputes about debts ;
since it w'as not with a view to advantage, but out
of contempt and by way of insult, as tiiey thought,
that he bore so hard upon them.

Antipater in one of his Epistles, wlierc he speaks
of the death of Aristotle the philosoplier, observes;
" That OTeat man, beside his other extraordinary
*' talents, had the art of insinuating himself into
" the affections of those, with v^hom he conversed."
For v/ant of this talent, tlie ilhistrious actions and
virtues of Coriolanus were odious even to those who
received the benefit of them, and who notwithstand-
insc could not endure ' that overbearino: austeritv'
which, as Plato savs, is " alwavs the companion of
solitude." But as Alcibiades on the other hand
knew how to treat those, witli whom he conversed,
with an engaging civility, it is no wonder that the
glory of his exploits flourished in the favour and
honourable regard of mankind, since his wvy faults
had occasionally their grace and elei^ance. Hence
it was that, though his condnct was often very pre-
judicial to Athens, he was still frequently a])))ointe(l
commander-in-chief; while Coriolanus, after many
heroic acliievements, with the best })retensions sued
for the consulship, and lost it. The former deserved
to be hated by his countrymen, and vv'as not ; the
latter was not beloved, though at the same time lie
was admired.

We sliould moreover consider, that Coriolanus

preserve the two leading powers of Greece in a condition to annoy
each other, and in the nieaa time to reaj) tb'^. atlvantage them-
selves.

CORIOLANUS COMPARED. ' i'29

performed no considerable services, v/Iiile lie com-
manded the armies of his country, thoufrh for the
enemy against his country, lie did ; but tliat Alci-
biades, both as a soldier and a general, effected
great things for the Athenians. While among his
fellow-citizens, Alcibiades was superior to all the at-
tempts of his enemies, though their calumnies
prevailed against him in his absence ; yhereas
Coriolanus was condemned by the Romans, though
])resent to defend himself, and was at length assassi-
nated by the Volsci, against all ric^hts indeed human
and divine. Nevertheless, he altbrded them a co-
lour for what they did, by granting to the entreaties
of the women that peace, which he had refused to
the application of the embassadors; thus leaving the
enmity betv/een the two nations and the grounds of
the war entire, and losing a very fivourable oppor-
tunity for the Volsci. For surely he would not have
drav.n off his forces without the consent of those,
who had committed them to his conduct, if he had
sufficiently regarded his duty to his employers.

If however, w'ithout considering the Volsci in the
least, he consulted his own resentment alone in stir-
ring up the war, and put a period to it again when
tliat was satisfied, he should not have spared his
country on his motlier's account, but have spared
her with it ; for both Ids mother and his wife made a
part of his natiye city, which he was besieging. But
inhumanly to reject the application and prayers of the
embassadors and the petition of the priests, and then
to consent to a retreat in deference to his mother, was
not doing her honour, but bringing disgrace upon his
country ; as unw-orthy to be saved for its own sake, and
saved only in compassion and condescension to a
woman. For the favour was invidious, and so far from
being engaging, that in fact it savoured of cruelty, and
consequently was unacceptable to both parties. He
retired, without being won by the supplications of
those with whom he -was at war, and without havinsr
won the consent of those for whom he undertook it.

€30 ALCIBIADES & CORIOLAXUS COMPARED.

The cause of all which was the austerity of liis man-
ners, and the arroiiance and inflexibihtv of his mind,
things hateful enough to the people at all times ;
but, when united with ambition, savage and into-
lerable. Persons of his temper, as if they had no
need of honours, neglect to ingratiate themselves
with the multitude, and yet are excessively cha-
grined when those honours are withheld. It is true,
neither Metellus, nor Aristides, nor Epaminondas
was pliant to the people's honour, or could submit
to flatter them ; but then they had a thorough con-
tempt of every thing, which the people could either
give or take away : and when they were banished,
or upon any other occasion miscarried in the suf-
frages, or were condemned in large fines, they
nourished no anger against their ungrateful country-
men, but were satisfied with their repentance and
reconciled to them at their request. And surely he,
who is sparing in his assiduities to the people, can
but with an ill grace think of revenging any slight,
which he may suffer : for extreme resentment,
founded on disappointment in a pursuit of honour,
must be the effect of an excessive desire of it.

Alcibiades, for his part, readily acknowledged that
he was charmed with honours, and that he was very
uneasy at being neglected ; and therefore he endea-
voured to recommend himself to those, among whom
lie lived, by every engaging art in his power. But
the pride of Coriolanus would not permit him to
make his court to those, who were capable of con-
ferring honours upon him ; while at the same time
his ambition filled him with indignation and regret,
when they passed liim by. This, then, is the
blamcable part of his character ; all the rest is emi-
nently glorious. In point of temperance and disre-
gard of riches, he is fit to be compared with the
most illustrious examples of integrity in Greece ;
not with Alcibiades, who in this respect was the
most profligate of men, and had the least regard foj
every principle of decorum.

THE

LIFE

«F

TIMOLEON.

SmiMARY.

^iafe of Sicily, previous!// to Timoleoii's arrival. The Carthaginiant
make a descent upon the island, and the Sicilians send to Corinth
for succours. The Corinthians determine to despatch troops to
their assistance, under the command of Timoleon. His noble hirthy
character, and braverij. He takes a part in the destruction of his
brother, laho had usurped the government of Corinth. Different
opinions upon the subject. He resolves to spend his Ife in relircr
■ment. Refexions on the effects of excessive grief. Icetes' trench fry
occasions the hurrying of the succours. Presages of their su<;cesSf
Icetes endeavours to mislead Timoleon, tvho frids himself much
perplexed. He eludes the Carthaginians, and disembarks his forces.
Is distrusted bjj the Sj/racusaiis, and other inhabitants of Sicily,
(lains an advantage over Icetes. Adramnn opens ifs gates to him,
and Dionysius gives up to him the citadel of Syracuse. Dionysius
is sent to Corinth. His many remarkable sayings. Timoleon re-
ceives a reitforcement : incurs considerable danger. The garrison
in the citadel are reduced to great extremities. Icetes goes to be-
iiege Catana ; but is recalled by intelligence qftlie capture (f the
Achradina. Timoleon gets possession of Messina, and marches
to Syracuse. Magon is surprised, and -withdraws. Syracuse
taken by storm. The citadel, and all that had beenihe property
of the tyrant destroyed. Re-establishment of the liberty of Sicily.
Afresh attempt of the Carthaginians upon that island : Opposed
by Timoleon, who encourages his drooping forces. The Cartha-
ginian numbers* Timoleon attacks them in crossing a river : is fir

232 TIMOLEON.

vourecThij a storm ; and gains a complete viclorr/. He sends ihs
spoils to Corinth. The Carthaginians despatch additional forces to
Sicily. Proofs of the foiour, in ivhich Timoleon is held bij the
gods. Icetes reviews the ivar ; but is taken, and killed. Timoleon
reduces the rest of the Sicilian tyrants ; the gratititde of Sicilj/.
Timoleon compared with the great vien of his age. Re-establishes
himself at Syracuse : loses his sight in old age. His honours,
death, and monument.

jl he afikirs of the Svracusaiis, before Timoleon
was sent into Sicily, were in the following posture :
Dion, having driven ont Dionysins the tyrant, was
soon assassinated ; those, who had participated with
him in delivering Syracuse, were divided among
themselves ; and the city, which only changed one
tyrant for another, was oppressed vv'ith so many mi-
series, that it was almost desolate \ As for the rest
of Sicily, the wars had made part of it quite a desert,
and most of the towns that remained were held by
a confused mixture of barbarians and soldiers, who
having no regular pay were ready for every change
of government.

Such being the state of things, Dionysius, in the
tenth year after his expulsion, having collected a
body of foreigners drove out Nysicus - then master

' Upon the death of Dion, who had expelled Dionysius the
Younger from Syracuse, 01. cv. 4., B. C. 357., his nuntlierer Cal-
lippus 'usurped the supreme power; but after ten months he was
driven out, and slain with the same diigger, vvliich he had planted
in the breast of his friend. Hipparinus, the brother of Dionysius,
arriving with a numerous fleet possessed himself of the city of
(Syracuse, a«d held it for the space of two years. Syracuse and
all Sicily being thus divided into parties and factions, Dionysius
the Younger, who had been driven from the throne, natural!}' took
advantage of these troubles. Diod. Sic. x., &c.

^ Nysieus was a man of high military character, and had been
commander-in-chief under Dionysius.*

TIMOLEQN. ^5^

of Syracuse, restored his own affliirs, and re-esta-
blished himself in his dominions. Thus he, who
had been unaccountably stripped by a small body
of men of the greatest power that any tyrant ever
possessed, stiii more unaccountably from a beggarly
fugitive became the master of those, by whom he had
been expelled. Every one therefore, who remained
in Syracuse, became slaves to a tyiant at all times
of an ungentle nature, and at that time in particular
exasperated by his misfortunes to a degree of savage
ferocity. But the best and most considerable of the
citizens having retired tolcetes, prince of the Leon-
tines ^, put themselves under his jirotection, and
chose him for their general. Not, that he was bet-
ter than the most avowed tyrants ; but they had no
other resource: and they were willing to repose
some confidence in him, as being of a Syracusan
family, and having an army able to cope with that of
Dionysius.

In the mean time, the Carthaginians appearing
before Sicily with a large fleet, and being likely to
avail themselves of the disordered state of the island,
the Sicilians struck with terror determined to send
an embassy into Greece, to beg assistance of the
Corinthians : not only on account of their kindred
to that people ^, and the many services which they
had received from them on former occasions ; but
because they knew that Corinth was always a patron-
ess of liberty and an enemy to tyrants, and that she
had engaged in many wars, not from a motive of

3 These people inhabited a city (hod. Leontinl) situated not far
to the N. of S5n-acuse, between the rivers Lissus and Ferias (hod.
Lisso, and Fiume di San Leonardo) and originally built by the
Chalcidians of Naxus in Sicily. The surrounding countries, called
Campi Leontini or Lcestrygonii, were celebrated for their fertility.*

4 The Syracusans were a colony from Corinth, founded by Ar-
chias the Corinthian (the year following the foundation of Naxus
by the Chalcidians) 01. xii. 1., A. C. 732. The rest of Sicily hud
been planted with Phoenicians and other ' barbarians,' as the Gre-
cians called them, above three hundred years before,

9

fCi- TIMOLEON.

ambition or avarice, but to maintain the freedom and
independence of Greece. Upon this Icetes, whose
intention in accepting the command had been not
so much to deliver Syracuse from it's tyrants, as to
set up himself there in the same capacity, entered
into a private negociation with the Carthaginians ;
M'hile in pubhc lie commended the design of the Sy-
racusans, and despatched embassadors along with
theirs into Peloponnesus. Not that he was desirous
of obtaining succours from that quarter, but he
hoped that if tlie Corinthians, on account of the
troubles of Greece ^ and their engagements at home
should (^iis it was likely enough) decline sending any,
3ie might the more easily incline the balance to the
side of the Carthaginians, and then make use of their
alliance and co-operation, either against the Syracu-
sans or their present tyrant. That such were his
views, a little time discovered.

When the embassadors arrived and their business
was known, the Corinthians, always accustomed to
give particular attention to the concerns of their
colonies, and especially to those of Syracuse, having
fortunately nothing to molest or employ them in
their own coinitry, readily passed a vote that the
succours should be granted. The next thing to be
considered was, who should be general : when the
magistrates put in nomination such, as had endea-
voured to distinguish themselves in the state : but
one of the plebeians stood up and nominated Timo-
leon, the son of Timodenuis, who as yet had never
concerned himself in the business of the common-
wealth, and was so far from hoping or wishing for
such an appointment, that it seemed some god had
inspired his proposer witli the thought ; with such
indulgence did fortune immediately promote his
election, and so much did her fiivour afterward sig-
nalise his actions, and add lustre to his valour!

' Occasioned by the encroachments and intrigues of Philip, king
of Maccdoa.*

TIMOLEON. 235

His parentage was noble on botli sides, for his
lather Timodemus'* and his mother Demariste were
of the best families in Corinth. His love of his
country was remarkable, and so was the mildness
of his disposition, except that he' bore an extreme
hatred to tyrants and wicked men. His natural abi-
lities for war were so happily tempered, that as an
extraordinary prudence was seen in the enterprises
of his younger years, so an undaunted courage dis-
tino'uished his decHnin^; aj^^e. He had an elder bro-
ther, named Timophanes, who resembled him in
nothing ; being rash and indiscreet of himself, and
utterly corrupted besides through a passion for sove-
reignty infused into him by some of his profligate
acquaintance, and certain foreign soldiers whom he
had always about him. He appeared to be impe-
tuous in war and to court danger, which gave his
countrymen such an opinion of his courage and ac-
tivity, that they frequently entrusted him with the
command of the army. And in these matters Timo-
leon much assisted him, by entirely concealing or
at least extenuating his faults, and setting off and
magnifying the good qualities which nature had given
him.

In a battle between the Corinthians and the troops
of Argos and Cleone \ Timoleon happened to serve
among the infantry, when Timophanes, at the head
of the cavalry, was brought into extreme danger ; for
his horse, being wounded, threw him amidst the
enemy. Upon this, part of his companions were
frightened and presently dispersed : and the few
who remained, having to sustain the attack of num-
bers, with difficulty stood their ground. Timoleon,
seeing what had occurred, ran to his assistance, and
covered him as he lay with his shield ; and, after

^ Timenetus, says Diod. Sic. xvi. 65. From this historian it
appears, that Timoleon was already eminent as a general, and at
the head of the Corinthian administration.*

J The last village of Argolis, on the side of Corinth.*

235 TiMOLEOX.

havinsr received abundance of darts, and maiivstrokes
of the sword upon his body and his armour, by great
efforts repulsed tlie enemy, and saved his brother.

Some time after this, the Corinthians apprehensive
that their city might be surprised through some
treachery of their allies, as it had been previously
resolved to keep on foot four hundred mercenaries,
gave tlie conmiand of them to Timophanes. T)ut
he, having no regard to justice or honour, soon en-
tered into measures to subject the citv to himself;
and, having put to deatli a number of the principal
inhabitants without form of trial, declared himself
it's absolute sovereign. Timoleon deeply concerned
at this, and accou.nting the treacherous proceedings
of his brother his own misfortune, went to expostu-
late with him, and endeavoured to persuade him to
renounce this mad and unfortunate ambition, and i^i
bethink himself how to make his fellow-citizens some
amends for the crimes which he had committed.
But as he rejected his single admonition v.ith disdain,
be returned a few davs aftervvard, takiuii,- with him a
kinsman named yEschylus, brother to the wife of
Timophanes, and a certain soothsayer a friend of his,
whom Theopompus calls Satyrus, but Ephorns and
Timaeus mention by the name of Orthagoras. These
three, standing round him, earnestlv imnlored him
yet to hsten to reason, and change his mind. Timo-
phanes at first laughed at them, and subsequently
gave way to a violent passion : upon v.hich Timoleon
stepped aside, and stood weeping with his face co-
vered, while the other two drew their swords, and
despatched him in a moment ^

' Diod. Sic. (xvi. 10.) in the circumstances of this fact, differs
from Plutarch. lie informs us that, Timoleon having killed his
brother in the market-place with his onn hand, a great tumult
.arose among the citizens. To appease this tumult, an assembl}'
v.as conven'jd ; and in the height of their debates the Syracusan
embassadors arrived, demanding a general; upon which, tliey una-
nimously agreed to send Timoleon ; but first informed him that,
* if he discharged his duty there well, he should be considered as

TIMOLEON. 237

The matter being soon generally known, tlie prin-
cipal and most valuable part of the Corinthians ex-
tolled Timoleon's detestation of wickedness, and
that nia^-naniniitv wliich, notwithstanding; the ijentle-
ness of his heart and his affection to his relations,
had led him to prefer his country to his family, and
justice and honour to self interest. While his brother
ibught valiantly for his country, he had saved him;
and slain him, v.hen he treacherously enslaved it.
Those who knew not how to live in a democracy,
and had been used to make their court to men in
power, pretended indeed to rejoice at the tyrant's
death ; but at the same time reviling Tiraoleon as
guilty of a horrible and impious deed, they created
him extreme uneasiness. When he heard how hea-
vily his mother bore it, and that she uttered the most
dreadful wishes and imprecations against him, he
went to excuse it, and to console her : but she could
not endure the tl^ought of seeing him, and ordered
the doors to be shut ao-ainst him. lie then became
entirely a prey to sorrow, and attempted to put an
end to his lire by abstaining from all kinds of food.
In these nnhappy circumstances, his friends did not
abandon him. Tliey even added force to their en-
treaties, till they prevailed upon him to live. He
determined, however, to live in solitude; and ac-
cordingly withdrew from all public affiiirs, and t{)r
some years did not so nnich as ao'n'oach the citv;
but wandered- about the most- gloomy parts of his
grounds, a victim to melancholy. Thus the judge-
ment, if it borrows not from reason and philosophy
suihcient strength and steadiness for action, is easily
iuisettled and depraved by any casual commendation
or dispraise, and departs from it's own purposes.
K)r an action should not onlv be iust and laudable
in itself, but the principle, i'l-om which it proceeds,

one who had killed a tyrant; if not, as the inurtlierer of his !)ro-
ther.' (L.) PlutarciTs account, hovvever, appears the more
probable one, and Is supported bj other authorities.*

238 TIMOLEOX.

should be firm and immoveable, in order that our
conduct may have the sanction of our own approba-
tion. Otherwise, upon the completion of any under-
taking, we shall through our own weakness be tilled
■with sorrow and remorse, when the splendid ideas
of honour that led us to perform it, vanish ; just as
the glutton is soon cloyed with the luscious viands,
which he had devoured with too keen an appetite,
llepentance tarnishes the best actions ; whereas pur-
poses grounded upon knowledge and reason never
change, tliough they may happen to be disappointed
of success. Hence it was that Phocion of Athens,
having vigorously opj)osed the proceedings of Leos-
thenes^ (which, notwithstanding, turned out much
more happily than he expected) when he saw the
Athenians offering sacrifices and elated with their
victory, told them : ^' He was glad of their success,
*' but if it was to do over again, he should give the
" same counsel." Still strono'er was the answer
which Aristides the Locrian, one of Plato's intimate
friends, gave to Dionysius the Elder, when he de-
manded one of his daughters in marriage ; " I had
*' rather see the virgin in her grave, than in the
" palace of a tyrant.'* And when Dionysius soon
afterward put his son to death, and then insolently
asked him ; " What he now thought, as to the dis-
" posal of his daughter ?" " I am sorry," said he,
*' for what you have done, but I do not repent of
*^ what I said." It is only a superior and more ac-
complished virtue, however, which can attain such
heights as these.

As for Timoleon*s extreme dejection in conse-
quence of the late fact, whether it proceeded from
regret of his brother's fate or from the reverence
which he bore his mother, it so shattered and im-
paired his spirits, that for almost twenty years he was
concerned in no important or public affair.

V.'hsn therefore he was nominated general, and

5* See the Life of rhocion.

TLMOLEON. -^Vf

readily accepted and elected by the people, Telc-
clides, a man of the greatest power and repiitatioii
in Corinth, exhorted him to l)eliave well, and to exert
a 2;eneroiis valour in the execution of his commission:
" For,*' said he, *" if your conduct be good, we siiall
'•' consider you as the destroyer of a tyrant; if bad,
" as the murtherer of your brother '^"

While Timoleon was assembling his forces and
preparing to set sail, the Corinthians received letters
from Icetes, wbach plainly discovered his revolt and
treachery. For his embassadors were no sooner set
out for Corinth, than he openly joined the Cartha-
ginians and acted in concert with them, in order to
expel Dionysias from Syracuse, and usurp the
tyranny himself. Fearing likewise tiiat he should
lose his op{)ortunity, by the speedy arrival of the
army from Corinth, he wrote to the Corintliians to
acquaint them, " That there was no occasion for

them to put themselves to trouble and expense, or

to expose themselves to tlie dan^'er of a voya2:e to
*' Sicily ; particularly, as the Carthaginians would

oppose them, and were looking out for their ships,

with a numerous fleet : and that indeed, on ac-
" count of the slowness of their motions, he had
" been forced to enga2,-e those verv CarthagtiniaRs
" to assist him ao-ainst the tyrant."

Ifanyoftiie Corintliians before v.ere cold and
indifferent as to the expedition, upon the reading of
these letters they were all so incensed against Icetes,
that they readily supphed Timoleon with whatever
he wanted, and united their endeavours to expedite
his sailing.

When the fleet was equipped and the soldier.-*
provided with all that was necessary, th.c priestesses
of Proserpine had a dream, in which that goddess
and her mother Ceres appeared to them in a travel-

'= This version is preserved for tlie snke of it'.-; nt'rspicuity ; but
in strictness it is rather a version of Diodorits Siculus, than of
Pl'Jtarcii. The former accurately distinj^uishes tht' deed, accordiug
to it's mora] compleKJon, bv tlie tuo terms Tvpfjy^.K'y.-c- and «(^^^*
^■yi»: the latter use^ the Vrord <3f>^«x:y«» for both.*

24.() TIMOLEON.

ling garb, and told them, " That they intended to
" accompany Timoleon into Sicily." Upon this
the Corinthians equipped ^^ a sacred galley, which
they called ' the Galley of the Goddesses.' Timo-
leon himself went to Delphi, where he offered
sacrifice to Apollo ; and, upon his descending into
the place where the oracles were delivered, met with
the following strange occurrence : A wreath, em-
broidered with crowns and pictures of victory,
slipped down from among the offerings which were
there hung up, and fell upon Timoleon*s head, so
that Apollo himself seemed to send him crowned
to the enterprise.

He had seven ships of Corinth, two of Corcyra^-,
and a tenth fitted out by the Leucadians, with which
he put to sea. It was in the night that he set sail,'
and was making his way with a prosperous breeze ;
when on a sudden the heavens seemed to be rent
asunder, and to pour upon his ship a bright and
spreading flame, wliich soon formed itself into a
torch, such as is used in the Sacred Mysteries, and
having conducted them through their whole course
brought them to that quarter of Italy, for which they
designed to steer. The soothsayers declared, that
this appearance perfectly agreed with tlie dream of
the priestesses ; and that, by this light from heaven,
the goddesses showed themselves interested in the
success of the expedition ; particularly, as Sicily was
sacred to Proserpine ; it being fabled that her rape
happened tiiere, and that the island was bestowed
upon her as a nuDtial S'ift^'^.

The fleet, thus encouraged by tokens of the divine

" Or, as Diod. Sic. (ib. 66-) more probably states, gave that
name to one of those ah-ead}' equipped.*

'^ flod. Corfu I., known in Homer's time as the residence of
t)»c Pha?aoians. Leucadia, a peninsula in the neighbourhood, was
chierty distinguislied by it's celebrated promontory (of Leucate)
called ' the Lovers' Leap.'*

'3 The bridegroom made a present to the bride upon the third
day alter, the wedding, when according to the modesty of those
ancient times, she first appeared without a veil ; for which reason
the present was called t(yxK(i,?.v7:Tr,f,t<»i.

TIMOLEOX. 2il

flivour, speedily crossed the sea and made the coast
of Italy. But the news bronght thither from Sicily
much perplexed Timoleon, and disheartened his
forces. For Icetes having beaten Dionysius in a set
battle ^*, and taken great part of Syracuse, had by a
line of circumvallation shut up the tyrant in the
citadel and that part of the city which is called ' the
Island,' and besieged him there. At the same time
he ordered the Carthaginians to take care, that
Timoleon should not land in Sicily ; hoping, when
the Corinthians were driven off, without farther
opposition to share the island with his new allies.
The Carthaginians accordingly despatched twenty of
their galleys to Rhegium '■', in which were embas-
sadors from Icetes to Timoleon charged with pro-
posals, qnite correspondent to the rest of his pro-
ceedings ; for they were nothing but specious and
artful words, invented to give a colour to his trea-
cherous designs. They were to make an offer,
" That Timoleon might, if he thought proper, go
" and assist Icetes with his counsel and share in his
*' successes : but that he must send back his ships
" and troops to Corinth, since the war w^as almost
*' concluded, and the Cartliaginians were deter-
" mined to prevent their passage, and ready to repel
*' force with force."

The Corinthians then, as soon as they arrived at
Rhegium, meeting with this embassy and seeing the
Carthaginians riding at anchor near them, were
vexed at the insult ; a general indignation w\^s ex-

'•* Icetes, finding himself in want of provisions, withdrew from
the siege of Syracuse toward his own country ; upon wliich Dionj-
sius marched out, and attacked his rear. But Icetes facing about
defeated him, killed three thousand of his men, and pursuing him
into the city got possession of part of it. Our author observes a
little below that Syracuse, being divided by strong v/alls, was as it
were an assemblage of cities. (L.) T!ie embassadors, it appears
from Diod. Sic. xvi. 66 — 68., v.ere not on board the tv/enty galleys
mentioned belov.', but had previously been despatched to Metapon-
turn, where Timoleon had landed.*

'i Hoii. Reggio in Calabria, on the straits of Messina.*

VOL. IJ. E,

2i2 TIMOLEON.

pressed against Icetes, and fear for the Sicilians,
Avhoni they plainly saw left as a prize to reward
Icetes for his treachery, and llie Carthaginians for
having assisted him in establishing his tyranny. And
it seemed impossible for them to get tlie better, either
of the barbarians who were watching them with dou-
ble their number of ships, or of the forces of Icetes,
■which they liad oxpected would have put themselves
under their command.

Timoleon upon this occasion, coming to an inter-
view witli the embassadors and the Carthaginian
commanders, mildly replied, " He would submit to
■"^ their proposals (for what could he gain by opposing
" them ?) but he was desirous that they would give
" them in pubHcly before the people of Rhegium,
" previously to his quitting that place, since it was
' a Grecian city and a common friend to both
parties. For that this tended to his security, and
they themselves would stand more firmly to their
engagements about the Syracusans, if tliey took
that people for witnesses to them."
This overture he made only to amuse tliem,
intending all tlie while to steal a passage, and the
masi'istrates of Rhemimi entered zealously into his
scheme, as wishing to see the affairs of Sicily in
C'orinthian hands, and dreading the neighbourhood
of the barbarians. They sunnnoned therefore an
assembly, and shut the gates, lest tlie citizens should
go about any other business. Being convened, they
made long s})eeclies, one of them taking. u[) the
argmnent where another had laid it down, with no
other view than to gain time for the Corinthian
trallevs to iret under sail ; and the Carthaixinians
Avere easily detained in the assembly as having no
suspicion because Timoleon was present, and it was
ex})ected every moment that he would stand up and
make his speech. Rut npon secret notice that the
other gallc} s had put to sea ^'', and that his alone

'* The Carthaj^iniiins believid, that the departure of those luiie
galleys for CoiiiUh had been agreed upon between the officers uf

12

TIA^OLEON.

243

was left bclilnd ; by tlic help of the Rhcglans who
pressed close to tlie Rostrum and concealed him
among tlicm, he sli})pcd through the crowd,, got down
to tlie shore, and hoisted sail with all speed.

He soon arrived with all his vessels at Tauro-
menium in Sicilv, to win'ch he had been invited
some time beibre, and where he was now kindly
received by Andromacluis, the lord and master of
that city. This Andromachus was father to "Ti-
ina3us, the historian ; and, being much the best of
nil the Sicilian princes of his time, both governed
his own people agreeably to the laws and principles
of justice, and had ever avowed his hatred and
eiHiiity to tyrants. Upon this account, he readily
allowed Timoleon to make his city a place of arms,
and persuaded his people to co-operate strenuously
with the Corinthians in restoring liberty to the
whole island.

The Carthaginians at Rhegium, upon the breaking
up of the assembly seeing that Timoleon was gone,
were irritated to find tliemselves outwitted ; and it
afforded no small diversion to the Rhegians, to hear
Pha?nicians complaining of any thing effected by
guile ''. They despatched however one of their
ij-allevs with an embassador to Tauromenium, who
represented the affiir at large to Andromachus,
insisting with much insolence and barbaric pride,
that he should immediately turn the Corinthians out
of his tf)wn ; and at last showing him his hand with
the palm uj)ward, and then turning it down again,
told him " If he did not comply with that condition.

botli parties, and tliat the tenth was left behind to cany Timoleon
to Icetes.

'" Frans Pitnica, ' I'licenician fraud,' had passed into a proverb.
(L.) Pcrfidia jtlusqnam Pnnicn, nihil vcri, tiili'd sancti, nullus dcum
inftw:, luilliim jicjuratidinn, Jinlla rcti^io (Liv. xxi. 4.), are some of
the strong features iu the portrait drawn of Annibal by one of the
most eminent liistorians of Rome. And that tliis was not a recent
part of their character, appears from Horn. (Od. xiv. 288.)

H 2

214 TIMOLEON.

" the Carthaginians \voul(l overturn his city, just as
" he had turned his liand." Andromachus onlv-
smiled, and without making him any other answer
stretched out his liand, first with one side up and
then the other, and bade him " Becrone dircctlv, if
" he did not choose to have his ship turned upside
" down in the same manner."

Icetcs, hearing that Timoleon liad made good his
passage, was much akirmed, and sent for a great
number of the Carthaginian galleys. The Syracusans
then began to despair of a deliverance ; for they
saw the Carthaginians masters of their harbour ''',
Icetes possessed of the city, and the citadel in the
hand of Dionysius ; while Timoleon held only by a
small border of the skirts of Sicily, the little town of
Tauromenium, with a feeble hope and an incon-
siderable force, havino; no more than a thousand men
and provisions barely sufficient for their subsistence.
Neither had the Sicilian states any confidence in him,
plunged as they were in misfortunes, and exasperated
against all who pretended to lead armies to tlieir
succour, particularly on account of the perfidy of
Callippus and Pharax. The one was an Athenian,
and the other a Lacedaemonian ; and both came with
professions to do great things for the liberty of Sicily,
and the demolition of tyrants : yet the Sicilians soon
found, that the reign of former oppressors was com-
paratively a golden age, and reckoned those far more
happy who had died in servitude, than tliose who
had acquired such a freedom. Expecting theicfore
that this Corinthian deliverer would be no better
than those before him, and that the deceitful hand
of art would reach out to them the same bait of
good hopes and fair promises to draw them into sub-
jection to a new master, they all, except the people
of Adranum, suspected and declined the Corinthian
proposals. Adianum was a small city, consecrated

'* The Cartlinginians hnd ;i Imndrod ami filty men of war, sixty I ft
t.hotJsaiKl toot, and three hundred chuiots. Diod. Sic. xvi. (j7. J'^'"

TIMOLEON. 2i5

to tlic god Adranus^^, Avho was held in the highest
veneration throughout all Sicily. It's inhabitants
were at variance with each other ; some calling in
Icetes and the Carthaginians, and others applying to
Timoleon. Both generals striving which should
get there first, as fortune would have it, arrived about
the same time. But Icetes had five thousand men
with him, and Timoleon at the most only twelve
hundred drawn out of Tauromenium, which was
ibrty-two miles and a half from Adranum. The
first day he made but a short march, and pitched
his tents in c:ood time. The next dav he marched
forward at a great pace, though the road was very
rugged, and toward evening was informed that
Icetes had just reached the town, and was encamp-
ing before it. At the same time his officers made
the foremost division halt, to take some refreshment,
that they might be the more vigorous in the ensuing
engagement. This however was against the opinion
of Timoleon, who entreated them to advance as fast
as possible, and to attack the enemy before they
were put in order ; it being probable, now they were
just come off their march, that they were employed
in pitching their tents and preparing their supper.
He had no sooner given this direction, than he took
his buckler and placed himself at the head of them,
as leading them on to undoubted victory.

His men thus encouraged followed him most
cheerfully, being now not quite thirty furlongs
from Adranum. As soon as they came up, they
fell upon the enemy, who were in great confusion
and ready to fly at their first approach. For this
reason not many more than three hundred were
killed, but twice as many were made prisoners, and
the camp Avas taken.

'' This deity, by his insignia subsequently mentioned, mvtst have
lieen Mars. His temple was guarded by a hundred dogs. (L.) He
is represented on an Athenian medal in Pelerin's MedaiUes des,
peiiples et des villes, iii. p. 97. The city itself is situated below
/Etna, upon a river of the same name, which flows from that
mountain.^

-2m TLMOLEON.

Upon this, tlic people of Adranum opened tlicir
gates to Tinioleoii, and joined liis ])arty ; deelaring
with terror and astonisliment, that during the battle
the sacred doors of the temple had oj)ened of their
own accord, tlie spear of their god liad been seen to.
shake to the very point, and his face to run down
\vith sweat. These things did not foresliow that
victory only, but tlie future successes, to which this
dispute was a fortunate prelude. For several cities,
by their embassadors, immediately joined in alh'ance
with Timoleon ; and Mamercus-^ sovereign of
Catana, a warlike and wealthy prince, entered into
tiie confederacy. Ikit (what was stiil iuoyq material)
Dionysius himself, having renounced all hope and
being unable to hold out nuich longer, despising
Icetes who was so shamefullv beaten, and admiring
the bravery of Timoleon, offerctl to deliver up to
him and the Corinthians both himself and the
citadel.

Timoleon accep<;ed of this good fortune so supe-
rior to his hopes, and sent Euclides and Telejua-
chus, two Corinthian officers, into the citadel ; as
he did four hundred men besides, not all together
nor openly (tor that would have been im})ossibIe,
because the enemy were upon their guard) but
by stealth, and a few at a time. U'his corps then
took possession of the citadel and the tyrant's move-
ables, with whatever he had pro^•ided for carry iiig
on the war ; namely, a great number of horses, all
kinds of engines, and a vast ([uantity of darts.
They found also arm-^ tor seventy thousand men,
which had been laid up of old, and two thousand
soldiers with Dionvsius, whom he delivered along
witli the stores to 'Jnnoleon. But the tyrant re-
served his monev to himself, and havinu' embarked
on board a ship sailed with a few of his friends,
without being perceived by Icetes, and reached the
camp of Timoleon.

*° Marcus, says Diod. Sic. ib.

TBIOLKON. 247

Then it was, that he first appeared in the liuniblc
figure of a private man-', and as such was sent
with one sliip and a very moderate sum of moncv
to Corinth ; he, who had been born in a splendid
court, and educated as heir to tlie most absolute
jiionarchy that ever existed. He held it for ten
years'-; and f{)r twelve more, from the time tliat
Dion took up arms against him, he was exercised
continually in wars and troubles : insomuch, that
the mischiefs caused by his tyranny were more than
recompensed u|)on his own head in what he sutieredv
He saw his sons die in their youth, his daughters
deflowered, and his sister, who was also his wife*^,
defiled by the brutal lusts of his enemies, and then
(as we have related more particularly, in the Life
of Dion) slaughtered with her children, and thrown
into the sea.

AVhen Dionvsins arrived at Corinth, there was
hardlv a man in Greece, who was not desirous to
see and to discourse with him. 'Some, hating the
man, and rejoicing at his misfortunes, came for the
pleasure of insulting him in his present distress:
others, whose sentiments with respect to him were
somewhat changed, and who were touched with
compassion tor his tiite, ])lainly traced the great
influence of an invisible and divine ])ower displayed
in the ati'airs of feeble mortals. For neither natui'c
nor art'-^ produced in those times any thing so

"' Dionvsins was horn to absolute power, wliereas most otlicr
tyrants (Dion\liiu.s the Elder, for instance) had raised themselves
to 'it, and some irom a mean condition.

-- l"or lie began bis reiyn 01. ciii. ].,A. C. SGS. Dion took
up arms against him Ol. ev. 4., and he delivered the citadel to
'1 imoleon, alid Vas sent to Corinth, 01. cix. ]. (L.) See Diod.
Sic. XV. 7M.S xvi»<). It is said, that he there subsisted bv teacliin<'-
sciiool, }tf\f/{!.(! fu inipcrin C'lrcrc nan potrrat : Cic. Tusc. Quapst. iii.
ly., l^p. ta'm. ix. is., ad. Att. ix. !>., and this his extraordinary
change of situation pjissed into a proverb. 'i'o some insolent
vnenaces of I'hilip of Macedon the Spartans, with their usual
hiconisn), hinted a possible reverse of fortune : ' Dionysius at
Corinth.'*

-i Soplnx»syne,the daughtev of his father's wife Aristomache.*

'+ i'Jutarch udds * nor art;' implying that the tragic poet*, Mho

218 TIMOLEOX.

remarkable as that work of fortune, which exhibited
the man, lately the sovereign of Sicily, novv^ liolding
conversation in a victualler's shop at Corinth, or
sitting whole days in a perfumer's, or drinking the
adulterated wine of taverns, or squabbling in the
streets with women who subsisted by their beauty ;
or directing female musicians in their singing, and
disputing with them seriously about the harmony of
certain airs, that were sung in the theatre.

Some were of opinion, that he fell into these un-
worthy amusements, as being naturally idle, effemi-
nate, and dissolute : but others thought it was a
stroke of policy, and that he rendered himself despi-
cable, in order to prevent his being feared by the
Corintliians ; affecting that meanness and stupidity,
contrary to his nature, lest they should imagine that
the change of his circumstances sat heavy upon him,
and that he aimed at re-establishino- himself

Nevertheless, some sayings of his are recorded, by
which it should seem that he did not bear his mis-
fortunes in an abject manner. When he arrived at
Leucas, which was a Corinthian colony as well as
Syracuse, he said, " He found himself in a situation
" like that of young men, who had been guilty of
" some misdemeanor. For as they still converse
" cheerfully wath their brothers, but are abashed at
" the thought of coming before their fathers, so he
*' was ashamed of going to live in the mother city,
" and could pass his days with the Leucadians much
" more to his satisfaction." Another time, when a
certain stranger rudely derided him at Corinth for
having in the midst of his power taken pleasure in
the discourses of philosophers, and at last asked him,
" What he had gotten by the wisdom of Plato '°?"
" Do you think," said hcj " that we have reaped
" no advantage from Plato, when we can thus bear

deal large!}' in the misfortunes of princes, had no where repre-
sented so signal a cattistrophe.

^^ The difterent voyages made by this philosopher at Dionysius'
entreaty to Syracuse, and their consequences, are detailed at length
in the Life of Dion.'-

TIMOLEON. 249

(£

such a change of fortune ?'* Arlstoxenus tlie mu-
sician, and some others, having inquired, " What
" was the ground of his displeasure against Plato?'*
lie answered, " That absolute power abounded in-
" deed with evils ; but that it had this great infeli-
" city above all the rest, that among the number of
" those, who call themselves the friends of an arbi-
trary prince, there is not one who will speak his
mind to him freely ; and that by such he had been,
deprived of the friendship of Plato.'*
Some one who had a mind to be arch, and to
make merry with Dionysius, shook his robe when he
entered his apartment, as is usual when persons ap-
proach a tyrant ''' ; and he, quickly returning the jest,
bade him " Do the >'ame when he went out, that he
" might not carry off any of the moveables.'*

One day over their cups Philip of Macedon, with
a kind of sneer, introduced some discourse about
the odes -^ and tragedies, which Dionysius the Elder
left behind him, and pretended to doubt how he

*" To show, that they have no dagger concealed in theh* gar-
ments.*

-^ Dionysius the Elder valued himself upon his poetry, though
he has been censured as the Worst poet in the world. Phiioxenus
himself, an excellent poet, attempted to undeceive him in the
favourable opinion which he had of his own abilities, but was sent
to the quarries for his presumption. The next day however he was
restored to favour, and Dionysius repeated to him some verses with
which he had taken extraordinary pains, expecting his approljation.
But the poet, instead of giving it, looked round to the guards, and
said to them very humorously, * Take me back to the quarries.'
Notwithstanding all this, Dionysius disputed the prize of poetry at
the Olympic games; but there he was hissed, and the rich pavilion
which he had sent thither was torn in pieces. He had better suc-
cess, however, at Athens ; for he gained the prize of poetry by a
grossly-partial adjudication, at the celebrated feast of Bacchus.
Upon this occasion he was in such raptures, that he drank to excess,
and the debauch threw him into violent pains : to allay these, he
asked for a soporific ; and his physicians gave him one that pro-
duced a sleep, out of which he never awaked. (L.) An oracle had
foretold, that ' he should die, whenever he overcame those who
were better than himself;' this he had always applied to the Car-
thaginians, and had therefore never exerted against them his v.hole
strength. See Diod. Sic. xiv. 109., xv. 6.*

^50 TIMOLEOK.

could find leisure for such works. To this Dionvsius
smartly replied, " They were written in the time
" which you, and I, and all other jolly fellows, spend
" over the bowl."

Plato did not see Dionysius in Corinth, for he

*

had now been dead some time. I^ut Diogenes of
Sinope, when he first met him, addressed him 'as
follows; " How little dost thou deserve to live!"
To which Dionysius answered, " It is kind in you
" to svmpatliise with me in mv misibrtunes !" " Dost
" thou think then,'* said Diogenes, " that I have
" any pity for thee ; and that I am not rather vexed
" that such a slave as thou art, and so tit to grow
" old and die like thy father on a tyrant's uneasy
" throne, should instead of that live with us here in
"mirth and pleasure r" So that, Avhen I compare
with these words of the philosopher the expressions
of Philistus, in which he bewails tiic fate of the
daughters of Leptines -^5 "That from the splendid
enjoyments of absolute power they were reduced
to a humble station;" they appear to me the
lamentations of a woman, who regrets her perfumes,
her purple robes, and her golden trinkets. This
account of the savings of Dionvsius seems to me
neither foreign from biogra})hy, nor without it'*
utility to such readers as are not in a hurry, or
absorbed in other concerns.

If the ill-fortune of Dionysius was surprising, the
success of Timoleon was not less wonderful. For
within fifty days after his landing in Sicily, he had
made himself master of the citadel of Syracuse, and
despatched Dionysius to PelojKinnesus. 'i'he Corin-
thians, encouraiied bv these advantages, sent him

'■^ Lcptinc?, as mentioned belou', ^vns tyrant of Apolionin, a city
of Ricilv near c;ii)e Pnchyniis. I'liilistus wrote the History of
Faypt in twelve, of Sicily in eleven, and of the reijjn of Dionysius
in five looks. Of these the last is accoiinted the best by Cicero,
vho from his having made Thucydides his model in ooniposition
(l)e (Vat. ii. 1.'5.), calls liim fcue pitsillux Thnn/didcs, (Kp. ad.
Q. i'lati-. ii. J 3.) Sec also Voss. de Hist. (ir. i. tx

TIMOLEON.

251

a re-inforcemeiit of two thousand foot and two
hiindi-cd horse. These advanced on their way as
far as Thurium : but finding it impracticable to gain
a passage thence, because the sea was beset with a
numerous fleet of Carthaginians, they were forced
to stop there and watch their opportunity. They
cmj)loyed their time, however, in a very noble
undertaking. For tlie Tlunians, inarching out of
their city to var against ilie Bruttians, left it in
charge with these Corintliian strangers,, who de-
fended it with as much honour and integrity as
it' it had been their own.

In the mean time Icetes carried on the siege of
the citadel with great vigour, and blocked it up so
closely, that no provisions could be introduced into
it for the Corinthian garrison. He provided also-
two strangers to assassinate Timolcon, and sent
them })rivately to Adranum. That general, who
never kept any regular guards about him, lived
then among the Adranites v>ithout any sort of
precaution or suspicion, on account of his confi-
dence in their god. The assassins, happening to
hear that he was going to offer sacrifice, went
into the temjile with their poniards under their
clothes, and mixing with those who stood round the
altar got nearer to him by little and little. They
uere just going to give each other the signal to
begin, when somebody strikes one of them "on the
head with his sword, and lays him at his feet.
Neither he who struck the blow, nor the conipanion
oftliedead man kept his station : the former, with
his sword in his hand, fled to the top of a liigh
rock; and the latter laid hold on the altar, im])Ior-
ing Timolcon to sj)are his life, on condition that he
discovered the v*Iiole matter. .Vccordingly, })ardon
^vas promised him ; and he confessed that he, and
the ])erson who lay dead, were sent on purpose to
kill iiim.

\\lii!e he was mdking this confession, (he other
man was brought down from the rock, and loudly

252 TIMOLEON.

protested that lie was guilty of no injustice, for he
had only taken riii'liteons vengeance on the M-retch
tv'ho had mnrthcrcd his tktlier in the city of Leon-
tium^*^. And for the trutfi of this he appealed to
several then present, who all attested the same, and
could not but admire the wonderful management of
fortune, which movino; one thin.'j: bv another, brins:-
ing together the most distant incidents, and com-
bining those that have no manner of relation but
rather the greatest dissimilarity, makes such use of
them that the close of oPiC process is always the
bcirinninfr of another. Tiie Corinthians rewarded
the man with a present of ten minaL*, because his
hand had co-operated with the guardian genius of
Timolcon, and he had reserved the long-meditated
satisfaction for his private wrongs to the time, when
fortune availed herself of it to save the general. This
happy escape had effects beyond the present, for it
inspired the Corinthians v*'ith high expectations of
Timoleon, when they beheld the Sicilians now reve-
rence and guard him as one w-hose person w^as sacred,
and who was come as the minister of the i»'ods to
avenge and deliver them.

When Icetes liad failed in this attempt, and saw
many of the Sicilians going over to Timoleon, he
blamed himself for making use of the Carthacfinians
in small numbers only, and availing himself of their
assistance as it were bv stealth and as if he were
ashamed of it, when they had such immense forces
at hand. lie sent tliereibre for Mago, their com-
mander-in-chief, and his wliole fleet ; who in terrible
pomp took possession of the harbour with a hundred
and fifty ships, and landed an army of sixty tliou-
sand men, which encamped in the city of Syracuse ;
insomuch that every one imagined the inundation
of barbarians, announced and expected of old, was
now come upon Sicily. For in the many wars.

3° History can scarcely afford a stronger instance of an interfering
Providence. Plutarch's remarks upon the event are excellent.

TIMOLEON. 25S

winch they had waged in tliat island, the Cartha-
ginians had never before been able to take Syra-
cuse ; but Icetes then receiving them, and delivering
up the city to thcni;, the vvhole became a camp of
barbarians.

The Corinthians, -who still held the citadel, found
themselves in very dangerous and difficult circum-
stauces ; for beside tliat they were in want of pro-
visions, because the port was guarded and blocked
up, they were employed in sharp and continual dis-
putes about the walls, which were attacked witli all
kinds of machines and batteries, and for the defence
of which they were obliged to divide themselves.
Timoleon however found means to relieve them, bv
sending a supply of corn from Catana in small fish-
ing-boats and little skiffs, which v\'atched the oppor-
tunity of making their way through the enemy's
fleet, when it happened to be separated by a storm.
Mago and Icetes no sooner saw this, than they re-
solved to render themselves masters of Catana, from
which provisions had been furnished to the besieged :
and accordingly, taking with them the best of their
troops, they sailed from Syracuse. Leo the Corin-
thian, who commanded in the citadel, having ob-
served from the top of it tliat those of the enemy
who stayed behind abated their vigilance, and kept
but an indifierent guard, suddenly fell upon them as
they were dispersed ; and killing some, and putting
the rest to flight, gained the quarter called Achra-
dina, which was much the strona:est and had suffer-
ed the lea^t from the enemy ; for Syracuse is an as-
semblage, as it were, of towns ^'. Finding abund-
ance of provisions and money there, he did not give

^' There were four: the Isle, or tlie citadel, v.hicli was between
the two ports ; the Achrndina, at a little distance from the former;
Tyche, so called from the temple of Fortune; and Xeapolis, or * the
new city.' See Liv. xxv. 24-., Diod. Sic. xiii. 7. To these, some
eminent authors (and Plutarch is of thq number, though Cicero
tidv. Verr. de Si^jn. enumerates onl}'- four) add a fifth, which ther
call Epipolsc. Thus Strabo says, z-iP,si7:c?a', yxf o vs 7r.^>.«i5?.

S54 Ti:^roLEox.

tip the acquisition, nor return into the citadel; hut
stood lij^on Iiis defence in the Achradina, liaving for-
tified it qnitc round, and joined it b}Miew works to
the citadel. Mago and Icctes were now near Catana,
wl^en a horseman, despatched from Syracuse, brought
them tidings that the Achradina was taken ; wliich
struck them v/itli such surprise, that they returned
in great haste, having neither taken the place wliich
they went against, nor kept that which they had

Prudence and valour have, perhaps, as mucli right
as fortune to lav claim to these successes ; but the
event, which next ensued, is wholly to be ascribed
to the. favour of fortune. The corps of Corinthians
that wereatThurium, dreading the Carthaginian fleet,
which under the command of Hanno watched their
motions, and finding at the same time that the sea
for many days was stormy and tempestuous, deter-
mined to march through the country of the Brut-
tians ; and partly by persuasion, partly by force, they
made good their passage through the territories of
the barbarians, and came down to Rhegium, the sea
still continuing rough as before.

The Carthaginian admiral, not expecting that the
Corinthians would venture out, thought it was in
vain to sit still ; and having persuaded himself that
he had invented one of the finest and ablest strata-
gems in the world, ordered the mai-iners to crown
themselves with o-arlands, and to dress up the galleys
with Grecian and Phoenician bucklers''-, and thus
equipi'cd sailed to Syracuse. Wlien he came near
the citadel, he haik'd it with loud huzzas and ex-
pressions of joy; declaring that he was just come

'' As it seems abt-arcl to make mention here of ' Phoenician
bucklers,' since they could afford no token tliat tlie Greeks were
beaten ; M. Dacier conjectures that the v/ord <Pcniy.i(ri> sliould not 1)6
taken for a patronymic, nor written with a capital but with. a simple
4', and tl'.en it may signify ' glistering with purple:* so Plutarch, a
little below, takes notice of xinn^ai es^acyfcu^iic, But it must be ac-
knowledged, that the y.at before the ^ffciiciirp stands in the way of that
correctiou^

TIMOLEON. 255

from beating the Corinthian succours, whom he had
met at sea, as they were attemptini;- a passage. By
these means he lioped to strike tc« ror into the be-
sieged. While he was acting tliis trifling part, the
Corinthians reached Rhcgium ; and as the coast was
clear, and the wind vmexpectedly falHng promised
smooth water and a safe voyage, they immediately
went aboard such barks and fishing-boats as they
conld find, and passed over into Sicily with so much
safety and in such a dead calm, that they even drew
the horses by the reins^ swimming by the side of the
vessels.

When they were all landed, and had joined Timo-
leon, he soon took Messana^'^ ; and thence marclied
in good order to Syracuse, de[)ending more u\nm
his good fortune than his forces, for he had not with
him above four thousand men. On the first intelli-
gence of his approach, Mago was greatly perplexed
and alarmed, and his suspicions were increased by
the fbllowinj^ circumstance : the marshes about Sy-
racuse'^, which receive a large quantity of fresh
water from the springs, and from the lakes and rivers
which discharge themselves there into the sea, have
such abundance of eels, that there is always })lenty
for those who choose to fish for them. With this
sport the common soldiers of both sides amused
themselves promiscuously at their vacant hours, and
upon any cessation of arms. As they were all
(jreeks, and had no pretence for any })rivate animo-
sity against each other, they fought boldly when they
met in battle, and in times of truce mixed together
and conversed with the utmost familiarity. While
thev were en2;a2:ed at one of these times in their
connuon diversion of fishing, they fell into discourse,
and expressed tlieir admiration of the convenience of
the sea, and the situation of the adjacent .])laccs.
Upon which, one of the Corinthian soldiers thus ad-

^' ' Messana' in the ancient Sicilian pronunciation, hod. Messina.

34 There is one morass called Lysimelia (Thucyd. vii. 53.), and
another called Syraco. From this last the city took it's name.
Tijese morasses render the air of Syracuse very unwholesome.

ti
ii.

256 TIMOLEOX.

dressed those who served under Icetes : " And can
" you, who are Greeks ^^, readily consent to reduce
*' this city, so spacious in itself, and blest with so
" many advantages, into the power of the barbarians,
" and to bring the Carthaginians, the most deceitful
" and bloody of them all, into our neighbourhood ;
when you ought to wish, that between them and
Greece there were many Sicilies ? Or can you
think that they have brought an armed force from
*' the Pillars of Hercules and the Atlantic ocean,
" and braved the hazards of war, merely to erect a
*' principality for Icetes ; who, if he had had the
*' prndence which becomes a general, would never
" have driven out the founders, to call into his
" country tlie worst of it's enemies, when he might
" have obtained of the Corinthians and Timoleon
*' every proper degree of honour and power ?"

The soldiers in Icetes' pay, repeating these dis-
courses often in their camp, gave Mago, who had
long sought a pretence to be gone, reason to suspect
that he was betrayed. Accordingly, though Icetes
entreated him to stay, and remonstrated upon their
great superiority to the enemy, he weighed anchor
and sailed back to Africa, shamefull}^ and unaccount-
ably suffering Sicily to slip out of his hands.

Next day, Timoleon drew up his army in order
of battle before the place ; but when he and his
Corinthians were told that Mago was fled, and saw
the harbour empty, they could not forbear laughing
at his cowardice : and by way of mockery caused
proclamation to be made about the city, promising
a reward to any one that could give information
whither the Carthaginian fleet was gone to hide
itself. Icetes however had still the spirit to stand a
farther shock, and would not let go his hold ; but
vigorously defended those quarters of the city M'hich
he occujMed, and which appeared almost impreg-
nable. Timoleon therefore divided his forces into
three parts, and himself with one of them made his

3i Greek mercenaries in the armr of that prince.*

TIMOLEON. 257

attack by the river Anapus, wliere he was likely to
meet with the warmest reception ; commanding the
second, under Isias the Corinthian, to be<»in their
operations from the Acln-adina ; while Dinarchus
and Demaretus, who hroui^ht the last re-infbrcement
from Corinth, were ordered to attempt the Epipolae :
so that, several impressions being made at the same
time and on every side, the soldiers of Icetes were
overpowered and put to flight. Tiiat the city then
was thus taken by assault and suddenly reduced,
upon the flight of the enemy, we may justly impute
to the bravery of the troops and the ability of their
general ; but that not one Corinthian was either
killed or wounded, the Fortune of Timoleon claims
entirely to herself, maintaining as it were a dispute
with his valour, whether those who read his story
ought more to admire the luck or the merit of his
actions. The fame of tiiis achievement not only
quickly overspread Sicily and Italy, but in a few
days resounded through Greece : so that the city of
Corinth, which was in some doid)t whether or not it's
fleet had arrived in Sicily, was informed by the same
messengers, that it'slbrceshad madegood their passage
and were victorious. So well did their affairs prosper,
and so much lustre did fortune add to the gallantry of
their exploits, by the speediness of their execution.

Timoleon, thus master of the citadel, did not pro-
ceed like Dion, or spare the place for it's beauty
and magnificence ; but guarding against the suspi-
cions, which first slandered and then destroyed that
illustrious man, ordered the public crier to give
notice " That all the Syracusans, who were willing
" to have a hand in the work, should come with
" proper instruments to destroy the bulwarks Of
" tyranny ^^" Upon this they all came, consider^

3^ How Strong a parallel to this procedure is funiishecl b}' Paris,
in the demolition of the Bastile, A. D. 17.S9.

Ah ! d sic omnia !

But Louis XVI. was no Dionysius, nor wsre his dcotroyers Ti-
iHoleons.*

VOL. II. S

258 TIMOLEOX.

ing that proclamation and that day as the surest
oomniencenient of their liberty ; and not only de-
molished the citadel, but levelled with the cc^'ound
both the palaces and the monuments of the tyrants.
Plaving soon cleared the place, he erected upon it
a common-hall for the seat of judicature, at once to
gratify the citizens, and to show that a popular
government should be raised upon the ruins of ty-
ranny.

The city, thus taken, was found comparatively
destitute of inhabitants. Many had been slain in
the w\ars and intestine broils, and many more had
fled from the rage of the tyrants. Nay, so little fre-
quented was the market-place of Syracuse, that it
produced rank grass enough for the horses to pasture
upon, and for the grooms to repose themselves by
their sides. The other cities, except a very few,
were entire deserts full of deer and wild boars, and
such as had leisure for it often hunted them in the
suburbs and about the walls : while none of those,
■who had possessed themselves of castles and strong-
holds, could be persuaded to quit them, or return
to the city ; regarding the tribunals and other seats
of government, with hatred and horror, as so many
nurseries of tyrants. Timoleon and the Syracusans
tJierefore thought proper to write to the Corinthians,
to send them a good number from Greece to people
Syracuse, because the land must otherwise lie un-
cultivated, and because they expected a more for-
midable war from Africa; havini^ been informed
that Mago had killed himself, and that the Cartha-
ginians, ])rovokcd at his misconduct in the expedi-
tion, had cruciried his body, and were collecting im-
mense forces tor the invasion of Sicily in the ensuing
summer.

These letters of Timoleon's being delivered, the
Syracusan embassadors attended at the same time,
and entreated the Corinthians to take tlieir city
under their protection, and to become founders of it

a

TIMOLEON. 2B9

anew. They did not however hastily seize the prof-
fered advantage, or appropriate the city to them-
selves ; but first sent to the sacred games and the
other great assemblies of Greece, and caused procla-
mation to be made bv tlieir heralds ; " That the
Corinthians having abolished arbitrary power in
Syracuse, and exjielled the tyrant, invited all Sy-
racusans and other vSicilians to people that city,
where they should enjoy their liberties and privi-
leges, and have the lands divided by just and
equal lots among them.'* They then despatched
envoys into Asia and the islands, in which they were
told the chief part of the fugitives had dispersed
themselves, to exhort them all to come to Corinth;
where they should be provided with vessels, com-
manders, and a convoy at the expense of the Co-
rinthians, to conduct them safe to Syracuse. Their
intentions thus published^ the Corinthians enjoyed
the most deserved and distinguished glory of having
delivered a Grecian city from tyrants, preserved it
from the barbai'ians, and restored the citizens to
their country. But the persons who met upon this
occasion at Coi'inth, not being sufficient in number,
desired that thev mi^ht take others alono- with them
from Corinth and the rest of Greece, as new colo-
nists; and having thus completed their number to
ten thousand, they sailed to Syracuse. Ere this
time, great multitudes from Italy and Sicily had
flocked in to Timoleon ; who, finding them (as
Athanis reports) amount to sixty thousand, freely
divided the lands among them, but sold the houses
for a thousand talents. By this contrivance he both
]eh it in the power of the ancient inhabitants to re-
deem their own, and took occasion also to raise a
stock for the community ; Vv^ho had been so poor in
all respects, and so little able to furnish the supplies
for the war, that they had sold the very statues, after
leaving formed a judicial process, and lodged accusa-
tions against them as if they had been so many cul-

s 2

260 TIMOLEON.

prits. Upon this occasion we are told they spared
one statue, when all the rest were condemned ;
namely that of Gelon one of their ancient kings, in
honour of the man, and for the sake of the victory^'
which he had gained over the Carthaginians at
Him era.

Syracuse being thus revived, and replenished with
such a number of inhabitants who thronged to it
from all quarters, Timoleon was desirous to bestow
the blessing of liberty upon the other cities also, and
once for all to extirpate despotism out of Sicily. For
this purpose, marching into the territories of the
petty tyrants, he compelled Icetes to quit the inte-
rests of Cartilage, to agree to demolish his castles,
and to live among the Leontines as a private per-
son. Leptines also, prince of ApoUonia and several
other little towns, finding himself in danger of being
taken, surrendered and had his life granted him, but
W'as sent to Corinth : for Timoleon looked upon it
as glorious, that the tyrants of Sicily should be forced
to live as miserable exiles in the city, whicli had ori-
ginally colonised that island, and should be seen by
the Greeks in such an abject condition.

After this, he returned to Svracuse to settle the
civil government, and to establish the most import-
ant and necessary laws^% along with Cephalus and
Dinarchus, lawgivers sent from Corinth. In the
mean while, willing that the mercenaries should reap
some advantage from the enemy's country, and be
kept from inaction, he sent Dinarchus and Dema-

^" He had defoated Hainilcar wlio landed in Sicilv, with three
hundred thousand men, Oh Ixxv. 2. (Diod. Sic. xi. 20.)

^* Among other wise institutions, he appointed a chief" magistrate
to be cliosen yearly, whom the Syracusans called the Amphipolus of
Jupiter Olympius; thus giving him a kind of sacred character. Of
these, the first was Commenes. Hence arose tiie custom, among
the Syracusans, of computing their years by the respective govern-
ments of these magistrates; whicli continued in tlie time of Diod.
Sic. (xvi. 12.) that is, in the reign of Augustus, above three hun-
dred years after the office was first introduced.

TIMOLEON. 261

rctus Into the Carthaginian province ; who drew
several cities from the Punic interest, and not only
lived in abundance tliemselves, but also raised money
i'rom the plunder for carrying on the war. While
these matters were transacting, the Carthaginians ar-
rived atLilybiBum with seventy thousand land-forces,
two hundred galleys, and a thousand other vessels
carrying machines of war, chariots, vast quantities of
provisions, and all other stores ; as If they were now
determined not to carry on the war by piecemeal,
but to drive the Greeks entirely out of Sicily. For
tlieir force was sufficient to effect this, even if the
Sicilians had not been disunited and harassed by
mutual animosities. When the Carthaginians there-
fore found that their Sicilian territories were laid
waste, they marched under the command of Asdru-
bal and Hamilcar In great fury against the Co-
rinthians.

Information of this being brought directly to
Syracuse, the inhabitants were struck with such ter-
ror by that prodigious armament, that scarcely three
thousand out of ten times that number took up arms,
and ventured to follow Timoleon. The mercenaries
were in number four thousand, and of them about a
thousand gave way to their fears when upon their
march, and turned back, crying out ; " That Ti-
" moleon must be mad or In his dotage, to advance
" against an army of seventy thousand men with
" only five thousand foot and a thousand horse, and
" to lead his handful of men too eight days* march
" from Syracuse ; by which means there could be
'* neither refuge for those who fled, nor burial for
" those who fell in battle.**

Timoleon considered It as an advantage, that these
cowards had discovered themselves before the en-
gagement ; and, having encouraged the rest, led
them hastily to the banks of the Crimesus% where

39 A Sicilian river; the name of which Bochart derives from a
word signifying * sniallage, or parsley,' a herb produced abund-
antly in it's neighbourhood j for the same reason, too, a small city

252 TIMOLEOK

he was told the Carthnmniaiis were drawn Loffetlier.

tT? CD

But as he was ascending a hill, at the top of which
the enemy's camp and all their vast forces would be
in sight, he met some mules loaded with parsley.
This his men regarded as a bad omen, because with
parsley we usually crown sepulcHires ; whence the
proverb, v/ith respect to one who is dangerously ill,
" He has need of nothing but parsley." To deliver
them from this superstition, and to remove their
despondency, Timoleon ordered the troops to halt ;
and making a speech suitable to the occasion, ob-
served among other things, " That crowns were
" brouiiht to them before the victory, and offered
" themselves of their own accord." For the Corin-
thians, having from all antiquity considered a wreath
of parsley as sacred, crov/ncd the victors with it at
the Isthmian games : in Timoleon's time it was still
in use at those games, as it is now at the Nemean,
and the pine-branch has but lately taken it's place.
Having thus addressed his army, the general took
a chaplet of parsley, and crowned himself with it
first, after which his officers and the common sol-
diers did the same. At that instant the soothsayers
observing two eagles flying toward them, one of
which bore a serpent with his talons, while the other
advanced with a loud and animating noise, pointed
them out to the army, who all betook themselves to
prayer and invocation of the gods.

The summer was now begun, and the end of the
month Thargelion '" brought on the solstice. The

at it's mouth was called by the Greeks Selinontium, and a rivulet
near it Selinus. At the head of the above-mentioned infamous
band of deserters was Thrasius, a principal accomplice fifteen years
before in the sacrilegious expedition of the Phocensians against the
temple of Delphi. Such is the heroism of infidelity !*

4° Here we see the uncertainty of the Grecian months. The
writers upon that subject, Dion. Halic. e. g. (Rom. Ant. 1.), take
Thargelion to be ' April.' And yet here we are told, that the end
of that month was near the solstice. Hence it is, that Dacier ven-
tures in this place to translate it * June,* the solstice certainly being
fn that month.

TIMOLEON. 2G3

river then sending up a thick mist, tlie field was at
first covered with it, so that notliing in the enemy's
camp was discernible : only an inarticuhite and con-
flised noise, which reached the summit of tlie hill,
showed that a great army lay at some distance. But
wlien the Corinthians had reached the top, and laid
down their sliields to take breath, the sun had raised
the vapours higher ; so that the fog, being collected
upon the sununits, covered them alone, while the
places below were all visible. The river Crimesus
appeared clearly, and the enemy were seen crossing
it, first with chariots drawn by four horses, and
formidably provided for the combat ; behind which
there marched ten thousand men with white buck-
lers. Tliese they conjectured to be Carthaginians,
from tlie brightness of their armour, and the slow-
ness and good order in which they moved. Then
followed the troops of other nations, advancing in
a confused and tumultuous manner.

Timoleon, observing that the river put it in his
power to engage with what number of the enemy he
pleased, bade his men take notice how the main
body was divided by the stream, part having already
passed and part preparing to pass it ; and ordered
Demaretus with the cavalry to attack the Car-
thaginians, and throw them into confusion, be-
fore they had time to range themselves in order of
battle. He himself then, descending into the plain
with the infantry, formed the wings out of other
Sicilians, intermingling a few strangers with them ;
but the natives of Syracuse and the most warlike of
the mercenaries he placed about himself in the cen-
tre, and waited a while to observe the success of the
horse. When he saw that they could not come up
to grapple with the Carthaginians, on account of the
chariots that ran to and fro before their armv, and
that they were obliged often to wheel about to avoid
the danger of having their ranks broken, and then
to rally again and return frequently to the charge;
he took his buckler, and called to the foot to follow

26i TIMOLEON.

him and be of good courage, with an accent that
seemed more than human, so much was it above his
usual pitch ; whether it were exalted by his ardour
and enthusiasm, or whether (as many were of opi-
nion) it was assisted by the voice of some god. His
troops answering him with a loud shout, and press-
ing nim to lead them on without delay, he sent or-
ders to the cavalry to get beyond the line of cha-
riots, and to take the enemy in flank ; vrhile he
himself thickening his first ranks, so as to join
buckler to buckler, and causing the trumpet to
sound, bore down upon the Carthaginians. The
first shock they sustained with great spirit: for being
fortified with breast-plates of iron and helmets of
brass, and covering themselves with large shields,
they could easily repel the spears and javelins. But
when the business came to a decision by the sword,
where art is not less requisite than strength, all on a
sudden there broke out dreadful thunders from the
mountains, mingled with long trails of lightning ;
after which the black clouds, descending from the
tops of the hills, fell upon the two armies in a storm
of rain, wind, and hail. This tempest was on the
backs of the Greeks, but beat upon the faces of the
barbarians, and almost blinded them with the sleety
shovvcrs and the fire continually streaming from the
clouds.

These things extremely incommoded the enemy,
particularly such of them as were not veterans. The
chief inconvenience seems to have been the roarinsr
of the thunder, and the clattering of the rain and
hail upon their arms, which prevented them from
hearing the orders of their officers. Besides, the
Carthaginians not being light but heavy-armed, as I
stated above, the dirt was troublesome to them :
and as the bosoms of their tunics were filled with
water, they were very unwieldly in the combat, so
that the Greeks could overturn them with ease ; and
when they were down, it was impossible for them,
encumbered as they were with arms, to get up again

TIMOLEOX 265

out of tlie mire. For the river Criincsiis swollen
|)artly with the rains, and partly having it's course
stopped by the vast numbers that were crossing it,
hiid overflowed it's banks. The adjacent field like-
wise, having many cavities and low places in it, was
tilled with water which settled there ; and the Car-
thaginians, falling into them, could not dfsengage
themselves without extreme difficulty. In short, the
storm continued to beat upon them with great vio-
lence, and the Greeks having cut to pieces four
hundred men who composed their first ranks, their
whole body was put to flight. Vast numbers were
overtaken in the field, and put to the sword ; many
rushed into the river, and jostling M'ith. those that
were yet crossing it, were carried down and drown-
ed. The larger part, who endeavoured to gain the
hills, were stopped by the light-armed soldiers and
slain. Among the ten thousand that were killed, it
is said, there weie three thousand '^^ natives of Car-
thage ; a heavy loss to that city : as none of it's
citizens were superior to these either in birth, in for-
tune, or in character. Neither have we any account,
that so many Carthaginians ever fell before in one
battle ; for generally making use of Lybians, Spa-
niards, and Numidians in their wars, if they sus-
tained a defeat, it was chiefly at the expense of the
blood of strangers.

The Greeks discovered by the spoils the quality
of the slain. Those who stripped the dead set no
value upon brass or iron, such was the abundance
of silver and gold : for they passed the river, and
made themselves masters of the camp and baggage.
Many of the prisoners were clandestinely sold by the
I soldiers, but five thousand were delivered in upon
the public account, and two hundred chariots also
were taken. The tent of Timoleon afforded the
most beautiful and magnificent spectacle. In it were
piled all kinds of spoils, among which a thousand
breast-plates of exquisite workmanship and ten thou-

4' 2,500, says Diod. Sic. xvi. 80.*

ii.

266. TJMOLEOX.

sand bucklers were exposed to view. As there was but
a small number to collect the plunder of such a mul-
titude, and they found such immense riches, it was
the third day after tiie battle before they could erect
the trophv. With the first news of the victory, Ti-
molcon sent to Corinth the most splendid of the
arms which he had taken ; desirous that the world
might admire and emulate his native city, when
they saw the fairest temples adorned — not with
Grecian spoils, nor v/ith the unpleasing monuments
of kinch'ed blood and domestic ruin — but Vvith the
spoils of barbarians, which bore tliis honourable in-
scription, declaring the justice as well as the valour
of the conquerors ; " That the people of Corinth
*' and Timolcon their general, having delivered the

Greeks who dwelt in Sicily from the Carthaginian

yoke, made this offering, as a grateful acknow*

ledgement to the gods."

After this, Timoleon left the mercenaries to lav
waste the Carthaginian province, and returned to
Syracuse. By an edict there published he banished
from Sicily the thousand hired soldiers, who had de-
serted him before the battle, and obliged them to
quit Syracuse before sun-set. These wretches passed
over into Italy, where they were treacherously slain
by the Bruttians. Such was the vengeance, which
heaven took of their perfidy.

Nevertheless Mamercus prince of Catana, and
Icetes, either moved with envy at the success of
Timoleon or dreading him as an implacable enemy,
who thought no faith was to be kept with tyrants,
entered into a league with the Carthaginians, and
desired them to send over a new army and general,
if they wished not wholly to lose Sicily. Upon which,
Gisco came with a fleet of seventy ships, and a body
of Greeks whom he had taken into pay. The Car-
thaginians had not employed any Greeks before, but
now they considered them as the bravest and most
invincible of men.

Upon this occasion, the inliabitants of Messene
rising with one consent slew four hui^dred of the
9

I

TIMOLEON. 267^

foreign soldiers, whom Timoleon had sent to their
assistance ; and within the dependencies of Carthage
the mercenaries, commanded by Euthymus the Leu-
cadian, were cut off by an ambush at a place called
Hierae'". Hence the 2:ood fortune of Timoleon be-
came still more illiist ious : for these \vere some of
tiie men who, wiih Philodcmus of Phocis and Ono-
marchu'^, !iad broken into the temple of ^'^ polio at
Delphi, and were partakers with them in the sacri-
lege ". Shunned as execrable upon this account,
they wandered about Peloponnesus, when Timoleon
lieing in great waiit of men took them into pay.
When tliey came into Sicily, they were victorious
in all the battles where he commanded in person :
but after the great struggles of the war were over,
being sent upon service where succours were re-
quired, tlicy were totally cut off, not all at once, but

'^^ We do not find that there was any piace in Sicily called
* Hierae:' in all probability, therefore, it should be ' Hie'tjc ;' for
Steph. (de Urb.) mentions a castle in Sicily of that name. (Lubin.,
who thinks it is hod. Lato in the vale of Mazara, SO miles S. of
Palenno.)

■'^ The Sacred War, which lasted from 01. cv. 4. to 01. cviii. 1.,
commenced upon this occasion. The Amphictyons having con-
denmed the people of Phocis in a heavy fine, for plundering the
country of Cyrrha which was dedicated to Apollo, and that people
being unable to pay it, their whole country was adjudged forfeit to
the god. Upon which Philomelus (not 'Philodemus') called the
people together, and advised them to seize the treasures in the
temple of Delphi, to enable them to hire forces to defend them-
selves. This brought on a war of six years ; in the course of which,
most of the sacrilegious persons miserably perished. (L.) See
Diod. Sic. xvi. 26, 27, 60. Philomelus himself fell headlong down
a precipice: Onomarchus, his succesr-or ia the command, was as-
sassinated by his own soldiers, and exposed on a cross ; and
Phayllus, his brother, died of a sudden consumption. Even the
wives, vi'ho had profanely worn the ornaments of the temple, shared
in the mit^eries of their husbands. The most sacrilegious Grecian
chiefs, Ajax, Oileus, &c. expiated their crimes b}'^ proportionably-
heavy inflictions. The sacred plate of the Jewish temple was on
the table of Belshazzar, when the Invisible Hand traced his destiny
upon the wall. Thus both fabulous and sacred history exclaim,

Discitejustitiam monil'i, et non temnere Divos.

(Virg. vi. 620.)*

268 TIMOLEON.

by little and little. In this, avenging justice seems
to have been Milling to nse the prosperity of Timo-
leon as an apology for it's delay ; taking care, a,s it
did, that no harm might happen to the good from
the punishment of the wicked : insomuch, that the
favour of the gods toward that great man was not
less discerned and admired in his very losses, than
in his most brilliant successes.

Upon any of these paltry advantages, the tyrants
took occasion to ridicule the Svracusans, at which
they were hio-hly incensed. Mamercus for instance,
who valued himself on liis poems and tragedies,
talked in a pompous manner of the victory, which
lie had gained over the mercenaries ; and ordered
the following insolent inscription to be put upon the
shields, which he dedicated to the gods :

These bucklers ''■* puvpled, ivorv-^okl-embost,
The clay to our phiin Httlc bucklers lo&t.

Subsequently, when Timoleon was laying siege to
Calauria, Icetes took the opportunity of making an
inroad into the territories of Syracuse, where he met
with considerable booty ; and having caused great
havock and mischief, he marched back by Ca-
lauria itself, in contempt of Timoleon and the
slender force which he had with him. Timoleon
suifered him to pass, and then followed him with
his cavalry and light-armed foot. When Icetes
saw that he was pursued, he crossed the Damyrias^^,
and waited in a posture to receive the enemy on the
other side. What emboldened him to do this, was
the difficulty of the passage, and the steepness of
both the banks. But a strange dispute of jealousy
and honour, which arose among Timoleon's officers,
a while delayed the combat ; not one of them con-
senting to go after another, but each wishing to be

■♦4 They were shields, which had been taken out of the temple at
Delphi.

*5 Or the Laniyrias, the difference between the Greek A and A
being so slight, as to render such a mistake not improbabl-e.*

TIMOLEON. «(59

foremost in the attack : so that their fording was
likely to he very tumultuous and disorderly hy their
jostling one another, and pressing forward ibr pre-
cedency. To remedy this, Timoleon ordered them
to decide the matter by lot, and that each of them
for this purpose should give him his ring. These he
shook in the skirt of his robe ; and the first which
came up happening to have a tropliy for the seal, the
young officers received it with joy, and crying out
that they would not wait for any other lot, made
their way as fast as possible through the river, and
fell upon the enemy ; who unable to sustain the
shock soon fled, throwing away their arms, and leav-
ing a thousand of their men dead upon the spot.

A few days after this, Timoleon marched into the
territory of the I.eor.tincs, where he took Icetes
alive; and his son Eupolcmus, and Euthymus his
general of the horse, were brought to him bound by
the soldiers. Icetes and his son were capitally pu-
nished, as tyrants and traitors to their country :
neither did Euthymus find mercy, though remark-
ably brave and bold in action, because he was ac-
cused of a severe sarcasm against the Corinthians.
He had said (it seems) in a speech which he made
to tlie Leontines, upon the Corinthians taking the
field '^% " That it was no formidable matter, if the
" Corinthian dames were gone out to take the air."
Thus the generality of men are more apt to resent a
contemptuous word than an unjust action, and can
bear any injury better than disgrace. Every hostile
deed is imputed to the necessity of war, but satiri-
cal expressions are considered as the overflowings of
hatred or malisrnity.

•»* A verse in the Medea of Euripides (516.), quite altered in it*s
msaning by the different punctuation. Medea there says,

M-; /*«» 71 [Aii[j!j!^>;ijrS', K. T. A.

lastead of which, Euthymus pronounced it thus :

Kep>^i«< yuidiKl', t^ri?:^ev J«^(*«y,

570 TIMOLEOy.

When Timoleon was returned, the \vjves and
daughters of Icetes were brouglit by the Syracusaris
to a pubh'c trial, condemned, and executed. This
seems to have been the most exceptionable part of
Timoleon's conduct : for, if he had interposed, the
women would not have suffered. But he appears to
have connived at it, and to have given 'tliem up to
the resentment of a people anxious to make some sa-
tisfaction to the manes of Dion, who had expelled
Dionysius. For Icetes was the man who, as we have
related in the Life of Dion"^", threw Arete the wife
of Dion, his sister Aristomache, and his son (yet a
child) alive into the sea.

Timoleon then marched to Catana aq;ainst Ma-
inercus, who v/aited for him in order of battle upon
the banks of the Abolus '^^ ; and defeated and put
him to flight, with the loss of above two thousand
men, no small part of which consisted of the Punic
succours sent by Gisco. Upon this, the Carthagi-
nians desired him to grant them peace, which he did
on the following conditions : " That they should
hold only the lands witliin the Lycus "^ ; that tiiey
should })ermit all who desired it, to remove out of'
their province with their families and goods, and
'^ to settle at Syracuse ; and that they should re-
*^ nounce all alliance with the tyrants." Mamercus,
reduced by this treaty to despair, set sail lor Italy,

' ■♦' From this passage, and another before, it seems as if the Life
o'f Dion had been written before this. And yet at the eonclusion
of the Life of Dion Fhitarch expresses himself, as if this had been
nritteu tirst: For there he mentions some circumstances, ' of whicli
(he adds) 1 have made more particular mention in the Life of Timo-
leon.' In one of them therefore, if not in both, those references
must have been made by tlie transcribers, according to the different
order in whicli the I^ives were placed.

"S Ptolemy and others cull this river Alabas, Alabis, or Alabon.
It is near Hybia, betv^een Catana and Syracuse. See Diod. Sic. iv.
58., and Sreph. de Urb.

■•^ Plutarcii probably took the name of this river, as he found it
in Diod Sic xvi. 82.; but other historians call it the Halycus.
The Carthaginians, indeed, might possibly ,<>ive it the oriental
fispirate huy which signifies only the particle' ♦ the.*

I!

TlMOLEONl "'iii

^ith an intent to bring the Lucariians agaihs Tiiijo-
Icon and the 8yracusans. But the crews tacking
about with the galleys, and returning to Sicily, de-
livered up Catana to Timoleon ; which obliged
Mamercus to take refuge at Messina with Hippo,
the prince of that city. Timoleon coming upon them
and investing the place both by sea and land. Hippo
got on board a ship, and attempted to make his
escape, but was taken- by the Mcsscnians themselves,
who exposed him in the theatre ; and calling their
children out of the schools, as to the finest spectacle
in the world, the punishment of a tyrant, first
scourged him and then put him to death.

Upon this, Mamercus surrendered himself to
Timoleon, agreeing to take his trial at Syracuse, on
condition that Timoleon himself should not be his
accuser. Being conducted to Syracuse, and brought
before the people, he attempted to pronounce a
speech, which he had composed long before for
such an occasion ; but as he was received with cla-
mour, and saw that the assembly were determined to
show him no favour, he threw off his upper garment,
ran through the theatre, and dashed his head vio-
lently against one of the steps, with a design to kill
himself: failing however in his attempt, he was
taken up ahve, and suffered the punishment of
tliieves and robbers.

In this manner did Timoleon extirpate tyranny
from among the Sicilians, and put a period to their
wars. He fbiuid the whole island turned almost
w^ild and savage with it's misfortunes, so that it's
very inhabitants could scarcely endure it; and yet
he so civilised it again, and rendered it so desirable,
that strangers came to settle in the country, from
which it's own people had lately fied ; the large
cities of Agrigentum and Gela, which after the
Athenian war had been sacked and left desolate by
the Carthaginians, were now rcpeopled ; the former
by Megcllus and Pheristus from Elea, and the latter
by Oorgus from the isle of Ccos, who also collected

^72 TIMOLEON.

and brought along with him some of the old citizen*;.
Timoleon not only assured them of his protection,
and of peaceful days to settle in after the tempests
of such a war; but cordially entered into their
necessities, and supplied them with every thing, so
that he was even beloved by theiii, as if he had been
their founder. Nay, to such a degree did he enjoy
the affections of the Sicilians in general, that no war
seemed concluded, no laws enacted, no lands divided,
no political regulation made in a proper manner,
except it was revised and retouched by him : he was
the master-builder, who put the last hand to the
Work, and bestowed upon it a happy elegance and
perfection. Though at that time Greece boasted a
number of illustrious men, whose achievements were
highly distinguished, Timotheus (for instance), Age-
silaus, Pelopidas, and Epaminondas, with the last of
whom Timoleon principally vied in the course of
glory ; yet we may discern in tiieir actions a certain:
labour and effort, whichdiminishes their lustre, and
some of them have afforded room for censure, a-jd
been followed with repentance ; whereas there is
not a single action of Timoleon (if wo except the
extremities, resorted to in the case of his brother)
to which we may not, witli Timaeus, apply that
passage of Sophocles ;

What Love, v/liat Venus, by their soft control • • ,.
Bound the fair parts in this harmonious whole ? ' "

For, as the poetry of Antimachus ^'^ and the por-
traits of Dionysius '^ (both of them Colophonians)

^° Antimachus was an epic poet of Celophon, a city in Ionia,
who flourislied in the days of Socrates and PhUo. He wrote a
poem called ' the Thebaic!.' Quintilian (x. 1.) says, he possessed a
great degree offeree and solidity, together with a considerable ele-
vation of stile, and liad the second place assigned him by the gram-'
marians, after Homer; but as he failed in the passions, in the dispo-
sition of his fable, and in the ease and elegance of manner, though
he was second, he was far from coming near the first.

i' Dionysius was a portrait-painter, and therefore called Anthro-
pograj}/tns, [Win, ii. iS. xxxv. 10. j

TIMOLEON. 273

with all the nerves and strength, which one finds
in them, appear to be too much forced and laboured;
whereas the paintings of Nicomachus ''^ and the
verses of Homer beside their other excellences and
graces, seem to have been struck off with freedom
and readiness ^^ : so if we compare the exploits of
Kpaminondas and Agesilaus, performed with infinite
pains and diflicidty, to those of Timoleon, which
glorious as they were had in them a great deal of
ease, when we deeply and justly consider the case,
■\ve shall conclude the latter not to have been the
work of fortune mdeed, but the effects of fortunate
virtue.

He himself, it is true, ascribed all his successes
to Fortune. For in writing to his friends at Corinth,
or addressing the Syracusans, he often said that he
w^as highly indebted to that goddess, when she was
resolved to save Sicily, for having done it vmder his
name. In his house he built a chapel and offered
sacrifices to Chance ^\ and dedicated the house itself

S" * Nicomachus,* as Pliny informs us, * painted with a s^vift,
-as w ell as nmsteily hand ; and his pieces sold tor as much as a town
was worth.' Ncc fuit alius in arle vclocio)\ — ^ Tab nice singnhv
oppidoriun vccnihnnt opibus/ Aristratus the tyrant of Sicyon,
having agreed with him for a piece of work which seemed to
require a considerable time, Nicomachus did not appear till withia
a i'tiw days of that, on which he had agreed to finish it. Upoa
this, the tyrant talked of punishing him; but in those few days he
completed the thing most admirably, and entirely to his satisfaction.

5 J Surely, as has been observed before me, a great excellence;

— ut sibi quivis
Speret idcmy sudet midtiimfrustraque laboret,
Ausus idem. (Hor. A. P. 24-0.)

Well has Quintilian wound up his panegyric on Homer witli * Ut
maoni sit viri virtutes ejus non cemidatione, qiLodJieri non potest ^ s^d
intcllcctu scqui.^ {x. I.)*

5* When the ancients ascribed any event to Fortune, they did
not mean to deny the operation of the Deity in it, but only to
exclude all human contrivance and power. And, in events ascribed
to Chance, they might possibly mean to exclude the agency of all
rational beings, whether human or divine. (L.) The deliverance of
"Sicily was the work of Fortune, according to Timoleon (or rather
Plutarch); it's deliverance by his hand, of Chauce. Fortune kd

VOL. II. T

271- TIMOLEOX.

to Fortune : for the Syracusans had given Iiim one
of the best houses in the city, as a reward of his
services ; and provided him, besides, a very elegant
and agreeable retreat in the country. In the country
it was, that he spent most of his time with his wife
and children, whom he had sent for from Corinth :
for he never returned home, took no part in the
troubles of Greece, nor exposed himself to public
envy (the rock, upon which great generals commonly
split, in their insatiable pursuits of honour and power)
but remained in Sicily, enjoying the blessings which
he had introduced ; and of which the greatest was,
to see so many cities and so many thousands of peo-
ple made happy through his means.

But since, according to the comparison of Sirao-
nides, every republic must have some impudent
slanderer, just as every lark must have a crest upon
it's head, so it was at Syracuse ; for Timoleon was
attacked by two demagogues, Laphystius and Demae-
netus. The first of these having demanded of him
sureties, that he would answer to an indictment
which was to be brought against him, the people
began to rise, declaring they would not suffer him
to proceed. But Timoleon stilled the tumult, by
representing " That he had voluntarily undergone
" so many labours and dangers, on purpose that
" every Syracusan might have recourse, when he
" pleased, to the laws." And, when Demjenetus
in full assembly alleged many articles against his
behaviour in command, he vouchsafed him no
answer ; but only said, " He could not sufficiently
" express his gratitude to the gods for granting his
" request, in having permitted him to see all the
*^' Syracusans enjoy the liberty of saying whatever

they thought fit.'"

((

the man, wliose father had been murthcred twenty years before, to
the same temple with the murtherer — at the very moment, as Chance
would have it, that the assassin was meditating a new crime in tlie
murther of Timoleon,*

TIMOLEON. 275

Having then confessedly perfonned greater tilings
than any Grecian of bis time, and being the only-
man who had realised those glorious achievements,
to which the orators of Greece were constantly
exhorting their countrymen in the general assemblies
of the states, Fortune happily ]")laced him at a dis-
tance from the calamities in which the mother-country
was involved, and kept his hands unstained with it's
blood. He made his courage and conduct appear
in his dealings with the barbarians and with tyrants,
as well as his justice and moderation wherever the
Greeks or their friends were concerned. Very few
of his trophies cost his fellow-citizens a tear or put
any of them in mourning '■' ; and yet, in less then
eight years, he dehvered Sicily from it's intestine
miseries and distempers, and restored it to the native
inhabitants.

After so much prosperity, wlien he was well
advanced in years, his eyes began to fail him, and
the defect increased so fast that he entirely lost his
sight. Not that he had done any thing to occasion
it, nor was it imputable to the caprice of Fortune "'^^
but it seems to have been ovving to a family-vv-eakness
and disorder, which operated together with thif^
course of time. For several of his relations are said
to have lost their sidit in the same manner, havino-

1 . . ^ c->

had it gradually impaired by years. But Athanis
informs us, notwithstandijig, that during the war
with Hippo and Mamercus, and while he lay before
Ivlyllre, a wiiite speck appeared on his eye, which
v>as a plain indication that blindness was coming on.
This did not hinder him, however, from continuing

55 This was the prniul boast of Pericles on liis death-bed, but it
must be confined to his domestic adniini.stration ; as it could never
be predicated with justice, in an unlimited sense, of the author of
the Peloponnesian war.*

^'' Plutarch here hints at an opinion, which v>as very prevalent
among the Pagans, tliat if anj- person was signali}' favoured with,
success, some niisibrtune would inevitably happen to counterbalance-
it. This they imputed to the envy of a malignant daemon,

X 2

275 TniOLEOX.

the siege, and prosecuting the war until he got
the tyrants into his power. But when he was re-
turned to Syracuse, he immediately hiid down the
command, and excused himself to the people from
any farther service, as he had brought their affairs
to a happy conclusion.

That he bore his misfortune without repining, is
not to be wondered at ; but it was reallv admirable
to observe the honour and respect, which the Syra-
cusans paid him when blind. They not only visited
him constantly themselves, but brought all strangers
who spent some time among them to his house in
the town, or to that in the country, that they too
might have tlie pleasure of seeing tlie deliverer of
Syracuse. And it was their joy and pride, that he
chose to spend his days with them, and despised
the splendid reception which Greece was prepared
to give him, on account of his eminent successes.
Among the many votes passed, and things contrived
lor his honour, one of the most striking was their
decree ; " That, whenever they should be at war
with a foreign nation, they would employ a Corin-
thian general.'* Their method of proceeding also,
in their assemblies, had the same object. For they
decided smaller matters by themselves, but consulted
him in tlie more important cases. Upon these occa-
sions, he was conveyed in a litter through the market-
])lace to the theatre ; and when he was carried in,
the people saluted him with one voice, as he sat.
He returned the civility, and having paused a while
to. allow time for their acclamations, took cognisance
of the afi'air, and delivered his opinion. The assem-
bly gave their sanction to it, and then his servants
carried the litter back through the theatre ; and
the people having accompanied him with loud
applauses, despatched the rest of the public business
bv themselves.

With so much respect and kindness was the old
age oi I'imoleon cherished, as that of a connnon
/iilhcr! and at last he died of a slight illness, co-ope-

71M()LE0X. ^TT

ratiDg uith lengtli of years -'^ Some time being
granted to tlie Syracusans to prepare for liis funeral,
and for the neighbonring inhabitants and strangers
to assemble, the whole was conducted with the
utmost magnificence. The bier sumptuously adorn-
ed was carried by young men, selected by the
people, over the ground where the palace and
castle of the tyrants had stood prior to their
demolition. It was followed by many thousands
of men and women, in procession not unlike that of
a public festival, crowned with garlands and clothed
in white. The lamentations and tears, mingled
with the praises of the deceased, showed that the
honour now paid him was not a matter of course,
or mere compliance with a duty enjoined, but the
testimony of real sorrow and sincere affection. At
last the bier being placed upon the funeral pile,
Demetrius, who had the loudest voice of all their
Jieralds, was directed to make proclamation as
follows : " The people of Syracuse inter Timoleou
" the Corinthian, the son of Timodemus, at the
" expense of two hundred mina3 : they honour him
" moreover with annual games for ever, to be cele-
brated with performances in music, horse-racing,
and wrestling ; as the man who destroyed tyrants,
subdued barbarians, repeopled great cities which
lay desolate, and restored to the Sicilians their
" laws."

The body was interred and a monument erected
for him in the market-place, which they afterward
surrounded with porticoes and other buildings suit-
able to the purpose, and then made it a place of
exercise for their youth, under the name of Timo-
leonteum. And they themselves continued to make
use of the form of government and the laws^*

57 He died 01. ex. 4., B. C. 337., after having governed Sicily
eight vears. (Diod, Sic. xvi. !)0,)*

"^** Of their hiws, wliich had originally been framed by Diodes,
he left some — those, in particular, relative to wills and contract?— «
m)alterpd ; but such of their civil regulations, as had been changed

a

278 TIMOLEON.

established by liim, which insured their happiness
for a long course of years '^.

or subverted by the tyrants, be corrected or restored. In this
department, he availed himself of the assistance of Cephak)s.
(Diod. Sic. xvi. 8i'.)*

^'^ This prosperity was interrupted, about thirty years afterward,
by the cruelties of Agatliocles, who made himself tyrant of Syra*
evise. (Id. xix. ?•, «S-'c.}

THE

LIFE

OF

PAULUS iEMILIUS^

SUMMARY.

Plutarcli's motives in '■Mrili)^^ the Lives of illustrious men. Noble
extraction of Paulus JUmiJius. His birihy first offices, and ex-
ploits. His marriages ; war in Liguria, and taste for the sciences.
War with Perseus, king of Macedon. Origin of the Roman war
•with that country. Paulus Ai.milius is elected consul a second time,
and appointed to the management of the Macedonian ivar. He
harangues the people, and sets off". Pe r sacs' avarice ; and JEmi-
lius' Judicious condiw.t. Different opinions about springs and
fountains. jEmilius enters Macedon hij mount Olympus. Height
if that mountain. Scipio crosses it. Perseus' consternation ; and
the prudent measures of JEmilius. Eclipse of the moon. Plan of
the battle. Perseus retreats. Vigorous resistance of the Macedo-
nian phalan.x ; which, however, is at last hrohen. /Emilius gains
a complete victory: is alarmed for his son. Perseus fiies, and
carries off Ids treasures to Samothrace. JEmilius in two days takes
possession of the whole of Macedon. Desjpatch with ivhich the iw
tclUgence is conveyed to Rome. Other instances of the speedy cir-
culation ofnevos. Perseus is taken, and kindly treated by jEmi-
lius. His abject behaviour. JEmilius' speech to his soldiers upon
the vicissitudes of human affairs. He travels in Greece, and in-
troduces there many judicious regulations. His great satisfaction
in that country. He p)asses into Epirns ; and returns to Italy,
tiervius Galba endeavours to deprive him of the honour of a tri-
umph. Servilius addresses the people in his favour, A triumph
is decreed to him. It's exlraordinary magnificence. Perse-iis is led

280 PAULUS .EMILIUS.

lip in if, toith his children. JEmilius* personal splendour. He
loses his tivo sons ; but supports his misj'oriune with great mag-
nanimity. Death of Perseus, and fate of his children. Taxes
abolished at Rome. Difference of jEmilius' conduct from that of
his son Scipio. He is elected censor : dies. Honours jmid him.
lie haves behind him very inconsiderable property.

IIEN I first applied myself to the writing of
these Lives, it was for the sake of others : but I
pursue, and persevere in, that study for my own ;
availing myself of history, as of a mirror '\ from
which 1 learn to adjust and regulate my conduct.
For it is like living and conversing with these illus-
trious men, when I invite as it were and receive
them, one after another, under my roof when I
coiisider

How great and wonderful they were 5,

and select from their actions the most memorable
and glorious :

^ This Life is by the modern editors of Amyot, nnd by 31. Ki-
card, judiciously made to precede that of Tiniolcon as the preface
clearly indicates it ought to be ; in opposition to most of the edi-
tors of Plutarcli, who seem to have thought, without sufficient
foundation, that the Greek sliould always go before his Roman
parallel.*

^ fSo Tererice,

Denique
Inspicere, lanquam in speculum, in vitas omnium
Jubco, atquc ex (iliis siimcrc exemplmn sibi. ( Adelph. iii, 4.)

.^.nd Livy,

Hoc illud est prcecipuc in cngiiitione rerum salnbre ac frugiferumf
emnis tc exempli documoita in illustri posita monnmcnlo mtueri :
inde tihi, ttucqiie reip., quod imiterc capias ; indcfocdum inceptu,f(C-
dum exilu, quod vitcs. (Praef.)*

i ia-a-ai ty,v olo<; ri Ilom. II. xxiv. 629., whcre the phrase

is applied to Priam's admiration of Achilles. These allusions at
once prove the fulness of Plutarch's raini;|, and set oif his coni-?
positions.*

PAULUS .T:MILIUS. 281

Wliat greater bliss ! What medicine, of our manners
More powerfully corrective !

Democrltiis has a position in his philosophy ■*, ut-
terly false indeed and leading to endless superstitions,
that tliere are phantasms or images continually float-
ing in the air, some propitious and some unlucky ; and
advises us to pray, that such may strike upon our
senses as are agreeable to and perfective of our na-
tiu*e, and not such as have a tendency to vice and
error. For my part, instead of this, I fill my mind
with the sublime images of the best and greatest
men, by attention to history and biography ; and if
I contract any blemish, any ill custom or ungenerous
ieeling from other company in which I am unavoid-
ably engaged, I correct and expel them, by calmly
and dispassionately turning my thoughts to these
excellent examples. For the same purpose, I now
put into your ^ hands the Life of Timoleon the Co-
rinthian and that of ^milius Paulus, men celebrated
not only for their pursuits, but for their virtues j in-
somuch that they have left room to doubt, whether
tlieir great achievements were not more owing to
their good fortune, than to their prudence.

Most writers agree, that the yEmilian family was
one of the most ancient among the Ptoman nobility:
and it is asserted that the founder of it, who also

♦ Democritus held that visible objects produced their image in
the ambient air, which image produced a second, and the second a
third still less than the former, and so on till the last produced it's
counterpart in the eye. This he supposed to be the process of the
act of vision, and called of^-v y.sti' uiiVxav ifj.Trrua-Hc. But he went on
to what is infinitely more absurd. He maintained that thought was
formed, accordingly as those images struck upon the imagination ;
that of these there were some good, and some evil ; that the good
produced virtuous thoughts in us, and the evil the contrary. (L.)
Flutarch, however, has made a fine use of this whimsical theory.
Lucretius has amplified the notion of images (simulacra) m the
beginning of his fourth book, ver. SI., &c. For an account of De-
mocritus, see Diog. Laert. ix. 34.*

5 \\z. those of Sessius Seneeio. Jsee not, (3. j at the beginning
of the Life of Theseus.*

585 PAULUS .^MILIUS.

left It his surname, was Mamercus" the son of Pytha-
goras the pliilosopher \ who for the pecuhar charms
and gracefuhiess of his elocution was called ^mi-
lius ^ ; such at least is the opinion of those, who say
that Numa was educated under Pythagoras.

Those of this family, who distinguislied them-
selves^, found their attachment to virtue generally
blessed with success. And notwithstanding the ill
fortune of Lucius Paulus at Cannae, he displayed
in^Don that occasion both his prudence and his valour.
For when he could not dissuade his coUegue from
lighting, he joined him in the combat, though much
against his will, but did not partake with him in his
flight : on the contrary, when he who had plunged
them into danger deserted the field, Paulus stood his
ground, and fell bravely amidst the enemy with his
sword in his hand '°.

This Paulus had a daughter named ^Emilia, who
^vas married to Scipio tlie Great, and a son called
Paulus, whose history I am now writing.

At the time, in which he made his appearance
in the world, Rome abounded with men celebrated
for their virtues and other excellent accomplish-
inents^^; and even among these ^^^milius made a
distinguislied figure, without having pursued the
same studies, or set out in the same track, witli the
young nobility of that age. For he did not exercise
himself in pleading causes, neither could he stoop to
salute, and solicit, and caress the people, which was
the method adopted by most of the candidates for

^ See the Life of Nunia, Vol. I.

" He is called P3'thag()ras the philosopher, to distinguish him
from P\thagoras the wrestler.

f From the Greek «:/xt/;io:.*

9 From Lucius /Emiliiis, who was consul A. V. C. 270. and over-
came the V'olsci, to Lucius Paulus, who was tatlier to Paulus /Lmi-
lius and fell at Cannsc, A. U. C. 538., there were many of those
jEuiilii renovMied for their victories and triumphs.

'^ See t!ie Life of Fabius Maximus, p. 89.

" In that period we hud the Sempronii, the Albini, the Fabii
^Lixinii, tlie Marcelli, the Scipiones, the Fulvii, the Sulpitii, the
Cethegi, the Metelli, vvc. &,c. \ !

PAULUS .T:MILIUS. 28S

popularity. Not that lie had been denied talents
from nature to acquit himself well in eitlier of these
respects, but he reckoned the honour that flows from
bravery, justice, and probity, preferable to both ;
and in these virtues he soon surpassed all the young
men of his time.

The first of the hisrh of^ces of state, for which he
was a candidate, was that of ^dile ; and he carried
it against twelve competitors, who (we are told)
w^ere all subsequently consuls. And when he was
appointed one of the priests called Augurs, whom
tiie Romans employ in the inspection and care of
divination by the flight of birds and by prodigies in
the air, he studied so attentively the usages of his
country, and acquainted himself so perfectly with
tlie ancient ceremonies of religion, that what before
was only considered as an honour, and courted on
account of the authority annexed to it ^", appeared
in his hands to be one of the principal arts. Thus he
confirmed the definition, which is given by some
philosophers, " That religion is the science of wor-
" shipping the gods ^\" He did every thing with
skill and application ; he laid aside all other con-
cerns while he attended to this, and made not the
least omission or innovation ; but disputed with his
collegues about the miiuitest article, and insisted
that though the Deity might be deemed merciful,
and willing to overlook sonjc neglect, yet it w^as
dangerous for tlie state to connive at and pass by
such things. For no man ever began his attempts
against government with an enormous crime ^'^^ and
relaxing; in the smallest matters breaks down the
fences of the greatest.

'^ Under pretence that the auspices were favourable or other-
•vvise, tlie Augurs had it in their power to promote or obstruct any
jiublic art'air whatever. (Cic. de lA^j^g. ii. 12.) Of this college most
of the patrician youth, who wished to take a part in statc-alfairs,
were adaiittcd niemliers.

'^ See Plato's Eutliyphron,*

'"* Thus nemo rcpentij'nit InrpissimnSy in Plutarch's opinion (it
anpcarti), was as trueof politicai, as of moral turpitude,*

^^ PAULUS .^MILIUS.

: Neither was he less exact in requiring, and ob-
serving, the miHtary disciphne of his country. He
did not study to be popular in command, nor en-
deavour like the generality to make one commission
the foundation for another, by humouring and in-
dulging the soldiery ^^ : but, as a priest instructs the
initiated with care in the sacred ceremonies, so he
explained to those who were under him the rules
and customs of war ; and being inexorable, at the
same time, to those who transgressed them, he re-esta-
blished his country in it's former glory. With him in-
deed the beating of an enemy was a matter of much
less account, than the bringing of his countrymen
to strict discipline ; the first seeming to be the ne-
cessary consequence of the latter.

During the war, in which the Romans were en-
gaged with Antiochus the Great ^^ in the east, and
in which their most experienced officers were em-
ployed, another broke out in the west. There was
a general revolt in Spain ^"^ ; and thither ^'5imilius
was sent, not with six lictors only like other praetors,
but with twice the number, which seemed to raise
his dignity to an equality with the consular. He
beat the barbarians in two pitched battles '% and
killed thirty thousand of them : which success ap-
pears to have been owing to his generalship in choos-
ing his ground, and attacking the enemy while they
were crossing a river ; tor, by these means, his army
gained an easy victory. He made himself master
of two hundred and lifty cities, which voluntarily

^5 Tlie Roman sol("|,iers were at the same time citizens, who haci
votes for all the great civil and military employments.

"^ The war with Antiochus the (rreat, king of Syria, began about
A. U. C. 562., twentv-four years after the battle of Cannae. The
consul Glabrio was employed in it, and after him the two Scipios ;
tlie elder of whom was content to serve as lieutenant under his
brother. (Liv. xxxvii. 1.)

*' Spain, after having shaken off the Roman yoke during the
Pu«ic wars, had been recovered by Scipio Nasica.

'** Livy (ib. 57.) speaks only of one successful battle, in which
Paulus ^'Emilius forced the entrenchments of the Spaniards, killcel
erghtci^n thousand of tliem, and made three hundred ^iri^ouers,.

PAULUS .¥.MILIU.'§. ?»5

Opened their gates to liim : and Imviiig established
peace throughout the province, and secured it's aU
legiance, he returned to Rome not a drachma richer
than he went out. He never indeed was desirous
to enrich himself, but lived in a generous manner
upon his own estate ; which however was so far fi'om
being large, that after his death it was hardly suffi-
cient to answer his vv^ife's dowry.

His first wife was Papiria, the daughter of Papi-
rius Maso, a man of consular dignity. After he
had lived with her a long time in wedlock, he di-
vorced her, though she had brought him very fine
children ; for she was mother to the illustrious Sci-
pio, and to Fabius Maximus. The reason of this
separation history does not record; but with respect
to divorces in general, the account which a certain
Roman, who put away his wife, gave of his ov/n
case seems to have been a just one When his
friends remonstrated, and asked him, " Was she not
" chaste? Was she not fair ? Was she not fruitful?'*
He held out his shoe, and said, " Is it not handsome?
" Is it not new ? Yet none knows where it pinches,
" but he that wears it." It is certain, that men usu-
ally repudiate their wives for great and visible faults ;
yet sometimes also a peevishness of temper or in-
congruity of manners, small and frequent distastes
though not discerned by the world, produce the
most incurable aversions in a married life '^.

"' M. Ricard, with some others, thinks it not improbable that
the author of tliis observation was Paulus TEmilius himselK The
very ingenious Dr. Robertson mentions tliis Irequeney of divorces,
as one of tlie necessary reiisons for introducing the Christian reh-
gion at that precise period of time, uhen it was pubUshed to the
world. ' Divorces on very slight pretences were permitted both
by the Greek and Roman legislators. And, though the pure man-
ners of those republics restrained for some time the operation of
I such a pernicious institution, thouglh^-the virtue of private pei'sons

' seldom abused the indulg; i.ce that the legislator allowed them; yet

no sooner had the establishment of arbitrary power and the pro-
1 -gress of luxury vitiated the taste of men, than the law with regard

. to divorces was found to be among the worst corruptions that pre-

vailed in that abandoned age. The facility of separations rendered

32

286 PAULUS .EMILIUS.

^mllius, thus separated from Papilla, married a
second wife, by whom he had also two sons. These
lie brought up in his own house; tlie sons of Papiria
being adopted into the greatest and most nobhi fa-
milies in Home, the elder '-° by the Fabius Maxim us
who was five times consul, and the younger by his
cousin-german the son of Scipio Africanus, who gave
liim the name of Scipio. One of his daughters was
married to the son of Cato, and tlie other to ^Elius
Tubero a man of superior integrity, and who of all
the Romans knew best how to bear poverty. There
were not fewer than sixteen of the ^IClian family and
name, who had only a small house and one farm
among them'^^ ; and in this house they all lived, with
their wives arjd many children. Here dwelt the
daugliter of vEaiilius, wiio had been twice consul,
and had triumphed twice ; not ashamed of her hus-
band's poverty, but admiring tliat virtue whicli kept
him poor. Very different is the behaviour of bro-
thers, and other near relations in these days ; who,
if their possessions be not separated by large tracts
of land, rivers, and fortresses, arc perpetually at

Tnarried persons careloss of practising or obtaining those virtues,
which render domestic life easj' and delightful. The education of
their children, as the parents were not nmtuall}' endeared or- inse-
parably connected, was generally disregarded ; each parent consi-
dering it but a partial care, which might with equal justice devolve
on the other. Marriage, instead of restraining, added to the vio-
lence of irregular desire, and under a legal title became the vilest
and most shameless prostitution. From all these causes the mar-
riage-state fell into disreputation and contempt, and it became ne-
cessary to force men by ])enal laws into a society, where they ex-
pected no secure or lasting happiness. Among the Romans domestic
corruption grew of a sudden to an inc.cdible height. And per-
haps, in the history of mankind, we can find no parallel to tiie un-
disguised impurity and licentiousness of tiiat age. It \vas in good
time therefore, &c. &c.'

-" Who took the name of Q. Fabius .'Emilianus, and was father
to the celebrated orator Q. Fabius. His brother likewise, the ce-
lebrated Africanus ?tIinor, or the second, who destroyed Carthage
A. U. C. 608., took the name of Tlimiliamis.*

-' See Val. Max. (iv. 4.) v.-ho adds, minus multos cuUorcs des'ule-
ram, oiiam doyninoa habelxiL*

PAULUS .EMILIUS. 287

variance about them. So much instruction does
history suggest to the consideration of those, who
^re willing to profit by it !

When yEmilius was created consul ^^, he went
upon an expedition against the Ligurians, whose
country lies at the foot of the Alps, and who arc
also by some called ' Ligustines:' a bold and mar-
tial j)eople, who by their vicinity to tlic Romans had
learned from them the art of war. For they dwelt
in the extremities of Italy, bordering upon that part
of the Alps which is washed by the Tuscan sea, just
opposite to Africa, and were mixed with the Gauls
and Spaniards who inhabited the coast. At that
time they had likewise some strength at sea, and
their corsairs plundered and destroyed the merchant-
ships as far as the pillars of Hercules. They had an
army of forty thousand men to receive iEmilius, who
came but with eight thousand at the most. He en-
gaged them however, though five times his number,
entirely routed them, and having shut them up within
their walled towns, offered them reasonable and mo-
derate terms. For the Romans did not choose ut-
terly to cut off the people of Liguria, whom tliev
considered as a bulwark against the Gauls, a people
iilways hovering over Italy. The Ligiu"ians, con-
fiding in ^Emilius, delivered up their ships and their
towns. He onlv rased the fortifications, and then
re-delivered to them the cities : but he carried ofl:*
their shipping, not leaving them a vessel bigger than
those with three banks of oars; and he set at liberty
a number of prisoners, as well Romans as strangers,
whom they had captured both at sea and land""^.

Such were the memorable actions of his first con-
sulship. After which, he often expressed his desire
of being appointed again to the same high oflice,
and even stood candidate for it ; but, meeting v,ith

** It was in the year following, that he went against the Ligi -
rians. (Liv. xl. 25.)

-3 i^Emilius' conduct upon tliis occasion, as it appears from
Liv. xl. 25—28,, deserved an ampler detail.*

1^88 PAULUS /liMILIUS.

a repulse, he solicited it no more. Instead of that,
he applied liimself to the discharge of his function as
augur, and to the education of his sons; not in such
arts alone as had been taught in Rome, and tliose
•which he had himself acquired, but also in the po-
liter arts of Greece. For this purpose he not only-
kept masters who could teach them grammar, logic,
and rhetoric, but sculpture also and painting ; toge-
ther with such as were skilled in breaking and training
horses and dogs, and were to instruct tliem in riding
and hunting. When no public affairs prevented
him, he himself always attended their studies and
exercises. In short, he was the most indulgent pa-
rent in Rome.

As to public affairs, the Romans were then en-
gaged in a war with Perseus*^, king of MacedoB;
and to the incapacity or the cowardice of their ge-
nerals-^ they imputed it,, that the advantage was on
the enemy's side. For they, who had ibrced An-
tioch.r.s the Great to quit the rest of Asia-'', driven
him beyond mount Taurus, confined him to Syria,
and made him deem himself happy in purchasing
his peace with fifteen thousand talents -" ; who had
lately vanquished king Philip in Tliessaly-^, and de-
livered the Greeks from the Macedonian yoke ; in
short, wlio liad subdued Annibal, a chieftain supe-
rior to all kings both in valour and power — thought
it an intolerable thing to be obliged to contend for
a long time with Perseus upon equal terms, as if they

'■' This second Macedonian war witli Perseus began A. U. C. - i
tS3., 15. C. 171. _ _ ' j

^' Tiiose gcnernls were P. Licinius Crassu?, after Iiim A. Hosti- ; .|
llus Mancinus, and then Q. Martius PhiUppus, who dragged tlie
war heavily on during the three years of their consulsliip.

*'' Seventeen years before.

^' Livy says twelve thousand, which were to be paid in twelve [
years, by instalments of a thousand talents a year, (xxxviii. 3P<.) J

^3 Til is sei-vicc was performed by T. Q. Ilavninius, who defeated
Philip in Thessaly, killed eight thousand of his men upon the spot,
took live thousand prisoners, and after bis victory caused procla-
mation to be made by a herald at the Isthmian games that Greece })i
was tiee. Sec his Life. . .... ...

PAULUS ^MILIUS. 289

were competently matched by one, who only brought
into the field the poor remains of his father's ranted
forces. Here, however, the Romans were deceiv-
ed ; for they knew not that Philip, after his defeat,
had raised a much more numerous and better disci-
plined army, than he had before. This it may not
be amiss to explain in a few words, from the very
beginning. Antigonus^^, the most powerful among
the generals and successors of Alexander, having
gained for himself and his descendents the title of king,
had a son named Demetrius, who was father to Antigo-
nus surnamed Gonatas. Gonatas had a son named
Demetrius, who after a short reign left a young son
called Philip. The Macedonian nobility, dreading the
confusion often consequent upon a minority, set up
Antigonus, cousin* to the deceased king, and gave
him his widow, the mother of Philip, to wife. At first
they made him only regent and general, but afterward
findingthat he was a moderate and public-spirited man,
they declared him king. He it was that had the name

*9 This Antigonus killed Eumenss, and took Babylon from Se-
leucus ; and when his son Demetrius had overthrown Ptolemy's^
fleet at Cyprus, first (of all Alexander's successors) presumed to
wear a diadem, and assumed the title of king.

Philip, of the race of the Temenidee
^ ^ . _^

Antigonus I. Demetrius

m. Stratonice

I . .

Demetrius I. (Poliorcetes)

m. 1. Phila

Antigonus II. (Gonatas)

Demetrius II, Alcyoneus (natural child)

Philip Antigonus III. (Doson) Echecrates

--y\_

1

Perseus, last king of Macedon Demetrius

r— : « ,

Philip Alexander a daughter, who all died at Rome.

See the Life of Demetrius, Vol. V. not. (63.)
■ * Or rather nephew.

VOL. 11. U

?90 PAULUS .ET^IILIUS.

of Doson ^°, because lie was always promising, but:
never performed what he promised. After liiiii,
Philip mounted the throne, and though yet but a
youth soon showed himself equal to the greatest of
kings; so that it was believed, he would restore the
crown of Macedon to it's ancient dignity, and be
the only man capable of stopping the progress of tiic
Iloman power, which was now extending itself o\er
the wliole world. Being beaten however at Scotusa^'
by Titus Flaminius, liis courage for the present
sunk ; and, engaging to receive such terms as the
llomans should impose, he was glad to come off
with a moderate hue. But, recollecting himself
afterward, he could not brook the dishonour. To
rcign by the courtesy of the Romans appeared to
him more suitable to a slave, who minds nothing
])ut his pleasures, than to a man who has any dignity
of sentiment; and he therefore turned his thoughts
to w^ar, but made his preparations w'ith the utmost
privacy and caution. For suffering the towns that
were near the great roads and by the sea to run to
decay, and to become half desolate, in order that
he might be held in contempt by the enemy, he col-
lected an immense force in the higher provinces ;
and filling the inland places, the cities and castles,
with arms, money, and men fit for service, without
making any parade of v,-ar, he had his troops (like
so many wrestlers, trained and exercised in secret)
nlways in readiness for it. For he had in his arsenal
arms ibr thirty thousand men, in his garrisons eight
millions of measures of wheat, and money in his
coffers to defray the charge of maintaining ten thou-
sand mercenaries for ten years, to defend his coun-
try. But he had not the satisfaction of carrying these
designs into execution; for he died of grief and a
broken heart, upon discovering that he had unjustly

3° Doson signifips ' will-give.'

'' Tor uu account oi' this engagement, see the Life of Flaminius.

PAULUS i2i:MILIUS. 291

put Demetrius bis more wortliy son to death "% in
consequence of an accusation preferred by his other
son Perseus.

Perseus, wlio survived liimj inlicrited with the
crown his father's hostiUty to Rome ; but he was
not equal to such a burthen, on account of the ht-
tlensss of his capacity and the meanness of his man-
ners ; avarice being- the principal of the many
passions, which reigned in his distempered heart.
It is even said, that he was not Pliilip's son ; but
that the wife of that prince took him, as soon as he
was born, from his mother (a sempstress of Argos,
named Gnatha?nia^^) and imposed him upon her
husband as her own. And the chief reason of his
compassing the death of Demetrius seemed to have
been his fear that the royal liouse, having a lawful
heir, might prove him to be supposititious. But
though he was of sjach an abject and ungenerous
disposition, yet elated with the prosperous situation
of his affairs, he engaged in war with the Romans,
and long maintained the conflict ; repulsing several
of their fleets and armies commanded by men of
consular dignity, and even beating some of them.
Publius Licinius, who first invaded Macedon, he
defeated in an engagemicnt of the cavalry ^^, killed

3- This story is finely embellished in Dr. Young's tragedy of* the
Brothers ;' for a great part of which, however, that autlior was
indebted (it appears) to a French tragedy, called *■ Persce et De-
metrius.^*

33 Or Gnatlipcnium (see the Life of Aratus, near the conclusion.
Vol. VI.) a termination not unusual in the names of ancient cour-
tesans. See also the Life of Lycurgus, Vol. L*

34 Livy has given us a description of this action, at the end of his
forty-second book. Perseus oftered peace to those, whom he had
beaten, upon as easy conditions as if he himself had been over-
thrown, but the Romans refused it : they made it a rule, indeed,
never to make peace when defeated. (L.) Ita tunc vios erat, in
adversis vnltum secundce fortunce gerere, moderari aiiimos in secundis.
(ib. 62.) lis ne firent jamais la pais que vainqueurs, says Montesq.
Grand, et Decad. Arc. The rulo proved a wise one for that people,
but can never be universally adopted. £* ^s y.cn Jj/.^to? o inmi xxi^oiq^
^ays Polybius very judiciously upon the occasion, w.olai «» t<j

«/7««epiiO-i»»»,*

V 2

592 PAULUS ^MILIUS.

two tlionsaiul five hundred of his best men, and took
six hunched prisoners. He surprised the Roman
fleet which lay at anclior off Oreum ^% took twenty
of their store-ships, sunk the rest that were k)ade(l
■with wheat, and made himself master besides of four
galleys, which had each five benches of oars. By
another successful battle likewise he drove back the
consul Hostilius, who was attempting to enter his
kingdom by Elimia ; and when the same general
was stealing in by the way of Thessaly, he presented
himself before him, but the Roman did not choose
to stand the encounter. And as if this war alone
did not sufficiently employ him, or the Romans
singly were not an enemy respectable enough, he
went upon an expedition against the Dardanians, in
which he cut in pieces ten thousand of them, and
carried off much booty. At the same time, he pri-
vately solicited the Gauls who dwell near the Da-
nube, and are called Bastarnje. These were a war-
like people, and strong in cavalry. He tried the
Illyrians also, hoping to bring them to join him by
means of Gentius their king ; and it was reported
that the barbarians had taken his money, under pro-
mise of makinp- an inroad into Italv by the lower
Gaul, along the coast of the Adriatic ^^.

When this intelligence was brought to Rome, the
people thought proper to lay aside all regard to in-
terest and solicitation in the choice of their generals,
and to call to the command aperson of understanding,
fit for the direction of great affiiirs. Such was Paulus
*^milius, a man advanced in years indeed (for he

'> In Euboea.

3*^ See Polyi)ius, a contemporary author, who relates wliat passed
hi the embassy sent by Perseus.* He practised hkewise with Eunienes
kinp; of Bithynia, and caused representations to be made to An-
tiochus king of Syria, that the Romans were equally enemies to all
kings: but, Eumcnes demandinjj; fifteen hundred talents, a stop
was put to the negociation. The very treating, however, with
Perseus occasioned an inveterate hatred between the Romans and
their old friend Eumenes; but that hatred was of no service to
Perseus.

PAULUS .T:MILIUS. 203

was about threescore) but still in his full strength,
and surrounded with young sons and sons-in-law,
and a number of other considerable relations and
friends, who all persuaded him to listen to the peo-
ple calling him to the consulship. At first he re-
ceived the offer of the citizens very coldly, though
thev went so far as to court and even to entreat him,
for he was now no longer ambitious of that honour :
but as they daily attended at his gate, and loudly
summoned him to make his appearance in the Forum,
he was at length prevailed upon. When he put
himself among the candidates, he looked less like a
man who sued for the consulship, than as one who
brought success along with him ^^ : and, when at
the request of the citizens he went down into the
Campus Martius, they all received him with so en-
tire a confidence and such a cordial regard, that
upon their creating him consul the second time, they
would not suffer the lots to be cast for the pro-
vinces^^ as usual, but immediately voted him the
direction of the war in Macedon. It is said that
after the people had appointed him commander-in-
chief against Perseus, and conducted him home in
a very splendid manner, he found his daughter
Tertia, who was yet but a child, in tears. Upon
this he took her in his arms, and asked her, *' Why
" she wept ?" The girl embracing and kissing him,
said ; " Don't you know then, father, tliat Perseus
" is dead.?" meaning a little dog of that name, which
she had brought up. To which ^milius replied,
" 'Tis a lucky incident, child ; I accept the omen.**
This particular is related by Cicero, in his Treatise
on Divination ^^.

It was the custom for those, who were appointed
to the consulship, to make their acknowledgements to
the people in a speech from the Rostrum : ^milius,
having assembled the citizens upon this occasion,

3? See Livy xliv. 22.*

3» Livy says the contrary, (xliv. 17.) 3? i. 46.*

<c
cc
<c

(C

(C

(C

294 PAIJLUS yEMILIUS.

told them, " That he had applied for his former
consulship, because he wanted a command ; but
in this they had applied to him, because they
wanted a commander : and therefore, at present,
he did not hold himself obliged to them. If they
could have the war better directed by another,
he would readily quit the employment ; but if
they placed their confidence in him, he expected
that they would not interfere with his orders, or
propagate idle reports, but provide in silence what
was necessary for the w^ar: for, if they v,'ished to
command their commanders, their expeditions
" would be more ridiculous than ever''"." It is not
easy to express how much reverence this speech
procured him from the citizens, and what high ex-
pectations it produced of the event. They rejoiced,
that they had passed by the smooth-tongued candi-
dates, and made choice of a general, who had so
much freedom of speech and such dignity of man-
ner. Thus the Romans submitted like servants to
reason and virtue, in order that they might one day
rule and become the masters of the world.

That Paulus iEmilius, when he went upon the
Macedonian expedition, had a prosperous voyage
and journey, and arrived with speed and safety in
the camp, I impute to his good fortune ; but when
I consider how the war was conducted, and observe
that the greatness of his courage, the excellence
of his counsels, the attachment of his friends, his
presence of mind and dexterity of expedients in
times of danger all contributed to his success, I
cannot place his glorious and distinguished actions
to any account but his own. The avarice of Perseus,

'♦° See this harangue somewhat differently reported in Livy,
The three preceding years had supplied the Romans with too much
occasion for finding fault with their generals ; and it had now nearly
grown into a habit with them, i^milius, however, does not wholly
renounce their jurisdiction : — * Non sum is, qui non existimem adino-
nendos duces esse ; immb cum, qui de svd unius sententia omnia geratf
superbum judico magis quam sapientcm,* &c. (xlv. 22.)*

PAULUS /EMILIUS. 295

indeed, may possibly l^e considered as a fortunate
circumstance for /iMnilius ; since it blasted and
ruined t!ic immense preparations and elevated hopes
of the Macedonians, by a mean regard to money.
For the Bastarnje had come at his request, with a
body often thousand horse", each of which had a
foot-soldier by his side, and they all fought for hire :
they were men who knew not how to till the ground,
to feed cattle, or to navigate ships ; but their sole
])rofession and employn)ent was to fight, and to con-
quer. When these pitched their tents in Medica''^
and mingled with the king's forces, who beheld them
tall in their persons, ready beyond expression at
their exercises, lofty and full of menaces against the
enemy, the Macedonians were inspired with fresh
courage, and a confident opinion that the Romans
would not be able to stand against them, but be
terrified both by their looks and by their strange
and frightful motions.

After Perseus had filled his people with such
spirits and hopes, the barbarians demanded of him
a thousand pieces of gold '^^ for every officer ; but
the thoughts of parting with such a sum almost
turned his brain, and in the narrowness of his heart
he refused it, and broke off the alliance : as if he
had not been the enemy of the Romans, but their

-»' Livy (xliv. 26.) has well described this horseman and his
foot-soldier. He says, * There came ten thousand horse, and as
many foot who kept pace with the horse, and when any of the cavalry
were unhorsed they mounted, and went into the ranks.'

The Velites, a kind of light-armed troops first instituted, on the
suggestion of the centurion Q. Nnvius, during the siege of Capua
in the second Punic war (Liv. xxvi. 4.), were of the same de-
scription.*

As soon as Perseus had intelligence of the approach of the
Bastarnae, he sent Antigonus to congratulate Clondicus their king.
Clondicus made answer, that the Gauls could not march a step
farther without money ; which Perseus, in liis avarice and ill-policj-,
refused to advance.

** A district of Thrace, situated between the rivers Strymon and
Ncssus or Nestus.*

'^^ See Livy xliv. 26.*

296 PAULUS ^MILIUS.

steward, who "was to give an exact account of his
whole expences to those, against whom he was
acting. At the same time^"* the example of the
enemy pointed out to him better things ; for, beside
their other preparations, they had a hundred thou-
sand men collected and ready for their use : and
still he having to oppose so considerable a force,
and an armament maintained at such an extraor-
dinary expense, counted his gold and sealed his
bags, fearing as much to touch them as if they had
belonged to another. Yet he was not descended
from a Lydian or Phoenician merchant, but allied ^^
to Alexander and Philip, whose maxim it was to
procure empire by money, and not money by em-
pire, and who pursuing that maxim conquered the
world. For it was a common saying, " That it
" was not Philip, but Philip's gold, which took
*' the cities of Greece.'* As for Alexander, when
he went upon the Indian expedition, and saw the
Macedonians dragging after them a heavy and un-
wieldy load of Persian wealth, he first set fire to
the royal carriages, and then persuaded the rest to
do the same to theirs, that they might move forward
to the war light and unencumbered : whereas Per-
seus, though he and his children and his kingdom
overflowed with wealth, would not purchase his

^* We agree with the editor of the old English translation, that
the original liere is extremely corrupted, and very difficult to be
restored ; and that it seems improbable, the Romans sliould have an
army of" a hundred thousand men in Macedon. See Livy xliv. 21.
But the improbability lessens, if we consider that Paulus ^Emihus
applied upon this occasion to the alHes, especially the Achaeans,
for what forces they could spare; and if we include those, which
'acted on board the Roman fleet. iEmilius indeed, just before the
battle, expresses his apprehensions from the enemy's superiority
of numbers ; and it is true, that he had none to depend upon but the
Romans, who were comparatively few. In his Grecian allies he
could not place much confidence, because it was their interest,
that the kingdom of Macedon should stand ; and in fact, when that
fell, severe tribunals were set up in Greece, and it's remaining
shadow of liberty was lost.

** As he pretended at least ,•

PAULUS iEMILIUS. 297

preservation by the expenditure of a small part of it ;
but was carried a wealthy captive to Rome, and
showed that people, what immense sums he had
saved and laid up for their use.

Nay, he not only deceived and sent away the
Gauls, but also imposed upon Gentius king of the
Illyrians, whom he had persuaded to join him in the
war by a subsidy of three hundred talents. He
even went so far, as to order the money to be
counted before that prince's envoys, and suffered
them to put their seal upon it. Gentius, thinking
his demands complied with, in violation of the laws
of honour and justice, seized and imprisoned the
Roman embassadors who were then at his court.
Perseus now concluded that there was no need of
money to draw his ally into the war, since he had
unavoidably plunged himself into it by an open in-
stance of violence, and an inexcusable act of hostility:
and therefore he defrauded the unhappy man of the
three hundred talents, and without the least concern
beheld him, his wife, and his children shortly after-
ward dragged from his kingdom (as out of their nest)
by the praetor Lucius Anicius, who was sent against
him at the head of an army^^

^milius, advancing against such an adversary as
Perseus, despised indeed the man, yet could not but
admire his preparations and his strength. For he
had four thousand horse, and nearly forty thousand
foot who composed the Phalanx : and being en-
camped by the sea-side at the foot of mount Olym-
pus, in a place perfectly inaccessible and strength-
ened on every part with fortifications of wood, he
lay free from all apprehensions, persuaded that he
should wear out the consul by protracting the time,

*^ See Livy xliv. 30, 31. The expedition only lasted thirty days,
and the news of the event reached Rome, before intelligence of the
undertaking had transpired. From this Gentius the herb Gentian
had it's name, as he first discovei-ed it's useful bitterness, Plin. H. N.
xxvii. 17. For the clear understanding of this whole passage, the
reader ehould consult Livy, xliv. 17., and Polyb. Legat. 77.*

9

298 PAULUS .EMILIUS*.

and exiiausting his treasures. But yEinilius, always
vigilant and attentive, weighed every expedient and
method of attack : and perceiving that tlie soldiers
through want of discipHne in time past were impa-
tient of delay, and ready to dictate to their general
things impossible to be executed, he reproved them
with the utmost severitv ; ordering: them not to inter-
meddle or attend to any thing but their own persons
and their arms, that they might be in readiness to
use their sv;ords as became Romans, when their
commander should give them an opportunity. He
ordered also the sentinels to keep watch without
their pikes^^, that they might guard the better against
sleep, when they were sensible that they liad nothing
to defend themselves with against the euemv, who
might attack them in the night.

But his men complained the most of want of water;
for only a little, and that but indiflerent, ilowed or
rather came drop by drop fi*om some springs near
tlie sea. In this extremity xEmilius, seeing before
him mount Olympus very high and covered with
trees, conjectured from their verdure that there must
be springs in it, which would discharge themselves
at the bottom, and therefore caused several pits and
wells to be dug at the foot of it *. These were soon
filled with clear water, which ran into them with
the greater force and rapidity, because it had been
previously confined.

Some however deny, that there are any hidden
sources constantly provided with water in the places
from which it flows, neither will they allow the dis-
charge to be owing to the opening of a vein ; but
assert, that the water is formed instantaneously from

<7 Livy, who gives us his harangue upon the occasion (xliv. 34.),
says, ' without their shields ;' the reason of" which was, that the
Roman shields being long, thev might rest their heads upon them
and sleep standing, i^milius, however, made one order in favour
of the soldiers upon guard; for he directed them to be relieved at
noon, whereas before they used to be upon duty the whole day.

• See, for a similar instance of successful sagacity, the Life of
Pompcy IV. 16-3.*

iPAULUS ^MILIUS. 299

the condensation of vapours, and that by the cold-
ness and pressure of the earth a moist vapour is
rendered fluid. For as the breasts of women are not,
Jike vessels, stored with milk always ready to flow,
but prepare and change the nutriment which is in
them into milk ; so the cold and springy places of
the ground have not a quantity of water hid within
them, which as from reservoirs perpetually full can
suilice to supply large stream-s and rivers ; but, by
compressing and condensing the vapours and the
air, convert them into water. And such places
being opened afford that element freely, just as the
breasts of women supply milk from their being sucked,
by compressing and liquefying the vapour ; whereas
the earth, which remains idle and undug, cannot pro-
duce any water, because it wants that motion which
alone is the true cause of it.

But those, who teach this doctrine, give occasion
to the sceptical to observe that by parity of reason
there is no blood in animals, but that the wound
produces it by a change in the flesh and spirits,
which that impression renders fluid. It is likewise
refuted by those who, digging deep in the earth to
undermine some fortification or to search for metals,
meet with deep rivers, not collected by little and
little (which would be the case, if they were pro-
duced at the instant the earth was opened) but
rushing upon them at once in great abundance.
And it often happens, upon the breaking of a huge
rock, that a quantity of water suddenly gushes out**%
and as suddenly ceases. So much upon this sub-
ject (of springs).

iEmilius sat still for some davs, and it is said that
there never were two large armies so near each

4* A singular illustration of this, it is said, occurred a few years
ago to some workmen, who were digging a well for earl Spencer
at Wimbledon in Surrey. Upon piercing the last stratum of stone,
the water gushed out with great vehemence, and instantly rose
several feet. See this topic more amply discussed by Sen. Quaest.
Nat., and in the Encyclop. Methodique, Art. Geographie Physique
by M. Demarest, from whom M. Ricavd abstracts a long note upon
the subject.*

300 PAULUS ^MILIUS.

other, which remained so quiet. But exploring and
weighing every thing, he got information'^ that
there was only one way left unguarded, which lay
through Perrh^ebia by Pythium and^ Petra ; and
conceiving stronger hope from the defenceless con-
dition of the place, than fear from it's rugged and
difficult appearance, he ordered the matter to be
discussed in council.

Scipio surnamed Nasica, son-in-law of Scipio
Africanus, who was subsequently a leading man in
the senate, was the first tliat offered to head the
troops in taking this circuit to come at the enemy.
And after him Fabius Maximus, the eldest son of
iEmilius, though he was yet but a youth, expressed
his readiness to join in the enterprise, j^milius,
delighted with this circumstance, gave them a de-
tachment ; not so large indeed as Polybius records,
but to the amount mentioned by Nasica in a short
letter, in which he describes this action to a certain
king^*^. They had three thousand Itahans, who
were not Romans, and five thousand men besides,
who composed the left wing. To these Nasica added
a hundred and twenty horse, and two hundred
Thracians and Cretans intermixed, who were of
the troops of Harpalus.

With this detachment he began to march toward
the sea, and encamped at Heracleum ^^ as if he in-
tended to sail round and fall upon the enemy's camp

« From two merchants of Perrhaebia, a province of Thessaly, as
Livy (xliv. 35.) informs us; who however adds, that it was not
* left unguarded.' Pythium, or Pythoum, was a city of Macedon :
and Petra, a fortress in the same country.*

5° Neither the account of Polybius, nor the letter of Nasica, are
now extant.*

** The consul gave out that they were to go on board the fleet,
which under the command of Octavius the praetor had been ordered
to lie off the coast, for the ostensible purpose of ravaging the mari-
time parts of Macedon, but in reality to draw Perseus from his
camp. (Liv. xliv. 35.) (L.)

This Heracleum, a name belonging to upward of forty cities in
different parts of the ancient world, was situated in Lyncestis a
province of Macedon, not far from the W. coast of the bay of
Therma.*

PAULUS ^MILIUS. SOI

behind ; but, when his soldiers had supped and night
came on, he explained to the officers his real design,
and directed them to follow a different route. Pur-
suing this without loss of time, he arrived at Pythium,
where he ordered his men to take some rest. At
tills place Olympus is ten furlongs and ninety-six
feet in height, as it is signified in the inscription ^^
made by Xenagoras the son of Eumekis, the man
who measured it. The geometers indeed affirm,
that there is no mountain in the world more than
ten furlongs high, nor any sea more than that in
depth ; yet it appears, that Xenagoras took the
height not in a careless manner, but regularly and
with proper instruments.

There Nasica passed the night. Perseus, on his
side, seeing ^milius lie quiet in his camp, had not
the least thought of the danger which threatened
him ; but a Cretan deserter, who had slipped from
Scipio by the way, came and informed him of the
circuit which the Romans were taking in order to
surprise him. Tliis intelligence threw him into great
confusion, but he did not remove his camp ; he only
despatched ten thousand foreign mercenaries and
two thousand Macedonians under Milo, and gave
them orders to possess themselves of the heights

'* A numerical inscription of six lines, in which the only notable
want of precision consists in a jumble of hexameters and penta-
meters, is given ^i the original, and preserved in some translations,
but judiciously Emitted by Langhorne. Plutarch in adding, from
the geometers, that there is no mountain in the world more than
ten furlongs high, is inaccurate. For a list of the loftiest see a
paper, accompanied by an ingenious plate, in the jNIonthly Maga-
zine 1798, II. 107. M. Ricard specifies, among otlsers, the Puy de
Dome, Le Ploinb de Cantal, and le Pay de Saincy du Mont d'Or
in the Pyrenees, de Buet and Mont Blanc in the Alps, the Pike
of Teneriffe, and Chimborn^o (the highest in the world) in the
Andes or Cordillenxs in S. America. And as to the depth
of the sea, it is determined by La Place from what he deno-
minates, ' the oscillations oC the second class,' which depend
chiefly on tlie rotation of tb.e earth, and are the principal cause of
the difference of the two tides in the same day, to arerage about
four leagues!*

302 PAULUS ^MILIUS.

with all possible expedition. Polybius states, that
the Romans fell upon them while they were asleej),
but Nasica informs us, there was a sha-rp and dan-
gerous conflict for the heights ; that he himself
killed a Thracian mercenary, who engaged him, by
piercing him through the breast with his spear ;
and that the enemy being routed, and Milo put to
a shameful flight without his arms and in his under-
garment only, he pursued them without any sort of
hazard, and led his party down into the plain.
Perseus terrified at this disaster, and disappointed
in his hopes, decamped and retired. Yet he was
under a necessity of stopping before Pydna, and
risking a battle, unless he had chosen to split his
army into garrisons for his towns ^^, and there ex-
pect the enemy ; who, when once entered into his
country, could not be driven out without much
slaughter and bloodshed.

His friends represented to him, that his army
was still superior in numbers ; and that they would
fight with the utmost resolution in defence of their
wives and children, and in sight of their king, who
was a partner in their danger. Encouraged by this
representation, he fixed his camp there ; prepared
for battle, viewed the country, and assigned to each
officer his post, as intending to meet the Romans
when they came off their march. The field where
he encamped was fit for the plialanx, which re-
quired plain and even ground to act in : near it was
a chain of little hills, proper for the light-armed
troops to retreat to, and from which they miglit
wheel round and renew the attack ; and through
the middle ran the rivers yEson and Leucus, which
though not very deep, because it v.as now the latter

^^ His most judicious friends advised him to garrison his strongest
cities with his best troops, and to protract the war ; experience hav-
ing proved, tliat the Macedonians were better able to defend cities,
than the Romans were to take them : but this opinion the king
rejected, from the cowardly idea, that perhaps the town, whigh
he chose for his residence, might be the hrst besieged.

PAULUS /EMILIUS. SOS

end of summer, were likely to give the Romans
jiome trouble.

^^milius, having joined Nasica, marched in good
order against the enemy. But when he saw the
disposition and number of their forces, he was
astonished, and stood still to consider what was pro-
per to be done. Upon this tlic yonng officers eager
tor the engagement, and particnlarly Nasica flushed
with his success at mount Olympus, pressed up to
him, and entreated him to lead them forward v/ith-
out delay. yEmilius only smiled, and said ; " My
" friend, if I v/ere of your age, I should certainly do
" so : but the manv victories which I have i^aincd,
" have made me observe tlie errors of the van-
quished, and forbid me to give battle immediately
after a march, to an army well drawn up and
" every way prepared '-\"

He then ordered the foremost ranks, who were
in sight of the enemy, to present a front, as if they
were ready to engage, and the rear in the mean time
to mark out a camp and throw up intrenchments;
after which he made the battalions Vv-heel off by de-
grees, beginning with those next the soldiers at work,
so that their disposition was insensibly changed, and
his whole army encamped Vvithout noise.

When they had supped and were thinking of
nothing but going to rest, on a sudden the moon,
which was then at full and very high, began to be
darkened, and, after changing into various colours,
was at last totally eclipsed ". The llomans, accord-

'■♦ See Xasica's speech, and Emilias' two replies (one given
immediately, and one the next day) as well as other particulars of
the action, in Liv. xliv. "6 — "8.*

^"5 Livy informs v;s, tliat Sulpitius Gallus one of the Roman
tribunes foretold this eclipse; first to the consul, and then with
his leave to the army : and thus that terror, winch eclipses were
wont to breed in ignorant minds, was entirely taken off, and the
soldiers more and more disposed to confide in ofiicers of so much
wisdom and genera! knowledge. Rotniinis viilitlbus GcUi sapientia
projje dnina 'clden. (ib.)

304. PAULUS iEMILIUS.

ing to their custom, made a great noise by striking
upon vessels of brass, and held up lighted faggots
and torches in the air, in order to recall her light ;
but the Macedonians did no such thing ; horror and
astonishment seized their whole camp, and a whisper
passed among the multitude, that this appearance
portended the fall of the king. As for ^milius, he
was not entirely unacquainted with tliis matter ; he
had heard of the ecliptic inequalities, which bring
the moon at certain periods into the shadow of the
earth, and darken her till she has passed that quarter
of obscurity, and receives light from the sun again.
Nevertheless, as he was wont to ascribe most events
to the Deity, and was a religious observer of sacri-
fices and of the art of divination, he offered up to
the moon eleven heifers, as soon as he saw her regain
her former lustre. At break of day also he sacrificed
oxen to Hercules, to the number of twenty, without
any auspicious sign ; but in the twenty-first the de-
sired tokens appeared, and he announced victory to
his troops, provided they stood upon the defensive ^^
At the same time he vowed a hecatomb and solemn
games in honour of that god, and then commanded
the officers to marshal tlie army in order of battle :
waiting however till the sun should decline, and get
round to the west, lest if they came to action in the
morning, it should dazzle the eyes of his soldiers, he
sat down the mean while in his tent, which was open
to the field and to the enemy's camp.

Some say, that toward evening he availed himself

^'^ Here we see /Emilias availed liiniself of augury, to bring his
troops the more readily to comply with what he knew was most
prudent. He was sensible of their impetuosity, but he was sensible
at the same time that coolness and calm valour were more neces-
Bary to be exerted against the Macedonian phalanx, which was not
inferior in courage and discipline to the Komans; and therefore
he told them, that the gods enjoined them to stand upon the
defensive, if they desired to be victorious. Another reason why
^milius deferred the fight was, as Plutarch states, because the
inorniug sun was full in ' the eyes of his soldiers.*

PAULUS .EMILIUS. 305

of ill! artifice, to make the enemy be^'iii the fiolit.
It seems he turned a horse loose without a bridle,
and sent out some Romans to catch him, who were
attacked while they were })ursuing him, and so the
engagement began. Others say that the Thracians,
commanded by one Alexander, attacked a Roman
convoy : that seven hundred Ligurians making up to
it's assistance, a sharj) skirmish ensued ; and that,
larger reinforcements being sent to both parties, at
last the main bodies came into action, ^milius
like a wise pilot, foreseeing by the agitation of both
armies the violence of the impending storm, came
/OUt of his tent, passed through the ranks, and en-
couraged his men. In the mean time Nasica, who
had rode up to the place where the skirmish began,
saw the whole of the enemy's army advancing to
the charge.

First of all marched the Thracians, whose very
aspect struck the beholders with terror. They were
men of a prodigious size ; their shields were white
and glistering; their vests were black, their legs
armed with greaves ; and as they moved, their long
])ikes heavy-shod with iron shook on their right
shoulders. Next came tlie mercenaries, variously
armed, according to the manner of their respective
countries : with these were mixed the Pa^onians. In
the third place advanced the battalions of Macedon,
the flower of it's youth and the bravest of it's sons :
their new i)urple vests and gilded arms making a
most splendid appearance. As these took their
})ost, the Chalcaspides moved out of the camp ; the
fields gleamed with the polished steel and the brazen
shields which they bore, and the mountains re-echoed
to their cheers. In this order they marched forward,
and that with so much boldness and speed, that the
first of their slain ^' fell only two furlongs from the
Roman /b.svvc.

^^ The light-armed. It is to be regretted that this imperfect
statement of the Macedonian order of battle cannot be corrected
VOL, Jl. X

306 PAULUS .T.MILIUS.

As soon as the attack began, ^^milius advanced
to the first ranks, and found that the foremost of the
Macedonians had struck the heads of their pikes
into the shields of the Romans, so that it was im-
possible for his men to reach their adversaries with
their swords. And when he saw the rest of the
Macedonians take their bucklers from their shoulders,
join tliem close together, and witli one motion pre-
sent their pikes against liis legions, the strength of
such a rampart and the formidable a])pcarance of
such a front struck him with terror and amazement.
He never indeed beheld a more dreadful spectacle,
and he frequently afterward mentioned the impres-
sion which it made upon him. He took care how-
ever to show a pleasant and cheerful countenance
to his men, and even rode alx)ut without either hel-
met or breast-plate. But the king of Macedon (as
Polybius informs us) as soon as the engagement com-
menced, gave way to his fears, and withdrew into
the town ""^ under pretence of sacrificing to Hercules;
a deity who accepts not the timid offerings of cowards,
nor favours any unjust vows. And surely it is un-
just, that the man who never shoots should bear
away the prize ; that he, M'ho deserts his post, should
conquer; that he, who is despicably indolent, should
be indulged with success ; or that a bad man should
be happy. But the god attended to the prayers of
/luiii'ius ; for he solicited military strength and vic-
tory with his sword in his hand, and fought while he
implored the divine aid. Yet one Posidonius ^'-^j who

either from Polybius, whose account of it is lost; or from Livy,
whose Xiivth book, where it is still unmutilated, ditlers widely from
Plutarch. (See ib. 41.)*

"^^^ Pydna (says Livy il>. ¥2.) a city in Pieria, a ^lacedoniaa
province near the head of tlie bay of Therma. The Pella, to which
ho subseijucntly fled, was a little farther to the N., and chiefly
distinguished a.5 the birth-place of Alexander t!ie Great.*

-'' This could not be Posidonius of Apamea, who wrote a con-
tinuation of Polybius' history; for he went to Rome during th;
consulship of Marcellus, a hundred and eighteen years after this.l
buttle. Plutarch, indeed, seems to have taken hiin either for a

PAULUS ^EMILIUS. 307

says he lived in those times and was present at that
action, in the History of Perseus (which he wrote
in several books) affirms, that it was not out of
cowardice, nor under pretence of ofiering sacrifice
that he quitted the field, but because the day before
ihe fight he liad received a hurt on his leg from the
kick of a horse ; that when tiie battle came on,
though very nuich indisposed and dissuaded by his
friends, he commanded one of his horses to be
brought, mounted him, and charged without a
breast-plate at the liead of the phalanx ; and that
amidst the shower of missive weapons of all kinds,
he was struck with a javelin of iron ; not indeed with
the point, but with it's shaft glancing in such a man-
ner upon his left side as not only to rend his clothes,
[ but to give him. a bruise in the flesh, the mark of
which remained a lona; time. This is what Posi-
donius alleges in Perseus' defence.

The Romans, who engaged the phalanx, being
unable to break it, Salius a Pelignian officer snatch-
ed th.e ensign of his company, and threw it among
the enemy. Upon which, the Pelignians rushing
forward to recover it (for the Italians look upon it
as a great crime and disgrace to abandon their stand-
ard) a dreadful conflict and slaughter on both sides
ensued. The Romans attcm])ted to cut the pikes
of the Macedonians asunder with their swords, to
beat them back with their shields, or to put them
by with their hands : but the Macedonians, holding
them steady v/ith both hands, pierced their adver-
saries tlu'ough their armour, as neither shield nor
corslet was proof against the pike'^". Hie Pelig-
nians and Marrucinians'^', who without anv sort of

counterfeit, or (or a writer of no account, wlien he calls him ' one
Position i us, who says he lived in those times.'

*^ Tiiis s;hous the advantiige, whicli the pike has over the broad-
sword; and the bayonet is still better, because it gives the soldier
the free use of his musket, v>ithout being encumbered with an ad-
ditional weapon, and when fixed to the musket supplies the place of
a pike.

^' Of these Italian natio»s the first, who lived in the neighbour-

X. 2 •

308 PAULUS yEMILIUS.

discretion or ratlicr with a brutal fury liad exposed
themselves to wounds, and run npon certain death,
were tlu'own down hcadlono:. The first line thus
cut in pieces, those who were bcliind were forced to
give way, and though they did not fly, yet they re-
treated toward mount Olocrus. ^milius seeing
this, as Posidonius relates, rent his clothes. He was
reduced almost to despair, to find that part of his
men had retired, and that the rest declined the com-
bat with a phahuix which, on account of the pikes
defending it on all sides like a rampart, appeared
impenetrable and invincible. But the unevenness
of the ground and the large extent of the front not
})ermitting their bucklers to be joined through the
whole, he observed several interstices and openings
in the Macedonian line (as it happens in large armies,
according to the different efforts of the combatants)
in one part pressing forward, and in another forced
to give back. For this reason he divided his troops,
with all possible expedition, into platoons, which he
ordered to throw themselves into the void spaces of
the enemy's front "" ; and so not to engage with the
whole at once, but to make many impressions at the
same time in different parts. These orders being
given by .Emilius to the officers, and by the officers
to the soldiers, they immediately made their way be-
tween the pikes, wherever there was an opening ;
which was no sooner done, than some took the ene
my in flank, where they were quite exposed, while
others bv a circuit attacked them in the rear ; thus
was the plialanx soon broken, and it's strength which
depended upon one united effort was no more. Wheni
they came to fight man with nian and party with! \

liooil of the Marsi, were originally descended from the SabinesJ
((^v. I'ast. iii. 9J.) The latter inhabited a district situated on tl«
Adriatic*

''^ 'I'his gained the Romans tlie victory. ' In medio secnnda /r^/<U j,,
immissa dissipavit phalaniiem ; ncque idla cxidentior causa victorueM , .
qittim (jKud miilta passim prcvlia erant, qiuc Jluctuantcm turbariuM *^'
' prima, deiii disjccemnt phctlimgcm,^ Sec. (Liv. xiiv. 41.)*

PAULUS zCMILIUS. tm

party, the Macedonians liad only sliort swords to
strike the k)ng shields of the Romans that reached
from head to foot, and slight bucklers to oppose to
the Roman swords, which from their weight and the
force with which they were managed pierced through
all their armour to the bodies; so that they main-
tained their ground with dilliculty, and in the end
were entirely routed.

It was here, however, that the most strenuous
efforts were made on both sides ; and here Marcus
tlie son of Cato and son-in-law of iEmilius, after
surprising acts of valour unfortunately lost his sword.
As he was a youth who had received all the advan-
tages of education, and who owed to so illustrious a
father extraordinary instances of virtue, he was per-
suaded that he had better die, than leave such a
spoil in the hands of his enemies. He therefore flew
tin'ough the ranks, and wherever he happened to see
any of his friends or acquaintance, told them his mis-
fortune and implored their assistance. A number
of brave young men were thus collected, who follow-
ing their leader with equal ardour quickly traversed
their own army, and fell upon the Macedonians.
After a sharp conflict and dreadful carnage, the ene-
my was driven back, and tiie ground being left va-
cant, the Romans sought for the sv/ord, which with
much difficulty was found under a heap of arms and
dead bodies. Transported with this success, they
charged those who remained unbroken^ with still
greater eagerness and shouts of triumj)h. The three
thousand Macedonians, who were all select men,
kept their station and maintained the fight, but at
last were entirely cut oft". The rest fled ; and ter-
rible, indeed, was the slaughter. The field and the
sides of the hills were covered with the dead, and
the river Leucus, which the Romans crossed the
day after the battle, was even then mixed with blood.
For it is said, that about twenty-five thousand were
killed on the Macedonian side : v/hereas the Ro-

SIO PAULUS .^MILIUS.

mans, according to Posidonius, lost but one liundrcd;
and, according to Nasica, only fourscore'".

This i^rcat battle was soon decided, for it bca'an
at the ninth hour''*, and victory declared herself be-
fore tiie tenth. The remainder of the day was em-
ployed in the pursuit, which was continued for the
space of a hundred and twenty furlongs, so that it
was not far in the night when they returned. The
servants went with torches to meet their masters,
and conducted tliem with shouts of joy to their
tents, which they had illuminated and adorned with
crowns of ivy and laurel '^\

But the o'eneral himself was overwhelmed with
grief. For of his two sons then serving under him,
the youngest, whom he most loved, and wlio of all
the brothers was most happily formed for virtue,
was not to be found. As he was naturally brave and
ambitious of honour, and withal very young '^^, he
concluded that his inexperience had engaged him
too far in the hottest of the battle, and that he was
certainly killed. The whole army sympathised in
his suspense and distress ; and leaving their supper,
ran with torches, some to the general's tent, and
some out of the trenches to seek him among the first
of the slain. A profound melancholy reigned in the
camp, while the field resounded with the cries of
persons calHng out, ' Scipio.* For so admirably had
nature tempered him, that he was very early marked
out by the world, as one beyond the rest of the

^'^ Utterly impossible ! if the circumstances of the fight are con-
sidered : but Livy's account is dreadfully mutilated.

^* i. e. three in the afternoon.

"^ The laurel was sacred to Apollo, and the ivy to Bacchus.
Bacchus, who is sometimes supposed to be the same with Hercules,
was a warrior, and we read of his expedition into India. But the
Roman custom, of adorning the tents of the victors with ivy, might
arise from a more simple cause ; Caesar says, that in Pompey's camp
he found the tent of Lentulus and some others covered with ivy:
§0 sure had they made themselves of the victory. L. et/am Lcntuli
Cj nonmiUorum tabeniacnla protccta cdera. (B. C. iii. 96.)

^"^ He was ut that time in his seventcentli year.

PAULUS yEMILIUS. 311

voutli likely to excel in the arts both of war and of
civil government.

It was now very late, and he was almost given up,
when he returned from the pursnit with two or three
friends, covered witli tlie fresh blood of the foe, like
a spirited young honnd carried too far by the charms
of the chace. This is that Scipio, who subsequently
destroyed Carthage and Numantia, and was incom-
])arably the first, both in virtue and power, of the
Romans of his time. Thus Fortune did not choose
at present to make ^Emiliuspay for the favour which
she showed him, but deferred it to another opportu-
nity ; and, therefore, he enjoyed tliis victory with
unqualified satisfaction.

As for Perseus, he fled from Pvdna to Pella with
his cavalry, which had suffered no loss. When the
foot overtook them, they rej)roached them as cowards
and traitors, pulled them off' their horses, and wound-
ed several of them ; so that the king, dreading the
consequences of the tumult, turned his horse out of
the common road, and lest he should be known,
wrapped up his purple robe and placed it before
him : he also took off his diadem, and carried it in
his hand ; and, that he might converse the more
conveniently with his friends, alighted from his horse
and led him. But they all slunk away from him by
degrees ; one under pretence of tying his shoe, an-
other of watering his horse, and a third of being him-
self thirsty: not that they were so much afraid of
the enemy, as of the cruelty of Perseus ; who, exas-
perated with his misfortinies, sought to lay the blame
of his miscarriage upon any body rather than him-
self. He entered Pella in the night, where he killed
with his poignard Euctus and Eudffius two of his
treasurers; who when they waited upon him, found
fault with some of his proceedings and provok-
ed him by an unseasonable lil)erty of admonition.
Upon which, every body forsook him, but Evander
the Cretan, Archedamus the il^'tolian, and Neon the
Boeotian : neither did any of his soldiers follow him
9

312 PAULUS .ICMILIUS.

except tlic Cretans, wlio were attached not to Ills
i)ers()n but to his nioncv, as bees are to tlie honey-
comb. For he carried much treasure along witli
Iiim, and suffered them to take out of it cups and
bowls, and other vessels of gold and silver ''", to the
value of fifty talents. But when he came to Amphi-
polis and thence to Alepsus^*^, his fears a little abat-
ing, he sunk again into his old and inborn distemper
of avarice ; lamented to his friends, that he had in-
advertently given up to tiie Cretans some of the gold
plate of Alexander the Great ; and applied to those
"who had it, and even entreated them with tears to
return it to him for the value in money. Those, who
knew him well, easily discovered that he was ' play-
ing the Cretan with the Cretans ^'^;' but such as
were prevailed upon to give up tlie plate, lost all,
for he never paid the money. Thus he got thirty
talents from his friends, which were soon afterward
to come into the hands of his enemies, and with tlicse
he sailed to Samothrace, where he took refuge at
the altar of Castor and Pollux"'^.

The Macedonians have always had the character
of being lovers of their kings"' ; but now, as if the

^' He was afraid to give it them, lest tlie ^Macedonians out of
spite should seize all the rest. See Livy, ib. -k).

^8 One MS. has it ' Galepsus,' probably upon the authority of
Livy, ib.

^"^ It was an ancient proverb, ' The Cretans are always liars.'
St. Paul (Tit. i. 12.) has quoted it from Callimach. (L.) Hymn.
in Jov. 8., or Epimenides of Cnossus. As a proverb, indeed it
would naturally be in many mouths. (See a learned note by Wol-
fius in loc.) hi the present instance, by having professed for Per-
seus' person an attachment, which they only felt for his money, they
fully justified the national character. This phrase is again quoted
in a subsequent part of the work.*

''° He carried with him two thousand talents.

" When I'erseus was at Amphipolis, being afraid that the in-
habitants would deliver him up to the Romans, he came out with
Philip, the only child he had with him, and having mounted the
ti-ibnnal began to speak ; but his tears flowed so fast, that after seve-
ral trials he found it impracticable to jiroceed. Upon which, he re-
quested Kvander to supply his place ; but the people who hated
liim refufced to hear him, crying out, ' Be gone, be gone; we are

PAULUS -T^MILIUS. 51^

chief bulwark of their constitution were broken
down and all were fallen with it, they submitted to
iEmihus, and in two days he was master of the
whole of Macedon. This seems to give some coun-
tenance to those, who impute these events to For-
tune. A prodigy, which happened at Ampliipolis,
testified also the favour of the gods. The consul was
offerinir sacrifice there, and the sacred ceremonies
were begun, when a flash of lightning fell upon the
altar, and at once consumed and consecrated the
victim. But the share which fame had in this affair
exceeds both that prodigy, and what is recorded like-
wise of his good fortune. For on the fourth day
after Perseus was beaten at Pydna, as the people
were ai: the ecjueslrian games in Rome, a report vv^as
suddenly sj)read in the first scats of the theatre"',
that yEmilius had gained a great battle over Perseus,
and ovcrtiuiicd the kingdom of Macedon. The in-
telligence was made public in a moment, the multi-
tude clapped their hands and uttered loud acclama-
tions, and it passed current that day in the city.
Afterward, v,lien it appeared that it had no good
foundation, tlie story dropped for the present and
died away ; but, when within a few days it was con-
firmed beyond dispute '^ they could not but feel
surprise at the report which had been it's harbinger,
and the fiction which had turned to truth.

In like manner it is said, that an account of the

resolved not to expose ourselves, our wives, and our children for
your sukes. Fly tiieretbre, and leave us to make tiie best terms we
can with the conquerors.' Evander had been the principal actor in
the assassination of Eumenes, and was suhsecjuently despatched in
Sainothrace b}' order of Perseus, who was aiVaid that he would
otherwise accuse him as the author of that niurther.

"^ Val. .Max. (I. viii. 1.) informs us, that it was raised by one
P. Vatinius, vviio quoted two young men on white horses (Castor
and Pollux, of course) as his authority.*

"^ It was contirmed by the arrival of Q. Fabius Maximus the son
of .Ii^milius, L. Lcntulus, and Q. Metellus, who had been sent ex-
press by iiiinihus, and reached Rome the twentieth day after tin*
action, i^y^'c Liv. xlv. 1.)

JJI* PAULUS yEMILIUS.

battle of the Italians near the river Sagra'* was car-
ried into Peloponnesus on the same day, upon which
it was fought ; and of the defeat of the Persians at
Mvcale, with equal expedition, to Plataeas : and
that very soon after the victory which the Romans
gained over the Tarquins, and the people of Latium
"who fought under their banners, two young men of
uncommon size and beauty, who were conjectured
to be Castor and Pollux, arrived at Rome from the
army with the news of it ''. The first man they met,
by the fountain in the market-place, as they were
refreshing their horses which tbamed with sweat,
expressed his surprise at their account of the vic-
tory : upon which they are said to have smiled, and
to have stroked his beard ; and that, immediately
changing from black to yellow, conciliated credit
to his report, and procured him the surname of
jEnobarbus "°, or ' Yellow-beard.'

All these stories are confirmed bv that, which
happened in our own times. For, when Lucius
Antonius rebelled against Domitian, Rome was much
alarmed and expected a bloody w^ar in Germany ;
but on a sudden and of their own proper motion the
people raised a report, and spread it over the city,
that Antonius was vanquished and slain, that his
army was cut in pieces, and that not a single man

'* In Magna Graccia, not far from Rhegium. See Cic. de Kat.
Deor. ii. 2., Justin, xx. 3., iSrc*

'^ See the Life of Coriolanus, p. 177.*

'"^ His name was Lucius Domitius, and from him descended the
emperor Nero. Suetonius, in his Life of that emperor, relates tlic
same story, which is preserved hkewise by Livy (xlv. L) and Dion.
Halic. (vi.) Castor and Polkix were considered as very friendly to
the Romans. This pra^-natural communication of intelligence
Grotius seems to impute to diumons or genii : for, when God makes
the prophet Ezekicl behold the king of Babylon laying siege to Je-
rusalem, he observes, ' Facile Deo J'ttit res, qmc tarn longe gere-
bantur, sub ipsuni tcnipus prophet fC ostenderc, cum id etiam dce-
viones, Deo sinente, fece^-int ; sicut Corndio sncerdoli in vinetis
agent; ostensnfuit tola series PharsaJici prcdii, teste Lncana et Gel'
lio, ApoUonio vera Tyanceo cccdes Domitiani.' (in loc.)*

PAULUS iEMILIUS. 315

had escaped "'. Such a currency liad the rumour,
and such was the credit given to it, that many of
the magistrates offered sacrifices upon the occasion.
13nt when the author of it was sought for, they were
referred from one to another, all their inquiries were
eluded, and at last the story, absorbed in the im-
mense crowd (as in a vast ocean) appearing to have
no solid foundation, completely vanished. But, as
Domitian was marching his forces to chastise the re-
bels, messengers and letters met him upon the road,
which brought an account of the victory. They then
found that it was won on the same day, upon which
the report had been propagated, though the field
of battle was more than twenty thousand furlongs
from Rome. This is a flict, with which no one
can be unacquainted.

But, to return to the story of Perseus : Cneeus
Octavius, who was joined in command with yEmi-
lius, came with his fleet to Samothrace ; where, out
of reverence to the gods'**, he permitted Perseus to
enjoy the protection of the asylum, but watched the
coasts and guarded against his escape. Perseus

■^7 The report was, perhaps, originally fountled on the circum-
stance recorded by Suet. (Domit. vi.), who states that, on the very
(lay of the battle, ' Slaluam Domilinni Roma; insignis aqidla cir-
auuplcxa pennis dangores Icetissimos edidit.*

The revolt in question took place in Upper Germany, A. D. 92.*
^s The gods of Samothrace were dreaded by all nations. The
pagans carried their prejudices so i'ar in favour of those pretended
deities, that they were struck with awe upon the bare mention of
tlieir names. ()f all the oaths, which were in use among the an-
cients, that b}' those names was deemed the most sacred and in-
violable. Such indeed as were found not to have observed it were
regarded as the curse of mankind, and persons devoted to destruc-
tion. Diod. Sic. (v.) informs us, that these gods were alv.ays
present, and never failed to assist those who were initiated and
called upon them in any sudden and unexpected danger ; and that
none ever duly peribrmed their ceremonies, without being amply
rewarded for their piety. No wonder, then, if the places of refuge
in this island were highly revered. Beside the temple of Castor
and Pollux, to wjiich Perseus had fled, there was also a wood
esteemed such, where those who were admitted to the holy rites of
the Cabiri used to meet.

516 PAULUS .EMILIUS.

however found means privately to engage one Oran-
des, a Cretan, to take him and his treasure into his
vessel and carry them off. He like a true Cretan
took on board the treasure, and advised Perseus to
come in the night with his wife and children and ne-
cessary attendants, to the port called Demetrium ;
but, before this, he had set sail. Miserable was the
condition of Perseus, compelled as he was to escape
through a narrow window, and to let himself down
by the wall w^ith his wife and children, who had
little experienced such scrambling fatigue : but still
more pitiable were his groans when, as he wandered
by the shore, he was informed that Orandes had been
seen a good way off at sea. By this time it was day,
and destitute of all other hope he fled back to the
•wall "^. He was not indeed undiscovered, but he
reached the place of refuge, with his wife, before
the Romans could take measures to prevent it. His
children he put into the hands of Ion, who had been
his minion, but was now his betrayer, for he deli-
vered them up to the Romans ; and thus, by the
strongest necessity with which nature can be bound,
obliged him to yield himself, as beasts do when
their young are taken, to those who had his offspring
in their power.

He had the highest confidence in Nasica, and for
him he inquired ; but as he was not there, he be-
wailed his fate, and sensible of the necessity of his
situation, surrendered himself to Octavius. It then
appeared more plainly than ever, that he laboured
under a more despicable disease than avarice itself,
I mean the fear of death ; and this deprived him
even of pity, the only consolation of which fortune
does not rob the distressed. For when he desired
to be conducted to ^milius % the consul rose from

79 Liv}' says, lie hid himself in an obscure corner of the temple of
Castor and I'ollux (xlv. ().)*

''° Then at Amphipolis. Octavius, as soon as he had the king in
his power, put him on board the admiral-galley, and haviiij: em-
barked ali^o all his treasure wluch was left, immediuttly \veighe4

12

{I
a
cc

a

a
«c

a

PAULUS .EMILIUS. 317

his seat, and accompanied by his friends went to re->
ceive him Avith tears in his eyes, as a great man un-
happily fallen through the displeasure of the gods.
But Perseus behaved in the vilest manner; he bowed
down with his face to the earth, and embraced his
knees ^' : his expressions indeed were so mean, and
his entreaties so abject, that ^milius could not en-
dure them; but, regarding him with an eye of regret
and indignation, " Why dost thou, wretched man 1**
said he, " acquit fortune of what might seem her
principal crime by a behaviour, which makes it
appear that thou deservest her frowns ; and that
thou art not only now, but hast been long, un-
worthy the protection of that goddess ? Why dost
thou tarnish my laurels, and detract from my
achievements, by showing thyself a mean adver-
sary and unfit to cope with a Roman ? Courage
in the unfortunate is highly revered, even by an
*' enemy ; and cowardice, though it meets with
" success, is ever held by the Romans in con-
« tempt^-." '

Notwithstanding this severe rebuke, he raised him
up, gave him his hand, and delivered him into the

and stood for Ampliipolis. An express was despatched thence to
iicquaint ^fimilius with what had happened, who sent Tubero his
son-in-law and several other persons of distinction to meet Perseus.
Up likewise ordered sacrifices to be offered, and made the sania
rejoicings as if a new victory bad been obtained. The whole camp
ran out to see the royal prisoner, who covered with a mourning-
cloko, walked alone to the tent of i?5)inilius.

i^' This both Livy, ib., and Val. INIax. (v. i. 8.) deny, for the
credit of their hero il-lmilius, who (they say) sustiiined him, when
in the act of throwing himself prostrate.*

^^ See Livv's account of tins interview, and Emilias' moral
harangue upon the occasion (xlv. 8.) That historian does not with
Plutarch stoically denominate Perseus' fall »£/Ai(r)}rop, but leaves it
dubious, by his * crrore luii»ano, seu cam, seu necessitate,'' whether
we are to rank ^^milius among the Academics, the Epicureans, or
the followers of Zeno. Livy's detail of the consul's speech, his
addressing his captive in Greek, and Perseus' obstinate silence and
tears, is the most circumstantial, natural, and appropriate. His
subsequent harangue to his followers, however, is given by that
writer much more briefly'.*

a
ti
a
a
a

CI

6C

518 PAULUS yEMILIUS.

custody of Tubero. Then taking l)is sons, bis son.';-
in-law, and the principal officers, particularly sach
as were the youngest, back with him into liis tent,
he sat a long time silent to the astonishment of the
whole company. At last, he began to speak of the
vicissitudes of fortune, and of human affairs : " Is it
fit then (said he) that a mortal should be elated
by prosperity, and plume himself upon the over-
turning of a city, or a kingdom? Should wc not
rather attend to the instructions of fortune, who
by such visible marks of her instability, and of
the weakness of human power, teaches every one
that goes to war to expect from her nothing solid
and permanent ? What time for confidence can
" there be to man, when in the very instant of vic-
tory he must necessarily dread the power of for-
tune ; and the very joy of success must be mingled
" with anxiety, in him that reflects upon the course
" of unsparing fate, wliich humbles to-day one man,
*' and to-morrov/ another ? When one short hour
" has been sufficient to overthrow the house of
^^ Alexander, who arrived at such a pitch of glory,
" and extended his empire over great part of the
'' world ; when you see princes, lately at the head
" of immense armies, receive their provisions for
the day from the hands of their enemies ; shall
you dare to flatter yourselves, that fortune has
firmly settled your prosperity, or that it is proof
'' against the attacks of time? Shall you not rather,
" my young friends, quit this elation of heart and
" the vain rantures of victorv, and Jiumble vour-
selves iu the thought of what may happen here-
after, in the strong expectation that tiie gods will
send some misfortune to counterbalance the })re-
" sent success?" ^-^imilius, we are told, having
isaid a great deal to this purpose, dismissed the,
young men seasonably chastised by this grave dis-
course, and restrainetl in their natural inclinatioR
to arroLnince.

W hen this was done, he distributed his army i}J

PAULUS .TilMILlUS. 5] 9

quarters, wliile he went to take a view of Greece"''.
This progress was attended both with honour to
Jiimself, and advantage to the Greeks ; for he re-
dressed the people's grievances, reformed their civil
government, and gave them gratuities, to some wlieat
and to others oil, out of the royal stores ; in which
such vast quantities are said to have been found,
that the number of those who asked and received
was too small to exhaust the whole. Findino; a "-reat
square pedestal of white marble at Delphi, designed
ihr a golden statue of Perseus, he ordered his own
to be put upon it '^^ ; observing it was but just, tliat
the conquered should give place to the conqueror.
At Olympla, we are told, he uttered the celebrated
saying, " This Jupiter of Phidias *"' is the very Ju-
" piter of Plorner."

Upon the arrival of the ten commissioners®^ from

*5 Having previously tl(jspatched his son Q. Maximus on his re-
turn from Rome, and L. Posthutiiius to reduce some places whicJi
still held out, and left the command of his forces to C. Sulpitius
Callus. (Liv. ib. 27.)*

8+ This was not quite so consistent with his huraiiiating discourse
upon the vicissitudes of fortune.

s^ This colossal statue, the threat ornament of the magnificent
temple consecrated to Jupiter Olympius (see Pausan. v. 11.), v,a:>
of ivory ; and, as Livy states (xlv. 28.), awed even ^Emilius by it's
majesty, as if he had been in the very presence of the Deity. What
a compliment then does this expression convey to the poet (Il.«.
528 — 530.), as well as to the sculptor; and how well does it justify
the assertion, that Homer alone * saw and portrayed the forms of
the gods !' But if his nod in Homer produce such terrible eifects,
liow much more dreadful is his glance, as described by Habakkuk,
iii. 6. &€. and how infmitcly superior is the prophet to the poet!]*

^^ These ten legates were all men of consular dignity, who came
to assist /Emilius in settling a new form of government.

For their names and instructions, see Liv. xlv. 17, 18. Among
the latter should particularly be noted the regulations relative to
the letting to farm ot th.e public nunes and the royal demesnee,
•whieh was wholly si^jpressed : ' nam ncqiie sine jmbUcano cxcrccri-
posse; et, ubl ]mblica7iHs est, ibi aid jiis publicum raniim, a ut liber-
tatem sociis mulmn esse.'' 8in:ilar objections have been nuide to the
old French system of farmers-general, and to our now-necessaiy
excise.*

The Macedonians were nut ranch charmed with tlie promise of
Jiberty, because they could nut well campreheud what that libcriiy

320 TAULUS .^MILIUS.

Komc for settling the affairs of Macedon, lie de-
clared the lands and cities of the Macedonians free,
and ordered that they shonld be governed by their
own laws ; only reserving a tribute to the Romans
of a hundred talents, which was not half of what
their kings had imposed.

After this he exhibited various games and specta-
cles, offered sacrifices to the gods, and made great
entertainments ; for all which he found an abundant
supply in the royal treasures. And he showed so
accurate a discernment in the ordering, placing,
and saluting of his guests, and in distinguishing what
degree of civility was due to every man's rank and
quality, that the Greeks were amazed at his know-
ledge of matters of mere politeness, and that amidst
his heroic actions even trifles did not escape his at-
tention, but were conducted with the utmost deco-
rum. That w^hich afforded him the highest satis-
faction was that, notwithstanding the magnificence
and variety of his preparations, he himself gave the
greatest pleasure to those whom he entertained.
And to such as expressed their admiration of his ma-
nagement upon these occasions he observed, " That
it required the same genius to draw up an army,
*^ and to order an entertainment''^, so that the one
" might be most formidable to the enemy, and the
" other most agreeable to the com])any."

Among his other good qualities, his disinterested-
ness and magnanimity stood foremost in the esteem
of the world. For he would not so much as look
upon the immense quantity of silver and gold col-
was, especially as coupled with a tribute of a hundred talents! They
saw evident contradictions in the decree ; which, though it spoke
of leaving them ander their own laws, imposed many new ones,
and threatened more. What most disturbed tliem was a division of
tlieir kingdom, by which their national imion was dissolved.

87 See Liv. xlv. 82., from whom it appears that the adnn'ration
chiefly attached to tlie ■prudentia in dandis spcctacidis, ad quce rudes
turn Roman; cra)it*

To these two particulars, of drawing up an army and ordering an
iBntertainmeut, Heary the iVtU of Fraucu addud — making love. .

PAULUS yEMILlUS. 321

Icctcd out of tlie royal palaces, but (lollvcred it to
the qua'stors to be carried into the public treasury.
He reserved only tlic books of the king's library for
his sons, who were men of letters; and in distri-
buting rewards to those, who had distinguished
tlieniselves in the battle, he gave a silver cup of five
j)ounds weight to his son-in-law .4^]lius Tubero. This
is that Tubero who, as we have already mentioned,
was one of the sixteen relations that lived together,
and were all supported by one small farm : and this
piece of plate, acquired by virtue and honour, is said
to have been the first that was in the family of the
^liaus, neither they nor their wives having previ-
ously used any vessels of silver or gold.

After he had made every proper regulation ^^,
taken his leave of the Greeks, and exhorted the
Macedonians to remember the liberty which the
Romans had bestowed upon them^^, and to preserve
it by good laws and general harmony, he marched
into Kpirus. The senate had made a decree, that
the soldiers who had fought under him against Per-
seus should have the spoils of the cities of Epirus.
In order therefore tliat they might fall upon them
unexpectedly, he sent for ten of the principal inha-
bitants of each city, and fixed a day for them to
brincr in whatever silver and ijjold could be found in
their houses and temples. With each of these he

*'' At tlie close of these proceedings, Andronicus the .'EtoHaa
and Neon the Boeotian, because they had ahvays been friends to
Perseus, and had not even now deserted him, were condemned
and hist their Jieads. So unjust, amidst all the specious appearances
of justice, were the conquerors !

**'> This boasted favour of the Romans to the people of Macedon
was certainly notliing extraordinary. Their country being now di-
vided into four districts, it was declared unlawful for any person to
intermarry, to carry on any trade, or to deal in land with anv one,
who was not an inhabitant of his own district. They were prohi-
bited from importing salt, or selling ship-timber to the barbarian
nations. All tlie nobility, and their children exceeding the age of
tifteen, were commanded immediately to transport themselves into
Italy: and the supreme power in Macedon was vested in certaia
Roman senator*.

YOL. IK y

n22 PAULUS .^MILIUS.

sent a centurion and a guard of soldiers, under pre-
tence of scarcliing for and receiving the precious
metal, and as for this pu.rpose only. But when the
day came, they rushed upon all the inliabitants, and
began to seize and plunder them. Thus in one hour
an hundred and fifty thousand persons were made
slaves, i.nd seventv cities sacked. Yet, from this
general rum and desolation, each soldier had no
more than eleven drachmas to his share. So that all
men shuddered at the winding up of the war, when
they reflected u})on the horror of such a complete
destruction, for the sake of such a petty dividend of
advanta<^e !

^^milius having executed this commission, so con-
trary to his mildness and humanity, went down to
Oricum ^\ where he embarked his forces and passed
over into Italy. He sailed up the Tiber in the king's
galley, which had sixteen ranks of oars, and was
richly adorned with arms taken from the enemy and
with cloth of scarlet and purple ; and the banks of
the river being covered with multitudes, who came
to see the ship as it advanced slowly against the
stream, the Romans in some measure anticipated his
triumph.

But the soldiers, who looked with longing eyes
on tlic wealth of Perseus, when they found their ex-
pectations disappointed, indulged a secret resent-
ment and wci 3 ill-atfectcd to ^milius. In public,
however, th?.y assigned another cause. They alleged
that he hud been severe and imperious in command,
and chereibre they did not meet his wishes for a tri-
umph. Servius Galba, who had served under him
as a tribune, and who bore him a personal enmity,
observing this pulled offtlie mask, and declared that
no triumph ought to be allowed him. Having spread
several calumnies against him among the soldiery,
and sharpened the resentment which they had al-
ready conceived, Galba requested another day of

"" A sua-portlown in Macedon.*

]

PAULUS ^MILIUa S23

the tribunes of tlic people ; because the remaining
four liours of the one then passing, he said, were
nsufficient for the intended impeachment. But as
the tribunes ordered In'm to speak then, if he liad
any thing to say, lie began a k">ng liarangue fidl of
injurioiis and false allegations, and spun it out to the
end of the day. When it was daik, the tribunes
dismissed the assembly. The soldiers, now more
insolent than eyer, thronged about Gnlba ; and,
animating each other, before it v^as light took their
stand again in the Capitol, where the tribunes had
ordered the assembly to be held.

As soon as day appeared, it was put to the vote^
and the lirst tribe gave it against the tririmph "'.
When this was communicated to the rest of the as-
sembly and the senate, the commonalty expressed
deep concern at the injury done to iEmilius, but
their words had no effect. Tlie principal senators,
however, insisted that it was an insuiferablc at-
tempt ; and encouraged each other to repress the
bold and licentious spirit of the soldiers, who would
in time stick at no instance of injustice and vio-
lence-'-, if sometiiing were not done to prevent their
depriving Paulus ^Enn'Iius of the honours of his vic-
tory. They pushed therefore through the crowd,
and coming up in a body demanded that the tri-,
bunes should put a stop to the suffrages, until they
had delivered what they had to say to the people.
Tlie poll being accordingly stopped and silence ol)-
tained, Marcus Servilius a man of conssdar dignity,
who had killed three and twenty enemies in single
combat, stood up and spoke as follows : " 1 am
" now sensible, more tlian ever, how illustrious a
" general Paulus /Emilius is, when with an armv
**' so mutinous and disorderly he has performed such

9' And yet a triumph was decreed, without any hesitation, to Iiis
inferior officers Anicius and Oclavius. For this inconsistency Livy
i:issii:;ns but too vahd a reason: ' In fad a I nv id/' a media sunt, nd summa
Ji^rnu' tend if.' (xlv. S5.)*

^^ This was sadly verified in the times of the Roman emperors.

Y 2

61

3fi PAULUS JE'snuvs.

^' o-reat and honourable achievements : but I am
*' surprised at the incoosistencv of tlie Roman peo-
" pie, if after rejoicing in triumphs over \\\c lilyrians
*' and Lfgurians ''^, they envy themseh^es the plea-
" sure of seeing thcking of Macexlon brought alive,
" and all the glory of Alexander and Philip led
captive by the Roman arms. For is it not most
extrcH>Tdinary that you, who upon a slight rumour
of the victory brought hither some time ago
^ oifered sacrifices, and made your requests to the
*^' gods, that you nn'ght soon see that account veri-
" tied ; now when the consul is returned with a real
" victory, sliould rob those gods of their due honour
and yourselves of the satisfaction, as if you were
afraid to behold the greatness of the conquest, or
were wilhng to spare the king ? thm>gh, in fact,,
it would be much better to refuse the triumph
out of mercy to him, than envy to your general.
But to such aH excess is your malignity arrived.

€i

if,

a

ii
a

<(

^ that a man who never received a wound, a man
" made sleek bv case and luxury and fattened in
" the sliade, dares discourse about the conduct of
*' the war and the right to a triumph, to you who
*' at the expense of so much blood have learned
" how to judge of the valour or misbehaviour of
" your commanders'-^'/*

At the same time baring his breast, he showed an
incredible ntnnber of scars upon it, and then turning
his back, uncovered some parts which it is reckoned
indecent to expo^^e ; and addressing himself to

'^ Instead of Airvu''^ * Lybrans ' (the common reading in the
Greek), we sliould undoubtedly, whh the .small alteration of one
letter, read Aiyvuv^ ' Ligui-ians.' For the I>igm'ians liad beeu
conquered by ^Timiliu3.

'-'•♦ Compare I^ivy, xlv. 37 — "9, The exposure, mentioned be-
low, which it Avou^kl almost seem Phitarcl* considered as intentional
fill order, perhaps, to show th;\t lie had received no wounds, I'roin
the enemy at least, a pastciiori ) that writer represents as accidental ;
• ada per tis forte tjiuf velanda crant, tninnr iniiiiinum proximis risiim
movil,' kc. 155). Tliis passage has been ntistaken by some of the
aimotators on Fhitarch.'^

ii
ii

ii

ii

PAl-LUS .I'.MIIJITS. 325

fralba said, " 'Jlimi laTifl,licst at this, but I calory
" in these marks betbix: my fellow citizens : for I
i^ot them by being on horseback, day and ni<rht,
in their servi-cc. But go on to collect the votes ;
I will attend tiie whole business, and mark those
cowardly and nn<i'ratefnl men, who had rather
have their own inclinations indiilo-ed in war, than
be properly commiuided.'^ This speech, we arc
told, so liumbled tli€ soldiery, and effected such au
alteration in tlicm, that tlie trimnph was voted to
^'Iiniilius by every tribe.

It is said to have been conducted after the follow-
ing manner : In every theatre (or, as they call it.
Circus) where equestrian games used to be held, in
the Forum and other parts of the city, which were
convenient for seeing the procession, the })eople
erected scaffolds, and on the day oi' the triumph
Mere all dressed in white. The temples were set
open, adorned with garlands and smoking with
incense. Many lictors and other officers compelled
the disorderly crowd to make wav, and opened a
clear passage. The triumph took up three days.
On the first, which was scarcely sufficient for the
show, were cxliibited the imaires, iiaintinirs, and
■colossal statues taken from tlie encmv, and now
carried in two hundred and fifty chariots. On the
next, the richest and most beautiful of the Mace-
donian arms were brought up in an inunense number
of waggons. 'j'hese glittered with ncw-furbished
brass and polislicd steel, an<l though they were piled
with great art and judgement, yet seemed to be
thrown together promiscuously; helmets being placed
npon shields, breast-plates np<vn greaves, Cretan
tsU-gets, Thracian bucklers, and quivers of arrows
liuddled among the horses' bits, with the points of
naked swords and long pikes appearing through on
every side. Ail these arms were tied together with
such a proper liberty, that room was left tor them to
clatter as they were drawn along; and the clank of
them was so harsh and ternble, that they a\ ere not

526 PAULUS .^^.MILIUS.

seen v.'ithoat dread, though among the spoils of the
conquered. Alter the carriages loaded with arms
•walked three thousand men, who carried the silver
money in seven hundred and fifty vessels, each of
vrhich contained tiiree talents and was borne bv four
men. Others brought bowls, horns, goblets, and
cups, all of silver, disposed in such order as would
make the best shov/, and valuable not only for their
size but the depth of the basso relievo. On the
third day, early in the morning, first advanced the
trumpets, not with such airs as are used in a pro-
cession of solemn entry, but with such as the Komans
, sound, when they animate their troops to the charge.
These v/ere follov/ed by a hundred and twenty
oxen, their horns fi;ilded and set off with ribbons and
garlands. The young men, who led these victims,
were girded with belts of curious workmanshi]) ; and
after them came the boys, who carried the gold and
silver vessels for the sacrifice. Next went the per-
sons that bore the gold coin ^^ in vessels holding
three talents each, like those which contained the
silver, and which were to the number of seventy-
seven. Then followed the bearers of the consecrated
bowl'*, often talents' weight, which ^^milius had

5' According to Flutarch's account, there were 2,250 talents of
silver, and 231 of gold coin. According to Valerius Antias, it
aniounted to somewhat more; but Livy thinks his computation too
small, and Velleius Paterculas makes it almost twice as much. Tiie
account which Futcrculus gives of it is probably right, since the
money new brought from Macedon set the Romans free from all
taxes for 125 years. See below, p. S;i2.

9^ This bowl weighed six hundred pounds, for the talent weighed
sixty : it wa' consecrated to Jupiter.

On the subject of the Tiiericlean cups, mentioned helow, there is
much recondite learning in Bentley's Dissertation upon the Epistles
of Phalaris, III. pp. 78 — 92. ed. 1777, where he replies fully to an
argument (among others) ibunded on this very passage, and ren-
dered the more remarkable by Mr. Boyle's barbarous nominatives,
Afliyo-Jii'dt and ^i>.ivy.ie'c.i. The sum of Dr. B.'s observations is, that
Thericles, after Vv'hom cups of a certain fashion (though of different
materials) were denoriiinated Thericlean, v.as a Corinthian j)ottcr,
contemporary with Aristophanes (as Athena?us affirms, xi.) all
whose extant comedies were written and acted between 01. Ixxxviii.

PAULUS yEMILIUS. 327

eaiiscd to be made of gold and adorned with precious
.stones ; and those who exposed to view the cups
denominated by the names of Antigonus, .Scleucns,
and Thericles, together with the gold plate which
liad been used at Perseus' table. Immediately
behind was to be seen the chariot of that prince,
with his armour upon it, and upon that his diadem ;
at a little distance were led captive his children,
attended by a number of governors, masters, and
preceptors, ail in tears, who stretched out their
hands by way of sujiplication to the spectators, and
taught the children to do the same. There were
two sons and one daughter, but all so young, that
they were not much affected with the heaviness of
their misfortunes. This insensibility of theirs made
the change of their condition more pitiable, inso-
much that Perseus passed on ahriost without notice :
so fixed were the eyes of the Romans upon the chil-
dren from pity of their fate, that many of them
shed tears, and none tasted the joy of the triumph
without a mixture of pain, till they were gone by^''.
Behind the children and their train walked Perseus
himself, clad all in black, and wearing sandals of
the fashion of his country. He had the appearance
of a man overwhehned with terror, and whose reason
almost staggered under the load of his misfortunes.
He was followed by a great number of friends and
favourites, whose countenances were oppressed Avith
sorrow ; and who, by fixing their wec}:)ing eyes con-
tinually upon their prince, testified to the spectators

and Ol. xcvii., the earlier date above 1'20 years after Plialaris*
death ; and therefore could not possibly form a part of rhat tyrant's
donation to his Messenian ])hysician, Polyciitus. They ucre some-
times made of the turpentine-tree (Theophr. Hist. Plant, v. 4.),
and sometimes of jflass, or gold. See Cic. in Verr. iv. 18. See
also INI. Larcher Acad, des hux'ript. xliii.*

97 The triumph ceaced ; tears gush'd from every eye:
The world's great victor pass'd unheeded by— '

s.ays Pope in his prologue to Addison's Cato, describin^T the effect
produced upon the Roman mind by the introduction of the 'imago'
of Cato in Ca^tar's triumph.*

52S PAULUS .^':iMILirS.

that it -was his lot which they lamented, and that
tiicy were re,<j,'ar(lless of their own. He had sent
indeed to ^^milius, to desire that he might be
excused from being led in triumph, and being
made a public spectacle : but ^^^milius, despising
his cowardice and attachment to life, bv Mav of
derision it seems sent him word, " That it had been
" in his power to prevent it, and still was, if he were
" so disposed ;" hinting, that he should prefer death
to disgrace. But he had not the courage to strike
the blow, and the vigour of his mind being destroyed
by vain hopes, he became a part of his own spoils.
Next were carried four hundred coronets of gold,
which the cities had sent to vEmilius along with their
embassies, as compliments upon his victory. Then
came the consul himself riding in a magnificent cha-
riot, a man, exclusive of the pomp of power, worthy
to be viewed Vvitli admiration ; but his good mieu
was now set off with a purple robe interwoven with
gold, and he held a branch of laurel in his right hand.
The whole army likewise carried boughs of laurel,
?ind divided into bands and companies followed the
general's chariot ; some singing satirical songs usual
at Rome upon such occasions '^^ and some chanting
odes of victory and the glorious exploits of yEmilius,
who was looked up to and revered by all, and whom
no good man could envy.

But, perhaps there is some superior Being, whose
office it is to cast a shade upon any great and emi-
nent prosperity, and so to mingle the lot of human
life, lliat it may never be ]ierfcctly free from cala-
mity; but that those, as Homer says^^, may think

'8 Of tliese, as sung at Caesar's triumph over the Gauls, Suetonius
has preserved some samples, in his Life of tliat emperor, sect, iy.*

•'^ Plutarch here refers to a passage, in the speech of Achilles ta
piiani ('li, xxiv. a'J6.)» which is thus translated by Pope :

Two urns by Jove's high throne have ever stood,
The source of evil one, and one of good.
From thence the cup of mortal man he fills,
I'lt^'ingF to tl;c;-e, to thojc distributes ills:

PAULUS .EMILIUS. 329

themselves most happy, to whom fortune gives an
e(|iial share of good and evil. For ^millus having
four sons, two (namely, Scipio and Fabius, as has
been mentioned above) adopted into other families,
and two by his second wife, as yet but young, whom
lie brought up in his own house ; one of these died
at fourteen years of age, five days before his father's
triumph, and the other at twelve, three days after it.
There was not a man among the Romans, who did
not sympathise with him in this affliction. All were
shocked at the severity of Fortune '"'^j which thus
scrupled not to introduce such deep distress into a
house full of pleasure, of joy, and of festal sacrifices,
and to mix the songs of victory and triumph with
the tears and mournful dirges of death.

/EmiHus however, rightly considering that man-
kind have need of courage and fortitude, not only
against swords and spears but against every attack
of fortune, so tempered and qualified the present
emergencies, as to over-balance the evil by the good,
and his private misfortunes by the public prosperity;
that nothing might appear to lessen the importance.

To most he mingles both : the wretch, decreed
To taste the bad unmix'd, is cursed indeed.
The luippiest taste not happiness sincere,
But find the cordial draught is dash'd with care.

Plato has censured it as an impiety to say, that God gives evil.
ifod is not the author of evil. IXIoral evil is the resuH of the abuse
of free agency: natural evil is the consequence of the imperfection
of matter : and the Deity stands justified in his creating beings
liable to I)()th, because natural imperfection was necessary to a pro-
gressive cxisten(,'e, moral imperfection was necessary to virtue, and
virtue was necessary to happiness. Homer's allegory, however,
seems borrowed from the eastern maimer of speaking: Thus in the
Psalms, ' In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and he poureth
out of the j;ame ; as for the dregs thereof, all the ungodly of the
earth shall drink them.' (Ixxv. 8.)

'°= Or, more probably, the just and visible interposition of Pro-
vidence ; to punish in some measure that general havock of the
human species, which the Roman pride and avarice had so recently
made In Greece. For, though God is not the author of evil, it is
no impeachment of his goodness to suppose, that by particular
punishments he chuKtises particular crimes.

(.1

((■

330 PAULUS /EMILIUS.

or tarnish the o:]orv, of liis victory. For, soon after
the burial of the first of his sons, he made (as we
have stated) his triump!ial entry ; and, upon the
death of the second soon after the triumph, he assem-
bled tlie people of Rome, and made a sj»eech to them,
not Hke a man who himself stood in need of conso-
lation, b'.it hke one able to alleviate the grief which
his fellow-citizens felt for liis misfortunes :

" Though I have never," said he, " feared any
thing human, yet among things divine I have
always had a dread of Fortune, as the most faith-
" less and variable of beings ; and, because in the
course of this Vvar she prospered every measure
of mine, the I'ather did 1 expect that some tem-
pest would follow so favoin-able a gale. For in
one day I passed the Ionian sea, from Ih'undusium
to Corcyra : thence in five days 1 reached Delphi,
" and sacrificed to Apollo. Within five days more,
*' I took upon me the command of the army in
" Macedon ; and as soon as I had offered the
'' usual sacrifices for purifying it, I proceeded to
" action, and in the space of fiiteen days from that
" time put a glorious period to the war. Distrust-
" ing the fickle goddess on account of such a flow
" of success, and being now secure and free from
"^ all danger with respect to the cneni}', I was most
apprehensive of a change of fortinie in my pas-
sage home ; having such a large and victorious
army to conduct, together with the spoils and
royal prisoners. Nay, when I arrived sate among
my countrymen, and beheld the city full of jo}',
festivity, and gratitude, still I suspected Fortune ;
knowino' that she grants us no considerable favour
" without some mixture of uneasiness, or infliction
of pain. Thus full of anxious thoughts for what
might happen to the commonwealth, my fears
did not quit me, till this calamity visited my
house, and I had my two promising sons, the
only heirs whom I had left myself, to bury one
after the other, on the very days sacred to triumph.
9

cc

et

cc
cc
cc
cc

cc

cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
((

ii

PAULUS .TilMILIUS. S31

'^ Now therefore I am secure as to the greatest dan-
" ger, ii'.id I trust and am fully persuaded that For-
" tune will continue kind and constant to us, since
" she has taken sufficient retribution for her favours
of me and mine ; for the man who led the triumph
is as striking an instance of the weakness of human
power, as h.e that was led captive ; with this dif-
*' ference alone, that the sons of Perseus who were
" vanquished are alive, and those of iEmilius who
" conquered are no more '"'." Such was the gene-
rous and high-souled speech, which ili^milius made
to the people, from a spirit of magnanimity perfectly
honest and free from artifice.

Though he pitied the fate of Perseus, and was
well inclined to serve him, yet all he could do for
him was to 2:et him removed from the comm.on
jirison to a cleaner apartment and better diet. In
that confinement, according to most writers, he
starved himself to death. But some writers of the
time say, the manner of his death was very strange
and peculiar. The soldiers (they inform us) who
were his keepers, being on some account provoked
at him and determined to wreak their malice, when
they could find no other means of effecting it, kept
him from sleep ; taking turns to watch him, and
using such extreme diligence to keep him from rest,

'°' A speech surely, as Livy observes, in bis ])reface to it (xlv.
■4-0.) ' memorahiUs, et Romaiio principe digiia.' As reported by
that historian, it abundantly deserves perusal : and, toward it's
conclusion in particular, must forcibly remind the reader of the
eloquent palhos, with which the admirable Burke deplores the
loss of his only son, in his ' Letter to the Duke of Bedford,' <S:c. ;
as well as of the simpler, but perhaps not less affecting, lamenta-
tion of Lo<j;an, the Indian, described in Morse's America, p. 18.
Paulli in doino, prccfcr se, nemo supercst, &c. The spirit of the
s-avage however, as might be expected, is more in harmony with
that of the Roman chieftain, than that of the christian parent. In
the two former, the advantages accruing to their respective coun-
tries form their consolation ; the latter ' prostrate on the earth,
most unfeignedly recognises the divine justice, and in some degree
submits to it,' &c. But the whole passage is pathetic beyond my
commendation.*

532 PyVULUS iEMILIUS.

that at last he was quite wcarfed out aud died ""'.
Two of his sons also died : aud the third, named
Alexander, is said to have been distinguished for his
art in turninsc and other small work : aud, haviuix
perfectly learned to speak and write the Roman
laiiguage, was employed by the magistrates as a
clerk ^^^, in which capacity he showed himself very
serviceable and ingenious.

Of the acts of -5i]milius, with regard to ]\facedon,
the most acceptable to the Romans was, his bringing
them so much money into the public treasury, that
the people had no occasion to pay any taxes till the
times of Hirtius and Pansa, who were consuls in the
first war between Antony and Ciesar '"\ ilMnilius
had also the unconunon and peculiar happiness to
be highly honoured and caressed by the people, at
the same time that he remained attaciied to the
patrician party, and did nothing to ingratiate liimself
with the commonalty, but uniformly acted in con-
cert with men of the first rank in matters of govern-
ment. This conduct of his was subsequently ad-
duced, as a reproach to Scipio Atricainis (the
Younger) by Appius. These two, being then the
most considerable men in Rome, stood for the cen-
sorship ; the one having the senate and the nobility
on his side, for the Appian family were always in
that interest, and the other not only great in himself",
but ever greatly in favour with the people. When
therefore Appius saw Scipio come into the Forum

^"^ Tin's account we have from T)iod. Sic. xxvi. (ap. Pliot.
Bibliod).) Philip is said to have died before his father, but how or
mhere cannot he collerL(.'d, because the hooks of Livy and Diodorup
Siculus, which treat of thorc times, are h)st.

'°^ Here was a remarkable instance of the pride of the Roman
senate, to have the son of a vanqui>hed king for their clerk; while
>icomedes, the son of Prusas king of Ijithynia, was educated by
them with all imaginable pomp and splendour, because the father
bad placed him under the cai'c of the republic.

'°* Upon the amount of these sums, which thus exonerated the
people from imposts for upward of a hundred and twenty years,
auVhors widely difter. .See and compnie Liv. xliv. 40., \'en.
Paterc. i. 9., Plin. H. N. xxxiii. V:., <S;c.*

PAULUS .^MILIUS. S3S

nttcnded by a crowd of mean persons, and many
wlio had been slaves but who were able to cabal, to
influence the multitude, and to carry all before thcn\
cither by solicitation or clamour, lie cried out, " O
Paulus ^Miiilius ! groan, groan from beneath the
earth, to think that JKmilius the crier and Licin-
nius the rioter conduct thy son to the censorship!"
It is no subject of wonder, however, that the cause
I of Scipio was espoused by the people, since he was
continually heaping kindnesses upon them. But
^milius, though he ranged himself on the side of
the nobility, was as much beloved by the populace
as the most insinuating of their demagogues. This
appeared in their bestowing upon him among other
honours that of the censorship ^^•^, which is the most
sacred of all offices, and which has high authority
annexed to it in many respects, but particularly iu
the power of inquiring into the morals of the citizens,
lor the censors could expel from the senate any
member who had acted in a manner unworthy of
Jiis station, and enroll any man of character in that
body ; and they could disgrace any one of the eques-
trian order, who had behaved licentiously, by taking
away his horse. A hey also took account of the
value of each man's estate, and registered the num-
ber of the people. The number of citizens, which
iEmilius took, was three hundred and thirty-seven
thousand four hundred and fifty-two. He declared
Marcus ^^ilmilius Lepidus first senator, who had
already four times arrived at that dignity. He ex-
pelled only three senators, who were men of no note ;
and both he and his collegue Marcius Philippus
behaved with equal moderation, in examining the
conduct of the knights.

Pfaving settled many important afiliirs while he
bore this office, he fell into a distemper which at first

"'^' He was cliosen censor with Q. Marcius Philippus, four year*
after his second consulship. Livy, in relating the institution, lias
well detailed the extent, of this authoritative office ^iv. S.) It was
fstublished A. U. C. 311., A. C. 41-3.^^

3:54 PAULUS .£xMILIUS.

appeared extremely dangerous, but in time became
less threatenincj, thouo'h it was still troublesome aiid
difficult to be cured. By the advice therefore of
his physicians he sailed to Velia'°'^, where he remain-
ed a long time near the sea, in a very retired and
quiet situation. In the m.ean time, the Romans
deeply regretted his absence, and by frequent ex-
clamations in the theatres testified their anxious de-
sire to see him again. At last a public sacrifice
coming on, which necessarily required his attend-
ance, yI5]milius seemino- now sufficiently recovered
returned to R,ome ; and offered that sacrifice, with
the assistance of the other priests, amidst a prodi-
gious multitude of people, who loudly expressed
their joy for his return. Next day, he sacrificed
again to tlie gods for his recovery. Having finished
these rites, he returned home and went to bed :
when suddenly before he could feel the chanc:e he
fell into a delirium, in which he died the third
day '^^ having attained every thing regarded as essen-
tial to the happiness of man.

His funeral was conducted with wonderful solem-
nity ; the cordial regard of the public did honour
to his virtue, by the best and happiest obsequies.
These did not consist in the pomp of gold, of ivory,
or other expenses and parade of preparation ; but in
esteem, in love, in veneration, expressed not only
by his countrym.en, but by his very enemies. For
as many of the Spaniards, Ligurians, and Macedon-
ians"'% as happened to be then at llome and were
young and robust, assisted in carrying his bier;

1°^^ Plutarch here writes Elca instead of Velia, and calls it a town
in Italy, to distinguish it from one of tiie siime name in Greece.

'°' A. U. C. 594., JEt. 68 *

'°^ These were some of the Tvlacedonian nobility, wito were then
at Home. Valerius Maximus (II, x. 3.) says, it was like a second
triumph to ^Emilius, to have tliose persons assist in siipportinix I'is
bier, which was adorned with representations of the disasters of
their country. It was more honourable, in fact, than the triumph
which he had led up; because ii: bore witness to his humanity, and
the other only to his valour.

TIMOLEON AND P. 7T:MILIUS COMPARED. 555^

white the aged followed it, calling ^milius their
benefactor and the preserver of their countries. For
he not only, at the time when lie conquered them,
had gained the character of humanity ; but continued
likewise to do them services, and to take carr of
them, as if they had been his friends and relations.

The estate, v>-hich he left behind him, scarcely
amounted to the sum of three lumdred and seventy
thousand denarii, of which he appointed his sons
joint-heirs : but Scipio the younger, who had been
adopted into the opulent house of Africanus, gave
up his part to his brother ''^^. Such is the account,
wliich w^e have, of tb.e life and character of Paulus
./Kmilius"",

TniOLEON AND PAULUS .I^^ilLIUS

COMPARED.

IF we consider these two great men, as history
has represented tliem, we shall iind no striking dif-
ference between them in tlie comparison. Both
waged wars with very respectable enemies, the one
with the Macedonians, the other with the Cartha-
ginians ; and both with extraordinary success. One
of them conquered Macedon, and crushed the house
of Antiffonus, which had flourished in a succession

^°'^ Scipio had previously distinguished himself by several noble
donations to his mother and other connexions. He appears indeed
to have been a most generous man, and worthy ot'his disinterested
father. Plutarch, it should be observed, is rather at variance with
himself in what he here stater, about /Emihus' property, as referred
to his Ibrmer statement on the same subject, p. 285."^-

"° A saving of his to his son Scipio is worth mentioning: ' A;
good general never gives battle, but when he is led to it tither by
the last necessity, or by a very favourable occasion.' It is record-
ed by Sempronius Ascllio, who served as military tribune uuder
Scipio, at the siege o{ Numantia.

$56 TIMOLEON AND

of seven kings'^' ; the other expelled tyranny froin
Sicily, and restored that island to it's ancient liberty.
It may be remarked in favour of ^'Emilius, that he
engaged Perseus when in his full strength, and when
he had beaten the Romans ; whereas Timoleon en-
countered Dionysiiis, when reduced to very desperate
circumstances : but, on the other hand, it may be
observed to the advantage of Timoleon, that he sub-
dued many tyrants, and defeated an immense army
of Carthaginians with such forces as he could collect ;
not veteran and experienced troops like those of
j5:Cmilius, but mercenaries and undisciplined men,
who had been accustomed to fight only at their own
pleasure. For equal exploits, with unequal means
and preparations, are to be referred to the general
who performs them.

In their employments, both paid a strict regard to
justice and integrity. ^'Emilius was prepared from
the first so to behave, by the laws and manners of
his country ; but Timoleon*s probity was owing en-
tirely to himself A proof of this is, that in the time
of iEmilius good order universally prevailed among
the Romans, through a spirit of obedience to their
laws and usages, and a reverence of their fellow-
citizens : whereas not one of the Grecian generals,
who commanded in Sicily, kept himself uncorrupted,
except Dion ; and many suspected that even he af-
fected monarchy, and dreamed of setting up a regal
authority like that in Laceda.Mnon. Tinifeus informs
us, that the Syracusans sent away Gylippus"- loaded
with infamy, for his insatiable avarice and rapacity
while he had the command ; and many writers give

'" Plutarch lierc only includes the princes regularly descended
from Antigonus I., without noticing the occasional revolutions in
that kingdom.*

"* For an account of this general's knaveries, which ended io
•his being obliged to Hy from Sparta, in order to avoid capital punish-
jiient, see the Life of Lysandcr, Vol. HI. p, 207., anU DIod. Sic.
xiii. lOa*

PAULUS iEMILIUS COMPARED. 337

accounts of the misdemeanors and breach of articles,
of which Pharax tlie Spartan and Cahippus the A-
thenian were guilty, in hopes of gaining the sove-
reignty of Sicily. What were these men, liowever,
and upon what power did they build such hopes ?
Pharax was a tbllower of Dionysius, who was already
expelled, and Callippus was an officer in the tbreigu
ti'oops in Dion's service. But Timoleon was sent to
be general of the Syracusans, at their own ciirncst
request ; he had not an army to provide, but found
one ready formed which cheerfully obeyed his orders:
and yet he employed this power for no other end,
than the destruction of their oppressive masters.

Yet again, it is worthy of our admiration in ^mi-
lius, that though he subdued so opulent a kingdom,
he did not add a single drachma to his own sub-
stance. He would not touch, nor even look upon
the money himself, though he gave many liberal
gifts to others. I do not, however, blame Timoleon
for having accepted a handsome house and lands :
for it is no disgrace to have accepted something out
of so much, though to have accepted nothing would
liave been better. That is the most consummate
virtue, which shows itself to be above pecuniary con-
siderations, even when it has the best claim to them.
As some bodies are able to bear heat, and others
j cold, but those are the strongest which are equally
* fit to endure either ; so the vigoiu* and firmness of
I those minds are the greatest, M'hich are neither elated
' by prosperity nor broken by adversity. And, in this
respect, ^milius appears to have been superior; for
; in the grievous and severe misfortune of the loss of
i his sons he maintained the same steadiness and dig-
1 nity of carriage, as in the midst of the highest suc-
i cess. But Timoleon^ when he had acted with regard
} to his brother as a patriot ought to do"^ did not let
j his reason support him against his grief; but, be-

"3 The approbation here given to fratricide exposes our author
to repeated, and very severe, rebukes from the piety of his christiau
annotators.*

VOL. 11. Z

338 TIMOLEON & P. .T.MILIIS COMPARE]).

coming a prey to sorrow and remorse, for the space
ot twenty years, he could not so much as look u})on
the place where the public business was transacted,
much less take a part in it. A man should, indeed,
be afraid and ashamed of what is really shameful ;
but to shrink under every reflection upon his charac-
ter, though it implies an ingenuousness and delicacy
of temper, has nothing in it of true greatness of
mind.

\

\

THE

LIFE

OF

PELOPIDAS,

SUxMMARY.

BrflfiioHS on the contempt of death. Whether ^ or not, a general
should rashly expose himself to danger. Noble extraction of Pelo-
pidas. His marriage. Character qf Pelopidas ; and Epaminondas.
Their intimacy. The higher ordersy supported hij the Spartans,
establish an oligarch!/ at Thebes. Distress of the Thebans.
Their exiles voell received at Athens. Plan concerted by Pelopidas
for the deliverance of Thebes. He secretly, ivith some other con-
spirators, enters the city. They apprehend that they are discovered ;
and are much alarmed upon the occasion : but are re-assured by
Charon : have a second alarm : Jirst despatch Archias ; and after-
ward Leontidas and Hypates : are assisted by Epaniinondas and
Gorgias. Pelopidas is elected Bwotarch. This conspiracy com-
pared u-ith that of Thrasybulus. The Spartans invade Bccotia.
Pelopidas* stratagem. The Thebans gain several advanta(res.
I'hcir tinsuccessfid attempt upon Orchomenus. Battle of Tegyra^
in vchich the Spartans are defeated. Origin of the Sacred Band.
How employed by Pelopidas. Cleombrotus, king of Sparta ^
marches against the Thebans. Pelopidas* perplexing dream.
Battle of Leuctra, gained by Epaminondas and Pelopidas. They
invade Laconia. Charge brought against them. Pelopidas pro-
cures the condemnation of the orator Meneclidas : is sent against
Alexander y tyrant of Pherce : passes into Macedon : proceeds to
Thessaly as embassador, and is detained prisoner by Alexander.
His indignant behaviour upon the occasion. He is released by
Ilpaminondas : ami sent embassador into. Persia, His success,

z 2

5i0 PELOPIDAS.

His disintfrestedness puts the other generals to the blush. He
viarches a second time against Alexander : and falls in battle.
Affliction of the army. Magnificence of ids interment. Refesionx
upon "what constitutes the real grandeur of generals. The tyrant
of PhercE is compelled to submit to the Thebans : perishes by a
conspiracy.

f^ATO the Elder, hearing some one commend a
man who was rashly and indiscreetly daring in war,
made this just observation, that " there was a great
'* difference between a due regard to valour, and a
" contempt of life." To this purpose there is a
story of one of the soldiers of Antigonus, who was
astonishingly brave, but of an unhealthy complexion
and bad habit of body. The king inquiring the
cause of his paleness, he acknowledged that he had
a private infirmity. He therefore gave his physi-
cians a strict charge that, if any remedy could be
found, they should apply it wdth the utmost care.
Thus the man was cured ; after which he no longer
courted danger, nor risked his person as before.
Antigonus questioned him about it, and could not
forbear to express his wonder at the change. The
soldier did not conceal the real cause ; " You, sire,'*
said he, " have rendered me less bold by delivering
*' me from that misery, which made my life of no
" account to me\" From the same mode of
arguing it was, that a certain Sybarite said of the
Spartans ; " It was no matter of w^onder, that they
*' ventured their lives freely in battle, since death
*' was a deliverance to them from such a train of

' Lucullus' soldier, in Horace, acted and answered his general
precisely on the same principle :

Jhit CO quo visy qui zonam pcrdidit.

Hor. Ep. II. ii. 40.*

PELOPIDAS. 34,1

" labours, and from such wretched diet." It was
natural for the Sybarites % a people dissolved in lux-
ury and pleasure, to think that they, who despised
death, did it not from a love of virtue and honour,
but because they were weary of life. But, in fact,
the LacedfEmonians thought it a pleasure either to
live or to die, as virtue and right reason directed ;
and so this epitaph testifies :

Nor life nor death they dcem'd the happier state,
But life that's dignified, or death that's great.

For neither is the avoiding of death to be censured,
if a man be not dishonourably fond of life ; nor is the
meeting it with courage to be commended, if he be
disgusted with life. Hence it is, that Homer leads
out the boldest and bravest of his warriors to battle
always well-armed ; and the Grecian lawgivers punish
him, who throws away his shield, not him who loses
his sword or his spear : thus instructing us that the
first care of every man, especially of every governor
of a city or commander of an army, should be to de-
fend himself, and after that to think of annoying the
enemy. For if (according to the comparison made
by Iphicrates'^) the light-armed resemble the hands,
the cavalry the feet, the main-body of infantry the
breast, and the general the head ; then that general
who suffers himself to be hurried away by his im-

* The Sybarites were a colony of Greeks, who settled in ancient
times on the gulf of Tarentiun. The felicity of their situation, co-
operating with their wealth and power, drew them into a proverbial
degree of luxury. But it is not easy to credit the extravagant things,
which AthenaDus (xii. 3.) relates of them.

One of the most ridiculous, however, it may be amusing to intro-
duce. A Sybarite, happening to see a man digging, cried out that
* it had given him a rupture :* and another, to whom he was re-
lating his calamity, said, ' the very hearing of it gave him a pain
in his side !' One of them is somewhere said to have been incon-
venienced by the folding of a rose-leaf upon his couch! *

'I'heir chief city which at first was called Sybaris, from a river of
that name, was afterward named Thm-ium or Thurii.

^ An illustrious Athenian s€nei*al, who raised himself by his merit
from obscurity.*

3*2 PELOPIDAS.

petuosi^y, so as to expose himself to needless hazards,
not only endangers his own life, but those likewise
of his whole army whose safety depends upon his.
Callicratidas therefore, though otherwise an eminent
man, did not judiciously answer the soothsayer, who
desired him not to expose himself to danger, be-
cause the entrails of the victim threatened his life :
" Sparta," said he, " is not bound up in one man.'*
For in battle he was indeed but one, when acting
under the orders of another, whether at sea or land :
but, when he had the command, he virtually com-
prehended the whole force in himself; so that he
was no longer a single person, as such members must
perish with him. Much better was the saying of old
Antigonus, when he was about to engage in a sea-
fight near the isle of Andros. Somebody observed to
him, that the enemy's fleet was considerably larger
than his; " For how many ships then wilt thou reckon
*' me ?" He represented the importance of the com-
mander as great, which in fact it is, when he is a m.an
of experience and valour; and the first duty of sncii
a one is to preserve him, who preserves the whole.

Hence we must allow that Timotheus expressed
himself happily, wlicn Chares showed the Athenians
the wounds which he had received as their general,
and his shield pierced w ith a spear : " I for my part,"
said he, " was much ashamed, when at the siege of
" Samos a javelin fell near me ; as if 1 had behaved
" too much like a young man, and not in a manner
** becoming the connnander of so large an arma-
*' ment." For where the scale of the whole action
turns upon the general's hazarding his own person,
there he is to stand the combat and to brave the
hiost imminent danger, without regarding those who
say that a good general should die of okl age, or at
least an old man : but when the advantage to be
reaped from his personal bravery is only small, and
all is h)St in case of a miiscarriage, no one then ex-
pects the exploits of tlm soldier to be achieved by the.
risk of the general. •

PELOPIDAS. 343

Tims much I tlioiiglit proper to premise before
the Lives of Peh)pidas and Marcellus, who were both
great men, and both perished by their rashness. Both
were excellent soldiers, both did honour to their
country by their exquisite generalship, and both had
the most formidable adversaries to deal with ; for the
one defeated Annibal, till that time invincible, and
the other conquered the Lacedccmouians, who were
masters both by sea and land ; and yet at last they
both threw away their lives, and spilled their blood
without any sort of discretion, when the times most
required such men and such generals. From this
resemblance between them, we have composed their
Lives as parallels to each other.

Pelopidas, the son of Hippoclus, was of an illus-
trious family in Thebes, as was also Epaminondas.
Brought up in affluence, and coming in his youth to
a large estate, he applied himself to relieve such
necessitous persons as deserved his bounty, to show
that he was really the master of his riches, and not
their slave. For most men, as Aristotle says, either
through covetousness make no use of their wealth,
or else abuse it through prodigality ; and these live
in perpetual slavery to pleasure, as those do to cease-
less toil. The Thebans, with grateful hearts, enjoy-
ed the liberality and munificence of Pelopidas : Epa-
minondas alone could not be persuaded to share in
it. Pelopidas however partook in the poverty of his
friend, glorying in a plainness of dress and slender-
ness of diet, indefatigable in labour, and plain and
open in his military conduct. In short, he was like
Capaneus in Euripides,

Whose opulence was great, and yet his heart
Not therefore proud.

He looked upon it, indeed, as a disgrace to expend
more upon his own person, than the poorest Theban.
As for Epaminondas, poverty was his inheritance,
and consequently fiimiliar to him j but he made it

84t PELOPIDAS.

still more light and easy by philosophy, and by the
uniform simplicity of'liis life.

Pclopidas married into a noble family, and had
several chiidren ; but setting- no higher value upon
money than before, and devoting all his time to the
concerns of the commonwealth, he impaired his sub-
stance. And when his friends admonished him tliat
" money, which he nei^lected, was a very necessary
" thing;" " It is necessary indeed,'* said he, " for
" Nicodemus there," pointing to a man that was
lame and blind '.

Epaminondas and he were both equally inclined to
every virtue, but Pelopidas delighted more in the
exercises of the body, and Epaminondas in the im-
provement of the mind ; and the one diverted himself
in the wrestling-ring or in hunting, while the other
spent his hours of leisure in hearing or reading some-
thing in philosophy. Among the many things re-
flecting glory upon both, there was nothing which
men of sense so much admired, as the strict and
inviolable friendship that subsisted between them
from first to last, in all their high stations, military
and civil. For if we consider the administration of
Aristides and Themistocles, of Cimon and Pericles,
of Nicias and Alcibiadcs, how much the common
interest was injured by their dissensions, their envy
and jealousy of each other ; and then cast our eyes
ii])on the mutual kindness and esteem, which Pelo-
pidas and Epaminondas inviolably preserved ; we
may fairly and justly call these collegues in civil
government and military command, not those, whose
!»tudv it was to iret the better of each other ratlier
than of the enemy. The true cause of the difference
was the virtue of tliese Tiiebans, which led them not
to seek in any of their measures their own honour

^ This may be very heroicul : but it is surely not justifiable in the
ottluent, to waste the property coiuniitted totbeir stewardship. How
mueh more correct is t'icero's estimate of the great nian"s duty ;
A //.""/ liahct ncc fortuna ti'.a mnjns ijuam td possis, nee natura tuet
Tneliit^ qiiam uf wJist CQnffervay'if.quawplurimos,*

PELOPIDAS. SiS

and wealth, pursuits always attended with envy and
strife : but, being both inspired from the first with a
divine ardour to. raise their country to the summit of
glory, for this purpose they availed themselves of the
achievements' of each other, as if they had been their
own.

Many liowever are of opinion that their extraor-
dinary friendship took it's rise from the campaign
which they made at Mantinea % among the succours
sent bv the Thebans to the Lacedajmonians, who as
yet were their friends and alhes. For being placed
together in the heavy-armed infantry, and engaged
with the Arcadians, that wing of the Lacedaemonians
in which they were stationed gave way and was
broken : upon which Pelopidas and Epaminondas
locked tlieir shields together, and repulsed all that
attacked tliem ; till at last Pelopidas, having received
seven deep wounds, fell upon a heap of friends and
enemies vvho lay dead togetlier. Epaminondas,
tliough he thought there was no life in him, yet stood
forward to defend his body and his arms, and being
determined to die rather than leave his companion
in the power of his enemies, engaged with numbers
at once. He was now in extreme danger, being
wounded in the breast with a spear and in the arm
with a sword, when Agesipolis king of the Lacedai-
monians brought succours from the other wing, and
beyond all expectation rescued them botl^

After this, the Spartans in appearanc^Pontinued
to treat the Thebans as friends and allies °, but in

^ We must take care not to confound this with the fonious h:Utle
at Manlinea, in which Epaminondas was shiin. Tor that battle was
tbiiglit agaip.st tiic Lacedaemonians, and this for them. The actioa
here spoken of was probably about 01. xcviii. 3. (See Diod. Sic.
XV. 5.)

"5 During tlie whole Peloponnesian war, Sparta found a very
faithful ally in the Thebans : and, under the countenance of Sparta,
the Thebans recovered the government of Bccotia, of which the/
had been deprived on account of their defection to the Tersiaus.
At length however they grew .so powerful and headstront^, that
when the Peace of Antalcidas came to be subscribed to, they re-

9

un PELOriDAS.

reality they were suspicious of their spirit and their
power ; more ))articularly they hated the party of
IbiTienias and Androclides, in which Pelopidas had
ranged liimself, as attached to liberty and a popular
government. Arcliias, Leontidas, and Philip there-
fore, men inclined to an oligarchy and rich withal
and ambitious, persuaded Phoebidas the Lacedae-
monian, who was marching by Thebes with a body
of troops'", to seize the castle called Cadmea, to
drive the opposite party out of the city, and to place
the administration in the hands of the nobility, sub-
ject to the inspection of the Lacedaemonians. Phcc-
bidas listened to the proposal, and coming upon the
Thebans unexpectedly during the feast of tlie Thcs-
mophoria ^, made himself master of the citadel, and
ha'>ing seized Ismenias carried him to Laceda^mon,
where he was shortly afterward put to death. Pelo-
pidas, Pherenicus, and Androclides, with many
others that fled, were sentenced to banishment. Put
Epaminondas remained upon the spot, being despised
for his philosophy as a man who would not inter-
meddle with affairs, and for his poverty as a man of
no power.

Thouffh the Lacedaemonians took the command
of tlie army from Ph(X^bidas, and fined him a hun-
dred thousand drachmas, they nevertheless kept a ]

fused their Jj^currence, and were with no small difficulty over-
awed and flPed into it by the contederates. We learn indeed
from Polybius, that though the Laced.enionians at that peace de-
clared all the Crecian cities free, they did not withdraw their gar-
risons from any one of thein.

" Plio-'bidas was marching against Olynthus, at that time be-
sieged by the Laceda-monians under his brother Eudamidas, when
Leontidas or Leontiades (Xenoph. Hellen. v., whom see) one of the
two pole»iarchs, betrayed to bin) the town and citadel of Thebes.
Ismenias was the other polemarch.

8 The women were celebrating this feast in the Cadn»ea. (L.)
It was the chief of those instituted in honour of Ceres, and c»m-
memorated al once those two greatest of human blessings, the
establishment of laws, and the introduction of agriculture. About
it's institution, authors widely differ ; but for it's ceremonies see
Meursius, Grace, ler. it., & M. du Tlieil, Acad, dcs luscript. xxxix.*

PKLOPIDAJ^. 31?

garrison in the Cadmca. All the rest of Greece wa4
surprised at this absurdity of theirs, in punishing tho
actor and yet authorising the action ^. As for the
Thebans, who had lost their ancient form of govern-
ment, and were brought into subjection by Archias
and Leontidas, there was no room for them to liope
to be delivered from the new tyranny ; which wa:i
so eHectually supported by the power of the Spartans, ^
that it coukl not be pulled down without subverting
their dominion both by sea and land.

Leontidas nevertheless, having received intelli-
gence that the exiles were at Athens, and that they
were treated there with great regard by the people
and not less respected by the nobility, formed secret
designs against their lives. For this purpose he em-
ployed certain unknown assassins, who took off An-
droclides ; but all the rest escaped. Letters were
also sent to the Athenians from Sparta, insisting that \
they should not harbour or encourage the exiles, but
drive them out as persons declared by the confe-
derates to be common enemies : but the Athenians,
agreeably to their usual and natural humanity, as
well as in gratitude to the city of Thebes, would not
suffer the smallest injury to be done to them. For
the Thebans had strenuously assisted in restoring the
democracy at Athens, having made a decree that if
imy Athenian should march armed through IJirotia
against the tyrants, he sliould not meet with the
slio'htest hindrance or molestation in that country.

Pelopidas, though he was one of the youngest '",

9 Polybius, in his fourth book, speaking of an equally atrocious
piece of conduct in the Etolians, has jjainted this foul action of the
Lacedaemonians in it's true colours. ' To shut it's eyes, in order
to hinder others from seeing it,' in the ostrich indeed is merely
foolish; but in man it is at least as profligate as it is foolish, and
generally as fatal. See also Diod. Sic. xv, '205. Wliat mockery
was it then in Agesilaus, who hypocritically asked, ' In what the
king of Persia was greater than himself, if he were not more just ?'
to s'tand up as Phcebidas' apologist!*

" Xenophon, in the account which he gives of this transnctiorr,
does not so nmch as meation Pelopidas. His silence in this respect

• 12

a

3i8 PELOPIDAS.

applied to each exile in particular, as well as lia-
rangLied them in a body ; urging, " That it was both
dishonourable and impious to leave their native
city enslaved and garrisoned by an enemy, and
meanly contented with their own lives and safety
*' to wait for the decrees of the Athenians and to
" pay their court to the popular orators : and that
they ought to run every hazard in so glorious a
cause imitating the courage and patriotism of
Thrasybulus ; for, as lie advanced from Thebes
to crush the tyrants in Athens, so should they
" march from Athens to deliver Thebes."

Thus persuaded to adopt his proposal, they sent
privately to their friends who were left behind in
Thebes to acquaint them with their resolution, which
was highly approved ; and Charon, a person of the
first rank, offered his house for their reception.
Philidas found means to be appointed secretary to
Archias and Philip, who were then polemarchs ; and,
as for Epaminondas '', he had taken pains all along
to inspire the youth with sentiments of bravery. For
he desired them in the public exercises, to try the
Lacedaemonians at wrestling ; and when he saw
them elated with success, he used to tell them by
way of reproof, " That they should rather be
" ashamed of their meanness of spirit in remaining
" subject to those, to whom in strength they were
" so much superior."

A day being fixed for carrying their design into
execution, it was agreed among the exiles that Phe-
renicus with the rest should stay at Thriasium '-,

was probably owing to bis p.-a-tiality for his hero Agesilaus, whose
glory he might think would be eclipsed by that of I'elopidas and his
collegue Epaminoiulas ; for of the latter, also, he speaks very
sparingly.

" This is all the part, which Plutarch assigns to Epaminondas iii
this enterprise. His excuse for not engaging farther in it was, that
• he would not dip his hands in the blood of his fellow-citizens.*
This is more fully stated in oar author's Treatise upon the Genius
©f Socrates.*

" A towQ near mount Cithasron.""

PELOPIDAS. Si9

while a few of the youngest should first attempt to
get entrance into the city ; and that, if these hajv
pened to be surprised by the enemy, the others
should take care to provide for their children and
their parents. Pelopidas was the first w^ho offered
to be of this party ; and after him Melon, Demo-
clides, and Theopompus, all men of noble blood,
united to each other by the most faithful friendship,
and who never had had any contest but which should
be foremost in the race of glory and valour. These
adventurers to the number of twelve, having em-
braced those who stayed behind, and sent a messen-
ger before them to Charon, set out in their under-
garments with dogs and hunting-poles: that none
who met them might have any suspicion of what
they were about, and that they might seem to be
only hunters beating about for game.

When their messenger came to Charon, and ac-
quainted him that they were on the way to Thebes,
the near approach of danger made not the least
change in his resolution : he behaved like a man of
honour, and prepared to receive them. Hippostheni-
das, who was also in the secret, was not by any
means a bad man, but rather a friend to his country
and to the exiles ; yet he wanted that firmness,
which the present emergency and the hazardous
point of execution required. He grew giddy, as it
were, at the thought of the great danger, into which
they were about to plunge ; and at last opened his
eyes enough to see, that they were attempting to
shake the Lacedaemonian government, and to free
themselves from that power, without any other de-
pendence than that of a few indigent persons and
exiles ". He therefore went to his own house with-

'5 It was not mere giddiness, which turned In'm round. It oc-
curred to him that the garrison of fifteen hundred men would over-
match them, even if they should succeed in despatching the tyrants ;
that two very excellent officers were to be on guard that very night,
and that the Thespian soldiers had been tUat day ordered under
arms.*

-3.-0 pt:lopidas.

out saying a word, and despatched one of liis friends
■to ]\leloii and Pelopidas to desire tliem to defer their
enterprise for the present, to return to Athens, and
to wait till a more favourable opportunity should offer.

Chlidon, for that was the name of the man sent
upon this business, went home in all haste, took his
horse out of the stable, and called for the bridle.
His wife being at a loss, and not able to find it, said
she had lent it to a neighbour. Uj)on this words
arose, and mutual reproaches followed ; the woman
venting bitter imprecations, and wishing that the
journey might be fatal both lo him and to those that
sent him. So that Chlidon having spent great part
of the day in this squabble, and looking upon what
had happened as ominous, laid aside all thoughts of
the journey, and went elsewhere. So nearly was
this noble and glorious undertaking disconcerted at
the ver)' outset.

Pelopidas and his company, now in the dress of
peasants, divided and entered the town at different
quarters, while it was yet day. And as the cold
weather was setting in, there happened to be a sharp
wind and a shower of snow, which concealed them
the better, most people retiring into their houses to
avoid the inclemencv of the weather. But those
who were concerned in the affair received them as
they came, and conducted them immediately to
Charon's house ; the exiles and others making up
the number of forty-eight.

As for the affairs of the tvrants, they stood thus:
Philidas, their secretary, knew (as we have stated)
the whole design of the exiles, and omitted nothing
which might contribute to it's success. He had in-
vited Archias and Philip some time before to an en-
tertainment at his house on that day, and promised
to introduce to them some women, in order that
those who were to attack them nu'ght find them dis-
solved in wine and pleasure ^'*. They had not yet

'■* Pcrliaj^s at first he really intended to i»Vroduce some womeu

PKLOPIDAa 3',!

rlrunk very deeply, ^vhen a report reached tlicm,
which tliough not false seemed uncertain and ob-
scure, that the exiles were concealed somewhere in
the city. And, though Philidas endeavoured to
turn the discourse, Archias sent an ofticer to Charon
to command his immediate attendance. 13y this time
it was grown dark, and Pclopidas and his companions
were preparing tor action, having already put on
their breast-plates and girded their swords, when
suddenly there was a knocking at the door : upon
which some one ran to it, and asked what the per-
son's business was ; and having learned from the
officer, that he was sent by the polcmarchs to fetch
Charon, brought back the news in great confusion.
They were unanimous in their opinion, that the affair
was discovered, and that they were all lost, before
they had performed any thing which became their
valour. Nevertheless, they thought it proper that
Charon should obey the order, and go boldly to the
tyrants. Charon was a man of the utmost intrepi-
dity and courage in dangers, which threatened only
himself; but he was at that time much affected on ac-
count of his friends, and afraid that he should incur
some susj)icion of treachery, if so many brave citi-
zens should perish. As he was on the point there-
fore of setting off, he took his son who was yet a
child, but of a beauty and strength beyond his co-
evals, out of the women's a])artment, and put him
into the hands of Pelopidas ; desiring, " That if he
" found him a traitor, he would treat that child as
" an enemy, and not spare his life." Many of them
shed tears, when they saw the concern and mag-
nanimity of Charon ; and all expressed their uneasi-
ness at his thinking any of them so dastardly, and so
nuich disconcerted with the present danger, as to be
capable of suspecting or blaming him in the least.
They entreated him therefore not to leave his son

(or, as it is in the original, yvjy.ts', -ro^i i rav^'f »>•■■, • married women'),
and tlic dressing up of the exiles in ibniulc habits was an afttr-
thought.

S6t PELOPIDAS.

with them, but to send him out of the reach of what
might possibly happen, to some phice wliere, safe
from the tyrants, he might be brought up to be an
avenger of his country and his friends. But Charon
refused to remove him ; " For what life,*' said he,
" or what deliverance could I wish him, that would

be more glorious than his falling honoin-ably with

his father and so many of his fi'iends r" He then
addressed himself in prayer to the gods, and having
embraced and encouraged them all, went out ; en-
deavouring by the way to compose himself, to form
his countenance, and to assume a tone of voice very
different from the real state of his mind.

When he was come to the door of the house,
Archias and Philidas went out to him and said,
" What persons are those, Charon, who (as we are
" told) have lately come into the town, and are
*^ concealed and countenanced by some of the citi-
" zcns ?" Charon was a little fluttered at flrst, but
soon recovering himself asked, " Who the persons
*' they spoke of were, and by Avhom harboured ?'*
And, finding that Archias had no clear account of
the matter, he concluded thence that his information
was not derived from any person privy to the design,
and therefore said ; " Pray do not disturb your-
*' selves with vain rumours : I will make, however,
" the best inquiry I can ; for perhaps nothing of
*' this kind ought to be disregarded.'* Philidas, who
was by, commended his prudence, and conducting
Archias in again plied him strongly with liquor, and
prolonged the carousal by keeping up their expecta-
tion of the women.

When Charon returned home, he found his friends
prepared, not to conquer or to preserve their lives,
but to sell them dearly and to fall gloriously. To
Pelopidas he told the truth, but he concealed it from
the rest, pretending that Archias had discoursed
with him about other matters '".

'5 There appears no necessity for tliis artifice ; and Plutarch ia-

ti
a

PELOPIDAS. 353

The first storm was scarcely blown over them,
when fortune raised a second. For there arrived an
express from Athens with a letter from Archias,
high-priest there, to Archias his name-sake and par-
ticuhir friend, not filled with vain and groundless
surmises, but containing (as was subsequently dis-
covered) a clear narrative of the whole affair. The
messenger being admitted to Archias now almost
intoxicated, as he delivered the letter, said ; " The
person, who sent this, desired that it might be
read immediately, for it contains business of great
importance.'* But Archias, receiving it, said
smiling, " Business to-morrow." He then put it
under the bolster of his couch, and resumed the con-
versation with Philidas. This saying ( ' Business
to-morrow') passed into a proverb, and so continues
among the Greeks to this day.

A good opportunity now offering for the execu-
tion of their purpose, they divided themselves into
two bodies, and sallied out. Belopidas and Damo-
clidas went against Leontidas and Hypates ^'^, who
were neighbours, and Charon and Melon against
Archias and Philip. Charon and his company put
women's clothes over their armour,, and wore thick,
wreaths of pine and poplar upon their heads to
shadow their faces. As soon as they came to the
door of the room where the guests were, the com-
pany shouted and clapped their hands, believing
them to be the Vvomen, whom they had so long ex-
pected. When the pretended women had looked
round the room, and distinctly noted all the guests,
they drew their swords ; and, assaiHng Archias and
Philip across the table, showed who they were. A

deed liimself, in liis Treatise upon the Genius of Socrates, says
that Charon came back to the little band of patriots with a pleasant
countenance, and gave them all an account of what had passed
without tlie least disguise.

"^ These had not been invited to the entertainment, because
Archias, expecting to meet a woman of great distinction, did y?lt
choose that Leontidas should be there.

VOL. ir. 2 A

554 pj:lopida8.

small part of the company Avere persuaded by Phi-
lidas not to intermeddle ; the rest engaged in the
combat, and stood up tor the polemarchs, but being
disordered with wine, were easily despatched.

Pelopidas and his party liad a more difficult affair
of it ; tor they had to do with Leontidas, a sober and
valiant man. They found the door made fast, as lie
was gone to bed, and knocked a long time beforti
any body heard. At last, a servant perceived it,
and came down and removed the bar ; which he had
no sooner done, than they pushed open the door,
and rushing in threw the man down, and ran to the
bed-chamber. Leontidas, conjecturing by the noise
and trampling what the matter was, leaped from his
bed and seized his sword ; but he forgot to put out
the lamps, which had he done, it would have left
them to fall foul on each other in the dark. Being
therefore fully exposed to view, he met them at the
door, and with one stroke laid Cephisodorus, the
first man who attempted to enter, dead at his feet.
He next encountered Pelopidas, and the narrow-
ness of the door, together with tlie dead body of
Cephisodorus lying in the way, made the dispute
long and doubtful. At last Pelopidas prevailed, and
having slain Leontidas, marched immediately with
his little band against Hypatcs. They got into his
house in the same manner, as thev had done into
the other : but he quickly perceived them, and made
his escape into a neighbour's house, whither they
followed and despatched him.

Their business being thus completely finished,
they joined Melon, and sent for the exiles whom
they had left in Attica. They proclaimed liberty
to all the Thebans ^", and armed such as came over
to their party, taking down the spoils that were
suspended upon the porticos, and the arms out of

'7 Pelopidas also sent Philidns to all the gaols in the city, to re-
lease those brave Thcbans, whom the tyrannical Spartans had kept
in fetters.

PELOPIDAS. 553

tlic sliops of the armourers and sword-cutlers. E])a-
miuondas and (lorgidas came to their assistance,
^vith a considerable body of young men, and a select
number of the old, whom they had collected and
armed.

The whole city was now in the utmost terror and
confusion ; tlic houses were filled with lights, and
the streets with men running to and fro. The peo-
])le, however, did not yet assemble ; but being asto-
nished at what had happened, and knowing nothing
Avith certainty, waited with impatience for the day.
It seems therefore to have been a o-reat error in the
Spartan officers, that they did not immediately sally
out, and fall upon them ; for their garrison consist-
ed of fifteen hundred men, and they were joined
besides by many people from the city. But terrified
by the shouts, the lights, the hurry, and the univer-
sal confusion, they contented themselves with keep-
ing possession of the citadel.

As soon as it was dav, the exiles from Attica cams
in armed : the people complied with the summons
to assemble ; and Epaminondas and Gorgidas pre-
sented to them Pelopidas and his party, surrounded
by the priests, who carried garlands in their hands,
and called upon the citizens to exert thcinselves for
their gods and their country. Housed by this ap-
pearance, the whole assembly stood up, and received
them with loud acclamations as their benefactors
and deliverers.

relo])idas then elected governor of Bo^otia, toge-
ther with Melon and Charon, immediately blocked
up and attacked the citadel ; anxious to drive out
the Lacedaemonians and to recover the Cadmea^%

'8 As it is not probable tliat the regaining of so strong a place
sbould be the work of" a dav, or have been etFectcd with so small a
force as Pelopidas then had, we must have recourse to Diod. Sic.
(xvi. 25.) and Xenophon (Ilellen. v.), who inform us that the
Athenians, early the next morning ai'ter the seizing on the city,
sent the Iheban general five thousand foot and two thousand horse
under the command of Xenophon : and that several other bodies
*ff troops came in from the cities of Bcjcoti^, to the nuu»ber uf uboiA^,

U A 2

3.36 PELOPIDAS.

before succours could arrive from Sparta. And,
indeed, lie was but a little before-hand with them ;
for they had but just surrendered the place, and
were returning home according to capitulation, when
thcv met Cleombrotus at Megara marchiufj; toward
Thebes with a large army. The .Spartans called to
account the three harmosta^ or ofiicers, who had
commanded in tlie Cadmea, and signed the capitu-
lation. Hermippidas and Arcissus were executed
tor it, and upon the third, named Dysaoridas, so
severe a line was imposed tliat he was forced to quit
Peloponnesus "-'.

Tim action of Pelopidas -° was by the Greeks
called ' sister to tliat of Thrasvbulus,' on account
of their near resemblance, not only in respect of the
great virtues of the men and the difficulties which
they had to encounter, but the success with which
thev were crowned bv fortune. For it is not easy
to iind another instance so remarkable, of the few
overcoming the many and the weak the strong,
merely by dint of courage and conduct, and by these
means procuring such signal advantages to their
country. But the change of affairs, which followed
this action, rendered it still more glorious. For tlie
war whicii humbled the pride of the Spartans, and
deprived them of their empire both by sea and land,
originated from tliat night ; when Pelopidas witliout
taking town or castle, but being only one out of

seven tliousand more ; tliat Pelojiidas besieged the place in form
v.ith tlieui, and that it held out several days, and at length sur-
rendered for want of provisions.

'!' It uHs a maxim witli the Spartans, to die sword in hand in the
defence of a place conmiitted to their care.

^° M. Dacier gives a long parallel between the conduct of this
action and that of the prince of Moiuico, in driving a Spanisli pxr-
ii-on out of iiis town: (L.) with a view chietiy (as he says) of show-
ing, that Plutarch is able to suggest hints for enterprises and per-
formances equal to those, which were the glory of the most re-
nowned hcroos of antiquity ! The exploit of Tlnasybulus, as well
as the enormities of the Thirty 'J yranls, whom he expelled froia
Athens, is reconUul bv the two above-quoted historians, Xenophoa
(ib.) and Diod. Sic. x'iv. a2, 33.*-

PELOPIDAS. 357

twelve who entered a private house, loosened and
broke to pieces (if we may express truth by a meta-
phor) the chains of the Spartan government, until
then esteemed completely indissoluble.

The Lacedfcmonians soon after this advancing
into Bocotiawith a powerful army, the Atlicnians were
deeply alarmed, and renouncing their alliance with
the Thebans, took cognisance in a judicial way of
all who continued in the interest of that people :
some they put to death, some they banished, and
upon others they imposed heavy fines. The Thebans
being thus deserted by their allies, their affiiirs
seemed to be in a desperate situation. But Pelopidas
and (lorgidas, who then had the command in Btrotia,
sought means to embroil the Athenians again with
the Spartans ; and to this end they availed them-
selves of the following stratagem : there was a Sjiar-
tan named Sphodrias, a person of great reputation
as a soldier, but of no sound judgement, sanguine
in his hopes and indiscreet in his ambition. This
jnan was left with some troops at Thespige, to re-
ceive and protect such of the Bcrotians, as might
come over to the Spartans. To him Pelopidas pri-
vately sent a merchant, in whom he could confide^^,
well provided with money, and with proposals still
more persuasive than money; viz. " That it became
" him to undertake some noble enterprise — to sur-
prise the Pirieus for instance, by falling suddenly
upon the Athenians, who were not provided to
receive him ; for that nothing could be so agree-
able to the Spartans as to be masters of Athens,
" and that the Thebans now incensed against the
" Athenians, and considering them as traitors, would
" lend them no kind of assistance.'*

Sphodrias, suffering himself at last to be per-
suaded, marched into Attica by night, and advanced

*' This is more probable, than what Diodonis vSiculus saA's (xr.
29.) namely, tliat Cleonibrotus without any order from the Ephori
persuaded Sphodrias to surprise the Pirxus.

358 PELOPIDAS.

as ilir as Elciisis '-. There the hearts of his soldiers
began to fail, and finding his design discovered he
returned to Thespian, after he had thus involved the
Lacedjrmonians in a long and dangerous war. For '■

upon this the Athenians readily united with the
Thebans, and having fitted out a large fleet sailed ]
round Greece, engaging and receiving such as were
inclined to shake off the Spartan yoke.

In the mean time, the Thebans by tlicmselves
frequently came to action with the Lacediemonians
in BoL'Otia, not in set battles indeed, but in such as
were of considerable service and improvement to
them ; for their spirits were raised^ their bodies ;

inured to labour, and by being used to these ren-
contres they gained both experience and courage.
Hence it was, that Antalcidas the Spartan said to
Agesihuis, when he returned fiom B(eotia wounded;
Truly you are well paid for the instruction, which i
you have given the Thebans, and tor teacliing
" them the art of war a2;ainst their will." Thouirh,
to speak properly, Agesilaus was not their instructor,
but those prudent generals who made choice of fit
opportunities to let loose the Thebans, hke so many
young hounds, upon the enemy; and when they
had tasted of victory, satisfied with the ardour
which they had shown, brouglit tliem off again sarc.
Of this, the chief honour was (hie to reio})idas*
For, from the time of his being iirst chosen general
until his death, there was not a single year that he was
out of employment, either as ca})tain of tlie Sacred
Band, or as governor of Bcrotia. And, in the course
of these years, the Lacedaemonians were several

ii

-* They hoped to have reached the Pira;us in the niglit, but
found, wlieii the day appeared, tliat they had advanct-d no iarlher
than Eleusis. Sphodrias, perctiving that he Nvas discovi red, in his
return plundered the At!)eniiui territories, 'I'he Laicdieinonians
recalled Sphodria*;, and the Epliori proceeded against hin\; but
Agesilaus, influenced by his ^on \vho ua« attached to the son et
?phodrius, 1)]-Quyhl him oil". 'Aenoph, Ildleu, v-}

1

PELOPIDAa 359

times defeated by the Thebans ; particularly at
]*latiP{u, at TJicspia'., where IMurbidas wlio had sur-
prised tlie Cadmea was killed, and at Tanagra, where
Pelopidas beat a considerable body, and slew with
his own luind their i>'eneral Panthoides -'.

Jkit tliese combats, thouii^h thev served to animate
and encourage the victors, did not (juite dishearten
the vanquished. For they were not pitched battles,
nor regular engagements ; but rather advantages gain-
ed over the enemy by well-timed skirmishes, in which
the Tliebans sometimes pursued, and sometimes re-
treated.

Jkit the battle of Tegyrae, which was a sort of,
prelude to that of Leuetra, raised the character of
Pelopidas very high ; for none of the other com-
manders could lay claim to any share of the honour
of tliat day, neither had the enemy any pretext to
cover the shame of their defeat.

He kept a strict eye upon the city of Orchome-
nus-% which had adopted the Spartan interest, and
received two companies of foot for it's defence, and
anxiously watched for an opportunity to make him-
self master of it. Bcinq; at lenu:th informed that the
garrison were gone upon an expedition into Loeris,
he hoped to take the town with ease, now that it
Avas destitute of soldiers, and therefore hastened
thither witli the Sacred Band and a small party of
horse. But finding, Avhen he was near the town,
that other troops were coming from Sparta to sup-
ply the place of those which had marched out, he
led his forces back again by Tegyra^ along the sides
of the mountains, the only way by which he could
go : for all the flat country was overflowed by the
river Melas, wliich from it's very source spreading

^3 Is tin's a patronymic ; as Xenoplion, in his account of appa-
rently the same action, names the general slain upon this occasion
Alypetus.*

-'» This was one of the largest and most consideraI>le towns i»
Baotiu, and still garrisoned by the Lacedaemonians.

360 PELOPIDAS.

itself into marshes and navigable pieces of water,
made the lower roads impassable*".

A little below these marshes stands the temple of
Apollo TegyrsLMis, whose oracle there has not been
loni^: silent '''. It flourished most in the Persian wars,
while Echecrates was high-priest. Here, they re-
port, Apollo was born ; and at the foot of the neigh-
bouring mountain, called Delos, the Melas returns
into it's channel. Behind the temple rise two copious
springs, whose waters are admirable for their cool-
ness and agreeable taste. The one is called ' Palm,'
and the other ' Olive,' to this day ; so that Latona
seems to have been delivered, not between two
trees, but two fountains of that name. Ptoiim like-
wise is close by, whence (it is said) a boar suddenly
rushed out, and frightened her ; and the stories of
Python and Tityus, the scene of which lies here,
favour the opinion of those who maintain that Apollo
was born in this place. The other proofs of this
matter I omit. For tradition does not reckon this
deity among those who were born mortal, and sub-
sequently changed into demi-gods ; like Hercules
and Bacchus, who by their virtues were raised from
a frail and perishable being to immortality : but he
is one of the Eternal and Unbegotten -\ if we may
give credit to the ancient sages, who have treated
upon these high points.

The Thebans then retreating from Orchomenus
toward Tegyras, the Lacedaemonians who were return-

-5 This account of the Mehis agrees exactly with that given by
Strabo, who represents it, in his time, as lost either in the hollows
or the marshes near Haliartus (ix.)*

-* See our author's Treatise on the Ceasing of Oracles. Tegyrse
was a city in Boeotia, and mount Ptoiim in it's neighbourhood was
the seat of another temple of Apollo Ptoiis.*

-7 This is a very remarkable passage. The ancient sages (as
Pythagoras, Plato, and others) believed that God had children that
were Eternal, Unbegotten, and like himself. And this notion de-
scended to them from remote tradition, which made mention of a
Son of God, co-eternal with the Father, but which they had cor-
rupted by their vain and idle fancies !*

I

PELOPIDAS. S61

ing from Locris met them upon the road. As soon
as they were perceived to be passing the straits, some
one ran and said to Pelopidas, " V/c are fallen into
" the enemy's hands :" " And why not they (re-
" plied he) into our's ?" At the same time, he or-
dered the cavalry to advance from the rear to the
front, that they might be ready for the attack ; and
the infantry, who were but three hundred -% he
drew up in a close body, hoi)ing that wherever they
charged they would break through the enemy, though
superior in numbers.

The Spartans had two battalions. Ephorus says,
their battalion consisted of live hundred men ; but
Calhsthenes makes it seven, and Polybius and others
nine hundred. Their polemarchs, Gorgoleon and
Theopompus, pushed boldly on against the The-
bans. The shock began in the quarter, where the
generals fought in person on both sides, and was
very violent and furious. The Spartan commanders,
who attacked Pelopidas, were among the first slain ;
and all v/ho were near them being either killed or
put to flight, the whole army were so terrified, that
they opened a lane for the Thebans, through which
they might have passed safely, and continued their
route if "they had chosen it. But Pelopidas, disdain-
ing to accept the opportunity, charged those who
yet stood their ground, and made such havock
among them, that they fled in great confusion. The
pursuit however was not continued very far, for the
Thebans were afraid of the Orchomenians, who were
near the place of battle, and of the forces just ar-

^8 This small body was however the very flower of the Theban
army, and was dignified by the name of the ' Sacred Battalion,' and
the'< Hand of Lovers' (as mentioned below), being equally famed
for their fidelity to the Theban state, and their aiiection for each
other. Some fabulous things are related of them, from which we
can only infer that they were a brave resolute set of young men,
who had vowed perpetual friendship to each other, and liad bound
themselves by the strongest ties to stand by one another to the last
drop of their blood, and were therefore the fittest to be employed
in such dangerous expeditions. (L.) See Plato's Sympos., on the
effects of enthusiastic attachment in the breasts of virtuous youth.*

S62 PKLOPIDAS.

rived from LaccclcL'mon. They were satisfied with
having beaten them in fair combat, and continuing
their march through a dispersed and defeated army.

Having therefore erected a trophy, and gathered
the spoils of the slain, they returned home not a little
elated. For it seems that, in all tlieir former wars
both with the Greeks and the barbarians, the I.ace-
diemonians had never been beaten, the greater num-
ber by the less, nor even by equal numbers in a
pitched battle. Thus their courage appeared irre-
sistible, and their renown so much intimidated their
adversaries, tliat thcv did not care to hazard an en-
gagement w-ith them on e(jual terms. This battle
first taught the Greeks that it is not the Eurotas, nor
the space between Babyce and Cnacion ''\ which
alone produces brave warriors ; but that wherever
the youth are ashamed of what is base, resolute in a
good cause, and more inclined to avoid disgrace than
danger, there arc the men who are terrible to their
enemies.

(jorgidas (as some say) first formed the Sacred
Band, consisting of three hundred select men, who
were cpiartered in the Cadinea, and maintained and
exercised at the ])ublic expense. They were called
* the City-band,' for citadels in those days were de-
nominated ' cities.'

Others affirm, that it was composed of men
strongly attached to each other; and a lively remark
of i'ammenes upon the subject is recorded, in which
he observed that Homer's Nestor was no tactician,
when he advised the Greeks to marshal themselves
by tribes and families,

That race with race, and tribe with tribe may join.

He should rather have placed together those, who
A\cre strongly attached to each other ; for men of
tlic same tribe or family make little account of each

^' See the Lire of Lyciirgus, I. 120.-

PELOPIDAS. 36^

©thcr III tlic midst of difficulties, whereas a band ce-
mented by tender friendship is indissohible and in-
vincible ; as both parties, ashamed of being base in
the presence of each other, stand firm in danger for
their mutual protection. Nor is this at all wonder-
ful ; since they have more reverence for the objects
of their regard, even when absent, than for others
who are present. Thus the man, whose enemy was
about to kill him as he lay upon the ground, earnestly
implored that he would run him through the breast;
" That my dear friend (said he) when he sees my
*' corpse, may not blush to find it wounded in the
*' back.'* Thus it is said that loliius, the favourite
of Hercules, partook of his labours and combats :
and licnce Aristotle states that, even in his time,
it was usual '^^ for friends of this character to swear
inviolable affection at loliius' tomb. It is probable
theretbre that this band was called ' Sacred,' on tlie
same account that Plato stiles a lover " a divinely-
inspired friend^'."

This band, it is said, remained undefeated till the
battle of Cheronasa ; and when Philip, after the
tight, took a view of the slain, and came to the place
where the three hundred, who with their light arms
had encountered the tiles of his phalanx, lay heaped
together, and on expressing his surprise, was told
tliat it was ' the Band of Friends ;' he exchiimed,
with tears, " May a curse light upon those, wlio
'* sus])ect that such brave men could ever do or
'• sutler a shameful tiling 1" It is certain, in short,
that it was not (as the jioets affirm) the criminal pas-
sion ot'Lacus'^-, which introduced tliis custom among
the Thebans ; but their legislators, wishing to soften
and smooth from their infancy their natural fierce-

''° This custom seems to have prevailed both in Phocis and
BcKotia, where these uyavren of profane antiquity were observed with

sreat solemnity.*

■'' In the S) mpos. quoted abovc^^
3'- The story is detailed in our author's Comparisons of the
Grecian and llomun Uislorn-'S.*

set FELOPIDAS.

iiess and asperity, brought the flute into general
vogue botli in their studies and their sports, and
gave it ])opu]arity and pre-eminence ; and at the
same time instilled into them principles of generous
attaclnnent in their public exercises, in order thus
to temper their youthful impetuosity. Agreeably
to this, thcv made Harmony, who was said to be the
daughter of Mars and Venus, tlie tutelar goddess of
their city ; intimating that, wherever innate bravery
and valour are united with the arts and graces of
persuasion, there every thing being combined in per-
fect liurmony, the best-modulated and most regular
c'overnment must necessarily be found.

But to return to the Sacred Band, (jorgidas, by
disposing it's members here and there in the first
ranks, and covering the front of his infantry with
them, gave them but little opportunity to distinguish
themselves, or effectually to serve the common cause,
thus divided as they were, and mixed with other
troops more in number and of inferior resolution.
But when their valour appeared with so much lustre
at Teffyrie, where thev fouo-ht tojjrether and close to
the person of their general ; Pelopidas would never
part them afterward, but kept them in a body, and
constantly charged at their head in the most danger-
ous attacks. For as horses go faster when harnessed
together in a chariot, than they do when driven
single, not because their united force more easily
breaks the air, but because their spirits are raised
higher by emulation ; so he thought the courage of
brave men would be most eliecti\e, when they were
acting together, and contending with each other
"which should display the greatest excellence.

But when the Lacedaemonians had made peace
with the rest of the Greeks, and continued the war
against the Thebans only, and when king Cleom-
brotus had entered their country with ten thousand
foot and a thousand horse, they were not only threat-
ened with the common dangers of war as before, but
even with total extirpation j which spread the utmost

PELOPIDAS. 263

terror over all Ba?otia. As Pelopidas upon this oc-
casion was departing for the army, liis wife following
him to the door, and beseeching him with tears to
take care of himself, he said ; " My dcai*, piivatc
" persons are to be advised to take care of them-
" selves, but persons in a public character to take
" care of others."

When he came to the army, and found the general
officers differing in opinion, he was the first to agree
to that of Epaminondas, who j)ropo«ed that they
should give the enemy battle, lie was not indeed
then one of those that conunandcd in cliief, but he
was captain of the Sacred Band; and they had the
confidence in him due to a man, who had given his
country such pledges of his regard for liberty.

The resolution being thus taken to hazard a battle,
and the two armies in sight at Leuctra, Pelopidas
had a dream wliich caused him extreme concern. In
that field lie the bodies of the daughters of Sceda-
sus, who from the place of tlieir interment are called
' LeuctridiK.' For a rape having been committed
upon them by some Spartans, whom they had hos-
pitably received into their house, they had killed
themselves, and were buried there. Upon this, their
father went to Lacedaemon, and demanded tliat jus-
tice should be done upon the persons, who had been
guilty of so detestable and atrocious a crime ; and
as he could not obtain it, lie vented bitter impreca-
tions against the Spartans, and then slew himself
upon his daughters' tomb. From that time, many
prophecies and oracles forewarned the Spartans to
' beware of the vencTcance of Leuctra;* tlie true in-
tent of which but few understood: for they were in
doubt as to the place that v,as meant, tliere being a
little maritime town called Leuctrum in Laconia,
and another of the same near Megalopolis in Arcadia.
Besides, that injury had been done to tlie daughters
of Scedasus long before the battle of Leuctra.

Pelopidas then, as he slept in his tent, thought he
saw these young women weeping at their tombsjand
9

266 PELOPIDAf^.

loading the Spartans with imprecations : while tlieir
father ordered him to sacrifice a red-liaircd young
virgin to the damsels, if he desired to be victorious
in the ensuing engagement. Tliis order ap]"5earing
to him cruel and unjust, he rose, and communicated
it to the sootlisayers and thx generals. Some were
of opinion, that it should not be neglected or dis-
obeyed, quoting in support of tlieir opinion the
ancient stories of Mencccens the son of Creon^^, and
Macaria the daugliter of Hercules, as well as the
more modern ini^tances of riierecydes the jiliiloso-
pher, who was put to death by the Lacedaemonians,
and whose skin was preserved by their kings pursuant
to the direction of some oracle ; of Leonidas, who by
order of the oracle likewise sacrificed himself", as it
\vere, for Greece ; and lastly of the human victims
offered by Themistocles to IJacchus Omestes, before
the sea-fight at Salamis : to all which sacrihces the
ensuing success gave a sanction. They observed
farther, that Agesilaus setting sail from the same
place with Agamemnon, and against the same ene-
mies, and seeing moreover at Aulis the same vision
of the goddess '^ demanding his daughter in sacrifice,
through an ill-timed tenderness for his child rcfiised
it ; the consequence of which was, that his expedition
proved unsuccessful.

3' Mcnccccus devoted himselfto deatli for the good of bis country,
OS did also Macaria for thy heneiit of the Ilerachda". For an account
of the i'omier see the Phocnissa?, and for the latter the 11 eracHdae
of Euripides. (L.)

Of the j)art of Pherecydes' history, mentioned below, no other
memorial remains. The sacrifice of Themistocles is* recorded in bis
Life, Vol. 1. p. 3;;2.*

^* Xenoplion (llellen.vii.) acquaints us that Pelopidas, when be
"Went upon an embassy to tlic king of Persia, represented to him
that the hatred, whicl; the Lacedaemonians bore the 'i'hebans, was
owin<r to their not bavinjr followed A<;csilaus when be went to make

O or)

war upon Persia, and to their having prevented him from sacrilicin<:^
his daughter at Aulis when Diana demanded her, a compliance with
which demand would have insured his success: such, at least, was
the doctrine of tbe heathen tiieology. This was judicious in the
Theban convoy, as it would most probably satisfy the great king,
that to this obstinacy of theirs he owed the safety of his empire.

PELOPIDAS. Sf57

Those, who were of the contrary opinion, argued
that so barbarous and unjust an oiiering could not
possibly be acceptable to any superior Being : that
no Typhous or giants, but the father of gods and
men, gov^erncd the world : that it was absurd to
suppose, that the gods delighted in human sacri-
fices'^'; and that, if any of them did, they ought to
be disregarded as impotent beings, since such strange
and corrupt desires could not be generated or con-
tinue to exist, except in weak and vicious minds.

While the principal officers were engaged upon
this subject, and Pelopidas was more perplexed than
all the rest, on a sudden a she-colt quitted the herd,
and ran through tlie camp ; and, when she came to
the place where they were assembled, stood still.
The officers themselves only admired her colour,
which was a shining red, the stateliness of her form,
the vigour of her motions, and the sprightliness of
her neighings ; but Theocritus the soothsayer, un-
derstanding the thing better, cried out to Pelopidas,
" Herecomes the \dctim, fortunate man that thouartl
" wait for no other virgin, but sacrifice that, which
*' heaven has sent thee.'* They then took the coltj
and led her to the tomb of the virgins ; where, after
the' usual prayers and the ceremony of crowning her,
they offered her up with joy, not forgetting to pub-
lish to the whole army the vision of Pelopidas and
the sacrifice required.

The day of battle being come, Epaminondas drew
up the infantry of his left wing in an oblique form,
that the right wing of the Spartans being obliged to
divide from the other Greeks, he might fall with all
liis force upon Cleombrotus wlio connnandcd them,
and break them with the greater ease. Bu.t the
enemy perceiving his intention, began to cliange
their order of battle, and to extend their riglit wing
and wheel about, with a design to surround Epa-

35 This idea was first discountenanced by the followers of Pytha-
goras. iSee Hierocl. on the Golden Verses of that philosopher.*
12

S68 PELOPIDAS.

mlnondas. In the mean time, Pelopidas came briskly
up with his Band of three hundred ; and before
('leombrotus could extend his wing as he desired,
or reduce it to it's former disposition, fell upon tlie
Spartans, disordered as they were with the imperfect
movement. And tliough the Spartans, wlio were ex-
cellent masters in the art of war, laboured no point so
much as to keep their men from confusion, and from
dispersing when their ranks happened to be broken ;
so that both privates and officers should be able to
knit again with any commanders or followers who
offered themselves, and to make a combined and
strenuous effort, wherever any occasion of danger
required : yet Epaminondas then attacking their
right wing only, without stopping to contend with
the other troops, and Pelopidas rushing upon them
with incredible speed and braver}^, broke their reso-
lution and bafiied their art. The consequence was
such a rout and slaughter, as had been never known
before^". Hence Pelopidas, who had no share in the
chief command, but was only captain of a small band,
gained as much honour by this day's signal success
as Epaminondas, who was governor of Boeotia and
commander of the whole army.

But soon afterward they were appointed joint-
governors of Boeotia, and entered Peloponnesus

^^ The Theban arm}' consisted at most but of six tliousand men,
whei-pas that of the enemy was at least thrice that number, reckoning
the allies. But Epaminondas trusted most in his cavalry, in which
he had much the advantage, both as to quality and good manage-
ment; the v.-ealthy Lacedaemonians alone keeping horses at that
time, which made their cavalry consist chiefly of ill-fed undisciplined
eteeds and unskilful ri'Jers : the rest he endeavoured to supply by
the disposition of his men, who were drawn up fifty deep, vhile
the Spartans Vvfre but twelve. When the Thebans had gained the
victory, and killed Cleoaibrotus, the Spartans renewed the fight to
recover the king's body ; and in this object the Theban general
>visely cliose to gratify them, rather than hazard the success of a
second onset. The allies of the Spartans behaved ill in this battle,
which was fought, 1?. C. 371., because they had expected to con-
quer without fighting ; as for the Thebans, they had then no allies.
(See Diod. Sic xv. 55., who illustrates tliis passage, and Xenoph.
Ilellcn. vi.)

l^ELOPIDAS. 869

together, where tliey caused several cities to revolt
from the Lacedaenionians, and brought over to the
Theban interest Ehs, Argos, the whole of Arcadia,
Jind great part of Lacouia itself. It was now the
winter-solstice, and tlic latter end of the last month
an the year, so that tliey could retain their office
only a few days longer : tor new governors were to
succeed upon the first day of the next month, and
the old ones were to deliver up their charge under
pain of death.

The rest of their collegues, afraid of the law and
disliking a winter-campaign, were for marcliing home
without loss of time : but Pelopidits, joining with
Epaminondas to oppose it, encouraged his fellow-
citizens and led them against Sparta, lloiving passed
the Eurotas, they took many of the Laceda^moniaii
towns, and ravao-ed the whole country to the very
sea with an army of seventy thousand Greeks, of
which the Thebans did not com})ose the twelfth part.
But the character of those two illustrious men, with-
out any public order or decree, made all the allies
follow wherever they led, w'ith silent approbation*
Eor the first and supreme law, that of nature, seems
to direct those who have need of protection to take
him for their chief, who is most able to protect them.
And as passengers, though in fine weather or in port
they may behave insolently and brave the pilots,
whenever a storm arises and danger appears, fix their
eyes upon them, and rely wholly on their skill : so
the Argives, the Eleans, and the Arcadians in their
councils were against the Thebans, and contended
Avith them for superiority of command ; but when
the time of action came, and danger pressed hard,
they followed the Theban generals of their own
accord, and submitted to their orders.

In this expedition they united the whole of Arca-
dia into one body, drove out the Spartans who had
settled in Messenia, and called home it's ancient
inhabitants ; they, likewise, repeopled Ithome. And
in their return through Cenchreit they defeated the

YOL. II. 2 B

\

570 PELOPIDAS.

Athenians^'", wlio liad attacked them in the straits,
with a design to obstruct tlieir passage.

After sucii achievements, all the other Greeks
were charmed with their valour, and admired their
good fortinie : but the envy of their fellow-citizens,
which grew up togetlier with their glory, prepared
f()r them a very luikind and unsuitable reception.
For at their retiun they were botli capitally tried,
for not having delivered up their charge according
to law in the first month which they call Boucation,
but retained it four months longer ; during which
time they performed those great actions in Messenia,
Arcadia, and Laconia.

Pelopidas was tried first, and v/as therefore in
most danger : they were both, however, acquitted.
Epaminondas bore the accusations and attempts of
malignity ^'^ with the utmost patience, considering it
as no small instance of fortitude and magnanimity,
not to resent the injuries done by his fellow-citizens ;
but Pelopidas, who was naturally of a warmer tem-
per, and stimulated by his friends to revenge himself,
laid hold on the following opportunity : Meneclidas,
the orator, was one of those-, who had met upon the
noble enterprise in Charon's house. This man find-
ing himself not held in the same honour with the rest
of the deliverers of their country, and being a good
speaker, thougii of bad principles and a malevolent
disposition, indulged his natural turn by accusing
and calumniating his superiors ; and this he con-
tinued to do with respect to Epaminondas and
Pelopidas, even after judgement had been passed

i'' This happened to the Athenians through the error of their
general Iphicrates, who (tliough otherwise an able man) forgot tlie
pass of Cenchrea?, while he placed his troops in less commodious
posts.

3S M. Ricaul judicionslj remarks that the whole of tin's prose-
cution ought not to be set do^vn to ' malignity,' as the Thebans had
the highest respect for their laws, which liad certainly in the present
instance been wilfully, thougli beneficially violated ; and for Epa-
minonda.:*' generous conduct upon the occasion refers to Plutarch's
Apophthegms, where the whole story is related more at large.*

PELOPIDAS. 371

in their favour. He even got Epaminondas de-
prived of the government of Boeotia, and managed
a party against him for a long time with success i
but his insinuations against Pclopidas were not lis-
tened to by the people, and he therefore endea-
voured to embroil him with Charon. It is the
common consolation of envy, when a man cannot
maintain the liigher ground himself, to represcnt|
those by whom he is excelled as inferior to some
others. Hence it was, that Meneclidas v/as ever
extolling Charon's actions to the people, and lavish-
ing encomiums upon his expeditions and victories.
Above all, he magniiied his success in a battle fought
by the cavalry under his command at Flatasas, before
the battle of Leuctra, and endeavoured to perpetuate
the memory of it by some public monument.

The occasion he took was this : Androcydes of
Cyzicum had agreed with the Thebans for a picture
of some other battle ; which he worked at in the city
of Thebes. But upon the revolt, and the war that
ensued, he was obliged to quit that city and leave
the painting, now almost finished, with the Thebans.
This piece Meneclidas endeavoured to persuade the
people to hang up in one of their temples, with an
inscription signifying that it was one of Charon's
battles, in order to cast a shade upon the glory of
Pelopidas and Epaminondas. It was indeed a pro-"
posal of absurd vanity to prefer one single engage-
ment^^ in which tliere fell only Gerandas (a Spartan
of no note) with forty others, to so many and such
important victories. Pelopidas therefore opposed
the motion, insisting that it was contrary to the laws
and usages of the Thebans to ascribe the honour of

3£> Xenophon (Hellenic, v.) speaks slightly of Charon : he says,
* The exiles went to tiie liouse of one Cliiiron.' (L.)

Perhaps he was, in tiiis instance, too easily influenced by his in-
vidious encomiast; but his concern and conduct in the conspiracy,
by which Thebes was rescued from the Spartan yoke, prove him
to have been no ordinary man. See also the Treatise upon the
Genius of Socrates, where that enterprise is detailed at great

length.*

2 B 2

372 PELOPlDASv

a victoiy to any one man in particnlar, and that their
country ouo'ht to have the irlorv of it entire. As for
Charon, he was hbcralin Iiis praises of him tlnxnigh-
out his ^vhole harangue, but he proved that Mene-
chdas was an envious and malicious man ; and often
inquired of the Thebans, whetlier they had never
before done any thing that was great and excellent.
Upon this, a heavy line was laid on Meneclidas ; and,
as he was not able to pay it, he endeavoured after-
ward to disturb and overturn the government. Such
particulars as these, though small, sei've to give au
insio'ht into the characters of men.

At that time Alexander*" the tyrant of Phera^,
making open war against several cities of Thcssaly,
and secretly designing to bring the whole country
into subjection, the Thessalians sent embassadors to
Thebes, to entreat the favour of a general and some
troops. Upon which Pelopidas, seeing Epaminondas
engaged in settling tlie afiairs of Peloponnesus, offered
himself and his services as commander in Thessalv ;
for he was unwiilioo' that his military talents and
skill should lie useless, and was well-satisfied withal
that, wherever Epaminondas was, there was no need
of any other general. He therefore marched with
his forces into Tliessaly, where he soon recovered
Uarissa ; and as Alexander came and made submis-
sion, he endeavoured to soften and humanise him,
and instead of a tyrant to render him a just and good
prince. But nnding him incorrigible and brutal, and
receiving fresh complaints of his cruelty, his un-
bridled lust, and his insatiable avarice, lie thought
it necessary to treat him with some severity ; upon
which, he made his escape with the guards.

Having now secured the Thessalians against the

*° He IkicI lately poisoned his uncle Pulyphron, and set. liiinscif
up tyrant in Iiij; stoad. Pol\ pliron indeed had killed his own brother
rolydorus, the father of Alexander. All these with Jason (brother
ofPolyphron and Polydorus) were usurpers in Thessaly, whicli \\iV'3
previously a tree state. (Sec Diod. Sic. xv. Gl., and Xeuoph. Hel-
lenic, vi.)

PELOriDAS. S73

tyrant, and left them in a good understanding among
themselves, he advanced into Macedon''^ Ptolemy
had commenced hostilities against Alexander king
of tliat country, and they had both sent for Pelopidas
to be an arbitrator of their differences, and an
assistant to him who should appear to have been
injured. He accordingly went and decixled their
disputes, recalled such of the Macedonians as had
been banished, and taking Piiilip tiie king's brother
and thirty young men of the best families as hostages,
brought them to Thebes ; that he miglit show the
Greeks to what height the Theban commonwealth
liad risen by the reputation of it's arms, and the con-
lidence reposed in it's justice and integrity"*-.

This was that Philip ^\ who subsequently made
war upon Greece, to conquer and enslave it. Hg
was now a boy, and brought up at Thebes in the
house of Pammenes. Ilence he was believed to
have proposed to himself Epaminondas for his pat-
tern ; and he was perhaps attentive to that great
man's activity and generalship in war, which was in
truth the most inconsiderable part of his character :
but as for the temperance, justice, magnanimity,
and mildness, which constituted his true greatness,
Piiilip had no share of them, either natural or
acquired.

After this, the Tliessalians again complaining
that Alexander of Plierai disturbed their peace, and
formed designs upon their cities, Pelo])idas and
Ismenias were deputed to attend them. But, hav-
ing no expectation of a war, Pelopidas took no
troops with him, and was therefore obliged by the

'•' Amyntns II. left tliree legitimate children, Alexander, Por-
(licc^u:, and Philip, and one natural son whose name was Ptolemy.
Tliis hi>t made war against Alexander, slew him by treachery, and
reigned three years.

■*^ A-boiit this time, the cause of liberty was in a great measure
ikserted by the other Grecian states. Tliebes was now the only
conmioiiwcalth, which retained any remains of patrrotisi« and cow-
ijcrn for the injured and oppressed. (Diod. iSic. xv. GO.)

■^2 The falhu- of AJexauder the Great.*

374-

PELOPIDAS.

urgency of tlic occasion to make use of the Thes-
salian forces.

At tlie same time, there were fresh commotions in
Macedon : for Ptolemy had assassinated the king,
and assumed the so^'ereignty. Pelopidas, who was
called in by the friends of the deceased, was desirous
to undertake the cause ; but, having no troops of
his own, he hastily raised some mercenaries, and
immediately marched with them against Ptolemy.
Upon their ap])roach, Ptolemy bribed the merce-.
naries, and brought them over to his side : yet dread-
ing the very name and reputation of Pelopidas, lie
went to pay his respects to him as his superior,
endeavoured to pacify him with entreaties, and
solemnly promised to keep the kingdom for the
brothers of the dead king, and to regard the enemies
and friends of the Thebans as his own. For the
performance of these conditions he delivered to
him his son Philoxenus, and fifty of his companions,
as hostages. These Pelopidas sent to Thebes. But
"being incensed at the treachery of the mercenaries,
and having intelligence that they had lodged the
best part of their effects together with their Avives
and children in Pharsalus, he thought by taking
these he might sufficiently revenge the affront. Upon
which, he assembled some Thessalian troops, and
rnarched against the town. He was no sooner arrived,
than Alexander the tyrant appeared before it with
his army. Pelopidas, concluding that he was come
to make an apology for his conduct, went to him
with Ismenias : not that they were ignorant what
an abandoned and sanguinary man they had to deal
with ; but they imagined, that the dignity of Thebes
and their own characters would protect them from
violence. The tyrant however, when he saw them
alone and unarmed, immediately seized their per-
sons, and possessed himself of Pharsalus. This
struck all his subjects with horror and astonish-
ment: for they were persuaded that, after such a
flagrant act of injustice, he would spare nobody,

PELOPIDAS. 375

but behave upon all occasions and to all persons like
a man, who had desperately thrown off all regard to
his own safety.

When the Thebans heard of this outrage, they
were filled with indignation, and gave orders to
their army to march directly into Thessaly ; but,
Epaminondas then hajjpening to lie under their dis-
pleasure^^, they appointed other generals.

As for Pelopidas, the tyrant took him to Phera?,
where at first he did not deny any one access to
him, imagining that he was deeply humbled by his
misfortune. But Pelopidas, seeing the Pheraaans
overwhelmed with sorrow, bade them be comforted,
because now vengeance was ready to fall upon the
tyrant ; and sent to tell him, " That he acted very
" absurdly in daily torturing and putting to death
" so many of his innocent subjects, and in the mean
" time sparing him, who (he might know) was deter-
" mined to punish him, when once out of his hands.'*
The tyrant surprised at his magnanimity and uncon-
cern, answered, " Why is Pelopidas in such haste
" to die?" "Which being reported to Pelopidas,
he replied, " It is that thou, being more hated by
" the gods than ever, mayest the sooner come to a
" miserable end."

From that time, Alexander allowed none access
to him, except his keepers. Thebe however the
daughter of Jason, who was wife to tne tyrant, hav-
ing an account from those keepers of his noble and
intrepid behaviour, had a desire to see him, and to
have some discourse with him. When she came into
the prison, she woman-like could not presently dis-
tinguish the majestic turn of his person amidst such
an appearance of distress ; yet supposing from the

^* They were displeased at him, because in a late battle fought
with the LacedfEmonians near Corinth lie had not (as they thought)
pursued his advantage to the utmost, and put more of tlie enemy
to the sword. Upon which, they removed him from the govern-
ment of Boeotia, and sent him along with their forces as a private
person. (Diod. Sic. xv. 72.) Such acts of ingratitude toward
^reat ixien. ai-e common in popular governments ! -

376 PELOPIDAS.

disorder of his lialr and the meanness of his attire
and provisions, that he was treated unworthily, she
wept. Pelopidas, who did not know his visitor, was
much surprised ; but when he understood her quahty,
jlie addressed her by her father's name,' with whom
he had been intimately acquainted : and upon her
saying, " I pity your wife;" he replied, " And I
'* pity you, who wearing no fetters can endure
" Alexander." Tliis very much affected her ; for
she hated the cruelty and insolence of the tyrant,
who to his other debaucheries added that of ha\dng
abused her youngest brotlier. In consequence of
this, and by frequent interviews with Pelopidas, to
whom she comnumicated her sufferings, she con*
ceived a still stronger resentment and a more
thorough hatred against her husband.

The Theban generals having entered Tliessaly
without doing any thing, and either through their
incapacity or ill-fortune returned with disgrace''',
the city of Thebes fined each of them ten thousand
drachmas, and gave Epaminondas the command of
the army destined to act in that country. The
r^utation of the new general gave the Thessalians
fresh spirits, and occasioned such insiuTCctions
among them, that the tyrant's affairs seemed to be
in a perfectly desperate condition ; so great was the
terror which fell upon his ofHcers and friends, so
forward were his subjects to revolt, and so uni-
versal was the joy at the prospect of seeing him
punished.

Epaminondas, however, preferred the safety of
Pelopidas to iiis own fame ; and fearing, it' he carried
matters to an extremity at first, that the tyrant might
gi'ow desperate and destroy his prisoner, he pro-
tracted the war. By taking a circuit, as if to finish
Jiis preparations, and other delays, he kept Alexaur

•♦^ They were pursued by Alexander, and nnieh liarassed in tlieir
retreat. That they were not indeed wholly cut off, was owing tq
the conduct of Epaminondas (then serving as a private), whom the
soldiers constrained to take the couinumd. (Diod, Sic, xv. 71.)*

PELOriDA?;. 377

dar ill suspense, and managed him so as neither io
moderate his violence and pride ^'^, nor yet to in-
crease his herccness and maHgnity. For he knew
his savage disposition, and the Httle regard which
he paid to reason or justice : that he had buried
some persons aUve, and dressed others in the skins
of bears, and wild boars, and then by way of diver-
sion baited them with dogs, or despatched them
with darts ; that having summoned the people of
Melibcra and Scotusa (towns in friendship and alli-
ance with him *') to meet him in full assembly, he
had surrounded them with guards, and with all the
wantonness of cruelty put them to the sword; and
that he had consecrated the spear with which he
slew liis uncle Folyphron, and having crowned it
with garlands, offered sacrifice to it as to a god, and
gave it the name of Tychon '\ Yet upon seeing a
tragedian act the Troades of Euripides, he hastily
left the theatre, and at the same time sent a
message to the actor, " Not to be discouraged, but
*' to exert all his skill in his part ; for it was not
*' out of any dislike that he went out, but he was
" ashamed that his citizens should see him, who
" never pitied those he put to death, weep at the
" sufferings of Hecuba and Andromache."

This execrable tyrant was terrified at the very
liamc mid character of Epaminondas,

And dropped the craven wing.

-He despatched an embassy in all haste to offer satis-
faction, but that general did not vouchsafe to admit
such a man into alliance with the Thebans ; he only
granted him a truce of thirty days, and having reco-

^^ 'If tlie tyrant had restrained his excesses, his subjects might
have returneil to him ; and, if his iury had been more provoked, he
might have unu'chered Pelopidas.

•♦^ Cities in Magnesia, a province wliich Liy to the south of Mace-
don. Tiiis trait of cruelty is also reported by Diod, Sic, ib. 75.*

^3 ' The fortunate;'*

ST8 PELOPIDAS.

vered Pelopidas and Ismenias out of his hands,
marched back again with his army.

Soon after this, the Thebans having discovered
that the Lacedteinonians and Atlienians had sent
embassadors to the king of Persia, to draw him into
leagLie with them, sent on their part Pelopidas,
whose estabhshed reputation amply justified their
choice. For he had no sooner entered the kind's
dominions than lie was universally known and
honoureci : the fame of his battles with the Lacedae-
monians had spread itself throughout Asia; and,
after his victory at Leuctra, the report of new suc-
cesses continually following had extended his renown
to the most distant jirovinces. So that when he
arrived at the king's court, and a])peared before the
satraps and generals and governors that waited there,
he was the object of isniversal admiration : " This,"
said they, " is the man who deprived the Lacedjje-
" monians of tlie empire both of sea and land, and
" confined within the bounds of Tiiygetus and
*' Eurotas that Sparta, which a little before under
•*' the conduct of Agesilaus m.ade war against the
'" great king, and shook the realms of Susa and
" Ecbatana." On the same account Artaxerxes
rejoiced to see Pelopidas, admired him exceedingly,
and loaded him with honours, wishing it to be pub-
licly noticed, that he was reverenced and courted
by the greatest characters. But, when he heard
him converse in terms stronger than those of the
Athenians, and plainer than those of the Spartans,
he was still more delighted with him ; and as kings
seldom conceal their inclinations, he made no secret
of his attachment, but let the other embassadors see
the distinction in which he held him. It is true
that, of all the Greeks, he seemed to have done
Antalcidas the Spartan the highest honour^-', when

■*'> If Plutarch means the Spartan embassador, ho differs £ron\
Xenophon, who says (Hellenic, vii.) that his name was Euthycles.
Hy likewise informs us, that Timagoras was the person, whom the
king esteemed next to Pelopidas. (L.) But perhaps reference is

9

PELOPIDAS. 379

he took the garland wliich he wore at table from his
licad, dipped it in perfumes, and sent it him. But,
thougli lie did not treat Telopidas with that famili-
arity, he made him the richest and most magnificent
presents, and fully granted his demands ; which
were, " That all the Greeks should be free and
" independent, that Messene should be repeopled,
*' and that the Thebans should be regarded as the
" kino-'s hereditary friends."

With this answer he returned, but without accept-
ing any of the king's presents, except some tokens
of his favour and regard ; a circumstance which
reflected no smiall dishonour upon the other embas-
sadors. The Athenians condemned and executed
Timagoras, and justly too, if it was on account of
the many presents which he had received. For he
accepted not only gold and silver, but a magnificent
bed, and servants to make it, as if that was an art in
which the Greeks were unskilled'". He received
also fourscore cows, and herdsmen to take care of
them, as if he wanted their milk for his health ; and
at last suffered himself to be carried in a litter as
far as the sea-coast at the expense of the king, who
paid four talents for his conveyance : but his having
received presents does not seem to have been the
principal thing, which incensed the Athenians ^\

made to some former period, when Antalcidas was at the Persian
court. The custom of sending perfumes and essences, as marks of
regard, still prevails (Hke most others of their ancient custonis) in
the East ; presents of betel, often enclosed in silk-bags, are made
by the Indians, Chinese, &c. to each other, and to strangers. The
emperor of China gave master George Staunton, son of the secre-
tary to lord Macartney's embassy, his areca-nut purse from his
girdle with his own hand.*

i° The Persians, as Athena;us ii. 9. from Heraclides informs us,
were the first who had slaves exclusively employed in making their
beds. And M, Ricard, in confirmation of this statement, says he
himself saw at Paris a Polish nobleman, who had a Persian servant-
expressly engaged to make his coilee and light his pipe. Upon
this subject, much additional illustration might be ])rocured from
the opulent Europeans in tiie East and West- Indies.*

^' According to Xenophon (Hellenic, vii.) Timagoras' real
offence, as alleged by his brother-env^y Leon, was his having kept

SRO PELOPIDAS.

For when Epicratesthe armonr-ljcarcr acknowledged
in full assembly that he had received the kini2:'5
presents, awd talked of proposing a decree that,
instead of choosing nine Archons every year, nine
of the poorest citizens should be sent embassadors
to the king, that by his gifts they might be raised
to aiiiuence, the people only laughed at the motion.
What exasperated th.e Athenians most was, that the
Thebans had obtained of the king all they asked ;
they did not consider, how much the cliaracter of
iPelopidas outweighed the address of their orators
with one, who invariably paid particular attention to
•miHtary excellence.

This embassy procured Pelopidas great applause,
as wdl on account of the repeopling of Mcssene, as
the restoring of liberty to the rest of Greece.

Alexander the Pherfean was now returned to his
natural disposition ; he had destroyed several cities
of Thessaly and placed garrisons in the towns of
the Phthiotfe, the Achfeans, and the Magnesians.
As soon as these oppressed people had learned that
Pelopidas was returned, they sent their deputies to
Thebes to implore the favour of some forces, Avith
iiim at their head. The Thebans willingly granted
(their reque&t, and an army was soon raised ; but as
the general was on the point of marching, the sun
began to be eclipsed, and the city was covered with
darkness in the day-time.

Pelopidas, observing the people in deep conster-
nation at this phenomenon, did not think proper to
force the army to move while under such terror and
dismay, nor to ri.sk the lives of seven thousand of his
fel{ov»-citizens. Instead of that, he went himself
into Thessalv ; and taking- with him only three hun-
dred horse consisting of Theban voliuiteers, and
strangers, set out, contrary to the M-arnings of the
soothsayers and the wishes of the people, lor they

up a corroKponilenco with Pelopidas, ami confirmed every thi'iig
advanced by him in favour at' the Tkebitt)s.*

PELOPIDAS. 381

conslflerecl the eclipse as a sign from heaven, the
object of which must be some illustrious personage.
I>ut, beside that Pelopidas was the more exasperated
against iVlexander on account of the ill treatment
which he had received, he hoped from his conversa-
tions with Thebe, that he should find the tyrant's
family embroiled and in great disorder. His princi-
pal incitement, however, was the honour of the thing.
He had a generous ambition to show the Greeks, at
a time when the Lacedaemonians were sending gene-
rals and other officers to Dionysius the tyran.t of
♦Sicily, and the Athenians were pensioners to Alex-
ander as their benefactor, to whom they had erected
a statue in bras,s, that the Thebans were the only-
people w^ho took the field in behalf of the oppressed,
and endeavoured to exterminate all arbitrary and
unjust government.

When he was arrived at Pharsalus, he assembled
his forces, and marched directly against Alexander ;,
who knowing that Pelopidas liad but few Thebans
about him, and that he himself had double his num-
ber of Thessalian infantry, went to meet him as far
as the temple of Thetis. When he was informed,
that the tvrant was advancino- toward him with a
large army : " So much the better," said he, " for
" we shall beat so many tl^e more."

Near the place called Cynoscephal^, there are
two steep hills opposite to each other, in the middle of
the plain. Of these, botii sides endeavoured to get
possession with their infantry. In the mean time.
relopi(his with his caviilry, which was numerous and
excellent, charged the enemy's horse and put them
to the rout. But while he v/as pursuing them over
the plain, Alexander had gained the Jiiils ; having
advanced before the Tiiessalian foot, whom he
attacked as they Avere trying to force thc^se strong
heights, killing the foremost and wounding many
of those who followed, so that they toiled without
eficcting any thing. Pelopidas seeing this; recalled

12

isa PELOPIDAS.

his cavalry, and ordered them to fall upon such of
the enemy as still kept their ground on the plain ;
and, seizing his buckler, ran himself to join those
who were engaged on the hills : there he soon made
his way to the front, and by his presence inspired
his soldiers with such vigour and alacrity, that the
enemy thought they had quite different men to deal
with. They stood, indeed, two or three charges ;
but when they found tiiat the foot still pressed for-
ward, and saw the horse return from the pursuit,
they gave ground and retreated, slowly however and
step by step. Pelopidas then taking a view from an
eminence of the enemy's whole army, wliich had
not yet fled, but w^as full of confusion and disorder,
stopped a while to look round in quest of Alexander.
When he perceived him on the right, encouraging
and rallying the mercenaries, he was no longer
master of himself; but sacrificing both his safety
and his duty as a general to his passion, he sprang
forward a great way before his troops, loudly calling
for and challenging the tyrant, who did not dare to
meet or to wait for him, but fell back and hid
himself in the midst of his guards. The foremost
ranks of the, mercenaries, who came hand to hand,
were broken by Pelopidas, and a number of them
slain ; but others, fighting at a distance, })ierced his
armour with their javelins. The Thessalians, ex-
tremely anxious for him, ran down the hill to his
assistance ; but, when they came to the place, they
found him dead on the ground. Both horse and
foot, then falling upon the enemy's main body, en-
tirely routed them, pursued them to a considerable
distance, and covered the plain with carcases, having
slain above three thousand.

Such of the Thebans, as were present, were deeply
afflicted at the death of Pelopidas ; calling him
" their father, their saviour, and instructor in every
'' thing that was great and honourable." Nor is'
this to be w^ondered at ; since the Thcsiialians and

PELOPIDAa SB3

allies, after having exceeded by their public acts in
his favour tlie highest honours that are usually paid
to human virtue, testified their regard for him still
more sensibly by the sincerest sorrov/. For it is
said, that those who were in the action neither put
off their armour, nor unbridled their horses, nor
bound up their wounds, after they heard that he
was dead ; but notwithstanding their heat and
fatigue repaired to the body, as if it still had life
and sense, piled round it the spoils of the enemy,
and cut off their horses' manes and their own hair'-'.
Many of them, when tliey retired to their tents,
neither kindled a fire, nor took any refreshment ;
but a melancholy silence reigned throughout the
camp, as if instead of having gained so signal and
glorious a victory, they had been worsted and en-
slaved by the tyrant.

When the intelligence was carried to the towns,
the magistrates, young men, children, and priests
marched out to meet the body with trophies, crowns,
and golden armour: and wdien the time of his inter-
ment w^as come, some of the oldest Thessalians went
and begged of the Thebans, that they might have
the honour of buryino; him. One of them ex-
pressed himself in these terms ; " What we request
" of you, our good allies, will be an honour and
" a consolation to us under this heavy misfortune.
" It is not the living Pelopidas, whom the Thessa-
" bans desire to attend ; it is not to Pelopidas sen-
" sible of their gratitude, that they would now pay
" the due honours : all we ask is permission to
" wash, to adorn, and to inter his dead body.
" And, if we obtain this favour, we shall believe
" you are persuaded, that we think our share in the

•

5i Ksifai h »T;r»?, K£<fEo-.9-<*« Js ksh uvthc; A customary tolcen of
mourning among the ancients. See a former note. See also
Kuster De vera mu Vcrhonnn Mediorivn i. 6. ii. 1., where he
accuratel)' distinguishes between the meanings of tlie active and
middle of the verb here employed. An instance, more happily
iJlust)-ati\e of his theory, could no wlieve be found. .

384. PELOPIDAS.

" common calamity greater than yours. You Jiavc?
lost only a good general, but we are so un-
happy as to be deprived both of him, and our
liberty. For how shall we presume to ask yvui
" for another general, when we have not restored
" to you Pelopidas?"

The Thebans granted their request. And surely
there never was a more magnificent funeral, at least
in the opinion of those that do not place magnifi-
cence in ivory and gold and purple, as Philistus^^
did, wlio dwells in admiration upon Dionysius' fune-
ral ; though this, properly speaking, was nothing
but the pompous catastrophe of that dismal tragedy,
bis tyranny. Alexander the Great also, upon the
death of Hephaestion, not only had the manes of the
horses and mules shorn, but caused the battlements
of the walls to be taken down ; that the verv cities
might seem to mourn, by losing their ornaments,
and having the appearance of being shorn and soiled
with grief. These things being the effects of arbi-
trary orders executed througli necessity, and at-
tended both with envy of those for whom they are
done, and hatred of those who command them, are
not proofs of esteem and respect, but of barbaric
pomp and luxury and vanity, in those who lavish
their wealth to such frivolous and despicable pur-
poses '^^ But that a man who was only one of the
subjects of a republic, dying in a strange country,
neither his wife nor children nor kinsmen ])resent,
without the request or command of any one, should
be attended home, conducted to the grave, and
crowned by so many cities and tribes, might justly
pass for an instance of the most perfect happiness.
For the observation of /Esop is not true, that " Death

^^ This writer {successively served nnuer both tlic Dinnvsii, and
being defeated by Dion, killed hiaiself. Sec the Life of Timoleon,
p. 250. not. (29.') ^■

^■* How much more sublimely Bossuet, in his Funeral Oration
Upon the prince de Conde : Ces colo)incf:, (jin scrnblod jjorier jus-
'qu^aa del Ic magnifitiue tanoi^nage de Notre mant .'*

PELOPIDAS. 585

is most unfortunate in the time of prosperity :" ©a
the contrary, it is tlien most liappy, since it secures
to pfood men the glory of their virtuous actions,; and
places them above the power of fortune^'; 'The
compliment therefore of the Spartan was much more
rational, when embracing Diagoras, after he and his
sons and grandsons had all conquered and been
crowned at the Olympic games, he said; " Die now,
" Diagoras ^'', for thou can'st not be a god." And
yet I think, if a man should put all the victories ifi
the Olympian and Pythian games together, he would
not pretend to compare them with any one of the
enterprises of Pelopidas, which were numerous and
all successful ; so that after he had spent the chief
part of his life in honour and renown, and had been,
appointed the thirteenth time governor of Bcjeotia,
he died in a heroic exploit, the consequence of which
was the destruction of the tvraiit, and the emanci-
pation of Thessaly. ^

His death, as it gave the allies great concern, so
it brought them still greater advantacjes. For the
rhebans were no sooner informed of it, than prompt-
ed by a desire of revenge, they despatched upon,
that business seven thousand foot and seven hundred
horse, under the command of Malcites and Diogiton.
These, finding Alexander weakened with his late
defeat, and reduced to considerable difficulties, com-
pelled him to restore the cities which he had tiikcn
from the Thessalians; to withdraw his garrisons from
the territories of the Magnesians, the Phthiotee, and

5^ Conformably with this principle Chscrea exclaims, in a trans-
port of joy.

Nunc temvux p>-ofectu eat, cum perpeti me possum infer/ici,
Ne Iwc gaudium contaminet vita ccgritudine aliqua. '

(Ter. Eur. iii. 5.)*

^^ This Diagoras was a desceudent of Hercules through the line
of Tlepolemus, who governed Riiodcs, and fell before Troy ; and
is the subject of Pindar's seventh Olympic ode, wliich the Rhodians
got engraved in letters of gold upon tl;e temple of Miajrva at

Lindus.*

vox., II. % C

SS« PELOPIDAS.

the Achaeans ; and to engacje by oath to submit to
the Thebans, and to keep his forces in readiness to
Execute their orders.

With these terms the Thebans were satisfied. And
here I shall introduce an account of the punishment,
wliich the gods inflicted upon him soon afterward for
his treatment of Pelopidas. He (as we have already
mentioned) first taught Thebe, the tyrant's wife, not
to dread the exterior pomp and splendour of his pa-
lace, though she lived in the midst of assassins and
renegades. She therefore, fearing his falsehood and
bating his cruelty, agreed with her three brothers
Tisiphonus, Pytholaus, and Lycophron, to take him
off; and they carried their design into execution in
the following manner : the whole palace was full of
guards throughout the night, except the tyrant's
bed-chamber, an upper room guarded by a dog
chained at the door, which would fly at every body
except his master and mistress and one slave that fed
him. When the time fixed for the attempt was come,
Thebe concealed her brothers, before it was dark^
in a room close by. She went in alone as usual to
Alexander, who was already asleep, but presently
came out again and ordered the slave to take away
the dog, because her husband chose to sleep without
being disturbed ; and, that the stairs might not creak
as the young men came up, she covered them with
wool. She then fetched up her brothers, and leav-
ing them at the door with poignards in their hands,
went into the chamber; and taking away the tyrant's
sword, which hung at the head of his bed, showed
it them, as a proof that he was in their power and
fast asleep. The young men now being struck with
terror, and not daring to advance, she reproached
them with cowardice, and swore in a rage that she
would awake Alexander, and tell him the whole.
Shame and fear having brought them to themselves,
she led them in and placed them about the bed, her-
self holding the light. One of them caught him by
the feet, and another by the hair of his head, while

PELOPIDAS. 387

the third stabbed him with his polgnard. Such a
death was, perhaps, too speedy for so abominable a
monster ; but if it be considered, that he was the
iirst tyrant assassinated by his own wife, and that
his dead body was exposed to all kinds of indigni-
ties, and spurned and trampled under foot by his
subjects, his punishment will appear to have been
proportioned to his crimes.

P

2 c 3

THE

LIFE

OF

MARCELLUS.

SUMMARY.

Manners of Marcellus. His courage, and first appointments. The
Gauls declare tvar against the Romaiis. The first generals sent
against them are recalled. Respect entertained bij the Romans for
their religious rites. Marcellus is elected consul, and marches
against the Gauls .• engages, and kills their king. His triumph.
Co7isecrates the spolia opima to Jupiter. Annibal ijivades Italy.
After the fatal day at Cayma; Marcellus is one of the principal
supports of Rome. He marcha to the relief of Naples and Nola :
attaches Bandiiis to the Roman parti/ : gains some advantages
over Annibal : is again elected consul, and obtains fresh successes.
His third consulship. Severe proceedings of the senate against the
soldiers, lahofied at Cannce. Marcellus takes Leontius in Sicili/,
and besieges Syracuse. Genius of Archimedes. Problem, u-hich
he solves for Hiero. Terrible havock made by his engines. Mar-
cellus fruitlessly endeavours to guard his forces from their effects.
Archimedes' passion for geometry, Marcellus gains several ad-
vantages in Sicily ; gets possession of Syracuse, and reluctantly
<nves it up to pillage. Archimedes slain : Marcellus' concern upon
the occasion. His humanity. He pardons the city of Enguium :
carries to Rome the pictures and statues of Syracuse, and receives
the honour of an Ovation. Origin of that term. Charge brougJit
against him by the Syracusans. His defence, and generous be-
haviour upon his acquittal. He marches against Amiibal ; and
engages him ivith success. Fresh advantages over him. He r«?-
crivcs a check however near Canusitcm. He defeats Annibal i is.

MARCELLUS. 3S9

again impeached, and acquitted. Is chosen a Jifth time consul.
Unfavourable presages against him. He marches against Annibaly
falls into an ambuscade, and is killed. Honours paid to him by
the Carthaginian general. Public ornaments dedicated by Mar\
celhis. His posterity.

Marcus CLALTDIUS, who was five times consul,
was the son or" Marcus, and (according to Posido-
nius) the first of his family who bore tlie surname of
Marcellus, that is, ' Martial '.' He had indeed
great military experience, a muscular frame, a power-
ful arm, and a natural inclination to war. But,
though impetuous and lofty in the combat, upon
other occasions he was modest and humane. He
was so far a lover of the Grecian learning and elo-
quence, as to honour and admire those who excelled
in them, though his employments prevented his stu-
dying or attaining them himself to the degree he de-
sired. For if Heaven ever designed that any man

in war's rude lists should toil,

From youth to age,

as Homer expresses if^, it was certainly the princi-
pal Romans of those times. In their youth they
had to contend with the Carthaginians for the island
of Sicily, in their middle age with the Gauls for
Italy itself, and in their old age again with the Car-
thaginians and Annibal'\ Thus they had not, even

* The Romans were fond of havinj^ names derived from their
tutelar deity. Hence the appellations of Marcus, Marcius, Ma-
mers, ^lainercus, &c.*

^ II. xiv. 8G.

^ The military age of the Romans, hy Sorvius Tullius' regula-
tion, extended from seventeen to forty-six, after which they were
exempted from all farther service, except in the case of a Galhc
war (as stated below). So that, literally to justify Plutarcli's ol)-
servation, if that indeed were necessary, \vc must suppose him to

.^90 MARCELLUS.

in advanced life, the common relaxation and repose,
but were called forth bv their birth and merit to ac-
^ept n)ilitary commands.

As for Marcellus, there was no kind of fighting,
in which he was not trained and expert; but in sin-
gle combat he excelled himself. He therefore never
refused a challenge, or failed of killing the chal-
lenger. In Sicily, seeing his brother Otacilius in
great danger, he covered him with his shield, slew
those who attacked him, and saved his life. For
these things, he received from the generals crowns
and other military honours, while yet but a youth ;
and, his reputation increasing every day, the people
appointed him to the office of Curule ^dile ^, and
the priests to that of Augur. This is a kind of
priesthood, to which the law assigns the inspection
and observing of the divination taken from the flight

of birds.

* * *■* # * # *

After the first Carthaginian war % which had lasted
twenty-two years, Rome was soon engaged in a
liew war with the Gauls. The Insubrians^ a Celtic

refer to the conclusion of the first and the commencement of the
second Punic war. The Lacedaemonians served till near sixty ; the
Athenians, who entered at eighteen (and were retained the two
first years to defend the city, and garrison the forts of Attica), till
only forty years of age.*

* See "the Life of Camillus, L 388. nott. (53) and (90).

^ Plutarch is a little mistaken here in his chronology. The first
Punic war lasted twenty-three years, for it began A. U. C. 490, and
included A. U. C 512. During the whole of that period the Gauls
continued quiet, and did not begin to stir till four years afterward.
They then advanced to Ariininura; but the Boii, mutinying against
their leaders, slew the kings Ates and Galates : after which the
Gauls fell upon each other, and numbers were killed ; the sur-
vivors returned home. Five years after this, they began to prepare
for a new war, on account tf the division, which I'laminius had
made of the lands of the Picentines taken from the Senones of Cis-
alpine Gaul. These preparations were carrying on a long time ;
and it was eight years after that division, before the war began in
earnest under their chief Congolitanus and Anerccstes, when L.
^niilius Piipus and C Atilius Ilegulus were consuls, A. U. C. 52^,
(See Pol>b. ii. 9., and Suppl, Liv, xx, 35.)

6 Hud'. The Milanese.*

MARCELLUS. SO}

nation, wlio inhabit that part of Italy which h'es at
the foot of the Alps, though very powerful in them-
selves, called in the assistance of the Gesata? ' a
people of Gaul, who tight for pay upon such occa-
sions. It was a surprising and most fortunate thing
tor the Roman people, that the Gallic war did not
break out at the same time with the Punic ; and
that the Gauls, observing an exact neutrality all
that time, as if they had waited to take up the con-
queror, forbore to attack the Romans till they were
victorious, and at leisure to receive them. This
war however was still not a little alarming to the
Romans, as well on account of the vicinity of the
Gauls, as of their old military renown. They were
indeed the enemy, whom they most dreaded, for
they had made themselves masters of Rome ; and
from that time it had been provided by law, that the
priests should be exempted from bearing arms, ex*
cept in the event of a fresh invasion by the Gauls'.

The immense preparations, which they made, were
farther proofs of their fears (for it is said, that so
many thousands of Romans were never seen in arms,
either before or since), and so vvere the new and ex-
traordinary sacrifices, which they offered. Upon
other occasions, they had not adopted the rites of
barbarous and savage nations, but their religious
customs had been agreeable to the mild and merci-
ful ceremonies of the Greeks : on the appearance
of this war, however, they were forced to comply

■^ So called probably from their weapons, gcesa. See Prop. El. IV.
xi.42., Virg. JEn, viii. 662., Liv. vlii. 8., and Varro quoted by Nonius
xviii.*

8 At this period (1806) the emphatic clause in the Roman mili-
tary code, entitled De Vacaiioue, ' nisi bellum gallicum exo-
KiATUR,' demands an Englishman's particular attention. To the
same purport Cicero : Ut oportet hello Gallico, ut majorum jura
moj'esqne prcescribunt, nemo est civis Romanus, qui sihi ulld excusU'
tione utendum pntet. (Pro Fonteio, sect. 16.)

The numbers alluded to below are computed by Polybius at
seven hundred and seventy, and by the writer of the Livian Sup-
plement at eight hundred, thousand meu, This included however,
of course, their Italian allies.*

392 . MAIICELLUS.

with certain oracles found in the books of the Sibyls;
?.nd accordini'lv they buried two Greeks ^ a man
and a woman, and likewise two Gauls, alive in the
Beast-market. Hence originated certain mysterious
and horrid rites, which still continue to be per-
formed in the month of November.

In the beginning of the war, the Ptomans some-
times gained great advantages, and sometimes were
no less signally defeated ; but there was no decisive
action, till the consulship of Flaminius and Furius,
•who led a very powerful army against the Insubrians.
Then (we are told) the river which runs through the
Picentine territory was seen flowing with blood, and
three moons appeared over the city of Ariminum ^°.
The priests likewise, who were to observe the flight
of birds at the time of choosing consuls, affirmed
that the . election was defective and inauspicious.
The senate therefore immediately sent letters to the
camp to recall the consuls, insisting that they should
return without loss of time and resign their oflice,
and forbidding them to act at all against the enemy
in consequence of their late appointment.

Flaminius, having received these letters, deferred
opening them till he had engaged and routed the
barbarians ", and over-run their country. When he

' They, subsequently, offered the same sacrifice in the second
Punic war. See Liv. xxii. 57., who there refers to this preceding
instance of barbarity, as minlmc Rommium sacrum. See the Life
of Fabius Muxinius, p. 92. not. ^53.)

'" ' LmuB quoque trince, nt Cn. Dontitlo, Cain Fannio Cnss. np-
paruere, quos p/eriqiie appcllaverunt soles nodnrnos.'' ( Phn. H. N.
ii. 32.) This circumstance is Hkewise mentioned by Jul. Obsequens,
xcii. The former writer states, tliat never more than three suns
had been seen at once before his time. Gassendi says that, A. D.
1625, six were seen together in Poland ; and Schenerus informs us
that, on .March 20, 1629, five were observed at Rome, and seven
on Jan. 2-k of the following year : adding, that there is no reason,
why eleven might not be seen at the same instant !*

" See Liv. xxi. 613. Flaminius was not entitled to this success
by Jiis conduct. He gave battle with a river behind him, where
there was no room for his men to raliy or retreat, if they had been
broken. But possibly he might make such a disposition of his forces,
to show them that they must either conquer or die ; for he knew

12

MARCELLUS. 393

returned therefore loaded with spoils, the people did
not go out to meet him j and because he had not
directly obeyed the order which recalled him, but
had treated it with contempt, he was in danger of
losing his triumph. As soon as the triumph was
over, both he and his collegue were deposed and
reduced to the rank of private citizens. 80 much
regard had the Romans for religion, referring all
their affairs to the good pleasure of the gods, and in
their greatest prosperity not suffering any neglect
of the forms of divination and other sacred usages ;
fully persuaded, that it was a /matter of greater im-
portance to the preservation of their state to have
their generals obedient to the gods, than even to
have tliem victorious in the field.

To this purpose, the following story is remark-
able : Tiberius Sempronius, who was as much re-
spected for his valour and probity as any man in
Home, wJiile consul, named Scipio Nasica and Caius
Marcius his successors. After they had set off for
the provinces allotted to them, Sempronius happen-
ing to meet with a book containing the sacred re-
gulations for the conduct of war '-, discovered in it
one particular, which lie had never known before.
It was this : " When the consul goes to take the
" auspices in a house or tent without the city hired

that he was acting against the intentions of the senate, and that
ntjthing but success could bring liini oif. (Polyb. ii.) He was na-
turally, indeed, rash and daring. It was the skill and management
of the legionary tribunes, which made amends for the consul's im-
prudence. They distributed among the soldiers of the first line the
jjikes of the Tiiarii, to prevent the enemy from making use of their
swords: and, when the first ardour of tlic (-lauls was over, ordered
the Romans to shorten their swords, close with the enemy so as to
leave them no room to lift up their arms, and stab them ; which
they did without running any hazard themselves, the swords of the
Gauls having no points. (L.)

This same Flaminius was subsequently defeated by Annibal at
Trebia, A. U. C. 5ii6.*

'^ See tie. de Nat. Dcor. ii. 4., VaJ. Max. i. 1., who say that he
had formerly known this regulation, ujud that by this book it waa
recalled toliis memory.*

cc
<(

S94* MARCELLUS.

•' for that purpose, and is obliged by some necessary
*' business to return into the city before any sure
sign appears to him, lie must not make use of that
lodge again, but take another, and there begin
'* his observations anew." Sempronius was ignorant
of this, when he named those two consuls, for he had
twice made use of the same lodge ; but, when he
perceived his error, he acquainted the senate with
it: and they, not thinking it proper to pass lightly
over even so small a defect, wrote to the consuls
about it, who left their provinces and returned with
all speed to Rome, where they laid down their
offices. But this did not happen till long ^^ after the
present afi'air.

But about that very time two priests of the best
families in Rome, Cornelius Cethegus and Quintus
8ulpitius, were degraded from the priesthood : the
former, because he had not presented the entrails of
the victim according to rule ; and the latter, be-
cause as he was sacrificing, the tuft of his cap, which
was such a one as the Flamines wear, fell off. And
because the squeaking of a rat happened to be heard,
at the moment when Minucius the dictator was ap-
pointing Caius Flaminius his general of the horse,
the people obliged them to quit their posts, and ap-
pointed others in their stead. But while they ob-
served these small matters with such exactness, they
did not indulge in any kind of superstition '^, for
they neither changed nor exceeded the ancient cere-
monies.

Flaminius and his collegue being deposed from
the consulship, the magistrates called Interreges^*
nominated Marcellus to that high office ; who, when
he entered upon it, took Cncius Cornelius for his

'3 Sixty years.

'■» This word is liere used in the literal sense.

'^ These were officers who, when there were no legal magistrates
in being, were appointed to hold the Comitia for electing new (Jnes.
The title of Interregcs, which had been given them while the go-
vernment was regal, was continued under the commonwealth.

9

MARCELLUS. S95

colleguc. Though the Gauls were said to be dis-
posed to a reconcihation, and the senate was peace-
ably inclined, yet the people at the instigation of
]\Iarcellns were inclined to war. A peace, however,
■was concluded ; and seems to have been broken by
the Gesatae, who having passed the Alps with thirty
thousand men, prevailed upon the Inslibrians to join
them with much greater numbers. Elated with their
strength, they marched immediately to Acerras '^, a
city on the banks or' tiie Po. Theie Viridomarus,
king of the Gesatas, with a detachment of ten thou-
sand men, laid waste all the country about tlic river.
When Marcellus was informed of their march, he
left his collegue before Acerras, with the whole of
the heavy-armed infantry and a third part of the
horse ; and taking with him the rest of the cavalry,
and about six hundred of the light-armed foot, set
out and advanced by forced marches day and night,
till he came up with the ten thousand Gesatas near
Clastidium ^\ a little town of the Gauls, which had
but lately submitted to the Romans. He had no
time, however, to give his troops any rest or refresh--
mcnt ; for the barbarians immediately perceived his
approach, and despised his attempt, as he had only
a handful of infantry, and they made no account of
his cavalry. These, as well as all the other Gauls,
being skilled in fighting on horseback, thought they
had the advantage in this respect ; and, besides, they
far out-numbered MarceUus. They marched there-
fore directly against him, their king at their head,
■with great impetuosity and dreadful menaces, as if
sure of crushing him at once. Marcellus, because
his party was but small, to prevent it's being sur-
rounded extended the wings of his cavalry, thinning

'^ The Romans were besieging Acerra, a town between Milan
and Placentia near tlie j miction of tiie rivers Aclda and Po, and
the Gauls advanced to' relieve it; but finding theiiiseU\'s unable
to succeed, they passed the Po with part of their army, and laid
siege to Clastidium to make a diversion. (Polyb. ii., Suppl. Liv.
x-\. 52.)

*j Livy places this toyvnin Liguria Montana.

iOQ MARCELLUS.

and widening the line, till he presented a front
nearly equal to that of the enemy. He was now
advancing to the charge, when his horse, terrified
with the shouts of the Gauls, turned short and
iorcibly carried him back. Marcellus fearing that
this, interpreted by superstition, should cause some
disorder in his troops, quickly turned his horse again
toward the enemy, and then paid his adorations to
the sun ; as if that movement had been made not
by accident but design, for tlie Romans always turn
round vvhen they worship the gods ^**. Upon the
point of engaging, he vowed to Jupiter Feretrius '"
the choicest of the enemy's arms. In tlie mean
time, the king of the Gauls descried him, and judging
from his ensigns of authority that he was tlie consul,
set spurs to his horse, and advanced a considerable
way before the rest, brandishing his spear, and loudly
challenging him to the combat. He was distinguish-
ed from the rest of the Gauls by his stature, as well
as by Ins armour ; which, being set off with gold and
silver and the most lively colours, shone like light-
ning. As Marcellus was viewing the dispositions of
the enemy's forces, he cast his eyes upon this rich
suit of armour : and, concluding that in it his vow
to Jupiter would be accom])lished, he rushed upon
it's wearer, and pierced his breast-plate with his
spear ; which stroke, together with the weight and
force of the consul's horse, brought him to the
ground, and with two or three more blows he de-
spatched him. He then leaped from his horse, and
took off his armour ; and lifting up his spoils toward
lieavcn exclaimed, " O Jupiter Fcretrius, who ob-
*' servest the deeds and exploits of great warriors
" and generals in battle, I now call thee to witness,
*' that I am the third Roman chieftain and general
*' who have, with my own hands, overcome and slain
^' a chieftain and a king ! To thee 1 consecrate * the

'" See the Life of Numa, Vol. I. p. 192, not. (60.)
^^ See the Lift oi' llomyjus, ib. p. 75.

MARCELLUS. 597

*-* opiiiie spoils.' Do thou grant us equal success in
** the prosecution of this war."

When this prayer was ended, the Roman cavah-y
encountered both the enemy's horse and foot at the
same time, and gained a victory, not only signal in
itself but peculiar in it's kind; for we have no ac-
count of such a handful of cavalry beating such num-
bers, both of horse and foot, either before or since.
Marceilus having killed the chief part of the enemy,
and taken their arms and baggage, returned to his
collegue"°, who had met with no such good success
against the Gauls before the great and populous city
of Milan. This by the Gauls, and it's neighbour-
hood, is accounted the metropolis of their country ;
and hence they defended it with such spirit that
*Scipio, instead of besieging it, seemed himself to be
besieged. But upon the return of Marceilus the
GesataB, understanding that their king was slain, and
his army defeated, drew off tlieir forces. Thus
Milan is taken "^ ; and the Gauls surrendering the
rest of their cities, and referring every thing to the
equity of the Romans, obtain reasonable conditions
of peace.

The senate decreed a triumph to Marceilus alone ;
and, whether we consider the rich spoils displayed
in it, the prodigious size of the captives, or the mag-
jiificence with which the whole was conducted, it
was one of the most splendid ever seen. Rut the
most agreeable and uncommon spectacle was Mar-
ceilus himself, carrying the armour of Viridomarus,
which he had vowed to Jupiter. He had cut the
huge trunk of an immense mountain-oak in the form
of a trophy, which he adorned with the spoils of
that barbarian, suspending anil fastening every part

*^ During the absence of Marceilus, Aceri-a; had been taken by
his coUegue Scipio, who had marched thence to invest Mediolanuni»
hod. Milan, (See Polyb. ib., and Suppl. Liv. xx. 51-.)

*' Comum also, another city of considerable importance, sur-
rendered : and all Italy, from the Alps to the Ionian sea, became
entirely Ron^an.

398 MARCELLUS.

of his arms in the happiest order. When the pro-
cession began to move, he mounted his chariot
'Vvhich was drawn i)jfour horses, and passed through
the city with the tro})hy on his shoulders, which was
tJie noblest ornament of the whole triumph. The
army followed clad in elegant armour, and singing
odes composed for the occasion, and other songs of
triumph, in honour of Jupiter and their general.

Yv^hen he came to the temple of Jupiter Feretrius,
he set up and consecrated the trophy, being the
third and last general, who has hitherto been so
gloriously distinguished. The first was Romulus,
after he had slain Acron, king of the Ca^uinenses ;
Cornelius Cossus, who slew Volumnius tlie Tuscan,
was the second ; and the third was Marcellus, who
liilled with his own hand Viridomarus king of the
Gauls. Since his time, no other has occurred "^
The god, to whom these spoils were devoted, was
Jupiter, surnamed Feretrius (as some say) from the
Greek word Fherctron, which signifies ' a car ;' for
the tro}ihy was borne upon a carriage of this kind,
and the Greek language was then much mixed with
the Latin. Others suppose that Jupiter had that
appellation, because he ' strikes with lightning,' for
the Latin word Jerire signifies ' to strike.' Others
again affirm, that it is on account of the strokes,
which are given in battle; for even now, .when the
llomans charge or pursue an enemy, they encourage
each other by calling out, J'eri, Jcri, ' strike them
down, strike them down.' AVhat thev take from the
enemy in the field, they call by the common name
of spoils;' but what a Roman general takes from
the general of the enemy, they call ' opime spoils.*
It is said indeed that Numa Pompilius, in his Com-
mentaries, mentions ' opime spoils' of the first, se-
cond, and third order : that he directed the first to
be consecrate 1 to Jupiter, the second to Mars, and
the third to Quirinus ; and that the persons who

*^ See the Life of Romulus, as above.

MARCELLUS. 3.'?3

took the first should be rewarded with three hun-
dred ases, the second with two hundred, and the
third with one hundred. The most received opinion
is, however, that those of the first kind onJy ought
to be honoured with the name of ' opime,' v^liich a
general takes in a pitched battle, when he kills tiie
enemy's general with his own hand. Cut enough
of this matter.

The Romans were so excessively delighted with
this victory, and the termination of the war, that
they made an offering to Apollo at Delphi of a gold-
en cup, in testimony of their gratitude : they also,
liberally shared the spoils with the confederate cities,
and sent a very handsome present out of them to
Hiero king of Syracuse, their friend and ally.

Some time after this, Annibai having entered Italy,
Marcellus was despatched with a fleet to Sicily. The
war continued to rage, and that unfortunate blow
was received at Canme, by which many thousands
of Romans fell. The few, who escaped, fled to Ca-
nusium ; and it was expected that Annibai, who
had thus destroyed the strength of the Roman forces,
would march directly to Rome. Upon which, Mar-
cellus first detached fifteen hundred of his men to
guard the city ; and afterward by order of the senate
proceeded to Canusium, drew out the troops which
had retired thither, and marched at their head to
keep the country from being ravaged by the enemy.

The wars had by this time carried off t]\Q chief of
the Roman nobility, and most of their best officers.
Still indeed there remained Fabius Maximus, a man
highly respected for his probity and prudence ; but
his extraordinary attention to the avoiding of loss
passed for inactivity and want of spirit. The Ro-
mans therefore, considering him as a proper person
for the defensive, but not the offensive part of war,
had recourse to Marcellus ; and wisely tempering
his boldness and energy with the slow and cautious
conduct of Fabius, they sometimes a])])ointed them
consuls together, and sometimes sent out one of them

400 MARCELLUS.

in the quality of consul, and the other in that of pro-
consul. Posidonius informs us, that Fabius was
called the ' Shield,' and Marcellus ' the Sword*;'
but Annibal himself said, " He stood in fear of Fa-
*' bins as his schoolmaster, and of Marcellus as his
** adversary ; for he received hurt from the latter,
" and by the former was prevented doing hurt him-
" self."

Annibal's soldiers, elated with their victory, grew
careless, and straggling from the camp roamed about
the country ; where Marcellus fell upon them, and
cut off great numbers. After this, he marched to
the relief of Naples and Nola. The Neapolitans he
confirmed in the Roman interest, to v>'hich they were
themselves well-inclined : but when he entered Nola,
he found great divisions there, the senate of that
city being unable to restrain or win the commonalty,
who were attached to Annibal. There was a citizen
in this place, named Bandius "^ well born and cele-
brated for his valour ; for he had eminently distin-
guished himself in the battle of Cann«, whereafter
killing a number of Carthaginians, he was found at
]ast upon a heap of dead bodies covered with wounds.
Annibal, admiring his bravery, dismissed him not
only without ransom, but with handsome presents,
honouring him with his friendship and admission to
the rights of hospitality. Bandius, in gratitude for
these favours, heartily espoused Annibal's party, and
by his authority drew the people on to a revolt.
Marcellus thought it wrong to put to death one, who
had gloriously fought the battles of Rome. Besides,
the geneial had so engaging a manner grafted upon
his native humanity, that he could hardly tail of at-
tracting the regards of a man of generous spirit. One
day, Bandius happening to salute him, Marcellus
asked who he was : not that he was a stransrer to his
person, but that he might have an opportunity to
introduce what, he had to sav. Beino- told, that his

* See the Life of Fabius Maxiaius, p. 93.
'i Or JJantius.

MARCELLUS. 401

name was Lucius Bandias : " What !" exclaimed
JMarcellus, in seemiug delight and admiration-*;
" that Bandius, "who has been so much talked of in
" Rome tor his gallant behaviour at Cannae, who
" indeed was the only man that did not abandon
"■ the consul ..'^imilius, but received in his own body
" most of the shafts that were aimed at him !" Ban-
dius saying that he was the very person, and showing
some of his scars; " Why then," replied Marcellus,
" when you bore about you such marks of your
" regard for us, did not you come to us one of tlie
" first ? Do we appear to you slow to reward tlie
*' virtue of a friend, who is honoured even by his
" enemies :'* After this obliging discourse, he em-
braced him, and made him a present of a war-horse
and five hundred drachmas in silver.

From this time Bandius was very cordially attach-
ed to Marcellus, and constantly informed him of the
proceedings of the opposite party, who were very
numerous and had resolved, when the Romans march-
ed out against the enemy, to plunder their baggage.
Upon whicli, Marcellus drew up his forces in order
of battle within the city, placed the baggage near the
gates, and published an edict forbidding the inhabi-
tants to approach the walls. Annibal, seeing no
hostile appearance, concluded that every thing was
in great disorder in the city, and therefore advanced
to it with little precaution. At this moment Mar-
cellus commanded the gate next him to be opened,
and sallying out with the best of his cavalry, charged
the enemy in front. Soon afterward, the infantry
rushed out at another gate'^ with loud shouts. And
while Annibal was dividing his forces to oppose these
two parties, a third gate was opened, and the rest of
the Roman troops issuing out attacked the enemy
on another side, who were much disconcerted at
such an unexpected sally, and made but a faint

"•* See the Life of Fabius jNIaxLinus, p. 94., not. (56.)
^^ Of these salhcs, and their effect, Livy (xxiii. 16.) gives a some-
what dift'erent, more mode?t, and more probable account.*
VOL. II. 2 D

402 MARCELLUS.

resistance against those with whom they had first,
engaged, on account of their being assailed by ano-
ther body.

Then it was that Annibal's men, struck witli terror
and covered with wounds, first fled before the Ro-
mans, and were driven to their camp. Above five
thousand of them are paid to h.ave been slain, whereas
o£ the Romans there fell not more than five hundred.
Livy, indeed, does not make the defeat and loss on
the Carthaginian side to have been so considerable :
he only affirms, that Marcellus gained great honour by
this battle, and that the courage of the Romans was
•wonderfully restored after their misfortunes ; as they
now no longer believed that they had to do with an
enemy invulnerable and invincible, but who was
himself liable to suffer in his turn.

For this reason the people called Marcellus, though
absent, to fill the place of one of the consuls^ who
was dead ; and prevailed, against the sense of the
magistrates, to have the election put off till his re-
turn "^ Upon his arrival, he was unanimously chosen
consul : but it happening to thunder at that time,
the augurs observed that the omen was unfortunate j
and as they did not choose to declare it such, for fear
of the people *% Marcellus voluntarily laid dov/n the

^<5 This was Posthumius Albinus, who had been destroyed with
his whole army of five and twenty thousand men by the Boii, in a
vast forest called by the Gauls ' the forest of Litana.' It seems
they had cut all the trees near the road, by wliicli he was to pass,
in such a manner, that they might be tumbled upon his army with
the least motion. (L.) (Livy, xxiii. '24.) Tiie consul himself fell in
the action, and the Gauls converted his skull into a drinklng-vessel,
to be used at their public festivals. This event happened only a
few months after the battle of Cannrc ; and appears, as M. Ricard
observes, scarcely credible to tlie extent stated by the liistorian.*

'■'' The people suspected, that he had been purposely sent out of
the way by the senate. (Liv. xxiii. 31.) ^

^8 Marcellus was a plebeian, as was also his collegue Sempronius;
and the patricians, unwilling to see two plebeians consuls at the same
time, influenced the augurs to pronounce the election of Marcellus
disagreeable to the gods. But the people would not have ac-
quiesced in the declaration of the augurs, had not Marcellus showed
iiimsclf upon this occasion as zealous a republican as he was a grej^t

I

MARCELLUS. 4021

office. Notwithstanding this, he had the command
of the army continued to him as proconsul, and re-
turned immediately to Nola, whence he made excur-
sions to chastise those '"^^j wlio had declared for the
Carthaginians. Annibal hastened to their assistance,
and offered him battle, which he declined. But some
days afterward ^% when he saw that Annibal, no
longer expecting a battle, had sent out the chief part
of his army to plunder the country, he attacked him
vigorousl}^, having first provided the foot with long
spears (such as they use in sea-fights) which they
were taught to hurl from a distance at the Cartha-
ginians, who were unskilled in the management of
the javelin, and only fought hand to hand with short
swords ^\ For this reason, ail that attempted ta
make head against the Romans, were obliged to give
way and fly in great confusion, leaving five thousand
men slain upon the field ^'" ; beside the loss of four
elephants killed, and two taken. What was of still
greater importance, upon the third day after the
battle ^^, above three hundred horse, Spaniards and
Numidians, came over to Marcellus ; a misfortune,
which had never before happened to Annibal : for
though his army had been collected from several
barbarous nations, differing both in their manners
and their language, yet he had long preserved a per-
fect unanimity throughout the whole. This body of

commander, and refused that honour which had not tlie sanction of
all his fellow-citizens.

^9 The Hirpini, and the Saranites. (Id. ib. 42.)*

3° Four days previously to this, there had been a bloody action
before the walls of Nola, which would have been more decisive, but
fpr a remarkable storm that parted the combatants. (Id. ib. 44.)*

^' Such was the general character of the swords of the ancients,
L e. the Spartans (see the Life of Lycurgus, 1. 142.), Romans^
Gauls, &c. &c.*

2^ And upward, beside six hundred taken prisoners, and the loss
of nineteen military standards* On the Roman side, there were
not a thousand killed. (Liv. xxiii. 46.)

33 Livy makes them, one thousand two hundred and seventy-two.
It is therefore probable that we should read in this place, * one
tliousaod three hundred horse.'

2 D 2

404. MARCELLUS.

horse ever continued faithful to Marcellus, and to
those who succeeded him ia the command^^.

Marcellus, being appointed consul the third time,
passed over into Sicily"\ For Annibal's success had
encouraged the Carthaginians again to revive their
claim to tliat island : and they did it the rather, be-
cause the affairs of Syracuse were in some confusion
upon the death of Hieronymus^'^, its sovereign. On
this account, the Romans had already sent an army
thither, under the command of Appius Claudius ^\

The command devolving upon Marcelhis, he was
no sooner arrived in Sicily, than many Romans came
to throw themselves at his feet, and represent to him
their distress. Of those, who had tbught against
Annibal at Cannae, some escaped by flight, and others
were taken prisoners ; the latter in such numbers, that
it was thought the Romans must want men to defend
the walls of their capital. Yet that commonwealth
had so much firnniess and elevation of mind that,

^* Marcellus beat Annibal a tliird time before Nola; and had
Claudius Nero, who was sent out to take a circuit and attack the
Carthaginians in the rear, come up in time, that day would probably
have compensated the loss sustained at Cannae. (Liv. xxiv. 17.)

i>' A. U. C. 510.

5<5 Hieronynius was murthered by his own subjects at Leontium,
the conspirators having prevailed on Dinomanes, one of his guards,
to favour their attack. He was the son of Gelo, and the grandson:
ofHiero. Gelo died before his father, who lived to ninety; and
llieronymus, who was not fifteen at his grandfather's death, was
slain some months afterward. These three deaths hajipenGd lov/ard
the latter end of the year, which preceded JMax-cellus' third con-
sulate. (Liv. xxiv. 4 — 7.)

3' Appius Claudius, who was sent into Sicily as prictor, was
there before the death of llieronymus. That young prince, having
a turn for raillerj', only laughed at the llonian onfoassadors : ' I
will ask )'^ou,' said he, ' but one question ; who were conquerors
at Canna?, you or the Carthaginians ? I am told such surprising
things of that battle, that I should be glad to know all the par-
ticulars of it.' And again, ' Let the Romans restore all the
gold, corn, and other presents, which they drew from my grand-
father, and consent that the river Himera be the common bound-
ary between us, and I will renew the ancient treaties with them.*
Some writers are of opinion, tliat the Roman praetor was not entirely
uiicoucerued in a plot, which was so useful to his republic. (Id.
,ib. 6.)

MAPtCELLUS. 405

though Amilbal offered to release the prisoners for
a very inconsiderable ransom, they refused it by a
public act, and left them to be put to death, or sold
out of Italy '^". As tor those who had saved them-
selves by flight, they sent them into ►Sicily, with an
order not to set foot upon Italian ground during the
war with Annibal. These came to Marcellus in a
great body, and falling on their knees implored, with
loud lamentations and floods of tears, the favour of
being admitted again into the army ; promising to
make it appear by their future behaviour, that that
defeat had been owing to their misfortune, and not to
their cowardice. Marcellus moved with compassion
wrote to the senate, desiring leave to recruit his army
with these exiles, as he should find occasion. After
much deliberation, the senate signified by a decree,
" That the commonwealth had no need of the service
" of cowards ; that Marcellus however might em-
*' ploy them if he pleased, but on condition that he
" did not bestow upon any of them crowns, or other
" honorary rewards." This decree gave Marcellus
some concern, and after his return from the war in
Sicily he expostulated with the senate, and com-
plained ; " That, notwithstanding his many and signal
" services, they would not allow him to rescue from
*' infamy those unfortunate citizens."

His first care, after he arrived in Sicily, was to
make reprisals for the injury received from Hippo-
crates the Syracusan generaP^; who to gratify the
Carthaginians, and by their means to set himself up
tyrant, had attacked the Romans, and killed great
numbers of them, in the district of Leontium. Mar-
cellus therefore laid siege to that city, and took it
by storm, but did no harm to the inhabitants ; only
such deserters as he found there, he ordered to be
beaten with rods, and then put to death. Hippocrates

38 This inhuman policy, suited only to a military and barbarian
republic, has already been the subject of a note, and is beautifully
illustrated by Horace's Ode III. v. (See Liv. xxii. 59 — 61.) *

''> See Livy, xxiv. 29.*

406 MARCELLUS.

took care to give the Syraciisans tlie first notice of
the taking of Leontium, assuring them at the same
time, that Marcellus had put to the sword all who
were able to bear arms ; and, while thev were under
great consternation at this intelligence, he suddenly
appeared before the city, and made himself master
ofit^^

Upon this, Marcellus marched with his whole army,
and encamped before Syracuse. But, before he at-
tempted any thing against it, he sent embassadors
with a true account of what he had done at Leontium.
As this information had no effect upon the 8yracu-
sans, who were entirely in Hippocrates' power^^, he
made his attacks both by sea and land ; Appius
Claudius commanding the land-forces, and himself
the fleet, which consisted of sixty galleys of five
banks of oars, full of all sorts of arms and missile
weapons. Beside these, he had a prodigious machine
carried upon eight galleys fastened together, with
which he approached the walls, relying upon the
number of his batteries and other instruments of war,
as well as on his own great character. But Archimedes
despised all this, and c6nfided in the superiority of his
engines ; though he did not think the inventing of
them an object worthy of his serious studies, but
only reckoned them among the amusements of geo-
metry *. Neither indeed would he have gone so

''° After surmounting several obstacles. See Liv. xxiv. 30—
S2.*

'*' On the assassination of Hicronymus the commonwealth having
l^ecn restored, Hippocrates and Epicydcs, Annibal's agents and of
Syracusan extraction, had the address to get themselves admitted
into the number of praetors. In consequence of which, they found
means to embroil tlie Syracusans with Rome, notwithstanding tlie
opposition of such of tlie prictors as had their country's interest at
heart.

* Archimedes, as the Quarterly Reviewers v. 89. justly observe,
appears to have maintained a rank among ancient philosophers
similar to that of Newton among the moderns. He must he considered
indeed as the father of the sciences of statics and of hydrostatics;
lor to him we owe the true theory of the equilibrium of machines,
^s well as the fundamental laws of hydrostatical equilibrium. His-
discoveries in pure geometry alone would secure for him the ad-

MARCELLUS. 407

far, but at the pressing instances of king Hiero, who
entreated him to turn his art from abstracted notions
to material substances ; and to make his reasonings
more intelligible to the generality of mankind, by

miration of all ages. His predilection for travelling in unbeaten paths
led him to explore the new subject of the measure of curvilinear
magnitudes, in which his discoveries were so numerous, and his
methods so admirable, that antiquity assigned him the first place
among geometricians. Vir stupendce sagacitatis, says Wallis, qui
prima fund amenta jyosuU invetitionum Jere omnium, de quibus pro-
viovendis cetas nostra gloriaticr. How much is it to be deplored that,
in consequence of his being infected with the ridiculous notion of
the Platonists, which would not allow them to leave any thing in
writing relative to the detail of mechanical contrivances, posterity
should have lost the benefit not only of his particular inventions,
but also of the improvements to which they would naturally have
led. His treatises, which have reached our times, are two books on
the Sphere and Cylinder ; one on the Measure of the Circle, or the
Ratio of the Diameter to the Circumference ; one on Conoids and
Spheroids ; one on Spirals ; one on the Equilibrium of Planes, or on
their Centres of Gravity ; one on the Quadrature of the Parabola ;
two of Bodies floating on Liquids ; one, Psomonites or Arenarius,
on the Number of the Sands, and a collection of Lemmata, or Geo-
metrical Propositiens. He was the first who demonstrated the well-
known property of the straight lever when the arms are incom-
mensurable; and his proof has not been surpassed by any modern
demonstration, except that of Newton in the I'rincipia ; which, as
shown in the ' Retrospect of Philosophical Discoveries,' No. IS, is
applicable to the- case of parallel forces acting on a straight lever.
The only valid objection to the process of the Syracusan geometer
lias been removed by professor Vince, Phil. Transact. Ixxxiv. 33.
To Archimedes likewise, instead of the Arabians or the later Greeks,
Wallis has correctly referred the invention of characters to denote
the several powers of any quantity, commonly called * Algebraic' or
' Copic ;' And his Arenarius (in which he proves that not only
the sands of the sea-shore, of the whole earth, but even a greater
quantity of particles than could be contained in the >ieiriA,»c, or im-
mense sphere of the fixed stars, would be less than the sixty-fourth
term of a decuple geometrical progression increasing from unity, or
unity with sixty-three cyphers annexed, i. e. a thousand decillions)
obviously contains the germ of the invention of Z/Oo«?7///«w. Re-
vault, in his edition of 1615, folio, Paris, has given some account of
such of his works as are lost : his Crown of Hiero (mentioned below,
not. 45) ; the Cochieon, or Water-screw; the Helicon, a kind of
endless screw; the Trisposton, consisting of a combination of wheels
and axles ; the Machines employed in the defence of Syracuse ; the
Burning Speculum; the Machines moved by air and water ; and
theJMaterial Sphere; to which may be added his Principles, alluded
i@ only by Pappus perhaps in his Math. Coll., viii.*

40S MARCELLUS.

applying them tlirougli the medium of the senses to
the uses of common life.

The first who engaged in the study of mechanics,
a branch of knowledge subsequently so much ad-
mired and celebrated, were Eudoxus and Archytas"^',
who thus gave a variety and agreeableness to geo-
metry, and confirmed by sensible experiments and
the use of instruments some problems, incapable of
demonstration in the way of deduction and theorem.
That problem (for example) of two mean propor-
tional lines, which cannot be found out geometri-
cally, and are yet so necessary for the solution of
other questions, they solved mechanically, by the
assistance of certain instruments called Mesolabes
taken from conic sections. But when Plato '^ in-
veighed against them with great indignation, as hav-
ing corrupted and debased the excellence of geome-
try, by causing her to descend from incorporeal
and intellectual to sensible things, and obliging her
to make use of matter, which requires much manual
labour and is the object of servile trades ; then me-
chanics were separated from geometry, and being
despised by the philosopher, were long considered as
a branch of the military art.

Be that as it may, Archimedes one day asserted
to king Hiero (whose kinsman ^% and friend he was)

'^^ Eudoxus was a celebrated geometer and astronomer of Cnidus.
He first regulated the Grecian year. His Life was written by Dio-
genes Laertius. Arcliytas lived under Dionysius the Elder, above
a hundred and sixty years before the siege of Syracuse. See his
Life by the same biographer (viii. 82.)*

■♦5 Plato esteemed nothing serious in the sciences, but what was
intellectual ; and therefore would not allow a philosopher to apply
Jiimself to natural philosophy, otherwise than as an amusement.*

** And yet Cicero, Tusc. Quaest. v. 23., where bespeaks of his
search for the tomb of this great man (^ccty^oina nvoj c-vmo-io^, as Plu-
tarch terms him below), calls him ' hum His homunculits F But Dacier
informs us, tliat, Cicero only knew Archimedes from the account
given of him by Polybius (viii.) The illustrious Syracusan, con-
tent with his mathematical speculations, had always kept himself
aloof from the comparatively-sordid concerns of public life, and
had not like Plato deeply engaged in political speculations, or like
Archytas uniformly led the aruiies of hie country to victory. Tliis

I

MARCELLUS. 409

tins proposition, that with a given power he could
move any given weight whatever ; nay, from his
confidence in his demonstration he ventured, it is
said, to affirm that if there was another earth besides
this wliich we inhabit ^% by going into that, he
w^ould move this M'hitliersoever he pleased. Hiero,
full of wonder, desired him to evince the truth of
his proposition, by moving some great weight with
a small power. In compliance with Vv^hich, Archi-
medes caused one of the king's galleys to be drawu
on shore with many hands and much labour : and
having well manned her, and put on board her usual
loading, he placed himself at a distance ; and with-
out any pains, only moving with his hand the end of
a machine, whicli consisted of a variety of ropes and
pullies, he drew her to him in as smooth and gentle
a manner, as if she had been under sail. The king,
quite astonished when he saw the force of his art,
prevailed upon Archimedes to construct for him all
kinds of engines and machines, which could be used
either for attack or defence in a siege. Of these
however he never made use, the chief part of his
reign being blessed with peace and tranquillity ; but
they were extremely serviceable, upon the present
occasion, to the Syracusans, who with such a num-
ber of machines had the inventor himself to direct
them.

will perhaps sufficiently account for the preference given to the lat-
ter, in the above-quoted passage, by the Roman orator.*

•'^ Tzetzes gives us the very expression, which Archimedes made
use of upon the oacasion; n« fw, x-xi x.^l'-'^^''"'' f'-^^ y-'' j^fijo-w Tcaa-oiv.
(L.) If the name of this machine however were derived, as some
affirm, from the inventor Charistion, it affects Archimedes' sup-
posed claim to the honour of the disawery. It was by this prince,
likewise, that the Syracusan geometer was employed to detect the
adulteration of his crown, which he was enabled to effect, by ob-
serving the water rise as he entered the bath — a problem now fami-
liar to every hydrostatical scholar. See Dutens, Qricrine dei
Dccouvertcs attribuees aux Modernes, III. x. p. 'J55. 4-to. Ed. l790',
Vitruv. Architect, ix. 3., Vince's Hydrost.Svo. Prop. xxii. Art. 55. ^
&c. In the Enci/cl. Brit, indeed, he is stated to have composed a
".vork {Uifi Ti)? STi<^«i'«, now lost) upon this very subject.*

410 MARCELLUS.

Wlien the Romans attacked them both by sea and
land, they were struck dumb with terror, imagining
that they could not possibly resist such numerous
forcer>, and so furious an assault. But Archimedes
quickly began to play his engines, and shot against
the land-forces all sorts of missile weapons and
stones of an enormous size with so incredible a noise
and rapidity, that nothing could stand before them ;
overturning and crushing whatever came in their
way, and spreading terrible disorder throughout the
ranks. On the side toward the sea w-ere erected
vast macbiaesj thrusting forth on a sudden over the
■walls huge beams -Tith the necessary tackle, "which
striking with a prodigious force on the enemy's gal-
leys sunk them at once : while other ships, hoisted
up at the prows by iron claws or hooks "^^ like the
beaks of cranes, and set upright on the stern, were
plunged to the bottom of the sea ; and others again
by ropes and grapples were drawn toward the shore,
and after being whirled about, and dashed against
the rocks which projected below the w'alls, were
broken to pieces, and the crews perished. Very
often a ship lifted high above the sea, suspended
and twirling in the air, presented a most dreadful
spectacle. There it swung, till the men were thrown
out by the violence of the motion, and then it split
against the walls or sunk, on the engine's letting go
it's hold. As for the machine, which Marcellus
brought forward upon eight galleys, and w^hich was
called ' Sambuca' on account of it's likeness to the
musical instrument of that name, wlule it was at a
coiisiderable distance from the walls, Archimedes

*^ What most Iiarassed tfie TJomans was a sort of crow with two
claws, fastonod to a long chain, which was let do^rn by a kind of
lever. The weight of the iron caused it to fall with great violence,
and drove it into the planks of the galleys. Then the besieged, by
loading it with load at the other end, raised up the crow, and with it
the prow to which it was fastened, sinking the poop at the same
time into the water. After this the crow letting go it's hold all on
a sudden, the prow of the galley fell with such force into the sea,
that the whole vessel was fill«.l with water and went to the bottom.
12

MARCELLUS. 411

discharged a stone often talents' weight^'', and after
that a second and a third, ail of which striking upon

*' It is not easy to conceive, how the machines formed by
Archimedes could thro.v stones of" ten quintals or talents (that is,
twelve hundred and fifty pounds weight) at the ships of Marcellus,
when they were at a consid n-nble distance from the walls. The
account, which Polybius gives us (viii.), is much more probable.
He says, that the stones thrown by Archimedes' balistas were of the
weight of ten pounds; and v/ich him Livy seems to agree. If we
suppose indeed that Plutarch did not mean the talent of an hundred
and twenty-five pounds, but the talent of Sicily (which some say
weighed twenty-five, and others only ten pounds), his account
comes more within the bounds of probability. (L )

It may be remarked here, that neither Polybius, nor Livy, nor
Plutarch say one word about the celebrated burning-glasses, with
which Archimedes is reported to have set on fira several of th^s
Roman gallies. M. Ricard therefore, following Kepler, Naude,
Descartes (Dioptricjue, viii. 128.), Fonten^lle, <S:c. prnnon.ices it
an unfounded fabrication of later authors. Adams, however, in
his * Lectures on Natural and Experimental Philosophy,' I. 391.11.
232., represents this result as effected ' by means of a compound
of several small square plane mirrors moving every wa}' upon
hinges,' with which (notwitlistanding the loss of almost hcdftherajjs
of the sun on account of the inaccuracy of the polish, and the want
of perfect opacity in the substance of the mirror) both Kirchcr and
Bufibn succeeded; the former with five plane niirrcrs (see his De
Arte Magna Lucis et Umbra, X. iii. 888.), and the latter, on a
much more enlarged scale — 'having in IT-l;? with 168 of the same
description set wood in flames at the distance of 200 feet, melted
lead at 120, and silver at 50. With only 40 he burned a plank at
a distance of about 70 feet. See his Supplement a V Histoire Na-
tiircUe. See Ncedham and Nicolinis Papers in the valuable Abridge-
ment of the Pliiios. Trans, ix. S-i^., and an Abstract of Buffon's own
Letter on the Subject, ib. 5.58. Sec also Dr. Parsons on Father
Kircher's opinion, x, 4-88. M. Dutens, in his Origrne des Decou-
vcrtes attrilnices aux Moa'ernes, has an entire chapter. III. viii. pp.
^35 — 245. (Ed. 4to. 1796.), in which he quotes Tzetzes Chil. III. p.
292., Anthcmius of Tralles (then only in .MS.), Lucian, Galen, Zo-
iiaras, Eustathius in II. v. &c. <^'C. to repel the charge of forgery ad-
duced against this story. M. Peyrard, who publisiied at Paris in
1808 a French translation of the Works of Archimedes, has at-
tached to it a ' Memoir of a new burning INIirror' fapprouve, as
he adds, par la Classe des Sciences Physiques et Mathemafiques de
rinstitntj, by moans of which the solar rays may be reflected upon
an object whether at rest or in motion, in as great a quantity as the
operator pleases. He has little doubt indeed, he observes, that
with 590 properly adjusted mirrors, each of five decimetres in
height, he could reduce to cinders a fleet at th.e distance of a quar-
ter of a league J at half a Icggue, with the same numbvn-of ametre

412 MARCELLUS.

it with an araaziti^ noise and force, shattered and
totally disjointed and broke it to pieces.

Marcelliis in this distress drew off his galleys as
fast as possible, and sent orders to the land-forces
likewise to retreat. He then called a council of
"war, in which it v/as resolved to come close to the
walls, if it were possible, next morning before day.
Vov Archimedes' engines they thought, being very
strong and intended to act at a considerable distance,
would in that case discharge themselves over their
heads ; and, if pointed at them when so near, pro-
duce no effect. But for this Archimedes had lono-
been prepared, having by him engines fitted to all
distances, with suitable weapons and shorter beams.
Besides, he had caused holes'*^ to be made in the
walls, in which he placed ' Scorpions,' that did not
carry far, but could be very rapidly discharged ;
and by these the enemy was galled, without know-
ing whence the weapon came.

When therefore the Romans, undiscovered as they
thought, had approached close to the walls, they
were welcomed with a shower of darts and huge
pieces of rock, which fell as it were perpendicularly
upon their heads; for the engines played from every
quarter. This obliged them to retire ; and when
they were at some distance, other shafts were shot
at them from the larger machines in their retreat,
W'hich made terrible havock among them, as well as
greatly damaged their shipping, without any possi-
bility of their annoying the Syracusans in their turn.
For Archimedes had placed most of his engines under
covert of the walls ; so that the Romans, being in-
finitely distressed by an invisible enemy, seemed to
fight against the gods.

(">9.37 inches) in height ; and at a league with tlie same numher
of two metres high. And tliis the Quarterly Reviewers assure us,
is not gasconade. They prefer his contrivance indeed to BufFon's,
Parker's, or any other. See v. 109.

"8 These are mentioned both by Polybius (viii.) and Livy, xxiv.
S-1'., and by both represented ag wide within and narrow without.*

MARCELLUS. 413

jVlarcellus however got off, and laughed at his own
artillery-men and engineers : " Why do not we
" leave off contending," said he, " with this ma-
" thematical Briareus, who sitting on the shore ^'■',
*' and acting as it were but in jest, has shamefully
" baffled our naval assault ; and, in striking us with
" such a multitude of bolts at once, exceeds even
" the hundred-handed giants of fable ?'* And in
truth all the rest of the Syracusans were no more
than tlie body in the batteries of Archimedes, while
he himself was the all-moving and informing soul.
All other weapons lay idle and unemployed ; his
were the only offensive and defensive arms of the
city. At last the Romans were so terrified, that if
they saw but a rope or a stick put over the walls,
they cried out, " Archimedes was levelling some
" machine at them;" and turned their backs, and
fled. Marcellus, observing this, gave up all thoughts
of proceeding by assault, and leaving the matter to
time, converted the siege into a blockade.

Archimedes however had such a depth of under-
standing, such a dignity of sentiment, and so copious
a fund of mathematical knowledge, that though in
the invention of these machines he gained the repu-
tation of a man endowed with divine rather than
human knowledge, he yet did not vouchsafe to leave
any account of them in writing. For he considered
all attention to mechanics, and every art which mi-
nisters to common uses, as mean and sordid ; and
placed his whole delight in those intellectual specu-
lations, which without any relation to the necessi-
ties of life have an intrinsic excellence arising solely
from truth and demonstration. If mechanical
knowledge indeed be valuable for the curious frame
and amazing power of those maciiines, which it pro-
duces, the other is infinitelv superior on account of

*5' For y.cJi^uv TTfe^ rr^ B^cXairTciv^ it has been proposed to read
KvciB^i^av £« t;j5 B-x>iUtra-/,c, ' usiiig our ships as bowls to draw water ia
from the sea ;' with reference to a passa<^e in the eighth book of
Polvbius, whence Phitarcli may have copied his allusion.*
9

iu Marcellus.

it*s invincible force and conviction. And it is cei**'
tain, that abstruse and profound questions in geo*
metry are no where solved by a more simple pro-
cess, and upon clearer principles, than in the
writinos of Archimecies. Some ascribe this to the

o

acuteness of his genius, and others to his indefati-
gable industry, by which he made what had cost
considerable pains appear unlaboured and easy.
In fact, it is almost impossible for any one by him-
self to discover the demonstration of his propositions :
but, as soon as he has learned it from him, he will
think that he could have done it v/ithout assistance :
such a smooth and ready way docs he lead us to
what he wishes to prove. We are not therefore to
reject as incredible what is related of him, that under
the perpetual fascination of a domestic and cohabit-
ing iSiren (that is, his geometry) he neglected his
meat and drink, and took no care of his person ;
and was often carried bv force to the baths, whe.e
he would make mathematical figures in the ashes,
and with Ids finger draw lines upon his body after it
was anointed : so much was he transported with in-
tellectual delight, and such an enthusiast in science.
And though he was the author of many curious and
excellent discoveries, yet he is said to have desired
his friends only to place on his tomb-stone a cylinder
containing a sphere ^"^ and to inscribe upon it the

*• Cicero, when he was qufcstor in Sicil}', discovered this monu-
ment in the sluipe of" a small pillar, and showed it to the Syracusans,
who did not know that it was in being. He says, there were some
iambic verses inscribed upon it, the latter halves of which were al-
most eaten out by time ; and that there were likewise to be seen,
as those verses asserted, the figures of a cylinder and a sphere, the
proportion between which Archimedes first discovered. Fron*
the death of this great mathematician, Mhich happened A. U. C.
542., to the qusslortihip of Cicero A. U. C. 678. a hundred and
thirty-six years had elapsed. This period, though it had not efthced
the cylinder and the fphere, had put an end to the learning of vSy-
racuse, once so respectable in the republic of letters. (L.) (Cic.
Tusc. Qua^st. v. 2y.) Archimedes* sepulchre was almost overgrown
with thorns and briars, and but for the industry of the Dian of
Arpinum would most probably never ag«in have been discovered.*

MARGELtUS. 4Ii5

proportion whicli the containing solid bears to the
contained. Such was Archimedes, who exerted all
his skill to defend himself and the city against the
Romans.

During the siege of Syracuse Marcellus went
against Megai'a, one of the most ancient cities of
Sicily, and took it. He also fell upon Hippocrates,
as he was entrenching himself at Acrillas, and killed
above eight thousand of his men "'. Nay, he over-
ran the greatest part of Sicily, brought over several
cities from the Carthaginian interest, and beat all
who attempted to face him in the field.

Some time afterward, when he returned to Syra-
cuse, he surprised one Damippus a Spartan, as he
was sailing out of the harbour ^^ ; and, the Syracu-
sans being very desirous to ransom him, several
conferences were held about it. In one of these
Marcellus noticed a tower but slightly guarded, into
which a number of men might be privately conveyed,
the wall that led to it being easy to be scaled. And as
they often met to confer at the foot of this tower, he
made a correct estimate of it's height, and provided
himself vv'ith proper scaling-ladders ; and observing
that on the festival of Diana the Syracusans drank
freely and gave a loose to mirth, he aiot only pos-
sessed himself of the tower undiscovered, but before
day-light he had filled the walls of that quarter
with soldiers, and forcibly entered the Hexapylum.

5' Himiico had ts^itered the port of Heraclea with a numerous
fleet sent from Carlhaj^e, and landed twenty thousand foot, three
thousand hoi-se, and twelve elephants, livs Ibrces were no sooner
disembarked, than he marched against Agrigentum, which he rcr
took from the Romans, with several other cilies lately reduced by
Marcellus. Upon this the Syr^cusan garrison, which was yet en-
tire, determined to send out Hippocrates with ten thousand foot
and fifteen hmidred horse, to join Himiico. Marcellus, after hav-
ing made a vain attempt upon Agrigentum, was returning to Sy-
racuse. As he drew near Acrillae, he unexpectedly discovered
Hippocrates busy in fortifying his camp, fell upon him before he
I had time to dravf up his army, and cut eight tiiousand of them ia
pieces. (Liv. xxiv. 35, 36.) '

^' To demand sucgour of king Philip. (Liv. xxv, 23.)*

416 MARCELLUS.

The Syracusans, as soon as they perceived it, began
to move about in the utmost confusion ; but Mar-
celkis ordering all the trumpets to sound at once,
they were seized with consternation, and betook
themselves to flight, believing that the whole city
■was lost. The Achradina however, which was the
strongest, fairest, and most extensive part of it, was
not taken ; being divided by walls from the rest of
the city, one part of whicli was called Neapolis, and
the other Tyche. The enterprise having thus suc-
ceeded, Marcellus at day-break moved down from
the Hexapylum into Syracuse, where he was con-
gratulated by his officers on the glorious event ^\
But it is said that he himself, when he surveyed from
an eminence that mighty and magnificent city, shed
many tears "* in pity of it's impending fate : reflect-
ing into what a scene of misery and desolation it's
splendid appearance would be changed, when it
came to be sacked and plundered by his soldiers.
For the troops demanded the plunder, and not one
of the officers durst oppose it. Many even insisted,
that the whole place should be burned and levelled
with the ground ; but to this Marcellus absolutely
refused his consent. It was with the utmost reluct-
ance, that he gave up the effects and the slaves :
and he strictly charged the soldiers not to touch
any free man or woman, nor to kill, abuse, or make
a slave of any citizen whatever.

But though he acted with so much moderation,
the city had harder measure than he wished, and
amidst the great and general joy his soul sympa-
thised and condoled with it's sufferings, when he
considered that in a few hours the prosperity of
such a nourishing state Avould be no more. It is.

53 EpipoljE was entered in the night, and Tyche the next morn-
ing. Epipola; was encompassed with tlie same wall as Ortvgia, the
Achradina, Tyche, and Neapolis ; had it's own citadel, called
Euryaluni, on the top of a steep rock ; and was, as we have observed
(in the Liie of Timoleon, p. '253, not. 31.) a fifth city.

i^ Liv. XXV. 24.

MARCELLUS. 417

even said, that the plunder of Syracuse was as riclL
as that of Carthage after it^\ For the rest of the

5-5 The siege of Syracuse lasted in the whole tlires years ; no
small part of v.'hicli passed, after IMarcellus had entered Tyche.
As Plutarch has run so slifj;Iit!y over the subsequent events, with a
view (Dacier unjustly, I think, insinuates) of injuring the lame of
the illiHitrious Roman, though he ciscv.here does justice to his inte-
grit}"^ and impartiality, it n;av not I)e amiss to give a sunnnary
detail of them from Livy (xxv. 23 — 31.) ; Polybius' account of the
event being, unfortunately, lost.

Epicydes, who had his head-quarters in the farthest part of
Ortygia, hearing that the Romans had seized on Epipolee and
Tyche, advanced to drive them from their posts; but, finding much
greater numbers tiian lie expected, after a slight skirmish he retired.
Marcellus, unwilling to destroy the city, tried gentle methods with
tilie inhabitants ; but the Syracusans rejected his proposals: and-
their general appointed the Roman deserters to guard the Achra-
dina, which they did with extreme care, knowing tiiat if the town
were taken by capitulation they must die. Marcellus then turned
his arms against the fortress of Euryalum, winch he hoped to reduce
in a short time by iamiiie. Philodemus, who commanded there,
held out some time, in hope of succours from Hippocrates and
Himiico ; but, finding himself disappointed, surrendered the place,
on condition of Ix.ing allowed to march out with his men and join
Epicydes. Marcellus, uow master of Euryalum, blocked up the
Achradina so closely, that it could not hold out long without new
supplies of men and provisions. Rut Hippocrates and Hin'.ilco
soon arrived ; and it was resolved that Hippocrates should attack
the old camp of the Romans without the wails, commanded by
Crispinus, while Epicydes sallied out upon ^farcellus. Hippocrates
however was vigorously repulsed b}' Cris])inus, who pursued him up
to his entrenchments ; and Epicydes was forced to retura iiito the
Achradina uith great loss, and narrowly escaped being taken pri-
soner by Marcellus. The unfortunate ^yracusans were now in the
utmost distress for want of provisions: and to complete their misery,
a plague broke out among them, of uhich Himiico and Hippocrates
with manv thoui;ands more ilied. I'pon this, Bomilcar sailed to
Carthage again ibr fri'sh supplies, and returned to Sicily with a
large fleet; but hearing of the immense preparations of the Romans:
at sea, and probably dreading the event of a battle, he unexpectedly
steered away. Epicydes, who had gone out to meet liim, was
afraid to return into a city half-taken, and therefore fled for refuge
to Agrigentum. 'Jhe Syraensans then a?s.assinated the governors
left by Epicydes, and proposed to submit to Marcellus. Eor this
purpose they sent deputies, who were gr.^iously received. But
riio garrison, which consisted of Roman deserters and mercenaries,
raising fresh disturbances killed the officers appointed by the Syra-
cusans, and chose six new ones of their own. Among these was a
Spaniiird named Mericue, a man of integrity, who disapproving of

VOL. a. ' 2 E

41^

MARCELLUS.

city was soon betrayed to tlie Romans, and pillaged :
the royal property alone being preserved, and car-
ried into the public treasury at Rome.

But what most afflicted Marcellus was the un-
happy fate of Archimedes, who was at that time
in his studv, eno-aoed in some matliematical re-
searches; with his mind, as well as his eye, so intent
upon his diagram, that he neitlicr heard tlie tumul-
tuous noise of the Romans, nor perceived that the
city was taken. A soldier suddenly entered hi^'
room, and ordered him to follow him to Marcellus ;
and Archimedes refusing to do it, till he had finished
his problem and completed his demonstration, tiie
soldier in a passion drew his sword and killed him.
Others say, the soldier came up to him at first witii
a drawn sword to kill him, and Archimedes per-
ceiving him begged he would hold his hand a mo-
ment, that he might not leave his theorem imperfect;
but the soldier, neither regarding him nor his
theorem, laid him dead at his feet. A third account
of the matter is that, as Archimedes was carrying to
Marcellus in a box some mathematical instruments
(sun-dials, spheres, and quadrants) by which the eye
might measure the magnitude of the sun"^", a party

the cruelties of his party determined to give up tlie place to IMar-
cellus. in pursuance of which, under pretence of greater care than
ordinary, lie de.-ired that each governor might have the sole direction
in liis own quarter; wliicli gave him an opportunity of o])ening the
jjate of Arethusa to the Roman general. And noiv Marcellus, at
length master of the unfaithful city, gave signal proois c»f his clc-
niCHcy and good-nature. [With respect to Archimedes, in particular,
his orders were nibst honourably specilic: Exiniia hominh prudantid
delect at us, id cnpiti iJ'hts pnjrcreiur cdixit, poie tantttm glor'ue in
Archimede savatn, quantum in opprrt^nis S_i/racusis reponois, Val,
Max. VIII. vii. 7.*3 He suffered the Roman deserters to escape,
for he was luuvilling to shed the blood even of traitors. No wonder
then, that he spared the lives of the Syracusans and their children :
though (as he told then)) the services, which good king Hicro
had rendered Rome, were exceeded by the insults which had Ktely
been offered her by themselves.

■ 5^ Upon this ]M. Bailly has some learned observations, proving
the accuracy of the instruments with wliich Archimedes could ascer-
tain, so nuarlj' as he seems to have done, the apparent dian;eter of

MARCELLUS. 419

of soldiers met him, and imagining that thcrC was
gold in the box, took away his h'fe for it. It is
agreed however, on all hands, that Marcellus was
much concerned at his death * ; that he turned away
his face from his murtlierer, as from an impious and
execrable })erson ; and tiiat, having by inquiry foiuid
out his relations, he bestowed upon them many
signal favours.

Hitherto the Romans had shown other nations
their abihties to ])lan, and their courage to execute ;
but they had given them no proof of their clemency,
their humanity, or (in one word) of their political
virtue. Marcellus seems to have been the first,
who made it appear to tlie Greeks, that the Romans
had greater regard to equity than they. For such
was his goodness to those wlio addressed him, and
so many benefits ditl he confer upon cities as well
as private persons, that if Enna *"", Megara, and
►Syracuse were treated harshl}-, the blame of that
severity was rather to be charged on the sufterei's
themselves, than on those by whom they were
chastised.

•' 1 shall mention one of the numerous instances of
this great man's moderation. There is in Sicily a
town called Enguium, not large indeed but very
ancient, and celebrated for the appearance of the
goddesses called ' The Mothers ^^' Tlie temple is

the sun, and conjecturing the metliods which lie used upon tht
occasion. (Astron. Mod. i. 19, 'Jl.)*

* Liv. XXV. 'M.

" For the beauty of this Sicihan city, and the fcrtih'ty of the
sarroundins; countrv,

That fair field

Of" Enna, where Proserpine gathering flowers,

Herself a fulrer flow er, by gloomy Dis

Was gather'd ( M iit. P, L. iv. 2G7. )

See Cic. adv. Verr. de Sign/.s : for it's treachery to the Roman?,
and the consequent butchery of it's inliabitants by L. Pinarius, who
comnumded the garrison placed there, aui ma'o uut neccssario
Jacinore, Liv. xxiv. 37., <S:c.*

^5 These are supposed to be Cybele, Juno, and Ceres. Cicero
speake of a temple, of Cybele only at Enguium, (Verr iv. -iTt.)

2 E 2

420 MARCELLUP.

said to have been built by the Cretans, nnd' they
still show some spears and brasen helmets, inscribeti
with the names of Merioncs and Ulvsses, who con-
secratcd them to those goddesses. This town was
strongly inclined to favonr the Carthaginians; but
Nicias, one of it's principal inhabitants, endeavoured
to persuade them to go over to the Romans, declar-
ing his sentiments freely in their public assemblies,
and proving that his opposers did not consult their
true interests. These men, fearing his authority
and the influence of his character, resolved to carrv
bim off, and put him in the hands of the Carthagi-
nians. Nicias, apprised of their project, took mea-
sures for his securitv, without seemins; to do so. He
publicly gave out unbecoming speeches against ' the
Mothers,' as if he disbelieved and made light of the
received opinion conccniing the presence of those
goddesses. In the mean time, his enemies rejoiced
that he himself thus furnished them with sufficient
reasons far the worst they could do to him. On the
day which they had appointed for seizing him, there
happened to be an assembly of the people, and
Nicias was in tlie midst of them, treating about
some public business. But on a sudden he threw
himself upon the ground, in the midst of his dis-
course ; and after having Jain there some time with-
out speaking, as if he had been in a trance, he lifted
np his head, and turning it round began to speak
with a feeble trembling voice, which he gradually
quickened : and when he saw the whole assembly
Ktruck dumb with horror, he threw off his mantle,
tore his vest in pieces, and ran half-naked taone of
the doors of the theatre, crving out that he was
pursued by ' the Mothers.' From a scruj)le of
religion, no one durst touch or stop him ; all there-
fore making way, he reached one of the city-gates,
though he no longer used any worel or action, like
one that was heaven-struck and distracted. Ilii;
wife who was in the secret, and assisted in the stra-
tagem, took her children, and went and prostrated

12

MAIICELLUS. 4^1

hei^elfiis a SLi})plicant before the altars of die god-
desses. Then pretendiui^ that she was goiiig to seek
her husband, who was wandering about in the fields,
she met with no opposition, but got safe out of tlie
town; and so both of them esea}>ed to Marcellus at
Syracuse. The people ot' Enguium adding many
other insults and misdemeanors to their past faults,
^lareelJus came and luid them loaded with irons,
in order to punish them. But Nicias approached
him with tears in his eyes, and kissing his hands
and embracing his knees, implored pardon for all
the citizens, and for his enemies first. Upon this,
Marcellus relenting set them all at liberty, and did
T30t permit his troops to commit the least disorder
in the city ; at the s;ime time bestowing upon
Nicias a large tract of laud, and many rich gifts,
'i'hese particulars \v€ learn fiom Posidonius the
philosopher.

Marcellus'^ after tin's, being called home to a
war in the heart of ItaJy, carried with him the most
valuable of the statues and paintings in Syracuse,
that they might embellish his triimiph, and be an
ornament to Home. For, before this time, that citv
neither possessed nor knew any curiosities of this
kind*^*^, being a stranger to the charms of taste and
CiCgance. Full of armss taken from barbarous nations
and bloody spoils, and ciowned as she was with
trophies and other monuments of her triumphs,
she afforded not a cheerful and pleasing spectacle
£t for men brought up in ease and luxury, but
wore a look awcful and severe. And as Epiaminondas

^' Beff/i-e he left SicKy, he gained a considcrahle victory over
Epicydes and Huuno; in which he slew great nunihers, and took
many prisoners, beside eight elephants. (Liv. xxv. 40.)

''° Upon tliis Livy {ib.) piously moralises, and Pwlybius appro-
priates an excellent chapter (ix. 10.) to the inquiry, ' Whether
the Romans did well in trunsn)itting home the ornaments ot" con-
quered cities ?' A little of the morality of these writers might
2)ave been circulate*! in the I'Vcnch ariiiies, with no diiJadvantage
to unhappy Italy (ISOG.)*

422 3IARCELLUS.

called the plains of Bocotia ' the orchesti'a '^^ of
Mars/ and Xenophon Ephcsus ' the arsenal of war,'
So in my opinion (to use the expression of Pindar)
one might then have stiled Home ' the temple of
frowning Mars^".*

Thus Marcellus became more acceptable to the
people, because he adorned the city with curiosities
in the Grecian taste, whose variety as well as grace
and elegance delighted the spectator : but the graver
citizens preferred Fabius Maximus, who when he
took Tarentum, brought nothing of that kind away.
The money indeed and other rich moveables he
carried off, but he suffered the statues and pictures
to remain, using this memorable expression, *' Let
** us leave the Tarentines their angry deities *."
They blamed the proceedings of Marcellus, in the
first place, as most invidious for Rome, because he
had led not only men, but the very gods in captivity
and triumph ; and next, because he had corrupted
a people inured to agriculture and war, wholly un-
acquainted with luxury and sloth, and (as Euripides
says of Hercules)

Rough and unbred, but great on great occasions ^-%
by furnishing them with an occasion of idleness

*' Or ' stage,' on account of the battles there fought, * wliich
he looked upon as games,' says Dacier. How forcibly does this
last word remind the reader of Cowper, one of the most excellent,
poetical, and miserable of men !

War is a game which, were their subjects wise.

Kings would not play at. Nations would do well

T' extort their truncheons from the puny hands

Of heroes, whose infirm and baby minds

Are gratified with mischiefs ; and who spoil,

Because men suffer it, their toy the world. (Task v.)

JKenophoii's expression occurs in his Hellenic, iii.
*- Fyth. ii.

* See the Life of Fabius Maximus, p. 98.
*' A verse quoted more than once by Plutarch.*

MARCELLUS. 423

and vain discoarse ; ior they now began to spend a
considerable part of the day in disputing about arts
and artists. ]3ut notwithstanding such censures,
this was the very thing in which Marcelhis exulted,
even to the Greeks themselves, that he first taught
the Romans to esteem and admire the exquisite
performances of Greece, to which they had been
previously strangers.

Finding upon his return that his enemies opposed
Jiis triumph, and considering tliat the war was not
(juite finished in Sicily, as well as that a third triumph
might expose him to the envy of his fellow-citizens '^^
lie so far yielded, as to content himself with leading
up the greater triumph on mount Alba, and entering
Home with the less. The less is called by the
Greeks ' evan,' and by the Romans ' an ovation.'
In this, the general does not ride in a ti'iumphal cha-
riot drawn by four horses, he is not crowned with
laurel, neither has he trumpets sounding before him ;
but he walks in sandals, attended with the music of
many flutes, and wearing a crown of myrtle ; his
appearance therefore, having in it n{)thing warlike,
is rather pleasing than formidable. This is to me a
plain proof that the triumphs of old were distin-
guished, not by the importance of the achievement,
but by the manner of it's performance. For those,
who subdued their enemies by fighting battles and
spilling much blood, entered with the martial and
dreadful pomp of the greater triumph, and (as is cus-
tomary in the lustration of an army) wore crowns of
laurel, and adorned their arms with the same. But
when a general, without fighting, gained his point
by treaty and the force of persuasion, the law decreed

^* Our author mentions but one triumph before this, namely,
that over the Gauls, nor do other wiiters speak of any more : and
instead of rptro? an ancient MS. gives us TrpuTc^ which is the read-
ing followed by Dacier. If it be the true one, it must be translated,
' his former triumph had exposed him to envy.' But, as Plutarch
afterward expressly says, that Marcellus had rpj^ j^p(«(*?»?, 'three
triunipiis,' we have retained the common reading; though we ac-
knowledge, that he might be mistaken in the matter of fact.

424 MARCELLUS.

him this ovation, Mhich liad more the appcarancfc of
a festival than of war. For the flute is an instrument
used ill tiine of peace ; and the myrtle is the tree of
Venus, who of all the deities is most averse from
violence and bloodshed.

Now the term ^ ovation ' is not derived (as most
authors suppose) from the word exau^ which is
littered in shouts of joy, for the}'- have the same
shouts and songs in the other triumph ; but the
Greeks have wrested it to a v/ord well known in
their language, believing this procession intended in
some measure in honour of Bacchus, whom they
call Evius and Thriambus. The truth of the matter
is as follows : it was customary for the oencrals in
the greater triumphs to sacrifice an ox, and in the
less a sheep, in Latin oiv.v, whence the word ' ovation.*
Upon this occasion it is worth our while to observe,
liow different the institutions of the .Spartan were
from those of the Roman legislature, with respect
to sacrifices. In Sparta the general, who had put a
period to a war by policy or persuasion, sacrificed
a bullock ; while he, whose success had been owing
to force of arms, offered only a cock. For, though
they were a very warlike people, tliey thought it
more honourable and more worthy of a human beiniir
to succeed j^y eloquence and wisdom, than by cou-
rage and force. But tliis point I leave to be consi-
dered bv the reader.

"When Marcellus was chosen the fourth time
consul, tlie Syracusans at the instigation of his ene-
mies came to Rome to accuse him, and to complain
to the senate that he had treated them cruelly and
contrary to the faith of treaties'". It liappened, that
Marcellus was at that time in the Capitol, otfering
sacrifice. The Syracusan deputies went immediately

*5 The Syracusans were scarcely arrived at Rome, before the
«on!<uls drew lots for their provinces, and Sicily fell to Marcellus.
This was a heavy blow upon the Syracusan deputies, and they would
not have dared to prosecute their charge, had not Marcellus volun-
tarily oftbred to change the provmces. (Liv. xxvi. 29, yO.)

MAllCELLUS. 425

to the :scnatc, mIio were still sitting, and falling on
their knees implored them to hear their complaints,
and to do them justice : but the other consul re-
pulsed them with indignation, because Marcellus
was not there to defend himself. Marcellus how-
ever, being infoi'med of it, came with all possible
expedition, and having taken his chair of state first
despatched some public business as consul. When
that was finislied, he descended from his seat, and
went as a private person to the place appointed for
the accused to make their defence in, giving the
Syracusans an opportunity of substantiating their
charge. Ikit tliev were much confounded to see
the dignity and unconcern, w^ith which he behaved ;
and to lind the man, who had been irresistible in
arms, still more aweful and terrible in his robe of
purple. Nevertheless, encouraged by his enemies,
they opened the accusation in a speech mingled
with lamentations ; the sum of v/iiich was, " That,
*■' thou£>h friends and allies of Rome, tliev had
" sufiered more damage from Marcelhis, than some
" otiicr generals had permitted to be done to a
** con(}uered enemy." To this Marcellus re])Iied°^ ;
*' That, notwithstanding the many instances of their
^' criminal behaviour toward the Romans, they had
*' suftcred nothing but what it was impossible to
*' prevent, when a city was taken by storm : and
" that Syracuse was so taken was entirely their own
" fault, because he iiad often sunnnoncd it to sur-
" render, and they had refused to listen to him.
" That, in short, they v/erc not forced by their
" tyrants to connnit hostilities, but they had them-
" selves set up tyrants for the sake of going to
'• war."

The reai*ons of both sides thus heard, the Syra-
cusans according to the usual custom withdrew;
and Marcellus went out with them, leaving it to

6f' When the Syracusans bad finished their accusations against
Marcelkis, liis collegue Lasvinus ordered t'lcni to withdraw ; but
Mcircelius desired that they niiglit stay, and hear his dcfcutc.

If 6 MARCELLUS.

his collcgue to collect the votes. While he stood
at tlie door of the senate-house ^S he was neit-lier
moved with any apprehension about the issue of
the cause, nor with any resentment against the
xSyracusans, so as to chanji^e his usual deportment,
but with the utmost mildness and decorum he \\aited
for the event. When the cause Avas decided, and
he was declared to have gained it^% the Svracusans
fell at his feet, and besougiit him with tears to par-
don not only those who were present, but to take
compassion upon the rest of their citizens, who
would ever acknowledge with gratitude the favour.
Marccllus, moved by their entreaties, not only par-
doned the deputies, but continued his protection to
the other Syracusans ; and the senate, approving the
privileges which lie had granted, confirmed to them
their liberty, their laws, and tlieir remaining posses-
sions. For this reason, beside other signal honours
with which they distinguished Marccllus, they made
a law that, whenever he or anv of his descendents
entered Sicily, the Syracusans should wear garlands
and offer sacrifices to the gods.

After this Marccllus marched asrainst Annibal.
And though almost all the other consuls and gene-
rals, after the defeat at Cannse, availed themselves
of the single art of avoiding an engagement with
that chieftain, and not one of them durst meet him
fairly in the field, Marccllus adopted quite a different
method. He was of opinion that Annibal, instead
of being himself worn out by length of time, would

«' While the cause was debating, he vrcnt to the Capitol, to tal^e
the names of the new levies. (Liv. ib. SI, ;>'2.)

^8 The conduct of Marccllus, upon the taking of Sj'racuse, was
not entirely apjuoved at Rome. Seme of the senators, remem-
bering the attachment which king Hiero had upon all occasions
shown to their republic, could not help condemning their general
for having given up the cit}' to be plundered by his soldiers. The
Syracusans were not in a condition to make good their party against
an army of mercenaries, and were therefore reluctantly obliged to
yield to the times, and obey the ministers of Annibal who com-
Bumdcd the army.

MARCELLUS. 42*?

Insensibly waste the strcni:^tli of Italy, and tliat tlie
slow cautious maxims of" labiiis were not adapted to
cure the mahidy of his country ; since, by pursuing
them, the fiames of war couKl not be extinguished,
nntil Italy was consumed: just as timorous physi-
cians neglect to apply strong though necessary re-
medies, thinking the distemper will abate v/itii the
strength of the ])atient.

In the first place, he recovered the best towns of
the Samnitcs, which had revolted. In them he found
considerable magazines of corn, and an immense
quantity of money, beside making three thousand of
Annibnl's men in their garrisons prisoners. Next,
when Cneius Fulvius tlie proconsul with eleven tri-
bunes was slain, and the greatest part of his army
cut in pieces by Annibal in Apulia, he sent letters
to Rome to exhort the citizens to be of good cou-
rage, for he himself was on his n]arch to vlrive An-
nibal out of the country^-'. The reading of these
letters, however, Livy informs ns, was so far from
removing their grief, that it added terror to it ; the
Komans reckoning the present danger so much
greater than the past, as Marccllus was a greater
man than Fulvius.

Marcellus then going in quest of Annibal, ac-
cording to his promise, entered Lucania, and found
him encamped on inaccessible heights near the city
Numistro. Marcellus himself pitched his tents upon
the plain, and the next day was the first to draw up
his forces in order of l)attle. This Annibal did not
decline, but descended fiom the hills, and a combat
ensued, indecisive indeed but fierce and bloody :
for, though it began at the third honr''^, night with
difficulty put a stop to it. Next morning early.

'^9 The Latin annotator observes, on the authority of Livy, that
instead oi'%i>'fc(.v we should here read x^p"-', '^"d then tlie passage
will stand ; ' He himself was on his march against Annibal, and
would take care that his joy should be very short-lived.'

The passage of Livy, quoted below, is xxvii. 2.

7° Nine o'clock in the niornintr.*

^28 MARCELLUS.

Marcellus again marshalled his army, and posting-
it among the dead bodies challenged Annibal to a
fresh contest for the decision of the victory. But
that chieftain chose to draw off; and Marcellus,
after he had gathered the spoils of the enemy and
buried his own dead, marched in pursuit of him.
The Carthaginian laid many snares for him, but he
escaped them all ; and having the advantage too in
all skirmishes, his success was regarded with admira-
tion. When the time therefore of the next election
came on, the senate thought proper to summon the
other consul from Sicilv ^^ rather than recall Mar-
cellus who was grappling Vvith Annibal ; and, upon
his arrival, ordered him to declare Quintus Fulvius
dictator. For a dictator is not chosen either by the
people, or by the senate ; but one of the consuls or
prtEtors, advancing into the assembly, nominates
whom he pleases. Hence some think that the term
dictator comes from dicere, which in Latin signifies
* to nominate'-,* but others assert that the dictator
is so called, because he refers nothing to plurality of
voices in the senate, or to the suffrages of the people,
but issues his orders at his own pleasure. For the
orders of magistrates, which the Greeks call diatag-
mata, the Romans call edicta (that is, ' edicts.')

The coUegue "^ of Marcellus was disposed to ap-
point another person dictator ; and, that he might
not be obliged to renounce his own opinion, he left
Rome by night and sailed back to Sicily. The
people therefore named Quintus Fulvius dictator,

'• On the suggestion of ^larGelhis liimself, who rtprcsentcci to
them by letter the importance ot" his continuing to press upon An-
nibal : this letter the praetor enclosed in that, by which the senate
vecalled Laevinus. (Liv. xxvii. 4.)^'

■'^ This is Varro's opinion (De L. L. iv. l-k) The other is tliat
oi'Dion. Halic v. It.*

'* Lacvinus, wiio wished to have nominated M. Valerius Me«-
sala dictator. As he let't Rome abrupt!)', and enjoined the pr.Ttor
not to nominate Fulvius, the tribunes of the people took upon them
to do it, and the senate got the nomination confirmed by ^lar-
celius. (Liv. lb. 5.)

MARCELLUS, 429

and the senate wrote to Marcel] us to confirm the
non\ination, which he did accordingly.

Marcclkis was appointed proconsul for the year
following: and having agreed with Fabius Maximus
the consul by letter, that Fabius should besiege Ta-
rentum, v\'hile he himself should observe the mo-
tions of Annibai and prevent bis relieving the place,
he marched after him with ail dilisjence, and came
up with him at Canusium. And as Annibai con-
tinually shifted his camp, to avoid a battle, Marcel-
lus watched him closely, and took care to keep hhn
in sight. At last coniing up with him as he was en-
camping, he so harassed him with skirmishes, that he
brought him to an engagement ; but night quickly
came on, and parted the combatants. Early next
mornins:, he drew his army out of the entrench-
ments, and marshalled them in order of battle ; so
that Annibai in 2;reat vexation assembled the Cartha-
ginians, and entreated them to exert themselves
more in that battle, than thev had ever done before :
" For you see,'* said he, " that we can neither take
" breath, after so many victories already gained,
" nor enjoy the least leisure in our superiority, un-
" less this man be driven off."

After this a battle ensued, in which Marccllu^
seems to have miscarried by an unseasonable move-
ment''\ For, seeing his right wing hard pressed,
he directed one of the lcG;ions to advance to the

'77'

front to support tliem. This movement tln-ew the
whole army into disorder, and decided the day in
favour of the enemy, two thousand seven hundred
Romans being slain upon the spot. Tslarcellus re-
treated into his camp, and having summoned his
troops together told them : " He saw tlie arms and
" bodies of Rpmans in abundance before him, but

'* The movement was not unseasonable, but lU-cxccuted. Livy
savs, the right wing gave way taster than they needed to have
(lone ; and the eighteenth legion, which was ordered to advance
from rear to front, moved too ;jiovrly : this occasioned t!ie di^*
vrder. (xxvii- 12.)

ii

itiH "IVIARCELLUS.

*' not one Iloman.'* On their imploring forgive-
ness, lie said, " He would not forgive them wliilc
vanquished, but v,hen they came to be victorious,
he v.ould ; and that he would lead tliem into the
field again the next day, that the news of their
" victory might reach Rome before that of their
" fliiyht." Previously to dismissinp" them, he scave
orders that barley should be measured out instead of
wheat'"', to those companies which had turned their
backs. His reprimand made such an impression
upon them, that though many of them were smart-
ing under dangerous wounds, there was not a man
who did not feel more pain from iNlarcclIus' words,
than from his own ij^ashcs.

Next morning the scarlet ro])e, which was tlie
ordinary signal of battle, was hung out early ; and
the dishonoured companies obtained leave, on their
earnest request, to be posted in the foremost line:
after which, the tribunes drew up the rest of the
troops in their proper crder-^ Wlien this was re-
ported to Annibai, he exclaimed ; " Ye gods, what
" can one uo with a person, vvho is not anectcd with,
cither good or bad fortune ? Tliis is the only man,
who will neither give any time to rest vx'hen lie is
victorious, nor take any when he is beaten. We
" must even lesoive to fight with liim for ever ;
" since, whctlier prosperous or unsuccessful, a ])rin-
ciple of confidence, or of shame, equally impels
him to new attempts and farther exertions of

a

a

''•' courage."

Both armies then engaged ; and Annibai, seeing
no advantage gained by either, ordered his elcpiiants
to be brought forward into the first liiic, and to be
pushed against the Romans. Tiie shock of them
caused at fir^t extreme confusion in the Roman
front; but Flavins a tribune, snatching an ensign-
stafr'from one of the companies, advanced, and with

^» Tliis vv^as II common punislimcnt. Beside which, he ordered
that tlio OiTiceis of those companies slioiild continue all day litnij
with their swurds drav.ii, and wirtiOiit their girdles. (Id. ib. 13.)

9

MARCELLUS. *n

the point of it wounded the foremost elephant. The
beast on this turned back, and ran upon the second,
the second upon the next that followed, and so on
till they were all thrown into extreme disorder.
Marcellus, observing t\m^ ordered his horse to fall
furiously upon the enemy, and taking advantage of
the contusion already made, to put them entirely to
the rout. Accordingly, they charged with extra-
ordinary vigour, and drove the Carthaginians to
their entrenchments. The slauisihtcr was dreadful ;
and the fall of the killed, ami the plunging of the
wounded elephants, much contributed to it. It is
said, that more than eight thousand Carthaginians
fell in this battle ; of the Romans not above three
thousand were slain, but almost all the rest were
wounded '^. This gave Annibal an opportunity of
decamping silently in the night, and removing to a
considerable distance from Alarcellus ; who on ac-
count of the number of his wounded was not able
to pursue him, but retired by easy marches into
Campania, and passed the summer in the city of
Sinuessa "" to refresh his soldiers.

x\nnibal, thus disengaged from Marcellus, made
use of his troops now at liberty, and securely over-
ran the country, burning and destroying all before
him. This gave occasion to unfavourable reports
against Marcellus at Rome ; and his enemies incited
Publius Bibulus, one of tlje tribunes of the pco{)ie,
a man of violent temper and a vehement speaker,
to accuse him in form. Accordingly Bibuhis often
assembled the people, and endeavoured to persuade
them to take the command from him. and give it to
another: " Since Marcellus," said lie, " only ex-
" changed a few thrusts with Annibal, and then
" left tlie stage, and is gone to the hot-baths to re-
" cruit himself-'."

:6 Permidt'u Livy xxvii. H-."^

" Livy (ib. 20.) sa^'s, in Ve))a.-?ia, which being much nearer
Canusiura, was more convenient for the wounded men to retire to.
** There were hot-baths near Sinuessa, as> Strabo (v.) inforais

i32 IMAPiCELLUSf.

"When Marcelkis \vas apprised oC these practices
against liim, he left his army in cJiaro-e Avitli liis
lieutenants, and went to Home to make his defence.
Upon his arrival, he found an impeachment framed
out of those calumnies. And the day fixed for hear-
ing it being come, and the people assembled in the
i'laminian Circus, Bibulus ascended the tribunes*
seat, aad adduced his charge. Marcellus' answer
was brief and plain : but many persons of distinction
among the citizens strenuously exerted themselves,
and spoke with much freedom ; exhorting the people
not to judge worse of Marceilus than the enemy
himself had done, by fixing a mark of cowardice upon
the only general, whom Annibal declined to engage
as anxiously as he had soucjht to engage with other

s.

These remonstrances had such an ctiect, that the
accuser was totally disappointed in his expectations ;
for Marcellus was not only acquitted of the charge,
but a fifth time chosen consul.

As soon "'-' as he had entered upon his office, iic
visited the cities of Tuscany, and by his personal
influence allayed a dangerous commotion, that tend-
ed to a revolt. On his return, he was desirous to
dedicate to Honour and Virtue the temple, wliich
he had bidlt out of the Sicilian spoils ; but lie was
oppo;5ed by the priests, who would not consent that
two deities should be contained in one temple^".

us, but none near Venusia. IC Marcellus thcroibre wtnt to the
latter placf, this satirical stR)ke was iniipplicablo. Accordini^l}',
Livy (ib. '21.) does net apply it ; he only makes Bibulus say, that
* .Mart'cUus proved the suninior in quarters.'

'•'^ I'efore, it' we viv.\y trust Livy, ib.*

^'^ They said, it' the temple should be struck with thunder and
lightning, or if anv otiier prodifjv shouhl luip[)en to it demanding
expiation, they should not know to ^\ liether of the deities they
ought to otter the expiatory sacrifice. IMnrcellus therefore, to
&atisiy the prie'^ts, began a second tcinple to Virtue, so placed with
regard to that of Honour, that by a happy archittH."tural morality
the latter could only be api)roached through the former, and the
work was carried on with .great diligence ; but he did not live to
dedicate it. (Id. ib. 2.1) His son consecrated both the temples
»bout four years afterward.

MARCELLUS. 433

Taking this opposition ill, and considering it as omi-
nous, he began another temple.

There were many other prodigies^', which gave
him uneasiness. Some temples were struck with
lightning; in that of Jupiter, rats gnawed the gold;
it was even reported that an ox spake, and that there
was a child living born with an elephant's head :
and, when sacrifices in expiation of these prodigies
were offered, there were no tokens of success. The
augurs therefore detained him in Rome, notwith-
standing his impatience and eagerness to be gone.
For never was man so passionately desirous of any
thing, as he v/as of fighting a decisive battle with
Annibal. It was his dream by night, the subject of
his conversation all day with his friends and col-
legues, and his sole request to the gods, that he
might meet Annibal fairly in the field. Nay, I really
believe, he would have been glad to have had both
armies surrounded with a wall or entrenchment, and
to have fought within that enclosure. Had he not
indeed already attained such a height of glory, had
he not given so many proofs of his equalling the most
illustrious generals in prudence and discretion, I
should say that he yielded to a puerile and extrava-
gant ambition, unsuitable to his years ; for he was
above sixty, when he entered upon his fifth con-
sulate.

At last the expiatory sacrifices being such as the
soothsayers approved, he set out with his collegue ^^
to prosecute the war, and fixed his camp between
Bantia and Venusia. There he tried every method
to provoke Annibal to a battle, which that chieftain
constantly declined. But perceiving that the con-

s' Not all of them at Rome, however: the temples struck with
lightning were those of" Fortune and Mars at Capua, and the ex»
ploit of the rats or mice, which Cicero humorously ridicules (De
Piv. ii. 27.), at Cuma;.*

*^ His collegue joined him from another quarter of the country.
(Liv. ib.)

VOL. II. 2 P

434 MARCELLUS.

suls had ordered some troops to go and besiege tlie
city of the Epizephyrian or Western Locrians^^ he
laid an ambuscade on their way inider the hill of
Rctelia, and killed two thousand five hundred of
tliem. This added stiuirs to Marceihis' desire of
an engagement, and made him draw nearer to the
enemy.

Between the two armies was a hii], which afrbrded
a tolerably strong post ; it was covered with thickets,
and on both sides were hollows, vvlience issued
springs and rivulets. The Romans were surprised
tliat Annibal, wiio came tirst to so advanta<j^eoiis a
place, had not taken possession of it, but left it for
the enemy. He did indeed think it a good place
for a camp, but a better for an ambuscade, and for
that purpose he chose to use it. He filled therefore
the thickets and hollows with a considerable number
of archers and spearmen, assuring himself that the
convenience of the post would draw tlie llomans to
it. Neither was he mistaken in his conjecture. Pre-
sently nothing was talked of in the Roman army,
but the expediency of seizing this hill; and, as if
they had been all generals, they set forth the many
advantages which they should have over the eneiiiy
by encamping, or at least raising a fortification ispon
it. Thus Marcellus was induced to go, with a ievr
horse, to take a xiew of the hill ; but, before he
went, he offered sacrifice. In the first victim wh.ich
was slain, the soothsayer sliowed him the liver with-
out a head ; in the second the head was unusually
plump and large, and the other tokens appearing
remarkably good, sccraed sufficient to dispel tin-
fears of the first : but the soothsayers declared that
they were the more alarmed upon that very account,
for when highly favourable signs suddenly follow

83 Tills was not a detacliment from the forces of the consuls,
which thev did not choose to weaken, when in tlie siirht of siicli an
«neiny as Annibal ; hut consisted of troops drawn txom Sicily, and
from the garrison of Tarentum. (Id, ih. '26.)

MARCELLUS. 435

the most threatening and inauspicious ones, the
strangeness of the alteration shoukl the rather be
suspected ^^. As Pindar however observes.

Nor fire's dread force, nor brasen gate,
Control the high behests of Fate.

He therefore set out to view the place, taking with
him his collcgue Crispinus, his son Marcellus wlio
was a tribune, and onlv two hundred and twenty

•m ^^ *•'

Jiorse, among whom there was not a single Roman ;
they Avere all Tuscans, except forty Fregellanians,
whose courage and fidelity he had sufficiently ex-
perienced. Upon the summit of the hill, which (as
we said before) was covered with trees and bushes,
the enemy had placed a centinel, who without being
himself seen, could see every movement in the llo-
man camp. Those who lay in ambush having intel-
ligence from him of what was going forward, kept
close till Marcellus came very near ; and then all at
once rushed out, spread themselves around him, let
fly a shower of arrows, and charged him with their
swords and spears. Some pursued the fugitives, and
others attacked those who stood their ground. These
were the forty Fregellanians : for the Tuscans hav-
ing taken to flight at the first charge, the others
closed in a body to defend the consuls, and conti-
nued the fight, till Crispinus wounded with two ar-
rows turned his horse to escape, and Marcellus be-
ing transfixed between the shoulders with a lance
fell down dead. Then tlie few Fregellanians who
remained, leaving the body of Marcellus, carried oflT
his son who was wounded, and fled to tlie camp.

In tliis skirmish, there were not many more than
forty men killed ; eighteen were taken prisoners,
beside five liciors. Crispinus died of his wounds a

84 ^Yfjc id sane (says Livy, ib. 26., upon whom this passage serves
as a good comment) ariispici placuissCy quod secundum trunca et
iurpia exta nimis Icvia apparuisscnt.*

2 F 2

436 MARCELLUS.

few days afterward^"'. This was a most unparalleled
misibrtune, the Romans having lost both their con-
suls in one action *'.

Annibal made little account of the rest, but when
he knew that Marccllus was slain, he hastened to the
place, and standing over tlie body a long time sur-
veyed it's size and niien ; yet without speaking one
insulting word, or exhibiting the least sign of joy,
which might have been expected at the fall of so
danc:erous and formidable an enemv. He stood,
indeed, awhile astonished at the strange death of so
great a man ; and at last taking his signet from hi-;
tinger*^', caused his body to be magnificently attired
and burned, and the ashes to be put into a silver urn,
and then placed a crown of gold upon it, and sent it
to his son. But certain Numidians, meeting thos(^
who carried tlie urn, attempted to take it from them ;
and, as the others stood upon their guard to defend it,
the ashes were scattered in the struggle. When An-
nibal was informed of it, he said to those who v/ere
about him, " You see it is impossible to do any thing
" against the will of the Deity." He punished the
Numidians indeed, but he took no farther care about
collecting and sending again the remains of Mar-
cellus, believing it the ordinance of some god that he

85 He did not die till the latter end of tlie year, having named
T. Manlius Torcjuatus dictator, to hold the Comitia. Some say he
died at Tarentuni, others in Campania. (Id. ib. SS.)

^^ This Livy dejilores, particularly as having happened ' in an
encounter not worth naniinji,' isine meworaiido pnelio. (lb.)*

87 Annibal imagined, that he should have some opportunity or
other of making use of this seal to his advantage. But Crispiniis de-
spatched messengers to all the neighbouring cities in the interest of
Rome, acquainting them that Marcellus was killed, and Annibal
xnaster of his ring. This precaution preserved Salapia, in Apulia.
Nay, the inhabitants turned the artitiee of the Carthaginian ujiou
himself. For admitting, in pretended deference to a letter sealed
with that ring, six hundred of Annibal's men (most of them Roman
deserters) into the town, they on a sudden raised the draw-bridges,
cut in pieces those who had entered, and with a shower of dart»
from the ramparts drove buck the rest. (Id. ib. '2S.)

MARCELLUS. 437

yliould die in this extraordinary manner, and that his
aslies should be denied burial. This aceount of the
matter we have from Cornelius Xepos, and Valerius
Maximus ; but Livv'^'^and Augustus Caesar affirm,
that the urn was carried to his son, and that his re-
mains were interred with the utmost magnificence.

Marcellus' public donations, beside those which
he dedicated at Rome, were a gymnasium which he
built at Catana in Sicily, and several statues and
paintings brought from Syracuse, which he placed in
the temple of the Cabiri in Samothrace, and in that
of Minerva at Lindus. In the latter of these the
following verses, as Posidonius informs us, were in-,
scribed upon the pedestal of his statue :

The star of Rome, Marcellus here behold.
For birth, for deeds of arms, by fame enroll'd.
Seven times his fasces graced the martial plain.
And by his thundering arm were thousands slain.

The author of this inscription combines with his
five consulates the dignity of proconsul, with which
he was twice honoured. His posterity continued in
great splendour down to Marcellus, the son of Caius
Marcellus and Octavia the sister of Augustus ^^, who
died very young, in the office of iedile, soon after
he had married Julia the emperor*s daughter. In
honour of his memory, Octavia his mother dedicated
to him a library "^"^j and Augustus a theatre, and both
these public works received from him their appella-
tions.

«8 Livy (ib.) informs us, that Annibal buried the body of Mar-
cellus on the hill where he was slain. Oi' Augustus Caesar's works
none are now extant.

^^ His family continued after his death a hundred and eighty-five
years; for he was slain A. U. C. 546., and young Marcellus died
A. U. C. 731., iEt, 19.

*° According to Suetonius (Aug. xxix.) and Dion. liii. 1., it was
not Octavia, but Augustus, who dedicated this library. (L.)

It was upon this young man, that Virgil composed those pathetic
lines at the end of the sixth .-Eneid, which so deeply aftiscted Octa-
via, and drew from her so magnificent a recompence.*

d^JS

PELOPIDAS AND ^lARCELLUS

COMPARED.

THESE are the particulars, wliicli we thought
worth reciting from history concerning Marcellus
and Pelopidas ; betvvcen whom there was a strong
resemblance in the giih of nature, and in their lives
and manners. For they were both men of heroic
strength, capable of enduring the utmost fatigue,
and eminent for their courage and magnanimity.
Tlie sole difference is that Marcellus, in most of
the cities which he took by assault, conunitted con-
siderable slaughter ; whereas Epaminondas and Pe-
lopidas never spilled the blood of any man whom
they had conquered, :;or enslaved any city which
they had subdued. And it is affirmed that, if they
had been present, the Thebans would not have de-
prived the Orchomenians of their libertv.

As to their achievements, amongthose of Marcellus
there was none greater or more illustrious than his
having beaten such an army of Gauls, both horse
and foot, with a small body of cavalry (of which
scarcely another instance is on record) and slain their
prince v.ith his own hand. Pelopidas hoped to have
done something of the like nature, but he miscarried
and lost his li(e to the tyrant in the attempt. With
these exploits of Marcellus the signally-glorious
battles of Leuctra and Tegyrae, however, may be
compared. And on the other hand there is nothing
of Marcellus', accomplished by secret ambuscade,
which can be set against the happy management of
Pelopidas in effecting his return from exile, and
taking ofithc Thcban tyrants. Of all the enterprises
indeed of the dark and guileful hand of art;, that was
the ;aas(;er-})iece.

If it be said, that Annibal was a formidable enemy
to the Romans, the Laceda^-moniaiis were certainly
9

PELOPIDAS AND MARCELLUS COMPARED. 439

tlie same to the Thebaiis. And yet it is on all hands
aij^reed, that they were thoroughly beaten by Pclopi-
das at Leuctra and Tegynie, whereas (according to
Polybiiis) Annibal was never defeated by Marcellus,
but continued invincible till he engaged with Scipio.
We believe however with Livy, Caesar, and Cornelius
Nepos among the Latin historians, and wath king
Juba'^^ among the Greek, that Marcellus did some-
times defeat Annibal, and even put his troops to
flight, though he gained no advantage of him suffi-
cient to turn the balance considerably on his side ;
whence one might even suspect, that the Cartha-
ginian was then acting v;ith the art of a wrestler,
who occasionally suffers himself to be thrown. But
what has been verv iustlv admired in Marcellus is,
that after such inunense armies had been routed, so
many generals slain, and the whole empire almost
totally subverted, he found means to inspire his
troops with courage enough to make head against
the enemy. He was the only man who, from their
long-continued state of terror and dismay, roused
the army to an eagerness for battle ; and infused
into them such a confidence and spirit that, far from
tamely giving up the victory, they disputed it with
the greatest zeal and obstinacy. For those very men,
Avho had been accustomed by a run of ill-success to
think themselves happy if they could escape Annibal
by flight ^'^ were tauarht bv Marcellus to be ashamed
of coming off with disadvantage, to blush at the very

"' This historian was the son of Juba king of Nvimidia, who in
tlie civil war sided witli Pompey, and was slain by Petreius in single
combat. The son, mentioned here, was brought jn triumph by
Caesar to Rome, where he was educated in the learning of the
Greeks and Romans.

5- Qkos opimus

Fallere et effagere est triiimphus, (Ilor. Od. IV. iv. 52.)

But the tables were then turned, if we may trust a Roman
and a poet upon the subject ; for these words, supposed to - be
uttered at a later period of the war, are there put into Annibal's
mouth.*

440 PELOPIDAS AND MARCELLUS COMPARED,

thought of giving way, and to be sensibly affected if
they did not gain the victory.

As Pelopidas never lost a battle in which he com-
manded in person, and Marcellus won more than
any Roman of his time, he who performed so many
exploits, and was so hard to conquer, may perha])S
be put upon a level with him who was never beaten.
On the other hand it may be observed, that Mar-
cellus took Syracuse, whereas Pelopidas failed in his
attempt upon Sparta. Yet in my opinion even to
have approached Sparta, and to have been the first
that ever passed the Eurotas in a hostile manner,
was a more illustrious achievement than the con-
quest of Sicily ; unless it be said that the honour of
this exploit, as well as of that of Leuctra, belongs
rather to Epaminondas than Pelopidas, whereas the
glory which Marcellus gained was entirely his own.
For he, singly, took Svracuse ; he, without his col-
legue, defeated the Gauls ; he made head against
Annibal, not only without the assistance, but against
the remonstrances of the other generals ; and, chang-
ing the face of the war, he first taught the Romans
to meet the enemy with a good countenance.

As for their deaths, I praise neither the one nor
the other, but it is with concern and indignation that
I think upon the strange circumstances by which
they were both attended. At the same time I ad-
mire Annibal, who fought such a number of battles
as it would be a labour even to reckon, Avithout ever
receiving a single wound : and 1 greatly approve -the
behaviour of Chrysantes in the Cyropaidia^S who
having his sword lifted up and ready to strike, upon
hearing the trumpets sound a retreat, calmly and
modestly retired without giving the stroke. Pelo-
pidas however was somev/hat excusable, because he
was not only warmed with the heat of battle, but
incited by a generous desire of revenge. And, as
Euripides says,

P3 Book iv., at the beginning.

PELOPIDAS AND MARCELLUS COMPARED. Ul

The first ofcliiefs is he who wins fame's prize,
And wins it not willi life : the next, who dies,
But dies in Virtue's arms ^*

In such a man, dying is a free act, not a passive
submission to fate. But beside his resentment, the
end jM'oposed by Pelopidas in conquering, which was
the death of a tyrant, not quite unreasonably ani-
mated liim to uncommon efforts; for it wasnoteasv
to find another cause so noble and glorious, in which
to exert himself. But Marcelkis without any urgent
occasion, without that enthusiasm which often pushes
men beyond the bounds of reason in time of danger,
unadvisedly exposed himself, and died not like a
general, but like a spy ; risking his five consulates,
his three triumphs, and his royal trophies and spoils
against a company of Numidians and Spaniards, who
had bartered with the Carthaginians for their lives
and services : — an accident so strange, that those
very adventurers could not forbear grudginai' them-
selves such success, when they found that the Roman
the most distinguished for valour, as well as for ])ower
and reputation, had fallen by their hands amidst 3/
party of Fregellanian scouts.

Let not this, howTvcr, be deemed an accusation
against these eminent men ; but rather a complaint
to them of the injury done to them.':elves, in having
sacrificed all their other virtues to their intrepidity,
and a fiee expostulation with them for having been
so prodigal of their blood as to shed it for their own
sakes, when it ought to have flowed only for their
country, their friends, and their allies.

Pelopidas was buried by his friends, in whose cause
he was slain, and Marcellus by the enemies who slew
him. The first was a happy and desirable thing,

"*'♦ By a critical coincidence, the intelligence of lord Nelson's
victory and death at Trafalf^ar is now (Nov. 8, 1805) fresh in cir-
culation : and the most obvious remark of an Englishman is, that
though he would have preferred a less signal success achieved with-
out the loss of his hero, he cannot imagine any circunistance, by
■which that hero would have be«n more effectually immortalised.*

412 PELOPIDAS AND MARCELI.US COMPARED.

but tlie other was a greater and a more extraordinary
one ; as gratitude in a friend for benefits received is
not equal to an enemy's admiring the virtue, by
which he has suffered. In the lirst case, there is
more regard to interest and expediency, than to
merit ; in the latter, real worth is the sole object of
the honour conferred.

THE

LIFE

OF

A R I S T I D E S.

SUMMARY.

///V on'oiii. Different accounts of Jiis estate : that of Demetrius
Phalereus opposed. His friendship for Clisthcnes. Causes of his
hostility to Themistocles. Their opposite principles. Equity of
Aristides. His integrity in the administration (f the public

finances. Deference for MUtiadcs. Valour and moderation at the
battle of Marathon. Callias' cruelty and injustice. Justice of
Aristides, The excellence of that virtue. Themistocles gets him
banished by Ostracism. The duration of that punishment at Athens :
mode of it's infiiction. He is recalled: has an interview tvith
Thennstocles. Battle of Salamis. He concurs ijcith Themistocles
in promoting Xerxes' retreat. Mardonius' jyroposal to the Athe-
nians. Aristides despatched to Sparta, to hasten the succours :
elected general (flhe Athenian forces. They are perplexed by an
oracle, idiich is explained to their satisfaction. Aristides appeases
the dispiUes among the confederates . First skirmish with the bar-
barians, in tvhich the Atheniaris have the advantage. Death of
Masistius, general of the Persian cavalry. Mardonius projects to
surprise the Greeks ; Aristides informed of his design by the Icing
of Macedon : sooths the Athenians, tvho are dissatisfied with Pau-
sanias. The Greeks wish to change their place qj^ encampment, but
meet with great inconveniences. The Laced ccmonians, sepai-ated

from the rest of their forces, are attacked by Mardonius. Their
steadiness. Pausanias' distress. Battle of Plnta'ce. Aristides
attacks the Greeks, who had sided with Mardonius. That general's
death. The Greeks take possession of the Persian camp, where
they make great carnage. Herodotus refuted. Dispute about the
prize of valour settled by Aristides. Sacred fire fetched from

41i ARISTIDES.

TJe^phi to purifij the altars after their barbarian pollution. Public
Jestivnh esiahiixhed by Arisiiclcs decree, in consequence of this
victory. Form of government at Athens after the riclorif of
Plntd'cc. The expedient- of Themistocles rejected by Aristidc^ as
nnjnst. Pride and arrogance of Pnumnias : the mildness qfCimoiiy
and the Justice of Aristides, attach the confederates to the Athenian
jynrty. Tax imposed by A>-isiid.es upon the Greeks. Federation-
oath ^ pronounced by Aristides in the name of the Athenians. His
pttblic conduct. His poverty, continued till death : moderation
at the time of Thcmidocles* disgrace: death and funeral. His
daughters portioned at the j^ublie expense.

Aristides, the son of Lvslmaclm^!, was of the

, *■'

tribe of Aiitiochus, and of the vvani of Alopece. Of
his estate we have diflerent accounts. Some say,
that he was always very poor, and that he left two
daughters behind him, who remained a long time
unmarried on account of their poverty \ But Deme-
tnusthe Phalerean, in his ' Socrates,' contradicts this
general opinion ; and states that there was a farm at
Phalera, which went by the name of Aristides, and
that he was buried there. And, to prove that there
was a competent estate in his family, he produces
three arguments. The first is taken from the office of
Archon % whicli made the year bear his name, and

' Ap(1 yet, by a law of Solon, the bride was to carry with her
only three suits of clothes, ami a little household stufl" of small value.
(L.) See Vol.1, p. 'i-tT. Plutarch engages in this inquiry, as M.
liiciird observes, not from any deference to wealth, but because at
Athens the rank of a citizen was determined, according to Solon's
regulation, by his property.*

* The Athenians reckoned their years by archons, as the Romans
did their's by consuls. One of the nine archons, who had all estates
of the highest degree, was for t!iis purpose chosen by lot I'rom the
rest, and had his nan>e inscribed in the public registers: (L.) and
from this circumstance those, upon whom the lot fell, were called
the Kponymi. See the Life of Solon, Vol. I. p. 214., not. ('59.)
Demetrius the Phalerean was placed over Athens by Cassander, a
few years after the death of Alexander the (Jreat ; and by an equit-
able adiuiuistration of ten years gained the honour of three bun-

AllISTIDES. -tlS

>vliich fell to him by lot ; and for this none took
their chance bat such as had an income of the highest
degree, consisting of five hundred measures of corn,
wine, and oil, wlio were thence denominated ' Pen-
tacosiomedinnii/ The second argument is founded
upon the Ostracism, 'oy wliich he was banished, and
which (they contend) was never inflicted on tlie
meaner sort, but only on persons of quality, whose
grandeur and family-pride made them obnoxious to
the people. The last is drawn li'om the tri])ods,
which Aristides dedicated in the temple of Bacchus
upon account of his victory in the public games, and
which are still to be seen, witii this inscription; "The
tribe Antiochis gained the victory, Aristides de-
frayed the charges, and x\rchestratus was the author
of tliG play."

But this concluding argument, though in appear-
ance the strona'cst, is in reality a very weak one. For
Epaminondas, who (as every oody knows) lived and
died poor, and Plato the philosopher, who w^as not
rich, exhibited very splendid shows : the one was at
the cxj)ense of a concert of flutes at Thebes, and the
other of an entertainment of singing and dancing per-
formed by boys at Athens ; Dion having furnisiied
Plato with the money, and Pelopidas Epaminondas •.
For why should good men inexorably decline the pre-
sents of tlieir friends? Though they niay think it mean
and ungenerous to receive any thing for themselves
to lay up, or to gratify an avaricious temper, they
need not refuse sucii oiicrs as serve the purposes of
honour and magnilicence, without any views of profit.

As to tiie tripods, 'inscribed with the nanie of

dred, or (according to Plin. IJ. N. xxxiv. G., and Varro cited by
Nonius xii.) thrt-e litmdred and ^ixty public statu-?. He was sub-
sequently however condemned to deatii by the Atlienians, thouyh
lie escaped into Egypt, and ail his statues were de^^troycd on one
day.*

3 But does it tlierefore folh'.w, that Aristides must have bad
friends ecjually munificent? From his reply to his rich relation
Callias, toward the close of this Life, we may mfer that he would
not readily have incurred such an obligation for the mere purpoie»
of pavade,"^ or perhaps for any purpo:jL^ wliatever.*

MG ARISTIDES.

Aristides, Panoetlus* plainly proves that Demetiiiif?
was deceived hv the name. For, accordins: to the
registers from the Persian to the end of the Pelopon-
ncsian war, there were only two of the name of
Aristides, who won tlie prize in the choral exliibi-
tions, and neither of them was tlie son of Lysimachus;
the former being tlie son of Xenopliilus, and the
latter having lived at a much later period, as appears
from the characters^, which were not in use till
lifter Euclid's time, and likewise from the name of
the poet Archestratiis, Vv'hich is not found in any
record or author during the Persian wars : whereas
mention is often made of a poet of that name, who
brought his pieces upon the stage in tlie time of the
Peloponnesian war^ But this argument of Pana?tius
should not be admitted without farther examination.
And as for the Ostracism, every man distinguished
by birth, reputation, or eloquence was liable to suffer
by it ; since it fell even upon Pericles' tutor Damon,
because he was regarded as a man of superior abili-
ties. Besides, Idomeneus informs us that Aristides

■♦ Panaetius of Rhodes, a great Stoic master, numbered Scipio and
Lselius among liis pupils, and accompanied the former into Egypt.
He had not however the extravagant aii.-terity, nor the thorny
logic of that school; but frequently quoted Plato, Aristotle, Xcno-
crates, Theophrastus, Dicrearchus, &c. (See Cic. de Fin. iv. 28.)*

5 r(i<.!Mf/jcfi-iiiv,c_, which is the common reading, has been well
changed by M. Salvini to y^y.ijjfji.iy..;c. (L.) The E'jclid here men-
tioned, whose Life is written by Diog. Laert., was a dialectician of
Mcgara, had been a pupil of Socrates, received Plato (then thirty
years of age) into his liouse upon the death of that philosonlicr, and
was about ninety years anterior to his n;jraesake, tlie Alexandrian
geometer. From tliis consideration Valerius Maximus has been
judiciously corrected (viii. 12., where he says Plato ref^^rred those,
who wislied to construct a cubic altar double of that already erected
at Delphi, to the geometer ' Euclid') by the substitution of the name
* Eudoxus.' The latter Mas also an eminent mathematician, as has
been before stated, and v as Plato's contemporary and friend.*

6 It was very possible for a poet, in his own lif'^-time, to have had
his plays acted in the Peloponnesian war, and in the Persian too.
And therefore the inscription, which Plutarch mentions, might have
belonged to this Aristides. (L.) Vospius, it may be observed, has
(it does not appear why) j)iaced Archestratus among tiiose, v/ho
flourished at a time not certainly ksown. A treatise of his, upon
Elocution, is still extant.*

ARISllDES. 447

was created iirst archoii iiotby lot, but by the particu-
lar appointment of the people. And if he was archoii
siibse(}uently to the battle of Platisa?, as Demetrius
himself writes^, it is highly probable that, after such
great actions and so much glory, his virtue might gain
him that office which others obtained by their wealtii.
It is plain, however, that Demetrius laboured to re-
move the imputation of poverty, as if it were some
heavy evil, not only from Aristides but from Socrates
too ; who (he says) beside a house of his own, had
seventy mina?" placed at interest in the Iiands of Crito.
Aristides had a particular friendship for Clisthenes,
who settled the popular government at Athens after
the expulsion of the tyrants" : yet he had at the same
time the highest veneration for Lycurgus, the Lace-
daemonian, whom he considered as the most excellent
of lawgivers ; and this led him to be a favourer of
aristocracv, in which he was always opposed by
Tliemistocles, the leader of the party of the com-
mons. Some indeed state that, being brought up
together from their infancy, even v»lien boys they
were alwavs at variance, not onlv in serious matters
but in their very diversions ; and their tempers were
discovered from the first by that opposition. Tlic
one was insinuating, daring, and artful ; variable,
and at the same time impetuous in his pursuits : the
other was solid and steady, inflexibly just, and in-
capable even at play of using any falsehood, flattery,
•or deceit. But Arlsto of Chios '" writes that their

"7 But Demetrius v^as mist-iken ; for Aristides was never archou
after the battle of Plat^jcas whicii \v:is rouglit Ul. Ixxv. '2. In the
list of archons the name of Aristides is fouiiJ 01. Ixxii. 4., the year
after the battle of Marathon, and ()!. l^xiv. 2., four years before
the battle of Piataeic. See Plutarch him.seif a little below.

« But Socrates himself dcclnres (in his Apology to his judgc>)
that, considering his poverty, tliey could not in reason fine hi:a
more than one mina.

9 These tyrants were the Pisistratida^, who were driven out about
01. Ixvii. S. Clisthenes was tlie giandson of the tyrant 'of Sicyoa
of that name.

'° Dacier thinks, that it was rather Aristo of Ceos ; because, as
a Peripatetic, he was more Ukely to wrice treatises upon love than
fhe other, who was a Stoic.

■US ARISTIDES.

enmity, which subsequently attained such a height,
took it's rise from love.

They were both, it is said, violently enamoured
of the same object (one at that time most eminently
distinguished for personal charms), and from the ex-
cessive ardour of their passion, did not suffer tlieir
rivalry to expire with the beauty, by which it had
been kindled ; but carried it vivid and blazing, as if
it had been only fanned into a flame by previous ex-
ercise, to the administration of public aliiiirs.

Themistocles, who was an agreeable companion,
gained many friends and became respectable in the
strength of his popularity. Thus, when he was told
that " he would govern the Athenians extremely
" well, if he would but do it with equity and without

respect of persons ;" he replied, " May I never sit

upon a tribunal, where my friends shall not find
" more favour from me than strani>;ers !"

Aristides, on the contrary, took a method of his
own in conducting the administration. For he would
neither consent to any injustice to oblige his friends,
nor yet disoblige them by denying all their requests :
and as he saw that many, depending upon their in-
terest and connexions, were tempted to do unwar-
rantable things, he never sought that kind of support,
but declared that a good citizen should place his
whole confidence in advising and doing what was
just and right. Nevertheless, as Tlicjuistocles made
many rash and dangerous motions, and endeavoured
to break his measures in every si;ep of government,
he was. obliged to oppose lum equaUy in his turn ;
partly in sell" defence, and partly to lesj,en his power,
which through the favour of the people was daily in-
creasing, lor he thought it better, that the com-
monwealth should miss some advantages, than that
Themistocles by gaining his point should come at
last to carry all before him". Hence it w^as that one

" Both tlie casuistry and the policy of this principle seem equi-
vocal : for does; it not tend to bring a minority into disrepute, when
the people (who are far fL-oui bliiul) observe them promiscuously
opposing, per fax atqite nrfus, evea the beneficial measures of theic
political adversaries i *

ARISTIDEa 449

day, when Tliemistocles was bringing forward some-
thing advantageous to the pubhc, Aristides opposed
it strenuously and with success ; but as he vvent out
of the assembly, he could not forbear saying, " The
affairs of the Athenians will never prosper, except
they throw Themistocles and myself into the Bara-
*' thrum ''." Another time, when he intended to
propose a decree to the people, he found it strongly
disputed in the council, but at last he prevailed ;
having learned it's inconveniences however from the
preceding debates, he withdrew it, just as the presi-
dent was going to put it to the question, in order to
it's being confirmed by the jicople. He frequently
likewise offered his sentiments through a third per-
son, lest by the opposition of Themistocles to himself
the public good should be obstructed.

In the changes and fluctuations of the government,
his firmness was wonderful. Neither elated with
honours, nor discomposed by ill success, he went
forward in a moderate and steady manner, persuaded
that his country had a claim to his gratuitous ser-
vices, without the reward either of honour or profit.
Hence it was, that when those verses of iEschylus
concerning Amphiaraus were repeated on the stage.

To be, and not to seem, is this man's choice ;
Reaping the fruits that in a rich mind grow.
Whence sage advice and noble actions tiow'^ —

the eyes of the people in general vrere turned upon
Aristides, as the man to whom this lofty encomium

** The Barathrum was a deep pit, into which condemned persons
were thrown Jieadlong. See Suid. and Harpocr. in voc.

'^ These verses are to be found in the ' Siege of Thebes bv
tlie Seven Captains.' They are a description of the genius and
temper of Amphiaraus, given to Eteocles by tlie courier, who brings
an account of the enemy's attaclcs and of the characters of the com-
manders. Plutarch has changed one word in them for another,
which suited his purpose better; reading ^i%c*.ioi *just,' instead of
«fiis-o? ' valiant.' (L.)

Sallust gives a similar encomium to Cato, in his parallel of that

steady republican andCoesar, at the end of his Catilinarian War (sect.

Ivii.), where it is added, it a quo minus gloriam petebat, eu magis ilium

ndsequebatur — an idea, not unlike the reference made by Tacitus to

VOL. IL 2 G

4r.O ARISTIDES,

was most applicable. He was capable indeed of
resisting the snggestions, not only of flivour and
affection, but of resentment and enmity also, wherever
justice was concerned. For it is said that, when he
was caiTying on a prosecution against his enemv,
and after he had brought his charge the judges were
going to pass sentence without hearing the ]>erson
accused, he sprung up to bis assistance, entreating
that lie miglit be heard, and have the privilege
which the laws allawed. Another time, when he
himself sat as jodge between two private persons,
and one of them al)sen-ed, " That his adversary
" had done many injuries to Aristides ;" " Tell me
" not that," said he, " but what injury lie has done
*-' to you ; for it is your cause which I am judging,
'■' not my own/*

"When appointed public treasurer, he made it
appear that not only the archons of his time, but
their prcdecessar& also had divided much of the
public money to their own use, ami particularly
Themistoclcs j

-For he, v/itb all Iris wisdom,

Could ne'er comtnaiid his hands.

For this reason, when Aristides gave iu his accountSy
I'liemistocTes raised a strong party against him, ac-
ruscd him of having misap})lie(l the })ublic money,
and (according to Idomeneus) got him condemned.
But the principal and most respectable of the citi-
7xnis", incensed at this treatment of Aristides, intcr-
y)oscd ; and prevailed, not only that he might be
excused the tine, but re-elected chief treasurei*. He
now pretended that.his former proceedings had been
too strict, and keeping a gentler haml o\er those
who acted under him, suffered them to pilfer thd^
public money, witlwut seeming to detect them or

the images of Brutus ami Cassius, wliich (he itiforms us ) eo magis
pne/ulgelja?it, quod non videbantiir. A character resembling that
in the text is Ku!)?eq'uently ascribed to Philopoemen. See his Life.:*;
•^ The court of tijc Areopagiws iiitcr[.>;>secl iu his behalf.

ARISTIDES. fSl

reckoning strictly with tliem : so that, fattenuig on
the spoils of their country, they lavished their praises
on Aristidet^, and heartily espousing his cause be-
sought the people to continue him in the same
department. But, when the Athenians were going*
to confirm it to him by their suffrages, he gave them
this severe rebuke : " While I manaajed your finances
" with all the fidehty of an honest man, I was loaded
" with calumnies; and now, when I sufiisr them to
" be a prey to public robbers, I am become a mighty
*' good citizen. But I assure you, I am more
*' ashamed of tlie present honour, than I was of the
*' former disgrace ; and it is with indignation and
" concern that I see you esteem it more meritorious
*' to oblige bad men, than to take proper care of
'* the public revenue." By thus speaking and dis-
covering their frauds, he silenced those who were
recommending him with so much noise and bustle,
but at the same time he received real and valuable
praise from the worthiest of the citizens.

About this time Datis, who had been sent by
Darius under pretence of chastising the Athenians
for burning Sardis '^, but in reality to subdue all
Greece, arrived with his fleet at Marathon, and
began to ravage the neighbouring country. Among
the generals, to v. horn the Athenians entrusted the
management of this war, Miltiades w^as first in dig-
nity, and next to him in reputation and authority
stood Aristides. In a council of war, which was then
held, Miltiades voted for giving tlie enemy battle '^;
and Aristides, seconding him, added no little weight
to his scale. The generals commanded by turns,

'^ Nine or ten years before. This arrival took place 01. Ixxii. 2.,
B. C. 491.*

'^ According to Herodotus (vi. 109.) the generals were mueh
divided in their opinions: some ^vere for fighting, others not.
Miltiades observing this, addres-:ed himself to Callimachus of
Aphidnco, who was polemarch, and whose power was equal to that
of all the other generals; and he declared for giving baUle immedi-
ately. Possibly, Aristides might have some slwre in bringing
Callimachus to this resolution.

2 G 2

cacli his day ; but wlien it came to Aristides' tiirn^i
he suiTcndcred his right to Miltiades, thus proviug"
to his collegnes that it was no disgrace to espouse-
and follow the directions of tlie wise^ but that on
the contrary it answered several honourable and
salutary purposes. By these mcrsus he quelled the
spirit of contention, and bringing ihem to adopt
the best opinion, strengthened the hands of Mil-
tiades, who had now the absolute and undivided
command ; the other generals no longer insisting
on their own days, but entirely submitting to his
orders '^

■ In -this battle, the main body of the Athenian
army v/as pressed the hardest ^% because there for
a long time the barbarians made their greatest
cfibrts against the tribes I^eontis and Antiochis ;
'And Thcmistocles and Aristides Vvho belonged to
those tribcH, exerting themselves at tlieir head with
all the spirit of emulation, fought with so much
A igour, that the enemy were put to flight and driven
back to tiieir shi])s. But the Greeks perceiving that
rhe barbarians, instead of sailing to tiie islands in
iirder to return to Asia, were driven in by the wind
and currents toward Attica '^, and fearing that
Athens from it's deienceless state miarht fall an
easy prey, nuuched home Avith nine tribes, and

'" Vrt he woiifcT not figlit, until his proper day of command ar-
rived': lest, tlirou<:h some hitent spark of jealousy and envv, any of
ihe generals sttould be led not to do their duty. (Id. ib. 110.)

'*i The Athenians and Platieans fought with such obstinate
valour upon the right and left, that both the nings of the barbarian
arnn were forced to fly. The Persians and Sacse however, per-
ceiving that the Athenian centre was weak, charged with sueh force
that thev broke tlu'ough it : this those on the right and left perceived,
upd bending the points of their victorious wings inward enclosed
the Persians, and cut them in pieces. (Id. ib. 113., &c.)

'"-* It was reported in those timeSy that the Alcmaeonida? encou-
raged the Persians to make a second attempt, by holding up, as
they aj)proached the shore, a shield for a signal. However that
Tvaij, the Persian fleet endeavoured to double cape Suniura, with a
view to surprise the city of Athens before the army could return.
Herodotus had collected the details of this battle from eye-witnesses,
(Id. ib. 115, HG.)

•ABISTIDES. 4.^3

used such expedition that they rrac-lvcd the city in
one day -*^.

Aristides was left at Maratliori with liis own tribe,
to guard the pn'soners and the spoils; and he justi-
iied the jiubhc expectation: for thoi^gh tliere was
much gold and silver scattered about, and rich gar-
ments and other incalculable booty in the tents and
ships which tliey had taken, yet he neither had an
inclination to touch any thing himself, nor permitted
others to do it. Notwithstanding all his care, how-
ever, some enriched themselves unknown to him ;
among whom w^as Callias, the torch-bearer •'. One
of the barbarians happening to meet him in a private
place, and probably ti'om his long hair and his fillet'-^
taking him for a king, prostrated himself before him ;
and leading him by the hand, showed him a large
quantity of gold hidden in a well. But Qiliias, not
less cruel than unjust, took away the gold, and then
murthered the man who had given him the inform-
ation, lest he should disclose the thing to others.
Hence, thej tell us, the eoniic writers called his

"■^ Erouj Marathon to Athej^s is about forty uiijee ; and this, foi
troops previousJj exhausted by a long and severe eug^gement^ was
a most extraordinary march.

-' ' Tcrch-bearers,' stiled in Greeic A«c^i<q_o(, were persons dedi-
cated to tke service of the gods, aiul admitted even to tlic most
sacred Mysteries. Pausaniiis (i.37. ) spc'uks .of it as a great happi-
ness to a woman, that >:he had seen her l)rothcr, her husband, and
her son successively enjoy this lii^^ii oiRce. Cal'Jias^ Lt will ajjpear
m the sequel, was Aristid'Cs' cousin.

-- Both priests and kings wore fillets, o^- diadem«. It is well
known, tliat in ancient times tliose two diiniilies were "fenerallv
vested in the same person ; and such nntions, as abolished the
kingly office, still reserved the title of king for a person who minis-
tered in the principal functions of the priesthood. (L.^ K. g. the
Bnsilcux of Athens, 4h« Rex ^Sacrorum of Rome, &c. {i-i^'. ii. 2.,
Dion, Ilalic. iv. 74'., v. 1.)? where the priest's wife was also deno-
Kiinated 7^d'_^/>/« (Maerob. Satuvn. i. 15.), and his house anciently
liegio. See Serv. in Virg- ALn. viri. S6.".. In t!ie theatre of Syra-
cuse likewise an ifiscrijitiori, including the word V-aa-if'iirG-cii, was
discovered by count Gaetano in 1756; upon whicli /'f. Lrtgothcta,
canon of the cathedral of that city, contends that this title wii"-^
,g}ive« to the principal of the priestesses of Bacchus, £cc. In thlSi.
iiQ vtfver, he is opposed by tlie Chev. Landoliiia.*

*54> ARISTIDE."^

family Laccopluti, i. e. * enriched by the well,' jest-
ing upon the place whence their fbuuder drew his
■wealth -^.

The year following, Aristides was appointed to
the office of archon, which gave his name to that
year; though according to Demetrius the Phalerean,
he was not archon till after the battle of Plataeas, a
little before his death. But in the public registers
we find none of the name of Aristides in the list of
archons, after Xanthippidcs, in whose archonship
Mardonius was beaten at Platasee; whereas this
Dame is on record immediately after Phanippus%
who was archon in the year of the battle of
Marathon.

Of all the virtues of Aristides, the people were
the most struck Vvith his justice, because by it the
public utility was the most promoted. Thus he, a
poor man and a commoner, gained the royal and
divine title of ' the Just,* which kings and tyrants
have never coveted. It has been their ambition to
be stiled Foliorccti, 'takers of cities;' Ccraiuii,
* thunderbolts ;' Nicanors^ ' conquerors.' Nay, some
have chosen to be called ' Eagles' and ' Vultures-'^;'
preferring, it appears, the fame of strength and power
to that of virtue. Whereas the Deity liimsclf, to
whom they are anxious to be compared and assimi-
lated, is distinguished by three things, immortality,
pov/er, and virtue ; and of these, the last is the most
excellent and divine. For space and the elements
are everlasting ; earthquakes, liglitning, storms, and

'3 The French have a proverb, Biche c.nmme nn puits ; w])icli,
Ricard seems to tliink, may be traced to tliis source. Wells, in
time of war, have iVequcntly been made the receptacles of the
iflost valuable property.*

-•* From the registers it appears, that Phanippus was archon 01.
Ixxii. 3. It was therefore in this year, that tlie battle of iNlarathon
was fought, B. C, 490. (See Corsini, Fast. Att. iii.)

-' The surname of Poliorcetes was borne by Demetrius of
Macedon, tliose of Ccraunus and Nicaiior by two of the Seleuci
<i|" Syria, and those of E:igle and Vulture by"f.vo of the Antiociji
cf.the iattev kingdom,*

^AKLSTIDES. 4n3

.torrents luive an amazing power; bat of justice'"''
nothing participates, without jTasojiing and thinking
on God. And whereas men entertain three dilierent
sentiments with respect to the gods, namely, admi-
ration, fear, and esteem ; it should seem that they
admire and think tliem liaj)})y on a-CGoiuit of their
freedotn from death and corruption, that tliey fear
and dread them because oi' their power and sove-
reignty, and that they love, esteem, and reverence
them for their justice. Yet, though affected these
three different ways, tlrey desire only the Iv/o first
properties of the Deity — immortality, which our
nature will not admit, and power, which depends
chiefly upon fortune — while they fooiishly neglect
virtue, tiie only divine quality within their reach ;
not considering that justice alone confers a kind of
divinity upon the life of those who ilourish most ia
power, prosperity, and high station, while injustice
2'enders it brutal.

Aristides at first was much loved and respected
for his surname of ' the Just,' and subsequently as
much envied ; the latter chfeHy by the management
of Themistocles, who catised it to be rumoured
among the people, that Aristides had abolished the
courts of judicature by drawing the arbitration of all
causes to himself, and was thus insensibly usurping
sovereign power, tliough without it's usual attendants.
The people, elevated with the late victory, thought
themselves capable of every thing-, and the highest
res])€ct little enough for them. Uneasy therefore
at finding tlvat any one citizen rose to such extra-
ordinary honour and distinction, they assembled at
Athens from all the towns in Attica, and banished
Aristides by the Ostracism ; disguising their envy
of his character under the specious pretence of
guarding against tyranny,

'^^ ^.y./ii cJe x«« i&ff/ji^o? Jfi^pv, oTi yjYi rm (pfovui yen AO.niZFS0AI to
Bf.of^ /■osr«4A«v^.t!' I. In this passage Xoy.c^ra-h-u: is iir.cd in the same
sc-.i.«c as in 1 Cor. xiii. n., n osv«r-7 » AOriZEl Al Ky.^:>i, whith is
(wo bcHcve) a rare instance. Perhaps in this passage oi' F]iit;ja.rh.
instead of c-'. \vc sl)cukl read u.

456 ARISTIDES.

For the Ostracism was not a punishment for crmics
and misdemeanors, but was very decently called a
humbling and lessening of some excessive influence
and power. In reality, it was a mild gratification
of envy ; for through it whoever was offended at the
■growing greatness of another discharged his spleen,
not by any irretrievable infliction, but by only
voting a ten vears' banishment. As soon as it
began to fall however upon the mean and the pro-
fligate, it was wholly laid aside ; Hyperbolus being
the last, who was exiled by it.

The reason of it's turning upon such a wretch
was the following : Alcibiades and Nicias, who were
persons of the most considerable interest in Athens,
had each his party ; but perceiving the people about
to proceed to the Ostracism, and that one of them
'was likely to suffer by it, they consulted together,
and joining interests caused it to fall upon Hyper-
bolus. Upon which the people, fidl of indignation
at finding this kind of punisinnent dishonoured and
turned into ridicule, entirely renounced and abo-
lished it*^

The Ostracism, to give a summary account of it,
•was conducted in the following manner : Every
citizen took a piece of a broken pot or a shell, upon
which he wrote the name of the person he wished to
have banislied, and carried it to a part of the market-
place enclosed v;ith wooden rails. The magistrates
then counted the number of the shells ; and if it did
not amount to six thousand, the Ostracism stood for
nothing: if it did, they sorted the shells, and the
person whose name was found upon the greatest
number was declared an exile for ten years, but with
permission to enjoy his estate.

At the time that Aristides was banished, when
the people were inscribing the names on the shells,
an illiterate burgher (it is said) came up to him as
some ordinary person, and giving him his shell,
desired him to write ' Aristides' upon it. The good

_»7 See the Life of Alcibiades, II. 127,*

ARISTIDES. 45

iH

J.

man, surprised at the adventure, inquired " Whether
" or not Aristides had ever injured him?" " No,"
said he, " nor do 1 even know him ; hut it vexes
" me to hear him every where called ' the Just'."
Aristides made no answer, but took the shell, and
having written his own name upon it, returned it
to the man. When he quitted Athens, he lifted up
his hands toward heaven, and agreeably to his
character made a prayer very different from that of
i-Vchilles'^ ; namely, "That the people of Athens

might never see the day, which should force them
*' to remember Aristides."

Three years afterward, when Xerxes was rapidly
advancing through Thessaly and 15a3otia to Attica,
the Athenians rescinded this decree, and by a public
ordinance recalled all the exiles. The principal
inducement was their fear of Aristides ; tor they
were apprehensive that he would join the enemy,
corrupt great numbers of the citizens, and draw
them over to the interest of the barbarians. But
they little knev/ the man. Before this ordinance of
theirs, he had been exciting and encouraging the
Greeks to defend their hberty ; and after it, when
Themistocles was appointed to the command of the
Athenian forces, he assisted him both with his per-
son and his counsel ; not disdaining to raise his
worst enemy to the highest pitch of glory, for the
public good. For v» hen Eurybiades the commander-
in-chief had resolved to C[uit Salamis'-'-^, and the

4

-^ II. i. 408 — ^lO., where he implores his mother to influence
Jupiter in favour oi" the Trojans, to the (k■^truction of his own
countrymen, that they may i'eel tlie impotence of their cliielhiin,
find weep over the eftects of his injustice. He even goes farther
.^11. xvi. <)7 — 100.) in praying, that hoth the (irccians and tlieir
enemies may fall to a man by each other's hands, and only
J^itroclus and himself survive to rase the walls of Troy. Even
Cauiillus, notwithstanding his ordinary moderation, was much less
just and resigned upon a similar occasion than Aristides. See
his Life, I. 377."

*y Eurybiadcr; v.as for standing away for the gulf of Corinth, that
he might be near the land-army. JJut 'J'hemistocks clearly saw
that in the ttraits of Salamir, they could light the Persian fleet.

*58 ARISTIDES-

enemy's fleet taking advantage of the night, before
he coald carry his purpose into execution, had sur-
rounded the islands and ahiiost blocked up the straits,
without any one's perceiving that the confederates
were thus henmied in, Aristides sailed the same
night from ^52gina, and passed with the utmost
danger through the Persian fleet. As soon as he
reached Themistocles' tent, he desired to speak with
him in private, and there addressed him in these
terms : " You and I, Themistocles, if we are wise,
*' shall now bid adieu to our vain and childish dis-
putes, and enter upon a nobler and more salutary
contention, striving which of us shall contribute
*' most to the preservation of Greece ; you in
doing the duty of a leader and general, and I
in assisting you with my service and advice. I
find that you alone have hit upon the best mea-
sure, in advising to come to an immediate action
in the straits. And, though the allies oppose
*• your design, the enemy promote it. For the sea
on all sides is covered with their ships ; so that the
Greeks, whether they will or not, must engage
" and quit themselves like men, there being no
*' room left for flight."

To this Themistocles replied, " I could have
" v/ished, Aristides, that you had not been before-
" hand with me in this noble emulation ; but I will
'• endeavour to outdo your haopv bei^inninff by my
*' future actions." At the same time he acquainted
him v.'ith the stratagem, which he had contrived to
ensnare the barbarians ^'* : and then desired him to

which was greatly superior in numbers, to much more advantage
than in the gulfof Corinth, where there was an open sea. (Herod,
viii. 57, 58., &c.) (L.)

Tlie ensuii\t>- diftlogue is more simply given by the same Instcrir.n,
ib. 79., wfio likewise informs us {ib. 57-), tliat the project of
* coming to an imniediate action' was originally suggested by the
Athenian ?vlivjs;piiikis, and untaiiJy appropriated by Tlienn'.stocles.

3° This stratagem v/as, to send a pe.'-son to acquaint the enem)>
that tlie Greeks were going to quit the straits of Salan'n's; and
thert'ibrL', ilthe Pcrsiciiss were desiroiKS to crusii them at oucfj ihvy

iC
ti
4.C

£(

ARLSTIDES. ^.-ip

go and make it appear to Eiirybiaclcs, that there
could be no safety for them without venturiucc '<^ sea-
iight in their present station : for lie knew, that
Aristides had much <^reater influence over him, than
he. In the council of war assembled upon this
occasion, Cleocritus the Corinthian said to Themis-
tocles ; " Your advice is not agreeable to Aristides,
" since he is present, and says nothing." " You are
" mistaken," said Aristides, " for I should not have
" been silent, had not Themistocles' counsel been
*' the most eligible. And I now^ hold my peace,
" not out of regard to the man, but because I ap-
" prove his sentiments." This counsel, therefore,
the (Grecian officers adopted.

Aristides then perceiving that the Tittle island of
Psyttalia, which lies in the straits ovcr-against
»Salamis, was full of the enemy's troops, put on
board the small transports a number of the bravest
and most resolute of his countrymen, and made a
descent u{)on it ; where he attacked the barbarians
with such fury, that they were all cut in pieces,
except some of the principal persons, w^ho were made
prisoners. Among the latter were three sons of
iSandauce the king's sister, whom he sent imme-
diately to Themistocles ; and it is said that, in pur-
suance of some oracle adduced by Euphrantides the
soothsayer, they were all sacrificed to IJacchus
Omestes. After this, Aristides placed a strong
guard round the island, to take notice of such as
were driven ashore, that so none of his friends might
perish nor any of the enemy escape. For about
Psyttalia the battle raged the fiercest^', and (as ap-
pears from the trophy erected there) the most stre-
nuous efforts were made.

Yvhen the engagement was over, Themistocles by

. . . . '

must instantly fall upon them before their dispersion. See Herod,
viii. 75. and the Life of Themistocles, I., 33b"., where likewise
<p. 352.) a more detailed aeeount is given of the barbarous sacri-
fice of the sons of Sandaucc, or Sar.dace, mentioned below.
^' The battle of :?-alaciis was fought 01. Ixxv. 1., 13. C. -ISO,

12

160 ARISTIl5Ea

way of soiuuling xliistides scad, " That tliough great
*' thing's were alreiidy achieved, o-reater still remained
behind ; for they might conquer Asia in Europe,
by making all the sail they could to the Helles-
pont, to break down the bridge." Aristides how-
ever exclaimed against the proposal, and bade him
think no more of it, but rather consider and inquire
into the speediest means of driving the Persians out
of Greece ; lest finding themselves shut up with
such immense forces, and no way lai't to esciipe, they
should be impelled by necessity to %ht with the
most desperate courage. Upon this, Themistoclcs
sent to Xerxes the second time by the eunuch
ArnacGs, one of the prisoners^'-, to acquaint him
privately that the Greeks were strongly inclined to
proceed immediately to the Hellespont, with' a view
of destroying the bridge which he had left there ; but
that, in order to save his royal person, he w'as exert-
ing his best endeavours to dissuade tliem from it.
Xerxes, terrified by this intelligence, made all pos-
sible haste to the Hellespont; leaving Mardonius
behind him with the land-forces, which consisted of
three hundred thousand of liis best troops.

In the streno'th of such an armv, Mardonius was
very formidable ; and the fears of the Greeks were
heigiitened by his menacing letters, which were in
the following stile : " At sea, in your wooden towers,
" you have defeated landmen unpiactised at the oar ;
"'- but there are still the wide plains of Thessaly,
" and the fair fields of l](rotia, where both horse
" and foot may fio-ht to the best advanta^'C." To
the Athenians he wrote separately, being authorised
by the king to assure them that their city should be

3- This expedient answered two purposes. It drove the kin/r of
Persia out ol" Europe ; and at the same time in appearance conferred
an obligation upon him, which might be remembered to Themis-
tocles' udvanta<^e, whenever he came to have an occasion tor it.
His first measure l;ad been sent by Sicinus (see the Lite of The-
mistoclcs, I. 330.), and tlie same person likewise, according to
Herod, viii. 1 U\, \vas t'ne bearer of tlie second.

AltlSTIDES. 461

rebuilt, large sums bestowed upon them, and the
sovereignty of Cxreece placed in tlieir hands, if they,
would take no farther share in the war^^

As soon as the Lacedaemonians received intelli-
gence of these proposals^\ they were much alarmed,
and despatched embassadors to Athens to entreat the
people to send tlieir wives and children to Sparta, and
to accept ii'oni them whatever was necessary for the
support of such as were in years: for the Athenians,
having lost both their city and their country, were
in ffreat distress. Yet when thev had liieard what
the embassadors had to sav, they o-ave them such an
answer, by the direction of Aristides, as can never
be sufficiently admired. They said, " They could
'' easily forgive their enemies for thinking that every
.*' tiling was to be purchased with silver and gold,
'^' because thev had no idea of anv thinsi: more ex-
** cellent ; but they could not help being displeased,
that the Lacedaemonians should regard only
their present poverty and want, and forgetful of
their virtue and magnanimity, call upon them to
*' fight the battles of Greece for the paltry consi-
" deration of a supply of provisions." Aristides
having drawn up this answer in the form of a decree,
and summoned all the embassadors to an audience in
full assembly, bade those of Sparta tell the Lacedae-
monians, " That the })eople of Athens would not,
" for all the gold citiier above or under ground,-
" barter the liberties of Greece.**

33 He made these proposals by Alexander king of Maccdon, w]i»
delivered them in a set bpeeeh, which was answered by the Spartan
envoys. (Merod. ib. 140, l^l.)

" Or rather, as Herodotus says, suspecting Alexander's errand
and trembling; on account of some old oracles, whicli predicted the
expulsion of themselves and all the Dorians from Peloponnesus l>y
the Persians and Athenians.- Neither did they propose to tiie
Athenians to send their wives and children to Sparta, but only
offered to maintain them during the war. They observed, that the
original quarrel was between tlie Persians and the Athenians; that
the Athenians were always wont to be the ibremost in the cause of
liberty ; and that there was no reason to believe, the Persians would
observe any terms with a people whom they hated. (Id. ib. 142.)

WS ARISTIDKS.

As for those of Mardonius, lie ])ointcd to tlie sun
and told them, " As long as this luminary shines,
" so long will the Athenians carry on war with the
" Persians for their country which has been laid
" waste, and for their temples which have been pro-
" faned and burnt." He likewise procured an
order, that the priest should solemnly execrate all
who sliould dare to propose an embassy to the
Persians, or even talk of deserting the alliance of
Greece.

When Mardonius had entered Attica the second
time, the Athenians again retired to Salamis. And
Aristides, who upon that occasion went embassador
to Sparta, complained to the Laced semoiiians of
their delay and neglect in abandoning Athens once
more to the barbarians ; and pressed them to hasten
to the succour of that part of (rreece, which had not
yet fallen into the enemy's hands. The Ephori gave
him indeed an audience^', but seemed attentive only
to mirth and diversion, for it was the festival of H^-
acinthus^^ At niij!:ht however thev selected live
tliousand Spartans, v^ith orders to take each seven
helots with him, and to march before mornino: un-
known to tiie Atlienians. Wheji Aristides came to
\nakehis remonstrances airain, thcv smiled and lold
liim ; " That he did but trifle or dream, since their
*' army was at that time advanced as tar as Orestiinn
'^' on their march against the foreigners," for so the
Lace(kemonians called the barbarians. ■ Aristides in
reply said, " It was not a time to jest, or to put
" their stratagems in practice upon their friends,
*' but against their enemies." Tiiis is the account,
M'hich Idomeneus gives of the matter ; but in xA^ris-
tides' decree, Cimon, Xanthippus, and Myronides

^^ They put off their ansncr from time to time, until they had
pr.tned ten days: in tin's time they iiad finislicd ihc wall across the
Ibthnms, wliich secured them nrjainst theharbarians.

''' Among the Spartans this feast lasted three days; the first and
last were da3's of mourning for Ilyacinthus' death, but the second
was a festival celebrated with all kinds of diversions. Sec the
Life of Numa, I. 171., not. (12.)

ARISTIDES. iCyS

are said to have gone upon the embassy, and not
Aristides.

Aristidcs, however, was appointed to command
the Athenians in the expected battle, and marched
with eight thousand foot to PJataia?. There Pau-
sanias, who was commander-in-chief" of all the con-
federates, joined him with his Spartans, and the
otlier Grecian troops arrived daily in great numbei-s.
The Persian army, which was encamped along the
river Asopus, occupied an immense tract of ground;
and had fortified a spot, ten furlongs square, for
their baggage and other things of value.

In the Grecian army there w^as a soothsaver of
Elis, named Tisamenus^'', who foretold certain vic-
tory to Pausanias and the Greeks in general, if they
forbore attacking the enemy and stood upon the de-
fensive. And Aristides, having sent to Delphi to
inquire of the oracle, received this answer : " The
" Athenians shall be victorious, if they address their
" prayers to Jupiter, to Juno of Citheeron, to Pan,
*' and to the nymphs Sphragitides ^'^ ; if they sacrifice
" to the heroes Androcrates, Leucon, Pisander,
" Damocrates, Hypsion, Actason, and Polyidus ;
" and if they fight only in their own country, on
the plain of the Eleusinian Ceres and of Proser-
pine.'* This oracle not a little perplexed Aris-
tides. For the heroes, to whom he was commanded
to sacrifice, were the ancestors of the Plateeans, and
the cave of the nymphs Sphiagitides was in one of

3^ The oracle having promised Tisanicr.us five great victories, the
Lacedaemonians were desirous of having him ibr th.eir soothsayer ;
but he demanded to be admitted a citizen of Sparta, wliich v.as at
first refused. Upon the approach of the Persians, hov,-ever, he ob-
tained that privilege both lor himself and his brother liegias. This
would scarcely have been worth mentioning, had not those two been
the only straiigers, who were ever made citizens of Sparta. (Id.
ix.32.)

3s The nymphs of mount Cithoeron were called • Sphragitides*
from the cave Sphragidion, so named probably from the silence
observed in it by thepersons, who went tiiitlier to be inspired;
silence being described by 'sealing' tlie lip.^. (See i'auiaa. ix.^
Herod, ix. 69.)

(C

•i(U' ARISTIDES.

the summits of mount Cithffiron, opposite the quar-
ter where tlie sun sets in the summer ; in v.liich
cave (it is said) there was formerly an oraele, where
inany who dwelt in those parts were inspired, and
therefore called ' KijDiphokpii.' On the other hand,
to have the promise of victory only upon condition
of fighting in their own country, on the plain of the
Eleusinian Ceres, was calling the Athenians back to
Attica, and removing the seat of war.

In the mean time Arimnestus, general of the
Plataeans, dreamed "^'-^ that Jupiter the Preserver in-
quired of him, " What the Greeks had determined
" to do ?'* To which he answered, " To-morrow
" they will decamp and march to Eleusis to fight
*' the barbarians there, agreeably to the oracle.'*
Upon which the god replied, " They quite mistake
'' it's meaning ; for the place intended by the oracle
" is in the environs of Plata^a^ and if thev seek tor
-^ it they will find it.'* Tlic matter being so clearly
revealed to xVrimnestus, as soon as he awoke, he
sent for the oldest and most experienced of his
countrymen ; and, having advised with them and
made tlie best inquiry, he found that near I-Iusia3 (at
the toot of mount Citlian-on) there was an ancient
temple, called the temple of the Eleusinian Ceres
and of Proserpine. Upon this he immediately con-
ducted Aristides to the place, which appeared to be
very commodious for drawing up an army of foot
that was deficient in cavalry ; because the bottom of
mount Cithaeron, extending as far as the temple,
made the extremities of the field on that side inac-
cessible to the horse. In that place likewise stood
the chapel of the hero Androcrates, quite covered
v>ith thick bushes and trees. And that nothing
might be Avanting to fulfil the oracle and confirm
their hopes of victory, the Plataeans resolved on the
motion of Arimnestus to remove the boundaries be-

39 Or, to gain credit to \\\% communication, prctciKlccl that he
dreamed.*

ARISTIDES. 4G5

tAvecn tlieir country and Attica, and for the sake of
Greece to make a grant of those lands to the Athe-
nians, that according to the oracle they might fight
in their own territories"^. This generosity of the
Plata}ans gained them so mnch renown, that many
years afterward, when Alexander had conquered
Asia, he ordered the walls of Plataeas to be rebuilt,
and proclamation to be made by a herald at the
Olympic games ; " That the king granted the Pla-
treans this favour on account of their virtue and
generosity, in having given up their lands to the
Greeks in the Persian war, and otherwise behaved
with the greatest spirit*.

AVhen the confederates came to have their several
posts assigned, there was a warm dispute between
the Tege-dtic and the Athenians ; the Tegeata? in-
sisting that, as the Lacedaemonians were posted in
the right wing, the left belonged to themselves, and
in support of their claim setting forth the gallant ac- .
tions of their ancestors. As the ^Athenians expressed
great indignation at this, Aristides stepped forward
and said, " The time will not permit us to contest
with the Tegeata? the renown of their ancestors,
and their personal bravery : but to the Spartans
" and to the rest of the Greeks we say, that the
" post neither gives valour nor takes it away; and
" whatever post you assign us, we will endeavour to
*' do honour to it, and take care to reflect no dis-
grace upon our former achievements. For we
are come hitlier not to quarrel with our allies, but
to fight with our enemies ; not to pronounce en-
comiums on our forefathers, but to approve our
" own courage in the cause of Greece. And the
'' battle will soon show, what value our country
should set upon every state, every general, and
every private man." After this speech, the coun-

(C

*° This was, of course, clencliing the oracle. But the obvious
reference of the Pythoness was to the Attic ceremonies established
at this place iu honour of Ceres of Eleusis,*
• * See the Life of Alexander, VoU IV'. p. 295.*

VOL. II. 2 H

+66 ARISTIDES.

cil of war declared in favour of the Athenians, and
gave them the command of the left wing.

While the fate of Greece hung in this state of
suspense, the affairs of the Atiienians were in a very
dangerous posture. For those of the best families
and fortunes being reduced by the war, and seeing
their political authority and distinction gone witii
their wealth, and others rising to honours and em-
ployments, assembled privately in a house at Plata-^a*,
and conspired to abolish the democracy ; and, if
that failed, to ruin the whole of Greece, and betray
it to the barbarians. When Aristides received in-
telligence of the conspiracy thus entered into in the
camp, and found that numbers were corrupted, he
was much alarmed by it's happening at such a crisis,
and unresolved at iirst how to proceed. At length
he determined neither to leave the matter wholly
unexamined, nor yet to sift it thoroughly ; because
he knew not how tar the contagion had spread, and
he thought it advisable to sacrifice justice in some
degree to the public good, by forbearing to prose-
cute many of the guilty. He therefore caused eight
persons only to be apprehended, and of those eight
only two of the most guilty to be proceeded against,
.'i^schines of Lampra and Agesias of Acharnoc ; and
even they made their escape during the prosecu-
tion ". The rest lie discharged, and gave them and
all their contcderates an opportunity of recovering
their spirits and changing their sentiments, as they
might imagine that nothing was made out against
them : but he admonished them at the same time,
*' That the battle was the great tribunal, where they
" must clear themselves of the charge, and show
" that they had never followed any counsels, but
" such as were just and useful to their country.'*

After this*- Mardonius, to make a trial of the

^^ Most probably by his connivance, lest the infliction of their
punislinient should cause some disturbance.*

""■ The battle of Plataea: was fought Ol. Ixxv. 2., B. C. 479, the
veiir after that of .Salawiis- Herodotus was then about nine or ten

12

ARISTIDES. 467

Greeks, ordered liis cavalry, in which he was
strongest, to skirmish with them. The Greeks were
all encamped at the foot of mount Cithseron in
strong and stony places ; except the Megarensians,
who to the number of three tliousand were posted oia
the plain, and consequently suffered much by the
enemy's horse, which charged tliem on every side.
Unable to stand against such superior numbers,
they despatched a messenger to Pausanias for assist-
ance. Pausanias hearing their request, and seeing
the camp of the Megarensians darkened with the
shower of darts and arrows, and that they were
forced to contract themselves within a narrow com-
pass, was at a loss what to do ; for he knew, that
his heavy-armed Spartans were unfit to act against
cavalry. He endeavoured therefore to awaken the
emulation of the generals and other officers about
him, that they might deem it a point of honour and
rivalry voluntarily to undertake the succour of the
Megarensians. But they all declined it, except
Aristides ; who made an offer of his Athenians, and
gave immediate orders to Olympiodorus, one of the
most active of his officers, to advance with his select
band of three hundred men and some archers inter-
mixed. These were all ready in a moment, aud
rushed forward to attack the barbarians. Masistius the
general of the Persian horse, a man distinguished for
his strength and graceful mien, no sooner saw them
advancing, than he spurred his horse against them.
The Athenians received him with creat firmness, and
a sharp conflict ensued ; for they considered this as
an earnest of the success of the whole battle. At
last, Masistius' horse was wounded with an arrow,
and threw his rider j who could not recover himself

years old, and had his accounts (at variance with those in the text)
from persons, who were present in the battle. He informs us, that
the circumstance here related by Plutarch happened before the
Greeks left their camp at Erythrre, in order to encamp round to
Plataeae, and before the contest between the Tegeatse and iha
Athenians took place, (ix. 19, 20., &c.)

2 II 2

iG8 ARLSTIDES.

because of the weight of his armour, nor vet be
easily slain by the Athenians striving which should
do it first, because not only his body and his head,
but also his legs and arms were covered with plates
of gold, brass, and iron. But the vizor of his hel-
met leaving part of iiis face open, one of them
pierced him in the eye with the staff of his spear,
and so despatched him. The Persians then left the
bodv'*\ and tied.

The importance of this achievement appeared to
the Greeks, not from the number of their enemies
lying dead upon the field (for that was but small}
but from the mourning of the barbarians, who in
their grief for Masistius cut off their hair and the
manes of their horses and mules, and filled all the
plain witli their cries and groans, as having lost
the man next to Mardonius in courage and au-
thority.

After this engagement with the Persian cavalry,
both sides for a long time forbore the combat ; for
the soothsayers from the entrails of the victims
equally assured the Persians and the Greeks of vic-
tory, if they stood upon the defensive, and threat-
ened a total defeat to the acrafressors. At lenn-th
however Mardonius, seeing but a few days* provision
left, and that the Grecian forces daily increased by
the arrival of fresh troops, grew uneasy at the delay,
and resolved to pass the Asopus early next morning,
and fall upon the Greeks, whom he hoped lo find
unprepared. For this pur})ose, he gave his orders
over night. But at nn'dnight a man on horseback
softly approacheit the (xrecian camp, and addressing
himself to the centinels, bade them call to him Aris-
tides the Athenian o'eneral. Aristides innnediatelv
came, and the luiknown person said ; " I am Alex-

•*3 Herodotus, on the contrary, says {ix. 23.) that Uiey cliiirgod
again with great fury, in order to curry it oil", thouijh their utten:j5t
was unsuccessful. The custom of cutting off the liair, mentioned
beh)\v, as a mark of grief, was not peculiar to the baih:uians. See
the Life of Pelopidas, p. ijSii., not. (52.)* • •

a

. ^ARISTIDKS. 4rty

'^ aiidcr king of Maccdon, who for '(\\c friendship
which I l)ear you liave exposed myself to the
greatest dangers, to prevent your figiiting under
the disadvantage of a surprise. Mar(k)nius will
give you battle to-morrow ; not indeed induced
by any well grounded hope or prospect of success,
but by the scarcity of provisions : for the sooth-
sayers by their ill-boding sacrifices and oracles
" endeavour to divert him from it, but necessity
" forces him either to hazard a battle, or to sit still
" and see his whole army perish through want.'*
Having thus opened himself to Aristides, Alexander
desired him to take notice and avail himself of the
intelligence, but not to communicate it to any other
person ^\ Aristides however thought it wrong to
conceal it from Pausanias, who was commander-in-
chief: but he jn'omised not to mention the affair to
any one besides, till after the battle ; and assured
Iiim at the same time that, if the Greeks proved vic-
torious, the whole army should be acquainted with
his friendly and glorious daring.

The king of Macedon having despatched this affair
returned, and Aristides immediately went to Pau-
samas' tent, and laid the whole before him ; upon
w^hich the other officers were sent for, and ordered
to have the troops under arms and prepared for
battle. At the same time, according to Herodotus,
Pausanias informed Aristides of his design to alter
the disposition of the army, by removing the Athe-
nians from the left wing to the right, and setting
them to oppose the Persians ; against whom they
would act with the greater bravery, because they
had given proof of their manner of fighting, and

•''' According to Herodotu?, ix. ^k, Alexander had excepted
Pausanias out of this charge of secrecy; and this is most probable,
because Pausanias was generalissimo of the Grecian army. (L.)
The same historian likewise (ib.) assigns the motive of Alexander's
regard for the Greeks, viz. his Grecian extraction. His descent
indeed bv the father's side from Hercules of Aryos jirocured his
admission as a competitor at the Olynipic games, an honour scru-
pulously withheld from barbarians. (See also Herod, v- '2'2.)*

470 ARISTIDES.

with the firmer assurance of success, because they
had ah'eady succeeded. As for the left wing, which
would be engaged with those Greeks that had em-
braced the Median interest, he intended to command
there himself. The other Athenian officers thought
Pausanias carried it with a partial and high hand, in
moving them up and down like so many Helots at
his pleasure, to face the boldest of the enemy's troops,
while he left the rest of the confederates in their
posts'*^. But Aristides told them, that they were
under a complete mistake : " You contended,'* said
he, " a few days ago with the Tcgeata^ for the com-
*' mand of the left wing, and valued yourselves upon
the preference ; and nov/, when the Spartans
voluntarily offer you the right wing (which is, in
effect, surrendering to you the command of the
whole army), you are neither gratified with the
honour, nor sensible of the advantage of not being
*^ obliged to fight against your countrymen and
those who have the same origin with yourselves,
but against barbarians your natural enemies."
These words had such an effect upon the Atheni-
ans, that they readily agreed to change posts with
the Spartans, and nolhing was heard among them
but mutual exhortations to act with bravery. They
observed, " That the enemy brought neither better
" arms, nor bolder hearts, than they had at Mara-
" thon ; but came with the same bows, the same
embroidered vests and profusion of gold, the same
effeminate bodies, and the same unmanly souls.
For our part (continued they) we have the same
weanons and strcni^th of bodv, together with ad-
ditional spirits from our victories ; and we do not
like them fight for a tract of land or a single city,
but for the trophies of Marathon and Salamis ;
*' that the people of Athens, and not Miltiades and
" Fortune, may have the glory of them."

*' Herodotus says the contrary ; namely, that all the Athenian
officers were ambitions of iliat post, but did not propose it, from au
jipprehcnsipn of disobliging the Spartans. (lb. 45. J

CI

16

it

ARISTIDKS. 471

Wliilc tliey were thus encouraging cacl) other,
they hastened to their new post. But the Thebans,
being intbrmed of it by deserters, sent and acquaint-
ed Mardonius ; who eitlier out of fear of the Atlie-
nians, or from an ambition to try his strength witli
the Lacedaemonians, immediately moved the Per-
sians to his right wing, and the Greeks who were of
his party to the left, opposite to the Athenians. This
change in the disposition of the enemy's army being
known, Pausanias made another movement, and
passed to the right ; which Mardonius perceiving
returned to the left, and so still faced the Lacedae-
monians. Thus the day passed without any action
at all. In the evening the Grecians held a council
of war, in which they determined to decamp, and
take possession of a place more commodious for
water, because the springs of their present camp
were disturbed and spoiled by the enemy's horse *^.

When night was come ^\ and the officers began
to march at the head of their troops to the plac6
marked out for a new camp, the soldiers followed
unwillingly, and could not without great difficulty
be kept together : for they no sooner had left their
first entrenchments, than many of them hurried to
the city of Plataeae ; and cither dispersing there, or
pitching their tents without any regard to discipline,
were in the utmost confusion. It happened that the
Lacedaimonians alone, much against their will, were
left behind. For Amompharetus an intrepid man,
who had long been eager to engage, and was uneasy
to see the battle so often put off and delayed, pro-
nounced this decampment in plain terms a disgrace-
ful ffight ; and declared, '^ That he would not quit

•"5 See Ilerod. ib. 48 — 50., and far tlie ensuing account, 51', f>:',
Sic. It was only tlic division of Lacedicmonians commanded by
Amompharetus, which refused to move.*

•*' Upon this occasion Mardonius did not fail to insult Artabazu?',
rcproacliing him with his cowardly prudence, and iiis false notion
of the Laccdfcmoniani?, who as he pretended never fled before nfi
pneniy,

472 ARISTIDES.

" his post, but remain there with his troops and
" await Mardonius." And when Paiisanias repre-
sented to him, that the measure was adopted in pur-
suance of the counsel and determination of the con-
federates, he took up a large stone with both his
hands, and throwing it at Pausanias' feet said,
" This is my ballot for a battle ; and I despise the
" timid counsels and resolves of others." Pausanias
was at a loss what to do : but at last he sent to the
Athenians, who by this time were advancing, and
desired them to halt a little, that they might all pro-
ceed in a body ; and marched at the same time with
the rest of the troops toward Plata^ai, hoping thus to
draw Amompharetus after him.

By this time, it was day ; and Mardonius ^^ who
was not ignorant that the Greeks had quitted their
camp, put his army in order of battle and bore down
upon the Spartans ; the barbarians shouting and
clanking their arms, as if they expected to have only
the plundering of fugitives, and not a battle. And,
iaideed, so it was likely to have turned out. For
though Pausanias, upon seeing this motion of Mar-
donius, stopped and ordered every one to his post ;
yet either confused by his resentment against Amom-
pharetus, or by the sudden attack of the Persians,
he forgot to give his troops the word : and hence
they neither engaged readily, nor in a body, but
continued scattered in small parties, even after the
fight was begun.

Pausanias, in the mean time, offered sacrifice ; but

*8 HavincT passed the Asopus, he came up with the Lacedsc-
monians and Tegeatae, who to the number of fifty-three tliousand
were separated from the body of the army. Pausanias, finding
himself thus attacked by the whole Persian army, despatched a
messenger to acquaint the Athenians, who had taken another route,
with the danger he was in. The Athenians immediately marched
to succour their distressed allies ; but were attacked, and to their
great regret prevented, bj' those Greeks who sided with the Per-
sians. The battle being thus fought in two different places, the
Spartans were the first who broke into the centre of the Persian
army, and after a most obstinate resistance put them to flight.

ARISTIDES. 4.75

seeing no auspicious tokens, he commanded the
Lacedtemonians to lay down their shields at their
feet, and to stand still and attend his orders without
opposing the enemy. After tliis he offered other
sacrifices, the Persian cavalry still advancing. They
were now within bow-shot, and soinc of the Spartans
were wounded ; among others Calhcrates, a man
who for size and beauty exceeded the whole army,
and wiio being shot with an arrow and at tlie point
of death exclaimed, " He did not lament his dying,
" because he came out resolved to shed his blood
" for Greece ; but he was sorry to die, without
" having once drawn his sword against the enemy."

If the terror of this situation was great, the steadi-
ness and patience of the Spartans was marvellous ;
for they made no defence against the enemy's charge,
but waiting the time of heaven and their general,
suffered themselves to be wounded and slain in their
ranks.

Some say that, as Pausanias was sacrificing and
praying at a little distance from the lines, certain
Lydians coming suddenly upon him, seized and
scattered the sacred utensils ; and that Pausanias
and those about him, having no weapons, drove them
away with rods and scourges. And in imitation of
this assault, according to them, the Spartans still
celebrate a festival *^, in which boys are scourged
round the altar, and which concludes w'ith the ' Ly-
dian march.*

Pausanias extremely aflflictcd at these circum-
stances, while the priest oll'ered sacrifice upon sacri-
fice, turned toward the temple of Juno, and with
tears trickling from his eyes and uplifted hands pray-
ed to that goddess the protectress of Citiueron, and
to the other tutelar deities of the Platffians ; " That
" if the fates had decreed the Grecians should not
conquer, they might at least be permitted to sell
their lives dear, and show the enemy by their

"•^ Called ^ic^d^iyaxric. The Lydian march, says M. Ricard, is
no( elsewJierp mentioned.*

4rif ARISTIDES.

" deeds, that they had brave men and experienced
** soldiers to deal with."

The very moment that Pausanias was utterinij
this prayer, favourable tokens appeared^", and the
soothsayers announced him victory. Orders were
immediately issued to the whole army to come to
action, and the Spartan phalanx had suddenly the
appearance of some fierce animal erecting his bristles,
and preparing to exert his strength. The barbarians
then saw clearly that they had to do with men, who
were ready to spill the last drop of their blood ; and
therefore, covering themselves with their targets,
€hot their arrows against the Lacedaemonians. The
Lacedaemonians moving forward in a close compact
body fell upon the Persians, and forcing their targets
from them directed their pikes against their faces
and breasts, and brought many of them to the
ground. When they were down, however, they
continued to give proofs of their strength and cou-
rage : for they laid hold on the pikes with their
naked hands, and broke them ; and then springing
up betook themselves to their swords ^' and battle-
axes, and wresting away their enemies' shields, and
grappling close with them, made an obstinate resist-
ance.

The Athenians all this while stood still, expecting
the Lacedaemonians : but when the noise of the
battle reached them, and an officer (as we are told)
despatched by Pausanias gave them an account that
the engagement was begini, they hastened to his
assistance ; and, as they were crossing the plain
toward the place where the noise was heard, the
Greeks who sided with the enemy advanced against
them. As soon as Aristides saw them, he sprung
forward a considerable w^ay before his troops, and

5° So Herod, ib. 61.*

5' To.? w^.i-tt^ciK, the pcculiiir name ofa short curved Median sword,
(Hor. Od. I. xxvii. 5.) Upon the ' naked hands' ot' tlie text above,
M. Dacier and Kicard agree in thinking the term * naked' should
\st made to refer to their being witlioutanns. (^ce Herod, ib.)*

ARISTIDES. 4-75

CLilIIng Gilt to them with all his force conjured them
by the gods of Greece, " To renounce this impious
" war, and not oppose the Athenians, hastening as
*' they were to the succour of those, who were no^y
" the foremost to hazard their lives for the safety
" of their native land.'* But, finding that instead
of hearkening to him they approached in a hostile
manner, he quitted his design of going to assist the
Lacedaemonians, and joined battle with these Greeks,
who were about five thousand in number. But the
chief part soon gave way and retreated, especially
when they heard that the barbarians were put to
flight. The hottest of the action is said to have been
with the Thebans ; among whom the first in quality
and power, having embraced the Median interest,
by their authority influenced the populace, though
not of themselves so inclined.

The battle thus divided into two parts, the Lace-
daemonians first broke and routed the Persians, and
Mardonius ^- himself was slain by a Spartan named
Arimnestus ^^, who (as the oracle of Amphiaraiis had
foretold him) broke his skull v*'ith a stone. For
Mardonius had sent a Lydian to consult his oracle,
and at the same time a Carian to the cave of Tro-
phonius^\ Trophonius' priest answered the Carian
in his own language : but the Lydian, as he slept in
the temple of Amphiaraiis •^% thought he saw a

*^ Mardonius, mounted on a wlifte liorsc, eminontlj- dlstinguisIieJ
Iiimself, and at the head of a thousand chost-n nitn slew a great
jiuwiber of the enemy; but, when he fell, the whole Persian army
was easily routed. Herodotus does not .'■pecify the mode of hi«
deatli (ib. 62.), and in his subsequent account of .Mardoniui' oracle-
hunting ditt'ers in several particulars from Plutarch.

^5 In some copies he is called * Diamnestus.' Arimnestus was
general of the Plata?ans.

5-1 The cave of Trophonius was Jioar the city of Lebadia in
'B(cotia, above Delphi. Mardonius had sent to consult not only this
oracle, bat almost "ail the other oracles in the country, so restless
and uneasy was he about the event of the war. (Id. ib. ]?A', 135.)

55 Amphiaraiis, who had boen swallowed up alive in his chariot
during the war of tlie Seven Chieftains against 'I'hebes, had a temple
and oracle at (Jropus in Attica, on the? conlines of P>a'0tiu. lie had

476 ARLSTIDES.

minister of the god approach him, who conimaiided
hiin to be gone, and u])on his refusal threw a great
stone at his head, and killed hiin by the blow. Such
is the account, which we liave of that aflair.

The barbarians, tljing before the Spartans, were
pursued to their camp, wliich they had fortified with
wooden walls. And soon afterward the Athenians
xouted the Tliebans, killing three hundred persons
of the first distinction on the spot. Just as the The-
bans began to give way, intelligence arrived, that
the barbarians were shut np and besieged in their
wooden fortification : the Athenians therefore, suf-
fering the Greeks to escape, hastened to assist in
the siege ; and finding that the Lacedaemonians,
unskilled in tlie storming of Vvalls, made but a slow
progress, attacked and took the camp ^^ with a pro-
digious slaughter of the enemy. For it is said that,
of three hundred thousand men, only forty thousand
escaped v.ifch Artabazus ''' : whereas, of those who
fouo'ht in the cause of Greece, not more were slain
than one thousand three hundred and sixty ; among
whom were fifty-two Athenians, all (according to
Clidemus) of the tribe of Aiantis, which greatly
distinguished itself in that battle. And hence, by
order of the Delphic oracle, the Aiantidas offered a
yearly sacrifice of tlianksgiving for the victory to
the nymphs Sphragitides, having the expense defray-
ed out of the public treasury. The Lacedaemonians
lost ninety-one, and the Tegeat£i3 sixteen. It is sur-

in his life-time been a great interpreter of dreams, and therefore
after his death gave his or;iclesby dreams: for which purpose tliose
wiio consulted him slept in his temple, on the skin of a ram which
they had sacrificed to him. See a former note.

^'' The spoil was immense, consisting of vast sums of mone}', of
gold and silver cuj)s, vessels, tables, bracelets, rich beds, and all
sorts cf furniture. Of all these thev srave the tenth to ]\iusanias.

^' Artabazus, who from Mardonius' iniprudent conduct luid but
too well foreseen the misfortune that befel him, after having distin-
guished himself in the engagement, made a timely retreat with the
forty thousand men v»hom he commanded, arrived safe at Byzan-
tium, and thence passed over into Asia. Beside thefe, only three
thousand others escaped. (Herod, ix. 31 — (i9.)

ARISTIDES. 477

prising', Iio\ve\Tr, tliat ^'^ Herodotus should say these
were the only Greeks wlio engaged the barbarians,
and that no other were concerned in the action '^.
For both the number of the shiin and the monuments
evince, that it was the common achievement of the
confederates ; and the altar erected upon the occa-
sion would not have had the following inscription,
if only three states had been engaged, and tlie rest
iiad sat still :

The Greeks, tlieir country freetl, the Persians slain.
Have rear'd this common altar on the plain,
To freedom'*; patron, Jove.

This battle was fouaht on the fourth of Boedio-
mion % Jiccording to the Athenian way of reckon-
ing; but, according to the Bceotian computation,
on the twentv-fburth of the month Panemus. And

^8 Dacier has shown very clearly, that Pkitarcli misunderstood
an expression of Herodotus (ix. 70.), find that tliis mistake of his
own led him to impute one to that historian. Tlie expression is,
y.A?M yjiv i^^m iy^u «,r6<r-j_a,v,i««rcfa», which Pliitarch must have supposed
to mean, * I cannot bear witness for any other of the Greeks;'
whereas it's real meaning is, ' of which I cannot give any other (or
*' better") proof.'

^'■> Herodotus (ib. 69, 70.) names no others; but then he names
only those, who most distinguishL-d themselves. Tiie others in fact
liad disbanded themselves, witli the exception Oi th.e Corinthians
and Megarensian^ : who, advancing to assist in the-pursuit of the
already-defeated Persians, were inlercepted by the Thebau cavalry,
and driven back with great lo^s. The inscription below, which
however ' proves nothing' in favour of Plutarch's argument, was
written by Simonides. (Pausan. ix. II.)*

<-° Dacier justly ol)serve6 in a note, thsit an Athenian month does
not answer exactly to one ef ours, but to part of one and part of
another. Neither does Plutarch seem to have been sure ; for, iu
the Lite of (""auiilius, Vol. I. p. SS.9., lie says tliis battle was fought
* on the third of Poedromion,' But we rather think some error
lias crept into the text, since being a Bceotian himself, he could
not be ionoratit upon what day the fcstivid of that victory was cele-
brated. (L.) In the s<ime Life likewise, ib., the Bisotian Panemus is
reproocnted as equivalent not to Boedrouiion, but its immediate pre-
decessor ill llie Grecian calendar (as arranged both by Scaliger and
Fetav.), Mctagcitoion. This, however (as Taylor lia'S also observed,
11.701.), may pe accounted Ibr by Dacier's above-cited observat
tion.*

478 ARISTIDES.

jipon tliat day, there is still a general assembly of
the Greeks at PlatfEse, and the Platceans sacrifice to
Jupiter ' the Patron of Freedom ' for the victory.
Neither is this difference of days in the Grecian
months to be wondered at ; since even now, when
the science of astronomy is so much improved, the
months begin and end differently in different places.
This victory proved nearly the ruin of Greece.
For the Athenians, unwilling to allow the Spartans
the honour of the day, or to consent that they should
erect the trophy, would have referred it to the deci-
sion of the sword, had not Aristides taken consider-
able pains to explain the matter and pacify the other
generals, particularly Leocrates and Myronides ;
persuading them to leave it to the decision of the
other Greeks. A council was accordingly sum-
moned, in wliich Thcogiton of Megara suggested
That those two states should give up the palm to
a third, if they wished to prevent a civil war."
Upon tliis Cleocritus the Corinthian rose up, and it
was expected that he was going to set forth the pre-
tensions of Corinth to the prize of valour, as the city
next in dignity to Spaita and Athens: but they were
most agreeably surj)rised when they found that he
spoke in behalf of the Platceans, and proposed ;
That, all disputes laid aside, the palm should be
adjudged to them, since of them neither of the
contending parties could be jealous." Aristides
was the first to give up the point for the Athenians,
upon wliich Pausanias did the same for the Lacedac-

6i

monians °'.

The confederates thus reconciled, eighty talents
were set apart for the Platirans, with which they
built a temple and erected a statue to Minerva ;
adorning the temple with paintings, which to this

^' As to indivldnali:, when they cnme to determine which had
behaved with the lircatest courage, they all gave judgement in favour
of Aristodenuis, who was the only one that had saved himself at
ThermopyUc, and now wiped off the blemish of his former conduct
by a glorious deatli. But see Kerod. ix. 70.

AUISTIDES. 479

day retain tlieir original beauty. Both the Lacedae-
monians and Athenians erected separate trophies ;
and sending to consult the oracle at Delphi, about
the sacrifice which they were to offer, they were di-
rected by Apollo, " To build an altar to Jupiter
'* * the Patron of Freedom,* but not to ofter any
*^ sacrifice upon it, till they had extinguished all the
" fire in the country (because it had been polluted
" by the barbarians), and rekindled it pure from the
" common altar at Delphi." Upon this the Grecian
generals traversed the country, and caused the fires
to be put out ; and Euchidas a Platasan, undertak-
ing to fetch fire with all imaginable speed from the
altar of the god, went to Delphi, sprinkled and pu-
rified himself there with water, placed a crown of
laurel upon his head, took fire from the altar, and
then hastened back to Plata^a;, where he arrived be-
fore sun-set, having thus performed a journey of a
thousand furlongs in one day. But, having saluted
his fellow-citizens and delivered the fire, he fell
down and died on the spot. The Plataeans carried
him to the temple of Diana surnamed Euclia, and
buried him there, putting the following short in-
scription upon his tomb ;

Euchidas, vvlio ran to Delplii, reached Platajaj the same day.

As for Euclia, the generality believe her to be
Diana, and call her by that name ; but some say,
that she was daughter to Hercules and Myrto, the
daughter of Men<x>ceus and sister of Patroclus, and
that dying a virgin she had divine honours paid to
her by the Boeotians and Locrians. For in the market-
place" of every city of theirs she has a statue, and an
altar where the betrothed of both sexes offer sacrifice
before marriage ''".

'- A judicious institution, to oflbr an ante-nuptial sacrifice to
Diana * of good report ' (fur that is implied by the epithet, Encha),
signifying, that the happiness of marriage is greatly dependent
upon the preservation of an unblemished character.*

4S0 ARISTIDES.

In the first general assembly of the Greeks after
this victory, Aristides proposed a decree, " That
*' deputies from all the states of Greece should meet
*' annually at Plata:^, to sacrifice to Jupiter ' the
" Patron of Freedom,' and that every fifth year
*' they should celebrate the games of Liberty ^^ :
" that a general levy should be made throughout
" Greece of ten thousand foot, a thousand horse,
" and a hundred ships for the war against the bar-
" barians ; but that from this the Platasans should
" be exempted, being set apart for the service of
" the god to propitiate him in behalf of Greece,
'' upon which account their persons should be held
" sacred."

These articles passing into a law, the Platseans
undertook to celebrate the anniversary of those who
were slain and buried in that place, and they conti-
nue it to this day. The ceremony is as follows : On
the sixteenth day of Maimacterion, which with the
Boeotians is the month Alalcomenius, the procession
begins at break of day, preceded by a trumpet
sounding the signal of battle. Then Ibllow several
chariots full of garlands and branches of myrtle, and
next to the chariots is led a black bull. After that
come some young men who are free-born, carrying
vessels full of wine and milk for the libations, and
cruets of oil and perfumed essences; no slave being
allowed to partici]>atc in a ceremonv, sacred to the
memory of men who died for liberty. The proces-
sion closes with the archon of Platiua^, who at other
times is not allowed either to touch iron or to wear
any garments except such as are white, but upon
that day is clothed v.ith a pur})le robe and girt with
a sword: and carrying in his hand a water-pot, taken
out of the public hall, walks through the midst of
the city to the tombs. He then takes water in the
pot out of a fountain, and with his own hands washes

*^ See Pausan.ix. 11.

ARISTIDES. 481

tlie little pillars of the monuments ^^, and rubs them
with essences. After this, he kills the bull upon a
pile of wood; and, having made his supplications to
the terrestrial Jupiter '^^ and Mercury, he invites
those brave men who fell in the cause of Greece, to
the funeral banquet and the steams of blood. Last
of all, he fills a bowl with wine, and pouring it out
subjoins ; " I present this bovvl to tlie men, who
" died for the liberty of Greece." Such is the cere-
mony still observed by the Plataeans.

When the Athenians were returned home, Aris*
tides observing that they used their utmost endea-
vours to make the government entirely democratical
considered, on one side, that the people deserved
som.e attention and respect on account of their gal-
lant behaviour ; and, on the other, that being elated
with their victories, it would be difficult to make
them renounce their purpose : and therefore he
caused a decree to be passed, that all the citizens
should have a share in the administration, and that
the archons should be chosen out of their whole
body.

Themistocles having one day declared to the ge-
neral assembly, " That he had thought of an expe-
" dient, which would be very salutary to Athens^,
" but which ought to be kept secret ;" he was or-
dered to communicate it to Aristides only, and to

^•^ It appears from an epigram of Callimachus, that it was custo-
mary to place little pillars upon the monuments, which the friends
of the deceased perfumed with essences and crowned with flowers.
(L.) The interment appears to have taken place in the month
after the action, as Maimacterion follows Boedromion in the Grecian
calendar.*

^5 The terrestrial Jupiter is Pluto, who like the celestial had his
Mercury, or else borrowed the messenger of the gods from his
brother. To be sure, there might as well be two Mercuries, as two
Jupiters ; but the conducting of souls to the shades below is reck-
oned part of the office of that Mercury, who waits upon the Jupiter
of the skies.

^^ This was before the battle of Plataea?, at the time when Xerxes
was put to flight and driven back into Asia. See the Life of The-
mistocles, I. 341., and not. (77.)
VOL. II. 2 I

452 ARISTIDES. -

abide by his judgement. He accordingly told him,
" His project was to bnrn the wliole fleet of the
" confederates ; bv wliich means the Athenians
'' would be raised to the head and sovereignty of
" all Greece." Aristides then returned to the assem-
bly, and acquainted the Atlicnians, " That nothing
*' could be more advantageous than the project of
" Themistocles — nor at the same time more unjust."
And, upon his report of the matter, they commanded
Themistocles to abandon all thoucrhts of it. Such
regard had that people for justice, and so much con-
fidence in Aristides' integrity.

Some time after this"', he was joined in commis-
sion with Cimon, and sent against the barbarians ;
where, observing that Pausanias and the other
Spartan generals behaved with excessive haughti-
ness, he chose a quite different manner, showing
much mildness and condescension in his whole con-
versation and address, and prevailing upon Cimon
to behave toward the whole league with equal good-
ness and affability. Thus lie insensibly drew the
chief cojnmand from the Lacedaemonians, not by
force of arms or horses or ships, but by his gentle
and obliging deportment. I'or the justice of Aris-
tides and the mildness of Cimon having attached the
confederates to the Athenians, their regard was in-
creased by the contrast which they found in Pau-
sanias* avarice and austerity. The latter never
spoke to the officers of the allies, but with sharp-
ness and anger ; and he ordered many of their men
to be flogged, or to stand all day with an iron an-
chor on their shoiilders. He would not suffer any
of them to provide tliemselves with forage or straw
fo lie upon, or to go to the springs for Avater before
the Spartans were supplied, but placed his servants
there with rods to drive away those who should at-
tempt it. And when Aristides was going to re-
monstrate with him upon it, he knit his brows, and

*- Eight years aftenvard.

(C

ARISTIDES. 483

telling him " He was not at leisure," refused to
hear him.

IVom that time the sea- and land-officers of the
Greeks, particularly those of Chios, 8amos, and
Lesbos, pressed Aristides to take upon himself the
command of the confederate forces, and to receive
them into his protection ; since they had long de-
sired to be delivered from the Spartan yoke, and to
act under the orders of the Athenians. He an-
swered, " That he saw the necessity and justice of
what they proposed, but that the proposal ought
first to be confhmed by some act, which would
make it impossible for the troops to depart from
their resolution." Upon this Uliades of Samos
and Antagoras of Chios, conspiring together, went
boldly and attacked Pausanias' galley at the head of
the fleet. Pausanias, resenting this insolence, cried
out in a menacing tone ; " He would soon show
those fellows, tiiat they had offered this insult, not
to his ship, but to their own countries." But
they told him, " The best thing which he could do
" was to retire, and thank fortune that she had
" fought for him at Plataaae ; for that nothing but
" the regard which they had for that memorable
" action, restrained the Greeks from wreaking their
" just vengeance upon him." The conclusion was,
that they quitted the Spartan banners, and ranged
themselves under those of the Athenians.

Upon this occasion, the magnanimity of the Spar-
tan people appeared with great lustre. For as soon
as they perceived that their generals were corrupted
by too much power, they sent no more, but volun-
tarily resigned their pretensions to the chief com-
mand ; choosing rather to cultivate in their citizens
a principle of modesty and tenaciousness of the
customs of their country, than to possess the so-
vereignty of Greece.

While the Lacedaemonians were at the head of
afifairs, the Greeks paid a certain tax toward the
war; and now, being desirous that every city'might

2 I 2

(C

48t ARISTIDE?.

be more equally rated, they entreated the Athf-
nians that Aristidcs might take it upon himself, and
gave him instructions to inspect their lands and re-
venues, in order to proportion the burthen of each
to his station and ability.

Aristides, invested with this authority, whicli
made him master as it Mere of all Greece, did not
abuse it. For though he went outjjoor, he returned
poorer; having settled the quotas of the several
states not only justly and disinterestedly, but with
so much humanity, that his assessment was agree-
able to all. And as the ancients praised the times
of Saturn, so the allies of Athens blessed the im-
posts of Aristides, calling it ' the happy fortune of
Greece :' a compliment, which soon afterward ap-
peared still more just, when their amount was sub-
vSequently doubled, and even tripled. For the tax
imposed by Aristides produced only four hundred
and sixtv talents; this Pericles increased almost one
third ; and Thucydides writes that, at the beginning
of the (Peloponnesian) war, the Athenians received
from their allies six hundred talents ; and after the
death of Pericles those who held the administration,
raised it by little and little to thirteen hundred.
Not that the war grew more expensive, either by
it's length, or it's w^ant of success ; but because
ihey had accustomed the people to receive distribu-
tions of money for the public spectacles and other
purposes, and had made them fond of erecting mag-
nificent statues and tem])les''\

The great and illustrious character, which Aris-
-tides acquired by the equity of this taxation, piqued

^^ Pericles, in particular, generated this extravagant passion for
-arcbiteetural embcllisliment. The paying of two oboli likeuise to
tliose of the poorer classes, who attended the popular assemblies,
was the still more mischievous regulation oi this powerful states-
man ; who likewise instituted the theatrical fund, an establishment
sacredly rppropriated to it's pernicious destination o? paying for
the admission of the citizens to the public spectacles. Ihe sum
given to each for this purpose was two oboli, and this was subse-
"(juently tripled.*

4C

6C
Ci

ARISTIDES. 485

Themistocles ; and he endeavoured to turn the praise
bestowed upon him into ridicule by saying, " It was
not the praise of a man, but of a money-chest,
to keep treasure without diminution.*' By this,
however, he took but a feeble revenge for Aristides*
sarcasm. For one day Themistocles happening to,
observe, " That he looked upon it as the principal
'• virtue of a general, to know and foresee the de-
signs of the enemy;'* Aristides replied, " That is
indeed a necessary qualification, but there is ano^
ther very excellent one and really becoming a
" general, and that is — to have clean hands."

When Aristides had settled the articles of alliance,
he called upon the confederates to confirm them with
an oath ; which he himself took on the part of the
Athenians, and while uttering the execration against
those who should break them, he threw red-hot pieces
of iron into the sea*"^. When the subsequent urgency
of affairs, however, required the Athenians to govern
Greece with a stricter hand than those conditions
justified, he advised them to let tlie consequences of
the perjury rest with him, and pursue the path which
expediency pointed out^^. Upon the whole, Theo-
phrastus says, that in all his own private concerns-,
and in those of his fellow-citizens he was inflexibly,
just ; but that in affairs of state he did many things,

^' As much as to say, * As the fire in these pieces of iron is ex-
tinguished in a moment, so may the days be extinct of those, who
break this covenant.' (L.) Of this custom many instances occur
among the ancients, and particularly that of the Phocensians, when
to avoid the arms of Cyrus' pra;fect llarpagus, tliey abandoned their
country, and founded" Marseilles, 01, Ix. '2., B. C. 539. See Hor.
Epod. xvi. 18. 25., where the story is copied from Herod, i. 165.,
and the expression saxa is interpreted by Baxter of ^ferruvielapiih
liqiirfado conjlatum^ or iron-ore.*

'•^ Thus even Aristides ' the Just' made a distinctioB between
his private and his political conscience: a distinction which has no
•manaer of foundation in truth or reason, and which in the end will
be productive of ruin, rather than of advantage ; as all those nations
will find, who avail themselves of injustice to serve a present occa>-
sion. For so much reputation is so much pov/er ; and states, as
well as private persons, are respectable only by their character. (L.)
Dr. Langhorne does not seem to have anticipated any eraergencyi
Tvhich could justify the capture of Copenhagen (1807).*
9

486 ARISTIDES.

according to the exigency of the case, to serve his
country, which seemed often to demand the assis-
tance of injustice*. And he relates that, when it
was debated in council whether the treasure depo-
sited at Delos should be brought to Athens (as the
Samians had advised, though contrary to treaties) on
it's coming to his turn to speak, he said ; " It is not
*' just, but it is expedient"'."

It must be admitted however, that though he ex-
tended the domination of Athens over so many j)eo-
ple, he himself still continued poor, and esteemed his
poverty no less a glory, than all his laurels. The
following is a clear proof of it : Callias the torch-
bearer, who was his near relation, was prosecuted in
a capita] cause by his enemies. When they had
adduced their charge aofainst him, which wasnothinfj
very flagrant, they launched out into irrelevant mat-
ter, and thus addressed the judges ; " You know
Aristides the son of Lysimachus, who is justly the
admiration of all Greece. AVhen you see with
what a garb he appears in public, in what manner
" do you think he must live at home ? Must not
** that man, who shivers here with cold for want of
'*' clothing, be there almost famished, and destitute
*' of all necessaries? Yet this is he, whom Callias,
*' his cousin-german and the richest citizen in
** Athens, absolutely neglects, and leaves with his
'* wife and children in complete wretchedness ;
" though he has often made use of him, and availed

* In this principle, says Parr, he was not followed by Mr. Fox.
Bayle indeed, who quotes this passage, is fair enough to refer his
readers to tlie more favourable account which Cicero gives of Aris-
tides, De Off. iii. 11. There is, however, too much trutli (he adds)
in what Bayle has said concerning the religion of a sovereign, in
not. H. on art. Agesilaus II. (Character of Fox, II. 5"0.)

■'' This reply, though the subject of it was certainly a less flagrant
inviision of general rights than Themistocles' proposal to burn the
confederate fleet, p. 482., is yet too much at variance with Aristides*
answer upon the latter occasion, to permit us to consider him as a
consistent character. But M. Ricard will not believe the present
Story, though it unfortunately harmonises but too well with the ad-
vice given just above.*

it

a

a

" th
'' tl

ARISTIDES. 4S7

'* himself of liis interest with yoii.'* Callias, per-
ceiving that this point aifectcd and exasperated his
judges more than anything else, called for Aristides
to testify before the court, that he had often offered
him considerable sums and strongly pressed him to
accept them, but that he liad always refused them in
such terms as these ; " It better becomes Aristides

to glory in his poverty, than Callias in his riches :

for we see every day many people make a good as
" well as a bad use of riches, but it is hard to find

one who bears poverty with a noble spirit ; and
icy only are ashamed of it, who are poor against
leir will." When Aristides had given his evi-
dence, there was not a man in the court, who did
not leave it with an inclination rather to be poor
with him, than rich with Callias. This jiarticular
we have from ^^^schines, the disciple of Socrates.
And Plato, among all that were accounted great
and illustrious men in Athens, judges none but Aris-
tides worthy of real esteem. As tor Themistocles,
Cimon, and Pericles, they tilled the city with porti-
coes, and wealth, and superfluities ; but virtue was
the only object, which Aristides had in view during
the whole course of his administration.

We have extraordinary instances of the candour,
with which he behaved toward Themistocles. For
though he was his constant enemy in all affairs of
government, and the cause of his banishment, yet
when that general was accused of capital crimes
against the state, and he had an opportunity ol* reta-
liating, he indulged not the least x^s^w^s^' ; but while
Alcmaeon, Cimon, and many others were accusing
Iiim and driving him into exile, Aristides alone nei-
tlier did nor said any thing to his disadvanlage : for,
us he had not formerly envied his prosperity, so now
he did not rejoice in his misfortunes.

As to the death of Aristides, son}e say it happened
in Pontus, whither he had sailed on business of the
state J others, that he died at Athens full of days,
12

488 ARISTIDES.

and equally honoured and admiretl by his fellow-
citizens : but Cratcrus t!ie Macedonian"- gives us a
still different account. He informs us, that after
Themistocles' banishinent,the insolence of the people
gave encouragement to a number of unprincipled
informers, who attacking the best and greatest men
rendered them obnoxious to the populace, now pufled
up with prosperity and power. Aristides himself was
not spared, but on a charge brought against him by
Diophantus of Amphitrope was condemned for hav-
ing received a bribe of the lonians, at the time when
he imposed the tax. He adds that, being unable to
pay his fine, which was fifty minae, he sailed to some
part of Ionia, and there died. But Craterus gives us
no written proof of this assertion, neither does he
refer to any register ofcourt or decree of the people ;
though upon other occasions he is full of such proofs,
and constantly cites his author. The other historians
without exception, who have given us accounts of
the unjust behaviour of the people of Athens toward
their generals, among many other instances dwell
upon the banishment of Themistocles, the imprison-
ment of Miltiades, the fine imposed on Pericles, and
the death of Paches, who on receiving sentence killed
himself in the judgement-hall at the foot of the tri-
bunal ; neither do they forget Aristides' exile, but
they say not one word of this condemnation.

Besides, his monument is still to be seen at Pha-
lerum, and is said to have been erected at the public
charge, because he did not leave enough to defray the
expenses of his funeral. They inform us likewise, that
the city provided for the marriage of his daughters,
and that each of them had three thousand drachma?
as her portion out of the treasury : and to his son
Lysimachus the people of Athens gave a hundred
minae of silver, and a plantation of as many acres of

'» Who lived not long after Aristides. Vossius (Hist. Grjcc. iii.)
thinks him the person of that name, who accompanied Alexander
the Great to the East. Aristides died 01. Ixxviii. 1., B. C. 467 .f

ARISTIDES. 48»

land, witli a pension of four drachmas a clay ''^; the
whole being confirmed to him by a decree, which
Alci blades drew up. Callisthcnes adds that, Lysi-
machus at his deatli leaving a daughter named Poly-
crite, the people ordered her the same subsistence
with those, who had conquered at the Olympic
games"*. Demetrius the Phalerean, Hieronymus of
Khodes, Aristoxenus the musician, -and Aristotle
himself (if the Treatise upon Nobility is to be reckon-
ed among his genuine works) relate that Myrto, a
grand-daughter of Aristides, was married to Socrates
the philosopher ; who had another wife at the same
time ''■\ but took her likewise, because she was in ex-
treme want, and remained a widow on account of
her poverty. 13ut this is sufficiently confuted by
Pantetius, in his Life of that philosoplier.

The same Demetrius, in his account of vSocrates,
informs us that he remembered one Lysimachus
grandson to Aristides, who plied constantly near the
temple of Bacchus, having certain tables by which
he interpreted dreams for a livelihood ; and that he
himself procured a decree, by which his mother and
his aunt had three oboli a day each allowed for their
subsistence ''\ He farther acquaints us that, when he
subsequently undertook to reform the iVthenian laws,

'5 Though this may seem no extraordinary matter to us, being
only about haU-a-crovvn of our money, yet in those days it was con-
siderable. For an embassador, as appears from the Acharnenses of
Aristophanes, 1. ii. 6*., was allowed only two drachmas a day. The
poet indeed is speaking of one sent to the king of Persia, at whose
court, as we learn from other passages in our author, an embassador
was pretty sure to be enriched.

^■' These were maintained in the Prytaneum at the public ex-
pense, receiving a fixed daily allowance, for the remainder of their
lives.*

7s Cecrops had indeed interdicted polygamy at Athens ; but a
decree was enacted there, in Socrates' time, giving the rights of the
city to children born of concubines, in consequence of the great
depopulation which had taken place. M. llicard however thinks
that Pantttius' Life of Socrates, if extant, would have confuted
this story.*

76 Provisions, as we have seen (Life of Solon, L 252.), were very
cheap in the market of Athens.*

4-90

ARISTIDE8.

lie ordered each of those women a draclima a dar.
Nor is it a subject of" wonder, that tliis people took
so much care of those who lived with them in
Athens : when having heard that a grand-daughter
of Aristogiton ^' lived in mean circumstances in
Lemnos, and continued unmarried on account of
her poverty, they sent for her to Athens, and married
her to a man of a considerable family, giving her for
a portion an estate in the borough ofPolamos. That
city, even in our days'*', continues to give so many
proofs of her benevolence and humanity, that she is
deservedly the object of admiration and applause.

'' This hero in conjunction with Ilarmodius gave the first blovr
to the tyranny of the Pisistratid.T, by killins; Ilipparchus, one ofthe
sons of Pisistratus, Ol. Ixvi. 4., B. C. 513., for which they were in*
stantl}' executed by Ilippias the survivor. The latter maintained
his authority nearly four years longer, and nas driven out of Atheiis,
at the same time that the farquins u-cre expelled from Ron)e. See
Thucyd. vi. 54- — 59., and Alcacus' Ode. The latter has been trans-
lated, witli conjrenial spirit, by sir William Jones.*

'8 Implying, from the time of Aristides, a lapse; of nearly six cen-
turies— a most honourable proof of their perseverance in the ])rarriep
of an eminent public \-irtue ! The Engjisli likewise, not to nienfioii
innumerable and most libeial pensirms paid on account of pubhc
service, have their flrrciiicus Lar at Blenheim, and a\ ill probably
soon have an equally magnificent and e<jually merited Trafalgii,r.*

THE

LIFE

OF

CATO THE CENSOR.

SUMMARY.

Ills ancestors. Origin of the tiame of Cato, His eloquence and
braver ij. He profits bi/ the example qfCurius, and the instruction
of Xearchus titc philosopher. Valerius draivs him to Rome. He
attaches himself to Fabias Maximus, and refuses to attend Scipio
into Africa. His eloquence and primiliveness qj^ manners gain him
tjic admiration qftJie Romans. His excessive economij. Kindness
<yfthe Athenians, even iouniiuah. His integritij in the government
i)f Sardinia. His stile ; and memorable sayings. His remon-
strances to the Romans : bon mots : his consulship and expedi'
iiou into Spain. He is superseded by Scipio. His triumph.
His campaigns in Thrace and Greece. He retains the Greek
cities in their subjectioii. He souls to reconnoitre the Straits of
Thcrmopylcv. Difficulties in passing them. His zeal for justice^
and against the vicious. He stands for the offce of censor. Appre-
hensions of the higher classes, by rvhom he is ineffl'dnnlly opposed.
He gains his election, and displays great severity in the discharge
of his duti/. Incurs the odium of the ivealthy by his imposts upon
articles ofluxur.y : braves their resentment^ and defeats their hos-
tility. The jjeoplc erect a stniue to his honour, for having reformed
the public manners. His domestic virtues. The education, which
he himself gives his son, and it's siuxess. His treatment of his
slaves. He gives up agriculture for commerce. Arrival of Car-
veades, and Diogenes the stoic at Rome. Caters opinions ttpon,
Greek literature, philosophy, and medicine. His second marnage.
He loses his son : hi'^Jbrtitudc under this calamity. His mode of

492 CATO the censor.

life in the conntri/. He is sent to Carthage, to maJce up a quarret
between Masinissa and the vihabitanta of that city. He excites
the third Punic war. His death, and jmsteriti/.

Marcus CATO (it is said) wasbom atTuscuIum,
of which place his family originally was, and before
he was concerned in civil or military affairs, lived
upon an estate which his father had left him near the
country of the Sabines. Though his ancestors were
reckoned to have been persons of no note, yet Cato
himself boasts of his father, as a brave man and an
excellent soldier ; and assures us that his great
grand-father Cato received several military rewards,
and that having had five horses killed under him, he
had the value of them paid him out of the treasury,
as an acknowledgement of his gallant behaviour. As
the Romans always gave the appellation of ' New
Men' ' to those who, having no honours transmitted
to them from their ancestors, were the first of their
family to distinguish themselves, they designated
Cato by the same term : but he used to say, that he
was ' new * indeed with respect to ofiices and digni-
ties, but with regard to the services and virtues of his
ancestors, very ancient. V

His third name, at first, was not Cato, but Pris-
cus. It was subsequently changed to that of Cato,
on account of his remarkable wisdom ; for the

' The jus imaginum was annexed to the great offices of state,
and none had their statues or pictures, but such as had borne those
offices. He therefore, who had the pictures of his ancestors, was
called * noble;' he who had onh- his own, a 'new man;' and he,
who had neither the one nor the other, * ignoble.' So says Asconius.
But it does not appear that a man who hatl borne a great office, the
consulate for instance, was ' ignoble' because he had not his statue
or picture ; for he might not choose it. Cato himself did not choose
it ; his reason, we suppose, was because he had none of his ancestors,
though he himself assigned another, (See A. Gell. xiii.* 19.)

CATO THE CENSOR. 493

Romans call wise men ' Catos *.* He had red hair
and grey eyes, as the following little epigram ill-
naturedly enoLifjh declares :

With eyes so grey and hair so red.

With tusks 5 so sharp and keen,
Thou'lt friirlit the shades when thou art dead,

And hell won't let thee in.

Inured to labour and temperance, and brought up
as it were in camps, he had an excellent constitution
with respect to strength, as well as health. Elo-
quence he considered as a kind of second body, an
instrument of great things, not only usefid but ne-
cessary for every man, who docs not choose to live
obscure and inactive. Hence he exercised and im-
proved that talent in the neighbouring boroughs and
villages, by undertaking the causes of such as applied
to him ; so that he was soon allowed to be an able
pleader, and afterward a good orator.

From this time, all who conversed with him dis-
covered in him such a gravity of behaviour, such a
dignity and depth of sentiment, as qualified him for
the greatest affairs in the most respectable go\'ern-
ment in the world. For he was not only so disin-
terested as to plead without reward, but it appeared
that even the honour to be gained in these contents
was not his principal view. His ambition was mili-
tary glory ; and, v.hen yet but a youth, he had
fouirht in so many battles, tliat his breast was full of
scars. He himself informs us that he made his first
campaign at seventeen years of age, when Annibal
in the height of his prosperity was laying Italy waste
wdth fire and sword'. In battle he stood with a firm

^ The Latin word cuius signifies ' prudent :' and he appears t«»
have been the first, who bore it as a proper name.

^ The epigrammatist, when he says that he was yt!t'iS'»r.irr,c, * one^
that bit every thing which came in his way,' plays upon his name of
Porcius (qu. Parens, ' Hog.')

* If we refer this to the year of the battle of Cannaj, A. U. C.
538., we shall find Cato, as Cicero states, was born A. U. C. .5'21.
M. Kicard, from Cic. de Senect. iv., infers his birth to have tukea
place A. U. C. 519., and hi* first campaijju A. U. C 539.*

19 i CATO THE CENSOR.

and steadfast foot, a powerful arm, and a fierce coun-
tenance, and s})oke to his enemy in a threateninj];'
and dreadful accent ; for he rightly judged, and
endeavoured to convince others, that such a kind of
behaviour often strikes an adversary with more terror
than the sword itself. He always marched on foot,
and carried his own arms, followed onlv bv one ser-
vant who carried his provisions. And he never, it
/ is said, was angry or found fault with that servant.
j wliatever he set before him ; but, when he was at
! leisure from miHtarv dutv, would ease and assist him
'i\ in drcssinii: it. All tiie time he was in the armv, he
\\ drank nothing but water, except that when almost
I consumed with thirst, lie would ask tor a little vine-
I gar% or when he found his strcngtii exhausted, he
f would talvc a little wine.

Near liis countrv-.seat was a cottage formerlv
belonghig to ]\IaiiJu.s Curius", wlio was thrice ho-
noureii with a triumph. Cato often walked thither,
and refiectiriii: on the smallness of the ihrm and the
meanness of the dwelling, used to meditate upon the
peculiar virtues of the man who (though he was tlic
mop-t illustrious character in Rome, had subdued the
fiercest nations, and dri\en Pyrrhus out of Italy)
cul/tivated this little spot of ground with his own
IimkIs, and afler three triumphs retired to this cot-
tage. Here the em.bassadors of the Samnitcs found
liim in the chimney-corner dressing turnips, and of-
lered him a large present of gold : but he absolutely
refused it, remarking, " A man, who can be satisfied

5 Ol6c,-i/vy.riy.ov, says Ilinpocratt'S ; and, on account of this it's
-cooling quality, it was usually given to labourtrs in the harvest.
(See iUith, ii'. 14.)'^

^ JNianius Curius DcMitatus triumphed twice in his first consulate
(see Ilor. 1. xii. 11., I'lor. i. 1.').) ; over tlie ISanniitos, and over the
Sabines. And eight years afler that, in his tiiird consulate, he tri-
umphed over Pyrrhus. lie, suliseciueutly, led up an Ovation for
his victory over tlic lAicani.niJ:. (L.) This groat man, alter so many
achicvonentsand honours, pronounced that citizen a pernicious one,
%vho did not find seven acres of land (the (juantity ])rescril)ed upon
the expulsion of the kings) sufficient for his subsistence. (Plin. II.
N. xviii. a.)*

I

CATO THE CENSOR. 495

'' with such a supper, has no need of gold ; and I
" think it more glorious to conquer the possessors
" of it, tliau to possess it niyselK" Full of these
thoughts, Cato returned home ; and taking a view of
his own estate, liis servants, and his manner of hving,
increased his labour and retrenched his expenses.

When Fabius Ma\imus took t!ie citv of Tarentum,
Cato, who was then very young'', served under him.
Happening at that time to lodge with a Pythagorean
philosopher, named Nearchus, he desired to hear
some of his doctrine ; and learning from him the
same maxims which Plato advances, " That pleasure
" is the strongest incentive to evil ; that the heaviest
" burthen to the soul is the body, from which she
** cannot disengage or preserve herself, but by such
*' a wise use of reason as shall wean and separate her
*' from all corporeal passions," he became still more
attached to frugality and temperance. Yet it is said
that he learned Greek very late, and was considerably
advanced in years when he began to read the writers
in that language, from whom he improved his elo-
quence, somewhat by Thucydides, but by Demos-
thenes much more. His own writings, indeed, are
sufficiently adorned with precepts and examples bor-
rowed from the Greek ; and among his Maxims and
Sentences we find many, which are literally transla-
ted from the same originals.

At that time there flourished a Roman nobleman
of great eminence, called Valerius Flaccus, whose
penetration enabled him to distinguish a youth of
rising virtue, and whose benevolence inclined him to
encourage and conduct liim in the path of glory.
This nobleman had an estate contiguous to Cato's,
where he often heard his servants speak of liis neigh-
bour's laborious and temperate manner of life. They
told him, that he was accustomed to go early in the
morning to the little towns in the neighbourhood,

7 Fabius Maximus took Tarentum in hi? fifth consulate, A. U. C.
545. Cato was then twenty-three years old ; but he had made his
first campaign under the same Fabius five years before.

406 CATO THE CENSOR.

and defend the causes of such as applied to him 3
that thence he would return to his farm, where in a
coarse frock ^ if it was winter, and naked if it was
summer, he would labour with his domestics, and
afterward sit down v/ith them, and partake of their
bread and wine. They related also many other in-
stances of his condescension and moderation, and
mentioned several of his short sayings, full of wit and
good sense. Valerius, charmed with his character,
sent him an invitation to dinner. From that time,
by frequent conversation he found in him so much
sweetness of temper and ready wit, that he considered
him as an excellent plant, which only required culti-
vation, and deserved to be removed to a better soil.
He therefore advised and persuaded him to go to
Kome, and apply himself to affairs of state.

There, his pleadings soon procured him friends
and admirers ; the interest of Valerius, liivcwise,
greatly assisted his rise to preferment : so that he
was first made a tribune of the soldiers, and after-
ward quaestor. And having gained considerable
reputation and honour in those employments, he
"was joined with Valerius himself in the highest
dignities, being his collegue both as consul and
as censor.

Among all the ancient senators, he attached him-
self chieiiy to Fabius Maximus ; not so much how-
ever on account of his reputation and power, as for
the sake of his life and manners, which Cato consi-
dered as the best of models. So that he made no
scruple of differing from the great Scipio, wlio though
at that time but a young man, was yet through a
spirit of emulation the person most hostile to Fabius*
authority. For being sent qutestor with Scipio to
the war in Africa, and perceiving that he indulged
himself as usual in unbounded expenses, and lavished
the public money upon the troops, he took the

8 Eluyjtc^ a short and strait garment simply covering the shoulders*
See A. Gell. vii. 12. In this summer-costume we have the nudus
«ra of Virgil, Georg. i. !29ii.'^

(C

cc

ii

cc

cc

CATO THE CENSOR. 497

liberty to remonstrate : observino^, " That the pro-
digality itself was not the chief evil, but the con*-
sequence of that prodigality; since it corrupted
the ancient simplicity of the soldiery, who when
they had more money than was necessary for their
subsistence, were sure to squander it in luxury
and riot." Scipio replied, " That he had no
need of an excessively frugal treasurer, because
he intended to spread all his sails in the ocean of
w^ar, and because his country expected from him
an account of services performed, not of money
expended." Upon which Cato left Sicily, and
returned to Rome; where, in conjimction with
Fabius, he loudly complained to the senate " Of
tScipio's immense profusion, and of his passing his
time like a boy in wrestling-rings and theatres, as
if he had been sent out, not to make war, but to
" exhibit shows." In consequence of this, tribunes
were sent to examine into the affair; with orders, if
the accusation proved true, to bring Scipio back to
Rome. Scipio represented to them, " That success
" depended entirely upon the magnitude of the
" preparations ;" and made them sensible, " That
" though he spent his hours of leisure in a cheerful
" manner wdth his friends, his liberal mode of
" living had not caused him to neglect any serious
" or important business." With this defence the
commissioners were satisfied, and he set sail for
Airica.

As for Cato, he continued to gain so much autho- j
rity by his eloquence, that he was commonly called =;|
' the Roman Demosthenes;' but he w^as still more \
celebrated for his manner of living. His excellence \
as a speaker awakened a general emulation among
the youth, to distinguish themselves in the same
way, and to surpass each other : but few were willing
to imitate him in the ancient custom of tilling the
field with their own hands, or eating a dinner prepared
without fire, and a spare frugal supper ; few like him
could be satisfied with a plain dress and a poor cot-
VOL. II. 2 K

49S CATO THE CENSOR.

tage, or think it more honourable not to want the
superfluities of life, than to possess them. For the
commonwealth now no longer retained it's primitive
purity and integrity, on account of the vast extent
of it's dominions ; the many different affairs under
it's management, and the infinite number of people
subject to it's command, had introduced an amazing
variety of customs and modes of living. Justly there-
fore was Cato entitled to admiration, when the other
citizens were frightened at labour and enervated
with pleasure, and he alone remained unconquered
by either ; not only while young and ambitious, but
in his age and grey hairs, after his consulship and
triumph : like a brave wrestler, who after he has
come off conqueror, observes the common rules, and
continues his exercises to the last.

He himself informs us, that lie never wore a gar-
ment, which cost him more than a hundred drachmas;
that, even M'hen praetor or consul, he drank the same
wine with his slaves ; that a dinner never cost him
from the market above thirty ascs : and that he was
thus frugal for the sake of his country, in order to
enable himself to endure the harder service in war.
He adds that, having found among some goods, to
which he was heir, a piece of Babylonian tapestry,
he immediately sold it ; that the walls of his country-
houses were neither plaistered, nor white-washed ;
that he never gave more for a slave than fifteen
hundred drachmas, as not requiring in his servants
delicate shapes and fine faces, but strength and abi-
lity to labour, that they might be fit to be employed
as grooms and neat-herds ; and these he tliought
jiroper to sell again when they grew old ^, that he

* He himself says in express terms, * A master of a family should
sell his old oxen, and all the horned cattle tliat are of a delicate
frame ; all his sheep that are not hardy, their wool, their very pelts^
his old waggons, and the old instruments helonging to his hus-
bandry ; such likewise of his slaves, as arc old or infirm, and every
thing else that is useless. A master of a family should love to sell,
not to buy.' What a fine contrast there is between the spirit of

CATO THE CENSOR. 4C9

iiiiglit have no useless persons to maintain. In a
word, he thought notliing cheap, that was super-
fluous ; that what a man has no need of, is dear
even at a penny ; and that it is much better to have
fields, where the plough goes or cattle feed, than
iine gardens and walks, that require much watering
and sweeping. - A -"7k

Some imputed these things to a narrowness of
spirit, while others supposed that he betook him-
self to this contracted manner of living, in order to
correct by his example the grov/ing luxury of the
age. For my part, I cannot but charge his using
his servants like so many beasts of burthen, and
turning them off or selling them when grov*'n old,
to the account of a mean and ungenerous spirit,
which accounts the sole tie between man and man ,
interest or necessity. But goodness moves in a I
larger sphere than justice : the obligations of law 1
and equity reach only to mankind, whereas mercy \
and beneficence should be extended to creatures of
every species ; and these still flow from the breast
of a well-natured man, as stream.s that issue from
a copious fountain. A good man will take care of
his horses and dogs, not only while they are young,
but when old and past service. Thus the people of
Athens, when they had finished the temple called
Hecatompedon "", set at liberty the beasts of burthen
which had been chiefly employed in that work,
suffering them to pasture at large free from any
farther service. It is said, that one of these subse-
quently came of it*s own accord to work, and placing
itself at the head of the labouring cattle, marched
before them to the citadel. This pleased the people,
and they made a decree, that it should be kept at
the public charge as long as it lived. The graves of
Cimon's mares, with which he thrice conquered at

this old stoic, and that of the liberal-minded and benevolent Plu-
tarch ! (L.) Yet Washington, the tertiics Cato of these latter times,
is said to have sold his old charger!*
'° See the Life of Pericles, p. 23.

2 K 2

.500 CATO THE CENSOR.

the Olympic p^ames, are still to be seen near his-
own tomb. Many have shown particular marks of
regard in buryinor the doc^s, which thev had brouGclit
up and cherished ; and among the rest Xantliippus
of old, whose do2: swam by the side of his s^allev
to vSalamis, when the Athenians were forced to
abandon their city, and was subsequently interred
by his master upon a promontory to tliis day called
' the Doer's Grave''.* We certainly ouo-ht not to
treat livins; creatures like shoes or household i^oods,
which when worn out with use, we throw awav ;
and, were it only to teach benevolence to human
kind, we should be tender and m.erciful to other
creatures. For my own part, I would not sell even
an old ox, which had laboured for me ''; much less
would I banish as it were, for the sake of a little
money, a man grown old in my service from his
usual place and accustomed diet ; since he could be
of no more use to the buyer, than he was to the
seller. But Cato, as if lie took a pride in these
things, informs us that when consul he left his war-
horse in Spain, to save the public the charge of his
freight. Whether such things as these are instances
of greatness or littleness of soul, let the reader
judge for himself

He was, however, a man of wonderful temperance.
For, when general of the army, he took no more
from the public for himself and those about him than
three Attic medimni of wheat a month, and less
than a medinnius and a half ofbarley for his horses ''\
And when he was governor of Sardiuia, where his
predecessors had occasioned the province enormous
expenses for pavilions, bedding, and apparel, and

" Cynos-sema. See the Life of Tlioniistoclos, I. 328.

'* This, as M. llicard justly observes, is surely Ciirryiiiij the prin-
ciple too far ; and would eventually do more harm than good.
Gentle usage during their useful life, and a gentle dismission from
it, is all that humanity or Christianity claims at our hands, cspeciall}'
for such animals as are obviously intended for our subsistence.*

'i See the Life of Lycurgus, L 123.

CATO THE CENSOR. 501

still more by the number of tlieir friends and
attendants, and their sumptuous feasts and amuse-
ments, he on the contrary Avas as remarkable for his
frupility. He put the public, indeed, to no kind of
charge. Instead of making use of a carriage, he
walked from one town to another attended only by
a single officer, who carried his robe and a vessel
for libations. But, if in these things he appeared
plain and easy to those who were under his com-
mand, in every thing else he preserved great gravity
and severity. For he was inexorable in whatever
related to public justice, and inflexibly rigid in the
execution of his orders ; so that the Roman govern-
ment had never before appeared to that people
either so aweful, or so amiable '■*.

Tiiis contrast was found not only in his manners,
but in his stile, which was elegant, facetious, and
familiar, and at the same time grave, sententious,
and vehement. Thus Plato informs us, "The out- |
" side of Socrates was that of a satyr and a buffoon ;
" but his soul was all virtue, and from within him
" issued such divine and pathetic things, as drew
" tears from the hearers, and melted every heart '•\**
And as the same may justly be affirmed of Cato, I
cannot comprehend the meaning of those, who com-
pare his language to that of Lysias. This, however,
1 leave to the decision of those, who are more capa-
ble than myself of estimating the several sorts of
stile used among the Romans : and, being persuaded
that a man's disposition may be discovered much

'•* His only amusement was to hear the instructions of tlie poet
Ennius, under whom he learnetl the Greek sciences. He banislied
usurers from his province, and reduced the interest upon loans
ahnost to nothing.

'i Synipos. The effect of Socrates* eloquence upon Alcibiades
is stated in the Life of the latter, p. 11(>. Lysias' character,
^vhieh it is not requisite here to extract, maybe collected from Cic.
de Clar. Orat. ix., Dion. Haiic. in his Life of that orator, and
QuintihcUi x. 1. The latter writer in particular compares his
eloquence to, not the rapid course of a great river, b»t the quiet
flow 01 a limpid rivulet."*

66

oQ'i CATO THE CENSOR.

better by liis speech, than by his looks (though some
are of a different opinion), 1 shall record some of
Cato's remarkable sayings.

One day when the Romans were making an un-
seasonable clamour for a division and distribution of
corn, to dissuade them from it he thus began his
address ; " It is a difficult task, my fellow-citizens,
" to speak to the belly, because it has no ears." At
another time, complaining of the luxury of the Ro-
mans, he said, " It is a hard matter to save that
" city from ruin, where a fish is sold for more than
*' an ox^''.'* Upon another occasion he observed,
The Roman people are like sheep ; for as those
can scarcely be brought to stir singly, but all in a
body readily follow their leaders, just such (said
he) are ye. The men, whose counsel you would
not take as individuals, lead you with ease in a
" crowd." Speaking of the power of women, he
remarked, " All men naturally govern the women,
*' we govern all men, and our wives govern us."
But this is derived from the Apophtliegms of The-
niistocles ^\ For his son directing in most things
through his mother, he said, " The Athenians govern
«' the Greeks -, I govern the Athenians ; you, wife,
" govern me, and your son governs you : let him
" then use with moderation that power, vvhich, child
" as he is, sets him above all the Greeks." Another
of Cato's sayings was, " That the Roman people
" fixed the value, not only of the several kinds of
'^ colours, but of the arts and sciences. For (added
" he) as the dyers dye that sort of purple, which is
" most agreeable ta you, so our youth only study
" and strive to excel in such things as vou com-
*' mend." Exhorting the people to virtue, he said,

'^ Luxury was now rapidly making it's way at the tables of
Rome. Athengeus vi. 19. states, after Polybius, tliat salt-fish from
the Black Sea sold for nearly twelve guineas a-piece ! But see, for
instances of still greater extravagiuice in Tiberius' time in epicurism,
spectacles, furniture, &:c.. Suet. Tib. xxxiv,*

17 Sae his Life, L 339.

(C

CATO THE CENSOR. 503

•' If it is by virtue and temrcrance, that you are
" become great, change not tor the worse ; but, if
by intemperance and vice, change for the better :
for you are already great enough by such means
as these." Of persons perpetually soliciting for
high offices he observed, " Like men, who know
" not their way, they want lictors always to conduct
" them." He found fault with the people, for often
choosing the same persons consuls ; " You either
" (said he) think the consulate of small worth, or
" that there is but a small number worthy of the
" consulate." Concernins: one of his enemies, who
led a very profligate and infamous life, he remarked j
" His mother takes it for a curse, and not a prayer,
" vrhen any one wishes her son may survive her."
Pointing to a man, who had sold a paternal estate
near the sea-side, he pretended to admire him, as
one who was strons^er than the sea itself; " For
" (said he) what the sea could not have swallowed
" without difficulty, this man has taken down with
" all imaginable ease." When king Eumenes came
to Rome, the senate received him with extraordinary
respect, and the principal citizens strove which
should do him the most honour, but Cato visibly
neglected and shunned him. Upon which some-
body inquired, " Why do you shun Eumenes, who
" is so good a man, and so great a friend to the
" Romans?" " That may be," answered Cato,
" but I look upon a king as a creature that feeds
" u])on human flesh ^* ; and, of all kings who have
'' been so much celebrated, I find not one to be
compared with an Epaminondas, a Pericles, a
Themistocles, a Manius Curius, or with Hamilcar
" Barcas." He used to say, that " His enemies
" hated him, because he neglected his own concerns,
and rose before day to mind those of the public.
But that he would rather his good actions should

I

^ Thi? jest is taken from the phrase in Homer (II. i. 231.)
si]>/je^o(cr, ^'/.fr;Mviy ' a pcople-devouring king.'

12

SOi CATO THE CENSOR.

i

" go unrewarded, than his bad ones unpimisheci ;
" and that he pardoned every body's faults with
" greater ease than his own.** The Romans having
sent three embassadors to the king of Bitiiynia, of
whom one had the gout, another had his skull tre-
|l panned, and the third was accounted little better
' than a fool, Cato smiled and observed ; " They had
" sent an embassy, which had neither feet, head,
" nor heart '^.'* When Scipio applied to him at the
request of Polybius in behalf of the Acha?an exiles-'^,
and the matter was much canvassed in the senate, f
sonje speaking in favour of their restoration and
some against it, Cato rose up and said ; " As if we
" had nothing else to do, we sit here all day debat-
" ing, whether a few poor old Greeks shall be buried
*' by our grave-diggers, or by those of their own
" countrv?" The senate then decreed, that the
exiles should return home ; and Polybius some days
afterward endeavoured to procure another meeting
of that body, to restore those exiles to their former
honours in Achaia. Upon this affair he sounded
Cato, who answered smiling, " This was just as if
" Ulysses should have wished to enter the Cyclops*
" cave again for a hat and a belt, which he had left
" behind!'* It was a saying of his, " That wise
" men learn more from fools, than fools from wise
" men ; for the wise avoid the errors of fools,
" while fools do not profit by the examples of the
" wise.'* Another of his sayings was, " That he
" liked a young man who blushed, more than one
who turned pale : and that he did not a})prove a
soldier, who moved his hands in marching and

^^ Some ancients, says M. Ilicarcl, particularly Aristotle and the
stoics, placed the soul or understanding in the heart.*

^° The Acliseans had entered into measures for delivering up
their country to the king of Persia : but, being detected, a thousatid
of tht m were seized, and compelled to live exiles in Italy. There
they continued seventeen years ; after which about three hundred,
who were still living, were restored by a decree of the semte spe-
cially enacted in fiivour of Polybius, one of the number. (See Supp.
Liv. xhx. 3.)

(C

CATO THE CENSOR. 505

" his feet in fighting, and wlio snored louder in bed
" than he shouted in battle/' Jesting upon a very
fat man, he asked, " Of what service to his country
" can such a body be, which from the tliroat to the
" groin is nothing but belly?" When an epicure
desired to be admitted into his friendship, he re-
marked, " He could not live with a man, whose
" palate had quicker sensations than his heart." He
used to say, " The soul of a lover lived in the body
*' of another:" And that, " In all his life, he had
never repented but of three things : the first, that
he had trusted a woman with a secret ; the second,
that he had gone by sea when he might have gone
by land ; and the third, that he had passed one
day without having a will by him '-\'* To an old
debauchee he observed, " Old age has deformities
" enow of it's own ; do not add to it that of vice."
A tribune of the people, who had the character of
a poisoner, proposing a bad law and strenuously
exerting himself to get it passed, Cato said to
him, " Young man, I know not whether is the
" more dangerous ; to drink what you mix, or to
" enact what you propose." Being scurrilously
treated by a man, who liad led a dissolute and infa-
mous life, he said, " It is upon very unequal terms
" that I contend with you ; for you are accustomed
" to hear reproach, and can utter it with pleasure ;
" but with me it is disagreeable to utter, and un-
" usual to hear it." Such was the manner of his
repartees, and short sayings.

Being appointed consul along with his friend Va-
lerius Flaccus, the government of that part of Spain
which the Romans call Citcrior, ' Hither,' fell to
his lot -'-. While he was subduing some of the na-

21 A^ta^iToc. This has been misunderstood by all the translators
who have agreed in rendering it, ' that he had passed one day idly.*
(L.) M. Ricard follows the old interpretation. Langhorne's is
al'ter Meiziriac.*

" As Gate's troops consisted for the most part of raw soldiers,
he took great pains to discipline them ; knowing that they had to

9

i6

g

306 CATO THE CEN.SOPv.

tions there by arms, ant! winninp: others by kindness,
a large army of barbarians fell upon him, and he was
in danger of being driven out with dishonour. Upon
this occasion, he sent to desire succours of his neigh-
bours the Celtibcrians, who demanded two Iiundred
talents for that service. All the officers of his army
thought it intolerable, that the Romans should be
obliged to purchase assistance of the barbarians.
But Cato said, " It is no such great hardship : for if
w^e conquer, we shall pay them at the enemy's ex-
pense ; and, if we are conquered, there will be no-
body either to pay or to make the demand.'* He
gained the battle, and every thing subsequently suc-
ceeded to his wish. Polybius informs us, that the
walls of all the Spanish towns on this side the river
Bastis vrere rased by his command in one day-^, not-
withstanding their numbers and the bravery of their
inhabitants. Cato himself informs us, that he took
more cities than he spent days in Spain, nor was it
a false boast ; for they were actually not fewer than
four hundred -\ Though this campaign afforded the
soldiers much booty, he gave each of them a pound
weight of silver besides j saying, " It is better that

deal with the Spaninrds, who in their wars with tlie Romans and
Carthaginians had learned the military- art, and were naturally hrave
and courageous. Before he came to action, he sent away his fleet,
that his soldiers might place all their hopes in their valour. With
the same view, when he came near the enemy, he made a circuit,
and posted liis army behind them in the plain; so that the Spani-
ards were between him and his camp. Tlie province here spoken
of constituted nearly the northern half of Spain.

-5 As the dread of his name procured him great respect in all
the provinces beyond the Iberus (hod. Ebro), he wrote on the same
day private letters to the commanders of several fortified towns» i.

oi-dering them to demolish without delay their Ibrtifications ; and
assuring them, that he would pardon none, but such a^ rcacjily com-
plied with his orders. Every one of the commanders, .believing the
orders to be sent only to himself, immediately beat down their walls
and towers. (Liv. xxxiv. 15.)

-^ This number is more agreeable to the calculation of Ptolcmj,
M'ho computes the cities, c^-c. of old Spain at three hundred and
eighty, than to that of Pliny, who onl}' uuikes them aniount to one
hundred and eighty-four. * ft

CATO THE CENSOR. 507

ii

many of the Romans slioiild return with silver in
their pockets, than a few with gold." And for his
own part he assures us, that of the whole of what
was taken in the war, nothing came to his share but
what he eat and drank : " Not that I blame (says
" he) those, who seek their own advantage in these
" things; but I had rather contend for valour with
the brave, tiian for wealth with the rich, or in
rapaciousncss with the covetous." And he not
only kept himself free from extortion, but all those
likewise who were under his immediate direction.
He had five servants with him in this expedition, one
of whom, named Paccus, had purchased three boys
from among the prisoners : but when he understood
that his master was informed of it, unable to meet
his eye, he hanged himself. Upon which Cato sold
the boys, and put the money into the public treasure.
While he was settling the affairs of Spain, Scipio
the Great, who was his enemy, and wished to in-
terrupt the course of his success and to have the
finishing of the war himself, managed matters so as
to get himself appointed his successor. After which,
he made all possible haste to take from him the
command of the army. But Cato, hearing of his
marcli, set off with five companies of foot and five
hundred horse, as a convoy to attend upon Scipio ;
and on his way defeated the Lacetanians ", and took
among them six hundred Roman deserters, whom
he caused to be put to death. And, upon Scipio's
expressing his displeasure at this, he answered ironi-
cally ; " Rome would be great indeed, if men of
" birth would not yield the palm of virtue to ple-
" beians, and if plebeians like iiimself would contend
" for excellence with men of birth.'* Besides, as
the senate had decreed that nothing should be dis-
turbed or altered which ("ato had established, the
post which Scipio had so anxiously solicited rather

^s A small Catalpnian tribe, near the foot of the Pyrenees.*

508 CATJ THE CENSOR.

tarnished his own glory, tlian that of Cato ; for he
"--y-^ontinued inactive during- that government.
^ In the raean time, Cato was honoured with a tri-
umph. Btit he did not afterward remit or lessen
his eiforts like those, whose ambition is only for fame,
and not for virtue ; and who having readied the
his^hest honours, borne the otfice of consul, and led
up triumphs, w^ithdraw from public business and
give the rest of their days to ease and pleasure. On
the contrary, like those who are just entered upon
business, and thirst for honour and renovrn, he ex-
erted himself as if he were beginning his race anew ;
his services beinf^ alv/ays ready both for his friends
in particular, and ibr the citizens in general, either
at the bar or in the field. For he went with the
consul Tiberius Sempronius to Thrace and the Da-
5iube "'^, as his lieutenant. And he attended Manius
Acilius Glabrio as a legionary tribune into Greece,
in the w'ar against Antiochus the Great ; who, next
to Annibal, was the most formidable opponent the
Romans ever encountered. For having recovered
almost all the provinces of Asia which Seleucus Ni-
canor had possessed, and reduced many warlike na-
tions of barbarians, he was so much elated, as to
think the Romans the only enemies worthv of his |
prowess. Accordingly he crossed the sea with a
powerful army, colouring his design with the spe-
cious pretence of restoring liberty to the Greeks; of
■which however they stood in no need, having: been
lately rescued by tiie kindness of the Romans from
the yoke of Philip and the Macedonians ', and ren-
dered independent.

^^ The year after his consulship. Examples of tliis condescension, *

in generals and men of consular quality, abound in Roman historj\ If

Epann'nondas, afler having several times filled the high appoint-
ment of bcrotarch, stooped to accept a small police-office, and dis«
charged it with the most scrupulous attention and punctuality.*

^^ By Titus Quinctius Flaminius, who proclaimed the independ-
ence of Greece at the Isthmian games, A. U. C. ^5%. JSee his
Life, III. Vo.

CATO THE CENSOR. 509

Upon lus approach, all Greece was in the utmost
commotio!], and unresolved how to act ; being cor-
rupted with the splendid hopes infused by the ora-
tors, whom Antiochus had gained. Aciluis, there-
fore, sent embassadors to the several states ; Titus
Flaminius appeased the disturbances, and as 1 have
related in his Life, without having recourse to any-
violent means, retained most of tlic (creeks in the
Roman interest ; and Cato confirmed the people of
Corinth, as well as those of Patras and iT^gium, in
their duty. He also made a considerable stay at
Athens ; and there is still extant (it is said) a speech
of his, which he deliv^ered to the Athenians in Greek,
expressing his admiration of the virtue of their an-
cestors, and his satisfaction in beholding the beauty
and grandeur of their city. But this account is not
true, for he spoke to them by an interpreter. Not
that he v^as ignorant of Greek ; but he chose to
adhere to the customs of his country, and laugh at
those who admired nothing but what was Greek.
He therefore ridiculed Posthumius Albinus, who
had written a history in that language and apologised
for his improprieties of expression : saying, " He
" ought to be excused, i^ he wrote it by command
" of the Amphictyons." ^Vc are assured, that the
Athenians admired the strength and conciseness
of his language ; for what he delivered in few words.
the interpreter was obliged to make use of many,
fully to explain ; so as to convince them, that the
expressions of the Greeks flowed only from the lips,
while those of the Romans came from the heart -^

Antiochu.s having blocked up the narrow pass of
ThermopyicE witli his troops, and added walls and
entretichments to the natural fortifications of the
place, sat down there unconcerned, thinking the

-3 There cannot be a stronger instance than this, that the brld'
expression of llio Spartans was owini; to tiie native simpliclfv of
their manners and t!ie sincerity of their hearts. It was the expres-
sion of nature. Artificial and circumlocutory expressions, like
licentious paintings, are tlje consequences of h'centious life.

510 CATO THE CENSOR.

v/ar could not touch him. And, indeed, the Ro-
mans despaired of forcing the pass. But Cato, re-
collecting: the circuit which the Persians had taken
upon a like occasion % set out in the night with a
proper detachment.

When they had advanced a considerable height,
the guide who was one of the prisoners niissed his
■way, and wandering about among impracticable
places and precipices, threw the soldiers into inex-
pressible dread and despair. Cato, observing the
danger, ordered his forces to halt ; while he with one
Lucius Manlius, who was dextrous in climbing the
steep mountains '°, went forward with great difficulty
and at the hazard of his life at midni^lht without anv
moon, scrambling among wild olive-trees and steep
rocks, which still more impeded his view and added
darkness to the obscurity. At last, they hit upon
a path, which seemed to lead down to the enemy's
camp. There they set up marks on some of the
most conspicuous rocks upon the top of the moun-
tain Callidromus, and returning the same way took
the whole party with them ; conducting them by the
direction of the marks, and thus regaining the path
which they had left, where they made a proper dispo-
sition of the troops. Tliey had marched but a little
farther, when the path failed them, and they saw no-
thing before them but a precipice, which distressed
them still more ; for they could not yet perceive,
that they were near the enemy.

The day now began to appear, when one of them
thought lie heard the sound of human voices, and
soon afterward they saw the Grecian camp and the

*5> In the Persian war, Leonidas with only three hundred Spar-
tans sustained the shock of an innumerable multitude in the pass of
Thermopyla:;, until the barbarians taking a circuit round the moun-
tains by bye-ways came upon him from behind, and cut his party
in pieces.

3° The mountains to the east of the straits of Thermopylae are
comprehended under the name of (Eta, and the highest of tliera is
called Calhdromus, at the foot of which is a road si^tv feet broad,
(Liv. xxxvi. 15., and Strabo ix.)

a

ii
it

CATO THE CENSOR. ^il

advanced guard at the foot of the rock. Cato there-
fore made a halt, and sent to acquaint the Firmians,
that he wislied to speak with them in private ^^
These were troops, v/hose fidelity and courage he
had experienced upon the most dangerous occasions.
Tiiey immediately liastened into his presence, when
lie thus addressed them : " I am desirous of taking
one of the enemy alive, to learn from him who
they are that compose this advanced guard, and
how many in number ; and to be informed what
is the disposition and order of their whole army,
and what preparations they have made to receive
us. But the business requires the speed and im-
petuosity of lions, who rush into a herd of timo-
" rous beasts."

When Cato had finished speaking, the Firmians
without farther preparation poured down the moun-
tain, surprised the advanced guard, dispersed them,
took one armed man, and brought him to Cato.
This prisoner told him, that the main body of the
army was encamped with the king in the narrow
pass, and that the detachment which guarded the
heights consisted of six hundred select ^tolians.
Cato despising these troops, on account as well of
their number as of their negligence ^", drew his
sw^ord the first, and rushed upon them with all the
alarm of voices and trumpets. The ^tolians no

A.

sooner saw him descend from the precipices, than
they fled to the main body, and threw the whole
into the utmost confusion.

At the same time, Manius forced Antiochus* en-
trenchments belov/, and poured into the pass with
his army. Antiochus Iiimself being wounded in the
mouth with a stone, and having some of his teeth
struck out, the anguish obHged him to turn his horse
and retire. After his retreat, no part of his army

3' Firmium was a Roman cojoay in the Picene, hod. the iNIarch
of Ancona.

3^ The «;\ivo7i;; and 6A«vtjpi« of the original include ajeu de mot,
which can hardly evei- be preserved in a version.*

J

glS CATO THE CENSOR.

could withstand tlie shock of the Romans ; and
though there appeared no hopes of escaping by
flight, on account of the straitness of the road, the
deep marshes on one side and the rocky eminences
on the other, they yet crowded along tln-ough those
narrow passages, and pushing each other down from
fear of being destroyed by the Romans, miserably .
perished. 4

\ Cato, who was never sparing in his own praises',
f and thouc;ht boastinn; a natural attendant on "rreat
^ actions, is very pompous in his account of this ex- *
\ ploit : " Those, who saw him charging the enemy
*' (he states), routing and pursuing them, declared
" that Cato owed less to the people of Rome, than
*' the people of Rome to Cato ; and that the consul
** Manius himself, coming hot from the fight, took
" him in his arms as he likewise came in panting
*' with exertion, and embracing him a long time
" cried out in a transport of joy, that ' Neither he
" nor the whole Roman people could sufficiently
" reward Cato's merit.' "

Immediately after the battle, the consul sent him
with an account of it to Rome, that he miglit be the
first to carry the news of his own achievement. He
had a favourable wind to Brundusium : thence he
reached Tarentum in one day; and, having travelled
four days more, arrived at Rome the fifth day after
he landed, and was tlie fii-st who brought tlie intelli-
2;ence of tlie victorv. His arrival filled tlie citv
with sacrifices and other testimonies of joy, and gave
the people so high an opinion of themselves, tliat
they now believed there could be no boimds by sea
or land to their empire.

These are the most remarkable of Cato*s actions.
With respect to civil affairs, he appears to have
thought the impeaching of oifendcrs and bringing
them to justice, a thing which well deserved his at-
tention. For he prosecuted several, and encouraged
and assisted others in carrying on their prosecutions.
Thus he set up Petilius against Scipio the Great :

CATO THE CENSOR. 51S

but, secure in the dignity of his family and his OAvn
magnanimity, Scipio treated the accusation with the
utmost contempt. Cato, perceiving that he would
not be capitally condemned, dropped the prosecu-
tion : but, in concert with some other accusers, he
impeached his brother Lucius Scipio, who was sen-
tenced to pay a fine beyond his ability, so that he
"was in danger of imprisonment ; and it was not with-
out great difficulty, by appealing to the tribunes,
that he was dismissed ^^

We have also an account of a young man, that had
procured a A'erdict against an enemy of his father
who was lately dead, and got him stigmatised. Cato
met him, as he w^as passing through the Forum, and
taking him by the hand addressed him in these
words: " It is thus that we are to sacrifice to the
" manes of our parents, not with the blood of goats
" and lambs, but with the tears and condemnation
" of their enemies."

Cato, however, did not escape these attacks ; but,
whenever in the business of the state he gave the
least handle, he was invariably prosecuted, and some-
times in danger of being condemned. For it is
said, that nearly fifty impeachments were brought
against him ; the last, when he was eighty-six years
of age : upon which occasion he made use of the
memorable expression, " It is hard that I, who have
" lived with men of one o-cneration, should be ob-
" liged to make my defence to those of another.'*
Neither was this the end of his contests at the bar ;
for four years afterward, at tlie age of ninety ^^, he im-

55 Tliis unbounded privilege of impeachment, like all great ad-
vantages, was liable to great perversion: and even Oato himself does
not seem, in exercising it, to iiave uniforn^ly kept his eve upon the
public interest.*

34 Plutarch here is not consistent with himself. Toward the be-
ginning of this life he says, that Cato was but seventeen years old at
the time of Annibal's success in Italy; and at the conclusion he
informs us, that he died at tlie beginning of the third Punic war.
But the battle of Canute took place A.U. C. SfiS; and the third
Punic war broke out, A. U. C. 60j. According to this computa-
VOL. II. 2 L

514 CATO THE CENSOR.

])eachc(l Scrviliiis Galba: so that like Nestor lie
lived three generations, and like him too was alway-;
in action. In short, after having constantly opposed
Scipio in matters of government, he lived until the
time of Scipio the Younger liis adopted grandson,
and the son of Paulus ^'Jmilius who conquered Per-
seus and the Macedonians.

Ten years after his consulship, Cato stood for the
office of censor, the apex of all civil honor.r, and the
M-inding up as it were of all the dignities of state,
i' or, beside the other authority with which this office
was invested, it gave the magistrate a right of in-
quiry into the lives and manners of the citizens.
The Romans did not think it proper, that any one
should be left to follow his own inclinations witliout
inspection or control, either in marriage, in the pro-
creation of children, in his table, or in his society.
But, convinced tliat in these private scenes of life
a man's real character was much more distinguish-
able than in his public and political transactions,
they appointed tv/o magistrates, the one out of the
patricians and tlie otlier out of the plebeians, to in-
spect, regulate, and chastise such as they found in-
clined to dissipation and licentiousness, and desert-
ing the ancient and established modes of living.
These great ofiicers were called Censors, and invest-
ed with power to deprive a Roman knight of his
horse, or to expel a senator who led a vicious and^
disorderly life. They likewise took an estimate of
eacii citizen's estate,* and enrolled them according
to their pedigree and condition.

This Oiilce has several other great prerogatives
annexed to it^^: and therefore, when Cato solicited
it, the principal senators opposed him. The motive
to this opposition, with some of the patricians, was
envy ; for they regarded it as a disgrace to the no-
tion, Cato couUl not he more than eighty-five years old when hs
died, A. I '. C. GOo ; and tliis account is confirmed by Cicero dti

Clar. Orat. xx. Sec also ?lin. II. N. xxix. 1.

. i> See the Life of Camillus, I. 363., not. (5.)

CATO THE CENSOR. 516

bility, that persons of a mean and obscure origin
should be elevated to the hiohest honour in the state.
With others, it was fear ; lor, conscious that their
lives were vicious, and that they had departed from
tlie ancient simplicity of manners, tliey dreaded the
austerity of Cato, because they apprehended that he
would be stern and inexorable in his oflice. Having
consulted and prepared their measures, they set up
seven competitors in opposition to him ; and, ima-
gining that the people wished to be governed v/itli
an easy hand, soothed them with the hopes of a mild
censorship. Cato on the contrary, v/ithout conde-"
scending to the least complaisance, in his speeches
from the Rostrum professed his resolution to punish
every instance of vice ; and loudly declaring that
the city required thorough reformation, conjured the
people, if they were wise, to choose not the mildest,
but the severest physician. He told them, that he
himself was one of that character, and among the
patricians Valerius Flaccus was another ; and that
with him for his collegue, and him alone, he could
hope to render good service to the commonv/ealth,
by effectually cutting off and searing the hydra-like
luxury and effeminacy of the times. He added, that
he saw others pressing into the censorship, in order
to exercise it negligently, because they were afraid
of such as would discharge it faithfully.

The Roman people upon this occasion showed
themselves truly great, and worthy of the best of
leaders : for, far from dreading the severity of this
inflexible man, they rejected those smoother candi-
dates who seemed ready to consult their pleasure in
every thing, and chose Valerius Flaccus v/ith Cato ;
attending to the latter, not ai one who solicited the
Oiiice of censor, but as one who, already possessed
of it, gave out his orders by virtue of his authority.

Cato then named his friend and collegue Lucius
Valerius Flaccus chief of the senate, and expei'^
many others from the house ; particularly ^
Quinctius, who had been consul seven ye-"'

2 L 2

a
cc

51(5 CATO THE CENSOR.

and (wliat was a still higher honour) was brother to
Titus FJaminiiis, the conqueror of king Philip.

The cause of his expulsion was the following ;
Lucius was strongly attached to a favourite boy,
whom he always kept near him, and carried witli
him even when he commanded armies, and who had
greater influence and interest with him than any of
his most intimate friends. When Lucius was resi-
dent in his proconsular province, one day as they
were drinking, this boy (who sat next him, as usual)
among other fulsome attentions to his master, a man
easily manageable in liis cups, said ; " I love you
so tenderly, that I left at home a show of gladia-
tors, which I had never seen before, in order to
come to you, though I long to see a man killed."
" In return for this favour,'* he replied, " you shall
" not sit uneasily at my table : I will soon cure
" your longing." L'pon which, he ordered a con-
vict to be brought into tiic room, where they were
carousinjT : and sendim^ for one of his lictors with an
ax, he again asked his minion, whether he wished
to see the execution ; and, on his answering in the
affirmative, commanded the criminal's head to be
struck off. The story is thus told by most writers,
and Cicero (in his Dialogue on Old Age) introduces
Cato ffivino; this account of the matter. Livv how-
ever states, that the person slain was a Gaulish de-
serter, and that Lucius killed him not by the lictor,
but with his own hand ; and for this, he quotes the
authority of Cato himself.

Lucius being thus expelled from the senate by
Cato, hio brother indignantly appealed to the people,
and summoned Cato to assign his reason for the ex-
pulsion. And, while he was relating in full detail
the transaction of tlie banquet, Lucius '^^ attempted

i^>It seems probable, from a subsequent and nearly identical ac-

a/)ov^ t'lis expulsion (in the Life of Flaminius, III. 55.), that we

'/;/i/s ,j7„ '1 'Titus' in this place. See also Livy xxxix. 41. The

^*'by a capricious delicacy in Langhorne, is omitted in.

'nserted almost verbatim in the Life just quoted.*

CATO THE CENSOR. .^517

to deny the thing; but upon Cato's tendering to
him an oath, he shrunk from it, and his expulsion
w-as therefore pronounced vahd. On a subsequent
exhibition of shows however, the people had pity
upon him, as he passed by the consuhir seat and
placed himself as far from it as he could, and called
him back ; to the utmost of their power correcting,
and healing, what had taken place.

He expelled also Manilius another senator, whom
the general opinion had marked out for consul, be-
cause he had given his wife a kiss in the day-time
in the sight of his daughter. " For his own part,"
he said, " his wife never embraced him, except
" when it thundered dreadfully ;" adding, by way
of joke, " That he was happy, when Jupiter was
"' pleased to thunder."

He was censured as having merely indulged his
envy in degrading Lucius, who was brother to
Scipio the Great, and had been honoured with a
triumph ; for he took from him his horse, and it was
believed he did it to insult the memory of Scipio
Africanus. But there was another thing, w^hicli
rendered him more generally obnoxious ; and that
was the reformation, which he introduced with re-
spect to luxury. To begin his attack upon it openly^
was impossible, because the whole body of the peo-
ple was infected, and he therefore took an indirect
method. He caused an estimate to be made of all
apparel, carriages, female ornaments, furniture, and
utensils ; and whatever exceeded fifteen hundred
drachmas in value, he rated at ten times as much,
and imposed a tax according to that valuation. For
every thousand ase.Sy he made them ])ay three ; in
order that those who found themselves burthcned
with the tax, while the mode>it and frugal with equal
substance paid much less to the public, might be in-
duced to retrench their api)earance. This procured
him many enemies, not only among those, who ra-
ther than part with their luxury submitted to the

515 CATO THE CENSOR.

iinpost, but amoiio: those likewise who lessened their
expenses to avoid it. For the generality of mankind
think, that a prohibition to show their wealth is the
same thing as taking it away ; and that optdence is
seen in the sirperiluities, not in the necessaries of
life. And this (we are told) was what surprised
Aristo the philosopher ; for he could not compre-
hend, why those who are possessed of superfluities
should be accounted happy, rather than those who
abound in what is necessary and useful. But Scopas
the Thessalian, when one of his friends asked him
for something which could be of little use or conve-
nience to him, and gave that as a reason why he
should grant his request, replied ; " It is in these
" useless and superfluous tilings, that I am rich and
" happy." Thus the desire of wealth, far from
being a natural passion, is an adventitious and fb-
Teimi one, arisini^ from vulvar oninion.

Cato paid no regard to these complaints, but ra-
ther increased his rigour. He cut off the pipes, by
which people conveyed water from tlie public foun-
tains into their houses and gardens, and demolished
all the buildings which projected into the streets.
He lowered the price of public works, and thi-med
out the public revenues at the highest rent which
they could bear. By these things lie brought him-
self into great odium : so that Titus Flaminius and
his party attacked him, and prevailed upon the se-
nate to annul the contracts, which lie had made for
repairing the temples and public buildings, as de-
trimental to the state. They farther incited the
boldest of the tribunes to accuse him to the people,
and fine him two talents. They likewise vehemently
opposed him with regard to a hall, wiiich he built at
the public charge below the senate-house by the
Forum, called ' the Porcian Hall."

Tiie people, however, appear to have been highly
pleased with his behaviour in this ofiice. For when
ihey erected his statue in the temple of Hcaltli,

\

CATO THE CENSOR. 519

tliey made no mention on the pedestal of his victo-
ries and his triumj)]), but the inscription was to this
eftect : " In honour of Cato the C ensor, who when
the Koman commonwcaltli was dechninc^ and lean ins;
to decay, set it upright again by salutary discipline
and wise ordinances and institutions."

Before this, he Iiad ridiculed those who were fond
of such honours, and said; " They were not aware
" that they })lumed themselves upon the workman-
" sln'p of founders, statuaries, and painters, while
" the Romans bore about a more glorious image of
" him in their hearts." And to those who expressed
their wonder tliat, while many persons of little note
had tlieir statues, Cato had none, he replied; " He
" Juid much rather it shoidd be asked, why he had
" not a statue, than why he had one." In short,
lie was of opinion that a good citizen should not even
accept his due praise, unless it tended to the ad-
vantage of the connnunity. Yet, of all men, he was
the most forward to commend himself: for he in-
forms us that those who were guilty of misdemeanors,
and afterward reproved for them, used to sa\^, " They
" were excusable; they w^ere not Catos ^"^ :" and
that such as imitated some of his actions, but did
it awkwardly, were called ' left-handed Catos.' He
adds, " That the senate in dangerous times cast
" their eyes upon him, as ])assengers in a ship do

upon the })iIot in a storm :" and " Tliat, when
' he happened to be absent, they liequently defer-
" red the consideration of matters of impoitance."
These ])articu]ars, indeed, are conhrmed by other
writers; for his life, liis eloquence, and his age, gave
him great authority in Rome.

He was a good father, a kind luisband, and an
excellent economist. And as lie did not think the
care of his family a mean and trifling thing, de-

3** Thus had his name become proverbial fov moral correctne**;.
Witness, too, the

Teiijits e ccelo cccidit Cato. (Juv. ii. 10.)*

c

520 CATO THE CENSOR.

iiianding only a superficial attention, it may be of use
to give some account of his conduct in that respect.

He chose his wife rather for her linnily, than her
fortune ; persuaded that, though women of both
descriptions have their pride and self-consequence,
yet tiiose of 2;ood families are more ashamed of any
base action, and more obedient to their husbands in
every thing that is honourable. He used to say,
that they who beat their Vv'ives or children, laid their
sacrilegious hands on the most sacred things in the
world ; and that he preferred the character of a
good husband to that of a great senator. And he
admired nothing more in Socrates, than his having
lived in an easy and quiet manner with an ill-tem-
pered w^ife and stupid children. Wlien he had a
son born, no business however urgent, except it re-
lated to the public, could hinder him from being
present while his wife washed and swaddled the in-
fant. For she suckled it herself; nay, she often
gave the breast to her servants' babes, to inspire
tliem witli a brotherly regard for her own.

As soon as the dawn of understanding appeared,
Cato took upon himself the ofiice of schoohnaster to
his son, though he had a slave named Chilo, who
was a respectable grammarian and taught several
other children. But he did not choose (he informs
us) tliat his son should be reprimanded by a slave,
or pulled by the ears if he happened to be slow in
learning, or indebted to so meari a person for his
education. He was, therefore, himself his pre-
ceptor in grammar, in law, and in the necessary
exercises. For he taught him not only how to throw
a dart, to fight hand to hand, and to ride, but to
box, to endure heat and cold, and to swim in the
roughest and most rapid parts of the river. He
■wrote histories for him, he farther acquaints us, with
his own hand in larj.;e characters ; so that, without
stirring out of his father's house, he might gain a
knowledge of the illustrious actions of the ancient

CATO THE CENSOR. 521

Komans and of the customs of his countrv. He was
as careful not to utter an indecent word ""^ before his
son, as he would have been in the presence of the
vestal virgins ; neither did he ever bathe with him.
A regard to decency \\\ this respect was, indeed, at
that time general among the Ronians : for even
sons-in-law avoided bathing with their fathers-in-law,
not choosing to appear undressed and naked before
them. The Greeks however subsequently taught
them not to be so scrupulous in uncovering tlicm-
selves, and they in their turn taught the Greeks to
bathe naked even before the women.

While Cato was adopting such excellent measures
for forming his son to virtue, he found him naturally
ductile both in genius and inclination ; but as his
bodv was too weak to undergo much hardshii), his
father was obliged to relax the severity of his disci-
pline, and to indulge him a little in point of diet.
Yet even with this constitution he was an excellent
soldier, and particularly distinguished himself under
Paulus .^milius in the battle against Perseus. Upon
this occasion his sword happening to be struck from
his hand, the moisture of which prevented him from
grasping it firmly, he turned to some of his compa-
nions with deep concern, and implored their assist-
ance in recovering it. He then rushed with them
into the midst of the enemy, and having with extra-
ordinary efforts cleared the place where the sword
was lost, he at last found it under heaps of arms and
dead bodies of fHends, as well as enemies, piled
upon each other '"^. Paulus ^milius admired tliis
gallant action of the young man ; and there is a let-
ter still extant, written by Cato to his son, in which
he extremely commends his activity and high sense
of honour expressed in the recovery of that sword.

39 How Strongly does Juvenal press this most important particular
iipon a parent's notice !

Maxima ddiciur jmcro re-cc.rcntia, Sec.

(Sat.xiv. 4-7.)».
4* See the Life of Pawlus /EmilluP, p. f,09.*

522 CATO THE CENSOfi.

The young man subsequejitly married Tertia, (\aup:h-
ter to Paulus yEiiiiliiis and sister to young Scipio j
the honour of which a]hance was as much owing to
his own, as to his fath.er's merit. Thus Cato's care
in the education of his son answered the end pro-
posed.

He had many slaves wdiom he purchased among
the captives taken in war, alu-ays choosing th.e
youngest and such as were most capable of instruc-
tion, hke whe]ps or colts that may be trained at plea-
sure. None oi' these slaves ever went into anv other
man's house, except they were sent by Cato or his
wife; and if any of them was asked what his master
-was doing, he always ansvv'ered, " He did not know.'*
For it was a rule with Cato, to have his slaves either
em|)loyed in the house, or asleep; and he liked those
best vvho slept the most kiiidiy, believing that they
were better-tempered than such as enjoyed less of
that refreshment, and fitter for any kind of business,
jind, as he knew that slaves will stick at nothing to
gratify their passion for women, lie allowed them to
have the company of his female slaves, upon paying
a certain price, but under a strict prohibition of ap-
proaching any other women,

When he was a young soldier, and as yet in low
circumstances, he never found fault witii any thine:
that was served up to his table, but thougiit it a
shame to (quarrel with a servant on account of his
palate. Yet afterv/ard, when he was possessed of
an easy fortune and made entertainments tor his
friends ai]d the principal officers, as soon as dinner
was over, he never failed to correct with leathern
thongs such, of his slaves as had not given due at-
tendance, or had suffered any thing to be spoiled.
He contrived means to raise quarrels among his ser-
vants, and to keep th.em at variance, ever suspecting
and fearing some bad consequence from their unani-
mity"*'. And when any of them were guilty of a

*»' Thes3 were surely discreditable in.^tances of petty vanity, oj
piean suspicion, and v/lio)ly unworthy oi" a great a:an,*

CATO THE CENSOR. Ii23

capital crime, he gave tiicm a Ibrmal trial, and in
the presence of their fellow-servants pnt them to
death.

As his tliirst after wealth increased, and he found
ap^ricnltnre rather amusing than proiitable, he turned
his thoughts to surer dependences ; and employed
liis money in purchasing ponds, hot-baths, places
proper for fullers, and estates in good condition hav-
ing: pasturc-oround and wood-lands. From these he
derived a great revenue; " such a one (he used to
" say) as Jupiter himself could not disappoint
" him of'."

He practised the most blameable kind of usury,
that upon ships. His method was to insist, that
tliose whom he furnished with money should take a
great number into partnership. When there were
at least iiity of tiiem and as many ships, he de-
manded one share tor himself, to be managed by
Quintio his fieedman, who sailed and tratlicked
along with them. Thus, though his gain was con-
siderable, he did not risk his capital, but only a small
part of it.

He likewise lent money to such of his slaves, as
chose it ; and they en:!p!oyed it in })in-chasing boys,
"w]]o were subsequently instructed and fitted lor ser-
vice at Cato's expense ; and being sold at the year's
end by auction, Cato took several of them himself
at tlie price of the highest bidder, deducting it out
of what he had lent. To incline his son to the same
economy, he told him, " That to diminish his sub-
*' stance was not the ])art of a man, but of a widow."
Yet he carried the thing to extravagance, when lie
ventured to assert, " That the man truly wonderful
*'- and godlike, and fit to be registered in the lists of
" glory, was he, from the final balance of whose ac-
" counts it appeared, that he had more than doubled
'■* what he had received from his ancestors."

Wlien Cato was far advanced in years, there ar-

4^ By hail-.stones, excessive rains, droughts, &:c,*
12

aHi, CATO THE CENSOR.

rived at Rome tv/o embassadors from Atliens^'^ Car-
neades the academic, and Diogenes the stoic. These
envoys were sent to negociate the remission of a fine
of iive hundred talents, v/hich had been imposed
upon the Athenians for contuniacy by the 8icyo-
nians, at the suit of the people of Oropus '^ On the
arrival of these philosophers, such of the lloman
youth as had a taste for learning waited upon them,
and heard them with wonder and deiiglit. Above
all, they were charmed with the graceful manners of
Carneades ; the force of whose eloquence, accom-
panied by an adequate reputation, had drawn an
audience of the politest and most considerable per-
sons in Rome, and the sound of whose fame like
a mighty wind had filled the whole city. The re-
port ran, that there was come from Greece a man
of astonishing faculties, whose more than human
powers could soothe and soften the fiercest passions,
and who had made so strong an impression upon
their youth, that forgetting all other pleasures and
diversions they were quite seized by an enthusiastic
love of philosophy.

The Romans were transported to find it so ; nor
could they without uncommon pleasure behold their
sons thus fondly embrace the Grecian literature, and
follow these wonderful teachers. But Cato, from
the beginning, was alarmed at it. He no sooner
perceived this passion for the Grecian learning begin
to prevail, than he was afraid that the young meii
would turn their ambition that way, and prefer the
glory of eloquence to that of deeds of arms. But
when he found that the reputation of these philoso-
phers rose still higher, and that their first speeches

*^ Aulus Gellius (vii. M.) mentions a third, Critolalis th?
peripatetic,

■*■' The Athenians had plundered the city of Oropus. Upon
complaint made by the inhabitants, the aflair was referred to the
dt termination of the Sicyonians, and the Athenians not attending
to justify themselves were fined five hundred talents. See Suppl.
Liv. xxvii. 24'., and Pausan. vii. 2.

9

CATO THE CENSOR. Bt5

were translatecP^ into Latin by Caius Acilius a
senator of great distinction, who had earnestly
begged the favour of interpreting them, he lost all
patience, and resolved upon some specious pretence,
to procure their dismission.

He went therefore to the senate, and complained
against tlie magistrates for so long detaining embas-
sadors, who could persuade the people to whatever
they pleased : " You ought,'* said he, " to determine
their affair as speedily as possible ; that returning
to their schools they may declaim to the youth of I
" Greece, and that ours may give attention as before <
" to the laws and the magistrates." This he did, ■
induced not by any particular pique to Carneades
(whi«h some suppose to have been the case) but by i
his aversion from philosopliy, and his making it a I
point to show his contempt of the polite studies \
sand learning of the Greeks. Nay, he scrupled not
to affirm, " That Socrates himself was a prating
seditious fellow, who used his utmost endeavours
to tyrannise over his country by abolishing it's
customs, and seducing the people to opinions
contrary to the laws"*^." And, to ridicule the
slow methods of Isocrates' teaching, he said, " His
" scholars grew old in learning their art, as if tiiev
" intended to exercise it in pleading causes in the
" shades below." Nay, to dissuade his son from
those studies, he told him in a louder tone than
could be expected from a man of his age, and as it
were in an oracular and })ro})hetic v;ay, " Th.at when

45 The translators of Plutarcli have not sulTere-ii this testimony, io
fiivour of trnndation, to escape their notice. They even quote
another instance of tlie honour, in which it was licld ; whvn the
Roman senate voted their thanks to Pompey, for having pubHshed
a version of some treatises of Hippocrates, ice, found in the strong-
box of Mithridatcs.*

**'' Surely, as M. Ricard observes, a most unjust censura ! as no
one could show more respect to tlie laws than he, who refused to
break them by escaping from prison — even to save his life. The
customs and opipions, which he sought to supersede, were notori-
ously pernicious; and, in endeavouring to eti'ect his purpose, he
used only the legitimate arms of persuasion and example.*

.526 CATO THE CEXSOll.

" the Romans came thoroii.G^bly to imbibe the Grc-
" cian literature, tliey wouJd lose the empire of the
" world." But time has shown the eiujitiness of
that invidious assertion ; for Rome v/as never at a
higher pitch of grandeur, than vvheit she was most
perfect in the (xrecian erudition, and most attentive
to all kinds of learning^'.
I Neither was Cato an enemy to the Grecian phi-
i losophers alone ; he looked upon the physicians,
I also, with a suspicious eye. He had heard, it seems,
], of the answer which Hippocrates returned to the
kin^y of Persia, when he sent for him and offered
him a reward of many talents ; " I will never make
" use of my art in favour of barbarians, who arc
" enemies to the Greeks." This (he said) was an
oath, Mhich all the ph;ysicians had taken, and he
therefore advised his son to beware of tliem all.
He added tiiat he himself liad written a little trea-
tise, in which he had eet down his ovv^n method of
cure^^ and the regimen he prescribed, when any of
: his famiJv were sick : tliat he never recommended
\ fasting, but allowed them licrbs, with duck, pigeon,
; or hare ; sucli kinds of diet being light and suitable
; for sick people, having no inconvenience except that
\ of producing dreams \ and that with these remedies,
: and this regimen, lie had preserved himself and his
iluniiy. But iiis self-sufficiency in this respect did
not go unpunished : for he lost both his Vv'ife, and
Iris son. jIc liimself, indeed, I)y liis strong make

47 Rome ]iad indeed a very extensive empire in tlic Aiignstan
age, but at thg siime time ?Iie had lost her aacient constitution and
her iibeity. Not that the learning of the Komans ccntriljutcd to
that loss : thei«' irreligion, their luxury, and their corruptiyii oeea-
sioned it.

'■'^ Cato •,v;.)s a complete quack. Ills riedical receipt?, which may
be found in his Treatise upjn Country-atrairs, are either very sim-
ple or very dangerous ; and fasting, whic'i ho exploded, is hetter
tlian them all. Duck, pigeon, and hare, which (if we may believe
Plutarch) he gave his sick people as a light diet, are certainly the
strongest and most indigestible kinds of food, and their producing
dreams was a proof of it, (L.) Fie has even preserved the fonnuia,
sect. ICQ., of a cluirm ihr dislocations !*

CATO THE CENSOlt. 527

niid good habit of body lasted long ; so that even
when old, he frequently indulged his inclination for
the sex, and at an unseasonable age took a young
woman to witc.

This was on the following pretence : After the
death of his wife, he married his son [as mentioned
above] to the daughter of Paulu.s .'j:^miiius, the sister
of Scipio : aud continned himself a widower, but had
a young female slave that came privately to his bed.
It could not however remain Ions: a secret in a small
house, with a daughter-in-law in it ; and one day as
the favourite slave seemed haughtily to flaunt by in
this contracted mansion, vouiio; Cato t^avc her a
severe look and turned his back upon her, but said
not a word. The old man was quiekly informed of
this circumstance ; and finding that this kind of com-
merce displeased his son and his daughter-in-law, he
did not expostulate with them, nor take the least no-
tice. Next morniiig he went to the Forum, according
to custom, with his friends about him ; and as he
walked along he called aloud to one Salonius, who
had been his secretary and was now one of his train,
and asked him, " Whether or not he had provided a
" husband for his daughter ?" Upon his answering,
" That he had not, and should not without consult-
" ino; his best friend :" Cato said, " Whv then I
" have found out a very tit one for her, if she can
bear with the disparity of age ; for in otlier re-
spects he is unexce])tionable, but he is very, very
old.'* Salonius replying, " That he left the dis-
posal of her entirely to him, for she was under his
protection, and had no de))endence but upon his
bounty;" Cato without farther ceremony said,
" Then I will be your son-in-law." The man at first,
as may easily be imagined, was astonished at the pro-
posal : believing Cato past the time of life for marry-
inji, and regardiim' himself as liir beneath an alliance
with a family, which had been lionoured vvith the
consulate and a triumph. But when he saw that
Cato v/as in earnest, he embraced the offer with joy,

a
a

523 CATO THE CENSOR.

and tlie marriage-contract was signed as soon as they
reached the Forum.

While they were busied in preparing for the nup-
tials, young Cato taking liis relations with him went,
and asked his father ; " What ofience he had com-
" mitted, that he was to have a stepmother put upon
*' him ?" Upon which Cato exclaimed, " Ask not such
" a question, my son; for, instead of being offended,
'^^ I have reason to praise your whole conduct : I
" am only desirous of having more such sons, and
'' leaving more such citizens to my country." But
this answer is said to have been given, long before,
by Pisistratus the Athenian tyrant ; who, when he
had sons by a former wife already grown up, married
Timonassa of Ar^os, bv whom he is stated to have
iiad two other sons, Iciphon and Thessalus.

By this wife Cato had a son, whom he called after
his mother's fitlier Salonius. As tor his eldest son
Cato, he died in his pnxitorship. His father often
mentions him in his v»ritings, as a brave and worthy
man. He bore his loss however with the moderation
of a philosopher, appl^^ing himself with his usual ac-
tivity to affairs of state. For he did not, like Lucius
Lucullus at a subsequent period and Metellus Pius,
think age an exemption from the service of the pub-
Jic, bat considered that service as his indispensable
duty ; nor jQi did he behave as Scipio Africanus had
done, vvho finding himself opposed by envy in his
course of glory quitted the administration, and spent
the remainder of his days in inaction. But, as one
told Dionvsius that the most honourable death was
to die in possession of sovereign pov.-er, so Cato
esteemed that the most honourable old age, which
was spent in serving the commonwealth. The
amusements, in which he passed his leisure-hours,
were writing books and tilling the ground : and tins
is tlie reason of our having so many treatises on vari-
ous subjects, and histories of Ins composing-^'^

^° Beside upward of a hundred and fifty Orations, which he left
behind hini, he wrote a Treatise upon Military Discipline, and Books

CATO THE CENSOR. 629

In Ill's younger clays he applied himself to agricul-
ture, with a view to profit ; tor he used to say, that
lie had only two w^iys of increasing his income,
labour and parsimony : but, as he grew old, he re-
garded it solely in the light of theory and amuse- I
ment. He wrote a book conccrnino- country affairs^', \
in which among other things he gives rules for making I
cakes, and preserving fruit ; for he was desirous to \
be thought curious and particular in every thing.
He kept a better table in the country, than in the
town ; for he always invited some of his acquaint-
ance in the neighbourhood to sup with him. With
these he passed the time in cheerful conversation,
making himself agreeable not only to those of his
own age, but to the young : for he had a thorough
knowledge of the world, and had collected a variety
of facts and anecdotes, which were highly entertain-
ing. He looked upon the table, as one of the best
means of forming friendships ; and, at his, the con-
versation generally turned upon the praises of great
and excellent men among the Romans. Of the
profligate and the unworthy no mention was made ;
for he would not allow in his company one word,
either good or bad, to be spoken of them ^'.

The last service, w'hich he is said to have rendered
the public, was the destruction of Carthage. The
younger Scipio, indeed, gave the finishing stroke to
that work ; but it was undertaken chiefly by the
advice, and at the instance, of Cato. The occasion
of the rupture was as follow^s : the Carthaginians and
Massinissa king of Numidia being at war with each
other, Cato was despatched into Africa to investigate
the causes of the quarrel. Massinissa from the first

of Antiquities : in two of these he examines tlie foundation of the
cities of Italy ; the other five contained the Ilonii'.n history, parti-
cularly a narrative of the first and second Punic war.

5' De Re Rustic//. This is the only work of his, which remains /|
entire. Among other ' curious and particular' subjects, it treats (
of the fatting of geese, poultry, and pigeons ! &c*

J» See Hor. Sat. IL vi.71., &c.*
VOL. II. 2 M

530 CAtO THE CENSOR.

had been a friend to the Romans ; and the Cartha-
ginians had been admitted into tlieir alHance*^ after
the signal overthrow which they received from Scipio
the Elder, but upon terms which deprived them of a
considerable part of their dominions, and imposed
a hca\y tribute '*. When Cato arrived at Carthage,
lie found that city not in the exhausted and humble
condition which tlie Romans imagined, but full of
effective men, abounding in money, arms, and war-
like stores^ and not a little elated by the thought of
it's being so well provided. He concluded, there-
fore, that it was now time for the Romans to endea-
vour to settle the points in dispute between the
Nun)idians and Carthage ; and that if they did not
soon make themselves masters of that city, which as
their old enemy retained strong resentments of her
late usage, and was prodigiously increased in power,
they would soon be exposed afresh to all their former
dangers. For this reason he returned in all haste to
Rome, where he informed the senate ; " That the
*' defeats and other misfortunes, which had happened
" to the Carthaginians, had not so much drained
** them of tiieir forces, as cured them of their folly :
" and that in all probability, instead of a weaker,
" tliey had made tiiem a more skilful enemy.
••' That their war with the Numidians was only a
•^^ prelude to future combats with the Romans ;
** and that the late peace was a mere name, for
**■ ilivv liad considered it only as a suspension of
*' arms, of which thev were willing: to avail them-
" selves simply till they had a favourable opportunity
*' of renewing the war."

At the conclusion of his speech (it is said) he

•'•-* Or rather, say the late ech'tors of Aniyot's Frencli translation,
* to a peace ;' as they never were adniitted to make with the Koniani
an offcii^'ive and dot'ensive, or even a simply detensivt' alliance.-

^* Scipio AlVicanus obliged the Carthaj;inians, at the conclusion
of the second Punic war, A. U. C. 55^2., to deliver up their llect to
the Romans, to cede to Massinis&a jnut of Syphax's dominions, and
to pay into the public treasury ten thousand talents.

CATO THE CENSOR. 531

shook tlie lap of his j^own, and purposely dropped
some Lybian fi<:>'s ; and wlicn he found the senators
admired them for their size and beauty, he told them,
" Tliat the country where thev crrew was but three
" days' sail from Rome." But what is a stronger
instance of his enmity to Carthage, he never gave
his opinion in the senate upon any point whatever,
without adding these v/ords, " And my opinion is,
" that Cartha<?e should be destroyed^'." Publius
Scipio, surnamed Nasica, made it a pomt to mamtain
tlie contrary, and concluded all his speeches thus ;
" And my opinion is, that Carthage should be left
" standing." This illustrious man most probably,
perceiving the people hurried by feelings of insolence
into the most wanton excesses, so that in the pride
of prosperity they could not be restrained by the
senate, but through their overgrov.?n povvcr were
able to drav/ the government what v/ay they pleased,
thouirht it best that Carthasje should remain to curb
and moderate their presumption. For he saw, that
the Carthaginians were not strong enough to conquer
the Romans, and yet were too respectable to be de-
spised by them. On the other hand Cato deemed
it dangerous, while the people were thus inebriated
and giddy with power, to suffer a city which had
always been great, and which was now grown sober
and v/ise through it's misfortunes, to lie on {lie watch
for every advantage against them. It ap})eared to
him, therefore, the wisest course to have all outward
perils removed from the commonwealth, that it
might be at leisure to guard against internal cor-
ruption.

Thus Cato, vv-e are told, occasioned the third and
last war against the Carthaginians. But as soon as
it began, h"e died, having first prophesied of the per-
son that should put an end to it ; who was then a
young man, and had only a tribune's command in

" Hence Dclaida est Carthapo passed into a species of proverb,*

2 M 2

532 ARISTIDES AND CATO COMPARED.

the army, but was giving extraordinary proofs of liis
conduct and valour. The news of these exploits
being brought to Rome, Cato cried out,

■ He is tlie soul of council;

The rest like shadows glide ^'^.

This, .Scij)io soon confirmed by his actions.

Cato left one son by his second wife (who, as wc
have already observed, was surnamed Salonius) and
a grandson by the son of his first w^ife, who died be-
tbre him. Salonius died in his pra^torship, leaving a
son named Marcus, Vvho came to be consul, and who
was the father ''^ of Cato the philosopher, the best
and most illustrious man of his time.

ARISTIDES AND CATO

COMPARED.

HAATNG thus given a detail of the most memor-
able actions of these eminent men, if we compare
tiie \\4iole life of the one with that of the other, it
will not be easy to discern the difference between
them, the eye being attracted by so many striking
resemblances. But if we distinctly examine the
several parts of their lives, as we do a poem or a pic-
ture, we shall find in the first place this circumstance
common to them both ; that they rose to higli sta-

'•' This verse Is by Homer applied to Tiresiaa, Od. x. 495., where
Circe advises Ulysses to visit the shades.*
'^ The pedigree stiuids thus :

C!ato the Censor

Cato Salonius, by his second marriage

Marcus Cato the consul

Cato of Utica, the philosopl\;pr.

ARISTIDES AND CATO COMPARED. 533

tions and great honour in their respective common-
wealths, not by the help oi'lhmiiy-connexions, but
merely by their own virtue and abilities. It is true
that, at the time when Aristides raised himself,
Athens was not in her grandeur, but the dema-
gogues and chief magistrates were men of moderate
and nearly equal fortunes. For estates of the highest
class w^ere then only five hundred medimni; of those
of the second order, who were knights, three hun-
dred ; and of those of th.e third order, who were
called Zeugita3, two hundred '^. But Cato from a
little village and a country-life launched into the
Roman government, as into a boundless ocean, at a
time, not when it was conducted by the Curii, the
Fabricii, and the Hostilii, and received for it's magi-
strates and orators men of narrow circumstaiices,
who held with their own hands the plouah and the
spade ; but when it was accustomed to regard con-
siderations of fiimily, opuleiice, distributions among
the people, and servility in courting their liivour :
for the Romans, elated with their ])ower and impor-
tance, loved to humble those, who stood candidates
for the high of^Hces of state. And it was not the
same thing to be rivalled by a 'J'hemistocles, who
was neither distinguished by birth nor fortune (for
he is said not to have been worth more than three,
or at the most five talents, when he first applied
himself to public affairs), as to have to contend with
a 8ci})io Africanus, a Servius Galba, or a Quintius
Flaminius without any assistance or support, except
a tongue accustomed to speak with freedom in the
cause of justice''^.

Besides, Aristides was only one among ten, who
commanded at Marathon and Rlatuua? : whereas Cato

^8 See the Life of Solon, I. 9A2*

^' M. llicard justly observes, that if Plutarch slunvs any partiah'ty .
in this passage, it certainly is not in favour of the Greek ; though
he has been frequently charged v. itli that propensity, and might
here, if anywhere, have indulged it with impunity in I'avour of Aris-
tides, one of the greatest and most virtuous men of antiquity.-

53i ARiSTIDES Ax\D CATO COMPARED.

was chosen one of the two consuls, from a number
of competitors; and one of the two censors, though
opposed by seven candidates, and those some of the
noblest and most illustrious men in Rome.

It should be observed likewise, that Aristides was
never principal in any action ; for Miltiades had the
chief honour of the victory at Marathon, Themi.sto-
cles of that at Salamis, and the palm of the impor-
tant day at Plataeae (as Herodotus informs us) was
adjudged to Pansanias. Nay, even the second place
was disputed Vvith Aristides by Sophanes, Aminias,
Callimachus, and Cyngegirus, who eminently distin-
guished themselves upon that occasion. On the
other hand, Cato not only stood first in courage and
conduct during his own consulate, and in the war
with Spain ; but when he acted at Thermopylas only
■as a tribune, under the auspices of another, he en-
<xrossed the glorv of the victory : tor it was he who
unlocked the pass for the Romans to ru:-h upon
AiDtiochus,and they brought the war npon the back
of the king, vi^ho attended only to vvhat was before
him. Tliat victory, whichi was manifestly the work
of Cato, drove Asia out of Greece, and subsequently
opened a passage for Scipio to th;it continent.

Both of them were equally victorious in war: but
Aristides miscarried in the administration, being
banished and oppressed by the faction of Thcniis-
to cles '^'^ ; while Cato, though he had for antagonists
almost all the greatest and most powerful men in
Rome, who kent contending with him even in his
extreme old age, like a skilful wrestler invarial)lv
held his footing. Often impeached beibre the people,
and often the manager of an impeaciiment, he gene-
rally succeeded in his prosecution of others, and was
never himself condemned, secure in that bulwark
of life, the defensive and oifensive armour of elo-

*° This however will not be imputed to Aristides as a fault,
when we recollect the hicrit which attracted, the malignit}' which
itnpclled, and the ease wliich accompanied, the ban o? the
Ostracism.*

AllISTTDES AND CATO COMPARED. 533

qucncc; and to this, much more justly tlian to for-
tune or Ills guardian genius, we may ascribe his
luiving maintained his digjiity unblemished to the
last. For Antipater bestowed a similar encomium
upon Aristotle the philosopher, in what he wrote
concerning him after his death, tliat ' aniong his
other nualities he had the very extraordinary one,
of persuading people to whatever he pleased.'

That the art of governing cities and common-
wealths is the chief excellence of man, admits not
a doubt ; and it is generally agreed, that the art of
governing a family is no small ingredient in that
excellence*"'. For a city, which is only a collection
and system of families, cannot generally prosper,
unless it's constituent families be ilourisliing. And
Lycurgus, when lie banislied gold and silver out of
Sparta, ajid gave the citizens instead of it money
made of iron which had been spoiled for other uses
by the fire, designed not to excuse them from at-
tending to frugality, but only to prevent luxiuy,
M'hich is a tumour and inflammation caused by
riches, in order that every one might have the
greater abundance of tlie necessaries and conve-
niences of life. From this establish.ment it appears,
that he saw farther into futurity than any other le-
gislator; since he was sensible, that every society
has more to apprehend from it's needy, than from
it's wealthy members. Jlence Cato vv-as as attentive
to the management of his domestic concerns, as to
that of public alfairs ; and not only increased his
own estate, but became a guide to others in econo-
my and agriculture, upon which he collected many
useful rules.

But Aristides by his indigence brought a dis-
grace upon justice itself, as if it were the ruin and

^' See tho cr.rJy chapters of ylristot. Polit. How often indeed
liT/e dcrangcii finanti?s, a consequence periiaps of tlic private iiri^
providence of t:vj iuiiu.--ter, led to the ruin of mighty empires ! *

356 ARISTIDES AND CATO COMPARED.

impoverishiTient of families, and a quality profitable
to any one rather tiian to the owner. Hesiod, how-
ever, lias abundantly exhorted us both to equity
and to frugality, and inveighs against idleness as
the source of injustice''". The same is well repre-
sented by Homer"-*;

The culture of the field, the home employ,
Which rears the smiling' progen}', no juy
Could boast for me : to view urion the flood
The hounding ship, to hear the tale of blood,
To puint the polish'd spear, and hurl the laace.
Were mine.

By which the poet intimates, that those Vv'ho neglect
their own aftairs generally support themselves by
violence and injustice. For what the physicians say
of oil (that u^.ed outwardly it is beneficial, but per-
nicious when taken inwardly) is inapplicable to the
just man ; neither is the statement correct, that he
is useful to others, and unprofitable to himself and
his family. The politics of Aristides seem therefore
to have been defective in this respect, if it be true
(as most writers assert) that he left not enough be-
hind him either for the portions of his daughters, or
for the expenses of his funeral.

Thus Cato's family produced prastors and consuls
to the fourth generation, for his grandsons and their
children bore the highest oflices ; whereas, though
Aristides Avas one of the most eminent men in
Greece, yet the m.ost distressful poverty prevailing
among his descendcnts, some of them were forced
to support themselves by jugglers* tricks, others to
receive public alms, and not one of them entertained
a feeling or a sentiment worthy of their illustrious
ancestor.

This point, it is true, is liable to some dispute :

*^ Plutarch here refers to a line of that poet, alluded to before
in the beginning of his Life of ^olon, I. 220.*
^- Od. xiv. 222.

ARISTIDES AND CATO COMrARED. 537

lor poverty is not disli(>noiiml)Ic in itself, but only
when it is the effect of idleness, intemperance, pro-
digality, and folly. AVhen, on the contrary, it is
associated with all the virtues in the sober, the in-
dustrious, the just, and the valiant statesman, it
speaks a noble and an elevated mind. For an atten-
tion to little thinf^s renders it impossible to do any
thino- truly great ; neither can that man provide for
the wants of others, who has numerous and impor-
tunate wants of his own. The main provision for a
statesman is, not riches but a contented mind, which
requiring no superfluities for itself, leaves a man at
full liberty to serve the commonwealth. God is ab-
solutely exempt from wants ; and the virtuous man,
in proportion as he reduces his wants, approaches
nearer to the Divine Perfection. For as a body well
framed for liealth needs nothing exquisite, either in
food or clothing; so a rational way of living, and a
well-governed family, demand only a very moderate
support. Our possessions, indeed, should be pro-
portioned to the use which we make of then]. He
who amasses much, and uses but little, is far from
being satisfied with his abundance : for if, wliile he
is solicitous to increase it, lie has no desire of those
things which wealth can procure, he is ix)olish ; and
if he does desire, and yet out of meanness of spirit will
not allow himself to enjoy them, he is miserable.

I would fain ask Cato himself, " if riches are to
" be enjoyed, wliy when possessed of much, he
" plumecl himself upon being satisfied with little."
If it be a commendable thing (as indeed it is) to be
contented vrith coarse bread, and such wine as our
servants and labouring people drink, and not to
covet purple and elegantly-plaistercd houses ; then
Aristides, Epaminondas, Manius Curius, and Caius
Fabricius were j^erfectly right, in neglecting to ac-
quire what they did not think it ])roper to use. For
it was by no means necessary, tiiat a man who like
Cato could make a delicious meal on turnips, and

9

5r,s ARISTIDES AND CATO COMPARED.

loved to boil them himself while his wife baked the
bread, should talk so very iinich about a farthing, and
write by what means a man might most expedi-
tiously acquire wealth. Simplicity and frugality in-
deed are then only great things, when they free the
3nind from all desire and care about superfluities.
Hence it was, that Aristides in the trial of Callias
said, *' None should be ashamed of poverty, but
" those who were poor against their wills : they^
" who like himself were poor out of choice, might
" glory in it." For it is ridiculous to suppose, that
the poverty of Aristides was to be imputed to sloth ;
since he mi^ht without the least baseness have
raised himself to opulence, by the spoil of a single
barbarian, or tlie plunder of a single tent. But
enough of this.

As to military achievements, those of Cato added
but little to the Roman empire, which Avas already
very extensive ; whereas the battles of Marathon,
8alamis, and Plata^rC, the most glorious and import-
ant actions of the Greeks, are numbered among those
of Aristides "'. And surely Antiochus is not worthy
to be mentioned with Xerxes, nor the demolishing
of the walls of the Spanish towns with the destruction
of so many thousands of barbarians both by sea and
land. Upon these signal occasions, Aristides v.as in-
ferior to none in real service : but he left the glory
and the laurels, as he (hd the wealth, to others who
had more need of tliem, because he v\as above them.

I do not blame Cato for perpetually boasting and
giving himself the preference to others, though in
one of his pieces he says, " It is absurd for any per-
" son either to commend, or to depreciate himself:'*"

^'* Here, perhaps, a little of tlie (jlrecian biograplier begins to
appear. For liatl he not beCore statecl, th;it Aristides divided tlie
glorv of Marathon and Flatrcie with nine others ? And yet, it must
be admitted, he v/as certainly entitled to more than his numerical
quota of tliat glory. In their conduct likewise toward their respect-
ive enemies (Thcmistocks, and Scipio) mentioned below, the
lloman falls infinitely below the Athenian hero.*
J '2

ARISTIDES AND CATO COMPARED. 539

but I think the man, who is often praising himself,
less complete in virtue than the modest man, who
does not even wish to be praised by others. For
modesty is a very proper ingredient in the mild and
engaging manner necessary for a statesman ; on the
other hand, he who demands extraordinary respect
is difficult to please, and liable to envy. Cato was
very subject to this fault, and Aristides entirely free
from it. For Aristides, by co-operating with his ene-
my Themistocles in his greatest actions, and becom-
ing as it were a guard to him while he had the com-
mand, restored the affairs of Atliens ; whereas Cato,
by counteracting Scipio, nearly blasted and ruined
that expedition of his against Carthage, which
brought down the before-invincible AnnibaL Nay,
he continued to raise suspicions against him, and
to persecute him with calumnies, till at last he drove
him out of Rome, and got his brother stigmatised
with the shameful crime of having embezzled the
public money.

As for temperance, which Cato ab.vays extolled
as the highest of virtues, Aristides preserved it in
it's utmost purity and perfection ; while Cato, by
marrying so much beneath himself and at an un-
seasonable time of life, stood justly impeached in
that respect. For it was by no means decent, at
his advanced age, to bring home to his son and
daughter-in-law a young wife, the daughter of his
secretary, a man who was receiving wages from
the public purse. AVhetlier he did it merely to
gratify his appetite, or to revenge the affront which
his son had offered to his favourite slave, both the
thing and the pretext were dislionourable. And the
reason, which he assigned to his son upon the
occasion, was ironical and groundless. For if he
was desirous of having more children like him, he
should have looked out previously for some woman
of familv, and not have deferred the thouniits of
marrying again, till his commerce with so jnean a

540 ARISTIDES AND CATO COMPARED.

creature was detected : and after it was detected,
he ought to have chosen for his father-in-jaw, not
one who would most readily accept his proposals,
but one whose aUiaiice would have done him the
greatest honour.

1

END OF VOL. II.

Pfjnted by C. Baldwin, Ntw BriUge-strect, London.

BSNDIk'G SECT. APR 2 7 1973

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY

DE Plutarchus

7 Lives

1813
V.2